Realism in Art: Recent German Fiction
Author: Lewes, George Henry.
Publication info: The Westminster Review ; London (1858): 33 p.

Realism in Art: Recent German Fiction [in, The Westminster Review. July and October, 1858 ... Vol. XIV.]
[Page 488]
ART . VI.— Realism in Art: Recent German Fiction .
1. Neue Novellen . Von Paul Heyse. 1858.
2. Novellen . Von Paul Heyse. 2te Auflage. 1857.
3. Zwischen Himmel und Erde . Von Otto Ludwig. 2te Auflage. 1858.
4. Adam und Eva . Von Theodor Mügge. 1858.
5. Die Dokumente . Von Theodor Mügge. 1857.
6. Soll und Haben . Von Gustav Freitag. 8te Auflage. 1858.
7. Die Leute von Seldwyla . Von Gottfried Keller. 2te Auflage. 1858.
ERASMUS relates a curious case of mania which afflicted a young Italian gentleman, who, although he had never been in Germany, nor had ever learned German, was suddenly and incomprehensibly seized with an irresistible tendency to utter copious and incoherent phrases, distinctly recognisable as German. A celebrated physician was called in. The diagnosis left no doubt that the young gentleman was suffering from worms. A cure was effected; but with the departure of the entozoa there was a complete and final extinction of the German idiom. From that moment the young gentleman had easier intestines, and spoke nothing but harmonious Italian.
Without guaranteeing the physiological accuracy of this anecdote, which is cited by Erasmus somewhere in his oration in praise of medicine, we confess that we should not be reluctant to see a similar method of cure applied to many of the German literati, as, at any rate, a tentative effort to restrain the too abundant copiousness of weak and watery idiom which flows from that body. If we are to take the diagnosis of the Leipsic Fair,
[Page 489]
we must pronounce entozoa to be epidemically rife. How otherwise can the phenomena be explained? How is it that with a language rich, flexible, potent for every purpose, and with writers who, as masters of composition, take rank beside the greatest names in literature, the majority of Germans nevertheless contrive to render their noble language the most wearisome, the most cumbrous, the least intelligible, and least expressive medium for the accurate and delicate communication of ideas and sentiment? How is it that, with such models, they have not learned the art of writing? To be gentlemen of somewhat slow, sluggish minds is perhaps their misfortue; but to be writers deplorably deficient in the first principles of composition is assuredly their fault. Some men pasture on platitudes, as oxen upon meadowgrass; they are at home on a dead level of commonplace, and do not desire it to be irradiated by a felicity of expression. But if they cannot be felicitous, they should at any rate be clear; if their phrases are only approximative, their sentences need not be half a page in length, clause within clause, and encumbered with auxiliaries. To write well is an art; and an art possessed by few; but to write decently, and with care, is an accomplishment which can be learned by all, although it is one not yet mastered by the writers to whom we allude. This is a defect over which foreigners marvel, and cultivated Germans mourn. Where lies the cause of that defect? It cannot lie in the language, since in poetry all Germans express themselves clearly, if not always felicitously; and in the prose of the good writers—of which there are many—we see how capable the language is of crystal clearness, stately largo , delicate expression, or sharp, rapid epigram. Can the cause be the entozoa? The prescription of that Italian physician should be sought for.
Seriously, no one acquainted with German literature can fail to be struck with the very remarkable latitude which is given to bad and negligent writing of all kinds. Great are the achievements of the German mind, and incalculable the debt which Europe owes to Germany. In every department of literature, art, and science, he who has mastered the German language finds himself in possession of a key which will unlock costly cabinets. Our scholars, our historians, our jurists, our philosophers, our men of science, and our poets, are every day learning more and more how to value and how to employ such a key. Yet while German thought and German industry have enriched Europe in every direction, while German literature is everywhere held in profound and merited respect, there is, as there has always been, a laxity, not to say licence, in German style, which mars the effect of much good labour, and which encourages the publication of a mass of bad literature that
[Page 490]
otherwise would never see the light. The reader will of course understand that we exclude all those writers who, gifted with the talent of expression, or conscious of the demands of literature, attend to their diction, as the painter attends to his colouring. We refer solely to the mass of authors to whom the idea of the art of writing being an art , like any other, seems never to have presented itself. Much of this must depend on the public. If bad writing were severely criticised, bad writers would diminish. But when the most slovenly and imperfect diction will not prevent a writer from gaining a great reputation, encouragement is held out to incompetence and indolence. In France, unless a man writes clearly and correctly he is not read; if he writes felicitously, he becomes famous. But in Germany there is no severe public taste; and Germans seem rarely to possess that susceptibility to the delicate shades of distinction on which taste depends. They take things more en bloc . The jewelled finger with a dirty nail does not shock them as it shocks us. If a man has anything to say, they let him say it as carelessly as he pleases.
Strangely enough it sounds, in our ears, when works of biography and fiction, such as schoolboys ought to be whipped for writing, are classed under the head of schöne Litteratur —belles lettres. An ill-written work of erudition or science unnecessarily taxes the reader, who has already enough to do in mastering the contents; but in such cases faults of manner are forgiven for the sake of the matter: we know that a savant cannot always have a talent for expression, and that an able experimenter may be a feeble expositor. Yet even this forgiveness has its limits. We have a right to refuse too wide a latitude. If a man is unable to write, let him get another to put his ideas in a presentable shape. Negligence is an offence; and it is from negligence that so many German professors write badly. No one would demand of them literary talent; but we may rightfully demand that proper respect to literature which would keep them from slovenly, obscure writing. Graces are gifts: it can no more be required of a professor that he should write with felicity than that he should charm all beholders with his personal appearance; but literature requires that he should write intelligibly and carefully, as society requires that he should wash his face and button his waistcoat. The most celebrated of living chemists is also one of the most popular writers; we cannot expect that all chemists should have the bright intellect of a Liebig, but we have a right to demand that, as authors, they should not bestow less pains, less industry than he does. The rough draft of MS. which they would send to press, he writes twice, and even thrice over again, never letting it be printed till he is satisfied that the ideas are clearly expressed.
[Page 491]
No man who comes before the public has the right of eluding this labour and this difficulty. The art of writing is not easy, as those know best who have written best. The “gentlemen who write with ease” are read with fatigue; and Mr. Helps has somewhere accounted for this fatigue by the admirable suggestion that bad writers employ many phrases “in the secret hope that one among them may be found to fit.” The difficulty in writing is, after having clearly determined what you mean, to find the expressions which clearly present that meaning, and no more; every superfluous word is a loss of power, or a loss of clearness.
Such excuse as may be found for an ill-written work of science does not exist in the case of a novel or biography. And yet so ill-written are the majority of German biographies and novels, so unlovely is the greater part of the schöne Litteratur , that the sight of a volume is apt to produce a shudder—a kind of intellectual gooseflesh. For the present we will leave the biographies in peace, and confine ourselves to the fiction which has recently appeared.
The novels of Germany are singularly inferior to those of France or England; indeed, graceful as are many of the German legends and fairy tales, fiction seems but little suited to the German genius, and novels of real life almost altogether beyond its range. Every reader knows how bad is the mass of novels in England and France; how they do but repeat the conventional types of character and incident, in language more or less inflated and ungrammatical; there can be no surprise, therefore, at finding a German circulating library furnishing the same class of works. But Germany is distinguished from England and France in this, that whereas these countries produce from time to time a really considerable amount of striking fiction, enough to seduce even grave readers, and to redeem novel reading from the reproach which would justly cling to it, were novels of no higher quality than the staple of the library; in Germany the mass is very feeble, and there are no novelists who in England or France would be eminent. We do not say that there are no creditable German novels; but we think every competent critic will allow that the best of these are of quite a different quality from those which produce a “sensation” in England and France. And if we desired an easy proof of this assertion, we might refer to Freitag's “Soll und Haben,” which has been translated three or four times in England, and in cheap editions has been largely read; so that we may refer to it with some confidence of being understood. For half a century no novel has had such a success as this in Germany. It has already reached its eighth edition, and has been read by “everybody.” This success is certainly legitimate. Comparing the work with the other novels we have seen, we perceive
[Page 492]
in it qualities which would in all countries render it acceptable, but which in Germany must give it eminence. Freitag is not an artist, in the high sense of the word, but he is very near being one: he has an eye for character, and he has in some degree the still rarer gift of dramatic presentation of character; he has a faculty of invention, and a strenuous desire to paint realities; he knows life under many forms, and is wide in his sympathies; he has further a power of writing such as his countrymen rarely exhibit. Nevertheless, this book, which produced so profound a sensation in Germany, produced none at all in England: it was largely bought, because an excitement was got up about it, owing to the rival translations, and the Chevalier Bunsen's foolish preface; but we never heard of any critical reader who thought the novel comparable to the better class of novels in England and France. We should scarcely suppose that even German critics would place “Soll und Haben” beside Balzac or George Sand, Thackeray or Dickens; while English critics assuredly would place it below the works of very inferior writers. One feels that there is a great deal of merit in Freitag's book, and that it contains matter which a more artistic hand would have fashioned into enduring forms; but it is a work to read, not to re -read. This is felt by some German critics also who, now they have recovered from their surprise at having been really interested in a work which, after all, leaves behind it no enduring impression, attribute this failure to produce a deep impression to what they call the author's “realism.” According to them, Freitag's work fails, because it moves amid the prosaic realities of life, telling us of merchants and shopkeepers, such as may be found behind many a counter; men honourable, indeed, and honoured in their circle, but having no care or thought of art, philosophy, and the higher aims of life. It is this want of the “ideal element” which makes “Soll und Haben,” according to the critics, a work of the day; which gives it a temporary success, “because our age is realistic,” and because the bourgeoisie loves to see itself represented in fiction; but which inevitably condemns it to oblivion. Were this criticism well-founded, the consequence to be drawn from it would be that novelists should care little about reality, and much about ideal subjects: a conclusion which renders the dearth of good novels somewhat inexplicable, seeing that already the libraries swarm with works having but the faintest possible relation to any form of human life, and the strongest infusion of what is considered the “ideal element.” The hero is never a merchant, a lawyer, an artisan— Gott bewahre! He must have a pale face and a thoughtful brow; he must be either a genius or a Herr Baron. The favourite hero is a poet, or an artist, often a young nobleman who has the artistic nature; but always a man of
[Page 493]
genius; because prose can be found at every street-corner, and art must elevate the public by “beautifying” life.
This notion of the function of Art is widely spread. It has its advocates in all countries, for it is the natural refuge of incompetence, to which men fly, impelled by the secret sense of their inability to portray Reality so as to make it interesting. A distinction is drawn between Art and Reality, and an antithesis established between Realism and Idealism which would never have gained acceptance had not men in general lost sight of the fact that Art is a Representation of Reality—a Representation which, inasmuch as it is not the thing itself, but only represents it, must necessarily be limited by the nature of its medium; the canvas of the painter, the marble of the sculptor, the chords of the musician, and the language of the writer, each bring with them peculiar laws; but while thus limited, while thus regulated by the necessities imposed on it by each medium of expression, Art always aims at the representation of Reality, i.e . of Truth; and no departure from truth is permissible, except such as inevitably lies in the nature of the medium itself. Realism is thus the basis of all Art, and its antithesis is not Idealism, but Falsism . When our painters represent peasants with regular features and irreproachable linen; when their milkmaids have the air of Keepsake beauties, whose costume is picturesque, and never old or dirty; when Hodge is made to speak refined sentiments in unexceptionable English, and children utter long speeches of religious and poetic enthusiasm; when the conversation of the parlour and drawingroom is a succession of philosophical remarks, expressed with great clearness and logic, an attempt is made to idealize, but the result is simple falsification and bad art. To misrepresent the forms of ordinary life is no less an offence than to misrepresent the forms of ideal life: a pug-nosed Apollo, or Jupiter in a greatcoat, would not be more truly shocking to an artistic mind than are those senseless falsifications of nature into which incompetence is led under the pretence of idealizing, of “beautifying” nature. Either give us true peasants, or leave them untouched; either paint no drapery at all, or paint it with the utmost fidelity; either keep your people silent, or make them speak the idiom of their class.
Raphael's marvellous picture, the “Madonna di San Sisto,” presents us with a perfect epitome of illustration. In the figures of the Pope and St. Barbara we have a real man and woman, one of them a portrait, and the other not elevated above sweet womanhood. Below, we have the two exquisite angel children, intensely childlike, yet something more , something which renders their wings congruous with our conception of them. In the never-to-be-forgotten divine babe, we have at once the intensest realism of
[Page 494]
presentation, with the highest idealism of conception: the attitude is at once grand, easy, and natural; the face is that of a child, but the child is divine: in those eyes, and on that brow, there is an indefinable something 1 which, greater than the expression of the angels'; grander than that of pope or saint, is, to all who see it, a perfect truth; we feel that humanity in its highest conceivable form is before us, and that to transcend such a form would be to lose sight of the human nature there represented. In the virgin mother, again, we have a real woman, such as the campagna of Rome will furnish every day, yet with eyes subdued to a consciousness of her divine mission. Here is a picture which from the first has enchained the hearts of men, which is assuredly in the highest sense ideal, and which is so because it is also in the highest sense real—a real man, a real woman, real angel-children, and a real Divine Child; the last a striking contrast to the ineffectual attempts of other painters to spiritualize and idealize the babe—attempts which represent no babe at all. Titian's unsurpassable head of Christ, in the famous “Christo del Moneta,” if compared with all other heads by other painters, will likewise be found to have its profound significance and idealism in the wonderful reality of the presentation: the head is more intensely human than that of any other representation of Christ, but the humanity is such as accords with our highest conceptions.
We may now come to an understanding on the significance of the phrase Idealism in Art. Suppose two men equally gifted with the perceptive powers and technical skill necessary to the accurate representation of a village group, but the one to be gifted, over and above these qualities, with an emotional sensibility which leads him to sympathize intensely with the emotions playing amid that village group. Both will delight in the forms of external nature, both will lovingly depict the scene and scenery; but the second will not be satisfied therewith: his sympathy will lead him to express something of the emotional life of the group; the mother in his picture will not only hold her child in a graceful attitude, she will look at it with a mother's tenderness; the lovers will be tender; the old people venerable. Without once departing from strict reality, he will have thrown a sentiment into his group which every spectator will recognise as poetry. Is he not more real than a Teniers, who, admirable in externals, had little or no sympathy with the internal life, which, however, is as real as the other? But observe, the sentiment must be real, truly expressed as a sentiment, and as the sentiment of the very people
[Page 495]
represented; the tenderness of Hodge must not be that of Romeo , otherwise we shall have such maudlin as the “Last Appeal.” Let us have Teniers rather than Frank Stone; truth, however limited, rather than spurious idealism. The mind of the painter is expressed in his pictures. Snyders and Landseer are both great animal painters, both represent with marvellous accuracy the forms and attitudes of animals; but Landseer is a poet where Snyders is merely brutal. Landseer paints his dogs, sheep, and stags with the utmost fidelity; he does not idealize them, except in that legitimate style of idealization which consists in presenting the highest form of reality: he makes his animals express their inner-life; he throws a sentiment into his groups. Snyders does nothing but represent dogs tearing down wild boars, or animals in a state of demoniacal ferocity; Landseer makes us feel that dogs have their affections and their sorrows, their pride and their whims.
In like manner the novelist (to return to the point from which we started) expresses his mind in his novels, and according as his emotional sympathy is keen and active, according to his poetic disposition, will the choice and treatment of his subject be poetical: but it must always be real—true. If he select the incidents and characters of ordinary life, he must be rigidly bound down to accuracy in the presentation. He is at liberty to avoid such subjects, if he thinks them prosaic and uninteresting (which will mean that he does not feel their poetry and interest), but having chosen, he is not at liberty to falsify, under pretence of beautifying them; every departure from truth in motive, idiom, or probability, is, to that extent, a defect. His dressmaker must be a young woman who makes dresses, and not a sentimental “heroine,” evangelical and consumptive; she may be consumptive, she may also be evangelical, for dressmakers are so sometimes, but she must be individually a dressmaker. So also the merchant must have an air of the counting-house, an ostler must smell of the stables. To call a man a merchant, and tell us of his counting-house, while for anything else we might suppose him to be a nobleman, or an uncle from India, is not Art, because it is not representation of reality. If the writer's knowledge or sympathies do not lead him in the direction of ordinary life, if he can neither paint town nor country, let him take to the wide fields of History or Fancy. Even there the demands of truth will pursue him; he must paint what he distinctly sees with his imagination; if he succeed, he will create characters which are true although ideal; and in this sense Puck, Ariel, Brutus, and Falstaff are as real as Dick Swiveller or Tom Jones.
To accuse “Soll und Haben” of “realism” would in our eyes be the highest of compliments, because the book undertakes to represent the life of the bourgeoisie in Germany; and although it
[Page 496]
may not be so great an achievement to represent such a form of life as to represent the life of a poet, an artist, a thinker, or a statesman, it would be a greater achievement to represent the ordinary life truly than the extraordinary life incompletely. Teniers is leagues below Raphael, but he is infinitely superior to the “ideal painters” who annually astonish Europe. The author of “Soll und Haben” is not a Teniers. He represents daily life, but he does so imperfectly; his truth is but partial, and is mixed with falsehood; and because he is not real, he is not poetical. In several dithyrambic passages he tries to persuade us that the life he paints is not without its poetry; but like many other writers he confounds poetry with dithyrambs, thinks that it can be added from without , not seeing that the true poetry of life lies in the emotions and affections proper to each situation, and cannot be imported into it. The poetry of a student's garret is not the poetry of the labourer's family occupying the next room. The poetry of an alley is not the poetry of a farm-yard. Wherever there is beauty, suffering, and love, there will be poetry. We remember walking through the Jews' quarter in Prague, when it had for us only a squalid curiosity, until the sight of a cheap flower or two in the windows, and a dirty Jew fondling his baby, suddenly shed a beam as of sunlight over the squalor, and let us into the secret of the human life there. The artist who depicted only what we saw at first, would not have been so real as he who also depicted the flowers and affections; and not being so real, he would not have been so poetical. Of this poetry, Freitag has scarcely a gleam. The finest touches are those in the representation of the pathetic affection of the Giant for his little son, and the consciousness of his own early death. But in general the emotions and fancies, which are the sunshine of back alleys and dingy counting-houses, as they are of parks and town-houses, and which Dickens so well knows how to represent when he takes us into the squalidest scenes, are so sparingly touched by Freitag, that his novel oppresses us with a weary sense of prose, till we pant for a breath of fresh air.
There are many faults in “Soll und Haben,” among them a tiresome imitation of Dickens, and a want of artistic development (too much being indicated which should be painted out); but the chief cause of its not producing an enduring impression, even on those who read it eagerly to the end, is the want of precisely that realism with which it has been reproached. We have no belief in any of the characters; they do not affect us as real beings; they occupy no place in the gallery of ideal portraits with which our memory is enriched. Who believes in Anton or Fink? Who understands and sympathizes with them? Had they been painted
[Page 497]
by a genuine realist, they would have lived beside the imperishable creations of Jane Austen, a writer whom no one would class among the idealists, but a writer who having chosen commonplace people has painted them for immortality. It is but two months since we read Freitag's novel, and the very names of the female characters have vanished from memory. A true creation is unforgetable. No one will ever forget Major Pendennis walking down Pall Mall, or wagging his old head over the fire; no one will ever forget the successful creations (and how numerous they are!) of Dickens. It matters not whether a portrait be daguerreotyped from the streets, or created by the imagination, it matters not how familiar or how exceptional, whether a Swiveller or a Falstaff, a Brutus, or a Mephistopheles—if truly drawn, it will be enduring.
“Soll und Haben,” we believe, owes its success to the fact that it does represent real life better than other German novels; and its success is limited, because the representation is imperfect, not because of its “realism.” We have only to turn by way of contrast to Otto Ludwig's “Zwischen Himmel und Erde” (Twixt Heaven and Earth) which has been pronounced by one of the most eminent of German critics the finest novel of the century. It appeared to us a mawkish, ineffective, wearisome story. So wanting in any of the higher qualities did we find this work, that it remained a puzzle to us what the critics could discover in it to justify their praise. “Psychological depth,” “poetic conception,” “German integrity,” “idealization of the workman's life,” and “portraiture of character,” are phrases large enough, indeed, to include a great amount of ability, but it needs acute interpreting power to detect these qualities in Otto Ludwig's work. The characters are not only the abstractions of virtue and vice with which we have been familiar in hundreds of novels, but even as abstractions they are not well portrayed. The villanous brother, the “jovial” Fritz, is a wild and melo-dramatic caricature, meant to be a character, but impressing us only with a sense of the author's feebleness in character-drawing. It is possibly “the meaning” which charms his admirers, who take the will for the deed; they see what the author intended to execute, and give him the credit of the execution. It is thus also we may explain the success of many celebrated paintings of the Modern German School; pictures in which a great deal is meant, and very little executed, full of symbol and historical meaning, which require a long commentary before they can be rendered intelligible, and which before and after the commentary leave the emotions untouched and the eye ungratified.
The story of “'Twixt Heaven and Earth” is this: The Nettenmeyers,
[Page 498]
father and sons, are slaters, of high character and in good business. They live in a small German town. The father is a stern, despotic representative of integrity; the elder son vain, jovial, and vicious; the younger shy, clever, and intensely virtuous. This virtuous youth is in love with a girl, to whom he dares not avow his passion, although the reader sees quite well that she returns it. His brother, “jovial” and impudent, undertakes to dance with her, and ascertain her sentiments by pleading his brother's cause. He falls in love with her himself, deceives the unsuspecting youth, gets him sent to Cologne, pretending all the while to urge his brother's suit, and finally marries her himself. For a long while he keeps his brother away from home, by assuring him that Christine has an invincible repugnance to him, and that his presence would be very painful to her. At last the church-tower has to be new roofed, and old Nettenmeyer insists on his younger son returning home to assist in the work. The situation which now begins, continues its slow development to the end of the book. On the one hand, the rejected lover who thinks his brother's wife has a strong repugnance to him; on the other, the wife who really loves him, but imagines he dislikes her; and between them the villanous brother and husband who has deceived them both, and who is in terror lest his villany should be discovered, all the while suffering agonies of jealousy, because he knows they love each other. He has the further pain of seeing his younger brother take the upper hand in the business, being deferred to by the architect, and consulted with respect by all. The superintendence of the roofing of the church-tower is given to this virtuous junior, the children learn to love their uncle, and to be always sounding his praises; and although their mother is for the present kept at a distance from him, will not the secret one day be discovered, and then. ...? Rage, humiliation, and jealousy drive the “jovial” Fritz to dissipation. He gets into debt. He maltreats his wife; and by so doing is, in some mysterious manner (probably “psychological”), the cause of his child's death. He sets spies to watch his wife and brother. Finally, he attempts to murder his brother, and in conclusion falls from the church-tower while endeavouring to drag down his brother with him.
There is something inexpressibly revolting in this story, made the more so by the mawkish manner in which it is written. A tragic situation there undoubtedly is, but one which under any treatment must necessarily be unpleasant; to bring out the real tragedy, however, it is necessary that we should believe in and be interested in the characters, understand their motives, and feel that their actions are true; whereas in this story the characters
[Page 499]
are wholly without individuality and truth; the motives are absurd; the dialogue never that of real men and women. The reader is in every scene thrown back on utter disbelief; it is sheer extravagance and caricature, if taken as a presentation of life; and as at the same time it is not interesting from the manner of telling the story, nothing but a stern resolution to go to the end enabled us to finish it. Otto Ludwig is a poet, of whose tragedies poets speak in high praise, and we are willing to believe that in any other department of literature he may succeed better than in that of fiction—in fiction he has everything to learn. He cannot tell the story simply, but must be incessantly interrupting it with wearisome pages of “psychological” narrative, setting forth what the characters would have felt, did not feel, and did not see, or else narrating circumstantially their dreams and reveries. Because these pages are occupied with rubbish of this kind they are admired as “psychological;” but true psychology in a novel consists in the presentation of the actual emotions, motives, and thoughts at work in the action of the drama.
“'Twixt Heaven and Earth” is the work of a poet, and is assuredly not open to the charge of excessive realism, for anything less like reality it would be difficult to find, out of the circulating library. Here, again, we must remark, that the opposite of realism is not idealism, but falsism. The characters and language, the motives and emotions, are not real, because they are not true; this does not make them ideal, however. If the author wished to represent a family of slaters, he should have painted the real family; he might have given them virtues and vices at will; but he should have preserved their strictly human character. If, on the contrary, his object was to represent, not the slater as slater, but ideal types of virtue and of vice, he should have chosen another scene, other circumstances, avoiding the proximity of that reality which he did not intend to touch. Had Balzac treated that subject, he would have made it disagreeable, no doubt, and painful; but he would so have presented the characters, the feelings, and even the external life of these slaters, that we should have been forced to believe in their existence, and sympathize in their struggles. In Art, as in Life, there is high and low, great and little; and everything that is truly represented is interesting in proportion to its truth of presentation and its objective value: a well-painted table-cover is better than an ill-painted face; but a well-painted face, with a noble expression, is the highest reach of art, as the human soul is the highest thing we know.
Such are the two most eminent of recent novels; and they may afford a measure of German fiction when not eminent. It
[Page 500]
surprises an Englishman to hear novelists of third and fourth rate merit (according to German scale) spoken of by serious and cultivated men as if they belonged to the acknowledged literature of the country. In England everybody reads a good novel; but only “novel readers” think of opening or speaking of the inferior works: it is understood that there is a large and listless public which must be amused; and, as this public is far from critical, an abundant supply of not good writing is every season produced to meet the demand; but outside this public no one knows of such works. In Germany it is probably the same, with this difference, that many works which with us would never get beyond the novel-reading class, have a literary reputation, and their authors are talked about over tea and sausage. It is dangerous, therefore, to take an opinion on a novel if you mean to act on it, and buy or borrow the said novel. You will hear a work spoken of, as in England a work by Kingsley or Mrs. Gaskell would be mentioned; on eagerly beginning to read it you find that you are in a morass of mediocrity, out of which you scramble with all speed. Few German novelists have yet learned the art of telling a story; so that when they have no real superiority of mind they cannot, like the French, and many English mediocrities, fall back upon a certain skill in construction which, for the time at least, fastens the reader's attention. They have no horror of dulness. They seem rather to delight in it. No passage can be too long for them; no dialogue too trivial; no description too verbose. They pause, turn back, turn aside, as if there were no need to hurry forwards—which, indeed, there seldom is, for nothing awaits the reader at the close. Instead of presenting a character, they talk about it. Instead of a dramatic scene, they write a long narrative. Remorseless in platitude, they set down “reflections” such as feeble writers seem to have an instinctive tendency to indulge in all over the world; and thus they sprawl over the lengthy pages in somnolent satisfaction. In exasperating dulness we know nothing which can approach a second-rate German novel, unless it be a third-rate German novel. It has long been a mystery to us what human soul can find entertainment in such writing, and what kind of entertainment is found. These books are not wise, and still less are they witty; they are not like life, neither are they like art; they have no interest of story, no novelty or subtlety of character. They bear the same relation to our novels as Rindfleisch bears to beef: the form and name are similar; the animal in each case belongs to the same zoological species; but oh! the difference in flavour!
As a specimen of one of the superior writers, whose names are mentioned with respect, we read the “Dokumente” of Theodor Mügge. Inasmuch as this novelist has a reputation, we supposed
[Page 501]
that it was founded on some excellences; but this, the first novel of his we had read, gave us little desire to cultivate a further acquaintance. It is written in that dead-level style which can only be excusable when the story itself is of interest. Not a remark escapes the author which for an instant can arrest the mind; not a witticism, not a felicity of expression, not one good description is to be found. The story has the merit of not being slow and tedious in development; but it has the disadvantage of being threadbare in its incidents, and as improbable as it is threadbare. To think of a writer in our day making conspirators come under the very window of the man they are plotting against, and there, though they know he is in the room, arrange their plan in conversation distinctly audible to him! This is as bad as the wretched device of making a man write very circumstantially all his plans to a confederate, which letter is accidentally dropped by the confederate just before the victim approaches the spot to find the letter, and be put on his guard. When first such incidents were invented they were poor and unworthy of art; but having been used by hundreds of poor novelists, one meets them with surprise in a writer of reputation. And this leads us to remark on the singular affinity which exists between the bad writers in all countries, making them always choose the same rubbish from that mass of invention which is, as it were, the common property of literature. Considering that these writers never invent for themselves, never express their own experience, but always borrow the incidents and language of others, how is it that they exhibit such unanimity in borrowing the bad? When they write, why do they imitate poor writers? When they employ incidents, why do they select the most foolish and improbable? It is only explicable on the ground of natural affinity. On a similar ground, all bad actors on every stage of Europe closely resemble each other; the same absurdly inexpressive gestures, the same conventional tones, the same wild departure from anything ever witnessed in life are noticeable in Italian, German, French, and English actors of the inferior order, so that they all seem to have studied under one model, and that model a scarecrow.
Unwilling to measure Theodor Mügge by a single work, which might be his worst, we ventured on a second—“Adam und Eva”—the title of which was piquant. A man of genius may write a bad work; a man of talent may be unreadable at times; there was therefore a sort of superficial plausibility in the notion that Mügge might be a good writer in spite of “Die Dokumente.” But the notion was only superficially plausible. The slightest reflection rectified it. There is a sort of consistent mediocrity which excludes hope; “Die Dokumente” is permeated by this mediocrity. The bad work of a clever writer is bad , but not
[Page 502]
mediocre: it misses its effects, it does not interest, but even in its failure it bears the peculiar mark of a writer not mediocre. Shakspeare writes nonsense occasionally, and violates both nature and art in his presentation; but he is never mediocre, never complacently dead-level. Goethe is dull and tiresome at times. Dickens is at times tiresome with characters evidently meant to be very humorous, and which, doubtless, have some humour in his conception, although he fails to bring it visibly before us; but Dickens, though perverse, though missing his aim at times, is never mediocre. The writer who is mediocre through one volume is hopeless. In spite of this well-grounded conviction we ventured on a second novel by Mügge, and found, indeed, that it was better than the first, although still mediocre. “Adam und Eva” is a French novel written with German piquancy and point; a minuet in sabots. It has the merit of keeping the reader's attention alive till the close, for, inasmuch as the characters are utterly removed from the ordinary laws of human psychology, you never at any moment anticipate what will be the turn of events; accordingly the story is a succession of surprises, for which the regular novel-reader will be duly grateful. One cannot feel the slightest interest in any of the persons, simply because their actions and feelings are not made intelligible. The writing is poor. The humorous attempts are of the kind which consist in “catchwords,” and the omission of personal pronouns and conjunctions. There is one character who never says anything save “Hm,” supposed by the author to be a very hilarious creation.
With such an experience of German novels as is indicated in the foregoing remarks, the reader may imagine the keenness of pleasure with which we made the acquaintance of some charming tales by Paul Heyse, named at the commencement of this article. Paul Heyse is one of the three poets whom the King of Bavaria has chosen to honour, in a style at once creditable to him and to them. Of his poems we cannot speak; but of his tales it is pleasant to be able to say that they are mostly genuine works, delightful to read, and infinitely superior to most of the fictions with which we are acquainted, not only in literary workmanship, and in artistic conception, but in dramatic power. In each volume there are four short tales. We prefer the “Novellen” to the “Neue Novellen” on the whole; but as the former have been translated into English by Mr. George Kingsley, under the somewhat unattractive title of “Four Phases of Love,” we shall merely refer to them, urging the reader by all means to get sight of them, in English or in the original, for the sake of the exquisite story La Rabbiata , a perfect gem of a few pages, and the piquant little anecdote Marion , which ought to have been developed into a
[Page 503]
longer story. The “Neue Novellen” open with a story called Das Mädchen von Treppi , which is not only our favourite of the four, but, inasmuch as it admits of being told within the compass of this article, may be selected as a good illustration of the author's powers. An abstract would do the author injustice, and not interest the reader; we shall therefore translate the whole, taking a few liberties in the way of abridgment, so as to bring it within our limits. In some parts we shall paraphrase rather than translate, and nowhere pretend to reproduce the delicate beauty, of the original.
“High up on the Apennines, between the northern part of the Papal States and Tuscany, lies a small hamlet, named Treppi, a lonely spot, inaccessible to wheeled vehicles, and visited only by peasants and artists during the day, and by smugglers during the night. About nine o'clock, on a misty October night, a party of six or seven armed men left their heavily-laden horses to the care of a rough ostler, and stepped out of the mist into the wide kitchen of the inn. An old dog, lying by the door, wagged his tail as they entered, and then rose and walked wearily into the hut where a bright fire was blazing. Beside this fire stood the hostess, motionless, with her arms hanging listlessly; and as the old dog thrust his nose into her hand, she seemed as if awakened from a dream, as she said kindly, ‘Fuoco, old fellow, you are ill, go and sleep.’ The dog whined and wagged his tail; then curling himself on an old skin by the hearth, stretched himself, wheezing and grunting. Meanwhile the smugglers had seated themselves at the long table, and began to eat their polenta in silence. The wood on the hearth crackled, the flame flickered, the dog wheezed, and the young hostess who still sat by the fire left untouched her supper, and suffered her eyes to wander vacantly over the wall before her. The mist stood like a white wall before the door; but the moon now rose above the mountains, and seemed to light the travellers who were heard approaching. The clatter of hoofs grew louder, and presently three men were at the door. The youth who had acted as ostler now approached the hostess, who sat gazing abstractedly in the fire. ‘There are two of them from Porretta,’ he said, ‘without goods. They have got a signor with them, whose passport is not regular, and they are to guide him over the mountains. The signor wishes a bed; can he have one?’
“‘Make him one of hay in the room,’ she said, carelessly. The youth nodded, and went to the table, where the three new-comers had already seated themselves. The two were contrabandistas, armed to the teeth; their jackets thrown over their shoulders, their hats pulled over their brows. They nodded to the others as to old friends, made room for their signor, crossed themselves devoutly, and began to sup.
“The signor ate nothing, but taking his hat off thrust his fingers through the curls clustering on his brow, and allowed his eyes to wander round the room, reading the pious sentences, written in charcoal on the wall, resting for a minute on the picture of the Madonna in the corner, and finally fixing them on the hostess, whose profile was sharply defined by the glare of the flames. She sat with one
[Page 504]
foot on the stool; her hands clasping her knee, her gaze steadily fixed.”
“‘Padrona, have you any wine?’ said the stranger at length. No sooner were the words spoken than she sprang up, as if suddenly stung, and had to steady herself with both hands against the chair; at the same instant the old dog awoke with a yell, and the stranger was startled to find four such fiery eyes turned upon him; but before he had time to express himself, the dog was at him, tore the cloak from his shoulder, and was preparing for another spring, when the hostess cried: ‘Back! Fuoco, back! quiet, sir, quiet!’ The dog paused, but continued fiercely growling. ‘Shut him in the stable, Pietro,’ continued the hostess; but she had to repeat this order in a peremptory tone before it was obeyed, so amazing, so unheard-of was it to turn out the old favourite from his place by the fire. Without any apologetic remark, the hostess ordered the maid to bring wine for the stranger, who drank it in silence, not a little astonished at the uproar his question had occasioned.
“At last each had finished his supper, and all, save the new-comers, had disappeared. One of these then rose, and said, ‘The sun rises at four. His eccelenza need not trouble himself to get up before, we shall be in Pistoja in good time. I will call his eccelenza.’ He walked to the Madonna picture, crossed himself, and disappeared, followed by his companion. The stranger was now alone with his hostess. She lighted a lamp, and placing it on the table before him said, as she looked intently at him, ‘Filippo, have you forgotten me?’ He gazed into her face, and saw that it was very lovely, and very wild; but at last he replied, ‘Upon my word I don't remember you.’
“‘It is impossible,’ she said, with a tone of the deepest conviction. ‘You have had seven years to think of me. That is a long, long time; an image can fix itself in the memory in that time.’
“‘Yes, indeed, he who has nothing else to do for seven years save to think of a pretty woman's face must at last get tolerably familiar with it.’
“‘Yes,’ she answered, musingly, ‘so it is; you said so then; you said you would think of nothing else.’
“‘Seven years ago? Ah, then I was a sportive youth, and would have said anything. Did you really believe me?’
“She nodded thrice, quite earnestly, and answered, ‘Why should I not believe it? I have in my own experience found that you were right. I have done nothing but think of you.’
“‘Child,’ said he, with a kindly expression, which sat well on his stern features, ‘I am sorry to hear it. Seven years ago I thought every woman knew the value of tender words from men—what did I not think of women then! Now, to speak honestly, I seldom think of them at all. Dear child, believe me, we have much more serious matters to think of.’
“She was silent, as if she did not rightly comprehend what he was saying, and waited till he should say something intelligible to her.
“‘I begin now to recollect,’ he said, ‘that I was here seven years ago. I should have known Treppi and this house again, perhaps, had
[Page 505]
it not been for the mist. Yes, the doctor ordered me to the mountains, and like a young fool I was always risking my neck on the most precipitous.’
“‘I knew,’ she said, as a touching gleam of joy spread over her face, ‘I knew you could not have forgotten it. Why, the old dog has not forgotten you, nor his hatred; and how can love forget?’
“She spoke with so much conviction and animation that he gazed at her with increased amazement. ‘I do remember something of a girl,’ he said, ‘who met me on the mountains, and prevented my passing the night there by bringing me to her parents' house. I remember also that this girl took my fancy....’
“‘Yes,’ she interrupted, ‘greatly!’
“‘But I remember that she took no fancy to me. I had a long talk with her; but all my eloquence extorted only eight or ten words from her. And as I thought at last to awaken the sleeping lips with a kiss—I see her now—she sprang aside, and in both hands caught such stones, that it was a mercy I escaped the martyrdom of St. Stephen. If you are that pretty girl, how can you have the face to speak to me of your love?’
“‘I was only fifteen, Filippo, and very bashful. Besides, I was afraid of my parents. Mother looked sharp after me, as you sat there—in the very place where you now are—and I went out, and stood by the window, that I might look at you. You were younger then, but not handsomer. You have still the eyes you then had, and with which you could gain all they chose to ask; and the same voice, which enraged Fuoco's jealousy. Poor beast! I had loved nobody but him till then; and that I loved you then, he discovered better than you did.’
“‘Right! He was like mad that night. What a night it was, Fenice! I know I had no rest when you would not come into the house, so I went out to seek you. But I only saw the white kerchief on your head, for you rushed into the room near the stable.’
“‘It was my bedroom, Filippo. You could not enter there.’
“‘But I tried. I remember how I stood there for hours tapping and begging for admittance, scamp that I was! and vowing that my head would burst if I did not see you once more.’
“‘Not your head, it was your heart , you said. Oh, I know every word.’
“‘Yet you would listen to none then.’
“‘I thought I should die. I stood in the farthest corner, and thought, oh! could I but summon courage to creep to the door, and lay my mouth near the hole through which you were speaking, that I might feel your breath!’
“‘Oh, the folly of youth! If your mother had not come, I should have stopped there till you had opened! I am almost ashamed of myself to think with what savage anger I was forced to decamp, and dreamt the whole night long of you.’
“‘I sat awake in the darkness,' she said. ‘Towards morning, sleep overcame me, and when I awoke and saw the sun was up—where were you? No one told me, and I dared not ask. I hated the faces of
[Page 506]
those around me as if they had murdered you, to prevent my seeing you. I ran into the mountains, and wandered there, calling out your name, sometimes with entreaties, sometimes with maledictions, because on your account I could love no one else. I was away two days; and when I returned home father beat me, and mother would not speak to me—she well knew why I had run away. My dog, Fuoco, had accompanied me; and whenever I called your name aloud he howled.’
“There was a pause, during which they gazed upon each other. Filippo then asked how long her parents had been dead.”
“‘Three years. Then I went to Florence; for you had said you came from Florence. I lived there a month, trying to find you; at last I heard that you had long since gone away.’
“Filippo stood up, and began pacing about the room. Fenice followed him with her eyes, but manifested none of the agitation which seemed to move him. At last he came towards her, and said, ‘And why do you confess me all this, poveretta ?’
“‘I have had seven years to gather courage to confess it. Ah! if I had but confessed it then , this poor heart would have been spared much misery. But I knew that you must come back to me, Filippo; only I did not think it would have been so long first. I am a child to talk so. What does all that matter now it is past? Filippo, you are come; and I am yours eternally, eternally.’
“‘Dear child,’ he said, in a low tone, and then suddenly stopped.
“‘Many wanted to marry me,’ she continued; ‘but I only wanted you. No sooner did any one begin to say sweet things to me than your voice sounded in my ears sweeter than anything on earth. For a long while they have left me in peace, although I am still young, and as handsome as ever. They seemed to know that you would soon come back.’
“‘And suppose I am already married,’ he said.
“She opened wide her eyes. ‘Filippo, you are trying me. You have no wife. The fortune-teller told me so.’
“‘She was right, Fenice, I have no wife. But how can she, or you, know that I want one?’
“‘How can you help wanting me?’ she said, with the deepest conviction.
“‘Listen to me, Fenice,’ he said; and in quiet, earnest tones he told the history of his past life, and his present position. He had drawn upon himself the hatred of the Bolognese police, on account of his political opinions; and as they could not trap him, they had resolved to dishonour him. For this purpose a quarrel had been picked with him, followed by a challenge. The spot chosen for the duel was Pistoja; but his passport had been refused him; and when the day came, and his adversary was on the ground, he absent, the report would be industriously circulated that he had shown the white feather. To outwit them, he had engaged the contrabandistas to guide him to Pistoja over the mountains.
“As he concluded, she snatched his hand hastily, and exclaimed—‘Do not go, Filippo; they want to murder you.’
“‘Assuredly they do; but how do you know that?’
[Page 507]
“‘I see it here and here,’ she replied, pointing to her brow and heart.
“‘You, too, are a fortune-teller, then?’ he said, smiling. ‘Your art will convince you that you must banish the old love out of your thoughts. Perhaps events have so fallen out in order that I should not quit the world without freeing you from your faithful bondage, dear child. Doubtless it is better so. We should not perhaps have suited each other. You loved another Filippo, a careless, light-hearted youth, who had known no sorrow but love sorrows. What would you have done with a solitary, sombre, thought-oppressed man?’
“He tried to take her hand kindly, as she said slowly, and without the slightest intonation—‘You do not love me!’ Then flinging back his hand with a scream, she uttered her words passionately: ‘No, no, no, no, you do not love me. You cannot. You cannot. Will you rather rush to death than into my arms? Can you come after seven long years only to say adieu? Can you speak so calmly of your death, as if it were not also mine? Oh, better for me had I been blind ere these eyes beheld you, deaf ere these ears listened to you. Why did not Fuoco tear you to pieces ere I knew that you had only come to tear my heart in pieces? Oh, God! Oh, God!’
“She flung herself on the ground before the Madonna, and prayed fervently. The howling of the old dog was heard between her sobs. The moonlight streamed in upon her despair. In a few moments her arms were round his neck, and her wet cheek rested piteously against his, as she sobbed out—‘Do not leave me, Filippo. Go not to this murderous rendezvous. If you remain with me, who will know it? Let the wolf-dogs say what they please. ... Yes! you shall stay. The Madonna has given you to me that I might rescue you. Forgive me the angry word, Filippo; I don't know what I said. Let us sit down, and talk over everything. Will you build a new house here? Will you have new servants? We will send these away. Even Nina shall go. And Fuoco. Or we will fly from here together. I know these mountains, and will lead you anywhere. Before sunrise we shall be in the valleys, and can go to Genoa, Venice, where you will.’
“‘Stop!’ he said, firmly. ‘Enough of folly for to-night. Fenice, you cannot be my wife. If they do not succeed in murdering me tomorrow they will another day; come it must, I know.’ He here gently, yet firmly unloosed her grasp from his neck. ‘Look here, child; things are bad enough without our making them worse by folly. In after years, when you have a husband and children, you will bless me for being reasonable to-night. Now let me go to bed; and you, too, must get to sleep; and take care that we do not see each other to-morrow morning. You have an excellent reputation here, as I learned from my guides; and if to-morrow morning we should be seen embracing in this way, and you were to make a scene—is it not so, Fenice? And so, good night; good night, dear child.’
“He offered her his hand, but she took it not. ‘Have I not suffered enough,’ she said, ‘during the last seven years because I was reasonable , as you call it, one night? And now do you wish that this cursed reasonableness should make me eternally miserable? No, no, no! I
[Page 508]
will not suffer you to escape again. It will be my fault if you go, and are murdered.’
“‘Do you not hear that it is my will?’ he said, imperiously,—‘that I now intend sleeping, and alone . What are you talking about? If you do not feel that my honour calls me away from you, it is a proof that you were never worthy of me. I am no puppet to be moved as you will. My path is clear—and it is too narrow for us both. Show me the bed where I am to pass the night, and then .... let us forget each other.’
“‘If you strike me I will not leave you. If death himself came between us I would drive him away with these arms. In life and death you are mine, Filippo!’
“The colour mounted to his brow as with both hands he tore her from him, exclaiming—‘Silence! And now all is over, for ever! Am I a thing that any one may clutch who pleases. I am a man; and to her who would have me I must give myself. You have sighed for me seven years—has that given you the right of dishonouring me on the eighth? Seven years ago I loved you, because you were other than you are now. But now all is over. For the last time, where is my room?’
“He spoke harshly; and as he concluded, the tone pained him, but he said nothing more. He awaited some stormy reply, but she passed him quite coldly, silently opened a door not far from the hearth, pointed to the iron bolt, and then seated herself once more at the hearth. He was annoyed at her silence, but entered, and bolted himself in. He paused some time listening. But no sound came from the room. The whole house was quiet; not a sound, save the neighing of the horses, and the occasional howl of the dog, reached his ears. He threw himself on the bed, and gazed round the room, gradually becoming aware that it was Fenice's bedroom, and a deep pity for the poor girl filled his heart; he regretted his harsh words, and half rose to go and unsay them, but second thoughts assured him all was for the best. The poor child had thought of nothing but him during these seven years; and now!—she would have been just the wife for him. So simple and loving; so careless of dress and idle frivolities, such as consume the lives of women; but now!
“At length he fell asleep. As he awoke it was still dark, but he soon became conscious that the darkness was not the twilight which precedes sunrise—a beam of light shimmered along the floor. He sprang up, and found the hole in the wall, which had overnight admitted the moonlight, was now stuffed up with hay; pushing it out, the broad sunlight streamed upon him. In savage anger with the contrabandistas for having overslept themselves, and with Fenice for having darkened his room, to make him oversleep himself, he unbolted the door, and walked into the next room. Fenice sat on her old place by the hearth, as if awaiting him. Every trace of last night's emotion had vanished from her face.
“‘You have made me oversleep myself,’ he said, sternly.
“‘Yes,’ she replied, indifferently. ‘You were tired. You will reach Pistoja time enough, since you have to meet your murderers in the afternoon.’
[Page 509]
“‘I did not tell you to trouble yourself about my weariness. Where are my guides?’
“‘Gone.’
“‘Gone? Do you want to drive me mad? Where are they? They would not go away without being paid.’
“‘I have paid them. I told them you were sleepy, and that I would guide you the rest of the way, for my stock of wine is out, and I must get more in Pistoja.’
“He was too angry to reply at once; at length he burst forth. ‘No, with you I stir no step. Serpent! do you think I am to be held in your folds? We are now more separated than ever. I despise you for thinking so poorly of me as to suppose your miserable arts could fix me. Not a step will I go with you. Send one of your men—and there pay yourself.’
“He threw a purse towards her, and went to the door, as if seeking some one. ‘It's useless looking,’ she said, quietly; ‘you will find no one in Treppi, except a few feeble old women and children.’ He paused and stamped impatiently. ‘And why should you refuse to go with me? I know you cannot be mine. I had a dream last night which told me so. But I still love you, and should like to spend an hour or two more in your company. That is why I sent every one away. You are free to leave me when and where you will. But you cannot reach Pistoja without a guide—you would infallibly lose yourself among these mountains, and then would never reach your rendezvous.’
“‘Pest!’ he murmured, as he bit his lips in vexation. Then looking her full in the face, he was surprised to see how calm she was, how different from last night; and, to tell the truth, he was a little piqued at finding no trace of the storm. ‘If you are really grown reasonable,’ he said, coldly, ‘I have no objection to your accompanying me.’
“Without any expression of joy she rose, and said, ‘We must first eat something, for we shall get nothing between this and Pistoja, and there are some hours between this and there.’ She placed a mess of polenta before him, and a jug of wine. She ate, standing at the hearth, but drank no wine. He swallowed a few spoonfuls, gulped down the wine with a somewhat contemptuous expression, as if its flavour were none of the best, and lighted his cigar at the fire. Up to this moment he had not vouchsafed her a look, but as he stood beside her he could not help a glance, and was half amused, half piqued to observe an expression of triumph in her eyes, and a flush upon her cheek. She moved to the table, and snatching up the jug, exclaimed, ‘No one shall ever drink out of this now that your lips have touched it.’ With this she dashed it to pieces against the flags.
“A lightning flash of suspicion, ‘Can she have poisoned me?’ disappeared as soon as it had startled him. He more rationally explained her act as a bit of the superstition of love; and moved quietly out of the house, preceded by Fenice.
“A lovely mountain path led them over rivulets, through valleys, and over precipices. Fenice walked on a few feet in advance, but spoke no word. Filippo could not keep his eyes off her. At last they began to talk. She answered him calmly, but with a perceptible sadness in her
[Page 510]
tone. He walked and talked without once thinking of the duel which awaited him, but wholly given up to the emotions of the scene. Her beauty, her sad voice, the summer beauty of the place, the romance of the situation, filled his soul.
“At last he began to be aware, from the position of the sun, that she was leading him directly away from Pistoja, and that he was two hours further from his journey's end than when he started. ‘Stop!’ he exclaimed; ‘you are deceiving me again. Is this the way to Pistoja, you serpent?’
“‘No,’ she answered, quietly.
“‘Now by all the powers of hell, the devil himself might learn hypocrisy from you. Accursed blindness which prevented my seeing what you were.’
“‘Love is mightier than devil or angel,’ she said, in a deep, sad voice.
“‘Love!’ he shouted. ‘You idiot! do you think that the will of a man can be coerced by what a mad girl calls love? Turn back with me at once; show me the shortest way, or I will strangle you with these hands. Idiot! don't you see that I must hate one who would disgrace me before the world?’
“He approached her with furious looks. ‘Kill me,’ she exclaimed. ‘Do it, Filippo. But when you have done it you will cast yourself upon my corpse and weep tears of blood because you cannot make me live again. Your bed will be here beside me. You will have to fight away the vultures that would devour my flesh. The hot sun will burn you; the dews of night will fall on you till you sink a corpse beside me—for you can never more leave me. What, do you think that one who has lived among these mountains would throw away seven years as if they were one day? I know what they have cost me, and that I pay a good price when I purchase you with them. And shall I let you go to your death? Ridiculous! Try to leave me, and you will soon learn that you are bound to me for ever. In the wine you drank this morning there was a love-philtre which no man has ever withstood. You are mine!’
“She had an imperial air as she uttered these words, but he laughed scornfully, and replied: ‘Your love-philtre has ill served your turn, for I never hated any one as I hate you in this moment. But I am a fool to hate such a fool. It may cure you of madness and love never to see me again. I can do without your guidance. There is a shepherd's hut, and smoke issuing from the chimney. They will point out the way for me. Adieu.’
“She said nothing, but seated herself in a shadow of a rock, and gazed into the rippling rivulet at her feet, as he hastened away. In spite of his exasperation he had not gone far before the words she had spoken began to affect his imagination; in vain he stormed at her, and laughed at her folly; her image pursued him as he wound along amid precipitous rocks, and through thick clumps of fir-trees. It was in vain that he turned and turned, clambered up this path and down that, the hut was either out of sight, or always seemingly further than before; and ever present was the image of Fenice. ‘Simple child,’ he
[Page 511]
said, ‘she sits up there firmly believing in the potency of her philtre.’ On and on he went, but no nearer seemed the hut; and he began to despair of reaching Pistoja in time. He hastened his steps, and in his agitation often turned back to take a path he had previously rejected. At length, on turning a corner, he found himself but a few feet from Fenice, who sat where he had left her, and gazed at him with happy eyes.
“‘Are you come at last, my Filippo?’ she said; ‘I expected you much sooner.’
‘Devil!’ he replied, ‘do you mock me, because in my agitation I have lost my way? If I see you again it is but again to curse you. If I am here, on my soul it is not because I sought you. You will not have me, use what philtre you may.’
“She smiled, and shook her head strangely. ‘It draws you without your knowing it,’ she said. ‘You would find me without seeking, if all the mountains in the world were between us, for I mixed in your wine seven drops of blood from the heart of a dog. Poor Fuoco! he loved me and hated you. So will you hate the Filippo you were when you rejected me, and only be at rest within yourself when you love me. Filippo, do you now see that I have conquered you? Come now, I will show you the way to Genoa, my love, my husband, my darling!’
“She rose, and held out her arms to embrace him, but suddenly shrunk back at his aspect. He was as pale as death, except the bloodshot eyes; his lips moved inarticulately, his hat had fallen, his hands waved her off. ‘A dog! a dog!’ he gasped. ‘No, no, no! better a dead man than a living dog.’ A wild laugh burst from him, and slowly, as if every step was an effort, with his bloodshot eyes fixed on her, he retreated backwards till he fell headlong into the ravine he had just left.
“Night was before her eyes. With both hands she held her heart, as she hoarsely murmured the word ‘Madonna!’ As in a dream she began the rapid but difficult descent of the ravine, helping herself alternately with the firs and boulders, till she reached the spot where he lay motionless against a tree, his brow bathed in blood, his clothes torn, his eyes closed. It was not until she had ascertained that he still lived that she gave way to a burst of tears—mingling grief and gratitude.
“As Filippo came to his senses, and once more opened his eyes, he saw two shepherds—an old man and a boy—sprinkling water in his face and rubbing his temples. His head rested on something soft. He knew not that it was resting on Fenice's lap. He seemed altogether to have forgotten her. Drawing a deep breath, he once more closed his eyes. After a long pause he said faintly, ‘Will one of you honest fellows—go swiftly—to Pistoja. I am waited for there. God will reward you if you—tell the hostess of La Fortuna—what condition—I am in. My name---.’ He here lost consciousness again. Fenice undertook to deliver the message, and gave instructions to the shepherds to carry him gently to Treppi, there to lay him in her bed, and send for La Chiaruccia, who would attend to his wounds. They obeyed her, and no sooner were they out of sight than, with a deep
[Page 512]
sigh, she started along the rough path which led downwards from the mountains.
“It was nearly three o'clock when Fenice reached Pistoja. The tavern La Fortuna stood a few hundred paces from the town, and at this period of siesta was quiet enough. The host never moved from the bench on which he reclined, but merely asked her what she wanted. ‘I bring a message from Signor Avvocato Filippo Mannini,’ she said. He quitted her for a moment, and entered a pavilion, the windows of which were darkened by curtains. Into this she was presently afterwards introduced, and found there three men drinking wine.
“‘The Signor Avvocato will not come, then, as he promised?’ said one of the men to her. ‘But who are you, and what credentials have you?’
“‘I am Fenice Cattaneo, from Treppi; and as to credentials, I want none, for I speak the truth.’
“‘Why comes he not? We held him for a man of honour.’
“‘Nor is he less so because a fall from the rocks has broken his leg, and deprived him of consciousness.’
“The men exchanged looks, and the speaker then said—‘You are a bad hand at lying, Fenice Cattaneo. If he lost consciousness, how could he send you here to tell us of it?’
“‘He recovered speech for a moment, and said he was waited for in the Fortuna , and ordered some one to narrate what had befallen him.’
An incredulous laugh burst from the other men. ‘You hear,’ said the speaker, ‘these gentlemen do not seem to place entire confidence in your story. It is truly pleasanter to invent accidents than to act as a man of honour.’
“‘If that means that Signor Filippo is kept away by cowardice, it is a base lie, for which heaven will hold you accountable,’ she replied firmly, looking at them one after the other.
“‘You are warm, little one; I suppose you are the Signor's beloved?’
“‘No; the Madonna knows I am not,’ she answered in her deepest tones. They whispered together. She heard one say—‘Treppi is Tuscan;’ and another reply—‘Do you believe a word of this story?’ the third said—‘He is as much at Treppi as---’
“‘Come and see him yourselves,’ she exclaimed. ‘But lay aside your arms, or I will not conduct you.’
“‘Foolish girl! do you suppose we would hurt such as you?’
“‘No, but him .’
“‘Have you any other condition to specify?’
“‘That you bring a surgeon with you. Is there one among you?’ They once more began whispering, and one left the pavilion, shortly returning with a fourth, who seemed not to know the men.
“It was evening before they reached the heights. Treppi seemed as quiet as usual. Only a few childish faces peered from the doorways as Fenice and her followers passed by. When they reached her house there was a group of contrabandistas talking before the door, and servants were busy with the heavily-laden horses. As Fenice and the
[Page 513]
others approached, silence fell on the contrabandistas, who moved aside to let them pass. Fenice spoke a few words to her maid, Nina, and then opened the door of her chamber. The wounded man was seen stretched on the bed, and beside him, crouching on the ground, an aged woman from Treppi.
“‘How goes it, Chiaruccia?’ asked Fenice.
“‘Not worse, thanks be to the Madonna!’ replied the old crone, as she gazed upon the men who followed Fenice into the room. Filippo awoke, and the colour came into his pale face as he recognised Fenice.
“‘I have brought your antagonist here,’ she said, ‘that he might convince himself it was impossible for you to come. And a surgeon is also here.’
“Filippo suffered his glazed eye to wander over their faces, and then said, feebly—‘He is not there. I know them not.’
“‘It is enough that we know you,’ said the one who had spoken to Fenice. ‘We have orders to arrest you. Letters have been seized from which it appears that you were coming into Tuscany not so much about the duel as about a conspiracy. You see before you the Commissary of Police; and here are my instructions.’
He held a paper before the eyes of the wounded man, who, however, sank back in unconsciousness. ‘Examine his wounds,’ said the commissary to the surgeon. ‘If his condition by any possibility admits of his being removed, we must move him at once.’ Fenice disappeared. The surgeon commenced his examination, during which voices were heard outside, a tramping to and fro, and the sudden appearance of faces at the window, which quickly disappeared, betokened some unusual excitement. The surgeon on completing his survey, pronounced that the removal was possible, though dangerous; so dangerous, that he could take none of the responsibility on himself. He was assured this was unnecessary, and was ordered to bind the wounds, so as to permit instant departure.
“‘Molza,’ said the commissary, ‘go and seize those horses that are outside.’ As the sbirro obeyed, and opened the door, he started back at the sight of a room full of angry faces. In front stood two resolute contrabandistas. Fenice advanced, and said, firmly:—‘You will be kind enough to quit this room without delay, and without the wounded man—or you will never see Pistoja again. Blood has not been spilled in this house so long as Fenice Cattaneo has been its mistress, and Madonna keep it pure! Go; and make no attempt to return, if you value your lives. You remember the pass where only one at a time finds footing over the precipice! A child could defend that pass by simply rolling down the blocks of stone which overhang it. We shall place a watch there till this gentleman is well and safe. Now go, and tell your fellow-citizens how you deceived a poor girl, and would have murdered a wounded man!’
“The faces of the sbirri darkened, and a long pause ensued. Then all three drew out their pistols, and the commissary said, coldly, “We come in the name of the law. Six of you will be shot if you force us to make the law respected.’
“A growl ran through the assembly. ‘Quiet, friends,’ exclaimed
[Page 514]
Fenice, with sublime courage. ‘They dare not. They know well enough that for every man they shoot, they and their kin will have to pay tenfold. They dare not pull a trigger. You talk absurdly,’ she said, turning to the commissary. ‘The fear which speaks in your face speaks more sensibly; do what it bids you, and depart unharmed. The way is free, signori!’
She stood aside, and pointed to the door. There was a pause. The sbirri were irresolute. The peasants looked implacable. After whispering together, the sbirri with tolerable composure walked through the room, followed by the energetic curses of their conquerors, and were soon out of sight.
During the whole of this scene the wounded man, half raised on his elbows, looked on in amazement. La Chiaruccia now approached, settled his pillow, and said—‘Quiet, my son, lie quiet. La Chiaruccia will watch while you sleep, and Fenice will take care that you are safe.’
Ten days and ten nights was Filippo under the care of the old woman. He slept well at night, and the greater part of the day he was at the open door enjoying the fresh air and solitude. When he was able to write he despatched a letter to Bologna, and received next day an answer, but whether it was pleasant or unpleasant could not be read in his pale face. Except with the Chiaruccia and the children of Treppi he spoke with none. He only saw Fenice in the evening as she drove the cattle home, for she rose at sunrise, and left the house during the entire day. Even when she came home she never spoke to him, and seemed to be quite unaware of his presence. Her face was pale and rigid; her eyes without fire.
“One morning she came into his room, and said, quietly—‘You are now well enough to go home. La Chiaruccia says so. I have a horse and a guide for you to-morrow; and I only ask of you one thing—the promise that you will never return here.’
“‘I promise it, Fenice, on one condition.’ She was silent. He looked in her eyes, and said tenderly—‘If you go with me.’
“She looked angry, as she said, ‘No jesting. I exact the promise without conditions; and I claim it from you as a man of honour.’
“‘What! will you reject me after making me yours for ever by a love-philtre?’
“She quietly and sadly shook her head. ‘Henceforth there is no witchcraft between us. You lost blood before the philtre had worked— that destroyed it. And it is well so, for I did wrong. Let us speak no more of it. Only say that you are ready to go.’
“‘If this magic fails, then must another be employed, Fenice.’
“‘Silence,’ she exclaimed; ‘I am deaf. I now know that one cannot buy a human soul, neither with services, nor with seven years' waiting. Do not think you have made me miserable; you have cured me.’
“‘Answer me,’ he said, passionately. ‘On your soul, speak truly! Have I cured you of your love ?’
“‘No,’ she said, firmly. ‘But it is mine. You have no right or power over it. Go!’
“He was at her feet. Passionate and incoherent words issued from
[Page 515]
his lips; deepest sincerity flashed from his eyes. Her own eyes began to rekindle, and her cheek to flush. And at sunrise on the following day, the lovers were seen descending the mountains on their way to Genoa, whither Filippo had resolved to withdraw. The pale man rode on a horse, and his radiant bride walked at the side, her hand on the bridle. On both sides rose the heights of the Apennines; the eagles screamed over the ravines; and in the distance shimmered the blue sea, like their own bright future to the wanderers.”
Such an abridged version will serve better than any criticism to make the reader aware that in these tales an original writer is recognisable. Unequal the tales are, but none of them are the product of the circulating library. Heyse writes a story because he has some psychological problem which demands artistic expression. He does not “sit down to write,” like contributors to the magazines; but he writes because impelled. A keen and subtle insight into the working of passion, and a very charming style, distinguish his stories. What an Italian colour there is in this story we have just retold! How the direct, simple, passionate nature of Fenice is exhibited in unforced, spontaneous touches! How real is this imaginative picture! Still more remarkable in this respect is “La Rabbiata.” In the “Blinden” and the “Kreisrichter” there is a want of steady psychological truth; in each there is a good idea, and some interesting pages, but we feel that the author has not mastered the secrets of his characters, and that a deeper experience of life would have given another turn to these stories.
The superiority of these tales led us to hope that perhaps in German “Novellen” (our equivalent for novelle is story) we should find the entertainment we could not find in German novels: a suspicion which was strengthened by the recollection of Auerbach's village stories; and “Die Leute von Seldwyla” was taken into our evening circle. The two first of the five tales in this volume were not very promising; but the third, “Romeo und Julia auf dem Dorfe,” turned out a little chef-d'œuvre . We are introduced to two sturdy and respectable Swiss peasants, each of whom cultivates his own bit of land with loving diligence and success. One of these, Manz, has a son named Sali, the Romeo of the story; the other, Marti, has a daughter, the charming village Juliet. As the two peasants are staunch friends, the two children are constant playfellows; and perfectly exquisite is the description of these two children at play together in the field—a picture of child-life only equalled by Dickens's exquisite story of the elopement of the two children in one of the Christmas numbers of the “Household Words.” The reader seeing Manz and Marti such good friends, will begin to wonder whence the Capulet and Montague bitterness is to come which will sadden the
[Page 516]
lives of Romeo and Juliet; but a glimmering of the coming evil soon dawns. The parents are friends, but they are also men, and above all, landed proprietors. Between their land lies a field, which for years has been uncultivated, because no one can establish a rightful claim to it. This field is overgrown with weeds, and has long been the spot on which both peasants have shot their rubbish. It lies there, a good piece of arable land, profiting no one. As the years roll on, and the children grow up, this field gradually becomes smaller and smaller between the fields of the two friends, which grow broader and broader; the encroachments have been gradual, but silently effective. And now the corporation resolves on selling the field by public action. Manz and Marti are the most eager bidders, and, after a hot contest, Manz becomes the possessor. From this moment begins the strife which is to end only with their lives. No sooner is the sale completed than Manz, walking away with Marti, casually remarks:—“I have observed lately that you have driven your plough across the end of the field, which now belongs to me, and have cut off a good slice at the corner. You no doubt did this in the belief that the field would shortly be yours, and treated it as if it were your own. But since I have bought it, you cannot, of course, suppose that I shall allow so considerable a reduction of my property, and will not object to my making the boundary-line straight again as before. There wont be any quarrel about that.” Marti replies with equal sang froid that he knows not what quarrel can arise, since the matter is very simple: “You bought the field as it is, and since it was put up to sale, it has not been altered a hair's breadth.” It is but a brief interchange of words which follows, but enough to indicate the desperate struggle of obstinacy which will ensue. The friends separate without looking at each other, but fixing their steady gaze in the distant blue as if some marvel of nature were visible in the opposite side of the horizon, such as entirely occupied them. Early on the following day, Manz began clearing his newly-bought field of its stones and weeds, and having collected them into carts, tilted the whole upon that portion which Marti had so carefully ploughed. Marti flew in anger to the authorities, and then commenced the lawsuit, which finally ruined both. The whole of this struggle is admirably conceived and depicted. We are made thoroughly to participate in the embittered obstinacy which grows into deadly hatred, and brings with it first distress, then improvidence. Meanwhile the children have grown up into young man and woman, but have not seen each other for years, and have learned to share the animosity of their parents. Manz, who has a wife, and not a wise one, is the first to succumb. He is forced by poverty to quit house and land, and to settle in a
[Page 517]
wretched beer-house in the town. The description of the once respectable family now fallen so low, and of the disappointment of the wife when she finds that, instead of being the hostess of a flourishing inn, as she had imagined, she is mistress of a squalid beer-house, is worthy of Balzac. Admirable, also, is the picture of Manz's further fall, when even this beer-house cannot be made to bring food. At length matters go so hard with the family, that Manz and Sali are reduced to the precarious extremity of angling in the river for a subsistence. Meanwhile, Marti, who has held out somewhat longer, and who still keeps a house over his head, is also reduced to fishing; and a fine scene occurs where the two men with their children accidentally see each other on the opposite banks of the same stream, and begin cursing and upbraiding each other with their downfall. From curses to blows the step is small, and the two infuriated old men meet on the bridge, strike each other on the face, and endeavour to throw each other into the stream; but are saved by their children, who meet once more after so long a separation, and silently press each other's hands, “which were moist and cold from the water and the fish they had handled.”
Romeo and Juliet have thus come together again, and the love of childhood has in an instant sprung up into the love of lovers. The next day Sali cannot rest till he has sought out Vrenchen (that is Juliet's name), and spent with her a happy hour in that field where they were wont to pass so many happy hours. But her father surprises them, curses him, and beats her. This is more than Sali can bear; he snatches up a stone, strikes Marti on the head with it, and is alarmed to see the old man sink senseless on the heap of stones. The old man is not killed; but for some days he remains in a dubious state, and when he recovers the use of his speech, it is found that he has lost his reason. But, though insane, Marti is cheerful, and even merry. He has forgotten the past, forgotten his present evil. He is soon removed to an asylum, and then Vrenchen is without money or a protector. The lovers meet once more, but it is only to learn that there is no hope for them. Vrenchen must quit the house and seek a situation. Sali is too poor to aid her. They resolve, however, that their last day shall be spent together, and as it is Sunday, they will dance together at the Kirchweih . Very prettily and touchingly told is this part of the story, which is quite a little love poem, full of innocent passion and joy. Were our space less circumscribed, we would translate the whole of the description of this lovers' Sunday; but its length is too great, and an abstract would spoil it. We must therefore content ourselves with referring our male readers to the original, which they will find quite a bit of genius—a free poetic fancy in the
[Page 518]
conception, and a thorough realism presiding over the execution. Indeed, the realism is, in one respect, carried too far. We have already hinted that it is our male readers to whom we recommend the original, and it is vexatious to think that a man of genius should write a story which, because of a few sentences that might perfectly well have been omitted without destroying the interest or reality of the picture, cannot be read aloud in the family circle. The story ends tragically, as its name leads us to anticipate. The lovers are intensely happy during one long summer day; and rather than part on the morrow they seek union in death.
Very different, yet in its way scarcely less original and admirable, is the story of the “Drei gerechten Kammacher.” It is a humorous, unforgetable picture of three hardworking, miserly, narrow-minded, narrow-hearted combmakers aspiring to the savings of Süss Bünzlin, a washerwoman, who may be described as the female of such males, and whose complacent platitudes are extremely amusing. There is but little of what is called “story” in this novelle , little incident and intrigue; but the characters and situation are so presented that we seem to live in the narrow world, and watch every detail with untiring interest. Here, again, we have realism triumphant. The story is itself fantastic enough, yet one never feels that it is not literally true. That unpleasantly virtuous maiden, and those horribly virtuous combmakers, are like the people we have known and avoided; their life, though altogether foreign to our experience, is made so real to us by the author's skill that we could almost vouch for its reality, though knowing it to be fiction.
Thus our experience of German fictions completely bears out the critical principles which assign the first place to Realism in Art; only those works which are distinguished by any felicity of realism in their treatment are capable of conveying any durable pleasure to the cultivated reader, and this in exact proportion to the truthfulness of the treatment. If German novels are, for the most part, dreary inflictions, it is because they have so little realism that they resemble nothing on earth or under it.
NOTES
1 This is only true of the original. No copy or engraving that we have ever seen has even a tolerable accuracy in these finer, subtler beauties.
$$$
