Recent Works of Fiction. Ruth
Author: Anon., fl. 1853 (The Prospective Review).
Publication info: The Prospective Review : A Quarterly Journal of Theology and Literature; London  : iv, 599 p. London (1853)

Recent Works of Fiction. Ruth. By the Author of Mary Barton [in, The Prospective Review; a quarterly journal of theology and literature. Vol. IX. (Christian Teacher. Vol. XV)] Art . IV.—RECENT WORKS OF FICTION. Ruth. By the Author of Mary Barton. The novel has been styled the modern Epos, but if, in ancient times, Calliope was represented as holding in her hand the three great Epics of antiquity, her modern representative ought rather to be typified as a female Briareus, furnished with fifty heads, and a hundred hands, and might even then not unreasonably complain of the fatigue to which she is subjected in the service of her numerous votaries. The avidity with which works of fiction are perused, aspiring, as they do, to delineate emotions and experiences in which all human beings are equally interested, cannot excite surprise. “Man is dear to Man,” and the desire for sympathy is one of the deepest instincts of his nature; yet his inner mind is shrouded in a veil of mystery; his emotions, whether of joy or of sorrow, lurk often unsuspected in the recesses of his heart, and his most cherished thoughts shrink from exposure, except when conveyed in an imaginative form. All genuine fiction, however, is the idealized transcript of actual experience; and as the architects of old built their souls into the stately minsters, whose storied aisles embody the aspirations of a by-gone age, so the heart of humanity has enshrined itself in the glowing pages of romance, where stand revealed those hidden passages of experience, which in actual life are witnessed only by the eye of Him who seeth in secret; and as we listen to the wail of sorrow or the tones of joy, uttered, it may be, in a foreign language, and coming to us from a distant time, our heart responds to the sympathetic touch, and we recognise the deep truth of the poet's words, “that we have all of us one human heart.”
It is not merely as the record of past emotion, as the silent witness through each succeeding generation to the great doctrine of Human Brotherhood, that we value fiction; we regard it as fulfilling a high and a holy mission in the present; it conjures up an ideal world in the midst of our prosaic realities, and men, absorbed in selfish
[Page 223]
interests, are awakened to more generous sympathies, and their hearts, severed in the turmoil of the world, find a bond of fellowship and reunion in the affections and antipathies inspired by the creations of the poet:—
                                         “For books, we know,
Are a substantial world, both pure and good;
Round these, with tendrils strong as flesh and blood,
Our pastime and our happiness will grow.”
Fiction has yet another claim to our regard as a vehicle for the transmission of opinion; the results of speculative inquiry, when presented in an abstract form, wear, to the ordinary mind, an aspect so severe and uninviting, that we joyfully hail the imaginative faculty which invests dead principles in the living hues of experience, and thus brings them home to the conscience and apprehension of humanity. We accordingly find that as society awakens to a consideration of its vital interests, the province of fiction expands; it becomes the chosen medium for the discussion of the vexed and difficult questions, moral, religious, social and political, which agitate the minds of men; and the various theories adopted for their solution endeavour to obtain a hearing, by assuming an imaginative expression, and embodying themselves in a concrete form.
The vast influence thus acquired by works of fiction, and the prominence which they assume as an element of modern civilization, renders it important to determine the laws of taste by which they should be regulated;—a consideration the more worthy of regard when we reflect how closely interwoven are the various lines of thought, and that by the law of reciprocation, a wrong bias impressed upon any one of its manifestations has a tendency to spread beyond its immediate sphere; and hence literature, while it reflects the character of the age in which it is produced, becomes, in its turn, one of the most powerful agencies by which that character is modified.
The highest function of the critic is to act as the interpreter of genius, which, working under the impulse of its creative instincts, may be, and we believe frequently is, unconscious of the deep truths embodied in its own productions; the critic's eye, “made quiet by the power of harmony,” sees into the life of a work of art, penetrates
[Page 224]
its hidden meaning, and detects the subtle beauties which escape the notice of the superficial observer.
His subordinate function is to determine the laws of taste in harmony with which genius itself must consent to work, if it would remain within the sphere of beauty, and send forth its creations, “unmixt with baser matter,” to charm and elevate the minds of contemporaries, and to live for ever in the thought of humanity.
It would be impossible within the compass of an article to dwell individually upon the numerous works of fiction, with which our imaginative literature has recently been enriched, and from the perusal of which we have derived both instruction and pleasure. From the ample field outspread before us, we shall therefore select “Ruth,” not only from its high merit as a work of art, but from the deep interest attached to the moral questions which it involves. Before proceeding to our pleasant task of hearty appreciation, we shall take this opportunity of pointing out what appear to us some false tendencies, manifested in the imaginative literature of the day; “Ruth” being reserved for after consideration, is not included in the following strictures, which are offered in no irreverent or depreciating spirit, but rather from an earnest desire that an agency so replete with power and blessing as fiction, should be wielded with full efficiency, and enlisted heartily in the sacred cause of truth and goodness.
Novels may be divided into two classes, the epic, and the dramatic; the former, proposing as their aim a comprehensive survey of life, are necessarily slow in their development; we cannot accelerate the march of Providence, nor with impatient hand gather prematurely its slowly-ripening fruits; ample scope is thus allowed for digression and disquisition; and the readers, like travellers through a pleasant country, instead of hurrying to the goal, are contented to linger by the way, and to enjoy the rich prospects which open round them as they advance. Other novels on the contrary, by the rapidity of their action, the small number of characters introduced, and the limitation of the field of view, bear more affinity to the drama, which exhibits the concentrated essence of life, rather than life itself. Now it would seem reasonable that the extent of canvas should bear some proportion to the
[Page 225]
dimensions of the picture: fashion, however, having prescribed a certain framework, as characteristic of the legitimate novel, the author is under the necessity of contracting or dilating his matter in accordance with the prescribed limits; a process by which his movements are greatly embarrassed. It is unquestionably a difficult problem to expand into three volumes thought which would naturally embody itself in a much smaller compass; and to this vicious practice may, we think, in some degree be attributed the diffuseness of style which characterizes a large portion of our modern literature.
For the full enjoyment of fiction, too, the imagination must be in a productive mood; the figures then start into life, and the various aspects of nature flit through the mind, forming a background to the living scene; a redundancy of commonplace, however, effectually paralyses the imagination, and shuts the portals of the ideal world; there is nothing by which the effect of a work of art is more impaired, than by the too frequent intermingling of insignificant details, and we feel assured that if from many works of fiction the superfluous matter were eliminated, they would gain in power what they would lose in bulk. Occasionally recourse is had to still more desperate measures; one work of fiction, which obtained a high and deserved reputation, was returned to the author by the publisher, with the request that a hundred pages might be added; the consequence was the introduction of an episode, by which the symmetry and significance of the whole were greatly impaired; the absurdity of such a proceeding in reference to the plastic arts would be obvious at once, and reminds us of Addison's witty description of certain Greek poems, which were to be cramped or extended to the dimension of the frame prepared for them; they were obliged, he says, to undergo the fate of those persons whom the tyrant, Procrustes, used to lodge in his iron bed; if they were too short he stretched them on a rack; and if they were too long he chopped off a part of their legs, till they fitted the couch prepared for them. The publisher's apology would doubtless be that a more saleable article was thus produced. Alas for art, when it thus becomes the slave of Mammon! It is another manifestation of the tendency only too characteristic of the age, “to degrade
[Page 226]
the cow of Isis into the milch cow, and to count what the butter will fetch in the market.”
Another false tendency to which we would advert, manifests itself, we think, in the kind of characters selected as the subjects of fiction. From certain instinctive tendencies in the human mind, there is a degree of pleasure derived from any faithful imitation of Nature; but that from her exhaustless treasure-house of beauty, artists, relying upon this principle, should voluntarily select the repulsive for the exercise of their art, seems an unaccountable perversity. Literature, it is true, must be based upon reality; there is, however, a high and generous, as well as a low and grovelling, reality; and the true artist, in embodying the spirit of the age instead of introducing us to a region of sordid and vulgar fact, depicted with revolting minuteness, gives greater prominence to its ennobling elements, and though not ignoring the existence of evil, yet veils it in a poetic form. It is not the function of art simply to reproduce the noisy and turbulent present, but to impart rhythmical beauty to its manifold aspects, and by introducing us into a region of calmer and loftier thought to win us to a nobler life.
As in painting no executive skill, no richness of colour, can redeem a trivial conception and faulty design, so in literature no grace of style or harmony of diction can impart interest to ignoble views of life, and types of character essentially mean.
“True fiction hath in it a higher end
Than fact;—
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
'Tis not enough to draw forms fair and lively,
Their conduct likewise must be beautiful;
A hearty holiness must crown the work,
As a gold cross the minster dome, and show
Like that instonement of divinity,
That the whole building doth belong to God.”
Our final stricture has reference to a practice against which we beg to enter our most earnest protest; we refer to the levity with which vice is not unfrequently alluded to. The effect of custom in deadening our impressions is well known, and it is a trite, but not the less important, observation, that familiarity with vice tends to diminish
[Page 227]
the horror with which it is at first instinctively regarded. Let not the novelist plead in excuse “that it is not his province to play the moralist.” The artist might with equal truth justify the introduction of a distorted limb, on the plea that anatomy is no concern of his. Life is profoundly moral, and it is only our superficial glance which fails to recognise God's holy law, underlying its complicated phenomena; could we penetrate the recesses of the human heart, and see the tide of emotion coloured to remotest time by a momentary impulse; or could we disentangle the web of life, and trace the outward consequences of actions, weaving their dark or golden threads through the many-coloured texture, we should see God's holiness abundantly vindicated, and perceive that His moral government is regulated by laws as inflexible as those which govern the material universe. The fact of the highest artistic genius having manifested itself in a polytheistic age, and among a people whose moral views were essentially degraded, has, we think, fostered the erroneous notion, that the sphere of art has no connection with that of morality. The Greeks, with penetrative insight, detected the essential characteristics of man's organism as a vehicle of superior intelligence, while their intense sympathy with physical beauty made them alive to its most subtle manifestations, and reproducing their impressions through the medium of art, they have given birth to models of the human form, which reveal its highest possibilities, and the excellence of which depends upon their being individual expressions of ideal truth. Thus, too, in their descriptions of Nature, instead of multiplying insignificant details, they seized instinctively upon the characteristic features of her varying aspects, and not unfrequently embodied a finished picture in one comprehensive and harmonious word. In association with their marvellous genius, however, we find a cruelty, a treachery, and a license, which would be revolting if it were not for the historical interest which attaches to every genuine record of a by-gone age. Their low moral standard cannot excite surprise when we consider the debasing tendency of their worship, the objects of their adoration being nothing more than their own degraded passions invested with some of the attributes of deity. Now, among the
[Page 228]
modifications of thought introduced by Christianity, there is perhaps none more pregnant with important results than the harmony which it has established between religion and morality. The great law of right and wrong has acquired a sacred character when viewed as an expression of the divine will; it takes its rank among the eternal verities, and to ignore it in our delineations of life, or to represent sin otherwise than as treason against the supreme ruler, is to retain in modern civilization one of the degrading elements of heathenism. Conscience is as great a fact of our inner life as the sense of beauty, and the harmonious action of both these instinctive principles is essential to the highest enjoyment of art, for any internal dissonance disturbs the repose of the mind, and thereby shatters the image mirrored in its depths.
We are far from maintaining that the novelist should usurp the function of the preacher; his mission is to delineate life, in all its richness and harmony, and we are well aware that in actual experience the indirect teachings of example come home to the heart with far greater power than those delivered in the tone of direct exhortation; we may remark, incidentally, that highly as we appreciate Bulwer's last effort, “My Novel,” rich as it is in lessons of wisdom, and abounding in passages of rare beauty, we cannot but think that its artistic value is marred by the prominence given to the didactic element. The characters thereby lose their spontaneity, and want the breath of life; they seem not so much to have sprung into being from the fervent depths of a creative imagination, like the goddess of beauty emerging from the wave, as to have been called into existence for the purpose of embodying certain moral ideas. The moral tone should be felt through a work of fiction, like the pulse of health through a living organism, never obtruding itself into notice, but imparting grace and elasticity to every movement; the love of what is pure and honourable should be brought home to our hearts, heightened by the rich glow of the imagination, and while our charity is fostered by being made to feel how much that is excellent may possibly co-exist with moral evil, we must never be seduced by levity or sophistry, into a forgetfulness of its deadly character.
The unobtrusiveness of the moral elements in “Ruth”
[Page 229]
constitutes, we think, one of its greatest charms, and enhances its merit as a work of art. A passage from the volume of life, one of the saddest contained in that mysterious record, is transcribed for our perusal, and is left, without comment, to suggest its appropriate lesson. But as life itself, with its myriads of living agents, “encircled by the mystery of existence,” may justly be regarded as an allegory, the significance of which depends upon the right reading of the truths underlying its outward manifestations; so every episode in life partakes of an allegorical character, and invites to a deciphering of its hidden meaning, and an unfolding of its teachings. It is in this spirit that we turn to the narrative before us, which seizes upon the mind with the strong grasp of reality, and through its graceful diction, graphic delineation of nature, and skilful portraiture, fully maintains the high reputation which the author has already achieved as a writer of fiction. In the pages of her recent work she exhibits one phase of a vast social evil, which claims the earnest consideration of the wisest and noblest minds, and which, in its manifold bearings, involving the deepest questions in ethical science, is manifestly beyond the scope of a single work of fiction; we shall endeavour to point out a few of the truths which she has conveyed through the medium of her touching tale, and in order to render our remarks intelligible, we shall preface them by a brief outline of its more prominent features.
The heroine is an orphan girl, left alone in the world by the premature death of her parents, and apprenticed by her guardian, a hard-headed man of business, to Mrs. Mason, a fashionable milliner in a neighbouring town. Accordingly, at the age of fifteen, she is transplanted from her sweet country home, to the uncongenial atmosphere of the work-room, and from her first introduction on the scene awakens our tenderest sympathy, when in a brief interval from toil, she springs to the large, old window, and presses her hot forehead against the cold glass, as a bird presses against the bars of its cage, and looks out into the wintry sky. As Mrs. Mason's assistant, she attends in the ante- chamber of the assembly-rooms on the occasion of a public ball, and there becomes an object of attention to Mr. Bellingham, who is struck by the graceful form, and rich auburn hair, of the young apprentice. On the following
[Page 230]
morning chance again throws her in his way, at the moment when he succeeds in saving the life of a drowning child, an action which Ruth's imagination magnifies into a deed of heroic daring; he makes her his almoner in behalf of the suffering child, and thus becomes invested in her eyes with the additional grace of thoughtful benevolence. On the following Sunday, he joins her as she is coming out of church, and inquires after the health of his little protegé; and at the same time devises some excuse for meeting her again. On Sundays Mrs. Mason chose to conclude that all her apprentices had friends who would be glad to give them a welcome, while she went to spend the day at her father's; accordingly no dinners were cooked, no fires lighted, and we may well inquire what was to become of such as Ruth, who had no home and no friends in that large and populous town. The monotonous idleness of the day seemed worse than the incessant toil of the week, until the time came when it seemed to be a recognized hope in her mind that on Sunday she should see Mr. Bellingham, and hear a few words of kindness from him. He gradually insinuates himself into her confidence, and at length persuades her to accompany him to Milham Grange, her dear old home, situated at about six miles distant; with artful sophistry he silences her girlish scruples, and full of innocent delight, she sets forth upon the expedition; her return to the scenes associated with the fond memories of childhood is touchingly described, and we may mention, as one characteristic of our author's genius, the happy art with which she heightens the effect of her narrative, by the graceful and harmonious blending of natural scenery with the sentiments and emotions of her characters. As they were returning from their excursion, they were surprised by Mrs. Mason, who, full of indignation at seeing Ruth so far from home, accompanied by a stranger, prohibits her return to her house, adding, in terms of concentrated wrath, that she would have no slurs on the characters of her apprentices; Ruth, in her distress and bewilderment, is persuaded to accept of Mr. Bellingham's eagerly-proffered aid;—docile by nature she enters the carriage, and, unsuspicious of harmful consequences, is driven to London. So closes the first act of this melancholy drama. The second act opens in a remote village
[Page 231]
in North Wales, where Ruth reappears, accompanied by her betrayer; we believe that she fell in ignorance, and continued to live on in her fall in unconsciousness of sin; such a state of mind we believe to be possible, especially when we consider the halo thrown round Mr. Bellingham, by superior station and intellectual culture, which, combined with the unbounded confidence inspired by affection, would cause her to regard him as her oracle, and believe whatever he sanctioned to be right. Mr. Bellingham is attacked by brain fever, and under these trying circumstances, Ruth displays the germs of that energy of character which were subsequently ripened under more favourable circumstances; while the depth and fervour of her love manifest themselves in the scene, when, sick with anxiety, she waits through the dreary watches of the night, while the life of her lover hangs trembling in the balance. The passage is too long for quotation, or we should be tempted to insert it as a specimen of powerful description and deep pathos. A letter has been dispatched at the recommendation of the village doctor to summon Mrs. Bellingham, the mother of the invalid, a proud, haughty woman, whose portrait is sketched with a vigorous hand. When the crisis of her son's disease is past, she directs all her energies to sever his connexion with Ruth, whom she treats with withering scorn. She is only too rejoiced to find him quite willing to accede to her wishes, and ready to relinquish the toy which has ceased to charm, provided only the thing can be done handsomely, and he be spared any worry about it. Preparations for their departure are accordingly hurried; within an hour, Mrs. Bellingham and her son have quitted Llan-dhu, and are pursuing their journey, while a note from the former is delivered to Ruth, enclosing a bank-note of fifty pounds, with a recommendation, if she is not already dead in trespasses and sins, to enter some penitentiary.
Her first impulse is to follow the carriage, impelled by the passionate desire to gaze once more upon the face of her lover, till at length, when the object she sought has disappeared in the distance, she throws herself down on the ling by the side of the road and longs to die, longs for the sure hiding place earth gives to her weary ones. Suddenly a shadow fell across her garments; Mr. Benson, the deformed gentleman, who had first noticed the young girl in
[Page 232]
her innocent beauty, beheld her now, crouched up like some hunted creature, with a wild, scared, look of despair, which almost made her lovely face seem fierce; he saw the poor, lost wanderer, and when he saw her he had compassion on her.—There was some look of heavenly pity in his eyes, which touched her stony heart. He has left me, Sir!—he has gone off and left me!—she said low and mournfully, and then burst into the wildest, dreariest crying ever mortal cried. We have not space to follow Mr. Benson in his wise and tender dealings with that crushed and agonized spirit; with grave authority, and tearful, earnest compassion, he redeems her from the death of the suicide, and then summons his sister, Faith, to nurse the poor young creature, whom he had rescued from the jaws of death, but who, stricken and felled, lay stunned into a state of insensibility. She rallied at length to a consciousness of her sorrow, as evinced by the tears which came rolling down her pale, sad face.—But holy nature sent a comforter.
“There was a stony region in her heart,
But He at whose command the parched rock
Was smitten, and poured forth a quenching stream,
Hath softened that obduracy, and made
Unlooked for gladness in the desert place
To save the perishing.”
The prospect of becoming a mother reconciles her to life, and turns her heart to God. Mr. Benson and his sister consult together as to the course to be pursued with the poor outcast; they agree to take her home, but aware of the fearful trial which awaits the illegitimate child, they think it better to conceal her real situation, and to represent her as a widowed relative. For himself, Mr. Benson was brave enough to tell the truth; for the helpless babe about to enter a cruel world, he was tempted to evade the the difficulty. It was the pivot on which moved the destiny of years, and he turned it wrong.
The scene again changes, and we are transported to Mr. Benson's home; he was a dissenting minister in Eccleston, a manufacturing town, where we are introduced to a variety of new characters and interests, several of which we must omit, and confine our attention to the principal agents, the more prominent of whom we shall
[Page 233]
briefly notice. Sally, the confidential servant of the Bensons, is drawn with a masterly hand. She is a rare compound of strong affection, sound practical sense, and racy humour, occasionally bordering on the grotesque, and stands out in bold relief, like a living reality. The scenes in which she describes her courtship and the making of her will are inimitable, and introduced with admirable artistic effect, as they afford a relief from the too painful interest inspired by the main incidents of the story.
Of Mr. Benson's congregation, to which many poor were drawn by love for his character, Mr. Bradshaw formed the apex; an eminence to which he was raised by his wealth and social consideration. He was a stern, iron man, powerful and authoritative in appearance, with an undisguised contempt for all who failed in the success which he had himself achieved, while every moral error or delinquency came under his unsparing judgment. His favourite recreation was patronizing, and Ruth found favour in his eyes; her quiet manner, subdued by deep sorrow, being interpreted into a becoming awe of himself; he accordingly desired his wife, a gentle-looking woman, thoroughly broken into submission, to pay her every attention.
We must, however, return to Ruth, who had now become an inmate of the Benson home, where she inhaled a purer moral ether than she had been accustomed to for months. In due time a little babe was laid by the mother's side.
“A kindlier passion open'd on her soul,
When that poor child was born. Upon its face
She looked as on a pure and spotless gift
Of unexpected promise, where a grief
Or dread was all that had been thought of.”
It was a boy, and oh, how Ruth prayed, even while she was too weak to speak; and how she felt the beauty and significance of the words “Our Father!” and yet in the still watches of the night sadness grew like a giant, when she remembered that there would be no earthly father to guide and strengthen the child, and to place him in a favourable position for fighting the hard battle of life; and then, in those hours of spiritual purification came the wonder and the doubt of how far the real father would
[Page 234]
be the one to whom, with her desire of heaven for her child, she would wish to entrust him. Slight speeches, telling of a selfish, worldly nature, unnoticed at the time, came back upon her ear, having a new significance. Little child! Thy angel was with God, and drew her nearer and nearer to him, whose face is continually beheld by the angels of little children.
Ruth was anxious to remove to some cottage, and in her vocation as dressmaker to maintain herself and her child; she is persuaded, however, to remain in her present home till her child should be weaned, and under Mrs. Benson's guidance sets to work to acquire the knowledge afterwards to be communicated to her son. An event occurs, however, which changes the current of her destiny. During Mr. Benson's absence from home, Mr. Bradshaw proposes to his sister that Ruth shall enter their family as nursery governess, a plan to which Miss Benson easily accedes. On Mr. Benson's return a reluctant acquiescence is wrung from him by his sister; his conscience warning him that he ought to tell Mr. Bradshaw the whole story. His objections, and those of Ruth, are however overruled, and Ruth is installed in her new situation.
The quiet days grew into weeks and months, and even years, without any event to startle the little circle into the consciousness of the lapse of time.
The calm, however, was at length to be broken. Ruth, with her two little pupils, was sent to the sea-side, where Mr. Bradshaw had purchased a house; he was the mover of a project for bringing forward a man on the liberal interest, to contest the election with the Tory member, and was glad to have his house clear for electioneering hospitality. We must again advert to our author's skill in depicting the various aspects of external nature, and to the artistic manner in which she introduces us to each new locality. In reading one of her descriptions we seem to look out into the open sky, while the imagination revels in the long reaches of beauty and grandeur outstretched before it. With a few bold touches we are transported at once to the Eagle's Crag, the new Bradshaw residence, built on the summit of a rock, which nearly overhung the shore below. “From every part of the rooms, they saw the grey storms gather on the sea-horizon,
[Page 235]
and put themselves in marching array; and soon the march became a sweep, and the great dome of the heavens was covered with the lurid clouds, between which and the vivid green earth below, there seemed to come a purple atmosphere, making the very threatening beautiful; and by-and-by the house was wrapped in sheets of rain, shutting out sky and sea, and inland view; till, of a sudden, the storm was gone by, and the heavy rain-drops glistened in the sun, as they hung on leaf and grass, and the ‘little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west,’ and there was a pleasant sound of running waters all abroad.”
Various motives induce Mr. Bradshaw to take Mr. Donne, the new candidate, together with his lawyer, to spend the Sunday at the Eagle's Crag, and Ruth is accordingly directed to make all needful preparations for their reception. She and her pupils, during their afternoon walk on the sands, are joined by the gentleman, and while Mr. Bradshaw is greeting his little girls, Mr. Donne addresses himself to Ruth, who has been introduced to him by Mr. Bradshaw as
“ ‘My daughters' governess, Mrs. Denbigh.’ ‘Are you fond of the sea?’ asked he. There was no answer. ‘Do you enjoy staying by the sea-side, I should rather ask?’
The reply was ‘Yes,’ rather breathed out in a deep inspiration than spoken in a sound. The sands heaved and trembled beneath Ruth. That voice! No! if name, and face, and figure, were all changed, that voice was the same which had touched her girlish heart, which had spoken most tender words of love, which had won, and wrecked her, and which she had last heard in the low mutterings of fever. It seemed as if weights were tied to her feet—as if the stedfast rocks receded—as if time stood still;—it was so long, so terrible, that path across the reeling sands.”
We have not space to follow all the fluctuations in Ruth's emotional life during that terrible visit. We are tempted, however, to extract the following passage, as manifesting our author's deep feeling for art, and true perception of its significance. Mr. Donne is of course no other than Mr. Bellingham, who, for some family reasons, has been induced to change his name. He joins Ruth and her pupils on their way to church; they all went up the middle aisle into the Eagle's Crag pew. “Ruth's heart sank as she saw him there; she knew that his look was
[Page 236]
on her; she moved up the pew, out of the burning glance of those eyes of evil meaning. She could not listen, but in this extreme tension of mind to hold in her bewildered agony, it so happened that one of her senses was preternaturally acute. While all the church and the people swam in misty haze, one point in a dark corner grew clearer and clearer till she saw (what at another time she could not have discerned at all) a face—a gargoyle I think they call it—at the end of the arch next to the narrowing of the nave into the chancel, and in the shadow of that contraction. The face was beautiful in feature (the next to it was a grinning monkey), but it was not the features that were the most striking part. There was a half-open mouth, not in any way distorted out of its exquisite beauty by the intense expression of suffering it conveyed. But the eyes looked onward and upward to the ‘Hills from whence cometh our help.’ And though the parted lips seemed ready to quiver with agony, yet the expression of the whole face, owing to these strange, stony, and yet spiritual eyes, was high and consoling. If mortal gaze had never sought its meaning before, in the deep shadow where it had been placed long centuries ago, yet Ruth's did now. Who could have imagined such a look? Who could have witnessed—perhaps felt—such infinite sorrow, and yet dared to lift it up by faith into a peace so pure?”
“Whatever it was—however it came there—imaginer, carver, sufferer, all were long passed away. Human art was ended—human life done—human suffering over; but this remained; it stilled Ruth's beating heart to look on it. She grew still enough to hear words, which have come to many in their time of need, and awed them in the presence of the extremest suffering that the hushed world has ever heard of.”
A few days after Mr. Donne's departure Ruth received the following note without name or initials.
“ ‘For our child's sake, and in his name, I summon you to appoint a place where I can speak, and you can listen, undisturbed. The time must be on Sunday; remember! your boy's welfare depends on your acceding to this request.’
Ruth did not attempt to answer this letter till the last five minutes before the post went out. She could not decide until forced to it. She took up the pen and wrote:
    ‘The sands below the rocks. Time, afternoon church.’”
[Page 237]
The interview is quite too long for extraction: a few extracts may serve to indicate its character.
“ ‘We were happy once,’ continued he, ‘can such happiness never return?’ Thus he went on, anxious to lay before her all he had to offer before she should fully understand his meaning. ‘If you would consent, Leonard should be always with you,—educated where and how you liked—money to any amount you might choose to name should be secured to you and to him—if only Ruth—if only those happy days might return!’”
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
“ ‘I did not come to be spoken to in this way,’ said she. ‘I came, if by any chance I could do Leonard good. I would submit to many humiliations for his sake, but to no more from you.’
‘Are you not afraid to brave me so?’ said he. ‘You forget that if I spoke out ever so little, the good people of Eccleston would throw you off in an instant. Now,’ he continued, ‘do you understand how much you are in my power?’
‘Mr. and Miss Benson know all—they have not thrown me off,’ Ruth gasped out. ‘Oh, for Leonard's sake! you would not be so cruel.’
‘Then do not you be cruel to him—to me. Think once more!’
‘I think once more;’ she spoke solemnly. ‘To save Leonard from the shame and agony of knowing my disgrace, I would lie down and die. Whatever may be my doom—God is just—I leave myself in his hands. You have humbled me enough, sir. I shall leave you.’
She turned away resolutely. Mr. Donne folded his arms and looked after her. ‘She thinks she has baffled me; we must bid a higher price.’ He gained upon her, for her step was wavering. ‘Ruth,’ he said, overtaking her, ‘you shall hear me once more;—hear your triumph. I am come to offer to marry you, Ruth. To-morrow I will speak to any one in Eccleston you like.’”
“‘I cannot,’ said she; her voice was very faint and low.
‘Why, what on earth makes you say that?’
‘I do not love you. I did once. I could never love you again. All you have said and done since you came to Abermouth has only made me wonder how I ever could have loved you. The time that has pressed down my life like brands of hot iron, has been nothing to you. It has left no sense of sin on your conscience, while me it haunts and haunts; and yet I might plead that I was an ignorant child—only I will not plead anything, for God knows all.’”
“‘You mean that I am no saint,’ he said; ‘but here are advantages
[Page 238]
for Leonard to be gained by you quite in a holy and legitimate way.’
“She stood very erect. ‘If there was one thing needed to confirm me, you have named it. You shall have nothing to do with my boy, by my consent, much less by my agency. I would rather see him working on the road-side than leading such a life—being such a one as you are.’
“ ‘It is enough!’ said he. ‘Neither you nor your child shall ever more be annoyed by me.’”
We must, however, hasten on to the conclusion. Ruth is recognised by Mrs. Pearson, the sister-in-law of Mrs. Mason, and her sad story comes to the ears of Mr. Bradshaw.
While she was engaged with her pupils, he suddenly entered the room, his face purple with suppressed agitation; after dismissing the children the tempest burst forth. Ruth stood trembling.—The old offence could never be drowned in the deep; but thus, when all was calm on the broad, sunny sea, it rose to the surface, and faced her with its unclosed eyes, and its ghastly countenance. We give the conclusion of this terrible scene.
“ ‘I cannot bear it—I cannot bear it,’ were the words wrung out of Ruth.
‘Cannot bear it! cannot bear it!’ he repeated. ‘You must bear it, madam. Do you suppose that your child is to be exempt from the penalties of his birth? Do you suppose that he alone is to be saved from the upbraiding scoff? Cannot bear it indeed! Before you went into your sin, you should have thought whether you could bear the consequences or not.’
He absolutely took her by the shoulders and turned her by force out of the room. He held the street door wide open and said, —‘If ever you, or your bastard, darken this door again, I will have you both turned out by the police.’ ”
We must pass over the touching scene in which she reveals the sad truth to her darling child, and also that in which Mr. Bradshaw pours out the vials of his wrath and indignation against Mr. Benson for his connivance at the deceit to which he had been a party. Poor Ruth wished to leave her friends and her son, that they might not share in her disgrace; Mr. Benson, however, persuades her to relinquish her purpose, and with words of gentle wisdom strengthens her spirit to endure the trials which
[Page 239]
awaited her. One of the most painful circumstances attending her changed position was the difficulty of procuring employment. She felt within her such capability, and all ignored her, and put her by on the other side. Resting on the firm basis of truth, however, her character gained dignity and strength, and a sphere was at length opened for her energies in the capacity of a sick nurse, an employment in which she found exercise for all her powers. The poor patients were unconsciously soothed by her harmony of manner, voice and gesture, which arose from its being the true expression of a kind, modest, and humble spirit. The low-breathed sentences which she spoke into the ear of the suffering and the dying carried them upwards to God.
The effect produced upon Leonard by the knowledge of his mother's disgrace is powerfully drawn; we feel an intense sorrow for the poor child, stealing along by back streets,—running with his head bent down—his little heart panting with dread of being pointed out as his mother's child—so he used to come back, and run trembling to Sally, who would hush him up to her breast with many a rough-spoken word of pity and sympathy.
A terrible pestilence broke out at Eccleston; when the customary staff of matrons and nurses attached to the hospital had been swept off, Ruth offered herself as matron, and was accepted.
“One evening Leonard lingered in the street on which the hospital abutted, attracted by the crowd that were gazing up intently towards the lighted windows of the hospital; the greater part of these poor people had friends or relatives in that palace of death. Leonard stood and listened. At first their talk consisted of vague accounts of the fever. Then they spoke of Ruth—of his mother; and Leonard held his breath to hear.
‘They say she has been a great sinner, and that this is her penance,’ quoth one. And as Leonard gasped, before rushing forward to give the speaker the lie, an old man spoke.
‘Such a one as her has never been a great sinner; nor does she do her work as a penance, but for the love of God, and of the blessed Jesus. She will be in the light of God's countenance when you and I will be standing afar off. The blessing of them that are ready to perish is upon her.’
Immediately there was a clamour of tongues, each with some tale of his mother's gentle doings, till Leonard grew dizzy with the
[Page 240]
beatings of his glad, proud heart.... He stepped forward, and touching the old man's arm, who had first spoken, Leonard tried to speak; but for an instant he could not, his heart was too full; at length he managed to say: ‘Sir, I am her son!’
‘Thou! thou her bairn! God bless you, lad,’ said an old woman, pushing through the crowd. ‘It was but last night she kept my child quiet with singing psalms the night through.’...
Many other wild, woe-begone creatures pressed forward with blessings on Ruth's son, while he could only repeat: ‘She is my mother.’
From that day forward Leonard walked erect in the streets of Eccleston, where ‘many arose and called her blessed.’ ”
Ruth comes forth from the fever-ward unscathed, but hearing that Mr. Bellingham has been seized by the pestilence, she goes to nurse him during his delirium, and falls a victim to her sense of duty. Her death scene is full of tender beauty, and with a tear for her hapless doom, we follow her, after she has put off this mortal coil, and behold her among the multitude of those who came out of great tribulation, into the presence of Him who shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
Such is an outline of the story, with the omission of the subordinate characters and incidents, which are skilfully interwoven with the principal plot, and serve to relieve and heighten its effect. We fear that the reflections which we are about to offer will be placed in the same category as the maxims which we find appended to the generality of fables, and which most readers presume to think they should have had sagacity enough to discover for themselves: at the risk however of being thought tedious, we shall endeavour to point out a few of the more important lessons suggested by the narrative before us.
The various dramatis personæ not only bear the stamp of individuality, acting and speaking like real men and women, with whose emotions we can sympathize, but acquire a wider interest as representing the views and opinions entertained by large sections of the community; the prevailing tone of which in reference to the painful subject under consideration is thus faithfully mirrored, and it may not be uninstructive to consider some of its more prominent phases.
A sin of omission, to the fatal consequences of which the
[Page 241]
conscience of society requires to be awakened, is brought under our notice in the character of Mrs. Mason; we refer to the absence of that tender vigilance and generous sympathy towards the homeless and unprotected, which, manifested in the ordinary relations of life, would, we believe, rescue from destruction many a fellow creature whose heart yearns for sympathy, and yet who meets it only under the seductive garb which beguiles her into sin. To those who are severed from the ties of natural affection, and who have never realized that abiding presence, whose shelter imparts to every place the sanctity of home, life must needs present a dreary aspect; and urgent as is the duty of “searching out the lost sheep in the wilderness,” we cannot but think it as holy an office of christian love, and a duty equally imperative, to shelter the innocent, and to remove from their path every temptation to enter on the pilgrimage of guilt; and in order to accomplish this object, society must minister more generously, not only to the physical requirements of its destitute and dependent members, but also to the equally pressing claims of the affections and the soul. In the character of Mrs. Bellingam, who may be regarded as the representative of a large section of the community, is exhibited a common phase of conventional morality; she is the type of those, who, without any hearty abhorrence of sin, for its own sake, are yet sorely annoyed at the disagreeable consequences when brought within their own sphere; refusing to inquire in what quarter the blame really lies, they veil their own selfishness under the mask of righteous indignation, and satisfy the requirements of conscience by loading with invective the least guilty party, who, as in Ruth's case, is often more sinned against than sinning, while they suffer the greater criminal to pass unscathed. True and solemn are Mr. Benson's words:—
“ ‘We may not dare to trample any of God's creatures down to the hopeless dust; it is his holy will that the women who have fallen should be numbered among those who have broken hearts to be bound up, not cast aside as lost beyond recall.’ ”
Mr. Bradshaw's morality again is of a different stamp, and much as we rebel against his pompous self-righteousness, and obtuseness of moral perception, we nevertheless sympathize with his genuine horror of vice, and feel
[Page 242]
respect for the stern justice, which does not spare even his own son when he offends against its inexorable law. The common proverb, “summum jus, summa injuria,” finds however a striking exemplification in the conduct of the rigid censor. Justice instead of being typified as wearing a bandage round her eyes, should rather be pourtrayed with powers of vision singularly acute, able to discern the several degrees of guilt, and to take cognizance of the infinite variety of circumstance which may have led to its commission; if with blind severity she brand with equal rigour every departure from the narrow way, she becomes, as in the case of Mr. Bradshaw, one of the direst forms of injustice, which, by closing the gates of mercy against the erring, tends to swell the ranks of the hopelessly depraved.
Our author has not attempted the impossible task of pointing out any definite course of action, or of establishing any general rules in reference to the evil in question; but she has shown the infinite wrong inflicted by the too prevalent custom of treating human beings in indiscriminate masses; and, through the character of Mr. Benson, she enforces the christian duty of bringing an earnest, thoughtful, and loving mind to the consideration of every individual case, which comes within the range of our experience. With regard to the deception practised in the concealment of Ruth's real position, deeply repugnant as it is to our own moral sense, we believe that under circumstances so embarrassing, such a course would have recommended itself to many conscientious minds, while indirectly it shadows forth the conventional morality which prevails in reference to this subject, by which additional difficulties are thrown in the way of those who are striving to redeem the erring.
Our objection to the deception rests on artistic grounds, as untrue to the conception of Mr. Benson's character. Those who are accustomed to regard the outward consequences of actions as the test of their moral worth, may we think be more easily seduced into a violation of truth; a falsehood affording, to our superficial gaze, an easy outlet from an embarrassing position; but to those who look to the intuitions of conscience as their standard of right, who regard virtue as the harmony of the human will with that of the Deity, a lie assumes a character so utterly
[Page 243]
repugnant as to render its deliberate adoption impossible. There is deep truth in the solemn utterance, “In thy light we shall see light;” and Mr. Benson, who is represented from the first as a religious man, living habitually in the sight of Him “who desireth truth in the inward parts,” would not have required the miserable experience of years to teach him that “God's omnipotence does not need our sin.” Nevertheless, the aggravated wretchedness which results from the adoption of the wrong course, not only redeems the work from the charge of sanctioning falsehood, but forcibly demonstrates the folly as well as wickedness of endeavouring, even under the specious plea of mercy, to counteract the great law of retribution, or to tamper with the eternal principles of truth and justice.
Into this moral atmosphere, which resolves itself into the mingled elements of culpable negligence, conventionalism, pharisaical rigour, and christian charity, not always wisely directed, or sufficiently courageous to meet the requirements of duty, our author has introduced her heroine, who, from her first appearance, in her isolation and girlish innocence, awakens our tenderest pity, and the conception of whose character is, we think, admirably adapted to the poetical requirements of her position. As we before observed, our author has confined her attention to one phase of the social evil under consideration, her object being to enter a protest against the prevalent conventional morality, which treats with revolting levity the crime of the seducer, and consigns to equal obliquy his innocent victim, and the hardened sinner. In order therefore to touch the deepest springs of compassion, she brings before us a case, of a young girl falling in ignorance, yet whom the conventional morality of a Mrs. Bellingham would consign to inevitable ruin. We have no sympathy with the sentiment conveyed in Milton's familiar line:
“He for God only, she for God in him.”
Nevertheless, we believe it to contain a faithful picture of a girl's creed, when her affections have been engaged prior to the development of her judgment and her moral sense; under such circumstances her lover's wishes become to her absolute law, obeyed with unquestioning docility. We have heard it objected to this view of Ruth's character,
[Page 244]
that it is inconsistent with her life-long, and in case of her innocence, her uncalled for remorse, upon which nevertheless the interest of the delineation is made to depend. It appears to us, however, that remorse is a term not strictly applicable to Ruth's state of mind. As the eye of her conscience gradually became purged she would feel an intense recoil from her error, though committed in ignorance, blended with deep sorrow for the delusion under which she had been betrayed; these feelings, combined with the painful consciousness of having incurred social disgrace, would generate a mingling of emotions in the delineation of which our author has, we think, exhibited her usual skill. We have ventured on the above remarks in justification of the artistic propriety of Ruth's character, as a poetical conception, introduced for a specific purpose; nevertheless we beg to enter our protest against a prejudice which, in our judgment, fatally pervades the literature and moral atmosphere of Germany,—we refer to the notion of the subordination of the judgment and the moral sense to passion and sentiment, being regarded as characteristic of an interesting type of female character, an opinion which we hold to be most pernicious, and treasonable to the highest nature of woman. Characters capable of this state of mind, except in cases of extreme youth and inexperience, as in that of Ruth, may indeed awaken our profoundest compassion, but the sentiment is so tinged by moral disapprobation, as to render them scarcely proper objects of admiration.
There is yet another topic in reference to the character of Ruth, to which we must direct attention, as involving a moral question of some importance; we refer to her rejection of Mr. Bellingham's hand, conduct which we have heard censured both on moral and artistic grounds. Morally, it has been urged, it was as much too late for her to refuse the marriage obligation, as if she had uttered the most solemn form of words at the altar; the change in her affections, resulting from the discovery of her lover's treachery, being in no respects different from a disappointed marriage, whose interruption nevertheless we should not sanction. There is no principle which we regard as of more paramount importance to the highest interests of humanity, than the sacred and indissoluble character of
[Page 245]
marriage; and if anything were needed to confirm our opinion, it would be the present social aspect of Germany, where the facility of divorce strikes at the very root of morality, and vitiates it to the very core; the pillars of domestic peace are thus shaken, and an element of instability introduced into the sacred recesses of home. Feeling however thus strongly upon the subject, we cannot agree with those who regard such a connection as that between Ruth and Mr. Bellingham as morally binding upon the least guilty party. Perpetuity is an essential element in our conception of marriage; the presence of this idea in the mind of Ruth, though unrealized, and though in the boundlessness of her faith she sought no reciprocal guarantee, redeemed her, we think, from the consciousness of guilt, while its utter absence from the thoughts and intentions of Mr. Bellingham rendered the connection, in so far as he was concerned, an unholy one, and absolved his partner from all subsequent obligation. The more steadfast the fidelity of her own attachment, the more intense would be the recoil from her betrayer; and it seems to us that it would be a cruel injustice to render binding a compact entered into by one of the parties with manifest bad faith, and who, moreover, by his subsequent conduct had proved himself utterly unworthy of a woman's love; while marriage, accepted under such circumstances, as a mere means of worldly escape from disgrace, would be a profanation of the most sacred of all social relations. Such would be our justification of Ruth's conduct, considered under a moral aspect; for its artistic propriety we are glad to be able to appeal to so consummate an artist as George Sand, who, in her beautiful drama of Claudie, has embodied a story similar to that of Ruth. In the third act, she introduces the faithless lover Ronciat, as offering marriage to Claudie, the orphan girl whom he has so deeply wronged, and the passage in which she rejects his offer, so forcibly expresses, in a few brief words, the morale of the situation, that we are tempted to quote it.
Rémy is Claudie's aged grandfather.
“Ronciat. Eh bien! Claudie, vous ne m'écoutez point? Je suis Denis Ronciat, et je vous offre ma main, foi d'homme!
Rémy, àa Claudie. Ma fille! entends-toi c'est à toi de répondre.
Claudie (avec fermeté, se levant). Mon père, pour épouser un homme, il faut jurer à Dieu de l'aimer, de l'estimer, et de le
[Page 246]
respecter toute sa vie; et quand on sent qu'on ne peut que le mépriser, c'est mentir à Dieu, c'est faire un sacrilege, je refuse.
Ronciat. La sérieusement?
Claudie. Je refuse.”
Mr. Bellingham's character is drawn from the life, and suggests many valuable lessons, teaching that it is the cold heart and the vacant mind which are most liable to fall into sin; while the coarse and callous form which his nature eventually assumes, exhibits the hardening effect of a vicious career, and is a solemn protest against the dangerous error, that a personal familiarity with wickedness can be contracted without permanent injury to the moral nature. His demeanour in the solemn presence of the dead gives the finishing touch to our author's sketch of the cold, heartless seducer; but, as we have no faith in the existence of such a disease as the complete moral ossification of the human heart, we are tempted to hope that this scene is an exaggeration, and to believe that no man could have remained so utterly unmoved under circumstances so solemn, or could have given utterance to a sentiment so revolting in its selfish apathy, as that with which he leaves Mr. Benson's house. “I wish my last remembrance of my beautiful Ruth was not mixed up with all these people.”
An ancient chronicler with touching pathos relates the story of the treachery practised by the Spaniards towards the Yucaian islanders, whom they wished to decoy from their homes to labour as slaves in the Hispaniola mines. They did persuade the poor wretches, he says, that they came from the regions of the blest, where they should enjoy all kinds of delight with the fruition of all beloved things; and the islanders, infected with these subtle imaginations, singing and rejoicing, left their country and followed vain and idle hope; but when they saw that they were deceived and found not that which they desired, but were compelled to undergo grievous sovereignty and to endure cruel and severe labour, they either slew themselves, or choosing to famish, gave up their fair spirits, being persuaded by no reason or violence to take food; and so these miserable Yucaians came to an end.
The enormous wickedness of this conduct, by which, as
[Page 247]
has been justly observed, humanity itself has been outraged and disgraced, finds its parallel in the baseness and perfidy of the seducer; for does he not, by appealing to what is most lovely in a woman's nature, her love, her trust, her abnegation of self, lure her into an abyss of wretchedness, and into a bondage more degrading than that of the Hispaniola mine? Men may call such actions youthful follies, but, as Mr. Benson truly observes, there is another name for them with God.
In conclusion, we thank our author for directing public attention to a subject fraught with such painful interest, and one, the consideration of which is encompassed with so many difficulties, as that which she has embodied in her touching narrative. The one-sidedness of her view may, we fear, have a tendency, in some quarters, to lessen her influence as a moral teacher; from the reticence, however, necessarily induced by artistic consideration, we are by no means entitled to infer the absence of that full knowledge, and mature consideration of the subject, in its manifold bearings, which would be essential to invest her opinions with authority. We are aware also that many earnest thinkers would consign this subject to the sphere of silence, and regard it as altogether beyond the region of art; we respect their scruples though we cannot sympathize with them; so long as evils are ignored, and any allusion to them held to be inconsistent with good taste, no earnest conviction can be generated in the public mind; to the remedial power of truth, embodied in earnest words, moral maladies the most inveterate must eventually yield. And let not those who are labouring in the great cause of social amelioration, be appalled at the magnitude of the evils with which they are called upon to grapple, or feel tempted to despise the day of small things; as in the material universe, the tiny seed lodges in the hollow of the rock, and by its expansive force gradually undermines the superincumbent mass; so in the subtler regions of the mind, the germs of truth strike root, and spread forth their delicate fibres; and mountains of error and wickedness are loosened from their foundations, and the cheerful daylight shines in, where once reigned darkness and the shadow of death.
$$$
