Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



■% 



RESTORED. 



VOL. I. 




RESTORED. 



VOL. I. 



RESTORED. 



THE AUTHOR OF 



"SON AND HEIH," 



WOI be Ou Snal g«l at Dl. 
To paogB of n&ton. line ot Till. 
Dafucti of iloDbl, and tsliilB ot bloixL" 




LOUDON: 
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS, 

13, QBEAT MABIACHIOUOH STREET. 

1871. 



/^ 



UIHDOli: 
BT MAODOHAU) AXD TDOWKIh 



TO 

L. S. A^. 

MY HONOURED CHIEF AND DEAR FRIEND, 

WHO IS ALL THAT I ASPIRE TO BE, 

AND 

WHO HAS, UNCONSCIOUSLY, 

INSPIRED MUCH THAT I HAVE HERE WRITTEN. 



EESTOEED. 



CHAPTER I. 

At the first sight, you felt he had not known 
The things pertaining to his cloth alone. 
Chairman of quarter-sessions had he been ; 
Serious and calm, *twas plain he much had seen. 
Had miscellaneous large experience had 
Of human acts, part good and partly bad. 
Serious and calm, there lurked, I know not why^, 
At times, a softness in his voice and eye. 
Some shade of ill a prosperous life had crost. 
Married, no doubt — a wife or child had lost. 

A. H. Glough. 

THE Reverend Arthur Byrne, M. A., prebendary 
of Exeter, was the rector of the parish of 
Tregalva, in the county of Cornwall. 

A bright career at Rugby and at Oxford, 
prizes, honours, a first-class, family eclat, 
golden opinions amongst university mi^ the 
half religious, half ambitious fervour of or- 
dination, a few busy years in a curacy in a large 

VOL. I. B 



German philosophers, and English poets, high- 
bred manners and love of art, the " enthusiasm 
of humanity," and desires for his own worldly- 
advancement, all found their appointed home at 
Tregalva, The " church-town" was a straggling 
street of cottages, the suburbs were lonely farms 
scattered over the " broad back of the bushless 
downs." The post town was five miles, and the 
nearest railway station twenty miles away. The 
most important parishioner was a small farmer, 
and the ordinary inhabitants were farm labour- 
ers and fishermen. The only event that ever 
happened at Tregalva, out of the usual course 
of births, deaths, and marriages, was the rare ar- 
rival of a party of tourists in the summer, and 
ill the winter a not unfrequent shipwreck. 
The life of the Reverend Arthur Byrne was by 
uo means a useless, idle, or unhappy one, but it 
seemed to involve an enormous waste of 
material. 

So sechided, so blameless was that life, one 
can hardly imagine it ever to have been touched 



RESTORED. 3 

by any strong, tragic passion. But after seven 
years of married life, and happiness as uncloud- 
ed as is possible in this world, Arthur Byrne's 
•wife, with her few hours' old baby, had left him 
— a childless widower. And ever since the mere 
thought of second marriage had seemed to him 
a profanation. 

Later on in life, his only sister — who, many 
years younger than himself, had been, since their 
parents' death, his frequent companion and sort 
of pet child — despite a storm of expostulation 
from every quarter of her family, had persisted 
in marrying a certain Henry Malreward, who 
possessed a small estate, many debts, and the 
worst character in Somersetshire. 

Mr. Malreward was a widower with one little 
son. No one indeed accused him of having been 
a bad husband, perhaps on the principle that 
Henry VIH. is considered to have lived happily 
with Jane Seymour: — his wife died before he had 
had time to ill-use her. There was a dark fas- 
cination about a handsome, disreputable man, 
just as there was a sombre picturesqueness 
about a decaying country mansion, which turn- 
ed the brain of a romantic girl, filled with the 
fashionable poetry of her day. To Frederica 
Byrne, this ordinary roue^ with his beautiful, evil 

b2 



J 



RESTORED. 



VOL. I. 



RESTORED. 



VOL. I. 



usual sound tiiat time of night at Tregalva — the 

• 

rumbling of carriage wheels. He listened, and 
heard some two-horse vehicle driving down the 
lane to the Rectory, which lay in a sheltered 
hollow below the village. This lane led to the 
Rectory and to a cluster of cottages, and then 
up a steep hill to the church, which stood right 
out on the cliflFs, overlooking the sea like a light- 
house, and there the lane made an end in the 
churchyard. There flashed through Arthur 
Byrne's mind a foolish tale told of some former 
rector of Tregalva, — ^how on a stormy night like 
this he heard a carriage drive furiously past his 
house and up the hill to the churchyard ; but it 
never came back again, though he waited and 
listened for it all night long ; and how two days 
after came tidings that his wife, who was away 
in the north on a visit to her parents, had died 
the very hour that he heard the carriage which 
never returned. 

This time the carriage pulled up suddenly at 
the Rectory gate. The Rector, convinced that 
some sick or dying parishioner needed him, went 



RESTORED. 9 

out into the hall and opened the front door. The 
gust that rushed in took away his breath, and all 
but knocked him down. The moon was hidden 
again, but two lamps were flashing and flicker- 
ing, and he could discern the dark forms of two 
panting, steaming horses, a post-chaise of the 
period, a post-boy letting down the steps and 
helping some one to alight — a tall, slight, femi- 
nine figure. 

The dignified Rector dashed out into the 
mud and the darkness, and threw open the gar- 
den gate. ** Frederica, is that you ?'* he cried. 

Then two soft arms were clinging round his 
neck, and a soft voice whispered, " Oh, Arthur, 
I have been a bad sister to you, but I thought I 
might beg a shelter for my children, if not for 
myself." 
*' Come to me, darling — all of you," he an- 

.swered. " Whilst I. am alive, you know you 

have a home and a protector here." 

Mrs. Malreward turned and said in a gentle, 

self-possessed tone, " Take care, Susan, you will 

wake the baby. Come to mamma, Freddy 

dear. Can your people help us with these 

things, Arthur ?" 

The whole Rectory household came to the 

aid of the young lady, who was encumbered 



garden path, her slight arms filled with the 
clinging burden of a little girl two or three 
years of age. 

But Mrs. Malreward smiled and shook her 
head. '* She has a strong will, and will never 
go to strangers. But if your housekeeper will 
take the baby — ^he is too heavy for Susan." 

After a period of such utter confusion as the 
sudden inroad of a lady and two young chil- 
dren upon the Rector's household might be ex- 
pected to cause, after the half famished travel- 
lers had been warmed and fed, the brother and 
sister were at last left alone together in the 
study. He drew for her the arm-chair towards 
the fire, and, taking her hand in his, he looked 
at her tenderly and anxiously. She was rather 
tall, and her exceeding slightness of make 
caused her to appear even taller than she really 
was. Her troubles had left little outward mark 
upon her, save the almost painful thinness of 
her face and figure ; she was perfectly pale also, 
except for a faint flush on her cheeks, like the 



RESTORED. 11 

tender pink hue inside a shell. Her thick gold- 
en hair was piled high on her head in the pic- 
turesque fashion of that day. She looked very 
sweet, girlish, innocent ; at the same time, when 
in repose her lips closed in that firm and melan- 
choly line which tells of suffering bravely borne ; 
and her simple manners had a self-possessiou 
and an air of command which her brother had 
n^ver seen in Frederica Byrne. 

"How did you come, my poor child?" the 
Rector said at last. 

" It was very easy. I travelled by the mail 
coach to Plymouth, then I posted the rest of the 
way here." 

•* But such a night — such stormy weather !" 

^* Is it ?" and she smiled. " Oh I yes, I believe 
it i-ained when we were changing horses. But 
the cbfldren were both asleep, and I took care, 
of course, that they were well wrapped up with 
shawls." After the life she had led the last 
two or three years, it seemed nothing to this 
young, delicate-looking creature to be driving 
at night over bleak moors, in the teeth of a 
howling wind, with rain crashing at the chaise 
windows. She had always been physically 
brave, and now, with her babies warm asleep 
by her side, and her husband a hundred and 



a: r 



little while ago. I have become quite a domes- 
tic character, you see,'' she said, with another 
of her sweet, arch smiles. 

Here Arthur Bjme, at the mention of his 
brother-in-law s hated name, could restrain him- 
self no longer from asking a question which yet 
he dreaded to put, because he knew the answer 
would be something which would half break his 
heart to hear. **Tell me all about it, my poor 
darling : tell me why you came suddenly like 
this.** « 

She hesitated a little and looked down. *^ I 
am afiraid you will think I have done very 
wrong, but indeed I could not bear it any 
longer. He has been drinking more than usual 
lately, and that evening he brought home with 
him two or three men, all more or less intoxi- 
cated, and he wanted me to sit down to dinner 
with them ; and when I refused he struck me, as 
I expected he would.** ^ 

** Struck you, Frederica P and the Rector al- 
most choked. ^^ Did he — ^forgive me for asking 



RESTORED. 13 

you — did he ever dare to do that before?" 
** Oh 1 yes," she answered, with a sort of in- 
nocent snrprise. ^^That is," she added hasti- 
ly, "never when he was quite sober. But 
that night he swore he would send away my 
children from me. I managed to get away 
from him somehow, and I ran upstairs and 
locked myself into the nursery. By and by, 
when I knew he would have taken a great deal 
more wine and become quieter, I awoke the 
children, and dressed them, and packed a few 
of their things and mine, and made Susan get 
herself ready; and then we crept downstairs, 
and out of the house." 

"But how did you manage to meet the 
coach ?" 

" Ah 1 well, there was a difficulty, as I felt I 
could not trust the servants enough to let them 
know where we were going, and how to get the 
children, and the few things we must take with 
us to the place where we should meet the coach 
iSiree miles away? I don't know what we 
should have done, if it had not been for a boy 
who is often about the house — Mr. Malreward's 

son 

" His son I — Harry, do you mean ?" 

" No ; Harry is a good little fellow, but he is 



read — for he knew nothing but what the head- 
keeper could teach him — and I have said a kind 
word to him sometimes, and now I think he 
would do anything for me. I know he is the 
best friend I have at Malreward Court. Well, 
he came with us, and carried Freddy, and T 
took baby, and Susan did her little all with the 
shawls and things, and it was quite dark ; no- 
body saw us, and we got safely to the coach, 
and here I am, Arthur I" and she looked at him 
with a lovely, triumphant face. 

The Rector was silent, and brooded gloomily 
for a minute. *' How do you know he is Mr. 
Malreward's son ?" 

" Oh I when he has been angry with me, he 
has taimted me with it, and said that he cared 
more for his little finger than for both my chil- 
dren. So I said — * If 80, why don't you educate 
him, and bring him up like a gentleman's son, 
since he is one?* I have taught him all I know, 
very little, as you are aware, but some of the 
happiest hours of my life at home have been 



RESTORED. 15 

spent in trying to civilize that boy. It is a 
novel sensation to feel myself the slightest use 
to any human being 1 His position is such a 
wretchedly amphibious one — the tastes and in- 
stincts of a gentleman, with the education of a 
ploughboy ; pampered like a son, and ranking as 
a servant." 

" You are just as romantic as ever, Frederica," 
said her brother, in a half-vexed tone. 

Mrs. Malreward made no answer. When her 
brother looked at her a minute after, he found 
that she had fallen asleep. The firelight gave 
a flush to her wasted cheeks, and seemed to 
shine right through the hand which hung down 
by her side, her lips were parted, still smiling 
that strange, innocent, unearthly smile. If she 
had been dead she could hardly have looked 
more pallid, more helpless, and at the same time 
more peaceful. " Long disquiet merged in rest." 

But Arthur Byrne, as he looked at her, was 
not at rest. It had given him a shock to find 
Hiis young sister of his familiarized with mascu- 
line vice and brutality, so that she spoke of it as 
a thing to be expected, and endured, and made 
the best of; and that she should associate with, 
should try to educate and raise above his 
branded condition the illegitimate son of her 



creatures. At the same time Arthur could do 
full justice to the sweet, tolerant temper that no 
outrage could empoison, to the buoyant spirit 
that no tyranny could wholly depress, to what, 
in fact, if she had been a man, he would have 
called the pluck with which she took the punish- 
ment of her own self-will and folly. 

Suddenly Mrs. Malreward started, her face 
worked convulsively, she clasped her hands to- 
gether. ** Harry, don't, please don't !" she cried. 
Then she opened her eyes, and stared at her 
brother with a piteous, unrecognizing look, which 
iu one moment, as no argument could have done, 
chased away the faint shade of his disap- 
proval. 

He put his arm round his sister. " Frederica, 
my darling, you are safe here with me. If he 
should come," he muttered fiercely — " but never 
mind, you are safe." 

** Ah I" and she shivered with the nameless 
horror, the vapour as firom a charnel-house, 
which sometimes we breathe in dreams. *' I 



RESTORED. 17 

wish I did not go to sleep, I get such bad dreams. 
Will you light a candle for me, please t" And 
she rose languidly. ** I should like to go up- 
stairs to the children." 

When she had left the room, the Rector sat 
long brooding gloomily over the fire. It seemed 
as though a gust of rain and wind had burst 
into his study, and had blown away all its 
drowsy atmosphere of thought and comfort. 
" Poor Freddy," he said. " I must not be too 
hard upon her. What a child she is still ! Truly 
her whole life has been a dream, a foolish, ro- 
mantic, far-fetched dream ; then an awakening 
to a terrible, prosaic, degrading reality." 

The next day. and the day after, Mrs. Malre- 
ward came down punctually to breakfast, played 
with her children, who were none the worse, 
thanks to her carefulness, for their Jong journey. 
She had long talks with her brother, and long 
walks with him about his parish. He thought 
the crimson spots on her cheeks, and the lovely 
light in her blue eyes, the sign of renewed 
health. " The sea-air has done you good already, 
Fredeiica." But she smiled faintly, and made 
no answer. He did not imagine the effort, which 
every hour grew more intolerable, to laugh, to 
talk, even at last to move. 

VOL. I. C 



-i 



the room, fell down, and fainted dead away. 
The Rector carried her to the sofa, rang for the 
servants, and sent off his groom to ride fiill 
gallop to the doctor's house, three miles off. 
Mrs. Malreward soon recovered her senses, and 
confessed that she thought she had caught a 
chill during her journey through rain and tem- 
pest to her brother's house. "We started in 
such a hurry, we had only shawls and cloaks 
with us enough to keep the children warm." 
The doctor came, pronounced that Mrs. Malre- 
ward had a feverish cold, but that with a little 
rest, and careful nursing, she would soon be all 
right again. 

"Careful nursing!" Arthur Byrne almost 
laughed. The tender devotion of her only 
brother, the faithful attentions of old servants, 
the good wishes of a whole parish were hers ; 
and, on her own part, the most resolute determi- 
nation to get well. But the doctor came and 
w6nt, recommended this and that ; the Rector 
hardly left her day or night ; the neighbours 



RESTORED. 19 

sent her those Cornish rarities, finiit and game ; 
she herself tried to smile, and tell her children 
that " mamma would soon be well, and able to 
play with them again ;" all had but one result — 
Mrs. Malreward grew gradually and steadily 
worse. 

And thus began that old sad story which to 
so many of us is written on the memory as with 
tears and blood. New symptoms forcing them- 
selves upon the keen yet reluctant notice of 
those who watch by the bedside ; faint uneasi- 
ness growing into an agony of terror ; fresh 
remedies eagerly sought for, and then cast 
aside in despair ; physicians called in, only to 
seal the death-warrant ; distant friends sum- 
moned in incoherent words of anguish ; dark- 
ness closing in day by day — the sure, stealthy 
approach of death. 

When Mrs. Malreward knew that the end of 
her short, stormy married life was near, there 
awoke in her a passionate longing to see her 
husband. She refused to let the Rector write 
to him, well knowing the stern summons — 
" Your wife is dying — come at once if you wish 
to see her again," the only words which Arthur 
Byrne could bring himself to address to Henry 
Malreward. With trembling hands and failing 

c2 



VtAVbV ^«*1. O k3k>->>ivs 



Before they had thought it possible that he 
could arrive, Mr. Malreward drove up to the 
Rectory. It was a bitter moment to Arthur 
Byrne when he was forced to receive into his 
house the man whom he looked upon as the 
murderer of his sister. When Mr. Malreward 
crossed the threshold, the Rector involuntarily 
clenched his fist, as if to knock him down ; but 
with a stern courtesy he greeted him, and 
ushered him upstairs. He could scarcely see 
Mr. Malreward's face, so muffled was he in a 
cloak, but he noticed that his hands shook very 
much, and that his voice, as he asked, " How is 
she now?" was hoarse and trembling. When 
the two men crept softly into the darkened 
chamber where lay the invalid, it overthrew all 
Mr. Byrne's preconceived ideas to see the out- 
raged, dying wife stretch forth her feeble hands, 
and whisper, " Harry, my dearest, is that you ?" 
And when Mr. Malreward fell down on his knees 
by her side, and with a great sob buried his 
face in the bedclothes, Mr. Byrne groped his 



RESTORED. 21 

way out of the room, and went downstairs like 
a man who had been struck a blow. He sat 
speechless in his study, unheeding the torrent 
of inquiries poured upon him by his aunt, Mrs. 
Warner, who, summoned by Frederica's illness, 
had been staying the last fortnight at the Rec- 
tory. 

About half an hour afterwards, the bell of 
Mrs. Malreward's room rang violently. The 
Rector and Mrs. Warner rushed upstairs. Fred- 
erica was lying with closed eyes, gasping for 
breath, and with the awful, unmistakable look 
upon her face that made Arthur's very heart 
stop beating. Mr. Malreward was bending over 
her, his arm was supporting her head. " Some 
brandy — quick 1" he cried ; " she is fainting I'* 
He tried to take the glass which Arthur brought, 
but the brother, with set teeth, and muscles 
rigid with passion— love, grie^ hatred even, 
tearing at his heart here in the presence of 
death — pushed him aside, and with his own 
hand held the brandy to Frederica's lips. She 
opened her sweet, child-like blue eyes, her lips 
moved, but it was only to whisper her husband's 
name, and with her last look fixed upon her 
husband's face, and with her head resting upon 
her husband's breast — she died. 



woman-like, tried to comfort him with clumsy 
conventional phrases, out of which the meaning, 
if it ever had existed, had &ded long ago. Mr. 
Byrne said not a word, swept the books and 
papers he was in the habit of using, out of the 
study, declined to enter it again while Mr. Mal- 
reward was sitting there, and went about the 
darkened house with tearless eyes and a white, 
set face. The object on which^all his energies 
were now resolutely bent was that his sister's 
wishes respecting her children, often expressed 
during her illness, should be carried out. To 
this end, Arthur Byrne wrote to a certain Mr. 
Erie, and begged him to come down to Tregalva. 
Mr. Erie had been family lawyer to two gene- 
rations of Malrewards, and it was commonly 
reported that the present head of the house 
feared neither God nor devil, but stood in awe 
of his solicitor. 

Mrs. Malreward was buried in the church- 
yard on the cliff. The day of the funeral a 
gale was raging, as is common at Tregalva 



RESTORED. 23 

during the winter months. As the dark proces- 
sion wound slowly up the hill to the church, a 
shudder went through the people, for the hearse 
was nearly overturned by the wind. Several 
stout countrymen came forward, steadied the 
wheels, and dragged the horses up the road. 
Those of the villagers who were weakly and 
infirm, found it impossible to follow the cofiin 
further; others went struggling on, gasping for 
breath, leaning up against the wind as though 
it were a wall. When they reached the church- 
yard, and ranged themselves round the open 
grave, the roaring of the sea three hundred feet 
below drowned the voice of the Rector ; the 
wind almost tore his surplice from his shoulders, 
and sometimes clouds of spray shot up the cliffs, 
and fell upon the coffin Uke rain. The villagers 
who stood around, grasping the tomb-stones, 
lest the hurricane should carry them off their 
feet, gazed curiously at the two strangers, 
who were chief mourners — the picturesque old 
lawyer, with white hair and gold spectacles, 
who was manifestly overcome, though, whether 
by grief or by the tempest, could hardly be 
told — the poor widower, the handsome, grand- 
looking Mr. Malreward, who shed tears, and 
sobbed, and pressed his cambric handkerchief to 



M 



V r 



But Arthur Byrne, as he read the words, " our 
dear sister here departed," in a voice that '^as 
almost hard, felt as though his very heart would 
burst, while the presence of Frederica's husband 
seemed to turn his tears into fire. 

When everybody had fought his way home 
again, the Rector and the lawyer, as they had 
agreed together beforehand, opened fire upon 
Mr. Malreward regarding the disposal of his 
children. They found they had no formidable 
enemy to fight with. 

" Anything you like," he said, with a weary 
stupefied air. "Let it be just as poor dear 
Frederica wished." 

Mr. Byrne had it all his own way, and for the 
first time heard a whisper of conscience, that 
he ought to try and forgive Mr. Malreward. He 
went so far as to hold out his hand to his bro- 
ther-in-law when the latter left the Rectory, 
and to say, 

" Rest assured, Mr. Malreward, your children 
will be cared for as if they were my own. 



RESTORED. 25 

Good-bye, do not forget this last week." 
But Arthur thought that if the father were 
to forget his children, it would be the .best thing 
that could happen to them. 

Mr. Malreward and his lawyer, Mr. Erie, re- 
turned together to Somersetshire. Mrs. Warner 
— ^well satisfied with the sum Mr. Malreward had 
promised her for their maintenance — took her 
niece's babies away from the wild north of Corn- 
wall to her winter home at soft Torquay. Things 
went on at Tregalva just as they had been 
before. The only result of Frederica's flight to 
the Rectory, and her early death, seemed to be 
that people talked about poor Mrs. Malreward 
for a week or two, and then forgot that she had 
ever existed. Somebody noticed that about this 
time the Rector's hair began to turn grey ; and 
about twice every year he left home, it was sup-' 
posed to see Mrs. Malreward's children. A 
granite cross in the churchyard marked the 
place where she slept beside the Atlantic, and 
bore her name, the date of her death, and the 
words, " I will be a father to the fatherless." 
And here ends the first act of this story. 



i 



CHAPTER n. 

It is a mistake to suppose that the mere knowledge of the 
fact that any tie of blood exists between two persons will 
avail to produce the affection which should accompany such 
relationships. — ^T. A. Trollope. 

WHEN six years afterwards, — according to 
the promise given to Mrs. Majreward, — 
her son Victor came to Kve with Arthur Byrne, 
the Rector found him a pale, large-eyed child, 
with brain and conscience precociously develop- 
ed, caring nothing for out-door games, but fond 
of puzzling his little head over theological pro- 
blems, apt to dream by night about hell and the 
Judgment Day, and then to wake up and sob 
and cry, — in short, in body and mind he was 
fast ripening into a fit subject for a juvenile 
memoir. The Rector burnt the little books — 
"The Fairchild Family" and so forth, which 
Mrs. Warner had stored in his trunk, and sent 
him out into the garden to make mud-pies. 
Mr. Byrne then looked about him for a noisy, 



RESTORED. 27 

harum-scanim companion of Victor's own age. 
Some words which his sister had spoken during 
her last illness came into the Rector's mind. 

I 

" Do not forget those two poor boys at Malre- 
ward Court, little Harry and Mark Deverell. I 
should like to have lived, if it were only to have 
helped them." Mark Deverell was of course 
out of the question. But Victor's lawful elder 
brother, his father's heir — what safer antidote 
could be found to Victor's morbid love of dream- 
ing over a sensational religious story-book than 
the society of a healthy, riotous schoolboy ? 

Arthur Byrne had a little struggle with his 
pride before he could prevail upon himself to ask 
a favour of Mr. Malreward. But one day Victor's 
tearful entreaties that his uncle would tell him 
whether or not he — the boy of seven years old — 
was converted, determined the Rector to seek his 
conversion in a very different way. He wrote 
immediately to beg Mr. Malreward to let Harry 
spend his next summer vacation at Tregalva. 
The young heir was delighted at the invitation, 
gained his way with his father, as he usually did, 
and from that time forward he paid a yearly visit 
to the Rectory. And while Harry made his way 
up and down the rocks, and coaxed and worried 
the fishermen, and sp;0nt half the hot summer 



4 



Harry Malreward was an average specimen of 
an English schoolboy. He had many of the 
faults, and the follies, and the fine qualities of 
his order. He hated study, and was always at 
the bottom of his class ; he was careless, and 
generous, and truthful ; and it was reported that 
for his sake, and through his unconscious influ- 
ence over his father, Mr. Malreward had of late 
years forsworn drink, betting, and bad com- 
pany ; and, as the villagers said, " Malreward 
Court was getting quite respectable." 

Mr. Byrne's keen eyes watched the meeting 
between the half-brothers, who furtively eyed 
each other all over, like two animals at their 
first encounter. The Rector suggested that 
Victor should help Harry to unpack his box, and 
then take him out for a walk. Mr. Byrne's mind 
was soon set at ease by hearing shouts of laugh- 
ter coming from Harry's bed-room, and by pre- 
sently seeing the two boys set off for the cli£b, 
carrying between them a stupendous kite. 
Harry never admitted Victor as a companion 



RESTORED. 29 

and an equal in any of his more serious amuse- 
ments, but he petted him, and teazed him, and 
made fun of him, and took care of him, as a 
kind-hearted boy will sometimes treat a little 
sister. Whilst Victor looked up to his brother, 
who routed him out of quiet nooks, who care- 
fiiUy helped him up and down slippery cliff 
paths, who hid in out-of-the-way places alike 
the dog-eared Latin grammar and the cherished 
book of sea-stories — Victor looked up to Harry 
as heathens do to their gods, as a powerful, in- 
comprehensible, sometimes beneficent, but al- 
ways troublesome higher being. 

Harry's ambition was not satisfied with his 
yearly visits to the Rectory. If there were 
boats, caves, fishermen, and breakneck paths at 
Tregalva, there were woods, ponies, tame phea- 
sants to be petted, wild rabbits to be shot, at 
Malreward Court A splendid vision rose be- 
fore Harry's half closed eyes as he lay — tamed 
by hot weather — one summer day, full length on 
the beach at Tregalva. Why should he not in- 
troduce this funny little brother of his to that 
realm in which he reigned supreme in the Christ- 
mas holidays. Would he not with a royal conde- 
scension show him his gun, his secret lurking- 
places in the covers, the old rambling rooms, 



house, and forbade Harry — ^in a much sharper 
tone than he usually spoke to his heir — ever to 
mention the subject again. Harry was a per- 
severing boy, and in the end he hit upon a 
compromise. For a few weeks in every year, 
he was accustomed to make the life of his god- 
mother. Miss Radcliffe, a middle-aged maiden 
lady, a perfect burden to her, and to turn out 
of windows her neat little house in a quiet street 
of Bath, that city of old maids. He easily per- 
suaded his god-mother to invite Victor to join 

him in paying her a visit. The poor lady 

• 

quaked as she thought — if one boy turned her 
peaceful rooms into a Pandemonium, what 
would two boys do f But she soon found out 
that pensive, large-eyed Victor, acted upon his 
riotous elder brother almost as a sedative. She 
was inclined to agree with the farmer who said 
— apropos of agricultural labour — that " a boy 
was a boy, but that two boys were only half a 
boy," and she wished she could try if " three 
boys made no boy at all." 



RESTORED. 31 

Whfle Victor was staying in Bath, a hand- 
some young game-keeper, Mark Deverell by 
name, used often to come over from Malreward 
Court with hampers of game and fruit. He 
talked to Victor, and used to look at him a 
great deal ; he made him secret presents — " Tom 
Brown's Schooldays " and other boy's books — 
likewise a stuffed owl, with mysterious injunc- 
tions to hide them away in his box, and to shew 
them to nobody until he went home. " We get 
twice as many good things now you are here, 
Victor," said Harry, one day. " Deverell would 
not take the trouble for me, I know." And then 
he went on to tell Victor what a cheeky fellow 
Deverell was, and that the governor had perfect- 
ly spoilt him, till he didn't know his place, and 
that, for his part, he meant to thrash him when 
he got big enough. " Why, you would think 
he was a gentleman, to see the way he struts 
about, and the books he reads, instead of being 
nothing but a keeper. I can't think, for the life 
of me, why the governor puts up with his airs." 

Arthur Byrne, knowing well Miss Radcliffe, 
and that Victor would be in trustworthy hands, 
consigned him to her charge for three or four 
weeks. Then he came to Bath on his way 
home from London, to take the boy back with 



pleaded pressing engagements as a reason for 
not going to Malreward Court ; and in the end 
it was arranged that they — Mr. Malreward and 
Harry, Mr. Byrne and Victor — should dine toge- 
ther at an hotel, the one evening that the Rec- 
tor spent in Bath. . 

Victor was intensely curious, and a little 
scared, about meeting Mr. Malreward, whom, 
however, he did not in the least realize to be his 
father. His uncle Arthur so completely filled 
that place in his aflfections, and his boyish awe, 
that he could not conceive that any other man 
had a legal claim to it* Mr. Malreward stared 
at his younger son, spoke very few words to 
him, and those few, rather roughly and oddly. 
The dinner passed oflf pleasantly to all appear- 
ance, though Arthur Byrne felt that he had 
never been present at a more, uncomfortable 
family gathering. At dessert the waiter made 
some unlucky mistake about the wine, where- 
upon Mr. Malreward exploded in a most sud- 
den and unexpected burst of fury. The man 



RESTORED. 33 

•ft 

bore it stolidly, knowing Mr. Malreward of old, 
and that he should probably get an extra shilling 
by-and-by for being well sworn at. Mr. Byrne 
glanced at Harry, who was nonchalantly sip- 
ping his wine ; then at Victor, who was staring, 
pale, horrornatruck at the language which he 
felt rather than understood was dreadful. Then 
the Rector rose from the table, and said, " Mr. 
Mabeward, Victor and I are not used to this 
kind of thing. So, thanking you for your hos- 
pitality, we will wish you good night." 

Victor thought admiringly what a plucky 
man his uncle was. He did not realize — though 
the Rector did afterwards with a slight tremor 
— the amount of risk he ran. What was there 
to hinder Mr. Malreward from saying, and from 
carrying out the threat, too — " You may go if 
you like, Mr. Byrne, but Victor is my son and 
will remain with me." — But the host merely 
frowned, nodded, and without rising from his 
chair, wished his brother-in-law a sulky '* good 
night." 

Victor was then about thirteen. From one 
cause or another, the two boys met only once 
more during the next few years of their lives, 
and that was at Tregalva Rectory. Mr. Byrne 
saw clearly that the heir was beginning to take 

VOL. I. D 



had divided her life between Tregalva Rectory 
and going about with her great-aunt, Mrs. 
Warner, to different watering-places. Mrs. 
Warner will not appear in these pages, and 
there is no need to say much about her. She 
was one of those women whose conscience and 
whose tongue are abnormally developed, who 
think that nearly every thing is wrong, who are 
always trying to do good to others, and who 
succeed only in making everybody about them 
feel wicked. For a person with ordinary nerves 
and temper to be made to live with Mrs. Warner, 
was as if you had condemned a piece of cloth 
to spend its existence with a teazing machine, 
or a nutmeg to dwell with a grater. And 
Freddy, being endowed with a fair share of 
the sensitive, irritable nature of the Malre wards, 
felt often as though her skin, from head to foot, 
were clothed in a blister. She had virtually 
more liberty in her young days that her brother 
Victor had in his. At every step she advanced 
Mrs. Warner fell back, but with a harassing 
fire of grumbling and nagging, which marred 



RESTORED. 35 

all the beauty of leisure and independence. 
Finding that her aunt opposed her in everything 
she said, did, or attempted to do, she grew, 
as Mrs. Warner said, " reckless ;" and so long as 
she gained her own ends, Freddy cared little 
whether they were right or wrong ones. 

Arthur Byrne groaned over his aunt's system 
of training, and of late years he had kept 
Freddy at Tregalva as much as was possible. 
" The girl's nature is a fine one getting spoilt," 
he used to say to himself, "just as a spirited 
young thorough-bred may be spoilt by a bad 
driver. Mrs. Warner is lax where she ought to 
be strict, and strict where she ought to be lax. 
She frets all the gloss off Freddy's life by her 
perpetual worrying about sordid little trifles, 
while in all important matters she lets her have 
her head and go her own road ; she is not com- 
petent to lead, she can only goad and harass 
her along. " Really " — and, at this point in his 
meditations upon Mrs. Warner, the Rector would 
walk about irritably, as though the air were full 
of gnats — "I cannot wonder that poor Freddy's 
temper is frayed as it is. That woman's tongue 
would make me or any man mad, and a man 
could escape from it, as a girl cannot. It seems 
as though all the tact and insight which God 

d2 



would most irritate and wound them. As 
somebody says in a book, ^ She first establishes 
a raw place and then rubs upon it.' I may be 
too severe with Victor sometimes, but I never 
do, and never will, worry the boy." 



37 



CHAPTER ni. 

.... Young and slender, scarcely past 
His sixteenth summer, gentle as a girl, 
Shrinking from each rude gaze or jesting word, 
A hidden fire within his lustrous eyes 
Telling of musings deep. 

E. H. Plumptre. 

ONE bright November morning, Victor and 
Freddy — who had just come to pay a long 
visit to her uncle's house — went out for the 
half hour's saunter on the cliffs, which always 
came as an interval between Victor's morning 
and afternoon work. They ascended the steep 
lane which led from the Rectory to the church. 
It was a grey, massive, weather-beaten build- 
ing, made of jagged slaty stones, the walls 
were bowed a little, this way and that, the 
tower was low and square, — altogether it looked 
more like a natural growth of rock, than any 
handiwork of man's. As I have said before, 
it stood right out upon the cliff like a lighthouse. 



sea* So the church stood between the moors 
and the ocean, like life between two Eternities 
— the Past and the Future. 

The nearest way to the cliffs led through the 
churchyard. There never was a more cheerfiil 
churchyard than that of Tregalva, bleak and 
solitary as its situation might appear, not far 
from the " thundering shores of Bude and Bos," 
and " wild Tintagel by the Cornish sea." No 
trees stood round it to drop their decaying 
leaves upon the graves, no green mould or 
fungi ever defiled them. They lay open to the 
hills, the sea, the free winds of heaven, the sun- 
light which now slept upon them, like the smile 
of God. 

" Let us sit down here," said Victor, as they 
came to the low mound of earth which, with a 
few square slaty stones upon the top of it, 
formed the seaward boundary of the church- 
yard. " I have brought out with me that new 
poem of Tennyson's which came down from 
London last night, and I have not had time to 




RESTORED. 39 

look at it yet." So Victor began to devour a 
green-covered volume which he took from his 
pocket, and Freddy, with much the same wistful 
delight in her eyes, gazed at the sea. 

Victor was now nearly seventeen. He was a 
tall, slender, long-limbed lad, too graceful-man- 
nered to deserve the name of hobbledehoy. The 
first thing that you saw when you looked at him 
were his eyes. They were a clear grey, very 
large, deeply set, the kind of eyes which can 
laugh, and melt, and kindle, and flash fire. His 
face was a slender oval, naturally pale, with the 
colour coming and going in it like a girl's, but 
now it was somewhat tanned with sun and 
wind. His nose and mouth were sharply cut, 
his hair was golden brown, somewhat curly. 
This is a prosaic catalogue of the boy's appear- 
ance. I can give you no idea of the lights and 
shades of expression which came and went upon 
his sensitive, mobile, yet firm face, like sunshine 
and shadow passing over a rock. 

Freddy was not so good-looking as her 
brother. Her features were less regular, and 
the outline of her face was square instead of 
oval. Her hair — ^brown, with golden gleams in 
it like his — grew very low on her forehead, and 
formed a parallel line with her stright eyebrows. 




restrained strength which spoke of Arthur 
Byrne's firm discipline. Freddy was a Malre- 
ward, save when her wild, bright, tender smile 
came like a burst of sunlight, and then the like- 
ness to her mother was startling. True in- 
heritance of the Malrewards were Freddy's grey 
eyes — clear, soft, wistful eyes, like a summer 
twilight. She had her mother's energy, the 
splendid health of the Byrne family, and, deep 
down in her nature, the strange foreboding 
melancholy of the dark Malreward blood. 

The day was like May rather than November. 
There were no trees with yellow leaves to re- 
mind one it was the fall of the year. No damp 
malarious mists, no smell of decaying vegetation, 
could taint that wide, breezy, sunny world. The 
only hint of autumn was in the rich, reddish- 
brown hues of the withered bracken, which grew 
thickly here and there about the cliffs. The air 
was warm, and stillj and golden, the sky was 
blue, the sea was blue, only the one was a tur- 
quoise, the other a sapphire blue. Rocks almost 



RESTORED. 41 

blacky y^t with quite indefinable tints about 
them of bronze, and iron-red, and purple ; milky 
curves of foam, waves close to shore a colour I 
can only describe by the hackneyed phrase "liquid 
emerald ;" the earthly green of the grassy cliff, 
russet fern, and orange spots of Hchen on grey 
stones ; ineffably tender shades of violet and 
gleams of lustrous opal far out at sea ; a few 
sails, a white sea-guU flying ; the horizon-line 
quivering, pulsating with light, and air, and dis- 
tance ; then space, infinity — a vast solemn mur- 
mur, softer than silence. 

At last Freddy said, " How can you sit there 
poring over your book, when fthe whole world 
is so beauttful t Put it down, and use your eyes 
to better purpose." 

Victor, as if awakened from a dream, looked 
up with flushed cheeks,* and eyes which, had a 
dazed expression in them. « Yes," he said, 
softly, after a long gaze around him, " there is 
something in the sea and air to-day which 
makes me think of the words, * The peace ot 
God which passeth all understanding.' Is it 
not strange — I have met with the idea some- 
where in a book, I know — ^that the sea, which is 
the most restless thing in the world, should 
sometimes give us a feeling of peace which 



V « x^ AA x>» ^a> «-• %^ V V A «^ ^^'V * ^^ ^^^^ I 



always looking and staring at things, can't ex- 
press one bit what I think about them ; and 
you, who sit poring and dreaming over your 
books, can just look up and say in one word all 
that I feel." 

"For all that," Freddy went on presently, 
" I should hate to be like you, forced to go on 
grinding day after day at your lessons, whether 
you are in the mood for them or not. I like to be 
idle, to wander about in the open air, to think, to 
find wild flowers and watch the birds, and to , 
work only when the fit takes me. By-the-by, 
I must remember to return you your Euclid 
when we go in to lunch. I suppose you will 
want it this afternoon. I finished the fourth 
book last night, and I can conscientiously 
say I understand every prop., as far as I have 
gone, and I think they are perfectly beau- 
tiful." 

" That is all very fine, Freddy," answered the 
boy niefully, " for you just to run through them 
for your own pleasure. You haven't got to learn 



RESTORED. 43 

them, and to say them out of book to Uncle 
Arthur as I have. It's an awful grind, I can tell 
you." 

" So I should say, poor fellow ; and I don't 
see the good of it ; mere crank labour, it seems 
to me. But you must not go to Cambridge, 
that is clear. Seriously, Victor, what are you 
going to be 1 It is really high time that you 
made up your mind." 

Victor gave a great sigh. "I know what 
Uncle Arthur would like ; he would like me to 
go to Oxford, and take holy orders, and then 
come back here to be his curate. But I can't 
do it. He ought to have kept me out of his 
library, from all books, except a " select few," if 
he wanted me to be even as sound a Churchman 
as he is himself. I can't go reading everything 
that comes in my way — reviews, newspapers, 
poetry, novels, theology — and then tie myself 
down to the Thirty-nine Articles. And think of 
being forced to read the Athanasian creed 1 
How uncle could have bound himself to the 
whole machinery of it is a perfect marvel I But 
things were different when he was young. There 
were uot all the ideas flying about in the very 
air that there are now. And I don't believe he 
could do it now." 



most things. You cannot be a clergyman, of 
course. But how do you mean to get your 
living f " 

** Well, I won't be a lawyer, or a doctor, or a 
land-surveyor, or a civil engineer, or anything 
else of the kind. I would sooner break stones 
on the road. I mean to be a literary man, pure 
and simple. I don't see why I should not still 
live here, and help Uncle Arthur in his parish, 
in every way a layman can, and at the same 
time earn my own livelihood by writing. Do 
you know, Freddy," and the boy looked impor- 
tant and mysterious, " I have got the idea of a 
great work in my head t It is to be the history 
of religious liberty ; and I mean to start with 
the theory which something uncle once said 
suggested to me — that young people and young 
nations are always intolerant, and it is a sort of 
law of nature that they should be so, intended 
for their self-preservation. And then I would 
trace through all history how the floating belief 
that thought and conscience ought to be free 



RESTORED. 45 

began to dissolve the solid frame-work of 
Church and State — like one of St. Paul's glori- 
ous paradoxes, you know ; * the things which 
are not, bringing to nought the things which 
are.' But there is Uncle Arthur coming, and I 
must tell you more about my book another time ; 
there is no hurry, for I must think for years and 
years, and read and study everything — before I 
shall be ready to be^n it." 

The Rector of Tregalva was coming along 
the cliffs towards the churchyard. He was tall, 
thin, grey-haired, very upright ; he looked all 
nerves and sinews. He had blue eyes, with 
something of an eagle's look in them — and in 
the way in which he carried his head — a jaw of 
iron, and an occasional smile, the brightest, 
sweetest, that ever lighted up the face of a hu- 
man being. His features had that clearness 
which is the stamp of gentle blood — as though 
they were the first impress from a mould, while 
all vulgarer faces were cast from a mould which 
was blurred and outworn. Arthur Byrne was 
one of those people who gain in power and 
nobility of character as they grow older. He 
had been a better and a happier man during: 

had found a wide outlet in the training of his 



cal. His chief faults were pride, love of power, 
and a fiery temper, which last, however, he kept 
well under control. 

This was the man whom the boy Victor loved, 
honoured, and obeyed as his father, master, 
king by the right divine of " love and of power, 
and of a sound mind/' There is no sweeter, 
subtler pleasure to a noble soul than to discover, 
and to acknowledge, and to bow down before a 
still nobler one. This is an instinct of human 
nature in general, and I do not believe it has 
anything to do with the relations between the 
sexes. It is but a perversion of that instinct 
which leads some women to submit, even to 
desire, to be tyrannized over by men no better 
than themselves — the rule remains when the 
pi-inciple which ennobled it has vanished. 
Those only have a right to command who are 
themselves the most obedient subjects of the 
law of God and of conscience. "/>«> servire 
regnarey^^ was the family motto of Arthur 
Byrne. 



RESTORED. 47 

The Rector walked home with his nephew 
and niece, chatting genially with them as their 
friend and companion. Somehow, though Vic- 
tor and Freddy had plenty of acquaintances of 
their own age, they always felt that for tho- 
rough sympathy and understanding about most 
things, they must go to Uncle Arthur. He dis- 
cussed with Victor the poem that the boy had 
just been reading, and inquired of Freddy what 
observations on natural history or meteorology 
she had been making that morning. 

" Well, uncle, I decidedly think that it will 
rain this evening at the turn of the tide ; these 
kind of days are always too bright to last. 
And, do you know, just now I was looking at 
such an odd white spot on the cliff a long way 
off. I thought a stratum of chalk must have 
got into it somehow — I am as ignorant of ge- 
ology as 1 am of most things, you see — ^when 
suddenly the white spot dissolved into the air 
with a great flapping of wings. It was a con- 
clave of gulls. And I have just seen a large 
black bird, with a long neck — a cormorant, was 
it not? — and I heard some hawks screaming 
round the cliffs. Is that a sign of rain, I won- 
der r 

And so talking together, they descended the 



from the Rectory windows. The house was 
muffled with fuschia and cotoneaster, the latter 
now full of crimson berries, glowing like coals 
of fire among the stiff sprays and blue-green 
leaves. A few stunted, but much-prized, trees 
stood round the garden; the borders, now 
flowerless, save for a few|chrysanthemums, buff, 
and milk-white, and maroon — and a bit of vel- 
vet lawn, were all exquisitely kept. ' Behind 
the house stood many outbuildings — stables, a 
large walled kitchen-garden, and a paddock, 
stretching away for several acres. Everything 
about the place showed that the Rector of Tre- 
galva was a man of cultured tastes and com- 
fortable means. 

That afternoon there came the most evil hour 
in Victor's daily life — that appointed for the 
study of mathematics. It was all up-hill work 
to the boy ; he groaned as he went along, and 
if he ever was inclined to think his uncle hard 
upon him, it was now. 

" What is the use of grumbling, my dear 



RESTORED. 49 

boy ?" Baid Arthur Byrne one day. " The more 
you dislike mathematics, the more I am forced 
to keep you at them. That is the law of edu- 
cation — of life generally ; the truths which we 
are naturally the slowest to learn have con- 
stantly to be dinned into our ears— have to be 
driven into us at last at the point of the bayo- 
n6t, so to speak, if we will not learn them with- 
out. I dislike mathematics just as much as you 
do ; it is the same toil for me to teach as it is 
for you to learn them. But my sympathy in 
your distaste does not incline me to let you off 
one jot or tittle. I shall be stern to myself and 
stem to you." 

It was this union of sympathy with severity 
— this thorough understanding of the toil or 
pain that he inflicted, together with the un- 
flinching determination to inflict it all the same 
if he believed it was for Victor's mental oi* 
moral good — which gave the man such a hold 
over the boy. 

Victor was sitting in his uncle's study, with 
both his elbows on the table, his hands buried 
in his hair, frowning dismally over a tough 
proposition in the sixth book of Euclid, when 
Mr. Byrne came in. 

"Well, Victor, do you know itt" 

VOL. 1. E 

i 



uuuio Lut;. 



" Even Freddy ! Your sister is not an inferior 
being," returned the Rector, a little sharply. 
"The Cambridge middle-clafis examinations have 
proved that although there are few women great 
mathematicians, yet the capacity for mathe- 
matics is more common in girls than in boys. 
I will give you ten minutes more to learn that 
proposition," and Mr. Byrne consulted his watch. 
"If you cannot say it then, I must ride by 
myself this afternoon, instead of having you for 
ray companion." 

The Rector sat down in his arm-chair, and a 
very unfair proceeding, thought Victor, read 
the Greek which he loved, whilst Victor toiled 
away at the Euclid which he hated. In exactly 
ten minutes more, Mr. Byrne looked up, and 
took the book which Victor brought to him. 
The boy went on swimmingly for the first few 
lines, then began to flounder amongst the 
" A B C's " and « D E F's," finally gasped, and 
came to a dead halt. 

" Victor, look at me," said Mr. Byrne, quietly. 



RESTORED. 51 

" Have you really tried your hardest to learn 
this?" 

Victor looked anywhere but at his uncle's 
piercing blue eyes. " Really, sir, it is so awfully 
confusing " 

*' That will do. Put the book away. As we 
have scarcely any ink in the house, I wish you 
would go over to Caraelford this afternoon, and 
get me a bottle the same as the last. And, 
Victor, go to the stables, tell John to bring 
round General at once ; and tell him to exercise 
Black Tom this afternoon." 

"I wish, sir," said Victor, colouring, "you 
would let me grind away at that prop, a little 
longer. I believe I should know it in another 
quarter of an hour." 

" You know veiy well that under no circum- 
stances are you to go on working after your 
regular hours for leaving off. No, your day is 
over, past recall." 

And Victor, his pride somewhat mortified, 
left the room for a walk across the moors to 
their post-town ; whilst the Rector, having a 
distant parishioner to visit, set out for a ride in 
another direction. 

It may seem but a small privation to the boy 
this being sent to take a ten miles' walk by liini- 

E 2 



Victor, and he is on the whole willing to work, 
to the utmost extent that is good for him. 
Therefore it would be unfair to his mind and 
body were I, under any drcumstances, to in- 
crease that amount of work.** Nor, from the 
boy's earliest years, had the Rector once struck 
liis nephew. Arthur Byrne believed that cor- 
jH^ral punishment was justifiable only for very 
few otfences, and those were such heinous ones 
that Victor had never been guilty of them. Mr. 
Bvme always contrived that whatever he made 
Victor suffer, he himself should share in the 
suffering, and that Victor should feel that he 
did ; and this had a powerful influence over the 
Kn-*s affectionate, high-spirited nature. '^ It is 
not that I want to inflict punishment,** thougiit 
the Rector; ^but I want to bring tbe lK>y 
under the dominion of law — the law which 
is as much above the master as it is aK>ve the 
pupil." 

A little while agv\ Victor had got into a 
terrible scrape. Once or twice in the season the 



RESTORED. 53 

hounds met within a mile of Tregalva, and on 
these occasions the Rector allowed himself and 
his nephew the delight of joining in the fun. It 
was rather a self-denial to Arthur Byrne, I sus- 
pect, to abstain from hunting oftener ; and only 
a strong conviction that it was a clergyman's 
duty not to spend time, money, his own strength, 
and his horse's, in mere sport, kept him at 
home. The long-looked-for morning of the 
meet arrived, and behold, the Rector, as he had 
beforehand warned Victor would probably be 
the case, was sent for to visit a sick parishioner 
five miles away. 

" So, Victor," said his uncle, as they mounted 
at the Rectory gate, and were about to ride off 
in opposite directions, ** you can just go to the 
meet, and see the hounds throw off, then ride 
along the road to meet me, and so home to- 
gether to work." 

However, when the young gentleman did see 
the hounds throw off that delicious autumn 
morning, and the whole field ride after them, 
he and his pony both went mad, and galloped 
away after the rest. It was late in the after- 
noon when he came slowly riding home, tired, 
splashed from head to foot, wondering — now 
the intoxication had passed — how he could 






lessness which he was determined to put down 
with a strong hand in everyone who came 
under his sway. " Lawlessness," he used to say, 
'' is the besetting sin of young people at the 
present day." 

Exactly as Victor had expected, he encounter- 
ed in the hall, Mr. Byrne, with a face terrible to 
behold. " So, sir, this is the consequence of 
trusting you I No, you need not tell me where 
you have been, young Penreath has just gone 
by, and he told me he saw you,("riding pluckily," 
theRector could have added.) "Now,for disobey- 
ing orders, you will consider yourself under ar- 
rest, for a day and a half, that is, until breakfast 
time the day after to-morrow ;" and with that 
Mr. Byrne went into his study, and shut the 
door. 

So that afternoon, and the whole of the next 
day, silence and gloom hung over the house. 
Victor was shut out from family prayers ; from 
meals, until Mr. Byrne had finished, and left the 
dining-room ; from the study ; from all books, ex- 



RESTORED. 55 

cept his lessons, which the Rector laid aside for 
him on the hall table. He carefully kept out of 
his uncle's way, but happening the next morn- 
ing to meet him upon the stairs, he turned very 
red, and bowed to him in silence, with downcast 
eyes. Mr. Byrne returned the salutation cour- 
teously, but passed on without a word. There 
was nothing for Victor to do when his lessons 
were done, but to wander disconsolately about 
the rectory grounds ; for when he was " under 
arrest" he was not permitted to go beyond 
them. The long day dragged itself away at last; 
it was a dismal day to Victor, and one scarcely 
less so to his uncle. 

The instant the breakfast bell had rung the 
second mon:iing, Victor came into the room, and 
went up to the Rector with a hurried, humbled, 
yet glad and eager air, — knowing his penance 
was over, — " I am very sorry, sir, it shall never 
happen again," he said, with a wistful look. 

" I hope not, Victor I" and Arthur Byrne with 
his bright smile held out his hand. *^ I don't know 
how you found it, but yesterday was one of the 
longest, dullest days I ever spent in my life." 

So fast friends again, they breakfasted to- 
gether, and afterwards fell to work as usual. 
But notwithstanding their speedy reconcilia- 



ing at Tregalva. When they assembled at din- 
ner that evening, Mr. Byrne and Victor both 
looked tired, and the latter a little out of spirits 
also, but idle Miss Malreward came in with bright 
eyes and glowing cheeks. 

"I have had such a jolly tramp over the 
cliffs," said she. " What have you two gentle- 
men been about V 

" I have been to Tregellas farm," answered the 
Rector,"" Mrs. Cardew is better, I am glad to 
say. Victor has been doing some shopping for 
me in Camelford." 

" Camelford 1 you wicked boy, why did you 
not ask me to go with you, instead of sneaking 
off there by yourself I" 

Victor looked embarrassed, but his uncle, not 
wishing to take Freddy into their counsels, 
said, " A ten miles walk is too long for you, 
my dear." 

" Ten I" cried the yoimg lady, opening her 
eyes very wide, " why, I can walk fifteen." 

**My dear Freddy," said her uncle, in the 



RESTORED. 57 

bantering tone he often used to her, "your 
splendid energies are quite thrown away. It is 
like a waste of water power. Oh, if you were 
odly Victor's brother, would I not make you 
turn wheels and grind corn ? — ^would I not keep 
you tightly to work ? But here you go wander- 
ing about at your own sweet will, like a little, 
lazy river. In some things, in your shirking 
work as much as is possible, your contempt 
for law and authority, you are much more like 
a schoolboy than this fellow here." 

^* Thank you, uncle I I had infinitely rather be 
a girl than a boy. I shall never marry, and I 
shall have ten times more liberty than that un- 
fortunate young lord of the creation, whom you 
make work like a slave now, and who will have 
to work like a slave in some profession by and 
by, whilst I can be as idle as ever I like." 

^* Ah, Freddy, you women have yet to learn 
that there is more independence in giving up 
your time to earn your own living than in 
having your time at your own disposal, and de- 
pending on others for your money. And there 
is such a thing as a 'perfect law of liberty,' 
mind." 

" Darling old uncle, don't look at me so grave- 
ly as that, I am not worth it/' and Freddy turn- 



I 



X 7 



have reduced you to something like order by 
this time," he auswered playfully. 

" I wish you had brought me up," and the 
girl's voice had a sudden pathetic thrill in it, ** I 
should have been very different novir from what 
I am. Oh, uncle, you might be as hard upon 
me as you liked, I would not mind, you would 
never worry me." 

Victor hardly spoke a word during dinner. 
As soon as the meal was over, he got up and 
went back to the study, to prepare his lessons 
for the next day. The Rector was called out 
to speak to one of his churchwardens, and was 
kept by him talking for half an hour, whilst 
Freddy ensconced herself in a comfortable arm- 
chair by the fire and read the Times. " The 
lords of creation, as they call themselves, don't 
always get the best of it in this world," thought 
she. 

When Victor came in to tea, he pounced again 
upon Tennyson's new poem, and was soon lost 
to the outer world. Tea-time was a comfort- 



IIESTORED. 59 

able meal at the Rectory — when Freddy was 
staying there, she always exercised her feminine 
prerogative of making tea, and she and every- 
body were allowed to read during the meal, if 
it so pleased them to do. So all was silence, 
except that the urn hissed comfortably ; some- 
times a tea-cup rattled, sometimes the leaf of 
a book was turned over, sometimes, also, the 
Times rustled as Freddy turned it about; till 
suddenly Victor looked up and threw his book 
down on the table. 

" Hang it, Freddy, how can a fellow read 
when you keep on crackle, crackle, with that 
wretched paper f 

" I beg your pardon," she answered abstract- 
edly, and went on reading. 

The Rector gave Victor a look which made 
the boy colour and cast down his eyes. 

But he thought — " Victor's brain has done as 
much work as it can stand to-day." And pre- 
sently he closed his Guardian and said, " If you 
have both done tea, will you ring the bell, please, 
Victor, and bring out the card-table. Your old 
uncle would like a rubber, if you have no objec- 
tion, young people. I will play with dummy." 

It was in vain to try to keep " silence, and 
the rigour of the game;" for the young people 



persecutions he suflfered at the hands of Euclid, 
when it was time to have prayers and go to 
bed. 

They all slept soundly that night ; they did 
not dream that throughout their lives they 
should never again have quite such an evening 
of peace, and security, and harmless fun. 



61 



CHAPTER IV. 

Ah, would 'twere so with manj 

A gentle girl and boy ; 
But were there ever any 

Writhed not at passed joy ? 

Keats. 

fPHE next morning at breakfast-time Mr. 
X Bryne said, with his genial smile, 

"Freddy, my dear, I am sorry to have to 
condemn you again to hours of solitude to-day. 
Victor has his lessons, and T have magistrate's 
business. * Men must work and women must 
weep,' you know." 

" As if I were going to cry because I was not 
encumbered wath that boy all day long," an- 
swered Freddy, with a toss of her pretty head. 
" Don't you know, uncle, I am like Miss Austen's 
' Mrs. Elton,' I have ' resources within myself.' 
I am never dull except when I am worried. So 
you see how can I help being happy here, whether 
T am with you, or whether I am alone?" 



visitor, eh, Victor ? Will you ride with us this 
afternoon at two o'clock, Freddy? General is at 
your disposal. And choose where we shall go, 
my dear; anywhere within a radius of ten 
miles." 

" You dear good Uncle Arthur," and Freddy 
jumped up and kissed him. 

The brother and sister were laughing and jok- 
ing together, and did not notice the effect pro- 
duced upon their uncle, by-and-by, by the read- 
ing of a letter which the post had brought him. 
Presently the Rector's clear tone cut through 
their mirth like a sword, and suddenly silenced 
them. 

" Victor, this letter concerns you." 
The boy started and looked at his uncle's 
face, which was then pale and almost stern. If 
Victor's conscience had not been a pretty clear 
one, it would have sorely troubled him. 
'' Concerns me, did you say, sir ?" 
" Yes — " Mr. Byrne paused a moment, and 
the young people began to look aghast. 



RESTORED. 63 

** What in the world have I been doing now ?" 
wondered Victor. 

" It is from Dr. Radcliflfe, an old acquaintance 
of mine, who used to attend your poor mother, 
and who is doctor to the parish in which Mr. 
Malreward lives. He writes to tell me that 
your brother Harry met with a serious accident 
the day before yesterday ; he was thrown from 
his horse, and is now lying in a very precarious 
state. The poor fellow is most anxious to see 
you, Victor ; it seems quite upon his mind. Dr. 
Radcliffe hopes that you will come to him at 
once, it is so important that he should be kept 
calm. Mr. Malreward, he says, seems perfectly 
distracted, and can do nothing. But here — you 
can see the letter for yourself." 

" Poor Harry !" cried Victor, turning quite 
white as he read it. " Dr. Radcliffe says he will 
get over it, doesn't he ?" 

"He does not commit himself to any opinion. 
What will you do, my dear boy ?" 

" It is my duty to go, I suppose," said Victor, 
with a somewhat wild, scared look. " Don't you 
think so yourself, uncle ?" 

"Yes — Victor." The words came slowly, 
after a pause, and with a deep breath. " What 
do you say, Freddy ?" 



was in their troubled, altered looks. An Tin- 
definable shadow of evil suddenly brooded over 
that peaceful, sun-lighted room. Freddy and 
Victor had never entered their birth-place since 
the night of their unconscious flight from thence, 
but there was to them something ominous 
and dreadful in the very name of Malreward 
Court. 

" Yes, Freddy is right, " at last said the 
Rector, and he got up like a man who had 
nerved himself for a painful operation. " You 
must go, my dear boy; your brother wants you — 
that is enough. We are all in God's hands," 
said Arthur Byrne, a little incoherently, as it 
seemed. "If you can get ready by the time the 
waggonette is brought round, we shall just 
catch the next up-train at Bodmin Road/* and 
the Rector hastily left the room. 

" It is hard lines having to go away just as 
you are come, Freddy," said Victor, as he pre- 
pared to follow his uncle. " I am an awfully 
selfish beggar to be thinking about that now. 



RESTORED. 65 

though. Poor Harry ! I wonder whether he is 
in much pain?" 

" Poor Harry !" echoed Freddy, but she was 
thinking " Poor Victor ! How I should hate to 
be forced to go to that dreadful Malreward 
Court ! Well, dear boy, I daresay Harry will 
soon be better, and you won't have to stay 
there long ; you will be home again by this day 
week, in time to keep Uncle Arthur's birth-day." 

" Long before that, I hope," said Victor, as 
he ran upstairs. In a few minutes more he was 
down again, with a little portmanteau in his 
hand ; and Mr. Byrne, buttoned up in his great- 
coat, and still looking pale and grave, came in 
to say that the carriage was at the door ; so 
Victor, with a parting kiss to his sister, and one 
sorrowful look cast round the room, went out, 
took his seat on the box beside Mr. Byrne, be- 
hind the spirited and not altogether clerical pair 
of bays, and was whirled away out of sight. 

Freddy went back into the dining-room, 
where the interrupted meal still stood upon the 
table, with the cups and saucers, and the unfin- 
ished piece of toast in Victor's plate, and the 
coflfee still warm in the coffee-pot. " I cannot 
believe it is true," she said, as she looked out of 
the window, trying to keep the tears from her 

VOL. T. F 



light and colour from the landscape. The girl 
who stood moping there with her hands hang- 
ing down, her eyes staring blankly into the dis- 
tance, her mind brooding over all sorts of vague 
and frightful calamities to come, you would 
hardly have recognised as the gay, careless, 
saucy Freddy of an hour ago. She turned 
away at last with a sigh. " Things will never 
be quite the same again, I knowJ'* 

Then her eyes fell upon that new poem of 
Tennyson's, lying upon a side-table. " What a 
pity that Victor did not take the book with him ! 
It would have been a companion for him the 
whole journey, and he would have forgotten all 
about the horrors he is going to. I wonder 
whether I could overtake the carriage, if I ran 
across the fields t" She looked at the clock 
which stood upon the mantelpiece. " I could." 

She dashed up-stairs into her bed-room, 
seized an old garden hat and shawl, the first 
things upon which she could lay her hands — her 
thick boots were generally on her feet — down 



*^ 



RESTORED. 67 

again into the dining-room, she stuflFed the preci- 
ous book into her pocket, then, bare-headed, put- 
ting on her hat, and throwing her shawl round 
her as she went, she tore through the garden 
into the fields at the back of the Rectory. 

Now there was a short cut through these 
fields, which, diligently pursued, might enable 
her to come up with the carriage, notwithstand- 
ing it had had several minutes' start, as it rolled 
along the winding high-road to the town of 
Bodmin. It was a desperate chance, she knew, 
two miles hard running to be done, including 
the climbing of perpetual stiles, which were no- 
thing but rough stone steps up and down the 
walls. She ran and ran, her old shawl flying 
in the wind, sometimes slipping and bruising 
herself as she clambered the. walls, sometimes 
tearing rents in her dress — she ran and ran — 
panting for breath, her face crimson, feeling 
once or twice as though she must give in and 
throw herself down on the ground, and yet 
determined she would die rather than not do 
what she had set herself to do — she ran and 
ran, till she saw the grey, slaty high road wind- 
ing before her, and almost immediately heard 
carriage wheels rumbling along. 

" Only a few yards more," she thought, her 

f2 y 



his fiery bays yith a suddenness which nearly 
threw them on their haunches. 

"Freddy!'' cried her uncle in amazement. 
" How in the world did you get here ? What 
is the matter ?" 

" Your book, Victor, your book 1" she gasped, 
waving it in the air. ** You left it behind. I 
said I would do it, and I have done it. Oh, 
dear I" and she sank down upon a heap of stones 
by the side of the road. 

Victor jumped down, and ran to her side. 

"Freddy, you darling, you aire a brick! — 
what, did you run here all the way for me, to 
bring my Tennyson ?" And he took her limp, 
trembling hand in his, and shook it over and 
over again, his manly dignity not allowing him 
to kiss her here, in the turnpike road, in the 
presence of the old groom, who sat with folded 
arms and stolid countenance in the waggon- 
ette. 

" Jump in, Freddy," and the Rector looked 
at his niece with a smile, half reproof half 



RESTORED. 69 

admiration. " We must drive yon to Bodmin 
now/' 

For one moment Freddy looked, and longed, 
and hesitated. "No, nncle," and she turned 
away resolutely. " I know you want to talk to 
Victor, and give him lots of good advice, poor 
boy! Good-bye, Victor — darling Victor 1" and 
as if afraid she might be tempted to change her 
mind, she set off running across the fields she 
had come. But she soon pulled up, and turned 
round with loving, tearful eyes, and hands 
clasped together, to watch the caniage out of 
sight. Then she began to walk slowly towards 
home, exhausted, crying, and alone. 



CHAPTER V. 

A loDii; and hrt furefwdl. 

Ye poos, sweet simpficilieB of life. 
Good books, good fineDds, and I10I7 iioodit and all 
That lent rougli life sweci Sanday-aaemiiig lesta, 
Making earth heaTen-like ! 

A.H.CLaircffl. 

rW places are more weird than a conntry 
raflwaj station at night. The roof is open 
in the middle to the black depths of sky ; one 
or two gas-lamps creak and swing ; lights and 
shadows flicker oddly ; people muffled in cloaks 
pace up and down, and talk in melancholy 
tones ; &r away a red light burns soUenly, and 
the line of rails, like the road of life, appears 
out of the darkness, glimmers for a little way, 
then vanishes into it again. 

There were not many people waiting for the 
last train that evening at Malreward Station. 
Two countrywomen, each with a blue band-box 
and a bundle tied up in a red cotton handker- 



*> 



RESTORED. 71 

chief, had arrived half an hour before the train 
was due, and now sat patiently on the wooden 
bench outside, too humble to venture into the 
little office, and partake of the luxuries of a 
bright fire and flaring gas. The station-master 
wore a black and gold uniform, and was ticket 
clerk and superintendent in one« He was good- 
looking, as most railway officials are, but he 
sank into insignificance beside the person with 
whom he was lounging over the fire. This was 
a tall, broad-shouldered, very handsome man, 
about thirty, dressed in the ordinary walking 
costume of a gentleman, great-coat with velvet 
collar, felt hat, and dog-skin gloves. His fea- 
tures were of an aristocratic cast ; he had deep- 
set, dark grey eyes, full of fire and softness, 
and a large, curly, golden-brown beard. This 
was Mark Deverell, the head gamekeeper at 
Malreward Park. 

He was standing with one arm resting on the 
little wooden mantelpiece, smoking a choice 
cigar, and looking down into the fire with a 
gloomy face. '* I never expect the worst, Mr. 
Deverell," the station-master was saying. He 
was something of a philosopher — ^railway offi- 
ci^,ls, stage-coach drivers, turnpike keepers, who 
daily see crowds of people of every variety un- 



'^ If I were in your place, I should want a 
railway smash now and then, for the sake of the 
sensation." The keeper spoke in refined tones, 
and if his speech was full of provincial idiom, it 
was never un grammatical. " Being as I am, I 
am thankful that we have got a few poachers 
left in the country." 

" Ah, that's just the diflference between you 
and me," said the placid station-master. "I 
like a happy medium — ^not such a crowd of pass- 
engers one week that you are driven hither 
and thither, and worried off your legs, and the 
next week not a soul travelling, and the trains 
as dismal as hearses. No ; give me fair average 
returns, and a quiet time between the trains for 
a pipe and a newspaper. After all, if a man 
has got a will of his own, and isn't soon daunt- 
ed, he can generally get, in the long run, the 
sort of life he likes best. A man is pretty much 
what he makes himself." 

" Do you believe that t" and Mark Deverell 
looked up with a sort of fierce despair in his 



RESTORED. 73 

face. " I should say it entirely depended upon 
whose son a man is, and what sort of people he 
has about him, as to how he would turn out. 
It's just a question of blood and breeding whe- 
ther he goes to the good or to the bad. There 
are some people that don't give others a chance 
to be anything but blackguards." 

The discussion seemed resolving itself into 
the original elements of most discussions — free- 
will and predestination. Deverell walked to 
the door and stood looking down the line. 
Presently he said — " Train is comings Mr. Joyce." 

" You always hear the trains before I do," 
said Mr. Joyce admiringly. " You would save 
telegraphs, Mr. Deverell." 

" A keeper must have the eyes of a hawk 
and the ears of a hare," replied Mark Deverell. 

In a few seconds more, the red eyes of the 
train were growing larger and larger in the 
darkness, and then it sailed up creaking and 
groaning, and spitting fire and steam. Deverell 
was instantly aware of his young master's face 
looking out of a first-class carriage window. 
" Here I am, Mr. Victor," and he took off his hat 
with a Grand Seigneur air, and opened the car- 
riage door at the same moment. 

Victor looked doubtfully at him, hardly 



have yoii got ?" 

Victor informed him, and then — somewhat to 
his surprise, as he expected to find some convey- 
ance waiting for him outside the station — ^his 
portmanteau was consigned to the care of a 
porter, and they set off to walk to Mah'eward 
Court. 

" How is Harry t" were the first words Victor 
uttered as they turned into the high-road. 

Deverell looked down. " He is better, «ir," 
he answered in rather a tremulous voice. " He 
is out of pain. He will never suffer any more." 

Victor seized hold of the keeper's arm in sud- 
den horror. " What do you mean, Deverell — 
what do you mean t" 

Deverell looked at him then, with tears in his 
kind eyes— tears for the boy whose troubles he 
foresaw, not for the dead heir, who slept in peace 
at Malreward Court. " He died this afternoon, at 
one o'clock. I would have telegraphed to you 
to tell you not to come, but I knew it was no 
good, and that you would have started." 



RESTORED. 75 

Victor stood still in the middle of the road. 
Such a sense of utter desolation smote him as 
he thought of the merry boy who had played 
with him on the cliffs of Tregalva, the good- 
natured elder brother, the young life cut so 
short. But bitterest of all was the feeling that 
he could not mourn him more. It adds a ter- 
rible sting to our sorrow for a dead kinsman 
when we feel we miss him but little, and that 
our loss is but a light one. " Poor Harry I poor 
Harry 1 " said Victor. " My only brother I" — He 
did not notice that Deverell winced as he utter- 
ed those words. Victor walked on presently 
—talking sorrowfully about Harry, and hearing 
all that Deverell could tell him respecting his 
last hours. " How does Mr. Malreward bear it ?" 
he asked. 

" He is half distracted, Mr. Victor. We must 
forgive a good deal to a man who has suffered 
such a blow as that. But you had better not 
go near Malreward Court — no good can come 
of it. I want you to stay at my lodge to-night, 
and then go back again to Cornwall by the first 
train to-morrow. He was very angry when he 
heard you were coming." 

"Are things as bad as that?" cried Victor 
passionately. " Won't he behave to me like a 



o — 



tone. "I can't have you going back to the 
B*^ation, and making a confounded row and 
scandal, this time of night. There's a good fire, 
and a nice bit of supper waiting for you at the 
lodge. I am head-keeper now, you know." 

Victor gave in with a sigh, and walked 
silently by Deverell's side. It was a very dark 
night ; clouds sailed wildly across the sky and 
were rent into chasms, out of which gleamed a 
faint blurred star or two. The wind was rising, 
and swept with a melancholy murmur through 
the trees. On each side of the high-road lay 
woods, Mark Deverell's domain; thick under- 
growth, — with here and there, rising above it, a 
tall fir or a massive beech — shut in the path 
with a black, impenetrable walL It was a still 
and lonely place in the day-time ; at night it 
had the suffocating darkness of a vault. 

Presently there was a fiadnt rustle in the 
bushes, a low whistle — and the dark figure of a 
man leaped over the wall which separated the 
road firom the woods. Victor started a little. 



RESTORED. 77 

"It's only one of my men," said Deverell. 
" Will you kindly wait a moment, sir f ' There 
followed a few hurried words between the men, 
who spoke in cautious whispers, like conspirat- 
ors ; for in such a place as this the very trees 
have ears, and no one can tell who may be lis- 
tening. " Eleven o'clock, at the second gate in 
lower Oak-wood," were the only words that 
Victor could distinguish. "Very well, sir," 
answered the under-keeper, who thereupon 
scrambled over the wall again, and was lost in 
the gloom of the wood. 

A mile more they tramped along ; now and 
then the woods left off and revealed a dark 
vision of fields and open coimtry, with scattered 
lonely lights from farms and cottages. Then 
the woods closed in again thicker and blacker 
than ever, and the road pursued its way, like a 
railroad through a cutting, getting deeper and 
deeper, till it was lost altogether in a down- 
right tunnel. In the most awful depths of 
all they came to two stone pillars, which glim- 
mered tall and ghostly. Deverell opened a 
great iron gate ; they passed through, and it 
fell behind them with a harsh clang. They were 
now in Malreward Park. 

A sort of horror came over Victor as he heard 



cast into some dread oubliette, and should be 
heard of never, never more. 

Across the park they went, by short cuts and 
byways, which Deverell knew well in the dark. 
There were all the strange, eerie sounds about, 
that you may hear by night in the country — 
rustlings in the grass and dead leaves; footsteps 
which follow, but never overtake you ; the patter- 
ing faU of acorns and dead wood; groanings, as 
though the trees had evil consciences. At last 
the keeper's lodge rose dark and massive before 
them, with a red flicker of firelight from the 
lozenge-paned window. Deverell unlocked the 
door, and through a stone porch, with seats on 
either side, they passed into a very comfortable 
little parlour. 

The firelight was dancing on a few good en- 
gravings, which hung round the white-washed 
walls, on the guns which were ranged over the 
mantelpiece, and which were surmounted with 
a stag's head and antlers. A high-backed, crim- 
son-cushioned arm-chair etood before the fire, a 



RESTORED. 79 

table covered with white damask was in the 
centre of the room, and another — piled with 
books and newspapers — stood in the bow-win- 
dow. "Now sit there and rest yourseli^ Mr. 
Victor," — and the keeper pointed to the arm- 
chair — ** while I get your supper." 

Victor, feeling thoroughly dead beat, threw 
himself down, and idly watched Deverell light 
two candles in tall, antique candlesticks, and, 
with hand deft as a woman's, spread a dainty 
little meal of cold roast pheasant, and an em- 
browned and ornamented pie of wood-pigeons, 
and other good things. 

"Your supper is ready, sir," said Deverell, 
as he placed one chair at the table. 

But Victor said, smiling, " Come, sit down and 
join me. Do you think I could eat a mouthful 
with a great fellow like you standing behind my 
chair ?" So Victor and the gamekeeper made a 
hearty meal together. 

Presently the boy asked, " And do you live 
here all alone, Deverell? Don't you find it 
rather dull and solitary work ?" 

" Yes, I have lived here all alone since the old 
head-keeper died. As to finding it dull, I have 
too much to do and to see after ; solitary — well, 
it more depends upon what a man is than upon 



him from feeling lonely I Or does he mean that 
he is so different from most men of his class — 
which he is, no doubt — that he can never find a 
companion ?" "I wonder you don't marry," said 
the boy aloud, as he rose from the table. 

Deverell's splendid grey eyes shot fire. 

" Marry I Whom, pray I What sort of woman 
would marry a gamekeeper I" 

" Well, are there not some nice girls among 
the farmers' daughters ?" • 

Deverell shrugged his shoulders, and made no 
answer. 

There was a long silence after that. A storm 
was rising, and through the trees whict sur- 
rounded the lodge swept those grand and 
solemn harmonies of the westerly wind which 
are like organ music, or like the long swell of 
waves upon a beach. A vague and melancholy 
apprehension weighed upon Victor's mind as he 
sat half dozing by the fire. There had been some- 
thing in Deverell's sudden flash of anger which 
brought to him a dreadftil remembrance ; but so 



RESTORED. 81 

shadowy was it that it eluded his grasp when- 
ever he attempted to seize it. 

Deverell sat beside him — his long limbs stretch- 
ed out, his head bent down, a dark cloud brood- 
ing upon his fine face. Suddenly he looked up 
with a bright smile, and in a gentle voice he 
asked, " How is Miss Malreward T Did you re- 
member to bring her likeness with you this 
time r 

Victor opened his eyes, and came back with a 
start from the land of visions into which he had 
begun to wander. "My sister Freddy? Yes, 
I have her photo here," and he took it from his 
pocket-book and handed it to the keeper. " You 
have never seen her, have you I" 

" Haven't I, sir ?" answered Deverell, with an 
odd smile. He was thinking of that wild night 
sixteen years ago ; of the sudden flight of the 
beautiftil young mistress of Malreward Court, 
and of the little girl whom he had carried in his 
arms. He went to the table, held the photo- 
graph close to the candle, and long and earnestly 
gazed upon it. He returned it at last with a 
sigh. " No, sir, I don't see any resemblance to 
your mother. That is a true Malreward face. 
She might be like her when she smiled — I don't 
know." 

VOL. I. Or 



to think that my loss when she died was gi eater 
than yours. You never knew her, she never 
said to you a gentle, high-minded word now 
and then, as she used to say to me ; but you 
have her nature in you, fighting with the evil 
Malreward blood. Thank God for her, sir; 
though you can't remember how she looked, and 
what she said, as I can. Surely a man can 
never fall away utterly who has such a mother 
looking down upon him from Heaven. But as 
for those whose father and mother both are a 
curse to them, whose very blood has a stain in 
it, they are like those the Methodist preachers 
tell about, predestined to reprobation, cast away 
in this world and next." 

Deverell came back to the fireside, and rest- 
ing his arm upon the mantelpiece, looked down. 
The light flickered luridly on his face; some 
beautiful lost spirit seemed to gaze out of his 
eyes. 

Presently Victor asked, "My mother died 
when she was very young, did she not? " 

" Yes, she was very young, very bright, with 



RESTORED. 83 

such a spirit — no trouble seemed able to master 
it. I wonder how death managed to destroy 
anyone so overflowing with life as she was. 
But she died when she was a shining Ught in 
a dark place, when her children and — and I 
wanted her ; and those live on and on who are 
a torture to everyone about them, who go on 
adding sin to sin every day of their lives. But, 
as some one says in a book, it isn't likely that 
those who are not wanted on earth should be 
wanted in heaven, or in hell either.** 

** I suppose it is true what they say, that the 
Malrewards have been an unlucky race for many 
generations ?" said Victor, who, like most imagi- 
native young people, had a great hankering 
after old &mily traditions. 

** There is a curse on the Malrewards, you 
know that, Mr. Victor t No robbery of Church 
property, and all that humbug, but a real, sub^ 
stantial 'damned spot' upon them. It hap- 
pened three hundred years ago, or thereabouts. 
There was a Sir Henry Malreward, who atro- 
ciously wronged a lady while her husband was 
away at the wars somewhere. She died broken- 
hearted ; and when she was dying, she cursed 
him and his house for generations to come, in 
a way that was something awful and unheard 

G 2 



deaths — they have been shot in duels, or by 
their own guns accidentally ; some have com- 
mitted suicide, some have been killed like your 
poor brother Harry. And the worst of all is, 
there has been ever since a sort of taint in the 
blood — half madness, half devilry; there has 
been a kind of Cain-and-Abel feud between 
brothers ; fathers have turned their sons out of 
doors, sons have cursed and struck their fathers ; 
there is hardly a crime in the calendar they 
have not had the credit of committing. But they 
say that, just before that poor lady died, there 
came a sort of light over her melancholy face, 
as though she saw something a long way oflF, 
and she spoke a few broken words — ^how that 
the last of the Malrewards should save himself 
and his house, and the end should be peace and 
righteousness. We don't seem very near the 
end yet, sir ; we are still pretty short of those 
articles at Malreward Park at present," and the 
keeper broke oflF with a bitter laugh. 

" How did you get up all these dreadful old 



RESTORED. 85 

stories ?" asked Victor, who was breathless with 
interest. 

" Oh, Mr. Malreward took considerable plea- 
sure in telling me such tales when I was a 
youngster." Here Deverell looked at his gold 
hunting- watch. "I must be off now to the 
covers. We are rather expecting a visit from 
a gang of London poachers to-night. As soon 
as I am gone, you had better lock up the door 
again, Mr. Victor, and go to bed. You will find 
that room there ready for you," and he pointed 
to the door of an inner chamber. " I hope 
you will sleep comfortably, and excuse the poor 
accommodation — it is the best I can offer you," 
said the keeper, a little loftily. 

"But, my good fellow, that is your room, 
is it not 1 Where will you sleep, and what time 
will you come home I" 

" Sleep in the woods, maybe, Mr. Victor ; and 
come home at daybreak on a hurdle. We 
keepers hold our lives in our hands. Don't 
look scared, sii* ; think what dull lives we should 
have if we had never a chance of a brush with 
the poachers." 

And whistling like a blackbird, he went out 
of the room, and ran up a winding staircase, 
leaving Victor with the persuasion that Deverell, 



fashioned clock in a tall black case ticked slow- 
ly and solemnly from a comer. Victor pondered 
with half-shut eyes over the wild legend he had 
been hearing, the dark fortunes of the family 
descending from generation to generation, like 
a scroll written with mourning, lamentation, 
and woe. He pondered over it as he would 
over a story in a book. He considered himself 
to belong to his dead mother, to his uncle Ar- 
thur, to their sober, honourable lineage. He had 
not yet learnt, as he was soon to do, by a stern 
schooling, that the blood of the Malrewards 
flowed through his own veins, that the brand 
was upon him also, and that despite himself he 
shared in their " heritage of woe.*' 

All at once he was startled by a faint sound 
out of doors, heard above the roaring in the 
trees — a slight yet distinct sound, like a footstep. 
A minute after he thought he saw the handle 
of the locked door turn stealthily. Again he 
felt convinced that he heard footsteps, this 
time the other side of the house. Glancing at 
the uncurtained window, he could have sworn 



RESTORED. 87 

he saw a pale face move quickly past. The 
boy thought of the London poachers, cautiously 
he reached down one of the guns which hung 
over the mantelpiece, and was about to call 
Deverell, when the keeper came downstairs in 
his shooting-dress. " There is some one out- 
side the house — a poacher, do you think ?" Vic- 
tor said in a low tone. 

Deverell instantly stalked across the room, 
unlocked the door, threw it wide open, looked 
out into the night. " I think you are mistaken, 
sir," he was just about to say, when he started 
back into the house with a muttered curse. 
There stood in the doorway a^ man, compared 
with whom the great Enemy of souls would 
have been a welcome guest. 

Mr. Malreward walked into the lodge, past 
Deverell, who would have liked to shut the 
door in his face. The same undefined remem- 
brance rushed over Victor then, as it had 
done when witnessing Deverell's sudden anger. 
The two men were not alike in features, only 
in a sudden momentary expression. Mr. Mal- 
reward was about the average height, but he 
looked dwarfed beside the keeper. His face 
was pallid, much worn and lined, his hair was 
very grey, his thick grizzled moustache and 



horse. AltogetLer, Mr. Maireward was the 
wreck of what had onoe been a very handsome 
man. 

He came across the room with quick, nn- 
steadj steps to where Victor was standing. 
The boy had grown yery pale, but a certain re- 
solnte look had come oyer him. It was the 
dread of meeting his father which had been al- 
most nnconscionsly weighing upon his mind aU 
that day, and now that meeting had come he 
strung himself up to endiu*e it. 

" So, sir, you are come,** began Mr. Maire- 
ward, in a Yoice hoarse with grie^ rage, and 
drink. "You come, the very minute my poor boy's 
breath is out of his body, to claim your place as 
my heir. You can leave me for years, when 
you don't see that you can get anything out of 
me ; you despise my claims upon you ; you have 
your home and your friends of your own ; but 
the instant you see a chance of coming into my 
property — ^here you are 1" 

*' I came here because my poor brother sent 
for me," cried Victor, crimson with rage, his 




RESTORED. 89 

father's insinuations sending his self-control to 
the winds. Till that moment, so completely had 
he identified himself with his uncle's family and 
his uncle's interests, so strange and far-away 
had seemed to him the House of Malreward — ^till 
that moment the idea had not occurred to him 
that Harry's death had made him his father's 
heir. " My only wish is never to see this place 
again I" 

" Silence, sir 1" For some reason this wish of 
Victor's seemed to irritate Mr. Malreward be- 
yond all bearing. " If I choose that you shall 
remain here, you will do so. It's that canting 
parson uncle of yours — ^" and he cursed the 
Rector savagely, — "who has taught you to 
hate your proper home, and set my authority at 
defiance 1" 

" I will not hear my uncle spoken of like that 
— my dear, good uncle, who has been a hundred 
times better than any father to me." And Vic- 
tor, shaking from head to foot, began to walk 
towai'ds the door. 

Mr. Malreward's answer to this was to seize 
his son by the collar. He would have dashed 
him to the floor ; but Mark Deverell, who had 
been standing a grim and silent spectator of the 
scene, here interfered, and Mr. Malreward found 



1 



upon him with a fierce sneer. 

** Yes, Mr. Malreward ; as long as I am your 
head-keeper I am master in this house." Then 
to Victor he said in an undertone, " Never an- 
swer your father when he is like this, and you 
will find it the better for you in every way." 

Mr. Malreward, with one of those sudden 
varying moods of his, which looked almost like 
insanity, Jiow seemed to forget Victor's exist- 
ence. He threw himself into the arm-chair by 
the fire, and covered his face with his hands, 
rocking himself to and fro. For some minutes 
there was a strange and dreadful silence. Deve- 
rell busied himself with his gun, as though he 
had not another idea in his head. Victor, his 
heart throbbing with excitement, watched and 
waited, his dislike and terror of his father almost 
swallowed up in an intense curiosity as to what 
he would do and say next. 

Presently Mr. Malreward groaned out — " Oh, 
Mark — Mark ! — do you remember — ^it was only 
this day week, we went partridge-shooting, and 
Harry killed ten birds out of twelve shots, and 




RESTORED. 91 

Captain Thorpe said he never saw a yonng fel- 
low a better shot. That was warm work, that 
was, just in the corner of the large tnmip-field. 
And do yon remember Harry's dog fell lame, 
and how mad he was about it ; and that cursed 
gun of mine missed fire twice. It was only a 
week ago, Mark; can you believe itt Rethrew 
down his powder-flask in my room when he 
came in, and there it is still. Oh, Harry, my 
boy, my boy ! — and he is laid out up there in 
a dark room ; the old women have locked the 
door, and won't let me go near him, and the 
house seems very empty. Come home with me, 
Mark, will you? I won't stay in the place 
alone," and he started up with a wild look in 
his eyes. 

" No sir, I really can't," answered the keeper, 
in an irritated tone. " My men are waiting for 
me as it is. We must watch the covers to- 
night." 

" Curse the covers — kt the keepers and 
poachers fight it out together; what do I care ? 
Come home with me ; do you hear, Mark t I 
will not be in the Court by myself." 

" Come, Mr. Malreward, it is getting late, and 
I want to be off," and Deverell took his gun 
under his arm, and fixed his intense eyes upon 



winspered Victor, wtiom ins tetfa^'s giie^ and 
DeTerelTsapparenthaidinoBBtoliiiii, hadtondied, 
and altogether oonfkiaed with a deep eeaoae of 
pty. 

** On no acconnt, Mr. Vktor,** retomed DeTe- 
rell in the same undertone. ** He will go diink- 
ing all night long, and make 700 drink too, if 
he can. Come, air, are yon readj?^ 

Mr. Malreward cursed him bitterly. ^It*8 
a hard woild — a hard world,'' and the tears be- 
gan to roll down his worn dieeks. ^ I am a 
poor lonely forsak^i old man, despised by 
eTerybody. The only diild I had who cared 
for me, died this morning, and the others in- 
salt me, make a mo<^ of me. I was robbed of 
two of them wh^i they were too yonng to 
know me, and they have been brought np by 
strangers, tanght to hate me and set me at de- 
fiance. And look, there's* Mark thare,'' and Mr. 
Mahreward suddenly turned round upon Victor, 
who stood staring at him with a sort of dread- 
ful &scination — ^^Mark, whom I have indulged 
like "* 




RESTORED. 93 

** Will you be silent, sir?" burst out Mark, in 
a perfect fury. Again the strange, seemingly 
unaccountable likeness to Mr. Malreward blazed 
out in the keeper's face. Coming fresh from 
the pure, healthy life of his uncle's Rectory, 
into this dark atmosphere of hinted crime and 
tragedy and legendary curse — darkness "set 
on fire of hell," fierce passions, wild words 
whose meaning he could not discover, — the 
whole scene became to Victor like a ghastly 
nightmare. It ended at last by Deverell taking 
his master by the arm, and getting him out 
of the house, Mr. Malreward maundering on, 
meanwhile, in a thick mournful voice, with the 
tears rolling down his cheeks — a spectacle 
which would make one's pity for the bereaved 
father lose itself in shame for hid degradation. 

" Good night, Mr. Victor. Lock up the door, 
and go to bed," were the keeper's parting 
words. 

" I will go to bed, Deverell, but I doubt if I 
shall sleep much to-night," answered Victor, 



t 



CHAPTER VI. 

There are some unaccountable fathers, vho seem, during 
the whole course of their Kves, to be preparing reasons for 
their children to be comforted with their deaths. 

La Brutere. 

ALL night long Victor hardly lost con- 
Bciousness. He turned, and tossed, and 
started up in bed every half hour, thinking it 
was time to start for the station. When 
the tardy November morning dawned, he 
fell into a deep sleep, woke up in a panic, 
and found that there was just an hour before 
the first down train was due. He dressed 
hastily, hearing meanwhile Deverell moving 
about in the outer rooms, whistling quietly, and 
setting out the cups and plates. 

The boy joined him in a few minutes. 
•' Good morning, Deverell, I am afraid I have 
overslept myself — thank you, I cannot stay for 
breakfast. And when did you come home last 
night? — and did you catch the poachers?" and 



RESTORED. 95 

Victor stood, putting on his gloves, as if de- 
termined not to be beguiled by the breakfast, 
and yet trying to check his impatience, and be 
courteously interested in his host's proceedings. 

"Nothing stirring but the owls. That's 
generally the way here, sir; not always, 
though,'' and the keeper's face suddenly dark- 
ened as with a terrible remembrance. " But, 
Mr. Victor, Mrs. Jennings — ^that's the old house- 
keeper at the Court — has just been here to say 
that Mr. Malreward wishes to see you at break- 
fast at half-past nine o'clock." 

Victor started and turned red. " That is im- 
possible, of course. I can only just catch the 
train as it is." 

" There is another down train at 1.10." 
But Deverell did not look at him as he spoke. 
Perhaps Victor's impatience to get away seem- 
ed to him like the struggles of a bird in a snare, 
which it pained him to watch. " I would go 
up to the Court if I were you. Mr. Malre- 
ward may think you are afraid of him." 

" No, I am not afraid, certainly," but the boy 
was too bent upon gaining his freedom to care 
even for that imputation. "But what good 
will it do ? — just tell me that. Am I to go up 
there and be bullied as I was last night — but 



nis oiner. u i were you, jur. v icior, i wouia 
have a \nt of fareakfist here, and then go up to 
the Court for an honr or two." 

Victor stood sflent for a mmnte or two, biting 
his lips, and fighting desperately with himself. 
His strong sense of dnty conquered him at last. 
He threw his gloves down on the table with a 
heavy sigh. 

^^ Here goes, then ; I will stay. Bnt I cannot 
eat, thank yon. At what time did yon say the 
next train goes?" 

**• 1.10. It is a quarter past nine now, and we 
might as well be o£El If you won*t eat here, you 
will have a better appetite at the Court. Come, 
NelL" 

The great curly black retriever stretched out 
before the fire jumped up and followed them, 
and Victor walked beside Deverell through the 
park, feeling like a criminal going to exe- 
cution. It was a morning of mist and sunshine ; 
the grass had its luxuriant autumnal greenness, 
was sparkling with last night's rain, and was 




RESTORED. 97 

strewed with leaves, as with a coat of many 
colours. Leaves were drifted into heaps, lay 
ankle deep on the paths, were floating in the 
air. The trees were all delicate films of amber 
and red gold ; their branches clearly drawn 
against the blue morning sky, were followed 
line by line by sparse, bright-hued foliage. 
Tracery and colour both were there ; compared 
with what these trees would be a few weeks 
hence, it was as a stained-glass window is to 
a plain one. The whole world seemed full of 
intense, yet infinitely tender contrasts of colour. 
The red and yellow beeches stood out in strong 
relief against the purple shadows on the hills ; 
the one were in colour like mellow apples, 
the other like the bloom on a plum. In the 
plantations were the vividly pronounced blue- 
green of spruce firs, and the soft furry yellow 
brown of larches ; a birch looked as if its bright 
foliage were powdered with gold dust ; a cherry- 
tree burned like a carnation, and a still green 
oak seemed a bit of summer, beside the sha- 
dowy, purple brown of a leafless sycamore. 

" We won't go the shortest way," said Deve- 
rell. "That's through the village, and it's a 
place I can smell a mile off. It's all old rags 
and heaps of cabbage-stalks ; and which are the 

VOL. I. H 



« 



with a sneer. " That is, you had better not. It 
is just one of his hobbies, you see; thinks it pic- 
turesque, perhaps." 

" Well, I call it a disgraceful thing — " began 
Victor hotly ; then he checked himself. " You 
have a clergyman here, I suppose ?" 

" Yes ; but he is a queer sort of fish. Of course 
he can't do much with two hundred a year. I 
don't make it go very far, I know that. His 
wife tried it on, poor soul— ^I mean visiting the 
people ; giving them tracts, and soup, and 
flannel, and all the rest of it — ^but I believe she 
died of it at last — of the misery and helpless- 
ness of it, seeing them go on drinking and fight- 
ing, and living like — ugh I — you don't know how 
they live, some of them. They can't be decent 
in those sties of cottages, if they knew how to 
be so. And so the old parson seems pretty well 
to have given it up as a bad job, and he shuts 
himself up with his books, or I meet him in the 
covers sometimes, croaking away to himself 
like an old raven ; and he preaches clever, crazy 



^ 



RESTORED. 99 

sort of sermons, about death, and judgment, and 
wrath to come, — till I think sometimes he is 
downright mad with the world, and the devil 
who made it." 

"The devil who made the world?" 
" Well, isn't that just what the parsons think, 
heaps of them ? Sometimes I think so myself. 
It's all very well on a bright spring morning, 
when the primroses are out all over the covers, 
and the birds are singing like mad, and making 
their nests so orderly and comfortable— 'it's all 
very well to say it's a nice sunshiny sort of 
world, and a good God over us all, making 
things go straight. But wait till a nasty wet 
evening comes, and I go home with the rain 
running off me, and my boots heavy with clay, 
so that I can scarcely lift them ; perhaps the 
fire is gone out, or smokes enough to poison mo ; 
and I think there is a nice warm room and 
some company at the Court, instead of this nest 
of blue-devils, so I go up there — though I am 
wishing all the time I had locked my door, and 
thrown away the key first — and take a hand at 
cards with Mr. Malreward and some of his 
friends, or sit round the fire and smoke, and 
there — God never made that world, anyhow." 
Deverell paused suddenly, and walked on in 

h2 



against something which he loathed, but from 
which he could not free himself. " The evil 
which I would not, that do I." The keeper, 
with that curious sort of vanity and self-deceit 
common in people of higher morals and educa- 
tion — found it easy to confess to a vague sha- 
dowy sort of wickedness, to invest Malreward 
Court with a lurid halo, as though it were a 
Pandemonium of supernatural powers of gam- 
bling and hard-drinking. He would carefully 
hide from Victor that he ever spent an evening 
at the matter-of-fiact and vulgar "Malreward 
Arms." 

" Mr. Malreward calls me a Calvinistic Metho- 
dist," Deverell went on with a queer smile. 
" But it isn't their books or their parsons that 
make me talk like one ; but what I see, with my 
own eyes, going on about me. A pointer pup 
becomes a pointer, and not a retriever, and no 
training will make his smooth coat a curly one — 
and before that pointer pup is half grown, he will 
stand at the sparrows. If a child is bom in 



RESTORED. 101 

• 

that village yonder, in a tumble-down house, 
with just three times as many people in it as 
there ought to be, if he is brought up on kicks, 
cuffs, and bad words, bad air, little food, and 
bad what there is of it — and sent out to scare 
the birds instead of going to school — ^how can 
he help growing up just what his father was be- 
fore him ? Or if there's bad blood in a family 
— whether that family be high or low — the bad 
blood will come out generation after generation, 
till it clean dies out from sheer wickedness. 
What a man is born to, that he is. There's 
something keeps going on all the time, like a 
great piece of machinery with wheels and bands 
— ^working round and round, round and round ; 
and often it's just the harmless, careless, easy 
sort of people, who like to sit in the sun and 
hear the birds sing, and want everybody to be 
happy, who get caught up into it, and smashed 
into little bits." 

" Yes," said Victor, with youthful delight at 
discovering a bit of live philosophy in his school 
knowledge — ** that is just what they say about 
the old Greeks, you know. There never have 
been people who led such free, natural, joyful 
lives, who loved everything bright and beauti- 
frily as they did — ^pictures and statues, and 



i 



Fate, sitting iu judgment over them, from 
which no man could escape ; and Fate found 
out and punished all wickedness sooner or later, 
and made whole families of innocent people 
suffer for the sins of their ancestors, or for their 
blindness and ignorance even," 

They had now come to Malreward Court. It 
was not a large house, as country mansions go. 
Part of it was of one date, part of another. The 
side which contained the front entrance was 
the oldest, and was irregular, gabled, Eliza- 
bethan in style. The windows were long, low, 
mullioned, and diamond-paned. The house was 
sparely ornamented ; a coat^of-arms was carved 
above the principal doorway, with the mystic 
motto, " The last shall be fir at J^ The apex of 
each gable was surmounted by a griffin holding 
a shield. Many stacks of carved and pillared 
chimneys clustered on the roof; but towering 
above all were two very singular structures, 
large domes or cupolas, made of panes of glass 
set in an iron framework. Each cupola was 



RESTORED. 103 

crowned with a tarnished gilt weathercock, one 
of which was broken. 

The house owed all its beauty to nature, not 
to art. Time had stained its stones with many 
mellow, softly -blended hues of orange, grey, and 
russet. Half the front was clothed in a solid 
mass of ivy, glittering intensely green in the 
morning sunshine. Round the doorway climb- 
ed one forlorn rose-tree ; the long sprays torn 
down by the gale, half stripped of their wither- 
ed leaves, waved to and fro ; a few palUd roses 
still clung to their stems. The blinds were 
drawn down in every window; in some the 
shutters were shut. Hardly a curl of smoke 
rose from any chimney. Dead silence was 
about the house ; there was not a sound any- 
where but the rustle of dry leaves and the twit- 
ter of a little bird. Rusty iron railings shut oft 
the house and its immediate surroundings from 
the road by which Victor and Deverell had 
come through the park. The straight path, 
which led from the gateway to the house, was 
green and slippery with a sort of slimy moss ; 
the lawns on each side were more moss than 
grass, were littered with dead leaves, and 
speckled with grey toadstools. A great cedar, 
with velvety branches dipping down to the 



of what groiinds or garden there lay within the 
fence. Over the whole place, even with the 
bright morning sunshine falling upon it, there 
seemed a chill, melancholy air of desolation. 

Deverell opened the door with a latch-key, 
and Victor entered the house where he was 
born, and which he had left, an unconscious 
baby, in the arms of his fugitive young mother. 
The hall into which they came was so dark that 
Victor was half blinded, and he nearly ran up 
against an old woman who was passing at that 
moment with a breakfast-tray in her hand. 

" Mr. Malreward down yet, Mrs, Jennings ?" 
asked the keeper. 

"No, Mr. Deverell, but he will be directly. 
And is this the young gentleman ?" and Mrs. 
Jennings curtseyed low, to the peril of the tray. 
*' I hope I see you well, sir. Dear me, how like 
he is to his father 1" 

"Old humbug 1" growled Deverell, as he threw 
open the dining-room door. " There, Mr, Vic- 
tor, I must bid you good-bye for the present, I 
shall be up here again in an hour or two." 




RESTOBED. 105 

Victor saw his ally depart, and felt rather 
disconsolate at being left alone in the enemy's 
territory. **I have never been to school," 
thought he, *'bnt this must be uncommonly like 
the first day there." The room was a tolerably 
large and lofty one, but of commonplace and 
worse-for-wear appearance ; the furniture was 
dingy mahogany and leather ; the Turkey car- 
pet was almost threadbare. The blinds were 
down, in respect to the eldest son lying dead 
upstairs. The three windows were tall and 
narrow, with thick mouldings and deep window- 
seats, of a later style than those in the front of 
the house. The only noteworthy thing about 
the room was that ten or twelve old portraits 
were hanging roxmd the walls. Victor was 
looking earnestly at one — the picture of a 
young man in splendid seventeenth century 
costume, with brown hair hanging round a 
finely-featured face, with something wild, 
melancholy, ominous — a shadow of remorse — ^m 
the large grey eyes. Victor was wondenng 
why this fece seemed so familiar to him — ^was 
it Mark Deverell that it resembled t— when the 
door opened, and he started round to meet his 
&ther. 

Victor could hardly believe that this was the 



Frederica Byrne's heart twenty years ago. His 
grey hair and beard, his deep mourning suit, 
looked quite venerable. It was only now and 
then, when his eyes shot forth their evil, sinis- 
ter glare, that he was betrayed — eyes which 
seemed to soil any woman's face that they 
rested upon. 

He held out his hand to his son, and said, in 
a languid voice, " I am glad to see you, Victor. 
You are punctual, and punctuality is a virtue 
that I admire — ^in other people. Sit there, will 
you ? Do you take tea or coffee ? Help your- 
self ; never mind me. I never eat anything at 
breakfast." 

After that Mr. Malreward was silent for about 
ten minutes. It seemed an hour to Victor, for 
all the time he was conscious that Mr. Malre- 
ward was looking at him. It was impossible to 
eat with those ominous eyes fixed upon him, 
equally impossible he found it to think of any- 
thing to say. At last he burst out in despera- 
tion, for he was beginning to feel in this half- 
darkened room, with this strange silent man 




RESTORED. 107 

sitting there glaring at him, as though he had a 
bad nightmare, " Are those family portraits, sir?" 

"Yes, all family portraits, all Malrewards," 
answered the Squire, dreamily. Then he cried, 
in a quick, sharp tone, " You are not a Malre- 
ward, though, except your eyes — ^yes, you have 
the Malreward eyes. How is the Reverend 
Arthur Bvrne ? Does he still hate me like the 
very devil, and say I murdered your mother?" 

*' I am sure, sir," stammered Victor, in alarm, 
beginning to think that he was breakfasting with 
a madman — " I am sure my uncle would never 
think of talking like that before me." 

" That is a gentlemanly sort of evasion," . 
sneered Mr. Malreward. " But, Victor — no, don't 
look at me like that, — you are like your mother, 
niy boy. There, get on with your breakfast." 
And he threw himself back in his chair with a 
deep sigh. " I shall want you to write a letter 
for me presently. You smoke, I suppose ?" And 
Mr. Malreward took a cigar from his case, and 
smoked it over the breakfast-table. " No I Ah I 
well, the parson would not let you, I suppose — 
good little boy I What did he teach you ? 
Latin, Greek, Theology, and all that kind of 
thing, fit for a budding parson ? You were to 
have been a parson, were you not ? Take holy 



i 



1 



" And I suppose yon cannot ride, or shoot, or 
play billiards ? Nous anrons changes tout cela," 
muttered Mr. Malreward. 

" I can ride, of course ; I have sometimes fol- 
lowed the hounds," said Victor, with dignity. 
"My uncle keeps a pony on purpose for me. 
Equally, of course, as I live by the sea-side, I 
can row a little. As I am English, I can play 
cricket; and as I am Cornish, I can wrestle. 
Shooting — ^that is, cover-shooting — ^I don't care 
about. I mean to join a rifle-corps." 

" We shall see all about that." And Mr. Mal- 
reward relapsed into another long silence. He 
smoked two cigars; now and then he sighed 
heavily ; now and then he stared at Victor, who 
was getting more and more uncomfortable, and 
who took furtive peeps at his watch, thinking 
it must be getting near one o'clock, the time 
seemed so long in passing. 

At last Mr. Malreward started up, pitched the 
end of his cigar into the fire. " Ring the bell, 
will you, Victor, and then come with me into 
my study." 



RESTORED. 109 

Victor followed his father across the hall, 
down a passage into a room, which, if it had not 
smelt strongly of brandy and tobacco, would 
have seemed to him a very pleasant little den. 
The blinds were drawn up here, the mullioned 
window looked out upon a sunny lawn, a 
gravel path losing itself in a belt of dark and 
glittering evergreens, above which rose the 
mossy and ancient turrets of the stables. The 
study itself contained little more than two 
shabby leather-covered arm-chairs, a table much 
worn and splashed with ink, a davenport ditto, 
two or three bookshelves full of paper-covered 
novels, a huge pile of dusty newspapers, two 
double-barrelled guns, and a few other odds and 
ends littered about the room. 

" Sit down, Victor; you will find pen, ink, and 
paper there, and write to Mr. Byrne to say that 
you are going to stay here, at Mah-eward Court, 
to be present at your brother's funeral." 

" But, Mr. Mabeward," and Victor sprang up 
again in dismay, feeling that what he had been 
dreading for the last twelve hours had suddenly 
come upon him, " I cannot stay, indeed it is out 
of the question. I must go home to-day by the 
one-o'clock train." 

"Must you? And why, pray?" Mr. Malre- 



upon you compared with what I have?" burst out 
the man, in a tremulous, passionate voice. ^^ It 
is a fine thing, truly, for a parson to bring you 
up to refuse — no, I will not say obedience, we 
don't expect that firom our children now-a-days, 
but common respect, compassion to one be- 
reaved as I am. Harry never crossed me, never 
gave me an unkind word." And Mr. Malreward 
turned away, and leant his head against the 
mantelpiece. 

This is what gave the man such a terrible 
advantage over the boy — ^the forlorn position of 
one marked out by Heaven to suflFer a sorrow 
contrary to Nature's order, the sorrow of a father 
over his dead son. 

" I am caught in a trap," thought VictoJr, de- 
spairingly. "I should be a brute to go and 
leave him now ; and yet — oh I why did I ever 
come ?" 

He went shyly up to his father. " I am very, 
very sorry, sir. I wish I could help you." 

"Help mel'' cried Mr. Malreward, wildly. 




RESTORED. Ill 

" Nobody can help me. But I will tell you what 
you can do — keep me from going mad. They 
will be coming by-and-by, those people, those 
undertakers ; they will be hammering down his 
coffin, and he will soon be a heap of bones in the 
old vault, and there will be an end of it. And 
yet I heard him last night walking about the 
house, whistling, as plainly as I hear my own 
voice now. But I shall never see him again, 
never. The parsons tell a diflFerent tale, but I 
know better. There will never be any rising 
again for Harry and me. 

" Oh ! yes, yes," cried Victor, with his eyes 
fiill of tears. " There will, indeed, if you would 
only believe it." 

"There, shut up, will you?" answered his 
father, in a rough tone ; " I don't want any of 
your cant, I get plenty of that sort of thing 
from Mark. A pretty fellow he is to preach ; 
reminds me of the devil quoting Scripture. 
But I will tell you what I want you to do — ^have 
your meals with me, that I may not see an 
empty place at the table ; talk when I want you 
to talk, and hold your tongue when I want you 
to be quiet 5 come round the place with me 
when I want a companion, and keep out of my 
way when I don't. I will not spend another 



4 



V/«A* 



in his stifif, boyish hand, wrote a few lines to his 
uncle. The words were as constrained as the 
writing, as he qtdte expected that Mr. Mal- 
reward would look over his shoulder ; and al- 
though the latter did not resort to such an ex- 
treme measure, he watched Victor all the time, 
which was almost as disconcerting. 

" The boy is like his mother," Victor heard 
him mutter, "especially about the mouth. 
Race tells, yes, race always tells in every way. 
Did they ever let you know, Victor, that your 
mother sent for me when she was dying ? She 
was very kind to me at the last. But I suppose 
you have been brought up to look upon me as a 
monster of iniquity, a vessel of wrath, as Mark 
says. Lord, how the old women and the parsons 
shake their heads over their tea when they hear 
my very name 1" 

" Yes, sir," said Victor, colouring, for although 
Mr. Byrne never mentioned his brother-in-law's 
name, except when it was absolutely necessary, 
and then with the most business-like calmness, 



RESTORED. 113 

in the boy's imagination Mr. Malreward had 
always seemed invested with a sort of aureole 
of wickedness. " I knew my mother forgave 

« 

you — no, I did not mean to say that " 

"Yes, say it, Victor, that is the word, forgave 
me," repeated Mr. Malreward, with strange 
gentleness. " God bless her for it, if there be a 
God." 

Victor wrote on then much more fluently. 
" He feels poor Harry's death dreadfully, and 
do you know I am sure he must have been fond 
of my mother, from the way in which he speaks 
of her," were the next words the boy put in his 
letter. 

" Well, have you done it ?" and Mr. Malre- 
ward grew impatient. " Put it down there, it 
will get posted, never fear. Reach down my 
gun, will you ? I am going round the covers, 
and I wish you to come with me. That fellow, 
Mark, ought to be here ; he is always after his 
time, the good-for-nothing dog." 

" I hate seeing things killed," Victor ventured 
to grumble. 

" In consideration of your fine feelings, my 
little parson, and also that the number of my 
pheasants has been rather diminished lately, we 
will have an eye only for the rabbits to-day. 

VOL. r. I 



i 



On the lawn in front of the house, they found 
Deverell, with his gun under his arm, and a 
cigar in his mouth, lounging up and down, 
reading the last number of the Field. His re- 
triever sat tall and jetty in the sunshine, blink- 
ing her eyes, and snapping at the flies. 

" Why the deuce didn't you tell me you 
were here ?" irritably demanded Mr. Malreward. 

" I was in no hurry, sir," and Deverell did not 
lift his eyes from the paper. 

"Confound you, sir, that is my paper you 
have got there, do you know that ?" 

Deverell coolly folded it and put it into his 
pocket. "I will bring it back again this even- 
ing, Mr. Malreward." 

His master said no more, and they went away 
across the park. The afternoon was full of the 
dying pomp and state of autumn — blue skies, 
gold and crimson foliage, violet glooms on the 
hills. The woodland paths were arcades and 
vistas of golden mist ; the hazels sparkled and 
shone as if 'they were made of solid sunshine ; 




RESTORED. 115 

touches of green, orange, scarlet, brown, all 
mingled together in a soft, gorgeous mosaic 
work — from the pale pink and lemon colour of 
the elder, amber maple, russet oak, to the blood- 
red leaves of the wild guelder-rose, and the 
bronze and chocolate colour of the cornel tree. 
Long purple and slate-blue shadows lay across 
the mossy wet paths, some fallen leaves glittered 
like nibies, the clematis trailed its light green 
leaves and grey feathers; scarlet hips, black 
privet berries, were coral and jet. The air was 
very still, was full of faint fragrance from the 
moist rich earth and decaying leaves. Dis- 
tant sheep-bells tinkled, cocks were crowing, 
voices came from the far-off fields. A robin 
sang his blithe yet touching strain, crowds of 
chaffinches went flitting along with their quick 
dancing flight, a squirrel whisked up a tree 
with angry chatter, a rabbit went bobbing 
through the dry leather-coloured bracken, and 
was followed by the flash and report of Mr. 
Malreward's gun, which nine times out of ten 
missed its aim, to Victor's secret satisfaction. 

Mr. Malreward stalked along in sombre si- 
lence, firing at intervals, apparently indifferent 
as to whether he hit or missed. Victor fell be- 
hind. " How jolly this is 1" he said in an under- 

I 2 



i 



" That's a long-tailed titmouse ; see, his tail 
is half as long again as his body, as' though it 
were a handle to take hold of him by. We have 
five kinds of titmice about here, and they do 
make the queerest noises, especially in the 
springtime, like rusty hinges creaking, some 
of them. Whenever I hear a bird's note I 
don't know — and there are very few I do not 
know, I can say that — I set it down to a tit of 
some kind, and I am pretty sure to find that I 

• 

am right. Those long-tailed fellows, now — last 
April I happened to see a brace of them up in an 
oak tree ; not a leaf out then, you know — bare 
as Christmas ; each of them had a feather or a 
bit of moss in its bill, and was hopping about 
and clapping its little wings. What are you up 
to already? thinks I; and so I looked about, 
and sure enough on the bend of one of the 
boughs I found out a nest, but it was made and 
stuck on in such a natural sort of way, with 
odds and ends of moss and lichen about it — for all 
the world like a bit of the old tree itself, that I 



RESTORED. 117 

give yon my word for it, Mr. Victor, I should 
never have thought it anything else, if those 
little fools hadn't jumped about and made such 
a fuss. Well, I used to pass that tree every 
day in my rounds, and every time I passed it for 
a whole week those tits were working away like 
navvies. But one day there came a bitter north- 
easter, and when I passed the tree there was 
that cunning little nest swinging backwards and 
forwards in the wind, hanging bottom up\yard8 
by one thread, and the birds far away. What 
is it Burns says ? ' The best laid schemes of 
mice and' men gang aft agley,' and fate comes 
to the titmice as well as to us." 

" I wish you would stop that fool's chatter of 
yours, Mark," growled Mr. Malreward, unex- 
pectedly. "I think sometimes you c^re half 

mad." 

» 

"Nothing more likely, sir," returned the keeper 
nonchalantly. 

Mr. Malreward turned upon him a black and 
bitter look. Perhaps he attached a deeper 
meaning to the remark than Deverell had intend- 
ed. Victor felt chilled. It was hard, thought 
he, that Mr. Malreward's extraordinary temper 
should spoil what little pleasure he could get 
out of Malreward Court. But grief and drink 



ward turned in a sort of fierce agitation. " What 
in the world did you come this way fort Do 
you think I want to be stared at by people, and 
made a spectacle oft I daresay they would 
like to see how I am looking to-day — a poor 
heartbroken old man — ^these fine prosperous 
neighbours of mine, driving by in their carriages. 
Oh, it is a fine thing to be respectable, and make 
a lot of money, and go to church on Sundays ; 
but they are not all such saints as they look, I 
could tell you a thing or two. Go back I Do 
you hear? I will not be stared at! I wish I 
was dead, and out of the place !" 

As they went back by the path they had 
come, Victor — walking on alone, with a strange 
mingling of loathing and pity for this strange, 
miserable, terrible man his father — heard De- 
verell say in a voice of deep feeling, " People are 
not all brutes, as you make out, sir. There are 
plenty of kind hearts sorry enough for you to- 
day. And there's something worth your living 
for walking on ahead there. That son of yours 



RESTORED. 119 

will do something to restore the old name, or I 
am much mistaken in him." 

" Son ! He a son of mine 1 A stranger, an 
alien, that is what he is, brought up to hate me 
and his own name I What shall we do to make 
you a Malreward?" and he brought his hand 
down upon Victor's shoulder, " you poor pale- 
faced, chicken-hearted lad, looking fit only to 
pray and preach, and dawdle about among the 
old women I Ah, my boy 1" he said with a wild 
laugh, as he saw the flash in Victor's eye, " have 
I raised the devil in you ? I would disown you 
for a son of mine, if I could not. That is right," 
cried Mr. Malreward, glaring with malignant, 
derisive eyes,. and leaning his hand still more 
heavily on Victor's shoulder, " look as savage 
as you can. You have got a will for me to 
break, my boy 1" 

Half-an-hour afterwards, as they turned a 
comer of the woodland path, they came upon 
an old woman gathering sticks. Victor had 
never seen such an old woman before. She 

« 

looked hardly human. Her skin was stretched 
like parchment over her bones ; she was almost 
bent double ; her face had a hungry, wolfish 
stare ; her white hair streamed forlornly ; her 
clothes were only a bundle of foul rags. When 



Mr. Malreward came striding down the path 
till he came close to her ; then he stood still, 
and looked at her. Those who have watched 
the fiendish delight with which boys will tor- 
ture an animal, will understand the kind of 
enjoyment which the man derived from the 
hunted, helpless, agonized look of this human 
creature. His ordinary practice was to swear 
till he was out of breath at the vagrants whom 
he chanced to find trespassing on his domains ; 
but, as people said, " there was never any ac- 
counting for Mr. Malreward*" To-day he simply 
glared in silence for a few moments at the of- 
fender ; then he walked on, saying coolly, " See 
that the old hag gets a summons, Deverell. 
She will have three months of it this time, no 
doubt." 

"I say, Deverell," whispered Victor, "the 
poor creature looks perfectly starved. Will not 
the magistrates fine her? I could pay the 
money, you know." 

" Hush, sir ; she won't be hurt, never fear. I 



^ 



RESTORED. 121 

never happen to remember where these sort of 
people live, or what their names are." 

" Mr. Malreward is not a magistrate himself, 
is he ?" 

"No, thank Godl" fervently answered the 
keeper. 



CHAPTER VII. 

.... Oh, 'tis hard 
To learn 70a have a father np in Heaycn 
By a gathering certain sense of being on earth 
Still worse than orphaned. 

E. B. Bbownino. 

ITTHEN they returned to Malreward Court, 
T T the sun had set, the old house rose up in 
sombre and mysterious gloom against a wild 
and lurid sky ; clouds of crimson, bronze and 
purple, torn into strange shapes, flying from the 
west, foreboded another stormy night. Entering 
the hall, Mr. Malreward said, " Ring that bell, 
Victor, Mrs. Jennings will show you your room. 
I have given you one of the best in the house, 
but you will find only shabby grandeur, moulder- 
ing gentility here. I cannot offer you the luxuries 
you have been used to at Tregalva Rectory, but 
it will do you good to rough it a little, as your 
father has had to do all his life long. The 
Malrewards are an unhappy, impoverished race. 



RESTORED. 123 

poor and wicked, graceless reprobates ; that is 
what people call us. Flattering, isn't it? — decid- 
edly flattering;" and the Squire, muttering and 
sneering to himself, walked off to his study ; while 
Victor, in company with Mrs. Jennings, a fat, 
good-natured, slatternly woman, and lighted by 
a tallow candle, ascended the broad shallow 
steps of the black oak staircase, with its carved 
balusters and wide landing-places. 

"This way, Mr. Victor, this way," the old 
housekeeper chattered on, as she led the way 
down a dark gusty corridor on the second floor. 
A wild green gleam from the stormy western 
sky looked in through a window at the farther 
end. The candle, flaring backwards, threw odd 
lights and shadows* on the walls — doors shook 
and rattled in the rising wind. " 'Tis a ram- 
bling, ancient place, sir, but dreadful dusty and 
inconvenient. You should see some of the 
gentry's places hereabouts — fine, big houses, all 
kept so beautifal ; but then they has a sight of 
servants, you know. Me and my Hannah has 
quite enough to do to keep one or two rooms 
decent ; and the dust and moths do get about 
shocking ; and there's a good few locked up, as 
is never used now. Here's your room, sir, as is 
to be, and it's one of the best of 'em. But may 



'* Law, sir 1 then you should see him certainly. 
He makes the beautifullest corpse that ever I 
saw ; and he's all laid out there so nice, and 
looking so natural. Sure, you'd never like his 
coflSn nailed down, as 'twill be to-morrow, and 
you miss seeing of him, and he so fond of you 
as he was, when he was a little boy." 

"Yes, I will go," said Victor suddenly. 
" Which room is it t Give me the candle, please. 
I would rather go in alone." 

He went a few steps into the chamber of 
death, his heart beating fast. In the dim, 
wavering light, he saw a bed with what looked 
like a pile of white clothes heaped upon it, and 
then he heard, from out of the deep shadows 
around it, a sound like half-choked sobs. He 
stepped back into the corridor, pale and startled. 
"What is that? — who is it?" hewhispered to Mrs. 
Jennings. 

" It's the master, I think ; better come away. 
Sure I didn't know he was there ; he must have 
come up the other stairs. Yes, Mr. Victor, 




RESTORED. 125 

though you mightn't think it to look at him," 
Mrs. Jennings rambled on, as they returned 
down the corridor to Victor's room, "the old 
Squire has got some feelings in him. He's 
pretty good to me and my old man and my girl 
Hannah, and if he does cuss and kick up a row 
dreadfiil sometimes, we don't hearken to him 
more than we can help ; and we get along pretty 
comfortable here considering, though 'tisn't 
many as would like to live in a place like this, 
where there's so many rum tales told about. 
But 'twas wonderful how fond the Squire was 
of poor Mr. Harry ; there was seldom a miss 
word between them. Mr. Harry, you see, knew 
just how to humour him ; and you must try and 
do the same, Mr. Victor. Here's your room, 
sir, and your portmanteau is took up, and I hope 
you'll find everything comfortable. Dinner at 
six, please, Mr. Victor." 

The dip-candle turned blue, and all but went 
out in the violent rush of wind which met Victor 
as he entered his bedroom. There was only one 
faint circle of light around him, and he could 
but dimly make out the length and breadth of 
the great room, a few chairs and tables sparely 
scattered about — solid, dingy mahogany, such 
as one seldom sees in modern houses ; and an 



when he became conscious that a small hurri- 
cane was blowing down upon his head, and that 
a glimmer of light he could not accoimt for was 
cast upon the carpet. He looked up, and be- 
held the oddest phenomenon he had ever seen 
in any bedroom. From the middle of the lofty 
ceiling rose a round cupola of glass. The pale 
twilight sky, the slanting clouds driven through 
the heavens, were all visible through it ; a planet 
glittered like a vvdld, ominous eye ; and the wind 
rushed in through every crack and crevice in 
the framework. 

This cupola impressed Victor very unpleasant- 
ly ; it gave him a sense of forlomness, insecurity, 
of being watched night and day by something 
he could not escape from. The eye which in 
some prisons is perpetually — through a hole 
in the door — fixed upon the prisoner, could 
hardly have seemed more intolerable than this. 
" And is there no window to the room f thought 
he. It was a dreadful idea, and he went grop- 
ing round the walls, and found with intense 



RESTORED. 127 

relief a window, long and low, like those in 
the front of the house, with shutters barred 
and curtains drawn across it. " Well, that is 
one mercy ; but why could they not have given 
me a room with a decent roof to it, I wonder? 
They cannot all have these confounded cupolas, 
can they ?" But instinct warned him how Mr. 
Malreward would sneer if he made any objec- 
tion to his quarters ; and as he would have to 
sleep only a few nights at the Court, he resolved 
to put up with them. 

It wanted a whole hour to dinner time, and 
he made his toilet slowly, disliking the room he 
was in, with quite a bitter personal prejudice, 
yet disliking the idea of going downstairs and 
sitting with his father still more. He began to 
count how many days he must spend at Mal- 
reward Court, as schoolboys count the days 
before the holidays. He wondered what Uncle 
Arthur and Freddy were doing at that moment, 
and what they would say when they got his 
letter to-morrow morning. And then came the 
chill, mournful thought of Harry, poor Harry, 
older than himself by only four years, lying 
dead a few rooms away. He remembered his 
father's bitter grief, and tried to realize that 
Mr. Malreward had a human heart to love his 



kX^b AAA VA*^^ VV X^X^X^b* V V JkA W I 



prison da to that poor wretch? — she would 
have got food, shelter, decent clothing. What 
was it that made her so frightened at Mr. Mal- 
rewardt" A strange shiver crept through the 
boy ; he knew that the presence of his father 
awoke in him something of the same unaccount- 
able horror and repulsion, and an intense, al- 
though half-scared antagonism to everything he 
said or did. 

The great clock of Malreward church tolled 
the hour of six. Coming out of his room, Victor 
took the wrong turning, and, quite losing his 
way, wandered about the dark passages till he 
came to a steep corkscrew staircase. This 
must lead him to the dining-room somehow, he 
thought, and he descended, seeing presently a 
light below him reflected on the walls, and 
hearing voices. For a moment he could not 
tell which of the two men was speaking, Mr. 
Malreward or Deverell. An odd sort of har- 
mony in their tones confused him, and then 
passed away, as a sudden likeness in their faces 



RESTORED. 129 

had come and gone last night. As he went 
down the stairs, he could not help hearing the 
words which were spoken. 

" I am arguing against my own wishes, as 
you know very well, sir. But you had better 
look at it all the way round, before you say any- 
thing. You have been saved a deal of expense 
already, and there are more than four years to 
run before the estate will have to be re-settled. 
Why can't you let things go on as they were ? " 

" Expense, indeed I As if I were such a mean 
beggar -as to think of the expense 1" sneered 
Mr. Malreward. 

" No, you never do, when you have set your 
mind on anything — I will do you that justice," 
answered the keeper, in exactly the same tone. 

" I tell you what it is, sir, I mean to have my 
own way in this. 1 have got law on my side, 
and gospel too, for that matter. Well, what 
do you want, Victor ?" 

Victor was standing bewildered at the open 
door of Mr. Malreward's study. Mr. Malreward 
himself was standing on the hearth-rug with his 
back to the fire, scowling with pale face and 
reddened eyes. Deverell was lounging in an 
arm-chair, a cigar between his lips, his gun 
resting against one side of the chaii*, his arm 

VOL. I. K 



" You will soon be more at home here, I trust 
— it w your home." The words were friendly, 
the tone almost menacing. '* I presume dinner 
is ready ; and I will accompany you. I shall 
want you at eleven o'clock to-morrow -morning, 
Deverell ; and you had better not keep me 
waiting again, sir I" 

The keeper merely nodded his head, and said, 
" All right, Mr. Mabeward." 

Dinner was, as breakfast had been, a long, 
silent, gloomy meal. Once Mr. Malreward asked 
abruptly, " And what is your sister like, Victor ?" 

"What is she like, sir?" repeated Victor, 
startled. 

" Yes, what is she like ? Tall or short, dark 
or fair, that is the way of asking about a young 
lady, isn't it?" 

" Well, she is not particularly short or tall, 
or dark or fair either." 

" A most lucid description. Pray go on." 

" What I mean to say is," answered Victor, a 
little irritated, " she is about the middle height. 



RESTORED. 131 

she has brown hair, a good deal of colour, and 
beautiful grey eyes." Then it flashed across 
Victor's mind whose eyes Deverell's were like — 
large, lustrous, intense, could it be that the 
young lady's eyes and the gamekeeper's bore to 
each other a strange resemblance I Victor be- 
gan to think that the house was haunted, or 
that he himself was bewitched. The people in 
it said and did such unaccountable things, and 
such queer fancies would come into his mind. 

" Hum I " Mr. Malreward pondered grimly. 
" She would hardly like living here, I suppose." 

" Heaven forbid !" thought Freddy's brother. 

" No, this is not a fit place for a girl. I know 
nothing about accomplishments and fashions, 
and not a woman in the whole county would 
notice her, that's just the fact. Besides, I should 
be obliged to get a governess for her, or duenna, 
or something of the kind, and the creature 
would be wanting to marry me, confound her I" 
And he laughed. For the more generally in- 
sufierable is a man, the more he fondly believes 
himself to be the admiration of the opposite sex. 

After dinner Mr. Malreward began to maun- 
der about his dead son, and was pathetic, as 
only a man who drinks can be. *' I cannot stand 
much more of this," thought Victor. His fresh 

k2 



things, as though one had profaned a church, to 
hear Mr. Malreward Bob, Id a thick voice — 

"He was such a bright, handsome fellow, the 
kiDdest-hearted — a dead shot, sir, would ride at 
anything, had a fistlikeirou. And I am nothing 
but a poor old man, broken in health, filing 
faet, old and poor, and he is taken iiret, and I 
have got to bury him. People point at me, and 
say it is all a judgment, the curse of the Malre- 
wards. There is no one to stand by me, and I 
am very miserable — very miserable I" 

Just as Victor was meditating a rush out of 
the door, out of the window, anywhere, that he 
might escape from the sight of the grey head 
shaking idiotically, the tears running down the 
wizened cheeks, the trembling hand clutching 
the glass of brandy, Deverell stalked into the 
room. Mr. Malreward looked up, and with a 
sudden change of tone, growled, " I thought you 
had gone home long ago." 

" So I had, sir, but I came up again to see if 
you would like a game of 4cart6," 



RESTORED. 133 

*' You and your 6carte may go and be hanged I 
I am not well to-night." 

" I will ring for some soda-water, if you will 
allow me, sir. And, Mr. Victor, if I were you, I 
would say good night. Yes, good night, you 
understand m^," he repeated, seeing the boy look 
at him a little haughtily. *' You will find some 
books of mine on the hall table, if you will do 
me the favour of borrowing them. The library 
here is locked up, and there are no books about 
the house that you would like. I have told Mrs. 
Jennings to light a fire in your bed-room, so I 
hope you will find things pretty comfortable, 
sir. 

Victor found a number of novels in paper 
bindings, just such as Deverell had supposed 
would interest a boy, some of Captain Marryat's, 
some of Cooper's, some of Mayne Reid's. "What 
a good-natured fellow he is, thought Victor ; 
" but I am not much in the mood for these to- 
night." However, he took them with him to his 
room, which, with a bright fire blazing and 
crackling in the roomy, old-fashioned grate, look- 
ed a little more cheerful. He lighted the two 
candles, which, in tall plated candlesticks, stood 
upon the mantelpiece, drew a chair to the 
hearth, and sat with his head resting on hia 



lees bed, which he had discoTered somewhere 
about the room, almost lost m the vastness of it. 
It seemed to Victor as though he had been 
asleep half the night, wheu suddenly he started 
into that state of wide, vivid wakefulness Avhich 
sometimes follows the deepest slumber — a state 
when memory and imagination are strung up to 
their intensest pitch, and words and deeds long 
ago forgotten stand out from the past in letters 
of fire ; when the veil of flesh seems thinnest^ 
and the soul lies bare beneath the gaze of its 
Creator. Victor opened his eyes, and looked 
right up into the midnight sky. Millions of 
miles away, through blue-black depths, he saw 
the stars burning, solemn, awful, inscrutable, 
like a handwriting upon the heavens, which no 
man could read, and yet which contained in it 
the secret of all past ages, and the future destiny 
of creation. Victor trembled and hid his face. 
In a dread hour like this, when the whole earth 
seems asleep, and the powers of heaven shine 
in their majesty, when the soul is brought face 




RESTORED. 135 

to face with the Almighty, it is ready to call 
upon the rocks and hills to cover it — not by 
reason of its guilt, so much as by the mere fact 
of its being human. 

Malreward church clock tolled the hour of 
one. Soon afterwards Victor heard a distant 
sound in the house — a man's voice, hoarse, 
thick, quarrelsome — heavy stumbling footsteps, 
the loud banging of a door — then silence. 

In the darkness and stillness of the night, 
Victor fullv realized, for the first time in his 
life, that this man, this Mr. Malreward, was his 
father. He might never see him again after 
this week ; he might even change his own 
name, but he could not alter the laws of nature, 
or deny the blood which flowed through his 
veins. He was Mr. Malreward's son. There- 
fore he was heir to that taint of vice, that in^ 
veterate set towards a downward course, which, 
according to popular tradition, had marked 
out the Malrewards, generation after generation, 
from amongst the families about them, as a sort 
of devil's priesthood ; a peculiar people, zealous 
for evil works. Those stars above, sweeping 
away in their inconceivably immense orbits, 
were all governed by law, were the very im- 
personation of a Fate which proceeded on its 



Thoughts like these passed vaguely but fear- 
fully through the boy^B mind. He shuddered, 
and cried out — 

" God, help me I How can I ever hope 
to become a good man!** 

Some old and well-known words floated 
through his memory, like a sweet solemn strain 
of church music. " Kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation." 

And soon after that he fell asleep. 



137 



CHAPTER VIIL 

There came 

A stranger with authority, not right 

(I thought not) who commanded, caught me up. 

E. B. Browninq. 

A FEW days passed, much as Victor's first 
day at Malreward Court had done. Then 
came the morning of the elder son's funeral. A 
day of fog and twilight, dripping yellow trees 
peering out of the gloom, black soddened leaves 
under foot. Malreward Church was close to 
the Court ; an ancient ivy-grown wall separated 
the churchyard from the grounds, some of the 
windows of the house looked right down upon 
the tombstones. This churchyard was a decay- 
ing and neglected place ; the stones were covered 
with green mould, and leaned this way and that ; 
some were cracked in half and lay on the 
ground ; here and there human bones lay ex- 
posed* outraged by the daylight, and human 
eyes looking at them. Nettles, coarse grass, 



raouldy stems, and half their branches dead for 
want of air and light. 

Into this melancholy place they bore poor 
Harrv Malreward. His father and his brother 
walked behind the coffin ; following them were 
Dr. Radcliffe, the medical man of the neighbour- 
hood ; Mr. Stansfield Erie, who, as family lawyer, 
had succeeded hip uncle, the Mr. Erie who had 
been present at the fimeral of Victor's mother. 
Last came Mark Deverell, alone — except that 
his black retriever crept behind him with down- 
cast head and tail. Victor had a horror haunt- 
ing him all the time, that Mr. Malreward would 
do or say something wild or profane, would 
break out in some frightful manner during the 
service. But the solemn and touching words 
had been hurried over by the Vicar, and the 
bereaved father had stood motionless all the 
while, with a sort of stunned and weary air. 
Only, just as the earth fell heavily on the lid of 
Harry's coffin, Victor saw Mr. Malreward start 
back, and clutch hold of Deverell, who was 



RESTORED. 1 39 

standing just behind — saw Deverell bend down 
and whisper something in his ear. Arm in arm, 
with the dog close at their heels, the Squire and 
his gamekeeper walked back to the house. 

Victor felt intensely relieved that the service 
had been gone through without a scene. The 
lawyer and the doctor glanced at each other. 

'^ Just like old Malreward," muttered Stans- 
field Erie. 

The Vicar, Mr. Groves, without going back 
to the vestry, pulled off his surplice in the 
churchyard and handed it to the sexton, and in 
a great hurry followed the other gentlemen to 
the Court. They all assembled in the dining- 
room. The blinds were drawn up, a great fire 
was blazing, a hot luncheon was spread. Mr. 
Malreward took the head of the table, and in a 
quick, imperative way signed to Victor to sit 
opposite to him. Little was said for some min- 
utes. Dr. Radcliffe and Mr. Erie exchanged a 
few constrained remarks; the Squire and the 
Vicar hardly spoke a word. Stiff and uncom- 
fortable as these meals of "funeral baked 
meats " must always be when the guests are 
conscious of a sort of relief and reaction, 
but are afraid of letting it appear, and there- 
fore carefully compose their looks, and attune 



tarily, as a friend, but simply by virtue^ of his 
profession. 

To Victor, after living several days with his 
father, this finding himself again in the com- 
pany of sober, honourable men, was like coming 
out of a dark, mephitic vault into fresh air and 
the light of heaven. He had leisure to look at 
each of the three guests, and to form his own 
opinion about them, before either of them ad- 
dressed him; First, the Vicar. He was mid- 
dle-aged, short and stooping, with a downcast, 
abstracted look. His white neckcloth was 
soiled and slovenly ; the rest of his dress was 
rusty, and hung upon him like the clothes of a 
scarecrow. He spoke little, ate as though he 
had not tasted food for a couple of days, and as 
he ate he frowned darkly at his plate. 

"That is a clever man," thought the boy. 
** But he has been disappointed, or has made a 
muddle of his life somehow, and his poverty is 
dragging him down and down, till he has lost 
respect for himself and for every one else." 



RESTORED. 141 

Next came Mr. Erie. He was the very type 
of a fine young Englishman. Tall, broad-shoul- 
dered, powerful-limbed, with thickly-curling 
flaxen hair, and clear, candid, if rather cold, 
blue eyes — the worst feature of his face, an ob- 
stinate-looking mouth, being hidden by a thick 
moustache — with a splendid, imperious air of 
health and prosperity, he looked like what he 
was, the worthy descendant of a chivalrous and 
ancient race. He was the first cousin of a baro- 
net, and he was also, with another cousin as 
nominal head-partner, one of the well-known 
firm of solicitors practising in the neighbouring 
town of Donnistone. "A fine fellow," was the 
boy's verdict upon him. " It is a treat to look 
at his clear, honest eyes. He would never have 
anything of his own to hide — I could swear to 
that. But they say family lawyers know lots 
of other people's secrets and scandals. Well, 
he is the last man I should like to confess any- 
thing to, I know that." 

Lastly, Dr. Radcliffe, a man about fifty, with 
grizzled hair, with rather an ugly face, yet a 
face which would have made anyone of ordi- 
nary capacity guess to what profession he be- 
longed — grave, kindly, penetrating as steel, 
with manners strangely gentle, and which yet 



find myself telling him anything before I knew 
where I was." 

"Well, Dr. RadcliflTe," said Mr. Malreward 
presently, in that languid, drawling way of his, 
which was peculiarly offensive to most people, 
" have you been prospering lately ? I congra- 
tulate you upon having had a most unhealthy 



season." 



44 
44 



Yes, Mr. Malreward,** was the quiet answer, 

it always is an unhealthy season about here, 
and always will be while the labourers' cottages 
remain as they are. Typhoid fever has become 
endemic in your village." 

"Ah, indeed!" muttered the Squire — "yes, 
that parish work cannot pay." 

" And when the cholera visits England again, 
Mr. Malreward, we shall have it hot and strong 
here. That is a destroyer which comes to the 
rich as well as to the poor." 

" Rich I — yes, very true ; but where are the 
rich in the parish to be found — eh, Mr. Groves ? 
Well, as we shall all share and share alike, let 




RESTORED. 143 

US hope the cholera will come here, doctor. 
You medical men like to study new, mysterious 
agonies. You will not need to leave your prac- 
tice and go up to London hospitals to watch 
them, as you did the last cholera year. Stay 
here, try laudanum, calomel, cayenne pepper, 
on the Malreward people. Fiat experimentam in 
corpore vili, you know. And how is your good 
cousin. Sir Willoughby, Mr. Erie ? Is he still 
pursuing his model course, and flourishing like 
a green bay-tree ? I beg pardon ; I have quoted 
the wrong sort of text, have I not, Mr. Groves I 
1 am rather ignorant of Scripture, you see." 

" He is doing his best," answered Stansfield 
Erie, in his calm, dignified, rather austere man- 
ner. " He has just been spending a large sum 
in building labourers' cottages throughout his 
estate. I went over them the other day. They 
are all perfectly drained and ventilated ; each 
has three bedrooms, two kitchens, a wash-house, 
a good-sized piece of garden-ground, and the 
cottagers have the right of pasturage on a com- 
mon. Of course, with all the decencies of life 
about him, and sufficient wages to keep body 
and soul together, the agricultural labourer be- 
comes a different species of being to the man 
who lives in a two-roomed hovel with nine 
children and nine shillings a week." 




RESTORED. 147 

inal farewell to Mr. Malreward, the doctor 
went away, and Victor felt as though he had 
lost a friend. 

Mr. Groves had at last finished his lunch, 
and Mr. Malreward felt that now they were on 
equal terms. With his mouth full, the Vicar 
was more than a match for the Squire, for he 
simply went on eating, and could not be pro- 
voked into any reply whatever. 

" Do you believe in the Burial service ?" be- 
gan Mr. Malreward. 

" I do." 

" What, every word of it ? ' Dear brother 
here departed,' ' sure and certain hope,' and all 
the rest of it ? If I were to die now, you would 
positively read it over me?" 

"I should have to do so, unless you died 
under those circumstances mentioned in the 
rubric, as absolving a priest from the duty," the 
Vicar answered stolidly. 

" What faith — what Christian charity ! Al- 
though you know, and I know, that you take 
every opportunity of calling me a godless, 
drunken reprobate. Well, there must be a 
wonderful whitewashing power in death ! or a 
wonderful blinding power in the holding of a 

l2 



upon you the approval of heaven, and the bene- 
dictions of your fellow-creatures ! — how sweet 
to roll along the road to everlasting bliss in a 
cushioned carriage ! Poor devils like you and 
me, Mr. Groves, find it rather a strait and thorny 
path, don't we f " 

The Vicar vouchsafed no answer, but went 
on eating, as if he should never have a dinner 
again. 

" Have some more pheasant," said his host. 
" Do ; there's still a wing left, and I have a 
brace or two more in the covers. Another glass 
of port; it will do you good, I assure you. 
Your feelings do you honour, Mr. Erie. There 
is nothing like philanthropy for breaking down 
all distinctions of class, age, and sex. In my 
day, I fear, few young men took much interest 
in drains and wash-houses." 

Without a word or look of reply, Mr. Erie 
turned away, and made a few inquiries of the 
doctor as to what disinfectants he recom- 
mended. 




RESTORED* 145 

Victor sat silent, biting his lips, burning with 
shame that he should be forced to hear his fa- 
ther insult guests at his own table with odious 
sneers. " Not one of these men would have 
come here to-day if he could bave helped it," 
thought he, " except perhaps the Vicar, for the 
sake of a dinner." And not one of them would 
speak to him one word beyond what was ab- 
solutely necessary. He was only a Malreward, 
one of a disreputable race, " a chip of the old 
block," as the hateful vulgar saying is. The 
boy's heart swelled proudly ; he had been accus- 
tomed to be treated by his uncle's friends as 
their equal in everything but age and experience. 
Well, he should go home to-morrow, and never 
see them or Malreward Court again. 

Just then Dr. Radcliffe, who was sitting at his 
right hand, turned upon him his kind, deep-see- 
ing eyes and said : " You have been living with 
your uncle, the Rector of Tregalva, have you 
not ? I remember your mother, Mr. Victor ; I 
remember her well. You may not thank me 
perhaps when I tell you that I assisted at your 
entrance into this vale of tears." 

" I wish you would tell me about my mother," 
cried the boy with sudden eagerness, but lower- 
ing his voice lest Mr. Malreward should over- 

VOL. T. L 



was a noble woman when she died. Those few 
years of married life were just her whole life- 
time to her. When I look back at my remem- 
brance of her at Malreward Court, it seems to 
me as though I were looking through a tele- 
scope at night, and a bright star had crossed 
the field of the glass, shining a little while, then 
passing away again into the darkness. It is 
hard to me to realize even now that she is dead; 
I suppose if she were alive it would be just as 
hard to realize that she was growing middle- 
aged. I can fimcy her to be only just as slie 
was then, exquisitely youthful and buoyant. 
You have seen her portrait in the drawing- 
room here ? Ah, no, the room is kept locked 
up, I believe. Well, go and get the key after 
lunch and look at the picture if you want to 
know what your mother was like." 

At that moment Mrs. Jennings brought a 
message that Dr. Badcliffe was wanted im- 
mediately at a patient's house. So with a 
hearty shake of Victor's hand, and a rather for- 



^ 



RESTORED. 147 

inal farewell to Mr. Malreward, the doctor 
went away, and Victor felt as though he had 
lost a friend. 

Mr. Groves had at last finished his lunch, 
and Mr. Malreward felt that now they were on 
equal terms. With his mouth full, the Vicar 
was more than a match for the Squire, for he 
simply went on eating, and could not be pro- 
voked into any reply whatever. 

" Do you believe in the Burial service ?" be- 
gan Mr. Malreward. 

"I do." 

" What, every word of it ? * Dear brother 
here departed,' ' sure and certain hope,' and all 
the rest of it ? If I were to die now, you would 
positively read it over me ?" 

"I should have to do so, unless you died 
under those circumstances mentioned in the 
rubric, as absolving a priest from the duty," the 
Vicar answered stolidly. 

"What faith — what Christian charity I Al- 
though you know, and I know, that you take 
every opportunity of calhng me a godless, 
drunken reprobate. Well, there must be a 
wonderful whitewashing power in death I or a 
wonderful blinding power in the holding of a 

l2 



you have the goodness to say so in so many 
words." 

" Sit down, Mr. Erie," said the Squire coolly. 
" I am not finding fault with my pastors and 
masters. We all know that clergymen and 
Avomen have the privilege of saying things 
which they do not believe. I know that you, 
lawyer as you are — " and he looked at the 
young man with an odd sort of respect, ** say 
what you mean, and mean what you say." 

" Mr. Malreward, " said Stansfield Erie still 
standing, " when you insult one of your guests, 
you insult all ; and when you profane the holy 
words you have just heard, in such a place, on 
such an occasion — " and he paused, he seemed 
unable to proceed. 

Mr. Malreward looked down, touched with a 
sense of shame, perhaps. He was silent a min- 
ute ; then, seeing that his guests were about to 
depart, he rose with a haughty grace and said, 
** Well, gentlemen, I wish to thank you all — I 
am sorry Dr. Radcliffe has been forced to leave 



m 



RESTORED. 149 

US — I wish to thank you for your presence here 
to-day, for paying the last respects to my elder 
son." Again he paused and looked down. ** I 
wish also to introduce my younger son to you. 
He is a stranger to you, almost a stranger to 
me. He has hitherto been brought up by his 
uncle, the Rector of Tregalva, with a view to 
entering the Church. Now, however, that he 
is my heir, he will for the future live entirely 
with me at Malreward Court." 

Victor sprang forward, his cheeks flaming, 
his eyes staring wildly. He tried to speak, 
he could only gasp, and feel as though he were 
choking. Then he became conscious — as if it 
were a freezing cuiTent of air — that Mr. Erie 
wks gazing at him with a grave, steady scorn. 
" If you and your father are going to quarrel in 
the regular Malreward fashion, at least have the 
decency to wait until I am out of the house—" 
was what he seemed to say. Victor pulled 
himself up immediately, returned Mr. Erie's 
look with a proud and bitter one, and felt as 
though he hated the dignified, prosperous 
young man. 

Mr. Malreward looked out of the window to 
see his guests depart, and he muttered grimlj*, 
"Confound those fellows' impudence 1 They 



i 



and 80 I put up with him. They always get 
as good as they give when they do come here, 
that's one blessing." 

Then Victor went up to his father ; he was 
very white, his hands shook, and his heart beat 
furiously. " Sir, you made a great mistake just 



now " 



"A mistake! Indeed!" Mr. Malreward turned 
swiftly round upon his son. A flash in his eye 
warned him that his blood was up, and that he 
was quite ready for the fight which he foresaw. 

"Yes, sir, you said — ^you said — " Victor 
stammered with his eagerness, and with his de- 
sire to speak calmly and respectfully, and to 
keep down the fury which he felt. " You said 
I was going to live here. I never dreamt of such 
a thing. I never had any idea of it ; you never 
said anything about it before ; you asked me to 
stay for poor Harry's funeral — that was all. I 
am very much obliged to you for your hospi- 
tality and all that ; but of course I must go home 
to-morrow." 



RESTORED. 151 

" Once for all, Victor, thifl matter shall be 
settled." Mr. Malreward spoke in a stern, slow 
tone, and brought his hand down heavily on the 
table. Providence is supposed to fight on the 
side of the strongest battalions, and having, as 
he had said, law and gospel to back him up, the 
father could afiord to keep calm. " You seem 
to be totally ignorant of two facts. First, that 
you, being a minor, are a mere infant, a chattel, 
in the eyes of the law. Secondly, I, being 
your father, have power to decide where and 
with whom you shall spend the next four years 
of your life. That is just the state of the case 
between us ; and I rather think, when you have 
considered it, you will find it expedient to alter 
your tone and manner to me, sir. You may run 
away to sea, as boys do in books, if you like, 
though I don't fancy yoti would find that much 
of a change for the better. But one thing I am 
determined about, and that you will find. You 
shall not return to your uncle's house. And if 
you ever go back there without my leave, I will 
prosecute him for taking you out of my custody." 

Something as a convicted criminal hears the 
sentence pronounced upon him by the judge, 
did Victor stand and listen to Mr. Malreward. 
He turned white, cold, sick ; he began to won- 



I 



At; OtXl WAI/li UUU.aibUl.Obl. U.10 1/111 V;i/UCBB, iVI I . ITX^iirr" 

ward threw himself down in his arm-chair, 
lighted a cigar, crossed his legs comfortably, 
and began reading a newspaper, as though he 
were utterly indiflferent as to what his son 
might be feeling, as though he crushed all the 
brightness out of his young life with as much 
ease as he would kill a fly. The thought rushed 
over Victor that Uncle Arthur was longing for 
to-morrow, looking for the boy who had been 
like a son to him in his lonely life, with a hun- 
dred little things to tell him when they met. 
" Oh, sir !" cried Victor, with tears of agony in 
his eyes, "do listen to me, do consider my 
uncle if you won't me 1 He has been so good 
and kind to me, I can never give you any idea 
of it. For ten years I have lived entirely with 
him, he has broug];it me up ever since I was a 
little fellow, he has taught me everything I 
know ; I know he cares for me just as if I were 
his own son I" 

**Your uncle is nothing to me," answered 
Mr. Malreward, without lifting his eyes from 



RESTORED. 153 

his paper. " It was all very well for him to 
bring you up when you were only my younger 
son ; I never interfered, you might have been a 
parson for what I cared. But I don't choose 
that my heir should be out of my own control. 
Arthur Byrne did what he could to set your 
mother against me, I have not forgotten that. 
He shall not play the same game with you." 

" Your heir, indeed 1 As if I wanted to be 
your heir I" 

"You will sing a different song when yoti 
come of age. I know you young fellows." 

" Will nothing move you — nothing ?" 

"Nothing. And I desire that you will be 
silent, I am reading." 

Mr. Malreward's coolness made Victor per- 
fectly frantic. "It's a cruel, wicked shame 1 
You have regularly cheated me, and caught me 
in a trap ! You asked me to stay here just 
over to-day, and I s^id I would, to please you. 
You never said one word then about my living 
here altogether. Oh ! if I had only known it — 
only known it — ^would I have ever entered these 
accursed doors 1 I wonder you like me to live 
here ; I wonder you think it a fit place for a 
young fellow. I wonder you are not ashamed 
for me to see and hear the things I do I" 



€ 



154 RESTORED. 

He had awakened the sleeping tiger at last. 
Mr. Malreward started up, dashed down his 
cigar and newspaper. *' Say another word, and 

by , sir, I will give you such a thrashing as 

you never had before in your life I" 

" Dare to touch me 1" Victor shrieked at him, 
clenching his fists. " I will strike you faadk 
againT 

For a minute the father and son stood glaring 
at each other in dreadful, dumb fury. Mr. Mal- 
reward might have overpowered the boy, though 
sometimes, when aroused, these sensitive young 
natures have the strength of madmen. But the 
Squire was one of those people upon whom the 
passions of others have sometimes a curiously 
soothing effect. " A dutiful son, a pious youth I" 
he said, with his sneering smile. "Did the 
Reverend Arthur Byrne teach you first to insult 
your father, and then to oflFer to strike him I" 

Victor suddenly dropped into a chair, and 
hid his face on the table. "Yes, he is my 
father," he thought, " and it is the day of the 
funeral — my brothers funeral. God, how 
frightfully wicked I have become already I" 

Mr. Malreward tried to go on reading his 
newspaper. But he could not give his mind to 
it, he could not keep himself from glancing 



RESTORED. 155 

round at his son from time to time. For a fall 
quarter of an hour Victor sat like this, without 
moving or raising his head. Something in his 
attitude, the utter prostrate despair of it, touched 
his father with a curious uneasiness. ** I have 
pretty well conquered him," thought he, " and 
I begin to feel a little sorry for him." 

He rose and went towards the boy. " Come, 
Victor," he said, gruffly, but not unkindly, " get 
up, don't sit moping there like that. Come, 
come," and he laid his hand on Victor's shoulder, 
but the boy shuddered and shrank away from 
him, *'it is a very good thing for you to find out 
at first starting that I am master in my own 
house, and over my own son, and mean to be ; 
but I am not going to lock you up, or keep you 
on bread and water, or anything of that kind, 
so get up, and go out and amuse yourself; do 
you hear? And look here, I am going to write 
to your uncle myself, to tell him you are to re- 
main here. Is there anything down at Tre- 
galva that you would like to have ? There was 
a pony you said something about, would your 
uncle sell it, I wonder?" 

Victor looked up then with a face that seemed 
to have grown ten years older, so lined and 
pinched was it, white to the lips, with a strange 




•■^■^ -■^' t ■■ 



the lodge. If you cannot find Deverell there, 
look about the covers till you meet him. Tell 
him to come up here at five o'clock." 

Victor rose slowly ; he felt sick and shivering, 
with the physical eflfects of strong emotion. He 
hesitated a moment or two, then hurriedly, 
looking down, with the blood rushing back to 
his white cheeks, he said, "I beg your pardon, 
sir, for — for what I said just now. I am going 
mad, I think." 

" We are a mad race." And Mr. Malreward 
held out his hand to his son, triumph at having 
so far subdued his spirit put him in good 
humour. " I like you none the worse for having 
a spice of the Malreward devil in you, boy ! 
I took you for a Miss Molly the first day you 
came. I made a little mistake, I see. Never 
mind, I have a hand strong enough to break in 
anything." 



157 



CHAPTER IX. 

" But who is there now to watch over and protect our 
poot Sintram ?" — " The prayer of his mother," answered 
Rolf. — Sintram. 

VICTOR dragged his weary limbs across the 
Park ; his head ached, he felt strinDed, he 
hardly knew what had happened, or whither he 
was going. He did not realize yet the full force 
of the blow which had fallen upon him ; but an 
intolerable sense of misery and shame was burn- 
ing at his heart. All his life before he had as- 
sociated with gentlemen, and had been treated 
as one ; and now being at that age when young 
people are so sensitive to the respect of others and 
theiroAvn self-respect, he felt as though his father 
had insulted him beyond endurance, and had 
provoked him into answering words which 
would degrade him for ever in his own esteem. 
He mechanically pursued his way to DeverelVs 
lodge. There he found a tidy-looking old 
woman down on her knees washing the door- 



master, I suppose, sir ? Be you ill, please, sir ? 
You look like death a'most." 

" No, my good woman, thank you," and the 
boy hastily turned his face away. " Which way 
did Deverell go f " 

She directed him ; he thanked her and went 
on, repeating to himself in a stupefied sort of 
way, " First turn to your right, second path to 
the left," he went on and on, sometimes stum- 
bling from sheer weariness. " How can I find 
Deverell ?" he said at last ; " and what does it 
matter whether I find him or not ? I'll go no 
further," and he threw himself down on the 
ground, and hid his face in the grass. 

He lay there for a long time, just as if he 
were dead. Once he lifted his head a little, 
and spoke aloud — " And the day after to-mor- 
row is uncle's birthday, and I was going to give 
him that oak book-stand which I carved myself 
on purpose. Oh I Uncle Arthur, what shall I 
do, what shall I do ?" Then the boy burst out 
crying passionately ; he struggled to keep down 
his sobs, lest even in that solitary place some- 



RESTORED. 159 

body should overhear him, — but it was in vain. 
It was indeed a solitary place, and Victor 
thought that he might die, and lie there for 
months, and be forgotten, before his body would 
be found. Thick underwood, shadowy groves 
of sticks and branches, some hung with brown 
and yellow leaves, hemmed him in, as with an 
impenetrable wall. Here and there the bare 
trees loomed like weird shadows, or as some 
one has described trees seen through a fog, " like 
seaweed behind tissue paper;" all beyond was 
shut out by a curtain of chill, white mist. Lost 
to the world, set aside and forsaken, seemed 
this little corner of the wood. The noise and 
business of life might be going on all the same far 
away ; but the silent, solemn mist wrapped this 
place round as with a winding-sheet. The quiet 
was like death — one of the little beads of moisture 
which hung in rows on the under side of every 
shining twig and branch, now and then dripped 
down on the fallen leaves ; a rabbit rustled 
amongst the withered bracken; a little bird 
flew by with soft whirr of wings and plaintive 
twitter ; all more distant sounds were stifled in 
the fog. Like death, too, was the faint smell of 
the decaying leaves which strewed the ground 
with ankle-deep layers, brown, yellow, black. 



time to spring up and escape, a strong hand 
shook him by the shoulder. "What in the 
world are you lying there for, Mr. Victor ? Do 
you want to catch your death of cold?" 

Victor shrank, and tightly covered his face. 
" I don't care if I do. Leave me alone, Deverell. 
Cantiot I have peace even here?" 

'* Get up, Mr. Victor, ox I'll make you," said 
the keeper, sternly. " You are not used to the 
wet ground as 1 am." 

At this, finding that there was no help for it, 
Victor slowly rose to his feet, and with boyish 
shame tried to turn away his tear-stained face. 
But Deverell's eyes were too quick for him. 

" What is it, sir ? Is the blow cotne at last ?" 
And the strangest pathos suddenly thrilled 
through the man's voice. " Did it come about 
to-day ? I feared as much." 

" Oh 1 Deverell, if you knew anything about 
it, why didn't you speak out, why didn't you 
give me some warning? I would have gone 
back to Tregalva that first night; but no, it 
would have been no good, I suppose, if he had 



RESTORED. 161 

made up his mind to claim me. Deverell, Mr. 
Malreward says I am to stay here altogether;^ — 
here in this horrible place, never to go home 
any more," and a great sob almost choked the 
boy. 

" I knew the very first day you came that 
your father wanted to keep you here, and I said 
everything I could against it; but 'twas no 
manner of use, you might as well talk to that 
tree there as to Mr. Malreward when he is in one 
of his stubborn fits. I know him 1" cried Deve- 
rell, with a savage gesture. 

"What can I do, Deverell? Tell me — you 
are the only friend I have here." 

A swift, bright gleam shot out of Deverell's 
eyes. Then he looked down and said, " Let me 
hear all about it, if you don't mind, Mr. Victor. 
How did he begin?" 

" It was after lunch, and he said before them 
all — the gentlemen who came to the funeral — 
that I was going to live here for the future. It 
was just as if he had shot me. I managed to 
hold my tongue until they were all gone, and 
then I asked him what right he had to say that. 
And then, Deverell, he said the most hateful, in- 
tolerable things, things which of course I knew 
before, but which I had never realized as affect- 

VOL. I. M 



^ ' O m 



**• Yes, tiiat IS just abont the state of the case,"* 
8ud Deveidl, as he stood giindiDg down the 
beech-husks which strewed the ground, nnder 
his heaTj boot, as a sort of rdief to his feeHngs. 
^ The oommon law as we have got it in Eng- 
laiid,betwe»i &ihei8 and diildien, hnsbands and 
wires, and people who ought to be hnsbands 
and wires, and are not, is just abaut the most 
cursedly un£ur thing I know. But what else 
can you e^ect ? Those that make the laws — 
husbands, ittfaeiSi and futhers who are not hus- 
bands, haTe got it all in their own H^n^ j?^ and 
make the laws to suit th^ own oonTeni^ice. 
Hie weakest always go to the walL^ 

**' But just see, DererelL, how cruellT hard it is 
i^on a fdlow. My unde brings me up, gives 
me a good education, is just as kind to me as if 
1 were his own son ; th^i all at onoe my £sither, 
who has nev^- taken the smallest interest in me, 
or trouUe about me, irhom I had never seen 
but onoe before, that I can remember— <^omes 
suddenly down upon me, and just to gratify his 



RESTORED. 163 

love of tyranny, nothing else, it seems to me, 
declares that I shall live entirely with him. Is 
it common fairness, do you think, that a man 
who has never even cared to know all my life 
whether I was dead or alive, should, just be- 
cause he is my father, have an absolute power 
over me, while the man who has been like my 
real father all these years should have no claim 
at all ? Well, my life is come to an end. I 
wish I was where Harry is I" 

"It is little more than four years, after all. 
The time will soon go," said Deverell, after a 
pause. 

" Four years 1 Would the time seem short to 
you if you were sent to prison for four years ?" 

" Still the time will go ; and once you come 
of age, you can live where you like. And, after 
all, Mr. Victor, the place will be yours one day. 
It is something to feel that you are heir to an 
old name and an old estate ; that some time or 
other you will be like a little king, with a hun- 
dred subjects or so, dependent upon you pretty 
much whether their lives are a blessing or a 
burden to them. You wish now, and it's very 
natural, that the place, and the people, and the 
Malrewards and all, were sunk at the bottom of 
the sea. But by the time you are of age, you 

M 2 



draining, and bothering yourself about the land 
and the labourers, than to sit at home at ease, 
in a library full of books. We will walk on now, 
if you please, sir; it is cold work standing here." 

Then Victor remembered to give his father's 
message, and they turned their steps towards 
the Court in silence, until suddenly the boy 
said, " It seems to me as though I had known 
for years that I should have to live here. 1 felt 
sure of it the first night that I came. I can 
hardly believe that it was only this morning 
that those people came to the funeral, and that 

Dr. Radcliffe said Deverell," he interrupted 

himself, " can you get the key of the drawing- 
room for me ? There is a portrait of my mother 
in there." 

" That is odd your asking me," said Deverell, 
with a slight sad smile. " It is the very thing 
I was going to show you when we got back to 
the Coui-t." 

The keeper took Victor by a back door, through 
several dusky and perplexing stone passages, 



RESTORED. 165 

into the entrance hall. Then, with a key he 
had obtained from Mrs. Jennings on the way, 
Deverell unlocked a door, and stealthily, lest 
Mr. Malreward should hear them, they entered 
into pitch darkness, and closed and locked the 
door behind them. Deverell groped, his way 
across the room, unclosed the shutters, and let 
a dusty light come in through the tall, narrow 
windows. A faint, mouldy smell, a great deal 
of tarnished gilding about the ceiling and cor- 
nices, furniture in mufflings of brown Holland, 
an air of antiquated and faded grandeur about 
the tapestry carpet, the great blue china jars, 
the black and yellow cabinets — this was the 
general aspect of the disused drawing-room. 
Deverell folded his arms upon the window-sill, 
and stared out into the park, whilst Victor, 
thrilling with tender curiosity and excitement, 
went up to the portrait, which hung above an 
old-fashioned piano, fluted with yellow silk. 

It represented a young girl sitting upon a 
rustic garden seat, with a soft green haze of 
trees in the background. She was dressed in 
white ; the gown was a little open at the throat, 
a blue ribbon fastened it at the waist. Her 
brown hair, with a sort of veiled gold shining 
through it, was drawn over a cushion, and piled 



blue of a sky just before sunrise ; there was a 
little dimple in the chin. How was it that be- 
hind this child-like innocence and freshness 
there was a look of suffering, as though tears 
had washed those eyes so bright, and pain had 
refined those cheeks and lips to such ethereal 
loveliness ? — how was it ihat she looked so soft, 
and yet so resolute ? I cannot tell, nor could 
Victor have told, yet he felt that it was all 
there — ^the gaiety, the tenderness, the heroic 
endurance, the unutterable grief of that strange, 
sweet soul, Frederica Malreward. 

Long did the boy stand there in silence, re- 
volving many things in his mind, looking at 
the picture of the mother whom he had never 
known, something as a good Catholic might 
look at a Madonna. When he spoke, however, 
it was in no very devout tone. " Mr. Malre- 
ward drove her away, and broke her heart — 1 
can never forget that 1" 

" But she forgot it, though," said Deverell ; 
" she died in his arms." 



I 



RESTORED. 1 67 

" Is it- not hard that you can remember her, 
and that I was nothing but a wretched little 
senseless baby when she died ?" 

'^ I can't remember very much about her all 
at one time," — and Deverell came towards the 
picture — "but little things she said and did 
come flashing into my mind sometimes, when I 
am tramping about alone in the covers. I re- 
member the night she went away clearly 
enough. It was about nine o'clock ; I was 
sitting half asleep over the fire in the house- 
keeper's room, when Susan, the nurse-girl, 
came whispering in my ear that Mrs. Malreward 
wanted me. I was wide awake in a minute, 
and went, as Susan told me, to the same door 
as we came in at just now. There was your 
mother, Mr. Victor, with a face as white as a 
ghost, with a strange, wild, bright look about 
her, as though she could have killed anyone 
who tried to stop her. She had you in her 
arms, a baby wrapped up in a shawl. Susan 
gave me your sister to carry — she was a sturdy 
little creature, I remember, with a pretty strong 
will of her own, and fat little hands, which 
pulled at my hair — and we set off to walk to 
the coach. What a night that was to be sure I 
Dark as pitch ; sometimes it rained and hailed 



ready to cry with the fright and the uncom- 
monness of being out there in the dark and all. 
I remember yom: little sister crying once, and 
Mrs. Malreward saying, * Give her to me, Mark ; 
I can carry them both.' And I really believe 
she could have done it ; her strength that night 
seemed a miracle. I quieted the child as well 
as I knew how, and we got at last to the place 
where the four cross roads met, where the sign- 
post was, and the place where the man was 
hung in chains, sixty years back, and where we 
were to meet the mail coach. Well, we waited 
and waited, and the rain it did come down, and 
I took my coat off, and put it round little Miss 
Freddy. It was the most I could do, but I be- 
lieve, Mr. Victor, that your mother took off 
every bit of shawl and cloak she had on, and 
covered up the children with it, and that was 
how she caught her death, no doubt." 

" Yes, she gave her life for me," said Victor, 
in a low, impassioned tone. 

" We stood there for an hour or thereabouts. 



RESTORED. 169 

for a few old fir-trees gave us a bit of shelter ; 

anyhow, it was better than the open common. 

I was but a young chap then, and I got dead 

beat at last, what with the wet and cold and 

howling wind, and thinking of the horrid tales 

folks told about the place, and expecting every 

moment to hear Mr. Malreward and the old 

head-keeper (he was a bad one, he was) come 

raging and clattering along the road after us 

on horseback. But your mother, Mr. Victor, 

all the while talked and smiled in her sweet, 

cheerful way. Sometimes she sang quietly a 

little verse of a hymn to her baby — I remember 

the words of one, 

' Hush, my dear, lie still and slumber, 
Holy angels guard thy rest,' 

till the mail coach came thundering up at 
last, with the lamps burning and the horses 
steaming, and I shouted, and they pulled up, 
and the guard got down, and helped them all 
inside. The last thing I remember was your 
mother looking at me, with her bright pale face 
and golden hair like an angel's, and taking my 
hand in both of hers, ' God bless you, Mark, dear, 
good boy 1' she said. ' I shall always care for 
you, if I never see you again, I shall not forget 
you.' And in a moment they were all gone, and 



Victor a«ked, " And what v^^v^ _ 
when he found out she was gone?" 

" He didn't find it ont till the next morning, 
and then he was just like a madman, cursing 
and tearing about the place. I believe in his 
heart he would have given his whole estate to 
have had her back again. He quieted down 
after a bit, and swore he would never hear her 
name mentioned again. I think he was too 
ashamed and too afraid of your uncle to dare to 
go to Tregalva after her. I remember, too, 
when he found out I had carried Miss Freddy 
down to the coach, he swore he'd kill me ; and 
he did so much towards it that he gave me a 
thrashing which made my bones ache for weeks 
after. However, I didn't care — not 1 1 I gloried 
in it, as being somehow for Mrs. Malreward's 
sake. But soon came the tidings that she was 
very ill, and your father went down to Corn^val 
just in time to see her die. When he cam 
back he seemed a changed man. But the chang 
didn't last, you se^." 

" I shall never forget what you did and si 



RESTORED. 171 

fered for her, Deverell 1" and the boy, with tears 
in his eyes, grasped the keeper's hand and 
wrung it. 

" I remember another thing, Mr. Victor. One 
day she said to your poor brother Harry, more 
to herself than to him, for he was but a little 
fellow then, and could not have imderstood her 
— ' Harry, my child, you will be lord of the 
manor some day. Oh 1 Harry, if you love me, 
set your face like a flint against all the wicked 
Malreward ways. It is you who must restore 
the old place and the old name !' She little 
thought then that it would be her own son 
who would have to do it." 

Deverell's splendid eyes were fixed upon the 
boy — eyes which seemed to pierce him through 
and through like a sword. Victor thrilled ; his 
blood stirred with a vague presentiment of the 
hard yet noble destiny to which he had been 
elected — a vision of battle and wounds, and 
glorious death, like a young man might feel 
when he first put on his soldier's uniform. 

^ *' Now, sir, we must be going," and Deverell 
began refastening the shutters. "You can al- 
ways get the key from Mrs. Jennings, and come 
in here when Mr. Malreward is out of the way. 
Py the by, you will write to Mr. Byrne to-night, 



letter at once, I would come upstairs with you 
and wait in the corridor outside till you had 
done it." 

'' Come upstairs, by all means ; but into my 
room, not outside it, if you please. Mrs. Jen- 
nings allows me a fire ; and I cannot call myself 
a mollicoddle, for, with that confounded cupola 
overhead, I might as well sleep in a barn." 

" Do you like this room, sir ?" and the keeper 
looked round him with an odd expression of 
disgust. 

" Like it 1 No, I don't, certainly. It is aw- 
fully queer when I am lying in bed to look 
straight up into the sky, and see the stars over- 
head. But the other rooms seem all dust and 
cobwebs, and those that are furnished have beds 
like hearses, — great stuffy four-posters, which 
no right-minded person would think of sleeping 
in. This at least has a nineteenth century iron 
bedstead. But what does it matter whether I 
like the room or not ? Don't tell me, Deverell," 
he burst out vehemently, " that I am going 



RESTORED. 173 

to live in this house, for I won't staijd it 1 " 
Deverell made no answer. He sat down by 
the fire with his head resting on his hand, in 
just the same place, in just the same attitude, 
that his young master had passed so many 
dreary evening hours. Victor wrote page after 
page to the Rev. Arthur Byrne. When he 
paused for a minute's rest to weary brain and 
hand, he saw that Deverell was leaning back in 
his chair, sound asleep. Victor's thoughts be- 
gan to wander from his own troubles to this 
man, who as a boy had served and worshipped 
Mrs. Malreward, with something of the roman- 
tic devotion of a page to his lady, in chivalrous 
legends. This big, burly, bearded man — how 
strange he was, with his sensitiveness, his per- 
sonal vanity, his tact and sympathy— qualities 
not (all of them) common in men, — rare in men 
of his class. That there was a darker, coarser, 
wilder side to his nature, Victor instinctively felt ; 
and he felt also that Deverell would do all he 
could, even to the verge of hypocrisy, to keep 
this out of his young master's sight. 

All was quiet in the room, except the slight 
creaking of Victor's pen upon the paper, and 
Deverell's regular breathing. It was growing 
dusk that foggy afternoon ; the firelight flickered 



« What is that ?" cried Victor. 

Deverell awoke with a start. " Did any one 
call — did you speak, Mr. Victor ? I was nap- 
ping, I think ;" and he got up and stretched his 
strong limbs. 

" Only an odd noise — mice in the wainscot, 
I suppose. I shall have finished the letter in 
one minute." 

Deverell was standing with his back to the 
fire, looking dismal and half-asleep. Victor 
was sealing the letter and putting on the stamp, 
with his face turned involuntarily towards the 
fireplace, when all at once that curious, slight 
yet perfectly distinct sound was repeated. 
Victor felt as though he could have put his 
finger on the exact part of the wall from which 
it seemed to come — the wall, mind you, not the 
wainscot — at least four feet above the floor, 
quite out of a mouse's latitude. The rubbing 
as of fingers on the wall, suddenly a muffled 
thump — then dead silence. 

'* There, Deverell, do you hear that ?" 



RESTORED. 175 

But Deverell sprang into the middle of the 
room, his eyes glared Mrith fury. " The old 
devil, at that trick again I" he muttered, and 
stamped his foot on the ground. " Here, give 
me your letter, I'll post it, all right," and he 
swept the letter off the table, burst out of the 
room, and went thundering down the corridor. 

" Well, this is an awfully queer house, and 
there are awfully queer people in it," said Vic- 
tor, aloud, for the sound of his voice was better 
than nothing. " What on earth made Deverell 
go off like that ? Is it — no, can it be, that Mr. 
Malreward — " and the thought made the boy's 
face burn — " is hidden somewhere, listening to 
what we said ?" 

He went out into the corridor, determined to 
clear up this mystery, and acquaint himself with 
his surroundings, which he had never taken the 
trouble to do before. Now the door of his bed- 
room was the last door on that side of the corri- 
dor. Immediately beyond it, the corridor was 
ended by a deeply-recessed bow-window with a 
wide seat running round it, covered with faded 
moth-eaten crimson cushions. It was plain 
that the wall from which the mysterious sound 
had come was the outer wall of the house, 
and Victor's bed-room on that side had no 



of the corridor, was in much the same condition. 
Victor stood bewildered, trying to put these 
facts together, and to see what they all meant. 
There was no room beyond his own on one 
side ; on the other, no place in which any per- 
son could be concealed. Besides, if Deverell 
were enraged by the suspicion that any person 
was secretly listening to their talk — " and by- 
the-by," thought Victor, " we had hardly spoken 
to each other since we entered the room " — why 
did he rush downstairs to discover them ? 

" I cannot be mistaken," said the boy, as he 
went back to his room ; " I did hear the odd 
sound, and so did Deverell, or why did he fly 
into such a rage ? Here was the place, I could 
swear to it — four feet or thereabouts from the 
floor, nine feet, say, from the cornice, and this 
wall is the outer wall of the house. What 
animal, what cat or rat or mouse, could hang 
on that outside wall, between the sky and the 
ground, and scrape softly with their paws like 
this ?" and with his open hand he lightly swept 



RESTORED. 177 

the wall ; it gave him an odd creeping sensa- 
tion to find that, by doing so, he had exactly 
reproduced the original sound. 

He recoiled into the middle of the room with 
a shudder, he lighted his two candles, and began 
to make his toilet for dinner. " I will think no 
more about it," said he. " Deverell evidently 
knows what it is, and must explain it." 

Instead of waiting for the dinner-bell to ring, 
as was his habit, Victor went downstairs the 
instant he was dressed. As he was descending 
the last flight, he heard loud harsh talking. 
Mr. Malreward and Deverell were coming across 
the hall, and were evidently at high words. 
The keeper was hardly the same man who had 
spoken of Mrs. Malreward so gently and rever- 
ently an hour ago. His face was pale, dark, 
quivering, his eyes blazed with a red light. 
Suddenly the two men came to a halt ; the 
Squire said something in his slow, sneering 
way ; whereupon Deverell struck the ground 
with the butt end of his gun, and broke out into 
a storm of curses. 

Victor bounded down half-a-dozen stairs into 
the hall. " Hold your tongue, Deverell," he 
cried, imperiously, "or never speak to me again !" 

The keeper, interrupted in the full swing of 

VOL. I. N 



to you, you can never have to bear what I 
have 1 " And with that he went out and shut 
the hall door with a bang which seemed to shake 
the house. 

Mr. Malreward, with a sinister, smiling face, 
put his arm through Victor's, and drew him 
into the dining-room. " A mad fellow," he 
said softly ; " very mad — you must be careful 
of him, my dear boy. Never believe a word he 
says. You don't, do you ? No, of course not. 
Queer stories — very queer stories. There always 
are in old houses." 

Victor made no answer. He was sorely dis- 
comfited at the thought of passing the whole 
evening alone with his father, of being forced to 
watch the gradual, steady process of his getting 
drunk. No Deverell would come to-night — 
perhaps not for many nights. Victor could 
not tell whether such a quarrel as he had 
just witnessed was according to the natural 
order of things at the Court, or whether it was 
an alarming phenomenon, portending the break- 



RESTORED. 179 

ing up of the weather — in other words, the 
friendly relations between the keeper and his 
master. And to Victor it was a humiliation to 
be forced even to sit at the same table with 
his father, when that morning words had passed 
between them, which made his cheeks burn and 
his ears tingle to remember. 

But Mr. Malreward had either forgotten the 
scene, or else the knowledge of the hold that he 
had upon the boy disposed him to be gracious 
towards him in trifling matters, knowing that 
at any moment he had only to tighten that hold 
to bring him down to his knees. Victor, with 
the short-sightedness of young people, did not 
perceive that he had injured his own cause be- 
yond recovery. There was something in the 
boy's desperate struggles to get free which 
unconsciously aroused in his father the two 
strongest instincts of the masculine nature — the 
desire of holding property, and the desire of 
hunting down prey ; something in the fierce 
Malreward blood breaking through Arthur 
Byrne's conscientious training, which drew the 
Squire towards his son with an odd, Warped 
kind of fatherly pride and affection. It would 
be a sin, thought he, that the spirited lad, 
with the spice of the devil in him, strong 

N 2 



metaphor — there were few things he liked 
better than breaking in a fiery, sensitive young 
horse ; and he would have Victor here — ^if all the 
parsons in the country cursed him with bell, 
book and candle, he would torment him and 
aggravate him till his young blood was up, and 
the fire flashed out of his eyes, as it did this 
morning ; then he would be down upon him with 
whip and spur, and a tight hand upon his rein, 
till he made him go just the pace he chose ; he 
would knock all the canting, priggish notions 
out of him ; he would give him a hunter and -a 
breech-loader, and teach him to ride across 
country, and to bring down his bird ; he would 
show him life, and make a man of him, this boy 
of his, whom he had lost and whom he had 
found again, and whom he loved, in his selfish 
kind of way. 

After dinner, Mr. Malreward became extremely 
affable, talked a good deal, and asked Victor 
many questions about his life at Tregalva. 

"And how many hours did Arthur Byrne 



RESTORED. 181 

keep you at your lessons ? Bless my soul ! that 
was stiff work. Wouldn't he let you off, 
now, if there was any fiin going on — a meet in 
the neighbourhood, say, or a shipwreck ? Twice 
to church on Sundays, prayers every day, Greek 
and Latin at home, tracts and old women out of 
doors — that was the style, eh ? And were there 
no other young fellows in the place to put you 
up to a thing or two ? Don't tell me, sir, you 
hadn't a lark sometimes, when his reverence 
was safe out of the way. Ah 1 you good boys, 
you good boys, who fold your hands and look 
as demure as a cat stealing cream, you won't 
take in an old bird like me." 

In that dining-room at Malreward Court, with 
the dark curtains drawn, the fire-light touching 
the old portraits with a fitful glow, a sombre 
Malreward face, a bit of steely armour, a crim- 
son robe starting out into vivid relief, then 
sinking down again into gloom, with the 
shadows standing all round the walls, and the 
one lamp upon the table shedding its subdued 
light upon antique china and much-battered 
plate, with the malign, pallid face of bis father 
staring and chuckling and leering at him from 
the opposite side of the table, Victor underwent 
slow torture. With the straining eyes and 



past, blameless, as Victor knew it had been, 
save for childish faults, idleness, waywardness, 
ill-temper. He tried to answer courteously, but 
he was determined not to speak at all, unless he 
was absolutely obliged to do so. 

Mr. Makeward went rambling on, leaning back 
in his chair, his hand on his wine-glass; he 
looked drowsy, comfortable, complacent. Sud- 
denly, without the slightest provocation, unless 
Victor's silence at some insulting remark could be 
called such, he sprang up with a frightful scowl, 
and struck the table with his fist. " You are 
sulky, sir, you are devilish sulky !" he roared. 
" Leave the room. Take your gentlemanly 
manners elsewhere! Stop!" he cried, as the 
boy, with pale face and flashing eyes, and with 
that haughty grace of his family which even 
Mr. Malreward never lost when he was sober, 
rose, and walked across the room without a 
word, " ring that bell, boy I I'll have old Jen- 
nings here; servant as he is, he'll be better com- 
pany than you, heir of the Malrewards !" 



RESTORED. 183 

Outside the dining-room was pitch darkness. 
According to one of those petty stinginesses 
which household extravagance always enforces, 
the hall-lamp was never lighted unless Mr. Mal- 
reward had company. It was one of the un- 
pleasant features about the Court, that there 
was never light enough in it. The lamp which 
burned in the dining-room was almost swallowed 
up by the shadows which waited in a wide circle 
all round the table, and when the moon shone 
through the cupola, as it had done last night, it 
nearly put out the two candles in Victor's bed- 
room. 

He went groping up the oak staircase, whose 
blackness intensified the gloom, leaning on the 
balusters, for he felt worn out. " What can I 
do ?" he muttered. " Mr. Malreward seems bent 
on making me mad. I could stand his sneers 
or his fury, if I only knew when to look out for 
them, but one never knows what he is going to 
do or eay next. Is it drink, or insanity, or what? 
If it be insanity. Heaven help me ; it must be in 
my blood too, and he will drive me to it. I have 
not a friend in the place except poor Deverell, 
and I don't doubt he bears me a grudge for 
what I said to him to-night. Oh ! Uncle Arthur, 
wont you help me ?" 



.... I sat as one forlorn. 
Then said the voice in quiet scorn, 
Behold, it is the Sabbath mom. 

Tennyson. 

^pHE next day was Sunday. " I cannot think 
1 what Sunday will be like in this ghostly, 
awful place I" thought Victor, when he had 
awakened, as a prisoner awakes on his first 
morning in gaol. " It is hard to imagine that 
they can have any Sundays here." Sunday at 
Tregalva was a cheerful, bustling day ; the 
Rector seemed always at his best, pleasantly ex- 
cited, his keen eyes beaming, his blood warming 
to his work, although sometimes he became a 
little tired and out of spirits before he went to 
bed. But these reactions and self-distrustings 
generally visit, like pale, reproachful phantoms, 
impulsive, enthusiastic men, just after they have 
laboured with all their might — the whole soul 
and nervous force having gone out into the 
work, the man himself is left empty and forlorn. 




RESTORED. 185 

But what would Sunday at Malreward Court 
be like? — a house which seemed haunted by an 
evil conscience, the shadows of remorse, and the 
malarious atmosphere of vice. It was some re- 
lief to be told by Mrs. Jennings that "Mr. Mal- 
reward liked to rest of a Sunday, and wouldn't 
be down these two hours, so Mr. Victor might 
have his breakfast as soon as he liked." But 
the dining-room was too much associated with 
his father's looks and words, to make even a 
solitary meal there a pleasant one. It gave 
Victor the oddest sensation when presently a 
quaint chime of four bells rang out close to the 
house. It was all a discord — church bells, with 
their sacred, peacefiil reminiscences, pious me- 
morials of the dead, words of prayer, the holy 
place within a stone's throw * and brandy, cigars, 
taunts, curses, foul sneers and inuendoes. As 
Victor was opening the iron gate which sepa- 
rated the lawn in front of the house from the 
park, he was joined by Deverell. Victor looked 
at him a little oddly, remembering how they 
had parted the night before. " Good morning, 
Deverell. Are you going to church too?" 

Deverell read his thoughts. " Yes, sir, I am 
quite used to it — going to church, I mean. The 
nearer the church the farther from God. That's 




186 RESTORED. 

about it, isn't it ?" he said, with a quick glance 
from the church to the Court close by. 

A few village people were straggling along 
the road which led from the village across the 
park, a few lads were idling about the neglected, 
nettle-grown churchyard. The church itself was 
externally a fine specimen of the Perpendicular 
style, and had one of the lofty towers common 
in the county. You descended a step to enter 
the porch, which was as large as a good-sized 
room, and had deep stone seats on each side. 
Internally, the building was one of those speci- 
mens of churchwarden architecture common 
enough twenty years ago, but whose number 
every year diminishes. The moulding of 
arches and pillars, the tracery of windows, were 
clogged up by coats of dirty whitewash ; the oak 
rood screen had pegs driven into it, upon 
which labouring men hung their Sunday hats ; 
the pulpit was of painted deal, so also was the 
wooden gallery, which blocked up the west 
window, and which bore a dingy hatchment. 
"The dim religious light" inside the church 
came not from " storied windows richly dight," 
but from a thick film of dirt upon the glass. 
Here and there the walls were stained with 
green, grotesquely shaped streaks of mould; 



RESTORED. 187 

there was a damp, chill, charnel-house smell, 
and a look of decay and melancholy every- 
where, as though the massive walls which had 
braved so many centuries of wind and weather, 
were mouldering and perishing, like the dead 
men's bones beneath the floor — blighted by the 
neglect of so-called Christians. 

As Victor and Deverell, in their deep mourn- 
ing dress, walked up the aisle, it would have 
been hard for a stranger to say which of the 
two was not a gentleman. A little thrill ran 
through the church. Simple-minded as the boy 
was, he could not help being conscious that 
everybody was looking at him. The keeper 
showed his young master into a great square 
pew, whitewashed deal without, ragged green 
baize within, then betook himself to a humbler 
seat close by. Moths flew about when Victor 
entered, a little cloud of dust rose out of the 
out-at-elbows hassock when he knelt, and pre- 
sently a spider dropped from the plaister ceiling 
and ran along his prayer book. The abstracted 
little Vicar in his dingy surplice came hurrying 
out of the vestry, got into his reading-desk, 
and with the help of a cracked-voice clerk, 
mumbled through the service, psalms, canticles, 
and prayers, as hard as he could go. 



the black and white urns and cherubs overhead, 
the carved and antique stones under foot, with 
crosses and "Hie jacets," which the white- 
washed pews ruthlessly cut in twain ; and then 
his shyness at being stared at having a little 
passed away, with boyish curiosity he began to 
look all round the church. There were two 
benchfuls of restless school children, about 
twenty villagers, such as could still muster a 
tidy appearance on Sundays, a few old women 
in black satin bonnets, a few white-haired old 
men in clean smock frocks, young women in 
modem flimsy stufib and cheap artificial flowers, 
lads with supematurally shining hair and red 
neckties. These sat in dark and inferior por- 
tions of the church. Nearer the chancel were 
several large pews, nearly all of which were 
empty, oddly placed, with seats facing every 
way. One contained a farmer's family, a 
grey-haired, careworn man, several women in 
flaunting finery; in another sat two young 
ladies exactly alike in their pretty inanity ; hair, 



RESTORED. 189 

features, complexion ; and, as if that were not 
enough, in their pink bonnets, for jackets, down 
to their very gloves, the one sister was the ex- 
act duplicate of the other. They looked at 
each other, whispered, and stifled a giggle vfery 
often during the service. 

Victor's eyes wandered discontentedly over 
these people, were not captivated by the two 
pretty sisters, whom most of his elders ad- 
mired, and rested at last upon a lady sitting 
alone. Hers was not a countenance that would 
have attracted most boys, but Victor's dawning 
ideas of feminine beauty were all refined and 
poetic. She looked about five and thirty. She 
was tall and slight in figure, her face was pale 
and transparent, the features were singularly 
pure in outline, her dark hair was streaked 
with grey. Her expression was tender, motherly, 
yet so pathetic — "Mater dolorosa" were the 
words which came into Victor's mind, as he 
looked at her. 

But now Mr. Groves in his rusty black gown 
had mounted the pulpit. And the moment he 
had spoken the first sentence of his discourse, 
Victor's eyes were involuntarily drawn towards 
him. It was as if the sordid sullen man had 
awakened into a new life. Fire flashed out of his 



unaerstooa mm. ne naa long ago oecome 
hopeless of raising his drunken and degraded 
parish to any level of comfort, or even de- 
cency. Perhaps Mark Deverell the head-keeper 
was the only man there who took any interest 
in what he said. But he preached on ; for once 
his wild, half-crazed imagination had its way, 
and lifted him up from the dust and noise of 
everyday life, above what we call light, into the 
clouds and darkness, to see the gleam of the 
*' White Throne and the Crystal Sea," 

Victor sat breathless, his fascinated eyes fixed 
upon the Vicar, his cheek resting on his hand. 
All at once some magnetic influence seemed to 
draw his gaze away. Deverell was sitting im- 
mediately before him. His eyes were also fixed 
upon Mr. Groves ; his cheek also rested on his 
hand. Victor looked beyond, and the two sis- 
ters, in pink bonnets, were both staring at him, 
or at Deverell — which was it ? — but they were 
staring, with a wondering, triumphant look, as 
if they had just made some discovery. The 



RESTORED. 191 

boy involuntarily frowned a little, turned his 
head away, and tried to take up again the 
broken thread of his attention. But he could 
not help wondering what these girls had found 
out so remarkable about himself or Deverell. 
Coming out of church, Victor heard a femi- 
nine voice behind him say, "Now, did you 
ever see such a likeness I" Presently, as he 
stopped to look at the old stone cross which 
stood half choked with nettles in the church- 
yard, the two pink-bon netted young ladies 
passed him, with mincing steps and side-long 
glances. " Why, they must mean themselves," 
thought Victor ; " the one is the reflection in a 
looking-glass of the other." 

"Who are those girls? — do you know, 
Deverell ?" 

" Those are the Miss Holbrooks. People 
call them the prettiest girls in the neighbour- 
hood ; they are not in my style, though. Poor 
Mr. Harry was uncommonly sweet upon one of 
them — I don't know which, either or both, they 
are just alike." 

" Am I like Harry I" asked Victor, suddenly. 

" You, sir ? Oh I no. Mr. Harry took after 
his mother's family ; he was rather short, with 
dark hair and eyes — don't you remember? 



what they are like. (You need not look quite 
so far," thought Deverell, with a grim smile.) 

" Let us take a turn in the park," said Vic- 
tor. So they went down one of the paths 
which wound in and out beneath the trees. 
The sun was conquering the fog, the air was 
full of misty sunshine and sunny mist, blue 
vapours slid between the waning trees, light 
clouds of golden foliage seemed floating in the 
air, moist leaves under foot glistened purple 
and red ; in little brambly dells and hollows 
there was a gleam of crimson haws, and a few 
belated blackberries. 

"All dying gently, carelessly — not as we 
die," thought Victor ; and to him, as to most 
young people, the thought of death had a 
strange fascination. To youth, as to the an- 
cients, death is no hollow-eyed skeleton, the 
King of Terrors, no ghastly business of coflSns, 
undertakers, winding-sheets, and worms; but 
the royal robe and crown of life, the calm-faced 
boy with folded wings and inverted torch. 



RESTORED. 193 

Sleep's twin brother, Wonderfiil, Conqueror, the 
Prince of Peace. " That was a strange sermon, 
Deverell. Does the Vicar often preach like 
that?" 

" Pretty much, sir. They say he eats opium. 
I suppose that, and his books, and wandering 
in the woods here, are the only pleasures he 
has got. He is an M.A. ; he was well thought 
of at Cambridge, and now see what he has 
come to — five children, two hundred a year, 
and a tumble-down parsonage ! There's a pond 
in the garden there, with a grove of yews and 
laurels, and such like gloomy shrubs round it ; 
the water is as still and as black as ever it 
can be, and nobody knows how deep it is. 
They call it the Parson's Pool, and they say 
two Vicars of Malreward have drowned them- 
selves there. Ah ! there's no end to the queer 
stories they tell about these parts. I read 
somewhere that Calvinism quite died out of one 
of the States in America when they had drained 
the land about there. And I believe, if the 
farms here were better tilled, and there were 
fewer public-houses and more decent cottages, 
the ghosts and the bad tales of murders and 
suicides would all fly away like owls at day- 
light." 

VOL. I. 



uneasily. " Mice, I suspect, sir, — ^plenty of mice 
at the Court, No, I'll tell you the truth "—but 
even then Deverell did not meet his eyes — " I 
thought your father was liatening to us. But 
he was not." 

VYou ran downstairs," said the boy, in an 
injured tone. " How could he be listening 
downstairs ?" 

" Did I run downstairs f — well, so I did ; and 
Mr. Malreward was sitting in his study smok- 
ing. I am speaking the truth, Mr. Victor/' and 
Deverell flashed at him a fierce, haughty glance. 
" Upon my word and honour, sir, I don't know 
what that noise was, and I can't make out. I 
believe it was all fancy — fancy," 

" I don't believe it was anything of the kind/' 
muttered Victor ; but he thought it useless to^ 
say more. 

" Did you notice that lady in mourning ?" 
asked Deverell, as if anxious to change the 
subject. " That was Mrs. Radcliffe, the doctor's 
wife." 



RESTORED. 195 

"That pale, beautiful, melancholy creature, 
like pictures of the Virgin Mary, is she Dr.Rad- 
cliffe's wife I I took such a liking to him yes- 
terday, do you know. They are people I 
should like uncommonly to see something of." 

They returned to the house by a different 
path — a path which led them through a sombre 
alley of laurels, which almost met overhead; 
the topmost leaves reflected the sunshine with 
a wintry glitter. Presently they came to a little 
iron gate. Deverell unlocked it with a key whic^ 
he took from his waistcoat pocket. "I have 
something to show you, Mr. Victor," he said ; 
and now the man's mobile face had changed 
to its very gentlest look. "Come in here — 
this. was your mother's garden. She often used 
to walk here ; she was so fond of flowers." 

They went through the antique place — a little 

overgrown and melancholy was it, with prim 

walks, and flower-borders fringed with box, 

with here and there a decayed rustic seat, and in 

the middle a grey stone sundial, cracked and 

mossy. There were clumps of old-fashioned 

flowers — wall-flowers and sweet- Williams, clove 

carnations, rosemary and love-lies-bleeding ; 

but all had bloomed their little day, and shed 

their scented petals long ago. Only a few 

02 



dewy grafis, the evergreens. 

** I keep the key,** said Deverell, as they 
slowly sauntered along. ^ I let nobody in here 
but my boy Jack, who works in the borders 
sometimes, and weeds the paths. I keep it up 
as well as I can, you see; but the flowers 
will die sometimes. And I come here for a 
walk Sunday afternoons, sometimes I pick one 
of these,** he pointed to some sweet, pale, 
monthly roses, which hung pensively amidst 
their shining green leaves, **to wear in my 
button-hole to church ; but I didn't to-day ; and 
here is the key, Mr. Victor — ^it is all yours now," 
he said, with a slight smile, which had some- 
thing pathetic in it. 

" No, indeed, I will not take it," said the boy, 
for he had a dim consciousness of what this 
little garden was to the man — a pure and peace- 
ful bit cut out from the " loud-tongued, evil 
world," a link with his days of youth and com- 
parative innocence. "You keep the key, as 
you have done all these years. I am sure the 



RESTORED. 197 

place looks in beautiful order ; and you will let 
me have it if I like to come here again to-mor- 
row. That will be fair, won't it ?" 

Returning through the garden gate, the laurel 
alley presently led them to the lawn, upon which 
the chief rooms at Malreward Court looked out. 
This side of the hou6e was a century or two 
later than the rest. The windows were all tall 
and narrow, encased in heavy mouldings ; each 
was headed by a " broken pediment," cout 
taining an urn. A quaint row of vases sur- 
mounted the parapet. In many of the win- 
dows the shutters were shut ; the rooms — far 
too numerous for the small and impoverished 
family of Malreward — had long been disused. 
Ivy was gaining a steady hold upon the house 
— even crossed and re-crossed the dingy win- 
dow panes. 

Victor and Deverell suddenly came upon Mr. 
Malreward, who was sauntering listlessly along, 
with the inevitable cigar in his mouth. He 
looked up, with a sardonic sneer, when his sou 
and his keeper walked up to him, respectfully 
raising their hats ; Victor colouring a little as 
his father s parting words last night came back 
to his mind. 

"Ho, here you are at last, then. So you 



Byrne would saj to it. I would make him a 
present of it when old Groves goes to Kingdom 
come, the rotten old church, the rotten old 
parsonage, and the Parson's Pool, and all, only 
he has a snug little Rectory, and a stable full of 
horses, and a cellar of choice wine ; and he 
wouldn't come, not even to be your father con- 
fessor, Victor, my boy. Ah I we poor devils — 
we poor devils, how can we ever hope to get to 
Heaven? I am going to drive over to Don- 
nistone, to dine with Captain Thorpe, this after- 



noon." 



Mr. Malreward's drawling tone suddenly 
changed into a sharp one, seeing the gleam of 
relief which shot from Victor's eyes, and which 
he was too guileless to know how to hide. " I 
should take you with me, sir, only I don't con- 
sider that your manners are sufficiently gentle- 
manly at present for me to introduce you to my 
friends. By-and-by I shall expect you to ac- 
company me. So I'll leave you with Deverell — 
you may do some more church-going, or go 



RESTORED. 199 

rabbit-shooting, or have a prayer-meeting at 
the lodge, or what you like." He sauntered off. 
" We'll have a jolly afternoon now you are 
gone, Mr. Malreward," muttered Deverell. " I'll 
gf> «id hunt up Mrs. Jennings, and see that she 
gets you your dinner quickly ; then if you 
like to come round the covers with me by and 
by, I shall be very pleased, Mr. Victor ; and if 
you care for birds, one of my men has got the 
funniest little tame owls you ever saw ; and 
there's a pair of silver pheasants in the covers 
somewhere, which I should like to show you. 
Then if you'll do me the honour to come back 
to the lodge, I'll make you a first-rate cup 
of tea, and perhaps there are some of my books 
you may like to look^ over. Anyhow, you 
needn't hurry back to the Court ; Mr. Malreward 
won't be home till the small hours of the morn- 
ing, I know." 



CHAPTER XI. 

....... Not passing thro' the fire 

Bodies, but souls — ^thy children's — ^thro'the smoke, 
The bHght of low desires-Hlarkening thine own 
To thine own likeness. 

Tennyson. 

THE next morning, immediately Victor could 
escape from the breakfast table, he rushed 

out of doors to look for the postman, who he 
felt sure would bring him a letter from Mr. 
Byrne. As he walked across the lawn, he saw 
down one of the vistas of the park, somebody 
very different to the postman — a tall, almost 
soldierly-looking figure, grey-haired, clad in a 
long black coat. With a cry, the boy dashed at 
the iron fence, vaulted it, and went tearing over 
the grass like a young horse. When he came 
up to the Rector, he could only gasp and stam- 
mer — " Oh, Uncle Arthur T — and seize his hand 
in both of his own. 

" My dear boy 1" was all Arthur Byrne could 
say, as he looked down into the flushed face, 



RESTORED. 201 

the lijps smiling ecstatically, the eyes a little 
moistened — of the lad whom he loved as if he 
were his own child ; and there was a dimness in 
his own eyes also. And Victor thought that 
somehow his uncle looked older than he had 
done when they parted a week ago ; as though 
fresh lines had been drawn in his face, and his 
hair had grown greyer. 

Presently they walked on together — Victor 
clinging to his uncle's arm. " It is awfully 
good of you to come, and to come so soon. 
How did you manage it, sir ?" 

" If yesterday had not been Sunday, I should 
have been here last night. As it was, I had the 
waggonette brought round to the door a few 
minutes before evening service was over, so that 
I had nothing to do when I came out of church, 
but to jump in, and drive right away to Bodmin 
Station. We did the twenty miles in a little 
over two hours — ^pretty well that. Scandal will 
be busy with my name, I know. But what do 
I care, my boy I" 

" And how are Freddy, and Black Tom, and 
Martha and John, and everybody?" 

"All well — except that Freddy, poor child, 
is almost wild about you. I had to be a very 
stem uncle to prevent her from coming with me 



tered Victor. " Were you not awfully angry 
when you got my letter yesterday ; and Mr. 
Malreward wrote to you too, didn't be ? Didn't 
it come like a thunderbolt ? I am sure it did to 
me-^nd just ihint, the day of poor Harrj^'s 
funeral and all. Ob, uncle — uncle 1" the boy 
chitched the man's arm convulsively, and look- 
ed up with eyes of imploring agony — "you 
will help me, you will stand by me, you will 
get me out of this horrible place I Oh, if you 
only knew what I have gone through ; the things 
he says ; how he drinks and swears — " and Vic- 
tor almost choked. 

"Don't talk to me about it, nowl" said 
Arthur Byrne, in a tone of sharp pain. " I must 
go straight to the house and see Mr. Malreward; 
I must keep cool, and I cannot if you talk like 
that!" then his hand wrung Victor's and his 
voice grew hoarse — "Oh, Victor, my boy, 
would to God you were my son I" 

" Heaven only knows how this interview be- 
tween your father and myself will end," said 



RESTORED. 203 

the Rector, a few minutes afterwards. " But 
don't hope too much from it, dear fellow 1 It 
is a losing battle we have to fight — equity 
against law, right against might, moral claims 
against so-called natural ones, for ten years 
have given me some claim to your love and 
obedience and companionship, have they not, 
Victor ? But you know I will fight for you, yes, 
to the last drop of my blood I would fight — " 
Arthur Byrne looked every inch of him the 
ideal of a Christian knight, his lips curling, his 
keen blue eyes kindling, with the indignation 
which is God-like — grey-haired, past five and 
fifty as he was, his vigorous, athletic fi'ame — 
trained by the good old rule of the Church 
catechism, which was also the rule of the Greek 
athlete, " temperance, soberness, chastity," — 
could have out-run, out-ridden, out-wrestled, 
most men of twenty-five. And Victor looked 
at him, as a youthfal soldier might look at his 
General, and felt that it would be a light thing 
to die for him. 

" I cannot tell how long I may be with Mr. 
Malreward," said the Rector, as they entered 
the house, " but keep in the way somewhere, so 
that I may find you when I leave him. It 
would have been better perhaps if I had not 



his cigar and newspaper. " Mr. Byrne, sir," 
he said j then rushed away upstairs ; while 
the Rector with his light, yet dignified step, 
with his face a little pale, and head carried a 
little proudly, walked acrogs the room to meet 
his deadly foe. 

Mr. Malreward rose, astonished, and held out 
his haod. He was in a good-humour this morn- 
ing, having won heavily at play last night. 
" This is quite an unexpected pleasure, Mr. 
Byrne. I don't think you have entered my 
house since poor dear Frederica died. And how 
many years is it since we dined together that 
day in Bath V 

"About four, I think," answered Mr. Byrne, a 
little distantly. 

" Well, well, time flies, and we are all getting 
on in life, though I should have known you 
anywhere. Your hair is grey, but you look 
wonderfiilly well for your years. Ah I yes, 
yes, sea-air, a settled income, freedom from 
cares and worries, there's nothing like it. Bat 




RESTORED. 205 

you see me a wreck, a perfect wreck, sir," he 
said, plaintively. " My health was never good, 
and I have so much to try me — losses, business 
anxieties. You have no idea what it is to have 
an impoverished estate like this on your hands. 
I verily believe all my tenants are in a league 
together to defraud and persecute me. I am 
obliged to deny myself many little comforts 
which my health requires. I can't afford to 
keep a stable full of horses as you do, and I 
can't think how the deuce you can. And last 
week, as you know, I suffered the heaviest blow 
that could have fallen upon me." Mr. Mal- 
reWard looked down and sighed, this time with 
genuine emotion. 

"It was indeed a blow." And the Rector 
was softened, as who would not have been? 
" It is a terrible thing for us middle-aged people, 
when the young ones — whom we had hoped 
would fulfil all our own highest ambitions, and 
carry out our interrupted plans, and be the stay 
and comfort of our old age — are taken before 
us. Both their lives and ours seem purposeless, 
broken off short ; but it may be that they are 
gone to begin a career of nobler work elsewhere.*' 

Mr. Malreward moved impatiently in his chair, 
and Arthur Byrne then followed his impulse. 




206 RESTORED. 

and dashed right into the subject to discuss 
which he had come. It was something strange 
for the Rector, — priest, and magistrate, chief dig- 
nitary of the place in which he lived, — to beg for 
mercy, and from a man of whom he had the 
very worst opinion. 

" Then, Mr. Malreward, since you have known 
what it is to lose a boy very dear to you, your 
daily companion, whom you have seen grow up 
under your own eyes, I come to ask you to 
spare me that very same grief. 1 received your 
letter yesterday, telling me your wishes about 
Victor. It is no exaggeration to say that when 
I read it, T suffered as you did when the doctor 
told you Harry would die. I don't speak of 
what I have done for Victor — that is nothing. 
I ask you to think only of what he has been to 
me for ten years of my widowed, childless life." 

"If we are to discuss this matter at all," re- 
plied Mr. Malreward, coldly, " I must beg you 
to leave all sentiment out of the question, or I 
might argue that without Victor my life would 
be quite as lonely as yours. To keep to facts — 
is Victor your son, or is he mine ? By all the laws 
of nature, of every country that I ever heard of, 
and the doctrines of your own church, a father 
has an indefeasible claim to his own child.'' 



RESTORED. 207 

" Yes, very true ; but being a father generally 
means something more than being the mere 
author of a child's existence. What do you 
know of Victor ? — what share have you had in 
bringing him up, training him, making him 
what he is I I have had the labour of his edu- 
cation, the care of his health, the responsibility 
of his conduct. What have you had, Mr. Malre- 
ward, during the sixteen years of your son's 

life r 

" I am very glad to have this opportunity of 
thanking you for all you have done for Victor. 
1 am deeply grateful, I wish I could show you how 
grateful, in some more substantial fashion, but I 
know you would feel yourself insulted were 1, a 
wretchedly embarrassed man, even to mention 
any repayment of that part of your private for- 
tune which you have laid out upon the boy." 

"I should think so, indeedl" cried the Rector. 

" But as a man of the world, you must see in 
what a very different position in every way the 
death of his elder brother has placed Victor. 
The education and training you have been giving 
him, admirable, no doubt, in their way, are 
totally unsuited to the heir to a landed estate." 

'* If Victor were here to speak for himself, he 
would say, I know — * Forego all those paternal 



i 



'J 



agreement of the kind ? He has no more power 
to disinherit himself than I have to disinherit 
him. There is not a single proprietor of an 
entailed estate in the kingdom who would not 
laugh to scorn — as I do — the idea of his son and 
heir, during his minority, being brought up out 
of his own control, with ideas and opinions 
totally at variance with his own, only to turn 
round upon him, and play the very devil with 
everything when he comes of age. Now, let us 
drop this very unpleasant discussion. You must 
see that no good can come of it. Have you 
breakfasted, Mr. Byrne ? What can I offer you 
— wine, coflfee, anything — pray tell me?" said 
the Squire, with his hand upon the bell. 

** Thank you, Mr. Malreward, I cannot eat 
or drink in your house," said the Rector, 
getting up, very pale and resolute. " 1 cannot 
do anything which would lead you to suppose 
that I mean to submit to your decision about 
Victor. I will not give up my boy to you quite 
so readily as that. There are other ways — 
other ways." 



RESTORED. 209 

" Pray sit down again a moment, Mr. Byrne," 
said Mr. Mai reward, with rather an ugly smile. 
"There is one fact you have evidently quite 
overlooked. Your boy, as you call him, is not 
my only child. And the day my son Victor 
leaves my house, whether for Tregalva Rectory 
or elsewhere, that very day my daughter Fred- 
erica comes to live at Malreward Court." 

Arthur Byrne stood and stared at him with a 
face as grey and hard as a stone. " You would 
not be such a fiend I When you know the char- 
acter of the men who visit at your house I" 

" Listen to the reverend man," murmured Mr. 
Malreward. " He swears, all of .course in a pious 
way, at a father who dares even to hint that 
he has any rights over his own children I I tell 
you fiankly, I don't want the girl here — she 
would be confoundedly in the way ; whereas 
Victor, when he has had to rough it a little, 
and I have laughed all the priggishness out of 
him, might be a pleasant companion for me. 
But, as sure as there is a God above us, Arthur 
Byrne, if you meddle with the boy, I'll have the 
girl here, if I have to lock her up all the time to 
keep her out of harm's way. If you can make 
my heir a ward in Chancery, you can't her, a 
penniless girl; and as for you, I'll prosecute 

VOL. I. P 



Arthur Byrne dropped speechless into a chair* 
His head was in the dust, his neck was beneath 
the foot of his old enemy. It was the bitterest 
moment of the Rector's life. He remained silent 
until the servant, who entered, had left the 
room again. Then, declining with a bow the 
refreshments which his brother-in-law pressed 
upon him, he said, with lips that quivered, and 
voice a little tremulous, " Well, Mr. Malreward, 
I will confess it, you have beaten me, but it is 
with the devil's own weapons. Your threats to 
me personally, I value just for what they are 
worth ; but Freddy, my sister's daughter, shall 
not be condemned to live here, shut out from 
the society of other ladies, her very reputation 
tarnished perhaps by being in the same house 
with some of your fiiends. But " — the words 
almost choked him, but he forced himself to 
speak them for Victor's sake — "nevertheless, 
let us part friends." 

"By all means. I have not the slightest 
Avish to quarrel with you. I have only played 



-» 



RESTORED. 211 

out the trump card which I had in reserve, and 
it is no shame to you that you have not won the. 
odd trick. Well, if you won't take anything 
now, you will stay to dinner, and sleep here to- 
night, I hope I" 

" Thank you, it is quite out of my power to 
do so. I have a funeral to-morrow, and other 
engagements, and I must return to-day by the 
one o'clock train." He sighed. Until that mo- 
ment he had not realized what wild and un- 
founded hopes had been sustaining him, that 
Victor would be his companion on that home- 
w^ard journey. " I should like before I go to 
speak to you a few words about Victor." 

"Certainly, certainly. I shall be interested 
in anything you can tell me about the boy." 

" He is really a very fair classic ; his know- 
ledge of modern history and literature generally, 
has been most gratifying to me," Mr. Byrne 
said, with a sad, proud air, like a man speaking 
of his dead son. " Mathematics are his weak 
point. What sort of man is the vicar of your 
parish ? And could it be arranged that Victor 
should go every day to read with him for a few 
hours? I am anxious that he should not lose 
ground. He does very well for a boy of his 
age, but still- " 

p2 



the rest of it, as he will ever know how to stow 
away. What he wants to be taught, are a few 
things which will give him his place amongst 
other young fellows. He can't shoot — he can't 
even ride, so far as I know." 

The Kector let that unfounded accusation 
pass. " Victor will have plenty of time for work 
and play, too ; and even amongst country gen- 
tlemen I never heard that a good education was 
counted a disgrace. Mr. Groves is a clever 
man, I believe ?" 

" Yes, a book-worm, a learned pig — every- 
thing of the sort. He is devilish poor, too, and, 
to tell you the truth, so am I ; I really have 
not a penny to throw away upon dead lan- 
guages." 

" I shall be most happy, if you will allow me, 
to make the arrangement with your vicar," said 
Arthur Byrne, eagerly, but with a slight curl of 
his lip. 

" Ah ! well, — that is good of you. Well, Til 
speak to Groves about the boy, and see what 
he will do it for, and let you know." 



RESTORED. 213 

The Rector pondered for a few minutes. 
Should he try to appeal to this man's better 
feelings ? — had he any to appeal to ? Well, he 
would speak out ; he was pretty well used to 
casting bread upon the waters, sowing good 
seed by the wayside, and all the rest of the 
noble, but somewhat disheartening routine of 
his profession. " To me, Victor's youthful na- 
ture seems one of the most beautiful and love- 
able I have ever known. He is very conscien- 
tious. If I tell him to do a thing, and show 
him that it is his duty to do it, however diflScult 
or distasteful it may be, I can rely upon his do- 
ing it, first or last. He has none of the modern 
boyish notions that it is a fine manly thing to 
break rules and outwit authorities ; he is natu- 
rally obedient to what is really above him. His 
chief fault is his temper, and that is what I 
particularly want to speak to you about. It is 
one of those sensitive, irritable tempers, often 
accompanying a noble nature and a finely-or- 
ganized brain. Try to bear with him as pa- 
tiently as you can ; do not unnecessarily pro- 
voke the boy. I know he is trying to overcome 
this fault." 

" I made the discovery that he had a temper 
the very first day he was here, and it is just 




ideas of training only too strict." 

** There is just this difference between our 
ideas of strict training, ray dear sir. You would 
keep a young horse in a comfortable stable, with 
a raanger full of corn, but never put a bridle on 
him — never let him smell the fresh air, or feel 
the turf under his feet ; and I would put a tight 
curb in his mouth, ride him with whip and 
spur across country, and make him take every 
fence he came to, till he learnt to be in at the 
death." 

" Well, my enemies generally taunt me with 
being a muscular parson. If you tried to make 
a young horse take every fence he came to, ten 
to one you would kill him or maim him for life. 
To drop metaphors, which are rather fatiguing, 
which do you really wish, Mr. Malreward ?" — 
the Rector bent forward a little, and fixed his 
eyes upon his bi'other-in-law — " do you wish 
that Victor should grow up honoured and re- 
spected, taking his proper place amongst other 
country gentlemen, setting himself with might 



BESTORED. 215 

and main to restore your impoverished estate, 
ttnd to make himself a blessing to everyone 
about him ; or to see him drag down the name 
of Malreward still lower into the mire of drink, 
gambUng, and bad women ?" 

"Victor must take his chance, like other 
young fellows," replied his father coolly. " You 
parsons sit at home in your studies, poring 
over your books, and know next to nothing of 
life. There is a good deal of human nature in 
a man ; you may preach and preach, and the 
leopard won't change his spots, — that is Scrip- 
ture, isn't it ? You cannot keep a boy always 
under your eye ; he must set about learning 
some profession or business or other. Off he 
goes to London, or to one of the universities, 
and breaks out all the worse, because he has 
been kept in so tightly all his life before. Yes, 
pious parents, graceless prodigals ; clergymen's 
sons, the devil's stepsons — the old story. Vic- 
tor must BOW his wild oats sooner or later, and, 
for my part, I prefer it to be sooner. Anyhow, 
I shall not hinder him." 

" I will not ask you to hinder him. I only 
ask you not to tempt him." 

" He won't want much tempting, I fancy. 
For all you make him out to be such a paragon. 



stood towering over Mr. Malreward with some- 
thing of the look of a mediaeval warrior-priest 
rebuking a courtier. "Is it any use for me to 
speak to you, I wonder ?" 

'* I fear not," murmured Mr. Malreward. 

" Had you not a mother once ? — did she 
teach you that a boy must be a brute beast or 
a devil before he can be a man ? Had you not 
a wife once ? — dear Frederica ! — don't you think 
she may be looking down from heaven, feeling 
that, though she was in heaven, her heart 
would break if her son — her only son — were 
lost to her ? I give him up to you to-day, 
Henry Malreward, a pure. God-fearing soul, 
stained with nothing worse than childish faults. 
At the great Day of Judgment I shall demand 
him of you, and Frederica will demand him of 
you, and the Almighty Judge of all will demand 
him of you I" 

" Pray spare me. I am not used to going to 
church, and your sermon makes my head ache." 

" I wish I could make your heart ache 1 But 



^ 



RESTORED. 217 

it will ache some day, never fear. Do you 
never feel something gnawing you — something 
like a little spark of fire scorching you, not 
often, when you are ill, perhaps, when you lie 
awake in the dead of night sometimes ? That 
is the beginning of the end — that is a worm 
which will never die — a fire which will never 
be quenched — it is all there already. You 
will find out it is there when the day comes — 
and you know it mZi come — when you are lying 
on your bed, and the doctors have given you 
up, and the women are waiting to lay you out, 
when your breath is failing, and your eyes are 
growing dim, and all the sins you have ever 
committed come staring round you like people's 
faces, then you would give all the gold in the 
world, if you had it, for just one day to repent 
in ! God grant it may not be too late I — there 
is mercy for everyone who repents." 

" Yes, you may sneer — sneer at the authority 
of the Church, whose minister I am. You would 
sneer at Christ Himself, if He stood here in the 
flesh to warn you of the wrath to come. But 
you will not sneer when the wrath does come ; 
when you are called out of your grave to see 
Heaven opened, and the Son of Man coming in 
His glory to judge the quick and dead 1" 



to the station," replied Mr. Malreward, looking 
very pale — but trying to smile and sneer as 
iisnal. " And I will give you leave to preach 
to him as much as you like ; all your preach- 
ing won't alter human nature — not one hair's 
breadth. The boy will have his fling, despite 
you or me." 

The Rector was crossing the room ; but at 
this, he looked round once more — his last look 
— ^upon Mr, Malreward. 

" God is stronger than the devil I You men 
of the world deny it, many religious men doubt 
it. But — I know it I And that is my mortal 
defiance to you, Henry Malreward I" 

Then the Rector went out of the room, and 
shut the door. 



219 



CHAPTER XII. 

Go thy way and God bless thee ; for it is not possible that 
the 4011 of these tears should perish. 

S. AuonsTiKR. 

1 7ICT0R had been waiting at the head of the 
T staircase, enduring one of those hours 
of suspense, which seem to take away a whole 
year from a young life. When at last the din- 
ing-room door opened, he was down into the 
hall with one bound. 

" Get your hat and come out with me," said 
the Rector, in an altered tremulous tone. "I 
have no good news for you, my dearest boy. I 
cannot speak for a minute. My heart is almost 
broken." 

They wandered away beneath the trees — 
the man and the boy — ^in their speechless sor- 
row. The fire had gone out of the Rector's 
eyes ; his proud head was bent down ; his firm 
step was become feeble — he looked like a de- 
feated general retreating from a lost field of 



Byrne had answered — ^"None, my boy, none; 
Bave in God !"— Victor felt as though he were 
going to die. 

" Let us sit down here," said the Rector, as 
they came to the trunk of a fallen tree. " I do not 
feel as though I could walk any further just 

yet." 

"Oh, Uncle Arthur I when shall I see you 
again ; when shall I see Freddy again ? Oh, isn't 
it cruelly hard 1" 

And then Victor suddenly hid his face upon 
his uncle's shoulder, and burst out crying pas- 
sionately. 

" Don't, don't, my boy — ^" said Arthur Byi'ne 
with a great sob; "you'll unman me quite," and 
the tears began to roll fast down the Rector's 
face. 

Thus they sat for some minutes, Arthur 
Byrne with his grey head hanging down, his 
hands resting on his knees, sighing, weeping 
bitterly ; Victor, all huddled together, clinging 
to his uncle's arm, his whole body shaken by 
his sobs. And the Rector thought of the yet 



RESTORED. 221 

unperverted conscience, the yet unwithered af- 
fections, the yet unsullied soul, of the boy by 
his side — and wished to God that he was stand- 
ing by his grave. 

At last Mr. Byrne drew himself up. 

" There ; hush, Victor — hush, my dearest boy ; 
it is of no use ; there is not an hour before the 
train starts, and I have a hundred things to say 
to you. Can you listen to me now ?" 

Victor, with the prompt obedience which 
came from his long training, raised his head and 
tried to look his uncle in the face. 

" Yes, sir 1" and he choked down a sob — " I 
will listen, with all my mind and soul." 

" Well, then — we must walk on now, for I 
cannot lose that train — Mr. Malreward would 
hear no argument that I could use ; finally he 
swore that if you left his house, he would force 
your sister to live at Malreward Court instead. 
After that, what could I say ; what can you 
say 1 Our mouths are shut." 

" Oh, uncle I" cried the boy in horror. ** Poor 
Freddy I it would be ten times worse for her I" 

" Yes, it would be ; and in a way you hardly 
realize. It rests with yourself in a great mea- 
sure, whether or not your whole future life is 
spoilt by a few years spent in this place — ^but 



live with her as her compamon ; and the thought 
of her being under the Bame roof with some of 
Mr. Malreward's friends, is perfectly terrible to 
me. So, Victor, you see, for Freddy's sake, 
you and I must submit." 

" There are some old words which come into 
my head — " the Rector went on — " 'Quit you 
like men, be strong I' This parting, this sor- 
rowftil day for us both, must have come some 
time or other. I could not have kept you 
always with me ; you must have gone out into 
the world by yourself. Only not so young as 
this; not with so cruelly short a warning! 
They do not send boys of sixteen into bat- 
tle quite unprepared 1 And it is the great bat- 
tle of all ; the real battle of life. What can 
I say — what words of mine will be of any help 
to you ?" 

Arthur Byrne was silent for a minute. He 
looked up to heaven, and his very look was a 
prayer. The strong, high^pirited man felt 
crushed by the sense of his own powerlessness. 




RESTORED. 223 

What could he do to save this boy's soul, which 
he loved like his own ? The very air seemed 
full of mocking fiends, who told him all his 
love and care and training would be as threads 
of tow, in the tire of awakened passions. He 
could only look up to heaven and sigh, as if his 
very heart would break. " Holy Father, keep 
through Thine own name those whom Thou hast 
given me" — for eighteen hundred years the 
prayer uttered by loving hearts in agony for 
others. 

" My boy, it is very terrible that I should have 
to speak to you like this about your own father; 
but nothing is ever gained by shutting our eyes 
to the truth. I cannot tell you to follow his 
example in any one thing. What you have got 
to do is to set your face like a flint, and to walk 
in exactly the opposite way to which he is going. 
It would be hypocrisy in me to tell you to honour 
him — ^you cannot do it ; but this you can and 
you must do — show him all respect and courtesy, 
whatever he may say or do, and obey him all 
the more implicitly in things which you know 
to be right, because it will be your duty to dis- 
obey him in other things. One great hope for 
you is in the very grossness and repulsive- 



courage. I think I might have more fears for 
you if I were leaving you to-day alone in 
London. There are so many easy, attractive, 
deadly paths there, leading you to destruction 
almost before you see clearly whither you are 
going. I am not so much afraid that you will 
learn to swear or drink. Those are vices which 
now-a-days even the world calls low and coarse. 
Still, take care. It is an old saying, that vice 
loses half its grossness when it loses its strange- 
ness; and it is an old trick of the devil's to at- 
tack us on the side which we think the strongest. 

But there are other sins " 

And here Arthur Byrne said some words to 
his nephew too plain-spoken for me to dare to 
write them here. For one advantage of vice is, 
that it can deal in suggestions which amply 
serve its purpose, while virtue seldom dares to 
speak at all. To judge from the sermons one 
hears Sunday after Sunday, the evil which 
Arthur Byrne did not shrink from naming has 
quite died out among us. 



RESTORED. 225 

" Victor," his uncle went on presently, " abhor 
as the very devil's own doctrine that common 
idea that there is in man's nature any necessity 
that he should sin. Man wa^ made in the image 
and glory of God, not in the likeness of four- . 
footed beasts, and creeping things; and God has 
given to us the power of being absolute masters 
over our lower nature, deny it who will. I 
speak as one Christian to another, I am not 
now concerning myself with the cynical beliefs 
or disbeliefs of men of the world ; and I tell you 
to consider the real meaning of this theory 
which some members of my own profession — 
some priests ordained by the laying on of conse- 
crated hands, and supposed to have received the 
gift of the Holy Ghost — have not been ashamed 
to state publicly as their belief, that that vast, 
frightful army of miserable women, fellow- 
women of our mothers, and sisters, and wivesj 
is an absolute necessity of civilization. Con- 
sider what this theory really means I It either 
means that the Scriptures are not true, that the 
holy Apostles are not inspired, that they who 
do these things shall not be ' cast into the lake 
which burneth with fire and brimstone ;' or it 
means this — that God is cruel and unjust to a 
degree of cruelty and injustice of which no 
VOL. I. Q 



" I have kept you so much out of the evil world, 
thatperhaps you will hardly realise all that I have 
been saying to you," the Rector added, as Victor, 
crimsoning, scared, listened in silence. "But 
forewarned is forearmed, you know ; and your 
eyes will soon be wholly opened here. And 
when you hear foul talk going on around you, 
when hateful ideas are suggested to your mind, 
think of your mother, your sister, all the noble 
women of whom you have ever read or heard — 
yes, think of your future wife, as an ideal of 
loveliness and purity, which one day you hope 
to meet and call your own ; then think, ' Shall 
I take this body, these members of Christ, and 
make them the members of an harlot? God 
forbid 1' As I stand in the presence of the God 
who made me," — and the Rector looked up and 
raised his hand—" both before and after the few 
short years of my manied life, I have kept my- 
self wholly faithful to the wife who is now in 
Heaven 1 

" And now, my dear boy, I will tell you some 




RESTORED. 227 

of the things you must seek and hold fast by. 
First, prayer, public and private. I daresay 
your father will laugh at you ; but you are not 
a coward, to let ridicule keep you from church. 
Secondly, this ;" and he took from his pocket a 
little volume bound in black calf with red edges. 
" This is my Greek Testament, — my constant 
companion ; now I want it to be yours. I will 
write your name in it ;" and with his pencil-case 
he wrote in the first page : " Victor Malreward. 
From his godfather and uncle, Arthur Byrne," 
with the day of the month and year. " And 
then, thirdly, write often to me long letters, just 
as if I were a brother about your own age, and 
your father confessor in one. Tell me every- 
thing about yourself — ^your troubles, great and 
small ; your temptations and your trials, your 
progress in your studies, how you amuse your- 
self, every little thing will be interesting to me. 
For your life up to this time has been like a 
quiet little pastoral ; but now.it will seem what 
it always has been — a tragedy. I do not mean, 
of course, one of gloom and grief; it need not 
be that — but a tragedy in the sense of being a 
life of solemn and tremendous import. What is 
so tragic," thought the Rector, " as the drama 



that their time was bo shorfc, weighed down by 
the world of thoughts which they tried to utter, 
the uncle and nephew spoke often in short, 
broken sentences. Victor sent many loving mes- 
sages to Freddy. " Dear Freddy 1 and to think 
I cannot even bid her good-bye I Tell her to 
write to me very often, — ^won't you, uncle V- 

** Of course she will write to you long letters, 
and so do you write to her. If young fellows 
more often made confidantes of their sisters, and 
would think sometimes to themselves, ' Is this 
book which I am reading, these words which I 
am saying, such as I should like my sister to 
read or to hear, and if they be not fit for her, 
why should they be so for me f — it would be 
better for both parties," 

Just where great beech trees spread their 
broad arms half across the road, and a mossy 
crumbling wall separated it from a cdrpet of red 
leaves, and a world of shadowy gold-speckled 
underwood, a man sprang across their path. It 
was Mark Deverell. He walked up to Mr. 



RESTORED. 229 

Byrne, looking a little flushed and excited, and 
took off bis hat with an amount of respect that 
Victor had never seen him show to his master. 

**Mr. Byrne, I believe. I am Mark Deverell, 
Mr. Malreward's head keeper. May I ask, sir, 
if Mr. Victor is going back with you to Corn- 
wall r 

" Oh, you are Mark Deverell. I have heard 
of you ; but I did not know you were living 
here still ;" and the Rector drew back, looking 
stern, and oddly disconcerted. 

Deverell cast down his eyes ; his face burned, 
the powerful man seemed strangely abashed. 
" And that is her brother !" he said under his 
breath. 

*' Uncle," cried Victor, surprised and hurt, 
" Deverell has been a kind friend to me. I don't 
know what I should have done here without 
him. Yes, Deverell, it is all up with me ; I have 
to live at Malreward Court." 

Deverell held up his head again with his 
haughtiest air, his grey eyes flashing, his whole 
face quivering. " Well, Mr. Byrne, all that a 
poor servant like me can do, I will do for your 
sister s son. The day may come when you will 
be sorry you added, even by what a look is worth, 
to what I have to bear. I can be as true as death, 



"My pride, — my accursed pride ! That can never 
be undone now. It is a lesson to me. We must 
walk on, Victor; it is getting late, and I have 
still so much to say to you. Mr. Malreward has 
almost promised me that you shall go every day 
to read with the vicar, Mr. Groves." 

" He is an awfully queer fish," answered Vic- 
tor, not much liking the prospect. 

" Well, you cannot expect that it will be as 
much pleasure to you to study with him as it 
has been to study with me. But placed as you 
are here, with every temptation to idleness, your 
education will be a means of grace to you. I 
saw a French novel lying on your father's table 
just now. I daresay there are plenty more of 
the same kind in the house. Don't touch them, 
Victor, — do you hear me? — any more than 
you would touch a cobra capella, I am going 
to double my subscription to Mudie's, so that 
you may have a box of books from London as 
often as I do. Send me a list of those you 
want ; you shall have them unless there is some 
strong reason to the contrary. There must be 



BESTORED. 281 

some tough books iu every box, which I shall 
expect you to master ; the rest can be novels, 
poetry, or what you like." 

"Oh! Uncle Arthur," cried the boy, with 
youthful, sorrowful enthusiasm, "how can 1 
ever thank you enough ? 1 have never thanked 
you at all yet, for all your goodness to me all 
my life long, because you have always seemed 
just my own father to me. And now I feel quite 
dumb and stupid. How can I thank you?" 

" I will tell you how ; remember this day — ^re- 
member your Confirmation day to the last day 
of your life." 

^* I will— I will!" 

And now they were close to the little railway 
station. It rose before them, with its sheds, 
and trucks, and signal posts ; and Victor's eyes, 
dimmed with tears, looked at it as though it 
were the scaffold for his execution. 

" We are as near to God on sea as we are on 
land, as that Elizabethan hero. Sir Humphrey 
Gilbert, said in the storm. You are as near to 
God at Malre ward Court as you were at Tre- 
galva Rectory, His love, His care, His author- 
ity, are over you here as they were there ; and 
in a poor and humble fashion my love, my care, 
my authority, are still over you too, and, with 



silent, sometimes exchanging a few half inco- 
herent words, like the words dying men speak. 
And then at last the train came up, and there 
was all the little bustle and hurry of getting 
the few passengers and their luggage in and 
out of the compartments. Arthur Byrne stood 
by Victor's side until the very last moment. 
Then, with a face deathly white, he clasped the 
boy's hand in both his own. " My last words," 
he whispered. "Remember your name — your 
baptismal name — Victor, conqueror I ' He that 
overcometh, shall not be hurt of the second 
death.' And now good-bye ; God bless you all 
your life long, my own dear boy 1" 

Without one look back, the Rector sprang 
into a carriage, the train went gliding out of the 
station, and Victor was left to fight the battle 
of life — alone. 



233 



CHAPTER XIII. 

And so my lot was ordered, and a father 
First turned the moments of awakening life 
To drops, each poisoning youth's sweet hope. 

Shellet. 

MANY a worse man than Mr. Malreward has 
borne a better character. Many a man 
of the ordinary hard, sensual, sportsman-like 
type — outwardly polished, inwardly coarse- 
grained — ^was received into the best county so^ 
oiety, whilst Henry Malreward, notwithstanding 
his old name and acres, was left out in the cold. 
The evil reputation of the Malrewards was 
due as much to their Bohemianism, as to their 
wickedness; and to their running counter to 
the ways of the world, as much as to their too 
thorough conformity with them. The Malre- 
wards had always been daring, eccentric, un- 
conventional in their virtues, as well as in their 
vices. 

The last Squire, Henry Malreward's grand* 



a fanatical one, which they thought worse. He 
had caught every wild opinion which had floated 
through the troubled air of the latter part of the 
last century and the beginning of this. He, in 
the days of Pitt, and in those of Castlereagh, 
had openly avowed his sympathy with French 
Jacobins, and English Radicals; he, in his youth, 
had narrowly escaped stoning at the hands of 
the people ; and in his age, hanging at those of 
the governing classes — he had been a free 
thinker, when free thinking was considered sy- 
nonymous with blasphemy and atheism — he had 
dabbled in science in days when the vulgar 
could still hardly distinguish between chemistry 
and alchemy, astronomy and astrology; and 
had committed the unpardonable sin of deform- 
ing Malreward Court with cupolas, that he 
might study the heavens from his own bedroom ; 
he had died at last, carried away like Dr. 
Faustus, according to popular tradition, or, as he 
would have said, like Simon in the " legends 
of Christianity," his eyes turned towards the 
dawn of liberty, political and intellectual, which 



RESTORED. 235 

was breaking through the thick darkness in 
which long had walked the nations. 

It may be supposed that when Henry Mal- 
reward succeeded to the family estate, he re- 
ceived no warm welcome from the county. And 
yet he had shown no sympathy with his grand- 
father's heresies, but had been sowing his 
wild oats according to the most approved 
fashion of young men of the higher classes. 
Society soon found out its mistake, and was 
beginning to receive him, when an event 
happened, which once more put the family 
beyond the pale of civilization. To begin 
with, Henry Malreward returning home one 
afternoon from shooting, and having emptied 
the brandy flask which he usually carried with 
him, met in a country lane Miss Vavasour, a 
very pretty young lady, belonging to one of the 
neighbouring families. Whereupon he kissed 
her, called her a few endearing names, and 
having frightened her half out of her senses, 
walked on. Next morning he felt mad with 
himself, and wondered how best he could do 
penance. . He had ridden only a few yards from 
his own door that day, when he encountered 
the young lady's brother, who, without waiting 
for the apology which Henry Malreward was 



< 



there was a tolerably even chance whether he 
would have changed for the better or for the 
worse. But when he ventured out into the 
world again, he found that he 'was cut dead by 
everybody. " Wherefore f he cried defiantly, 
" the score is even between the Vavasours and 
myself. If I have offered an insult, I have ex- 
piated it; if I have Buffered an insult, I deserved 
it." But in those days, duelling had not become 
extinct, and he soon found out the reason why 
he was sent to Coventry. Young Vavasour 
was still alive, and boasting of the way in 
which he had punished young Malreward ; and 
young Malreward having neglected his clear 
duty of following up the insult to the lady by 
shooting the lady's brother, was no longer fit 
for the society of gentlemen. 

Of Henry Malreward, it might emphatically 
be said, " a little grain of conscience made him 
sour." The Vavasours, brother and sister, re- 
mained unmolested, but from that ^day forward 
Mr. Malreward's hand was against every man 
and every man's band was against him. With 



* 



RESTORED. 237 

all the energy of his passionate nature he flung 
himself into the unequal contest with the 
world. He enclosed commons, stopped up foot- 
paths, insulted everybody with whom he came 
in contact, by sneers which were all the harder 
to forgive because they were too covert to be 
resented, boasted of being an infidel on every 
point of a country gentleman's creed, allowed 
his parish church to fall into the most disgrace- 
fill state of neglect, — ^and killed every fox he 
could find. 

In a few years time, he grew tired of his iso- 
lation, and tried to make his peace with society 
by marrying a pretty, good-tempered girl of 
good family, whom poverty alone induced to 
accept Henry Malreward as a husband ; but she 
died at the birth of her first child. Afterwards 
the crowning fortune of his life came to him by 
his marriage with Frederica Byrne. She was 
much admired and pitied by the neighbouring 
gentry, and it seemed as though the Squire 
were at last about to retrieve his position, and 
restore his damaged name. But evil habits 
proved too strong for him. His love for his 
beautiful young wife could not cure him of 
gambling and drinking, or protect her from out- 
breaks of his violent temper. Remorse for her 



Harry had plenty of tact, good-nature, and 
worldly wisdom ; he made friends for himself 
even amongst people who would have scorned 
to speak to his father ; and there seemed again 
a brighter prospect for his house, when, at the 
age of twenty, a fall from his horse cut short 
all his father's hopes and his own. Truly it 
seemed as though the curse of God followed the 
Malrewards. 

Yet one more chance was given the Squire 
when his son Victor came to live at the Court. 
He felt an odd kind of fatherly affection for the 
boy, who was at once so like and so unlike him- 
self ; in his training and ideas, his antipodes — ^in 
his sensitive and excitable temperament, hie 
very son. Victor irritated him just as he irri- 
tated Victor — sometimes beyond endurance; 
and yet he loved him, and took a pride in him. 
The boy was clever, handsome, well-bred ; he 
boasted that there was not a man in the county 
who had a better-looking, better-mannered son. 
The boy was affectionate, too, though he had 



RESTORED. 239 

nothing but fear and hatred for his father. Mr. 
Malreward swore to himself that he would soon 
make Victor care a hundred times more for his 
indulgent " governor," than he did for his stiff, 
severe, schoolmaster of an uncle. Sometimes, 
indeed, during the first few weeks of Victor's 
life at Malreward Court, the boy's silence, his 
pale, heart-broken look, provoked the Squire 
into one of his outbursts of bad temper and bad 
language ; but sometimes he would clap Victor 
on the shoulder, and say with a gniff kindli-^ 
ness, ** Come, my boy, it's no good sighing and 
moping ; I have got you, and I mean to keep 
you. Put away that stupid book, do you hear? 
and we'll go for a jolly long ride together." 

And so at sixteen years of age Victor passed 
through the first great sorrow of his life, suffer- 
ing it as a child, to whom the present was 
everything, who had little hope or belief in the 
future; suffering it also as a man, who was 
conscious, in some degree, of the terrible rocks 
and quicksands which compassed him about. 
On his young head were piled, so it seemed to 
him, all the griefs of orphans, suddenly cast 
adrift in a world of cruel workhouse officials and 
wicked uncles ; and of schoolboys, torn away 
firom loving parents, imprisoned in some " Do- 



\ji ifi.xiiv;iuic;« O/UU. w u.\j v>v^uivi ijxxv uij yy xijii i/iic/ 

X A ' i i 

occasional drawback of Mr. Malre ward's temper, 
the Court, with its idleness and license, its guns, 
horses and good living, might have seemed a 
very paradise. 

However, Victor was not long allowed to 
remain idle. A good deal of correspondence 
passed between the Rector of Tregalva and the 
Vicar of Malreward, with occasional notes to 
and from the Squire ; the upshot of which was 
that within ten days of his final parting with his 
uncle, the boy was in harness again. Having 
plenty of tact, determination, and money, Arthur 
Byrne carried his point without much difficulty ; 
and he arranged that Victor was to read with 
Mr. Groves three hours every day, do a stiff 
amount of work for him at home, and twice a 
week take French and German lessons in the 
town of Donnistone. His uncle's first letters 
to Victor contained words as tender and com- 
forting as any father could have written to his 
son ; but there came a somewhat sharp reply to 
the passionate longing for death, which Victor, 




RESTORED. 241 

after the manner of young people in trouble, 
had expressed. " When fellows of your age say 
they want to die,it generally me^ns nothing more 
than that they want to be idle. There is plenty 
of work to be done in the world, and you must do 
your share before you will be allowed to rest." 
Then, in a gentler tone, Arthur Byrne went on 
to beg Victor to send him a weekly abstract 
of his studies. " I ask this merely as a favour 
to myself, not to put upon you the burden of 
trying to serve two masters. But if you can 
only guess the comfort it will be to me when I 
am so far away from you, to feel as though I 
had still some share in your work, I know you 
will do it." The Rector himself was suffeiing 
terribly, and his sorrow, less violent than Vic- 
tor's, was a deeper and farther seeing one. 
Some years ago Arthur Byrne had seriously 
debated with himself, whether or no he should 
send Victor to a public schooL But he had 
shrunk from forcing the delicate, sensitive boy 
to endure the faggings and floggings from 
which he himself had suffered in his youth, and 
to which he attributed some of that coarseness 
and brutality which is to be found amongst 
English boys of gentle birth. And considering 
also Victor's natural want of steadiness and 
VOL. I. R 



tages — careful teaching, strict discipline he 
would indeed have at the Rectory, Arthur 
Byrne was in some respects more inclined 
to err on the side of severity, than that of 
indulgence — ^but he could not supply his nephew 
with many companions of his own age. And 
now Mr. Malreward had suddenly, despite Vic- 
tor's struggles, cast him into a furnace heated 
seven times hotter than the world's furnace is 
wont to be heated, and had condemned him to 
dwell amongst as corrupt a society as could be 
found in any school in the country. 

Victor felt a little odd and shy the first 
morning that he presented himself, with an 
armful of books, at Malreward Vicarage. He 
walked through a desolate and neglected gar- 
den, where the grass on the lawn, for long want 
of mowing, seemed to have turned into straw ; 
where weeds flouiished instead of flowers, and 
the walks were green and slimy — to the poverty- 
stricken house. Forlorn, untrimmed creepers 
trailed about a broken trellis work ; the paint 




RESTORED. 243 

had long ago peeled off the woodwork of the 
doors and windows, the house-bell was broken, 
and he had to rap with his knuckles. At last 
the door was opened, by the dirtiest maid- 
servant he had ever seen, who with an almost 
equally dirty child inher arms, and in a sulky and 
injured manner, as if she resented being dis- 
turbed at her morning's work, showed him in 
to the Vicar's study. Victor first stumbled 
over a battered wooden doll lying across the 
threshold, then nearly came head foremost 
down an unexpected step into a dusky little 
room, where Mr. Groves sat like a spider in his 
web. 

" Oh, it is you, is it, Malreward ?" muttered 
the Vicar, as the boy, blushing a little at his own 
awkwardness, came in. '* Just sit down one 
minute, will you, while I finish my sermon." 

" Cool I" thought Victor, " when he knew I 
was coming at eleven o'clock, and it is that now 
to a second." However, there was nothing to 
do but to sit down and wait, although the one 
minute expanded into twenty — and to amuse 
himself by glancing round the queer little den. 
It was as unlike Mr. Byrne's exquisitely 
furnished and exquisitely kept sanctum as could 
be imagined. Books and pamphlets black with 

R 2 



was shaded by ivy, and tlitj very air seemed 
thick with dust — were various shelves ranged 
round the room, some — as far as Victor could 
make out — held books; some fossils ; some 
human bones ; a child's skeleton was hung up 
in one corner ; a skull grinned in another, and 
bottles, some full of chemicals, some empty, and 
all dirty, stood everywhere. 

Mr. Groves got up and began walking up and 
down the room, his hands clasped behind his back, 
muttering to himself. Long habit had taught 
him unconsciously to avoid falling foul of the 
heaps of books and odds and ends upon the 
floor. Presently he stood still, opposite to Vic- 
tor, and stared at him. Victor rose, thinking it 
only civil to do so ; then the Vicar seemed to be 
aware of his presence — " Ah, to be sure, it is 
young Malreward ; and you came to read with 
me, didn't you? I remember all about it now. 
Sit down, sit down. Mr. Byrne writes to me 
that you have gone through a good deal of the 
regular public school routine, and that you now 
might be in the lower sixth. Well, I remember 



RESTORED. 245 

what public schools were ia my time, and I 
daresay now. you can tell me the details of all 
the Peloponesian wars, and the relations of the 
sine and the cosine — " (" I hate mathematics, 
sir," interpolated Victor,) " but you are utterly 
ignorant of the structure of the earth, and of 
your own body." 

" I have read some scientific books with Mr. 
Byrne, but I cannot say I remember much about 
them," answered Victor humbly. 

"Well, well, we will give and take. You 
shall rub up my classics, which have got rather 

* 

rusty, and I will teach you a few things about 
the air you breathe, and the food you eat, the 
sun and stars over your head, and the flowers 
and stones under your feet. The heavens de- 
clare the glory of God — yes, and so does the 
very dust of the earth I" and the Vicar's dulled 
eyes flashed with a weird inward light. " Now, 
what was the first thing you used to do every 
morning with Mr. Byrne ?" 

"Read a chapter of the Greek Testament, 
and then construe it as best I could." 

" That is right. Yes, give your own version, 
however lame and halting, and not the author- 
ized one. Now I never saw much good in a 
boy going through the Iliad^ for instance, when 



is just this difference — we may, or we may not, 
have already the finest English version of it 
that can possibly exist, and yet there are chap- 
ters and chapters which have been so pawed 
over, so quoted and bandied about, so encrust- 
ed with traditions, popular and controversial, 
that all life and meaning and spirit have died 
out of them long ago. We must put the old 
wine into new bottles ; newer words may give 
us truer ideas. Read to me — let us say the 
eighth chapter of the Romans ; and the simpler 
words, and yet the more unlike our hackneyed 
English version, you can turn it into, the better 
I shall be pleased with you." 

So, while Mr. Groves paced up and down 
the room, Victor, a Kttle nervously at first, 
read and construed in a manner which called 
forth now and then from the Vicar a muttered 
" Very good — very good indeed I" Then, 
" Stop there a moment I" he cried, as Victor 
came to the twentieth verse. " There, have you 
ever thought over that verse — that glorious 
gospel to the bii-ds and beasts? — those inno- 



RESTORED. 247 

cent creatures, ever fulfilling the law of God, 
cast down unwillingly, with us guilty, rebellious 
humanity, who wilfully sin ; subject to the ty- 
ranny of our cruelty and our ignorance ; suffer- 
ing, dying with us, that they may rise again 
with us, redeemed, free, immortal ! I know 
Augustine is against me, but I have Irenseus 
and the Greek Fathers on my side, and I will 
believe it, though I cannot understand it — this 
blessed answer to the awfullest mystery in the 
world, the sufferings of the sinless." And then 
the Vicar murmured to himself the words of 
Solomon — "Thou lovest all the things that 
are, — Thou sparest all, for they are Thine, O 
Lord, Thou lover of souls, and Thine incor- 
ruptible spirit is in all things." 

" Now, then, Malreward, suppose you coach 
mo up a little in Tacitus." So to Latin they 
went for half an hour or so, in the middle ot 
which a loud scrimmage and howling seemed 
going on in the passage without. Mr. Groves 
rushed out of the room ; his voice was heard 
expostulating, pacifying; then he returned, 
with a little girl in his arms, with grimy, tear- 
stained cheeks, and a great bruise on her fore- 
head. "There, go on, Malreward; it is only 
Dottie, who is always getting knocked down 



Well," said the Vicar presently, " we will 
not do any mathematics this morning. Mathe- 
matics are all very well — they lie at the founda- 
tion of science — ^but what is the good of always 
stopping at the foundation, and never rising 
any higher? Might as well call that empty 
old skull, with all the flesh and brains gone out 
of it, a human head, as think, as public-school 
boys do, that when you have mastered a few 
books of Euclid and a little algebra, that you 
know all the science that you need to know. 
Now I will gi^e you a little lecture upon some- 
thing ; you must make notes in your own mind, 
and answer my questions afterwards. What 
shall it be about ? Ah ! I know — your own 
arm. Do you know anything about the ma- 
chinery of it, and how it works when you move 
it I No — I thought not. I can tell you that ; 
but this I can not tell you, and nobody else can, 
how your will — that is your mind — sets the 
machinery in motion to begin with. No, it is 
no use to kick against the miracles of the New 
Testament, when a miracle — that is something 



RESTORED. 249 

which no human reason, no law that is at pre- 
sent, or is ever likely to be, found out, can ex- 
plain — ^when a miracle happens every time you 
will to move your little finger, and do it. I am 
a bit of a heretic, as are most men who med- 
dle with science, though the Bishop has not 
been down upon me yet, but I have never 
found out that the laws of nature can explain 
the whole world, 'any more than the Athana- 
sian Creed can explain the Trinity. I do not 
think, mind you, that miracles are a breach of 
law, but that they are in accordance with some 
higher law. Miracles are to us what the steam- 
engine and the electric telegraph would have 
been to the medieevals ; the difference being 
that we are never likely to find out in this life 
what is the higher law which governs them." 
Then Mr. Groves took down from a shelf a 
skeleton hand and arm, and upon that, and 
upon his own arm, gave Victor a little anato- 
mical lecture in simple and homely language ; 
while the child played quietly with the skull and 
a bit of an ammonite. 

The boy was at first rather startled at the 
Vicar's eccentric ideas, and system of education ; 
but there was nothing of a Philistine in Victor's 
composition, and he was fascinated by the 



heard. Victor, unless when excited, was natu- 
rally a silent boy, and his habit of reserve had 
grown upon him to a morbid degree since he 
had come to Malreward Court. Not that he was 
sulky, but he found it impossible to talk to his 
father about anything in which he really took 
an interest, and a kind of dumbness soon comes 
over those who live with others with whom they 
are thoroughly out of sympathy. 

The chief drawbacks to these literary and 
scientific hours were Mr. Groves's unpunctuality 
and irregularity. Victor never knew, when he 
went at the appointed hours, whether or not he 
should find him at home. And often troops of 
(dirty and disorderly children would invade the 
Vicar's study. Mr. Groves, in his abstraction, 
scarcely noticed their incursions, but they drove 
Victor nearly wild. Mr. Malreward grumbled 
over Victor's absences from home, and absorp- 
tion in his lessons, and often would imperatively 
command him to ride or shoot with him, when 
he was due at the Vicarage. His conscientious- 
ness, his desire to please his adored Uncle Arthur, 




RESTORED. 251 

kept him from altogether neglecting his work, 
but he complained bitterly in his letters to 
Tregalva of the hindrances and vexations he 
had to endure. 

Mr. Byrne replied — '^ It is with you, dear boy, 
a case of 

* The old order changeth, yielding place to new, 
And God fulfils himself in many ways, 
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.' 

Probably you have gained all the good you are 
ever likely to gain from enforced punctuality 
and order. You are now promoted to a higher 
and a harder discipline — that of trying to keep 
an attentive mind, and a steadfast heart, amidst 
every kind of distraction and temptation. And, 
after all, as regards your work, you have to do 
only what those of our fellow-creatures who* are 
so heavily weighted in the race of life — I mean 
women — ^have nearly always to do; those of 
them who do study, study at odd moments, at 
snatched intervals." 

The Rector's panacea of hard work proved the 
best cure of Victor's grief at leaving him. The 
wound would always be there, but in time it 
began to cicatrice over. Agonies of home-sick- 
» ness would indeed now and then torture the 
boy; memories of his happy past, dear old 



L^ 



252 RESTORED. 

scenes, would madden him, as mirages of green 
pastures and still waters will madden travellers 
in scorching deserts. Sometimes his longings 
for a breath of the sea, for the open moorlands 
of Tregalva, grew almost intolerable; he loathed 
the beautiful Malreward park and woods, they 
stifled him and hemmed him in; at best they 
were but the furniture of a prison. But after he 
had been cudgelling his brains for an • hour or 
two over a tough bit of Greek or algebra, his 
boyish nature would reassert itself, and instead 
of shutting himself up in his bed-room, as he 
had done whenever he could get away from Mr. 
Malreward, he now sought Deverell, and went 
wandering all over the covers with him. Even 
his father's company, when they were both 
well mounted, and were galloping together 
across country, became not wholly distasteful, 
i^rthur Byrne, with a haughty generosity very 
characteristic of him, had coldly refused Mr. 
Malreward's offer of buying Victor's pony. Then, 
three days after, a splendid bay mare, the pride 
of the Rector's stables, had arrived at Malre- 
ward Court, as a parting present from Mr. Byrne 
to his nephew. 

One afternoon, Victor went shooting with 
Deverell ; or, rather, he carried a gun and talked 



RESTORED. 253 

to the keeper, who now and then interrupted 
him with a slight reproof. " There you go again, 
Mr. Victor, you never even saw that rabbit." 
Or, if the boy did fire, the report was generally 
followed by a shake of the keeper's head. 
" Won't do, sir, you aimed half a yard too high ; 
one would think your eye or your hand was 
made wrong." 

At last Victor succeeded in shooting one 
solitary rabbit. " There, he is dead, poor little 
beast ; but what pleasure have I got by it? No, 
Deverell, I shall never be a good shot — my 
heart is not in it. Nothing short of tiger-killing 
would be any sport to me." 

" Still, Mr. Victor, you must go on, and give 
your mind to it, if you don't your heart. A 
man never knows where he may find himself 
before he dies. With your taste for books, and 
for learning all about things, you will be sure to 
travel a great deal, and some day your life may 
depend upon your having a steady eye and 
hand. If you can't shoot straight in an English 
cover, you won't be able to in the jungle, or the 
bush, I fancy. Besides, rabbits are vermin, as 
well as tigers ; and the best thing a country 
gentleman can do, is to exterminate every one 
of the pests that gnaw the crops, and make the 
farmers mad." 



€ 



'•/ •/ 



" Ah 1 the pheasants 1 " and Deverell fairly 
ground his teeth with a sudden fury. " May he 
get well served out for it in another world who 
brought over the first brace of pheasants to 
curse England — the pretty, precious birds, that 
feed on gold and human blood. Haven't I seen 
enough of it in my life ? — money spent on the 
breeding of them that would have made every 
village in the kingdom a fit place for Christians, 
instead of being what some of them are — sinks 
of dirt and wickedness 1 Then, when the 
birds are running about everywhere, under the 
feet of the farm lads, who are hungry, may- 
be, never tasting a bit of fresh meat from 
year's end to year's end; or perhaps it's nothing 
but the man's sporting instinct, which is as 
strong in ploughmen as it is in gentlemen ; then 
they go out at night with a gun or a snare, 
get caught time after time, are had up before 
the very magistrates who crammed the place 
with temptations for them, and get fined and 
put in prison till their characters are gone, and 




RESTORED. 255 

their souls too, and then they turn from wild, 
thoughtless lads, not worse than nine-tenths of 
your public schoolboys, into hardened, desperate 
men, ready for murder or any blackguard thing. 
And can you take up a newspaper during the 
shooting season without reading of a keeper 
being shot or having his brains knocked out ?" 

Victor drew a deep breath. " There is hardly 
a night I don't think of you, Deverell, out at all 
hours, risking your life, and what for? — not 
your country, certainly, only your country's 
poultry." 

" Shall I tell you a little story, Mr. Victor ? It 
w411 do you good to remember it when you come 
to be Squire of Malreward Park," and the man's 
face had something really deadly in it, so white 
and fierce was its look. " Two years ago 1 had 
the best under-keeper I ever had in my life, 
clever at his work, sweet-tempered, not a vice 
in him, as fine a young fellow as you would 
wish to see. He was but a year older than you, 
Mr. Victor. David Blunt was his name. I used 
to like to have him with me — I always felt a 
better man somehow. Well, one night we were 
out together in Southwood — a moonlight Oc- 
tober night it was, as bright as day. About 
one in the morning we heard a gun go off not 



standing out black and clear against the moon- 
light ; we both sung out, David and I, then one 
of the men up with his gun and fired both 
barrels slap in our faces. I heard the shots 
rattle about me, but I ran on without thinking ; 
but David, he just gave a cry, and a little leap 
in the air, and fell straight down at my feet 
as I came up to him. /My poor mother!' I 
heard him groan when I caught hold of him, 
and then he was gone — dead in my arms. Well, 
I let the poachers run away, and we never 
caught them afterwards ; but I could think of 
nothing but the boy. I had to get him home 
somehow, and go and tell his mother. She was 
a widow, and he was her only son — and there — 
there — never mind the rest," and Deverell 
clenched liis fist, and set his teeth; but the 
tears ran down his cheeks like rain. 

Victor answered in a solemn and impassioned 
tone.. "If I ever live to be master of Malre- 
ward Park, God do so to me, and more also, if 
I preserve a single head of game on the estate." 



RESTORED. 257 

" Stick to that, sir — stick to that, and maybe 
the curse of the Malrewards will never come 
near you." 

*' And here is my hand upon it, Deverell. I 
won't judge other landowners, but this I know, 
poor David's blood shall not cry to heaven in 
vain from my estate." 

A few minutes afterwards Deverell was 
rattling on again in his own careless fashion. 
" Mr. Malreward is going to have a shooting- 
party the day after to-morrow, as I suppose 
you know. I have hired five-and-twenty fellows 
as beaters. Will you go, Mr. Victor?" 

" I shall have to go, I suppose. That is the 
rule here. I am never allowed to work or to 
play in my own fashion, only in Mr. Malre- 
ward's." 

" Well, you won't like it, that is all. I don't," 
said Deverell, with an odd glance at the boy. 

The morning of the shooting-party, the Court 
was all in an uproar. Men, horses, and ser- 
vants began to arrive soon after breakfast. Mr. 
Malreward had invited four or five friends to 
spend three days with him, and several others 
merely for the one day's battue. It was a bril- 
liant winter's morning — clear sky, blue hills, 
softly-tinted brown and purple woods, a sparkle 

VOL. I. S 



cropped up a stone or old stnmp covered with 
vivid green moss. The long clean branches of 
the underwood gleamed grey and reddish in 
the level misty sunshine ; oak-trees stood about, 
with gnarled and jagged stems, some covered 
with lichen, like the bloom on a greengage, 
some with ivy, which, with its intense green, 
its distinctly-marked touches, its depth of sha- 
dow, stood out in strong relief aud threw all the 
other hues into soft aerial perspective. There 
was plenty of life and joy in the covers before 
the sportsmen entered them. Crowds of tit- 
mice of every kind went flitting, chattering, 
swinging themselves from the boughs ; chaf- 
finches pattered over the dead leaves, calling 
to one another with their peculiar ringing note ; 
a robin sang; a jetty, golden-billed blackbird 
fled across the path. 

For the first hour or so, Victor was in a state 
of wild excitement. Mr. Malreward's guests 
sauntered along the rides in picturesque cos- 
tumes — gaiters, velveteen coats and knicker- 



RESTORED. 259 

bockers — elegant ruffians, as somebody calls 
modern sportsmen ; while Deverell, in face and 
height and bearing, looking a grander gentle- 
man than any other man there, stalked about 
with his black retriever behind him, command- 
ing, exhorting, storming at the beaters. Under- 
keepers followed with brown and white 
spaniels ; and guns went oflf with jets of fire and 
curls of blue smoke, sometimes half-a-dozen, one 
after the other, like a little battle, with the run- 
ning accompaniment of the beaters' shouts and 
rattle of their sticks : while game, winged and 
four-legged, flew and ran about madly. Victor 
took his place amongst the other gentlemen as 
they walked in single file down the path ; he 
fired from time to time, but his hand was too 
unsteady, and his brain was too excited by the 
noise and confusion and slight soupgon of dan- 
ger, for him to hit anything ; nor did he desire 
to do so. 

He soon began to have enough of it — enough 
of pheasants falling in heaps, convulsed, shat- 
tered, hares and rabbits screaming like children, 
bloody far, feathers, mangled creatures knocked 
on the head. " Do you call this sport ?" he said 
at last to his next neighbour, Sir George Horn- 
by, a dissipated-looking middle-aged man, as 

S 2 



upon which the war was conducted. " Do you 
call this sport? Why, you don't give the game 
a chance ; you have nothing to do but to idle 
about, whilst the beaters drive them over your 
head or under your feet. I would as soon 
knock over the fowls in a farmyard, for my 
part." 

Sir George Hornby smiled with a sort of 
compassion for the boy's youth and greenness. 
* I suppose you prefer the old-fashioned farmer's 
kind of sport, tramping over ten miles of turnips 
and stubbles with a pointer ; and one brace of 
birds to show for your day's work when you get 
home. You won't find many of the rising 
generation agree with you, young gentleman." 

" So much the worse for them," cried Victor, 
fiercely. " Here, take my gun," he said to an 
under-keeper, " I have had enough of this cursed 
butcher's business." And ready to shake the 
dust off his feet against them all, he went strid- 
ing along the fields, and almost involuntarily 
took the path which led him to the Vicarage. 

Mr. Groves was in his den, and greeted Vic- 



RESTORED. 261 

tor with a pleased, odd smile, as the boy entered 
— flushed, excited, in his black velveteen shoot- 
ing* dress, but without his gun. The Vicar had 
become very fond of his pupil. It was like a 
gleam of sunshine to the lonely, poverty- 
stricken man, to talk with this eager, thought- 
ful boy, with whom he could exchange ideas as 
he could not to another soul in the place ; 
who was greedy after all the knowledge which 
his tutor could give him, and who in return 
often denied himself a novel in order to procure 
some book from Mndie's, for which the poor 
Vicar was famishing. Sometimes the latter 
would say mournfully — " After all, there is so 
little that I can teach you. It is the curse of 
poverty that one cannot keep pace with other 
men's knowledge. I have to stint and scrape 
to get a new book ; and science is a thing that 
won't keep very long; some fresh discovery 
which supersedes the last, is being made every 
day. I did manage to go to the British Associa- 
tion last year, but I have felt ever since as 
though I had robbed my children of food and 
clothing. Well, well, I shall know it all in 
another world." 

Victor was quite cut to the heart by such 
lamentations as these. Coming from his uncle's 



pay hi8 upper servants. 

" Why, Malreward," said Mr. Groves, as the 
boy threw himself into a cHair, " I thought you 
were off with those men of Belial, and I should 
see nothing of you all day." 

"I am downright sick of it; the very air 
seems to smell of blood, as though 1 had been 
in a slaughter-house. What are Englishmen 
coming to, I wonder, with their battues " 

" And their gun clubs," said the Vicar. 

" And the beaters driving the game up into a 
corner, tinder their very eyes and noses, so that 
it is only dolts like me who never hit anything, 
that they have any chance of getting away 
from." 

" And the ladies sitting round under the trees 
clapping their kid-gloved hands, when the 
gentle pigeons, with the breast-tones broken, 
and one eye put out beforehand — (so they say) 
— fall screaming, bleeding at their very feet." 

" Oh, sir 1 why, that is like the Roman women 
who watched the gladiators." 



RESTORED. 263 

" Yes. Only they have the eruelty and not 
the courage of the Roman women. I tell you 
what, Malreward, those woods of yours — God 
made them a heaven of beauty ; there is not a 
Bong-bird ever found in England that I have 
not heard sing there ; and as for flowers, I have 
found there eleven different species of orchids 
alone — ^but men have turned them into a hell of 
torments. Did you ever see a rabbit caught in 
a trap, and his legs torn to the bone by the iron 
teeth? I have, scores of times, and have 
knocked the poor wretch on the head to put 
him out of his misery, though I am a man who 
hates to kill a fly." 

" Good heavens 1 they don't have those traps 
here, and Deverell such a kind-hearted fellow as 
he is 1" 

" Of course they do, though ; there is hardly 
a cover side in the country where they don't 
sow by the dozen those — 'I say it deliberately — 
accursed engines of the devil. Deverell is a 
humane man, the humanest — for a gamekeeper — 
I ever knew, but he passes by on the other side 
like the Levite, and when there is any cruel 
work to be done, he shuts his eyes and leaves 
it to his underlings.'* 

" I shall talk to him about it, depend upon 



" What can you expect of a society which has 
lords, gentlemen and game-preservers on its 
subscription lists ? Well, well — God doth not 
stop his ears at the cry of the innocent, * and the 
creature itself shall be delivered.' Here, Malre- 
ward, let us take the bad taste out • of our 
mouths, by looking through that gem of a book 
you got from London for me." 

The book was the English edition of Miche- 
let's "L'Oiseau," with its exquisite pictures. 
One would think that both author and artist 
had been birds themselves in some former state 
of existence. Surely no mere human being 
could feel such perfect sympathy with the pen- 
sive, tender, sensitive, bird-nature, its passion- 
ate affections, its "musings and dumb sorrows." 

" Man will not be truly man until he shall 
labour seriously to accomplish the mission which 
the earth expects of him — the pacification and 
harmonious communion of all living nature." 

" When the birds hop fearlessly round me," 
said Mr. Groves, "and the chaffinch — which 
year after year builds his nest in my garden — 



RESTORED. 265 

takes crumbs from my hands, as you saw the 
other day — have I not more complete dominion 
over the fowls of the air, than your sportsmen 
have when they shoot down pheasants by the 
score ? * Love is the fulfilling of the law.' " 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Ob, moon and stars, forgive ! and thou, clear heaven, 

Look pureness back into me. 

A. H. Clough. 

WHEN Victor came home from a long ride 
that afternoon, he found that the shoot- 
ing-party had returned. Some of the men were 
idling about, smoking and gossiping. Victor 
ran up a back staircase, and hoped to get un- 
noticed to his bed-room, when, as ill-luck would 
have it, he met Mr. Malreward face to face in 
one of the corridors. 

" Well, sir, what account have you to give of 
yourself?" said Mr. Malreward, in rather a jovial 
tone, however, for his guests and himself had 
been well pleased with their day's sport. " Afraid 
of being shot, and ran away, so I hear. A pretty 
Miss Molly I have for my son I " 

Victor burst out at this — ^for he had not wholly 
escaped the evil influences which beset English 
boys, and (being only sixteen) he was at times 
inclined to despise himself for his own merciful- 



RESTORED. 267 

ness — " I am not a coward, but I think men who 
kill game like butchers are." 

" Yes, you can't shoot any more than an idiot 
can, and so you console yourself by slandering 
your betters." 

" My betters 1" cried the boy, with fierce scorn. 

"I'll box your ears in another minute, you 
confounded young upstart I" 

" I should like to see you try it 1" And Victor 
instinctively clenched his fists. 

Mr.Malreward burst out laughing. "Threaten- 
ing you with a little paternal chastisement is 
such a cheap way of raising the devil. Ton my 
soul, Victor, you do look like a devil 1" 

" Yes, you torment me and aggravate me, and 
then you turn round and triumph over me," cried 
Victor, almost beside himself. " I call that like 
a devil !" 

Mr. Malreward sauntered off with a grim 
chuckle, and Victor went raging to his bed- 
room, and banged the door after him. He went 
striding up and down the whole length of the 
room ; he seized upon a strap, which he used to 
fasten round his school-books when he carried 
them to the Vicarage, and — for in these states 
of extreme irritation he had always a mad desire 
to vent his rage upon something ; to bite, and 



A-bX^ f^ y^ V JLAJLKa^ vx^^/«/*^ 



upon the leather and all but bit it through. 

From time to time he gasped out bitter, fiirious 
words. ^ " iTes, he delights in torturing me, in 
maddening me ; he is cruel to everything he has 
got in his power, bird or beast, or his own son. 
He took me away from my home, where every- 
body cared for me and was kind to me ; he keeps 
me here just to make my life a misery to me. I 
am like one of those poor rabbits, caught in a 
trap, half torn to pieces, but I can't get away, I 
can't get away I What will be the end of me ? 
Shall I go mad, or become a devil, as he said I 
was ? I am a devil already 1" And he suddenly 
stood still in the middle of the room. " I never 
felt like this before — I never knew it was in me, 
even; When did I feel like it at Tregalva? 
When did I, with all my faults, speak one disre- 
spectful word to Uncle Arthur ? And when did 
he provoke me to it I Was he not always kind, 
and good, and just f Oh I yes, just^ indeed; and 
what would he think of me now I What does 
God tbink of me ?" 

Victor dropped into a chair, and hid his face. 



RESTORED. 269 

shuddering. He felt as though he had sud- 
denly found himself upon the brink of a preci- 
pice, and as though he stood looking over at 
the blackness of darkness just below his feet. 
His eyes were all at once opened to the dread- 
ful possibilities of his nature, the Malreward 
nature, which from generation to generation — 
so tradition ran — had broken out in deadly feud 
between father and son, brother and brother. 
And he had just been longing to strike his 
father ; he had been wishing for his death ; he 
had felt as though he himself could have mur- 
dered him. 

'* What will become of me if I go on like this?" 
he thought, 'tl remember Uncle Arthur saying 
one day, if I could not conquer my temper now 
when I was young, worse things than temper 
even, might conquer me when I grew older. I 
must, I will conquer it — God helping me 1 If I 
don't I shall be a lost man — a Malreward like the 
rest! I must begin to do it now, this very 
hour; but how? — that is the question. I wish 
I could ahvays remember the verse that I learnt 
when I was a child : — 

' He waa insulted every day, 

Yet all His words were kind, 
And nothing men could do or say. 
Disturbed His heavenly mind.'" 



r 



\/AVWAA *V TV W9 JUL VfUl^XUg l-LEVrXV^ t/I.J.C4.Ll. CV VV VJL VAj C« XXAV^A V^ 

look from his uncle. But at Malreward Court, 
though he had little of a man's liberty, yet he 
began to feel that a man's responsibility was 
coming heavily upon him ; he must guide, rule, 
restrain himself entirely here. Victor deter- 
mined that every time he lost his self-control, 
he would appoint himself some penance as 
severe as any that the Rector would have in- 
flicted upon him. He would not look at a 
novel or a newspaper for a whole week, he 
would force himself to write out some frightfully 
tough Greek or German exercise, he would 
learn by heart a fabulous amount of Euclid ; he 
was now as he always had been, singularly 
willing, for a boy, to submit to anything which 
he thought would help him to overcome his be- 
setting fault. 

But there had never been a shade of asceticism 
in Arthur Byrne's mode of training his nephew. 
And Victor soon saw the uselessness of any ar- 
bitrary remedy, any quack recipe for his irrita- 
bility of temper. He might as well hope to 
cure it by walking with unboiled peas in his 



RESTORED. 271 

shoes as by any of the punishments to which he 
had proposed to condemn himself. No, the 
atonement must be the natural consequence 
growing out of the offence. " The sacrifices of 
God are a broken spirit ;" and the only way in 
which he could hope to master the temptation 
of behaving disrespectfully to his father, would 
be to force himself to beg his pardon whenever 
he had yielded to it. 

Then the boy's proud, high-spirited nature seem- 
ed to spring up in revolt, as conscience laid this 
stern command upon him. "What I beg his 
pardon, when he continually insults me as he 
does ! Not I, indeed ! He ought to beg mine." 

" That he will never do, and it is no use to 
wait for it," a voice seemed to answer. " But 
does that absolve you from your duty ? And 
which is the degradation — to do wrong or to 
atone for it ?" 

" I cannot, and I will not !" " You must, and 
you shall I " So went on — as the boy sat 
crouched in a heap, his hands clenched in his 
hair, his teeth set, every muscle rigid,-80 went 
on that strange, strife between the two selves, 
which rages, one time or other, in every one of 
US who tries to do the hard right instead of the 
easy wrong. " It is your only chance," said the 



1. / 



look. " I must go to him at once. If I put 
it off till to-morrow I shall be lost." He went 
down the long corridor to Mr. Malreward's bed- 
room, which was the other side of the house. 
When he reached the door, Victor paused a 
minute ; another desperate struggle went on in 
his mind. " He is my father — my father, and I 
ought to do it." At other times he spoke of 
him simply as Mr. Malreward ; but when he was 
conscious of having sinned against him, the boy 
forced himself to say, "He is my father — my 
father. God, help me and conquer me!" 
Then he knocked at the door, and said, " May I 
come in, sir ?" 

" What do you want, Victor ? Well, come 
in," was the rather gruff reply. 

Victor, with a quickly beating heart, with a 
pale face, and dark shadows round his eyes, 
walked up to his father, who was standing at 
his dressing-table. 

" I spoke very rudely to you just now. Will 
you forgive me, please, sir?" 

Mr. Malreward was secretly astonished and 




RESTORED. 273 

4 

gratified ; but he thought it more in accordance 
with his dignity to play the part of an " injured 
parent." *' Well, Victor," he answered very de- 
liberately, " I will forgive you this once, but it 
must never occur again, mind." 

" I hope not, sir, indeed ;" and Victor looked 
down, sighing. 

" Because if this sort of thing goes on, we shall 
certainly come to a violent quarrel some day ; and 
that can only end in one way — reducing you to 
entire and absolute submission to my wishes," 
said Mr. Malreward, with a kind of gusto. 

A thrill shot through Victor — defiance, enthu- 
siasm, faith, just such as some youthful Early 
Christian might have felt at a hint of coming 
martyrdom. "You will never be able to do 
that, God helping me !" was his inward cry. 
But all the more he forced himself to answer re- 
spectfully, " I will do all I can to please you — 
fatherr The word was spoken at last, in a 
very low tone, but it was spoken, and the boy b 
victory over himself was complete. 

Mr. Malreward was touched — more than he 
chose to show. "There, get away with you, 
and dress for dinner, and make yourself spruce, 
do you hear ? I want to see my son and heir 
looking his best. I don't suppose I should like 

VOIi. I. T 



" Sometimes there is a look in his face, a tone in 
his voice, as though he really cared for me. 
Only the hard part of it is, he seems to like best 
the worst side of me," 

There was a dinner-party that night at Mal- 
reward Court. Some of the guests were old 
acquaintances, boon companions of the Squire's ; 
some were friends' friends, who were staying 
in the neighbourhood for the sake of hunting 
or shooting. The gloomy old dining-room was 
for once brilliantly lighted ; there was a glitter- 
ing show of heir-loom plate upon the side- 
board — opiate which appeared only upon state 
occasions, and which spiteful people declared 
spent the rest of its life at the pawnbrokers'. 
As Victor sat in the heir's place, opposite his 
father, and glanced up and down the long table, 
all aglow with fruit and flowers, glass and silver, 
as he looked at the men who sat around, talk- 
ing with low laughs and sneers, some lolling 
languidly in their chairs, caressing their wine- 
glasses, some eager over their plates — a strange 




RESTORED. 275 

horror and loathing came over the boy, like the 
instinctive cowering of a young bird at its first 
sight of a hawk. No such men as these ever 
dined at the Rector's table, at the tables of any 
of his intimate friends. Something in their blas^^ 
supercilious bearing, in the look of their eyes, 
their lined, worn faces, stamped them as the 
class of men one sees at races, pigeon-matches, 
music-halls, round Homburg gaming-tables, 
lounging at midnight about the Haymarket. 

Victor did his best to be attentive to his 
father's guests. On his left hand sat a boy 
about his own age, but who looked and talked 
like a cynical man of the world ; and how could 
a poor uneducated fellow like Victor hope to 
keep up any conversation with him I Victor 
knew little of London life — he had been only 
once or twice to the theatre ; he could not have 
told the names even, of any race-horses or 
ballet-dancers ; he could not play billiards ; he 
had never read Ouida's novels, or Paul de 
Kock's. Then Victor tried his other neighbour, 
an older man, but he lived for nothing but 
" sport " — rat-hunts, pigeon-matchee, steeple- 
chases, an occasional cock-fight; and waei ac- 
quainted with no literature but Belts Life, and 
the like. After that, Victor gave it up in 

T 2 



Victor, then made him crimson to the roots of 
his hair. Englishmen in a so-called Christian 
country might learn a lesson from heathen 
Rome. In such an assemblage as this, little 
reverence is paid to youth. The conversation 
before had had a nauseous flavour to Victor's 
taste, but now it grew horrible beyond en- 
durance. " I shall be a coward if I sit here any 
longer," suddenly thought the boy. " Whatever 
the consequences may be, I will get up and 
leave the room." 

He rose, and quietly and coolly, although his 
heart was beating furiously, walked to the door. 
One or two of the men stared; Mr. Malreward 
frowned; but in another moment Victor was 
safe outside the dining-room door. He seized 
his hat, threw on his great-coat, and rushed 
out into the park. 

He left the glaring, heated room, the fumes 
of wine, the haggard faces, the cynical laughs 
and leers, the death's-head grinning at its oAvn 
corruption and dishonour ; he came out into the 



RESTORED. 277 

solemn stillness of the winter's night. How 
calra, how pure, how exquisitely fresh seemed 
this world of God's I A few stars burned in the 
stainless sky, the moon was near the zenith, the 
white light — type of all things serene and 
chaste — slept on the sparkling grass, the trace- 
ried trees, the soft gloom of the hills. The 
moonbeams were flashed back from the ever- 
greens as from polished armour ; shadows from 
the leafless trees lay across the grass like deli- 
cate lace-work; far away a stream rippled, 
silver clear, unheard by day, as the "still, 
small voice " is unheard in the noise and strug- 
gle of life. 

Victor walked quickly through the park, 
clenching his hands together, biting his lips till 
they bled. " Shall I ever forget it all, I wonder ? 
Will my mind ever feel clean again ? And how 
long will it be before I growjike those men?" 

Then he burst out into a perfect paroxysm. 
"0 God!— God! No, there is no God, 
there cannot be a God. He would never have 
taken me away from my home, from all good 
and noble influences, and chained me down, a 
mere boy as I am — here ! There is no help, no 
hope for me, anywhere. I have no father on 
earth — no Father in Heaven, either." 



f ^<» a^ ^^ 



might have turned. 

There were stealthy steps approaching him ; 
then the moonlight fell full on Deverell's beard- 
ed face and stalwai-t figure, and glittered on 
the gtm which he carried under his arm. Vic- 
tor was leaning against the tnmk of a tree, 
half hidden in the shadow. " Who goes there ?" 
came Deverell's stern challenge. 

The boy made no answer, he felt a forlorn 
quiver of relief at hearing the voice of his one 
friend at Malreward Court, a strange, wild sort 
of friend, a kind-hearted, but anything but a 
good man. Then Victor thought, "Let him 
take me for a poacher, and shoot me dead if he 
likes — what do I care?" 

Deverell walked straight up to him, then 
started back. 

"Mr. Victor I you out here ! Why didn't you 
answer me ? I was just going to collar you." 

" There is a dinner-party at the Court to- 
night," was all that Victor said. " I suppose 
you know what that means." 

" Pretty much, sir — yes, pretty much," and the 



RESTORED. 279 

keeper stood, stroking his beard thoughtftilly, 
looking at him with his piercing glance. " And 
so you don't like it ?" 

"Like it — like it? Should I like being in 
hell? Deverell — ^" and then the boy's voice 
sank into a tone of quiet despair — " how long 
do you think it will be until I come to like it?" 

Deverell looked down with a gloomy face, 
and began fidgetting with his gun. What 
could he say, what hope could he give to his 
young master? Had not he too made some 
straggle against the stream when he was a boy, 
and what was he the better for it now? He 
was all the worse perhaps, because he had once 
known something that was like a mother's 
gentle influence, during the few years that 
Mrs. Malreward had spent at the Court ; all the 
worse because he had known this, and yet had 
lived the kind of Kfe he had done since. The best 
that he could hope for Victor was, that he might 
sow all his wild oats when he was young; and 
as for the reaping of them — which is a reaping 
that is not made in joy — ^well, he hoped that 
Victor might repent and reform, and all the 
rest of it, long before he came to his — Deverell's 
age. (Only, where is the logic of repenting for 
doing that which was natural, inevitable, that 



ly light ; words came to his lips in the sudden, 
involuntary way, which is sometimes — as I be- 
lieve — the direct inspiration of tlie Holy Ghost. 
" I have a Father in Heaven, although just now 
he seems to have left me alone, to struggle on 
by myself as best I can." 

He put his hand over his face, as if half 
ashamed of having expressed his thoughts, 
and walked quickly on. Deverell kept by his 
side, and was trying to think of something to 
say, when a shot rang through the still dark 
frosty air. 

The keeper started. " Do you hear that, Mr. 
Victor? I must be off." 

"What is it r 

" Poachers in Southwood, as I am a living 
sinner. Good-night sir," and he began to run. 

*'A11 right, I'm coming too," and Victor, 
setting his hat firmly on his head, and button- 
ing up his great-coat, set off after the keeper. 

At that Deverell pulled up short, and turned 
round upon him with a sort of ferocity. " You 



RESTORED. 281 

will do nothing of the sort whilst I am head 
keeper. Remember David Blunt I" 

" I do remember David Blunt, and I would 
rather be shot down as he was, than live on 
here I" 

** Go back to the house this minute, Mr. Vic- 
tor, or I will make you I" 

The boy felt rather discomfited, for such a 
threat from Deverell was no joke; and while h^ 
was considering what to do, the keeper dis- 
appeared. 

" Never mind," thought Victor. " I'll be on 
his track. The poachers have one gun, at all 
events, and Deverell has Aw, and there may be 
bloodshed ; perhaps, being the young Squire, as 
they call me, 1 could stop it." 

He began to run lightly over the grass. The 
boy's lithe and very slender frame— which pro- 
mised in height and make to grow like Arthur 
Byrne's — was more than a match in speed for 
the stalwart keeper's, and he had to stop pre- 
sently, to dodge behind a tree, to render the 
distance between them a safe one. Victor's 
heart bounded ; his spirits sprang up from their 
morbid depression. 

"Ah! this is something like sport," he 
thought, "this hunting poachers, better than 



his young master was after him, and was tear- 
ing through the weird shadows and ghostly 
moonlight, down one of the long mossy rides. 

Victor was now as reckless, as ready for a 
fray as any schoolboy in the land. He who 
shrinks from wantonly inflicting suffering upon 
any living being may nevertheless exult in the 
sense of his own bodily danger. There is no 
man so brave as a sensitive, enthusiastic, ten- 
der-hearted man, when once his blood is up. 
In the long run culture must win the day 
against brute force — brain and nerve must con- 
quer bone and flesh. 

, Deverell had turned into a path which ran at 
right angles with the first, but Victor, not 
knowing this, went straight on. Then all at 
once he saw the big, burly figure of a man 
coming slowly down the ride, peering cautious- 
ly about the bushes. A wild thrill shot through 
the boy. He, not Deverell, had found the 
poacher, after all ; and now, what would hap- 
pen next? Would he level the gun which 



BESTOBED. 283 

Victor saw clearly in the moonlight that he 
carried ? — would there be the flash, the smoke, 
and before he had heard the report — death like 
David Blunt's ? 

Victor ran straight on. "It is my best 
chance," thought he. " When he sees I am un- 
armed, he will hardly fire at me." Then the 
poacher started, stood still, grasped his gun 
tightly, but did not raise it. " Hullo, keeper 1" 
he cried — " you had best keep your distance." 

Victor halted. " Look here," he cried, breath- 
lessly, " I come as your friend ; you had better 
go home — the keepers are after you." 

" Who be you, then ?" and the man came for- 
ward a few steps, with a puzzled and suspicious 
stare. Then Victor recognised him as a labourer 
whom Deverell had once pointed out as "a 
wild, clever, dare-devil sort of chap, who would 
do well enough in the colonies, but who was up 
to every sort of mischief here." 

"I am Victor Malreward," said the boy, 
walking close up to him, "and you are Jim 
Paddon. 

" What, the young Squire 1" and the poacher 
began to look rather uncomfortable. He would 
have had little objection to putting a keeper or 
two " out of the road," all in the way of busi- 




poaching and game-preserving, and all the rest 
of it. As it is, I don't see that yon have any 
more right to take my father's pheasants than 
you have to take his poultry, and you would 
not do that, I am sure." 

"Well, sir, you see," answered the man 
sulkily, "it's hard to see good food running 
about under one's feet when one's hungry ; and 
Squire won't give a poor man a rabbit, even, 
and there's a terrible sight on 'em here." 

" Now, Jim Paddon, just go home quietly 
with your gun, and whatever it is you have 
there — I'll ask no questions, and I will give 
you my word of honour you shall hear nothing 
more about this night's work, if you will pro- 
mise not to go poaching again. I wish you 
would go out to Canada or Australia — you are 
just the fellow for it — I would help you -" 

At the mention of emigration the man's eyes 
brightened. He was about to answer, when all 
at once his whole face changed ; he sprang for- 
ward, seized Victor by the collar, hurled him 
against a tree, and pinned him there. " You 



RESTORED. 285 

young liar I" he roared, with a fierce execration 
— " yoTi thought to catch me in a trap, did 
yer? Stand back there, keeper, or I'll knock 
young Squire's brains out I" 

Victor was half stunned, but in another 
second he understood the whole situation. 
Deverell had suddenly come upon them, and 
now he was planted a few yards off in the 
middle of the ride, glaring, helpless, with no- 
thing to do but to storm and swear, afraid to 
move lest the poacher should murder Victor ; 
afraid to fire, lest he should do it himself. Jim 
Paddon stood at bay, ready to show desperate 
fight rather than be taken prisoner ; and Victor 
was jammed against the tree, finding himself as 
powerless as a child in the hold of the almost 
gigantic poacher. The ludicrousness of the 
whole thing came over the boy, and he burst 
into a fit of laughter, which, collared as he was, 
half choked him. 

" I say, Jim Paddon, you and Deverell can't 
stand here all night, each afraid to move for fear 
of the other. If you will go straight home, we 
will do so too, and I'll promise you on my hon- 
our you shall never hear any more about this." 

" That's all very fine, young master, but 
who'll answer for keeper there 1" 



guard, and be off with you, and I'll say nothing 
more about it this time." 

"Very good, I'll go straight home; but if 
either of you comes one step after me, look out 
for yourselves, that's all." And suddenly he 
seemed to gather up all his strength into one 
great bound, and in another second he was out 
of sight. 

Victor drew a long breath, shook himself, and 
walked up to the keeper, who was still standing 
in the middle of the path. " Come, Deverell, 
we must be off now. What a regular lark it 
has been, my catching the poacher, and the 
poacher catching me I I am sorry you came up 
when you did, though, for I flattered myself I 
was managing him uncommonly well. I am 
sure there is some good in that fellow. I shall 
go and look him up to-morrow, and see if I can't 
get him to emigrate. Faugh ! I wish he had not 
been quite so grimy, though." And Victor 
looked in disgust at his coat, which was half 
ruined in the fray. "I am all over dirt and 



RESTORED. 287 

blood. Well, it is not human blood, as it might 
have been." 

Then Deverell broke oxit into one of his 
furious passions. " This is the last time you 
ever come round the covers with me, day or 
night ! How dared you come here, when I 
ordered you not, interfering, and — and risking 
your life I" And Deverell's voice trembled, but 
not with rage alone. 

Victor walked on without a word. Some- 
thing in his air, his very silence, reminded the 
keeper that whatever else Victor was, he was 
also what Jim Paddon called him — the young 
Squire. 

Deverell bit his lips fiercely, then he followed 
him with swift steps. " I beg your pardon, Mr. 
Victor," he said, raising his hat as he overtook 
the boy. " I sincerely beg your pardon for the 
way in which I spoke. But really, seeing you 
in that brute's clutches, nearly made me mad." 

"All right, Deverell." And Victor looked 
round with his bright, sweet smile, the first 
time that he had smiled thus for weeks. "Bat 
I shall rely upon your not saying one word to 
Mr. Malreward about what has happened to- 
night." 

"Certainly, sir, you may rely upon me for 



never in such a humiliating position before. Uncle 
Arthur and I have often wrestled together, and 
he is a tremendously powerful man, but then he 
never put out his whole strength, and I did not 
know till to-night what a man's arm could be." 

" Well, what was that text the Vicar took the 
last Sunday I was at church? Something 
about ' their strength being to sit still.' Yon 
have some of the fighting sort of courage, Mr. 
Victor, but you have got no end of the courage 
of keeping quiet." 

" I wish I had when Mr. Malreward aggra- 
vates me," sighed Victor. " That is harder to 
stand against than all the poachers in the king- 
dom. Well, I am beginning to feel awfully tired. 
I shall go home and go to bed." 

As they passed the Court, a range of tall 
windows glared redly through the darkness, 
fragments of laughter, songs, the scent of cigars 
floated out into the night air. Victor shivered, 
turned pale, and walked quickly on. 

" Go in the back way," said Deverell. " You'll 



RESTORED. 289 



get safely to your room. You feel a bit happier 
now than you did when you first came out, Mr. 
Victor ?" 

" Indeed I do," answered the boy. '' There is 
nothing like doing something stirring— wbether 
it is hard work, or wrestling, or real fighting, to 
drive the devil out of you." 



VOX-. I- 



CHAPTER XV. 

It is plain to me, however much thou mayest pretend to 
the contrary, that thou art, and wilt ever remain, my true 
and beloved heir. — Sintram, 

MR. MALREWARD had long ago made his 
peace with the West Wilts Huut, and on 
the following morning the meet was to take 
place just outside Malreward Park. Victor ar- 
rayed himself in an elaborate hunting costume. 
Mean as Mr. Malreward was about most things, 
he never grudged a penny for his son's personal 
adornment. But weary and out of spirits, Victor 
was in a very different mood to the bounding 
joy with which he used to set forth in his ordi- 
nary dress, and on his ordinary pony, to gallop 
for a few miles across the moors after that 
Cornish pack of hounds which on rare occasions 
met near Tregalva. He felt somewhat embar- 
rassed, remembering how he had left it on the 
night before, when he went into the dining-room, 
which was filled with men in " pink," talking 



RESTORED. 291 

and laughing loudly, devouring substantial 
meats, and drinking strong drinks. Nobody 
appeared to notice him as he slipped in quietly 
and took his usual place at the table. Only 
while he was trying with diflBculty to get 
through a cup of coffee and a roll, a chill ran 
through him as for one minute he saw his fa- 
ther's eyes fixed upon him with a scowl. 

After breakfast, as the men were sauntering 
about the grounds, lighting cigars, and just 
about to mount the horses, which were being 
led up and down by dapper grooms, Victor 
standing a little apart, and examining some- 
thing in Boadicea's harness which did not please 
him, was startled by his father's voice, low and 
stern, in his ear. To give Mr. Malreward his 
due, however irritated he might feel with Vic- 
tor, he never publicly insulted or bullied his 
son. " I shall have something to say to you 
by-and-by. I do not say it now, as I do not 
wish to upset your temper, and make you dis- 
grace me in the hunting-field, as you do at my 
own table. But remember, sir, before this day 
is over I shall call you pretty sharply to ac- 
count for your behaviour to my guests last 
night." 

"Yes, I knew how it would be," thought 

U 2 




292 RESTORED. 

Victor, with quite a sick feeling, as Mr. Halre- 
ward walked away and re-entered the house. 
" Would any young fellow in the county change 
places with me, I wonder t — would anybody 
like to be heir of the Malrewards — and live the 
life I dot" 

Presently young Longford, one of Victor's 
near neighbours at the dinner-table last night, 
sauntered, in company with another boy, to- 
wards Victor, and said, taking a cigar from his 
lips, " May I ask if your dinner disagreed with 
you last night ?" 

" Not the dinner," answered Victor quickly ; 
then he checked himself. " I will not lower my- 
self to their level," thought he, "by answering 
their chaff." He remembered what Deverell 
had said about the courage of keeping quiet, 
and resolved that no taunts should wring an 
answer from him. So he turned his back upon 
his tormentors, and went on fastening Boadicea's 
harness, his lips compressed together into a firm 
line, which gave his boyish face a look that was 
cjiiriously like one of Arthur Byrne's. 

" I suppose the wine, and the dishes, and the 
conversation, had all rather a more recherchSs 
flavour than you have been accustomed to at 
your reverend uncle's table. Boiled mutton and 



RESTORED. 293 

rice puddings, Sunday schools and district visit- 
ing, that is the sort of fare you have be^n 
brought up on, I suppose. Ah, well I have 
you ever been at a clerical dinner ?" said Master 
Longford, with a leer. 

"Let the poor youth alone," said the other 
boy ; " let him indulge his illusions, and believe ' 
in parsons and women as long as he can." 

" My dear Malreward, you will find it much 
cheaper to use our experience than to buy it 
yourself, as our pastors and masters say, when 
they want us to be good boys. Depend upon 
it, clergymen are just like other men. I had a 
reverend uncle once like you — an awfully solemn 
old party he was — wore a wig and gold spec- 
tacles; but he drank like a fish all the same. 
When you are a little older and wiser, you will 
find out that this paragon parson of yours has 
a little pet weakness of some kind or other " 

Victor sprang round, his face white, his eyes 
blazing. Without a word he clenched his fist, 
!hit Longford a blow which, the youth being of 
a stout and unwholesome nature, with more fat 
than muscle — felled him to the ground. 

" Victor, sir I how dare vou ?" said Mr. Malre- 
ward, suddenly coming out of the house. But 
there was little anger in his tone, and anyone 




Jk ** AAA OVA W \J V/TV>A T VTAAV/ VAAV l9(«tAAV *T AXVr \A««* \^a0 

to insult Mr. Byrne 1" cried Victor, ae he stood 
with hie arm thrown round his horse's neck, 
his bright eyes flashing — "severe in youthfiil 
beauty," he looked like a picture of a boyish 
St. George. 

" Get on your horse, Victor, and be off with 
you, you quarrelsome young beggar 1 I am 
very sorry that this should have happened, 
Longford," said Mr. Malreward, as the fallen 
hero picked himself up in sulky silence, while 
the men standing about could hardly keep from 
jeering and chuckling. He looked daggers 
at the Malrewards — father and son — then he 
mounted and rode off without a word, but with 
a very black eye. The only remark that Mr. 
Malreward made was, ** Mind, Victor, when you 
want to do that sort of thing again, don't 
choose the front of my own house for the place 
to do it in." Mr. Malreward glanced at his 
heir, the handsome, distinguished-looking boy, 
sitting his thoroughbred bay mare so gallantly, 
with a harmless pride in the one manly accom- 
plishment in which he excelled ; and the father's 



RESTORED. 295 

heart began to soften. **I will say no more 
about it this time," thought Mr. Malreward ; 
" but if he ever takes himself off again as he did 
last night, I will just give him a good thrash- 
ing next morning, that's all." 

The meet was in a field, bounded on one side 
by the turnpike road, on another by a large 
wood, well fenced, with a gate in it, standing 
open; on the other two sides by a range of 
pastures, amidst which, sheltered by a clump of 
elms, rose the yellow ricks, the barns, the grey 
gables of a farm. The road was full of every 
kind oi vehicle — open barouches and waggon- 
ettes, in which reclined ladies wrapped in fars 
and scarlet rugs ; dog-carts, in which some of 
the hunting men had arrived ; traps belonging 
to neighbouring farmers ; the usual crowd of 
labourers, country women, and farm lads, stood 
and stared. The huntsman was riding slowly 
up and down, with his dogs around him, 
in a compact mass; a crowd of men were 
walking their horses about the field, talking, 
smoking. The master was just mounting his 
hunter as the party from Malreward Court rode 
into the field. As the hounds were to draw 
one of the Malreward covers to-day, some civili- 
ties were obliged to pass between the master 



nephew he had a cordial welcome from every 
gentleman in the field, fonnd that as the heir of 
the Malrewards he was under a cloud. Some- 
thing in the flash of the boy's eye, in the 
haughty turn of his head, told how much he 
resented his novel position ; but what mercy 
could the great-grandson of a Radical and a 
Dissenter, the son of a one-time murderer of 
foxes find in the company of English country 
gentlemen t 

In a few minutes the hounds were off into the 
wood, and men and horses went pressing after 
them through the open gate. Some time passed 
before the welcome " giving tongue " was heard ; 
the much-prized vermin still seemed scarce on 
the Malreward estate. The Squire and his 
friends were waiting about together at a point 
where four rides met; they knew they were 
rather black sheep in the estimation of most of 
the other men present ; and the fact made them 
a little loud and defiant — curls of smoke, noisy 
jokes and laughter, rose from amidst the group. 
Victor stole quietly away down one of the rides. 



RESTORED. 297 

" I have half a mind to go home again," he said 
to himself. " What fan is it to come here and to 
feel myself cut by every decent man in- the field t 
Can I wonder at it, when I see what my father's 
friends are? Well, life is rather hard npon 
me," and the boy almost smiled at the terri- 
ble irony of his fate. " I am forced into the com- 
panionship of everything loathsome to me, and 
in consequence I am shunned by every right- 
minded man in the county." 

As he rode slowly down the woodland path, 
his mare's hoofs sinking deep into the moss 
which deadened all sound of his approach, he 
came upon three gentlemen, all well mounted, 
talking together with their backs towards 
him, one of whom, a fair-haired, broad-shoul- 
dered man, he recognised as the young law- 
yer, Stansfield Erie. 

" A fellow that shoots pigeons, and half lives 
upon brandy," said a voice which he did not 
know. "I say, Erie, a most unpleasant part 
of your profession must be having to do the 
civil to such clients as that." 

" Another most unpleasant part is having to 
listen to scandal," answered Mr. Erie, in his 
quiet, good-humoured tone. 

"Is that refined, gentlemanly-looking boy 



"Pity he ever came here, he wiij be utterly 
rained, can't help himself they are a bad lot, 
always were and always will be, those Malre- 
wards." 

*^ Hush I" whispered Stansfield Erie, hearing 
a horse's step behind them. It was too late. 
The next moment Victor was slowly riding past, 
sitting very upright in his saddle, his cheeks all 
in a flame, his large eyes burning like two 
lamps ; with a grave and stately air he turned, 
bowed, doffed his hat, and rode on without a 
word. 

Almost involuntarily the three men bowed 
and raised their hats to the boy. There was a 
moment of uncomfortable silence. Two of the 
group looked red and confounded — " A lesson 
to you, gentlemen. Never mention names in 
public," smiled the third, the imperturbable Mr. 
Erie. 

Victor rode slowly on, carrying his head 
proudly, with his hand tight on Boadicea's 
rein — not for the world would he have stooped, 
or hastened his horse's pace until he was &irly 



RESTORED. 299 

out of sight. Then he turned into a cross path 
where nobody was in view, and the reins fell 
upon Boadicea's neck, and the boy's head sank 
upon his breast. " So they meant my father— 
my father," he groaned, in his youthful shame 
and rage. " Oh, my God, let me die now, to- 
day ; take me away before I grow any more like 
him !" 

Suddenly, quite close to Victor, ran out a 
blast of the master's horn. The boy was in 
luck to-day, a score of men would have given a 
round sum for his unsought-for position. At the 
end of the ride which he had taken unconsciously 
was another open gate. He dashed through it, 
found himself close to the M. F. H. and a few of 
the oldest and wisest men of the hunt, only a 
few yards behind the hounds, who were off in 
full cry across the field. " I will show them 
that I can ride, at all events," thought the boy, 
with a wild throb of his heart. '* I will stick at 
nothing to-day." 

Victor's blood was up now, and so was 
Boadicea's ; it was all easy work at first, half-a* 
dozen grass fields, gates standing wide open, 
two thirds of the men behind, well out of the 
way ; for a time Victor had nothing to do but to 
hold in his mare with all his might, or he would 



of motion,'* as Boadicea, with even strides, raced 
over the grass — ^she seemed scarcely to touch 
the ground, nor did he seem to move in his 
saddle, and yet all the time he was embittered 
with a sense of shame, of wrong, of hatred to 
the other men in the field ; with a longing to do 
something to show them he too was a man to 
be hated, not a mere boy to be despised. He 
felt at war with the whole world; with his 
father's friends, and with his father's enemies ; 
alike with the set of rou^s and blacklegs who 
visited the Court, and the decorous county- 
gentry to whom the very name of Malreward 
was a byword and an abomination. 

Other men were riding up now ; there was 
quite a crowd of red coats behind Victor, but 
the boy's light weight, and the really splendid 
powers of Boadicea, helped him to keep his 
place in the front, and made up for his disadvan- 
tage of knowing less about the country than did 
any of the regular members of the hunt. He 
kept his eye upon the master, and followed in 
his track as nearly as possible ; Boadicea had 



RESTORED, 301 

taken on^ or two fences in capital style, but 
there came a moment when Victor was in danger 
of losing his position in the field. All the more 
prudent sportsmen were crowding and jamming 
through a gate, with some sharp words and 
anything but cordial feelings to each other. 
Victor saw he should have no chance amongst 
a number of strong, excited, angry men. " Now 
for it 1" he thought, " conquer or die 1" and he 
put Boadicea at a tremendous fence. It was a 
wild moment, he felt a quiver that was not fear, 
only a sort of wonder what it would feel like 
to come crashing down amongst the sharp 
stakes, or on the hard ground beyond, with per- 
haps Boadicea's body smashing in his ribs, or 
her hoofs striking his head — he shut his eyes, 
held his breath, one moment of flying through 
the air, one thought of poor Harry — then he 
found himself still safe on his horse's back, ca- 
reering through the field beyond. 

A few minutes more of the hardest riding he 
had ever known in his life, a feeling that he 
must die if it lasted much longer, when he be- 
came aware that at the further end of the 
turnip-field he had just entered, the man in 
firont of him had drawn bridle, and the hounds 
were altogether iix a heap. Victor rode up just 



t»' 



steaming horse, his brain swimming, his heart 
beating as if it would burst, a feeling of disgust 
and disappointment came over the boy, half re- 
action from mental excitement, half mere bodily- 
exhaustion. " Is this all ?" thought he. " It 
seems but a poor cowardly sort of affair after all 

• 

— all these men, horses, and dogs, to hunt down 
one wTetched little vermin. Now, I suppose, as 
it is still early, they will try to find another ; 
but Boadicea and 1 have had enough, and we 
will go home." As he rode off slowly and dis- 
contentedly, he heard a man say, "Who the deuce 
is that boy, and where did he get his mount, I 
wonder? Did you see them take that big fence 
just now r 

*' Oh 1 he is a son of old Malreward's." 

" That accounts for it, then. Those that are 

bom to be hanged, you know " 

Mr. Malreward, riding alone, and looking 
rather pale and excited, overtook his son in the 
park. "Victor, my boy, I am proud of you.; 
you have done great things to-day. The whole 




RESTORED. 303 

field are talking about you," said the father, 
with a pardonable exaggeration. 

" It was not I, sir, it was Boadicea," answered 
Victor, wearily and incoherently. 

^^ I would not take a hundred guineas for that 
mare I" 

" No, you would not," thought Victor. *' Be- 
cause I would just put a pistol to her head be- 
fore you should sell her — Uncle Arthur's present 
as she is." 

" But I tell you what, Victor, you can ride 
like the very devil, and it does my heart good to 
see you ; but, for all that, you and I don't go 
out with the West Wilts Himt again." And 
here Mr. Malreward burst into a sudden storm of 
swearing, which made his son almost start out of 
his saddle. 

** What on earth is the matter, sir t And, 
really, can't you speak without all that kind of 
language ?" said Victor, irritably. 

**ril tell you what is the matter, sir; and 
don't talk like that to your father, you cursed 
young prig ! The matter is, that I have been 
grossly insulted 1" And then Mr; Malreward 
went off into a rambling story about something 
which somebody had said, either to his face or 
behind his back, which, Victor hardly knew or 



upon them, Deverell shall kill every fox in the 



covers." 



'* So much the better. I don't care — not I. 
Precious little pleasure I have had from my dajc'B 
sport." 

"Why, you look dead beat, boy; you have 
more pluck than strength," said Mr. Malreward, 
in a gentler tone. " Here, take a pull at this." 
And he offered him his brandy flask. 

"No, thank you, sir." And Victor turned 
away with ill-concealed disgust. The fumes of 
spirits wefe, to his youthful mind, associated 
with all sorts of horrors — toothache, sea-sickness, 
and, lately, with dreadful evenings in the din- 
ing-room at Malreward Court. 

The father laughed grimly. " You will take 
more kindly to it before long, my boy." 

Victor looked forward to the coming evening 
with a sickening dread. Most of Mr. Malre- 
ward's guests were to remain until the following 
day. What should he do if the conversation 
at dinner time became as horrible as it was last 



RESTORED. 305 

night ? " If I leave the room again,*' thought 
he, " I know Mr. Malreward will half murder me 
to-moiTow." The boy trembled; he turned red 
and pale ; he was just at the age when the 
mere possibiUty of receiving a blow seems most 
intolerable. 

Then all at once some words rushed into his 
mind. "Fear not them who can kill the body, 
rather fear him who can destroy both body and 
soul in hell." A sense of freedom and peace- 
fulness came over him, a calm disregard of con- 
sequences, as different from the reckless courage 
he had shown when hunting as divine enthusiasm 
is different from human passion. *' I am afraid 
of those men. If I once hear their stories, I 
cannot get them out of my head afterwards; and 
if they go on to-night as they did last night, I 
shall get up and walk out of the room once more. 
And then Mr. Malreward may do what he likes. 
I do not care, I am in God's hands." 

Our trials and our temptations seldom come from 
the quarter that we expect them to come. When 
Victor took his place at the dinner-table that 
evening he was very pale and very calm, there 
was something of the martyr's look and spirit 
about him. Alas, that such high feelings should 
have ended as they did 1 But when our whole 
VOL. I. X 



ly the two men who sat nearest to himi ex- 
changed glances, and then began compliment- 
ing him upon his skill in riding. He said as 
little as possible in reply. To a certain extent 
he was upon his guard ; nor was he surprised 
when flattery developed into chaff. " He had 
often followed the hounds in CJornwall, had he 
not ? and his uncle, the Rector, had taught him 
to ride, they supposed. Fox-hunting parsonB 
were getting scarce now, more's the pity ; but 
that uncle of his was a wonderful man, so they 
had heard — a muscular Christian, as rich as a 
Bishop, a regular paragon. And what a lucky 
fellow young Malreward was to be his uncle^B 
heir as well as his father's ! He must have 
played his cards well, to live with a parson, and 
keep in his good books, and yet not get bored 
to death. No, he would not make them believe 
that he was any too prim and too goody — ^no 
Malreward ever was that yet. They were all 
good fellows — capital fellows. Come, now, 
how did he manage it I Did he throw dust in 



RESTORED. 307 

the reverend eyes t or was it that the reverend 
eyes saw, and winked, and looked the other 
way I Parsons were but men, you know, and 
they were all young fellows once themselves, 
&c." And so the two men went chattering on, 
whilst Victor sat, stem, silent, with compressed 
lips, his blood boiling, and yet determined not 
to be irritated into making any answer. 

But instead of speaking, he often raised his 
glass to his lips, and in his rage and confusion 
he did not notice that, however often he did so, 
it was full to the brim. His mind was excited, 
his body was exhausted ; he was too fatigued 
to eat ; he was just in that state when alcohol 
has its most powerful influence over the human 
frame. And soon his resolution of not answer- 
ing passed entirely out of his mind ; he began 
talking in a loud, thick, angry voice. " I tell 
you what it is, you fellows, I have had enough 
of this. I would knock both of you down, if 
you were not at my own table — ^no, it's Mr. 
Malreward's table, I have nothing to do with 
the place. I hate it all, and the whole lot of 
you — never saw such a rowdy set in my life.'* 

Mr. Malreward and the men at his end of the 
table were discussing and making bets about 
some steeplechases which were to come off by 

x2 



passed from one to another. In a minute 
more Mr. Malreward and all the other men 
stopped talking, and stared at the boy. And 
the last thing Victor remembered was starting 
up, trying to shout, " Come on, I will fight the 
whole lot of you 1" and yet imable to say the 
words he meant ; then, staggering, putting out 
his hands to lay hold of the table, missing it, 
and falling heavily on the floor. 

When Victor came back to his senses, he 
found himself lying, half dressed, with a blanket 
thrown over him, on his bed in the cupola-room, 
and the morning sunlight streaming down upon 
him. How did he get here ? — what had hap-, 
pened to him ? — ^how was it he felt so fiight- 
ftdly ill, his head beating as though a hammer 
were inside it, his eyes and lips and throat 
burning like fire ? — was he sickening for some 
dangerous fever? Nothing of the kind. He 
had been intoxicated the night before. 

Oh I the bitter cry that burst from the boy's 



RESTORED. 309 

lips as, after a moment of utter incredulity, the 
whole truth became revealed to him I Then he 
turned to the wall, hid his face in the pillow, 
and lay for some minutes as if he were dead. 

Some writer has said that there is no misery 
in the world like that of feeling thoroughly 
ashamed of oneself. The soul struggles in 
helpless loathing to get free from the body, 
which has done it some grievous wrong, as if 
it were a foul corpse to which it was chained. 
" It was not I that did this thing ; it is this vile 
creature with which I am forced into compan- 
ionship." And yet all the while the soul feels 
itself to be the real criminal of the two, because 
for one moment, even, it had allowed itself to 
be overpowered. " 1 can kill myself, my body, 
which has sinned ; I cannot kill myself, my soul, 
which is stained." Victor felt himself to be de- 
graded below the vulgarest drunkard he had 
ever seen staggering out of a public-house. 
Two nights before he had made what he had 
considered to be a stand for the right; last 
night he had sat down to table with all sorts of 
fine heroic determinations to defy Mr. Malre- 
ward to do his worst, and to leave the room 
again, if he felt himself called upon to do so ; 
and now How all the men must be chuckling 



whom he had so despised. They had not been 
brought up as he had been; they had never 
known Uncle Arthur, who had tried to make 
him a Christian and a gentleman. ^ Oh I Uncle 
Arthur, what would you say if you had seen me 
as I was last night I Can 1 really be the Victor 
Malreward whom you knew?" 

Yes, he was Victor Malreward ; he could not 
alter his name or his nature ; and now the boy 
went thrdugh the darkest hour he had ever 
known in his life. It had all come true what 
those country gentlemen in the hunting-field 
yesterday had foretold about him. " He is sure 
to be utterly ruined ; he cannot help himself; 
they are a bad lot, those Malrewards — always 
were and always will be." His father and his 
father's friends had all at times laughed and 
sneered in much the same way. ''Don't tell 
me you are going to be a saint. No Malreward 
could do it if he tried ever so hard. Wild blood 
in the veins is sure to show itself sooner or later. 
You have made a good beginning, my boy. Go 
on and prosper." 



BEST<»RKD, 311 

The destiny of ins family, like a dark, awful, 
irresistible conrent, seemed sweeping him away. 
Sliding down the stream, sucked into a whirl- 
pool, the boy looked up, and cried out, as if in 
his death struggle, " God I help me — help me 1" 

Soon afterwards Deverell entered the room, 
with the noiseless step which is the gamekeeper's 
professional accomplishment, '^How do you 
find yourself now, Mr. Victor? I heard you 
had been ill, and I came to see after you." 

** I am not ill ;" and Victor hid his face. ^' You 
know as well as I do it is not that. You had 
better go away and leave me to myself." 

To Deverell's lips rose the bitter saying of 
Mephistopheles — " You are not the first ;" but 
his sympathetic nature told him what this, his 
sudden fall, was to the boy, " Don't take it so 
much to heart, dear Mr. Victor. It was not 
your fault at all. Those cursed blackguards 
laid a wager amongst them they would make 
you tipsy, and they kept on chaffing you and 
filling up your glass when you were not look- 
ing ; and at last they put brandy in, and that 
finished you of course, you not being used to 
it. Mrs. Jennings OTerheard them laughing 
about it last night, and saw the money handed 
over, and that is how it was I came to know." 

" Was it so really ?" cried Victor, raising his 



the £SereD/oe: letvieea wine sfed Ijcandv."" 

*^ Xow, Hr. Tictor, don t take on so about if. 
Hear the rest cyfmTstorv. ItfJdMr.Makew^ard 
an hrmr agow — it would hare be^i no ise last 
niglit — about tbe biadiguzd tridiL tbey had 
pLajed upon yon; and he fiared up fike the 
Terj deviL And a precioiis row tboe has been ! 
wann words all rcMmd; and the end of it is, those 
fellows Bownej and Slade, who made the bet, 
haTe gone off in a hnfl^ and I don*t beUeTe we 
shall be honoured by their company again in a 
hnrry ; and the other men are to leave this afteF- 
noon^ as yon know. So now, Mr. Victor, get 
up and have yonr cold batii, and I will bring 
yon some soda-water, and go oat for a turn in 
the fresh air, as soon as yon feel np to it," said 
Deverell, who was too well experienced in 
prescribing for cases like Victor's. 

" I wish you would bring me some ink, 
please, Deverell. There is none left in my ink- 
stand ; and I must write to Uncle Arthur before 
I go out.^ 



RESTORED. 313 

" Why, you are never going to tell him about 
last night V replied the keeper, " Whatever is 
the good of that ?" 

" Deverell I do you think so meanly of me as 
that, then?" 

"I beg your pardon, sir;" and Deverell 
coloured slightly. " I spoke without thinking." 

" It will be a dreadful thing to do," said Vic- 
tor, with almost a sob. " But somehow it is 
the only hope and comfort I have left. Yes," 
thought the boy, "if he forgives me, then I 
shall believe that there is some chance for me, 
notwithstanding all that people say. But if he 
either does not answer my letter at all, or 
writes as if he were so ashamed of me that he 
wished to have nothing more to do with me, 
— ^then it will be all up with me, and I shall go 
headlong to the devil." 

Later in the day, having followed Deverell's 
prescriptions, and having at last accomplished 
the toil and difficulty of dressing himself, Victor 
sat down to write to the Rector. Several times 
his shaking hand began a letter, then tore it 
up after the first few lines. " My punishment 
is greater than I can bear ;" and at last Victor 
laid his aching head down on the table, and the 
tears ran through his fingers, which he clasped 



sternly in years past his unole had sometimes 
visited what had seemed a very trivial offence. 
Perhaps the reason was because he himself Jbad 
considered it trivial ; and it had appeared any* 
thing but such to his iindfi. He recollected on 
one such occasion when he had been inclined to 
rebel, how the Rector had said to him, with a 
deep tenderness suddenly thrilling through bia 
tone, " Oh I believe me, Victor, I do not punish 
you from any blind resentment, but with my 
eyes wide open to see the peculiar dangers of 
such a temperament as yours, I will leave 
nothing undone which can brace your conscience 
and your will. I will control you, that you may 
learn to control yourself. Would you not rather 
suffer when you are a boy, than sin when you 
are a man f 

Then Victor, thoroughly softened, had, in 
his simple, boyish way, pressed his cheek 
against his uncle's shoulder, and then without 
another word had written to decline for himself 
and for Mr. Byrne an invitation to join a pio-nic 
party, which, in consequence of some small 



RESTORED. 315 

scrape he had got into, the Rector had ordered 
him to do, " Of course I shall not go without 
you," Mr. Byrne added, gravely smiling. "Do 
you think I could enjoy myself if I left you 
doing penance at home?" 

Victor gained courage to go on writing as he 
recalled the ending of the story. " Yes, he is 
stern, he is severe, and yet how kind he is— 
how I love him, dear, dear Uncle Arthur 1" And 
then he raised his eyes to a large photograph 
vhich hung above his mantelpiece. It was the 
Rector of Tregalva to the very life. The black 
clerical dress of Anglican cut — ^muscular par- 
son as he was said to be, Arthur Byrne was 
seldom seen in a non-professional costume, the 
little symbols of his authority were pleasant to 
him — the haughty poise of the head, the thick 
grey whiskers, and hair brushed well off the 
temples, the deep set earnest eyes, which look- 
ed able to pierce one's inmost soul, the straight 
nose with the keenly cut nostrils, the mouth 
firm and grave even to severity, and which yet 
seemed ready to expand into a most genial 
smile. A noble, powerful face, but too stem 
and lined and weather-beaten, to be called a 
handsome one. 

The letter was finished at last. 

"My dear Uncle,— I have something most 



out that some of the men here made a bet 

about it, and they put brandy in my glass -when 

I was not looking. But I am afraid this is not 

much excuse for me. I must have known the 

difference if I had been quite sober before. 

Now 1 have made up my mind that I will never 

touch a single drop of wine or any thing of 

the kind again; and whatever Mr. Malrewiard 

may say I will keep to it, so help me God ! 

" I had better not write any more now. You 

will perhaps be so disgusted as to wish to have 

nothing to do with me. But for pity's sake, 

dear Uncle Arthur, don't cast me off entirely ; 

give me another chance, and send a few lines in 

return to your unhappy 

" Victor Malreward/* 
The remainder of that miserable day was 

to Victor something between the slow conva- 
lescence from a severe illness, and a culprit's 
fii'st day in jail. When the dinner-bell rang he 
did not attempt to go downstairs imtil a mes- 
sage brought by Mrs. Jennings that Mr. Mai- 




RESTORED. 317 

reward was quite alone and wished Mr. Victor 
to dine with him, obliged him to do so. He 
entered the hateful room, the scene of his dis- 
grace, with downcast eyes and crimson cheeks. 

"Well, Victor, my boy, how are you?" his 
father greeted him somewhat jovially. "All 
right again, I hope. Have some brandy and 
soda." 

" None of your cursed brandy," muttered the 
boy, leaning his burning forehead on his hand. 

" We had a very fair day's sport to-day, 
though some of the fellows' hands were rather 
shakey, I fancy. They are all gone now, and I 
suppose the pheasants are not sorry, nor you 
either, eh ?" said the Squire, with a sidelong 
glance at his son. 

"Look here, Victor," Mr. Malreward went on, 
as the boy remained silent, " it was the most 
blackguardly thing I ever heard of, for Slade 
and Rowney to make that bet about my son, 
in my own house ; and I told them so this 
morning, and that it will be the last time they 
ever enter my doors. You may be a solemn- 
faced young fool, I don't defend all your ridi- 
culous canting ways, not I ; but it is my place 
to give you a setting down, when you want 
one, not theirs to play tricks upon you. So 



happy there; I never said or did half the 
^cked things I do here; Uncle Arthur cares 
for me, you don't. Is it any pleasure to yon 
to see me miserable and degraded, do yon 

really want me to grow up like like the men 

you have here? Do you never remember 
my mother?" 

Mr. Malreward started, looked down, turned 
quite pale. When he spoke at last, there was 
an odd sort of jar and imeasiness in his tone, 
" It is no use talking to me about Tregalva, as 
you know very well. I am your father, and it 
is only right and natiu-al that you should live 
with me. But as for wanting to see yon 
miserable — I never heard such humbug in my 
life. Why, the chief fault I find with yon iSy 
that you go about with such a long &ce, and 
don't seem up to fun and larking like other 
young fellows ! I have told you again and again 
— so long as you are civil to me and my friends, 
and are never out of the way when I want you, 
you can amuse yourself just as you like. I 
never interfered with Harry, poor fellow; we 




RESTORED. 319 

always got on well together, and I can't think 
why the deuce you and I can't ■ " Mr. Malre- 
ward broke off with a sigh ; and scarcely ano- 
ther word was exchanged between the father 
and son that night. 

For what was there to say ? Victor neither 
could be, nor wished to be, to his father all that 
gay, easy-going, worldly-wise Harry had been. 
His younger son was to Mr. Malreward a con- 
stant source of selfoomplacency and annoy- 
ance ; one moment he was proud of him, the 
next he was provoked by him ; he was alter- 
nately Attracted and repulsed. *'For all his 
soft-spoken ways, and he has wonderfully 
winning ways sometimes, I will allow that — 
Victor is as stubborn as a mule. I don't be- 
lieve I shall ever do anything with the boy 
until I have half killed him, and I suppose it 
must come to that some day, for I won't keep 
a creature about the place that is not thoroughly 
broken in." 

Meanwhile Victor looked upon his father as 
his evil genius, who for some reason as inex- 
plicable as the origin of evil itself, was air 
lowed to embitt^ and degrade his youthful 
existence. Mr. Malreward seemed to have 
power not only to destroy his happiness, but 
to demoralize his temper, to irritate hia ^Wi\& 



Deiween xnem impossiDie. ii Kinarea Diooa 
does not blend two natures into harmony, it 
clashes them together in hideous discords ; if 
likeness of nature does not produce sympathy, 
it must produce the most subtle and irreconcil- 
able of all antipathies. Between Mr. Malre* 
ward and Victor there existed that incompati- 
bility, the only cure for which is death, or the 
widest separation which life can give. 

Another day was passed by Victor in much 
misery of body and mind. Then came the 
longed-for letter from Mr. Byrne. 

" My dearest Boy, — Your letter was a sor- 
rowfiil one for you to write and for me to re- 
ceive. But the mere fact of your writing it 
shows that you have no need of any reproof 
from me. Your own conscience has given you 
that. I know that you are penitent, and there- 
fore I know also that God has forgiven yon. 

"And now I want you to feel that you .have 
not lost your s^lf-respect, or my respect for you. 
Remember, dear boy, that struggle, suffer, sin, 



RESTORED, 321 

as you may — God loves you always, and so do 
I. He cares for you, and watches over you, 
and seeks by every means, tender ones and 
stern ones, to keep you from going wrong ; all 
that I, in my feeble and shortsighted human 
way have tried to be to you. He is, in His 
infinitely wise and strong way. Whatever you 
do you cannot unmake yourself God's child. 
But you must try harder than you have ever 
done before, not to become an unworthy and 
undutiful one. 

" I agree with you that you had better en- 
tirely abstain from all intoxicating drinks for 
the future. You will be laughed at by every- 
one arouud you, but I know you too well to 
suppose that you will not find ridicule a light 
burden to bear after remorse. If it will make it 
any easier for you, I will promise you to abstain 
in like manner. My daily glass of wine will be 
but a small sacrifice to make, if making it will 
help you in any way. I need hardly add that 
I burnt your letter as soon as I had read it. 
Your secret is as safe with me as if I were in 
reality your Father Confessor.* 

" We are all much as usual, nothing has hap- 
pened here since I wrote last. Write to me 
again as soon as you feel inclined to do so* 

VOL. I. Y 



When Victor had read this letter, he for some 
minutes hid his face in his hands in silent grati- 
tude. His uncle had said to him all that he 
had dared to hope that he would say, and far 
more. He did not despise him, was not ashamed 
of him, loved him as tenderly as ever. It seem- 
ed very strange, yet so it was, that in his shame 
and self-abasement Victor felt drawn closer to 
Arthur Byrne's warm, fatherlike heart, than he 
had ever done before. It was just as it was in 
the parable, thought this simple-hearted, boyish 
prodigal, when the father " ran, and fell on his 
neck and kissed him." 

Victor put the letter away in his desk, to be 
read again at some future time, not to be de- 
stroyed as his confession had been. 

" I am the last fellow to believe in the sacer- 
dotal kind of thing. I honour Uncle Arthur 
neither more nor less, because he is a clergy- 
man. But priest, or no priest, he is, and al- 
ways has been, God's vicegerent on earth to 



me. 



323 



CHAPTER XVI. 



•^k 



• ^ g. Sorely a day is coming, when it will be known again 

hat virtue is in purity and continence of life ; how divine 

"* *i the blush of young human cheeks, how high, beneficent, 

r i-jtemly inexorable, if forgotten, is the duty laid on every 

■ creature in regard to these particulars. — Carlyle. 

^*TT was a December evening about a year 
tkz X after. The sun had gone down, a crimson 
£: copper ball, half an hour ago. Ineffably tender 
B.' were the hues, rosy, primrose, sea-green, melt- 
9 ing into the violet blue of the zenith. The 
H evening star glittered low down in a sea of 
: crimson, below that again a mist of grey blue, 
in colour like the smoke of a clear wood fire, 
was rising from the earth. Purple blue were the 
shadows on the chocolate-coloured woods ; there 
were amber gleams between dark stems. The 
earth was hard, brown, caked, with little splin- 
ters of ice in ruts and furrows ; the air was 
frosty, clear and still. Like iron rang the road 
beneath their heavy boots, as Victor and Dever- 
ell walked through the park; the gentleman 
was in black ▼elvet^n^^ysi keeper in grey 

y2 




blue smoke came from Deverelrs cigar, and the 
scarlet tip glowed in the dusk. 

Victor had grown a good deal during the 
past year ; he was still very slender in figure, a 
" May-pole of a boy," as his father disrespect- 
fully called him. There was a look of fragility 
about him, as if he had outgrown his strength, 
and the effect was enhanced by the clear bril- 
liancy of his eyes, the sensitiveness of his whole 
face, which seemed as if there were only enough 
flesh and blood about it to cover his soul. A 
slight golden brown fringe shaded his firm, 
melancholy mouth. The expression of his 
young face was very thoughtful, somewhat 
sad ; but now and then it would beam all over 
with his mother's own glorious smile. 

Ruddy, glowing fi'om his long tramp through 
the woods, and from the frosty air, Victor ran 
lightly up the old oak stairs, when he entered 
Malreward Court, and broke into clear whist- 
ling as he went down the long corridor to his 
bed-room. A red glow burnt in the grate, and 
cast a warm dusky glimmer on the walls ; cold 



RESTORED. 325 

grey twilight, sparkling stars, looked down 
through the great cupola above. Victor was 
quite hardened to the cupola now ; to all the 
celestial and meteorological phenomena which 
went on visibly over his head as he sat reading 
in the day-time, or lay in his bed at night. He 
w^as also pretty well hardened to, although 
he had never grown to like, the odd eery 
rustlings which now an^ then — at intervals of 
days and weeks — he heard inside, or outside, 
which was it ? — the wall of his room ; and had 
made up his mind they must be produced by 
currents of air, or by sparrows stirring in the 
ivy, which muffled the outer walls of the house. 
Victor set down his gun, poked up his fire till 
it blazed cheerily, and lighted his candles. 
Presently Mrs. Jennings knocked at his door, 
and brought him a cup of steaming hot tea. 
Then Victor threw himself down in his arm-chair 
by the fire, and from a confused heap of books 
which lay on his table — Sophocles, Darwin's 
Origin of Species, Tennyson, his old enemy Eu- 
clid, a pile of Macmillan's Magazines, Shelley, 
the last number of the Revue de deux Mondes, 
Mills' Liberty, Lecky's History of Rationalism, 
mixed up with half a dozen of the best novels 
of the day — from this pile of books he drew 



ble. Victor drank hie tea, read his novel, and 
thoroughly enjoyed himself until it was time to 
dress for dinner. These were the hours when 
he was inclined to believe that there were worse 
things in the world than living at Malreward 
Court. He might have been almost the sole 
European for fifty miles in a jungly district in 
India. He might have been a clerk in a grimy 
ofiice somewhere down in Thames Street. He 
might have been an usher in a school. 

There were bright spots in Victor's life at 
Malreward Court, as there are in every human 
life. He was by no means friendless. The 
genial Dr. Radcliffe and his gentle, highly cul- 
tivated wife, took a great interest in the boy ; 
even if they had not liked him for his own sake, 
,as warmly as they did, for Arthur Byrne's sake 
they would have done all they could to keep his 
nephew from sinking into the mire of Malreward 
Court. Victor often dined at the doctor's house ; 
and it was there that he made the acquaintance 
of the doctor's cousin, Tom Wardour, a sixth 



RESTORED, 327 

form Rugby boy, a year older than Victor himself. 
Whatever may be said of love, there is no such 
thing as true friendship at first sight ; and the 
young men often laughed together afterwards 
at the unfavourable opinion each formed of the 
other at their first meeting. " Malreward was 
an effeminate, excitable boy, lacking bone and 
sinew." " Wardour was a rough, sarcastic, un- 
gainly hobbledehoy, with more muscle than 
brains." Sbme earnest political and theological 
discussions, and a friendly encounter in the 
cricket-field — for Victor had become a member 
of a good county club — ^helped to change their 
mutual distrust into a liking which afterwards 
ripened into lifelong fnendship. 

Then Mr. Groves was always a pleasant, 
easy-going tutor, who never assumed any au- 
thority over the boy, and never found fault if 
his lessons were ill prepared, or his attendance 
at the Vicarage irregular. " Never mind, my 
dear fellow," he would say, if Victor attempted 
to make any excuse. *' I know the difficulties 
in your way, — I understand all about it." So 
that, as Victor thought, he would be unworthy 
the name of a gentleman if after that he did 
not use every effort to be punctual and indus- 
trious. As for his scientific studies, they were 



KJ 



then the books about them." Sometimes in 
spring and summer days he and Victor -would 
wander all over the Malreward woods in search 
of rare flowers and birds' nests, but ^vith scru- 
pulous regard to the rights of the feathered 
owners. And Deverell would join them, with a 
smile and a shake of the head. " You will spoil 
Mr. Victor for a sportsman, sir ; not that he 
ever was one to begin with. Poor Mr. Harry, 
now, was a true English boy — never happy un- 
less he was putting something to death." 

" Come, now, Deverell," the Vicar would an- 
swer, "when you go your rounds, you must 
get me a specimen or two of the white Helle- 
borine. I have found it here in past summers, 
but it is rare, uncommonly rare." Or — " I wish, 
Deverell, you would use all your keeper's arts 
to watch for me the salicaria locustillaj that is, 
the grasshopper lark, you know his odd whir- 
ring note ; I can never get a sight of him, he 
baffles me ; he is a ventriloquist, the rogue." 

And Deverell would grumble, and vow he 



RESTORED. 329 

would grub up every flower, and shoot every 
song-bird on the estate, because the two gentle- 
men, by their rummaging in his covers, disturb- 
ed the sitting pheasants, and set a bad example 
to trespassers ; and in the end would do his ut- 
most to please the young Squire and the Vicar. 

Mr. Malreward was in a good humour this 
evening, as he had been for some time past. 
He asked what sport Victor had had ; enquired 
how the woodcutters were getting on with the 
underwood. " You are a great help to me in 
these little matters about the estate, my dear 
fellow. I have so much important business to 
attend to, that really I let things go — ^" and he 
pensively sipped his wine. " But I can rely 
upon you, quite." 

Unfortunately, Victor had found out by bitter 
experience that he could not rely upon his 
father's continuing in an amiable mood from one 
moment to another. Often at the smallest pro- 
vocation, sometimes without any, his soft words 
would change — cat-like — into fury. It was 
this uncertainty of Mr. Malreward's temper, 
this likelihood at any moment of an outburst, 
which had such a depressing effect upon Victor, 
which, in his father's company, gave him the 
restless, apprehensive sense of discomfort which 



was on the occafiion when — after having vainly- 
remonstrated about the disgraceful state of neg- 
lect into which the labourers' cottages had been 
allowed to fall — ^the boy had employed, and paid 
out of his pocket-money, a couple of workmen to 
do a little whitewashing and repairing of roo& 
in the village. Victor had never forgotten that 
quarrel ; nor was he likely to do so. The fether 
and son were riding together at the time ; and 
irritated beyond endurance, swearing at what 
he called insolent interference — " You want me 
to die, sir, and have everything your own wayl" 
— ^he had raised his whip, and struck Victor 
with it sharply across the shoulders. For the 
first minute the boy had gone quite out of his 
mind, but somehow he had managed fo restrain 
himself from returning the blow, as his instinct 
was to do. The father and son scarcely spoke 
to each other for several days, then Mr. Malre- 
ward had made Victor something very like an 
apology. 

After dinner Mr. Malreward began suddenly — 



RE3T0RED. 331 

*' By-the-by, Victor, I ^met my old friend, Sir 
George Hornby, to-day, and he has asked you 
and me to spend Christmas week with him in 
London ; and I think we shall have a very jolly 
time of it. His sons will be there — they are in 
the army, you know — and he says they run up 
to town every evening, and get back to Alder- 
shot at two in the morning, by the cold-meat 
train, as they call it — takes the bodies down to 
Woking cemetery, you know. So when we old 
fogies are at the club, or having a quiet rubber, 
you boys can go about and enjoy yourselves just 
as you like." 

Victor's eyes brightened — any change from 
Malreward Court must be for the better, but 
London I — that and Oxford were magnetic poles 
to his young heart. How he craved for some 
higher, richer life ; for the society of men in the 
world of politics, of literature and art — no one 
kpew but Arthur Byrne, to whom he confided 
all his pangs of disappointed ambition, chilled 
sympathies, the bitterness of feeling his best 
ideas and energies withering for want of light, 
and air, and congenial society. 

Mr. Malreward went on — " Those young 
Hornbys know London from end to end ; they 
will take you everywhere ; show you life; go the 



Two remarks, made at different times, flashed 
into his head at once. " If Mr. Maheward or 
any of his friends should ever offer to take y oil 
to London with them, do everything you possi- 
bly can to avoid going," so Mr. Byrne had 
written long ago. " Those young Hornbys are 
the greatest blackguards in the army ; they will 
find themselves obliged to sell out one of these 
days," Dr. Radcliffe had happened to say in 
Victor's hearing. 

" I am very much obliged to you, sir, and to 
Sir George Hornby," began Victor, with a slight 
tremor in his voice, forseeing the storm which 
would break upon his head — "but I should 
greatly prefer spending Christmas here." 

Mr. Malreward turned round sharply upon 
him. "What do you mean, sir? What the 
devil do you mean ? I tell you it is settled, 
you and I go up to town Friday evening." 

Victor made no answer, he sat thinking and 
looking into the fire, while his father angrily 
tossed off two or three glasses of wine. It was a 



RESTORED. 333 

tremendous minute as the boy saw afterwards 
— one of those minutes which have power to 
affect for good or evil the whole after-life. 
*' Why should I not go up to town ?" he was 
saying to himself; "why should I stay cramped 
and stifled in this dismal hole all my young 
days — never hearing a debate in the House of 
Commons ; never entering a picture exhibition; 
never hearing any good music, or seeing any 
good acting — knowing little of the great, 
glorious, fascinating world of London ? Am I 
such a child that I can't keep out of harm's 
way, and don't know good from evil ? Who is 
to hinder me from going to a concert or a 
theatre — and coming straight home afterwards?" 
" I know what you are thinking about," sud- 
denly burst out Mr. Malreward. " Some of 
that cursed puritanical humbug which that old 
parson uncle of yours puts into your head — 
must not do this, and must not go there; this is 
not proper for good little boys, and that la bad 

company Bah ! Now listen to me, Victor. I 

will not have you disgracing me and making 
an infernal ass of yourself — ^you will behave like 
a gentleman, and be civil to my friends ; you 
will go about with them wherever they are 
good enough to take you, and get some of your 



come home again !" 

Then Victor got up, pale, but very firm. " I 
do not wish to disgrace you, or myself either. 
I must altogether decline to go to London. 
As I have work to do for Mr. Groves, T will 
wish you good night, sir." 

He went back to his room with a heavy heart. 
*'That confounded London scheme has come 
and spoilt everything, just when I had a little 
peace. Well, I suppose I shall have a sweet 
life of it now, until Mr. Malreward goes away." 
The faint gleam of sunlight which had lighted 
up that day, faded all away. Sighing wearily 
— he often sighed, this boy of eighteen, for 
him were little of the merriment, the light- 
heartedness of youth — only its legal disabilities, 
its subjection to the caprice and tyranny of 
seniors — he sat down to his evening's work. 
He was just beginning to forget his troubles in 
a Greek play, when footsteps came along the 
corridor, and, without any notice, Mr. Malre- 
ward walked into the room. Victor rose. 



RESTORED. 335 

startled and dismayed. Never before, since he 
had lived at Malreward Court, had hia father 
invaded this one spot of earth where he could 
find peace. 

The Squire had been drinking ; his face was 
flushed, his voice was a little thick, but he knew 
perfectly well what he was about. " You left 
the dining-room just now, in your usual un- 
gentlemanly manner, but if you think you have 
shut my mouth you will find yourself mistaken. 
What do you mean by defjdng me to my face, 
and refusing to go to London with me — what 
do you mean by it, sir?" he roared. 

"It is useless for me to give you my rea- 
sons," replied Victor, quietly, courteously, but 
very resolutely, " but I have made up my mind 
that I will spend Christmas here." 

Mr. Malreward gasped and glared at him, as 
if he were struck dumb with fury. There was 
a minute of dreadful silence. Victor clenched 
his hands tightly together, and set his teeth. 
He felt that some great crisis in his history was 
come, some battle as if for life or death between 
himself and his father. 

When Mr. Malreward spoke again, it was 
in that slow, sneering, lowered tone, which 
with him often followed these fits of rage, — it 



lived here, till things have come to such a 
pass, that, by Jove, sirl I don't know which 
is master in this house, you or I. But now, 
I'll tell you what it is, Victor — I am going to 
break your will for good and all, if I half kill 
you in doing it. To-night is Tuesday — well, to 
begin with, you will not stir from this room until 
Friday. Then I will give you another chance." 

" Do you think I am going to stand that at 
my age, Mr. Malreward ? " cried Victor, beside 
himself at this climax of insult. 

" We will see, sir." Mr. Malreward walked 
out of the room, leaving the door wide open. 
But the next instant crash went a door a few 
yards down the corridor — a tremendous door, 
five inches thick, oak bound with iron clamps, 
and studded with nails, which shut off the 
cupola room, and two small unfurnished rooms, 
from the rest of the house. Victor seized the 
poker, and dashed out into the corridor — but be- 
fore he could reach the door, came the insulting 
clang of the key turned in the lock, bolts shot 



RESTORED. 337 

top and bottom, then the triumphant voice of 
Mr. Mabeward shouting from the other side: 
" Break the door down — ^if you can ; but if you 
do, if you escape in any way, I will write 
straight off and claim your sister I" 

" Damnation I " cried Victor — for the first 
time in his life bursting into one of his father's 
customary expletives. He let the poker fall: 
a moment ago he had felt strong enough to do 
anything, but now his arms were pinioned, the 
rope was round his neck. There is no need to 
describe what passions raged in Victor's heart 
for one dark hour. 

After a time he went to his old place by the 
fire. He felt sick, shivering ; the re-action had 
come. He began to sigh and moan ; to pity 
himself — as young people do when they are in 
trouble — ^as though he was somebody else. 
" Was there another fellow in the whole king- 
dom treated as he was? — a gentleman born and 
bred — so young too ; so young to be so miser- 
able — dragged away from everybody he cared 
for, no harmless fun and frolic like other young 
fellows, nothing but taunts, insults, curses. 
And he was so happy once, in the dear old 
days at Tregalva ; days which made his very 
heart break to look back upon — and, oh. Uncle 

VOL. I. T. 



kill me some day. He looked like it to-night. 
Well, we will see who gives in first. Since it 
has come to this — he shall never take me to 
London aHve." 

He sat like this, brooding, sorrow-stricken, 
till one of his candles flared, then sank into the 
socket, and looking up he saw that the other 
had but a few minutes more to bum. He did 
not know then what precious treasure had been 
wasting while he sat idle. So, stiflf and aching, 
he rose and began to undress, before he was 
left in total darkness, save the dying glimmer 
of the fire ; then he went to bed, but not to sleep 
for several hours to come. 

When the grey chilly twiUght of the late 
December morning came creeping into the room, 
he awoke from a troubled dream, and wondered 
why he felt so indescribably wretched. At first 
he could hardly believe in what had happened 
on the night before — it seemed too grotesquely 
insulting that he, a young man, should be locked 
up in his bedroom like a child. He went out 



RESTORED. 339 

into the corridor in his dressing-gown to see 
whether the great oak door was really barricaded 
against him. " It would be impossible to break 
that door down," he said, as, after shaking it, 
and finding it fast, he surveyed its ponderous 
iron clamps and nails. " I could tie the bed- 
clothes together and let myself down from the 
window, of course. But what then ? I had as 
soon Mr. Malreward killed me outright, as force 
poor dear Freddy to live here. No, they are in 
reality moral, not material bars, which keep me 
in prison." 

" What will happen next ? Is he going to 
starve me ?" came the sinister thought, when 
Victor had had his bath, and was dressed, when 
the ruddy wintry sun sent its low rays into his 
room, and faint sounds of life in the house 
reached him. An hour or two passed, and the 
fireeziug atmosphere of the great, draughty 
room chilled him, and a healthy boy's hunger 
began to gnaw him. He tried ringing his bell, 
but, as he foreboded, no effect was produced, and 
presently the rotten old bell-rope came down in 
his hands. " This won't do," he said, at last. 
" I must make myself learn something in order 
to forget that I am hungry, and I will walk up 
and down the room in order to get warm." 

z2 



again. He stood still and waited ; he ^was too 
proud even to look out into the corridor, for he 
imagined that Mr. Malreward was at hand. 

It was only Mrs. Jennings, who came creeping 
in, looking scared and miserable, bearing a plate 
which contained part of a loaf of bread. She 
set it down upon the table, curtseyed, and said 
in a trembling voice, " Indeed, Mr. Victor, I am 
as sorry as ever I can be — you, such a nice kind 
young gentleman and all — but what be I to do? 
Master would turn us all out of doors without a 
character if I was to go ever so httle against 
his orders ; and his words was I were to bring 
you just this and nothing more; and it's no 
good, please, sir, for you to try and get out of 
the big oak door, for my old man Jacob has 
locked it outside, as Master told him to ; and 
there he is now, waiting till I come out again ; 
and I be locked up in here too, and if you -was 
to murder me, Mr. Victor, I couldn't help it — ^" 
she looked round her shrinkingly, as if she were 
in the cage of a young tiger. 



RESTORED. 341 

" All right, Mrs. Jennings ; poor old soul, it is 
no fault of yours," answered Victor, trying to 
laugh. " This is a joke, isn't it ? — prison bars, 
prison fare and all 1" ' . * 

" I'll make your bed and tidy your room a bit, 
please, sir; I am sure as Til do all as ever I can 
to make you comfortable." 

" Thank you, Mrs. Jennings, I am sure you 
will," repliedVictor, courteously; and he took his 
book out into the corridor and walked up and 
down, trying to repeat the lines he had learnt. 

"I can't do no more, please, sir," said the 
housekeeper, piteously, as she came out of the 
bedroom at last. " It would be as much as my 
life's worth, pretty near." 

" What — are you not going to light the fire, 
Mrs. Jennings ?" asked Victor, a little dismayed, 
as he saw the black, empty grate. 

" Indeed, sir — ^indeed, I be so sorry, but 'twas 
master's orders you were to have no fire, nor 
nothing but what I have brought you. And 
please, sir, you won't go for to try to get out of 
the oak door, when I do, will you now? 
Jacob is a deal stronger than you, and he has 
orders to stop you getting out, come what may." 

" I'll put his strength to the test," thought 
Victor ; then he checked himself. " No, for 



to his breakfast of dry bread and cold Trater. 
" So it is to be a regular case of blockade. Well, 
he will find it takes a good deal of starving and 
freezing to conquer me, I fancy." 

His resolution not to be mastered was meat 
and drink and warmth to him ; and presently, 
when his hunger was choked rather than ap- 
peased by the dry bread he had eaten, he turn- 
ed to his books and his writing, and worked 
vigorously for several hours. " This is a her- 
mit's cell," said he, " a scholarly retreat ; * plain 
living and high thinking,' — • stone walls do 
not a prison make,' and all the rest of it. If 
Mr. Malreward only leaves me to myself I shall 
do very well, I don't see that I am so very 
much worse off than when dear Uncle Arthur 
used to put me under arrest in the old days; and 
I have not now the feeling that he is unhappy 
about me, as I had then. By-the-by, I wonder 
whether Mr. Malreward haslet old Groves know 
that I am not coming to him this week, and 
what reason he has given. Ten to one he has 



/ 



RESTORED. 343 

given out that I have gone away on a visit 
somewhere." 

" Well," he said, At last, looking up from his 
books, straightening his back, and pushing his 
hair off his forehead. " My head is a ball of 
fire, and my feet are gradually freezing, it ap- 
pears to me ; I must start for a long walk, from 
the end of this room to that confounded oak 
door in the corridor, and back again ; and un- 
dertake an exploring expedition into the empty 
rooms, i might find a mouse or a spider to 
tame, in the approved prison fashion. What, 
is it only one o'clock? it seems to me quite 
twelve hours since Mrs. Jennings was here." 

His healthy young limbs craved for exercise ; 
but he soon found that pacing a few yards back- 
wards and forwards in a room, even piling 
chairs together and leaping over them, is a very 
different thing to a ten miles' walk in the open 
air. There is no change for the mind, no re- 
freshment for the nerves, in the regular routine 
of prison exercise ; it has all the fatiguing and 
none of the invigorating qualities, of a free 
man's constitutional. He wandered into the 
unfurnished rooms, looked out at every window^ 
tried to find amusement in turning out drawers 
and cupboards, in ransacking old hoards and 



VVr J^I 1 »\JI,*.\J AV« 



When he was quite tired out, and he had not 
actually traversed more inches than 'would 
amount to three miles, he ate a little more of 
his small portion of bread, then took up the 
novel he had been reading yesterday after- 
noon. But every half hour or so, the aching in 
his hands and feet forced him to get lip and 
walk about; as the afternoon went on the 
cold got a still stronger hold upon him, 
there seemed to be ice in his veins instead of 
blood ; and there began to gnaw him strange, 
sickening cravings after meat, vegetables, hot 
coffee, for anything but this choking, repugnant 
dry bread. 

As he was again pacing up and down, book 
in hand, forcing his mind to forget his body, 
he became conscious that he had a slight diffi- 
culty in making out the words he was reading. 
He looked up ; the sky, seen through the cupola 
overhead, had turned very grey. He looked at 
his watch, it was past four o'clock. He won- 
dered to find it so early, but it was growing 



RESTORED. 345 

dusk, as it ordinarily did at that hoar, when 
the days were at their shortest. He laid down 
his book and went to the mantelpiece. 

There were no candles in the candlesticks. 
Neither were there any matches in the room. 

Victor stood still a moment, horrorHstnick by 
this discovery, and all that it meant. It meant 
this — for fifteen hours, from half-past four this 
afternoon, until half-pkst seven to-morrow 
morning, he should be left in darkness. The 
boy turned pale ; for the first time since he had 
been made prisoner, his spirit quailed. ** This 
is absolutely diabolical," he said. ** This then 
is how Mr. Malreward means to break me down. 
I can stand cold, hunger, loss of liberty — ^but 

darkness, compulsory idleness Well, if I 

stand here thinking about it, I shall go nuuL 
Let me see — which book of mine has the largest 
print ? Hallam*8 Constitutional History of Eng- 
land, I think. I will take it close to the win* 
dow ; I shall be aUe to go on reading tor an- 
other half4ionr, I tfaink.^ He made a gallant 
fight for it, but fais eyes struck work at last. 
Then he closed the book, and stood looking 
out into the twiligbt^ 

It was a Meak ^uA \AiU^ evening; if tfaeie wm 
any red ^eam </f suwset, he oould mA see it 



' ' rVK» TW ViM. V-> 



flying heavily home, — not another living creature 
could he see. The dreariness of the winter's 
evening sank deep into Victor's heart; he began 
to feel a chill more freezing than any bodily 
cold — the chill of being absolutely alone and 
forgotten. " If only Deverell would come this 
way through the grounds," he thought; "if I 
could only hear his kind hearty voice; if I 
could see any human being whatever, so long 

as it was not my father ^" But all was 

desolation, all was silence, except the dismal 
creaking and groaning of the cupola, as it shook 
in the wind. With straining longing eyes, he 
watched the last cold gleam of daylight fade 
away. Then in solemn tones, like a fiineral 
knell, the clock of Malreward church struck five; 
and soon afterwards the sky, seen through the 
cupola, grew as dark as the room below, and 
blackest night settled down upon the world. 

" Let me see — there will be hardly a glimmer 
of light again for fourteen hours. Did I really 
know before how long the nights were in De- 



t 



RESTORED. 347 

cember ? But I will not think about ^ it, I will 
not. My mind has surely enough food in it to 
keep from starving for one or two idle evenings; 
and as for my body, why, 1 will see for how 
many hours I can forget its existence. Now I 
will walk about, till I get thoroughly warmed 
and tired, and then I will go to bed. What 
does it matter how early it is ? — surely if it is 
dark, I can sleep." 

Victor went groping about, cleared some of 
the chairs and tables out of the way, until he 
had made for himself a clear road across the 
room. Then he walked up and down as fast as 
he could, repeating lines of poetry aloud as he 
went. He had a capital memory, and this stood 
him in good stead to-night. So he went through 
long passages from Shakespeare, H Penseroso 
from beginning to end, an exquisite sonnet or 
two from the Elizabethan poets 

•' Care charmer Sleep, son of the sable night, 
Brother to Death, in silent darkness born, 

Relieve my languish, and restore the light, 
With dark forgetting of my care return. 
And let the day be time enough to mourn 

The shipwreck of my iU-adventured youth . . . ." 

And then with a bound over the little-loved 
eighteenth century, he dashed into Shelley; 
then repeated stanza after stanza of the In 



»» l^^/AJL ±A\^ »» ««M » '« 'p- ........ y j;.^ »■•; . . . . ~ ■■■ T-a « il 1 HI till 

clock had stopped, it struck again. How he 
loved that clock now ! it seemed like a living 
friend — the only one he had left. Presently — 
as if in mockery of the captive — ^the dinner- 
bell clanged downstairs far away. It seemed 
to hungry Victor as though a savoury fra- 
grance were wafted into the room, and he stood 
still, and wondered what there was for dinner. 
Then he laughed bitterly. " These cravings of 
one's carnal nature should be expressed in 
poetry, not in such very prosaic prose." 
And he walked on again, saying aloud — 



t( 



-Candied apple, quince and plum and gouid, 



With jellies smoother than the creamy curd. 
And lucent syrups, tinct with cinnamon ; 
Manna and dates, in argosy transferred 
From Fez ; and spiced dainties, every one 
From silken Samarcand to cedar^d Lebanon/' 

At last, being very weary, and a little fiunt, 
he thought that perhaps he had tired himself 
enough to be able to sleep; but being still 
miserably chilly, he did not undress, but lay 
down on his bed between the blankets. But it 



RESTORED. 349 

was then haj'dly seven o'clock, and commonly at 
that hour he had just finished dinner, and was 
thinking about the long evening's work he had 
before him. So it was no wonder, when he 
laid his cheek down on the pillow, which seem- 
ed like a block of ice, that he felt as though he 
had lost for the rest of his life all capacity 
of sleep, the bedclothes seemed only to steal 
away what vital warmth he had left, and his 
teeth began to chatter until the bed shook 
under him. . 

*' This won't do at all I" and he sprung up, to 
go through the weary round of pacing the 
room, of throwing himself on the bed, of 
starting up again in despair of warmth and 
sleep. He had long ago finished his bread to 
the last crumb, and by-and-by there began to 
torture him gnawing pangs of hunger. " Ah I" 
and he groaned and writhed and rocked him- 
self backwards and forwards. " I never knew 
before what it was to be hungry. God help us 
all I What must some of the very poor suffer ? 
Well, perhaps it is good for me that I should 
know." After a time the pain left him, and he 
grew deadly sick and faint ; this passed away 
also, and then for the present he lost all desire 
of food. 



ly and familiar things began to look odd and 
grotesque, and to take strange, flickering shapes. 
He shut his eyes, and then flashes of his life at 
Tregalva passed before them ; little trifles, long 
ago forgotten, came back with the vividness of 
a dream. 

How kind Uncle Arthur had been that day, 
two years ago, when coming home alone in the 
dusk, he had somehow missed his way on the 
desolate Cornish moors ; and after riding round 
and round, miles out of his homeward way, he 
had arrived at the Rectory at last — tired, a little 
scared, two hours late for dinner, with all his 
lessons to learn ; and his uncle — who could be 
so stem and awful — had merely said, "Don't 
distress yourself dear boy ; you say you lost 
your way, and your word is always enough for 



me. 



What fun he and Freddy had had that golden 
summer afternoon, when with bare feet they 
had waded at low water over the wet sands of 
lonely Bossiuey — splashing and dancing, flying 



RESTORED. 351 

and pursuing the foamy, emerald waves ; clam- 
bering over the smooth rocks, laughing, shriek- 
ing, when their bare feet slipped, and were 
bruised by the sharp black clusters of limpet 
and periwinkle shells which clung to the stones; 
finding hid treasures, long wavy tresses that 
might have been mermaids' hair, pebbles which 
shone like agate or onyx, secret lurking-places, 
gleaming fairy-like caves, hues of malachite and 
bronze and ruby, which the sea disclosed but 
once in twelve hours. 

Kind, well-known voices, little jokes, happy 
laughter, memories of long rides with boy-com- 
panions, of boating, pic-nic parties, memorable 
games of cricket — came to that dark and soli- 
tary room. And upon the gloom there shone 
presently — vivid, clear as a photograph — the 
Rector's study, mellow oak floor, heavy green 
curtains, the walls of books touched with rich 
colours, the glowing fire, the subdued lamp- 
light, soft lustre falling upon Arthur Byrne's 
grey head and noble face — stern, yet kindly — 
as he reclined in his comfortable arm-chair, 
reading, thinking — Ah, little he thought how 
fared it with his nephew, god-son, adopted 
child, here at Malreward Court, struggling with 
those deadly foes to the human race — cold, 



cAuvi. v/uxixy ixixoij xu ixxuoi/ oxxvLC xJLXVKf VLixy W ai,~lJLl tlX 

and comfort, so that the Rector would start and 
shiver and look up from his book, and feel 
as though a cold hand were laid upon his heart. 

** Oh, Uncle Arthur 1'' sighed the boy, " won't 
you come — won't you help me? Oh, if you 
only knew what I have to suffer, you would 
come 1" And then he thought of his young 
mother, whom he had never known — did she 
know how he, her only son, was treated here, 
in her old home ? — did people up in heaven ever 
feel sorry for those they had left on earth, 
did they want to help them, would they come t 
Oh, that she would come — ^his girl-mother, with 
the sweet, bright, tender face and golden hair — 
come gliding through the dark like a star I 

And then at last he slept — the sleep of sheer 
exhaustion. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



LONDON : PBINTED BT MAODONALD AND TUQWELL, BLENHEIM HOUSE. 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR, 

SON AND HEIR. 

In Three Volumes, 



OPINIONS OF THE PRESS. 
" A decidedly clever novel of what may be termed the strongly emotional school 
of fiction, but also possessing considerable merits of a less ambitions and exciting 
nature." — Spectator. 

" The author of 'Son and Heir' may fairly be congratulated on having achieved 
a legitimate success, by strictly legitimate means." — ^Saturday Beoieuf. 

" There is a great deal of merit, of a rare -and pleasant kind, in this novel The 
scenes are drawn with a firm, bold, picturesque, and pathetic hand." — Morning Post 

^ A remarkable and brilliant novel We can give no idea of the power, beauty 
and pathos with which the story is told." — Stcmdard. 

" A very pretty novel, with a fresh and delightful heroina The writer of * Son 
and Heir' has ability for the novelist's work which far exceeds that of several 
popular favourites in this department of literature." — Olobe. 

*' In the deep pathos and the power which are shown throughout, there is evi- 
dence that the author will one day win a high place amongst writers of fiction." — 
Court Journal. 

*' An admirable work, both in conception and in execution. The plot is remark- 
ably clever, and the characters are drawn with unusual ability. A more touching 
picture of perfect love and perfect faith was never written." — Illustrated London News. 

*' We have rarely taken up a novel which has pleased us more, or in which we 
have taken greater interest, than this. Without any pretence of being a sensation 
novel, there is yet an excitement about it, and at the same time a reality, that can- 
not fail to carry the reader along with it We shall gladly welcome another work 
by the author of ' Son and Heir.' ''—John Bull. 

" This book is one of the most remarkable of the season. It is full of power and 
promise. The dialogue is brilliant and piquant; the characters are admirably 
drawn, and their keeping ia well preserved. We think a very brilliant future is 
before the author." — Patriot. 

'' ' Son and Heir' is a decided success, and contains the promise of higher achieve- 
ments to coma The story is a well-imagined one, and worked out with meritorious 
cara It is something new, too, to have a hero who is not a mere bundle of impos- 
sible perfections, or an incarnation of one consuming passion ; but a simple blue- 
eyed young Englishman, remai^ble for his honesty and strong will The author 
is possessed of not a few of the spells by which readers are bound and their 
curiosity chained, while they follow the clue which tempts them through the 
labyrinth." — Westminster Review. 

"■ The fictions which the author of ' Son and Heir' has given to the world, possess 
qualities of a high order. They are fresh, strong, and wholesome. Eschewing 
alike sensationalism and pruriency, they are clever and careful delineations of 
varied character, full of thoughtfulness and power; ^ile they excite interest they 
elevate moral feeling." — British Quarterly Review. 

HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS, 13 GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET. 



i 



