Reuben and Rachel; or, Tales of Old Times, Volume 2 . . . (1798)
Author: Rowson, Susanna.
Publication info: Reuben and Rachel . 174-364. Boston: Manning & Lording, for David West, 1798.

 Main text
[Page ]
Reuben and Rachel;
OR,
Tales of Old Times.
VOLUME SECOND.
[Page ]
a
[Page ]
CHAP. I.
Tales by Compariſon modern, by the ſame Rule ancient;
or, Tales of Old Times continued.
To loſe the partner of the heart, and not feel
acutely, would be juſtly termed ſtupidity. To
attempt to delineate thoſe feelings, might with equal
juſtice be called preſumption. The firſt year of our
hero and heroine's exiſtence muſt therefore be paſſed
over in ſilence. At the end of that period we behold
their father combating, by the efforts of reaſon and
conſtant employment, the barbed ſhafts of affliction.
The very attempt to repel them weakened their force;
by repeated reſiſtance they became entirely harmleſs,
and fell, totally bereaved of point or power, to the
ground.
Reuben Dudley regained his ſerenity; his affections,
his hopes, his fondeſt wiſhes were now centred in his
children. Regret for the mother was ſwallowed up
in expectation of the children's future virtues and happiness.
Aunt Rachel preſided over the houſehold,
and ſuperintended the nurſery.
Reuben and Rachel were by no means ſuperior to
the generality of children of their age and condition.
Rachel was a lively brown girl, and both ſhe and her
brother very ſoon diſcovered, that by crying vociferously
they could obtain almoſt any thing. Aunt
[Page 174]
Rachel would not ſuffer the dear creatures to be crossed,
and papa thought them, without exception, the
ſweeteſt, moſt charming children in the univerſe. Alas!
cries affected wiſdom, how fooliſh the ſuppoſition;
but reaſon, unbiaſſed by prejudice, declares it is only
nature, pure, undiſguiſed nature.
Nature! dear goddeſs! how beautiful thou art,
when, chaſte and unadorned, thou appeareſt in the
veſtments of ſimplicity; when the undeviating features
portray but the feelings of the heart; when the
tongue, uncontaminated by vice, unverſed in the practice
of deception, gives utterance only to what thoſe
feelings dictate; then, who can reſiſt thy eloquence?
then, who can liſten to thy voice, or behold thy beauties
unmoved? The philoſopher gazes at thee with
rapture; the ſtoic cannot inveſtigate thy charms and
retain his apathy; forgetting his affected inſenſibility,
he beholds with wonder, admiration and love, thy in
obtruſive excellence, and joins involuntarily in the exclamation
of the enthuſiaſt, Oh Nature! dear goddess!
how beautiful throu art.
The children were neither ſtrikingly beautiful, or
remarkably brilliant. Health, cheerfulneſs, and dispositions
naturally good, rendered them engaging;
but their minds, like the minds of moſt infants, were
perfect blanks, on which the hand of education might
impreſs whatever characters the inſtructor pleaſed.
As they were educated in the ſtricteſt principles of
Quakeriſm, neither trouble nor expenſe was beſtowed
on the ornamental parts, though every thing uſeful
was attended to with the utmoſt care.
As they advanced in years, their characters naturally
developed themſelves. Reuben was open, generous,
unſuſpecting, and poſſeſſed a firmneſs of temper,
almoſt approaching to obſtinacy. Enthuſiaſtic in his
attachment to his ſiſter, from earlieſt infancy his actions
had declared, that to ſee her contented and happy,
made him ſo.
Rachel was modeſt, unaſſuming, meek, timid and
affectionate. Poſſeſſed of a good underſtanding, a
quick and clear perception, and a ſtrong memory, the
[Page 175]
taſk of inſtructing her was moſt delightful. Daily,
nay, almoſt hourly did her mind unfold ſome new,
ſome unexpected beauty. Her love of literature, and
the rapid progreſs ſhe made in every ſtudy in which
ſhe engaged, at once charmed and aſtoniſhed her aunt
and father. But her extreme diffidence prevented her
excellencies from being univerſally known, and it was
only by a long and intimate acquaintance her intrinsic
worth could be diſcovered. Yet Rachel was not
faultleſs. The meekneſs of her temper was ſuch, that
reſentment was a ſtranger to her boſom. An injury
was no more remembered than as it had given pain to
her heart, and that heart, moulded by the hand of
pure innocence, was credulous in the extreme. Her
exceſſive anxiety to ſee others happy, made her inattentive
to the means of promoting or preſerving her
own happineſs; and if any one profeſſed to love her,
though but a moment before they had held a dagger
to her breaſt, ſhe would have forgot the intended injury,
and never doubting their ſincerity, admitted them
to her confidence and friendſhip. Her affection for her
brother was equal to his for her. To ſeparate them,
though but for an hour, was to give them the ſevereſt
uneaſineſs. They were parted with tears, and met
again with ſuperlative ſatisfaction.
Such were Reuben and Rachel at ten years of age.
Their father doted on them with the tendereſt affection,
and aunt Rachel thought they were the moſt superior
beings in the whole univerſe. She would sometimes
talk to them about America, deſcribe the vaſt
woods, boundleſs plains, majeſtic rivers, and extenſive
lakes of that great continent. Reuben would liſten
with rapture, and ſay, “When I am a man, aunt, I
will go there.” “I ſhould like to go too,” Rachel
would ſay, “but I am ſure I ſhould be afraid to go to
ſea.”
It was on a winter's evening, as their father was
overlooking ſome papers, old deeds, &c. that had lain
mouldy in an old trunk for many years, (intending to
deſtroy thoſe that were uſeleſs) that Reuben eſpied a
fearlet plume, or rather coronet of feathers, which had
[Page 176]
been thrown with ſome other rubbiſh in a heap, in order
to be burned. He ſeized it, examined it with attention,
and at length, conceiving the purpoſe for
which it had been made, tied it round his head, and
marching up to his father, cried, “Look at me, Sir.”
“Upon my word, Sir,” replied his father, ſmiling,
“why you look like a ſachem indeed now.”
“Why, father, did the ſachems of the Indians wear
ſuch things on their heads?” aſked Reuben.
“Yes,” replied his father, “that was your grandfather's
coronet.”
“My grandfather, Sir!”
“Yes, child; he became a ſachem by marrying the
daughter of an Indian chief; but I thought your aunt
had told you that long ago.”
“No indeed, Sir; will you tell us all about it, how
it came to happen, now?”
“No; it is a long ſtory, and I am buſy.”
Curioſity is perhaps the ſtrongeſt impulſe of the human
mind. In extreme youth its power is irreſiſtible.
The children felt theirs awakened, and ſoftly opening
the door of their father's ſtudy, they ſlipped out, and
ran into the parlour to aunt Rachel. Aunt Rachel
was, it is true, an old maid.
Full fifty winters, as they paſs'd, had ſhed
Their ſilver honours on her rev'rend head;
But ſtill her heart its priſtine warmth retain'd;
The days were paſt, but mem'ry ſtill remain'd.
Still the lov'd form of the lamented youth,
His faith, his love, his conſtancy, his truth,
Were treaſur'd there.
The coronet that bound the brows of Reuben, recalled
a thouſand tender recollections. Her dear brother
William ſeemed to ſtand in miniature before her.
The form of Yankoo aroſe to her remembrance. Oberea
too ſeemed preſent; and when the boy aſked her if ſhe
knew whoſe crown that was, her feelings were ſo powerful
as for a moment to ſuſpend her anſwer.
“It was my brother's,” ſaid ſhe in a mournful tone,
taking it from the child's head and laying it on her
own knee; “I have ſeen him wear it often.”
[Page 177]
“He was a great man in America, aunt,” ſaid
Reuben.
“He was more than great, my love, he was good.”
“Pray, aunt,” ſaid Rachel, “do you remember my
grandmother?”
“Perfectly.”
“Was ſhe an Indian?”
“Yes.”
“What, quite a wild ſavage?”
“No, my dear, ſhe was what is in general erroneously
termed ſo; but her heart was as gentle, as compassionate,
as full of virtue and piety, as that of the
moſt enlightened Chriſtian.”
“Was ſhe black, aunt?”
“No; dark brown, or rather copper. But the
complexion of her face was like that of her mind.
Its charms and imperfections were diſcoverable at one
glance, and it was ever beautiful, becauſe invariable.”
“But was my grandfather a ſachem?”
“He was.”
“What is a ſachem?”
“It is a title given to a chief amongſt the Indians,
and is the ſame as governor with us.”
“How came he to be a chief of the ſavages, aunt?”
“I will tell you,” replied aunt Rachel.
It was a ſubject on which ſhe delighted to expatiate.
She ſtirred up the fire, folded up her work, and placing
the attentive children on each ſide of her, began.—
But my readers already know the whole ſtory, and
repetitions are ever tedious and unintereſting. Aunt
Rachel was minute in her recital. At the account of
her capture, Rachel wept; but Reuben ſtarted from
his ſeat, his countenance glowing with reſentment,
and cried, “I wiſh I had been there.”
“And what could you have done, my love?” ſaid
his aunt.
“Have reſcued you, or died,” replied our hero.
“Charming, undaunted ſpirit,” exclaimed his aunt,
and then continued her narrative.
When ſhe recounted the death of Otooganoo, and
the ſolemn manner in which he recommended their
[Page 178]
father (then an infant) to the care of the chiefs, “Good
old man,” ſaid Rachel, in the moſt expreſſive accent
of affection, “what a pity he ſhould die.”
“Then my father is a ſachem,” ſaid Reuben; and
the ſeeds of ambition which nature had implanted,
but which till that moment had lain dormant in his
boſom, ſtarted into life. At the account of their
grandfather's death, the children both ſobbed audibly.
“I will! I am determined I will! go to America,”
ſaid Reuben, firſt ſuppreſſing his emotions.
“What, without me, brother?” aſked Rachel, in a
mournful voice.
“No, no,” he replied, “not without you, but when
I am a man we will go together; we will find out our
grandfather's government, and diſcover ourſelves to
his people; I dare ſay they would be glad to ſee us,
ſince they loved him ſo well.”
“But what ſhould we go there for, brother? I am
ſure we are very happy here, and papa would not be
willing to part with us, and aunt Rachel too would
miſs us.”
“Well, then, I will go, and leave you with them,
and when I have ſettled myſelf in my government, I
will ſend for you all. Oh! what a fine houſe I will
have, and then what a number of ſervants, and horſes,
and coaches.”
Aunt Rachel ſmiled, to hear how eagerly the fancy
of youth catches at the hope of future greatneſs, and
how readily they connect the ideas of grandeur, affluence,
and numerous attendants, to the poſſeſſion of a
title. She gazed for a moment with pleaſure on his
intelligent countenance, which the emotions of his little
ſwelling heart had lighted up with uncommon animation;
and pauſed, unwilling to throw a damp on
thoſe delightful ſenſations he appeared to enjoy. At
length, “What would you ſay,” cried ſhe, “if I were
to tell you that your grandfather had no attendants
except a few warriors, who, from voluntary attachment
to his perſon, followed to protect him from danger;
that he had neither horſe nor carriage; that his
palace was chiefly compoſed of the bark of trees; that
[Page 179]
his bed was the ſkins of wild beaſts, and his ſeat of
ſtate the trunk of an old tree, hewn into ſomething resembling
a chair, covered with beaver and other ſkins,
and its ornaments the teeth of tygers, poliſhed ſhells
and fiſh bones?”
“But he was good,” ſaid Rachel, “and consequently
happy.”
“And he was brave and wiſe,” ſaid Reuben exultingly,
“and every body loved him.”
“Sweet children,” ſaid aunt Rachel, “thoſe are
conſequences which ought ever to follow goodneſs,
bravery and wiſdom. But, alas! they are not always
certain.
“What, then, are not all good perſons happy?”
“Not always in their outward circumſtances; but
they enjoy internal peace.”
“And are not the brave and the wiſe always esteemed?”
“By thoſe who have ſenſe and diſcernment they in
general are; but unfortunately, great and ſhining
qualifications, of either mind or perſon, excite in general
more envy than love.”
“What is envy, aunt?”
“A paſſion, my dear Rachel, to which I hope you
will ever remain a ſtranger.” With this wiſh the good
old lady kiſſed the children, and diſmiſſed them to
bed.
CHAP. II.
Education may poliſh the Manners, but Human Nature
will be ſtill the ſame. Though the father of our hero and heroine
was a man moderate in his wiſhes, and of that
reaſonable caſt of mind that preferred mediocrity to
affluence; yet he conceived it an indiſpenſable duty to
endeavour to improve his fortune for the ſake of his
children. He had retained ſome faint idea of the beauty
and fertility of the American continent; he alſo
[Page 180]
felt an irreſiſtible impulſe to viſit once more the place
of his nativity; and a number of families, of his own
perſuaſion, about this period emigrating to the colony
of Pennſylvania, amongſt whom were ſome of his
wife's neareſt relations, he collected together all the
ready money he was maſter of, and turning it into
ſuch merchandize as was moſt likely to be productive
of emolument, embarked with a deſign of purchaſing
land, building a houſe, and putting the whole in ſuch
a ſtate of cultivation, as might render it at once a
pleaſant and profitable habitation for his children,
when arrived to the age of maturity.
How naturally do we expect our children, or thoſe
in whoſe welfare we are intereſted, to adopt the sentiments
moſt congenial to our own feelings, without
conſidering that nature is as various in the formation
of the minds of men, as of their faces; and thoſe pursuits
and acquirements, which to one will give the
moſt ſuperlative delight, to another would bring only
miſery. Thus the father of Rachel and Reuben, being
himſelf a man of peace, fond of retirement and the
ſtudy of agriculture, thought he could not render
them a more acceptable ſervice, than to prepare them
a habitation, where they might enjoy uninterrupted
quiet; where plenty would preſide at the board, and
the ſtudy of nature, in all her varieties and beauties,
enliven ſolitude.
He placed his ſon at a public ſchool to finiſh his
education, and making proper arrangements for the
ſupport of his family during his abſence (which he
imagined would be about two years) he entruſted Rachel
to the care of her aunt, with inſtructions, that in
caſe of death ſhe ſhould remove to the houſe, and submit
to the direction of her maternal uncle, Hezekiah
Penn.
Reuben and Rachel were in their thirteenth year
when this ſeparation took place. Their tears fell at
the idea of being parted from their father; but when
the brother and ſiſter were informed that, during a
period of two years, they muſt not expect to meet
[Page 181]
only at each returning Chriſtmas, their grief was beyond
expreſſion.
When the carriage came to the door that was to
convey Reuben from her, Rachel burſt into an agony
of tears. “My brother! my dear, dear brother!”
ſhe cried, hanging round his neck.
“God bleſs you, my charming ſiſter! my dear,
amiable ſiſter!” cried he.
Aunt Rachel drew her niece from the door, from
the parting embrace of her brother (who was led to
the carriage by his father) and by degrees compoſed
and conſoled her.
It cannot be ſuppoſed that their father was an unmoved
ſpectator of this affecting ſcene. No! he felt
and compaſſionated their ſufferings; but he knew that
a maiden aunt and ſequeſtered manſion, would in no
wiſe prepare his ſon for the active ſcenes of life in which
(however contrary to his own wiſhes) he would moſt
likely hereafter engage.
His family concerns being now ſettled to his satisfaction,
he embarked for Pennſylvania. His commercial
plans were executed with great ſucceſs, his intended
purchaſe made on very advantageous terms, and
at the cloſe of the third year from his firſt arrival, he
prepared again to viſit England. Mr. Dudley had
taken from Europe with him a diſtant relation of his
wife's, a young man, of whom, as he will make a considerable
figure in the enſuing pages, it may not be
thought an unneceſſary digreſſion to give ſome account.
The mother of Jacob Holmes was niece to the father
of Caſſiah Penn. She had been left an orphan in
early infancy; but the loſs of parents was amply supplied
by her benevolent uncle and aunt. She was
nearly of the ſame age with their own daughter, and,
brought up with her, received the ſame benefit of education.
When Caſſiah married the father of our hero
and heroine, Mary Holmes continued with her
aunt, and by tenderaſſiduity endeavoured to prevent
her feeling too acutely the privation of her daughter's
ſociety. Mary was naturally ſincere and artleſs; but
Mary was handſome, and loved to be told of her
[Page 182]
beauty. She poſſeſſed what is in general termed one of
the beſt diſpoſitions in the world, becauſe ſhe ſeldom
took the trouble to contradict any one. Her eaſineſs
might, without much exaggeration, have been termed
indolence; and her extreme good-nature, folly and
want of feeling. To praiſe her beauty, was to win
her heart; and being often extolled for her ſweetneſs
and evenneſs of temper, ſhe conceived, that to be perfectly
paſſive was to be perfectly amiable; and Mary,
with a face extremely lovely, and a form captivating,
poſſeſſed neither expreſſion of countenance, nor sensibility
of heart; but like ſome kinds of tropical fruits,
which, when ripe, are ſo ſweet as to be inſipid, and,
though beautiful to the eye, have neither poignancy
or flavour to delight the taſte. She had loved her
couſin Caſſiah with as much tenderneſs as her nature
was capable of; ſhe thought her the moſt perfect of
human beings; and whilſt Caſſiah was her conſtant
companion, Mary was free from error.
In the neighbourhood of the dwelling of Obadiah
Penn, was the ancient ſeat of the family of the Fitzgeralds.
Arthur Fitzgerald was an only child; his
father had been dead many years; his mother's indulgence
had been unbounded; and at the age of
twenty-five, Arthur had ſcarcely ever known what it was
ro be contradicted. Heir at once to the eſtates of his
father and the hereditary honours of his mother; a
deſcendant of the houſe of Aumerle, of which he was
the laſt male branch, Arthur thought the chief end of
his exiſtence was pleaſure; and though poſſeſſed of a
good underſtanding, and a not naturally corrupt
heart, he often performed actions which did honour to
humanity; yet unlimited indulgence and unclouded
proſperity, by degrees rendered thoſe divine impulſes
of nature, compaſſion and benevolence, weaker and
weaker, till at length his heart ceaſed to be influenced
by either.
His mother, lady Allida, chiefly reſided at the Pinery,
the name the ſeat had taken from its being surrounded
by a deep wood of pine trees. Mrs. Pinup
was lady Allida's chief attendant, and ſuperintendant
[Page 183]
of her houſehold in general. Though it might be
ſuppoſed, that the vaſt diſtance pride places between
the family of a woman of quality in actual poſſeſſion
of eight thouſand pounds a year, and expectant of
twice the ſum, and that of a ſimple country gentleman,
whoſe whole annual income did not exceed eight
hundred, did not allow of any intercourſe between lady
Allida Fitzgerald, and the wife of Obadiah Penn;
but the ſervants of thoſe families ſometimes met, and
Mrs. Pinup, in the extreme condeſcenſion of her heart,
and likewiſe having her mind fixed on ſome excellent
raſpberry brandy (which the old lady kept as a wholesome
ſtomachic) ſometimes paid a viſit to dame Prue,
upper ſervant in Mr. Penn's family.
In ſome of theſe viſits, Mrs. Pinup had often ſeen
both Caſſiah and Mary; but there was always a modest
dignity in the manner of the former, that repelled
any approach to familiarity from perſons whoſe education,
manners and ſtation rendered them unfit companions;
yet it was a dignity no ways tinctured with
haughtineſs. She was ever gentle and affable, ſo
much ſo as to be a univerſal favourite, from the higheſt
to the loweſt.
But Mary would laugh with the maids; and though
reſpect for her as their maſter's niece, kept the menservants
in ſome awe, ſhe endured from them familiar
praiſes of her beauty, not only without reſentment, but
even with ſuch an apparent degree of ſatisfaction as
encouraged, rather than repelled their freedom.
Sometimes, when Mrs. Pinup was there, ſhe would go
down ſtairs purpoſely to chat with her, aſk a thouſand
queſtions about lady Allida, the houſe, the pleasuregrounds,
and other more inſignificant ſubjects, ſuch as
her dreſs, the faſhion of it; for Mary Holmes was no
Quaker in her heart, and would often pull off her cloſe
mob, and let her hair, which was very fine, fall looſely
over her ſhoulders. But if the more ſedate Caſſiah
ever beheld any of theſe ſigns of vanity, ſhe would
mildly reprove them, and as Mary feared to offend
her, the would ever reſtrain them in her preſence.
[Page 184]
Mrs. Pinup, ever communicative, and wonderfully
eloquent in the praiſe of lady Allida, would expatiate
for hours on her grandeur, her rich clothes, her houſe,
her plate, and jewels; nay, ſhe often aſked dame Prue
to come and bring the young ladies to ſee all theſe
fine things. Caſſiah uniformly refuſed theſe invitations,
but Mary, though ſubmiſſive to the ſuperior wiſdom
of her couſin, ſecretly wiſhed to accept them.
On the marriage of Caſſiah, her mother accompanied
her home, and remained with her as a viſitor nearly
a month. During this time, the heedleſs Mary,
unable to combat her inclinations, though ſhe knew
they were wrong, yielded to the ſolicitations of dame
Prue, and accompanied her to the Pinery. Lady Allida
was abſent for the day. Mrs. Pinup led her
gueſts through the antique and ſuperbly furniſhed
apartments. The rich velvet canopies, the ſtately
beds, the maſſy ſilver cups, large marble tables with
burniſhed ſupporters, China vaſes, large looking-glasses,
and beautiful tapeſtry, were gazed on by Mary
with wonder and delight. Plenty, unreſtrained by parsimony,
preſided over every department of the household
economy of Obadiah Penn. His furniture was
excellent in its kind, but it was plain.
The wardrobe was next diſplayed. The rich tiſſue,
brocaded or velvet ſuits were in turns the object of
her admiration and deſire. The fine lace pinners, the
diamond earings, necklace, and other ornaments—Oh!
how fine! how beautiful! how elegant! was repeated
a hundred times.
“Well,” ſaid Mary, “I wonder how I ſhould look,
dreſſed in ſome of this finery?”
“Look! why like an angel, I'm ſure,” ſaid Mrs.
Pinup. “Oh! there is nothing like dreſs, to ſet off a
pretty face; and if you look ſo handſome in that
brown paduſuoy gown and plain muſlin cap, how do
you think you would look in a full dreſs ſuit?”
Mary was holding a rich blue ſilk robe in her hand
at the moment; ſhe held it up againſt her ſide. The
delicacy of the colour was exactly ſuited to her complexion;
the effect it had gave an additional fluſh to
[Page 185]
her cheek. It was a looſe robe, made with open
ſleeves, and faſtened at the boſom with a diamond
claſp. The ground was blue, but it was ſuperbly embroidered
with ſilver, and round the neck and ſleeves
was a net of ſilver thread.
“Put it on,” ſaid Mrs. Pinup.
The faſhion of the dreſs was ſuch as partly to expose
the neck. The neck of Mary was covered with
a fine cambrick handkerchief. Mrs. Pinup took it
off; and then, ſlipping the robe over her other clothes,
faſtened it at the boſom, releaſed her luxurious flaxen
hair from the confinement of the cap, and turning her
to the glaſs, ſaid, “What do you think of yourſelf
now?”
Dame Prue ſat by, a ſilent ſpectatreſs of this ſcene.
She was too good-natured to condemn, and too wiſe
wholly to approve. Mary gazed and ſmiled, walked
along the room to admire herſelf at full length in the
glaſs, and ſaid, in a tone expreſſive of mortification,
“Well, I ſhall never like myſelf in my Quaker dreſs
again.”
“With this expreſſion, ſhe turned with a deſign of
throwing off her borrowed plumes, when ſhe beheld a
young man, whoſe dreſs beſpoke him of conſequence,
entering the apartment. He ſtopped for a moment; he
looked unutterable admiration; then exclaimed, in an
accent of wonder, “Angel! goddeſs! bright divinity!”
Covered with confuſion, Mary would have eſcaped
through the oppoſite door; but he ſaw her deſign,
and ſeizing her hand, beſought her not to be alarmed.
“Compoſe yourſelf, lovely creature,” ſaid he, “I
meant not to frighten you.”
“I did not know you were in the houſe, Sir,” ſaid
Pinup, in evident confuſion.
“I have not been in ten minutes,” ſaid he. “I intended
to dreſs and join my mother at lord Aumerle's,
but while Le Beau was ſettling my peruke, he informed
me, if I would come up into my mother's dressingroom,
I ſhould ſee, one of the prettieſt Quakers in the
world. But I ſee a celeſtial being. A Quaker! what!
ſhall thoſe lovely treſſes be concealed, that enchanting
[Page 186]
form be diſfigured by their puritanical, formal dreſs?
Forbid it, all ye loves and graces.”
Mary had neither ſenſibility nor diſcernment sufficient
to comprehend the inſult to which ſhe had exposed
herſelf, in thus aſſociating with the ſervants of a
family, who, if her ſuperior in point of fortune, was
not of a more elevated deſcent. But the feelings of
Mary were never very troubleſome to her, and the
Lethean draught of flattery her ears had drank, intoxicated
her ſenſes and perverted her underſtanding. Instead
of reſenting the freedom of Fitzgerald's addreſs,
ſhe was ſilent, and her heart ſecretly exulted at having
excited his admiration. Inſtead of inſiſting on going
immediately home, ſhe threw aſide her ſumptuous and
imprudently aſſumed ornaments, and in her own ſimple
attire deſcended to the houſekeeper's apartment, where
refreſhments were ſerved, of which Arthur partook.
The evening approached. Dame Prue aroſe to depart.
“I will ſee you ſafe through the Pinery,” ſaid
Arthur. The moon was riſing in full, unclouded majesty.
The evening was calm, mild and inviting.
“My lady will not return till late,” ſaid Pinup; “I
think I will go a little way with them myſelf, and not
trouble you, Sir.”
“I thought you knew, Pinup,” ſaid Arthur, “that
I never do any thing that I conceive a trouble. You
ſhall accompany the old gentlewoman, and I will offer
my arm to the young divinity.”
“How ſilver-ſweet found lovers' tongues by night,'
ſays our immortal Shakeſpeare; and who ſo well understood
human nature, its weakneſs, its virtues, its
paſſions; who ſo well delineate?”
The extent of the Pinery was a mile and a half;
yet the meadow, the ſtream that watered it, and the
hill on the ſide of which ſtood the manſion of Obadiah,
appeared to view before they thought they had
walked half way. For Arthur Fitzgerald talked of
love, and Mary Holmes, though incapable of ſeeling a
real paſſion, liſtened in delighted ſilence to the voice
of adulation.
[Page 187]
Dame Prue was confident Mrs. Dudley would not
greatly approve her own viſit to the Pinery, much
more, that ſhe ſhould have taken her niece with her.
She therefore deſired Mary to be ſilent on the ſubject.
Mary was not inclined to ſpeak upon it to any one. Had
Arthur taken no methods to ſee this weak girl again,
in all probability, the tranſient liking ſhe had conceived
for him would have died away; but Arthur, unaccustomed
to put any reſtraint on his paſſions, and
being greatly charmed with the beauty of the fair
Quaker, without once conſidering the conſequence of
ſeducing ſo young, ſo lovely a creature from the paths
of rectitude, wrote to her in a ſtyle of ſubmiſſive adoration,
and implored her, if ſhe wiſhed to ſave him
from deſpair, to meet him at the margin of the brook
in the meadow. Mary complied; repeated interviews
enſued, and ſhe fell a victim, not to ſenſibility
or paſſion—No; Mary Holmes was the victim of vanity
and too great pliability of temper. Conſcious of
her deviation from virtue, the preſence of her virtuous
aunt became painful to her; yet did ſhe not experience
the laudable kind of uneaſineſs which leads to repentance
and amendment.
Indifference is the lethargy of the ſoul; it is the
grave of virtue and excellence. Indifference acts upon
the mental faculties, as indolence does on the body;
for as the man who indulges in inactivity can never
expect to riſe into notice, ſecure or amend his fortune,
ſo the ſoul incruſted in indifference is incapable of inciting
one great or glorious action. It conceives not
the beauty of virtue, nor the real deformity of vice.
Its affections are cold; its pleaſures ſo languid, they
ſcarce deſerve the name. Its pains are few indeed.
But then what ſatisfaction does the poſſeſſor loſe! The
beauties of creation are unfolded to him in vain; in vain
the gorgeous canopy of heaven diſplays ten thouſand
thouſand moving worlds, that, as they roll in the expanse
of ether, contribute to embelliſh, cheer and warm
the globe which we inhabit; in vain the teeming earth
brings forth her fruit; nor field of ripened grain, nor
opening flower, nor flock, nor herd, afford one joy for
[Page 188]
him. He gazes at them all with ſtupid vacuity of
thought, and wonders at the grateful tear that ſprings
to the eye from the heart of ſenſibility.
The hiſtory of poor Mary is ſoon finiſhed. She left
the protection of her uncle, and accompanied Fitzgerald
to London. Diſſpation of every kind was
ruſhed into with avidity. Her purſe was liberally supplied
by her ſeducer; her houſe was elegant; her
equipage gay; her dreſs always ſplendid, and not seldom
capriciouſly extravagant. But though beauty
may faſcinate the ſenſes, prudence, virtue, and a good
underſtanding, are neceſſary to make the charm powerful
and laſting. Fitzgerald grew weary of her folly
and profuſion; he forſook her; yet not ungenerouſly.
He ſettled ſufficient on her to procure all the comforts
and ſome of the elegancies of life. But, alas! Mary
was ſtill young, ſtill lovely, and ſtill indifferent. The
opinion of the world was of little conſequence to her;
nor ſcarcely one individual in it was more regarded
than another. Adulation ſhe ſought, and it was
poured in upon her from every quarter. She regretted
not the deſertion of Fitzgerald; another and another
ſpoiler came; and Mary Holmes ſunk into the loweſt
abyſs of guilt and ſhame.
CHAP. III.
“ We all know what we are, but we know not what we
may be .”
That miſery is ever the certain concomitant of
guilt, is univerſally allowed an incontrovertible
fact. Mary Holmes, with as little reflection or feeling
as it is poſſible for a rational being to poſſeſs, was a
proof of the truth of this aſſertion. Diſſipation, whilſt
it had the charms of novelty, intoxicated her ſenſes,
and kept her mind in ſuch continued employment, that
her generous uncle Obadiah, her affectionate couſin
Caſſiah, home, the brook, the meadow, and the Pinery,
[Page 189]
were all forgotten in the conſtant vortex of folly. But the
ſame ſcene, however faſcinating at firſt, by continual repetition
loſes its charms, and becomes inſipid and disgusting.
So Mary, often in the midſt of noiſy mirth and
tumultuous pleaſure, would caſt a wiſhful, though transient
thought, towards her uncle's quiet parlour, and the
tranquil happineſs that was ever her companion there.
Seven years had paſſed, and Mary was no longer
followed, courted and admired. She had loſt her moſt
powerful charm. Her cheek was no longer ſuffuſed
with the crimſon of timidity, nor her manners attractive
from that feminine baſhfulneſs, which renders even
a plain woman agreeable; and a beautiful woman on
whoſe brow ſits modeſt baſhfulneſs, enthroned in native
purity, ever is, ever will be, irreſiſtible. But, alas!
when virtue has forſaken the heart, the vermillion of
chaſtity ceaſes to viſit the cheek, and beauty without
it, however exquiſite, can catch even the eye but for a
moment. Charmed with the moſt finiſhed workmanship
of nature, we look for the ſoul that ſhould inform
it. But we find it blotted! diſgraced! loſt! Admiration
ceaſes; pity ſucceeds; and whilſt we wiſh to
reform, we cannot but deſpiſe.
Mary had arrived at this laſt ſtage. Forſaken by
the men, her vanity was no longer gratified; and to
enliven her home, where could ſhe find, amongſt the
unhappy females with whom ſhe had been accuſtomed
to aſſociate, one whoſe converſation could either amuſe
or inſtruſt her. Unaccuſtomed, even in her happieſt
days, to ſeek amuſement within herſelf, it cannot be supposed,
when “ſin and ſhame had laid all waſte,” ſhe
could find pleaſure in reflection.
The life of Mary was a continued blank; unloving,
unloved. Joyleſs paſſed her days; nor wiſh, nor
hope, nor fear diverſified it; all was inanimation.
At this period ſhe found herſelf in the moſt interesting
ſituation a female can experience. She was about
to become a mother. If Mary ever was ſenſible of
any thing like remorſe, it was on this occaſion. She wished
ſhe had not ſwerve from the path of rectitude; ſhe
wiſhed her child had not been the offspring of ſhame.
[Page 190]
It was about the middle of April. The meadows
began to aſſume a cheerful appearance; the fruit trees,
rich in bluſhing ſweets, ſcented the air with perſume,
more grateful to the ſenſe than the moſt coſtly compound
of art. Mary's health had been impaired, by
midnight vigils, riot and intemperance. She ſought,
from the freſhneſs of the country air, a reinſtatement
of it, and a relief from that laſſitude and inanity which
weighed upon her ſpirits; a neat cottage but a few
miles from London became her refidence.
Late one evening, as ſhe was preparing to retire to
reſt, the ſound of a carriage driving haſtily by, attracted
her attention. In a moment the noiſe of the wheels
ceaſed; a ſudden ſhriek was heard, and then all was
ſilent.
“Why, as ſure as can be, ma'am,” ſaid the ſervant
who was helping her to undreſs, “the carriage is either
broke down or overſet.”
“I hope not, Dolly,” ſhe replied, going to the window
to liſten. Before ſhe had time to unbar the shutters
and raiſe the ſaſh, a loud ring at the gate announced
an unexpected viſitor. It was the perſon
who drove the carriage; it had been overturned; a
lady in it was hurt, and her huſband had ſent him to
requeſt they might be permitted to repoſe for the
night in her houſe, as the carriage had been ſo damaged
as to render it impoſſible for them to proceed on
their journey.
Mary was not deficient in the knowledge, nor backward
in the performance of the rites of hoſpitality.
“The ſtrangers ſhall be welcome, “ſaid ſhe, “to
every accommodation my humble manſion affords.”
The lady had fainted; for her arm was diſlocated,
and the pain had overcome her natural fortitude.
A gentleman, aſſiſted by his ſervant, bore her into the
houſe; their dreſs ſtruck on the heart of Mary. She
went to the ſofa on which the fair inſenſible was laid,
with a deſign of adminiſtering volatiles and a restorative
cordial. She raiſed her head, which was reclined
on her huſband's ſhoulder, and beheld the features of
Caſſiah. Her hands trembled, her cheek turned pale.
[Page 191]
“My couſin!” ſaid ſhe. Mr. Dudley looked at her
with attention, and, though decorated in the habiliments
of vanity, recognized the conntenance of Mary
Holmes.
But little now remains to be told. The hurt Cassiah
had received, confined her above a week, during
which time Mary was delivered of a ſon. The advice
and admonitions of her friends determined her to abjure
a way of life, into which ſhe had been firſt seduced
by want of reſolution, and in which, want of resolution
alone could have induced her to continue.
Buſineſs of importance had brought Dudley from
the country; and, prompted at once by affection for
her huſband, and a wiſh to ſee the capital, Caſſiah was
induced to accompany him. The deſired ends fully
accompliſhed, they prepared to return.
“Come, Mary,” ſaid Caſſiah, “throw off theſe trappings
of vanity; they become not the penitent. Assume
the dreſs of ſimplicity and purity, in which thou
wert wont to appear. Return with a noble firmneſs,
to the man who ſeduced thee, the wages of thy guilt, the
price of thy diſhonour. I pray thee, Mary Holmes,
return to the boſom of thy friends, to the paths of innocence
and virtue. Albeit thy good uncle Obadiah
is no more, yet I and my brother Hezekiah are his
repreſentatives. Had he been living, and thou hadſt
returned repentant, he would have exceedingly rejoiced;
would have killed the ſatted calf, and have bid his
friends and neighbours to come and welcome thee.
And ſhall not we perform the will of our deceaſed
father? Yea, verily will we, ſince in ſo doing we ſhall
alſo perform the will of our Father who is in heaven.
Dear Mary, turn not a deaf ear to my prayer; for
the ways of truth are the ways of pleaſantneſs, and
where innocence dwells, dwells alſo peace forevermore.
Mary muſt have been inſenſible indeed to have rejected
the earneſt ſolicitations of her amiable relation.
Every feeling of the force and beauty of virtue was
now powerfully awakened and called into action. She
returned the ſettlement ſhe had received from
[Page 192]
Fitzgerald, and accompanied Dudley and Caſſiah into Lancashire,
where a few years put a period to her existence.
Mr. Dudley had from his birth adopted her
ſon Jacob Holmes; and when he embarked for America,
Jacob accompanied him, was witneſs to every
tranſaction on that ſide the Atlantic, enjoyed his unlimited
confidence, and when he propoſed returning to
Europe, Jacob was entruſted with a copy of his will,
the title-deeds of the newly purchaſed eſtate, and left
in poſſeſſion of it, with directions to ſpare neither coſt
nor pains to improve, cultivate and beautify it.
CHAP. IV.
Things as they were, as they are, and as they ever will be. Section Reuben and Rachel had, during the abſence of
their father, increaſed in ſtature, and improved
in mental acquirements. Their perſons were much
altered for the better. Rachel was now approaching
womanhood; tall, ſtraight, and well-proportioned.
An intelligent animation lighted up her countenance,
which prepoſſeſſed the beholder, at firſt ſight, in her
favour. It was that kind of honeſt countenance in
which you might read every emotion of the heart, and
ſeemed to ſay, “I cannot deceive you, if I would.”
Reuben almoſt idolized his ſiſter, and when the holidays
permitted his annual viſit, never were three human
beings more ſuperlatively happy, than the brother,
ſiſter, and aunt Rachel. It was in one of theſe viſits,
as they were ſocially ſeated round their fire, their family
party enlivened by the company of a Miſs Oliver,
who was paſſing the winter with her grandmother, in
the neighbourhood, when a letter was brought. “It
is from your father,” ſaid aunt Rachel; “take it,
Reuben, and read it.” Reuben broke the ſeal, and
read as follows.
[Page 193]
Letter
“IT is with ſatisfaction of the pureſt kind, that I
take up my pen to inform my dear aunt Rachel and my
beloved children, that the buſineſs which brought me to
this place is at length finiſhed, and the completion of
it is equal to my moſt ſanguine expectations.
“The purchaſe of the land, (which is delightfully
ſituated on the banks of the Schuylkill, within a pleasant
ride of Philadelphia) the building of the houſe,
barn, ſtable, &c. in ſuch a ſtyle as might unite a degree
of ſimple elegance with convenience, the stocking
the farm, and other contingencies, have led me
rather to exceed the ſum I firſt ſat out with, though
that was greatly augmented by trade; and I have
been neceſſitated to give bills on England for five hundred
pounds; but they are at ſuch a date as will enable
me to reach home before they become due, or
ſhould I not, I have given my agent, Mr. Atkins, instructions
to ſell part of the Lancaſhire eſtate, if he has
not in his hands money ſufficient to pay the bills without.
You will, therefore, without heſitation, acquiesce
in whatever arrangements he may make for that
purpoſe.
“I intend embarking for England about the end of
October, and hope to ſee you all before the new year
commences.
“I ſuppoſe my darlings, Reuben and Rachel, are
almoſt grown out of knowledge. I would have
anſwered their letters, but time preſſes. I am pleaſed
with their evident improvement in writing and orthography.
Tell Reuben here will be an ample field for
his aſpiring and inquiſitive genius. Tell him, at the
ſame time, I wiſh him ever to aſpire to be eminently
good; for that only can render him eminently great.
Tell my deareſt Rachel, that if ſhe emulates the virtues
and perfections of her ſainted mother, ſhe will be
every thing that is amiable. Fare thee well. May
the Creator and Preſerver of the univerſe guard, protect,
and keep you all.
R. DUDLEY.
“P. S. I ſhall leave Jacob Holmes in care of my
eſtate here. I ſhall alſo leave him a trifle to put him
[Page 194]
in a little way of buſineſs, that by prudence and industry
he may render himſelf independent. The man
who depends for the neceſſaries of life on a patron,
can never aſſert that freedom of ſpirit which is the
natural prerogative of every human being. Jacob is
ſerious, aſſiduous, and ſerupulouſly conſcientious in all
his dealings. I have placed an unlimited confidence
in him, and am firm in the belief that he will never
abuſe it. Once more, God bleſs you.” Section “So then,” ſaid Reuben, his fine eyes beaming with
pleaſure, “ſo then, my father intends that we ſhall all
go to America. Well, I always earneſtly wiſhed to
go, and I find I ſhall be gratified.”
“But brother,” ſaid Rachel, “look at the date of
my father's letter, and remember what he ſaid about
ſailing in October: why, my dear brother, he will be
home very ſoon.”
“He may arrive in a few days,” ſaid aunt Rachel.
“A few days!” cried Reuben eagerly, “why he
may arrive this very night.”
“Oh dear! dear Reuben, do you think ſo?”
“Yes; and perhaps in ſix weeks or two months
time we may be all on the Atlantic ocean. Bleſs me!
Miſs Oliver, are you not well?”
This queſtion and exclamation, which Reuben addressed
to their fair viſitor, was extorted by ſudden surprise.
He had caſually glanced his eye towards her
as he was ſpeaking, and beheld her intereſting countenance
pale as aſhes.
“What is the matter, Jeſſy Oliver?” ſaid Rachel,
whoſe attention was awakened by her brother's question;
“is the room too warm?”
“No! no! my dear,” ſaid Jeſſy in tremulous accents;
“only! only! indeed I don't know what ails
me; but I was ſeized—
“With a ſudden ſickneſs at the mention of the Atlantic
ocean,” ſaid Hezekiah Penn, who had been
ſmoking his pipe in one corner of the room.
The dry manner in which he ſpoke, the look he caſt
towards her, recalled the roſes to the cheeks of Jeſſy.
[Page 195]
She affected to laugh at the idea; but it was not the
laugh of nature. Her heart was full, and her eyes
had nearly betrayed its feelings. Reuben was at firſt
ſurpriſed; but he looked on the confuſed fair one,
and an idea croſſed his mind which gave birth to a
ſentiment which could not be extinguiſhed but with
life.
Jeſſy Oliver was two years older than our hero and
heroine; extremely lovely in her perſon, accompliſhed
in her manners, and endowed with an underſtanding
far ſuperior to the generality of her ſex. She was sedate
beyond her years; but that ſedateneſs was the
offspring of ſorrow, occaſioned by the loſs of her mother
when ſhe was about twelve years old; ſoon after
which, her father unthinkingly united himſelf with a
young, volatile woman of quality, who, though ſhe
brought him a very ample fortune, yet by her extravagance,
threatened him with ruin, and by her levty,
with diſhonour.
Jeſſy had a brother, one year younger than herſelf.
Archibald Oliver was claſſmate with Reuben, and had
twice invited him to his father's country-houſe, which
was in Oxfordſhire, to paſs a few days in the midsummer
vacation. This friendſhip between the young
men naturally led to an intimacy with the ſiſter; and
Jeſſy, without a thought which ſhe would bluſh to own,
was tenderly attached to Reuben.
Her ſituation at home became diſagreeable in the
extreme. Fond of reading, drawing, needle-work,
and every elegant domeſtic employment; without affectation;
delicate in her manners and converſation,
and ſincerely pious; it cannot be imagined that Jeſſy
could find pleaſure in the ſociety of a woman, ignorant,
diſſipated and irreligious.
To her maternal grandmother ſhe wrote, in confidence,
the miſeries of her ſituation, and received from
her an invitation to paſs the winter with her in Lancashire.
Perhaps the viſit was not anticipated with
leſs ſatisfaction becauſe in the neighbourhood of the
family of Reuben Dudley. Not that Jeſſy was conscious
of being too partial to him; but that ſhe
[Page 196]
expected much pleaſure from the ſociety of his ſiſter and
aunt, of whom ſhe had often heard him ſpeak with enthusiasm.
She was charmed with the unaffected naivette of
Rachel, and the more ſhe knew of her the more ſhe
loved her; and though unperceived by herſelf, the
friendſhip ſhe conceived for the ſiſter ſtrengthened her
partiality for the brother. Their perſons were alike,
as much ſo as it was poſſible for a face truly feminine,
ſtrikingly to reſemble one whoſe features are more
marked, more manly, more expreſſive of character.
Jeſſy looked at Rachel with admiration. “How much
you are like your brother,” ſhe would ſay. Alas!
poor Jeſſy; ſhe was unconſcious, that it was that resemblance
which chiefly drew her heart, with irresistible
power, towards her new friend. The mind of Jessy
was as pure as the chaſte dew which glitters in an
April morn upon the boſom of a half-blown snowdrop;
and when with undiſſembled joy ſhe flew to
meet him on his arrival in Lancaſhire, and preſented
her hand and ſmiling mouth to greet him, it was with
the ſenſations of a ſeraph who welcomes a kindred
ſpirit to the manſions of the bleſt.
Oh why! why! is this pure, this unimpaſſioned intercourse
between the ſexes, ſo rare, as to be almoſt incredible?
Alas! it is a humiliating truth to own;
but human nature is ſo weak, ſo liable to error, that
its pureſt emotions may be conſtrued into guilt, and,
conſcious of our own imbecility, we tremble for the
firmneſs of another. Beſides, wherever beauty, ſenſe,
or merit dwells, there envy hovers round, with haggard
eye, and pale, diſtorted brow; the poiſon falling
from her baleful tongue diſcolours every object, and
caſts on even innocence itſelf a ſallow, doubtful hue.
Oh! how happy, how ſuperlatively happy, is the
youthful, inexperienced, yet ſuſceptible boſom!
Charm'd with each object that it meets,
                           Blythe as the vernal morn,
It from the roſe inhales the ſweets,
                           Nor feels nor dreads the thorn;
When hope, unfetter'd, pure as light,
                           Free as the paſſing wind,
[Page 197]
Bounds forward ſtill with chaſte delight,
Nor ſees the ſtorm, nor heeds the night,
                           That threatens cloſe behind.
Thus pure, thus ſuſceptible, thus fearleſs of evil,
were the hearts of Reuben, Rachel, and their fair friend
Jeſſy Oliver; when on the evening juſt mentioned, the
reception of the letter, the eagerneſs Reuben expreſſed
to embark for America, and the remark uncle Hezekiah
made on the ſudden ſickneſs of Jeſſy, awakened
new ideas in the breaſts of all.
Reuben had folded up his father's letter, returned it
to his aunt, and ſeated himſelf beſide Jeſſy, took her
paſſive hand, and ſeemed for a moment buſied in
counting over and over again, the beautifully white
and finely tapering fingers. Rachel ſeated herſelf on
the other ſide, and aſked, with innocent earneſtneſs,
“if ſhe was not better now.”
“Yes,” replied Jeſſy, almoſt unconſcious that ſhe
ſpoke at all.
“I thought you were,” ſaid Rachel, with the greatest
ſimplicity; “for the colour is returned to your lips
and cheeks.”
The remark did not make her paler. And when
uncle Hezekiah, adjuſting his broad-brimmed beaver,
and putting on his great coat, bade Reuben talk no
more of the Atlantic ocean, America, and ſuch frightful
things, the lily was entirely exchanged for the carnation.
Hezekiah went to the door, with a deſign to go
home; his horſe had been previouſly brought out.
But he opened the door, and ordering the poor beaſt
back to the ſtable, returned to the parlour, and protested
that it ſtormed tremendouſly.
“Does the wind blow very hard uncle?” ſaid
Rachel.
“Yes,” replied Hezekiah, deliberately ſeating himself,
and filling another pipe.
“And does it blow on ſhore?” ſaid aunt Rachel,
who, having experienced the dangers of the ſea herself,
felt more ſenſibly the perils to which her nephew
[Page 198]
might be expoſed, ſhould he be coming near the land
on ſuch a ſtormy night.
“It blows ſtrongly from the ſea,” ſaid Hezekiah,
drawing in a vaſt quantity of ſmoke, and then suffering
it gradually to evaporate, as it eſcaped in ſmall
curling clouds from his mouth.
As he ſpoke, a ſudden guſt ruſhed impetuouſly by
the houſe, and ſhook the apartment in which they were
ſitting.
“Does it ſnow or rain, brother?” ſaid Rachel.
“It ſnows,” ſaid Hezekiah, not giving Reuben
time to reply; “it ſnows, and is very dark indeed.”
At that moment, the diſcharge of a diſtant cannon
was heard; and Hezekiah, daſhing his pipe on the
hearth, ſtarted from his ſeat, and exclaimed, “There
is ſome ſhip in diſtreſs.” Before any one could reply,
another and another gun was heard, and the ſervant and
carriage arriving for Miſs Oliver, they were informed
that a ſhip had been ſeen in the offing, before dark, as
it was ſuppoſed, endeavouring to make the port of
Liverpool; but that ſhe appeared much diſabled in
her maſts, yards and rigging, and it was imagined ſhe
was now on ſhore, or in imminent danger.
It was not the remonſtrances or entreaties of his
friends, that could now reſtrain the impetuoſity of
Reuben. He was prepoſſeſſed with the idea that his
father was in the veſſel, and he would ſet off immediately
for Liverpool. He might be enabled to ſend relief
to the diſtreſſed mariners.
“Oh! my dear brother, it is impoſſible,” ſaid Rachel;
“only hear how the wind roars.”
“I do hear it,” he replied mournfully, “and every
blaſt ſeems to ſay, Reuben, thy father is periſhing.”
A momentary ſilence now enſued, when Hezekiah
propoſed going with his nephew. “I do not think,”
ſaid he, “that we can render them any ſervice; but suspense
is painful, and we may at leaſt learn earlier intelligence
of the fate of the veſſel and her unfortunate
crew; diſcover from whence ſhe came, and what passengers
were on board.”
[Page 199]
“Then promiſe you will not attempt to go off in
a boat, my dear Reuben,” ſaid Rachel.
“Oh heavens! he will not ſurely think of ſuch a
thing,” exclaimed Miſs Oliver.
“Silly children,” ſaid Hezekiah, “do not raiſe imaginary
miſeries to afflict yourſelves with. If he was
ſo mad as to wiſh to do ſo, he would not find any one
mad enough to carry him.”
The horſes were now at the door. Reuben handed
Miſs Oliver to her carriage, and then, accompanied by
Hezekiah, made all poſſible ſpeed to Liverpool; whilſt
aunt Rachel and her niece paſſed the night in traversing
the apartment, liſtening to the ſtorm, and ejaculating
fervent prayers for the preſervation of the unhappy
ſailors, whoſe perils (they were aſſured by the
repeated diſcharge of guns) ſtill continued. Neither
of them attempted to reſt; they ſpoke but little, but
each in ſilence indulged her own melancholy thoughts.
Aunt Rachel had, added to the anxiety ſhe felt for
her nephew's ſafety, a preſentiment that, ſhould any
thing happen to him, his children would be involved
in very diſagreeable circumſtances. Mr. Dudley had
not entruſted her with the exact ſituation of his affairs
previous to his leaving England. He had told her
ſhe might draw on his agent, Atkins, for two hundred
pounds each year, and that Atkins had alſo orders to
pay for Reuben's education, and defray all his expenses;
but ſhe knew that the laſt half year of Reuben's
board remained unpaid, and ſhe had herſelf received
a letter, recommending prudence to her, and
hinting, ſhould Mr. Dudley extend his ſtay abroad
another ſix months, he, Atkins, ſhould not be able to
ſupply the money neceſſary for houſe-keeping.
This had previouſly given birth to many uneaſy reflections;
and now that ſhe found he had drawn for ſo
large a ſum, and given Atkins unlimited power to ſell
or mortgage part of the Lancaſhire eſtate, ſhe feared,
ſhould any fatal accident prevent his reaching
England, Reuben and Rachel might be ſevere sufferers,
in more ways than the loſs of a father.
[Page 200]
For herſelf, ſhe had no fears; and though the half
of that eſtate conſtituted the whole of her worldly possessions,
yet ſuch was the native philanthropy of her
mind, ſo little was ſelf regarded, and with ſuch enthusiasm
did ſhe regard the offspring of her lamented
brother William, that to ſupply the ſmalleſt of their
wants, ſhe would have cheerfully diveſted herſelf of
even the common neceſſaries of life.
Aunt Rachel was now nearly approaching her sixty-fifth
year; but temperance, cheerfulneſs, and a decent
competence, joined to a conſtitution firm by nature,
had given even to this advanced period, ſtrength
of intellect, hilarity of ſpirits, and uncommon perſonal
vigour.
In reflections like thoſe juſt mentioned on her part,
and earneſt prayers for her father's ſafety and her
brother's return on the part of Rachel, was the wearisome
night paſſed. Towards morning the ſtorm abated,
and the ſun aroſe in a clear, unclouded horizon;
but the ravages of the tempeſt were to be ſeen; several
trees were lying on the ground, torn from their
roots by the violence of the wind. A barn had been
unroofed during the night, and the chimney of a neighbouring
cottage blown down.
“I wonder my brother don't return,” ſaid Rachel.
“I wiſh he may bring us good news when he does
come,” replied her aunt.
From the riſing of the ſun, till it paſſed the meridian,
Rachel ſcarcely for a moment quitted the window
that looked towards the road. At length, about three
o'clock, ſhe ſaw her brother ſlowly winding down the
hill.
“Ah! my dear aunt, here comes Reuben,” cried
ſhe.
“But he comes not like the meſſenger of joy,” replied
aunt Rachel.
“He is weary, aunt.” The affectionate ſiſter ran
to open the door, and receive her brother.
“What news, my dear Reuben?” ſaid ſhe eagerly,
as he led her into the parlour.
“The veſſel is loſt!” he replied.
[Page 201]
“And the crew?”
“All periſhed.”
“Did you learn where ſhe is ſuppoſed to be from?”
ſaid aunt Rachel.
“A pilot boat, that paſſed her yeſterday morning,
brought intelligence ſhe was from America, but not
what particular port.”
“Had they no pilot on board?”
“Yes, and he has periſhed with them.”
The tears ſtarted into Renben's eyes as he ſpoke;
Rachel wept audibly. Their aunt took a hand from
each.
“Weep not, my children,” ſaid ſhe, “but truſt in
God. If it has pleaſed him to deprive you of your
father, he is able to ſupply his place. Look up to
him, my children; worſhip him, ſerve him, obey him,
in ſincerity of heart. He may of his infinite wiſdom
afflict; but remember, and let it fill your ſouls with
humble hope and comfort, that his chaſtiſements are
but temporal, but his rewards to thoſe who love him,
eternal.”
“Then you think we are orphans?” ſaid Rachel.
“I think,” replied her aunt, “that it is more than
probable your father was in the ſhip which was laſt
night loſt.”
Two days from this paſſed, and no certain intelligence
could be procured. Sometimes they encouraged
a dawn of hope, and then again relapſed into
deſpair. Rachel was the earlieſt riſer in the family;
ſhe had been up above an hour when the newſpaper
was brought, as it was cuſtomary twice a week from
Liverpool. She took it from the ſervant, and as ſhe
held it to the fire to dry, the following paragraph met
her eyes.—“We are at length certain, that the
large ſhip which was loſt on Monday night laſt, endeavouring
to get into this harbour, was the Aurora,
of London, from Philadelphia. Two men, who providentially
eſcaped, brought the melancholy intelligence
of the captain, mate, ten hands and fourteen
paſſengers having periſhed; amongſt the latter was
Mr. Reuben Dudley.”
[Page 202]
Rachel read no more. The paper fell from her
hands, and ſenſe, feeling, almoſt life itſelf, was for a
while ſuſpended. She ſunk on the floor, her head
reſted on the elbow of her aunt's eaſy chair, her eyes
were open, but ſhe was as devoid of ſpeech and motion
as a ſtatue. In this ſituation her brother found
her. “My ſiſter! my dear Rachel!” he exclaimed,
eagerly raiſing her. His voice recalled her fleeting
ſenſes. She threw her arms round his neck, faintly
articulated, “Our father! our beloved father!” and
nature relieved her burſting heart by a violent guſh
of tears.
Aunt Rachel was prepared for the intelligence;
her heart had preſaged it from the firſt. She bore it
with the fortitude of a Chriſtian, though ſhe felt it as
acutely as her niece. But ſhe had learnt to repreſs
her feelings, and to bow with reſignation to the will
of an all-wife Providence.
CHAP. V.
“Soft as the ſilver dews that reſt
                           On flow'rs that ſcent the morning air;
So ſoft, ſo ſweet, to ſorrow's breaſt,
                           Is Friendſhip's ſmile and Pity's tear.”
It may naturally be ſuppoſed, that when the heavy
misfortune Reuben and Rachel had ſuſtained was
univerſally known, condolements of form and faſhion
poured in upon them, and ſome few offered consolation
with ſincerity, and participated in their afflictions
with feelings truly philanthropic. Amongſt the latter
claſs was Miſs Oliver. She wass ſo ſenſibly affected
by the loſs they had experienced in the death of
their father, that nearly a week elapſed before ſhe could
ſummon fortitude ſufficient to enable her to pay them a
viſit. At length, her wiſh to adminiſter comfort triumphed
over the fear ſhe had entertained of the anguish
ſhe muſt neceſſarily encounter in the interview.
[Page 203]
She aroſe with a reſolution of paſſing the day with
Rachel, took an early breakfaſt, and by nine o'clock
was at her habitation.
Anguiſh of heart had ſo enervated the mental faculties
of our heroine, that ſhe no longer aroſe with the
lark, ſought employment with avidity, or purſued it
with alacrity. “Why ſhould I work?” ſhe would
ſay; “I have no expectation now to cheer me; no
fond hope of a returning father's ſmiles and approbation
rewarding my labours.” Her mind occupied by
reflections ſuch as theſe, Rachel gave more hours to
her pillow than was her uſual cuſtom; not that ſhe
found there the reſt ſhe ſought; but there ſhe could
weep unreſtrained, there ſhe could uninterruptedly indulge
in contemplation. And if haply ſleep for a few
hours ſteeped her ſenſes in forgetfulneſs, ſhe bleſſed the
ſweet oblivion, and courted its return. She was seated
at the breakfaſt table when Miſs Oliver entered.
“Jeſſy!” ſaid the mournfully, and half riſing to present
her hand; but overcome by the ſenſations which
ruſhed on her ſoul, ſhe ſunk again on her ſeat.
Miſs Oliver took the proffered hand, preſſed it tenderly,
ſeated herſelf beſide her, but was ſilent. Yet
her ſpeaking eye met the glance of Rachel's; its expression
conveyed more than was in the power of
words; it ſaid, in the moſt intelligent language, Dear
Rachel, I feel, I participate your ſorrows.
It was the conſolation moſt congenial to the ſoul it
meant to addreſs. Rachel felt its ſincerity, its energy,
and was relieved. Oh! ſaid ſhe mentally, how
far preferable is this to the profuſion of words, with
which the unfeeling attempt to conſole me. She returned
the preſſure of Jeſſy's hand; a few tears escaped
from her eyes; Reuben kiſſed them off, and seating
himſelf oppoſite the two charming young women,
contemplated them till his own eyes were ſuffuſed;
and the ſuffuſion did honour to his heart, to nature,
to reaſon, to manhood!
How long this ſilence might have continued, is uncertain;
but it was abruptly interrupted by aunt Rachel,
who entered the apartment, followed by a
[Page 204]
diminutive figure habited in a grey coat, black waistcoat
and breeches, an immenſe and not very fashionable
peruke, high boots, a very deep pair of ruffles, and
a long neckcloth twiſted through the fourth button-hole
of his waiſtcoat.
This extraordinary perſonage appeared to be about
fifty years old. His black eyes, which were not the
leſs penetrating for being extremely ſmall, darted their
glances at the three intereſting figures that preſented
themſelves in the perſons of Reuben, Rachel, and Miſs
Oliver.
He bowed profoundly on entering. Rachel roſe
from her ſeat. Her ſorrows ſeemed to retire within
her heart, and a dignified compoſure took poſſeſſion of
her features, as ſhe received and returned his compliments.
“This gentleman comes from Mr. Atkins,” ſaid
aunt Rachel, as pointing to the ſofa on which Reuben
had ſat, ſhe motioned for him to be ſeated. “His
name, I underſtand, is —”
“Allibi, at your ſervice,” ſaid he, bowing again,
and recovering himſelf with an air of conſequence; as
if he had ſaid, I believe I am pretty univerſally known.
“Mr. Dudley, I preſume,” turning toward Reuben,
“and Miſs Dadley, his charming ſiſter, (bowing to
Rachel) if I may judge from your mourning habits.
Give me leave to condole with you on the unfortunate
cataſtrophe of our mutual friend. But man is
born to die; ſo regret is uſeleſs. Permit me, therefore,
to congratulate you on your acceſſion to his fortune.”
The mention of her father had called forth the
ſmothered ſenſibility of Rachel; but the concluſion
repelled it by rouſing her indignation.
“Congratulate?” ſaid ſhe, in a voice ſcarcely articulate.
“Congratulate?” echoed Reuben, and his fine
countenance glowed, his eyes darted reſentment. “Sir,
we are the children of Mr. Dudley, his natural offspring,
reared by his care, nurtured by his love, and
[Page 205]
taught by his wiſdom. Who then ſhall dare inſult
us?” And he roſe from his ſeat, laid one hand
on his breaſt, and with the other motioned as though
brandiſhing a weapon. “Who ſhall dare inſult us by
congratulation for his death? Oh! my father!”
“My dear, loſt father!” repeated Rachel.
“My afflicted friends,” ſaid Miſs Oliver, ſoftly.
It was a ſcene ſo new, the manners and ſentiments
of the young trio were ſo elevated, as to be almoſt unintelligible
to Allibi. He figetted on his ſeat, hemmed
at leaſt half a dozen times, and at length he began
with heſitation—
“I beg pardon. I proteſt I did not mean—that
is, I did not know. But as I was ſaying, young Mr.
Reuben Dudley, and his ſiſter Miſs Rachel Dudley,
being twin brother and ſiſter, and in the eye of the
law joint heirs of the poſſeſſions and eſtates, of what
kind ſoever, that is to ſay, of money, plate, jewels,
landed property, houſes, merchandize, or what not,
belonging or appertaining to their late father, Reuben
Dudley, deceaſed—”
“Oh heavens!” ſaid Rachel, folding her hands
acroſs her breaſt, as if to accelerate her breathing,
which was evidently laboured.
“My dear creature!” ſaid Miſs Oliver, in the accent
of commiſeration.
“Good Sir, be expeditious in explaining the nature
of your buſineſs,” ſaid Reuben; and he walked to the
other end of the room to conceal his own emotions.
Allibi with the ſame ſang froid proceeded.—“You
being, as I have before ſaid, co-heirs, do thereby ſtand
anſwerable for all debts contracted by, or owing from
the ſaid Reuben Dudley, deceaſed.”
“Granted,” ſaid Reuben, haſtily. “Pray come to
your concluſion.
“The concluſion is,” ſaid Allibi, deliberately drawing
forth his pocket-book, “that you muſt of consequence
pay this bill of five hundred pounds, which
your father drew previous to his leaving America, on
my client Andrew Atkins. Now he, Andrew Atkins,
having no property whatever in his hands wherewith
[Page 206]
to diſcharge this demand, and being empowered by
your father before the late fatal cataſtrophe to ſell,
mortgage, or otherwiſe diſpoſe of the Lancaſhire estate,
in order to liquidate this and other debts he had
contracted, I am ſent by him, my client, the ſaid Andrew
Atkins, to inquire when it will be convenient
for you to diſcharge the bill; or in caſe of non-ability
on your part, I am empowered to take poſſeſſion of
the ſaid eſtates on the part of my client, the ſaid Andrew
Atkins, in order that he may mortgage, ſell, or
otherwiſe diſpoſe of it, to enable him to anſwer this
and other demands which may be made on him.”
“I ſuppoſe,” ſaid aunt Rachel, “you know that
half the eſtate is mine.”
“Pardon me, madam,” ſaid the man of law, “I
know no ſuch thing. The late Mr. Reuben Dudley
inherited from his grandmother, the lady Arrabella
Ruthven, wife to Edward Dudley, who went to America
in the year 1645; and as the ſaid Reuben was the
only male deſcendant of the ſaid Arrabella, and ſhe
dying inteſtate—”
“Sir,” ſaid Reuben haſtily, “the eſtate is half my
aunt's; we wiſh not to conteſt it. It is, it muſt be
her's, by all the rules of juſtice.”
“I know nothing of juſtice,” ſaid Allibi; “the
law, the law, Sir, is my profeſſion.”
I thought, Sir, law and equity were ſynonimous
terms.”
“You are a very young man, Mr. Dudley, very
young, very inexperienced; when you are older, you
will be wiſer.”
Reuben could not anſwer; a look of pointed contempt
fully expreſſed his ſentiments. Allibi continued:
“And ſo, Sir, yourſelf and ſiſter being minors, it is
neceſſary to throw the eſtate into Chancery, when, after
your father's debts are diſcharged, the reſidue will
be paid to you when of age.”
“And in the mean time how are we to live,” ſaid
Rachel.
“Oh! my dear young lady, you have friends,
wealthy relations. You have alſo youth, beauty, and
[Page 207]
may command a home in twenty different families, and
in ſo doing confer a favour. Well, Mr. Dudley, I
preſume from your ſilence that you cannot pay theſe
five hundred pounds?”
Reuben bowed his head.
“I imagined it would be ſo, and have brought down
people to take poſſeſſion of the houſe, plate, ſtock,
farming utenſils, &c. and muſt beg you will remove
as ſoon as may be convenient. With your leave,
(riſing and putting on his hat) I will take an inventory
of the family plate which I ſaw in the beaufet in
the next room.”
He drew forth his pen, ink, and folded paper, and
without waiting for the leave he had requeſted, walked
into the adjoining apartment.
“Alas! alas!” cried Rachel, “whither ſhall we
go? Who will receive us? Where ſhall we find either
home or ſupport?”
“Had I a home I could call my own,” ſaid Jeſſy
Oliver, “you ſhould not have occaſion to repeat the
queſtion.”
“And poor aunt Rachel too, what will become of
her?” ſaid Rachel, tenderly taking her hand, which
hung paſſively over the arm of her chair, as loſt in
painful thought ſhe leaned her head againſt the ſide
of it.
“What will become of her?” ſaid Reuben with
energy, “why I will labour to ſupport you both.
Yes,” continued he, fervently claſping his hands, and
dropping on his knees before them; “yes, here in the
ſight of Heaven, I vow to dedicate my life to her and
you. I will cheerfully work to procure you ſuſtenance.
Induſtry ſhall ſupply our wants, innocence and content
make our dwelling, however humble, the abode
of pleaſure; and I will protect you from the ſcorn and
inſults of the world at the hazard of my life.”
As Reuben aroſe and folded his ſiſter in his arms,
Hezekiah Penn entered the room. He was ſoon informed
of their diſagreeable ſituation. But Hezekiah
knew ſo very little of the world and its concerns, that
[Page 208]
he could not offer advice; all he could do was to bid
them cheer up, and hope for better times.
“In truth, my dear kinſman, ſaid he, “I do commiserate
your ſufferings much; but I know not how,
young as you are, you can extricate yourſelves from
your preſent difficulty. Come, then, home to my
houſe; abide there till we can fix on ſome feaſible
plan for your future well-doing. I am not overcharged
with the good things of this world; but come and
partake of ſuch as I have, and take with it a
hearty welcome. I pray thee, Rachel Dudley, be not
down hearted, but come to my manſion; bring theſe
children with thee, and He who feedeth the young ravens
will provide the means of ſubſiſtence.”
The heart of Hezekiah overflowed with the “milk
of human kindneſs;” he meant all he ſaid, and felt
more, much more, than he could find words to express.
His friendly offers, and the endearing kindness
of Miſs Oliver, healed the bleeding hearts of Reuben
and Rachel, and even aunt Rachel was revived by
their influence. That very night they removed from
their own habitation to that of the benevolent Hezekiah,
and left the loquacious Mr. Allibi in full possession
of the premiſes, in behalf of his client Mr. Andrew
Atkins.
CHAP. VI.
Death of old Friend—Acquiſition of a Lover—Formality
perſonified. Soon after this arrangement took place, Miſs
Oliver was recalled home. With many tears ſhe
took leave of our heroine, told her, if ever fortune
ſhould put it in her power to offer her an aſylum, ſhe
might freely command her purſe, her houſe, her unbounded
friendſhip in every particular. When ſhe
had again embraced Rachel, ſhe turned towards Reuben.
[Page 209]
“Mr. Dudley,” ſaid ſhe, “the friendſhip of a girl
like me is an offering of ſo trifling a nature, I hardly
know whether you will think it worth accepting. You
are adviſed by your friends to viſit America, to look
after and ſecure the property your father poſſeſſed
there. It will probably be many years before we meet
again; and what changes may take place during this
ſeparation, it is impoſſible now to determine. Accept
my moſt ardent wiſhes for your proſperity. I know
you will often write to my brother; in thoſe letters
perhaps you will ſometimes remember me.”
“Oh! doubt it not, charming Miſs Oliver,” ſaid
he, preſſing her hand to his lips; while ſhe, fearful
that ſhe had ſaid more than the exact line of propriety
ſhe had preſcribed to herſelf rendered allowable,
hurried to her carriage, to hide emotions ſhe found
it impoſſible to ſtifle.
Atkins having now taken the management of the
eſtate eutirely into his own hands, pretended to advance
money himſelf for the liquidation of Mr. Dudley's
debts, and at the end of three months laid before
Hezekiah Penn, Reuben and aunt Rachel, a ſtatement
of accounts, which, to the minds of theſe three inexperienced,
honeſt children of ſimplicity, made it appear
as ſo involved, that it would be a long term of years
before it could even clear itſelf. In the mean time,
how were the orphans and their venerable relation to
be ſupported?
Letters were written to Jacob Holmes, a proper
time allowed, and no anſwer being returned, Hezekiah
perſuaded Reuben, who was now nearly eighteen,
to viſit that continent and make inquiry himſelf concerning
his father's effects.
“Your ſiſter,” ſaid Hezekiah, “ſhall ſtay with me
till you return. She ſhall not want a home nor a father
whilſt I live.”
A voyage to the weſtern continent had ever been
the primary wiſh of Reuben's heart; he hoped he
knew not what, but that hope led him on; and even
to part with his ſiſter was thought of with more composure,
ſince, if he amended his own fortune, ſhe was
[Page 210]
to be the partaker of it. Jeſſy Oliver too was foremoſt
in the happy group his ſanguine imagination portrayed
as eagerly flying to welcome his return to England.
Nay, fancy would ſo powerfully take poſſeſſion of his
mind, that ſhe would ſometimes carry him a ſecond
time acroſs the Atlantic ocean, and place him tranquilly
in the habitation his father had deſcribed, surround
him with a blooming offspring, and give them
Jeſſy Oliver for a mother, his ſiſter too heightening
by partaking their felicity; and even provide a ſnug
corner and eaſy chair for aunt Rachel.
“Uncle Hezekiah,” he would ſay, “will not be persuaded
to quit Old England, or elſe what a charming
family party we ſhould make.”
Oh! how delightful are thoſe day-dreams of youth;
like the ſhadows of a magic lantern, that paſs before
the admiring eye in quick ſucceſſion, each one as it
comes forward more pleaſing than the laſt. But sorrow,
diſappointment, poverty, throw a damp upon the
fire of youth, which had given brightneſs to the picture;
the brilliant tints grow pale; the figures are
ſcarcely perceptible; they paſs before us almoſt unnoticed;
when age entirely extinguiſhes the flame,
and all is darkneſs, undiſtinguiſhable chaos.
Spurred on by the native impulſe of his mind, which
incited him to activity, and inſpired him with the moſt
ſanguine preſentiments of future proſperity, Reuben
took leave of his friends in Lancaſhire, and embarked
for Philadelphia.
Previous to his departure, he had thrown off both the
habit and manners of a Quaker. Hezekiah remonstrated,
but Reuben would reply, “Nay, uncle, can
you believe it is of any conſequence to our eternal
welfare, whether we wear a plain drab coat or a scarlet
one? or do you not think I ſhould commit more
ſin in continuing the habit, when I cannot ſubmit to
the tenets of the Friendly ſyſtem? I admire their
primitive manners, and the ſimplicity of their language;
but I am a young man, uncle, and have to
make my way through the world. Beſides, I feel that
within me that tells me, ſhould my king or country
[Page 211]
require my aſſiſtance, I ſhould readily draw a ſword in
their defence. What, my dear uncle, if we were all
men of peace, who would protect us from the encroachments
of our enemies? No; you ſhall pray for
peace, and if the haughty foe is not inclined to grant
it, I will aſſiſt my brave countrymen to force them
to it.”
Perhaps Hezekiah did not ſay ſo much as he might
have done, had he not recollected that Reuben's father
had only become one of the ſect in compliance with
the wiſh of his wife; and Hezekiah had charity enough
to think that a man might be a very good Chriſtian,
though he wore a button to his hat, and ruffles to his
ſhirt.
From the time of Mr. Dudley's unfortunate death,
aunt Rachel's ſpirits flagged. She was no longer the life
of every ſociety in which ſhe mixed. The loſs of her
little independence, the being obliged to the hand of
charity for her daily bread, depreſſed her generous
mind. The deſtitute ſituation too of her darlings,
Reuben and Rachel, was a heavy affliction. Reſt and
appetite forſook her. Reuben's departure for America
was the finiſhing blow. The anxiety ſhe ſuffered
for his ſafety brought on a ſlow nervous fever, and
gradually undermined her conſtitution. Rachel watched
over her with unremitting tenderneſs and attention;
adminiſtered every medicine; read to her, prayed
by her; endeavoured to cheer her by affected serenity
when ſhe was awake, and wept over her with
agony when ſhe ſlept.
But care, affection, prayers and tears were alike ineffectual.
Aunt Rachel departed this life, and our
heroine felt, as the laſt breath lingered on the lips of
her maternal friend, that in loſing her ſhe ſhould become
forlorn, unconnected, and be left to ſtruggle
through a world with which ſhe was totally unacquainted,
without a comforter, adviſer, or protector.
Reuben ſtill lived, to be ſure, but Reuben was far,
very far from her; and ſhould ſhe ſtand in need of
advice or protection, ſhe might be loſt, and Reuben
[Page 212]
not even hear of her diſtreſs till ſhe was paſt the reach
of relief or aſſiſtance.
Occupied by reflections ſuch as theſe, Rachel would
often ſtrey into the rural church-yard, where, reſting
on the “lap of earth,” lay the remains of her mother
and her lamented aunt.
It was midſummer. The days were extremely
long, and at half-paſt eight o'clock in the evening, juſt
enough of the twilight remained, as threw over the
face of nature that modeſt, duſky veil, ſo congenial
to the contemplative mind. Rachel ſeated herſelf on
the fragment of a broken tomb-ſtone, and caſting her
eyes upon a new-made grave, where that very afternoon
a youth had been interred, the only ſon of a
farmer in the neighbourhood, ſhe, almoſt unknown to
herſelf, audibly repeated the following ſtanzas.
Reſt, gentle youth, here reſt in peace,
                           Secure from vanity and noiſe;
For here thy earthly ſorrows ceaſe,
                           From hence commence thy heavenly joys.
Short was thy ſpan; 'tis paſt! 'tis gone!
                           Early thou'ſt reach'd the appointed goal;
Freed from its clog, and upwards flown,
                           Angels receiv'd thy ſpotleſs ſoul.
Here in thy quiet manſion reſt,
                           Safe from all anguiſh, pain or care;
Light fit the turf upon thy breaſt,
                           Nor weed nor briar flouriſh there.
And when the chilling arms of death
                           Shall ſold this fragile frame of mine,
May my laſt ſigh of parting breath
                           Paſs tranquil and reſign'd as thine.
“My lovely moraliſt,” ſaid a voice, as Rachel finished
the laſt ſentence, “if you ſit here much longer,
you will ſtand a chance of ſoon being as tranquil as
that poor youth. His diſorder was a cold, and you
are taking the right method to catch one.”
Rachel roſe, turned her head, and beheld the apothecary
of the village. Dr. Lenient was a man nearly
[Page 213]
fifty years old, very humane, very learned, very skilful
in his profeſſion; but with regret it muſt be added,
not very rich. For if he attended a family whoſe
wants were great and means ſmall, when the journeyman
inquired if he ſhould make out the bill, as was
cuſtomary, at Chriſtmas, he would ſay, Pho, pho, tear
out the account and burn it; if I ſend it in, they can't
pay it. It is only my own time loſt; and the few
drugs—what did they coſt me? Nothing worth talking
of. Oh! burn it! burn it! If the poor man has
got a trifle beforehand, why he wants it, in this ſeaſon
of hilarity, to provide a good large plumb-pudding
for his little ones.”
With ſentiments ſuch as theſe, though the Doctor's
practice daily increaſed, yet it did not greatly augment
his revenue. However, he ſupported his family with
comfort and ſomething more than decency.
Our heroine was a great favourite with the good
man. Studious from her infancy, of an inquiring
genius, eager in the purſuit of knowledge, and attentive
to the converſation of thoſe who had the power
to impart it, Rachel at the age of twelve had prefered
a converſation with the doctor, to a ride or a ramble
with her young companions. Charmed by her ardent
thirſt for inſtruction, the old gentleman would anſwer
her queſtions, correct her errors, direct her ſtudies,
and labour to give her an unaffected turn for literature
and the polite arts.
When Rachel painted or worked flowers, the Doctor
would aſſiſt her in arranging her ſhades with propriety;
deſcribing, as he ſat beſide her while ſhe worked,
the natures, properties and uſe of every plant, ſhrub
or flower. If ſhe read, he corrected her pronunciation,
and taught her how to convey the full ſenſe of what
ſhe read to her auditors, by a pleaſing modulation of
voice. If ſhe wrote, he would point out the errors in
her ſtyle, and often has been heard to ſay, It was a
great pity ſhe could not ſpeak and read Latin.
“Come, my good girl,” ſaid he, “you ſhall go home
with me. You are too melancholy of late, and indulge
too much in ſolitary walks and gloomy
[Page 214]
contemplations. And let me tell you, my young friend, you
are inſenſibly falling into an error, which, if indulged,
will increaſe and grow upon you, till it becomes
guilt.”
Rachel ſtarted. “What mean you, Sir?” ſaid ſhe.
“I mean,” replied the Doctor, “that you are sinking
into torpor and inactivity; you are ſuffering the
functions of your ſoul to be entirely locked up by
grief, and you are diſtruſting the power of a Divine
Providence, in giving way to immoderate affliction.”
“Alas! my dear Sir,” ſaid Rachel, “have I not
cauſe to be afflicted? am I not a moſt unhappy creature?
My parents dead, my brother at an immenſe
diſtance from me, my good uncle Hezekiah in a very
infirm ſtate, and the only ſource from whence I could
look for ſupport entangled in the law!”
“All this is true, I muſt allow,” ſaid the Doctor
gravely, “but yet, Miſs Dudley, you have a firm, unalterable
friend, who has ſaid, (and his word is truth
itſelf) “Though thy father and thy mother forſake
thee, yet will not I forſake thee.” And this friend,
my dear, has endowed you with wonderful qualifications
of both mind and perſon; he has given you
good ſenſe, genius, and the benefit of improving thoſe
qualities by education; and all he requires of you is,
not ungratefully to bury the talent entruſted to your
keeping, but exert yourſelf to improve it to the utmost,
depending on him to ſecond your endeavours,
and he will amply reward your faith, patience and
induſtry.”
Cheered and comforted by converſation ſuch as this,
the melancholy cloud began to diſperſe from the brow
of Rachel. Her features aſſumed a ſweet, an interesting
compoſure; and, arrived at the dwelling of the
good Doctor, ſhe conſented to go in and partake of his
ſupper. For the houſe of Hezekiah Penn was within
five minute's walk of the Doctor's, and a lad was dispatched
to inform him that Rachel was ſafe, but would
ſup out.
This little neceſſary buſineſs was ſettled in the garden
that fronted the houſe, where the lad was buſied
[Page 215]
in watering ſome pots of curious flowers; and the
Doctor then led his fair companion through the ſhop
into a back parlour, where they uſually ſat.
“I have brought you a welcome viſitor, ſiſter,”
ſaid he, as he opened the door. Mrs. Auberry roſe
from her ſeat, and taking the hand of Rachel, cried,
“Welcome indeed.” Then turning to an elegant
young man in military uniform, ſhe continued, “My
dear Hamden, give me leave to preſent you to Miſs
Dudley. This, Miſs Dudley, is my ſon Hamden Auberry,
of whom you have often heard me ſpeak.”
The majectic figure, the ſoft, melancholy countenance
of Rachel, rendered more ſtriking by her deep
mourning habit, (for Rachel was not Quaker enough
to neglect that outward token of reſpect to the memory
of departed friends) made her appear in the eyes of
the young ſoldier almoſt divine. She bowed her head,
and preſented her hand with a grace peculiar to herself.
There was ſomething in the action nouvelle , and
irreſiſtibly charming in the eyes of Hamden. He took
the ſnowy pledge of amity, and bowed low upon it;
and if his fingers did contract cloſer than the frigid
rules of politeneſs render admiſſible, ſurpriſe and admiration
muſt plead his excuſe. Rachel was ſenſible
of the preſſure, and life's warm fluid, ruſhing impetuously
to her heart, from thence ſprang to her cheeks,
and gave uncommon animation to her expreſſive countenance.
Dr. Lenient was an old bachelor. Himſelf and
ſiſter were nearly of an age. She had, in her
youth, united herſelf to a young man, who, being a
younger ſon though of the united families of Hamden
and Auberry, had nothing but a commiſſion and the
intereſt of his father to depend on. Joanna Lenient
was poor in every thing, ſave perſonal beauty and a
good heart. Young Auberry ſaw her, loved her, and
bidding defiance to every ſuggeſtion of prudence, in
direct oppoſition to the will of his father, married her.
His father renounced him, and he never roſe above the
rank of captain. He ſought preferment in the field of
action, fought bravely under the gallant Marlborough,
[Page 216]
and fell in the memorable battle on the plains of Bleinhem.
His wife had never been acknowledged by his family,
and after his death ſhe retired, with her infant ſon,
then only fifteen months old, to the village where her
brother reſided. He had juſt entered upon the buſy
ſcenes of life, had a pleaſant houſe, a conſiderable degree
of employment; but no ſocial companion to render
the fireſide cheerful, or preſide at the temperate
meal. He invited his ſiſter to come and increaſe his
comforts by ſharing them. She complied, and his
home from that hour became her's. Her penſion was
devoted to the education of young Hamden, and the
ſupply of her own pocket expenſes; and the Doctor
found himſelf ſo happy in her ſiſterly affection, her
economy in managing his family, her good humour,
ſincerity, and ſtudy to pleaſe, that every other woman
of his acquaintance loſt ſomething in his opinion, when
compared with his ſiſter Auberry.
It happened that when Hamden was about ſeven
years old, the maid-ſervant of Dr. Lenient requeſted
leave to go to a neighbouring fair, and take little master
with her. Hamden joined his ſolicitations with
Suſan's, and was permitted to go. The brother of
Suſan was the head-waiter of an inn, in the town to
which they went, and thither the girl (after having
paraded through the fair with ſome of her companions,
and purchaſed for Maſter Auberry a gun and a drum)
repaired, in order to procure ſome refreſhment. Hamden,
ſatiated with cakes, fruit and ſugar-plumbs, left
her to take her repaſt in quiet, whilſt, taking his little
muſket on his ſhoulder, and ſlinging his drum before
him, he paraded in the court before the front of the
houſe, ſupporting his gun with his left hand, and beating
the drum with his right.
Hamden was a remarkably handſome boy; his
complexion at once fair and florid, his eyes large and
expreſſive, of the fineſt ſapphire hue, and his forehead
ſhaded by innumerable ringlets of beautiful flaxen
hair; tall of his age, and ſufficiently robuſt to prevent
an appearance of effeminacy. Such a boy ſo
[Page 217]
employed, could not fail to attract notice. A lady, who in
paſſing to her country-ſeat had ſtopped to take dinner
in this place, had obſerved his martial air and ſtep, as
he marched before the windows, and throwing up the
ſaſh, called him to her.
“So you have been to the fair, I ſee, my pretty
boy,” ſaid ſhe.
“Yes, ma'am, and Suſan gave me this gun; a'nt it
a pretty one? and the drum too; only hear how loud
I can beat it. She wanted to give me a fiddle and a
coach, but I choſe the gun, and next fair I will have
a ſword.”
“You ſhall have a ſword now, my ſweet boy; here
is a ſhilling to buy one.”
“No, thank you, ma'am,” ſaid Hamden; “mamma
gave me money enough, and ſhe would be angry if I
took any from ſtrangers.”
“You are a charming fellow; will you go with
me?”
“If mamma pleaſes, and you will promiſe to make
me a ſoldier.”
“Why do you wiſh to be a ſoldier?”
“Becauſe papa was a ſoldier. He was killed at the
battle of Bleinhem, and I ſhould like to know how to
fight, that I might kill the man that killed my father.”
The lady felt her eyes fill with tears; the undaunted
ſpirit of the boy delighted her.
“What is your name, my love?” ſaid ſhe.
“Hamden Auberry,” he replied; “'tis a great
name, my mamma ſays, and for the ſake of my father's
relations I muſt be careful not to diſgrace it, though
they never owned me, nor noticed me.”
At the name of Auberry, the lady had ſunk agitated
on the window-ſeat. “Come into the room, my
dear,” ſaid ſhe. Hamden obeyed, and was inſtantly
folded in her arms, while her tears bedewed his face,
as ſhe tenderly ſaluted him.
It was lady Anne Auberry, the eldeſt ſiſter of Hamden's
father. Struck by the innocent reproach his
natural and ſpirited replies had given, not only to herself,
but all the family, for their wilful neglect of ſo
[Page 218]
promiſing a branch of it, ſhe made inquiries concerning
the ſituation of his mother, ordered her carriage,
took the child home, and from that moment adopted
him as her own ſon. At that period ſhe was verging
upon forty, was ſtill unmarried, and remained ſo at
the time Hamden, returned from a tour he had been
making on the continent, was introduced to our heroine.
Lady Anne had ſpared no coſt in completing his
education. She never forgot the promiſe he had innocently
extorted from her at the moment ſhe firſt
converſed with him, and before he was ſixteen purchased
for him an enſigncy in a regiment upon the
home eſtabliſhment. He was now only twenty-two,
but what cannot intereſt and money procure? Hamden
Auberry, without once having been in actual service,
was advanced to the rank of Major.
When lady Anne thus laviſhly poured upon her
nephew every advantage which wealth could beſtow,
ſhe in her mind purpoſed making him her heir; indeed,
ſhe looked upon him as the heir of the family.
Her eldeſt brother's children were all puny beings,
and her ſecond brother had never married. She
therefore looked forward with the hope of one day
ſeeing Hamden one of the firſt men in the kingdom.
One of the preliminaries ſhe had ſettled for his advancement
was a marriage with ſome woman of splendid
rank and fortune. Perhaps lady Anne was not
quite ſo anxious about beauty, grace, good ſenſe, and
good humour, as Hamden himſelf thought was absolutely
neceſſary; for ſhe had pointed out three ſeveral
women of quality, who, ſhe aſſured him, would be
happy to receive his devoirs, and whoſe alliance would
do him infinite honour. But unfortunately one was
upwards of forty years old, another had a hump on
her back, coarſe, unmeaning features, and a disposition
that was the very counterpart of her form; and
the third, though formed by the tendereſt care of
young love, yet ſo vacant, ſo totally devoid of mental
endowments,
[Page 219]
And when the beauteous idiot ſpoke,
Forth from her coral lips ſuch nonſenſe broke,
That Hamden, though an enthuſiaſt in his admiration
of female beauty, could ſcarcely command patience
ſufficient to liſten with an appearance of common
civility.
His heart had remained untouched, and it was for
our heroine alone to call its tender ſentiments into action.
The artleſs, unaffected manner of Rachel, afforded
him the moſt delicate pleaſure, whilſt beholding
and converſing with her; for it was ſo apparent
in every word, look, ſmile of her's, that ſhe was unconscious
of her own charms, that thoſe charms became
the more ſtriking, the more faſcinating. About
half paſt ten, he waited on Rachel to the door of her
uncle's manſion, and then returned to tell his mother
ſhe was the only woman he had ever ſeen, who in the
leaſt appeared to him in every particular what a woman
ought to be.
Hezekiah had been married very early in life, but
his wife lived only a few years; and from the time
of her deceaſe, his houſehold concerns had been superintended
by a diſtant relation of his mother's, whoſe
tall, thin figure, and auſtere viſage, attired in the cloſe
mob black hood, and other plain habiliments uſually
worn by the ſect, looked, as much as it is poſſible to
conceive any thing to look, like formality perſonified.
Nor was her dreſs and perſon more ſtiff and forbidding
than was her manners. Ignorant in the higheſt
degree, ſhe valued herſelf on that ignorance; ſhe understood
nothing of polite literature; and whenever
ſhe ſaw our heroine engaged in any book, whether of
inſtruction or amuſement it mattered not, by her they
were all termed vanity and vexation of ſpirit. The
productions of the beſt poets were called blaſphemy.
Hiſtory was of no uſe; for of what conſequence was
it to her what was done in the world before ſhe was
born? And works of fancy, however excellent in
their kind, were all a pack of nonſenſe, and ſerved only
to fill young people's heads with proclamations.
[Page 220]
To be ſeen with a book on any day except Sunday,
was highly againſt her creed. For in her opinion
needle-work, ſpinning, and attending to the culinary
concerns of the family, were ſufficient to occupy every
hour of the day. Her pickles and preſerves were excellent
in their kind, and for good ſubſtantial roaſt
and boiled diſhes, with ſolid plumb-puddings, and large
family mince-pies, Tabitha would not give place to
any woman in England. Hezekiah thought, with all
her oddities, ſhe had his intereſt ſincerely at heart, and
therefore continued paſſive, and ſuffered Tabitha to
rule the family as ſhe pleaſed. But the maidens of
the houſehold unanimouſly declared, that ſhe ruled
with a rod of iron.
CHAP. VII.
Journey to London. When Hamden Auberry had ſeen Rachel to
her uncle's door and rapped at it, politeneſs
obliged him to wait till it was opened, which it was
by Tabitha herſelf. She glanced her eye at the scarlet
coat and the lace which decorated it, nor did ſhe
entirely overlook the handſome form and face of him
who wore it. But when, without noticing Tabitha,
Hamden bowed to our heroine, and kiſſing her hand
with an air of gallantry, wiſhed her a good night, ſhe
became troubled in ſpirit that Rachel ſhould have submitted
to ſuch an abomination quietly.
With upright head, her long, ſcraggy neck stretching
to its utmoſt extent, from a conſciouſneſs of her
own purity, in ſilent ſolemnity Tabitha ſtalked into the
parlour, where ſat Hezekiah almoſt dozing in his eaſy
chair. She depoſited the candle on the table, and
ſeated herſelf on his right hand. Rachel ſat down on
the other, ſide, and affectionately bending over the
chair, aſked her uncle how he was.
[Page 221]
“Why tired almoſt to death, thou mayeſt be ſure,”
ſaid Tabitha, not giving Hezekiah time to reply.
“Then it was a pity my uncle did not go to bed,”
ſaid Rachel innocently.
“Thou art both an unthinking and an unfeeling
girl, Rachel Dudley, elſe wouldeſt thou know that
anxiety for thy ſafety kept him up. But he has had
ſo many of thoſe uneaſy hours ſince thou haſt been in
his dwelling, that I can foreſee it will hurry him to
his grave. Oh! Rachel! Rachel! thou art turned
to vanity, to folly, to abomination. Thou art wilfully
running into the ſnares of the wicked one. Thou
doſt love to conſort with the children of diſobedience;
thou delighteſt to behold their veſtments, ſhining with
gold, and red in the blood of Jezebel.”
“Bleſs me,” ſaid Rachel, “what can you mean?
Uncle, pray ſpeak to me. I hope I have not given
you any cauſe for uneaſineſs. I ſent word that I ſhould
ſup at Dr. Lenient's; had you ſent by the boy for me
to come home, I ſhould have returned inſtantly.”
Hezekiah had taken her hand, which in her earnestness
ſhe had laid on his knee, gave it a gentle
preſſure, and was beginning to ſpeak; but Tabitha interrupted
him, and he knew it would be in vain to attempt
being heard, when ſhe was inclined to talk.
So he relinquiſhed his intention, leaned back in his
chair, ſhut his eyes, and inwardly wiſhed he could
ſhut his ears alſo.
“Thou didſt ſend word, it is true,” ſaid the persecuting
Tabitha, “but thou didſt not ſend word that a
ſtranger would walk with thee; that thou wouldeſt
lean on his arm, and ſuffer him to kiſs thy hand, in a
manner not becoming a maiden who wiſheth to preserve
her reputation. And this ſtranger was clothed
in ſcarlet and gold, and eats the bread that is purchased
by murdering his fellow-creatures. Verily, I
ſay, my ſpirit waxeth wroth when I think the daughter
of Caſſiah Penn turneth from the worſhip of her
father's houſe, and runneth after ſtrange gods, and
delighteth to dwell in the tents of idolaters.”
[Page 222]
“I beg your pardon,” ſaid Rachel tartly; “my
father deſpiſed both formality and hypocriſy.”
“Oh thou offspring of a generation of vipers,” cried
Tabitha, “doſt thou call our pure and undefiled faith
hypocriſy?”
“No! Heaven forbid I ſhould,” replied our heroine
mildly; “it is only the uncharitable and insensate
wretch, who, having neither heart to conceive,
nor underſtanding to enjoy, the innocent pleaſures
with which a bountiful Creator has enriched the world,
proudly arrogate to themſelves the right to judge
and contemn their fellow-creatures; and ſurely it is
the height of hypocriſy to pretend to deſerve the divine
appellation of Chriſtian, and yet harbour in the
boſom envy, hatred and malice.”
“Rachel! Rachel! child of folly, daughter of disobedience,”
exclaimed Tabitha vociferouſly, her meagre
features flaming with rage, as though the fire
within ſhone through her ſkinny cheeks and hollow
eyes; “child of darkneſs, hear me; thou art going
blindfold into the pit; thou art walking barefoot over
burning ploughſhares; but the ſoles of thy feet, like
thine eternal ſoul, is callous and inſenſible to the danger
that ſurrounds thee. Had thy mother lived unto
this day—”
“Oh! would to Heaven ſhe had!” cried Rachel,
her ſpirits no longer able to ſupport her againſt the
abſurd accuſations of Tabitha. “Oh that ſhe were
alive at this moment; ſhe would not ſuffer her innocent
child to be thus groſsly inſulted.”
Here ſhe gave way to an involuntary guſh of tears;
but ſuppreſſing them as quick as ſhe could, ſhe kiſſed
her uncle with affection, “Good-night! God bleſs
you, my dear Sir,” ſaid ſhe; “the unhappy Rachel
will not long be a trouble to you.”
“God bleſs you, my love,” ſaid Hezekiah, “and
grant us both patience according to the burthens it
may pleaſe him to lay upon us.”
“Amen,” ſaid Rachel ſervently, darting an indignant
look at Tabitha; then riſing and taking the candle
from the table, ſhe went towards the door; but
[Page 223]
the natural philanthropy of her mind would not ſuffer
her to part in enmity with any one. She turned towards
Tabitha. “Good-night,” ſaid ſhe in a ſoftened
accent, “and Heaven forgive us both as we forgive each
other.” Tabitha was ſullenly ſilent, and Rachel retired
to her ſolitary apartment, wept a few moments,
knelt, and commended herſelf to the protection of
Heaven; was compoſed and comforted by the action,
retired to bed, and ſunk into the arms of repoſe.
Sweet, heavenly ſweet, are the ſlumbers of the innocent.
Rachel's heart was uncontaminated; envy,
hatred, jealouſy, were equal ſtrangers to it. Her ſleep
was undiſturbed and refreſhing; her dreams the visitation
of miniſtering angels.
When Rachel left the parlour, Tabitha began speaking
to Hezekiah, but he aroſe from his ſeat. “My
head aches,” ſaid he, “I can ſit up no longer.” Then
taking his own candle, which ſtood ready on the table,
he bade Tabby good-night and retired to his
apartment.
“I will alter my will to-morrow,” ſaid Hezekiah,
as he laid his head on the pillow; (for, ſome years
previous to the death of Mr. Dudley, this will had
been made highly in Tabitha's favour) “I will alter
my will,” ſaid he, “it will not be right to leave my
fair and good kinſwoman Rachel, dependent on a person
whoſe underſtanding is weak, and whoſe heart is
contracted.”
In the morning he aroſe with the ſame determination,
and diſpatched a perſon for the moſt eminent
attorney of the neighbouring market town. He walked
himſelf to Dr. Lenient's, wiſhing to conſult with
him, and to have him a witneſs to his new will. But
unfortunately the attorney was gone to London on
particular buſineſs, and Dr. Lenient had been called to
Liverpool to viſit a patient, who, having found benefit
from his preſcriptions whilſt on a viſit in the country,
wiſhed to have thoſe preſcriptions continued.
At dinner, Hezekiah ate leſs than uſual, complained
of an acute pain acroſs his temples, and a coldneſs
down the ſpine of his back.
[Page 224]
“Why doſt thou not partake of that boiled ſoal?”
ſaid Tabitha; “the ſhrimp ſauce is good, I can aſſure
thee, for I made it myſelf.”
“I have no appetite for fiſh,” he replied, puſhing
the plate gently from him.
“Let me change your plate, dear uncle,” ſaid Rachel,
removing the one before him and ſetting one in
its place on which ſhe had previouſly laid the wing of
a chicken.
Hezekiah drew the plate towards him, cut a mouthful
and raiſed it to his lips. But the effort was vain;
his countenance changed; he ſunk back. It was a
kind of paralytic affection. He ſtruggled to ſpeak,
but could not articulate. By the order of Tabitha,
he was put into a warm bed, and Dr. Lenient being
juſt returned, attended on the firſt ſummons. He ordered
the uſual applications, and waited to obſerve
their effects. All the night he continued ſpeechleſs;
but towards morning, by a violent exertion, he ſpoke
ſo as to be underſtood. Deſiring to be raiſed in the
bed, he in faltering accents thus began:
“I called on you, my good friend, this morning,
to aſk your advice and opinion.”
“I wiſh I had been at home,” ſaid the Doctor,
“we might perhaps have prevented this ſevere attack.”
“That is not my meaning,” ſaid Hezekiah. “My
time is come, and, ſkilful as you are, my good Doctor,
I do not think you can ward off the ſtroke of
death.”
“I do not think I could,” ſaid the Doctor gravely.
“Tabitha,” ſaid the ſick man, reaching out his hand
towards her, “I am much indebted to you for the unwearied
attention you have for many years ſhewn me,
and the care you have taken of my temporal intereſt.
It has grieved me to ſee the little diſſenſions which
have of late taken place between you and my niece
Rachel, who, though younger, livelier, more free from
prejudice than yourſelf, is nevertheleſs one of the beſt
and moſt unoffending creatures in the world. Let
me ſee you friends,” continued he, taking Rachel's
hand and joining it with Tabitha's.
[Page 225]
Rachel could not ſpeak, Tabitha would not, and
Hezekiah continued:
“You will find on the opening of my will, Dr.
Lenient, that I have not forgot the ſervices I have received
from my ancient kinſwoman; but I am ſorry—
I meant to alter—I wiſh her to give—” His voice
again faultered—“to give her—” ſaid he with extreme
difficulty.
“Fifty or ſixty guineas,” cried Tabitha, interrupting
him.
“No,” exclaimed the dying man; then ſtruggling
violently, he at length articulated, “Give her half.”
They were his laſt words. In a few moments he ſunk
again into inſenſibility, and before evening expired.
Now the good-hearted Doctor fully comprehended
what Hezekiah meant when he ſaid, “Give her half.”
But Tabitha wilfully miſconſtrued the expreſſion; and
when the will was read, which gave the houſe, land,
cattle, plate, furniture, &c. to Tabitha Holdfaſt, in
conſideration of her more than ſiſterly kindneſs,” Dr.
Lenient intimating, that he expected ſhe would make a
fair and equitable diviſion of the whole with Rachel, in
compliance with what he underſtood to be the intention
of the teſtator from his laſt words, ſhe calmly replied.
“Friend Lenient, I am not accountable for what
thou mayeſt have underſtood. I am certain our dear
departed brother Hezekiah—” And here the handkerchief
viſited her eyes; but it returned
Dry as the chaff, which, flitting in the wind,
Too light to be depreſs'd by trifling ſhowers,
Defies the blaſt, and flutters o'er the heath;
Or, like the downy plumage of the ſwan,
White and unſullied.—
“I am certain,” ſhe continued, “he meant not the participation
thou wouldeſt inſinuate; for when (ever eager
to interpret and prevent his wiſhes) I mentioned
giving her fifty or ſixty guineas, he ſaid, “Give her
half;” and by his dying words I ſhall moſt ſurely
abide.”
[Page 226]
“He meant to ſay,” cried the Doctor vehemently,
“that you ſhould give her half of all he died poſſeſſed
of.”
“It may be to thy advantage, friend, (ſaid ſhe sneeringly)
to have his laſt will ſo underſtood. The singular
attentions of one of thy relatives to Rachel has
not paſſed unnoticed; and I think thy family is remarkable
for promoting its own intereſt at the expenſe
of others.”
It was a reproach too pointed to be miſunderſtood;
but it ſprung from a mind ſo debaſed, that it was beneath
notice. The Doctor took his hat, and wiſhed
Tabitha a good night. Rachel aroſe to light him to
the door.
“My good, dear girl,” ſaid he, “I would ſain have
procured from this woman a ſmall independence for
you; but it is in vain to flatter you with the idea. But
this give me leave to ſay, Should you not hear from
your brother, and your reſidence with dame Tabitha
becomes painful, I have a home. My ſiſter and myself
both poſſeſs hearts, which I thank God are not
yet quite petriſied.” Saying which, he ſhook her
hand and left her.
Rachel ſoon perceived the full extent of her unhappy
ſituation. The morning after the interment of her
uncle, Tabitha paid her thirty guineas, and from that
moment ſhe found that ſhe was looked upon as an intruder
in the family.
Rachel was not of a ſpirit to brook the cold hauteur
of Tabitha. Nor could ſhe think of availing herſelf of
the kind offer of Dr. Lenient. For, beſides that ſhe
ſhrunk from the weight of obligation, ſhe alſo felt there
would be an impropriety in her ſeeking an aſylum in
the family of Hamden Auberry. She was not insensible
to his merit, nor had ſhe liſtened unmoved to the
expreſſions of attachment that had ſometimes accidentally
eſcaped his lips. For Hamden knew he ſhould
have many obſtacles to encounter, ſhould he give way
to a paſſion for a woman in the ſtate of life in which
fortune had placed Rachel. Lady Anne would never
[Page 227]
be brought to approve of his allying himſelf to a perſon,
who had neither rank or wealth to recommend her.
Rachel ſaw the ſtruggle of his mind, and, attributing
that to pride which was only the effect of caution, resolved
never to intrude herſelf into a family which would
look upon her connexion as degrading to its principal
branch.
Having therefore formed a plan for her future conduct,
Rachel took an affectionate leave of the worthy
Doctor and his ſiſter, and a very cool one of Tabitha,
and departed in the ſtage-coach for London, reſolving
to conſult and adviſe with her friend Jeffy Oliver, in
regard to her executing the ſcheme ſhe had thought of
for her ſubſiſtence till ſhe ſhould hear from Reuben.
Mrs. Auberry gave her a letter to a reputable family,
with whom ſhe propoſed to board. Hamden was
abſent at the time of Rachel's departure on a fiſhing
party, and on his return, his mother merely informed
him that Miſs Dudley was gone to London; but wishing
to put a ſtop to any further intimacy between
them, ſhe did not mention with whom ſhe would reſide,
or how long her ſtay might probably be in the metropolis;
and as he was engaged to paſs the autumn with
lady Anne in Scotland, he was not ſo inquiſitive as he
might otherwiſe have been.
Rachel got ſafe to the end of her journey without
meeting with any adventure on the road. But unaccustomed
to travelling, ſhe was greatly fatigued; and
when ſhe entered the buſy ſtreets of London, the noiſe,
confuſion and hurry made her head giddy; the disagreeable
effluvia too, which aſſailed her olfactory herves
as ſhe alighted from the coach in a very cloſe lane in
the city, turned her extremely ſick, and ſhe would
have fallen, had not a ſpruce young man, who was
waiting for another coach to arrive, caught her by the
arm, and led her into the houſe, where a few drops and
water revived her, and ſhe began to inquire for a conveyance
in which ſhe might proceed to her lodgings.
A hackney-coach was ſent for, and while ſhe waited
for it, the young man re-entered the parlour where ſhe
[Page 228]
was ſitting, introducing a middle-aged woman, dressed
to the extremity of the faſhion.
“Walk in and ſit down, Miſs La Varone,” ſaid he,
“I will order the negus immediately.” Then turning
to our heroine, he continued, “And how do you
find yourſelf now, ma'am?”
“Much better, Sir, I thank you,” ſaid Rachel.
“Have you been ſick, ma'am?” ſaid Miſs La
Varone.
“I am not uſed to travelling, and was rather faint
when I firſt alighted; but it was only fatigue, and the
air of London is not quite ſo pure as that I have been
accuſtomed to from my infancy.”
“Oh dear me! I don't wonder, ma'am, if you never
were in London before, that it made you ſick.
Then this lane is ſo cloſe; and I proteſt it made me
as ſick as could be. But pray, ma'am, to what part
of the town are you going? Perhaps one coach will
ſerve us both.”
Rachel looked at the direction in her memorandum
book, and Miſs La Varone exclaimed, “Well, as I'm
alive, we are both going to the ſame place. Mr.
Spriggins, this young lady is going to your aunt's.”
Rachel knew but little of the world in general, and
leſs of London than almoſt any other place; yet there
was a ſomething within her, a kind of native rectitude,
that told her not to be too eaſy in agreeing to the proposal
of the ſtrangers who ſaid they would all go to Mrs.
Webſter's together. Yet her politeneſs and good-nature
was ſuch, as would not ſuffer her to repulſe them
rudely. Beſides, there was ſomething in the appearance
of La Varone, however familiar her addreſs had
been, that prepoſſeſſed her in her favour. She was a
ſmall, delicate woman; her pale countenance, the
features of which were extremely regular, was ornamented
by an animated pair of black eyes, and long,
dark eye-laſhes. Her dreſs, it is true, was in Rachel's
opinion rather too gay; but ſhe was totally unacquainted
with the ſtyle of dreſs that might be fashionable
in London, and therefore paſſed this circumſtance
the more eaſily over.
[Page 229]
Finding it impoſſible to ſeparate herſelf from her
new acquaintances, ſhe contented herſelf with giving
the hackney-coachman particular inſtructions where
to carry her, and in leſs than half an hour found herself
at Mrs. Webſter's, in Dartmouth-ſtreet, Westminster.
Mr. Spriggins, (who was ſhopman to a ſilk mercer
in the vicinity of St. James's Park) boarded with
his aunt, and Miſs La Varone occupied the ſecond
floor of the houſe.
Rachel begged an early cup of tea, and then retired
to the apartment prepared for her; where wearied nature
was refreſhed by ſeveral hours of profound ſleep.
But the fatigue which had accelerated her repoſe,
gradually giving way to its effects, her ſlumbers became
lighter, and about three o'clock, ſhe became sensible
of the (to her) unuſual noiſes that ſurrounded
her. The hollow voices of the watchmen, the rattling
of coaches and carts, the riotous mirth of intemperate
wretches of both ſexes, who, under the black
veil of night, prowled through the ſtreets in ſearch of
prey; all together ſtruck on the aſtoniſhed ears of our
heroine, who, not immediately recollecting where ſhe
was, ſprang out of bed, exclaiming, “Heavens! what
is the matter?” However, as Rachel was not
troubled with weak nerves, and had in general great
preſence of mind, ſhe preſently grew collected, remembered
ſhe was in London, returned to her bed, and endeavoured
to obtain another viſit from the leadenwinged
god. He liſtened, and was propitious to her
entreaties, and at eight o'clock the following morning
ſhe continued ſtill locked in his embraces.
CHAP. VIII.
Viſits—Curioſities. The ſcene of life into which Rachel had now entered
was every way new to her. Her intentions
in avoiding the family of Dr. Lenient on account
[Page 230]
of young Auberry were laudable; but her open and
ingenuous nature, fearleſs of guile, becauſe intending
none, was not competent to the taſk ſhe had undertaken.
Humane, generous, and credulous in the extreme,
ſhe felt that every human being had a claim
upon her affection; and willingly allowing that claim
to others, ſhe readily believed every profeſſion of friendship
made to herſelf.
Mrs. Webſter was a woman of moderate understanding,
devoid of knowledge, and with a very
ſmall ſhare of curioſity, and being a widow with
three girls, the eldeſt of which was but ſixteen, ſhe
had to work extremely hard at her buſineſs, which
was that of a hoop-petticoat maker, to ſupport her
family. From ſuch a woman, Rachel had nothing
either to hope or apprehend. She enjoyed from the
effects of her care a very neat apartment, and regular
decent meals; but as to any idea of a companion, it
was entirely out of the queſtion. The daughters were
young, and their minds totally uninformed; they
were of conſequence unfit ſociety for her. To whom
therefore could ſhe look to enliven her ſolitude by
cheerful converſation? Miſs La Varone had read a
great deal, though not in moſt inſtructive authors.
She had a conſiderable degree of ſuperficial knowledge,
was chatty, good-humoured, and ſtudious to render
herſelf agreeable. She became the conſtant companion
of Rachel, and was unfortunately the moſt improper
companion ſhe could have choſen.
Miſs La Varone was the daughter of a Swiſs valet,
who, having ſaved a conſiderable ſum of money in the
ſervice of a nobleman, and received a legacy at his
death, married the lady's maid, and opened a perfumery
and toy-ſhop, in which he ſucceeded extremely
well; eſpecially when his daughter grew old enough
to attend the cuſtomers, her pretty face and lively
manner acting as a taliſman to draw young men of
faſhion thither.
But human happineſs is futile! A fire broke out
in the neighbourhood, and their houſe was conſumed
amongſt a number of others, and as their property
[Page 231]
was not inſured, a few hours reduced them from a
ſtate of competence to abſolute beggary. The old
man received a hurt, in endeavouring to ſave part of
his ſtock, which he did not long ſurvive. The mother
again went to ſervice, and procured employment
for her daughter in the ſame family. The eldeſt ſon
of this family was pleaſed with her; offered her a settlement;
and at the age of eighteen, La Varone quitted
the protection of her mother, to accept that of a
libertine. Her mother had perhaps a higher ſenſe of
virtue than perſons in her ſituation are in general supposed
to poſſeſs. She remonſtrated, entreated, endeavoured
by every poſſible means to reclaim her;
but finding all equally ineffectual, renounced her.
And though ſhe had, without murmuring, returned
to her original way of life, and ſubmitted patiently to
the privation of thoſe comforts ſhe had many years enjoyed,
and which had been the fruits of her own industry,
yet ſhe could not meet ſhame without repining.
Her child's diſhonour ſunk deep into her heart,
and in a very ſhort time put a period to her exiſtence.
La Varone continued with her admirer till he married;
ſhe then removed from all her former connexions,
into the houſe where our heroine was now become
an inmate. She had been an eaſy conqueſt; her
ſettlement was conſequently not large. However, ſhe
kept up a genteel appearance, and frequently received
viſits from an elderly gentleman, a couſin, who was a
member of parliament. She ſaw but little company
beſides; but ſhe would expatiate for an hour on the
charms of retirement; ſo her living ſo recluſe was not
ſurpriſing. Her favourite amuſement was a play, and
ſometimes little excurſions in the country, where ſhe
would ſtay four or five days at a time.
The day after Rachel's arrival in London was devoted
to reſt. Miſs La Varone was extremely attentive,
invited her to take tea in her apartment, where
Mr. Spriggins alſo attended, and the elder Miſs Webster.
Here they talked of the many curioſities to be
ſeen in London. Weſtminſter Abbey, St. Paul's Cathedral,
the Monument, the Tower, the Palace; all
[Page 232]
which Miſs La Varone ſaid they muſt poſitively viſit,
and the gentleman offered very politely to be their
gallant.
Rachel was not devoid of curioſity. She had come
up to the metropolis with the beſt reſolutions in the
world, and Mrs. Auberry, when ſhe recommended
her to Mrs. Webſter's to board, thought ſhe had rendered
her young friend a very acceptable piece of service.
But ſhe never reflected, that twenty-five years
make a moſt amazing difference in the manners and
diſpoſition of a perſon, eſpecially if in that period they
have ſuffered much affliction, and from narrow circumstances
being unavoidably thrown into the ſociety
of people, whoſe educations having been circumscribed,
are often the ſlaves of contracted, low ideas and illiberal
prejudices; and it frequently happens, that
thoſe who are obliged to work inceſſantly for the support
of their families, being wholly occupied in the
hope of bettering their fortune, become inattentive to
appearances, and overlook actions, which earlier in
life would have ſtruck them with horror. This was
literally the caſe with Mrs. Webſter. The Mrs. Webster
whom Mrs. Auberry knew ſo many years ſince,
and ſhe to whoſe care ſhe now recommended her
young friend, were as oppoſite in perſon, manner, and
way of thinking, as if it had not been the ſame, but
two diſtinct people.
The ſecond morning, Rachel took a hackney-coach,
and drove to the houſe of Mr. Oliver, in the vicinity
of St. James's. She was ſtill in mourning; a grey
tabby night-gown, with black cuffs and robins, a plain
lawn cap, apron, handkerchief, and ruffles, was the
dreſs in which ſhe prepared to viſit her friend Jeſſy.
But a woman thus habited and in a hackney-coach
was not likely to challenge much attention from the
gay lackeys who waited in the hall of Mr. Oliver.
“Is Miſs Oliver at home, friend?” ſaid ſhe to the
footman who came to the door. A ſurly No! was
all the anſwer ſhe received, and the man was again
ſhutting the door.
[Page 233]
“Is ſhe expected home ſoon?” ſaid ſhe, putting her
hand out to prevent it from cloſing.
“I know nothing about it,” ſaid the fellow.
Rachel had deſcended from the carriage before the
coachman had knocked for admittance, and was standing
on the upper ſtep of a flight of ſtone ſtairs which
led up on each ſide from the ſtreet. Her figure had
attracted the eyes of Archibald, who was at home at
this time, and ſeated in a front parlour window, killing
time with a political pamphlet. Hearing her voice at
the door, and underſtanding from the tone of the servant's
voice that he was not anſwering in a very civil
manner, he opened the parlour door juſt as ſhe was
turning to deſcend the ſteps.
“You were inquiring for Miſs Oliver, madam,”
ſaid he; “ſhe is at preſent out of town, but I expect
to ſee her to-morrow. Who ſhall I tell her did her
the honour to call?”
“My name is Dudley,” ſaid Rachel.
“Dudley! is it poſſible; the ſiſter of my friend Reuben?”
“The ſame!”
“How happy I am, Miſs Dudley! Give me leave
to wait on you to your place of reſidence. I wiſh to
aſk after your brother; I have alſo ſome intereſting
intelligence to communicate to you concerning my
ſiſter.” He ſaid this as he handed her to the coach.
Then calling for his hat, before Rachel could collect
herſelf ſufficiently to refuſe or accept his propoſal, he
was ſeated in the carriage beſide her, and inquired
where he ſhould order it to be driven.
“Perhaps, my dear Miſs,” ſaid young Oliver as the
coach drove off, “you may think it particular that I
did not preſs you to enter my father's houſe. But to
confeſs a mortifying truth, neither Jeſſy nor myſelf are
allowed to take any more liberties there than we ſhould
be in the houſe of an entire ſtranger. My poor father
is ruled entirely by Mrs. Oliver, and his children have
but a ſecondary place in his affections.”
“Pray make no apologies, Mr. Oliver,” ſaid Rachel,
having a little recovered from the flutter into
[Page 234]
which his apparently odd conduct had thrown her;
“apologies are quite needleſs. I had no wiſh to enter
the houſe except my dear Jeſſy had been an inmate of
it. But you ſaid you had ſome intereſting intelligence.”
“True, but before I enter on it, tell me, when did
you hear from your brother?”
“I have not received the leaſt intelligence from him
ſince he left England; and ſometimes I fear—”
Rachel's eyes filled; her boſom heaved.
“Oh do not fear,” ſaid Oliver, reſpectfully taking
her hand: “Letters may miſcarry; you will no doubt
hear ſoon. But apropos of Jeſſy; has ſhe not written
to you lately? I underſtood you correſponded.”
“We did; but I have not received a letter from her
for nearly two months paſt.”
“Poor Jeſſy, ſhe had nothing pleaſant to employ
her pen, and ſhe always had an averſion to endeavouring
to lighten her own ſorrows by impoſing a recital of
them on the attention of others.”
He then proceeded to inform her, that his ſiſter had
unfortunately (as it proved) been ſingled out by a nobleman
of elevated rank and ſplendid fortune, as the
perſon with whom he wiſhed to ſhare thoſe advantages.
He ſolicited her hand, was encouraged by both
Mr. and Mrs. Oliver, but reſolutely rejected by Jeſſy
herſelf.
“My father,” continued he, “who (as I mentioned
before) has no will but his wife's, has ſent the poor
girl into the country, debarring her of all ſociety, and
declaring ſhe ſhall ſtay there till ſhe accepts his Lordship;
and I, who know her diſpoſition, think that sentence
is tantamount to ſaying ſhe ſhall ſtay there as
long as ſhe lives.”
“She is right to perſevere in rejecting him,” ſaid
Rachel, “if ſhe does not feel her heart ſufficiently attached
to him to incline her to ſhare his pains and
pleaſures through life. For of all the miſeries that can
be endured by a human being, ſure none can be ſo severe
as being obliged to ſubmit to the whims and
[Page 235]
caprices (for we all have them) of a perſon to whom we
are perfectly indifferent.”
Oliver gazed at her, as ſhe thus, with unaffected
freedom, delivered her ſentiments on a ſubject, which
the generality of thoſe young women with whom he
was acquainted would have bluſhed only to have heard
mentioned. But Rachel was entirely free from affectation
of every kind; ſhe had no idea, but that a
woman might ſpeak on the ſubjects of love and marriage,
without ſimpering, bluſhing, and fifty other little
fooliſh prettineſſes. Nor did ſhe feel the leaſt embarrassed
in converſing with a perſon of the oppoſite
ſex; for it had never entered her head, that every
man who ſaw her muſt fall in love with her, or that
they could not paſs an hour in her company without
entertaining her with praiſes of her wit and beauty, and
complaints of their own hopeleſs paſſion.
When the coach therefore ſtopped, and Rachel asked
him to walk in, he eagerly availed himſelf of the
invitation; and after ſitting with her till ſhe was summoned
to dinner, left her, impreſſed with ſo high an
opinion of her underſtanding, that he thought her the
moſt ſuperior woman he had ever known. She had
promiſed to entruſt him with a letter to her friend Jessy,
and he was determined to call for it himſelf, that
he might enjoy another half hour of her ſociety. But
in this he was diſappointed; for immediately after
dinner, Rachel wrote her letter, and leaving it with
Mrs. Webſter in caſe it ſhould be ſent for before her
return, ſhe took one of the little girls with her, and
walked to the houſe of Mr. Andrew Atkins, in Lincoln's-Inn,
hoping to hear ſome tidings of Reuben,
and alſo to inquire how long it would be before ſhe
might expect to receive any money on account of the
eſtate in Lancaſhire.
Being ſhewn into a parlour, and having ſent up her
name, the was deſired to wait till Mr. Atkins had dined,
when he would wait on her immediately. In about
an hour, he appeared, accompanied by the identical
[Page 236]
Mr. Allibi who had viſited herſelf and brother in the
country.
Rachel roſe from her ſeat.
“Servant, Miſs,” ſaid Mr. Atkins, ſlightly bowing,
and without aſking her to reſume her ſeat. “Pray
what may be your commands with me?”
“I wiſh to know whether you have had any intelligence
from my brother ſince his departure from England.”
“Intelligence? No indeed! I wonder you ſhould
think of my hearing from him; his going to America
was a wild-gooſe ſcheme. What does he expect to
get there?”
“He expects to take poſſeſſion of his father's eſtate,
which he purchaſed in Pennſylvania.”
“Pſhaw! pſhaw! Dudley made no purchaſe there
worth inquiring after. An uncultivated tract of land,
with a paltry houſe upon it, which my very good
friend and correſpondent, Mr. Jacob Holmes, has informed
me is entirely fallen down.”
“Jacob Holmes, did you ſay?” cried Rachel in
breathleſs agitation. “Why that is the very man my
father mentions in his letter to have left in charge of
his eſtate. He was brought up in my father's houſe.
Can he advance ſuch an untruth, when he muſt be conscious—?”
“Come, come, Miſs Dudley, don't ſpeak againſt Mr.
Holmes; he is a very worthy, honeſt man. Your
father lived in a very expenſive ſtyle in Philadelphia,
ſpent a great deal of money, more a great deal than
he ought. Even the trifling purchaſe he did make of
land was not half paid for.”
“Sir! Sir!” cried Rachel, waving her hand with
dignity, “I muſt not hear the memory of my father
treated with diſreſpect. You may have been taught
to believe what you now aſſert; or, perhaps, (darting
an indignant look at him) your profeſſion accuſtoms
you confidently to aſſert what you do not believe to be
true. Be that as it may, I ſee my brother and myſelf
are two unprotected orphans.” Here her cheeks assumed
a pallid hue, her lips trembled, and ſhe was
[Page 237]
unable to proceed; and though the unfeeling Atkins had
kept her ſtanding while he ſpoke to her, her agitation
was now ſo great, that ſhe was obliged to ſit down, or
ſhe would have fallen.
“As I would wiſh to ſave you the unneceſſary trouble
of calling on me again, I have brought Mr. Allibi,
who fortunately was dining with me, to give you any
information you may require concerning the Lancashire
buſineſs.”
“I am ſorry, my fair lady,” ſaid Allibi, “that it is
not in my power to give you ſuch information as you
may perhaps expect; but ſo many unexpected demands
have been made, that I hardly think the eſtate
will ever be able to recover itſelf. I have here (drawing
a memorandum book from his pocket) ſome few
memorandums of the ſtate of the affairs at preſent.
Whenever you ſhall require it, Miſs Dudley, I will lay
a regular ſtatement of the accounts before you, and
ſubmit the whole of our proceedings to your investigation.”
Rachel felt that this ſeeming integrity was an inſult
to her underſtanding. Aſſuming, therefore, an appearance
of fortitude that ſhe was far from feeling, ſhe exerted
herſelf to riſe from her ſeat.
“Good Mr. Allibi,” ſaid ſhe, conveying as much
acrimony into her looks and manner, as it was poſſible
for her voice and features to expreſs, “of what service
will it be for me to examine or inveſtigate thoſe
accounts? Did you, or your reſpectable client, Mr.
Andrew Atkins, imagine me competent to the taſk,
you would never have ſo readily offered it. But I am
a woman—an orphan; young, inexperienced, unprotected;
and even ſuppoſing I could diſcover errors,
who is there to ſupport my aſſertions? I am poor,
and I can plainly perceive, you have inclination as
well as reaſons for keeping me ſo. Oh that my injured
brother were but here!”
“You ſpeak pointedly, Miſs Dudley,” ſaid Atkins.
“I ſpeak as I feel,” replied Rachel.
“But you are too warm, my fair lady,” ſaid Allibi.
[Page 238]
“Pardon me,” cried Rachel, “I do not think I am
warm enough. Oh! that I could find words adequate
to the indignation of my ſoul! Do not misunderstand
me; for myſelf I am but little concerned.
I have an innocent mind that can be humble when required,
and hands that are not uſeleſs. But my brother
is in a ſtrange land; for him I feel a thouſand fears.
My father's memory has been traduced; on that subject,
my feelings are too powerful for utterance. If
my raſh judgment wrongs you, gentlemen, Heaven
pardon the error. For I leave you in the full persuasion,
that on whichever ſide the wrong is, the great
Redreſſer of injuries, the righteous Father of the oppressed,
will impartially judge between us. By his
ſentence we muſt abide, and to him in humble confidence
I ſubmit my cauſe.”
As ſhe finiſhed ſpeaking, ſhe hurried out of the
houſe, to prevent their being witneſs to emotions which
ſhe was unable longer to ſuppreſs; and ſhe found herself
in the ſquare oppoſite Newcaſtle houſe, before ſhe
was ſufficiently collected to remember to what part of
the town ſhe was going. Polly Webſter, who had
ſhewn her the way to Atkins's, had left her at the
door, as ſhe had ſome errands to execute for her mother
in the Strand. Our heroine had imagined ſhe ſhould
eaſily find her way home again; but when ſhe found
herſelf in a place with which ſhe was wholly unacquainted,
and endeavoured in vain to recover recollection
ſufficient to guide her to the right road, ſhe began
to be uneaſy. She wiſhed for a coach, but there was
not one came near her but what was previouſly occupied.
She walked ſtraight forward through a narrow
paſſage, which ſhe imagined ſhe had paſſed through
before; it took her into High-Holborn. The throng
of people, the multitude of carriages, and appearance
of the ſhops, led her to think ſhe was in the Strand;
and turning to the right hand, ſhe purſued her way,
expecting every moment to reach Charing-Croſs. But
as ſhe proceeded, ſhe began to perceive the difference
of the ſurrounding objects, and became ſeriouſly alarmed.
A heavy ſhower appeared threatening in the air,
[Page 239]
and even at Holborn-Bars, Rachel could not procure
a coach. The lightning had for ſome time gleamed
in the horizon; the thunder which had rolled distantly
now came nearer, and an univerſal war of elements
ſeemed approaching. Rachel looked round with increasing
apprehenſion. The tempeſt now burſt forth
at once; wind, thunder, hail, and ſheets of liquid fire,
rendered the ſcene tremendous. To avoid the fury of
the ſtorm, Rachel ran up an entry which led to a large
old-faſhioned manſion, and though not eaſily terrified,
the late incidents had ſo oppreſſed her ſpirits, that ſhe
ſat down on the ſteps, and burſt into an hyſterical flood
of tears.
“What is the matter, woman?” ſaid a man who
was coming from the houſe.
The brutal tone of this addreſs, the ferocious appearance
of the fellow that uttered it, was an additional
cauſe of terror. She roſe, endeavoured to ſpeak, but
could not; and when ſhe attempted to walk, her limbs
failed her, and ſhe ſunk again upon the ſtep.
“Why, miſtreſs, you have taken a little too much
cordial to-day,” ſaid the ſame man; “but come, I'll
lead you down the paſſage, and then you muſt go on
as well as you can; for you can't ſtay here.”
Rachel, though overcome with terror, was perfectly
ſenſible. She heard the remark made on her apparent
helpleſſneſs, endeavoured to repel the violence of her
emotions, and exert that fortitude of which ſhe was
poſſeſſed.
“I merely came here for ſhelter from the ſtorm,”
ſaid ſhe; “and if I could procure a coach—”
“Well, miſtreſs,” ſaid a dirty, ragged boy, “if you
will give me a ſhilling, I will call you one.”
Rachel readily agreed to the propoſal, and was putting
her hand to her pocket, when there was a cry in
the crowd that was now gathered, that a pick-pocket
was amongſt them. A young naval officer ſaid he
had loſt his watch and purſe. `Keep all in, keep all
in,' was the cry, and the throng ruſhed up the paſſage,
ſo that Rachel found herſelf in an inſtant ſurrounded by
a motley group of people, the chief part of which but
[Page 240]
to have been obliged to ſpeak to, would have filled her
at once with terror and diſguſt. But what were her sensations,
when, putting her hand again to her pocket, ſhe
found a ſtrange purſe hanging partly out, and felt a
watch actually within it. Before ſhe could ſpeak, a woman
ſeized her arm, and holding her hand ſo that ſhe could
not withdraw it, ſhe cried that ſhe had found the thief,
Rachel's ſtrength and ſpirits now at once forſook her;
ſhe fetched a deep ſigh, and fell ſenſeleſs into the arms
of the perſon who had been robbed.
“The poor creature is ill,” ſaid he; “ſtand away,
ruffians, and let her have air.” Then carrying her to
the entrance of the paſſage, he puſhed back her hat,
and untied her cloak. Her extreme youth, her beauty,
the neatneſs of her apparel, all conſpired to prepoſſeſs
him in her favour.
“Had you not better ſend for a conſtable?” ſaid
the wretch who had pretended to detect her.
“No,” ſaid the officer; “I do not think ſhe can be
guilty; or if ſhe is, extreme neceſſity alone could have
driven her to ſuch an expedient. How are you,
ma'am?” ſeeing Rachel begin to revive.
She looked wildly round her, put her hand to her
head as though endeavouring to recollect why or how
ſhe came there. At length the circumſtances recurring
to her memory, ſhe looked ſtedfaſtly on the officer,
and then on her accuſer.
“You have been robbed, Sir,” ſaid ſhe, “and your
property found in my poſſeſſion. How it came there,
Heaven knows; but as I ſtand in the ſight of Him
who rules the heavens, I do proteſt I am innocent.”
The ſolemnity of the appeal, the conſcious innocence
of her heart, which beamed from her eyes and informed
every feature of her face, rendered the truth of her
aſſertion indiſputable.
“I do believe you,” ſaid the officer; “but even had
I thought you guilty, what is the inſignificant value of
theſe trifles, when put in competition with the life of a
fellow-creature, whom diſtreſs urges to actions from
which the ſoul recoils.”
[Page 241]
The ſtorm was by this time much abated, and Rachel
having ſent again to procure a coach, the officer
ſaid he would not leave her till he delivered her in
ſafety to her friends. He was ſtanding at the entrance
of the paſſage, holding the hand of our heroine, when
a poſt chariot, that was driving haſtily through Holborn,
being for a moment impeded by a number of
carts and carriages, ſtopped directly oppoſite where
they ſtood. The glaſs was let down, and Rachel ſaw
diſtinctly Hamden Auberry, ſeated beſide an elderly
lady. She alſo was certain, that he both ſaw and recognized
her. The blood for a moment forſook her
cheeks, and then returned with impetuoſity, dying
them of the deepeſt crimſon. Scarcely was there time
to exchange the glance of recognition, before the
chariot moved forward again, and a hackney-coach
drawing up to the door, ſhe ſtepped into it, and, accompanied
by her protector, drove towards Dartmouth-street.
On their arrival at Mrs. Webſters, Rachel found the
family in great conſternation at her long abſence (for
Polly having returned without her, had been dispatched
again by her mother, who ſeared Rachel might
loſe her way; and learning that ſhe had been gone
ſome time from Atkins's, had returned as quick as ſhe
could, in the hope of finding her ſafe at home).
Miſs La Varone welcomed her with tears of joy,
and Mrs. Webſter ſaid ſhe was glad to ſee her ſafe.
Courtney, (the name of the young officer) without
particularly mentioning the circumſtances, ſaid ſhe
had been diſagreeably ſituated, and he had been fortunate
enough to be of ſervice to her. But Rachel
would explain the whole; her new friend, Miſs La
Varone, ſympathized with her, trembled with terror,
glowed with indignation, or melted with gratitude,
as the recital proceeded; and in the end, ſaid ſo many
obliging things to Lieutenant Courtney, that he began
to think her more than agreeable; and overlooking
the charms of our heroine, which had nothing but nature
and ſimplicity to recommend them, he was
[Page 242]
powerfully attracted by the artful lures thrown out by La
Varone.
The ſituation of Rachel, in regard to reputation,
was now as dangerous as it was poſſible; for Courtney
claimed the privilege of viſiting her; and Archibald
Oliver, when he returned from the country,
and his ſiſter, called to deliver the anſwer to the letter
he had taken, and one viſit led to another, till
ſcarcely a day elapſed without his paſſing ſome hours
in her company.
Rachel's intentions, when ſhe firſt came to London,
were to apprentice herſelf to ſome perſon who
could inſtruct her in ſome laudable employment,
whereby ſhe might render herſelf independent. For
in her opinion, the perſon who by the exertion of
any talent, or the exerciſe of induſtry, could ſupport
themſelves, was in every ſenſe of the word as independent
as they who inherited wealth or titles from their
anceſtors. But theſe praiſeworthy reſolutions were
from time to time put off, and her attention diverted
to other objects, till ſhe began to perceive the ſmall
ſum of money ſhe brought with her to London was
very viſibly diminiſhed, and yet no plan put in execution,
by which it could be repleniſhed. `I muſt do
ſomething to-morrow,' ſaid Rachel every night as ſhe
laid her head on her pillow. But to-morrow came,
and La Varone had ever ſome new ſcheme of pleaſure
to propoſe. Juvenile indiſcretion united with curiosity,
and a love of amuſement, natural to youth, led
her on from one day to another, till the laſt ten pound
note was broken in upon.
Forbear, ye rigid, ye experienced matrons, to blame
our heroine; it is the particular bleſſing of youth to
be enabled to enjoy the preſent moment, forgetful of
the paſt, nor fearing the future. Then cenſure not
thoſe who eagerly gather the roſes, unmindful of the
briars that ſurround them, or who, delighted with
their beauty and fragrance, forget, in the enjoyment
of their ſweets, the pain they ſuffered in gathering them.
Jeſſy Oliver had written to her, had endeavoured
to adviſe and comfort her; but Jeſſy ſtood in need of
[Page 243]
advice and comfort herſelf; and our heroine, though
conſcious that ſhe was not acting exactly right, could
not ſummon reſolution ſufficient to combat inclination;
but one party of pleaſure ſucceeded another,
till ſhe almoſt loſt the deſire of employment, or the
wiſh for independence.
CHAP. IX.
Variety—Courtſhip—Elopement—Letters. Section When Hamden Auberry firſt ſaw Rachel at
the entrance of the paſſage in Holborn, he
hardly could truſt his ſenſes; but on letting down the
glaſs and looking intently, he perceived it was no illusion,
but in reality the woman whom he had thought
the moſt faultleſs, the moſt perfect of her ſex. His
heart ſhuddered; he dared not ſtop the chariot in
which was his aunt, or he would have immediately
jumped out, and learnt from her own lips the reaſon
of her being in ſuch a place; but before he could form
any plauſible pretext for quitting the carriage, it moved
forward again with rapidity, and looking out of
the open window, he ſaw her go into the hackney-coach,
accompanied by Courtney.
If he at firſt had imagined Rachel had voluntarily
deviated from the path of rectitude, a moment's serious
reflection made him reject the idea; and he began
to be apprehenſive that her innocence and inexperience
might have betrayed her into ſociety and places,
not altogether proper for a woman of character.
But how could he ſatisfy himſelf? Or ſhould ſhe
be ſurrounded with danger, how could he diſcover
her? how adviſe, or, if neceſſity required, protect her?
Had he known where to find her, he would have ventured
even to entreat his aunt to take her under her
protection; but he had not the leaſt clue by which to
trace her place of reſidence. He thought of writing
to his mother, for information; but lady Anne
[Page 244]
purposed ſtaying in London but two days, and it was impossible
to obtain an anſwer in that time. However,
he did write, mentioning what he had ſeen, and requesting
to be informed under whoſe protection Miſs Dudley
was, hinting that he feared it was not what it
ought to be, or ſhe could never have been in the situation
in which he ſaw her.
On the day appointed, he accompanied his aunt into
Scotland; where, ſituated on the fertile banks of the
Clyde, was an antique family manſion of lord Montmorill,
her elder brother. Whilſt there, he received a
letter from his mother, which ſlightly mentioned that our
heroine was well, and that the circumſtance he had observed,
proceeded from her ſtanding up to avoid a ſhower.
She hurried over the ſubject as lightly as poſſible;
for ſhe ſaw the growing paſſion of Hamden, and
knowing from experience the implacable tempers of
the family, wiſhed to diſcourage hopes which ſhe ſaw
he entertained, though againſt his own better reaſon.
Rachel herſelf was far from being eaſy when ſhe
thought of the incident, on the firſt night after ſeeing.
Hamden; (for ſhe ſeldom was allowed a moment for
thought, except in the hours devoted to reſt) ſhe felt
a pleaſure in reflecting he was in town. “I can ſee
him now,” ſaid ſhe, “without incurring the illiberal
reproofs of Tabitha.”
The heart of Rachel harboured not a wiſh or thought
but what might have been made public to the whole
world; and while ſhe was conſcious of its rectitude, ſhe
felt proudly ſuperior to the little prejudices of vulgar
minds. She could not underſtand why ſhe might not
converſe with or entertain a friendſhip for perſons of
an oppoſite ſex, as well as with thoſe of her own. She
therefore indulged the hope, that Hamden would viſit
her during his ſtay in London; but when day after
day paſſed on, and he did not appear, ſhe again thought
pride had prompted the neglect, and calling all her
own ſelf-conſequence to her aid, ſhe endeavoured to
think as little of him as he apparently thought of her.
Young Courtney, the officer who under ſuch favourable
circumſtances was introduced to the reader
[Page 245]
in the preceding chapter, was the only ſon of his mother,
and ſhe was a widow. He had two ſiſters alſo,
lovely, innocent and helpleſs; their father had been a
veteran ſailor, commander of a firſt-rate man of war,
in defending which from the enemy he loſt his life.
The penſion of a captain's widow at that period was
very precarious, and at the beſt but trifling, to maintain
three women who had been accuſtomed to eaſe
and elegance.
Courtney gave them all the aſſiſtance in his power,
and had often thought he would never marry until
his ſiſters were ſettled in the world; and then if he
could meet with a woman who could and would supply
their place in attention to his mother. But unfortunately,
a few days acquaintance with Miſs La
Varone, made him waver in his reſolutions. She
could aſſume any character ſhe pleaſed. She diſcovered
that her perſonal charms had attracted the inexperienced
ſailor. She wiſhed to marry, that ſhe might with
impunity launch into extravagancies, which at preſent
the fear of a jail alone debarred her from.
La Varone, with a heart extremely depraved, possessed
one virtue in an eminent degree. She was what
the world in general calls extremely prudent , careful
to preſerve appearances, and where her own perſonal
ſafety or intereſt was concerned, cautious not to incur
the ſmalleſt degree of danger. By nature fond of
luxury, ſhow, and expenſive pleaſures, ſhe had the art
to ſeem frugal, retired, and ſtudious. She was ſenſible
that at thirty years old, the ſeaſon for conqueſt was
paſt, and though ſhe did not own to more than five
and twenty, and by particular attention to her complexion
and dreſs, was not ſuſpected to be more; yet
ſhe thought if ſhe could ſecure a permanent establishment
for herſelf before old age and neglect overtook
her, it would be the wiſeſt ſtep ſhe could poſſibly take.
The name of Courtney was honourable, his perſon
handſome, his manners agreeable, and his family unexceptionable.
It was a conqueſt worth ſome pains.
La Varone artfully drew forth his ſentiments in regard
to the woman he might prefer for a wife, and
[Page 246]
appeared the very character his warm imagination
and unadulterated heart had conceived as moſt charming.
She ſpoke of his mother with reſpectful affection,
of his ſiſters with all the ſervour of enthuſiaſtic
friendſhip; but if he mentioned her viſiting them previous
to their marriage, ſhe contrived to evade his solicitation;
yet with ſuch modeſty, alleging ſuch delicate
motives for her reſuſal, that whilſt it oppoſed his
wiſhes increaſed his love.
Our heroine was equally with Courtney the dupe
of La Varone, and rejoiced in the affection that subsisted
between them; looking forward to their union, as
a period that would at once inſure their felicity, and
ſecure to herſelf two ſincere friends, in whoſe protection
ſhe ſhould feel herſelf perfectly ſafe till the arrival
of her brother.
During this interval of time, Rachel was frequently
viſited by Archibald Oliver. He had at firſt beheld
her with admiration, liſtened to her with delight, and
every enſuing interview had heightened thoſe sensations
to a degree which almoſt might be termed adoration.
But Archibald poſſeſſed not a doit independent
of his father, and that father he knew was, by his
wife's extravagance, nearly ruined.
Though volatile in his temper, eccentric in his ideas,
and violent in his paſſions, young Oliver was scrupulously
honourable; and he would have deemed it the
height of cruelty to engage the affections of a woman
he could not with prudence marry, or to marry her
when he could neither provide for her ſupport, or for
thoſe helpleſs innocents of which he might become the
father. And fearing to forſeit the highly valued privilege
of viſiting her, he confined his feelings within his
own boſom. “She loves me now,” he would ſay,
“like a brother; ſhall I then, by claiming more, loſe
even the affection I poſſeſs? No; I will adore her in
ſilence, and pray that her felicity may be complete,
though at the expenſe of my own.”
One morning he entered the parloun (where La
Varone and our heroine uſually ſat at work) and seating
himſelf beſide the latter, told her he came to make
[Page 247]
her a partaker of his own uneaſineſs. “Our dear
Jeſſy,” continued he, “has left her father's protection,
nor have we any idea whither the beloved fugitive is
fled. Here is a note ſhe left for me; incloſed is a letter
for you, Miſs Dudley. The perſecutions the ſweet
girl has lately undergone, I have concealed from you,
becauſe, as you could not alleviate them, I wiſhed not
to make you participate. But diſguiſe muſt now be
at an end. This was to have been her wedding day;
but early in the morning it was diſcovered ſhe was not
in her apartment. The confuſion this diſcovery occasioned,
reached me as I was preparing, with a desponding
heart, to accompany the devoted victim to the altar;
and as I was ruſhing out to inquire the cauſe (for
my mind foreboded ſomething fatal) the girl who usually
attended on Jeſſy, came into my dreſſing-room,
and in agitated ſilence put theſe papers into my hand,
retiring the inſtant ſhe delivered them. I haſtily tore
my letter open; but it contained, as you will ſee, nothing
ſatisfactory. I learnt that a note had been delivered
to my father, and wiſhing equally to avoid him,
Mrs. Oliver, and the diſappointed bridegroom, I took
a coach and drove directly here.” The letter to Archibald
was as follows.
Letter
WHEN the altar is decorated, the prieſts at hand,
and the knife is raiſed, that will terminate exiſtence,
who can blame the poor victim devoted to ſacrifice, if
it break the chain by which it is held, aſſerts the privilege
of nature, and, bounding over the plain, ſecures
at once both life and liberty? Brother, beloved brother,
they have prepared the altar, but the deſtined victim
will eſcape their ſnares.
Deliver the incloſed to the friend of my ſoul, Rachel
Dudley; if ſhe contemn me, I will return a voluntary
ſacrifice. For ſo pure is her mind, ſo unprejudiced
her opinions, ſoaring ſo far above the common herd,
that I would abide by her deciſion even in a cauſe of
life and death.
[Page 248]
Deareſt Archibald, though I am driven to the
dreadful alternative of marrying the man I deſpiſe, or
quitting the paternal roof, do not you forſake our father.
I ſolicit, I conjure you, my brother, in the name
of our ſainted mother, forſake not our only remaining
parent. I fear he will ſoon, very ſoon, ſtand in need
of a comforter. I will be conſtant in my inquiries
concerning his welfare, and whenever I find my presence
neceſſary to his peace or comfort, I will appear.
Any thing but truth I would have ſacrificed for his
ſake. Could you ſee my heart at this moment, you
would pity the anguiſh I feel in bidding you adieu,
perhaps forever.
JESSY OLIVER.
Section Rachel wiped off the tear this letter had extorted,
and proceeded to peruſe the one addreſſed to herſelf.
Letter
WILL my dear friend pardon me that I intrude
myſelf upon her, and by explaining my ſorrows, make
her a party in my concerns? I have ſuffered much
perſecution, dear Rachel, ſince we parted; and to
avoid ruſhing at once into guilt and miſery, I have
taken a ſtep for which the world will cenſure me. But
what is the world to me? Had I voluntarily aſſumed
the ſplendid ſhackles prepared for me, had I become a
titled wretch, and promiſed faith and truth to one
man, whilſt every wiſh, every tender thought of my
heart was devoted to another, would the approving
ſmiles of that misjudging world, the adulation it is ever
ready to pay to ſplendor and nobility, have compensated
for the ſacrifice I ſhould have made of internal
peace, of conſcious integrity? No.—Admired, courted,
envied, I ſhould ſtill have been miſerable. The
baſeneſs of my conduct would be my daily reproach;
I ſhould have ſought to baniſh reflection by diſſipation,
and who can tell where the career of guilt and folly
might have ſtopped?
I have endured both ſtern commands and ſoft entreaties;
I have been ſoothed and threatened alternately.
That I might with more ſecurity follow the
[Page 249]
plan I had previouſly adopted for my future conduct,
I pretended (Heaven pardon the deceit) to accept the
huſband my diſſolute and ambitious mother-in-law had
provided for me, and to-morrow morning I am expected
to put on the Hymeneal yoke, and become a
counteſs. But before the appointed hour arrives, I
ſhall be far, far out of the reach of their tyranny. Let
not my ſweet friend, whoſe boſom is the ſacred temple
of purity, ſear that I ſhall forget what is due to myself.
That I am ſtrongly attached to a worthy youth,
I ſeruple not to confeſs; but he is a ſtranger to my
paſſion, and in all human probability will ever remain
ſo; for never will Jeſſy Oliver offer herſelf unſolicited
to the acceptance of any man. My affections are pure
as they are ardent; but the name of the object of them
ſhall never paſs my lips, or eſcape my pen. I fly from
proffered wealth and grandeur, to obſcurity; even
from you, my dear Rachel, I will ſeclude myſelf.
Were I happy or affluent, you ſhould be my choſen
companion, the partner of my heart. But I am the
reverſe, and will ſuffer alone. If you will condeſcend
to receive and anſwer the letters of a fugitive, I have
formed a plan by which we may regularly correſpond;
but do not flatter yourſelf that by that means you can
trace me; nor do not, I entreat you, ſuffer my brother
to know the means by which my letters are conveyed.
And now, my deareſt Rachel, adieu! Fear not for
me. I will never diſhonour the name of my father,
or forget the virtue of my ſainted mother. Perhaps
(my heart ſinks at the idea, but perhaps) I ſhall never
ſee you again. If ſo, may Heaven ſhower its choiceſt
bleſſings on you, and inſpire me with patience and fortitude
to ſubmit, without repining, to an affliction
which would lacerate the heart of
JESSY OLIVER.
Section When Rachel had finiſhed this letter, ſhe imparted
to Archibald as much of the contents as ſhe thought
neceſſary; but to all his entreaties of being permitted
to peruſe it ſhe continued inexorable. She admired
the reſolution of Jeſſy, and had ſo good an opinion of
[Page 250]
her heart and underſtanding, that ſhe felt confident of
her ſtrict adherence to truth and rectitude.
In all their paſt hours of friendly confidence, Miſs
Oliver had never ſuffered a ſyllable to eſcape her lips
by which Rachel could gueſs at her partiality to Reuben;
and at the time when they were moſt together,
our heroine was too inexperienced to diſcover the passion
of her friend by looks and geſtures. Perhaps,
had ſhe converſed much with Jeſſy after her own acquaintance
with Hamden Auberry, ſhe might have
been more clear-ſighted.
Soon after this circumſtance, young Oliver, weary
of home, diſſatisfied with himſelf, and more than ever
in love with Rachel, felt there was a neceſſity for tearing
himſelf from her ſociety. Beſides, he hoped, in
travelling through the northern counties of England,
to be enabled to learn ſome tidings of his ſiſter. A
diſtant relation of his mother's reſided in the beautiful
little town of Alnwick, in Northumberland; thither
he repaired on a viſit. Its romantic ſituation pleaſed
him; the ſociety of ſeveral agreeable families in its
vicinity delighted him; and if we add that a lovely
and intereſting woman, whoſe fortune was large and
independent, beheld him with affection, and ſuffered
that affection to become manifeſt, it is to be hoped the
fair reader will not blame him, if he lengthened his
ſtay at Alnwick, and every day thought leſs and leſs
of Rachel.
After the marriage of Lieutenant Courtney with
Miſs La Varone, our heroine felt ſomewhat disappointed
that ſhe had not been preſſed to accompany
the new Mrs. Courtney into the country. The Lieutenant
had, to be ſure, ſolicited her company; but the
bride did not, even by a ſingle monoſyllable, ſecond
thoſe ſolicitations; ſo Rachel ſaw them depart, fervently
wiſhed them hourly increaſe of felicity, and
then ſat down to reflect on her own ſituation in London,
without friends, without employment, and with
only eight guineas in her pocket.
[Page 251]
“I have done wrong, (ſaid ſhe mentally) very
wrong. I muſt take more care, muſt endeavour to
be more prudent for the future.”
As ſhe ruminated on the paſt, felt no ſatisfaction in
the preſent, and looked with fear and deſpondency toward
the future, ſhe heard a confuſion in the adjoining
apartment, and the voice of Polly Webſter, who was
her favourite, entreating a woman to have patience,
who by her expreſſions and manner ſeemed a total
ſtranger to that virtue. She opened the door, and
learnt that Mrs. Webſter was indebted to this woman
for tea, ſugar, &c. (for ſhe kept a chandler's ſhop in
the neighbourhood) nearly five pounds.
Now five pounds, to a perſon in abject circumstances,
is a debt of as much conſequence as five thouſand
would be to one who keeps high company, a carriage,
horſes, ſervants, dreſſes gay, and, as it is generally
termed, lives in ſtyle; nay, perhaps, ten times more.
For the poor being, who for the abſolute neceſſaries
of life has incurred a ſmall debt, may be dragged by
a remorſeleſs creditor to die in a priſon, unknown, unpitied;
while he who, to indulge in luxury and superfluity,
had deceived the expectations of honeſt industry,
deprived the laborious mechanic of his due, or
duped the unwary tradeſman, is ſuffered to proceed
with impunity. Nay, even thoſe who criminate his
conduct, will flatter his vices, eat at his table, take
him by the hand, and ſmile in his face, whilſt in their
hearts they laugh at his abſurdity, pity his weakneſs,
or condemn his depravity. Not but there are thoſe,
who, diſcriminating between the embarraſſments of
neceſſity, and thoſe of wilful extravagance, pity the
one and deſpiſe and execrate the other. Yes, there are in
this world hearts to commiſerate misfortune, whilſt they
dictate to the tongue comfort, and to the hands relief
to the ſufferer. And thoſe choſen, thoſe ſuperlatively
happy few, muſt ſurely be the favourites of Heaven.
For the bleſſing they delight to confer on others, will
return a thouſand-fold into their own boſoms.
But I digreſs. To return to Mrs. Webſter: She
could not pay the demand, and was threatened with
[Page 252]
the law. Rachel had but eight guineas; but ſhe
could pay this demand and have three left. She stayed
not to inquire what was prudent; ſhe felt what
would be humane. She followed the heavenly precept
of “doing as ſhe would be done by;” ſhe paid
the money.
The heart of Mrs. Webſter dilated with gratitude;
and the pain Rachel had endured from the departure
and coldneſs of Mrs. Courtney, was forgot in the transport
of the preſent moment; ſo true is it, that real
happineſs muſt be the reſult of the knowledge and
practice of virtue.
Mr. Spriggins, the nephew of Mrs. Webſter, though
awed by her ſuperior ſenſe and the dignity of her manner,
was an ardent admirer of our heroine; but he had
never yet breathed a word that could lead her to suspect
his paſſion. La Varone, young Oliver, and Lieutenant
Courtney, had contributed to impoſe ſilence on
him, and keep him at a diſtance. But now they were
gone, he could offer any civility to her without the
fear of having his endeavours to pleaſe entirely frustrated,
by officiouſneſs or rivalry.
The ſecond day after their departure, he came, and
requeſted the Miſs Webſters and Rachel would accompany
him to the play. He foreſaw that the young
ladies would not be permitted to go without Miſs Dudley,
and alſo that her good-nature would not ſuffer
her to decline his invitation, as by ſo doing ſhe would
deprive the juvenile party of a rational and (to them)
rare amuſement. His expectations were realized;
and at an early hour they were all at the pit door of
Drury-Lane Theatre. The performance was a tragedy
and pantomime, both excellent in their kind.
Rachel, whoſe ſenſibility often uſurped dominion
over her rational faculties, baniſhing the milder reign of
reaſon, was, during the tragedy, ſo entirely abſorbed
by the ſufferings of the hero and heroine, that the splendid
circle that ſurrounded her in the boxes was totally
unnoticed. But between the play and entertainment,
ſhe looked round on the glittering throng; and in the
ſtage-box, converſing with attentive carneſtneſs with
[Page 253]
an elegant and very young lady, ſhe ſaw Hamden
Auberry.
The lady laid her hand on his ſhoulder. Rachel
diſcovered that her ſeat was uncomfortable. Hamden,
as he converſed, twiſted a curl of her luxuriant
auburn treſſes round his fingers.
“I declare I am out of patience,” cried Rachel.
“At what, ma'am?” cried the officious Mr. Spriggins.
“At the players,” ſaid ſhe; “they are ſo tedious.”
“Yes, ma'am,” replied Spriggins, “they are to be
ſure a long while.”
At that moment Hamden had taken the hand of
his fair companion and preſſed it to his lips.
“I cannot endure it any longer,” cried Rachel,
“the pit is ſo crowded, and it is ſo hot.” Rachel
was not eaſily overcome; but her heart was more attached
to Hamden Auberry than ſhe was aware of.
“It is ſo oppreſſive,” repeated ſhe, unwilling to acknowledge
even to herſelf the cauſe of her uneaſy sensations.
“I muſt really quit the houſe,” ſaid ſhe,
gaſping for breath. And then, before any effort could
be made to get her through the crowd, a ſudden miſt
came over her eyes, and ſhe fainted.
The young Webſters were frightened, and Spriggins
was entirely occupied in ſupporting her, ſo that no
method was taken to recover her. But an elderly
gentleman, who ſat near them, obſerved if they could
lift her up, ſo that ſhe might be above the crowd, it
would accelerate her return to life. Accordingly, he
humanely ſtepped up on the ſeat, and raiſed her in his
arms. A ſmelling bottle was now applied, and ſome
lavender rubbed on her temples.
The buſtle this incident had occaſioned in the pit,
attracted the notice of the company in the boxes; and
as the old gentleman raiſed the declining head of Rachel
that ſhe might receive the more benefit from the
air of ſeveral fans, Auberry ſaw and knew her. Like
lightning he ſprang over the front of the box, and rushing
through the company, was by the ſide of our heroine,
when returning life began to animate her lips
[Page 254]
and cheeks; and when ſhe opened her eyes, Auberry
was the firſt object that met them. The tender solicitude
of his looks and manner, whilſt he inquired into
the cauſe of her diſorder, contributed to reſtore her
entirely; and having thanked the old gentleman for
his care, and made room for Auberry to ſit between
herſelf and Polly Webſter, as he held her hand, and
ſpoke to her of his mother, Dr. Lenient, and the reſt
of their acquaintance in Lancaſhire, ſhe entirely forgot
both her indiſpoſition and its cauſe.
Though the impulſe of the moment had urged
Hamden Auberry, in direct oppoſition to every rule
of politeneſs or even propriety, to quit his company
and ſpring into the pit, when he beheld the lifeleſs
form of Rachel, yet when he now ſaw her perfectly
recovered, he remembered the neceſſity of immediately
returning to them, and apologizing for the abruptness
of his conduct.
“I do not feel altogether ſatisfied, my charming
Miſs Dudley,” ſaid he in a low voice, “that the society
in which, perhaps, you are obliged to mix, is proper
or congenial to your feelings. Who are theſe young
women, and the young man who attends them?”
“I am not indeed,” ſaid Rachel, “ſituated exactly
as I could wiſh; but I know not how to better myself.”
“Where ſhall I call on you,” ſaid Hamden; “I
cannot now ſtay to ſay all I think. I muſt return to
my couſin, lady Lucy.”
“Is that your couſin?” ſaid Rachel, glancing her
eye upon the young lady in the box.
“Yes; I came to town by my aunt's deſire merely
to accompany her; ſhe is come upon a viſit to a friend
of her mother's, and is going with her to make a ſhort
tour on the continent.”
“And do you accompany her?” ſaid Rachel; but
ſhe dared not raiſe her eyes to his face as ſhe made
the interrogation; for ſhe felt that her own was suffused
with a bluſh.
“No; I ſhall only go with them as far as Dover.
But as we do not ſet forward till Saturday, I ſhall
[Page 255]
hope to paſs a few delightful hours in your ſociety
previous to my journey. At what time will you be
at leiſure to-morrow morning?”
“I am always at leiſure to ſee my friends,” replied
Rachel, with a faſcinating ſmile.
Hamden's countenance expreſſed his gratitude, and
the pleaſure her frankneſs gave him, and preſſing her
hand, he wiſhed her a good night, returned to the
box, and a few moments afterwards, the whole party
in which he was engaged left the theatre.
The remainder of the performance was entirely loſt
upon our heroine. Her perſon was preſent, and ſhe
ſaw the figures that paſſed and repaſſed before her;
but her mind was totally abſent, and ſhe might as well
have gazed upon vacancy. She was diſſatisfied with
herſelf; ſhe had diſcovered that ſhe was too much interested
in whatever concerned Hamden Auberry;
ſhe feared too that he had diſcovered her weakneſs.
Theſe reflections entirely employed her thoughts.
When the performance was ended, ſhe mechanically
followed her party out of the houſe. When freed
from the hurry of coaches, chairs, orange-women,
link-boys, and the crowd that had juſt immerged from
the play-houſe, ſhe took hold of Polly's arm, and in
ſilence purſued her walk home. When ſhe entered
the parlour ſhe aſked for a candle, and would have
retired to her chamber; but Mrs. Webſter had prepared
ſome little delicacy for her ſupper, and ſhe had
too much good-nature and politeneſs to refuſe ſitting
up to partake of it.
The curioſity of Spriggins and the two elder Websters
was excited by the behaviour of Hamden Auberry.
They had talked it over as they walked home together,
and all agreed that he was certainly a lover.
The company he was with declared he was of a superior
rank in life; but they had not been quite pleaſed
that our heroine had neglected to introduce them.
“He is a monſtrous handſome man,” ſaid Belle, the
ſecond daughter.
“He is well enough,” ſaid the eldeſt, “but he
ſeems ſo proud and ſelf-conceited.”
[Page 256]
We'll joke Miſs Rachel a little about him at ſupper
time,” ſaid Spriggins.
“I wonder what made her faint,” ſaid Belle.
“Why lawk, Belle!” replied the ſiſter, “you know
ſhe has always lived in the country, and ſo I ſuppoſe
the lights, and the noiſe, and the heat—”
Juſt then they arrived at home, and in a few minutes
they were all ſeated round the ſupper table.
Miſs Dudley has been very ill at the play, mamma,”
ſaid Polly.
“Yes, indeed,” cried the eldeſt, “ſhe fainted quite
away, and there was ſuch a fine gentleman jumped
out of the box and came to her, I believe he is an old
acquaintance.”
“I believe ſo too,” ſaid Belle, laughing; “for he
ſeemed monſtrous anxious, and looked ſo happy when
ſhe began to recover.”
“He is an old acquaintance,” ſaid Rachel, at once
diſtreſſed and flattered by the manner in which his
anxiety and aſſiduity was mentioned; “it was Major
Auberry, madam,” addreſſing herſelf to Mrs. Webster;
“the ſon of our reſpected friend.”
“Indeed! Well, I have not ſeen him ſince he was
an infant; and beſides, if he even remembered me, he
is ſo much amongſt the great folks, it would be beneath
him to notice me, or any of my family, though
his mother and I, when girls, were juſt like ſiſters.”
“Yes, yes,” cried Spriggins, whoſe ſelf-conſequence
had been lowered by his being entirely overlooked by
the Major; “yes! when folks get up in the world,
they generally forget their poor friends.”
“But I dare affirm Major Auberry is not one of
thoſe kind of people,” ſaid Rachel; “he intends calling
on me to-morrow, and I have no doubt but he will rejoice
in being introduced to Mrs. Webſter and her family.”
“Well, we ſhall ſee!” cried Spriggins; “but I am
ſure he is not overburthened with good manners, or he
would have ſaid good night, or your ſervant, or ſome
ſuch like, to me, when he went away; for though
mayhap I am not ſo grand, nor ſo fine, nor ſo learned,
I thinks I underſtands good-breeding as well as any
[Page 257]
body. And for the matter of that, a man is but a
man, and I don't ſee why wearing a laced coat, or being
called Sir, or My Lord, or Your Grace, makes
one man a bit better than another.”
Rachel found that it would be in vain to attempt
defending Hamden againſt the complaints and prejudices
of Spriggins, whoſe contracted mind and very
ſmall portion of underſtanding, would not ſuffer him
to comprehend thoſe nice diſtinctions which, allowing
for the natural equality of man, ſtill preſerves that respect,
that neceſſary ſubordination, due from inferiors
to perſons of ſhining abilities, liberal education, and
ſuperior underſtanding; and the ignorant, self-opinionated
being who prates of equality, never once conceives
the cauſe of the diſtinction, which education
(more than any other cauſe) makes between man and
man. Perſons of large fortunes are enabled to enjoy
the benefits of inſtruction in its moſt extended ſenſe;
and they who have cultivated their minds with care,
whoſe taſtes and manners are highly poliſhed, feel
as great a repugnance to the ſociety of the vulgar
ignorant, in whom mean pride, obſtinacy and vanity
in general combine, as the pure and uncontaminated
mind would feel in being forced into an intercourſe
with the vicious. But Rachel knew theſe arguments,
if advanced, would have no effect on Spriggins; ſhe
therefore liſtened in ſilence to the end of his harangue,
then wiſhing them all a good night, retired to her
apartment.
CHAP. X.
Matters of Conſequence. The next morning by ten o'clock, Hamden Auberry
was in Dartmouth-ſtreet. He was introduced
to Mrs. Webſter and her daughters; to the former,
as the friend of his mother, he was uncommonly
reſpectful, and he ſpoke to the girls with ſuch freedom,
politeneſs and affability, that when they went
[Page 258]
into the adjoining room, Belle declared he was a moſt
captivating man.
Polly ſaid ſhe hoped, if he was going to marry dear
Miſs Dudley, that he was as good as he was handsome.
For if he was a king, he could not be too good
for her.
“Marry,” ſaid the eldeſt, putting up her lip, “I
dare ſay he would be frightened to hear you ſay ſuch
a thing. No! no! young men of his rank and fashion
don't often marry poor girls; if they did, I
don't ſee why ſome folks might not ſtand as good a
chance as others.” And ſhe caſt a ſly glance at the
looking-glaſs, which hung directly oppoſite to where
ſhe was ſitting.
Hamden, in this interview with our heroine, felt his
admiration increaſe. Every circumſtance that had
taken place during her reſidence in London, ſhe recapitulated
to him, with an ingenuous freedom that
captivated his heart, whilſt his reaſon applauded the
involuntary tribute of admiration and reſpect, her
manners and ſentiments exacted.
When ſhe had finiſhed her artleſs recital, (which
was drawn forth by his inquiries, not voluntarily obtruded
on his attention) “You are, I fear, improperly,
as well as uncomfortably ſituated,” ſaid he with energy.
“I acknowledge it,” replied Rachel, “but I muſt
bear it with patience; there is no remedy.”
“What do you mean, my dear Miſs Dudley? You
ſurely have friends.”
“I dare ſay I have, Sir, many friends; but I ſhould
be ſorry to treſpaſs on their goodneſs.”
“Is it poſſible Miſs Dudley can imagine—” He
was proceeding, but ſhe ſtopped him.
“Do not miſunderſtand me, Major Auberry; I do
not think meanly of my friends, but I am conſcious of
my own defects; I am too proud to live in a ſtate of
ſervile dependence.”
“Good heavens! what do you mean?”
“Nothing very extraordinary. My brother is absent;
my late dear father's agent, I greatly fear, is
[Page 259]
difhonest; and perhaps I ſhall find it neceſſary to be industrious,
in order to continue in ſome degree respectable.”
She ſaid this without embarraſſment, and with a
cheerful ſmile. She felt no degradation in the idea of
exerting her talents to procure ſupport.
Hamden was ſilent; a certain ſomething ſtruck cold
upon his heart. No wonder; it was the cold, hard
drop that turns whatever it falls upon to ſtone. Poverty
has a moſt unaccountable petrifying quality;
many a heart has it rendered impenetrable as adamant;
many a boſom has it incaſed in marble, or enveloped
in ice, ſo firmly congealed, that only the ſun of prosperity,
riding in full meridian, could ſoften or relax
it. Hamden felt the cold chill run trembling through
every nerve; but his heart defied its frigid power, and
glowed with more fervour. He ſaid but little after
this explanation, and ſoon took his leave.
On his return to his lodgings, he thus inquired of
himſelf. Do I love Rachel Dudley? Moſt aſſuredly,
beyond all other women. Does ſhe return my paſſion?
That is a queſtion yet to be determined. If I might
judge from the intelligence of her eyes—But hope
may be preſumption. Would I marry her? Yes, with
delight and tranſport, if ſhe would accept me. What?
in defiance of my aunt's wiſhes and injunctions?
Here was a moment's pauſe. At length he proceeded
in his queſtions. Would I be willing to relinquish
all hope of future affluence, honour, title, and
devote my life to obſcurity and Rachel Dudley? I
fear not. I ſhould repine at the advantages I had relinquished,
and embitter her life by my own fruitleſs
regret. Then is it honourable, by indirect attentions,
to lead her to ſuppoſe ſhe has an excluſive preference
in my boſom, or to awaken expectations, which will
end only in diſappointment? Certainly no.
After thus cloſely interrogating his own heart, Hamden
determined to avoid viſiting Rachel again; but
on the morning following, he received a letter from his
mother; it would be but kind to call and let Miſs Dudley
know her friend Dr. Lenient was well, and that Tabitha
[Page 260]
Holdfaſt had taken to herſelf a help-mate of one of
the faithful.
He accordingly went; one viſit produced another.
Prudence on one ſide, and pride on the other, were for
a while forgotten. Hamden talked of love, and Rachel
liſtened with complacency.
It was on a fine evening in the beginning of September,
as wandering on the banks of the Thames, where
a row of young willows drooped their pendent branches
over the ſoftly gliding ſtream, that Hamden (on
whoſe arm Rachel reclined with the confidence of fraternal
affection) ſpoke of the happy intercourſe of congenial
minds.
“Dear, charming Rachel!” ſaid he, “it ſeems as
though our ſouls were formed at the ſame moment,
and partake of congenial particles.”
“Our ſentiments are certainly much alike in moſt
things,” ſaid Rachel.
“And why not in every thing,” cried Hamden eagerly.
“Why, my lovely friend, loving as we love
each other, (for you do not deny though you heſitate
to avow your affection) why do we not ſanctify that
affection by the moſt ſolemn vows?”
“You have an aunt, Hamden Auberry,” ſaid Rachel
with firmneſs, “and on her depends your future
fortune. She will not approve of the untitled, unportioned
Rachel for your wife.”
“Do not name her. I will renounce her favour.
I will henceforth live but for you.”
“Hamden,” ſaid Rachel, and her features aſſumed
a ſerene ſolemnity that was almoſt celeſtial, “Hamden,
I have not expreſſed the feelings of my ſoul, because
I was ſenſible of the impoſſibility of our ever being
united with the conſent of your aunt; and know,
though you were dearer to me than life itſelf, I will
never intrude myſelf into a family, who would think
themſelves degraded by the alliance. That I am an
unconnected being, is certain; no one has a right to
ſay, Rachel, why doſt thou ſo? But I have a heart
that tells me when I err. To the reproaches of this
truſty, ſilent monitor, I will never ſubject myſelf; to
[Page 261]
the contumely and conſures of the world I am invulnerable;
they too often misjudge and condemn the
innocent unheard.”
“Sweet, charming moraliſt, whither wouldſt thou
lead me?” ſaid Hamden.
“To happineſs, I hope,” ſaid Rachel ſmiling.
“That I feel my heart glow with eſteem to you,”
continued ſhe, “is a truth I wiſh not to deny; but
that eſteem is pure; nor perſonal intereſt, nor hope of
future aggrandizement, will ever bias me. You aſk
me for a wife; here is my hand; let us ſanctify our
loves in the face of Heaven. Enable me to ſatisfy
my dear Renben, when he returns, that I have not dishonoured
the name of Dudley; and for the indiscriminating,
curious, idle multitude, let them think as they
may. Happy in your affection, their ſmile or their
frown will be alike inconſequential.”
The gratitude of Hamden was manifeſted in wild,
enthuſiaſtic expreſſions of everlaſting love. But Hamden's
pride ſtill predominated, and he accepted the
title of huſband to an amiable woman, whoſe virtue
and underſtanding would have done honour to a diadem;
yet, fearing to forfeit the paltry diſtinctions of
wealth and title, he ſuffered her to bear the ignominy
of ſuſpicion, and the bitterneſs of reproach, from thoſe
who neither comprehended or could eſtimate her merit.
They were married in St. John's Church, Westminster;
and Rachel removed to a lodging provided for
her by her huſband in the neighbourhood of Mary-lebone.
When Rachel propoſed removing from Mrs. Webster's,
ſhe found no ſmall difficulty in ſatisfying her inquiries
reſpectting the cauſe of her removal. She had
imprudently acquainted Mrs. Webſter with the diminished
ſtate of her finances; when therefore on the
morning of her marriage, which took place a little
after eight o'clock; for Rachel, though ſhe had now
been ſome months in London, continued the healthgiving
cuſtom of early riſing, and frequcntly walked
before breakfaſt, ſo that it was nothing extraordinary
for her to be abroad ſo early; when, in conſequence
[Page 262]
of this union, ſhe prepared to quit her lodging, and
gave Mrs. Webſter a bank bill for forty pounds, requesting
her to get it changed, the old lady looked at
her with a ſcrutinizing eye; and though not apt to
make remarks, could not avoid ſpeaking to our heroine
in the following words:
“It is no buſineſs of mine, to be ſure, Miſs Dudley;
but I am afraid you are going to do a very imprudent
thing. To your family and connexions I am a
total ſtranger; but for the ſake of my friend, Mrs.
Auberry, I could wiſh you had conducted yourſelf with
more circumſpection.”
“In what, madam?” ſaid Rachel indignantly,
“have I tranſgreſſed the laws of prudence?”
“You have received the viſits of ſeveral young men.
Mr. Oliver, I concluded, was your lover for ſome
time; but after viſiting, taking you on parties of pleasure,
and being as attentive as man could be, whiſk he
goes off into the country, and there's an end of the
matter.”
Rachel could not help ſmiling as ſhe replied—“Mr.
Oliver, I believe, madam, never thought of me in any
other light than as a friend. I am ſo happy as to be
eſteemed by his ſiſter, and for her ſake he ſhewed me,
whilſt he ſtayed in town, more than common reſpect.”
“Well, it may be ſo; but it had a very odd appearance
though. Then came Mr. Courtney. I made
quite certain that he would be the happy man, when,
behold! inſtead of you, he marries Miſs La Varone.
To be certain, ſhe was a clever ſort of a body; but
then one would have thought a young man would
not be at a loſs to chooſe between you and her.”
“Well, you find he was not at a loſs,” anſwered
Rachel rather petulantly.
“And now,” continued Mrs. Webſter, not noticing
her reply, “now here has been Major Auberry, dancing
attendance above a month paſt. I am afraid he
means no good; he is, as one may ſay, one of the
quality folks; and his aunt, lady Anne, would no
more agree to his marrying a poor girl, than ſhe would
to his going to Jeruſalem. What then does he deſign?
[Page 263]
Take care, Miſs Dudley, do not let him make you his
dupe. You are going from me; for what purpoſe,
or into whoſe protection, you have not thought proper
to tell me; however, that is neither here nor there.
As I ſaid before, it is no buſineſs of mine. But when
I think, that not a fortnight ſince you ſhewed me the
contents of your purſe, which were very trifling, and
declared it was all you poſſeſſed in the world, and that
I now ſee you in poſſeſſion of forty pounds, I cannot
help thinking all is not as it ſhould be.”
“I thank you, madam, for your care and anxiety
on my account,” ſaid Rachel, who perceived, in Mrs.
Webſter's manner, more of curioſity than real solicitude
for her welfare, “but to quiet your apprehenſions,
permit me to aſſure you, I ſhall be careful never to
offend againſt virtue and morality. My conduct may
incur cenſure, but ſhall never be criminal. Whilſt
my dear brother is from England, I hold myſelf accountable
to no one for my actions; and whilſt my
own heart acquits me of any breach of my duties
either moral or religious, I am perfectly indifferent as
to what opinion the world in general may form concerning
me.”
Thus argued Rachel; but her ideas were erroneous,
and ſhe found, when too late, it is not only neceſſary
to be virtuous, but to appear ſo. Alas! pity it is, but
the ſemblance is often more reſpected than the reality.
“I ſuppoſe we ſhall ſee you ſometimes, Miſs Dudley?”
ſaid Mrs. Webſter with a ſneer, as ſhe took leave
of her.
Rachel ſlightly anſwered in the affirmative, ſhook
hands with her and Belle, kiſſed the affectionate little
Polly (who ſtood ſobbing by the window) and put a
guinea into her hand; then ordering her trunk to be
placed in a hackney-coach that waited at the door, ſhe
ſtepped in, drew up the glaſs, and a few moments conveyed
her to her new lodgings, where her huſband
was ready to receive her.
The attachment of our heroine to Major Auberry
was pure as it was ardent. Accuſtomed from infancy
to confine her affections within a narrow circle, ſhe
[Page 264]
would have felt no repugnance to ſeclude herſelf from
all other ſociety, could ſhe have been certain by ſo
doing to inſure his eternal love and ſidelity. She had
aſked leave of Hamden to inform Jeſſy Oliver, with
whom ſhe regularly correſponded, of the change in her
circumſtances; but he ſorbade her. She acquieſced in
ſilence.
It had never entered her mind, that an unknown indrividual
like herſelf, could excite the curioſity of her
neighbours. She was the leaſt inquiſitive of any human
being. “Of what conſequence,” ſhe would often
ſay, “is the buſineſs, pleaſures or purſuits of others
to me. I harbour no ill will towards any; and
have I a right to ſcrutinize their actions? No.”
Hamden Auberry, ſtill the ſlave of pride, and fearing
to forfeit the favour of lady Anne, ſuffered his
wife to go by the aſſumed name of Dacres. Our heroine
too was equally the ſlave of the ſame paſſion, but
it was of a more laudable kind. He ſacrified the
reputation of a virtuous woman, rather than relinquiſh
the inſignificant diſtinction wealth and power could
give; and ſhe nobly (though romantically) braved
the cenſures of the world, to evince her thorough contempt
of both.
CHAP. XI.
Acroſs the Atlantic. As Variety is ſaid to be the ſaſcinating charm that
intrances the ſenſes, awakens attention, and, displaying
her many coloured wings in a thouſand different
lights, obſcures from our view the ſcythe and
glaſs of Time, and ſuffers him to paſs unheeded by;
at her ſhrine I kneel, her aid I invoke. Come, enchanting
phantom, who, as thou paſſeſt momentarily,
aſſumeſt ſome new ſome charming form. Whether
as pleaſure, tripping lightly forward, thy temples
wreathed with roſes, and thy hands ſtriking with
[Page 265]
sportive lay the dulcet lyre; or whether, in the robe of sonrow
clad, with pale, cold cheek, and uplift, tearful
eye; or cheerful induſtry, with placid ſmile, with bosom
tranquil, and with moderate ſcrip, ſtored with
life's comforts, not its ſuperfluities; or as meek patience,
bowing with ſubmiſſion before the keen blaſt of
undeſerved calamity; whatever ſhape thou doſt assume,
to me thou art welcome. Haſton then, for
with thee ever comes the Muſe. Her veſtments white
claſped by a golden zone, her buſkined leg half bare,
her auburn treſſes floating in the wind; her veil,
which part conceals her beauteous face, and part plays
looſely in the breeze, wrought with devices ſtrange
and rare; Hiſtory, Poetry, Fiction and Truth,
blended ſo ſoft as to relieve each other; ethereal
viſion, come; I wait thee here. For many is the
painful hour thou haſt ſoothed; many the heartache
thou haſt lightened. Wearineſs has fled at thy
approach, and the ſtill hour of night has been as cheerful
as the full blaze of day.
`But, madam, if you pleaſe, we would prefer a little
leſs of the figurative, and a little more plain matter
of fact.'
Pardon me, gentle reader. I forgot I was writing
the hiſtory of Reuben and Rachel, and was giving you
the hiſtory of my own ſeelings.
A poor ſubſtitute, you ſay. I acknowledge the
truth of the obſervation, and therefore return to my hero.
After a paſſage of thirty days, Reuben Dudley arrived
ſafe in the Delaware, and on the thirty-ſecond
day after his departure from Liverpool, landed in the
city of Philadelphia. He had with him ſeveral letters of,
what is called, recommendation from merchants in
Liverpool, to their tranſ-atlantic correſpondents; but
they contained nothing more than a general mention
of his family, and that his character and morals had
been hitherto unimpenched.
“I will not inquire out the gentlemen to whom
theſe letters are directed, till I have ſeen my good
friend Jacob Holmes,” ſaid Reuben to himſelf, as he
walked up the main ſtreet. “He will, without doubt,
[Page 266]
accompany me, when I wiſh to viſit them. How glad
will he be to ſee me,” continued he mentally. “His
natural love to my ſiſter and ſelf, his gratitude to my
father—”
At the remembrance of his father, Reuben's heart
became full; and when he ſeated himſelf in the tavern
to which he had been recommended, and began to reflect
ſeriouſly upon where he was, and that it was more
than probable his father might have been in that very
houſe, in that very room, nay, he might have reſted on
the identical chair he was now ſeated on, the fulneſs
of his heart overflowed at his eyes, and he indulged in
the effuſion without reſtraint.
He had ordered ſome ſupper. As the maſter of
the houſe came in with it, Reuben aſked him if he had
ever known one Mr. Dudley, who had reſided in Philadelphia
between two and three years.
The landlord had, previous to the queſtion being
aſked, drawn a chair to the oppoſite ſide of the table
to that where our hero was ſeated, and when he heard
the interrogation, anſwered it by another.
“I expect he is ſome relative of yours, by your being
ſo inquiſitive about him.”
“He was,” ſaid Reuben mournfully, “a very near
and dear relative.”
“So I expect,” replied the landlord. “Pray where
is he now?”
“In heaven,” ſaid Reuben, raiſing his eyes, whilſt
every pulſation vibrated in exulting confidence of his
father's worth.
“You muſt not be too ſure of that,” ſaid the landlord.
“Had you known him, Sir,” ſaid Reuben with a
firm and earneſt manner, “you would have no more
doubt of his preſent happineſs than I have.”
“I did know him,” replied the hoſt.
“Then you knew one of the beſt men that ever lived.”
“Yea, he was good in the worldly acceptation of
the word; he did alms, told no lies, hated no one,
paid every man, yea, more than his due; but all this
[Page 267]
is vanity, filthy rags, unclean veſtments. He was not
one of the choſen; he was in a loſt ſtate.”
Here a diſpute enſued, in which Reuben evidently
loſt ground with his antagoniſt; for Reuben argued
with coolneſs, and took reaſon for his monitor; whereas
his opponent was wild, enthuſiaſtic, and extremely
ignorant. He had adopted ſome eccentric ideas in
regard to religion, and he aſſerted that his opinions
were right, “becauſe they were,” and that all who
did not think exactly as he did, were in the high road
to deſtruction, for the ſame unanſwerable reaſon, “because
they were.”
Before Reuben had finiſhed his ſupper, the landlord
left him, to impart to his ſpouſe all he had learnt concerning
the ſtranger. The curioſity of Jael was not
ſatisfied with this intelligence of her helpmate's.
“Thou haſt learned nothing, Zekell,” ſaid ſhe; “I
will go and queſtion the young man myſelf.”
Jael entered the parlour.
“You are juſt arrived,” ſaid ſhe, ſitting down in the
place her huſband had juſt left.
“Yes, juſt landed.”
“From England?”
“Yes.”
“What part?”
“Liverpool.”
“Liverpool?”
“Yes.”
“I expect you have got ſome kinsfolks in the city.”
“Not that I know of.”
“No friends, no acquaintances?”
“Oh yes! Do you know Jacob Holmes?”
“Yes, to be ſure I do. Maſter has reaſon to know
him; he is a dire hard man to deal with.”
“What buſineſs does he follow?”
“Buſineſs! Well, I expect you don't know much
about him, to aſk that queſtion. Why Jacob Holmes
is one of our grandeſt men, for all he be a Quaker.
And then he married ſuch a grand woman; why I
expect ſhe had a matter of five hundred pounds to her
fortin.”
[Page 268]
“Mr. Holmes is married then?”
“What, did not you know that? Well, I thought
you were a boaſting ſort of fellow, pretending to know
folks who you never ſaw'd.”
“How long has he been married?” ſaid Reuben.
“Why I expect it is about a year and a half ago.”
“So long?”
“Yes, ſo long; and madam Holmes has got a ſweet
little baby, about three months old.”
Reuben pauſed a moment, and then without reflection
exclaimed, “Why he muſt have married immediately
after my father's departure for England.”
“And pray what may be your name?” ſaid Jael,
placing both her elbows on the table, and reſting her
chin on her hands, whilſt her large blue glaſs eyes
were fixed on the face of our hero with a moſt unmeaning
ſtare.
“My name is Dudley,” replied Reuben.
“So I expected,” ſaid ſhe, and ſomething like low
cunning informed her broad and inexpreſſive features.
“And ſo you are cum'd to look ater the fortin ſquire
Dudley left?”
“Even ſo,” replied Reuben, puſhing from him the
plate that contained his almoſt untaſted ſupper. “How
far from Philadelphia does the late Mr. Dudley's estate
lay, and which is my neareſt road to it?”
“Ah, young man!” ſaid Jael, “I expect you be
cum'd on a fool's errant. It matters not to you where
it lies; he never paid for it; and cording to counts
that we have heard, the ſquire owed a pretty deal before
he cum'd from home.”
Reuben ſtarted. “Of whom are you ſpeaking?”
ſaid he.
“Of ſquire Dudley.”
“What Dudley? what was his Chriſtian name?”
“Name! name! I can't juſt now ſay; but I expect
it was a bible name.”
“Was it Reuben?” aſked our hero eagerly.
“I do expect it was,” ſaid the woman, riſing without
the leaſt emotion, and beginning to remove the
ſupper from the table.
[Page 269]
“Oh! my dear father!” exclaimed Reuben, and
his reſpiration became ſo difficult that he was obliged
to walk to the window and throw up the ſaſh.
Jael replaced the diſh upon the table, and with a
look and manner to which no deſcription can do justice,
thus addreſſed him:—
“If ſquire Dudley was your father, I wonder how
you got ſafe over ſea. Nobody was ſurpriſed when they
heard he was caſt away and drownded; for he was as
great a reprobate as ever lived.”
“Reprobate!” repeated Reuben with vehemence,
and his eyes flaſhed reſentment, whilſt his heart swelled
almoſt to burſting.
“Yes, reprobate,” repeated Jael, “and I expect you
will find a pretty many folks in Philidelphy that will
tell you as how here he comed over ſea, and pretended
to be a vaſt rich man.”
“'Tis falſe!” cried Reuben; “I would ſtake my
exiſtence upon his probity. My father would have
ſcorned to pretend to any thing more than he could
make appear reality.”
“But I ſay he did though,” ſaid Jael; “giving
away his intereſt as a body may ſay, ſelling his goods
at half-price, that, as he ſaid, the poor might buy as
well as the rich. Then if he ſaw a man that wanted,
he never inquired whether he was a Chriſtian or a Papish,
but lent or gav'd him what he axed.”
“And a juſt and beneficent God will reward him
for it,” ſaid Reuben, raiſing his eyes fervently. “He
is now, I truſt, reaping the reward of his philanthropy.”
“It mought a been all very well,” continued Jael,
not noticing the ejaculation of our hero, “had he only
given away his own; but to deal ſo hardly as he did
by that pious young man, Jacob Holmes—Oh! it was
a wicked thing.”
Reuben approached a few ſteps towards his hoſteſs,
and then ſtopped, fixed in curioſity and amazement;
amazed at the malignity with which this ignorant
woman endeavoured to aſperſe the memory of his
father, (whilſt every ſentence till the laſt, muſt appear
[Page 270]
in the eye of pure religion and candour as his higheſt
culogium) and curious to know from what ſource this
malignity proceeded; whilſt Jael, leaning over the
back of the chair from which ſhe had ariſen, her features
ſtill fixed and without expreſſion, in the ſame
monotonous tone of voice proceeded:—
“It is a ſerious thing, young man, a very ſerious
thing, for one to be left gardeen to a wealthy child.
Oh! it is a trying matter, a grand ſnare, laid by Satan,
the mighty tempter, the great deceiver. Money
is the root and ſpring of all evil; it is the bait the
wicked one makes uſe of to draw the children of vanity
aſtray, as he did thy father. Oh! it was an abomination
for him to keep Jacob Holmes as he did, without
even pocket money, whilſt he was throwing away
his intereſt by handfuls.”
“I do not underſtand you,” ſaid Reuben; “Jacob
Holmes was an orphan child, adopted, brought up
and educated by the charity of my father.”
“Ah! that was the ſtory ſquire Dudley told, when
he firſt comed here; but we knows better things now.
It was the money of the good Jacob Holmes on which
he was living; for I expect if it had been his own he
would a been more careful of it. But thy father,
young man, has wronged the orphan of his right, and
made himſelf rich at the expenſe of the ſon of the
widow, and the curſes of the widow and the orphan
will reſt upon him and his children.”
“So be it,” cried Reuben; “I fear no judgment
for my father's actions. Oh that I may be enabled to
emulate his virtues, to tread his footſteps—But I feel
I am to blame in liſtening to one, whoſe aim is to caluminate
the memory of him who gave me being.
What could he have done to deſerve thy hatred, that
even his ſacred duſt cannot reſt in peace? Did he ever
wrong thee or thy family?”
“No, not he; I expect he was the means of my
getting a matter a twenty pounds or ſo, that I ſhould
a loſt; but then, though it did me a kindneſs, it did
not tell much to his credit, though (as maſter ſaid)
[Page 271]
we got our money, and what matter was it to us who
paid it?”
“True,” cried Reuben, “that could be of but little
conſequence indeed; but pray tell me, how came
my father to render you this ſervice?”
“Why I expect it is ſo long a ſtory, you will be
tired.”
“Tell it as conciſely as poſſible,” ſaid Reuben; “I
will anſwer for my patience; and even ſhould it be
more lengthy than I expect, when a father's good
deeds are the theme, what ſon could be weary or feel
his attention flag?”
Jael looked at him, with mouth and eyes extended.
She comprehended nothing more than that he deſired
to hear how his father happened to pay her twenty
pounds; ſo, ſtill leaning over the back of the chair,
ſhe began:—
“I expect it's a matter a three years agone, a woman
comed over in a ſhip from London, an ſhe ſaid as
how ſhe comed ater her huſband. She was as pretty
a body, I expect, as one mought ſee in a hundred.
Maſter and I was juſt married, and got into this here
houſe. So ſhe comed an wanted to board with us,
an ſhe had a baby with her about ſix months old. So
ſhe had plenty of money, an a golden watch, an a
power of fine clothes; ſo we let her have our beſt
room, an hired a girl to wait on her.”
“Plenty of money, a gold watch, and fine clothes,”
ſaid Reuben mentally, and he turned from the ſelfiſh
narrator to hide his indignation and contempt.
“Well, ater a while,” ſhe continued, “we found as
how the parſon ſhe cum'd ater was not her huſband;
he had kept her company, and I expect, promiſed to
marry her; but he would neither own her nor her
child when he ſaw'd her here. So ſhe did nothing but
cry, and cry, and kiſs her little girl; ſhe was too proud
to work, and ſo, when her money was ſpent, and her
golden watch ſold, ſhe ſaid ſhe wiſhed to die.”
“Poor, unfortunate girl,” ſaid Reuben in a tone of
commiſeration, “how I pity her!”
[Page 272]
“Pity her indeed,” ſaid Jael, “a creeter! When I
told her ſhe mought get a good living by going out to
ſarvice, ſhe ſaid ſhe knew not how to labour for bread;
them was her very words, an ſo ſhe would not eat nor
drink, an uſed to go night ater night with her clothes
on, ſitting on the floor, and reſting her head on a chair
or the window-feat. She at laſt grew ſo weak, that
ſhe was not able to walk; ſo I went and axed her
what ſhe meant by going on ſo; for ſhe know'd as
how ſhe owed me above twelve pound; ſo ſhe only
anſwered me, `ſhe meant and wiſhed to die, and at
once releaſe me and herſelf.' But then ſhe would
hug her baby, and cry, `Poor little wretch! what
will become of you? It were better we both died together.”
Reuben's eyes gliſtened with the dew of ſenſibility,
but he was ſilent.
“So at laſt ſhe fell into a conſumption; I expect it
was all owing to her pride that was ſo humbled and
mortified. So ſeeing as how ſhe was like to become a
trouble to maſter, I told her how ſhe muſt go about
her buſineſs; for I wanted my room to let to somebody
elſe.”
“Did you tell the poor dying creature ſo?” ſaid
Reuben, in a tone expreſſive at once of anger and commiseration;
“did you tell her ſo?”
“Yes, I did,” ſaid Jael; “for you knows self-preservation
is the firſt law in nature, and 'tis but right
one ſhould chriſten their own child firſt. So madam
got up, and with her child in her hand crawled down
ſtairs; and when ſhe got into the kitchen, ſhe fainted
away. So ſquire Dudley was in the next room, and
he heard the buſtle in the kitchen, and came out to
axe what was the matter; ſo when I told him, he
threw me the money ſhe owed me; but he called me
a very bad name. Then he got two men to carry the
ſick body to his own lodging in an arm chair, an there
he had her tended and doctored; but that did no good,
for ſhe died. An there he took the child, and had it
put out to nurſe, though every body ſaid he ought to
[Page 273]
be aſhamed of himſelf for doing any thing for ſuch a
ſort of woman.”
“Oh my father! my father!” exclaimed Reuben,
“ought not thy ſon to exult that thy character was
ſuch, that even the aſperſions of thy enemies are thy
higheſt praiſe?—And where is the poor child?” addressing
himſelf to the woman.
“Dead; for ater the ſquire went away, Jacob
Holmes would not pay for its being nurſed; and who
can blame him? There had been enough of his interest
waſted already.”
“I tell thee, woman,” ſaid Reuben, “Jacob Holmes
never had any property whatever but what he enjoyed
from the beneficence of my father.”
“I expect that ſtory won't do you much good
here,” ſaid Jael; “but howſoever, you axed about the
child, an ſo as I was ſaying, it went to the poor-houſe,
and there it died.”
As Jael finiſhed this hiſtory, ſhe took the diſh and
plate from the table, and left the room, and Reuben
ſhortly after retired to bed, but not to reſt. To find
his father's memory traduced, to find Jacob Holmes
in actual poſſeſſion of his eſtate, and believed universally
the lawful owner of it, was a ſhock he had never
dreamed of receiving, and knew not how to ſupport.
As he had imagined he ſhould, without the leaſt difficulty,
take immediate poſſeſſion of the effects his father
had left in Holmes's care, and as he knew there muſt
be conſiderable money in his hands, ariſing from the
ſale of merchandize with which he had been entruſted,
our hero had taken but a very ſmall ſum of money
with him from England. Indeed his finances in general
were in ſo confined a ſtate, that he could not command
a ſum of any conſequence. It was therefore no
ſmall addition to his uneaſy ſenſations, that he was in
a ſtrange land, with very little money, and without a
ſingle friend. However, he determined the next morning
to viſit Jacob Holmes; for, ſtill unwilling to believe
human nature could be guilty of ſuch depravity,
or that a man, adding diſhoneſry to ingratitude, would
return the benevolence of the father by wronging the
[Page 274]
ſon, he indulged a feeble hope, that his reception would
be better than from what he had heard he had a right
to expect.
After a reſtleſs and perturbated night, he aroſe with
the earlieſt dawn, and having inquired for a horſe, was
preparing to viſit Jacob, when, as he went to the door
with the deſign of mounting, he ſaw the identical person
he was going in ſearch of juſt alighting. Spite of
the intelligence he had received from Jael, Reuben's
heart warmed with affection, when he beheld a perſon
who had been ſo dear to his father, and who had borne
himſelf and ſiſter in his arms a thouſand times. He
darted forward, and took his hand. “Jacob,” ſaid
he, in a tone of fraternal tenderneſs, “Jacob, how are
you?”
“Well, I thank thee, young man,” replied Jacob,
coldly withdrawing his hand, and ſtalking with upright
formality into the houſe.
Though chilled by his frigid manner, Reuben felt
his heart contract, yet he followed him into the parlour,
and laying his hand upon his ſhoulder, cried, “Don't
you know me, Jacob?”
“No, really, young man, thou haſt greatly the advantage
of me; I do not recollect ever to have ſeen
thee before.”
Nearly ſix years had elapſed ſince Jacob had left
England, and a period of that length might naturally
be ſuppoſed to make a material alteration in the person
of a youth, whom it had transformed, as it paſt,
from a cheerful, blooming boy, to the graceful, wellinformed
man. But ſtill there was ſufficient in his
manner, voice and features, to inform Jacob Holmes,
at one glance, who it was addreſſed him. But Jacob
had found a ſhort memory very uſeful on many occasions,
and was determined to try its efficacy on this;
and therefore boldly aſſerted he had never, to his recollection,
ſeen Reuben before.
“Look at me again, friend Jacob,” ſaid our hero,
“you ſurely cannot totally forget the face of Reuben
Dudley, the ſon of your friend, Mr. Dudley, of
Laneaſhire.”
[Page 275]
“I do remember thee now,” ſaid Jacob; “but how
is it, young man, that I ſee thee in the garb of the children
of vanity? thy father wore it not.”
Reuben was now ſtruck by obſerving the very formal
and primitive appearance of Jacob. “I hope I
am not the leſs pious,” ſaid Reuben with a ſmile, “because
my coat is not cut in the ſame faſhion as thine,
or my hat quite ſo large. I am come to inquire after
my father's effects, and to releaſe you from the trouble
you have ſo long had, of attending to concerns
which may interfere with your own buſineſs and pursuits.”
“Thou art welcome to Philadelphia, friend Reuben,”
ſaid Jacob, aſſuming ſome ſmall degree of cordiality;
“I ſhall be ready to give an account of my
ſtewardſhip whenever thou ſhalt demand it. In the
mean time, go home with me, and ſojourn till thou
canſt ſuit thyſelf better. I am going acroſs the river
on ſome little matter of buſineſs; when I return, we
will go together to my houſe.”
“Ah!” ſaid Reuben, after Jacob had left him, “I
fear this man has a diſhoneſt heart; but I will not
judge too haſtily.”
Towards evening, Jacob returned, and with our
hero proceeded to the houſe of Mr. Dudley, which
he now claimed as his own. It was ſituated on the
declivity of a hill, that, riſing gradually behind it,
ſheltered it from the wintry blaſts, and whoſe ſides
were covered with a variegated wood; the ſpreading
pine, the cedar, the wild walnut, the hiccory, the birch,
the oak, were intermingled, and beautifully diverſified
the foliage, whilſt here and there the parſimon tree
diſplayed its tempting but deceitful fruit, which, like
the frivolous pleaſures of the world, are lovely to the
eye when viewed at a diſtance; but when taſted, disappoint
the expectation, and its harſh acidity is rejected
with diſguſt. Here too, in native beauty, bloomed
the laureſtinus, and here innumerable wild flowering
ſhrubs, gave richneſs and faſcination to the ſcene,
whilſt the mild ſouth-weſt breeze waſted their delicious
odours to the ſenſes, refreſhing and invigorating
[Page 276]
nature. From the front of the manſion, the green banks
ſloped gently to the margin of the Schuylkill, and displayed
the advantages of cultivation. Here were
fields of ripened grain; here were paſtures, where the
ſheep and cattle repoſed in ſafety, and feaſted on luxuriant
verdure. To a mind ſo pure, ſo every way
formed to conceive and enjoy the beauties of nature
as was that of our hero, the ſcene was enchanting;
he rode on, wrapt in contemplation and delight. At
length perceiving the houſe, which juſt peeped from
between the ſurrounding trees, he aſked, “Is that my
father's houſe?”
“That is my houſe,” ſaid Jacob.
“And how far from hence is my father's place?”
“This is the place the deſigned to purchaſe.”
“Deſigned?”
“Yes, but he went away before he concluded the
bargain, and I have ſince made it mine.”
They had now reached the houſe, entered a large
gate and diſmounted, when Jacob, with affected solemnity
and humility, welcomed Reuben to his homely
dwelling, and preſented him to his wife Dinah, a
pretty Quaker, whoſe heart was naturally good, but
whoſe underſtanding was ſcarcely above mediocrity,
and had been cramped by prejudice, and whoſe knowledge
of the world extended not beyond her own immediate
family concerns. She loved Jacob ſincerely;
he was in her eyes the firſt of human beings; and
when ſhe preſented her hand to welcome Reuben, it
was with an air of friendly cordiality; for he was the
friend of her huſband ſhe thought, and as ſuch, claimed
the firſt place in her eſteem, and was entitled to every
mark of reſpect and attention. She was more than
commonly careful that her ſupper ſhould be good in
its kind, and ſerved with neatneſs. A chamber was
prepared for him by her orders, and thither he retired
at an early hour, to reflect on his own uncomfortable
ſituation, and lament the ingratitude and diſhoneſty of
Jacob Holmes.
[Page 277]
CHAP. XII.
Settlement of Accounts—A Campaign.
The next morning after breakfaſt, Reuben requested
to ſee a ſtatement of his accounts, that
he might be a judge of what he ought to do; but Jacob
told him he expected his wife's father the enſuing
day, and as he had been confidentially entruſted with
the mutual concerns between Mr. Dudley and himſelf,
he thought he would be a proper perſon to be preſent
at the final adjuſtment of their accounts.
To this delay Reuben with reluctance conſented,
and the day paſſed on heavily enough; for notwithstanding
the novelty, beauty and variety of the surrounding
objects, his mind was too much occupied in
reflections on his own ſorlorn ſituation, and from
thence reverted to the inconveniencies and misfortunes
to which his beloved ſiſter might be ſubject, ſhould he
be detained from England, and by the fraud of Jacob
Holmes rendered incapable of remitting her any pecuniary
aſſiſtance.
On the following morning, Jacob's father-in-law arrived,
and he, with great formality bringing out a
heap of papers, began to read over to our hero long
accounts of money paid.
“And pray,” ſaid Reuben, “where is the account
of the ſales of the merchandize from whence this money
aroſe? My father left very confiderable property
in your hands, and I have every reaſon to imagine the
eſtate he purchaſed here was entirely paid for, as he
drew large ſums from his agent in England for that
purpoſe.”
“Thou canſt not prove what thou doſt affert,” ſaid
Jacob, with a look of malignant ſatisfaction; “and I
believe thou wilt find it difficult to diſpoſſeſs me of an
eſtate, the title deeds of which are all made out in my
name; and to prove my right thereto, I have the receipts
given to me for various ſums of money, paid
by me at different times, till the whole was paid for.”
[Page 278]
“But tell me,” ſaid Reuben, “whoſe property was
the money with which you made theſe payments?
Was it not my father's.”
Reuben fixed his penetrating eyes on the face of Jacob,
as he made this interrogation, whoſe eye fell beneath
the ſcrutinizing glance; he dared not meet the
honeſt look; his cheek turned pale, his lips trembled,
and his tongue ſaltered, as ſtooping, with a pretence
of replacing ſome papers in a box, but in reality to
hide emotions he could not ſuppreſs, he replied, that
the money was his own.
“Oh Jacob!” ſaid Reuben, “how canſt thou aſſert
ſuch a falſehood? Does not thy heart ſmite thee whilſt
thou art thus deliberately planning to rob the orphans
of their juſt due?” His heart ſwelled; he could not
proceed.
Friend Simcox, the father-in-law of Jacob, took upon
him to anſwer:
“It was thy father, young man, who endeavoured
to wrong the orphan of his juſt due; it is thou haſt
occaſion to bluſh for his evil deeds. This worthy
young man has improved the trifle of property Reuben
Dudley left behind him, and all demands againſt
him diſcharged, there remains a ſum amounting to
about fifty or ſixty guineas, which Jacob is ready to
pay whenever thou ſhalt demand it; and I would advise
thee to return home in the firſt ſhip that goes.”
A converſation now enſued, which convinced our
hero that he had little hope of ever obtaining his right;
for was he even to apply to the law, money would be
wanting to proſecute his ſuit, or to prove his right to
the eſtate, which was called Mount Pleaſant. Mr.
Dudley had with him, at the time he was loſt, all the
original papers neceſſary to be produced, the duplicates
of which were in the hands of Jacob. That all
the papers were irrecoverably loſt, Reuben had informed
this unworthy ſteward of by letter, immediately after
the fatal cataſtrophe.
There was another circumſtance, which militated
much againſt him, and with which he was not informed
till that hour. Mr. Dudley had ever placed an
[Page 279]
unbounded confidence in Jacob Holmes; he was a man
of eaſy diſpoſition, fond of agriculture, and ſuch pursuits
as might ultimately tend to benefit the country
of which he was about to become an inhabitant, and
to render his new purchaſe at once beautiful and beneficial.
He had therefore, after having ſurveyed the
land, and had one converſation with the perſon of
whom he was about to purchaſe it, entruſted the whole
management of the buſineſs to Jacob. The whole of
the payment not having been made before he left Philadelphia,
he had never had the deeds properly executed,
and the news of his being drowned arriving before
they were completed, Jacob conceived the idea of having
them filled up in his own name. He had, from
their firſt arrival in Philadelphia, been artfully undermining
the reputation of his benefactor, by representing
himſelf as a youth of fortune entruſted to his guardianship;
and whenever he made a payment, he always
gave the perſon to underſtand that it was his
own money that he was advancing to ſerve his friend
Dudley. This idea having been artfully propagated,
and univerſally credited, and Mr. Dudley and himſelf
being equally ſtrangers in the place, Jacob found no
difficulty in procuring the eſtate to be ſecured to himself.
He found it much more difficult to ſilence the
admonitions of his conſcience. But the heart naturally
ungrateful, by eaſy gradations may be habituated
to admit, and even approve, every other vice. Gratitude
is the foundation and ſource of all the moral virtues.
For if we receive the many great and good
gifts of our beneficent Creator without a grateful sensibility,
we no longer love him; and whom we do
not love, we become indifferent, whether we obey or
ſerve.
Jacob ſtifled the remonſtrances of conſcience; and
even when he ſaw our hero, could he have done it
without fear of the law, would ſcarcely have heſitated
to give him a quick paſſport from this to a better
world.
The accounts adjuſted according to the plan Jacob
had concerted, and which old friend Simcox never
[Page 280]
ſcrutinized, becauſe he wiſhed not to be undeceived,
the paltry ſum of fifty-ſeven guineas was offered to
our hero, for which he was requeſted to give a general
acquittal of all demands whatever, on the perſon
or property of Jacob Holmes.
When this money and this curious acquittal were
preſented to Reuben, the one for his acceptance, the
other for his ſignature, his indignation aroſe beyond the
bounds within which he had endeavoured to confine
it. He roſe from his ſeat, puſhing, with an indignant
motion, the proffered money from him.
“Add not inſult to injury,” ſaid he, “Jacob Holmes;
I would recapitulate who and what you are; but there
are ſeveral forcible reaſons that oblige me to ſilence.
And firſt—You, Jacob, are not anſwerable for the
faults of thoſe, whoſe memories the grave has consigned
to eternal oblivion; nor dare I ſpeak of obligations;
for well I know he who conferred them, ever
made it a rule to fix the ſeal of ſilence on his own
good deeds, and the faults of his fellow-creatures. As
to taking the money you offer and ſigning this acquittal,
they are alike repugnant to my feelings. I have
no demand on your property, Jacob; I aſk but for my
own; the property of my late dear father is mine and
my ſiſter's. For myſelf, I value it not. I am young,
unencumbered, have hands to labour, or an arm to
fight. I cannot want bread. But my ſiſter, lovely,
innocent, unacquainted with the world, muſt ſhe be
dependent? Muſt ſhe court the ſmiles of that world?
Muſt ſhe ſubmit to the contumely of the haughty, the
ſlights of the unfeeling, or the more humiliating pity
of affected ſenſibility, and in return procure the ſcanty
means of bare exiſtence? No! I cannot tamely give
up her right, however I might relinquiſh my own.
I do aſſert, Jacob Holmes, and you, friend Simcox, bear
witneſs to the aſſertion, that this eſtate, this houſe, this
land, the ſtock and all appertaining to it, is the joint
property of myſelf and ſiſter Rachel, inherited from
our father, Reuben Dudley; nor will I relinquiſh the
claim whilſt I have exiſtence.”
[Page 281]
He took his hat, and walked towards the door;
then turning, he added—
“Jacob, poor as thou haſt, by thy diſhoneſty, made
me, I pity thee. Yes, Jacob Holmes, I pity thee.
Thou haſt reduced me to poverty, and thyſelf to misery.”
Dinah, Jacob's wife, had overheard the conversation;
not at firſt intentionally, but paſſing through the
parlour that adjoined the room in which they were, and
catching a word that awakened her curioſity, ſtopped.
Curioſity, when once awakened, is hard to be repelled,
at leaſt in women, ſay the oppoſite ſex. Whether we
are more troubled with the impulſe than our fathers,
brothers, or huſbands, I will not now diſpute; it is a
certainty Dinah ſtopped to liſten to a converſation
which had powerfully excited her's.
It has been remarked, that Dinah's underſtanding
was not of the moſt brilliant kind; but ſhe poſſeſſed
that plain, natural ſenſe which enabled her to have a
full and clear perception of right and wrong. Her
wiſhes were moderate, her wants few. She was equally
a ſtranger to avarice, luxury and ambition. She
liſtened to the accuſation of Reuben, and all that ſhe
poſſeſſed of ſenſibility was awakened; not that ſhe
feared to be deprived of part of the comforts and conveniencies
ſhe at preſent enjoyed; but the man whom
ſhe thought the firſt and beſt of all God's creatures,
had been accuſed of fraud; if innocently, her indignation
would fall on his accuſer; if juſtly, then Jacob
Holmes was no longer the perfect being ſhe had ever
believed him; and if guilty of diſhoneſty, Dinah felt
ſhe could no longer reſpect him. Yet ſhe was unwilling
to believe aught to his prejudice; ſhe therefore
approached our hero as he left the apartment.
“Thou muſt not leave us in anger, Reuben Dudley,”
ſaid ſhe, laying her hand on his arm as he attempted
to paſs her; “if Jacob has done thee wrong,
I dare affirm it was not wilfully; and if thou canſt
make it appear, he will make thee ample reſtitution.”
“Do not detain me, madam,” ſaid he, gently freeing
himſelf from her hold; “I am in haſte to depart;
[Page 282]
but I part not in diſpleaſure with you. God bleſs
you, and make you as happy as you are innocent.”
Then kiſſing the child, which ſhe held in her arms, he
went haſtily to the ſtable, ſaddled his horſe, and without
any oppoſition, mounted and proceeded to Philadelphia.
Dinah entered the room where her father and husband
were ſitting. “Good Jacob,” ſaid ſhe, “let not
the young man leave us in anger. I do remember
his father; I have heard him ſpeak of thee with affection,
as though thou hadſt been his own child. I verily
believe he did love thee, Jacob; for his ſake, let
me call back the young man.”
“No,” cried Jacob, with a ſtern look, “ſtay where
you are (for ſhe was about to quit the room); the
youth has behaved unſeemly, refuſes the money which
I have tendered him, and lays claim to my whole estate.”
“And art thou ſure, quite ſure, Jacob Holmes,”
ſaid ſhe, and her countenance expreſſed fear and doubt,
“art thou quite ſure that he has no lawful claim upon
thy property? In good truth, I thought he ſpoke as
though he were aſſured of his right.”
“Dinah,” ſaid Jacob, “thou art a good woman;
thou doſt underſtand thy houſehold concerns; they
are ſufficient for the extent of thy capacity. I pray
thee, Dinah, trouble not thyſelf with what is beyond
thy comprehenſion. Thou art a ſtranger to the
world, totally unacquainted with the arts and deceptions
with which it abounds.”
“Verily thou ſayeſt right,” ſhe replied mildly, “but
as I could not aſſert a falſehood without heſitating,
nor claim what was the right of another, without blushing,
I judged by the firm voice and unembarraſſed
manner of the young man.”
“If thou didſt judge of him by thyſelf, Dinah,”
ſaid her father, “thou didſt wrong.”
“Perhaps ſo, father; I am ſimple, and uninstructed.
But I hope I am not equally wrong in judging
of my huſband's heart by my own; for I think, Jacob,”
continued ſhe, and ſhe laid her hand
[Page 283]
affectionately on his arm, “I think I would rather be poor and
honeſt, than rich at the coſt of another; wouldſt not
thou, Jacob?”
Jacob could not reply, nor even lift his eyes to the
face of his wife; he rather unkindly ſhook off the hand
ſhe had laid on his arm, and the child juſt then beginning
to cry, he bade her take away the noiſy boy,
for it diſturbed him. Dinah obeyed in ſilence, repaired
to a diſtant apartment, and as the infant drew
from her boſom life's nouriſhing fluid, ſhe hung fondly
over him and wept.
Our hero in the mean time returned to Philadelphia.
His mind was haraſſed, his ſpirits depreſſed;
he endeavoured to compoſe himſelf, and to form ſome
plan for his future conduct; but, inexperienced as he
was, he wanted a friend to adviſe and direct him.
“To-morrow,” ſaid he, “I will deliver the letters I
brought with me.”
Reuben was elegant in his appearance, though perfectly
plain in his dreſs; but there was an air of superiority,
not pride or ſelf-conſequence; it was that native
dignity of manner, which is ever inſpired by conscious
rectitude of heart and unimpeached integrity.
His perſon was ſtriking, and what would in general be
termed handſome. It will naturally be ſuppoſed he
was therefore received with politeneſs, and would have
prepoſſeſſed almoſt every one in his favour, but that
almoſt all whom he converſed with were prejudiced
perſons, who conceived that Jacob Holmes's intereſt
had been much injured by the extravagance and folly
of his father.
From ſeveral to whom he delivered letters, (which
letters were nothing more than a ſimple annunciation
of his name and family) he received invitations to
their houſes; but when his circumſtances began to be
ſuſpected, and indeed the openneſs of his diſpoſition
led him rather to expoſe than endeavour to conceal
them; when it was diſcovered he wanted friends who
would be farther ſerviceable than merely giving him
a dinner, or a bed for a few nights; he found, by
their diſtant, frigid manner, that he was no longer
[Page 284]
welcome, that he was thought an intruder. His independent
ſpirit took fire; he no longer viſited, he
ſhut himſelf in his apartment, lived ſparingly, and revolved
a thouſand different plans by which he hoped
to immerge from obſcurity, and reſcue from oblivion
the name of Dudley. He had applied to ſeveral professors
of the law to give him advice and aſſiſtance for
the recovery of his right; but his poverty was known
to be certain, his claims were ſuppoſed very doubtful;
no one would undertake the cauſe.
Can any ſituation be more diſtreſſing, than that of
a young man, of brilliant underſtanding, aſpiring genius,
laudable ambition and uncorrupted heart, thus
deprived of every means of improving his fortune,
or exerting his talents, in ſuch a manner as might at
once be advantageous to himſelf and ſociety in general?
In a large and flouriſhing town, without a friend,
without even an aſſociate towards whom he felt the
ſmalleſt degree of affection, how forlorn, how totally devoid
of comfort were his days! A ſolitary individual,
who looked on the ſurrounding multitude, whom business
or pleaſure had drawn together, and ſaw not one
with whom the feelings of his ſoul could claim kindred,
not one who conceived or commiſerated his sufferings,
or, ſhould ſickneſs overtake him, would feel
intereſted for his recovery, or drop a tear of regret
over his bier, ſhould it pleaſe Heaven to put a period
to his exiſtence.
Depreſſed by his own ſituation, and tortured by reflections
on what might poſſibly be the diſtreſſes of his
ſiſter, Reuben had not courage even to write to her.
“Why ſhould I torment her,” he would ſay, “by an
account of my ill ſucceſs? Why write, when I have
not one comfortable idea to tranſmit? No, I will
ſuffer her to ſuppoſe I am no more; my ſilence will
lead her to imagine I have paid the debt of nature.
She will grieve, but time will ſoothe and leſſen her
affliction, which even at the firſt will not be half ſo
poignant, as the knowledge of my exiſting in a ſtate
of obſcurity, without money, without credit, without
friends would occaſion.”
[Page 285]
Jeſſy Oliver too, would ſometimes intrude on his
thoughts; but he endeavoured to baniſh hopes, which,
ſpite of reaſon, would often ariſe. “She is loſt to
me,” he would ſay; “I ſhall never ſee her more, or
ſhould I, will my ruined fortune entitle me to the hand
of a woman of her rank? But Miſs Oliver is above
valuing a man for the paltry diſtinctions of wealth.
Then ought I not to repel, with the utmoſt force of
honour, every ſelfiſh paſſion that would inſpire a wiſh
to degrade her by a union with my humble deſtiny?”
Theſe were the hourly reflections of our hero.
Night came, and he, cheerleſs, ſought the pillow of
repoſe, courting oblivion in the arms of ſleep. But
the ſomnific power was deaf to his ſolicitations; or if,
perchance, he paid a tranſient viſit, ſealing his weary
eyes for a few hours, Memory, ſtill wakeful, would
repreſent paſt ſcenes, or fondly paint illuſive preſent
joys.
Rachel and Jeſſy were the objects of his dreams.
Sometimes he ſaw his ſiſter on the brink of a precipice,
from the edge of which a horrid ſpectre ſtrove to
precipitate her, when, as ſhe fell, Jeſſy appeared with
arms extended to catch and ſave her from plunging
into the dreadful abyſs that yamned beneath. Sometimes
his fancy repreſented his ſiſter and Miſs Oliver
embarked in a ſmall and ill-accommodated veſſel, on a
tempeſtuous ocean; the ſky lowered, the winds howled,
and glaring meteors ſhot along the horizon; the
waves roſe tremendous, broke on the little barque,
and ſhe diſappeared. Then in a moment he ſaw the
fair form of Jeſſy leading his fainting ſiſter up the
beach, when, as they ſtrove to avoid the encroaching
tide, their feet would ſlip, and ſucceeding waves again
immerſe them in the foaming flood; and then again
an inſtantaneous change (for the viſions of ſleep are
wild and unconnected) would repreſent thoſe dear objects
of his fondeſt ſolicitude ſeated in an arbour of
evergreens, twined round with myrtle flowers and
roſes. He ſaw them, talked to them; ſweet ſmiling
infants ſeemed to play around them. Archibald Oliver
too was there, and a ſtranger of noble mien. But
[Page 286]
ſuddenly ſome new terror would ariſe; he ſtarted,
awoke, and all the faſcinating viſion fled. Sleep thus
agitated and diſturbed afforded but little refreſhment,
and in a few weeks our hero was but the ſhadow of
his former ſelf.
About this period the natives, who had been driven
back into the Allegany Mountains, and who had pitched
their habitation, in different tribes, upon the furthermost
banks of the Suſquehannah, Allegany and
Mohawk rivers, made frequent deſcents into the new
ſettled parts of the country, plundering, burning and
deſtroying with impunity every European ſettlement
within their reach.
In conſequence of the treachery and rapacity of
theſe ſavages, it became neceſſary to ſend a military
force to repel them, and guard the lives and properties
of the inoffenſive ſettlers; and Patrick Gordon,
Eſq. who at that time governed the colony, propoſed
raiſing a volunteer company for this ſervice. Proper
officers were accordingly appointed, and the company
increaſed daily.
The noiſe this occaſioned in the city awakened Reuben
from his lethargy of deſpondency. The native
ſpark of ambition, which had ſo long lain dormant,
was fanned to a flame, and with the ſanguine ardour
ever inſeparable from youth, vainly imagining to deſerve
was to inſure preferment, he offered himſelf to the
Governor, and was accepted.
His candour in ſpeaking of himſelf and circumstances;
his youth, his manners, his open, unembarrassed
air, and intelligent, manly countenance, ſpoke
volumes in his favour, and procured him the honourable
appointment of ſtandard bearer.
Early in the ſpring, they began their plan of operations,
and marched towards the margin of the Susquehannah.
During the ſpring and ſummer months,
they had ſeveral rencounters with the Indians, and being
in general victorious, they had driven and purſued
them a farther diſtance into the country than they
imagined, and the weather began to grow cold before
they thought of returning. At length the officers
[Page 287]
having unanimouſly agreed that it would be hazardous,
as well as of little uſe, to purſue their retreating
ſoe any farther, preparations were made for their gaining
good quarters before the inclement ſeaſon ſhould
be too far advanced. The main body had began their
march, and our hero, (who was now promoted to the
rank of lieutenant) with a ſmall party, was left to follow
the next morning with the baggage.
Amongſt the party of which Reuben was ſecond in
command, was an Iriſh youth, who particularly attached
himſelf to our hero. O'Neil was ignorant, but honest.
Like an unpoliſhed diamond, his outward appearance
was uncouth and rough; but within was a jewel
of ineſtimable price. Simplicity, integrity and humanity
were the characteriſties of his ſoul. This young
man was ſo pointed in his attentions to our hero, that
it could not paſs unnoticed. One day, when he had
been voluntarily performing ſome little menial office,
Reuben thus addreſſed him:
“By what good fortune, O'Neil, is it, that I am ſo
particularly favoured with your kind offices?”
“Arrah, my ſwate maſter,” ſaid O'Neil, “by no
great matter of good fortune, only that your Honour
happened to have a father.”
“Did you know my father, O'Neil?”
“Och! and did you think I did not know him?
Many is the time I havent ſerved him, to be ſure; and
while Pat O'Neil lives, he will ſerve any that wears
the name of Dudley, for his ſake; aye, by night or by
day, fair weather or foul, all's one for that. And did
you think now I could ever forget how he paid the
money for that ſwate crater, Madam Juliana, and how
he had her nurſed, and —”
It now ſtruck Reuben that he might, through
O'Neil, learn ſome further intelligence concerning a
circumſtance, which he had often thought of ſince the
information he received from Jael, on the firſt day of
his arrival; for he naturally ſuppoſed that the Juliana
he talked of was the unfortunate woman, whoſe sorrows
his father had alleviated. He put ſeveral questions
to his humble friend, and gleaned from him a
[Page 288]
tale which cannot be better related than in his own
ſimple language.
“It was in dear Ireland,” ſaid he, “about fifteen
miles from Dublin's ſwate city, that my honoured
maſter had a houſe; I would tell you his name, but
that I can't, becauſe, you ſee, I promiſed Madam
Juliana never to breathe a ſyllable of the matter. She
was all the child he had; and he thought ſhe was too
good for the ſun to ſhine on, and ſo ſhe was; but ſhe
was not quite ſo good neither, that is to ſay, ſhe might
a done better than to liſten to a ſpallpeen of a lord that
was an Engliſhman, only that he was born in Dublin.
So he ſaw her one day when ſhe was riding out, and
he ſpoke to her, and rode home with her; and when
my maſter ſaw who he was, he turned him out of the
houſe, and never aſked him into it; and I heard him
tell Madam Juliana at ſupper-time, that he was no better
than he ſhould be, an if he had ſaid not half ſo
good, he would have ſaid more in his favour than he
deſerved. I was a boy, pleaſe your Honour, then,
and half a guinea tempted me to take a letter and give
it to her. Och! the remembrance of that makes my
heart ache very often; for if I had not been ſo eaſily
perſuaded, my good maſter and my ſwate lady might
a been alive and happy together now. So ſhe did not
mind what her father ſaid, but wrote to him, and met
him; and one evening he brought a chaiſe and four
horſes. It was after ſunſet, and the new moon gave
but little light; ſo ſhe ſaid, “Patrick, will you walk
with me as far as the Mill-Bridge?”
“Now it was October, and the wind was ſharp. So
ſays I, `It is cold, my lady,' ſays I.”
“A little or ſo,” ſaid ſhe, and her voice ſeemed to
tremble. “It is a little cold, Patrick, but here is something
to keep you warm;” ſo ſhe put a crown piece
into my hand. So we went out together, and as I
opened the gate, ſhe turned and looked up at the windows
of her father's ſtudy; for there was a big row of
trees from the houſe to the gate, and his ſtudy windows
were right oppoſite. So ſhe looked at them,
[Page 289]
and lifted up her hands and wrung them, and I heard
her ſob.”
“You had better go back, Miſs,” ſaid I; but ſhe
made me no anſwer, only walked very faſt forward;
and when I ſaw the lord and the chaiſe, my mind misgave
me, and I ſaid, “Och! Miſs July, what are you
going to be after doing?”
“Do not be frightened, my good lad,” ſaid ſhe,
“but go back and take this letter to my father.”
“Go back?” ſaid I, “no! no! Pat O'Neil does
no ſuch thing; I could not bear to ſee my poor old
maſter die of the heart-break, or go crazy for your
loſs.”
“But you muſt go back,” ſaid the lord.
“But I won't,” ſaid I; “I will follow my miſtreſs
to the end of the world, and farther too if needs
muſt.”
“Och! your Honour, I cannot tell how I felt when
I thought they were going away without me. He
had lifted my poor lady in, who ſeemed almoſt dying;
ſo I caught hold of her gown, and hung upon the
ſtep of the chaiſe, and ſwore never to quit my hold till
my hands were cut off.”
“Let him go with us, poor fellow,” ſaid my lady.
“He will betray us,” ſaid the lord.
“No, I will not,” ſaid I; “let me go with my
miſtreſs, and I will not ſpeak a word to nobody; but
I will protect her, fight for her, die for her.”
“Get up behind,” ſaid he.
“I ſprung up in a giffey, and away we went. Well,
that night we went aboard a packet, and failed away
to England, and there a Roman Catholic prieſt married
them; but the falſe-hearted lord never meant the
thing that was right all this while; for in a week or
two he grew cool, and at laſt told her he was no Catholic,
and therefore not her huſband, and that to provide
for her during her life, he had got her a huſband,
and when ſhe was married, ſhe might go back to her
father. So a captain uſed to come with him, and I
don't know how they managed; but Madam Juliana
was married to him, and I thought the next day ſhe
[Page 290]
would have gone diſtracted. She tore her beautiful
flaxen hair, and wrung her hands, and cried and sobbed.
So then, in a little while her huſband went away
over ſea, and then after Madam lay in, ſhe followed
him, and when ſhe came to Philadelphia, he would not
own her, and ſhe pined and pined, till at laſt—”
Here the voice of poor O'Neil failed. His honeſt
heart burſt forth at his eyes.
“Spare yourſelf, Patrick,” ſaid Reuben, “for I think
I know the reſt.”
“Not quite all, your Honour,” ſaid Patrick; “for
on the day before ſhe died, your good father, Heaven
bleſs him for it, let me ſee her. She was almoſt gone,
and ſpoke ſo low, I could ſcarce hear her.”
“Patrick,” ſaid ſhe, “I want to thank you for your
ſteady attachment to me. I would fain leave you
ſomething as a remembrance; but I have nothing
left of any value.”
“My dear, ſwate, angel lady,” ſaid I, “you will
leave me the remembrance of your precious ſelf. I
never! no, never! ſhall forget you.”
“I ſent for you,” ſaid ſhe, “to tell you, Patrick,
that, ſhould you ever ſee my father, he may know from
you that I have been puniſhed, juſtly, I own, though
very ſeverely, for my diſobedience to the beſt of parents.
I leave my child an orphan, in a ſtrange land; but
my benefactor has promiſed to take care of it. You,
I know, will, to the utmoſt of your power, protect it.”
She fainted before ſhe had finiſhed; they took me
out of the room, and I never ſaw her again. Och!
your Honour, ſhe is ſurely in heaven; for to die heart-broken,
and in poverty, in a ſtrange land, without any
friends—Do you not think ſhe is in heaven? do you
not think her ſins were pardoned?”
“We will hope ſo,” ſaid Reuben; “but disobedience
to parents is certainly a deep offence againſt the
commandments of our Creator.”
“But ſhe was very penitent,” ſaid O'Neil. Reuben
was ſilent.
After this converſation, there ſeemed a kind of social
bond formed between Reuben and the young
[Page 291]
Irishman; the latter performing all the offices of a ſervant,
the other practiſing all the kindneſs and benevolence
of the beſt of maſters. The autumn nights were cold;
O'Neil would watch till he ſaw our hero in a ſlumber,
then, adding his own blanket to the ſlight covering of
Reuben's bed, he would wrap himſelf as well as he
could in his great coat, and lie down on the ground
beſide him.
The baggage being placed in order ready for an
early march, the ſoldiers and officers were retired to
reſt. O'Neil had, as uſual, thrown his blanket over
his maſter (as he delighted to call him) and the air
being more than uſually ſharp, he found it impoſſible
to ſleep. He aroſe, and raking together the dying embers
of a fire by which they had dreſſed their ſupper,
began to re-kindle it. As he was thus employed, he
thought he heard a ruſtling amongſt the trees; and
turning half round, perceived, by the ſaint light the
fire caſt around, the faces of two Indians peeping from
behind a large tree. He gave a loud cry; the Indians
uttered the war whoop; a ſcene of confuſion and
horror enſued, and in a few moments part of the little
corps were ſlain, the reſt wounded and made priſoners.
Amongſt the latter was our hero, and his faithful
adherent, Patrick O'Neil.
CHAP. XIII.
Another Viſit to ſavage Habitations. There had, ſome little time previous to this
event, been ſeveral of the Indian chiefs taken
priſoners by the Europeans, and it was to this circumstance
thoſe, who were taken priſoners by the natives,
owed the preſervation of their lives, as the ſavages entertained
hopes that by means of theſe they might
procure the liberty of their captured brethren.
Their route lay acroſs the country, and before they
had reached their place of deſtination, a very heavy
[Page 292]
fall of ſnow rendered the woods almoſt impenetrable;
but the Indians, inured from their infancy to cold,
hunger, every ſpecies of hardſhip, felt little or no inconvenience
from the ſeverity of the ſeaſon, whilſt the
Europeans ſunk under their accumulated ſufferings;
and of twelve who were taken priſoners, ſeven died by
the way.
Reuben had been ſlightly wounded, and O'Neil had
received a ſcratch, as he called it, in endeavouring to
preſerve his maſter, from the tomahawk of an Indian.
But Reuben was by nature intrepid, and O'Neil was
callous to every calamity that affected only himſelf.
They mutually comforted and ſupported each other,
and were amongſt the few who ſurvived at the end of
their weariſome, pedeſtrain journey.
The morning after their arrival at the Indian settlement,
the five ſurviving captives were preſented to the
ſachem, Wampoogohoon. His wigwam was larger
and more commodious than thoſe of his ſubjects. It
was well lined with ſkins of various wild beaſts, and
on a kind of throne, covered with the ſame materials,
ſat the ſachem. At his left hand ſat a woman, whoſe
complexion ſpoke her of European deſcent, and behind
them ſtood a young female, in appearance about seventeen
years old. Her ſkin was a ſhade darker than
that of the woman's; her eyes were of that kind of
dark grey, which may almoſt be termed blue, and yet,
from the ſhade of long black eyelaſhes, may ſometimes
be miſtaken for black. Their expreſſion was at once
ſoft and animated, and her dark auburn hair, which
did not really curl, but hung in waves down her back
and over her ſhoulders, was ornamented with a few
glaſs beads, and a tuft of ſcarlet feathers, ſancifully
arranged, and not entirely devoid of taſte. The reſt
of her dreſs, though greatly ſimilar to the other women,
had a ſomething of delicacy, in its formation and
method of being put on, that was particularly pleaſing
to Europeans. Her figure was above the middle
ſize, yet not robuſt enough to be thought maſculine,
though every feature glowed with ruddy health, every
limb diſplayed the ſtrength and firmneſs of her frame.
[Page 293]
She ſtood with her right hand leaning on the ſachem's
ſhoulder, in her left ſhe held an unbraced bow, and a
quiver full of arrows was ſlung acroſs her back.
Wampoogohoon received the captives with a kind
of ſullen dignity. He ſpoke to them in very bad English,
but they underſtood ſufficient to comprehend
that he mean to detain them till the captured Indians
were returned in ſafety.
During the time he was ſpeaking, Reuben looked
attentively at the two women, who from their places,
and the univerſal reſpect paid them, he concluded
were the wife and daughter of the chief. The pensiveness
manifeſt in the countenance of the elder, the beauty
and majeſty of the younger, awakened in his boſom
a wiſh to be acquainted with their ſtory; for he was
certain they were of European extraction, though of
what nation he could not determine, as they had neither
of them ſpoke.
At length, when the conference was ended, and the
ſachem waved his hand for them to depart, his wife
aroſe, and ſpoke to him in the Mohawk tongue. Reuben
perceived, from the ſoft tone of her voice and her
earneſt manner, that it was a ſupplication. He answered,
but not with the gentleſt accent; ſhe laid her
hand on his arm, and repeated her requeſt, in which
ſhe was joined by Eumea, his daughter. He looked
irreſolute for a moment, then ſeeming to acquieſce in
their demands, arofe from his ſeat, and taking his bow
and arrows, was followed by his attendants out of the
wigwam.
The two intereſting females now came forward,
and the eldeſt, whoſe name was Victoire, addreſſed our
hero in very tolerable French:
“Stranger, I am ſorry for your captivity, though
my ſituation amongſt theſe Indians makes me appear
your enemy. Yourſelf and companions are no doubt
ſurpriſed, to ſee a perſon of my complexion ſo intimately
connected with one of theirs; my ſtory may
be told in a few words. My mother, a native of
France, being of a proteſtant family, and apprehending
perſecution, emigrated to this new-found world,
[Page 294]
in company with her huſband, a man of ſtrict piety
and principles. Their portion of worldly goods was
not large; they purchaſed a wild, uncultivated ſpot
upon the borders of the Allegany, and by five years
of indeſatigable labour, rendered their little hut and
ſurrounding garden, together with one field, tolerably
comfortable; but juſt when they began to taſte ſome
ſmall degree of happineſs, which would ſearcely have
deſerved the name, but by being contraſted with the
exceſs of hardſhip they had endured in clearing and
rendering their little demeſne fit for cultivation; then,
at the moment when they hoped to reap the reward of
their labours, a party of Mohawks came down upon
them, rifled and deſtroyed their dwelling, murdered
my father and two little brothers, and carried my
wretched mother and myſelf, then only a year old, into
captivity.”
Victoire pauſed; ſhe ſeemed affected; a tear glistened
in the expreſſive eyes of Eumea. At length the
former proceeded:—
“My mother was a convincing proof of the exceſs
of miſery the human mind can ſuffer; ſhe ſurvived
the loſs of a huſband tenderly beloved, and two children.
I was her comfort, her ſtay, which held her to
this world; for my ſake ſhe bore captivity without
murmuring, for my ſake ſhe wiſhed and ſtrove to preserve
her exiſtence; ſhe lived till I was fourteen years
old, and gave me every inſtruction which memory furnished,
for ſhe had no aſſiſtance from books. She instilled
into my young mind a knowledge and love of
a ſupreme, benignant Being, and taught me to place my
whole dependence on him, whoſe goodneſs was equal
to his power.
“Wampoogohoon was the youngeſt ſon of the sachem,
who at that time governed this tribe; he offered
me his protection. My mother, in a dying ſtate,
rather than leave me expoſed to inſult, adviſed me to
accede to his propoſal, and I became his wife. His
father and brothers are ſince dead, and you behold
him a chief of the Mohawks. He is not unkind to
me, and as the father of my children, I feel an
[Page 295]
affection for him. Eumea is the only ſurviving child I
have of ſix; for her ſake, I wiſh for ſome intercourſe
with the Europeans, that her mind, which is not a barren
ſoil, may receive the culture of education. To
this end, I have requeſted my huſband to permit you
to have a wigwam to yourſelves, where you may dwell
in quiet, till we hear of the ſafety of thoſe Indians who
have been detained by your party. In return, I only
requeſt you to exert your abilities to inſtruct, in your
language, cuſtoms, manners and religion, my child
Eumea.”
Saying this, ſhe preſented the Indian maid to Reuben,
who aſſured Victoire he would do all in his power
to return the obligation ſhe had conferred.
He was then, with his companions, ſhewn to a habitation
that wore a trifling appearance of comfort; in
it were three or four bear ſkins, a quantity of clean
dry ſtraw, ſome dried fiſh, veniſon and maize, and
without was plenty of fuel.
Here our hero indulged himſelf in reflection; and
often would his thoughts revert to his grandfather,
William Dudley, who was for many years in a situation
ſomewhat ſimilar. But Reuben had ſeen too much
of ſavage men and manners to have a wiſh to remain
amongſt them, even though he might have been elevated
to the higheſt ſeat of dignity.
It was at once a comfort and amuſement to Reubeh,
that he was obliged, for ſeveral hours every day,
to employ his mind, in order to cultivate that of his
pupil Eumea. He contrived, by boiling the ſhumak
berries, to make a liquid with which he could write on
white birch bark. In this manner, he made an alphabet,
which ſhe preſently learnt; and ſeeming to delight
in attending to his inſtructions, he experienced a
double ſatisfaction in endeavouring to expand and inform
her underſtanding. She was ſoon able to read
ſhort ſentences, which he compoſed for her; his hand
being generally employed, and his mind often totally
occupied in ſtriving to recollect what might be of the
moſt ſervice to his lovely ſcholar, he had little time for
reflection.
[Page 296]
O'Neil laboured inceſſantly to keep their dwelling
warm and tight; and ſometimes he went out with his
gun, and brought home ſome kind of game which
ſerved to diverſiſy their ſcanty repaſts; and often Victoire
would accompany her daughter to their wigwam,
and on thoſe occaſions generally carried ſomething
which they thought a delicacy, ſuch as noa-cake,
omanny, or ſuccataſh, viands compoſed of maize and
dried beans; and thus wore away a very long and intensely
ſevere winter. Reuben had been a priſoner
above ſix months, and yet no news had arrived that
could raiſe his hopes of ſpeedy liberation; and we
muſt leave him amongſt theſe children of nature, and
return to our heroine, whom we left married to Hamden
Auberry, but living in the vicinity of Mary-lebone,
under the aſſumed name of Dacres.
CHAP. XIV.
Scandal—Separation—Jealouſy. It has been already remarked, that Rachel had as
little curioſity in her compoſition as any woman
exiſting: ſhe was alſo by nature of a retired, quiet
turn of mind, though eaſily led into ſcenes of dissipation,
in which, as ſhe generally mixed to gratify others,
ſhe took but little ſatisfaction. She therefore
ſpent the chief of her time at home, either employed
at her needle, or reading. Hamden was fond of music;
he had procured her a ſpinnet and a maſter. She
had a conſiderable taſte for drawing; Hamden was
a proficient in the art; he directed and improved her
judgment; pointed out proper ſubjects for the exerciſe
of her genius, and with her book, her pencil, her necdle,
muſic, and ſome few domeſtic concerns, ſhe ſo
ſweetly diverſified her time, that not one moment
hung heavy on her hands. Indeed, Rachel had, from
her childhood, been taught that moſt uſeful, and to
thoſe who practiſe it, that moſt pleaſant of all leſſons,
[Page 297]
conſtant employment; that it is better to be engaged
in trifling purſuits (if innocent) than ſuffer the mind
to ſink into inanity for want of exerciſe.
Hamden remained in London about a month or ſix
weeks after their marriage. He then left her to return
to his aunt, who was ſtill in Scotland; and at the
time he bade his dear Rachel adieu, he purpoſed returning
to her within the ſpace of two months.
After the departure of her huſband, our heroine
continued the ſame regular courſe of life. But calumny,
who has a hundred ears, a thouſand eyes, and ten
thouſand tongues, not one of which is ever ſuffered to
ſlumber for an inſtant, could not permit her to enjoy
her favourite and inoffenſive employment unmoleſted.
Though Rachel had imagined that the uniform tenor
of her conduct was ſuch, as might defy even the
prying eyes of malice and envy, yet ſhe felt there
was ſomething wrong in her appearance. She went
by an aſſumed name; yet, confident that ſhe was in
reality the wife of Aubevry ſhe alſo felt that though
ſhe had tranſgreſſed the bounds of prudence, ſhe had
ſtrictly adhered to the rules of virtue and morality;
and this internal aſſurance gave her great comfort.
And when retiring for the night, ſhe would reflect
that her heart was in univerſal charity with all her
fellow-creatures, that her purſuits were altogether
harmleſs, and in ſome degree laudable; a ſweet serenity
would diffuſe itſelf through her boſom, and offering
up her prayers for the ſafety of her beloved
Reuben, and her almoſt adored huſband, ſhe would
ſink into a ſlumber, as compoſed and refreſhing as her
own mind was pure and uncontaminated.
The heart that is itſelf a ſtranger to guilt ſuſpects
it not in another. Such was the heart of Rechel;
without enthuſiaſm pious, without oftentation charitable,
and innatcly virtuous, without an idea that there
was any particular merit in being ſo; ſince, without
being inſenſible to the inevitable miſery that muſt and
ever will follow the forfeiture of that ineſtimable jewel,
chaſtity, ſhe wondered how ſo many heedleſs women
fell into an error ſo repugnant to her own feelings.
[Page 298]
As Major Auberry was certain he could not remain
long with his wife, when he ſecured her a handſome and
convenient place of reſidence, he was not forgetful of the
pleaſure that would naturally reſult from a companion
of her own ſex being under the ſame roof with her. In his
ſearch after lodgings or a ready furniſhed houſe, chance
directed him to Mrs. Varnice, the widow of an attorney,
whoſe pride would not ſuffer her to leave the houſe
her huſband had engaged but a ſhort time before his
death, and who would, to ſupport that pride, (the real
origin of which was meanneſs, not real dignity of ſoul)
ſubmit to any thing but labour.
At the time Major Auberry applied for the upper
part of her houſe, ſhe knew him, and that his name
was not Dacres. “But he will pay me well,” ſaid
ſhe mentally; ſo ſhe concealed her knowledge, and
agreed to our heroine's becoming the miſtreſs of the
apartments.
When Rachel was firſt introduced to her, ſhe observed
her lovely, majeſtic form, and ſweetly intersting
countenance. Mrs. Varnice was ſhort, rather too
much em bon point , dark complexioned, and on the
wrong ſide of forty; but her eyes, which were of jetty
hue, and whoſe brilliancy ſhe endeavoured to increaſe
by an artful tinge of rouge on her high cheek-bones,
were animated and expreſſive, and ſhe was not without
hope that ſome future conqueſt might ſecure to her
a ſecond matrimonial eſtabliſhment. To ſuch a woman,
the firſt appearance of our heroine was by no
means prepoſſeſſing.
“She is certainly handſome (ſaid ſhe, on the day
Rachel took poſſeſſion of her new lodgings) ſhe is
handſome, I muſt own; but your pretty women have
ſeldom much to recommend them beſides their beauty.”
This remark was made to a poor relation, who
was dependent on Mrs. Varnice for bread; an unfortunate
being, who, from want of education, and extreme
poverty, poſſeſſed a mind as abject as her circumstances.
Education, ſpirit of light, being of the firſt order,
who in thy right hand doſt hold a magic mirror,
[Page 299]
displaying to the aſtoniſhed ſenſe of youth the wondrous,
faſcinating charms of nature; who, ſtill receding as
we purſue, yet ſtill diſplaying ſomething ſtrange and
charming, inviteſt the admiring pupil ſtill to follow;
whoſe left hand holds a tablet, on which is written all
that was learnt from thy inſtructive mirror; who as
thou paſſeſt, giving place to age, who hangs his head
and droops that thou canſt charm no more, preſenteſt
the tablets, whence fond memory gleans ſomething to
cheer the laſt cold eve of life, and being tranſmitted
to the riſing age, incite them to attend thy earlieſt call,
follow thee through thy moſt intricate labyrinths, that,
as thou doſt aſcend the hill of fame, holding before
them ſtill the inſtructive glaſs, each riſing age may
take a higher ſtep, till frail humanity ſtands on thy
ſummit:—Education, thou firſt, beſt gift that mortals
can receive; thoſe who know thee not, conceiving not
thy intrinſic value, ſlight thee, condemn thee, treat thee
with contempt; but they who feel thy influence, benignant
power, will revere thee, worſhip thee, and
court thy ſmiles, humbly entreating that the riſing
age might fully comprehend and taſte thy beauties.
Rachel had received a good, though not a brilliant
education; her mind was therefore free from prejudice.
Mrs. Varnice and her couſin Lettuce were totally
uncultivated, and ſuperſtition and prejudice were
eaſily admitted and encouraged. The former of theſe
women, therefore, concluded our heroine to be a deluded
victim to inexperience and affection. She
thought the infatuation (as ſhe called it) of Hamden
would not laſt long, and wiſely imagined, by paying
the moſt marked attention to him, by giving up her
own opinion whenever it was in oppoſition to his, and
in a hundred different forms, which ſhe conceived to
be the height of complaiſance, but which to Auberry
himſelf appeared to have partook more of abject servility,
to ſupplant her in his good opinion; however,
as he imagined her, in the main, a good-natured,
inoſſenſive woman, he encouraged her advances
to an intimacy with Rachel. He knew the
purity of our heroine's mind, and native good ſenſe
[Page 300]
would prevent her receiving any ill impreſſions, or contracting
any low ideas from converſing with a woman
every way ſo infinitely her inferior, and at the ſame
time thought her knowledge of the world might guard
the inexperienced Rachel from impoſitions.
If the firſt fight of our heroine awakened in the bosom
of Mrs. Varnice the malignant fiend envy, her
manners and converſation aſſiſted to heighten it, and
in leſs than a fortnight Mrs. Varnice pronounced her
to be proud, conceited, fooliſh, in ſhort, every thing
that was the direct oppoſite to her real diſpoſition.
Yet ſhe concealed her opinion, and would take opportunities
to admire her underſtanding, praiſe her ſhape,
her complexion, even the tone of her voice. Rachel
was not greedy of flattery; but where is the human
being that can at all times turn a deaf ear to its adulating
voice, or ſteel their hearts to its inſinuating
qualities?
When Anberry left his wife to go to his aunt in
Scotland, Mrs. Varnice had not an idea that he meant
to return, and felt ſomewhat mortified that all her arts
to attract his notice had proved ineffectual; but as ſhe
found it would be to no uſe to repine, ſhe turned her
thoughts to what advantage might be made of our
heroine.
The parting between Major Auberry and his lady
had been extremely painful on both ſides. Rachel's
heart ſunk within her, and as the chaiſe drove from
the door, her emotions became ſo violent, that Mrs.
Varnice was obliged to lead her into her own parlour,
and give her a glaſs of drops and water.
“Come, come, my dear Madam,” ſaid ſhe, as Rachel
endeavoured to ſuppreſs her tears, “you muſt
not give way to this immoderate ſorrow; Mr. Dacres,
I dare ſay, will ſoon come back again; I ſuppoſe he
is not gone very far.”
“Four hundred miles,” ſaid Rachel, “appears to
me an immenſe diſtance; and I know not how to account
for it, but I feel ſuch an oppreſſion at my heart,
it ſeems as though I had beheld him for the laſt time,
and yet I know he will return as early as poſſible.”
[Page 301]
“O! to be ſure he will; he promiſed to come back
ſoon, did not he?”
“He will come as ſoon as he can, I know; but the
length of his ſtay does not depend entirely on himſelf.
However, he has promiſed I ſhould hear from him
very often, and I ſhall count the moments with impatience
till I can hope to receive a letter. I have been
very troubleſome to you, Madam,” continued ſhe,
riſing to quit the parlour; “pray pardon my childiſh
behaviour; I will retire and endeavour to attain fortitude
to bear this firſt (and I hope in Heaven it will
be the laſt) ſeparation.”
Her eyes filled again as ſhe ſpoke, and courteſying
haſtily, ſhe repaired to her own apartment; and having
diſburthened her heart by giving a free courſe to
her tears, ſhe compoſed her ſpirits; and aſſerting that
underſtanding which was ever ready at her call, ſhe
began to employ herſelf on a piece of embroidery, the
pattern for which was drawn by Hamden; from that
ſhe went to her ſpinnet, and played as well as ſhe could
a trifling air which he had taught her. Theſe employments
amuſed and ſoothed her. She became composed,
and determined, during this enforced and painful
abſence, to occupy herſelf in acquiring thoſe accomplishments
which ſhe knew would be moſt agreeable
to her huſband. Every trace of the primitive puritan
was now entirely aboliſhed, except that ſhe was
extremely neat in her dreſs, and ſimple in her manners.
She followed faſhion as far as ſhe thought it
conſiſtent with propriety, but no farther; and though
ſtrangers would pronounce her perfectly elegant at
the firſt glance, were they to ſcrutinize the ſeveral articles
that compoſed her apparel, they would be at a
loſs to ſay what particularly conſtituted that elegance.
In ſhort, Rachel was the kind of woman who gives
taſte and faſhion to every thing ſhe wears, however
plain its formation, however common the materials of
which it is made.
The ſtate of her mind, after the departure of her
huſband was ſuch, as precluded every idea of ſeeking
ſociety during the day. She attempted, but the
[Page 302]
attempt was vain, to partake of a meal which the care
of Lettuce had provided (for Lettuce had performed
the office of attendant on the perſon of our heroine
from the firſt day of her reſidence in the houſe of Mrs.
Varnice); but towards evening ſhe began to reflect,
that the ſolicitude and attention of her hoſteſs demanded
ſome return; ſhe therefore requeſted ſhe would
come and take tea in her apartment.
It was now the middle of October, and the twilight
at that period ſoon cloſes; it was ſix o'clock, when
the tea things were placed on the table; a cheerful
fire illumined the hearth, two wax candles lent their
rays to enliven the ſcene, the windows were cloſed,
the curtains let down, and perfect ſilence reigned in
the apartments. The houſe was as retired as though
twenty miles from London, and not a ſound interupted
the tranquillity of the ſurrounding ſcene, ſave now
and then the rattle of a ſolitary carriage paſſing to and
from the environs of the city.
If there is a moment in which the human mind is
more inclined to unbend, and place an unlimited confidence
in thoſe who profeſs a friendſhip, it is, when
fully comprehending the charms of ſolitude, we find
that ſolitude may be enlivened by being participated
by one who enters into all our feelings, and ſmiles or
weeps as the colour of our fate or expreſſion of our
ſentiments excites the oppoſite emotions. Such was
the moment we have juſt deſcribed, nor was our heroine
inſenſible to its influence.
“I am glad to ſee you ſo much recovered,” ſaid
Mrs. Varnice, ſeating herſelf at the tea-table, and
drawing the tea-board towards her, which Lettuce
had juſt brought in; “ſhall I ſave you the trouble and
make the tea?”
Rachel acknowledged her goodneſs, and acquieſced
in the propoſal.
“I ſuppoſe Mr. Dacres,” ſaid ſhe with a ſigh, “is
now many miles diſtant from me; and ſuppoſe he
writes at the firſt poſt town, when may I expect to
hear from him?”
“That I cannot tell,” ſaid the artful Mrs. Varnice,
“unleſs I knew what road he took.”
[Page 303]
“The High North-road.”
“Well, you may hear from him ſooner, but I do not
imagine he will write till he gets to York. He is a
beautiful man,” taking a miniature in her hand that
hung by a ribbon round Rachel's neck, “a very handsome
man indeed; and I think there is ſomething in
your countenances very much alike, very much indeed,
juſt about the eyes and the mouth; that pretty
dimple, juſt at the left corner. Well, you were certainly
relations.”
“No indeed, we were not, I never ſaw him till
within eight months of our union.”
“Indeed! Well, I could have ſworn you had been
couſins. Where were you married, in London?”
“In Weſtminſter.”
“In Weſtminſter? what at the Abbey?”
“No.”
“At St. James's Church?”
“No.”
“Oh! you were married at St. Margaret's?”
“No, I was not.”
“Bleſs me, then what church was it?”
“Pardon me, I am not at liberty to ſay.”
Mrs. Varnice ſmiled. “Ah! I underſtand now;
it was a ſtolen match?”
“Not entirely ſo.”
“What, I ſuppoſe your friends knew it?”
“I have no friends in England.”
“None?”
“No, not one. I have a brother, a dear, respectable,
worthy brother; but he is in America.”
“In America? Dear me; what all amongſt the
blacks and the wild Indians?”
Rachel could not ſuppreſs an inclination to ſmile,
whilſt ſhe anſwered, “No, Madam, amongſt the European
ſettlers, who have, within the laſt century, emigrated
into the new world, which I underſtand is a
fertile continent extending from north to ſouth, and
conſtituting one entire quarter of the habitable globe.”
“And ſo, your brother is gone over ſea to thoſe
ſtrange parts. And what could tempt him to leave
dear little England?”
[Page 304]
“To inquire after property my father left there.”
“Dear well, how odd! And ſo your father died
abroad.”
“No, he was loſt on his paſſage home, even when
in ſight of his native ſhores.”
“Oh dear! how unfortunate! So you have no
friends in London?”
“In London? No, nor in England, except my husband.”
“Dear me! Well, I hope he will prove a faithful,
good huſband to you.”
“I have no doubt of his faith or tenderneſs.”
“Oh dear no! I dare ſay not; though men are
ſtrange, inconſtant beings, will profeſs much without
meaning any thing, marry women under aſſumed
names, and never care for them after a little while.”
“There may have been ſuch things,” ſaid Rachel;
“but for the honour of human nature, I could wiſh
not to believe them poſſible till my ſenſes convince
me.”
“Sweet innocent! I wiſh you may never be convinced,”
ſaid Mrs. Varnice pointedly.
This exclamation awakened ſomething in the boſom
of Rachel, that could not rightly be termed either jealousy
or curioſity, but it was a mixture of both; and
the artful Varnice led her on, till ſhe had gleaned from
Rachel (only that names were concealed) every circumstance
relating to herſelf, her brother and her
huſband.
After a day or two paſt in that kind of uncomfortable,
unconnected manner, which every perſon of sensibility
muſt have experienced when ſeparated from the
choſen friend of their hearts, Rachel began again to
reſume her uſual avocations. Her needle employed
the earlieſt hours of morning, after which ſhe dreſſed,
and walked into the fields for air and exerciſe. Her
dinner paſt, ſhe employed the intermediate hours between
that and evening with a book, her pencil, or a
leſſon on her ſpinnet; and the evenings were uſually
paſſed in reading to, converſing and working, or playing
picquet with, Mrs. Varnice.
[Page 305]
But during this period, it muſt not be imagined
that ſhe was entirely forgotten by her quondam friends,
the Webſters. They had been indefatigable in their
inquiries, till they found out her lodgings, and hearing
that ſhe went by the name of Dacres, they were persuaded
that ſhe had forgot the reſpect due to herſelf,
and become the miſtreſs of Hamden Auberry.
Mr. Spriggins, though at firſt mortified and disappointed
by her ſudden departure from his aunt's houſe,
ſoon found conſolation, by transferring his devoirs to
his eldeſt couſin, by whom they were very favourably
received; and an old uncle having left him a decent
houſe, ſhop and ſtock in trade, in a market town in
Northumberland, he ſoon obtained the aſſent of Mrs.
Webſter, and took her fair daughter, to ſhine forth in
all the airs and finery of a London bride, and to ſet
the faſhions for three months to come, to all the tradesmen's
wives and daughters in a little country town.
His ſhop too was newly painted and decorated in the
London ſtyle, and Mr. Spriggins himſelf was ſo polite,
ſo obliging, that he ſoon attracted a large number
of cuſtomers.
Beginning the world thus, not only without embarrassments,
but with a ſmall ſum of ready money in
hand, this young couple found, in a very ſhort time,
that they were in a fair way to accumulate a fortune.
The wife, though proud, vain, and fond of finery, was
meanly parſimonious, and would ſtint her family in
neceſſaries, in order to buy a finer gown, or give a
more expenſive treat than her neighbours. Belle
Webſter was ſent for to be her companion, and ſet
her cap at ſome of the ſmart young men, in hopes of
an eſtabliſhment for life; while little Polly was left to
aſſiſt and conſole her mother for the loſs of her two
eldeſt daughters.
When Hamden Auberry reached his uncle's ſeat,
he was received with ſuch affectionate tokens of joy
by lady Anne, that he was almoſt tempted, in that
moment of tenderneſs, to throw himſelf on her mercy,
and confeſs his marriage. Happy had it been, both
for himſelf and our heroine, had he followed the
[Page 306]
impulse; but he took time to conſider, and that falſe
pride, which was his only foible, repreſented to him,
that he was ſecure of the perſon and heart of Rachel,
bound to her by the moſt irrevocable vows; he hazarded
nothing, therefore, by longer concealment. But
to avow his engagements with a woman in reſpect to
rank and fortune ſo diametrically oppoſite to what lady
Anne deſired, might forfeit her regard forever;
nay, this very pride flattered him that it was for the
ſake of his wife he ſtill wiſhed to conceal their union,
and that the wealth and conſequence in lady Anne's
power to beſtow were only valued by him, as, by possessing
them, he could elevate the woman of his choice
to a rank ſhe was born to adorn. Alas! this was
falſe reaſoning; it was in reality an unwillingneſs to
give up the reſpect, the parade, the eaſe and conveniencies,
wealth is ever certain to inſure.
Two days after his arrival in Scotland, the family
were ſurpriſed by the ſudden and unexpected appearance
of lady Lucy. The tour to the continent had
been ſhortened by an untoward incident, and ſhe having,
on her return, landed at Harwich, ſhe proceeded
immediately north, without going to London. Lady
Anne was not diſpleaſed by the return of her niece;
ſhe looked upon Hamden as the certain ſucceſſor to
the title and eſtates of his late grandfather, but ſhe
thought a union with lady Lucy might by no means
retard the completion of her wiſhes, which were to ſee
him at the head of her family.
It was the evening after the arrival of this lady,
that, ſitting in a family way with only her aunt and cousin,
and diverting them with her vivacity and innocent
prattle, when, turning ſuddenly to Hamden, ſhe cried,
“Oh! by the bye, Coz, how does your pretty Quaker
girl do?”
Hamden's face was but a trifle paler than his coat.
He heſitated, attempted to anſwer; but finding himself
at a loſs for words, affected a laugh.
“You may laugh,” cried ſhe, “but I declare I
thought her very pretty.”
[Page 307]
“Who are you ſpeaking of?” ſaid lady Anne,
fixing her eyes on the glowing face of Hamden.
“Oh! he knows,” continued the thoughtleſs girl,
“and now I have the ſcene full in my mind, I'll tell
you, aunt. You muſt know we went to the play.—”
“Nay, dear Lucy,” ſaid Hamden, gaily catching
her hand, “how can you remember ſuch ridiculous
trifles?”
“Your ſervant, couſin Hamden; it was no trifle
at the time. Now, aunt, I'll tell you how it was.
Between the play and farce, I had obſerved a very
pretty, intereſting Quaker, who ſat in the pit looking
very earneſtly at Mr. Hamden. I ſuppoſe ſhe had
ſeen him before. Eh, couſin?—Well, dear aunt, the
houſe was very full, and the pretty Quaker fainted;
when behold ye, my gentleman here takes a leap over
the front of the box, and ruſhing through the crowd,
flew to her aſſiſtance. But if you had ſeen when ſhe
recovered—”
“A little moderation, if you pleaſe, lady Lucy,”
cried Hamden, eagerly interrupting her; “you paint
the ſcene in ſuch lively colours, that my aunt will suppose
the bagatelle of conſequence.”
“And your manner, Hamden, does not contradict
the ſuppoſition,” ſaid lady Anne pointedly. “Pray
who was this fainting damſel?”
“It was a Miſs Dudley,” ſaid Hamden, in a hurried
accent; “I was introduced to her when I laſt visited
my mother.”
“Indeed!” ſaid lady Anne, ſarcaſtically.
“Yes, ſhe was a great favourite of my mother's;
but I underſtand ſhe is lately married to an old crony
of mine, one Dacres. I am ſure, aunt, you muſt remember
what friends Tom Dacres and I were when
boys.”
“And are you friends now?” ſaid Lucy with a
half ſmile and a ſly glance at her aunt.
Lady Anne was ſtruck with the evident embarrassment
of Hamden; ſhe therefore put an end to the
converſation by riſing and deſiring him to attend her
to her cloſet. Here a converſation enſued, which
[Page 308]
convinced Auberry, that the moment his aunt ſhould be
aſſured of his having formed a family connexion with
our heroine, would be the laſt of her favour.
“I muſt diſſemble longer,” ſaid he. Alas! dissimulation
is ſeldom neceſſary, can never be laudable,
and was in this caſe deſpicable.—But we will return
to our heroine.
The firſt ſix weeks of her huſband's abſence ſhe bore
with tolerable patience; when a month more paſſed
over, and no hope of his return, ſhe murmured at the
delay; but when, at laſt, week after week glided on,
and Auberry did not appear, ſhe began to deſpond.
Mrs Varnice was not ſurpriſed; it was what ſhe had
expected. She by flow and almoſt imperceptible degrees
endeavoured to undermine the principles of our
heroine; but Rachel, though not quick at diſcerning
evil (becauſe almoſt a ſtranger to its baneful qualities)
at laſt diſcovered her aim, and repulſed her with the
ſcorn ſhe merited.
But innocence is ever inadequate to oppoſe, with any
degree of ſucceſs, the united powers of envy and cunning.
In revenge for the contempt with which ſhe
had been treated, Mrs. Varnice ſuppreſſed the next
letter with which Lettuce was entruſted to carry to
the poſt, opened, read it, and committed it to the fire.
By the tenor of this letter, ſhe comprehended that Rachel
fully believed herſelf the wife of Auberry; but this
ſhe knew before, and inwardly laughed at what ſhe
ſuppoſed to be the credulity of a fond, unſuſpecting
girl.
Having once began to interrupt the correſpondence,
ſhe did not heſitate the next poſt-night to make Lettuce
keep watch at the ſtreet door, and prevent the
rap of the poſt-man, which would have immediately
called our heroine down ſtairs. The ſtratagem succeeded;
ſhe took the expected letter from the postman's
hand, paid the poſtage, and retired to her own
apartment to read it.
It has often been ſaid, that envy is its own puniſher,
and in this caſe the adage was completely verified; for
when from this letter ſhe diſcovered that Hamden
[Page 309]
really was, and freely acknowledged himſelf, the husband
of our heroine, her heart overflowed with rancour,
and ſhe determined to heſitate at nothing which
might be likely to poiſon the happineſs of one ſhe at
once envied and hated.
One act of guilt leads but to the commiſſion of another;
it is in vain the human heart may think only
this one little deviation, and I will ſtop. As the ball
precipitated from the ſummit of a hill pauſes not, but
ruſhes with amazing velocity till it reaches the very
loweſt part of the vale beneath, ſo the human ſoul,
giving way to temptation, ſinks from error into guilt,
nor pauſes till plunged in the loweſt abyſs of depravity.
Another and another letter from Hamden was opened
by Mrs. Varnice, whilſt thoſe from Rachel (whoſe
heart now began to throb with fear, doubt, and a
thouſand anxieties, which none but thoſe who are
united to, and ſuffering an early ſeparation from, the
man of their choice can conceive) ſuffered the ſame
fate. At length one arrived incloſing a bank bill for
a hundred pounds. At the ſight of it, Mrs. Varnice
turned pale; fear was the firſt emotion of her boſom.
But not even Lettuce was privy to the receipt of this
letter. Mrs. Varnice was not very economical; a
hundred pounds would relieve her from ſome few embarrassments.
She looked at it, pauſed for a moment,
at length, committing the letter to the fire, ſhe deposited
the note in her pocket-book, and on the enſuing
morning exchanged it at a ſilk mercer's where ſhe purchased
a gown of roſe-coloured tabby.
This note would have been very acceptable to Rachel;
for ſhe began to be ſenſible of the decreaſe of
her finances, and to experience the ſolicitude and pleasing
cares of maternal tenderneſs; and to prepare for
the reception of a little ſtranger, ſhe had nearly exhausted
the whole of the money Hamden had given
her at parting.
It cannot be ſuppoſed that the mind of Hamden
was in a much eaſier ſtate than that of our heroine;
but as he was now on a party of pleaſure with his uncle,
lady Anne and lady Lucy, making excurſions
[Page 310]
from one part of Scotland to another, and ſtaying but
a few days in each place, he reconciled himſelf to not
hearing from his wife, under the idea that her letters
might not follow him as he directed, and that he ſhould
get them all together when he returned to Glaſgow.
But when he returned, and found not a ſingle letter
waiting for him, he felt the utmoſt impatience, and
would have ſet off immediately for London, but that
his aunt was attacked with an alarming fever, and to
leave her at ſuch a period, would be the height of ingratitude.
She lingered long, and even when pronounced
out of danger, ſtill hovered as it were on the
brink of the grave for many weeks, and at length
change of climate was ordered as the only chance of
perfect reſtoration.
Hamden, whoſe mind was now tortured almoſt beyond
ſufferance, finding that he ſhould be obliged to
attend his aunt to Liſbon, whilſt preparations were
making for the voyage, diſpatched his confidential servant
to London, to make inquiries for and bear remittances
to our heroine. Though this man may juſtly
be termed confidential, yet ſo fearful had Hamden
been of having his marriage known, that even he was
not entruſted with the ſecret, and Rachel was humiliated
even in the eyes of her huſband's ſervant. But
her manners were ſuch as had ever ſecured reſpect from
James, and the honeſt fellow, often when he thought
of her ſituation, pitied her, and blamed his maſter.
Nearly ſeven months had now elapſed ſince the marriage
of our heroine, above five of which ſhe had been
ſeparated from her huſband, and half of that period
had paſſed in the continual diſtreſs of alternate expectation
and diſappointment.
“I have been deceived,” ſhe would ſay, whilſt tears
of anguiſh ſtole down her cheeks; “Hamden no longer
loves, no longer thinks of me, and, forſaken of him,
who is there in this vaſt univerſe, (for Heaven alone
can tell whether my dear brother is in exiſtence) who
then is there that cares for the unhappy Rachel? And
forlorn, forſaken, wretched as I am, I ſhall give life to
[Page 311]
a helpleſs innocent, whoſe father will perhaps bluſh to
own him.”
Rachel's days were joyleſs, and the tear of anguiſh
fell nightly on her pillow. The roſe no longer bloomed
on her cheeks, nor did the animated beam of health
and internal peace dance in her expreſſive eyes; pale,
languid, heart-broken, ſhe ſuffered in ſilence; for to
whom could ſhe complain?
Mrs. Varnice had expoſed to her, her true character,
and Rachel would not hold communication with
a woman ſhe deſpiſed. She nurſed her grief in solitude.
If ſhe endeavoured to amuſe the heavy hour,
by her pencil or muſic, every flower ſhe drew was
moiſtened by her tears, and the chords of the instrument
reverberated but the ſtrains of melancholy.
It was a fine morning in the beginning of March,
that, ſtill conſidering it a duty to uſe every method to
preſerve health, (though life was no longer valuable)
Rachel walked to the green park. It was an early
hour; ſhe did not fear being met by any one who
knew her; there were but few by whom ſhe would
be recognized, and thoſe few ſeldom viſited the park
except on a Sunday evening, to ſee and be ſeen. As
with ſlow ſtep ſhe paced along the margin of Rosamond's
Pond, ſhe was ſtartled by a voice which suddenly
exclaimed, “Heavens and earth! Miſs Dudley!”
She raiſed her eyes, and beheld Archibald
Oliver. A ſudden emotion, ſomething like ſhame,
ruſhed upon her heart; ſhe juſt articulated his name,
extended her hand towards him, and, tottering to a
ſeat that was near, ſhe ſunk on it almoſt fainting.
“Good God! my dear Miſs Dudley, to what am I
to attribute theſe emotions?”
“My name is Dacres, Sir,” ſaid Rachel; but her
voice faltered, and the carnation viſited her cheeks as
ſhe remembered her very apparent ſituation.
“You are married then?”
“Yes.”
“May you be happy, happy as you deſerve. But
why thus alone? it is not ſurely proper. Where is
Mr. Dacres?”
[Page 312]
The ſormer intimacy that had ſubſiſted between Oliver
and our heroine could alone have excuſed theſe
abrupt interrogations; but Rachel had ever considered
him as a brother, and new ties, new affections, had
made him behold her now only in the endearing light
of a ſiſter.
“My huſband is in Scotland,” ſaid Rachel, “whither
he was called by buſineſs of conſequence; but
come (continued ſhe, forcing a ſmile) if you are disengaged,
walk home with me, and I will tell you all you
wiſh to know, and in return be very inquiſitive concerning
your happineſs.”
Then, with that innocent freedom that gave a charm
to all her actions, ſhe paſſed her hand through his arm,
and they purſued their way to her lodgings, engaged
in ſuch intereſting chat, that they had reached the door
before either imagined they were half way.
During their walk, Rachel told as much of her own
ſtory as could be done without infringing the vow ſhe
had voluntarily made to Auberry never to divulge his
real name and family till authorized by him; and in
return, ſhe learnt that Oliver had experienced a very
tolerable ſhare of happineſs in his matrimonial connexions,
that his wiſe was then in town, and had juſt
made him a father. Of Jeſſy he could give her no
information, and ſince our heroine's marriage, that
young lady had declined the correſpondence of Rachel,
alleging, as ſhe no longer ſhared her conſidence, ſhe
would not intrude her letters where ſhe muſt ſuppoſe
them unwelcome. This had at the time given Rachel
much pain; but as Hamden would not allow her to
explain her ſituation to her friend, ſhe was forced to
relinquiſh a correſpondence ſo dear to her heart, and
with it all intercourſe with the only woman ſhe had
ever known whom ſhe thought really deſerved the name
of friend.
Oliver could not on that morning ſet above half an
hour with our heroine; but on the enſuing day he called,
and drank tea with her. After this, ſcarce a day
paſſed but he inquired after her health. He ſaw there
was ſomething of myſtery enveloped her; he ſaw ſhe
[Page 313]
was not happy; and though his knowledge of her
heart, underſtanding and principles made him reject
the idea whenever it intruded itſelf, he ſometimes almost
ſeared ſhe had been imprudent.
To the afflicted heart, the voice of friendſhip is a
ſoothing cordial. Rachel had not heard its adulating
ſound for ſeveral months previous to her meeting
with Oliver. She dreamt not of impropriety, and,
unconſcious of evil, dreaded not cenſure. His viſits
were always welcome, and the day paſſed drearily in
which ſhe ſaw him not.
It has been already remarked, that the greateſt and
almoſt only ſault of our heroine was a too great openness
of diſpoſition, in regard to her own circumſtances
or buſineſs; ſhe never thought of concealment, and
nothing but the moſt unbounded affection for Auberry
could have prompted her to enter into engagements
which would involve her conduct in apparent myſtery,
and oblige her to wear for a while the veil of concealment.
To Oliver, therefore, only concealing his real
name and family, ſhe was explicit in regard to her
fears for the health and life of her huſband; ſhe alſo,
without heſitation, mentioned the embarraſſed ſtate of
her ſinances. Oliver offered her money; but, though
ſhe ſought conſolation from the ſoothings of friendship,
her ſpirit roſe above pecuniary obligation. She
was grateful for the offer, but firm in her refuſal to
avail herſelf of it.
On the evening when this explanation took place,
Oliver had ſupped with Rachel, and the hoarſe voice
of the watchmen proclaiming half paſt eleven o'clock,
was the firſt thing that reminded them it was time to
break off their intereſting converſation. They had
talked of Reuben, of Jeſſy, and the doubtful ſate of
thoſe dear relatives had drawn tears from both their
eyes.
“I muſt leave you, Mrs. Dacres,” ſaid he, riſing
and taking his hat.
Rachel rang the bell; but no one anſwering, ſhe
took one of the candles from the table, and deſcended
the ſtairs to light him out.
[Page 314]
“Good night, my dear Madam,” ſaid he; “do not
come to the door, you will take cold.”
“Good night, Mr. Oliver,” ſaid Rachel; and as
he pulled the door after him, ſhe turned the key, put
the chain acroſs, and turned to re-aſcend the ſtairs,
when, to her ſurpriſe, the parlour door opened, and
Mrs. Varnice appeared.
“Bleſs me,” ſaid Rachel, “I thought you were all
in bed.”
“Oh! I dare ſay you did, and hoped it too.”
“Hoped, Madam! I neither hoped, nor cared; only
I rang the bell for Lettuce to light Mr. Oliver out,
and as ſhe did not anſwer it—”
“I would not let her anſwer it; and let me tell
you, Mrs. Dacres, (if that is your name) I think your
conduct very unwarrantable; and if you muſt have
gentlemen viſiting you in your huſband's abſence, and
ſtaying till twelve or one o'clock, you muſt get another
lodging; for I will have no ſuch goings on in
my houſe. Mr. Dacres, (as you call him) if he is
your huſband, will have no great reaſon to be pleaſed
with your conduct; and if he is not, why, my houſe
is a houſe of good repute, and the ſooner you quit it
the better.”
Petrified with aſtoniſhment, Rachel could not answer
for the ſpace of a minute; at length, reſentment
conquering her ſenſibility, ſhe replied:
“Had I ſuppoſed you entertained ſuch humiliating
ideas of me, Madam, I would not ſo long have remained
an inmate in your habitation; but, painful as
it is to me, I ſhall be neceſſitated to ſtay ſome little
time longer till I can diſcharge my account with you.
I ſhall not leave a houſe whilſt I am indebted to the
miſtreſs of it.”
“No, I'll take care of that,” ſaid Mrs. Varnice, with
a malicious grin; “I ſhall hardly let you go in my
debt when I can detain any valuable property to the
amount. But I ſhall ſay no more to-night, to-morrow
you muſt look out for another place, and pay me
how you can; for paid I will be, or you muſt take
the conſequence, and ſo good-night.”
[Page 315]
Rachel would have ſaid good-night, but the words
ſtuck in her throat; ſhe ſlightly inclined her head, and
paſſing haſtily up ſtairs, ſunk almoſt ſainting on the
neareſt ſeat. Lettuce, who had been tutored by Mrs.
Varnice, followed her up, pretended to blame her
couſin, and take the part of our heroine.
“I will not ſtay in the houſe,” ſaid Rachel, “but
how to raiſe money to pay her.”
“Dear! that would be no difficult matter,” ſaid
Lettuce, “ſo many pretty trinkets as you have! Thoſe
bracelets now—”
Rachel looked on them and ſighed.
“I cannot part with them,” ſaid ſhe, “they were
the firſt preſent I received from my huſband.”
Well, but you have ſuch a vaſt number of pretty
things, your watch and your etwee!—”
This converſation let our heroine into a ſecret with
which ſhe was before entirely unacquainted—that ſhe
could raiſe a ſum of money on theſe baubles without
entirely parting with them; and ſhe went to bed with
a full determination to quit the manſion where ſhe
had been ſo much inſulted, the enſuing morning. It
may well be ſuppoſed ſhe ſlept but little; ſhort moments
of forgetfulneſs, and thoſe interrupted by horrid
viſions, were all ſhe could obtain.
At the dawn ſhe aroſe, and ſo earneſtly did ſhe ſet
about a removal, that by twelve o'clock, ſhe had paid
the exorbitant demands of Mrs. Varnice, and was
ſeated in her new lodgings; though to accompliſh
this point ſhe had diſpoſed of almoſt every thing of value
ſhe poſſeſſed, not excepting the bracelets, for which
ſhe had expreſſed ſo much regard.
Two days after this removal, James arrived, commissioned
by his maſter to make inquiry after our heroine.
The tale told by the arch-ſiend, Mrs. Varnice,
filled his honeſt heart with horror.
“Receive the viſits of gentlemen, obliged to leave
the lodgings in which his maſter had placed her, and
go into others, on account of keeping bad hours, and
other diſorderly behaviour. Good Sirs,” ſaid James,
I can hardly believe it; ſhe was ſo good, ſo modeſt,
[Page 316]
ſo mild. It made one's heart glad to look at her; and
to hear her talk, would a made an old man young again.
Body o' me! there muſt a been ſome witchcraft uſed
to make her change ſo all of a ſudden.”
But to all James's inquiries of where ſhe was removed
to, they pleaded ignorance; and he being restricted
in the time allowed him to make the journey, could
not ſtay ſo long as he wiſhed to make inquiries in the
neighbourhood. With a heavy heart, he ſet forward
on his return to his maſter; but near Berwick, the
carriage was overſet in which he was travelling, and
his right arm broken.
Hamden, agonized almoſt to diſtraction by his long
abſence, the cauſe of which he was not acquainted
with, (as a ſever and delirium, which immediately
ſucceeded the accident, provented James from taking
any method to let his maſter know his ſituation) was
obliged to embark with his aunt, without receiving
the leaſt intelligence of the ſate of Rachel.
`She has forgotten me, ſhe repeants her union with
me,' he would ſay, `and ſeeks for an opportunity to
break thoſe engagements which I have heſitated to
announce to the world.'
In theſe moments he would be ready to reveal all
to his aunt; but the fear that Rachel no longer loved
him, or perhaps was no longer worthy of his affection
for her, always withheld him; and the voyage to Lisbon,
though in itſelf extremely pleaſant, ſeemed to
the unhappy Hamden to teem only with vexation, and
when landed, and the firſt buſtle of ſeeking a lodging,
&c. was over, he walked through the ſtreets like a discontented
ſhade; indeed, it was but the ſhadow of
Hamden Auberry, for his better part was flown to the
ſhores of Albion, where it hovered round the manſion
in which he imagined ſtill dwelt the object of his dearest
affection.
[Page 317]
CHAP. XV.
Sorrows of the Heart. Section
In the mean time, the afflictions of our heroine daily
increaſed. Oliver had left London; ſhe was
without friends and without money, and to increaſe
the ſorrows of her heart, ſhe became the mother of a
fine boy about the middle of June. Before her confinement,
ſhe entruſted her hoſteſs with the real ſtate
of her ſinances, and to retrench her expenſes, had taken
a room on the ſecond ſtory, where ſhe ſuffered in
ſilence all the miſeries of diſappointed love, added to
the poignant ſting of poverty. Once ſhe wrote to
Mrs. Auberry; had ſhe addreſſed the letter to Dr.
Lenient, ſhe had done right. But Mrs. Auberry had
received a letter from Mrs. Webſter, which had prejudiced
her againſt Rachel; ſhe therefore did not mention
to her brother that ſhe had heard from her, and
threw the letter into a draw, without deigning to give
our diſtreſſed heroine the comfort of one line in anſwer.
During her conſinement, ſhe was told by the woman
who attended her, that a very fine lady had
taken the range of apartments on the firſt floor, which
conſiſted of a dining-room, drawing-room, and bedchamber;
that ſhe had taken them only for a few
weeks, whilſt her own houſe was finiſhed and properly
furniſhed. “She is a charming lady,” ſaid the talkative
old woman, “and keeps her chariot, her own
maid and footman.”
All this intelligence appeared of ſo little consequence
to our heroine, that ſhe ſcarcely heard a syllable
of the whole harangue; but the next day, as ſhe
was paſſing from the bed to the ſofa at the other end
of the room, ſhe caſt her eyes caſually out of the window;
an elegant chariot drew up to the door, and to
her utter aſtoniſhment ſhe ſaw Mrs. Courtney deſcend
from it.
Loſt in amazement, ſhe ſat down; that her eyes
had not deceived her, ſhe was certain. To what could
[Page 318]
ſhe attribute this ſudden elevation of fortune? This
was a riddle ſhe had not power to unravel; but whatever
was the cauſe, ſhe rejoiced at the effect, and, forgetting
the coldneſs ſhe had experienced from La Varone
immediately after her marriage with Lieutenant
Courtney, conſcious only of a pleaſurable ſenſation,
to find a perſon with whom ſhe had formerly lived in
habits of intimacy ſo near her, ſhe wrote with a pencil
on a ſlip of paper,
“Dear Mrs. Courtney, your friend Rachel is again
an inmate of the manſion you inhabit, and flatters herself
you will give her the pleaſure of your company
for half an hour.”
This billet ſhe ſent by the nurſe, and in a few moments
Mrs. Courtney entered the apartment. The
attendant withdrawn, and a few common-place inquiries
paſt,
“You cannot think, my dear Madam,” ſaid our
heroine, “what real pleaſure it gives me to find Mr.
Courtney's proſpects ſo much amended, ſince your
marriage.”
“Yes, he is made a Captain; beſides, a particular
friend of mine, whom I had not ſeen for many years,
has ſettled on me a very handſome income, which
makes me quite independent.”
“How fortunate!” ſaid Rachel in the ſimplicity of
her heart. “And where is Captain Courtney?”
“Gone to India.”
“Is either of your ſiſters, or your mother-in-law in
town with you?”
“Oh dear no.”
“They are well, I hope?”
“Yes, quite well; that is, I believe ſo, for I have
heard nothing to the contrary, but I have not ſeen
them lately.”
“No?”
“No, not for theſe three months paſt. But come,
tell me, my demure friend, what changes have taken
place in your ſate ſince we parted.”
With a look of mingled confuſion and candour, in
the ſimple language of truth did Rachel explain to
[Page 319]
Mrs. Courtney every circumſtance of her marriage
and conſequent uneaſineſs, ſtill concealing the real
name of her huſband.
She ſpoke to a woman whoſe heart was impure,
and who ſcrupled not to judge of others by herſelf.
Beſides, Mrs. Courtney had been to viſit Mrs. Webster,
and had learnt from her the manner of our heroine's
departure from her houſe, and with whom it was
ſuppoſed ſhe reſided. She laughed at the affliction
Rachel appeared to experience from her huſband's
neglect, called her agony of heart ideal miſery, told
her the honey moon could not laſt forever, bid her
keep up her ſpirits, and, promifing to ſee her again in
the evening, left her. Accordingly, in the evening
ſhe again viſited her.
“I have been thinking, Mrs. Dacres,” ſaid ſhe with
a half ſmile, and looking ſidelong from under her dark
eyelaſhes, “that change of ſcene and air would be of
ſervice to you. I am going into Northumberland, to
viſit our old acquaintance, Mrs. Spriggins; what ſay
you to a jaunt? You will travel at your eaſe with me
in the chariot, Pelham will help take care of the child,
and I dare ſay the journey will not be the leſs agreeable
becauſe it will take you near the borders of Scotland.”
A tinge of carnation paſſed over the languid cheek
of Rachel, as ſhe ſaid ſhe ſhould like ſuch an excursion,
but it was not in her power to take it.
“What, for want of money, I ſuppoſe? Pſhaw!
nonſenſe! you cannot be wholly deſtitute; a triſle will
ſerve, and you ſurely wiſh to be nearer the Major than
you are at preſent.”
Rachel's heart beat quick, as ſhe attempted to reply.
Mrs. Courtney put her hand before her mouth,
“Come, don't deny it; I have found out your secret,
but I won't betray you. Perhaps, when you are
within a day's journey, he may be able to viſit you.
London is at a vaſt diſtance from the banks of the
Clyde.”
There is nothing more difficult to a perſon of natural
veracity than to be under the neceſſity of
[Page 320]
afferting a ſalſehood. Rachel ſelt the impoſſibility of doing
it, and remained ſilent. In ſhort, her innocence,
her credulity, her ardent wiſh to be near her huſband
prevailed, and ſhe conſented to accompany Mrs. Courtney
into Northumberland. But, however liable to err
from the frankneſs and candour of her temper, Rachel
had ſtill that pride of ſoul which could not condeſcend
to tell Mrs. Courtney that three guineas, and a few
clothes, conſtituted the whole of her worldly poſſeſſions.
Part of thoſe clothes, with ſome very ſine laces, were
diſpoſed of to pay the nurſe and other contingent expenses;
and with a mere trifle in her purſe, our heroine
departed with her unworthy affociate from London.
Mrs. Courtney was deceived when ſhe invited Rachel
to take, this journey with her; but it was the depravity
of her own heart had deceived her, and before
the reached Northumberland, ſhe diſcovered that the
mind of our heroine was ſtill uncontaminated, ſtill
pure, and ſhrunk from vice with diſguſt, turned from
immorality with abhorrence.
On their arrival at Mr. Spriggins's, Mrs. Courtney
was received with a profuſion of compliments, whilſt
Rachel was ſcarcely noticed. She was ſhown to an
upper apartment, and, weary as ſhe was with the journey,
ſuffered to undreſs the child herſelf, and put him
to bed. She laid him on the pillow of repoſe, and,
kneeling beſide the bed, poured forth her afflicted ſoul
to her Maker. Her cheek reſted on the ſame pillow
with that of her infant, and her tears flowed without
reſtraint. She ſelt that the pretended friendſhip of
Mrs. Courtney was only oſtentation; ſhe feared ſhe
had more to ſuſſer than ſhe ſhould be able to ſupport.
She prayed for reſignation to the will of Heaven, and
her tears continued to ſlow, not from impatience, they
were the effuſions of an afflicted ſpirit.
After a few weeks reſidence in the family of Mrs.
Spriggins, Rachel perceived that not even a ſhadow of
reſpect and attention towards herſelf remained in the
manners of the whole family. At meals, ſhe was suffered
to take the loweſt ſeat at the table, where ſhe was
ſometimes ſo totally overlooked, as not to be helped
[Page 321]
till every one elſe had begun their dinner; and then
ſhe was inſulted by an affectation of friendly familiarity,
ſuch as, “Bleſs me, Mrs. Dacres, I had forgot
you; but why don't you ſpeak? you are at home you
know.”
At theſe moments, Rachel's heart would ſwell to
her eyes, and in ſtruggling to ſuppreſs her tears, the
food ſhe attempted to ſwallow ſeemed almoſt to choak
her.
Mrs. Courtney diſagreed with and diſcharged her
woman, and the next day requeſted our heroine to riſe
from her ſeat, and fetch her work from the other end
of the room. Had Rachel been independent, ſhe
would without heſitation have complied with the request;
but Rachel was poor, and ſhe felt the requeſt
an inſult.
“I am not qualified to ſupply the place of your
ſervant, Madam,” ſaid ſhe haughtily.
“Why I do not ſuppoſe you are,” ſaid Mrs. Courtney,
yawning indolently; “but indeed, child, circumstanced
as you are, I do not know what you could do
better than endeavour to get a place; though to
be ſure your child is an objection.”
The expreſſive eyes of our heroine flaſhed indignation,
at the inſolent manner and propoſal of her oftentatious
friend; but ſhe diſdained to anſwer. `I am
not yet fallen quite ſo low as that,' thought ſhe, and
roſe to quit the apartment.
“I really am ſorry for you, child,” continued Mrs.
Courtney, detaining her, “but painful as it is for a
perſon who is ſo much intereſted for your welfare as I
am to ſpeak diſagreeable truths, I really muſt tell you,
that the haughty airs you give yourſelf are very unbecoming;
you muſt learn humility.”
“I hope I ſhall in time,” ſaid Rachel indignantly,
“if I do not, I ſhall profit but little by your endeavours.”
“Come, come, you miſunderſtand me; if you do
not incline to do ſomething for a livelihood, I really
think it would be adviſeable for you to go on to Scotland
to your huſband. I expect a friend of mine here
[Page 322]
in a few days, with whom I am going to make a tour
through the northern counties; if you chooſe to go
with me in quality of a companion, and take the care
of my clothes, aſſiſt me to dreſs and undreſs, I will
pay you twenty guineas a year; but then you muſt
leave your child here at nurſe.”
“No, Mrs. Courtney,” ſaid Rachel, “if I am obliged
to eat the the bread of ſervitude, I will earn it of strangers,
not of one who once thought herſelf honoured
in being called the friend of Rachel Dudley. I will
be the humble companion (or rather a ſlave on which
ill humour may be laviſhed with impunity) to no one.
I would gladly embrace your firſt propoſal of ſeeking
my huſband, but you know I have not the means of
proſecuting the journey, even by the cheapeſt conveyance.”
“Heavens and earth!” replied Mrs. Courtney,
with a look of well-affected ſurpriſe, “is it poſſible you
can have come into this ſtrange place without any
money? And what do you mean to do, child?”
“To be no longer troubleſome to you, Madam,”
ſaid Rachel. “I thank you, Madam,” continued ſhe,
“for the ſhelter your roof has ſo long afforded me,”
turning to Mrs. Spriggins, who had ſat a ſilent and
inſenſible ſpectatreſs of the ſcene, “but will no longer
intrude; but this very night remove to a habitation
better ſuited to my preſent humble condition.”
She then haſtily left the room. On the ſtairs ſhe
met Belle Webſter.
“What is the matter, Mrs. Dacres?” ſaid ſhe; for
the tears, which a laudable pride had reſtrained whilſt
ſhe was in the preſence of her inſolent hoſteſs and her
companion, wounded ſenſibility forced in a torrent
from her eyes the moment ſhe had ſhut the door.
“What is the matter?” ſaid Belle.
“Nothing,” replied our heroine, “only I have ſtayed
here too long.”
“Dear! I'm afraid ſiſter has been vexing you;
well, don't mind her, you know ſhe never was very
good natured.”
[Page 323]
“I do not mind either her or her aſſociate,” ſaid
Rachel; “but I wiſh to releaſe them from an unwelcome
intruder, and ſhall leave the houſe immediately.
Do me the favour, Miſs Webſter, to requeſt one of the
ſervants may take my trunk to the inn.”
“Dearee me! I hope you are not in earneſt?”
“In very earneſt, I aſſure you.”
“Well, now I'm quite ſorry.”
“I thank you, Miſs Webſter. Will you aſk the
favour I requeſt?”
“Oh! to be ſure I will; but you won't go before
tea?”
“Before another hour,” ſaid Rachel firmly.
Belle was not overburthened with underſtanding;
ſhe did not perfectly comprehend the delicacy of our
heroine's feelings, nor did ſhe give herſelf the trouble
to think much about it; ſo wiſhing her health, ſhe descended
the ſtairs, and ſent up a boy to take her trunk.
It was between four and five o'clock in the afternoon,
when Rachel, taking her dear boy in her arms, and
followed by the lad with her parcels, left the houſe of
Mr. Spriggins, and went to ſeek a lodging in a town,
to almoſt every inhabitant of which ſhe was a perfect
ſtranger. She knew that the public inns afforded
lodgings to travellers, and to one of the moſt reputable
of theſe ſhe directed her ſteps. Her purſe was but slenderly
provided, but ſhe augmented her little ſtore by
the ſale of a gold locket, the laſt thing of value which
ſhe poſſeſſed, and from which ſhe took a lock of plaited
hair; for it was the hair of Hamden Auberry, and to
her a thouſand times more precious than the metal
in which it had been enſhrined.
On the following morning, ſhe inquired after a private
lodging, and was recommended by the woman
who kept the inn, to a mean apartment in one of the
moſt unfrequented ſtreets in the town. To this humble
aſylum ſhe retired, and felt a degree of melancholy
pleaſure that ſhe could indulge her tears without
reſtraint.
It may occaſion ſome degree of ſurpriſe, that Spriggins,
who had formerly been an admirer of our
[Page 324]
heroine, would ſuffer her to leave his houſe without either
friends or money; but the heart by nature contracted,
and whoſe chief object has been ſelf, is ſenſibly affected
by an appearance of ſlight; it can never either forget
or forgive it; and ſuch a heart languidly moved
in the boſom of Spriggins.
But thoſe viſitors, who had ſeen Rachel in the family,
and now miſſed her, felt an awakened curioſity to
know what was become of her. To theſe interrogatories
had the Meſdames Spriggins and Courtney simply
anſwered, that ſhe was gone home; curioſity would
have died, but they felt they had done wrong in driving
her, poor and unprotected as ſhe was, from their
houſe; and in palliation of ſo inhuman an action,
threw aſperſions on her character. Not content with
depriving her of the protection of their own roof, they
prevented her obtaining that protection from any other,
whoſe inmates were in the ſmalleſt degree respectable.
That the human heart is liable to error, and that
on the eternal record our crimes and follies are enrolled,
and will one day appear in dreadful judgment
againſt us, is a ſolemn truth, which no perſon of common
ſenſe will attempt to deny; yet we are led to
hope, that the tear of unſeigned penitence will blot
thoſe offences out. But the crime of ſlander is of ſo
ſoul a die, its ſable hue ſtains the ſacred page, and only
mercy infinite can purify it. Oh thou Giver of life,
guard, I beſeech thee, my heart from ingratitude,
and my lips from ſlander; and for the reſt, thy will
be done.
During the period of theſe viciſſitudes, Rachel had
never omitted writing every week to her huſband, only
at the time when the birth of her ſon prevented her.
Theſe letters, written after ſhe left the houſe of Mrs.
Varnice, all lay at the place where he had deſired
them to be addreſſed; and when James was sufficiently
recovered to follow his maſter, he made them into
a parcel, and took them with him.
But words are inadequate to deſcribe the feelings
of Hamden, when he by turns liſtened to the account
[Page 325]
which James gave him, and read the pathetic letters
of his wife; ſometimes love, ſometimes reſentment
predominated. But when he read that he was a father,
and that his once loved Rachel, in that ſeaſon of
ſickneſs, was without the means to purchaſe the necessary
accommodations and comforts to render the situation
in ſome meaſure ſupportable, he determined to
hazard every thing, own his marriage, and fly to her
relief and comfort.
Hamden was ever impetuous; he reſolved one moment,
and the next put the reſolve in execution. Lady
Anne heard him with more calmneſs than he had
expected; but that apparent calm was deceitful;
when he had finiſhed, ſhe upbraided him with his duplicity,
imprecated miſery on both himſelf and his wife,
and with a determined air renounced him forever.
In vain was every endeavour to ſoften her reſentment,
and Hamden embarked for England, without the
ſmalleſt hope of being reinſtated in her affection, or of
ever being the better for her fortune.
Mortified pride, love and jealouſy corroded in his
boſom during his ſhort voyage; and on his arrival in
London, he repaired immediately to the houſe of Mrs.
Varnice; for though Rachel had mentioned her removal,
yet ſhe had forgot to mention the name of the
ſtreet to which ſhe had removed; and though ſhe was
diſpleaſed with Mrs. Varnice, yet, as ſhe did not know
the extent of that woman's vileneſs, ſhe ſpoke of her
no farther than to ſay ſhe had reaſon to think both
Hamden and herſelf had been miſtaken in her character.
This was not ſufficient to deter Hamden from
going to her houſe, eſpecially as he conceived it the
only probable means of finding Rachel. But this
viſit did not ſerve to conciliate his affection, or awaken
returning tenderneſs. Mrs. Varnice told her own tale.
Our poor heroine was repreſented as imprudent, if not
guilty, in regard to Oliver; extravagant and thoughtless,
in her expenſes.
“Why indeed,” ſaid Auberry, “I thought I left
her ſufficient to defray every expenſe till my return;
[Page 326]
and when I found my ſtay protracted beyond my expectations,
I forwarded her a hundred pounds.”
“Well, who could have thought it?” ſaid Mrs.
Varnice; “before ſhe left me, ſhe, to my certain
knowledge, raiſed money on her watch, rings, bracelets.”
“Bracelets?” ſaid Hamden.
“Oh yes! Lettuce pledged them for her.”
“Cruel, unkind Rachel!”
“Dear! don't let it diſtreſs you ſo; I ſuppoſe her
young friend Oliver helped her off with ſome of the
money.”
“Damn him!” ſaid Hamden. “Oh! Rachel,
Rachel, why have you uſed me thus? Oh! Mrs.
Varnice, if you knew how I loved her, how I adored
her! how at this moment her faſcinating image twines
around every chord, every fibre of my heart! you
would wonder how ſhe could be ſo ungrateful, ſo vile,
ſo barbarous.”
Alas! weak, credulous Auberry, had you inſtead
of liſtening to this woman's infamous aſperſions, treated
them with ſcorn, and boldly aſſerted the innocence
of your wife, and your full confidence in her truth and
honour, her accuſer, conſcious of her own guilt and
duplicity, would have retired intimidated within
herſelf, and ſhrunk from a ſcrutiny, from whence ſhe
muſt have been aſſured her own falſehood would ſtand
detected. But who will eſpouſe the cauſe of an injured
wife, when he who has ſolemnly ſworn to protect
her from all evil, liſtens with avidity to the voice
that defames her, and joins with her worſt enemies to
precipitate her into the abyſs of ignominy.
From the houſe of Mrs. Varnice, Hamden went to
the lodging ſhe had laſt occupied, and there, from a
converſation with the woman of the houſe, learnt the
route Rachel had taken, and with whom; but unfortunately,
he alſo learnt that ſhe had been viſited
almoſt daily by Oliver, during the period of his ſtay
in London. Tortured almoſt to madneſs, he reſolved
to follow her, upbraid her with her perfidy and cruelty,
[Page 327]
oblige her to relinquiſh the care of the child to him,
and take an everlaſting leave of her.
In the mean time, our heroine was drinking very
deeply of the cup of affliction; poverty was her constant
companion. The trifle ſhe poſſeſſed, at the time
ſhe left the houſe of Spriggins, was ſoon expended,
and by degrees the remains of her wardrobe dwindled
away, till two cotton gowns, with a change of linen,
were the whole of her earthly poſſeſſions. She had
inquired for work, but could get none. The dearth
of amuſement in a country town makes every trifle,
if wearing the appearance of novelty, become of consequence;
and what ſpreads faſter than a tale of scandal?
The circumſtance of our heroine's coming from
London to Mr. Spriggins, and quitting the houſe ſo
abruptly, had been talked over in almoſt every family
in the place, told a hundred different ways, and each
narrator adding or altering ſome circumſtance, poor
Rachel was looked upon, even by the woman of whom
ſhe rented her ſmall apartment, as a ſuſpicious character;
and had ſhe been inclined to partake the pleasures
of ſociety, ſhe would have found the doors of almost
every claſs of people ſhut againſt her. But ſhe
had ſtill the conſolation of an innocent heart, and a
firm faith and reliance on an omniſcient Deity, who
would not ſuffer her eventually to periſh. She submitted
to her afflictions as to the wife diſpenſations of
his providence, and prayed daily for a more humble,
more unrepining ſpirit. She was entirely ignorant
alſo, that any ſtigma had been thrown on her reputation,
and conſcious of not deſerving, ſhe feared not
the cenſures of a world, which, though ſhe would not
wilfully offend, ſhe was but little ſolicitous to pleaſe.
The neglect of Auberry ſunk the deepeſt into her
heart, when her thoughts reverted to the few happy
weeks paſt in his ſociety immediately after their marriage.
The tear of bitter remembrance would guſh
from her eyes, and as ſhe preſſed her infant to her
heart, it bled at every vein, that he, as well as herself,
ſhould be ſo totally abandoned by his father.
[Page 328]
It was one evening in Auguſt, when Rachel, having
lulled her darling to ſleep, the twilight ſtill giving
ſufficient light, took her tablets from her pocket, and,
as ſhe leaned over a window ſhe had juſt opened to
gaze at the ſerenity of an evening, that ſeemed to give
pleaſure to the whole creation but her forlorn, unhappy
ſelf, wrote with her pencil the following lines:
When the frame to the earth is bent low,
                           By ſickneſs or ſorrow oppreſt;
When the moments drag penſive and flow,
                           And the heart it lies cold in the breaſt;
When each ſocial comfort is fled,
                           Nor friend nor companion is near;
When reſt has forſaken the bed,
                           And the pillow is ſtain'd with a tear:—
Ah! then, what avails each gay ſcene
                           Which Nature unfolds to our ſight?
In vain Phebus riſes ſerene,
                           Or Cynthia enlivens the night!
In vain is you canopy ſpread
                           Thus gorgeous, with ſapphire and gold,
When each ſenſe of pleaſure is fled,
                           And each fond affection lies cold!
Haſte, Apathy, haſte thee, and bring,
                           With poppies infuſed in the bowl,
A draught from the Lethean ſpring
                           To ſteep in oblivion my ſoul.
Thy fable ſtole paſs 'fore mine eyes,
                           That when pale affliction I view,
No ſhades of paſt pleaſures may riſe
                           To ſharpen her arrows anew.
But come, with thy ſenſe-numbing power,
                           Aſſiſt me thoſe arrows to brave;
Nor leave me till that happy hour,
                           When I ſink to repoſe in the grave!
When ſhe had finiſhed, the full ſenſe of her own deplorable
ſituation ruſhed upon her mind; ſhe reſted
her head upon her hand, and, unable to weep, a kind
of ſtupor pervaded all her ſenſes; and ſo entirely
[Page 329]
absorbed was ſhe in her own agonizing reflections, that
ſhe was as perfectly loſt to every ſurrounding object
as if ſhe had been no longer in exiſtence. From this
reverie ſhe was arouſed by the cry of her child, and in
her haſte to let down the window, ſhe dropped her
tablets. It was an awkward circumſtance; for the
window looked into a garden belonging to a genteel
houſe that was in another ſtreet. It was therefore
impoſſible to regain them that night; but ſhe reſolved
to go early the enſuing morning to inquire for them;
for they had formerly belonged to her mother, and
were on that account highly valued by Rachel.
Accordingly, the next morning, as ſoon as ſhe imagined
ſhe could gain admittance, ſhe took her child
in her arms, and walked round to the front of the
houſe. The door was opened by a decent young
woman, and Rachel was beginning to ſpeak, when,
turning her eyes toward a parlour, the door of which
ſtood partly open, ſhe ſaw Archibald Oliver, dreſſed
in deep mourning, ſitting at a breakfaſt table, and
holding the identical tablets ſhe came to inquire for,
in his hand. She was ſurpriſed—ſhe was ſilent.
“Did you wiſh to ſee my miſtreſs, Ma'am?” ſaid
the young woman.
“Yes!” ſaid Rachel, hardly conſcious that ſhe had
anſwered at all.
There was ſomething in the air and manner of our
heroine, that, had ſhe been clothed in the meaneſt apparel,
would ſtill have commanded reſpect. The young
woman paſſed before her, and courteſying as ſhe pushed
open the parlour door, deſired her to walk in, and
ſhe would call her miſtreſs immediately. At the ſound
of approaching ſteps, Oliver raiſed his eyes.
“Good God! Mrs. Dacres!” exclaimed he.
Rachel was fluttered; ſhe could not ſpeak. A languid
ſmile illumined her pallid countenance as ſhe extended
her hand towards him. But the expreſſive
tear that burſt from its gliſtening orbit, contradicted
the appearance of tranquillity the ſmile was meant to
convey.
[Page 330]
“How is it, Mr. Oliver,” ſaid ſhe, when ſhe could
command her voice, “that I ſee you here?”
“A very unhappy circumſtance brought me and
ſtill detains me here,” he replied. Rachel glanced
her eye over his fable dreſs. Jeſſy darted into her
mind.
“Your ſiſter!” ſaid ſhe eagerly.
“Is well,” interrupted he, at once comprehending
her fears, at leaſt I have no reaſon to think to the
contrary; but Mrs. Oliver is no more.”
His voice faltered; Rachel was ſilent; ſhe knew
the folly and impertinence of common-place consolation.
Oliver recovered himſelf, and having learnt
from our heroine every occurrence that had taken
place ſince he ſaw her in London, he in return informed
her, that friendſhip for a very particular acquaintance
of her's had brought him to that place—
“An acquaintance of mine?” ſaid Rachel.
“Yes, Lieutenant Courtney.”
“Courtney! You aſtoniſh me; I thought he was
gone to India.”
“He had an appointment of that kind, which was
procured him by lord M—; but ſome diſcoveries
which he made after he had even joined his ſhip, and
had received ſailing orders, compelled him to quit his
appointment, throw up his commiſſion, and follow his
unprincipled wife to this place. Lord M. has a ſeat
at Alnwick, which is only a ſhort ride from hence,
and Courtney having obtained ſufficient teſtimony of
her depravity and his own diſhonour, came to me,
and aſked my advice in what manner he ſhould proceed.
See your wife, ſaid I, and remonſtrate with
her. I will go with you. He ſeemed inclined to follow
my advice, and we rode together toward this
place. When we had proceeded a few miles, we ſaw
a chariot and four driving ſuriouſly along; the liveries
beſpoke it the equipage of lord M. Courtney no
ſooner ſaw it, than, clapping ſpurs to his horſe, he gallopped
from me, and before I could get up with him,
had ſtopped the carriage in which was Mrs.
[Page 331]
Courtney and his Lordſhip. The irritated, impetuous husband
had dragged the ignoble peer from the carriage,
and, drawing a caſe of piſtols, preſented him one,
whilſt with the other he prepared to defend himſelf,
when one of the footmen ſtruck him acroſs the head
with the end of a whip, and he fell lifeleſs to the
ground. Lord M. ſprang into his carriage again and
drove off, leaving me with my ſervant to take what
care we could of poor Courtney. We were nearer
this place than we were to Alnwick, and placing him
on the horſe before John, with great difficulty we got
him here. This houſe is kept by a woman who nursed
my wife; and as I thought he would be quieter
and better attended here than in a public inn, I had
him brought hither. The wound on his head is deep,
but the ſurgeon does not think him in ſo much danger
from the effect of that as from the violent perturbation
of his mind.
Rachel liſtened with aſtoniſhment to this detail, and
was ſo entirely abſorbed in reflection on the ſtrange
incidents Oliver related, that when the miſtreſs of the
houſe entered, and requeſted to know what her commands
were, ſhe had totally forgotten the circumstance
that had brought her to the houſe. She hesitated,
bluſhed; at length, caſting her eyes on the
breakfaſt table, ſhe ſaw the object of her inquiry; but
the conſciouſneſs of her embarraſſed, awkward appearance,
ſo increaſed her confuſion, that the inquiries ſhe
made for her tablets had more the appearance of subterfuge
than truth. However, the maid having mentioned
that Mr. Oliver had picked them up in the garden,
they were delivered to our heroine, who, having
expreſſed a deſire to ſee Courtney, and promiſed to return
in the afternoon for that purpoſe, took her leave.
Now, though Rachel did not know five perſons in
the neighbourhood where ſhe dwelt, even by ſight, yet
ſhe was herſelf known by every individual in it; and
her embarraſſed and heſitating manner, added to a
knowledge of the evil reports which were circulated
concerning her, led the woman where Oliver lodged,
[Page 332]
to imagine ſhe came to viſit him, or Courtney, as ſhe
ſeemed ſo perfectly acquainted with both.
In the afternoon, Rachel determined to ſee Courtney.
She had no idea that impropriety could be annexed
to a viſit which ſhe conceived to be an act of
duty; and when ſhe found him ſo extremely ill as to
need the moſt conſtant and tender attention; when
ſhe diſcovered that it was in her power to ſoothe his
afflicted heart, and ſmooth the bed of pain, by an exertion
of friendly aſſiduity; forgetting every thing but
that ſhe had once been under obligations to him, ſhe
reſolved herſelf to be his attendant till he ſhould recover
ſtrength ſufficient to enable him to return to his
mother and ſiſters. Thus every morning ſhe repaired
to the chamber of the ſick man, nurſing him with
the affection of a ſiſter, and adminiſtering to him the
conſolation of a friend.
Mrs. Spriggins and her unprincipled gueſt were
mean enough to employ their ſervants to inquire in
the neighbourhood after our heroine, and be conſtant
ſpies upon her actions. That ſhe was often, nay, almost
continually at the houſe where Oliver was, and
where Courtney lay ſick, they were aſſured of; and
though they knew that ſhe conſtantly returned to her
ſolitary apartment to her meals, which were ſcanty
enough, and that ſhe was always at home at an early
hour in the evening, yet they failed not to attribute to
motives the moſt degrading to the ſex, a conduct which
was the reſult of pure benevolence, and did honour to
her heart, however it proved, that her head was not too
much ſtored with worldly prudence and knowledge.
Things were exactly in this ſituation, when Hamden
Auberry arrived in ſearch of a woman, whom,
one moment, he was ready to kneel and worſhip, and
the next, to call down everlaſting wrath upon her.
It may eaſily be imagined, that the ſtory told by
Mrs. Spriggins, Mrs. Courtney and family did not
tend to ſoften his heart towards her; ſo far from it,
he poured forth a torrent of execrations, and vowed
never to ſee her more. But when he had returned to
his inn, and muſed a few moments, he thought he
[Page 333]
would ſee her once more, upbraid her, and bid her an
everlaſting farewel; he had learnt in what quarter of
the town ſhe lodged, and at the duſk of the evening
went to the houſe and inquired for her. She was not
at home. At eight o'clock he called again; ſtill ſhe
was not returned. Having obtained a direction to
the houſe where he was told ſhe ſpent every day, and
having aſſured himſelf that was the reſidence of Oliver,
he determined to keep watch before the door, and
be himſelf an eye-witneſs of her leaving it, and at
what hour. Long and weariſome was the night, and
horrible were the feelings of Auberry. About twelve
o'clock, he determined to leave her to her fate, and
return with all ſpeed to London; but before he had
reached the inn, deſire of revenge impelled him to return.
`I will tear her from the arms of Oliver,' ſaid
he, `and wreak my vengeance on both her and her
paramour;' but then the memory of his child croſſed
his imagination, and with it the fond recollection of
what the mother was when he firſt knew her; a flood of
tenderneſs ruſhed over his ſoul, and he wept like an infant.
In this diſtracted manner did Auberry paſs the night,
and the dawn of day found him ſitting on the ſteps of a
door oppoſite to the lodgings of Oliver. He roſe from
the cold, damp ſeat, and with a heavy heart was giving
a laſt look at the houſe, when the door opened
gently, and Rachel herſelf, with her child in her arms,
came out.
Though during the whole night Hamden had supposed
his wife was there, yet ſomething like hope had
ſometimes led him to think he might have been deceived,
and ſhe might ſtill be innocent; but this ocular
proof was beyond all doubt. He reeled againſt a poſt,
ſtaggered and fell.
Rachel ſaw him; but, wrapped in a coarſe great
coat which he had borrowed at the inn, with his hat
flapped, it was impoſſible, by the faint glimmer of the
twilight, ſhe ſhould know him; ſhe imagined it to be
an inebriated perſon, juſt endeavouring to return
home; and fearful, ſhould ſhe be obſerved by him at
that early hour, that he might in ſome reſpect or other
[Page 334]
be rude to her, ſhe quickened her ſteps, and before
Auberry was ſufficiently recovered to ſpeak or riſe
from the ground, ſhe was out of ſight, and in a few
moments reached her own habitation. A little girl,
who was up on ſome particular occaſion, let her in,
and ſhe threw herſelf on the bed, in hopes to obtain
ſome repoſe, while Auberry returned to the inn, penned
a haſty letter to her, which he left, with orders that
it ſhould be ſent by eight o'clock in the morning. He
then ordered a chaiſe and four, and proceeded with
all the rapidity of ſuch a conveyance to London, seldom
ſtopping even for refreſhment, as though he
thought, by the velocity of the movement, to leave
his cares behind, or loſe the remembrance of them, by
attending to the various objects that paſſed in quick
ſucceſſion before him.
In the mean time, Rachel had enjoyed about two
hours ſleep, and felt herſelf greatly refreſhed; for the
fatigue and anxiety of the night had exhauſted both
her ſpirits and ſtrength. She had attended as uſual
the day before at the bedſide of Courtney; towards
noon he had ariſen, and was removed for the benefit
of the air into an adjoining apartment, and placed in
an eaſy chair near the window. The noiſe of horſes
drew his attention towards the ſtreet. He looked out,
and ſaw his wife, accompanied by lord M. on horseback,
attended by two ſervants in rich liveries. She
raiſed her eyes, ſaw the emaciated figure of her husband,
pointed him out to her diſſolute companion,
and both burſt into a loud laugh. Courtney was
unequal to the ſhock; he attempted to ſpeak, but his
voice failed him; he gaſped, groaned, and fell to the
floor. Alarming faintings ſucceeded each other, and
he was reduced to ſuch a ſtate of weakneſs, that the
medical gentleman who attended him imagined it almost
impoſſible that he ſhould live through the night.
Was it poſſible for Rachel in ſuch a ſituation to leave
him? No! She had not been treated with ſufficient
reſpect by the miſtreſs of the houſe where ſhe lodged,
to make her think it neceſſary to ſend any meſſage to
her concerning her ſtaying out, or her reaſons for ſo
doing.
[Page 335]
Towards morning, Courtney fell into a quiet ſleep,
and Oliver entreated Rachel to retire, and endeavour
to take ſome repoſe. Acting from motives the moſt
pure and even commendable, without a thought or
wiſh in the ſmalleſt tittle derogatory to virtue, Rachel
had no apprehenſion of incurring cenſure from any.
How ſurpriſed was ſhe then, on awaking in the morning,
to read the following note, which was brought
to her by the little girl who had let her in.
“Miſstreſs Dakirs, ater the adventer of laſt nite, you
cant ſuppos I will ſuffer you to ſtay any longer in my
ouſe, wich is a oneſt ouſe; and furdermore, I does
not expect you to go without paying me every fardin
of what you oes me. You muſt go meditly, as I does
not want women of your ſort in my ouſe no longer.”
Rachel was really ſo totally unconſcious of evil,
that ſhe was at a loſs to think what the woman meant
by “the adventure of laſt night;” but going to her to
inquire, was ſo overwhelmed with abuſe, that, weeping,
trembling, almoſt fainting, ſhe retreated from the
houſe leaving every thing behind her to ſatisfy the rapacity
of her inhuman landlady.
As ſhe was going out of the door, ſhe met the porter
with her huſband's letter. She took it, broke the
ſeal, and read that he had been there, that he had ſeen
her, that he believed her loſt to virtue, and that he
abandoned her forever. Overcome by ſenſations the
moſt agonizing, ſhe ſat down on the ſteps of the door.
The letter remained open in her hand; her eyes were
riveted to it, and only that ſhe breathed, ſhe might
have been taken for a ſtatue of fixed and mute deſpair.
How long ſhe would have remained in this ſituation
is uncertain, or whether, ſinking into inſenſibility, ſhe
would not have loſt all conſciouſneſs of her miſery,
had not the woman with the diabolical malice of a fiend
opened the door, and bade her begone from the ſtep.
Arouſed from her lethargy of grief, ſhe aroſe, folded
her child to her boſom, and bowing her head in meek
reſignation, the ſorrows of her heart found vent at her
eyes, and ſhe obeyed in ſilence.
[Page 336]
And what was there, in this moment of anguiſh, to
ſupport the ſinking ſpirits of our afflicted heroine?
Conſcious innocence! And whilſt humbled to the
very duſt, ſhe could look up with hope and confidence
to Him who is a rock of defence to the injured, a ſure
help to thoſe who truſt in him.
Wounded pride would have firſt impelled her to
hide herſelf from Oliver, as ſhe diſcovered, from the
unconnected ſcrawl left by Auberry, that it was of
him he was jealous, and had it been only for herſelf
that ſhe was intereſted, ſhe would moſt likely have suffered
every degree of miſery before ſhe would have
aſked relief of any one; but her child, the ſon of Auberry,
the lawful heir to large poſſeſſions, for his ſake
ſhe was reſolved to ſtifle her feelings, and endeavour
to convince his cruel father that he had injured her in
the moſt unwarrantable manner.
She therefore went immediately to his lodgings,
and calming her perturbed ſpirits as much as ſhe
poſſibly could, thus addreſſed him:—“Mr. Oliver, I
am neceſſitated to requeſt the loan of a few guineas,
at the ſame time that I tell you it is more than probable
I may never be able to repay you. Something
has taken place this morning, which obliges me in future
to forbear ſeeing you, or giving any farther attendance
on our unfortunate friend.”
“Good heavens!” ſaid Oliver, ſtruck with her pale
countenance, ſwollen eyes and evident agitation;
“what can be the matter? Wherever you are going,
do not refuſe me the ſatisfaction of knowing, that I
may be able to aſſiſt, protect, comfort, be a brother to
you.”
“It is impoſſible,” ſaid ſhe, “the world will not
ſuffer it.”
He comprehended the meaning of her words, and
without reply tendered her his purſe. She took five
guineas from it, and then requeſting to ſee Courtney,
of whom ſhe took a ſilent leave, ſhe departed, leaving
Oliver aſtoniſhed and affected at her conduct. He
muſed a few moments, and then thinking, however
rigid propriety might forbid her to viſit the houſe he
[Page 337]
inhabited, or receive viſits from him, yet it did not forbid
him following and diſcovering her retreat, where
he might ſupply her with all the neceſſaries and comforts
of life. He ſnatched his hat, and ruſhed into the
ſtreet; but he was too late; Rachel was no longer in
ſight, nor could he diſcover which way ſhe had gone.
Our heroine walked to a poor cottage about a mile
from the town, inhabited only by an old woman and
her daughter. Here ſhe agreed to board at a very
low rate for a few days, and then ſat down to write
to her huſband. She endeavoured to explain circumstances
that appeared ſuſpicious; but to think that
Auberry ſuſpected her honour, gave her ſuch inexpressible
anguiſh, that ſhe was frequently obliged to
lay down her pen and weep. At length ſhe finiſhed,
earneſtly conjuring, if not for her own, yet for his
child's ſake, he would ſend her ſome relief, nor ſuffer
them to expire with want, or languiſh out their lives
in poverty and obſcurity.
This letter ſhe directed to a coffee-houſe in London,
which ſhe knew he frequented, and requeſting an answer
to be directed to the poſt-office at Newark, ſhe
left her infant in the charge of her old hoſteſs, went
herſelf and put her own letter in, inquiring at the ſame
time when ſhe might expect an anſwer.
When ſhe returned to her humble home, fatigue, anguish
of heart, and the violent emotions ſhe had experienced
during the day, had ſo far overcome her,
that ſhe went to bed much indiſpoſed, and after a
night of reſtleſs agitation, ſhe awoke from a ſhort
ſlumber ſo ill, as to be unable to riſe.
From that time, a period of three weeks was a total
blank to Rachel. A fever, accompanied by a delirium,
brought her to the verge of the grave; but the
tenderneſs of her good old hoſteſs and her daughter,
co-operating with a naturally good conſtitution, and
the attendance of a ſkilful man of medicine, at length
triumphed over the diſorder, and ſhe returned to life
and a renewed ſenſe of her ſorrows.
The firſt thing ſhe thought of was her expected
letter. She diſpatched the young cottager to
[Page 338]
Newark to inquire for it; ſhe returned empty handed;
there was no letter there. Thus day after day paſſed
on. The five guineas Rachel had borrowed of Oliver
were totally expended during her illneſs, and no
letter arriving from her huſband, ſhe was once more
pennyleſs, but not totally friendleſs. The poor inhabitants
of the cottage were Chriſtians . Had ſhe been
ſtained with a thouſand errors, they would not have
thought it right to remember them when ſhe was bowed
to the earth by affliction. Their whole poſſeſſions
were, the cottage, a ſmall garden, a cow and two spinning
wheels; but they dried the tear from her eyes by
the voice of kindneſs, and told her ſhe ſhould be welcome
to ſhare their humble fare till returning health
enabled her to join their labours for ſubſiſtence, if
nothing better offered. During her illneſs, the old
cottager had found Auberry's letter, and wiſhing to
gain ſome intelligence concerning her family, had perused
it.
“She may be guilty,” ſaid ſhe, “but I have no
right to judge her. She is ſick and afflicted; it is
therefore my duty to nurſe and comfort her.” She
then returned the letter to the pocket from whence ſhe
took it, nor even after Rachel's recovery did ſhe ſuffer
her to imagine, by any word, look or hint, that ſhe had
ſeen it.
As ſoon as Rachel had gathered ſtrength ſufficient
to enable her to attempt it, with ſlow and uneven ſteps
ſhe proceeded to Newark, determined to make inquiry
herſelf concerning a letter; for ſhe thought it impossible
for Auberry to abandon her and his child to
abſolute want.
She went to the office, and was told no ſuch letter
was there. “Are you certain, Sir?” ſaid ſhe; “it
muſt have been here ſome time, if it is here at all.
Pray look amongſt the letters that lay in the office;
it is of more conſequence to me than you can imagine.
It is directed to Mrs. Dacres, to be left here till
called for.”
A young man hearing her repeat the name of Dacres,
turned over a parcel of letters, and preſented to
[Page 339]
the trembling hands of our heroine the long-expected
epiſtle from her huſband.
Rachel opened it; a hundred pound bank note
dropped from it! She attempted to read it, but a
miſt came over her eyes; ſhe reeled, and would have
fallen, but the young man caught her. He called
for water, and an interior door opening, a young
woman, very plainly habited, ruſhed out, ſupported
and preſſed to her boſom the lifeleſs, inanimate form,
calling on her to revive by the tender name of friend,
her dear, unhappy Rachel. Life ſoon reviſited her
lips and cheeks; ſhe opened her eyes, and found herself
in the arms of Jeſſy Oliver.
Leaning on the arm of this dear friend, and hardly
daring to truſt her ſenſes leſt it ſhould prove an illusion,
Rachel retired into a ſmall, neat parlour, where
ſhe ſoon regained ſufficient compoſure to peruſe her
letter. It was ſhort, and the concluſion of it almoſt
annihilated her. It was as follows.—
Letter
My adored Rachel ,
THERE is ſuch an appearance of candour and
ſincerity throughout your whole letter, that I cannot
but believe you innocent; prove yourſelf ſo, and on
the receipt of this come immediately to London, and
prepare to follow my fortunes to foreign climes. Our
marriage is no longer a ſecret; my aunt has discarded
me. I have ſold my commiſſion, and in the despair
I felt at your perfidy, have taken paſſage on board
a veſſel bound for Philadelphia. If you love me as
you ſay, and as I would fain think you do, you will
not heſitate to leave England forever, ſince it is for
my peace of mind that I ſhould do ſo. I cannot submit
to live in it below the rank I have been accustomed
to fill. If your affection leads you to be the companion
of my voyage, the ſharer and ſoother of all my
cares, I ſhall regret neither fortune nor country. If
not, if ſome ſtronger attachment binds you to this ſpot,
Oh Rachel! I cannot bear the thought; but ſhould
it be ſo, why the farther we are divided the better.
[Page 340]
“Incloſed I imagine is a ſum ſufficient to diſcharge
any debts you may have contracted, and bring you to
London. If you come, I ſhall expect to ſee you in
ten days from the date of this letter. If not, farewel
forever; we meet no more on this ſide eternity, and
I will ſtrive if poſſible to forget you.
HAMDEN AUBERRY.”
Section Rachel referred to the date of the letter; it had been
written near a month. “Then he is gone! left me
forever! and thinks me the moſt depraved of women,”
ſaid ſhe; and her emotions became ſo violent, that in
her preſent debilitated ſtate, Miſs Oliver feared ſhe
would have fallen into fits; at any rate, ſhe thought
it neceſſary to take her home, and procuring a carriage,
ſhe herſelf accompanied her to her lowly habitation.
By the way ſhe talked her into ſomething
like compoſure; ſhe learnt every circumſtance that
had taken place ſince their ſeparation.
Convinced of the purity of our heroine's heart, that
her motives had been always right, though her conduct
had been ſometimes directly contrary to the rigid
rules of prudence, ſhe felt all her affection for her revive;
and taking her hand when ſhe had finiſhed her
detail, ſhe cried, “Well, Mrs. Auberry, (as we ſhall
henceforth call Rachel) in return for the confidence
you have repoſed in me, I will tell you my ſtory. It
is a very ſimple one, without one romantic or extraordinary
incident.
“When I left London, I recollected an old ſchool
fellow I had at this place, of whoſe ſenſe and discretion
I had a very high opinion; to her I repaired, and
through her means ſettled the method of corresponding
with you and Archibald, alſo the means of receiving
a ſmall yearly income, which I poſſeſſed independent
of my father. I then threw aſide the fine
lady entirely, aſſumed the plain attire you ſee me now
wear, and with it a ſimplicity of manners that might
be likely not to betray my real rank in life. I then
procured an apartment at a farm-houſe, that is situated
in a moſt delightful though very ſolitary valley,
[Page 341]
about three miles from hence. I purchaſed a few
books, with materials for needle-work, and diverſified
my time with reading, working, and taking neceſſary
exerciſe. The productions of my needle, through my
friend were ſent to London and ſold, increaſing my
little income in ſuch a manner as to afford me all the
comforts of life. I heard of my brother's marriage,
and of his reſidence ſo near me. I longed to ſee him;
but was too proud to think of throwing myſelf on the
liberality of his wife, for I knew that Archibald himself
was as poor as I was. I therefore continued my
retirement and avocations. I have frequently thought
of you, and from ſome accounts which accidentally
met my ears, was led ſometimes to blame but oftener
to pity you.
“But ſhould I ever return to the gay world, my
young aſſociates will, I have no doubt, be ſurpriſed
that I ſhould have eloped from my father's houſe,
changed my name, and ſecluded myſelf above a year
and a half in a cottage, yet never have met with a
ſingle adventure, or made one conqueſt; nay, if you
will believe me, the impenetrable ruſtics have entirely
overlooked my beauty and accompliſhments; and
though I have appeared regularly every Sunday, when
the weather permitted, at the pariſh church, the Squire
has not once noticed me, and I have remained entirely
unmoleſted.
“But I am weary of this dull ſameneſs of ſcene,
and you and I will now ſet out together in ſearch of
adventures. This mad brained, harum-ſcarum husband
of yours, though I think he little deſerves ſuch
attention from us, yet we will e'en go after him. For
if we ſhould not find him, we may perhaps find somebody
elſe that will be glad to ſee us.”
Rachel comprehending that Jeſſy meant Reuben,
replied with additional penſiveneſs, “Alas! my dear
girl, I have never heard from my brother ſince he left
England.”
“So I underſtand,” ſaid Jeſſy, ſtill forcing a ſmile,
while her eyes were brimfull of tears; “but I cannot
repreſs a fond hope, which almoſt amounts to a belief,
[Page 342]
that he is ſtill in exiſtence, and that we ſhall one day
meet again. As to Archibald, it will not be proper
to let him know of our deſign till it is too late for him
to overtake and accompany us; for that would overthrow
my whole plan of reconcilement between you
and Auberry. And ſhould the worſt come to the
worſt, there is ſtill my little annuity; we will live together,
my dear Rachel, in humble, but contented independence.
What our income will not procure, industry
ſhall ſupply. We will ſtudy to fulfil the duties
of our lowly ſtation, and, enjoying the ſweet consolation
of an approving conſcience, hold the trifling multitude,
that is in general termed the world , in ſo little
eſtimation, as neither to court its ſmiles or fear its censures.”
This was a plan too agreeable to the feelings of Rachel
not to be immediately cloſed with. This re-commencement
of friendſhip, with a perſon ſo dear to her
heart as Jeſſy Oliver, ſeemed to eaſe her boſom of half
its load. A very ſhort time ſufficed for the ſettlement
of every concern, either of Miſs Oliver or our heroine,
and on the ſecond morning after their meeting
they were on their road to London. Rachel left ample
teſtimony with her aged hoſteſs at the cottage,
that whatever her other errors might have been, ſhe
was not guilty of the ſin of ingratitude. Arrived in
London, they made every inquiry after Auberry, and
learnt that he had been departed above a fortnight,
and it was univerſally believed to America.
It was late in the ſeaſon for veſſels to croſs the boisterous
Atlantic ocean; the two fair friends could hear
of none likely to ſail to the port they wiſhed, under a
month or ſix weeks. This appeared to the anxious
and impatient Rachel an eternity; and being informed
that a ſhip would go from Liverpool in the courſe
of ten days, they purſued their journey for that place,
and arrived juſt in time to ſecure a paſſage, as the vessel
was to ſail the following morning.
Reduced as our heroine was by illneſs, this long
journey was almost too much for her ſtrength; but
Jeſſy Oliver had fine ſpirits, and a conſtitution which,
[Page 343]
though not robuſt, could ſupport great fatigue without
ſinking under it. They alighted at the inn, and
reſolved to indulge in a few hours reſt before their embarkation,
where we will leave them and make ſome
little inquiry after Auberry.
When he had diſpatched his letter with the money
to Rachel, he waited with the utmoſt impatience the
arrival of the time in which he might expect her. He
had in the firſt hurry of jealouſy, rage and disappointment
ſold his commiſſion, and taken a paſſage on
board a ſhip bound to Philadelphia, determined never
more to viſit his native country, where every bright
proſpect of his youth had been untimely blaſted. The
reception of his wife's letter awakened all his tenderness
for her. Rachel in want, depreſſed, ſick, brokenhearted,
was ever before his eyes. `She may yet be
innocent,' cried he; the very ſuppoſition ſeemed to
give him comfort; `yet the proofs of her depravity
were ſo inconteſtable—' here his heart glowed with
reſentment; `I will at leaſt ſend her the means of
coming immediately to me. If ſhe comes, I will receive
her with affection, if not, I will endeavour to forget
that I ever knew her.' In this frame of mind he
wrote the letter which conveyed the money to our heroine.
But when day after day paſſed, and no tidings of
her neither by letter or any other means, he concluded
ſhe was totally abandoned, and in deſpair of ever
knowing peace again, he embarked on his intended
voyage. But tempeſtuous weather enſuing, and the
brig in which he embarked being rather ancient,
ſprung a leak, and they put into Liverpool to refit;
where Auberry, giving way to the deſpair that preyed
upon his mind, ſunk into a ſtate of inanity. Both
mind and body became debilitated; a hectic fever
ſlowly undermined his conſtitution; and when the vessel
was ready to depart, he was too ill to make the
voyage, and ſuffered her to go without him. He
had gone to his mother immediately on his arrival in
Liverpool, where he explained to her all his cauſe for
ſorrow, and felt every wound bleed afreſh as he
[Page 344]
perused ſome letters from Belle Webſter, which tended
highly to criminate his wife. Doctor Lenient was absent
at the time of his arrival; a ſmall eſtate had been
left him in Ireland, and he had croſſed the channel in
order to take poſſeſſion and ſettle ſome very material
buſineſs.
When Hamden had been with his mother about
three weeks, the Doctor returned, ſurpriſed to ſee his
nephew, and more ſurpriſed at his very rueful appearance.
He inquired what he had been doing to alter
himſelf ſo. “I have been ruining myſelf,” ſaid Auberry.
“Odſo! I hope not,” replied the good-hearted Doctor,
“What, have you been gambling?”
“Yes, in the lottery of life, and have drawn a blank.
In ſhort, my dear uncle, I have married a woman without
either family or fortune, and am diſcarded by my
aunt; but that I could have borne, had my wife been
faithful.”
“Odds my life!” ſaid the Doctor, “matrimony
ſeems no improver of happineſs; for this is the ſecond
tale of miſery I have heard to-day. What think you,
ſiſter? juſt as I landed from the packet, I ſaw two
women ſtanding on the ſhore, ready to ſtep into a boat
that was waiting. One countenance I knew inſtantly;
for though pale and greatly emaciated, there was ſtill
that character of ſenſibility and virtue impreſſed upon
it for which I uſed to admire it. It was our unfortunate
young friend Rachel Dudley.”
Hamden gaſped for breath, but he ſuffered the Doctor
to proceed without interruption. “She had a fine
boy in her arms,” continued the Doctor, “apparently
about four months old, and ſpite of all we have heard,
I felt myſelf impelled to ſpeak to her. Her companion
was Miſs Oliver, whom we heard had eloped from
her father's houſe, and who has not been heard of by
her family for above a twelvemonth.”
“Well, Sir,” cried Auberry impatiently, “but
what of Rachel.”
“Why I'll tell you,” ſaid the Doctor, taking off
his wig and deliberately putting on his crimſon velvet
[Page 345]
cap, and without noticing the emotions of Hamden;
“when I went up to her, and aſked her how ſhe did,
ſhe laid her hand on her boſom, and with a look I
ſhall never forget, anſwered, “Neither well nor happy,
Doctor.”
“I am ſorry, my poor girl,” ſaid I, “for ſome circumstances
that I underſtand have taken place, and
knowing your extreme ſenſibility, cannot be ſurpriſed
that they have injured both your health and peace of
mind. But where are you going now?”
“To America,” ſaid ſhe, “in purſuit of my husband.”
“You are married, then,” ſaid I.
“Yes,” ſhe replied, and fixing her eyes on my face,
“did you not know it?”
“No, how ſhould I? I have been in Ireland theſe
two months paſt. Juſt then the ſailors called to her
to get into the boat. She tendered me her hand.”
“God bleſs you, my good Doctor,” ſaid ſhe. I
ſhook her hand, helped her in, and—”
“And ſhe is really gone, then,” cried Hamden
frantickly.
The Doctor raiſed his eyes; the agitated countenance
of his nephew alarmed him. “Yes, I believe
ſo,” ſaid he in a doubtful tone; “but why does it affect
you thus?”
“Why does it affect me? Oh! Sir, I am the husband
of Rachel! It is me ſhe is gone in purſuit of.
I have deſerted, abandoned, forſaken her; I thought
her depraved; I was told—”
“Yes, and ſo have I been told,” ſaid the Doctor
with vehemence, ſtriking his hand on the elbow of his
chair; “but after beholding her meek, expreſſive
countenance, where candour and purity are ſtamped on
every feature; after ſeeing her emaciated frame, and
hearing her tremulous, plaintive accents, I would not
believe the ſmalleſt tittle to her diſadvantage, though
millions joined to affirm it! Young man, you have
been haſty, and blinded by paſſion; have thrown away
a pearl of ineſtimable price.”
[Page 346]
Hamden's feelings were now too great for utterance.
His mother ſoothed him; but Dr. Lenient, who hated
family pride, blamed the whole of his conduct; and
though before he went to bed he preſcribed ſomething
to compoſe the agitated ſpirits of Auberry, yet when
retired, his thoughts were wholly occupied by Rachel,
wandering without a proper protector, in ſearch of a
man who had wantonly ſacrificed her happineſs and
reputation on the altar of ambition and intereſt.
CHAPTER LAST.
Where heaven-born Freedom holds her court
                           Let me erect my humble ſhed;
Where all the arts with joy reſort,
                           And Science rears her laurell'd head.
We left Reuben in captivity, employing every
leiſure moment in expanding the mind and
cultivating the talents of Eumea. In this manner ſix
weary months paſſed on, and ſtill no hope of emancipation.
At the end of this period, tidings arrived
that the Indian chiefs had been guilty of a breach of
the European laws, and in conſequence had ſuffered
death. The ſachem called a council of his elders and
chieſtains, and it was determined that Reuben and his
unhappy companions ſhould on the enſuing morning
be bound to the ſtake, and ſuffer thoſe inhuman tortures
which none but ſavages could inflict, and none
but ſavages ſubmit to, without an endeavour to be
avenged of thoſe who inflict them.
Eumea was in the wigwam at the time this horrid
ſentence was paſſed; her heart ſunk; there were but
a few hours to intervene before it was to be put in execution.
In the dead of night, ſhe entered the wigwam
of our hero.
“Engliſhmen,” ſaid ſhe, “awake, get up; danger
and death are at hand; haſte, quit this place, flee into
the woods that ſkirt the mountains, and the God of
[Page 347]
the Chriſtians go with you.” In a few words ſhe explained
to them the neceſſity of their immediate flight,
and directing their ſteps to a cavern in a hollow glen,
ſhe threw her arms round the neck of Reuben, bathed
his cheek with her tears, preſſed her cold trembling
lips to his, and ſobbing, Adieu! returned to her restless
bed to weep and pray for his ſafety.
Innumerable were the hardſhips endured by Reuben
and his companions, ſkulking in caves, or deep
woods, feeding on wild fruit, and even glad to make
a meal of acorns; terrified by the ruſtling of the
leaves, or the ſteps of wild though inoffenſive animals,
natives of the uncultivated tracts through which they
were obliged to paſs.
After three weeks weariſome journey, they at length
arrived at a European ſettlement; but ſo reduced
through famine and fatigue, that it ſeemed as though
they were only arrived at a place of ſafety that they
might reſt from all their cares in death. Even the
ſtrength and ſpirits of O'Neil began to flag, and he
bitterly regretted that he was no longer able to cheer,
attend and comfort his dear maſter.
But what was the ſurpriſe of Reuben, when, the day
after his arrival at this place, he ſaw Eumea enter the
apartment where he was. He raiſed himſelf from the
bed on which he was reclining, and in a voice that expressed
at once ſurpriſe and pleaſure, exclaimed, “Eumea
here! what ſtrange incident!” She ſtopped him,
took hold of his hand, and looking earneſtly in his
face—
“Is it ſtrange that I ſhould follow you; (ſaid ſhe)
were not you my inſtructor, my more than father, my
friend, and was it poſſible Eumea could ſtay behind
you and live? Do not look angry; I know I have
done wrong; for you taught me to love, reſpect, and
never forſake my father and mother. I tried to remember
your precepts, I tried to obey your injunctions;
but, alas! the ſilent night was witneſs to my
anguiſh, and the riſing ſun could not dry the dew from
my eyelids. If I ſlept, I ſaw you, liſtened to you,
and was happy. Fleeting joy! that but embittered
[Page 348]
the moment of awaking! The flowers you had gathered
for me the day before you left me, I bound upon
my breaſt next my heart; I have worn them there
ever ſince; they withered and dried, but every day I
refreſh them with my tears. One morning, juſt as
the day appeared, I aroſe, took my bow and arrows,
and reſolved to follow you. My mother was ſtill
aſleep; I looked at her, I knelt beſide her; but I dared
not kiſs her leſt ſhe ſhould awake. I would have
prayed, but you had told me that an undutiful child
could never be a favourite of our heavenly Father; ſo
I preſſed my hands on my heart, which throbbed ſo
loud, it ſeemed to ſay, Oh! God of the Chriſtians,
bleſs my mother! God knows every thought of the
heart, and though I dared not pronounce his ſacred
name with my lips, perhaps its ſilent petition may be
read and anſwered.”
Eumea pauſed; Reuben would have anſwered, but
he was at a loſs what to ſay. O'Neil, weak and ill
as he was, had moved towards her, and ſitting at her
feet, leaning one hand on her knees, his head reſted
on it, and his languid eyes were fixed on her face, as
he liſtened to her with profound attention.
“It is my belief,” ſaid he, “that God Almighty
never turns away from the prayers of an innocent
heart; and then to be ſure he knows all we want,
when we can't ſpeak to aſk for even a morſel of brend.
Oh! if we were only to have what we deſerved, we
ſhould find but poor accommodations, in our journey
through this world; but you ſee he was ſo good as to
ſend people before us, to make every thing comfortable;
and all he requires is, that we ſhall in return
make things pleaſant and agreeable for them that
come after us.”
Reuben could not help ſmiling at O'Neil's morality.
Eumea ſeemed loſt in thought, and ſcarcely to
have attended to what he ſaid; but when ſhe found
he was ſilent, ſhe again addreſſed our hero.
“So you ſee here I am; but what have I gained
by following you? Nothing! for now all that I sufered
before for your abſence, I now feel on account
[Page 349]
of my mother. But I will not return. No; I could
not ſupport my father's unkindneſs, and my mother's
reproaches, which would be the more painful becauſe
mingled with affection. I will follow you, my dear
inſtructor, I will be your handmaid, and love and
ſerve you to the laſt hour of my life.”
“And ſo will I,” ſaid O'Neil, “and I'll well ſerve
you too, my beautiful Indian lady, every day and all
the day, and by night too, if ſo be there be neceſſity.”
“And how did you know that you ſhould find me
here?” ſaid Reuben.
“I knew,” ſhe replied, “that this was the neareſt
ſettlement, and had I not found you here, I ſhould
have travelled onward to Philadelphia; and had you
not been there, I ſhould have thought you had died
by the way, and would have ſought you in a better
world, the world of ſpirits.”
“You would not, I hope, Eumea, have dared to
ruſh unbidden into eternity?” ſaid Reuben.
“I fear I ſhould,” ſhe replied; “for why ſhould we
endure life, when the nights are paſt in anguiſh, and
every day is a day of ſorrow? When the wintry blaſts
howl, when the ſnow falls, and the froſt binds up the lakes:
then, when confined to the wigwam, there is no comfort
within, but the tempeſt of the paſſions rages more furious
than the gale that bows the tall cedars, and ſhakes to the
roots the ſtately oak; why ſhould we not ſleep with
the infect or the reptile tribes, that paſs the dreary
ſeaſon in inſenſibility? And when the warm ſouthern
breeze diſſolves the ice, and bids the trees be green,
the bloſſom come; when the blackbird whiſtles merrily,
and the robin begins to dreſs his plumes; if then
nor fragrant bloſſom, nor cheerful bird, nor flowerspeckled
field delight the ſenſe, or ſoothe the tortured
ſoul, were it not better to ſeek repoſe in other climes,
more ſuited to our feelings? Or when the deer ſeeks
the deep woods, and pants though lying on the river's
brink, when the ſcorching ſun dries the graſs and
parches up the ground, where is the harm if, plunging
in the wave, we quench the fever that conſumes us,
or from our veins let out the blood, that ruſhes with
[Page 350]
ſuch fury through our frame, ſwelling the heart till
it is near to burſting? Or even when the ſeaſon of
corn arrives; when cluſters of wild grapes hang on
the bending vines; when the berries, blackened by the
ſun, peep through the half-faded leaves; when the
cool, ſoft breeze of evening, and the ſweet air of the
morning, affords refreſhing ſlumbers to the eyelids, or
uncloſes them to pleaſing proſpects, that, being surveyed,
makes the heart dance with joy—Ah! then,
if the eyes are dimmed with tears and the heart oppressed
with ſorrow; is it a ſin to ſeek that happy
place where we can neither weep nor ſuffer more?”
“You have profited but little by my inſtructions,
Eumea,” ſaid Reuben, “if you can argue thus.”
“I will follow you, then,” ſaid ſhe emphatically,
“and endeavour to improve.”
In about a fortnight, our hero and his companions
were enough recovered to continue their journey. It
was in vain he entreated Eumea to return to her
mother, ſhe perſiſted in following him. It was without
effect that he repreſented to her, that in accompanying
him ſhe would be looked upon with diſreſpect
by the European women; her reſolution was taken
and was not to be ſhaken.
The appearance of Reuben and his followers was
miſerable in the extreme when they entered Philadelphia;
and what added to their miſery was, that amongſt
them all they had not a ſingle copper, nor any friends
to whom they could apply for aſſiſtance. The forlorn
group had croſſed the Schuylkill, and with weary
ſteps were approaching the city, when a venerable
man of the ſociety of Friends, riding out for exerciſe
and air, ſurveyed them with an eye of compaſſion,
and ſtopping his horſe—“Friend,” ſaid he, addreſſing
Reuben, “both thou and thy companions ſeem fatigued,
and appear to have taken a long journey;
from whence doſt thou come?”
“From captivity,” ſaid Reuben.
“Yes,” cried O'Neil, who, having recovered his
uſual ſpirits, puſhed forward to ſpeak for himſelf;
“yes, we have been obliged to pay a pretty long viſit
[Page 351]
to the copper-coloured gentlefolks, and if we had not
come away as we did, they would have ſcalped us and
roaſted us, and then a pretty figure we ſhould have
cut! But this dear creature, who, though ſhe is a little
darkiſh or ſo, has a heart as beautiful as an angel;
ſo ſhe told us what they were about going to do.
Said ſhe, Get up, my lads, and run away whilſt you
can; for to-morrow you will have no legs to run with.
So away we came, and a fine trampooſe we have had.
And now we have got here, I don't know that we are
much better off; for if they had roaſted us, we ſhould
not a lived to be ſtarved to death; for a devil a penny
have we got to buy bread.”
“Nevertheleſs,” ſaid the benevolent friend, “thou
ſhalt not ſtarve. I am not rich; but Heaven forbid
that I ſhould ſuffer a fellow-creature to want while I
have a morſel to give him, or a blanket to ſpare to
ſhelter him from the inclemencies of the weather. I
have a houſe on the banks of the Delaware, but a very
ſhort diſtance from the city, and its doors were never
ſhut againſt the unfortunate; come home with me,
then, and bring the good Indian maiden with thee.
It matters not to what nation, kindred or people they
belong who are in affliction; I feel they are my brethren,
and as ſuch, I will gladly ſhare my own comforts
with them.”
They heard with delight the genuine effuſions of
mercy and benevolence flow from the lips of the man
of peace, and being directed by him, purſued their way
to the habitation of hoſpitality.
“A ſmall manſion, built by frugality and furniſhed
by ſimplicity, ſituated on the banks of the Delaware,
and ſurrounded by a large and well-cultivated garden,
was the dwelling of Stedfaſt Trueman. Elizabeth his
wife was not handſome, but there was ſomething in
her look, voice and manner, more charming than
beauty. Her houſe, her children, herſelf, were pure
emblems of neatneſs, innocence and induſtry. She
heard that ſome poor gueſts were arrived, directed to
their friendly roof by her huſband, came into the
kitchen to bid them welcome, and with her own hands
[Page 352]
aſſiſted to ſet forth refreſhment. The children came
round them, ſome eagerly curious and inquiſitive, and
others timidly ſtanding aloof, to obſerve the ſtrange
dreſs and appearance of the travellers.
In this aſylum, Reuben and his companions ſoon
recruited both health and ſpirits. Their benevolent
friend ſupplied them with ſome coarſe clothing, the
joint product of his farm and his wife's induſtry. In
the courſe of converſation our hero mentioned his father's
name.
“Dudley,” ſaid friend Trueman; “I knew him
well; a more worthy, honeſt man never exiſted.
If thou art his ſon, thou haſt, I fear, been greatly
wronged by the man Jacob Holmes. I have reaſon to
believe thy father was a man of ſtrict integrity, and
that he would not premeditatedly aſſert a falſehood.
He did declare to me in confidence every particular
of his paſt life, and though he did not boaſt of his
good deeds, yet I gathered enough to believe that Jacob
was the child of his bounty. But the man has
ſince ſo boldly and ſolemnly contradicted that belief,
that I dare not judge too raſhly; and Heaven forbid
that I ſhould condemn him; for, juſt or unjuſt, he is
gone to give an account of his ſtewardſhip before
Him, who, requiring but humility, juſtice and mercy
from his ſervants toward their fellow-creatures, will in
no wiſe excuſe thoſe who ſlight his counſels, or break
his commandments.”
Reuben was ſurpriſed. “Is Jacob Holmes then
dead?” ſaid he.
“Verily he ſleepeth with his fathers,” ſaid Trueman.
“He was greatly hurt about three months
ſince, by a fall from his horſe; the bruiſe was internal,
brought on a ſpitting of blood, which baffled all
medical aid, and he went off ſuddenly, when he supposed
himſelf mending. Indeed, I was told he never
believed himſelf in danger. More is the pity; the rod
of affliction, that warns us of approaching diſſolution,
is a ſalutary and neceſſary judgment, that as we bow
under the correcting hand, we may implore that mercy
which is never withheld from the penitent ſinner.”
[Page 353]
“And who inherits his eſtate?” ſaid Reuben.
“His infant ſon, who with his mother, ſtill reſides
in the houſe.”
“Mrs. Holmes is a worthy woman,” ſaid Reuben,
“and poſſeſſes an honeſt ſimplicity of heart extremely
intereſting. Oh bounteous Diſpoſer of events,” continued
he, and his ſoul expanded as he ſpoke, “viſit
not, I humbly beſeech thee, the ſins of the father upon
the child; but may he live to be a comfort to his
mother, a friend to the worthy, and thy faithful servant
to a good old age.”
“Thy pious prayers, good young man,” ſaid Trueman,
“return tenfold on thy own head.”
The unfortunate participators of Reuben's captivity
being recruited, departed in ſearch of employment;
but himſelf, O'Neil and Eumea were detained in the
habitation of friend Trueman, who wiſhed to place our
hero in ſome reputable employ, meant to detain O'Neil
in his own ſervice, and thought the food and raiment necessary
to render the Indian maid comfortable, would
never be miſſed by his own family. The inquiries he
ſet on foot for employment for our hero made it universally
known that he was returned to Philadelphia.
One morning, as he ſat converſing with Trueman,
he was ſurpriſed by the entrance of Mrs. Holmes. She
advanced to him with a firm but eager ſtep, and presenting
her hand, “I am glad to ſee thee, friend Reuben,”
ſaid ſhe; “I did not hear of thy return till yester
even, or I ſhould have come to viſit thee before.”
Our hero cordially ſhook her proffered hand, led
her to a ſeat, and told her he was happy in an opportunity
to renew their acquaintance.
“I expect thou doſt know already that Jacob Holmes
is gone home,” ſaid ſhe, her boſom heaving and her
eyes ſwimming in tears. Reuben bowed aſſent.
“Thou haſt no right to regret his departure,” continued
ſhe, “but he was the choſen friend of my heart,
the father of my child, the ſupport of his family; his
loſs to me is irreparable.” She pauſed a moment. “I
have, ſince his departure,” ſhe continued, recovering
her voice, “diſcovered amongſt ſome old papers, which
[Page 354]
I do dope and believe he had never inſpected, the attested
copy of a will, and other accounts of consequence
to thee. Here they are; thou wilt find by
them that thou art the real poſſeſſor of Mount Pleasant.
I am ſure I could not be happy to detain it
from the lawful owner, and I here relinquiſh all claim
to it, and throw both myſelf and child upon your benevolence.”
She then untied a handkerchief, and delivered
the papers into the hands of Reuben, whoſe
feelings on the occaſion cannot eaſily be deſcribed.
Our hero, thus raiſed almoſt inſtantaneouſly from
extreme poverty to a ſtate of eaſe, and indeed (what
in thoſe days of moderation was termed) affluence,
made it his firſt care to place Mrs. Holmes and her
ſon in a comfortable habitation, and to ſettle upon
them one third of all his father died poſſeſſed of. He
placed Eumea with her, who aſſiduouſly endeavoured
to conform to the European dreſs, cuſtoms and manners;
but ſhe pined at being ſeparated from Reuben,
and if more than two days elapſed without her ſeeing
him, ſhe would give way to the moſt violent affliction.
Our hero had, previous to his campaign againſt the
Indians, frequently written to his ſiſter; but theſe letters
being directed to the care of Mr. Andrew Atkins,
were never forwarded to our heroine; indeed, after
the firſt, he might have pleaded in excuſe that he did
not know where to find her.
Reuben made every inquiry at the poſt-office, and
of the maſters of veſſels then arriving from England,
for letters, but could hear of none addreſſed to himself;
and he meditated a voyage to his native place,
in order to bring his ſiſter over, and ſometimes indulging
the fond hope, that Jeſſy Oliver might accompany
her. But as he had much to ſettle previous to taking
ſo long a voyage, he deferred it till the enſuing
ſpring.
His friend, Stedfaſt Trueman, had made a purchaſe
of ſome land ſituated in New-Jerſey, near the mouth
of the Delaware; he thought it neceſſary to viſit it
this autumn, and plan out the improvements he meant
ſhould take place in the ſpring. He invited Reuben
[Page 355]
to accompany him on this excurſion, and he, wiſhing
to ſee a little of that part of the country, aſſented.
Their journey was extremely pleaſant; but on the
day preceding that they had ſettled for their return to
Philadelphia, a cold ſtorm, ſuch as often precedes or
accompanies the ſun's autumnal paſſage acroſs the
equinox, commenced, and they reſolved to tarry till
its fury was abated. On the evening of the ſecond
day, it was increaſed to a tremendous degree, not
blowing ſteadily, but in guſts, that threw the ocean into
horrible convulſions, heaping up vaſt mountainous
waves that ſeemed to threaten heaven, and leaving
hollow chaſms, in which the veſſels (which they could
plainly deſcry from the windows of the houſe they
were in) ſeemed often to be loſt, though in a moment
after they appeared again on the ſummit of the highest
wave.
Friend Trueman and our hero were greatly affected
at the evident diſtreſs in which ſeveral ſmall barks
appeared; they ſtood anxiouſly watching them, till
the curtain of night ſhut them from their view. The
houſe they were in was ſituated at the entrance of Great
Egg-Harbour; and as the ſtorm abated in ſome trifling
degree towards morning, Reuben and his friend
aroſe with the earlieſt dawn, to ſee if any ſigns of
wrecks were apparent, or if they could be of any service
to the ſuffering mariners, who might, if luckily
they eſcaped ſuch a cataſtrophe, be in want of friends
and aſſiſtance. They wrapped themſelves in their
great coats, and walked towards the ſea, where they
preſently deſcried a ſhip dreadfully ſhattered, endeavouring
to make the harbour. Her foremaſt and maintopmast
were gone; ſome of her ſails, torn in atoms,
were fluttering in the wind, and the few ſhe could expand
were ſcarcely manageable.
Long they laboured, for ſome hours oppoſed both
by wind and tide; at length the latter turned in her
favour, and ſhe fetched in, but not without making repeated
ſignals of diſtreſs; and it was very evident, as
ſhe approached the ſhore, that ſhe laboured heavily in
the water, and all the ſpectators concluded ſhe was in
[Page 356]
danger of ſinking. The ſea ran ſo high, no boat
could, without imminent riſk, go to the aſſiſtance of
the wretched crew. At length a fiſhing boat ventured
off. The people on board had thrown out an anchor,
but ſhe dragged it, and the wind ſetting acroſs
the harbour, ſhe was making ſtern foremoſt to the
ſhore. Juſt as the boat reached her, ſhe ſtruck, and
the cries of the affrighted ſailors and paſſengers reached
the ears of thoſe who ſtood on the ſhore, waiting
in ſuſpenſe and horror to behold the fate of ſo fine a
ſhip and her unfortunate company. Several women
were ſeen on the deck, and the ſpectators ſeemed as
though they could have given their own lives to preserve
the lives of the ſufferers.
When the boat reached the ſhip, the people ruſhed
over the ſides into her; the women were helped in,
and in a few moments their ſituation was as perilous
from having overloaded the boat, as it had been before
in the veſſel. However, they put off, and made
towards the ſhore; the wind favoured them, and the
ſpectators exultingly cried, In five minutes they will
be all ſafe; but in a much leſs time, a ſudden flaw
took the ſails; from the number of perſons on board,
the fiſhermen could not flack the ſheets in time, and
ſhe overſet.
All the aim of thoſe on ſhore was now to ſave, if
poſſible, the lives of ſome, who, borne by the foaming
ſurge, ſeemed almoſt to reach the land, when the receding
wave would daſh them back into the dread
abyſs of waters. Spars faſtened by ropes were thrown
into the ſea, while a number of men on ſhore ſtood
ready to drag them to land, ſhould any deſpairing
wretch ſeize them as the means of deliverance. Reuben
was buſied in this humane endeavour, when he
heard a ſhout of exultation from a group of men employed
in the ſame manner at a little diſtance. They
waved alſo for more help. He therefore quitted his
own party, which was more numerous, and ran to
their aſſiſtance, when he perceived that two women
had been already ſnatched from a watery grave, and
[Page 357]
ſeveral men were, by the help of the ſpars, near the
ſhore.
“Here,” ſaid the maſter of the houſe at which they
lodged, “here, take this poor infant, and carry it to
the houſe, bid my dame make up a large fire in every
room, and get all the beds ready. You muſt ſleep on
the floor to-night, Sir.”
Reuben claſped the poor little dripping infant to
his naked breaſt, wrapped his coat round it, and was
delighted to find, by a faint moaning noiſe it made,
that in all probability it would recover. He ran to
the houſe, gave the child into the care of a kind hearted
Negro wench, and then returned to help the two
women. One was entirely ſenſeleſs, for ſhe had dropped
on the very moment ſhe reached the ſhore; the
other was unable to walk or ſpeak, but yet could make
ſigns that her ſenſes were perfect. Reuben aſſiſted to
carry them in, gave them in charge to the women of
the houſe, and then returned to the ſea ſide; but ſoon
perceiving nothing more was to be done, he came
back to inquire after the little traveller.
“The women are both recovered,” ſaid a man, as he
entered the houſe.
“I am glad of it,” ſaid Reuben; “might I be admitted
to ſpeak to them; they are no doubt Engliſh
women, and will rejoice to find a countryman ſo near
them, who is willing and ready to render them any
ſervice.”
This meſſage was carried to the ladies, and in a moment
he was admitted. They were in ſeparate beds
in the ſame room. Reuben drew near that which was
next the door; the perſon who occupied it raiſed herself
partly, and exclaiming, “It is! it is my brother!”
threw herſelf into his arms, which, ſinking on the
bed beſide her, he had extended to receive her; for the
moment he beheld her face, he recognized his ſiſter,
and the exclamation of `Dear Reuben!' `beloved Rachel!
' mutually eſcaped their lips as they burſt into a
flood of tears.
And what were the feelings of Jeſſy Oliver at this
moment? they were indeſcribable. She folded her
[Page 358]
hands over her face, and the ſilent tears trickled
through her fingers. Rachel recovered articulation
firſt. “Reuben,” ſaid ſhe, “there is a dear friend of
both yours and mine; 'tis Jeſſy Oliver, who has been
my friend, my ſupporter, my more than ſiſter.”
Reuben left his ſiſter, and dropping on his knees by
the bedſide of Jeſſy, drew her hands from her face,
and feeling more at that moment for her kindneſs to
his ſiſter, than from any other motive, preſſed them to
his heart, and cried, “May Heaven forever bleſs you.”
The enſuing ſcene may be conceived, but cannot be
deſcribed. Reuben diſcovered, from the lamentations
of his ſiſter, that it was her infant he had brought to
the houſe (ſhe had dropped it at the moment of landing
when her ſenſes failed her, and imagined it drowned)
and he had the exquiſite pleaſure of reſtoring it to
her arms.
A few days reinſtated their health and ſpirits, and
our hero, with his friend Stedfaſt Trueman, eſcorted
the happy Rachel and Jeſſy to Philadelphia. The former
explained every circumſtance of her marriage,
and its ſubſequent conſequences; and the latter when
ſolicited to become miſtreſs of Mount Pleaſant, did
not frown or threaten to be obdurate. They arrived
at friend Trueman's houſe about midday, and after
taking a ſlight refreſhment, Reuben, with his ſiſter and
her charming friend, proceeded to Mount Pleaſant.
They were met at the gate by O'Neil.
“Och! my dare maſter,” ſaid he, “I'm mighty
glad you are come back, for here has been a ſtrange
ſort of a gentleman here, and for the matter of that
he is here now, in our houſe, but he is ſick; ſo as he
ſeemed to love your honour, and talk kindly of my
good lady your ſiſter that I have heard your honour
ſpeak of, I put him into the beſt chamber, and ſent for
a doctor, and I hope your honour won't be angry, because
you ſee I did as if I had been in your honour's
place.”
O'Neil would have gone on, had he not ſeen a chaiſe
approach (for Reuben was on horſeback). “And
be theſe viſitors?” ſaid he.
[Page 359]
“Yes,” replied our hero, “and the very ſiſter you
ſpoke of, and a charming lady, who I hope will ſoon
become your miſtreſs, O'Neil.”
The honeſt, affectionate O'Neil ſtayed not to reply;
he darted forward, and ſeemed as if he would have
helped the horſe that drew the ſiſter of his beloved
maſter. When the carriage ſtopped, he waited not
for ceremony; but as Jeſſy ſtood on the ſide of the
chaiſe ready to alight, he ſeized her in his arms, and
bore her into the houſe; then running back, took the
child from Rachel, (whom Reuben had helped out of
the chaiſe) almoſt devoured it with kiſſes, and leaping,
dancing and capering, cried, “Yes! yes! he will be
happy after all, I knew he would, I was always ſure
he would. O that my dear Miſtreſs Juliana was but
alive now!”
Perhaps the reader has before this ſurmiſed, that the
ſtrange, inquiſitive, ſick gentleman was no other than
Hamden Auberry, who had embarked for Philadelphia
immediately after his knowledge of our heroine's
ſeeking him in that place; but the ſhip in which he
embarked being a faſt ſailer, and ſteering a different
courſe to that purſued by the one in which was his
wife, arrived ſafe in the port of Philadelphia the very
night before the commencement of the ſtorm in which
poor Rachel ſuffered ſo much, and ſo nearly eſcaped
with life. His firſt inquiries were for Reuben, and he
was directed to Mount Pleaſant; on his arrival there,
he learnt that Rachel was not arrived, and that Reuben
was abſent from home. Change of climate, the
fatigues of a long voyage, and the anguiſh of mind he
had endured for ſix months paſt, had ſo enervated
his frame and ſhook his conſtitution, that when he attempted
to remount the horſe that brought him, he
turned ſo faint as to be obliged to return to the houſe,
where he grew ſo much worſe, that O'Neil (as he
had told his maſter) adviſed him to go to bed, and
ſent for a doctor.
The meeting between our heroine and her huſband
was all that real affection and ſenſibility can imagine.
Rachel wept, and regretted the pain ſhe had
[Page 360]
unintentionally given him, whilſt he implored her pardon for
that falſe pride, which had firſt expoſed her to the suspicions
and inſults of thoſe who, envying her ſuperior
merit, rejoiced in an opportunity to level her with their
own contaminated ideas.
About ſix weeks after this happy meeting, Reuben
received the hand of Jeſſy Oliver. It was a day of
feſtivity. The gates of Mount Pleaſant were thrown
open, and every viſitor made welcome. To add to
their mirth, a dance in the evening was to finiſh the
entertainment.
A ſocial meal, diſpenſed with cheerfulneſs, and partaken
with a true ſpirit of hilarity, had been juſt removed,
when the parlour door haſtily opened, and Eumea
entered. Her hair hung looſe about her shoulders;
her eyes were wild, aud her voice broken. She
ruſhed toward Reuben and Jeſſy, and taking a hand
from each, joined them; then preſſing them to her
boſom, raiſed her eyes to heaven—
“God of the Chriſtians,” ſaid ſhe fervently, “make
them forever happy. Wife of Reuben, thou art a happy
woman, for thy huſband is a man of honour. He
ſaw the weakneſs of a poor, unprotected Indian maid,
he pitied her folly, but took no advantage of it.”
Jeſſy was affected by the ſimple yet fervent addreſs.
Reuben took the hand of Eumea, and would have
made her ſit down, but ſhe refuſed.
“No! no!” ſaid ſhe, “Eumea will reſt no more,
know peace no more. I had raiſed a deity of my own,
built an altar in my boſom, and daily offered the sacrifice
of a fond, an affectionate heart; but the days
are paſt, I can worſhip no longer without a crime.
Farewel,” ſaid ſhe, enthuſiaſtically elaſping her hands,
“do not quite forget the poor, poor Eumea!”
She then left the houſe, and Reuben ſent a perſon
to follow and ſee that ſhe came to no ill. She went
home, but continued not long there; a young woman,
who from her wild looks and incoherent language
imagined her mind to be diſordered, endeavoured to
detain her, but in vain. About the duſk of the evening
ſhe went out, and all inquiry for her was fruitleſs
[Page 361]
till three days after, when as Reuben was giving ſome
orders to O'Neil, in that part of his ground that lay
on the verge of the Schuylkill, they diſcovered something
floating on the water; the garments beſpoke it
a woman. Reuben's heart ſhuddered; they dragged
it to the ſhore; it was the corpſe of poor Eumea. Reuben
ſighed, raiſed his eyes to heaven, but was ſilent.
Not ſo O'Neil. He fell on his knees beſide the pale
corſe, and his honeſt heart burſt in a torrent from his
eyes.
“Och! my flower of the foreſt,” ſaid he, “and art
thou gone, and was it love that made thee leave us?
Beautiful, good, ſweeteſt of ſavages—O! thy poor
O'Neil can pity thee. And what ſhall he do now thou
haſt cloſed thine eyes? Thou haſt murdered thy ſweet
ſelf, and what is there now in the world that he cares
for?”
Reuben was ſtruck with the fervency and humility
that was at once expreſſed by O'Neil; for it ſpoke as
plain as words could ſpeak, `I loved her, but I never
dared to tell my love, leſt it ſhould offend her.'
Our hero by degrees drew him from the contemplation
of the melancholy object, and proper forms being
gone through in regard to the body, it was buried in
a field near the margin of the river. O'Neil banked
up the grave, twiſted oſier twigs and fenced it round;
at the head he planted a weeping willow, and at the
foot a wild roſe tree. Of a night when his labour was
finiſhed, he would viſit the ſpot, ſing old ditties, and
weep whilſt he ſung; and though he lived to good old
age, O'Neil never knew another love.
After this period, our heroine for many years enjoyed
an uninterrupted ſeries of felicity. Auberry, entirely
occupied by the cares of a mercantile life, into
which he had ſucceſsfully entered, and giving every
leiſure moment to the aſſiſting of Rachel in the education
of a beautiful riſing family, was entirely cured of jealousy
and ambition, and wondered he could have ever
doubted the faith of his wife, or have riſqued losing
ſo vaſt a treaſure forever, rather than relinquiſh
the hope of being rich and great.
[Page 362]
Reuben and Jeſſy were patterns of conjugal felicity,
and that felicity was increaſed in the courſe of a few
years, by the arrival of old Mr. Oliver, Archibald and
Courtney. The former had ſaved a trifle from the
wreck of his fortune, which had been almoſt diſſipated
by a worthleſs woman. Archibald brought with him
an amiable bride in the perſon of Courtney's ſiſter.
The abandoned Mrs. Courtney had met the fate her
vicious courſe of life merited, and died abroad, neglected
by all her pretended lovers, a victim to diſeaſe,
poverty and remorſe.
It was in the ſeventh year of our hero and heroine's
happy ſettlement in Philadelphia, that the latter was
told one morning that a gentleman from England desired
to ſee her. She went into the parlour, and beheld,
to her infinite ſurpriſe, Mr. Allibi.
“Mrs. Auberry, I preſume,” ſaid he, bowing profoundly.
“I am happy, Madam, to be the firſt to wiſh
you joy on a very great and unexpected acceſſion of
fortune. Your huſband's relation, lady Anne, is dead;
alſo her brother the Earl, and I may now ſalute you
Counteſs of Montmorill. Moreover,” continued he, not
giving her leave to ſpeak, “I am to inform you, by
order of Mr. Andrew Atkins, that yourſelf and brother,
Mr. Reuben Dudley, being the only deſcendants
of the lady Arrabella Ruthven, who married about
the year 1644-5, with Edward Dudley, ſon of Henry
Dudley, deſcendant of the unfortunate lady Jane Grey,
and who relinquiſhing her title, embarked with him
for America; as I ſay, yourſelf and brother being the
only legitimate deſcendants of that marriage, you are
acknowledged joint heirs to the titles and immenſe estates
of the houſe of Ruthven. And I am commissioned
by my very good friend, Mr. Andrew Atkins,
to receive your orders in what manner he ſhall proceed
in regard to ſaid eſtates, and to inform you, your Lancashire
eſtate is now, through his care, entirely free
from incumbrances.”
Rachel, overwhelmed by the rapidity with which
Allibi related all this good news, and ſcarcely crediting
what ſhe heard, yet underſtanding ſufficient,
[Page 363]
perfectly to comprehend the mean fineſſe of Allibi and his
dirty employer, in thus informing her of her acceſſion
of fortune, and making a merit of relinquiſhing the
Lancaſhire eſtate, in hopes of being made agent and
ſteward to thoſe of much greater value, could ſcarcely
command her temper, whilſt ſhe interrogated him concerning
the extraordinary intelligence he conveyed.
However, being aſcertained of the truth of his assertions,
and received from him ſome papers of consequence,
with a long, fulſome, congratulatory letter
from Mr. Andrew Atkins, ſhe appointed him to call
the enſuing morning, when her brother and huſband
would be ſure to meet him.
On the following morning, therefore, at a little paſt
eight o'clock, Mr. Allibi entered the breakfaſt parlour,
where he found Reuben, Rachel, Mr. Auberry and
Mrs. Dudley aſſembled to breakfaſt. After partaking
a ſocial meal, and delivering and atteſting to every
neceſſary paper, both in regard to their new acquisitions
and the Lancaſhire eſtate, he was ſomewhat
aſtoniſhed to hear Reuben addreſs him in the following
words:—
“You may think, Mr. Allibi, that by bringing us
this intelligence you have greatly heightened our felicity;
and in one reſpect you have, as it extends our
power of ſerving our fellow-creatures. As to titles,
both my brother Auberry and his wife Rachel, join
with me to renounce them; they are diſtinctions nothing
worth, and ſhould by no means be introduced into
a young country, where the only diſtinction between
man and man ſhould be made by virtue, genius and
education. Our ſons are true-born Americans, and
while they ſtrive to make that title reſpectable, we wiſh
them to poſſeſs no other. Let the titles then go, and
ſuch of the eſtates as are annexed to them, to more
diſtant branches of our ſeveral families, or in caſe of
default of heirs, let them ſink into oblivion. Of the
immenſe property of which we are become poſſeſſors,
we ſhall retain no more than will ſet our ſons forward
in buſineſs, and give our daughters moderate portions;
[Page 364]
the reſidue ſhall be equally divided amongſt the indigent
relatives of both families.”
Allibi brightened at theſe words, thinking he ſhould
be conſtituted agent in this buſineſs; but Reuben continued:—
“I am obliged to you for the trouble you have taken
on my account, and hold myſelf your debtor for
the expenſes of your voyage and other contingencies,
which, whenever you pleaſe, I ſhall be ready to discharge;
and when you return, I will trouble you with
a letter to Mr. Andrew Atkins, informing him he will
be no farther troubled with my affairs, but will pleaſe
to ſettle all accounts with Mr. Courtney, a gentleman
who has kindly undertaken to go to England for that
purpoſe.”
The poor, diſappointed Allibi could ſcarcely breathe
at the concluſion of this ſpeech; he ſhuffled on his ſeat,
attempted to recommend himſelf by reprobating the
conduct of Atkins, but a look of marked contempt
from Reuben ſilenced him; and, mortified beyond endurance,
he roſe haſtily and took his leave.
In a ſhort time, Courtney embarked for England,
ſettled every thing according to the directions of Reuben
and Auberry, made many an orphan glad, and
many a diſconſolate heart leap for joy. He liberated
the poor debtor, aſſorded relief to depreſſed merit, and
wiped away the tear from the eye of ſuffering virtue.
The incenſe of gratitude aſcended towards heaven,
and was returned in bleſſings on the heads of Reuben,
Rachel, and their poſterity.
FINIS .
ERRATA. Vol. I. page 129, 14th line from the bottom, for wife read ſiſter .
page 170, 11th, line from the top, for ſiſter read couſin .
Back matter
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
$$$
