Rhetoric
Author: De Quincey, Thomas.
Publication info: The Collected Writings Of Thomas De Quincey . viii, 455 p. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1890.

Rhetoric [in, The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey, New And Enlarged Edition, By David Masson ... Vol. X. Literary Theory And Criticism]
[Page 81]
RHETORIC 1 No art cultivated by man has suffered more in the revolutions of taste and opinion than the art of Rhetoric. There was a time when, by an undue extension of this term, it designated the whole cycle of accomplishments which prepared a man for public affairs. From that height it has descended to a level with the arts of alchemy and astrology, as holding out promises which consist in a mixed degree of impostures wherever its pretensions happened to be weighty, and of trifles wherever they happened to be true. If we look into the prevailing theory of Rhetoric, under which it meets with so degrading an estimate, we shall find that it fluctuates between two different conceptions, according to one of which it is an art of ostentatious ornament, and according to the other an art of sophistry. A man is held to play the rhetorician when he treats a subject with more than usual gaiety of ornament, and, perhaps we may add, as an essential element in the idea, with conscious ornament. This is one view of Rhetoric; and under this what it accomplishes is not so much to persuade as to delight, not so much to win
[Page 82]
the assent as to stimulate the attention and captivate the taste. And even this purpose is attached to something separable and accidental in the manner . But the other idea of Rhetoric lays its foundation in something essential to the matter . This is that rhetoric of which Milton spoke as able “to dash maturest counsels and to make the worse appear the better reason.” Now, it is clear that argument of some quality or other must be taken as the principle of this rhetoric; for those must be immature counsels indeed that could be dashed by mere embellishments of manner, or by artifices of diction and arrangement.
Here then we have in popular use two separate ideas of Rhetoric: one of which is occupied with the general end of the fine arts—that is to say, intellectual pleasure; the other applies itself more specifically to a definite purpose of utility, viz. fraud.
Such is the popular idea of Rhetoric; which wants both unity and precision. If we seek these from the formal teachers of Rhetoric, our embarrassment is not much relieved. All of them agree that Rhetoric may be defined the art of persuasion . But, if we inquire what is persuasion, we find them vague and indefinite or even contradictory. To waive a thousand of others, Dr. Whately, in the work before us, insists upon the conviction of the understanding as “an essential part of persuasion”; and, on the other hand, the author of the Philosophy of Rhetoric is equally satisfied that there is no persuasion without an appeal to the passions . 2 Here are two views. We, for our parts, have a third which excludes both. Where conviction begins, the field of Rhetoric ends; that is our opinion: and, as to the passions, we contend that they are not within the province of Rhetoric, but of Eloquence. 3
[Page 83]
In this view of Rhetoric and its functions we coincide with Aristotle; as indeed originally we took it up on a suggestion derived from him. But, as all parties may possibly fancy a confirmation of their views in Aristotle, we will say a word or two in support of our own interpretation
[Page 84]
of that author which will surprise our Oxford friends. Our explanation involves a very remarkable detection, which will tax many thousands of books with error in a particular point supposed to be as well established as the hills. We question, indeed, whether any fulminating powder, descending upon the schools of Oxford, would cause more consternation
[Page 85]
than the explosion of that novelty which we are going to discharge.
Many years ago, when studying the Aristotelian Rhetoric at Oxford, it struck us that, by whatever name Aristotle might describe the main purpose of Rhetoric, practically, at least, in his own treatment of it, he threw the whole stress upon finding such arguments for any given thesis as, without positively proving or disproving it, should give it a
[Page 86]
colourable support. It could not be by accident that the topics, or general heads of argument, were never in an absolute and unconditional sense true, but contained so much of plausible or colourable truth as is expressed in the original meaning of the word probable . A ratio probabilis , in the Latin use of the word probabilis , is that ground of assent— not which the understanding can solemnly approve and abide by—but the very opposite to this; one which it can submit to for a moment, and countenance as within the limits of the plausible. 4 That this was the real governing law of Aristotle's procedure it was not possible to doubt: but was it consciously known to himself? If so, how was it to be reconciled with his own formal account of the office of Rhetoric, so often repeated, that it consisted in finding enthymemes? 5 What then was an Enthymeme?
[Page 87]
Oxford! thou wilt think us mad to ask. 6 Certainly we knew, what all the world knows, that an enthymeme was understood to be a syllogism of which one proposition is suppressed—major, minor, or conclusion. But what possible relation had that to rhetoric? Nature sufficiently prompts all men to that sort of ellipsis; and what impertinence in a teacher to build his whole system upon a solemn precept to do this or that, when the rack would not have forced any man to do otherwise! Besides, Aristotle had represented it as the fault of former systems that they applied themselves exclusively to the treatment of the passions—an object
[Page 88]
foreign to the purpose of the rhetorician, who, in some situations, is absolutely forbidden by law to use any such arts: whereas, says he, his true and universal weapon is the enthymeme, which is open to him everywhere. Now, what opposition, or what relation of any kind, can be imagined between the system which he rejects and the one he adopts, if the enthymeme is to be understood as it usually has been? The rhetorician is not to address the passions, but—what? to mind that in all his arguments he suppresses one of his propositions! And these follies are put into the mouth of Aristotle!
In this perplexity a learned Scottish friend 7 communicated to us an Essay of Facciolati's, read publicly about a century ago (Nov. 1724), and entitled De Enthymemate , 8 in which he maintains that the received idea of the enthymeme is a total blunder, and triumphantly restores the lost idea. “Nego,” says he, “nego enthymema esse syllogismum mutilum, ut vulgo dialectici docent. Nego, inquam, et pernego enthymema enunciatione una et conclusione constare, quamvis ita in scholis omnibus finiatur, et a nobis ipsis finitum sit aliquando, nolentibus extra locum lites suscipere.” I deny, says he, that the enthymeme properly understood is a truncated syllogism, as commonly is taught by dialecticians. I deny, let me repeat, peremptorily and furiously I deny, that the enthymeme consists of one premiss and the conclusion: although that doctrine has been laid down universally in the schools, and upon one occasion even by myself, as unwilling to move the question prematurely or out of its natural place .
Facciolati is not the least accurate of logicians because he may chance to be the most elegant. Yet, we apprehend, that at such innovations Smiglecius will stir in his grave, Keckermannus will groan, “Dutch 9 Burgersdyk” will snort,
[Page 89]
and English Crackenthorpius (who has the honour to be an ancestor of Mr. Wordsworth), though buried for two centuries, will revisit the glimpses of the moon. And really, if the question were for a name, Heaven forbid that we should disturb the peace of logicians: they might have leave to say, as of the Strid in Wharfdale,
“It has borne that name a thousand years,
And shall a thousand more.”
But, whilst the name is abused, the idea perishes. Facciolati undoubtedly is right: nor is he the first who has observed the error. Julius Pacius, who understood Aristotle better than any man that ever lived, had long before remarked it. 10 The arguments of Facciolati we will give below 11 ; it may be
[Page 90]
sufficient here to state the result. An enthymeme differs from a syllogism, not in the accident of suppressing one of its propositions; either may do this, or neither; the difference is essential, and in the nature of the matter : that of the syllogism proper being certain and apodeictie; that of the enthymeme simply probable, and drawn from the province of opinion.
This theory tallies exactly with our own previous construction of Aristotle's Rhetoric, and explains the stress which he had laid at the outset upon enthymemes. Whatsoever is certain, or matter of fixed science, can be no subject
[Page 91]
for the rhetorician: where it is possible for the understanding to be convinced, no field is open for rhetorical persuasion. Absolute certainty and fixed science transcend opinion, and exclude the probable. The province of Rhetoric, whether meant for an influence upon the actions, or simply upon the belief, lies amongst that vast field of cases where there is a pro and a con , with the chance of right and wrong, true and false, distributed in varying proportions between them. There is also an immense range of truths where there are no chances at all concerned, but the affirmative and the negative are both true: as, for example, the goodness of human nature and its wickedness; the happiness of human life and its misery; the charms of knowledge, and its hollowness; the fragility of human prosperity in the eye of religious meditation, and its security as estimated by worldly confidence and youthful hope. In all such cases the rhetorician exhibits his art by giving an impulse to one side, and by withdrawing the mind so steadily from all thoughts or images which support the other as to leave it practically under the possession of a onesided estimate.
[Page 92]
Upon this theory, what relation to Rhetoric shall we assign to style and the ornamental arts of composition? In some respects they seem liable to the same objection as that which Aristotle has urged against appeals to the passions. 12 Both are extra-essential, or ἐξω του ρραγματος ; they are subjective arts, not objective; that is, they do not affect the thing which is to be surveyed, but the eye of him who is to survey. Yet, at a banquet, the epicure holds himself not more obliged to the cook for the vension than to the physician who braces his stomach to enjoy. And any arts which conciliate regard to the speaker indirectly promote the effect of his arguments. On this account, and because (under the severest limitation of Rhetoric) they are in many cases indispensable to the perfect interpretation of the thoughts, we may admit arts of style and ornamental composition as the ministerial part of Rhetoric. But with regard to the passions, as contended for by Dr. Campbell, it is a sufficient answer that they are already preoccupied by what is called Eloquence .
Coleridge, as we have often heard, is in the habit of drawing the line with much philosophical beauty between Rhetoric and Eloquence. On this topic we were never so fortunate as to hear him: but, if we are here called upon for a distinction, we shall satisfy our immediate purpose by a very plain and brief one. By Eloquence we understand the overflow of powerful feelings upon occasions fitted to excite them. But Rhetoric is the art of aggrandizing and bringing out into strong relief, by means of various and striking thoughts, some aspect of truth which of itself is supported by no spontaneous feelings, and therefore rests upon artificial aids. 13
Greece, as may well be imagined, was the birthplace of Rhetoric: to which of the Fine Arts was it not? and here, in one sense of the word Rhetoric, the art had its consummation:
[Page 93]
for the theory, or ars docens , was taught with a fulness and an accuracy by the Grecian masters not afterwards approached. In particular, it was so taught by Aristotle: whose system we are disposed to agree with Dr. Whately in pronouncing the best as regards the primary purpose of a teacher; though otherwise, for elegance and as a practical model in the art he was expounding, neither Aristotle, nor any less austere among the Greek rhetoricians, has any pretensions to measure himself with Quintilian. In reality, for a triumph over the difficulties of the subject, and as a lesson on the possibility of imparting grace to the treatment of scholastic topics naturally as intractable as that of Grammar or Prosody there is no such chef-d'œuvre to this hour in any literature as the Institutions of Quintilian. 14 Laying this one case out of the comparison, however, the Greek superiority was indisputable.
Yet how is it to be explained that, with these advantages on the side of the Greek Rhetoric as an ars docens , Rhetoric as a practical art (the ars utens ) never made any advances amongst the Greeks to the brilliancy which it attained in Rome? Up to a certain period, and throughout the palmy state of the Greek republics, we may account for it thus:— Rhetoric, in its finest and most absolute burnish, may be called an eloquentia umbratica ; that is, it aims at an elaborate form of beauty which shrinks from the strife of business, and could neither arise nor make itself felt in a tumultuous assembly. Certain features, it is well known, and peculiar styles of countenance, which are impressive in a drawing-room become ineffective on a public stage. The fine tooling and delicate tracery of the cabinet artist is lost upon a building of colossal proportions. Extemporaneousness, again,—a favourable circumstance to impassioned eloquence,—is death to Rhetoric. Two characteristics indeed there were of a Greek popular assembly which must have operated fatally on the
[Page 94]
rhetorician: its fervour, in the first place; and, secondly, the coarseness of a real interest. All great rhetoricians in selecting their subject have shunned the determinate cases of real life: and even in the single instance of a deviation from the rule—that of the author (whoever he be) of the Declamations attributed to Quintilian—the cases are shaped with so romantic a generality, and so slightly circumstantiated, as to allow him all the benefit of pure abstractions.
We can readily understand, therefore, why the fervid oratory of the Athenian assemblies, and the intense reality of its interest, should stifle the growth of rhetoric: the smoke, tarnish, and demoniac glare of Vesuvius easily eclipse the pallid coruscations of the aurora borealis. And, in fact, amongst the greater orators of Greece there is not a solitary gleam of rhetoric. Isocrates may have a little, being (to say the truth) neither orator nor rhetorician in any eminent sense; Demosthenes has none. But, when those great thunders had subsided which reached “to Macedon and Artaxerxes' throne,” when the “fierce democracy” itself had perished, and Greece had fallen under the common circumstances of the Roman Empire, how came it that Greek Rhetoric did not blossom concurrently with Roman? Vegetate it did; and a rank crop of weeds grew up under the name of Rhetoric, down to the times of the Emperor Julian and his friend Libanius (both of whom, by the way, were as worthless writers as have ever abused the Greek language). 15 But this part of Greek Literature is a desert with no oasis. The fact is, if it were required to assign the two bodies of writers who have exhibited the human understanding in the most abject poverty, and whose works by no possibility emit a casual scintillation of wit, fancy, just thinking, or good writing, we should certainly fix upon Greek rhetoricians and Italian critics. Amongst the whole mass there is not a page that any judicious friend to literature would wish to reprieve from destruction. And in both cases we apprehend that the possibility of so much inanity is due in part to the quality of the two languages. The diffuseness and loose structure of Greek style unfit it for the closeness, condensation,
[Page 95]
and το ἀγχιστροφον of rhetoric; the melodious beauty of the mere sounds, which both in the Italian and in the Greek are combined with much majesty, dwells upon the ear so delightfully that in no other language is it so easy as in these two to write with little or no meaning, and to flow along through a whole wilderness of inanity without particularly rousing the reader's disgust.
In the literature of Rome it is that we find the true El Dorado of rhetoric, as we might expect from the sinewy compactness of the language. Livy, and, above all preceding writers, Ovid, display the greatest powers of rhetoric in forms of composition which were not particularly adapted to favour that talent. The contest of Ajax and Ulysses for the arms of Achilles in one of the latter books of the Metamorphoses is a chef-d'œuvre of rhetoric, considering its metrical form; for metre, and especially the flowing heroic hexameter, is no advantage to the rhetorician. 16 The two Plinys, Lucan (though again under the disadvantage of verse), Petronius Arbiter, and Quintilian, but above all the Senecas 17 (for a Spanish cross appears to improve the quality of the rhetorician), have left a body of rhetorical composition such as no modern nation has rivalled. Even the most brilliant of these writers, however, were occasionally surpassed in particular bravuras of rhetoric by several of the Latin Fathers, particularly Tertullian, Arnobius, St Austin, 18 and a writer whose name we cannot at this moment recall. In fact, a little African blood operated as genially in this respect as Spanish, whilst an Asiatic cross was inevitably fatal, by prompting a diffusion and inflation of style radically hostile
[Page 96]
to the condensation of keen, arrowy rhetoric. Partly from this cause, and partly because they wrote in an unfavourable language, the Greek Fathers are, one and all, Birmingham rhetoricians. Even Gregory Nazianzen is so, with submission to Messieurs of the Port Royal and other bigoted critics who have pronounced him at the very top of the tree among the fine writers of antiquity. 19 Undoubtedly he has a turgid style of mouthy grandiloquence (though often the merest bombast); but for polished rhetoric he is singularly unfitted, by inflated habits of thinking, by loitering diffuseness, and a dreadful trick of calling names. The spirit of personal invective is peculiarly adverse to the coolness of rhetoric. As to Chrysostom and Basil, with less of pomp and swagger than Gregory, they have not at all more of rhetorical burnish and compression. 20 Upon the whole, looking back through the dazzling files of the ancient rhetoricians, we are disposed to rank the Senecas and Tertullian as the leaders of the band; for St. Austin, in his Confessions, and wherever he becomes peculiarly interesting, is apt to be impassioned and servent in a degree which makes him break out of the proper pace of rhetoric. He is matched to trot, and is continually breaking into a gallop. Indeed, his Confessions have in parts,—particularly in those which relate to the death of his young friend and his own frenzy of grief,—all that real passion which is only imagined in the Confessions of Rousseau under a preconception derived from his known character and unhappy life. By the time of the Emperor Justinian (say A.D. 530 ), or in the interval between that time and the era of Mahomet ( A.D. 620 ),—which interval we regard as the common crepusculum between Ancient and Modern History, all Rhetoric (as the professional pretension of a class) seems to have finally expired.
In the Literature of Modern Europe Rhetoric has been cultivated with success. But this remark applies only with any force to a period which is now long past; and it is probable, upon various considerations, that such another
[Page 97]
period will never revolve. The rhetorician's art in its glory and power has silently faded away before the stern tendencies of the age; and, if, by any peculiarity of taste or strong determination of the intellect, a rhetorician en grande costume were again to appear amongst us, it is certain that he would have no better welcome than a stare of surprise as a posture-maker or balancer, not more elevated in the general estimate, but far less amusing, than the acrobat, or funambulist, or equestrian gymnast. No; the age of Rhetoric, like that of Chivalry, has passed amongst forgotten things; and the rhetorician can have no more chance for returning than the rhapsodist of early Greece or the troubadour of romance. So multiplied are the modes of intellectual enjoyment in modern times that the choice is absolutely distracted; and in a boundless theatre of pleasures, to be had at little or no cost of intellectual activity, it would be marvellous indeed if any considerable audience could be found for an exhibition which presupposes a state of tense exertion on the part both of auditor and performer. To hang upon one's own thoughts as an object of conscious interest, to play with them, to watch and pursue them through a maze of inversions, evolutions, and harlequin changes, implies a condition of society either, like that in the monastic ages, forced to introvert its energies from mere defect of books (whence arose the scholastic metaphysics, admirable for its subtlety, but famishing the mind whilst it sharpened its edge in one exclusive direction); or, if it implies no absolute starvation of intellect, as in the case of the Roman rhetoric, which arose upon a considerable (though not very various) literature, it proclaims at least a quiescent state of the public mind, unoccupied with daily novelties, and at leisure from the agitations of eternal change.
Growing out of the same condition of society, there is another cause at work which will for ever prevent the resurrection of rhetoric: viz. the necessities of public business, its vast extent, complexity, fulness of details, and consequent vulgarity, as compared with that of the ancients. The very same cause, by the way, furnishes an answer to the question moved by Hume, in one of his essays, with regard to the declension of eloquence in our deliberative assemblies. Eloquence, or at least that which is senatorial and forensic,
[Page 98]
has languished under the same changes of society which have proved fatal to Rhetoric. The political economy of the ancient republics, and their commerce, were simple and unelaborate; the system of their public services, both martial and civil, was arranged on the most naked and manageable principles; for we must not confound the perplexity in our modern explanations of these things with a perplexity in the things themselves. The foundation of these differences was in the differences of domestic life. Personal wants being few, both from climate and from habit, and, in the great majority of the citizens, limited almost to the pure necessities of nature,—hence arose, for the mass of the population, the possibility of surrendering themselves, much more than with us, either to the one paramount business of the state, war, or to a state of Indian idleness. Rome, in particular, during the ages of her growing luxury, must be regarded as a nation supported by other nations; by largesses, in effect; that is to say, by the plunder of conquest. Living, therefore, upon foreign alms, or upon corn purchased by the product of tribute or of spoils, a nation could readily dispense with that, expansive development of her internal resources upon which Modern Europe has been forced by the more equal distribution of power amongst the civilized world.
The changes which have followed in the functions of our popular assemblies correspond to the great revolution here described. Suppose yourself an ancient Athenian at some customary display of Athenian oratory, what will be the topics? Peace or war, vengeance for public wrongs, or mercy to prostrate submission, national honour and national gratitude, glory and shame, and every aspect of open appeal to the primal sensibilities of man. On the other hand, enter an English Parliament, having the most of a popular character in its constitution and practice that is anywhere to be found in the Christendom of this day, and the subject of debate will probably be a road bill, a bill for enabling a coal-gas company to assume certain privileges against a competitor in oil-gas, 21 a bill for disfranchising a corrupt borough, or perhaps some technical point of form in the Exchequer Bills bill. So much is the face of public business vulgarized by details.
[Page 99]
The same spirit of differences extends to forensic eloquence. Grecian and Roman pleadings are occupied with questions of elementary justice, large and diffusive, apprehensible even to the uninstructed, and connecting themselves at every step with powerful and tempestuous feelings. 22 In British trials, on the contrary, the field is foreclosed against any interest of so elevating a nature, because the rights and wrongs of the case are almost inevitably absorbed to an unlearned eye by the technicalities of the law, or by the intrieacy of the facts.
But this is not always the case! Doubtless not: subjects for eloquence, and therefore eloquence, will sometimes arise in our senate and our courts of justice. And in one respect our British displays are more advantageously circumstanced than the ancient, being more conspicuously brought forward into effect by their contrast to the ordinary course of business.
“Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placèd are,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.” 23
But still the objection of Hume remains unimpeached as to the fact that eloquence is a rarer growth of modern than of ancient civil polity, even in those countries which have the advantage of free institutions. Now, why is this? The letter of this objection is sustained, but substantially it is disarmed, so far as its purpose was to argue any declension on the part of Christian nations, by this explanation of ours, which traces the impoverished condition of civil eloquence to the complexity of public business.
But eloquence in one form or other is immortal, and will never perish so long as there are human hearts moving under the agitations of hope and fear, love and passionate hatred. And, in particular to us of the modern world, as an endless source of indemnification for what we have lost in the simplicity of our social systems, we have received a new dowry of eloquence, and that of the highest order, in the sanctities of our religion: a field unknown to antiquity, for
[Page 100]
the pagan religions did not produce much poetry, and of oratory none at all.
On the other hand, that cause which, operating upon eloquence, has but extinguished it under a single direction, to rhetoric has been unconditionally fatal. Eloquence is not banished from the public business of this country as useless, but as difficult, and as not spontaneously arising from topics such as generally furnish the staple of debate. But rhetoric, if attempted on a formal scale, would be summarily exploded as pure foppery and trifling with time. Falstaff on the field of battle presenting his bottle of sack for a pistol, or Polonius with his quibbles, could not appear a more unseasonable plaisanteur than a rhetorician alighting from the clouds upon a public assembly in Great Britain met for the despatch of business.
Under these malign aspects of the modern structure of society, a structure to which the whole world will be moulded as it becomes civilized, there can be no room for any revival of rhetoric in public speaking, and, from the same and other causes, acting upon the standard of public taste, quite as little room in written composition. In spite, however, of the tendencies to this consummation, which have been long ripening, it is a fact that, next after Rome, England is the country in which rhetoric prospered most at a time when science was unborn as a popular interest, and the commercial activities of aftertimes were yet sleeping in their rudiments. This was in the period from the latter end of the sixteenth to the middle of the seventeenth century; and, though the English Rhetoric was less rigorously true to its own ideal than the Roman, and often modulated into a higher key of impassioned eloquence, yet unquestionably in some of its qualities it remains a monument of the very finest rhetorical powers.
Omitting Sir Philip Sidney, and omitting his friend, Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke (in whose prose there are some bursts of pathetic eloquence, as there is of rhetoric in his verse, though too often harsh and cloudy), the first very eminent rhetorician in the English Literature is Donne. 24
[Page 101]
Dr. Johnson inconsiderately classes him in company with Cowley, &c., under the title of Metaphysical Poets: 25 metaphysical they were not; Rhetorical would have been a more accurate designation. In saying that , however, we must remind our readers that we revert to the original use of the word Rhetoric , as laying the principal stress upon the management of the thoughts, and only a secondary one upon the ornaments of style. Few writers have shown a more extraordinary compass of powers than Donne; for he combined— what no other man has ever done—the last sublimation of dialectical subtlety and address with the most impassioned majesty. Massy diamonds compose the very substance of his poem on the Metempsychosis, thoughts and descriptions which have the fervent and gloomy sublimity of Ezekiel or Æschylus, whilst a diamond dust of rhetorical brilliancies is strewed over the whole of his occasional verses and his prose. No criticism was ever more unhappy than that of Dr. Johnson's which denounces all this artificial display as so much perversion of taste. There cannot be a falser thought than this; for upon that principle a whole class of compositions might be vicious by conforming to its own ideal. The artifice and machinery of rhetoric furnishes in its degree as legitimate a basis for intellectual pleasure as any other; that the pleasure is of an inferior order, can no more attaint the idea or model of the composition that it can impeach the excellence of an epigram that it is not a tragedy. Every species of composition is to be tried by its own laws; and, if Dr. Johnson had urged explicitly (what was evidently moving in his thoughts) that a metrical structure, by holding forth the promise of poetry, defrauds the mind of its just expectations, he would have said what is notoriously false. Metre is open to any form of composition, provided it will aid the expression of the thoughts; and the only sound objection to it is that it has not done so. Weak criticism, indeed, is that which condemns a copy of verses under the ideal of poetry, when the mere substitution of another name and classification suffices to evade the sentence, and to reinstate the composition in its rights as rhetoric. It
[Page 102]
may be very true that the age of Donne gave too much encouragement to his particular vein of composition. That, however, argues no depravity of taste, but a taste erring only in being too limited and exclusive.
The next writers of distinction who came forward as rhetoricians were Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy 26 and Milton in many of his prose works. They labour under opposite defects. Burton is too quaint, fantastic, and disjointed; Milton too slow, solemn, and continuous. In the one we see the flutter of a parachute; in the other the stately and voluminous gyrations of an ascending balloon. Agile movement, and a certain degree of fancifulness, are indispensable to rhetoric. But Burton is not so much fanciful as capricious; his motion is not the motion of freedom, but of lawlessness; he does not dance, but caper. Milton, on the other hand, polonaises with a grand Castilian air, in paces too sequacious and processional; even in his passages of merriment, and when stung into a quicker motion by personal disdain for an unworthy antagonist, his thoughts and his imagery still appear to move to the music of the organ.
In some measure it is a consequence of these peculiarities, and so far it is the more a duty to allow for them, that the rhetoric of Milton, though wanting in animation, is unusually superb in its colouring; its very monotony is derived from the sublime unity of the presiding impulse; and hence it sometimes ascends into eloquence of the highest kind, and sometimes even into the raptures of lyric poetry. The main thing, indeed, wanting to Milton was to have fallen upon happier subjects: for, with the exception of the “Areopagitica,” there is not one of his prose works upon a theme of universal interest, or perhaps fitted to be the ground-work of a rhetorical display.
But, as it has happened to Milton sometimes to give us poetry for rhetoric, in one instance he has unfortunately given us rhetoric for poetry. This occurs in the Paradise Lost , where the debates of the fallen angels are carried on by a degrading process of gladiatorial rhetoric. Nay, even the counsels of God, though not debated to and fro, are, however,
[Page 103]
expounded rhetorically. This is astonishing; for no one was better aware than Milton 27 of the distinction between the discursive and intuitive acts of the mind as apprehended by the old metaphysicians, and the incompatibility of the former with any but a limitary intellect. This indeed was familiar to all the writers of his day; but, as Mr. Gifford has shown, by a most idle note upon a passage in Massinger, 28 that it is a distinction which has now perished (except indeed in Germany), we shall recall it to the reader's attention. An intuition is any knowledge whatsoever, sensuous or intellectual, which is apprehended immediately : a notion, on the other hand, or product of the discursive faculty, is any knowledge whatsoever which is apprehended mediately . All reasoning is carried on discursively; that is, discurrendo ,—by running about to the right and the left, laying the separate notices together, and thence mediately deriving some third apprehension. Now, this process, however grand a characteristic of the human species as distinguished from the brute, is degrading to any supra-human intelligence, divine or angelic, by arguing limitation. God must not proceed by steps and the fragmentary knowledge of accretion; in which case at starting he has all the intermediate notices as so many bars between himself and the conclusion, and even at the penultimate or antepenultimate act he is still short of the truth. God must see ; he must intuit , so to speak; and all truth must reach him simultaneously, first and last, without succession of time or partition of acts: just as light, before that theory had been refuted by the Satellites of Jupiter, was held not to be propagated in time, but to be here and there at one and the same indivisible instant. Paley, from mere rudeness of metaphysical skill, has talked of the judgment and the judiciousness of God: but this is profaneness, and a language unworthily applied even to an angelic being. To judge, that is to subsume one proposition under another,— to be judicious, that is, to collate the means with the end,— are acts impossible in the Divine nature, and not to be ascribed, even under the licence of a figure, to any being
[Page 104]
which transcends the limitations of humanity. Many other instances there are in which Milton is taxed with having too grossly sensualized his supernatural agents; some of which, however, the necessities of the action may excuse; and at the worst they are readily submitted to as having an intelligible purpose—that of bringing so mysterious a thing as a spiritual nature or agency within the limits of the representable. But the intellectual degradation fixed on his spiritual beings by the rhetorical debates is purely gratuitous, neither resulting from the course of the action nor at all promoting it. Making allowances, however, for the original error in the conception, it must be granted that the execution is in the best style. The mere logic of the debate, indeed, is not better managed than it would have been by the House of Commons. But the colours of style are grave and suitable to afflicted angels. In the Paradise Regained this is still more conspicuously true: the oratory there, on the part of Satan in the Wilderness, is no longer of a rhetorical cast, but in the grandest style of impassioned eloquence that can be imagined as the fit expression for the movements of an angelic despair; and in particular the speech, on being first challenged by our Saviour, beginning
“ 'Tis true, I am that spirit unfortunate”
is not excelled in sublimity by any passage in the poem.
Milton, however, was not destined to gather the spolia opima of English rhetoric. Two contemporaries of his own, and whose literary course pretty nearly coincided with his own in point of time, surmounted all competition, and in that amphitheatre became the Protagonistæ. These were Jeremy Taylor and Sir Thomas Browne; who, if not absolutely the foremost in the accomplishments of art, were undoubtedly the richest, the most dazzling, and, with reference to their matter, the most captivating, of all rhetoricians. 29 In them first, and perhaps (if we except occasional passages in the German John Paul Richter) in them only, are the two opposite forces of eloquent passion and rhetorical fancy brought into an exquisite equilibrium,—approaching, receding,
[Page 105]
—attracting, repelling,—blending, separating,—chasing and chased, as in a fugue,—and again lost in a delightful interfusion, so as to create a middle species of composition, more various and stimulating to the understanding than pure eloquence, more gratifying to the affections than naked rhetoric. Under this one circumstance of coincidence, in other respects their minds were of the most opposite temperament: Sir Thomas Browne, deep, tranquil, and majestic as Milton, silently premediating and “disclosing his golden couplets,” as under some genial instinct of incubation; Jeremy Taylor, restless, fervid, aspiring, scattering abroad a prodigality of life, not unfolding but creating, with the energy and the “myriad-mindedness” of Shakspere. Where but in Sir T. B. shall one hope to find music so Miltonic, an intonation of such solemn chords as are struck in the following opening bar of a passage in the Urn-Burial —“Now, since these bones have rested quietly in the grave under the drums and tramplings of three conquests,” &c. 30 What a melodious ascent as of a prelude to some impassioned requiem breathing from the pomps of earth, and from the sanctities of the grave! What a fluctus decumanus of rhetoric! Time expounded, not by generations or centuries, but by the vast periods of conquests and dynasties; by cycles of Pharaohs and Ptolemies, Antiochi and Arsacides! And these vast successions of time distinguished and figured by the uproars which revolve at their inaugurations; by the drums and tramplings rolling overhead upon the chambers of forgotten dead—the trepidations of time and mortality vexing, at secular intervals, the everlasting sabbaths of the grave! Show us, O pedant, such another strain from the oratory of Greece or Rome! For it is not an Οὐ μα τους ἐν Μαραθωνι τΕθνηκοτας , 31 or any such bravura, that will make a fit
[Page 106]
antiphony to this sublime rapture. We will not, however, attempt a descant upon the merits of Sir T. Browne after the admirable one by Coleridge: and, as to Jeremy Taylor, we would as readily undertake to put a belt about the ocean as to characterize him adequately within the space at our command. It will please the reader better that he should characterize himself, however imperfectly, by a few specimens selected from some of his rarest works: a method which will, at the same time, have the collateral advantage of illustrating an important truth in reference to this florid or Corinthian order of rhetoric which we shall have occasion to notice a little further on:—
“It was observed by a Spanish confessor that, in persons not very religious, the confessions which they made upon their deathbeds were the coldest, the most imperfect, and with less contrition than all which he had observed them to make in many years before. For, as the canes of Egypt, when they newly arise from their bed of mud and slime of Nilus, start up into an equal and continual length, and uninterrupted but with few knots, and are strong and beauteous, with great distances and intervals, but, when they are grown to their full length, they lessen into the point of a pyramid, and multiply their knots and joints, interrupting the fineness and smoothness of its body: so are the steps and declensions of him that does not grow in grace. At first, when he springs up from his impurity by the waters of baptism and repentance, he grows straight and strong, and suffers but few interruptions of piety; and his constant courses of religion are but rarely intermitted, till they ascend up to a full age, or towards the ends of their life; then they are weak, and their devotions often intermitted, and their breaks are frequent, and they seek excuses, and labour for dispensations, and love God and religion less and less, till their old age, instead of a crown of their virtue and perseverance, ends in levity and unprofitable courses, light and useless as the tufted feathers upon the cane: every wind can play with it and abuse it, but no man can make it useful.”
“If we consider the price that the Son of God paid for the redemption of a soul, we shall better estimate of it than from the weak discourses of our imperfect and unlearned philosophy. Not the spoil of rich provinces—not the estimate of kingdoms—not the price of Cleopatra's draught—not anything that was corruptible or perishing; for that which could not one minute retard the term of its own natural dissolution could not be a price for the redemption of one perishing soul. When God made a soul, it was only faciamus hominem ad
[Page 107]
imaginem nostram ; he spake the word, and it was done. But, when man had lost his soul, which the spirit of God had breathed into him, it was not so soon recovered . It is like the Resurrection, which hath troubled the faith of many, who are more apt to believe that God made a man from nothing than that he can return a man from dust and corruption. But for this resurrection of the soul, for the re-implacing of the Divine image, for the re-entitling it to the kingdoms of grace and glory, God did a greater work than the creation. He was fain to contract Divinity to a span; to send a person to die for us who of himself could not die, and was constrained to use rare and mysterious arts to make him capable of dying: He prepared a person instrumental to his purpose by sending his Son from his own bosom—a person both God and Man, an enigma to all nations and to all sciences; one that ruled over all the angels, that walked on the pavements of heaven; whose feet were clothed with stars; whose understanding is larger than that infinite space which we imagine in the uncircumscribed distance beyond the first orb of heaven; a person to whom felicity was as essential as life to God. This was the only person that was designed in the eternal decrees to pay the price of a soul; less than this person could not do it. Nothing less than an infinite excellence could satisfy for a soul lost to infinite ages, who was to bear the load of an infinite anger from the provocation of an eternal God. And yet, if it be possible that Infinite can receive degrees, this is but one-half of the abyss, and I think the lesser.”
“It was a strange variety of natural efficacies that manna should corrupt in twenty-four hours if gathered upon Wednesday or Thursday, and that it should last till forty-eight hours if gathered upon the even of the Sabbath, and that it should last many hundreds of years when placed in the sanctuary by the ministry of the high priest. But so it was in the Jews' religion; and manna pleased every palate, and it filled all appetites; and the same measure was a different proportion, —it was much, and it was little; as if nature, that it might serve religion, had been taught some measures of infinity, which is everywhere and nowhere, filling all things, and circumscribed with nothing, measured by one omer, and doing the work of two; like the crowns of kings, fitting the brows of Nimrod and the most mighty warrior, and yet not too large for the temples of an infant prince.”
“His mercies are more than we can tell, and they are more than we can feel: for all the world, in the abyss of the Divine mercies, is like a man diving into the bottom of the sea, over whose head the waters run insensibly and unperceived, and yet the weight is vast, and the sum of them immeasurable: and the man is not pressed with the burden, nor confounded with numbers: and no observation is able to recount, no sense sufficient to perceive, no memory large enough to retain, no understanding great enough to apprehend, this infinity.”
These passages are not cited with so vain a purpose as that of furnishing a sea-line for measuring the “soundless
[Page 108]
deeps” of Jeremy Taylor, but to illustrate that one remarkable characteristic of his style which we have already noticed, viz. the everlasting strife and fluctuation between his rhetoric and his eloquence, which maintain their alternations with force and inevitable recurrence like the systole and diastole, the contraction and expansion, of some living organ. For this characteristic he was indebted in mixed proportions to his own peculiar style of understanding and the nature of his subject. Where the understanding is not active and teeming, but possessed and filled by a few vast ideas (which was the case of Milton), there the funds of a varied rhetoric are wanting. On the other hand, where the understanding is all alive with the subtlety of distinctions, and nourished (as Jeremy Taylor's was) by casuistical divinity, the variety and opulence of the rhetoric is apt to be oppressive. But this tendency, in the case of Taylor, was happily checked and balanced by the commanding passion, intensity, and solemnity of his exalted theme, which gave a final unity to the tumultuous motions of his intellect. The only very obvious defects of Taylor were in the mechanical part of his art, in the mere technique . He writes like one who never revises, nor tries the effect upon his ear of his periods as musical wholes, and in the syntax and connexion of the parts seems to have been habitually careless of slight blemishes.
Jeremy Taylor 32 died in a few years after the Restoration.
[Page 109]
Sir Thomas Browne, though at that time nearly thirty years removed from the first surreptitious edition of his Religio Medici , lingered a little longer. But, when both were gone, it may be truly affirmed that the great oracles of rhetoric were finally silenced. South and Barrow, indeed, were brilliant dialecticians in different styles; but, after Tillotson, with his meagre intellect, his low key of feeling, and the smug and scanty draperies of his style, had announced a new era, English divinity ceased to be the racy vineyard that it had been in the ages of ferment and struggle. 33 Like the soil of Sicily ( vide Sir H. Davy's Agricultural Chemistry ), it was exhausted for ever by the tilth and rank fertility of its golden youth.
Since then great passions and high thinking have either
[Page 110]
disappeared from literature altogether, or thrown themselves into poetic forms which, with the privilege of a masquerade, are allowed to assume the spirit of past ages, and to speak in a key unknown to the general literature. At all events, no pulpit oratory of a rhetorical cast for upwards of a century has been able to support itself when stripped of the aids of voice and action. Robert Hall and Edward Irving, when printed, exhibit only the spasms of weakness. 34 Nor do we remember one memorable burst of rhetoric in the pulpit eloquence of the last one hundred and fifty years, with the exception of a fine oath ejaculated by a dissenting minister of Cambridge, who, when appealing for the confirmation of his words to the grandeur of man's nature, swore,—By this and by the other, and at length, “By the Iliad, by the Odyssey,” as the climax in a long bead-roll of speciosa miracula which he had apostrophized as monuments of human power. As to Foster, he has been prevented from preaching by a complaint affecting the throat; but, judging from the quality of his celebrated Essays, he could never have figured as a truly splendid rhetorician; for the imagery and ornamental parts of his Essays have evidently not grown up in the loom, and concurrently with the texture of the thoughts, but have been separately added afterwards, as so much embroidery or fringe. 35 .
Politics, meantime, however inferior in any shape to religion as an ally of real eloquence, might yet, either when barbed by an interest of intense personality, or on the very opposite footing of an interest not personal but comprehensively national, have irritated the growth of rhetoric such as the spirit of the times allowed. In one conspicuous instance it did so; but generally it had little effect, as a cursory glance over the two last centuries will show.
In the reign of James I. the House of Commons first became the theatre of struggles truly national. The relations of the People and the Crown were then brought to issue, and, under shifting names, continued sub judice from that time to
[Page 111]
1688; and from that time, in fact, a corresponding interest was directed to the proceedings of Parliament. But it was not until 1642 that any free communication was made of what passed in debate. During the whole of the Civil War the speeches of the leading members upon all great questions were freely published in occasional pamphlets. Naturally they were very much compressed; but enough survives to show that, from the agitations of the times and the religious gravity of the House, no rhetoric was sought or would have been tolerated. In the reign of Charles II, judging from such records as we have of the most critical debates (that preserved by Locke, for instance, through the assistance of his patron Lord Shaftesbury), the general tone and standard of Parliamentary eloquence had taken pretty nearly its present form and level. The religious gravity had then given way; and the pedantic tone, stiffness, and formality of punctual divisions, had been abandoned for the freedom of polite conversation. It was not, however, until the reign of Queen Anne that the qualities and style of parliamentary eloquence were submitted to public judgment; this was on occasion of the trial of Dr. Sacheverell, 36 which was managed by members of the House of Commons. The Whigs, however, of that era had no distinguished speakers. On the Tory side, St. John (Lord Bolingbroke) was the most accomplished person in the House. His style may be easily collected from his writings, which have all the air of having been dictated without premeditation; and the effect of so much showy and fluent declamation, combined with the graces of his manner and person, may be inferred from the deep impression which they seem to have left upon Lord Chesterfield, himself so accomplished a judge, and so familiar with the highest efforts of the next age in Pulteney and Lord Chatham. With two exceptions, indeed, to be noticed presently, Lord Bolingbroke came the nearest of all parliamentary orators who have been particularly recorded to the
[Page 112]
ideal of a fine rhetorician. It was no disadvantage to him that he was shallow, being so luminous and transparent; and the splendour of his periodic diction, with his fine delivery, compensated his defect in imagery. Sir Robert Walpole was another Lord Londonderry; like him, an excellent statesman, and a first–rate leader of the House of Commons, but in other respects a plain unpretending man; and, like Lord Londonderry, he had the reputation of a blockhead with all eminent blockheads, and of a man of talents with those who were themselves truly such. “When I was very young,” says Burke, “a general fashion told me I was to admire some of the writings against that minister; a little more maturity taught me as much to despise them.” Lord Mansfield, “the fluent Murray,” was, or would have been but for the counteraction of law, another Bolingbroke. “How sweet an Ovid was in Murray lost!” says Pope; and, if the comparison were suggested with any thoughtful propriety, it ascribes to Lord Mansfield the talents of a first–rate rhetorician. Lord Chatham had no rhetoric at all, any more than Charles Fox of the next generation: both were too fervent, too Demosthenic, and threw themselves too ardently upon the graces of nature. Mr. Pitt came nearer to the idea of a rhetorician, in so far as he seemed to have more artifice; but this was only in the sonorous rotundity of his periods, which were cast in a monotonous mould,—for in other respects he would have been keenly alive to the ridicule of rhetoric in a First Lord of the Treasury.
All these persons, whatever might be their other differences, agreed in this,—that they were no jugglers, but really were that which they appeared to be, and never struggled for distinctions which did not naturally belong to them. But next upon the roll comes forward an absolute charlatan : a charlatan the most accomplished that can ever have figured upon so intellectual a stage. This was Sheridan, a mockingbird through the entire scale, from the highest to the lowest note of the gamut; in fact, to borrow a coarse word, the mere impersonation of humbug. Even as a wit, he has been long known to be a wholesale plagiarist; and the exposures of his kind biographer, Mr. Moore, 37 exhibit him in that line
[Page 113]
as the most hide-bound and sterile of performers, lying perdu through a whole evening for a natural opportunity, or by miserable stratagem creating an artificial one, for exploding some poor starveling jest; and in fact sacrificing to this petty ambition, in a degree never before heard of, the ease and dignity of his life. But it is in the character of a rhetorical orator that he, and his friends on his behalf, have put forward the hollowest pretensions. In the course of the Hastings trial, upon the concerns of paralytic Begums , and mouldering queens—hags that, if ever actually existing, were no more to us and our British sympathies than we to Hecuba—did Mr. Sheridan make his capital exhibition. The real value of his speech was never at any time misappreciated by the judicious; for his attempts at the grand, the pathetic, and the sentimental had been continually in the same tone of falsetto and horrible fustian. Burke, however, who was the most double-minded person in the world, cloaked his contempt in hyperbolical flattery; and all the unhappy people who have since written lives of Burke adopt the whole for gospel truth. Exactly in the same vein of tumid inanity is the speech which Mr. Sheridan puts into the mouth of Rolla the Peruvian. This the reader may chance to have heard upon the stage; or, in default of that good luck, we present him with the following fragrant twaddle from one of the Begummiads, which has been enshrined in the praises ( si quid sua carmina possunt ) of many worthy critics. The subject is Filial Piety .
“Filial piety,” Mr. Sheridan said, “it was impossible by words to describe, but description by words was unnecessary. It was that duty which they all felt and understood, and which required not the powers of language to explain. It was in truth more properly to be called a principle than a duty. It required not the aid of memory; it needed not the exercise of the understanding; it awaited not the slow deliberations of reason: it flowed spontaneously from the fountain of our feelings; it was involuntary in our natures; it was a quality of our being, innate and coeval with life, which, though afterwards cherished as a passion, was independent of our mental powers; it was earlier than all intelligence in our souls; it displayed itself in the earliest impulses of the heart, and was an emotion of fondness that returned in smiles of gratitude the affectionate solicitudes, the tender anxieties, the endearing attentions experienced before memory began, but which were not less dear for not being remembered. It was the
[Page 114]
sacrament of nature in our hearts, by which the union of the parent and child was sealed and rendered perfect in the community of love; and which, strengthening and ripening with life, acquired vigour from the understanding, and was most lively and active when most wanted.”
Now, we put it to any candid reader whether the above Birmingham ware might not be vastly improved by one slight alteration, viz. omitting the two first words, and reading it as a conundrum. Considered as rhetoric, it is evidently fitted “to make a horse sick”; but, as a conundrum in the Lady's Magazine , we contend that it would have great success.
How it aggravates the disgust with which these paste-diamonds are now viewed to remember that they were paraded in the presence of Edmund Burke; nay— credite posteri !-in jealous rivalry of his genuine and priceless jewels! Irresistibly, one is reminded of the dancing efforts of Lady Blarney and Miss Carolina Wilhelmina Skeggs against the native grace of the Vicar of Wakefield's family: —“The ladies of the town strove hard to be equally easy, “but without success. They swam, sprawled, languished, and “frisked ; but all would not do. The gazers, indeed, owned “that it was fine; but neighbour Flamborough observed “that Miss Livy's feet seemed as pat to the music as its “echo.” Of Goldsmith it was said in his epitaph,— Nil tetigit quod non ornavit : of the Drury Lane rhetorician it might be said with equal truth,— Nil tetigit quod non fuco adulteravit . 38 But avaunt, Birmingham! Let us speak of a great man.
All hail to Edmund Burke, the supreme writer of his century, the man of the largest and finest understanding! Upon that word, understanding , we lay a stress: for, oh! ye immortal donkeys who have written “about him and about him,” with what an obstinate stupidity have ye brayed
[Page 115]
away for one third of a century about that which ye are pleased to call his “fancy.” Fancy in your throats, ye miserable twaddlers! As if Edmund Burke were the man to play with his fancy for the purpose of separable ornament! He was a man of fancy in no other sense than as Lord Bacon was so, and Jeremy Taylor, and as all large and discursive thinkers are and must be: that is to say, the fancy which he had in common with all mankind, and very probably in no eminent degree, in him was urged into unusual activity under the necessities of his capacious understanding. His great and peculiar distinction was that he viewed all objects of the understanding under more relations than other men, and under more complex relations. According to the multiplicity of these relations, a man is said to have a large understanding; according to their subtlety, a fine one; and in an angelic understanding all things would appear to be related to all. Now, to apprehend and detect more relations, or to pursue them steadily, is a process absolutely impossible without the intervention of physical analogies. To say, therefore, that a man is a great thinker, or a fine thinker, is but another expression for saying that he has a schematizing (or, to use a plainer but less accurate expression, a figurative) understanding. In that sense, and for that purpose, Burke is figurative: but, understood, as he has been understood by the long-eared race of his critics, not as thinking in and by his figures, but as deliberately laying them on by way of enamel or after-ornament,—not as incarnating , but simply as dressing his thoughts in imagery,—so understood, he is not the Burke of reality, but a poor fictitious Burke, modelled after the poverty of conception which belongs to his critics.
It is true, however, that in some rare cases Burke did indulge himself in a pure rhetorician's use of fancy; consciously and profusely lavishing his ornaments for mere purposes of effect. Such a case occurs, for instance, in that admirable picture of the degradation of Europe where he represents the different crowned heads as bidding against each other at Basle for the favour and countenance of Regicide. Others of the same kind there are in his ever-memorable letter on the Duke of Bedford's attack upon him in the
[Page 116]
House of Lords 39 ; and one of these we shall here cite, disregarding its greater chance for being already familiar to the reader, upon two considerations: first, that it has all the appearance of being finished with the most studied regard to effect; and, secondly, for an interesting anecdote connected with it which we have never seen in print, but for which we have better authority than could be produced perhaps for most of those which are. The anecdote is that Burke, conversing with Dr. Lawrence and another gentleman on the literary value of his own writings, declared that the particular passage in the entire range of his works which had cost him the most labour, and upon which, as tried by a certain canon of his own, his labour seemed to himself to have been the most successful, was the following:—
After an introductory paragraph, which may be thus abridged,—“The Crown has considered me after long service. The Crown has paid the Duke of Bedford by advance. He has had a long credit for any service which he may perform hereafter. He is secure, and long may he be secure in his advance, whether he performs any services or not. His grants are engrafted on the public law of Europe, covered with the awful hoar of innumerable ages. They are guarded by the sacred rule of prescription. The learned professors of the rights of man , however, regard prescription not as a title to bar all other claim, but as a bar against the possessor and proprietor. They hold an immemorial possession to be no more than an aggravated injustice,”—there follows the passage in question:—
“Such are their ideas, such their religion, and such their law. But, as to our country and our race, as long as the well- compacted structure of our Church and State, the sanctuary, the holy of holies, of that ancient law, defended by reverence, defended by power, a fortress at once and a temple ( templum in modum arcis 40 ), shall stand inviolate on the brow of the British Sion; as long as the British monarchy, not more limited than fenced by the orders of the State, shall, like the
[Page 117]
proud Keep of Windsor, rising in the majesty of proportion, and girt with the double belt of its kindred and coeval towers; as long as this awful structure shall oversee and guard the subjected land: so long the mounds and dykes of the low fat Bedford Level 41 will have nothing to fear from all the pickaxes of all the levellers of France. As long as our sovereign lord the king, and his faithful subjects the lords and commons of this realm,—the triple cord which no man can break; the solemn, sworn, constitutional frank-pledge of this nation; the firm guarantees of each other's being and each other's rights; the joint and several securities, each in its place and order, for every kind and every quality of property and of dignity,—as long as these endure, so long the Duke of Bedford is safe, and we are all safe together: the high from the blights of envy and the spoliation of rapacity; the low from the iron hand of oppression and the insolent spurn of contempt. Amen! and so be it: and so it will be
‘Dum Domus Æneæ Capitoli immobile saxum
Accolet, imperiumque Pater Romanus habebit.”’
This was the sounding passage which Burke alleged as the chef-d'œuvre of his rhetoric; and the argument upon which he justified his choice is specious, if not convincing. He laid it down as a maxim of composition that every passage in a rhetorical performance which was brought forward prominently, and relied upon as a key (to use the language of war) in sustaining the main position of the writer, ought to involve a thought, an image, and a sentiment; and such a synthesis he found in the passage which we have quoted. This criticism, over and above the pleasure which it always gives to hear a great man's opinion of himself, is valuable as showing that Burke, because negligent of trivial inaccuracies, was not at all the less anxious about the larger proprieties and decorums (for this passage, confessedly so laboured, has several instances of slovenliness in trifles), and that in the midst of his apparent hurry he carried out a jealous vigilance upon what he wrote, and the eye of a person practised in artificial effects.
An ally of Burke's upon East Indian politics ought to have a few words of notice, not so much for any power that he actually had as a rhetorician, but because he is sometimes reputed such. This was Sir Philip Francis, who, under his early disguise of Junius, had such a success as no writer of
[Page 118]
libels ever will have again. 42 It is our private opinion that this success rested upon a great delusion which has never been exposed. The general belief is that Junius was read for his elegance; we believe no such thing. The pen of an angel would not, upon such a theme as personal politics, have upheld the interest attached to Junius, had there been no other cause in co-operation. Language, after all, is a limited instrument; and it must be remembered that Junius, by the extreme narrowness of his range, which went entirely upon matters of fact and personal interests, still further limited the compass of that limited instrument. For it is only in the expression and management of general ideas that any room arises for conspicuous elegance. The real truth is this: the interest in Junius travelled downwards; he was read in the lower ranks, because in London it speedily became known that he was read with peculiar interest in the highest. This was already a marvel; for newspaper patriots, under the signatures of Publicola, Brutus, and so forth, had become a jest and a byword to the real practical statesman; and any man at leisure to write for so disinterested a purpose as “his country's good” was presumed of course to write in a garret. But here for the first time a pretended patriot, a Junius Brutus, was read even by statesmen, and read with agitation. Is any man simple enough to believe that such a contagion could extend to cabinet ministers and official persons overladen with public business on so feeble an excitement as a little reputation in the art of constructing sentences with elegance,—an elegance which, after all, excluded eloquence and every other positive quality of excellence? That this can have been believed shows the readiness with which men swallow marvels. The real secret was this:—Junius was read with the profoundest interest by members of the cabinet, who would not have paid half-a-crown for all the wit and elegance of this world, simply because it was most evident that some traitor was amongst them, and that, either directly by one of themselves, or through some abuse of his confidence by a servant, the secrets of office were betrayed. The circumstances of this breach of trust are now fully
[Page 119]
known; and it is readily understood why letters which were the channel for those perfidies should interest the ministry of that day in the deepest degree. The existence of such an interest, but not its cause, had immediately become known; it descended, as might be expected, amongst all classes; once excited, it seemed to be justified by the real merits of the letters; which merit again, illustrated by its effects, appeared a thousand times greater than it was; and, finally, this interest was heightened and sustained by the mystery which invested the author. How much that mystery availed in keeping alive the public interest in Junius is clear from this fact,—that since the detection of Junius as Sir Philip Francis the Letters have suddenly declined in popularity, and are no longer the saleable article which once they were.
In fact, upon any other principle, the continued triumph of Junius, and his establishment as a classical author, is a standing enigma. One talent, undoubtedly, he had in a rare perfection—the talent of sarcasm. He stung like a scorpion. But, besides that such a talent has a narrow application, an interest of personality cannot be other than fugitive, take what direction it may; and malignity cannot embalm itself in materials that are themselves perishable. Such were the materials of Junius. His vaunted elegance was, in a great measure, the gift of his subject; general terseness, short sentences, and a careful avoiding of all awkward construction— these were his advantages. And from these he would have been dislodged by a higher subject, or one that would have forced him out into a wider compass of thought. Rhetorician he was none, though he has often been treated as such; for, without sentiment, without imagery, without generalization, how should it be possible for rhetoric to subsist? It is an absolute fact that Junius has not one principle, aphorism, or remark of a general nature in his whole armoury; not in a solitary instance did his barren understanding ascend to an abstraction or general idea, but lingered for ever in the dust and rubbish of individuality, amongst the tangible realities of things and persons. Hence the peculiar absurdity of that hypothesis which discovered Junius in the person of Burke. The opposition
[Page 120]
was here too pointedly ludicrous between Burke, who exalted the merest personal themes into the dignity of philosophic speculations, and Junius, in whose hands the very loftiest dwindled into questions of person and party.
Last of the family of rhetoricians, and in a form of rhetoric as florid as the age could bear, came Mr. Canning. “ Sufficit ,” says a Roman author, “ in una civitate esse unum rhetorem .” But, if more were in his age unnecessary, in ours they would have been intolerable. Three or four Mr. Cannings would have been found a nuisance; indeed, the very admiration which crowned his great displays manifested of itself the unsuitableness of his style to the atmosphere of public affairs; for it was of that kind which is offered to a young lady rising from a brilliant performance on the pianoforte. Something, undoubtedly, there was of too juvenile an air, too gaudy a flutter of plumage, in Mr. Canning's more solemn exhibitions; but much indulgence was reasonably extended to a man who in his class was so complete. He was formed for winning a favourable attention by every species of popular fascination. To the eye he recommended himself almost as much as the Bolingbroke of a century before; his voice, and his management of it, were no less pleasing; and upon him, as upon St. John, the air of a gentleman sat with a native grace. Scholarship and literature, as far as they belong to the accomplishments of a gentleman, he too brought forward in the most graceful manner; and, above all, there was an impression of honour, generosity, and candour, stamped upon his manner, agreeable rather to his original character than to the wrench which it had received from an ambition resting too much on mere personal merits. What a pity that this “gay creature of the elements” had not taken his place contentedly, where nature had assigned it, as one of the ornamental performers of the time! His station was with the lilies of the field, which toil not, neither do they spin. He should have thrown himself upon the admiring sympathies of the world as the most dazzling of rhetorical artists, rather than have challenged their angry passions in a vulgar scuffle for power. In that case he would have been alive at this hour [1828];
[Page 121]
he would have had a perpetuity of that admiration which to him was as the breath of his nostrils; and would not, by forcing the character of rhetorician into an incongruous alliance with that of trading politician, have run the risk of making both ridiculous.
In thus running over the modern history of Rhetoric, we have confined ourselves to the Literature of England: the Rhetoric of the Continent would demand a separate notice, and chiefly on account of the French pulpit orators. For, laying them aside, we are not aware of any distinct body of rhetoric, properly so called, in Modern Literature. Four continental languages may be said to have a literature regularly mounted in all departments, viz. the French, Italian, Spanish, and German; but each of these has stood under separate disadvantages for the cultivation of an ornamented rhetoric. In France, whatever rhetoric they have (for Montaigne, though lively, is too gossiping for a rhetorician) arose in the age of Louis XIV; since which time the very same development of science and public business operated there as in England to stifle the rhetorical impulses, and all those analogous tendencies in arts and in manners which support it. Generally it may be assumed that rhetoric will not survive the age of the ceremonious in manners and the gorgeous in costume. An unconscious sympathy binds together the various forms of the elaborate and the fanciful, under every manifestation. Hence it is that the national convulsions by which modern France has been shaken produced orators,—Mirabeau, Isnard, the Abbé Maury,—but no rhetoricians. Florian, Chateaubriand, and others, who have written the most florid prose that the modern taste can bear, are elegant sentimentalists, sometimes maudlin and semi-poetic, sometimes even eloquent, but never rhetorical. There is no eddying about their own thoughts; no motion of fancy self-sustained from its own activities; no flux and reflux of thought, half meditative, half capricious; but strains of feeling, genuine or not, supported at every step from the excitement of independent external objects.
With respect to the German Literature the case is very peculiar. A chapter upon German Rhetoric would be in
[Page 122]
the same ludicrous predicament as Van Troil's chapter on the snakes of Iceland, which delivers its business in one summary sentence, announcing that—snakes in Iceland there are none. Rhetoric, in fact, or any form of ornamented prose, could not possibly arise in a literature in which prose itself had no proper existence till within these seventy years. Lessing was the first German who wrote prose with elegance; and even at this day a decent prose style is the rarest of accomplishments in Germany. We doubt, indeed, whether any German has written prose with grace unless he had lived abroad (like Jacobi, who composed indifferently in French and German), or had at least cultivated a very long acquaintance with English and French models. Frederick Schlegel was led by his comprehensive knowledge of other literatures to observe this singular defect in that of his own country. Even he, however, must have fixed his standard very low, when he could praise, as elsewhere he does, the style of Kant. Certainly in any literature where good models of prose existed Kant would be deemed a monster of vicious diction, so far as regards the construction of his sentences. He does not, it is true, write in the hybrid dialect which prevailed up to the time of our George the First, when every other word was Latin with a German inflexion; but he has in perfection that obtuseness which renders a German taste insensible to all beauty in the balancing and structure of periods, and to the art by which a succession of periods modify each other. Every German regards a sentence in the light of a package, and a package not for the mail-coach but for the waggon, into which his privilege is to crowd as much as he possibly can. Having framed a sentence, therefore, he next proceeds to pack it, which is effected partly by unwieldy tails and codicils, but chiefly by enormous parenthetic involutions. All qualifications, limitations, exceptions, illustrations, are stuffed and violently rammed into the bowels of the principal proposition. That all this equipage of accessaries is not so arranged as to assist its own orderly development no more occurs to a German as any fault than that in a package of shawls or of carpets the colours and patterns are not fully displayed. To him it is sufficient that they are there . And Mr. Kant,
[Page 123]
when he has succeeded in packing up a sentence which covers three close-printed octavo pages, stops to draw his breath with the air of one who looks back upon some brilliant and meritorious performance. Under these disadvantages it may be presumed that German rhetoric is a nonentity; but these disadvantages would not have arisen had there been a German bar or a German senate with any public existence. In the absence of all forensic and senatorial eloquence no standard of good prose style—nay, which is more important, no example of ambition directed to such an object—has been at any time held up to the public mind in Germany; and the pulpit style has been always either rustically negligent or bristling with pedantry.
These disadvantages with regard to public models of civil eloquence have in part affected the Italians. The few good prose writers of Italy have been historians; and it is observable that no writers exist in the department of what are called Moral Essayists ,—a class which, with us and the French, were the last depositaries of the rhetorical faculty when depressed to its lowest key. Two other circumstances may be noticed as unfavourable to an Italian rhetoric: one, to which we have adverted before, in the language itself, which is too loitering for the agile motion and the το ἀγχιστροφον of rhetoric; and the other in the constitution of the national mind, which is not reflective nor remarkably fanciful, the two qualities most indispensable to rhetoric. As a proof of the little turn for reflection which there is in the Italian mind, we may remind the reader that they have no meditative or philosophic poetry, 43 such as that of our Young, Cowper, Wordsworth, &c.,—a class of poetry which existed very early indeed in the English Literature ( e.g ., Sir J. Davies, Lord Brooke, Henry More, &c.), and which in some shape has arisen at some stage of almost every European literature.
Of the Spanish rhetoric, a priori , we should have augured well; but the rhetoric of their pulpit in past times,
[Page 124]
which is all that we know of it, is vicious and unnatural; whilst, on the other hand, for eloquence profound and heartfelt, measuring it by those heart-stirring proclamations issued in all quarters of Spain during 1808–9, the national capacity must be presumed to be of the very highest order.
We are thus thrown back upon the French pulpit orators as the only considerable body of modern rhetoricians out of our own language. No writers are more uniformly praised; none are more entirely neglected. This is one of those numerous hypocrisies so common in matters of taste, where the critic is always ready with his good word as the readiest way of getting rid of the subject. To blame might be hazardous; for blame demands reasons; but praise enjoys a ready dispensation from all reasons and from all discrimination. Superstition, however, as it is under which the French rhetoricians hold their reputation, we have no thought of attempting any disturbance to it in so slight and incidental a notice as this. Let critics by all means continue to invest them with every kind of imaginary splendour. Meantime let us suggest, as a judicious caution, that French rhetoric should be praised with a reference only to its own narrow standard; for it would be a most unfortunate trial of its pretensions to bring so meagre a style of composition into a close comparison with the gorgeous opulence of the English rhetoric of the same century. Under such a comparison two capital points of weakness would force themselves upon the least observant of critics: first, the defect of striking imagery; and, secondly, the slenderness of the thoughts. The rhetorical manner is supported in the French writers chiefly by an abundance of ohs and ahs ; by interrogatories, apostrophes, and startling exclamations; all which are mere mechanical devices for raising the style; but in the substance of the composition, apart from its dress, there is nothing properly rhetorical. The leading thoughts in all pulpit eloquence, being derived from religion, and in fact the common inheritance of human nature, if they cannot be novel, for that very reason cannot be undignified; but for the same reason they are apt to become unaffecting and trite unless varied and individualized by new infusions of thought and
[Page 125]
feeling. The smooth monotony of the leading religious topics, as managed by the French orators, receives under the treatment of Jeremy Taylor at each turn of the sentence a new flexure, or what may be called a separate articulation 44 ; old thoughts are surveyed from novel stations and under various angles; and a field absolutely exhausted throws up eternally fresh verdure under the fructifying lava of burning imagery. Human life , for example, is short; human happiness is frail ; how trite, how obvious a thesis! Yet, in the beginning of the Holy Dying , upon that simplest of themes how magnificent a descant! Variations the most original upon a ground the most universal, and a sense of novelty diffused over truths coeval with human life! Finally, it may be remarked of the imagery in the French rhetoric that it is thinly sown, commonplace, deficient in splendour, and above all merely ornamental; that is to say, it does no more than echo and repeat what is already said in the thought which it is brought to illustrate; whereas in Jeremy Taylor and in Burke it will be found usually to extend and amplify the thought, or to fortify it by some indirect argument of its truth. Thus, for instance, in the passage above quoted from Taylor upon the insensibility of man to the continual mercies of God, at first view the mind is staggered by the apparent impossibility that so infinite a reality, and of so continual a recurrence, should escape our notice; but the illustrative
[Page 126]
image, drawn from the case of a man standing at the bottom of the ocean, and yet insensible to that world of waters above him, from the uniformity and equality of its pressure, flashes upon us with a sense of something equally marvellous in a case which we know to be a physical fact. We are thus reconciled to the proposition by the same image which illustrates it.
In a single mechanical quality of good writing, that is in the structure of their sentences, the French rhetoricians, in common with French writers generally of that age, are superior to ours. This is what in common parlance is expressed (though inaccurately) by the word style , and is the subject of the third part of the work before us. Dr. Whately, however, somewhat disappoints us by his mode of treating it. He alleges, indeed, with some plausibility, that his subject bound him to consider style no further than as it was related to the purpose of persuasion. But, besides that it is impossible to treat it with effect in that mutilated section, even within the limits assumed we are not able to trace any outline of the law or system by which Dr. Whately has been governed in the choice of his topics. We find many very acute remarks delivered, but all in a desultory way, which leave the reader no means of judging how much of the ground has been surveyed and how much omitted. We regret also that he has not addressed himself more specifically to the question of English style,—a subject which has not yet received the comprehensive discussion which it merits. In the age of our great rhetoricians it is remarkable that the English language had never been made an object of conscious attention. No man seems to have reflected that there was a wrong and a right in the choice of words, in the choice of phrases, in the mechanism of sentences, or even in the grammar. 45 Men wrote eloquently, because they wrote feelingly; they wrote idiomatically, because they wrote naturally and without affectation; but, if a false or acephalous structure of sentence, if a barbarous idiom or an exotic word happened to present itself, no writer of the seventeenth century seems to have had any such scrupulous sense of the dignity belonging to his own language
[Page 127]
as should make it a duty to reject it or worth his while to remodel a line. The fact is that verbal criticism had not as yet been very extensively applied even to the classical languages; the Scaligers, Casaubon, and Salmasius, were much more critics on things than critics philologically. However, even in that age the French writers were more attentive to the cultivation of their mother tongue than any other people. It is justly remarked by Schlegel that the most worthless writers amongst the French as to matter generally take pains with their diction; or perhaps it is more true to say that with equal pains in their language it is more easy to write well than in one of greater compass. It is also true that the French are indebted for their greater purity from foreign idioms to their much more limited acquaintance with foreign literature. Still, with every deduction from the merit, the fact is as we have said; and it is apparent not only by innumerable evidences in the concrete , but by the superiority of all their abstract auxiliaries in the art of writing. We English even at this day have no learned grammar of our language; nay, we have allowed the blundering attempt in that department of an imbecile stranger (Lindley Murray) to supersede the learned (however imperfect) works of our own Wallis, Lowth, &c.; we have also no sufficient dictionary; and we have no work at all, sufficient or insufficient, on the phrases and idiomatic niceties of our language, corresponding to the works of Vaugelas and others for the French. 46
Hence an anomaly not found perhaps in any literature but ours,—that the most eminent English writers do not write their mother tongue without continual violations of propriety. With the single exception of William Wordsworth, who has paid an honourable attention to the purity and accuracy of his English, we believe that there is not one celebrated author of this day who has written two pages consecutively without some flagrant impropriety in the grammar (such as the eternal confusion of the preterite with the past participle, confusion of verbs transitive with intransitive, &c.), or some
[Page 128]
violation more or less of the vernacular idiom. 47 If this last sort of blemish does not occur so frequently in modern books, the reason is that since Dr. Johnson's time the freshness of the idiomatic style has been too frequently abandoned for the lifeless mechanism of a style purely bookish and artificial.
The practical judgments of Dr. Whately are such as will seldom be disputed. Dr. Johnson, for his triads and his antithetic balances, he taxes more than once with a plethoric and tautologic tympany of sentence, and in the following passage with a very happy illustration:—“Sentences which might have been expressed as simple ones are expanded into complex ones by the addition of clauses which add little or nothing to the sense, and which have been compared to the false handles and key-holes with which furniture is decorated, that serve no other purpose than to correspond to to the real ones . Much of Dr. Johnson's writings is chargeable “with this fault.”
We recollect a little biographic sketch of Dr. Johnson, published immediately after his death, in which, amongst other instances of desperate tautology, the author quotes the well-known lines from the Doctor's imitation of Juvenal—
“Let observation, with extensive view,
Survey mankind from China to Peru,”
and contends with some reason that this is saying in effect,— “ Let observation with extensive observation observe mankind extensively .” Certainly Dr. Johnson was the most faulty writer in this kind of inanity that ever has played tricks with language. 48 . On the other hand, Burke was the least so;
[Page 129]
and we are petrified to find him described by Dr. Whately as a writer “ qui variare cupit rem prodigialiter unam ,” and as on that account offensive to good taste. The understanding of Burke was even morbidly impatient of tautology; progress and motion, everlasting motion, was a mere necessity of his intellect. We will venture to offer a king's ransom for one unequivocal case of tautology from the whole circle of Burke's writings. The principium indiscernibilium , upon which Leibnitz affirmed the impossibility of finding any two leaves of a tree that should be mere duplicates of each other in what we might call the palmistry of their natural markings, may be applied to Burke as safely as to nature: no two propositions, we are satisfied, can be found in him which do not contain a larger variety than is requisite to their sharp discrimination.
Speaking of the advantages for energy and effect in the licence of arrangement open to the ancient languages, especially to the Latin, Dr. Whately cites the following sentence from the opening of the 4th Book of Q. Curtius:— Darius, tanti modo exercitus rex, qui, triumphantis magis quam dimicantis more, curru sublimis inierat prœlium, per loca quœ prope immensis agminibus compleverat, jam inania et ingenti solitudine vasta, fugiebat . “The effect,” says he, “of the concluding verb, placed where it is, is most striking.” 49 The sentence is far enough from a good one; but, confining ourselves to the sort of merit for which it is here cited as a merit peculiar to the Latin, we must say that the very same position of the verb, with a finer effect, is attainable, and in fact often attained, in English sentences; see, for instance, the passage in Richard's soliloquy beginning— Now is the winter of our discontent , and ending, In the deep bosom of the ocean buried . See also another at the beginning of Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity , on the thanklessness of the labour employed upon the foundations of truth; which, says he, like those of
[Page 130]
buildings, “are in the bosom of the earth concealed.” The fact is that the common cases of inversion, such as the suspension of the verb to the end, and the anticipation of the objective case at the beginning, are not sufficient illustrations of the Latin structure. All this can be done as well by the English. It is not mere power of inversion, but of self-intrication, and of self-dislocation, which marks the extremity of the artificial structure; that power by which a sequence of words that naturally is directly consecutive commences, intermits, and reappears at a remote part of the sentence, like what is called drake-stone on the surface of a river. In this power the Greek is almost as much below the Latin as all modern languages; and in this, added to its elliptic brevity of connexion and transition, and to its wealth in abstractions, “the long-tailed words in osity and ation ,” lie the peculiar capacities of the Latin for rhetoric.
Dr. Whately lays it down as a maxim in rhetoric that elaborate stateliness is always to be regarded as a worse fault than the slovenliness and languor which accompany a very loose style.” But surely this is a rash position. Stateliness the most elaborate, in an absolute sense, is no fault at all; though it may happen to be so in relation to a given subject, or to any subject under given circumstances. “Belshazzar the king made a great feast for a thousand of his lords.” Reading these words, who would not be justly offended in point of taste had his feast been characterized by elegant simplicity? Again, at a coronation, what can be more displeasing to a philosophic taste than a pretended chastity of ornament, at war with the very purposes of a solemnity essentially magnificent? An imbecile friend of ours, in 1825, brought us a sovereign of a new coinage: “Which,” said he, “I admire, because it is so elegantly simple.” This, he flattered himself, was thinking like a man of taste. But mark how we sent him to the right about: “And that , weak-minded friend, is exactly the thing which a coin ought not to be: the duty of a golden coin is to be as florid as it can, rich with Corinthian ornaments, and as gorgeous as a peacock's tail.” So of rhetoric. Imagine that you read these words of introduction, “ And on a set day Tullius Cicero returned thanks to Cœsar on behalf of Marcus
[Page 131]
Marcellus ,” what sort of a speech is reasonably to be expected? The whole purpose being a festal and ceremonial one, thanks- giving its sole burden first and last, what else than the most “elaborate stateliness”? If it were not stately, and to the very verge of the pompous, Mr. Wolf would have had one argument more than he had, and a better than any he has produced, for suspecting the authenticity of that thrice famous oration. 50
In the course of his dissertation on style, Dr. Whately very needlessly enters upon the thorny question of the quiddity , or characteristic difference, of poetry as distinguished from prose. 51 We could much have wished that he had forborne to meddle with a quœstio vexata of this nature, both because in so incidental and cursory a discussion it could not receive a proper investigation, and because Dr. Whately is apparently not familiar with much of what has been written on that subject. On a matter so slightly discussed we shall not trouble ourselves to enter farther than to express our astonishment that a logician like Dr. Whately should have allowed himself to deliver so nugatory an argument as this which follows:—“Any composition in verse (and none that is not) is always called, whether good or bad, a poem, by all who have no favourite hypothesis to maintain.” And the inference manifestly is that it is rightly so called. Now, if a man has taken up any fixed opinion on the subject, no matter whether wrong or right, and has reasons to give for
[Page 132]
his opinion, this man comes under the description of those who have a favourite hypothesis to maintain. It follows, therefore, that the only class of people whom Dr. Whately will allow as unbiassed judges on this question—a question not of fact, but of opinion—are those who have, and who profess to have, no opinion at all upon the subject, or, having one, have no reasons for it. But, apart from this contradiction, how is it possible that Dr. Whately should, in any case, plead a popular usage of speech as of any weight in a philosophic argument? Still more, how is it possible in this case, where the accuracy of the popular usage is the very thing in debate, so that, if pleaded at all, it must be pleaded as its own justification? Alms-giving, and nothing but alms-giving, is universally called charity , and mistaken for the charity of the Scriptures, by all who have no favourite hypothesis to maintain,— i.e. by all the inconsiderate. But Dr. Whately will hardly draw any argument from this usage in defence of that popular notion.
In speaking thus freely of particular passages in Dr. Whately's book, we are so far from meaning any disrespect to him that, on the contrary, if we had not been impressed with the very highest respect for his talents by the acuteness and originality which illuminate every part of his book, we could not have allowed ourselves to spend as much time upon the whole as we have in fact spent upon single paragraphs. In reality, there is not a section of his work which has not furnished us with occasion for some profitable speculations; and we are, in consequence, most anxious to see his Logic ,—which treats a subject so much more important than Rhetoric , and so obstinately misrepresented that it would delight us much to anticipate a radical exposure of the errors on this subject taken up from the days of Lord Bacon. It has not fallen in our way to quote much from Dr. Whately totidem verbis ; our apology for which will be found in the broken and discontinuous method of treatment by short sections and paragraphs which a subject of this nature has necessarily imposed upon him. Had it coincided with our purpose to go more into detail, we could have delighted our readers with some brilliant examples of philosophical penetration, applied to questions interesting from their importance
[Page 133]
or difficulty with the happiest effect. As it is, we shall content ourselves with saying that in any elementary work it has not been our fortune to witness a rarer combination of analytical acuteness with severity of judgment; and, when we add that these qualities are recommended by a scholarlike elegance of manner, we suppose it hardly necessary to add that Dr. Whately's is incomparably the best book of its class since Campbell's Philosophy of Rhetoric .
Note .—In what is said at the beginning of this paper of the true meaning of the Enthymeme, as determined by Facciolati, we must be understood with an exclusive reference to Rhetoric. In Logic the old acceptation cannot be disturbed.
NOTES
1 [1] Suggested as an excursive review by Whately's Elements of Rhetoric. [Such is De Quincey's brief footnote to the title of the paper in his reprint of it in 1859 in vol. xi of his Collective Edition of his Writings. It had appeared originally in Blackwood's Magazine for December 1828, in the form of a review of Whately's well-known “Rhetoric,” then a new book with the title “Elements of Rhetoric. By Richard Whately, D. D., Principal of St. Albans Hall, and late Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford.” In the magazine the paper itself bore the title “Elements of Rhetoric” but this title was shortened in the reprint.—M.]
2 [1] The Scottish theologian and critic, Dr. George Campbell, Principal of Marischal College and University, Aberdeen (1719–1796); whose Philosophy of Rhetoric, published in 1776, is one of the shrewdest books on the Principles of Style and Literature produced in Great Britain in the course of the eighteenth century.—M.
3 [2] As these opening paragraphs of the paper seem to imply an imperfect recollection of the contents and substance of Aristotle's Treatise on Rhetoric, and a hazy conception of the causes of the change of meaning which the word “Rhetoric” has undergone in its descent from the Greek and Roman world into modern times, a few words may here be interposed by way of elucidation and addition:— Rhetoric, as understood by Aristotle, and by all his Greek and Roman successors, was the Science and Art of Oratory. It was the Science and Art of persuasion by means of speech,—whether by that actual method of direct address to an audience face to face which we usually call “public speaking,” or, more obliquely, by written pleadings which might be read in private. Now, as there were three recognised kinds of oratory in the ancient world,—the oratory of political assemblies, the oratory of law-courts, and that third and rarer kind of oratory the sole purpose of which was some immediate moral effect upon the hearers,—the distribution of the Ancient Rhetoric corresponded. The oratory of political assemblies, or all oratory of what we should now call the Parliamentary type, was distinguished by Aristotle as Symbouleutic Oratory, the Latin equivalent of which was Deliberative Oratory; the oratory of law-courts was called Dikanic Oratory by the Greeks, and Judicial or Forensic Oratory by the Latins; and the third kind of oratory, or such oratory as most nearly resembled our oratory of the pulpit, was called Epideictic Oratory by the Greeks, and Demonstrative Oratory by the Latins. The ancient orators having to practise all the three kinds as occasion offered, and the functions of the orator or public speaker having been far more extensive and continual in the system of ancient society than they are now, it happened naturally that Rhetoric assumed a most important place in the business of education among the ancients. It was, in fact, all but co-extensive with the whole business of education; for, as De Quincey remarks, “it designated the whole cycle of accomplishments which prepared a man for public affairs.” Philosophy, on the one hand, it is true, and Poetry on the other, were recognised as high forms of private intellectual activity for those who were at leisure; but it was by oratory that a man exerted public influence, and rose to eminence and statesmanship. Hence the extraordinary elaborateness of the Science and Art of Rhetoric as set forth in Aristotle's treatise, and subsequently expounded and developed by such Roman masters as Cicero and Quintilian. The instruction of a young man in Rhetoric included, or presupposed, in their view, in the first place, instruction in all the kinds of matter or doctrine required in oratory. An orator must come to his special work adequately instructed in History, in Jurisprudence, in Political Economy, in Politics, in Ethics or Moral Philosophy, and in whatever other sort of knowledge might be necessary to him in his deliberative, forensic, or epideictic speeches. Thus Rhetoric included or presupposed much that may be described as the ancient equivalent to the teaching of our modern Universities. But it was in the theory of the ways of applying this acquired knowledge of all varieties to the special purposes of the orator's art that the Ancient Rhetoric reached its perfection. The following is a summary under that head:—The success of a speech on any particular occasion depends, according to Aristotle, on three things: viz. (1) the Pistis, or combined strength of the persuasives found out for the occasion, the nature and amount of the means employed for getting the hearers to agree with the speaker and go along with him; (2) the Taxis, or right and orderly arrangement of the discourse; (3) the Lexis, or Style and Diction. In Aristotle's treatise each of these three subjects—Pistis, Taxis, Lexis—is treated systematically; but it is the part on the Pistis that occupies most space, and that alone presents any points of difficulty. The Pisteis or “means of persuasion” available for an orator on any occasion, but in greater or less proportion according to the circumstances, are classed by Aristotle as of these three varieties:—(1) The Ethical Pistis, consisting in those persuasives which are derived from the character, antecedents, and demeanour of the speaker himself,—his reputation for ability and integrity, his evident or seeming earnestness, &c.; (2) The Pathetic Pistis, consisting in the orator's power to sway the passions of his audience,—to move them to pity, anger, &c.—and so to compel them to a different view of a case from that which would have recommended itself to their cool judgment; (3) The Logical Pistis, consisting in the actual reasoning or argumentation, the address to the pure understanding.—Under this last head there was further subdivision; to which we shall have to advert in another note; but from the preceding sketch so far of the Ancient or Aristotelian Rhetoric it will be seen how the term “Rhetoric” has gradually lost its original meaning and acquired a new one. Aristotle, as has been said, does discuss the subject of Style or Diction as belonging properly to Rhetoric. He devotes twelve short chapters to this subject—containing remarks on the different kinds of style, on figures of speech, &c.; and admirable little chapters they are, with hints and suggestions good to this day. Now, it is on these chapters, as the easiest and most popular portion of his treatise, to the neglect, or comparative neglect, of all the more abstruse and difficult parts, that modern taste has fastened. After training in oratory had ceased to be the main object or form of education, and especially after there had been devolved on the printing-press many of those oratorical functions which had formerly belonged to the living voice with some aid from annexed manuscript, people recollected but vaguely the more scientific solidities of the Ancient Rhetoric, and became interested chiefly in what it had taught on the special subject of Style or Literary Expression. So far there was a narrowing of the old idea or definition of Rhetoric. But the narrowing was compensated by a curious accompanying extension. Although what Aristotle had said on the subject of style had been said most directly for the behoof of the orator and with relation to his craft, did not most of it hold good for practitioners of the literary art in any form whatever,—for historians, or poets, or philosophers, as well as orators? Had not all these to employ language for their purposes; and would not any body of precepts for the use of language that served for the orator serve pretty well also, though with some necessary modifications perhaps, for the historical writer, the philosopher, or the poet? Thus all kinds of literature,— narrative literature in all its forms, poetry in all its forms, and all forms of expository or speculative literature,—were taken within the field of Rhetoric, so far as there might be principles of diction or literary expression common to them all; and, this having been done, it was easy to generalise still more by assuming for Rhetoric not only the charge of the diction in all kinds of literature, but also to some extent the charge of the matter or intrinsic psychological substance in each kind,—allowing Rhetoric to discuss, for example, such questions as the difference between wit and humour, the nature of the poetic imagination, the laws of tragic poetry or of any other species of poetry, and so in fact to annex to itself all that had been treated independently and separately by Aristotle in his Poetics, and by Horace in his De Arte Poetica.—Three definitions of Rhetoric have thus come down in competition with each other, or more or less in confusion: viz. I. The Ancient or Aristotelian definition, which made Rhetoric strictly the Art and Science of Oratory, spoken or written. II. That middle kind of definition which makes Rhetoric the Art and Science of Style or Diction for any literary purpose. III. A definition which would stretch Rhetoric into the Science of Literature, or of Literary Theory and Literary Criticism universally, and make it treat of the principles of Historical Writing, Poetry, and Expository Writing, as well as of Oratory. Whately endeavoured, on the whole, to revert to the old or Aristotelian definition; but the general modern drift has favoured one or other of the two other definitions, or perhaps a compromise between the second and the third. This in the main is De Quincey's position, though, as we shall see, he attempts a difference.—M.
4 [1] It is ludicrous to see the perplexity of some translators and commentators of the Rhetoric, who, having read it under a false point of view, labour to defend it on that footing. On its real footing it needs no defence.
5 [2] This is an exaggeration of the proportions assigned to the Enthymeme in the Aristotelian Rhetoric. The Enthymeme is certainly of importance there; but it is by no means the all-in-all there that one might infer it to have been from De Quincey's words. It came in more particularly at that point of Aristotle's survey of Rhetoric where he discussed the Logical Pistis,—i.e. that means of persuasion which consists in the actual ratiocination, the logical address to the pure understanding, which an orator may employ in support of his case (see footnote, ante, p. 84).—All Rhetorical reasoning, all the reasoning of common life, Aristotle explained, is, and can only be, of one or other of two kinds, corresponding severally to induction and deduction in Logic. Now, inductive reasoning in rhetoric, as in common life, is always in the form of Paradigm or Example, whereas deductive reasoning in rhetoric, as in common life, is always in the form of Enthymeme (i.e. thought or maxim). If an orator in any Greek city, observing that one of the leading citizens had been going about for some time attended by an armed body-guard, were to argue in the public assembly that this looked suspicious and indicated a design of forcibly seizing the tyranny or single and personal sovereignty in the state, and if that orator were to try to gain over his fellow-citizens to this view by reminding them of this and that well-remembered instance in previous Grecian history where a tyrant had prepared the way for his assumption of the tyranny by surrounding himself with a body-guard,—that would be inductive reasoning or reasoning by Paradigm. This kind of reasoning, in short, consists in the production of examples or like cases, which may shed probability on the view argued for. Reasoning by Enthymeme, or deductive reasoning, on the other hand, consists in first putting forth some general proposition or maxim likely to be assented to, and then bringing the particular case on hand under the cover of that proposition or maxim so as to partake of its plausibility. If, by way of fastening a charge of murder on the accused person at the bar, an advocate, in default of more direct evidence, were to advance the proposition that the murderer in any case of murder is likely to be some one who had an interest in the death of the murdered person, and were then to show that the prisoner was remarkably in this predicament with respect to the man whose murderer had to be discovered,—that, along with other arguments, might have some weight with the jury, and would at all events be an instance of deductive reasoning or Enthymeme.—So far it is not difficult to grasp the distinction; but the toughest and most obscure bit in all Aristotle's Rhetoric is undoubtedly that in which he defines the Enthymeme more minutely and specifies the varieties into which it may break itself. It is at this point that De Quincey comes in with his proposed correction of the traditional notion of the Enthymeme. It is acute and interesting, and will probably be more intelligible to the reader after this general explanation.—M.
6 [1] Whatever validity there may be in that correction of the traditional doctrine of the Enthymeme to which De Quincey now proceeds, he is certainly wrong in some of these introductory remarks. Not only, as has been shown in the preceding note, does he greatly exaggerate the place and proportions of the Enthymeme in Aristotle's Rhetoric; but he is wrong, utterly wrong, in the statement that Aristotle excluded from his Rhetoric all appeal to the passions. On the contrary, the Pathetic Pistis, or that means of persuasion to which an orator might help himself by powerful playing upon the feelings of his audience, was distinctly recognised by Aristotle and discussed by him at large (see footnote, ante, p. 84). One of the most curious and interesting portions of his Rhetoric, indeed, is a little Natural History of the Passions, or inventory of the ruling feelings of men, in youth, middle life, old age, &c., which he introduces in illustration of the Pathetic Pistis.—M.
7 [1] This “learned Scottish friend” was the late Sir William Hamilton. It was in the summer before Waterloo, viz. in the summer of 1814, that I first became acquainted with him—in fact forty-five years ago on this 20th day of March 1859, from which I date my hurried revision of this paper entitled Rhetoric. [See ante, Vol. V, pp. 338–340.—M.]
8 [2] It stands at p. 227 of Jacobi Facciolati Orationes XII, Acroases, &c. Patavii, 1729.—This is the second Italian edition, and was printed at the University Press. [See ante, Vol. V, p. 340.—M.]
9 [3] “Dutch Burgersdyk”:—Pope in the Dunciad. The other names, if qualified apparently to frighten a horse, are all real names of men who did business in logic some 250 and 200 years ago, and were really no pretenders, though unhappily both grim and grimy in the impertinent estimates of contemporary women. [Martin Smigletius, Polish theologian and logician, 1562–1618; Bartholomew Keckermann, German writer, 1573–1609; Francis Burgersdyk (Burgersdicius), Dutch logician, 1590–1629; Richard Crakanthorpe, English controversialist, 1567–1624.—M.]
10 [1] Giulio Pacio, Venetian scholar, jurist, editor of Aristotle, &c., 1550–1635.—M.
11 [2] Upon an innovation of such magnitude, and which will be so startling to scholars, it is but fair that Facciolati should have the benefit of all his own arguments: and we have therefore resolved to condense them. 1. He begins with that very passage (or one of them) on which the received idea of the Enthymeme most relies; and from this he derives an argument for the new idea. The passage is to this effect, that the enthymeme is composed ἐκ ρολλακις ἐλαττονων ἡ ἐξ ὡν ὁ συλλογισμος—i.e. frequently consists of fewer parts than the syllogism. Frequently I What logic is there is that? Can it be imagined that so rigorous a logician as Aristotle would notice, as a circumstance of frequent occurrence in an enthymeme, what, by the received doctrine, should be its mere essence and differential principle? To say that this happens frequently is to say, by implication, that sometimes it does not happen—i.e. that it is an accident, and no part of the definition, since it may thus confessedly be absent, salva ratione conceptus. 2. Waiving this argument, and supposing the suppression of one proposition to be even universal in the enthymeme, still it would be an impertinent circumstance, and (philosophically speaking) an accident. Could it be tolerated that a great systematic distinction (for such it is in Aristotle) should rest upon a mere abbreviation of convenience, “quasi vero argumentandi ratio et natura varietur cum brevius effertur,” whereas Aristotle himself tells us, that οὐ ρρος τονἐξω λογον ἡ ἀφοδΕιξις, ἀλλα ρρος τον ἐνι τη ψυχηι”? 3. From a particular passage in the 2d book of the Prior Analytics (chap. 27), generally interpreted in a way to favour the existing account of the enthymeme, after first of all showing that under a more accurate construction it is incompatible with that account, whilst it is in perfect harmony with the new one, Facciolati deduces an explanation of that accidental peculiarity in the enthymeme which has attracted such undue attention as to eclipse its true characteristic: the peculiarity, we mean, of being entitled (though not, as the common idea is, required) to suppress one proposition. So much we shall here anticipate as to say that this privilege arises out of the peculiar matter of the enthymeme, which fitted it for the purposes of the rhetorician; and these purposes, being loose and popular, brought with them proportionable indulgences; whereas the syllogism, technically so called, employing a severer matter, belonged peculiarly to the dialectician, or philosophic disputant, whose purposes, being rigorous and scientific, imposed much closer restrictions; and one of these was that he should in no case suppress any proposition, however obvious, but should formally enunciate all: just as in the debating schools of later ages it has always been the rule that, before urging his objection, the opponent should repeat the respondent's syllogism. Hence, although the rhetorician naturally used his privilege, and enthymemes were in fact generally shorn of one proposition (and vice versa with respect to syllogisms in the strict philosophic sense), yet was all this a mere effect of usage and accident; and it was very possible for an enthymeme to have its full complement of parts, whilst a syllogism might be defective in the very way which is falsely supposed to be of the essence of an enthymeme. 4. He derives an argument from an inconsistency with which Aristotle has been thought chargeable under the old idea of the enthymeme, and with which Gassendi has in fact charged him.However, as in reality the whole case was one of mere misapprehension on the part of Gassendi, and has, in fact, nothing at all to do with the nature of the enthymeme, well or ill understood, Facciolati takes nothing by this particular argument; which, however, we have retained, to make our analysis complete. 5. He meets and rebuts the force of a principal argument in favour of the enthymeme as commonly understood, viz. that in a particular part of the Prior Analytics the enthymeme is called συλλογισμος ἀτΕλης, an imperfect syllogism,—which word the commentators generally expound by “mutilus atque imminutus.” Here he uses the assistance of the excellent J. Pace, whom he justly describes as “virum Græcarum litterarum peritissimum, philosophum in primis bonum, et Aristotelis interpretum, quot sunt, quotque fuerunt, quotque futuri sunt, longe præstantissimum.” This admirable commentator, so indispensable to all who would study the Organon and the ΡΕρι Ψυχης, had himself originally started that hypothesis which we are now reporting as long afterwards adopted and improved by Facciolati. Considering the unrivalled qualifications of Pace, this of itself is a great argument on our side. The objection before us, from the word ἀτΕλης, Pace disposes of briefly and conclusively. First, he says that the word is wanting in four MSS.; and he has no doubt himself “quin ex glossemate irrepserit in contextum.” Secondly, the Latin translators and schoolmen, as Agricola and many others, take no notice of this word in their versions and commentaries. Thirdly, the Greek commentators, such as Joannes Grammaticus and Alexander Aphrodisiensis, clearly had no knowledge of any such use of the word enthymeme as that which has prevailed in later times; which is plain from this,—that, wherever they have occasion to speak of a syllogism wanting one of its members, they do not in any instance call it an enthymeme, but a συλλογισμον μονολημματον.
12 [1] See footnote, ante, p. 87.—M.
13 [2] Is this to be taken as De Quincey's own special conception of Rhetoric? If so, it may be translated as meaning the art of intellectual and fantastic play with any subject to its utmost capabilities, or the art of enriching any main truth or idea by inweaving with it the largest possible amount of subsidiary and illustrative thought and fancy. I do not think that he keeps very strictly to this conception of Rhetoric,—which does not accord perfectly with any of the traditional definitions already mentioned, ante, p. 85, footnote; but it does accompany him through a good deal of what follows, and regulates to some extent his selection of authors to represent the rhetorical style. —M.
14 [1] Quintilian, A.D. 42–118, author of Institutiones Oratoriœ or Institutes of Oratory.—M.
15 [1] The Emperor Julian, A.D. 331–363; Libanius, Greek rhetorician, A.D. 314–391.—M.
16 [1] This, added to the style and quality of his poems, makes it the more remarkable that Virgil should have been deemed a rhetorician. Yet so it was. Walsh notices, in the Life of Virgil which he furnished for his friend Dryden's Translation, that “his (Virgil's) rhetoric was in such general esteem that lectures were read upon it in the reign of Tiberius, and the subject of declamations taken out of him.”
17 [2] Pliny the elder, A.D. 23–79; Pliny the younger, A.D. 61–106; Lucan, A.D. 39–65; Petronius Arbiter, died A.D. 66; Quintilian, A.D. 42–118; Seneca the elder, died about A.D. 32; Seneca the younger, died A.D. 65.—M.
18 [3] Tertullian died circa A.D. 240; Arnobius lived about A.D. 290; St. Augustine, A.D. 354–430.—M.
19 [1] Gregory Nazianzen, bishop of Constantinople about A.D. 380.—M.
20 [2] John Chrysostom, bishop of Constantinople from 397 to 407; St. Basil, bishop of Cœsarea from 371 to 380.—M.
21 [1] Written thirty years ago [i.e. in 1828.—M.]
22 [1] There were speeches of Demosthenes and others on intricate civil cases of debt, &c.—M.
23 [2] Shakspere, Sonnet 52.
24 [1] Sir Philip Sidney, 1554–1586; Lord Brooke, 1554–1628; Dr. John Donne, 1573–1631.—M.
25 [1] Abraham Cowley, 1618–1667: Johnson's dissertation on the “Metaphysical Poets” occurs in his Life of Cowley.—M.
26 [1] Robert Burton, 1576–1640. His Anatomy of Melancholy was first published in 1621.—M.
27 [1] See the Fifth Book of the Paradise Lost, and passages in his prose writings.
28 [2] Gifford's edition of Massinger, published 1813.—M.
29 [1] Jeremy Taylor, 1613–1667; Sir Thomas Browne of Norwich, 1605–1682.—M.
30 [1] Browne's Urn-Burial was published originally in 1658; and the splendid passage in it to which De Quincey refers is the whole of the concluding chapter. His quotation of the opening words is not quite accurate. The real words are:—“Now, since these dead bones have already outlasted the living ones of Methuselah, and in a yard underground, and thin walls of clay, outworn all the strong and spacious buildings above it, and quitely rested under the drums and tramplings of three conquests.”—M.
31 [2] A famous passage in Demosthenes's great speech “Concerning the Crown,” in which he invokes the memories of the illustrious dead at Marathon, Salamis, &c.—M.
32 [1] In retracing the history of English rhetoric, it may strike the reader that we have made some capital omissions. But in these he will find we have been governed by sufficient reasons. Shakspere is no doubt a rhetorician majorum gentium; but he is so much more that scarcely an instance is to be found of his rhetoric which does not pass by fits into a higher element of eloquence or poetry. The first and the last acts, for instance, of the Two Noble Kinsmen,—which, in point of composition, is perhaps the most superb work in the language, and beyond all doubt from the loom of Shakspere,—would have been the most gorgeous rhetoric, had they not happened to be something far better. The supplications of the widowed Queens to Theseus, the invocations of their tutelar divinities by Palamon and Arcite, the death of Arcite, &c., are finished in a more elaborate style of excellence than any other almost of Shakspere's most felicitous scenes. In their first intention they were perhaps merely rhetorical; but the furnace of composition has transmuted their substance. Indeed, specimens of mere rhetoric would be better sought in some of the other great dramatists, who are under a less fatal necessity of turning everything they touch into the pure gold of poetry. Two other writers, with great original capacities for rhetoric, we have omitted in our list from separate considerations: we mean Sir Walter Raleigh and Lord Bacon. The first will hardly have been missed by the general reader; for his finest passages are dispersed through the body of his bulky history, and are touched with a sadness too pathetic, and of too personal a growth, to fulfil the conditions of a gay rhetoric as an art rejoicing in its own energies. With regard to Lord Bacon the case is different. He had great advantages for rhetoric, being figurative and sensuous (as great thinkers must always be), and having no feelings too profound, or of a nature to disturb the balance of a pleasurable activity; but yet, if we except a few letters, and parts of a few speeches, he never comes forward as a rhetorician. The reason is that, being always in quest of absolute truth, he contemplates all subjects, not through the rhetorical fancy, which is most excited by mere seeming resemblances, and such as can only sustain themselves under a single phasis, but through the philosophic fancy, or that which rests upon real analogies. Another unfavourable circumstance, arising in fact out of the plethoric fulness of Lord B.'s mind, is the short-hand style of his composition, in which the connexions are seldom fully developed. It was the lively mot of a great modern poet, speaking of Lord B.'s Essays, “that they are not plants, but seeds; not oaks, but acorns.”
33 [1] Dr. Robert South, 1633–1716; Dr. Isaac Barrow, 1630–1677; Archbishop John Tillotson, 1630–1694.—As De Quincey's list of the finest representatives of English Prose Rhetoric in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries ends here, we may note with some surprise the omission of John Lyly, the author of Euphues (died about 1601), and Drummond of Hawthornden (1585–1649), whose prose-tract entitled A Cypress Grove rivals for beauty and music of style the best of Browne of Norwich.—M.
34 [1] Robert Hall, Baptist preacher, 1764–1831; Edward Irving, 1792–1834. Strange that Chalmers is left unmentioned!—M.
35 [2] John Foster, essayist, 1770–1846; not to be confounded with John Forster, biographer of Dickens, &c.—M.
36 [1] Henry Sacheverell, Tory divine, tried before the House of Lords in 1710 for sermons attacking the Revolution Settlement, the Act of Toleration, &c. He was suspended from the clerical office for three years, and the sermons were ordered to be burnt by the hangman.— M.
37 [1] Moore's Life of Sheridan, published in 1825.—M.
38 [1] Johnson's epitaph on Goldsmith is here incorrectly quoted, as usual. The words were not Nil tetigit quod non ornavit—which would be incorrect Latin for “He touched nothing that he did not adorn”— but “nullum fere scribendi genus non tetigit, nullum quod tetigit non ornarit.” “No kind of writing almost but he touched, none that he touched but he adorned.” De Quincey's parody of this for Sheridan is “He touched nothing that he did not corrupt and discolour.”— M.
39 [1] A Letter to a noble Lord on the attacks made upon Mr. Burke and his Pension in the House of Lords by the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Lauderdale early in the present Sessions of Parliament, 1796.—M.
40 [2] Tacitus of the Temple of Jerusalem.
41 [1] “Bedford Level”:—A rich tract of land so called in Bedfordshire.
42 [1] For De Quincey on Sir Philip Francis and the authorship of the Junius Letters see ante, Vol. III, pp. 132–143.—M.
43 [1] The nearest approach to reflective poetry which we ourselves remember in Italian literature lies amongst the works of Salvator Rosa (the great painter)—where, however, it assumes too much the character of satire.
44 [1] We may take the opportunity of noticing what it is that constitutes the peculiar and characterizing circumstances in Burke's manner of composition. It is this: that under his treatment every truth, be it what it may, every thesis of a sentence, grows in the very act of unfolding it. Take any sentence you please from Dr. Johnson, suppose, and it will be found to contain a thought, good or bad, fully preconceive. Whereas in Burke, whatever may have been the preconception, it receives a new determination or inflexion at every clause of the sentence. Some collateral adjunct of the main proposition, some temperament or restraint, some oblique glance at its remote affinities, will invariably be found to attend the progress of his sentences, like the spray from a waterfall, or the scintillations from the iron under the blacksmith's hammer. Hence, whilst a writer of Dr. Johnson's class seems only to look back upon his thoughts, Burke looks forward, and does in fact advance and change his own station concurrently with the advance of the sentences. This peculiarity is no doubt in some degree due to the habit of extempore speaking, but not to that only.
45 [1] Hardly true!—M.
46 [1] Claude Favre de Vaugelas (1585–1650), author of Sur la Langue Francoise.—M.
47 [1] For ample verification of this remark, see the late Professor Hodgson's admirable little book entitled Errors in the Use of English,— a wonderful collection of examples of bad English from recent or still living English writers of celebrity. No one escapes.—M.
48 [2] The following illustration, however, from Dr. Johnson's critique on Prior's Solomon, is far from a happy one: “He had infused into it much knowledge and much thought; had often polished it to elegance, dignified it with splendour, and sometimes heightened it to sublimity; he perceived in it many excellences, and did not perceive that it wanted that without which all others are of small avail, the power of engaging attention and alluring curiosity.” The parts marked in italics are those to which Dr Whately would object as tautologic. Yet this objection can hardly be sustained; the ideas are all sufficiently discriminated; the fault is that they are applied to no real corresponding differences in Prior
49 [1] We wish that, in so critical a notice of an effect derived from the fortunate position of a single word, Dr. Whately had not shocked our ears by this hideous collision of a double “is,”— “where it is, is.” Dreadful!
50 [1] The substance of all this is found elsewhere in De Quincey. See ante, Vol. V, pp. 230–236.M.
51 [2] “As distinguished from prose”:—Here is one of the many instances in which a false answer is prepared beforehand by falsely shaping the question. The accessary circumstance, as “distinguished from prose,” already prepares a false answer by the very terms of the problem. Poetry cannot be distinguished from prose without presupposing the whole question at issue. Those who deny that metre is the characteristic distinction of poetry deny, by implication, that prose can be truly opposed to poetry. Some have imagined that the proper opposition was between poetry and science; but, suppose that this is an imperfect opposition, and suppose even that there is no adequate opposition, or counterpole, this is no more than happens in many other cases. One of two poles is often without a name, even where the idea is fully assignable in analysis. But at all events the expression, as “distinguished from prose” is a subtle instance of a petitio principii.
$$$
