Shakspeare's Critics: English and Foreign
Author: Lewes, George Henry.
Publication info: The Edinburgh Review or Critical Journal ; Edinburgh (1849): [38] p.

Shakspeare's Critics: English and Foreign [in, The Edinburgh Review; or; Critical Journal: For July, 1849 ... October, 1849 ...]
[Page 39]
Shakspeare's Critics: English and Foreign. Art. II.—1. Lectures on Shakspeare. By H. N. Hudson. 2d Edition. New York, 1848. 2. Macbeth de Shakespeare en 5 actes et en vers. Par M. Emile Deschamps. Paris, 1848. 3. Shakspeare's Dramatic Art and its Relation to Calderon and Goethe. Translated from the German of Herman Ulrici. Chapman Brothers, 1846. 4. An Inquiry into the Philosophy and Religion of Shakspeare. By W. J. Birch, M. A. Mitchell, 1848. 5. Etudes sur le Seizième Siècle. Etudes sur l'Antiquité. Par Phil. Chasles. W. Jeffs, 1847. 6. History of Opinion on the Writings of Shakspeare. By Charles Knight. 1847. In the quiet town of Stratford upon Avon stands a house of antique structure though of humble architectural pretensions, before whose door several generations have passed and repassed, filled with deep reverence for the birthplace of England's greatest poet. One feeling has animated that long line of men; one feeling persistent through strange varieties of taste and language, varieties not less remarkable than the fashions of their changing costume, from the slashed doublet of our ancestors to the horse-collared and swallow-tailed disguise of the present day. Many houses of far more imposing aspect have crumbled into dust; new houses built upon their sites have also vanished, and even their successors are in decay; yet still that house remains, the goal of a thousand pilgrimages. Many great names have likewise risen in our literature, names once proudly borne and loudly echoed—risen, and fallen into silence—but still the name of Shakspeare shines with undimmed lustre. If passing clouds have for a moment hidden it, the moment after, it was as bright as ever.
The history of European Taste is written in the history of Shakspearian criticism; and it would be a most entertaining and profitable book which should display these fluctuations of opinion, by taking Shakspeare's reputation as a text. The subject divides itself into three epochs. The first is, that of the poet's own age, in which criticism was perverted by classical prejudices.
[Page 40]
The second, that of the ascendency of what is called French Taste. The last, that of the ascendency of German Taste. We propose to take a rapid survey of the principles which regulated all three; but before entering on it, we wish to bring forward a few considerations which seem to us to have been too much neglected by all these critics.
It must have been remarked by every one that criticisms on Shakspeare have been generally vitiated by the application of arbitrary principles, drawn from the Greek and the French drama; or else, through want of comprehensiveness, have sunk to the mere consideration of isolated passages and particular topics: While almost all attempts at enlarged and philosophic criticism have been unsatisfactory, in consequence of the critic not having distinctly set before him the aim and purpose of the poet. Much of this has arisen from a misconception of the office of criticism. Critics are not the Legislators, but the Judges and Police of literature. They do not make laws—they interpret and try to enforce them. Every one admits that there could have been no Aristotle till there had been a Homer; but this admission is not carried far enough: it does not recognise the fact that the appearance of every truly original poet may probably originate new laws—which will need a new Aristotle. For what really is the meaning of ‘Rules of Art?’ Are rules anything absolute in themselves, and binding upon all generations?—or, are they not rather the conclusions which from time to time experience appears to have warranted, with respect to the best methods of attaining the artist's aim?
Before anything, therefore, can be settled about the rules of an Art, the object of the Art must be first distinctly ascertained. In the case of Shakspeare we are not aware of any critic having borne this in mind throughout, with the completeness and correctness which the case requires. Shakspeare was a Dramatic poet; but of all the numerous disquisitions on his genius, there have been none which, properly speaking, treat his works as dramas. As a poet, as a thinker, and as a delineator of character he has been praised and described with nice discrimination. But as a dramatic poet, as the writer of dramas, scarcely any one has descended from generalities to point out his characteristic excellence. It is certain, however, that plays are not to be judged simply as poems. The drama is a branch of art peculiar in itself, aiming at peculiar effects, and achieving its effects by peculiar means. A drama is poetry applied to the purposes of the stage: and many a poem which may be exquisite in the closet would be unendurable on the stage. Architecture is not more the application of symmetry to the purposes of habitation, than
[Page 41]
the drama is the application of poetry to the purposes of the theatre. And as in architecture, we cannot regard beauty irrespective of utility, so neither in a drama will mere poetry succeed.
What then is the first purpose of a dramatist—the very condition at least, under which he works? To interest and amuse an audience . Let no one exclaim against this as a prosaic or degrading supposition. Prosaic or not, the fact is undeniable: People do go to the theatre for amusement. Whatever higher aims the dramatic poet may have in view, unless he amuses and sustains attention, he has failed. This is vividly shadowed out in the Theater Prolog to Faust, wherein the manager and the poet typify the two elements of a drama: popular amusement and poetic beauty. The means are passion, character, poetry, and story, so combined as to rivet the attention of an audience; and while rivetting their attention, stirring and exalting the soul by that ραθηματωυ καθαρσις which belongs to art. For art is not mere amusement; but something which, through amusement, leads us into higher regions, and calls finer faculties into play. The purpose of the dramatist is this: Appealing to the vulgar instincts of curiosity, appealing to our delight in sensuous impressions, appealing to that sympathy which man feels for man, he seeks, while fixing our attention, at the same time to fill our fancy with images of exquisite beauty, and leave in us the abiding influence of great thoughts and noble aspirations.
To disregard the Stage in treating of the art of Shakspeare, is as if a man were to point out the mechanism of a watch, without any reference to its powers of indicating time. He may call upon us to admire the ingenuity and complexity of its mechanism, its wheel within wheel, and chain upon chain; he may point out the splendour of the diamond on which it turns; but after all we ask, does it keep time? Though it should be studded with diamonds, still it is a bad watch if it does not keep time. So with a drama. It may be poetical, it may have nice discrimination of character, it may be bright with gems—but it is a bad play if it fail to amuse an audience. Amusement is the preliminary condition; if that fail all fails. Vainly may critics agree on the merits of a tragedy, on its truth, its originality, its ‘correctness’ according to the rules; if not a heart beats, if not an eye is wet with tears, the audience, in shameless defiance of Aristotle, will be cold—perhaps will yawn. Academies may lay down rules, but they cannot sway audiences; no audience ever wept academic tears.
It is not difficult to write rounded periods about the aim of tragedy being the purification of the passions, and about the
[Page 42]
stage being a secular pulpit from which great poets have delivered their lessons to mankind. But let us be frank. A direct question demands a direct answer. Did you ever in the whole course of your life ‘book two front seats in the boxes,’ or shield your wife from the crush at the pit door, under the impression that your passions were to be purified, and next Sunday's sermon anticipated? Did you not, on the contrary, book those places under the reasonable expectation of being amused—of having your eye dazzled by splendid scenery, your ear caressed by harmonious verse, your heart moved by the exhibition of passion? If you had not been amused, would you not have hissed? Moreover, remembering Shakspeare's position—at once the poet and the manager of a company,— ask yourself this other question: What did Shakspeare think of, when he sat down to write a play? You will answer, if you answer honestly,—‘To fill the Globe theatre:’ and you know, he could only fill it by amusing the public.
To obviate misconception, we may distinguish here between theatrical and dramatic excellence, for we are by no means desirous of reducing Shakspeare to the level of a mere playwright. Amusement, we have said, is primarily sought at the theatre. Now, there being low amusements as well as refined amusements, and the lower faculties being more universally energetic in man than the higher faculties, it is natural that the theatre should be furnished with plays which have no value beyond that derived from acting. A good acting play may be a miserable poem; a fine poem may be a miserable acting play; the art of the dramatist is to unite the acting qualities of the one to the more refined and enduring qualities of the other. We may illustrate this by portrait painting. As in a portrait the first requisite is correct likeness, so in a drama the first requisite is a rivetting story. The painting may be a daub, the drama may be trash; but if the one resemble its original, if the other interest an audience, the main object has been achieved. Superadd to the indispensable condition of resemblance the charms of good painting, and you have a fine portrait; endow the play with appropriate poetry, with delicate fancy and deep passion, and you have a fine drama. A Titian, should he fail to render the traits and expression of his sitter, cannot by the magic of his pencil supply that failure in the eyes of one who wished to possess the image of a person whom he loves; nor could even a Shakspeare, by the prodigality of his fancy, imagination and knowledge, prevent the weariness of an audience, should he throw that wealth away on an undramatic subject. For the purpose, indeed, of connoisseurs and students, a work of more elaborate art will have advantages over the correct
[Page 43]
portrait or the amusing play; and this has led that class of persons into an under estimate of the value both of resemblance in portrait painting, and of theatrical excellence in the drama. But if they fancy that theatrical effect is easily attained, they are mistaken. None of the powers which we most admire may be necessary to produce a good acting play: But, in proportion to the refinement of the subject, the difficulty of combining theatrical excellence with poetic treatment becomes greater,—so great indeed, that success in it is among the rarest of literary triumphs. An ordinary man can model a rude figure out of clay; but to bend the marble to the slightest caprices of the mind, to make its stubborn material plastic to the most airy and delicate conceptions, is the work only of a great artist. To take an example from the dramatic representation of Character: However much we may delight in delineations of character for their own sake, it must be remembered that the art of the dramatist is not shown in the mere portrayal of mental states, but in the adaptation of those mental states to the purposes of the drama . A character may be drawn with skill, and yet not be dramatic. All the traits which do not assist the fuller comprehension of the story are superfluous and inartistic. Suppose jealousy be the passion of the play, as in Othello. For simple theatrical purposes the writer may confine himself almost exclusively to this passion, and only exhibit in Othello the jealous husband. It is obvious, however, that our sympathies will not be greatly stirred, unless in this jealous husband we recognise other passions and other traits of human nature; and the great problem is, so to contrive and combine these additional features, as not only to make the character individual and engaging, but to help forward the action and interest of the piece. An ordinary Moor in a paroxysm of jealousy would be a far less touching sight than that of the highminded, chivalric, open, affectionate Othello. The art of the poet is therefore to delineate these other qualities; and the art of the dramatist is to make them dramatic agents in the development of his story. Accordingly, all that we see and hear of Othello are not simply preparations for the exhibition of his jealousy and wrath, but are circumstances skilfully adapted for bringing out the story. We thus learn both how the gentle Desdemona was justified in her love, and how Iago found him so easy a victim; so that at last we listen not only with patience, but compassion, to the noble speech, in which at the moment of executing his stern sentence on himself, he seeks to show that he was worthy of a better fate. Had Shakspeare introduced traits into this portrait which, though consistent in themselves, yet had
[Page 44]
no bearing on the general picture, he would have ruined its dramatic interest. People do not go to the theatre to learn Moorish customs or to analyse character, but to see a drama; and a drama is not a mirror of life in all its fulness and in all its details.—It is an episode in life, and must so be circumscribed.
These introductory observations bring to a point the debated question of Shakspeare's dramatic art, and place it in some degree in a new light. That he is the greatest of our Poets is an undisputed proposition—that he is the greatest of our Dramatists has also always been admitted; yet by a strange misconception he was long accused of ‘wanting art!’ He has charmed the audiences of his own and of every succeeding age. Amid all the fluctuations in opinion which have from time to time diversified the aspect of our literature, there have been fluctuations in the style of criticism, but there has been no ebb in the deep and abiding reverence felt for his genius. There is indeed a vulgar error, according to which Shakspeare is supposed to have fallen into neglect, and to have been ‘revived’ in the last century. Though refuted by the most ample and explicit evidence, this strange notion still pertinaciously keeps its ground; for when was an error of the kind exploded by being refuted? Crushed to day, it re-appears to-morrow as vigorous as ever. We, however, need waste no ink upon the subject. The reader who has any misgivings about the uninterrupted success of Shakspeare, will find the fact placed beyond all cavil in Charles Knight's ‘History of Opinion.’ True it is, that their admiration was long extorted from the critics in defiance of their ‘rules.’ They felt the greatness of Shakspeare; but they did not understand it. They eulogised his genius, but they wailed over his ‘irregularity.’ He was nature's child, but he outraged Aristotle. While Ben Jonson and his learned contemporaries heartily admired him, they could not help thinking that he ‘wanted art.’ What they meant was, that he wanted learning.
The scholarly men who, on the revival of ancient literature, confounded want of learning with want of art, must at times one would think, have questioned the reasonableness of their theory, from what was passing before their eyes in the case of Shakspeare and Ben Jonson:—dramatists who might appear to have been born to represent and verify the very distinction which they overlooked. Shakspeare drew delighted audiences; and the grateful actors of the ‘Globe’ lived upon his plays even after his death. Thus he had ‘art’ enough to achieve the first and greatest object,—that of interesting his
[Page 45]
audience, with a salient and lively interest, issuing from the human heart, and enduring therefore through all time. Would he have succeeded better in his aim as a dramatist, had he read Aristotle and imitated Euripides? The question needs no answer. ‘Rare old Ben,’ with all his ‘ancient art,’ failed to attract the crowd; and reproached the performers with their idolatry of his more successful rival. Leonard Digges tells us how people flocked to see Shakspeare:—
                                         ‘O how the audience
Were ravished! With what wonder they went thence!
When some new day they would not brook a line
Of tedious though well laboured Catiline.
Sejanus too was irksome: they prized more
Honest Iago or the jealous Moor.’
And he further says of Jonson's plays,—
‘Though these have shamed all th' ancients, and might raise
Their author's merit with a crown of bays,
Yet these sometimes, even at a friend's desire
Acted, have scarce defrayed the sea-coal fire
And door-keepers.’
Is it not absurd then to talk of ‘art’ which, addressing itself to public taste, will not ‘defray the sea-coal fire?’ The art of keeping away the public is not an art of rare and difficult accomplishment. Warburton's assertion that Shakspeare's sublimity and wit supported him in his defiance of the rules, while Ben Jonson was obliged to make up for his inferiority by borrowing all he could from art, is a very suitable foundation for the inference that—‘here we see how a want of sufficient natural genius accidentally contributed to the refinement of the English stage.’
The error we are combating is, however, a very natural error. In those days so blind was the reverence felt for the classic writers, that art was not understood to be the best means of attaining an end : it was understood to be the closest imitation of ancient models . ‘I have thought our poetry of the last age,’ said Rymer, one of the most learned men of his day, ‘as rude as our architecture. One cause thereof might be that Aristotle's Treatise of Poetry has been so little studied amongst us .’ He would have been pronounced an ignoramus in that age, who should have ventured to dispute the necessity of following ancient models, where any thing more was to be attempted than ‘splitting the ears of the groundlings.’ With respect to Shakspeare himself, few, indeed, denied that he was equal, if not superior, to the ancients in beauty of imagery, in depth of insight, in the portraiture of passion, in grace, tenderness, airiness, wit, and
[Page 46]
pathos; But the schools, nevertheless, repeated that he ‘wanted art!’ In case his critics had been asked what art he wanted, they would unanimously have declared it was the art which they admired in the classics. Superior to the classic in the effect which he produced, he was supposed to be inferior in the means!
But unless the highest dramatic effects can be supposed to be the result of mere chance, they must have been the result of art. That ‘fluent Shakspeare scarce effaced a line,’ certainly was not true. To talk of ‘nature’ and inspiration' is easy enough; but whoever looks closely into these plays, noting their numerous failures and their numberless successes, will see at once that Shakspeare was a very careful, though perhaps not a theoretical artist. Instead of blinding himself over antique books, he closely watched the tempers of mankind; his rules were not drawn from ancient precedents, but from his own keen sense of the mode in which an audience was to be moved. What were the unities, what was the chorus, to him, who as manager, actor, and dramatist, felt the living pulse of the public from day to day? How well, how nicely he discriminated the beatings of that pulse, his unparalleled successes have proved. Let us add that much of what amused an audience in his days—‘conceits which clownage kept in pay’—and long poetical descriptions, will not amuse them now ; hence the heaviness of some of his scenes on the modern stage. This change modern critics and dramatists too frequently overlook. They fall into the very error which they applaud Shakspeare for having avoided. They treat him as a classic—as a model to be slavishly imitated; until his genius has ended by consecrating as beauties the very defects which a wiser homage would have admitted to be blemishes,—spots on the sun, it is true, but still spots.
In his own day Shakspeare's triumph was complete. Even with his learned contemporaries, he had but one fault,—and that was a departure from classic models. From these models, Beaumont and Fletcher, who approached the nearest in popularity, departed as widely as himself. Then came the influence of French taste, which backed its pretensions not only by classic models, but by the masterpieces of Corneille and Racine. In spite of this taste, Shakspeare continued to hold undisputed sway over the hearts of Englishmen. No system of criticism could obscure the splendour of his genius. It was necessary, therefore, that an attempt of some kind should be made to reconcile the contradiction presented by a great poet, acknowledged to surpass the most finished artists in his effects, yet supposed all the time ‘totally ignorant of art.’ The reconciliation was brought
[Page 47]
about by means of the word ‘inspiration.’ In this attempt we read the idolatry of Shakspeare's admirers. Homer, indeed, might occasionally nod; Æschylus be obscure; Euripides prosaic, and Virgil verbose and tautologous; for they were men.—But Shakspeare could have made mistakes only because he had not read certain classic authors: a tincture of learning would have infallibly guarded him from every error! If he wrote trash sometimes, it was to please the groundlings; while his false metaphors, disgusting images, and tedious speeches must have been ‘foisted ‘in by the players.’ Thus Pope, in his celebrated Preface, attributes the bombast and triviality to be found in Shakspeare, wholly to the necessity of addressing a vulgar audience. And with this judgment Warburton agrees;—premising only that Shakspeare ‘knew perfectly well what belonged to a true composition,’ and had once tried to reform the public taste (see Hamlet); but having failed, became the favourite of the people afterwards by complying with it!
We are afraid, however, that, from an infirmity of the human mind of which there are numerous examples, Shakspeare very sincerely admired those bombastic passages, and thought them truly grand; and that he probably had the same affection for his buffoonery and conceits as inveterate punsters have for their puns. An ingenious article on ‘Critical Induction’ in the last number of the Classical Museum , exposes the rashness of emendations which proceed upon no better ground than the improbability of eminent authors writing anything bad. Faultlessness is one of the privileges of mediocrity. It is with great geniusses, Longinus says, as with great riches:—something always must be overlooked. Nor only overlooked: there will be even something in excess. We readily admit, therefore, that Shakspeare himself, were he alive, would be exceedingly amused at our making any difficulty in acknowledging his inequalities, and at our being at so much trouble to account for them, where they cannot be explained away.
The criticism which reigned from Dryden to Morgann and Coleridge is too well known to need illustration here. It was essentially French in its principles—essentially false in its application. The ‘correct’ school would more properly be called the ‘timid’ school. Its writers piqued themselves on their ‘sense’ and ‘propriety,’ and were more solicitous not to offend, than to enchant. The level they sought, accordingly soon became a dead level. With respect to Shakspeare, the most remarkable criticism which that period produced was the Preface of Dr. Johnson. If we compare its dignified tone of generous admiration and honest blame, with the feeble and often contemptuous tone
[Page 48]
of the Remarks affixed to the separate plays, we shall recognise at once the difference between the general effect of Shakspeare's genius, and the particular effect of perverted criticism. From Ben Jonson downwards—from Sejanus to Irene—men admired Shakspeare in spite of their critical axioms; yet this admiration never led them to suspect the truth of the axioms!
Rightly to understand this question of dramatic art, agitated by so many critics, it is necessary that we should examine what foreigners have written upon Shakspeare: and we begin with Voltaire, who had the honour of introducing our great poet to his countrymen. ‘Every Englishman,’ pertinently remarks Mr. C. Knight, ‘from the period of Johnson, who has fancied himself absolved from the guilt of not admiring and understanding Shakspeare, has taken up a stone to cast at Voltaire. Those who speak of Voltaire as an ignorant and tasteless calumniator of Shakspeare, forget that his hostility was based upon a system of art which he conceived, and rightly so, was opposed to the system of Shakspeare.’ 1 Voltaire's position was peculiar. He had been educated in a rigid system; and had grown up in the belief that Racine was the very consummation of dramatic art. Yet, as a writer, he felt the yoke of classic rules press so heavily upon him, that he secretly sighed for greater freedom. We cannot read his correspondence without being struck with his uneasiness at the strictness of Parisian taste,—a strictness which actually compelled him to abandon many of his favourite conceptions. Much as his taste was shocked by such an instance of unbounded license, nevertheless that this very license enabled the poet to produce most marvellous effects, was a fact which there was no disguising. In the first ardour of his admiration he expressed himself unguardedly; for which, in after years, he did more than sufficient penance. But to the last, although as a Frenchman he could not help being outraged at the unexampled want of goût , and the reckless disregard no less of les bienséances than of le style noble ,—on the other hand, as a man of genius, he could not help having a hearty sympathy with the genius of Shakspeare. The Englishman was a savage, no doubt; but he was an ‘inspired’ savage. In an age when Frenchmen were as much convinced as ever were the Athenians, that all foreigners were barbarians, our philosophers and poets must have been a great embarrassment to Voltaire. Praise escapes from him in a mingled transport of admiration and astonishment: admiration at such excellence, and astonishment at finding it among barbarians. It is a great mistake to suppose that the praise was not genuine; it was far more genuine, we are persuaded, than
[Page 49]
the praise which he afterwards heaped upon Cato. He said indeed that Cato was a model, having ‘des vers dignes de Virgile et des sentiments dignes de Caton;’ but he imitated Shakspeare —and no compliment approaches that of an imitation.
At the time Voltaire introduced the name of Shakspeare into France, the English language was almost as rare an accomplishment in Paris as Chinese is at present. The effect of his ‘Lettres sur les Anglais,’ joined to other concurrent influences indicative of the coming ‘Anglomanie,’ caused English to be studied;—and, as a natural consequence, Shakspeare was translated. And then so great and general was the admiration, that Voltaire trembled for the cause of French tragedy and good taste. His apprehensions could not but be affected in some degree by his interests; for his own great reputation as a dramatic poet was implicated in the fate of the classic drama. He endeavoured, therefore, by ridicule and contempt to stem the torrent. But it was too late. Shakspeare's spell was upon all who had studied him; it was felt that the barbarian was a Titan. Voltaire was furious; alarmed at the movement he himself had originated, he retired into the recesses of ancient prejudices, from which he thundered against ‘les barbares’ and ‘les welches.’
We have taken the trouble to look out from among his criticisms and correspondence for the passages in which he mentions Shakspeare; and here are some of the most significant: ‘France,’ he says, in a letter to the Abbé Desfontaines, dated November, 1735, ‘is not the only country where tragedies are written; and our taste, or rather our custom, of bringing nothing on the stage but long conversations on love, does not delight other nations. In general, our stage is devoid of action, and deficient in subjects of exalted interest. The presence too of our petits maîtres crowding on the stage, interferes with the action; and exalted subjects are banished because our nation dares not think on them. Politics were attractive in Cornille's time, on account of the Fronde; but now-a-days no one goes to see his pieces. Had you but seen the piece of Shakspeare (“Julius Cæsar”) played, as I have seen it, and pretty nearly as I have translated it, our declarations of love and our confidantes would seem miserable in comparison.’ This sentence might have been written by the most échévelé of the romanticists. Voltaire, no doubt, is here pleading in favour of his own translation; but lest too much stress should be laid on that circumstance, we will quote two lines from a letter only a few days previous. Shakspeare is ‘le Corneille de Londres,— grand fou d'ailleurs , et resemblant plus à Gilles qu' à Corneille; mais il a
[Page 50]
des morceaux admirables.’ Thirty-three years afterwards, writing to Horace Walpole and defending himself from the charge of despising Shakspeare, he observes; ‘I said, it is true, long ago, that if Shakspeare had lived in the time of Addison, he would have united to his own genius the elegance and purity which render Addison so admirable. I said that his genius was his own; his faults those of his age. In my opinion he is precisely like Lope de Vega and Calderon. His genius is fine but uncultivated; no regularity, no bienséance, no art—but mingling vulgarity with grandeur, buffoonery with sublimity: he is the Chaos of tragedy, in which there are a hundred gleams of light.’ This, we believe, was his deliberate opinion; and such as we find in his careful criticisms.
In 1776, however, a man was found intrepid enough to translate Shakspeare, adroit enough to secure the subscription of royal personages, and— ô comble d'horreur !—barbarian enough to proclaim Shakspeare ‘le dieu du théâtre!’ This was too much for Voltaire; whose pretensions to be ‘le dieu du théâtre’ himself were considerable. His anger was now unappeasable: and it broke out in invectives of ludicrous vehemence. Le Tourneur, the translator, was ‘un misérable,’ an ‘impudent imbécile,’ and even ‘un faquin.’ The following outburst is amusing. ‘Have you read two volumes by that creature (Le Tourneur) in which he wishes to make us accept Shakspeare as the sole model of true tragedy? He calls him the god of the stage! He sacrifices all the French without exception to his idol, as in days of yore they sacrificed pigs to Ceres. ... Do you not feel an intense hate towards this impudent idiot? Will you sit down under such an affront to France? ... The horrible part of it is that the monster has followers in France; and—as the crown of this calamity and horror—I it was who first mentioned Shakspeare; I it was who showed France the pearls I had found on this enormous dungheap ! Little did I think that I should one day help to trample on the crowns of Racine and Corneille, and to ornament with them the brows of a barbaric player.’ A fortnight afterwards he resumes his wrath: ‘The abomination of desecration is in the Temple of the Lord. Lekain, who is as angry as you are, tells me that almost all the young men of Paris are for Le Tourneur. I have seen the end of the reign of reason and good taste. I shall die leaving France barbarian .’ To Laharpe he wrote about the same time: ‘I know very well that Corneille has great faults; I have said so but too often; but they are the faults of a great man; and Rimer (Rymer) might well say that Shakspeare was nothing but a miserable ape .’ His violence,
[Page 51]
increasing under its own contortions, at last foams at the mouth. According to his next letter—‘the Gilles and Pierrots of the St. Germain Fair, fifty years ago, were Cinna and Polyeucte in comparison with the persons of that drunkard Shakspeare, whom Le Tourneur calls the god of the stage! ... It is impossible (he says afterwards) that any man not absolutely mad could in cool judgment prefer such a Gilles as Shakspeare to Corneille and Racine. Such an infamous opinion could only spring from sordid avarice running after the guineas!!’ And there is more in the same style.
The indignation thus exhaled in familiar letters was far from being exhausted in these private channels. He addressed a remonstrance to the French Academy, in terms so violent that it was thought necessary to qualify the language before it could be read to the members. The delusion of the public was alleged to consist in an anglomania, which, not content with placing ‘du rost bif’ on French tables, dared to prefer Shakspeare to Corneille. Voltaire makes a poor appearance as a critic on this occasion. Instead of grasping the real subject, he merely notices some indecent and trivial expressions, and certain anachronisms, which were doubtless enormities in the eyes of the Forty. He opposes Boileau's dictum to Shakspeare's neglect of the unities. He compares the opening of ‘Bajazet’ with the opening of Romeo and Juliet:—two scenes which admirably illustrate the respective art of the two kinds of drama, but which Voltaire, overlooking the possibility of there being more than one kind of drama, satisfies himself with contrasting, and bids the Academy decide. ‘A Scotch judge,’ he adds, ‘who has published “Elements of Criticism,” in three vols., in which there are some delicate and judicious reflections, has nevertheless been unfortunate enough to compare the first scene of that monstrosity, “Hamlet,” with the first scene of that chef-d'œuvre “Iphigénie.” He affirms that the beautiful verses of Areas are not worth the reply of the sentinel, “there's not a mouse stirring.” Yes, a soldier may indeed reply thus in the guard room; but not on the stage, before the highest persons in the kingdom, who express themselves nobly, and before whom we must express ourselves in the same style .’ This is a very significant sentence: and we beg the reader to bear it in mind. Voltaire sums up as follows: ‘Let the Academy then decide whether the nation which has produced “Iphigénie” and “Athalie” ought to abandon them for men strangling women on the stage, for porters, for witches, buffoons, and drunken priests; whether our court, so long renowned for its politesse and taste, ought to be converted into an alehouse; and whether the palace of a virtuous sovereign ought
[Page 52]
to be a place for prostitution.’ The pamphlet which he published under the pseudonyme of ‘Jerome Carré’ must be well known to most of our readers. It is a lively examination of ‘Hamlet’ and of the ‘Orphan’ du tendre Otwai ; but it is only a variation of the eternal theme about Shakspeare's vulgarity and want of art.
Returning now to the question at issue, it is easy to perceive that it has been ill argued, on both the French and the English side; and that the ρρωτον ψΕυδος of the argument has been a total forgetfulness of the differences of national taste, disposition, manners, and education. The French have not spoken more absurdly of the English drama, than the English of that of France. Both have set up an arbitrary standard. Thus, Voltaire, after giving a sarcastic account of ‘Hamlet,’ says: ‘We cannot have a more forcible example of the difference of taste among nations. How shall we speak after this of the rules of Aristotle, and the three unities, and the bienséances , and the necessity of never leaving the scene empty, and that no person should go out or come in without a sensible reason! How talk after this, of the artful arrangement of the plot, and its natural development; of the expressions being simple and noble; of making princes speak with the decency which they always have, or ought to have; of never violating the rules of language! It is clear that a nation may be enchanted without giving oneself such trouble.’ 2 This is said, of course, in irony. But if we take it seriously, much confusion will disappear: For we will venture, very seriously, to ask:—If a civilised and intelligent nation can be enchanted from age to age, in spite of the absence of certain conditions supposed to be necessary , does that not show the fallacy of supposing them to be necessary? Does it not prove these conditions to be accidental , not essential : to depend upon the tastes and manners of the nation, not upon the principles of dramatic art? All that Voltaire's objections amount to is this: in England, people are interested at the theatre by dramatic effects; in France, the people can only be delighted by effects more purely literary . Good: but if the public be equally interested, the object of the dramatist is equally attained; and thus both French and English tragedy are, and ought to be, respectively admired.
Not to inquire too curiously into the causes of the distinction, we may take it as a fact, that the French are more sedulous in their attention to the elegancies and graces of life, and that the English are more practical and earnest: the French have a
[Page 53]
more lively fancy, the English a richer imagination. If they excel in filagree, and we in machinery, the reason must lie either in a radical difference of mental organisation, or in Pascal's alternative—that, as habit is a second nature, nature may be only a first habit. Without drawing odious comparisons concerning different kinds of merit, we must admit that the French have at all times exhibited more culture and more regard for literature as literature, than ourselves: And in the drama this has been remarkably the case. Something, no doubt, is owing to the way in which the drama originated in each country. In England it grew out of a popular amusement, and has always addressed itself to the nation at large. In France it owed its existence to the court: and has never ventured to suppose itself addressing any but highly cultivated audiences. If the theatre is now the property of all Frenchmen, not so the tragic drama. What the classic performances by the templars in old days to scholarly audiences were to the popular performances of ‘Ralph Royster Doyster’ and ‘Gammer Gurton's Needle, ’which were open to all comers; such is the tragedy of Racine and Corneille, at the present day, to the drames of the Porte St. Martin and the Ambigu Comique. The attempt to introduce Greek plays into England failed; for England, as M. Philaréte Chasles says, ‘a fait de son théâtre un amusement populaire, et une représentation confuse, profonde, et forte, des actions de la vie humaine.’ In France, however, the scholarly attempt succeeded. Jodelle's ‘Cléopatre captive,’ performed in the presence of Henry II., so captivated that monarch that he gave five hundred crowns to the author. Paris followed the king's taste; and the ‘Mysteries’ were replaced by imitations of the antique drama. ‘C'est de cette source obscure et faible que remoute la tendance classique de notre théâtre.’ 3
A lettered audience of course demanded literary excellencies which no popular audience would have cared for. And literature has ever been somewhat pedantic, or at least sensitive to the censure of pedants. Every spectator at a drama of Corneille or Racine was a critic, and had the ‘rules’ by heart. Those who wonder how it is that the lively volatile French can patiently endure the tedium of the long tirades and longer dialogues in their classic plays, forget that they are, as Théophile Gautier happily expressed it, ‘la nation la plus sensée dans ses plaisirs, et la plus folle dans ses affaires.’ The importance they have attached to ‘rules’ has in all ages been excessive. We may smile
[Page 54]
when we read Corneille's declaration that the rules of Aristotle are for all times and for all people; ‘et certes je serais le premier que condammerais le Cid s'il péchait contre ces grandes et souveraines maximes que nous tenons de ce philosophe:’ And yet, in spite of our license, what English dramatist would dare to produce a tragedy in four acts, or a tragedy in rhyme?
Classical and imitative in its origin, the French drama has in the end become national. Shakspeare is not more the darling and the despair of English poets, than Corneille and Racine are of the French. Meanwhile, no two nations differ more widely in their artistic taste than the French and English; and this has made their criticism so onesided. We use the word in no depreciatory sense, when we say that French art is more conventional than ours: For art is necessarily conventional in its forms: and great part of poetry is a departure from the language of real life. All primitive poetry, including Homer, is rude and careless in its expression; it has a large admixture of the prosaic, and much of the language is only separated by rhythm from the language of ordinary life. So also in primitive music we find a preponderance of those ordinary intervals which characterise speech, and which are unmelodic. As nations advance in culture, poetry becomes more and more artistic, less and less simple and spontaneous; until at last refinement is carried to an excess which causes a reaction in favour of simplicity. Few persons will now prefer the ‘Æneid’ to the ‘Iliad;’ yet no one conversant with the two can deny that the former is in one sense more a work of art than the latter. In the use of language, Homer is often rude and prosaic; Virgil always delicately vigilant, though not always impressive. That he has employed more ‘art’ to produce his effects than Homer found necessary, is as obvious as that a trim garden was fashioned by a different hand from that which created a wild and picturesque ravine. We do not say the garden is more enchanting, —far from it; but it has the charm which labour, felicitously employed, always produces on the worker, man.
All poetry then being a departure from nature—otherwise it would be nature and not art—the very delicate question arises: How far is the departure allowable ? The whole difference between the French and English schools lies in their different estimate of the degree. Our poetry is to theirs what our gardens are to theirs: a closer imitation of nature, with a greater disregard for mere technical excellencies. In an English garden you have a sense of artistic arrangement; but man's share in the production of this effect is not intrusively forced on your
[Page 55]
attention. In a French garden you never for a moment lose the consciousness of man's labour and man's art.
The most extravagant criticism has proceeded from the want of something like a fixed principle in the great problem of imitation . Dr. Johnson has been applauded for his answer to Voltaire, who expressed his wonder that Shakspeare's extravagances should be endured by a nation which had seen Cato: ‘Let him be answered that Addison speaks the language of poets , and Shakspeare of men .’ But this epigram has really neither sense nor truth in it. Shakspeare did not speak the language of men, but of poets, and the greatest of poets; it was because his language, as poetry , was so superior to that of Addison that the effect it produced was so much greater. The secret of Shakspeare's success is, that his representations of nature are more vivid and lifelike than those of Addison; and from what does this vividness arise, but from the intensity of poetic power and the brightness of the medium through which it passes? That medium is style. Had Shakspeare spoken the language only of men, as distinguished from that of poets, he would never have delighted thousands upon thousands of all ranks and characters.
Critics have been too apt to talk about nature and the natural, as if the object of art were to produce an illusion; as if correct imitation of nature were the first condition of a work of art. But this is a most mischievous mistake. In such poets as Dante, Milton, and Spenser, the absence of any illusion, and of any specific imitation of nature, in no way lessens their claims as artists; while the presence of direct imitation in painted statues or waxworks figures has always injured their pretensions to be considered works of art. The Furies of Æschylus were not by any means so real as the poetical machinery of a modern melodrame—or as the ‘gig’ of Thurtell, once exhibited on the Surrey boards, with some ‘of the real water from the pond;’ But which was the most admirable? The most exquisite works of art necessarily depart from the truth, to produce their highest effects. All that our artistic faith demands is that there be no incongruous mixture of reality with fiction; and that our judgment be not shocked by a contradiction with the object which we have in view. No one's sense of reality is shocked by observing that a marble statue has not the hues, the action, and the warmth of a human being. It does not profess to be an imitation ; it professes to be a representation , in hard, cold, and colourless marble, of a human form. Paint it,—and on the one hand you quit the professed sphere of art, that is, representation,— to intrude on that of reality, that is, imitation; while on the other hand the imperfection of the means will always prevent
[Page 56]
your attempt from being successful:—for your imitation must still be an imperfect one. Men no doubt delight in representation, and they also delight in imitation; but the artist should be careful never to confound these distinct provinces. If he proposes merely to imitate nature, he must content himself, for the most part, with addressing the lowest faculties in man. He may paint a peach trailed over by a bunch of grapes; his object here is imitation—and, if successful, he will excite some vulgar wonder. But in this case he must not hope to leave an abiding impression of beauty in the soul of any human being: our artistic nature will remain untouched. It is the same, if the subject of imitation belongs to a higher class. Now in the drama we propose to represent , not to imitate , life,—and to represent it in its poetical aspects. And we soon discover how many of the realities, which in actual life would be most affecting, are so far from being poetical, that they will not bear transferring to any stage of more pretension than a booth.
If this distinction between representation and imitation be correct; if a work of art be amenable to the strict truth of nature only in so far as it professes to be an imitation,—it is a distinction which will serve us as a guide through the obscurities of many questions. Our present purpose with it is its application to the French classic drama. That drama, it is notorious, does not affect likeness or imitation. It represents, to be sure, the emotions and the passions of men; but it is neither solicitous to produce an illusion, nor to imitate the actions and language of ordinary life. Critics have made merry with its ‘unnatural’ use of confidants, and long declamations; they have also been unsparing in their condemnation of rhyme: —rhyme also is so unnatural! To be consistent, this style of objection should be pushed further: it ought to condemn the absurdity of operas and ballets in which lovers express love, vengeance, and despair in cavatinas and scenas; for no man in the outer world ever warbled vengeance, or hurled defiance in an entrechat . Under some such feeling, Madame de Staël laughs at the idea of Curtius performing a pas seul before leaping into the gulph. The actual spectators, we submit, are more reasonable, as well as more accommodating. No spectator at a French play ever exclaimed, ‘How absurd to talk in rhyme; men don't talk so!’ Neither did any spectator at an English play ever object to blank verse, solioquies, and asides. They know that they are witnessing a representation, not a reality. It is probable, indeed, that in the English drama rhyme would be objectionable; not because ‘unnatural,’ but because more artificial than the general style which our drama observes. For we depart
[Page 57]
from nature less widely; and our representation, though in some respects much more poetical, retains in others much more of the semblance of imitation. With us rhyme never appears to have succeeded on the stage, except in short passages. While in the French drama, where no imitation is professed, rhyme is only a beauty the more.
This discussion may help us to explain how the French, adopting a peculiar form of art, should regard as faulty every deviation from that specific form. In their system of representation, all imitation was subordinate to the charms of stately diction and harmonious versification. Dignity was a substitute for fidelity. The allusion to a mouse in ‘Hamlet’ was more like nature than the description in ‘Iphigénie;’ but it was less beautiful, less ‘noble,’ less like art. English crities retaliate the scorn, and ridicule the ‘pomposity’ of the French drama, which they complacently contrast with the ‘nature’ of their own. But all such comparisons are misplaced. The French drama is as different from the English, as the Orlando Furioso is from the Excursion. Who thinks of judging these poems according to one standard? Both French and English dramatists knew very well the style of art which would suit their audiences. The French delight in a well-planned story, unfolded in a direct and ‘logical’ manner; in sustained pomp of language; in philosophic maxims and in sharp antitheses. The English delight in action, passion, and imagery; they trouble themselves very little about dignity or bienséance . A Frenchman's first remark on a new play is respecting its beaux vers ; an Englishman is struck by its characters and its ‘situations.’ The danger which most besets a French dramatist is lengthy dialogue and description; that of an English dramatist is the tendency to melodramatic exaggeration.
Alfred de Vigny has declared that ‘toute tragédie était une catastrophe et un dénoûment d'une action déjà mûre au lever du rideau.’ Such a tragedy must be essentially different from one of Shakspeare's; where not merely the catastrophe, but the first origin and whole development of the event, is transacted before our eyes. No comparison can be established between two such styles. Each nation ought to be considered at liberty to prefer its own; for tastes admit not of dispute. Notwithstanding which, unfortunately each nation has insisted upon the recognition of its own taste as absolute. Even M. Chasles, in spite of his English education and sympathies, and with all his admiration for Shakspeare, is too much of a Frenchman not to believe, that the classic drama is the only perfect form. ‘The perfection of the drama, as drama, is in
[Page 58]
Sophocles; and it will always be a mistake to seek in Shakpeare the finished beauty and supreme proportions, the relation of the parts to the whole, in a word the complete art of the drama; what we must seek in that great man is the strict and minute examination of humanity, the metaphysical and yet living distinctions of Hamlet and Macbeth;—the sublime qualities of the philosopher and observer. The men of genius of the Gothic and barbarian world, of which Shakspeare is the intellectual king, have achieved the poetical beauty of details by the study of truth; whereas Sophocles and Racine, penetrated with the sentiment of beauty, have given to truth a form at once lovely and immortal.’ M. Chasles also observes, comparing the two nation, ‘Emanant du sentiment du beau, l'art hellénique veut la beauté de la forme, et tend à l'unité; le génie contraire, attaché à la sévérité du devoir, cherche le vrai, et tend à la variété. A l'un, l'harmonie et la règle; à l'autre, la profondeur dans le caprice.’ 4 This passage well describes, though somewhat affectedly, the national tendencies of the Hellenic and Teutonic mind. The Greeks worshipped beauty, and sacrificed to it every other consideration. All their statues are calm—if the Laocoon is, as we suppose, subsequent to Virgil. Love, Desire, Pain and even Terror, are represented in majestic repose. The convulsions of passion were as sedulously avoided by the Greeks as they are eagerly sought after by the Teutonic race. The Belvidere Apollo has conquered, and is calm. Fawns and Satyrs are monsters—yet beautiful. Caliban under a Greek hand would have been handsome. Medusa's face is lovely and grave: the terror is in her serpent-locks.
As soon as ever the critical nature of French poetry is properly appreciated, there can be no difficulty in understanding French criticisms upon foreign poets. Their fastidiousness is at once accounted for; and that verbal sensitiveness, which has astonished Englishmen, ceases to be a subject of wonder. We shall then no longer laugh at Voltaire for being shocked at ‘the itching palm of Cassius,’ at Hamlet's talking of his mother's ‘shoes,’ and at ‘not a mouse stirring.’ On the contrary, we shall fully comprehend how French poetry, scrupulously avoiding every detail which may be prosaic or vulgar (unless, indeed, lighted up by passion, and then few things can be vulgar), seeks by every possible artifice of language to distinguish itself from ordinary speech. It is pitched altogether, in a higher key; and, therefore, the familiarities of English poetry sound discordant in it. Still, after all, the Frech do not adopt a different
[Page 59]
principle from that adopted in our own poetry; they only enforce it with greater rigour. There are many terms and many subjects which are banished by us also from poetry, on account of their vulgar or unpoetic associations; nor is this the case only with words appropriated to disgusting objects. A wig, for example, has nothing unusual or disgusting; yet the most daring poet would never introduce the word upon a serious occasion. What we should feel if the word ‘wig’ were introduced, the French feel, when they find a queen's shoes mentioned, in a profoundly serious passage. There are hundreds of other innocent words now suffering under this capricious proscription, even in our free country. A lover, we suppose, may still indite a woeful ballad to ‘his mistress's eye-brow,’ but by no means to her nose : if he allude to her breath, it must be to its scent, not its smell. Our heroic bards may lawfully speak of bread or wine, but not of brandy or beef,—though more heroic aliments than the former.
That etiquette should prescribe certain restrictions in language, and that a court amusement should not offend by uncourtly language, may to a great extent justify the timidity of Racine and Voltaire; but never was there a more complete error than what Voltaire and the French critics promulgated respecting the classical precedent for their fastidiousness. The Greeks were in no way so timid. Whoever is familiar with their drama must be aware of the singular ignorance concerning it which the French critics, at the time they were always citing it as a model, universally displayed. The principles they profess to have drawn from it are contradicted perpetually by the drama itself. The Greeks often violated the unities, sometimes mingled comedy (and not very ‘dignified’ comedy) with tragedy, and certainly were by no means alarmed at familiar words.
French taste for a long while reigned supreme. From the fall of its empire we date the rise of the opinion, now we think pretty well established, that Shakspeare was a careful artist,— not a blind, irregular genius, stumbling on fine passages by accident. The periwig of Louis XIV., however, had long overshadowed European literature. The French critics claimed to be the legitimate successors to the throne of Aristotle. England, Germany, Italy and Spain, all more or less avowedly, submitted to the yoke. Rome did not more completely subdue the world by her arms, in her high and palmy days, than France subdued the literature of Europe. But universal dominion cannot rest on unsound foundations. An irruption of the Germans was destined in both cases to shatter an unnatural empire;
[Page 60]
and restore to Europe its liberty, and to nations their nationality. Lessing was the Attila of this literary revolution.
Before passing into Germany, let us leave France by the Pyrenees, and cast a glance at Spain,—a country where, if Schlegel's famous distinction between classic and romantic art had any value, Shakspeare should have found the most hearty and genial reception. The truth however is, that in spite of some external resemblances, the Spanish drama differs profoundly from the English, and in truth is much nearer in spirit to the French. The adoption of French taste in Spain was therefore as easily accomplished, as it was slowly superseded. It may be said to have begun with Calderon; a startling assertion, perhaps, but by no means difficult of proof. Calderon was the first to borrow from the French; though in borrowing he kept to his own dramatic style—as Corneille had kept to his in borrowing from the Spaniards. Calderon took from Corneille the ‘Heraclius,’ which he christened ‘En esta vida todo es verdad y todo men tira.’ 5 . The acknowledged supremacy of French influence over Spanish literature would strengthen under the dominion of the Bourbons. As early as 1737 Luzan published his ‘La Poetica, ò reglas de la poesia en general,’ which was composed from Aristotle and Bossu; and which long continued to be an absolute authority. It is only within the last twenty years that Spain has emancipated herself from the bondage of classic rules. But unhappily she has changed masters without recovering her nationality; quitting the French classicists she has passed over to the French romanticists. Imitation for imitation, one can scarcely congratulate them on a change which has placed Dumas and Bouchardy on the pedestals of Corneille and Racine.
There was no Voltaire to introduce Shakspeare into Spain: and little would it have profited Shakspearian criticism had such a man been found. The greatest name we have seen affixed to Shakspeare in the country of Cervantes in Moratin. He translated Hamlet, and translated it in prose! Moratin had learned from Voltaire to admire the philosophic insight of that play; but he learned, in the same school, to deplore its want of art, its degrading triviality of language, and its intolerable mixture of ‘low scenes’ with dignified tragedy. French criticism on poetry
[Page 61]
is narrow enough in French hands; at second hand it becomes insufferable.
The first foreigner whose vision was keen enough to see beyond the mists of prejudice and pedantry, who could discern the eternal principles of art under every variety of form, and who had the glory of proclaiming Shakspeare to be the greatest dramatist the world had ever seen, was Gottlob Ephraim Lessing. French taste was absolute when he first raised up the standard of revolt. Frederick was on the throne; and called Voltaire his friend. Heavy Germans had no higher ambition than that of imitating the elegance and grace of fastidious France. Zaire , ‘dictated by love itself,’ was the consummation of finished art. There was but one Voltaire, and Gottsched was his prophet! While that creed was in the ascendant. Lessing, the restless, daring, brilliant Guerilla chief, attacked both Voltaire and his prophet. He contrasted Shakspeare with the French poet—contrasted them with polemical dexterity, with rare acuteness, with invincible logic—and at once dwarfed the conventional elegancies of the Frenchman, by placing them beside the majestic proportions of our Giant.
‘No one dares deny,’ proclaimed the Leipsiger Bibliothek , ‘that the German stage owes its greatest improvements to Herr Gottsched.’ In answer to this defiance Lessing sprang into the arena. His answer was a thunderclap: ‘I am that No one!’ He not only denied it; he did more: he shattered Gottsched's pretensions, and told his countrymen that there was a Shakspeare. Gottsched had heard indeed of that obscure British poet, and knew that ‘the English made a great fuss about his theatrical poems.’ But what of that? Had there not been a certain Mrs. Lennox, who had exposed the faults even of his most celebrated pieces? (Doch hat sich in neuren Zeiten eine Frau Lennox gefunden, die Vielen seiner berühmtesten Stücken die Fehler gewiesen hat!) What then could Lessing mean by praising this rude, uncultivated writer? He had not read Mrs. Lennox apparently! but on the other hand he had read Shakspeare. To a natural sagacity scarcely ever surpassed, Lessing fortunately joined a familiarity with the masterpieces of ancient and of modern art. He knew Aristotle much better than most of those who professed to follow him; and knew him too well to pin his faith upon any dictum which the ‘stout stagyrite’ had advanced for the guidance of the Greeks. Armed at all points, with learning, with logic, with wit, and with a flexible taste, he triumphed over the pedants of his day; and first taught Germany where Shakspeare ought to stand. No one can have read the Dramaturgie without regretting that so few of its pages are
[Page 62]
devoted to Shakspeare. There is enough, however, to show what Lessing, the critic, could achieve.
Wieland's translation came to assist Lessing's criticism; and from that day Shakspeare has found a second home in Germany. Göthe, Herder, Lenz, Merk, Gerstenberg, the Schlegels, Tieck, Schiller,—poets, critics, and philosophers,—have all combined to contribute their mite of illustration, and to solve the various questions raised by his genius and his life. It would be unjust to deny that to Germany Europe owes much of its relish for, and intelligence of Shakspeare. But, on the other hand, it is just as certain that to Germany Europe owes no inconsiderable amount of nonsense, triviality, and perverted criticism, against which it is time to make a stand. German criticism, in fact, has now usurped the despotic throne formerly occupied by the French. Its authority is respectfully bowed to, or humbly dissented from, in England, America, France and Italy. Dogmatic writers suddenly become timid when they confront German critics; and the spirit of German criticism is scarcely ever opposed. In the few observations we have to offer, we must beg the reader to remember that our limits do not admit of anything like a comprehensive treatment of the subject; and therefore if our remarks are rather upon the weak points of German criticism than upon the strong, it is because it seems to us that the weak points most need attention at present.
Göthe, as the greatest of all Germans, is peculiarly interesting when he speaks about Shakspeare; and many are the luminous and profound remarks with which he has exalted his theme. So wise and poetical a mind could not fail to recognise the wisdom and beauty of so great a poet; but after having imitated in ‘Götz von Berlichingen’ and in ‘Egmont’ the free movement and historic pictures of the English dramatist, he came, in the later period of his life, to a conclusion, which, the more we think of it, the more paradoxical it appears. He wrote an essay to prove that Shakspeare was not a great theatrical writer! It is a curious illustration of the absence of fixed principles, that two such critics as Göthe and Charles Lamb, (not to mention others,) should have gravely maintained that Shakspeare's very excellencies as a dramatic Poet prevented the success of his works on the stage:—in other words, the excellencies were so great that they failed to produce the very effects for which they were employed! This extraordinary fallacy has taken deep root. We constantly meet with it in print, and in conversation. To object to any stage representation of ‘those immortal works,’ is very generally considered to be a mark of delicate and refined taste. Shakspeare would certainly have thought it but
[Page 63]
a sorry compliment. It is worth while to look into the confusion out of which this opinion has proceeded. True it is, that no stage representation of Othello, Hamlet, or Lear can be critically satisfactory, or perfectly adequate to our desires. Actors, the best of them, are but indifferent personifications of those ideal figures with which the poet's creative mind has peopled the world. In reading Shakspeare, our imagination is lifted up into a purely ideal region, where it holds direct and undisturbed converse with the imagination of the great poet; while, in seeing Shakspeare on the stage, our conceptions are necessarily lowered by the presence of the bodily forms of actors. But if the impressions be thus in some measure degraded, on the other hand, they become greatly more intense. Hamlet may have a large mouth, Imogen thick ankles, Othello may be hoarse, Coriolanus be perhaps a ‘gentleman of the Jewish persuasion:’—and it will be asked, are these Shakspeare's characters? We answer, objections of this kind would interdict all representation upon the stage. If there is to be an acted drama, scenic representation must be accepted with all its imperfections, for the sake of its incalculable advantages. One is apt to underrate the value of the stage from familiarity with its performances. Yet it can scarcely be denied that if we had never seen Macbeth, Othello, or Hamlet performed, our conceptions of them would have been far less vivid than they are. In proof of this, let any one compare his enjoyment of a play which he has never seen acted, with that of one which he has seen well acted. Kean's Shylock and Othello produced an infinitely grander effect than could have been reached by any closet reading: But was Kean at all ideal, in person, voice, or gesture? To say that many beauties occur to us in the closet, which escape us on the stage is very true, but has little or nothing to do with this objection. The two pleasures are so far from being opposite and inconsistent, that neither of them will be ever experienced in the highest degree, except in the case of plays which are capable of standing the double test. Besides, we are persuaded that the same persons who are most delighted in reading the plays at home, will be those who are most delighted at seeing them well acted. Originally, it must be remembered too, there was no room for this distinction. In Shakspeare's time, plays were written for the theatre and not for the study; the stage was their only publication. Therefore, if Shakspeare put forth his strength to suit this mode of publication and failed , he was in that case a bungling artist; and the ‘excellencies’ which caused that failure were not excellencies, but splendid faults. But the fact is, that he succeeded: and that these excellencies
[Page 64]
have converted his success with his contemporaries into immortal fame. The plays of Shakspeare, which were the delight of the ‘Globe,’ continue, as we have observed above in replying to a different objection, to be the delight of every age and station. They are still ‘the divine, the matchless’ of ‘every play-house bill,’ as much as in Pope's time; and constantly performed to the lowest, as well as highest audiences. Hamlet, Othello, Macbeth, and Romeo and Julict, charm the uncultivated crowd in suburban theatres, quite as much as the more reflective audiences at theatres royal. Those who cannot follow Hamlet in his farreaching scepticism, who know nothing of the southern romance which glows in Romeo and Juliet, who cannot be supposed to appreciate the airy fancy or profound wisdom of the poet, are nevertheless fascinated by his acted plays. That is a sufficient answer to all who may be disposed to doubt his theatrical excellence, in consequence of their seeing in him beauties beyond and above the reach of a mere play-wright.
The truth is that Göthe, though a great poet, was but an indifferent dramatist, and confounded dramatic art with poetic art. Not to mention his own plays, there is striking evidence extant of his false notions of dramatic art. He altered and adapted Romeo and Juliet for the Weimar theatre. A. W. Schlegel had, in a celebrated essay, shown the necessary connection of every scene in the original play; but Göthe, under the perversion of his wrong notions of theatrical exigencies, undertook to make it what he called a ‘stage play.’ The success of this experiment is instructive: during the five and twenty years which have elapsed since the attempt was made, this ‘stage play’ has been acted on no single German stage—in spite of the prestige of Göthe's name. What! the piece arranged solely with a view to stage effect fails, and the ‘untheatrical’ original always succeeds! Does not this tell us, what indeed we knew before, that Shakspeare understood his art and its application to the stage, better than the poet-manager Göthe?
The curious may compare Göthe's adaptation with the original. It has been recently published by Edward Boas. 6 Whole acts are altered, and important scenes omitted. We will give one ‘specimen brick.’ The opening scene or exposition of Romeo and Juliet in Shakspeare is, as usual, masterly; being both dramatic in spirit and theatrical in effect. It strikes the true key-note, and arrests the spectator's attention by its lively action. The quarrel between the followers of the Montagues and Capulets exhibits the enmity of the two houses as intense and of old standing. That Voltaire should have been shocked at such an
[Page 65]
undignified exposition, and at a servant's saying ‘Do you bite your thumb at me, sir?’ is intelligible enough; but is it not strange to find Göthe omitting such a characteristic and effective scene? He supplies its place with a chorus sung by servants:—
‘Zündet die Lampen an,
Windet auch Kränze dran
Hell sei das Haus!
Ehret die mächtige
Feier mit Tanz and Schmaus,
Capulet der Prächtige
Richtet sie aus;’
and so forth!
We need only allude to Göthe's thoughtful and inventive criticism on the character of Hamlet:—it is known to every one. But a remark upon the Ghost is too curious and too little known, to be passed over. In the scene between Hamlet and his mother, the entrance of the Ghost was thus indicated in the first edition: ‘Enter the Ghost, in his night gown !’ Göthe noticing it, says: ‘Who is not pained at first learning that? Who does not reject such an idea? And yet, if we think of it, we shall find it to be correct. The Ghost is cased in armour when he first appears before the sentinels on the platform. But we begin to feel ashamed of ourselves for having so long tolerated his appearance in the private chamber of the queen, armed thus cap-à-pie. How much more homely, domestic, and terrible he now appears, in the same form in which he was wont to appear in this chamber, in his night dress, and unarmed!’ Göthe, in further proof of the first edition being agreeable to Shakspeare's intention, adduces Hamlet's words:
‘My father in his habit as he liv'd’.
This seems to be conclusive. For, as Hamlet had already seen the Ghost in armour, and the armour had been specified, the remark ‘in his habit as he lived’ would have been uncalled for and out of place, unless the habit were different from that in which Hamlet had already seen him. But what would Voltaire have said to a Ghost in his night-gown! 7
Göthe has assisted us in the appreciation of certain passages, and of one character; but he has given us no assistance towards a clearer insight into dramatic art. Tieck, whose long-promised
[Page 66]
work on Shakspeare has for some years been suspected to be a promise destined to remain unfulfilled, has in several detached criticisms thrown considerable light both on poetical and theatrical difficulties. Among the very best of his criticisms is one on Shakspeare's treatment of the supernatural ( Behandlung des Wunderbaren , 1793). 8 Although the main idea of this essay was given by Lessing in his comparison between the ghost in Semiramis and the ghost in Hamlet, Tieck has the credit of having applied and developed the idea with felicity.
The Schlegels are constantly mentioned in connexion with Shakspeare; and their merits are certainly great. It is but justice, however, to add that they, too, owe almost every thing to Lessing. All that they have done (translation apart) is but an offshoot from Lessing and Herder. When once Lessing had destroyed the reigning prejudices about art, and shown the narrowness of French principles, and the vital force and richness of Shakspeare, they who came after him had an easy task. If the Schlegels had but followed him in the spirit as well as in the novelties of his criticism, the world would have been spared a quantity of verbiage and fantastic speculation. A. W. Schlegel's ‘Lectures’ are wonderful as lectures, in which the rhetoric is always effective; but they have been singularly overrated as philosophical criticisms. Considered as rhetorical expositions, they have a clearness and an eloquence which has carried them over Europe; but we cannot compliment them on their depth or sagacity. The lecture upon Shakspeare contains a number of ‘fine things’ said about the poet; but it is rather a panegyric than a critique. The ideas, when there are ideas, have all the vagueness in which rhetoricians delight, and which philosophers condemn. Expanding an idea which is to be found in Lessing and in Morgann's ‘Essay on Falstaff’ respecting organic and mechanical forms, Schlegel tells us with much emphasis that Shakspeare was an ‘organic artist.’ But in spite of his glowing praise of the poet's ‘profound art,’ we defy the most acute reader to divine what the precise nature of that art actually is. It may be comforting to know that Shakspeare ‘worked upon certain profound principles;’ but we should like the teacher to have told us what those principles were, and how we are to detect their ‘working’ in the plays. Lessing, on the contrary, though less profuse in displays of philosophical language, tells us plainly and forcibly in what Shakspeare's art consists, and in what it is superior to the art of Voltaire. Schlegel speaks finely and discriminatingly upon the masterly power of characterisation which Shakspeare exhibits;
[Page 67]
but that is a topic with regard to which there never has been a dispute, from Ben Jonson downwards. In other respects, and when he descends to details, he is lost; the heights of abstraction and cloudy vagueness alone are congenial to his spirit. We cannot indeed help suspecting the value of those ‘profound principles of criticism’ which lead a man to decry Molière, to despise Racine, to place Calderon on a level with Shakspeare,—and to proclaim that ‘Sir John Oldcastle’ and ‘Lord Thomas Cromwell’ are not only ‘unquestionably written by Shakspeare,’ but are ‘deserving to be classed among the best and maturest of his works !’ Nor can we hope to fathom principles which are to prove that Shakspeare's anachronisms ‘were for the most part committed purposely, and after great consideration ’—and that in Shylock ‘we hear a sprinkling of the Jewish pronunciation in the mere written words—as we sometimes still find it in the higher classes notwithstanding their social refinement.’ Dashing rhetoric carries the day throughout. You are authoritatively told that Shakspeare is an artist. So far so good. You are then further informed that the peculiarity of this Shakspearian art is ‘its thorough realisation of the romantic spirit.’ Here you begin to feel a haze descending; a modest misgiving steals upon your mind as to whether you clearly apprehend the nature of this same ‘romantic spirit;’ you wish to understand the distinction between classic and romantic. The wish is rational; and the philosopher is only too happy to enlighten you—in the following luminous sentences: ‘The whole of ancient poetry and art is as it were a rhythmical nomos (law), an harmonious promulgation of the permanently established legislation of a world submitted to a beautiful order, and reflecting itself in the eternal images of things.’ This is not very clear, perhaps; but it sounds well; and as, after all, you care little, perhaps, about ancient art, you hurry on to what is said about the modern— There at any rate he may be intelligible. Let us see. ‘The romantic poetry, again, is the expression of the secret attraction to a chaos, which is concealed between the regulated creation , even in its very bosom, and which is perpetually striving after new and wonderful births; the animating spirit of original love hovers here anew over the waters.’ We hope some of our readers may understand this: But for ourselves, we would only ask why, if Shakspeare is the realisation of the spirit above described, the critic has not undertaken to point out the ‘secret attraction to chaos’ and the ‘love hovering over the waters’ in Shakspeare's separate plays? But instead of this, he contents himself with meagre and somewhat common-place remarks upon the story and the characters.
[Page 68]
If we have dwelt on Schlegel's defects, and especially on the exaggerated pretensions of his philosophy, it is because the peculiar character and boast of German criticism is what it calls its ‘Philosophy of Art.’ This sounding name imposes. The application of abstract ‘principles’ to works which the artists themselves never suspected to be philosophical, gives a novel air to criticism, and seduces the unwary. But unless we are greatly deceived, this philosophy of art is a vain and misplaced employment of ingenuity; and will no more advance criticism than ontological speculations will advance human knowledge. To understand Nature, we must observe her manifestations, and trace out the laws of the coexistence and succession of phenomena. And, in the same way, to understand Art, we must patiently examine the works of art; and, from a large observation of successful efforts, deduce general conclusions respecting the laws upon which success depends. To confine ourselves for the present to Shakspeare, the drama is, as we have said, not poetry only, but poetry applied to a particular purpose. That purpose is stage-representation. In dramatic criticism, therefore, there are two departments: one treating of a play as poetry, in which case it is to be judged exactly in the same way as any other poem—epic, ode, or elegy; the other treating of a play as a theatrical work—in which case it must be judged according to the indispensable conditions and requisitions of the stage. Now we have already stated—and it will be evident to all who will examine Shakspearian criticism upon this distinction— that, while the former of these departments has been carefully studied in every direction and from every point of view, the latter has been almost entirely neglected. As a poet, Shakspeare needs little further illustration; so diligent, so sagacious, and so comprehensive has been criticism. As a dramatist, he has been by turns, absurdly enough, tested, according to classic rules, to the rules of French tragedy, and, finally, to those of German philosophy. No German, Lessing excepted, seems to have borne distinctly in mind the simple fact, that the drama is only amenable to the laws of stage representation. It has even been thought to be honouring Shakspeare to call him essentially untheatrical; and to say that the plays which he above all things meant for representation (he would not publish them himself in any other form) are really ill adapted to representation! The Germans are greatly to blame for this; and their ‘philosophical principles’ appear to be as much beside the real question, as the ‘classic rules’ which attempted to impose their arbitrary limits to the poet's wide and sweeping range.
Franz Horn—whose five volumes (‘Shakspeare Erlaütert’), in
[Page 69]
spite of much that is questionable and a little that is decidedly fantastic, do, nevertheless, contain some solid instruction—is pushed to the wall and despised by his countrymen, because he is not philosophical. His minute and laborious analyses of the characters, however, are always worth reading, and are likely generally to set the reader thinking. He is a German Hazlitt. He does not unravel the tangled question of dramatic art, but he throws considerable light on the dramatic poet . Passing over a multitude of inferior writers, vying with each other in uttering obscurities, we pause at Ulrici's famous work, allured by its title and its reputation. It is entitled ‘Shakspeare's Dramatic Art;’ yet there is not a syllable in it relating to the drama, properly speaking! It is a bulky treatise of pseudophilosophy, of which Shakspeare is the text. Had Lessing been alive, how mercilessly would he have flagellated this pompous book! We can fancy his amusement on reading that elaborate chapter which explains Shakspeare's poetic theory of life ( poetische Weltanschauung ), in which, after a succession of dreary platitudes, the author arrives at the following conclusion: —Shakspeare was a Christian poet, and in his dramas we must learn to read Christian philosophy, just as in Sophocles we read Greek philosophy. This conclusion Ulrici is at pains to establish with great gravity and form, as if it were a novelty, and an important one. He accordingly describes at great length what was the spirit of Paganism, and what is the spirit of Christianity; and after proving that in the Christian theory of life Destiny has no place, he shows that Shakspeare did not employ Destiny as a tragic agency!
‘Shakspeare's invention,’ he says, ‘composition, characterisation, and language,—in short, his dramatic style , although in the first instance qualified by the notion of dramatic art which lived within him, derives its most decided peculiarity from his particular view of that relation between God and the world, from which the nature, life, and history of humanity first derives its true import. We allude to his poetical apprehension of the universal system of things .’ Here is a plain assertion that Shakspeare's most decided peculiarity is derived from his taking a Christian and not a Heathen view of life. Considering that he was born, bred, and educated in a Christian country, and that he was addressing a Christian audience, the fact of his not adopting the Heathen theory of life might, we think, have been more simply accounted for; and towards the close of this chapter it does seem to have occurred to the learned author, that this ‘peculiarity’ must be shared by every other Christian poet. But he gets rid of the difficulty, in a singular passage (pp. 167-8.
[Page 70]
of the trans.), in which he claims for Shakspeare the distinction of exhibiting in his plays the Christian theory with greater purity, distinctness, and completeness! The writer of that very foolish book on the ‘Religion and Philosophy of Shakspeare,’ in which the poet is made an Atheist, is not more hopelessly wrong than Ulrici is in making Shakspeare, above all things, a Calvinist. Charles Butler and others have imagined that they could discover symptoms of his having been a Roman Catholic. So much for these suppositions. But let us grant for a moment that all Ulrici says about Shakspeare's Christian view of life is true; what has that, we ask, to do with the question of dramatic art ? If Shakspeare were a philosopher, and his plays had been only meant for treatises, Ulrici's attempt would have been dull, indeed, but justifiable: but to look at plays in this light could only occur to a German professor. We knew before that a German was not easily satisfied with looking directly at a thing; his tendency is always to look beyond it: but such specimens of ‘profundity’ as we meet with in Ulrici, at every turn, are gems which shine all the brighter from their leaden ‘setting.’ Here is one in which he detects the profound significance of Shakspeare's quibbles:—‘If, then, we go back to the origin of this verbal play, and further reflect that Shakspeare never kept up this game of rejoinder and antithesis emptily and unmeaningly, but that with him it has always some meaning, and not unfrequently a most profound significance , we shall see good reason for the whole representation being pervaded by it. For in this discrepancy between the indicated matter and its indication, and the inappropriateness of the same or similar words to express wholly different objects, we have the revelation of the deep fundamental and original disagreement between human life and its true idea; as well as the inadequacy of human cognition and knowledge of which language is the expression, for the wide range of objective truth and reality,—and consequently of the weakness entailed upon man's noblest intellectual power by the fall and the first lie.’ 9 Philosophy which enables a man to penetrate depths like these, can serencly smile down the laughter of Englishmen, who, it is notorious, are totally wanting in the ‘philosophic sense.’
This much, however, we must say for Dr. Ulrici, that he is not, like Schlegel, guilty of the gross inconsistency of laying down abstract principles, and forgetting to apply them when he
[Page 71]
comes to the separate plays. On the contrary, he sturdily proceeds to apply his philosophy; and each play serves him as the text for a moral sermon. The sermon indeed is not good; but at any rate it is a sermon. We are not much edified, to be sure, by learning that in Othello,—‘wedlock, so far as it is the chief element and a leading motive in the social development of the human race, is the position of life from which the poet has surveyed the horizon of the tragic view of the world and providence;’ 10 nor will it much increase our sympathy with, and delight in, that tragic masterpiece, to learn that Othello, unhappy man, ‘like Romeo, misemploys his divine gifts; and, forgetting their true destination, devotes himself to this earthly life.’ Othello had indeed noble qualities; but they were dashed to pieces, were ‘powerless and unsupported, so soon as he looked upon this earth alone as his abiding stay, and not as a passing moment of the eternal life of humanity.’
The title of Ulrici's book is a misnomer: it should have been called ‘Sermons on Shakspeare.’ And yet, serious as are its defects, it would be unjust to deny that it has also merits; the greatest of which we take to be the suggestiveness, which every grave examination of such a subject must possess. Few people will feel that they have learned anything from Dr. Ulrici; but he may have stimulated inquiry and originated many thoughts. As a contribution to the theory of dramatic art, in any sense of the term, his book is worthless. It has been successful however in England, far beyond its merits—owing, we presume, to the prevailing mania for German philosophy: while in Germany it has been followed by numerous essays still more extravagant. Among these, the most remarkable are, Dr. Rötscher's ‘Abhandlungen zur Philosophie der Kunst,’ which, for those who desire to see how Shakspeare taught German metaphysics, will be very curious. Not a glimmer of poetic or dramatic criticism peers through the mist. We should except, however, as one of the best and most sensible essays in their recent criticism, an essay on Hamlet, by Professor Gans, reprinted in his ‘Vermischte Schriften.’ How long philosophical criticism will continue in vogue, nobody can venture to predict; but we are certain that, so long as it continues, Shakspeare will be judged from a point of view altogether false.
In England, we are glad to think, the Philosophy of Art, as taught in Germany, though much admired , has been little adopted . We have talked grandly enough about ‘principles,’ but, after all, it is only detached passages and isolated portions
[Page 72]
from the German school, which have attracted any real attention. Coleridge, who introduced it among us, has himself treated Shakspeare in a merely fragmentary manner; he contributed, however, greatly towards giving a new tone to Shakspearian criticism. What was original in him in this particular, and what of German extraction, it is not easy to say. That tone was speedily taken up, because it flattered our national vanity, and reconciled the discrepancy between our admiration and our opinions. A storm of ridicule, which has not yet passed away, forthwith assailed the critics of the preceding age; and newspaper writers, who accepted upon trust the dictum that Shakspeare was a profound artist (though they could not have said in what his art consisted), cast every epithet of scorn upon the Johnsons and Popes of a benighted era. They have not given us, it is true, any substantive work upon Shakspeare of much pretension; but an immense mass of valuable observation pervades our modern literature: And the influence of Germany, and of Coleridge and his contemporaries, has been a healthy influence on the whole. If it has encouraged our idolatry, as idolatry, it is equally true that our general appreciation of Shakspeare is much more intelligent than in the last century.
Of Mr. Hudson's ‘Lectures,’ though our friends in America have deemed them worthy of a second edition, and the ‘North American Review’ worthy of an elaborate notice, we cannot speak favourably. They profess indeed to contain nothing new; and they are as good as they profess. Perhaps, as lectures, their rhetorical style may have been acceptable; but what does the reader say to this, an average specimen?—
‘For if this strongest, yet calmest, this greatest, yet gentlest, of mortals, makes us tremble when he but breathes upon us the melodies and fragrancies of his soul, he must perforce overwhelm us when he opens the floodgates of his power, and lets loose his tempests and cataracts upon us. Too much for criticism even when he smiles like some protecting spirit of humanity, and sheds the sunlight of his genius round its sweetest and gentlest transpirations, he may well strike criticism dumb with amazement when, like a divinity in the transports of his might, he rides upon the whirlwind and directs the storm of human passion.’ (Vol. ii. p. 44.)
In this country such writing is called ‘fine writing,’ and is not much esteemed. Nor is the matter of the ‘lectures’ superior to the manner.
The translation of Macbeth, named at the head of this paper, recals us once more to France. A change has come over the spirit of its Shakspearian criticism, almost as great as that which has come over our own; and from the same cause—the introduction
[Page 73]
of German ideas. The herald of this new revolution was Madame de Stael. By making German literature fashionable she helped to break through the barriers of classical rules, and forced a new opening for Shakspeare. Madame de Stael really admired his genius. But she was too much of a French woman of the old school, not to think his ‘taste’ defective; and she followed the common opinion in attributing his faults to his age. The daring innovator who had first cleared the way for l'école romantique , was left behind by those who followed. The history of that school we cannot now stop to trace: But, as might be expected, every phase of it brought the glory of the English drama more prominently forward. In combating the authority of Racine (whom Madame de Stael still considered indisputably the first of poets), the romanticists were glad to shield themselves under the authority of Shakspeare.
In 1822 M. Guizot revised Le Tourneur's translation, and prefixed to it a calm, sagacious, and every way remarkable life. He argued the question like a philosopher of a higher order. Openly disavowing that narrow criticism which presumes to limit the drama to one form, he maintained that the drama in France had lost the true sense of its destination, by its aristocratic exclusiveness. In the following excellent passage the fundamental principle of criticism is clearly stated. ‘If the romantic system has its beauties, it has necessarily its art and its rules. Every thing which men acknowledge as beautiful in art, owes its effect to certain combinations, of which our reason can always detect the secret, when our emotions have attested its power. The science—or the employment of these combinations—constitutes what we call art. Shakspeare had his own. We must detect it in his works, and examine the means he employs and the results he aims at.’
About the same period M. de Barante published his critique on Hamlet (reprinted in his Mélanges , 1825); the influence of German ideas is very visible in it. He ingeniously and more Germanico defends the obviously defective dénouement by saying, ‘Il était difficile de le dénouer, puisqu'il n'avait pas de nœud, et que l'action marchait comme au hazard. ... Le doute a présidé à tout son ensemble, et pèse encore sur le dénouement.’ So completely does he give up all the classic rules, that he says: ‘The encounter of Hamlet with that army which is about to shed its blood for a few acres of land, and the famous scene of the gravediggers, too obviously enter into the general plan of the piece—they are in too strict harmony with the unity of impression which Shakspeare has sought, to necessitate our insisting on their propriety, and to show that
[Page 74]
they are not bizarreries or barbarisms, but the consequences of a whole dramatic system.’
Guizot and De Barante were followed by Villemain, who in 1827 published his essay on Shakspear's life and genius ( Nouveaux Mélanges Historiques et Littéraires ). 11 inferior to the essay of Guizot in distinct enunciation of principles, it had greater effect upon France; perhaps because France was then better prepared to accept its doctrines. Villemain's mind is of an academic cast, and is peculiarly alive to the beauties of the classic school. His acknowledgment of Shakspeare, therefore, came with greater force; and his defence of the grave-diggers was not the defence of an advocate anxious for license for its own sake. There was an earnest recognition of the poet's ‘beauties,’ and a recognition of the fact that the drama is not necessarily of one form only; but there was none of that idolatry of Shakspeare's faults, which the Germans have made an article of faith. ‘All the absurd improbabilities,’ he says, ‘all the buffooneries of which Shakspeare is so lavish, were common to the rude theatre which we possessed at the same era; it was the mark of the times: why should we now admire in Shakspeare the defects which are every where else buried in oblivion, and which have survived in the English poet, only on account of the sublime traits of genius with which he has surrounded them.’ This differs as widely from Schlegel and Ulrici, who—seeing in those improbabilities and buffooneries the results of mature deliberation, and the deep significance of a profound thinker—persuaded themselves that faults were beauties, as it differs from the earlier French critics, by whom these faults had been exaggerated, travestied, and caricatured. ‘It is necessary,’ adds Villemain, ‘in judging Shakspeare, first to reject the mass of rude and false taste which oppresses him; it is, perhaps, also necessary to avoid building systems applicable only to our own times with these old monuments of the age of Elizabeth. If a new form of tragedy should proceed from our actual manners, and from the genius of some great poet, this form would no more resemble the tragedy of Shakspeare than that of Racine.’ In his ‘Cours de Littérature,’ Villemain has some admirable remarks on Shakspeare; whom he contrasts with Voltaire, and triumphantly shows that not only in depth and truth of passion, but also in bon gôut , Shakspeare is greatly the superior!
From this time downwards, the Shakspeare mania has continued to spread. In 1829 Alfred de Vigny produced his careful translation of Othello on the stage of the Théâtre
[Page 75]
Francais. It was confessedly an experiment. He wished to settle the following problem: ‘La scène Française s'ouvrira-t-elle, ou non, à une tragédie moderne, produisante dans sa conception un tableau large de la vie, au lieu du tableau resserré de la catastrophe d'une intrigue; dans sa composition des caractères, non des rôles ; dans son éxécution, un style familier, comique, tragique, et parfois épique?’ Success was the answer. It was acted from fifty to sixty times. From that time translators have been busy; critics have echoed the laudatory tones of Germany and England, and every petty novelist and journalist can quote ‘that is the question,’ and talk glibly of ‘le vieux William’ and ‘I'immortel Will.’ Even the great—the illustrious —the pyramidal Dumas himself, translates Hamlet à ses heures perdues ; and condescends to make the dénouement more effective and plus logique ! He is a daring master of paradox who can now venture—as M. Ducuing, in a very remarkable eassy, lately ventured 12 —to question Shakspeare's superiority over every other dramatist. The critic just named is, we conceive, altogether mistaken in his views of dramatic art; but as a protest in favour of the classic school, his essay is both vigorous and ingenious. What particularly strikes us in it, is the obstinacy with which he persists in demanding des rôles in lieu of characters (to use De Vigny's happy phrase), and in seeing nothing but a mechanical regularity in dramatic structure. We may quote as significant of the present state of feeling in France the following passage:— ‘De démontrer, aprés tant d'autres, comment Shakspeare a porté dans son cerveau, depuis les plus suaves éclosions de l'ègolgue jusqu'aux plus resplendissantes créations de I'èpopée, et comment il a su approprier à la scèna Anglaise les modes les plus divers de la poesie dramatique; á qui pourrait-il aujourdhui paraitre profitable de venir le tenter de nouveau?’
The admiration for Shakspeare, in short, is now so general, and panegyrics have become so common, that M. Ducuing is forced to apologise for presuming to take the other side. What a change from the language of Voltaire! That French criticism upon Shakspeare is, even now, entirely satisfactory, few Englishmen will allow; but it seems to us to be distinguished by one merit, which may in some sense be a set-off against its imperfect appreciation of the poet—we mean its appreciation of the dramatist . While England writes glowing eulogies on the poetry , and Germany utters oracles on the philosophy , France at present appears
[Page 76]
always to bear in mind the dramatic purpose of Shakspeare, and to remember that in works written for the stage what we ought first to inquire after is the theatrical art which they display. Sometimes, indeed, they seem to overlook the fact of Shakspeare being something more than a mere playwright; as for instance, when they undertake to teach him how he might have produced greater ‘effects.’ Thus Shakspeare makes Macduff slay Macbeth, and appear with his head upon a pole; after which, Malcolm is proclaimed king. M. Deschamps has not only made Macbeth and Macduff mortally wound each other (a most unwarrantable change),—but, to produce a coup de théâtre , he summons the witches, who with torches in their hands appear on the citadel , and then Macbeth, slightly raising himself, points to them and exclaims:—
‘Malcolm tu vas régner! e'est juste! mais regarde!
Oui! voilà les trois sœurs qui m'ont perdu.—Prends garde
A leurs conseils maudits, et songe à mon adieu!
( Il meurt.—Eclat de rire des sorcières .)
Malcolm :
Amis, vive l'Ecosse, et ne croyons qu'en Dieu!’
This is doubtless an ‘effect;’ but it is produced at the expense of poetic consistency. Shakspeare understood the treatment of his supernatural agency a great deal too well to bring witches into any place less congenial to their nature, than the ‘blasted heath’ or their own dark cave!
This example alone may show us how difficult it is for the poet to preserve the integral truth and consistency of his creations, and at the same time to achieve theatrical effects. We English laugh at Dumas when he alters Hamlet, and at M. Deschamps when he alters Macbeth, thinking to make them more effective ; but we should remember that Cibber had done the same with Richard III.; and that our own Garrick—the friend of Johnson and Reynolds—the great Shakspearian interpreter (as he was called), had practised still bolder experiments on the object of his worship, and for precisely the same purpose. Our age repudiates such things; because we have learned to believe that we cannot tamper with a work of art without injuring its effect. Though the momentary theatrical effect may be heightened, the permanent dramatic effect is spoiled. As before stated, the great difficulty which the dramatist has to overcome, is to preserve the poetic truth of conception with the theatrical effect of execution. In almost all plays, except Shakspeare's, we see that the difficulty is greater than the dramatist can master. Either he sacrifices poetic truth to theatrical effect, or he sacrifices theatrical effect to a poetic consistency which only produces languor in the audience. Shakspeare's ‘art’ consists
[Page 77]
in the marvellous power with which he exhibits the most beautiful poetry in combination with the most effective modes of stage representation. To talk of his poetry as poetry, irrespective of the conditions of the stage and the difficulties of those conditions, is as if we were to talk of Raphael's wonderful grace, beauty, and mental power, irrespective of his facility in transferring to canvass the images which bewitched his soul. When we think of the plays of such poets as Coleridge, Byron, Words- worth, and Keats, ranking, with all their poetry, in the lowest grade of theatrical merit; and compare with them some of the plays of Shakspeare, ranking as the very highest and most perfect of theatrical pieces, we shall perhaps acknowledge that the criticism, which loses sight of theatrical art as a main element in dramatic art, must be but one-sided and imperfect.
NOTES
1 History of Opinion on the Writings of Shakspeare.
2 Quoted by Mr. Knight in his ‘History of Opinion.’
3 Chasles: Etudes sur le XVI. siècle, p. 130. A volume of piquant and erudite criticisms.
4 Etudes sur l'Antiquité, p. 5.
5 A traditional error constantly repeated, even by Spanish writers, ascribes the plagiarism to Corneille, who, it is said, plundered Calderon as he had previously plundered Guillen de Castro. But dates settle the question. Corneille's play appeared in 1647; Calderon's not till seventeen years afterwards, in 1664. M. Chasles has some curious remarks on this point in his Etudes sur l' Espagne, where the whole question is argued.
6 Nachträge zu Göthe's Werken, Leipsig, 1846.
7 In the print prefixed to Roscoe's Shakspeare (reprinted by Mr. Knight in his edition, where, by the way, no comment is made on this stage direction of the first edition) the ghost, even in this scene, appears in complete armour: the point is worth clearing up.
8 Reprinted in the ‘Kritische Schriften,’ 1848, vol. i.
9 English Trans. p. 150. Original, p. 159. We quote the English version to obviate any suspicion of having tampered with the passages.
10 Trans. p. 164. Orig. p. 174.
11 It has been translated in Drake's ‘Memorials of Shakspeare.’
12 Shakspeare et notre Repertoire in ‘La Revue Nouvelle,’ Jan. 7. 1846.
$$$
