Shelley's 'Wandering Jew'
Author: Jewsbury, Maria Jane.
Publication info: The Athenæum ; London (1831): [2] p.

Shelley's ‘Wandering Jew’ [in, The Athenæum; Journal of Literature, Science, and the Fine Arts ...]
[Page 456]
SHELLEY'S ‘WANDERING JEW.’ To make an article that has appeared in one journal the groundwork of an article in another, may be considered somewhat out of order; a proceeding, that, if the original article were good, is analogous to painting the lily and gilding refined gold. Nevertheless, ‘The Wandering Jew,’ published in Fraser's Magazine for July, is, to all intents and purposes, as important, in point of length, as Lord Byron's early poems; and we do not see why the accidental form of publication should militate against its lying equally open to criticism. Added to this, whilst, in the way of scorn, calumny, and unkindness, brimming measure has been dealt out to Shelley, few connected with periodical literature have taken the trouble to understand and appreciate his poetry, or to draw, for the benefit of the public, a boundary-line between his metaphysical subtleties and moral mistakes, and the remaining mass of his true, pure, beautiful poetry,—poetry instinct with intellectual life—radiant, harmonious, and strong. The introductory essay in Fraser for June is an earnest and understanding composition; and, although not prepared to coincide with some of the views taken either of Shelley or his poetry, we rejoiced over the paper, as exhibiting a rich vein of thought, and a dignified generosity of sentiment; so much so, that we take the opportunity of adding a column or two on the same subject. In our common “dealings” with our neighbour we are required “to be true and just;” and it has always struck us that the rule applies to literature no less than traffic, and that a man does not cease to be our neighbour by being a poet, though perchance he may become a troublesome one, in which case we shall have occasion to be additionally “true and just in our dealings.”
Shelley was one towards whom this literary, no less than daily-life duty, was greatly intermitted. Great numbers imitated in their judgment the partial Jews of old, who made the ephah small and the shekel great—forgetting that all delinquents of the same class are to receive the same measure. This, in two remarkable instances, was not the case: Lord Byron was sceptical, selfish, dissipated, and eccentric, and was believed to have taken higher degrees in evil than he really had; but he wrote impassioned and brilliant poetry that revolutionized the public taste, spell-bound the public heart; and though much of this poetry contained scepticism, selfishness, profligacy, and eccentricity, yet, by some strange anomaly, grave and good people, after protesting against these elements, spoke of and quoted the remainder with enthusiasm,—nay, very often felt an enthusiasm for the man. Let us see how Shelley was treated. He too was sceptical, and with more sincerity, with a conviction, perhaps, that disbelief of Christianity was a duty; he also was eccentric, but he was gentle-hearted, selfdenying, a lover of his species, a yearner after its improvement. He too wrote poetry, some of it embodying his anti-Christian views,—a paradise, in which the Tree of Life had been cut down, but certainly containing less to pollute the imagination, poison the spring of action, and sear virtuous emotions, than many of the writings of his noble friend and contemporary. But he was weighed in a different balance (we advert only to literary treatment), and it became suspicious to quote, and dangerous to admire him. Till latterly, he was a poet,
Whom there were none to praise,
And very few to love.
Feeling, as we do, the very gravest disagreement with many of the political and religious opinions of Shelley; grieving, as we do, that he died when his genius was beginning to work clear,—we are yet indignant at the treatment he received. Could he have entertained the public with wit and satire, as Lord Byron entertained
[Page 457]
it, or had his poetry been palpable and impassioned, like Lord Byron's poetry, his scepticism would have been passed over like Lord Byron's scepticism. The public did not admire his poetry, and for that, more than any other reason, expressed a horror of his principles. The public always looks after its own entertainment. Two circumstances combine to render the reprehensible part of Shelley's poetry more innoxious than parts of several other poets who are never reprehended. In the first place, his theories are so far out of the common track—they are so subtile, aërial, and attenuate—so abstracted from any connexion with the ways of the world, that they cease to be dangerous by becoming unintelligible. There is no parallelism between his speculations and worldly licence; in Lord Byron's there is. Shelley was a visionary, desiring, and believing it possible, to build a palace upon a cloud —namely, human happiness—without superhuman assistance. His poetry exhibits the contradiction of inculcating Christian ethics whilst spurning Christian doctrines, and of representing effects without ascribing them to adequate causes. He and St. Paul exactly agree in their estimate and inculcation of virtues—“love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance;” but whilst one accounts for them as “the fruits of the spirit”—the Divine spirit re-breathed into man—the other considers them as necessary attributes of man,
Sceptreless, free, uncircumscribed; but man
Equal, unclassed, tribeless, and nationless;
Exempt from awe, worship, degree;—
thus giving omnipotent power to outward events and conditions, and attributing regeneration of mind to modifications of circumstance.
The other reason why Shelley's erroneous sentiments are comparatively innoxious, is, that by altering the names of his metaphysical agents, the cipher finds a key, becomes intelligible, and is found, when interpreted, to speak the truth. Christianity is this key. Let the spiritual nonentity, which the author calls Universal Love, Harmony, Wisdom, Liberty, be called God , and the mist clears off, and the poetry reads religiously, in the true meaning of the term. His most magnificent production, (Greek sculpture in poetry,) the ‘Prometheus Unbound,’ supplies an illustration: Shelley's own meaning with respect to Jupiter, Demogorgon, and the like, matters nothing; most readers will, in Prometheus himself, feel and see but a shadow of One , whose name, to be suggested, needs not to be mentioned:
Know ye not me,
The Titan? he who made his agony
The barrier to your else all-conquering foe?
With regard to Shelley as a poet, he is not likely, in our day, to dispute the palm of popularity with many far inferior to him in intellect, feeling, harmony, and knowledge. There is an elemental subtlety about his mind, which those who “handle a truth they are required to believe, as if it were an ox they were called upon to purchase,” shrink from in dismay. His genius may be likened to the old church pictures of the cherubim—a winged head, unable to walk the earth, but at home when soaring through the sky.
Nor seeks nor finds he mortal blisses,
But feeds on the aërial kisses
Of shapes that haunt Thought's wildernesses.
Wordsworth, Byron, and Shelley, may be called the representatives of the past, the present, and the future. Between the first and last there is some analogy, since both agree in disapproving that connecting link to which Lord Byron adapted himself, and, whilst less philosophical, became more popular than his mightier brothers. Wordsworth's past is royalist and ecclesiastical; Shelley's is republican and pagan; Byron's present comprised everything that affected his own mind, and could be made to affect the minds of others; for he never loved anything abstractedly. Wordsworth delights mainly in the saints, sages, and heroes of English history; Shelley goes back to antique philosophers and demigods; Byron keeps amongst men and women as they are. The reflections of the first poet have chief reference to the duties of man; of the second, to his capacity for improvement; of the third, to his actual misery and actual enjoyment. Wordsworth refers to the past for examples—Shelley for opinions—Byron for images. Cast in the same era, Byron would have fought and revelled with Alcibiades; Shelley would have speculated with Plato; and Wordsworth would have discoursed with Socrates. Cast in the present era, Shelley was, of the three, farthest removed from his element and spirit's birthplace. The tone of his mind is antique, but its bias is towards the future—his Elysium of perfection: the present being a Tartarus that engulphs all good. He does not deal with things, but thoughts, and thoughts that are often sublimated into phantoms. The very cadence of his verse, the structure of his language, seems the struggle of spirit with sound and form, manifests a yearning after immateriality —a desire to make mere words etherial essences, impersonations of beauty—melody woke by the wind, drank by the dew, heard by the heart, and giving birth to dreams of things not earthly—
Low, sweet, faint sounds like the farewell of ghosts.
With the exception of Coleridge, the English language has not such a consummate master of harmony—nor, with the same exception and the addition of Wordsworth, a poet possessing such an exquisite knowledge of external nature, from its grander aspects amongst seas and mountains, to its fine and silent pencilling amongst moss and flowers. He could delineate a storm and describe a sensitive plant; but when he treated of human life, he wanted force, compression, and tangibility: his men and women are “such stuff as dreams are made of”—his narratives perplexed —his incidents obscure; in short, all his worldly realities are unreal. But, send him to the garden where grows the sensitive plant; or place him upon the mountainous ruins of the Baths of Caracalla; or amidst the Euganean hills; or in any spot where nature keeps court; and not only does he describe exquisitely and accurately the real appearances before him; but he also portrays that second and independent aspect, which, according to his mood, the scene would wear to the spectator.
Shelley's love of nature differs from that of any other poet: he seems to love it like a living thing—as if it possessed human attributes—were capable, like man, of feeling joy and sorrow. His sympathy has something strange in it, something sad; for he robs the soul of its birthright, to bestow it upon matter. Gloomy, yet melodious, he is the fallen angel of song! The whole of ‘The Sensitive Plant’ exemplifies what we have stated!—it is difficult to select from such a wilderness of blooms; but a few stanzas we must give:—
There was a power in this sweet place—
An Eve in this Eden—a ruling grace—
A lady, the wonder of her kind,
Whose form was upborne by a lovely mind,
Which, dilating, had moulded her mien and motion,
Like a sea-flower unfolded beneath the ocean.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
I doubt not the flowers of that garden sweet
Rejoiced in the sound of her gentle feet;
I doubt not they felt the spirit that came
From her glowing fingers through all their frame.
She sprinkled bright water from the stream
On those that were faint with the sunny beam;
And out of the cups of the heavy flowers
She emptied the rain of the thunder-showers.
She lifted their heads with her tender hands,
And sustained them with rods and osier bands;
If the flowers had been her own infants, she
Could never have nursed them more tenderly.
And all killing insects and gnawing worms,
And things of obscene and unlovely forms,
She bore in a basket of Indian woof,
Into the rough woods far aloof:—
In a basket of grasses and wild flowers full,
The freshest her gentle hands could pull.
For the poor banished insects, whose intent,
Although they did ill, was innocent.
‘The Wandering Jew,’ written when Shelley was seventeen, we agree with the essayist in Fraser , in thinking “a wonderful attempt,” containing, with all its schoolboyism, the germ of the ‘Prometheus.’ One thing surprises us— there is very little promise of Shelley's after versification ; and there is a good deal of Sir Walter Scott's manner in the descriptions;— there is, however, a tone of that perfect song, ‘I awake from dreams of thee,’ in the following fragment:—
See yon opening flower
Spreads its fragrance to the blast;
It fades within an hour,
Its decay is pale, is fast:
Paler is yon maiden,
Faster is her heart's decay;
Deep with sorrow laden,
She sinks in death away.
Shelley was only thirty when his mysterious and beautiful genius was quenched in death. He can scarcely be called a great poet; but had he lived, he would probably have become one, for all the powers were germinating in his mind. He had begun, also, to apprehend his own mistakes; the “charmed deep” of his spirit might, and probably would, have ceased to be chaotic; “birds of calm” might have brooded over it; his intellectual powers might have attained a balance and consistency amongst themselves; he might also have attained intellectual common sense, that “brain in the hand,” the want of which so often made his poetry a tangled mass of fine but unavailing phantasies. He would probably have learned, that ideas, like man, require a body,—“lonely apparitions being for another state, where thought shall be independent of language, and imagination of the senses.” More than this, we cannot help believing that, in matters of infinitely more importance, he would have come to his right mind; and after passing through the burning desert of Infidelity, striving in vain to cure its brackish waters, and plant its sands with flowers, he would at last have emerged into “Eden, the garden of God.” Shelley would then have been written amongst poets as “full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.”
$$$
