Tales of Fashionable Life [Review]
Author: Jeffrey, Francis.
Publication info: Contributions To the Edinburgh Review . vii, 536 p. London: Longman, Brown, Green, And Longmans, 1844.

Tales of Fashionable Life. By Miss Edgeworth [in, Contributions to the Edinburgh Review. By Francis Jeffrey ... In Four Volumes. Vol. III
[Page 410]
Tales of Fashionable Life. By Miss Edgeworth . The writings of Miss Edgeworth exhibit so singular an union of sober sense and inexhaustible invention— so minute a knowledge of all that distinguishes manners, or touches on happiness in every condition of human fortune—and so just an estimate both of the real sources of enjoyment, and of the illusions by which they are obstructed, that it cannot be thought wonderful that we should separate her from the ordinary manufacturers of novels, and speak of her Tales as works of more serious importance than much of the true history and solemn philosophy that come daily under our inspection. The great business of life, and the object of all arts and acquisitions, is undoubtedly to be happy; and though our success in this grand endeavour depends, in some degree, upon external circumstances, over which we have no control, and still more on temper and dispositions, which can only be controlled by gradual and systematic exertion, a very great deal depends also upon creeds and opinions , which may be effectually and even suddenly rectified, by a few hints from authority that cannot be questioned, or a few illustrations so fair and striking, as neither to be misapplied nor neglected. We are all, no doubt, formed, in a great degree, by the circumstances in which we are placed, and the beings by whom we are surrounded; but still we have all theories of happiness—notions of ambition, and opinions as to the summum bonum , of our own—more or less developed, and more or less original, according to our situation and character—but influencing our conduct and feelings at every moment of our lives, and leading us on
[Page 411]
to disappointment, and away from real gratification, as powerfully as mere ignorance or passion. It is to the correction of those erroneous theories that Miss Edgeworth has applied herself in that series of moral fictions, the last portion of which has recently come to our hands; and in which, we think, she has combined more solid instruction with more universal entertainment, and given more practical lessons of wisdom, with less tediousness and less pretension, than any other writer with whom we are acquainted.
When we reviewed the first part of these Tales which are devoted to the delineation of fashionable life, we ventured to express a doubt, whether the author was justifiable for expending so large a quantity of her moral medicines on so small a body of patients—and upon patients too whom she had every reason to fear would turn out incurable. Upon reflection, however, we are now inclined to recall this sentiment. The vices and illusions of fashionable life are, for the most part, merely the vices and illusions of human nature—presented sometimes in their most conspicuous, and almost always in only their most seductive form;—and even where they are not merely fostered and embellished, but actually generated only in that exalted region, it is very well known that they “drop upon the place beneath,” and are speedily propagated and diffused into the world below. To expose them, therefore, in this their original and proudest sphere, is not only to purify the stream at its source, but to counteract their pernicious influence precisely where it is most formidable and extensive. To point out the miseries of those infinite and laborious pursuits in which persons who pretend to be fashionable consume their days, would be but an unprofitable task; while nobody could be found who would admit that they belonged to the class of pretenders; and all that remained therefore was to show, that the pursuits themselves were preposterous; and inflicted the same miseries upon the unquestioned leaders of fashion, as upon the humblest of their followers. For this task, too, Miss Edgeworth possessed certain advantages of which it would have been equally
[Page 412]
unnatural and unfortunate for her readers, if she had not sought to avail herself.
We have said, that the hints by which we may be enabled to correct those errors of opinion which so frequently derange the whole scheme of life, must be given by one whose authority is not liable to dispute. Persons of fashion, therefore, and pretenders to fashion, will never derive any considerable benefit from all the edifying essays and apologues that superannuated governesses and preceptors may indite for their reformation;—nor from the volumes of sermons which learned divines may put forth for the amendment of the age;—nor the ingenious discourses which philosophers may publish, from the love of fame, money, or mankind. Their feeling as to all such monitors is, that they know nothing at all about the matter, and have nothing to do with personages so much above them;—and so they laugh at their prosing and presumption—and throw them aside, with a mingled sense of contempt and indignation. Now, Miss Edgeworth happens fortunately to be born in the condition of a lady—familiar from early life with the polite world, and liable to no suspicion of having become an author from any other motives than those she has been pleased to assign.
But it is by no means enough that we should be on a footing, in point of rank, with those to whom we are moved to address our instructions. It is necessary that we should also have some relish for the pleasures we accuse them of overrating, and some pretensions to the glory we ask them to despise. If a man, without stomach or palate, takes it into his head to lecture against the pleasures of the table—or an old maid against flirtation—or a miser against extravagance, they may say as many wise and just things as they please—but they may be sure that they will either be laughed at, or not listened to; and that all their dissuasives will be set down to the score of mere ignorance or envy. In the same way, a man or woman who is obviously without talents to shine or please in fashionable life, may utter any quantity of striking truths as to its folly or unsatisfactoriness,
[Page 413]
without ever commanding the attention of one of its votaries. The inference is so ready, and so consolatory—that all those wise reflections are the fruit of disappointment and mortification—that they want to reduce all the world to their own dull level—and to deprive others of gratifications which they are themselves incapable of tasting. The judgment of Miss Edgeworth, however, we think, is not in any very imminent danger of being disabled by this ingenious imputation; since, if we were to select any one of the traits that are indicated by her writings as peculiarly characteristic, and peculiarly entitled to praise, we should specify the singular force of judgment and self-denial, which has enabled her to resist the temptation of being the most brilliant and fashionable writer of her day, in order to be the most useful and instructive.
The writer who conceived the characters, and reported the conversations of Lady Delacour—Lady Geraldine—and Lady Dashfort (to take but these three out of her copious dramatis personæ ), certainly need not be afraid of being excelled by any of her contemporaries, in that faithful but flattering representation of the spoken language of persons of wit and politeness of the present day—in that light and graceful tone of raillery and argument—and in that gift of sportive but cutting médisance , which is sure of success in those circles, where success is supposed to be most difficult, and most desirable. With the consciousness of such rare qualifications, we do think it required no ordinary degree of fortitude to withstand the temptation of being the flattering delineator of fashionable manners, instead of their enlightened corrector; and to prefer the chance of amending the age in which she lived, to the certainty of enjoying its applauses. Miss Edgeworth, however, is entitled to the praise of this magnanimity:—For not only has she abstained from dressing any of her favourites in this glittering drapery, but she has uniformly exhibited it in such a way as to mark its subordination to the natural graces it is sometimes allowed to eclipse, and to point out the defects it still more frequently conceals.
[Page 414]
It is a very rare talent, certainly, to be able to delineate both solid virtues and captivating accomplishments with the same force and fidelity;—but it is a still rarer exercise of that talent, to render the former both more amiable and more attractive than the latter—and, without depriving wit and vivacity of any of their advantages, to win not only our affections, but our admiration away from them, to the less dazzling qualities of the heart and the understanding. By what resources Miss Edgeworth is enabled to perform this feat, we leave our readers to discover, from the perusal of her writings;— of which it is our present business to present them with a slender account, and a scanty sample.
These three new volumes contain but three stories; —the first filling exactly a volume, the second half a volume, and the last no less than a volume and a half. The first, which is entitled “Vivian,” is intended to show not only into what absurdities, but into what guilt and wretchedness, a person, otherways estimable, may be brought by that “infirmity of purpose” which renders him incapable of resisting the solicitations of others, —of saying No , in short, on proper occasions. The moral, perhaps, is brought a little too constantly forward; and a little more exaggeration is admitted into the construction of the story, than Miss Edgeworth generally employs;—but it is full of characters and incidents and good sense, like all her other productions. 1
But we pass at once to the last, the longest, and by far the most interesting of these tales. It is entitled, “The Absentee;” and is intended to expose the folly and misery of renouncing the respectable character of country ladies and gentlemen, to push, through intolerable expense, and more intolerable scorn, into the outer circles of fashion in London. That the case may be sufficiently striking, Miss Edgeworth has taken her example in an Irish family, of large fortune, and considerable rank in the peerage; and has enriched her main
[Page 415]
story with a greater variety of collateral incidents and characters, than in any of her other productions.
Lord and Lady Clonbrony are the absentees;—and they are so, because Lady Clonbrony is smitten with the ambition of making a figure in the fashionable circles of London;—where her very eagerness obstructs her success; and her inward shame, and affected contempt for her native country, only make her national accent, and all her other nationalities more remarkable. She has a niece, however, a Miss Grace Nugent, who is full of gentleness, and talent, and love for Ireland—and a son, Lord Colambre, who, though educated in England, has very much of his cousin's propensities. The first part of the story represents the various mortifications and repulses which Lady Clonbrony encounters, in her grand attempt to be very fashionable in London—the embarrassments, and gradual declension into low company, of Lord Clonbrony—their plots to marry Lord Colambre to an heiress—and the growth of his attachment to Miss Nugent, who cordially shares both in his regret for the ridicule which his mother is at so much expense to excite, and his wish to snatch her from a career at once so inglorious and so full of peril. Partly to avoid his mother's importunities about the heiress, and partly to escape from the fascinations of Miss Nugent, whose want of fortune and high sense of duty seem to forbid all hopes of their union, he sets out on a visit to Ireland; where the chief interest of the story begins. There are here many admirable delineations of Irish character, in both extremes of life; and a very natural development of all its most remarkable features. At first, his Lordship is very nearly entangled in the spells of Lady Dashfort and her daughter; and is led by their arts to form rather an unfavourable opinion of his countrymen. An accidental circumstance, however, disclosing the artful and unprincipled character of these fair ladies, he breaks from his bondage, and travels incog . to his father's two estates of Colambre and Clonbrony;—the one flourishing under the management of a conscientious and active agent; the other going to ruin under the dominion of an unprincipled
[Page 416]
oppressor. In both places, he sees a great deal of the native politeness, native wit, and kind-heartedness of the lower Irish; and makes an acquaintance at the latter with one group of Catholic cottagers, more interesting, and more beautifully painted, in the simple colouring of nature, than all the Arcadians of pastoral or romance. After detecting the frauds and villany of the tyrannical agent, he hurries back to London, to tell his story to his father; and arrives just in time to hinder him from being irretrievably entangled in his snares. He and Miss Nugent now make joint suit to Lady Clonbrony to retire for a while to Ireland,—an application in which they are powerfully seconded by the terrors of an execution in the house; and at last enabled to succeed, by a solemn promise that the yellow damask furniture of the great drawing-room shall be burnt on the very day of their arrival. In the mean time, Lord Colambre, whose wider survey of the female world had finally determined him to seek happiness with Grace Nugent, even with an humble fortune, suffers great agony, from a discovery maliciously made by Lady Dashfort, of a stain on her mother's reputation; which he is enabled at length to remove, and at the same time to recover a splendid inheritance, which had been long withheld by its prevalence, from the woman of his choice. This last event, of course, reconciles all parties to the match; and they all set out, in bliss and harmony, to the paradise regained, of Clonbrony;—their arrival and reception at which is inimitably described in a letter from one of their postilions, with which the tale is concluded.
In this very brief abstract, we have left out an infinite multitude of the characters and occurrences, from the variety and profusion of which the story derives its principal attraction; and have only attempted indeed to give such a general notice of the relations and proceedings of the chief agents, as to render the few extracts we propose to make intelligible. The contrivance of the story indeed is so good, and the different parts of it so concisely represented, that we could not give an adequate epitome of it in much less compass than the
[Page 417]
original. We can venture on nothing, therefore, but a few detached specimens: And we take the first from a class of society, which we should scarcely have thought characteristic of the country in question: we mean the Fine ladies of the Plebeian order, who dash more extravagantly, it seems, in Dublin, than any other place in this free and commercial empire. Lord Colambre had the good fortune to form an acquaintance with one of these, the spouse of a rich grocer, who invited him to dine with her at her villa, on his way back from the county of Wicklow. The description, though of a different character from most of Miss Edgeworth's delineations, is so picturesque and lively, that we cannot help thinking it must have been taken from the life. We are tempted, therefore, to give it at full length.
“After a charming tour in the county of Wicklow, where the beauty of the natural scenery, and the taste with which those natural beauties have been cultivated, far surpassed the sanguine expectations Lord Colambre had formed, his Lordship and his companions arrived at Tusculum; where he found Mrs. Raffarty, and Miss Juliana O'Leary, —very elegant,—with a large party of the ladies and gentlemen of Bray assembled in a drawing-room, fine with bad pictures and gaudy gilding; the windows were all shut, and the company were playing cards, with all their might. This was the fashion of the neighbourhood. In compliment to Lord Colambre and the officers, the ladies left the card-tables; and Mrs. Raffarty, observing that his Lordship seemed partial to walking, took him out, as she said, ‘to do the honours of nature and art.’ ”
“The dinner had two great faults—profusion and pretension. There was, in fact, ten times more on the table than was necessary; and the entertainment was far above the circumstances of the person by whom it was given: for instance, the dish of fish at the head of the table had been brought across the island from Sligo, and had cost five guineas; as the lady of the house failed not to make known. But, after all, things were not of a piece: there was a disparity between the entertainment and the attendants; there was no proportion or fitness of things. A painful endeavour at what could not be attained, and a toiling in vain to conceal and repair deficiencies and blunders. Had the mistress of the house been quiet; had she, as Mrs. Broadhurst would say, but let things alone, let things take their course; all would have passed off with well-bred people: but she was incessantly apologising, and fussing and fretting inwardly and outwardly, and directing and calling to her servants—striving to make a butler who was deaf, and a boy who was hair-brained, do the business of five accomplished footmen of parts and figure . Mrs. Raffarty called ‘Larry! Larry! My lord's plate, there!—James! bread, to
[Page 418]
Captain Bowles!—James! port wine, to the Major.—James! James Kenny! James!’ And panting James toiled after her in vain. At length one course was fairly got through; and after a torturing half-hour, the second course appeared, and James Kenny was intent upon one thing, and Larry upon another, so that the wine sauce for the hare was spilt by their collision; but what was worse, there seemed little chance that the whole of this second course should ever be placed altogether rightly upon the table. Mrs. Raffarty cleared her throat, and nodded, and pointed, and sighed, and set Larry after Kenny, and Kenny after Larry; for what one did, the other undid; but at last, the lady's anger kindled, and she spoke!—‘Kenny! James Kenny, set the sea-cale at this corner, and put down the grass, cross-corners; and match your maccaroni yonder with them puddens, set—Ogh! James! the pyramid in the middle can't ye.’ The pyramid in changing places was overturned. Then it was, that the mistress of the feast, falling back in her seat, and lifting up her hands and eyes in despair, ejaculated: ‘Oh, James! James!’—The pyramid was raised by the assistance of the military engineers, and stood trembling again on its base; but the lady's temper could not be so easily restored to its equilibrium.” —p. 25–28.
We hurry forward now to the cottage scene at Clonbrony; which has made us almost equally in love with the Irish, and with the writer who has painted them with such truth, pathos, and simplicity. An ingenious and good-natured postboy overturns his Lordship in the night, a few miles from Clonbrony; and then says,
“ ‘If your honour will lend me your hand till I pull you up the back of the ditch, the horses will stand while we go. I'll find you as pretty a lodging for the night, with a widow of a brother of my shister's husband that was, as ever you slept in your life; and your honour will be, no compare, snugger than the inn at Clonbrony, which has no roof, the devil a stick. But where will I get your honour's hand? for it's coming on so dark, I can't see rightly.—There! you're up now safe. Yonder candle's the house.’ ‘Well, go and ask whether they can give us a night's lodging.’ ‘Is it ask ? When I see the light! —Sure they'd be proud to give the traveller all the beds in the house, let alone one. Take care of the potato furrows, that's all, and follow me straight. I'll go on to meet the dog, who knows me, and might be strange to your honour.’
“ ‘Kindly welcome!’ were the first words Lord Colambre heard when he approached the cottage; and ‘kindly welcome’ was in the sound of the voice, and in the countenance of the old woman, who came out shading her rush candle from the wind, and holding it so as to light the path. When he entered the cottage, he saw a cheerful fire and a neat pretty young woman making it blaze: she curtsied, put her spinning wheel out of the way, set a stool by the fire for the stranger; and repeating in a very low tone of voice, ‘Kindly welcome, sir,’ retired. ‘Put down some eggs, dear, there's plenty in the bowl,’
[Page 419]
said the old woman, calling to her; ‘I'll do the bacon. Was not we lucky to be up?–The boy's gone to bed, but waken him,’ said she turning to the postillion; ‘and he'll help you with the chay, and put your horses in the bier for the night.’ ”
“No: larry chose to go on to Clonbrony with the horses, that he might get the chaise mended betimes for his honour. The table was set; clean trenchers, hot potatoes, milk, eggs, bacon, and ‘kindly welcome to all.’ ‘Set the salt, dear; and the butter, love; where's your head, Grace, dear?’ ‘Grace!’ repeated Lord Colambre, looking up; and to apologise for his involuntary exclamation he added, ‘Is Grace a common name in Ireland?’ ‘I can't say, plase your honour, but it was give her by Lady Clonbrony, from a niece of her own that was her foster-sister, God bless her; and a very kind lady she was to us and to all when she was living in it; but those times are gone past,’ said the old woman, with a sigh. The young woman sighed too; and sitting down by the fire, began to count the notches in a little bit of stick, which she held in her hand; and after she had counted them, sighed again. ‘But don't be sighing, Grace, now,’ said the old woman; ‘sighs is bad sauce for the traveller's supper; and we won't be troubling him with more,’ added she, turning to Lord Colambre, with a smile— ‘Is your egg done to your liking?’ ‘Perfectly, thank you.’ ‘Then I wish it was a chicken for your sake, which it should have been, and roast too, had we time. I wish I could see you eat another egg.’ ‘No more, thank you, my good lady; I never ate a better supper, nor received a more hospitable welcome.’ ‘O, the welcome is all we have to offer.’
“ ‘May I ask what that is?’ said Lord Colambre, looking at the notched stick, which the young woman held in her hand, and on which her eyes were still fixed. ‘It's a tally , plase your honour.—O you're a foreigner—It's the way the labourer keeps the account of the day's work with the overseer. And there's been a mistake, and is a dispute here between our boy and the overseer; and she was counting the boy's tally, that's in bed, tired, for in troth he's over-worked.’ ‘Would you want any thing more from me, mother,’ said the girl, rising and turning her head away. ‘No, child; get away, for your heart's full.’ She went instantly. ‘Is the boy her brother?’ said Lord Colambre. ‘No: he's her bachelor,’ said the old woman, lowering her voice. ‘Her bachelor?’ ‘That is, her sweetheart: for she is not my daughter, though you heard her call me mother. The boy's my son; but I am afeard they must give it up; for they're too poor, and the times is hard—and the agent's harder than the times! There's two of them, the under and the upper; and they grind the substance of one between them, and then blow one away like chaff: but we'll not be talking of that, to spoil your honour's night's rest. The room's ready, and here's the rush-light.’ She showed him into a very small, but neat room. ‘What a comfortable looking bed,’ said Lord Colambre. ‘Ah, these red check curtains,’ said she, letting them down; ‘these have lasted well; they were give me by a good friend now far away, over the seas, my Lady Clonbrony; and made by the prettiest hands ever you see, her niece's, Miss Grace Nugent's, and she a little
[Page 420]
child that time; sweet love! all gone!’ The old woman wiped a tear from her eye, and Lord Colambre did what he could to appear indifferent. She set down the candle and left the room; Lord Colambre went to bed, but he lay awake, ‘revolving sweet and bitter thoughts.’
“The kettle was on the fire, tea things set, every thing prepared for her guest, by the hospitable hostess, who, thinking the gentleman would take tea to his breakfast, had sent off a gossoon by the first light to Clonbrony, for an ounce of tea, a quarter of sugar , and a loaf of white bread; and there was on the little table good cream, milk, butter, eggs—all the promise of an excellent breakfast. It was a fresh morning, and there was a pleasant fire on the hearth neatly swept up. The old woman was sitting in her chimney corner, behind a little skreen of white-washed wall, built out into the room, for the purpose of keeping those who sat at the fire from the blast of the door. There was a loop-hole in this wall, to let the light in, just at the height of a person's head, who was sitting near the chimney. The rays of the morning sun now came through it, shining across the face of the old woman, as she sat knitting; Lord Colambre thought he had seldom seen a more agreeable countenance; intelligent eyes, benevolent smile, a natural expression of cheerfulness, subdued by age and misfortune. ‘A good morrow to you kindly, sir, and I hope you got the night well? —A fine day for us this Sunday morning; my Grace is gone to early prayers, so your honour will be content with an old woman to make your breakfast.—O, let me put in plenty, or it will never be good; and if your honour takes stirabout, an old hand will engage to make that to your liking any way, for by great happiness we have what will just answer for you, of the nicest meal the miller made my Grace a compliment of, last time she went to the mill.’ ” —p. 171–179.
In the course of conversation, she informs her guest of the precarious tenure on which she held the little possession that formed her only means of subsistence.
“ ‘The good lord himself granted us the lase ; the life's dropped, and the years is out: but we had a promise of renewal in writing from the landlord.—God bless him! if he was not away, he'd be a good gentleman, and we'd be happy and safe.’—‘But if you have a promise in writing of a renewal, surely, you are safe, whether your landlord is absent or present.’—‘Ah, no! that makes a great differ , when there's no eye or hand over the agent.—Yet, indeed, there,’ added she, after a pause, ‘as you say, I think we are safe; for we have that memorandum in writing, with a pencil, under his own hand, on the back of the lase , to me, by the same token when my good lord had his foot on the step of the coach, going away; and I'll never forget the smile of her that got that good turn done for me, Miss Grace. And just when she was going to England and London, and young as she was, to have the thought to stop and turn to the likes of me! O, then, if you could see her, and know her as I did! That was the comforting angel upon earth—look and voice, and heart and all! O, that she was here
[Page 421]
present, this minute!—But did you scaled yourself?’ said the widow to Lord Colambre.—‘Sure, you must have scalded yourself; for you poured the kettle straight over your hand, and it boiling! O deear ! to think of so young a gentleman's hand shaking so like my own.’— Luckily, to prevent her pursuing her observations from the hand to the face, which might have betrayed more than Lord Colambre wished she should know, her own Grace came in at this instant.—‘There, it's for you safe, mother dear—the lase !’ said Grace, throwing a packet into her lap. The old woman lifted up her hands to heaven with the lease between them—‘Thanks be to Heaven!’ Grace passed on, and sunk down on the first seat she could reach. Her face flushed, and, looking much fatigued, she loosened the strings of her bonnet and cloak.— ‘Then, I'm tired!’ but, recollecting herself, she rose, and curtsied to the gentleman.—‘What tired ye, dear?’—‘Why, after prayers, we had to go—for the agent was not at prayers, nor at home for us, when we called—we had to go all the way up to the castle; and there by great good luck, we found Mr. Nick Garraghty himself, come from Dublin, and the lase in his hands; and he sealed it up that way, and handed it to me very civil. I never saw him so good—though he offered me a glass of spirits, which was not manners to a decent young woman, in a morning—as Brian noticed after.’—‘But why didn't Brian come home all the way with you, Grace?’—‘He would have seen me home,’ said Grace, ‘only that he went up a piece of the mountain for some stones or ore for the gentleman,—for he had the manners to think of him this morning, though shame for me, I had not, when I came in, or I would not have told you all this, and he himself by. See, there he is, mother.’—Brian came in very hot, out of breath, with his hat full of stones. ‘Good morrow to your honour. I was in bed last night; and sorry they did not call me up to be of sarvice . Larry was telling us, this morning, your honour's from Wales, and looking for mines in Ireland, and I heard talk that there was one on our mountain—may be, you'd be curous to see; and so, I brought the best I could, but I'm no judge.’ ” —Vol. VI. p. 182–188.
A scene of villany now begins to disclose itself, as the experienced reader must have anticipated. The pencil writing is rubbed out: but the agent promises, that if they pay up their arrears, and be handsome, with their sealing money and glove money, &c. he will grant a renewal. To obtain the rent, the widow is obliged to sell her cow.—But she shall tell her story in her own words.
“ ‘Well, still it was but paper we got for the cow; then that must be gold before the agent would take, or touch it—so I was laying out to sell the dresser, and had taken the plates and cups, and little things off it, and my boy was lifting it out with Andy the carpenter, that was agreeing for it, when in comes Grace, all rosy, and out of breath— it's a wonder I minded her run out, and not missed her—Mother.
[Page 422]
says she, here's the gold for you, don't be stirring your dresser.—And where's your own gown and cloak, Grace? says I. But, I beg your pardon, sir; may be I'm tiring you?’—Lord Colambre encouraged her to go on.—‘Where's your gown and cloak, Grace, says I.’— ‘Gone,’ says she. ‘The cloak was too warm and heavy, and I don't doubt, mother, but it was that helped to make me faint this morning. And as to the gown, sure I've a very nice one here, that you spun for me yourself, mother; and that I prize above all the gowns that ever came out of a loom; and that Brian said became me to his fancy above any gown ever he see me wear, and what could I wish for more.’— Now, I'd a mind to scold her for going to sell the gown unknown'st to me; but I don't know how it was, I couldn't scold her just then, —so kissed her, and Brian the same; and that was what no man ever did before.—And she had a mind to be angry with him, but could not, nor ought not, says I; for he's as good as your husband now, Grace; and no man can part yees now, says I, putting their hands together. —Well, I never saw her look so pretty; nor there was not a happier boy that minute on God's earth than my son, nor a happier mother than myself; and I thanked God that had given them to me; and down they both fell on their knees for my blessing, little worth as it was; and my heart's blessing they had, and I laid my hands upon them. ‘It's the priest you must get to do this for you to-morrow, says I.” —Vol. VI. p. 205–207.
Next morning they go up in high spirits to the castle, where the villanous agent denies his promise; and is laughing at their despair, when Lord Colambre is fortunately identified by Mrs. Raffarty, who turns out to be a sister of the said agent, and, like a god in epic poetry, turns agony into triumph!
We can make room for no more now, but the epistle of Larry Brady, the good-natured postboy, to his brother, giving an account of the return of the family to Clonbrony. If Miss Edgeworth had never written any other thing, this one letter must have placed her at the very top of our scale, as an observer of character, and a mistress in the simple pathetic. We give the greater part of this extraordinary production.
“My dear brother,—Yours of the 16th, enclosing the five pound note for my father, came safe to hand Monday last; and, with his thanks and blessing to you, he commends it to you herewith enclosed back again, on account of his being in no immediate necessity, nor likelihood to want in future, as you shall hear forthwith; but wants you over, with all speed, and the note will answer for travelling charges; for we can't enjoy the luck it has pleased God to give us, without yees : put the rest in your pocket, and read it when you've time.
[Page 423]
“Now, cock up your ears, Pat! for the great news is coming, and the good. The master's come home—long life to him!—and family come home yesterday, all entirely! The ould lord and the young lord, (ay, there's the man, Paddy!) and my lady, and Miss Nugent. And I driv Miss Nugent's maid, that maid that was, and another; so I had the luck to be in it alone wid'em , and see all, from first to last. And first, I must tell you, my young Lord Colambre remembered and noticed me the minute he lit at our inn, and condescended to beckon at me out of the yard to him, and axed me—‘Friend Larry,’ says he, ‘did you keep your promise?’— ‘My oath again the whiskey is it?’ says I. ‘My Lord, I surely did,’ said I; which was true, as all the country knows I never tasted a drop since. And I'm proud to see your honour, my lord, as good as your word too, and back again among us. So then there was a call for the horses; and no more at that time passed betwix’ my young lord and me, but that he pointed me out to the ould one, as I went off. I noticed and thanked him for it in my heart, though I did not know all the good was to come of it. Well no more of myself, for the present.
“Ogh, it's I driv 'em well; and we all got to the great gate of the park before sunset, and as fine an evening as ever you see; with the sun shining on the tops of the trees, as the ladies noticed the leaves changed, but not dropped, though so late in the season. I believe the leaves knew what they were about, and kept on, on purpose to welcome them; and the birds were singing; and I stopped whistling, that they might hear them: but sorrow bit could they hear when they got to the park gate, for there was such a crowd, and such a shout, as you never see–and they had the horses off every carriage entirely, and drew 'em home, with blessings, through the park. And, God bless 'em, when they got out, they didn't go shut themselves up in the great drawing-room, but went straight out to the tirrass , to satisfy the eyes and hearts that followed them. My lady laning on my young lord, and Miss Grace Nugent that was, the beautifullest angel that ever you set eyes on, with the finest complexion and sweetest of smiles, laning upon the ould lord's arm, who had his hat off, bowing to all, and noticing the old tenants as he passed by name. O, there was great gladness, and tears in the midst; for joy I could scarcely keep from myself.
“After a turn or two upon the tir rass, my Lord Colambre quit his mother's arm for a minute, and he come to the edge of the slope, and looked down and through all the crowd for some one. ‘Is it the widow O'Neill, my lord?’ says I; ‘she's yonder, with the spectacles on her nose, betwixt her son and daughter, as usual.’ Then my lord beckoned, and they did not know which of the tree would stir; and then he gave tree beckons with his own finger, and they all tree came fast enough to the bottom of the slope, forenent my lord; and he went down and helped the widow up, (O, he's the true jantleman,) and brought 'em all tree up on the tirrass , to my lady and Miss Nugent; and I was up close after, that I might hear, which wasn't manners, but I couldn't help it! So what he said I don't well know, for I could not get near enough after all. But I saw my lady smile very kind, and take the
[Page 424]
widow O'Neill by the hand, and then my Lord Colambre ' troduced Grace to Miss Nugent, and there was the word namesake , and something about a check curtains; but whatever it was, they was all greatly pleased: then my Lord Colambre turned and looked for Brian, who had fell back, and took him with some commendation to my lord his father. And my lord the master said, which I didn't know till after, that they should have their house and farm at the ould rent; and at the surprise, the widow dropped down dead; and there was a cry as for ten berrings. ‘Be qu'ite,’ says I, ‘she's only kilt for joy;’ and I went and lift her up, for her son had no more strength that minute than the child new born; and Grace trembled like a leaf, as white as the sheet, but not long, for the mother came to, and was as well as ever when I brought some water, which Miss Nugent handed to her with her own hand.
“ ‘That was always pretty and good,’ said the widow, laying her hand upon Miss Nugent, ‘and kind and good to me and mine. That minute there was music from below. The blind harper, O'Neill, with his harp, that struck up ‘Gracey Nugent!’ And that finished, and my Lord Colambre smiling with the tears standing in his eyes too, and the ould lord quite wiping his, I ran to the tir rass brink to bid O'Neill play it again; but as I run, I thought I heard a voice call Larry.
“ ‘Who calls Larry?’ says I. ‘My Lord Colambre calls you, Larry,’ says all at once; and four takes me by the shoulders, and spins me round. ‘There's my young lord calling you, Larry—run for your life.’ So I run back for my life, and walked respectful, with my hat in my hand, when I got near. ‘Put on your hat, my father desires it,’ says my Lord Colambre. The ould lord made a sign to that purpose, but was too full to speak. ‘Where's your father?’ continues my young lord.—‘He's very ould, my lord,’ says I.—‘I didn't ax you how ould he was,’ says he; ‘but where is he?’—‘He's behind the crowd below; on account of his infirmities he couldn't walk so fast as the rest, my lord,’ says I; ‘but his heart is with you, if not his body.’—‘I must have his body too: so bring him bodily before us; and this shall be your warrant for so doing,’ said my lord, joking. For he knows the natur of us, Paddy, and how we love a joke in our hearts, as well as if he had lived all his life in Ireland; and by the same token will, for that rason , do what he pleases with us, and more may be than a man twice as good, that never would smile on us.
“But I'm telling you of my father. ‘I've a warrant for you, father,’ says I; ‘and must have you bodily before the justice, and my lord chief justice.’ So he changed colour a bit at first; but he saw me smile. ‘And I've done no sin,’ said he; ‘and, Larry, you may lead me now, as you led me all my life.’—And up the slope he went with me, as light as fifteen; and when we got up, my Lord Clonbrony said, ‘I am sorry an old tenant, and a good old tenant, as I hear you were, should have been turned out of your farm.’—‘Don't fret, it's no great matter, my lord,’ said my father. ‘I shall be soon out of the way; but if you would be so kind to speak a word for my boy here, and that I could afford, while the life is in me, to bring my other boy back out of banishment—’
[Page 425]
“ ‘Then,’ says my Lord Clonbrony, ‘I'll give you and your sons three lives, or thirty-one years, from this day, of your former farm. Return to it when you please.’ ‘And,’ added my Lord Colambre, ‘the flaggers, I hope, will be soon banished.’ O, how could I thank him—not a word could I proffer—but I know I clasped my two hands and prayed for him inwardly. And my father was dropping down on his knees, but the master would not let him; and obsarved , that posture should only be for his God! And, sure enough, in that posture, when he was out of sight, we did pray for him that night, and will all our days.
“But before we quit his presence, he call me back, and bid me write to my brother, and bring you back, if you've no objections to your own country.—So come, my dear Pat, and make no delay, for joy's not joy complate till you're in it—my father sends his blessing, and Peggy her love. The family entirely is to settle for good in Ireland; and there was in the castle yard last night a bonfire made by my lord's orders of the ould yellow damask furniture, to plase my lady, my lord says. And the drawing-rooms, the butler was telling me, is new hung; and the chairs, with velvet, as white as snow, and shaded over with natural flowers, by Miss Nugent.—Oh! how I hope what I guess will come true, and I've rason to believe it will, for I dream't in my bed last night, it did. But keep yourself to yourself —that Miss Nugent (who is no more Miss Nugent, they say, but Miss Reynolds, and has a new-found grandfather, and is a big heiress, which she did not want in my eyes, nor in my young lord's), I've a notion, will be sometime, and may be sooner than is expected, my Lady Viscountess Colambre—so haste to the wedding! And there's another thing: they say the rich ould grandfather's coming over;—and another thing, Pat, you would not be out of the fashion. And you see it's growing the fashion, not to be an Absentee!”
If there be any of our readers who is not moved with delight and admiration in the perusal of this letter, we must say, that we have but a poor opinion either of his taste or his moral sensibility; and shall think all the better of ourselves, in future, for appearing tedious in his eyes. For our own parts, we do not know whether we envy the author most, for the rare talent she has shown in this description, or for the experience by which its materials have been supplied. She not only makes us know and love the Irish nation far better than any other writer, but seems to us more qualified than most others to promote the knowledge and the love of mankind.
NOTES
1 I now omit the original account of the two first tales; and give only what relates to the last,—and most interesting, and characteristic.
$$$
