Theatrical Examiner. No. 256
Author: Hazlitt, William.
Publication info: The Examiner, A Sunday Paper, on Politics, Domestic Economy, and Theatricals ; London [London]. 01 Jan 1816: 832, [4] p.

Theatrical Examiner. No. 256 [in, The Examiner, A Sunday Paper, on Politics, Domestic Economy, and Theatricals ...]
[Page 663]
THEATRICAL EXAMINER. No. 256. There have been two theatrical or operatic debuts, to which we are in arrears, and of which we must say a word, Miss Morri's Rosetta , in Love in a Village , at Covent-Garden, and Miss Keppel's Polly , in the Beggar's Opera , at Drury-lane. Both of them appeared to us to be indifferent. Miss Morri is by much the best singer of the two, but there is something exceedingly unprepossessing and hard both in her voice and manner. She sings without the least feeling, or lurking consciousness that such a thing is required in a singer. The notes proceed from her mouth as mechanically, as unmitigated by the sentiment, as if they came from the sharp hautboy or grating bassoon. We do not mean that her voice is disagreeable in itself, but it wants softness and sweetness of modulation. The words of the songs neither seem to tremble on her lips, nor play around her heart. Miss Morri did not look the character. Rosetta is to be sure a waiting-maid, but then she is also a young lady in disguise. There was no appearance of the incognita in Miss Morri . She seemed in downright earnest like one of the country girls who come to be hired at the statute-fair. She was quite insensible of her situation, and came forward to prove herself a finer singer, as one of her fellow-servants might have done to answer to a charge of having stolen something. We never saw a debutante more at ease with the audience: we suppose she has played in the country. Miss Matthews , who is a good-natured girl, and wished to patronise her on so delicate an emergency, presently found there was no occasion for her services, and withdrew from the attempt with some trepidation.—If Miss Morri did not enchant us by her incomprehensible want of sensibility, neither did Miss Keppel by the affectation of it. Sensibility is a very pretty thing, but it will not do to make a plaything of, at least in public. It is not enough that an actress tries to atone for defects by throwing herself on the indulgence of the audience:—their eyes and ears must be satisfied, as well as their self-love. Miss Keppel acts with very little grace, and sings very much out of tune. There was some attempts made to prejudice the audience against this young lady before she appeared: but they only had the effect which they deserved, of procuring a more flattering reception than she would otherwise have met with: but we do not think she will ever become a favourite with the town.
Owing to the early filling of the house, we were prevented from seeing Othello on Tuesday; but we understand that Mr. Young played Othello like a great humming-top, “full of sound. but signifying nothing,” and that Mr. Macready in Iago was like a mischievous boy whipping him: and that Miss Boyle did not play Desdemona as unaffectedly as she ought. But we hope we have been misinformed: and shall be glad to say so, if possible, in our next.
While the Drury-Lane Committee have been playing at Managers in town, Mr. Kean has been playing at something better in the country. We see the following account of him in the Edinburgh Courant , which we shall here insert, as it is a very able, just, and elaborate criticism on the merits of some of his principal performances. After some introductory remarks, the writer proceeds:—
“Similar causes seem to have produced the same effects upon Mr. Kean's reception here. The school of Kemble , meaning by that phrase the school of grandeur, grace, and elegance—not certainly at variance with natural emotions, but always connected with and accompanying them—had not only formed a numerous and highly-gifted race of pupils, but had also contributed to give a certain tone to popular taste and criticism. Upon the soundness or rectitude of this taste, we do not presume to decide; but, in so far as it operated at all, it must have operated against Mr. Kean , whose powers are all of the grandest moral and intellectual nature, but whose person and deportment have no manner of alliance with external grace or dignity. During the greater part of the three first acts, accordingly, the prevailing feeling of the audience, if we may judge from the calmness of their attention, seemed to be that of disappointment: and it was not till Richard had cast off the serpent's skin, and assumed the tone and bearing of the hero, that the spectators were aroused to the full perception of his excellence. It was here, that, like his illustrious predecessor, he bore down and triumphed over every feeling of doubt or hesitation. The fire and rapidity of his action—the quickness of his transition from passion to passion—the whirling atmosphere of bustle and exertion in which he involved himself—made every spectator's heart beat and leap with his own; and when, at the catastrophe, losing his sword, and dumb with rage and despair, he made impotent thrusts with his disarmed and failing hand at his adversary, the emotions excited by this new and hazardous experiment burst forth in torrents of admiration. The energy of the soul, recovering for a few moments the exhaustion of its mortal companion, was displayed in gestures of increasing fury and revenge: till, at length, the rageful spirit sunk in the conflict. The glare of malice, which fastened upon his adversary while one atom of consciousness remained, had an effect most deeply terrific, and here the feelings of the audience found vent is the loudest exclamations of delight.
“The greatest defect of Mr. Kean is unquestionably his voice, yet this must be explained; for no proposition was ever farther from truth, than that Mr. Kean has a bad voice: it is, strictly and accurately speaking, merely defective. When limited to level discourse, or displayed in the tones of persuasien, entreaty, or love, it is eminently beautiful and melodious; but being defective in power, and singularly confined in extent, it is a most inadequate
[Page 664]
crater for those bursting turbillions of passion, which often rend his mortal machine. Yet such is the resistless fire and brilliancy of his action, so true, so vigorous, and original his conception, so rapid, and so decisive the flashes of his eye, that the soul is hurried along almost without the agency of the ear; and the same storm of passion which almost robs the actor of the power of speech, absorbs the auditor in a conflict of emotions which render him insensible of his loss
“Admirable as this delineation of Richard was, his Shylock , which was exhibited on Tuesday evening, struck us as being a still more masterly display of genius. Of the representatives of Shylock , belonging to the present day, Cooke approached nearest, till now, to that mental image, which every reader forms for himself, of the stubborn and savage Jew; but there is not one feature of the character, as represented by Kean , besides its infinitely stronger impression of general truth, in which the delineation of Cooke does not fall short of his successor. The colouring of Cooke was always just and always strong: but it was also coarse and broad and general. That of Kean , on the contrary, while it is equally true, and yet more powerful, is various, changeful, multiplied in its tints, now deepening, now mellowing, exhibiting, by fitful and shifting glances, every shade and nicety of hue that belongs to the actual painting of nature. This infinite variety is one of the strongest charms, as well as one of the highest distinctions, of this remarkable man's art; and, in this power, we question whether he has ever been equalled but by Garrick , whom we should suppose him strongly to resemble.
“But both these representations fall far short of the delineation of Sir Giles Overreach , which was given to us last night. It was in this tremendous display of the blackest and most savage workings of the soul, that the splendour of Mr. Kean 's genius shone forth, out-dazzling competition, and baffling every attempt at rivalry; and it is here that we are forced to relinquish even the effort to give any idea of his excellence; for while the language that aimed to describe it adequately, would perhaps be charged with exaggeration, it would fal far below the truth. We really have not the courage to cope with the attempt. It is a hideous character, and Kean aggravates every frightful lineament belonging to it. In the catastrophe, where all the pride and malice of the fiend are lapsed in the unmitigated bitterness of his rage and dispair, he seemed to borrow his colouring from the nether world—so phrenzied and demoniacal were his ravings, so much more appalling was the terror of his silence. The acmé of his frightful sufferings struck the ghastliness of dismay through the house. It will be recollected that his last words are—
---Shall I thus fall
Ingloriously, and yield? No: spite of fate,
I will be forced to hell like to myself;
Though you were legions of accursed spirits,
Thus would I fly among you!
“In delivering these words, Kean attempts to draw his sword, and rushes madly among his enemies; but he has miscalculated the strength which his temporary energy had given him, and falls exhausted and insensible on the ground. Recorering from their amazement and horror, the byestanders order him to be carried off, and his servants accordingly betake themselves to the performance of that office. At the moment when they are bearing him away, his senses slowly return—he slowly recovers his recollection, and with it all the demoniac fury of his remorseless nature. Its expression is confined, however, to his countenance, for every limb is chained up in impotence. His eyes kindle with renewed rancour, and he seems on the point of again springing upon his victims; but at this moment of horrible interest, when fate and vengeance are glaring in his eyes, his physical powers utterly and at once forsake him, and his head drops lifeless on his chest. He is carried off.
The applause of the house here broke out into shouts and hurras. They were too highly wrought to bear more, and the curtain was ordered to fall, leaving the play unfinished. Mr. Kean 's triumph was complete.
$$$
