CHILDREN'S BOOK 
COLLECTION 

LIBRARY OF THE 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 



>: 








ADVENTURES OF A DONKEY./ 



THE 




>f/.,Mi///f//tf //"ft/. 



ADVENTURES 



A DONKEY. 



ARABELLA ARGUS, 

Antkor of " THE JUVENILE SPECTATOR." 



LONDON : 

frRINTCD BY AND FOR WILLIAM DARTOS, JU*. 
58, HOLBORN HILL. 

1815. 



THE 

ADVENTURES OF A DONKEY. 



" Poor little foal of an oppressed race ! 

U I love the languid patience of thy face: 

" And oft with gentle hand 1 give thee bread, 

-' And clap thy ragged coat, and pat thy head." 



Prefatory Address. 

THOUGH the services of my species are no 
longer of that character which distinguished 
them in former ages, I presume to think the 
biography of an Ass, may yet, be worthy of 
publication,, Pride of ancestry, a usual weak- 
ness amongst Bipeds, will I trust, be forgiven in 
creatures doomed (even in their most foitunate 
estate) to bear the taunts and insults of the ra- 
tional part of the creation. If we refer to aDti- 
quity, it must be allowed the record is every 
way consoling to our fetiings as a class; and 
though tfee comparative happiness of any animal 



2 TheAdvmtuj-esofu'DGnkey. 

at distinct periods is of little moment to his 
present content, it cannot be denied, that 
there is something satisfactory in reflecting on 
on the respectability of our progenitors. Thus 
T, an Ass of the Eighteenth century obtrude my 
history on the public, and while I avoid the ar- 
rogance of claiming particular merit on the 
score of pedigree, I honestly confess, there have 
been moments in my life, when the memory of 
my descent, has proved highly congenial to my 
feelings. Naturalists, (as 1 believe those learned 
persons are called who describe the genus 
and character of animals,) have done us justice 
as a species. Mine, as a domestic sketch will 
bear none of those features of authorship which 
embrace deep research, and elaborate disquisi- 
tions. I present for your patronage, the life and 
adventures of a home- bred Donkey, and trusting 
to the liberality of an enlightened juvenile pub- 
lic, remain their respectful and obedient Servant 
Jemmy Donkey. 



The Adventures of a Dmikcy. 



CHAP. I. 

" Sincerity/' is my motto, I am therefore 
compelled to begin, by declaring that the early 
seeds of vanity were sown in my bicast by the 
praises of a. clouting mother. I was scarcely ten 
months old, when I overheard my mama repeat- 
ing to my papa, all the handsome things farmer 
Howel had said of me. I now recollect her 
voice faultered as she closed her recital, and 
conclude she anticipated our certain separation. 
For myself, I was so elated with the word?, 
* c He is a remarkably handsome Donkey," ckc. 
&c. that I took no account of the price set upon 
my head, but gamboled from morn till nigh:, 
and while my parents pursued their accustomed 
labours, remained a stranger to the cares insepa- 
rable from servitude. 

Description would fail me, were I to attempt 
to pourtray the attachment our mothers feel for 
ihcir offspring. I well remember exciting the 
alarm of my mama one evening. 

1 had pursued some Ducks into a harn and 
n*as enjoying the fright I occasioned, when her 
well-known voice echoed through the meadow. 
J fled, at the summons, and to this day have not 
forgotten the tender chidmgs and affectionate ca- 
resses she bestowed upon me as her fesrs 
B2 



4 The Adventures of a Donkey, 

ded. Farmer Howel, though a humane man, 
was sedulously attentive to" his own interest ; 
thus, in the absence of my parents I found my- 
self an object of some moment to his visitors. 
Modesty induces me to omit the flattering com- 
ments which occasionally reached my ears. 
Whether this organ in our species, from its 
size, is more exposed to the admission of vanity, 
J presume not to decide, it is sufficient to say, 
/ listened with delight, and retained all I heard. 

^ r a'.ious opinions were passed upon my capa- 
city. One thought it would be a pity to har- 
ness me another recommended taking me to 
'\ i-.iibridge, where there could he no doubt of 
!w selling vrell a third declared a private family 
there were children, would be the most 
profitable plan. 

The farmer seemed pleased with this last 

suggestion, and I suppose believed he knew a 

p-.i chaser, for I was released from further 

scrutiny and again scampered at liberty. I 

*o blush while I add, that I buried these 

consultations in mv own bosom, and if this 

concealment ultimately spa;rd my parents some 

unnecessary pangs, it must be confessed my 

motives were highly reprehensible. 

Ambition however had pervaded my every 
feeling ; I had thrust my head through an aper- 
ture in some old pailin^s one day, and was 
snuffing the air in listless vacancy, when ;i 
Donkey smartly caparisoned (and on which s>ut 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 3 

a beaut i ful young lady) came trotting down the 
road. " O happy Ass," sighed I, " Shall lever- 
be so blessed r" To add to my delight, a footman 
on horseback followed; "here" said I exultingly, 
'" here is a triumph for us, the horse our im- 
perious enemy, in attendance on an Ass !" Sleep 
fled my eyes that night white leather bridles, 
stuffed saddles, and handsome young ladies 
haunted my imagination. I daresay 1 was very 
troublesome, for my father complained that I 
kicked the straw about and was remarkbly 
restless. 

All that the farmer and his friends had said 
recurred to my memory, and though I could 
not decide which proposition best pleased me, 
the idea of change was in itself enchanting, 
and I longed for the moment that was to effect 
this wish of my heart. Alas ! it arrived too 
soon, though I did not immediately discern my 
misfortune. 

My readers may have felt the inconvenience 
of a tight shoe, but they can have no conception 
of what we suffer under the hands of our shoe- 
makers : suffice it to say, I was shoed according 
to the usage of our genus, and like other 
thoughtless animals, soon forgot my pain, in the 
novelty of these new appendages; I have since 
learned, that pride is in most instances attended 
with pain. I dare not contradict the remark, 
having some reason in my person for believing 
it true. Yet I know you will all smile at the liule 
B 3 



6 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

whims I assumed on this important epoch in my 
life. 

In the first place, the addition to my height 
seemed immense, I actually lowered my head 
as I entered or issued from our stable; my poor 
mother laughed at me sometimes and at others 
would sigh prophetically; but my chief pleasure 
consisted in kicking up the dust, and making 
uil the noise I could with my shoes. The far- 
mer and his wife were highly amused with my 
freaks. I had received two or three handsful 
of hay from them upon different occasions, and 
attributing these kindnesses to my powers of 
entertainment, I ventured to intrude on for- 
bidden ground, scampered into the paved court, 
and finding a pail of warm milk standing 
invitingly in my way, had nearly drank the 
whole when the the dairy maid approached. 
Conceive my amazement when this virago fell 
upon me, and not content with the stripes she 
inflicted with a clothes-prop, threw a large 
stone after me; fortunately I escaped from her 
cruelty, but not without adding to my crime by 
kicking over the pail in my flight. 1 hope I am 
n^)t injudicious in expressing my gratitude for 
that texture of skin which makes us less suscepti- 
ble lo pain. 

1 persuade myself, rational animals will not 
fake advantage of a confession of this sort, nor 
indeed docs my present experience lead me to 
question their knowledge of wliat we c'tfn bear. 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 7 

But to proceed, whether the indignity I had 
suffered being the first of the kind, or as the 
spite of a female was more particularly wound- 
ing, I know not. I looked anxiously for the 
return of my parents, and no sooner did they 
arrive than I hastened to unburthen my grief. 
My mama listened dispassionately. 

" You did wrong Jemmy," said she, f( the milk 
was the property of our master, and intended 
for the use of his family." 

" How was I to guess that r " said I. " Be- 
sides it looked so nice and tasted so sweet. And 
pray did not the farmer sell your milk? How 
many shillings have I seen paid for it? Nay I 
heard Mrs. Howel say her little boy's life was 
saved by drinking Asses' milk." 

** All this may be true Jemmy," replied my 
mother, "but it does not lessen your fault. In 
the first plac^, nature has kindly bestowed upon 
us a palate suited to our stations in life ; delicacy 
of appetite would be a grievous misfortune to 
animals invariably left to provide for themselves. 
This freedom however, by no means authorizes 
indiscriminate depredations on our part : hap- 
piness consists in being contented with our lot ; 
and while the Ass can browse in the fertile mea- 
dow, and slake her thirst from the neighbouring 
stream, rest assured she enjoys more real com- 
forts than thousands of her species." 

" Grass and water!" said I, tossing my head 
disdainfully. " Why every Donkey gets'these; 



8 The Adventures of a l)o;n^ci/. 

why my dear mamma, I saw a beautiful Ass 
\vith a smart saddle and white leather bridle, 
the other day, do you think he Jives upon such 
mean fare ? '* 

"Ah! Jemmy, Jemmy," sighed my mother, 
" you are a stranger to the Donkey world, that 
well-dressed beau who has excited your childish 
envy, would most probably claim our compas- 
sion did \ve know his private hii>toiy. *A11 is not 
gold that glitters' child, fine trappings dazzle 
the ignorant and inexperienced ; I am afraid you 
xvill too soon be placed in a situation to judge 
for yourself; may honesty actuate you on ail 
occasions ; endeavour to please your employers, 
and recollect that docility is not only valu- 
abls in itself, hut highly conducive to your 
happiness as an Ass." 

There must be something intoxicating in the 
feelings of youth ; though \ listened to my 
mama with all possible deference, and thought 
her sentiments wise and just, it is certain they 
made no lasting impression on my mind. The 
very next day saw me guilty of a trespass. A 
can of ale was placed within a hedge for the 
farmer's men, then getting in the hay; my 
quick scent drew me thither, I cannot say the 
smell was fragrant, but I thought there could be 
r/o hazard in tasting it., I did so and shuddered, 
took a second taste and liked it better, again 
I turned to the can and drank heartily, when a 
voice vociferated -from a distance, and in the 



The Adventures cj <L Donkty. 9 

vxt moment a stick was hurled at me. Less 
iortanare than formerly, I sustained an injury in 
my leg, and under the influence of pain began 
capering about. This agitation produced a 
confusion in mv head, resembling as I should 
imagine the feelings of an intoxicated rational 
animal: if my conjecture is right, surely this 
vice is every way aegiading, for I remember, I 
became an object of ridicule to the fanner's men, 
who stood laughing at my antics, while two or 
three Donkeys of my acquaintance actually shun- 
ned me for some days. Nor dared I complain 
of my broken shin last my parents should in- 
terrogate me respecting the accident which 
had caused it. I am afraid I shall appear a very 
faulty Donkey in the eyes of my readers, an 
anticipation that would deeply wound my sensi- 
bility, did I not firmly believe, that many frolics 
of the enlightened and educated biped,' which 
excite a smile during their "acting time," if 
delineated fairly would appear equally unjusti- 
fiable. In truth I shall have occasion to con. 
trast our errors ere I close my history. 

Months rolled on, during which I was doomed 
to hear myself reviled as a most mischievous 
animal, an arrant thief, &e. occ. I hung my 
head and looked silly at first ; chance however 
initiated me into the art of expressing my in- 
dignation. Balaam a very sagacious old frienc' 
of my father's, being compelled to resist the 
brutality of some boys one evening, I observed 



10 The Adventures / a Donkey, 

that his countenance acquired considerable 
fierceness as he exhibited his teeth and brayed 
loudly. Thinks I to myself, "'This shall be 
my plan, I will no longer bear insult tamely." 
Alas! the presumption of ignorance i An op- 
portunity soon presented itself " Here come* 
thieving Jemmy," said the dairy maid of farmer 
Howel, calling the carter to drive me into the 
meadow. I felt indignant, and facing them 
boldly, grinned (as 1 thought) most formidably, 
braying at the same time with all my might. 
Instead of alarming my enemies, my efforts ex- 
cited their derision, calling forth peals ot laugh- 
ter at my expense. If ail imitators were thus 
humbled in their first attempts, I am persuaded 
mimicry would cease to be a prevalent foible 
amongst Asses. Observe, I do not deny the 
propriety, the almost necessity that a Donkey 
like a man, should entertain a just sense of his 
prerogatives ; it is the folly of assuming these 
privileges prematurely that I condemn. Polite- 
ness may induce some animals to overlook this 
precocity in their species; with us it is quite 
otherwise, the natural simplicity of our charac- 
ters is such, that though man should omit to 
wound us, our own class are vigilant in reprov- 
ing the most trivial affectation in the young. 

" Poor giddy thing," said old Balaam as I 
retreated from the scene of my d ; sgrace. Come 
here child ! So you were really so weak as to 
imagine you could frighten those people by your 
puculc braying ! " 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 1 1 

"XVhy," said I poutingly, "I have seen 
you do the same." 

"True, but I am of an age to claim respect/' 
replied Balaam, " added to which, my services 
entitle me to some consideration. You should 
endeavour to conciliate esteem ; let me tell you 
Jemmy, you will lead a sad life, if you set out 
with these false notions of your own conse- 
quence ; you must learn to bear and forbear, 
and above all things avoid the folly of aping 
your elders." 

Though Balaam's wisdom was proverbial in 
our family, there was a sternness in his manner 
which frightened rather than convinced his 
auditors; nay, I am tempted to add, that to his 
mistaken asperity on numberless occasions, I 
attribute some of my subsequent indiscretions. 

"What! if we are born to labour," would I 
exclaim mentally, " I see men and women return 
from their daily toil cheerful and happy, and 
may not an Ass perform his appointed task and 
retain his natural vivacity ? When / gee a 
place, he shall see I know how to conduct 
myself." 

As these soliloquies occurred, 1 always found 
my thoughts reverting to the smart saddle and 
bridle of a certain Donkey. "And when 7 am 
so dressed/' would I say, " Old Balaam shall 
see me, I will trot down the green lane and shew 
him my finery." 

Now nothing could be more like an Ass, than 



If Jhs Adventures of a Donkey. 

this resolution of mine, but I must not antici- 
pate. I was surprised one morning, by farmer 
Howel's presenting a sieve of com for my ac- 
ceptance, and hastening to avail myself of thio 
luxurious treat, was for some minutes uncon- 
scious of the snare into which I had fallen. A 
rope, a common mpe was passed round my 
neck, the sieve withdrawn, and in a few 
minutes I wai led out of the meadow. It was 
in vain I brayed and called upon my mother, 
she was from home, and the carter my old 
enemy was little disposed to attend to my sol-* 
row. I recollected my mother's advice, * that 
docility was an amiable trait in a Donkey,*' and 
endeavoured to accommodate my feelings to my 
situation. The journey seemed tedious to my 
companion, who frequently lashed me with the 
rope in order to quicken my pace. At length v,e 
stopped at a noble looking mansion; I was 
ushered into an extensive field of well-grown 
grass, and, released from my ignoble bondage, 
for a moment forgot I was far distant from my 
parents. 



GHAP. II. 

First Impressions. 
THIS memorable event took place in the 



Tke Adrcniurtt nf a D<.nkey. 13 

eighteenth month of my existence : the prompt- 
ness with which my removal was accomplished, 
left me totally ignorant of my future destiny, 
yet ere the evening closed I experienced an at- 
tention which bore some promise of kindness. 
A fat red faced woman (whom my gratitude 
transformed into a goddess) threw an apron full 
of cabbage leaves before me, I ate a hearty 
supper, and fatigued with mv journey looked 
around for a shelter for the night ; a building 
almost equal to farmer Howel's house, had al- 
ready received two or three horses, I tried the 
the door, it was locked, nor would my preju- 
dices or courage have led me voluntarily to ex- 
pose myself to insult and contempt, could I have 
found access. No ! it was one of those efforts 
suggested by despair in which reason yields to 
circumstances, Old Balaam's sombre warnings 
glanced across my mind. ft Alas ! " thought 
I, " to conciliate esteem where no consideration 
is awarded appears enigmatical to me ; " and my 
eyes were suffused with tears as I recollected 
the half-tiled home of my parents. " They will 
think of their poor Jemmy to night, would I 
were again in their stable though I never more 
tasted a cabbage leaf." It was not easy to my 
donkey capacity, to reconcile the contradic- 
tion of providing a good supper for an animal, 
and leaving it without a shelter for the night. 
The neglect of my owners roused me to exer- 
tion; forcing my way through a hedge, I wan- 



I* The Adventures of a Donkey. 

clered near the house, till espying a door oprn 
I ventured in, it was a small building and bj 
the light of the moon, I discovered it to he a 
brewhouse. Our olfactory nerves are very 
delicate ; thus, though one of my senses w,i* 
somewhat offended by the smell of the place, 
necessity compelled me to submit- to the incon- 
venience. You may smile at the idea, of a 
Donkey's dream, and would perhaps call me a 
downright Ass if I related mine on the night in 
question; to avoid the imputation of weakness 
J desist, though I am convinced a two-legged 
author would mould mv dream into a most 
interesting episode. Well, morning uriivcJ, and 
with it a full seuse of my situation. On first 
opening my eyes, I stood in profound amaze- 
r.ot exactly recollecting where I was : no 
sootier had memory recalled the incidents of the 
preceding day, than that sagacity which even 
Donkeys partially share, told me, I was not in 
my proper abode to effect a retreat without dis- 
covery was desirable. I was rejoicing in my 
adroitness, when a gentleman in a scarlet jacket 
r an after me and before I could gain the field 
tiali a dozen pebbles were levelled atlne. 

"Leave the Donkey alone Robert,'* said the 
fat Lady, my cabbage-leaf friend. And advanc- 
ing to wards me she added, " poor Jemmy, did 
we forget to open the shed for you last night, 
poor fellow I'll take care it shan't happen a- 
gain." 
I brayed in my most melodious style hoping 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 1,3 

it would be understood as an expression of gra- 
titude, I dont know that Mrs. Bond penetrated 
my meaning, but her uniform kindness leads me 
to believe, there are persons in the world who 
appreciate and comprehend the feelings of a 
Donkey. 

How often have I listened to the praises be- 
stowed upon horses and dogs ! How many re- 
cords of their sagacity have reached my long 
ears ! Alas ! my vanity does not help me to one 
anecdote, one incident, in which OUR talents 
natural or acquired arc favourably exhibited; yet 
in attachment to our masters and that faithful- 
ness of memory so highly prized in the animals 
I quote, in these essential qualifications I think 
we stand nearly equal. It cannot be, our roygli 
exterior that places us beneath notice ; for as 
far as 1 can judge, beauty is not the exclusive 
possession of any particular class of animals. 

But to proceed ; I had sighed for a change in 
my mode of life, yet content was a stranger to 
my bosom. The voice of my parents no longer 
gladdened my heart, if my food was more 
sumptuous, there wanted that social intercourse, 
that lively chit-chat to which I had been accus- 
tomed. The days seemed grievously irksome, 
and though Mrs. Bond, had politely shewn me 
my fogging apartment, it was impossible for a 
Donkey or.' my disposition to avoid some por- 
tion of ennui in a seclusion bo unbroken. I 
began to wish for some employment, now first 
C2 



16 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

discovering old Balaam's maxim to be just, 
*' that idleness is fatiguing." An unusual de- 
pression had seized my spirits one afternoon, 
when perceiving my good friend Mrs. Bond, I 
ran towards her. 

'* Ah poor fellow," said she, '* I can't stop to 
talk to you now, \ve are all in a pucker, and you. 
will have enough to do when the pet comes." 

" What does she mean ?" said I to myself. 
<e I never heard of such an animal." 

While reflecting on the import of this speech, 
a travelling chaise with four horses turned into 
the court yard : ; number of men-servants ran 
to and fro, and amongst otheis the man in the 
scarlet jacket, whom I now discovered to be a 
groom. Amused by the bustle I stood looking 
over a gate, when a shrill squeaking voice ex- 
claimed, ''Robert ! Robert ! shew me my Don- 
key, I say Robert I want my Donkey." 

" He's in the field Master Frederick," replied 
the groom. Ci I can't go with you now Sir, if 
you'll wait till I've done in the stable I'll give 
you a ride." 

" But I wont wair, I will see him directly," 
resumed the youuc; gentleman, leave the horses 
and come along with tin 1 . 1 ' 

" What leave my horses Sir after such a fag 
No no Master Fredy, if you can't wait I can't 
help it, only take care, you don't worry t're 
Donkey, he's a propor virir-r, one I promise 
vou." 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 17 

I concluded from the sketch the groom had 
thought proper to give respecting me, that my 
young master would avoid my presence; deeply 
bounded that the prejudice of this man should 
so far mislead him, I a.>sumeda cheerfulness fo- 
reign to my feelings, and displaying my figure to 
the greatest advantage, endeavoured to engage 
the notice of Master Frederick by a thousand 
graceful movements ; my exertions were unheed- 
ed, the young gentleman retiring at the summons 
of a man-servant. " We are indeed an unfor- 
tunate race," sighed I, u traduced by tongues 
that know us not, yet will be the chroniclers of 
our doings. I clearly perceive an Assinine ex- 
istence is synonymous with misery.'* 

These cogitations of your humhle servant 
may with justice be traced to my early educa- 
tion. Balaam had impressed me with those 
gloomy anticipations which mar our present 
enjoyments. Ah! how different were the sen- 
timents of my dear mother, but I cannot even at 
this distance of time speak of her without the 
liveliest emotion. I was regaling on some pota- 
toe parings, and musing on my fate, when Ro- 
bert introduced my young master into the field ; 
resolved on refuting the representation of my 
enemy, I approached Master Frederick with the 
utmost deference ; as I drew near he retreated, 
till with a terrific scream he hid himself behind 
Robert. What was my mortification to find / 
who had been called a 'handsome l)onkey, was 
c3 



18 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

an object of alarm to my owner ! Now as you 
all know, looking-glasses make no part of our 
domestic furniture, but we supply cms deficiency 
by never drinking but from the clearest water 
within our reach. It is therefore unnecessary to 
add, that like yourselves we regard our reflected 
likeness with some little degree of partiality ; if 
we exceed the bounds of prudence in the in- 
dulgence, remember I am speaking of Asses, and 
that it would be unreasonable to expect in an 
Ass, more than belongs to him as an Ass. But 
I declare no stream in which I ever saw myself 
had impressed me with the belief, that my face 
or figure was calculated to Brighten any person. 

Overcome by disappointment I continued to 
gaze mournfully upon my master. The groom 
who had laughed heartily -at Frederick, now 
coaxed me, patted my sides, and persuaded the 
child to mount my back. 

" I wont I teli you," exclaimed the child 
(< he will throw me off, I know he will." 

t( Let me hold you on," replied Robert, 
throwing a rope round my neck. After many 
assurances the little gentleman was mounted. I 
cannot say I felt quite easv ; his weight was tri- 
fling, but this was my deotit as a beast of bur- 
den, and I somehow feared it would not prove 
auspicious. 

Two or three quiet walks across the field in- 
spired my young Nimrod with courage. 

l( Make him trot Robert,'* said he. I instantly 






The Adit-ntures of a Donkey, 19 

fell into the most agile motion. O sad mis- 
chance; Robert missed his hold, and my rider 
fell to the ground ! The screams of Frederick 
brought Mrs. Bond to his assistance. Robert 
declared the young gentleman was not hurt, and 
endeavoured to pacify him. 

" I will go and tell mama you laughed at me 
when I tumbled off that ugly Donkey," said 
Frederick, pushing the groom with all his 
strength. 

" O ! fie Master Fredy, why I thought you 
was more of a man, than to cry at a fall upon 
the grass, 1 ' said Mrs. Bond. 

<c Get me a whip Robert, I will beat the Don- 
key," resumed Frederick. 

*' No, Sir, I shall do no such thing," retorted 
Robert. " The Donkey carried you as well as 
possible, it was my fault, in letting him slip from 
my hold." 

" Then I wish I had the whip, I would give 
you a good lashing, that I would." 

" Would you indeed," laughed Robert, I 
should like to try you." 

Enraged at the mirth of the groom, the young 
gentleman made his escape. 

" Why he's worse than ever," said Mrs. Bond, 
" it is quite surprising to me, that such good 
people as my master and mistress are, shbuld spoil 
their child so foolishly." 

c ' A puny snivelling little pet," rejoined Ro- 



20 The Adt >:;iture* uf a Donkey. 

bcrt, <: I pity Jemmy ; sure enough he'il have 
a fine time oi it." 

" So then T am the servant of that animal 
called a pet," thought I, and I reverted to all 
the creatures I had seen of the same size and 
genus. Farmei Howel had children, but to me 
they appeared quite a different description of 
animal. Neither pouting nor fretfulness had 
ever fallen under my observation, And as Mas- 
ter Frederick seemed to possess many comforts, 
I concluded the word pet to imply a discontent- 
ed self-willed animal, and grieved to find myself 
the slave of such a tyrant. 

It was remarkable, that Robert who had hith- 
erto taken pleasure in teazing me, from the 
moment of my master's arrival adopted a distinct 
line of conduct. It seems to me, that mere 
thoughtlessness will at times propel a species of 
cruelty, void of malice. A good marksman (to* 
shew his skill) will shy a stone at us with fatal 
accuracy. I can assure these hurlers, v,e do not 
doubt tneir capability, but protest against ther 
honour of being used as targets. 

If I suffered individually at this period, 1 am 
willing to allow my situation afforded me view* 
of life highly edifying to an inexperienced Don- 
key. I saw horses curried and dressed with the 
nicest care, and I beheld them lashed and beaten 
on the most trivial occasions. Though a stran- 
ger to corporeal suffering, my sympathy was 
powerfully awakened by these spectacles. ct Ah ! 



The Adventures of a Donkey* 21 

what shall The in the hands of an angry master V f 
thought I ; nor could I exactly ascertain the 
foibles which subjected them to this treatment. 
Time has enlightened me on this subject, and 
I now boldly declare beasts of burden are as 
liable; to suffer from the temper of their masters 
as their own fallibility. 

The parents of my young master deserved the 
elogium Mrs. Bond had bestowed upon them, 
they \vere in themselves amiable, and would 
frequently reprove the impatience of Frederick, 
but alas! this sooiled boy had been too long 
habituated to indulgences to submit to control]). 
His natural timidity increased my difficulties, 
if I kept a walking pace, I was ** a stupid brute," 
if I ambled gaily, " a mischievous creature." I 
bore his revinngs calmly for some time, yet it 
-was grievously humiliating that all my efforts 
should be so misconstrued ; and in truth, my 
donkey pride was offended, that a saddle and 
bridle had not been provided for me. Under 
the impulse of this feeling, I one morning con- 
trived to shift the green baize substitute for a 
saddle, and gently iaid my master on his back ; 
again Robert was my advocate, and by proposing 
the immediate purchase of the necessary trap- 
pings appeased the tears of Frederick. 

Mrs. Fenton assenting to the expenditure, I 
waited the hour of equipment with all the little 
anxieties of pride, and perhaps some of my rea- 
ders will understand my disappointment, wh.cn 



22 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

I declare, nothing could be more contrary to my 
expectations than the dress Robert purchased. 
A. common saddle and dark leather bridle for 
a Donkey whose imagination had been inflated 
ky a glimpse of the moot elegant Ass in the 
kingdom ! This disparagement was not to be 
borne, I looked contemptuously on the groom, 
and in my own mind wondered such a com- 
mission should have been left to his taste. It is 
impossible for an Ass to guess how bipeds arc 
affected by the stupidity or bad taste of their 
dress-makers, &c. &c. I only know, I shrug- 
ged my shoulders with scorn, and would scarce- 
ly submit to be dressed. Robert conquered at 
last, and I was decorated in my new habili- 
ments: what my sensations were at lhat time I 
cannot describe. In conforming to the fashions 
of the age, my readers enjoy a thousand advan- 
tagcs which a solitary Donkey must not hope to 
experience. I believe fashion would cease to be 
of consequence altogether did not emulation 
keep it alive. Now I (who had sighed to ap- 
pear with all the splendour of a domesticated 
Ass) received these honours at a period when 
my talents and general character were totally 
obscured ; thus the mere tiusel or ornament lost 
its most attiactive charm, the power 'n exciting 
admiration, for that Master Frederick or any of 
the family would descern my merits or do justice 
to my personal beauties was what I dared not 
anticipate. 



The Adventures of a Donkey. l>3 

It must be allowed fortune jumbled an odd 
variety in my juvenile path, but perhaps I err, 
and it is rather the singularity of my taste, 
which tempts me to lay these memoirs before 
the public, than any peculiar hardship in my 
fate. At all events I am a truth-telling Donkey, 
and writing from the heart rather than the head, 
I promise to be as succinct in my subsequent 
histony as in these my first impressions. 



CHAP. III. 

A Neiu Master. 

TWO months of incessant drudgery had com- 
pletely taught me to bear the restraint of a sad- 
dle, when piaster Frederick on a sudden declin- 
ed my services. I thought myself happy in 
losing his patronage, and was looking forward 
to a little ease, when Mrs. Fenton inquired if 
I could not be made serviceable, and proposed 
harnessing m e to a donkey cart : Robert reply- 
ing in the affirmative, I was accordingly ap- 
pointed to the honour of drawing my mistress 
about the grounds. The change was agreeable, 
and though somewhat above my strength, I ac- 
quitted myself to the satisfaction of Mrs. Fenton. 
But it was in vain I looked for the delicate white 



24 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

bridle, that object of my ambition. " Surely ' r 
thought I, "a lady will never bear to handle 
such common reins, why even the pet, com- 
plained that they stained his gloves !" Mv mis- 
tress however, continued to employ and commend 
me without thinking it necessary to alter my 
dress. If the humanity of Mrs. Fenton had not 
interfered, my whimsical young master would 
gladly have added to my toil in these excur- 
sions, by taking a seat by her side. 

"No my dear Fred, I cannot allow you to 
ride with me, it would be too much for the 
poor Donkey ; " would -she say, C4 ask Robert to 
teach you to drive, and you shall take an airing 
before breakfast.'* 

Alas! this was putting new arms into the 
hands of an enemy. Robert undertook the office 
with a sullenness for which I could not then 
account, but during the process I gained an 
insight into the character of my master, which 
in a degree justified the repugnance of the 
groom. 

In proportion us the feeble mind of this boy 
rendered him contemptible to those about him, 
his arrogance increased ; every failure to which 
bis pusillanimity exposed him, was revenged 
on those persons he considered his inferiors Of 
course the animal who could not expiess him- 
self orally, received his portion of ill usage. If 
Robert was called " fool, rascal, &c. &c." my 
s'dfs felt the effects of master Frederick's temper; 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 6 

fortunately the strength of this young tyrant was 
not that of a Hercules, or my situation had been 
miserable indeed. About this period a most 
agreeable ch..nge took place in our family, a 
young lady and gentlemen relatives of Mrs. 
Fenton made us a visit. Charles Fairfax was in 
his twelfth year, his sister Marianne a year youn- 
ger; their open good humoured countenances 
and lively spirits formed a striking contrast to 
the peevish features of my masier, but 1 was not 
so credulous as to decide on their characters 
from an index of this nature. No ! it was 
their subsequent conduct which then claimed 
my gratitude, and enables me at this moment to 
speak of them with pleasure. 

Nothing could exceed their astonishment 
when Master Frederick one morning thought fit 
to scold the groom, because he had locked the 
stable door, and he could not get my saddle 
exactly r when he wanted it. 

" You great fool you, you are always doing 
wrong/' said he, tc get me the saddle directly ; 
here my cousins have been waiting this hour. 
I know papa would be very angry if he knew 
you took the horses such a long airing, and 1*11 
tell him when we go to breakfast." 

" I am not your servant, Sir," replied Robert, 
"nor I dont know who would have any thing 
to do with you that knew you/' 

" Hold your tongue, and do as you are bid/' 
resumed the little tyrant. 



'26 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

" Pray Sir do you wish to ride the Donkey 
this morning ? " said Robert, bowing to Master 
Fairfax. 

" Not particularly," replied Charles. 

" Then Sir, if it is no disappointment to you, 
I will not give Master Fredy the saddle till I 
have seen my master, he would not suffer his 
servants to be treated as they are, if he knew it, 
but I will tell him my mind, if I lose my 
place." 

" To be sure you think yourself of great con- 
sequence Mr. Bob, but I know something, and 
I'm determined I'll tell, so you had better give 
me the saddle." 

"You get no saddle from me Sir, retorted 
Robert, " but I think, when / tell all ! know, 
somebody will sing to another tune." 

Marianne Fairfax had very properly re- 
treated from this altercation, callins; her brother 
to look at a brood of chickens. I gladly pursued 
their steps, delighted to be near children whose 
appearance impressed me in their favour. 

" I declare Marianne I never heard any thing 
like Frederick," said Charles, " I hope he wifl 
nbt expect me to take his part, the groom has 
treated him as he deserves." 

" O he was always a pet," replied Marianne, 
"but pray look at these pretty creatures, did 
you ever see such a fine brood ? " 

Charles was admiring the chicks, when Fred- 
erick siezing my tail caused me to start, and in 



The Adventures of a Donkey. C7 

avoiding him I accidentally kicked one of the 
little flatterers. Maria., r.c .n to the spot, and 
raking up the chick, cxur.lnv cl it tenderly ; I 
listened with much ^xietv, and was delighted 
to hear her say, its limbs were not brckeu. My 
tranquillity was of short date, a heavy strokeon 
my back nearly knocked me down. 

"What are you about Frederick ? '* said 
Charles, wresting a spade from the hands of my 
master. 

tl Why he deserves a good drubbing," re- 
torted Frederick, " he might have killed the 
chicken." 

11 And you might have killed the Donkey, 
had the blow fallen on his head." 

" Well it is my own if I had Sir, and that 
spade is mine," said he, endeavouring to regain 
the murderous weapon, u and this field is mine, 
it is very odd I may'nt do as I please in my own 
house." 

" I dont call any of these things yours," said 
Charles, " and if they were, you would have no 
right to act as you were doing." 

" O to be sure you are very good," sneered 
my master, "but I say the Donkey ought to be 
thrashed, and he shall too." 

"Not while I am here to prevent it," con- 
tinued Charles restraining the arm of Frederick; 
" but if you pull my hair Frederick, I shall br 
forced to give you a thrashing, so I warn you in 
time." 



28 'l"he Adventures of a Donkey. 

Marianne interposed, and begged her brother 
would leave him to himself, and take a walk 
with her in the shrubbery. Charles marched off 
v.-ith the spade on hi* shoulder: this act in it- 
self one or humane courage, roused the anger 
of my vindictive tyrant, who waiting till my 
friends were out ot sight, attacked me again. 
As I have before observed, his powers did not 
keep pace with his intentions ; I was more 
worried than injured by his malice, but think- 
ing a little braying could do no harm and might 
bring mychampion to my aid, I uttered two 
or three sonorous notes, and as I expected so 
it happened. In an instant Charles Fairfax 
leaped over a gate, and approaching Frederick 
exclaimed, 

" Touch the Donkey again, and I will either 
give you a drubbing, or carry you to your 
father." 

" Do if yon dare, I should like to see you 
carry me indeed! I dare say you think yourself a 
fine fellow because you have been two years at 
a. public school, but who cares for you? not I, 
I assure you." 

"It would be difficult to say what you do 
care for except indulging your own humours/' 
replied Charles. " Believe me Fred, I will not 
interfere with these so long as they are confined 
to yourself, but I shoulu be ashamed to stand 
by and see you ill use a dumb animal, merely 
because the groom has offended yon.'* 

"That's right," retorted Frederick, "I'll get 



The Adventures of a Do?ikcy. '23 

Mr. Bob a good rowing ; " and running off, it*} 
left my champion smiling at the vaunting cow- 
ardice of my silly master. 

Though I do not profess to be a scientific Ass- 
nor in the least addicted to philosophical in 
^uiry, there are certain estimates that a merely 
observing animal will make, and by chance 
stumble on probabilities. Thus I, a beast ot 
burden declare, that our fatigue is increased 01 
ameliorated by the temper of those we carry (of 
course this remark applies only to our services 
a la cheval) ; I persuade myself this is not a Don- 
key chimera, but a truth that would be gener- 
ally acknowledged were we in the habit of 
submitting our opinions to the public. There is 
something elastic in good humour, it gives a 
buoyancy to the frame similar to what it imparts 
to the countenance ; while suilenness, passion, 
or any other deformity of the mind, by its un- 
certainties diminishes the zeal of the employed, 
and makes that a task which might be made a 
pleasure. Charles Fairfax was more robust in 
appearance than my master, yet, when he 
did me the honour of mounting my back I was 
all agility, anxious to display my best paces 
and this without a touch from the whip. 

But to return to the fracas I witnessed : I was 
beginning to regret that the habits or a Donkey 
precluded him from knowing what occurs with- 
in doors, and that in consequence I should not hear 
how the cousins adjusted their difference, when 
D 3 



30 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

Mrs. Bond entered the field with some provender 
for your humble servant, and was instantly 
joined by Robert. 

* c I thought you'd get your warning," sairl 
Mrs. Bond, addressing the groom, *' but I find 
Blaster Fairfax has done some good for us all I 
hope." 

" Good ! why he's the finest fellow I ever saw : 
yes, little sniveller tried his worst, but master 
actually coloured for shame when young Fairfax 
spoke up; would you believe it, the spiteful 
monkey asked his father if he allowed the Don- 
key to be fed with oats ? You know master is a 
little particular about stable expenses. I never 
gave the Donkey one oat since he came from 
the farmer's," said I, ' but you gave me some 
for him which was just as bad/ said young 
mischief; '* so then I up and told, that master 
Frederick was always in the stables taking the 
oats, that I was afraid he would get a kick some 
day or other, and that for peace and quietness' 
sake I gave him a few oats one morning and 
never but once. I wish you'd seen young 
Fairfax when I said this, you never saw such 
a scornful look as he gave our young one." 

"And what did mistress say ?" asked Mrs. 
Bond "Why she said I ought to leave the sad- 
dle where Master Fenton could find it, as it was 
a great dissappointmem to the child, when he 
got up eaily on purpose to ride his Donkey and 
was prevented by my carelessness. I said he 



The Adventures of a Donkey* 31 

could not put the saddle on if I left it out, and 
if it was not well braced he might get a. fall. 
My master said I was right, and seemed satisfied 
enough, but the pet thought heM get me into a 
scrape yet, so he begins again with * Ah 1 Mr. 
Bob, with all your impudence you can't deny 
that you was out two hours this morning though 
Papa said an hour was enough.' Now there 
was no standing this from a child, so I told 
master that I'd borne a great deal of bad lan- 
guage from his son, and that I had resolved to 
tell him of his swearing, but if I was to be 
called to accouut by a baby t would leave my 
place. 

tc< Let him go Papa, send him away to-day,' 
said Frederick. * No ! said master, I'm afraid 
you have been a very bad boy Fred.' Mistress 
looked vexed and asked where I had taken the 
horses that morning. I told her to the farmer's 
by my master's orders. 'Very true Robert, I had 
forgot that I told you to do so ' said master. 
'Well rhen' said my mistress c only take care and 
leave the Donkey rouly every morning by eight 
o'clock' Robert. * Will that make you happy my 
love?' said she hugging the young rascal. *I 
clont know,' sobbed little squeaky. Master 
Fairfax, burst out a laughing, c well done Fred, 
that's honest ' says he, * for I dont think the 
Donkey is a greater favourite with you than 
Kobert.' 

"<O yes he's very fond of his Donkey 



The Adventures >Ja Donkey. 

Charles,' sai J mistress, 4 and will soon ride 
like a little n.an.* 

" * I hope Fred will never think of making me 
one of his favorites then,' replies yoi.ng Fair- 
fax, ' for I should be sorry to receive such 
proofs of bis regard as he bestows on his Don- 
key/ 

<4 * I should like to know what business you 
have with me or my Donkey Sir ? ' said Fred- 
crick, ' I tell you it is my own and I will beat 
him and kick him whenever I please.' 

*' Masu r grew quite angry at this, called Fred- 
crick a ' Irtle savage,' and declared he would 
send the Donkey to the farmer's, for he had 
been worried to death by the frights and whims 
of his son ever since they came to the Hall. 

'* ' It is such an ugly vicious beast,' said Fredy, 
Robert said it was, he knows he did the very 
first night we came here.' 

" So then I said, the Donkey was a very fine 
one, and though I had warned him not to ride 
him but when I was by, it was because I knew 
the beast wanted training like all other animals, 
but it was not by ill using him as Master Fredy 
did, that the Donkey would ever be made a good 
carrying one. 

" ' You have said enough Robert,' said master. 
Farmer Howel shall have the Donkey again; no 
child of mine shall use any animal ill. I am 
afraid we have helped to spoil you Frederick, 



The Adventures u/'a Donkey. 33 

but I hope it is not too late to save you from 
secerning wicked.' 

11 1 left the room, but Thomas says, youn'-- 
Fairfax offered Frederick his hand, and declare-:! 
he would not have said a word about what pas- 
in the field, if he had not thought his cousin un- 
just to me. It seems the little pet defended 
himself, but the other was too clever for him, 
and master was so pleased with what his nephew 
said, specially aboui trying to get me into dis- 
grace for the very thing I had done to please 
him, that he wished over and over again he had 
such a boy." 

It will readily he believed I was deeply inte- 
rested in this discussion, it was not so much the 
important figure I made in the narration, as the 
conviction that intellectual animals occasionally 
condescend to think of us and of our sufferings'; 
and with that spirit of good fellowship which 
leads us to forget injuries, I augured favourably 
of the future conduct of my master. This way 
my first thought, the succeeding one told me I 
must no longer call Frederick Fenton my master. 
And as I had heard that Mr. Fenton was very 
decisive, when he made a resolution, new hopes 
stole into my bosom, that I should return to the 
farmer's and again see my parents. Next morn- 
ing undeceived me in this particular. Doctor 
Manton, a physician, calling to see Mrs. Fenton, 
expressed a wish to see Master and Miss Fairfax ; 



34 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

they were in the garden, and my mistress in ac- 
companying the doctor in search of them came 
in contact with me. 

" Where did you get that fine Donkey," said 
Mr. Manton, " I am looking out for one, can 
you recommend me to any person who would 
seive me well." 

" You sliall have that" said my mistress we 
want to get rid of him. 

The doctor made a few inquiries, and I heard 
myself formally consigned to Mr. Manton. 
Something like a. sigh escaped my bosom, it was 
grievous to perceive how lightly I was estimated 
where I had never voluntarily offended ; while 
the recollection of Mrs. Bond's many kindnesses 
in the cabbage-leaf department, sensibly depres- 
sed my feelings. " I am again launched on the 
world," thought I, " and peihaps at a greater 
distance from my parents, new ills may await 
me: custom has, in a degree, reconciled me to 
my present lot; shall I have fortitude to bear a 
change which may only prove a change in suf- 
fering ?" The white bridle flitted across my 
mind u ah !" thinks I, " this may be the mo- 
ment in which my hopes are to be realized." 

Pardon me, my gentle readers, nor deem a 
Donkey a more egregious Ass, that an object 
so inconseqnential in your eyes should to him 
appear so attractive. 

What is ambition, but an ardent desire to pos- 
sess that which we believe would increase our 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 35 

happiness ? Men seek fame and hoard gold 
without considering the instability of either of 
these possessions: yet 1 never heard that the dis- 
appointments of the few, diminished the ambi- 
tion of the many. 

Thus, whether it be a white leather bridle or 
the treasures of Golconda, time only can eluci- 
date onr mistake; and, by unveiling the passing 
hour, teach us to value those which have fled 
for ever. 



CHAP. IV. 

A Journey and its Consequences. 

YOU will do me the justice to believe T did 
not quit Fenton Hall without a sigh; I am so 
tenacious of being included amongst the gour- 
mands, that I am really scrupulous of declaring 
all I felt when the blue apron of Mrs. Bond was 
lost to my view. 

Suffice it to say, my sensibility was painfully 
awakened: but alas ! there is no way of describing 
our griefs pathetically. If I said my tears flow- 
ed plenteously, you would laugh at the idea of 
a Donkey's tears ; pallid cheeks do not rank 
amongst our personal beauties. 

It is impossible to attempt the rieroic style in 



3') The Adventures cf a. Donkey. 

the biography of an Ass; I must descend, ami iij 
imple language tell you, ray heart was heavy, 
and I could not disguise it. It was some conso- 
lation to me to perceive, that Robert seemed 
sorry to part with me, I lubbec! mv nose grate- 
fully against his sleeve as he threw the reins 
round my neck. The doctor bud mounted his 
horse and taken the bridle in his hands, when 
he questioned Robert respecting my temper &c. 

'* He is as good a Donkey as can be Sir," 
said Robert, " he has not had a fair chance 
r ere, but I will answer for him where he is wc!S 
used/ 1 

The doctor vouched for the humanity wit' 
vhich I should be regarded where I was going, 
-rid we issued forth. 

This eulogium of the groom's, deserved and 
attained due consideration from rne. " In giv- 
ing me a good character to mv new master. 
Robert has done me all the service he could," 
thought I, ** yes, it must be my constant endea- 
vour to merit the patronage of my employer:'* 
and like half a thousand projectors, I was layinp, 
down a plan of conduct perfect in theory, 
though its practice proved too much for donkev 
philosophy. 

The gentle pace of the doctor, and his encou - 

'aging expressions, beguiled a journey of five 

i Mies insomuch, that before we reached Pen rose. 

Mrs Manton's home, I found my spirits greatly 

:i. That prejudice known to exist be 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 37 

tvveen the horse and Ass had subjected me 
more than once to a contemptuous glance from 
my companion. I bore this patiently, perceiving 
that his rudeness did not escape the notice of 
my master, who was obliged ro use his whip ia 
order to make Martello quicken his pace. I 
entreat you to understand, that I did not rejoice 
in the stripes Martello received. No: it was 
my sense of tiie politeness due to me as a stran- 
ger which led me to hope the Doctor's reproof 
might prove salutary. 

Penrose was delightfully situated, not so spa- 
cious as Fentou Hall, but an air of comfort was 
diffused through the grounds ; the cattle seemed 
to enjoy the most luxuriant pasturage, while the 
dwelling of my master appeared a perfect pic- 
ture. " Happiness must reside here," thinks I 
to myself, and in the fulness of my joy I was no 
sooner shewn into the paddock than T rolled on 
the grass, as if to take possession of this charm- 
ing spot of earth. Imagine my confusion on 
discovering Martello and an old mare eyeing 
me with disdain from a neighbouring enclosure; 
recovering my feet, I returned their stare. I 
had heard Mrs. Bond say, " A cat might look 
at a king: and surely an Ass might look at a 
horse ! Whether my countenance has any thing 
very comic in it, or that my juvenile effrontery 
moved their risibility I know not, they snorted 
loudly, threw back their manes and gallopped 
away. 





The AiL enturcs rf a Donkey. 

While yet I was reflecting on the arrogance 
of my neighbours, the Doctor and his son enter- 
ed the paddock. 

" If I thought \vc could get a side saddle in 
the village/' said Mr. Manton, " I should like 
to have the Donkey completely caparisoned be- 
fore Caroline sees him." 

" Shall I go to Wilcox? perhaps he has one," 
replied Mr. George Mantotv my master acqui- 
esced, and the gay gentleman departed on his 
errand. 

What a palpitation I experienced during his 
absence! it was evident I was the appointed ser- 
vant of a lady, and a white leather bridle 
seemed the natural consequence of such a dis- 
tinction. 

I paced the field, peeped over the gate, and 
regarded evciy approaching passenger with fixed 
attention. " Hope was deferred;" George Man- 
ton returned alone my chagrin would have been 
obvious, did Donkey physiognomy make any 
iigure in the studies of the biped. Be that as it 
may, unv bosom admitted the good within my 
icach; the young gentleman patted me on the 
head as he passed, and as I followed him pluck- 
ed sonic grass with which he condescended to 
feed me ; delighted with these attentions I con- 
A company him. The Doctor joined 
.icn I had the pleasure of hearing that 
x would bring a saddle he thought likely 
rosuit in the couire of an hour. I had fancied 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 39 

myself rather fatigued fiom my journey, but 
this intelligence so entirely altered my feeling 
I seemed equal to any effort and only longed 
for the arrival of the sadler. 

That blissful moment came the saddle fitted, 
and oh ! enchanting sight ! the " white leather 
bridle" at length graced my figure. Transport- 
ed with myself, I would fain have sought some 
liquid stream in which I might catch a glimpse 
of my person; the thing was impracticable at 
this juncture ; and though the sun shone, and 
occasionally traced my shadow accurately, there 
was nothing to excite one's vanity in this sort of 
reflection. It is true, I was mindful of my car- 
riage, wore my ears erect, and was in that happy 
temper of mind which makes every thing agree- 
able. I yet knew it was possible to increase my 
satisfaction, and I had every disposition to make 
the attempt. Mr George Manton attended my 
toilet, and was pleased to express himself much 
to my liking. 

61 Poor Caroline will be delighted with her 
Donkey," said he, and he sighed; " dear girl," 
he continued, " may it afford you a transient 
gratification, and we will endeavour to be satis- 
fied that our intentions are directed to your com. 
fort.'' 

*' Ah! this is just what she will like," said the 
Doctorexamining me, " come, George, lead him 
into the court, and I will persuade her to walk 
on the lawn.'* 

E2 



40 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

George Manton rook the reins and I hastened 
to meet my mistress ; as we turned the angle 
of the house, I discerned a sweet looking girl 
leaning on the arm of the Doctor. 

" My dear sir," said Miss Caroline, " how 
kind YOU are ! I shall be afraid of expressing my 
wishes, if I am to be the occasion of so much 
trouble to you ;" and walking towards me, she 
declared I was the handsomest Donkey she had 
overseen. 

" And I hope he is appointed to carry a docilo 
girl," smiled the Doctor, * f who will never venture 
to misapply terms, and call that a trouble which 
is my highest gratification." Miss Caroline 
pressed the hai,d of the Doctor, I thought she 
looked sorrowful, but it was very becoming to 
her for her manner was perfectly natural. Mr. 
George Manton proposed her trying me imme- 
diately ; my fair mistress making no objection, I 
had the inexpressible delight of conveying her to 
a spot called Prospect Point, at the summit of an 
adjacent hill. George Manton walked by my 
side, occasionally applauding the steadiness of 
my pace and bestowing on our species in gene- 
ral the most flattering commendations. 4< Yet 
the Ass is an animal whose services are ill re- 
quited," said my mistress. 

" Cruelly so," replied George Manton. {( I 
declare 1 have often felt disposed to interfere in 
their behalf, particularly in London; where the 
heaviest loads arc imposed on them without the 



The Adventures of a Donkey, 41 

least regard to their strength, or the poor food 
on which they subsist." 

" I have often thought the hardy nature of 
the ass exposed them to greater suffering," 
resumed Miss Caroline; "we are anxious to 
provide for those creatures whom nature has 
made less independent, while such as can shift 
for themselves are liable to neglect/* 

"This does not excuse us, Caroline ; on the 
contrary it places our characters in a most un- 
amiable point of view. There is a want of 
feeling, of common gratitude, in denying our 
support to the animal that performs its duties 
faithfully, and as I believe few persons deny the 
advantages of economy, I cannot comprehend 
why the services of the hum,ble Donkey should 
go unrewarded/ 1 

" If this poor fellow could understand us," 
rejoined my mistress, gently stroking my neck, 
c ' he would know he had fallen into good hands ; 
but the brute creation collectively claim my 
compassion ; there is something shocking in the 
idea of a horse, a dog, or any animal, being 
pampered and petted one day, and on the next 
ill used, if not starved/' 

*' The fluctuating nature of that animal, man, 
makes this too probable, Caroline ; as your 
knowledge of the world increases you will find 
this instability is not confined to his dumb in- 
feriors ; power is a dangerous weapon, and, like 

3 



42 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

riches, frequently changes the character of its 
possessor." 

My mistress smiling replied, " Well, George, 
\\e shall see how you use your wealth.'* 

The young gentleman answered gaily, but 
there was a melancholy sat on his brow which 
to me appeared extraordinary. The dew begin- 
ning to fall, we turned towards home, where I 
left my lovely burthen and repaired to a com- 
fortable shed appropriated to my use. 

It would be impossible to picture my indivi- 
dual happiness at this period; but alas! I had 
drawn a false estimate of that of the Penrose 
family. Miss Caroline was not the daughter of 
the Doctor but his ward ; the sweetness of her 
temper had endeared her to every member of 
the family ; the servants contended who should 
wait upon her, and it was with deep regret T 
perceived she daily required more assistance ; 
naturally delicate, my respected mistress had 
taken cold after dancing, consumptive symptoms 
ensued, and when I became an inhabitant of 
Penrose paddock, the Doctor considered her 
situation hopeless. Mr. George Manton would 
sometimes fancy he saw an improvement in her 
looks; his father repressed these hopes, gently re- 
minding him that the disease under which Mi<s 
Caroline languished was frequently most flatter- 
ing when its last and more fatal symptoms were 
at hand. 

How sweet were my labours in the service 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 43 

of Caroline Morden ! with what zeal I attended 
her pleasure, and how humane was the conduct 
of Mr. George Manton ! This young man, then 
in his nineteenth year, possessed all that infor- 
mation which distinguishes the more advanced 
in life, without a particle of vanity : his opin- 
ions were given with so much deference, there 
was so much pliability in his temper, I think 
it would have improved the most stupid Ass in 
the world if he had the benefit of observing 
the manner, and listening to the conversation of 
this excellent youth. 

I freely confess my obligations to this young 
gentleman. The degrading insults I received 
from Martello and old Bessy, a half blind mare, 
had more than once roused me to anger it 
might be jealousy on their part, for my situa- 
tion was certainly most enviable but there is 
something in contempt which even an Ass is 
disposed to resent. Straying into their den^sne 
one evening, I was pursued from place to ^.ace, 
snorted at and treated with every indignity ; it 
was in vain I endeavoured to repel their attacks ; 
fortunately Mr. George saw my distress and 
came to my relief. When recovered from my 
fright I could scarcely help smiling ut the idea 
of an animal so large as the horse being so easi- 
ly subdued by man. At this moment the Doc- 
tor joined his son, and hearing of my fracas, 
a conversation ensued which helped to enlighten 
rue in this respect. 



44 The Adccntures of a Donkey. 

" One wonders to see the antipathy of these 
animals so lively in their domesticated state," 
said George Manton ; " the query to me is, 
whether the Ass is a degenerated horse, or a 
distinct species." 

"BufFon says, the Ass is not a horse degene- 
rated/' replied the Doctor, " that like all other 
animals he has his family, his species and his 
rank; his blood is pure, and although his nobi- 
lity is less illustrious, yet it is equally good and 
ancient with that of the horse.'* 

u In his wild stale, the Ass becomes a for- 
midable enemy to the horse," resumed Mr. 
George. 

" Yes, they will not suffer a horse to associate 
with them, and should one stray where they are 
feeding, they attack him wrth the most savage 
fury, never quitting him till he appears to be 
quite dead. Thus, though man by cultivation 
and care seems to have changed the characters 
of domestic animals, I am of opinion that 
nature is more frequently restrained than sub- 
dued ; there will be less ferocity in the creature 
that is uniformly well treated, bat even the dog, 
that sagacious, faithful friend, has been known 
to turn against his oppressor though that op- 
pressor was his master." 

" Then you allow the existence of temper in 
the brute creation, Sir?" 

" Why I think it is impossible to deny it, 
George ;" replied th Doctor, " the school- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 45 

master's rod is not more efficacious on occasion 
than the whip of the horseman ; and with re- 
spect to the horse, I would say, this truly no- 
ble animal is tenacious of his lights, feels his 
superiority over all other quadrupeds, and, 
though capable of the warmest attachment, is at 
times subject to the caprices of temper." 

** I have certainly observed a degree of ob- 
stinacy, as of passion, in the animal in question, 
and grieved to witness the chastisement he has 
in consequence received ; yet one ought not to 
wonder at this when we reflect on the slight 
causes that rouse us to irritability/' 

" Poor Caroline's favourite must be confined 
to the paddock," resumed the Doctor, " Mar- 
tello is a high spirited Castilian, but like his 
species will acquire humility as his services be- 
come less distinguished." 

" The patience of the Ass, makes him valua- 
jble in my eyes,'* continued Mr. George, 
leaning on my back and kindly smoothing my 
coat. 

*' And what is remarkable, George," said the 
Doctor, " from the moment the Ass carries his 
first load, this tractabiiity is a striking feature in 
his character." 

The arrival of my mistress, who approached 
us leaning on the arm of her maid, interrupted 
the conversation. If I could have felt angry in 
her presence, this would have been the mo- 
ment, for I was listening with all my ears, and 



46 The Ad een lures of a Donkey. 

when their length is considered, it will be ad- 
mitted that few animals possess more extensive 
opportunity tor the acquisition of knowledge. 

CHAP. v. 

Symptoms of Education. 



CALLED to the performance of my duty, I 
bore Miss Morden to "Prospect Point;" the 
halts made in our short journey convinced me 
my mistress could ill bear the fatigue of riding. 
Yet the same gentleness of manner was remark- 
able, the same engaging spirit of inquiry which 
made her so estimable to her friends. Seated 
upon a camp chair, Miss Caroline asked many 
questions respecting my species. I grazed at 
her feet in the hope of increasing my little stock 
of information. 

" It was the Spaniards who transported the Ass 
to America, Sir ? " said my mistress, addressing 
her guardian. 

"Yes, my love," replied Mr. Manton, "and 
that country seems to have been favourable to 
this race of animals ; they have multiplied in 
amazing numbers, so much so, that in Quito 
the owners of the grounds where they are bred, 
suffer all persons to take away as many as itiey 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 47 

can, on paying a small acknowledgment in 
proportion to the number of days their sport 
lasts." 

( I have read an interesting description of 
heir manner of descending the Andes in South 
America ; it must be terrifying to see them slide 
down such immense precipices." 

" But the sagacity they display on these oc- 
casions, by no means entitle them to the degra- 
ding epithets so generally attached to the men- 
ion or an Ass. When they approach these 
descents, they stop of themselves, and should the 
ider attempt to spur them on, they continue 
mmoveable. They seem at this time rumina- 
ing on the danger which lies before them and 
preparing for the encounter. They not onlv 
new the road, but tremble and snort at the 
ianger." 

" I cannot conceive how the rider keeps his 
ieat," said my mistress. 

" He has only to sit firm on his saddle with- 
out checking the rein, for the least motion would 
destroy the equilibrium of the Ass, in which 
,ase both must inevitably perish; rind indeed the 
3osture of the animal is favourable to his bur- 
hen in these descents Their fore feet being- 
placed as though they were stopping them- 
iclves, the hind feet put together, but a little 
"orwardjin this attitude they slide down with the 
wiftness of a meteor, and their address in this 
rapid descent is truly wonderful j for in their 



48 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

swiftest motion they follow the different wind- 
ings of the road, as if they had previously set- 
tled the route they were to pursue/' 

" I really think the animal that conveyed me 
safely over a pass of this kind would ever after 
be entitled to my gratitude." 

" Fame, is all that the poor Ass attains," re- 
sumed Mr. Manton. " He gains a kind of reputa- 
tion, after being long used to these journeys, 
but I rather doubt that his happiness is increas- 
ed by this ; so true is it, that fame whether, at- 
tached to the rational or animal creation, is but 
an empty name." 

" A mere bubble,'* laughed Mr. George ; 
" the Ass, however, has certainly risen in our 
estimation. Surely since the ladies have conde- 
scended to ride them, and make them useful in 
drawing carriages, some of those attentions be- 
stowed upon the horse, are indisputably their 
due." 

" Unless you think with Gay, ' an Ass should 
like an Ass be treated,' " smiled the Doctor; " of 
course you allude to their being regularly fed, 
rubbed clown and washed ; this is the practice at 
Cairo, they in consequence grow to a large 
size and are occasionally sold at a high price. 
In this country, on the contrary, this useful ani- 
mal is much neglected and abused. We edu- 
cate the horse with the greatest care, nothing is 
spared to render him beautiful, h is dressed, 
stranded, instructed, and exercised; while the 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 49 

Ass is abandoned to the brutality of servants, or 
to the abuse of children. If he had not a great 
i many good qualities, he would not be able to 
bear the hard usage to which he is daily exposed 
and which certainly makes him more stupid, and 
indocile than he otherwise would be." 

" My dear Sir," exclaimed my mistress, 
" pray do not call them all indocile and stupid! 
I declare I could almost imagine my Jemmy 
understood my feelings, he stops when I cough, 
and is the best tempered creature in the world." 

You may be sure this remark of Miss Caro- 
line's met my approbation ; for all my asinine 
pride had been roused by the concluding obser- 
vation of the Doctor. Mr. George further tran- 
quillized my irritated nerves. 

*' We do not consider, that if the horse had no 
existence," resumed my amiable champion, " the 
Ass, both in himself, and with regard to us, 
would be the most distinguished animal in the 
creation it is comparison alone that degrades 
him." 

" And this ought not to offend him, did he 
understand us," said my mistress, presentingsome 
oak leaves for my acceptance, " for it is by com- 
parison we draw most of our conclusions, and 
the Donkey must submit to that which his mas- 
ter has no means of avoiding. The flesh of 
the Ass is sometimes eaten I believe," added Miss 
Caroline. 

" Yes the Arabians take them in snares for the 



50 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

sake of their flesh/* replied Mr. George; "the 
Romans were likewise fond of them; Pliny tells 
us that the epicures preferred those of Africa to 
all others." 

f< These creatures are very nice with regard to 
water," resumed Miss Morden, "and I observe 
in drinking never sink their nose like the horse." 

" It is alleged he is afraid of the shadow of his 
ears; but I should rather attribute this tc his 
general antipathy to that element, for he never 
wallows in mire or water, having a dislike to 
wetting his feet, and will turn out of his road to 
avoid a puddle." 

" If the Donkey would bear it, I should like 
vastly to see how he would look when rubbed 
down and washed," said my Mistress; "I am 
sure it must conduce to tie health of the animal." 

" We will try him,*' said Mr. George ; <{ per- 
haps, Caroline, you anticipate some freak from 
your Donkey, for the Ass frequently takes the 
liberty of rolling himself amongst thistles, or 
ferns, without regard to his burthen, but seem- 
ingly with a view to reproach the neglect of his 
master.'* 

Never had I before wished to possess the power 
of speech ; how I longed to assure my Mistress 
she had nothing to apprehend from me, that my 
utmost ambition was to attend her pleasure ! And, 
though I certainly shrank from the operation 
to which she had doomed me, I yet resolved to 
bear it patiently, and if possible continue to de- 



The Adventures of a Donkey, 51 

serve her good opinion. There is a promptitude 
in the plans of the young, which sometimes 
leaves reason at a distance: Thus, though it 
was evening, and near the hour of retiring, we 
no sooner reached home than Mr. George hast- 
ened to fulfil the wishes of my Mistress; disrob- 
ing me of my trappings, and throwing off his 
coat, he procured two pails of water and dash- 
ing them at my sides, strove to encourage me 
under my suffering by the kindest and most en- 
dearing expressions. In vain I tried to seem 
pleased, it would not do ; my whole frame was 
shivering, nor could the rubbing down, or the 
approving voice of my Mistress, reconcile me to 
the uneasiness of my situation. I take credit to 
myself that I did not rebel, and by a kick, forfeit 
my good character. Impatient to make my re- 
treat, I believe I made an attempt to escape, but 
Mr. Gecrge was really too much interested in 
my welfare to leave my coat absolutely wet. 

The Doctor, who had been visiting his patients, 
returned at this juncture. 

" Hey-day,'* said the old gentleman, " why is 
it possible you have been so imprudent as to wash 
the Donkey at this time of night ? I am afraid 
the poor creature will suffer from your thought- 
lessness, George : my dear fellow, you should 
have reflected that when inflicting a sort of pe- 
nance on this animal, it was in your power to 
temper it, by giving him the benefit of a warm 
sun to dry himself ; nay, it would have been 

F2 



52 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

good policy. The Donkey invigorated and re- 
freshed by your exertion, might in future, have 
submitted to your wishes with cheerfulness. 

" Oh dear, I hope he wont take cold," said 
my Mistress, who was sitting at the window; 
" do pray Sir, let Jenkins be called, he under- 
stands horses, and may, perhaps, advise what is 
best to be done for my poor Jemmy." 

Jenkins was called; but, mark the brutality of 
this man, he could neither allow that I was im- 
proved by my sousing, nor that any harm could 
come to an Ass for any thing of the sort. 

** Why they are as hard as iron," said he, " and 
as obstinate as mules ; for my part I cannot see 
why they are ever used, not I, nasty sulky brutes.*' 

Mr. George could be very droll at times, and 
he knew the character of Jenkins. 

t( You must not speak disrespectfully of Jem- 
my," replied he, " he is a very good tempered 
fellow Jenkins, and if he does not suffer from his 
washing to-night, ice must see that it is done 
every day." 

"Sir?" replied Jenkins, "/tend Bonkeys! 
No ! Mr. George, I have enough to do with my 
horses." 

"So then you would not to oblige me, bestow 
a little time on tfiis inoffensive animal ?" 

" It would be lost time, Sir, I know it; time 
out of mind they have been known to be stupid, 
dirty brutes." 

" Well," said the Doctor, '* Jemmy must de- 
cide this point, if he is not injured by my son's 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 53 

mistake in washing him at night-fall instead of 
the morning, I shall expect that you, Jenkins, 
will be ready to do as Mr. George has proposed." 

Jenkins was mute in the presence of his mas- 
ter, but us he drove me to my shed his eloquence 
revived : nor did he omit to urge me on by se- 
veral smart blows on my sides. 

"A pretty thing indeed, to turn Donkey-dres- 
ser after twenty year's service!" muttered he, 
" yes, to be sure I'll dress you, but it shall be 
with a good horse- whip." 

These threatenings were not lost upon me. It 
seemed as though my fortitude was to be tried to 
the utmost. It gives me pleasure, however, to 
state, I sustained no material injury from this my 
first introduction to a cold bath; the agitation of 
my nerves subsided as I reverted to the motives 
which influenced my Mistress. It would have 
been ungrateful in the extreme had I done other- 
wise ; and I recommend it to Asses in general, to 
adopt a similar effort of their understandings, 
under every real or imaginary oppression. 

Had I sat lain down, I should have said, to 
ruminate on the wretchedness of my condition, 
petulantly concluded that my protectors had a 
pleasure in seeing me miserable, it is probable I 
had nourished revenge in my bosom, or by con- 
cealing my feelings brought on some serious ma- 
lady. That I looked to the morrow, with the 
same thoughtless indifference as formerly, I will 
not pretend to say : No, 1 dreaded a repetition 
F 3 



54 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

of that shock from which I had so lately escaped ; 
my sleep was broken, and uneasy ; huge pails, 
and rough brushes, passed before my " mind's 
eye," and the unamiable visage of Jenkins more 
than once crossed my imagination. 

As I profess to be an Ass of some observation, 
it may be supposed I made my own reflections 
on the conversation of the preceding day. 

As a member of the asinine community, I 
had received much gratification from the hand- 
some things said of us ; the subordination of 
animals to their masters no longer astonished me; 
on the contrary I could not but admire the con- 
fidence man places in the beast of burden, by 
trusting his personal s'afety to our discretion and 
sagacity. I readily allowed, thai our tractability 
should be evident ere these distinctions were be- 
stowed upon us. And had there been any thing 
wanting to reconcile me to the degrees of master 
and servant, I had seen an instance between 
man and man, where a deficiency in the respect 
due to a superior had placed t.ie humbler party 
in an ungracious point of view. : the sullen re- 
luctance of Jenkins incited the good Doctor to 
exert an authority very foreign to hi.* disposition. 
Had Jenkins represented this additional labour 
as incompatible with his other employments, his 
humane master would readily have listened to 
him. How creatures possessing the power of 
speech can so far pervert its use I cannot 
understand ! 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 55 

But I am prattling like a giddy Donkey, for- 
getting, in my resentment towards Jenkins, the 
numberless imperfections in my own fraternity. 
|[ know we can be sulkyobstinate in tbe ex- 
:reme ! yes, many a stripe have I borne, rather 
than submit to the guidance of a capricious 
rider ; and if I could have spoken, there is no 
saying how far I might have committed myself, 
t perceive all the danger of judging others, more 
especially those of a distinct genus ; but surely 
there can be no harm in expressing one's con- 
tempt for that sort of revenge which leads a ra- 
tional being to vent his anger on an innocent 
Donkey, when it was perfectly in his power to 
state his grievance, had he chosen to do so re- 
spectfully. Suppose we sometimes stand still 
when we ought to proceed; or dismount our 
rider by surprise, will you make no allowance 
for our fatigue ? nor do us the honor or believing 
that like yourselves we have our caprices? We 
yjossess no modes of expressing our displeasure, 
but such as render us odious in the eyes of our 
superiors : yet I declare (excepting the fastidious 
old Balaam) I do not recollect that I was ever 
considered an ill-conducted Donkey; and as lam 
willing to allow that I share in common the 
foibles of my particular class, it leads me to con- 
clude that tenderness to the failings of one's own 
species is but a sort of self love which even an 
Ass may detect, if he is disposed to take the 
trouble. 



56 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

Amidst the many vague wishes which floated 
in my brain at this happy period of my exist- 
ence, was one which had incessantly haunted 
me since first I entered on the world a desire to 
exhibit myself in my handsome trappings before 
old Balaam. 

Do not dishonor my feelings, courteous reader, 
or suppose that I had become insensible to pa<- 
rental love ; no, an Ass of my acquaintance had 
informed me a meeting of this tender nature 
was totally out of the question, and that the 
first separation of the foal from its dam was 
generally a final one. 

With Balaam the case was otherwise ; he re- 
gularly passed the summer at Tunbridge, in 
Kent, and hearing by accident that we were only 
a few miles distant from that fashionable place, 
I sometimes indulged a hope of crossing his path. 
" How he will stare," would I say to myself. 
ff Yes, I think it will be hardly necessary to tell 
him, a Donkey's life may be very comfortable. 
He will see I am well fed, cheerful, and elegantly 
dressed." 

In short, it would he endless to repeat the va- 
rious harangues my Donkey capacity suggested, 
as appropriate to this much desired event. It 
didarri ve, but not under theuuspices I anticipated . 

But I am gallopping as though I were an actual 
racer at this moment ; and alas ! I have some in- 
tervening vicissitudes to relate, and must endeav- 
our to be methodical. 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 57 

The morning arrived, and it was with heart- 
felt pleasure I heard the footstep of Mr. George 
Manton approaching my shed. Had Jenkins 
made his appearance, I really think I should 
have fainted ; answering the kind salutation of 
Mr. George, I ran towards him, and we sallied 
forth. " Come ray poor fellow, " said he, " I am 
glad to see you so brisk, we must pursue the same 
course, there is a warm sun to dry you this 
morning." I started back intuitively, and as is 
usual with us when alarmed, my ears inclined 
backwards ; the young gentleman laughed at me, 
called me "a comical animal:" but finding him 
resolute, I made a virtae of necessity and sub- 
mitted with a good grace. Jenkins was not of 
our party, and the expedition with which my 
young master performed his office soon left me 
at liberty to bask beneath the rays of a glowing 
summer sun. 



CHAP. VI. 



A Transfer. 

THE increasing weakness of my beloved 
Mistress, left me at liberty to amuse myself; 
but idleness was no longer pleasing, my duties 
had been so moderate, and in themselves so de- 



58 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

lightful, nothing could be more irksome than my 
situation when Miss Caroline used to employ me. 

I heard something about a journey to Bristol, 
and such was my ignorance, I -dually considered 
myself included in the arrangement; disap- 
pointment was my lot they departed one morn- 
ing ere I quitted my shed, and to add to rny 
melancholy Jenkins, whether front forgetfulness 
or malice 1 know not, left me a piisoner during - 
the whole day ; in vain I kicked and braved, 
my efforts were unheeded, and it is probable I 
should have been nearly famished had not the 
return of Mr. George, late in the evening, pro- I 
cured my release. 6t Is the Donkey housed, Mrs. 
Bennet?" said my young master, addressing the 
Housekeeper, who was passing near my prison. 

" Dear heart ! why Pant seen him to-day,'* 
said she, (< poor fellow if he's been locked up all 
this time, he must be almost starved.'' 

" This is Jenkin'sneglect," replied Mr. George, 
opening the door ; I ran forward overjoyed to 
behold my kind friend. 

" Dear Caroline !" he exclaimed, " your poor 
favorite is already doomed to neglect," and fol- 
lowing my footsteps, he seemed lost in his own 
reflections. I snatched a hasty but plentiful 
meal ; took two or three trots across the paddock, 
and with due consideration for the fatigue and 
feelings of my patron, retreated to my shed for 
the night. 

The Doctor \va* absent nearly a fortnight; his 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 59 

return seemed deeply to affect his son, my young 
Mistress was no more, and every individual at 
Penrose, not excepting Jenkins, evinced the most 
heart-felt sorrow on this occasion. 

I knew not what to think ; days stole on, and if 
the full range of a fertile meadow, gentle treat- 
ment, from such of the family as chance threw in 
my way, ij' these ought to have made me content, 
I was a stupid Ass not to prize them, but my 
sweet Mistress had said, " comparison, was the 
medium hy which rational animals judge," and 
could an Ass err in adopting this mode. 

Alas ! what a contrast did my inactive life 
present to that which had marked the days when 
Miss Morden's pleasure guided my conduct. I 
have some reason to believe that the Doctor and 
his son entertained similar ideas respecting my 
situation; for, though I occasionally received their 
kind notice, I observed the name of my Mistress 
would escape their lips, as if they too were com- 
paring the past with the present. 

Whether idleness is really the parent of mis- 
chief I know not, it is certain, want of occupation 

ed me into a folly, which fatally injured my fu- 
ture fortune. Tired by the monotony of my 
pxistence, I one morning strolled down a shady 

ane, contiguous to Penrose, and charmed by the 
Fragrance, not less than the flavour of the hazel 
tranches that courted my acceptance, continued 

ny walk ; when, turning an angle, I found myself 

n the high road. The morning was lovely, and 



60 The Adventures uf a Donkey. 

though the sun had scifrcely risen, there was f 
chriping amongst the birds, and an appearance 
of activity in the sons of men, which forcibly- 
claimed my attention. I saw labourers going to 
their work waggons creeping up the side of 
of the hill, while the inhabitants of a small Inn 
seemed busily preparing to receive their guests. 
At length a heavy laden stage approached ; I 
stood gazing at the panting animals that drew it, 
when a smart stroke on my back, caused me to 
recede a few paces; it was the coachman, who 
could not suffer an opportunity of shewing his 
regard for our species to escape him. As the 
horses were unloosed from the carriage, and led 
to the stables, their languid appearance excited 
my sympathy ; comparison here seemed to place 
my Donkey hardships in the most trivial point of 
view, nor did it escape me that th^ four animals 
led out to supply their place looked jaded, and 
unfit to bear the fatigue to which they were des- 
tined. I was beginning to rejoice that I was not 
a horse, and I believe had made an apostrophe 
in the true spirit of an Ass, when a sallow look- 
ing man, with an old kettle upon his shoulder, 
fixed ins eyes upon me ; accustomed to admira- 
tion, I concluded my beauty attracted his 
notice, and under this impression slowly pursued 
my way ; the man continuing to follow and talk 
to me in the gentlest language. Descending a 
hollow, the face of the country assumed another 
aspect j a large wood lay before me, and I felt it 



The Adventures of a Donkey, 01 

xvould be imprudent to proceed. But what was 
my horror and surprise, when this black-eyed 
gentleman seized me by the inane, and slipping 

!an old leather belt from his waist threw it 
round my neck and expeditiously mounting 
HIV back, began urging me onward ! My resis- 
tance was prompt, and for some minutes effec- 
tive ; I dismounted him twice, and bore the 
heaviest blows with determined courage, till my 
brutal antagonist in a rage struck me on the 
head with his kettle, and nearly stunned me. 
Tortured almost to madness, I darted off at a 
pace which again unseated my rider; thinking 
this the moment for escape, I left him in a 
thicket and endeavoured to strike out a new 
path. I did so, and ran until nearly exhausted ; 
when hearing the cry of a child and the bufe of 
voices at a little distance, I hastened to the spot, 
\vhre a group of five or six persons were 
seated under a tree ; my sudden appearance 
startled them, but they received me wirh hospita- 
lity, and kindly leading me to an adjacent tree 
secured me from farther fatigue for the present, 
by fastening the tinker's belt to one of its strong- 
est branches. As my agitation subsided, I 
took an opportunity of looking at my neigh- 
bours ; their features and complexion were un- 
like all I had ever seen, except those of my re- 

i cent enemy, and a prophetic tremor shook my 
frame as I admitted the belief that I had intro- 
duced myself into the family of my kettle ac- 



(52 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

quaintance. My suspicion was soon realized. 
The tinker arrived, and no sooner beheld me, 
than he broke into an exclamation of joy. " So 
you are here are you, you rascal!" said he 
" you served me a pretty trick, but as I've got 
you at last, 1 forgive you/* 

This leniency was wholly unexpected, and 
my sprits rose in proportion. But alas ! this 
tranquillity was transient. To an Ass of my 
education, nothing could be more uncongenial 
than my new mode of life. The mysterious 
manner of my owners excited my surprise and 
curiosity ; we rarely travelled in daylight, and 
our lodgings were uniformly fixed in the most 
unfrequented parts. There was a constant tre- 
pidation and alarm amongst them on the ap- 
pearance of a passenger; if the wind rustled 
through the trees they hid their property of 
whatever description : and though we mutuallv 
fed on excellent food, I do nor remember to 
have seen them enjoy a single meal. 

These facts were incomprehensible to me for 
some days; till, on our arrival at Maidstone, in 
Kent, Dan, my unfeeling purloincr, returning 
from a morning ramble, imparted his fears to 
his companions. " We must be off/' said he, 
" there's a notice for all vagrants to quit the town, 
and I only axed for a job at one house, and 
they told me if a gipsy made his appearance he 
should be sent to jail." This intelligence pro- 
duced the utmost confusion in our patty ; and 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 63 

my back was destined to feel its immediate 
jrfect. Two panniers were slung across me ; 
jjur remaining stock of provender, with the few 
cooking utensils that belonged to these wander- 
ers, seemed too light a load in their estimation, 
md a squalling child was added to my burthen. 
My legs tottered under this enormous load, but 

t would have been useless to contend at such 
i moment. Only one of the women with Dan 
accompanied me : I heard something of arrangc- 
.nents for the night, but was too much oppres- 
sed by my own sufferings to attend to them. 
What self accusations were mine during this 
day ! Penrose, and its quiet enjoyments, were 
continually rising in my memory ; and how 
often did I wish that the ignorance of my 

;uides might lead them into its beloved neigh- 
bourhood. I misunderstood the character of 
my new owners ; even though the fear of justice 
had not taught them caution, their natural 
'sagacity cannot be questioned. 

That we performed a long journey on this 
memorable day, my almost sinking frame could 
have attested ; and the circuitous route we were 
compelled to make in order to avoid towns 
and villages added greatly to its length. It was 
ten o'clock, when, after wading through a san- 
dy soil, similar as I should imagine to those 
'countries* in which we formerly made a con- 

* Arabia, Persia and Egypt. 
G2 



64- The Adventures of a Dmkey. 

spicuons figure, that Dan, wjth evident satis- 
faction, pointed to a light and expressed his 
belief that our friends were at hand. This inti- 
mation gave me new vigour : his conjecture 
proved just: a large fire kindled beneath a 
shelving rock concealed the gipsies, and a plen- 
tiful supper regaled them after their fatigue. I 
must in justice declare, I never lived better 
than during this period ; but whether to attri- 
bute this to their humanity, or that profusion 
is the attendant of profligacy, is not for me to 
determine, I certainly availed myself of their 
liberality with no disposition (at that time) to 
judge their conduct. 

The assembled group now related the events 
of the day, which seemed to give universal 
satisfaction: till one of the women added, that 
she had heard a Donkey cried in the town of 
Tunbridge, and she was sure from the descrip- 
tion it was me. I was instantly on the alert. 
Hope took possession of my bosom. Ah ! and 
shall I again return to Penrose ! sighed I. The 
next moment damped my joy. f< We must sell 
him then," said Dan; "I will set off in the 
morning and see what I can do.'* Even this 
decision bore something of promise: I should 
be released from my present ignominious mode 
of life, should no longer be the companion of 
thieves, anci perhaps at Tunbridge I might 
meet my old Mentor Balaam. 1 will own there 
were other considerations which had their 
weight at that moment. 



The Adventures of a Dojikc-y. f .5 

Tunbriclge was a fashionable place : it was, 
therefore, natural to suppose some attention 
would be paid to the exterior of a Donkey, whose 
services were required by persons of fashion. 

Surely, surely, vanity is the most formid- 
able enemy to improvement ! viz. with Asses: 
for I conclude no other class of animals are so 
foolishly blind. Could any thing be more 
ridiculous than my again fixing my thoughts on 
fine trappings, when I had so lately murmured 
at my fate, though in the possession of these 
things? But I believe it is necessary to our 
true enjoyment of life that we should experi- 
ence some of its disappointments. 

At an early hour next morning, Mr. Dan 
took leave of his companions, promising to re- 
tain me if it could be done with safety. To my 
great surprise the complexion of this gentleman 
was at least twenty shades fairer on this morn- 
ing ; and I found from the jocose remarks of his 
associates that he xvas nx>t a gipsy, but one of 
those criminal beings who prefer a life of fraud 
to the not more laborious, though respectable, 
calling of a mechanic. This change in the ap- 
pearance of Dan was adopted as favourable 
to his expected sale of your humble servant; 
but even the adroitness of the ci-devant gipsy 
was to be foiled. We were in the environs 
of Tunbridge Wells, near what are called the 
Bell Rocks : my ignorance in geography had 
led me to think the Weils must be contiguous 
G 3 



66 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

to the town of Tunbridge I was consequently 
surprised when Dan asked a waggoner if he 
thought there was any chance of his selling me 
if he crossed the hill. 

" Its like enough, master, the place is very 
full," replied the waggoner. cc But mayhap 
you found this Donkey ! " continued the man, 
"eh ! if that's the case you'd better make your 
market that way, there's one been cried yester- 
day at Tunbridge Town.' 1 

Dan muttered between his teeth, and coolly 
declaring 1 was his own property, we pursued 
our way, but at a slackened pace. We had 
just reached Mount Sion, and I was looking 
with delight on the fertile valleys below, when 
a voice vociferated, 

" Holla, mister! I say, where did you get 
that Donkey ? " 

Dan dropped from my back and approaching 
the window of a public house, asked who called 
him. 

" Where did you find that Donkey, I say ? " 
resumed the man, whom I now discovered to 
be Jenkins, my surly insulter at Penrose. 

" Did you say you had lost a Donkey, Sir ? : * 
said Dan with the utmost humility. 

" Yes, we have lost one sure enough, and 
I've been a wild goose chase after it too," con- 
tinued Jenkins advancing, " but I should like 
to know where you found it, tell me that ?" 

"In forest Sir, two days ago." 

" That's a likely story truly ; and now I look 



The Adventures of a Do?ikey. 67 

at your face, you rogue, I remember you well ; 
you stole a saucepan under pretence of mending 
it; give me the Donkey and think yourself 
well off I dont send you to jail." 

Dan wholly denied having stolen me, declar- 
ed he never mended a saucepan in his life, 
(which was perhaps true) and positively insisted 
that he was taking me to Tunbridge, where he 
learned I had been cried, and hoped to get the 
reward offered for me, as he was very poor, and 
had a wife and seven children to support. 

" You get no reward from me ! " resumed 
Jenkins, seizing me from the reluctant Dan, 
"make the best of your way out of this place, 
or you may meet a reward you dont expect." 

The mortified Dan was forced to yield, the 
few persons who witnessed the altercation being 
decidedly in favour of Jenkins. What incom- 
prehensible animals we Donkeys are ! I, who 
had blushed for my degradation as the servant 
of a gipsy, knew not how to rejoice at falling 
into the hands of Jenkins : yet I trusted his 
power would be temporary, and looked forward 
to resuming my gambols in the luxuriant pad- 
docks of Penrose, 

Jenkins seemed in no hurry to depart ; a rope 
procured from the landlord, and fastened to the 
sign post just without the door, secured me 
from straying, while it left me at liberty to ob- 
serve my old enemy. I saw Jenkins and his 
companions drinking, and afterwards playing 



68 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

with spotted pieees of papery I have since learn- 
ed were cards ; though the party were at first 
cheerful, loud words ensued, yet they continu- 
ed to be amused with these things ; at last trie 
words, 

"1*11 bet the Donkey on this hand," reached 
my tired ears ; I could not comprehend what / 
had to do with their employment ; a short time 
decided my fate. It seems Jenkins lost and 
I, in consequence, became the property of his 
opponent. I thought Jenkins looked sad, as 
my new master (a short coarse featured man) 
with an exulting smile, declared I was a very 
line Donkey, and would bring him in six shil- 
lings a day at the least. These men whom I 
had seen so boisterous and apparently friendly, 
parted in the most ungracious manner. I was 
led to a poor hovel of a shed, in which I found 
two Donkeys reposing after the fatigues of the 
day; while I, who had fasted since the morn- 
ing, was left to my own reflections. 

The unprincipled conduct of Dan, incieased 
by the wilful falsehoods he had uttered, left a 
serious impression on my uind; yet, upon 
contrasting Jenkins's unjust tranfer of his mas- 
tei's property, he appeared infinitely more 
reprehensible. He was a confidential servant, 
considered worthy of trust, and, though I would 
not defend the lawless depredations of my gipsy 
acquaintance, one does not expect the same cor- 
rectness from those who exclude themselves 
from tire influence of good example. 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 69 

Now Jenkins lived in the bosom of a family 
eminent for their virtues, white Dan, by long 
association with the vicious, had become in a. 
manner a stranger to those obligations by 
which man is bound to man and forbidden to 
do that to another he would consider unjust if 
applied to himself. But I must not expatiate on 
this subject ; it is infinitely above my capacity, 
and you are no doubt impatient to hearjiow I 
was received amongst the fashionable Donkeys 
at Tunbrid<re. 



CHAP. VII. 

High Life. 

FORTUNE had hitherto precluded me from 
any extensive acquaintance with my own parti- 
cular class ; it was therefore with some timidity 
I anticipated the greetings of my snoring com- 
panions ; fatigue and hunger had so completely 
subdued me, that contrary to our usual nabits, 
I stretched myself at full length, and no doubt 
added to the harmony of my associates. 

Daylight was just peeping through our dilapi- 
dated shed, when my slumbers were broken by 
the whispering of my neighbours. 

" A ieilow-labourer, of course," said one. 



70 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

11 He little thinks what a life he will lead/' 
jeplied'the other. 

"My friends !" said I, starting up, " allow 
an inexperienced Donkey, the benefit of your 
counsel?'' I was proceeding in a strain of re- 
spectable entreaty, when one of my new neigh- 
bours imperiously replied 

" Experience implies age, and from your 
height I should conclude you were my senior." 

Hum, thinks I to myself, this is vanity, 
but of another kind ; " But Sir, or Madam," I 
continued, "I presume not to judge by this 
light you may be younger than myself, and 
you may be as old as my grandam." 

This unfortunate remark excited the indignation 
of my reprover, who turning from me in dis- 
dainful silence left me to regret my silly at- 
tempts at repartee. I was beginning to arrange 
a conciliatory apology, when the ill-suppressed 
laughter of my other companion checked my 
purpose, 

" I certainly know that voice," said he, "it 
can be none but the thoughtless Jemmy." 

" My dearest Mr. Balaam," said I, now really 
glad to hear his rough voice, " by what fortu- 
nate event do we meet at Tunbridge ? " 

" The fortune of the thing rests with yourself, 
Jemmy, for I will answer for my visit being 
wholly involuntary; of course the love of novel- 
ty brings you hither; still a seeker after fashions 
I suppose, though by the jangour of your 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 71 

voice, I conclude you do not find smart saddles 
and white bridles constitute the entire happiness 
of an Ass." 

With a sigh of heart-felt anguish I assented to 
this, simply stating the long fast 1 had been neces- 
sitated to keep. Balaam generously cheered my 
spirits by assuring me I should fare tolerably well 
in my present service, but it was equally certain 
my fatigue would be extreme. The high minded 
Juba, who had treated me so cavalierly, now ad- 
vanced and appeared desirous of my friendship. 

I was too great a novice in the ways of the 
Donkey world, to understand that the counte- 
nance I received from Balaam had raised me in 
the estimation of this worldly Ass. 

It might be a proof of his discernment to value 
those whom Balaam esteemed, but my ideas of 
friendship were at this period purely romantic, 
perhaps you will call them vain; I looked for a 
congeniality of sentiments, similar tastes, in shore, 
all tTiose nothings which make up the tottering 
fabric of juvenile attachments. Of course while 
under this delusion, the advances of Juba met my 
sovereign contempt. Balaam laughed at us, 
called us a pair of idiots, and by bidding me re- 
late my precious adventures diverted my rising 
indignation. 

The sincerity of my nature would not suffer 
me to gloss over my faults ; I told my tale briefly, 
but faithfully. 



72 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

(i Well," said Balaam, as my narration closed, 
" it must be confessed you merit your present 
degradation, to leave Penrose paddock for vou 
knew not what? silly, ungrateful Ass !" 

" But, my dear Mr. Balaam," said I, "I fully 
intended to return ; I only wished to enjoy a 
morning ramble, ami pray take into^consideration 
that geography is not our fort." 

" Silence," rerorted Balaam, "no qtrrbbling 
Sir; instinct is he-towed upontu: let me tell you , 
Mr. Jem, that the Ass enjoys a large portion of 
this gracious gift ;- what animal is quicker at 
scenting his master than an Ass r more readily 
knows his home, or is more sagacious in dis- 
covering the best track in a mountainous soil ? 
but you have carved your own fortune, and must 
abiJe bv it, only beware of murmuring, nor bv 
Stepping out of your character as an Ass expose 
yourself to contempt." 

heart was full, the severity of Balaam 
seemed peculiarly ill-timed, it was v not in nature 
that a young hungry Donkey could bear such 
cutting language. 

'* I may have been faulty," said I, " but all 
As. c es arc not as wise as Mr. Balaam." 

iJalaam brayed most ironically, then in a soft- 
ened tone added, t( It is my regard for you leads 
me to reprove your vanity ; I knpvv that the 
animal who offers advice is generally considered 
an Ass, but it shall not deter me from warning 
the offspring of an old friend." 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 73 

My feelings were instantly subdued, and with 
a tremulous voice I inquired after my parents. 
Balaam assured me my father was well when he 
last met him, and that my mother was most hap- 
pily situated in the family of a farmer Adams. 
The door of our hovel was now unbarred ; after 
a glance at Juba, whose exterior by no means 
justified his juvenile presumption, and regaling 
on the soft luxuriant pasturage that abounds in 
this pleasant country, we were called to work. 
A saddle, at least half a foot too long, disgraced 
my back ; I saw Balaam smile as I curved and 
evinced my dissatisfaction at the unfitness of my 
dress ; the thing was irremediable, we were led 
to the hill where ponies and donkeys of all sizes 
and descriptions were assembled. 

It was quite a new scene to me ; ladies and 
children mounted on ponies, while nursing maids 
and footmen were galloppingaway upon donkeys: 
they seemed more able to carry than to guide ; 
at length my turn came, and it was necessary to 
change the saddle, for my rider was a lovely little 
girl, about six years of age. A man and maid ser- 
vant attended our progress ; the dear creature was 
so light, and her attendants appeared so careful of 
her, J was convinced I carried no common burthen. 

"Jane," sa,id my fair equestrian, " I wish 
mama could see me on this nice Donkey/' 

" As we are to have him for an hour, Lady 
Harriet," replied the maid, '' suppose we lead 
him down to the cottage." 



74 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

The footman instantly took the hint, and 
walked by my side ; as we approached the resi- 
dence of Lady Harriet, a lady from a chamber 
window exclaimed, 

" Well, how does my Harriet like her ride, are 
you sure you are not at all afraid ?" 

*' Oh, no mama, it is so quiet, I wish it was 
my very own." 

"A likely matter to be sure Miss," rejoined a 
young gentleman, who had just risen from his 
bed, and apparently roused to the exertion bv a 
motive which did not do him honour, "if 
papa buys it, it will be for me, so make yourself 
easy as to that.'* 

At this moment a gentleman with a book in 
his hand issued from behind a tree. " And pray 
Sir, who told you 1 was disposed to give any in- 
dulgence to a selfish sluggard r" said he. 

" Why I thought to be sure, you would never 
buy a Donkey for a girl/' pouted the young 
gentleman j " but if I make haste and come down 
may I have a ride papa?" 

" Certainly not," replied his father. 

" If I get up early to-morrow morning may T 
ride?" 

" I make no terms with my children," re- 
sumed thegentleman turning towards me: c * it is 
a very line Donkey, Philip," he continued, ad- 
dressing the footman, " does he go w^ll ?" 

" Remarkably well, my Lord, quiet as a lamb, 
his paces are very good indeed." 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 75 

u What do you say Caroline, shall we make a 
purchase for Harriet r ' 

" Think how far we are from home," said 
Ladv Hampton, u but do as you please my dear, 
at all events we can have him for a week or two." 

" True; well then, suppose \ve send Philip to 
make an agreement with his master;" Lady 
Hampton assenting, I was in less than an hour 
admitted into the temporary service of Lady 
Harriet Fancourt. It may be a silly remark I am 
going to make, but to me, there is not in exist- 
ence, so laughable an animal as a male pet. 
Judging by what is expected to constitute the 
masculine character in our class, I can make no 
allowance for the irritable petulances, the tearful 
complaints, and the jealous whims these creatures 
exhibit towards the softer sex, and until these 
weaknesses are totally disowned by the mascu- 
line gender, I beg leave to say, the word Hero 
must remain an indefinite expression. 

T would call the month I passed in the Earl of 
Hampton's family a blissful dream, had not the 
caprices of Master Hubert Fancourt occasion, 
ally interrupted my happiness. 

It might sound harsh, to say this boy did not 
love his sister, but to judge from appearances 
such really was the case. If my little mistress 
was enjoying a morning ride, Hubert was sure 
to interrupt us; and when stictly interdicted not 
to mount my back, but get a pony whenever 
he chose to rise at the hour his father appointed, 
H 2 



76* The Adventures of a Donkey. 

though this mandate was by the Earl considered 
decisive, the undatiful boy continually infringed. 

It was in vain that Philip interposed, the poor 
nursery maid's arms more than once suffered se- 
verely from his unmanly pinches, while the 
frightened Lady Harriet was threatened with a 
t( good licking," if she ever told her papa or 
mama that he rode the Donkey. 

I used to wonder the servants did not betray 
this young tyrant, till I heard them say, u They 
could not rind in their hearts to grieve such good 
parents; that it was quite impossible to make out 
how Mr. Hubert had grown such a tyrant, but 
they knew, when his brother, Lord Fancourt 
came home for the holidays, he would either 
make him better, or explain his thoughts to the 
Earl and his Lady." 

This event did not take place during my ser- 
vice in the Hampton family ; thus it is my pain- 
ful task to speak only of the foibles of Master 
Hubert. Lady Harriet was so gentle and affec- 
tionate in all respects, that the servants were al- 
ways disposed to please her, and I observed in 
this sweet child a peculiarity of language I had 
never heard before. 

" Philip, if you please, will you saddle the 
Donkey ?" And " Jane, if you have had your din- 
ner, I should like a little ride." These prettinesses 
of speech sounded remarkably harmonious to my 
ears ; it did not appear, that the words in them- 
.sdres were difficult of pronunciation, on the 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 17 

contrary, I had witnessed considerable efforts in 
children of different dispositions, who by the 
adoption of peremptory commands laboured to 
make themselves ridiculous. 

And how different was the effect! Alas! if 
young ladies and gentlemen could know how 
much their characters suffer by such disgraceful 
ebullitions, I think they would endeavour to be 
cautious, though they considered their inferiors 
to be Asses. 

But I was speaking of Hubert Fancourt ; he 
had played us so many tricks, I never saw him 
that I did not anticipate mischief. We were re- 
turning from a pleasant airing one morning, Phi- 
lip employed in making a daisy chain for Lady 
Harriet, and Jane listening to the dear little crea- 
ture's recitation of some beautiful verses ; when 
this young ruffian rushed through a hedge, and 
seizing my tail threw me of my guard, I kicked 
up my heels, my lovely burthen with astonishing 
presence of mind grasped the pommel of her 
saddle, and was thus spared from harm, but the 
screams of Master Hubert assured me I had done 
mischief. 

" You deserve it Sir," said Philip, raising the 
boisterous boy from the ground, " I only hope 
you are more frightened than hurt.'* 

" Frightened you Booby, do you think I'm 
afraid of an Ass?" replied the struggling Hubert, 
" get away, I want none of your assistance." 

H 3 



78 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

" Lead the Donkey, Philip," said Jane, " and 
let me look at that cruel boy's cheek. Sir, I must 
wipe your face ; it is bleeding/' continued Jane, 
as the young gentleman strove to evade her 
purpose. 

" Oh dear me Jane, is my cheek really bleed- 
ing?" rejoined the alarmed Hubert. "What 
shall I do ; will papa see it ?" 

" To be sure Sir, but you did not think per- 
haps, that your cruel trick might have been the 
death of your sister." 

" Well bat she is not hurt you see, so dont 
stand chattering about what might have been ; 
what shall I say to papa ? Help me out of this 
scrape, for I know he will make such a row if 
he hears the truth." 

" Why I hope you dont intend to tell a story 
about it, Sir, and indeed, if I am asked, depend 
upon it I shall tell the whole truth." 

" You nasty, cross, ill-natured thing, get out, 
I want none of your assistance/* replied Hubert, 
pushing the conscientious Jane on one side, and 
hastening home. 

I certainly regretted that any branch of Lord 
Hampton's family should suffer through me, yet 
I put it to all, and every description of animals, 
not to impute it to a criminal intention. Against 
an open attack, the most simple Ass might guard, 
but there is no saying how any creature will 
conduct himself, who is covertly assailed. I 
hope I shall stand acquitted to my readers, for I 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 7 9 

should blush to think that even a momentary re- 
sentment had led me into the error of ingratitude. 

My little Mistress expressed her fears least her 
papa should be angry with Hubert. 

" We cannot herp it my dear if he is/' said 
Jane ; (< Master Hubert is so thoughtless and 
passionate, he must expect to suffer for it some- 
times." 

Pour Lady Harriet could not understand the 
justice of this remark ; her affectionate heart took 
alarm ; I was dismissed, and T saw her sorrow- 
fully approach the house. 

Citcumstances conspired to make me ac- 
quainted with the result of this accident. Mas- 
ter Hubert's wound, though slight, left some 
traces on his cheek. In his hurry to avoid his 
father, he stole through the library window and 
unexpectedly encountered the Earl just issuing 
from Ins dressing-room. 

" What has happened ?" said my Lord, dis- 
covering that the linen of the young rebel was 
stained with blood. 

" I, I was playing that is I took hold of 
the Donkey's tail, and he kicked me," said Hu- 
bert, surprised into an acknowledgement of the 
truth- 

" Tliat is to say, you have been cruel Sir?" 
replied my Lord, " and the animal in his own 
defence has retaliated ; it is very fair, I hope it 
will teach you humanity." 

Master Hubert discomfitted, retreated to his 



80 The Adventures of ft Donkey. 

chamber ; and it is with conscious pride I add, 
this involuntary avowal precluded the young gen- 
tleman from being admitted into the presence of 
Lord and Lady Hampton for three days. 

tl We must check this pernicious propensity," 
said the Earl to his Lady, " or heaven knows 
where it will end. Cruelty to animals is a cow- 
ardly vice, almost indicating a bad heart ; 
indeed, I wholly doubt the existence of good 
feelings in any point, where this habit is suffered 
to take deep root/ 1 

I have heard, that Lady Hampton shed tears 
upon this occasion, and while she lamented the 
misconduct of her son, wisely participated in the 
judgment of my Lord, and banished him from 
her presence for the prescribed term. Had these 
excellent parents known the danger to which 
their little girl had been exposed b'y the mischiev- 
ous Hubert, it is probable bis punishment had 
been more severe. 

The anger of this boy was now levelled at the 
servants, and during his disgrace, I heard them 
frequently lament, that however contrite Master 
Hubert might appear while he thought his papa 
and mama could hear him, he was, if possible, 
more passionate and overbearing than ever. 



CHAP. VIII. 

. ^ttrsion. 
sold Tckon on prosperity as a certain 



T/te Adventures of a Donkey. 81 

possession, the envy of the malicious would 
prove shaftiess ; in faet there are dispositions to 
whom envy is a grateful incense. Now I will 
not allow this was my case, but. it is certain, 
that during my temporary splendour, I was an ob- 
ject of some consideration to the Asses of my ac- 
quaintance. Balaam would smile on me enpasmnt, 
and if possible give me a word of advice, while 
Juba regarded me with a sort of jealous glance, 
that seemed to say a great deal. I knew he 
was an ill bred Donkey, but never having given 
him any personal offence, could not tamely 
submit to his scorn. When he sneered, I car- 
ried my head with more than donkey stateliness ; 
and once, upon hearing him tauntingly say, 
" how proud I am!" could not forbear by re- 
plying " that I hoped I deserved my present 
good fortune." 

It could not gratify my feelings to see other 
Asses less comfortable than I was. No ! I was 
beginning to understand the mutability of don- 
key happiness, and rather strove to enjoy the 
present moment, than trust myself to calculate 
on its durability. 

Not any of the kindnesses the amiable lady 
Harriot bestowed on me, more sensibly gratified 
my taste, than those occasional feeds of corn 
I received from her pretty hands ; and my ap- 
pearance was so considerably improved by these 
indulgencies, I was actually proving plump, 
when I perceived by the activity of the domes- 



82 Tkt Adventures of a Donkey. 

tics, that the family were upon the eve of quit- 
ting Tunbridge. My spirits drooped at the 
bare idea of separation, but when I heard my 
Lord desire Philip to rake me home, I thought 
I should have fallen to the earth. Lady Harriet 
patted my sides, venting her regrets in so sweet 
a manner, I knew not how to make enough of 
her. " Good bye, poor fellow," said she, 
" Philip, pray tell Mr. Staples he is such a good 
tempered Donkey, I hope he will always keep 
him, and if we come to Tunbridge next year, 
I am sure Papa will let me have him again." 

Philip promised to obey his young lady, but 
I saw him smile at her innocent zeal. 

*' You wont get hi to such snug quarters in a 
hurry," rejoined he, as we pursued our way to 
my home. It is no less singular than true, that 
every domestic in Lord Hampton's family had 
treated me with uniform kindness, nor can I 
account for this, but by supposing that the ac- 
tive and humane characters of the Earl and his 
Lady effected this laudable imitation. 

They never spoke to their servants, but in the 
most obliging lauguage; the consequence was, 
that a degree of willingness and order was ob- 
servable in their househould, which I never 
met with in any other family ; yet there was no 
profusion, none of those mistaken ingulgences 
which spoil servants, and expose their employers 
to imposition. 

Ah ! happy days : I could grow eloquent in 



The Adrentures of a Donkey. 83 

mv regrets en this subject ; but time presses, 
and my tale is to be told. Philip did not omit 
to give me due praise when consigning me to 
my master. 

"Its all very well," said Mr. Staples, " but 
I'm glad the job's over, for I could have made 
treble the money of him by day-work, only I 
didn't like to offend his lordship." 

Philip had nothing further to say, and I was 
left to my fate. The ill-fitting saddle was again 
put OB, and although the evening was rather 
advanced I took my stand on the hill. It was 
not many minutes ere a large fat woman singled 
me out, and with the assistance of a livery servant, 
mounted my back. It was in vain the man 
told her she had better wait till a side-saddle 
could be got. 

"Dont talk to me John," said she, "why I 
hasn't the least fear in the world ; I tell you I 
used to ride when I was quite a girl, and with 
nothing but a halter round the horse's neck could 
go a smart trot : do you think I can't manage a 
Ass ? " 

John smiled, and seemed to think that as 
she was not now a girl, but a fat, unwieldy old 
woman, it was not a case in point. 

Perfectly indifferent to this lady's juvenile 
sports, I only felt I had a grievous load to car- 
ry, and exerted all my strength to get through 
my task with credit. 

Greatly as I admired the scenery o Tun- 



84 The Adventures of a Donkey, 

bridge, I found the soil peculiar!}* unfavourable 
to my progress. Its deep sandy roads added so 
considerably to my fatigue : I was forced to 
stop to take breath. My rider intent on shew- 
ing her skill, attributed this to obstinacy, and 
using her whip with energy, forgot the want 
of the pommel and fell from her seat. John 
was so cruel as to laugh, while I, yet held fast 
in her grasp by the reins, in struggling to get 
free, dragged her a few paces in the sand. 

''You stupid booby, stop the Ass," exclaimed 
the enraged lady ; "I shall spoil my pelisse/' 

"Let go the reins, said John, half averting 
his risible features. She did so, and I very 
humbly stood still and looked on. John was in 
the act of wiping the dust from the soiled garb, 
when a lady and gentleman approached. 

<e Ha ! is it you Mrs. Price," said the gentle- 
man half smiling, "I hope you are not hurt?" 

**O no Sir George, I'm a famous horse- 
woman, but these Donkeys are such hopstropo- 
lous animals there's no managing them.'* 

" What made you venture to ride without 
a proper saddle?" inquired the lady. 

" O my lady, I has no fears, I never had 
when I was a girl." 

" But pray do not ran such a hazard again, 1 * 
resumed the lady, " it is very imprudent.** 

They passed on, and I found that my offend- 
ed rider was the cook of Sir George and Lady 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 85 

Civil and considerate as their manner had 
been it did not meet the approbation of Mrs. 
Price. 

They seemed to treat her expedition as a 
foolish frolic, ill suited to her age ; and like 
the tenacious Juba the allusion touched her 
vanity. I rather think she would have expres- 
sed her anger, had not some of the inferior 
servants of the family joined us. 

"Dear me ma'am, was it you that tumbled 
off the Donkey?" said a pretty giggling girl, 
" why Mr. Thomas and I saw you from the 
mount, we little thought it was you." 

" Then you see it was me," replied the old 
Lady in a surly tone, ** but look if I've spoiled 
my pelisse. I'll give Staples a good scolding for 
saying this was a quiet Donkey an ugly, obsti- 
nate beast ;" and she made an effort to strike 
me. John interfered, and declaring there was 
not a Donkey in Tunbridge strong enough to 
cany her safely, diverted her rage from poor me. 
John now grew obstinate, and by persisting in 
his opinion, so completely deranged the temper 
of Mrs. Price, that I really expected it would 
end seriously. 

" You had better lead the Donkey home," said 
Thomas, addressing John, *' and if Mrs. Price 
will lean on my arm I shall be happy to assist 
her down the hill." 

The offer was accepted, they departed, and 
John now indulged in a hearty laugh at the ap- 



86 The Adventures of a DanJtey. 

pearance of the fat lady. But the consequences 
of this evening proved injurious to me ; Mrs. 
Price took occasion to villify me, and actually 
prevented my being admitted into the family oi 

Sir George R . My Master vexed at this 

proscription, seemed disposed to vent his disap 
point no en t on me, though he had so recently as- 
serted that day-work was preferable to a job 
But this is only another proof that the good with- 
in our reach is seldom as highly valued as tha*. 
which eludes our grasp. 

Balaam welcomed me most cordially to out 
shed. Juba yet kept aloof, though I could un- 
derstand by his restlessness that he listened to my 
description of the Hampton family, with any 
thing rather than a friendly disposition. 

" You are yet a fortunate Animal" said olc 
Balaam ; (( I hope you will conduct yourself with 
temper, now you have returned to more commor 
duties, always remembering that while no more 
will be expected from you, than other Asses, thai 
every body knows how ftir our abilities extend.' 

" But the fat cook, my dear Sir," said I. 
(( was she not unreasonable in expecting me tc 
carry her, under the disadvantages I have men- 
tioned?" 

t( Undoubtedly," resumed Balaam. " She, like 
my friend Juba, would submit to any indignity 
provided her youth was not called in question." 
Here Juba was evidently agitated, "but it won 
do Jemmy," continued Balaam, "freaks *m 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 87 

frolic are natural in the young ; while they dis- 
grace the dignity of the more advanced in life." 

There was something so decisive in the lan- 
guage and manner of Balaam, I did not wonder 
that Juba should be awed to silence in his pre- 
sence, but I certainly was surprised to find my- 
self so much the object of his dislike. He never 
could be civil to me; if chance led us the same 
road, he ran himself almost to death in order to 
get before me : and at the stand, if / happened 
to be selected, he forgot the certain fatigue to 
which I was exposed, in the vexation of seeing 
me preferred. Experience had taught me, that 
it was possible to live on terms of amity, even 
with horses $ for the humble hacks of Tunbridge 
evinced none of that hauteur I had borne with 
from Martelloand other highly educated animals 
of that species. And I felt it as a lamentable 
drawback on my little portion of happiness, that 
an inhabitant of the same dwelling should so ill 
understand my feelings. 

Naturally of a social disposition, I was begin- 
ning to give this matter some serious considera- 
tion, when the recollection of Master Fancourt's 
conduct towards his sister recurred to my mind. 

' What can be expected from an Ass, when 
rational beings so far commit themselves," 
thought 1. Again, the youth of Hubert Fan- 
court presented itself ; but that was only another 
reason why the tendernesses and gentle feelings 
of childhood should have graced his manner. 
I 2 



88 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

The petulance of Juba, appeared less extraor- 
dinary on comparison, for he enjoyed not the 
blessing of parental care, or the leisure of inde- 
pendance. Amongst other incidents that attract- 
ed my notice at this period, was a partv to 
Penshurst, to view the venerable mansion of the! 
Sidneys. A wt-11 filled barouche, two ponies, 
and your humble servant formed the cavalcade, 
and pleasure was to be the order of the day. 

My task was easy in the outset, being ap-< 
pointed to carry a young gentleman of light' 
weight. I should have premised that a basket of: 
provisions had been packed in the barouche, 
under the idea of dining on the grass. 

We had performed about half our journey, 
when a boy who rode a pony, slackened hisi 
pace to speak to my rider. " Are you hungry, 
Ned?" said he. 

Ned answered in the negative. 

" Poh, I know you are, only you are so mo- 
dest; I have persuaded Fanny that she is, you 
will join us, and you shall see what a row I'll 
make."-*- Riding off before Edward could reply, 
he hailed the carriage; it was some minutes ere 
the coachman heard him. Miss Fanny, who 
rode the other pony, seemed pleased with the 
joke; my rider declared it was altogether wrong. 

The loud shouts of Master Arthur, fas this 
young Pickle was called) alarmed the barouche 
party, and when we overtook them, they were 
all standing up. " What lias happened ? Is 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 39 

Fanny safe ? I hope Edward's Donkey has behaved 
well?" were the several questions put at once. 

" O we are all well enough," replied Arthur, 
" but almost famished, I cannot go a foot with- 
out something to eat, and Fanny is quite faint." 

" Dear me she does look pale," said Arthur's 
mother, " what can we do ?" 

u Do? Why open your store basket, and hand 
us out something good," said the undaunted Ar- 
thur. " But it is under the seat my dear," said 
a second Lady entreatingly, <c and it would dis- 
turb us to unpack it now. 1 ' 

44 Very well Ma'am, if you choose us all to be 
made ill, rather than suffer a trifling inconveni- 
ence it is no matter." 

" What a strange boy you are," resumed his 
mother ; 1 suppose we must try what can be 
done." 

" Sister, you do very wrong," replied the el- 
derly Lady, <c the whims of Arthur ought not to 
be indulged, I will answer for his being no more 
hungry at this moment than I am." 

44 Aunt Jemima is thinking of the pigeon pie," 
laughed Arthur, " dont deny it, I see it in your 
face ;" the barouche party smiled ; <4 but we 
will be content with a few sandwiches, so dont 
look so cross." 

" That boy's spirits never flag," cried a gen- 
tleman with more lenity than prudence, " it is 
impossible to be angry with him." 

" I differ from you/' rejoined Mrs. Jemima, 
i 3 



90 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

" Arthur is not so much a lively as a mischiev- 
ous boy," and I see nothing to approve in that 
sort of talent which can only be indulged at the 
expense of other people's feelings." 

t( He is young, sister," cried the mother of 
Arthur, " you should make allowances. Dear 
me what have we done?" she continued, ad- 
dressing a young Lady, who was assisting in 
opening the basket, " I am afraid we have bro- 
ken a bottle, well it can't be helped, there my 
my loves/' handing a paper of sandwiches to her 
son, " you must make these do till we get to 
Penshurst." Arthur received the package, and 
ordering the coachman to go on, immediately 
dismounted. 

" I dare say neither of you want these things," 
said he (< so let us give our cattle a luncheon. 
Edward laughed at the folly of his friend, while 
Miss Fanny declared it would be quite amusing 
to see a Donkey eat sandwiches. '* 

We soon devoured these trifles, to the no small 
amusement of Arthur. But now a new whim 
seized his fancy. " He begged Edward would 
exchange and let him ride the Donkey." I an- 
ticipated evil from this, but had nothing to do 
but obey. 

He then proposed a race This was positively 
rejected by Edward, "who exclaimed against the 
danger that might ensue to Miss Fanny, and the 
injustice of putting a Donkey in competition 
with a Horse." 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 9 1 

" Then good bye, I'm off," said Arthur, " you 
shall see I will soon be up with the carriage." 

Alas ! what was sport to him, was unutterable 
pain to me. The utmost exertion on my part 
could not satisfy this impatient Jehu. His spurs 
goaded my sides, and the incessant lash of his 
whip wounded even to torture, panting, smart- 
ing beneath his thoughtless hand, I found it im- 
possible to effect his wish of overtaking the ba- 
rouche. My best efforts had proved successless ; 
the only alternative left was, to dismount him as 
carefully as I could, and thus tire him of my 
services. 

Never had I encountered a more arduous at- 
tempt; his agility and strength were really sur- 
prising, and the blows 1 received, ere I accom- 
plished my object nearly exhausted me. I suc- 
ceeded at last, a friendly dunghill received my 
proud Master, while I, alarmed for the conse- 
quences of my resentment, scrambled on my 
feet, and at a gentle pace pursued the route of 
the carriage. I heard him halloo, and the rat- 
tling of some pebbles at my heels convinced me 
he expected I would return, or await his arrival, 
but I was not quite such an Ass as to do either. 

My leaders may know what it is to suffer from 
a fall, or a wound, but they can have no idea of 
the anguish a beast of burthen is from thought- 
lessness, or cruelty too often doomed to suffer. 
The pulsation, or throbbing of u trifling wound, 
will disorder the frame of a rational being. 
Then what must it be, when the whole body is 



92 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

in a state of irritation ; when every nerve and 
fibre seems stretched to the utmost ; and the con- 
ti nued exertion of the wretched animal is expected 
and enforced even in the moment of its greatest 
suffering ? 

Blush ! blush ! ye scratched Ladies, and 
whimpering little gentlemen; or if ye think ye 
" have felt persecution, learn mercy." 

I do not believe Master Arthur was more 
cruel than many other boys ; but what are 
called high spirited boys, and Pickles, are for 
the most part very thoughtless, inconsiderate 
beings ; and where these foibles exist, a degree 
of selfishness is generally observable. It was 
purely for his own amusement, that Arthur 
incommoded his mother and her friends, and it 
was by the same laudable motive he was actuated 
when lashing me almost to a mummy. Did anv 
other of the party derive additional pleasure from 
his folly ? The sequel of mv recital shall decide. 
Keeping the carriage in my eye, I trottedon,till 
seeing it stop at an inn, I hastened to the des- 
tined goal. 

Mrs. Jemima, who first discovered me, looked 
horror struck, till the gentleman declared, it was 
impossible any serious accident could happen 
through a Donkey's throwing his rider. 

" How I rejoice Arthur did not ride the odious 
beast, 1 ' said the mother of my late tormentor. 

" I hope poor Ned is safe," replied Mrs. Jemi- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. r j3 

ma, " dear boy, I shall not know a moment of 
ease till I see him." 

ft Dear me sister, how silly ; dont you hear 
Mr. Povvel says there's nothing to fear? And 
Edward is so over cautious, so monstrous pru- 
dent, I should not wonder to find he had sent 
the Donkey on out of pure humanity. " 

" Edward's intentions are always good, always 
amiable," replied Mrs. Jemima with calm dis- 
pleasure. 

This altercation as may be imagined, gave me 
no satisfaction, I rather apprehended further op- 
pression when it should be known that I had 
presumed to escape from the brutality of Arthur. 

The party alighted, and a footman was sent 
in pursuitof the stragglers. Had I been perfectly 
free from apprehension* on my own account, it 
is certain I might have found amusement in the 
desultory conversation that ensued ; for as every 
body was anxious respecting the absentees, not 
one would enter the inn, but kept lounging near 
the door. 

" I'm sure I hear Arthur's voice," said his 
mother, and in the next moment a boy driving 
some pigs made his appearance. 

" I dare say it was those nasty animals fright- 
ened the stupid Donkey, 5 ' she added. 

" Have you overtaken two young gentlemen 
and a lady ? said Mrs. Jemima, addressing the 
pig-driver, " one of the boys must be on 
foot, have you seen them?" 



94 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

" I only corned from yon field," said the boy, 
pointing across the road, cc I'sc seen nobodv, 
not I." 

Mr. Powel had walked to some distance. 

" Mr. Powel is waving his hankerchief," said 
the yonng Lady, "I will run and inquire what 
it means." 

She returned in a few minutes, ' all is well 
Ma'am, Edward is with Mr. Powel, they will 
be here directly." 

" I trust you are not hurt my dear boy," cried 
Mrs. Jemima, taking the hand of her favourite." 

" It was not I who was thrown, but Arthur/' 
he replied, " but make yourself easy Ma'am/' 
turning to the frightened mother, " The Don- 
key only laid him on a dunghill and took french 
leave.*' 

" Why I thought you rode the Donkey Ed- 
ward ?" she resumed. 

" I did, till Arthur entreated me to exchange, 
and conceiving he would really be less liable to 
accident, I instantly complied." 

<c But you see, you did wrong/' pouted the 
discontented mother, "for the Donkey proved 
vicious. I expected more prudence from you, 
Sir." 

" I am sorry I have disappointed you Ma'am,"' 
added Edward, "but I am seldom so happy as to 
meet your approbation /' and turning away, he 
retraced the road a few paces. 

" Sister! Sister!" said Mrs. Jemima, " this 



The Adventures oj a Donkey. 95 

is unpardonable; if he had refused the request 
of Arthur, you would have upbraided him; 
but it is no matter, I do not forget that Edward 
is my nephew, though you do." 

" Why, indeed ! 1 must say, Master Edward 
does not appear to blame in this matter/' said 
Mr. Powei, with great deference; (l the charm- 
ing spirits of my young friend Arthur are be- 
yond a doubt very delightful, but my dear Mrs. 
Cosway, we must at times fear, least that which 
is really charming in his character should lead 
him into danger." Miss Mowbray, who ven- 
tured no opinion in the hearing of her fretful 
friend, whispered Mrs. Jemima, " that, it seem- 
ed to eacape the recollection of Mrs. Cosway, 
that her Pickle was infinitely more exposed to 
hazard with a half- bread Pony, than the poor 
Donkey $ but, indeed I am astonished alto- 
gether! she added, cc not a word is said about 
Fanny, and it is she only that engages my 
thoughts." 

"Fanny rides remarkably well, my dear!" 
rejoined Mrs. Jemima, " though with you I re- 
gret to perceive my sister's too evident par- 
tiality/' 

By this time the equestrians made their ap- 
pearance, and every thing and every body was 
forgotten in Mrs. Cosway 's joy at meeting her 
darling. Edward was assisting his cousin Fan- 
ny in alighting, when Mrs, Jemima turning to 



96 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

Arthur, inquired how it happened that "he a- 
gain rode the Pony/' 

" Ned made me mount him, because he said, 
my mother would take fright if she saw me 
walking ; but has he not explained his plan ? 
Then 1 will : he is a capital manager, he walk- 
ed on first to tell you I had taken a roll on a 
dunghill, and prevent any false alarms. 5 ' 

"Then it appears my nephew's prudence did 
not forsake him," retorted Mrs. Jemima, glanc- 
ing reproachfully at her sister ; *' he was only 
so unfortunate as to be arraigned, before he was 
heard." 

*' Come we are all safe and well now," said 
Mrs. Cosway, (< let us make the most of our time. 
" They entered the demesne of Penshurst, and 
I was turned into a field of stubble, where it was 
as impossible to make a meal, as to be recon- 
ciled to the idea that this \vas a day of pleasure. 
I must reserve what occured in our journey 
home, and the enjoyment of the rational part of 
our company for a new chapter." 



CHAP. IX. 

Going Home. 
IT was expected that the fragments of the 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 97 

store basket, would prove sufficient to dine the 
servants in attendance ; and it was in conse- 
quence of their resisting this proposal, that I 
became acquainted with the following particu- 
lars. 

The party had viewed the house, and ad- 
journed to the park, where the cloth was spread 
on the grass. The basket was produced, when 
behold ! even as suspected, a bottle of red port 
had been cracked, in complying with the whim 
of Arthur; and nearly the whole of the pro- 
vision was spoiled at this moment perhaps 
there was no doubt of the junior parties being 
hungry. Arthur still continued to rally his 
aunt on the loss of the pigeon pie, with more 
boldness than justice, for Mrs. Jemima (as I 
heard the coachman say), was the only person 
in the family who was simple in her diet. It 
seems, that after cutting such things as were 
really eatable, Mrs. Cos way told the men to 
carry the remainder to the inn, and make the 
most of them. Joseph, an elderly, respectable 
servant, to whom this order had been given, 
pointed out the impossibility of doing so. 

"1 told my mistress," said he, "that we 
would very willingly take a soack of bread and 
cheese, and wait till we got home ; but she was 
in such a rage with me for saying so, I never 
saw her so angry." 

The coachman to whom Joseph addressed 
himself, was sitting on a, stile cracking nuts, 



98 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

and occasionally throwing the husks at me ; 
having been a sufferer in this pleasurable jaunt, 
it is natural to suppose I was interested in every 
tiling connected with it. 

" Well if we can get nothing better, I sup- 
pose we had best take our lunch at once," cried 
coachman. 

" To say truth, it is a shame to see such gooc 
victuals lost," replied Joseph, "but look 
heie's a mess !" presenting the basket, t( to be 
sure the've picked out the best, but you see it* 
impossible to eat any of this ; the salt has got ir 
amongst it, and the wine, and the pie-crust ii 
soaked through and through." 

While yet they were examining the spoiled 
remnants, Master Edward approached. 

"Joseph," said he, "you must be hungry 
and slipping a three shilling piece into his hand 
he ran off before either of the men could thank 
him." 

" What a noble fellow that is!" exclaimed 
coachman, fl I only wish he was in somebody'* 
place, I think we might look forward to a gooc 
Master." 

"He is ap excellent boy no doubt, but oui 
young one hasn't a bad heart neither; no ! he'e 
only giddy, and that is not so much his owi: 
fault; in poor Master's time, he was a differen: 
creature: to be sure young Edward is ten to one 
more like his uncle than t'other is; but if that Mr 
Powel doesn't do more harm than good, im 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 99 

name's not Joseph. He's always ready to 
praise him and juggle the mother." Here, there 
is a chasm in my narration. The men repaired 
to the inn, and I was left to contemplate the 
stubble. Having some taste for antiquities, 
more especially those of my native isle, I was 
beginning to regret that I should in all probabi- 
lity quit Penshurst without gaining the most- 
trivial information connected with its history ; 
when glancing my eye towards an adjacent field, 
I saw an intelligent looking Ass, whom I re- 
solved to address. After the usual compliments 
had passed, 

" Pray Madam," said I, " will you be so 
obliging as to tell me such particulars, as may 
have reached your ears, respecting yon ancient 
pile ?" 

"From what I can learn/' replied she, "it 
was built in the 16th century, I believe in the 
reign of Edward the Sixth. The Sydneys 
Earls of Leicester lived here in princely magnifi- 
cience ; here Monarchs were entertained, and 
here the ^ood and glorious Sir Philip Sydney 
was born." 

"If I mistake not Madam," said I, " our 
illustrious Queen Elizabeth visited her minister 
and favourite, Robert Earl of Leicester, at Pens- 
hurst." 

" She did," replied my quondam friend, 
somewhat pettishly, "yes her majesty was no 
K2 



100 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

enemy to favouritism, though it seems, we 
were almost extinct during her reign." * 

" Indeed !" said I. 

"Itis true however, and had not the faculty 
discovered the medical qualities of our milk, it 
is probable we had been expatriated from tins 
island for ever.'* 

" I cannot suppose her majesty had any per- 
sonal enmity to us as a species," I resumed; " I 
should rather imagine, that the less luxurious 
habits of that period caused our more useful 
properties to be overlooked, if not unknown." 

" I grant there was some difference in the 
style of living," resumed my new friend, " but 
the Ass, Sir ! yes the Ass, had indubitable 
claims on a princess who professed and practis- 
ed the rights of the Christian Religion. " 

The allusion was fair, inasmuch, as the most 
honourable record attached to our history, 
is connected with the history of the religion of 
of Christ. But the warmth of my friend, con- 
vinced me, she was not equal to discussing this 
subject judiciously ; I therefore endeavoured to 
divert the conversation, by observing, "that 
we were now made very generally serviceable." 

"But does it conduce to our happiness?" 
rejoined the lady, "the very contrary is the 
fact. Formerly the Ass had a distinct employ- 
ment, and if her education was limited, it 

* This is a fact. 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 101 

usually proved sufficient for her station; bur, 
since we have been appointed to run in gigs, 
act as ponies, draw loads, we do neither well ; 
and those frequent tastes of ease which 
chance throws in our way, but disqualify or 
impress us, with that disgust for common la- 
bours which exposes us to chastisement, at the 
very moment we most deserve compassion." 

Whatever justice there might be in these 
conclusions, I felt there would be danger in at- 
tending to them; my friend was evidently a 
discontented Ass, and as / had more than once 
indulged in gloomy reflections and vague re- 
pinings, I thought it best to retreat, ere I im- 
bibed any additional taste for misery. We 
parted amicably, and as I stood gazing on the 
wails of Penshurst, I could not help fancying to 
myself, the British Qaeen and her gay cour- 
tiers, visiting this favoured spot. 

This naturally gave rise, to what amongst 
rationals, is called an association of ideas. 
Armours and helmets rose to my " mind's 
eye" then our strength and stature: nor could 
all my self-love, reconcile me to the belief that 
we could have been made useful as beasts of 
burthen in those days. I do not speak of in- 
animate weight. Imagine to yourself, gentle 
reader, a man in armour, seated on a full grown 
donkey ! The thing is too absurd to dwell upon. 
Well then, if the nutritive property of Asses' 
milk, had escaped the observation of medical 
K 3 



102 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

men, (as I believe was the case,) I think the 
Asses of the present day will allow, that the 
Queen of England may be forgiven the sin of 
omitting to support the assinine race; since the 
human race were so highly benefited by the 
wisdom of her councils, the example of her 
government, and the never-fading lessons of 
magnanimity she has bequeathed to posterity. I 
recollected hearing Doctor Manton and his son, 
discussing the characters of some discontented 
Englishmen one evening ; but I remember lht\j 
were displeased with the present times, and 
found something to applaud in all that was gone 
past. 

I cannot enter into the merits of this matter, 
but like other Asses, I have my opinion; and 
must think those who vent their chagrin on the 
departed dead, are infinitely less excusable than 
the caviler who fights with the hour in hand. 
It is seeking misery, while it exhibits the very 
worst species of resentment. My new acquain- 
tance would not suffer me to leave Penshurst, 
without displaying further proofs of her unhap- 
py temper. 

"You have not fared too well here," said 
she, thrusting her nose over the fence that di- 
vided us, " but it is no wonder, the owner of 
<his neld thinks himself a great agriculturist ; he 
knoxvs nothing of farming, or these acres would 
have been sown with turnips." 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 103 

I merely smiled, fearful of venturing any re- 
mark before so great an adept. 

" Turn which way you will/' she resumed, 
" there is nothing but hops, as if the sight of 
these plantations was to satisfy the appetite." 

" Oh, oh, madam ! " thinks I, (< I understand 
you now, the old fable of 'the fox and the 
grapes ' applies here, as I believe it does in a 
thousand instances which escape our observa- 
tion." So anxious was I to avoid the conta- 
gion of this lady's example, I actually forgot 
the short allowance to which I had for some 
hours been doomed ; and only longed for the 
moment of departure. It was nearly five 
o'clock, when seeing the horses putting too, I 
bade adieu to my testy friend, and approached 
the gate. Chance brought Mr, Edward to the 
spot. 

'* Why Joseph," said he ! " if this poor ani- 
mal has had nothing given to him, he must be 
almost starved ; he could not pick a mouthful 
from this field." 

*' Not much to be sure Sir," laughed Joseph. 

" Get me some corn," rejoined Edward. 
Conceive my joy as these words reached my 
ears ; and imagine the glee with which I fed 
from the sieve my kind young friend brought 
to me. 

O ye ! who eat from habit, for whom many 
hands provide, and who are regularly summoned 
to your meals, you know not what it is to be 



104 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

forgotten ; to hear the joyous gaiety attendant 
on a pleasant dinner, nay perhaps smell the 
tempting viands, while one's empty stomach is 
yawning to partake of the feast. If I thought 
amplification on this head, would have the 
effect of procuring a single comfort to my con- 
temporaries, I would venture to be diffuse ; but, 
I doubt my powers in this line. You all think 
you know how an Ass should be treated 01 
maltreated, and my zeal might chance to ex- 
pose him to more obvious neglect. 

We quitted Penshurst, observing the same 
arrangement in our cavalcade, as when we left 
home. Mrs. Cosvvay had gently hinted, that 
she would prefer her son's taking a seat in the 
barouche, but Arthur, was too used to com- 
mand, to listen where his own wishes were 
concerned ; we therefore set off at a pleasant 
trot. Miss Fanny Cosway soon took occasion 
to express her disappointment in their excur- 
sion. 

" It has been so stupid !" said she ; "for my 
part, I see nothing wonderful in old nouses, and 
old furniture, with all the long stories about 
the Sydneys ; our own house in Warwickshire 
is much handsomer." 

" Ed ward is laughing at you Miss Fan,'* re- 
plied Arthur ; " he was quite at home, while 
old Powcl displayed what he knew, or thought 
he knew, still I think it is a fine place ; but 
pray Ned, how do you manage to recollect 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 10,5 

names and dates? Aunt Jemima was in rap- 
tures with her dear boy ; I could have forgiven 
her that, if she had not rowed me, because I 
forgot there ever was such a person as Edward 
the Sixth/' 

" You affected ignorance in order to teaze 
your Aunt," said Edward, " if I know any 
thing of English history, I owe it to her instruc- 
tion ; and as you have had more of her society 
than I ever enjoyed, it must be your own fault, 
if she did not give you the same advantage. " 

" Why, to be sure ! I recollect she was well 
disposed to teach, if I had chosen to listen ; 
but I never could bear to be taught by a woman. 
They think themselves so clever, and gabble so 
much dont you tell the old Lady what I say, 
Miss Fan : I know you have a trick of blab- 
bing." 

" I'm sure Arthur you are very unkind," 
pouted Miss Fanny, " but this is always the 
way, when you are vexed with yourself." 

"I never was better pleased with myself than 
at this time," said Arthur, "for if there has 
been any fun to-day, it may fairly be attributed 
to me." 

tf It certainly has not been the most pleasant 
of your whimsical attempts/' resumed Edward; 
at least, I judge so from Mrs. Cosway's being 
so low spirited," 

<f O ! my mother is subject to such fits:'' 
said Arthur, with the utmost coolness, but as 



106 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

you say, she must be flat indeed, for even old 
Towel's flattery of me, could not make her 
smile : I hate that: old quiz." 

" I neither like nor hate him Arthur, and only 
wonder to see him made of consequence any 
where." 

" Edward you ought not to set Arthur a- 
gainst Mr. Powel, he is our guardian you 
know," said Miss Fanny, " and I'm sure he's 
very good natured, and makes us very hand- 
some presents whenever he comes to stay with 
us." 

i( It was your brother said he hated Mr. 
Powel," rejoined Edward; "I hope you do 
not believe him Fanny, and I likewise hope 
you have a better motive for liking your guar- 
dian than that of the useless presents he brings 
you." 

" Dear me, you are so good Edward, there's 
no saying a word before you." 

u He is very right for all that," cried Arthur, 
" I only wish you and I thought like him in all 
respects," 

This justness of sentiment in Master Pickle, 
claimed my unqualified approbation ; it was 
clear to me, he wanted only the guidance of 
firm and judicious friends to make him a re- 
spectable member of society ; whether these 
advantages ever fell to the lot of the young 
gentleman in question, I cannot say. 

It soon became evident to me, that the seniors in 



The Adventures of a Donkey. ' 1O7 

this pleasurable excursion, were equally dis- 
appointed in its result. As the carriage was 
ascending a little steep, Mrs. Cosway inquired 
of her son, " how far he thought we were from, 
home." The question was put, and answered 
by every one according to their ideas of distance, 
till the coachman set us all right by saying, 
we had about four miles to go. 

" Four miles ! " exclaimed Mrs. Cosway, 
*' why it will be dark. Sister, I said it would 
have been better to set off directly after break- 
fast, but you said there would be sufficient day- 
light for our purpose." 

** It was impossible to foresee the delays to 
which we have been subjected," said Mrs. 
Jemima calmly. 

Poor Arthur," sneered Mrs. Cosway, well 
he will soon return to school, and spare his 
aunt the pain of seeing him happy." 

" You mistake me sister, I am anxious when 
he is from home," rejoined Mrs. Jemima, " be- 
cause I know his foibles, and he never visits us, 
that I do not discover additional cause for un- 
easiness." 

Arthur laughed, distorted his features, and 
shewed every mark of silent derision , fortunate- 
ly the road became level, and we were left a 
little behind. 

" The old lady is seriously offended," said he, 
<c yet it is ridiculous in my mother to squabble 



108 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

with her because a day in September is not like a 
day in June." 

"When you recollect what influences your 
mother to this opposition, T think at least you, 
should not arraign her conduct," said Edward. 

This rebuke offended the young gentleman, 
who I suppose, aware, that he dared not resent 
it as his feelings at the moment prompted, 
found an opportunity of revenge in teasing me. 

" Ah Mi. long ears, I owe you a thrashing,'* 
said he, at the same time giving me a few 
lashes with his whip. Edward remonstrated to 
no purpose. 

"It is but a hired Donkey," said Arthur, 
" you are over squeamish Sir, if you dont like 
his capering, exchange, and I'll be bound to 
work him so, he shan't throw me again." 

tf He shall not be left to your mercy Arthur," 
rejoined Edward, and clapping his spurs, I 
understood his wishes, and triumphantly bore 
my burthen off at a smart canter. It had es- 
caped my rider's notice, that a shoe of the Pony 
Arthur rode, was so loose, as to impede his pro- 
gress. I however had seen it, and more con- 
fident in myself from this discovery, entertain- 
ed rfo fear of being able to distance my tormentor. 
We did so, and arrived at the dwelling of Mrs. 
Cos way, without further adventure. I just 
heard Mr. Edward give orders for tea being made 
ready, for the expected travelers, and was 
quietly led home by a boy, whom my consi- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 1O 

derate young friend paid handsomely for his 
errand. 

"And this" thinks I, "is what they call a day of 
pleasure: if/ had experienced disappointment 
in being ill treated by one of the party, it is 
certain, as far as happiness consists in cheerful 
spirits, a desire to be pleased, a \vish to accom- 
modate oneself to the circumstances of situation ; 
not one of these rationals has known what it is 
to-day. Balaam laughed immoderately at my 
description of this trip; but, he astonished me 
by saying, t( that if I could hear the party 
themselves describe their pleasure, it would wear 
a very different character." 

"Impossible," said I; "excepting Master 
Edward, there was nothing but cross purposes, 
from the time we left Tunbridge till we re- 
turned." 

" And for this very reason it would be as I 
say," replied Balaam, "each knows, how far 
their own petulance contributed to make it un- 
comfortable, it is therefore their interest to 
combine in thinking or saying, it was otherwise ; 
unless they are all seriously determined on cor- 
recting their tempers." 

I eaiH;:n say / was convinced by the reason- 
ing of my old Mentor, but 1 had learned to 
respect him so fnr, as to be si lent though un- 
convinced, Ralauri ceitainly was a most dis- 
Donkey : i trust my readers have dis- 
ci thii l-;ng since, for myself I may rr.ly 
fi 



110 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

say, even his pleasantries were lessons in dis- 
ouise ; arid though I ought to blush for the 
many ignorances these memoirs contain, I must 
acknowledge, that had he not given me habits 
of thinking, and taught me to arrange my ideas, 
" The Adventures of a Donkey/' had never 
glided into the press, a loss which the juvenile 
world, will, I trust, duly consider ; and while 
they Jo justice to the character of my old friend, 
make every allowance for the deficiencies of his 
gratetid pupil : for you all know, that the wisest 
teachers do not always succeed in making their 
scholars wise. 



CHAP. x. 

New Services and a Removal. 

IT would prove an endless task, were I to 
attempt an illustration of the various characters 
I met at Tunbridge. I must however acknow- 
ledge, there was a diversity in my employment, 
that exactly suited my disposition. 

If I was one day the slave of the froward 
and intemperate, the next perhaps introduced 
me to those gentler spirits, to whom even a 
Donkey is disposed to do justice. But I must 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 1 1 1 

not omit to mention the races which took 
place during my sojourn in Kent. 

The first day passed without any thing 
memorable or essential to my history, except- 
ing that a sort of emulative ambition swelled 
my ass-like bosom, on seeing a really ordinary 
Donkey receive many marks of favour in 
consequence of his success as a racer. I ra- 
ther imagine, that my carriage and manncc 
betrayed a desire for this distinction ; for 
Mr. Staples, on the ensuing morning, held 
a consultation in my presence, which seemed 
to imply that he thought me capable of an 
attempt of the kind, with some regret for his 
remissness in not proposing me as a candidate 
for a saddle, to be won that day. As ill 
fortune would have it, the destined compe- 
titor for this prize was missing at the ap- 
pointed hour; every search was made, but 
without success; and at a few minutes' warn- 
ing, a perfect stranger to my jockey, and 
wholly untrained, I was called upon 'to ex- 
hibit myself on the Donkey course. Conceive 
the delicacy of my situation when led through 
a crowd of spectators, [ took my place be- 
tween two professed racers! I saw them 
sneer contemptuously, and felt how complete 
their triumph would be if I suffered rnyseli 
to be frightened into inertness : and though 
the object of a new saddle was to me a most 
desirable prize, (whose back was already sore 

L3 



112 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

from the friction of my present accoutre- 
ments,) I would gladly have borne with " the 
ill I knew," rather than venture on an attempt 
which might expose me to derision. 

My jockey was certainly very encouraging, 
but I recollected, that on the preceding day 
a most marked difference was observable in 
the manners of the multitude when the horses 
ran and when the Donkies displayed their 
agility. On the former occasion, a sort of 
interested attention was visible, and in their 
applause was mixed some of those expressions 
which implied sympathy for the animals that 
contributed to their amusement. But when 
the Donkies started, nothing but laughter en- 
sued loud, boisterous, unrestrained laughter! 
Now to me, this was particularly offensive; 
I always had a dread of this species of mirth. 
Whether I am really more nervous than the 
generality of my class, I know not, but I 
confess the effect of this emotion has fre- 
quently incapacitated me for exertion. As 
1 could not hope to escape this mark of dis- 
tinction, I endeavoured to collect my har- 
assed spirits; and listening attentively to the 
opinion and expectations of my appointed 
rider, hoped that I had acquired some portion 
of fortitude. We started ! and the shouts or 
the spectators as instantly, commenced. I lost 
my self-possession, suddenly stopped, nor 
could the whip or spurs of my rider move me 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 113 

until my competitors had reached their goal. 
I never could (even to myself) satisfactorily 
account for this failure; if 1 said the voices 
of rational heings frightened me into coward- 
ice, you would call me an impertinent Ass: 
yet, I have sometimes thought the event 
would have been different, had my efforts 
been received with more politeness. I know 
it was insinuated that 1 took fright at the 
sound of a penny trumpet blown by a little 
boy at the moment I was passing ; and some 
of my enemies went so far as to say, that my 
ears were laid back ; in short, that I exhibit- 
ed every symptom of pusillanimity of which 
my species can he accused. But f positively 
deny these slanders. Might not modesty, 
genuine timidity be supposed to have some 
influence on an Ass thus suddenly brought 
into public notice? Admitting that I had 
sighed to be distinguished, I only wished to 
share the honours of my brethren; it never 
entered my imagination that my master would 
elevate me to the highest post, without al- 
lowing me to acquire some knowledge of the 
part I was to perform ! Nor can I to this day 
think I deserved the sarcasms that succeeded 
my defeat. 

I can imagine the smiles of my readers at 
this epoch of my memoirs. You will recol- 
lect my little vanities, and perhaps think I 
deserved to be humbled. But 1 appeal to 

L3 



114 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

your dispassionate judgments, ye gentle judges! 
and would ask, if there is not some difference 
between the animal that obtrudes his accom- 
plishments upon the public, and one that is 
involuntarily thrust into notice ? You will 
say, my secret wishes stand in force against 
me. 

I presume to controvert this position, and 
will obstinately maintain, that a Donkey must 
be acquitted of all tendency to vain presump- 
tion on this head, until something more near 
perfection is discoverable in your species. 

I am not such an Ass as to believe that vain 
wishes are not a general foibles. I have seen 
too much of the world to be deceived in this 
respect : and while my natural candour leads 
me to avow my own defalcations, I would 
entreat my juvenile readers to be lenient in 
their censure. 

But to return. My master, who witnessed 
my disgrace, and whose awful voice had too 
often been the harbinger of suffering to lose 
any of its potency on this occasion, no sooner 
saw my failure than he rushed forward and 
seizing the whip of my discomfited rider, 
beat me most unmercifully. To what ex- 
tremes his revenge might have been carried 
it is impossible to say, had not a gentleman 
interposed, and, in an authoritative tone, or- 
dered him to desist. 

" Inhuman man !" said the gentleman, " is 



The Adventures of a Doiilcey. 115 

it thus you abuse the faculties with which 
your Maker has endowed you? Which is 
the greater brute this dumb animal, that 
fear or want of training has made unmanage- 
able, or you, who thus wantonly display the 
brutality of your heart?" 

" He cou'd ha' won it well enough if he'd 
chose," replied my master, " but he's obsti- 
nate; and as he's my ow T n, 1 shall do as I 
please with him." 

The whip was again raised, when my be- 
nevolent champion darted into the crowd, and 
snatching the arm of Staples, wrested the 
weapon from his hand. 

" Master Staples," said a countryman, in 
a low voice, " have a care what you're about, 
the gemmen's a magistrate, and may commit 
you." 

" Oh !" thinks I to myself, " what a happy 
thing it is when such good men are entrusted 
with power !" This was said in the simpli- 
city of my heart. I thought it impossible 
but my master would feel ashamed of the 
conduct which had exposed him to the re- 
proofs of the humane justice. I may be mis- 
taken ; perhaps he was ashamed, and my ig- 
norance of the way in which this feeling ex- 
hibits itself in your genus led me into error. 
I will only add, that though his passion wag 
restrained while we were in public, he did 



lift The Adventures of a Donkey. 

not forget to give me a thrashing when we 
got home. 

Balaam, who witnessed the inhuman re- 
venge of my master, sympathized most truly 
in my suffering. 

" What a savage is man!" said he, when 
we were left to ourselves. " I heard of your 
disgrace," he continued, " if that can be 'call- 
ed disgrace in which we are machines and not 
free agents. But you were pleased with the 
humane man who interfered between you and 
our master, Jemmy ?" 

" Yes," said I, " I wish he were my mas- 
ter." 

" Aye, that would be well. Yet, rely upon 
it, you owe your second drubbing to his kind- 
ness." 

I stared in astonishment. 

"Ha! ha!" resumed Balaam, '* you may 
prick up your ears, Jemmy, and look sur- 
prised, but mark me : the more brutal a man 
is, the more will he dread exposure: had 
Staples been allowed to give you the thrash- 
ing he thought you deserved, it is probable 
his passion had soon subsided ; the reproof of 
the magistrate drew the eyes of the multitude 
upon him. He dared not answer a man whose 
authority was so well known, and you in con- 
sequence suffered for that which ,w r as really 
intended to do you a service.'' 

Though my sides were actually smarting 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 117, 

under this second proof of Staple's ferocity, 
there was something so incongruous in the 
reasoning of Balaam, that I could not bring 
mysfllf to believe him : feigning fatigue I be- 
took myself to my old corner, and retraced the 
events of the day. 

" What th^n," said I, mentally, " does virtue 
cease to be virtue when exerted in behalf of an 
inferior species ? it cannot be !" And revert- 
ing to the many anecdotes I had heard Mr. 
George Man ton read to Miss Caroline, (where 
the active humanity of man, as directed to- 
wards dumb animals, was most feelingly pa- 
negyrised,) I felt clearly, that Balaam was 
wrong, and for this once, took credit to my- 
self for superior discernment. 

At length the Tunbridge season closed, 
and our master, whose love of gain was insa- 
tiable, let us out to a bricklayer, who lived 
about a mile distant. Behold your .humble 
servant, Balaam and Juba, with three neigh- 
bouring Donkies, harnessed in team ! It is 
true, our feeding was more regular, nor could 
we complain of its quantity, but you may 
imagine my displeasure, when a pair of blinkers 
were affixed to my head! it seemed to im- 
pugn my character. Was I an impertinent, 
staring Ass ? Did they think I knew so little 
of good breeding that I could not conduct 
myself without these screens ? Balaam hap- 
pened to be my partner on the morning I 



118 Thr Adventures of a Donkey. 

made my debut in the bricklayer's employ. 
Whispering my dislike to these things, the 
old gentleman, as usual, laughed at me. 

" Why, Jemmy, you will always be a child," 
said he ; "I thought you had drawn a garden 
chair at Mrs. Fenton's ; of course their har- 
nessing was not complete ! Blinkers are indis- 
pensably necessary to draught animals ; they 
constrain us to look straight forward, and thus 
expedite our progress." 

" They look very ugly," said I; "though 
I now recollect horses wear them." 

" Undoubtedly," resumed Balaam. " Use 
has taught me to consider them a pleasant 
shade to the eye. But, my dear Jem, let me 
advise you to think a little before you speak : 
here are six of us, and one man drives us ; 
could he do so if our attention was diverted 
from side to side ? if we were at liberty to look 
about us? the thing would be impossible. 
No, we must plod on in the way you see, and 
as I cannot suggest a better fashion, nor hope 
to see it adopted if I could, pray learn like 
other Donkies to bear with blinkers." 

" I suppose I must," sighed I: " but sure- 
ly, Mr. Balaam, you cannot admire the lan- 
guage of our driver? For my part, I dont 
understand the man : gee up ! and waugh ! 
what does he mean by such strange words ?" 

" You will understand him presently," 
smiled Balaam ; " nor is there any thing to 



The Adcentures of a Donkey. 119 

complain of in the words themselves, their 
accompaniment is sometimes rather painful. 
All you have to do, is to catch their meaning 
and avoid the blow to which your stupidity 
or obstinacy may expose you." 

" Mighty well," I replied ; " so these ration- 
als expect us to understand them, though they 
seldom recognise our meaning." 

" There are good masters as well as good 
servants," continued Balaam, " and our pre- 
sent employer is a very good man I have 
served him before: but there is an enthusi- 
asm in your nature, my dear Jem, which does 
not tend to make you 'happy. If we are sub- 
ordinate to man, he is likewise under controul, 
and that to his own species too a kind of 
subjection to which we are strangers. How 
would you like to be the servant of a rich, 
over-fed Donkey, that kept you at work early 
and late, fed you scantily, yet expected you 
to be humble and contented ?" 

" Oh, horrible !" said I ; " say no more, 
my dear Balaam ; blinkers are very pleasant 
things. I dare say our driver has the happiest 
way of imparting his meaning ; I shall soon 
comprehend his gee ho's! &c." and using my 
feet rather adroitly, old Balaam could not re- 
frain from laughing. 

" Spare my old legs," said he, " and take 
care that your friskiness does not displease 
the carter." 



. 120 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

I fell into a quiet pace, and was delighted 
to find my old Mentor was well disposed to bear 
with my vivacity. Nearly two months elapsed 
in the service of Mr. Maxwell, the bricklayer, 
when we returned to our old master. 

One of Staples' s boys was ill of the ague, 
and the doctor advised change of air: after 
some deliberation they proposed sending him 
to Bromley, (likewise in Kent,) where they 
had a relation. I was saddled one Sunday 
morning, and, with the invalid on my back, 
set off for Bromley. 

"Tom," said my master as we were just 
departing, " tell cousin Smith, if he can get 
a chap for the Donkey he may sell him; I've 
no mind to the fellow since the race-day." 

Tom promised 'to tell his cousin and we 
proceeded. I did not dislike this intimation, 
yet I grieved to think I had not taken leave 
of Balaam, whose good sense had so entirely 
won my affections, it was really painful to 
me to think we might never meet again. Our 
journey was rather tedious, poor Tom's- 
malady having weakened him so much asi 
almost to incapacitate him for a guide; .it 
was past ten o'clock ere w r e reached Bromley. 
The night was cold and dark, and the recep- 
tion of the invalid such as impressed me with 
no very favourable opinion of cousin Smith's 
hospitality. I was turned to graze in -a 
swampy field where an old horse was quietly 



The Adventures <>f a Donkey. 1*21 

reposing after the fatigues of the week. Ex- 
cepting the short period in which I was the 
gipsies' servant, I had never slept but under a 
shelter. Balaam had deplored this circum- 
stance as unfitting me for the vicissitudes he 
believed to be inseparable from my fortunes as 
an Ass. Never having considered the matter 
in this point of view, how great was my rest- 
lessness on the night in question ! I believe I 
should have wasted the hours in idle regrets, 
had not the calm fortitude of my neighbour 
awakened a more just train of reflection. 

" This Animal," sighed I, " is of a class 
peculiarly favoured by man; and perhaps, 
were I acquainted with his early history, I 
should find he too has tasted the luxuries of 
life, and in a degree superior to those I have 
enjoyed; he may have been a successful 
Racer." As this idea took possession of my 
mind, something like a feeling of conscious 
inferiority checked my discontent, and I com- 
posed myself to sleep ; where, I beg my 
readers will suffer me to rest for a few hours. 



CHAP. XI. 

A Journey towards London. 

THE morning brought Mr. Smith to the 
M 



122 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

field, who casting a careless eye over my figure 
led my companion away. The too percepti- 
ble anatomy of this poor Animal caused me 
to shudder, his bones seemed actually start- 
ing through his skin, his knees were broken, 
and two or three half-healed wounds on his 
shoulders, assured me the friction of his har- 
ness must be a constant source of pain. I 
saw nothing of my aguish friend during two 
days ; on the third, he crept by the palings, 
and in a feeble voice explained his father's 
wishes respecting me. Cousin Smith appear- 
ed disposed to depreciate my value; Tom 
would not allow this. After some altercation, 
Smith muttered that he would see what he 
could do, and I was left to myself. The air 
of Bromley did not suit my taste ; the coun- 
try was flat and after the pleasant hills of 
Tunbridge, appeared very uninteresting. 

Just as I was beginning to hope a purchaser 
might not be found and that I shovdd return 
to the society of old Balaam, a new master 
was introduced to me in the person of a sand- 
man, whose business, according to his descrip- 
tion, seemed to be extensive. He talked ot 
" Lunnon, Fulham, Kensington," &c. &e. 
But it was the first word only that had charms 
for me ; I sighed to behold the metropolis ot 
my native Isle, and in my desire to visit Lon- 
don, forgot the ignominious circumstances 
under which it -war? i^ost probable 1 shuuKi 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 123 

make my entree. The bargain was soon con- 
cluded, and I quitted Bromley for Lewisham. 

Our first journey was to Blackheath, where 
I was loaded most heavily, nor could the fre- 
quent stripes of my master teach me to con- 
sider my burden light, my knees would tremble 
in spite of my wish to give satisfaction. I 
rather think my master conceived my load was 
not equally balanced, for he thought proper to 
mount behind the bags and added so consider- 
ably to my fatigue, it was with the utmost 
difficulty I reached home. Two or three la- 
bourers had joked him on the road, and one 
man, whose language sounded new to my ears, 
declared, " It was a great big cruelty to 
load a dumb baste so unmercifully; and by 
St. Patrick, I'm glad it isn't I, that's your 
sarvant," said he. 

My Master growled something about " a 
Paddy," and bid him mind his own busi- 
ness. 

" And isn't this my business, and every 
man's business?" resumed the man. "Oh! 
shame on ye that can keep a sarvant and don't 
know which way to trate him." 

My sides now bore full testimony to old 
Balaam's assertion, " that the interference of 
the humane," provokes if not increases the 
ferocity of the naturally brutal disposition. 

However, as I have said, we reached home. 
I hoped my toil was over for this night ; no 



124 The Adventures of a Donktij. 

such thing : two ragged children mounted my 
back, and proud of having something on which 
they could exercise their authority, galloped 
me up and down the village, to the no small 
amusement of their tattered acquaintance. 

Many requests were made, That Bob, 
might have a little ride, and Dick try just how 
he should like riding the new Donkey. T hanks 
to the selfishness of my master's family, these 
aspiring gentry were regularly refused. When 
I did retire for the night, I really thought I 
could have enjoyed one of those ablutions 
Miss Morden recommended as healthful; so 
completely had the dirty poverty of these peo/- 
ple disgusted me. 

Six weeks of toil so wasted my form and 
subdued my strength, that my master enter- 
tained fears for my life ; his ill-humour in- 
creased ; he had not had enough work out of 
me. What was to be done? Telling his 
grievance to a milk carrrier, it was suggested 
that at Blackheath, there were always some 
invalids and I might do very well to carry a 
sick child. My master took the hint, and 
giving me two or three days of good feed me: 
carried me thither. I suppose I might call 
this short interregnum " being at nurse," for 1 
was placed under the care of a laundress, w he- 
had a fine drying ground, allowed the full 
range of an adjoining field and left at my 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 125 

Fortune favoured me here-; one of Mrs. Ek 
lis's customers saw, liked me, and made no 
demur at the price required. The money was 
instantly paid, and 1 heard the Lady say, she 
would send for me in an hour. I stole a side- 
long glance at my mistress, saw she was well 
dressed and looked good-natured, and instant- 
ly felt a sort of renovation run through my 
whole frame. Yet, I must, in justice to the 
salubrity of Blackheath declare, I believe it 
to be a very eligible situation for sick Don- 
keys. You may suppose, I had my own 
reflections, or rather anticipations respecting 
my new home. At one moment I pictured to 
myself a noble mansion and extensive grounds 
then, a romantic cottage, and luxuriant 
shrubberies in short, I experienced all those 
sensations that a sanguine mind will feel under 
suspense. At the appointed time a man in a 
plain livery made his appearance and I was 
delivered over with due form. 

" Come along my old fellow," said the man, 
as he ran by my side; there was something 
auspicious in this commencement, and I put 
my best leg forward in order to shew my 
tractability. 

" Matthew," says my companion to a groom 
who was rubbing down his horses, " is not 
this a handsome Donkey?" Matthew ad- 
vanced. " Yes he is a monstrous fine Don- 
key," he replied, " he doesn't look over strong 

M3 



126 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

though," and, as he relaxf d his hold from me, 
he squeezed a spunge (which he was using to 
his horses) full in my face. Now this was 
an unexpected ablution ; and unmindful of 
Balaam's advice, I not only showed my teeth, 
but retreating a few paces brayed with all my 
might The groom laughed heartily, and 
wished to repeat his joke, but my kind guide 
prevented him. 

" You are as mischievous as a child Mat," 
said he, " but there's one good thing, if the 

Suing ladies see you play any tricks with the 
onkey, you will get into a scrape, so I'd hare 
you take cure." 

This WGS joyful news to me. I was to 
serve ladies and they must be humane from 
what my conductor intimated. 

They were humane, amiable in every 
respect ; I think I see the sweet girls at this 
moment. But they deserve a regular introduc- 
duction, and I must summon all my Donkey 
eloquence to do them justice. 

The family consisted of a gentleman, lady, 
and three daughters their ages eight, ten and 
eleven. Maria Turner, the eldest girl, was a 
very clever, intelligent child. I observed in her 
a kindness and consideration for her younger 
sisters that was truly delightful; indeed, there 
was more affection in this family than had 
ever previously fallen under my view. 

Mr. Turner was a merchant, and rode to 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 127 

Town daily ; the young ladies were employed 
in the house during the morning. At one 
o'clock I was regularly saddled (and let me 
tell you, it was a very complete thing, white 
leather reins, &c.) when our pastime began, 
and it was pastime to attend these children. 
Well then, we sallied forth on the heath, and 
they rode me by turns ; there was no wrang- 
ling, no pouting with 

** I am sure you have rode longer than I 
did," or " That is not fair Emma," and I am 
sure Charlotte ought to let me ride before her, 
because I am the eldest." 

No! all was harmony. I know their pa- 
rents set them an excellent example, but I 
believe they were likewise much indebted to 
the care of a lady, who accompanied us in our 
rambles. Miss Howard (as this lady was 
called) used to relate very pleasant anecdotes 
during our rambles, and as we only went at 
a gentle pace, I had an opportunity of listen- 
ing to them. I cannot omit one anecdote 
which took ray fancy amazingly. The wind 
was rather high on the morning she related it, 
so that I did not exactly catch the name of 
the person, or the place in which it hap- 
pened. 

" A great man (I believe it was in European 
Turkey,) was riding out one morning, when he 
observed three Asses, heavily laden, standing 
at the door of a house in which their masters 



128 The Adrcnturcs of a Donkey. 

were regaling. He pursued his journey, and 
on his return three hours afterwards, beheld 
the poor animals at the same spot. Calling 
for their owners, he ordered the Asses to be 
unladen, and their burthens placed upon the 
backs of their masters for the same space of 
time, saying, ' it was the fittest punishment 
for such thoughtless cruelty.' " 

My readers may think little of this fact, 
but to me it was a most amusing anecdote ; I 
fancied to myself the mortification of these 
gentlemen, nay, so completely did I enter 
into the spirit of the thing, I felt my sides 
shake with laughter, and was only fearful 
least my mirth should incommode the lovely 
little Charlotte, then seated on my back. Nor 
did I fear that the Donkeys could suffer for 
the degradation their owners had sustained ; 
for, as an occurrence of this sort could only 
happen in a despotic government, where the 
vigilance of the powerful is ever suspiciously 
alert, it is most probable these Turkish Don- 
kies submitted to their punishment without 
daring to think of revenge. 

Excuse me, but I cannot resist a smile, 
even at this moment It is true, you will 
not enter into my feelings on this occasion, yet, 
as often as I have related this story to the 
Asses of my acquaintance, (and I confess that 
is little less than a hundred times,) we h.ivr 
been inconceivably amused. I regret old Ba- 



The A dv entures of a Do n key. I -2Q 

laam never heard it, it was exactly the thing 
to please him. Poor Balaam ! alas ! hebut 
I am wandering. Let me see, we were riding 
on the heath : well, though the weather was 
cold and Christmas near at hand, we seized 
every fine afternoon to ambulate about this 
pleasant spot. It was delightful to see these 
children meet their father, as we frequently 
did ; their questions were so pertinent and 
sensible, and his manner of explaining them 
so pleasant, I used to call these my intellec- 
tual rambles. I remember Miss Maria one 
day was very anxious to know, why Asses 
were called Donkies. Miss Howard had de- 
clared, she could not tell how the appellation 
originated, as it bore no reference to any living 
language. My ears were stretched to the ut- 
most to catch all the information I could on 
this subject; indeed, it was one which had 
often engaged my thoughts. 

While yet the young ladies were talking, 
Mr. Turner arrived", and they immediately ap- 
pealed to him. 

" My information will not be perfectly sa- 
tisfactory, Maria," said he; u and for this 
reason it is not derived from an authority to 
which I would yield implicit credit. Like 
you, I was curious to know why Asses were 
called Donkies, and after some search, I found 
a definition which I will give you .verbatim : 

" ' Donkey, or Donkey Dick, a male Ass ; 



130 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

called Donkey, perhaps, from the Spanish or 
Don-like gravity of that animnl : also entitled, 
the King of Spain's Trumpeter/" 

The party smiled at tnis explanation; for 
myself, I rather liked the gravity ascribed to 
us, it implied dignity; but the allusion to 
the trumpeter was a satire upon our harmonic 
powers. I looked timidly around expecting 
every moment to hear some remark that 
shouid make me feel uncomfortable. 

I dia my young ladies injustice. They 
laughed at the odd ness of the derivation, or 
application of the term ; and while Miss Ma- 
ria declared she could look at me till she fan- 
cied she really saw a great deal of solemnity 
in the character of my countenance, Miss 
Emma said, I was a very handsome good- 
natured creatured, and little Charlotte observ- 
ed, I was never tired. 

Tired ! no, my dear, kind mistresses, it was 
not in your natures to injure a worm ! 

I ingenuously confess, that for this once, 
I rather turned to the living page of existing 
goodness, than sought to treasure up what 
might be further quoted by Mr. Turner; so, 
throwing aside the gravity ascribed to us, I 
set oft' at the most lively trot imaginable, my 
young rider delighting to show her skill, and 
calling to her papa to see how well she could 
manage me. Between ourselves, this was a 
little mistake my care in choosing the 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 131 

smoothest paths went more than half way 
towards making her equal to guiding me. 
Pardon this egotism, gentle reader, and think 
how seldom our merits are fairly estimated. 

A few days hefbre Christmas, I heard some 
talk of the family's going to town for the ho- 
lidays. Maria and Emma were overjoyed at 
the idea; Charlotte regretted it, " because 
she could not ride a Donkey in London." 

" O lie, Charlotte," said Emma, " you for- 
get that your brother George will come home ; 
besides, you know papa says, the days are so 
short he cannot come to us every day, and you 
would not like to go to bed without kissing 
him, would you?" 

" No to be sure I would not ; but cannot 
we take the poor Donkey with us ?" asked 
Charlotte. 

" Why you would be laughed at if you 
rode a Donkey in London, and where could 
we keep the poor creature? Evans will take 
care of him here, and when we come back 
he will be quite glad to see little Charlotte," 
said Emma. 

I was discouraged by Emma's mention of 
London as a place in which persons riding a 
Donkey would be a matter for laughter. Fool- 
ish Ass that I was, I thought vulgar prejudices 
must be confined to those whose limited in- 
tercourse with what is called the world, might 
in a degree justify their ignorajice : alas ! I had 



132 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

no Balaam to set me right, and I secretly! 
wished I could make my appearance on this 
great theatre, if but to clear up the mistake 
of my young friend. On the evening previous! 
to the removal of the family, Mr. Turner 
came home rather earlier than usual, and, 
with his daughters, took a turn in the mea- 
dow in which I was grazing: " Ah, there's 
your Spanish Trumpeter,'* said he; "girls, 
you remember your poor pensioner, Mrs. Ar- 
not ;" the young ladies replied in the affir- 
mative. 

" She is in great trouble," he continued ; 
" her old horse died yesterday morning, and 
as she cannot afford to buy another, the poor 
woman is quite disconsolate." 

" Dear me, papa," said Maria, " we will 
all join ouf pocket-money; how much will 
a horse cost ?" 

" More than you possess, my dear girls," 
he resumed; " but I was thinking, with your 
mutual consent, it would be an act of charity 
to present your Donkev to her, and I will buy 
you another, or perhaps a pony will suit you 
better, when we return to the Heath." 

" But indeed, papa, her cart is too large to 
be drawn by a Donkey," rejoined Maria. 

" I have thought of that, Maria, and if you 
all agree, it would be a good plan to let her 
sell the old cart and I will buy her on 
to the strength of your favourite." 



The Adrenturcs of a Do?ikey. 133 

" Then we all agree I'm sure," said Emma. 
" Yes, papa, we are quite willing Mrs. Arnot 
should have the Donkey, because she will use 
him well." 

" What a nice Christmas present it will be !" 
said Charlotte ; " but I hope Mrs. Arnot will 
sometimes bring her cart into the Square, that 
we may see the poor fellow:" and rubbing 
her little hands across my forehead, she look- 
ed as though she had rather not part with 
me. 

The ease with which this transfer was ar- 
ranged, very powerfully affected my sensibi- 
lity. I had considered myself a favourite 
servant, and really hoped I had found a per- 
manent home. It is true, the motives by 
which my owners were actuated were at once 
liberal and humane. But, with all my respect 
for the Turner family, there was blended that 
sense of humiliation, that feeling conviction 
of our insignificance as a class, which render- 
ed me truly miserable. 

In the warmth of my heart, I could not 
help questioning their right to dispose of one, 
who had faithfully fulfilled the duties of his 
station. But here memory helped me to be 
just. I had heard more than one rational 
being lament the caprice of their employer*. 
I recollected that a clean, healthy-looking 
young woman, with grief, declared, she had 
.thought herself fixed in a good service, when 
K 



134 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

a visitor procured her dismissal, by remarking 
a defect in one of her eyes, which the lady 
said, " was really awful, and made her quite 
nervous whenever she met her." And a la- 
bouring man had worked more than a fort- 
night for a stone mason, who, discovering he 
was an Irishman, instantly paid and sent him 
off. These facts stood me in good need. If 
change was the inevitable lot of my fraternity, 
I, certainly, had no right to complain; for I 
should not only quit my employers with a 
good character, but carrying with me the re- 
grets of some of the family. That personal 
vanity in which I had too often indulged, was 
now gradually declining. It is true, I some- 
times heard civil things said of my figure, &c. 
but no lasting advantages attended these com- 
pliments: on the contrary, they had, in my 
more youthful days, subjected me to those 
humiliations the conceited more or less ex- 
perience. Latterly, I learned to consider such 
encomiums as reproofs they seemed to throw 
a slur upon my mental capabilities. " I want 
those agremens," would I say, " which give 
a sterling character to beauty." Yet thp 
question is, " Should I have been happier, 
should I have learned the art of being content, 
under my chequered fortunes?" if so, what 
a faulty Ass have I been. But who will look 
for superior endowments in a Donkey, whose 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 135 

best services have procured him no higher 
honour than that of drawing a London cart ? 



CHAP. XII. 

A Glance at the Metropolis. 

IT was finally arranged that I should go 
to Town with the groom, who had orders to 
set off early next morning. An unusual me- 
lancholy took possession of me, as I reflected, 
that this was, perhaps, my last appearance 
in genteel life. I was less sanguine respecting 
London and its wonders; and indeed, as my 
fate was already carved out, there was nothing 
like incident or adventure attached to my mi- 
gration, a circumstance peculiarly disappoint- 
ing to an Ass of a romantic turn of mind. 
Matthew, who was a good-humoured, giddy 
young man, cheerfully undertook the charge 
of me, and it was on our way towards Dept- 
ford, I learned something of my destined mis- 
tress. 

" So you are off I see," said a man in livery, 
addressing my conductor; " but what will 
you do with the Donkey in Town ?" 

" Master intends giving him to a pensioner 
of his," replied Matthew. 



136 The .Adventures of a Donkey. 

" Well, that's good, but I do think there 
isn't a better man than your master." 

" It is a good family altogether," continued 
Matthew. " 1 woudn't change, no, not to 
live with the Prince Regent! Tes, and not 
only the Donkey, but a new cart is to be got 
for the poor old woman ; and all the children 
are as pleased at it, as if they had the finest 
present given to themselves." 

" Well, such people deserve money, I say," 
resumed the man; " I only hope they may 
never meet a bad return, for that sometimes 
makes even the best hard-hearted." 

" They are nbt likely to be imposed on, 
because they go about and seek into things," 
said Matthew. " Why the old woman that's 
to have this Donkey, goes about London with 
garden-stuff: well, she fell down just opposite 
our door in Russel Square one of the child- 
ren saw her, and sent out somebody to assist 
her: it was in the hard frost last winter the 
poor creature was almost froze we had her 
in, and the maids rubbed her ancle. Mistress 
came down to inquire into her story ordered 
her to have some victuals gave her a pound 
note, and advised her to go home for that day 
at least. Well, next morning mistress walks 
to Somer's Town, where this woman lives 
hears a good character of her that she 
brought up a nephew that had been her ruin, 
and forced her to take to her present business. 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 137 

So then she gave her our custom, which is 
something sent her in some coals, and almost 
k< pt her all the winter; and master brought 
home word last night, that her horse is dead x 
so she is to have this Donkey and a new cart.*' 

This recital met the entire approbation of 
our detainer; who, wishing the Turner family 
a hundred guineas for every one they BOW pos- 
sessed, suffered us to depart. You may be 
sure I did justice to these really good friends, 
and though I might not actually fall in love 
with the occupation of my appointed mistress, 
I hoped every thing from her gratitude. We 
trotted along the road, and, to my great dis- 
appointment, each step that brought me 
nearer to the metropolis, increased the unplea- 
santness of my feelings. You will ask, what 
1 could expect, at such a season of the year, 
but dirt and fog? Now a fog was a luxury 
to which I had hitherto been a stranger; con- 
sequently its effects rather surprised me. My 
breath seemed impeded by this extraordinary 
quality of the atmosphere, and I began to 
think that blinkers must be a superfluous 
appendage in London, where it seemed almost 
impossible to find one's way in broad day- 
light. As we crossed Blackfriars-bridge, the 
sun cast a partial gleam, and exhibited a view 
I was well disposed to admire. I shall never 
forget the delight with which the Thames 
inspired me as an object. We, as I have be- 
N3 



13S The Adventures of a Donkey. 

fore observed, are epicures in water; and 
though as an element we have our fears and 
prejudices when in too close contact with it, 
so much of our comfort depends upon the 
pure state in which we get this beverage, that 
1 trust I shall be pardoned for the warmth 
with which I express myself on this subject. 

I was not so silly as to expect to find Lon- 
don paved with gold, but I certainly thought 
it would be whole complete in every part 
Great, therefore, was my vexation, when I 
found myself less equal to preserve my paces, 
according to my ideas of grace, than in many 
mean villages through which I had passed. 
Matthew had frequent occasion to pull my 
reins, hi order to save me from falling. It is true, 
the thick mud which filled up the interstices 
between the stones, might help to retard my 
progress ; but I really think, if abstemiousness 
were not an acknowledged property of the 
Ass, any person who had seen me stagger in- 
to London, would have called me a most im- 
moral Donkey. 

Our route lay through a part of Fleet Street, 
Chancery Lane, across Holborn to Russel 
Square. What a scene it was altogether! 
What bustle and noise ! The splendour of 
gay carriages contrasted by loaded carts, wag- 
gons! &c. &c and, to add to my astonish- 
ment, men carried loads that appeared to re- 
quire the strength of a horse. I was beginning 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 139 

to think we really were a proscribed animal 
in this world of business, when a strange sen- 
sation in my nose, something like what you 
would call sneezing, occasioned me to look about 
for the cause that could produce such a nou- 
velle effect on my olfractory nerves. I soon 
discovered a miserably fragile-looking Donkey, 
dragging a small railed cart iaden with bags 
of soot. I have since learned, that any sudden 
surprise checks the emotion called sneezing 
with your genus. Such a specific was at hand. 
Hear it, O ye neglected, uncombed Donkeys ! 
a human being yes, a man drove this cart, 
whose black face and hands were only rivalled 
by his sable garb ! They call this description 
of person a chimney-sweeper; but as it never 
has proved to me, that these people have an 
antipathy to water, I cannot reconcile myself 
to the idea of their invariably dirty appear- 
ance. My poor fellow-donkey excited my 
compassion : his drooping frame seemed little 
able to drag his load, yet he was young. Two 
lines I had heard Mr. George Manton repeat, 
occurred to my mind : 

" And most unlike the nature of things young 1 . 
That earthwards still thy moveless head is hung." 

Under such circumstances, I really thought 
shame would have bowed my head. 

How super-eminently fortunate did my lot 
appear! There was something invigorating 
in the idea of carrying fresh garden plants ! 



140 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

and I was actually calculating the chance of 
a few stray cabbage leaves occasionally falling 
to my share, when a completely trimmed 
vegetable cart, drawn by a Donkey, obstructed 
our path. It was in vain I strove to inhale 
the freshness of its contents; every thing 
looked dry and impoverished, so unlike all 
I had ever seen, that L knew not how to be- 
lieve such trash could meet purchasers. The 
wretched Donkey was nearly knee-deep in 
mud. I shuddered at these specimens of the 
estimation in which we were held in London, 
and scarcely raising my eyes least I should 
encounter some new object to pain my sen- 
sibility, we reached Russel Square. 

" Would I had been born at Grand Cairo!" 
sighed I, as I saw Matthew cleanse his horses 
after their journey. What though I partook 
of the shelter of an elegant stable in a spacious 
mews; the weight of my limbs seemed insup- 
portable! and on the instant that I might be 
called an inhabitant of the great metropolis, 
I would have given worlds to have been trans- 
ported to the fields of Tunbridge, or any other 
fields in which I could have indulged in a roll 
on the grass. You will think me a dissatis- 
fied Ass, and perhaps wonder that at such a 
time my mind could be occupied by such 
seeming trifles. Cleanliness is a half virtue, 
and it had ever been my habit to practise it 
to the utmost of my power. I cannot describe 



77<: Adventures of a Donkey. 141 

all I thought and felt on this important day.- 
Ignorant as I was respecting London habits, 
I waited, with great anxiety, the arrival of the 
family, fully expecting they would visit me 
in my new abode. But the carriage was put 
up, night closed in, and my hopes were dis- 
appointed. 

The ensuing morning brought master Tur- 
ner to the mews : he was a fine boy, full of 
vivacity, but perfectly conciliating in his man- 
ner. He did me the honour of mounting my 
back, and expressed himself highly pleased 
with me: only regretting that Donkeys were 
not rode in London, or he should have enjoyed 
an airing in the New Road. 

On the subsequent morning a light, compact 
cart was brought to the stables, and my harness 
being fitted, I was led forth by Matthew, who 
had orders to take me into the Square, that 
the young ladies might see me before I de- 
parted. I saw them ^ill standing at the draw- 
ing-room windows; they looked pleased, but 
by no means gay : I rather think I was hon- 
oured by their mutual regrets at this moment; 
for as Matthew received his final directions, 
the sash, was gently raised, and the words, 
" Good bye, poor fellow !" " I declare he looks 
very nicely," and " Pray Matthew tell Mrs. 
Arnot he is remarkably good-natured, and 
seldom requires tbe whip," were pronounced. 
These compassionate sentences felt on my ears 



li'2 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

with a sweet but melancholy sound : I scarce- 
ly dared raise my eyes to take a parting glance, 
so powerfully did the certainty of my sepa- 
ration affect my spirits. 

I was soon called to witness a more pleasing 
scene : on our arrival at a small house, rather 
agreeably situated in a lane leading out from 
the road called Somer's Town, Matthew (who 
was highly pleased with his errand) stopped, 
and rapping with his whip, Mrs. Arnot an- 
swered the summons. 

" Well, old lady, how are ye ?" said Mat- 
thew. The poor woman replied to his ques- 
tion by stating her recent loss. 

" I know your good young ladies will pity 
me," said she; " indeed master was quite grieved 
when I told him Dobbin was dead ; it is, as I 
may say, losing the very bread out of one's 
mouth." 

" Why so it would be," replied Matthew, 
" if there wasn't good people in the world, 
to help them that can't help themselves : but 
what say you to going partners with me?" 
laughing. " I think this cart is big enough for 
us, in ail conscience." 

" You are always merry ; but it's fit you 
should be, you are young. That's a conve- 
nient little cart, sure enough, Mr. Matthew, 
but I hope you're not going to leave your 
place ; I should be sorry to hear that." 

" I hope I'm settled for some time," re- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 143 

sumed Matthew : " but I forgot, I have a bit 
of paper for you, which will explain my er- 
rand ;" and presenting a note to Mrs. Arnot, 
he waited the effect of her surprise. 

" I'm in such a tremble and I don't know 
where I've laid my spectacles," said she ; 
" your eyes are younger than mine, Matthew, 
read it for me." 

Matthew took the note, and read as fol- 
lows : 

" MRS. ARNOT, 

" We were very sorry to hear of your loss 
in the poor old horse ; we hope, however, that 
the cart and Donkey which Matthew has the 
pleasure of conveying to you, will answer 
your purpose, and prevent your feeling any 
serious inconvenience. Papa and mania think 
a lighter cart will be better for your health 
and strength. You will call for orders as 
usual; and if you find any difficulty in dispos- 
ing of the old cart, papa bids us say, he will 
speak to a person with whom he has lately 
had some dealing, and who perhaps may be 
desirous to oblige him. Wishing you every 
success, we are your sincere friends, 

" MARIA TURNER, 

" EMMA TURNER, 

" CHARLOTTE TURNER." 

" Sincere friends!*' exclaimed Mrs. Arnot t 



141 The Jdrcntnrcs of:: Dor ^n/. 

.*' they are angels! O, what children! Mr 
JVlatthew. But let me not forget their dea: 
parents; it is they that have trained their 
up to goodness, and God will reward them: 
they are rewarded, for their children are hum- 
ble and dutiful, and will live to repay then" 
for all their cares." The poor woman seemec 
oppressed while paying this tribute to my lat( 
patrons. Matthew kindly drew her attentioi 
to her new property, and as he uuharnessec 
me, and led me to a respectable patch of pas 
ture at the back of the house, I was gratifiec 
by the unfeigned approbation Mrs. Arnot be 
stowed upon me. 

" It will indeed be better suited to m\ 
strength," said she, following us ; " yes, mas- 
ter was quite right; if Dobbin had lived, ' 
should ha* gone on in the old way. Make m\ 
duty to the dear young ladies you know wha 
to say as well as I do tell th-em I've no eye! 
for writing, or 1 would answer their prett) 
letter, but I'll keep it as long as I live. Yoi 
wont forget, Matthew, to tell 'em how hapru 
they've made me. And about the old cart 
pr'aps as master will take the trouble, IK 
would make a better hand of it than I should 
And be sure and say, I will call in Russe 
Square the first thing to-morrow. I shall b 
olr' to market early in the morning." 

" Master George guessed as much," smiler 
Matthew, taking a bit of paper from hit 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 145 

pocket ; " so, as he had no share in the young 
ladies' present, he sent you this one pound 
note to go to market with." 

My mistress actually shed tears at this proof 
of Master Turner's liberality, and I have 110 
doubt I should have joined her, had she re- 
mained any longer. 

She retired with Matthew, and I fell to and 
made a very tolerable meal considering the 
saason of the year, and the extent of Mrs. 
Arnot's demesne. 

It may argue little in favour of my gentility, 
when I add, that I really preferred Somer's 
Town to Russel Square. Vaulted stables, and 
neatly paved mews, could not reoncile me to 
the want of herbage ; there is something re- 
freshing to the eye (putting the taste out of 
the question) in that universal colour with 
which providence has clothed the earth. I 
was absurdly going to say, that no other colour 
could prove so acceptable to the senses, when 
the very circumstance of its being a provision 
of nature makes the fact incontrovertible. We 
want neither the sanction of the Poet, nor any 
conviction bat our own unbiassed judgment 
to convince us, that in nature's plan, 

" V/hutever is, is rio-ht." 

The next morning initiated me into the 
:xjstle oi a market ; I have heard that many 
Asses have made their debut in the neigh- 



140 The A a ven t ures of a Donkey . 

bourhoodof Covent Garden, but I really thinl 
few if any were ever better received than 1 
was on my first appearance. 

A little audience was collected around me 
and though their applause, was not uniformly 
expressed in a language to which my ears 
were accustomed, Donkeys as well as othei 
animals, can discern what is intended as com- 
pliment, and vice versa. 

A very singular looking old lady, who was 
sitting on an inverted basket, with a tube in 
her mouth from which she whiffed a gale by 
no means aromatic ; this extraordinary per- 
sonage certainly excited my surprise, and in 
retreating a few steps, in order to avoid suffo- 
cation, 1 forgot an appendage tlie cart, and 
coming in contact with a passenger, had nearly 
done mischief, when the old lady started from 
her seat a flame issuing from her mouth, and 
seizing my bridle exclaimed, 

" Can't ye be asy now ! Sure y're a great 
big blockhead, that ye can't see'y're killing 
the craters behind ye." 

It would seem that her reproof sounded 
equally ludicrous to the by-staiulers as my- 
self, laughter ensued, but the good humour of 
my reprover did not forsake her; she resumed 
her seat, until a man summoned her to can V 
i\ load, which it astonished me to see a wo-| 
imin able to bear. She however went orl 
cheerfully, and 1 kit something like a twinge 



The Adrentnres of a Donkey 147 

of conscience when I recollected how fre- 
quently I had made a difficulty of trifles; 
though I could not bring myself to think of 
the fair sex, while recurring to the features 
and person of this portress. It was sufficien 
she was a woman, and I grieved at the neces- 
sity which placed her in such a situation. 

My mistress was evidently superior to 
most of the persons assembled in this place ; 
every body seemed willing to serve her. But 
though she received their civilities gratefully, 
I perceived she was by no means familiar; 
regulating my conduct by rner'*s, 1 kept a 
respectful distance, not making the least ap- 
proach to acquaintanceship with any of the 
Donkeys in waiting. 

Indeed, they were for the most part, of the 
very lowest order of Donkeys : you will ask 
how I ascertained this? Rest assured gentle 
readers, that, as in your species there are 
orders and degrees in society, so amongst us, 
there are well-bred Donkeys, vulgar Donkeys, 
and Donkeys that neither ease nor indulgences 
could render elegant. But I will never lend a 
foot (the scribbling member in all Assinine 
literature,) to publish what could not edify 
the public. Indeed, I am of opinion, that 
wre we indifferent to the failings of our imme- 
diate class, there is danger in delineating 
vices too faithfully; in setting forth the con- 
sequences cf error, an Author may hope to 
o-2 



148 The Adve?ttures of a Donkey. 

do some good, and even should he fail, he 
retains the consolation of knowing his own 
moral taste cannot be questioned. 

Upon the honour of a Donkey, who is most 
solicitous of being considered an ingenuous 
Ass, I am laterally surprised to find myself 
thus wandering from Covent-garden market, 
to Authorship and its moral effects. 

Jemmy's " himself again." 

Our marketing turned out well ; a great 
proportion of this morning's purchase was 
left inRussel Square, where I looked anxiously 
for my good friends they were out in the 
carriage, and I saw nothing of them that day. 
To dwell on this period of my history would 
be tedious, suffice it to say, my days were 
uniformly quiet and comfortable, no more 
labour being required of me than what I could 
with ease perform. The Turner family con- 
tinued to be our best customers, and the sale 
of the old cart producing a tolerable sum* my 
mistress looked forward to the approach of 
spring with a satisfaction to which she had 
for some years been a stranger. I cannot 
omit one remark respecting my feeding, if 
but to do honour to my mistress: considering 
me as a sort of partner in her toils, she never 
forgot to place fresh water in an old tub set 
aside for my use ; and many a stale cabbage, 
aye, and many a fresh leaf fell to my share 
when in our journeys she thought I had fasted 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 149 

too long. Excellent woman ! you deserved 

a better What was I going to say ? My 

gratitude had nearly led me to anticipate 
what you will find in the next Chapter. 



CHAP. XIII. 

An old Enemy, with a new Face. 

IX the month of April we received fre- 
quent visits from the Miss Turners, who hav- 
ing persuaded my mistress to put a little fruit 
in her windows, took this opportunity of 
further befriending her; they however left 
town the first week in May. Mrs. Arnot soon 
after took cold, in consequence of getting wet 
in returning from market. Her complaint 
ended in the Rheumatism, which prevented 
our accustomed little journeys. A neighbour, 
who sometimes chatted over the palings which 
enclosed our house, advised her letting her 
cart by the day, and give up going to market 
My mistress hesitated more than a week, at 
length she assented, and my life was now to- 
tally altered. 

One day, I fetched and carried linen for a 

laundress; on the next, a pair of panniers 

dangled at my sides; and accompanied by a 

man whose voice almost deaienetl me, I was 

63 



150 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

the bearer of a weight such as I had never 
before sustained. 

On these days I always observed, that in 
proportion as my load lessened, I experienced 
his favour or anger, and though I' could not 
possibly have any influence on the public 
taste, it seemed that my driver thought other- 
wise, and revenged his ill fortune on my poor 
sides. Yet I was compelled to smile some- 
times, when he would recommend his aspara- 
gus, &c. &c. as fresh from the gardens, when 
the truth was, they were the refuse of those 
large green-grocers who must daily be sup- 
plied with fresh vegetables. At last, to com- 
plete my degradation, I was deemed to work 
one whole day for a chimney-sweeper. This 
arrangement was made by ti;e neighbour of 
my mistress, who unmindful of my feelings, 
only stipulated for the black gentleman's pro- 
viding his own harness. 

I rather wondered Mrs. Arnot shouVd assent 
to my being thus employed ; and while a sort 
of trappings were manufactured of old ropes, 
I looked anxiously in at the windows, hoping 
her humanity might yet save me from this 
odious appointment She was not visible, 
and I set off somewhat out of humour I con- 
fess. O! what a tedious day did it seem ! 
My nerves were in a state of irritation truly 
pitiable. I suppose 1 must not say we sneeze ; 
as an emotion indicative of extreme sensibility 



The A dventures of a Don key . 151 

you may not choose us to share it in common ; 
but I declare, I think, I sneezed ou tins un- 
iortunate day. My head was in constant ac- 
tion a sort of tremor agitated my tongue, 
accompanied by a noise not unlike the snort- 
ing of a horse. 

After perambulating through half the streets 
of London, I was, late at night, conveyed to 
my humble home. Alas! my mistress's kind 
care was wanting, my tub was dry ; no cheer- 
ing good-night met my ears ; all was gloom ; 
and spiritless and disappointed I endeavoured 
to cofnpose myself to sleep. 

Mrs. Corsan the good neighbour of my 
mistress, paid me a visit in the morning, bring- 
ing a pail of water in her hand. " Poor fel- 
low," said she, " I'm afraid your kind mistress 
will never give you another herself." I stared 
her in the face, but must have remained igno- 
rant of her meaning had not a man stopped to 
inquire after Mrs. Arnot. 

" She's very bad," said Mrs. Corsan, 
" hasn't closed her eyes all night ; you see 
that fellow's coming has made her worse ; 
poor soul, it's hard she can't live at peace after 
meeting with such good friends." 

" I wish the family was in town," replied 
the man, " I'd let 'em know, that I would. 
She has no right to be made a beggar for such 
an idle rogue as that !" 

" So I told her," continued Mrs. Corsan, 



15'2 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

" but it's no use advising her ; she says he is 
her own brother's child, and if helping him 
will save him from wicked ways, she must do 
it while she has a shilling." 

" And he will take her last shilling : he lias 
no more heart than a stone. He got money <>f 
her last night, and I saw him at an aie-hou*e 
directly after." 

" Well, I'm determined I wont leave tlu: 
house to-day," resumed Mrs. Corsan ; " and if 
he does come, I'll tell him my mind." 

" Do so," said the man : " I could find in 
my heart to write to some of Mr. Turner's 
servants. But if she isn't better by Sunday, I 
shall be at leisure then, and will go to Black- 
heath it is but a pleasant walk." 

The kind-hearted Corsan blessed this honest 
creature, while I watched his departure fan- 
cying the tranquillity such a man must feel 
within himself. The indisposition of my mis- 
tress gave me serious uneasiness. 1 wandered 
round the house, peeping in at the windows, 
in the hope of seeing her: fortunately, this 
proved a day of bodily rest; I say fortunate- 
ly, for in the afternoon, as I was strolling by 
the door, I heard a faint voice say, 

" A h ! poor fellow, are you looking for me ?" 
It was my dear mistress I hastened to greet 
her the day was warm and the sash thrown 
up. She patted my head, and seemed truly 
glad to see me, inquiring of her friend, if she 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 153 

had thought of giving me water. Mrs. Cor- 
san's attentions claimed my gratitude, which 
I evinced by rubbing my head against her 
arm, in token of recognisance. While I was 
thus basking in the presence of my good 
friends, the garden gate was opened I turned 
intuitively, and beheld Jenkins. 

My mistress looked agitated, he approached 
the window, and leaning on the sill exclaimed, 

" Why old lady, you look a hundred per 
cent, better than you did yesterday ; you wont 
die this time." 

" I hope not," said Mrs. Corsan, stepping 
forward,; " and while I'm her nurse, I'll take 
care she shall be kept quiet" 

" That's what I say," retorted Jenkins, 
" and I advise her to sell her cart and Donkey 
and enjoy herself while she can, and I know 
a man who wou'd be glad to buy 'urn." 

" Xo indeed, that must not be," said Mrs. 
Corsan; " she can let 'urn out while she is 
sick ; besides, she must not offend the family 
that gave them to her." 

"A gift's a gift!" sneered Jenkins; "I 
should like to hear any body tell me what I 
was to do with my own property." 

" Then leave me to do as I please with 
mine," said my mistress, feebly. 

" She'll do," laughed Jenkins ; and takjng 
me by the mane, he said, I was " a fine Don- 



154 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

key, a very fine Donkey, worth three guineas 
of any body's money." 

Admire my self-possession ; no turn or 
look of mine betrayed that I had ever seen 
him. And indeed, had not his peculiar voice 
been an indisputable proof of his identity, 
his strangely-altered person might have led 
me to discredit the accuracy of my visual 
perception. He was no longer the stout, 
healthy-looking man I remembered at Pen- 
rose: his face was florid, but it was the flush 
of intemperance; while his almost skeleton 
figure bespoke any thing but health. 

Mrs. Arnot really seemed afraid of him : and 
when he asked for something to eat, I thought 
she trembled. He entered the house, and as 
his voice grew elevated, I heard Mrs. Corsan 
arguing with him to be moderate. The Tur- 
ner family were named, and the word Black- 
heath ; but I could not attach any thing cer- 
tain to what I overheard. He went away 
early in the evening, and for two days we saw 
no more of him. On the third, he again made 
his appearance. Mrs. Corsan forbade him ad- 
mission, declaring his aunt was in bed, and 
had been getting worse ever since his last visit. 
Jenkins ridiculed this said, he must see 
his aunt, he had a message for her from the 
.M^> Turners, who had sent her some wine 
that was to cure her. 



Tfte Adventures of a Donkey. 155 

" Why you haven't been there?" exclaimed 
Corsan. 

" To be sure I have though,'* replied Jen- 
kins; " I took care what I was about, and 
didn't say I was her nephew; I knew better 
than that : they took me for a neighbour, and 
gave me a good dinner for my trouble." 

" She will break her heart if she hears this, 
you cruel man ; haven't you once been her ruin ? 
She might have had a comfortable house over 
her head, and lived like a lady if it hadn't 
been for you." 

Jenkins grew abusive, forced his way into 
the house, and I was left to conjecture the 
consequences of this unfeeling outrage. 

Alas! before Sunday arrived, my poor mis- 
tress was no more: her feeble frame sunk 
under the conflict of disease heightened by 
the brutality of her nephew. Jenkins kept 
possession of the house a violence his rela- 
tionship to the deceased seemed tg sanction. 
He was her heir, and such had been the cor- 
rectness of her worldly dealings, the little fur- 
niture, the cart, and myself remained unin- 
cumbered by any claim whatever. 

Mrs. Corsan, whose zealous indignation 
knew no bounds, threatened to apprize the 
Turner family of Jenkins's imposition. He 
took fright at this, and ere my mistress was 
buried, called in a broker, had the goods 
valued, and actually sold the cart and your 



156 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

humble servant to a dealer in crockery- ware. 

I was to quit Somer's Town next morning; 

but so secretly had he conducted his vilfony, 

Mrs. Corsan knew nothing of my destination. 
As I stood gazing at our humble dwelling, 

and thinking of the calm pleasures I had en- 
joyed in the service of my respected mistress, 
my old friend Matthew alighted from a horse 
and entered the garden. The poor fellow 
started back as he saw the closed windows. 
Mrs. Corsan, (who would not quit the house 
till the last duties were performed,) led him 
into the garden, and, with great tenderness, 
told her little tale. Matthew was too much 
affected to speak for some minutes; then, 
resting his arm across me, he sighed. 

" Well, I'm sure our people will be truly 
sorry," said he, " she was such a good old 
woman: I little expected to find things as 
they are. I came on an ugly errand. Pray 
can you tell me where the man lives that 
bfought us word Mrs. Amot was ill?" 

" Not I," replied Mrs. Corsan; " it was 
her wicked nephew ; he deceived you, arrd^ 
God forgive me, but 1 shall always lay her 
death to him; he flurried her, and she was 
too weak to bear it." 

" And as sure as the world, he robbed us," 
rejoined Matthew. " We missed two silver 
forks and a table spoon soon after he was gone, 
2nd the butler had somehow a suspicion about 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 157 

him ; so I said, I would come and inquire what 
sort of character he bore." 

" He has no character that's good. Why 
he has sold every stick to a broker, and got 
the money, or a part of it. Tve seen nothing 
of him to-day, and if he's done as you suspect, 
lie'll take care to keep out of the way." 

:< And what will he do with the cart and 
Donkey ?" asked Matthew, kindly regarding 
me. 

" Its impossible to say : perhaps that's sold 
:oo. He's afraid of me, because I fetched my 
husband to prevent his having a parcel of peo- 
ple in here to drink with him." 

" Well, as I dont know how master would 
act, if he knew this rogue was poor Mrs. 
Arnot's nephew, I can say nothing, only I 
think hanging is too good for him." 

" Aye, he'll meet his punishment, no doubt," 
resumed Corsan : " why when I knew Mrs. 
A mot fifteen years ago, she had as good a 
house and furniture as you shall see; and 
what makes it worse, she gave this fellow his 
learning, and bound him to a printer, where 
he might have done well: lie got into debt, 
however, and she was forced to help him ; 
then he came home to live with her this was 
her ruin: from one thing to another she 
parted with all her property, and at last took 
to selling garden-stuff. But it is so hard to 
think, that just when she might have been 



158 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

comfortable, throngh the goodness of youi 
family, this wicked man should come and de- 
stroy "her." 

Matthew was deeply sensible of the worth 
of my mistress, and said all that was humane 
and considerate to her truly firm friend. 

" Well, if this scroundrel appears," said 
he, " it might be as well to give him a hint 
that we suspect him ; for I confess, / should 
not like to have any hand in bringing him tc 
justice, on poor Mrs. Arnot's account. But 
do you know, one of our maids said she was 
sure he was an impostor, and when the but- 
ler gave him the wine in charge, she sa-w 
something shine in his pocket as the bottle 
was being put in." 

" I'm afraid it is like him," sighed Corsan. 

Matthew took a melancholy leave of this 
good woman, and as he patted me, said, '* 1 
wonder if this poor fellow is sold or not: oui 
young ladies would willingly have him again, 
I'm sure." 

Mrs. Corsan could give him no information 
on the subject, and he departed. 

Think what my feelings were at the bare 
suggestion of such happiness, when I knew 
how 1 really was engaged. The sketch 1 had 
heard of Jenkins's history was truly painful 
that sulleness 1 had observed in him when ii 
the service of Dr. Manton, now appeared cha- 
nt< U<ristic ; to a man of his vicious turn o: 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 159 

mind, good humour must ever be a stranger. 
There must be a sort of harmony between 
the actions and the feelings of the person in 
whom this gracious charm of character is 
discernable. For my own part, I should as 
soon expect to meet forbearance in a hungry 
tiger, as equability of temper in the being 
whose conscience is his constant (though se- 
cret) accuser. 

What a singular fate was mine ! again to 
be at the disposal of this wretched man. But 
the actual misery he had occasioned my late 
respected mistress, would not permit me to 
think of self. There was some consolation in 
knowing I should not be his slave : thus I 
looked to the morrow, if not with pleasure, at 
least with calm resignation. 

My purchaser arrived at an early hour next 
morning. Mrs. Corsan vehemently opposed 
my removal until she could send for her hus- 
band. The man waited patiently, and upon 
hearing a detail of Jenkins's conduct, seemed 
to regret having had any dealings With him : 
but he had paid three guineas in advance, and 
had appointed an hour to conclude the bar- 
gain. Mr. Corsan joined us, offered his opi- 
nion, and strongly advised the man to get off 
his bargain. This did not suit my new mas- 
ter; he wanted a cart and Donkey, had made 
a fair proposal, which had been accepted, and 
producing a written agreement signed by Jeiv 



iGo The Adventures of a J)onhcy. 

kins, the Corsans had rfothing further to say: 
I was harnessed to the cart, and bade adieu 
to Somep's Town as a n-iidon'r. 



CHAP. XIV. 

A Summer in London. 

LONDOX is a little world of itself. I de- 
clare I thought myself well acquainted with 
the metropolis, but I found I was quite a no- 
vice in this respect; and as we journeyed 
southwards towards Westminster, I was sen- 
sible of a striking difference in tlie air. The 
month of May, in a clear atmosphere, is an 
enchanting season. In a close, populous 
neighbourhood, where poverty is conspicuous, 
the luxuriances of nature seem almost an in- 
convenience. I am certain, from all I have 
seen, other animair besides Asses, have an 
antipathy to water; it must be so or we 
should not be disgusted by the sight of 
those thousands of squalid beings with which 
the city of London abounds. My new mas- 
ter and his family were of this class, and to 
my utter surprise, neither pasture nor stable 
awaited me in this service. Some varieties 
I had seen ; but it had never occurred to me 
rh:ft I should be led through a house, and 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 16 1 

destined to consider a space not exceeding 
twelve feet, a place for repose and refresh- 
ment after the toils of the day. I literally 
shuddered as the cart was backed upon an 
adjacent dunghill, and I was introduced 
through the family mansion. 

Did I say the family mansion ? it was an 
egregious mistake; the dwelling contained 
at least half a dozen families, equally elegant 
in their habits and manners. I believe they 
were industrious, but it did not appear to me 
that the best consequences of industry attend- 
ed their exertions. The younger branches 
were uniformly idle, wandering the streets 
from morn to night; while the seniors when 
their appointed labour was over, were chiefly 
employed in eating and drinking. To me, 
this was a strange perversion of common sense 
in creatures who know all the necessity of 
providing against the approaches of old age ; 
the attacks of disease, and those thousand ills 
to which " flesh is heir." Thus, while I say 
there was an influx of money amongst these 
people occasionally, they yet lived in a state 
which while it implied poverty, scarcely de- 
served commiseration. My situation was truly 
deplorable* my immediate duties being of so 
hazardous a description as to keep me in con- 
stant alarm. , 

You have seen those slight carts decorated 
with crockery ware: well, it was a vehicle 
p 3 



162 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

thus ornamented I was doomed to lead. I 
had made the discovery, that the sun could 
shine in London, as my half-roasted body 
could have attested. We began our travels 
at an early hour, and seldom got home before 
nine o'clock at night 

A few mouthsful of hay, were thought 
sufficient for my support during the day, and 
though I was really tantalized by the sight of 
a green field, many temptations presented 
themselves in the course of my peregrinations: 
for instance, could 1 see those long bags sus- 
pended to the mouth of a Hackney-Coach' 
horse, and not sigh for such a charming ap- 
pendage? See them drink from the offered 
pail, and not feel my own deprivations ? It 
will be said, I am mistaken ; that Hack horses 
are by no means so well treated as I imagine. 
Granting that individual suffering leads us to 
magnify the comforts of others; you cannot 
deny, that we are an abused race. The 
simple fact, that there are men appointed to 
attend to the feeding of Horses, places this in 
an unequivocal point of view. Who thinks of 
an Ass; momentarily releases him from his 
harness and suffers him to feel a glimpse of 
liberty; slakes his thirst; or, in the most 
trivial particular seems to consider him en- 
dowed with feeling? 

() if nature had not been more provident, 
and kindly bestowed on us the virtue of ab- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 163 

stemiousness, how much more wretched had 
been our lot ! But as man possesses the 
power (did he feel the inclination) to improve 
our condition, it is surely a disgrace to him, 
and somewhat impugns that high character 
of justice with which he too frequently invests 
himself. Old Balaam used to say, " that ra- 
tional animals occasionally mistook the mean- 
ing of the word justice, and while pride 
influenced their actions, really thought they 
were acting equitably." I am not disposed 
to refute this assertion, more especially as I 
have seen some instances of quickness of feel- 
ing, a dread of being under obligation, which 
forcibly corroborate the remark of my friend 
Balaam. Yet how can we reconcile the con- 
tradiction of that stately biped called man. 
owing obligations to creatures like us, and 
taking no account of our services ? The 
stronger the contrast between the obliged and 
.the obliger, the more imperiously does it claim 
the regard of the former. 

But here again all-beneficient Providence 
has befriended us : we are patient, submis- 
sive, not prone to resent injuries; and surely 
these qualities should endear us to beings to 
whom authority is so invaluable. 

We ask no special favours, nor require a 
code Assinine to be enacted for our benefit. 
Xo; it is the simple exercise of humanity to 
which we think we have undoubted elaims; 



16 1 The Adventures of a Dot&ey. 

and these pretensions will ever remain in force 
amongst Asses, until MAN, by a reference to 
the religion he professes or the laws under 
which he lives, disproves our appeal by con- 
vincing us, he is licensed to wound and mal- 
treat the defenceless. 

Forgive this digression : the subject is one 
in which I am too feelingly interested to be 
concise. 

To return to my perishable burthen. Our 
success was various ; there were days in which 
I was scarcely sensible of any diminution in 
my load, and others when a brisk trade gave 
mutual satisfaction to my master and your 
humble servant. Attentive, and open as my 
ears always were to receive information, it 
will not be supposed I could exactly compre- 
hend those nice distinctions between the 
names of persons and things, only to be acqui- 
red by intense study, deep research. My ig- 
norance in this particular led to a painful 
result: we were in Piccadilly, had just leceiv- 
ed payment for some of our goods, a gentle 
touch of the whip apprized me I was expect- 
ed to proceed, when words, which to me 
sounded like " Plates off," caused me to stop 
suddenly; a jingling, or rather a concussion 
amongst our crockery convinced me I had 
done mischief. My master seized my reins, 
struck me violently across the aaouth, yet 
evidently expected me to bear his brutality 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 165 

with Spartan indifference. How far my 
natural hardihood might have helped me at 
this juncture I know not, for the whole street 
v,-as in commotion. I shared in the agitation, 
and in endeavouring to recede from my master's 
grasp plunged the cart into one of those holes 
so frequently left open for the good of the 
public. 

Like other erring animals I stood still when 
the mischief was done; but as I looked 
around me, and saw the people running to and 
fro, I said to myself, " this is surely a very 
extraordinary proof of sympathy ; these peo- 
ple can feel upon occasion, yet I really had 
no idea that a few plates slipping off my 
shelves could have had such an effect!" And, 
conscious that my second error must have 
proved more extensively injurious to my mas- 
ter, I fully expected the crowd would now 
surround us. Conceive my surprise when my 
master forgetting his rage, inquired which was 
Platoff! 

" That's him," said a coachman from the 
box, " that's the Don Cossack!" 

" Ah," thinks I to myself, " this then is 
the trumpeter of some king! I suppose na- 
tions differ in the animals they select for this 
office. The king of Spain prefers Asses, I 
should say Donkeys." My limited education 
did not allow me to judge of this personage 
by his dress ; as good fortune would have it, 



idti The Adventures of a Donkey. 

a gentleman with a little boy (who had 
mounted behind a carriage to get a sight of 
this Hero) in a few words set me right. 

" That is PlatofT," said he, " General of 
the Cossacks, called Don Cossacks from their 
inhabiting the neighbourhood of the river 
Don, in Russia." 

" I think," said the young gentleman, " that 
the i'mperor of Russia should be styled Alex- 
ander tie Great; I am sure he is a better 
man than the son of Philip was. But when 
will they write a history of these times? I 
want to read an exact description of the en- 
trance of the Allies into Paris." 

" Fame will do justice to their magnani- 
mous conquests," replied the elder stranger ; 
" but my dear boy, there are already printed 
documents which may help to assist your 
laudable curiosity. It will require time and 
reflection to give such a history of late events, 
as shall be worthy of the men it is to immor- 
talize." 

" Oh," thinks T, "what an Ass have I 
been; history, is to be the trumpeter of these 
men !" 

The plan appeared excellent according to 
my idea, for I had heard so many amusing- 
anecdotes quoted from books of Natural His- 
tory, I could not doubt that a natural history 
of great and good men, must tend to the edi- 
fication of the whole species, I shall be 



The Adventures of a Do?ikey. Ki7 

dubbed a jealous Ass when I add, that my 
nationality was a little touched as these high 
encomiums on foreigners reached my ears. 
" What" said I, " are we to be overlooked ? 
Are the English people a degenerate Race ?" 
And looking round (somewhat pettishly I 
own,) my murmurs yielded to a contrary con- 
viction. All was enthusiasm, loud shouts! 
" hats off!" The warmest gratulations spon- 
taneously uttered ! 

" I understand it now," said I, exultingly. 
" An inferior people would not know how to 
receive these warriors. It is only the brave, 
that jiarticipate the achievements of the va- 
lorous." 

But to descend from my Heroics ; the 
streets were in a few minutes deserted, and 
my master found leisure to resume his resent- 
ment. Many degrading epithets were bestow- 
ed on my stupidity, but not one word was 
said of the bad state of the pavement 

Whether our gravity is against us in some 
situations, or that we really want that physi- 
cal animation which when'opposed to passion, 
will sometimes awe even a tyrant, 1 cannot 
determine ; 1 rather fear our timidity is mis- 
taken for insensibility ; and we suffer for that 
very deference we observe towards our mas- 
ters. Mr. Carter (my then owner,) had not 
sustained any material injury from my acci- 
dent, but he had lost time, and though this 



18 The Adcentures of a Donkey. 

was perfectly optional on his part, it was attri- 
buted to me, nay, the flight of the populace 
added to his ill humour, there was nothing 
to be clone in the way of business. Men of a 
certain character (aye and children too,) must 
have something to quarrel with I, an unre- 
sisting Ass stood before him, could any 
thing be more opportune? Forgetting the 
chances were against his brittle merchandize, 
he seized his whip and lashed,me so unmerci- 
fully that contrary to all precedent, I made a 
desperate effort, broke from his hold, and 
running with all my might reached the top of 
St James's Street, amidst the clattering of my 
demolished burthen and the cheering of two 
or three gentlemen who had witnessed our 
contest There, an unexpected obstacle pre- 
sented itself, the poles of a sedan chair stop- 
ped my progress, the chair was rescued from 
destruction by the activity of one of those 
herculean animals who carry these leathern 
vehicles; but I fell, and my knees received 
an injury never to be recovered. Carter arri- 
ved furious almost to madness : by this time 
a small but select crowd were assembled one 
or two persons lamented the poor man's loss 
in his broken crockery, but a gentleman who 
had been chiefly instrumental in assisting me 
to rise, declared, " the scoundrel is justly 
punished. I have watched you for some mi- 
nutes," said he, addressing my master. " Do 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 169 

[ you know Sir, you are liable to imprisonment 
for maltreating this wretched animal? and I 
! am strongly inclined to make you an exatn- 
! pie." Carter looked alarmed, and as it is the 
custom to call every thing that looks timid, 
an Ass. I suppose it would be proper to say, 
he looked like an Ass. I confess, I never 
beheld a more striking contrast than the coun- 
tenance my master exhibited while under this 
gentleman's censure, and that which had dis- 
torted his features when exerting himself to 
wound me. It may be that personal fear is 
not becomiog to man, for certainly I never saw 
a human face that carried less of dignity in it 
than my master's did at this moment Refer- 
ring to the board on which Carter's name and 
abode were painted, the gentleman drew out 
his pocket-book and made a memorandum ; 
then, in an impressive voice bade him be cau- 
tious how he conducted himself, for that he 
would not lose sight of him. 

We moved on slowly. I was now for the 
first time, suffering under bodily infirmity; 
and conscious that my misfortune was of a 
nature to lessen my usefulness, the future fill- 
ed me with horror. 

I could not but observe, however, that in 
the late instance the interference of the stran- 
ger, seemed to have an effect somewhat differ- 
eyit from the doctrine of Balaam. My master 
really appeared humbled, and once or twice 



170 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

stopped to examine my knees without uttering 
any of those murmurs, I anticipated from 
concealed, rather than subdued anger. We 
reached home, and our adventure was related 
to the assembled family. I had heard of such 
a thing as embellishment of style, figures of 
speech, &c. &c. ; but certainly never was tale 
more partially amplified, than that in which 
I was the unfortunate Hero. " Oh," thinks 
I, " if my actions are thus trumpeted by one 
who knows me, what a portrait will be hand- 
ed down to posterity!" I really believe it 
was the injustice of this story-teller, that first 
led me to think of writing my own memoirs. 
Ic was too bad to hear myself called an obsti- 
nate brute, not worth my feeding ! Nay more, 
that I had brought ill luck into the family, 
and now, was good for nothing! Whatever 
truth there might be in the last remark, I 
thought I had some claim on their humanity ; 
my lameness was got in their service, and if 
more tenderness had been shewn me, I might 
yet have retained the full use of my limbs. 
How to get rid of me was the thing ; my 
knees were bound up, and for nearly a week, I 
was a prisoner. The natural vigour of my 
constitution was yielding to this unwholesome 
confinement, when a clean respectable look- 
ing woman was introduced into my presence. 
" Poor thing! he's been sadly maimed," 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 171 

said she ; " to be sure, he wont be hard 
worked with me, but it' I buy him, and he 
lon't answer my purpose, that would be a 
jjreat disappointment." 

Carter strongly recommended the animal 
* that was good for nothing!" he would 
gladly keep me himself, for he knew I should 
soon be es strong as ever, only he had met 
with a horse, a great bargain; and indeed, his 
work was too much for a Donkey ! 

After some demurs on the part of the wo- 
man, they agreed, and he was to send me to 
Kensington next clay. 

I felt it was impossible to change for the 
worse, and resigned myself to the vicissitudes 
of fortune with all the calmness of philosophy. 
My spirit was broken, that vivacity which had 
supported me under so many difficulties no 
longer lent its aid, nor did I ever hope to find 
a service that should restore me to my former 
self. It was therefore, with a listless indiffer- 
ence I obeyed the summons of Jack Carter, 
my master's son, who was deputed to convey 
me to Kensington. On his mounting my 
back, I was fully sensible of the injury I had 
sustained in my legs. I rather tottered than 
walked, my rider perceived it, and with that 
cunning which belonged to his family, dis- 
mounted, in order to avoid giving me the ap- 
pearance of being what I really was at the 
time, a worn out, melancholy Donkey. Mrs. 
Q 2 



1 ? The Adventures of a Donkey. 

Dawes received me kindly; the agreeable 
situation of her house, and the comfort of the 
open air, were quite a regale to me, who had 
been suffocating in Westminster for three 
months. I saw she was a laundress, and re- 
collecting with pleasure 1113- former service 
with a person of this calling, adjourned to a 
field at the back of the drying-ground, more 
composed and happy than 1 had felt since the 
death of the excellent Mrs. Arnot. 



CHAP. XV. 

More than one Surprise. 

I SHOULD deeply regret, if any thing I 
have said of myself should dispose my readers 
to think me a censorious Ass; nay, it would 
vex me if I thought any one could justly ac- 
cuse me of caprice. Yet, I know not how 
far I shall stand acquitted to the juvenile 
world, when I declare, that in less than a week 
after my arrival at Kensington, my renovated 
health and improved spirits, by leading me 
to look out of myself, presented objects which 
called forth my disapprobation, and exceed- 
ingly offended my ideas of propriety. It may 
be argued, that having associated with the 
Carter family and other" Westminster gentry., 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 173 

I ought to have been lenient towards less con- 
spicuous personages. Allow me to say, that 
in proportion as people are removed from the 
more immediate pressure of poverty, we ex- 
pect to see some of that gratitude, those at- 
tentions to the wants of others, which make 
prosperity doubly valuable. My mistress was 
what is called a hard-working woman, viz. 
she employed a number of hands, and in order 
not to lose money, made no difference between 
Sunday and other days. Though she paid 
her assistants regularly, it was always at a 
lower rate than others paid ; and such was 
her fear of being cheated, I really think she 
was more miserable while gaining money, 
than thousands who are in actual want of 
u shilling. I soon learned, it was to her taste 
for bargains I owed my station in her family : 
consequently, my increasing strength was mat- 
ter of triumph to one who placed all to the 
account of her own foresight, rather than the 
real cause. I could not respect this woman : 
she had not an atom of sympathy in her na- 
ture. And though I fed well, I did not feel 
in the smallest degree, indebted to her care ; 
the season was luxuriant, and the field in 
which I resided was not her entire property. 

The Donkey of a neighbour shared my 

pasturage; a circumstance which helped to 

restore me to cheerfulness. He was intelligent 

aad amusing, and used to relate the occur- 

Q3 



174 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

rences of each day as they arose. His imme- 
diate employment was that of carrying goods 
for a small grocer. It was from him I learned 
the character of Mrs. Dawes. Once put upon 
one's guard, every thing tends to confirm or 
controvert our suspicions. I was soon con- 
vinced he was right. If my mistress wa 
called away for half an hour, her poor ser- 
vants took a little respite, or enjoyed a laugh 
amongst themselves ; for I should have told 
you, Mrs. Dawes was an enemy to mirth in 
every shape. I used to watch these poor 
labourers with lively emotion, and often as I 
stood gazing at them, have I heard them 
say, They worked harder than horses, but 
never could give satisfaction to their employ- 
er. My own fate compared with these' 
women's was bliss ; in fact, there were only 
three days in the week in which my services 
were required ; and though my knees never 
acquired their former strength, I Was then 
fully able to get through my appointed duties. 
The natural character of any animal is fre- 
quently obscured by the circumstances of si- 
tuation; the creature himself often doubting 
whether he has not mistaken his own feelings 
and tastes. 

Poverty and low life had given me this sort 
flfittipre&ian I had sedulously avoided the 
contamination too often produced by " evil 
communication/' but with that ennui inep* 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 173 

arable from an English Ass, believed it im- 
possible I could ever be cheerful again. Vi- 
vacity was certainly a striking feature in my 
character ; it must have been a radical qua- 
lity in my disposition, for neither broken 
knees nor past experience could teach me to 
be grave when I felt myself equal to a frolic. 
One sunny morning, perceiving the drying 
ground full of linen, whose whiteness almost 
dazzled the sight, I walked round the field 
admiring the regularity of the lines ; on a 
nearer approach, I observed that some of the 
articles were of an immense size, suspended 
over two lines, forming beautiful avenues be^ 
neath. The whim seized me, that I should 
like to walk in these lovely alcoves: whc:n, 
opposing my shoulders to some 'weak palings, 
they gave way and in I inarched. Nothing 
could exceed my delight on finding myself 
enclosed within these tents; I wandered from 
one path to another, snuffing the freshness of 
the gale which gently wafted my covering to 
and fro, when a screaming amongst the women 
startled me. I stood transfixed, hoping I was 
screened from detection, and not quite certain 
that my vagary had caused their alarm. 
Could uny thing be more silly than my con- 
duct? I forgot that my legs were exposed 
to view; and not until I was compelled to 
exert them in running from my assailants did 
I discover my error. Perhaps a more laugh- 



176 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

able scene has seldom beea witnessed. Fi- 
gure to yourselves half-a-dozen women armed 
with mops, clothes-sticks and wet linen, and 
think you behold me, running up one path 
and down another, the women laughing all 
the time as though they enjoyed this part of 
the frolic as much as 1 had done the former. 
In the midst of our contest Mrs. Dawes re- 
turned from an errand. Her voice struck 
terror into the cheerful group ; each was ac- 
cused of having left the gate open. I grieved 
at this, and making a sudden spring rushed 
through another part of the palings, effecting 
iny escape, but at the expense of my poor 
knees, which were again seriously injured. 
Mrs. Dawes followed, and reviling me as a 
mischievous brute, gave me some severe blows 
with one of the broken palings. Resistance 
was out of my power I could scarcely stand ; 
and indeed such was my coasciousness on 
this occasion, I almost thought I deserved the 
chastisement she inflicted on me. 

There was nothing miserly in the blows of 
this lady : she dealt them most liberally, I 
assure you. But when I heard her say, " all 
the be<l-furmturemustbe re-washed/* I cannot 
describe my regrets. It was in vain the wo- 
men examined and declared they were not in 
the least soiled she would be obeyed. This 
tyranny completely disgysted me ; and I be- 
lieve I should have taken a resolution never 



The Adventures of a Donkey. H7 

again to indulge in a frolic, however innocent, 
had not Mrs. Dawes received a letter which 
caused her immediate departure for Town. 
The women took advantage of this, and she 
had scarcely left the house, when the curtains 
were replaced on the lines. I had now leisure 
to think of the consequences of my folly. My 
lameness was really very painful : ah ! bow I 
dreaded the idea of dragging a load ; con- 
vinced as I was, that my mistress would not 
fail to reproach me, if I experienced not more 
lively proofs of her temper. 

My mode of life at this period might be 
called purely domestic I saw so much of the 
household arrangements, and was constantly 
withia hearing of its concerns. Task-masters 
and mistresses owe little to the zeal of their 
slaves ; and though in this happy country the 
whip is reserved for unfortunate quadrupeds, 
the tongue, that goading weapon (when un- 
feelingly exercised,) though it enforces obe- 
dience never claims esteem. 

The character of Mrs. Dawes was now se- 
verely handled by her assistants. I had heard 
an old adage, viz. " When, the cat's away, the 
mice will play." " I must just run and see 
if my boys are come from school," said one 
of the women; " and I," said another, "must 
tell the baker to save me a stale loaf:" to be 
brief, all, save one woman, departed. 

This was undoubtedly wrong; but there 



.Ictveni-ns of a Donkey. 

was some apology for these persons, inasmuch, 
as I have good reason for thinking they 
in ployed as they si'l L T stood 
looking- at the chssni I had nia^e in the pa- 
iings, when I saw a man enter the drying- 
ground: he walked upon tip-toe, and began 
ro riear the lines. I thought this good-na- 
:, being always pleased to see*" women 
1 unnecessary fatigue. An enthusiastic 
Donkey, like other animals of a similar de- 
scription, is apt to evince its approbation in 
some way or other. 1 1 bought I could do no 
less than regard this kind stranger attentively : 
I dare say there was a strong expression of 
sensibility in my countenance at the moment. 
I wished to catch his eye, not in the vain hope 
of exciting his sympathy that I positively 
deny : no, it was a simple tribute of silent ad- 
miration I intended to bestow on him. I ran 
forward he started a few paces then turn- 
ing, with a ferocious grin menaced me, but it 
was by action only. Conceive my dismay, 
when I discovered in this active personage 
the features of the villanous Jenkins ! What 
could a poor Donkey do ? It was not a case 
in which braving could be serviceable. Un- 
intentionally I adopted a line of conduct which 
rescued my mistress from an immense loss. 
This man had always been my terror; his 
tlm.atrring aspert on the present occasion re- 
vived that fear he was but too well calculated 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 1 79 

to inspire: hastening from his scowling 
glance I ran -Awards the house startled the 
solitary woman, who, raising her eyes, beheld 
the depredator, anul instantly gave the alarm. 

Jenkins had carried oft' a large bundle, and 
would have escaped detection, had not the 
other women been near at hand, and hearing 
the cry of " Stop thief!" actually seized his 
person. I saw him brought back, followed 
by a mob; all WPS confusion: no one knew 
how to act till an officer of justice was sum- 
moned. The guilty Jenkins was then convey- 
ed to a place of confinement, and the frightened 
women were left to account for their absence. 
The exact result of this business never reached 
me: I conclude the : r excuses were not ac- 
cepted, as I saw strangers in their place next 
day. Jenkins only escaped condign punish- 
ment from the circumstance of the linen he 
had stolen being dry : a point in law certain- 
ly beyond my comprehension, though highly 
grateful to my feelings when I recoils-ted his 
amiable aunt. He was transported for seven 
years. When this sentence reached my ears, 
I could not help breathing a wish, that a 
change of climate might produce that altera- 
tion in his conduct that might ultimately lead 
to reformation. My Donkey friend on thi^ 
evening appeared much depressed: I deh^v- 
ly sought his confidence, when, with a SILT!' 
he exclaimed, 



ISO The Adventures of a Donkey. 

" Your present life leaves you at liberty to 
enter into the concerns of man, while I am 
wholly occupied by the oppressions under 
which my own species languish." 

" My dear friend," I replied, " surely you 
cannot doubt my Donkeyish sympathy? I 
am an Ass, and nothing that relates to Asses 
is indifferent to me." 

" Spoken like yourself," resumed Bobby. 
" I met an old friend to-day whose sufferings 
have touched me keenly: I remember him 
one of the strongest Asses I ever saw indif- 
ferent to labour, cheerful, patient; in short, 
quite a perfect animal. This morning I saw 
him feeble and almost sinking for want of 
sustenance, dragging a load of wood, under 
which his legs trembled, yet he had some 
miles to go. When I expressed my sorrow 
at seeing him in this situation, he smiled 
calmly; said, there was nothing remapkable 
in his fate, that we were destined to labour, 
and should endeavour to bear it with grati- 
tude." 

" Such characters make one ashamed of 
oneself," replied I; " btit if your friend has 
escaped broken knees, he is probably as equal 
to Hs station as I who am young and appa- 
ruifly healthy." 

Bob smilc-d. " Then you take no account 
of age," said he, " nor think perhaps that 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 181 

quiet and repose would be acceptable to an 
old Ass?'* 

" You mistake me, my dear Sir ; I only 
suggested the possibility of your friend's good 
constitution supporting him under difficulties 
my shattered limbs could not endure." 

" The truth is, my dear Jemmy, we are 
all prone to consider our own misfortunes too 
deeply. I grant yours is a case that must 
excite fears for the future, but we must not 
rob the present hour of its enjoyment in order 
to speculate on an issue which may never 
arrive. There is a degree of selfishness in 
this, unworthy of your character : forgive my 
freedom ; did I esteem you less, I should not 
have presumed to reprehend your sentiments.'* 
" A thousand thanks, my kind Mentor," 
sighed I, and I rubbed my nose against his 
neck in token of my perfect gratitude. " I 
stand corrected ; I fear it is too true that de- 
bility renders us irritable and partially selfish ; 
but I am a fortunate Donkey in meeting such 
a friend, I could almost think, while I listen 
to you, that my early instructor the excellent 
Balaam, was before me." 

" Balaam !" exclaimed Bobby, " did you 
say Balaam ?" 

I answeeed in the affirmative. 
" O Jemmy," continued my friend, " it is 
for that inestimable Ass I am now grieving! 
Yes, it was he whom I met wir?h this morning; 



ISS The Adventures of a Donkey. 

but give me the history of your acquaintance ; 
I am impatient to hear when and where your 
friendship began." 

As well as my feelings would permit, 
I complied. Bob was all attention, only in- 
terrupting -me to express his approbation of 
the justice with which I delineated the cha- 
racter of our mutual friend. 

" My mother should have been his wife," 
resumed Bobby. " I have heard he was the 
most lively Ass imaginable, until disappoint- 
ment somewhat soured his temper. I owe 
him infinite obligations ; forgetting the injury 
he had sustained in my mother's broken faith, 
he has ever shewn me the greatest tenderness; 
and when my father deserted us, by constantly 
making me his companion, attracted the no- 
tice of his master, who eventually received 
me into his service. Fate removed me from 
his protection, but I have never ceased to re- 
tain a just sense of his virtues. But what are 
words, or what will gratitude avail? He 
is doomed to incessant slavery ! Alas! if his 
own strong mind were not his best support 
how pitiable were his situation! As it is, I 
question whether he would not reprobate that 
sensibility which leads us to lament irreme- 
diable evils, rather than strive to bear up 
against them." 

You may be sure I listened to this admira- 
ble model* of ray esteemed old friend with 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 183 

all the attention- he deserved. Yet, such was 
my natural love of inquiry, I could not help 
wishing to be informed respecting those cir- 
cumstances that had brought Balaam to 
London 

Bobby could give me no light on this sub- 
ject, further, than that he now resided at 
Hampstead. 

In this instance, as in many that preceded 
it, I felt the disadvantage we labour under in 
being ignorant of geography. I believe few 
animals are more sagacious in finding their 
homes than Asses: but this is a species of 
local sagacity that scarcely soars beyond in- 
stinct. What am I saying? Instinct is at 
once our limit and our bliss : did we possess 
higher attributes, Nature, jealous of her rights, 
would lead us to rebel, and counteract those 
separations to which we are invariably doom- 
ed. But as vague wishes are confined to no 
particular species of animal, I hope mine will 
meet indulgence ; more especially when it is 
remembered, that friendship is an active prin- 
ciple, " never easy when a friend's distress- 
ed," bold in its designs, and however well- 
intentioned, not always reasonable in its spe- 
culations. 

Had I known how to find my way to 
Hampstead, and entertained no fear of being 
stopped on the road mot by highwaymen nor 



184 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

footpads but as a strayed Ass, and perhaps 
put into the pound, 1 certainly should have 
decamped that evening in spite of my broken 
knees : pbut I was a hired slave, and was yet 
to endure my share of Mrs, Dawes' tyranny. 

There \vas a luxury however in talking of 
dear Balaam : Bobby promised me, that if 
chance again brought them together, he would 
not fail to convey my dutiful remembrances to 
the worthy old Ass. 

It is surprising to think, with what different 
sentiments one regards the same character at 
distinct periods of time. I who had presumed 
to arraign the justice of Balaam who had 
thn i-'ht him severe if not illiberal I now 
saw him as he really was, a very superior 
>onkey. His cautions were the result of 
observation his warnings, invaluable lights 
to those who had sense enough to heed them 
and that peculiar art with which he drew 
aside the veil that concealed follies which 
escaped the notice of less sagacious Asses, 
was well calculated to repress the simple cre- 
dulity of the trusting, inexperienced Donkey. 
I blush to think I ever breathed a censure 
against this venerable animal. 



The Adventures of a Donkey, 185 

CHAP. XVI. 

A Fair and an Elopement, 

WHEN the head of a family is distinguish- 
ed for ill humour, it rarely happens that the 
dumb dependants escape its influence. I had 
felt the utmost commiseration for a poor dog 
that was chained to his kennel and most spa- 
ringly fed by a mistress, who yet expected 
him to be vigilant in his office of watching 
the clothes ; and in the simplicity of my heart, 
wondered he made no effort to absolve 
himself from so rile a bondage, when I was 
doomed to experience a similar kind of con- 
finement. I beseech you not to suppose I 
incurred this punishment by any new frolic 
in fact, my spirits at this period were parti- 
cularly low: no, it was the parsimonious 
disposition of Mrs. Dawes that led to this 
result. The palings remained some time as 
I had left them, until her landlord, paying her 
a visit, made some remarks which compelled 
her to have them repaired. The expense 
could not be considerable, though I heard her 
tease the carpenter and declare, he was making 
a job of it because she was a lone woman. 
The man denied the charge, and hastened his 
work, glad no doubt to be released from her 
R 3 



186 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

voluble complaints: but, in order to prevent 
any future transgressions on my part, a rope 
was thrown over my neck and tied to a tree 
thus confining my exercise within its limits. 
I felt this as the most pointed insult 1 had 
ever encountered, nor could I bar the idea 
of meeting Bobby under so painful a degra- 
dation. I was boisterous at first, kicked up 
my heels, brayed, and in short, shewed every 
disposition to resist : alas ! what imbecile 
creatures we are! What is our strength op- 
posed to the ingenuity of the rational creation ! 
But it was hard to reflect that the very qua- 
lity which made us useful to our employer?, 
should thus be rendered negative when our 
own comfort was the consideration. Nor 
could I look around me without anticipating 
the day when, having eaten to the length of 
my rope, I might be starved in the view of 
plenty. 

I knew Mrs. Dawes practised this sort of 
self-denial, scarcely allowing herself the 
necessaries of life : this was no rule for me; 
I was not a glutton, but most assuredly I had 
no liking to the Pythagorean system. Ere 
evening arrived I had changed my mind, and 
longed to consult with Bob respecting this; 
new misfortune. So true it is, that the con- 
solations of friendship are a balm for almost 
every ill. Bobby came home later than usual 
I heard his footsteps but could not, as was 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 187 

my custom, meet him half way. The worthy 
fellow was grieved to find me under such a 
restraint: but here his good sense did not 
forsake him ; he would not allow that I was 
the most unfortunate Donkey in existence, 
nor listen to my passionate regrets at the 
loss of my liberty. 

" This is weak in the extreme," said he ; 
" liberty is undoubtedly a privilege of incal- 
culable worth; but you breathe the fresh air, 
are in no immediate want of food, and your 
occasional duties will vary the scene a little. 
Think of the female Ass r so often doomed 
to drag a chained log not only within a limit- 
ed space, but frequently is this chain con- 
nected with the head, thus holding her in a 
*tate of inconceivable uncomfortableness!" 

"I have heard of such things," said I; 
" thank fortune I never saw a lady Ass in this 
situation, nor can I understand why such a 
refinement in cruelty should be inflicted on a 
female." 

" She is thus punished," resumed Bobby, 
" because her maternal feelings would lead 
her to pursue her purloined offspring. There 
is no danger nor difficulty from which a fe- 
male Ass would shrink, where the safety of 
her young ones is concerned. That her estate 
on many occasions is deplorable, no one will 
deay : it of course excites our sympathy ; but 
even rational animals have taken note' of it. 



1SS The Adventures of a Dunhcy. 

I heard our friend Balaam repeat some line? 
on this subject which pleased me excessive- 
LV." 

I besought Bobby to recite them. He com- 
plied as follows: 

''is thy sad heart thrill'd with filial pain 
To see thy wretched mother's shortened chain ? 
And truly, very piteous is her lot! 
Chained to a log-, within a narrow spot, 
Where the close-eaten grass is scarcely seen, 
While sweet around her waves the tempting reen." 

" Very natural," sighed I, " yes, yes, I can 
feel the full force of this description, ' the 
tempting green,* beyond the reach of a hun- 
gry Donkey, must be a most facinating pros- 
pect.*' 

" Poor Balaam,*' retorted Bobby in an im- 
pressive tone, " how does he fare to-night ? 
Possessing this coveted liberty, he perhaps 
wants strength to seek the requisite nourish- 
ment." 

I felt myself blush, from the tip of my cars 
to the point of my chin, which is giving an 
uncommon latitude to this most becoming of 
all beauties. 

" Say no more," said I with emotion, " you 
shall be spared the trouble of reproving me on 
this subject again; have you heard of dear 
Balaam? Is he better?" 

" I did not see him,*' replied Bobby, " but 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 189 

his fellow-labourer Mr. Jnba, overtook me this 
morning in Oxford Street, and tells me our 
friend was too ill to come to town to-day.'* 

In spite of my promise to bear my present 
iuthralment patiently, this intimation threw 
me into an agony not to be described. 

" Help me to break these ignoble fetters," 
said I, " that I may flee to my suffering 
friend !" 

" I am afraid Juba knew you better than 
I thought he did," retorted Bobby," I have 
been your defender Jemmy ; but he is right, 
your heart may be, I believe it is good, your 
judgment is very detective." 

" Juba was always my enemy," I replied ; 
" he, is a Donkey of the meanest capacity, 
grovelling in his ideas, and can never hope to 
rise in the world ; I confess, I should not 
have expected you to listen to such an Ass." 

" I did not give entire credit to his asser- 
tions," continued Bobby, " not for the reasons 
you assign, for though Juba is an unpolished 
Donkey, he possesses that most essential of all 
qualifications, useful or common sense, and 
will succeed, where hundreds would starve 
but he was angry, and I never rely too im- 
plicitly on the depositions of angry Don- 
keys." 

" I shall never be wise," said I. " O ! most 
excellent pupil of my respected old friend, 



190 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

bear with my follies, and tell me, if it is 
utterly impossible for me to reach the resi- 
dence of Balaam !" 

Bobby could not encourage me to hope such 
a scheme was practicable ; but his natural 
goodness of heart led him to applaud my zeal 
in this particular, and ere I closed my eyes to 
dream the usual dream of a prisoner, namely, 
of liberty, he quieted my scruples respecting 
himself. 

" You are not singular," said he, " it may 
require some courage to speak simple truths ; 
but the listener who is to profit by advice 
must possess a species of courage seldom to 
be met with at your time of life : nothing but 
a perfect knowledge of self, can render us 
patient of reproof; and I am afraid this is 
an acquaintance we rarely make until the be- 
nefits to be derived from it become inconse* 
quential because we adopt the means when 
the end must be too transient to do us cre- 
dit." 

This home appeal produced the most un- 
qualified candour on my part 1 am not con- 
scious that I concealed the most trivial failing 
in my temper or dispositions. Bob applauded 
my ingenuousness, and thus ended our confer- 
ence. 

Well, next morning while we were at break- 
fast, Mrs. Dawes brought a man into the field 
who, approaching me, began to examine my 
knees. 



The A dventures of a Donkey . 191 

" I'll warrant I deliver him up as sound as 
I found him," said he, " so then the bargain's 
sturck, missus. * 

" Why as for that, if you've a mind to have 
him for good and all, I don't care; I can al- 
ways hire a horse when I want one," replied 
my mistress. 

" Why that wouldn't suit me ye see ; I've 
no pasturage, and as I say, it's a mortal sin to 
keep a dumb beast and not give it enough to 
eat." 

Mrs. Dawcs was silent and the man 
porceeded " No! for three days, I should 
like to have him, the fair only lasts three 
days." 

I felt a cold shiver at the bare mention of a 
fair. " Oh !" thinks f, " if there are Races 
at this place as at Tunbridge, what shall I 
do ? And again, if it re'Uly was the penny 
trumpet, that caused my failure, what may I 
not expect to meet in the environs of London, 
where, of course, every species toy is on a 
more grand scale !" 

" His knees are terribly broken to be 
sure," resumed the man, as he released me 
from the rope. 

My vanity instantly fled who would think 
of proposing a broken-kneed Donkey as a 
Racer ? 

I wonder whether rational beings make 
mistakes of this nature, and reckon upon their 



192 Thf Adventures of a Donkey. 

beauties and attractive qualities, when they 
no longer exist : if so, they, and they only 
will understand the awkwardness of my feel- 
ings at this moment. Bobby smiled signifi- 
cantly. ' You are vastly cfever indeed, Mr. 
Bob," thought I, " if you can guess my secret 
thoughts ;" and I raised my head in the ex- 
pectation of being reproved, when the kind 
creature m a half whisper informed me 
that if my destination was West-end Fair, 
it was in the neighbourhood of Hampstead, 
and I might probably meet Juba, and gain 
some intelligence respecting Balaam. Again 
I blushed, and it was a blush of shame, to 
think I had judged this amiable Donkey's 
feelings by my own disappointed, or rather 
humbled vanity. We parted, and I had 
soon the pleasure to hear, West-eild was to 
be the theatre of my actions. Mr. Ford my 
temporary master, soon harnessed me to a 
miserably shattered looking vehicle ; but 
though 1 doubted its security, there were'four 
full-grown persons who held a contrary opi- 
nion, they ascended the cart by a ladder to 
use the language of Gilpin, 

" Four precious souls, and all agog 
To dash through thick and thin." 

Dashing, however, was out of the question 
with me. Fortunately my driver was humane; 
and as he walked by my bide, my incapacity 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 193 

was not suspected for some time. At length 
a lady exclaimed, " you had better come in, 
we can make room for you, Mr. Ford, and 
then we can whip up the Donkey." 

Ford declined the offer, perhaps conscious 
that I should disappoint their expectation if 
he complied, though his answer carried a 
better interpretation. "No! no!" said he. 
" We must think of the Donkey too, four to 
ene, is enough in all conscience, besides, / 
shall want him when I get there." 

The party were very impatient, continu- 
ally inquiring how far we had to go, &c. &c. 
Ford was civil in his replies, and by hinting, 
that it was better to go at an equal pace, than 
to hurry and perhaps have me founder on the 
road, reconciled them to my certainly tedious 
pace. ^ case in point soon presented itself, 
we had past through Kilborn Turnpike, when 
a crowd of people in the road obstructed our 
progress. I heard a whip used with great 
vehemence, Ford stepped forward, the crowd 
made way for him, when J saw a wretched 
Donkey writhing beneath the hand of its 
cruel owner. A. party of men, women and 
children stood around, who it appeared had 
been the load with which this creature's 
strength could not contend; and for this, his 
master chose to wound him, almost to flay- 
ing, in order of course, to increase his ca- 
pability. 



194 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

I admit, that there was a great degree of 
obstinacy in this animal, at least, wh?t you 
would call stubbornness. For, so every oppo- 
sition of an irrational animal is termed by your 
genus; with us, it has a different meaning, 
we call it self-defence: and though greatly 
varying from your acceptation of this natural 
right, we think obstinacy at times stands us in 
good need. The master, who finds blows do 
not answer his purpose, will adopt another 
line of conduct. Granting that we suffer in 
these amiable indulgences of our owners, I 
speak from conviction, it is better to get one 
or two sound drubbings in the way of experi- 
ment, than to erect our masters as licensed 
savages by patiently bearing every blow, that 
temper or malice can inflict The poor Ass 
in question, was quite a Spartan in his way, 
he stood immoveable, neither heeding the 
' taunts of his master, nor the impatient 
complaints of the party whose pleasure he re- 
tarded. 

" Why master Dawson," said, Ford "is 
this the way to get any service of this poor 
beast? Lend me the reins ; I'll warrant he'll 
go quiet enough with kind usage." 

" You don't know him," replied Dawson, 
" but come let's see what you can do with 
him:" and he resigned the bridle with a sneer. 
Ford began by patting the Ass on the head, 
coaxing him," and then with a gentle flap of 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 195 

the whip, ran by his side. The Donkey 
instantly accommodated himself to this pace, 
to the no small surprise of the by-standers. 
Dawson was vexed ; he had been proved in- 
competent to manage an Ass and no doubt 
the poor fellow paid for it when we left them, 
which we soon did, I, mentally eulogizing 
the judicious and humane Mr. Ford, with 
whom I should have thought myself happy 
to pass the remainder of my days. That was 
not to be. 

But to proceed we reached the fair, Ford 
during the remainder of our journey, enfor- 
cing the policy as well as the justice of treating 
dumb beasts with kindness. 

" I always find my account in it," said he, 
" slow and sure is my way, and if the beast 
wont work with good words, why I am sure 
he wont with bad." And unloosing my har- 
ness, he gave me an excellent feed of Hay, 
which tended greatly to raise my spirits and 
renew my strength. 

The fair was excessively amusing, and 
might have captivated any Donkey whose 
thoughts were given to the scene, mine were 
intent on Balaam, or in the event of his inabil- 
ity to appear in public, on Juba, whom I 
resolved to meet with all possible cordiality. 
But a rustic Donkey is quite a novice in a 
certain sphere. It is only in London, we ac- 
quire a knowledge of life. I had never heard 



196 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

of penny rides in a donkey cart, nor knew 
that a dozen children might be crammed into 
a carriage scarcely large enough to hold half 
the number conveniently. It was at \ Vest- 
end fair T was feelingly taught to understand 
this item. 

Though my master superintended these 
gambols, and was really very considerate, he- 
could not shield me from the fatigue and las- 
situde attendant on such constant exertion. 
And as each new load I took up, brought 
fresh spirits, and expected proportioned en- 
joyment, I dreaded, least my failure should 
injure Mr. Ford. While I was anticipating 
disgrace, a friendly shower of rain compelled 
every body to seek shelter ; and I was unlosed 
from the cart and placed under a canvass shed. 
Here I found Juba, who like myself, looked 
fagged to death. I soon discovered I was in- 
debced to Bobby's good offices, by the grace- 
ful manner in which Juba met my advances 
Yes, I say graceful manner, for never surely 
was Ass so much improved as Juba since I 
saw him last. We talked of Balaam, and I 
heard with delight, he was rather better 
that morning. Juba described his residence, 
and when I found it was not much above a 
mile from West-end my active mind was plan- 
ning how to catch a glimpse of my respected 
old friend. 

Great therefore was my delight, when upon 



The Adventures of a Donkey. lg? 

the re-appearance of the SUH, and my resump- 
tion of my toil, I heard Ford tell a friend, he 
should remain at West-end till the fair was 
over. I weighed my projected elopement by 
every bearing of gratitude, and could find 
none sufficiently powerful to deter me from 
its prosecution. Mr. Ford was a good man, 
but he was a new friend. Balaam claimed 
my utmost deference and esteem; I owed 
him obligations innumerable; and as I fully 
proposed returning to my new master, felt f 
was acting no dishonourable part. 

Ah ! how I longed for the shadows of even- 
ing to fall ; when, left to myself, I might put 
my design into execution ! It was late ere 
this happy moment arrived and when it 
came, I found I should have many difficulties 
to encounter. In the first place, the fair con- 
tinued to be illuminated till nearly midnight, 
secondly, I was in a field surrounded by a 
high bank and a well-secured gate, and 
thirdly, there were other animals besides my- 
self within this enclosure. I imagine that I 
took a short nap, for on a sudden I was 
startled by some noise, and on looking around 
found the fair was in darkness, and the sky 
spangled with stars. " This, then, is the mo- 
ment," thought I ; and creeping towards the 
bank, I placed my fore-feet in the earth and 
peeped over. The regular snoring of a pig 
(as I imagined,) met my ear," then I am 
3 



198 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

safe,'* I continued, " for dirty as these ant-' 
mals are, they do not absolutely sleep in 
ditches;" and with an agility quite extraor- 
dinary considering the fatigue I had under- 
gone, I reached the summit, descended a few 
pact s on the other side, still encouraged by 
the somnific harmony of the pig, when, find- 
ing the earth moist towards the bottom, I 
hesitated, it began to give way, my feet 
were sliding, and the smell of stagnant water 
offended my nose. Retreat was impractica- 
ble. I recollected that the she Ass would en- 
counter any difficulty in behalf of her young- 
ones, and even from" attachment to her mas- 
ter; and making a plunge, gained Terra Fir- 
ma. Scarcely had I time to congratulate 
myself on this exploit, ere I stumbled over 
something soft the snoring instantly ceased, 
and the voice of a man vociferated, " Murder! 
thieves! help!" I took to my heels, not 
stopping to take breath until out ot hearing of 
these appalling sounds. It was impossible 
to refrain from smiling at my mistake. There 
could be no doubt I had taken this gentleman 
for a pig ! But time was precious, and I dared 
not indulge the mirth to which this circum- 
stance gave rise. Hampstead church steeple 
was to be my guide, the night was yet too 
dark to direct me accurately ; so turning to a 
small common in my way, I endeavoured to 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 199 

cleanse myself from the contamination of the 
odious ditch. 

At that moment the church clock struck 
four, I pricked up my ears and followed the 
sound. The grey light of morn was begin- 
ning to unveil the hill the prospect refreshed 
my spirits and as I trotted on, 1 could not 
help rejoicing, that so pleasant a spot was the 
residence of the invalid Balaam. " How sur- 
prised he will be!'* would 1 say to myself. 
" Yes, I know he will be delighted to see 
me, when I convince him I have no intention 
to desert my present employer." He was 
surprised! but I must reserve that and another 
adventure fora new chapter. 



CHAP. XVII. 

An Asylum. 

I SHOULD have told you, Juba's home 
being contiguous to the fair, he did not sleep 
at West-end. This circumstance proved for- 
tuitous to me. It was now broad day-light, 
and I was impatient to snatch a hasty inter- 
view with dear Balaam and return to Mr. Ford. 
I had peeped into many enclosures, and re- 
garded the figure of half a dozen Donkeys 
without tracing any likeness to my friend, 



200 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

when Juba made his appearance: he abso- 
lutely started when he saw me. 

" In the name of prudence, have you wan- 
dered hither to see Balaam ?" asked he. 

I answered in the affirmative, entreating 
him to lead me to the old gentleman. 

" I cannot do that," he replied ; " my mas- 
ter has just called me to be harnessed; but if 
you cross the road behind that villa," point- 
ing with his chin, " behind that villa you 
will find Balaam : he is in good care, and I 
really think looks better this morning, though 
I had but a slight glimpse of him from my 
field. I fear you will suffer for this, Jemmy," 
he continued ; " beware of the pound ; and if 
possible retrace your path before you are 
missed." 

He scampered off while I, with similar 
speed, approached the white villa. How my. 
heart palpitated when I caught a glance o't 
his long ears ! His figure seemed emaciated 
but it was the wreck of a handsome Donkey, 
graceful even in its decline. Putting my lips 
to the palings, I gently repeated his name he 
listened for a moment " My dearest Mr. 
Balaam !" said I he was before me in an 
instant. 

" Dear Jem, is it you!" he exclaimed ; and 
we rubbed our noses together with unrestrain- 
ed affection. 

"1 know your situation," he added ; " Juba 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 201 

gave me a brief account of your meeting yes- 
terday ; but, much as I value your friendship, 
my dear fellow, I tremble for the consequences 
of your present truancy." 

" I shall have time to get back," I replied, 
" Oh ! let me enjoy the delight of beholding 
you once more! How often I have thought 
of you I cannot describe." 

My old friend was visibly affected by my 
manner, tears filled his eyes, and for a few 
seconds we were silent. Just then, a tall, 
elegant-looking man crossed the field, and 
bounding over a gate, alighted close at my 
side. I must think that the finest perception 
of a Donkey lies in his nose ; nwne was so 
sensibly affected on this occasion, I scarcely 
knew how to express myself every nerve 
was in agitation I felt it was my dear young 
master, Mr. George Manton and forgetting 
that deference Asses owe to man, ran after 
him, pursuing his footsteps so steadily as to 
excite his notice; he turned, and I beheld it 
was he ; he looked at me kindly, and then 
proceeded. It was not self-interest, gentle 
reader ; there were a thousand reasons against 
a man's retaining any recollection of an Ass : 
but no time or distance could obliterate from 
my memory, the amiable conduct of this 
young man. 

I continued to follow him. Touched, as I 
suppose, by the singularity of my attentions, 



202 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

he leaned against a tree regarding me stead- 
fastly. I ventured to approach nearer walk- 
ed round him and at last rubbed my head 
against his sleeve. " This is very extraordi- 
nary," said he> musingly; " poor Caroline, if I 
thought this really was, or could be, your old 
favourite, I would purchase him at any price.*' 

These words transfixed me. Whether the 
expression of my countenance confirmed his 
suspicion, or the strong dark line which ex- 
tended the whole length of my back, and had 
occasioned Miss Marden to say I was marked 
like a zebra to which of these his reflections 
were given, I will not determine. Suffice it 
to say, I was highly gratified by his manner; 
convinced, that a man of his dispositions 
would not only be pleased with the attach- 
ment of a dumb animal, but take delight in 
cherishing his fidelity. Determined on put- 
trhg my sagacity to the test, he climbed a 
bank and was lost to my view : I instantly 
set off at a canter, braying most sonorously. 
He re-appeared at a considerable distance, and 
I hastened to him with all imaginable speed. 

" Poor fellow," said he, opening a gate, " I 
must think you know me : come along." I 
continued by his side until we reached a mea- 
dow belonging to the beautiful white cottage : 
here he left me for a while, and to my inex- 
pressible delight, I found Balaam was my 
neighbour oaly separated from me by an 



TJie Adventures of a Donkey. "203 

elegant wire fence. I related my adventure 
he listened with profound attention. 

" It promises well," said he, " but you are 
the servant of another who is most probably 
seeking you at this moment." 

I sighed; and dreading lest Balaam should 
enforce the propriety of my immediate de- 
parture, began making a few desultory in- 
quiries respecting the owners of the villa. 
He knew little of them they were customers 
of his master's (who was a baker) and he 
believed Mr. Manton to be a relation of the 
family, as he often saw him playing with the 
children. White bridles and smart saddles 
no longer engaged my vanity ; but if I could 
attain a service amongst children, (provided 
they were humane,) it seemed the only sta- 
tion in which my shattered limbs cauld make 
me moderately useful. 

It would be impossible to describe my 
feelings during the absence of Mr. Manton ; 
every sound made my heart flutter. 

At length he returned, accompanied by a 
lady and three children, two girls and a boy. 
" Now observe him, Charlotte," said Mr. 
George, addressing the lady, and walking 
across the field : 1 pursued him. 

The lady laughed declared it was extra- 
ordinary, but she united in thinking I was the 
identical animal he decribed. 

" I must go town," continued my dear 



204 The Adventurcsvf a Donkey. 

young master, " but the Donkey must re- 
main here ; if any owner arrives, offer what 
you think fair at all events buy him: you 
see his legs are not sound, but he will do for 
the children." 

" Thank you, cousin George," said, the 
children in a breath ; " how nice it will be to 
ride about the fields on a Donkey!" 

Mr. Manton kissed them and departed. 

What a revolution in my favour had a few 
hours produced! My spirits were in a state 
of intoxication it was a happiness too perfect 
to appear real ! " Am I really at home ?" said 
I, mentally, " may I range this field, drink 
from that clear pond, and see my dear mas- 
ter daily? Oh! this is too much!" And 
taking a roll on the grass, I endeavoured to 
tranquillize my feelings. The equitable ar- 
rangement Mr. Manton had made respecting 
my purchase, entirely quieted my conscience 
with regard to Mr. Ford. He would act for 
my real owner, Mrs. Dawes, and I had that 
opinion of Ford, that he would deal fairly by 
all parties. Balaam and I had a long chat in 
the afternoon : it was only then I discorered 
the immense ravages time had effected in the 
person of my friend. His intellects were as 
acute as ever but his debility was a depres- 
siner contemplation to one who loved him as 
I dm. " And is this venerable animal doom- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 205 

ed to labour!" sighed I; " ah! what a fortu- 
nate Donkey am I !" 

Mr. George returned in the evening, bring- 
ing in his gig a complete saddle and bridle 
for your humble servant: alas! with what 
distinct feelings did I view these once desired 
ornaments! No Ass of common delicacy but 
must be pleased to find himself decently dress- 
ed but it was no longer the decorations of a 
handsome Donkey : in fact, I believe I should 
at the moment have been better pleased, had my 
liberal master selected a less conspicuous #arb 
forme. But I found I was in error, and check- 
ed my presumptuous folly. 

The distinction was a compliment to the 
children of his cousin, and I was vainly as- 
cribing it to myself. 

I was soon in a state of requisition. My 
duties were pleasant for kindness and good- 
humour graced the little Herberts they were 
truly amiable ; forcibly reminding me of the 
Turner family. Towards evening-, Mrs. Her- 
bert and Mr. George walked into the field, 
when my master related a circumstance which 
claimed my entire attention. 

" I saw an enemy of this poor animal's to- 
day," said he, "but I did not know how far 
he had betrayed the confidence my father re- 
posed in him till this monaing." He then pro- 
ceeded to state, that he had been to see Jen- 
kins, an old servant of the doctor's, who was 
T 



50i The Adventures of a Donkey. 

under sentence of transportation. " Like most 
guilty men, checked in their career of vice,'* 
continued Mr. George, " he reverts to his 
lesser crimes with the strongest compunction; 
no doubt, as being the foundation of his later 
turpitude, they may be considered as the 
primary causes of his ruin : yet, I am apt to 
think, conscience suggests this sort of com- 
promise, as the least fearful contemplation to 
a guilty heart" 

" This is rather in favour of the actually 
penitent," replied Mrs. Herbert; " the being 
who confesses his less glaring crimes, is doubt- 
less well acquainted with himself; and when 
the law (as in this man's case,) does not affect 
his life, we may forgive him if he refrains 
from criminating himself too scrupulously, 
provided he is resolved to turn from his evil 
ways, and offer his contrition where it may 
and will (if he is sincere) be accepted." 

" I suppose I thought as you do at the 
time," replied Mr. George, with a benevolent 
smile ; " I hope the wretched man will find 
some comforts provided for his voyage ; I have 
seen the captain of the ship and given him 
directions to supply him with a certain sum 
on his arrival at their destined port, provided 
he conducts himself properly during the voy- 
age. He was greatly affected on seeing me ; 
related many impositions he had practised 
under our roof; and amongst others, said, 



The Adventures of a Dotikey. 207 

he found poor Caroline's Donkey in the pos- 
session of a gipsy, from whom he took it, and 
afterwards gave him in compensation to a 
man to whom he lost money at cards. He 
really seemed to deplore his injustice towards 
my father more than any other errors of his 
life." 

" No wonder," replied Mrs. Herbert ; " my 
uncle's character is so uniformly amiable, that 
none but the most dissolute of beings could 
injure him, without feeling remorse at some 
future period." 

Here the conversation was suspended ; but 
I, who had witnessed Jenkins's cruelty to 
my dear mistress, was at a loss to account 
for his silence on this subject. Surely his 
want of duty, his unfeeling avarice towards 
her, were crimes of the deepest dye ! I check- 
ed this effervescence of my zeal, and recollect- 
ing how leniently Mrs, Herbert had judged 
the wretched culprit, retracted my hasty cen- 
sure ; not less convinced it was presumptuous 
in an Ass to arraign a rational animal, than 
that a rational animal must pay the forfeit of 
his errors even though our verdict is with- 
held. 

In less than a week from this epoch, my 
excellent Mr. George, through the medium of 
an advertisement, had settled my transfer with 
Mr. Ford ; and I now felt secure and happy. 
I might say, it was only now I tasted real 
T 2 



208 The Adi'uitures of a Donkey. 

happiness. My feelings were calmed; none 
of those chimeras which had mislead me in 
the season of health and beauty, now milled 
my temper: nay, that very sameness in my 
duties, that had formerly appeared tedious, 
from being suited to my present infirmities, 
excited that active gratitude in my bosom 
which I have every reason to believe was daily 
appreciated by my owners. In fact I know it 
was, and you shall know my reasons for this 
self-assurance ere I take my leave. 

It used to grieve me to see Balaam go out 
to work: it is true his business was not labori- 
ous, but to my idea, he was not in a state of 
convalescence when called to resume his du- 
ties; and I trembled least a relapse should 
ensue. How flattering it was to my feelings, 
to hear the dear old Donkey declare, my 
lively chit chat kept him alive. Many a 
moonlight night have we loitered over our 
palings, each unwilling to bid adieu. Juba, 
would sometimes join us, and his society was 
agreeable, but as he could only give us this 
pleasure by stealth, (bavins: two or three fields 
to cross and the chance of finding Balaam's 
gate fastened) we were never quite sure of his 
company, a circumstance that Balaam used 
laughingly to say gave a greater zest to his 
visits. 

I understood the old gentleman, but had too 
much value for his opinions to question their 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 20.9 

justice; he alluded to that love of adventure, 
which had certainly had too much influence 
on my actions. 

However, thinking it impossible he could 
again have occasion to reprove me in this par- 
ticular, I rather encouraged his cheerful sallies 
as indications of improving health. 

You will scarcely believe it gentle readers, 
but so it happened, I did transgress again ; 
and having announced myself a Donkey of 
reracity, I suppose I must relate the fact, nor 
will you wonder at my prolixity in its detail, 
when you learn what serious reasons I have 
for remembering this my last juvenile frolic. 

Frqiri the moment of my being established 
at Hampstead, I resolved on writing my me- 
moirs ; but, such was the deference I felt for 
Balaam's judgment, I wanted courage to ap- 
prize him of my intention ; yet I was deter- 
mined to arrange my plan, trusting to some 
fortunate moment for asking his advice and 
assistance, if possible. About this period, a 
very elegant lady Ass, used to ramble down 
our lane every morning. Balaam had spoken of 
her talents with much respect. " She has seen 
the world," said he one morning after she 
departed ; " I don't know, that I ev^r met a 
more intelligent Ass." Now I had observed 
rational beings to pay great respect to elderly 
females, seeming to consider their opinions 
valuable. " Ah !" thinks I, " if this sensible 



210 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

Ass would condescend to encourage my at- 
tempt, it might prove a passport to the 
countenance of Balaam ; at least there could 
be no harm in sounding her on the subject." 
The next evening proved auspicious to my 
design. Balaam greatly fatigued retired early"; 
one "of the Miss Herberts had left the gate 
open, and I sallied forth in quest of Mrs. 
Scamper, (for so she was called.) Well, I wan- 
dered from enclosure to enclosure, the night 
was getting dark and no Mrs. Scamper to be 
seen; when just as I was preparing to return 
home, I thought I heard her mellifluous bray, 
I paused, stood in mute attention; but the 
sound died away, or if it was repeated the sul- 
len church clock had drowned the enchanting 
harmony. How authorship affects other Ani- 
mals, I know not ; with me, it was beginning 
to be an imperious feeling, it was my daily 
thoughts and my nightly dream, thus a con- 
fidant was absolutely necessary to my repose, 
either to patronise my undertaking or repress 
my ambition. With these feelings I resolved 
to absent myself from home this one night, 
daylight would facilitate my return, and as I 
was assured the musical bray I had heard 
could issue from none other than the amiable 
Mrs. Scamper, I determined to remain near 
the spot till morning. A public road, how- 
ever, is no secure place for an unoccupied 
Donkey. I therefore turned down a lane 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 211 

making my supper en passant. It was nearly 
midnight, when stealing near some palings 
that enclosed a neat modem cottage, a small 
gate gave way, and afforded me ingress into 
the fore court. I walked leisurely over the 
lawn, approached the house, when the night 
breeze wafted a fresh and most grateful odour 
under my nose. I raised my head, and found 
a well-loaded Vine whose fruit tempted my 
palate. I fear I was somewhat voracious in 
my attack ; making as free with the branches 
as the fruit. I had eaten half way round the 
house, when I heard a whispering within. 
Thinks I, " it is time to decamp;'* and tread- 
ing as lightly as possible, still keeping doge 
to the house, my ears touched a wire which 
communicated from a trellis work door-frame 
to the house ; a bell, immediately tinkled 
I took to my heels but ere I reached the 
outer gate, a gun was fired from a window 
above, it grazed my tail. I scarcely knew 
whether I was wounded or not, so great was 
my alarm ! " Thieves and Murder," were the 
words which followed this warlike defence ; 
but I had paid too dearly for my dessert, to 
wait further chastisement. X I ran as though 
the enemy had actually been at my heels ; 
nor stopped till I reached the cow-house of 
Mrs Herbert. Here, I found time to reflect 
on my folly ; but, neither the fright 1 had 
endured, nor the injury my tail had sustained, 



21-2 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

was to be compared to my shame at having 
such a tale to relate to Balaam. " He will 
think me incorrigible," sighed I, and I wept 
as I anticipated our next meeting. While I 
was thus the victim of self-accusation, the 
cowherd approached, and unlocking the door 
was entering, when I thrust by him, well 
knowing if I could make my way through the 
shed, I should gain my own meadow. Alas ! 
in my haste, I perceived not a bar which 
crossed the interior door; the good fellow 
knew me, and was throwing open the door 
when the bar fell on my back, and I sunk on 
the ground. 

It was some minutes ere I could rise, and 
when I did, was but too sensible I had receiv- 
ed an incurable injury. Hobbling to my im- 
mediate residence I threw myself on the grass, 
the kind cowherd following and pitying me, 
in accents of the most compassionate interest. 
1 was soon surrounded by the dear children, 
whose artless expressions, and tender caresses, 
at once filled me with gratitude and touched 
me with remorse. 

" Silly Ass that I was," said I mentally, 
" to be seeking patronage, when I possessed 
the friendship of such disinterested beings as 
these !" Yet, as my pain in some measure 
subsided, the excess to which my desire of 
fame had exposed me, seemed an additional 
motive for giving publicity to my follies. " It 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 2KB 

may warn the thoughtless Donkey/' thought 
I, " and teach him to curb those aberrations 
of the imagination that have made me a crip- 
ple for life." As these reflections occupied 
my mind, Balaam peeped over my fence. 

" What has happened r" said he, the liveli- 
est sympathy agitating his aged frame. I 
explained myself ad libitujn, not omitting my 
authorship propensity. Balaam looked sur- 
prised, and I really believed entertained some 
doubts of my sanity ; but with his usual con- 
sideration, sta/ted no objections, simply saying, 
" it was not a time to talk of mental exertion, 
when my bodily weakness claimed every 
attention that friendship could bestow." Dear 
old Donkey, yes ! yours were not professions: 
how would he watch my gait, and comfort 
me with the hope, that time (by reconciling 
me to the awkwardness of my carriage, and 
the slow pace I was compelled to use,) would 
teach me to be grateful, that no more serious 
consequences had attended my inauspicious 
search after patronage ! 



CHAP. XVIII. 

A Congress of Donkeys, and Conclusion. 
YOU will believe my young master was not 



214 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

an unmoved spectator of my sufferings. It 
was on this occasion he expressed himself in 
terms which at once convinced me of his hu- 
manity, and assured me, that even an Ass by 
diligence and fidelity may make a lasting 
friend of man. 

" Charles," said Mr. George addressing 
master Herbert, " so long as you condescend 
to ride a Donkey, I make you master of this 
poor animal ; your Sisters will of course 
share him with you as usual, but I give him 
to you. I know I can rely on j'our using him 
well, and I recommend your preventing him 
from wandering, by cautiously shutting the 
gates. And my dear Charlotte," turning to 
Mrs. Herbert, " I have a request to make of 
you, never part with this faithful creature ; 
but should he become useless leave him at 
liberty to range about the grounds. I am per- 
suaded you will oblige me, for you, equally 
with myself, loved the dear girl to whose 
comfort he contributed most materially." 

Mrs. Herbert was evidently affected by this 
reference to the sweet Caroline ; she willingly 
acceded to the request of my master, pro- 
mising she would take care of me so long as I 
lived. 

This arrangement, threw me into raptures, 
and had I been as agile as formerly, no doubt 
I should have evinced my joy by a thousand 
lively antics ; as it was, I could only look my 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 21!) 

delight; and if the eyes of a Donkey may be 
allowed to look brilliant, mine certainly did 
on this memorable occasion. Mr. George then 
turned to a livelier top : c, and with great hu- 
mour described my recent frolic. It appeared, 
that the gentleman on whose Vine 1 had re- 
galed, was a friend of Mr. Manton's ; they had 
Miet since the eventful night, and Mr. Crosby 
when reporting the ridiculous alarm of his 
servants, declared he had never witnessed a 
more comic scene. It seems the gardener 
having missed some fruit (unknown to the 
family) slept with a loaded musket by his 
bed-side. My munching had been heard 
by this vigilant gentleman ; and the frequent 
pulls I made at the Vine, led him to believe 
there must be a gang of thieves in the garden. 
The tinkling of the bell, he conceived to 
be unintentional on the part of the de- 
predators ; but when I ran down the gravel 
path, he thought he had his man, and fired. 
Mr. Crosby, whom the report of firearms 
roused from his bed, instantly arose, and 
on quitting his room, found the male and fe- 
male servants assembled on the landing-place. 

" Depend upon it, it is that great Irishman, 
that said he was a haymaker," said one of the 
women. " I tell you it's no such thing," re- 
plied the gardener, " it was a little short thick- 
set man." 

" I beg your pardon Mr. Thomas, but for 



2K> The Adventures of a Donkey. 

my part I've never closed my eyes to-night, 
which I reckon quite miraculous, and I have 
been listening for three hours or more, and at 
last I peeped through the curtains, and if ever 
I saw a tall, black, ill-looking fellow, he was 
one !" 

Mr. Crosby now interfered, demanding the 
cause of the alarm, and who had presumed to 
keep loaded lire arms without his knowledge. 
The gardener excused his transgression hv 
declaring the garden was robbed every night/ 
tf But where's the groom r" asked Mr. Cros- 
by, " I thought this musket was in his care?'* 
I begged it of him/' replied the gardener, 
" but Jack's gone after the rascals, Sir ; we 
shall hear some'at of 'urn. He would go, there 
was no hindering him, he got over the stables 
and dropped over the wall." 

Mr. Crosby thought fit to follow the daunt- 
less Jack, making Thomas (most unwillingly' ) 
his companion. It appears they met the 
groom a short distance from the house, who 
laughingly declared the thief to have been a 
poor Donkey, which he had followed all the 
way to Mrs. Herbert's cow-house. The gar- 
dener was not to be convinced : he had seen 
the villain, nay more, he knew he should dis- 
cover traces of blood in the morning, for he 
heard the fellow groan, and hobble of}' as if he 
was wounded!" 

Daylight, however, brought no proof of 



The Adventures of a Donkey 217 

Mr. Tom's accuracy ; there were no traces of 
blood, nor any print of a human 'footstep. The 
Vine was stripped to a certain height all round 
the house, the bell-wire bent, and the shoe- 
marks of some hoofed animal plentifully im- 
printed on the flower beds. Mrs. Herbert's 
cow-herd further corroborated the testimony 
of the groom, by examining me, and discover- 
ing my tail to have been singed. Thus the 
tall Irish hay-maker, and the little fat man, 
dwindled into no more formidable an animal 
than a poor giddy Donkey, who finding him- 
self unexpectedly placed in the way of temp- 
tation, had not resolution to resist its allure- 
ments. 

As I listened to this whimsical fact, I could 
not help wondering at the extraordinary differ- 
ence there must be in the sight of men and 
women, and that of Donkeys. Did all these 
people say what they believed to be truth ; or, 
did fear lead them astray? From what Mr. 
George said in conclusion, it would appear, 
each of these persons maintain their assertion, 
and though in the hearing of their master they 
avoid the subject ; enjoy amongst themselves 
that most delightful of all predilections (with 
the ignorant,) " a tale of terror." Now if 
iwe were to indulge such a taste, when con- 
viction so palpably proved our mistake, we 
jfhould be called obstinate Asses. Query 
I What are these gentry? 
v 



Si 8 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

But I have done with adventures; and in 
this stage of my existence, when I am press- 
ing forward as a candidate for Donkey fame, 
feel all the presumption and danger of atempt- 
ing further analysis of the human character. 

As my spirits recovered their tone, Balaam 
reverted to my hints respecting authorship. 
I hung my ears, and no doubt looked very 
silly as he commenced his harangue. I 
thought my answers, however, had their 
effect He was silent for a few minutes, 
when, resting his nose on my fence, as was his 
custom, he asked, what 1 anticipated from 
the publication of my memoirs. 

" Why, my dear Sir," said I, " the writer 
who neither desires nor could be benefited by 
pecuniary emolument, has some right to be 
considered a disinterested scribe. I grant that 
our lives exhibit none of those marvellous inci- 
dents that can amuse the romantic, butsuivly, 
if a genuine history of a very useful animal 
was submitted to the public, it might teach 
that public to estimate their services more 
agreeably to humanity." 

" The attempt is hazardous," replied Ba- 
laam, " in fact, my dear Jemmy, I feel so 
timid oi! the subject, so fearful of encouraging 
you to do that which may expose you to de- 
rision, I would rather you sought the advice 
of some Ass better qualified to give you coun- 
sel on a matter of guch importance." 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 219 

" If you approved," said I, despairingly, 
" what were the whole race of Donkeys to 
me!" 

" I cannot apply, for I do not deserve this 
compliment," resumed Balaam ; " however, 
not to dismiss the subject too abruptly, sup- 
pose we were to convene a meeting of the best 
informed Donkeys of our acquaintance, and 
take their opinions. It could do no harm, 
and may exonerate me from that appearance of 
fastidiousness which I perceive has had its 
effect on your spirits." 

I denied this, but I fear rather awkwardly, 
for Balaam with a smile added, " you may 
ride your hobby yet Jem, younger heads, and 
more sanguine Asses, may see this matter in a 
different point of view ; I think Juba must be 
our secretary on this occasion. Shall I depute 
him to apprize our friends of your wishes?" 

" My dear Sir," I replied, " if I am not 
asking too much, will you allow the commit- 
tee to be assembled in your name ?" 

tf That, is incompatible with my principles, 
dear Jem. It is a serious thing to lend one's 
name in a case of this nature, nor could it be 
clone, without in a manner, announcing me as 
favouring your design; and as I at present can- 
not give you encouragement to prosecute your 
plan, I would rather remain a neuter person- 
age; in this stage of the business." 






220 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

" Then I must give it up altogether," sigh- 
ed I. 

" By no means," continued Balaam, " Juba 
shall intimate, that you have suggested a plan, 
which you conceive to be beneficial to the 
Donkey world at large: but that, unwillling 
to rely on your own judgment, you request the 
presence of such of our mutual friends, as are 
interested in the lives and fortunes of the Asi- 
nine community." 

" Admirable !" I exclaimed, " nothing can 
be better, we shall muster pretty strong no 
doubt But my dear Sir, you will give me 
your support ?" " 

" I will broach the subject, Jemmy," he 
resumed, " but recollect, it will be with the 
utmost impartiality." 

" Enough, my respected friend, I feel all 
the value of this condescension, and can never 
sufficiently express my gratitude." 

"I will imagine if to be such as I prize," 
rejoined Balaam, " viz, sincere. But now my 
good fellow, compose your spirits; and as 
authorship is your passion, arrange your 
thoughts, and prepare yourself to submit them 
to tt < ars of our committee." 

We parted, and it was now I felt all the 
temerity of my project. Stretching my length 
upon the grass, I began (in idea,) to polish 
my language, smooth my periods and accord- 
ing to Donkey taste, improve my style alto- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 21 

gether. But I found this a most unprofitable 
if not an endless rumination ; what I liked 
one moment 1 rejected in the next. " I believe 
I must trust a little to the imagination," said 
I to myself, " that is, not in point of fact, 
but for that colouring which a favourite sub- 
ject ever receives from the fancy." 

Again, I recollected I was preparing a work 
expressly designed for the juvenile world, a 
class of readers who demand the best efforts 
of all who presume to address them ; and per- 
haps in point of criticism, there is not a more 
formidable ordeal, than that which is some- 
times instituted by these caviling young gen- 
try. " Tush !" said I, " they cannot expect 
much from an Ass, a simple, self-taught Don- 
key." In short though the sanction of the 
committe was yet wanting, I did not find my 
scribbling mania subside, that happy leisure 
on which I could now securely reckon, 
increased my desire of imparting my memoirs ; 
and, when Balaam the next evening whis- 
pered me, that I might expect the junto at 
eight o'clock the ensuing night, I gave my- 
self up to meditation scarcely taking food or 
nourishment, so completely was my every 
feeling absorbed in that of authorship. 

At the appointed hour, I beheld the assem- 
bled group consisting of Balaam, Mrs. Scamp- 
er, Juba, Dicky, Snap, Fairy, Hob, Bobtail, 
Fatima and Vixen. By a whimsical concur- 
u3 



522 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

rence, Balaam's field gate was unclosed, thus 
I, from my green fence, appeared as if placed 
at the bar, before my judges. Balaam opened 
the sitting, in a forcible but impartial state- 
ment of my wishes. I saw some ears parti- 
cularly erect, and Mrs. Vixen stepped forward 
and examined my countenance with deep 
scrutiny. Balaam proceeded, without noticing 
this lady's rudeness ; as he made his perora- 
tion, a silence of a few seconds ensued. Mrs. 
Vixen, with a grin, was on the eve of reply* 
ing, when Balaam good-naturedly observed, 
" Seniority of age must have the preference," 
bowing to Mrs. Scamper. 

" Then I may take a nap," retorted Vixen, 
" for I believe I am the youngest lady in the 
committee." 

We all smiled, well knowing madam Vixen 
had made an egregious mistake. Mrs. Scam- 
per, however, advanced towards my fence, 
and in a voice of conciliating harmony, ad- 
dressed me as follows : 

" If I am not misinformed, Mr. Jemmy, 
your proposed publication is designed for the 
use and amusement of young people; then 
how do you hope to benefit your species by 
an address to cnildren ; beings under author- 
ity ; incapable of doing us service, even were 
they so disposed?" 

" It is with the utmost deference I venture 
to avovr a contrary opinion, madam/' I re- 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 223 

plied : " children of amiable manners, have 
much influence in society; particularly amongst 
their inferiors. A well-educated child may, 
in the most graceful manner, and in language 
at once appropriate and kind, reprove the in- 
humanity of the less informed, and since we 
have been appointed to the distinction of 
carrying ladies and gentlemen, drawing garden- 
chairs, &c. &c. this sort of interference be- 
comes a point of some importance." 

Mrs. Scamper smiled; " I know it is a 
thankless office to oppose the favourite project 
of an ardent mind," said she, " but until I 
hear something of your plan, and the incidents 
it is to comprise, I must continue to doubt 
its utility." 

" I differ from you, ma'am," interjoined 
Snap ; " so many rational Asses have thrust 
their histories on the public, I can see no rea- 
son for preventing a genuine Ass from telling 
his own story." 

There was such an emphasis laid on the 
word genuine by this petulant Donkey, that 
T really rejoiced Madam Luna denied us her 
beams; I felt that 1 blushed profusely, and 
had not the gentle voice of Fatima rallied 
my aroused feelings, I believe I should have 
retorted. 

" Mr. Jemmy," said the charming Fatima, 
" I applaud your intention, and sincerely hope 
you will carry it into execution: allow m 



224 The Adventiires of a Donkey. 

to ask, if you propose to make your work a 
general or an individual memoir ?" 

" Individual, madam," I replied, " but in- 
terspersed with anecdote and observations." 

" Ah !" she resumed, " to be sure you are 
the best judge; yet I must think our genus, 
from its antiquity and the honourable mention 
made of us in the best and most valuable of 
records, offers a wide field for exalting us in 
the estimation of the present generation." 

Here old Balaam drew nearer the fence, evi- 
dently desirous of attending to my reply. 

" My dear madam," said I, " I was fully 
aware of this, and would gladly have availed 
myself of testimonials so irrefragably convinc- 
ing and distinguished; but we are no longer 
the animals we were ! The horse has super- 
seded us! Our very name is a by-word 
amongst the vulgar! And, our occupations, 
(though varying in laboriousnees as in respect- 
ability,) yet expose us so much to the ludi- 
crous, that I would rather forbear from quoting 
the proofs you mention, than blend them with 
matter irreverent" 

" But, Jem," interjoined Balaam, " as you 
would turn author in the service of children, 
how can you reconcile this omission?" 

" Sir," I replied, " the children for whom 
my humble efforts would be exerted, must of 
course have some acquaintance with the Sa- 
cred Writings; and it is from them I should 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 225 

expect that blending of authentic record and 
individual history, that might ultimately prove 
beneficial to my species." 

" You have my free assent from this mo- 
ment/' rejoined Balaam ; " it was this one 
point which led me to oppose your scheme. 
I will hope your reasoning is just, for it \* 
agreeable to principle and that view of the 
human character, it has ever been my wish to 
entertain." 

" So then," exclaimed Mrs. Vixen, " you 
expect great things from your undertaking! 
Well, vanity is a fine dream, till we wake and 
find it but a dream." 

" We shall never get a blow less, nor an 
additional mouthful of hay, for all the wisest 
of Donkeys could say in our favour," sneered 
Snap. 

" I think I saw you once in Kent, Mr. 
Jemmy," resumed Mrs. Vixen, " at the Tun- 
bridge Races. You may remember my hus- 
band won the saddle. You must have been 
very nervous at that time ; it quite surprised 
my friends to see you frightened by a penny 
trumpet ha! ha! ha!" 

" Madam," I replied, " T have not forgot- 
ten the circumstance: the penny trumpet 
shall be duly mentioned in my memoirs; I 
will neither increase its size, nor enhance its 
value ; nor will I omit to name Mr. Vixen's 
talents as a racer." 



10.6 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

It was in this stage of my examination that 
J uba stepped forward. 

" I ;do not pretend to know any thing of 
books or histories of any kind," said he; "but 
if you do publish your life, Jemmy, do not 
forget to say something of Donkey prejudices 
and Donkey satire." 

It is clear he alluded to Mrs. Vixen, and 
I was alarmed lest the junto should squabble 
amongst themselves, and prematurely dissolve 
the meeting. 

" It was my firm intention to be just," I 
replied; " and if a Donkey may pledge hie 
honour, I here declare, I will not 

" ' Extenuate, nor aught set down in malice/ " 

" Then now, Mr. Jem," said Hob, " give us 
a brief sketch of your intended history." 

I complied but not without considerable 
embarrassment: my situation was in truth 
very trying. To see so many long ears 
stretched to catch my accents to hear two 
or three (as I thought) dissentient snorts, as 
certain observations escaped ray lip* how I 
got through my task, even at this moment ap- 
pears extraordinary. Yet I accomplished it, 
and obtained a majority. . 

Bobtail, who was of a phlegmatic charac- 
ter, astonished us all by entering into the spi- 
rit of my memoirs. " What you say of soot- 
carrying," said he, " is strictly true ; I could 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 227 

almost have fancied the odious powder was 
under my nose: yes, I know what it is to 
carry bags, and chimney-sweepers too.'* 

Dicky and Miss Fairy evinced little interest 
during the first part of the discussion; but 
perceiving they whispered, I thought it pos- 
sible timidity "restrained them from offering 
an opinion. Therefore, addressing myself to 
Miss Fairy, I begged she would favour me 
with her sentiments. 

" Indeed I have no opinion to give," she 
replied, petulantly ; " Mr. Dicky and I to be 
sure, have remarked, that you have said very 
little of the beauty of lady Asses, though one 
ought not to be offended at that; for some 
Donkeys are too much taken up with them- 
selves to think of any thing else." 

This was a terrible attack upon a Donkey 
who had the highest respect for the fair sex. 

" Madam" I rejoined, " I trust those who 
know me will exonerate me from the imputa- 
tion of being insensible to the worth of the 
female Ass. If my memoir enters more 
largely into the sufferings of Donkeys, it is, 
because I hope and believe, excessive labour 
and hard usage are more particularly their lot. 
<Jf the utility and worth of our feminine 
friends, none but an illiterate Ass could enter- 
tain a doubt. That I have not attempted the 
language of the flatterer, is a point on which 
I pride myself; for though this style is said 



528 The Adventures of a Donkey 

to be a favourite one with Asses, I have not 
availed myself of the privilege, not less cau- 
tious of injuring the morals of my own class, 
than fearful of appearing as the copyist of a 
higher order of animals." 

The committee now dispersed; and Balaam 
with an impressive adieu retired to repose. 

I saw the dear old Ass go out to his accus- 
tomed work next morning, and, occupied by 
my own projects, night again revolved ere the 
claims of friendship refreshed my memory. 
Nine, ten, eleven o'clock and no Balaam. I 
lingered near the fence, cheating the tedious 
minutes by a thousand vague conjectures; at 
length, wearied with watching, I sunk into 
a light slumber, from which I was awakened 
by the well-known voice of Juba ; it was day- 
break, and a cold rainy morning. 

" Jemmy," said my friend Juba, " you 
have been alarmed by the absence of our poor 
Balaam?" 

" Yes, indeed, Juba, most seriously alarm- 
ed."' 

" Alas!" he resumed, " our anxiety on hi 
account is at an end you will see him no 
more the excellent Balaam is dead." 

" Dead !" I exclaimed ; " tell me when and 
where he died.'* 

" It happened yesterday morning ; I over- 
took his master "in Tottu ham-Court Road; 
our old friend lay extendtl quite 



The Adcentures of a Donkey. 229 

tnd by what I heard from the crowd, his death 
Mas occasioned by a lit." 

This melancholy intelligence affected me 
deeply ; I had lost my early counsellor, my 
constant friend ; and the only consolation now 
left me, was to talk of him, an indulgence in 
which Juba feelingly participated. 

One evening, after having enjoyed this lux- 
ury, my mind yet dwelling on his virtues, the 
following tribute to his memory escaped me : 

To the Memory of Balaam. 

lf-ever Donkey claim'd the meed of fame, 
Balaam ! that honour should adorn thy name ; 
Born to do credit to thy helpless race, 
In thee each virtue of the Ass we trace ; 
Patient, submissive, moderate in food, 
Shaming the vicious, inspiring the good ; 
Thy bright example should for ever give 
Rules, to succeeding Donkeys, hovr to lirej 
But, if inconstant feelings lead astray, 
And, Asses yet, in Folly's mazes bray, 
One grateful convert shall thy worth proclaim, 
And cherish virtue in thy much-loved name. 

JEMMY. 

Effusions of this description can never be 

fenerally interesting. The parties should be 
nown to each other in order to excite that 
pleasing sympathy so soothing to friendship. 
As such, I shall freely forgive my readers 
though they criticise my poetic talents. I can 
only say, Juba applauded my little offering, 
and having a taste for recitation, has frequent- 



130 The Adventures of a Donkey. 

ly gratified me by repeating them, with a pa- 
thos which had an excellent effect, according 
to my Donkey conception. 

Shall I experience similar indulgence from 
my rational censors ? Alas ! I tremble at the 
idea of what may be my fate : yet, surely, the 
intentions of an author should have some 
weight with his readers, and mine, I boldly 
declare, are humane. I know that every 
living thing has feeling that from man, who 
" walks erect and can contemplate the hea- 
vens/' to the " beetle that we tread upon," 
each can feel ; that the great Disposer of the 
Universe hath placed his intelligent creatures 
above all the other works of his mighty hand : 
he has invested you with power, but that 
power must be tempered with mercy, or ye 
are no longer the servants in whom he will be 
" well pleased." 

If you have laughed with me through some 
of the proceeding pages, let me hope you will 
not reject a brief admonition at the close of 
my literary attempt : I positively assert, that 
lam a patriotic Ass; love my country, re- 
spect her laws, and take a lively interest in, 
her prosperity; and though I stand up in the 
defence of my own class, I presume to think, 
the object I have in view does not, in the 
smallest degree, implicate us as a body. We i 
are willing to give you our labour, submit to ' 
your guidance, and in all respects conduct 1 



The Adventures of a Donkey. 23 1 

ourselves as faithful servants, and 'the only 
return we ask is kindness the simple offices 
of humanity. Would it were in my power 
to impart to your species a small portion of 
that habitual patience with which we are en- 
dowed ! convinced as I am, that we more fre- 
quently suffer from the hasty temper than the 
actual insensibility of our masters. To the 
readers of my adventures I trust it will be 
sufficient to add, that should any dumb ani- 
mal fall under their temporary displeasure, I 
hope they will pause ere they deform them- 
selves by cruelty, and bestow a thought on one 
who, having " felt persecution," conceived 
himself qualified to implore mercy one who, 
while he allows his fallibility as an Ass, has 
no hesitation in declaring himself, 

The most respectful 

And humble of Donkeys; 
JEMMY. 

HAMPSTEAD, MIDDLESEX, 
October 29^,1814. 

THE END. 



A LIST 

or 

IMPROVED BOOKS, &c. 

TOR 

CHILDREN, 

RECENTLY PUBLISHED 



WILLIAM DARTON, JUN. 
58, HOLBORN HILL, 

(OPPOSITE ELY PLACE,) 
LONDON. 



1 The little Vocabulary, intended as an introduc- 
tion to any of the larger Spelling-Books, and parti- 
cularly designed to assist Mothers in the instruction 
of their young Children: By Mrs. Lovechild, price 
6d 

2 The Modern Goody Tico-shoes ; exemplifying 
the Good Consequences of early attention to Learning 
amd Virtue. By Mary Belson, Author of " The 
Orphan Boy," Industry and Idleness, 1 ' &c. &c. 
price It 



I nip raced Books for Children. 

3 The Yellow Shoe-strings ; or, the Good Effects 
of Obedience to Parents, price Is 

4 Easy Reading ; adapted to the capacities of 
Children from Five to Seven Years old ; designed to 
advance them by natural and easy gradations to the 
perusal of larger works ; being a companion to, and 
intended to follow the " Little Vocabulary." Di- 
vided into a number of short Lessons, and embel- 
lished with many wood cuts. By Mrs. Lovechild, 
price Is 

5 Henry: a Story for Little .Boys and Girls from 
Five to Seven Years old. By Frances Bowyer Vajx. 
Part the First, price Is 

6 Lectures at my School ; or, Play-Ground Con- 
versations. By a Friend to Youth. Illustrated with 
fifty elegant Engravings , price 2s 6d half bound 

7 Learning better than House and Land, as ex- 
emplified in the History of Harry Johnson and 
Dick Hobson. By J. CAREY, LL. D. 2s 6d half 
bound 

8 The Scripture Alphabet, by a Parent for his 
Children; illustrated with twenty-seven Engravings 
from Scripture, price Is 

9 My Real Friend; or, Incidents in Life, found- 
ed on Truth. With several Copper-plates, price Is 

10 Grateful Tributes ; or, Recollections of Infan- 
cy. By MARY BKLSON, Author of " Industry and 
Idlenesss," &c., price with plates Is (3d or without 
plates 6d 

11 London ; a Descriptive Poem. Second Edi- 
tion, corrected and illustrated with elegant Views on 
Copper-plates, price Is 



Improved Books for Children. 

12 The Adventures of the Celebrated little Tho- 
mas Dellow, who was stolen from his parents on the 
18th of November, 1811, and restored to them on 
the 3d of January, 1812. Illustrated by eight charac- 
teristic Engravings, price Is 

13 The First, or Mother's Catechism ; containing 
Common Things necessary to be known at an Early 
Age. By the Rev. DAVID BLAIR, price 9d 

14 The French and English Primer, or an easy 
Vocabulary of Twelve Hundred common Words for 
the Use oi Children. By the ABBE BOSSUT, price 9d 

15 A Tour Through England; described in a 
Series of Letters from a Young Gentleman to his 
Sister. With Copper-plates, third edition, revised 
price 3s 

16 A Visit to London; containing a Description 
of the principal Curiosities of the British Metropolis. 
With six Copper-plates, price 2s Cd 

17 A Visit to a Farm House, or an Introduction 
to various Subjects connected with Rural Economy. 
Embellished with beautiful Plates, price 2s Gd 

18 Mary and her Cat ; a Tale for Good Children, 
chiefly in Words of two Syllables, price Is 

19 Juvenile Plutarch; containing Accounts of 
the Lives of celebrated Children, and of the Infancy 
of persons who have been illustrious for their Virtues 
or talents. With Plates, 2 vols. price 5s 

20 The Juvenile Spectator; being observations 
on the Tempers, Manners, and Foibles of various 
Young Persons ; interspersed with such lively Mat- 
ter, as it is presumed, will amuse as well as instruct. 
By ARABELLA ARGUS. 2 vols. 12mo. price 4s 6d 
each vol. bound 



Improved Books for Children. 

21 The Wonders of the Telescope, or a Display 
of the Starry Heavens and the System of the Universe : 
calculated to promote and simplify the Study of Astro- 
nomy. With fourteen Plates, price 6s 

22 The Wonders of the Microscope, or an Expla- 
nation of the Wisdom of the Creator, in Objects 
comparatively minute, adapted to the Understanding 
of Young Persons. Illustrated with five large Cop- 
per-plates, price 4s 6d 

23 The Wonders of the Horse ; recorded in 
Anecdotes, and interspersed with Poetry. By JO- 
SEPH Taylor, Author of " Tales of the Robin.' r 
Price 2s Od half bound 

24 The Mice and their Pic Nic ; an Allegorical 
Tale, representing the Manners and Customs of the 
present Age; in Contentment a Fashionable Visi- 
tor High Breeding the Effects of Fashion the 
Epicure-^-an Invitation a Consultation and Journey 
a Season in London Etiquette, &c. price Is co- 
loured Plates, or 6d plain 

25 Animal Creation, or the Power of the Supreme 
Being attempted to be unfolded to the Minds of the 
Rising Generation. By a Parent. Containing many 
engravings of Animals in Wood, price 6d 

26 Dix*s Juvenile Atlas; containing forty-four 
Maps, with plain Directions for copying them ; de- 
signed for Junior Classes. 4to. half bound, price 10s 
6d plain, or 14s full coloured 

27 The Orphan Boy, or a Journy to Bath. Found- 
ed on Fact. By MARY BELSON, price 2s half 
bound 

28 The Sphinx, or Allegorical Lozenges. By a 
Descendant of Cleobulina, an ancient composer of 
Enigmas, &c. price 9d 



Improved Books for Children. 

20 On the Education of Daughters ; translated 
from the French of the ABBE FENELON, afterwards 
Archbishop of Carabray. 12mo. extra boards, pric 
2s 6d with a beautiful Frontispiece 

30 A Description of the most remarkable Trees 
Plants and Shrubs, in all parts of the World ; illus- 
trated with several curious Anecdotes of their wonder- 
ful Properties, and, at the same time, manifesting 
infinite Wisdom in the Formation of those valuable 
Productions, so beneficial to all Mankind. By 
JOSEPH TAYLOR, Author of " Tales of the Robin" 
12mo. price 4s sheep lettered 

31 The True History of a Little Boy, %vho 
cheated himself. Founded on Fact. With appro- 
priate Cuts, price Is 6d coloured, or Is plain 

32 Studies in Penmanship, for the Use of Schools; 
being Specimens of the various Hands now in Use. 
Written by JOSEPH DON BAY AND, writing MasUr 
of Ack worth School, price Is 

33 The Wonders of Animated Nature ; consist- 
ing of Descriptions at large, and Engraved Repre- 
sentations of the principal Animals and Birds in the 
Royal Menageries of London and Paris. Translated 
from LA CEPEDE, with considerable Additions by 
the English Editor, 8vo. half bound, price 8s 

34 The Good Boy's Soliloquy ; containing his 
Parent's Instructions relative to his Disposition and 
Manners Illustrated with Sixteen Copper-plate Cuts, 
price Is 

35 The Whim Wham ; or, Evening Amusements, 
for all Ages and Sizes ; being an entire New Set of 
Riddles, Charades, Questions, and Transposition*. 
By a Friend to lanocent Mirth, price Is 

T 



Improved Books for Children. 

36 Portraits of Curious Characters in London, 
Sec. &c. with Descriptive and Entertaining Anecdotes. 
Price One Shilling. Containing Likenesses of the 
following singular Characters : Nathaniel Bentley, 
Esq. Ann Siggs Martin Van Butchell John 
Statham Anne Longman John and Robert Green 
Tom and his Pigeons Roger Smith George Ro- 
mondo Toby, or Sham Abraham Sir John Dinely 
" Brother John and I" Ann Johnson Samuel 
Horsey Miss Theodora de Verdion, who dressed 
as a man Daniel Lambert Mary Jones A well 
known Carver in Fleet Market John Elwes, Esq. 
the Miser The Flying Pie-man Thomas Laugher, 
Aged 109 Years - Daniel Dancer, Esq. The above 
Portraits are now accompanied with a Biographical 
Skttch of each Character, which will be found highly 
interesting. 

37 Scripture Characters, by a Parent for his 
Children; illustrated with several beautiful Plates, 
price Is 6d 

38 Talcs of the Robin, and other small Birds. 
By Joseph Taylor, price 2s 6d 

39 The Book of Games; or, a History of Juve- 
nile Sports, practised at a considerable Academy 
near London. Illustrated by Twenty-four Copper- 
plates, price 3s 6d half bound 

40 Signor Topsy Turves Wonderful Magic Lan- 
thern ; or, The World turned upside down. By the 
Authors of " Original Poems." Illustrated with 
Twenty-four Engravings by the Rev. Isaac Taylor. 
of Colchester, price 3s 6d half bound 

41 London Melodies; or Cries of the Seasons. 
Two Parts, price Is each. With several Engrav- 
ings 



Improved Books for Children. 

42 The Adventures and Conversations of a Sum- 
mer's Morning ; intended to Entertain and Instruct 
the Minds of Youth : a New Edition improved. By 
Wra. Wiseacre, Esq. price Is 6d half bound 

43 The Baby's Holiday, to which is added, the 
White Lily. By Mary Belson, Author of several 
popular Works, Is coloured plates 

44 The First Step to Knowledge; being- an easy 
Introduction to the various English Spelling-Books. 
By the Rev. J. Goldsmith. 28th Edition, price 6d 

45 The Geographical Primer ; designed for the 
Younger Classes of Learners, and calculated to 
advance them, by natural and easy Gradations, to 
a perfect acquaintance with the Elements of the 
Science ; with an Appendix, containing Fourteen 
Hundred Questions on the principal Maps. By J. H. 
Wiffen. 18mo. 3s bound 

46 The Invited Alphabet, or, Address of A to B; 
containing his friendly proposal, for the Amusement 
and Instruction of good Children. With twenty-five 
Engravings on Copper-plates, price Is 6d 

47 The Assembled Alphabet, or, Acceptance of 
A's Invitation ; concluding with a Glee for Three 
Voices. Being a Sequel to the " Invited Alphabet," 
with elegant Copper-plate Engravings, price Is (id 

48 Infantile Erudition ; concluding with a Glee 
for Three Voices : to which are added, the Figure 
Dancers. The whole intended as a Supplement to 
the "Invited" and " Assembled" Alphabets: illus- 
trated with beautiful Copper-plates, price Is Od 

49 Divine and Moral Songs for the Use of 
Children, by Isaac Watts D. D. With many Plates 
price 6d 



Improved Books for Ciiildrea. 

50 Franklin's Way to Wealth, or, Poor Richardl 
Improved; to which 'is added, " Hovr to make Much 
of a Little," earnestly recommended to the Industri- 
ous Poor ; also " Alphabetical Maxims," worthy 
the remembrance and regard of all. An entire ne\f 
Edition, with several Copper-plates, by Bob Short, 
price 6d 

51 A Neir and Entertaining Alphabet, for Young 
Children ; where some Instruction may be gained, 
and much Amusement. Embellished with twenty-six 
Engravings, price (3d 

52 Harry and his Mother; a Monitory Tale, 
intended chiefly for Youth. By W. Parr, with many 
Copper- plates and wood Engravings, price Is 

53 A Nosegay for the Trouble of Culling ; or, 
Sports of Childhood, with many cuts, price Is 

54 Simple Truths, in Verse; intended for the 
Amusement and Instruction of Children at an 
early Age. By Mary Belson, 18ino. half bound, 
price Is 6d 

55 Biographical Sketches of Eminent British 
Characters', containing the Life and Character, La 
bours and Actions of several British Worthies, accoii.* 
panied with several Portraits, price 6d 

56 A First or Mothers Dictionary for Chil- 
dren ; containing upwards of Three Thousand Eight 
Hundred Words, which occur most frequently in. 
Books and Conversation ; simply and familiarly 
explained and interspersed throughout with occasional 
remarks: the whole adapted to the capacities of 
Younger Pupils By Anna Brownweli Muryhy, 
price 4s 6d bound 



Improved Books for Children, 

57 Innocent Poetry, for Infant Minds, by the au- 
thor of " Industry and Idleness," and " Precept and 
Example," fourth edition, considerably improved, 
with several Copper-plates, price Is 

58 Industry and Idleness, a pleasing and instruc- 
tive Tale for Good Little Girls, in words not exceeding 
two syllables. A new edition, corrected, price Is 

59 A School Dictionary, or Entick's English 
Dictionary, abridged, and adapted to the use of 
Schools ; containing only the roots of words, and those 
of importance and utility, and omitting derivative, ob- 
solete, vulgar and unusual words. By the Rev. David 
Blair, author of the " First or Mother's Catechism," 
third edition, with numerous improvements, price 3s 
bound 

60 An Outline of Scripture History ; with an 
Introduction to the Church Catechism, by A Lady for 
the use of her Children, price 6d 

61 Precept and Example, or Midsummer Holi- 
days ; to which is added, the Mother's Reward, or 
Christmas Holidays, a new edition improved. By 
Mary Belson, author of " The Orphan Boy," price 
Is 6d half bound 

62 The Royal Museum, or Picture-Book, con- 
taining a large number of engraved subjects, price 6d 



PENMANSHIP. 

Executed by the best Masters, and beautifully 
Engraved. 

63 Large Text Copies, several sorts, 6d each 

64 Round Text ditto ditto 



Improved Books for Children, 

65 Round Hand ditto, various 6d each 

66 Small Hand ditto ditto 

67 Running Hand ditto ditto 

68 Geographical Small Hand Copies, quite new, 
price 6d each 

69 Scripture Selections, various sorts, in Running 
Hand, 6d each 

70 A complete Collection of Ciphers, in Two Parts, 
6d each Part 

71 Select Pieces on various Subjects, in plain and 
ornamental Penmanship, price 6d each 

72 German Text Copies, price 6d 

73 Roman Print Copies, ditto 

74 Engrossing Copies, or Modern Law Penman- 
ship, price 6d 

75 Round Hand Exercise Copies, to accompany 
Grammatical, Geographical, Historical, and other 
Exercises, price 6d 

76 Round Hand Exercise Copies, to accompany 
French Exercises and Translations, so arranged, that 
the pupil may, at one glance, find any letter he wants 
as well as monosyllables in common use, price 6d 

77 Holiday Piece-Book, ornamented, containing 
blanks for the pupil to fill up, price Is 6d 

78 A new Geographical Chart, for the use of 
Schools and private Students, designed and written 
by W. Thackwray, Walworth, price Is 6d. With a 
Key to ditto 

79 A Chronological Table, containing the suc- 
cession of the Kings of England, from the Conquest 
to the present time. Designed and written by W. 
Thackwray, Walworth, price Is 6d. \Vith a Key to 
ditto, 6d 

80 Ten Alphabets, consisting of German Text, 



Improved Books for Children. 

Old English, Roman Print, Italic Print, and Engross- 
ing-, price 3d 

This beautiful, engraved 4to Sheet is a useful refer- 
ence for Schools, Painters, Engravers and Sculptors, 
and cannot be obtained in any other form without 
purchasing expensive publications; beside the con- 
venience of displaying the whole under one view in a 
small compass, at a very trifling charge. 



CARDS. 

81 Instructive Conversation Cards, consisting of 
thirty-two Biographical Sketches of eminent British 
Characters, in a m*at Case, price 2s 

82 Instructive Conversation Cards, containing a 
Description of thirty-two of the most distinguished 
Places in England, price 2s in a neat case 

83 Poetical Looking-Glass, or entertaining and 
instructive Mirror for Young Ladies and Gentlemen. 
By Bob Short, price Is 

84 Trades on Cards, with many copper-plate 
Engravings, price Is 

85 Quadrupeds on Cards, for the Instruction and 
Amusement of Youth in the study of Natural History, 
price Is 

, 86 Sixteen Cards in Natural History, with en- 
tertaining Descriptions and many Engravings, price Is 
87 An entire new Pack of Puzzle Cards, for the 
entertainment of young people, by a Friend to Inno- 
cent Mirth, price Is 



Improved Books for Children. 

88 Practical Multiplication Cards, on a plan 
adapted to render the study of Arithmetic easy, 
price Is 



GAMES. 

89 Newton's New Game of Virtue Rewarded 
and Vice Punished, for the Amusement of Youth of 
both sexes ; on Canvas, with a Case and Tetotum, 
Counters and Pyramids, complete, price 9s 

90 Newton's New Game of the Mansion of Bliss; 
on Canvas, with Tetotum, Counters and Pyramids, 
complete, price 9s 

91 The Seven Puzzles, on Canvas, in Case, de- 
signed for the entertainment of a Winter's Evening, 
price 2s 9d 

92 Walker's New Geographical Game, exhibiting 
a Tour through Europe, on Canvas, and in Case, 
with Tetotum and Counters, complete, price 6s 

93 Walker's Game of England and Wales, a nevr 
Geographical Pastime, on Canvas, and in Case, with 
Tetotum, Counters, &c. complete, price Os 

94 Walker's Tour through Ireland, a new Geo- 
graphical Pastime, price 6s 

95 Walker's Tour through Scotland, a new Geo- 
graphical Pastime, price 6s 



Improved Books for Children. 

DISSECTED MAPS 

Are submitted to the Notice of Schools, and 
those who have the care of Youth, as affording 
them useful information, blended with amuse- 
ment, all of which are of Mahogany, and wilt 
not fzr/>, and warranted perfect. 

England and Wales, price 3s 6d 
The Same, . . 7s (3d 

The Same, . . 10s 6d 

Europe, . . 3s Od 

The Same, . . 7s 6d ' 

The Same, . 10s 6d 

The W'jrid in Hemispheres, price 5s 
The Same, price 7s (Jd 
The Same, price 10s Gd 

And every other kind of Dissected Maps, at 
various vrices, according to their size. 

THE FOLLOWING WHOLE SHEET MAPS ARg 

CLEARLY ENGRAVED AND COLOURED, 

PRICE 6'd EACH. 

1 Western Hemisphere, or New World 
2 Eastern ditto, or Old World 

3 Europe 

4 Denmark 

5 Sweden, Denmark and Norway 

6 Russia in Europe 

7 Russian Empire 

8 Scotland 



Improved Books for Child ret;. 

9 England 

10 United Kingdom of England, Scotland and 
Ireland 

11 Ireland 

12 France 

13 Holland 

14 Poland and Prussia 

15 Netherlands 

16 Germany 

17 Switzerland 

18 Hungary 

19 Spain and Portugal 

20 Italy 

21 Turkey in Europe 

22 Ditto in Asia 

23 China 

24 East Indies 

25 Persia 

26 Asia 

27 Hindostan 

28 Africa 

29 North America 

30 United States of America 

31 West Indies 

32 South America 

33 Arabia 

34 Egypt 

35 Greece 

36 Mercator's Chart of the World 

37 Romanum I in per him 

38 Graccia Antiqua 

96 A new whole Sheet Map of England and 



Improved Books for Children, 

Wales, by Mr. Brooks, with the whole of the Turn*? 
pike and other Roads, laid down with great care, be- 
ing a complete Traveling Companion, price 3s 6d 

97 Ditto ditto in a neat Case for the Pocket, 
price 5s 

98 Ward's Plan of London, on a sheet, coloured, 
price Is, and with the East and West India and Lon- 
don Docks, price Is 6d 

99 Ditto on Canvas in a Case for the pocket, with- 
out the Docks, price 2s (kl 

100 Ditto ditto with Docks in Case, price 3s 6d 



DISSECTED PUZZLES. 

Goldsmith's Deserted Village, illustrated with 
very neat Engravings. The Poem is handsomely 
engraved on copper, and will be found a curiosity, 
well adapted for the purposes of a present, price 8s 

Price 4s Cd each, 
My Father, with coloured plates, 
My Mother, . ditto 



My Sister, 
My Brother, . 
My Bible, 
Aly Governess, 
My Son, 
My Daughter, 
My Childhood, 
My Pony, 



ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ciitto 
ditto 
ditto 



Improved Books for Children. 

The Poem of Gratitude, with coloured Plates 
The Infant's Pastoral Hymn, called My Shepherd, 
or the Lambkin's Confession. 

WITH A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF OTH- 
ERS, FROM ONE SHILLING AND SIX- 
PENCE TO EIGHT SHILLINGS. 



SCHOOL BOOKS 

Of most kinds are also kept, and Schools sup- 
plied on the usual Terms. 

%* A Quantity of Damaged Books to he 
Sold Cheap. 



