< II II \ IKIH.U.fl. 

KING, - 

IRA BOOKBINDER. 
/ .ST* 44.EAKTS 

1IGHT0N, V 




1'IBRAR.Y 
OF THE 

U N IVERSITY 

Of 1LLI NOIS 




K 

V. 





G ^arfca* 



The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its return to the library from 
which it was withdrawn on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books 
are reasons for disciplinary action and may 
result in dismissal from the University. 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 






NOV 3 1982 



L161 — O-1096 



vw 



*%* I 



THE ENGLISH BOY 



AT 



THE CAPE. 



LONDON 



GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, 
st. John's squari . 









wit) 



LONDON. 



THE 



ENGLISH BOY 



AT 



THE CAPE: 



AN ANGLO-AFRICAN STORY 



BY THE 

AUTHOR OF KEEPER'S TRAVELS. 



'* The world my country, and my friend mankind !' 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. III. 



LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR WHITTAKER & Co. 

AVE MARIA LANE. 

1835. 



f<?-3 
v. 3 



THE 



ENGLISH BOY 



AT 



THE CAPE. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Thy golden sunshine comes 
From the round heaven, and on their dwelling lies, 

And lights their inner homes : — 
For them thou fill'st with air th' unbounded skies, 

And givest forth the stores 
Of ocean, and the harvests of its shores. 

Bryant. 

" A fine Caffre," it has been observed, " gives 
the idea of the human animal in the highest pos- 
sible condition/' "The figures of these people," 
it has been added, (with immediate reference, 
however, to a particular tribe or nation of Caf- 
fres, — for there are many,) "are the noblest that 

VOL. III. B 






2 THE ENfil ISII BOY 

my eye ever gazed upon ; their movements the 
most graceful, and their attitudes the proudest, 
standing like forms of monumental bronze." — " I 
was much struck," says the traveller now quoted, 
" with the strong resemblance that a group of 
CarTres bears to the Greek and Etruscan antique 
remains, except that the savage drapery is more 
scanty, and falls in simpler folds. Their mantles, 
like those seen on the ancient vases, are gene- 
rally fastened over the shoulder of the naked arm, 
while the other side is wholly concealed; but they 
have many ways of wearing the carosse, or man- 
tle, and of giving variety to their only garment." 
To this identical tribe or nation, (which is that 
possessing, for about two hundred miles, from 
west to east, the country bordering upon the 
colony,) belonged to the party in whose hands 
events had now delivered Charles. Their total 
number is roughly estimated at eighty thousand 
souls, and they live under the several govern- 
ments of four principal incoes, kings, or chiefs 1 , 

1 The Caffre word inro may deserve comparison with the 
Peruvian word hica, it having the same meaning. The entire 
difference of complexion, nevertheless, forbids US to Suppose 
an affinity between the Peruvians and Black Caffi 

This latter people we are disposed to think of the same race 
with the Macrobian Ethiopians of Herodotus. The African 
Ethiopians, properly so called, appear common to the whole 
length of the eastern side of the continent. 



AT THE CAPE. 3 

all descended from Toguh 1 , the ancient lord of 
the country ; but of whose respective pedigrees 
that of Hinza is the proudest, as most direct. 
They give to themselves the name of Amakosi, 
and to their country that of Amacosini ; but 
these words really imply nothing more particu- 
lar than "the men," or " the people," and the 
" country of the men," or "of the people." Like 
all the rest of the Caffre tribes or nations, they 
have another name distinguishing them from the 
other Caffres, who to them are foreigners; and 
who, as well as having their own separate govern- 
ments, are often enemies in war. 

We are speaking, however, of none but the 
Black Caffres. The name of " Caffre," as 
before intimated, is repeated by the Portuguese 
and the English as it falls from Moorish lips, 
upon which it means " heathens ;" and, in the 
Moorish or Arabic sense or usage, means as 
much English and Portuguese, and all other 
nations that are not Mohammedan, as it means 

1 Is Toguh a name of God, claimed, under so many different 
names, as the first king of so many nations ? It is doubtless 
thus with Targitaus, (at other times called Hercules,) the 
father of the Scythians, and of their line of kings. 

Is it, too, because the family of Hinsa is held to be the 
elder branch of so divine a race, that they are in so much 
reverence, even with the other incoes ? See the first volume 
of our work, page 9. 

b2 



4 THE ENGLISH BOY 

these particular people of the south-east of 

Africa 1 . But, if, putting the Bushmen out of 

view, we first distinguish the Caffres from the 

Negroes, or nations of central Africa, which, 

for the most part, are equally " heathen ' with 

the Caffres ; then, we are next to distinguish the 

Black Caffres of the south of the Negro country, 

from the Falatahs of the north, who seem 

to be sometimes called Red Caffres, and who, 

in truth, resemble the Black Caffres in their 

figure, and, unless where reclaimed, in their 

modes of life and heathenism, but not in their 

complexion ; for the Falatahs, or Red Caffres, 

except that, at the lowest, they are pastoral 

and agricultural, bear a certain comparison 

with the Indians of America, while the Black 

Caffres, even in their rudeness, have similitudes 

to some of the most highly civilized of the 

Indians of Asia: there being, in the south of 

the Indian Peninsula, Hindoos as black as the 

Black Caffres, while they are as small and slight 

as the Bushmen on the west of the southern 



1 The wideness of the meaning of the national name of 
Caffre, in a Mohammedan mouth, is illustrated by the rirrnaa 
stance, that in India, another Cafirestan, or Caiireland. or 
Cain-aria (that is, another heathen territory), is spoken of, the 
situation of which is behind the Indian Caucasus, or Coh. or 
Cosh, or Cush. or Cash ; and adjoining to C<j.s/(gur. 



AT THE CAPE. 3 

point of Africa. The Black Caffres, then, as a 
race, inhabit the south-eastern coasts of Africa, 
stretching inland, in the direction of Cape Town, 
till they meet the ancient country of the Bush- 
men, or Wild Hottentots 1 . 

1 In the reign of Xerxes, (reckoned B. C. 486,) a Persian, 
named Sataspes, undertook, as the alternative between that 
task, and the suffering of capital punishment for a crime which 
he had committed, to attempt the circumnavigation of Africa, 
setting out from his port in Egypt, in the Mediterranean, and 
returning by the Indian Ocean, or Arabian Sea : "Continuing 
his voyage," says Herodotus, " for several months, in which he 
passed over an immense tract of sea, he saw no probable ter- 
mination of his labours, and therefore sailed back to Egypt. 
Returning to the court of Xerxes, he, amongst other things, 
related, that in the most remote places he had visited, he had 
seen a people of diminutive appearance, clothed in red gar- 
ments, who, on the approach of his vessel to the shore, had 
deserted their habitations, and fled to the mountains. But he 
affirmed that his people, satisfied with taking a supply of pro- 
visions, offered them no violence. He denied the possibility of 
making the circuit of Africa, as his vessel was totally unable 
to proceed. Xerxes gave no credit to his assertions ; and, as he 
had not fulfilled the terms imposed on him, he was executed, ac- 
cording to his former sentence." Beloe's translation, book iv. 
Melpomene, c. 43. — Now we quote this passage, in ofder to sub- 
mit to the reader our opinion of the probability, that this " peo- 
ple of diminutive appearance," and the country which they 
inhabited, both of which the unfortunate Sataspes reported to 
Xerxes that he saw, were the people and country of the Hot- 
tentots ; and that thus, among other things, we carry back 
some account of that people, and of their abode in their pre- 
sent country, for twenty-three hundred years. " The immense 

B 3 



6 THE ENGLISH BOY 

These Caffres, then, are a people of full 
stature, Roman features, long hair, and jet-black 
complexion. It may here be observed, in pass- 

tract of sea," that, as the historian adds, he described him- 
self to have passed over, before he reached those " most remote 
places" to which he assigns this diminutive people, assists our 
persuasion, that he had actually so nearly reached the Cape, as 
to have found the country of the Hottentots ; and that, at all 
events, from this, as well as from the " several months" that 
his previous voyage had lasted, he was not far from that 
Weedy or Grassy Sea, which, for so large a space, upon either 
side of the equator, is spread over the Atlantic ; and which the 
Phoenicians were accustomed to reach in thirty da3~s. It i<. 
perhaps, a further prop to our conjecture, that the history 
does not say that Sataspes' people of diminutive appearance 
were black ; that therefore it is to be presumed they were 
not so ; that, therefore, he must have passed the latitudes of 
all the coasts of Nigritia, or of Central Africa ; and that thus 
he was brought to those, either of the diverse Caffre nations, 
who are tall, or to those of the Hottentots, who are actually 
diminutive ; while, that the black complexion of the diminu- 
tive people would have been taken notice of, had it existed, is 
what we ought to expect, because, in a previous instance, 
where Herodotus has had to give a report of another African 
people of diminutive appearance, but situate inland. ;uui in the 
north of Africa, their " black colour" h by no means o v er l ooked. 

Be the truth, however, of the report by Sataspes to Ken 
what it may, it carries upon its face all the features of even 
the most modern voyage to uncivilized shores; and, what is 
further, the features of the most honourable of those voyages, 
where (as in this Persian voyage) the civilised strangers have 

inflicted no injury upon the uncivilised natives. Sataspes 

and his people landed to procure provisions ; the inhabitants tied 



AT THE CAPE. 7 

ing, that the population of Africa, upward from 
the Cape to the coasts of the Mediterranean, 
presents, successively, the several states of savage, 
pastoral and agricultural, barbarous, and what is 

to the mountains ; and Sataspes was able to assure Xerxes, (and 
knew that Xerxes would be pleased to hear,) that except taking 
the provisions which they needed, and in which the natives de- 
clined to deal with them, they were guilty of no act of violence 
upon all the coast. 

As to the " red clothes" which Sataspes reported these dimi- 
nutive people to wear (and of which, as the wearers fled precipi- 
tately to the mountains, he might obtain no particular view) ; 
could they (such as is the clothing of the Wild Hottentots of our 
own day) be the skins of beasts, the fur worn outward ? If so, 
and if, in all respects, the wild Hottentots of the fifth century 
before Christ resembled the wild Hottentots of the nineteenth 
century after Christ, what a fair example have we not here, 
of the small impression which the lapse of ages can make 
upon the condition of any given people, where no extraordi- 
nary revolution occurs, to create the change ! For the rest, if, 
upon the authority of this relation of the Greek historian, we 
could believe in the reality of a visit of Sataspes to the 
Hottentots, it would afford no inharmonious name in geo- 
graphy, and commemorate a remarkable event, if we were 
now to call the south-west coast of Africa Sataspia, and the 
Hottentots, Sataspians. It is true that, according to the ac- 
counts of the Phcenecian voyage, undertaken for Necho, king 
of Egypt, and commonly dated about B. C. 670, the whole of 
Africa had been rounded, and therefore the coasts of the Hot- 
tentots passed, two centuries before the voyage of Sataspes ; 
but we know nothing of the fact that the Pbcenecians commu- 
nicated with any part of them, though memorials of their stay 
have sometimes been fancied as still subsisting at the Cape. 

We 



8 THE ENGLISH BOY 

more commonly called civilized. The Bushmen 
are properly savage, because they subsist wholly 
upon the wild gifts of nature. The Black 
Caffres are savage, except that they keep folds of 
domesticated cattle, and plant fields or gardens. 
The Red Caffres are divided into such as are 
properly Caffres or heathens, and live after the 
manner of their Black brethren ; and such as 
have joined the Mohammedan faith, and live in 
towns and villages. The Negro nations plant 

We have elsewhere spoken of the origin of the Dutch terms 
Bush and Bushmen, (the latter signifying the Wild Hotten- 
tots) ; and, if that new example of French and Celtic derivatives 
in common use in English mouths, carries us back to a passing 
speculation in a preceding chapter (see page 137 of our 
first volume), it may be allowed to enlarge a little even the 
present remark, and add a testimony more to the wide 
dissemination of the Celtic dialects, and the light which an 
acquaintance with them is able to throw, both upon geogra- 
phical names, and other truths, and upon the geographical 
history of the Celtic tribes or nations. It is not the Wild 
Hottentots alone, that have ever been distinguished nationally 
by the name of Wood or Bushmen ; because in Spain, the name* 
of Basque, Biscayan, Biscay, and its Bay, have all the same 
original. Basque, the people and the country, implies a people 
and a country of woods and forests — boselis, bosjes, few, and 
bosquets; and the English bosky, " bushy ;" whence Biscay, 
Biscaya, in the same manner SB, in contrast, the country ad- 
jacent to Biscay is called Navarre: — that is. an open, cham- 
paign, plain, Of level country; from the same Celtic root as 
that which gives to the French their niveau, " level. " 



AT THE CAPE. 9 

fields, build cities, and practise a variety of arts; 
but they are without the use of letters, and are so 
disfigured with hideous customs, (along with 
many which are of good report,) that their 
state is to be called barbarism, and themselves 
barbarians. The Moors, or Western Arabs, upon 
the other hand, (though, in numerous respects, 
less estimable than any of the foregoing,) have 
the use of letters, and fulfil, altogether, the 
claims to the title of a civilized people. 

The Black CafFres are gentle or rugged ac- 
cording to the occasion ; but this admission does 
not vindicate them from the charge of savage- 
ness. It is not how soft and amiably a people 
can behave when they are pleased, or when they 
are not offended nor excited, that stamps them 
as civilized, or as morally estimable ; for those 
things are natural to the human character, and need 
no cultivation, and confer no distinction. But 
the test of the cultivated man is, his moderation 
in resentment, his forbearance toward his ene- 
mies, his mildness even in his anger, his inca- 
pability of cruelty ; — the length, in short, to 
which he can go, or beyond which he will not 
go, under circumstances the most adapted to 
bring into action the violence of his temper. 
The command of temper, — this is breeding; 



10 THE ENGLISH BOY 

and breeding is civilization. If there are per- 
sons who think to compound, by their suavity 
when pleased, for their brutality when offended ; 
such persons grievously mistake, both what their 
neighbours may fairly ask of them, and what is 
their own rank in civilization and in nature. 
The savage, as we have said, is every thing of 
this; and so are wolves and tigers. But the 
natural man, exposed, in his natural state, to 
many foes, to many difficulties, and to many 
dangers, threatening incessantly even his life, is 
prone to indulge in all that ruggedness and 
fierceness with which he is endued for his de- 
fence. Yet, even in him, these qualities may take 
the shape of vices, and are always to be kept in 
check. The great business of improvement of 
human character, both in civil and in savage life, 
is the restraint of its ferocity, and the increase 
of its sweetness. A North American Indian, 
being asked what, among the Indians, was con- 
sidered as distinguishing a "good man," could 
never be gotten beyond the test of mildn 
" What sort of a man," said the inquirer, "do 
you call a good one?" — " Ho," anwered the In- 
dian, "that is mild to his friends." — "But what 
would you have him beside?" — "He should 
be mild," returned the Indian, "to his wife and 



AT THE CAPE. 1J 

children." — " Well, but what would make him 

more remarkably good?" — "He must be mild 

when he is drunk." — " And nothing else ?" — 

" Why, he should be mild to his enemies." But, 

if all this is attainable in savage life, it is still 

more so in civil, in proportion to the height 

of civilization. Civilization relieves men from 

many dangers and provocations ; and, because it 

softens the road of life, so it should soften 

manners : — 

" Ars emollit mores." 

But civilization is comparative ; and, in the 
midst of the highest civilization, individuals en- 
joy its advantages only in comparative degrees. 
In the most polished cities, there are thousands 
who lead hard lives, and are exposed to have 
their tempers soured and inflamed. But this 
misfortune, where it demands excuse, is the result 
of poverty, or of what is called a low condition ; 
and thus it is, that a mildness of character and 
manners comes to be essential to gentility, and 
even to bear the name of gentleness ; for gentle- 
ness is nothing, as to the meaning of the word, 
but that character of mind which, by their very 
station, is usually found, and therefore strictly 
expected, in persons literally of birth; — that is, 
born of wealthy families — superior in condition; 

7 



12 THE ENGLISH BOY 

while to the opposite character, for the corre- 
sponding reason, belongs the name of vulgar. 
All the descriptions of men's behaviour are 
drawn from words signifying, in the original, a 
certain station of life; and the justice of the 
terms consists in this, that in reality, there fa 
certain description of behaviour, good or bad, 
characteristic of the majority of those filling the 
station ; and it is no answer, that in all those 
stations, there are individuals who, for better or 
for worse, do not act according to the nominal 
and real standard of their station. As to indi- 
viduals, if they act below the average charac- 
ter of their station, so much the greater is the 
dishonour to themselves ; if better, their own is 
the entire praise ! But so it is, that when we 
speak of rude, rustic, boo?'ish, clownish, churlish; 
we mean, literally, the manners common to the 
country labourer or cultivator of the earth, living 
on wolds and wilds, straitened perhaps by povertv, 
a stranger to, or only distant beholder of the so- 
cial arts, and without the opportunity of soften- 
ing his manners by an enlarged intercourse of 
any kind, and, least of all, by an intercourse 
with the generous and polite. It is the same, 
too, when we talk of urbanity, which means the 
manners of towns; of politeness, which means the 



AT THE CAPE. 13 

manners of cities ; of courteousness, which means 
the manners of courts; and so, also, when we 
talk of generosity, which, like gentility, in its ori- 
ginal and literal sense, means the virtues usual 
and to be expected in persons of birth, or of 
good or high breeding or condition. But these 
are truths which ought to impress us with the 
most valuable moral lessons; first, as they con- 
demn, and stain with shame, and impeach the 
title of those who enjoy the advantages of life 
without exhibiting its fruits ; secondly, as, more 
or less, they excuse those, who, labouring under 
the disadvantages, and confessing their low breed- 
ing and condition, betray also the effects ; and 
thirdly, as they magnify the lustre of those 
others, (and they are thousands,) who, in spite 
of the denials which might plead for their de- 
ficiencies, have yet, from a variety of sources — 
their observation — their good taste — the natural 
goodness of their disposition — and perhaps a 
virtuous and really polished, though humble 
birth and breeding, shown forth the very quali- 
ties which society requires rigorously only of 
their superiors in social life. To such, indeed, 
(whether we speak of manners or of conduct,) 
as warm an eulogium is always to be given, as, 
with respect to those who disgrace their oppor- 

VOL. III. C 



14 THE ENGLISH BOY 

tunities, the warmest condemnation ; and it is in 
this way that speaks the poet : — 

" What can exceed the merit of the great ? 
Nothing — but merit in a low estate ;" 

because, in a low estate, it is the most hard to be 
attained. 

But, as the civil state exhibits all the several 
degrees of human character or temper which we 
either cite or allude to ; so, the savage state sup- 
plies a term for human failings below the low 
of those of civil life, the word savage literally- 
meaning (and in the French tongue uniformly) 
nothing more than wild, untamed, uncivilized, 
uncultivated, so that even a wild rose is a "rose 
sauvage" — though with us, it implies the fero- 
cious; and it is this liableness to the charge of 
ferocity that constitutes the Caffre a savage, what • 
ever the amenities that, at another moment, may 
mark his haracter. " The Gaffires are not cruel," 
says a traveller, who yet, with the Mime pen, 
relates very cruel acts performed by Cafires 
toward those with whom they are in enmity : but 
their real variety of demeanour is to be discerned 
in such sketches as those that follow : " 1 have 
watched," says the traveller referred to, u a 
group of Caffres, as they stood round me, in easy 



AT THE CAPE. 15 

graceful attitudes, and wondered that they could 
ever be savage ; when the discourse turned 
suddenly on war, and a Caffre was asked to 
show their manner of attacking an enemy. The 
expression, in a moment, changed ; his eye 
assumed a vindictive glare, his lip the stern 
curve of vengeance ; and, throwing from him his 
carosse, and grasping the assagay firmly in his 
right hand, he bounded impetuously forward; 
crouched, as if to avoid the weapon of his foe ; 
and then, again, rushed on, with every muscle 
of his fine form clearly developed, and when his 
time had arrived, brandishing his weapon, he 
raised it to a horizontal position, gave it a qui- 
vering motion ere it left his hand, and sent it 
whizzing through the air." And again : — " In 
these vast boundless tracts, there are no associa- 
tions connected with the past, mankind is in its 
infancy; but there is nothing in their simple 
manners to offend. The savage is never vulgar ; 
his armed figure, encircled by his dogs; his 
graceful and free-born motions when in pursuit 
of game ; his frank manner, and bold approach, 
on perceiving the white stranger who is travers- 
ing his country, — are all noble, and in keeping 
with the surrounding region — 

" Untouched as yet by any meaner hand 
Than His who made it." 

c2 



16 THE KNC.I.ISH BOY 

We have the same authority, nevertheless, and 
many others, for several more of the mixed trait 
sometimes exalting, and sometimes greatly mo- 
derating, our views of Caffire life \ 

1 The national character, not less than national appearance, 
of the Caffres and Hottentots, (civilized or savage,) differs, 
under certain aspects, exceedingly. The Caffres, who, as we 
have seen, are a pastoral people, and who, therefore, in their 
cattle, possess and pursue the accumulation of property, are 
prudent in its management; can even be dishonest in its acqui- 
sition ; and probahly temper, more or less, the impulses of gene- 
rosity in its regard, by habits of avarice, and of regard to self. 
The Hottentots, who (what, at present, seems almost difficult 
to believe) are said to have been, at the first settlement, an 
assemblage of pastoral communities as well, are now (the 
Bushmen, or wild or savage Hottentots, at least) wholly without 
property, and subsisting only upon the free gifts of nature. 
But, whether from this, or from any other source of national 
peculiarity, all travellers concur in attributing to the Hottentots 
(even in the civilized state) that thoughtlessness as to self 
upon the one hand, and that generosity as to others upon the 
opposite, which so usually marks the human character, where 
men arc at once in possession of the present means to give. 
and without the habit of making provision for the future. 

Travellers, too, are as unanimous upon the personal beauty 
and genera) exterior of the Caffir upon the degree of 

contrast to those features in the Hottentots. "We were 
much struck.'" -ays one of the latest, "with the easy and 
noble carriage of the Karlre-men. . . . The Karlres are ele- 
gantly formed, and ire to ex< i edingly graceful in their general 
demeanour, that they appear to be ■ nation of gentlemen. In 
manners they are respectful without servility, and possess a 

native delicacy which prevents them from giving offence by 



AT THE CAPE. 17 

Such, then, were the new people into whose 
hands Charles was now delivered. He came 



word or action. There is no perceptible difference to be ob- 
served in their manners, from the chief to the poorest of the 
tribe. Property, in fact, is much more equally divided among 
the Kaffres, than in [higher - ] civilized societies. (See our re- 
marks, in an early chapter, above, upon the inevitable 
tendency of all exceeding national wealth to impoverish* 
comparatively, the greater part of the people.) " This" 
[equal distribution] continues our author, " constitutes the 
happiness of the infant state of society ; and if we may 
judge by the free and cheerful manners which characterize 
the Kaffres, we may conclude that they are a happy people." 
..." As soon," says he, " in another place, " as we entered 
the Kaffre territory, a new and enlivening scene awaited us. 
Every Kaffre we met on our way came up to us in the most 
frank and easy manner, and shook us by the hand ; yet with- 
out the slightest appearance of vulgar confidence or forward- 
ness. They evidently showed, by their demeanour, which was 
at once graceful and modest, that they considered us their su- 
periors ; but that they felt, at the same time, they were freemen, 
and entitled to addres us on terms of equality." — Moodie's 
Ten Years in South Africa, &c. London. 1835. 

A critic upon Lieut. Moodie's work, (evidently enjoying a per- 
sonal acquaintance with the subjects of his criticisms, and add- 
ing the orthography of an eastern scholar,) remarks upon these 
passages : " The Kafirs are as remarkable for their strong 
common sense, as for their corporeal symmetry. In their ne- 
gociations with the Colonial Government, their chiefs, and the 
Governor of the Cape Colony, have sometimes apparently 
changed places in the scale of civilization — the former being the 
enlightened, the latter the barbarian party. The Kafir chieff 
repeatedly urged to the late Governor the cruelty and im* 

c3 



18 THE ENGLISH BOY 

among them in amid events the least adapted 
to give him confidence in his safety and kind 

policy of the Commendo system; they urged the injustice and 
barbarity of retaliating upon a community the crimes of indi- 
viduals — they offered to pay double for the cattle stolen by 
their people ; but this equitable offer was rejected, and that 
disgraceful system of reciprocal pillage was adopted, which 
[anno 1835] has plunged the colony into its present calami- 
ties." — Athenaeum, No. 391. 

Leaving, at this place, the Caffres, and still quoting our 
present author, among many, only because he is the most re- 
cent ; and quoting, here, as in former instances, only for the 
sake of creating in our readers the greater confidence in the 
truth of the slight national sketches embodied in our text, and 
even in our notes; we turn, now, to some of the traits afforded 
by him of the Hottentots, as well as of the Dutch colonists ; 
for we think that few of our readers will have seen what has 
just now appeared, without concurring with us in the thought, 
that in the Caffres of the Cape, we actually behold the living 
representatives of Herodotus's Macrobian Ethiopians. (We 
allude, in an especial manner, to the historian's account 
of the reception given by the latter to the ambassadors of 
Cambyses.) But, to talk, here, of the Hottentots, and of the 
Cape-Dutchmen: "The poor Hottentots."' says Lieut. Moodie, 
" were treated by the ignorant [Dutch] colonists as a people 
incapable of improvement.". ...'• The Hottentots are pos- 
sessed of acute, though not very powerful or durable feelings. 
Their character is one of singular weakness, joined to the most 
lively perceptions, and observation of external things. Tk- 
have not a little cunning when their suspicions are excited; 
but they are habitually honest, sincere, and confiding, and will 
rather tfeoJ than cheat. They are quick in Doting peculiarity 
of character or manner The [civilized] Hottentots are ge- 



AT THE CAPE. 1 i> 

treatment under their power, and least promising 
as to the final accomplishment of all his dearest 

nerous in the extreme to their friends and acquaintances, and 
can refuse them a share of nothing they possess. This is one 
cause of their general poverty, and that so few of them acquire 

any considerable property of any kind ACape-Dutchman's 

sympathies are confined to his own family. He knows not the 
feeling of friendship beyond the circle of his immediate rela- 
tives. But the Hottentots are like one large family, bound 
together by common injuries, common feelings, and common 
interest. This union constitutes their happiness ; and of this 
comfort tyranny cannot deprive them. Theft is very uncom- 
mon among them, and they may safely be entrusted with any- 
thing but intoxicating liquors The most amiable trait in 

the character of these people is their sincerity. It is a well- 
known fact, that a Hottentot, when he is examined before a 
court of justice, generally tells the whole truth without dis- 
guise, though he is certain that his own conviction and punish- 
ment will follow his confession. So often have I observed this 
noble trait of character, that I would at any time attach more 
credit to the assertion of a Hottentot, regarding any simple 
matter of fact, than to the oath of one of the lower classes in 
the colony, when they have any object to serve by deception. 
I now come to the vices of the Hottentots. Though incapable 
of lasting resentment, they are passionate, savage, and cruel, 
to their women and children, on the slightest provocation. The 

men hardly ever come to blows in their quarrels These 

shocking scenes are generally occasioned by drinking 

There is, however, nothing rude in the manner of the Hotten- 
tots on ordinary occasions: they are extremely affectionate, 
and are very delicate in avoiding causes of offence, never con- 
tradicting or interrupting each other in conversation, unless 
they are excited by violent passions. Their conversation (the 



20 THE ENGLISH BOY 

wishes. They had destroyed or scattered, like 
so many beasts of the forest, or like a burrow of 



author is still speaking of the civilized Hottentots, and not of 
the Bushmen,) is at the same time coarse and unrefined, 
though less so than that of the Cape-Dutch;" to which latter 
observation the author adds, at the commencement of a loner 
note, — " Of all the people I have ever seen, the Cape- Dutch 
are the coarsest and least polished in their manners. The 
conversation of both sexes," &c. &c. These are the softest 
words of Lieut. Moodie, that we can find, respecting the Cape 
Dutch ; and yet it is with reference to quite another class (a 
semi -native one) of the Cape population, that his critic, before 
quoted, uses the subjoined emphatic, and apparently pointed 
phraseology : " In one passage, (and one alone,) relating to a 
very important class of the South African population, we find 
our author guilty of an undue harshness of expression /" — Yet 
hear how (among things of more severity) he goes on : 
" The moment a Dutch woman enters the conjugal state, she 
takes her seat by a little table in the hall, from which she 
never stirs, if she can help it ; and they often laugb at the 
folly of the English women, in going about the house to attend 
to their domestic concerns, when they might have every thing 
done by calling to their servants, without quitting their places. 
When the Dutch ladies marry, they become exceedingly torpid 
and phlegmatic in their manners and habits, dirty and slovenly 
in their dress. . . . Like the men, they gradually, at an 
early age, grow to an unwieldy size." — " In addition to their 
(the Cape-Dutchmen's) extreme ignorance on all subjects un- 
connected with their peculiar mode of life, the Dutch colonists 
entertain rather extravagant notions of the privileges of Chris- 
tians ; and are in general firmly persuaded, that all who have 
been sprinkled with a little water, go to heaven, when they die, 
as a matter of course. One thing, howevi r. [Willi ■ them sadly. 



AT THE CAPE. 21 

field- vermin, the hospitable people with whom he 
had so long dwelt, and upon the speedy and 

(how the baptized Hottentots and slaves are to be disposed of 
after death;) for they think it quite impossible that an order 
of beings whom they are accustomed to regard with such con- 
tempt, should be placed on an equality with themselves." Then, 
returning to the Hottentots, he adds : " Some of the features 
of these do not, certainly, agree with the commonly received 
ideas of beauty; but they have expressive eyes, and a liveliness 
and grace of carriage . . . that lightness and ease in their 
motions for which all savages are remarkable. . . . The 
true Hottentots are a small and slight race, with acute senses, 
and lively irritable tempers." 

The Griquas, or "people with shoes," who occupy the 
whole north-eastern frontiers of the colony, beyond the Orange 
River, form that part of the Cape population to which we have 
just above alluded, as pronounced by the critic the only 
subject of "undue harshness of expression" with Lieut. 
Moodie ; and what the critic adds upon this latest history, will 
at the same time help to show even the intellectual abilities 
of the savage or wild Hottentots, or Bushmen, were their 
position more propitious : " The Griquas, . . . though 
bold and resolute, are easily governed ; and Waterboer, the 
chief of their nation, is a diminutive Bushman of the lowest 
caste, who commands their respect by his natural abilities. 
[These people are of a class which, according to Lieut. 
Moodie, assume airs of decided superiority over the " true " 
but civilized Hottentots, wherever they live among them.] 
The Griquas are not dependent on the colony, but their 
importance, as a barrier against the wilder natives of the inte- 
rior, has led to a close alliance with them ;" and " it was 
agreed, in December last, that Waterboer and the Governor 
of the Cape Colony shall for the future communicate directly 



22 THE ENGLISH BOY 

peaceable removal of whose craal, all his hopes 
had so long rested, and had recently been so 
eagerly raised, for his final journey to Martha 
Hoylancl's, and for his final restoration to his 



with one another ; and that the former shall receive annually 
from the British 100/. and two hundred musquets for the de- 
fence of the frontier." 

Mr. Barrow tells us that the name Hottentot is a fabrication 
of which he was able to trace neither the original nor the mean- 
ing. He adds, " that when, at the first discovery of the coun- 
try, the Hottentots were spread over the whole of the south- 
east of this extremity of Africa, as an independent people, 
each horde had its particular name ; but that the name by 
which the collective body, as a nation, was distinguished, and 
which, at this moment, they bear among themselves, in every 
part of the country, is Quaiquae." 

This author, writing forty years ago, bears the same tes- 
timony to the moral and intellectual character, and redeem- 
ing points of personal comeliness, among the Hottentots or 
Quaiquaes, (the Umlaoes of theCaffres,) as that which, since 
the date of his work, (that of the beginning of English ac- 
quaintance and dominion at the Cape,) has been repeated 
by every English visitant. It is highly honourable to Mr. 
Barrow, also, and to English sentiment and letters, that no time 
was lost in proclaiming the sufferings and oppression to which 
the Hottentots had then, without mitigation, been so long ex- 
posed; and that if, under the English dominion* " happily for 
this much injured race, a new order of things has, within 
these few years, dawned upon the colony," neither the first 
moment of that English dominion, nor the work of its rirst 
English historian, appeared without the exposure of their 
existing misery, and the demand for its relief. 



AT THE CAPE. 23 

mother and his home ; they had trodden down the 
frail but hospitable cabin in which he had so long 
lodged and fed, and in which dwelt old Carree, 
and his old wife ; they had driven from him, 
like a hare before the hounds, and in their 
teeth, and perhaps slaughtered, the affectionate 
though ugly little girl, that had raised him when 
fallen, fed him when famished, led him when a 
cripple, clothed him when naked, healed when he 
was wounded ; and who had now, for thus long 
a time, been his companion, his nurse, his play- 
fellow, — the guardian spirit that was still to lead 
him, and to bring him to his goal : and they had 
done all this in the midst of ra^e and of violence, 
of fire, of shrieks, and blows, and the pouring 
forth of blood ! Yet, as to himself, their first 
act was an act of forbearance ; their second, one 
of positive benevolence, and concern for his pre- 
servation ; and the entire rest, the most unequi- 
vocal tokens of desire for his welfare ! It per- 
plexed him to reconcile all this : that he should 
see men at once so wicked and so good; 
so barbarous upon one side ; so tender upon 
another ! He did not understand that each of 
these things was compatible in the same men ; 
that the same men may be kind to some, and 
cruel to others ; kind upon one occasion, and 
cruel upon another ; and all this, either with or 



24 THE ENGLISH BOY 

without some show of reason more or less com- 
plete ! He did not take into account the evil 
done upon provocation real or imaginary, and 
either sufficient or insufficient ; nor the fixed 
animosities against particular persons or bodies 
of men, founded, rightly or wrongly, upon past 
experience. He scarcely comprehended that 
the same men, who, with j ustice, might be hate- 
ful to each other, might have each their share of 
the best qualities in themselves ; and that, while 
they seemed but monsters in their relations 
with some of their fellow creatures, yet they 
might have human virtues in a general aspect, 
and claim to be beloved and pardonable children 
of the Divinity, all together ; while, more or le>-. 
they were bad, or turbulent, or wrangling bro- 
thers, in the great family of mankind ! He had 
already seen the prejudices of the English 
against the Dutch, of the Dutch against the 
English, of the Dutch against the Bushmen, of 
the Bushmen against the Dutch, and of the 
Bushmen, the Caffres, and the Dutch, alter- 
nately and respectively; and that there might be 
grounds for more or less justification of all these 
prejudices, and of the acts to which they gave 
birth. At the same time, lie had thus far soon, 
and felt, and intimately experienced, that all 
these several denominations of men had their 



AT THE CAPE. 25 

virtues as well as their vices ; their amiable fea- 
tures and situations, along with their odious; 
and in an especial manner he had seen, felt, and 
experienced, that all of them could be kind and 
tender toward himself. Here, then, were the 
arguments, even at this time, for the allaying of 
his fears, for the softening of his indignation, 
and for the moderating of his grief; and here, 
in spite of all that he had this morning seen and 
undergone, were the truths which taught him, 
that now, no more than hitherto, was he in the 
gripe of monsters, not the arms of men ; that 
the enemies of the Bushmen might still be the 
foster-fathers of an English child ; that human 
sensibilities might have their turn in the bosoms 
of Caffre warriors ; that those warriors might 
yet lead him to Caffre homes of peace and gentle- 
ness and joy, and yet befriend him in Africa, 
and bring him to Martha Hoyland, and restore 
him to his mother ; and that from all these parti- 
culars, it became no moral inconsistency, if he 
was yet to see these Caffres, and these Caffre 
homes, even after the morning's work which had 
now past, reposing amid the blessings of mater- 
nal nature, and enjoying, in common with all 
the other things upon the earth, the bounties of 
the sunshine and the rain ! 

vol. in. n 



k 26 THE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

O'er the brown Karroo, where the bleating cry 

Of the Springbok's fawn sounds plaintively ; 

Where the Zebra wantonly tosses his mane, 

As he scours, with his troop, o'er the desolate plain ; 

And the timorous Quagha's whistling neigh 

Is heard, by the fountain, at fall of day ; 

And the fleet-footed Ostrich, over the waste, 

Speeds like a horseman who travels in haste ; 

Hieing away to the home of her rest, 

Where she and her mate have scooped their nest. 

Pringle. 

But we must pass swiftly, and almost in entire 
silence, over all that should belong to Charles's 
stay among the Caffres, and even over many suc- 
ceeding incidents, which now filled up a long and 
tedious interval of time. Many circumstances 
of interest, and many minor ad\ enturcs, would 
have adorned, in their relation, the pages oc- 
cupied with this part of the history : hut the 
size of our book has necessarily a limit, and 
there lie before us so great a variety of details. 



AT THE CAPE. 27 

more immediately forming the links which com- 
pose the chain of our discourse, that we sacrifice 
(though with reluctance) any more particular 
account, than that which we shall here briefly 
give, of scenes, and crossings, and disappoint- 
ments, and long and multiplied delays, under 
which, at this time, Charles incessantly laboured 
and grieved; and all terminating in submission 
to a single resource, (that of turning backward, 
through the colony, to Cape Town,) as the only 
prospect afforded him of finally reaching Mar- 
tha Hoyland's, and of hearing of his mother ! 

The Caffres carried him, indeed, to the east- 
ward ; but it was to the south-eastward, and not to 
the north-east ; and the track (when, at length, 
it brought them near any of the European 
settlements) brought him only to the poor and 
scattered farms of some of the rudest of the 
boors, fixed upon the sea-coast of that quarter of 
the colony; whose poverty, individually and among 
all around, had this among other inconvenien- 
ces, that it narrowed their communications upon 
every side, and was therefore an obstacle in the 
way of even their best inclinations to assist the 
orphan, in what, from his Caffre interpreters, 
(some of whom had a little both of Dutch and 
English,) they understood to be his aim, and 
were at least not unwilling to promote. 

d 2 



28 THE ENGLISH BOY 

It was at least a month after Charles's violent 
separation from even the survivors of the Hush- 
men, before his heart was once more lightened 
by the view of anything that bore the like- 
ness of a chance of arrival among settlements. 
For many days succeeding to that frightful 
morning which brought with it the destruction 
of the craal, and the slaughter, or, at the best, 
the flight and loss of the friends he then enjoyed, 
and by whom he had expected to be carried 
to some farm, whence, by further aid, he hoped 
to see his godmother ; for many days succeeding 
to this, though abundantly well- treated by the 
Caffres, he continued in the situation which we 
have described as to the first moments ; that is, 
lie was full of fears, or at least he stood in awe, 
of his new companions, upon the one side ; and 
upon the other, while their language had no 
resemblance to that of the Bushmen, (with which, 
in some very small degree, he had become ac- 
quainted,) he indulged jio hope that they would 
understand his own any better than it had been 
understood among the Bushmen. 

This denial of the benefits of speech was a 
jrood deal his actual situation among the Calfres 
by whom he had been first taken : but when, as 
speedily happened, these had returned to their 
own craal, and he became surrounded by larger 



AT THE CAPE. 29 

numbers of that people, lie was soon accosted 
by several who could speak a reasonable share of 
English. Many traversed, at a certain season of 
each year, the wide carroos. or tracts of barren 
sands, to traffic with the English settlers, and n 
veral were acquainted at some of the missionary- 
stations : and among- most of these he could find 
such as had ample knowledge of his parent 
tongue, for understanding all his story about his 
shipwreck, his progress into the interior, his 
desire to reach the English settlements and the 
farm of Martha Hoy land's husband: his disap- 
pointment of the promised partial help of the 
Bushmen, through the Caflre treatment of the 
craal: and his repininars at the ceaseless inter- 
ruptions to his meeting with his mother, and 
even to the hearing of her nan. 

The story won him the pity of the Caffr 
and was answered with promises of their own 
assistance to his objec But the seat of the 

Caffre craal was far out of Graham 'a T -wn and 
of all the English district- : and even far from 
the line of the great road which led eastward to 
them from Cape Town, through the neighbour- 
hood of Blouwveldts. In deviating, though - 
little as the small feet of Charles could at the 
utmost carrv him, when he wandered from the 

d 3 



:i!) THE ENGLISH HOY 

great stone at which Zephyr had placed him, he 
took, at least, the direction opposite to that of 
the public road ; and when he descended into 
the adjacent hollow, when he turned right and 
left, first after the bird, and next after the ante- 
lope ; and when, more than all, he crossed and 
recrossed the river, moved along the windings of 
its banks, ascended the high grounds to avoid its 
marshes, pursued the proffered openings in the 
woods, was led as the Honey-birds called him, 
advanced from the woody covers toward the edge 
of the ravine, and finally wound along its side, 
and to its bottom, and into the watered lands be- 
yond it ; first his hand held by the Bushman-girl, 
and next his limbs laid upon the Bushmen's hos- 
pitable litter ; when all this had happened, (as 
our readers have seen it happen,) and happened, 
step after step, still further, and in a more oppo- 
site direction to the line of the eastern road : and 
when, at last, he was torn from the Bushmen's 
valley, and transported to the lowing craalfl and 
verdant pastures of the Caffre husbandmen; then, 
not only the direction in which he lay was quite 
a new one, but his distance from where he ought 
to have been, a distance not to be measured by 
single miles, but by hundreds. The CaftVi -. 
like the Bushmen, projected, as all that they 



AT THE CAPE. .'31 

could the speediest do, to lead or send him, by 
the first opportunity) not to an English settle- 
ment, but to some Africaner farm ; and, as even 
this could not be instantly accomplished, the best 
of Charles's present lot consisted in the good 
things of the craal; whether, as part of these, 
we reckon the abundance of its milk and honey 
and rich fruits, and fish, and fowl, and beef and 
venison ; or the friendly demeanour of the men ; 
or the tears and kisses of the women, when he 
cried after Martha Hoyland and his mother ; or 
his adventures with the hunting-parties, his 
escapes among the rocks, his share in tracking 
and killing a leopard, his investiture with a ca- 
rosse of its shining spotted coat; (his hair and 
skin, at the same time, being properly orna- 
mented with red clay;) his gambols, and songs, 
and dances, with the merry and black-eyed chil- 
dren; his admission even to the evening ring, 
among the taller girls and boys ; or his acquisi- 
tion of a CarTre bow and arrow, and little Caffre 
assagay, and ivory armlets; and his success in 
often spearing a fish, or bringing down, from a 
tree, or out of the air, the bird upon which, an 
hour after, he made a hunter's dinner ! 

The CafTres were as eloquent in their ha- 
rangues, as lively and dramatic in their story- 
telling, and as passionately fond of stories, as 



32 THE ENGLISH BOY 

Charles's former friends, the Bushmen ; neither 
were they behind-hand with these last in the 
multitude of their songs, or in their ear or their 
capacities for music \ Often their music, and the 
words which they sung to it, were religious, both 
in design and character ; and as the Caffres, 
like the Hottentots, readily catch, and imitate, 
either immediately from the white men, or from 
Caffre after Caffre, as well the tunes, and words, 
and practices which other Caffres have derived 
from those white men; so, among other instances, 
Charles, during his abode in the craal, heard a 
Caffre hymn which had first been composed and 
sung at a far- distant missionary-station. The 
words were a Caffre composition, and they were 
sung to Caffre music, very grateful to the ear. 
We subjoin them in the original, as well as in 
a translation ; the first, in order to indulge the 
reader with some example of the Caffre language. 
The four first words of each stanza were given bv 
a single bass voice ; after which, all present, male 
and female, joined in the remainder. 

1 A German officer happening to play an air of Gluck's, in 
the presence of some Hottentot iromen, observed that it was 
listened to with the deepest attention, and that some of the 
women were even affected by it to tears. In a day or t. 
afterward, he heard his favourite melody, with accompaniments. 
all over the country, wherever his wanderings led him. 



AT THE CAPE. 33 



A CAFFRE HYMN. 

Ulin guba inhulu siambata tina, 
Ulodali bom' uadali pezula ; 
Umdala uadala idala izula, 
Yebinza inquinquis zixeliela : 
Utica umcula gozezuline, 
Yebinza inquinquis nozilimele, 
Umze uaconana subsiziele, 
Umcokeli na sicokeli tina, 
Uenze infaana zenza ga borni ! 

Imali incula subsiziele, 
Wena, wena q'aba inyaniza, 
Wena, wena caca linyaniza, 
Wena, wena clati linyaniza : 
Ulodali bom' uadali pezula, 
Umdala uadala idala izule ! 



TRANSLATION. 

He, the mantle that covers us, 

The Giver of life, ancient on high ; 

He, the Creator of the heaven, 

And of the ever-burning stars : 

God is mighty in the heaven, 

And moves the stars around it : 

We call upon God in his dwelling-place, 

Tbat he may lead us by his power ; 

For it is he that giveth light to the world ! 



He is alone, the only giver of good 
He is alone, the only sure defence 
He is alone, the only trusty shield 
He is alone, the only tree of refuge 



34 THE ENGLISH BOY 

He, the giver of life, ancient on high ; 
He, the creator of the heaven * ! 

1 The reader will observe, in this Caffre hymn, the occur- 
rence of two images, which, as they are derived from Caffre 
life, at once stamp its authenticity ; and remind us of the fidelity 
of transcript in certain instances, and of originality of thought 
in others, (and both from their direct derivation from realities,) 
which so often distinguish, by their presence, all the works of 
primitive generations, and by their absence, all the works of a 
higher civilization. We have lately met with a remark upon 
the newly-studied paintings of the Egyptian sepulchres, in 
which the painters of those works are said to have worked 
with a Chinese fidelity and minuteness of imitation of the ob- 
jects which they had undertaken to represent. But the same 
fidelity — the same direct resort to realities — and the same mi- 
nute precision of copy — were long since forced upon our own 
attention by paintings and carvings of American Indians, not 
more rude than some of the Egyptian ; and here, as there, 
whatever may be the deficiencies, as pictures, or as sculptures, 
at least it is impossible to mistake the object designed to 
be shown, or to accuse the artist of departure from graphic 
and characteristic truth. But the same thing happens with 
speech and books ; and, here, too, the ruder, the more 
primitive, the mind which dictates, the more commonly are 
realities consulted ; and the less danger have we of finding, 
either the absence of natural and appropriate images, or the 
presence, through a servile imitation, of such as are inappro- 
priate and common-place. In this Caftre hymn, God, under the 
image of a carosse, or mantle, is first called the shelter, the 
covering, the comfort of humanity. Further on, he is called the 
" tree — the only certain tree of refuge ;" because a tree is the or- 
dinary refuge of a Caffre, whether from the rays of the sun, or 
from a beast of prey, or from the arrows or the Mflagaya of a foe ! 

It was different with the Hebrews* among the rocky fastnee 
of Judea. Rocks were the refuges in Judea, whether the simply 



AT THE CAPE. 35 

Other circumstances were less agreeable. 
He found, in various things, the Caftres as 
foul in their manner of living as the Bush- 
men. He found them at least as superstitious. 
If the Bushmen had their sacred fly \ the 



natural resources that they offered, or as to their heing further 
strengthened with walls, and towers, and military engines of 
defence and offence. But it happened, from this cause, that 
the divine protection suggested a different image, as a mode of 
expression, to the Hebrews, than to the Caffres. The former 
styled God, their " rock of defence." 

When, however, in a former reign, there occurred a severe 
national calamity in England, in the wreck of the fleet of Ad- 
miral Sir Cloudesly Shovel, upon the rocks of the coast of 
Cornwall, and when a form of public prayer and humili- 
ation was ordered upon the event ; what was done, (as is well 
known,) by our English scholars and divines, in the composi- 
tion ? Why, echoes of scriptural language, and oblivious to 
things, and to the face of nature, they addressed the Divinity, 
upon the national calamity of shipwreck, beseeching him to be 
" our rock of defence !" 

1 In reference to the Hottentot's fly, or " Hottentot's god," 
which we have mentioned in a former note, (p. 241, of the se- 
cond volume,) the remark made in another place, upon the 
sameness of terms under which insects and birds are often 
spoken of by all old writers, including those of England, admits 
of illustration from the English version of the eleventh chapter 
of the book of Leviticus, where, (verse the twentieth,) at first 
sight, it must very much surprise us to read — " All fowls that 
creep, going upon all four, shall be an abomination to you." 

It soon appears, however, not only from the next verse, but, 
from several following, that those quadruped fowls are insect6 — 



.'30 THE ENGLISH BOY 

Caffres had more than one sacred bird; and, 
with both, if those thing were sometimes their 

u fly' m g creeping things;" — a division of the class of general 
creeping things — reptiles — vermin. 

But, again, the twentieth verse, for a moment seems, to 
raise up a new question. We ask ourselves which are the in- 
sects having^W legs ? The twenty-first and other verses, how- 
ever, soon discover to us, that the expression, " going upon all 
four," is not to he interpreted of " four legs," but simply sig- 
nifies, "creeping." The locust is called " a flying creeping 
thing that goeth upon all four ;" and yet the locust has six legs. 
A "thing that goeth upon all four," therefore, is not, in this place, 
exclusively a quadruped, but any creeping thing ; and falls under 
our present names of insect, reptile, vermin. But a "jfyi 
creeping thing," or a flying thing that goes upon "all four." b 
our " winged insect." This is plain from what follows, concern- 
ing locusts, of which, as is there seen, not only they are eaten by 
the Bushmen, the Arabs, and so many others of the present 
day; but they are specially permitted to the Israelites: — 
" Yet these may ye eat, of every flying creeping thing that 
goeth upon all four, which have legs above their feet, to leap 
withal upon the earth. (Our northern species of locust, it will 
be remembered, is called, by ourselves, the ' grasshopper,' and 
by the French, the ' sauterelle,' or leaper.) Even these of them 
ye may eat : the locust after his kind, and the bald locust after 
his kind, and the beetle after his kind, and the grasshopper 
after his kind. But all other Hying creeping things, which have 
four feet [which creep, which go ' upon all four,'] shall be an 
abomination unto you." 

The having "legs above their feet" 18 another remarkable 
expression ; but one which is sufficiently intelligible. Levi- 
ticus objects to all creatures that in any manner creep — in- 
cluding even such as have short legs; for it does not confine 
itself to the very short, or none at all. It prohibits the we isel. 



AT THE CAPE. 37 

consolations, at others, they occasioned a thou- 
sand fears, and cares, and griefs. The Caffres, 



and the ferret, and the mouse ; as well as the mole, the came- 
leon, the lizard, and the snail: " And whatsoever goeth upon 
his paws, among all manner of beasts, that go on all four, those 
are unclean unto you." . . . . " And every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon this earth, shall be an abomination : it shall not 
be eaten. Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever 
hath more feet, among the creeping things that creep upon the 
earth ; them ye shall not eat, for they are an abomination." 
The Hebrew has it, (says the marginal note,) " that doth mul- 
tiply feet;" — which is plainly better than "more feet," (that is, 
more than four,) words that again mislead us into thinking 
that "goeth upon all fours" implies going upon four feet, in- 
stead of its implying solely the particular act of creeping, or 
(by another term) of crawling. This verse excludes caterpillars, 
centipedes, and many other insects, reptiles, or vermin. 

The same general rule, as to things creeping, appears, in the 
same chapter, as to fishes. " A fish" is described in Genesis (i. 
20.) as " the moving (or creeping) creature that hath life [in 
the waters"] ; and in Leviticus the distinction is rn^de (simi- 
lar to that in regard to "all fowls that creep") between the 
more and the less active, or less creeping, of these moving or 
creeping things of the waters : " Whatsoever hath no fins nor 
scales in the waters, that shall be an abomination unto you." — 
Now, the fish that have " fins and scales" are true fishes; they 
really swim, or move, or creep ; and (in contrast with other 
things that "move in the waters") they may be said to rank 
with those "fowls which creep," but which have yet "legs 
above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth." 

It is observable that, as to fowls, in our modern usage of 
the name, the prohibitions concerning them are disposed of in 
the seven verses which precede the twentieth; as are those 

VOL. III. E 



38 THE ENGLISH BOY 

nationally and individually, were at least as 
heavy sufferers as the Bushmen, from the belief 



concerning beasts from the second verse to the eighth, and 
concerning fishes from the ninth to the twelfth ; while, from the 
twenty-ninth to the forty-third, the text concerns " creeping 
tilings" in general : " This (says the forty-sixth verse) is the 
law (1.) of the beasts, (2.) of the fowls, and (3.) of every 
living creature that moveth in the waters, (the fish,) and (4.) 
of every creature that creepeth upon the earth ;" — a passage in 
which we again see how entirely the name of " fowl" is made 
to apply as well to insects as to birds ; that is, to all flying 
things, our ivinged insects inclusive : for the " fowls that cree p M 
of the twentieth verse, are plainly the " flying creeping 
things" of the twenty-first; while all other creeping things, 
including many that we now call insects, are here, in general 
terms, styled the " creeping things of the earth," or our rep- 
tiles, worms, and vermin. 

In sum, the name of fowl is of general meaning, or descrip- 
tive only of things that fly ; and these are flies, or tcinged insects, 
as much as birds ; and thus winged insects have been called 
fowls, no^ss than birds. After this, bird being synonymous 
with fowl, as to what we commonly call fowls or birds ; so, 
bird, as well as fowl,'has been used to signify, indifferently, 
either bird or fly. (See, again, the note at p. 841, vol. iL) V\ 
enter into no explanation of the literal meaning of the name of 
bird, which would bring us round, by another road, to the same 
point. So arbitrary, and so purely conventional, and so nee. - 
wily such, are the names of these, as of all other thii 

It may be remembered, here, too, how nearly, through the 
class of humming birds, considered from the largest to the 

smallest, the kingdom of birds descends into that of insects; 
or, in reverse order, the kingdom of inserts rises into that of 
birds. The smsllesl of the humming-bird^ is called, by the 



AT THE CAPE. 39 

in witchcraft, which, sometimes, indeed, only- 
besotted them, but, at others, loaded them with 
miseries and crimes. As, in Europe, the Nor- 
wegian mariners and fishermen, and old pirates, 
looked upon their wizards and witches as Wind- 
sellers, or disposers of winds, for their assistance 
upon the ocean ; so, the Caffre husbandmen and 
herdsmen, with the scorching sky and thirsty 
surface of South Africa, and amidst its succes- 
sions of deadly droughts, conspicuously esteem 
the witches and wizards of their particular 
people as Rain-makers, or as persons by whose 
prayers and charms rain can be obtained, or be 
withheld from them ; an infatuation, among 
others, which is often attended with distressful 
consequences, of many of which Charles was a 
witness, and even, (through those about him,) a 
partaker: troubles which contributed to make 
the time seem long, that he thus spent among 
this people. Under the roof that he here 
called his home, the Caffre's mother wore out 
her age in suffering from the bodily wounds 
and mutilations which had formerly being in- 
flicted upon her through charges of witchcraft ; — 
through pretences that, at one time she had 
caused a drought, so that the grass was burnt 

French, the oiseau-mouche, or fly-bird; and it is shot with 
grains of sand, and not with lead. 

E 2 



40 THE ENGLISH BOY 

upon the ground ; the corn, the melons, and the 
green herbs destroyed, and the cattle killed with 
heat and thirst, in the midst of the dry beds of 
brooks and rivers ; — and at another, that she had 
inflicted diseases upon the craal ! 

At length, however, a large party of Caffres, in- 
vited to a wedding at a distant craal, received him 
into their company, to carry him to a farm-house 
on the way, and commend him to the white men's 
aid. They faithfully performed their errand, and 
found the Boor to whom they introduced him not 
averse from letting him stay till some chance of 
forwarding him should offer; nor the Vrouw re- 
luctant to let her Hottentot broil an extra slice 
for him, at dinner-time, from the sheep's carcase 
which hung beneath the rafters, and against the 
wall, under her eye, in the single sitting-room of 
the family. Charles was even entertained at this 
farm for many weeks ; its owners were plain good 
people ; they ate and slept, and wished ill to no- 
body. Charles was very welcome to his bed and 
to his board ; and they reckoned upon getting 
him, some time, upon the road among the Eng- 
lishes ; but, after a day or two, and for all the 
rest of his sojourn, they nearly forgot that he \\ as 
in their house. The Boor was as much a fisher- 
man as a farmer. Th< 4 VrOUW kept her maidens 
to the spinning-wheel by the dim flame of a lamp 



AT THE CAPE. 41 

of fish-oil by night, as well as by the sunbeams in 
the daytime ; the Boor knew almost more about 
a boat and a whale, than about a waggon and 
oxen ; and the country, the cause and the coun- 
terpart of this life of its few inhabitants, showed 
more variety, and promised more fertility, upon 
the side of the sea than of the land. A furlonsr 
from the house, you could leave the naked sur- 
face of what was called the homefield, and de- 
scend, by a rocky staircase among the craggs, to 
the shelly sea-beach underneath. 

Yet, upon a day, when Charles was paddling, 
with naked feet, upon the beach, running after 
the white and sunny waves as they retired, and 
running from them as they came back ; splashing 
the water, and making figures on the sand ; pick- 
ing up shells, and looking after shrimps; the 
sound of the conch, by which he was accustomed 
to be called to dinner, came a little earlier than 
usual upon his ear; and, upon his arrival at the 
Vrouw's side, he found an uncle of the family, 
(Mynheer Jansen,) who had stopped to take a 
meal and a dram, on his journey homeward from 
a distant part. The unexpected visit of Mynheer 
Jansen, the direction of his dwelling, and his 
greater opportunities of communication, either 
by land or sea, had put it into the head of the 
whale-fisher, that an opportunity was here offered 

e 3 



42 THE ENGLISH Isov 

for assisting Charles's progress ; and the boy 
being thus brought into view, and the dinner 
served, he soon began to consult with his uncle 
upon the subject, and to try his disposition. 
Mynheer Jansen raised but few objections to the 
scheme ; he could not promise any speedy suc- 
cess ; almost like his nephew, he lived out of any 
direct track for travel, and had but few neigh- 
bours, and those poor ; yet he would do what and 
when he could; and, as an earnest, he willingly 
placed Charles in his waggon, at his departure ; 
the latter at once thanking his hosts for the fa- 
vours received, and giving way to revived hopes, 
and long suspended feelings of joy, at the change 
of scene which he now obtained, and the prospects 
that it encouraged. 

But Charles remained long at Mynheer Jan- 
sen's without an opportunity of progress. Some 
months even elapsed, and Charles's spirits sunk 
at the delay. Mynheer Jansen treated him nei- 
ther ill nor well ; that is, he was turned among 
the servants, and made useful about the farm : 
but then he wanted for no necessaries, and as 
he was now growing old enough, and strong 
enough, not to be idle, his being pur to employ- 
ment at Mynheer Jansen's was every way na- 
tural and proper, and even laid a beneficial 
foundation for what eame afterward to be required 
of him, and what was most t<> his ultimate advan- 



AT THE CAPE. 4.'} 

tage. Even now, none of his moments were more 
cheerful, or more free from despondence and re- 
pining, than those in which he looked after the 
cows and calves, and drove them home at evening, 
and assisted at the milking. 

Mynheer Jansen often mentioned his case to 
the neighbours that fell in the way, but no means 
whatever seemed to discover themselves, of put- 
ting him upon the road to Martha Hoyland's, or 
to Graham's Town, or even to any part of the 
new English settlements. All were far away 
from Mynheer Jansen's district, and separated 
from it either by very circuitous and imperfect 
roads, or by trackless wilds, and by unfordable 
rivers ; and, as to the sea-coast, (here, as well as 
at his nephew's,) it had no port, and was no place 
for navigation, but bounded by one range of shal- 
low water, and (for a great proportion) of tremen- 
dous breakers. 

What communication, in short, Mynheer Jan- 
sen and his neighbours enjoyed with any distant 
part of the colony, was by land, and with no place 
but Cape Town ; and in this direction, at length, 
it was proposed, and means finally presented 
themselves, to forward Charles. He was already 
(it was true) far nearer, as the birds would fly, 
to Graham's Town, than to Cape Town ; and it 
seemed hard, that after all his difficulties and 
travel, and time lost, he should be sent back 



44 THE ENGLISH BOY 

again to the very place from which he had been 
brought; and while Graham's Town and its vi- 
cinity was still the scene of all his objects and 
his longings. But impediments of the kind in 
question are not always rare in travelling ; and 
Charles's return to Cape Town (though, to him, 
a roundabout road to Graham's Town !) was not 
without the promise of convenience. Mynheer 
Jansen had learned from him the attention which 
lie had enjoyed at the Government House ; he 
doubted not, therefore, that his return to Cape 
Town, after all his sufferings and obstructions, 
would be the signal for even increased zeal for 
his welfare ; and he knew, that while Charles, in 
these circums'ances, could hardly want for friends 
at the seat of Government, it was from that place 
that, even now, he could best and quickest be 
sent to Graham's Town, either by land or sea. 

At the distance of only a hundred and fifty 
miles from Mynheer Jansen, lived Mynheer 
Van Hoogst, a boor rather more opulent than 
most of those around him, and who was known to 
be preparing his waggons, oxen, and servants, 
for a long-projected journey to Cape Town. 
Mynheer Van Hoogst. after hearing all Charles's 
history, and especially so much of it as w;i^ 
joined with that of the late Land-drost of Graaf- 
Keynet, whom he had called bis friend] eon- 



AT THE CAPE. 45 

sented to be his new guide and guardian ; and, 
now, not more than two months were added to 
the time of expectation, before he was actually 
riding in one of Mynheer Van Hoogst's wag- 
gons, on the road to Cape Town ! We are for- 
bidden by the studied brevity of all this part of 
our narrative, to dwell upon Charles's obliga- 
tions to the hospitable Mynheer Jansen and his 
nephew, not excluding their respective Vrouws, 
and sons, and daughters. 

So large a part of the country through which 
he was now carried was wholly new to his eyes, 
and those eyes had now become so much more 
observant, and better informed, than on his 
previous journey ; that flowers, beasts, and birds, 
as well as scenery and cultivation, chases, and tra- 
velling adventures of all kinds, would here enliven 
as well as fill a large number of our pages, did we 
permit ourselves to speak at all, of what, upon 
this long and slow progress, he saw or heard, or 
was exposed to, or engaged in. But, slow as 
was the advance of Mynheer Van Hoogst's 
waggons, we hurry, for our own share, along the 
road to Cape Town, scarcely permitting to the 
reader the leisure for taking a glimpse at the lofty 
mountains, the wide plains, the deep-embedded 
rivers, or the dark and glossy forest-trees, amid 
which he is passing ; or to look where troops of 



16 THE ENGLISH BOY 

ostriches, or countless herds of antelopes, with 
their bleating fawns, are outrunning the wind 
over the wide expanses ; or where the mild and 
graceful cameleopard is browsing upon the lofty 
branches ! How vast, how motionless, how silent, 
in the meantime, and for the most part, — was all 
the solemn landscape; solemn, though bright with 
sunshine, and though gay with ten thousand 
tints, in the sky, on the distant hills, and on the 
immediate ground which the waggons were 
crossing, and in the deep and measureless valley- 
and plains which Jay between ! Here was a suc- 
cession of the landscapes, to each of which the poet 
might have applied his impressive verses : — 

" What lonely magnificence stretches around ! 
Each sight how sublime, and how awful each sound ! 
All hushed and serene, as a region of dreams, 
The mountains repose 'midst the roar of the streams ; 
Their glens of black umbrage by cataracts riven, 
And calm their blue tops in the beauty of heaven l M 

Charles neglected nothing, upon the route, 
that could either bestow or promise present and 
even momentary enjoyment; but every serious 
thought within, nevertheless, was given, all the 
way, to things absent, and tilings past and fu- 
ture. He thought of England) and the sea. and 
of his mother and of his father: he thought of 
Graham's Town and Martha Hoyland; and, as 



AT THE CAPE. 47 

he drew nearer and nearer to Cape Town, he fan- 
cied himself already at the Government House ; 
he fancied his welcome from the Aide-de-Camp; 
and he repeated to himself the words of condo- 
lence and reassurance which Lady Pontefract 
would address to him. What had chiefly mode- 
rated, too, from the beginning, his reluctance 
at returning to Cape Town, instead of pressing 
forward in the direction of Martha Hoyland's, 
was the recollection, that Lady Pontefract had 
promised to write to Lady Willoughby ; and 
that doubtless, by this time, her Excellency had 
received an answer, and could tell him all about 
his mother and his home ! 

A day's journey was still before him. The 
waggons, before another day-break, were to 
begin ascending the last ridge of hills which 
rise between the inner country and the Cape 
Flats. They would descend, before the next even- 
ing, the long pass of Hottentot- Holland's Kloof; 
they would hear the chatter of the baboons, at 
their evening council, among the craggs; they 
would see the summit of the Table Mountain ; 
and wheel, with gladdened hearts, and even 
quickened pace, their creaking waggons into 
Cape Town ! Would the arrival be early enough 
for Mynheer Van Hoogst to take him to the 
Government House that night; or must he 



48 THE ENGLISH BOY 

wait, after all, for tliat joyful event, till the suc- 
ceeding morning? 

By the side of a torrent, and where there was 
a spread of thick, and verdant, and sweet grass, 
the waggons uitspanned for the last night; and 
the travellers and their cattle took their supper 
and their repose. At sunrise they prepared to 
ascend the hills; and now their journey was well 
nigh finished. In a hollow of the remaining 
road, they found the train of another boor, pro- 
ceeding, not like themselves, to Cape Town, 
but from Cape Town to the country ; and halt- 
ing, to take breath before the next ascent. The 
travellers exchanged civilities, and each inquired 
the news. Droughts and rains were what Myn- 
heer Van Hoogst could give an account of to his 
fellow-colonist; while the latter talked of mar- 
ket-prices of wheat and beef, and of wet and dry 
goods, and Cape Town politics. He told Myn- 
heer Van Hoogst, (what the latter had never 
heard before,) that it was now almost a year since 
Lord Pontefract, and his family and start', had re- 
turned to Europe; and since a new Governor had 
filled his place. 

Ci A new Governor !" cried Mynheer Van 
Hoogst; "why, what do you say to that, my 
little friend ?" 

" But is Lady Ponteiract gone too?" interro- 



AT THE CAPE. 49 

gated Charles, panting for breath ; " and is the 
Aide-de-Camp gone too ?" 

" All gone," answered the traveller from Cape 
Town ; " all new people at the Government 
House." 

And Charles hung down his head, and be- 
came dissolved in tears. 



vol. ui. f 



50 THE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XXX. 



To make 



Humanity the minister of God to man. 

Armstrong. 

It was with a heavy heart, that, after all which, 
in this manner, he had learned of the changes at 
the Government House, Charles, from the naked 
and steep sides of the mountains to the north- 
ward, beheld, at length, toward the close of a 
gorgeous day, the whitening buildings of Cape 
Town beginning to make themselves visible 
upon the sands beneath ; with their patches of 
forest trees and other verdure, and with the calm 
waters of Table Bay, and the dark ocean to the 
southward in the distance, skirting and terminat- 
ing the picture that, to him, was now devoid, 
both of living figure, and of every soothing 
shelter ! The Government House had been his 
home in Cape Town ; and, short as had been his 



AT THE CAPE. 51 

acquaintance with it, and with its inmates, he 
had thought of all (in the contrast with all that 
was unknown) as his familiar roof- tree, and his 
familiar friends ! He had promised himself a re- 
newed sleep in the chamber which first received 
him after his shipwreck ; he had thought that he 
was going to Cape Town, to call, again, by 
name, upon Sukey, who had been his chamber- 
maid and nurse, and to tell her all the marvels 
that had marked his absence ; and even to chat- 
ter, too, and leap, and run, with the footman who 
had lifted him into Lady Pontefract's britscka, 
and carried some of the gifts with which he was 
laden at his departure, when, on that moonlight 
evening, he set out, from the Government-steps 
toward the Prinz Van Oranje, held by the hand 
by the kind-hearted Land-drost. He had fancied 
the smiles, and the gentle features, of the spark- 
ling Aide-de-Camp, ready to shine upon him as 
brightly and as softly as at their former meeting ; 
and to encourage his confidence, and to form the 
link which harmonized his infancy and his sheep- 
ishness with the grandeurs of the drawing-room, 
and of the dining-table. With that assistance, he 
had thought he could venture to sidle, as before, 
toward the knee of his foster-parent, the Vis- 
countess ; and, now, after his travels, and after 
his growth of at least three or four inches, even 



LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 



52 THE ENGLISH BOY 

to look in the face of the Noble Governor, in 
spite of his gravity and his years, his military 
conciseness of speech, and his red riband and 
glittering star. He had hoped to find at the 
Government House, even young Mynheer Van 
Dunderblouwer, and to hear answers to all the 
messages of love which he had dispatched by the 
friendly merchant, from those to Lady Ponte- 
fract, to those to Charley, the green monkey, in 
her ladyship's boudoir ; and, least of all had he 
forgotten to anticipate an hour's survey of that 
green monkey, and the grief with which the story 
of his own Charley would be listened to, both by 
the Aide-de-Camp and by Lady Pontefract: with 
the very probable prospect, that the purse of the 
latter would be opened, to procure him a new 
green monkey, from the German naturalist's re- 
pository ! These thoughts had soothed him, from 
the moment when he found his steps directed 
once more to Cape Town, as the tedious circuit 
by which alone he was to reach Graaf-Reynet, 
and the house and garden of Martha Hoyland, 
and to hear, from his godmother, of his mother 
Margaret, and of John and Martha : and these 
alone had lessened the weight of delay and dis- 
appointment which the hapless circuit so unspa- 
ringly inflicted; a circuit which (with all its 
troubles, and with many troubles that had gone 



AT THE CAPE. 53 

before it,) he had sometimes the ^additional pain 
of recollecting, he appeared to owe to the sole 
neglect of the instruction of the gay and honest 
Negro Zephyr, to remain at the great stone in 
the wood, till the latter had carried news of him 
to his fond Hottentot mammy, at the farm of the 
wicked Vrouw; and till some plan had been laid 
for him, between the Negro and the poultry- 
woman, for his momentary safety and conceal- 
ment, and speedy forwarding to Graaf-Reynet ! 
" Oh !" he would cry, at this recollection, " what 
a fault it was to be so giddy, and how much I 
have suffered for it, and am still suffering ;" and, 
while he said this, or while he thought it before 
he said it, a shock ran through his bones, from 
head to foot, and made him feel, as well in body, 
as in mind, how guilty he had been, and how 
much his guilt had been the cause of his misfor- 
tunes ! But the news of the recall of Lord Pon- 
tefract from the Cape Government, and of the 
sailing of his Lordship, with all his family 
and establishment, for Europe, in the frigate Eu- 
ryalus, filled him with a distress so piercing, and 
of such amount, as made him forget his fault; at 
the same time that it banished every dream of 
consolation, and taught him to think of himself 
only as the victim of calamity. It was true that 
he thought he could still inquire for the coun- 

f3 



54 THE ENGLISH BOY 

ing-house of Messrs. M'Cormack, and that even 
the mate of the ill-fated Nautilus might have 
made a voyage to England and back, and be now 
in some ship in the harbour ; but of all of these 
he knew so little, that he scarcely derived a 
single hope from the recollection of the name 
of either. As the waggon, therefore, with 
its locked hind-wheel, moved slowly down the 
heights, drawn by its long team of oxen, and 
sometimes jolting over a road-stone, or a sharp 
ledge of rock, laid bare by the vehement rains, 
and as it descended into the valley, and rolled 
across the Flats into the town, the tears ran 
down Charles's face, while, in desponding mood, 
he still hung his head, and occasionally beat, 
with a movement of vexation, the little twig in 
his hand, against the empty sack upon which he 
sat. " There will be nobody," said he, " to care 
for me in Cape Town ; and nobody to send me to 
Martha Hoyland. Everybody will send me 
away from them, like these Dutch farmers that 
the Caffres carried me to ; and I shall be starved ; 
and I shall never see my dear mother, nor 
brother, nor sister, nor Martha Hoyland either ! 
Who should think about me, here; now that the 
Lady and the Aide-de-Camp are gone : and how- 
shall I so much as get my supper to-night, and 
my breakfast in the morning? It is not, here, as 



AT THE CAPE. ,55 

in the woods, where there are roots and berries, 
and branches to make a covering with, and a 
fire ; and where the Honey-birds would lead me 
the way to find a bees'-nest : for, here, the walls 
are all stone, and the roads are all gravel ; and 
there are no Honey-birds, nor anything else to 
be my friend !" Alas ! we know as little of the 
good that awaits us, as the evil ; and our despair 
is often as senseless as our confidence. 

The sun had reached the very line of the 
horizon, and had dropped beneath it with that 
rapidity which, as we have said, is one of the phe- 
nomena of these tropical regions, just before the 
first, and second, and third waggon of the Dutch 
farmer, announced, by the bells upon the oxen, 
their entrance into the town ; and candles were 
already lighted when Charles, to his partial re- 
composure, beheld himself once more at the door 
of the Prinz Van Oranje, and beheld the same 
Dutch hostess, that, in the cool and sunny morn- 
ing which commenced his journey eastward, had 
detained the waggons of the Land-drost, to look 
for his brown-paper parcel; now busy at the 
door, giving welcome to the new comers from 
the settlements. She took no particular notice, 
however, of himself, disguised as he was in 
the common country dress of a boor's child ; 
except that, patting him on the head, she pushed 



56 THE ENGLISH BOY 

liim forward, to follow " his daddy," as she said, 
into the common room, where a large fire, and 
glasses of Cape brandy, gave to the whole party 
a hospitable reception. From this, indeed, the 
elder travellers, for a time, speedily withdrew, to 
look after their cattle, and after the contents and 
stowage of their waggons ; but in the meantime, 
Charles, wearied with his day's drive, and drawn 
to sleep by the cheerful blaze> lay upon the stone 
floor insensible, and relieved from sorrow; and 
with one arm round the neck of a new acquaint- 
ance, the great mastiff. 

As the coffee was to be made, the collops fried, 
the cabbage boiled, and even the cakes to be 
baked, and swum in butter, at the same bounteous 
hearth, it was not long before the Hottentot 
servants and black slaves of the good hostess, 
became busy with the hand-irons, the logs, the 
griddle, the frying-pan, the kettle, and the 
chimney-hook, at this interesting part of the 
chamber; nor before, in the prosecution of their 
cheerful and duteous activity, the foot, though 
naked, of a bustling Negro-girl, trod upon one 
of those of the great mastiff, who, thereupon, 
with a shriek and a growl, sprung up from his 
place; and leaving Charles's arm to be disposed 
of as it might, withdrew him a toot and a half 
only from the spot, and casting himself down 



AT THE CAPE. 57 

again, under the protection of the long wooden 
settle, resumed his sleep. Charles, far from 
being aroused by so small an incident, uncon- 
sciously recovered his arm from the immediate 
position in which it was abandoned by the mas- 
tiff, and was placing it calmly upon his breast ; 
when the Negro-girl, the frying-pan in her left 
hand, and perceiving, that though the dog had 
got out of her way, his sleeping companion still 
remained, snatched him up in her right arm, 
loudly vociferating, at the same time ; " What 
de Teyfel, does dis child do here ? Does he 
want to be burn ? How am I to do my work, 
you young Teyfel, if you lie here, taking up all 
de room at der fire ; you, and like you, der great 
dog ? Oh ! to be sure, you will like der collops, 
and der cabbage, and der butter, and der cakes ; 
but how poor Negro-wench to get dem dings 
ready, if you take up all der fire ? Den, Vrouw, 
she scold Negro-wench, and all along wid you, 
you young Teyfel !" So saying, she laid the 
drowsy youngster upon the settle, exactly over 
his late bedfellow the mastiff; and this with far 
more tenderness and care than her loud words, 
half earnest, and half jest might have given reason 
to suppose ; while Charles, still clinging to sleep, 
only muttered, with a half cry, as she held him, 
for a moment, upon the settle ; " I tell you, I 



58 THE ENGLISH BOY 

won't ! I won't go to bed, till I have seen the 
green monkey!" — " You see green monkey!" 
returned the Negro-girl ; " what for you see 
green monkey? You white monkey you-self ! Go 
to sleep, you piccanini ; and den you see, pre- 
sently, collops and cabbage, and cakes, and but- 
ter ; and have der coffee, and der sugar ! Go 
sleep, white-monkey-piccanini !" 

Charles was already fast asleep again, before 
the Negro-girl had yet ceased her tongue ; and 
he slept even through the noise of the cookery, 
of the setting of the knives and plates, and of 
the assembling, seating, and loud talking of the 
guests. But the good Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk 
had scarcely seen the travellers fairly placed 
around the table, and with the smoking viands 
under their chins; when, missing the little boy 
whom she had beheld as one of the party, and 
instantly turning toward where he lay, she ap- 
proached him, with the design of shaking him 
well awake, while yet there was time to secure his 
supper. Scarcely, however, with kindly violence, 
had she put her hands upon the slumberer, 
when she thought that she discovered, despite 
of the tan and freckles of his sun-burnt face, 
the same shipwrecked English orphan, whom, 
two years before, Lady Pontefract had cherished 
at the Government House, and the worthy 



AT THE CAPE. 59 

Land-drost had carried away in his waggons, to 
forward to his English friends at Algoa Bay ! With 
warm expressions of a surprise not entirely un- 
mixed with doubt, she called upon the company 
for explanation, and immediately heard the truth 
of the affair, as far as they had the means of tell- 
ing it. Mynheer Van Hoogst, without abating in 
his efforts to fish for a head of cabbage then swim- 
ming in a tureen of sheep's-tail fat 1 , and while 
still dipping a loaf of bread in the same liquor, 
yet communicated to the Vrouw Van Bomster- 
wyk, a very clear account of the short acquaint- 
ance which was all that he had had with the 
child, and of its bringing to a farmer's door by 
a party of Caffres, who described their finding it 
in a craal of Bushmen ; and, how, between the 
child's broken Dutch, and his own small smat- 
tering of English, he had even learned a portion 
of its previous history : a history from which, 
with the help of his Vrouw, he had judged it the 
most advantageous course for the child, to send 



1 The sheep bred at the Cape is lean, with the exception of 
its tail ; and the lean part of the flesh is dry. The tail is of 
extraordinary length and solidity; and what is called the fat, 
is a substance between fat and marrow. With reference to the 
north of Africa, so ancient a writer as Herodotus, has oc- 
casion to mention somewhat of the same description of sheep, 
and of its fat tail. 

7 



60 THE ENGLISH BOY 

it, at the earliest opportunity, to Cape Town. 
He knew that the boy was bent upon travelling 
in the opposite direction, and was anxious to find 
one Martha Hoyland, the friend of his mother, 
and his own gossip or godmother; but there 
were neither roads nor travelling between Alofoa 
Bay and the farm of Mynheer Hoogst; so that 
the long circuit, back again through Cape Town, 
was the shortest, or at any rate, the most practi- 
cable, line of march that was left open to the 
child ; besides which, Mynheer Hoogst and his 
household had understood enough of all that 
Charles had recounted to them of his adven- 
tures at the Government House, to think that he 
would be again befriended there, as soon as he 
should reach it. They had left their remote 
district, however, and even reached the seat of 
Government, with too imperfect a knowledge of 
Colonial events, and even of dates and persons, 
to reckon justly upon all the changes, which, 
as affecting the prospects of little Charles in 
Cape Town, the removal of Lord Pontefract 
from the Governorship, (an event which hap- 
pened in the interval,) had effectually produced. 
The Governor, his Lady, the Aide-de-Camp, 
and the English servants at the Government 
House, had sailed for Europe : ami except- 
ing that the Government House itself still stood 



AT THE CATE. 61 

in its old place, everything belonging to the 
domestic establishment of the governing author- 
ity was altered. Sir John Dickinson, the new 
Governor, was a bachelor, a rigid soldier, and a 
man of business, and scarcely heard of out of his 
sphere of duty; and, moreover, he was seriously 
occupied with the troubles of a disastrous Caffre 
war, and with the internal complaints and some- 
what turbulent proceedings of the Old or Dutch 
Colonists, concerning the plans of the English 
government at home, affecting the Cape currency, 
and the property of slaveholders. Sir John, 
therefore, and his Government House, were 
things which there was little chance of approach- 
ing, with any permanent benefit, with so small a 
tale as that of the afflictions of a little English 
boy, in search of his godmother. He might 
have gotten him received among the fifes or 
drums of one of the regiments in garrison, 
or in the field, if such had been the subject of 
request; but there was no romance of a lady's 
boudoir or britscka, or of gentle Aide-de-Camp, 
or of green monkey, or of attentive servants, to 
brighten the present, or to promise for the future, 
on Charles's return to Cape Town. So different 
is the same place, under different circumstances, 
and amid different persons; and so dependent 
are we, for so much that we either suffer or en- 

VOL. III. G 



62 THE ENGLISH BOY 

joy, upon all the things, and all the creatures, 
by which or whom we are surrounded; and so 
grateful are we bound to be, and so much love 
are we bound to render, when those things or 
creatures not only contribute to, but create our 
happiness; and how little to our credit, — how 
disreputable both to our hearts and our under- 
standing, — is any sulky feeling of an imaginary 
independence, or stupid pride of self-capacity to 
be the ministers of all our wants and comforts, 
instead of deep acknowledgment of the true 
sources from which they come ; and any dull 
forgetfulness of the personal obligations under 
which we lie, for so much of all that either de- 
lights or soothes our moments, or advances our 
interests, or accomplishes our objects, or gives 
its colour to the history of our lives ! The debt 
of gratitude is always greater than we can pay ! 
The Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk had long since 
heard and lamented the death of the Land- 
drost, and had not omitted to inquire what be- 
came of his orphan charge, after and amid the 
terrors of that event. She had heard, indeed, 
from the amiable lips of the young Mynheer 
Van Dunderblouwer, of the boy's safe arrival at 
Blouwveldt's, whence, as she had never doubted, 
he had been passed eastward to Graham's Town; 
and the same knowledge, and the same conclu- 



AT THE CAPE. 63 

sion, derived from the same source, had been 
received and formed at the Government House, 
long before the departure of Lady Pontefract. 
But the tale which now intervened, between 
Charles's arrival at Blouwveldt's, and his delivery 
at the Dutch whale-fisher's, was new, and as far 
as it was understood, either inexplicable, or mar- 
vellous, and almost incredible. Only a single 
feeling, in the meantime, followed the whole 
narration in the Vrouw, Imperfect as, in all its 
parts, it was, she saw enough in it to weep for it. 
Compassion was her sole emotion. She wept 
for the child that was so far removed from his 
mother and his home ; that had seen his father 
perish in the waves ; that had so long been tossed 
to and fro in a strange land, and that all the care 
of the Governor's lady, and of the kind-hearted 
Land-drost of Graaf-Reynet, had not been able 
to place under the protection of his only friends 
at the Cape. Nay, though the Vrouw at Blouw- 
veldt's was of Dutch original, like herself; and 
though Lady Pontefract was but an English wo- 
man, she drew no very favourable contrast be- 
tween the two, declaring, that after all, there were 
good and bad in every country ; and that, often, 
the best actions were done by those of whom 
they might be least expected, and the worst by 
such as had enjoyed the greatest opportunities 

g 2 



64 THE ENGLISH BOY 

of doing better ! " To think," she said, " of a 
vile Vrouw, whose forefathers had been born in 
Holland, and who had herself been brought up 
in the Lutheran church, and taught to know her 
duty to God and man, to let herself be outdone 
by one who was nothing but an Englisher !" 
" But, then," as she added, " to be sure, the 
Englishwoman was a lady — one of the quality 
— and such people were always better than the 
common sort, or, at least, they ought to be so." 
— The Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk might as well 
have staid by her first decision ; namely, that there 
are good and bad of all sorts ; but she did not 
know, or did not call to her recollection, that 
Lady Pontefract had been no warmer friend to 
Charles than his Hottentot mammy, or than the 
generous Bushman-girl. The worthy woman, 
in the meantime, however she might err in her 
distribution of the virtues among others, was im- 
bued with them herself; and yielded, neither to 
Englishwomen, nor to Hottentot wives or daugh- 
ters, in her desire to befriend the suffering : so, 
after taking care that Charles made a plentiful 
supper, and after endeavouring to comfort him 
under all his disappointments at Cape Town, she 
carried him to an upper room, and placed him 
ill a comfortable bed. 



AT THE CAPE. 65 



CHAPTER XXXI. 



Thv soul forsook 



The love of beauteous fields, and the blest lore 
That man may find in Nature's outspread book \ 

Anon. 

The hostess of the Prinz Van Oranje did not 
fail to cause a representation to be made to his 
Excellency the Governor, of the circumstances 
under which a poor little orphan, and shipwrecked 
English boy, had been brought back to Cape 
Town, after his dispatch, longer than two years 
before, for Graham's Town, under the special 
patronage of the late noble occupants of the Go- 
vernment House; neither did his Excellency neg- 
lect causing it to be signified to the hostess of the 
Prinz Van Oranje, that he would consider about 
something that might be done for the shipwrecked 
English boy. 

But the Governor's message encouraged no 

g3 



66 III K ENGLISH BOY 

immediate hope; and, as to Mynheer Van Hoogst, 
and his fellow-travellers, they were satisfied with 
having brought the boy to Cape Town, and with 
having paid for his first night's lodging, together 
with his supper and breakfast ; while, as to all to 
eome, they left it at the free disposal of the 
hostess and the Governor, taking no further 
care of Charles upon their shoulders. It might 
seem, indeed, that, in the absence of every one 
more ready to take part in the child's welfare, 
and especially in the simple task of either send- 
ing him forward to Graham's Town, or backward 
to England ; the house of M'Cormack, to which 
the unfortunate ship Nautilus had been con- 
signed, could, at least, have been asked to take 
some interest in the lot of this the smallest, and 
most helpless, of her surviving passengers. But 
whatever, in a happier event, could by possibility 
have followed from any attempt in that direction, 
the unfortunate failure of the house, and depar- 
ture of those concerned in it from the colony, 
(events which had occurred only a few months 
before,) was called to recollection by Mynheer 
Van Bomsterwyk, as soon as, in a moment of 
forgetfulness, their names were mentioned by bis 
Vrouw ; and, in short, nothing remained, but 
that either Charles should be thrown upon the 
public charity of Cape Town, or that he should 



AT THE CAPE. ()7 

linger on for a wliile, in the kitchen of the Prina 
Van Oranje, at the sole charge of Mynheer 
and the Vrouw, in partial hope that the day 
was not far distant, when the Governor would 
fulfil his promise, to consider about something 
that might be done for the shipwrecked English 
boy. 

The Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk had been 
moved by her first impressions of the singular, 
as well as unfortunate condition of little Charles; 
she had caught a tone of feeling in his behalf 
from that which she had seen displayed by Lady 
Pontefract, and by the Land-drost ; she had 
half persuaded herself that a similar interest 
would be taken in him by the actual Governor, 
and that commiseration for the English orphan 
would once more be fashionable in Cape Town, 
reflecting applause and profit upon all engaged 
in it; and, more than this, she had anticipated, 
even at the worst, but a very short delay, before 
Charles, in any case, should cease to be a guest 
without a friend to pay his reckoning. The 
lapse of a fortnight or three weeks, therefore, 
during which no inquiries were made con- 
cerning him from the Government House, nor 
any thought bestowed, by any part of Cape 
Town, upon a child whose appearance, this 
time, had been ushered in by no fatal ship- 



68 THE ENGLISH BOY 

wreck, nor even by a startling storm ; but who 
had arrived in an ordinary Dutch waggon, and 
was lodged in an ordinary Dutch inn, — the lapse 
of a fortnight or three weeks, in a manner so 
entirely unattractive and discouraging, made a 
change in the aspect of her English outcast, in 
the eyes of the hospitable Vrouw ; and it is pro- 
bable that, upon the strength of various cogent 
arguments which began to fall from her mouth, 
she would shortly have devolved her charge upon 
the public purse for his support, had not the 
little tale of his misfortunes suddenly found a 
new listener, and procured him, for the fleeting 
moment, another protector. 

Neither the Vrouw, nor yet her careful husband, 
ever changed their first kindness into brutality, 
nor even into absolute hard treatment. They 
only grew indifferent about him. They left him 
to herd with the Hottentots and slaves of their small 
household, and to depend, for each of his daily 
wants, upon the favour, and upon the humour, of 
the Negro-girl in the kitchen. It was not loi 
therefore, before his appearance, and. what was 
still worse, his manners, began to show signs, not 
only of the neglect of others, but of himself! 
Not his situation only was sinking, but he was 
himself sinking 1 to his situation. Charles. 
in the kitchen, and in the stable-yard, of the 



AT THE CAPE. 69 

Prinz Van Oranje, and in the dull streets, and 
amid the naked walls of Cape Town, was fast 
ceasing to be, either the innocent and rosy child 
of Derbyshire, or the adventurous wanderer of 
the African forest, hastening after the antelope 
or the Honey-bird ; or even the interesting fos- 
ter-brother of the Bush-girl, and companion of 
English Bushman, or fellow-traveller of the 
Caffre-band ; but in the stead of these, was sur- 
rounded, and daily growing into a similitude, with 
the dirt and the vulgarity of the refuse of civilized 
society ! Instead of the mountain and the river, 
instead of the forest and the flower ; instead of 
the glossy sides and lively motions of the spring- 
buck ; instead of the glowing colours of the 
birds and insects; — instead of that resplendent 
and melodious universe of nature, where all is 
purity and health, and vivacity, and vigour ; 
where all is beauty to the eye, and music to the 
ear ; where all is dignity, loveliness, and grace ; 
Charles had now about him little beside the 
degraded and the mean ; the wrecks of the 
things of the creation, the deformed, the muti- 
lated, and the corrupt : and, so imitative is hu- 
manity, and so ready to mould itself to its 
situation, that, now, while lounging by the 
kitchen-fire, or sleeping upon the dunghill, liis 
days were passed as tranquilly, though not, we 



70 THE ENGLISH BOY 

may be sure, as cheerfully, as when, with every 
morning's sun, he visited the calm waters of the 
lake or stream ; gazed, every evening, upon the 
glories of the sun that gilded and empurpled 
the leafy hills; and breathed, from hour to hour, 
the untainted air ! He submitted, too, without 
reluctance, to his association with the debased 
individuals of his species among whom he was 
placed, poisoned by the avarice of a vulgar 
civilization, or crushed and soiled by its oppres- 
sions ; he could even mix in the jeers of the slaves 
and servants ; he could wrangle with the Negro- 
cook for a foot-place at the fire, or for a morsel 
from the pan ; and with her, and with her fel- 
lows, and with the naked imps of the yards and 
out-houses, he could return snarl for snarl, and 
blow for blow ! Meantime, his clothes, which 
had scarcely held together to reach Cape Town, 
which had received some helping stitches 
from the Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk, and which 
had afterward been left to the sole charge of 
any Hottentot or Negro girl, that, either from 
labour or from merriment, would steal an in- 
stant to have pity upon him ; — his clothes grow 
ragged as they grew dirty, and grew both the 
faster, for the rude and boisterous, and even 
quarrelsome life he led ; and, along with his 
clothes, his skin, too, shared in the accumulating 



AT THE CAPE. 71 

filth from his two most ordinary resorts ; namely, 
the scullery and the pigstye. His hair was with- 
out a comb, and his face without a towel. 

But Charles was passive in all this descent 
into evil. He merely took things as they came ; 
and neither he, nor any of those among whom 
he was thus thrown, believed that they were to 
last for ever. He retained all his better disposi- 
tions; he acquired no reproachful inclinations; 
he lived in the hope of better scenes, and of 
quitting, in their prospect, every idle habit, along 
with every hurtful humiliation. He was still 
a pilgrim, bent upon approaching Martha 
Hoyland, and still more upon beholding, at no 
distant day, his mother, and his sister, and his 
brothers ; and it was these visions that still saved 
him inwardly, however low he might seem to 
have fallen upon the outside. The Governor's 
promise, some time or other to think of what 
could be done for sending him to the eastward, 
kept everything in expectation, and in suffer- 
ance, and in neglect, as well with himself as with 
others ; and nothing was altered, either for the 
better or the w r orse, because a total and final 
change for the better was continually thought 
coming. 

In the list of various nations, the scattered 
members of which are to be found among the 



THE ENGLISH HOY 



inhabitants of Cape Town, we are never to for- 
get the names of Chinese labourers and Malay 
artificers ; the first distinguished by their simple 
wants and patient industry, and the second by 
an industry of the most ingenious forms, in every 
kind of handicraft, but especially in that manu- 
facture of gold and silver trinkets, for which, 
in spite of the fewness, as well as incredible 
clumsiness of the tools, the whole East, from 
all antiquity, in so a high degree has been dis- 
tinguished. It was a Malay goldsmith, then, 
whose hovel stood in the next street from the 
Prinz Van Oranje, that alone, in all the popula- 
tion of Cape Town, chanced, at the crisis of 
which we are speaking, to interpose, for the 
rescue of little Charles from the gulf into which 
he appeared to be swiftly swallowing. The 
Malay was too temperate, too domestic, too 
fearful of defilement from Christian company in 
general, and especially too sensitive to all the 
horrors of the boozing* and intoxication of Dutch 
Africaner boors, in any case to have entered 
Mynheer Van Bomsterwyk's hostelry, or even to 
have lingered at its door, except in furtherance 
of the duties of his humble calling: a motive 
which, as it had happened, actually brought him, 
one morning, into the bar-room, early enough to 
find it free from customers, and vet not s<> early 



AT THE CAPE. 73 

but that Jemima, the handsomest of the Vrouw's 
entire stock of Hottentot attendants, had already 
swept and washed away from the tables and floor 
the tobacco-ashes and clammy slops of potent 
beer; which, spilt and drying since the night 
before, had glued to the latter the mugs of the 
luxurious company. It was but the fourth morn- 
ing after the arrival of Charles at Cape Town, 
and while his face was clean, and his clothes not 
yet arrived at their worst, that the goldsmith 
Namal came into the bar-room, almost as soon 
as the Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk had descended 
from her chamber, to bring home a pair of 
almost the largest and heaviest golden ear-rings 
that might be seen round Simon's Bay, and 
which he had mended, brushed, and beautified, 
in exact conformity with the orders of the Vrouw. 
The ear-rings, indeed, were wanted for a chris- 
tening-party, at which the Vrouw was to assist 
on the same evening; and Namal, aware of the 
occasion, had come further provided with nume- 
rous necklaces, and rings, and bracelets, of the 
most fantastic and elaborate patterns, and even 
corals, and spoons, and similar productions of his 
art; anxious, from the temptation of their fitness 
or beauty, to receive, from the tasteful and 
wealthy mistress of the best-frequented house 
of entertainment in Dutch Cape Town, more 

VOL. III. H 



74 THE ENGLISH BOY 

money than was simply due to him for his work- 
manship upon the ear-rings. The Vrouw, though 
she gave him small hopes of becoming a pur- 
chaser, permitted him to display his store, a task 
in which he was no sooner engaged, than with 
glistening eyes, and longing, outstretched heads 
and shoulders, the blooming Hottentot, Jemima, 
joined the party; followed, in but a few seconds, 
by the Negro girls and matrons, Lavinia, Phyllis, 
Chloe, Diana, Venus, and Latona \ The group, 
too, was increased by the children, black or yel- 
low, which came, either in their mothers' arms, 
or else approaching, nearer and more near, at first 
behind, and then in front of all the visitors ; a 
freedom the more easy, because the Vrouw, for 
the time, was partly absorbed in contemplation 
of the jewellery, and partly not unwilling to 

1 The Dutch and other colonists have studiously given 
to their slaves the divine or human names of Pagan anti- 
quity, upon the principle of shunning a supposed profaneness 
in the allowance of the usual names of Christians to those 
who are not Christians. As to the elegance, or the grandeur, 
in the meantime, of the names, the moderns, in bestowing them 
upon their slaves, have had before them somewhat of an exam- 
ple from the ancients. Among the Greeks, the word "Chryw 
which signifies "gold," was often the name borne by a slave; 
a circumstance by the way, that, in one of his odes, has fur- 
nished Anacreon with a simile and line of metaphorical ex- 
pression, founded upon the faets. that " slaves" arc apt to run 
away, and that it is the same with "gold!" 



AT THE CAPE. 75 

enjoy the sympathy, and even to consult the 
taste, of all her several handmaids. As suddenly, 
however, she became sensible, again, of the in- 
decorum of the intrusion; and, now, with one 
tremendous and stern rebuke, the whole were 
compelled to fly, with the exception of Jemima, 
who claimed superior privilege, and of Charles, 
the new and favoured guest, who had fully joined 
in the general excitement ; and whose amaze at 
the charms of gems and gold and silver, was not 
the least among those who made the party. In 
the end, the Vrouw added to her store a pair of 
golden bracelets, set with opal, the beauty of which 
she had found irresistible ; and Jemima (first run- 
ning to her hiding-place) produced coin enough to 
purchase a silver anklet, with bells, to adorn one 
of her naked feet, though not without the help 
of a ring in exchange, as well as not without the 
hope of buying the other anklet at an early day. 
As to Charles, with his finger to his mouth, he 
looked on in silence ; though, when he saw that 
even Jemima could become the mistress of the 
large, hollow, and glistening ring of silver which 
was to shine and gingle upon her yellow ankle, 
he lifted his eyes to her's, as if to say, " And 
nothing here for me !" a plaint which the ten- 
der beauty felt sufficiently deeply to condole 
with, by pinching one of his cars, and telling 

h 2 



76 THE ENGLISH BOY 

him, with a grin, that if he would lot the good 
Namal bore his ears that moment, he should 
have ear-rings too; for she would buy him a pair 
of brass ones, big enough to reach his shoulders ! 
All this, in the meantime, would have been 
wholly unimportant to the history of little 
Charles, had it not been that the Malay gold- 
smith, when his spirits were raised by the pur- 
chase of part of his wares ; when his suppressed 
anxiety for the safety of the whole, while they 
were pored over, and handled, and passed from 
one to the other, by the black and yellow group, 
was at an end; and when, at the conclusion of 
his bargain with the Vrouw, he was mildly sip- 
ping the orange-flower water of which he had 
ventured to call for a cool glass; — the Malay 
goldsmith (putting his hand upon Charles's head, 
stroking down his hair, and calling him " pitty 
boy," and finding him unable to speak Dutch) 
inquired of the Vrouw who he was, and whom 
he belonged to ? The Vrouw, at the same mo- 
ment, was laying her new bracelets across her 
wrists, and putting forth her two hands together, 
in warm admiration of her purchase ; fully satis- 
fied that, at the revel of the evening, even the 
gorgeous wife of the rich contractor Van Dams 
so far from displaying their equals, would have 
nothing in any degree to compare with them. 



AT THE CAPE. 77 

The ingenious artificer himself, though from 
another train of thought, could not but share in 
the complacency thus bestowed upon the work 
of his hands ; so, that his questions were neither 
soon answered, nor soon repeated : delays, how- 
ever, that did not ultimately prevent his briefly 
learning, from the motherly, and, as we have 
seen, not wholly uncompassionate Vrouw, that 
the boy before him was the same of whom, two 
years before, he must have heard, when he was 
saved amid a shipwreck on the coast, where his 
father was drowned; that was sent for to the 
Government House, carried toward Graham's 
Town by the Land-drost, and was now returned 
to Cape Town, under circumstances which she 
hastily described ; and, finally, was waiting for 
the Governor's promised assistance, once more 
to set out for Graham's Town. 

" Hear of dat boy," exclaimed the friendly 
goldsmith, as if repelling, because it would have 
been a reproach to him, the notion that he 
could have forgotten the story of Charles ; " O 
marvels of heaven and earth, did I not hear of 
dat boy, and did I not see him wid mine eyes ? 
Did I not see him at de Government House, 
when I was go to wait upon my Lady, when I was 
carry to my Lady the most beautiful gold and 
silver scent-box that ever I was make in all my 

n 3 



78 THE ENGLISH BOY 

life, and dat ever was make by all mine ancestors, 
(peace to their souls !) in all Malaya? And did 
I not see dis same pitty boy, when he was take 
by de hand, along de street, by dat goot young 
man, dat great young lord, what was de great 
General's Aide-de-camp, what has gone away 
to England wid de blessings of poor Malay, and 
poor Malay man's Vrouw, upon his young head ; 
and what shall never do him no harm, though 
poor Malay people no Christians !" 

" Yes, I remember," interrupted the Vrouw, 
"you and your wife had great reason to be 
thankful to the Aide-de-Camp." 

" Tankful ! you say, tankful !" cried the 
Malay, again, with growing emotion : " Did 
not my wife fall upon her knees to him ? Did she 
not bless him ? Did she not worship him ? Did 
I not kneel beside her ? Did we not pray for 
him ? Did we not call our children to dance 
round him ? Did not our Malay neighbours join 
with us ? Did we not make offerings to him, of 
flowers, and fire-works, and sherbet? Did we not 
fold him in our hearts ? Did we not salute him 
among the spirits of heaven ? When he went 
away, in the great ship, did we not follow him 
to the beach with our blessings, all( l did we QO | 

gaze after him till we could see nothing tor our 
tears ? And did we not throw flowers and cocoa- 



AT THE CATE. 79 

nuts into the sea, to make the spirits of the great 
water kind to him ? And did we not fill a little 
proa with filagree papers, and cocoa-nuts and 
flowers, and every luscious fruit, and set it be- 
fore the wind, that it might drift far into the 
ocean, to draw to itself, and to carry away with 
itself, every thing that could threaten the great 
English ship that contained our benefactor ? — 
Dat goot young man ! Was it not he, that when 
our low roof was burning, and when we had 
thought all our children safe, sprung through the 
dirt and the smoke, and through the blazing frag- 
ments of the thatch, and laid hold of our dear 
Noni ; and, clothed as he was in scarlet and gold 
all over, brought out our child in his arms, and 
carried him to the bosom of his mother ; and did 
not I find Noni with his mother, when I thought 
that he had been carried to her own home, half an 
hour before, by our goot neighbour, Surabaya, 
the poor embroiderer ? Oh my beautiful Vrouw 
Van Bomsterwyk, silver and gold are precious, 
and pearls, and emeralds, and rubies are lovely 
to the eye; but when the great and the gay 
ones of the earth are goot to the poor and the 
perishing, and employ themselves in offices of 
love, they are like the spirits of the topmost 
heaven, which come down, indeed, upon glit- 



80 THE ENGLISH EOY 

tering wings, but upon errands that are brighter 
still !" 

The Vrouw was too busy with her ear-rings 
and her bracelets, to interrupt the Malay, in 
any part of all this burst of feeling, or even to 
reprove any of the wild ideas which had mixed 
themselves with his apostrophe, and betrayed 
his pagan breeding ; nor, in truth, had she heard 
much more of it than the part where he had 
talked of the loveliness and preciousness of 
rubies, and emeralds, and pearls, and silver, 
and gold, and of the beauty of the Vrouw Van 
Bomsterwyk ; in all of which, as she thought, he 
expressed himself very sensibly, for a Malay: 
setting in motion, at the sound of those his words, 
the lightly-hung drops of the ear-rings, and 
turning the bracelets so that they might sparkle 
in the morning sun. 

• Namal, in the meantime, (after drying away 
the tears that, in conjunction with the words in 
which he had indulged, had now abated the 
throbs invited by the warmth of his recollec- 
tions,) was restrained from taking further notice 
of Charles, only by the understanding that his 
course was plain and easy, and that the Governor 
was already his patron ; circumstances which in- 
duced him to do no more than put upon one of the 



AT THE CAPE. 81 

boy's fingers a little ring of short-lived brilliance 
and the most trifling value ; after which, (though 
not without the profoundest acknowledgments to 
the Vrouw, and prayers for Charles, that every 
good spirit, and the Good Spirit of spirits, would 
bless him, and shelter him, and carry him to the 
goot woman, and her goot husband, at Graham's 
Town, and, more than all, would put him into 
the arms of his goot mother in England ;) after 
this, he took his leave of Charles and of the 
Vrouw. 

He did not finally leave the Prinz Van 
Oranje, however, before he had been called into 
the out-houses of the servants and slaves, where 
Latona, Venus, and Lavinia and the rest, caused 
him to open anew the cheaper part of the sam- 
ples he had brought with him; and where (in 
part with the assistance of their fathers, their 
husbands, and their brothers) they made many 
purchases, and gave more commissions, in 
necklaces, ear-rings, armlets, anklets, and brace- 
lets, for themselves and their children ; naked 
though were most of the latter, and nearly house- 
less all ; those for the children being for daily 
wear, while some of the remainder were chiefly 
designed to blaze and jingle at Hottentot and 
Negro balls and card-parties; to one of which 
Lavinia, and several others, from the Prinz Van 



8*2 THE ENGLISH BOY 

Oranje, were to add to the gentility that very 
evening, under favour of the Vrouw's engage- 
ment at the christening-party, where a total 
eclipse was now in preparation for all the jewels 
of the gorgeous wife of Mynheer Contractor Van 
Dam. Like their modest mistress herself, too, 
Venus and Chloe, and even more, required nu- 
merous repairs of trinkets already their own ; 
and while attending to all his customers of each 
colour, and endeavouring to understand with 
precision the orders of each, amid the boundless 
chatter of the whole; Namal the goldsmith 
increased his acquaintance with Charles, who 
had not failed to follow him, with the rest, into 
the slave-yard, still gazing, and still wondering 
at the show. 



AT THE CAPE. 83 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

'Mang black Gentoos, and pagan Turks. 

Burns. 

It was, then, to the goldsmith Namal, that 
Charles owed his deliverance from all the evils 
which, at this time, were growing one upon the 
other, from his lingering abode in the kitchen of 
the Prinz Van Oranje. There was no message 
from the Government House ; and ever, as the 
soft-hearted Malay, either attended upon his 
customers in the slave-yard, or passed the front 
door of the Africaner inn, he inwardly grieved 
over the neglect of which he saw his " pitty 
English boy" the victim, and especially over his 
dirty face and hands, and slovenly apparel ; and 
more than this, over that degraded listlessness 
of countenance and air, which, with a keen eye 
for the lines of nature, he fancied that he saw 
creeping onward, despite of all the secret work- 
ings of Charles's spirit, that, as we have said, 



84 THE ENGLISH BOY 

really subsisted, and more or less enlivened and 
sustained liim. But the more that the good 
man saw, or thought he saw, the child decline, 
either inwardly or outwardly, the more his 
heart grew nearer to him, and the more he felt 
himself called upon to make little efforts for his re- 
lief. Nothing serious, or determined, was done, 
as we have said, upon any side, because every 
hour was expected to bring the commands of 
the silent Governor ; and, the same time, the ex- 
pectation itself was forgotten in the breast that 
entertained it, or only remembered at long inter- 
vals, as an excuse for indolent repose. Neither 
the goldsmith, therefore, nor any one else, 
thought of a decided change for the boy in Cape 
Town ; and, as to the former, he was, for a long 
time, content only to advise a better care of the 
passing hour. Once, twice, or thrice, he had 
said to Charles, " Oh my littel boy, what a sad 
dirty face ! Oh shame for English boy to be 
so dirty ! Oh ! for dat dirt upon you face, no- 
body can see how pitty you are ;" but Charles, 
if he sometimes yielded to the rebuke of his 
new monitor, did it but rarely and imperfectly; 
and still the goldsmith waxed the warmer in his 
aid. By degrees, he came to draw him daily to 
his hovel, commending, to his wife, Sambayana, 
the child that had shared, with their own, the 



AT THE CAPE. 85 

zeal of the young Aide-de-Camp. And Samba- 
yana had sweetmeats, and scented waters, and 
preparations of flour and milk, of which Charles 
showed no reluctance to partake, and which he 
could enjoy in the midst of a peace, external 
and internal, to which, now, for many weeks, he 
had been a stranger. There was little, (except 
the puffing of the bellows, at the mouth of the 
rude and diminutive furnace of Namal, at which 
he worked under an adjacent open shed,) to dis- 
turb the noiselessness of the goldsmith's dwelling, 
unless the frequent operation of those bellows, 
either as the workmanship variously required 
them, or as the fierce sunshine put out his fire ; or 
else the songs of himself or his wife, or the shouts 
of his children; or, sometimes, the sudden call, in 
his garden, of one of those Cape birds that thus 
invite human help for the destruction of some 
snake which they have discovered ; and till the 
killing of which they interrupt themselves in the 
midst of the liveliest and sweetest notes of all 
their feathered neighbours : and Charles found 
this a serene exchange, as well from the boister- 
ous mirth, as from the angry scr earnings, of the 
Prinz Van Oranje. Beneath the roof of Namal 
and Sambayana, (itself a thatch without, and a 
bare frame within,) there was much to be dis- 
tinguished from what is usual under a more 

VOL. III. I 



86 THE ENGLISH BOY 

northern sky, and inmates of a different nation ; 
for, here, the climate and the manners brought 
together things that elsewhere might have he- 
tokened, on the one hand extreme poverty, and, 
upon the other a luxurious affluence. The floor 
was earthen, and in part uneven ; for the fre- 
quent broom, removing the smallest dust or 
litter, had worn hollows in some places of the sur- 
face. Furniture there was scarcely any ; for the 
mats served both for seats and beds. The walls 
however, had a few shelves, and many hooks ; 
and on these were set or hun? the entire 
assortment of household utensils. In a dark 
corner, however, was to be discovered an orna- 
mented curtain, and before it, vases of flowers, 
together with a lamp, of which the wick, upon 
certain holidays, w r as lighted ; and behind all, as 
occasion ultimately enabled Charles to see, was 
a small image, the figure of the object of the 
household worship. But, here, was silk and 
gold, as well as fragrance and rich colours ; and 
upon the persons, also, of Namal and his wife, and 
still more upon those of their children, (though 
the dark skins of these latter had all of them, 
more or less, no other coverings), were valuable 
trinkets of silver, and gold, and gems. 

Without ceasing to visit the premises of Myn- 
heer Van Bomsterwyk, and to make them his pro- 



AT THE CAPE. 87 

per home, Charles became, daily, a longer and 
more frequent guest with the Malays ; and the 
alteration speedily disclosed itself in the marked 
improvement of his manner and appearance. 
His curiosity received material indulgence, 
while permitted to witness and watch the mi- 
nute labours of the goldsmith, who, cross- 
legged before the stone that served him for 
an anvil, or intent upon the crucible which, 
with its metal, and its workmanlike ingredients, 
was heating in the furnace, spent hours upon 
hours in bringing to the perfection which he gave 
them, the delicate toys that he so often fabricated. 
What he saw, too, he was anxious to imitate ; 
and it was not long before his pride was gratified 
by the allowance to assist in some parts of the 
task, if only to blow the fire, or fetch coal or 
water ; and, at last, even to hammer and to file, 
and to exult in rounding a ring, or polishing a 
bead. By these employments his mind was re- 
invigorated. His hours had once more their 
objects. He lamented the going down of the 
sun, whenever it left his work unfinished ; and 
he longed for the return of the morning, when 
morning brought its work to be performed. 
With the restored health of his understanding, 
came, also, a renewed activity of body. He had 
a pleasure in motion, and he moved for what- 

i2 



88 THE ENGLISH BOY 

ever he thought of to be done. He was no 
longer indifferent to the rents nor to the soiling 
of his garments ; • and he no longer thought it 
greater labour than formerly, to apply almost as 
many ablutions to his person as his Malay 
patterns. 

But, since Charles, in this manner, rose every 
day, into increased esteem with Namal and his 
Sambayana; and as his own attachment, with 
the same progress, grew every day the stronger 
to the Malay dwelling-place, it soon fell out, 
that the goldsmith, taking occasion from the 
Vrouw's jesting with him, as he made his salaam 
to her, at her door, about the frequent absence 
of Charles at his workshop ; — the goldsmith, 
though with great caution and humility, ventured 
to propose, that he should come altogether to his 
hovel, for the short time which, no doubt, re- 
mained to be passed, before the Governor would 
find means to send him to the eastward. Namal 
]) leaded the pleasure which the boy took in 
watching his own labours, in listening to his 
wife's songs and stories, and in playing with his 
children; and the Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk, not 
without so far adverting to Charles's permanent 
welfare as to reflect, that he would be as easily 
found, if wanted, at the Malay goldsmith's, as in 
her own kitchen or slave-yard, cheerfully gave 



AT THE CArE. 89 

her consent to the change of the orphan's lodg- 
ings. 

Namal, after this success, went joyously and 
swiftly homeward ; nor, when he had related the 
adventure, was his joy greater, or more sincere, 
than that of Charles and Sambayana : " Thou 
hast done well, my husband," said the Malay 
wife, " to seize out of the slime, and bring away 
from the parching bottom, this poor fish, which 
has need of refreshing floods ! It is related in 
the books of Siam, that once, while Buddha, in 
the figure of a Pelican, dwelt upon earth, there 
happened a drought so great, that all the waters 
of the lake upon the banks of which the Most 
Merciful thus lived, were daily drying away ; and 
that already there were multitudes of fish which 
the departed waters had left uncovered, either to 
smother in the mud, or to faint and shrivel in the 
scorching sun, which soon hardened the surface, 
and seamed it with wide cracks. But, at so 
piteous a sight, the tender-hearted divinity, all 
Pelican as he was, thought of nothing but saving 
the poor fish, whole heaps of which, in his ample 
bill and pouch, he continued carrying, through all 
the drought, from wherever the lake left them, into 
deep pools and flowing rivers. Now, if Buddha, 
being a divinity, was thus busied to save simple 
fishes, from the slime in this place, and the parch- 

i $ 



90 THE ENGLISH BOY 

mg clay in that ; how worthily dost thou not do, 
my husband, to bring away this child, our fellow- 
creature, from the slime of dirt and meanness, 
and from the hot rays of turbulence and vice, 
either in which he was smothering, or beneath 
which he was scorched and shrivelling up !" 

" Thou hast judged well, my ever tender Sam- 
bayana," returned Namal ; " and well hast thou 
applied the lesson of one of those holy fables which 
saints and sages have imprinted upon the me- 
mory of mankind, not merely to please the ima- 
gination, but to teach virtuous actions ! Thou 
knowest that it is of the nature of the divine 
Buddha to be altogether compassionate !" 

Charles, indeed, in the time that followed, had 
soon occasion to observe, that a religious feeling, 
however misguided in its nature, and religious 
practices, however childish, and even ridiculous, 
were continually present, not daily only, but 
hourly also, in the house, in the garden, on the 
way-side, and in all the lives and actions of the 
family of his new foster-parents. They neither 
ate nor drank ; they neither rose up nor lav down ; 
they neither began nor ended anything; they 
scarcely looked to the sky, or to the earth ; with- 
out something said, and something done, which 
was either an act of thankfulness lor good 



AT THE CAPE. 91 

received, or a petition, or as a safeguard, against 
evil to be ! If they designed to drink, they first 
made drink-offerings, or libations, (either by 
spilling, upon their earthen floor, or other rest- 
ing-place, a portion of that thin food,) to spirits 
of that earth from which is every fruit and in- 
crease ; or by throwing the liquor into the air, 
to reach the lips of the spirits of that air with- 
out which there is neither life, nor health, nor 
joy ; but from which, also, as from the earth 
equally, can come all things that are malignant, 
afflicting, and destructive ! In a word, they 
were as grateful for the smallest benefits, as they 
were fearful of the minutest evils; and they 
showed, by all their practice, that they lived in 
the momentary sense of the existence, and pos- 
sible arrival, both of the smallest and the greatest 
of the one and of the other. But this manner of 
thinking, with its consequent usages, however 
conformable to the real state of men and of the 
universe ; and however just, and however beau- 
tiful under certain aspects, was not without its 
mischiefs, even in a house so pure, so reasonable, 
and so actively good and virtuous, as this of 
Namal and Sambayana; and still less in those 
of many neighbouring Malays, with the tenants, 
at least, of which, Charles now gradually formed 
an acquaintance. Even in the house, and in 



92 THE ENGLISH ROY 

the bosoms, of the good Sambayana and Namal, 
where the forms and the dictates of the super- 
stition of their joint country were, the one 
practised with a heartfelt devotion, and the other 
productive of every just, and every tender 
work ; even here, the superstition of their joint 
country was still a superstition ; that is, it was 
burdensome and melancholy in greater propor- 
tion than that in which it freed its votaries of 
chains, and lightened them of sorrows. It was 
true that they rejoiced in every good, (the least, 
like the greatest,) that befell them; but, upon the 
other hand, from their way of thinking, they 
lived in the continual fear, and even in the con- 
tinual expectation, of approaching evil ; and this 
while the prospect of evil is more terrible than 
the prospect of good enlivening ! 

As the night, however, drew on, Charles laid 
himself down upon the little mat which was his 
new bed, and upon which he slept soundly till the 
morning. At day-break every one was stirring, 
and repairing to the bath; on returning from 
which, Namal, drawing together his wife and 
children, in front of the curtain which concealed 
the idol, was followed by the whole group in 
the act of making certain gestures, and in 
speaking, or rather chanting, in low voices, cer- 



AT THE CAPE. 93 

tain words; none of either of which gestures or 
words were intelligible to Charles, but who heard 
and witnessed all in reverend silence, and with 
stillness of body. The acts of worship finished, 
Namal, accompanied by Charles, and by some of 
the children, went to begin the labours of his 
furnace; while Sambayana, not unassisted by 
her maid and the other children, swept and 
sprinkled the house, decorated it with flowers, 
and prepared the breakfast, at which, soon after- 
ward, the family again assembled. 

During the meal, the goldsmith having cast 
his eye upon some of the dazzling geraniums, 
(the produce of this their native country,) and 
thence commended the taste and care with which 
Sambayana had thus honoured the morning 
repast ; the latter, after apologizing for what she 
called the scantiness of her bouquets and fes- 
toons, upon the score that it was not the flowery 
season of the Cape, concluded with a gentle sigh, 
that, alas! they should never see again such 
flowers as brightened the fields, and breathed per- 
fumes in the air, in that beloved country beyond 
the eastern sea, — their own beloved Malaya ; 
and, here, she turned, as was not uncommon 
with her, to the amazed and almost tearful 
children round the mat, and nursed their love of 
the unseen shores she spoke of as their only real 



94 THE ENGLISH IJOY 

" home," by fond descriptions of the surpassing 
beauty, the sweet odours, and the clustering pro- 
fusion of the flowers by which is was adorned, 
and in the midst of which herself and their 
father had enjoyed their youth; so that even 
Charles (as far as he could be warmed by descrip- 
tions only) joined the children in lamenting* that 
the Cape was not Malaya, and in agreeing that 
flowers so rich, so sweet, and so abundant, could 
be found in no other country. It was not of the 
odours, nor of the beauties, merely, of some of the 
flowers, and herbs, and trees, of her own Malaya, 
that she could boast ; but also of the surpassing 
size of others. Compared with the forest-trees 
of Malaya, those of the Cape, she said, (and she 
might have added, those of Europe,) were pig- 
mies. The magnitude of the flowers, creepers, 
and trees of Malaya, was what she extolled 
above the stinted vegetation of the foreign soils 
and climes : " At home" said she, " we have 
creepers and vines (entwining trees of the same 
proportions) which hang a hundred feet to the 
ground, in girth as thick as a man'fl body, and 
often more so ; and the trees are generally from 
a hundred and sixty, to two hundred feet in 
height. Once, I saw a tree of which the measure 
was nine yards round; and even this is nothing 
to what 1 have heard of in the island of Java, 



AT THE CAPE. 95 

where, also, as I have been told, there grows the 
Devil's Betel Box, (for such is the foolish name 
the people give to it,) the largest and most mag- 
nificent flower in the whole world. It measures 
more than a yard across its leaves, from one outer 
edge of the flower to the other. Its nectarium, 
or inner cup, is nine inches in diameter, and 
nine inches deep, and can hold a gallon and a 
half of water; and it is this nectarium which is 
thus called the Devil's, or Gigantic Betel Box, 
or box for betel for chewing. The flower is of a 
yellow colour ; and its weight is fifteen pounds \" 
Her descriptions, it must be admitted, of the 
flowers she had left, were a little height- 
ened, (if that could be possible,) by the earnest 
feeling with which she looked back to them ; 
but Namal, (even if he were not himself patriot 
enough to think all other flowers unequal to the 
Malayan,) at least made no effort to abate his 
wife's regret for them, except by offering the 
consideration, that the Cape, though it had not 
the flowers of Malaya, had yet flowers in the 
most extraordinary number and variety, which 
belonged to itself, and could not be found in 
Malaya; and flowers, too, of exceeding beauty, 

1 See accounts of Malay vegetation, in the Life and Services 
of Sir T. Stamford Raffles, &c. &c. 



96 THE ENGLISH BOY 

and some with fragrance : " It is certainly true, 
however," he subjoined, " that we Malayans are 
born to delight ourselves with a profusion of 
flowers; and so, indeed, does it seem with all 
the other nations of the East. The Persians, (to 
come no further westward,) are themselves en- 
amoured of a Persian traveller upon the Jumna 
and the Ganges, who was so struck with the 
fondness of the Hindoos for flowers, that he said, 
they seemed as necessary to them as food ; an ex- 
pression which may help to explain away the idle 
report of ancient times, that there was a nation 
in India which lived wholly upon flowers." 

" No ! no!" said, here, the sprightly little girl 
Pandava, the goldsmith's eldest daughter; " 1 will 
never believe that flowers can serve for breakfast 
or dinner for men and women, nor even for little 
boys and girls ; though they may for fairies." 

" And why for fairies, light of my eyes ?" 
inquired Sambayana. 

" Oh mother !" returned Pandava, " have you 
forgotten the pretty story that the Parsee ' told 
us, in which the good fairies, (and that was in 

1 The Parsers (so called) of Bombay are of Persian origi- 
nal, but are Old Persians, or Pagan Persians, as adhering to 
the Fire Worship, or ancient worship of their country ; while 
the great majority of their countrymen have become converts 
to Mohammedanism, of the sect of Ali, otherwise called 
Sliiahs, or Sheahs. 



AT THE CAPE. 97 

Persia, too !) when thousands of their warriors 
were taken prisoners by the wicked fairies, and 
hung in cages upon trees, came to the poor 
starving prisoners, all fluttering like so many- 
birds, and fed them with flowers ? I thought of 
those good little fairies yesterday, when my 
father was telling about the good pelicans that 
carried fish to their poor fellow-pelicans, whom 
wicked men had fastened to stakes, after first 
breaking their wings !" 

Namal, as a finish to this little conversation 
upon flowers, bade all who heard him remark, 
how uniformly the divine Artificer of Nature had 
embellished it, under every form, and in every 
region, with the splendours of rich colours : 
"You behold them," said he, "in the flowers 
of the herbs, and of the trees and shrubs ; in the 
birds and insects of the air, which so often, as 
they settle upon the shrubs, and trees, and herb- 
age, appear again, as so many momentary 
flowers ; you behold them in the shells and fishes 
of the rivers and seas, among which latter, as 
among the rest, the gold and silver of the organ- 
ized creation rivals the metals of the mine; 
while the same mine has gems which repeat, 
again, the sparkle and the colours of the flowers, 
the birds, the insects, the shells, the fishes, and 
the metals; to say nothing of the lamps of the 

VOL. III. k 



98 THE ENGLISH BOY 

sky, which lengthen the list of Nature's jewels, 
which cover the sky as with reflexion of the 
flowers, the birds, the fishes, and the gems and 
metals of the earth ; and which may be said to 
see themselves again upon the earth, in the 
metals, gems, and flowers ! I say nothing of the 
rainbow, nor of the gay and sparkling dew-drops, 
nor of the images of the sun and stars, shining 
in the rivers, lakes, and seas ; nor of the colours 
of the heavens, and of the clouds ; nor of the 
fire-flies by night, nor of the air-bubbles by day; 
nor of the pearls, the coral, and the diamonds, 
the jasmin and the roses, which last I see, this 
moment, over again, in the teeth, the lips and 
eyes, of you my Sambayana, and of you my 
children ! But, finally, it accords, plainly, with 
the manifest scheme of nature, that men and 
their arts should further multiply and repeat 
these glories (the living letters of the speech of 
the Omnipotent !) in all the works they do, either 
for their cities, or their temples, or their palaces 
or houses, or their raiment; and humble instru- 
ments to this great end, are those poor artizans, 
who, like myself, labour to ornament the limbs, 
the heads, and the hands and feet of our brethren 
and each other; so that, still again, the nations 
walk abroad, and fill up the dance, and lie on 
the grass, and beneath the trees, like other flow. 

7 



AT THE CAPE. 99 

and birds, and gems, and stars, and beaming 
metals ; and so that man, besides emulating the 
mountains and the hills, and the cedars, and the 
palm-trees, and the oaks, and the rose-bushes, in 
his pyramids, his temples, his palaces, and his 
cottages; and the forests and the meadows in 
cities, and in his gardens; and thus disputing 
the landscape with the sovereign planter, the 
Almighty Gardener; disputes, also, upon his 
own figure, and in the attire of his wife and 
children, the plumage of the birds, and the 
enamel of the flowers; adding to the beautiful 
world of nature, an almost equally beautiful 
world of art : while the great Artificer of all 
looks with delight upon the little triumphs of 
his creatures, and displays of the powers he has 
given them, as (so to compare things !) thou and 
I smile upon the labours of our children, upon 
their exhibitions of the strength which they 
have derived from us ; and upon their skill in 
the arts which we have taught them, or that they 
mimic from our hands ! I remember, too, that 
in regard of the apparel of human figures, the 
weavers of silks and muslins, and the crafts- 
men of a hundred beautiful devices, (nay, even 
the slender capabilities of the poor Namal,) con- 
tribute, in their way, to multiply, and to spread 
still wider, the objects and the surface of that 

k2 



100 THE ENGLISH BOY 

all-pervading and all-embracing beauty, of which, 
under so many aspects, we have been <j (cak- 
ing; and which it has pleased the Author of the 
universe to make one of the most visible features 
of his work : 

" ' Thou hast flowers for earth, and stars for heaven, 
And gems for the blue sea !' " 

Namal came back from the thought of that 
wide and sublime survey of the infinite universe 
in which he had indulged, to the low roof which 
sheltered himself and his children, and drew 
from this notion of the great scheme of nature, a 
lesson of gratitude and piety ; of gratitude that 
his own weak hands were permitted to labour in 
the general task of beautification ; and of pious 
content with the humility of his allotted portion. 
These views, in short, entered, for part, into the 
matter of those brief prayers and praises with 
which the Malay breakfast finished, as it also 
had begun. 

The first hours of the morning thus disposed 
of, Charles, a little later in the day, underwent 
new and considerable changes in his appearance, 
and even received the seeds of others in his 
manners and ideas. The matron, Sambavana. 
from the beginning of Charles's visits to her 
dwelling, had not been sparing of her needle, to 



AT THE CAPE. 101 

stop the gaps in his torn and mouldering raiment, 
or of soap and water to remove the dirt which 
had every where disfigured him ; but, now 
that she could half reckon him as one of the 
children of her hearth, (and short as his stay with 
her was expected to be,) she was not long in 
projecting, with the full consent of her husband, 
and of Charles himself, an entire change, at once 
in the quality, and in the style of his habiliments. 
The weather was warm, and the example of 
all the Malay children at home and abroad was 
before him; and he heard, therefore, with joy, 
the proposal of Sambayana, that he should throw 
away, at once, all the rags and patches, as well as 
rotten shoes and stockings, with which he was en- 
cumbered ; and, instead of supplying their place 
with English apparel, which would have been 
costly, put on (after a swim in the shallows of the 
bay, half healthful, half devout) the dress of the 
elder Malay boys, of which the principal and most 
conspicuous article was a cotton shirt or tunic, 
with a small silk sash, exquisitely woven, and in 
which all colours were brought together with the 
most harmonious arrangement. But, this prin- 
cipal alteration accomplished by Sambayana, 
and Charles's hair combed and cut; Namal, also, 
had innovations to offer and effect, toward the per- 
is 3 



102 THE ENGLISH BOY 

fection of his appearance. Upon his naked arms 
above, and upon his naked legs below, Namal 
placed silver armlets and anklets respectively; 
and while Charles's eyes, in transport at his 
metamorphosis, glistened like the silver itself, the 
good man, though not quite so easily as the rest, 
won his consent to bore his ears, for insertion 
into which he produced a pair of his prettiest, 
though not very valuable, gold ear-rings; ear- 
rings that were literally and solely rings, but 
larger than the circle of a crown-piece. Charles 
had shrunk, for some little time, from submit- 
ting to the degree of pain which he feared to 
be inseparable from this last operation ; but, 
besides that he was so full of joy for his silver 
anklets and armlets, and so strongly tempted by 
the large gold ear-rings, and by the example of 
the children and their parents, and by the desire 
to please Namal and Sambayana by his consent ; 
besides these things, he perceived that all the 
family attached a religious importance to his 
wearing of ear-rings, regarding them, according 
to the general practice of the East, as marks 
of submission to the will of God, of being 
entered into his service, and of aspiring and 
confiding to live under his blessing ; that is, to 
do his bidding, to eat his bread, and to receive his 



AT THE CAPE. 103 

wages 1 . But Namal, pleased with the docility 
of his pupil, and warmed with the benevolence, 
and the piety, of his own motives, did not, now, 
stop at adorning the ears and arms and ancles of 
the little English boy ; but added a plain gold 
ring upon a toe of either foot. He placed 
also in the bosom of his tunic a small locket, 
brooch, or amulet, (for he called it by its Arabic 
original, hamail ; whence, as we may believe, our 
European amulet or hamailette, " a little amail" 
or "hamail ;") chiefly for its oriental purpose of 
protecting (through the starry influence with 
which it had been carefully indued) the mind 
and body of his young favourite against all 
human accidents 2 ! 

1 It would require more space than we can here afford, 
were we to enter into an explanation, (in other respects, perhaps 
desirable,) of that train of analogies which has presented itself 
to the human mind, so as to make the wearing of an ear-ring 
a symbol of dedication to the divine service. 

2 We are led by the same reason as in the preceding note, 
to suppress what, under the view of superstitions, we might 
otherwise wish to say, concerning lockets and brooches and 
amulets, and the astrological conceit of virtues imparted by 
the stars to metals. 

As to the mentions of the Pelican, which, in the course of 
this chapter, have twice occurred, regarding both its history 
and fable ; we may refer, for more upon the same subjects, to 
what will appear in the volumes of " The Pelican of the Wil- 
derness," by the Author of these pages. 



104 THE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 



Oh ! 'tis excellent 



To have a giant's strength, but it is tyrannous 
To use it like a giant. 

Shakspeaul. 

The temporary refuge, however, which Charles 
had now found beneath the roof of the hospitable 
Namal and Sambayana, was taken from him in a 
manner which no party had expected, either for 
its abruptness, or for the distressing circumstances 
which were its cause. It happened that the even- 
ing of a day that shortly followed the last of 
which we have been speaking, was the wake or 
vigil of a great religious festival of the Malays : 
and upon this occasion, the goldsmith, his wife, 
and the two elder children, all attired in their 
best apparel, wont to assist at the service which 
was to be led by the priests in a large apartment 
of a house in one of the Long, narrow, and dark 
streets of Cape Town. Charles was invited to 



AT THE CAPE. lOd 

accompany them ; and, if he had entertained any 
objection whatever, all this would have been en- 
tirely removed by the promises made him, that 
besides partaking of a savoury supper, with abun- 
dance of sweetmeats, he would hear much sing- 
ing, and see many lights and flowers, and rich 
and beautiful carpets, and silk canopies and cur- 
tains ; and find numerous worshippers and specta- 
tors. The two younger children, therefore, being 
left at home, in care of the Hottentot servant- 
girl, the whole family besides proceeded, at the 
proper time, or, rather, a few minutes after, to 
the place of festivity ; which, as they approached 
it, Charles found to be a large Dutch-built house, 
of which the door and all the windows stood wide 
open, all the latter filled with lights. 

The singing of the priests and others had 
unfortunately commenced. Namal and his wife 
felt themselves to blame for being thus late ; but 
they had lost a little time in their care to adorn 
Charles to the utmost. In the street, in front 
of the door, was a crowd of the poorest and least 
orderly of the inhabitants of that metropolis, 
including individuals of almost every complexion, 
from a jet black to a whited brown ; and mingled 
Europeans, Mozambique Negroes, Hottentots, 
Chinese,' Lascars, Bengalees, and others. The 
singing of the priests and their followers was 



106 THE ENGLISH BOY 

heard through the windows above ; so that the 
party were anxious to enter, and to ascend into 
the consecrated apartment, as speedily as possible; 
and their object, here, was materially forwarded 
by the care of a Malay, stationed for that purpose, 
who continually cleared the doorway of gaping 
and obstinate intruders, at the same time politely 
asking even strangers, if of a better description, 
freely to walk in. Once arrived within the 
house, Charles and his conductors passed through 
a long dark hall or passage, upon the right hand 
of which a door opened into a large kitchen, 
where the noise of cooking was heard, even above 
the boisterous clamour of a crowd of disorderly 
visitors and assistants ; but upon the other was a 
somewhat capacious staircase, which led to the 
scene of worship upon the upper floor, and which 
Namal and his little band, without stopping an 
instant below, hastily ascended. 

At the top of the stairs was a large lobby, 
where, again, the passage was partially obstructed 
by a body of strangers of every colour ; but 
through the midst of which Namal and his family 
were assisted by the porter to roach the open 
door of a large room, the immediate scene of the 
religious service; but here the male and female 
parts of the congregation were separated from 
each other; so, that while Namal, with Charles 



AT THE CArE. 107 

and Noni, passed to the right, among the men, 
Sambayana, and her little daughter Pandava, 
went to the left, among the women. 

The walls of the entire chamber were hung 
with a drapery of white cotton, which covered 
them in every part, and which was arranged 
in rich and tasteful folds, and ornamented with 
flowers. Numerous chandeliers, of cut glass, the 
manufacture of artists in England, were sus- 
pended from the ceiling, and liberally filled with 
lights ; and at the upper end of the room stood 
an elegant canopy or tabernacle, composed of 
draperies of white and crimson. Upon a carpet, 
laid in front of the tabernacle, sat three acred 
priests, of very handsome figure, wearing long 
beards, and clothed in white vestments, who were 
engaged in a solemn chaunt, in the chorusses 
and other parts of which they were helped by 
the men in general, and by the delicious voices 
of the women and girls, and of the youths who 
joined the strain. All were occupied with the 
duties of the hour, and of the place, and sur- 
rounded, at the same time, by their friends and 
neighbours, and fellow-believers; and, among the 
associated figures thus to be seen, were those of 
Sambayana and Pandava, sitting cross-legged 
upon their mats, beside the widow Surabaya, 
in the same posture ; she whose zeal to succour 



108 THE ENGLISH BOY 

her friends, at the time of the fire, had led Namal 
to believe, that among other services, she had 
carried to her own house, and placed on the 
same mat with her own children, the sleeping 
infant that in fact had being rescued by the 
young English Aide-de-Camp. 

But, at this moment, a noise and commotion, 
not only unseemly, but frightful, suddenly 
began to make itself heard in the lobby; and, 
almost immediately afterward, both the one and 
the other spread themselves into the lower part 
of even the sacred room. An instant more, and 
the entire assembly was in confusion. The 
chaunt and the chorusses had ceased, the men 
were at blows, and each of them struggling either 
to attack or to resist; the shrieks of the women, 
and the screams of the children, were heard in 
every direction ; the canopy was broken down ; 
the priests insulted and struck ; the hair of their 
beards pulled from their chins ; their vestments 
soiled and spit upon; the chandeliers broken : 
the lights extinguished ; the hangings torn from 
the walls, and the flowers trodden under foot : 
the lobby and the stair-case filled with scuffles 
and combatants; and many of the unhappy and 
unoffending Malays, men, women, and children, 
either bruised or trampled upon, and even 
thrown over the banisters ! 



AT THE CAPE. 109 

A party of officers, including two or three 
young midshipmen, belonging to an English 
East Indiaman, then in the harbour, but about 
to sail at day-break with the next tide, had been 
carousing at a farewell dinner with some of their 
friends on shore, and were on their way to get 
on board, when, the crowd, the lights, and the 
sound of the choral service in this house of pious 
festivity, situate near the port, attracted their 
attention. In the passage through the dark 
streets, with no more than a slave or two to 
carry a lanthorn for their guide, nothing but the 
fear of the police had prevented them, (wildly 
intoxicated as several of them were,) from rare- 
ing forth their favourite songs, and from break- 
ing, not only two or three, but half the windows 
that they passed; but, upon reaching the Malay 
house, the crowd, the lights, and the sound of 
other voices, raised up their rude exhilaration 
into a state of disgraceful madness ; the fury of 
which, however, they temporarily checked, 
when, " coming-to," as they said, before the 
Malay door, they formed an unanimous resolution 
to enter, and partake in whatever was going for- 
ward. The squalid and obsequious crowd in the 
street, no sooner beheld them approaching, than 
it instantly made them way; and even the Malay 
porter, though a little discomposed at the noise 

VOL. III. L 



/ 



110 THE ENGLISH BOY 

and turbulence with which they had hitherto 
moved ; yet, in deference to the charm, as well as 
confidence in the character, of an English uni- 
form, maintained all the suavity of his previous 
deportment, and politely invited these, like all 
preceding strangers, to place their feet within 
the mansion. The door-posts, nevertheless, were 
scarcely behind them, than, attracted by the 
crowd and voluble tongues, and noisy cookery 
in the kitchen, they turned immediately into 
that part of the interior ; and, where either the 
silliest, or else the fiercest of the whole, seized 
a wet dish-clout which lay upon a table hard by, 
and threw it at the head of an aged Malay 
woman, who, in an arm chair, and amid all the 
din, had been taking a nap before supper, in 
order to enable her the better to go through the 
after-fatigues of the evening. The outrage 
awoke and frightened the old woman, at the 
same time that it enraged herself and all about 
her; and, now, tongues, hands, and nails, and 
shovels, and tongs, and soup-ladles, had nearly 
confounded, and even demolished the stupid and 
ill-disposed midshipman, along with his half- 
guilty friends. By force of many intreaties and 
apologies, the companions of the offender, after 
seeing him in the complete grasp of those offen- 
ded, procured his pardon and release : and the 



AT THE CAPE. Ill 

next proceeding of the party, though much 
against the wish of the attendants, was to insist 
upon going up stairs, first promising the quiet- 
est demeanour. They had scarcely, however, 
reached the lobby, before, upon hearing more 
distinctly the voices of the women, and seeing 
the lights, and flowers, and draperies, they 
swore, at first, that there was a dance, and that 
they would instantly join it; and next, (having 
descried over the heads and shoulders of those 
who filled up the door-way, the priests seated 
upon the carpet, and the crimson canopy which 
rose behind their white vestments,) that the 
whole was " devil- worshipping," and that all the 
people were but poor and copper-skinned Ma- 
lays, and good-for-nothing heathens. Be the 
assembly, however what it might, they were re- 
solved upon forcing their way into the midst of 
it ; and, for this purpose, they presently began to 
push and jostle with violence whoever opposed 
their further progress, an act which, to all who 
were Malays without, and to every heart within, 
appeared sacrilege of the deepest horror. The 
resistance, then, which they now met with, in- 
flamed them moment after moment ; the Malays, 
at the beginning, sought only to repress the 
efforts at intrusion ; this provoked the English- 
men to blows, and blows were instantly returned. 

L 2 



112 THE ENGLISH BOY 

With the strength and audacity ot English sea- 
men (so admirable when honourably employed !) 
these deeply inebriated individuals (as the ma- 
jority of the party were) forced an almost instant 
admission into the sacred chamber ; where, amid 
the struggles, the intreaties, the execrations, and 
the imprecations of its proper inmates, and vehe- 
mently asserting the superiority of Englishmen, 
the worthlessness of foreigners, their hatred of 
Paganism, and their determination to have their 
way, and that nobody should stand against them ; 
they perpetrated, and brought upon the Malay 
temple and its votaries, all the crimes, all the suf- 
ferings, and all the confusion that has thus been 
mentioned under a general aspect, and of which 
we are now to come to particulars more closely 
connected with the persons of our peculiar 
history ! 

The original disturbers of the solemnity were 
but a small number of those English who hit- 
terly became partakers in the offence ; for the 
East-Indiaman's boat, with its crew, had long 
been waiting at the wharf, to take off their otfi- 
eers from their wassailing; and, as the wharf was 
nigh at hand to the Malay festivities, and as the 
rumour, and even the shouts and cries of the asr- 
pressors and the aggrieved, came speedily to the 
sailors' ears, the latter, either to defend their otfi- 



AT THE CAPE. I 13 

cers from wrong, or to take part with them, right 
or wrong, soon hurried to the hapless house, where, 
ascending the stairs, and forcing their way into 
the midst, this addition to the strength of the 
assailants, and the violence of these new per- 
formers, were not the smallest parts of the 
calamity. But the Malays, who, at the first, 
were taken by surprise, as well as restrained by 
the sanctity of the place and the occasion, grad- 
ually regained their presence of mind; and, at the 
sense and sight of actual outrage, barbarity, and 
insolence, threw aside ceremonial restraints, and 
employed their own strength, their courage, and 
their weapons, (in none of all which were they 
deficient,) for the rescue of their priests and 
their friends, their wives and their children, and 
in vengeance of the injuries committed. The 
creases were now quickly drawn upon every side, 
and the English officers unsheathed their cut- 
lasses and dirks ; but the Malays were far too 
many to be confronted when aroused, and 
nothing but flight remained, both for officers and 
men. All sprung toward the staircase, from the 
uppermost banisters of which, thronged as it 
already was with fugitives, and even combatants, 
many were glad to leap or drop, as the last hope 
for life ; and all, pursuing or pursued, rushed 
into the street, and hurried towards the wharf. 

1,3 



114 THE ENGLISH BOY 

The police, alarmed, as, by this time, it was j 
hearing 1 that English officers and Malays were 
in conflict ; seeing the Englishmen in flight, and 
being aware of the accustomed fierce and mur- 
derous sallies of so many of the Malays, when in 
drink and among themselves, directed all their 
efforts to assist the retreat of the former, and to op- 
pose, to the creases, and to the outstretched arms 
of the Malays, the long pikes which were their 
own protection. With that assistance the Eng- 
lishmen reached their boat without a single ma- 
terial wound ; and now, amid the darkness of the 
night, and with a vigorous plying of their oar-, 
they passed breathless till they reached their 
ship, then lying, with anchor almost a-peak, 
in the outer harbour ; fearful, no longer, indeed, 
of the Malays, but of some order from the Go- 
vernor, or civil, or perhaps military interference, 
if the truth should reach the Secretary's office, 
before the ship got under weigh. But the boat 
had no sooner put them on board, than, the pilot 
being already there, and indeed waiting for their 
arrival, the captain gave orders for heaving the 
anchor; after which, with loosened sails, and a 
rising breeze, the guilty vessel stood to sea, and 
recommenced her Indian voyage. 

Among the rioters, there wen' one or two, 
that, as they became sober, deeply lamented 



AT THE CAPE. 115 

the transaction in which they had been engaged, 
and anxiously hoped that they had done less 
mischief than their fears, and even their memory, 
painted to them, and that their hearts were 
warmly ready to deplore ; but there were others 
of the party too ignorant, and too barbarian, for 
accessibility to any emotion thus soft, or thus 
honourable to their nature ; and who, exulting 
in the success of their retreat, called all the rest 
a glorious evening's sport, and a noble finish to 
their " touching at the Cape." They were full 
of the Englishman's vice, upon every distant 
shore and soil ; that of despising and insulting, 
and sometimes even of substantially outrag-ins:, 
everything that is not English ; forgetful that 
all this is but the consequence of much ignorance 
of the head, joined with much viciousness of the 
heart ; and that though there are Englishmen to 
be cited, upon such occasions, as examples, it is 
those Englishmen only whom England abhors 
and blushes to acknowledge for her sons ! One of 
the ruffians, in the present instance, was able to 
tell, at breakfast the next morning, and as a case 
in point, (as to how an Englishman should serve 
any black fellow and Pagan, regarding whom he 
might think well of taking so much trouble,) the 
course which he had himself adopted on a walk 
in the neighbourhood of Calcutta ; where, a poor 



1 16 THE ENGLISH BOY 

Hindoo cotton-weaver bavins been slow to leave 
his loom, and procure, as he had desired him, a 
light for his cheroot, he had gone, after receiving 
it, and after seeing the tobacco fairly lighted, to 
the back of the " rascal's" bamboo hut, and set- 
ting fire to the broad leaves of its roof, consumed 
it, with the loom, and the warp, and the woof, 
and the cradle ; and the small basket of rice, and 
smaller bag of salt, which were to have fed the 
family for the day ! " It was true," he added, "that 
a meddling fellow of a Zillah judge, (an English- 
man himself, and who ought to have known 
better,) had kicked up a fuss about the matter, 
and would have had him tried, and perhaps 
hanged, under pretence of arson, if he could have 
discovered him, and got him into custody; and 
that there had been Thanadars, and Chocdars, 
and all the " dare" beside, in a paltry Mogul dis- 
trict, trying, for a long time, to ferret him out ; 
but his person was unknown, and he had given 
the whole of them the slip, for he had no idea of 
being bothered about the burning of the hog-tty 
of a Bengalee weaver !" 

This particular mode of assertion, in the mean- 
time, of English superiority, was not wholly ap- 
proved of by the entire company ; and, in truth, 
there were not wanting some outward expressions 
of disgust, and a greater share of inward reproba- 



AT THE CAPE. 117 

tion ; but, still, the English superiority to all the 
rest of the world was warmly supported ; and the 
first mate remembered that a native poet had 
said of his countrymen, 

" Pride in their port, defiance in their eye, 
I see the lords of human kind pass by!" 

" I tell you what," interrupted the second 
mate, (who, by the way, had his half pay on the 
Navy-list,) " I like that English * pride' and 
'defiance' exceedingly well when there's good 
reason for either ; but, at every other time, as I 
take it, it is the proudest thing in all the world, 
for the strongest man to be harmless, and for 
the boldest to be unpresuming ; and, as for 
' lords of human kind,' shiver all mv timbers 
if I don't think I 've sometimes seen as good 
'lords' among some other sorts of people, as 
among us that are English only ! As for me, I 
am no scholar, you know, any more than the rest 
of ye, but I just read a piece of a remark by one 
of your book-writers, while I was on shore 
at Cape Town; and the gentleman says this, 
just about some of the Old Indians, as they 
call themselves, (or Englishmen from India,) and 
some of their Mohammedan and Hindoo ser- 
vants, just as he saw them, at that same Cape 
Town; and he says, (but you may believe me, 



]18 THE ENGLISH BOY 

or not believe me, you know, just as you like;) 
he says, says he, c They look a great deal more 
like ' lords,' than most of their English masters 1 ;' 
and so much for ' lords of human kind,' whe- 
ther they are English, or Mussulman, or Hindoo ! 
And let those who call themselves these ' lords,' 
behave and bethink themselves as ' lords, ' or 
more shame for them if they do not ; that is, 
let them remember, that strength is given, not to 
oppress the feeble, but to defend them. I would 
have it said, of all my countrymen, as of us 
fellows of the sea : 

1 They shall find British sailors but conquer to save 2 !' " 

1 The brave and worthy seaman has here got into his head 
the observation of a Cape tourist, already cited in our work. 

2 It is pleasant to be able to put in contrast with any ex- 
ample of the misconduct of individual Englishmen in foreign 
countries, the exalted reputation which the nation at large has 
every where earned for itself with foreigners ; and especially 
(as in the instance to be subjoined) in the remote East, and upon 
the borders, and among the wildernesses, of that Indian terri- 
tory, with its hundred millions of people, whose dominion it has 
acquired, and whose destinies it sways. The missionary Wolff 
assures us that the language which follows was held to him 
in Afghanistan; and it is language which, as the reader will 
see, is equally honourable to the English people, as constituting 
a power among the nations of the eirth, and to the reputation 
of that sentiment and phraseology which we are accustomed 
to call Oriental: — " Affghanistaun, (as he tells us) they 
said, must be governed again by a crowned king. We are 
neither Balkwee, nor Hazarah, nor Toorkomauns [that is, we 



AT THE CAPE. 119 

We go back, in the mean time, to what re- 
mained of the Malay assembly, and to the inter- 
val between the rush after the English drunkards 
into the street, and the return of the baffled pur- 
suers. When the younger and stronger men had 
drawn their creases, joined by no small num- 
ber of the women, and followed the enemy, 
scarcely any were left behind except the priests, 
the aged, the mothers, and the children. But 
there were some, and among them, several who 
belonged to neither of these classes, whom bodily 
injuries and wounds detained upon the spot; and 
who, thrown down, or reclining, as they were, 
upon the floors of the chamber, the lobby, and 
the hall, and upon the stairs, could only now be 
observed. One solitary individual alone, had met 
immediate death ; but this was Surabaya, the 
friend and neighbour of Namaland Sambayana; 

are not robbers]. Hindostaun has belonged to us : now [for 
want of a king] we are afraid of Runjud Singh, an infidel. 
Let the Franks [the English] give us a king, and we are their 
humble slaves ! The Franks [the English] have taken Hin- 
dostaun, not by the sword, but by justice, equity, and know- 
ledge ; and they shall take the world by knowledge." — Mis- 
sionary Researches, &c. &c. By the Rev. Joseph Wolff. 

It may be proper to remind the reader, that " Frank" is the 
general Oriental name for Europeans ; but that, in the pre- 
sent instance, English Franks, or English Europeans, were 
the immediate people in question. 

7 



120 THE ENGLISH BOY 

the poor embroiderer; the young widow of the 
fisherman Manang, who had been devoured by a 
shark, twelve months before, while fishing in the 
bay; and the industrious and tender mother of two 
fatherless children, whom, with herself, she had 
maintained by her embroidery ! The body of 
Surabaya w r as found almost at the bottom of the 
staircase, lifeless, and disfigured about the face 
and bosom, where it had been trodden upon by 
so many feet in passing, and where the slaugh- 
tered victim had fallen and been suffocated. But, 
though no other life seemed to have been yet 
lost, several men, and women, and children, were 
either crippled, or otherwise much hurt. Sam- 
bayana, Pandava, and Noni, were quite safe, ex- 
cept for some slight scratches and bruizes ; but 
it was not so with Namal, nor even with Charles. 
Namal had been thrown over the banisters ; 
and in his fall, had broken one of his legs, 
and three of his ribs, and he lay helpless in the 
passage. Charles's collar-bone was broken, and 
he had received a deep wound from a random cut, 
inflicted in the darkness and confusion, by the 
weapon of one of his own furious and thought- 
less countrymen. Enough, therefore, was upon 
the hands of the women and others who could 
still move, and who were now to afford their suc- 
cours, or to render the lust duties, amid all the 



AT THE CAPE. 121 

terror, too, which they still entertained of the 
probable return of the English and their hus- 
bands, and of a renewal of the combat in the 
house. Some, with groans and melancholy 
songs, carried home the body of Surabaya, and 
placed it beside the mat upon which lay asleep 
her infant orphans. Others led away the lame, or 
bound up the bleeding, or supported, as well as 
they could, the faint. A litter was made for 
Namal, who, amid the helplessness of his broken 
leg, and the pain and oppression of his broken 
ribs, took Charles by his side, and held him 
safely under his arm. A strong party carried the 
litter which bore the wounded to the goldsmith's 
dwelling ; and Sambayana and her children 
walked along with it, consoling the sufferers, 
and weeping for their sakes. 



VOL. III. 31 



122 THE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

When one poor man helps another, God himself laughs 
for joy ! 

German Proverb. 

Afflictions thus profound were the fruit of the 
English disturbance among the Malays. At the 
abode of Namal were soon assembled a group of 
friends and neighbours, all lamenting the gold- 
smith's misfortune, and many offering their aid. 
Skilful surgery, both for Namal and Charles, 
would have been easily obtained without going 
out of the Malay community; for surgery, from 
the mechanical nature of its office, and the visi- 
ble and tangible objects with which it principally 
deals, (that is, with the flesh and bones only of its 
patients,) arrives at even an early and high per- 
fection among the least cultivated people ; while 
medicine, or the cure of diseases, (of which latter 
the occasions are commonly so hidden from souse, 
and so little removable either through the hand or 
eye,) is, to rude nations an occult science, and to 



AT THE CAPE. 123 

the most instructed a slow, and often, after all, an 
exceedingly doubtful acquisition. 

But it was not surgery alone for which Charles, 
still more Namal and his wife and children, had 
now necessity. The fracture and wound under 
which Charles was suffering were misfortunes 
easily remedied; but they were such, neverthe- 
less, as demanded attendance, a resting-place, 
and general quiet, for the patient. The broken 
leg of Namal was a more serious trouble. It 
not only ensured, at the very best, a tedious 
personal confinement ; but it turned his dwelling 
into a sick house, engrossed the cares of Sam- 
bayana, interrupted the course of his labours, 
and cut off the family resources for its daily 
bread. For each of these unhappy consequences, 
however, the charity of the purses, and of the 
hearts, of Namal's countrymen and neighbours 
was quick in finding all the relief that neigh- 
bours and countrymen could supply. Those of 
the Malay race alone were not permitted to take 
to themselves the joy of ministering to the 
sudden wants of Namal and Sambayana, and of 
their children and their household. With the 
society of any description of Europeans at the 
Cape, Namal and his friends and neighbours 
were indeed but little connected ; and what 
had happened, therefore, was little, or (as we 

m 2 



124 THE ENGLISH BOY 

ought to say) not in any degree, under its 
eye. But Africa and Asia afforded, as we 
have already made appear, a mixed commu- 
nity, the more united in itself through its 
exclusion from all other. Here were not only 
the Negro and the Hottentot, not only the China- 
man and the Malay ; but the Hindoo also, and 
his Mohammedan conqueror, and the Parsee, 
(as we have said,) from Bombay, and the Turk 
from Asia Minor ; and even the Jew, of a parent- 
age from Syria. Among most of these, from his 
trade of goldsmith, he had customers as well as 
acquaintance ; and all, of both these classes, 
now crowded around him, and his mourning wife, 
and afflicted children, eager to render one ser- 
vice or another, each in his different way. A 
Malay mother took charge of the two younger 
children; a Chinese found a bed for Noni; the 
Parsee, who had lately employed Namal upon 
trinkets for his daughter's wedding, was liberal 
with money. A Mohammedan doctor and sur- 
geon, and fortune-teller, and juggler, and char- 
mer of snakes, set NamaPs leg, and Charles's 
collar-bone; and the Jew Benjamin, a general 
dealer in gold and silver, pearls, and diamonds, 
and old shoes, laid down his empty clothes'-bag, 
while he carried away Charles to his own house, 
to be lodged, fed, and nursed by his willing 



AT THE CAPE. 1*25 

sister, Brinah. Under his roof, and with the fur- 
ther assistance of a Jew doctor, (for neither 
would the Mohammedan have entered the house 
of the Jew, nor would the Jew have allowed the 
entrance of the Mohammedan,) Charles's bone 
was soon united, and the wound closed up ; and 
while the hospitable Benjamin and Brinah still 
made him consider his homeaswith them, he went 
continually to and from Namal and Sambayana's, 
and played with Noni and Pandava and the little 
ones, all the time of Namal's recovery. It was 
strain enough, upon the notions of Benjamin, to 
be thus mixed with the idolators ; but his aver- 
sions yielded to his pity ; and there was no motive 
of that kind here, for his looking with forbearance 
upon a follower of the prophet of the Arabs ! 

All the kindness, meanwhile, of Benjamin 
and his family together, nor all the pleasure 
of his daily visits to the house of Namal, nor 
that of seeing the latter recovering, though 
slowly, from the effects of the violence which had 
been inflicted upon him; none of these things 
diverted the melancholy which had now begun 
to steal upon Charles, as, week after week, no 
tidings came from the Government House, 
that the Governor had found leisure to think 
of what could be done for sending him toward 
Graham's Town. The disappointment which 

m 3 



126 THE ENGLISH B<>\ 

lie experienced through the absence of Lady 
Pontefract, from whose promised correspond- 
ence with Lady Willoughby he had assured 
himself, both that his mother would learn the 
sorrowful tidings of his father's death, and of bl- 
own doubtful condition; and that, either directly 
or indirectly, he should himself hear of his mo- 
ther, and his brothers, and his sister ; this dis- 
appointment, which made still more bitter the 
failure of his journey in the direction of Martha 
Hoyland, and her husband, from whom, had he 
reached them, he reckoned confidently upon the 
same news ; all this had never sat lightly upon 
his mind, and at the present time, it began to 
prey upon it. Good Benjamin, also, as well as 
the generous Namal, had graver wishes for him 
than could be satisfied by the extension of a 
short-lived hospitality; for they judged that 
nothing could substantially serve him, but his 
restoration to the mother of his heart : and that, 
considering upon the one side, all their want 
of means and knowledge requisite for sending 
him to England, and, upon the other, all that 
lie said of his own desire to reach Martha Hoy- 
land's, and confidence under that event, and all 
that related to his home and mother : — consider- 
ing this, his progress toward Graham's Town was 
the thing chiefly and earnestly to endeavour. 



AT THE CAPE. 1*27 

Benjamin had easy access to the servants' 
hall at the Government House ; and, in that 
quarter, he was able, not only to make his efforts 
for interesting the Governor's body-servant in 
the hapless situation of Charles, so far as to ob- 
tain his promise for sometimes finding an occa- 
sion to recall the memory of it to the represent- 
ative of the sovereign in South Africa; but even 
with the same assistance, to get to the speech of 
His Excellency's private secretary, who readily 
took upon himself a similar task. When week, 
however, had still followed week, and the com- 
passionate Jew could still discover nothing, but 
that the Governor still said, he would look out 
for a time for taking the disposal of the young 
English lad into consideration ; then, at the end, 
he began to think, that nothing would ever be 
done, unless he stirred himself, in his proper 
person, to put so small a matter in train; after 
which the Governor's simple consent, either 
given, or not denied, might be sufficient for the 
rest. From the Government House to the Ex- 
change Coffee House, or even to the sailors' 
lodging-houses round the port, was no unusual 
circuit for poor Benjamin, in the daily exercise 
of his vocation ; and, if he had often made it with 
a bounding pulse, when going or returning from 
the making of a profitable sale or purchase, cer- 



128 THE ENGLISH BOY 

tainly it was not without sensations of a lively 
pleasure, that, his resolution taken, and his plan 
fixed, he set himself, the following morning, to 
learn the name of the first vessel that lay in the 
harbour, about to sail for Algoa Bay, and to have 
a little talk of business with the captain, in 
which it should not be the least important point, 
to ascertain the lowest terms upon which he 
would take a ship-wrecked and friendless Chris- 
tian boy, " what wash 'way from all hish friends, 
and from hish poor mooter, what wash widow 
into te bargain," — upon that coasting-voyage of 
seven hundred miles? 

Benjamin was eminently successful in his 
negociations of the morning. He sold the 
captain a pea-jacket, and a new spy-glass, and 
a pair of grains, or three-pronged harpoons, all 
for " great deal less than they cost him ;" and 
purchased, in return, a broken glass, a damaged 
speaking-trumpet, and an old hat, and two pair 
of boots, every one at " great deal more than 
they were worth," or than he should " ever get 
for them again ;" but in both cases, as the mean* 
of "helping him to take care of his family." 
Besides all this, however, he concluded an agree- 
ment with the skipper, to carry Charles, at a 
very cheap rate, into the harbour o( Algoa Bay: 
and for "the love of a Christian." as the Jew 



AT THE CAPE. 129 

emphatically said, to take safe and speedy mea- 
sures for sending*, at last, the " dear, poor, little 
boy," to the threshold of his dear godmother, 
Martha Hoy land. " For I love the pretty 
child," added Benjamin, with the kindest emo- 
tion, " just all as one as if he belonged to my 
own peoplsh ; and he is so goot," continued he, 
" and he will take no room in the ship, and he 
will behave so prettily, and you will not know 
that he is on board !" The skipper, in fewer 
words, assented to all that Benjamin desired; 
and, at parting, reminded the latter, that the 
boy must be by the hatches of the Pride of 
Dordrecht before the turn of the tide, by day- 
light on the day following but one. At this 
time, it was happily an advanced part of the 
Cape summer, through all which season there is 
nothing to fear from the south-east winds, so 
adverse to a progress from Cape Town to 
Algoa Bay; and so troublesome, at many sea- 
sons, on this whole coast of " storms !" 

But, these arrangements finished, Benjamin 
had still matters of importance to accomplish in 
behalf of the young adventurer ; and, as well to 
carry the news of what was done, as to consult 
with his sister Brinah about what remained, he now 
went straight from the Exchange Coffee House 
to his own dwelling; stooping, as he went, under 



130 THE ENGLISH BOY 

the weight and bulk of his great bag of clothes 
and other merchandize. Charles was overjoyed 
upon being told that a ship was actually ready to 
carry him, and with the prospect of the quickest 
passage, to the beloved Martha Hoyland, whose 
image was still cherished, loved, and dreamed of, 
though considerably faded upon his mind ; the 
joint effect of time, and of his own advance from 
infancy, the imperfect impressions of which latter 
left him to dote upon the recollections of his 
young godmother, almost without knowing why; 
and with no very distinct ideas, either of her 
person, or of her claims to his regard and confi- 
dence. He remembered, however, that she had 
danced him in her arms, and given him cakes, 
and fruit, and kisses ; that she had red cheeks, 
and sung him songs, and used to smile upon him 
with her dark eyes ; and, above all, that she had 
written to invite him to her house, and that his 
mother, when she suffered him to go away from 
home, had told him that he was going to Martha 
Hoyland, and that Martha would love him, and 
fondle him, and take as much care of him as 
herself; and moreover that it was now from 
Martha alone, that he expected to bear any ac- 
count of that mother herself, and through Mar- 
tha alone that he hoped ever again to behold 
that mother ! The news of his immediate 



AT THE CAPE. 131 

i 

voyage, therefore, transported liim; his daily- 
pining after Graham's Town now burst into the 
most impatient longing ; and his promised hap- 
piness was hardly to be distinguished from an 
assured enjoyment. He danced, capered, and 
shouted; kissed Benjamin, in spite of his beard; 
and Brinah, in spite of her snufTand spectacles; 
and, while the two latter deliberated upon what 
was next to be accomplished for him, and looked 
carefully over the new purchases in the old- 
clothes'-bag, he hopped and bounded away from 
their door, to the side of the sick Namal's mat ; 
striking, alternately, with a small cane, the hol- 
low, open, silver rings upon his arms and ancles, 
to make a peal of bells, as far as he was able, in 
festivity for his good fortune, and to prepare the 
hearers for his visit. 

" O father Namal !" said he, " what do 
you think ? O mother Sambayana ! O brother 
Noni ! O sister Pandava, and all vou little 
things beside ! what do you think ? Guess ! 
Come, guess?" 

But the news was evidently good, and there 
was little to guess, in the dwelling of Namal, 
except between the chance of a message from the 
Governor, and (what had become the more pro- 
bable gratification) the success of the Jew in his 
researches after a passage to the Bay. The 



132 THE ENGLISH BO? 

guess, therefore was soon made; and nothing 
was left but to congratulate Charles upon this 
step toward the fulfilment of all his wishes ! 

Brinah was entirely of opinion with her bro- 
ther Benjamin, that no time ought to be lost in 
communicating to the Government House the 
opportunity which offered for Charles's depar- 
ture. In the way in which matters stood, it was 
required, even by proper respect, not to let the 
boy be sent away without the Governor's know- 
ledge and approbation; and again, the visit 
which Benjamin should make, opened the last 
chance for His Excellency's marking his bene- 
volence toward the child: and who could tell but, 
even now, he would not bestow a sum sufficient 
to pay the passage, and to furnish a suit of 
Christian clothes, both which things were indis- 
pensable; and both (as far as was too much to be 
feared at present) dependent upon Benjamin's 
own purse and stores, or upon the joint aid, per- 
haps, of the few children of Abraham that 
Cape Town contained, and whom Benjamin 
might be able to unite in the cause. The 
remnants of heathen covering and ornaments 
which Benjamin had still tolerated, must now. 
with the exception of the rings and amulet, 
be utterly laid aside: the silver armlets and 
anklets must either be returned to Narnul, whose 



AT THE CAPE. 133 

present poverty needed them, however his deli- 
cacy might refuse ; or else be laid up by Charles, 
and one day carried to his mother, as memorials 
of the orphan's protection at the hands of the 
poor Malay. A jacket and trowsers, a pair of 
shoes, and a cap, were at present the immediate 
wants for the voyage, and for the journey to 
Graham's Town; and, though Benjamin never 
thought of letting him depart without them, still 
he was prepared to tell many a piteous story of 
the case, rather than that the whole charges 
should fall upon the " poor Jew, what had to 
take care of his family." 

After a dinner, at noon, upon fried fish and a 
little maccaroni, Benjamin, still in the humble 
vestments of his calling, (for better might have 
been at variance with his tale of poverty, ) and 
taking with him Charles, like another Joseph out 
of the pit, departed from his obscure mansion, 
and took the nearest street toward the Espla- 
nade and Government House. " My goot little 
boy," said he, as they moved forward together ; 
"we shall be sorry at part wit you, my dear 
child ; but it is for your goot, and you was go 
see your dear gotmooter, and hear of your dear 
mooter ; and who knows wetter, in all dis time, 
your dear mooter herself is not leave her own 
country, and come to tis terrible hot place, to 

VOL. III. \ 



134 THE ENGLISH BOY 

look for her own dear shile?" " Oh Benja- 
min !" answered Charles, " I am so happy to go 
to Martha Hoyland, and you have been so 
good to me, and so has good Mrs. Brinah, and 
so has Namal, and so has Sambayana ; but, 
sure, my mother has not come from England, 
either by herself, or with James, and John, and 
Mary with her ? But yet, who knows ?" 

They arrived, as Charles ended these words, 
at one of the wings of the Government House, 
where Benjamin, leaving the orphan out of 
sight, advanced with a bolder step than at his 
former application ; for the event was now at his 
own disposal, and the sole doubt, as to whether 
the Governor would or would not lighten to him 
the burden of that work of charity in which he 
was himself resolutely engaged, was all that re- 
mained to be cleared up ; for, that the latter 
would in any manner oppose the departure of 
Charles, there was no reason whatever to ima- 
gine. Benjamin inquired for the Private Secre- 
tary, but was taken by that gentleman to the 
Colonial Secretary's Office, within the building; 
where the Governor himself, at the moment, was, 
in the very act of giving audiences to various 
petitioners and applicants. The Private Secre- 
tary, after leading the Jew into the Governor's 
own room, and recalling to the Governor's 



AT THE CAPE. 135 

memory the nature of his humble errand, left 
him to manage his own case ; and the Governor 
(who, though he had been any thing but active in 
his benevolence upon this occasion, was by no 
means without either good nature or generosity) 
speedily put into Benjamin's hand a sum more 
than sufficient to pay for Charles's passage, and 
to furnish him with even a little stock of clothes; 
bidding the Jew (whom he greatly commended 
for his good conduct, which, he said, had been 
such as to make him ashamed of his own neg- 
lect, and who assured him that the money was 
more than enough,) to do all that was wanted 
for the boy, and to put the rest into his own 
pocket. But Benjamin, encouraged by so kind 
though late a reception, after assuring the Go- 
vernor, that excepting the lowest prices, which 
he should charge for the poor boy's clothes, and 
the sum also which (consistently with his con- 
science, and the care of his family) he was to pay 
the skipper, he would send every farthing with 
the boy to Graham's Town ; next ventured to 
ask, whether His Excellency would not confer a 
greater favour still, by casting his eyes upon the 
pretty child, and letting him kiss his knees, and 
thank his benefactor ; at the same time calling to 
recollection the misfortunes of Namal, who had 
been Charles's foster-father, but who had clothed, 

n 2 



136 THE ENGLI8H BOI 

or rather unclothed him, id a sad heathen man- 
ner ! The Governor consented to this also; and 
Charles, though almost dumb at the fearful intro- 
duction, yet testified, with Benjamin's assistance, 
the thanks he owed ; while the Governor, struck 
with his picturesque Malay apparel, now in- 
quired earnestly into NamaPs latest condition, 
and that of the children of Surabaya, sympa- 
thizing with the distresses of all, and lamenting 
that the offenders had never been found; and after 
hearing from Charles, through the lips of Ben- 
jamin, how tenderly he had been used by the 
Malay and his wife, he dismissed them both : 
first bidding Charles to be a good boy ; telling 
him that he hoped he was at the end of his 
troubles ; desiring him to call at the Government 
House, if ever he came again to Cape Town ; 
and finally giving the Jew a further sum of ten 
dollars as a present for Namal, and of five for 
the orphan children of the dead Surabaya. 

Benjamin kept his word with the Governor. 
He went joyfully to the house of Namal, where 
the sight of the bounty of ten dollars spread 
transport through the whole family : and sufficed, 
with the returning strength of the goldsmith, to 
reinstate him in his little trade 4 of efold and 
silver work and beads. lie carried the remain- 
ing five dollars to the guardian of the naked 



AT THE CAPE. 137 

children of Surabaya, of which less than half of 
one was enough to supply them with necklaces 
and ear-rings. On the next day, he persuaded 
Namal to receive back the armlets and anklets 
with which he had decorated Charles, to keep them, 
as he said, till the dear child came back again to 
see them all ; for, argued he, when they are once 
from off his limbs, how many accidents, or how 
many thieves, may he not meet with, to take 
them away ? For himself, he fitted the orphan, 
not only with clothes for his short passage ; but 
with a smart jacket, and collared shirt, and 
tasselled cap, in which to go on shore, and to 
arrive at Martha Hoyland's like the son of his 
mother ! Benjamin's conscience obliged him to 
make a certain profit upon all those articles of 
clothing, as well as upon the bedding and little 
sea-chest which completed the outfit of the 
young voyager; but after he and Brinah had 
fairly cast up the account, he put more than 
twenty dollars, which still remained, first into 
Charles's hand, and then into an opening of the 
lining of his jacket, which Brinah carefully 
sewed up; charging him to take care of the 
money just as if it were the warm blood from 
his heart ; and to give it to Martha Hoy land, to 
keep for him, the very moment he saw her ; and 
withal warning him, on the one side, that every 

n ;3 



138 THE ENGLISH BOY 

thing in the world was too uncertain that it 
might not be possible for his money to be yet 
necessary for saving his life ; and, upon the other 
that it was so large a sum, and he was now so 
rich a man, that with less than five times as 
much, a frugal and industrious Israelite had 
commenced a profitable traffic, and made 
himself richer than Solomon ! A little surplus 
small-change, which even yet went to balance 
the account, Benjamin dropped into the pocket 
of Charles's new trowsers, giving him leave to 
spend it how and as early as he pleased ; and 
out of this, besides buying, of Benjamin him- 
self, two silk sashes, and two plumes of feathers, 
for Noni and Pandava, and a pair of richly- 
wrought sandals for Sambayana ; he loaded him- 
self with sweetmeats for an evening resale of 
the whole family, adding the children of Sura- 
baya; and not forgetting other sweetmeats, from 
a Jew confectioner, such as the children of Bri- 
nah, upon whom he showered them, might eat ; 
and now, between this and the rising of the star-. 
he spent a last festal evening, under the alter- 
nate roofs of his two generous supporters, the 
descendant of Judah, and the idolatrous Malay, 
The children danced, and the neighbours came 
to join in good wishes to the young: adventurer, 
and to partake of the sweetmeats and the story* 



AT THE CAPE. 139 

telling ; and among these, the fire-worshipping 
Parsee and his newly-married daughter, and 
the Mohammedan charmer of snakes. In the 
midst of every thing, Charles remembered 
another duty, that of giving thanks and fare- 
wells to the hostess of the Prinz Van Oranje ; 
to whom he carried sweetmeats, flowers, and 
three lory's feathers of the brightest scarlet. 
The Vrouw Van Bomsterwyk kissed the grateful 
face that brought them ; prayed to God to bless 
the orphan's expectations; and sent to the inno- 
cent revellers at the Malay's, two large pitchers 
of as many sorts of sherbet ; — the orange-flower 
and the violet. Charles was to leave all before 
the next day, at noon. 

At morning-parade, which the Governor hap- 
pened to attend, Benjamin, so far from hesita- 
ting, went, with pride, (having Charles in his 
hand, and the latter in the best of his new suits,) 
to seek His Excellency ; displaying the change 
in the orphan's figure, offering to account for all 
the money received, and at least forcing His 
Excellency to look at the edges of the twenty 
dollars, which Brinah had temporarily laid bare 
in their hiding-place ; and calling down upon his 
head the blessings of him that delivered Israel 
out of the land of Egypt! This done, the 
honest Jew led back his charge to his own dwel- 



140 THE ENGLISH BOY 

lino;, where Brinali feasted him with lawful 
meats ; and whence, after fresh tears and thanks, 
and advice and admonitions, at the Jew's, and 
fresh partings of the most affectionate sort, at 
Namal's and Sambayana's, he went, with the 
personal care of Benjamin, on board the Pride 
of Dordrecht. Namal was still too weak to 
reach the quay ; but Sambayana, and Noni, 
and Pandava, came to kiss him as he stepped 
upon the plank which lay from the ship ; and 
when, at high water, the latter was thrown off 
from her moorings, and when getting out into 
the harbour, she let go her mainsail, the mother 
and the children threw into the sea the nuts and 
the flowers which they had brought or had 
picked up for that purpose, bidding, in the name 
of the Spirit of all spirits, every good spirit to 
take care of him, and every evil one to keep 
away ' ! Charles, for some time, held by the 

1 The modern European usage of christening ships, or 
throwing hottles of wine at their sterns, upon launching them, 
and of naming or dedicating them, are only remains of the long- 
established Pagan usages of offering libations and other 
sacrifices to the spirits of the deep, at the launches and de- 
partures from port, to procure them safety and success. Along 
the coast of Barbary, and in all other maritime countries where 
ancient ideas anil manners still prevail, these sacrifices are still 
to be witnessed without alteration; and in Roman Catholic 
countries, even yet, there is little difference, except in the sub- 
stitution of saints tor sea-gods, 



AT THE CAPE. 141 

shrouds, and waved his hands, and then his cap, 
in return for all their prayers; but presently, his 
attention was called from these by the parting 
words, and last embrace of Benjamin, who, 
having finished some bargains with the small 
crew, was now going down the ship's side, into 
the boat that was to carry him on shore ; and who 
finally told him, if any disappointment befel him 
at Graham's Town, to come back to Cape Town 
as he went ; and to keep his money, as the apple 
of his eye, for that or any other necessity. The 
wind was fair to the eastward ; and the Pride of 
Dordrecht, which had speedily cleared the har- 
bour, was soon wholly out of sight. 



N 3 



142 THE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

Pursue, poor imp, the imaginary charm ; 
Indulge gay Hope, and Fancy's pleasing fire ! 

Beattie. 

The recollections of a ship, and of the sea, were 
not of a nature to be the most cheerful to the 
mind of Charles, who had never been on board 
of the one, or afloat upon the other, since he 
was cast away in the Nautilus, and since he saw 
his father washed away by the same surge which 
devoured the Dutch philanthropist and his horse; 
nevertheless, the warmth of his present expecta- 
tions almost lightened every care, and almost 
obliterated every mournful memory. He was 
sea-sick, however; and this broke down much of 
his remaining spirits. 

" Will Martha Hoyland really be kind to me," 
he questioned himself, as he lay, partly despond- 
ing, upon the deck, where the sails gave him a 



AT THE CAPE. 143 

shifting shelter from the sun, as the vessel heeled 
from starboard to larboard ? " Will she even re- 
member me ; me, who should not know her if I 
were to pass her ? It is more than three years 
since she wrote to my mother ; she may have 
quite forgotten me in all this time ; or, as good 
Benjamin says, many things may have hap- 
pened ! She may not live in the same place, and 
nobody may know where to find her, or I may 
be as far off as I was at the Land-drost's farm at 
Blouwveldt's, and I may again seen nobody, ex- 
cept some wicked Vrouw ! Martha Hoyland may 
not live, now, in that pretty house she told my 
mother of; nor have that nice garden where 
the elephant came in, one night, and trod down 
the pea-stalks ! But, then, what will become of 
me ? How shall I ever hear of my poor mother, 
or ever get to where she is ? Oh ! I know ; I 
will get back to Cape Town, as Benjamin told 
me; and very soon I shall be as big as the 
cabin-boy that was drowned in the Nautilus; 
and, then, if nobody else will take me, some 
English captain will hire me, and I shall work 
my way back to England ; and, when I am once 
in England, I can beg along the roads to Derby- 
shire, or some good people will send me home 
to mother ! But Benjamin is right ; I must 
take care of the money in my best jacket; for 



144 THE ENGLISH BOY 

there is no telling, even now, what may happen 
to me yet ! Ah ! it was as fine an afternoon as 
this, and I was travelling much more pleasantly, 
and playing with my dear little green monkey, 
and young Mynheer Van Dunderblouwer was 
telling me such pretty stories ; and, then, came 
the Bushmen at night, and killed my good 
friend the Land-drost ! But for that, I should 
have been at Martha Hoyland's two years ago ; 
and, even, perhaps, in England, with my mo- 
ther !" 

Charles ate no supper this evening ; bur. 
when night came, he went below, and after 
some time fell fast asleep. In the morning, 
when he no longer beheld any signs of land, a 
bright sun and a blue sky were over his head. 
The sails showed a snow white, and the round 
masts shone with a yellow light. The breeze 
was as fresh as it was fair. The green waves, 
with their foaming crests, rolled in vast heights 
and hollows, or broke against the bows of the 
ship; and the white sea-gulls, with their black- 
tipped wings, sometimes poised themselves in 
the air, and sometimes dipped into the deep, or 
flew hastily along the surface of the heaving 
waters. The stately albatross, with its white 
plumage, either hovered aloft, or sat gigantic 
upon the ocean. The wind whistled among the 



AT THE CAPE. 145 

cordage ; and the ship, dipping fore and aft, was 
a gay and sparkling islet in the midst of the bil- 
lows, to all who, unlike Charles, had stomachs 
proof against its motion, and had put on their 
sea-legs. The planks of the deck scorched his 
sides when he lay down upon them, and his 
hands when he attempted to rise up; and the 
pitch, melting in the seams, stuck to his clothes 
and skin. 

By degrees, however, his sickness diminished. 
He was able, with steady feet, to pass from wheel 
to capstan ; and to gaze at the gilt-heads and the 
flying-fish, or at the crimson and cup-like mo- 
luscas ; or to sit upon a coil of rope, and count 
the hours to Graham's Town, or to hear the 
stories of the sailors ; and especially that of the 
Flying Dutchman, the ghost of a certain ship, 
which, as they told him, was well known to 
haunt the seas about the Cape, and to have 
been seen by everybody, except by such as are 
so unbelieving that they believe nothing. This 
latter topic was the peculiar favourite after night- 
fall, and before the moon was up; when, how- 
ever, if Charles looked round the horizon for the 
Flying Dutchman, he saw it not, and was 
presently fain to divert himself with the bub- 
bles of light, which blazed and became extin- 
guished again in the waves, as the latter ran along 

vol. in. o 



146 THE ENGLISH BOY 

the ship's sides, or dashed against the keel be- 
neath her bowsprit. The voyage was now a de- 
light to him, save only that he desired its end. 

Half the distance, from Cape Town to Algoa 
Bay, was passed by; and Charles had begun to 
observe the frequent appearance of schools x or 
shoals of black-fish, the only species of real dol- 
phin, or porpoise, which is found in the tropical 
and neighbouring parts of the Atlantic and 
Southern Oceans; and which differs from the 
porpoises or dolphins of the northern seas, not 
only in having darker coloured backs, a some- 
what greater length, and slenderer proportions ; 
but also by being without that sociable habit 
of playing about the ships they meet with, 
which, while it exposes them to the murder of 
the (/rains, has helped to procure to the dolphin, 
from the days of the highest antiquity, the repu- 
tation of being the friend of mariners, and even 
the friend of man ; the guardian of his anchors, 
and the willing; listener to his voice and flute. 
The weather had become cloudy, with baffling 
head-winds, which lengthened a voyage that is 

1 This is the seaman's pronunciation of the word shoal, when 
a shoal of fish is what he speaks of. He talks of shoal (shallow) 
water, but of schools (that is, multitudes) of fish ; and we see, 
here, the primary meaning of schools and scholars, in resp ect of 
learning. A school of learning is an assemblage of disciples. 



AT THE CAPE. 147 

sometimes made in three days. The lead- 
coloured waves, with their chalky selvages, rolled 
joyless ; and the black-fish, blowing low jets from 
the single holes in their foreheads, were sporting, 
in numbers, through the brine, but though 
always a-head of the ship, yet always at a consi- 
derable distance; as if they suspected danger 
from the approach of men ; or as if they were 
particularly shy of the skipper of the Pride of 
Dordrecht, who, smoking his pipe, and every 
now and then scanning them with his spy-glass, 
threatened confidently how many he would kill, 
when once he had got into the Bay. He pro- 
mised himself a fair number of barrels of oil, 
from the melting of their blubber. 

It was now Sunday ; and it was the reckoning 
of all hands on board, that, if they kept the 
breeze they had, the following Tuesday morning 
would see them safe in port. The crew was a 
handful of men and boys, of all colours and all 
faiths. There was Negro, Hottentot, Lascar; 
an Englishman, an Irishman, and a Dutchman, 
or Creole Africaner, exclusive of the Africaner 
skipper who was chief. The Irishman had be- 
come Charles's especial crony. He could tell 
so many tales of Fairies and Rapparees; he 
knew all about the Seven Champions of Christ- 
endom, and the goblin, Robin Artisson, that 

o2 



148 THE ENGLISH BOY 

used to steal the dirt out of the streets of Kil- 
kenny K He informed him how the tooth of St. 
Patrick, after lying, a thousand years, in the 
shallows, at the edge of a lake, was found, by 
another saint, changed into the brightest diamond 
that ever was seen, but still in its own right shape 
of St. Patrick's cutting-tooth, out of his upper 
jaw ; and carried to the chapel on the island in 
the lake, and buried under its altar, where no- 
body has ever seen it since : " But, howsomever," 
added he, "for that same raison, that lake is 
called the Lake of the Island of the Chapel of 
the Diamond Tooth ; and it's not far from the 
place, mind ye, (and good luck to it !) where I 
was born ; and what I tell you is as thrue as any 
thing you ever heard. And you see, Saint Pa- 
thrick was just stepping into the ferry-boat, to 
go to that same island, to say mass in the chapel, 
one fine morning, when that tooth (it was a cut- 
ting tooth, just the next to the eye-tooth, on the 
left side of his upper jaw) fell out of his head 
into the water, just between the dry land and 
the boat, where the water was shallow, and the 
minnows might be swimming along by the mil- 
lion. And did not Saint Pathrick look and look, 
and scrape a bit in the mud, all just to Bee if he 

1 See Burford Cottage, and its Robin Redbreast, Chapter X. 



AT THE CAPE. 149 

could not find his tooth; and did not he give it 
up, at the last, and just sit himself down in the 
boat, quite contented, and let the ferryman ferry 
him over to the island only, ye see, it boddered 
him a little while he was saying mass ? For then, 
now, he could not spake just as he used to do, 
no, not for the life of him, though, ye see, he 
was a saint, and a very great saint, that he was ; 
and, then, it was not till a thousand years after 
this, that another saint, but not so great a saint 
as Saint Pathrick, (some paple calls the name 
Phadrig, and what not; and I believe that it 
manes Pater, that's what you calls Peter:) what 
was the other saint doing, but just going over to 
say mass, in that same chapel, just as Saint Pa- 
thrick had gone a thousand years before ! And 
this other saint, that was not so great a saint as 
Saint Pathrick, what did he do, but put one foot 
just upon the top of the stern of the boat; and, 
then, may be, when he was lifting the other, 
just to send it after it, and thinking of nothing, 
it happened, ye see, that he cast down his eyes 
on the water, (just as you or I might do, for all 
he was a saint,) and maybe he was looking at the 
minnows, which were swimming along just as 
their forefathers swam before them; and, then, 
suddenly, what did he see, but something a-shin- 
ing in the mud, between the dark-green rushes, 

o 3 



150 THE ENGLISH BOY 

where the minnows were swimming, as straight, 
ye see, as the rushes would let them. How- 
somever, whichever way it was, (and that's no 
matter, you know, so long as the principal part 
of the story is thrue, and it's as thrue as any- 
thing you ever heard ;) some way or other, what 
did the saint see, just in the mud, by the roots 
of the young rushes, and where the minnows 
were swimming in and out ; what did he see but 
something a-shining as if it were a star, and just 
so that be thought it would put his eyes out ! 
And, then, says he, to himself, says he, that 
same thing that's a-shining after that fashion 
can't be a fish's eye, nor the white skin under its 
belly ; and so, says he to the ferryman, says he, 
1 Taddy ! stop a bit, Taddy ;' (for the saint knew 
that the ferryman's name was Taddy, ye see, 
and he called him by it; for it would not do for 
a saint, no how, not to spake dacentlv to every 
man, though it should be but to a ferryman :) so 
says the saint, ' Taddy ! stop a bit, Taddy :' (for 
every man has a name, and your saints, and 
praists, and sich like, they always calls a man by 
his name, when they knows ir. even it" lie is but 
a ferryman;) so, says the saint, (tliar was a praist,) 
' Taddy,' says he, *stop a bit, Taddy ! Won't 1 - 
what's a -shining there, like a star, or a diamond, or 
a piece of silverj and that can't be a fish's eye, nor 



AT THE CAPE. 151 

yet the white skin under it's belly ¥ And the 
ferryman answered and said, says he, (and he 
spake very reverently, ye see, to the saint ; for 
the saint was a jontleman, and a praist; for the 
saint, ye see, was only a praist while he was 
alive, and he was not made a saint till after he 
was dead; no, no more was Saint Pathrick; — and 
the ferryman knew that he was a praist, and 
what's more, was a jontleman besides; and he 
knew that he was going to say mass ;) so the fer- 
ryman spakes him very reverently, and he says, 
says he, * Plase your reverence,' says he, (for he 
was not an ignorant fellow, ye see, that did not 
know how to behave himself before a praist ; and 
may be he had been brought up to be a praist 
himself, but I don't know about that; but,) 
1 Plase your reverence !' says he, very reverently ; 
6 Plase your reverence ! I'll stop.' So the saint, 
(that was a praist,) what did he do, then? Did not 
he put his hand, (that was the hand of a praist, 
and of a saint, ) into the water ? Did not he put his 
right hand (no, it was his left hand, for the thing 
that was a-shining was on the left hand of the 
stern of the boat) into the water; and did not he 
muddle with his fingers, as I may say, (and may be 
the water w r as nodeeper than the first joint;) and 
did not he take out the tooth of Saint Pathrick, 
that was a diamond, and that Saint Pathrick had 
dropped, just at that same place, when he was 



152 THE ENGLISH BOY 

getting into the ferry-boat, to go to say mass, 
a thousand years before ? And did not the praist 
honourably bury the tooth of Saint Pathrick, (that 
was grown into a diamond,) under the altar of the 
holy chapel on the island in the lake ; and has 
not the diamond tooth of Saint Pathrick lain 
under the altar ever since, though, to be sure, 
nobody has ever seen it ?" 

In this manner, at the last, Mike brought to 
an end his story of the Lake of the Island of the 
Chapel of the Diamond Tooth; in his mode of 
narrating which, (where he dwells so much upon 
his saint's respectful address to the ferryman, 
whom he did not forget to call bv his name, — 
Taddy,) we are reminded of one among the 
many points, in relation to life and manners, re- 
corded of the late Admiral Lord Collingwood, — 
that he always forbade his officers to address his 
men in such terms as "You, sir," and others of the 
same disrespectful kind: "Even if you don't know 
a man's name," said he, " you can still call him 
'sailor;'" and we are not at all to be surprised 
that our Irish and Roman Catholic story-teller, 
amid all his ignorance in other matters, should 
have thought it worth while, and should have 
been entirely capable, to mark out to his 
young hearer the beauty and importance of such 
a particular of the highest breeding : or should 
possess so much knowledge of life a* to con- 



AT THE CAPE. 153 

sider its possession a necessary characteristic, 
in speaking of the deportment of one who was 
either priest, or gentleman, or saint. The Roman 
Catholic population of the world, and generally 
the continental population of Europe, (whether 
Roman Catholic or Protestant, in whatever else 
they may be deficient, retain, as bodies, the 
antique knowledge, and the observance when they 
choose, of all the elegance and suavity of human 
manners; and it is only amid the vulgarism 
of Protestant assumption and ignorance, (where 
mixed, too, with political pretension,) that we 
find their modern oblivion or disregard. But 
all the homage which men owe to each other 
is of reciprocal obligation. The lowest to the 
highest, and the highest to the lowest ; the 
poorest to the richest, the richest to the poorest ; 
the humblest in station to the highest, and the 
highest to the humblest. No man, except a 
vulgar man, thinks that he loses anything of his 
own dignity, by admitting, in all its degrees, 
the dignity of others ; but every man, at the 
same moment, has a claim upon all others for the 
admission of his own dignity, whatever may be 
its amount ; and there is no honest man without 
some dignity, because, in any case, he is a man. 
Yet these are lessons which, for obvious reasons, 
are always more easily learned, and therefore more 
commonly practised, by the high, than by the 



154 THE ENGLISH BOY 

low ; and hence it is, that as a body, the low are 
less well-bred than the high; and thus a person in 
humble life will often push you from the pave- 
ment, whereaprince of the blood would have given 
you the wall. But the poor and the humble 
have as much claim to the consideration of the 
high, as their opposites ; every one in his station. 
Buonaparte, at St. Helena, was walking, with 
General Gourgaud, and another, along a narrow 
path on the side of the rocks, when the party 
was met by a man with a heavy burden upon his 
shoulders. Buonaparte's companions appeared 
to be keeping the path, as if due to the " Em- 
peror ; " but the " Emperor" stepped aside, and 
made the others do as much, saying, " Respect 
au fardeau !" that is, " Homage to the burden !" 
or, " Consideration for the load !" As to what 
might be added, — that reciprocal deference of all 
ranks, one to the other, which we are applaud- 
ing, is the virtue of one state of society, and of 
one kind of human cultivation, (of which nei- 
ther, in the meantime, are without the vices at- 
tendant upon their abuse ;) and its opposite is the 
vice of another state of society, and of another 
kind of human cultivation, neither of which, in 
their own, and in their best view, are without 
their virtues. — Happy he, who can pick out of 
both that only which is good in each, and keep far 
from him all the evil ! The one leans to slavery ; 



AT THE CArE. 155 

the other, to the fostering of insolence, and to 
the infliction of outrage. 

Be this, however, as it may, Michael the 
Irishman thought more about Sunday than any 
one else on board the Pride of Dordrecht ; and 
he thought it right, too, that Charles should follow 
his example. Mike had a prayer-book in his 
chest, and he opened the thumbed leaves of the 
matins full in view of the young Englishman ; 
but the latter had made small progress in read- 
ing when he left Derbyshire, and had scarcely 
seen a book since the wreck of the Nautilus. 
To read, therefore, surpassed his art ; but Mike, 
besides a cross, had a collection of pictures 
(those useful, though sometimes deceitful, sub- 
stitutes for books !) drawn from the text of 
Scripture, and from the Lives of the Saints ; and 
these he commended to the meditations of 
Charles, after both had washed their faces care- 
fully for the day, and while, for himself, he with- 
drew, with his prayer-book, to kneel, and to cross 
himself, behind the foremast, and thus indulge 
in his devotions. The skipper, meanwhile, was 
smoking upon the taflarel ; the Hottentot was 
preparing the dinner ; the Englishman cleaning 
the cabin ; the Dutchman washing his shirt, the 
Negro piecing his straw hat , the Lascar lying 
asleep in the sun ; and a dog was stretched 
across the Lascar, to keep himself the warmer. 



156 THE ENGLISH BOY 

The breeze was fresh, and once more, fair and 
steady ; the sails set, and the wheel made fast ; 
so that the ship was being wafted on her voyage 
at the sole labour of the elements. 

Every thing was quiet, and therefore so far 
sabbath-like. There was not a sound, except of 
the softest trickling of the water, along the di- 
viding sides of the ship; and of the gentle splash 
of the spray, as the latter rose and fell upon the 
resisting liquid. Twice during this day, however, 
Charles had a sight of a great whale, of the 
species peculiar to these southern seas, which 
rose, at first head -foremost, almost immediately 
under the stern of the ship, and for a few seconds, 
seemed to sport with the vessel, by swimming 
round it as if it had been another whale, till, 
lifting its tail and sinking its head, it returned 
perpendicularly into the depths below; and which, 
the second time, (that is, a few minutes after.) 
w r as seen to rise again, at the distance of a quar- 
ter of a mile, over the lee quarter, and to swim 
steadily in a parallel line with the Pride of Dor- 
drecht, which it soon left behind : its back fin 
occasionally above the water, and its black lore- 
head, from the air-holes or nostrils, in which arose 
the jets of vapour that the huge fish continually 
snorted forth l . 

1 We persist in calling whales jishrs, though with all recent 
naturalists (from Linnscus downward) against us , and even 



AT THE CAPE. 157 

The short matins, however, of the pious islan- 
der concluded, he was in the next place desirous 
that Charles should dress, as well as meditate, in 
honour of the first day of the week ; and here, 
too, exchanging his sailor's jacket for a long 
landsman's coat, and bringing out a new hand- 
kerchief, which had been bought at the fair of 
Killaloe, he gave to Charles his own example, 
besides pleading the practice, not only of all 
the " quality" on College Green, but of "all the 
boys, let alone the girls, and the married wo- 
men," throughout the lands of Connaught. 
Charles had told him of the superfine blue jacket, 
and shining leather belt, of which he was the new 
and happy possessor; and even of the store 
of silver dollars, which the careful Brinah, 
with the concurrence of the equally careful 
Benjamin, had sewed into its lining ; and Mike, 
besides that he really thought a clean skin and his 
best coat among the obligations of a Sunday's 
duty, was not insensible to the having it seen, by 

(among such as are not naturalists) the reflecting author, to 
one of whose works we have referred, upon this subject, in 
preceding notes, and even promised ourselves a few parting 
words in " self-defence." Space allows to us no indulgence of 
that kind, any more than a present opportunity to advert 
again to the article Dolphin, in Booth's Analytical Dictionary ; 
but, as to Mr. Turner and the whale, we must at least enter 
our protest against the Scriptural argument tried to be drawn, 
both by that writer, and by some of the litigants at New York. 
VOL. III. P 



158 THE ENGLISH BOY 

the skipper and his crew, that it was with "a young 
jontleman, sure," that he passed so many hours 
in conversation, and by whom his stories were so 
well received : " And warn't it always the way," 
said he, " with Michael O' Sullivan, and with all 
that belonged to him, that they never kept com- 
pany but with jontlemen ? No, not one of them, 
since the time of Noah !" 

Charles needed, in the meantime, but little 
invitation and encouragement for putting himself 
into full dress. He had longed for the ship's 
arrival at her haven, not wholly without the consi- 
deration, that he should then jump into the boat, 
to go ashore, in his best jacket, and his tasseled 
cap. That he could have any pretence for 
wearing either of these on shipboard, was more 
than had entered his head; for Benjamin had 
expressly told him, that they were provided for 
his " going on shore." Now, however, the sug- 
gestion and example of Mike opened an early 
and unexpected opportunity. His clothes were 
quickly changed ; and he walked the deck the ad- 
miration of the crew in general, not less than 
of himself; and the rapture of the self-compla- 
cent Mike : " Your honour," said the latter, 
to the skipper, as he lay reclined upon the taffa- 
rel, " may I make so bold as to bring this young 
jontleman, that's just come on board of us this 
afternoon, (and is a small piece of a relation of 



AT THE CAPE. 159 

mine;) just to see how we are going on, and 
just to make his bow on the quarter-deck, and 
pay his compliments to the captain?" And 
the skipper, pardoning the joke, tapped, and 
tapped, with his tobacco-stopper, in the bowl of 
his pipe, while he replied ; " Ya, dat is very fine 
indeed : dat littel boy !" 

Nor did the display of Charles's possessions 
stop at this. The jacket had no sooner been out 
of the chest, than Mike obtained leave to try how 
twenty dollars felt when sewed in its lining ; to 
weigh the weight of a garment enriched with 
such a treasure ? The feel, he pronounced, was 
refreshing to a poor man's fingers; and the 
weight braced an O' Sullivan's nerves, like the 
air of the mountains of Wicklow ! But the 
worthy Irishman was less prudent than elated. 
He made public what was intended to be a 
secret, and called every hand in all the ship to 
admire and rejoice like himself! When Charles 
went again below, to restore his fine apparel to 
its place, the ponderous and splendid jacket was 
passed from man to man ; and all felt the hard 
dollars through the lining, and extolled the lux- 
ury of their cumbersomeness ! In the end, how- 
ever, the jacket was duly returned to its owner, 
and smoothly placed, once more, in its first 
depository. 

p2 



160 THE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Rocks, rivers, and smooth lakes more clear than glass 
Untouched, unbreathed upon. 

"Wordsworth. 

When Charles awoke upon the Tuesday morn- 
ing that succeeded, he found that, during the 
night, the Pride of Dordrecht had come to her 
anchorage, in Algoa Bay. The time was very 
early, and at first, the unusual stillness of every- 
thing on board exceedingly surprised him ; for 
he neither recollected, at the moment, that ex- 
pectation of the ship's making her port, which 
had been his last and most anxious thought be- 
fore he slept ; nor did the extreme quiet by 
which he found himself surrounded suggest to 
him the fulfilment of his hopes. On other morn- 
ings, the noise of feet upon the deck above : the 
stupendous preparations (as he thought them) 
for tacking the ship: the orders of the captain, 



AT THE CAPE. 161 

the answers of the men, the cries of the latter to 
each other; Dutch oaths, the Irishman's shouts 
of " Silence, boys ! Blood and ouns, bodderation 
to ye, don't ye hear the captain ?" and the various 
commands and answers, Dutch, English, Lascar, 
and Negro, "Haul taught!" "Belay that!" 
"Aye, aye, sir!" "Let go the halyards!" 
" What's dat stupid fellow doing with the main- 
sheets ?" " The clew-lines are foul, sir !" " Den 
dousand dayfels fly away wid all of you !" " Aye, 
aye, sir !" — this, or even the working and creak- 
ing of the ship, and the break of the water at its 
side, to say nothing of an occasional sluicing, 
from the head of a wave, down the hatchways or 
the companion-stairs ; this, or, at least, the noise 
of cooking in the frying-pan, and of the captain 
scolding the cabin-boy for his late spreading of 
the breakfast-table, and for the dirty knives and 
coffee-cups; — this, for (sad is it to say) breakfast 
had sometimes been quite ready and begun, be- 
fore Charles had even dressed himself, though 
he could stay upon deck after midnight, listening 
to the long and never-varying tone of Michael's 
stories; — this had been the common picture of 
the mornings of his short coasting voyage ; but, 
now, the ship was motionless, every tongue quiet, 
not a man to be heard or seen, except that Myn- 
heer Binckenshoecks, the governor of the whole, 

p 3 



162 THE ENGLISH BOY 

lay snoring in the berth opposite to that of 
Charles ! But, before the latter had well sent an 
inquiring eye around the cabin, where the sun 
shone full upon Mynheer's nose, the Lascar hap- 
pened to come in his way, sent by the mate to 
fetch up some short yarns, for splicing the broken 
tiller of the ship's boat : " What makes the ship 
so quiet, Jambo," said Charles ; " is everybody 
asleep ?" But he asked both questions almost in 
a whisper, in sympathy with the general silence. 

" Him ship asleep, too, lazy boy Inghileesee," 
answered the Lascar, himself scarcely yet awake; 
but adding, " What ! you no know him ship 
asleep at anchor, and him town dere close upon 
him bowsprit? You no believe, den, what him 
Jambo tell you last night ?" 

These words had scarcely left the lips of 
Jambo, before Charles, still in his shirt only, 
had sprung out of the cabin, and gained the 
deck, and was directing his eyes over the fore- 
castle. Here, everything was at least as tranquil 
as the cabin he had left. The sun, though but 
little above the horizon, shone with intense 
power ; but all that it shone upon was calm and 
noiseless. A small battery, five or six wharfs, 
a few white-painted houses, reflected, here and 
there, amid a sparing herbage, and low thin 
woods, with trilling eminences behind, and a sandy 



AT THE CAPE. 163 

beach in front; this, with two ships from Eng- 
land, lying in the roads ; a country whaler, and 
three smaller vessels, with several boats, either 
fastened to the wharfs, or the battery, or drawn 
upon the beach, but all at rest; the red-cross 
pendants at the mast-heads hanging as straight, 
and as fixed, adown the masts, or over the yards, 
as the masts themselves, and seeming as fixed in 
their positions as the blue sky behind them and 
above them ; this was all that the land and water 
presented to his view, the town which the Lascar 
had spoken of, inclusive ; and, as all was motion- 
less on shore, so, from the shore to the ship, and 
from the ship away to seaward, the water lay in 
glassy smoothness and aerial peace, without a 
ruffle, and without a sound. Where it reflected 
the great orb of the ascending sun, it seemed 
changed into a mass of melted gold ; but all the 
rest was green, and blue, and purple, except 
where, for its other reflections, it repeated, in 
its bosom, the white figures of the scanty dwell- 
ings, or the piles and plankings of the wharfs, 
and facings of the battery. Or, if there were 
element or living thing to break a solitude so 
bright, and yet so unbroken, it was the slap of 
the sea's surface, from one time to another, by 
some small and glittering fish, which leaped, for 
an instant, from beneath, and then dived again 



164 THE ENGLISH BOY 

below the little rings of the water which it had 
divided; or the sailing of the first white sea-bird 
of the morning, speeding its way silently along 
the mirror, painting it with its image, and here 
and there rippling it with the swift touch, either 
of its breast, or of its slanting wing. Once or 
twice, however, a blackfish, won by the pur- 
suit of its prey to come so close in shore, 
rose to breathe, and throw its smoky jet, 
some four feet, or more, into the air ; or, draw- 
ing, with elastic curve, its nose to its tail, 
and striking the latter against the element, 
sprang more loftily toward the skies, or bounded 
with successive leaps upon its course, half above, 
and half below the wave. But these were partial 
events in the soft monotony of the smooth bay, 
and tranquil early morning ; and, as they were 
few, so also they were short, leaving all, at the 
next instant, to its regained repose. 

The whole, in the meantime, that Charles yet 
beheld, was below the real town ; that is, the town 
of Port Elizabeth, at which he was really to land, 
and to which the vessel, at the next tide, was to 
get up. What fixed so much of his attention, 
and seemed to him to satisfy all his hopes, was 
no more than an outpost, and a group of farms 
and dwellings, at the entrance of the harbour; 
and the spot where the ship lay, was, in reality? 



AT THE CAPE. 165 

a small nook, or inner bay, sheltered, by a natu- 
ral mole, from those billows of the southern ocean 
which break incessantly upon the more open 
coast, and throw up sand at the mouths of its 
rivers, and whiten its shallows with the foam of an 
ever-raging" surf. It was for the identical house 
of Martha Hoyland alone, that the fond boy, 
amid the entire prospect of shore and sea, 
strained, nevertheless, his inquiring eyes. No 
attempt to undeceive him, as to distances, had 
in any sort succeeded. He had been warned 
that even Graham's Town, supposing Martha 
Hoyland's to be near it, was at a remote in- 
land point; and that to reach Algoa Bay, and 
even to set foot upon its beech, was but to make 
steps toward the arrival at his promised home. 
But every explanation of this kind, however it 
might convince his understanding, took no hold 
upon his imagination, which, now that he was to 
approach it by sea, still painted to him the farm 
of Martha and her husband as rising close to the 
water's edge ; the same as, when he thought him- 
self travelling to it in the waggons of the Land- 
drost, he had fancied it among brooks, and woods, 
and pastures, and corn-fields, and the stone dykes 
and mountain sides of his own native Derbyshire, 
and never brought the sea into his landscape ! 
But, now, his eyes fixed upon a particular house, 



166 THE ENGLISH BOY 

which was larger, and to his fancy, more beauti- 
ful than all the rest, and surrounded by a better 
homestead ; it was this house, that, as he imme- 
diately persuaded himself, contained his Martha 
Hoyland, and her husband, and her children ; 
and thither, from that moment, he was frantic 
that boat and man should carry him ; or to set 
off, at once, in the ship's boat, by himself, which 
he was quite sure that, without all assistance, he 
could row and steer. At this moment, the tur- 
keys, from their roosts upon the trees, and the 
English barn-door fowls, (after they had sat 
awake, for the hour past, upon their perches in 
the henroost,) began, now that the air had 
grown warmer, to come abroad, and to scratch 
the ground for worms; and Charles, for the first 
time, heard the crow of a cock, in a region so 
far to the south, and to the east, of the land in 
which he was born, and to which the bird was 
nearly as strange as he. But the impatient 
voyager, now no longer able to contain himself, 
(though not till after he had returned crow for 
crow, and flapped his elbows against his sides, as 
joyously as the cock his wings, leaping, at the 
same time,upon the deck ;) the impatient voyager, 
now no longer able to contain himself, jumped 
down the fore-hatchway, and, seizing the shirt- 
collar of Mike, who, not long relieved from the 



AT THE CAPE. 167 

middle watch, was enjoying his first sleep, — 
" Mike ! Mike !" cried he, pulling the collar 
again and again ; " come into the bows directly, 
that I may show you Martha Hoyland's house, 
and all the cocks and hens; and I know that 
Martha will be at the door herself, by the time 
that you have come with me !" 

" Och ! bodderation to ye," returned Mike ; 
" away wid you, ye spalpeen ; and why would ye 
be disturbing a dacent man, and a good sailor, after 
this fashion ? Och ! what do I want with Martha 
Hoyland, and her house, and her cocks and hens ? 
Is it me that ye are after calling to the watch 
again for balderdash the like o' that ? Lave me 
alone, I say, ye spalpeen ; don't tell me a word 
about it, for divil a bit will I stir, for all ye can 
bodder me wid ! Ye are just like the Peep-o-day- 
boys, in my own country, that won't let dacent 
people sleep quietly in their beds, at wwsaisonable 
hours, in a could morning; and all the harm I 
wish you is, that the Palers ("Peelers") were 
after ye, ye young spalpeen !" 

Despairing of success with his Irish friend, 
and of any immediate means of reaching the 
shore, Charles's next resort was to the mate ; but 
only upon the more humble errand of petitioning 
to be entrusted with the spy-glass, in order to 
discover whether he could not see Martha Hoy- 



168 THE ENGLISH BOY 

land either at some door or window ? The 
spy-glass, after much entreaty, and with many 
charges not to drop it out of his hands, and espe- 
cially not to drop it overboard, was actually al- 
lowed him ; and, armed with this, and being, by 
this time, in part provided with his clothing, he 
renewed his reconnoiterings from the forecastle, 
in confident persuasion, that, now, he should 
very soon descry his godmother, and all his god- 
brothers and god-sisters. 

And the chances, as it still appeared to him, 
were very much increasing ; for, as the sun rose 
higher in the heaven, so, the awaking and the mo- 
tion of the human inhabitants of the spot began 
to be more and more apparent. First one, and 
then a second, and then a third door or window 
was opened ; and first one, and then a second 
fisherman or farmer, yawning, and still in his 
night-cap, appeared at the doors, or came down 
to the water's edge, first casting a look at the 
sky, and at all the horizon round ; while the 
long shadows, even of those who had reached the 
boats, appeared to stretch back over the beach, 
and almost to touch the very thresholds they had 
crossed. After these began to be seen little 
children, rubbing their eyes, and dazzled with 
the low sunbeams, standing motionless, as if un- 
willing to beoin the day; or coming down, with 



AT THE CAPE. 169 

naked legs and feet, to the moist sand, (bounded, 
at an uniform distance from the water, by the dry- 
soil above,) to throw shells or pebbles into the 
sea, or to clamber into the boats; their white 
stays, and bright yellow-dyed flannel petticoats, 
contrasting with their roseate skins, as these 
with their shining, curled, and sunny locks ; and, 
here and there, their mothers, or a black or yellow 
servant-girl, speaking to them from the windows, 
or looking after them from the door, either to 
encourage them to go forward, or to see which 
way they had taken, and to bid them beware of 
mischief. But the children were scarcely abroad, 
before a thin white smoke, rising perpendicularly 
into the tranquil air, announced, from chimney 
after chimney, that breakfast was beginning to 
be thought of; and, one by one, at all those 
successive sights, Charles leaped higher, and 
even shouted at the top of his voice, though 
doomed to the double vexation of neither re- 
ceiving answer from the shore, nor hearing or 
seeing any thing in the ship, such as could pro- 
mise him immediately to land. 

The hours, in the meantime, advancing, many 
other changes presented themselves, in the skies, 
on the water, on the shore, and (not the least in- 
teresting to him) in the ship; almost sufficient 
to divert, for their respective intervals, the 

vol. in. o 



170 THE ENGLISH BOY 

strong feelings with which he rebelled against 
the delay. The watery vapours of the earth and 
sea, drawn up by the strengthening sun, formed 
themselves into light clouds, (a veil that miti- 
gated, for a short period, the overpowering 
brightness;) and, with that phenomenon, and 
as its effect, came the morning breeze, waving 
the trees and herbage, driving, though gently, 
the chimney-smokes out of their perpendicular ; 
curling and even tossing the water in the bay, 
which, now, no longer reflecting the objects 
upon shore, and scarcely, to appearance, even the 
colours of the sky; and no longer an uniform ex- 
panse, everywhere smooth, and everywhere of a 
sole tint ; was now partitioned into various stripes 
and breadths, more or less ruffled in their surfaces, 
and coloured green and yellow, grey and purple. 
The ship herself felt the returning life, as well 
aloft, in the air, as beneath, in the water; she 
slightly rolled at her anchorage; her pendant 
played fantastically in the breeze; there was 
the noise of vivacity and motion ; and, as the 
hours still advanced, Charles would have heard 
something like bustle and cookery behind 
him, but that, at this time, a fishing-boat, be- 
calmed till after day-break beyond the bay, had 
now pushed in with a full sail, and, scattering the 
spray to her starboard and larboard, ran herself, at 



AT THE CAPE. 171 

length, deep into the sand, and was quickly dis- 
charging her freight ; — those heaps offish, which, 
as they were successively raised from out of the 
boat, gleamed upon the beach like so many piles 
of polished silver ! 

By eight o'clock, in short, Charles was sum- 
moned to a hearty breakfast, for which, when 
once drawn from his contemplation of the shore, 
he found that he was quite ready. During this 
meal, also, he learned to correct many of the 
mistakes into which he had fallen. Mynheer 
Binkenshoecks was able to bring him over to the 
belief, that the little hamlet upon which he had 
been gazing was neither Graham's Town, nor 
even Port Elizabeth, at which he was first to set 
foot on shore ; that his discovery of Martha Hoy- 
land, or her husband, or her children, at any 
time that morning, were events entirely out of 
the question ; though the houses and families 
which he had partly seen, were certainly Eng- 
lish, and belonged to the English colonization 
of this part of the country, which, a few years 
before, the government had undertaken. He 
softened, however, those disappointments, by 
telling him, further, that in about an hour after 
breakfast should be finished, the tide would serve 
for getting up the bay, when the anchor would 
be heaved; and, that probably by eleven the 

92 



172 THE ENGLISH BOY 

ship would enter Port Elizabeth : — " And den, 
mine little boy," he concluded, " we shall see 
what can be done for you, to put you forward to 
Graham's Town, where, however, you will not 
find yourself arrive, no, not dese two, tree, days ; 
if you do get dere so soon as dat ! But first, we 
will ask in Port Elizabeth, wedder any body 
knows any ding of dat goot woman, your god- 
mother ; and, if not, why, den, mine child, you 
will not be able to hear any thing of dat Martha 
Hoyland, nor of dat Tom Hoyland, nor of der 
dear hinders, what you call dare children, no, not 
till you get to Graham's Town ! So, make dine 
self ver' content, mine goot poy !" 

u Content" was a hard word, in Charles's vo- 
cabulary, at such a moment as that then passing. 
Consternation was a state of mind more truly 
similar to what he now experienced, irrevocably 
satisfied, as, at length he was, that all his dreams 
of the early morning had been as false as they 
had been fleeting; and the only refuge left him 
was in nervous and eager inquiries concerning 
all that country, still unseen, and scarcely ap- 
proached, where only he was to count upon in- 
deed beholding the door of Martha Hoyland, 
and upon hearing, at least, at length, and after 
so many bitter disappointments, of that mother 
upon whose only bosom he could really find "eon- 



AT THE CAPE. 173 

tent ! " Fortunately, Mynheer Binkenshoecks, 
relieved from the cares of the voyage, satisfied 
with his night's rest, and with his breakfast, ap- 
peased ; though with sending no more than two 
of his motley crew to " Die tayfel" that same 
morning; and obliged to wait upon the tide for 
the heaving of his anchor ; and being moreover to 
part with his young passenger, and not wholly 
forgetting his promise to the Jew Benjamin, 
"for the love of a Christian," to see him pro- 
perly set forward between the port and Graham's 
Town ; — fortunately, at least for whiling a heavy 
hour with Charles, Mynheer Binkenshoecks was 
now more talkative, and more disposed to take 
notice of him, than he had hitherto appeared ; so, 
that he answered, with tolerable fulness, many of 
the questions, (and some of them even silly ones,) 
concerning which Charles was curious, at this 
fluttering moment. 

His informant communicated to him, there- 
fore, (what, indeed, the reader has partly heard 
already,) that the country upon the coast of 
which they were then lying, was that western 
part of the Cape Colony, or of the southernmost 
part of Africa, which has been called Caffraria, 
or Caffer, or CafTreland, or the country of the 
Pagans, Infidels, or Caffres, Caffirs, or Caufirs; 
names adopted by the Portuguese from the Mo- 

£3 



174 THE ENGLISH BOY 

hammedan Arabians who preceded them in the 
commerce and navigation of these seas ; and by 
them transmitted to the Dutch, the English, and 
the other European nations. He told him, that 
upon the eastern coast of Caffraria lay the 
Indian Ocean ; as, upon the western coast of 
the Hottentot country, or more ancient seats of 
the Colony, lay the Atlantic ; and upon the whole 
southern coast, the Southern Ocean, which they 
had themselves been navigating. He repre- 
sented, also, that so long as the Dutch were mas- 
ters of the colony, and even for many years after, 
Caffraria formed its eastern boundary, and the 
Great Fish-river the line which divided the two 
countries; but that, since the conclusion of the 
English Caffre-war, all the land between that 
river and the river Keiscamma had formed an 
addition to the colony; the Caffres, under their 
king Gaica, having ceded it to the English. 
Within the old territory, however, (though a 
portion of it was always disputed with the Dutch 
by the Caffres 1 ,) was the district of Albany, which, 

1 This particular portion of territory is among the occasions 
of all our Caii're-wars. 

We may take the opportunity of this note to observe, that 
it is to the Portuguese name of the hay in which we find our 
Pride of Dordrecht now riding, that is owed the English cor- 
rupted names, Al^oa, and Delagoa. The lake-like appearance 
of the bay, which has been somewhat adverted to in the text 
above, procured for it. from the Portuguese, the name of 



AT THE CAPE. 175 

by the former, upon account of the sour grass 
that grows there, had been called Zureveldt, 
and upon the coast of which they then were ; for 
it was the capital of that district which now bore 
the name of Graham's Town, though the Dutch, 
who began its building, had called it otherwise; 
and Graham's Town, he said, was the residence 
of a Lieutenant-governor, and the head -quarters 
of the English troops that had their station upon 
this eastern frontier. Still to the eastward, how- 
ever, of the district of Albany, was Bathurst, 
with its Port Frances, at the mouth of the river 
Cowie; as this of Albany had its Port Eliza- 
beth, at the mouth of its own river. " But alas !" 
added he, with a sigh, "the whole country, beau- 
tiful and fertile as it is within land, has neither 
a port that is generally safe, nor a river that 
is in any degree navigable. Even the rivers of 
which even the mouths are anything better than 
winter torrents, are obstructed, to seaward, by 
bars of sand that lie high and dry; for sand 
composes all the coast, and even its rocks, where 
there are any, though fantastic in figure, are but 
of water-worn and mouldering sandstone." 

Throughout Albany, as he bade Charles ex- 
pect, Dutch farmers and farms are still suffi- 

Bahia da Lagoa, or Bay of the Lake, or Lake Bay; and from 
" Bay da Lagoa," or " Dalagoa," we get " Dclagoa," and 
*• Algoa Bay." 



176 THE ENGLISH BOY 

ciently plentiful and generally the most wealthy ; 
though the numbers and activity of the English 
new-comers, were, as he allowed, surprising. 
Even Graham's Town had been an ancient 
Dutch settlement, with its land-drost and com- 
mandant, such as those officers as are still conti- 
nued in it ; but, then what was Graham's Town, 
before the arrival of the skilful and enterprising 
English emigrants, who were planted there to 
strengthen the frontier, and defend the new pos- 
sessions, after the establishment of the Caffre 
peace, in the year 1819? The old town of the 
Dutchmen was a rude village of some twenty 
houses; but, in its enlarged state, it is a con- 
siderable place, with many handsome buildings, 
and well furnished shops, and exhibits all the 
marks of business and prosperity ! 

" But does your goot godmother keep a shop 
in Graham's Town, mine child ?" said, now, the 
skipper ; interrupting his former discourse, be- 
cause, as he said, the tide was about to serve, and 
that the next thing would be to dispatch Charles 
from Port Elizabeth; and, indeed, the pilot had 
already begun to talk of manning the capstan, 
and of taking care that the cable did not get foul. 

" Oh ! no," replied Charles : " my godmother 
lives on a farm, but it is somewhere very near 
to Graham's Town !" 

" But is dat all you know, mine child?" 



AT THE CAPE. 177 

" Oil ! yes, I know that it is very near ; my 
father knew the name of the place, but I don't." 

" ' Very near,' mine poor child," repeated after 
him Mynheer Binkenshoecks ; " ' very near,' did 
you say, mine poor child, and you don't know 
de name ? I wonder, den, wedder you will ever 
find it? ' Very near,' mine poor child ! I wonder 
wedder it is five hundred miles away, or only 
one ? Dat is always de talk of your Vaderland- 
volk : ! They dink every ding 6 very near,' in 
dis great wide country; dough, sometimes, it is 
a dousand mil.es away ! Well, mine child, we 
will do de best for you dat we can. You must 
go to Graham's Town, to be sure : and dare you 
must ask all de volk for your godmother, de goot 
Martha Hoyland ? Or, perhaps, you will do bet- 
ter. Perhaps, dey will know, at the Govern- 
ment House, where is Tom Hoyland's farm ; but 
it may be through many woods, and over many 
rivers. But, now, stand out of de way ; or go 
below, mine child, and wash your face, and 
comb your hair, and put on your best clothes ; 
for de ship will soon be up to de port, and den 
we will go ashore, and wait upon de Comman- 
dant ; and, perhaps, he will be able to send you 
to Graham's Town, and even to find out your 
goot godmother." 

1 " People at home," or in the fatherland, or patriu; or 
land of their ancestors or lathers. 



178 THE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

Him great harms had taught much care. 

Sir Philip Sydney. 

At the sound of the last joyful words, Charles, 
whose colour, during the former part of the 
skipper's observations, had went and gone, the 
smiles at one moment upon his cheeks, and the 
tears at the next moment in his eyes ; while, in 
his breast, (as Mike related it,) his heart had 
flown about, like a little bird in a tree ; — Charles, 
at the joyful words which made the end, leaped 
down the companion-stairs, flew to his chest, 
and commenced with eagerness his toilet ; only 
too happy to be at length encouraged in that 
work; to obtain a hope of speedy debarkation ; 
and to be told of the possibility of finding 
Martha Hoyland, — by which he understood, in 
plainer English, the undoubted certainty ! Once 
more, he believed himself already in her arms, 
and once more he thought himself already lis- 



AT THE CAPE. 179 

tening to all that lie assured himself she could 
tell him of his mother and his home ! He saw her 
take out of her drawers the careful bundle of 
his mother's letters, bound round with riband, 
and deposited with lace and muslin, and babies' 
caps, and with a branch of dried English violets ; 
and he listened to the tender words which 
his mother had sent to be read to his very self; 
to the messages of love and admonition ; to the 
warnings to beware of lions and rhinoceroses, 
to all the " foolish" fears of a Derbyshire nursery, 
about sharks and elephants ; to her charges not 
to be too venturesome ; to remember his mother, 
and his brother John, and his little brother and 
sister, James and Mary, and to take care of him- 
self for their sakes; to her condolements of his 
orphanage; to inquiries about his health and 
height; to her trust in his good temper and 
obedience ; in his love of truth, and willingness 
to oblige ; in his thankfulness to God and man ; 
in his acknowledgment, among all things, of a 
reciprocal and universal dependence ; and in 
that humility, that gratefulness, that readiness 
to do services, and to confer favours, which this 
sentiment so directly teaches : and finally to 
her repeated questions to good Martha, whether 
his cheeks were still plump, and still red, and his 
soft hair still curly ? 



180 THE ENGLISH BOY 

But, while he thus thought, and talked, and 
sung, all by himself, and as his spirits or his 
fancy led, his toilet was made, and his best 
trowsers, boots, jacket, and tasselled cap, and 
snowy shirt, were all put on ; and many a bound 
did he make, (the cabin-glass dimly displaying 
to him his metamorphosis,) and many an ex- 
ulting whoop : " Oh how mother would like to 
see me now ! How little she thinks that my belt 
is black and shining like this ! I dare say she 
fancies that I have no cap but of the skin of a 
hyena ! Oh ! if she were to see my cloth cap, 
and its silk tassel, how she would wonder ! But, 
when I get to Martha's, I shall soon learn to 
write, and then I'll tell her all about it ; and, 
first, Martha shall write, and tell her all that I 
say !" But, neither Martha nor his mother 
being yet at hand, no sooner was he completely 
dressed, than up he sprang to the deck, to show 
himself to Mynheer Binkenshoecks and Michael 
O'Sullivan, and to see whether the ship WM not 
already at the wharf? 

It is true, that in the interval which had now- 
elapsed, the anchor had been weighed, the sails 
set, and the ship, with a brisk wind, impelled 
halfway up the bay. But never was a more con- 
spicuous alteration ! Charles could find nothing 
that he had lofr: and when, after some momeir 



AT THE CAPE. 181 

of breathless gazing upon the prospect, he saw- 
nothing near him but dancing waves, nothing 
behind him but an outspread ocean, (all, so far, 
but as the day before,) and nothing before him, 
in the long distance, but a selvage of white and 
leaping foam, severing the sea from land, and 
land from sea ; all his spirits, all his courage, all 
his manhood, at once forsook him, and he burst 
forth in one tremendous scream, followed by 
overwhelming tears ! Every hand was at the 
moment occupied. The lead was heaving ; the 
pilot was eyeing the sails, and looking at the co- 
lour of the water, and at a distant landmark ; the 
skipper was walking the deck, pondering upon 
his business ashore, and upon his own venture in 
the Pride of Dordrecht ; the cook was preparing 
the dinner, and all the rest were employed in 
vocations connected with the termination of the 
little coasting voyage : " What is de matter," 
cried the pilot, nevertheless, (willing to show how 
humorous he could make himself, and to raise 
a laugh at the expense of blubbering Charles;) 
" What is de matter, here, Master Skipper," said 
he, to the meditative Mynheer Binkenshoecks ? 
" Is dere a man overboard, or has dis young 
kinder just been eaten by a shark?" And now 
the skipper interfered ; and now Mike, as he 
came aft, for a marline-spike, and as he caught 
vol. in. R 



182 THE ENGLISH BOY 

Charles's explanation of his shock, gravely be- 
sought "a young jontleman, that was a rale jontle- 
man," to be ashamed of crying like a nurse-child ; 
and moreover, to look a-head, and see whether 
he could get a peep at the flag-staff, and the 
church steeple; and just to turn one eye to 
windward, and try whether he could get a 
glimpse of the same white houses, though now 
grown down to sugar-plums, at which he had 
been looking all the morning ? Charles looked 
as he was bade, and presently dried his tears ; 
but kept a grave face, and a silent tongue, as he 
stood turned toward the selvage of surf through 
all the remainder of the run. 

Arrived within a certain distance of the shore, 
the pilot brought up the ship, and ordered her 
anchor to be let go ; and even before this time, 
surf-boats were making for the offing, to carry 
goods and passengers on shore. In a very few 
minutes after, one of the boats was close upon 
the ship's quarter ; and Charles, whom the 
skipper had prepared to land with himself and 
the revenue-officer, had not failed to place him- 
self in the main-chains before she came up, in 
order to leap into her as soon as she touched the 
side. The skipper was not long in following, 
nor the boat in reaching the shore. As she ap- 
proached the outer edge of the surf, Charles felt 



AT THE CAPE. 183 

his breath leaving him again, from the appear- 
ance of danger which discovered itself, besides 
looking somewhat serious at the thought of the 
spray falling upon his cap and jacket; but, 
tossed as the boat was in her passage through 
the surf, and high and low as she wrought her 
course amid the waves which broke upon every 
side, such was the excellence of her build and 
management, that boat, and passengers, and 
cargo, reached the quay together, all safe and 
dry. 

From the quay, the skipper carried Charles 
direct to the office of the Commandant, persuad- 
ing himself that by this step he should best and 
the most expeditiously put him in the way to be 
forwarded to Graham's Town, and this with that 
security and certainty which would best fulfil 
his promise of punctuality to Benjamin the Jew; 
as well because the Commandant was himself 
an Englishman, and because, in virtue of his 
office, he was a person both efficient and respon- 
sible. The Commandant received with some 
surprise so young and solitary an emigrant into 
the new colony, and listened with compassion 
and curiosity to all that the skipper related of 
his adventures ; but, as it happened, to the great 
delight of Charles, that this functionary was 
aware of a small party proceeding, with wag- 
it 2 



184 THE ENGLISH BOY 

gons, that very afternoon, from Port Elizabeth 
to Graham's Town, he detained him only to 
mend the dinner that he had already made on 
ship board, with a large plate of apple-pie ; after 
which, making him a present of a rix-dollar, and 
engaging the party to take him free of charg< 
and with the greatest attention to his safety, he 
shook hands with him, and wished him a speedy 
meeting with his friends. The skipper had pre- 
viously taken a kind parting, and bade the goot 
God to bless him ! The party consisted of a 
Dutch farmer and his sons, and an English Ser- 
jeant of infantry ; but none of these, nor even 
the Commandant himself, had any information 
of the name of Hoyland. 

Charles's little sea-chest being placed in one 
of the waggons, and himself seated upon it, the 
team of twelve black oxen, cross-bred from Hol- 
land and England, and beautifully matched, and 
governed by a whip of which the thong and lash 
were thirty-five feet in length ; all this began to 
move over the sand-hills and low boshes which 
skirted the sea; the Dutchman, from time to time, 
calling out, to his oxen " Trae, trae ;" and the 
docile team demanding but little further atten- 
tion. The journey, thus far, reminded Charles 
of his progress with the Land-drost, ami of its me- 
lancholy adventure, though the country, in this 



AT THE CAPE. 185 

instance, presented, for the most part, a very 
different scene. The lofty mountains, and steep 
and narrow passes, which, on the former route, 
the waggons had been obliged to ascend almost 
immediately upon leaving Cape Town, were 
not here to be discovered; for, though the 
range continues eastward, it here lies further in- 
land. Charles had soon occasion, also, to see, 
that though the trees, and flowers, and birds, 
and wild beasts were generally the same as in 
the western districts, yet, here, there were many 
novelties, even of these sorts, agreeing with the 
new situations, high and low, dry and moist, 
rocky and sandy, and the various soils. Leaving 
the sand-hills at their backs, they crossed, for 
two miles or more, a belt, which winds with the 
coast of Albany or Zureveldt; and which the 
Dutchman told him was very fertile; and then en- 
tered upon a wide expanse of barren land, con- 
stantly, though gradually, ascending from the 
sea; where, as the waggons advanced, he often 
got down, to walk by their side, and to run into 
adjacent ploughings; and where, as they told him 
was constantly the case, he could pick up sea- 
shells which the plough had restored to day- 
light, and which remained in perfect preserva- 
tion. For twelve hundred geographical miles 
northward, or twenty degrees of latitude, the 

it 3 



)86 THE ENGLISH BOY 

level of the surface of this extremity of Africa, 
as they told him, kept uniformly rising above tl: 
level of the sea; so, that while on the east and 
west, this continent narrows, toward the Cape, 
as we see it in our maps, it descends, under tin- 
same parallels, lower and more low, as to its 
general level, in spite of the ranges of mountains 
which spring up from it; and every where pre- 
sents, both by its figure, and by its soils and 
fossils, and in spite of the beating of the ocean 
upward, against the southern shores, the ap- 
pearance of a region from which that ocean has 
gradually retired, and is still gradually retiring 
Aloes, geraniums, splendid heaths, and the sour- 
grass, with a reddish tinge, were spread over the 
ground, but only in patches, and guinea-hen-, 
and certain species of bustard, showed them- 
selves in little flocks; till, at length, the same 
sun, which, in the morning of this day, Charles 
had seen throwing gold from the east, as it rose 
above the ocean, sunk down rapidly behind 
the highlands in the west, rilling all the air with 
a crimson hue, purpling the distant hills, and 
firing with a richer hue the scarlet geraniums, 
the glossy leaves of the evergreens, and the 
gorgeous branches of flowers hanging in profu- 
sion upon the coral-trees : and, in the earlier 
part of the day, not the smallest of the pleasures 



AT THE CAPE. 187 

that he received, had been that of hearing and 
seeing, once more, his old and useful friends the 
Honey Birds. But, now, the travellers having 
gained the top of the deep banks of a small 
stream, (both banks and stream almost wholly 
concealed by shrubs and flowers,) they unyoked 
their oxen for the night ; and, after a supper of 
the venison of the spring-buck, and the flesh 
of several guinea-hens, and other species of 
game, (all admirably dressed by the Hottentot 
man-cook, and all relished, because of their dry- 
ness, with sheep's fat,) composed themselves to 
sleep, ^either in the waggons, or upon the 
ground. The night had a brilliant moon; so 
that the birds of the peewit species, or, by the 
Dutch variation, keewit, were constantly crying 
on the wing, as is their practice on such nights ; 
while, when the sky is darker, they reserve 
themselves to be the harbingers of sunrise. But, 
among those, and other lulling sounds, were also 
to be heard the yelpings of the jackals, (such 
as puppies make when they are beaten,) and 
the howlings of the hyenas, kept at a distance 
and in fear, by the equally dismal howlings 
provoked by their approach, among the dogs of 
the party. 

At day break, the oxen were again yoked, and 
all the travellers in motion ; but Charles knew 



188 THE ENGLISH BOY 

little of this change, because, stretched in hi> 
waggon, his exhausted spirits, and, what he now 
thought, his satisfied expectations, had both re- 
quired and encouraged the soundest and most 
lengthened sleep. It was not without difficulty 
that he could be awakened, even at the place 
and hour of breakfast. He awoke, nevertheless, 
at length, and made a full and merry breakfast ; 
but this was the last epoch, for many a year, of 
every inward peace, except his innocence, — and 
well nigh the termination of his childhood ! 

The affliction which this day came upon him 
was even childish still, though it might have been 
viewed as an affliction by the grey head as well. 
It was single, and without consequences, or, at 
least, consequences that were in any degree se- 
rious ; but it was not forgotten before another, of 
the gloomiest kind, and of deep and lasting influ- 
ence, assailed him ; so that, from the finish of this 
morning's breakfast, till many years thereafter, 
care sat upon his mind, and sorrow, more or 
less reasonable, dwelt in his bosom ! The terrors 
of shipwreck, the drowning of his father, the 
persecutions of the Vrouw, the wanderings in the 
woods, the eating of his green monkey, the 
storming of the Bushmen's craal, the flight of 
his little Bushman-girl deliverer and nurse; the 
revolutions at Cape Town ; the riots and wounds 



AT THE CAPE. 189 

at the Malay festival; the delay at reaching 
Martha Hoyland, and the continued separation 
from his mother ; all these things he had found 
to be afflictions, and all had either wrung from 
him his momentary tears, or returned, from time 
to time, to sadden his thoughts and recollections ; 
to check the rising laugh, or stop the half com- 
mencing song. But these were griefs either 
short-lived in their sources, or irremediable in 
their nature, or without succour except in hope; 
hope, which often encourages a supine because 
confident dependence upon occurrences that 
seem to promise their coming without effort of 
our own, and that no effort seems capable of 
hastening. We believe that they will come ; 
and we either know, or else erroneously be- 
lieve, either that they will come without our 
seeking, or that the time for seeking is still 
distant. Charles hoped — Charles confidently 
believed — that he should one day see his 
mother, and his brothers, and his sister; but 
never yet had it seemed to him that those 
events were to be forwarded by himself, or 
else that the time for his own forwarding them 
had yet arrived ! He swam upon an onward 
stream, and neither hoisted sail, nor put out 
an oar ; at noon, at night, and at morning, he 
promised himself his arrival at one loved and 



190 THE ENGLISH BOY 

wished for bank; the current was his only hope, 
and this was weakened by no doubts ; he saw the 
trees, the islands, and the hills continually re- 
cede behind him; he rounded point after point, 
and passed by rush and rush, in one unchec- 
quered progress. All that he required, therefore, 
was time ; and he could lie in the bottom of his 
boat, and (if neither memory nor impatience 
forced a tear) the time between could smile with 
joys, or waste in slumbers, just as the banks be- 
tween were green with herbage, and even gay 
with flowers : — the haven would appear at last ! 
But, from the day forward, of which we are now 
speaking, Charles became man and workman. 
He was to work out his own fortunes. He was 
to trim the sail, and bale the leak, and labour at 
the oar. And he rose to his new circumstances. 
The child forsook him ; he became grave and 
thoughtful; he had a steady aim ; he had a 
fixed desire, and an imperious duty. Hope 
took her more healthful form ; there was nothing 
to be despaired of, but every thing to be toiled 
for. With toil, all might be accomplished ; 
without it, nothing. Charles, therefore, became 
suddenly a mail. To dwell upon irremediable 
griefs is as erroneous as it is unnatural ; to sit 
down under remediable ones, is erroneous and 
unnatural also. Man was not made to mourn : 



AT THE CAPE. 191 

but to toil, even for his greatest happiness : to 
try always for the best, and to be patient always, 
but not nerveless, under the worst ! 

We have a sorrow, in the meantime, (still, for 
the most part, childish,) to relate as the sole one 
of this day ; as the whole of all the tribulations 
with which the reader will become acquainted 
in the present chapter. Wrapped in a thick 
outer-coat of one of the Dutch farmer's sons, 
Charles, without changing any part of the dress 
in which he had left the coasting-vessel, and 
been presented to the Commandant, had slept 
warmly through the night, and risen up refreshed 
and happy. But now, (and especially at the 
joint suggestion of his new Africaner friends, 
and of the English Serjeant, the latter telling 
him that it w T as no longer parade-day,) he pro- 
posed to employ some of the time which would 
necessarily be spent in yoking the oxen, and (for 
it was dawn, and the wild beasts were sleeping) 
in looking far and near for the strayed horses ; in 
changing his clothes, as well as in bathing in the 
clear stream at hand. With this, too, went all 
things well, till, after arraying himself in his 
more ordinary gear, he proceeded, once more, to 
lay carefully and smoothly his blue jacket in his 
chest ! From the Sunday (now four days past) 
when, at the recommendation of Mike O' Sullivan, 



19"2 THE ENGLISH BOY 

he had displayed his costume upon the deck of 
the Pride of Dordrecht, till the moment of this 
sylvan change, never had it occurred to him to 
seek the pleasure of feeling the twenty dollars 
which Brinah had sewed carefully beneath the 
lining of that jacket; and which Benjamin had 
charged him to be careful of, even as the warm 
blood of his heart, and as the apple of his eye ! 
Often, indeed, on the Sunday evening, and 
throughout Monday, had his thoughts lighted 
upon those dollars, and even his mental eye 
made sparkling by the vision of their shining 
faces; but never had he thought it worth his 
while to haul out and unlock his chest, or bur- 
row into its contents, only to feel, through the 
close-stiched lining, the hard and valuable de- 
posit ! On the next morning, now twenty-four 
hours ago, his ardent look-out for Martha Hoy- 
land and her children, his eager questions to 
Mynheer Binkenshoecks ; his wild intoxication, 
and fanciful excursions, while dressing himself 
for shore; his anguish when he thought the ship 
had put again to sea; his strained examination 
of the surf and coast, when restored to the be- 
lief that the port was really at his feet; his 
watchful station in the main-chains ; his hurried 
leap into the surf-boat; his fears when entering 
the surf: his anxious walk to the Commandant's: 



AT THE CAPE. 193 

his disappointment, as to learning, even there, 
the residence of Martha Hoyland ; his transport 
at a speedy journey ; his regale upon apple-pie 
and a glass of Cape Madeira; his pleasure at 
the Commandant's, and even the skipper's, good 
words at parting, and the present of a rix-dol- 
lar : the bustle of a new departure ; the coun- 
tenances of new friends; the sinking of the 
waggon-wheels in the sand-hills ; the picking up 
of shells ; the sight of new birds and flowers ; 
the promise and enjoyment of a venison supper, 
the drowsiness of evening, and the sleep of 
night : all and each of these things, (so moment- 
ous to his mind, and so crowded in their succes- 
sion,) had been sufficient to make him take out, 
put on, and wear, his blue jacket, with its em- 
broidery, and yet never feel, nor even think 
of, the twenty dollars which ought still to have 
been beneath its lining! Many a time, since 
the bounty of the Governor, and the honesty, 
and even liberality of the Jew, had made them 
his own, had he exulted in the possession of a 
sum of money, so extraordinary for his station 
and years, that nothing but a voyage to the Cape 
of Good Hope, with all its incidents, its dan- 
gers, and his own actual sufferings, could have 
been likely to put it into any part of the jacket 
of a little lad like him; the child of a poor 
VOL. III. s 



394 THE ENGLISH BOY 

farmer, and the brother of a poor ploughboy ! 
Many a time, too, had his wandering imagina- 
tion, his kindling feelings, his human vanity, his 
frivolous desires, and his lofty moral virtue, al- 
ternately built castles, as to his application, in 
the whole, or dollar by dollar, of this all African 
fortune ! It was no small thing, that through 
the money of the Governor, and the handsome 
management of Benjamin, he was approaching 
the threshold of his godmother, not with the 
naked, blistered, ulcerated feet that had been 
cleansed and cured by the little Bushman-girl, 
nor in the rags and dirt which had been re- 
moved from him by Namal and Sambayana, but 
in as gay a suit of new apparel, or "boy's 
clothing," as ever was purchased in Monmouth- 
street, or ever adorned the waxen statue in a 
shop-window in Oxford- Street, or in Cheapside ; 
but it was still more, that he could approach 
that godmother herself, not with new clothes yet 
empty pockets, calling aloud for an immediate 
sixpence ! Martha Hoyland herself, no doubt, 
hardly thought that she had invited to Africa so 
well-dressed and rich a godson ; but, then, for 
Martha's husband and children, what would they 
not think and say ? It was not his intention, 
however, to be author of a fruitless, and still 
less of a painful admiration. He would make 



AT THE CAPE. 195 

presents at Graham's Town, as he had made 
them at Cape Town. He would buy Martha a 
new shawl, and her husband a new hat; he would 
fill the children's laps with cakes and sweetmeats; 
and, if, as might happen, the poor things were 
without shoes, why, he would buy them shoes ! 
He thought, too, of some eatables, and of some 
ornaments, for his own use ; but, after all, these 
things were to cost but a small part of the 
twenty dollars. He should keep fifteen of them 
untouched ; and Martha should send them to his 
mother, and should tell her to spend the whole 
of them for herself, and for his brothers and 
sister ; or else to lay them out at once, and pay 
a ship to bring all the family to Africa ! As 
for himself, he had been so taught to look to 
Martha Hoyland for the supply of all his wants; 
that the use of money, for any necessary of his 
own, never entered into his head. 

But Charles, as he laid the jacket in his chest, 
gave way, at last, to the natural inclination for 
feeling the dollars in its lining ; and the feel- 
ing but too soon betrayed, that there was 
nothing now contained in it either hard or 
heavy ! A moment more, and his eyes were 
fixed upon the place of deposit; and behold it 
was cut open ! Every dollar had departed, and 
there was no question but as to the how and 

s2 



196 THE ENGLISH BOY 

where? Charles's heart was in his mouth, and 
the tears standing in his eyes. Loudly he pro- 
claimed to his companions the reality and the 
greatness of his loss. He had no suspicion of 
any thief on shore, nor did his fancy fix the 
robbery upon any particular sailor in the ship. 
He recollected, now, that when he took the 
jacket out of his chest, and put his arms into its 
sleeves, he thought it considerably lighter than 
when he exhibited on Sunday ; but he was then 
too elate with his prospect of landing, and with 
imagining the news at Martha Hoyland's, to 
think for a second moment upon the circum- 
stance. He did not believe that his friend 
Mike had been guilty of any thing beyond a 
childish vanity, and a silly ostentation, when he 
urged him to bring forth his jacket, and when he 
proclaimed the contents of its lining ; but he 
felt assured that this had been the occasion of 
his loss; and he shared the blame between 
Mike, who had prompted him to the display, and 
boasted so much of his wealth ; and himself, who 
had taken so little heed of the directions of Ben- 
jamin, and imitated so little the careful thoughts 
of Brinah ! 



-■ 



AT THE CAPE. 197 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

From rank to rank, from name to name, 
The fond inquirer trembling flew. 

Burger's Ballad of Leonora. 

Except for the good, or at least the pleasure, 
which, by means of his twenty dollars, he had 
promised himself to heap upon his friends, 
and except for the vanities in which he had 
reckoned upon indulging; the robbery which 
had been committed upon him neither was, nor 
appeared to himself, of any real importance. It 
was mortifying, it was disappointing, but he 
never thought of it as ruinous. As to his ap- 
proach at Martha Hoyland's, it only threw him 
back to what he had expected it to be when he 
first set forward to Cape Town, under the pro- 
tection of the Land-drost. His baggage had 
been much heavier when contributed by Lady 
Pontefract and the society at the Government 

s 3 



198 THE ENGLISH BOY 

House, than even under the provision of Benja- 
min the Jew, and even his pockets, at that 
time, had not been wholly empty ; but still, in 
all the arrangements of that journey, he had 
never expected to appear before his godmother 
the affluent possessor of a whole twenty dollars ! 
He had reckoned upon nothing then, but an 
entire dependence upon the hospitality of Martha 
Hoy land; and so far his situation was but the same 
at present. The twenty dollars, in the meantime, 
had encouraged an ambition, or fostered a pride, 
or awakened a vanity, which their loss had now 
thrown down; and, by the reverse which it had 
inflicted, he was not only made a more humble 
visitor than had seemed promised him, but he 
felt humbled in himself. The misfortune, how- 
ever, was not useless to him ; it gave him 
(though probably without his at all perceiving it) 
one lesson alike salutary and lasting, and more 
valuable than even the lesson of future caution; 
for it taught him that men must frequently sub- 
mit to have their vanity checked, even where 
their necessities are satisfied ; and to accept the 
fulfilment of their more essential wishes, with- 
out that accompaniment of superficial gratifica- 
tion which would have flattered their pride, as 
well as enhanced their pleasure. Now, the in- 
experience of the young very generally suffe 



AT THE CAPE. 199 

them to expect the arrival of everything' just in 
the exact way they wish ; they would enjoy per- 
haps, not only the substance, but the ornament 
as well; they would receive benefits, and yet be 
crowned with dignity ; they would be fed, and 
yet not be humbled; they would ask favours, 
and yet feel as if they conferred favours ; they 
would have not alone what is needful for them, — 
but, at the same time, what the Scottish song 
calls — 

" The pride and the blather on't;" 

and it is therefore that this check upon Charles's 
calculations — this example of the taking away 
what would have been the most pleasing, and 
leaving before him only that which was the 
most serviceable, and least dispensable; was a 
lesson salutary, and of a kind to be as perma- 
nent in its influence, as unperceived, or uninter- 
preted at its reception. We must learn to be 
often satisfied with what saves us from perishing, 
though it does not pamper us with sweets. Nature 
is bountiful, and yet reserved : — 

" Liberal, not lavish, is kind Nature's hand!" 

But Charles had certain other views of the 
matter, vain, perhaps, even yet, but still so 
allied to virtue, and so pardonable, as well as, no 
doubt so powerful, and so useful, among its 



200 THE ENGLISH BOY 

motives, that the virtuous reader will hardly 
fail to sympathize with him upon this part of his 
grief. He lamented, not only the loss of his 
means to confer pleasure and benefit, as he had 
intended; but the loss also of that consequent 
applause and esteem which his good deeds 
ought fairly to have brought to him. To be 
loved, and to be valued ; to have credit for kind 
and beneficent dispositions, are objects of such 
honest and honourable ambition among mankind; 
they command for us so many returns of worldly 
service ; they cover us with so much worldly 
lustre ; and they procure for us so much internal 
joy and rapture, that the moralist would scarcely 
be a philanthropist, and scarcely even a moralist, 
who should tell us, that even these yearnings of 
our hearts have something selfish in their nature, 
and even minister to a pride which the cynic has 
no objection to see humbled ! The power of 
conferring benefits is so godlike, and the in- 
cense of thanks and praise is so exalted, that 
there are anchorets, no doubt, who would chal- 
lenge the use of the one, and prohibit the enjoy- 
ment of the other, in creatures so lowlv as man- 
kind ; and tell us that it is well when we are 
denied the means of bestowing blessings, lest 
we should thus gorge our luxury, elate our 
pride, and puff up our vanity ! But such mo- 



AT THE CAPE. 201 

ralists are reasonable and useful, only when they 
warn us that such vices may sometimes be the sha- 
dows — not the lights — in even benevolence and 
liberality; for those vices (be they so called !) are 
weaknesses and failings proper to the virtues 
which they may accompany, and of which they 
prompt the activity, and promote the ends. We 
should not be virtuous, were there not pleasure 
in virtue ! 

Charles lamented, then, (let us confess) not alone 
that he had lost the power of doing so many good 
and pleasant things around him ; but that he had 
lost also the tangible title to a good name, and the 
source of incentive to a more lively affection, 
which his stolen money would have enabled him 
to bring. He had no doubt of a kind reception 
at Martha Hoyland's, — he had no doubt of his 
mother's, or of his brothers', or of his sister's 
love ; but would it have been nothing to have 
added, perhaps, some warmth to both, (or at least 
to have drawn out the lively expression of it,) 
by a display, without room for doubt, of his own 
good disposition, and of his fond, and filial, and 
considerate remembrance ? The means, in this 
present instance, had vanished ; but let us not 
believe, that even here, Charles had that unqua- 
lified occasion of grief which he unthinkingly 
imagined ! The visions of love and generosity, 



202 THE ENGLISH BOY 

himself the actor, had not floated in his brain, 
nor even thus abruptly passed away, without yet 
another lesson — without the exercise of those 
moral faculties which invited their use, and 
tutored their direction. He had revelled in the 
lesson of love and generosity ; he had drank 
deeper of the liquor of their practice ; and, if 
the sweetened chalice was now dashed from his 
lips, he remained with a longing for the draught, 
and with a heightened and practical disposition 
to pursue and to obtain its enjoyment ! If the 
thoughts of the vicious tend to the performance of 
evil, so do the thoughts of the virtuous to the per- 
formance of virtue; and where the disposition is, 
the opportunity, to each, is apt to come ! 

And, supposing, too, that all these exterior 
appliances of goodness should be, through life, 
denied him ; would he be still without his benefit 
and his reward ? Verilv, there is a reward for 
the virtuous, even if they are denied all worldly 
means of setting forth their virtue. They lose 
not nature's protection ; they scarcely lose the 
applause and love of men. They "wish the good 
they cannot do;" and, even if men, ignorant of 
their hearts, neglect them, it is their's to be 
" their own exceeding "Teat reward." Grievous 
and unequal, indeed, would be the condition of 
the feeble among mankind, if they shared in 



AT THE CAPE. 203 

none of the advantages of native virtue ! 
Grievous and unequal, indeed, would be the 
condition of the poor and the powerless, if they 
shared in none of the delights attendant upon 
the elegant, the tasteful, the liberal, or cha- 
ritable enjoyments, of wealth and influence 
and strength ! But they share always in all 
that nature gives, and often in all that man ; and 
they are seldom wholly shut out from positive 
performance, and therefore, from as positive 
praise. The disposition to virtuous and gene- 
rous deeds is a glow and a soothing to the heart; 
and even the sigh, or the real regret, at inability, 
have the merit and the reward of virtue. Nor is 
the whole of this internal or unseen. The same 
disposition imprints exterior beauty, and wins men 
the affections of the virtuous. The disposition 
to virtuous and generous deeds imprints the ex- 
terior countenance, and speaks in the voice, and 
lightens in the eye; and the world is wholly 
neither deaf nor blind. The generous and the 
virtuous will sometimes, at least, be discovered, 
and sometimes loved, in spite of their incapacity 
to do generous or virtuous deeds; and even 
their incapacity will not be total. Great things 
to the great, and small things to the small; and, in 
the performance of virtuous and generous deeds, 
the enjoyment (to the performer) flows not 



204 THE ENGLISH BOY 

so much from the greatness of the deed, as from 
the greatness of the desire. These virtuous dis- 
positions, too, at their lowest influence, give health 
and peace ; and here is, besides, a passive form of 
benevolence and generosity, of which the exer- 
cise and the rewards are commonly accessible to 
all. It suggests to men, if they can do no good, 
at least to do no harm ! 

Charles could recollect nothing precisely, as 
to the time or mariner of the despoiling of his 
jacket of its embedded dollars ; but he could 
easily understand the readiness with which it 
might have been effected upon the Sunday 
evening, when, upon Mike's boast, and while 
he was himself busied in changing his dress, and 
somewhat enchanted with the praises and com- 
pliments of the crew, the garment was passed 
from hand to hand, and only returned to him at 
the last moment, as he became impatient to 
complete the deposit in the chest, and to turn the 
key. The sergeant of infantry, with whom he 
was now travelling, strongly advised, that upon 
his arrival at Graham's Town, no time should 
be lost in "reporting" his loss to the superior of 
the Commandant at Port Elizabeth, by, or 
through which latter, he was certain, the Pride 
of Dordrecht would be embargoed, the crew 
mustered, and the Dutch skipper interrogated: 



AT THE CAPE. 205 

and the Dutch farmer was of opinion that 
the shortest method would be to get a letter 
written to that skipper, Mynheer Binkenshoecks, 
to whose care, as he justly remarked, it 
would have been wiser if the Jew Benjamin, 
and his sister Brinah, had originally consigned 
the money, instead of trusting to the poor and 
petty contrivance of sewing it into a jacket ! 
No one thought it possible for Charles to be 
carried back, at the instant, over the wilds which 
already separated him from the port; nor did 
any one encourage him, in reality, very greatly 
to hope, either from returning, or from writing, 
or from reporting, or from the aid of Command- 
ant or skipper, the restoration of his missing 
money. They suspected, in short, and as they 
frankly told him, that it had been divided among 
the thieves, and probably spent, by this time, 
among the brandy-shops and slop-sellers around 
the harbour. Charles believed, without hesita- 
tion, in a total loss ; and throwing himself upon 
his face, in the waggon, his sleeves soaking in 
his tears, he cried over his misfortune till he fell 
asleep ; indifferent to the jolts of the vehicle, 
the cries of the driver, the landscape around 
him, and the shots fired at gnoos, hart-beasts, 
and spring-bucks. Toward evening, however, 
he began to forget his troubles ; a dinner 

VOL. III. T 



206 THE ENGLISH BOY 

of venison and fish had recruited his spirits; 
he walked, or amused himself, with the dogs, or 
along with his companions, before, and behind, 
and upon each side of the waggons, which at 
the quickest rate moved no faster than three 
miles an hour ; and, at night, he slept as 
soundly as if no disaster had occurred. He had 
thought, while yet awake, only of his speedy 
arrival at Martha Hoyland's, and of the news 
which he made himself certain of hearing of his 
mother; or, if a transient recollection returned 
to him, it was but to make him say, " Martha 
shall write, and tell mother, and John, and James, 
and Mary, that I would have sent them the 
money if I had had it; — but, then, what is the 
use of that? How do I know that they will 
believe me ? and, besides, how differently they 
would have looked, and what different words 
they would have said, if they could have seen 
the dollars in their laps, instead of only reading 
that I had the inclination to send them !" 

Early the next morning, the sergeant, whose 
destination was Bathurst, the easternmost of 
all the colonial settlements, quitted the party of 
the waggons, at a Dutch farm where he found 
himself able to hire a horse for himself, and a 
horse and man to bring his beast : first repeating 
his recommendation to Charles, not to fail of 



AT THE CAPE. 207 

u reporting" his loss ! The waggons kept their 
way toward Graham's Town, where, however, 
they did not arrive till two days afterward. 
Charles's joy, when from the hills that, upon 
this side, overlook the valley in which it lies, he 
beheld, at first the smoke from its chimneys; 
then its churches, its barracks, and the roofs and 
sides of its houses ; and when, winding along the 
road below, he saw, at last, the signs of its inns, 
and the windows of its shops ; Charles's joy and 
agitated spirits, at this long-sought for event of 
his young life, shall be left to the reader's sole 
imagination of their expression and intensity ! 

It was, nevertheless, at an hour after his ar- 
rival in Graham's Town, that began all the 
heavier and more lasting of the boy's subse- 
quent afflictions. The Dutch farmer discharged 
the duty which he had undertaken, by safely 
presenting, according to his promise, to the 
Commandant at Graham's Town, the orphan 
passenger by the Pride of Dordrecht, with the 
name of the English family he was in search of; 
not omitting to make mention of his loss, and of 
the Governor's bounty, which had furnished the 
money; as also to state, that nothing now re- 
mained to the poor child but his chest and its 
contents, and the rix-dollar which had been given 
to him by the officer at Port Elizabeth. 

t2 



208 THE ENGLISH BOY 

Here, as at the place last-mentioned, Charles 
was received with kindness ; and the Command- 
ant, after listening to all that the child could tell 
him, respecting his notions of the place of abode 
of Martha Hoyland and her husband, immedi- 
ately set about inquiring, both officially and in 
the town, what was known of any settlers of that 
name. Charles was thunderstruck, no less than 
agonized, that even the first person he saw in 
Graham's Town should not so much as have 
heard of Martha Hoyland, his own godmother ; 
but the Commandant, though he could make 
nothing, that night, of the entire story of Hoy- 
land and his farm, and the lions and the elephants 
that frequented his kitchen and his garden, yet 
bade the trembling traveller to hope for better 
news on the following day ; and, in the mean- 
time, sent him to bed in his own house, where, 
however, the anxious boy passed only one of his 
few nights of almost sleepless perplexity and 
apprehension. Ail that the Commandant could 
tell him, from his accounts of these stori 
of wild beasts, in the letters of his godmother, 
was his conjecture, that the family must have 
been planted in some one of the very newest 
settlements, at a distance up the country : M We 
have no lions nor elephants," said he, "to visit 
us in Graham's Town, nor to roar in our streets, 



AT THE CAPE. 209 

nor look in at our shop-windows. Long ago they 
have taken their leave of the neighbourhood of 
our noise and smoke !" 

The morning came, and the noon and even- 
ing ; and still nothing could be heard of the name 
of Hoyland. Charles thought every messenger 
tardy, and every inquiry imperfect. Trusted, 
alone, into the streets, he ran to every inn, and 
every shop, and asked all the passengers and 
market-people, and tried the sentinels at the 
gates. Not a tongue could talk to him of Mar- 
tha Hoyland! Even the Hottentots, and Bosjes- 
men, and Caffres, several of each of whom he 
saw about, and with whose appearance and 
broken speech he was more or less familiar, 
could teach him nothing. The English were 
unacquainted with Martha Hoyland ; and when 
Charles and the Dutch, and the Hottentots, and 
the Bosjesmen, and the Caffres, had all made 
themselves reciprocally understood, the answers 
from the whole were every whit as hopeless ! 
Wearied, dispirited, and weeping, and every- 
thing but entirely broken-hearted, Charles re- 
turned to the Commandant's, and confessed the 
ill-success of even his own exertions. Some- 
times, (both from his English respondents, and 
amid the various hearing and various jargon of 
the rest,) a momentary belief, on both sides, of 

r3 



210 THE ENGLISH BOY 

the recollection of that, or of a similar name, had 
given him a flush of joy, and mark' his pulse beat 
thick and strongly; but everything had soon and 
uniformly sunk down again, to doubt, to contra- 
diction, and despondence ! 

Even the Commandant himself was near de- 
spairing. Toward the close of the day, he car- 
ried Charles to the Lieutenant-Governor, whom 
the latter found wearing the Windsor uniform, 
and who condoled with earnestness the English 
orphan's situation ; and desired, though in vain, 
his secretary to search anew among the lists 
of settlers. A notice of Charles's loss had been 
sent, by a Hottentot Yager, to Port Elizabeth, 
the day before; and this was all that could be 
done, upon that subject, for the present. As to 
the rest, the Lieutenant-Governor encouraged a 
hope, that through further efforts the Hoylands 
might still be found; observing, more particu- 
larly, that as market-day was on the morrow, 
(when so many country-people would come into 
town from so many directions, and so many of 
the towns-people be about,) a favourable chance 
would then offer for inquiry : and that even the 
bellman might be employed) to cry the name of 
these settlers, and of the child, and to tell a little 
of his story to the crowd : all of which, sooner 
or later, might help the parties to the discovery 



AT THE CAPE. 211 

of each other : " In the meantime," (he finished,) 
"in so singular a case, you will make me an- 
swerable, Mr. Commandant, for what expenses 
may occur. The young emigrant is a subject 
of the Crown ; and, since, in this remote tract of 
the empire, he has lost his natural father, and is 
cut off from his mother, and has not found his 
godmother, we must make him find, as well as 
we can, that he has godmother, and mother, and 
father, in the servants of the King. We should 
otherwise but ill fill up the place of the common 
father of his people !" Charles was soothed by 
so tender a reception, and exhilarated under his 
confidence restored; and slept calmly till the 
market-morning, exhausted with his previous 
cares, and more than satisfied with the approach- 
ing prospect. Awaking, however, early, he hur- 
ried into the market-place, before the bell had 
rung for commencing business, and almost be- 
fore any of the country-people had arrived with 
their fruits and flowers, and horses, and cattle ; 
or any of the towns-people, to show their knives, 
and beads, and broad-cloths. 

The Lieutenant-Governor had advised that 
the bellman should not receive his orders till to- 
ward ten or eleven o'clock in the day ; and that, 
in the meantime, the question should be asked 
among all those settlers and farmers, Dutch as 



'212 THE ENGLISH BOY 

well as English, who were known to be best ac- 
quainted with their respective districts; a duty 
which the Commandant did not omit to see fully 
discharged, though without the least succe<>. 
Charles, too, was busy, and with the same ill- 
fortune, in his attacks upon all he met, to tell 
whether Martha Hoyland lived anywhere near 
their respective places ; till at length the mul- 
titude which thronoed the market somewhat 
abashed his confidence, and endless negatives 
repressed his ardour, and numerous novelties 
and sights half diverted his attention. 

The morning was fine ; and if, even the day 
before, the streets and esplanade, and other open 
spaces, had appeared to him in no small degree 
alive with passengers, business, and amusement^: 
he had not, now, sufficient eyes to gaze upon all 
that was to be seen within the precincts of this 
infant and still rural city. 



AT THE CAPE. '21 3 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 



A happy rural seat it was, 

Of various view. Milton. 

But, the town being now thus full, and no in- 
formation even yet obtained, the black bellman 
was instructed in his story, and sent, with his 
shouting throat, and clamorous metal instrument, 
into every quarter of the market; and Charles 
(too deeply interested in the discoveries which 
this important person was intended to make, or 
to cause to be made, to wait in privacy the result 
of all the bustle he was to occasion,) hung closely 
to his side, and thus enabled the fluent Mozam- 
bique to add many a striking, and even many a 
pathetic touch, to his short but numerous ha- 
rangues. " O yes ! O yes !" he would begin, 
according to the English ceremony of his office ; 
but, presently, pointing to his companion, or 



214 THE ENGLISH BOY 

setting him upon his shoulder, " Here," he 
would add, "is the fatherless child himself, 
without a friend in all the world till he finds hifl 
own godmother, Martha Hoyland, who lives 
somewhere among the lions and the elephant^ ! 
Who knows Martha Hoyland, and her husband, 
and her three children; and will tell the noble 
Commandant where to send this poor fatherless 
child, by name Charles Laleham, and just arrived 
in these parts from England, to find his god- 
mother, to feed him?" In this case, as before, 
many attempts were made among the crowd, to 
ascertain the exact names of the parties men- 
tioned, and many promising suggestions of the 
desired communication were begun ; but all to no 
final benefit, through any actual knowledge of 
the Hoylands. Several tongues, in all the lan- 
guages, expressed a momentary persuasion that 
they could give the answer wanted; but each, 
after inquiry and explanation, grew silent, and 
left it only to a shake of the head, or pitying 
look, to conclude with an acknowledgment of 
total ignorance of the being of any such settlers 
as Hoylands ! But, if the crowds knew nothing 
of the Hoylands, they did not know the less of 
human wants and charities. Charles, and the 
Negro, for his use, were laden with gifts and 
alms. Some gave him eggs, and others fruit, 



AT THE CAPE. '215 

t 

and others flesh and fowl; some, copper stuivers, 
and others silver pieces ; and even the Caffres, 
(generally more fond to ask than give,) made him 
carry away, in his hands, a finely-plaited basket 
of curds. 

Groups, in the meantime, were continually 
forming and dispersing, formed of Dutch boors 
and English settlers, in junction or apart ; the 
individuals discussing with each other, whether 
this or that name could be meant, or this or that 
family answered the description, or this or that 
place could contain, or had contained, the 
homestead wanted for the boy ? No solicitude, 
however, was it ever so heartfelt; no memory, 
was it ever so strong ; no research, was it ever 
so eager, seemed to forward the end in view; 
and the market was thinning, and the unsold 
goods, and fruits, and cattle, were removing and 
driving off, and the bellman had ceased his pro- 
clamations ; and yet nothing had been learned. 
Charles, under the burden of his gifts, was still 
light of limb, compared with the heavy heart 
within him ! 

It was, now, however, when every chance 
seemed to have closed, that the broad light of 
day appeared to flash at once over the dark land- 
scape. An English settler pursued the bellman 
and the orphan down a long street, which led 



216 THE ENGLISH BOY 

from the market-place to the Commandant'-, 
whither both the latter were on their way, to 
relate the want of every immediate discovery; 
and when the panting islander reached the ob- 
jects of his errand, he told them that he knew 
Martha Hoy land and her husband as well as he 
knew himself, and that they were living on a 
pleasant farm, upon the other side of Bathurst ! 
It was true that it was a period of three years 
since he had ceased to be their neighbour, and 
had fixed himself in the opposite direction 
to Graham's Town, besides a twelvemonth 's 
absence at Cape Town, whence he had lately 
come back to the eastward ; but they were in- 
dustrious and thriving when he last saw them, and 
in high health and spirits; and he had even heard 
them speak of their expecting the Lalehams out, 
to settle near them; and expressly of Charles, 
Mrs. Hoyland's godson ! Besides this, he had seen 
a settler, who had seen them, just before he left 
Graham's Town for Cape Town; and, at Cape 
Town, he had seen another, who had talked with 
a man, who had met another, who knew a farmer, 
who fell in with a Dutchman, who had a Hotten- 
tot herdsman, who had a brother, or a brother-in- 
law, who lived with a Scotchman, who told an Irish 
half-pay officer, — that though Hoyland's corn 
was a little the worse for rust, there were some 



AT THE CAPE. 217 

of the primest beasts upon his farm, of the whole 
country round ! To all this, he added, that 
there was a man at market, whom he knew well, 
whose farm was a third of the way to Bathurst, 
who would take the boy with him, and push him 
on, for the rest of the journey; but, then, he 
had not spoken to the man about it yet, and the 
latter was now yoking his team, and singing-out 
for his parting glass! Charles sprung awav, 
with rapture, at this reward of all the day's en- 
deavours, to the house of the Commandant, 
where the Englishman repeated his good news, 
which he told even a third time, upon being 
taken, by the Commandant to the Lieutenant- 
Governor ; while the Mozambique bellman, not 
without sympathy in the good fortune of the 
child, as well as pride in the happy influences of 
his united bell and tongue, obtained the honour- 
able commission of hastening to the farmer who 
was to take the road toward Bathurst, and of bear- 
ging him either to wait a few minutes for his 
friend, the Englishman, or to take the Comman- 
dant's house in his way out of town. 

Everything, now, seemed so well ascertained, 
and so free from difficulty; the inquiry for a 
distant settler was so simple an event; and the 
answer obtained to the inquiry was so much to 
be expected in its nature, and was here so circum- 

vol. in. u 



218 THE ENGLISH BOY 

stantial in its detail ; and withal, the opportunity 
of forwarding the unfortunate and impatient boy 
that very evening was so very lucky ; that the 
Commandant and the Lieutenant-Governor had 
little left to do, besides congratulating each other 
upon the success of their mutual endeavours to 
promote the object which had now been ob- 
tained. They bestowed many thanks, and even 
a small reward, upon their English informant, 
and took his more particular account of the 
situation of Hoyland's farm, and its distance 
upon the other side of Bathurst ; nor was this 
wholly accomplished before the friendly waggon, 
(in front of which, conspicuous for the yellow 
handkerchief which bound his head, and for his 
silent but uplifted bell, stood the officiating Mo- 
zambique,) came rolling after its ten oxen, straight 
toward the house of the Commandant. The 
Englishman explained matters to his friend, who 
cheerfully undertook the fare to his own farm, 
and also to forward the boy to Bathurst ; premi- 
sing however, that he knew nothing of the Hoy- 
lands, — as might easily happen, because he knew 
nothing of the whole country In vend that 
town, and scarcely anything of the town itself. 
Charles, whose pockets were full, (though not 
entirely with the most valuable metals,) and 
which the Lieutenant-Governor further enriched 



AT THE CAPE. 2L9 

with a silver dollar, gave all his eatables, and all 
his copper, to the Mozambique ; and now that 
he thought want no longer threatened him, he 
even wished the Commandant to take the rest of 
what he had received in the market-place, and 
give it to the poor or sick; but the latter, upon 
the contrary, advised him to keep it in his pocket 
carefully, because some accident or delay might 
make him need it, even before he saw Martha 
Hoyland. Then, his chest having been placed in 
the waggon, he took the side of the farmer who 
drove it, in an ecstasy of spirits; in which the 
Lieutenant-Governor sympathizing, and willing 
to indulge it, as well as turn to a loyal account, 
reminded him, (as the farmer was throwing out 
his whip to the furthest spann of oxen, and the 
wheels beginning to move round,) that he, per- 
haps, owed his luck to the Government officers, 
and therefore, bade him wave his cap three 
times, and cry, " God save the King!" The cry 
was repeated, too, by the little crowd of mothers 
and sisters, and fathers, and brothers, which had 
gathered at the news of Charles's happy dis- 
covery, and of his departure by the waggon ; 
and which mingled its rejoicings and shaking of 
hands with Charles, with its applauses of the 
Lieutenant-Governor and the Commandant. 
Charles's new conveyance was still both 

u 2 



220 THE ENGLISH BOY 

owned and driven by a Dutch boor, a circum- 
stance which the more easily accounted for the 
unacquaintance of the latter with the English 
settlersandsettlements in andabout Bathurst, and 
especially upon its eastern side. Even the farm 
occupied by himself had been one of the most 
out-lying, and the most exposed to Caffre mo- 
lestation, under the Dutch masters of the colony: 
built, arid grazed, and ploughed, as it had been, 
in direct trespass upon the soil and rights of 
those plundered and persecuted natives; while 
with the precarious and harassing tenure under 
which, anciently, though not at present, it had 
consequently been held, the rude and desolate 
appearance of its house and appurtenances, (a^ 
Charles, upon reaching it found,) in every respect 
agreed. The appearance, too, of this boor, cor- 
responded, from the first, with the dwelling to 
which he was returning; for, upon the top of a fine 
manly figure, with a bright black eye, darting 
fire and animation, a noble forehead, and a blade 
bushy beard, he wore a slouched hat which nearly 
covered his face, and general habiliments equally 
coarse in texture and slovenly in adjustment; 
carrying upon his shoulder, when he left his 
waggon, a gun of the largest size, and an enor- 
mous powder-flask, Formed of a bullock's horn. 
highly polished. 



AT THE CAPE. 221 

The boor spoke but little English; and his 
head, as he drove his waggon, and as he looked 
after the horses, and oxen and sheep, which he 
had either purchased in the market, or brought 
away unsold, was full of calculations upon his 
profit and loss, and upon his bargains and sales 
to come. Charles, therefore, when the wagons 
had ascended the high hills upon the eastern 
side of Graham's Town, and when they were on 
their descent toward the plains and hollows, to- 
ward the Great Fish-river, gladly took to his 
feet, to sport along the road, and chatter with 
the Hottentots and slaves. But this freedom 
arrived late. The road had wound for some 
length along the valley ; and when the ascent 
commenced, the setting sun was already pouring 
upon the hills and upon the valleys, and upon the 
endless variety of shrubs which covered them, the 
richest flood of orange light. The air, in the 
meantime, was of the balmiest softness ; the 
eastern sky without the appearance of a cloud ; 
the shrubs were dispersing a fragrance which 
became increased, if the men or cattle disturbed 
or trod upon their branches, or if the wheels of 
the waggon, encroaching upon the sides of 
the half-beaten road, crushed them as they 
went, and expressed their juices. Along the 
grass, between the bushes, there sometimes ran 

u3 



'2-22 THE ENGLISH BOY 

two or three dosses, and across the road a rotel, 
the former from their supper of leaves and 
herbs, and the latter from a meal of honey. From 
the bushes themselves came the song of the 
Cape canary, and the single notes of many 
other birds; and upon the slope of the hills, and 
on the plains below, were bush-bucks and other 
antelopes grazing, sometimes solitary, and some- 
times in herds ; while in the bottom, and close to 
the streams that watered it, were blue groups of 
gnoos, feeding as they moved ; and herds of hun- 
dreds upon hundreds of cows and oxen, lowing 
as they answered the shells blown to them by 
their owners, and as they walked slowly to the 
craals in which they were to be sheltered for the 
night. On the way, too, the party met, at 
greater or less intervals, a few travellers bent 
homeward like themselves, but to whom Gra- 
ham's Town was the point in view. In a short 
time, the moon, visible before the setting of the 
Bun, became the ruling luminary : and now. 
except for the fitful cries of the wild animals. 
the gentle grinding of the wheels, and the occa- 
sional laughter, and occasional songs, of the 
slaves and Hottentots of the parry, nothing 
could surpass the stillness of the night ! The 
songs were of love, of war, and of the ehace : 
and some of them such as the Hottentots had 



AT THE CAPE. 223 

learned of the Caffres, though these latter are 
less melodious singers than themselves. By the 
side, however, of a brook, the oxen were at 
length unyoked ; the fires lighted ; the supper 
eaten: and the beds of earth, or else of skins, 
betaken to by the travellers. 

The forenoon of the following day brought 
the Dutchman to his farm. It lay among ver- 
dant hills, upon the hither side of the Fish- 
river, but overlooking its transparent waters; 
such as, from space to space, formed pools in 
the otherwise dry but expanded channel. The 
homestead stood exposed upon the waste, a group 
of scattered and unsightly buildings, without 
enclosure of any kind. Its own exposed and 
lofty situation (so different from the hollow and 
even marshy dells, commonly chosen by the 
Dutch, not for their houses only, but for their 
towns also) had been originally adopted for safety 
from the Caffres ; while its garden, for the 
advantage of water, was planted afar off. Close 
to a long: building: which formed the dwelling:- 
house, Charles alighted, and was presently in- 
troduced to the Vrouw, with whom, at dinner, 
her husband consulted as to the means of send- 
ing him to Bathurst. It was to Charles's sor- 
row that he found there was no chance of going 
further the same day ; and that his only choice 



•2*21 THE ENGLI8H BOY 

was to console himself with the information given 
by the Vrouw, — that Diederick Cnyler, the lion- 
hunter, with his waggon, and some horses, and a 
pony, would stop at the farm the next morning, 
on his way from the upper country, homeward, 
and to the Caffre Fair, through Bathurst; and 
that she had no doubt of Diederick's willingness 
to help the boy on his journey, especially as the 
child had money enough with him, to give him a 
dollar for his trouble. To all her husband's in- 
quiries, in the meantime, as to her knowledge of 
the Englishman Hoyland, or his farm, she re- 
plied with the most depressing negatives. Like 
himself, she knew not, nor had she heard of 
either. Even the account of the family, and of 
the direction in which they were settled, which 
the boor had received from his English market- 
friend at Graham's Town, afforded no help to 
their recollections ! 

Charles, who felt somewhat sorrowfully as to 
everything else that he heard upon this occa- 
sion, yet caught with pleasure at the mention of 
a lion-hunter and a pony. He was B8 curious 
as he was fearful upon the subject of lions, his 
adventure with a brace of which, in the woods 
near Blouveldt's, had never left his memory . 
and often brought back to him uneasy sensa- 
tions : while, with respect to a pony, the very 



AT THE CAPE. 225 

few instances in which he had hitherto been 
placed upon the back of a horse, had made im- 
pressions of so opposite a kind to the former, 
that he dwelt, for even hours succeeding, upon 
the joyful probability of his riding, with Diede- 
rick' s consent, upon the pony of the party, all 
the following: day. Consoled in this manner, 
and sent early to bed, he slept as soundly as if 
he had been without a care. 

Punctual in his arrangements, Diederick was 
at the farm at breakfast-time, where he listened 
with good- will to the proposal that he should 
take Charles with him to Bathurst. Diederick 
was the elder of two brothers, both of them re- 
nowned for lion-hunting ; and who, as Charles 
discovered from the anecdotes related at break- 
fast, and of w r hich he devoured every word, (al- 
most to the neglect of his bread-and-butter,) had 
more than once saved each other's lives, in the 
course of their rencounters with the monarch of 
the forest. The lion-hunter was a man of still 
more attractive appearance than even the boor 
that entertained him, now that the latter was di- 
vested of his coarse garments, and large slouched 
hat ; and the Vrouw told Charles, that Diederick's 
brother, Christian, was as tall, as strong, and 
as well-looking as the former, the elder of the 
two. Diederick was under forty years of age. 



226 THE ENGLISH BOY 

above six feet high, and of a remarkably intelli- 
gent and good expression of feature ; but Charles 
fancied to himself that Christian must be still 
nobler and more beautiful to look at, when he 
heard talk of one of the occasions upon which, 
with the coolest and most exalted courage, 
he had rescued his brother from a danger 
in which an immediate and the worst event 
seemed to have become certain. One day, the 
brothers were upon their horses together, when 
Diederick marked, as he thought, the exact spot 
where he saw a lion couch in concealment; upon 
which he rode forward, intending to alight at t 
convenient distance for shooting at his prey. 
But he had mistaken the ambush of the lion, which, 
as he advanced, suddenly sprung upon him from 
behind a large stone, or mass of rock, and bore 
down both himself and his horse upon the earth. 
He lay senseless from the fall, and the lion sprung 
upon him again, and would doubtless have de- 
stroyed him on the instant: but that his attention 
was now caught by the approach of Christian, 
who, afraid of firing while too far oft', lest he 
should miss his aim, and hurt his brother, came 
boldly up to both, as both were together on the 
ground, and shot the lion through the heart ! 

Diederick's replies to the intimation of his 
host, that the boy's journey to Bathurst was in 



AT THE CAPE. 227 

search of certain English friends, came upon 
Charles's ears far less agreeably, and almost 
quite as fearfully, as his tales of lion-hunting. He 
knew nothing (as he at first said) of the name of 
Hoyland, either at the town spoken of, or for 
miles around; and yet, upon further efforts to 
remember something of such settlers as these 
described to him, he thought, though still with 
doubt, that there had once been such, some fifty 
miles to the eastward of Bathurst ; but that they 
had left their farm, he knew not how, nor when, 
and hardly for what place, but at a distance, as he 
half believed, still further up the country. In all 
this, however, as he professed, he might still be 
telling a wrong story ; the Hoylands might still 
be living near to Bathurst, and even nearer than 
fifty miles ; he might be mistaken, both as to the 
person, and as to the farm; and there was nothing 
that remained to be done, but to take Charles 
safely to that spot, and there inquire, of the peo- 
ple inhabiting it, what they knew of the friends 
whom he was seeking? Diederick's oxen had 
been baited in their yokes; the long whip re- 
sounded ; and the waggon creeked over its de- 
parting wheels; while its master, cheerfully set- 
ting Charles upon his prize, the pony, and arming 
himself with his long gun and powder-horn, 
followed his team and servants, Charles by his 

7 



228 TUT. ENGLISH BO* 

side; and from whom the answers required of liim 
never ceased, concerning lions and lion-hunting. 
The lion depends much upon water, both for the 
slaking of its own thirst, and for the invitation of 
drinking-places, to the grazing animals which 
are its food, and where it can hide itself, to seize 
upon them ; and Diederick related to Charles, 
that such was the strength of limb which the 
ravenous monarch possessed, that he has known 
one of them to go forty miles to drink, his 
track having been traced by his footsteps. 
Diederick knew nothing of the jackal, a< the 
"lion's provider;" and he believed lions to be 
very capable of providing for themselves. He 
had heard and seen enough (he said) of yelping 
jackals; but not as the particular acquaintances of 
the mighty lion. The jackal, (or sha'cal,) we 
may remark, is the tropical substitute, upon the 
old continent, for the northern fox of the same 
region ; inhabiting the whole of Africa, as well 
as Syria and Arabia, and, the southern parts of 
Persia and India : and throughout all those 
countries, too, of the jackal, wherever there is 
water, there are lions. 

The road, taken by the travellers toward Ba- 
thurst, descended first toward the bed of the Great 
Fish-river, which it was necessary to pa^. The 
day was hot, and, in any place denied the mic- 



AT THE CAPE. '229 

cour of the wind, the sun raged as with the heat 
of a furnace ; but the sky and air were exqui- 
sitely clear, and the sea-breeze, blowing from 
the south-west, played freshly over the grass, and 
through the low shrubs, which, in circular patches, 
adorned the surface, and gave their fragrance to 
the atmosphere. Here, as in so many other of 
the sylvan scenes through which Charles had 
now passed in Southern Africa, everything was 
wild, and yet everything had that appearance 
which men suppose to result from human art. 
But it is the beasts of the field that, in these 
places, are the artists. Hour after hour, the Euro- 
pean stranger traverses unending lawns, and rises 
and descends over undulating hills, green and 
smooth, and spotted, here and there, with circular 
breadths of shrubbery, clipped and low at the 
edges, and growing higher as they recede to 
their centres ; and, here and there, also, are 
clumps of the large yellow-wood and coral trees, 
and of the evergreen oak of the Cape ; and, in- 
cessantly, he half expects to discover, through 
some vista, or at the turn of some hill, or of 
some grove, the mansion to which all this park- 
like expanse of herb and wood belongs; alive, 
moreover, as it is, with herds of gem-bucks, or 
of hart-beasts, or of some other pasturing spe- 
cies ! But all is the sole work, and single abode, 

VOL. III. x 



2.30 THE ENGLISH BOY 

of nature and her furry species. It is nature 
which spreads the herbage and lifts the wood; as 
it is nature, also, which flats the plain, and raises 
the hill, and sinks the dell; and it is her four- 
footed natives and families alone, which shave 
the grass, and clip the trees, and round the 
shrubberies and bushes into circles. Of much 
of this, indeed, our own English fields and wastes 
supply similar examples. The quadrupeds, and 
likewise the birds, are everywhere the gardeners 
and farmers. They manure, and tread, and turn 
up the ground, and plant a thousand fruit-trees 
and flowering plants. The grazing of the qua- 
drupeds, again, crops the grass, and keeps it 
short, and of an evenness of height, which could 
be as little explained as it might be expected, 
did we not take notice of the closeness and regu- 
larity with which they bite their vegetable 
viands ; and did we not recollect that the lower 
they eat toward the roots, the richer and the 
sweeter are the stalks and blades. In browsing 
upon the young shoots of shrubs and trees, and 
especially upon such as, when better grown, 
are hard or prickly, they nibble, contrariwise, 
at the topmost points, thus checking their rise; 
and this in proportion as they are nearer to the 
outward edge of the shrub or clump, or more 
within the reach ; so, that, in all. thev eneou- 



AT THE CAPE. 231 

rage a form approaching, every way, with more 
or less precision, to a circle, as well horizontal as 
vertical, or to a half globe, or hemisphere. We 
say, again, that examples of all this clipping, 
and shaving, and trimming trees and bushes into 
figure, (in which, as we see, neither our modern, 
nor our ancient gardeners are the sole adepts,) 
present themselves even in our own fields and 
wastes; and especially where the furze-bushes 
and holly-trees are frequented by our sheep and 
cows. Our holly-trees, indeed, are prickly only 
in self-defence against these hungry shearers; 
and their leaves, therefore, as we daily see, grow 
prickly only to such a height upon the tree as 
is within the reach of cattle ! It is among the 
consequences, likewise, of this constant exposure 
to the browsing and grazing of so vast and va- 
rious an assemblage of herbivorous animals as 
those of Southern Africa, (aided, perhaps, by the 
comparative dryness of the soil and air, which 
moderates the force of the production;) that 
this and some other countries, in their simply 
natural estate, display such spacious intervals of 
open ground, between their woods and single 
trees, the suckers and young growths being 
always so much exposed to removal by the con- 
stant working of such hosts of teeth ! But these 
are the adaptations of nature, between her sur- 

x 2 



'23*2 THE ENGLISH BOY 

faces and soils, her animals and plants; and BO 
possible was it for the garden in Eden to be 
beautiful, even as God "planted it," and before 
" the Lord God took the man, and put him 
into the garden of Eden, to dress it, and to ke> p 
it:" employments, by the way, for " the man;" 
which negative the imagination of those who teach, 
that the loss of Paradise was a loss of a life of 
indolence, instead of a fertile soil only, and of 
fairer fruits and flowers. But even without the 
hands of " the man," Eden, like South Africa, 
might have afforded a garden arrayed in all that 
beauty of prospect, (as well as enriched with other 
endowments, including apparent and real culti- 
vation,) of which we have now been speaking. 



AT THE CAPE. 238 



CHAPTER XL. 

I cried aloud, and said, Where are those that I loved ; 
where are they ? And Echo answered me, Where are they ? 

Jacoby. 

Winding, between the hills, down a declivity 
considerably steep, and in front of a pros- 
pect which made the approach magnificent, 
Diederick, his waggon, his horses, and his 
young guest, descended toward that part of the 
Great Fish-river where it receives the additional 
waters of the Cap. The tide was in, and the 
two rivers full to the tops of their banks ; a 
sight rather unfrequent in these regions, during 
the fine months of the year, when the channels 
of all the rivers of great width are more com- 
monly dry, except for the deep pools which 
glitter in them here and there. The streams were 
alike and perfectly transparent; and flowed amid 
the swells of verdant hills, sometimes oversha- 
dowing them with lofty evergreens ; and down- 

x3 



2:34 THE ENGLISH BOY 

ward the horizon finished with the wide Southern 
Ocean, roaring from wave to wave, and flinging 
its increasing surf. The sea-birds were pursuing 
the chace, up and down the surface of the stream ; 
and carrying the fish they caught to their Bests, 
among the varied hollows and projections of the 
mouldering sandstone rocks. On the sides and 
ledges of the same rocks, dasses and their brood* 
were either running in great fright at the ap- 
proach of the travellers, and disappearing in 
their holes ; or else, in seats of conscious security, 
sporting from crevice to crevice, and from led., 
to ledge, hiding and seeking with their small com- 
panions, sitting upon their haunches, or playing 
a thousand antics ; with now and then a skirmish, 
a flaw of temper, or a trial of strength ; a grin, 
and a blow with their cat-like paws; a fixed in- 
tent, for this moment, to conquer in battle; and, 
the next moment, a scampering away upon 
both sides, and nothing again thought of but 
gambols ! 

Ascending, next, a partial rise, upon the hank 
of the Fish-river, and embosomed, now, them- 
selves, in the towering hills, they travelled under 
the scorching sky: and, dazzled with the reflected 
sunshine of the water, moved slowly upward, to- 
ward the CarVre-drift, or ford, they were to CTOSS, 
and at which they had no sooner arrived, than 



AT THE CAPE. 235 

they dipped into the current. The tide, in the 
time which they spent upon the road, had com- 
pletely fallen, and now was even about return- 
ing-. Diederick had regulated his movements 
by his knowledge of the hours of high and low 
water; and delay was improper at the ford, 
because, soon after the flow, the depth and 
force of the element were sufficient to create 
more or less of danger. Charles, whom the heat 
of noon, and of the embosomed valley, had long 
since forced to resign his pony for the waggon, 
and even for the canvas which shaded, in part, 
the latter; awoke to behold, with mingled plea- 
sure and alarm, the accustomed oxen take the 
water, and draw the waggon into the swiftest 
part of the stream. He grew more apprehen- 
sive yet, when, as it seemed to him, the oxen 
and waggon, arrived in the very midst, stood 
still, as if unable to make further progress ; a fear 
from which he was not relieved, till, in spite of 
what he had thought his fixed position in the cen- 
tre of the river, the opposite bank became visi- 
bly more near ; the oxen, lifting their freed limbs 
from the shallower bed, dashed the spray before 
them as they went; the sounding liquid was left 
behind ; and even the wheels began to ascend 
the dry and pebbly shore. It is a uniform delu- 
sion upon the eye, that the rapidity of the motion 



236 THE ENGLISH BOY 

in a river, either upward or downward, mak 
man or beast that is crossing it, appear to him 
or itself to be stationary. 

Zureveldt, or the district of Albany, had been 
left behind, upon the western side of the river, 
and that of Bathurst, or the frontier of Caffre- 
land, or Caffraria, under the Dutch, was now 
entered ; but the town of Bathurst was yet far 
off. The district of Bathurst embraces the coun- 
try which was ceded to the English by the 
Caffres, after their unsuccessful attack upon 
Graham's Town, in the war of the year 1819 ; the 
last, as it was lately trusted, that could occur 
between that people and the present owners of 
the colony. Zureveldt had long been contested 
between the Caffres and Dutch ; and, in the 
year which has been mentioned, the former 
made a serious attack upon its new English 
masters. A serjeant of the Hottentot corps, 
returning, one evening, from patrole, fell in 
with a small party of Caffres ; one of whom 
called to him, and gave him notice, in good 
Dutch, that the next morning, when the sun 
(pointing to the eastward) was at Mich a height. 
they would be in GT&ham'8 Town, and show its 
people what fair fighting was ! The Serjeant re- 
ported what he had heard : but the whole wai 
treated as a Caffre jest. Fortunately, however. 



AT THE CAPE. 237 

an inspection of the military at the station had 
been previously ordered for that day ; for the 
Caffres, about nine thousand in number, and 
true to their appointment, covered, at the hour 
they had said, the hills which encompass the 
town, nor was it till after some time, that they 
could be brought within the reach of the guns. 
When, however, the slaughter at length com- 
menced, their flight was speedy ; and they were 
forced to abandon the bodies of several hundred 
of their dead, both on the hills, and in the woods 
beyond. 

Caffreland, therefore, at the present day, does 
not commence till upon the boundary of Ba- 
thurst, on one part of the line of which the Eng- 
lish have built and occupied Fort Wiltshire, with 
barracks and other appurtenances ; and under the 
guns of which, with a peaceful and admirable 
policy, they have established a Caffre fair, or 
market, which is holden upon two days in every 
week. Commerce, and the arts of peace, are 
thus called to the double task of improving and 
assisting, not one nation alone, but many of the 
west and north as well ; and of promoting secu- 
rity to the settlements and settlers through the 
same medium. The Dutch, instead of seeking 
to exalt and conciliate the Caffres, hunted them 
exactly as they hunted the beasts of the same 



238 THE ENGLISH BOY 

regions; and the result was an incessant blood- 
shed, robbery, and devastation ; the deepest 
hatred, and the conflict of the fiercest passions; 
upon the one side and the other. The English, 
by an opposite course, have sought to establish 
peace ; and, while displaying their own virtues, 
they have found out those of the enemy. Settlers 
and soldiers unite in testifying to those good 
qualities and general merits of the Caifres which 
contrast with their faults. A traffic, amountin 
annually, to the value, of, perhaps, fifty thou- 
sand pounds sterling, is even now pursued be- 
tween the English and the Caffres, the latter of 
whom buy and sell again, to nations more re- 
mote ; and this traffic, the commercial value of 
which is the least part of its importance, would 
be much greater than it is, did not a chief in the 
interior, hostile to the Caffres, and who boasts 
that he will ere long subdue everything between 
himself and the English frontier, maintain a 
line of exclusion, from Port Natal, north-west- 
ward, to Latacoo ; and were not the Caffres srill 
indifferent to almost every article of European 
production, save only beads and buttons. They 
have not yet discovered, like the Negro nations 
of Central Africa, the value of English needles ; 
and a Caffre woman, who. nevertheless, sold 
some platted baskets for a shawl, had yet no 



AT THE CAPE. 239 

other use for the garment, than immediately to 
tear it into pieces, which latter she distributed 
among her companions at the fair, as wrappers 
for holding beads ! 

Charles had no sooner crossed the Fish-river, 
than even the herbage taught him to know that 
he was in a country of another surface and still 
better soil. The sour-grass, of a reddish hue, 
had disappeared; and he travelled amid the 
sweet pastures into which, at every risk, and by 
perpetual trespass, the Dutch farmers of the 
Zureveldt, except in summer, were formerly in 
use to drive their cattle, to feed at Caffre cost. 
The sw r eet-grass has a resemblance to the Euro- 
pean florin, creeping and forming knots in the 
manner of that grass; but its continuance is 
short-lived and uncertain. Two days of rain 
will cause it to grow some inches, but, in twelve 
days more, it will have withered, and been dried 
up like chaff; so, that while Albany has the 
inconvenience of sour-grass, Bathurst is even 
threatened with no grass at all ! The general 
country, in the meantime, was still more beau- 
tiful, to Charles's eye, here, than in the portion 
which he had seen of Albany. The road to 
Bathurst lay through what appeared only one 
boundless park, except where it rather looked like 
pleasure-grounds. No shrubberies could have 



240 THE ENGLISH BOY 

more the air of accomplished art, than those which 
covered the banks of the delightful little river Cap. 
They glowed with flowers and berries of the 
brightest and most varied colours. The singular 
and gaudy strelitzia-regina grew there in richest 
luxuriance; and, high on the craggy hills, the 
chandelier-aloe expanded its sunny branches. 
The birds were gayer than the flowers, or more 
vivid from the quickness and multitude of their 
motions. The lory blazed amid the bright green 
leaves which waved as it alighted among them ; 
and paroquets, in flights, and king-fishers, and 
woodpeckers, and sprews, and sugar-birds of a 
dark glossy green, reflecting the sun's rays, 
thronged in all their beautiful and dazzling plu- 
mages, and filled the eyes with rapture ; while, 
to the ear, the song of the Cape canary, and the 
cooing of the pigeons, mingled with the short 
notes and whistles of whole flocks of others. 
They were watchful, in the meantime, of the 
chattering monkeys, and gliding snakes : or 
placed themselves habitually in situations whore 
they were free from danger. 

Presently, the country .spread abroad more 
widely. Scattered over the green lawn, dark 
clumps of lofty and thick troos arose from space 
to space, and clusters of the tall and light mi- 
mosa, with its balls of fringe, composed <>t yell< 



AT THE CAPE. '241 

blossoms, more yellow for the shining sun ; and 
the white stems of the somewhat palm-like eu- 
phorbias, towering thirty feet in height. Beyond 
these, too, were the gentle tintings of the distant 
mountains, relieved by the deep azure of a sky 
in Africa ! Antelopes, in herds, and in all the 
African variety, grazed upon the herbage, or 
chewed the cud under the shelter of the trees; 
and once, during the morning, Charles had sight 
of a troop of ostriches, fifteen or twenty in num- 
ber. At the sound, however, of the wheels of 
the waggon, the birds, distant as they were, 
hurried away from their feeding-ground ; half 
running, and half flying, and stretching fore- 
most their small heads, and camel-like long 
necks \ 

A country so fertile and so lovely, so full of 
game, and so adapted to pasture and to cultiva- 
tion, was never parted with by the CafTres but 
with grief. They had an eye for its beauties, as 
well as a dependence upon its products; and 
even now, when they travel through it as the 
land of another, they sigh to remember that it 
was their's in their infancy, and in the times of 
their fathers ! Many names of places, in the CafTre 
language, continue monuments either of their 

1 The name of ostrich implies "camel-bird." 
VOL. III. Y 



242 THE ENGLISH Hov 

admiration, or of their affection, for the scenes 
which they distinguish. 

The Caffres, in the meantime, as we have 
said, and as parts of our story have given reason 
to believe, suffer, and have suffered, from the 
Europeans, only what themselves inflict and 
have inflicted upon the Bosjesmen or Wild Hot- 
tentots, who seem the really ancient possessors 
of the whole of this extremity of Africa, from 
east to west, and to have been driven westward 
by bands descending southward along the coast ; 
as, now, the nations in the train of Chaca are 
threatening to overrun the Caffres upon the one 
side, while the Europeans compress them upon 
the other. The more ancient names of places 
are still Bosjesman or Hottentot ; as also are 
the monuments (the rude monuments which 
have existence) of every other kind. If, looking 
to their complexion especially, the Bosjesmen are 
of the same race with the Chinese, the historical 
adventures which, at some distant era, planted 
them thus far from their native seats, might fur- 
nish, if discoverable, an interesting chapter in 
the annals of mankind ; and one in no respect 
more difficult than that of the arrival of the Cafrei 
themselves, or, in the respective countries, that 
of the populations of Polynesia and Australia. 

The tragedy of our pages, in the meantime, 



AT THE CAPE. 243 

presses closely upon us for admission ; and, divert 
ourselves as we will, with topics which delay its 
arrival, the black moment, but for very little 
longer, will be deferred ! The travellers en- 
camped at night upon the plains that we have 
been describing, and pursued their way, at the 
earliest morning, toward the town of Bathurst. 
Within two or three hours after starting, they 
reached the deserted dwellings of a town that 
was for some time projected by the English go- 
vernment, and denominated Fredericksburg; and 
was also celebrated, in the country, for its neigh- 
bourhood to the scene of a very fatal issue of an 
elephant-hunt. The mention of an elephant-hunt 
made Charles as eager, for good part of the day, 
to hear what Diederick could tell him about ele- 
phants, as he had before been eager about lions; 
and the same story made him look about, too, as 
he went, to see if no elephant would show himself 
to the waggon. But Diederick was less fond of 
hunting elephants than lions, though eminently 
skilled in both; and Charles, as the distance from 
Bathurst became less, grew once more too im- 
patient for the discovery of Martha Hoyland, to 
let even the elephants engage him long. From 
Diederick, all his efforts could gain no answer 
respecting his godmother, more satisfactory than 
had been given at the boor's ; but he fixed him, 

y 2 



2-14 THE ENGLISH BOY 

at the least, to this admission, that Martha Hoy- 
land might possibly be living, even within five 
hundred miles of Bathurst, and yet the farm 
have remained unknown to Diederiek ! 

Charles was again upon the pony, and had 
ambled very comfortably, for some time, by the 
side of the boor and his Hottentots; when, ju^t 
upon the top of a slope which descended to the 
small river, that, a few miles below, almost sur- 
rounds the site of Fredericksburg, he passed the 
edge of a clump of trees and brushwood, the par- 
tial shadow of which he found exceedingly 
agreeable. At the same moment, Diederiek, and 
those about him, drew up to the waggon, to 
lock one of its wheels, and to steady the oxen, 
for the descent; and, at the same moment also, a 
violent rustling among the leaves and branches 
scared Charles and his pony ; the latter sus- 
pecting a lion, which has a decided taste for 
horseflesh ; and the former an elephant, which 
was the latest monster in his imagination ! A 
second moment had not arrived, before the pony 
was galloping down the hill, upon the side of 
which Charles, who had lost both bridle and seat, 
was rolling, and toward the bottom of which 
the pony himself fell: just in time to receive 
Charles, as he turned over, and save him from an 
actual tumble into the stream, and upon its 



AT THE CAPE. 245 

rocky bed. A quagga and her foal, terrified in 
the brushwood at the passing of the travellers, 
and showing their gay stripes, and lifted heels, 
as they broke away, had been the cause of the 
mischief, such as it was, but were now speedily 
out of sight ; and, while Diederick, at the head of 
his fore oxen, led them gently down the steep, 
a couple of Hottentots sprang over the sward 
like panthers, to pick up the pony and its rider. 

The pony was unhurt; and some slight 
bruizes, a bloody nose, and a few scratches upon 
the hands and face, earned among the bushes and 
jagged stones, were all the fleshly injuries sus- 
tained bv Charles. The Hottentots washed him in 
the stream below, and stopped the bleeding with 
cold water ; and Diederick was soon at his elbow. 
to feel that his bones were safe, and to remove 
his terror, and persuade him to bear his wounds 
without tears and crying. Assured that there 
was no elephant, nor even so much as a lion, at 
the top or at the bottom of the bank, and even 
prevailed upon to lift up his head, and look 
around him, for conviction, he was soon rein- 
stated in composure. He had no wish, however, 
to re-mount the pony ; but sat for many hours in 
the waggon, pensive, and heightening the me- 
lancholy with which he remembered his fall, with 
dismal thoughts about the Hoy lands, in regard 

v 3 



246 THE ENGLISH BOY 

to finding of whom, and their farm, he was 
half-willing", in his present mood, almost to 
despair. 

But, winding, still, as through an ample 
park, and lighted by a gorgeous moon, re- 
flected in the waters of the Cowie ; the travel- 
lers arrived, at length, within sight of the new, 
but yet half deserted town of Bathurst, which, 
like its outstage, Fredericksburg, the English 
authorities began with the design of making this 
district the seat of the Lieutenant-Government, 
but abandoned under another plan. The Eng- 
lish capital, unlike the towns of Dutch original. 
was to have risen upon an elevated surface ; 
and its few houses, actually built, are generally 
detached from each other, and stand between 
trees, and surrounded with gardens, upon two 
undulating hills, presenting the appearance of 
English cottage-villas. The principal edifice 
was intended for the court-house, but is used 
only as a school. More beauty, nor more 
picturesque effect, can hardly be imagined, 
than belongs to Bathurst, when gazed at up 
the river; and, its front commanding a deep 
glen of the richest verdure, the view is bounded 
by the ocean. It was now the twenty-first 
day of December, or the summer Bolstice, 
or longest day. in this Southern Hemisphere : 



AT THE CAPE. 247 

but yet the sun had long descended, and the 
moon long risen, before Charles was thus near to 
Bathurst. There were clouds in the heaven, 
which even increased the beauty of the moon- 
light; and sheet-lightning (incessantly, and 
with vividness and breadth) was playing in the 
western horizon. The silence of the air, from 
time to time, was broken by the cries of night 
beasts and birds, but not of such as were either 
terrible or mischievous. Those of the peewits 
came the oftenest upon the ear. When the 
travellers had drawn nearer still, they heard the 
gush and babble of the current, where it was di- 
vided by small rocks, or as it escaped by a stony 
bed; and, after this, the splash, and call, and 
whizzing of the wings, of water-fowl that rose 
either from the river, or from its sedgy borders. 
Over everything fell the silver moonlight. 

The waggon, and those that accompanied it, 
entered the main street of the town, where 
every light was extinguished, and where all was 
still the deepest silence, except for the barking 
of two dogs that lay at the doors, and which was 
returned with interest by those of Diederick ; and 
except for the candle of the landlord of an inn, 
who was parting with his latest guest, and finally 
shutting up his house for the night. This was 
the inn where Diederick proposed remaining till 



2-18 THE ENGLISH BOY 

the morning, and where he proposed depositing 
Charles, to make his further way, as he might 
be directed, in search of the settlers, Hoylands. 
The horses were presently led to the stables, and 
the oxen to the stalls ; and the waggon left standing 
in the street, with the dogs within it, or beside it. 
But, arrived at the kitchen-fire, and Chark*^ 
story related to host and hostess, what was the 
affliction of the first, at all that he could still hear 
of the objects of his search? The landlady 
thought that she had heard tell of such a man as 
Tom Hoyland ; but, then, his place, if she had 
really heard of him, and if it were the same, was 
far, very far, away, and nearer to Somerset than to 
Bathurst; and, again, she thought he was somehow 
broken up, and his farm sold ; and, in short, she 
knew nothing about the matter, and could help 
thepoor child with no information ! In the morning 
however, when people were about, she dared to 
say that some one would drop in, who might know 
better than she ; or, indeed, there was Mr. Jen- 
kins, about two miles out of Bathurst, who removed 
thither from a farm near Somerset the year 
before, and might be able to give some account 
of the boy's godmother and her husband. No- 
thing was left, therefore, for Charles, l>ut, sor- 
rowfully, and with apprehension, to take hi^ 
supper, and go to bed; Diederiek giving him a 



AT THE CAPE. 249 

hearty good bye, because he meant to proceed 
homeward at a very early hour in the morning; 
and Charles telling Diederick that he hoped they 
should meet again, and see a lion together ; for 
that, if the latter were at his side, he should not 
be afraid of twenty lions, and would himself kill 
a dozen. He also begged that Diederick would 
tell his brother Christian how much the En- 
glish boy, Charles Laleham, longed to see him ; 
and how much he praised him and loved him, for 
shooting the monstrous lion that was going to 
kill Diederick and his horse ! 

In the morning, Charles slept till it was late, 
and, when he rose, the rain was descending in 
torrents, and the water, tearing and overflowing 
the channel in the midst of the street, was rush- 
ing to pour itself into the river. The enchant- 
ing looks of Bathurst were departed ; the win- 
dows showed only what was dark, and wet, and 
dreary ; and it was even long before a solitary 
creature showed itself in the street, in the shape 
of a small terrier, which (the rain-drops upon its 
hair, and shaking its ears, and, every now and 
then, one of his tanned feet) crossed, from an 
opposite shelter, into the doorway of the inn- 
Charles, upon such a morning, though in Africa, 
was glad to eat his breakfast by the fire. 

The landlady was abundantly kind to him ; 



250 THE ENGLISH BOY 

or, at least, she intended so to be. She pitied 
his lone situation, and was distressed at the 
history of his orphanage. She grieved to think 
how little his poor mother knew of all his misfor- 
tunes. She found out a likeness between him- 
self and one of her own children, which had 
died at his own years. She asked every possible 
question as to his birth, his father, and his mo- 
ther ; the farm in Derbyshire ; the widow Dove- 
dale ; the lord and lady of the manor, and all 
the neighbours round ; and she drew this moral 
from his entire relation, that it was a pity people 
did not stay at home, and know when they were 
well off! " It wrung her heart," she said, "to 
see a dear little boy, the very picture of her own 
dear Jeremy, wandering about, nobody knew 
where, and without any body's knowing what 
was to happen to him ; and, as to leaving Eng- 
land, she herself had never repented of her 
choice but once, and that was ever since ! Ah ! 
my dear little outcast," said she, "you know 
nothing of how many of the venturesome folk, 
that have come to this deplorable country, have 
lost their money and their labour, and some of 
them their lives ; how many have perished by 
disease, and how many by grief and disappoint- 
ment; how many have turned idle, and fallen to 
drinking, and killed themselves by one bad 



AT THE CAPE. 251 

course or another ; how many have worked and 
worked, and yet lost every thing ; how many 
have been killed by the Caffres and the wild 
beasts; how many have had their beautiful sheep, 
and cattle, and fields, parched up by the sun, or 
drowned by the rain, or eaten bare by the 
locusts; and how many mechanics, and artists, 
and half-pay officers, and dancing-masters, have 
failed in their trades, or sunk under their new 
vocations ; with no skill to hold the plough, or 
drive a waggon ; and with the burning of a hot 
sun, or the soaking of deluges of rain ; and with 
weary journeys over the hills and plains; and 
with climbing up and down the steep banks 
of the rivers ; and tumbling up the rocks, and 
sousing in the pools, and wading through the 
streams, and floundering in the marshes, and 
leaping over the clefts and precipices ; and all 
this, too, sometimes, by the pale creatures from 
the English workshops ! Ah ! my child," she 
continued, " there is no knowing what may have 
happened to your own friends themselves ; and 
I should not wonder if you never get sight of 
them as long as you live ; nor ever get back to 
your dear mother, and brothers, and sister, any 
more than you ever see these Hoylands that you 
talk of! However, it may not be so bad as I 
am fancying : and pray God, for your sake, my 



k 2'r2 Jin. ] :\<;usn ftOY 

poor child, that it may not! Many people have 

done very well here ; and they say that there are 

plenty more a-eoming. I hope your Hoylandti 

have been lucky ; and, as to your troubles, why. 

I hope that you will get over them ! By and b • 

my husband shall put on his great coat, and his 

thick boots, and ride out to see what Mr. Jenkins 

says. Or, perhaps, somebody may come into 

the house, in spite of all the rain. 80 don't 

cry, my dear boy, whatever I may have said ; 

and besides, if you can't find your old friend-. 

why, perhaps, you may find new ! And you 

are so like my Jeremy, that I could feel in 

my heart to do nothing but kiss you all the day ! 

Only your hair is a little chestnut, and his was 

a little reddish ; and, to be sure, your face i- 

rather round, and his was rather long ; and your 

skin is clear, and his was a good deal freckled ; 

and you are tall and slim, and he was short and 

thick-set ; and his legs were a little bandy, orso, — 

but that was what would have altered as he grew 

up. So, don't cry, my dear little boy ! There i- 

room for hope yet ! When things come to the 

worst, they will mend; and there's comfort for 

you ! The buck is fitted to the burden. There M 

a Providence in all things; and they say, * God 

tempers the wind to the shorn lamb 1 ' 



AT THE CAPE. 253 



CHAPTER XLI. 

Very mournful is the tale 

Which you so fain would know ! 

Hermit of Warkworth. 

David Jenkins was an industrious emigrant 
from Wales. He had been used to the milking- 
of cows, and the breeding of goats ; and he had 
heard, at the fair, at Cardigan, that goats and 
black cattle, to say nothing of sheep, were 
thriving stocks at the Cape. He believed, also, 
that the soil would scarcely refuse him a crop of 
leeks ; and thus secure, as he promised himself, 
for his old age, and for his wife and children, in 
fair allowances of leeks and cheese, and trusting 
for all that might come besides, he gave up his 
lease, and sold his chattels, in the principality ; 
and, looking, for a last time, upon Snowdon and 
Plinlimmon, steered for Table Mountain and the 
Lion's Head ! He had prospered from the first 
vol. in. z 



254 THE ENGLISH BOY 

hour of his landing; and now, after selling his 
farm in the neighbourhood of Somerset to 
much advantage, he had purchased another at 
Bathurst, where he had built himself one of the 
best houses in the place ; and where it seemed 
likely, for himself and his posterity, that the 
name of Jenkins would long remain. He already 
rivalled some of the boors of the country round. 
He had a farm of seven thousand acres ; and 
when, at evening, his stock was driven home 
and counted, it would often number sixty horses, 
six hundred oxen and cows, and six thousand 
sheep, in addition to all his goats ! 

The rain being abated in the afternoon, the 
landlord, urged especially to the good errand 
by his wife, mounted the nag upon which he 
usually rode about his farm, and ambling to 
Graham's Town, bent his way to 'Squire Jen- 
kins's, with the news of the remarkable guest 
whom Diederick Cuyler had set down at his 
house. David knew that there was, or that 
there had been, a settler of the name of Hoyland, 
in the district of Somerset; but his place had 
been remote from his own, and he remembered 
but little about him. He thought} however, that 
he had heard something unfortunate ; but lie 
would get into town in the evening, after the 
beasts were brought to crcwL and take a pint. 



AT THE CAPE. 255 

and see the boy, and talk with the landlady ; and 
he had a cousin who was starting for Somerset 
within a few days, and could easily take the boy 
along with him. Jenkins was as good as his 
word ; and there was a whole council in assembly 
upon Charles's case. Nothing more precise, 
however, could even yet be learned, concerning 
the great object of his anxiety ; and it was only 
resolved that he should travel with Jenkins's cou- 
sin, and that, on the following day, he should 
come up to Jenkins's craal, and see the goats, 
and the Welshman's children, and stay there till 
his departure. In the morning, therefore, a 
waggon, (for this was the smallest vehicle con- 
venient,) driven by Hottentots, and resounding- 
with the shouts of little Hugh, and William, and 
Winifred Jenkins, came to fetch himself and his 
sea-chest ; the day was dry, though cloudy ; the 
landlord and landlady gave him their blessing, 
and would not be paid either for board or lodg- 
ing. 

Charles revelled upon toasted cheese, and 
bill-tongue, or dried beef; and romped, and 
raced, and butted with the children and the 
goats and kids, for a whole week, before Jen- 
kins's cousin arrived at Bathurst, on his way to 
Somerset. His heart, in the meantime, was any- 
thing but light; he sunk continually into gloom 

z,2 



'256 THE ENGLISH BOY 

and thoughtfulness; lie dreaded his failure to 
find Martha Hoyland, or he dreaded to find her 
less happy than he had made himself certain ; 
and, most of all, he dreaded the disappointment 
of all his hopes of hearing of his mother ! At 
length, however, the expected traveller arrived, 
and Charles was willingly received into his 
charge ; the Welshman and all his family bid- 
ding him an affectionate farewell, and heaping 
him with presents of eatables and rarities, and a 
sup of methlegin. A cheese was put into the 
waggon for his use ; and even a kid, that had been 
some time weaned, and upon which the young 
horns were growing conspicuous, was put into 
the waggon also, with a collar and a cord ; to be 
his playmate on the journey, and to dance or 
fight with him as the humour of one or both of 
them might order. Charles revived at the com- 
mencing of his journey, and at the acquisition of 
his kid, and at the sportiveness which the latter 
so continually exhibited ; and already he fancied 
himself marching up to Martha's door, nor ex- 
actly like a Taffy astride upon his goat : bur 
with the beginning of a flock in his possession, 
and even now a goatherd, and a Cape husband- 
man and capitalist ! kk It is true." said he, k; that 
I cannot show to Martha and her children a 
purse of twenty dollars : but she will be aston- 



AT THE CAPE. 257 

ished to find me with a kid of my own ; and I 
shall let the children play with him, and tumble 
them over, and frighten them, and make them 
run, at nothing but the sight of his foolish little 
horns ! Children are such babies !" 

Charles was but little advanced upon his pre- 
sent journey, before he found the country much 
less uniformly fertile and pleasant, than in the 
belt which is laced with the sand-hills of the sea- 
shore. In various places, grass of every kind 
had vanished, and there were only patches of 
stunted shrubs, and mimosa thorns, to afford 
meat for the sheep and cattle. Upon this food, 
however, the herds fed with eagerness, and grew 
fat; the whole of those great numbers, which, 
from spot to spot, discovered themselves, ap- 
pearing in the most excellent condition. They 
browzed over wide tracts of rock, and hill, and 
plain ; doomed as it might seem, to perpetual 
sterility, so far as herbage was concerned, and 
were attended here and there, by a solitary 
Hottentot herdsman. Birds, which the colonists 
call sparrows, and which have much resemblance 
to the sparrow of Europe, were numerous about 
the thorny mimosas, in which trees they appeared 
to build their nests. The Cape bustards, (pomes 
and corhaans or cor-hens, J and many other birds, 
including those of prey, with myriads of insects 

z3 



•J58 Till: ENGLISH BOY 

and reptiles, to omit all mention of the antelop 
and other beasts, were also numerous ; and thus 
these wilds, so barren, at a fir-r view, to human 
contemplation, were capable of sustaining living 
creatures, either wild or tame, but suited to the 
products, in numbers almost without limit. 
Pouws, corhaans, guinea-fowl, and what are 
here called pheasants, partridges, turtle-doves, 
and hares, were all in motion at the same time, 
roused by the noises of the wheels and waggons, 
and by the dogs which bore them company ; 
but the latter were soon checked in their running 
at them, by the multitudes of a prickly kind of 
seed which were concealed between the trees 
and bushes, and blown about by the winds ; 
and which, in size resembling a pea, presented 
(as natural caltrops) a thorn whichever way they 
fell. These seeds, in a particular manner, are 
the food of the guinea-fo\\ Is ; and at the same 
time, (there should be no doubt.) a defence de- 
signed for them against the Steps of their pur- 
sue;^ ! The dogs, finding their feet wounded 
and encumbered by these seeds, which pricked 
and stuck to them, soon desisted from the chat 
and walked soberly by the waggons. The art 
of war is thus without the honour of the original 
invention of the cult rap ! 

Going down, the day after, upon a surface 



AT THE CAPE. 259 

bordering a river, the country improved anew. 
The park-like scenery returned ; and extensive 
lawns of grass were shaded, from space to space, 
by clumps and thickets of the mimosa. At a 
cleft in the mountains, the pasturage was rich, 
and a fall of water afforded refreshment to our 
travellers and their cattle ; as it was also accus- 
tomed to do, daily, to all the vegetation, and to 
all the animal life, around it. On the third morn- 
ing, the first few miles were still over a good 
pasture; but presently, again, the aspect chang- 
ed, and became worse than even before. The 
whole was a succession of rugged, stony hills, 
with only heath-plants, and but these in patches. 
Many of these African heaths, however, were- 
flowering in luxuriant gaiety, and the Cape-par- 
tridges, as the travellers proceeded, rose in large 
and frequent coveys. The road lay on a steep 
descent ; and at the bottom passed between two 
chains of hills, with no more breadth than was 
sufficient to admit the waggon. Emerged from 
this, there was a large and fertile plain or valley, 
which it took three hours to cross, and where 
the heat and dust were almost intolerable. It 
had no water, except a few scanty pools, foul 
from the trampling of beasts ; but at which the 
cattle, horses, and Hottentots, all drank with 
eagerness. The whole route was northward, 



260 THI ENGLISH BOY 

and gradually rising from the level of tbe sea; 
the sky cloudless; and the day (except for 
the great heats, at certain hours, and in certain 
situations) soft, and serenely beautiful. 

The trees and shrubs were greener and more 
stout than those immediately below ; and here 
the trees, especially the mimosas, had usually a 
parasitic plant about them, growing, not like the 
ivy upon the elm; that is, from a root nourished 
in the ground ; but like the misletoe upon the 
oak, or from a root fixed upon the trunk or 
branches of the tree. Its flowers were somewhat 
like the flowers of the honey-suckle; but it 
never, like what often happens with the honey- 
suckle, grew alone. A sort of misletoe grew 
here as well, both on the Cape-oak and the mi- 
mosa. Yet here, upon a wretched spot at a 
small distance, stood the deserted house of a 
Dutch boor; and, taken altogether, the country 
was become worse. It was a lofty plain, or 
inclined plane, in which the Little Fish-river, 
following a serpentine track, has dug that track 
so deeply, that, to get a peep even at its waters, 
they must be looked down upon as into a pit. 
Surveyed from a moderate eminence, the course 
of the river might be marked by its willows-of- 
Babylon, and other shrubs and trees, which grow 
profusely at the bottom, and down the steep and 



AT THE CAPE. 261 

wall-like sides of its banks; and contribute largely, 
from that cause, to the concealment of the 
stream. One species of shrub was conspicuous 
through its contrast with the others. It was in 
full foliage and blossom, numerously branched, 
rich in its whole effect, and gracefully drooping. 
The upper ground, in spite of all, was desolate 
and naked, half beyond imagination. It might 
be called horribly barren. It grew sterile more 
and more ; and began to resemble certain coal- 
countries ; the more so from the black, slaty 
strata composing its rocks. Lions were well 
known in its neighbourhood ; for, even here, 
were farms and Africaner settlers, some held, and 
some deserted; and an old, deserted military post. 
So violent, indeed, were the contrasts of the land- 
scape, and so exclusively was the possession or 
want of water the sole cause of its sterility or 
fertileness, that the waggons stopped, this morn- 
ing, at a farm, where, aided by the vivifying 
element, there was a corn-field and a garden; 
the corn then cutting, and the fruit-trees filled 
with fruit; and, with these, two little water-mills ! 
But all this was the reward of human labour 
only. A water-course, of four miles in length, 
led from the top of a dam which had been 
raised in the Great Fish-river, to the mills, fed, 
in its progress, the corn-field and the garden. 
Irrigation is the only source of fruitfulness, in 



262 THE ENGLISH BOY 

this, and in so many other parts of Southern 
Africa ; and this art is now in as much request 
in the Cape colony, as anciently in Italy. The 
Dutch, indeed, have carried to the shores 
of Africa, the ancient agriculture, and this 
alone. The traveller sees everything, among 
the Africaners, just as Virgil painted it two 
thousand years ago ; — the same burning climate, 
and the same thirsty soil, as Italy presented to 
the swains whom Virgil sung ; the same instru- 
ments and usages of agriculture ; the same rude 
plough ; the same threshing, or rather treading- 
floor, in the open field, surrounded with no more 
than a mud wall; and the same treading out the 
grain by cattle, as in so many parts, of both the 
ancient and modern world, still nearer to our 
English home. A little further, at another 
farm of a Dutch boor, a lead, or water-course, of 
three thousand yards, enables the owner to irri- 
gate two hundred acres of plough-land and a 
garden, and to turn a mill ; and, with such 
assistance for the garden, vegetables can be 
raised in all the country, throughout the entire 
year. How the earth drinks in the water, when, 
during extreme heats, it is turned over it, is a 
sight which reminds the classical spectator of the 
monition in the Georgics : 

" Claudite jam vivos, pueri ; sat prata biberunt :" 



AT THE CAPE. 263 

which we translate : 

" Now stop the flow ; the meads have drank enough !" 

They were now, how r ever, approaching Som- 
erset. The Boschberg was become visible upon 
the right of the road ; and, though still distant, 
that mountain, from the torrents which pour 
from it in the rainy season, was the plain cause 
of the dry but deep pits and channels which 
showed themselves so frequently upon every 
side. Here, however, there was grass, though 
generally of the sour kind; and the country, 
opening, to the left, into gentle hills, and cheer- 
ful plains, improved afresh from mile to mile. 

As darkness returned once more, a beautiful 
scene, peculiar only to the circumstances of so 
wild a country, presented itself to sight. Part 
of the Boschberg, as here seen, terminates, about 
eight miles aw r ay, in an abrupt point ; and this, 
from which, throughout the day, smoke had been 
observed to arise, wore, now, the look of a 
volcano. The grass was burning; and the 
flame, growing brighter and brighter, was also 
extending itself down the side of the mountain. 
At one moment it appeared like a stream of lava, 
and at another resembled the ordered march of 
an advancing army ; while, from its being hid- 
den, here and there, by patches of shrub, and 



'264 THE ENGLISH BOY 

from the seeming motion of those patches, (occa- 
sioned by the real motion of the travellers, and 
the consequent intersections, and changes of 
position,) there might be fancied the firing of 
skirmishing parties, and their advances and re- 
treats. So often do things visible repeat them- 
selves, or different things take similar appear- 
ances, in all departments of nature, and even of 
art; and so easy it is to perceive one of the 
origins of those optical delusions, natural, or at 
least undesigned, which, time after time, have 
led men to imagine and believe that they saw 
things which had no real presence ! Houses and 
trees, men and animals, mountains and lakes, 
water and fire ; all are capable of seeming to exist 
where they have no existence ; and all, recipro- 
cally, may be mistaken for each other. The eye 
is only one of the organs upon which we depend 
for our knowledge of even visible objects. Inces- 
santly it can deceive us; and there are few of its 
perceptions which do not require, or do not habit- 
ually, and without observation, receive, the sup- 
port of other organs of sense, before we obtain 
real assurance of the veracity of the impression. 
We must often correct, or bring to the test, the 
impressions of sight, by joining with them those 
of the touch, the hearing, or other sense*-; 
in the same manner that we assist those with 



AT THE CAPE. 267) 

sight. None of the senses can commonly be 
trusted by themselves ; and it has been one of 
the most fertile sources of error, (more especially 
as to fanciful and marvellous appearances,) to 
give that credit to solitary conclusions from 
sight, which we seldom yield to conclusions de- 
pendent upon any other sense exclusively ! 

But, changing the direction of his road, the 
blazing point of the Boschberg withdrew from 
Charles's observations, and presently afterward, 
too, even its reflection in the adjacent atmos- 
phere; and, now, again, the diversion, which 
either that or any other spectacle on his way, 
had afforded him, gave place to those palpita- 
tions of heart with which he drew near to Somer- 
set, and thought of the fresh answers which he 
was to hear, to all the old inquiry about Martha 
Hoyland, and her husband's farm ! In an hour 
and a half after the sunset, they were passing 
through some excellent corn-land in front of the 
town, and beholding, even through the gloom, the 
roofs and elevations of several handsome build- 
ings, relieved against the dark and lofty mass of 
the Boschberg ; and Charles, in the front of the 
waggon, eager for the place where it was to stop, 
was pressing his kid to his bosom (its nose under 
the frill of his shirt, and its forelegs bent upon his 
lap;) and telling it the company it was soon to 

vol. in. a a 



26(5 THE ENGLISH BOY 

be introduced to, and the manner in which it 
was to behave: "But oh!" cried he, in con- 
clusion, "suppose we should never find them? 
Suppose they are dead, or gone away? What 
shall we do, then, Nanny ; (for he called it Nanny :) 
and where shall we go, and how shall we live, 
and how shall I hear of mother? And suppose she 
should be dead, as well as Martha? Oh ! what 
a lone child am I ; and what will become of me 
in these barren w r astes, and upon these dark 
mountains and naked rocks ; and with nothing 
but the sky above, and with the sea between 
me and home ?" 

Charles had travelled comfortably and play- 
fully with his kid, the dogs, and the Hottentots ; 
and he, and all his companions had feasted upon 
his cheese, and bill-tongue, and white bread, 
and pot of honey, and flask of methlegin, and 
the kid had browzed its fill upon the sweet 
shoots of shrubs and bushes ; but Jenkins's cou- 
sin had turned out a silent man, taking but little 
notice of him, save that he rode safely, and was 
not left behind; for, withal, he was not of the 
best temper, and a little the worse for envy 
of his cousin's remarkable good fortune. In 
reaching, however, the door of a house at the 
entrance of the town, and bringing ln> oxen to a 
stand, he told Charles that this was the end of 



AT THE CAPE. 267 

their journey, and that now was the time for him 
to inquire after his friends from England ! 

And Charles, and his kid together, had sprung 
from the waggon, and were ranged among the 
group which, collecting and surrounding the 
house-door, as the waggon had been heard to 
approach, and as it was seen to draw to Reece 
ap Reece's white-faced mansion, the sign of the 
Prince's Feathers, and of the head of the 
Marquess of Anglesey ! Reece ap Reece was 
another cousin of Charles's guide, and of the 
latter's cousin, David Jenkins ; and Charles, at- 
tracted by his round smiling face, as well as by 
the light in his hand, and the apron on his knees, 
made him the first to whom to address himself, 
for news of Martha Hoyland. But the two 
Welshmen were talking Welsh, and asking and 
answering questions of their own, with a rapidity, 
and loudness of voice, which forbade that Charles 
should be either attended to or heard, and drove 
him, at random, to the lookers on. " Pray, sir, 
where is Mr. Hoy land's farm ?" " Pray, sir, 
do you know Martha Hoyland ?" These were 
the questions which he put to each ; and, before 
two or three of the strangers (all eager to look 
at the waggon, and to learn the news from Bat- 
hurst and below) had been prevailed to give 
half an ear, and then their hasty answer, 

Aa2 



268 THE ENG1 ISII BOY 

that they knew no such farm or person ; be- 
fore this, Charles had returned to the host of 
the Prince's Feathers, and pulling him by the 
sleeve, and keeping hold of one of his hands, 
" Oh ! do tell me, sir," said he, with supplication, 
and in anguish, " where is Martha Hoyland's ? 
Where is my godmother's farm ; she that knows 
my mother, and that wrote word, that if my 
mother would send me to Africa, she would take 
care of me in her own house ?" 

" Martha Hoyland !" cried, at length, the good 
landlord, Reece ap Reece, (his candle still 
alight, but his face no longer lighted with a 
smile ;) " and is it Martha Hoyland dat dis pretty 
little Sassenach is splutter all dis about; and 
about Tom Hoyland's farm, and about his moder, 
and his godmoder, and about his godmoder's 
ownhouse?" And, then, (first asking his cousin, 
in Welsh, whence the young Sassenach, or Saxon, 
or English boy, had come, and one or two 
other particulars:) "Ah! my poor child," lie 
resumed, " your poor godmoder has no longer 
any house of her own to take care of you in ! 
The poor thing! she has no longer a house for 
her poor self. What ! don't you know that 
her husband is dead, and her children too, (at 
least Jemmy and Sukey, that is.) and the farm 
sold, and poor Martha gone to be a hrlp, (that i>. 



AT THE CAPE. 269 

a servant,) I hardly know where, but full a hun- 
dred miles away ! This is bad news for you, my 
poor boy ; but how came you to be sent here, 
and wheu did you come from home, that you 
did not know it all before ?" 

Charles's lip had quivered from the moment 
that the Welshman began to speak ; and, pre- 
sently, he had gasped for breath. His tongue 
grew too large for his mouth, and he had no 
power to speak. But, in another moment, the 
tears gushed from his eyes ; and, letting go the 
string which confined his goat, and lifting again 
and again his hands and feet, sobbing and 
screaming convulsively, and groaning, weeping, 
complaining, he cried out, alternately : " Oh my 
poor godmother ! Oh my poor little Jemmy 
and Sukey ! Oh mother ! why did you let me 
come here ? Oh father ! why did you bring me ? 
Oh mother — and, perhaps, you are dead too? 
And, perhaps, sister and brother are dead, like 
Jemmy and Sukey; and like Martha Hoyland's 
husband, and like my own father ; and, perhaps, 
only I am left alive, and nobody to take care of 
me ! How shall I hear of mother ? How shall 
I find Martha? Oh! oh! oh! who will tell 
me of my mother ?" 



i a 3 



'270 TILE ENGLISH BOY 



CHAPTER XLII. 



O life of blessedness ! 



To reap the fruit of honourable toil, 
And bound our wishes with our wants. 

SOUTHET. 

We have brought, in this manner, the history of 
the wanderings of our orphan in Africa almost 
to the period of one grand but melancholy 
epoch in its course; the total disappointment of 
all the hopes and expectations under which those 
wanderings had been pursued; — hopes and expec- 
tations from the discovery of Martha Hoyland, 
and of the promised shelter of her home: expec- 
tations, too, and hopes, still dearer, united, in the 
mind of the sufferer, with that discovery and 
that shelter — the present news of his mother, 
and the future restoration to her arms ! 

But our pages have filled too fast to allow 
that we any Longer continue to relate in detail 

even a small part of the numberless incidents 



AT THE CAPE. "271 

which yet intervened, between the event of our 
preceding chapter and the true catastrophe of 
our tale, and which gradually prepared its ar- 
rival such as it will finally be seen. Already, 
in more than one part of our work, and as our 
readers have been plainly told, the obligation to 
press forward, has placed us in the necessity of 
being silent upon an abundance of particulars ; 
and here, still more to our own regret, and to 
the most deep regret of our readers, (if they 
knew all,) we are forced to crowd into a few 
sentences, what ought to have been expanded 
into nearly as many chapters ! 

The Welsh landlord and his wife, and his 
wife's sister, soothed to the utmost of their 
power the sorrows of poor Charles. There was 
but one way, however, in which they could yield 
sustainment to his almost broken heart; and this 
was by inquiring foi him, in every imaginable 
direction, after the sad retreat of Martha ! 
Months passed in these inquiries, apparently in 
vain; and, during that long interval, it was only 
to the hospitality of the Welshman, assisted by 
the neighbours, that the grieving exile owed his 
food and lodging. 

At length, a hope, like a watery sun, bright- 
ened above him; not to dispel, but only to render 
less dark, the clouds of his affliction. Passing 



27 k 2 THE ENGLISH BOY 

from one settler to another, news was brought of 
the place to which the widow had gone in ser- 
vice; and far distant as it was, means were soon 
afterward found to send him, from hand to 
hand, and though by a circuitous and tedious 
route, to that last aim of his diminished pros- 
pects. He reached the farm to which he had 
been directed ; he reached it only to learn that 
it was two years since Martha, carrying with 
her little Sukey, (for the reported deaths of 
both her children were half mistaken,) had seized 
upon a sudden and rapturous opportunity afforded 
her for returning to England; that she had gone : 
and that nothing more had been heard of her ! 

Oh desolation, solitude, despair! Charles 
threw himself upon the earth ; but even the 
earth — the earth of Africa — could offer him no 
pillowy bosom ! He turned and tossed upon it 
in restless agony; it was foreign to him as the 
sky that covered it ; he was alone — he thought 
himself alone — a solitary emmet upon a naked 
globe — a friendless birdling in a vacant sky ! 
Here, then, was the real finish of the Long tale 
of his African expectations! Here ended his 
voyage and his journey, which were to have car- 
ried him to his godmother ! Here broke his final 
tie to Africa ! Now, he w;is indeed a Btranerer ! 

A new ezistence } and no other, was be- 



AT THE CAPE. 273 

fore him. All things past were, for the moment, 
sundered from all things future. The vision 
that had fed him, the object that had animated 
him, the dream that had constantly blended, in 
his fancy, the Africa around him, with the Eng- 
land that was behind him ; all had vanished ! 
Africa, desolate Africa, — the dull and hope- 
less reality of Africa, was all that remained to 
him ; England was gone ; imagination died in 
him ! 

But grief wears itself out. His passionate 
grief subsided, and reason and recollection be- 
gan their slow return. He became calm and 
thoughtful upon the earth, and he no longer re- 
fused the words of comfort addressed to him by 
his new acquaintances. He inquired further 
concerning Martha's departure, and the light 
presently broke upon his mind, that if the 
widowed, friendless, almost childless Martha, 
sooner or later, could find a passage back to 
England, so might he ! He compared Martha's 
sorrows with his own ; he found that himself and 
she were joined in misfortune, and that they might 
yet be joined in its alleviation. He was now 
old enough to work in Africa, like Martha ; and 
means might be presented to him, as to Martha, 
for going back to England. More than all, the 
history of Martha's departure brought out news 



274 THE ENGLISH BOY 

of his dear mother ! Martha had told the 
mistress with whom she had lived a hundred 
particulars concerning Margaret Laleham. She 
had received more than one letter from her du- 
ring her service. It was chiefly at Margaret's 
instance and invitation that she had been roused 
from her despondent resignation in Africa, and 
sought her return to England. She had talked 
to the mistress with whom she lived, of her 
ancient schoolfellow, and of the happy hills of 
Derbyshire. She had talked, too, of John 
Laleham's voyage and shipwreck, and of the 
lost orphan Charles; for lost she had believed 
him to be. Lady Pontefract had written to 
Lady Willoughby, and had even arrived in 
England, and conversed with Lady Willoughby; 
and the latter had reported all to the sub- 
dued and ever - sorrowing Margaret, before 
the date of Margaret's latest letter to Martha. 
Margaret, as it now appeared, was in the belief, 
when she wrote the letter, that her child had 
perished in the forests of Africa, no less than 
her husband upon its coasts; for Lady Ponte- 
fract's latest news, first recounting Charles's de- 
parture from Cape Town with the Land-drost, 
the Land-drost's death, and Charles's cheerful 
message by Mynheer Van Dunderblouwer, 
ended with the despairing tale of his total loss, 



AT THE CAPE. 275 

after having been seen in the woods by black 
Zephyr ! Margaret knew nothing (how should 
she?) of his deliverance by that angel of the 
desert — the tiny Bush-girl ! What tears, what 
agonies of tears were used to overwhelm the 
melancholy Martha, when she added to these 
histories, that of her own share in all this break- 
ing-in upon the happiness of her dear schoolfel- 
low, — in the imagined miserable death of her dear 
godchild ; and when she added, even to these, 
the recollection of the house and fields and garden 
to which she had invited all to come, and where, 
with her husband and her children round her, 
she had believed that with bliss and pride she 
should received them all — and rosy, curly, 
blue-eyed Charles among the foremost ; — what 
tears, what agonies of tears were used to over- 
whelm her at those moments, were now trans- 
ferred to the youthful and lorn stranger ! 

Amid so many subjects, however, for even 
new and aggravated anguish, Charles had found 
one, at least, to fill him with extatic joy ! 
His mother was alive ; two years ago, his mo- 
ther was alive ! Two years ago, Lady Wil- 
loughby, likewise, (his mother's sure protector,) 
was alive ! Of his brothers and his sister, his 
comforters could not say that they remembered 
Martha to have spoken ; but they knew that any 



276 THE ENGLISH BOY 

misfortune, besides those of the loss of her hus- 
band, and of the child that was with him, had 
never been mentioned by Martha, as filling 
the bitter cup of Margaret Laleham. Here, 
then, was hope renewed. Here were visions 
reappearing. Here were aims again to be pur- 
sued. Here were objects to engage the present 
and long future moments. His mother was to 
be written to. That she lived still was to be 
anxiously discovered. His present livelihood 
was to be gained. His return to England ^as 
to be eagerly accomplished, or at least steadily 
endeavoured after ! 

By degrees, too, Charles came to the further 
consolation of reflecting, that his mother, if living, 
(and of this there was no reason to doubt,) was in 
all probability in possession of later intelligence 
concerning him, than any of which she could 
have spoken, more than two years gone by, in 
her letters to her beloved Martha. Upon his 
return to Cape Town, the Vrouw Van Bomster- 
wyk, at his own earnest request, had engaged) 
first, Mynheer her husband, and next Myn- 
heer the Colonial Interpreter, to write to her 
in the boy's own artless language : and though 
Mynheer Van Bomsterwyk's hand-writing had 
turned out as illegible, as his broken Dutch 
and English had been found unintelligible: and 



AT THE CAPE. 277 

though Mynheer the Interpreter had made a dry 
and pompous story, of what Charles had given 
him in charge in words that might have been 
said to kiss and weep; still, a letter had been 
sent, and with not more than two fatal blunders 
in the direction ! But the Jew Benjamin, also, 
had undertaken the charitable task, addressing 
himself to his correspondent in Duke's Place, in 
London, adding even a postscript at the dicta- 
tion of Namal and Sambayana; in which latter 
the mourning widow was assured that her child 
lived for her, and in all their hearts ; and was 
more handsome than the peacock, more lovely 
than the lotus-flower, and more innocent than 
the milk-white dove ! Even the Governor's 
secretary, too, at the petition of the anxious 
Jew, had written to Lady Pontefract, informing 
her late Excellency of Charles's safety in Cape 
Town, and embarkation for Algoa Bay : " It 
behoves Israel," said Benjamin and his sister 
Brinah, " to befriend the stranger ; for has 
not the Law commanded it of him ? Has it not 
charged it upon him by his recollection of his 
own need of hospitality ? Has it not said, ' For 
ye are strangers and sojourners in the land, as 
all your fathers were?'" In truth, Margaret 
had heard, and had written to her son, at Gra- 
ham's Town ; but who, at Graham's Town, had 

VOL. III. Bb 



278 THE ENGLISH BOY 

known any thing of the little wanderer, Charles 
Laleham ? especially after the death of Hoyland, 
and the removal of Martha? 

Better things, however, were in store for all. 
The English settlers to whom Charles had tra- 
velled upon the report of Martha's residence 
with them, were poor, and had many children ; 
so that they could neither befriend him, nor 
offer him employment, to their wishes. But 
Charles was now old and strong enough to make 
himself useful upon a farm ; and he had learned, 
as we intimated in its proper place, something 
of the peculiar duties to be performed upon a 
Cape farm, at the Dutch boor's, in the neigh- 
bourhood of the sea-coast. Able and willing, 
therefore, to work, he soon found a settler to 
hire him ; his business being, at times to drive 
the team at plough, at others to pick stones, and 
almost at all times to assist in the troublesome 
charge of getting the cows, half wild, to submit 
to their milking, in the craal. The condition, 
in the meantime, of many of the settlers was 
anything but certain; and it soon happened 
that Charles's first master fell into ruin, and 
could no longer retain him for his plough-boy. 
Years now followed. The changes of place, and 
the vicissitudes of fortune, among the masters 
whom he served, still occasioned him several 



AT THE CAPE. 279 

removals, and such as gradually led him into 
parts of the colony remote from that in which 
he first began to eat the bread of industry ; 
and it was one of the many afflictions of 
those removals, that even now an interval of 
four distressful years elapsed, before Charles 
attained to the enjoyment of that object of all 
his waking and his sleeping thoughts — the re- 
ception of a letter from his mother, and the ac- 
quisition of the certain knowledge that his mo- 
ther lived — that she knew himself to be alive ; 
that his brothers and his sister were living also ; 
that Martha Hoy land and Sukey were again his 
mother's neighbours at Cherryburn ; and that 
all were well, except for the abiding grief for 
that which each had lost ! The alterations of 
Charles's abode, the mismanagement in forward- 
ing former letters upon both sides, had occa- 
sioned the long delay, but now it had ceased to 
be. Martha's ancient mistress had written for 
Charles at the beginning. Charles had learned 
to write and read, and could scarcely hold a pen 
before he had written also ; but, in one way or 
another, the correspondence of the Lalehams, 
as formerly that of the Hoylands, had met with 
many obstructions between England and Africa, 
and between Africa and England. 

But Charles's transport, at the final reception 

Bb2 



280 THE ENGLISH BOY 

of all this news from home, and at the prospect 
of a communication uninterrupted, only re- 
doubled his zeal and industry in labour, and 
sharpened his impatience again to behold his 
mother. He had reached his fifteenth year. 
He was the foremost in activity, and in trustwor- 
thiness, upon the farm where he now lived. In 
spite of fatigues, of dangers, and of burning 
suns, bis days were cheerful, and his nights were 
peaceful. Hope was his divinity, and it sus- 
tained and blessed him. He was a toiler of the 
field, that — 

" Like a lacquey, from the morn till eve, 

Sweats in the eye of Phoebus and all night ; 
Sleeps in Elysium." 

If Charles's infancy had obtained him friends 
through its helplessness*and its misfortunes, his 
youth obtained him them also, by its capacities 
and its virtues. Industrious, skilful, obedient, 
cheerful, diligent, faithful, hating a lie: the son 
of Margaret, and of that just and worthy father 
whom the waves had swallowed, confirmed in 
every heart, by the merits of his conduct, the 
prepossessions invited by his countenance, his 
figure, and his air : and, when (as unfortunately 
in previous instances) his latest English em- 
ployer became unable to continue his wages, or 



AT THE CAPE. 281 

even his food, such was the character for which, 
for miles and miles around, Charles had made 
himself to be distinguished, that he was speedily 
established in a new and even better home. A 
good character, it has often been said, is a bril- 
liant fortune; and though this, like every 
general truth, may fail of universal experi- 
ence, Charles became one of those in whom it 
was exemplified, if that moderate sufficiency of 
means to which it earlv led him, and which he 
long enjoyed contented and at peace, may re- 
ceive, with the reader's consent, the name of 
— though not perhaps, a brilliant, yet — a happy 
fortune ! Charles passed into the employment of 
a substantial and venerable boor, (by name 
Van Dam Van Yssel,) happy in circumstances, 
but almost bereft of kindred: and one w r ho, 
through the innocence and virtues of his own 
life, had long been pointed at as an ornament 
of his station and his country. Charles was the 
favourite and the dependence of the old man, 
but his heart, nevertheless, was always turned 
toward England; and the concern of all his 
hours was that of acquiring the means, and find- 
ing the opportunity, to embark once more upon 
the ocean, and reach the port that would open 
to him the road to his mother ! 

Yet there arrived his seventeenth birth-day. 

Bb :3 



•2&2 THE ENGLISH BOY 

and he was still a hind in Africa, tending the 
flocks of Mynheer Van Dam Van Yssel. The 
anniversary was beautiful as to the skies, and 
the boor made it a feast upon the farm. The 
daily duties were nevertheless performed; and 
at evening, before the mirthful supper was to be 
begun, Charles lodged the sheep and other 
cattle in the craal, while the pleased and bene- 
volent boor looked smiling on, delighted with 
the condition of the whole, and counting their 
amazing numbers. 

It was this evening, then, that after the finish- 
ing of the supper, and after the departure of 
the guests, Mynheer Van Dam Van Yssel 
opened to Charles the determination which he 
had long framed, to make the English orphan- 
boy his heir ! He indulged, too, in other sub- 
ordinate arrangements for Charles's happiness 
and his own. It was his plan, that Charles's 
mother, and his brothers, and his sister should 
join the orphan in Africa, and settle upon the 
farm before himself should die ; and further, 
that though he felt the desertion and distress 
which he was to experience in the absence of 
Charles, still the latter should sail for England, 
embolden them for their voyage, and conduct 
them to their new abode : M Go," said he, "and 
fetch dine moder, and dine broders, and dine 



AT THE CAPE. 283 

seester, and dine dog, and dine cat, and dine 
kettle, and dine stool ; and plant them all about 
poor Van Dam Van Yssel, while he can still 
welcome them ; and about the house and fields of 
the poor farm of Spek-boom !" 

To tell the joy, the gratitude, which, from 
this moment, entered and kept possession of the 
breast of Charles, would be as impossible as 
assuredly it must be needless. Suffice it that 
we say, that all was speedily performed ; that 
Charles sailed for England, found his mother, 
was received with rapture, overcame her fears of 
the voyage ; and carried her, and his brothers, and 
his sister, and his dog, and his cat, and his kettle, 
and his stool, and Martha Hoyland and her 
daughter Sukey; and brought them all, to plant 
about good Mynheer Van Dam Van Yssel, while 
he still lived to welcome them, and about the 
house and fields of the fruitful farm of Spek- 
boom ! Margaret and Martha were the more 
willing to encounter, even as to themselves, this 
great change in their scene of life, because 
both Widow Dovedale and Lady Willoughby 
had died ; and Cherryburn, to neither of them, 
nor to their children, nor to their friends nor 
kindred, now remained what it had once been ! 

Charles's succeeding years may scarcely find 
a record in our book. We must not linger 



284 THE ENGLISH BOY 

to relate, how, after a short period more, he be- 
came the husband of Sukey Hoyland; nor how 
his cattle, and his fields, and his gardens mul- 
tiplied and flourished; nor paint the picture 
when it could be said — 

" In Keisi's stream his kine are lowing; 
On Keisi's banks his flowers are blowing:" 

and still less can we make bold to anticipate the 
time when he came to be described as one who — 

" Tells to his sons his youthful tali 
In peaceful Chiun's happy vales!" 

So, neither, can we enlarge our pages, to 
satisfy the reader's excusable solicitude for 
knowing the after-fates of Margaret and Martha, 
and those of Charles's sister and his brothers. 
Let it be enough, that at least those of the 
two former were as serene as hearts with closed 
but not unaching wounds could find them ! It 
is the same with others that have had their 
places in our story, and who were not unmet 
by Charles in later seasons of his life. We 
have done with most of these, and must resolve 
to pass all that concerns them over; but not 
so the lot of the little Bushman-girl, regard- 
ing which it is impossible for us to be wholly 
dumb. Charles had the indulgence granted to 



AT THE CAPE. 285 

him, even but a short time after his return to 
Africa, to be the means of saving her life from 
the midst of sudden danger, and when she, in 
her own turn, had lost father and mother ; and 
when neither she nor Charles had reason to 
believe that the two, even if living, were living 
within leagues of one another ! Charles brought 
into the presence of the grateful Margaret, the 
Bush-girl that had saved her child in the wil- 
derness, and whom she loaded with thanks and 
benefits ; he brought her, too, to his Hottentot 
mammy, whom, together with black Zephyr, he 
had gathered about him fron Blouwvc kit's; and 
under whose care she soon added the manners, 
and the virtues, and the knowledge, of civilized 
life, to the sweetness of her pristine nature. 
She learned, amid the thunders, as amid the 
calms, to believe herself — 

" Safe in the hand of one disposing power;" 

and she was married, not long after, to a faithful, 
generous, affectionate young Hottentot, Charles's 
chief keeper of his flocks. 

For Charles himself, the adventures of his 
youth, if they had afforded him but little educa- 
tion in the arts and artificial information of his 



286 THE ENGLISH BOY 

time and native country? (and which are of high 
value in themselves,) they had not denied him 
a higher education still — the education of the 
bosom and the affections ; the culture of the vir- 
tues of the breast. In an especial manner, they 
had brought him up, even unconsciously — un- 
suspected, and without the formality of lessons, 
— in that first of amiable, and wise, and happy or 
fortunate tempers of mind, which breathes the 
largest sentiment of esteem and admiration for 
all that is to be found, in man, and nature of the 
beautiful, the true, the just. It was not that 
he left himself unaware of the existence of their 
opposites ; it was not that he had no eyes for 
what the world contains of the deformed, the 
false, the wicked ; but that he did not pry for 
their discovery, did not hurry to the conviction, 
did not dwell upon it when convinced. He 
remembered always the speech of the Parsee, 
in the hut of Namal, from whom he had once 
heard — " It was the saying of the wise Jem- 
sheed, Be in no haste to discover faults, but 
quick to discern beauties : the thorns of the 
sweet rose will last, after its fair leaves have 
withered !" 

Charles, in his helpless orphanage, had not 
only found friends for himself, in every rank of 
civil life ; among men of all complexions, faiths. 



AT THE CAPE. 1287 

and countries ; — a table and a dwelling-place in 
every spot and climate ; but lie had seen, also, 
that others were made participators as well, of the 
beneficence both of man and God. He loved, 
therefore, God and man. He knew that nature 
was not without its inflictions, nor man without 
his vices. He knew that the same skies could be 
alternately clear and dark, and even the same 
men kind and unkind, besides the diversities of 
men. He did not even flatter himself, that as 
to mankind, all w r ho had shown him benevo- 
lence were uniformly distinguished for their 
virtues. But he gave large praises to what he 
saw good ; he narrowed to the utmost the bounds 
of what was undeniably bad; and, above all 
things, he believed in good on all hands. His phi- 
losophy was a philosophy of love, founded upon 
respect and esteem for every thing around him ; 
and this in an age when hate is the passion pre- 
eminently nourished ; when all men, and all 
classes, are hourly incited reciprocally to hate 
their neighbours ; to think them either enemies 
or unworthy ; — and in a world, too, and among 
a species, of which it is the most prevailing of 
prevailing vices, less that men are ill themselves, 
than that they think ill of others ! 

Thus satisfied, thus tranquil, thus confiding, 
thus at peace upon every side; — thus patient 

7 



288 THE ENGLISH BOY AT THE CAPE. 

under wrong and evil, thus grateful for the small- 
est good, Charles lived throughout his days, and 
reached their latest close. No wickedness against 
others, nor no anger against others' wickedness, 
even where he confessed the latter real ; no plots 
to injure,no revenge for injuries ; ever disturbed 
his sleep, or enfeebled his health, or disfigured 
his countenance. One spirit of content and 
peace obtained in him ; one confidence in all 
things, and lands, and persons ; not romantically 
extravagant, but practical and within limits ; and 
such as the poet designs to express when he 
exclaims : 

" I cannot go 

Where universal Love not smiles around ! 
***** 
Should Fate command me to the utmost verge 
Of the green earth ; to distant barbarous climes, 
Rivers unknown to song, where first the sun 
Gilds Indian mountains, or his setting beam 
Flames on the Atlantic isles ; 'tis nought to me : 
Since God is ever present, ever felt ; 
In the void waste, as in the city full; 
And where He vital breathes, there must be joy !" 



THE END. 



Gilbert & Rivington, Printers, St. John's Square, Londo.i. 



