The Excursion [Review]
Author: Jeffrey, Francis.
Publication info: Contributions To the Edinburgh Review . vii, 536 p. London: Longman, Brown, Green, And Longmans, 1844.

The Excursion; being a Portion of the Recluse, a Poem. By William Wordsworth [in, Contributions to the Edinburgh Review. By Francis Jeffrey ... In Four Volumes. Vol. III]
[Page 233]
The Excursion; being a Portion of the Recluse, a Poem . By William Wordsworth. 1 This will never do! It bears no doubt the stamp of the author's heart and fancy: But unfortunately not half so
[Page 234]
visibly as that of his peculiar system. His former poems were intended to recommend that system, and to bespeak favour for it by their individual merit;—but this, we suspect, must be recommended by the system—and can only expect to succeed where it has been previously established. It is longer, weaker, and tamer, than any of Mr. Wordsworth's other productions; with less boldness of originality, and less even of that extreme simplicity and lowliness of tone which wavered so prettily, in the Lyrical Ballads, between silliness and pathos. We have imitations of Cowper, and even of Milton here; engrafted on the natural drawl of the Lakers—and all diluted into harmony by that profuse and irrepressible wordiness which deluges all the blank verse of this school of poetry, and lubricates and weakens the whole structure of their style.
Though it fairly fills four hundred and twenty good quarto pages, without note, vignette, or any sort of extraneous assistance, it is stated in the title—with something of an imprudent candour—to be but “a portion” of a larger work; and in the preface, where an attempt
[Page 235]
is rather unsuccessfully made to explain the whole design, it is still more rashly disclosed, that it is but “ a part of the second part , of a long and laborious work” —which is to consist of three parts!
What Mr. Wordsworth's ideas of length are, we have no means of accurately judging: But we cannot help suspecting that they are liberal, to a degree that will alarm the weakness of most modern readers. As far as we can gather from the preface, the entire poem—or one of them, (for we really are not sure whether there is to be one or two,) is of a biographical nature; and is to contain the history of the author's mind, and of the origin and progress of his poetical powers, up to the period when they were sufficiently matured to qualify him for the great work on which he has been so long employed. Now, the quarto before us contains an account of one of his youthful rambles in the vales of Cumberland, and occupies precisely the period of three days! So that, by the use of a very powerful calculus , some estimate may be formed of the probable extent of the entire biography.
This small specimen, however, and the statements with which it is prefaced, have been sufficient to set our minds at rest in one particular. The case of Mr. Wordsworth, we perceive, is now manifestly hopeless; and we give him up as altogether incurable, and beyond the power of criticism. We cannot indeed altogether omit taking precautions now and then against the spreading of the malady;—but for himself, though we shall watch the progress of his symptoms as a matter of professional curiosity and instruction, we really think it right not to harass him any longer with nauseous remedies,—but rather to throw in cordials and lenitives, and wait in patience for the natural termination of the disorder. In order to justify this desertion of our patient, however, it is proper to state why we despair of the success of a more active practice.
A man who has been for twenty years at work on such matter as is now before us, and who comes complacently forward with a whole quarto of it, after all the
[Page 236]
admonitions he has received, cannot reasonably be expected to “change his hand, or check his pride,” upon the suggestion of far weightier monitors than we can pretend to be. Inveterate habit must now have given a kind of sanctity to the errors of early taste; and the very powers of which we lament the perversion, have probably become incapable of any other application. The very quantity, too, that he has written, and is at this moment working up for publication upon the old pattern, makes it almost hopeless to look for any change of it. All this is so much capital already sunk in the concern; which must be sacrificed if that be abandoned: and no man likes to give up for lost the time and talent and labour which he has embodied in any permanent production. We were not previously aware of these obstacles to Mr. Wordsworth's conversion; and, considering the peculiarities of his former writings merely as the result of certain wanton and capricious experiments on public taste and indulgence, conceived it to be our duty to discourage their repetition by all the means in our power. We now see clearly, however, how the case stands;—and, making up our minds, though with the most sincere pain and reluctance, to consider him as finally lost to the good cause of poetry, shall endeavour to be thankful for the occasional gleams of tenderness and beauty which the natural force of his imagination and affections must still shed over all his productions,— and to which we shall ever turn with delight, in spite of the affectation and mysticism and prolixity, with which they are so abundantly contrasted.
Long habits of seclusion, and an excessive ambition of originality, can alone account for the disproportion which seems to exist between this author's taste and his genius; or for the devotion with which he has sacrificed so many precious gifts at the shrine of those paltry idols which he has set up for himself among his lakes and his mountains. Solitary musings, amidst such scenes, might no doubt be expected to nurse up the mind to the majesty of poetical conception,—(though it is remarkable, that all the greater poets lived, or had lived, in the full
[Page 237]
current of society):—But the collision of equal minds, —the admonition of prevailing impressions—seems necessary to reduce its redundancies, and repress that tendency to extravagance or puerility, into which the self-indulgence and self-admiration of genius is so apt to be betrayed, when it is allowed to wanton, without awe or restraint, in the triumph and delight of its own intoxication. That its flights should be graceful and glorious in the eyes of men, it seems almost to be necessary that they should be made in the consciousness that men's eyes are to behold them,—and that the inward transport and vigour by which they are inspired, should be tempered by an occasional reference to what will be thought of them by those ultimate dispensers of glory. An habitual and general knowledge of the few settled and permanent maxims, which form the canon of general taste in all large and polished societies—a certain tact, which informs us at once that many things, which we still love and are moved by in secret, must necessarily be despised as childish, or derided as absurd, in all such societies—though it will not stand in the place of genius, seems necessary to the success of its exertions; and though it will never enable any one to produce the higher beauties of art, can alone secure the talent which does produce them from errors that must render it useless. Those who have most of the talent, however, commonly acquire this knowledge with the greatest facility; —and if Mr. Wordsworth, instead of confining himself almost entirely to the society of the dalesmen and cottagers, and little children, who form the subjects of his book, had condescended to mingle a little more with the people that were to read and judge of it, we cannot help thinking that its texture might have been considerably improved: At least it appears to us to be absolutely impossible, that any one who had lived or mixed familiarly with men of literature and ordinary judgment in poetry, (of course we exclude the coadjutors and disciples of his own school,) could ever have fallen into such gross faults, or so long mistaken them for beauties. His first essays we looked upon in a good degree as
[Page 238]
poetical paradoxes,—maintained experimentally, in order to display talent, and court notoriety;—and so maintained, with no more serious belief in their truth, than is usually generated by an ingenious and animated defence of other paradoxes. But when we find that he has been for twenty years exclusively employed upon articles of this very fabric, and that he has still enough of raw material on hand to keep him so employed for twenty years to come, we cannot refuse him the justice of believing that he is a sincere convert to his own system, and must ascribe the peculiarities of his composition, not to any transient affectation, or accidental caprice of imagination, but to a settled perversity of taste or understanding which has been fostered, if not altogether created, by the circumstances to which we have alluded.
The volume before us, if we were to describe it very shortly, we should characterise as a tissue of moral and devotional ravings, in which innumerable changes are rung upon a few very simple and familiar ideas:—But with such an accompaniment of long words, long sentences, and unwieldy phrases—and such a hubbub of strained raptures and fantastical sublimities, that it is often difficult for the most skilful and attentive student to obtain a glimpse of the author's meaning —and altogether impossible for an ordinary reader to conjecture what he is about. Moral and religious enthusiasm, though undoubtedly poetical emotions, are at the same time but dangerous inspirers of poetry; nothing being so apt to run into interminable dulness or mellifluous extravagance, without giving the unfortunate author the slightest intimation of his danger. His laudable zeal for the efficacy of his preachments, he very naturally mistakes for the ardour of poetical inspiration;— and, while dealing out the high words and glowing phrases which are so readily supplied by themes of this description, can scarcely avoid believing that he is eminently original and impressive:—All sorts of commonplace notions and expressions are sanctified in his eyes, by the sublime ends for which they are employed; and the mystical verbiage of the Methodist pulpit is repeated,
[Page 239]
till the speaker entertains no doubt that he is the chosen organ of divine truth and persuasion. But if such be the common hazards of seeking inspiration from those potent fountains, it may easily be conceived what chance Mr. Wordsworth had of escaping their enchantment,— with his natural propensities to wordiness, and his unlucky habit of debasing pathos with vulgarity. The fact accordingly is, that in this production he is more obscure that a Pindaric poet of the seventeenth century; and more verbose “than even himself of yore;” while the wilfulness with which he persists in choosing his examples of intellectual dignity and tenderness exclusively from the lowest ranks of society, will be sufficiently apparent, from the circumstance of his having thought fit to make his chief prolocutor in this poetical dialogue, and chief advocate of Providence and Virtue, an old Scotch Pedlar —retired indeed from business—but still rambling about in his former haunts, and gossiping among his old customers, without his pack on his shoulders. The other persons of the drama are, a retired military chaplain, who has grown half an atheist and half a misanthrope—the wife of an unprosperous weaver —a servant girl with her natural child—a parish pauper, and one or two other personages of equal rank and dignity.
The character of the work is decidedly didactic; and more than nine tenths of it are occupied with a species of dialogue, or rather a series of long sermons or harangues which pass between the pedlar, the author, the old chaplain, and a worthy vicar, who entertains the whole party at dinner on the last day of their excursion. The incidents which occur in the course of it are as few and trifling as can well be imagined;—and those which the different speakers narrate in the course of their discourses, are introduced rather to illustrate their arguments or opinions, than for any interest they are supposed to possess of their own.—The doctrine which the work is intended to enforce, we are by no means certain that we have discovered. In so far as we can collect, however, it seems to be neither more nor less than the old
[Page 240]
familiar one, that a firm belief in the providence of a wise and beneficent Being must be our great stay and support under all afflictions and perplexities upon earth —and that there are indications of his power and goodness in all the aspects of the visible universe, whether living or inanimate—every part of which should therefore be regarded with love and reverence, as exponents of those great attributes. We can testify, at least, that these salutary and important truths are inculcated at far greater length, and with more repetitions, than in any ten volumes of sermons that we ever perused. It is also maintained, with equal conciseness and originality, that there is frequently much good sense, as well as much enjoyment, in the humbler conditions of life; and that, in spite of great vices and abuses, there is a reasonable allowance both of happiness and goodness in society at large. If there be any deeper or more recondite doctrines in Mr. Wordsworth's book, we must confess that they have escaped us;—and, convinced as we are of the truth and soundness of those to which we have alluded, we cannot help thinking that they might have been better enforced with less parade and prolixity. His effusions on what may be called the physiognomy of external nature, or its moral and theological expression, are eminently fantastic, obscure, and affected.—It is quite time, however, that we should give the reader a more particular account of this singular performance.
It opens with a picture of the author toiling across a bare common in a hot summer day, and reaching at last a ruined hut surrounded with tall trees, where he meets by appointment with a hale old man, with an iron-pointed staff lying beside him. Then follows a retrospective account of their first acquaintance—formed, it seems, when the author was at a village school; and his aged friend occupied “one room,—the fifth part of a house” in the neighbourhood. After this, we have the history of this reverend person at no small length. He was born, we are happy to find, in Scotland—among the hills of Athol; and his mother, after his father's death, married the parish schoolmaster—so that he was taught
[Page 241]
his letters betimes: But then, as it is here set forth with much solemnity,
“From his sixth year, the boy of whom I speak,
In summer, tended cattle on the hills!”
And again, a few pages after, that there may be no risk of mistake as to a point of such essential importance—
“From early childhood, even, as hath been said,
From his sixth year , he had been sent abroad,
In summer —to tend herds! Such was his task!”
In the course of this occupation it is next recorded, that he acquired such a taste for rural scenery and open air, that when he was sent to teach a school in a neighbouring village, he found it “a misery to him;” and determined to embrace the more romantic occupation of a Pedlar—or, as Mr. Wordsworth more musically expresses it,
“A vagrant merchant, bent beneath his load;”
—and in the course of his peregrinations had acquired a very large acquaintance, which, after he had given up dealing, he frequently took a summer ramble to visit.
The author, on coming up to this interesting personage, finds him sitting with his eyes half shut;—and, not being quite sure whether he is asleep or awake, stands “some minutes' space” in silence beside him. “At length,” says he, with his own delightful simplicity—
“At length I hail'd him— seeing that his hat
Was moist with water-drops, as if the brim
Had newly scoop'd a running stream!—
    —‘'Tis,’ said I, ‘a burning day!
My lips are parch'd with thirst;—but you, I guess,
Have somewhere found relief.’”
Upon this, the benevolent old man points him out, not a running stream, but a well in a corner, to which the author repairs; and, after minutely describing its situation, beyond a broken wall, and between two alders
[Page 242]
that “grew in a cold damp nook,” he thus faithfully chronicles the process of his return:—
“My thirst I slak'd; and from the cheerless spot
Withdrawing, straightway to the shade return'd,
Where sate the old man on the cottage bench.”
The Pedlar then gives an account of the last inhabitants of the deserted cottage beside them. These were, a good industrious weaver and his wife and children. They were very happy for a while; till sickness and want of work came upon them; and then the father enlisted as a soldier, and the wife pined in that lonely cottage—growing every year more careless and desponding, as her anxiety and fears for her absent husband, of whom no tidings ever reached her, accumulated. Her children died, and left her cheerless and alone; and at last she died also; and the cottage fell to decay. We must say, that there is very considerable pathos in the telling of this simple story; and that they who can get over the repugnance excited by the triteness of its incidents, and the lowness of its objects, will not fail to be struck with the author's knowledge of the human heart, and the power he possesses of stirring up its deepest and gentlest sympathies. His prolixity, indeed, it is not so easy to get over. This little story fills about twenty-five quarto pages; and abounds, of course, with mawkish sentiment, and details of preposterous minuteness. When the tale is told, the travellers take their staffs, and end their first day's journey, without further adventure, at a little inn.
The Second Book sets them forward betimes in the morning. They pass by a Village Wake; and as they approach a more solitary part of the mountains, the old man tells the author that he is taking him to see an old friend of his, who had formerly been chaplain to a Highland regiment—had lost a beloved wife—been roused from his dejection by the first enthusiasm of the French Revolution—had emigrated on its miscarriage, to America —and returned disgusted to hide himself in the retreat to which they were now ascending. That retreat is then most tediously described—a smooth green valley
[Page 243]
in the heart of the mountain, without trees, and with only one dwelling. Just as they get sight of it from the ridge above, they see a funeral train proceeding from the solitary abode, and hurry on with some apprehension for the fate of the amiable misanthrope— whom they find, however, in very tolerable condition at the door, and learn that the funeral was that of an aged pauper who had been boarded out by the parish in that cheap farm-house, and had died in consequence of long exposure to heavy rain. The old chaplain, or, as Mr. Wordsworth is pleased to call him, the Solitary, tells this dull story at prodigious length; and after giving an inflated description of an effect of mountain mists in the evening sun, treats his visitors with a rustic dinner—and they walk out to the fields at the close of the second book.
The Third makes no progress in the excursion. It is entirely filled with moral and religious conversation and debate, and with a more ample detail of the Solitary's past life than had been given in the sketch of his friend. The conversation is, in our judgment, exceedingly dull and mystical; and the Solitary's confessions insufferably diffuse. Yet there is occasionally very considerable force writing and tenderness of sentiment in this part of the work.
The Fourth Book is also filled with dialogues, ethical and, theological; and, with the exception of some brilliant and forcible expressions here and there, consists of an exposition of truisms, more cloudy, wordy, and inconceivably prolix, than any thing we ever met with.
In the beginning of the Fifth Book, they leave the solitary valley, taking its pensive inhabitant along with them, and stray on to where the landscape sinks down into milder features, till they arrive at a church, which stands on a moderate elevation in the centre of a wide and fertile vale. Here they meditate for a while among the monuments, till the Vicar comes out and joins them; —and recognising the Pedlar for an old acquaintance, mixes graciously in the conversation, which proceeds in a very edifying manner till the close of the book.
[Page 244]
The Sixth contains a choice obituary, or characteristic account of several of the persons who lie buried before this group of moralizers;—an unsuccessful lover, who had found consolation in natural history—a miner, who worked on for twenty years, in despite of universal ridicule, and at last found the vein he had expected—two political enemies reconciled in old age to each other— an old female miser—a seduced damsel—and two widowers, one who had devoted himself to the education of his daughters, and one who had preferred marrying a prudent middle-aged woman to take care of them.
In the beginning of the Eighth Book, the worthy vicar expresses, in the words of Mr. Wordsworth's own epitome, “his apprehensions that he had detained his auditors too long—invites them to his house—Solitary, disinclined to comply, rallies the Wanderer, and some-what playfully draws a comparison between his itinerant profession and that of a knight-errant—which leads to the Wanderer giving an account of changes in the country, from the manufacturing spirit—Its favourable effects—The other side of the picture,” &c. &c. After these very poetical themes are exhausted, they all go into the house, where they are introduced to the Vicar's wife and daughter; and while they sit chatting in the parlour over a family dinner, his son and one of his companions come in with a fine dish of trouts piled on a blue slate; and after being caressed by the company, are sent to dinner in the nursery.—This ends the eighth book.
The Ninth and last is chiefly occupied with a mystical discourse of the Pedlar; who maintains, that the whole universe is animated by an active principle, the noblest seat of which is in the human soul; and moreover, that the final end of old age is to train and enable us
“To hear the mighty stream of Tendency
Uttering, for elevation of our thought,
A clear sonorous voice, inaudible
To the vast multitude whose doom it is
To run the giddy round of vain delight—”
[Page 245]
with other matters as luminous and emphatic. The hostess at length breaks off the harangue, by proposing that they should all make a little excursion on the lake, —and they embark accordingly; and, after navigating for some time along its shores, and drinking tea on a little island, land at last on a remote promontory, from which they see the sun go down,—and listen to a solemn and pious, but rather long prayer from the Vicar. They then walk back to the parsonage door, where the author and his friend propose to spend the evening;—but the Solitary prefers walking back in the moonshine to his own valley, after promising to take another ramble with them—
“If time, with free consent, be yours to give,
And season favours.”
—And here the publication somewhat abruptly closes.
Our abstract of the story has been so extremely concise, that it is more than usually necessary for us to lay some specimens of the work itself before our readers. Its grand staple, as we have already said, consists of a kind of mystical morality: and the chief characteristics of the style are, that it is prolix, and very frequently unintelligible: and though we are sensible that no great gratification is to be expected from the exhibition of those qualities, yet it is necessary to give our readers a taste of them, both to justify the sentence we have passed, and to satisfy them that it was really beyond our power to present them with any abstract or intelligible account of those long conversations which we have had so much occasion to notice in our brief sketch of its contents. We need give ourselves no trouble, however, to select passages for this purpose. Here is the first that presents itself to us on opening the volume; and if our readers can form the slightest guess at its meaning, we must give them credit for a sagacity to which we have no pretension.
“But, by the storms of circumstance unshaken,
And subject neither to eclipse or wane,
Duty exists;—immutably survive,
For our support, the measures and the forms,
[Page 246]
Which an abstract Intelligence supplies;
Whose kingdom is, where Time and Space are not:
Of other converse, which mind, soul, and heart,
Do, with united urgency, require,
What more, that may not perish?”
“'Tis, by comparison, an easy task
Earth to despise; but to converse with Heav'n,
This is not easy:—to relinquish all
We have, or hope, of happiness and joy,—
And stand in freedom loosen'd from this world;
I deem not arduous!—but must needs confess
That 'tis a thing impossible to frame
Conceptions equal to the Soul's desires.”— p. 144–147.
This is a fair sample of that rapturous mysticism which eludes all comprehension, and fills the despairing reader with painful giddiness and terror. The following, which we meet with on the very next page, is in the same general strain:—though the first part of it affords a good specimen of the author's talent for enveloping a plain and trite observation in all the mock majesty of solemn verbosity. A reader of plain understanding, we suspect, could hardly recognise the familiar remark, that excessive grief for our departed friends is not very consistent with a firm belief in their immortal felicity, in the first twenty lines of the following passage:—In the succeeding lines we do not ourselves pretend to recognise any thing.
“From this infirmity of mortal kind
Sorrow proceeds, which else were not;—at least,
If Grief be something hallow'd and ordain'd,
If, in proportion, it be just and meet,
Through this, 'tis able to maintain its hold,
In that excess which Conscience disapproves.
For who could sink and settle to that point
Of selfishness; so senseless who could be
In framing estimates of loss and gain,
As long and perseveringly to mourn
For any Object of his love, remov'd
From this unstable world, if he could fix
A satisfying view upon that state
Of pure, imperishable blessedness
Which Reason promises, and Holy Writ
Ensures to all Believers?—Yet mistrust
Is of such incapacity, methinks,
No natural branch; despondency far less.
[Page 247]
—And, if there be whose tender frames have droop'd
Ev'n to the dust; apparently, through weight
Of anguish unreliev'd, and lack of power
An agonising sorrow to transmute ;
Infer not hence a hope from those withheld
When wanted most; a confidence impair'd
So pitiably, that, having ceas'd to see
With bodily eyes, they are borne down by love
Of what is lost, and perish through regret!
Oh! no, full oft the innocent Suff'rer sees
Too clearly; feels too vividly; and longs
To realize the Vision with intense
And overconstant yearning—There—there lies
The excess, by which the balance is destroy'd.
Too, too contracted are these walls of flesh,
This vital warmth too cold, these visual orbs,
Though inconceivably endow'd, too dim
For any passion of the soul that leads
To ecstasy! and, all the crooked paths
Of time and change disdaining, takes its course
Along the line of limitless desires.
I, speaking now from such disorder free,
Nor sleep, nor craving , but in settled peace,
I cannot doubt that They whom you deplore
Are glorified.” —p. 148, 149.
If any farther specimen be wanted of the learned author's propensity to deal out the most familiar truths as the oracles of his own inspired understanding, the following wordy paraphrase of the ordinary remark, that the best consolation in distress is to be found in the exercises of piety, and the testimony of a good conscience, may be found on turning the leaf.
“What then remains?—To seek
Those helps, for his occasions ever near,
Who lacks not will to use them; vows, renew'd
On the first motion of a holy thought;
Vigils of contemplation; praise; and pray'r,
A Stream, which, from the fountain of the heart,
Issuing however feebly, no where flows
Without access of unexpected strength.
But, above all, the victory is most sure
For Him who, seeking faith by virtue, strives
To yield entire submission to the law
Of Conscience; Conscience reverenc'd and obey'd
As God's most intimate Presence in the soul,
And his most perfect Image in the world.” —p. 151.
[Page 248]
We have kept the book too long open, however, at one place, and shall now take a dip in it nearer the beginning. The following account of the Pedlar's early training, and lonely meditations among the mountains, is a good example of the forced and affected ecstasies in which this author abounds.
                                         —“Nor did he fail,
While yet a Child, with a Child's eagerness
Incessantly to turn his ear and eye
On all things which the moving seasons brought
To feed such appetite: nor this alone
Appeas'd his yearning:—in the after day
Of Boyhood, many an hour in caves forlorn,
And 'mid the hollow depths of naked crags,
He sate, and even in their fix'd lineaments,
Or from the pow'r of a peculiar eye,
Or by creative feeling overborne,
Or by predominance of thought oppress'd,
Ev'n in their fix'd and steady lineaments
He trac'd an ebbing and a flowing mind.” —p. 11.
We should like extremely to know what is meant by tracing an ebbing and flowing mind in the fixed lineaments of naked crags?—but this is but the beginning of the raving fit.
In these majestic solitudes, he used also to read his Bible;—and we are told that—
“There did he see the writing !—All things there
Breath'd immortality, revolving life
And greatness still revolving; infinite !
There littleness was not; the least of things
Seem'd infinite; and there his spirit shap'd
Her prospects; nor did he believe,—he saw !
What wonder if his being thus became
Sublime and comprehensive! Low desires,
Low thoughts had there no place; yet was his heart
Lowly; for he was meek in gratitude.” —p. 14, 15.
What follows about nature, triangles, stars, and the laws of light, is still more incomprehensible.
                                         —“Yet still uppermost
Nature was at his heart, as if he felt,
Though yet he knew not how, a wasting pow'r
In all things which from her sweet influence
Might tend to wean him. Therefore with her hues,
[Page 249]
Her forms, and with the spirit of her forms,
He cloth'd the nakedness of austere truth.
While yet he linger'd in the rudiments
Of science, and among her simplest laws,
His triangles —they were the stars of heav'n,
The silent stars! Oft did he take delight
To measure th' altitude of some tall crag
Which is the eagle's birthplace, or some peak
Familiar with forgotten years, that shows
Inscrib'd, as with the silence of the thought,
Upon its bleak and visionary sides;—
                                         ---and I have heard him say
That often, failing at this time to gain
The peace requir'd, he scann'd the laws of light
Amid the roar of torrents , where they send
From hollow clefts up to the clearer air
A cloud of mist, which in the sunshine frames
A lasting tablet—for the observer's eye
Varying its rainbow hues. But vainly thus,
And vainly by all other means, he strove
To mitigate the fever of his heart.” —p. 16–18.
The whole book, indeed, is full of such stuff. The following is the author's own sublime aspiration after the delight of becoming a Motion , or a Presence , or an Energy among multitudinous streams.
“Oh! what a joy it were, in vig'rous health,
To have a Body (this our vital Frame
With shrinking sensibility endu'd,
And all the nice regards of flesh and blood)
And to the elements surrender it
As if it were a Spirit !—How divine
The liberty, for frail, for mortal man,
To roam at large among unpeopled glens
And mountainous retirements, only trod
By devious footsteps; regions consecrate
To oldest time! and, reckless of the storm
That keeps the raven quiet in her nest,
Be as a Presence or a Motion !—one
Among the many there; and, while the Mists
Flying, and rainy Vapours, call out Shapes
And Phantoms from the crags and solid earth
As fast as a Musician scatters sounds
Out of an instrument; and, while the Streams—
(As at a first creation and in haste
To exercise their untried faculties)
Descending from the regions of the clouds,
And starting from the hollows of the earth
More multitudinous every moment—rend
[Page 250]
Their way before them, what a joy to roam
An equal among mightiest Energies !
And haply sometimes with articulate voice,
Amid the deaf'ning tumult, scarcely heard
By him that utters it, exclaim aloud
Be this continu'd so from day to day,
Nor let it have an end from month to month!” —p. 164, 165.
We suppose the reader is now satisfied with Mr. Wordsworth's sublimities—which occupy rather more than half the volume:—Of his tamer and more creeping prolixity, we have not the heart to load him with many specimens. The following amplification of the vulgar comparison of human life to a stream, has the merit of adding much obscurity to wordiness; at least, we have not ingenuity enough to refer the conglobated bubbles and murmurs, and floating islands, to their Vital prototypes.
                                         —“The tenor
Which my life holds, he readily may conceive
Whoe'er hath stood to watch a mountain Brook
In some still passage of its course, and seen,
Within the depths of its capacious breast,
Inverted trees, and rocks, and azure sky;
And, on its glassy surface, specks of foam,
And conglobated bubbles undissolv'd,
Numerous as stars; that, by their onward lapse,
Betray to sight the motion of the stream,
Else imperceptible; meanwhile, is heard
Perchance a roar or murmur ; and the sound
Though soothing, and the little floating isles
Though beautiful, are both by Nature charg'd
With the same pensive office; and make known
Through what perplexing labyrinths, abrupt
Precipitations, and untoward straits,
The earth-born wanderer hath pass'd; and quickly,
That respite o'er, like traverses and toils
Must be again encounter'd.—Such a stream
Is Human Life.” —p. 139, 140.
The following, however, is a better example of the useless and most tedious minuteness with which the author so frequently details circumstances of no interest in themselves,—of no importance to the story,—and possessing no graphical merit whatsoever as pieces of
[Page 251]
description. On their approach to the old chaplain's cottage, the author gets before his companion,
                     —“when behold
An object that entic'd my steps aside!
It was an Entry, narrow as a door;
A passage whose brief windings open'd out
Into a platform; that lay, sheepfold-wise ,
Enclos'd between a single mass of rock
And one old moss-grown wall;—a cool Recess,
And fanciful! For, where the rock and wall
Met in an angle, hung a tiny roof,
Or penthouse, which most quaintly had been fram'd
By thrusting two rude sticks into the wall
And overlaying them with mountain sods!
To weather-fend a little turf-built seat
Whereon a full-grown man might rest, nor dread
The burning sunshine, or a transient shower;
But the whole plainly wrought by Children's hands !
Whose simple skill had throng'd the grassy floor
With work of frame less solid; a proud show
Of baby-houses, curiously arrang'd !
Nor wanting ornament of walks between,
With mimic trees inserted in the turf,
And gardens interpos'd. Pleas'd with the sight ,
I could not choose but beckon to my Guide,
Who, having enter'd, carelessly look'd round,
And now would have pass'd on; when I exclaim'd,
‘Lo! what is here?’ and, stooping down, drew forth
A Book,” &c. —p. 71, 72.
And this book, which he
                                         —“found to be a work
In the French Tongue, a Novel of Voltaire,”
leads to no incident or remark of any value or importance, to apologise for this long story of its finding. There is no beauty, we think, it must be admitted, in these passages; and so little either of interest or curiosity in the incidents they disclose, that we can scarcely conceive that any man to whom they had actually occurred, should take the trouble to recount them to his wife and children by his idle fireside:—but, that man or child should think them worth writing down in blank verse, and printing in magnificent quarto, we should certainly have supposed altogether impossible, had it
[Page 252]
not been for the ample proofs which Mr. Wordsworth has afforded to the contrary.
Sometimes their silliness is enhanced by a paltry attempt at effect and emphasis:—as in the following account of that very touching and extraordinary occurrence of a lamb bleating among the mountains. The poet would actually persuade us that he thought the mountains themselves were bleating;—and that nothing could be so grand or impressive. “List!” cries the old Pedlar, suddenly breaking off in the middle of one of his daintiest ravings—
                     —“List!—I heard,
From you huge breast of rock, a solemn bleat !
Sent forth as if it were the Mountain's voice!
As if the visible Mountain made the cry!
Again!”—The effect upon the soul was such
As he express'd; for, from the Mountain's heart
The solemn bleat appear'd to come! There was
No other—and the region all around
Stood silent, empty of all shape of life.
— It was a Lamb —left somewhere to itself!” —p. 159.
What we have now quoted will give the reader a notion of the taste and spirit in which this volume is composed: And yet, if it had not contained something a good deal better, we do not know how we should have been justified in troubling him with any account of it. But the truth is, that Mr. Wordsworth, with all his perversities, is a person of great powers; and has frequently a force in his moral declamations, and a tenderness in his pathetic narratives, which neither his prolixity nor his affectation can altogether deprive of their effect. We shall venture to give some extracts from the simple tale of the Weaver's solitary Cottage. Its heroine is the deserted wife; and its chief interest consists in the picture of her despairing despondence and anxiety, after his disappearance. The Pedlar, recurring to the well to which he had directed his companion, observes,
                                         —“As I stoop'd to drink,
Upon the slimy foot-stone I espied
The useless fragment of a wooden bowl,
Green with the moss of years; a pensive sight
[Page 253]
That mov'd my heart!—recalling former days,
When I could never pass that road but She
Who liv'd within these walls, at my approach,
A Daughter's welcome gave me;—and I lov'd her
As my own child! O Sir! the good die first!
And they whose hearts are dry as summer dust
Burn to the socket.”
                                         —“By some especial care
Her temper had been fram'd, as if to make
A Being—who by adding love to peace
Might live on earth a life of happiness.” —p. 27, 28.
The bliss and tranquillity of these prosperous years is well and copiously described;—but at last came sickness, and want of employment;—and the effect on the kind-hearted and industrious mechanic is strikingly delineated.
                                         —“At his door he stood,
And whistl'd many a snatch of merry tunes
That had no mirth in them! or with his knife
Carv'd uncouth figures on the heads of sticks—
Then, not less idly, sought, through every nook
In house or garden, any casual work
Of use or ornament.”—
“One while he would speak lightly of his Babes,
And with a cruel tongue: at other times
He toss'd them with a false unnat'ral joy:
And 'twas a rueful thing to see the looks
Of the poor innocent children.” —p. 31.
At last, he steals from his cottage, and enlists as a soldier; and when the benevolent Pedlar comes, in his rounds, in hope of a cheerful welcome, he meets with a scene of despair.
                                         —“Having reach'd the door
I knock'd,—and, when I enter'd with the hope
Of usual greeting, Margaret look'd at me
A little while; then turn'd her head away
Speechless,—and sitting down upon a chair
Wept bitterly! I wist not what to do,
Or how to speak to her. Poor Wretch! at last
She rose from off her seat, and then,—O Sir!
I cannot tell how she pronounc'd my name.—
With fervent love, and with a face of grief
Unutterably helpless!” —p. 34, 35.
Hope, however, and native cheerfulness, were not yet
[Page 254]
subdued; and her spirit still bore up against the pressure of this desertion.
                                         —“Long we had not talk'd
Ere we built up a pile of better thoughts,
And with a brighter eye she look'd around
As if she had been shedding tears of joy.”
“We parted.—'Twas the time of early spring;
I left her busy with her garden tools;
And well remember, o'er that fence she look'd,
And, while I paced along the footway path,
Called out, and sent a blessing after me,
With tender cheerfulness; and with a voice
That seem'd the very sound of happy thoughts.” —p. 36, 37.
The gradual sinking of the spirit under the load of continued anxiety, and the destruction of all the finer springs of the soul by a course of unvarying sadness, are very feelingly represented in the sequel of this simple narrative.
                                         —“I journey'd back this way
Towards the wane of Summer; when the wheat
Was yellow; and the soft and bladed grass
Springing afresh had o'er the hay-field spread
Its tender verdure. At the door arriv'd,
I found that she was absent. In the shade,
Where now we sit, I waited her return.
Her Cottage, then a cheerful Object, wore
Its customary look,—only, I thought,
The honeysuckle, crowding round the porch,
Hung down in heavier tufts: and that bright weed,
The yellow stone-crop, suffer'd to take root
Along the window's edge, profusely grew,
Blinding the lower panes. I turn'd aside,
And stroll'd into her garden. It appear'd
To lag behind the season, and had lost
Its pride of neatness.”—
“The sun was sinking in the west; and now
I sate with sad impatience. From within
Her solitary Infant cried aloud;
Then, like a blast that dies away self-still'd,
The voice was silent.” —p. 37–39.
The desolate woman had now an air of still and listless, though patient sorrow.
                                         —“Evermore
Her eyelids droop'd, her eyes were downward cast;
And, when she at her table gave me food,
She did not look at me! Her voice was low,
[Page 255]
Her body was subdu'd. In ev'ry act
Pertaining to her house affairs, appear'd
The careless stillness of a thinking mind
Self-occupied; to which all outward things
Are like an idle matter. Still she sigh'd,
But yet no motion of the breast was seen,
No heaving of the heart. While by the fire
We sate together, sighs came on my ear,
I knew not how, and hardly whence they came.
                                         —I return'd,
And took my rounds along this road again,
Ere on its sunny bank the primrose flow'r
Peep'd forth, to give an earnest of the Spring.
I found her sad and drooping; she had learn'd
No tidings of her Husband; if he liv'd
She knew not that he liv'd; if he were dead
She knew not he was dead. She seem'd the same
In person and appearance; but her House
Bespake a sleepy hand of negligence.
                                         —Her Infant Babe
Had from its Mother caught the trick of grief,
And sigh'd among its playthings!” —p. 41–43.
Returning seasons only deepened this gloom, and confirmed this neglect. Her child died; and she spent her weary days in roaming over the country, and repeating her fond and vain inquiries to every passer by.
“Meantime her House by frost, and thaw, and rain,
Was sapp'd; and while she slept the nightly damps
Did chill her breast; and in the stormy day
Her tatter'd clothes were ruffl'd by the wind,
Ev'n at the side of her own fire. Yet still
She lov'd this wretched spot: and here, my Friend,
In sickness she remain'd; and here she died!
Last Human Tenant of these ruin'd Walls.” —p. 46.
The story of the old Chaplain, though a little less lowly, is of the same mournful cast, and almost equally destitute of incidents;—for Mr. Wordsworth delineates only feelings—and all his adventures are of the heart. The narrative which is given by the sufferer himself is, in our opinion, the most spirited and interesting part of the poem. He begins thus, and addressing himself, after a long pause, to his ancient countryman and friend the Pedlar—
“You never saw, your eyes did never look
On the bright Form of Her whom once I lov'd!—
[Page 256]
Her silver voice was heard upon the earth,
A sound unknown to you; else, honour'd Friend,
Your heart had borne a pitiable share
Of what I suffer'd, when I wept that loss!
And suffer now, not seldom, from the thought
That I remember—and can weep no more!” —p. 117.
The following account of his marriage and early felicity is written with great sweetness—a sweetness like that of Massinger, in his softer and more mellifluous passages.
                     —“This fair Bride—
In the devotedness of youthful love,
Preferring me to Parents, and the choir
Of gay companions, to the natal roof,
And all known places and familiar sights,
(Resign'd with sadness gently weighing down
Her trembling expectations, but no more
Than did to her due honour, and to me
Yielded, that day, a confidence sublime
In what I had to build upon)—this Bride,
Young, modest, meek, and beautiful, I led
To a low Cottage in a sunny Bay,
Where the salt sea innocuously breaks,
And the sea breeze as innocently breathes,
On Devon's leafy shores;—a shelter'd Hold,
In a soft clime, encouraging the soil
To a luxuriant bounty!—As our steps
Approach the embower'd Abode, our chosen Seat,
See, rooted in the earth, its kindly bed,
The unendanger'd Myrtle, deck'd with flowers,' &c.
“—Wild were our walks upon those lonely Downs,
Whence, unmolested Wanderers, we beheld
The shining Giver of the Day diffuse
His brightness, o'er a tract of sea and land
Gay as our spirits, free as our desires,
As our enjoyments boundless.—From these Heights
We dropp'd, at pleasure, into sylvan Combs;
Where arbours of impenetrable shade,
And mossy seats detain'd us, side by side,
With hearts at ease, and knowledge in our hearts
‘That all the grove and all the day was ours.’” —p. 118–120.
There, seven years of unmolested happiness were blessed with two lovely children.
“And on these pillars rested, as on air,
Our solitude.”
[Page 257]
Suddenly a contagious malady swept off both the infants.
“Calm as a frozen Lake when ruthless Winds
Blow fiercely, agitating earth and sky,
The Mother now remain'd.”
                                         —“Yet, stealing slow,
Dimness o'er this clear Luminary crept
Insensibly!—The immortal and divine
Yielded to mortal reflux, her pure Glory,
As from the pinnacle of worldly state
Wretched Ambition drops astounded, fell
Into a gulph obscure of silent grief,
And keen heart-anguish—of itself asham'd,
Yet obstinately cherishing itself:
And, so consum'd, She melted from my arms!
And left me, on this earth, disconsolate.” —p. 125, 126.
The agony of mind into which the survivor was thrown, is described with a powerful eloquence; as well as the doubts and distracting fears which the sceptical speculations of his careless days had raised in his spirit. There is something peculiarly grand and terrible to our feelings in the imagery of these three lines—
“By pain of heart, now check'd, and now impell'd,
The Intellectual Power, through words and things,
Went sounding on,—a dim and perilous way!”
At last he is roused from this dejected mood, by the glorious promises which seemed held out to human nature by the first dawn of the French Revolution;—and it indicates a fine perception of the secret springs of character and emotion, to choose a being so circumstanced as the most ardent votary of that far-spread enthusiasm.
“Thus was I reconverted to the world!
Society became my glitt'ring Bride,
And airy hopes my Children!—If busy Men
In sober conclave met, to weave a web
Of amity, whose living threads should stretch
Beyond the seas, and to the farthest pole,
There did I sit, assisting. If, with noise
And acclamation, crowds in open air
Express'd the tumult of their minds, my voice
There mingled, heard or not. The powers of song
I left not uninvok'd; and, in still groves,
[Page 258]
Where mild Enthusiasts tun'd a pensive lay
Of thanks and expectation, in accord
With their belief, I sang Saturnian Rule
Return'd,—a progeny of golden years
Permitted to descend, and bless mankind!” —p. 128, 129.
On the disappearance of that bright vision, he was inclined to take part with the desperate party who still aimed at establishing universal regeneration, though by more questionable instruments than they had originally assumed. But the military despotism which ensued soon closed the scene against all such exertions; and, disgusted with men and Europe, he sought for shelter in the wilds of America. In the calm of the voyage, Memory and Conscience awoke him to a sense of his misery.
                     —“Feebly must They have felt
Who, in old time, attir'd with snakes and whips
The vengeful Furies. Beautiful regards
Were turn'd on me—the face of her I lov'd!
The Wife and Mother, pitifully fixing
Tender reproaches, insupportable!” —p. 133, 134.
His disappointment, and ultimate seclusion in England, have been already sufficiently detailed.
We must trespass upon our readers with the fragments of yet another story. It is that of a simple, seduced, and deserted girl, told with great sweetness, pathos, and indulgence, by the Vicar of the parish, by the side of her untimely grave. Looking down on the turf, he says—
“As, on a sunny bank, a tender Lamb,
Lurks in safe shelter, from the winds of March
Screen'd by its Parent, so that little mound
Lies guarded by its neighbour. The small heap
Speaks for itself;—an Infant there doth rest;
The shelt'ring Hillock is the Mother's grave!—
There, by her innocent Baby's precious grave,
Yea, doubtless, on the turf that roofs her own,
The Mother oft was seen to stand, or kneel,
In the broad day, a weeping Magdalene.
Now she is not! The swelling turf reports
Of the fresh show'r, but of poor Ellen's tears
Is silent; nor is any vestige left
Upon the pathway of her mournful tread;
[Page 259]
Nor of that pace with which she once had mov'd
In virgin fearlessness—a step that seem'd
Caught from the pressure of elastic turf
Upon the mountains wet with morning dew,
In the prime hour of sweetest scents and airs.” —p. 285–287.
Her virgin graces and gentleness are then very beautifully described, and her seduction and lonely anguish passed over very tenderly.
“‘Ah why,’ said Ellen, sighing to herself,
‘Why do not words, and kiss, and solemn pledge;
And nature that is kind in Woman's breast,
And reason that in Man is kind and good,
And fear of Him who is a righteous Judge,
Why do not these prevail for human life,
To keep two hearts together, that began
Their spring-time with one love, and that have need
Of mutual pity and forgiveness, sweet
To grant, or be receiv'd?’” —p. 289.
“A kindlier passion open'd on her soul
When that poor Child was born. Upon its face
She look'd as on a pure and spotless gift
Of unexpected promise, where a grief
Or dread was all that had been thought of.
                                         —‘Till this hour,’
Thus in her Mother's hearing Ellen spake,
‘There was a stony region in my heart!
But He at whose command the parched rock
Was smitten, and pour'd forth a quenching stream,
Hath soften'd that obduracy, and made
Unlook'd-for gladness in the desert place,
To save the perishing; and, henceforth, I look
Upon the light with cheerfulness, for thee
My Infant! and for that good Mother dear,
Who bore me,—and hath pray'd for me in vain!—
Yet not in vain, it shall not be in vain.’
—Through four months' space the Infant drew its food
From the maternal breast. Then scruples rose;
Thoughts, which the rich are free from, came and cross'd
The sweet affection. She no more could bear
By her offence to lay a twofold weight
On a kind parent, willing to forget
Their slender means! So, to that parent's care
Trusting her child, she left their common home,
And with contented spirit undertook
A Foster-Mother's office.” —p. 291–293.
Here the parents of her new nursling soon forbade her all intercourse with her own most precious child;—
[Page 260]
and a sudden malady carried it off, in this period of forced desertion.
                     —“Once, only once,
She saw it in that mortal malady:
And, on the burial day, could scarcely gain
Permission to attend its obsequies!
She reach'd the house—last of the fun'ral train;
And some One, as she enter'd, having chanc'd
To urge unthinkingly their prompt departure,
‘Nay,’ said she, with commanding look, a spirit
Of anger never seen in her before,
‘Nay ye must wait my time!’ and down she sate,
And by the unclos'd coffin kept her seat;
Weeping and looking, looking on and weeping
Upon the last sweet slumber of her Child!
Until at length her soul was satisfied.
    You see the Infant's Grave!—and to this Spot,
The Mother, oft as she was sent abroad,
And whatsoe'er the errand, urg'd her steps:
Hither she came; and here she stood, or knelt,
In the broad day—a rueful Magdalene!” —p. 294.
Overwhelmed with this calamity, she was at last obliged to leave her service.
“But the green stalk of Ellen's life was snapp'd,
And the flower droop'd; as every eye might see.”
    “Her fond maternal Heart had built a Nest
In blindness all too near the river's edge;
That Work a summer flood with hasty swell
Had swept away! and now her spirit long'd
For its last flight to Heaven's security.”
“—Meek Saint! through patience glorified on earth!
In whom, as by her lonely hearth she sate,
The ghastly face of cold decay put on
A sun-like beauty, and appear'd divine;
So, through the cloud of death, her Spirit pass'd
Into that pure and unknown world of love,
Where injury cannot come:—and here is laid
The mortal Body by her Infant's side!”
—p. 296, 297.
These passages, we think, are among the most touching with which the volume presents us; though there are many in a more lofty and impassioned style. The following commemoration of a beautiful and glorious youth, the love and the pride of the humble valley, is full of warmth and poetry.
[Page 261]
                                         —“The mountain Ash,
Deck'd with autumnal berries that outshine
Spring's richest blossoms, yields a splendid show,
Amid the leafy woods; and ye have seen,
By a brook side or solitary tarn,
How she her station doth adorn,—the pool
Glows at her feet, and all the gloomy rocks
Are brighten'd round her! In his native Vale
Such and so glorious did this Youth appear;
A sight that kindled pleasure in all hearts,
By his ingenuous beauty, by the gleam
Of his fair eyes, by his capacious brow,
By all the graces with which nature's hand
Had bounteously array'd him. As old Bards
Tell in their idle songs of wand'ring Gods,
Pan or Apollo, veil'd in human form;
Yet, like the sweet-breath'd violet of the shade,
Discover'd in their own despite, to sense
Of Mortals, (if such fables without blame
May find chance-mention on this sacred ground,)
So, through a simple rustic garb's disguise,
In him reveal'd a Scholar's genius shone!
And so, not wholly hidden from men's sight,
In him the spirit of a Hero walk'd
Our unpretending valley!” —p. 342, 343.
This is lofty and energetic;—but Mr. Wordsworth descends we cannot think very gracefully, when he proceeds to describe how the quoit whizzed when his arm launched it—and how the football mounted as high as a lark, at the touch of his toe;—neither is it a suitable catastrophe, for one so nobly endowed, to catch cold by standing too long in the river washing sheep, and die of spasms in consequence.
The general reflections on the indiscriminating rapacity of death, though by no means original in themselves, and expressed with too bold a rivalry of the seven ages of Shakspeare, have yet a character of vigour and truth about them that entitles them to notice.
“This file of Infants; some that never breathed,
And the besprinkl'd Nursling, unrequir'd
Till he begins to smile upon the breast
That feeds him; and the tott'ring Little-one
Taken from air and sunshine, when the rose
Of Infancy first blooms upon his cheek;
The thinking, thoughtless Schoolboy; the bold Youth
Of soul impetuous; and the bashful Maid
[Page 262]
Smitten while all the promises of life
Are op'ning round her; those of middle age,
Cast down while confident in strength they stand,
Like pillars fix'd more firmly, as might seem,
And more secure, by very weight of all
That, for support, rests on them; the decay'd
And burthensome; and, lastly, that poor few
Whose light of reason is with age extinct;
The hopeful and the hopeless, first and last,
The earliest summon'd and the longest spar'd,
Are here deposited; with tribute paid
Various, but unto each some tribute paid;
As if, amid these peaceful hills and groves,
Society were touch'd with kind concern,
And gentle “Nature griev'd that One should die!”— p. 244, 245.
There is a lively and impressive appeal on the injury done to the health, happiness, and morality of the lower orders, by the unceasing and premature labours of our crowded manufactories. The description of night-working is picturesque. In lonely and romantic regions, he says, when silence and darkness incline all to repose—
                                         —“An unnatural light,
Prepar'd for never-resting Labour's eyes,
Breaks from a many-window'd Fabric huge;
And at the appointed hour a Bell is heard—
Of harsher import than the Curfew-knoll
That spake the Norman Conqueror's stern behest.
A local summons to unceasing toil!
Disgorg'd are now the Ministers of day;
And, as they issue from the illumin'd Pile,
A fresh band meets them, at the crowded door,—
And in the Courts;—and where the rumbling Stream,
That turns the multitude of dizzy wheels,
Glares, like a troubl'd Spirit, in its bed
Among the rocks below. Men, Maidens, Youths,
Mother and little Children, Boys and Girls,
Enter, and each the wonted task resumes
Within this Temple—where is offer'd up
To Gain—the Master Idol of the Realm,
Perpetual sacrifice.” —p. 367.
The effects on the ordinary life of the poor are delineated in graver colours.
                                         —“Domestic bliss,
(Or call it comfort, by a humbler name,)
How art thou blighted for the poor Man's heart!
[Page 263]
Lo! in such neighbourhood, from morn to eve,
The Habitations empty! or perchance
The Mother left alone,—no helping hand
To rock the cradle of her peevish babe;
No daughters round her, busy at the wheel,
Or in despatch of each day's little growth
Of household occupation; no nice arts
Of needle-work; no bustle at the fire,
Where once the dinner was prepar'd with pride;
Nothing to speed the day, or cheer the mind;
Nothing to praise, to teach, or to command!
—The Father, if perchance he still retain
His old employments, goes to field or wood,
No longer led or follow'd by his Sons;
Idlers perchance they were,—but in his sight;
Breathing fresh air, and treading the green earth;
Till their short holiday of childhood ceas'd,
Ne'er to return! That birth-right now is lost.”— p. 371, 372.
The dissertation is closed with an ardent hope, that the farther improvement and the universal diffusion of these arts may take away the temptation for us to embark so largely in their cultivation; and that we may once more hold out inducements for the return of old manners and domestic charities.
“Learning, though late, that all true glory rests,
All praise, all safety, and all happiness,
Upon the Moral law. Egyptian Thebes;
Tyre by the margin of the sounding waves;
Palmyra, central in the Desert, fell!
And the Arts died by which they had been raised.
—Call Archimedes from his buried Tomb
Upon the plain of vanish'd Syracuse,
And feelingly the Sage shall make report
How insecure, how baseless in itself,
Is that Philosophy, whose sway is fram'd
For mere material instruments:—How weak
Those Arts, and high Inventions, if unpropp'd
By Virtue.” —p. 369.
There is also a very animated exhortation to the more general diffusion of education among the lower orders; and a glowing and eloquent assertion of their capacity for all virtues and all enjoyments.
                                         —“Believe it not!
The primal Duties shine aloft—like stars;
The Charities that soothe, and heal, and bless,
[Page 264]
Are scatter'd at the feet of Man—like flow'rs.
The gen'rous inclination, the just rule,
Kind wishes, and good actions, and pure thoughts—
No mystery is here; no special boon
For high and not for low, for proudly grac'd,
And not for meek of heart. The smoke ascends
To heav'n as lightly from the Cottage hearth
As from the haughty palace.” —p. 398.
The blessings and the necessities that now render this a peculiar duty in the rulers of this empire, are urged in a still loftier tone.
“Look! and behold, from Calpe's sunburnt cliffs
To the flat margin of the Baltic sea,
Long-reverenc'd Titles cast away as weeds;
Laws overturn'd,—and Territory split;
Like fields of ice rent by the polar wind,
And forc'd to join in less obnoxious shapes,
Which, ere they gain consistence, by a gust
Of the same breath are shatter'd and destroy'd.
Meantime, the Sov'reignty of these fair Isles
Remains entire and indivisible;
And, if that ignorance were remov'd, which acts
Within the compass of their sev'ral shores
To breed commotion and disquietude,
Each might preserve the beautiful repose
Of heav'nly bodies shining in their spheres.
—The discipline of slavery is unknown
Amongst us,—hence the more do we require
The discipline of virtue; order else
Cannot subsist, nor confidence, nor peace.” —p. 402, 403.
There is a good deal of fine description in the course of this work; but we have left ourselves no room for any specimen. The following few lines, however, are a fine epitome of a lake voyage:—
                     —“Right across the Lake
Our pinnace moves: then, coasting creek and bay,
Glades we behold—and into thickets peep—
Where crouch the spotted deer; or raise our eyes
To shaggy steeps on which the careless goat
Browsed by the side of dashing waterfalls.” —p. 412.
We add, also, the following more elaborate and fantastic picture—which, however, is not without its beauty:—
“Then having reach'd a bridge, that overarch'd
The hasty rivulet where it lay becalm'd
In a deep pool, by happy chance we saw
[Page 265]
A twofold Image. On a grassy bank
A snow-white Ram, and in the crystal flood
Another and the same! Most beautiful,
On the green turf, with his imperial front
Shaggy and bold, and wreathed horns superb,
The breathing Creature stood! as beautiful,
Beneath him, show'd his shadowy Counterpart.
Each had his glowing mountains, each his sky,
And each seem'd centre of his own fair world:
Antipodes unconscious of each other,
Yet, in partition, with their several spheres,
Blended in perfect stillness, to our sight!” —p. 407.
Besides those more extended passages of interest or beauty, which we have quoted, and omitted to quote, there are scattered up and down the book, and in the midst of its most repulsive portions, a very great number of single lines and images, that sparkle like gems in the desert, and startle us with an intimation of the great poetic powers that lie buried in the rubbish that has been heaped around them. It is difficult to pick up these, after we have once passed them by; but we shall endeavour to light upon one or two. The beneficial effect of intervals of relaxation and pastime on youthful minds, is finely expressed, we think, in a single line, when it is said to be—
“Like vernal ground to Sabbath sunshine left.”
The following image of the bursting forth of a mountain-spring, seems to us also to be conceived with great elegance and beauty.
“And a few steps may bring us to the spot,
Where haply crown'd with flow'rets and green herbs,
The Mountain Infant to the Sun comes forth,
Like human life from darkness!”
The ameliorating effects of song and music on the minds which most delight in them, are likewise very poetically expressed.
                                         —“And when the stream
Which overflow'd the soul was pass'd away,
A consciousness remain'd that it had left,
Deposited upon the silent shore
Of Memory, images and precious thoughts,
That shall not die, and cannot be destroy'd.”
[Page 266]
Nor is any thing more elegant than the representation of the graceful tranquillity occasionally put on by one of the author's favourites; who, though gay and airy, in general—
“Was graceful, when it pleas'd him, smooth and still
As the mute Swan that floats adown the stream,
Or on the waters of th' unruffled lake
Anchors her placid beauty. Not a leaf
That flutters on the bough more light than he,
And not a flow'r that droops in the green shade
More winningly reserv'd.”
Nor are there wanting morsels of a sterner and more majestic beauty; as when, assuming the weightier diction of Cowper, he says, in language which the hearts of all readers of modern history must have responded—
                     —“Earth is sick,
And Heav'n is weary of the hollow words
Which States and Kingdoms utter when they speak
Of Truth and Justice.”
These examples, we perceive, are not very well chosen —but we have not leisure to improve the selection; and, such as they are, they may serve to give the reader a notion of the sort of merit which we meant to illustrate by their citation. When we look back to them indeed, and to the other passages which we have now extracted, we feel half inclined to rescind the severe sentence which we passed on the work at the beginning:—But when we look into the work itself, we perceive that it cannot be rescinded. Nobody can be more disposed to do justice to the great powers of Mr. Wordsworth than we are; and, from the first time that he came before us, down to the present moment, we have uniformly testified in their favour, and assigned indeed our high sense of their value as the chief ground of the bitterness with which we resented their perversion. That perversion, however, is now far more visible than their original dignity; and while we collect the fragments, it is impossible not to mourn over the ruins from which we are condemned to pick them. If any one should doubt of the existence of such a perversion, or be disposed to
[Page 267]
dispute about the instances we have hastily brought forward, we would just beg leave to refer him to the general plan and character of the poem now before us. Why should Mr. Wordsworth have made his hero a superannuated Pedlar? What but the most wretched affectation, or provoking perversity of taste, could induce any one to place his chosen advocate of wisdom and virtue in so absurd and fantastic a condition? Did Mr. Wordsworth really imagine, that his favourite doctrines were likely to gain any thing in point of effect or authority by being put into the mouth of a person accustomed to higgle about tape, or brass sleeve-buttons? Or is it not plain that, independent of the ridicule and disgust which such a personification must excite in many of his readers, its adoption exposes his work throughout to the charge of revolting incongruity, and utter disregard of probability or nature? For, after he has thus wilfully debased his moral teacher by a low occupation, is there one word that he puts into his mouth, or one sentiment of which he makes him the organ, that has the most remote reference to that occupation? Is there any thing in his learned, abstract, and logical harangues, that savours of the calling that is ascribed to him? Are any of their materials such as a pedlar could possibly have dealt in? Are the manners, the diction, the sentiments, in any, the very smallest degree, accommodated to a person in that condition? or are they not eminently and conspicuously such as could not by possibility belong to it? A man who went about selling flannel and pocket-handkerchiefs in this lofty diction, would soon frighten away all his customers; and would infallibly pass either for a madman, or for some learned and affected gentleman, who, in a frolic, had taken up a character which he was peculiarly ill qualified for supporting.
The absurdity in this case, we think, is palpable and glaring: but it is exactly of the same nature with that which infects the whole substance of the work—a puerile ambition of singularity engrafted on an unlucky predilection for truisms; and an affected passion for simplicity and humble life, most awkwardly combined with
[Page 268]
a taste for mystical refinements, and all the gorgeousness of obscure phraseology. His taste for simplicity is evinced by sprinkling up and down his interminable declamations a few descriptions of baby-houses, and of old hats with wet brims; and his amiable partiality for humble life, by assuring us that a wordy rhetorician, who talks about Thebes, and allegorizes all the heathen mythology, was once a pedlar—and making him break in upon his magnificent orations with two or three awkward notices of something that he had seen when selling winter raiment about the country—or of the changes in the state of society, which had almost annihilated his former calling.
NOTES
1 I have spoken in many places rather too bitterly and confidently of the faults of Mr. Wordsworth's poetry: And forgetting that, even on my own view of them, they were but faults of taste, or venial self-partiality, have sometimes visited them, I fear, with an asperity which should be reserved for objects of Moral reprobation. If I were now to deal with the whole question of his poetical merits, though my judgment might not be substantially different, I hope I should repress the greater part of these vivacités of expression: And indeed so strong has been my feeling in this way, that, considering how much I have always loved many of the attributes of his Genius, and how entirely I respect his Character, it did at first occur to me whether it was quite fitting that, in my old age and his, I should include in this publication any of those critiques which may have formerly given pain or offence, to him or his admirers. But, when I reflected that the mischief, if there really ever was any, was long ago done, and that I still retain, in substance, the opinions which I should now like to have seen more gently expressed, I felt that to omit all notice of them on the present occasion, might be held to import a retractation which I am as far as possible from intending; or even be represented as a very shabby way of backing out of sentiments which should either be manfully persisted in, or openly renounced, and abandoned as untenable. I finally resolved, therefore, to reprint my review of “The Excursion;” which contains a pretty full view of my griefs and charges against Mr. Wordsworth; set forth too, I believe, in a more temperate strain than most of my other inculpations,—and of which I think I may now venture to say farther, that if the faults are unsparingly noted, the beauties are not penuriously or grudgingly allowed; but commended to the admiration of the reader with at least as much heartiness and good-will. But I have also reprinted a short paper on the same author's “White Doe of Rylstone,”—in which there certainly is no praise, or notice of beauties, to set against the very unqualified censures of which it is wholly made up. I have done this, however, not merely because I adhere to these censures, but chiefly because it seemed necessary to bring me fairly to issue with those who may not concur in them. I can easily understand that many whose admiration of the Excursion, or the Lyrical Ballads, rests substantially on the passages which I too should join in admiring, may view with greater indulgence than I can do, the tedious and flat passages with which they are interspersed, and may consequently think my censure of these works a great deal too harsh and uncharitable. Between such persons and me, therefore, there may be no radical difference of opinion, or contrariety as to principles of judgment. But if there be any who actually admire this White Doe of Rylstone, or Peter Bell the Waggoner, or the Lamentations of Martha Rae, or the Sonnets on the Punishment of Death, there can be no such ambiguity, or means of reconcilement. Now I have been assured not only that there are such persons, but that almost all those who seek to exalt Mr. Wordsworth as the founder of a new school of poetry, consider these as by far his best and most characteristic productions; and would at once reject from their communion any one who did not acknowledge in them the traces of a high inspiration. Now I wish it to be understood, that when I speak with general intolerance or impatience of the school of Mr. Wordsworth, it is to the school holding these tenets, and applying these tests, that I refer: and I really do not see how I could better explain the grounds of my dissent from their doctrines, than by republishing my remarks on this “White Doe.”
$$$
