The Ethics of Criticism
Author: Buchanan, Robert Williams.
Publication info: The Contemporary Review ; London (1900): iv, 908 p.

The Ethics of Criticism [in, The Contemporary Review. Volume LXXVII. January–June 1900]
[Page ]
THE ETHICS OF CRITICISM. A Word to Sir Walter Besant.
“ Dogberry : You shall also make no noise in the streets; for the Watch to babble and talk, is most tolerable and not to be endured. ... If you meet a thief you may suspect him, by virtue of your office, to be no true man, and for such kind of men, the less you make or meddle with them, why the more is for your honesty!” — Much Ado About Nothing. When I was editorially informed that my article on the “Voice of the Hooligan” had “startled the dovecots,” and that no less a person than Sir Walter Besant was “going to reply,” I thought I knew the fate in store for me at the hands of that good old custodian of the City's peace. Long and respectfully had I observed the amiable Knight, becloaked like Dogberry of old, and carrying the official staff and lanthorn, sallying from the round house of the Literary Watch, with more or less decrepit followers at his heels: and always, I observed, had his spiriting been done gently, so that, even when he “ran in” a Publisher or other “Malefactor,” he had dismissed him speedily, with little more than a reprimand. His disposition, I knew, was liberal and kindly: so much so that he had loudly proclaimed to all young Citizens that there was no occupation easier or more profitable than his own daily one of Bookmaking, the only endowments necessary for its pursuit being a pen, a sheet of paper, and a copy of the “Author.” published monthly! His own career had been sunny, and had ended, as all the world knew, in a Knighthood: so it was fitting and natural that he should uphold the ways of Literature as ways of pleasantness and profit, and should devote his leisure to patrolling Grub Street, and proclaiming “All's Well,” through the still small watches of the present intellectual Darkness.
Knowing this much, if not more, of Sir Walter. I rejoiced to hear that I was to fall into hands so mereiful. My treatment would be, I thought, neither fierce nor savage: if I were seized and taken to durance vile, I should at least not be beaten black and blue by the bâton of a mere policeman: there would be no handcuff business, and above all no false swearing, when I was brought before the
[Page 222]
Bench. Yes, I said to myself, with the good old literary Watchman I shall be all right, even if he does call on me to “stand” as a Malefactor! But alas! I had to discover that even the best of us is human after all! I had forgotten that on a recent occasion (on the very occasion when he was proclaiming garrulously that Literature was the easiest of all trades) I had offended this good man deeply. 1 With my denunciation of the literary Hooligan came his opportunity, and—well, he has taken it to the best of his power. Not content with calling on me to “stand,” he flatly proclaims me a rogue and a liar! Not satisfied with disliking my opinions, he affirms that they are founded on the basest and most selfish of all motives, those of envy and disappointed vanity! This is so unlike Sir Walter, even Sir Walter in a rage, that I seareely know what to make of it; and I am forced to the disagreeable conclusion that he, like so many worthy souls nowadays, has caught the prevailing epidemic and grown positively homieidal. 2
But rightly or wrongfully, justly or unjustly, here I stand “charged,” with Sir Walter Besant (Lord love him) bearing angry withness again me. I have disturbed the Town's peace; I have wantonly assaulted a good young genius of Christian disposition; and for the rest I bear a bad character, as a person of very doubtful literary morals. Have I anything to say in my defence? Marry, yes, a good deal, if that worshipful Magistrate, the Public, will listen, and if the dear old Watchman will only be quiet, even when I accuse him (as I am reluetantly compelled to do) of malice and false swearing.
First, however, let me examine his cotention that Literary People disgrace themselves and their profession whenever they say severe and unsympathetie things about each other. This, from a Literary Person who calmly imputes the basest and meanest of motives to his opponent, and who taunts him from the witness-box with want of trade-success and the most despicable of trade-vanity, is rather a rich contention to begin with! But let us try to ascertain what it means, or rather let me try to make this not too sapient guardian of literary morals see what I mean. From the point of view of Sir Walter Besant, Literature is a little ring of amiable and worthy gentlemen, whose mission it is to make an honourable subsistence by writing works for the market, and to extend to each other, under all circumstances, the polite courtesies of their trade union. Their duty is to support each other, praise each other, in every way be loyal and kindly to each other. Members of the medical and legal professions, it is contended, never denounce
[Page 223]
each other. We cannot imagine “the late Lord Coleridge contributing articles to the magazines in abuse of the late Sir George Jessel” (this, by-the-by, is a little necrologically mixed, but such is Deponent's way), or “Bishop Wilberforce attacking Archbishop Sumner for alleged heresy, atheism, or immorality,” or “Sir Frederick Leighton asking for a dozen pages in which to call Millais a humbug in Art, an imposter, a corrupter of the popular taste.” “Even if these charges were proved,” says the Witness, “would Leighton's be the hand to write them down? No; self-respect, dignity for the calling” (please note this phrase) “would impose restraint and reticence. It is only in Literature that the World feels no astonishment when one more chapter is added to the long list of venomous attacks by one author upon another.”
Now what Sir Walter means is perfectly clear, although the language in which he expresses himself is somewhat difficult to construe. His references, however, are unfortunate, since they chiefly concern individuals less noteworthy for candour and originality than for prosperous trimming and social finesse. One can hardly conceive Bishop Wilberforce belonging to any ethical Forlorn Hope, or Sir Frederick Leighton sounding the note of any intellectual revolt. All the men whom Sir Walter names as incapable of personal discourtesy were, I fancy, quite as incapable of personal originality or heroism; at any rate, if the truth had to be told concerning either Art or Religion, one would hardly have selected the speaker from among the magnates of the English Church or the President and Council of the Royal Academy! A Clique is a Clique, whether it is concerned with the practical business of organised Episcopacy, or the equally practical business of selling pictures, or the quite as practical business of producing books for the market; and whenever a new thing has to be uttered to the world it is seldom or never voiced by those who have interests vested in the high officialism of any prosperous Trade Union.
But putting aside Sir Walter's assumption that personal attacks and accusations are altogether confined to Literature, and that our Doctors, Lawyers, and Artists are quite angelically incapable of expressing their honest opinion of each other, what follows? That the Ethics of Literature is lower and baser than that of Medicine, or the Bar, or Pictorial Art, and that men of letters, men who use the pen, are less generous, less dignified, less amiable, than the followers of those other professions? By no means. Literature, although itself only a very small part of Life, is a much broader and larger part of Life than either Medicine, the Bar, or Art; indeed, it includes all these branches of human activity, of only one of which, the last, can we say that it is something more than a mere Profession. The pursuit of Medicine is very indirectly concerned with the question of Ethics, while the profession of the Law is to a large
[Page 224]
extent absolutely opposed to the highest Ethical sanctions. Of Literature alone can it be said that its very breath and being, its essential fons et origo , is ethical; that without ethics, without ethical truth and beauty, Literature would be non-existent. A man absolutely without heart or kindly sympathy may be a great Physician. A man utterly devoid of common humanity may be, and often has been, a great Lawyer. A man of very inferior literary and moral sense may be, and occasionally has been, a great Painter. But no man who is devoid of prescience and wisdom, of commanding insight and humanity, can ever be a great Author.
However much this last assertion may be traversed and confuted, illustrations being at hand of very strong and powerful and prosperous Writers in whom the highest moral qualities seem more or less deficient, it will be found that all Writers who have achieved permanent immortality have done so by virtue of their ethical greatness. Even Rabelais, with whom our good Sir Walter consorted during his literary youth, has been justified to posterity by the clean part of him, that which startled the Church and seared the Cowls, not by that which has turned so many stomachs, and, I honestly admit, turns mine. If we glance at random over the line of noble names, from Socrates to Shakespeare, from Virgil to Dante, from Aristophanes to Fielding and Dickens, from Chaucer to Milton, from Milton to Wordsworth, from Shelley to Walt Whitman, we shall discover that our Poets and Thinkers are great exactly in proportion to the wisdom and beauty of their message to the world; and that whenever a Writer has proved a traitor to Progress and to Humanity, whenever he has shouted with the Crowd and has represented the vileness and not the purity of his generation, he has been doomed to more or less rapid oblivion, as practically a criminal against his kind.
This being admitted, and I think few individuals except members of the old-fashioned literary Watch will seriously dispute it, is it not a matter of some importance that we should attempt to discover such traitors to Truth and to Humanity, when, from one cause or another, they are really devitalising the very air we breathe? Even accepting Sir Waltor's delectable conception of Literature as a Pickwick Club of amiable and prosperous shopkeepers, dutifully admiring and prasing each other's wares, ought there not to be a limit to friendly nepotism, and an end occasionally to the compounding of moral felonies against mankind? Is it not now more than ever notorious that the evils of the Literary profession, the evils which still break many hearts and drive many honest aspirants to the workhouse and the grave, are due to the system of log-rolling and personal collusion, expressing itself through the endless tricks of the trade? And then, to come to the crucial moral question, if a Baker sells poisoned bread, is no other Baker in the town to say so?
[Page 225]
According to Sir Walter, Literature is the only profession the members of which denounce wrong-doing in each other. If this were so, how proud and unique would be the position of Literature! Unfortunately, it is not so. Members of the Medical profession may hesitate to denounce individual quackery, although they punish in the severest manner the slightest breach of professional etiquette; but it would be better for the world, a thousand times better, if in this profession and in all the others, including Literature, there were less etiquette and more honesty, more truth-speaking on the part of individuals and less trimming and lying to conciliate trades and cliques. In the medical profession, for example, there is, I believe, a professional etiquette which forbids one practitioner, on being called in to a patient who is dying through the ignorance and malpractice of another practitioner, apprising those concerned of such ignorance and malpractice! An etiquette of the same sort, according to Sir Walter, forbids a man of letters avowing his detestation of a Hooliganism which, he believes, is not merely causing the death of one sick individual, but is sowing the whole world broadcast with butchered and martyred men.
Here at last we come to the very core of the moral question, and reach the real inwardness of my criticism. According to Sir Walter Besant, a man of letters has no right to say a word against any Jack Cade of his own craft who rushes from street to street with a howling Mob at his heels, and is indirectly or directly concerned in fanning the evil passions of semi-barbarous crowds. To our Knight, who vaunts Literature as a roaring trade, the question is merely one of professional etiquette, and of personal vanity, envy, and uncharitableness on the part of a craftsman! “Self-respect, the dignity of the calling, nay, the ordinary laws of common courtesy,” should, Sir Walter thinks, prevent one author from expressing his bad opinion of another, especially when that other is generally admired. The expression of any such bad opinion can only be inspired by one sentiment, that of professional jealousy or trade malice. So that when Byron exposes in a masterpiece the shameful sycophancy and wicked servility of the laureate Southey, or when Shelley bewails in burning numbers the faults and backslidings of hireling poets, or when Browning says of a contemporary:
“Just for a handful of silver he left us,
Just for a ribbon to stick on his coat,”
the motive is always the same one—envy of the other's dirty gains! The truth must not be spoken, even if the Doctor is a murderous quack, the Lawyer a lying rogue, the Literary Man a public nuisance! Foul and evil teaching must not be exposed, even when it is poisoning the very Wells!
[Page 226]
I do not propose to examine in detail Sir Walter's vindication of Mr. Rudyard Kipling. So enthusiastic is it that it actually makes the good Knight drop into poetry, and talk in mixed metaphors about “the hundred millions who read the Anglo-Saxon tongue and flock into the vast theatre to listen spell-bound to a single voice,”— that of him whom I have christened Hooligan. Sir Walter's literary tastes do not interest me; his moral predilections are my chief concern. Let me now inquire, a little more closely, into these.
“Kipling, in prose and in verse,” says Sir Walter, gloatingly, “is one to whom War is an ever present possibility and an ever present certainty! There is a time to speak of Peace and a time to speak of War! At this moment it is well that someone who has a voice should speak of War!” And so on, and so on. The vein is 'Ercles vein, a tyrant's vein, a bloodthirsty vein, wonderful on the lips of so mild and home-bred a citizen! Sir Walter is frank enough, indeed, to avow that he likes bloodshed, that there are “worse evils than War,” and he is not afraid to echo, at this hour of the day, the mad platitudes which drove Englishmen into homicidal frenzy forty years ago. There are worse things than War, quotha? Worse things even than War beginning and ending in the lust for Gold, and the ardour of freebooters to grab the solid Earth?
Well, since Sir Walter Besant has chosen to express his honest admiration of Fire, Famine, and Slaughter, and to cite chapter and verse from a great Poet in support of his case and that of a Church which is now crying havoc to the War-wolves, let me show the hopelessness of any agreement between us by frankly answering him to this effect—that I take my stand on the belief that there is no worse evil than War, and that all the talk of its power to purify a nation or an individual is the veriest and foulest Cant. Two blacks never yet made a white, nor any two wrongs a right, and, disguise the truth under what phrases we may, War is simply Murder with another name. That is my belief, and if that belief is false, every word which I have written concerning Mr. Kipling is false as well.
Under one condition only is the slaying of our fellow men justifiable, or at least pardonable—the condition of righteous Self defence. Our good Sir Walter, so full of anxiety for his fellow craftsmen, so shocked and shamed when one of those craftsmen protests against homicidal mania and Jingo-patriotism in another, can contemplate with serenity the bloody holocaust of suffering martyred thousands; snugly seated in his office chair, reeling out Literature at so much per thousand words, can assure his readers that the processes of Plunder and Slaughter are glorious and ultimately purifying; can glibly quote from a poem of which Tennyson lived long enough to be ashamed, but which is still among the few
[Page 227]
blots on a noble reputation; can talk of the “potency of War,” “the ennobling of a People by War”; nay, can utter the usual banalities about “noble aims,” in connection with a crusade baser even, if that is possible, than the mad Crimean crusade which once deluged Europe with innocent blood!
Even so, it seems to me, might Robert Shallow, Esquire, have defended the civic bloodshed of his own generation; and certainly Robert Shallow, Esquire, could not have darkened counsel more thoroughly than Sir Walter Besant, Knight. I pass again over his enthusiasm for Mr. Rudyard Kipling, whom he further justifies on the score of a legion of omnivorous readers. Even so Ponson de Terrail might be justified by any one of the millions who honestly admire him, and even so might Xavier de Montepin be exalted by a reader of Le Petit Journal , on the basis of the “largest circulation in the world”! Sir Walter's taste in books does not concern me; let it go. I pass over also the sleepy arguments by which he seeks to establish the idea that Literature is a mere business of success and non-success, sale and non-sale, conditioned and inspired by some more or less nepotic Author's Club. In all this his ideas are amiable, if ideas they may be termed. But when, with the finger of blood on every door, and the cry of the Hooligan in every street, and the mad cry of Cain in the market-place, and the shadow of Death passing from land to land, this shallowest of literary Knights Non-combatant assures me that there “are worse things than War,” I answer him again from the bottom of my heart that there is only one thing worse—that thing being the cultivated Stupidity, the hopeless senseless Folly and Obtusity, against which even the very gods still strive in vain.
I regret to have to speak so roundly to such a harmless soul, essentially kindly perhaps, and only erring from sheer lack of imagination; but in answering his somewhat rambling charges against me, I chiefly desire to make my own cause clear. I must explain, therefore, despite the strong prejudice which the statement will awaken, that I am unable to conjure up any more enthusiasm for War itself than for its leading Expositors and Poets, and that even the glory of men who die bravely upon the battle-field leaves me comparatively cold. A soldier to my mind is not necessarily a hero; he enters the game of killing other people at the risk of being killed himself, and if he loses he pays the forfeit; if he were not killed he would be killing, and I personally see nothing heroic in that. Nor am I, in the new sense of the word, a Patriot. Although I love my country, and if necessary would die in its defence, I would not stir one foot to help my countrymen in any cause which I believed to be cowardly, treacherous, and merely homicidal. To follow the ravings of a howling Political Majority, excited to frenzy
[Page 228]
by ignorant Leaders and their attendant nigger minstrels, is not, to my thinking, Patriotism. These things I state roundly, leaving Sir Walter Besant to make the most of them, in his estimate of my moral baseness.
Sir Walter, true to his character of old-fashioned Watchman, carries from the night-time into the daytime his sleepy cry of “All's Well.” He is highly indignant with me, therefore, because I have said that, Militarism being rampant, Humanitarianism is out of fashion, a statement which I am glad to say has since been endorsed by no less a person than Mr. Frederick Harrison. 3 “There never was a time in the history of Christianity,” says Sir Walter, when Philanthropy, practical Christianity, was so much in fashion: and to support his statement he runs glibly off his tongue the shibboleths
Free Schools, Free Libraries, Factory Acts, Continuation Schools, Polytechnics, adding to these, as if they were not enough, Toynbec Hall, Mansfield Hall, and Oxford House! Even so, it seems to me, and with like relevance, would the inimitable Mr. Gradgrind have discoursed to his hearers on the beauties of a mathematical Philanthropy. Is there no difference, then, between human sympathy and the teachings of the Board Schools, between Love and loving Charity and the opening of picture galleries and museums on Sundays? The Workhouse is a beneficent institution, but somehow or other the Poor have always regarded it askance! The Board School does incalculable good, but its ministrations seldom or never, I fear, recall the Beatitudes! Not for one instant would I seek to depreciate any one of these or similar benefactions, or detract one hair's breadth from the honour of such men and women as are working bravely to enlighten and to help their fellows: but what answer is it to me, when I quote the Poet of the Poor, and cry:
“Alas for the rarity
Of Christian charity
   Under the sun!”
to be assured, by optimists like Sir Walter, that the scheme of the Charity Organization Society works out on the whole quite admirably! Bread may often become very bitter in the giving, and much of the bread of British philanthropy has, I fear, a somewhat Gradgrindian, not to say Besantian, savour!
Indeed, indeed, good Sir Walter Besant, Knight, this cry of “All's well” sounds feeble almost to fatuousness at this epoch of plunder and bloodshed, of Jameson raids and Chartered shares, of City train-bands rushing to assist in the spoliation of Naboth's Vineyard.
[Page 229]
Philanthropy, quotha? Christianity, i' faith? I have but to open my Daily Alarmist , and my eye falls upon the following:—
“ THE BOY WHO SHOT THREE BOERS ! “ English Boys and Girls send Him a Christmas Present. “Trumpeter Shurlock, who with his own hand shot three Boers at Elands Laagte, has stirred a practical responsive chord in the hearts of patriotic boys and girls at Benhall School, Saxmundham, Suffolk.
“We have received from Mr. John Chambers, the schoolmaster, a watch and chain, subscribed for by the children and accompanied by a letter intended for the trumpeter of the 5th Lancers. Here is the letter which Trumpeter Shurlock's youthful admirers are sending him:—
“ Dear Trumpeter Shurlock ,— Our schoolmaster reads us the war news every morning , and what we liked best was to hear about you, and how you shot the three Boers , and we thought we should like to send you a Christmas present.
We thought at first we would send you a plum pudding, and then a flannel shirt, but we got too much money for that. So, as some kind friends helped us, we got enough to send you a watch and chain, which we hope you will accept.
If ever you come to Suffolk, we hope you will call and see us, so that we may give you a cheer.
Please let us know if you get it and if you like it.
Hoping you will come safe home and be able to show it to your mother. We are pleased you are our young countryman, and we hope if any of us are ever soldiers, we will do our duty like you.
Wishing you all good luck, we remain, Your young English Friends, Gertie Rackham , Frank Chambers , (For the Children of Benhall School).”
So that the benefiicent homicide of youthful England is not confined to “Stalky and Co.” and other creations of the egregious Mr. Kipling, but runs red in our very streets and lanes, and infects our very errand boys and urchins at play! The Boy who killed three Boers! How dear must he be to the heart of the Knight who dotes on War, and Bloodshed, and Mr. Kipling! Doubtless, too, this boy has partaken of the Christianity of the School Board, and may even have strolled in his regimentals through the very educational People's Palace!
I am very sorry for Sir Walter Besant. He has always had a place in my heart with the other Knights of fame—the good souls who mean so well, yet who are always on the side of the loaves and fishes and the big battalions. I am quite sure that he hates cruelty and wrong doing just as much as I do, and is incapable of a brutal thought or deed. But the mischief is that his very amiability leads him astray. I blame him not for loving and defending his fellow
[Page 230]
craftsmen; for kindling with indignation when he witnesses what he considers “a venomous attack” on a noble reputation. I am quite sure, indeed, that he would defend even the malefactor Buchanan, if he thought him subjected to cruel and cowardly maltreatment. But alas, although he is kindly, he is not wise. He fails to see that far higher issues than those of mere writing and selling books underlie the question of Morality in Literature— that Literature, indeed, although but a part of Life, only fulfils its functions when it is the noblest and the purest part of it. The question of Mr. Kipling's genius, of my base motives, my misappreciation, really does not count in the discussion. What counts is the Carnage to which every Weathercock of a scribbler is pointing, and the brutality which is expressing itself daily and hourly, not only in mere words, but in deeds which have made the name of England execrated all over the civilised globe. Sir Walter Besant avers that I have no right to speak of these things, because they concern the prestige and the pocket of one who, with a Publisher on each side of him (like the Bishop on each side of Richard in the play) lately cried aloud for and obtained the sympathy of two Continents. I say that I have every right to speak of these things, because they concern the honour and the prosperity, nay, the very existence, of those two Continents, and the happiness of every humane and peaceloving citizen who dwells therein. Robert Buchanan.
NOTES
1 “The Profession of Literature, an Open Letter to Sir Walter Besant,” published in the Sunday Special.
2 “ls it the Voice of the Hooligan?” By Sir Walter Besant. CONTEMPORARY REVIEW, January, 1900.
3 In his address as President of the English Positivist Society.
$$$
