The Ethics of Art
Author: Patmore, Coventry Kersey Dighton.
Publication info: The British Quarterly Review ; Edinburgh  : [22] p. Edinburgh (1849)
[The Ethics of Art] [in, The British Quarterly Review, August and November, 1849]
[Page 441]
[The Ethics of Art] Considerable interest begins to attach itself to the subject of the ethics of art; and it is high time that it should be so. Art has suffered, and, in a less degree, religion and morality have suffered, for want of some settled understanding concerning their relationships. That such deficiency does really exist, and to an extent which is very surprising, for times when few things are esteemed too slight to merit learned investigation, may be inferred from the confession of Mr. Ruskin, who, although he knows more of the matter than most people, admits that he is in almost total darkness concerning the practical result of art upon the moral and religious condition of men and nations. We trust, before long, to welcome some carefully-considered treatise upon this magnificent theme: may we not hope that Mr. Ruskin himself will be induced to take up and thoroughly sift a question, the importance of which it is evident he very deeply feels? No other living writer could so well perform the task. It demands for its fulfilment much general learning, a highly educated taste for, and a technical knowledge of, art; genius to perceive, and courage to state new truth; and (what, in combination with these qualities, has of late times been rare) a devout and humble soul. The author of ‘Modern Painters,’ and the ‘Seven Lamps of Architecture,’ is the man for the work. But, whoever does it, let us hope that it will be done in an uncompromising manner; in authorship, as in all else, absolute honesty is infinitely the best policy. No doctrine, however true, can prosper if it be propounded timidly; half-statements are like half-measures, they are lost themselves, and lose the makers of them. Let no man, who is afraid to be laughed at by fools and knaves undertake to define the relationships of art and religion.
[Page 442]
In the absence of anything more satisfactory, our readers may find a few random thoughts of our own upon the ethics of art not unacceptable. These thoughts fall under the following heads: first, the nature of art, and its à priori aptitude or inaptitude for the true service of the soul; secondly, the history of art, and of what we can gather concerning its effects; thirdly, the characters of artists; and, lastly, the future prospects and possibilities of art as a teacher.
Before we inquire into the influence of art, let us determine what we mean by the word. All, save some small party of sensualists, agree that art is something which ought to have an elevating power; and it is now generally believed that many works, which centuries have stamped with fame, were intended to exert such power. It is also very commonly held, that works which all persons of authoritative taste agree to call works of art, do actually elevate and benefit the student of them: of this, however, there are certain doubts, which are plausible enough to deserve attention, and to demand confutation or confirmation; to these we shall attend by-and-by.
It follows, from the general admission that art must have, for one of its conditions, a tendency to elevate (whether it does so or not is another question), that that which is literally imitative of what men ordinarily see in things around them is not art, since, as a rule, such imitation can have no such tendency. And historically we know, that the best kinds of art have not been literally imitative; that is to say, literal imitation has generally been so far subordinated to something else as to allow, upon occasion, of its very manifest abandonment and sacrifice. Edward Dodwell, in his ‘Tour in Greece,’ remarks that the modern Greeks hold in abomination the statues and paintings resembling life which adorn the churches of other countries. When he endeavoured to convince them that there was no more harm in good paintings than in the wretched daubs which they admired in their own churches, they endeavoured to convince him that the unlikeness to reality constituted the excellence of these representations. Now, although such an absence of literal imitation can never constitute the merit of a work of art, it may be questioned whether, in the presence of other attributes of art, it may not add to and purify the effect. There is a peculiar charm in the works of Cimabue, Giotti, and others, prior to what is commonly regarded as the best Italian era, for which we can only account, by attributing it to the open disavowal, by those painters, of any attempt at imitating external nature, farther than was needful for the conveyance of their thought. In the subsequent styles of painting, which, while they were the
[Page 443]
results of truly artistical mind, aspired also to a precise and skilful representation of natural appearances, the attention of the spectator is liable to be distracted, if not wholly diverted, from the all-important meaning to secondary matters. The prayer of the great artist, who requires that he may ‘fit audience find, though few,’ is not likely to be granted to him who labours to make his productions interesting, also, to those who, in common with the birds that pecked at the grapes of the ancient painter, can recognise and approve nothing beyond a more or less complete literal resemblance to natural objects. All really great artists have perceived the comparative worthlessness of literal verisimilitude. In most cases, violations of literal likeness, by artists of the generally imitative schools, are only of negative purpose; that is, to get rid of some difficulty standing in the way of another and more important object. Shakespeare, however, presents us with an instance of the most violent departure from natural verisimilitude, which not only serves an important negative end, but provides also a most striking artifice in the construction of his drama; we refer to the porter's speech, which has so long puzzled the commentators on ‘Macbeth.’ By this passage Shakespeare, in a surprising manner, has broken the continuity of the time, without disturbing that of the action, the unchecked rapidity of which is an essential element in ‘Macbeth.’ It is the middle of the night: Lady Macbeth and her husband have retired, warned by a knocking at the gate, ‘lest occasion should show them to be watchers;’ the knocking continues all the while the porter is uttering his soliloquy, which is purposely discordant in itself and with the adjacent portions of the play, though it is far from being altogether mal-à-propos; he at last opens the gate, but by that time it is ‘good morrow;’ everybody is up; Macduff is going to wake Duncan at the appointed hour; and the reader, or spectator, has not perceived that a few seconds of time have represented the best part of a night.
If likeness to natural objects as men commonly behold them, is to be regarded as constituting art, art must, of course, be excellent in proportion to the perfection of that likeness; and Madame Tussaud's waxwork exhibition must rank above the Vatican. Taking the lowest kind of art, namely, that which treats of external facts and phenomena for their own sake—is not its essential character the power of showing things in a new light, that is, as we do not see them? This negative quality of art is, however, so widely admitted at present, that we need dwell upon it no longer.
It is, indeed, true that there is a large class of persons
[Page 444]
whose souls have been so constituted or degraded, that nothing but mere imitation of what they have seen or felt will touch them—persons who, by no amount of outward cultivation, will be able to comprehend the assertion, that true art is, to those who can receive it, a real revelation; ‘the light that never was, by sea or land,’ is to them darkness; the simplicity and frequent worldly ignorance of the man of genius are to them folly; if they use the word genius at all, they apply it to flashily informed cleverness, and the emotional correlative of mere cleverness, ‘sensibility;’ an excitable temperament, and feelings that flash in the pan, stand with them for enthusiasm; and the calm will that ‘scorns delights and lives laborious days,’ working with power resembling that which lifts a coast-line for a thousand miles, passes with them for cold plodding, and a sort of perversion of stupidity to good purposes. It is a great, though indirect commendation of art, that persons of this stamp—and, be it remarked, they are pretty equally distributed among all ranks of society—usually exhibit a similar incapacity for the appreciation or assimilation of every kind of substantial worth: their morality is prudence; their spirituality, too often, conceited and unsteady impulse;
‘And when they travel right, it is
With strain and vulgar emphasis;
Not like the meek and mighty stars
Prologressing swift in silent cars.’
To this order of persons the artist does not appeal.
To come to positive characters: Art resolves itself into two great kinds, namely, direct, and indirect or symbolical, representation. Direct representation, if it is artistical, is always ideal —an excellent word, but one which has been discredited by frequent abuse. The great French critic, M. Quatremere de Quiney, thus describes it: ‘The ideal does not here mean that which people are accustomed exclusively to attach to the term; that is to say, the beautiful par excellence . Each class of object or subject, in the wide range of imitation, has its ideal; its character generalized, and brought, by the genius of art, to the idea , or distinct image, which becomes, at one and the same time, for the imagination its type; for the mind its definition; for the eye its copy.’ A pig of Morland's, for example, is the ideal of a pig; and the Apollo Belvidere is the ideal of a beautiful young man; and the merit of the pig and of the Apollo consists, not in their accurate resemblance to the pigs and human beings about us, but in their being, severally, more piggish and more human than anything that we have ever seen, or ever shall see. This delineation of the
[Page 445]
spirit and intention, so to speak, of Nature, instead of her exact forms and real results, seems, upon the face of it, to be a very powerful means of instructing the soul in the most worthy kinds of knowledge.
Let it not be supposed that the faculty of accurate imitation is to be slighted. On the contrary, it is an essential stepping-stone to the representation of that which is above imitation. Constantly, indeed, imitation is well worth having for its own sake: many who cannot perceive the beauty of a natural object are quite capable of recognising its transcript in a picture, poem, or statue; for in these beauty is separated from distracting circumstances. There are faces, forms, characters, landscapes, and skies, which are not to be excelled by art; but such high natural revelations confine themselves wonderfully to the eye of the born artist, and require to be clothed anew by him, in order to become visible to the common gaze. In this kind of imitation, however, the ideal is still at work: the artist detects and selects the essential, rejecting non-essentials; the faculty of such detection and selection being of a piece with the mind's creative power. There are also moments of feeling, of which often we think little at the time, but to which, as to the epocha of our lives, the most of us look back. These the memory commonly fails to restore; and yet, be it joyful or sad, or even terrible, and in its full recurrence to be dreaded, past feeling comes, with inexpressible charms, to the recollection. Now, among the many attributes which go to make the artist, especially the poet, is the power of remembering emotion; and he often does the work of a true artist in recalling that emotion, without change or adornment, to minds which have unwillingly forgotten it.
It may aid the attainment of some distinct notion of art, and of its ethical capacities, if we say that the artistic is, in all its range, the antithesis of the scientific. The scientific deals exclusively with second causes, and our common language and thoughts are, perhaps unavoidably, impregnated with this element. The artistic confines itself, no less exclusively, to phenomena and to the First Cause, and takes note of no relationships between the former and the latter, but such as are immediate and direct. The artist does not regard phenomena as unreal, but rather as the only realities, apart from his soul and from God: he says with Goethe—
‘They are not shadows which compose a dream;
I know they are eternal, for they are ’
From this it results that artistical expression is always absolute ; and that the poet, as Dryden says, is a lawgiver; and that true
[Page 446]
poetry, as Aristotle says, is the most philosophical of all writing Donne writes very poetically—
‘We have added to the world Virginia, and sent
Two new stars lately to the firmament.’
Here the phenomena—that is to say, the facts considered only in their effects, and apart from the method of their origin—are alone regarded; and the mind delights in beholding the simple result of a couple of scientific discoveries conveyed in its simplest possible form. The noblest examples of this rule of poetical expression are to be found in the Bible and in the Apocrypha: ‘Thou coveredst it (the earth) with the deep as with a garment; the waters stood above the mountains; at thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunders they hasted away; they go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys into that place which thou hast founded for them; thou hast set a bound which they may not pass over , that they turn not again to cover the earth. ... He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth. ... He toucheth the hills, and they smoke,’ (Psalm civ). ‘The beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars, an ornament giving light in the highest places of the Lord: at the commandment of the Holy One, they will stand in their order, and never faint in their watches . Look upon the rainbow, and praise him that made it; very beautiful is it in the brightness thereof: it compasseth the heavens about with a glorious circle, and the hands of the Most High have bended it .’ (Ecclesiasticus xiii.) The phenomena italicised are treated without any reference to gravitation, ‘theories of the earth,’ astronomical or optical laws. They are described as they seem to a child-like and religious mind; and here, as is oftener the case than most people suppose, the appearance is identical with the reality. It is this characteristic of expression which has conferred never-fading beauty and life upon the writings of poets who have not attempted any task higher than the artistical transcription of separate thoughts, facts, and natural images; and it is this, also, which has endowed the productions of the greatest artists with a permanence far beyond that which attaches to the works of the philosopher or the theologian. Whether we read, in William Browne, of
                     ‘Homely towns,
Sweetly environ'd with the daisied downs,’
or rise, with Dante, into regions of thought and feeling, where Time becomes the mystery, and not Eternity, we find our delight to be still dependent, in no small measure, upon the circumstance that we meet the feeling, fact, or thought, face to face, instead of being required to stumble prosaically ‘about it
[Page 447]
and about it.’ Here, then, is another general quality which must favour the notion that Art is peculiarly adapted to become a teacher of the soul.
The attribute last described confers upon Art a power of extreme brevity, and consequent pregnancy; and this brevity and pregnancy may be indefinitely increased, in the hands of the great artist, by the means which he has of suggesting more than he explicitly affirms. When should we have done, if we attempted to write in full all the truth that is intentionally suggested in some one of Shakspeare's plays? This pregnancy is a great advantage in the teaching of art, especially at a time when books have so increased that our imperfect national library counts more than a dozen miles of crowded shelves.
The foregoing remarks chiefly concern the mode of expression which is employed by Art: the thing to be expressed is reality , of whatever kind. It is a mistake, in modern times prevalent in proportion to the degradation of art, to suppose that its highest and fittest, not to say its essential object, is the direct representation of beauty—of beauty either merely physical, or of physical beauty operating as the symbol of the soul's excellence. This, truly, was a leading idea of pagan art; witness its opposite extremes in the Apollo and the Laocoon. But pagan art is of small importance to the present question: its remains are few, and it can never be revived. Beauty is one among the many realities which Art now grasps. The artist reveals reality whenever he exhibits or suggests the true relation of any object to the rest of the universe. Such relation constitutes its reality; reality, in this sense, is by no means a familiar sight to ordinary men, and the revelation of it seems calculated to be extremely edifying. Be the object an event, or a series of events, a man's character, a moral law, an emotion, the human form, a cloud, or a stone, the artist invests it with its proper life, and teaches it to proclaim its peculiar lesson, by abolishing the state of isolation in which it commonly presents itself to us, and exhibiting it as an integral portion of nature: we say of nature , because the assertion, as it stands thus, answers to the whole sphere of Art of which there is at present any popular knowledge in England. Of super-nature—of truly spiritual life, as the subject of Art, we are not accustomed to hear much talk. Properly devotional Art flourished most extensively in Spain; but Spanish poetry and Spanish painting are not widely studied or understood; partly because few learn the language, and since Spanish paintings out of Spain are rare; partly because the very excellence of such artists as Calderon and Velasquez must of itself condemn them to general neglect in times of a general absence
[Page 448]
of religious fervour. The early Italian painters were devotional; but they likewise fill but a restricted space in that commonly and heartily recognised domain of Art to which alone we would here make reference. Michael Angelo and Raphael rest their claims to be called devotional artists chiefly upon the generally religious character of the subjects chosen by them. It is true that the former was a man of religious feeling; but his devotion was not sufficient for the infusion of his works with any very high degree of that feeling. It is not to be supposed that the lover of the Fornarina should afford us higher lessons of unearthly love. Concerning Raphael's greatest effort, the Transfiguration, Frederick Schlegel justly writes—‘The subject altogether is treated with a superficial, lightly-kindled enthusiasm; not with that simple, earnest power—that profound meditation and deep devotion, with which the reverential love of the earlier masters would have approached a subject so truly divine and holy.’
Reality of any kind being the fit subject for the artist to show forth in his works, the artist who is in earnest—and there have been true artists who have only played—will devote himself to the exposition of the highest realities of which he is cognizant. Now the artist, or the man of genius, is capable not only of perceiving realities with much greater vividness than other men, but also of perceiving realities of a higher kind than are seen by any other men, save those in whom God's Spirit more especially dwells. That Genius is a kind of natural religion is, indeed, true in a much deeper sense than is ordinarily believed by the utterers of that critical common-place. Originality, the prime element of genius, is no more nor less than a practical faith in the ‘Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world’—accepting these words in their most literal sense, as applicable to the light which every reflective man, Christian or not, must find within him, and which he must acknowledge to be not himself; although, or rather say because , he sees it to be the ground of his personality. Originality may be cultivated. Judging from what we know personally, and have read concerning original men, we find reason to conclude that whenever originality has existed in a remarkable degree, it has been carefully cultivated. Probably, there are few persons who might not become original in what is now unfortunately a remarkable degree, could they only be impressed with the universal worth of originality. It is, however, a much more ordinary quality than it is commonly believed to be. Religion and originality are so far allied that, in active life, the first very frequently demands the aid of the last.
[Page 449]
Genius seems to be little more than a perfectly honest intellect, the character of its productions being, of course, greatly modified by circumstances of bodily health, temperament, &c., but, above all, by the condition of the other of the three great constituents of man, his will and affections. If these are likewise right, the intellect will be universally efficient, for it will have the help of the imagination, which can only flourish in company with goodness. If the will and affections are wrong, the intellect can succeed only in the prosecution of physical science. These and other considerations which these will suggest, concerning the subject of art, and the nature of the artistic faculty, render it highly probable that the productions of art are suited to promote the welfare of those whom they address.
We do not think that we can advance the purpose of this our first batch of reflections better than by concluding them with the following passage from the pages of our contemporary, the North British Review :—
‘A sense of the true position of art as a teacher pervades and renders valid the writings of many critics, who have nowhere formally recognised the nature of that position. But the absence of such recognition, we are disposed to believe, has been the result, not so much of the difficulty that has been felt to be attendant upon making it, as of the boldness which its statement has hitherto demanded. Our best critics
‘Have heard the Muses in a ring,
Ay, round about Jove's altar sing.’
But whenever they have treated of them under this relationship, it has been a question of the Muses and Jove, and not of the arts and the religion of Christ; in other words, the relationship has always been discussed in a mood of pagan sentiment, and not according to a straightforward Christian method. It has been the inevitable consequence of their ill-understood position, that too little honour, and too much, has been attributed to the arts. Upon one hand, the word imagination has been regarded as a general expression for all that is unsubstantial; upon the other, its true substantiality has been impaired by exaltation to the highest place among the attributes of the soul. ... However much modern art, so called, may have been the degeneration of art into an aimless imitation of natural objects and passions, with no consideration of their claim, or absence of claim, to artistical repetition, it is not to be doubted that art of every kind took its earliest and boldest flights in the immediate region of religion; and it may be affirmed, without fear of rational dispute, that the soul of art is gone when religion has wholly taken her departure. It follows from this truth, that an irreligious criticism must needs be insufficient;
[Page 450]
and yet the spirit of almost all our criticism has been irreligious. Religion herself has not been blameless in this matter. During the last three centuries she has given little or no encouragement to her handmaiden, whose defection, together with that of her interpreter, criticism, and philosophy in general, which is the criticism of nature, has not been entirely unprovoked.’
We are now to inquire how far the apparent aptitude of art to advance the cultivation of man has been confirmed by history. At the outset, we are met by a very startling consideration —namely, the extreme fewness of those to whom true art seems to appeal, and the apparent impossibility that the influence of art, if individually good, can ever be wide enough to justify the artist's sacrifice of time, energy, and ‘practical’ activity. How great, how popularly impracticable is the degree of cultivation which seems to be acquired for an extensive appreciation of art! Does it not appear as if art were one of the highest ends, rather than a simple mean of education! To this we answer, first, that art has not always had its present esoteric character, that more favourable circumstances than at present exist have immeasurably facilitated its operation; and secondly, that if those who are capable of receiving profit from art had always been, and always were to be, as few, in proportion to the mass, as they now are, the artist would probably still be justified in pursuing his heart-absorbing, and, too often, heart-wearing vocation.
It is an historical fact that true art, at the times in which it has greatly flourished, has not been unpopular. There are two circumstances which, in such times, have produced an extensive appreciation of it. In the first place, every great development of art has had a peculiar and popularly comprehensible adaptation to the time and place of its occurrence; and this very adaptation at future times, and in other places, has become an obstacle in the way of any very general effect. So true, indeed, is this remark, that we find entire periods, and those highly civilized periods, during which the art of a preceding age has been wholly without effect, even upon the students and lovers of the subject in its general form. In the building of the Cathedral of Strasbourg, a hundred thousand artists worked night and day. (We use the word artists advisedly, because, it is a well known fact that the Gothic masons were left to their own direction in the minor details of their work.) Four centuries afterwards, there were not to be found in Europe a hundred men who possessed any adequate feeling for the work which had been produced, and certainly, therefore, appreciated by the
[Page 451]
enthusiasm of a whole nation. A pure feeling for Greek sculpture, so rare now, was once so common, that the people of Cnidus refused to part with the chef-d'æuvre of Praxitiles to Nicomedes, who offered, in exchange, to relieve them from a great national burthen; and this famous statue continued to figure upon the coins of the Cnidians. The fact is, that great artists, like other great teachers, ‘commonly outrun the time in the direction which it is spontaneously taking;’ and it is, therefore, a quite comprehensible thing that the circle of their admirers should contract, or wholly vanish, when the tendencies of the age fall into a new, or contrary direction. The other circumstance to be noticed is one which is not less favourable to the popularity of an art at the time of its development. It is well known that the several developments of art have always been totally unprecedented in their kind; so unprecedented, that the canons of criticism, arising from the analysis of preceding developments, have always been manifestly inapplicable to the new school. The artists have, therefore, taken their own way; and, what is ethically of more importance, those to whom they have appealed have been able to take their own way also; their hearts have been open to the new influence, because the base itch of criticism has not scaled them over in that particular direction. They have only to learn; the difficult, with most, the impossible task of unlearning, has not to be performed; they come to the discipline of the new teacher in the only condition in which a true teacher can be approached with profit, namely, as babes desiring the sincere milk of his word. The humility, caused by a conscious ignorance of what that teacher has to impart, renders average minds receptive of his influence to a degree which is afterwards rare among the best cultivated students, and impossible in the genuine and professed ‘ connoisseur .’ How far this humility is likely to be generally regained is, therefore, a question of high concern to those who would estimate the future value of art; but it is a question upon which we must not enter now.
Striking as has commonly been the reception of a new art, and largely as we may therefore estimate its direct effects, it is likely that its most important operation has ever been, and always will be, indirect. The soft and equably distributed light of a clouded day is all from the sun, although we behold him not; and how much of the gentle life of modern civilization may we not consider to be derived from sources no less invisible to the general eye? Whenever art has really no place, or is only existent in its lower kinds, there we discover, in manners,
[Page 452]
coarseness; in morality, the harshness and narrowness of the ‘didactic;’ and in religion, a certain inclination to ferocity, the obvious result of acting and thinking absolutely , in the absence of that sense of harmony which it seems to be the first office of art to engender and to cultivate.
Some remarkable facts in the history of art, and apparently much to art's discredit, must here be examined. Although it is true that art ‘has taken its first and boldest flights in the immediate region of religion,’ it is too true also that it is with the decay of religion that the origin of art has been thus closely associated.
Dr. Louis Batissier, in his ‘Elements d'Aschéologie Nationale,’ writes justly, ‘who has not remarked that the poets and prose writers laughed at Jupiter and his Olympus, while Phidias and Praxitiles were engaged upon their sublime divinities of marble, which people admired, but did not adore? Was not Erasmus casting his sarcasms, Rabelais his irony against Catholic worship, at the time when Raphael, Leonardo da Vinci, Titian, and Michel Angelo were surpassing the finest spirits of pagan antiquity?’ Let the reader call to mind the dozen or so of popes, whose pontificates were contemporaneous with the life of the artist last named. Leo the Tenth was much above the average degree of respectability; and of him Guicciardini, in a sketch which is, upon the whole, certainly meant to be favourable, writes, ‘To a remarkable easiness of manner he added a most profound dissimulation, with which he circumvented every one in the beginning of his pontificate, and thus passed for a very good prince; I dare not say an apostolical goodness, for in our corrupt times the goodness of a pontiff is commended when he does not surpass the wickedness of other men .’ That the popes were the true representatives of their subjects is sufficiently proved by the unpopularity of the religious Adrian. If it be denied that these times did, in fact, exhibit the highest development of Italian art—if we are referred back to those of Dante and Cimabue, we are met by many proofs that we have not arrived at any very much better state of things. Boccaccio could not have written and become exceedingly popular in any but times of considerable religious degradation; and whatever Puseyite architects may affirm to the contrary, it is historically demonstrable, that some of the architectural splendours of that era owe their existence quite as much to municipal jealousies and emulations, as to efforts for the advancement of the glory of God. A writer, from whom we have already quoted, says, plausibly at least—
[Page 453]
‘The fact that religion has been in a state of decline during the most completely artistical ages, might appear to make against the utility of the services of art. But it can no longer appear to do so, when we remember what are the conditions of artistical production. The profound fable of the pagan mythology made the Muses the daughters of Memory. It is as impossible for the artist to depict an emotion while himself within its primary influence, as it would be for him to delineate an object stationed at less than the focal distance of his vision. Never was a good love-song made by a poet in love, but when his passion has only lately ceased to agitate his life, when every recollection fills his heart with tender, but undisturbing echoes, when he can stand off and regard his affection as an object, then may he tell it abroad in words which will serve lovers for their love language, and startle pulseless bosoms with the truth, that they also have been young and passionate. As it is with the emotion of an individual, so it is with that of a nation or an age: a secondary emotion, namely, that which is exerted during the period of vivid and immediate recollection, constitutes the proper inspiration of the artist. But this inspiration, once gone forth, whether under the form of architecture, poetry, sculpture, music, or painting, remains an everlasting memento of the primary sentiment—a means, possibly, of reviving it, and an invaluable expression for it, if ever it should be revived. Thus, then, the truth that the best periods of art have followed, and have not been coincident with those of religion, has nothing to do with the question of the usefulness of art in the service of her divine mistress and mother.’
Another, and a much more important consideration, one which has caused the most serious doubts concerning the worth of art, is that which relates to the moral character of artists, or rather to the popular notions of that character. Leaving it to the reader to determine for himself as to the probable fairness of any inferences which have been arrived at by the reversal of the rule that we should judge of the tree by its fruits, we shall endeavour to discover what weight there lies in the usual arguments on this matter. Inactivity, self-indulgence, and a generally sensual temperament, are the charges which are ordinarily made against the character of the artist. If these charges are to have any force against the nature of art itself, it must be shown that they are true in proportion to the strength and intensity of the artistical character; but we do not find this to have been the case. Where shall we look for a higher name in art than that of the eminent soldier at Marathon, Salamis, and Platæa, who, in his own epitaph, dwells upon his arduous services for the military glory of the state, making no allusion to his invention and perfection of tragic poetry; or that of Cromwell's
[Page 454]
diligent and self-denying secretary, of whom the mighty Muse was habitually propitiated by fasting and prayer; or that of the minister at Weimar, who submitted himself to a life-long course of discipline in order to the development of his gift; or that of the prudent manager of the Globe Theatre, turning Lord Southampton's present of a thousand pounds to the best account, and retiring with high self-consideration when he had fulfilled his calling; or that of the wise, patriotic, and successful defender of Monte San Miniato and Florence against the seige of the Prince of Orange—the painter of the Last Judgment, and the plodding superintendent of marble quarries at the bidding of the low-minded Leo? In this class of artist, we certainly do not discover any justification of the foregoing accusations. The inference in disfavour of art is, therefore, null and void, although the charge should be fully substantiated with respect to any lower class. Of artists, regarded indiscriminately as a body, the numerical majority, perhaps, deserves the common censure. One of them laments, in a ‘Complaint to his Muse,’
‘Thou slackenest all my nerves of industry
    By making them so oft to be
The tinkling strings of thy loose minstrelsy.
Whoever this world's happiness would see,
    Must as completely cast off thee,
    As they who only Heaven desire,
    Do from the world retire.’
These are words which would fit the case of many; but fancy the scorn of Milton at one who should have counted him or any other ‘poet Sage’ among ‘such cattle!’ If he himself sometimes admired and imitated the speaker of these lines, it only proves what, indeed, we all know, that Cowley was no such man as the ‘loose minstrelsy’ with which he occasionally diverted himself, tended, but only tended, to make him. Although it is not at all necessary, for the stability of the argument, yet for the excuse of a number of men to whom the world is deeply indebted, let us remind the reader that ‘every condition has its peculiar temptations, every habit its consequential weaknesses, and that every body of men stands represented, to the opinion of the world, by its worst members. The temptations and weaknesses of a contemplative condition and habit are, however, of a nature to produce results more popularly interesting than the sins of selfishness, pride, avarice, &c., which are severally the predominant failings of classes engaged in other special spheres of action. Again, there is no other order of men, besides the ministry, whose characters are so generally investigated, as are those of the votaries of
[Page 455]
the fine arts; because, with the exception named, in no other case is character felt to be so intimately connected with an occupation and its products.’
The question of the religion of artists is rendered obscure by the very excellence of the mode by which art expresses religion, and by the extreme importance which all true artists will attach to language, and their consequent diffidence and caution in speaking of what they, more than other people, must feel to be unspeakable. We do not remember any instance of a great poet who should be described, in the absolute sense, as irreligious. Burns and Campbell were not irreligious, though an acute sense and dread of inconsistency made them ashamed to be thought religious. They are great poets. Of Shelley and Keats we cannot think so highly as it is becoming the fashion to think. Neither was Lord Byron a great poet; for should a man be called so whose sentiment and metaphysics nauseate one, as his do? There are good ‘physical force’ passages in his tales, but it would be difficult to discover ten consecutive lines of classical execution in all his works. His reputation with the rising generation rests almost as much upon Goethe's praise of him, as that of some of our minor poets at one time did upon the praise of Doctor Johnson; and yet it is certain that Goethe never knew English well enough to form any sound judgment upon the matter. With regard to the characters of artists, let us finally remark, that all the difficulties which should make us wary in judging ill of any man, operate with tenfold force when we endeavour to judge the artist. As Mr. Monckton Milnes, in his ‘Life of Keats,’ most truly reminds us, the works of the artist ‘are his works indeed;’ if, then, we must judge him, let us judge him by these, and not by action, inaction, or apparent self-indulgence, which, by an almost invariably peculiar physical temperament in the artist, are deprived of the significance that we may venture, with charity and self-mistrust, to attach to such indications in ordinary men.
The last question we have to call upon history to answer, is,—What has been the effect of works of art upon individuals, and through them, upon nations? What corroboration or denial of the apparent fitness of art to inform (in the old and true sense of the word) do we discover in actual practice? The question, as we set out by affirming, is a most puzzling one. History is, indeed, almost silent upon it. Beyond the vague general fact, already noticed, that suavity of manners and gentleness of feeling have usually accompanied the cultivation of the fine arts, we have little to assist us in the testimony of
[Page 456]
history; and we cannot even attribute these qualities, with any certainty, to influences with which, perhaps, they only happen to have been contemporaneous. If, however, we allow to the arts, at least, this amount of credit, it is impossible, in the present state of knowledge, to say how far the good has been subtracted from, or overbalanced by, the evil of the idolatry which has been too often paid to them. Let us follow Mr. Ruskin's example, and frankly confess our inability to interpret history upon this subject. We are, therefore, compelled to confine the inquiry to the nature of art and the constitution of man. In Mr. R. Newman's recently published work upon ‘the Soul’—a work which contains more truth and more error than have been often located in the same volume—we find the following remarks upon the influence of that section of art which consists in the representation of beauty:—
‘As awe is softened into reverential wonder, when the understanding is sufficiently enlightened to save us from vain and degrading fears, so the latter sentiment warms into admiration when we discern the beauty which invests the infinite world. As a glimpse of life beyond the grave, and a glance of the eye into the depths of space, are adapted to calm stormy passions, so a tranquil resting of the soul on whatever form of beauty tends to impart cheerfulness, elasticity of spirits, and mute thankfulness towards—perhaps we know not whom. The child who gazes on the colours of the sunset, on the light which ripples with the water, or on the deep blue of the sky, is often ready to bound with speechless and unanalyzed delight. Nor need adults any higher beauty to call forth the same feeling, though the magnificent scenery of some favoured spots is appreciated by them with still keener zest. Thus, in short, to call forth the heart into admiration, and prepare it for love , is the appropriate function of all natural beauty.
‘How far the beauty of the human countenance can be included, is a question which may move debate. The living face of man is undoubtedly an infinite depth, inasmuch as it depicts character; but this concerns expression only, and is therefore but partially dependent on mere feature and primitive form. It must, indeed, be admitted, that meek and majestic features, a pure soul shining through the eye, a self-collected spirit seen in the general harmony of the countenance, and in the absence of anything spasmodic, exert a strong moral action on the spectator; and, in so far as religion consists in a quickening of the conscience, under the sense that a supreme intelligence is gazing on us, the sight of a human face—even painted or sculptured—may be called a religious influence. Such is that of a mother to her infant; but this influence is not that of beauty, though it is heightened by beauty. We must disentangle the two things. A countenance of great purity and love must have a certain sweetness of its own, but not dependent on feature. On the other hand, the finest features that ever were may be insipid and inexpressive, as those of many Venuses
[Page 457]
and Madonnas. Such beauty does not even draw admiration from the cultivated—and when it does in any, the limit is soon reached; satiety succeeds. The matter has therefore no place in our present discussion. But as, in the few instances in which it is our privilege to see a human face beam with the highest moral qualities of man, the mere sight is kindling to every good and holy emotion, so pictures and statues which skilfully represent such countenances are themselves (up to a certain limit, not easily reached) a moral and spiritual power.
‘It is not from these that idolatrous mischiefs are to be feared; no populace ever became degraded by gazing on them. The representations of the Man of Sorrows, on which the eyes of the middle ages were fed—varying, no doubt, greatly in merit—were yet, on the whole, highly conducive to spiritual improvement. On the contrary, the stupid and debasing idolatry was found in connexion with some staring large doll, triced out in tawdry finery, and called a Virgin— such as still infest continental cathedrals—or some daub of a picture, neither having, nor supposed to have, artistic excellence. Such things were made fetish, and the worship of them was attended with nearly the same influences as the worship of a stone fallen from Jupiter. They had not even elevating reminiscences, for no one fact was imagined concerning the Virgin that tended to quicken the conscience.
‘But though the painted or sculptured countenance is, under certain circumstances, a spiritual power, yet, as being a work of art, it in all cases puts us beneath the artificer, and may even keep us down to his level. This was strikingly illustrated in Greek sculpture: a statue of exquisite beauty, representing some hero, or an Apollo, because of its beauty, seemed to the Greeks a fit object of worship. We still have before us some of the finest performances of their sculptors; we know distinctly enough what an Apollo, what a Mercury was, and we can accurately appreciate the value of such worship. None of the qualities of mind which we peculiarly call spiritual were expressed at all. Meekness, thankfulness, love, contentment, compassion, humility, patience, resignation, disinterestedness, purity, aspiration, devoutness, —little of all these was felt or understood by the sculptor; and how could he communicate them? Those who adored his work could not rise to a higher adoration: such is the danger besetting those who allow themselves to cultivate devout feeling by aid of human art. We must not, indeed, disdain that occasional stimulus, but much less must we habitually have recourse to it, or make ourselves dependent on it.
‘The same remark I believe will apply to church architecture. That the canopy of heaven elevates and sobers the heart, preparing it for devotion if devout in itself, few will deny. It needs not much susceptibility further to confess, that a lofty cathedral, when suitably constructed, has an effect similar in kind to this, and that, other things being equal, it is better adapted for prayer (though not for preaching)
[Page 458]
than a well-lighted room with a low and flat roof. It is, then, evidently our wisdom to use such an advantage when it offers itself. ... Considering how rare access to churches of the noblest kind must always be, tenets of religion which dwell much on such a help to devotion are likely to gravitate into mere fetish superstition.
‘An opposite danger is often remarked to accompany the use of all the fine arts as handmaids to religion, namely, that the would-be worshipper is so absorbed in mere beauties as never to rise into devotion. Music, painting, and architecture, are by him appreciated as such; and if criticised as such, then farewell to their religious influences. That the danger is real and imminent, the history of Italy and of modern Rome proves. What Romanist will claim for Rome a high place in his religious world? And yet where else have these influences acted on so great a scale for so long a time! On the whole, therefore, we must assign an exceedingly subordinate place in religion to that beauty which the hand of man produces. Its author is not divine enough; it is dangerous to make much of his work. Only when it is so glorious as to rise above criticism, can it lift us higher than our common level.’
In the sentence in italics, we heartily believe that the true rule which should regulate the employment of art as a moral or religious aid, is enunciated. But Mr. Newman is not the first who has declared it. Lord Bacon implies the same thing when he concludes his chapter on Poesy, in the ‘Advancement of Learning,’ with the words, ‘ But it is not good to stay too long in the theatre ;’ and a modern poet has said—
‘The Muses are the helpmates
    Of mankind, are born to be
Supporters of our moments,
    Slack in faith ; their deity
Is but our own reflected:
    Make them idols, and they flee;
Or worse, remain as tyrants,
    Who, most tyrant-like, employ
The powers we give against us.’
There are numerous evils, besides those mentioned by Mr. Newman, which may arise from the use of the kind of art contemplated by him as anything more than an ‘occasional stimulus.’ Of these, probably the greatest is the production of a morbid refinement of the senses—a refinement that unfits them for the part they are intended to assume in the economy of a world where beauty is as rare as deformity is abundant. A man without an eye for beauty might be almost as well without an eye at all; but he is in not much better case whose habit of perception has attained that extreme and abnormal activity which is not uncommon among men who have long been abandoned
[Page 459]
to the seductive tyranny of ideal beauty. Art, however, though always working in the interest of beauty, expatiates, as we have seen, in a field far wider than that which beauty comprehends. Whatever is, is the legitimate subject of art. So far, indeed, is it from being confined to that which is in itself attractive, that art may safely employ facts and images which are rightly banished from ordinary conversation. If modern art is tender upon this score, it is less to its praise than to its disgrace and degradation, as not apprehending its high privilege of deriving from the entire universe a perfect and universal language. It is true, that the exercise of this privilege of artistical language, to its full extent, has often set limits to its audience. But who have been the persons excluded? Surely not those to whom the kind of art in which such privilege is available, would, in any case, appeal.
The value of art may fitly be considered in connexion with two psychical facts, thus expressed by the great philosophical poet of our age, Mr. Wordsworth:
‘It is thing impossible to frame
Conceptions equal to the soul's desires;
And the most difficult of tasks to keep,
Heights which the soul is competent to gain.’
The supreme power of art in extending the vision of the soul is so widely allowed, that we need not insist upon it here; but there is a danger accompanying such extension, of which all are not aware: we mean, the danger of overlooking or neglecting the fact, that increased breadth of mental vision demands, but does not always give, a proportionate increase of mental strength. To be ‘as wide as Asia, and as weak,’ is to merit pity without having the means of moving it; in other words, to be contemptible: and this character is nowhere more common than among persons who apply themselves much to the contemplation of art, without comprehending its principal use, which is to correct the gravitating tendencies of the soul, in those seasons, too well known to all spiritual minds, when the spiritual sense is deadened, and ‘the peace which passeth all understanding’ flags, and demands a sign , in order to its sustenance. The arts, in their highest operation, are ‘supporters of our moments slack in faith;’ but those who have recourse to them as the main props of spiritual life, are likely to increase the kind of weakness which they are suited to correct. An eye accustomed to, and in seasons of oppression from the senses, thirsting for, the sight of pure truth, receives help and refreshment inexpressible from the sensuous embodiment of truth in works of art. When meditation fails to rouse the soul, when
[Page 460]
all scientific affirmations of higher realities seem blank and barren, and when even the most impassioned eloquence does but show forth our own temporary impoverishment, by demonstrating to us the present wealth and happiness of the speaker, an inspired verse, a strain of true music, a turn in a Gothic abbey, or a glance at a picture, be it only of sheep reposing, with a distance of quiet mountains, will remind the soul of its rights, and restore it to its home. Or, if the sin which so easily besets us has been the conscious cause of such estrangement, and the sole restorative, a living repentance, delays its coming, how powerful an instrument, in the hands of God, is the vivid representation by art of sin's exceeding sinfulness! If these assertions of the use of Art, as the handmaid of Religion, have any truth in them, it is greatly to be regretted that the power of appreciating art is, at present, and long has been, less cultivated by religious men than by men who are quite incapable of deriving this kind of service from artistic productions.
Upon irreligious men, it is probably not the highest kind of art which operates most beneficially. The highest art induces an exceedingly refined and spiritual delight, that seldom exceeds the mild form of passion called emotion; it acts more upon the spirit than the pulses; and it commonly fails to satisfy the vulgar craving for the ‘striking,’ the ‘pathetic,’ and so forth. In the very first paragraph that follows, Mr. Newman points only to the lowest class of effects that the poems to which he alludes, if they are true poems, must be capable of producing: but these are the effects proper to the mental condition which he and we are now contemplating:
‘All the generous side of human nature is nurtured and expanded by the contemplation of the Infinite. Hence it is that a sense of the sublime and beautiful, though it be not yet religion, supplies to morals an important part of that which it is reserved for religion to give in full power and divine harmony. Hence the glorious effect of high poetry, and of all that excites pure and beautiful imagination on the youthful mind. Therefore it is that to weep with Andromache, to shudder for Hector, to tremble at Achilles, to admire Alcestis, to rejoice with Admetus, constitute a better moral training than Paley's ‘Philosophy,’ or Aristotle's ‘Ethics,’ can give. Whatever throws the heart out of self, and swallows it up into some noble or beautiful idea, affords to the moralist precisely that which he wants, but cannot get within his own science. He may, as it were, build an elegant engine, but he has to look elsewhere for heat and moving power.’
It cannot be too much impressed upon the mind, that the moral and spiritual effects of art, whether high or low, have moderation in the use of art for the condition of their production
[Page 461]
and permanence. This truth is in no way derogatory to the dignity of art. The Bible itself, if studied as continually and exclusively as art is sometimes studied by its idolators, would fail to work its due effects: to inform the spirit by contemplation without disciplining the will by active life, is to sow in the heart seeds of despondency and despair, which must germinate and flourish whenever the will shall chance to be forced into strong and continued action; the discovery, always new, though a million times made, and sad enough in any case, of the impossibility of enacting pure truth and beauty, must cause a series of shocks too dreadful to be borne without injury to the mind, when the soul has received an amount of light which is out of all proportion to its strength. From this derangement of the balance and adjustment of the elements of life, has arisen the fact—the most melancholy one which can be proved from history—that very commonly—
                     ‘The poet in his youth begins in gladness,
But thereof comes in the end despondency and madness.’
Let us conclude these remarks with a few words concerning the prospects of art as a teacher. The results of art which already exist will probably take a more important part in furthering the welfare of mankind than has yet been fulfilled by them. There are powers in operation which tend to the multiplication of works of art, and to the dissemination of a sound feeling for them, to an extent unprecedented in history. A library of poems and a portfolio of prints are now such easily attainable luxuries, that they will soon become necessaries: the latter will, to some extent, include architecture, of which the beauty and power are wonderfully susceptible of graphical transcription. Science has recently developed, and is still engaged in developing, means of repeating most of the essential features of painting, architecture, and sculpture, with a fidelity as astonishing as it is important—a fidelity whereby we have preserved to us even the authority of the original work—an advantage which none will undervalue but those who have yet to learn, that indestructible instincts, whether they seem to be reasonable or not, must be propitiated and not opposed. There is no man, nor will there ever be one, so unhuman as not to value a work of art—if he values it at all—the more for its being the direct and unquestionable work of the artist. No copy, however faithful, if it be not necessarily faithful, will satisfy this craving for original authority. Processes, we repeat, are now perfected, or are being perfected, by which this authority is continued in the copy, so that the true relative values of that and the original are almost the same as those of the
[Page 462]
printed poem and the manuscript. Mr. Ruskin says admirably, that ‘a finished work of a great artist is only better than its sketch, if the sources of pleasure belonging to colour and realization are so employed as to increase the impressiveness of the thought.’ The thought, the pith of the matter, is always contained in the sketch, and this, at least, is susceptible of multiplication with its original authority, by our present methods of chemico-electrical, Daguerreotype, and Calyotype engraving.
The great interest that now attaches to art, regarded in the light in which we have been considering it, must soon cause the wide promulgation of rules and principles directing its employment. The golden rule in this, as in all else, will be found to be moderation . It will be found, that quite as much of art as can be made available for the good of any man's soul is easily to be obtained by him; whatever has set a limit to his means in this way, will generally be discovered to have also limited his wants. It will, moreover, be discovered that, unless a man can devote a whole life of leisure to travel, he will not get much of the substantial good of art by leaving his native country in pursuit of it. One picture familiarly known, seen, and loved day by day like a near friend, is worth a hundred galleries superficially examined and transiently felt. Galleries and museums are places for artists and idle people. If you have an idle hour, visit them by all means, but have your palladium in your own house; a print by Albert Durer, a cast of a lump of gothic foliage, or a Calyotype transcript of a Greek statue or bas-relief, hung up where you see it every day, will work you more good than many holiday visits to the National Gallery, St. Alban's Abbey, or the Elgin room at the British Museum.
Great is the benefit which must result to the spiritual culture of men, if they do no more than make the proper use of existing works of art. But we trust that there is reason for higher hope. May we not look forward to the rise of a new and devotional art, which, being devoid of the antiquarian element that always develops itself in works of art as the times which they partly represent are changed, shall make an appeal, whereto men may respond as easily and universally as the Greeks responded in the Periclean age to sculpture, or the inhabitants of Northern Europe, in the middle ages, to architecture. But the prerequisite to this better state of things is one, we fear, which few will have faith to anticipate—viz., that Europe should be the home of a Christianity making some approach towards a true catholicity—a catholicity far other than that which has its centre in the Vatican.
$$$
