The Fille de Chambre (1794)
Author: Rowson, Susanna.
Publication info: The Fille De Chambre . . . iv-207. Philadelphia: H. & P. Rice, 1794.

Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Title Page
THE
FILLE DE CHAMBRE,
A NOVEL.
By Mrs . ROWSON,
OF THE NEW THEATRE, PHILADELPHIA;
AUTHOR OF CHARLOTTE , THE INQUISITOR, VICTORIA , &c.
The higheſt wiſh I ever form'd has been,
Juſt to be plac'd above the reach of want,
In the bleſt medium between ſhining ſtate,
And the hard griping hand of penury.
Enough for this, and, if I have to ſpare
A little for my ſuff'ring fellow creatures,
I ſhall have reach'd the height of my ambition,
PHILADELPHIA:
1794.
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
PREFACE.
“ The fille de chambre ,” cried
Mr. Puffendorf, the other day, as
he took up the title page of my manuſcript
(for, to own the truth, he caught me scribling:)
“Why, ſurely Madam, you do
not think of troubling the Public with the
adventures of ſo inſignificant a character?”
I ſmiled, for I knew my good friend
Puffendorf imagined worth and virtue entirely
connected with birth, rank and fortune,
and that the actions of an obſcure
individual, poſſeſſed of neither of theſe advantages,
could not for a moment be
worthy attention. There was ſomething
in my ſmile that rather offended him, ſo,
without waiting for an anſwer, he thus
proceeded:
[Page iv]
“You are the ſtrangeſt woman upon
earth! You pretend to blend in your writings
both inſtruction and amuſement;
but, in the name of common ſenſe, what
inſtruction can be drawn from the life of
an Abigail? Why, the whole muſt be a
ſeries of intrigue, low wit, and frivolity.”
“Then, Sir, you muſt ſuppoſe ſhe lives
with people in very exalted ſtations, and
I write their memoirs, not her's.”
“No, Madam, no, I ſuppoſe no ſuch
thing; for then your work might be
worth reading. Perſons of high birth are
as different from their inferiors, in their
ſentiments and manners, as you can possibly
imagine.”
“I grant it, Sir, yet I hope you will
allow, that the inferior in fortune is often
the ſuperior in every other qualification.”
“Madam! Madam!” cried he, ſtriking
the table in a paſſion, “you are enough to
drive a man mad.”
“Do not miſtake me,” I replied, mildly;
“I do not mean to inſinuate, that virtue,
ſenſe, or honour, are confined to any
[Page v]
particular ſtation in life. I am fully sensible,
that there are many exalted characters
in this happy nation, whoſe amiable
conduct, more than their elevated rank,
render them objects of univerſal adoration:
but, at the ſame time, you muſt
give me leave to add, that the number is
but very few, when compared to the arrogant,
the trifling, and the profligate, who
form ſo large a part of our people of fashion
Virtue will appear amiable, tho'
habited in the garb of poverty: and a
woman may be an intereſting character,
tho' placed in the humbleſt walks of life,
and poſſeſſing no other recommendations
than a feeling heart, and a ſtrong ſenſe of
her duties, both moral and religious.
Such a character is my FILLE DE CHAMBRE,
the true child of nature; and as ſuch you
muſt not expect to read of wonderful discoveries,
of titles, rank and wealth, being
unexpectedly heaped upon her. The
only claim ſhe will have upon your attention,
ſhall be her integrity and innocence.”
“It will never do,” ſaid he, “take my
[Page vi]
word for it; you will never get five shillings
for your manuſcript.”
“I ſhall try it, however,” ſaid I, as
he went ſnarling down ſtairs; “nor ſhall
ſplendor ever with me be a veil to cover
guilt; vice and folly are fair game whereever
they appear, and cannot be too
much held up to ridicule and abhorrence;
nor ſhall meek-eyed virtue be ſuffered to
ſink to oblivion; wherever ſhe dwells ſhe
ſhall be greeted with ſmiles of approbation,
while the veil of humility ſhall be
withdrawn from her heavenly countenance,
that all may behold her tranſcendent beauties,
and, with a degree of glorious enthusiasm,
follow her faithful votaries.”
Main text
[Page ]
CHAP. I.
THE COTTAGE FIRE SIDE.
“ But who knows, my dear father,” cried Rebecca
Littleton, laying her hand on that of her
father, “who knows but ſomething yet may be done
to reward a veteran grown grey in his country's ſervice?”
“I hope there will, my child,” ſaid Mr. Littleton;
“and if there is not we muſt be content, for his Majesty,
God bleſs him, cannot provide for all. I wiſh,
my girl, it was in my power to convince him, that I
am ſtill willing to fight for him, though the bread I
eat from his bounty is but brown: but with this poor
ſtump,” looking at all that remained of his right arm,
“and this diſabled leg,” ſtretching it out as well as
he could, “all my fighting days are over; I can only
talk now, my child.”
“But you have fought bravely once,” ſaid Mrs.
Littleton, while a beam of exultation darted from her
eyes.
“And after all,” cried Rebecca, “it is hard to be
diſtreſſed for fifteen pounds.”
It was a clear froſty evening, in the beginning of
January, when, in a little cottage, on the ſea coaſt of
Lincolnſhire, Mr. Littleton, an old ſuperannuated lieutenant
in the army, his wife, daughter, and two or
three neighbours, were comfortably ſeated round a
[Page 008]
cheerful fire, the brown jug was juſt repleniſhed by the
fair hands of Rebecca, and the ſong, the joke, and
the tale went cheerfully round, when an unwelcome
though not unexpected, viſitor made his appearance,
and threw a damp over their harmleſs mirth.
This was no other than their landlord's ſteward, who
came to demand the rent, in paying which they had
been, from various diſagreeable reaſons, more backward
than uſual; it amounted to fifteen pounds, and
the poor old man had no method whatever to raiſe the
money. He had often made his diſtreſſes known to
people in power, who had once ſtyled themſelves his
friends, but never received any thing more than promises
that ſomething ſhould be done; but hope had ſo
often deceived him, that he now ceaſed to liſten to her
flattering voice, and was ſinking into deſpondency,
when the lovely Rebecca cheered him with the ſentence
at the beginning of the chapter.
Rebecca was the youngeſt of ſeven children, and
the only one who lived to years of maturity. She was
at this time juſt ſixteen, and had combined in her person
all the beauty of a Venus, and the ſimplicity of a
Grace. She poſſeſſed a ſtriking figure, juſt tall enough
to be elegant. Her ſhape was perfect ſymmetry, and
her countenance one of thoſe which may ſafely be pronounced
more than beautiful; for, to the ſofteſt blue
eyes, flaxen hair, and a complexion that out vied the
lilies, was added ſuch an inexpreſſible look of benevolence
and candour, that it was impoſſible to ſee and
not love her. She had been taught by her father to
read and write her own language correctly, by her mother
ſome little knowledge of the French, and by the
vicar's lady, who was extremely fond of her, ſhe had
learned to play, with a conſiderable degree of taſte, on
the lute; but being educated intirely in the family way,
and never having paſt the boundaries of her native village,
except once or twice to a neighbouring fair, there
was about her ſuch an air of modeſt timidity, that, by
the unobſerving, might be miſtaken for ruſtic bashfulness.
Though conſidered by her young companions as the
[Page 009]
belle of the village, in her own opinion ſhe was ever the
meaneſt, the leaſt worthy notice of any. Brought up
in the ſtricteſt notions of the proteſtant religion, ſuch
univerſal charity pervaded her ſoul, that ſhe never suspected
the worth and integrity of her fellow creatures;
but implicitly believed, that every one, who proſeſſed
to love or eſteem her, ſpoke the genuine feelings of
their hearts.
She harboured no ideas which fear or ſhame prevented
her revealing, for this reaſon, her actions, her sentiments,
were often open to the malevolent misconstructions
of thoſe, who, having art ſufficient to conceal
the real impulſe of their natures, aſſume the ſemblance
of thoſe virtues, the reality of which is poſſeſſed only
by the genuine children of ſimplicity.
In giving the character of Mr. Littleton, we require
but few words; he was honeſt, poſſeſſed of valour,
good ſenſe, and a liberal education.
Mrs. Littleton was twenty years younger than her
huſband, and was, when he married her, remarkably
beautiful. She was the daughter of an exciſeman, and
at a country boarding ſchool had picked up a few ſhowy
accompliſhments, but her mind had been totally neglected;
her ſentiments were therefore narrow and illiberal,
and ſhe poſſeſſed that kind of worldly knowledge,
which rendered her ſuſpicious of the integrity
of every human being.
The little knowledge Rebecca poſſeſſed of mankind,
ſhe had gleaned from a ſmall, but not ill-furniſhed, circulating
library, to which all the inhabitants of the
village ſubſcribed. Her mind was highly tinctured
with the romantic, but withal was enlightened with
ſuch a high ſenſe of honour, virtue and piety, that it
was almoſt impoſſible to lead her to a wrong action;
yet there were times when the fortitude of Rebecca
was vulnerable. She could ſtand unmoved in a right
cauſe againſt entreaty, perſuaſion, and even the severest
threats; but ſhe was not proof againſt the ſahft
of ridicule.
We have ſaid that Mrs. Littleton had been handſome
indeed, ſhe was ſo ſtill, being at this period but forty
[Page 010]
ſeven years old; for piercing black eyes, cheſnut hair,
and a florid complexion, gave her greatly the look of
youth. This juvenile appearance of her mother was a
great misfortune to Rebecca, for Mrs. Littleton was
ever more pleaſed with being told ſhe looked like her
eldeſt ſiſter, than in being complimented with being
the mother of ſo lovely a young woman; indeed, ſhe
conſidered every compliment paid to her daughter as
derogating ſomething from her own merit. She considered
her more as a rival than a child, and was happy
in every opportunity to ridicule the feelings of a heart,
of whoſe intriſic worth ſhe had no idea.
Rebecca could not ſometimes help feeling the unkindness
of her mother; but whatever thoſe feelings
were, ſhe ſuffered in ſilence; no complaint ever eſcaped
her lips, but ſhe endeavoured, by the mildeſt acquiescence
in her every wiſh, to conciliate that affection
which ſhe would have conſidered as her greateſt comfort.
“It is hard, indeed, to be ſo diſtreſſed for fifteen
pounds,” ſaid Rebecca: “I wiſh I could hit on any
plan by which my dear father might be relieved from
this embarraſſment. I have a great mind, if you will
give me leave, to go to-morrow morning to Lady Mary
Worthy; I ſaw her laſt week at the vicar's when ſhe
aſked me to come and ſee her, and ſaid ſhe ſhould be
happy to render me any ſervice in her power.”
“And do you think ſhe really meant what ſhe ſaid?”
cried Mrs. Littleton.
“To be ſure I do,” replied Rebecca.
“Then you are a fool, retorted the mother, “not
to take it, as it was deſigned, a mere compliment,
which ſhe paid in reſpect to Mrs. Alton, who, ſhe ſaw,
was rather partial to you.”
“Dear mamma” ſaid Rebecca, in an accent of surprise,
“how can you think ſo? There was no neceſſity
for her to aſk me, if ſhe had not wiſhed me to come,
for, you know, I am greatly her inferior.”
“Don't talk ſo ſilly, child! do you ſuppoſe I wiſh
every body to come to my houſe whom politeneſs obliges
me to aſk?”
[Page 011]
“I can only ſay, mamma, that I would never aſk
any perſon whom I ſhould not be really glad to ſee
when they came.”
“I think, my dear,” ſaid Mr. Littleton (though I
have the greateſt reſpect imaginable for your opinion)
“that it would not be amiſs for Rebecca to go to Lady
Mary; when ſhe knows our ſituation ſhe may be
prevailed with to requeſt her ſon, Sir George, to wait
till we can make up the ſum: I will, in the mean time,
write to my old friend, Lord Antrim, perhaps, he
may get my ſmall penſion enlarged,
Mrs. Littleton remained ſilent, and it was agreed
between Rebecca and her father, that the next morning
ſhe ſhould viſit Audley Park.
CHAP. II.
THE APPLICATION. At twelve o'clock, next morning, the lovely Rebecca,
habited in a plain white jacket, a strawhat,
and black tereſa, ſat out for Audley Park.
Lady Mary was alone in the library when ſhe arrived,
and, on the ſervant's announcing her name, desired
her to be immediately ſhown up.
“Now this is really kind,” ſaid ſhe, with the moſt
condeſcending ſmile, advancing to the bluſhing Rebecca,
and, taking her hand, led her to the ſofa on which ſhe
had been ſitting, and ſeating herſelf by her ſide: “I
flatter myſelf you are come to ſpend the day with me.”
“Indeed, madam,” replied Rebecca, “I was not
ſo preſuming as to hope ſuch an honour: I came to request—
to entreat”— ſhe faltered—the tears
ſtarted in her eyes—Lady Mary interrupted her.
“Speak out, my love; do not be alarmed, but reſt
aſſured, I am ready to grant you any favour within
the limits of my power.”
“You are very good, madam. I hope you will pardon
the liberty I have taken; but my father, madam
[Page 012]
—his income is very ſmall—we are a twelve-month
in arrears in our rent—if you will kindly
uſe your intereſt with Sir George in our behalf.—
“Surely, my dear, your agitation is unneceſſary.
I dare ſay my ſon has never thought of the rent.”
“No, madam, I do not ſuppoſe he has, it is ſo
trifling; but Mr. Villars, his ſteward, aſked for it laſt
night, and was very angry!”
“Indeed! ſaid her ladyſhip; was he angry?”
“I do not mean to complain of Mr. Villars, madam,
for he has been very good to us, and often has waited
a month or two for his money. You know, madam,
he is only doing his duty when he demands it; for was
he to be remiſs in collecting the rents, Sir George
would certainly be offended with him.”
Lady Mary ſmiled at the eager manner in which
Rebecca uttered this apology for Villars; but it was a
ſmile of the utmoſt ſatisfaction, it convinced her of
the goodneſs of her young viſitor's heart.
“I think,” ſaid ſhe, “if ſome friend could be found
who would advance this ſum for your father.”
“Alas! madam, how is it to be repaid, unleſs, indeed,”—
heſitating, bluſhing, and riſing from
her ſeat.
“Unleſs what, my ſweet girl?”
“Your ladyſhip would generouſly lend me the money,
and take me into your ſervice, that I might render
myſelf uſeful till it is repaid; or, if you think me
too preſuming, madam, perhaps, you could recommend
me to ſome family where there are children. I am not,
it is true, accuſtomed to ſervitude, but I will exert my
poor abilities cheerfully, and hope my willingneſs to
oblige will, in ſome meaſure compenſate for my awkwardness.”
“You are too good, and too lovely,” ſaid Lady Mary,
“for a ſervant; but you ſhall, if you pleaſe, come
and live with me. I will ſettle this little difficulty of
your father's and ſhall think myſelf obliged if you
will accept a trifle annually for your pocket expences.
She then drew forth her purſe, and preſented the delighted
maid with a twenty pound bank note.”
[Page 013]
Greatful beyond the power of expreſſion, Rebecca
could only ſink on her knees, preſs the hand of her
benefactreſs to her lips, and, ſmiling through the tears
that guſhed from her eyes, looked thoſe thanks ſhe
found it impoſſible to utter.
“Go, go, you are a ſimple girl I ſee,” cried her
ladyſhip, raiſing and puſhing her gently from her. “Go,
make your father happy, and, if you can obtain his
aſſent to my propoſal, to-morrow I will come and fetch
you home; but I muſt have you mend that little heart
of your's, it is but a very poor one to go through the
world with.”
“It means well,” replied Rebecca, trembling and
confuſed, raiſing her timid eyes to the face of her benefactress.
“Aye, aye, I am ſure of that, but it is too honeſt
by half; beſides, your intelligent countenance betrays
its every emotion.”
“I hope, madam, it will never experience any, but
may be revealed with impunity.”
“Ah! my dear,” ſaid Lady Mary, ſhaking her
head, “you will, no doubt, one day find that it will
be to your intereſt to diſguiſe its feelings as much as
poſſible.”
Rebecca, then took her leave, and as ſhe returned
home, could not help thinking that it was very ſtrange,
and very inconſiſtent too, that ſincerity ſhould be deemed
a virtue, and yet diſguiſe be thought neceſſary to
thoſe who have much commerce with the world.
CHAP. III.
SUSPICION. “ Well , Miſs, what ſucceſs?” cried Mrs.
Littleton, as Rebecca entered the room: “I
hope you are convinced I was right, in ſuppoſing your
vanity incited you to hope without foundation.”
“Indeed, my dear mamma, for once you were
[Page 014]
mistaken: Lady Mary has received me kindly, and more
than granted my requeſt.”
She then, with the moſt bewitching ſimplicity, related
her interview at the Park, while Mr. Littleton
looked exultingly happy; but good mamma contracted
her brow, and, drawing herſelf up, as was her cuſtom
when any thing diſpleaſed her, ſaid:
“I hope, Mr. Littleton, you will not think of letting
the girl go: Lady Mary certainly does not mean
to take her entirely, and it will only be filling her head
with idle notions, of which, heaven knows, ſhe has
plenty already. Beſides, what do we know of Lady
Mary? It is true, ſhe came down here laſt year, and
remained about three months; but who can tell any
thing of her character and morals? She may lead the
girl into all manner of folly.”
Now the caſe was exactly this: the late Sir George
Worthy had purchaſed this eſtate but a few months
before his death, and as Lady Mary was a woman of a
very retired turn, the ſhort time ſhe remained in the
country ſhe viſited but few families, and thoſe without
ceremony. Lady Mary was truly benevolent, but ſhe
performed thoſe acts herſelf, and not unfrequently made
the ſilence and ſecrecy of the perſons benefitted, the
only terms on which they were to hope a continuance
of her favours.
She in general reſided at a ſeat about twenty miles
from London, to the end that ſhe might ſtrictly scrutinize
the conduct of a daughter who was married to a
young diſſipated nobleman, and who, though bleſſed
with a mother, whoſe example might have led her on
to every laudable purſuit, was ſo entirely ſwallowed up
in the vortex of folly and diſſipation, that ſhe had not
time to attend to the eſſential duties of a wife, mother,
and miſtreſs of a family.
In the place where Lady Mary uſually reſided, ſhe
was conſidered as a proud, unſocial woman, by the
midling kind of gentry; by her equals as an oddity,
and by her dependants as ſomething ſuperiorly good,
and was by them beloved, reſpected, nay, almoſt
adored as an angel of benevolence.
[Page 015]
But Mrs. Littleton ſeldom gave people credit for
virtues which ſhe had not the penetration to diſcover,
though ſhe could eaſily imagine them capable of practising
deceit, inhumanity, or almoſt any vice that can
diſgrace human nature: ſhe therefore thus continued
her diſcourſe to her huſband.
“People are not always what they ſeem to be; this
lady may make very fair promiſes, and when once the
girl is in her power, treat her as a common ſervant. I
beg Mr. Littleton, you will not let her go.”
“I am ſorry my dear love,” cried Mr. Littleton,
“to differ from you in my opinion concerning Lady
Mary's offer; I think our dear girl will be highly honoured
in her friendſhip and protection. You know
my dear if ſhe ſhould find herſelf unhappy, ſhe has a
home, however homely, where ſhe will be ſure of being
received with tranſport. I am growing old; when
I am gone all is gone; it would be ſome comfort to
me to reflect in my laſt moments, that my dear Rebecca
was not likely to feel the pangs of want. The ſmall
annuity I have purchaſed for you will ſupply the necessaries
of life to one, but not to both of you. I am as
unwilling as you can be to part with her; but it is necessary
ſhe ſhould be in ſome way of earning a ſupport,
and, I truſt, ſhe has ſenſe and fortitude ſufficient to
withſtand every temptation to evil.”
“Oh! my father,” cried Rebecca, taking his hand,
“you may, indeed, depend on a child whoſe heart
your precepts have trained in the love of virtue. Methinks,
ſhould I ever be tempted to ſtray in the paths
of vice, your bleſt image will riſe to my imagination;
methinks I ſhall hear your perſuaſive voice ſay “Rebecca,
wilt thou break thy father's heart?” Will
it be poſſible, then, for me to proceed? Oh! no;
the remembrance of you, like a taliſman, will ſhield
me from every danger.”
“Why, how the girl talks!” ſaid Mrs. Littleton:
“I declare ſhe learns theſe things out of the books ſhe
is for ever reading; for 'tis not the language of the
world; there is nobody hardly can underſtand her”.
“It is the language of the heart,” replied the father.
[Page 016]
“Well, Sir, you are to act as you pleaſe; but if
any ill come of it, don't blame me; don't ſay I drove
her from home.”
“My dear, you talk of things which never could
enter my mind. I know you will always be happy to
have your child with you, ſtrange if you were not, ſo
amiable as ſhe is! But as I ſaid juſt now, I am growing
old, I cannot remain much longer with you, and, perhaps
you may marry again.”
“Marry again! Mr. Littleton, you ſurely are trying
to vex me. Ah! my deareſt life, when I looſe
you I ſhall looſe all my happineſs; the reſt of my life
will be a continued ſcene of mourning; there is a degree
of indelicacy in a woman marrying a ſecond time:
it is an inſult to the memory of the firſt huſband, of
which I could not have believed you thought me capable.
It has hurt me more than I can expreſs,” and
ſhe burſt into tears.
“All this now is nonſenſe,” ſaid the old man, taking
hold of her hand; “for my part I ſee nothing in
a woman's having two huſbands; it is naturally to be
expected when ſhe is left a lovely widow, in the prime
of life, as you are now.”
“No indeed papa,” ſaid Rebecca, innocently,
“there is nothing in it at all; it is as common as can
be.”
“Hold your tongue, Miſs; do not talk ſo unfeelingly
of the loſs of your poor dear father.”
“God ſend,” cried Rebecca, fervently claſping her
hands “that for this many, many years, I may not
experience ſo heavy an affliction as the loſs of my revered
parent: it would be a heavy ſtroke to us both,
my dear mamma, but to me irreparable; for, though
you might find another huſband, where ſhould poor
Rebecca find another father?” She turned away, covered
her face with her hand, and ſobbed aloud.
After much more altercation it was at length agreed,
that Rebecca ſhould accept Lady Mary's offer, and that
Mr. Littleton ſhould himſelf go to the Park that afternoon
to thank her for her bounty, and to requeſt her
[Page 017]
kindeſt attention to the welfare and peace of his darling
Rebecca.
Lady Mary received him with great politeneſs, and,
after chatting ſome time with him, and aſſuring him of
her protection to his daughter, ſhe thus addreſſed him:
“I feel myſelf much intereſted in the happineſs of
Rebecca, and for that reaſon, though I mean to make
her my companion, I ſhall not introduce her into company,
or give her a taſte for expenſive pleaſures. When
I have viſitors, her meals will be ſerved in her own
apartment; when I am alone, which is the greateſt
part of my time, ſhe will eat and ſit with me, reading,
working, or amuſing herſelf as inclination ſhall prompt.
“I will confeſs I have an intereſted motive for this
conduct. I have a ſon, Mr. Littleton, the laſt remaining
branch of two noble families. I am ſenſible his
heart is not invulnerable, and I am fully convinced
that your daughter is the moſt lovely woman I ever
beheld; but all charming as ſhe is (pardon me, Sir,
it is my duty in this point to be ſincere) I ſhould not
chooſe to ſee her the wife of my ſon, and I have too
high a regard for her to expoſe her to trials to which
her fortitude may be unequal. I do not ſcruple to ſay
it would hurt my pride to ſee her his wife; but it would
wound my ſenſibility to ſee her his miſtreſs. My houſe
at Twickenham is large; one part of it is ſeldom visited
by any body but myſelf; here I mean to order her
an apartment, and whenever I expect Sir George I
ſhall requeſt her to keep within it: however, as he is
a very gay young man, I do not ſee him very often,
and when he does come he does not ſtay with me above
two or three hours; therefore, Mr. Littleton let Rebecca
know this, if ſhe can bear ſolitude ſometimes,
and in general retirement, I ſhall eſteem myſelf happy
to have her with me. If ſhe diſlikes the plan, do not
fear to inform me. I remember I was once young myself,
and ſhall not be at all offended if I find youth and
beauty unable to ſubmit implicitly to the caprices of
age. One thing more I muſt mention: I ſhall constantly
viſit Audley Park once a year; Rebecca ſhall
always accompany me, and as we ſhall be out of all
[Page 018]
danger at thoſe times, every amuſement that I can procure
ſhe may depend upon enjoying.”
Mr. Littleton was a man of ſenſe: he was pleaſed
with Lady Mary's frankneſs, and readily conceived,
that the propoſed retired ſituation of his child would be
the only thing to ſhield her from thoſe ſnares and
temptations to which a young woman is ſubject, who,
poſſeſſed of beauty, wit, and ſenſibility, has neither
rank or fortune to recommend her to the ſerious attention
of thoſe who might pretend to admire while, they
lead the unſuſpecting innocent a victim to vice and seduction!
He returned home, and maugre the ill-grounded
ſuſpicions of his wife, the next day but one was fixed
on for the lovely Rebecca to attend her patroneſs, and
enter on an entire new courſe of life.
CHAP. V.
NOUVELLE SCENES. Lady Mary was not an early riſer; Rebecca
had been accuſtomed from earlieſt infancy to
leave her bed at fix o'clock; ſhe had therefore aroſe at
her uſual hour, and finding herſelf likely to be alone
till ten o'clock, went into the library, and ſelected
from among the many books there, Sir Charles Grandison
for her morning amuſement; the intereſting pen
of Richardſon had ſo entirely charmed her attention,
that ſhe thought not of time till Lady Mary made her
appearance.
“You have been reading, my love,” ſaid ſhe; “are
you fond of Novels?”
“I like theſe entertaining Hiſtories, madam; they
always command my attention, and awaken my sensibility.”
“It is dangerous, Rebecca, to indulge that sensibility
too much; beſides, my dear, you muſt not give
[Page 019]
way to an exceſs of feeling, when the tale you read is
only a fiction.”
“A fiction! madam; you ſurpriſe me. I thought
they had been the Hiſtories of perſons who had really
exiſted.”
“Far from it, child; human nature can never ariſe
to ſuch a pitch of excellence as this Sir Charles Grandison
is repreſented to be; nor will you among your
own ſex, be able to find a woman like Miſs Byron:
beſides, if you accuſtom yourſelf to think theſe high
wrote ſcenes real, you will find the actual occurrences
of human life ſo flat and inſipid, that the very disappointment
will render you diſguſted with the world.”
Rebecca liſtened with attention, but ſtill in her
heart ſhe thought, ſurely, theſe amiable characters,
theſe intereſting ſcenes, are not all fiction. I ſhall certainly
at ſome future period, meet with men and women
as amiable as theſe are repreſented. She nourished
this idea in ſilence, and dwelt on the delightful vision,
till at laſt too fatally convinced, that to be perfect
was not compatible with mortality. She wept over
the errors of her fellow creatures, and lamented that
reaſonable beings placed in a world abounding with
every comfort, ſhould ungratefully daſh the cup of felicity
from their lips, and eagerly drink of that which
was ſtrongly tinctured with gall. It is eaſily in our
own power to be happy, ſaid ſhe; but to render ourselves
really miſerable, requires much art, contrivance
and ſolicitude; for, before we can be completely unhappy,
we muſt forſake the commandments of our all-wife
Creator; we muſt diſtruſt his merciful Providence,
and render ourſelves totally unworthy his heavenly protection.
But I am ſpeaking of her maturer reflexions, and
forgetting that ſhe is but juſt entered on the grand
theatre of life.—And to return:
The time was now nearly elapſed which Lady Mary
uſually ſpent in Lincolnſhire, which was two months
before and one after Chriſtmas, at which period ſhe
enlivened the hearts of all Sir George's tenants, and
[Page 020]
made the ſmile of tranquillity ſit on the countenances
of age, and ſoftened the couch of pain and ſickneſs.
And is not this the real incenſe to be offered at ſo
glorious a ſeaſon? Will it not go up as a ſweet smellling
ſacrifice before the Moſt High? Oh! ſurely it is
the benevolent heart will ever be acceptable to him
whoſe heavenly benevolence led him to ſuffer an ignominious
death, that we might live for ever in glory unfading,
in bliſs unchangeable.
It was with infinite pain that Rebecca parted from
her father; nor did he experience leſs anguiſh. “God
preſerve you my child,” ſaid he embracing her, “remember
the happineſs of your poor father depends on
your well doing.”
“Good bye, Rebecca,” ſaid the mother; “God
bleſs you, child, be careful, circumſpect, and wary;
ſuſpect every one of a deſign on you till you are convinced
of the contrary. You muſt think all men knaves,
and all women treacherous, and then you will avoid
many troubles. Truſt no one; keep your thoughts
to yourſelf if you are unhappy, bear your ſorrows in
ſilence, for no one will pity you if you tell them; the
happy will only laugh at you, and the miſerable have
enough to do to feel for their own afflictions. If you
are happy, be ſilent alſo; for if you boaſt of your felicity,
ſome will ridicule the ſource from whence it follows,
and others will, from envy, endeavour to interrupt
that happineſs they cannot themſelves enjoy.
Keep your thoughts to yourſelf; have few acquaintances,
fewer intimates, and no boſom friends. Friendship
is a pretty word, but there is no ſuch thing as a
true friend exiſting in the world. Remember what I
ſay; the world is full of deceit, and ſilence and suspicion
are the only things to ſecure you from its effects.”
“But ſuſpicion is incompatible with Chriſtianity,”
ſaid Rebecca; “we are taught to `judge not that we
be not judged.”
Mrs. Littleton looked at her daughter with an air of
ſurpriſe, but remained ſilent. Lady Mary preſſed her
hand, and led her to the chaiſe. Rebecca bowed to
her parents, and before ſhe was from diſtance deprived
[Page 021]
of the pleaſure of beholding them, the tears had effectually
obſcured them from her view.
Their journey was pleaſant, and the novelty of the
objects ſhe encountered, in a ſhort time diverted her
ideas, and before ſhe arrived at Twickenham ſhe was
quite tranquil and happy; nay, ſhe was even more
cheerful than Lady Mary had ever ſeen her before.
It was late when they alighted; but the elegance of
the houſe, the extent of the gardens, and the taſte in
which they were laid out, was full and pleaſurable
amuſement to Rebecca the next morning. Her own
apartment commanded a view of the Thames and its
delightful banks; ſhe thought ſhe ſhould never be weary
of ſtanding at the window. “I will write my father
an ample account of this charming place,” ſaid ſhe;
but when ſhe had rambled over all the pleaſure grounds,
alas! thought ſhe, it will be impoſſible to give him an
adequate idea of its beauties. I muſt even requeſt him
to come next ſummer, and judge of it himſelf.
For eight months, happineſs, pure, unallayed happiness,
took up her abode in the boſom of Rebecca.
She read, ſhe worked, walked, or played on her lute
alternately, as inclination led, and during that time ſhe
had been confined to her apartment but twice, once
when Lady Oſſiter viſited her mother, and once when
Sir George was expected to dinner.
CHAP. VI.
WHAT MIGHT BE EXPECTED. Time now flew on the ſofteſt pinions with Rebecca;
every riſing day brought increaſe to her happiness;
the tenderneſs and affection of Lady Mary hourly
increaſed; ſhe had diſcovered in her gentle companion
great taſte for muſic, and a dawning of genius for
drawing.
“Theſe are talents,” ſaid her ladyſhip, “that ever
afford a fund of innocent amuſement to the poſſeſſor,
[Page 022]
and it is certainly my duty, by cultivating them, to
compenſate, in ſome meaſure, for the cheerful acquiescense
Rebecca ſhows to every deſire of mine, particularly
in ſubmitting, without repining, to a recluſe
life, which moſt young perſons, at her time of life, and
poſſeſſed of her beauty and vivacity, would think cruel
in the extreme.”
Lady Mary had received an education befitting her
rank, and had not neglected the means of improving a
very elevated underſtanding, and a bright natural genius,
by refuſing attention to the ample means of cultivation
which fortune held out; on the contrary ſhe
made herſelf miſtreſs of the fine arts, muſic and painting,
and to the moſt delicate and judicious choice of
the works of fancy, ſhe added an extenſive knowledge
of hiſtory and natural philoſophy.
To her, therefore, the cultivation of ſuch a mind as
Rebecca's was a ſource of the moſt refined pleaſure.
She ſaw its beauties daily expand under her attentive
care, with the ſame delight as the lapidary diſcovers the
cruſt that envelopes the rough diamond give way to
his labours, and the ineſtimable jewel aſſuming a degree
of brilliancy that promiſes well to reward his induſtry.
But, though the talents of Rebecca were thus eaſily
drawn forth, and the ruſticity of her manners began to
aſſume a more poliſhed air, it was impoſſible to alter the
ſimplicity and purity of her mind. Whenever her generous
patroneſs endeavoured to give her ſome idea of
the manners of the world, ſhe manifeſted ſuch a degree
of ſweet incredibility, when informed of vices of which
ſhe had no idea, and was ſo ready to frame excuſes for
errors of which ſhe imagined few could be guilty, and
none intentionally, that Lady Mary was at length assured
that nothing but experience would convince the
innocent maid, but that every boſom was as free from
guilt and treachery as her own.
“My dear Rebecca,” ſaid ſhe to her one day, “I
will no longer labour to inform you of the vices and follies
of mankind, the total ignorance of which ſeems to
conſtitute your chief felicity. Long, my ſweet girl,
may you retain that primitive ſimplicity of heart; it
[Page 023]
ſhall be my care to leave you at my death an independence,
to prevent your charming unſuſpecting nature
from buying experience at ſo dear a rate, as an intercourse
with, or a dependence upon, the ſmiles of an
unfeeling, misjudging world.”
Thus Lady Mary determined; but, alas! like too
many others, ſhe deferred, adding this codicil to her
will from day to day, till a ſudden accident put it intirely
out of her power.
The autumn was now advancing, and Rebecca looked
forward to the time when ſhe ſhould reviſit her native
village. “And how will my dear father be delighted,”
ſaid ſhe, “to ſee and hear my improvements? To be
ſure there is no harpſichord in his cottage; but he will
ſurely come to the Park, and then I will ſurpriſe him
by playing ſome of his favourite airs: my mother too,
I will requeſt Lady Mary to let me give her that piece
of grey luſtring ſhe ſo kindly brought me from town laſt
week. I will buy her alſo a new cloak and bonnet,
ſhe will be the gayeſt of all our neighbours next winter;”
then taking out her port folio, ſhe ſelected
of her beſt drawings, and, in imagination, arranged
them round her father's little ruſtic parlour.
Lady Mary was that morning gone to Windſor on a
viſit to an old acquaintance, and Rebecca, having
amuſed herſelf in her own apartment ſome time, in the
manner already mentioned, at length took up her lute,
and opening a window which looked into a retired part
of the garden, and into which darted the mild rays of
a September's ſun. She tuned her inſtrument, and began
ſinging the following little ſong, which ſhe had
learned but a few days before; it was of conſequence a
favourite from its novelty more than from its real beauty.
Aurora, lovely, blooming fair!
                           Unbar'd the eaſtern ſkies;
While many a ſoft pelucid tear
                           Ran trickling from her eyes.
Onward ſhe came with heart-felt-glee
                           Leading the dancing hours;
For tho' ſhe wept, ſhe ſmil'd to ſee
                           Her tears refreſh the flow'rs.
[Page 024]
Phœbus, who long her charms admir'd,
                           With bright refulgent ray,
Came forth, and, as the maid retir'd,
                           He kiſs'd her tears away.
So youth advances, mild ſerene,
                           Our childiſh ſorrows ceaſe;
While hopes, gay ſun-ſhine, guilds the ſcene,
                           And all is joy and peace.
While Rebecca was ſinging, ſhe had been ſo intent
on her muſic, that ſhe had not obſerved any body enter
the part of the garden to which her window looked;
but on laying down her lute, and turning her eyes that
way, ſhe perceived a young gentleman, in a riding
dreſs, leaning againſt a tree, and gazing intently at her.
The natural roſes that played on her cheeks were heightened
by this diſcovery. She aroſe haſtily, and was
going to pull down the window, when the young gentleman
advancing, with a look of the moſt earneſt supplication:
Stay one moment, angelic creature!” ſaid he,
tell me if what I now behold is reality or an il
? Art thou a ſpirit of light, or the lovelieſt human
being the earth bears?”
“Sir!” replied Rebecca, with a voice and look of
ſurpriſe, “did you ſpeak to me?” and ſhe involuntarily
ſuſpended the hand that was raiſed to ſhut the window.
“Oh! ſpeak again, thou faireſt of thy ſex,” ſaid he,
“Tell me, art thou, indeed, a mortal?”
“To be ſure I am,” ſaid Rebecca, ſmiling; “what
elſe ſhould I be?”
“And doſt thou live here?”
“Sometimes,” replied Rebecca, with more reſerve,
beginning to perceive the impropriety ſhe was guilty of
in talking to a ſtranger.
“And cannot you either deſcend into the garden, or
ſuffer me to viſit the apartment that contains ſo much
lovelineſs?”
“I can do neither,” ſaid Rebecca gravely, and ſhe
again raiſed her hand to draw down the ſaſh.
“Oh! ſtay an inſtant,” ſaid he, “and tell me, all
angel as thou art! Did thy heart ever vibrate with the
ſoft emotions of love?”
[Page 025]
“Sure, ſure, it has! elſe I were ungrateful,” ſhe
replied, innocently.—“I love my parents; I love
my lady: yes, heaven is my witneſs, how much, how
fervently, I love her!” She laid her hand on her
heart, and raiſed her eyes, with a look of grateful affection:
“Enchanting ſimplicity! but do you love
no other?”
“Heaven forbid! I love all mankind.”
“But no one in particular.”
“No.” Her uplifted hand fell from the ſaſh, and
her eyes were caſt, firſt on the young gentleman, then
on the ground.
“Could you love me, ſweeteſt?”
“Methinks not, for you are rudely inquiſitive.”
“But you will not hate me?”
“Hate you, Sir! No; you never did me any harm,
and if you had, I know it is my duty to forgive you,
and pray for your happineſs.”
“Then you will not think of me with indifference?”
“That would be impoſſible,” ſaid ſhe, in a softened
accent as ſhe pulled down the window: but he
heard not what ſhe ſaid, and being no longer able to
gaze on her beauties, or liſten to her voice, he retired
from the garden in a ſtate of mind by no means enviable.
CHAP. VII.
DEBATE ON MATRIMONY. Sir George Worthy was a young man of violent
paſſions. At a very early age he had been made
his own maſter, and, like moſt young men of large independent
fortune, from unlimited indulgence was led
to believe, that the moſt trifling occurrence which
thwarted his inclination, was an inſupportable affliction;
it was therefore a very great mortification to him
[Page 026]
to be obliged to quit the garden in ſuch a ſtate of suspence,
eſpecially as he did not know who the young
lady was: however he reſolved to ſtay at his mother's
houſe a few days (a favour which he had never deigned
before ſince the death of his father) for he imagined
this fair viſitant would of courſe make her appearance
at dinner, and that after the firſt formal introduction,
he ſhould have the ſuperlative ſatisfaction of enjoying
her company in an unreſerved family way.
When Lady Mary arrived, ſhe was much ſurpriſed to
ſee her ſon in the drawing-room; but as ſhe had not the
remoteſt idea of his having been arrived long, after the
firſt ſalutations were paſt, ſhe went to her own apartment,
and diſpatched Mrs. Harley, her woman, to inform
Rebecca, that as ſhe had company, ſhe would
order her dinner to be ſent up, and ſhould not expect
to ſee her in the dining parlour.
Harley was not ſatisfied with ſimply delivering her
meſſage, but alſo delivered her own ſentiments on the
ſubject.
“Heaven keep me from pride,” ſaid ſhe. “One muſt
be blind, indeed, not to perceive the cauſe of my lady's
confining you in this manner: mercy on us, as if fleſh
and blood without a title was not as good as fleſh and
blood with one! Marry come up, and were I to be
judge, I think you are to the full as good as Sir
George, mayhap better. All is not gold that glitters.
I warrant ye, if Sir George was once to ſee your ſweet
face, he would think a title well beſtowed.”
“I do not underſtand you, my good Harley,”
ſaid Rebecca, with a look of the utmoſt ſimplicity.
“Oh! it is all very well, Miſs; if you are ſatisfied
I am; only I ſay it is a ſhame to ſhut you up ſo
whenever Sir George comes.”
“Sir George!” cried Rebecca, eagerly; “is Sir
George Worthy at Twickenham?” “Yes, Miſs
Becky, he is and that is the reaſon.”—
“Hold, Harley; my lady's commands are ſufficient
for me, without any reaſon alledged; but pray how
long has Sir George been here?”
“He arrived immediately on my lady's leaving
[Page 027]
home, and amuſed himſelf in the garden till a few moments
before her return.”
“'Tis very well,” ſaid Rebecca: “Your miſtreſs
perhaps, may want you. Mrs. Harley, pray do not
let me detain you.”
Harley muttered ſomething about inſenſible, and left
the room.
Lady Mary, having adjuſted her dreſs, repaired to
the dining parlour, and ſent the butler to inform her
ſon that dinner was ſerved. With a palpitating heart
Sir George obeyed the ſummons; but how great was
his ſurpriſe and diſappointment, on entering the room,
to ſee no perſon there but his mother, and the cloth
laid but for two! His chagrin betrayed itſelf in his
countenance.
“Do we dine by ourſelves madam?” ſaid he somewhat
confuſed.
“That is an odd queſtion, George,” ſaid her ladyship.
“I thought you was acquainted with the recluse
life I lead, and therefore could not expect to meet
much company at my table.”
“Why that is true,” ſaid he, endeavouring at an air
of indifference; “but I thought ſometimes a neighbour
might drop in.”
He plainly perceived there was ſomething of a mystery,
and was too much a man of the world not to veil,
as much as poſſible, the ardent deſire he felt to penetrate
it; he therefore partook of the repaſt provided
for his mother, and when the cloth was removed, informed
her he intended ſpending a week or ten days
with her, previous to her departure for Lincoluſhire.
Lady Mary was rather ſurpriſed at this propoſal;
but having long wiſhed for an opportunity to converſe
with her ſon on a ſubject near her heart, namely, an
union that had been for many years thought of between
Lady Eleanor Harcourt, her brother's only child, and
Sir George, for whom he had propoſed to beg the title
of Earl of Chatterton, in reverſion, he being the only
male branch remaining of the family: ſhe therefore
ſatisfied herſelf with ſending an affectionate note to
[Page 028]
Rebecca, briefly informing her of the cauſe that would
occaſion their ſeparation for a few days, and aſſuring
her ſhe would viſit her apartment the next morning, if
opportunity offered.
Rebecca ſighed as ſhe read the note; but ſhe flattered
herſelf it was a ſigh of pleaſure, for the happineſs
her benefactreſs would enjoy in the company of her
ſon.
In the courſe of the evening Lady Mary introduced
the ſubject neareſt her heart, and endeavoured to divine
the real opinion Sir George entertained of his couſin's
perſon, merit and accompliſhments.
He frankly acknowledged her a very amiable woman,
a woman every way calculated to make the marriage
ſtate happy: “But,” continued he, “pardon me, my
dear madam, if I ſay, I do not think myſelf, by any
means worthy the hand of ſuch a woman. I am wild,
and have ſeen ſo much of elegant refined beauty, that
it is no longer an object of admiration. I can look on
my couſin Eleanor, all lovely as ſhe is, without the
leaſt emotion, except what proceeds from the affection
I bear her as a near and worthy relation; but this is
not the kind of affection neceſſary to form a happy
marriage. My heart has ever been unmoved by real
paſſionate love, and I do verily believe, if ever it is
enſnared, it will be by the pure charms of nature, unadulterated
by art: I declare to you the enchanting
naiveté of unaffected innocence would be to me a thousand
times more captivating, than all the ſplendid
charms of an elegant accompliſhed woman of faſhion.”
It is impoſſible to deſcribe the aſtoniſhment of Lady
Mary upon this unexpected declaration of her ſon; it
kept her for ſome moments ſilent.—“It is well,”
ſaid ſhe, mentally, “that I took thoſe precautions in
regard to Rebecca; ſhe is exactly the woman to ſuit
his taſte, and I ſhould have experienced the mortification
of ſeeing my ſon reject a title and ſplendid fortune,
and ally himſelf to obſcurity.”
“Perhaps, George,” ſaid ſhe, ſmiling, you have
ſomewhere met with a woman whom you think possesses
thoſe captivating charms.”
[Page 029]
“Oh! no,” ſaid he, careleſsly; but why ſhould we
talk on this ſubject now? Eleanor and myſelf are both
young enough yet. Let her ſee a little more of the
world; it is more than probable I may not be the man
of her choice.”
“She will never have her father's conſent to marry
any other; nor do I think he would ever forgive a ſtep
of that nature; nor can I ſay, George, that I ſhould
eaſily overlook your preferring any other woman to
Eleanor.”
“Upon my ſoul, my dear mother, this is a moſt ridiculous
idea! In the name of common ſenſe, why are
two perſons, who experience nothing more than indifference
towards each other, to be chained together,
and ſeal their own miſery, to gratify the inclinations
of thoſe, who, though they have a right to our utmoſt
reſpect and obedience, aſſume an undue authority when
they endeavour to controul us in a point ſo very delicate
as the choice of a companion for life. I ſee you
are offended, my dear mother; let me entreat you to
pardon my ſincerity. Believe me, your happineſs is
the firſt wiſh of my heart, and to promote it ſhall be
the whole ſtudy of my life. It is to prevent you from
future pain that I ſpeak thus, for, alas! what anguiſh
muſt ſeize the heart of a parent, who, having forced a
beloved child into a loathed marriage, ſees him plunged
in miſery, nay, perhaps, in guilt, from which ſhe
has no power to extricate him: but let us not part in
anger,” continued he, riſing, and taking his mother's
hand.
“Be aſſured, ſhould inclination ever prompt me to
an union with Lady Eleanor, every tranſport I experience
will be heightened by the thought that it increaſed
your felicity; but, ſhould it not, let not your displeasure
embitter the life of a ſon who loves you with the
trueſt affection.”
He then kiſſed her cheek, and wiſhed her a good
night.
“He talks reaſonably,” ſaid Lady Mary, as he left
the room; “but it would grieve me to ſee the family of
[Page 030]
Harcourt ſink to oblivion, when it is in his power to
perpetuate both its name and title.”
CHAP. VIII.
FEMALE HEROISM. Sir George had previouſly given his valet Le Brun
an order to make inquiries obliquely concerning the
fair recluſe, whom he had ſeen at the window in the
garden, and now retired with the eager expectation of
hearing ſomething of her.
“Well, Le Brun,” ſaid he, “what news? Can you
learn whether the fair ſpirit of the garden haunts it continually,
or only ſometimes?”
“Oh, Monſieur,” ſaid Le Brun, “I did aſk Mademoiselle
Harley. Oh! ſhe be one ver pret voman;
ſhe never refuſe me any thing. She be von jolie petite
fille.”
“Good Monſieur,” ſaid Sir George, “defer the
account of your own ſucceſs till another opportunity,
and inform me of what you have heard.”
“Dat be vat I vas intend, my Lor. Mademoiſelle
Harley tell me dat my Lady, your moder, keep von
ver charmante demoiſell, to play, to read, to ſing to
her ven ſhe be alone; but ven your onor, or any company,
be com, my Lady do ſhut her up.”
“And who does Harley ſay ſhe is?”
“Oh! ma ſoi; ſhe be de daughter of a pauvre old
man, who vas one ſoldier. He live in Lincolnſhire;
de call her Mademoiſelle Rebecca—.”
“And does ſhe conſtantly occupy thoſe apartments
in the ſouth wing?”
“Ouè, Monſieur, ouè, and ſhe valk every morning
in de garden by de time de ſun be up.”
This was enough for Sir George. He diſmiſſed Le
Brun, and determined to riſe by times himſelf, and
join Rebecca in the garden.
In the mean time Rebecca's thoughts were fully
[Page 031]
employed in reflecting on the unexpected incident
which had thrown her in the way of the very man
whom it was her intereſt to wiſh to avoid. “It was
unfortunate,” ſaid ſhe, “very unfortunate, that I
ſhould have opened the window at that time; if Lady
Mary was to know I had ſeen and converſed with her
ſon, it would make her very unhappy, and yet how
ſhall I ever be able to face her after having, though involuntarily,
tranſgreſſed the only reſtriction ſhe thought
fit to lay upon me? Will it not be beſt to watch the
moment when ſhe retires to her apartment, to go to her,
candidly confeſs the accidental rencounter, and endeavour
to deprecate the anger I muſt otherwiſe expect to
encounter? Yes, it will certainly be right; my kind
generous Lady Mary ſhall never have occaſion to accuſe
me of want of ſincerity.”
When ſhe had formed this reſolution, her thoughts
again reverted to the elegant accompliſhed manner, and
fine perſon of Sir George, again in idea ſhe recalled
every ſentence he had uttered, and innocently indulged
the faſcinating reflexion unſuſpecting of the consequence.
The clock had juſt ſtruck eleven when Rebecca heard
the footſtep of Lady Mary on the ſtairs. She heard
her enter her dreſſing room, and then, with palpitating
heart, preſented herſelf at the door of the apartment,
and, by a gentle tap, demanded admittance.
Mrs. Harley opened the door; pale, trembling, her
eyes caſt on the ground, the agitated Rebecca entered,
and courteſying, in a manner in which the ſoul ſeemed
to bow more than the body, attempted an apology for
the untimely intruſion.
“Come in, my love,” ſaid Lady Mary, then looking
at her face ſhe continued, “Are you not well, Rebecca,
or has any thing alarmed you?”
Your goodneſs, Madam, overpowers me,” ſaid Rebecca
ſeating herſelf; “my mind is not quite at caſe,
and, if you have a few moments to ſpare, I ſhould be
glad to communicate ſomething to you, without any
witneſs to our converſation.”
“Harley,” ſaid her ladyſhip, “I ſhall not go to hed
[Page 032]
juſt yet, and will ring when I want you. (Harley retired)
“And now, my dear, what is this mighty secret?”
taking Rebecca's hand.
“I am come my deareſt Lady,” ſaid ſhe, riſing “to
inform you, that I have, though undeſignedly, broken
your injunctions, and incurred your diſpleaſure: let me,
therefore Madam, expiate my offence, by being banished
from this delightful place, and from your truly
valuable ſociety. Send me back, Madam, to my humble
home; but, oh! I conjure you, do not deprive me
of your friendſhip and good opinion, which I value infinitely
more than any other earthly good.”
“You ſurpriſe me my dear child! I am at a loſs to
comprehend your meaning. From the whole tenor of
your conduct, ſince you have been here, I am convinced,
that, if you have offended me, the fault was involuntary,
indeed. Come, come, do not look ſo grave:
I ſuppoſe this amazing ſault, when revealed, will be
diſcovered a very trifle. You have let my favourite canary
out of its cage, or you have broke one of the large
India jars.”
“Ah! my dear Lady, worſe, infinitely worſe, I
have ſeen Sir George. Now, pray do not look angry;
indeed, he is the firſt and only perſon I have ſeen ſince
my arrival here; nor did I ſeek the interview.”
“Do not alarm yourſelf thus, my love,” ſaid Lady
Mary, obliging her to ſit down again. “Come, compose
your ſpirits, and tell me ſincerely how it happened,
what paſſed between you, and what you think of my
ſon?”
“Oh! I think him,” ſaid Rebecca, the moſt engaging
young man I ever ſaw; he has ſuch a manly
look, yet ſuch a ſoft air and voice.”
“Indeed!” ſaid her Ladyſhip, gravely, “and pray
what might he ſay to you?”
“Ah! Madam, it would be vanity in me to repeat
all he ſaid, he ſpoke ſo many fine things.”
“It is well Rebecca, I ſee you ſtill retain that candour
and ſincerity for which I ever loved you. I am
fully ſatisfied that this interview was not ſought on your
ſide, nor can I ſuppoſe it was on his. You ſeem to
[Page 033]
entertain a very favourable idea of Sir George, and I
make no doubt but he does the ſame of you; but do
not from this indulge any vain hopes that you can ever
be any thing to each other. Young men of a certain
rank in life, do not frequently match themſelves with
their inferiors, yet they will leave no art uneſſayed to
awaken ſenſibility in the heart of every woman whom
they affect to admire. Will you make me one promiſe,
Rebecca, and, without reſerve, ever remember to keep
it inviolate.”
“Dear Madam, do you, can you, doubt me?
Speak your commands; I am ſure they will not be severe,
and when I diſobey you, from that moment may
peace and joy be ſtrangers to my boſom.”
“Then promiſe me, my dear, that you will never,
directly, nor indirectly, liſten to any overtures of love
which Sir George may make, or give him the leaſt encouragement;
and while you keep the promiſe ſacred,
may every earthly happineſs ſurround you; and ſhould
you ever feel inclined to break it, reflect it is the only
thing which you can do to wound the peace of a woman
who loves you as her own child.”
“Then hear me, Madam,” ſaid Rebecca, “while
I ſolemnly proteſt, that never, while I retain my ſenſes,
will I liſten to any profeſſion of love whatever from your
ſon. The grateful affection I bear towards your Ladyship
will prompt me to keep this vow inviolable, had
I no other motive; but, my dear Lady, I have two
powerful reaſons for never infringing it. The firſt, I
truſt you will believe, is an invincible repugnance inherent
in my boſom to every thing derogatory to the
dignity and honour of my ſex, and which will urge me
to treat with ſcorn every overture that tended to the
injury of either:—And for the other, pardon me, Madam,
I feel my inferiority, nay, feel it ſo powerfully,
that I will never meanly creep into a family who would
think themſelves diſhonoured by the alliance.”
“My dear good girl,” ſaid Lady Mary, embracing
her, “I honour you for this ſpirited reply. You
would not diſhonour any family; but I never was a
friend to unequal matches; they are ſeldom productive
[Page 034]
of much felicity; beſides, my ſon is the deſtined husband
of another.”
Rebecca heard her in ſilence, ſighed, and was preparing
to leave the apartment. “Stay, my love,”
ſaid Lady Mary, “though you have charmed me by
the frankneſs and candour of your behaviour, I am not
ſatisfied, but that George will attempt to ſee you again;
ſhall I requeſt my dear girl will keep intirely in her
apartment to-morrow, and avoid going to the windows,
and in the evening a chaiſe ſhall be ordered to the back
garden gate. My own man James ſhall attend you,
and you may proceed one ſtage on your journey towards
Lincolnſhire that night. James will take particular
care of you, and ſee you ſafe at your father's houſe,
where you can pay them a ſhort viſit till I join you,
which will be in about three weeks time.” She then
put a heavy purſe into her hand, bade her conſider it
as her own, and then wiſhed her a good night: but
calling her back, as ſhe was about to leave the room,
ſhe deſired her to be careful what ſhe ſaid to Harley,
and in particular to avoid mentioning her intended
journey.
“Is it pride?” ſaid Rebecca, as ſhe retired to reſt:
“Or is it a tender wiſh for my felicity, that actuates
Lady Mary? Surely it is the latter. Her liberality,
her condeſcending affection, all tend to convince me
it is my happineſs alone ſhe is ſtudious to preſerve:
and never ſhall it be ſaid that Rebecca Littleton, like
the ungrateful viper, ſtung the friendly boſom that
warmed her into life; for, ſurely, the cultivation of
our mental faculties, the enlargement of our ideas, is
a ſecond, nay a better life than what we receive from
nature, and this life I have received from my revered
benefactreſs. What delightful ſources of pleaſurable
amuſement has ſhe opened to my view! How inestimable
the benefits I have received from her hand! Then
her thoughts reverting to Sir George, ſhe continued,
“Surely the ſon of ſuch a mother muſt be all that is
good and amiable, and it is not infringing my vow to
love him as a brother. Ah! how happy will be the
partner he ſhall chooſe, nay, that he has choſen; for
[Page 035]
did not his mother ſay his deſtiny was fixed? May their
felicity be as laſting as their lives! May every earthly
bleſſing crown them! May heaven ſhower down its
bounties on their heads, that their joys may render
completely happy the heart of my kind, my generous
Lady Mary!”
Then lifting up her ſoul, in its nightly addreſs, to
the Throne of Grace, ſhe blended the name of Sir
George with that of his mother, and ſunk into that
peaceful kind of ſlumber, which only innocence, like
her's, can enjoy.
CHAP. IX.
MORTALITY. Small was the reſt Sir George enjoyed that
night, and ſoon as the morning peeped into his
chamber he left his bed, and repaired to the part of the
garden where Le Brun had informed him Rebecca usually
walked; but vain was this early attention, vain
the anxious expectation in which he waited, the goddess
of his morning adoration did not make her appearance,
nay, even ſo ſcrupulous was ſhe of her Lady's
injunctions, that ſhe kept the window ſhutters cloſed on
the ſide next the garden, and only opened one that
looked on a graſs plot that faced Lady Mary's apartment.
Till near nine o'clock Sir George walked in the
hope of ſeeing Rebecca; but finding thoſe hopes frustrated,
he returned, highly diſappointed, to his apartment,
and prepared to meet his mother at breakfaſt.
“She has not been out, Le Brun,” ſaid he, as his
valet was tying his hair: “I have walked three hours
for nothing.”
“Oh! Monſieur vill have bon ſtomache to his dejeunner.”
“Damn the breakfaſt,” ſaid Sir George, “What
[Page 036]
could keep the lovely girl from walking as uſual this
morning?”
“She be no awake yet,” ſaid Le Brun. “Mademoiselle
Harley tell me ſhe no ring her bell yet.”
“Then Harley attends her?”
“She vant ver lit attendance; ſhe be von amiable.”
“But Harley anſwers her bell?”
“Ouè, Monſieur, ouè, no oder go to her chamber.”
Sir George ſtarted from his ſeat, wrote a few haſty
lines, and bidding Le Brun give them to Harley with
five guineas, deſired they might be delivered into the
hands of Rebecca.
When Harley attended our heroine at breakfaſt, ſhe
laid the letter on the table.
“And what is this, Mrs. Harley?” ſaid ſhe, taking
it up.
“A letter, Miſs, which I was deſired to deliver into
your hands.”
“From whom does it come?”
“A ſweet rich gentleman, my dear young Lady,
who, having once ſeen you, wiſhes again to enjoy that
ſatisfaction.”
“From Sir George Worthy?”
Harley courtſeyed aſſent.
“Well then, my good Harley, take it to your Lady,
deſire her to read it, and dictate the anſwer ſhe
would wiſh me to ſend; or ſtay, I will encloſe it in a
blank cover, and do you deliver it to the perſon who
intruſted it to your care.”
“Why, ſurely,” ſaid Harley, “ſurely, Miſs Becky,
you do not reflect on what you are doing! Sir George
is a man of fortune, a handſome, agreeable man.”
“His beauty to me, Mrs. Harley, would be his
leaſt recommendation: beſides, I hope ever to make
it an invariable rule of my conduct to receive no letters
from men, without the ſanction of thoſe who are better
judges of what is proper than I can be: but, as it
will be needleſs to trouble my Lady with this, give me
that ſheet of paper from the writing deſk.”
Harley gave her the paper; ſhe folded up the letter,
ſealed it, and gave it to her.
[Page 037]
“But you have not directed it, Miſs.”
“There is no neceſſity for directing it. Do you deliver
it to the perſon who gave it to your care.”
“Ah! Miſs, I think you will repent, for Le Brun
tells me Sir George loves you to diſtraction. He has
been walking in the garden theſe three hours in hopes
of meeting with you.”
“I am vaſtly obliged to him,” ſaid Rebecca, smiling,
while her cheeks aſſumed a deeper glow, and her
eyes a brighter luſtre.”
“But you do not pity him, though his heart is almost
breaking!”
“I do pity him, Harley, indeed, I do; and if he
were poorer, and I were richer—.”
“Ah! Miſs, Love levels all diſtinctions. Sir George
would think himſelf the perſon obliged. He told Le
Brun you were the only woman he ever thought on with
partiality.”
“Mrs. Harley,” ſaid Rebecca, opening a drawer
of a ſmall cabinet, “do me the favour to accept theſe
few yards of lace; I never had an opportunity before
of giving you ſome ſmall token of my gratitude for
your kind attention to me ſince I have been in this family.
But, good Mrs. Harley, you muſt never talk to
me in this manner again. I beg you will not tell me
any thing that Le Brun ſays; I have no deſire—that
is—it is not proper—I muſt not liſten to ſuch discourse.”
Harley, ſimpering, withdrew, and the innocent
Rebecca little imagined ſhe had betrayed a ſecret which
ſhe ought to have guarded with the utmoſt care; nay,
ſhe even did not think that her heart was the leaſt interested
in Sir George's welfare, any otherwiſe than, as
the ſon of her benefactreſs, it was her duty to rejoice
in his felicity.
The remainder of the day Rebecca ſpent in arranging
her clothes, &c. for her journey; nor did ſhe forget,
among her muſick, to put the new ſong, “It is
certainly extremely pretty,” and ſhe ſung it to herſelf
all the day.
Towards evening Lady Mary rang for Harley.
[Page 038]
“Harley,” ſaid ſhe, “I think you have a brother
at Windſor. I have ordered a chaiſe for Miſs Littleton
to take a ride this evening, therefore, if you like, you
may go with her. Be ſat down at your brother's and
ſtay all night. I will call for you to-morrow as I take
an airing.”
Harley, who little ſuſpected the ſcheme that was in
agitation, readily embraced this opportunity of viſiting
her brother. She looked about for Le Brun, to inform
him of her intended abſence; but Lady Mary had taken
care to ſend him out of the way.
Her Ladyſhip took a very affectionate leave of Rebecca,
told her James had received every neceſſary order,
and again thanked her for the integrity of heart
ſhe had ſo nobly ſhown in having no concealments from
her, and promiſed her that her friendſhip, for herſelf
and family, ſhould be manifeſted, even after her death.
She then returned to the drawing room, and kept Sir
George engaged in converſation till ſhe imagined Rebecca
was departed.
Sir George, though mortified by the return of his
letter unopened, yet conceived great hopes from the
account Harley gave him of their converſation, and determined
to watch carefully for an opportunity to ſee
and perſonally plead his own cauſe to his fair enſlaver;
but he cautiouſly concealed theſe thoughts from his mother,
whom he was far from imagining was, at that
very moment, counteracting all his ſchemes.
In the mean time Rebecca continued her journey,
and by noon, on the ſecond day of her departure, ſhe
found herſelf drawing very near her father's cottage.
“Ah!” ſaid ſhe, “how ſurpriſed and delighted will
the dear old gentleman be to ſee me arrive ſo unexpectedly;
nay, I think, even my mother will rejoice to
ſee her child after ſo long an abſence:” then, in idea,
ſhe ran over all ſhe had to relate to them. “And how
my father will applaud my conduct!” ſaid ſhe, exultingly.
“Surely there can be no pleaſure in this world
equal to the applauſe of a parent whom we love, and
whom it has ever been our ſtudy to obey.”
The chaiſe drew up to the door. She looked towards
[Page 039]
the parlour window; no one appeared. “I am afraid
they are not at home,” ſaid ſhe; but caſting her eyes
up to the chamber, ſhe ſaw the window curtains cloſe
drawn. At that inſtant Ruth, their faithful ſervant,
appeared at the door.
“Oh! dear Miſs,” ſaid Ruth, in a tone of ſorrow,
“I did not think you could have come ſo ſoon.”
“What is the matter?” cried Rebecca, ſpringing
from the chaiſe, and ſeizing the hand of Ruth, in
breathleſs agitation.
“Your poor father!” ſaid the ſervant.
“Oh, God! my father is dead!”
“No, my dear Miſs, not dead; but very—very ill.”
“Merciful heaven!” cried Rebecca, ſinking on her
knees, with upliſted hands and ſtreaming eyes, “restore
him to my prayers, or let me not live to know
his loſs.”
The tranſition was ſo great, from pleaſure to extreme
ſorrow, that ſhe could no longer ſupport it, but
fainted in the arms of Ruth.
On her recovery ſhe found her mother by her ſide.
She threw her arms round her neck, wept audibly on
her boſom, but could not ſpeak.
“Ah! child, you may well cry,” ſaid Mrs. Littleton,
“for your father is not expected to live one hour
after another.”
“Then lead me to him, dear mother; lead me to
him, that I may receive his bleſſing, and catch his laſt
figh. Ah! he muſt not die without a parting embrace
to his Rebecca.”
Mrs. Littleton made no reply, but proceeded ſlowly
up the ſtairs. Rebecca followed, and in a moment
found herſelf by the bed-ſide of her almoſt expiring
father. He put forth his hand; ſhe preſſed it to her
lips, and ſunk in ſpeechleſs agony on her knees.
“Do not lament thus, my dear child!” ſaid he
faintly: “Heaven's will be done. I truſt you have
found a protector in Lady Mary, and I ſhall go satistisfied
with that comfortable reflexion.”
“Protector! indeed,” cried Mrs. Littleton, peevisnly;
“heavy was the day when ſhe left her home for
[Page 040]
the protection of ſtrangers! I am ſure you have never
been well ſince. This illneſs is all her fault. You
have done nothing but pine and mope about, and if
any thing happens it will all lay at her door; but ſhe was
ſo eager forſooth to go, any where rather than home,
ſhe was tired of the company of her old father and mother.”
“Do not, my dear love,” ſaid Mr. Littleton, “do
not embitter my laſt moments by laying on the mind
of this poor girl more than ſhe can bear. Behold her
anguiſh, and pity it. Do not attribute my illneſs to ſo
wrong a cauſe. My frame has long been decaying: I
felt it myſelf, though I forbore to afflict your boſom by
mentioning my apprehenſion.”
“Oh! my father,” cried Rebecca; “I hope you
will recover. I hope—.”
“Do not deceive yourſelf, my dear; my diſorder is
a decay of nature, and a ſlow nervous fever, which the
phyſician informed me yeſterday it was impoſſible to
remove. I then deſired your mother to ſend for you;
but tell me, my child, how is it poſſible you can have
arrived ſo ſoon?”
“Alas!” replied Rebecca, “I did not know you
were ill till I arrived at the door. I came by my Lady's
deſire to ſpend a few weeks with you and my mother
before ſhe comes into the country.”
“You have not offended her, Rebecca?” ſaid the
father.
“No indeed,” ſaid ſhe, exultingly; “I am higher
in her eſteem than ever.”
“Ah! ſo ſhe may tell you,” cried Mrs. Littleton;
“but I will anſwer for it ſhe was tired of your company,
or ſhe would never have ſent you away before her;
ſo there is an end of your fine hopes, Miſs Becky.”
It was with the utmoſt uneaſineſs that Rebecca beheld
her mother thus prejudiced againſt her. She endeavoured
to recollect if any inadvertant expreſſion, in
any of her letters, had given her cauſe of offence; and,
in hopes to conciliate her good humour, ſhe, in the
evening, opened her trunk, and preſented her mother
with the ſilk before-mentioned.
[Page 041]
She received it ſullenly, and laying it down, without
ſcarce deigning to look at it, ſaid, “This is no
time to think of fine clothes, child, though in my
heart I believe your thoughts never run on any thing
elſe but dreſs, and faſhion, and nonſenſe.”
The truth was, that if Rebecca had a foible it was
a paſſion for faſhionable dreſs; but this was never carried
to an extreme, and, though remarkably attentive
to the decoration of her perſon, ſhe was never fine or
tawdry.
This ill-timed reproach of her mother's filled her
eyes with tears, and ſhe retired to bed, but not to reſt,
her father's illneſs, and the diſtance ſhe then was from
her benefactreſs, were ſuch painful reflexions, that
ſleep was a ſtranger to her eyes till the morning began
to dawn, when ſhe enjoyed a few hours of compoſed
ſlumber.
Mr. Littleton's diſorder daily increaſed. He found
his end nearly approaching, and frequently recommended
to his daughter to preſerve, after his death, the ſame
dutiful reſpect for her mother ſhe had ever manifeſted.
To Mrs. Littleton he did not fail to recommend a
tenderneſs of behaviour, that might tend to invite the
confidence of Rebecca. “You are too harſh with the
poor girl,” he would ſay; “treat her kindly: I am
ſure you will find her deſerving of it.”
“I know her better than you do,” was the conſtant
reply, “and I know ſhe is an artful, deſigning girl.”
Mr. Littleton could not believe any evil of his favourite,
and died in her arms on the fifth day after her
arrival, bleſſing her with his laſt breath.
CHAP. X.
DISAPPOINTMENT. Sir George had not really determined in his own
mind whether he would addreſs Rebecca on an honourable
ſcore, or merely endeavour to gain her
[Page 042]
affections, and then act as he ſhould find, from her manner
and diſpoſitiou, ſhe deſerved.
That day and the next he waited patiently in the
hope of ſeeing her; but on the third, when Harley
returned, (for Lady Mary did not bring her home till
that time) how great was his ſurpriſe and disappointment
to hear that Rebecca had been ſent for into the
country to a relation that was ill; for Mrs. Littleton's
letter arriving the day following Rebecca's departure,
it ſerved as a ſufficient apology for her abſence, though
indeed, Lady Mary did not think proper to enter into
explanations with her woman, and rather miſled her,
by mentioning Briſtol as the place where Rebecca's
ſick friend was.
Though Sir George had previouſly informed his mother
that he thought of accompanying her into Lincolnshire,
he no ſooner heard that the object of his
purſuit had taken a different route than he determined
to purſue her.
“I have thought better of it,” ſaid he to her Ladyship;
“I ſhall not viſit my tenants this year, for I
have ſeveral engagements in town which I cannot well
get off: beſides, I had forgot that I had promiſed a
friend of mine to accompany him to Bath.”
“Ah! cried Lady Mary, exultingly to herſelf, “my
good George, your journey will be in vain.”
In a few days Sir George left Twickenham, and immediately
ſet out with poſt horſes for Briſtol, where
both himſelf and Le Brun were extremely diligent in
their inquiries, though the reader may eaſily imagine
to how little effect: however, he ſtill continued, and
nouriſhed the hope, that chance would, by ſome means
or other, diſcover to him the reſidence of the fair Rebecca,
for as he could not ſuppoſe the ſituation of her
friend very ſplendid, he thought it needleſs to inquire
for her among people of faſhion; but he deſired his valet
to be very minute in examining every houſe where they
let lodgings.
Three weeks had now elapſed ſince Rebecca's departure,
and Lady Mary was preparing to viſit Lincolnshire,
when, as ſhe was converſing with her
[Page 043]
daughter, Lady Oſſiter, one morning, ſhe was ſuddenly
ſeized with a fainting fit, which was ſucceeded by several
others, and left her ſo weak and low, that the
faculty called in thought her life in imminent danger.
Alarmed at this intelligence, ſhe deſired Harley to
write immediately for Rebecca to return, and, calling
for pen and ink, determined no longer to delay making
the poor girl independent; but when ſhe took the pen
and attempted to write, her faintneſs returned, and ſhe
was totally unable to execute her purpoſe; but reſolved
to do ſomething for her, ſhe called Lady Oſſiter to her,
and thus addreſſed her:
“There is a young woman, of the name of Littleton,
who has been with me ſome months, though now ſhe
is in the country. She is of a ſweet diſpoſition, and
it was my intention to leave her at my death a thouſand
pounds. I requeſt you, my child, to pay her this ſum,
as ſoon as you conveniently can, after my deceaſe, and
alſo give her my watch, a ſmall picture ſet with pearls,
and this ring, taking one from her finger. I hope ſhe
will arrive time enough to be informed from my own
mouth of my intentions in her favour; but ſhould ſhe
not, I truſt, you will not be neglectful of the deſire
of a dying mother.”
It was with great difficulty, and many interruptions,
that Lady Mary made known to her daughter this her
requeſt. Lady Oſſiter promiſed obedience; but, alas!
Lady Oſſiter ſeldom remembered her promiſe, however
ſacredly given. It was impoſſible to give Sir George
notice of his mother's danger, for no one knew where
he was.
Lady Mary continued tolerably compoſed all that
night; but the next day her fits returned, and ſhe
expired in the evening.
When Rebecca received the news of her benefactreſs's
illneſs ſhe flew to Audley Park. James was ſtill there.
“Your Lady is very ill, James,” ſaid ſhe; “I muſt
ſet off immediately for Twickenham.”
“And I will attend you, Miſs,” ſaid James, eagerly.
“Only ſay when you will like to ſet off, and I will
order the chaiſe.”
[Page 044]
“I will go the moment you can procure one,” ſaid
ſhe. “I thought you would go with me, James, and,
indeed, I ſhould be afraid to take ſuch a journey by
myſelf; but do not order a horſe, my good James;
we ſhall travel faſter if you ride in the chaiſe with me.
I could not bear to have you hurrying after me on
horſeback.”
James had lived with Lady Mary from the day of
her marriage. He had ſerved his miſtreſs with the trueſt
fidelity, and the tears guſhed from his aged eyes when
he heard of her danger.
When Mrs. Littleton ſound Rebecca was determined
to obey Harley's ſummons, ſhe conceived it was a high,
an unpardonable breach of filial duty, for her to think
of leaving a mother in ſo early a ſtate of widowhood.
“You give me a great proof of your affection, Miſs,”
cried ſhe, ſcornfully, “to leave me in ſo much affliction,
and fly poſt haſte after ſtrangers: however, we ſhall
ſee who is moſt worthy your attentions by and bye. I
ſuppoſe, when my Lady is tired of you again, you
will be glad enough then to return to your mother.”
Though Rebecca was greatly hurt by theſe unjuſt
reproaches, it did not prevent her intended journey,
and ſhe ſet off that evening attended by James, and,
indeed, in her own mind, firmly reſolved, that nothing
but abſolute neceſſity ſhould ever oblige her again to
viſit Lincolnſhire, except it was in the company of Lady
Mary.
It was late in the evening when ſhe arrived at Twickenham.
The ſad countenance of the domeſtic who
opened the door, led her preſaging heart to fear the
worſt.
Harley met her in the hall, preſſed her hand in ſilence,
and proceeded to light her to her uſual apartment.
Rebecca hardly dared breathe as ſhe went up ſtairs;
as ſhe paſt her Lady's dreſſing-room, ſhe ſtopped,
looked earneſtly at Harley, and, laying her hand on
her heart, cried:
“Tell me the truth:” but her reſpiration became ſo
difficult ſhe could not finiſh the ſentence.
“All is over,” ſaid Harley.
[Page 045]
“I feared ſo,” cried Rebecca; then turning into
her own room, ſhe ſunk on the bed in a ſtate of ſtupid
inſenſibility, from whence it was difficult to rouſe her.
Harley uſed her utmoſt endeavours, and at length
ſucceeded. Rebecca raiſed her claſped hands to heaven,
exclaimed, “Thy will be done,” and the ſalutary
drops of ſorrow guſhed in a torrent from her eyes!
Harley was pleaſed to ſee them flow, and imagining to
leave her to the free indulgence of them would be beſt,
retired to inform Lady Oſſiter (who had not yet left
Twickenham) that Rebecca was arrived.
“I will ſee her in the morning,” ſaid her Ladyſhip,
careleſsly. “Take her with you, Harley, to the
houſe-keeper's room.”
“She is in her own apartment, Madam. She never
aſſociated with even the upper ſervants.”
“Oh! ſhe is quite the fine Lady I ſuppoſe. How
could you endure the creature's pride, Harley?”
“I never diſcovered that ſhe had any, Madam. She
is the meekeſt being in exiſtence.”
“My mother uſed to ſay ſhe was handſome,” cried
her Ladyſhip, looking in the glaſs.
“I believe every one thought her ſo who looked at
her. Sir George was greatly ſtruck with her, though
he ſaw her but once.”
“Well, ſo much the better; I ſuppoſe he will take
the trouble of providing for her off my hands; eh,
Harley, don't you think ſo?”
“Indeed, Madam, I have often thought Miſs Littleton
would one day be Lady Worthy.”
“Woman!” ſaid Lady Oſſiter, turning haſtily round,
with a look of the utmoſt contempt, “how could ſuch
an idea enter your mind? Lady Worthy, indeed! No,
I think George knows better than that; he may, perhaps,
make her his miſtreſs: but go, good woman, go,
you have made me quite ſick by the horrid ſuggeſtion.”
“Poor Rebecca,” ſaid Harley, ſoftly, as ſhe left
her imperious Lady: “Poor girl, you will ſee a ſad
change I fear. You have loſt your beſt friend, and ſo
we have all, indeed; for though my late dear Lady
was proud ſhe never wanted humanity.”
[Page 046]
CHAP. XI.
TEARS OF SENSIBILITY AND SORROW A-LA-MODE.
When the mind of Rebecca became a little composed,
Harley prevailed on her to take ſome
refreſhment. She took a few mouthfuls of boiled chicken
and drank a glaſs of wine, and then inquired in
which room the remains of her revered benefactreſs lay.
“In her own dreſſing-room as yet,” ſaid Harley;
“but to-morrow ſhe will be removed.”
Rebecca ſaid but little more, and Harley thinking
the fatigue of her journey, and the agitation of her
mind combined, might incline her to go early to reſt,
removed the ſupper table, and wiſhed her a good night.
No ſooner was Rebecca alone than ſhe gave way to a
freſh burſt of grief; the loſs of her father was again
renewed, the unkindneſs of her mother was remembered
with double anguiſh, and her own friendleſs ſituation
ſtruck ſo forcibly on her mind, that her ſorrow became
almoſt inſupportable. At length her tears ſeemed
exhauſted; a kind of torpid calm ſucceeded, and ſhe
formed the reſolution of viſiting the chamber that contained
the deceaſed Lady Mary.
With haſty and unequal ſtep ſhe reached the door of
the apartment, opened it ſoftly, and pauſed for a moment
to ſummon all her fortitude.—The attendants in
the adjoining room heard her enter, and approached to
conſole her; but ſhe waved her hand in ſilence for them
to retire, and they reſpected her too much to attempt
an intruſion on her grief, but left her to the free indulgence
of it.—She placed the candle ſhe held in her hand
on a table and approached the coffin, gazed, with reverential
awe on that countenance, which had often
beamed on her looks of the kindeſt benevolence.
“Dear and only friend,” ſaid ſhe, “ſince thou art
gone, where is there a heart remaining that feels one
ſpark of affection for the poor Rebecea? Oh my more
than mother, thy adopted child is now bereſt of every
earthly comfort! Spirit of purity, look down from the
[Page 047]
manſions of felicity, and hear the vows I here repeat: never
to infringe one command of your's while life warms
my heart. While you lived it was my pride, my glory, to
deſerve the affection with which you honoured me, and
if ſhall be ſtill my ſtudy to preſerve, to the lateſt hour
of my life, my integrity unſhaken; though you can no
longer be ſenſible of my reſpect and love, ſacred ſhall
be your memory to my heart, that heart which, whilſt
it retains your precepts, can never ſtray from the path
of rectitude, never be unworthy of the regard of all
who love virtue.”—Here her feelings overpowered her;
her head ſunk on her hand—her tears again burſt forth—
her lips continued to move—but articulation was denied.—
At this inſtant the door opened, and Sir
George entered. He ſtarted involuntarily at beholding
Rebecca. Her penſive attitude, her depreſſed countenance
plainly depicted the ſorrows of her heart; the
afflicted maid had not heard his approach. He drew
near, and laid his hand on one of her's. She raiſed her
timid eyes, looked at him mournfully, pointed to the
coffin, and cried, emphatically:
“She is gone for ever!”
Sir George really loved and reſpected his mother; nor
had he heard of her illneſs when the public prints announced
her deceaſe. Shocked beyond meaſure, he
inſtantly took poſt horſes, and never ſtopped, even for
neceſſary refreſhment, till he alighted at his mother's
gate, ſaint and fatigued. He aſked if his ſiſter was
there, and being informed ſhe was in the drawing-room,
he went haſtily up ſtairs; but how was he diſgnſted,
upon entering the room, to ſee the unfeeling daughter
of ſo good a mother receive him with the greateſt ſang
froid .
She aroſe, preſented her cheek, was glad to ſee him,
ſlightly mentioned the melancholy event, and ſoon after
aſked him if he intended ordering a mourning coach,
or only to put his ſervants in black? “I think,” continued
ſhe, “the mournings are much ſhorter than they
uſed to be, and nothing near ſo deep: I am glad of
it; for my own part I deteſt mourning, it makes one
look ſo dirty and diſmal.”
[Page 048]
Juſt then Lord Oſſiter entered, and propoſed a game
at cards, by way of whiling away the evening.
“Ah! do join us, George,” ſaid her Ladyſhip;
“I have been moped to death this week paſt.”
“I am not in a humour for amuſement, ſiſter,” ſaid
Sir George, coldly; “and ſince you have no feeling
yourſelf of the irreparable loſs we have ſuſtained, I ſhall
not trouble you with mine, but retire where I may indulge
them uninterrupted.”
How great muſt be the contraſt then between this
unfeeling ſiſter and the affecting ſenſibility of Rebecca!
He preſſed her paſſive hand in ſilence, mingled his tears
with her's, and found his heart inſenſibly relieved.
“My poor mother,” ſaid he, after a pauſe of a few
moments, “little did I think when we parted it was
the laſt time!”
“She is undoubtedly happy,” ſaid Rebecca, “in
ſome meaſure, forgetting her own ſorrow, and wiſhing
to convey conſolation into the boſom of Sir George.”
“Oh! I know ſhe is,” replied Sir George; “if
the practice of every virtue can inſure eternal felicity,
ſhe is happy beyond what our weak imaginations can
paint.”
Rebecca's tears ſtreamed afreſh.—“Ah! my dear
mother,” ſaid he, “your loved remains are embalmed
by the tears of grateful affection, though thy daughter,
forgetful of thy worth, can amuſe herſelf with trifles,
and neglect the tribute due to thy memory.”
“Ah!” ſaid Rebecca, “I never can forget her—
never wiſh it; for the remembrance of her virtues will
emulate me in the attempt to imitate them.”
She preſſed her lips to thoſe of her clay cold benefactress,
faintly and tremulouſly pronounced the word
“farewell!” and ruſhed haſtily out of the apartment.
The next morning, at twelve o'clock Harley summoned
her to attend Lady Oſſiter.
On entering the dreſſing room, ſhe found her Ladyship
deeply engaged with her mantua-maker and milliner.
She did not even notice the entrance of Rebecca;
but thus continued her directions to the former of her
tradeſwomen:
[Page 049]
“Let them be made as elegant and as full as possible;
but, at the ſame time, remember, I wiſh to pay
every neceſſary reſpect to my dear mother. It was a
very ſudden thing. Mrs. Modily, you cannot think
how it ſhocked me; my nerves will not be ſettled again
this fortnight, I dare ſay; then, a thing of this
kind forces one to be mewed up, and ſee no company,
ſo I thought I might as well ſtay where I was as go to
town. But, as I was ſaying, Modily, let my white
bombazine be made very handſome, and full trimmed
with crape: I do not mean to keep from viſiting above
a fortnight, and, I think, in a month or ſix weeks I
may wear white muſlin, with black crape ornaments,
for undreſs.”
The accommodating mantua-maker agreed to all the
Lady ſaid, when, turning round to ſpeak to her milliner,
Lady Oſſiter was ſtruck by the elegant perſon,
and modeſt humble countenance of Rebecca.
“Oh! I ſuppoſe,” ſaid ſhe, careleſsly, “you are
the young woman my poor mother mentioned in her
laſt moments?”
Rebecca courtſeyed aſſent, but was unable to ſpeak.
“Ah! ſhe was very good to you, I understandWell,
don't make yourſelf uneaſy, I will be you friend
in future.”
Rebecca attempted to expreſs her thanks; but her emotions
were ſo violent, ſhe was forced to continue ſilent.
“I dare ſay, child,” ſaid her Ladyſhip, “you have
ſome taſte in dreſs; come, give me your opinion about
the caps I have ordered. Here, La Blond, ſhow her
thoſe caps: well now, what do you think, will theſe
be deep enough? for, though I hate mourning, I
would not be wanting in reſpect; one's friends are apt
enough to ſay ill-natured things; one can't be too cautious
in giving them occaſion. Do you think I ſhould
go without powder? You look monſtrous well without
powder; but then you have light hair, and your black
dreſs, though ſo very plain, is becoming. Who are
you in mourning for, child?”
Rebecca was ſtruck almoſt ſpeechleſs with astonishment.
[Page 050]
“Good heavens!” ſaid ſhe, mentally, “can this
be the daughter of Lady Worthy?”
“Who are you in mourning for, child?” ſaid Lady
Oſſiter.
“My father, Madam.”
“Oh! you have loſt your father. Well, it can't
be helped, old folks muſt be expected to drop off. You
muſt not be low ſpirited if you are with me: I hate
low ſpirited people, though ſince I loſt my poor mother
I have been low enough myſelf; but I endeavour
to ſhake it off as much as I can; it is of no manner of
uſe to grieve; when folks are once dead, we can't recal
them, though we fretted ourſelves blind.”
“But we cannot always command our feelings, Madam,”
ſaid Rebecca.
“No, child, that is true. I am ſure I often wiſh
my feelings were not ſo delicate as they are; it is a
great affliction to have too much ſenſibility. Pray
what is your name, my dear?”
“Rebecca.”
“Rebecca, that's a queer old faſhion name. I remember
when my mother uſed to make me read the
great Family Bible, I remember then reading about a
Rebecca Somebody; but, Lord! child, 'tis a vaſt
vulgar name; I'd alter it if I was you; one never
hears of ſuch a name among people of any reſinement.”
“I am ſorry it does not pleaſe your Ladyſhip,” ſaid
Rebecca, almoſt ſmiling at her abſurdity; “but as I
was chriſtened by it I muſt be ſatisfied with it.”
“Well, then, Rebecca, but what is your other
name?”
“Littleton, Madam.”
“Ah, Lord! they are both three ſyllables—that is
ſo tireſome. Well, but, Rebecca (for I like the name
beſt on account of its oddity) ſhould you have any objection
to enter into my ſervice?”
“Far from it, Madam; I ſhall cheerfully ſerve any
part of the family of my dear departed Lady?”
“Ah! but I am not quite ſo ſentimental as my mother
was: I ſhall not want any body to work and read
by me. I ſhall want you to be uſeful; now for inſtance,
[Page 051]
to make up my morning caps, to trim my muſlin dresses.
Can you ſpeak French, child?”
“Yes, Madam, and ſhall be happy to render myſelf
uſeful in any thing within the compaſs of my power.
I do not wiſh to eat the bread of idleneſs.”
Rebecca ſpoke with a degree of ſpirit that ſurpriſed
Lady Oſſiter: however, ſhe unabaſhed, proceeded:
“I have two little boys and a girl; I really have not
time to attend them: now I could wiſh you to hear
them read, give them ſome little knowledge of the
French, and take care of Miſs Oſſiter's clothes. Can
you make frocks?”
“I make no doubt but I can, if I try, and my utmost
endeavours ſhall not be wanting.”
“That is well. I underſtand my mother did not
ſuffer you to eat with the ſervants, ſo you ſhall have
your meals in the nurſery with the children. I ſuppoſe,
if my woman ſhould happen to be ill, or out of the way,
you would have no objection to dreſs or undreſs me.
“I am afraid I ſhould be awkward, Madam; but
if you will pardon my want of experience, you ſhall
always find me ready to obey your commands.”
“And what wages do you expect?”
“Whatever you pleaſe.”
“What did my mother give you?”
“I had no ſettled ſalary.”
“Well, but I like to know what I am about; I'll
give you ſixteen guineas a year.”
Rebecca agreed to the terms, and, retiring to her
apartment, left Lady Oſſiter to finiſh her conſultation
with her milliner and mantua-maker—while ſhe took up
her pen, and informed her mother that ſhe had entered
into a new line of life, in which ſhe hoped to be enabled
to do her duty, and gain the approbation of her Lady.
CHAP. XII.
THE MAN OF THE WORLD. During the time that intervened between the
death of Lady Mary and her interment, Sir
George, though he frequently thought of Rebecca,
[Page 052]
made no attempt to ſee her, but ſatisfied himſelf with
ſending every day to inquire after her health.
“It is certainly a very improper time,” ſaid he, “to
think of entertaining her on the ſubject of love. Her
heart is at preſent over charged with ſorrow; beſides
I ſhould prove myſelf highly unworthy of her eſteem,
could I, at this melancholy period, think ſeriouſly on
any thing but the mournful cauſe of our meeting.”
The morning after the laſt ſolemn ceremony was
performed, Sir George, ſitting at breakfaſt with his
brother and ſiſter, mentioned that, in reſpect to his
mother's memory, he ſhould remain at Twickenham a
couple of months, and ſee no company, but one or
two ſelect friends: he then invited Lord and Lady
Oſſiter to remain with him during that period, and
propoſed ſending immediately for the children.
“You'll pardon me, brother,” ſaid her Ladyſhip;
“I cannot think of remaining any longer in this melancholy
place than till to-morrow, and I muſt ſay you
are much to blame, in reſolving to bury yourſelf from
the world: I am ſure it is a ſtep which cannot be expected
from ſo young a man.”
“You are to act as you pleaſe, ſiſter, and, I hope,
you will permit me to do the ſame.”
“Oh! apropos , you know the young woman, Rebecca—
what's her name? I never can remember it.
She that my mother kept with her as a kind of companion.”
“I have ſeen her,” ſaid Sir George, “and cannot
ſay but I am ſurpriſed my mother made no mention of
her in her will; but, I ſuppoſe, ſhe deſired you to
make ſome proviſion for her.”
“Yes, ſhe did mention her to me, and I have taken
her into my protection.”
Here Lord Oſſiter, who had been careleſsly looking
over the news-paper, laid it down.
“So then,” ſaid he, with an air of curioſity, “your
Ladyſhip has taken her as a companion; but, pray,
if that is the caſe, why is ſhe not at the breakfaſt table,
to ſave you the trouble of making the tea?”
“Oh! you labour under a vaſt miſtake, my Lord;
[Page 053]
no humble toad-eater will ever make a part of my household.
I aſſure you, I deteſt the whole claſs of them;
they are in general a ſet of forward, impertinent creatures,
made up of pride and idleneſs: I keep nobody
about me but can render themſelves uſeful; and I know
of no uſe your cringing companions are but to criticiſe
their Lady's actions, and contribute to their Lord's
amuſement.”
His Lordſhip looked diſappointed, and reaſſumed
the news-paper.
Sir George was perfectly aſtoniſhed at his ſiſter's illbred
expreſſions; but willing to know in what manner
Rebecca was provided for, ſimply aſked the queſtion.
“Why, I have taken her into the nurſery to teach
the children to read.”
“I approve the plan vaſtly,” ſaid Lord Oſſiter,
again laying down the paper: “I think the children
wanted a governeſs.”
“Not ſo faſt, my Lord: I have as great a diſlike
to governeſſes as to companions. I hate the whole claſs
of your ſecond-hand gentry. Rebecca will hear them
read—dreſs and undreſs Miſs Oſſiter—make her frocks—
and upon occaſion, aſſiſt my woman.”
Sir George felt his cheeks glow with indignation.
“I think, ſiſter,” ſaid he, “conſidering the place ſhe
held in our mother's eſteem, the ſituation you mean to
give her is not paying that dear woman's memory a
proper reſpect; beſides, I do not think it probable,
after having been treated as the companion of Lady
Mary, Miſs Littleton will feel herſelf ſatisfied with
being only the ſervant of her daughter.”
“Don't make yourſelf uneaſy about that, George;
I have talked with her, and agreed about terms; however,
if you chooſe to retain her here as houſe-keeper
extraordinary,” attempting an arch look,—
“To cheer the ſolitary days of mourning,” added
his Lordſhip.
Sir George darted at them both a look of the utmoſt
contempt. “Your inuendos,” ſaid he, “are as cruel
as they are groundleſs: however, Lady Oſſiter, you
will pleaſe to know, that no perſon, who has been
[Page 054]
honoured by the friendſhip of my mother, ſhall be treated
with diſreſpect, when I have the power to prevent it.
If Miſs Littleton is not ſatisfied with her ſituation, I
ſhall think it my duty to place her above it.”
“I will ſend for her here, and you may aſk her,”
ſaid her Ladyſhip.
“Aye, that is the beſt way,” ſaid Lord Oſſiter,
ringing the bell; for from Sir George's evident agitation,
he imagined there muſt be ſomething extraordinary
about Rebecca, and earneſtly wiſhed to ſee her.
“Tell Rebecca I want her,” ſaid the Lady to the
ſervant who entered the room.
“For heaven's ſake, Lady Oſſiter,” ſaid Sir George,
“do not ſhock the poor girl's feelings, by ſending for
her here.”
“Oh! Lord, ſhe muſt get the better of thoſe feelings
you talk about, or ſhe will never be good for
much; beſides, it always diverts me to ſee her bluſh,
and look like a fool.”
“Rebecca Littleton can never look like a fool, Madam,”
cried Sir George, with vehemence, “and ſince
you perſiſt in ſending for her, you will excuſe me if I
do not ſtay to ſee Lady Oſſiter render herſelf ridiculous,
by inſulting a woman every way her ſuperior, but in
the paltry diſtinction of fortune.”
He then left the room, ſhutting the door after him
with violence, and in a few moments Rebecca entered.
How great was the ſurpriſe of Lord Oſſiter when he
beheld the ſtrikingly beautiful figure that preſented itself
to his view! Modeſty had recalled to her cheeks
the roſy hue which grief had chaced from them. Her
fine eyes were timidly raiſed from the ground to her
Lady's face, while, with a gentle inclination of the
body, and a voice of ſofteſt harmony, ſhe requeſted to
know her commands.
“Nothing particular, child; only I was montioning
to my brother the ſituation I had offered you in my
family, and he thinks you will not be ſatisfied with it.”
“Indeed, Madam, I am greatly obliged to Sir
George for his ſolicitude, but muſt requeſt your Ladyship
to inform him that while I can be ſo fortunate as
[Page 055]
to obtain your approbation, I ſhall never be otherwiſe
than happy, and ſhall deem myſelf highly honoured by
your protection as long as your Ladyſhip ſhall think
fit to extend it towards me.”
“Perhaps you would like to tell him ſo yourſelf,
child?”
“By no means, Madam.”
“But you are quite ſatisfied, Rebecca?”
“Intirely ſo, my Lady, and that ſatisfaction will
ever remain uninterrupted, while I am conſcious of
performing my duty.”
“Well, that's all,” cried her Ladyſhip, in a half
peeviſh accent.
Rebecca courtſeyed, and retired.
“Well, and what do you think of her, my Lord,”
cried the Lady, turning to her huſband; “why you
ſeem in amaze!”
“I am perfectly ſo, my dear (endeavouring to recollect
himſelf;) but it is becauſe I can't, for my ſoul,
conceive what George can ſee in this girl to make ſuch
a fuſs about her.”
“Why, don't you think her handſome?”
“No woman appears ſo in my eyes when your Ladyship
is by.”
“Oh! you're vaſtly civil this morning; but, pray
what fault have you to find with her perſon?”
“Nay, nothing particular; but I think ſhe is altogether
inſipid.”
“She is very fair.”
“Yes, but I was never ſtruck with your very fair
women; they have not half the expreſſion of your fine
brunettes.”
Lady Oſſiter was a very dark woman, and could not
help at that moment going to the glaſs to adjuſt her
handkerchief.
“She has very fine eyes, my Lord.”
“Fine eyes, oh! ridiculous; you may as well admire
the blue glaſs beads ſtuck in the head of a wax
doll. I don't ſee any thing about her even tolerably
pretty but her neck and ſhoulders; they ſeem ſhaped
well enough.”
[Page 056]
“This horrid mourning makes one look like a fright,”
cried the Lady, ſtill looking in the glaſs, “and they
have made my gown ſo abominably high, I declare I
appear quite round ſhouldered; it ſhall poſitively be
altered before I wear it again.”
“Not if I might adviſe, my dear; for I declare I
never ſaw you look better than you do this morning;
and, in my opinion, women inclined to em bon point
have more dignity in their perſons than the very slender;
for inſtance, now your Rebecca; ſhe will always
remind me of Death and Daphne.”
“Dear, my Lord, when have I ſeen you in ſo agreeable
a humour? I declare you are quite witty.”
“How can I be otherwiſe, my Lady, when I have
ſo good a ſubject for ridicule?”
Her Ladyſhip did not take the keenneſs of the sarcasm,
and retired, to give ſome orders to her woman,
perfectly ſatisfied that Rebecca was infinitely inferior to
herſelf in perſonal attractions; while her artful huſband
applauded himſelf for the part he had acted, which he
naturally imagined would ſecure, within the reach of
his power, a woman whoſe charms had made ſuch an
impreſſion on his mind, that he was reſolved, if poſſible,
to ſacrifice her a victim to ſeduction.
CHAP. XIII.
THE WOMAN OF HONOUR. When Sir George left the parlour, he retired to
his own apartment, and calling for pen and ink,
addreſſed the following letter to Rebecca:
Letter
“With a heart fully ſenſible of the merit of the object
I preſume to addreſs, how is it poſſible but I muſt alſo
be ſenſible of the fear of offending her? pardon me,
dear young Lady, if almoſt unacquainted with the
[Page 057]
thouſand little delicacies expected by your ſex from
thoſe of ours, who venture to offer their friendſhip and
aſſiſtance to innocence and beauty; pardon me, I ſay,
if my expreſſions are not ſufficiently denotive of my respect
and eſteem, while I venture to aſk if the ſituation
my ſiſter offers you is perfectly conſonant with your
expectations and wiſhes; yet I ought to know the modesty,
the humility of your mind, will lead you to tell
me it is.
“But, alas! I too well know the diſpoſition of
Lady Oſſiter to imagine a heart, like your's, replete
with ſenſibility, can enjoy any tolerable degree of tranquillity,
when ſubject to her caprice and ill humour: I
muſt therefore entreat my lovely friend to accept not
from me, but as a legacy from my mother (for I am
ſenſible ſhe deſigned it, though the ſudden ſtroke that
deprived us of her prevented her putting her deſigns in
execution) the encloſed two thouſand pounds, which
will, at leaſt, place you above dependance on the weak
and unworthy.
“Permit me alſo to aſſure you, dear amiable Miſs
Littleton, that, in every future period of my life, I
ſhall be happy to convince you how much I am intereſted
in your welfare, and that nothing would give me more
ſincere pleaſure, than being allowed to devote my life
and fortune to the promotion of your felicity.
“I am, with every token of eſteem and reſpect,
your friend,
GEORGE WORTHY.”
Section Rebecca could not read this letter without emotion;
yet did ſhe not heſitate what anſwer to return; the letter
itſelf ſhe carefully locked up in her cabinet, but
the bank-bills ſhe ſealed up in the following note:
Letter
“Rebecca Littleton returns her moſt grateful acknowledgments
to Sir George Worthy for the kind solicitude
he evinces for her happineſs. She begs leave
to return his noble preſent, which ſhe cannot think of
[Page 058]
accepting, as it would lay her under an obligation too
oppreſſive to a ſpirit which Sir George is miſtaken in
thinking humble. Rebecca feels herſelf highly satisfied
in the protection of Lady Oſſiter, and, though
ſhe feels grateful for the offered friendſhip of the ſon
of her ever-lamented benefactreſs, ſhe muſt beg leave
to decline it, as the vaſt diſtance fortune has placed between
them renders it impoſſible to cultivate true friendship,
which can only ſubſiſt between perſons on an
equality with each other. Rebecca wiſhes to be retained
in the memory of Sir George only as the ſervant
of his ſiſter, and, at the ſame time, aſſures him, the
ſon of Lady Mary Worthy will ever be retained in her
mind with ſervent wiſhes for his happineſs.”
When ſhe had ſent away this note, ſhe again read
over Sir George's letter; a tear, almoſt unknown to
herſelf, fell on it as ſhe peruſed with attention his offers
of friendſhip: but ſhe ſoon recollected herſelf, haſtily
bruſhed away the token of her weakneſs, and, returning
the letter to her cabinet, began to prepare for her
removal to town, whither Lady Oſſiter intended returning
the next day.
CHAP. XIV.
TRIAL OF THE HEART. “ What a noble mind is here diſplayed!” ſaid
Sir George, as he read Rebecca's note.
“How much does this woman's ſentiments elevate her
above the ſtation in which Providence has placed her!
I fear my letter was not dictated with ſufficient delicacy;
her pride has taken the alarm, that laudible pride that
is a woman's beſt ſafeguard: but no matter, I will not
write again, but wait till I can diſcover in what manner
my ſiſter behaves to her. When ſhe has tried her
new ſituation, ſhe may not find it ſo eaſy as her little
knowledge of the world at preſent leads her to imagine.
When ſhe finds herſelf uncomfortable, then, perhaps,
[Page 059]
the offer of friendſhip from me will be more acceptable.”
In the evening Sir George, having no inclination to
join the inſipid chat of Lord and Lady Oſſiter, pleaded
letters to write, and went to the library to look for a
book that might afford him an hour's rational amusement.
As he entered the room, he ſaw Rebecca buſily
employed in retouching a ſmall drawing that lay before
her, and he obſerved, that ſhe frequently looked at a
portrait of his mother that hung over the chimney.”
“I diſturb you, I fear, Miſs Littleton.”
“By no means, Sir,” cried Rebecca, riſing, viſibly
embarraſſed; “I was juſt going. Indeed, my being
here is an intruſion, I muſt entreat you to pardon.”
“I ſhall be extremely ſorry if Miſs Littleton considered
herſelf as an intruder in any apartment in this
houſe. You were drawing; will you permit me to ſee
your performance?”
“You will ſmile at my preſumption, Sir; but I have
been endeavouring to catch ſome faint reſemblance of
my regretted Lady, that ſhould any thing ſeparate me
from her daughter's ſervice, I might have it in my
power ſometimes to gaze on her beloved features and
weep.”
“You have been happy in preſerving the likeneſs;
but, I think, I have a miniature of my mother, the
moſt ſtriking thing of the kind I ever ſaw.”
He then drew from his pocket a ſmall caſe, which
contained Lady Mary's picture, elegantly ſet with
brilliants, intermixed with pearls. It had been ſet as
a preſent for Lady Oſſiter; but as that Lady knew
not of her brother's deſign, he thought he might now
diſpoſe of it more to his own ſatisfaction.
“Will Miſs Littleton honour me ſo far,” ſaid he,
taking it from the caſe, “as to wear this picture for
the ſake of her whoſe reſemblance it bears?”
“The picture of itſelf, Sir George, would be to me
an invaluable treature; but its ornaments are ſo ſuperb
and coſtly, you will pardon me if I decline the acceptance
of it.”
“Why will you mortify me by this refuſal? You
treat me very unkindly, Miſs Littleton, ſince even my
mother's picture is not acceptable from my hands!”
[Page 060]
“Indeed, Sir, you are miſtaken, and, to convince
you I am not ungrateful, was that picture deviſted of
its rich ornaments, I would accept it cheerfully, and
wear it, not only for her ſake, but your own.”
“Charming, engaging woman! exclaimed he, catching
her hand, “why are you thus irreſiſtibly lovely,
and yet refuſe me the ſatisfaction of placing you above
the malice of fortune?”
She bluſhed carnation deep, as ſhe attempted to withdraw
her hand; but a ſmile dimpled on her cheek, and
her heart peeped forth from her tell-tale eyes.
“You make me ſmile,” ſaid ſhe, “to hear you talk
of the malice of fortune. We, who are born in an
humble ſtation, cannot feel the want of luxuries which
we never enjoyed. Happineſs is not always annexed to
wealth, or miſery to poverty. We are all poor or rich
by compariſon, and my ſituation, which to you is an
object of compaſſion, would be to thouſands the summit
of felicity; but your condeſcenſion makes me forget
myſelf: I wiſh you a good night.”
“Stay one moment adorable Rebecca, cried Sir
George, ſtopping her as ſhe was about to leave the
room. “Hear me, I entreat you, with attention; by
heavens, you ſhall never go into the ſervice of Lady
Oſſiter, nor into any ſervice. I am your ſlave; my
life, my forune, all are your's. I love you more than
exiſtence itſelf. I mean not to offend your delicacy.
My deſigns are of the moſt honourable nature. Name
your own time, I will wait with patience. Only ſuffer
me to tell my ſiſter, that the woman whom I aſpire to
the honour of making my wife, muſt henceforth be
treated with that reſpect her worth and virtue demands.”
“Hold, hold, dear Sir George,” cried Rebecca,
pale and trembling, “I muſt hear no more. You honour
me, highly honour me by theſe profeſſions of regard;
but you talk of impoſſibilities. The humble
Rebecca Littleton, however ſenſible of your merits,
can never be your wife; inſurmountable obſtacles are
placed between us.”
“If your boſom, lovely Rebecca, glows with sensibility,
every obſtacle is eaſily removed.”
[Page 061]
“Do not interrupt me,” ſaid ſhe. “The obſtacles
I ſpeak of can never be removed; my vows are already
pledged; they are regiſtered in heaven; 'tis ſacrilege
to liſten to your declaration.”
Sir George dropped her hand, and, with a look of
mingled horror and ſurpriſe, cried, “Are you already
married?”
“No,” replied ſhe, faintly, “not married.”
“Then you ſport with my miſery, cruel, cruel girl!”
“Alas!” ſaid Rebecca, with a look of tenderneſs,
“heaven knows I do not. I would give worlds, did
I poſſeſs them, to ſave you from one hour's anguiſh;
but, ah! Sir George, mine is a wayward fate; my
boſom is heavy laden with ſorrow. Ah! do not increase
that ſorrow by letting me ſee you partake it.”
“Then,” cried he, ſtarting from his ſeat, “then
you do not hate me?”
“Hate you, oh! no, that were impoſſible.”
“Then we may yet be happy,” ſaid he, catching
her in his arms.
Rebecca's heart had almoſt betrayed her; but ſhe
was ſenſible this muſt be the moment of victory. She
puſhed him from her, and aſſuming an air of reſerve,
“Sir George,” ſaid ſhe, “if you wiſh my happineſs,
there is but one way by which you can promote it, that
is, by never more ſpeaking to me on this ſubject; my
fate is irrevocably fixed; ceaſe then to diſturb my felicity
by endeavouring to awaken my ſenſibility. You,
Sir George, are deſigned by heaven to move in an exalted
ſtation. You have many duties to fulfil, which
it will be almoſt criminal to neglect. For me, unknowing
and unknown by the world, if I can but paſs
through life blameleſs, my utmoſt wiſh is gratified.”
“Will you then leave me? ſaid he, “and leave me
devoid of hope?”
“No, Sir, I will endeavour to cheer your boſom
with the ſame hope that animates mine. I hope, sincerely,
you will ſoon meet a woman your equal, in
birth, fortune, and merit, who will obliterate from
your mind all traces of Rebecca; and may you, united
by the moſt ſacred ties, enjoy in her ſociety every blessing
that heaven can beſtow, or you deſire.”
[Page 062]
“No, Rebecca, no; do not indulge ſo vain an idea,
for while you live, and remain unmarried, never ſhall
the hymenial torch be lighted by me.”
“Ah!” cried Rebecca, forcing a ſmile, “you talk
wildly; we ſhall hear you tell a different tale ſhortly.”
“But will you not accept the picture as a token of
my eſteem?”
He held it towards her. She put his hand back,
and ſaid, in a tone of diſpleaſure, “I can accept no
diamonds, Sir George, and, for heaven's ſake, detain
me no longer here. I have acted very improperly in
talking with you ſo long; but I will take care this
ſhall be our laſt interview.”
She then courtſeyed ſlightly, and retired to her apartment,
where conſcious rectitude alone alleviated
the pangs of diſappointed love.
“Yes,” ſaid ſhe, “I have done right; an union
with Sir George would by no means ſecure me permanent
felicity; he is young, volatile, and poſſeſſed of
violent paſſions. Alas! when the novelty of my perſon
was worn off, I might ceaſe to charm, and how could
I endure his neglect? beſides, how ill could my heart
bear that he ſhould be ſubject to the ſneers of his acquaintance
on my account. Oh! my dear Lady Mary,
you knew what was beſt for me, and never will I forget
your injunctions.”
CHAP. XV.
SERVITUDE. And pray, what do think of my Lady? ſaid Mrs.
Lappett to Rebecca, the evening of her arrival
in Bedford-Square.
Lappett was an experienced Abigail. She had lived
with Lady Oſſiter from the time of her marriage, and
not, without envy, beheld Rebecca introduced
into the family, as ſhe feared ſhe might have a gown or
two the leſs in a year, or, perhaps, Rebecca might
[Page 063]
ſupplant her intirely. This jealouſy made her reſolve
to cultivate an intimacy with the unſuſpecting girl, and
be the moſt forward in ſhowing her civilities, that ſhe
might win her confidence, draw from her her real opinion
concerning her Lady, and then betray her. Lappett,
when ſhe had any favourite point to gain, could
aſſume a moſt inſinuating manner. The words that fell
from her tongue were ſmooth, and pleaſant as the river's
ſurface unruffled by a breeze: but like that, when
the whirlwind of paſſion aroſe, diſplayed the moſt
frightful contraſt.
“And what do you think of my Lady?” ſaid ſhe,
as ſhe was taking her tea in Rebecca's apartment.
“I hardly know what to think yet,” replied Rebecca.
“I never judge very haſtily. She appears extremely
good natured.”
“Ah! my dear, you will know her better by and
bye; there is a deal of difference between old ſervants
and new ones.”
“I ſhould be much obliged to you, Mrs. Lappett
to give me ſome little idea of the beſt method to obtain
her approbation.”
“Indeed, that is more than is in my power, child,
for what pleaſes to-day may diſpleaſe to-morrow: I
never give myſelf much trouble about it. How do you
like the children?”
“They are very fine boys; but I am moſt pleaſed
with Miſs Oſſiter; ſhe ſeems extremely mild and engaging.”
“Well, you are the firſt perſon I ever heard ſay
they liked her beſt. My lady can't bear her; ſhe ſays
ſhe is ſo ſtupid—.”
“I think it is very wrong,” ſaid Rebecca, in the
ſimplicity of her heart, “for mothers to make any
diſtinction in their regard for their children; and I
ſhall conſider myſelf doubly obliged to be kind and affectionate
to Miſs, if her mamma is unkind to her.”
“It ſhows the goodneſs of your heart, my dear
ma'am,” ſaid Lappett, beginning to ſee a little into
the diſpoſition of our heroine. “But, pray, have you
ſeen my Lord yet?”
[Page 064]
“Yes, once at Twickenham.”
“Well, don't you think him a vaſt handſome man?”
“He is well enough,” ſaid Rebecca, careleſsly;
“but Sir George Worthy is, in my opinion, a great
deal handſomer.”
“Lord Oſſiter is a man of gallantry, though, I aſſure
you, I muſt tell you, but it is between ourſelves, he
once made propoſals to me.”
“Indeed! Well, I think, you were right to refuſe
him; diſproportionate marriages are ſeldom happy.”
“Oh! Lord, my dear, it was not for marriage, I
aſſure you; it was ſince I lived with my Lady.”
“Good heaven!” cried Rebecca, with a look of
ſurpriſe, “what ſince he has been married?”
“Yes; but I would not have you mention it; he
offered me three hundred a year.”
“And how could you remain in the family after
ſuch an affront, Mrs. Lappett?”
“Why, I thought it was a pity to loſe my place,
ſo I kept my gentleman at a proper diſtance, and he
dropped the purſuit: but come, ma'am, let us hurry
the nurſery maid to put Miſs Oſſiter and the young
gentlemen to bed, and then we will go down and take
a game at cards in the houſekeeper's room.”
“You will excuſe me, Mrs. Lappett: I never played
a game at cards in my life; beſides, my Lady has
given me ſome muſlin to ſpot, and I muſt ſet about it.”
“Lord! child, you'll have enough to do if you humour
her by working of an evening.”
“It is my duty to do all that is in my power, and
I had rather work than ſit ſtill.”
“Well, then, bring down your work, you will be
moped to death ſitting here by yourſelf.”
“Oh! dear, no, I ſhall not: I am never lonely.
I work very faſt, and when I have done a good bit I
can take up a book and read. I would rather not go
down, if you will excuſe me.”
“Juſt as you pleaſe, ma'am,” ſaid Lappett; “we
ſhall be glad of your company, but if you prefer being
alone —.”
She courtſeyed, ironically toſſed her head, and left
[Page 065]
Rebecca to the enjoyment of her own reflexions, while
ſhe entertained her fellow ſervants with the pride, conceit,
and ignorance of the new comer. “I tried to get
her down amongſt us, that we might have a little fun
with her,” ſaid ſhe, “for you would laugh to hear
how fooliſhly ſhe talks. She will not ſtay here long,
take my word for it.”
At leaſt Mrs. Lappett had reſolved, in her own mind,
to uſe every exertion to diſplace Rebecca from a family
where, ſhe was fearful, her beauty, innocence and worth,
would attract the notice of one, whoſe devoirs ſhe considered
as entirely due to herſelf.
For, to own the truth, Mrs. Lappett had not been
quite ſo deaf to the propoſals of her Lord as ſhe had represented
to Rebecca, though ſhe rather made a mistake
in ſaying his Lordſhip had offered a ſettlement,
that being a meaſure earneſtly deſired by herſelf, but
which ſhe could find no means to bring Lord Oſſiter
into: indeed, he had found her too eaſy a conqueſty to
indulge a thought of putting himſelf to much expence
or trouble on her account.
The next morning, when Lady Oſſiter had breakfasted,
ſhe went immediately to the nurſery, a thing
ſhe had not been known to do for many months before;
but Rebecca was a novelty, and therefore demanded
from her Lady ſome little attention; as Rebecca had
been told that her Lady ſeldom, if ever, came into the
children's apartment, the viſit was intirely unexpected,
and Lady Oſſiter, found her buſily employed in arranging
ſome pencils and crayons in a ſmall, but elegant,
drawing box, which had been given her by her late
benefactreſs.
She aroſe, and apologized for the confuſion her
drawings, &c. which had fallen on the floor, had made
in the apartment; “had I known your Ladyſhip intended
this honour,”—
“Oh! never mind, child,” cried the Lady, with
a look of infinite good humour, which no woman knew
better how to aſſume than Lady Oſſiter; “I did not
come to diſturb you, but I thought I ſhould like you
to hear the children read.”
[Page 066]
“Have they ever been taught their letters, Madam?”
“Why, upon my word, I cannot tell: I believe
Charles can tell them when he ſees them: I have tried
him ſometimes by taking up the news-paper when he
was in the room; but I do not believe Lucy or James
know any thing about it; but call them in, and let us
ſee what they can do.”
Rebecca, who had about two hours before ſeen them
all neatly dreſſed, and given them their breakfaſt, opened
the adjoining room to call them, when how great
was her ſurpriſe when ſhe ſaw the eldeſt boy, who was
eight years old, with two or three colour-ſhells before
him, ſeveral bruſhes, and a baſon of water, with which
he had not been ſatisfied to daub ſeveral ſheets of paper,
and his own clothes, but alſo his brother and ſiſter's
hands, faces, and frocks! Infinitely chagrined that
they ſhould be ſeen by their mother in ſuch a condition,
ſhe turned mildly towards the nurſery maid, and aſked
“how ſhe could be ſo neglectful as not to mind what
the children were doing?”
“Mind them yourſelf, ma'am,” was the anſwer:
“I thought you came here to help me, not to command
me.”
“I ſhall for the future mind them,” ſaid Rebecca,
attempting to take the bruſhes from Maſter Oſſiter.
“You ſhall not have them,” ſcreamed he: “I will
paint when I pleaſe; mamma ſays I ſhall.”
Rebecca perſiſted in removing from his reach the
ſhells and water, when ſetting up a ſcream like a bed-lamite,
he threw one, which he had retained in his
hand, full in her face!
“What is the matter?” cried Lady Oſſiter, opening
the door. “Come hither, Charles; what do they
do to you, my love?”
“She will not let me play. She has taken away my
paints, and will not let me do any thing.”
“But ſhe ſhall let you do as you pleaſe,” ſaid the
mother, kiſſing him, “ſo do not cry.”
At that moment another ſcream, from the inner apartment,
vibrated in her Ladyſhip's ears, and Maſter
James and Miſs Oſſiter came bellowing into the room,
that “the new maid would waſh their faces.”
[Page 067]
“Heaven ſave me,” ſaid the Lady, “from often
viſiting the nurſery! You are enough to drive one mad.
I had hoped, indeed, that you, Rebecca, would have
managed them better than to have had all this uproar;
but I ſee ſervants are all alike; they have no more notion
of the management of children than natural fools:
why, I will anſwer for it, if I had time, I could make
theſe children do juſt as I pleaſe, without any of this
roaring. Do not you think, Charles, you would always
mind me?”
“Oh! yes, mamma; you never contradict me,
but give me every thing I want.”
“Well, go, my dear, go to Rebecca and have your
face waſhed, and you ſhall go out in the coach, and buy
ſome more paints. Do, child, put James and Miſs
Oſſiter on clean frocks, and get yourſelf ready to go
out with them. I will hear them read another time;
poor dears, they have been vexed enough this morning:”
then taking her favourite's hand, to lead him
out of the room, ſhe ſtopped, and picked up two or
three of Rebecca's drawings.—“Here, my love,” ſaid
ſhe, “aſk your maid to give you theſe pretty pictures.”
Rebecca was too meek to contradict, and he marched
off with her two beſt performances in his hand.
In about ten minutes a footman tapped at the door,
to inform Rebecca that the chariot waited, and that ſhe
muſt go to her Lady's dreſſing-room for Maſter Oſſiter.
Rebecca, who had been accuſtomed to peace and
regularity, was diſtracted by the hurry and confuſion
ſhe had been thrown into; but flattering herſelf it
would be better next day, ſhe made all the haſte ſhe
could, and repaired to the dreſſing-room, where, on a
ſofa, beſide his mamma, ſat the delectable Maſter Ossiter,
with a pair of gold-bowed ſciſſars, cutting the
houſes, trees, and figures, from her drawings, which
her Ladyſhip was amuſing herſelf by placing in a kind
of fantaſtic medley on the table before her.
“See, Rebecca,” cried ſhe, we have diſpatched
theſe pretty pictures, I dare ſay, a deal quicker than
you made them.”
Rebecca ſmiled faintly; but ſhe felt a cold chill ſtrike
[Page 068]
to her heart. “Alas! Lady Mary would not have
done ſo, ſighed ſhe, ſoftly, as ſhe followed the children
down ſtairs, and a tear ſtarted in her eye, which ſhe
was unable to ſuppreſs.
“Drive to the toy-ſhop,” ſaid Maſter Oſſiter, as
the man ſhut the chariot-door, “and ſee what mamma
has given me,” continued he, pulling half a guinea
from his pocket, and ſhowing it to his brother and sister:
“and I am to lay it out juſt as I pleaſe.”
As the chariot ſtopped at the ſhop door, a poor man,
pale and emaciated, with but one leg, took off his hat,
bowed, but did not ſpeak.
“Look at that poor man, my dear,” ſaid Rebecca;
“he would be very thankful for a ſmall part of your
money; ſuppoſe you was to give him a ſhilling?”
“What ſhould I give him a ſhilling for?” ſaid the
child.
“Becauſe he is in great diſtreſs; ſee how pale he
looks, and what a thin ragged coat he has on this cold
day!”
“Well, what is that to me?”
“Suppoſe, Maſter Oſſiter, you were cold and hungry?”
“That you know is impoſſible.”
“Impoſſible! Sir.”
“Yes, to be ſure; a'nt I a Lord's ſon, and ſhall
not I be a Lord myſelf, if I live long enough? and,
you know, Lords are never poor.”
“Then is it the more their duty to relieve thoſe
that are.”
“Duty!” ſaid he, ſtaring in her face; “mamma
never gives any thing to poor folks; ſhe ſays they
ſhould be all ſent to priſon, and made work.”
This dialogue had paſſed in the ſhop, and the miserable
ſubject of it ſtill was at the door. Miſs Oſſiter
put her little hand inſtinctively into her pocket.
“If I had any money; but mamma don't very often
give me any.” Then approaching Rebecca, in a kind
of half whiſper, “If you, ma'am, will give the poor
man half a crown, I will aſk my uncle for one to pay
you with the firſt time I ſee him.”
[Page 069]
Rebecca gazed on the child as ſhe was ſpeaking, and
ſhe fancied ſhe beheld her grandmother's benevolence
play about her infant countenance.—She caught her
in her arms, gave the deſired half crown, and joy for
a moment animated her boſom, when ſhe beheld both
the beggar and his little benefactreſs look equally happy.
CHAP. XVI.
MODERN MANNERS. A Few days after this Lady Oſſiter ſent for Rebecca,
in haſte, to her dreſſing-room. “You
ſeem to have ſome taſte for drawing child,” ſaid ſhe,
“pray can you paint flowers.”
“A little, madam.”
“Well, now I want you to do ſomething for me;
I laſt night ſaw the moſt beautiful painted trimming,
and I'll take you to a ſhop this morning where you ſhall
ſee ſome like it; if you think you can do it, I ſhall
be vaſtly pleaſed, for there is a ball next week.”
“But your ladyſhip is in mourning,” ſaid Rebecca,
bluſhing for her lady's folly.
“Oh, la! well, I proteſt I forgot that, but now,
I dare ſay you could fancy me ſomething pretty in
black and white; do try child: I ſhall change my
mourning in about a month, and I think you can do
it in that time.”
“If I knew what would pleaſe your Ladyſhip.”
“Do it according to your own taſte, Rebecca, and
I am ſure it will be pretty.”
The good natured Rebecca was willing to pleaſe to
the utmoſt of her power, but, alas, that power was far
from adequate to the many taſks impoſed upon her.
Mrs. Lappett was a great favourite, therefore often
aſked leave to go out, and then Rebecca was ſummoned
to attend the toilette of her lady, and indeed her taſte
and judgment in the arrangement of female ornaments
[Page 070]
was ſo elegant, that Lady Oſſiter never appeared to
greater advantage than when dreſſed by her hands.
Then was a morning cap to be made, or a dreſs freſh
trimmed, they were all brought to Rebecca; and did
her Ladyſhip ever aſk for any thing that was not ready,
the anſwer was, indeed, my Lady, I gave it to Rebecca,
two or three days ago, but ſhe is ſuch a fine
lady, and ſpends ſo much time at her book and her music.
In the mean time our fair heroine was ſacrificing her
health to the vain hope of obtaining the approbation
of her lady, ſhe had not a moment for the moſt trifling
relaxation; obliged to riſe early, on account of the
children, for the very nurſery maid impoſed upon her
good nature, and left her entirely to dreſs and undreſs
them. Mrs. Lappett would, if in the leaſt indiſpoſed,
retire to reſt, and leave Rebecca to ſit up for her lady,
who was addicted to the faſhionable vice of gaming,
and often was from home till four, five, nay ſometimes
fix o'clock in the morning; and when ſhe had ill luck,
would return in the moſt diabolical humour, and vent
that ſpleen which politeneſs obliged her to conceal in
company, on her meek unoffending attendant; indeed
to ſuch height did ſhe often ſuffer her paſſion to riſe,
that Rebecca, on hearing the knocker announce her
arrival, would fall into ſuch a fit of trembling, that ſhe
was ſcarcely able to ſtand, while ſhe undreſſed her.
But the reader muſt not ſuppoſe that, during this period,
either Sir George or Lord Oſſiter had forgot her; the
former had written her ſeveral letters, which ſhe returned
unopened; for, ſaid ſhe, conſcious as I am of my
own weakneſs, why ſhould I wilfully expoſe it to trials
it may not be able to withſtand. At length, wearied
out with her inflexible reſolution, he determined to
take a trip to the continent, and endeavour to baniſh
her from his thoughts; but before he went, he determined
at leaſt to put it in her power to leave his ſiſter
whenever her ſituation became painful, without being
obliged to have recourſe to ſervitude again. And Mrs.
Harley was the perſon he determined to employ on this
occaſion.
[Page 071]
Lord Oſſiter had made frequent attempts to ſee and
converſe with Rebecca, but ſhe was ſo much in the apartment
with the children, or in her lady's dreſſing
room, with Lappett, that he found it more difficult
than he at firſt imagined, and he was too cautious in
his affairs of gallantry to uſe pen and paper.
Lord and Lady Oſſiter were a very faſhionable couple;
they had married without affection, becauſe their friends
thought they were exactly ſuitable for each other in
birth and fortune; his Lordſhip had always kept up a
ſhow of politeneſs towards his wife, ſeldom contradicted
her or complained of her expences, though in his
heart he deſpiſed her pride and affectation, and laughed
at her abſurdity. He knew her well enough, to be
certain his honour was perfectly ſafe in her keeping, not
from a conviction of her principles being juſt or her virtue
impregnable, but he was fully ſenſible that ſelf-love
was her prevalent paſſion, and though ſhe was distractedly
fond of admiration, her heart was animated by
none of thoſe ſenſibilities which, though they in general
elevate the female mind, not unfrequently lay it
open to the greateſt errors.
One morning, as Rebecca was intently engaged in
completing the trimming we have mentioned, Mrs.
Harley unexpectedly entered the room.
A faint gleam of pleaſure animated the countenance,
and beamed from the eyes of Rebecca, as ſhe aroſe to
receive this faithful ſervant of Lady Mary's.
“Mrs. Harley,” ſaid ſhe, taking her cordially by
the hand, “to what am I to attribute this unexpected
pleaſure.”
Struck with her palid cheeks and altered air, Harley
firſt bruſhed off a ſtarting tear and then diſcloſed her
errand—
“I come, my dear Miſs, from my good young
maſter—”
“If to bring me a letter,” ſaid Rebecca, interrupting
her, “I muſt beg you to excuſe me—”
“My dear child,” ſaid Harley, “don't fly out in
this manner, but liſten to me attentively; I have children
of my own, Miſs Littleton, and heaven forbid I
[Page 072]
ſhould ever adviſe a young innocent creature to a wrong
ſtep; truſt me, I am actuated only by friendſhip, when
I entreat you to inform me what motives you have for
thus obſtinately refuſing the offers of a man of rank and
fortune, who loves you honourably and ſincerely.”
“Do not aſk me, dear Harley; do not let us talk
on this ſubject.”
“We will talk on no other then, for ſure I am
there muſt be ſome powerful reaſon for your conduct.
Is your heart otherways engaged? Does want of fortune
prevent your happineſs?”
“Ah, no! no! my friend,” cried Rebecca, her
head falling on Harley's ſhoulder, and her eyes filling
with tears; I am unhappy becauſe I am not insensible.”
“You talk in riddles, my dear; if you are not insensible—”
“Oh, ſtop! ſtop! you muſt ſay no more, unleſs
you mean to break my heart; for, alas, Harley, the
laſt time I ſaw my dear departed Lady Mary, I promised
her, ſolemnly promiſed her, by every hope of
ſelicity, never to liſten to an overture of love from Sir
George; and never, no never, while I retain the leaſt
remembrance of what is paſt, will I break a vow ſo
ſolemnly given.”
“This family pride,” ſaid Harley, “was the only
foible my lady had.”
“She had no foible,” ſaid Rebecca; “it was a
wiſh to inſure my felicity alone, prompted the requeſt.”
“Whatever was her motive, my dear Miſs, promiſes
when once made ſhould be ſacredly obſerved; I will
therefore ſay no more to you on the ſubject: Sir
George, ſince ſatisfied you will not accept his offers, is
reſolved next Monday to leave England.”
Rebecca turned pale, and Harley continued.
“He means to ſpend the winter on the continent,
but has deſired you will accept his mother's picture,
which he has had freſh ſet on purpoſe for you, and this
trifle, laying a bank note for five hundred pounds on
the table. Now I will have no qualms and ſqueamiſh
nonſenſe, Miſs Littleton; I am certain my lady meant
[Page 073]
to have provided for you—more ſhame for ſome folks that
they forget her laſt commands; but we cannot always
make people do as they ought. Now, you muſt take this
money, and conſider it as her bequeſt. I am ſure you will
find it neceſſary very ſoon to quit this family; your dear
pale cheeks and heavy eyes tell me you ſhould at this moment
be in your bed, rather than at work.” She then
drew out the picture, which was only ſet in plain gold.
Rebecca took it, preſſed it to her lips, and, tying the
ribbon that was fixed to it round her neck, placed it as a
ſacred depoſit in her boſom. She alſo took the bank note
and put it in her pocket book, but ſecretly reſolved that
nothing but the ſeverſt neceſſity ſhould tempt her to
break into it.
When Monday arrived, Rebecca could not avoid approaching
the window at the ſound of every carriage that
drew up to the door.
“He will not ſurely leave England,” ſaid ſhe, “without
taking leave of his ſiſter.”
About two o'clock ſhe ſaw his chariot draw up to the
door, and, half concealing herſelf behind the window
ſhutter, gazed on him, and breathed a prayer for his felicity,
as ſhe ſaw him alight. In about half an hour ſhe
was deſired to bring Miſs Oſſiter and Maſter James into
the drawing-room. She took them to the door, opened
it and put them in, but her feelings were too powerful to
permit her to enter.
“Ah, uncle,” ſaid Miſs Oſſiter, running eagerly to Sir
George, “I am glad you are come, I have been waiting
for you this long, long time.”
“Well, my dear Lucy,” ſaid he, fondly taking her on
his knee, “and what might make you wiſh to ſee me ſo
much.”
“Becauſe I love you dearly,” ſaid ſhe, throwing her
little arms round his neck, “but that a'nt all.”
“No! what elſe was it then?”
She lowered her voice, and, clapping her mouth cloſe
to his ear, ſaid, “I owe my maid half-a-crown, and I
told her you would pay her.”
“Sir George was ſurpriſed. “And pray how does
that happen?” ſaid he.
[Page 074]
“Rebecca lent it me,” ſaid ſhe, ſtill lowering her voice,
“to give a poor man.”
“Rebecca, what Rebecca?” ſaid Sir George, aſtoniſhed.
“Why, Rebecca,” replied the child; “my own maid
Rebecca, that teaches me to read and ſay my prayers,
and tells me if I am good I ſhall go to heaven.”
“What ſtuff is the child talking?” ſaid Lady Oſſiter,
catching the laſt word.
Sir George was too much affected to ſpeak; he put a
couple of guineas into Lucy's hand, and haſtily kiſſing
them all, hurried out of the houſe; as he ſeated himſelf
in the chaiſe, he caſt his eyes towards the upper windows.
Rebecca caught the glance; the impulſe was irreſiſtible;
ſhe threw up the ſaſh.
Sir George kiſſed his hand, while his countenance betrayed
the feelings of his ſoul.
Rebecca laid her's on her heart, then raiſed them towards
heaven, as ſhe would have ſaid, “God bleſs you.”
“Drive on,” ſaid Sir George, and again bowing his
head to hide his emotions from the ſervants, a moment
conveyed him from her ſight.
CHAP. XVII.
GALLANTRY, JEALOUSY, AND INTEGRITY. “I Do not think, my dear,” ſaid Lord Oſſiter, as he
was taking his chocolate in his lady's dreſſing-room,
one morning about a fortnight after Sir George's departure.
“I do not think it will be in my power to join the
intended party at Lady Rackett's to-night.”
“Some new engagement, my Lord,” ſaid her Ladyship,
ſmiling affectedly.
“Not a very agreeable one,” he replied. “I am obliged
to go into the City, on ſome infernal buſineſs with my
banker: theſe monied men are the moſt tireſome animals in
the creation. He ſays I have overdrawn him, and deſires I
will come and examine my accounts; it is a curſed ſtupid
affair, and I don't often concern myſelf about ſuch things,
but the fellow is ſo preſſing.”
“But perhaps you can get away in time to dreſs and
join us, my Lord, before ſupper.”
[Page 075]
“I will, if poſſible, but I dare ſay the wretch will make
me as ſtupid as himſelf before I have done with his diſcounts
and intereſts, ſo I ſhall be horrid bad company; therefore
it is moſt likely I ſhall come home and go to bed.”
“To bed, my Lord,” cried her Ladyſhip, laughing;
“why, ſure you are going to take pattern by the ſober cit.”
Though Lady Oſſiter pretended to deſire her Lord's
company, it was, in fact, the fartheſt thing from her wishes.
She had for ſome time paſt been admired and followed
by the Duke of—; a conqueſt ſo brilliant and unexpected,
was the higheſt gratification to this vain woman,
and ſhe had heard with pleaſure her huſband's intended appointment
in the city, as ſhe was reſolved to ſee his Grace
for half an hour at home, previous to their meeting at Lady
Rackett's ball, where ſhe was engaged to dance with him.
But Lord Oſſiter had frequently given her a few pretty
plain hints in regard to her conduct with her noble admirer,
and therefore, though ſhe had reſolved to ſee him,
ſhe thought it would be beſt to do it privately, and Lappett
being unfortunately gone to viſit a ſick brother in the
country, ſhe was obliged to make Rebecca her conſidante
on the occaſion, and immediately, on retiring from breakfast,
ſhe ſummoned her to her dreſſing-room.
“Rebecca, child,” ſaid ſhe, as ſhe entered, “I think
I have not given you any thing ſince you have been with
me, and you have done more than half of Lappett's buſineſs
for her; there is that blue ſatin gown and coat, you may
take it, and as it is rather ſoiled, here is ſomething to pay
for the dying and making up, preſenting her with a couple
of guineas. Do you know, child, (continued ſhe) I
have taken the ſtrangeſt whim in my head, and you muſt
lend me your aſſiſtance. I think that trimming you made
me extremely pretty, I dare ſay it will be greatly admired.”
“I am happy it pleaſes you, Madam,” ſaid Rebecca:
“but I thought you were ſaying you would have it altered.”
“Oh, no, I was not ſpeaking of my dreſs then; I
think nothing can be more elegant or better fancied, but
you have a charming taſte, that is certain. No, I was
going to tell you of a ſtrange whim I had taken to play a
trick with the old Duke of—; for, do you know
Rebecca, the man makes downright love to me whenever
he meets me, and the other day, when he was here, he left
[Page 076]
behind him theſe ſuperb bracelets. Now, I have a mind
to mortify him, and as my Lord is going into the City, I
will ſend to the Duke to come here that I may have an
opportunity to return his preſent and laugh at him.”
“Would it not be better to ſend them to him,” ſaid
Rebecca.
“Oh, no, that will not do half ſo well, for then, I
ſhould not have the ſatisfaction of ſeeing his chagrin, ſo,
Rebecca, you ſhall take a note, which I will write, and
ſend it, unknown to any of the other ſervants, and when
his grace comes he ſhall come diſguiſed, and paſs for your
brother, and you can bring him to my dreſſing-room.”
“Your Ladyſhip will pardon me,” ſaid Rebecca, laying
the two guineas on the table, “I am not fit to engage
in ſuch a ſervice; I would much rather decline it.”
“Decline it!” ſaid her Ladyſhip, reddening; “pray
are you not my ſervant?”
“Undoubtedly Madam.”
“And is it not your duty to obey my orders?”
“When they are proper.”
“And pray are you to be the judge of what is proper or
improper in my actions?
“By no means; but your Ladyſhip will allow me to
judge of my own.”
“Oh, certainly Madam, if you are too ſqueamiſh to
enter into ſo innocent a ſcheme.”
“I make no doubt but your deſigns, Madam, are perfectly
innocent, but where there is myſlery there is always
room for ſuſpicion, and ſhould my Lord diſcover it—”
“But how can he, child, if you are diſcreet.”
“I am determined to be ſo, Madam, and hope you will
pardon my temerity, if I humbly entreat you to drop this
deſign.”
“Prithee, good madam pert,” ſaid her Ladyſhip,
ſcornfully, “do not pretend to more delicacy and virtue
than your betters. I have as high a regard for my honour
as any woman can have, but I may indulge myſelf, I hope,
in a little innocent gallantry for all that. Go; I ſhell not
want you till I dreſs.”
Rebecca retired, and for this once the pain her lady's
anger gave her was more than counterbalanced by the
[Page 077]
reflexion that ſhe had acted right in rejecting the infamous
ſervice ſhe would have employed her in.
Contrary to her Lady's expectation, Rebecca had scarcely
reached her own apartment when Lappett returned,
and entered the dreſſing-room, to receive Lady Oſſiter's
command.
“Well, Lappett,” ſaid ſhe, “you are returned in very
good time, for I have been ſo groſsly affronted by that little
prude, Rebecca, that I can hardly contain my anger;
do you know the impertinent creature had the audacity to
refuſe getting me a note conveyed to the Duke of—;
though I had condeſcended to inform her that my intentions
were only to laugh at him. You know, Lappett, there
is not a woman breathing would be more cautious than
myſelf in doing any thing improper.”
“Dear, my Lady, I am ſure of that; nor is your Ladyship,
by any means, obligated to enter into explanations
with your ſervants, to ſpeak your command is always ſufficient
cient to have them inſtantly obeyed.”
The obſequious abigail took the note, conveyed it herself,
and at eight o'clock in the evening his Grace was admitted
to her Lady's dreſſing-room.
Lady Oſſiter meant nothing leſs than to over-step the
boundaries of diſcretion in this tete-a-tete . The Duke
was to her an object of diſguſt, but flattery was delightful
to her ears, and pearls and diamonds were pretty ornaments
in her opinion, eaſily purchaſed by a little condeſension
and ſhe flattered herſelf, that while ſhe remained virtuous in
one great point, ſhe might indulge herſelf in every other
imprudence, and deſy the cenſures of the world.
But it was the opinion of Rebecca, that every truly virtuous
woman ſhould carefully avoid even the appearance of
indiſcretion, eſpecially thoſe whoſe elevated ſtations might
render their examples infinitely pernicious to their inferiors:
ſhe therefore felt herſelf greatly hurt by Lady Ossiter's
want of prudence, and flattered herſelf the repulſe ſhe
had met from her would prevent her making her deſigns
known to any other ſervant, and ſhe readily imagined
Mrs. Lappett would be as unwilling as herſelf to engage in
the buſneſs; ſo when informed ſhe was returned, Rebecca
found herſelf ſomewhat relieved, as ſhe knew ſhe ſhould
avoid the painful taſk of dreſſing a woman whom ſhe feared
[Page 077]
The obſequious abigail took the note, conveyed it herself,
and at eight o'clock in the evening his Grace was admitted
to her Lady's dreſſing-room.
Lady Oſſiter meant nothing leſs than to over-step the
boundaries of diſcretion in this tete-a-tete, the Duke
was to her an object of diſguſt, but flattery was delightful
to her ears, and pearls and diamonds were pretty ornaments
in her opinion, eaſily purchaſed by a little condeſeention;
and ſhe flettered herſelf, that while ſhe remained virtuous in
one great point, ſhe might indulge herſelf in every other
inprudence, and defy the cenſures of the world.
[Page 078]
would be predetermined not to be pleaſed with her utmoſt
exertion.
While the Duke and her Ladyſhip were together, the
artful Lappett thought ſhe would juſt ſtep in and hear
what Rebecca had to ſay on the ſubject, for, by her specious
appearance of friendſhip, ſhe had ſo won on the unsuspicious
heart of our heroine, that ſhe never ſcrupled to
communicate to her every thought as it aroſe, except
thoſe which concerned Sir George, (and thoſe ſhe endeavoured
to conceal, if poſſible, even from herſelf.)
“So,” cried Lappett, ſitting down, “my Lady and
you had a tiff to day, I find.”
“We did not quite agree,” ſaid Rebecca, ſlightly,
“but I dare ſay ſhe has forgot it by this time; I am ſure
I do not wiſh to remember it.”
“I ſuppose ſhe wanted you to get a letter conveyed to
the Duke.”
“What then ſhe has told you herſelf, has ſhe?”
“Oh, Yes, the moment I came in. I declare it is a
pity my Lord is not acquainted with her conduct?”
“It would be a cruel thing, Mrs. Lappett, to plant dissension
between man and wife: beſides, I dare ſay, my
Lady, though imprudent, is not criminal.”
“To be ſure my Lady has ſome excuſe; my Lord is
always after other women: he is ſeldom at home, and
I am certain don't care a pin about his wife.”
“Perhaps if her Ladyſhip was more attentive to increaſe
his domeſtic comforts, he would neceſſarily grow more attached
to home, but while ſhe is ſo extravagantly fond of
diſſipation, and while the four honours have the power to
keep her from home, night after night, can we be surprised
if her huſband ſeeks abroad for that felicity he is
ſure of not meeting in his own houſe.”
“Why, to ſay truth, my Lady is a ſad rake.”
“And her children, Mrs. Lappett, ſhe pays but little
attention to them, nor will ſhe ſuffer any other perſon to
do it. Can there be a more lovely or engaging child than
Miſs Oſſiter. I am ſure the little time I have to inſtruct
her is amply repaid by her docility and attention; as to
Maſter Oſſiter and his brother James, they are ſo humoured,
eſpecially the former, that it requires greater powers than
I am poſſeſſed of to make them attend to any thing.”
[Page 078]
“I suppose ſhe wanted you to get a letter conveyed to
the Duke.”
“What then ſhe has told you herſelf, has ſhe?”
“Oh, Yes, the moment I came in. I declare it is a
pity my Lord is not acquainted with her conduct.”
“ would be a cruel thing, Mrs. Lappett, to plant difsension
between man and wife: beſides, I dare ſay, my
Lady, though imprudent, is not criminal.”
“To be ſure my Lady has ſome excuſe; my Lord is
always after other women: he is seldom at home, and
I am certain don't care a pin about his wife.”
“Perhaps if her Ladyſhip was more attentive to increaſe
his domeſtic comforts, he would neceſſarily grow more attached
to home, but while ſhe is so extravagantly fond of
diſſipation, and while the four honours have the power to
keep her from home, night after night, can we be surprised
if her huſband ſeeks abroad for that felicity he is
ſure of not meeting in his own houſe.
[Page 079]
“He is very paſſionate,” ſaid Lappett.
“Extremely ſo,” replied the artleſs Rebecca; “beſides
which, he is cruel, miſchievous, and a great liar, and theſe
things ſhould be corrected in time, or he will be as despicable
when a man, as he is now diſagreeable as a child.”
“His temper is very like his mother's.”
“I think there is ſome ſimilitude between them, for indeed,
Mrs. Lappett, I do not know how you acquire fortitude
to ſupport it, but my Lady is ſometimes ſo passionate
and capricious I am ready to die with vexation, and,
though my heart be ready to burſt, in her preſence I dare
not ſhed a tear, for if ſometimes, when I can no longer
ſuppreſs them, they will burſt forth, ſhe reproaches me
with childiſhneſs, paſſion, and folly. Folly it is, I will
own, to let the behaviour of ſo unfeeling a woman wound
my ſenſibility; but yet when I know that I do my duty
to the utmoſt of my power, it is very hard to meet with
nothing in return but taunts and unkindneſs.”
“So it is indeed, my dear, but you muſt keep up your
ſpirits.”
“I do, Mrs. Lappett, as well as I can, but my Lady
ſometimes aſks me what I am fit for? and if ſhe had not
taken me, who would? That my Lord often tells her, he
wonders ſhe will keep ſo awkward a creature about her. I
am ſenſible I have many obligations to her Ladyſhip's family,
but can I help my inexperience, unacquainted as I
am with ſervitude?”
“No, to be ſure, you cannot: but my Lady will want
me, and I ſhall come in for my ſhare, for I do aſſure you
child, we get it all round in turn; but you will know how
to bear theſe things better in time.”
Lappett returned to her Lady and not only repeated but
exaggerated every thing which Rebecca, in the ſimplicity
of her heart, had uttered.
“Ungrateful creature,” ſaid the Lady, “after what I
have done for her.”
“Ungrateful indeed, Madam. I wonder your Ladyship
will keep her.”
“I ſhall not keep her long, Lappett; I aſſure you, I
am quite ſick of her airs and impertinence.”
The clock had ſtruck ten, the children were in bed, and
Lady Oſſiter juſt ſtepped into her chair and gone towards
[Page 080]
Cavendiſh-Square, the ſervants retired to the lower apartments,
and ſilence ſeemed to reign throughout the houſe.
Rebecca, wearied with the fatigue and vexation of the day,
thought ſhe might this evening ſafely indulge, in a relaxation,
which ſhe had not enjoyed ſince her reſidence in
Lady Oſſiter's family, which was to practice a few hours
on the harpſicord. She took her muſic books and a candle,
and went to a ſmall parlour, in a retired part of the
houſe, where ſtood a ſine toned inſtrument, and where ſhe
ſat down and amuſed herſelf, unthinking how time paſt,
and entirely inattentive to the footſteps that paſſed and repassed
the door of the apartment. The muſic ſoothed and
compoſed the perturbation of her ſpirits. She played several
little plaintive airs, and accompanied them with her
voice; and among the reſt, the ſong ſhe was ſigning when
Sir George firſt ſaw her. When ſhe had got nearly through
it, the remembrance of that ſcene—the ſtriking contraſt
of her ſituation then and now, ſtruck ſo forcibly on her
imagination that ſhe was unable to proceed. She pauſed,
and tears involuntarily ſtole down her cheeks; her amusement
was ended; ſhe roſe from her ſeat, and was ſhutting
the book, when ſomebody laid hold of her, and repeating,
—as the maid retired,
He kiſs'd her tears away.
claſped her rudely in his arms and ſnatched a kiſs.
Rebecca, too much terrified to ſcream, could only endeavour
to diſengage herſelf, and turning round, beheld
Lord Oſſiter.
“If I have alarmed you, my dear creature,” ſaid his
Lordſhip, “I humbly entreat your pardon. But do not
let me interrupt your amuſement; come, ſit down again,
and let me hear that charming ſong you were ſinging
when I entered the room.”
“Your Lordſhip will pardon me, I had no intention of
being heard by any one;—I have ſome orders to execute
for my Lady.”
“Nay, nay, you do not get off ſo eaſily. Do you
know, my lovely girl, I have been abſolutely expiring
from the firſt moment I beheld you, for an opportunity
to tell you how much I admire and adore you.”
[Page 081]
“Surely your Lordſhip cannot ſeriouſly mean to inſult
me.”
“Inſult you, my angel, no, by heavens I would sacrifice
the wretch who ſhould dare to offend you:—No, my
dear girl, I mean to offer you love and affluence in the
room of dependence and poverty. I will place you in your
proper ſphere: ſuch beauty and elegance were not formed
for ſervitude. Come, liſten to me, I will furniſh you a
houſe, keep you a chariot, and ſettle five hundred a year.”
“Gracious heaven,” cried Rebecca, burſting into tears,
“to what am I expoſed.”
“Pſhaw, pſhaw, this is all prudery and nonſenſe; come,
dry your tears and let us go to my jeweller's, and you
ſhall take your choice of whatever trinkets his ſhop affords,
I will not limit you as to the ſum.”
Lord Oſſiter had but an indifferent opinion of female
delicacy; he thought the word virtue very pretty in the
mouth of a pretty woman, but as to the reality exiſting
in the heart, he thought no woman poſſeſſed ſo large a
ſhare but money, jewels, and flattery could lull it to ſleep;
how aſtoniſhed was he then to find, upon taking a few liberties
with Rebecca, ſhe ſhrunk inſtinctively from him,
ſhrieked faintly, and, ſtaggering a few paces toward the
door, fell lifeleſs to the floor.
Terrified, he caught her from the ground, and ringing
the bell with violence, began to tear open her gown and
handkerchief, in order to give her air. “My dear, my
lovely girl,” ſaid he, “for heaven's ſake revive.” Then
placing her on a ſofa, he ſeated himſelf beſide her, and
reſted her head on his ſhoulder.
At that moment who ſhould appear at the door but
Mrs. Lappett, all the fury of a jealous enraged woman
flaſhing from her eyes.
“My dear Lappett,” ſaid his Lordſhip, “I happened
to come unexpectedly into the room where this poor girl
was amuſing herſelf, and ſee how it has frightened her;
do get a little water.”
But Lappett was not to be deceived: ſhe had heard him
utter words of tenderneſs, and was ſufficiently convinced
Rebecca was her rival.
“The creature is ſo affected,” ſaid ſhe, “I declare there
[Page 082]
is no bearing her, but I aſſure your Lordſhip I have something
elſe to do than to wait on the dear lovely girl .”
Rebecca was now recovering, and, raiſing her head, ſhe
caught hold of Lappett's gown, as ſhe turned to leave the
room, and exclaimed, “Do not leave me, ſtay, ſave me,
take me from this place.”
“Indeed, Madam, I am in a hurry,” cried Lappett,
twitching her gown from the feeble graſp of Rebecca, and
flung out of the room, audibly ſaying, “Her Lady ſhould
be informed what ſort of a perſon ſhe had in her family.”
Rebecca aroſe, diſengaged herſelf from his Lordſhip's
arms, who no longer attempted to detain her, and with
trembling ſteps returned to her apartment.
CHAP. XVIII.
FASHIONABLE LEVITIES. “ So , Madam, cried Lappett, as ſhe was aſſiſting her
Lady to riſe the next morning; “ſo, Madam,
though Mrs. Rebecca was ſo delicate as to refuſe conveying
a letter to his Grace, ſhe has no objection to private
interviews with my Lord. Oh, I could have torn the
creature's eyes out, an impertinent minx.”
“What are you talking of, Lappett,” ſaid her Ladyship,
with the greateſt compoſure, “I proteſt you ſeem
out of your ſenſes.”
“I am, my Lady, almoſt, for when I reflect on ſo
kind, ſo good a Lady as yourſelf being treated in ſuch a
barbarous manner: why, Madam, after you were gone
laſt night, I went up to ſee if Rebecca was doing the
dreſs your Ladyſhip ſaid you would wear on Thurſday,
and I could not find her; however, as I knew ſhe sometimes
went to the library when you were not at home,
and ſtaid and read for two or three hours, I ſat down and
began a little of it myſelf, but, after working till paſt
twelve o'clock, I thought it was very odd where ſhe could
be, ſo I went down the back ſtairs, thinking perhaps
I ſhould find her in the houſekeeper's room, but as I
paſt the little muſic parlour, I heard the ſound of voice
and opening the door, what does your Ladyſhip think,
[Page 083]
I diſcovered, I thought I ſhould have ſwooned away, for
there ſat Rebecca, faſt locked in my Lord's arms, and
her head leaned on his ſhoulders.”
“Very well,” cried Lady Oſſiter, peeviſhly, the crimson
of reſentment ruſhing over her face and neck, “why
am I plagued with this long ſtory: one would think you
were jealous of the creature, by the paſſion you are in.”
“I jealous, my Lady, does your Ladyſhip think?”—
“Oh, no! I don't think about it; I ſuppoſe my Lord
is not worſe than other men of his rank, and while he is not
wanting in reſpect to me, I ſhall not trouble myſelf about
his amuſements; to be ſure, it is rather mortifying to have
a little inſignificant huſſy preferred in one's own houſe.”
“That is what I ſay, Madam.”
“You have no right to ſay or think about it; if I am
ſatisfied with my Lord's conduct, I deſire I may hear
none of your ſlippant impertinence upon a ſubject that
don't concern you.”
done, Ma'am, but I hope you'll diſcharge—”
“I certainly ſhall diſcharge every ſervant of mine, whoſe
conduct diſpleaſes me, therefore, Lappett, read that impudent
ſcrawl, and then let me know what wages are due
to you.”
Lappett took the letter, and trembled as ſhe took it,
for ſhe knew it to be one which ſhe had written to her
ſiſter, and having intruſted it to the houſe maid to put it
in the poſt, the girl's curioſity led her to open it, but,
being ſurpriſed by the entrance of her lady whilſt in the
act of reading it, ſhe had, in her hurry to put it in her
pocket, dropped it, and while the officious Lappett was
contriving to introduce the Duke unperceived to her Lady,
this unfortunate letter diſcovered her criminal intercourse
with her Lord. But though Lady Oſſiter had thus
bridled her paſſion while talking to her infamous confidante,
ſhe no ſooner ſaw the innocent Rebecca, than ſhe
vented on her that torrent of abuſe fear had prevented
her from pouring on the other.
Artful infamous ſtrumpet, were her elegant expreſſions,
to pretend to ſuch reſinement of ſentiment, and yet be
guilty of ſuch glaring faults.
In vain Rebecca wept, and called on heaven to witneſs
her innocence; even when kneeling, ſhe requeſted not to
[Page 084]
be bereaved of her only refuge, an unblemiſhed character.
The haughty Lady Oſſiter ſpurned her from her, and bid
her inſtantly leave her houſe, and get her bread without,
for ſhe was well convinced ſhe did not deſerve one.
Lord Oſſiter, prepared as he was to meet her anger,
was unable to bear the illiberal abuſe with which ſhe loaded
him; he therefore ſatisfied himſelf with telling her, when
ſhe practiſed the duties of a wife, he would begin to ſtudy
thoſe of a huſband; till then, ſhe had no right to complain,
and left her to compoſe her ſpirits, as ſhe could, while he
inquired of his valet what he knew concerning Rebecca.
He ſoon learnt, by inquiries being made among the servants,
that Rebecca was diſmiſſed, and that ſhe had taken
a place in the Lincolnſhire ſtage, in order to return to her
mother. This was ſufficient intelligence for his Lordſhip,
and he began to plan ſchemes for getting her in his power.
When Rebecca came to take leave of the children, her
feelings were undeſcribable. Miſs Oſſiter hung about her
neck; even Charles and James begged her not to
they would be good boys and never vex her by behaving
ill again. She embraced them all tenderly, and with a
heart almoſt broken, got into a hackney-coach, which
took her to the inn from whence the ſtage ſet out. She
aſked to be ſhown to an apartment, and ordered ſome
trifle for her ſupper, then ſitting down by a little ſolitary
fire, began to reflect on her vexations, nor did ſhe conſider
it as the leaſt, that ſhe was obliged to return to her mother
who had written to her but twice during her residence
in London, and even thoſe letters were ſhort and
cold.
The five hundred pounds Mrs. Harley had given her,
ſhe did not conſider as her own property, and beſides that,
ſhe was poſſeſſed of but ten guineas in the world; to be ſure
ſhe had a few valuable trinkets, preſents from Lady Mary,
and a good ſtock of clothes; but what was that, when
ſhe wanted ſupport it would ſoon be gone. In the midſt
of theſe painful reflexions ſhe drew the picture of her
benefactreſs from her boſom, and contemplated it as her
chief, her almoſt only comfort. But, examining it more
minutely than ſhe had ever before done, ſhe thought ſhe
diſcovered ſomething like a ſpring on the edge of the setting,
and preſſing her finger on it, the back flew off and
[Page 085]
diſcovered to her the portrait of Sir George, fixed behind
that of his mother.
Spite of herſelf ſhe could not help gazing on it with
pleaſure, and when ſhe conſidered the delicacy with which
he had managed to preſent it to her, he roſe higher
than ever in her eſteem.
“Ah,” ſaid ſhe, “he certainly loves me, and is worthy
my eſteem. Why are we not born for each other, for ſure
I am, I could be content with Sir George, though in
the humbleſt ſtation: more—far more happy than in an
elevated ſphere; for in the humbler walks of life the felicity
we experience muſt proceed from a mutual deſire to
pleaſe, but in an exalted ſtation we live not for ourſelves
but others, at leaſt if we have not fortitude to ſcorn and
deſpiſe the ſneers of the faſhionable world.”
Rebecca could not help conſidering the poſſeſſion of this
portrait, at this period, as an invaluable treaſure, and in
her own breaſt ſolemnly vowed never to part from it. She
indulged herſelf in gazing on it while ſhe ſat up, and
ſhe retired to bed, laid it on her pillow, and fell
into a compoſed ſlumber, which laſted till called at four
o'clock to join the paſſengers in the coach. Refreſhed
and comforted by the reſt ſhe had taken, Rebecca aroſe
with alacrity to purſue her journey, and nothing material
occurred till they had proceeded upwards of fifty miles
from town, when the coach was overtaken by a poſt-chaiſe
and four, in which was a man, who ſtopped the coachman
and aſked if there was not a young perſon within ſide
of the name of Littleton. “Yes,” cried Rebecca, innocently
looking out of the window, “my name is Littleton.”
“Ah, Ma'am,” cried the man, “I am commanded to
entreat you to return. Miſs Oſſiter was laſt night taken
extremely ill, and cries continually for you; my Lady
therefore begs you will forget what is paſt, and come and
take your uſual ſtation in the family. She is convinced of
your innocence, but if diſagreeable to yourſelf, ſhe will
only deſire you to remain till Miſs Oſſiter is better.”
Rebecca's heart, formed for the warmeſt affection, beat
high when ſhe heard of her little favourite's illneſs. The
ill treatment ſhe had experienced from Lady Oſſiter was
inſtantly forgot, and ſhe thought only of returning as
quick as poſſible to attend the dear little girl. She ſprang
[Page 086]
haſtily from the coach, and only taking with her a ſmall
portmanteau, containing a neceſſary change of linen, got
into the chaiſe, and though drawn as quick as four horſes
could carry her, ſhe thought every moment an hour, ſo
anxious was ſhe to arrive in Bedford-Square.
CHAP. XIX.
SEDUCTION. It was very late when Rebecca entered London, and
ſhe was not enough acquainted with the ſtreets to know
whether ſhe was going right or wrong; therefore, when
the chaiſe ſtopped in a large ſquare, ſhe jumped eagerly
out and ran into the houſe, without once conſidering
whether ſhe knew the place; but when ſhe had got in the
hall and the door was ſhut, juſt as ſhe was going to run
up ſtairs, the ſtaircaſe, which was different to the one ſhe
had been uſed to, ſtruck her, and turning haſtily round to
demand why ſhe was brought to a ſtrange place, ſhe
the parlour door open, and in an inſtant Lord Oſſiter was
at her feet.
“Good God!” ſaid ſhe, “where am I? why am I
thus betrayed?”
“You are not betrayed my adorable Miſs Littleton,”
ſaid he; “let me entreat you to be calm. Grieved to the
ſoul that Lady Oſſiter ſhould have treated you ſo unworthily,
I made uſe of an innocent ſtratagem to bring you
back, that I might obtain your pardon, and convince you
that I am ready to expiate, with my life, the offence ſhe
has committed againſt you.”
“If that is all,” cried Rebecca, ſcarcely able to reſpire,
through terror, aſſure yourſelf I have forgiven you, my
Lord, and will pardon the deceit you have been guilty
of, if you will ſuffer me inſtantly to quit this houſe, where
every moment I remain fills me with anguiſh and terror.”
“Why do you wiſh to quit this houſe, my dear angel,”
ſaid he, forcibly leading her into the parlour; “it is your
own, every thing in it is your's; all the ſervants are ready
to obey your commands.” Then ringing the bell, he ordered
all the ſervants to appear, and bid them conſider
[Page 087]
Rebecca as their miſtreſs, and obey her, as they valued
his future favour.
“Ah, my friends,” ſaid Rebeca, “do not attend to
what he ſays; I have no right to command you, I am only
a ſervant, like yourſelves, and ſuch I wiſh to remain; only
continue to me, juſt heaven!” cried ſhe, fervently raiſing
her eyes and hands, “my innocence unſullied, and my
integrity of mind unſhaken.”
“Be compoſed my deareſt love,” ſaid his Lordſhip,
diſmiſſing the ſervants, “no harm ſhall happen to you while
under my protection.”
“Oh!” cried ſhe, in an agony, “I ſee, unleſs ſome protecting
angel hovers over me, I am threatened with the
worſt of dangers. Let me go, Sir! by what authority
do you detain me here.”
“Whither would you go, my dear creature at this late
hour; if you quit this houſe no reputable door will open to
receive you, and I am ſure, my ſweet Rebecca would
not enter a houſe of infamy.”
“Alas! alas! my Lord, I fear I have done that already,
though heaven knows how innocently.
“My lovely girl, do but compoſe your agitated ſpirits,
and every thing will appear to you in a different light; let
me ſend your own woman to you, ſhe ſhall wait on you to
your own apartment, where I beg you will take ſome refreshment,
and endeavour to repoſe yourſelf; I ſwear to
you, Rebecca, I will not enter your chamber till you give
me leave.”
“Merciful heaven!” cried Rebecca, “what will become
of me?”
Lord Oſſiter retired, and an elderly woman made her
appearance with candles.
Rebecca for a few moments ſtood irreſolute; at length
ſhe determined to go up ſtairs with the woman, and by a
pretended calmneſs, endeavoured to ſound her principles,
and whether ſhe was entirely devoted to the intereſt of her
Lord. When ſhe was in the apartment which the woman
called her own, ſhe ſat down on a ſofa, and calmly inquired
who ſlept in the adjoining apartment.
“I do, Madam,” was the anſwer.
“Have you been long in this houſe?”
“I was only hired yeſterday, Madam; and my Lord's
[Page 088]
gentleman informed me the houſe was taken for a young
lady, a relation of his maſter's, who was expected from
the country.”
“And when do you expect ſhe will arrive?” ſaid Rebecca,
with aſſumed indifference.
“Madam,” cried the woman, ſtaring, “are you not
the lady?”
“No, indeed I am no relation of his Lordſhip's; I
lived in his family, as a ſervant to dreſs, undreſs, and
teach Miſs Oſſiter to read.”
“But you are juſt come from the country now, Madam?”
“I was on my journey into the country, when I was
fetched back again. I underſtood Miſs Oſſiter was ill.”
“My Lord undoubtedly has a great regard for you,
and means to give you in this houſe a brilliant establishment.
You can ſurely have no objection to exchange servitude
for affluence.”
“It is a deſirable change, certainly, if made on honourable
terms.”
“Liberality, my dear Madam, is ſometimes an equivalent
for honour.”
“Are theſe your real ſentiments?” ſaid Rebecca, with
a ſcrutinizing look.
“They are the ſentiments of one half of the world—”
“But had you a child, would you talk to her in this
ſtrain; would you wiſh her to barter all ſhe ought to hold
dear in life, for the paltry conſideration of ſplendour?”
She looked, as ſhe ſpoke, earneſtly in the woman's face:
it was an entreating, ſupplicating look, and the tears
guſhed from her eyes.
“I had a daughter once,” replied the attendant, (whom
we ſhall diſtinguiſh by the name of Harris:) “ſhe was
lovely as you are—ſhe was once as innocent; but innocence
could not ſhield her from the calumny of the world,
and ill treatment depraved a heart formed for the love and
practice of virtue.” She pauſed, her eyes filled, and Rebecca
began to hope ſhe ſhould find a friend that would
aſſiſt her in eſcaping the artful ſnare ſpread by Lord
Oſſiter, to entrap her innocence.
Mrs. Harris, finding her remain ſilent, left the room,
and in about ten minutes returned with a boiled chicken,
[Page 089]
which ſhe entreated Rebecca to take part of before ſhe
retired to reſt.
“I am totally unable to take any reſt,” ſaid Rebecca;
“but where is my Lord?”
“Gone home, and left his valet, in conjunction with
myſelf, to wait your commands.”
“Or rather to be my jailers,” ſaid Rebecca;” “but
come, Mrs. Harris, (for ſhe had inquired her name) come
ſit down, and if you will partake my ſupper, I will endeavour
to eat ſome. You were ſpeaking of your daughter,
I ſhould like to hear ſomething more concerning her.”
“Ah, Madam, her ſtory is but ſhort, but it will melt
your heart; indeed I do not know that I ſhould tell it
you at this time, but ſomething whiſpers me, it will be
right to give you ſome information concerning the villainy
of men. Perhaps you have a mother, Miſs.”
“I have,” replied Rebecca, her thoughts inſtantly reverting
to her dear native village.
“Oh, may ſhe never experience the anguiſh of heart I
have felt, in ſeeing her darling loſt to every ſenſe of ſhame
in this world, and to every hope of peace in the next.
“My huſband was a reputable tradeſman; we poſſeſſed
not the luxuries of life, but we enjoyed its comforts, and
were content. We had but one child; ſhe was the joy
of our hearts, the prop on which we reſted for happineſs.
My huſband had a ſiſter who had lived many years a
houſekeeper with a nobleman: this ſiſter was godmother
to my girl, who was chriſtened Jane, in compliment to
her. When Jenny was thirteen, her aunt declared ſhe would
give her a couple of years at a reſpectable boarding ſchool,
and then think about ſetting her in ſome way of getting
her bread.
“I had forgot to tell you, Miſs, that my huſband and
ſelf lived upwards of twenty miles from London, and it
was with great difficulty we brought ourſelves to part with
our darling; but confidering it would be for her intereſt to
go with her aunt, we at length conſented, and were satisfied
with ſeeing her at holliday time, and exulted not a
little at the evident improvement diſcernable in her perſon
and manners, whenever ſhe renewed her viſit. The two
years were paſt, and Jenny, taken from ſchool, was placed
[Page 090]
with an eminent milliner, in which buſineſs her aunt promised
to ſet her up when her apprenticeſhip expired.
“It happened one day, when ſhe had been to dine with
her aunt, that going up the front ſtairs, to fetch ſomething
from an upper apartment, ſhe was met by a young gentleman,
who ſtopped, made room for her, and bowed as
ſhe paſſed him. The next day, as ſhe was at work in the
ſhop, the ſame gentleman came in and aſked to look at
ſome gloves; ſhe aroſe to ſerve him. “Bleſs me, Miſs,”
ſaid he, “did I not ſee you yeſterday at Lord Melvin's?”
She anſwered in the affirmative.
“I was there,” ſaid he, careleſsly, “to receive her
Ladyſhip's order concerning the alteration of ſome furniture.
I have the honour to do the moſt of the upholstery
buſineſs for them.”
“They then fell into chat. He wondered he had never
ſeen her before, as he was ſo well acquainted with her aunt,
and begged leave ſometimes to call and inquire after her
health. From this an intimacy took place, and Mr. Smith
made propoſals of marriage, which were approved of by
the aunt: he even mentioned buying her indentures of her
miſtreſs, that the union might be expedited. But in the
midſt of this Jenny could not help remarking, that Mr.
Smith never aſked her to his houſe; but her aunt ſaid it
was his tenderneſs for her reputation that prevented him.
And he began to hint that he had made ſeveral lucky hits
in the lottery, and ſhould leave off buſineſs, or at leaſt
throw it into ſuch a line, that a few hours attendance every
day would be ſufficient, and the reſt might be performed
by perſons whom he would employ for that purpoſe.
Things were in this ſtate when we were wrote to, and the
match, as repreſented by her aunt, being every way beyond
our expectations, we freely gave our conſent; nay, ſo delighted
were we with the hope of her being ſo well ſettled,
that we made our neighbours partakers of our joys, and
our daughter's good fortune was univerſally talked of.
One evening, as we were ſitting in our little parlour, talking
of our future proſpects, among which was the hope of
ſeeing our dear girl and her huſband, immediately after
her marriage, we were ſtartled by a loud rap at the door,
and Mr. Harris having opened it, our poor Jenny ruſhed
in, pale, breathleſs, and to all appearance ſinking with
[Page 091]
fatigue. My love, you are welcome, ſaid I, catching her
in my arms; this is kind indeed to make us ſo early a viſit —but where is your huſband?”
“Huſband!” ſaid ſhe, wildly; “I have no huſband.
Who told you I was married?”
“Your aunt wrote us word, my dear, you were to
have been married four days ſince.”
“She laid her hand upon her forehead, as though endeavouring
to recollect ſomething.” “I believe it was ſo,”
ſaid ſhe, “but that aunt of mine is a ſad woman, for
though I thought I was married, it was all a falſehood.
And do you know, my dear mother, I am a poor undone
creature; but do not ſpurn me from you—indeed I am
not wilfully guilty.”
“Here ſhe pauſed, and, ſinking on her knees before us,
her emotions became ſo violent, that ſhe was unable to
proceed, and we conveyed her to bed, in a ſtate little
ſhort of abſolute diſtraction. For ſeveral days ſhe was unable
to give us any account of what had befallen her. She
was feveriſh, ſometimes delirous, and when any lucid intervals
appeared, too weak and languid to be capable of
ſpeaking more than two or three words at a time. When
ſhe began to recover, ſhe gave us an account that almoſt
broke our hearts; indeed her father never held up his head
again, but drooped and pined till a conſumption put a
period to his exiſtence.”
CHAP. XX.
DELIVERANCE. “ She told us, that at the time appointed her miſtreſs
gave up her indentures to Mr. Smith, and ſhe accompanied
her aunt and lover to his houſe, which was situated
in a newly built ſtreet: was ſmall, but commodious,
and elegantly furniſhed; which ſhe attributed to his having
been in that way of buſineſs. Here, it ſeems, they
were, as ſhe thought, married; Mr. Smith ſaying, he had
an objection to public weddings, and did not mind a little
extra expence to have things conducted with delicacy and
[Page 092]
privacy. Two days after her marriage, her huſband ſaid
he ſhould be obliged to leave her for the night, having a
little buſineſs to tranſact a few miles out of town, but he
would be with her again by dinner the next day. After
he was gone, feeling herſelf rather ſolitary, ſhe put on
her hat and cloak and went to her miſtreſs's, where ſhe
found ſeveral of her old companions preparing to go
to the play. This being a diverſion ſhe was fond of, but
little perſuaſion was neceſſary to get her to join the party;
accordingly, attended by a genteel young man, they proceeded
to Covent-Garden, and got a very excellent ſeat
in the two ſhilling gallery. The firſt act of the play
was nearly finiſhed, when a little buſtle in the ſtage-box
occaſioning Jenny to look that way, ſhe ſaw her huſband
enter, leading a very plain woman, ſuperbly dreſſed, and
take his ſeat beſide her on the front row.
“Look, Lucy,” ſaid ſhe, to one of her companions,
“would you not almoſt ſwear that was Mr. Smith.”
“Why, it is Mr. Smith,” returned the girl, innocently,
“I am ſure it is him.”
“If,” ſaid the young man who was with them, “you
mean the gentleman in the ſtage box, with that ordinary
woman, you are miſtaken in the name; that is Mr. Ponsonville,
eldeſt ſon to the earl of Melvin.”
“But I am ſure you are miſtaken,” cried Lucy, with
vivacity. “You will give a lady leave to know her own
huſband, I hope, and Mrs. Smith here claims that gentleman
as her property.”
“I am ſorry for it,” replied the young man, “for I
am convinced that is Mr. Ponſonville, and that Lady beside
him is his wife; my father has made his clothes ever
ſince he was a boy.”
“Jenny, who had ſat in ſilent agitation during this little
dialogue, now ventured to aſk if he meant the ſon of
Lord Melvin, of Melvin Court.”
“The ſame,” he replied.
“A confuſed idea now ruſhed into her mind, that ſhe
had been vilely betrayed. She was ſenſible that the perſon
ſhe ſaw was the man ſhe called her huſband; and if he was
in reality Mr. Ponſonville, and the huſband of another
ſhe was utterly ruined. Theſe reflexions prevented her
having any enjoyment of the play, and at the end of it ſhe
[Page 093]
requeſted the young man to ſee her into a hackney-coach,
as ſhe found herſelf not inclined to ſee the entertainment.
She drove immediately to her aunt's, but the coachman
was not able to draw up to the door, on account of ſeveral
carriages. She got out at the corner of the ſquare, and
proceeded on foot to the houſe, where ſhe arrived juſt as
an elegant chariot drew up. Curioſity led her to go near,
in order to ſee the gueſts alight. The chariot door opened,
and Mr. Ponſonville alighted, handing out the ſame lady
ſhe had ſeen at the play. This was proof ſufficient; ſhe
was too near then to be deceived—Ponſonville and Smith
were the ſame. She ſtaggered a few ſteps forward, faintly
articulated his name, and ſunk lifeleſs on the pavement.
“Mrs. Ponſonville, though plain in her perſon, possessed
a humane heart: ſhe ſaw her fall, and ordered the servants
to raiſe her and carry her in, and giving orders for
her to be taken care of, left her. Whatever Ponſonville's
feelings were, he diſguiſed them ſo well, his lady did not
in the leaſt ſuſpect his intereſt in the fainting Jane. And,
having informed Lady Melvin of what had happened, ſhe
requeſted that the orders ſhe had given might be enforced
by her Ladyſhip; and Harris was ordered to take particular
care of the young woman. The ſervant ſummoned
to receive theſe commands informed her Ladyſhip that it
was Miſs Harris, who, they imagined, was coming to ſee
her aunt, who had fainted, and that ſhe was now recovering
and in the houſekeeper's room; the Ladies therefore
imagining ſhe was in good hands, made no farther inquiry.
“When Jenny recovered ſhe began lamenting her hard
fate, and accuſing her aunt of deceiving her; but that
kind relation would not let her proceed.”
“What would the fool be at,” ſaid ſhe; “keep your
own ſecret, and nobody that you need care for will be the
wiſer; beſides I have had your intereſt at heart and your
fortune is made. Here (continued ſhe, going to a beaureau)
here is a ſettlement of five hundred a year as long
as you live.”
“Jenny caught the parchment from her, and tore it in
pieces: “Thus periſh, (ſaid ſhe) every ſign of my dishonour—
what are riches without innocence.”—“As you
have loſt the one, you might as well have kept the other,”
ſaid her aunt.
[Page 094]
“Jenny left the houſe without deigning a reply. The
next morning early Ponſonville was with her. Hard was
the ſtruggle between love and honour; for ſhe really
loved her ſeducer with the moſt enthuſiaſtic paſſion. His
ſighs, his tears were infectious; ſhe requeſted till the next
day to conſider, but ſhe was well convinced to deliberate
was to be loſt, and be had no ſooner left her, than ſhe
ordered a chaiſe, and flew for protection to the arms of
her parents.
“But we ſoon diſcovered that the poor girl's misfortune
would be made public. We were pitied by ſome,
laughed at and ridiculed by others, and the finger of
ſcorn was pointed at my unfortunate child whenever ſhe
ventured abroad. We ſold all our little poſſeſſions, and
repaired to London, where we thought to hide our ſhame
in obſcurity. Here my poor huſband paid the debt of
nature, and Jenny became the mother of a fine boy.
As ſhe paſſed for a widow, and was in the full bloom
of beauty, it is not to be wondered that ſhe ſhould be
addreſſed on the ſcore of marriage by a young man who
kept a perſumery and toy-ſhop in the neighbourhood.
Jenny's heart was ſtill too full of the idea of Ponſonville
to ſuffer any other attachment to grow on it; but poverty
began to ſtare us in the face: ſhe ſaw on one ſide, a
mother, a child pining with want, no protector, no friend
to comfort and relieve them; on the other, a home, a
protector, and a place of refuge for thoſe objects ſo dear
to her heart. She acceded to his propoſal and was married.
Three years paſſed on in tranquillity at leaſt, and
my daughter was the mother of another boy and a girl,
but I ſaw ſhe was not deſtined to be happy: her huſband
was frequently moroſe and peeviſh, and ſpent much of
his time at clubs and public houſes. But I knew they
had a good buſineſs, and therefore did not dread her
experiencing the evils of poverty. One day, as I was in
the ſhop, I ſaw a chariot draw up, and immediately called
Jenny to attend. She came juſt as the gentleman
deſcended and entered the ſhop. “Good heaven!” exclaimed
he. Jenny turned pale and leaned againſt the
counter. The gentleman recollected himſelf—“Is not
your name Harris?” ſaid he, advancing.
[Page 095]
“No,” ſaid ſhe, ſaintly, “it once was, but I am
married.”
“Curſed fate!” cried he, vehemently. “I am at
liberty, and have ſought you with unremitting diligence,
to do you the juſtice your virtue merits.”—At that instant
her eldeſt boy ran into the ſhop. Mother, ſaid
he, taking her hand.
“And whoſe is this cherub?” ſaid he, taking the boy
on his knee, for he had ſeated himſelf.
“Mine,” replied Jenny.—“And what is your name,
my ſweet fellow?” to the child.
“Ponſonville Smith,” ſaid the boy.
“Ponſonville,” cried he, viſibly agitated. “Ponsonville;—
and how old are you?”
“Four years laſt Chriſtmas.”
“Jenny,” cried he, taking hold of her hand. “Jenny,
my love, how like a villain I have behaved to this boy
and you.”
“He drew her towards him with one hand, while
he embraced the child with the other. She ſunk on a
ſeat beſide him, her head ſell on his ſhoulder, and they
both wept.—What a moment was this for the huſband
to enter,—he did enter. Jenny ſtarted, a deep bluſt
was ſucceeded by a deadly paleneſs, and it was with difficulty
we got her into the parlour.
“Ponſonville, now Lord Melvin, made ſome trifling
purchaſe, and went away. I ſaw the ſtorm that lowered
on her huſband's brow; it burſt forth in cruel invective,
and, having traced Lord Melvin, and from ſome
officious perſon learnt the whole ſtory, he was not content
with reproach only, but added even blows, and at length
proceeded to that pitch of brutality as to turn my child
and her unoffending offspring into the ſtreet. Lord
Melvin called to inquire for his boy,—he heard the tidings,
and never reſted till he diſcovered our place of
retreat. Miſerable indeed was the apartment where he
found his Jenny. He offered her independence for herself,
her mother, and children. I bluſh to add the remainder,
but let no one boaſt their virtue till the cold hand
of poverty has tried its ſtrength to the utmoſt. Jenny
accepted his propoſals, and for ſeven years, affluence
was her portion—but alas, not content; her heart bled,
[Page 096]
her anguiſh was undeſcribable, but ſhe wore the ſmile of
conent on her face, and the misjudging world thought
her happy. Alas! (ſhe would ſay) alas! my children,
what does your mother ſacrifice for you. But my Lord
died ſuddenly, and died inteſtate: there was ſome flaw
found in the ſettlement made on Jenny, by his heir, and
ſhe was again reduced to poverty. When the human
mind has gone a few ſteps in vice, how eaſy does it proceed:
my Jenny had aſſociated with women whoſe situation
were like her own; by degrees her mind loſt that
ſtrong ſenſe of rectitude which nature had implanted
there, and ſhe yielded, without compunction, to the
ſolicitations of another lover. I will proceed no farther;
ſhe is now gone, and in her laſt hours regretted the loſs
of that purity of heart which alone could have enabled
her to meet that awful moment with compoſure.”
The tears that ſell from Mrs. Harris's eyes encouraged
Rebecca. She ſlid from her ſeat on her knees before
her. “And can you, my dear Mrs. Harris,” ſaid ſhe,
in a moſt perſuaſive tone of voice, “Can you, who have
felt ſo much for a child, behold a poor forlorn creature,
who, unleſs you help her, muſt be inevitably loſt—plunged
into that abyſs of guilt and miſery which muſt ſink
her beneath the regard of every virtuous perſon. Oh! rather
ſtretch forth thy hand and ſave her. I am innocent
now, be thou my guardian angel, and deliver me from
this dreadful place. I can work, Mrs. Harris,—I am not
aſhamed to work, even in the meaneſt capacity—I will be
aſhamed of nothing but diſhonour.”
Mrs. Harris raiſed her, and ſpoke to her words of comfort.
They ſat together till the clock ſtruck four, and
then, taking off their ſhoes and putting out the light,
they ſtole ſoftly down ſtairs and out at the ſtreet door.
Mrs. Harris knew where ſhe ſhould find a ſtand of nightcoaches,
and proceeding there without moleſtation, they
got into one, and drove to a decent looking houſe in the
Borough, the miſtreſs of which readily admitted them,
and Rebecca having offered up her thankſgiving to the
protector of innocence, retired to a homely but clean bed,
and enjoyed ſeveral hours of uninterrupted repoſe.
[Page 097]
CHAPTER XXI.
A NEW PLACE.
When Rebecca awoke ſhe found herſelf greatly
refreſhed, and aroſe with a heart deeply impressed
with gratitude to Mrs. Harris, who had thus
unexpectedly delivered her from the worſt of all evils.
She went down ſtairs, and as ſhe was taking her breakfast
began to talk of what ſhe muſt do in future. I had
ſome intention of returning to my mother, (ſaid ſhe)
but I think now I had rather endeavour to get a place.
I have but a triſle in my purſe, but by writing to Lincolnshire
I can have my trunks returned, and I have
ſome money in them, and I will beg your acceptance
of part of it for the eminent ſervice you have
rendered me; in the meantime I ſhall be much obliged
to you if you could recommend me to a place, if you
heard of any thing which you thought would ſuit me.”
Mrs. Harris and her friend gave our heroine a cordial
invitation to remain with them till ſhe could hear
from her mother, and promiſed to inquire for a place
which might ſuit her abilities, as ſhe ſeemed to wiſh to
wait on a very young lady, or be companion to an elderly
one, as ſhe was certain her conſtitution would not
ſuffer her to engage with a woman of faſhion, who kept
a great deal of company and late hours, of which ſhe
had experienced a ſufficient ſpecimen in Lady Oſſiter.
Rebecca addreſſed a letter to her mother, briefly informing
her ſhe had left her Lady and was in queſt of
another place. That ſhe had at firſt intended to return
home, and to that end had forwarded her trunk,
which ſhe requeſted might be ſent to town again by the
firſt conveyance. In about four days ſhe received the
following anſwer.
Letter
“DEAR CHILD,
“I am ſorry to find you have left Lady Oſſiter as I
imagine you muſt have groſsly offended her Ladyſhip
[Page 098]
before ſhe could have parted with you, as you was ſuch
a favorite with her mother; however, Rebecca, you
choſe to leave your father's houſe, and to conduct yourself
by the advice of ſtrangers, you therefore know beſt
child, what you are about; I ſhall not take upon me to
adviſe, where my advice will be diſregarded. As to
coming into the country, I think it would be putting
yourſelf to a needleſs expence, as I know you would never
be happy to ſtay here: and ſenſible as I was of
that, you cannot wonder I have choſen a companion
and protector for myſelf, and by uniting with the worthy
Mr. Serle, have upon his daughter and family a claim
to thoſe tenderneſſes and attentions I in vain expected
from my own child. Mr. Serle went to the inn and inquired
for your trunk, but we can hear nothing of it;
you muſt therefore inquire for it at the inn from whence
the coach ſets out in London.
“As you always were, or pretended to be a little
philoſopher, I have no doubt but you will get very
well through the world; and you have youth and a
good conſtitution on your ſide. I ſhall always be glad
to hear of your welfare; above all things, Rebecca, be
modeſt and virtuous, and mind your religious duties,
as your poor father and I always taught you; and never
forget that you have a mother who loves you, and to
whom all your duty and reſpect is due. Mr. Serle and
Miſs Peggy deſire me to give their beſt wiſhes to you,
though they have no acquaintance with you.
I am, dear child,
Your affectionate mother,
R. SERLE.”
Section Rebecca's ſenſations, on the receipt of this letter,
are better imagined than deſcribed. Scarcely fix months
had elapſed ſince the death of her father, and her mother
was married again—that mother, who, but a ſhort
time ſince, had declared, that to be ſuſpected capable of
admitting a ſecond partner, was an inſult that hurt her
feelings exceſſively.
Rebecca now felt that ſhe was in reality a poor solitary
being, without a home, and almoſt without a friend;
[Page 099]
to be ſure Mrs. Harris had been very kind to her, but
could ſhe expect that kindneſs to laſt when ſhe had loſt
the power of making her any recompenſe. However
ſhe determined to make ſome inquiry concerning her
trunk, and to that end requeſted Mrs. Harris to accompany
her; but all the tidings ſhe could learn was,
that the coachman had left it in the country, and that
he had ſince heard it had been taken away by a perſon
who ſaid he came from Miſs Littleton herſelf, with orders
to pay all neceſſary expences.
“Was there any thing of much value in the trunk?”
ſaid Mrs. Harris.
“Alas!” cried Rebecca, “there was the greateſt
part of my clothes, and a five hundred pound bank
note, which I had to keep for a perſon who is gone
abroad.”
“Pray, child, what kind of a man is this father-in-law
of your's?”
“Indeed I can hardly tell you; he never viſited my
father during his life, nor did I ever ſee him above twice,
except at church; he has been a widower ſome years,
and has one daughter; he is an attorney by profeſſion,
but I believe he had never much practice.”
“Perhaps your mother's annuity was the object that
invited this marriage.”
“It may be ſo, but I can hardly think it, for at the
utmoſt it is not more than forty pounds year. My
mother has an agreeable perſon, and lively manner; I
do not think it improbable but he may have married
her for love.”
“I do not think it improbable but he has got your
trunk.”
“Dear, Mrs. Harris, how can you ſuggeſt ſuch a
thing; you quite ſhock me.”
“Shock you or not, I think that is really the caſe,
and I would adviſe you to purſue legal methods to discover
it.”
“No,” cried Rebecca, reſolutely, “never; I cannot
bring myſelf to ſuſpect that my mother would unite
herſelf to a man capable of ſuch an action, and if that
[Page 100]
were really the caſe, I hope I have too high a ſenſe of
ſilial reſpect to attempt expoſing her to the malicious
cenſures of a world, who would not fail to involve her,
however innocent, in her huſband's guilt. My own interest
ſhall ever give way to her peace of mind, for ſhe
was the choſen companion, the boſom friend of the beſt
of fathers, and though ſhe ſeems to have forgot that I am
her child, I can never forget ſhe is my mother.”
“All this may be very clever, for what I know,” ſaid
Mrs. Harris, “but I am ſure, in my opinion, it is very
ridiculous. You will find, my poor ſimple child, your
ſix guineas will go but a little way towards buying you
clothes fit for a decent place; however, we muſt not
meet troubles half way, it will be time enough when you
have got a place, to think about preparing to go to it;
but I have an acquaintance lives in this ſtreet, who perhaps
may have it in her power to help you to ſomething.”
They called on the perſon mentioned, who was lady's
woman in an opulent merchant's family. Mrs. Harris
mentioned Rebecca's intentions, and learnt that there
was a country lady, then on a viſit to this family, who had
parted with her maid, and was in want of one to ſupply
her place. Rebecca thought ſhe could venture to take
ſuch a ſituation in a regular quiet family. She was introduced
to the Lady, who, ſtruck with her lovely person
and modeſt demeanour, conceived an inſtant prepossession
in her favour, and engaged her, upon liberal terms,
to enter her ſervice on that day week.
Rebecca ſelt extremely happy that ſhe ſhould no longer
be a burden upon the kind Mrs. Harris, and eagerly
ſet about preparing as well as the narrow ſtate of her finances
would allow, to take poſſeſſion of her new place.
Mrs. Barton (the name of Rebecca's miſtreſs) was a
pleaſing lively brunette, about twenty years old. She
had married, when very young, contrary to the advice
of her friends, a young man of ſmall fortune and rather
flightly character, but ſhe had twenty thouſand pounds
at her own diſpoſal, and her motto was, “All for love.”
Barton was really attached to her in the firſt years of
their marriage, but his temper was too verſatile to belong
[Page 101]
conſtant to any thing, he in time grew cool, and often
played her falſe, but ſhe was of ſuch an even, cheerful,
unſuſpecting temper, ſo unaffectedly tender, ſo attentive
to his intereſt, and ſtudious of his peace, that he found
it impoſſible to treat her with unkindneſs, ſo that there
was always an appearance of much cordiality between
them, for though ſhe could not ſhut her eyes and ears
upon his infidelities, ſhe wiſely concluded it was prudent
ſometimes to be wilfully deaf and blind, and that if good
humour would not reclaim him, ill humour would certainly
make him worſe.
With this couple Rebecca went into Shropſhire, a few
weeks after ſhe entered Mrs. Barton's ſervice. Their
houſe was a venerable gothic building, ſituated in the
midſt of a beautiful park, and had fallen to Mrs. Barton
on the death of her godfather, from whom alſo ſhe
inherited her independent fortune. Rebecca found herself
much at her eaſe, Mrs. Barton was very kind to her,
and finding ſhe poſſeſſed an intelligent mind, often made
her the companion of her rambles about the grounds and
adjacent country. Mr. Barton troubled his lady but little
with his company, except at meals, and ſometimes not
then: nay, he even went ſo far as to ſleep from home several
nights in the week; and this being a liberty he had
never before taken, without his wife being informed of
the cauſe, ſhe felt herſelf really uncaſy, and, though
when he was preſent ſhe aſſumed her uſual cheerfulneſs,
it was impoſſible to conquer her feelings, ſo as not to
let her chagrin and mortification appear to Rebecca,
who ſincerely pitied, and by every affiduity in her power,
endeavoured to amuſe and entertain her. Mrs. Barton
kept but little company; ſhe was fond of reading,
drawing, muſic, and fancy works; in theſe ſhe discovered
Rebecca's taſte and knowledge, and many was the
heavy hour ſhe beguiled in joining the labours of her lady,
improving her judgment, and with the ſweeteſt diffidence
and humility correcting her errors.
In the mean time Lord Oſſiter provoked beyond
meaſure, that a ſcheme he had imagined infallible,
ſhould have proved totally abortive, diſpatched his
[Page 102]
faithful valet off to Lincolnſhire, in hopes to find the fair
fugitive there, and get her once more into his power;
but here he was again foiled; for though Rebecca had
wrote to her mother, that ſhe had engaged with a Mrs.
Barton, yet ſhe had not mentioned in what part of the
country the family uſually reſided, ſo that the faithful
ambaſſador returned to his diſappointed Lord without
the leaſt conciliatory intelligence.
CHAP. XXII.
SCHOOL FOR WIVES. The viſits of Barton from home became now too
long and too frequently repeated not to give his
wife ſerious cauſe for uneaſineſs; ſhe ſecretly reſolved
to diſcover, if poſſible, to whom he devoted ſo large a
portion of his time.
Now it ſo happened, that about ſeven miles from
Belle Park, on the ſide of a craggy hill, watered by an
impetuous ſtream, that ruſhed from the upper part of
the declivity, ſtood an old mill, and by the ſide of the
mill ſtood an old thatched cottage, within which lived
an old couple, who had a very young and a very lovely
grand daughter. Now, though this old man was the
owner of the mill and cottage, and ground many a buſhel
of corn for his poor neighbours, of which he never failed
to take his regular toll; yet it ſo happened that he
was but poor himſelf. The cottage, we have ſaid, was
old, ſo that the chilling blaſts of winter, and the scorching
heats of ſummer found eaſy entrance through its
ſhattered frame; but Dolly, the blooming Dolly, was
the pride of their hearts, and often as they ſat smoaking
their evening's pipe, they would gaze on her
[Page 103]
sparkling black eyes, ruddy complexion, and delicate ſhape,
and cry, “Ah, ſurely that girl is born to be the comfort
of our old age; ſhe is ſo handſome, there is no doubt
but ſhe will get a ſquire for a huſband, or, mayhap,
the Lord of the Manor. Ah, bleſs the dear face of it,
I ſhall live to ſee her a great lady I warrant, and then it
will ſend ſome people to mend old grandad's cottage,
and repair the crazy old mill.” Theſe were the waking
dreams of doating age, for alas Dolly had reached her
ſeventeenth year and no ſquire had yet made his appearance,
to verify her grandmother's prophecy. However
about this time one of Mr. Barton's footmen, a
ſmart lad, about nineteen years old, ſaw this paragon of
ruſtic beauty at a neighbouring fair, and, unfortunately
for his maſter's horſes, from that day whenever he was
diſpatched to the neighbouring town or villages, on
meſſages, errands, or what not, he always found the old
miller's cottage lay directly in the way between Belle
Park and the place to which he was diſpatched.
One evening Mr. Barton having mounted his horſe,
and called Thomas to attend him in his intended excursion,
being undetermined which way to go, aſked the
lad if he had diſcovered lately any new ride, for, he
ſaid, I have gone the old track ſo often I am weary of
it. Thomas, full of the charms of Dolly, and eager to
embrance the ſmalleſt opportunity of beholding them, or
at leaſt the cottage that contained them, aſked his master
if he had ever rode by Gaffer Jobſon's mill.
'Tis not above ſeven miles off, your honour, and is
the ſweeteſt and romanticeſt kind of a place, with trees
and rocks and a river: then the mill is ſo old, your honour,
that it looks, for all the world, like the places we
read about in ſtory books.
Barton ſmiled, and being directed by Thomas as to
the road he was to take, cantered off, followed by the
happy lover, exulting in the thought of ſeeing his mistress,
though it were but for a moment. But, perhaps,
thought he, maſter may look at the place, and then I
can ſlip in for a minute, and juſt ſpeak to Dolly.
[Page 104]
Alas poor Thomas thou art as blind as many other
wiſe politicians, or thou wouldſt never have taken thy
maſter to ſee the cottage and the mill.
The ſun was beginning to withdraw itſelf behind the
hill tops, when Gaffer having lighted his pipe and Gammor
ſet by her wheel, had ſeated themſelves on the ſteps
of their cottage, to talk over old times, and dream, as
uſual, of Dolly's good fortune. Dolly had juſt tied on
a clean coloured apron, ſmoothed back her luxuriant
cheſnut hair, and ſeated beneath a tree not far diſtant
from the door, was earneſtly contriving to diſpoſe to the
beſt advantage three yards of cherry-coloured ribbon
which Thomas had given her, round a chip hat, in
which ſhe thought to outſhine all her companions the
next Sunday at church. Lifting her eyes from this
very intereſting employment, who ſhould ſhe ſee but
the identical Mr. Thomas and a fine young gentleman
riding towards the mill.
Up ſhe bounced. “See, ſee, grandad,” ſaid ſhe,
eagerly, “ſee you fine gentleman and Mr. Thomas.”
She ſpoke loud, the evening was ſerene; her voice
vibrated on the ear of Barton; he turned his head, the
old mill, the trees, and rocks were no longer intereſting
objects. “I will have a little chat with the old man,”
ſaid he, guiding his horſe that way, but his eyes were
fixed on the lovely form of Dolly. He chatted with
the old couple till it was nearly dark, and as he rode
homeward could think only on the charms of their
grand-daughter. The next evening he rode that way
again, unattended, talked ſomething about repairing
the mill, and kiſſed Dolly at parting. Another and
another interview ſucceeded. Thomas was conſtantly
kept employed at home, and a few guineas, a new
gown, and two or three glittering gewgaws had the
power to baniſh him as entirely from Dolly's memory
as though he had never held a place there. The ſquire,
as ſhe called him, occupied all her thought, and, awell-a-day
for poor nature, the ſquire triumphed over all
the virtue Dolly ever poſſeſſed. The old folks too wilfully
ſhut their eyes, and in liſtening to projected
[Page 105]
repairs, and thinking of future proſperity, forgot it was
to be purchaſed by the infamy of their grand-daughter.
But Barton was by no means a liberal lover; he
talked much but performed little, and though he ſlept
ſeveral nights in a week at Gaffer Jobſon's, he was
content to ſleep on their homely mattraſs, nor once
thought of providing another.
Poor Thomas, mortified to the ſoul, could not conceal
his vexation, nor did he make a ſecret of the cauſe
among his fellow ſervants. It was whiſpered from one
to another, till at length it reached Mrs. Barton; not
from Rebecca, for ſhe would not have told ſuch a tale
to a diſtreſſed wife, to obtain the higheſt conſideration;
ſhe would have feared the effect it would have had on her
feelings, and agonized with the poor ſufferer in idea a
thouſand times. But Mrs. Barton was a woman of spirit;
ſhe felt her huſband's neglect ſeverely, but ſhe would
more ſeverely have felt the pity of her ſervants: ſhe took
great care therefore not to appear to need it.
“Do you know child,” ſaid ſhe to Rebecca, one day
as ſhe was aſſiſting her to dreſs; “do you know, child,
that this truant huſband of mine is fallen in love with
ſome chubby faced little chit in the neighbourhood, and
prefers the company of her and her ignorant relations to
my elegant ſociety, and their hard bed and coarſe ſheets
to his own made of down and covered with the fineſt
holland: do you not think the man is turned fool?”
She ſaid this with ſuch a ſmile of good humour that
Rebecca looked ar her with amazement, and heſitatingly
replied, “he is certainly blind to his own happineſs,
Madam.”
“Oh, no; I dare ſay the indulgence of theſe whims
conſtitutes what he calls happineſs, but I muſt confeſs
he ſeems totally indifferent about mine, and as that is
the caſe, I ſhall take what ſteps I think proper to ſecure
ſome for myſelf. Now I have a vaſt deſire to ſee this
irreſiſtable laſs of the mill, and as I know he dines at
Mr. Thornhill's to day, this very afternoon I will pay
her a viſit and you ſhall accompany me.”
[Page 106]
Rebecca thought this an odd ſtep, but ſhe had a very
high opinion of Mrs. Barton's ſenſe and prudence, and
therefore prepared to attend her without intimating the
leaſt diſapprobation of the ſcheme, which ſhe certainly
would have ventured to do, had ſhe not been ſatisfied
that her lady had ſome very good reaſons for her conduct.
About four o'clock they ſtepped into the chariot,
and proceeded to the mill without any attendant. They
left the carriage within a quarter of a mile of the cottage,
and went thither on foot, pretended wearineſs, and
aſked leave to reſt and have a draught of water. “Would
you like a little wine in your water, my Lady,” ſaid the
old woman.
“I ſhould have hardly ſuppoſed,” replied Mrs. Barton,
“that your cottage afforded ſuch a luxury.”
“Why, in good truth, we ne'er had ſuch a thing before,
and now Gaffer and I don't much care for drinking
a'nt, we'd rather have a cup of yale; but the ſquire that
courts our Dolly ſent ſome that he may have a little now
and then when he comes.”
“Your daughter is going to be married then.”
“'Tis my grand-daughter, my Lady,” ſaid the old
woman, courteſying. At that moment the back door
opened and in bounced Dolly. She bluſhed, courteſyed
awkwardly, and would have ſpoke but was at a loſs what
to ſay. Prepared as Mrs. Barton was to ſee ſomething
extremely lovely, the charms of this little ruſtic ſurpaſſed
her imagination. “What a lovely creature,” ſaid ſhe,
ſoftly, to Rebecca; “how could Barton be ſo wantonly
cruel as to contaminate the ſoul which animates this
beauteous form.” The tears ſtarted in her eyes as ſhe
ſpoke, but bruſhed them away unperceived. “And ſo
my dear you are going to be married, I underſtand, and
to a ſquire. I have ſome idea he is a friend of mine. I
believe he ſpends much of his time here, but I think
your accommodations are not very brilliant. You muſt
give me leave to ſend you ſome better furniture, and to
give orders to have your houſe repaired; and ſhould
your lover inquire who it was ordered theſe things, tell
him it was a lady who has a great regard for him, and
lives at the old faſhioned houſe in the park.
[Page 107]
Manifold were the courteſys and awkward acknowledgments
poured forth by the grand-mother and Dolly,
but Mrs. Barton imagined ſhe ſaw in the countenance
of the latter mingled ſhame and regret. “If
we could ſave this poor girl,” ſaid ſhe to Rebecca,
when they were ſeated again in the carriage; “if we
could ſave her and teach her the value of the gem ſhe
has unconſciouſly thrown away, we might then lead her
back to virtue, and, ſpite of her errors, ſhe may yet
become a valuable member of ſociety.”
The carriage drove to the neareſt town, when Mrs.
Barton went to an upholſterer's and ordered whatever
ſhe thought neceſſary, to be taken immediately to the
cottage; ſhe likewiſe engaged a carpenter to ſend people
the next day, to begin the repairs, and on returning
home ſhe diſpatched a large bundle of ſheets, table linen,
&c. by a poor labourer who knew nothing of the
reports current in the family. Rebecca eaſily ſaw her
Lady's deſign, and almoſt trembled for the event, indeed
Mrs. Barton herſelf could ſcarcely have been leſs
agitated. That night Barton returned late, and having
a large party to dine next day, it was impoſſible for
him to viſit his fair Dulcinea till the enſuing morning,
and then, juſt as he was going, a gentleman arrived
from town and detained him till after dinner.
“I ſhall not be at home to-night, Betſey,” ſaid he,
as he mounted his horſe; “I have an engagement with
two or three jovial fellows, and ſhall not like to ride
home late.”
Mrs. Barton ſmiled, I wiſh you a pleaſant evening,”
ſaid ſhe, “and as I am ſure of your being out of the
way I will ſend for my gallant.”
“You threaten well Betſey, but I have too good an
opinion of you to fear their execution.”
“Tea and ſupper was ſerved without Mrs. Barton
being any the better for them; ſhe became violently
agitated; Rebecca was ſummoned to attend her, but
alas Rebecca could not comfort her. The clock had
juſt ſtruck eleven when the bell at the great gate was
rung with violence.
[Page 108]
“He is returned,” ſaid ſhe, “and a few minutes
will now decide my fate. My good Rebecca leave me.”
Barton entered the room with the looks of a condemned
criminal. “Betſey,” ſaid he, “where were
you the day before yeſterday, and how did you employ
your time?”
“Not in a manner diſagreeable to you, I hope,”
ſaid ſhe, mildly; “I had heard how partial you were
to ſleeping at the mill cottage, and I took a ride to ſee
if you were well accommodated; but I found the bed
intolerable, and the houſe in ſuch a miſerable ſlate I
thought you ran great riſques of getting cold, ſo, being
unwilling to loſe you, I thought it was my duty, as a
good wife, to provide you with better conveniences.”
“My dear Betſey how can you talk thus calm,
when you know all my weakneſs—when you know how
I have injured you?”
“Barton,” ſaid ſhe, with a firm look and voice, “I
am not now to learn that I am no longer beloved; but
it was no reaſon becauſe you had grown weary of home,
you ſhould trifle away your life by ſleeping in a place
almoſt entirely open to nightly dews, and unſheltered
even by curtains to your bed. But mark me, my dear
Barton, that I love you, I truſt you have had innumerable
inconteſtable proofs; but if I am no longer beloved,
if my ſociety and endearments can no longer give you
pleaſure, let us part; why ſhould you deprive yourſelf of
the comforts and conveniences of life; let our fortune be
divided; leave me to ſolitude and quiet in this place, and
take your favourite to the Elms. But I charge you,
Barton delay not a day to make her a proper ſettlement,
left you hereafter grow weary of her, and fall a victim to
poverty and infamy: is a beauteous flower, pity it is
ſhe was ever tranſplanted into the garden of folly.”
“Betſey,” ſaid he, dropping on his knees before her,
and taking both her hands, “Betſey, you are an angel,
and I am totally unworthy your forgiveneſs: I ſee my
doom, I ſee my folly has baniſhed all the tenderneſs of
your heart, and you wiſh to be ſeparated from a wretch
who has treated you ſo unworthily.”
[Page 109]
“You are miſtaken, Barton, if you think I wiſh to be
ſeparated from you, could I once more be the miſtreſs
of your affections; to live with you, to love you, to promote
your happineſs would be the pleaſure of my life,
but I cannot have a divided heart; if another is preferred,
let me not, by conſtantly witneſſing your indifference
toward myſelf, ſuffer pains too acute to be borne
without complaining.”
“Oh Betſey! deareſt girl, forgive me, and take my
whole, my undivided heart; do with it what you pleaſe,
it never ſhall again wander from you, its choſen mistress.”
Mrs. Barton could no longer combat the impulſe of
her throbbing heart, ſhe dropped her head on the forehead
of her repentant huſband, and tears of unſeigned joy
ratified their reconciliation.
“But what muſt we do with poor Dolly,” ſaid ſhe,
after a pauſe of a few moments.
“I commit her to your care, my love,” replied Barton,
“ſenſible that you will do whatever is beſt for her
future well doing,—for my part, I will never ſee her
again.”
“Nay, Barton, keep your paſſions under the guidance
of reaſon, and you may ſee her without danger.”
CHAP. XXIV.
THE VOYAGE. Mrs. Barton let no time elapſe in merely forming
plans for Dolly. She took an opportunity to
found Thomas's ſentiments concerning her, and found
the poor lad as deeply in love as ever; “And would you
be willing to marry her, Thomas, provided the mill was
[Page 110]
repaired and ſhe had a few acres of ground well ſtocked?”
Thomas replied in the affirmative, and Dolly being
found no ways unwilling to comply, a few weeks made
them man and wife; Barton deſiring his Lady to ſpare
no expence neceſſary to make them quite comfortable,
and literally kept his promiſe of never ſeeing Dolly
again.
But though his reſolves, in regard to future constancy
were ſeriouſly made, his heart was compoſed of ſuch
inflammable matter, that he no ſooner began to contemplate
the unaſſuming charms of Rebecca, which, from
being much at home, he had now ſufficient leiſure to do,
than he found himſelf puzzled to keep his good resolutions;
and being unaccuſtomed to combat his inclinations,
he found this firſt attempt at ſelf-conqueſt too
painful to be perſevered in: and Mrs. Barton, with anguish
of heart, ſaw he was again relapſing into indifference
and inconſtancy.
Rebecca too ſaw, with evident diſpleaſure, the many
opportunities he took of throwing himſelf in her way.
It was ſometimes impoſſible to avoid liſtening to him on
a ſubject which filled her with diſguſt and ſorrow. He
offered her ſeveral valuable trinkets, which ſhe reſolutely
refuſed to accept; but at length his behaviour became
ſo unequivocal, that Rebecca determined to quit her
amiable miſtreſs, however unwilling to relinquiſh a situation
in which ſhe had enjoyed ſo much tranquillity.
Mrs. Barton quickly diſcovered the motives of our
heroine's intention, and honoured her for them.
“You are a truly amiable girl, Rebecca,” ſaid ſhe,
“and I will not part with you till I can recommend
you to ſome perſon who will be ſenſible of your value.”
The next morning Mrs. Barton informed her that,
during a viſit ſhe had made the preceding afternoon, ſhe
had heard of a ſituation which ſhe thought might prove
highly advantageous to her. “But perhaps,” continued
ſhe, “you would not like to leave England.”
“All places are alike to me,” ſaid Rebecca; “I have
ſo very few friends who intereſt themſelves at all in my
welfare, that provided my mother gives her aſſent, I can
[Page 111]
have no objection to quitting a place where every tie is
broken that once rendered it moſt dear to me.”
“Well then,” ſaid Mrs. Barton, “there is a young
lady who has been in England for her education; ſhe is
now about ſixteen years old, of an amiable temper, and
highly accompliſhed. Her father, who reſides in America,
has ſent for her home, and her governeſs has been
inquiring for a prudent well educated young perſon to
accompany her. The terms offered are fifty guineas,
and all expences paid, and ſhould you not approve residing
there, on your arrival, they will pay your paſſage
back again.
“Colonel Abthorpe is a man of large fortune; he
has formerly ſerved in the army, but at the concluſion
of the war reſigned his commiſſion, and retired to America,
his lady being a native of that place. Miſs Abthorpe
goes out in about fix weeks, and if you ſhould
like to accompany her, I have no doubt but you are the
kind of perſon that will ſuit her.”
Rebecca was pleaſed with the propoſal; ſhe waited
on the lady with whom Miſs Abthorpe had been educated,
and was highly approved of, both by her and
the young lady herſelf. She then wrote to her mother,
and in a few poſts received a letter dictated by her mother,
but wrote by her ſiſter-in-law, and written in ſuch
cold ſlighting terms that ſhe eaſily ſaw they would be
glad to have her ſo far from them, that there might be
no danger of her coming home, in caſe of ſickneſs or
other contingencies; ſhe therefore took leave of the amiable
Mrs. Barton, who could not part from her without
tears, and who preſented her with ſeveral valuable memorials
of her friendſhip.
The day after Rebecca entered Miſs Abthorpe's ſervice
ſhe ſet off for London, where ſhe was to join Mr. Seward's
family, who were to embark on board the ſame ſhip
with her, and under whoſe protection ſhe was to proceed
to New-England. It was late in September when
they arrived in town, and a variety of incidents detained
them till the middle of October, ſo that they had
but an untoward proſpect before them, when ſo late in
[Page 112]
the ſeaſon they embarked at Deal, on board a brig
bound for Boſton. A fair wind preſently took them
out of the channel, and they flattered themſelves with
a proſperous voyage; but theſe flattering appearances
were ſoon reverſed, for the wind ſuddenly changed,
riſing almoſt to a hurricane, ſo that it was impoſſible to
purſue their intended courſe or return to port, and they
continued toſſing about in the Atlantic till the latter
end of December, and then had not half made their
paſſage, though their proviſion was ſo exhauſted that
they were obliged to live on a very ſmall allowance of
bread; water and ſalt meat they had, and a few peaſe,
but of theſe they were extremely careful.
Poor Rebecca heartily wiſhed herſelf on ſhore again,
but ſenſible thoſe wiſhes were unavailing, ſhe confined
them to her own boſom, and exerted herſelf to ſupport
the ſpirits of Miſs Abthorpe, who, naturally delicate
and unaccuſtomed to fatigue, was nearly exhauſted with
terror, conſinement and hunger. In a few weeks they
were reduced almoſt to extremities; they had not even
a candle to light the binnacle, which contains the compass,
and the whole of their allowance now amounted to
one biſcuit and half a pint of water per day each person.
Mr. Seward had on board the ſhip with him, besides
two fine boys, the one fourteen the other twelve
years old, a charming little girl ſcarcely ſeven. Mrs.
Seward had been dead ſome years, and the child was
accompanied by her nurſe. The chief anguiſh this faithful
ſervant felt was in contemplating her little charge,
and thinking how ſhe was to be preſerved; indeed, to
ſuch a height did her affection riſe, that ſhe voluntarily
deprived herſelf of part of the very ſmall portion of
bread allotted her, that ſhe might lay it by againſt a
time of more eminent neceſſity for this darling of her
heart.
It was a clear cold day, the wind blowing ſtrongly
againſt them, when the maſter of the veſſel entered the
cabin with a ſmile. A ſmile at that particular time
was received by all as a good omen, for ſeldom had ſuch
a thing been ſeen in their melancholy party.
[Page 113]
“There is a ſhip bearing down towards us,” ſaid he.
“I have made a ſignal of diſtreſs, and no doubt we
ſhall be relieved.”
Hope, ſweet ſolace of the wretched, played round
the hearts of his auditors as he pronounced theſe
words; and all who were able crawled upon the deck
to watch, with eager eyes, the near approaches of the
expected relief. The veſſel drew nigh, and the maſter
enquired what was the matter.
“We are in the utmoſt diſtreſs,” ſaid Mr. Seward,
who took upon him to anſwer. “We have been ten
weeks at ſea, our proviſious are exhauſted, and we are
in danger of ſtarving.”
“I am ſorry for it,” replied the maſter of the other
veſſel; “but though we have a good wind now, we do
not know how ſoon it may change, and we may want
our proviſions ourſelves.”
It was in vain to attempt a reply; the veſſel was again
put before the wind, and in a few moments the intervening
billows, which roſe to a tremendous height, hid her
from their view.
Silent and ſad the diſheartened mariners and paſſengers
left the deck. Mr. Seward took his little girl in his
arms, his two boys hung on each ſide of him; he endeavored
at a look of fortitude, but the guſhing tears
betrayed the anguiſh of the paternal heart. Rebecca
ſeated herſelf on her bed, Miſs Abthorpe looked up in
her face for comfort, but ſhe had none to offer; ſhe
ſighed and reſted her head on Rebecca's ſhoulder.
“What ſhall we do,” ſaid ſhe, mournfully.
“Truſt in God,” replied Rebecca, faintly, preſſing
her hand.
Miſs Abthorpe returned the preſſure, and they joined
in ſervently committing themſelves to the protecting
care of him who could ſave to the uttermoſt.
Ten days more paſſed on in this dreadful manner,
when another veſſel was diſcovered, but, alas! Hope
refuſed to cheer their boſoms with the fainteſt ray.
“We muſt make an attempt to move their compassion,
however,” ſaid the maſter. Mr. Seward aſſented
[Page 114]
to the propoſal, and they mounted the deck together;
but Rebecca and her young lady ſat penſive and ſilent;
they hardly dared to hope, and the ſweet comforts of
religion forbade them to deſpair.
The noiſe on the deck prevented their hearing what
was ſaid, or whether any anſwer was returned to their
entreaties. In a few moments the noiſe increaſed almost
to tumult, a confuſed ſhout broke forth, which
the poor liſtening females miſtook for a murmur of horror
and diſappointment.
“They have refuſed us,” cried Miſs Abthorpe, endeavouring
to riſe from her bed.
“I am afraid they have indeed,” ſaid Rebecca; but
“do not you attempt to go on deck—ſtay here and I
will go and enquire.” With tremulous and unequal
ſteps after repeated attempts, Rebecca reached the
gangway. She was juſt trying to mount the ſteps,
when her intent was fruſtrated by a ſudden motion of
the ſhip, and ſhe fell down. “Heaven preſerve me!”
ſaid ſhe, as ſhe ſlowly aroſe.
“Heaven has preſerved us all,” ſaid Mr. Seward,
as he deſcended the ſteps,” for look, my good girl,
what a dinner its bounty has ſent us.”
At that moment a ſtrange ſailor came down with a
large wooden bowl, in which was a fine piece of boiled
beef, ſome potatoes, and a peaſe pudding.
“God bleſs your pretty hearts,” ſaid the ſailor, looking
round at Rebecca, Miſs Abthorpe, and the young
Sewards, “come fall too and lay in a good cargo for
according to the log your are light enough now.”,
“You have robbed yourſelves, I fear,” ſaid Rebecca;
“this was intended for your dinners.”
“That is neither here nor there,” ſaid he, putting
a large quid of tobacco in his mouth; and ſplit
my topſails if I would not rather rob myſelf any time
than ſee a brother ſailor want a dinner. D — e
we ſoon emptied the copper when we heard how cloſe
hauled you were, and ſet old ſtoke gally to work to
cook more; we brought enough for all, and they have
fallen too above board like a parcel of hungry ſharks.”
[Page 115]
Oh ye ſons and daughters of luxury whoſe tables are
covered with the moſt coſtly viands, and who turn
from them diſſatisfied and unthankful, could you feel
for a moment the ecſtaſy that pervaded the hearts of the
poor weary famiſhed mariners who now were partaking
the proviſion their charitable brethren had brought
them, you would henceforward juſtly conceive the happiness
of your own lot, and bow with gratitude to the
Divine diſpenſer of all bleſſings.
The freindly ſailors now departed, having taken an
inventory of what was moſt requiſite for the releif of
their brethern, and in about an hour and a half returned
with their captain, and a ſupply of bread, cheeſe, meat,
butter, and candles, alſo a ſmall quantity of ſpirituous
liquors to refreſh the ſailors.
“We muſt give you a bill on the owners,” ſaid Mr.
Seward, when he had taken an account of the ſtores
brought on board.
“No,” replied the generous captain, “I ſhall take
no bill. I expect no reward. I may one day be in the
ſame ſituation, and have only done as I would be done
by.”
[1] Exalted humanity, noble, diſintereſted ſailor, may
you ever experience from your fellow creatures the ſame
benevolence that expands and elevates your own heart.
May your days be many and your proſperity equal to
your deſerts.
Having taken a grateful leave of their benefactor,
they, with renovated ſpirits, purſued their voyage, and
the wind changing in the courſe of a few days, drove
them rapidly towards their deſired haven, ſo that on
the twenty eighth of January, about two in the afternoon,
they heard the joyful ſound of “Land a head.”
The port of Boſton is ſituated in ſuch a manner, that,
after having made land, ſix or ſeven hours good ſailing
will take a veſſel into ſafe harbour, ſo that our weary
[Page 116]
voyagers began to think of landing that evening, however
late it might be when they arrived; but as the night
came on, the wind increaſed, accompanied by ſnow and
ſleet; the cold at the ſame time being intenſe, it froſe
as it fell, and in a very ſhort period the ropes about the
ſhip were ſo incaſed with ice, that they became immoveable;
the darkneſs increaſed, and to add to their
diſtreſs, they loſt ſight of the light houſe at the entrance
of the harbour.
Their ſituation was now imminently dangerous: driving
before the wind, among a multitude of rocks and
breakers, without the leaſt chance of avoiding them:
to be ſhipwrecked in the very ſight of home, was a
painful trial indeed, yet this was what all expected, and
for which all endeavoured to prepare themſelves with patient
reſignation.
About ten o'clock all their fears were realized, and a
ſudden ſhock convinced them they had ſtruck on ſome
rocks. The enſuing ſcene from that time till ſeven the
next morning is better imagined than deſcribed, for till
that time they had no proſpect of relief, but continued
beating on the rocks, the waves waſhing over them,
and expecting momentary diſſolution. As the day-light
advanced they diſcovered the iſland from which the reef
ran, to be inhabited [2] . Several muſkets were immediately
diſcharged, and ſignals hung out, and about eight
o'clock they diſcovered people coming to their aſſiſtance.
It was impoſſible to bring a boat near the veſſel, but the
tide beginning to leave her, the men waded into the water,
and placed a ladder againſt her ſide, down which
the fear of immediate death gave Miſs Abthrope and
Rebecca courage to deſcend; but what were the feelings
of Mr. Seward, when he found the impoſſibility of
his little daughter's going down, ſo dangerous was it
rendered by the ice that enveloped the ſteps of the ladder,
and from whence, if ſhe fell, ſhe muſt have been
daſhed to pieces or loſt among the rocks; nor did he
dare to venture to deſcend himſelf with her in his arms,
[Page 117]
leſt a falſe ſtep or ſlip might deſtroy them both. But
there was no time for much deliberation, as it was absolutely
neceſſary to leave the ſhip before the tide returned.
At length an old ſailor offered an expedient which was
thought feaſeable; and the agitated parent faſtened a
ſtrong cord round the waiſt of his child, by which he
lowered her down the ſide of the veſſel; the old ſailor
caught her in his arms, and bore her exultingly to the
ſhore.
A new world now opened on Rebecca, who, when
ſhe was a little recovered, beheld with aſtoniſhment how
every object was bound in the frigid chains of winter.
The harbour, which ſhe could ſee from the houſe on the
iſland, was one continued ſheet of ice. The face of the
country was entirely covered with ſnow, and from the
appearance of all around ſhe could form no probable
hope of getting to Colonel Abthorpe's till the genial influence
of ſpring ſhould unbind their fetters; but in this
ſhe was agreeably miſtaken, for the inhabitants of thoſe
cold climates being accuſtomed to the weather, were
quick in expedients to facilitate their conveyance from
one place to another. The very next morning a boat
was procured, and men being placed at the head, to
break the ice as they proceeded. By two o'clock, on
the thirtieth of January, our heroine found herſelf once
more on terra firma, comfortably ſeated before a large
wood fire, in Colonel Abthorpe's parlour; for during
their voyage Miſs Abthurpe had conceived ſuch an
eſteem for her, that ſhe inſiſted on her being conſidered
as her friend and ſiſter, and her parents had too high a
reſpect for their daughter, to wiſh to contradict ſo laudable
a deſire.
Footnotes
[1] This apoſtrophe is the genuine emotion of gratitude, the author
having in a ſituation ſimilar to the one deſcribed here, experienced relief
beſtowed in the ſame diſintereſted manner.
[2] Lovel's Iſland.
[Page 118]
CHAP. XXIII.
ON THE OTHER SIDE THE ATLANTIC.
On the left hand of the entrance of Boſton harbour
is a beautiful little peninſula, called N—; it
conſiſts of two gradually riſing hills, beautifully diversified
with orchards, corn-fields and paſture land. In the
valley is built a little village, conſiſting of about fifty
houſes, the inhabitants of which could juſt make ſhift to
decently ſupport a miniſter, who on a Sunday aſcended
the pulpit in a ruſtic temple, ſituated by the ſide of a
large piece of water, nearly in the middle of the village,
and taught, to the utmoſt of his abilities, the true principles
of chriſtianity. The neck of land which joins this
peninſula to the main is extremely narrow, and indeed is
ſometimes almoſt overflown by the tide. On one ſide it
forms a charmingly pictureſque harbour, in which are a
variety of ſmall but delightfully fertile iſlands, and on the
other it is waſhed by the ocean, to which it lays open.
In this enchanting village ſtood Mr. Abthorpe's houſe,
in the midſt of a neat and well cultivated garden; and
here it was that, as the ſpring advanced, our contemplative
heroine beheld with rapture the rapid progreſs of
the infant vegitation; for the earth ſeemed hardly releafed
from the fleecy garb of winter, before it burſt forth
in the full bloom of vernal pride.
In this agreeable ſituation Rebecca remained nearly
two years, enjoying as much felicity as ſhe could expect
in the friendſhip of Mr. and Mrs. Abthorpe and the
affection of their amiable daughter. It is true ſhe sometimes
ſighed when ſhe thought of Sir George Worthy—
ſometimes gazed on his portrait and that of his mother's,
till her eyes overflowing could no longer diſtinguiſh
them. But theſe were luxuries, too dangerous to be often
indulged, they only ſerved to enervate her mind, and
render her incapable of enjoying the bleſſings placed
within her reach, and led her to repine at the wife
[Page 119]
difpensations of Providence; ſhe therefore exerted her natural
good ſenſe to keep theſe acute ſenſibilities within
proper reſtrictions, and by ſtriving to be happy in her
preſent ſituation, in a great meaſure rendered herſelf
really ſo. She had many admirers, and might have entered
into matrimonial engagements greatly to her advantage,
but ſhe reſolutely reſuſed them all, ſtill maintaining
towards each that invariable politeneſs and
frankneſs of demeanor, as at the ſame moment extinguished
their tenderer hopes and yet conciliated their
eſteem.
In the courſe of this time ſhe had received two letters
from Mrs. Barton, and one from her mother; the former
informed her, that her huſband was entirely reclaimed,
that ſhe was the happieſt woman in the creation, and
that ſhe hoped ſhe ſhould one day have Rebecca a
witneſs to her felicity; the contents of the latter was
not ſo pleaſing; her mother complained of ill treatment
from her daughter-in-law, and extravagance in her husband;
at the ſame time ſhe informed her, ſhe had juſt
lain in of a boy, who ſhe hoped would be the comfort of
her old age.
“I wiſh to heaven he may,” ſaid Rebecca, then laying
down the letter and reflecting how many leagues ſhe
was from her only ſurviving parent; that perhaps ſhe
might be in heavy affliction, ill treated by thoſe on
whom ſhe had placed the firmeſt reliance, laughed at by
the world, and not unlikely pinched by poverty. The
gentle-hearted girl burſt into tears; “Ah!” ſaid ſhe,
“why did I leave my native country; I ſhould have remembered
that my poor mother had no real friend but
me, on whom ſhe could ſafely rely for comfort in sickness
or affliction; I ſhould have remembered, that though
ſhe had preferred the friendſhip of others to mine, it
was ſtill my duty not to leave her expoſed to misfortunes
which my preſence and tender aſſiduties might
have alleviated.”
About this time the unhappy breach between Great
Britain and her colonies aroſe to ſuch a height, that it
never could be healed, and war, in her moſt frightful
[Page 120]
ſhape, began to ſtalk over this once happy land. Ere
this, the inhabitants of New-England, by their hospitality
and primitive ſimplicity of manners, revived in the
mind of our heroine the golden age, ſo celebrated by
poets. Here were no locks or bolts required, for each
one, content with his own cot, coveted not the possessions
of his neighbour; here ſhould a ſtranger make his
appearance in their little village, though unknown by
all, every one was eager to ſhew him the moſt civility,
inviting him to their houſes, and treating him with every
delicacy the ſimplicity of their manner of living afforded.
The only houſe of entertainment in this village, had
ſcarcely cuſtom ſufficient to ſupply its venerable miſtreſs
with the neceſſaries of life; but ſhe had a garden, a
cow, and a few acres of land; the produce of theſe
were ſufficient to her wants and wiſhes, and ſhe would
ſit in her matted arm chair, in a room whoſe only beauty
was “the white-waſhed wall, the nicely ſanded
floor,” while the ſmile of content played about her
face, and while ſhe thankfully enjoyed the bounties of
heaven, ſhe remembered not that any could be richer
or happier than herſelf.
But when fell diſcord ſpread her ſable pinions and
ſhook her curling ſnakes, how ſoon this bliſsſul proſpect
was reverſed; frighted at the horrid din of arms, hospitality
fled her once favourite abode, mutual confidence
was no more, and fraternal love gave place to jealouſy,
diffenſion, and blind party zeal. The ſon raiſed his unhallowed
arm againſt his parent, brothers drenched their
weapons in each other's blood, and all was horror and
confuſion. The terrified inhabitants of N— left
the village and took refuge in the more interior parts
of the country, all but Colonel Abthorpe's family, who
ſtill remained, though deſerted by all their ſervants;
for the Colonel had too high a regard for his royal
maſter to join the cauſe of his enemies, and it was impossible
to join the Britiſh troops without relinquiſhing
all his property; he therefore hoped the ſtorm would
ſoon paſs over; that ſome method would be propoſed
[Page 121]
and accepted to conciliate matters, and in the mean
time he wiſhed to remain neuter.
It was a ſtill morning about the latter end of July,
when Rebecca, being diſturbed by ſome little ruſtling
at her window, raiſed her head, and by the ſaint dawn
that juſt glimmered from the eaſt, diſcovered armed
men placed round the houſe. Alarmed, ſhe ſtarted
from her bed and awoke Miſs Abthorpe; they threw a
few clothes over them and flew to the Colonel's apartment.
They were met by Mrs. Abthorpe, who caught
her daughter in her arms, and, pointing to the room
where they uſually ſlept, cried, “Look Sophia, your
poor father.”
Miſs Abthorpe looked and beheld two ſoldiers with
firelocks, who placed at the door of the apartment, held
her father a priſoner.
“Ah, my dear mother,” ſaid ſhe, “who are theſe,
and what are they going to do; ſurely, ſurely they will
not murder us.”
“Don't frighten yourſelf, Miſs,” ſaid one of the
officers, “we do not uſually murder ſuch pretty girls.”
“But my father,” cried ſhe, eagerly, “what do you
intend to do with him.”
“Set him at liberty again when our expedition is
over.”
Rebecca now learnt that theſe were a part of the
American army, who had come to N— in whaleboats,
with a deſign of dragging their boats acroſs the
beach before mentioned, and proceeding to the light houſe
at the entrance of the harbour, intending to deſtroy it,
in order to miſlead the expected relief that was coming
to Boſton which was at that time blockaded: they had
before made an unſucceſsful attempt to demoliſh this
light-houſe, and were now come reſolved not to leave
their work unfiniſhed; accordingly they proceeded as
quiet as poſſible to the beach, almoſt carried their boats
over, and arrived totally unexpected at the little iſland
on which the light-houſe ſtood, and which was guarded
by a party of marines. A ſmart ſkirmiſh enſued, but
the Americans were too numerous to be withſtood by ſo
[Page 122]
ſmall a party; the whole of which they either killed or
took priſoners; and having completed their deſign, returned
to N—, victorious, though in the utmoſt
conſternation, for fear of being purſued by boats from
the Lively frigate, and other ſhips that lay in the harbour.
Rebecca was ſtanding at a window as they relanded,
the tears ſtreaming down her pale face, and ſo entirely
abſorbed in terror that ſhe was inattentive to the surrounding
objects. From this ſtate of torpor ſhe was
arouſed by a deep groan, and raiſing her eyes, ſaw two
Americans entering the houſe, bearing between them a
wounded marine, whom they laid on the floor, and
were preparing to depart, when Mrs. Abthorpe ruſhed
out of the adjoining apartment.
“What are you doing?” ſaid ſhe, “you will not
ſurely leave him here.”
`D—n him,” cried a wretch, “he is in our way;
if he don't die quickly we will kill him.”
“Oh, do not kill me!” ſaid the almoſt expiring soldier;
“I am not fit to die.”
At this moment Major Tupper entered: Mrs. Abthorpe
addreſſed him in a ſupplicating accent; “We
can procure the poor ſoul no affiſtance,” ſaid ſhe; “he
will periſh for want of proper applications to ſtanch the
blood.”
“My dear madam,” ſaid the Major, “what can we
do; we fear purſuit, and muſt retreat as faſt as poſſible,
and ſhould we take him with us, in our hurry and confusion
he will perhaps be precipitated into eternity. If
we make a ſafe retreat I will ſend to morrow.” He
then departed, and Colonel Abthorpe being now at liberty,
turned his thoughts toward the wounded ſoldier.
He had fainted, a mattreſs was laid on the ground,
and as they all united in endeavouring to remove him
upon it, the motion increaſed the anguiſh of his wounds,
and recalled his languid ſenſes.
“Oh, Spare me! do not kill me!” ſaid he looking
round with a terrified aſpect.
“Be comforted,” ſaid the colonel; “you are among
friends, who will do all in their power to ſave your life.”
[Page 123]
“God will reward you,” ſaid he, faintly.
They now examined the wound, and found, from its
depth and ſituation, that a few hours would terminate
the exiſtence of the poor ſufferer: however they made
long bandages of linen, and with pledgets dipped in spirits,
endeavoured to ſtanch the bleeding, but in vain.
“I am very faint,” ſaid he.
Rebecca knelt and ſupported him in her arms, aſſiſted
by the weeping Sophia.
“Can I live, think you, Sir?” ſaid he, looking
wiſhfully in the Colonel's face.
“I fear not,” was the reply.
“God's will be done,” ſaid he; but I have a long
account to ſettle, and but a ſhort time to do it in.
Dear good Chriſtians, pray with me—pray for me.
Alas, it is an awful thing to die, and with the weight
of murder on my conſcience.” Here he grew faint
again and ceaſed to ſpeak. A cordial was adminiſtered—
he revived.
“You ſee before you, my kind friends,” ſaid he
“a moſt unhappy man, the victim of his own folly.
My father is a clergyman in the North of England; I am
his only child, and have received from him an education
ſuitable to the ſtation in which he meant to have placed
me, which was the church; but, alas, I deſpiſed his precepts,
and joined myſelf to a ſet of the moſt diſſolute
companions, with whom I ran into every ſpecies of vice
and debauchery. By repeated extravagance I involved
my poor father, who, no longer able to ſupply my exhorbitant
demands, remonſtrated againſt my way of life;
but I was too much attached to vice to reſolve to quit
it, and in a fit of deſperation, having loſt more money
than I could pay, I enliſted into a regiment bound for
this place. Ah, Sir, I have reaſon to think my conduct
ſhortened the period of my dear mother's exiſtence,
and I have embittered the laſt hours of a father whom
it was my duty to comfort and ſupport. Theſe are
heavy clogs upon my departing ſoul, but he who witnesseth
the ſincerity of my repentance, I truſt will compassonate
and pardon me.”
[Page 124]
“No doubt of it,” cried Rebecca, whoſe heart was
almoſt burſting as ſhe liſtened to the expiring penitent.
He looked round, and fixing his eyes on Rebecca and
Sophia, “Poor girls,” ſaid he, “you are but young,
take the advice of a dying ſinner, and treaſure it in
your memories: obey your parents, never forſake them,
and ſhun vicious company, for had I done this it would
have been well with me in this evil day.”
Rebecca's ſuſceptible heart ſmote her, ſhe hid her
face with her handkerchief, and ſighed deeply.
“God for ever bleſs you, my friends,” ſaid he; “I
am going, a few pangs more, and all will be over. Oh,
may he whoſe fatal aim took my life have it not remembered
againſt him; may the Father of mercy forgive him
as freely as I do.”
He then began to repeat the Lord's Prayer, but expired
before he could finiſh it.
“Peace to his repentant ſpirit,” ſaid the Colonel, as
he raiſed his weeping daughter from her knees.
“His poor father,” ſaid ſhe, “what would he feel,
did he know this.”
“He felt more,” replied the Colonel, when the misguided
youth forſook the paths of virtue, than he would,
could he even behold him now.
The heat at this ſeaſon of the year is intenſe, and the
Colonel knew the body of the unhappy ſoldier muſt
that day be conſigned to the earth, yet how to make
the grave, or how to convey the corpſe to it when made
were difficulties which he could hardly think it poſſible
to ſurmount, but ſad neceſſity enforced the attempt;
he fixed on a retired ſpot, juſt by the ſide of his garden,
and began the melancholy taſk. Rebecca and Sophia
with their delicate hands endeavourd to aſſiſt, and by
evening they had completed it.
The faint rays of the ſetting ſun juſt tinged the summit
of the higheſt hill; the ſky was ſerene, and ſcarce
a breeze was heard to move the leaves or ruffle the ſmooth
ſurface of the water. Awfully ſolemn was the ſilenet
that reigned through this once cheerful village.
[Page 125]
As the Colonel ſat penſively conſidering his ſituation,
and thinking how in the decenteſt manner poſſible he
could render the laſt ſad duties to the deceaſed, he ſaw
a ſmall fiſhing boat, with one man in it, drawing near
the ſhore; he ran haſtily down, entreated him to land
and aſſiſt him in his mournful office.
The body was carefully wrapped in a ſheet—it was
impoſſible to obtain a coffin.
“We have no clergyman,” ſaid the Colonel, “but
the prayers of innocence ſhall conſecrate his grave.”
He gave the prayer book to Sophia, ſhe opened it,
and with her mother and Rebecca followed the body.
She began the ſervice, but her voice faltered, the tears
burſt forth, ſhe ſobbed, and could no longer articulate.
The Colonel took it from her; he was a man of undaunted
courage in the day of battle, but here even his
heart ſunk and his voice was tremulous; but he recalled
his fortitude and finiſhed the ſolemn rite in a becoming
manner.
“What a day has this been,” ſaid Sophia, as they
were partaking a little refreſhment.
“It has been a heavy day indeed my child,” ſaid
Mrs. Abthorpe, “but how much heavier would it have
been, had the poor departed been related to us by any
ties of blood: had he been a father, a huſband, or a
brother. Think not of the evils we endure, my dear
Sophia, but reflect how much more painful our ſituation
might be than it is, and offer up your thanks to your
Creator, that our afflictions do not exceed our ſtrength,
and that in this ſolitary place we enjoy health and serenity
of mind.”
“Ah,” ſaid Rebecca, mentally, “I do not enjoy
that ſerenity, for my mother, in affliction, in want, and
calling in vain upon her daughter for comfort, is ever
preſent to my imagination.”
For ſeveral weeks the ſolitude of Colonel Abthorpe
was undiſturbed, and Autumn began to advance. He
dreaded the approach of Winter, as he knew in that inclement
ſeaſon they would feel the want of many comforts
they had been accuſtomed to enjoy; and ſhut out
[Page 126]
from all ſociety, how ſhould they procure ſuſtenance.
Theſe reflections made him extremely unhappy. He
would gladly have gone to the Britiſh troops, but had
no poſſible means of conveying himſelf and family to
them, and his heart revolted from the thought of going to
reſide with the enemies of his ſovereign; however they
gave him not the choice, for the latter end of October
they diſpatched a party, conſiſting of a captain, lieutenant,
and fifty men, who ſurrounded the houſe of the
defenceleſs Colonel, making himſelf, his wife, daughter,
and our heroine priſoners, on pretence of his having
held correſpondence with the enemy. They were conveyed
into the country, their houſe torn to pieces, their
furniture deſtroyed, burnt, or divided among the soldiers,
and all their property confiſcated.
CHAP. XXV.
SUFFERING LOYALTY. Mrs . Abthorpe was a woman of delicate constitution.
This ſad reverſe of fortune was more than
ſhe could well ſupport; a ſlow nervous fever preyed upon
her frame; nor could the united efforts of her husband,
Sophia and Rebecca, arouſe her from the ſtate of
torpor and inaction into which ſhe had fallen, cooped up
in one ſingle room (for, though priſoners, they had the
liberty of walking about the place to which they been
conveyed) obliged to perform the moſt menial offices for
themſelves, with ſcarcely the neceſſaries, and none of
the comforts of life, except what was ſupplied from ſome
few benevolent families who were friends to government.
It may be eaſily ſuppoſed Col. Abthorpe and his family
acutely felt their painful ſituation, yet he endeavoured
to ſupp ort himſelf with a becoming fortitude.
Rebecca and her young Lady, in the courſe of a few
[Page 127]
months, learned to manage their wheels, which they
plied with diligence and dexterity, ſometimes spinning
cotton, ſometimes wool or flax, riſing with the
lark, and continuing their labours with unremitting industry,
till the ſhades of evening prevented their pursuing
it. They would then, as the progreſs of the ſpring
invited them, wander out to a neighbouring wood, the
borders of which were waſhed by a narrow arm of the
ſea; they would ſit on its banks, watching the unſtable
element as it ebbed or flowed, and admiring the rich
beauties of the ſurrounding proſpect. Their hearts
were innocent. Youth, health and exerciſe, gave them
a flow of ſpirits, and often as they ſat would they warble
ſome innocent cheerful air, or in an evening hymn
of thankſgiving, lift up their ſouls to their Creator.
But when the ſummer was paſt, and winter in its
dread array drew near, when the pinching blaſts of December
pierced bleakly through the crevices of their miserable
habitation, and there was neither fire or necessary
food to alleviate the horrors inſpired by the gloominess
of the ſeaſon, then it was their ſpirits began to
flag. Sophia would gaze ardently at her mother, on
whoſe pale countenance ſickneſs and ſorrow ſat triumphant,
and while, with a faint ſmile of tender affection,
ſhe endeavoured to cheer her, the ſtarting tear would
diſcover the deſpondency of her own heart.
It was a cold evening, the ſnow fell faſt, a very ſmal
portion of fire glowed on the hearth, and the little light
in their apartment proceeded from a ſmall lamp that
was placed on a deal table; beſide which ſat Colonel
Abthorpe, his head reſted on his hand, his eyes fixed in
mournful contemplation on the altered face of his beloved
wife, who, ſeated oppoſite to him was diligently
employed in knitting, while Rebecca and Sophia were
in hopes, by the produce of their labours to
ſmall, very ſmall ſhare of comforts they
[Page 128]
“I have felt it colder,” replied his Lady, endeavouring
at a ſmile; “beſides the room is ſmall, and a little
fire warms it.”
“To be ſure,” cried Sophia, “and then, while I
am at work, I never think of the cold; but I am afraid
of Rebecca; ſhe is more delicate than I am.”
“Your fears are needleſs, my love,” replied our heroine.
“I ſhould not mind the inclemency of the season
was your dear mother only comfortable.”
“We think our ſituation hard,' ſaid Mrs. Abthorpe,
“what then is the ſituation of the poor ſoldiers engaged
in the war?”
“Poor fellows,” ſaid the Colonel, paſſing his hand
acroſs his forehead, to conceal the rheum that diſtilled
from his eyes.
At that moment the door of their apartment opened,
and a ſtranger entered without ceremony.
The Colonel acroſs. Mrs. Abthorpe bowed her head
in token of ſalutation, and the young ladies ſuſpended
their work.
The ſtranger drew a chair. “You do not ſeem to
be comfortably ſituated, Colonel,” ſaid he, as he ſeated
himſelf, and caſt his eyes round the room.
“No,” replied the Colonel, with a deep drawn ſigh,
“comfort and I have long been ſtrangers to each other.”
“Mrs. Abthorpe looks ill,” ſaid the ſtranger; “has
ſhe had any advice?”
“The humanity of ſome friends, Sir, have procured
her every medical aſſiſtance; but, alas! in vain—the
malady is ſeated in her mind.”
“I was enquiring about you the other day,” ſaid
the ſtranger, “and was ſorry to hear you were ſo badly
ſupplied with the neceſſaries of life. A plan has ſince
ſtruck me by which you may be relieved from theſe distresses,
and reſtored to the eaſe and affluence
heretofore been accuſtomed to enjoy.”
This was at once calling forth
ditors. Mrs. Abthorpe raiſed
face, Sophia and Rebecca
Colonel liſtened in ſilence,
[Page 129]
“Our army is at preſent in want of experienced officers:
You do not hold any commiſſion under the King
of England?”
“But I have eat his bread, Sir,” ſaid the colonel,
haſtily.
Mrs. Abthorpe ſighed, and relapſed into her accustomed
penſive ſtate.
“If you would accept a commiſſion in our army,”
ſaid the ſtranger, “your property would be again restored,
and ample compenſation made for the loſſes you
have ſuſtained.”
The Colonel ſhook his head, and made a rejecting
motion with his hand.
“You will be raiſed to a rank ſuperior to any you
have held in the Britiſh army, and your name will be
immortalized as one of the glorious ſupporters of American
liberty.”
The colonel frowned contemptuouſly, and was going
to ſpeak, but the ſtranger interrupted him:
“You will have the felicity of ſeeing your amiable
wife and lovely daughter enjoying again the comforts
and elegancies of life. Pleaſure will once more inhabit
their boſoms, and enliven their features.”
The Colonel gazed tenderly on his wife and daughter,
pauſed, and ſeemed irreſolute. Mrs. Abthorpe read his
heart.
“And what,” ſaid ſhe, addreſſing the ſtranger, “are
the elegancies of life, when the mind no longer retains
its own approbation. It is true, Sir, the preſent change
in our circumſtances has awakened ſome painful sensations;
but it has not made us unhappy. I do not repine,
for, though unfortunate, we are not deſpicable; our
integrity has ever been unſhaken, and, I truſt, will ever
remain ſo.”
“True my love,” ſaid the colonel, recollecting himself,
“we will bear the preſent evils patiently, and hope
for better days in future.”
“But I would have you weigh this matter maturely,
Colonel,” ſaid the ſtranger, “before you pretend to decide.”
[Page 130]
“I have weighed it, Sir. You will pardon my abruptness,
and am determined to reject every offer that
would tend to draw me from the loyalty I owe the beſt
of ſovereigns; and allow me to ſay, I conſider ſuch offers
as inſults to my honour.”
“It is well, Sir,” ſaid the ſtranger, riſing, “if your
reſolution is taken, I will ſay no more on the ſubject;
but you will pleaſe to prepare your family for leaving
this place to-morrow. You are to be conveyed twenty
miles farther into the country.”
“Farther into the country, Sir!” ſaid the Colonel,
ſtarting. “My wife is unable to bear the journey.”
Sophia turned deathly pale, and left the room with
Rebecca.
“Do not be uneaſy, my dear Abthorpe,” ſaid the
amiable wife; I make no doubt but he, who for his own
wife purpoſes, ſuffers us thus to be afflicted, will endue
me with ſtrength of mind and body to bear it as becomes
a Chriſtian.”
The ſtranger walked acroſs the room. He was a
man of feeling, and had very unwillingly undertaken his
commiſſion. He was poſſeſſed of every virtue that could
alleviate the human heart. He had been taught to
think the cauſe, in which he was engaged, was a right
cauſe. He was young; his boſom glowed with enthusiastic
ardour. Can we blame him? for, though attached
to the cauſe of his country, he was ſtill more ſo to
that of humanity.”
“I am ſorry,” ſaid he; but a diſagreeable oppreſſion
upon the lungs prevented his proceeding farther.
The Colonel involuntarily took him by the hand:
“And had you, my dear Sir been tempted to deſert
your country's cauſe? What ſays your heart? Would
private intereſt have triumphed over the ſpirit patriotiſm
that now animates your boſom?”
“I have no wife and child,” ſaid he. The feelings
of ſenſibility could no longer be reſtrained, but ruſhed
impetuous from his eyes and though he was a man of
undoubted valour, he did not bluſh to indulge them.
[Page 131]
“Let thoſe bluſh,” ſaid he, mentally, who, “cannot
ſympathize with an afflicted fellow creature.”
“But ſuppoſe,” ſaid Mrs. Abthorpe, laying her hand
on his arm, for he had mechanically ſtopped beſide her,—
“Suppoſe, Sir, you had a wife, who would
feel more for your deviation from rectitude, than ſhe
would to endure the hardeſt pangs of poverty and sickness,
and who would rather die than ſee you an apoſtate
to the cauſe you had vowed for ever to eſpouſe.”
He turned abruptly from her; ſomething that ſpoke
within forbade him to anſwer.—
“And what have I done,” ſaid the Colonel, “that I
muſt leave a place where I have experienced ſuch friendship,
ſuch diſintereſted affection, from many of the inhabitants?”
“You are too near the ſea coaſt,” ſaid the ſtranger,
and may hold correſpondence with the enemy.”
He averted his eye from the Colonel's face, and pretended
to conſult his watch. “It is later than I
thought,” ſaid he, endeavouring at indifference in his
voice and manner.
“At eight o'clock to-morrow I expect you will be
removed. God bleſs you, my dear madam,” respectfully
taking Mrs. Abthorpe's hand.
She ſaw the feelings of his ſoul depicted in his face,
and forbore to encreaſe them by unneceſſary complaint.
“The change of air may do me good, Sir,” ſaid ſhe
with a ſmile of complacency; “for it often happens
that what we dread as an evil, in the end contributes to
our advantage.”
He gazed on her with a look of reverence and wonder,
bowed profoundly, and, unable to articulate another sentence,
haſtily left the room.
[Page 132]
CHAP. XXVI.
THE REMOVAL.
“ And muſt we leave this place, my dear father?”
ſaid Sophia, coming from a ſmall adjoining
apartment, whither ſhe had retired to indulge the tears
ſhe was no longer able to reſtrain: “Muſt we be separated
from thoſe friends whoſe generous attentions have
lightened all our afflictions?”
“We muſt, Sophia” ſaid her father, rather ſternly,
“to-morrow morning.”
“Ah! me,” ſaid the weeping girl, turning to Rebecca,
and reſting her head on her ſhoulder.
“Do not grieve thus, my dear Sophia,” ſaid our heroine;
for though ſeparated from your friends, you will
ſtill live in their remembrance, and they in your's.”
“Yes,” cried Sophia, with a look of grateful rapture,
“ ever while the vital tide nouriſhes my heart. Dear,
worthy inhabitants of [3] Hingham, when I forget the
friendſhip that alleviated my parent's ſorrows, may that
heart ceaſe to beat.”
The next morning, juſt as the grey dawn began to
enliven the Eaſt, Mr. Abthorpe's family were called to
begin their journey. An open chaiſe, drawn by a miserable
horſe, was all the conveyance provided for Mrs.
Abthorpe, Sophia and Rebecca; the Colonel himſelf
was expected to walk. About nine o'clock in the morning
they ſet out, but the roads were ſo full of ſnow,
and the horſe ſo old and lame, that, though they had
only a journey of twenty miles to make, they had not
completed it at four o'clock in the afternoon. The
darkneſs of night had begun to envelope every object,
when the chaiſe ſtopped at a hut that could ſcarcely be
called habitable. Rebecca and Sophia aſſiſted Mrs. Abthorpe
to alight; gloomy as was the outward appearance
of their deſtined habitation, the inſide ſerved only
to increaſe their horror; it conſiſted of three rooms.
[Page 133]
The windows had once been glazed, but were now ſome
parts open, and others mended with wood. One room
was boarded, the others had only the ground for a floor.
There were two chimnies, large and dreary, in which
no trace of fire appeared; all was deſolate and gloomy!
It was now quite dark, the Colonel was not yet arrived.
Rebecca and Sophia felt round the damp ſolitary
rooms for ſomething on which Mrs. Abthorpe might ſit
down, for ſhe was faint and weary from taking no refreshment
during their tedious journey, and having been
expoſed to the intenſe cold ſo many hours; but their
ſearch was vain, no ſeat could be found: they took
off their own loaks, and laid them on the floor: On
theſe ſhe ſunk weak and exhauſted, and, in ſpite of her
accuſtomed fortitude, ſuffering nature wrung from her a
few complaints.—Rebecca and Sophia knelt beſide and
ſupported her—the voice of comfort no longer iſſued
from their lips—their ſighs reſponſive anſwered her's—
their tears mingled as they fell—but all remained silent.
They heard footſteps approach—the Colonel's well
known voice ſaluted their ears.
“Dry your eyes, my dear girls,” ſaid Mrs. Abthorpe;
“Let us not increaſe his ſorrows, whoſe every
pang is doubled by our ſufferings.”
The Colonel entered, ſome one accompanied him for
they could hear more than one footſtep.
“We ſhall have a fire ſoon,” ſaid the Colonel; “it
is a very cold evening.”
“But I am well wrapped up, and do not feel it,”
ſaid Mrs. Abthorpe.
His heart thanked her though it refuſed to believe
her aſſertion.
Juſt then a third perſon entered, and threw down an
armful of wood, when the perſon, who had accompanied
the Colonel, produced a tinder box and ſtriking a
light diſcoverd to the aſtoniſhed females the ſons of two
of their beſt friends.
Mr. Lane! Mr. Barker! involuntarily burſt from all
their lips; but the generous young men would not hear
[Page 134]
a word of praiſe or thanks; they ſoon cheered the ſolitary
manſion with a comfortable fire; in the mean time a ſmall
cart arrived with two beds, a few chairs, and ſome kitchen
utenſils. From a baſket in this cart the young men
produced a couple of fowls, ſome butter, bread, and two
bottles of wine, ſo that in leſs than two hours, from
their firſt melancholy entrance, our diſtreſſed family were
ſeated in homely wiſe round an old wainſcot table, before
a large fire, partaking a plentiful ſupper, while
their hearts expanded with gratitude to that good Providence
who had raiſed them up friends when leaſt expected.
The next morning the young men exerted themſelves
to repair the breaches in the windows, and to ſtop the
large crevices in the doors of the houſe, having to the
utmoſt of their power, leſſened their troubles, and rendered
them tolerably comfortable, they departed, leaving
behind them ſome meat, bread, butter, cheeſe, and
a ſmall parcel of tea and ſugar; but, as the laſt-named
articles were at that time extremely ſcarce, they could
not be ſo liberal as their expanded hearts lead them
to wiſn.
Oh! with what rapture muſt the parents of theſe
young men have received them after ſuch a journey, to
which they had been incited by motives of the pureſt benevolence;
but benevolence was their characteriſtics.
[4] Bleſt ſpirits of philanthropy, whoſe hearts ere discord
ſhook her baleful wings, and ſhed her influence
over your happy plains, in a ſtate of almoſt primeval innocence,
ſelt not a pang but for another's woe, and
whoſe firſt pleaſure was to alleviate the ſorrows of a suffering
fellow creature! May the arrows of afflictions
with which an unnatural war has ſince wounded you,
be drawn forth by the hand of ſympathizing friendſhip
[Page 135]
and the anguiſh of them obliterated by the recollection
of your own good deeds.
But this is a theme which carries me from every
other. I would requeſt pardon for digreſſing my subject,
but I know thoſe only will blame me, who never
felt the ſweet emotions of unbounded gratitude.
But to return.—
The habitation to which Colonel Abthorpe had been
thus ſuddenly removed, was ſituated on the ſkirts of an
extenſive wood. The face of the country was rocky
and dreary, to which unpromiſing appearance the ſnow
and ice not a little contributed. There was but one habitation
within two miles of them, and that was occupied
by people, if poſſible more wretched than themselves.
In this diſmal ſituation, with no amuſement but what
ſprang from themſelves, for they had not even the consolation
of books, did the Colonel and his family paſs
four weariſome months, during which time they had of
ten no food but coarſe Indian bread and potatoes; nor
any firing but what Sophia and Rebecca aſſiſted each
other to bring in their delicate arms from the adjacent
woods, for the Colonel himſelf was great part of that
time conſined to the houſe with the gout; and in their
daily excurſions to procure this neceſſary appendage to
the ſupport of life in ſo cold a climate, they had no covering
to their ſeet, which often bled from the intenseness
of the cold, or from inciſions made by the rugged
path over which they were obliged to paſs.
It was the latter end of March, the ice was beginning
to diſſolve in the warmth of a mid day ſun, when Rebecca,
willing to enjoy a ſhort ſpace of uninterrupted
reflection, ſallied into the woods, unaccompanied by
Miſs Abthorpe. As ſhe gathered up ſome ſcattered
branches, and laid them together, her thoughts wandered
to her native land. She retraced every event of
her paſt life; “And where now is Sir George?” ſaid
ſhe. “Could he behold me at this inſtant, how
would his generous heart compaſſionate my misfortunes;
but, alas! perhaps I am no more remembered by him,
[Page 136]
or he conſiders me as numbered with the dead; and am
I not ſo to him? Then, why ſhould I wiſh him to retain
me in his mind, when, by forgetting me, he may
regain that felicity his generous ſentiments in my favour
had interrupted. No doubt, he is long ſince married
to the Lady with whom his mother wiſhed him to unite.
Ah! my beloved benefactreſs,” continued ſhe, ſitting
down on a large ſtone at the foot of a ſpreading pine,
“dear Lady Mary, little did you think when I parted
from you we were never more to meet! But that anguish
of heart would from that hour be the unremitting
portion of your Rebecca.”
She then drew forth the picture, which, through all
her diſtreſs, ſhe had ſtill carefully preſerved, and constantly
carried about her in a ſmall purſe, in which ſhe
had alſo depoſited Sir George's letter, and thoſe ſhe had
received from her mother. As ſhe opened this precious
repoſitory, her mother's writing caught her eye.
“My poor mother,” ſaid ſhe—“what waves, what
inſurmountable waves, now roll between us! Shall I
ever again behold you? Or is it my fate here, far distant
from my native land, to end an exiſtence, which
though ſhort, has been marked by variety of ſorrow?”
Here painful remembrance over-powered her. She rested
her cheek on her hand, and as ſhe held the picture
in the other, alternately raiſed her ſtreaming eyes to
heaven, and then fixed them on the portrait of Sir
George.
She was arouſed from this painful reverie by a deep
drawn ſigh, which ſeemed to proceed from a perſon
very near her, and, ſtarting, ſaw a venerable old man
ſtanding oppoſite her, habited in a lieutenant's dirty
uniform.
She aroſe, and, tying her bundle of wood together,
was preparing to lift it, when the old officer approached.
“It is too heavy for you, child,” ſaid he; “give
me leave to carry it.”
“I have not far to go, Sir,” ſaid Rebecca.
“Perhaps you are going by the unfortunate Colonel
[Page 137]
Abthorpe's habitation, or can direct me where to find
it?”
“I live in his family,” ſaid Rebecca, eagerly. “Do
you know him, Sir?”
“Alas! no, my dear child; but hearing he was a
priſoner at this place, and being myſelf in the ſame unhappy
predicament, I am going to claim his ſociety,
hoping that, as brothers in affliction, we may be enabled
to comfort each other: But, ſurely, I have ſeen you
before, though where or when I can by no means recollect.”
“Your features too,” ſaid Rebecca, “ſeem samiliar
to me, yet I do not think we ever met before.”
They had now reached the houſe, and depoſiting
their burthen at the door, entered.
“You will pardon me, Sir,” ſaid the old lieutenant,
advancing to the Colonel, “if I, unaſked, intrude myself
into your dwelling; but hearing there was an officer
in this place, I could not reſiſt the defire I ſelt to be
known to him.”
“And by what name am I to know and thank you
for this civility?” ſaid the Colonel, placing a chair for
his gueſt.
“My name is Littleton.”
“Littleton!” cried Rebecca, ſtepping eagerly forward.
“Yes, George Littleton,” ſaid the Lieutenant. I
have worne his Majeſty's livery above twenty years.
“My name is Littleton,” ſaid Rebecca.
“And your father's name?”
“Was William.—
“He is dead, then,” ſaid Mr. Littleton, with a difappointed
look.
Rebecca's tears confirmed the ſuſpicion.
“And did you never hear him ſpeak of a brother?”
“Yes, but as of one long ſince dead.”
“Alas! he thought me dead, but I am that brother;
nor can I doubt but you are his child, you bear ſo
ſtrong a reſemblance to him. My dear girl,” continued
he, embracing her, “how my heart bleeds to meet
[Page 138]
you here, and ſo badly ſheltered from the inclemency of
the ſeafon.
A few moments were now devoted to mutual gratulations
and mutual condolence. When the firſt tumult
was a little ſubſided, Rebecca wiſhed to be informed how
it happened that her uncle had been ſo long ſuppoſed
dead by her father?”
“Diſappointment and vexation,” ſaid the old gentleman,
“drove me from my native country; the loſs of a
wife and child, whom I tenderly loved, diſguſted me
with life, and I ſhipped myſelf to the Eaſt-Indies, from
whence I hoped never to return.”
Footnotes
[3] A village about twenty miles from Boſton.
[4] The Author begs leave to add to the names already mentioned,
thoſe of Gay, Levith, and Thaxter. It is a tribute of gratitude due to
that exalted philanthropy, that evinced itſelf in a diſintereſted friendship
for a family, whole misfortunes were their chief recommendation
and who had not the moſt diſtant hope of being ever able to cancel
their repeated obligations.
CHAP. XXVII.
AN OLD MAN'S TALE. “ I AM ſeveral years younger than was your father,
and was placed by an old uncle with a wealthy
merchant, with whom he promiſed to eſtabliſh me when
I had ſerved my clerkſhip with honour.
“My maſter had an only child; ſhe was not what is
uſually called a beauty, but ſhe was in my eyes more.
Her features were regular; the gentleneſs of her ſpirit
threw a ſoftneſs over her countenance, which at once prepossessed
every beholder in her favour. Added to the meek
forgiving ſpirit of a Chriſtian, ſhe poſſeſſed all the intripid
fortitude and courage of a Roman matron. The innocence
of her heart inſpired her with unaffected cheerfulness,
and a moſt engaging vivacity was tempered with a
modeſt ſimplicity.
Such was Roſa Benſon, when at the age of eighteen
ſhe was ſent for from France, where ſhe had been educated,
to take the care of her father's houſe, her mother
[Page 139]
having been taken ſuddenly off by an appoplexy. I was
juſt two years older, and could not behold unmoved, the
innumerable charms that were daily diſplayed by this engaging
girl. She performed on the harpſichord with great
taſte and execution, had a ſoft melodious voice, and ſung
with judgment. Her mind had been carefully cultivated,
which rendered her a well informed rational companion.
Mr. Benſon generally ſpent his evenings abroad, and
I frequently paſt many hours in uninterrupted conversation
with the charming Roſa.
I will not pretend to delineate the various imperceptible
degrees by which our hearts became attached to each
other: Suffice it to ſay, we ſelt the power of love mingled
with the pureſt friendſhip; nor did we once reflect
on the imprudence of indulging our ſenſibility till awakened
from our dream of bliſs by Mr. Benſon informing
his daughter, that her hand was ſolicited by an Earl,
and that he had given him leave to addreſs her; at the
ſame time he gave her to underſtand, he did not expect
any oppoſition to his will, and ſlattered himſelf he ſhould
ſoon behold her a Counteſs.
When Miſs Benſon informed me of this unexpected
ſtroke, I ſelt as though annihilated: I threw myſelf at
her feet, and entreated her not to make me the moſt
wretched of human beings by accepting my noble rival.
She aſſured me ſhe had too high a ſenſe of honour to
give her hand to one man, while her heart was entirely
devoted to another, but ſtill I was unhappy; nor did I
ceaſe ſoliciting the dear girl till ſhe conſented to be mine
by the ſtrongeſt of all ties, and by a private marriage I
ſecured to myſelf, as I then thought, the moſt permanent
felicity.
Still the Earl continued his affiduities: but Roſa
found means to evade her father's earneſt wiſhes, and a
more wealthy woman falling in his lordſhip's way, who
had no objection to making the exchange of money for a
title, ſhe was for that time delivered from farther importunity.
About ſix months after our marriage, it became necessary
for Mr. Benſon to ſend a perſon to the
[Page 140]
West-Indies, with powers to ſettle ſome buſineſs with the merchants
there: It was a lucrative employment. He mentioned
to my uncle that I might, if I choſe, undertake
the voyage. My uncle acquieſced. There was no alternative,
and I was under the neceſſity of leaving my
wife, whom I could by no means perſuade to accquaint
her father with our marriage previous to my departure.
During my abſence I was much ſurprized at receiving
no letters from my dear Roſa; but as I was ſenſible there
might be various cauſes for this apparent neglect, it only
ſerved to render me more attentive to my buſineſs, as I
knew the ſooner it was finiſhed, the ſooner I ſhould return
to the wife of my choice, the freid of my boſom.
At length it was completed, and I returned to my native
land, after being abſent from it about thirteen months.
Eagerly did I count the minutes whilſt travelling
from Deal to London; and when the chaiſe ſtopped
at Mr. Benſon's door, my heart throbbed with ſuch violence
that I could hardly ſpeak. I alighted, and ran
haſtily up ſtairs; but was much ſurpriſed, on entering
the drawing-room, to ſee a ſtrange Lady there, young
handſome, and elegantly dreſſed. Mr. Benſon mention
ed her as his wife.
“And where is Miſs Roſa?” ſaid I.
“She is not at home,” replied Mr. Benſon, coolly;
“but, come Littleton take your tea, and then we will
go into the counting houſe, and talk over buſineſs.”
Conſcious as I was of the near intereſt I took in every
thing that concerned Roſa, I forbore to mention her
again, left the agitation of my mind ſhould be betrayed
by my countenance; I took my tea in ſilence, and then
deſcended with my maſter to the counting-houſe, where,
in as conciſe a manner as poſſible, I gave him an account
of the buſineſs I had been ſent upon, and delivered to
him all the bills and other papers I had brought with
me from Jamacia; this employed us till near one o'clock
in the morning, and, ſatigued as I was, I could not but
be ſurpriſed that my hitherto indulgent maſter ſhould
have no thought of the long voyage and journey I had
juſt arrived from, and that I certainly required reſt.
[Page 141]
When we had entirely finiſshed, he thus addreſſed me:
“I promiſed you, Littleton, that this ſhould be a lucrative
buſineſs to you, there (opening his pocket
book;) there are bills to the amount of two hundred
pounds; and now, Sir, let me tell you, that you are a
knave and a villain, a deſigning, deceitful, ſcoundrel,
who, under the maſk of honor and probity, have robbed
me of my daughter, ſtolen her affections, and encouraged
her in diſobedience. It is to your arts I owe her
refuſal of the Earl of—, and had ſhe not been your
wiſe, ſhe would at this moment, have been a Dutcheſs.”
I had ſat as one petrified during this ſpeech; but on
his again calling me by the opprobious names already
mentioned, I rouſed myſelf, and endeavoured to anſwer;
but his paſſion, like a torrent, bore down all before it,
and I was obliged to be ſilent. At length he told me
he had diſclaimed his daughter, that he had ſent her
from his houſe, and would never give her a ſingle farthing,
no not even to keep her from ſtarving.
“But go,” continued he, “go to her, and may you
both, with your brat, ſtarve together.”
The mention of a child operated on my nerves like a
ſtroke of electricity. “And where are they, Sir?”
ſaid I, ſtarting from my ſeat, “where are my Roſa and
her inſant?”
“Somewhere in the country,” ſaid he; “but I don't
concern myſelf with them, nor do I ever wiſh to ſee you
or her again. You have diſappointed me in my deareſt
hopes and I will ſeek conſolation in the company of an
amiable woman, who may, perhaps, yet bring me children
more dutiful than the ungrateful viper you have
married.”
He then flung out of the room, and I too much irritated
to remain in a houſe where I had been ſo ill treated,
was preparing to leave it, when the door opened,
and one of the houſe maids entered, looking carefully
round her.
“I am glad you are come, Sir,” ſaid ſhe; “my poor
young Lady will rejoice to ſee you.”
“Where is ſhe, Betty?” ſaid I.
[Page 142]
“At Windſor,” replied the girl, “at my ſiſter's;
but ſhe has never been well ſince maſter was born.”
I took a direction from the girl, and ſet off immediately,
as I could procure a chaiſe.
It was between five and ſix when I arrived at Windfor,
and having ordered ſome breakfaſt, though I had
no inclination to eat, I ſent for the woman with whom
my love lodged, and finding her a diſcreet ſenſible person,
intruſted her with a letter to be dilivered cautiously,
to the dear creature, who I found was in a very
alarming ſtate.
In about two hours I was ſummoned to the cottage
that contained all my treaſure; but, good heaven! how
ſhall I deſcribe my ſenſation at the ſight of my wife,
ſcarcely the ſhadow of her former ſelf—pale—thin—her
eyes ſunk heavy—and devoid of luſter!”
“George,” ſaid ſhe, putting her dear boy into my
arms, “you are come home in time to receive this
pledge of my love, and to cloſe my eyes; but I ſhall die
content, ſenſible that you will be a kind father to my
child.”
I endeavourd to cheer her, and inſpire her with hopes
which I could not rationally indulge myſelf. I procured
the beſt medical advice, but all in vain; ſhe grew worſe
and worſe, and expired in leſs than a fortnight after
my arrival in England.
Previous to her death ſhe informed me that another,
ſtill more ſplended, offer of marriage, ſtrenuouſly urged by
her father, had wrung from her the ſecret of our marriage,
and that ſhe was immediately diſmiſſed from her father's
houſe in the moſt diſgraceful manner; that
ſhe had wrote to my uncle, claiming his protection-
if not on her own account, for the ſake of the unborn infant;
but his ansſwer was, that as I choſe to marry without
conſulting him, I might maintain my wife as I
could for he would never more do any thing for me;
and as to her he thought ſhe muſt have behaved very ill,
when her own father had diſcarded her. From that time
he entirely withdrew his favour, from me, and, though
[Page 143]
I went to him ſoon after the death of my wife, I was
not permitted to ſee him.
About this time your father, who was then an enſign
in a marching regiment, was ordered to Ireland. I had
not ſeen him for ſome years, as he had been ſtationed at
Plymouth; but could not let him leave the kingdom
without taking a perſonal leave: I therefore left my
dear boy with the good woman where my Roſa had
lodged, and ſat off for that place.
I had not been with my brother above three days,
before I received a letter from the nurſe, informing me
that my boy had been carried off by a convulſion fit the
day after I left Windſor. The world now appeared to
me an univerſal blank. I conſidered myſelf as a mere
cypher, without family, connexion or friends, and possessing
but a ſmall portion of wordly goods. I had formed
an acquaintance with ſeveral officers belonging to
one of his Majeſty's ſhips going to China; a deſire of
roving took poſſeſſion of my mind. I had, when a boy,
been fond of the ſtudy of mathematics, and during my
voyage to Jamaica, had contracted a fondneſs for a nautical
life, I therefore requeſted to be admitted on board
the Triton, and was accepted.
In this ſhip I went to the Eaſt-Indies, fully reſolved
never to viſit England again. This reſolution I kept inviolate
for many years, always, changing into ſome ſhip
ſtationed in thoſe parts whenever the one I was in was
remanded home. In his Majeſty's ſervice I aroſe by
degrees to the rank of lieutenant, and my ambition had
led me to hope, during this war, I ſhould have riſen
ſtill higher, for the ſhip I was in, being ordered home,
and I unable to obtain an exchange into one ſtationed in
India, I returned to England, and was ſoon after ſent
in a cutter with expreſſes to the fleet at New-York, from
whence I was diſpatched to Boſton, where I unfortunately
arrived after the evacuation of his Majeſty's
troops, and of conſequence fell into the hands of the
enemy. I have been detained a priſoner now near two
years, frequently removed from one place to another,
and every removal is ſtill for the worſe; but I hear there
[Page 144]
is now an exchange of priſoners talked of, ſo I hope to
be included in the cartel.
“But did you never write to my father?” ſaid Rebecca.
“Yes, frequently, during the firſt year of my absence
from Europe; but never receiving any anſwers,
owing, as I imagined, to the unſettled life a ſoldier in
general leads, I at length ceaſed to write. When I
was laſt in England I enquired for him of ſome of our
old friends, and learned that he was married, and had
one child; but they could give no information where he
was ſettled, as they had neither ſeen or heard from
him for many years.”
Rebecca felt a gleam of comfort dilate her affectionate
heart, at having thus unexpectedly found a relation:
“I am not then entirely unconnected,” ſaid ſhe, mentally,
at the ſame time laying her hand on that of her
uncle, and looking at him with eyes ſwimming in tears
of filial tenderneſs, excited by the ſtrong reſemblance he
bore to her father.
“My dear girl,” ſaid he, “you have found an old
uncle who will love you with all his heart, and defend
you to the laſt hour of his exiſtence; but I am as poor,
Rebecca, as when I firſt put on his Majeſty's livery. In
all my long ſervicce I have not picked up above two
hundred pounds prize-money, and, thinking I had no
one to take it after me, I have ſpent it as faſt, or, perhaps,
ſometimes faſter than I gained it. But my pay
has been running ſo long, we ſhall be quite rich when I
get home, and you ſhall call me father, and make up to
me the loſs of my Roſa and her boy.”
“I will be your daughter in every ſenſe of the word,”
ſaid Rebecca, affectionately kiſſing his hand.
The converſation now took a more general turn: Colonel
Abthorpe was delighted with the acquiſition of a
friend. They could not think of parting till evening,
nor then without a mutual promiſe of maintaining a frequent
intercourſe.
[Page 145]
CHAP. XXVIII.
WE COME HOME AGAIN.
When Colonel Abthorpe retired to reſt, he revolved
in his mind what Mr. Littleton had ſaid
concerning an exchange of priſoners. His wife's declining
health had long made him uneaſy. He flattered
himſelf was he once removed from captivity, and enabled
to obtain ſubſiſtence for his family, her mind would
be more at eaſe, and ſhe would of conſequence recover
her health and ſpirits. Theſe reflections occupied
him all night, and totally baniſhed ſleep. At dawn of
day he aroſe, and ſat down to draw up a petition, praying
to be, with his family, included in the intended
exchange.—This petition he preſented to the ſelect-men
of the place, to be by them tranſmitted to the general
court. The anſwer he received was a repetition of the
offers of employment in the American army, enforced
with promiſes of the moſt beneficial and lucrative rewards
for his ſervices. Theſe he ſtrenuouſly rejected,
declaring a reſolution to die rather than forſake the
cauſe of loyalty.
They found it was in vain to increaſe either their offers
of affluence, or their ill treatment; he was alike
unmoved by either, at leaſt he did not ſuffer them to
perceive the effect his miſeries had on his mind. If he
ſighed it was in ſecret, and he waited with an aſſumed
patience the end of his misfortunes, while the moſt afflictive
ſenſations corroded in his boſom: But when he
had almoſt bidden adieu to hope, when deſpair ſeemed
to have taken poſſeſſion of his mind, then was deliverence
neareſt at hand, and he received a letter, informing
him he was to be exchanged with his family by
the very next cartel. They were accordingly removed
to Boſton, and, in company with Mr. Littleton, put on
board a ſmall veſſel, bearing a flag of truce, in which
they arrived, after a ten days paſſage, ſafe at Hallifax.
[Page 146]
Here Mr. Littleton was immediately employed,
and drew on his agent for money to provide himſelf
and Rebecca with neceſſaries; nor did he withhold
part of his little ſtore from Colonel Abthorpe, who
was really in neceſſitous circumſtances. Mrs. Abthorpe's
malady had gained too much ground on her delicate
conſtitution ever to be repelled. She continued to decline,
and, in a few weeks after their arrival in Nova-Scotia,
ſhe ſunk to eternal reſt! Rebecca exerted herself
to comfort poor Sophia; but it was now become
abſolutely neceſſary for them to part. Colonel Abthorpe
had not the means even of ſupporting himſelf and daughter,
much leſs an extra perſon: Beſides, Rebecca was
eager to reviſit England, and ſee her mother; he therefore
furniſhed her with recommendatory letters to several
Ladies in London. Her uncle provided her a passage,
and gave her an order on his agent for the ſmall remainder
of all his worldly wealth. She took an affectionate
leave of her dear Miſs Abthorpe, and embarked
for her native land. It ſeemed as though the elements
were as eager to convey our heroine in ſafety home, as
they had been perverſe and tardy in bearing her from
thence; for on the twenty-eighth day from her leaving
Halifax, at the cloſe of the evening, ſhe found herſelf
ſet down at the door of the Croſs-Keys Inn, in Gracechurch
ſtreet, London. She had landed with a widow
lady and her maiden ſiſter (who came in the ſhip with
her) at Deal, and they had proceeded to town in a postchaise.
She remained at the inn with them that night,
and the next morning took a coach to ſeek the benevolent
friend of Mrs. Harris in the Borough. She was
removed, but Mrs. Harris herſelf occupied the houſe:
Rebecca therefore, met a hearty welcome, and determined
to take up her abode with her till ſhe could hear
from her mother, to whom ſhe immediately wrote.
Anxiouſly did ſhe count the time till ſhe thought it
poſſible to receive an anſwer. At length the welcome
ſound of a poſtman's rap ſaluted her ears. She almoſt
flew to the door. The letter required double poſtage;
ſhe paid it without heſitation, and haſtily returned to
[Page 147]
the parlour to examine its contents; but as ſhe approached
the candle, what were her feelings to diſcover
it was her own letter returned, with theſe words written
on the outſide:—
“Removed to London two years ago!”
“To London!” ſaid Rebecca; “but what part of
London? Good heavens! that I ſhould be in the ſame
place with my mother, and yet unable to find her! But,
perhaps, I have no mother now,” continued ſhe, mournfully:—
“She has been removed two years; alas! sorrow
may have levelled her with the duſt long ſince.”
She then endeavoured to recollect ſome perſon in her
native village, to whom ſhe could addreſs herſelf, in
hopes of gaining information whether her mother had
mentioned what part of the town ſhe intended to reſide
in. At length ſhe recollected the parents of Ruth, who
had lived ſeveral years ſervant in the family, and was
with them when her father died. To them ſhe immediately
wrote, and, as early as ſhe could poſſibly expect,
received the following anſwer:
Letter
“This comes with father and mother's kind love to
you, letting you know that we are all main glad to hear
you are alive, and come home again to old England, for,
certain ſure, we all thought you had been dead a long
while ago; ſo when father put on his ſpectacles, and
began to read your letter, I thought as how I ſhould
have ſounded for joy; for indeed, and for ſarten, Miſs
Becky, I would walk a many long miles to ſee your
ſweet face. Oh! dear, if you was but as rich, and as
happy as you are good, and as we all wiſh you.—
“As to your mother, we are deadly afraid ſhe has
made but a poor hand of marrying again, for old Serl
was but a ſhabby kind of body, though he pretended to
[Page 148]
be ſo grand, and tried to make folks believe he was a
gentleman.
“To be ſure they did flaſh away about a month or
two after they were married, and Peg Serl had a mortal
fight of new cloaths, but for all ſhe never looked
like a lady. Father ſaid as how you looked more like
one in a linen gown, and your nice curling hair without
powder, than ſhe did in her ſilks and ſattins, and her
hair plaſtered up with greaſe and flour; but after all
they did not hold out long. Serl did not uſe your poor
fooliſh mother well; he kept an impudent huſſy almoſt
under her noſe, and uſed to be always a drinking and
ſotting, and ſo the ſinery all went away by littles and littles,
and then they got ſadly in debt, and at laſt went off
to London, without letting any body know about it;
but couſin Dick was in London laſt Martinmas twelve
months, and he ſaid he ſaw Mrs. Serl go into a houſe in
Weſtminſter, but ſhe looked main ſhabby, and we never
ſince heard nothing about her.
“Father bid me tell you, that he read in the newspaper
how that Sir George Worthy was married to a
great Lady; but father ſays he could not have found a
more better Lady than your own ſweet ſelf, be the other
who ſhe may, and we all thought as how, when Lady
Mary (bleſs her dear name)! took you to live with her,
that we ſhould one day ſee you come back to the village,
Lady of the Manor; but it can't be helped, marrying
and hanging they ſay goes by fate. Mother and father
ſend their kind love and duty to you, wiſhing you a
good rich huſband, and ſoon; and ſo no more at present
from your's to ſerve till death.
RUTH RUSSETT.”
Section When Rebecca had finiſhed reading this letter her
mind was in a ſtate of anarchy, better imagined than
deſcribed. She ſat with the letter open on the table before
her—her hands folded in each other—her eyes fixed
on vacancy.
“Well, what news, my dear,” ſaid Mrs. Harris, as
ſhe came into the room, and, without particularly
[Page 149]
observing Rebecca, very leiſurely ſtirred the fire as ſhe ſpoke
to her.”
“He is married,” replied Rebecca unconsciously.—
“Well, child, you knew that before, I thought.”
“No, indeed; this is the firſt I ever heard of it.”
“Why, how you talk!” ſaid Mrs. Harris, ſtaring
at her; “to my certain knowledge ſhe wrote you word
of it herſelf.”
“Who wrote me word of it?”
“Why, your mother, child.”
“Oh! my mother,” cried Rebecca, endeavouring
to rally her ſcattered thoughts; then, pauſing for a
moment, “my poor mother,” continued ſhe, burſting
into tears, I fear I ſhall never ſee her more.”
There was a wildneſs in her looks, an incoherence in
her manner, that alarmed the compaſſionate Mrs. Harris.
She drew a chair, and ſat down beſide her, took
both her hands in her's, preſſed them tenderly, but remained
ſilent. This was a conduct more congenial to
the mind of Rebecca than the moſt eloquent harangue
could have been. She reſted her head on the boſom of
her friend, gave a free vent to her tears, and, by degrees,
regained a tolerable degree of compoſure.
CHAP. XXIX.
VARIOUS SCENES. When Rebecca had repelled the violence of her
firſt emotions, on finding Sir George was really
loſt to her, her mother's unfortunate marriage, and
its conſequences recurred to her mind, ſhe retired to bed,
but not to reſt; ſleep was a ſtranger to her eyes, and
[Page 150]
her thoughts were ſo harraſſed, that in the morning her
heavy eyes, pale lips, and burning hands, alarmed Mrs.
Harris.
“Come, come, child,” ſaid ſhe, gently ſhaking her,
“I muſt not ſee you in this way; you are far from well
now, and if you go on fretting thus, I ſhall have you
quite laid up. You muſt rouſe yourſelf, my dear; it is
very wrong to give way to ſorrow for misfortunes that
are irremediable.—Chance may, perhaps, diſcover in
what part of the town your mother is; in the mean
time you muſt not neglect your own intereſt. You
have never yet waited on any of the ladies to whom
Colonel Abthorpe gave you letters. I will have you
dreſs yourſelf this very day, and go to ſome of them.
Perhaps you may meet with a ſituation where, by your
mind being conſtantly occupied, you will have no time
to fret yourſelf to death, which I foreſee will be the caſe
if you are left to yourſelf.”
“Indeed, Mrs. Harris, I have no cauſe to wiſh for
life,” ſaid Rebecca, in a melancholy accent, “for, in
the whole world, I have no friend but you and my poor
uncle; him, perhaps, I ſhall never ſee again, and you,
I fear, will grow weary of ſuch a child of ſorrow.”
“Now you are very unkind, Rebecca, to ſuppoſe
me capable of neglecting you, or being wearied by your
complaints! No, my child, I feel for you every thing
that friendſhip and affection can feel for a beloved object;
and it is becauſe I think it neceſſary to your health that
you ſhould be rouſed from this ſtate of inaction, that
makes me willing to be deprived of your ſociety: Besides,
my dear, your mother may be, nay, in all probability,
is alive, and, at ſome future period, you may
have it in your power to render her happy and comfortable
in her latter hours by your tenderneſs and filial
love: For her ſake, then, exert your natural good ſenſe,
and bear your afflictions with becoming reſignation; it is
an indiſpenſable duty you owe to her, to yourſelf and to
your Creator.”
“Oh! Mrs. Harris,” cried Rebecca, “pardon my
petulance; I ſee the friendly deſign of your advice, and
will exert myſelf to follow it.”
[Page 151]
She now began to look over her letters, and determined
to wait that morning on Lady Winterton and
Mrs. Sackville, who lived both in a ſtreet near Cavendiſh
ſquare. She had two more letters, but they were to
ladies in the city.
Rebecca's dreſs was plain and neat in the extreme,
yet there was a dignity in her perſon and manner that
ever commanded reſpect: She, therefore, on knocking
at Lord Winterton's door, was immediately uſhered into
a parlour, and the ſervant took the letter to his Lady.
The Lady was at her morning toilet. She caſt her
eyes haſtily over the letter.
“What kind of a perſon brought this, Thomas?”
ſaid ſhe to the man who waited juſt without the door
of the dreſſing room.
“A very genteel young woman,” replied the man.
“Well, ſhew her into the breakfaſt parlour, and tell
her I ſhall be with her preſently. Is my Lord up?”
“Yes, my Lady, he is juſt gone down.”
“Well, go, do as I bid you.”
The man departed, and Rebecca was deſired to walk
into a parlour, where in his night gown and ſlippers,
ſat a perſonage, the exact counterpart of Lord Ogleby
in the Clandeſtine Marriage.
Rebecca ſtarted, and was going to retire.
“Pray, Madam,” ſaid my Lord, riſing, “do not
let me frighten you; my Lady will be here directly.
Thomas, a chair for the young Lady.”
Rebecca bluſhed, courtſeyed, and took her ſeat.
My Lord eyed her attentively. She felt her confusion
increaſe.
“She is a very fine girl,” thought his Lordſhip; I
wonder who the devil ſhe is.”
“The weather is very fine for the ſeaſon, Madam,”
ſaid he, thinking it was incumbent upon him to ſay
ſomething, though, in fact, it had rained inceſſantly
for a week.
“The ſun did break out for about an hour this morning;”
ſaid our heroine, half ſmiling; “but he ſeems to
have withdrawn himſelf again.”
[Page 152]
“He was conſcious, Madam, that when your beauties
were viſible to the admiring eyes of mortals, his
fainter glories could not be miſſed.”
“Heavens!” thought Rebecca, “what a ridiculous
old man, with his bombaſtic compliment: However, I
am glad he is old; perhaps his Lady may want a perſon
to read to her, or by cheerful aſſiduity, otherwiſe amuſe
her. She had, in her own mind, pictured Lady Winterton
as an elderly Lady, perhaps upwards of ſixty
years old. In this family,” thought ſhe, “ſhould I be
ſo happy as to be placed, I ſhall be free from the noiſe
and impertinence ſo frequently to be met with in the families
of young people of quality. I dare ſay they do
not keep much company; nay, perhaps, live in the
country above half the year. I wiſh I may ſuit her Ladyship;
ſhe certainly wants ſomebody, either for herſelf
or ſome of her freinds, by her deſiring me to wait to ſee
her.”
As Rebecca was indulging theſe reflections the door
opened, and a Lady entered, in appearance not more
than twenty, habited in a very modiſh undreſs.
“Miſs Littleton, I preſume,” ſaid ſhe, advancing—
Rebecca courtſeyed.
“Colonel Abthorpe,” ſaid the Lady, motioning for
her to be again ſeated, “has had a very diſagreeable
time in America. I dare ſay you are happy to find
yourſelf in England again.”
“Sincerely ſo, Madam.”
“This thought Rebecca, is undoubtedly a daughter.”
“The Colonel mentions,” reſumed the Lady, “that
you would wiſh to engage as companion to an elderly
Lady, or as governeſs to ſome genteel family of children.”
“Either ſituation would ſuit me, Madam,” ſaid
Rebecca; and if Lady Winterton could recommend
me—.”
“Lady Winterton wants a companion herſelf,” ſaid
the Lady, ſmiling; “but, perhaps, her age will be an
objection.”
“By no means, Madam; I ſhould give the preference
to an elderly Lady.”
[Page 153]
The Lady laughed; Rebecca bluſhed, and feared ſhe
had been guilty of ſome impropriety.
“Why, my dear creature,” ſaid the Lady, “I am
afraid, then, that you and I ſhall never agree, though
Colonel Abthorpe ſeemed to think that you might prove
an acquiſition to me; but I am too young for you, ſo
muſt poſitively turn you over to my Lord; he is more
adapted to your taſte.”
“Your Ladyſhip muſt pardon my ignorance,” ſaid
the trembling, bluſhing Rebecca; “I really had no
idea.”
“Hear her! hear her! my dear Lord; ſhe had no
idea that your ſenatorial wiſdom could have for wife
ſuch an inconſiderate rattle. I would bet a thouſand
pounds ſhe took you for my papa.”
“Your Ladyſhip is pleaſed to diſplay your wit at the
expence of good manners,” ſaid his Lordſhip.
“Oh! I humbly crave pardon,” cried ſhe with a
moſt bewitching ſmile, “I meant no offence; you know
I cannot help other people's miſtakes; for my own part
I think you infinitely charming; then twiſting one of
his grey locks round her beautiful fingers, ſhe continued:
“The ſnow on the hills, and the icicles pendant
from the leafleſs trees in December, are in my eyes, to
the full as beautiful as the variegated fields and full-blown
hawthorn in May. I like every thing in its ſeaſon, and
am moreover a great admirer of natural curioſities.”
“Impertinent!” ſaid his Lordſhip, riſing angrily,
and quitting the room.
“Well, now he is gone,” ſaid her Ladyſhip, drawing
her chair near Rebecca, “let us have a little ſerious
talk. You cannot ſuppoſe that inclination led me to
give my hand to that ludicrous piece of antiquity:
No, my dear girl, I married him to ſerve a father,
whom next to heaven, I love, and to get from the
power of an ill-natured old maiden aunt, who had kept
me at ſchool for fear I ſhould mar her fortune, and despoil
her of all her lovers; for ſhe had thirty thouſand
pounds independent fortune, and that gave her wizened
face and ſkeleton figure ten thouſand charms; ſhe or her
[Page 154]
fortune had admirers innumerable. I was always with
her at the holidays. My Lord ſaw me at the play.
Charmed with the idea of getting me married out of the
way, ſhe made her will, bequeathing to me all her fortune,
in caſe ſhe died without iſſue.
“This was buzzed about—her lovers all forſook her—
and poor aunty died of a broken heart in the fifty
ninth year of her age! My father had married this Lady's
ſiſter. He was poor. She was the co-heireſs of a
la ge fortune; but alas! ſhe knew not that if ſhe married
without her guardians conſent, the whole of her fortune
went to her eldeſt ſiſter.
“Diſappointment and ſorrow ſoon put a period to
her exiſtence. My father continued in poverty, but I
was committed to the care of my wealthy aunt.
“At that time I became acquainted with Lord Winterton,
my father's circumſtances were dreadfully embarrassed.
My aunt would not advance a ſingle guinea
to keep him from a gaol. I knew this marriage would
place him in affluence, and at the age of ſixteen, gave
my hand, promiſed to love and obey, before my heart
knew what love was. I have been married now five
years; my temper is naturally cheerful, and I am an
enemy to thought; but I have that within me which
convinces me I have a heart alive to every delicate sensation
of diſintereſted tenderneſs.
“You may, perhaps, think it odd, that I am thus
open to a ſtranger; but Colonel Abthorpe, who was
the intimate friend of my father, has given you a character
as bade me to wiſh to make an intereſt in your
heart, that I may ſay I have one boſom in which I can
repoſe my ſorrows, one friend who will pity my frailties.”
Rebecca felt inclined to love this unfortunate young
creature from the firſt moment ſhe beheld her. A very
few words ſerved to ſettle every preliminary, and it was
agreed that the very next day ſhe ſhould repair to her
new ſituation.
As the time allowed her was ſo very ſhort, Rebecca
thought ſhe would make uſe of the reſt of that day to
[Page 155]
deliver all the other letters; “for,” ſaid ſhe, “it is
right that I ſhould wait on theſe Ladies, though I am
ſettled with Lady Winterton; they may at ſome future
period be of ſervice to me.” She accordingly repaired
to Mrs. Sackville's.
Being ſhewn into the drawing-room, a tall, meagre
figure preſented itſelf, who ſcarcely deigned an inclination
of the head as ſhe took the letter, and, waving her
hand, cried, “Sit down young woman.”
Having read the letter—“And ſo you have been in
America, child? cried the Lady, with the ſame ſolemn
aſpect. “Well, I dare ſay, they are all in fine confusion
there; but let their diſtreſs be ever ſo great, it is
no more than they deſerve, a parcel of rebels .”
“They may have been miſled,” cried Rebecca, an
enthuſiaſtic ardour animating her expreſſive countenance;
“but they are in general a brave, benevolent ſet
of people.”
“'Tis a pity, as you are ſo partial, you had not remained
amongſt them.”
“I had no friends there, Madam, and wiſhed to return
to my native country.”
“Nay, you have not many friends here,” ſaid the
Lady, with a ſarcaſtic ſmile, “according to the Colonel's
account.”
Rebecca's eyes filled with tears.—Mrs. Sackville continued:
“I do not know of any body at preſent who
wants a young perſon of your deſcription.”
“You will pardon me, Madam,” ſaid Rebecca, for
this intruſion; “I did it merely in reſpect to the generous
attention of Colonel Abthorpe, who furniſhed me
with ſeveral letters; but I have been ſo fortunate as to
be engaged this very morning as companion to Lady
Winterton.”
“'Tis very well,” ſaid Mrs. Sackville, toſſing her
head: “Lady Winterton, I believe, wanted a convenient
friend, and very poſſible you may ſuit her purpoſe:
However young woman, do not ſay you go into her
family without knowing what kind of a woman ſhe is. I
have a very great regard for Lady Winterton, and
[Page 156]
ſhould be very ſorry to ſay any thing to her disadvantage;
but all the world knows ſhe married Lord Winterton
to hide an infamous intrigue with a low bred fellow
whom nobody knows. I thank heaven I have been
brought up to know the real value of virtue, and ſhould
be very ſorry to ſee a decent looking body, like yourself,
companion to a woman of no principle: However,
you are to do as you pleaſe; I have given you my opinion,
and you muſt take the conſequence of rejecting my
advice.” She then rang the bell, and Rebecca departed
with no very high opinion of her good nature, whatever
her other virtues might be.
She then repaired into the city, and delivered the
other two letters, but neither of the ladies were at
home; ſhe therefore immediately proceeded to her
lodgings, and informed Mrs. Harris of the ſucceſs of
her excurſion. Mrs. Harris adviſed her not to be diſheartened at the account Mrs. Sackville had given of
Lady Winterton; but ſhould ſhe find her the unprincipled
woman ſhe had been repreſented, to leave her immediately.
“Surely,” ſaid Rebecca, “ſhe cannot be abandoned
to vice; if her countenance is the index of her mind.”
On the evening of this day our heroine received a
friendly letter from Mrs. Barton, who gave her a pressing
invitation to viſit her, and make her houſe her
home: but Rebecca deteſted a ſtate of dependence—
ſhe therefore wrote a grateful return to this invitation,
and acquainted her with her engagement with Lady
Winterton.
C H A P. XXX.
VARIETY STILL. When Rebecca began to feel herſelf ſettled in
Wimpole-ſtreet, ſhe alſo began to find that ſhe
had entered on an entire new life.—Lady Winterton was
[Page 157]
extremely gay, ſaw a great deal of company, and lived
in one continued round of dreſſing, viſiting, and public
amuſements. It was in vain for our heroine to object to
accompanying her; ſhe had taken a peculiar fancy to
her ſociety, and was never happy without her. Lord
Winterton loved gaiety, and an oſtentatious diſplay of
grandeur as well as his Lady: She was therefore never
abridged in her pleaſures, were they ever ſo extravagant,
and the old Peer thought himſelf amply repaid for the
moſt ſplendid entertainments, or elegant preſents, by
the ſmiles and good humour of his Lady, who, in ſpite
of her caprice and ſatyrical wit, he tenderly loved.
One morning Rebecca had accompanied her Lady to
an auction, where they had ſcarcely been ſeated ten minutes
before a very elegant young man approached them,
and being introduced to her as a Mr. Savage, a particular
friend of her Ladyſhip's, attached himſelf to them
the whole morning.—Rebecca did not obſerve any thing
uncommon in his attentions to Lady Winterton, but
ſhe thought, as he handed her Ladyſhip to her carriage,
ſhe ſaw him put a folded paper into her hand, which ſhe
immediately conveyed into her pocket.
As it drew towards evening the Lady ſeemed vaſtly
uneaſy, eſpecially when ſhe found her Lord meant to
ſpend his evening at home: however, after ſhe had taken
her tea, ſhe ordered her chariot.
“Am I not then to have the pleaſure of your company,
Fanny?” ſaid his Lordſhip. “I propoſed supping
at home, becauſe I heard you were diſengaged.”
“Oh! my Lord, I ſhall be home again in about two
hours. Miſs Littleton and I are only going to call on
a ſick friend of her's.”
Rebecca ſtared. Lady Winterton gave her a supplicating
look, and, ſurpriſed as ſhe was, ſhe remained silent.
“If Miſs, Littleton wiſhes to viſit her friends,” ſaid
my Lord, “the chariot is certainly at her ſervice; but,
ſurely, my dear Fanny, you are not obliged to accompany
her.”
“Indeed but I am! and I am ſenſible the Lady will
[Page 158]
take it very unkind were I to neglect going. Don't you
think ſhe would, Rebecca.”
“I think,” ſaid Rebecca, timidly, “we may both
venture to defer our viſit till the morning, as my lord is
ſo kind as to ſpend the evening at home.”
“Ah! that is your good nature, my dear; you
would rather offend your friend, than lead me to disoblige
my huſband; but ſuppoſe we ſettle it this way: I
will go and ſee how the lady is, and you ſhall ſtay and
engage my Lord at piquet. I ſhall juſt call at my mantua-maker's
in my way home, and be with you again
before ſupper.”
“Your Ladyſhip will pardon me,” ſaid Rebecca,
giving her a penetrating look: “If you are reſolved to
go, you ſhall not have to ſay I am remiſs in the duty
I owe my friend. I am ready to attend you, Madam,”
riſing, and ringing for her cloak.
“For heaven's ſake! Lady Winterton,” ſaid Rebecca,
as the chariot drove from the door, “what is the
meaning of all this? You have diſtreſſed me beyond
meaſure, by calling on me to aſſert a falſhood.”
“Now you are angry with me, Rebecca,” ſaid the
Lady, taking her hand; “but pray think no more
about it: I could contrive no other means to get away
from that inquiſitive old man, without telling him where
I was going.”
“And ſurely your Ladyſhip does not wiſh to go any
where that would be offenſive to your huſband.”
“Oh! my dear girl, you will never forgive me, you
are ſuch a prudent creature yourſelf; but I am going to
meet —, though, believe me, it ſhall be the laſt
time. I am going to meet —, and take a laſt
farewell of Savage.”
“By your Ladyſhip's promiſing it ſhall be the laſt
time, I am led to think it is not the firſt. I could have
excuſed your making me acceſſary to ſuch an affair:
However, I ſhall take care not to be liable to be drawn
in a ſecond time.”
“Ah! Miſs Littleton, you have no compaſſion for
a ſuſceptible heart.”
[Page 159]
“Yes, Lady Winterton, I have, an infinite deal; I
feel for you ſincerely, if when your perſon is united to
one, your heart is in the poſſeſſion of another. Your
feelings, Madam, are involuntary; your actions are by
no means ſo: I am ſenſible you may not be able to conquer
the weakneſs of your heart; but you certainly
may avoid throwing yourſelf into ſituations which may
lead to criminality.”
The chariot ſtopped—Lady Winterton alighted—
and Rebecca followed her ſilently into a parlour,
where Savage was eagerly expecting her.
The enſuing ſcene, to which our heroine was a witness,
though it awakened all her compaſſion for the lovers,
who in years, ſentiments and manner, ſeemed ſo
ſuitable to each other, it gave her but an indifferent
opinion of her Lady's prudence. Savage, from his conversation,
appeared a man of ſtrict honour; he did
not ſeem to entertain an idea to the injury of his miſtreſs; but that unfortunate woman, hurried on by the
violence of her paſſion, made a thouſand diſcoveries of
her unbounded affections, which, with a man of leſs integrity,
might have precipitated her into everlaſting
infamy.
The promiſe of returning to ſupper was entirely forgot.
Rebecca reminded her of the hour: ſhe heard
her not, and the clock ſtruck twelve before ſhe could
bring herſelf to leave her lover.
During their ride home Rebecca ſpoke not a ſyllable
except one or two laconic anſwers to her Lady's questions.
She followed her into the hall, and, taking a
candle from a ſervant, wiſhed her a good night, and ran
haſtily up ſtairs, leaving Lady Winterton to make her
excuſes to her huſband for her breach of promiſe.
The next morning, as ſhe was riſing, one of the maids
brought her the following note.
Letter “For heaven's ſake! my dear Rebecca, do not contradict
whatever you may hear me ſay at breakfaſt, as
you value the peace of
F. WINTERTON.”
[Page 160]
Section
Rebecca threw the note into the fire, and went down
ſtairs. Her Lord and Lady were already in the parlour.
“And how do find yourſelf this morning, my dear?”
ſaid her Ladyſhip: “I vow you quite frightened me laſt
night.”
“Are you often taken in ſuch a ſtrange manner?”
ſaid his Lordſhip, with a look of concern.
“No, indeed, my Lord; I was taken quite by surprise
laſt night, and found myſelf very painfully affected.
I never was taken that way before, but I have felt
a return of the diſorder this morning.”
“Indeed!” cried her Ladyſhip, viſibly alarmed.
“Yes, Madam; but as change of air may be of service
to me, and your Ladyſhip ſeems terrified on my account,
I ſhall beg leave to retire to a friend's I have
ſome few miles from town. I ſhall go directly after
breakfaſt, and will ſend to-morrow for my trunks.”
“You do not mean to leave us, I hope?”
“Yes, Madam; I fee; it impoſſible for me to remain
with you any longer.” Lady Winterton burſt into tears.
“Nay, Miſs Littleton,” ſaid his Lordſhip, “you
muſt not leave us; my poor Fanny will break her heart.”
It was to no purpoſe for the Lady to weep, or her
huſband entreat: Rebecca remained inexorable, till
Lord Winterton leaving them, his Lady earneſtly entreated
her to forgive what was paſt, and ſhe would never
ſee Savage again.
“Do not leave me, Rebecca,” ſaid ſhe; “you are my
guardian angel; without you I ſhall be inevitably loſt!”
This argument prevailed, and Rebecca conſented to
ſtay, in hopes of drawing her Lady from her unfortunate
attachment. The winter was now entirely supplauted
by the gay-robed ſpring, and our heroine began to
ſigh for retirement, ſilver ſtreams, and ſhady groves.
Lady Winterton, to oblige her, propoſed ſpending a
few weeks at Chiſwick, where they had an elegant ſeat.
It was a charming evening in the beginning of June;
the ruddy ſtreaks of the parting ſun-beams had given
place to ſober grey; the moon with ſilver creſcent ſhed a
feeble light, and the ſtars, by imperceptible degrees,
[Page 161]
appeared in the blue expance of heaven, till all was one
continued ſcene of radiant glory. A nightingale perched
on a thorn, was tuning her melancholy pipe, and the
zephyrs paſſed gently over a long canal, waſting on
their wings the diſtant ſound of the tinkling ſheep bell,
and the ruſtic ſhepherd's whiſtle.
Rebecca had left her Lady in an alcove at the bottom
of the garden, and wandered into the pleaſure ground.
The beauty of the ſurrounding ſcene had given a
ſoft ſerenity to her mind, and ſhe ſat down to indulge
reflections, which, if not abſolutely pleaſant, were far
from painful.
She had not ſat long before ſhe obſerved two men
gliding among the trees, and proceeding as it were towards
the garden. At firſt ſhe felt rather terriſied, but
the idea of Savage ſtriking her, ſhe haſtened toward the
place where ſhe had left her Lady. She had hardly got
half way before ſhe felt herſelf ſuddenly ſeized by a person,
who ſoftly bid her not be alarmed, he only meant
to prevent her diſturbing an agreeable tete a tete , to
which a friend of his had been invited, and which
he was determined ſhould not be interrupted by her.
Rebecca trembled exceſſively, for, by the voice, and
what little ſhe could diſcern of his features, ſhe discovered
the perſon who held her to be no other than Lord
Oſſiter.
“Whoever your friend is,” ſaid ſhe, “he can have
no buſineſs here. Unhand me, Sir, or I will alarm the
houſe.”
“You muſt cry pretty loud, then, my dear, for you
are a good diſtance from it; but ſtay, have I not ſeen
your face before? Yes, by heavens!”
At that moment, a loud ſhriek from the alcove, and
a claſthing of ſwords, made him relinquiſh his hold, and
run toward the place from whence the ſound proceeded.
Rebecca followed as faſt as her trembling limbs would
permit; but what a ſcene preſented itſelf to her view.
Savage on his knees, ſupporting the bleeding, and apparently
lifeleſs body of Lady Winterton, and Oſſiter
ſtruggling to wreſt a ſword from the hands of her Lord,
[Page 162]
who foamed with rage, and threatened inſtant death to
the betrayer of his honour!
“Infamous wretch!” ſaid the enraged huſband, when
he beheld our heroine; “this is your doings, you contrived
and winked at their meetings, and moſt conveniently
left your vile friend to entertain her lover, while
you whiled away your time with that diſgrace to nobility!
Begone—leave my houſe this night—thou peſt to
ſociety! I have long been informed of your ſcandalous
proceedings, but would not believe till occular demonstration
left me nothing to doubt.”
Terrified and diſtreſſed as Rebecca was, ſhe could not
but wiſh to ſtay to afford what relief was in her power
to her Lady, but this was denied her. She had aſſiſted
Savage to bathe her temples with hartſhorn, and ſaw her
open her eyes, when the ſervants entered, took her in
their arms, and bore her to the houſe, where Rebecca
was forbade to enter, and any ſervant who ſhould dare
to afford her ſhelter, threatened with inſtant diſmiſſion.
“What now is to become of me!” ſaid ſhe, ſinking
on the ground as the door was ſhut againſt her: “What
next will be the fate of the wretched Rebecca.”
“Love, affluence, and pleaſure,” ſaid Lord Oſſiter,
endeavouring to raiſe her.
“Say rather death and infamy, my Lord; my reputation
is wounded—my peace of mind deſtroyed. Oh!
that my heart would break, and let me reſt forever!”
“Reſt in my arms,” ſaid he, rudely embracing her.
She ſhrieked.
“Forbear, my Lord,” ſaid Savage, approaching;
“this lady has been the friend of my adored Fanny,
and no one ſhall inſult her with impunity.”
“Your humble ſervant,” cried Oſſiter; “I understand
you, and have done, only give me leave to inform
you, that this pretty imaculate piece of prudery, about
four years ſince, was in a ready furniſhed houſe of my
providing, from whence ſhe thought fit to elope, and
has, I make no doubt, ſeen a great deal of life ſince that
period.”
Rebecca could hear no more—a ſudden chillneſs ran
[Page 163]
through her veins—ſhe reſpired with difficulty—her
head grew giddy—and ſhe ſunk into inſenſibility. When
ſhe recovered, recollection retained but faint traces of
the paſt ſcenes; it ſeemed like a diſturbed dream.—
“Where am I?” ſaid ſhe.—Lord Oſſiter approached
the bed-ſide—“You are in ſafety, my angel,” ſaid he,
“only compoſe your ſpirits, and nothing ſhall be omitted
that can make you happy.” She turned her head
from him, wept, but could not anſwer.
“You muſt not diſturb her,” ſaid a medical gentleman,
who had been called in. “Quiet and reſt is absolutely
neceſſary to preſerve her life.”
“Exert your utmoſt ſkill, doctor,” ſaid Oſſiter, “to
ſave her, and we will be guided entirely by your directions.”
“Then leave her to the care of the nurſe to-night,
and do not attempt to ſee her before noon to-morrow.”
Oſſiter kiſſed her hand, bowed, and retired.
Rebecca heard the door ſhut: ſhe raiſed her head to
look at the doctor, and perceived, to her great joy, he
was a grave, decent looking man. She made ſome excuse
to ſend the nurſe out of the room; then taking
both the doctor's hands in her's, cried, “Oh! good
Sir, if you have any compaſſion in your nature, ſhew it
now to a poor diſtreſſed orphan and ſave her.”
“My dear child,” ſaid he, “do not alarm yourſelf,
you are not in any immediate danger.”
“Oh! Sir, you miſtake me, it is not death I fear, it
is diſhonour. Alas! I know not where I am; but I
fear I am entirely in the power of a man who will sacrifice
me to his unhallowed paſſion.”
“Then you did not come with him voluntarily?”
“No! no! heaven knows I did not; I was in a ſtate
of inſenſibility.”
An intereſting converſation now took place—the doctor
was convinced of Rebecca's innocence, and bribing
the nurſe to aſſiſt, about twelve o'clock they helped the
poor ſufferer to get on her clothes, ſupported her down
ſtairs, and carried her in triumph to his own houſe.
[Page 164]
C H A P. XXXI.
RETROSPECTION AND NEW CHARACTERS.
Though Lady Winterton had ſolemnly promiſed
Rebecca to hold no farther correſpondence with
Savage, her love overpowered every good reſolution, and
ſhe had ſeen him ſeveral times previous to their leaving
London; for what man of gallantry can refuſe the request
of a woman he tenderly loves, though rigid honour
bids him fly her ſociety. Fanny, the lovely unfortunate
Fanny, entreated another interview; it was impossible
to avoid it, but each one was meant to be the
laſt.
Lord Oſſter was by no means the boſom friend of
Savage, but he had, by accident, become maſter of this
ſecret, and was therefore requeſted to accompany him
to Chiſwick, where he had enjoyed ſeveral interviews
with Lady Winterton before the laſt fatal one.
Lord Winterton's valet had obſerved his Lady's evening
walks, and made the important diſcovery that ſhe
had a lover. He informed his Lord, from that moment
her ſteps were watched, ſhe was diſcovered in the alcove—
Savage at her feet—her cheek reſted on his forehead—
her hand upon his ſhoulder, and tears were streaming
from her eyes.
“Turn, villain,” ſaid Lord Winterton, “and desend
yourſelf.” Savage aroſe, and drew his ſword; the
frantic Lady threw her arms about him, and received
her huſband's ſword in her own boſom. She ſell, and
Oſſiter at that moment entering, prevented the death of
her lover, who would certainly have fallen a victim to
the huſband's rage, had not timely aſſiſtance arrived.
The gentle innocent Rebecca was involved in her
Lady's crime; ſhe was ſuppoſed acceſſary to the interviews,
and forbade to enter the houſe, when ſhe fainted
as was mentioned in the preceding chapter. Oſſiter
[Page 165]
represented her to Savage as a woman of a very light character,
and he, unwilling to quit a place where he
might hope to hear whether his Fanny ſtill lived, ſuffered
that deſigning nobleman to carry her to the chaiſe which
waited for them, and convey her to the neareſt inn.
Here he ordered her to be put to bed, ſent for a doctor,
and, having ſtrongly recommended her to his care, retired,
after a ſlight ſupper, to bed, rejoicing in an accident
which had again put in his power a woman
whom, though he had given up all thoughts of gaining,
he could never entirely forget.
How great then was his ſurpriſe when, enquiring
for her the next morning, he found doctor, nurſe and
patient, all abſconded. He repaired to the doctor's
houſe, but could not obtain admittance. He curſed
the meddling fellow in his heart, vowed revenge againſt
Rebecca, and ſet off for London.
In the regular cheerful family of Dr. Ryland our heroine
ſoon recovered her health, and in a great meaſure
her ſpirits. She made enquiry concerning the fate of
her Lady, and learned that, though ſhe had recovered
from her wound, ſhe laboured under a very ill ſtate of
health, which, they feared, would terminate in a decline.
Rebecca gave a ſigh to her hard fate, and wished
ſhe might conquer her paſſion, and be prepared to
meet that peace in another world ſhe had failed of finding
in this.
Dr. Ryland was a truly benevolent man, but he had
a large family, and no great degree of practice, it was
therefore a thing not to be expected that our heroine
could remain with them long, and in the poor ſituation
ſhe then was, without money or cloaths, ſhe could not
think of returning to incumber Mrs. Harris. She had
informed Mrs. Ryland that ſhe wiſhed to get a place in
ſome genteel family, where ſhe could render herſelf useful
without much hard labour; that Lady enquired
among her friends, and learned that the Lady of a neighbouring
juſtice wanted a young perſon to get up her
ſmall linen, make her caps, bonnets, gowns, &c. and
occaſionally to take care of the family when the Lady
[Page 166]
was out. Rebecca joyfully waited on Mrs. Penure; the
kind Mrs. Ryland accompanied her, gave her ſuch a
character as ſhe deſerved, and had the pleaſure to find
ſhe entirely ſuited the Lady's plan. The ſalary was
ſmall, but Rebecca had but few wants to ſupply; to be
neat was now all ſhe required, indeed it was all ſhe could
henceforth expect. The doctor advanced a few guineas
to provide her a change of clothes, for ſhe had ſent
repeatedly, without effect, for her trunk from Lord Winterton's,
and, in the courſe of a week, from the time ſhe
waited on the Lady, Rebecca became an inmate in the
family of the worſhipful Juſtice Penure.
Jacob Penure had, from a very low ſtation in a reputable
tradeſman's family, raiſed himſelf, by indefatigable
induſtry, to the confidence of his maſter, and a ſhare
in the buſineſs, at the age of twenty-three. The fair
Miſs Abigail Prune, who had, in the younger part of
her life, ſerved ſeveral ladies in quality of waiting woman,
but who now kept her brother's houſe, caſt on him
the eyes of affection. Miſs Abigail was to be ſure rather
paſt her prime, having ſeen forty ſeaſons revolve, and
noted their various change, without the leaſt hope of
ever changing her own maidenly condition to the more
honourable one of wife.
Mr. Jacob was a comely young man. She reviewed
her own countenance in the glaſs; ſhe could not but perceive
the traces made by the hand of time. She was
above the middle ſize, extremely thin, and had a ſhape,
not “ſmall by degrees, and beautifully leſs;” but ſo exactly
ſtraight, that it was impoſſible to perceive the leaſt
difference between the bottom and the top, and inſtead
of that roundneſs, which conſtitutes elegance in the form
of a woman, her waiſt was as perfectly flat as though ſhe
had been preſſed between two boards. Her arms were
long; her hands large, hard and boney; her face was
round, but it was that kind of roundneſs that expreſſes
inſignificance. The ſmall remains of teeth ſhe poſſeſſed
might have been termed beautiful in ſome parts of the
world, for they were of jetty hue, and from her hollow
ſockets, over which could be diſcerned ſcarcely the trace
of brows, twinkled two extremely ſmall black eyes.
[Page 167]
The tip of her diminutive noſe was elevated.
Her complexion might have rivalled the tints of the
moſt beautiful orange lilly.
Such was the perſon of Miſs Abigail. We will leave
her accompliſhments and temper to ſpeak for themſelves.
Mr. Jacob Penure knew his own intereſt too well to
think of ſlighting the maiden's advances. She had five
hundred pounds in her own poſſeſſion, the accumulated
ſavings of near twenty years ſervitude; beſides, her brother
had no children, and he had much money. Mr.
Prune was far from diſpleaſed with his ſiſter's choice.
Penure was an attentive, induſtrious young man; he
made him equal partner with himſelf, and in about fifteen
years they found themſelves in poſſeſſion of a very
handſome fortune. About this time the old gentleman
died. All his poſſeſſions devolved to his ſiſter, and Penure
reſolved, though ſorely againſt his wife's opinion,
to leave trade, and retire into the country. Here he
was choſen juſtice of the peace, and by his integrity and
gentleneſs in the execution of his office, gained the love
of all who knew him.
He was a humane friendly character, but he ſtood in
fear of his wife.
The morning after Rebecca's arrival, the breakfaſt
things removed, (for ſhe was to eat at their table,) Mrs.
Penure deſired our heroine to accompany her up ſtairs.
“I am mightily glad,” ſaid the lady, ſitting down
by a large old-faſhioned caſe of drawers, and taking an
enormous bunch of keys from her pocket, “I am mightily
glad to have met with a young perſon like you, who
can make me up a few ſmart things. I love to be genteel,
and wear as good things as my neighbours; but
really it is ſo expenſive to have any thing done at the milliners,
and if one gets any journey-woman to come home,
they always aſk for as much again ſtuff as they want, and
ſteal half of it. Now I do hate to be cheated: I don't
mind giving away a bit of ribband or gauze that is left,
but it provokes me to have it taken away ſlyly.”
During this harangue, ſhe had pulled from her drawers
an immenſe quantity of yellow waſhed gauze, old
[Page 168]
muſlin, and thread lace, that bore the ſtrongeſt marks
of antiquity. She admired the cap our heroine had on,
and wiſhed to have one made like it; but among the
medley of trumpery ſhe had diſplayed, Rebecca could
not ſelect any thing fit for the purpoſe: beſides, our heroine's
head, though neat and plain, ſtill retained an air
of faſhion. Mrs. Penure's lank black hair was combed
in the exacteſt manner over a roll, and drawn up as tight
behind as poſſible; how then could the ſame cap ſuit
both?—However, an attempt muſt be made. The Lady
aſſured Rebecca, that her lace, muſlin, &c. were
very valuable, and inſiſted on not only one but ſeveral
caps being produced from thoſe materials; at the ſame
time ſhe opened a cabinet, in which were arranged, rolled
in the neateſt manner round cards, every ribband ſhe
had ever had in her poſſeſſion. “See, young woman,”
ſaid ſhe, exultingly, “here are variety of ribbands, take
your choice, let my caps be trimmed handſomely, but
don't waſte any; I hate waſte, ſo, if you can avoid it,
don't cut them.” Rebecca could not ſuppreſs a ſmile at
the ſolemn manner in which this treaſury of old-faſhioned
dirty, faded ribbands was committed to her charge.
However, ſhe promiſed to exert her abilities to pleaſe,
and was beginning to form a cap, but her miſtreſs had
not yet done with her. “I ſuppoſe,” ſaid ſhe, “you
will want linings and wire; beſides, you will not be all
day making two or three caps: I want a bonnet or two
made, and my beſt cloak freſh trimmed.”
“I am afraid I ſhall not be able to do all in one day,
Madam.”
“Well, you muſt do as much as you can, child, don't
be idle, I hate idle people. I hope you don't love reading.”
Rebecca heſitated; ſhe would not utter a falſehood.
“I think it an agreeable amuſement, but I will never
neglect my buſineſs.”
“No, indeed, I hope not, reading is the ruination of
all young people. I never read a book in my life but
my Bible, and the Houſe-keeper's Aſſiſtant. I was always
ſtudying to make the moſt of my time and how to
ſave or earn a penny.”
[Page 169]
A freſh cargo was now diſplayed to the wondering eyes
of Rebecca, of old mode, yellow, white ſarſenet, skeleton
wires, paſte board and blond lace, out of which ſhe
was deſired to produce a ſmart bonnet or two.”
“It is impoſſible, madam,” ſaid ſhe, “utterly impossible;
the bonnets worn now are ſo different from
what were worn ten years ſince. You muſt, indeed,
Madam, afford yourſelf new materials to make a genteel
bonnet.” Her arguments were vain; all ſhe could obtain
was a yard of mode, and four yards of riband, while
Mrs. Penure declared ſhe was leading her into extravagance,
and that the bonnet muſt laſt her ſeven years.
It is impoſſible to give a direct idea of our heroine's
ſenſations, when this miſerable woman, out of oftentation,
diſplayed to her the treaſures of her wardrobe.
Here were gowns, petticoats, nay, even ſtockings and
linen, which ſhe could no longer mend or wear, carefully
laid by her! Her narrow ſoul could not even expand
itſelf to give to others what ſhe could no longer uſe herſelf
the very wire that came out of her old caps was twisted,
kept and put in a box devoted for that purpoſe; hats
that bore the date of twenty years by their faſhion; old
ſtays, ſhoes and gloves, all were preſerved, though scarcely
worth acceptance by the pooreſt perſon.
Her houſe-keeping was of a piece with the reſt; every
thing was under lock and key; bread and ſmall beer
were the only things to which the ſervants had free access;
her table, it is true, was well ſupplied, but it was
oftentation, not liberality, occaſioned it. Her female
viſitors were ſeldom aſked to take more than one glaſs
of wine after dinner, for when ſhe had taken half a glaſs
herſelf ſhe would return the ſtopper to the decanter, and
cry, “I never allow myſelf more,” This was the ſignal,
and the wine was immediately removed, when ſhe would
ſay, “but perhaps, ma'am, you would have liked another
glaſs?”
It cannot be expected, in ſuch a family, that our heroine
could be happy; ſhe endeavoured to be content,
but the effort was vain. Mr. Penure ſaw ſhe was far superior
to the ſtation ſhe was in; he pitied her, but he
could do no more, without incurring the anger of a
[Page 170]
woman whom he had been accuſtomed to obey, and dreaded
to offend.
It happened one afternoon, when his Lady-wife was
gone to pay a viſit of ceremony (a thing not very customary
with him) the juſtice took his tea at home. Rebecca
was ſummoned to the parlour to make it; but,
alas! Rebecca could produce only a tea ſpoonful of
black tea, and a very ſmall quantity of ſugar.
“Why, ſure, child, you are not allowanced in tea
and ſugar?” ſaid he, with a look of diſpleaſure.
“There is plenty for me, Sir,” ſaid ſhe, affecting a
ſmile, and—.
“By heavens!” ſaid the juſtice, ſtamping with passion,
“you ſhall make no excuſe for her; confound the
ſtingy narrow-hearted—.
“Hold, Sir, I beſeech you,” cried Rebecca; “you
quite terrify me!”
“I am ſorry for it, child,” ſaid he; “but to think
my wife ſhould dare treat you thus, you who are every
way her ſuperior, and who, if I miſtake not, was born
to be ſerved by others, not be a ſervant yourſelf!”
“You are miſtaken, Sir,” ſaid our heroine, her eyes
falling as ſhe ſpoke: “Indeed you are miſtaken. I
am a poor orphan, without friends or connexions, and
have only to lament that my education has been ſuperior
to my fate. My birth was humble, and, I truſt, my
heart is humble; but my feelings are ſometimes more
than I can well bear.
The juſtice rang the bell; he wiſhed to hide his emotions.
“Get me ſome tea and ſugar,” ſaid he, giving
half a guinea to a ſervant who entered. He then drew
his chair toward our heroine, took one of her hands,
and told her “he felt inclined to prove himſelf her
friend, if ſhe would direct by what means to do it.”
“Be not alarmed, my lovely girl,” ſaid he, “though
my eyes acknowledge you beautiful, my heart only feels
for you as for a ſiſter, or a daughter. If you can venture
to make me your friend, confide in me, and truſt to
my honeſt intention; I will ſerve you to the utmoſt of
my power.”
During tea Rebecca had diſcloſed to her maſter the
[Page 171]
chief incidents of her life, veiling only thoſe which concerned
Sir George. Time had paſſed unobſerved. The
juſtice had drawn forth his purſe, and putting ten guinias
into the hands of Rebecca, entreated her to accept
them as the gift of a father. She ſtrenuouſly oppoſed
the liberal donation. He had taken her hand, and closing
it with the money within it, held it while he was
ſpeaking, when the door opened, and Mrs. Penure ſtood
before them. The juſtice ſtarted, and dropped Rebecca's
hand. The money fell to the floor.
The rage of Mrs. Penure inflamed her features, and
ſhot from her eyes; ſhe could not ſpeak, but ſhrieking
in a terrific manner flew at Rebecca, and would have
made her feel the weight of her tremenduous hand, had
not her huſband ſtepped between them. She recovered
her ſpeech.
“Profligate wretch,” ſaid ſhe “vile, ungenerous villain!
is it thus my tenderneſs and condeſcenſion, in taking
you to my bed, is re-paid? Is my money to be
ſquandered on your painted Jezabels that you bring into
my houſe to diſhonor me? Oh! my unfortunate lot!
Muſt I beggarred by an ungrateful wretch? Yes, I ſee
all my property will be waſted, and I ſhall go to the work-house.”
Here her tears broke out, and what with sobbing
and ſcreaming ſhe became unintelligible. Rebecca
would not ſtop to vindicate herſelf. She retired to her
room in ſilence, and ſoon after received a meſſage from
her miſtreſs to leave the houſe, who, at the ſame time,
made her ill behaviour a plea for not paying her wages,
though ſhe had been in the family above four months.
As ſhe was going out at the gate to ſeek the London
coach, one of the ſervants put a folded paper in her hand.
On opening it ſhe ſaw not the ten guineas, but a ten
pound note, with theſe words:
Letter “I know you have not been paid; accept this as a
ſmall return for your ſervices. God bleſs you, and
make you happy.
J. Penure .”
[Page 172]
C H A P. XXXII.
OLD ACQUAINTANCE RENEWED.
The coach ſat Rebecca down in Piccadilly; it was
quite dark. She thought it was beſt to go immediately
to Mrs. Harris's, and determined to take a coach
for that purpoſe. As ſhe ſtood waiting for her trunk to
be taken from the boot, two genteel young men paſſed
her, one of which turned round, and regarding her attentively,
“it is her, by heavens!” ſaid he, and flew towards
her.—Rebecca turned ſuddenly round, and discovered
the features of Sir George Worthy.
“My angelic Rebecca!” ſaid he, folding her in his
arms, regardleſs of the place where they ſtood, “do I
once more behold you? Do I indeed claſp you to my
breaſt, or is it an illuſion?”
“Sir George,” ſaid ſhe, ſtruggling to free herſelf
from his embrace, “I rejoice to ſee you well; but I
know not what I have done to deſerve this inſult.”
“Who ſhall dare inſult you, my adorable girl? I
have found you after ſuch a long ſeparation, when I
thought you loſt for ever, and we will never part
again.”
“For heaven's ſake let me go Sir George. Why
am I thus detained? Are you not married?”
By this time a crowd had gathered round them. An
old ſailor ſeeing a woman in diſtreſs ruſhed forward, and
ſtruck Sir George a blow that made him relinquiſh his
hold. Rebecca ſprang from him, and forgetful of her
trunk, ran haſtily down St. James's-ſtreet. When ſhe
had reached the bottom ſhe ſtopped to recover her
breath, and then proceeded ſlowly down Pall-Mall.
A poor miſerable looking object, whoſe emaciated
frame was but thinly ſheltered by a tattered mode cloak
for gown ſhe had none, from nocturnal damps, supporing
her feeble ſteps by holding by the iron rails before
[Page 173]
one of the houſes, in a weak, tremulous voice entreated
charity.
Rebecca never turned aſide from the ſupplications of
miſery. She ſtopped, and put her hand in her pocket.
They ſtood immediately under two large lamps.
“Merciful heaven!” cried the poor mendicant, laying
her cold hand on the one Rebecca had extended
with relief, and gazing ardently at her—“Rebecca!
my child! do you not know me?”
Our heroine looked intently on the pale viſage of the
object before her; miſery and ſickneſs had ſomewhat altered
it, but ſhe ſaw it was her mother. The feelings
of a daughter ruſhed impetuouſly over her heart. She
ſunk on her knees upon the pavement, and, claſping her
parent in her arms, exclaimed, “Oh, my mother! my
dear diſtreſſed mother!” and burſt into an agony of tears.
When the tumult of their feelings were ſubſided, Rebecca
thought of calling a coach, but where were they
to drive? She could not think of taking her mother to
Mrs. Harris's; they therefore drove to a ſtreet in Westminster,
where Mrs. Serl had formerly lodged, and were
fortunate enough to meet with an apartment empty.
Here their mutual embraces and endearments were again
renewed: Rebecca wept for joy at having found a parent
whoſe future life ſhe would endeavour to make happy,
and Mrs. Serl ſhed tears of contrition for having once
treated ſo unworthily ſo good a daughter.
She informed Rebecca that after they left Lincolnshire
Serl commenced gameſter, ſharper and ſwindler;
that his daughter went on the town, and turned an abandoned
profligate; and that, at laſt overwhelmed with poverty
and diſgrace, Serl himſelf had died in the FlectPrison,
leaving her in the greateſt diſtreſs, having neither
clothes, money, or friends. Her annuity had been long
ſince ſold, and ſhe muſt have periſhed, had ſhe not providentially
met with her daughter.
When Rebecca viewed her mother's tattered garments,
and thought of getting her more comfortable clothing,
her own trunk recurred to her memory. “I hope
[Page 174]
it is not loſt,” ſaid ſhe; “and it is lucky what little
money I poſſeſs is in my pocket.”
Her mother informed her that there was ſome decent
apparel at a pawn broker's in the neighbourhood, and
Rebecca, having received inſtructions in what manner to
proceed, went out in order to get it; but what was her
aſtoniſhment, on opening the parcel when ſhe had
brought it home, to ſee a gown made of a piece of India
chints, which ſhe remembered to have had in her
trunk when it was ſent into Lincolnſhire, with a muſlin
apron, and ſeveral other things, which ſhe equally knew
to be her own.
“Gracious heaven!” ſaid ſhe, dropping the parcel
from her hands, and fixing her eyes on her mother.
“What is the matter, my dear?” ſaid Mrs. Serl;
“that was a gown given me by poor Serl; it had been
bought for his firſt wife.”
“It was mine,” ſaid Rebecca, in a firm voice. “If
he told you it was his, he told a falſhood; it was in the
trunk which I loſt four years ago.”
An explanation now took place, which convinced
Mrs. Serl what a villain ſhe had choſen to ſucceed the
worthy Mr. Littleton; but our heroine would not ſuffer
her to make any painful retroſpects, or to accuſe herſelf.
She poured the ſweet balm of affectionate conſolation into
the boſom of her mother. She forgot her own forrows,
and ſeemed to have no with but to render her parent
the like forgetful of every paſt diſagreeable event.
The next morning ſhe repaired to the houſe where the
ſtage had ſtopped in Piccadilly to enquire for her trunk.
“The old gentleman took it away with him,” ſaid
one of the waiters, “and paid all expences;” for Rebecca,
in her fright the preceding night, had not paid her
fare to town.
“What old gentleman?” ſaid ſhe, ſurpriſed.
“Why, the old gentleman who knocked the young
man down that was ſo rude to you. He read the directions
on the trunk when it was taken from the boot,
ſwore he was your uncle, and inſiſted on having it; as
he offered to pay all expences the coachman did not refuse,
and both he and the young man went off together
[Page 175]
to ſearch for you; but returned in about an hour, and
left word, if you ſhould call this morning, for me to tell
you, you might hear of your trunk at number 46, Bedford-Square.”
“That is Lord Oſſiter's,” ſaid Rebecca, ſcarcely
able to reſpire.
“And, moreover,” ſaid the man, “the young gentleman
told me, if I could find where you was gone, or
could bring him to a ſight of you, he would give me ten
guineas, and ſo, ſeeing as how you are here, we had better
take a coach and go together.”
“No,” ſaid Rebecca, ſtruggling to ſuppreſs her emotions,
“No, I cannot go juſt now; in the afternoon it
will be more convenient. I will juſt ſtep back to my
lodgings, and return to you again by two o'clock.”
The man was ſatisfied. Rebecca tripped out of the
houſe, called a coach, and drove home. During her little
ride her mind dwelt on the ſingularity of the circumstance.
She had juſt heard the man, who reſcued her
from Sir George's inſults, had gone away with him, had
taken her trunk, and directed her to find it at Lord Ossiter's.
It was an inexplicable riddle; he had called himself
her uncle, but ſhe knew ſhe had but one uncle and
he was abroad in the navy. She was certainly fortunate
in eſcaping a ſnare, which ſhe had no doubt was
laid to trepan her. Lord Oſſiter had, perhaps, represented
her to Sir George as an abandoned creature, devoid
of virtue or principal; and that gentleman, once ſo esteemed,
ſo reſpected, was now conſidered as one, who,
believing her loſt to honour, would join his Lordſhip
in any ſtratagem to decoy her into his power.
Full of theſe ideas, ſhe told her mother ſhe would
immeadiately remove from the apartments ſhe then occupied,
leſt ſhe ſhould have been watched home, and
Sir George might be directed where to find her.
“Alas! my dear mother,” ſaid ſhe, “I am ſenſible
of my own weakneſs. I hope I love virtue as well as
woman ought; but I know I love Sir George, and
though he is the huſband of another; though reaſon, religon,
honour, all plead againſt my paſſion, ſtill, ſtill it
is ſo engraven on my heart, that to eradicate it, I feel
[Page 176]
is totally impoſſible. Can I then anſwer for my own
fortitude? I fear not: I might ſink under powerful
temptations; let me then fulfil my duty, and avoid
them.”
Her mother approved and ſtrengthened theſe resolutions,
and, having but very few things to put together,
in leſs than two hours they were in a new lodging
near Millbank, Wettminſter. Here Rebecca ſunk under
the fatigue of body, and agitation of mind ſhe had undergone,
and a fever enſued, which brought her almoſt
to the brink of the grave. The ſtrength of a good constitution
ſoon combated the violence of the diſorder, and
ſhe began to recover her ſtrength, when her mother was
attacked with one more alarming; this was the smallpox,
which, to a perſon of her years, was expected to
be fatal.
Ten pounds was all the worldly wealth Rebecca possessed
when ſhe met her mother; but ten pounds in a
houſe of ſickneſs would laſt but a very ſhort time; ſhe,
therefore on examining the contents of her purſe, when
her mother ſickened, found it contained but fifteen shillings,
and there was a doctor's bill to pay. It was alſo
neceſſary his attendance ſhould be continued to Mrs.
Serl, whoſe life was in imminent danger. During the
firſt ten days of her mother's illneſs Rebecca hardly left
her bedſide, denying herſelf almoſt the neceſſaries of
life, in order to lengthen out her little ſtore; but on the
fourteenth day ſhe was pronounced out of danger, and
that good nurſing, and nouriſhing food, was all that was
neceſſary to her reſtoration.
“Alas!” ſaid Rebecca, “I have no poſſible means
of procuring thoſe neceſſary comforts.” She was stooping,
as ſhe ſpoke, to take ſome gruel from the fire, the
pin of her handkercheif dropped out, and the picture of
Lady Mary ſwung forward againſt her hand.
Rebecca gazed at it mournfully.—“True,” ſaid
ſhe, “it is ſet in gold, and might afford a temporary
ſupply; but, then, is it not the portrait of my adored
benefactreſs? And does it not alſo contain the ſemblance
of the only man I ever did or ever can love? Duty
[Page 177]
alas! what right have I to talk of love? Is he not already
married? And were he not, have I not given a
ſolemn vow never to liſten to his addreſſes? Fooliſh,
fooliſh, Rebecca! why doſt thou nouriſh a paſſion
that muſt be forever hopeleſs?”
She was returning the picture to her boſom, when it
ſtruck her ſhe might, perhaps, get the minature carefully
taken out, and diſpoſe of the gold in which they were
ſet. “If ſo,” ſaid ſhe, “I may comfort my mother,
and yet preſerve the reſpect due to the portrait of Lady
Mary.”
CHAP. XXXIII.
THE BENEVOLENT LADY. Rebecca was ſo pleaſed with the project of raiſing
a ſupply of money from the gold, that ſhe told her
mother ſhe would go out for half an hour and breathe the
freſh air, as ſhe found the confinement ſhe had ſuffered
rather impeded her returning ſtrength. When ſhe was
out ſhe thought, by extending her walk, ſhe ſhould feel
herſelf refreſhed, ſhe therefore croſſed the Park, and going
out at Spring Gardens Gate, ſtopped at an eminent
goldſmith's in Cockſpur-ſtreet, and requeſted him to
take the pictures carefully out, and purchaſe the ſetting.
The man had juſt taken it in his hand, and was admiring
the neatneſs of the workmanſhip, and the curious contrivance
of the ſpring, when a chariot ſtopped at the
door, and a beautiful young Lady immediately entered.
The maſter of the ſhop held the picture open in his
hand while he received the Lady's orders concerning a
pair of bracelets. The portrait caught her eye: “Bleſs
me,” ſaid ſhe, “Pray whoſe is that? it is ſo like a person
that I know.”—
[Page 178]
“It belongs to that young woman, Madam; ſhe
wiſhes to ſell the gold without the pictures.”
The Lady had not before obſerved Rebecca; but now
her pale, but beautiful intereſting countenance ſtruck
her.
“It is a pity to have them unſet,” ſaid ſhe. Will
you part with it altogether? I will give you twice the
value of the gold.”
“I cannot, indeed, part with the portraits, Madam;
the one is a much valued friend long ſince dead, and the
other—.” A pale vermillion croſſed her cheek, and ſhe
heſitated.
“Aye, that other!” ſaid the Lady; “I never ſaw
any thing more like than that is to a particular friend
of mine; and even the features of the Lady ſeem familiar
to me.”
“Will you buy the gold, Sir?” ſaid Rebecca.
“No,” cried the Lady, “he ſhall not buy it. If
you will not part with it altogether to me for twice its
value, (I am certain you will pardon the remark) but
one motive could lead you to wiſh to diſpoſe of the setting.”
As ſhe was ſpeaking ſhe had taken ſeveral guineas
from her purſe, and wrapped them in paper. “You
ſhall call upon me, if you pleaſe, to-morrow morning,”
continued ſhe, preſenting our heroine with a card, under
which ſhe ſlipped into her hand the paper of money, and
without waiting for an anſwer, ſhe tripped out of the
ſhop. Rebecca was motionleſs; nor did ſhe think of
looking at the card till the maſter of the ſhop returned
from ſeeing the Lady to her carriage.
“I am glad you were ſo lucky,” ſaid he, “as to excite
the notice of that Lady; ſhe is an amiable woman,
and may prove a valuable friend.”
“Lady Chatterton,” ſaid Rebecca, reading the card.
“Yes,” continued he, “ſhe was Lady Eleanor Harcourt,
only daughter of the late Earl. She has been
married about three years. A moſt extraordinary circumstance
happened about that time; ſhe had been from
a child deſigned for her couſin, Sir George—.”
Juſt then a carriage drew up, ſeveral Ladies of faſhion
[Page 179]
demanded the jeweller's attention, and Rebecca, thinking
her mother might want her attendance, left the ſhop,
not without wiſhing ſhe could have heard what Sir
George the Lady was deſigned for, as that was a name
ſhe never heard mentioned, but ſhe felt intereſted, and
found it impoſſible to ſuppreſs the emotions of her heart.
Rebecca was truly grateful for the unexpected bounty
ſhe had received, and returned home fully reſolved to
wait on the benevolent Lady, and return her thoſe
thanks her aſtoniſhment had prevented her expreſſing at
the time: But on the morrow her mother was ſo very
ill it was impoſſible to leave her, and for ſeveral succeeding
days it rained continually: However, at length
a fine morning preſented, Mrs. Serl was greatly recovered,
and Rebecca, dreſſing herſelf as neatly as the very
limited ſtate of her wardrobe would allow, proceeded to
St. Alban's-ſtreet.
On knocking at the door ſhe was informed, that
Lady Chatterton was gone out for a morning ride; but
that, if ſhe was the young woman her Ladyſhip had met
at the jeweller's, ſhe was deſired to wait till the Lady
returned.
Rebecca was pleaſed with this little mark of attention,
and was ſhewn into a ſmall parlour, where a child,
of about eleven years old was practiſing on the pianoforte.
The child ſtopped on her entrance, and, ſtarting
from her ſeat, advanced a few ſteps towards Rebecca.
“Do not let me interrupt you Miſs,” ſaid our heroine.
“Oh! but I am ſure I cannot play, ma'am,” ſaid the
child: “Indeed I cannot; I had much rather look at
you. And pray ma'am, do not think me rude if I aſk
you if your name is not Rebecca Littleton?”
“That is my name,” ſaid the aſtoniſhed Rebecca.
“I knew, I was ſure, it could be no other,” ſaid the
child, throwing her arms round our heroine's neck;
“but you have forgot me—you do not remember your
little Lucy Oſſiter.”
“Miſs Oſſiter!”
[Page 180]
“Yes, your own little girl that loveed you ſo dearly,
and almoſt broke her poor heart when you went away:
But you ſhall not go away again, Rebecca; my dear
aunt will not let you go: I know the will not.”
“What aunt, my dear young Lady?”
“Why aunt Eleanor: I live with aunt Eleanor now.
Papa and mamma are gone to France, and brothers are
both at ſchool; ſo uncle George.—Oh! dear Rebecca,
I have got ſuch a deal to tell you about uncle George.—
I am ſure aunt will be very glad to ſee you, uncle and ſhe
are gone out together.”
“Good heaven!” thought Rebecca, “then I am in
the very houſe I moſt wiſhed to avoid. No wonder her
Ladyſhip ſaid ſhe knew the picture; but now is my only
time for avoiding a painful interview with Sir George,
who has, no doubt, though it did not ſtrike me before,
ſucceeded to his uncle's title on his marriage with his
couſin. Honour, gratitude, all unite to urge me immediately
to quit this place. Lady Chatterton has extended
toward me the hand of benevolence; nor will I repay
her by throwing myſelf in the way of her huſband, who,
from his behaviour when we met accidentally, has convinced
me he ſtill retains an improper regard for me.”
“As my Lady is not at home, my dear Miſs Oſſiter,”
ſaid ſhe, “I will call again another time.”
“Well, then, let it be ſoon, my own Rebecca; ſay
you will come again to-morrow.”
Rebecca tenderly embraced the affectionate child, and
having given her a kind of half promiſe to ſee her ſoon
again, haſtily left the houſe.
“Every thing,” ſaid ſhe, “conſpires againſt me. I
never find a friend but ſome croſs accident prevents my
reaping any benefit from their kindneſs: misfortunes
ſeem to be the only portion allotted for me in this world,
and patience and reſignation my only comforters. But I
will nor complain; I have been unexpectedly relieved
when almoſt in deſpair, when every earthly friend had
apparently forſaken me; and, I truſt, I ſhall be supported
by the ſame beneficient Power, as long as he
thinks proper to lay the burthen of life upon me.”
[Page 181]
As ſhe walked along, indulging theſe reflections, it
ſtruck her that ſhe would go to her uncle's agent, and
enquire when he had heard from him, and whether the
old gentleman was ſoon expected in England. But
when ſhe got to the place where he uſed to reſide, ſhe
found he was removed to a diſtant part of the town;
nor could the people, who then occupied the houſe,
give her a proper direction to find him.
“Now every ſtay is gone,” ſaid Rebecca, as ſhe
purſued her way homeward; “but, I thank God, I
feel my health returning, and, I ſhall be enabled to gain,
by induſtry at leaſt, the neceſſaries of life for my mother
and ſelf.” Alas! poor Rebecca, ſhe little knew how
ſmall a portion of the world's wealth fell to the ſhare of
the humble, the induſtrious female, who by continued
labour can ſcarcely gain ſufficient to ſupply, with the
coarſeſt food, the wants of nature, or to ſhield with decent
clothing her limbs from the inclemency of the weather.
While the daughters of vice and folly are ſurrounded
with luxuries, the ſuperfluous part of which would cheer
the hearts of the children of miſery; but, Oh! heavenly
reflection, the humble, virtuous female, has a ſweet
cordial comforter within that diffuſes a pleaſure over her
ſoul, which the thoughtleſs votary of folly can never
experience.
Bleſt ſpirit of content that preſides over the innocent
breaſt! How enviable are thy tranſports! Thou canſt
ſweeten the coarſe ſcanty meal of poverty, and ſhed quiet
ſlumbers on the priſoner's eye! The accuteſt pang the
heart can feel where thou haſt taken up thine abode, is
when it beholds its fallen ſiſters purchaſing the deluſive
pleaſures of wealth with the loſs of all that can render
them lovely or amiable.
Rebecca was poor, but her heart was void of discontent.
She enquired for employment, and was ſo happy
as to procure ſome; but the fruits of her almoſt inceſſant
induſtry were very inadequate to the wants of herſelf and
mother, who revived but very ſlowly from the bed of
ſickneſs.
[Page 182]
CHAP. XXXIV.
WE GO BACK TO THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.
When Sir George Worthy left England, in order,
if poſſible, to baniſh from his remembrance Rebecca
Littleton, he had, previous to his departure, viſited
his couſin Eleanor, and informed her of the ſtate of his
heart.
“I eſteem you, Eleanor,” ſaid he; “but I do not love
you as a man ought to love a woman he takes for his
wife. To be candid, my heart is in the poſſeſſion of another.”
“And to be equally candid, dear George,” replied
the lady, “mine is exactly in the ſame predicament; yet
I do not know how we ſhall avoid making each other
wretched, for my father poſitively ſwears I ſhall have you
or be a beggar, and my poor ſwain has neither name or
fortune to recommend him.”
“I mean to be abſent two years,” ſaid Sir George,
“that will give you a ſhort reprieve. I will write to
you often, and if at any time I can be of ſervice to the
man of your choice, do not heſitate to command me.”
In the Earl of Chatterton's family was a young man
nearly of the ſame age with Eleanor; he was a foundling,
and had been brought up and educated by his lordſhip in
the ſtyle of a gentleman, and when at a proper age presented
with a commiſſion.
Oakly, which was the name the Earl had given him
from having found him one morning at the foot of an
oak in his park, wrapped in a mantle, but without any
other cloathing. Oakly was a youth of ſtrict honour,
and his heart overflowed with gratitude to his benefactor,
whom he conſidered in the light of a father; but inſpite
of honour, gratitude, and innumerable reſolutions to the
contrary, he loved Lady Eleanor, ſome how or other accidentally
acquainted her with his paſſion, and found himself
beloved in return.
Things were in this ſituation when Sir George left
[Page 183]
England, and in this ſituation remained when a letter from
Eleanor ſummoned him to return, when he had been
ſcarcely abſent eighteen months. The Earl was ill, felt
himſelf daily declining, and wiſhed to ſee his daughter
married before he died. He obeyed the ſummons in
haſte.
Oakly was almoſt diſtracted. “But what am I,”
ſaid he, “that I ſhould aſpire to the hand of my patron's
daughter, an out caſt, a foundling, without family
or name, dependant on his bounty even for the
bread I eat? No, I will not impede her union with a
man every way her equal, who poſſeſſes honour and
goodneſs of heart, and will do juſtice to her virtues. I
will leave England,” ſaid he.
Unable to deliberate on a ſubject where inclination
and reaſon were ſo much at variance, he flew to the Earl,
and ſolicited an exchange into a regiment deſtined to
America. “Let me gather laurels in the field of battle,
my dear Sir,” ſaid he.
The Earl loved him tenderly. He preſſed to know
the cauſe of this unexpected application, and refuſed to
exert his intereſt in Oakly's behalf till he was informed.
“I love a woman of family and fortune,” ſaid he,
“I have ſome reaſon to think I am not indifferent to her,
and, knowing my own unfortunate ſituation, I wiſh to
avoid doing a diſhonourable action.”
“You will never act diſhonourable, Oakly,” ſaid the
Earl, “and this conduct is a proof of it. Who is the
Lady?—inform me —I will ſpeak to her friends
in your favour, and give you a genteel fortune.”
“Oh! my generous benefactor,” cried Oakly, “indeed
it is impoſſible; her parents never will conſent. I
dare not name her.”
“Come, come, you are too diffident: I am ſure there
is no family, of the leaſt diſcernment, but would think
themſelves honoured by the alliance. Come, who is the
paragon?”
“You muſt pardon me, Sir; I ſhould entirely forfeit
your friendſhip.”
“You will undoubtedly forfeit it by this unkind
[Page 184]
reserve. I am willing and able to ſerve you, Oakly; but
if, by your obſtinacy, you put it out of my power —.”
“Do not call it obſtinacy. By heavens! Oakly, I
love you as my own child; only tell me how to make
you happy, and I will do it, though it coſt half I am
poſſeſſed of.”
“Ah! my dear Sir, I fear, when you know —.”
“Know what?” cried the Earl, impatiently.
“That I love Lady Eleanor.”
“Love Eleanor!” cried he, emphatically; then your
ſuit is indeed hopeleſs.”
Oakly's heart ſunk within him.
“You are indeed a noble boy, though,” ſaid the
Earl, “and from this moment I hold myſelf bound, by
the moſt ſacred oath, never to ſuffer you to know the
want of a friend. Eleanor has, from her childhood,
been deſigned for her couſin George; indeed, my late
ſiſter and myſelf entered into a ſolemn engagement, that
which ever outlived the other ſhould ſee this union completed;
that now is my taſk. If it is abſolately necessary
to your peace to leave England, I will procure
you the deſired exchange; but I could wiſh, my dear
Oakly, you would conquer your paſſion, and remain
with us.”
“That is not in my power, Sir;” he replied, “to
be employed in actual ſervice is now the only wiſh I
have to make.”
The Earl did not mention this converſation to either
his daughter or Sir George, and Oakly carefully avoided
an interview with Eleanor till he was really appointed
to a company of foot that was expected to go for New-York
in the courſe of a few weeks. He then, having
made the neceſſary preparations for joining his regiment,
took a tender leave of her, aſſuring her it was his hope
to enſure her felicity by baniſhing from her fight a
wretch who had ſtepped between her and her duty, and
who would rather die than have it ſaid he had baſely stolen
the daughter of the man to whom he owed every enjoyment,
nay, almoſt life itſelf.
“'Tis all in vain,” ſaid Eleanor, “I can never love
[Page 185]
Sir George; nor do I think even the commands of a father
I love and revere can lead me to give him my hand.”
However, the preparations for the intended nuptials
ſtill proceeded. Sir George beheld them with total indifference.
He had uſed every endeavour to diſcover
Rebecca: he had, by various ſtratagems, traced her to
her embarkation with Miſs Abthorpe for America, and
was informed the veſſel in which they went was reported
to have been loſt, and all on board periſhed.
“Rebecca loſt!” He remembered his mother's firſt
wiſh to ſee Lady Eleanor his wife. “She is an amiable
woman,” ſaid he, “and though I cannot love again
with the emhuſiaſtic ardour I experienced for Rebecca,
I will, if ſhe voluntarily accepts my hand, exert myſelf
to make her happy. She, like myſelf, has experienced
diſappointment in her tendereſt hopes; we can at leaſt
conſole each other, and make up in friendſhip what we
want in love.”
Oakly had taken leave of his friends at Windfor, and
was on his journey for Portſmouth. Sir George was in
town with the lawyers, and the Earl and Lady Eleanor
at breakfaſt in the library, when a ſervant informed them
that a clergyman requeſted to ſpeak with them.—He
was deſired to walk up.
“I am come, my Lord,” ſaid he, ſeating himſelf
with evident embarraſſment, “from a poor woman in
this place, who, it is imagined, is at the point of death.
From ſomething ſhe has imparted to me, I imagine it
is abſolutely neceſſary for your Lordſhip to pay her a visit,
as ſhe has a circumſtance to relate which nearly concerns
your family. She is likewife in diſtreſſed circumstances,
and may, while ſhe lives, which will not be
long, require your benevolent aſſiſtance.”
The Earl never wanted to be twice told of an object
of compaſſion.—
“We will go directly,” ſaid he, and ringing the bell,
ordered the carriage. Lady Eleanor and the clergyman
accompanied him.
At a ſmall cottage, on the extremity of the foreſt, the
carriage ſtopped, and the clergyman led the way into an
[Page 186]
inner apartment, where, on a bed, expreſſive of poverty
in the extreme, lay a poor emaciated figure, in the laſt
ſtage of a conſumption.
“Here is the Earl and his daughter, Mrs. Watts,”
ſaid he.
“They are very good,” replied ſhe, “to come and
ſee ſuch a wretch as I am. Oh! Sir, Oh! my Lady,
you will never forgive me; but I cannot die in peace till
I have informed you that, through mine and my ſiſter's
wickedneſs, you have nouriſhed an impoſtor in your families,
and that the real heir to the late Sir George Worthy's
eſta e is either totally loſt, or may be a poor wanderer,
deſtitute of bread.”
The Earl and Eleanor ſat in mute aſtoniſhment, gazing
at each other.—The clergyman exhorted the penitent
to proceed.
“My eldeſt ſiſter,” ſaid ſhe, “was employed by the
late Lady Worthy to wet-nurſe her ſon, and was left at
Twickenham with the child, while her Ladyſhip made
a ſhort tour to Flanders. During her Lady's abſence my
ſiſter came to Windſor to me, bringing maſter with her.
I at that time gave ſuck to a ſweet little boy exactly of
the ſame age, whoſe mother had died at my houſe but a
month before. My ſiſter entreated me to take care of
maſter Worthy for a day, while ſhe went to town. I
conſented, and was proud of my charge. In the afternoon
(he was aſleep in the cradle) I left a little girl to
rock him, and ſtepped about half a mile to purchaſe
ſomething for ſupper againſt my ſiſter came home. I
made what haſte I could, but on my return, what was
my terror, to ſee the cradle empty, and my girl at play
in the ſtreet? However, I did not make any noiſe, or
alarm the neighbourhood; but enquiring of the girl who
had been there, ſhe ſaid only two gypſey women begging.
It immediately occurred to me, that the gold
bells and coral, together with the coſtly lace cap and jam
the child had on, had been the incitement to this theft.
When my ſiſter returned ſhe was almoſt diſtracted—her
character would be gone—ſhe ſhould never dare face
her Lady again! That evening we could think of
[Page 187]
nothing in order to deprecate the ſtrom we ſhould expect on
my Lady's return, till the diabolical thought preſented
itſelf of ſubſtituting my little nurſling, whoſe features
and complexion were nearly the ſame, in the room of
maſter Worthy, quieting our conſciences with the ides,
that, as his mother was dead, and his father poor, and
talked of going abroad, it would be doing a deed of charity,
and that, if we ſhould ever find the loſt inſant, we
might then acknowledge the fraud. Accordingly my
ſiſter returned to Twickenham with the child, the plan
ſucceeded beyond our expectations, for we feared the penetration
of the ſervants, and I wrote to the father of the
boy that his child was dead.”
“And who is it then,” cried the enraged Earl,
“whom you have thus infamouſly palmed upon the family
for the ſon of my ſiſter, and who was within a few
days to have been married to my daughter?”
“His father's name was George Littleton,” ſhe replied,
faintly, “and he was chriſtened after him.”
“And have you never heard any thing of my poor
couſin?” ſaid Eleanor, tenderly.
“Never, Madam; but ſhould he ever be found, he has
on his right arm, juſt below the ſhoulder, the mark of a
mulberry.”
“Saddle my horſes—ſend off all my ſervants,” ſaid
the Earl, ſtarting up; “he ſhall not go to that d—d
fighting place.”
“My dear father!” cried Eleanor.
“Rejoice, rejoice, my girl, for upon my ſoul the
young dog had that mark on his arm when I found him
ſprawling under the oak.”
“And is he alive, then?” ſaid the poor woman.
“Thank God—then I ſhall die content.”
Eleanor ſelt intereſted in the ſate of the poor creature,
who had made this important diſcovery. She promiſed
to befriend her while ſhe lived, and to take care of her
daughter, a girl about fifteen years old. She then returned
home with her father, who immediately dispatched
a meſſenger to bring his new-ſound nephew to town
again.—While Eleanor retired to her apartment to
[Page 188]
reflect on the alteration a few hours had made, and how
much it had brightened her future proſpects.
George Littleton, as we muſt now call him, however
conſcious of his innocence, felt greatly hurt at being ſo
long the uſurper of another's name and property; but the
Earl would not ſuffer him to dwell on that ſubject, and
on his marriage with Lady Eleanor. Sir George presented
his quandom rival with the writings of an eſtate, worth
five hundred pounds a year, given to him and his heirs
for ever; and ſo fond were they of his ſociety, that it was
but a ſmall part of every year he ſpent from them.
The Earl did not long ſurvive his daughter's marriage,
and Sir George ſucceeded to the title of Earl of Chatterton,
the Earl having begged the reverſion of it for him
ſome time previous to his death.
Mr. Littleton had given up all hopes of ever again
hearing of Rebecca.—He imagined her dead, but her
image was ſo deeply engraven on his heart, that he resolved
never to enter into the married ſtate. Sometimes
he would think ſhe might, perhaps, have been his ſiſter,
for he had never heard her father's Chriſtian name, but
his heart recoiled from this ſuggeſtion She was undoubtedly
a relation, yet he had never heard Rebecca
mention an uncle, but ſhe might have many; he had never
made many enquiries concerning her family.
One evening, when he was at a ſopper-party with
Lord Oſſiter, that nobleman addreſſed him with,
“George, I ſaw an old acquaintance of your's laſt night.
Ah, now I think of it, ſhe may be a relation.”
“Who do you mean my Lord?”
“Who! why who but that demure, primitive piece of
affected innocence, Mrs. Rebecca Littleton.”
“You muſt be miſtaken, my Lord: I have every
reaſon to think ſhe has been dead ſome years.”
“And I have ſubſtantial reaſons to think ſhe was alive
laſt night, and in my arms.”
He then gave an account of the affair at Lord Winterton's,
little to the honour of hour heroine. He alſo averred,
that ſhe voluntarily accompanied him in a chaiſe to a
neighbouring town, where ſhe ſpent the night at an inn,
[Page 189]
but left it in the morning with a perſon whom he imagined
ſhe liked better.
“Poor girl,” ſaid George, mentally, “heavy muſt
have been the trials that drove her to a life of infamy.”
From that time he frequented every place where he
ſuppoſed it likely to meet with her. “I will ſnatch her
from perdition,” ſaid he. “She ſhall ſhare my little
portion, eat of my bread, and drink of my cup. I will
ſpeak conſolation to a mind that was once as pure as angels,
and cannot without infinite pain, be intimate with
vice.”
About this time Lord Oſſiter's extravagance had ſo
envolved his eſtates, that it was neceſſary he ſhould make
a trip to the Continent in order to retrieve them. George
undertook to ſettle all his debts, and put the eſtates under
proper regulations, and to this purpoſe took up his
reſidence in Bedford-Square. He had been dining out,
where the champaigne flew briſkly round, when he accidentally
met our heroine juſt deſcended from the ſtage.
The wine gave him a great ſlow of ſpirits, which, added
to the relation he had heard from Lord Oſſiter, accounts
for the rude manner in which he accoſted her.
The blow he received from the old ſailor almoſt stunned
him: However, he followed him into the houſe, and
inſiſted on ſatisfaction for the inſult, as he termed it. The
old man ſwore it was a blow given in a right cauſe, and
that he was ready to give him a dozen more if he was
not already ſatisfied.
During this altercation the coachman came in with
Rebecca's trunk, and aſked where the young woman
was to pay him his fare?
“She is ran off,” ſaid a man who ſaw the tranſaction.
“Well then,” ſays the coachman, “I muſt keep the
trunk for what ſhe owes.” As he ſpoke he reſted one
end of it on a chair near a table, on which ſtood a candle.
The old ſailor looked at the directions, rubbed his
eyes, and looked again. “By all that's good,” ſaid he,
“it is my own girl, my Rebecca?—Which way did ſhe
go? Let me follow her. Stand out of my way.”
[Page 190]
“Not till you have paid me,” ſaid the coachman,
ſurlily.
The old man threw down five ſhillings, and deſiring
a waiter to take care of the trunk, ran out, followed by
George; but, inſtead of turning into Pall-Mall, they
went through the Palace into the Park, their ſearch was
therefore vain.
As they returned ſlowly together, George aſked the
old man “if he was any relation to Miſs Littleton?”
“Yes,” ſaid he, “I am all the relation ſhe has in
the world, and a deviliſh poor one too, for I have not
above half a guinea at this preſent time in my pocket.
I have not been in London above two hours, nor in
England above eight and forty.”
“Is your name Littleton, Sir?”
“So my mother told me: I ſuppoſe ſhe knew.”
“Pardon me if I am troubleſome; but had you ever
a ſon?”
“Yes, but he died an infant.”
“You were informed he died at Windſor?”
The old man anſwered in the affirmative.
“Ah! my dear Sir,” ſaid George, “you were deceived—
your ſon ſtill lives—longs eagerly to embrace
you—and divide with you the competence he enjoys.”
By this time they had returned to the public-houſe.
George called for a room, knelt before his father, and
related to him all the reader is already acquainted with.
What wonder if, in the delightful hurry of ſpirits this
diſcovery occaſioned, they did not think of the neceſſity
of writing a note for Rebecca, in caſe ſhe came to enquire
for her trunk; but, ſatisfied with leaving a verbal
meſſage, they repaired to Bedford-ſquare, to enjoy the
pleaſures of an uninterrupted converſation.
[Page 191]
CHAP. XXXV.
DISAPPOINTMENT.
The next morning Rebecca, ſo dear to both their
hearts, recurred to their imaginations; George
beheld her in want, plunged in infamy, the horrors of
which her ſuſceptible heart ſeverely felt, and from which
ſhe could by no means extricate herſelf.
“She may be in want,” ſaid his father; “but I'll
be d—d if ſhe is infamous. I know the dear girl,
George, and I'd ſtake my life upon her innocence. He
then gave his ſon an account of the manner in which he
found her in America, of the reſpect and eſteem ſhe created
wherever ſhe was known, and how much ſhe was beloved
by Colonel Abthorpe's family. But let us go to
the houſe where the coach ſtopped,” continued he; “ſhe
will moſt likely call there to get her trunk.”
They went out together, and entered the houſe juſt ten
minutes after Rebecca had left it. Diſappointed and
grieved, unable by any means to trace which way ſhe had
gone, and fearing ſhe would be diſtreſſed by the loſs of
her trunk, which might contain all her wordly poſſeſſions,
they returned heavily home, and reſolved to advertiſe it.
This they immediately did in ſeveral papers, in ſuch a
manner as it was impoſſible for Rebecca not to know it
was herſelf that was meant, though only the initials of
the name were uſed; but Rebecca never ſaw the papers,
and the repeated advertiſements were fruitleſs.
George had introduced his father to Lord and Lady
Chatterton; but, thought Rebecca had been once or twice
mentioned before that Lady, he had always avoided entering
into explanations, and Lady Chatterton did not
know that ſhe was the woman George had ſo long loved;
for though, in the earlier part of their intimacy, he
had frequently declared that his heart was engaged, he
had never ſaid to whom, or whether ſhe was above or
beneath him in rank; but ſimply ſaid, he had no hope of
being united to her.
[Page 192]
On the day Lady Chatterton had met Rebecca at the
jeweller's, ſhe mentioned the circumſtance at dinner
time. George and his father that day dined with them.
“I wanted to buy it of her,” ſaid ſhe, “for one of the
pictures was ſo like George Littleton, and the other was
a Lady, but I do not recollect who, though I think, I
have ſeen the features before.”
“Good heavens!” ſaid George, “I am certain it
could only be Rebecca herſelf.”
“I wiſh it may,” ſaid the Lady;—“but I did not
think of it at the time I ſaw her: however, I have appointed
her to come here to-morrow.”
“How did the poor girl look?” ſaid old Mr. Littleton.
“Very pale,” replied the Lady, “and, I fear, is
much diſtreſſed by the agitation ſhe diſcovered in her
countenance, and her viſible reluctance to part with the
picture.”
“Oh! my poor loſt Rebecca,” ſaid George, and, rising
haſtily from table, left the room, to give vent to
thoſe emotions he could no longer ſuppreſs.
Rebecca, in diſtreſs, offering, with evident reluctance
the gold that enveloped his portrait to ſale, convinced
him he ſtill retained a tender place in her remembrance;
once to have been beloved by Rebecca would have been
his higheſt wiſh—now ſhe was contaminated—loſt to virtue!
And, though ſtill inexpreſſibly dear to his heart,
ſhe could never be his wife; yet ſhe might be innocent.
Lord Oſſiter was not a man of the ſtricteſt veracity. He
would have given worlds for an interview with her, and
unable to wait the iſſue of the morning, when ſhe was expected
in St. Alban's-ſtreet, he obtained from Lady Chatterton
a direction to the jeweller, and haſtened to Cockspur-street,
in hopes to be able through him to trace out
her place of abode; but the jeweller had never ſeen her
before, and had hardly thought of her ſince. He could
give him no information.
Thoſe only who have felt the pangs of ſuſpence can
imagine the anxiety of Mr. Littleton and George during
the night. The next morning they repaired early to St.
[Page 193]
Alban's-ſtreet, but the day paſſed and no Rebecca appeared.
Another and another morning came, and ſtill
brought with them diſappointment.
“She will never come,”—ſaid George.—“The poor
girl is conſcious of her unhappy ſituation, and ſhame prevents
her taking advantage of Lady Chatterton's offers
of ſervice. Mr. Littleton began to be of the ſame opinion;
but the benevolent Lady Chatterton never went
out without leaving orders with her porter, that, ſhould
Rebecca call, ſhe might be deſired to wait till her return.
“I will myſelf,” ſaid ſhe, “have the pleaſure
of preſenting her to her uncle. She ſhall not be haſtily
informed that he is in England, left it ſhould overpower
her ſpirits, and if I find her worthy, I will give her to
her amiable couſin, and make her a fortune worth his acceptance.”
But unfortunately Miſs Oſſiter's joy, the effuſions of
which was mingled with incoherent intelligence concerning
her uncle's, marriage, prevented poor Rebecca from
reaping any benefit from her Ladyſhip's kind intentions
in her behalf.
George Littleton had accompanied Lord and Lady
Chatterton in their morning ride. They returned together.
Miſs Oſſiter came running to them as they entered
the parlour.
“Oh! dear aunt, who do you think has been here—
the greateſt ſtranger! I do not think you know her; but
I told her I was ſure you would be glad to ſee her.”
“Why, who was it, my love?” ſaid her Ladyſhip,
ſeating herſelf.
“Why, it was my own Rebecca Littleton; I knew
her in a minute, though ſhe is ſo pale and thin.”
“And where is ſhe?” ſaid George, almoſt choaked
with riſing emotions!
“She could not wait any longer,” replied the child;
“but ſaid ſhe would call again to-morrow”
“Was ever any thing ſo unfortunate!” ſaid Lady
Chatterton.
George bit his lips, took haſty ſtrides backward and
[Page 194]
forward in the room, frequently ſtruck his forehead with
his hand, but ſaid not a word.
In the afternoon the following letter was brought to
Lady Chatterton:
Letter
“ Madam ,
“Agreeable to your Ladyſhip's benevolent deſire, I
this morning waited on you in St. Alban's-ſtreet, an honor
which the extreme illneſs of my mother had prevented
my enjoying ſo early as I could have wiſhed. While
I was, in compliance with your commands, waiting your
Ladyſhip's return from airing, I diſcovered that Lord
Chatterton and Sir George Worthy are one and the ſame
perſon; it therefore ſtruck me that your Ladyſhip, having
ſeen his portrait in my poſſeſſion, might entertain but
an indifferent opinion of my character: It might alſo occasion
uneaſineſs between my Lord and you, and interrupt
that felicity which I ſervently wiſh may be as permanent
and laſting as your lives. I thought it my
duty, therefore, to explain to your Ladyſhip the means
by which this portrait came into my poſſeſſion.
“I once, Madam, lived in the family of the late Lady
Mary Worthy, more as an highly favoured companion
than a ſervant. Indeed ſhe was to me a generous
friend, a dear and reſpected benefactreſs, whom living I
loved with the affection of a daughter, and whom dead
I can never ceaſe to lament.
“Some months after her death, I received her portrait
as a preſent from Sir George, by the hands of Mrs.
Harley, her Ladyſhip's houſe-keeper, but did not know
it contained the reſemblance of Sir George himſelf till
ſome time after it had been in my poſſeſſion; nor have
I ſeen him ſince, till about two months ago, when I
accidentally met him in the ſtreet, and even then we
ſcarcely ſpoke to each other.
“Permit me, Madam, to return my thanks for the
unexpected bounty you ſo delicately beſtowed upon me;
to thank you alſo for that benevolence of heart which
led you ſo far to intereſt yourſelf in my behalf, as to with
again to ſee me; to have enjoyed your friendly protection
would have been a cordial to my depreſſed ſoul; to
[Page 195]
deserve it, the ſtudy of my life: but, alas, Madam, an insurmountable
obſtacle is placed between me and ſo enviable
a diſtinction. Since I was ſo happy as to meet you,
a circumſtance has occurred, which will prevent my again
having the pleaſure of waiting on you: But permit me
to offer up the moſt ardent prayers for the continued happiness
of yourſelf and Lord. May peace and love ever
dwell in your boſoms, and proſperity crown your days.
Permit me alſo to add, that however inconſiſtent my conduct
may appear, my heart will everflow with the moſt
grateful affection towards your Ladyſhip, while it beats
in the breaſt of,
Madam,
Your obliged humble ſervant,
REBECCA LITTLETON.”
P. S. I muſt entreat your Ladyſhip to inform my dear
Miſs Oſſiter, how much I was gratified by her affectionate
remembrance of me, and that I ſhall ever pray for her
happineſs. Section “I can't comprehend all this,” ſaid Lady Chatterton,
giving the letter into George Littleton's hand. He ran
his eye haſtily over the contents.
“But I can,” ſaid he: “I conceive it all; the dear
girl has never heard of the diſcovery of the real Sir George
Worthy. She imagines me to be your huſband, and the
generoſity of her ſoul will not ſuffer her to throw herſelf
in the way of a man who once proſeſſed to love her, and
whom, from the whole tenor of her conduct, I have reason
to think ſhe loves.”
“I would lay my life ſhe is a good girl,” ſaid Lady
Chatterton; “indeed her countenance appeared the index
of a mind replete with innocence and purity. I will
inſtantly order the carriage, and go to her; nor will I return
without her.”
“Dear, generous Lady Chatterton,” ſaid George,
ringing the bell.
“Where is the perſon who brought this letter?” ſaid
the Lady.
“It was brought by a porter, Madam, and he did not
ſtop a moment.”
[Page 196]
The joy that had for a moment animated the features
of George inſtantly vaniſhed. He again caught up the
letter, but there was no addreſs annexed to it.
Juſt then his father entered, and they lamented together,
that now they were more than ever convinced of the
worth of Rebecca ſhe had effectually ſecluded herſelf
from them.
“Overwhelmed with poverty too,” ſaid George,
and attendant on a ſick mother, who may, perhaps, be
periſhing for want, not only of medical aſſiſtance, but of
the comforts and neceſſaries on which exiſtence depends.”
“We will uſe every endeavour though to diſcover
her retreat,” ſaid Lady Chatterton, wiping away the tears
that ſtole from her expreſſive eyes, “and when we have
found her we will chaſe ſorrow from her heart, and unite
our endeavours to make her forget ſhe had ever been unhappy.”
CHAP. XXXVI.
LADY CHATTERTON'S BIRTH-DAY. After every probable method had been taken by
Mr. Littleton, George and Lady Chatterton, to
diſcover our heroine's retreat, all proving equally ineffectual,
they were obliged to reſt ſatisfied that no exertion
of theirs had been wanting; and truſt to chance for a
diſcovery, which their united efforts had been unable to
make. Old Mr. Littleton began to be tired of living on
ſhore, and applied for employment; but as he annexed
to the requeſt the condition of being promoted in the service,
he fonnd but little attention was paid to it, and he
only received repeated promiſes, that when opportunity
offered he ſhould be remembered. He ſpent great part of
his time with the Chatterton family, and as the ſummer
approached it was propoſed, that both himſelf and George
ſhould accompany them to their country ſeat.
[Page 197]
Lady Chatterton's birth-day was on the 7th of June,
and ſhe made a point of always celebrating it before ſhe
left town, her huſband regularly preſenting her with two
hundred pounds to be expended on the occaſion. Mr.
Clayton, his Lordſhip's chaplain, being caterer extraordinary,
always provided the entertainment, in which her
Ladyſhip was ſo very ſelfiſh, as to allow no one to partake
but her huſband, this identical chaplain, and herſelf.
Mr. Clayton was always extremely buſy for ſome
weeks previous to the day, the whole cities of London,
Weſtminſter, and their environs, being ranſacked for delicacies
to ſuit her Ladyſhip's taſte; for on this day ſhe
was a real voluptuary, though all the reſt of her life was
marked by temperance and moderation: But to ſpeak
without a metaphor, Lady Chatterton was a woman of
ſo unfaſhionable a turn, that, rather than raiſe the envy
of half the town, by giving a ſplendid ball, ſhe choſe to
expend the money her huſband gave her in relieving indigence,
and raiſing depreſſed merit.
“There ſhall be ſome cauſe for rejoicing on my birth-day,”
ſaid ſhe, “for I will cheer the afflicted ſpirit, and
fulfil the duties incumbent on my ſtation; we were created
to be of ſervice to each other, and we have no reason
to rejoice in our creation but as we fulfil the deſign
of him who gave us being.”
Mr. Clayton, therefore, carefully ſearched for objects
proper to excite her Ladyſhip's compaſſion, and ſhare
her benevolence. The happy ſeaſon now drew near,
and Clayton took his uſal walks round the metropolis,
while, with a laudable curioſity, he made little errands
into chandlers-ſhops, green-ſtalls, and public houſes, in
order to learn the circumſtances of the people in every
poor neighbourhood through which he paſſed. It happened,
as he was purchaſing ſome barly-ſugar at a ſhop
of the former deſcription, he ſaw two ſuſpicious looking
men aſcend the ſtairs, and immediately after heard a
buſtle in the appartment over the ſhop. Preſently the
men came down, accompanied by a genteel looking
man in deep mourning. He had the air and manner of
[Page 198]
a gentleman; but his uncombed hair, and pale, unshaven
face, beſpoke a mind ill at eaſe.
“Well, they have nabb'd him at laſt,” ſaid the mistress
of the ſhop, as the young man and his ungenteel
companions left the houſe together.—
“Would you believe it, Sir, that young man, not ſix
months ago, was one of the gayeſt bucks about town.
I remember him flaſhing away like a Lord, and I was
told he viſited Lords and gentlefolks of great fortune.
Indeed, they did ſay, there was a Lady of quality in
love with him, but that was not much to his credit or
advantage, for ſhe was a married woman, and once he
had liked to have got himſelf killed by her huſband.”
“But if he was ſo gay,” ſaid Clayton, “how came
he ſo reduced as he now appears?”
“Why, Sir, you muſt know I can give you good
information, for I once lived ſervant in the family,
though now, thank God, I can hold up my head without
ſervice, or without being beholding to any body,
and that is more than every one can ſay.”
“Well, but about the young gentleman,” ſaid Clayton,
rather impatiently.
“Yes, as I was ſaying, he was a gay ſpark, and
Miſs, his ſiſter, a very fine Lady. His father was a merchant,
and kept a large houſe in the city, and lived
away at a very high rate; coach, ſervants, every thing
like a Lord: Well, behold you, he died about ſix
months ago, and left not a farthing behind him, ſo
away went coach, fine houſe, furniture, plate and all,
to pay his debts, and Madam, Miſs, and her brother,
forced to humble themſelves, ſo they came to lodge
with me. The young man got a trifling place in ſome
office, and that is all they have to live on, which, I believe,
in my conſcience, is little enough, for they run
fine long bills with me.
Why, Sir, they owes me above three guineas now; but,
ſeeing as how other people are taken meaſures to get
their own, I ſhall make bold to aſk for mine. Charity
begins at home, is an old proverb, and a very good one;
don't you think ſo, Sir? If ſo be Mr. Savage can't pay
[Page 199]
his taylor, mayhap, when the bill gets a little higher,
he might not be able to pay me.”
“True,” ſaid Clayton, coldly; “but could you
briug me to a fight of Mrs. Savage, or her daughter?”
“Lord! not I; they are ſo proud, that if a body offers
to ſpeak or introduce a friend, they are upon ſtilts
directly.”
“Well, but pray ſtep up with a civil meſſage from
me; ſay I wiſh to ſpeak with them on particular business.”
“And who muſt I tell them you are, Sir?”
“My name is of no conſequence; only ſay a clergyman.”
The woman executed the commiſſion, and, ſoon returning,
deſired Mr. Clayton to walk up.
On entering a ſmall ill-furniſhed apartment, he beheld
two charmingly prepoſſeſſing women, the eldeſt of whom
did not appear to be more than forty years old, and the
youngeſt ſeventeen; they were dreſſed in mourning, plain
but extremely becoming, and had much the air of women
of faſhion.
He apologized for the ſeeming rudeneſs of a ſtranger
intruding himſelf into their apartments uninvited, mentioned
that he had ſeen the tranſaction of the arreſt, and
thought it might be in his power to alleviate, if not entirely
remove, their diſtreſſes.
The mother's eyes overflowed at the mention of her
ſon's impriſonment. Her daughter took her hand, pressed
it to her lips, gave her a conſolatory look; but the
ſtarting drops of ſympathy that trembled in her eyes forbade
her utterance.
“Lady Chatterton will dry thoſe tears,” ſaid Clayton,
mentally, “or I am deceived in her character.—
What a pity ſo much ſweetneſs ſhould droop under the
heavy hand of affliction!”
Clayton was a young man—Miſs Savage a charming
woman.
He drew from them, in the moſt delicate manner, an
account of their various embarraſſments in pecuniary matters,
ſaid he had known the late Mr. Savage, and once
[Page 200]
received a great obligation at his hands, which he was
happy in having now the power to return, requeſted they
would conſider him as their banker; “for, my dear
Miſs,” ſaid he to the daughter, “I owed your father a
conſiderable ſum of money.” He then preſented them
with the whole contents of his purſe, as he ſaid, in part
of payment, and departed, promiſing to ſee them again
in a few days.
His aſſertions, in regard to having known Mr. Savage,
were not ſtrictly true; but it was a pious fraud, by which
he prevailed on the diſtreſſed ladies to accept pecuniary
aſſiſtance, and, he humbly truſted, the deſign would
ſanctify the act.
Two days from this was Lady Chatterton's birth-day.
“Come, Clayton,” ſaid ſhe, when ſhe had read the
memorandums over of that day's intended route , “we
will pay the firſt viſit to your pretty Savage.”
Clayton introduced her to the Ladies as a perſon courting
their friendſhip, and deſirous of ſerving them. From
them ſhe learned that young Savage, when arreſted, having
not the leaſt hope of liberation, had inſiſted on being
immediately conveyed to priſon.
“Then we will go and find a key to open thoſe tremendous
doors,” ſaid Lady Chatterton, “and I think,”
glancing her eyes over her memorandums, “I have ſome
other buſineſs to tranſact there. My dear Ladies, I
will ſoon ſend this beloved ſon and brother to you, on
condition you all dine with me to-day at five o'clock.”
She preſented her card and departed, leaving the ladies
oppreſſed with delightful ſenſations that could only be
expreſſed by tears.
Lady Chatterton proceeded to the priſon, and was introduced
to young Savage, whom ſhe immediately congratulated
on his liberty, “your diſagreeable buſineſs is
all ſettled, Sir, ſaid ſhe, “and I beg you will haſten
home to your expecting mother and ſiſter.” Savage gazed
with aſtoniſhment at Lady Chatterton, for habited as
ſhe was in a plain robe of white muſlin, a bonnet and
a cloack of the ſame materials, and led by the hand of the
meek, benevolent looking Clayton, he knew not whether
[Page 201]
to conſider her as an inhabibant of this nether globe, or a
a celeſtial ſpirit.
“If what you ſay, Madam,” cried he, “be really
true, and I have no reaſon to doubt it, for your countenance
is benevolence itſelf. Pardon my ſeeming ingratitude,
but I could have wiſhed the affair had not been ſo
ſpeedily concluded.”
“Strange, indeed!” ſaid her ladyſhip: Do you not
wiſh for liberty?”
“Moſt ardently, Madam; but there is in this habitation
of miſery an object more deſerving your charitable
notice, an object ſo pitiable, ſo very intereſting to the
feelings of humanity, that I could, with ſatisfaction have
ſeen the liberality extended in my behalf transferred to
her.”
“Thank heaven!” ſaid her Ladyſhip, “neither the
means of comforting the afflicted, nor the will to uſe
thoſe means, are denied me; neither my heart or purſe
are limitted. Come, Sir, lead on to the place where I
may dry the tear of ſorrow, and gladden the priſoner's
ear by the welcome ſound of liberty.”
Savage led the way to a miſerable room, where, on a
truſs of ſtraw, for neither bed nor chair appeared in the
apartment, laid an old woman, almoſt worn to a skeleton,
whoſe haggard looks and laboured breathing, seemed
to portend approaching diſſolution!—On the ſame
ſtraw, ſupporting the aged invalid's head in her lap, ſat
the almoſt ſhadowy figure of a young creature, habited
in a white bead gown, her hair hanging negligently
over her face and ſhoulders, one hand held the burning
forehead of the apparently dying woman, the other hung
motionleſs by her ſide. Beſide them ſtood a pitcher of
water, and a ſmall brown loaf.
“Heaven preſerve us,” ſaid lady Chatterton, gaſping
for breath, “what a ſcene is here!” The old woman
raiſed her languid eyes at the ſound of the voice, but
the young one remained in the ſame poſture, nor ſeemed
to heed that any one approached.
Lady Chatterton drew near, took her hand, and, in
a voice ſoft as the muſic of the ſpheres, bid her be
[Page 202]
comsorted. “Come, cheer up, my poor girl,” ſaid ſhe, “I
will do all I can to ſerve you.”
She turned her head, looked earneſtly at Lady Chartterton,
a ſaint glow ruſhed over her pale features, and as
quickly diſappeared as ſhe exclaimed:—“Oh! I know
you; you are an angel of benevolence,” and ſainted.
She was immediately carried into the air, and on cutting
the lace of her ſtays, Lady Chatterton diſcovered a
ſmall ſhagreen caſe, hung pendant from her neck by a
riband. A ſudden irreſiſtable impulſe led her to open it,
when the portraits of George Littleton and Lady Mary
ſtruck her fight. She looked again on the young woman,
who was now juſt recovering, and inſtantly in her
reanimated countenance, recognized the features of Rebecca.
The debt, for which her mother had been thrown into
priſon, was fifteen pounds, which was contracted with
the apothecary during her's and Rebecca's illneſs. Lady
Chatterton ſoon contrived to have it diſcharged, and
poor Mrs. Serl being tenderly informed of her liberation,
was carefully placed in the carriage, her daughter on
one ſide, and her deliverer on the other, who ſupported
her as the coach moved ſlowly toward St. Alban's-Street;
nor ever did conqueror, in his triumphal car, feel more
exulting ſenſations than did her Ladyſhip when ſhe led
the grateful, trembling Rebecca into her own houſe,
ſaw her mother laid in a comfortable bed, and heard
from a phyſician, that tender attention and peace of
mind, would be more efficacious towards her reſtoration
than medicine. He alſo ordered Rebecca to be immediately
put to bed, and take ſome wine and water,
with a few drops of laudanum in it, as the agitation of
her ſpirits, and ſuddenchange of fortune, had occasioned
a wildneſs in her looks, and an incoherence in her
diſcourſe, that rather alarmed him. Lady Chatterton
ſaw the preſcription adminiſtered, and then deſcended
to meet her gueſts in the dining parlour, while the
exhauſted Rebecca ſunk into a more peaceful ſlumber
than ſhe had enjoyed for many months.
[Page 203]
CHAP. XXXVII.
AS IT SHOULD BE.
The party aſſembled in the dining parlour were
Lord and Lady Chatterton, the Savages, Mr. Clayton,
George Littleton and his father.
It was a tender, difficult taſk to inform theſe affectionate
relations that Rebecca was found, yet it was a taſk her
Ladyſhip's generous heart burned to execute. Gently
and by degrees ſhe made the intereſting diſcovery; but
when George knew that his Rebecca was really in the
houſe, it was impoſſible to prevent his flying to the apartment
that contained her; Mr. Littleton followed. They
entered the chamber with cautious ſtep. George ſoftly
drew aſide the curtain. She was in a profound ſleep.
He ſtood gazing with a look of joy, mingled with tender
pity, on her altered countenance. Mr. Littleton
ſunk on a chair by the bedſide. “Oh! my poor suffering
girl,” ſaid he, “how thou art changed!” His
head fell on the pillow beſide her, and tears ruſhed down
his venerable countenance.
Rebecca moved, the nurſe forced George from her
bed-ſide. She opened her eyes; the power of recollection
ſeemed for a while ſuſpended. She looked wildly
round her.
“Where is my mother?” ſaid ſhe: “I will not be
taken from her. If ſhe muſt die in priſon, I will die
with her.” She raiſed herſelf in bed, and ſaw her
uncle.
“Rebecca!” ſaid he, in an accent of tenderneſs,
“have you forgot me, my dear Rebecca.”
“Oh! no, my beloved uncle,” ſaid ſhe, her head
dropping on his ſhoulder. “Oh! no. How long have
you been in England?” Then pauſing a moment:
“But what have they done with my mother?”
“She is ſafe, my love; endeavour to recollect yourself:
do you not know ſhe came with you to this houſe?
She is in bed in the next room.”
Rebecca put her hand to her forehead: “I am
[Page 204]
striving to think,” ſaid ſhe; “but I cannot remember
where I am, how I came here.”—By degrees the power
of recollection returned, and every circumſtance recurred
to her memory:—“I am in the houſe of Lord
Chatterton,” ſaid ſhe. “I could have preferred any
other.”
“But ſuppoſe, my dear girl, Lord Chatterton ſhould
not be the perſon you think him? Suppoſe he ſhould
be a man whom you have never ſeen?”
Rebecca liſtened in ſilence, and her uncle, in the moſt
cautious manner, informed her of his having found a
ſon, and that ſon was the man ſhe had imagined married
to Lady Eleanor Harcourt.
The relation was wonderful. Rebecca could ſcarcely
credit it, yet, if it was really true, if ſhe was ſtill beloved
by the man whoſe image was engraven on her
heart, and, indeed, releaſed from the vow ſhe had ſo
ſolemnly given her deceaſed benefactreſs, the rapidity
with which theſe reflections ruſhed through her brain,
the violent emotions of her heart, almoſt overpowered
her weak frame. She breathed with difficulty, her
eyes grew dim, the attendant perceived the change,
and, giving her a few drops in ſome water, recalled her
fleeting ſpirits.
“And where is this new couſin of mine?” ſaid ſhe,
with a faint ſmile, when ſhe was a little recovered:
“methinks I ſhould like to ſee him.”
George's heart palpitated violently. He drew near
the bed, dropped on one knee, and cried, “Oh! my
Rebecca, behold me here!”
A ſmile of ineffable pleaſure beamed over the countenance
of Rebecca while ſhe extended her hand toward
her lover. He took it, and preſſed it to his lips. The
enſuing ſcene can be eaſily imagined by the feeling
heart, and to thoſe devoid of ſenſibility, the deſcription
would be inſipid, we therefore paſs it over in ſilence.
Peace being now reſtored to the boſom of Rebecca,
her health, her vivacity and bloom, rapidly returned,
her mother too, recovered a ſufficient degree of health,
to enable her to participate in her daughter's happineſs.
[Page 205]
An early day was named for the union of George and
Rebecca, previous to which Lord Chatterton procured
the old lieutenant to be ſuperannuated, and a handſome
penſion was given him in return for his long and faithful
ſervices; a lucrative poſt was alſo procured for
George, but he requeſted leave to transfer it to young
Savage.
“Pardon me, my Lord,” ſaid he, “but that young
gentleman has no means of ſupporting his amiable mother
and ſiſter. For my own part, though in the early
part of life accuſtomed to all the indulgencies of an affluent
fortune, I have been long convinced, that abundance
of riches cannot ſecure happineſs. Poſſeſſed of
my Rebecca, whoſe humble ſpirit will enjoy moſt felicity
in the quiet, undiſturbed walks of life, beholding
my father poſſeſſed of ſufficient to make his ſetting ſun
ſerene and unclouded, what can I deſire more? We will
retire into Berkſhire, to the eſtate you ſo generouſly settled
on my family, and if we can once a year boaſt of
the honour of a viſit from you and your amiable Lady,
I ſhall be the happieſt mortal breathing.” His Lordship
was pleaſed with George's frankneſs, and the place
was given to Savage, who was equally capable of discharging
the duties incumbent upon him with honour
and integrity.
Lady Chatterton had, with her Lord's approbation,
ordered a ſettlement to be made on Rebecca of two
thouſand pounds, which ſum his Lordſhip ſupplied and
placed in the funds for her own particular uſe.
The day after the union took place, Rebecca,
George, Mr. Littleton, and Mrs. Serl, took an affectionate
leave of their generous friends in St. Alban'sstreet,
and departed for Berkſhire.—The beauty of
the ſituation, the neat cottage-like appearance of the
houſe, and beautiful ſimplicity of the furniture, afforded
Rebecca the moſt pleaſurable ſenſations. She was
ſoon viſited by the neighbouring gentry, among whom,
what was her ſurpriſe to ſee, Lady Winterton, whoſe
ſable habilments told ſhe was emancipated from that
worſt of ſlavery, wedlock, with the man ſhe could not
love.
[Page 206]
She informed our heroine that her health was ſo impaired
by vexation, and the effects of the wound ſhe
had received, that her life was thought in imminent
danger. Change of air was preſcribed, and her Lord
had brought her down to a ſmall eſtate of his in Berkshire;
that ſhe had found benefit from the change, but
from the time of their leaving town, her Lord's health
had declined; he had been ſubject to an aſthmatic complaint,
which increaſed upon him, and had terminated
his life about two months before Rebecca's arrival in the
country.
Lady Winterton was too delicate in her preſent circumstances
to mention the name of Savage. She had
been imprudent, but never guilty. Sickneſs had moderated
the extreme vivacity of her diſpoſition, and taught
her to reflect. She could not avoid wiſhing to hear of
him, or learn the reaſon why, from the fatal evening
when they met at Chiſwick, he had never attempted to
write to or ſee her. She was entirely ignorant of his
fate from that time, yet ſhe kept thoſe wiſhes carefully
concealed.
Rebecca applauded her conduct, and deſired her husband
to mention, when next he wrote to Savage, that
Lady Winterton was their neighbour, and that ſhe was
a widow. The effect this letter produced may be eaſily
imagined. Savage flew into Berkſhire on the wings of
love, and the fair widow promiſed, in due time, to give
him her hand.
Lord and Lady Oſſiter continued on the Continent,
where, immerſed in vice and diſſipation, his Lordſhip
fell a victim to intemperance, and her Ladyſhip became
notorious for her gallantry; forgetful of the ſacred
name of mother, ſhe gave the reins to folly, and publicly
defied the laws of virtue and honour.
Though Rebecca, from the variegated ſcenes through
which ſhe had paſſed, had purchaſed a thorough knowledge
of the world, yet had it not hardened her heart,
or rendered her callous to the calls of miſery, her prudence
in her family concerns enabled her ever to have a
morſel for the hungry, and a garment to throw over the
[Page 207]
deſtitute orphan. When the poor ſaw her they bleſſed
her—infant lips ſet forth her praiſes—and aged knees
bent for her before the Throne of Grace. She cheered
the declining years of her mother and uncle. They
called down bleſſings on her head.
Her huſband adored her. Her ſervants loved and reverenced
her. Her boſom was the ſeat of unfeigned piety.
The ſmile of content dimpled on her cheek, and
her dwelling was the manſion of peace.
FINIS.
Back matter
[Page ]
PROPOSALS
For PRINTING by SUBSCRIPTION,
AN ORIGINAL
NOVEL,
IN FOUR VOLUMES DUODECIMO.
Dedicated, by permiſſion, to Mrs. Bingham,
entitled ,
TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART.
By Mrs. ROWSON ,
Of the NEW THEATRE, Philadelphia ,
Author of Victoria, Inquisitor, Charlotte, Fille
de Chambre , &c. &c.
“—If there's a pow'r above us,
“(And that there is, all Nature cries aloud,
“Thro' all her works,) he muſt delight in virtue,
“And that which he delights in, muſt be happy.”
“The ſoul, ſecur'd in her exiſtence, ſmiles
“At the drawn dagger, and defies its point.”
CONDITIONS.
I. The work to be printed with a neat type, on good paper.
II. Price to ſubſcribers two dollars bound, one half to be paid at the
time of ſubſcribing.
III. The ſubſcribers' names will be prefixed as patrons of the undertaking.
* * * Subſcriptions are received by the Author, the corner of Seventh
and Cheſnut-ſtreets, Meſſrs. Carey, Rice and Dobſon , Philadelphia—
Mr. Greene , Annapolis—Meſſrs. Allen, Berry and S.
Campbell , New-York—Meſſrs. Weſt, Thomas & Andrews, Blake
and Larken , Boſton—Mr. Haſwell , Vermont—Meſſrs. Rice , and
Edwards , Baltimore—Mr. W. P. Young , Charleſton.
[Page ]
[Page ]
$$$
