PR 

5054 

F96 





THE LIBRARY 

OF 

^ THE UNIVERSITY 

OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 



%"*-: 





m^J 



tsil^**^^ 



THE 



FUDGES IN ENGLAND; 



ETC. 



MSTio Ev BOURGOGNE asd MAnTI.NEl 
rue I'u (^olombier, jo. 



THE 



FUDGES IN ENGLAND; 

A SEQUEL 

TO THE 

"FUDGE FAMILY IN PARIS." 

si mea materia respondt't Musa jocosae, 
Vicimus. . Ovid. 



BY THOMAS MOORE. 



PARIS, 



PUBLISHED BY A. and W. GALIGNANI and C". 

RUE vtvrE:^NE. I?" l^. 

1835. 



Digitized by tine Internet Archive 

in 2008 witli funding from 

IVIicrosoft Corporation 



littp://www.archive.org/details/fudgesinenglandbOOmoor 






PREFACE. 



The name of the country town, in England— a well-known 
fashionable watering-place— in which the events that gave rise 
to the following correspondence occurred, is, for obvious reasons, 
suppressed. The interest attached, however, to the fads and 
personages of the story, renders it independent of all time and 
place ; and when it is recollected that the whole train of romantic 
circumstances so fully unfolded in these Letters has passed dur- 
ing the short period which has now elapsed since the great Meet- 
ings in Exeter Hall, due credit will, it is hoped, be allowed to 
the Editor for the rapidity with which he has brought the details 
before the Public ; while, at the same time, any errors that may 
have been the result of such haste will, he trusts, with equal 
consideration, be pardoned. 



853243 



CONTENTS. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

Letter L — From Patrick Magan, Esq., to the Rev. 
Ricliard , Curate of , in Ireland. .... 1 

LetterII.— From Miss Biddy Fudge, to Mrs. Elisabeth — o 

LetterIII.— FromMiss Fanny Fudge, to her Cousin, Miss 
Kitty 12 

Letter IV.— From Patrick Magan, Esq., to the Rev. 
Richard •' 

Letter V.— From Larry O'Branigan, in England, to his 
Wife Judy, at Mullinafad 22 

Letter VI.— From Miss Biddy Fudge, to Mrs. Eliza- 
beth 26 

Letter VII. — From Miss Fanny Fudge, to her Cousin, 
Miss Kitty 54 

Letter VIII.— From Bob Fudge, Esq., to the Rev. Mor- 
timer O'Miilligan of) 

Letter IX. — From Larry O'Branigan, to his Wife Judy. 43 

Letter X. — From the Rev. Mortimer O'MuUigan, to the 
Rev. 48 

Letter XI. — From Patrick Magan, Esq., to the Rev. 
Richard. So 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

Song of the Departing Spirit of Tiihe 59 

The Euthanasia of Van 6.> 

To the Rev. , one of the Sixteen Requisitionists of 

Nottingham 64 

Irisli Antiquities 66 

A Curious Fact 67 

New-Fashioned Echoes 6N 

Incantation. From the new tragedy of " The Bruns- 

wickers." 71 

How to make a good Politician 74 

Epistle of Condolence, from a Slave-Lord, to a Cotton- 
Lord 7;; 



viii CONTENTS. 

page 

The Ghost of Miltiades 77 

Alarming Intelligence — Revolution in the Dictionary — 

One Gait at the head of it 79 

Resolutions passed at a late Meeting of Reverends and 

Right Picverends 80 

Sir Andrew's Dream 83 

Love Song 85 

Sunday Ethics 87 

Awful Event 88 

The Numbering of the Clergy 89 

A Sad Case 91 

A Dream of Hindostan 93 

Proposals for a Gynoecocracy 9b 

Lord H-nl-y and St. Cecilia 96 

The Dance of Bishops 99 

Dick * + * * 102 

A corrected Report of some late Speeches 103 

The Brunswick Club 105 

Advertisement 107 

The Mad Tory and the Comet 108 

From the Hon. Henry (o Lady Emma . . . . 110 

Dublin University 112 

Translation from the Gull Language 114 

Notions on Reform 116 

Tory Pledges 118 

St. Jerome on Earth. First Visit 120 

— — — — Second Visit 122 

The Consultation 124 

To the Rev. Ch-rl-s Ov-rt-n, Curate of Romaldkirk . . 126 
Scene from a Play, acted at Oxford, called " Matricula- 
tion." • . . 128 

Late Tithe Case 129 

Fools' Paradise 151 

The Rector and his Curate ; or One Pound Two ... 133 

Paddy's Metamorphosis 154 

Cocker, on Church Reform 155 

Les Hommes Automates ... 157 

How to make Oneself a Peer 139 



THE 



FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 



LETTER I. 

FROM PATRICK MAGAM, ESQ., TO THE REV. RICHARD , 

CURATE OF , IN IRELAND. 

Who d' ye ihink we' ve got here ? — quite refoirm'd from the giddy 

Fantastic young thing, that once made such a noise — 
Why, the famous Miss Fudge— that delectahle Biddy, 

Whom you and I saw once at Paris, when boys, 
In the fuU blaze of bonnets, and ribands, and airs,— 

Such a thing as no rainbow hath colours to paint j 
Ere time liad reduced her to wrinkles and prayers, 

And the Flirt found a decent retreat in the Saint. 
Poor ''Pa" hath popp'd off— gone, as Cliarity judges, 
To some choice Elysium reserved for the Fudges; 
And Miss, with a fortune, besides expectations 
From some nuicli-reveretl and much-palsied relations. 
Now wants but a hu!^band, with requisites meet,— 
A^e thirty, or tliereabouts — stature six feet, 
And warranted godly,— to make all complete. 
Fs'ota bene— A Churchman would suit, if he's high, 
But Socinians or Catholics need not apply. 



2 THE FUDGES IN EXGLAKD. 

What say you, Dick? does n't this tempt your ambition? 

The whole wealth of Fudge, that renown'd man of pith, 
All brought to the hammer, for Church competition,^- 

Sole encumbrance, Miss Fudge to be taken therewith. 
Think, ray boy, for a curate how glorious a catch ! 
While, instead of the thousands of souls you now watch, 
To save Biddy Fudge's is all you need do; 
And her purse will, meanwhile, be the saving of you. 
You may ask, Dick, how comes it that I, a poor elf, 
Wanting substance ev'n more than your spiritual self. 
Should thus generously lay my own claims on the shelf, 
When, God knows! there ne'er was young gentleman yet 
So much lack'd an old spinster to rid him from debt, 
Or had cogenter reasons than mine to assail her 
With tender love-suit, — at the suit of his tailor. 
But thereby there hangs a soft secret, my friend, 
Which thus to your reverend breast I commend :— 

Miss Fudge hath a niece— such a creature !— with eyes 
Like those sparklers that peep out from summer-night skies 
At astronomers royal, and laugh with delight 
To see elderly gentlemen spying all night. 
While her figure — oh, bring all the gracefullesl things 
That are borne through the light air by feet or by wings, 
Not a single new grace to that form could they leach, 
Which combines in itself the perfection of each; 
While, rapid or slow, as her fairy feet fall. 
The mute music of symmetry modulates all. 

In short, ne'er was there creature more forra'd to bewilder 

A gay youth like me, who of castles aerial 
(And only of such) am, God help me! a builder; 

Still peopling each mansion with lodgers ethereal, 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 3 

And now, to this nymph of the seraph-Hke eye, 
Letting out, as you see, my first floor next the sky. (■) 
But, alas ! nothing 's perfect on earth,— even she, 

This divine httle gipsy, does odd things sometimes; 
Talks learning— looks wise (rather painful to see), 

Prints already in two county papers her rhymes; 
And raves— the sweet, charming, ahsurd little dear ! 
About Amulets, Bijous, and Keepsakes, next year, 
In a manner which plainly bad symptoms portends 
Of that Annua! blue fit, so distressing to friends; 
A fit which, though lasting but one short edition, 
Leaves the patient long after in sad inanition. 

However, let 's hope for the best, — and, meanwhile, 
Be it mine still to bask in the niece's warm smile ; 
While you, if you 're wise, Dick, will play the gallant 
(Uphill work, I confess) to her Saint of an Aunt. 
Think, my boy, for a youngster like you, who 've a lack. 

Not indeed of rupees, but of all other specie. 
What luck thus to find a kind witch at your back, 

An old goose with gold eggs, from all debts to release ye! 
Never mind, though the spinster be reverend and thin. 

What are all the Three Graces to her Three per Cents. ? 
While her acres! — oh Dick, it don't matter one pin 

How she touches the affections, so ijou touch the rents; 
And Love never looks half so pleased as when, bless him, he 
Sings to an old lady's purse *'Open, Sesame." 

By the way, I 've just heard, in my walks, a report. 
Which, if true, will ensure for your visit some sport. 

(•) That floor which a facetious garreteer called ** Le premier en 
pescendaiit du ciel." 



• THE FUDGES I\ ENGLAIVID. 

'T is riimour'd our Manager means to bespeak 

The Church tumblers from Exeter Hall for next week ; 

And certainly ne'er did a queerer or rummer set 

Throw, for the amusement of Christians, a summerset. 

'T is fear'd their chief " Merriman," C— ke, cannot come, 

Being call'd off, at present, to play Punch at home ; ('} 

And the loss of so practised a wag in divinily, 

Will grieve much all lovers of jokes on the Trinity; — 

His pun on the name Unlgenitus, lately 

Having pleased Robert Taylor, the Eevereml, greatly. (') 

'T will prove a sad drawback, if absent he be. 

As a wag Presbyterian 's a thing quite to see; 

And, among the Five Points of the Calvinists, none of em 

E'er thought of making a point of wit one of 'em. 

But ev'n though deprived of this comical elf, 

We 've a host of huffoni in Murtagh himself, 

Who, of all the whole troop is chief mummer and mime. 

As C— ke takes the Ground Tumbling, he the Sublime; (3) 

And of him we 're quite certain, so, pray, come in time. 

(•) See the Dublin Evening Post, of the 9th of this month (July), for 
an account of a scene which lately took place at a meeting of the Synod 
of Ulster, in which the performance of the above-mentioned part by the 
personage in question appears to have been worthy of all tiis former 
reputation in that line. 

(') ''All are punsters if tiiey have wit to be so; and therefore when 
an Irislunan has to commence with a Bull, you will naturally pronounce 
it a bull. (A laugh.) Allow nie to bring before you the famous Bull 
that is called Unigenitus, referring to the only-begotten Sou of God.' 
— Report of the Rev. Doctor's Speech, June 20, in the Record News- 
paper. 

{^) In the language of the play-bills, "Ground and L<fty Tum- 
bling." 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAKD. J 

LETTER II. 

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE TO MRS. ELIZABETH . 

Just in time for the post, dear, and monstrously busy, 
With godly concernments,— and worldly ones, too; 

Things carnal and spiritual mix'd, my dear Lizzy, 

In this little brain till, bewilder'd and dizzy, 
'Twixt heaven and earth, I scarce know what I do. 

First, I 've been to see all the gay fashions from town, 

Which our favourite Miss Gimp for the spring has had down. 

Sleeves still worn (which I think is wise) a la folle, 

Charming hats, pou de soie, — though the shape rather droll. 

But you can't think how nicely the caps oHulle lace. 

With the moitonnieres, look on this poor sinful face ; 

And I mean, if the Lord in his mercy thinks right, 

To wear one at Mrs. Fitz-wigrara's to-night. 

The silks are quite heavenly : — I 'ra glad, too, to say. 
Gimp herself grows more godly and good every day ; 
Hath had sweet experience —yea, ev'n doth begin 
To turn from the Gentiles, and put away sin, — 
And all since her last stock of goods was laid in. 
What a blessing one's milliner, careless of pelf, 
Should thus "walk in newness" as well as one's self! 

So much for the blessings, the comforts of Spirit 

I 've had since we met, and they 're more than I merit ! — 

Poor, sinful, weak creature in every respect. 

Though ordain'd (God knows why) to be one of the Elect. 

But now for the picture's reverse.— You remember 

That footman and cook-maid I hired last December ; 



X" 



6 THE FUDGES IN ElVGLAND. 

He, a Baptist Particular,— s/ie, of some sect 

Not particular, I fancy, in any respect; 

But desirous, poor thing, to be fed with the Word, 

And " to wait," as she said, " on Miss Fudge and the Lord." 

Well, my dear, of all men, that Particular Baptist 
At preaching a sermon, off hand, was the aptest; 
And, long as he staid, to do him justice, more rich in 
Sweet savours of doctrine, there never was kitchen. 
He preach 'd in the parlour, he preach'd in the hall. 
He preach'd to the chambermaids, scullions, and alL 

AH heard with delight his reprovings of sin. 
But above all, the cook-maid j — oh, ne'er would she tire, — 
Though, in learning to save sinful souls from the fire, 

Slie would oft let the soles she was frying fall in. 
(God forgive me for punning on points thus of piety I — 
A sad trick I 've learn'd in Bob's heathen society. ) 
But ah ! there remains still the worst of my tale; 
Come, asterisks, and help me the sad truth to veil,— 
Conscious stars, that at ev'n your own secret turn pale ! 



In short, dear, this preaching and psalm-singing pair. 

Chosen "vessels of mercy," as 1 thought they were, 

Have together this last week eloped; making bold 

To whip off as much goods as both vessels could hold, — 

Not forgetting some scores of sweet Tracts from my shelves, 

Two Family Bibles as large as themselves, 

And besides, from the drawer,— I neglecting to lock it— 

My neat " Morning Manna, done up for the pocket." (') 

(') ''Morninij Manna, or British Verse-book, neatly done iip lor llie 



THE FUDGES IIV EiVGLAlVD "J 

Was there e'er known a case so distressing, dear Liz ? 
It has made me quite ill :— and the worst of it is, 
When rogues are all pious, 't is liard to detect 
Which rogues are the reprobate, which the elect. 
This man "had a call," he said,— impudent mockery ! 
What call had he to mtj linen and crockery? 

I 'm now, and have been for this week past, in chase 
Of some godly young couple this pair to replace. 
The inclosed two announcements have just met my eyes, 
In that venerable Monthly where Saints advertise 
For such temporal comforts as this world supplies ; (') 
And the fruits of the Spirit are properly made 
An essential in every craft, calling, and trade. 

pocket," and chiefly intended to assist the members ot the British 
Verse Association, whose design is, we are told, " to induce the inha- 
bitants of Great Britain and Ireland to commit one and the same verse 
of Scripture to memory every morning. Already, it is known, several 
thousand persons in Scotland, besides tens of thousands in America and 
Africa, are euerj morning learning the same versed'' 

(') The Evangelical Magazine. — A few specimens taken at random 
ft-om the wrapper of tliis highly-esteemed periodical wiU fully justily 
the character which Miss Fudge has here given of it. " Wanted, in a 
pious pawn-broker's family, an active lad as an apprentice." " Wanted, 
as housemaid, a young female who has been brought to a saving 
knowledge of the truth." " Wanted immediately, a man of decided 
piety, to assist in the baking business." " A gentleman who under- 
stands the Wine Trade is desirous of entering into partnership, etc. etc. 
He is not desirous of being connected with any one whose .system 
of business is not of the strictest integrity as in the sight of God, and 
seeks connection only with a truly pious man, either Churchman or 
Dissenter." 



^ 



S THE FUDGES IIV ENGLAND 

Where the attorney requires for his 'prentice some youth 
Who has "■ learn'd to fear God and to walii in the truth ; " 
Where the sempstress, in search of employment, declares. 
That pay is no object, so she can have prayers ; 
And the Establish'd Wine Company proudly gives out 
That the whole of the firm, Co. and all, are devout. 

Happy London ! one feels, as one reads o'er the pages. 
Where Saints are so much more abundant than sages ; 
Where Parsons may soon be all laid on the shelf, 
As each Cit can cite chapter and verse for himself, 
And the serious frequenters of market and dock 
All lay in religion as part of their stock. (■) 
Who can tell to what lengths we may go on improving. 
When thus tlirough all London the Spirit keeps moving, 

(•) According to the late Mr. Irving, there is even a peculiar form 
of theology, got up expressly for the money-market. " I know how 
far wide," he says, "of the mark my views of Christ's work in the flesh 
will be viewed by those who are working with the stock-jobbing 
theology of the religious world." " Let these preachers," he adds, 
" (for I will not call them theologians,) cry up, broker-like, their 
article." Morning Tf'ntch, N" 3, 442 — 3. 

From the statement of another writer, in the same publication, it 
would appear that the stock-brokers have even set up a new Divinity of 
their own. " This shows," says the writer in question, " that the doc- 
trine of the union between Christ and his members is quite as essential 
as that of substitution, by taking which latter alone the Stock- Exchange 
DiViW^x has heen produced." — N" 10, p. 375. 

Among the ancients, we know the money-market was provided wilii 
more than one presiding Deity — " Deaj Pecunis (says an ancient au- 
thor) commendabantur ut pecuniosiessent." 



THE FUDGES IN EKGLAJXD. 9 

And heaven 's so in vogue, that each shop advertisement 
Is now not so much for the earth as the skies meant ? 

P.S. 

Have mislaid the two paragraphs— can't stop to look, 

Butbolh describe charming, — both footman and cook. 

She, " decidedly pious " — with pathos deplores 

The increase of French cookery and sin on our shores ; 

And adds — (while for further accounts she refers 

To a great Gospel preacher, a cousin of hers), 

That " though some make their sabbaths mere matter-of-fun days, 

She asks but for tea and the Gospel, on Sundays." 

The footman, too, full of the true saving knowledge, — 

Has late been to Cambridge, — to Trinity College; 

Served last a young gentleman, studying divinity, 

But left, — not approving the morals of Trinity. 

P.S. 

I inclose, too, according to promise, some scraps 
Of my Journal, — that day-book I keep of my heart ; 

Where, at some little items (partaking, perhaps, 
More of earth than of heaven ), thy prudery may start, 
A nd suspect something tender, sly girl as thou art. 

For the present, I 'm mute— but, whate'er may befall, 

Recollect, dear, in Hebrews, xiii. 4, St. Paul 

Hath himself declared, ''marriage is honourable in all." 



EXTRACTS FROM MY DIARY. 

Monday. 
Tried a new chale gown on — pretty ! 
No one to see me in it — pity ! 



10 THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

Flew in a passion with Friz, my maid : — 

Tlie Lord forgive me !— she look'd dismay'd; 

But got her to sing the 100th Psahii, 

While she curl'd my hair, which made me calm. 

Nothing so soothes a Christian heart 

As sacred music — heavenly art ! 

Tuesdmj. 

At two, a visit from Mr. Magan,— 
A remarkably handsome nice young man ; 
And, all Hibernian though he be. 
As civilized, strange to say, as we! 

I own this young man's spiritual state 
Hath much engross'd my thoughts of late j 
And I mean, as soon as my niece is gone, 
To have some talk with him thereupon. 
At present, I nought can do or say, 
But that troublesome child is in the way : 
Nor is there, I think, a doubt that he 

Would also her absence much prefer, 
As oft, while listening intent to me, 

He 's forced, from politeness, to look at her. 

Heigho ! — what a blessing should Mr. Magan 
Turn out, after all, a " renew'd" young man; 
And to me should fall the task, on earth, 
To assist at the dear youth's second birth. 
Blest thought ! and, ah, more blest the tie, 
Were it Heaven's high will, that he and I — 
But I blush to write the nuptial word, — 
Should wed, as St. Paul says, "in the Lord; " 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 11 

Not this world's wedlock— gross, gallant, 
But pure,— as when Amram married his aunt. 

Our ages differ — but who would count 
One's natural sinful life's amount , 
Or look in the register's vulgar page 
For a regular twice-born Christian's age, 
Who, blessed privilege ! only then 
Begins to live when he's born again. 
And, counting in this way, — let me see, — 
I myself but five years old shall be, 
And dear Magan, when the event takes place, 
An actual new-born child of grace, — 
Should Heaven in mercy so dispose, — 
A six-foot baby, in sivaddling clothes. 

Wednesday. 

Finding myself, by some good fate, 

With Mr. Magan left tete-a-tete, 

Had just begun, — having stirr'd the fire, 

And drawn my chair near his, — to inquire 

What his nolions were of Original Sin, 

When that naughty Fanny again bounced in; 

And all the sweet things I had got to say 

Of the Flesh and the Devil, were whisk'd away ! 

Much grieved to observe that Mr. Magan 

Is actually pleased and amused with Fan! 

What charms any sensible man can see 

In a child so foolishly young as she, — 

But just eighteen, come next 3Iay-day, 

With eyes, like herself, full of nothing but play, — 

Is, I own, an exceeding puzzle to me. 



i2 THE FUDGES IIX ENGLAND. 

LETTER III. 

FROM MISS FANNY FUDGE TO HER COUSIN, MISS KITTY 

STANZAS 

(inclosed) 
TO MY SHADOW; 

OR , 

WHY ? — WHAT ? — HOW ? 

Dark comrade of my path ! while earth and sky 

Thus wed their ciiarms, in bridal light array'd, 

Why, in this bright hour, walk'st thou ever nigh. 

Blackening my footsteps with tliy length of shade — 
Dark comrade, Why? 

Thou mimic Shape that, 'raid these tlowery scenes, 
Glidesl beside me o'er each sunny spot, 

Sadd'ning them as thou goest,— say, what means 
So dark an adjunct to so bright a lot, — 
Grim goblin, What? 

Still, as to pluck sweet flowers I bend my brow. 

Thou bendest, too, — then risest when I rise; — 
Say, mute mysterious Thing ! how is't that thou 

Thus comest between me and those blessed skies, — 
Dim shadow. How ? 



the fudges in england. 13 

(additional stanza, by another hand.) 

Thus said I to that Shape, far less in grudge 
Than gloom of soul, while, as I eager cried, 

Oh why? what? how?— a Voice, that one might judge 
To be some Irish echo's, faint replied 
All fudge, fudge, fudge ! 

You have here, dearest Coz, my last lyric effusion ; 

And, with it, that odions " additional stanza," 
Which Aunt will insist I must keep, as conclusion. 

And which, you '11 at once see, is Mr. Magan's;— a 
Mere part of that plot in which he and my Aunt are 
To stifle the flights of my genius by banter. 

Just so 't was wilh Byron's young eagle-eyed strain. 

Just so did they taunt him;— but vain, critics, vain 

All your efforts to saddle Wit's fire with a chain ! 

To blot out the splendour of Fancy's young stream. 

Or crop, in its cradle, her newly-fledged beam !!! 

Thou perceivest, dear, that, ev'n while these lines I indite , 

Thoughts burn, brilliant fancies break out, wrong or right. 

And I 'm all over poet, in Criticism's spite ! 

That my Aunt, who deals only in Psalms, and regards 
Messrs. Sternliold and Co. as the first of all bards,— 
That she should make light of my works I can't blame ; 
But that nice, handsome, odious Magan— what a shame ! 
Do you knows dear, that, high as on most points I rate him, 
I 'm really afraid— after all, I— must hate him. 
He is so provoking— nought's safe from his tongue, 
He spares no one authoress, ancient or young. 



i^ THE FUDGES IN ENGLAKD. 

Were you Sappho herself, and in Keepsake or Bijou 

Once shone as contributor, lord how he 'd quiz you ! 

He laughs at all Monthlies, — I've actually seen 

A sneer on his brow at the Court Magazine ! — 

While of Weeklies, poor things, there 's but one he peruses, 

And buys every book which that Weekly abuses. 

But I care not how others such sarcasm may fear, 

One spirit, at least, will not bend to his sneer; 

And though tried by the fire, my young genius shall burn as 

Uninjured as crucified gold in the furnace ! 

(I suspect the word "crucified" must be made " crucible," 

Before (his fine image of mine is producible.) 

And now, dear — to tell you a secret which, pray 

Only trust to such friends as with safety you may — 

You know, and, indeed the whole country suspects 

(Though the editor often my best things rejects). 

That the verses signed so, C^^I^ which you now and then see 

In our County Gazette (vide last) are by me. 

But 't is dreadful to think what provoking mistakes 

The vile country press in one's prosody makes. 

For you know, dear, — I may, without vanity, hint — 

Though an angel should write, still 'tis devils must print; 

And you can't think what hcivoc these demons sometimes 

Choose to make of one's sense, and, what 's worse, of one's rhymes. 

But a week or two since, in ray Ode upon Spring, 

Which I meant to have made a most beautiful thing, 

Where I taik'd of the "dewdrops from freshly-blow^n roses, " 

The nasty things made it '' from freshly-blown noses ! " 

And once when, to please my cross Aunt, I had tried 

To coramem'rate some saint of her clique, who 'd just died. 

Having said he "had taken up in heaven his position," 

They made it, he 'd " taken up to heaven liis physician ! " 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 15 

This is very disheartening ;— but brighter days shine, 
I rejoice, love, to say, both for me and the Nine ; 
For, wiiat do you think ?— so delightful ! next year. 

Oh, prepare, dearest girl, for the grand news prepare,— 
I 'm to write in the Keepsake— yes, Kitty, my dear, 

To write in the Keepsake, as sure as you 're there ! ! 
T' other night, at a ball, 't was my fortunate chance 
With a very nice elderly Dandy to dance, 
Who, 'twas plain, from some hints which I now and then caught, 
Was the author of something— one could n't tell what; 
But his satisfied manner left no room to doubt 
It was something that Colburn had lately brought out. 

We conversed of belles-lettres through all the quadrille,— 

Of poetry, dancing, of prose, standing still ; 

Talk'd of Intellect's march— whether right 'twas or wrong,— 

And then settled the point in a bold en avant. 

In the course of this talk 'twas that, having just hinted 

That I too had Poems which— long'd to be printed, 

He protested, kind man ! he had seen, at first sight, 

I was actually horn in the Keepsake to write. 

'•In the Annals of England let some," he said "shine, 

But a place in her Annuals, lady, be thine ! 

Even now future Keepsakes seem brightly to rise, 

Through the visa of years, as I gaze on those eyes,— 

All letter'd and press'd, and of large-paper size ! " 

How unlike that Magan, who my genius would smother, 

And how we, true geniuses, find out each other ! 

This, and much more, he said, with that fine frenzied glance 
One so rarely now sees, as we slid through the dance ; 
Till between us 't was finally fix'd that, next year, 
In this exquisite task I my pen should engage ; 



16 THE FUDGES IIV ENGLAND. 

And, at parting, he stoop'd down and lisp'd in my ear 
These mystical words, which I could Init JKSt hear, 

" Terms for rhyme, — if it 's prime, — ten and sixpence per page. 
Think, Kitty my dear, if I heard his words right, 

What a mint of half-guineas this small head contains; 
If for nothing to write is itself a delight. 

Ye Gods, what a bliss to be paid for one's strains ! 

Having dropp'd the dear fellow a curtesy profound. 

Off at once, to inquire all about him, I ran; 
And from what I could learn, do you know, dear, I 've found 

That he's quite a new species of literary man; 
One, whose task is, — to what will not fashion accustom us ? 
To edit live authors, as if they were posthumous. 
For instance,— the plan, to be sure, is the oddest ! — 
If any young he or she author feels modest 
In venturing abroad, this kind genlleinan-usher 
Lends promptly a hand to the interesting blusher ; 
Indites a smooth preface, brings merit to light, 
Which else might, by accident, shrink out of sight, 
And, in short, renders readers and critics polite. 
MyAuntsays, — though scarce on such points onecan credit her,— 
He was Lady Jane Thingumbob's last novel's editor. 
'T is certain the fashion's but newly invented ; 

And, quick as the change of all things and all names is. 
Who knows Ixit, as authors, like gi'ls, are prcseijied, 

We, girls, may be edited soon at St. James's ? ' 

I must now close my letter— there 's Aunt, in fidl screech, 
Wants to take me to hear some great Irvingite preach. 
God forgive me, I 'm not much inclined, I must say. 
To go and sit still to be preach'd at, to-day. 
And, besides— 'twill be all against dancing, no doubt, 
Which my poor Aunt abhors, with such hatred devout, 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND, 17 

Thai, so far from presenting young nymphs with a head, 
For I heir skill in the dance, as of Herod is said, 
She 'dwish their own heads in the platter, instead. 
There, again— coming, Ma'am !— I'll write more, if I can, 
Before the post goes— 

Your affectionate Fan. 

Four o'clock. 
Such a sermon !— though not about dancing, my dear ; 
'T was only on the end of the world being near. 
Eighteen Hundred and Forty 's the year that some state 
As the time for that accident,— some Forty Eight : (■) 
And I own, of the two, I 'd prefer much tlie latter. 
As then I shall be an old maid, and 't won't matter. 
Once more, love, good bye,— I've to make a new cap ; 
But am now so dead tired with this horrid mishap 
Of the end of the world, that I must take a nap. 



LETTER IV. 

FROM PATRICK MAGAN, ESQ., TO THE REV. RICHARD . 

He comes from Erin's speechful shore. 
Like fervid kettle, bubbling o'er 

(') With regard to the exact time of this event, there appears to he 
a difference only of about two or three years among the respective 
calculators. M. Alphonse Nicole, Docteur en Droit et Avocat, merely 
doubts whether it is to be in 1846, or 1847. "A cette epoque," he 
says, "les fideles peuvent esperer de voir s'effectuer la purification du 
Sanctuaire." 

1. 



18 THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

With hot effusions, — hot and weak ; 
Sound, Humbug, all your hollowest drums. 
He comes, of Erin's martyrdoms 

To Britain's well-fed Church to speak. 
Puff him, ye Journals of the Lord, (') 
Twin prosers, Watchman and Record ! 
Journals reserved for realms of bliss, 
Being much too good to sell in this. 
Prepare, ye wealthier Saints, your dinners, 

Ye spinsters, spread your tea and crumpets; 
And you, ye countless Tracts for Sinners, 

Blow all your little penny trumpets- 
He comes, the reverend man, to tell 

To all who still the Church's part take. 
Tales of parsonic woe, that well 

Might make ev'n grim Dissenter's heart ache : — 
Of ten whole bishops snatch'd away 
For ever from the light of day ; 
( With God knows, too, how many more. 
For whom that doom is yet in store) — 
Of rectors cruelly compell'd 

From Bath and Cheltenham to haste home, 
Because the tithes, by Pat withheld. 

Will not to Bath or Cheltenliam come ; 
Nor will the flocks consent to pay 
Their parsons thus to stay away;— 
Though, with SMc/i parsons, one may doubt 
If 'tis n't money well laid out ; — 
Of all, in short, and each degree 
Of that once happy hierarchy, 

(') "Our anxious desire is to he found on the side of the Lord. 
Record Newspaper-. 



THE FUDGES IX ENGLAND. 19 

Which used to roll in wealth so pleasantly ; 
But now, alas, is dooni'd to see 
Its surplus brought to nonplus presently ! 

Such are the themes this raan of pathos, 
Priest of prose and lord of bathos, 

Will preach and preach t'ye, till you 're dull again ! 
Then, hail him. Saints, with joint acclaim. 
Shout to the stars his tuneful name. 
Which Murtagh ivas, ere known to fame, 

But now is Mortimer O'Mulligan! 

All true, Dick, true as you 're alive — 
I 've seen him, some hours since, arrive. 
Murtagh is come, the great Itinerant, 

And Tuesday, in the Market-place, 
Intends, to every saint and sinner in 't, 

To state what he calls Ireland's Case; 
Meaning thereby the case of /us shop, — 
Of curate, vicar, rector, bishop, 
And all those other grades seraphic, 
That make men's souls their special traffic, 
Though seldom minding much which way 
The erratic souls go, so they pay. 
Just as some roguish country nurse. 

Who takes a foundling babe to suckle. 
First pops the payment in her purse. 

Then leaves poor dear to — suck its knuckle : 
Ev'n so these reverend rigmaroles 
Pocket the money — starve the souls. 

Murtagh, however, in his glory. 
Will tell, next week, a different story ; 



20 THE FUDGES I!B EIVGLASDr. 

Will make out all these men of barter, 
As each a sami, a downright martyr, 
Brought to the stake — i. e a beef one. 
Of all their martyrdoms the chief one ; 
Though try them ev'n at this, they '11 bear it, 
If tender and wash'd down with claret. 

Meanwhile Miss Fudge, who loves all lions, 
Your saintly, next to great and high 'uns, 
( A Viscount, be he what he may. 
Would cut a Saint out, any day), 
Has just announced a godly rout, 
Where Murtagh 's to be first brought out. 
And shown in his tame week-day state :— 
" Prayers, half-past seven, tea at eight. " 
Ev'n so the circular missive orders, — 
Pink cards, with cherubs round the borders. 

Haste, Dick — you 're lost, if you lose time,— 

Spinsters at forty-five grow giddy, 
And MurtJigh, with his tropes sublime, 

Will surely carry off old Biddy, 
Unless some spark at once propose. 
And distance him by downright prose. 
That sick rich squire, whose wealth and lands 
All pass, they say, to Biddy's hands, 
( The patron, Dick, of three fat rectories ! ) 
Is dying oi angina pectoris ; — 
So that, unless you 're stirring soon, 

Murtagh, that priest of puff and pelf, 
May come in for a honey -mooH, 

And be the man of it himself ! 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND 21 

As for me, Dick,— 't is wliira, 't is folly, 
Bui this young niece absorbs me wholly. 
'T is true, the girl 's a vile verse-maker, — 

Would rhyme all nature, if you 'd let her;— 
But ev'n her oddities, plague take her, 

But make me love her all the better. 
Too true it is, she 's bitten sadly 
With this new rage for rhyming badly, 
Which late hath seized all ranks and classes, 
Down to that new Estate, " the masses;" 

Till one pursuit all tastes combines,— 
One common rail-road o'er Parnassus, 
Where, sliding in those tuneful grooves, 
Call'd couplets, all creation moves, 

And the whole world runs mad in lines. 
Add to all this— whai 's ev'n still worse, 
As rhyme itself, though still a curse. 
Sounds better to a chinking purse, — 
Scarce sixpence hath my charmer got. 
While I can muster just a groat ; 
So that, computing self and Venus, 
Tenpence would clear the amount between us. 

However, things may yet prove better : — 
Meantime, what awful length of letter ! 
And how, while heaping thus with gibes 
The Pegasus of modern scribes, 
My own small hobby of farrago 
Hath beat the pace at which ev'n theij go ! 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 



LETTER V. 

FROM LARRY o'BRANIGAN, Ii\ ENGLAND, TO HIS WIFE JUDY, 
AT MULLINAFAD. 

Dear Jcjdy, I sind you this bit of a letther. 

By mail-coach conveyance, — for want of a hetther, — 

To tell you what hick in this workl I have had 

Since I left the sweet cabin, at MuUinafad. 

OcIj, Judy, that night! — when the pig which we meant 

To dry-nurse iri the parlour, to pay off the rent, 

Julianna, the crayihur, — that name was the death of her, (■) — 

Gave us the shlip, and we saw the last breath of her ! 

And there were the childher, six innocent sowls. 

For their nate litlle play-fellow tuning up howls ; 

While yourself, my dear Judy (though grievin 's a folly), 

Stud over Julianna's remains, melancholy, — 

Cryin', half for the craythur, and half for the money, 

" Arrah, why did ye die till we 'd sowl'd you, my honey?" 

But God's will be done! — and then, faith, sure enough, 
As the pig wasdesaiced, 't was high time to be off. 
So we gother'd up all the poor duds we could catch, 
Lock'd the owld cabin-door, put the kay in the thatch. 
Then luk lave of each other's sweet lips in the dark. 
And set off, like Ihe Chrishtians turn'd out of the ark ; 
The six childher with you, my dear Judy, ochone ! 
And poor I wid myself, left condolin' alone. 

(■) The Irish peasantry are very fond of giving fine names to their 
pigs. I have heard of one instance in which a couple of young pigs 
were named, at their birth, Abelard and Eloisa. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 23 

How I came to this England, o'er say and o'er lands, 

And what cruel hard walkin' I 've had on my hands, 

Is, at this present writin', too tadioiis to speak, 

So I '11 mintion it all in a postscript, next week :— 

Only starved I was, surely, as thin as a lath, 

Till I came to an up-and-down place they call Bath, 

Where, as luck was, I managed to make a meal's meat, 

By dhraggin' owld ladies all day through the street,— 

Which their docthors (who pocket, like fun, the pound starlins), 

Have brought into fashion to plase the owld darlins. 

Div'l a hoy in all Bath, though I say it, could carry 

The grannies up hill half so handy as Larry; 

And the higher they lived, like owld crows, in the air, 

The more /was wanted to lug them up there. 

But luck has two handles, dear Judy, they say, 

And mine has both handles put on the wrong way. 

For, pondherin', one morn, on a drame I 'd just had 

Of yourself and the babbies, at Mullinafad, 

Och, there came o'er my sinses so plasin' a flutther. 

That I spilt an owld Countess right clane in the gutther, 

Muff, feathers and all ! — the descint was most awful. 

And,— what was still worse, faith,— I knew 't was unlawful : 

For, though, with mere women, no very great evil, 

T' upset an owld Countess in Bath is the divil ! 

So, liftin' the chair, with herself safe upon it 

( For notliin' about her was kilt, but her bonnet), 

Without even raentionin' " By your lave, ma'am," 

I tuk to my heels and— here, Judy, I am ! 

What 's the name of this town I can't say very well, 
But your heart sure will jump when you hear what befell 
Your own beautiful Larry, the very first day, 
( And a Sunday it was, shinin' out mighty gay) 



24 THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

When his brogues to this city of luck found their way. 

Bein' hungry, God help me, and happenin' to stop, 

Just to dine on the shmell of a paslhry-cook's shop, 

I saw, in the window, a large printed paper, 

And read there a name, och ! that made my heart caper,— 

Though printed it was in some quare ABC, 

That might bother a schoolmasther, let alone me. 

By gor, you 'dhave laugh'd, Judy, could you 've but listen'd,A 

As, doubtin', I cried, " why it is! — no, it is n't:" 

But it ivas, after all — for, by spellin' quite slow, 

First I made out " Rev. Mortimer" — then a great " O;" 

And, at last, by hard readin' and rackin' my skull again, 

Out it came, nate as imported, " O'MulIigan !" 

Upljump'd, like a sky-lark, my jew'l, at that name,— 
Div'l a doubt on my mind, but it mxist be the same. 
" Masther Murthagh himself," says I, " all the world over ! 
My own fosther-brother — by jinks, I 'm in clover. 
Though there, in the play-bill, he figures so grand. 
One wet-nurse it was brought us both up by hand, 
And he '11 not let me shtarve in the inemy's land !" 

Well, to make a long hishtory short, niver doubt 
But I managed, in no time, to find the lad out j 
Aud the joy of the meetin' bethuxt him and me,— 
Such a pair of owld cumrogues— was charmin' to see. 
Nor is Murthagh less plased with the evint than I am, 
As he just then was wanting a vally-de-shara, 
And, for dressin' a gintleman, one way or t' other. 
Your nate Irish lad is beyant every other. 

But now, Judy, comes the quare part of the case; 
And, in throlh, it 's the only draw-back on my place. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 25 

'T was Murthagh's ill hick to be cross'd, as you know, 
With an awkward mishfortiine some short lime ago ; 
That 's to say, he turn'd Protestant, — why, I can't larn ; 
But, of coorse, he knew best, an' it 's not my consarn. 
All I know is, we both were good Catlvlics, at nurse, 
And myself am so still, — nayther betther nor worse. 
Veil, our bargain was all right and light in a jiffey, 
And lads more contint never yet left the Liffey, 
When Murlhagh, — or Morlhinier, as he's now chrishen'd, 
His name being convarled, at laist, if he is n't,— 
Lookin' sly at me (faith, 't was divartin' to see), 
" Of coorse, you 're a Protestant, Larry," says he. 
Upon which, says myself, wid a wink just as shly, 
" Is 't a Protestant ? — oh yes, / am, Sir," says I :— 
And there the chat ended, and div'I a more word 
Conlrovarsial between us has since then occurr'd. 

What Murthagh could mane, and, in throtli, Judy dear. 

What I myself meant, does n't seem mighty clear; 

But the tliruth is, though still for the Owld Light a stickler, 

I was just then too shtarved to be over partic'lar : 

And, God knows, between us, a comic'ler pair 

Of twin Protestants could n't be seen any where. 

Next Tuesday (as towld in the play-bills I mintion'd, 
Address'd " to the loyal and godly-intintion'd,") 
His Rivirence, my master, comes forward to preach, — 
Myself does n't know whether sarmon or speech, 
But it 's all one to him he 's a dead hand at each ; 
Like us , Paddys, in gin'ral, whose skill in orations 
Quite bothers the blarney of all other nations. 



26 THE FUDGES IN EKGLAiV'D. 

But, wliisht!— there 's his Rivirence, shoiitin' out " Larry," 

And sorra a word more will this shmall paper carry; 

So, here, Judy, ends my short hit of a letther, 

Wliich, faix, I 'd have made a much higger and betther, 

But div'j a one Post-office hole in this town 

Fit to swallow a dacent-sized billy-dux down. 

So, good luck to the childer !— tell Molly, I love her; 

Kiss Oonagh's sweet mouth, and kiss Katty all over, — 

Not forgettin' the mark of the red-currant whiskey 

She got at the fair when yourself was so frisky. 

The heav'ns he your bed ! — I will write when I can again ; 

Yours to the world's end, 

Larry O'Branigan. 



LETTER VI. 

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE TO MRS. ELIZABETH . 

How I grieve you're not with us!— pray, come, if you can, 

Ere we're rohh'd of this dear oratorical man. 

Who combines in himself all the multiple glory 

Of Orangeman, Saint, quondam Papist and Tory;— 

(Choice mixture ! like that from which, duly confounded, 

The best sort of brass was, in old limes, compounded)— 

The sly and the saintly, the worldly and godly. 

All fused down in brogue so deliciously oddly ! 

In short, he's a rfear,— and such audiences draws, 

Such loud peals of laughter and shouts of applause, 

As can't but do good to the Protestant cause. 

Poor dear Irish Church !— he to-day sketch'd a view 

Of her hisl'ry and prospects, to me at least new, 



THE FUDGES IX ENGLAND. 27 

And which (if it iahes as it ought) must arouse 

The whole Christian world her just rights to espouse. 

As to reasoning, — you know, dear, that's now of no use, 

People still will their facts and dry //gwrfs produce, 

As if saving the souls of a Protestant flock were 

A thing to be managed " according to Cocker!" 

In vain do we say (when rude radicals hector 

At paying some thousands a-year to a Rector, 

In places where Protestants never yet uere), 

"■ Who knows but young Protestants may be born there ? 

And, granting such accident, think, what a shame. 

If they did n't find Rector and Clerk w hen they came ! 

It is clear that, without such a staff on full pay, 

These little Church embryos must go astray ; 

And, while fools are computing what Parsons would cost. 

Precious souls are meanwhile to the Establishment lost !" 

In vain do we put the case sensibly thus; 

They'll still with iheir figures and facts make a fuss, 

And ask " if, while all, choosing each his own road, 

Journey on, as w^e can, tow'rds the Heav'nly Abode, 

It is right that seiYu eighths of the trav'llers should pay 

For one eighth that goes quite a different way?"— 

Just as if, foolish people, this was n't, in reality, 

A proof of the Church's extreme liberality. 

That, though hating Pop'ry, in o//)fr respects, 

She to Catholic money in no way objects ; 

And so lib'ral her very best Saints, in this sense, 

That they ev'n go to heav'n at the Cath'lic's expense. 

But, though clear to ovr minds all these arguments be, 

People cannot or will not their cogency see ; 

And, I grieve to confess, did the poor Irish Church 

Stand on reasoning alone, she 'd be left in the lurch. 



■2S THE FUDGES IIV ElVGLAKD. 

Il was therefore, dear Lizzy, with joy most sincere, 

That I heard this nice Rev'rend O' something we 've here 

Produce, from the depths of his knowledge and reading, 

A view of that marvellous Church, far exceeding, 

In novehy, force, and profoundness of thought, 

All that Irving himself, in his glory, e'er taught. 

Looking through the whole history, present and past, 
Of the Irish Law Church, from the first to the last ; 
Considering how strange its original birth, — 
Such a thing having never before been on earth,— 
How opposed to the instinct, the law, and the force 
Of nature and reason has been its whole course ; 
Through centuries encount'ring repugnance, resistance, 
Scorn, hate, execration, — yet still in existence ! 
Considering all this, the conclusion he draws 
Is, that Nature exempts this one Church from her laws, — 
That Reason, dumb-founder'd, gives up the dispute, 
And before the portentous anom'ly stands mute;— 
That, in short, 't is a Miracle !— and, once begun, 
And transmitted through ages, from father toSiOn, 
For the honour of miracles, ought to go on. 

Never yet wa" conclusion so cogent and sound. 
Or so fitted the Church's weak foes to confound. 
For, observe, the more low all her merits they place. 
The more strong they make out the miraculous case. 
And the more all good Christians must deem it profane 
To disturb such a prodigy's marvellous reign. 
As for scriptural proofs, he quite placed beyond doubt 
That the whole in the Apocalypse may be found out. 
As clear and well-proved, he would venture to swear, 
As anything else has been ever found there ; 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. '19 

While the mode in which, bless the dear fellow, he deals 
With that whole lot of vials and trumpets and seals, 
And the ease with which vial on vial he strings, 
Shows him quite a first-rate at all these sort of things. 

So much for theology :— as for the affairs 
Of this temporal world — the light drawing-room cares 
And gay toils of the toilet, which, God knows, I seek, 
From no love of such things, but in humbleness meek. 
And to he, as the Apostle was, " weak with the weak," — 
Thou will find quite enough (till I 'm somewhat less busy) 
In tlie extracts inclosed, my dear news-loving Lizzy. 



EXTRACTS FROM MY DIARY. 

Thursdaij. 
Last night, having nought more holy to do, 
Wrote a letter to dear Sir Andrev^^ Agnew, 
About the " Do-nothing-on-Sunday-Chib,"i 
Which we wish by some shorter name to dub : 
As the use of more vowels and consonants 
Thau a Chrislian, on Sunday, really wants, 
Is a grievance that ought to be done away. 
And the Alphabet left (o rest that day. 

Sundaij. 

Sir Andrew's answer ! — but shocking to say. 

Being frank'd unthinkingly yesterday. 

To the horror of Agnews yet unborn, 

It arrived on this blessed Sunday morn ! ! — 

How shocking!— the poslnian's self cried " shame on 't," 

Seeing the immaculate Andrew's name on't, ! ! 



30 THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

What will the Club do?— meet, no doubt. 
'Tis a matter that touches the Class Devout, 
And the friends of the Sabbath must speak out. 



Tuesday. 

Saw to-day, at the raffle,— and saw it with pain,— 

That those stylish Fitzwigrams begin to dress plain. 

Even gay little Sophy smart trimmings renounces, — 

She, who long has stood by me through all sorts of flounces. 

And show'd, by upholding the toilet's sweet rites. 

That we, girls, may be Christians, without being frights. 

This, I own, much alarms me ; for though oner's religious, 

And strict and— all that, there's no need to be hideous ; 

And why a nice bonnet should stand in the way 

Of one's going to heav'n, 't is n't easy to say. 

Then, there's Gimp, the poor thing,— if her custom we drop. 

Pray, what's to become of her soul and her shop ? 

If by saints like ourselves no more orders are given, 

She'll lose all the interest she now takes in heaven ; 

And this nice little " fire-brand, pluck'd from the burning," 

May fall in again at the very next turning. 

Wednesdaij. 

Mem. — To write to the India-Mission Society ; 

And send £20— heavy tax upon piety ! 

Of all Indian lux'ries we now-a-days boast, 

Making "Company's Christians" (■) perhaps cost the most. 

(■) The title given by the natives to such of their countrymen as 
become converts. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 31 

And the worst of it is, that these converts full grown, 
Having hved in our faith mostly die in ilieir oioi, (') 
Praying hard, at the last, to some god who, they say. 
When incarnate on earth, used to steal curds and whey. (>) 
Think, how horrid, my dear !— so that all's thrown away ; 
And (what is still worse) for the rum and the rice 
They've consumed, while helievers, we saints pay the price. 
Still 't is cheering to find that we do save a few,— 
The Report gives six Christians for Cunnangcadoo; 
Doorkotchum reckons seven, and four Trevandrum, 
While but one and a half's left at Cooroopadum. 
In this last-mention'd place 't is the barbers enslave 'em, 
For, once they turn Christians, dear, nobody '11 shave 'era. (») 

To atone for this rather small Heathen amount. 

Some Papists, turn'd Christians, ('*) are tack'd to the account. 

(•) Of such relapses we find innumerable instances in the accounts of 
the Missionaries. 

(») The god Krishna, one of the incarnations of the god Vishnu. 
' One day (says the Bhagavata) Krishna's play-fellows complained to 
Tasuda thai he had pilfered and ate their curds." 

(') "Roteen wants shaving; but the barber here will not do it. He 
is run away lest he should be compelled. He says he will not shave 
Yesoo Kreest's people." — BapC. Mission. Society^ Vol. ii. p. 493. 

('!) In the Reports of the Missionaries, the Roman Catholics are almost 
always classed along with the Heathen. "I have extended my labours 
(says James Venning, in a Report for i83i), to the Heathen, Malio- 
medans and Roman Catholics." " The Heathen and Roman CathoUcs 
in this neighbourhood (says another missionary for the year iSSa), 
are not indifferent, but withstand, rather than yield to the force of 
truth." 



32 THE FUDGES IIX ENGLAND. 

And though, to catch Papisis, one need n't go so far, 
Such fish are worth hooking, wherever they are ; 
And just now, when so great of such converts the lack is, 
One Papist well caught is worth millions of Blackies. 

Friday. 

Last night had a dream so odd and funny 

I cannot resist recording it here. — 
Methought that the Genius of Matrimony 

Before me stood, with a joyous leer, 
Leading a hushand in each hand 

And both for me, which look'd rather queer; — 
One I could perfectly understand, 

But why there were two wasn't quite so clear. 
'Twas meant, however, I soon could see. 

To afford me a clsoiee, — a most excellent plan; 
And — who snould this brace of candidates be 

But Messrs. O' Mulligan and Magan : — 
A thing, I suppose, unheard of till then, 
To dream, at once, of two Irishmen !— 
That handsome Magan, too, with wings on his shoulders' 

(For all this pass'd in the realms of the Blest) 
And quite a creature to dazzle beholders ; 

While even O'MuUigan, feallier'd and drest 

As an elderly cherub, was looking his best. 
Ah Liz, you, who know me, scarce can doubt 
As to which of the two I singled out. 
But, — awful to tell,— when, all in dread 

Of losing so bright a vision's charms, 
I grasp'd at Magan, his image lied. 
Like a mist, away, and I found but the head 
Of O' Mulligan, wings and all, in my arms ! 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 33 

The Angel had flown to some nest divine, 
And the elderly Cherub alone was mine ! 



Heigho !— it is certain that foolish Magan 
Either can't or n-on't see that he might be the man ; 
And, perhaps, dear, — who knows? — if nought belter befall- 
But— O' Mulligan may be the man, after all. 

N. B. 

Next week mean to have my first scriptural rout. 

For the special discussion of matters devout ; — 

Like those soirees, at Pow'rscourt, (■) so justly renovvn'd 

For the zeal with w^hich doctrine and negus went round ;— 

(■) An account of these Powerscourt Conversaziones (under the di- 
rect presidency of Lord Roden), as well as a list of the subjects discussed 
at the different meetings, may be found in the Christian Herald for the 
month of December, i832. The following is a specimen of the nature 
of the questions submitted to the company : — Monday Evening, Six 
o'clock, September 24, i832. — "An examination into the quotations 
given in the New Testament from the Old, with their connection and 
explanation, viz: etc. etc." — Wednesday. — "Should we expect a per- 
sonal Antichrist? and to whom will he be revealed ?'''' etc. etc. — Friday. 
— "What light does Scripture throw on present events, and their moral 
cliaracler .'* Jf hat is next to be looked for or expected?" etc. 

The lapid progress made at these tea-porties in settling points of 
Scriptui'e, may be judged from a paragraph in the account given of one of 
their evenings, by the Christian Herald: — 

"On Daniel a good deal of light was thrown, and there was some, I 
think not so much, perhaps, upon the Revelations, though particular 
parts of it were discussed with considerable accession of knowledge. 
There was some very interesting inquiry as to the quotation of the Old 
Testament in the New; particularly on the point, whether there was 



34 THE FUDGES IIV ENGLAND. 

Those theology-routs which the pious Lord R-d-n, 
That pink of Christianity, first set the mode in; 
Wliere, blessed down-pouring ! (■) from tea until nine, 
The subjects lay all in the Prophecy line ;— 
Then, supper— and then, if for topics hard driven, 
From thence until bed- time to Satan was given; 
While R-d-n, deep read in each topic and tome, 
On all subjects (especially the last) was at home. 



LETTER VII. 



FROM MISS FANNY FUDGE, TO HER COUSIN, MISS KITTY . 

IRREGULAR ODE. 

Bring me the slumbering souls of flowers. 

While yet, beneath some northern sky, 
Ungilt by beams, ungemm'd by showers. 
They wait the breath of summer hours, 

any 'accommodation,' or whether they were quoted according to the mind 
of the Spirit in the Old; this gave occasion to some very interesting de- 
velopment of Scripture. The progress of the Antichristian powexs 
was very fully discussed." 

(') "About eight o'clock the Lord began to pour down his spirit 
copiously upon us — for they had all by this time assembled in my 
room for the purpose of prayer. This down-pouring continued till 
about ten o'clock." — Letter from Mary Campbell to the Rev. John 
Campbell, of Row (dated Fernicary, April 4, i83o), giving an account 
of her "miraculous cure." 



THE FUDGES VH ENGLAND. 35 

To wake to light each diamond eye, 
And let loose every florid sigh ! 

Bring me the first-born ocean waves, 
From out those deep primeval caves, 
Where from the dawn of Time they 've lain,— 
The embryos of a future Main !— 
Untaught as yet, young things, to speak 

The language of their Parent Sea, 
(Polyphlysbaean (') named, in Greek) 
Though soon, too soon, in bay and creek, 
Round startled isle and wondering peak, 

They '11 thunder loud and long as He ! 



Bring me, from Hecla's iced abode, 
Young fires 

I had got, dear, thus far in my Ode, 
Intending to fill the whole page to the bottom. 

But, having invoked such a lot of fine things. 

Flowers, billows and thunderbolts, rainbows ;and wings^ 
Didn' t know uhat to do with'em, Avhen I had got 'em. 
The truth is, my thoughts are too full, at this minute. 

Of past MSS. any new ones to try. 
This very night's coach brings my destiny in it,~ 

Decides the great question, to live or to die ! 
And, whether I 'm henceforth immortal or no. 
All depends on the answers of Shnkins and Co. ! 

You '11 think, love, I rave, so 't is best to let out 
The whole secret, at once— I have publish'd a Book ! ! ! 

(0 If you guess what this word means, 'lis more than / cau ; — 
I but give 't, as I got it from Mr. Magan. 



36 THE FUDGES IIV EXGLAND. 

Yes, an actual Book :— if the marvel you doubt, 
You have only in last Monday's Courier to look, 
And you'll find " This day published by Simkins and Co. 
A Romaunt, in twelve Cantos, entitled ' Woe, Woe ! ' 

By Miss Fanny F , known more commonly so Cii;^^." 

This I put that my friends may n't be left in the dark, 

But may guess at my writing by knowing my mark. 

How I managed, at last, this great deed to achieve. 

Is itselfa" Romaunt" which you'd scarce, dear, believe; 

Nor can I just now, being all in a whirl. 

Looking out for the Magnet, (') explain it, dear girl. 

Suffice it to say, that one half the expense 

Of this leasehold of fame for long centuries hence, — 

(Though " God knows," as aunt says, my humble ambition 

Aspires not beyond a small Second Edition,) — 

One half the whole cost of the paper and printing, 

I've managed, this last year, to scrape up, by stinting 

My own little wants in gloves, ribbons, and shoes. 

Thus defrauding the toilet to fit out the Bluse ! 

And who, my dear Kitty, would not do the same? 
What's eau de Cologne to the sweet breath of fame ? 
Yards of ribbon soon end, — but the measures of rhyme, 
Dipp'd in hues of the rainbow, stretch out through all time. 
Gloves languish and fade away, pair after pair, 
While couplets shine out, but the bi igliter for wear. 
And the dancing-shoe's gloss in an evening is gone, 
While light-footed lyrics through ages trip on. 

The remaining expense, trouble, risk, — and alas ! 
My poor copyright loo — into other hands pass ; 

(') A day coach of that name 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 3' 

A-nd my friend, the Head Dev'l of the " County Gazette ' 

( The only Mecirnas I've ever had yet ), 

He who set up in type my first juvenile lays, 

Is now set up hy tliera for the rest of his days ; 

And while Gods (as my " Heathen Mythology"says ) 

Live on nought but ambrosia, his lot how much sweeter 

To live, Uicky dev'l, on a young lady's metre ! 

As for imffincj,— that first of all lit'rary boons, 

And essential alike both to bards and balloons ; 

As, unless well supplied with inflation, 't is found 

Neither bards nor balloons budge an inch from the ground;— 

In this respect, nought could more prosp'rous befall ; 

As my friend ( for no less this kind imp can I call ) 

Knows the whole world of critics, dear,— hypers and all. 

I suspect, indeed, he himself dabbles in rhyme, 

Which, for imps diabolic, is not the first time; 

As I 've heard uncle Bob say, 't was known among Gnostics, 

That the Dev'l on Two Sticks was a dev'l at Acrostics. 

But hark! there 's the Magnet just dash'd in from Town- 
How my heart, Kitty, beats ! I shall surely drop down. 
That awful Court Journal, Gazette, Athenaeum, 
All full of my book— I shall sink when I see 'em. 
And then, the great point— whether Simkins and Co. 
Are actually pleased with their bargain or no ! 

Five o'clock. 

A 11 's delightful — such praises ! — I really fear 
That this poor little head will turn giddy, my dear. 
I 've but time now to send you two exquisite scraps,— 
All the rest by the Magnet, on Monday, perhaps. 



38 THE FUDGES I\ ENGLAIVD. 

FROM THE '' MORM.\G POST." 

'T is known that a certain distinguish'd physician 

Prescribes, (or dyspepsia, a course of Hght reading; 
And Rhymes by young Ladies, the first, fresh edition 
(Ere critics have injured tlieir powers of nutrition), 

Are, bethinks, for weak stomachs, the best sort of feeding. 
Satires irritate— love-songs are found calorific; 
But smooth female sonnets he deems a specific. 
And, if taken at bed-time, a sure soporific. 
Among works of this kind, the most pleasing we know, 
Is a volume just publish'd by Sirakins and Co., 
Where all such ingredients, — the flowery, the sweet, 
And the gently narcotic, — are mix'd per receipt, 
With a hand so judicious, we 've no hesitation 
To say that— 'hove all, for the young generation, — 
'Tis an elegant, soothing and safe preparation. 

Nota bene— for readers,whose object 's to sleep, 
And who read, in their night-caps, the publishers keep 
Good fire-proof binding, which comes very cheap. 

ANECDOTE— FROM THE " COURT JOURNAL." 

T'other night, at the Countess of * * * 's rout, 
An amusing event was much whispei 'd about. 
It was said that Lord , at the Council, that day, 

Had, more than once, jump'd from his seat, like a rocket. 
And flown to a corner, where, heedless, they say. 
How the country's resources were squander'd away. 

He kept reading some papers he 'd brought in his pocket. 
Some thought them dispatches from Spain, or the Turk, 

Others swore they brought word we had lost the Mauritius; 
But it turn'd out 'I was only Miss Fudge's new work, 

Which his Lordship devour'd with such zeal expeditious.— 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 39 

Messrs. Simkins and Co. to avoid all delay 

Having sent it in sheets, that his Lordship might say, 

He had distanced the whole reading world by a day ! 



LETTER VIII. 

FROM BOB FUDGE, ESQ., TO THE REV. MORTIMER O'MULLIGAN. 

Tuesday Evening, 
I MDCH regret, dear Reverend Sir, 

I conld not come to * * * to meet you ; 
But this curst gout won't let me stir, — 

Ev'n now I but by proxy greet you ; 
As this vile scrawl, whate'er its sense is, 
Owes all to an amanuensis- 
Most other scourges of disease 
Reduce men to extremities, — 
But gout won't leave one even these. 

From all my sister writes, I see 
That you and I will quite agree. 
I 'm a plain man, wlio speak the truth, 

And trust you '11 think me not uncivil, 
When I declare that, from my youth, 

I 've wij^h'd your country at the devil : 
Nor can I doubt, indeed, from all 

I 've heard of your high patriot fame, — 
From every word your lips let fall, — 

That you most truly wish the same. 
It plagues one's life out — thirty years 
Have I had dinning in my ears. 



40 THE FUDGES IX ENGLAND. 

^'Ireland wants this, and that, and t' other" 
And, to this hour, one nothing hears 

But the same vile eternal bother. 
While of those countless things she wanted, 
Thank God, but little, has been granted, 
Andev'n thai little if we 're men 
And Britons, we 'II have back again ! 

I really think that Catholic question 
Was what brought on my indigestion ; 
And still each year, as Popery's curse 
Has gather'd round us, I 've got worse ; 
Till ev'n my pint of Port a-day 
Can't keep the Pope and bile away. 
And whereas, till the Catholic pill, 
I never wanted draught or pill, 
The settling of that cursed question 
Has quite t/nsettled my digestion. 

Look what has happen'd since — the Elect 
Of all the bores of every sect. 
The chosen triers of men's patience. 
From all the Three Denominations, 
Pour'd in upon us, — even Quakers, 
Turn'd into speechers and law-makers. 
Who '11 move no question, stiff-rump'd elves, 
Till first the Spirit moves themselves; 
And whose shrill Yeas and Nays, in chorus. 
Conquering our Ays and Nos sonorous, 
Will soon to death's own slumber snore us. 
Then, too, those Jews !— I really sicken 

To think of such abomination; 
Fellows, who won't eat ham with chicken, 

To legislate for this great nation!— 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 41 

Depend upon 't, when once lliey 've sway, 
With rich old Goldsniid at the head o' them, 

The Excise laws will be done away, 
And Circumcise ones pass'd instead o' them ! 

In short, dear Sir, look where one wilt. 
Things all go on so devilish ill, 
That, 'pon my soul, I rather fear 

Our reverend Rector may be right, 
Who tells me the Millennium 's near ; 
Nay, swears he knows the very year, 

And regulates his leases by 'tj — 
Meaning their terms should end, no doubt, 
Before the world's own lease is out. 
He thinks, too, that the whole thing 's ended 
So much more soon than was intended, 
Purely to scourge those men of sin 
Who brought the accurst Reform Bill in. (') 

However, let 's not yet despair; 

Though Toryism 's eclipsed, at present. 
And, — like myself, in this old chair, — 

Sits in a state by no means pleasant j 
Feet crippled, — hands, in luckless hour, 
Disabled of their grasping power ; 
And all that rampant glee, which revell'd 
In this world's sweets, be-duH'd, bedevil'd, — 

(•) This appears to have been the opiuion also of an eloquent writer 

in the Morning Watch. " One great object of Christ's second Advent, 

as the Man and as the King of the Jews, is to punish the Kings who 

do not acknowledge that their authority is derived from him, and 

who submit to receive it from that many-headed monster, the mob. — No, 

ID, p. 373. 

2. 



62 THE FUDGES IN ENGLAKD 

Yet, though condemn'd to frisk no more, 

And both in Cliair of Penance set, 
There 's something tells me, all 's not o'er 

With Toryism or Bobby yet j 
That though, between ns, I allow 
We 've not a leg to stand on nowj 
Though curst Reform and colchicum 
Have made us both look deuced glum, 
Yet still, in spile of Grote and Gout, 
Again we'll shine triumphant out! 

Yes— back again shall come, egad. 
Oar turn for sport, my reverend lad. 
And then, O'MuUigan, — oh then. 
When mounted on our nags again, 
You, on your high-flown Rosinante, 
Bedizen'd out, like Show-Gallante,— 
Glitter great from substance scanty; — 
AVhile I, Bob Fudge, Esquire, shall ride 
Your faithful Sancho, by your side; 
Then, — talk of tilts and tournaments! 
Dam'me, we'll 



'Squire Fudge's clerk presents 
To Reverend Sir his compliments; 
Is grieved to say an accident 
Has just occurr'd which will prevent 
The Squire,— though now a little better,— 
From finishing this present letter. 

Just when he'd got to "Dam'me, we'll " 

His Honour, full of martial zeal. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. /jS 

Grasp'd at his crutch, but not being able 
To keep his balance or his hold, 
Tumbled, both self and crutch, and roll'd 

Like ball and bat, beneath the table. 

All 's safe,— the table, chair, and crutch j— 

Nothing, thank God, is broken much. 

But the Squire's head, which, in the fall, 

Got bunip'd considerably— that's all. 

At this no great alarm we feel. 

As the Squire's head can bear a deal. 

Wednesday Morning. 

Squire much the same— head rather light,— 
Raved about " Barbers' Wigs" all night. 

Our house-keeper, old Mrs. Griggs, 
Suspects that he meant "Barbarous Whigs." 



LETTER IX. 

FROM LARRY o'bRANIGAN TO HIS WIFE JUDY. 

As it was but last week that I sint you a letther, 
You '11 wondher, dear Judy, what this is about; 

And, throlh, it 's a letther myself would like betilier, 
Could I manage to lave the contints of it out; 

For sure, if it makes even me onaisy, 
Who takes things quiet, 't will drhive you crazy. 



/i4 THE FUDGES IIV ENGLAND. 

Oh Judy, that riverind Mm thagh, bad scran to him ! 

Thatev'r Ishoiiklcome to 'vebeen sarvant-manto him, 

Or so far deinane the O'Bs aiiigan blood, 

And my Aunts, the Diluvians (whom not ev'n the Flood 

Was able to wash away clane from the earth) (') 

As to sarveone whose name, of mere yestherday's birth, 

Can no more to a great O, before it, purtend, 

Than mine can to wear a great Q at its end. 

But that 's now all over — last night I gev warnin'. 
And, niasthr as he is, will discharge him this mornin'. 
The thief of the world !— but it's no use balraggin'; {') — 
All I know is, I 'd lifiy limes rather hedragin' 
Ould ladies up hill to the ind of my days, 
Than w-ilh Murthagh to rowl in a chaise at my aise. 
And l)e forced to discind thro' the same dirty ways. 
Arrah, sure, if 1 'd heerd where lie last show'd his phyz, 
I 'd have known what a qiiare sort of monsther he is ; 
For, by gor, 't was at Exether Change, sure enough, 
That himself and his other wild Irish show'd off; 
And it 's pity, so 'i is, that tliey had n't got no man 
Who knew the W'ild cralhursto act as their showman, — 
Sayin' '* Ladies and Ginllemen, plaze to take notice. 
How shlim and how shieek this black animal's coat is; 
All by raison, we 're towld, that the nalhur o' th' baste 
Is to change its coal ouce in its life-time, at lasie; 

(') " I am of your Palrij.rchs, I, a branch of one of your antediluvian 
families, — fallows that the Flood could not wash away." — Congreve, 
Love for Love. 

(a) To balrag is to abuse. Mr. Lover makes it ballyrag, and he is high 
authority : but if I nuiombcr rightly, Curran in his national stories, 
nsed to emj)Ioy the word as above. — See Lover's most amusing and 
genuinely Irish work, the "Legends and Stories of Ireland." 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. ho 

And such objiks, in our counlhry, not bein' common ones, 
Are hoxifjht vp, as this was, by way of Fine Nomenons. 
In regard of its HO!ne,— why, in throlh, I 'm consarn'd 
To differ on this point so much with the larn'd, 
Who call it a ' Morthimer,' whereas the craythur 
Is plainly a ' Murthjigh,' by name and by nathur." 
This is howl 'd have towld them the rights of it all, 
Had I been their showman at Exelher Hall,— 
Not forgettin' that other great wondher of Airin, 
(Of th' owld bitther breed which they call Prosbetairin,) 
Tlie famed Daddy C— ke— who, by gor, I 'd have shown' em 
As proof how such basics may be tamed, when you 've 

thrown 'em 
A good frindly sop of the rale Raigin Donem. (') 

But, tbroth, I 've no laisure just now, Judy dear, 
For any thing, barrin' our own doings here, 
And the cursin' and dammin' and thund'rin', lick mad. 
We Papists, God help «s, from Murthagh have had. 
He says we 're all murtherers — div'l a bit less, — 
And tliat even our priests, when we go to confess, 
Give us lessons in murth'rin, ami wish us success ! 

When ax'd how he dared, by tongue or l)y pen, 

To belie, in this way, seven millions of men, 

Faith, he said, 't was all towld hini by Docthor Den ! (») 

''And who the div'l 's he?" was ihefiueslion that flew 

From Chrishtian to Chrishlian— but not a sowl knew. 

(') Larry evidently means the Regiuin Dotmtn; — a sum contributed 
by the government annually to the support of the Presbyterian churches 
in Ireland. 

(') Correctly, Dens,— Larry not being very parlicidai' in his nomen- 
clature. 



'i6 THE FUDGES IN EIVGLAIVD. 

While on went Murthagh, in iiigant style, 

Blasphaming us Cath'lics all the while, 

As a pack of desaivers, parjurers, villians, 

All the whole kit of ihe aforesaid millions, (■) — 

Yourself, dear Judy, as well as the rest, 

And the innocent craythur that 's at your breast, 

All rogues together, in word and deed, 

Owld Den our insthructor and Sin our creed ! 

When ax'd for his proofs again and again, 
Div'l an answer he 'd give hut Docthor Den. 
Gould n't he call into coort some livin' men? 
"No, thank you" — he 'd stick to Docthor Den, — 
An ould gintleman dead a century or two, 
Who all ahout us, live Cath'lics, knew ; 
And of coorse was more handy, to call in a huny, 
Than Docthor Mac Hale or Docthor Murray ! 

But, throth, it 's no case to he jokin' upon, 
Though myself, from bad habits, is makin' it one. 
And yourself, had you wilness'd his grand clymaclhrics. 
Which actially threw one owld maid in hysterics, 
Or, och ! had you heerd such a purty remark as his, 
That Papists are only ''Humanity's carcasses, 
Ris'n" — but, by dad, I 'm afeardi can't give it ye, — 
"Kis'ji from the sepulchre of— inactivity : 

(') "The deeds of darkness which are reduced to horrid practice 
over the drunken debauch of the midnight assassin, are debated, iu 
principle, in the sober morning religious conferences of the priests." — 
Speech of the Rev. Mr. M^Gkee. "Tlie character of the Irish people 
generallr is, that they are given to lying and to acts of theft." — Speech 
of the Rev. Robert Daly. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 47 

And, like owkl corpses, dug up from antikitij, 

Wandrin about in all sorts of inikity ! !" (') 

Even you, Judy, true as you are to the Ovvld Light, 

Would have laugh'd, out and out, at this ihgant flight. 

Of that figure of speech called the Blather umskite. 

As for me, though a funny thought now and then came to me, 

Rage got the betther at last,— and small blame to me ! 

So, slapping my thigh, " by the Powers of Delf," 

Says I boldly, "I '11 make an oration myself." 

And with that up I jumps,— but, my darlint, the minit 

I cock'd up my head, div'l a sinse remaiu'd in it. 

Though, salted, I could have got beautiful on, 

When I tuk to my legs, faith, the gab Avas all gone :— 

Which was odd for us, Pats, who, whale'er we 've a hand in, 

At laste in our legs show good sthrong undherstandiu'. 

Howsumdever, detarmin'd the chaps sliould parsaive 

What I thouglit of their doin's, before I tuk lave, 

" In regard of all that," says I— there I stopp'd short— 

Sorra a word more would come, though I shtruggled hard for't. 

So, shnapping my fingers at what 's call'd the Chair, 

And the owld Lord (or Lady, I b'lieve) that sat there, — 

" In regard of all that," says I bowldly again, — 

" To owld Nick I pitch Mortimer— oiid Doclhor Den;—" 

Upon which the whole company cried out, " Amen;" 

(») But she (Popery) is no longer the tenant of the sepulchre of in- 
actwity. She has come from the burial-place, walking forth a monster, 
as if the spirit of evil had corrupted the carcass of her departed hiima- 
nity; noxious and noisome, an object of abhorrence and dismay to all 
who are not leagued with her In iniquity,^'' — Report of the Rev. 
Gentleman's Speech, June 20th, in the Record Newspaper. 

We may well ask, after reading this and other such Reverend ravings, 
"Quis dubilat quia omne sit hoc rationis cgestas .^ " 



m THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

And myself was in hopes 't was to what I had said, 
But, by gor, no such ihing,— they were not so well hred ; 
For, 't was all to a pray'r Murlhagh just had read ou!. 
By way of fit finish to job sj devout ; 
That is, — afther well damning one half the community, 
To pray God to k^ep all in pace an' in unity ! 

This is all I can shtuff in this lelther, though plinty 
Of news, faith, I 've goi to All more— if 't was twinty. 
But I '11 add, on the outside, a line, should I need it, 
(Wrilin' "Private" upon it, that no one may read it,) 
To tell you how Mortimer (as the Saints chrishten him) 
Bears the big shame of his sarvant's dismisshin' him. 

{Private outside.) 

Just come from his Riv'rence — the job is all done — 

By the powers, I 've discharged him as sure as a gun ! 

And now, Judy dear, what on earth I 'm to do 

With myself and my appeiite, — both good as new, — 

Without ev'n a single traneen in my pocket, 

Let alone a good dacent pound-starlin', to stock it^ 

J« a mysht'ry I lave to the One that 's above, 

Who takes care of us, dissolute sowls, when hard dhrove ! 



LETTER X. 



PROM THE REV. MORTIMER o'mULLIGAN T0 THE REV. 

These few brief lines, my reverend friend, 
By a safe private hand I send, 
(Fearing lest some low Catholic wag, 
Should pry into the Letter-bag), 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 49 

To tell you, far as pen can dare, 
How we, poor errant martyrs, fare;— 
Martyrs, not quite to fire and rack. 
As Saints were, some few ages back. 
But, — scarce less trying, in its way, — 
To laughter, wheresoe'er we stray ; 
To jokes, which Providence mysterious 
Permits on men and things so serious, 
Lowering the Church still more each minute, 
And — injuring our preferment in it. 
Just think, how wearing out, my friend, 
To have, where'er our footsteps bend. 

Small jokes, like squibs, around us whizzing ; 
And bear the eternal torturing play 
Of that great engine of our day, 

Unknown to the Inquisition,— quizzing ! 

Your men of thumb-screws and of racks 
Aimed at the body their attacks ; 
But modern torturers, more refined. 
Work their machinery on the mind. 
Had St. Sebastian had the luck 

With me to be a godly rover. 
Instead of arrows, he 'd be stuck 

With stings of ridicule all over; 
And poor St. Lawrence, who was kill'd 
By being on a gridir'n grill'd, 
Had he but shared intj errant lot, 
Instead of grill on gridir'n hot, 
A moral roasting would have got. 
Nor should I, trying as all this is. 

Much heed the suffering or the shame, — 
As, like an actor, used to hisses, 



50 THE FUDGES m EIXGLAND. 

I long have known no other fame, 
But that (as I may own to you. 
Though to the uorld it would not do ), 
No hope appears of fortune's beams 
Shining on any of my schemes; 
No chance of something more per anit. 
As supplement to K— Uym — n ; 
No prospect that, by fierce abuse 
Of Ireland, I shall e'er induce 
The rulers of tliis thinking nation 
To rid us of Emancipation; 
To forge anew the sever'd chain, 
And bring back Penal Laws again. 

Ah happy time ! when wolves and priests 

Alike were hunted, as wild beasts; 

And five pounds was the price, per head. 

For bagging either, live or dead ; (')— 

Though oft, we 're told, one outlaw'd brother 

Saved cost, by eating up the other. 

Wise state of things! w-hen sons were bribed 

With their sires' wealth ; and one profest 
Conformist, of a race proscribed, 

Had power to beggar all the rest! (') 

(>) "Amon^ other amiable enactments against the Catholics at tliis 
period (1649% the price orfive pounds was set on the head of a Romisli 
priest, — being exactly the same sum offered by the same legislators for 
the head of a wolf." — Memoirs 0/ Captain Rock, book i. chap. 10. 

(') "By tlie laws now in force in this kingdom, a son, however undu- 
tiful and profligate, shall not merely, by the merit of conforming to the 
csta'blished religion, deprive the Roman Catholic father of the tree 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. ..1 

Then, then, indeed, good converts brought 
A price that set all shame at nought, 
Nay, made it glory to be bought. 
Ah, how unlike the paltry pay 
We fetch in this degenerate day ! 
A poor small rectory all our lot,— 
If zealous, laugh'd at, and, if not, 
Scored off as " paid for," and forgot ! 



Yes, all 's now o'er — I see too plain 
Those good times ne'er can come again. 
Our very progress here betrays 
That we are fall'n on thankless days. 
So dull are thought our "yarns" devout. 
Not Kenyon's self can sit them out ; (■) 
Nor ev'n that Saint, Lord Mandeville, 
Gulp down such endless length of pill. 



and full possession of his estate, the power to mortgage, etc. elc, 
but shall himself liave full liberty immediately to mortgage, or other- 
wise alienate, the reversion of that estate from his family for ever." 

Address presented by the Catholics in 1775. 

(') Lord Kenyon — "A previous engagement renders it necessary for 
me to depart at four o'clock; — thai hour has now arrived, and I must 
leave. I would therefore suggest to tlie meeting that my noble friend 
Lord Mandeville do take the chair." The motion that Lord Mandeville 
should lake the chair was agreed to; but it appeared that ihe noble 
Viscount had left the platform a short lime before. Lerd Kenyon then 
said, "I am informed that my friend Lord Mandeville has left the 
platform ; I will therefore move that Mr. Finch do take the chair." — 
Report oj the Proceedings, June 2 0lh, in the Record Newspaper. 



52 THE FUDGES IN ENGLAKD. 

So that, at last, — so dire our pinch, 
Wlien thus all decent chairmen flinch, — 
We 're forced to take to Mr. F — neh ! 
Then, too, ihey tell us, with what zeal 
All England throhs to our appeal : 
But, why (if the interest so intense is) 
Why do n't they pay the room's expenses? (') 
When Kenyon begg'd, in our behalf. 
He raised — not money, but a laugh! 

'T is true, they flock to us, as a show, — 
As men dug up (dead long ago), 
A sort of strolling Corpse and Co. 
( Like those old carcasses that lately 
I set upon their legs so stately ) 
All Doctor Dens' contemporaries, 
And quoting still his dead vagaries, 
'Mong living thinking men, who stare 
To see such resurrections there, 

(') Several touching appeals have been made to the public on this 
point, and Lord Kenyon, at the close of the second day's proceedings, 
said, "I hope ihe meeting will permit me to remind them, that very 
considerable expense has been incurred by the deputation and the 
committee. There will be a collection made at the door, in order to 
defray those expenses , and I trust that those who are able will contri- 
bute liberally." From Ihe following complaint, however, in the Record 
(July 9th), it appears that the noble Lord's appeal was unavailing : 
" Wo have lo remark that the contributions at the doors at the last 
meeting at Exeter Hall by no means defrayed the expenses, which are 
somewhat heavy (40/. is charged for the room alone), and we may be 
excused for requesting our readers to exercise a little more liberality al 
Ihe approaching meeting on Saturday." 



THE FUDGES IIM ENGL ARID 53 

And hear a dead dull Doctor's tliought 
As witness of live feelings brought ! 
While ev'n the Church, in whose defence 

We 've drawn the oraloric blade, 
Dreads the uplifted eloquence, 

And shudders at such perilous aid, — 
" Foes I can brave," she shrinking cries, 
" But save me from my dear Allies." 
Finding thus al! those schemes and hopes 
I built upon my flowers and tropes 
All scatter'd, one by one, away, 
As flashy and unsound as Ihey, 
The question comes — what 's to be done? 
And there 's but one course left me, — one. 
Heroes, when tired of war's alarms. 
Seek sweet repose in Beauty's arms. 
The weary Day-God's last retreat is 
Tlie breast of silv'ry-footed Thetis; 
And mine, as mighty Love 's my judge, 
Shall be the arms of ricli Miss Fudge ! 

Start not, my friend,— the tender scheme, 
Wild and romantic though it seem. 
Beyond a parson's fondest dream, 
Yet shines, too, with those golden dyes. 
So pleasing to a parson's eyes, — 
That only gildiug which the Muse 
Cannot around her sons diffuse; — 
Which, whencesoever flows its bliss, 
From wealthy Miss or benefice, 
To Mortimer indiff'rent is. 
So lie can only make it his. 



^A THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

There is but one slight damp I see 

Upon this scheme's feUcity, 

And that is, the fair lieroine's claim 

That I shall lake her family name. 

To this (though it may look henpeck'd), 

I can't quite decently object, 

Having myself long chosen to shine 

Conspicuous in the alias (■) line; 

So that henceforth, by wife's decree, 

( For Biddy from this point won't budge) 
Your old friend's new address must be 

The Uev. Mortimer O'FvcUje, — 
The " O " being kept, that all may see 
We're both of ancient family. 

Such, friend, nor need the fact amaze you, 
My pul)lic life's calm Euthanasia. 
Thus bid I long farewell to all 
The freaks of Exeter's old Hall, — 
Freaks, in grimace, its apes exceeding, 
And rivalling its bears in breeding. 
Farewell, the platform fiU'd with preachers,— 
The pray'r given out, as grace, (') by speechers, 

(■) In the first edition of his Dictionary, Doctor Johnson very sij^ni- 
fKaully exemplified the meaning of the word "alias" by the instance 
of Mallet, tlie poet, who had exchanged for this more refined name 
'lis original Scotch patronymic, Malloch. "What or/ier proofs he gave 
(says Johnson) of disrespect to his native country, I know not; but it 
was remarked of him that lie was the only Scot whom Scotchmen did 
not commend." — Li/e of Mallet. 

(») "I think I am acting in unison with the feelings of a Meeting 
assembled for this solemn object, when I call on the Rev. Doctor Hol- 
lowav to open it bv prayer." — Speech of Lord Kenjon. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND 55 

Ere they cut up their fellow-creatures: 

Farewell to dead old Dens's volumes, 

And, scarce less dead, old Standard's columns :— 

From each and all I now retire,— 

My task, henceforth, as spouse and sire, 

To bring up little filial Fudges, 

To be M. P. 's, and Peers, and Judges,— 

Parsons I 'd add, too, if alas ! 

There yet were hope the Church could pass 

The gulf now oped for her's and iier, 

Or long sunive what Exeter, — 

Both Hall and Bishop, of that name, — 

Have done to sink her reverend name. 

Adieu, dear friend, — you '11 ofi hear from me, 
Now I 'm no more a travelling drudge; 
Meanwhile I sign ( that you may judge 
How well the surname will l)ecome me ) 
Yours truly, 

Mortimer O'Fijiwjl. 



LETTER XT. 

FROM PATRICK MAGA>, ESQ., TO THE REV. RICHARD 

, Ireland. 

Dear Dick— just arrived at my own humble rjite, 
I inclose you, post-haste, the account, all complete, 
Just arrived, ]jer express, of our late noble feat. 



56 THE FUDGES I\ ENGLAND. 

[ Extract from the " County Gazette." ] 

" This place is gelling gay and full again. 

>(- + + + 

Last week was married, ' in the Lord, ' 
The Reverend Mortimer O'Mulligan, 

Preacher, in Irish, of the Word 
(He, who the Lord's force lately led on, 
Exeter Hall his Armo(//i-geddon), (') 
To Miss B. Fudge, of Pisgah Place, 
One of the chos'n, as ' heir of grace,' 
And likewise heiress of Phil. Fudge, 
Esquire, defunct, of Orange Lodge." 

" Same evening, Miss F. Fudge, 'tis hinted, — 

Niece of the ahove ( whose ' Sylvan Lyre,' 
In our Gazette, last week, we printed ), 

Eloped with Pat. Magan, Esquire. 
The fugitives were track'd, some time, 

After they 'd left the Aunt's abode. 
By scraps of paper, scrawl'd with rhyme. 

Found strew'd along the Western road ; 
Some of Ihem ci-devant curl-papers. 
Others half burnt in lighting tapers. 
This clue, however, to their flight, 

After some miles was seen no more ; 
And from inquiries made last night. 

We find they 've reach'd the Irish shore. " 

{') The rectory wiiich the Rev. gentleman holds is situated in the 
county o{ Armagh .' — -a most remarkable coincidence, — and well worthy 
of the attention of certain expounders of the Apocalypse. 



THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND 57 

Every word of it true, Dick,— the escape from Aunt's tlirall,— 

Western road, — lyric fragments,— curl-papers and all. 

My sole stipulation, ere link'd at the shrine 

( As some balance between Fanny's numbers and mine ), 

Was that, when we were one, she must give up the iVnie ; 

Nay, devote to the Gods her whole stock of MS. 

With a vow never more against prose to transgress. 

This she did, like a heroine ; — smack went to bits 

The whole produce sublime of her dear little wits,— 

Sonnets, elegies, epigrams, odes, canzonets, — 

Some twisted up neatly, to form aUinnettes, 

Some turn'd inlo liapillotes, worthy to rise 

And enwreathe Berenice's bright locks in the skies ! 

While the rest, honest Larry (who's now in mij pay ) 

Begg'd, as " lover oipo'thry" to read on the way. 

Having thus of life's poefry dared to dispose, 

How we now, Dick, shall manage to get through its prose, 

With such slender materials for style, Heaven knows ! 

But— I'm call'd off abruptly — anot/ier Express! 

What the deuce can it mean? — I 'm alarm'd, I confess. 

P.S. 

Hurra, Dick, hurra, Dick, ten thousand hurras ! 

I 'm a happy rich dog to the end of my days. 

There,— read the good news,— and while glad, for my sake, 

That Wealth should thus follow in Love's shining wake, 

Admire also the moral, that he, the sly elf. 

Who has fudged all the world, should be now fudged himself. 



as THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND. 

EXTRACT FROM LETTER IXCLOSED. 

' ' With pain the mournful news I write, 
Miss Fudge's uncle died last night ; 
And mucli to mine and friends' surprise, 
By will doth all his wealth devise, — 
Lands, dwellings, — rectories likewise, — 
To his ' heloved grand-niece,' Miss Fanny, 
Leaving Miss Fudge herself, who many 
Long years hath waited,— not a penny ! 
Have notified the same to latter, 
And wait instructions in the matter. 

For self and partners, etc. etc. " 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 



[The Author avails himself of the opportunity which this puhlication 
affords, to form a collection of all such trifles as he has, from time to 
time, published, since the appearance of his last miscellaneous volume, 
— entitled, "Odes upon Cash, Corn, Catholics, etc." In that volume, 
and in tlie following pages, are to be found, with but very few excep- 
tions, all the delinquencies, in this way, for which his pen is answer- 
able, i 



SONG OF THE DEPARTING* SPIRIT OF TITHE. 

" The parting genius is with sighing sent. " — Mihon. 

It is o'er, it is o'er, my reigii is o'er; 

I Iiear a Voice, from shore to sliore, 

From Dunfanaghy to Baltimore, 

And it saith, in sad, parsonic tone, 

" Great Titlie, — and Small, — are dead and gone ! " 

Even now, I beliold your vanishing wings, 
Ye Tenths of all conceivable tilings 
Which Adam first, as Doctors deem, 
Saw, in a sort of night-mare dream, (•) 

(') A reverend prebendary of Hereford, in an Essay on the Revenues 
of theChHrch of England, has assigned the origin of Tilhes to " some 
unrecorded revelation made to Adam." 



60 



TRIFLES, REPRmTED. 

After the feast of fruit abliorr'd,— 

First indigestion on record !— 

Ye decimate ducks, ye chosen chicks, 

Ye pigs which, though ye be Catholics, 

Or of Calvin's most select depraved. 

In the Church must have your bacon saved ;— 

Ye fields, where Labour counts his sheaves,' 

And, whatsoever himself believes 

Must bow to the Establish'd Church belief, 

That the tenth is always a Protestant sheaf;— 

Ye calves, of which the man of Heaven 

Takes Irish tithe, one calf in seven j (>) 

Ye tenths of rape, hemp, barley, flax, 

Eggs, (^) timber, milk, fish, and bees' wax ; 

All things, in short, since earth's creation, 

Doom'd, by the Church's dispensation. 

To suffer eternal decimation,— 

Leaving the whole ?ay-world, since then, 

Reduced to nine parts out of tenj 

Or,— as we calculate thefts and arsons,— 

Just ten per cent, the worse for Parsons ! 

Alas, and is all this wise device 

For the saving of souls thus gone in a trice ?- 

(') " The tenth calf is due to the parson of common right; and if 
there are seven, he shall have one." ~ lees's Cjclopa-di„, Art. 
" Tithes." 

{') Chaucer's Plowman complains of the parish rectors, that 
"For the tithing of a duck; 
Or an apple, or an aye (egg), 
They make him swear upon a hoke; 
Thus they foulen Christ's fay." 



TRIFLES, REPRIXTED. 61 

The whole put clown, in the simplest way, 
By the souls resolving not to pay! 
And even the Papists, tliankless race, 
Who have had so much the easiest case, — 
To pay for our sermons doom'd, 't is true, 
But not condemn'd to hear them, too, — 
(Our holy business being, 't is known, 
With the ears of their bailey, not their own). 
Even they object to let us pillage, 
By right divine, their tenth of tillage, 
And, horror of horrors, even decline 
To find us in sacramental wine! (') 

It is o'er, it is o'er, my reign is o'er, 

Ah, never shall rosy Rector more, 

Like the shepherds of Israel, idly eat. 

And make of his flock " a prey and meat." {') 

No more shall he his the pastoral sport 

Of suing his flock in the Bishop's Court, 

Through various steps, Citation, Libel, — 

Scriptures all, but not the Bible ; 

Working the law's whole apparatus. 

To get at a few pre-doom'd potatoes. 

And summoning all the powers of wig, 

To settle the fraction of a pig ! — 

Till, parson and all committed deep 

In the case of " Shepherds versus Sheep," 

(•) Among the specimens laid before Parliament of the sort of Church- 
rates levied upon Catholics in Ireland, was a charge of two pipes of port 
for sacramental wine. 

(') Ezekiel xxxiv .8. — "Neither shall the shepherds feed themselves 
any more; for I will deliver my flock from their month, that they may 
not he meat for them." — "V. lo. 



<;2 TRIFLES. REPRINTED. 

The Law usurps the Gospel's place. 
And, on Sundays, meeting face to face, 
While Plaintiff fills the preacher's station, 
Defendants form the congregation. 

So lives he, Mammon's priest, not Heaven's, 
For ienihs thus all at si.res and sevens, 
Seeking w hat parsons love no less 
Than tragic poets — a good distress. 
Instead of studying St. Augustin, 
Gregory Nyss., or old St. Justin, 
(Books fit only to hoard dust in,) 
His reverence stints his evening readings 
To learn'd Reports of Tithe Proceedings, 
Sipping, the while, that port so ruddy. 
Which forms his only ancient study; — 
Port so old, you 'd swear its tartar 
Was of the age of Justin Martyr, 
And, had the Saint sipp'd such, no douht 
His martyrdom would have been — to goul. 

Is all then lost ? — alas, too true, — 
Ye Tenths beloved, adieu, adieu ! 
My reign is o'er, my reign is o'er, — 
Like old Tluimb's ghost, "I can no more." 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 63 

THE EUTHANASIA OF VAN. 

" We are told that the bigots are growiug old and fast wearing out. 
If it he so, why not let us die in peace ?" 

Lord Bexley's Letter to the Freeholders oj Kent. 

Stop, Intellect, in mercy slop, 

Ye curst improvements, cease ; 
And let poor Nick V — ns— tt— t drop 

Into his grave in peace. 

Hide, Knowledge, hide thy rising sun, 

Young Freedom, veil thy head ; 
Let nothing good be thouglit or done, 

Till Nick \ — ns— tt— t's dead ! 

Take pity on a dotard's fears, 

Who much doth light detest ; 
And let his last few drivelling years 

Be dark as were the rest. 

You, too, ye fleeting one-pound notes, 
\ Speed not so fast away— 

i Ye rags, on which old Nicky gloats, 

I A few months longer stay. (■ ) 

Together s'.ion, or much I err. 

You hoth from life may go,— 
The notes unto the scavenger. 

And Nick— to Nick below. 

(') PitiliUiB parcere cbarta'. 



64 TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

Ye Liberals, whate'er your plan, 
Be all reforms suspended ; 

In compliment to dear old Van, 
Let nothing bad be mended. 

Ye Papists, whom oppression wrings, 
Your cry politely cease. 

And fret your hearts to fiddle-strings 
That Van may die in peace. 

So shall he win a fame sublime 
By few old rag-men gain'd ; 

Since all shall own, in Nicky's time, 
Nor sense, nor justice reign'd. 

So shall his name through ages past, 
And dolls ungotten yet, 

Date from " the days of Nicholas," 
With fond and sad regret ; — 

And sighing say, "alas, had he 
Been spared from Pluto's bowers, 

The blessed reign of Bigotry 
And Rags might still be ours ! " 



TO THE REVEREND . 

ONE OF THE SIXTEEN REQUISITIONISTS OF NOTTINGHAM. 

What, you, too, my ****** in hashes so knowing, 
Of sauces and soups Aristarchus profest! 

Are you, too, my savoury Brunswicker, going 
To make an old fool of yourself with the rest ? 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 65 

Far belter to stick to your kitchen receipts ; 

And \i something to tease you must have, for variety. 
Go study how Ude, in his " Cookery," treats 

Live eels, when he wants them for polish'd society. 

Just snuggling them in, 'twixt the bars of the fire, 
He leaves them to wriggle and writhe on the coals, (>) 

In a manner that H— r— r himself would admire, 
And wish, 'stead of eels, they were Catholic souls. 

Ude tells us, the fish little suffering feels; 

While Papists, of late, have more sensitive grown ; 
So, take my advice, try your hand at live eels. 

And, for once, let the other poor devils alone. 

I have ev'n a still better receipt for your cook, — 
How to make a goose die of confirm'd hepatitis; (') 

And, if you '11, for once, /(?//o(r-feelings o'erlook, 
A well-tortured goose a most capital sight is. 

First, catch him, alive,— make a good steady fire,— 
Set your victim before it, both legs being tied, 

(As,— if left to himself,— he might wish to retire). 
And place a large bowl of rich cream by his side. 

There roasting by inches, dry, fever'd, and faint, 
Having drunk all the cream, you so civilly laid, off. 

He dies of as charming a liver complaint 
As ever sleek parson could wish a pie made of. 

(i) The only way. Monsieur Ude assures us, to get rid ot the oil so 
objectiouahle in this fish. 

(») A liver complaint. The process by which the livers of geese are 
enlarged for the famous Pates de foie d'oie. 



m TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

Besides, only think; my dear one of Sixteen, 
What an emblem this bird, for the epicure's use meant, 

Presents of the mode in which Ireland has been 

i\lade a tid-bit for yours and your brethren's amusement : 

Tied down to ihe stake, while her limbs, as they quiver, 
A slow fire of tyranny wastes by degrees : 

No wonder disease should have swell'd up her liver. 
No wonder you, gounnands, should love her disease. 



IRISH ANTIQUITIES. 

AccoRDiiNG to some learn'd opinions, 
The Irish once were Carthaginians ; 
But, ti usiiiig to more late descriptions, 
I 'd rather say they were Egyptians. 
My reason 's this : — the Priests of Isi;--, 

When forth they march'd in long array, 
Employ'd, 'mong other grave devices, 

A Sacred Ass to lead the way; (■) 
And still the antiquarian traces 

'Mong Irish Lords this Pagan plan, 
For still, in all religious cases, 

They put LordR— d— n in the van. 

(') To this practi?i; llie ancient adage alludes, "Asinus purtans niys- 
teria." 



TRIFLES, REPRIXTED. 



A CURIOUS FACT. 



The present Lord K — ny— n (Ihe Peer uho writes letters, 

For which tlie waste-paper folks mucli are his debtors) 

Ilalli one Utile oddity, well worth reciting, 

AVhich puzzleth observers, even more than his writing. 

Whenever Lord K — ny— n doth chance to behold 

A cold Apple-pie — mind, the pie must be cold — 

II's Lordship looks solemn (few people know why), 

And he makes a low bow to the said apple-pie. 

This idolatrous act, in so " vital" a Peer, 

Is, by most serious Protestants, thought rather queer, — 

Pie-worship, they hold, coming under the head 

{y'ide Chrustium, chap, iv.) of the Worchip of Bread. 

Some think 'I is a tribute, as author, he owes 

For the service that pie-crust hath done to his prose; — 

The only good things in his pages, they swear. 

Being those that the pastry-cook sometimes puts there. 

Others say, 't is an homage, through pie-crust convey'd. 

To our Glorious Deliverer's niuch-honour'd shade ; 

As that Protestant Hero (or Saint, if you please) 

Was as fond of cold pie as he was of green peas, («) 

And 't is solely in loyal remembrance of that, 

My Lord K — ny — n to apple-pie takes off his hat. 

While others account for this kind salutation 

By what Tony Lumpkin calls " concatenation " — 

(■) See die anecdote, which the Duchess of Marlboroiiijh relates in her 
Memoirs, of this polite hero appropriating to himself one day, at 
dinner, a whole dish of green peas, — the (jrst of the season, — whili 
the poor Pi-incess Anne, who was then in a longing condition, sat In, 
vainly entreating with her eyes, for a share. 



68 TRIFLES, REPRmXED. 

A certain good-will that, from sympathy's ties, 

'Twixt old Apple-women and Orauge-men lies. 

But 't is needless to add, these are all vague surmises, 

For thus, we 're assured, the whole matter arises : 

Lord K — ny — n's respected old father (like many 

Respected old fathers) was fond of a penny ; 

And loved so lo save, (') that— there 's not the least question- 

His death was brought on by a bad indigestion, 

From cold apple-pie-crust his Lordship noxild stuff in, 

At breakfast, to save the expense of hot muffin. 

Hence it is, and hence only, that cold apple-pies 

Are beheld by his Heir with such reverent eyes — 

Just as honest King Stephen his beaver might doff 

To the fishes that carried his kind uncle off, — 

And while filial piety urges so many on, 

'T is pure appie-pie-ety moves my Lord K — ny — n. 



NEW-FASHIONED ECHOES 
Sir, 

Most of your readers are, no doubt, acquainted with the 
anecdote told of a certain not over-wise judge, who, when in 
the act of delivering a charge in some country court-house, was 
interrupted by the braying of an ass at the door. " What noise 
is that?" asked the angry judge. " Only an extraordinary echo 
there is in court, my Lord," answered one of the counsel. 
As there are a number of such " extraordinary echoes" abroad 

(') The same prudent propensity characterizes his descendant, who 
(as is well known) would not even go to the expense of a diphthong on 
his father's monument, but had the inscription spelled, economically, 
tJius : — " Morsj'anuavitaJ" 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 69 

just now, you will not, perhaps, be unwilling, Mr. Editor, to 
receive the following few lines suggested by them. 

Yours, etc.. 



Hue coeamus, (') ait; nullique libentiiis unquam 
Responsura sono, Coeamus, retulit echo. — Ovid. 

There are echoes, we know, of all sorts, 
From the echo, that " dies in the dale," 

To the " airy-tongued babbler," that sports 
Up the tide of the torrent her " tale. " 

There are echoes that bore us, like Blues, 
With the latest smart mot they have heard ; 

There are echoes, extremely like shrews, 
Letting— nobody have the last word. 

In the bogs of old Paddy-land, too, 
Certain " talented " echoes (») there dwell. 

Who, on being ask'd " How do you do?" 
Politely reply, " Pretty well." 

But why should I talk any more 
Of such old-fashion'd echoes as these, 

When Britain has new ones in store, 
That transcend them by many degrees ? 

For, of all repercussions of sound, 
Concerning which bards make a pother. 

There 's none like that happy rebound 
When one blockhead echoes another ;— 

(■) " Let us form Clubs." 

(') Commonly called " Paddy Blake's Echoes." 



■70 TRIFLES, REPP,li\TED 

When K — ny — n commences the hray, 
And the Borough-Duke follows his track, 

While loudly from Dublin's sweet bay, 
R— thd— ne brays, with interest, back ! 

And while, of most echoes the S(3und 
On our ear by reflection doth fall, 

These Brunswickers pass the hray round. 
Without any relleclion at all. 

Oh Scott, were I gifted like you. 

Who can name all the echoes there are 

From Benvoirlich to bold Ben-venue, 
From Benledi to wild Uamvar ; 

I might track, through each hard Irish name, 
The rebounds of this asinine strain. 

Till from Neddy to Neddy, it came 
To the chief Neddy K— ny — n, again ; 

Might tell how it roar'd in R — thd— ne, 
How from D— ws— n it died off genteelly,— 

IIow hollow it rung from the crown 
Of the fat-pated Marquis of E— y ; 

IIow, on hearing my Lord of G e, 

Thistle-eaters, the stoutest, gave way, 

Outdone, in their own special line. 
By the forty-ass power of his bray ! 

But, no, — for so humble a bard 
'T is a subject too trying to touch on; 

Such noblemen's names are toa hard. 
And their noddles too soft to dwell much on. 



TlilFLES. REPF.IXTED 71 

Oh Echo, sweet nymph of the hill. 
Of the dell, and the deep sounding shelves; 

If, m spite of Narcissus, you still 
Take to fools who are charm'd wiih tliemselves, 

Who knows l)iit, some morning retiring 

To walk by the Trent's wooded side, 
You may meet v\ilh N— wc — stie, admiring 

His own lengthen'd ears in the tide! 

Or on into Canihria straying, 

Find K— ny— n, that double-tongued elf, 

In his love of ass-cendency, l)raying 
A Brunswick dnet with himself! 



INCANTATION. 

FROM THE NEW TllAGEDV OF " THE BRl NSWICKERS." 

SCENE. — Penencleii Plain. In the middle, a caldron boiliiin,. 
Thunder. — Enter three Brunswichers. 
\st. Bruns. — Thrice hath scribbling K — ny — n scrawl'd, 
2rf. BruHS.— Once hath fool N — wc— stle bawl'd, 
5^/. BruHS.— B— xl— y snores :— 't is lime, 't is lime, 
Isf. Bruns. — Round about the caldron go; 
In the pois'nous nonsense throw. 
Bigot spite, that long hath grown 
Like a toad within a stone. 
Sweltering in the heart of S— tt. 
Boil we in the Brunswick pot. 

All. — Dribl)le, dribble, nonsense dribble, 
Eld — n, talk, and K — ny — n, scribble. 



■72 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

2d. Brujis.— Slaver from N— wc— stle's quill 
In the noisome mess dislil, 
Brimming high our Brunswick broth 
Both with venom and with froth. 
Mix the brains (though apt to hash ill. 
Being scant) of Lord M — ntc — shel, 

With that malty stuff which C s 

Drivels as no other man does. 
Catch (i. e. if catch you can) 
One idea, spick and span, 

From my Lord of S y. 

One idea though it be 
Smaller than the " happy flea," 
Which his sire, in sonnet terse, 
Wedded to immortal verse. (■) 
Though to rob the son is sin, 
Put his one idea in; 
And, to keep it company, 
Let that conjuror W — nch — Is— a 
Drop but half another there, 
If he hath so much to spare. 

(') Alluding to a well-known lyric composition of the late Marquis, 
which, with a slight alteration, might be addressed either to a flea or a 
fly. For instance : — 

" Oh, happy, happy, happy fly, 

If I were you, or you were I." 
Or, 

Oh, happy, happy, happy flea, 

If I were you, or you were me; 

But since, alas! that cannot be, 

I must remain Lord S v. 



TRIFLES, REPRmTED. 73 

Dreams of murders and of arsons, 
Hatch'd in heads of Irish parsons, 
Bring from every hole and corner, 
Where ferocious priesls, Hke H — n — r. 
Purely for religious good, 
Cry aloud for Papists' blood, — 
Blood for W— lis, and such old women. 
At their ease to wade and swim in. 

All. — Dribble, dribble, nonsense dribble, 
B — xl — y, talk, and K— ny — n, scribble. 

3d. Bruns. — Now tlie charm begin to brewj 
Sisters, sisters, add thereto 
Scraps of L — thbr— dge's old speeches, 
Mix'dwilli leather from his breeches. 
Rinsings of old B— xl— y's brains, 
Thicken'd (if yon '11 take the pains) 
With that pulp which rags create, 
In their middle, mjinpha state, 

Ere, like insects frail and sunny. 

Forth they wing abroad as money. 

There — the Hell-broth we 've enchanted— 

Now but one thing more is wanted. 

Squeeze o'er all that Orange juice, 

— — — keeps cork'd for use, 

Which, to work the better spell, is 

Colom'd deep with blood of , 

Blood of powers far more various 

Ev'n than that of Januarius, 

Since so great a charm hangs o'er i 

England's parsons bow before it ! 

All. — Dribble, dribble, nonsense dribble, 

B— xl— y talk, and K— ny— n, scribble. 
2rf. BruH.9.— Cool ii now with 's blood, 

So the charm is firm and good. [Exeunt. 

4 



7ft TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

HOW TO MAKE A GOOD POLITICIAN. 

"Whene'er you're in doubt, said a Sage I once knew, 
'Twixt two lines of conduct uhich course to pursue, 
Ask a woman's advice, and, whate'er she advise. 
Do the very reverse, and you 're sure to be wise. 

Of the same use as guides are the Brunswicker throng ; 
In their thoughts, words, and deeds, so instinctively wrong, 
That, whatever they counsel, act, talk, or indite. 
Take the opposite course, and you 're sure to be right. 
So golden this rule, that, had nature denied you 
The use of that finger-post. Reason, to guide you,— 
Were you even more doltish than any given man is, 
More soft than N— wc— stle— more twaddling than Van is, 
I 'd stake ray repute, on the following conditions, 
To make you the soundest of sound politicians. 

Place yourself near the skirts of some high-flying Tory,— 
Some Brunswicker parson, of port-drinking glory,— 
Watch well how he dines, during any great Question,— 
What makes him feed gaily, what spoils his digestion, — 
And always feel sure that /lis joy o'er a stew 
Portends a clear case of dyspepsia to tjou. 
Read him backwards, like Hebrew — whatever he wishes, 
Or praises, note down as absurd or pernicious, 
Like the folks of a weather-house, shifting about. 
When he 's out, be an Jh— when he 's in, be an Out. 
Keep him always reversed in your thoughts, night and day. 
Like an Irish barometer turn'd the wrong way : — 
If he 's up, you may swear that foul weather is nigh ; 
If he 's doicn, you may look for a bit of blue sky. 



-. 



TRIFLES, REPRIXTED. -Jo 

Never mind what debaters or journalists say, 

Only ask what he thinks, and then think t'other way. 

Does he hate the Small-note Bill ? then firmly rely 

The Small-note Bill 's a blessing, though you don't know why. 

Is Brougham his aversion? then Harry's yonr man. 

Does he quake at O'Connell ? take doubly to Dan. 

Is he all for the Turks ? then at once take the whole 

Russian Empire (Czar, Cossacks, and all) to your soul. 

In short, whatsoever he talks, thinks, or is, 

Be your thoughts, words, and essence the contrast of his. 

Nay, as Siamese ladies — at least, the polite ones — 

All paint their teeth black, 'cause the devil has white ones— 

If ev'n, by the chances of time or of tide, 

Your Tory, for once, should have sense on his side. 

Even tnen stand aloof,— for, be sure that Old Nick, 

When a Tory talks sensibly, means you some trick. 

Such my recipe is, — and, in one single verse, 
I shall now, in conclusion, its substance rehearse. 
Be all that a Brunswicker is not, nor couJd be, 
And then — vou '11 be all that an honest man should be. 



EPISTLE OF CONDOLENCE, 

FROM A SL.WE-LORD TO A COTTON-LORD. 

Alas ! my dear friend, what a state of affairs ! 

How unjustly we both are despoil'd of our rights ! 
Not a pound of black flesh shall I leave to my heirs, 

Nor must you any more work to death little whites. 



76 TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED . 

Both forced to submit to that general controller 
Of King, Lords, and cotton-miI!s— Pnblic Opinion, 

No more shall you beat with a big billy-roller, 
Nor / with the cart-whi[» assert my dominion. 

Whereas, were we suffer'd to do as we please 
With our Blacks and our Whites, as of yore we were let, 

We might range them alternate, like harpsichord keys, 
And between us thump out a good piebald duet. 

But this fun is all over; — farewell to the zest 
Which Slavery now lends to each tea-cup we sip ; 

Which makes still the cruellest coffee the best, 
And that sugar the sweetest which smacks of the whip. 

Farewell, too, the Factory's white picaninnies, — 
Small living machines, which, if tlogg'd to their tasks, 

Mix so well with their namesakes, the " Billies" and" Jennies," 
That ivhich have got souls in 'em nobody asks; — 

Little Maids of the Mill, who, themselves but ill-fed, 
Are obliged, 'mong their other benevolent cares. 

To " keep feeding the scribblers," (>) — and better, 't is said. 
Than old Blackwood or Fraser have ever fed theirs. 

All this is now o'er, and so dismal mij loss is, 
So hard 't is to part from the smack of the thong. 

That I mean (from pure love for the old whipping process) 
To lake to whipt syllabub all my life long. 

(») One ol the operations in collon-mills usually performed by 
children. 



TRIFLES, REPRIATED. 77 

THE GHOST OF MILTIADES.(0 

Ah quoties diibius ScripXis exarsit amatorl — Ovid. 

The Ghost of Miitiades came at night, 
And he stood by the bed of the Benthamite, 
And he said, in a voice that thrill'd the frame, 
" If ever the sound of Marathon's name 
Hath fired thy blood or fliish'd thy brow, 
Lover of Liberty, rouse thee now !" 

The Benthamite, yawning, left his bed — 

Away to the Slock Exchaag-e he sped. 

And he found the Scrip of Greece so high, 

That it fired his blood, it flusli'd his eye. 

And oh, 't was a sight for the Ghost to see, 

For never was Greek more Greek than he ! 

And still as the premium higher went, 

His ecstasy rose — so much per cent. 

(As we see in a glass, that tells the weather. 

The heat and the silver rise together). 

And Liberty sang from the patriot's lip. 

While a voice from his pocket whisper'd "Scrip I" 

The Ghost of Miitiades came again ; — 

He smiled, as the pale moon smiles through rain, 

For his soid was glad at that patriot strain ; 

(And poor, dear ghost — how little he knew 

The jobs and the tricks of the Philhellene crew !) 

(>) These verses, wliich appeared at a much earlier period than anv 
of the others in this volume, were (for a reason wliich now no longer 
exists) omitted in the former collection, entitled, "Cash, Corn, and 
Catholics." 



78 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

" Blessings and thanks ! " was all he said, 
Then, melting away, like a night-dream, lied ' 

The Benthamite hears — amazed that ghosts 

Could be such fools — and away he posts, 

A patriot still ? Ah no, ah no — 

Goddess of Freedom, thy Scrip is low, 

And, warm and fond as thy lovers are, 

Thou triest their passion when under par. 

The Benthamite's ardour fast decays, 

By turns he weeps, and swears, and prays, 

And wishes the d — 1 had Crescent and Cross, 

Ere he had been forced to sell at a loss. 

They quote him the Slock of various nations, 

But, spite of his classic associations, 

Lord, how he loathes the Greek quotations ! 

"■ Who '11 buy my Scrip ? Who '11 buy my Scrip ? " 

Is now the theme of the patriot's lip. 

As he runs to tell how hard his lot is 

To Messrs. Orlando and Luriottis, 

And says, " Oh Greece, for Liberty's sake, 

Do buy my Scrip, and I vow to break 

Those dark unholy bonds of thine — 

If you '11 only consent to buy up mine!" 

The Ghost of Milliades came once more; — 

His brow, like the night, was lowering o'er. 

And he said, with a look that flash'd dismay, 

" Of Liberty's foes the worst are they, 

Who turn to a trade her cause divine, 

And gamble for gold on Freedom's shrine!" 

Thus saying, the Ghost, as he took his flight, 

Gave a Parthian kick to the Benthamite, 

Which sent him, whimpering, off to Jerry — 

And vanish'd away to the Stygian ferry ! 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 19 

ALARMING INTELLIGENCE-REVOLUTION IN i HE 
DICTIONARY -ONE GALT AT THE HEAD OF IT. 

Gou preserve us!— there's nothing now safe from assault;— 
Thrones toppling around, churclies hroughl to the hammer; 

And accounts liave just reacli'd us that one Mr. Gait 
Has declared open war against English and Grammar ! 



He had long been suspected of some such design, 
And, the better his wicked intentions t' arrive at. 

Had lately 'mong C— lb— n's troops oithe line 
(The penny-a-line men), enlisted as private. 

There school'd, with a rabble of words at command, 
Scotch, English and slang, in promiscuous alliance, 

He, at length, against Syntax has taken his stand, 
And sets all the Nine Parts of Speech at defiance. 

Next advices, no doubt, further facts will afford ; 

In the mean time the danger most imminent grows, 
He has taken the Life of one eminent Lord, 

And who he '11 next murder the Lord only knows. 

Wednesday Ereirhuj. 

Since our last, matters, luckily, look more serene; 

Though the rebel, 't is stated, to aid his defection, 
Has seized a great Powder — no, Puff Magazine, 

And the explosions are dreadful in every direction. 

What his meaning exactly is nobody knows, 
As he talks (in a strain of intense botheration) 



80 TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

Of lyrical " ichor," (') " gelatinous" prose, (-) 
And a mixture call'd amber immortalization. (J) 

Now, he raves of a bard lie once happen'd to meet, 
Seated high "among rattlings," and churning a sonnet; (4) 

Now, talks of a mystery, wrapped in a sheet, 
With a halo (by way of a night-cap) upon it! (s) 

We shudder in tracing these terrible lines; 

Something bad they must mean, tho' we can't make it out; 
For, whate'er may be guess'd of Gait's secret designs, 

That they 're all Jjifi-English no Christian can doubt. 



I 



RESOLUTIONS PASSED AT A LATE MEETING OF 
REVERENDS AND RIGHT REVERENDS. 

Resolved,— to stick to every particle 
Of every Creed and every Article, 
Reforming nought, or great or little, 
We 'II stanchly stand by "every tittle," (^) 

(■) "That dark diseased ichor which coloured his effusions." — 
Gait's Life of Bjrou. 

(') "That gelatiuous character of their effusions." — Id. 

(3) " The poetical embalment, or rather amber immortalization." 
—Id. 

(4) " Sitting amidst the shrouds and ratllings, churning an inarticu- 
ate melody." — Id. 

(5) "He was a mystery in a winding-sheet, crowned with a halo."— /a'. 

(6) One of the queshons propounded to the Puritans in 1578 was — 
" Whether llie Book of Service was good and godly, every tittle ground- 
ed on the Holy Scripture?" On which an honest Dissenter remarks 
— " Surely they liad a wonderful opinion of their Service Book that 
there was not a tittle amiss in it." 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 81 

And scorn the swallow of that soul 
Which cannot boldly bolt the whole. 

Resolved, that, though St. Athanasius 
In damning souls is rather spacious,— 
Though wide and far his curses fall, 
Our Church " halh stomach for them all;" 
And those who 're not content with such, 
May e'en be d— d ten times as much. 

Resolved,~such liberal souls are we,— 
Though hating Nonconformity, 
We yet believe the cash no Avorse is 
That comes from Nonconformist purses. 
Indifferent \rhence the money reaches 
The pockets of our reverend breeches. 
To us the Juniper's jingling penny 
Chinks with a tone as sweet as any; 
And ev'n our old friends Yea and Nay 
May through the nose for ever pray, 
If also through the nose tliey 'II pay. 

Resolved, that Hooper, (') Lalimer, (') 
And Cranmer, (*) all extremely err, 

yj rhey,"lhe Bishops, "know that the primitive Church had no 
such Bishops. If the fourth part of the hishopric remained unto the 
Bishop, it were sufficient." — On the Commandments, p. 72. 

(») "Since the Prelates were made Lords and Nohles, the plough 
standeth, there is no work done, the people starve." — Lat. Serm. 

(5) "Of whom have come all these glorious titles, styles, and pomps 
into the Church. But I would that I, and all my hrethreu, the Bi- 
shops, would leave all our styles, and write the styles of our offices," etc. 
— Life of Cranmer, by Strype, appendix. 



J-S TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

In taking such a low-bred view 

Of what Lords Spiritual ought to do : — ' 

All owing to the fact, poor men, 

That Mother Church was modest then. 

Nor knew what golden eggs her goose, 

The Public, would in time produce. 

One Pisgah peep at modern Durham 

To far more lordly thoughts would stir 'em. 

Resolved, that when we, Spiritual Lords, 

Whose income just enough affords 

To keep our Spiritual Lordships cozy. 

Are told, by Antiquarians prosy, 

How ancient Bishops cup up theirs. 

Giving the poor the largest shares, — 

Our answer is, in one short word, 

We think it pious, but absurd. 

Those good men made the world their debtor. 

Rut we, the Church reform'd, know better; 

And, taking all that all can pay, 

Balance the account the other way. 

llesolved, our thanks profoundly due are 
To last month's Quarterly Reviewer, 
Who proves (by arguments so clear, 
One sees how much he holds per year) 
That England's Church, though out of date, 
Must still be left to lie in state, 
As dead, as rotten, and as grand as 
The munnny of King Osymandyas, 
All pickled snug,— the brains drawn out(')— 
Fine costly cerements swathed about,— 

(■) Pari of the process of embalmment. 



TRIFLES, REPiUNTED 83 

And " Touch me not, " those words terrific, 
ScrawI'd o'er her in good hieroglyphic. 



SIR ANDREW'S DREAM. 

" Nee tu sperne piis venientia somnia portis : 
Cum pia veneruiit somnia, pondus habent." 

Propert., Lib. 4^ jE/fj^. 7. 

As snug, on a Sunday eve, of late, 

In his easy chair Sir Andrew sate. 

Being much too pious, as every one knows, 

To do aught, of a Sunday eve, but doze, 

He dreamt a dream, dear holy man, 

And I'll tell you his dream asw-ell as I can. 

He found himself, to his great amaze, 

In Charles the First's high Tory days, 

And just at the time that gravest of courts 

Had publish'd its Book of Sunday Sports. (■) — 

Sunday Sports ! what a thing for the ear 

Of our Andrew, even in sleep, to hear ! — 

(■) The Book of Sports, drawn up by Bishop Moreton, was first put 
fortli in the reign of James I., 161 8, and afterwards republislied, at the 
advice of Laud, by Charles I., i633, with an injunction that it should be 
" made public by order from the Bishops." ),We find it therein declared, 
that " for his good people's recreation, His Majesty's pleasure was, that 
after the end of divine service they should not be disturbed, letted, or 
discouraged from any lawful recreations, such as dancing, either of men 
or women, archery for men, leaping, vaulting, or any such harmless re' 
creations, nor having of May-games, Whitsun-ales, or Morris-dance.i, 
or setting up of May-poles, or other sports therewith used," etc. 



84 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

It chancetl to be, too, a Sabbath clay. 
When the people from church were coming away; 
• And Andrew with horror heard this song, 
As the smiling sinners flock'd along : — 
" Long life to the Bishops, hurra! hurra ! 
For a week of work and a Sunday of play 
Make the poor man's life run merry away. " 

' ' The Bishops ! " quoth Andrew, " Popish, I guess, " 
And he grinn'd with conscious holiness. 
But the song went on and, to brim the cup 
Of poor Andy's anguish, the fiddles struck up ! 

" Come, take out the lasses— let 's have a dance — 

For the Bishops allow us to skip our fill. 
Well knowing that no one 's the more in advance 

On the road to heaven, for standing still. 
Oh, it never was meant that giim grimaces 

Should sour the cream of a creed of love ; 
Or that fellows with long disastrous faces 

Alone should sit among cherubs above. 

Then hurra for tlie Bishops, etc. 

" For Sunday fun w^e never can fail, 

When the church herself each sport points out; — 
There's May-games, archery, VVhitsun-ale, 

And a May-pole high to dance about. 
Or, if chance we be for a pole hard driven. 

Some lone lank saint, of jispect fell. 
With his pockets on earth, and his nose in heaven, 

Will do for a aiay-pole just as well. 
Then hurra for the Bishops, hurra ! hurra ! 
A week of work and a Sabbath of play 
Make the poor man's life run merry away. " 



TRIFLES, REPRIlVTEi>. 85 

To Andy, who doesn't much deal in history, 

This Sunday scene was a downright mystery; 

And God knows Avhere might liave ended the joke. 

But, in trying to stop the fiddles, he Avoke. 

And the odd thing is (as the rumour goes) 

That since that dream,— which, one would suppose, 

Should have made his godly stomach rise. 

Even more than ever, 'gainst Sunday pies,— 

He has view'd things quite with different eyes ; 

Is beginning to take, on matters divine. 

Like Charles and his Bishops, the sportimj line,— 

Is all for Christians jigging in pairs. 

As an interlude 'twixt Sunday prayers;— 

Nay, talks of getting Archbishop H— 1— y 

To bring in a Bill, enacting duly. 

That all grood Protestants, from this date, 

May, freely and lawfully, recreate. 

Of a Sunday eve, their spirits moody. 

With Jack in the Straw, or Punch and Judy. 



LOVE SONG. 

TO MISS . 

jir. — "Come, live with me and be my love." 

Come wed with me, and we will write, 

My Blue of Blues, from morn till night. 

Chased from our classic souls shall be 

All thoughts of vulgar progeny; 

And lliou Shalt walk through smiling rows 

Of chubby duodecimos. 

While I, to match thy products nearly. 

Shall lie-in of a quarto yearly. 



86 TUIFLES, REPRIIV'TED 

'T is Irue, ev'n books entaii some trouble; 

But /ire productions give one double. 

Correcting children is such bother, — 

While printers' dev'ls correct the other. 

Just think, my own Malthusian dear, 

IIow much more decent 'I is to hear 

From male or female,— as it may be, — 

''How is your book?" than "How 's your baby?" 

And, whereas physic and wet nurses 

Do much exhaust paternal purses. 

Our books, if rickety, may go 

And be well dry-nursed in the P\on- ; 

And, when God wills to take them hence, 

Are buried at the Row's expense. 

Besides, (as 't is well proved by thee, 
In thy own Works, vol. 93), 
The march, just now, of population 
So much outstrips all moderation, 
That ev'n prolific herring-shoals 
Keep pace not with our erring souls. (■) 
Oh far more proper and well-bred 
To stick to writing books instead ; 
And show the world bow two Blue lovers 
Can coalesce, like two book-covers, 
(Sheep-skin, or calf, or such wise leather) 
Letter'd at back, and stitcii'd together. 
Fondly as first the binder fix'd 'em. 
With nought but— literature bctwix I 'em. 

(') See "Ella of Garveloch." — Garveloch being a place where tlure 
was a large herring- fishery, but where, as we are told by the authof, 
'■ til' people increased mtich faster than the produce." 



TRIFLES, REPRWTED 87 

SUNDAY ETHICS 

A SCOTCH ODE. 

Plir, profligate Londoners, having heard tell 

That the De'il 's got amang ye, and fearing 't is irtib, 

We lia' sent ye a mon wha 's a niatcli for liis spell, 

A chiel o' our ain, that the De'il himsel 
Will be glad to keep clear of, one Andrew Agnew. 

So, at least, ye may reckon, for ane day entire 
In ilka lang week ye'll he tranquil eneiigh, 
As Auld Nick, do him justice, abhors a Scotch squire, 
An' would sooner gae roast by his ain kitchen fire 
Than pass a hale Sunday wi' Andrew Agnew. 

For bless the gude mon, gin he had his ain way. 
He 'd na let a cat, on the Sabbath say "mew;" 
Nae birdie maun whistle, nae lambie maun play, 
An' Phoebus himsel could na travel that day, 
As he'd find a new Joshua in Andie Agnew. 

Only hear, in your Senate, how awfu' he cries, 

'' Wae, wae to a' sinners who boil an' who stew ! 
Wae, wae to a' eaters o' Sabbath-baked pies. 
For as surely again shall the crust thereof rise 
In judgment against ye," saith Andrew Agnew! 

Ye may think, from a' this, that our Andie 's the lad 

To ca' o'er the coals your nobeelity, too ; 
That their drives, o' a Sunday, wi' flunkies, (>) a' clad 
Like shawmen, behind 'em, would mak the mon mad,— 
But be 's nae sic a noodle, our Andie Agnew. 

(') Servants in liver) . 



88 TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

If Lairds an' fine Ladies, on Sunday, Ihink right 
To gang to the deevil,— as maist o' em do, — 

To stop them our Andie would think na polite; 

And 't is odds (if the chiel could get ony thing by 't) 
But he'd follow 'em, booing, (') would Andrew Agnew. 



AWFUL EVENT. 



Yes, W— nch— Is— a (I tremble while I pen it), 

W— nch— Is- a's Earl liath crtf the British Senate,— 

Hath said to England's Peers, in accent gruff, 

''Thid for ye all," [snapping his fingers], and exit, in a huff ! 

Disastrous news!— like that, of old, which spread 
From shore to shore, "our mighty Pan is dead,'' 
O'er the cross benches (cross from being crost) 
Sonnds the loud wail, "Our W— nch— Is— a is lost ! '' 

Which of ye. Lords, that heard him, can forget 
The deep impression of that awful threat, 
" I quit your house ! ! "—'midst all that histories tell, 
I know but one event that 's parallel :— 



It chanced at Drury Lane, one Easter night, 
When the gay gods, too blest to be polite, 
Gods at their ease, like those of learn'd Lucretius, 
Laugh'd, whistled, groan'd' uproariously facetious,— 
A well-dress'd member of the middle gallery, 
Whose "ears polite" disdain'd such low canaillerie. 
Rose in his place — so grand, you 'd almost swear 
Lord W— nch— Is— a himself stood towering there,— 

(') For the "gude effects aud uteelity of booing," see the Man of the 
World. 



TRIFLES, REPRIIXTED. 89 

And, like that Lord of dignity and, nous, 

Said, "Silence, fellows, or I Ml leave the house! ! " 

How brook'd the Gods this speech? Ah, well-a-day, 

That speech so fine should he so thrown away ! 

In vain did this mid-gallery grandee 

Assert his own two-shilling dignity,— 

In vain he menaced to withdraw the ray 

Of his own full- price countenance away,— 

Fun against Dignity is fearful odds, 

And as the Lords laugh noiv, so giggled then the Gods! 



THE NUMBERING OF THE CLERGY. 

PARODY ON SIR CHARLES HAN. WILLIAMS's FAMOUS ODE, 

" Come, Cloe, and give me sweet kisses." 



" We want more Churches and more C-lergymeu." 

Bishop of London's late Charge. 

*' Rectorum numerum, terris pereuntihus, augent." 

Claudian in Eutrop. 

Come, give us more Livings and Rectors, 

For, richer no realm ever gave ; 
But why, ye unchristian objectors, 

Do ye ask us how many we crave? (■) 

(') Come, Cloe, and give me sweet kisses, 
For sweeter sure never girl gave; 
But why, in the midst of my blisses, 
Do you ask me how many I 'd have ? 



ilO TRIFLES. REPRIJVTED. 

Oil, lliere can't be too many rich Livings 

For souls of the Phirahst kind, 
Who, despising old Cocker's misgivings, 
To numbers can ne'er be confined. (■) 



Count the cormorants hovering about, (=) 
At the time their fish season sets in, 

When these models of keen diners-out 
Are preparing their beaks to begin. 

Count the rooks that, hi clerical dresses, 
Flock round when the harvest 's in play. 

And, not minding the farmer's distresses, 
Like devils in grain peck away. 

Go, number the locusts in heaven, (3) 
On their way to some litheable shore; 

And when so many Parsons you 've given, 
We still shall be cravini; for more. 



(') For whilst I love thee ahove measure, 
To numbers I 'II ne'er be confined. 

(') Count ihe bees thai on Hybla are playing, 
Count the flowers that enamel its Ileitis 
Count the flocks, etc. 

(5) Go number the stars in the heaven, 

Count how many sands on the shore ; 
When so many kisses you 've giveur 
I slill shall be craving for more. 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 91 

Then, unless ye the Church would suhmerge, ye 

Must leave us in peace to augment; 
For the wretch who could number the Clergy, 

With few will be ever content. (■) 



A SAD CASE. 



■' If it be the undcrgi-aduate season at which this rabies religiosa is to 
be so fearful, what security has Mr. Goulburn agaiust it at this moment, 
when his son is actually exposed to the full venom of an association with 
Dissenters?" — The Times, Mmc\\ 25. 

How sad a case!— just think of it— 
If G — lb— n junior should be bit 
By some insane Dissenter, roaming 
Through Granta's halls, at large and foaniinj; 
And with that aspect, ultra crabbed, 
Which marks Dissenters when they 're rabid ! 
God only knows what mischiefs might 
Result from this one single bite. 
Or how the venom, once suck'd in, 
Might spread and rage through kith and kin. 
Mad folks, of all denominations, 
First turn upon their own relations : 
So that one G— lb— n, fairly bit, 
Might end in maddening the whole kit, 
Till, ah, ye gods, we 'd have to rue 
Our G— lb— n senior bitten too; 

(') But the wretch who can number his kisses, 
With few will be ever content. 



92 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

The Hychurchphobia in those veins, 
Where Tory blood now redly reigns; 
And that dear man, who now perceives 
Salvation only in lawn sleeves, 
Might, tainted by such coarse infection, 
Run mad in the opposite direction, 
And think, poor man, 't is only given 
To linsey-woolsey to reach Heaven ! 

Just fancy what a shock 't would be 
Our G-lh — n in his fits to see, 
Tearing into a thousand particles 
His once-loved Nine and Thirty Articles; 
(Those Articles his friend, the Duke, (') 
For Gospel, t' other night, mistook); 
Cursing cathedrals, deans, and singers,— 
Wishing the ropes might hang the ringers, — 
Pelting the church with blasphemies, 
Even worse than Parson B— v — rl— y's; — 
And ripe for severing Church and State, 
Like any creedless reprobate, 
Or like that class of Methodists 
Prince Waterloo styles "Atheists!" 

But 't is too much, — the Muse turns pale, 
And o'er the picture drops a veil. 
Praying, God save the G — lb— rns all 
From mad Dissenters, great and small ! 

(') The Duke of Wellington, who styled them "the Articles of 
Christianity.' 



TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED 93 

A DREAM OF HINDOSTAN. 

7-isum teneatis, amici. 

" The longer one lives, the more one learns," 

Said I, as off to sleep I went, 
Bemused with thinking of Tithe concerns, 
And reading a book, by the Bishop of Ferns, (') 

On the Irish Church Establishment. 
But, lo, in sleep, not long I lay, 

When Fancy her usual tricks began, 
And I found myself bewitch'd away 

To a goodly city in Hindostan,— 
A city, where he, who dares to dine 

On aught but rice, is deem'd a sinner; 
Where sheep and kine are held divine, 

And, accordingly— never drest for dinner. 

"But how is this?" I wondering cried,— 
As I walk'd that city, fair and wide, 
And saw, in every marble street, 

A row of beautiful butcher's shops,— 
"What means, for men who do n't eat meat, 

This grand display of loins and chops?" 
In vain I ask'd— 't was plain to see 

That nobody dared to answer me. 

So, on, from street to street I strode; 
And you can't conceive how vastly odd 
The butchers look'd,— a roseate crew, 
Inshrined in stalls, with nought to do; 

(■) An indefatigable scribbler of Anti-Catholic pamphlets. 



9'i TRIFLES. REPRIIVTED 

While some on a bench, lialf dozing, sat, 
And the Sacred CowsAvere not more fat. 

Still posed to think what all this scene 
Of sinecure trade was meant to mean, 
"And, pray,"ask'd I — " By w-hom is paid 
The expense of this strange masquerade ? " — 
"The expense I — oh, that 's of course defray 'd 
(Said one of these well-fed Hecatombers) 
By yonder rascally rice-consumers." 

"What ! they, who never must eat " 

" No matter— 
(And, while he spoke, his cheeks grew fatter) 
The rogues may munch their Paddy crop. 
But the rogues must still support our shop. 
And, depend upon it, the way to treat 

Heretical stomachs that thus dissent, 
Is to burden all that won't eat meat, 

With a costly Meat Establishment." 
On hearing these words so gravely said. 

With a volley of laughter loud I shook; 
And my slumber fled, and my dream was spetl, 
And I found I was lying snug in bed. 

With my nose in the Bishop of Feuns's book. 



TRIFLES, REPIUIVTED 95 

PROPOSALS FOR A GYNOECOCRACY. 

ADDRESSED TO A LATE RADICAL MEETIN(; . 

" Quas ipsa decus sibi dia Camilla 

Delegit, pacisque bouas bellique ministras." — Virgil. 

As Whig Reform has had its range, 

And none of us are yet conlent, 
Suppose, my friends, hy way of change, 

We try a Female Padiament ; 
And since, of late, with he M. P.'s 
We 've fared so badly, take to she's, — 
Petticoat patriots, flounced John Russells, 
Burdetts in blonde, and Broughams in bustles. 
Tlie plan is startling, I confess,— 
But 't is but an affair of dress; 
Nor see I much there is to choose 

'Twixt Ladies (so ihey 're thorougli-luod ones) 
In ribands of all sorts of hues. 

Or Lords in only blue or red ones. 

At least, the fiddlers will be winners. 

Whatever other trade advances ; 
As then, instead of Cabinet dinners, 

We '11 have, at Almack's, Cabinet dances ; 
Nor let this world's important questions 
Depend on Ministers' digeslions. 

If Ude's receipts have done things ill, 
To Weippert's band they may go belter ; 

There 's Lady * * , in one quadrille, 
Would settle Europe, if you'd lei her : 



96 TRIFLES, REPRINTED 

And who the deuce or asks or cares, 

When Whigs or Tories have undone 'em, 
Whellier they've danced through State affairs. 
Or simply, dully, dined upon 'em? 

Hurra then for the Petticoats ! 

To them we pledge our free-born votes ; 

We'll have all she, and only she, — 

Pert blues shall act as " best debaters," 
Old dowagers our Bishops be, 

And termagants our Agitators. 

If Veslris, to oblige the nation. 

Her own Olympus will abandon, 
And help to prop the Administration, 

It can't liave better legs to stand on. 
The ftmied Macaulay ( Miss ) sliall show , 

Each evening, forth in learn'd oration ; 
Shall move (midst general cries of " Oh ! ") 

For full returns of population : 
And, finally, to crown the whole, 
The Princess Olive, Royal soul, 
Shall from her bower in Banco Piegis, 
Descend, to bless her faithful lieges, 
And, mid our Unions' loyal chorus, 
Reign jollily for ever o'er us. 



TO THE EDITOR OF THE 



Sir, 



Having heard some rumours respecting the strange anp 
awful visitation under which Lord H— nl — y has for some time 
past been suffering, in consequence of his declared hostility to 



TRIFLES, REPRmXED. 97 

"anthems, solos, duets, etc.," I took the liberty of makhig in- 
quiries at his Lordship's house this morning, and lose no time in 
transmitting to you such particulars as I could collect. It is said 
that the screams of his Lordship, under the operation of this 
nightly concert (which is, no doubt, some trick of the Radicals), 
may be heard all over the neighbourhood. The female who per- 
sonates St. Cecilia is supposed to be the same that, last year, 
appeared in the character of Isis, at ihe Rotunda. How the 
cherubs are managed, I have not yet ascertained. 

Yours, etc., 

P. P. 



LORD H— NL— Y AND ST. CECILIA. 

in Metii descendat Judicis aures. — Horat. 

As snug in his bed Lord H— nl— y lay, 

Revolving much his own renown, 
And hoping to add thereto a ray, 

By putting duets and anthems down, 

Sudden a strain of choral sounds 

Mellifluous o'er his senses stole; 
Whereat the Reformer muiter'd, "Zounds!" 

For he loathed sweet music with all his soul. 

Then, starting up, he saw a sight 

That well might shock so learn'd a snorer,— 
Saint Cecilia, robed in light. 

With a portable organ slung before her. 

And round were cherubs, on rainbow wings, 
Who, his Lordship fear'd, might tire of flitting, 



<)9, TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

So begg'd they'd sit,— but ah ! poor things, 
They had, none of them, got tlie means of sitting. (■) 

" Having heard," said the Saint, " you're fond of hymns, 
And indeed, that musical snore betray 'd you, 

Myself, and my choir of Gherubims, 
Are come, for a while, to serenade you." 

In vain did the horrified II — nl — y say 

" 'T was all a mistake" — " she was misdirected ;" 

And point to a concert, over the way, 
Where fiddlers and angels were expected. 

In vain — the Saint could see in his looks 

(She civilly said) much tuneful lore; 
So, at once, all open'd their music-books. 

And herself and her Cherubs set off at score. 

All night duets, terzets, quartets, 

Nay, long quintets most dire to hear, 
Ay, and old motets and canzonets, 

And glees, in sets, kept boring his ear. 

He tried to sleep, — but it would n't do; 

So loud they squall 'd, he nmst attend to 'em; 
Though Cherubs' songs, to his cost he knew. 

Were like themselves, and had no end to 'em. 

Oh judgment dire on judges bold, 

Who meddle with music's sacred strains ! 
Judge Midas tried the same of old, 

And was punish 'd, like H— nl— y, for his pains. 

(') " Asscyez-vous, mes enfans." — "II n'y a pas de qiioi, mon 
Seigneur." 



TRIFLES , REPRINTED. 99 

But worse on the modern judge, alas ! 

Is the sentence launch'd from Apollo's throne ; 
For Midas was given the ears of an ass, 

While H— nl— y is doom'd to keep his own ! 



THE DANCE OF BISHOPS; 
OR, THE EPISCOPAL QUADRILLE. 

A DREAM. 

" Solemn dances were, on great festivals and celebrations, admitted 
among the primitive Christians, in which even the Bishops and digni- 
fied Clergy were performers. Scaliger says, that the first Bishops were 
called PrcEsiiles (■) for no other reason than that they led off these 
dances." — Cjclopcedia, Art. Dances. 

V VE had such a dream,— a frightful dream,— 
Though funny, mayhap, to wags 'twill seem, 
By all who regard the Church, like us, 
'Twill be thought exceedingly ominous ! 

As reading in bed I lay last night, 

Which (being insured) is my delight,— 

I happen 'd to doze off just as I got to 

The singular fact which forms my motto . 

Only think, thought I, as I dozed away. 

Of a party of churchmen dancing the hay ! 

Clerks, curates, and rectors, capering all. 

With a neat-legg'd Bishop to open the ball I 

Scarce had my eye-lids time to close, 

When the scene I had fancied before me rose.-- - 

(') Literally, First Dancers. 



'00 TRIFLES, REPRINTED 

An Episcopal Hop, on a scale so grand 
As my dazzled eye-lids could hardly stand. 
For Britain and Erin cliibb'd their Sees 
To make it a Dance of Dignities, 
And I saw, — oh brightest of Church events! 
A quadrille of the two Establishments, 
Bishop to Bishop risa-vts, 
Footing away prodigiously ! 

There was Bristol capering up to Derry, 

And Cork with London making merry; 

While huge Llandaff, with a See, so so, 

Was to dear old Dublin pointing his toe. 

There was Chester, hatch'd by woman's smile, 

Performing a chaine des dames in style; 

While he who, whene'er the Lords' House dozes. 

Can waken them up by citing Moses, (') 

The portly Tuam was all in a hurry 

To set, en evant, to Canterbury. 

Meantime, while pamphlets stuff'd his pockets, 

(All out of date, like spent sky-rockets) 

Our Exeter stood forth to caper 

As high on the floor as he doth on paper,— 

Much like a dapper Dancing Dervise, 

Who pirouettes his whole church-service,— 

Performing, 'midst those reverend souls, 

Such entrechats, such cabriohs, 

Sucli halonncs. (') such— rigmaroles, 

(') "And what does Moses say?" — One of the ejaculations witli 
which tills eminonl prelate enlivened liis famous speech on the Catholic 
question. 

{') A description of the method of executini; this step may be usefu 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 101 

Now high, now low, now this, now that, 

That none could guess what the devil he'd be at ; 

Though, watching his various steps, some thought 

That a step in the Church was all he sought. 

But alas, alas ! while thus so gay, 

These reverend dancers frisk'd away, 

Nor Paul himself (not the Saint, but he 

Of the Opera-house) could brisker be. 

There gather 'd a gloom around their glee,— 

A shadow, which came and went so fast, 

That ere you could say " ' t is there," 't was past, 

And, lo, when the scene again was clear 'd. 

Ten of the dancers had disappear 'd, 

Ten able-bodied quadrillers swept 

From the hallow 'd floor where late they slept. 

While twelve was all that footed it still, 

On the Irish side of that grand Quadrille ! 

Nor this the worst:— still danced they on, 

But the pomp was sadden'd, the smile was gone, 

And again, from time to time, the same 

Ill-omen'd darkness round them came,— 

While still, as the light broke out anew, 

Their ranks look'd less by a dozen or two ; 

Till ah! at last there were only found 

Just Bishops enough for a four-hands-round j 

And when I awoke, impatient getting, 

1 1 eft the last holy pair poussetting 1 

to future performers in the same line :— " Ce pas est compose de deux 
mouvemens differens, savoir, pUer, et sauter sur un pied, et se rejeter 
sur Vauire." — Dictionnaire de Danse. Art. Contre-temps. 



102 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

Nota bene. — As ladies in years, it seems, 
Have the happiest knack at solving dreams, 
I shall leave to ray ancient feminine friends 
Of the Standard to say what this portends. 



DICK * "^ * 

A CHARACTER. 



Of various scraps and fragments bnilt, 

Borrow'd alike from fools and wits, 
Dick's mind was like a patch-work quilt, 

Made up of new, old, motley hits, — 
"Where, if the Co. call'd in their shares, 

If petticoats their quota got, 
And gowns were all refunded theirs, 

The quilt would look but shy, God wot. 

And thus he still, new plagiaries seeking. 

Reversed ventriloquism's trick, 
For, 'stead of Dick through others speaking, 

T was others we heard speak through Dick. 
A Tory now, all bounds exceeding, 

Now best of Whigs^ now worst of rats; 
One day, with Malthus, foe to breeding, 

The next, with Sadler, all for brats. 

Poor Dick ! — and how else could it be? 

With notions all at random caught, 
A sort of mental fricassee. 

Made up of legs and wings of thought,- ' 
The leavings of the last Debate, or 

A dinner, yesterday, of wits, 
Where Dick sate by and, like a waiter, 

Had the scraps for perquisites. 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 103 

A CORRECTED REPORT OF SOME LATE 
SPEECHES. 

" Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said, unto that 
aint." 

St. S— ncl — r rose and declared in sooth^ 
That he would n't give sixpence to Maynooth. 
He had hated priests the whole of his life, 
For a priest was a man who had no wife, (■) 
And, having no wife, the Church was his mother, 
The Church w^as his father, sister, and hrother. 
Thisheing the case, he was sorry to say, 
That a gulf 'twixt Papist and Protestant lay, (') 
So deep and wide, scarce possible was it 
To say even "how d 'ye do?" across it: 
And though your Liberals, nimble as fleas. 
Could clear such gulfs with perfect ease, 
'Twas a jump that nothing on earth could make 
Your proper, heavy -built Christian take. 
No, no,— if a Dance of Sects must be, 
He would set to the Baptist wilHngly,(5) 

(') " He objected to the maintenance and education of a clergy 
bound by the particular vows of celibacy, which, as it were, gave them 
the church as their onlyfamilj, making it fill the places of father and 
mother and brother.'" — Debate on the Grant to Maynooth College, The 
Times, April rg. 

(=) " It had always appeared to him that between the Catholic and 
Protestant a great gulf ialervened, which rendered it impossible, etc." 

(i) " The Baptist might acceptably extend the offices of religion to 
the Presbyterian and the Independent, or the member of the Church of 
England to any of the other three ; but the Catholic," etc. 



^04 TRIFLES, REPRINTED 

At the Independent deign to smirk, 

And rigadoon with old Mother Kirk; 

Nay ev'n, for once, if needs must be, 

He would take hands round with all the three; 

But, as to a jig with Popery, no,— 

To the Harlot ne'er would he point his toe. 

St. M— nd— V— le was the next that rose,— 
That Saint who round, as a pedlar, goes, 
With his pack of piety and prose, 
Heavy and hot enough, God knows,— 
And he said that Papists were much inclined 
To extirpate all of Protestant kind. 
Which he could n't, in truth, so much condemn, 
Having rather a wish to extirpate them ; 
That is,— to guard against mistake,— 
To extirpate them for their doctrine's sake ; 
A distinction Churchmen always make,— 
Inasmuch that, when they 've prime control, 
Though sometimes roasting heretics whole, 
They but cook the body for sake of the soul. 

Next jump'd St. J— hnst— njollily forth, 
The spiritual Dogberry of the Norlh,(') 
A right " wise fellow and, what's more. 
An officer," (») like his type of yore ; 

(') "Could lie then, holding as he did a spiritual office in the Chureli 
of Scotland (cries of hear, and laughter) with any consistency give his 
consent to a grant of money ? " etc. 

(=■) "I am a wise fellow, and, which is more, an oidcer."— Muck Jdo 
about Nothing. 



TRIFLES, REPP.IIVTED. 105 

And he ask'd, if we grant such toleration, 
Pray, what's the use of our Reformation ? (') 

What is the use of our Church and State ? 
Our Bishops, Articles, Tilhe, and Rate ? 
And, still as he yell'd out " what's the use?" 
Old Echoes, from their cells recluse 
Where they 'd for centuries slept, hroke loose, 
Yelling responsive, " What 's the use ?" 



THE BRUNSWICK CLUB. 

A letter having been addressed to a very distinguished personage, 

requesting him to become the Patron of tbis Orange Club, a polite 

answer was forthwith returned, of wliich we have been fortunate enough 

to obtain a copy. 

Brimstone-hall, September \, 1828. 

Private. — Lord Belzebub presents 

To the Brunswick Club his compliments, 

And much regrets to say that he 

Cannot, at present, their Patron he. 

In stating this. Lord Belzebub 

Assures, on his honour, the Brunswick Chib, 

That 't is n't from any lukewarm lack 

Of zeal, or fire, he thus holds back — 

As ev'n Lord Coal (3) himself is not 

For the Orange party more red-hot : 

(i) "What, he asked, was the use of the Reformation? What was 
the use of the Articles of the Church of England, or of the Church of 
Scotland ? " etc. 

(») Usually written " Cole." 



1(K5 TRIFLES. REPRIIXTED. 

But the truth is, till their Chib affords 

A somewhat decenter shew of Lords, 

And on its list of members gets 

A few less rubbishy Baronets, 

Lord Belzebub must beg to be 

Excused from keeping such company. 

Who the devil, he humbly begs to know, 

Are Lord Glandine, and Lord Dunio? 

Or who, with a grain of sense, would go 

To sit and be bored by Lord ftl-yo ? 

What living creature— eojccpt his nurse— 

For Lord M-ntc-sh-1 cares a curse, 

Or thinks 't would matter if Lord M-sk-rry 

Were t' other side of the Stygian ferry ? 

Breathes there a man in Dublin town, 

Who 'd give but half of half-a- crown 

To save from drowning my Lord R-thd-ne, 

Or who would n't also gladly hustle in 

Lords R-d-n, B-nd-n, C-le, and J-o-c-l-n ? 

In short, though, from bis tenderest years, 

Accustom'd to all sorts of Peers, 

Lord Belzebub much questions whether 

He ever yet saw, mix'd together, 

As 't were in one capacious tub. 

Such a mess of noble silly-bub 

As the twenty Peers of the Brunswick Club. 

It being impossible that Lord B. 

Could stoop to such society. 

Thinking, be owns ( though no great prig ), 

For one in his station 'twere infra dig. 

He begs to propose, in the interim. 

Till they find some prop'rer Peers for him. 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 107 

His Highness of C d, as Sub, 

To take his place at the Brunswick Club- 
Begging, meanwhile, himself to dub 
Their obedient servant, Belzebcb. 

It luckily happens, the R-y-1 Duke 

Resembles so much in air and look, 

The head of the Belzebub family, 

That few can any difference see; 

Which makes him, of course, the better suit 

To serve as Lord B.'s substitute. 



ADVERTISEMENT. (■) 

Missing or lost, last Sunday night, 
A Waterloo coin, whereon was traced 

The inscription, " Courage ! " in letters bright, 
Though a little by rust of years defaced. 

The metal thereof is rough and hard. 
And — 't is thought of late — mix'd up w^ith brass; 

But it bears the stamp of Fame's award. 
And through all Posterity's hands will pass. 

How it was lost, God only knows, 

But certain City thieves, they say, 
Broke in on the owner's evening doze. 

And filched this " gift of gods " away ! 

(') Written at that memorable crisis when a distinguished Duke, then 
Prime Minister, acting under the inspirations of Sir C. H — n — r and 
other City worthies, advised liis Majesty to give up his announced 
intention of dining with the Lord Mayor. 



im TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

One ne'er could, of course, the Cits suspect. 
If we had n't, tliat evening, chanced to see, 

At the robh'd man's door, a Mars elect, 
With an ass, to keep her company. 

Wliosoever of this lost treasure knows, 
Is begg'd to state all facts about it. 

As the owner can't well face his foes, 
Nor, indeed, just now, his friends, — without it, 

And if Sir Clod will bring it back, 
Like a trusty Baronet, wise and able. 

He shall have a ride on llie whitest hack 
That is left in old King George's stable. 



THE MAD TORY AND THE COMET. 

FOUNDED ON A LATE DISTRESSING INCIDENT. 

" MuCantern regna cometem." — Lucan. (') 

" Though all the pet mischiefs we count upon, fail, 
Though Cholera, hurricanes, Wellington leave us, 

We 've still in reserve, mighty Comet, thy tail ; — 
Last hope of the Tories, wilt thou too deceive us ? 

(') Eclipses and comets have been always looked to as great changers 
of administrations. Thus Milton, speaking of the former : — 
"With fear of change 
Perplexing monarchs." 
And in Statins we find, 

"Mutant quae sceptra cometae." 



TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED lOSJ 

" No— 't is coming, 't is coming, the avenger is nigh ; 

Heed, heed not, ye placemen, how Herapath flatters; 
One whisk from that tail, as it passes us by, 

Will settle, at once, all political matters ;— 

"The East-India Question, the Bank, the Five Powers, 
(Now turn'd into two) with their ri^niiarole protocols;— 

Ha ! ha ! ye gods, how this new friend of ours 
Will knock, right and left, all diplomacy's what d' ye calls! 

"Yes, rather than Whigs at our downfall should mock, 

Meet planets and suns in one general hustle ! 
While, happy in vengeance, we welcome the shock 

That shall jerk from their places. Grey, Althorp, and Russell." 

Thus spoke a mad Lord, as, with telescope raised, 

His wild Tory eye on the heavens he set; 
And, though nothing destructive appear'd as he gazed, 

Much hoped that there would, before Parliament met. 

And still, as odd shapes seem'd to flit through his glass, 

"Ha! there it is now," the poor maniac cries; 
While his fancy with forms but too monstrous, alas. 

From his own Tory zodiac, peoples the skies :— 

" Now I spy a big body, good heavens, how big ! 

Whether Bucky or Taurus, I cannot well say ; > 

And, yonder, there's Eld— n's old Chancery-wig, 

In its dusty aphelion fast fading away. 

" I see, 'mong those fatuous meteors behind, 

L — nd— nd— ry, in vacuo, flaring about ;— 
While that dim double star, of the nebulous kind. 

Is the Gemini, R— den jintl L— rt— n, no doubt. 



no TRIFLES, REPRIIXTED. 

"Ah, El~b'r— h ! 'faith, I first thought 't was the Comet ; 

So like that, in Milton, it made me quite pale : 
The head with the same ' horrid hair' (■) coming from it, 

And plenty of vapour, but — where is the tail?" 

Just then, up aloft jump'd the gazer, elated— 
For, lo, his bright glass a phenomenon show'd, 

Which he took to be C— b— d, vpaards translated, 
Instead of his natural course, t' other road ! 

But too awful that sight for a spirit so shaken,— 
Down (Iropp'd the poor Tory in fits and grimaces, 

Then off to the Bedlam in Cliailes-street was taken, 
And is now one of Halford's most favourite cases. 



FROM THE HON. HENRY- 
TO LADY EMMA .(') 

Paris, March 50. 

You bid me explain, my dear angry Ma'amselle, 

How I came thus to bolt without saying farewell ; 

And the truth is,— as truth you ^lill have, my sweet railer,- 

There are two worthy persons I always feel loth 
To take leave of at starling,— my mistress and tailor,— 

As somehow one always has scenes with them both; 
The Snip in ill-humour, the Syren in tears. 

She calling on Heaven, and he on the attorney, — 
Till sometines, in short, 'twixt his duns and his dears, 

A young gentleman risks being stopp'd in his journey. 

( ' ) " And from his horrid hair 
Shakes pestilence and war." 
{') Written at the time of the last great creation of Peers. 



TRIFLES, REPRllVTED. Ill 

But to come to the point, — though you think, I dare say, 
That 't is debt or the Cholera drives me away, 
Ton honour you 're wrong; — such a mere bagatelle 

Asa pestilence nobody, now-a-days, fears; 
And the fact is, my love, I 'm thus bolting, pell-mell. 

To get out of the way of these horrid new Peers ; 
This deluge of coronets, frightful to think of, 
Which England is now, for her sins, on the brink of; 
This coinage of nobles,— co'm'd, all of them, badly. 
And sure to bring Counts to a discount most sadly. 

Only think, to have Lords overrunning the nation, 

As plenty as frogs in a Dutch inundation; 

No shelter from Barons, from Earls no protection, 

And tadpole young Lords, too, in every direction, — 

Things created in haste, just to make a Court list of. 

Two legs and a coronet all they consist of! 

The prospect's quite frightful, and what Sir George R— e 

(My particular friend) says is perfectly true, 
That, so dire the alternative, nobody knows, 

'Twixt the Peers and the Pestilence, what he 's to do ; 
And Sir George even doubts,— could he choose his disorder, — 
'Twixt coffin and coronet, which he would order. 

This being the case, why, I thought, my dear Emma, 
'T were best to fight shy of so cursed a dilemma; 
And though I confess myself somewhat a villain, 

To 've left idol mio without an addio, 
Console your sweet heart, and, a week hence, from Milan 

I '11 send you — some news of Bellini's last trio. 

N. B.— Have just pack'd up my travelling set-out, 
Things a tourist in Italy canH go without— 



m TRIFLES, REPRliVTED. 

Viz., a pair gmts (jras, from old Houbigant's shop, 

Good for hands that the air of Mont Cenis may chap. 

Small presents for ladies, — and nothing so wheedles 

The creatures abroad as your golden-eyed needles. 

A neat pocket Horace, by which folks are cozen'd 

To think one knows Latin, when— one, perhaps, does n't; 

With some little book about heathen mythology, 

Just large enough to refresh one's theology ; 

Nothing on earth being half such a bore as 

Not knowing the difference 'twixt Virgins and Floras. 

Once more, love, farewell, best regards to the girls, 

And mind you beware of damp feet and new Earls. 

Henry. 

"College. — We announced, in our last, that Lefroy and Shaw wera 
returned. They were chaired yesterday; the Students of the College 
determined, it would seem, to imitate the mob in all things, harnessing 
themselves to the car, and the Masters of Arts bearing Orange flags and 
l)ludgeons before, beside, and behind tlie car." 

Dublin Evening Post, Dec. 20. 

Ay, yoke ye to the bigot's car. 
Ye chosen of Alma Mater's scions; — 

Fleet chargers drew the God of War, 
Great Cybele was drawn by lions, 

And Sylvan Pan, as Poets dream. 

Drove four young panthers in his team. 

Thus, classical L— fr — y, for once, is, 

Thus, studious of a like turn-out. 
He harnesses young sucking dunces, 

To draw him, as their chief, about, 
And let the world a picture see 
Of Dulness yoked to Bigotry ; 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 113 

Showing us how young College hacks 
Can pace with bigots at their backs, 
As though the cubs were horn to draw 
Such luggage as L— fr— y and Sh— w. 

Oh shade of Goldsmith, shade of Swift, 
Bright spirits whom, in days of yore, 
This Queen of Dulness sent adrift, 

As aliens to her foggy shore ; ( ')— 
Shade of our glorious Grattan, too, 

Whose very name her shame recalls ; 
Wliose effigy her bigot crew 

Reversed upon their monkish walls, (*)— 
Bear witness (lest the world should doubt ) 

To your mute Mother's dull renown, 
Once famous but for Wit turn'd out, 
And Eloquence turn'd xipaide doun; 
But now ordain'd new wreaths to win, 

Beyond all fame of former days. 
By breaking thus young donkeys in 
To draw M. P.'s, amid the brays 
Alike of donkeys and M. A.'s — 
Defying Oxford to surpass 'em 
In this new " Gradus ad Parnassum." 

(») See the lives of these two poets for the circumstances under vvhidi 
they left Dublin College. 

(») In the year 1799, the Board of Trinity College, Dublin, thought 
proper, as a mode of expressing their disapprobation of Mr. Graltan's 
public conduct, to order his portrait, In the Great Hall of the Univer- 
sity to be turned upside down, and in this position it remained for soma 
time. 



il4 TRIFLES. REPRINTED 

TRANSLATION FROM THE GULL 
LANGUAGE. 

BY DR. BOWRING. 

Scripta manet. 

'T WAS graved on the Stone of Destiny, (■) 
In letters four, and letters three; 
And ne'er did the King of the Gulls go by 
But those awful letters scared his eye ; 
For he knew a Prophet Voice had said, 
As long as those words by man were read. 
The ancient race of the Gulls should ne'er 
One hour of peace or plenty share. 
But years on years successive flew, 
And the letters slill more legible grew.— 
At top, a T, an H, an E, j 
And underneath, D. E. B. T. 

Some thought them Hebrew, — such as Jews, 
Who deal more in Scrip than Scripture, use ; 
While some surmised 't was an ancient way 
Of keeping accounts (well known in the day 
Of the famed Didlerius Jeremias, 
Who had thereto a wonderful bias), 
And proved, in books most learnedly boring, 
'T was call'd the PonticA way of scoring. 

Howe'er this be, there never were yet 
Seven letters of the alphabet, 
That, 'twixt them, form'd so grim a spell. 
Or scared a Land of Gulls so well 

(>) Liafail, or the Stone of Destiny,— for which see Westminster 
Abbey. 



TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. H^ 



As did this awful riddle-me-ree 
Of T. H. E. D. E. B. T. 



Hark !— it is struggling Freedom's cry ; 

"Help, help, ye nations, or I die; 

'T is Freedom's fight, and, on the field 

Where I expire your doom is seal'd." 

The Gull-King hears the awakening call, 

He hath summon'd his Peers and Patriots all. 

And he asks," Ye noble Gulls, shall we 

Stand basely by at the fall of the Free, 

Nor utter a curse, nor deal a blow ?" 

And they answer, with voice of thunder," No." 

Out fly their flashing swords in the air !— 
But,— why do they rest suspended there ? 
What sudden blight, what baleful charm, 
Hath chill'd each eye, and check'd each arm? 
Alas, some withering hand hath thrown 
The veil from off that fatal stone. 
And pointing now, with sapless finger, 
Showeth where dark those letters linger, — 
Letters four, and letters three, 
T.H.E. D. E. B. T. 

At sight thereof, each lifted brand 

Powerless falls from every hand ; 

In vain the Patriot knits his brow, — 

Even talk, his staple, fails him now. 

In vain the King like a hero treads, 

His Lords of the Treasury shake their heads ; 



116 TRIFLES , REPRllVTED 

And to all his talk of " brave and free," 
No answer getteth His Majesty 
Buf'T.H. E. D. E. B. T." 

In short the whole Gull nation feels 
They 're fairly spell-bound neck and heels j 
And so, in face of the laughing world, 
Must e'en sit down, with banners furl'd, 
Adjourning all their dreams sublime 
Of glory and war to— some other time. 



NOTIONS ON REFORM. 

BY A MODERN REFORMER. 

Of all the misfortunes as yet brought to pass 
By this comet-like Bill, with its long tail of speeches, 

The saddest and worst is the schism which alas ! 
It has caused between W—th—r—l'swaistcoatand breeches. 

Some symptoms of this Anti-Union propensity 

Had oft broken out in that quarter before; 
But the breach, since the Bill, hasattain'd such immensity, 

Daniel himself could have scarce wish'd it more. 

Oh ! haste to repair it, ye friends of good order. 
Ye Atw— ds and W— nns, ere the moment is past . 

"Who can doubt that we tread upon Anarchy's border, 
When the ties that should hold men are loosening so fast? 

Mahe W— th— r— 1 yield to " some sort of Reform," 
(As we all must, God help us ! with very wry faces ; ) 

And loud as he likes let him bluster and storm 
About Corporate Rights, so he'll only wear braces. 



TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED H7 

Or, if those he now sports have been long in possession, 
And, hke his own borough, are worse for the wear, 

Advise him, at least, as a prudent concession 
To intellect's progress, to buy a new pair. 

Oh ! who that e'er saw him when vocal he stands, 
With a look something midway 'twixt Filch's and Lockit's, 

While still, to inspire him, his deeply-thrust hands 
Keep jingling the rhino in both breeches-pockets — 

Who that ever has listen'd, through groan and through cough , 
To the speeches inspired by this music of pence, — 

But must grieve that there 's anything like falling off 
In that great nether source of his wit and his sense? 

Who that knows how he look'd when, with grace debonair, 
He began first to court — rather late in the season — 

Or when, less fastidious, he sat in the chair 
Of his okUriend, the Nottingham Goddess of Reason j (') 

That Goddess, whose borough-like virtue attracted 
All mongers in both wares to proffer their love ; 

Whose chair like the stool of the Pythoness acted, 
AsW— th — r — I's rants, ever since, go to prove; (') 

(i) It will be recollected that the learned gentleman himself boasted, 
one night, in the House of Commons, of having sat in the very chair 
which this allegorical lady had occupied. 

(') Lucan's description of the effects of the tripod on the appearance 
and voice of the sitter, shows that the symptoms are at least, very si- 
milar : 

Spumea tunc primum rabies vesana per ora 

Effluit 

tunc moestus vastis ululatus in antris. 



118 TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

Who, in short, would not grieve, if a man of his graces 
Should go on rejecting, unwarn'd by the past. 

The" moderate Reform" of a pair of new braces, 
Till, some day,— he all falls to pieces at last. 



TORY PLEDGES. 



I PLEDGE myself, through thick and thin, 
To labour still, with zeal devout, 

To get the Outs, poor devils, in, 
And turn the Ins, the wretches, out. 

I pledge myself, though much bereft 
Of ways and means of ruling ill. 

To make the most of what are left, 
And stick to all that 's rotten still. 

Though gone the days of place and pelf, 
And drones no more take all the honey, 

I pledge myself to cram myself 
With all I can of public money. 

To quarter on that social purse 
My nephews, nieces, sisters, brothers, 

Nor, so we prosper, care a curse 
How much 't is at tlie expense of others. 

I pledge myself, whenever Right 
And Might on any point divide, 

Not to ask which is black or white, 
But take, at once, the strongest side. 



TRIFLES, REPRIJXTED. 119 

For instance, in all Tithe discussions, 

I'm for the Reverend encroachers :— 
I loathe the Poles, applaud the Russians,— 

Am for the Squires, against the Poachers. 

Betwixt the Corn -Lords and the Poor 

I've not the slightest hesitation,— 
The People must be starved, t' insure 

The Land its due rerauneralion. 

I pledge myself to be no more 

With Ireland's wrongs beprosed or shamm'd,— 
I vote her grievances a lore, 

So she may suffer and be d— d. 

Or if she kick, let it console us, 

We still have plenty of red coats, 
To cram the Church, that general bolus, 

Down any given amountof throats. 

I dearly love the Frankfort Diet,— 

Think newspapers the worst of crimes ; 
And would, to give some chance of quiet. 

Hang all the writers of The Times; 

Break all their correspondents' bones, 

All authors of. Reply," "Rejoinder," 
From the Anti-Tory, Colonel J— es, 

To the Anti-Suttee, Mr. P— ynd— r. 

Such are the Pledges I propose; 

And though I can't now offer gold, 
There's many a way of buying those 

Who 've but the taste for being sold. 



120 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

So here *s, with three times three hurrahs, 
A toast, of which you '11 not coraplam, — 

" Long life to johhing; may the days 
Of peculation shine again !" 



ST. JEROME ON EARTH. 

FIRST VISIT. 

As St. Jerome, who died some ages ago, 
Was siting, one day, in the shades helow, 
" I've heard much of English bishops," quoth he. 
" And shall take a trip up to earth, to see 
How far they agree, in their lives and ways, 
With our good old bishops of ancient days. " 

He had learn' d — but learn'd without misgivings— 
Their love for good living, and eke good livings; 
Not knowing (as ne'er having taken degrees) 
That good living means claret and fricassees, 
While its plural means simply — pluralities. 
" From all I hear," said the innocent man, 
" They are quite on the good old primitive plan. 
For wealth and pomp they little can care. 
As they all say ' no' to the Episcopal chair; 
And their vestal virtue it well denotes 
That they all, good men, wear petticoats." 
Thus saying, post-haste to earth he hurries. 
And knocks at the Archbishop of Canterbury's. 
The door was oped by a lackey in lace, 
Saying, " What 's your business with his Grace?" 
''His Grace!" quoth Jerome— for posed was he, 
Not knowing what sort this Grace could be ; 



TRIFLES, REPRIXTED. 121 

Whether Grace preventhuj , Grace particular, 

Grace of that breed called Quinquarticular {')— 

In short, he rummaged his holy mind, 

The exact description of Grace to find, 

Which thus could represented be 

By a footman in full livery ! 

At last, out loud in a laugh he broke 

(For dearly the good saint loved his joke), (=) 

And said— surveying, as sly he spoke. 

The costly palace from roof to base — 

" Well, it isn't, at least, a saving Grace! " 

" Umph !" said the lackey, a man of few words, 
" The Archbishop is gone to the House of Lords." 
" To the House of the Lord, you mean, my son. 
For, in my time, at least, there was but one; 
Unless such many-fo?d priests as these 
Seek, ev'n in their Lord, pluralities ! " {^) 
" No time for gab," quoth the man in lace : 
Then, slamming the door in St. Jerome's face. 
With a curse to the single knockers all. 
Went to finish his port in the servants' hall, 
And propose a toast (humanely meant 
To include even Curates in its extent ) 
" To all as serves the Establishment." 

(') So called from the proceedings of the Synod of Dort. 

(») Witness his well-known pun on the name of his adversary, Vigi- 
lantius, whom he calls facetiously Dormitantius. 

(3) The suspicion altaclied to some of the early Fathers of being 
Arians in their doctrine would appear to derive some confirmation 
from this passage. 



122 TRIFLES, REPKIIVTED 

ST. JEROME ON EARTH. 

SECOND VISIT. 

" This much I dare say, that, since lording and loitering hath r ome 
up, preaching hath come down, contrary to the Apostles' times. For 
they preached and lorded not : and now they lord and preach not . . . . 
Ever since the Prelates were made Lords and Nobles, the plough 
slandeth; there is no work done, the people starve."— X«r;>«er, Sermon 
of the Plough. 

"Once more," said Jerome, " I 'II run up ami see 

How the Church goes on,"— and offset he. 

Just then the packet-boat, which trades 

Betwixt our planet and the Shades, 

Had arrived below, with a freight so queer, 

" My eyes ! " said Jerome, " what have we here ? "— 

For he saw, when nearer he explored, 

They 'd a cargo of Bishops' wigs aboard. 

"They are ghosts of wigs." said Charon, "all, 

Once worn by nobs Episcopal. 

For folks on earth, when they 've got a store 

Of things like these they want no more. 

Oft send them down, as gifts, you know. 

To a certain Gentleman here below. " 

'A sign of the times, I plainly see," 
Said the Saint to himself as, pondering, he 
Sail'd off in the death-boat gallantly. 

Arrived on earth, quolh he, "no more 
I'll affect a body, as before; 
For I think I 'd best, in the company 
Of Spiritual Lords, a spirit be, 
And glide, unseen, from See to See." 



TRIFLES, REPRINrED 123 

But oh ! to tell what scenes he saw,— 
It was more than Rabelais' pen could draw. 
For instance, he found Ex— t— r, 
Soul, body, inkstand, all in a stir. — 
For love of God ? for sake of King ? 
For good of people? — no such thing ; 
But to get for himself, l)y some new trick, 
A shove to a better bishoprick. 

He found that pious soul, Van M— Id— t, 

Much with his money-bags bewilder'd; 

Snubbing the Clerks of the Diocess, (') 

Because the rogues show'd restlessness 

At having too Utile cash to touch. 

While lie so Christianly bears too much. 

He found Old Sarum's witsas gone 

As his own beloved text in John, («)— 

Text he hath prosed so long upon. 

That 't is thought when ask'd, at the gate of heaven, 

His name, he'll answer ^' John v. 7." 

" But enough of Bishops I 've had to-day," 

Said the weary Saint,— ''I must away. 

Though I own I should like, before T go. 

To see, for once ( as I 'm ask'd below 

If really such odd sights exist ), 

A regular six-fold Pluralist. " 

Just then he heard a general cry 

" There's Doctor Hodgson galloping by ! " 

(') See (lie Bishop's Letter to Clergy ol Lis Diocese. 

(') John, V. 7. A text which, though long given up by all the 
rest of the orthodox world, is still pertinaciously adhered to by this 
Right Reverend scholar. 



12/| TRIFLES, REPRINTED 

" Ay, that 's the man," says the Saint, " to follow," 

And off he sets, with a loud view-hollo, 

At Hodgson's heels, to catch, if he can, 

A glimpse of this singular plural man. 

But,— talk of Sir Boyle Roche's bird ! (■) 

To compare him with Hodgson is absurd. 

" Which way. Sir, pray is the Doctor gone ?"— 

" He is now at his living at Hillingdon. " 

" No no, — you 're out, by many a mile, 

He 's away at his Deanery, in Carlisle. "— 

" Pardon me, Sir; but I understand 

He 's gone to his living in Cumberland." — 

" God bless me, no, — he can't be there ; 

You must try St. George's, Hanover-square. " 

Thus all in vain the Saint inquired, 

From living to living, mock'd and tired ; — 

'T was Hodgson here, 't was Hodgson there, 

'T was Hodgson nowiiere, everywhere ; 

Till, fairly beat, the Saint gave o'er. 

And flitted away to the Stygian shore, 

To astonish the natives under ground 

With the comical things he on earth had found. 



THE CONSULTATION. 

'• Wlien they do agree, their unanimity is wonderful. — " The Critic. 

Scene discovers Dr. Whig and Dr. Tory in consultation. Patient 
on the floor between them. 

Dr. Whig.— This wild Irish patient does pester me so. 
That what to do with him, I 'm curst if I know. 

(■) It was a saying of the wellk-nown Sir Boyle, that " a man could 
not be in two places at once, unless he was a bird." 



TRIFLES, REPRmXED. fir* 

I 've promised him anodynes 

Dr. Tonj. Anodynes!— Stuff. 

Tie liim down— gag him well— he '11 be tranquil enough. 
That 's my mode of practice. 

Dr. Whig. True, quite in your line, 

But unluckily not much, till lately, in mine. 
'T is so painful 

Dr. Tory, — Pooh, nonsense— ask Ude how he feels, 
When, for Epicure feasts, he prepares his live eels. 
By flinging them in, 'twixt the bars of the fire, 
' And letting them wriggle on there till they tire. 
He, too, says " 't is painful "— " quite makes his heart bleed "~ 
But '' your eels are a vile oleaginous breed. "— 
He would fain use them gently, but Cookery says " No," 
And— in short — eels were born to be treatedjusl so. (') 
'T is the same with these Irish,— who 're odder fish still, — 
Your tender Whig heart shrinks from using them ill; 
I, myself, in my youth, ere I came to get wise. 
Used, at some operations, to blush to the eyes; — 
But, in fact, ray dear brother,— if I may make bold 
To style you, asPeachum did Lockit, of old, — 
We, Doctors, must act with the firmness of Ude, 
And, indifferent, like him, — so the fish is hut stew'd, — 
Must torture live Pats for the general good. 

[Here imtient (jroans and kicks a little.) 

Dr. Whig. — But what, if one's patient's so devilish perverse. 
Thai he won't be thus torlured ? 

Dr. Tory. Coerce, Sir, coerce. 

(') This eminent artist, in the second edition of the work wherein he 
propounds this mode of purifying his eels, professes himself much con- 
cerned at the charge of inhumanity brought against his practice, but still 
begs leave respectfully to repeat that it is the only proper mode of pre- 
paring eels for the tabic. 



120 TRIFLES. REPRINTED. 

You 're a juvenile performer, but once you begin, 

You can't think how fast you may train your hand in : 

And (smiling) who knows but old Tory may take to the shelf, 

Wiih the comfort that, while he retires on his pelf, 

He 's succeeded by one just as — bad as himself? 

Dr. Whig (looking flattered).— yVYij, to tell you the truth, 
I 've a small matter here. 
Which you help'd me to make for my patient last year,— 

( Goes to a cupboard and brings out a strait- 
tvaistcoat and gag.) 
And such rest I 've enjoy'd from his raving, since then, 
That I 've made u[t my mind he shall wear it again. 
Dr. Tory (embracing him). — Oh, charming! — My dear 
Doctor Whig, you 're a treasure, 
ISext to torturing, myself, to help you is a pleasure. 

(Assisting Dr. Whig.) 
Give me leave — I 've some practice in these mad machines j 
There— tighter— the gag in the raOi.th, by all means. 
Delightful ! — all 's snug — not a squeak liced you fear, — 
Y(Ui may now put your anodynes olT itil next year. 

(Scene closes. ) 

TO THE REV. CH— RL— S OV-RT-N, 

CURATE OF ROMALDKIRK. 

(See Edinburgh Review, N" 117.) 

Sweet singer of Rom.ildkirk, thou who artreckon'd, 
By critics Episcopal, David the Second, (') 

(■) " Your Lordship, " say.sMr. Ov — rt — 11, in the Dedication of his 
Poem to the Bishop of Chester, " has kindly expressed your persuasion 
that mv ' Muse will always be a Muse of sacred song, and that it wiil be 
tiuied as David's iva*.' ' 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 1^'' 

If thus, as a Curate, so lofty your flight, 
Only think, in a Rectory, how you would write ! 
Once fairly inspired by the " Tilhe-crown'd Apollo," 
(Who beats, I confess it, our lay Phoebus hollow, 
Having gotten, besides the old Nine's inspiration. 
The TeJif /» of all eatable things in creation), 
There 's nothing, in fact, that a poet like you. 
So he-nimd and he-tenth'd, could n't easily do. 

Round the lips of the swcet-tongued Athenian, (■) they say. 

While yet but a babe in his cradle he lay, 

Wild honey-bees swarni'd, as a presage to tell 

Of the sweet-flowing words th..t thence afterwards fell. 

Just so round our Ov-rt-n's cradle, no doubt, 

Tenth ducklings and chicks were seen flitting about ; 

Goose embryos, waiting their doom'd decimation. 

Came, shadowing forth his adult destination, 

And small sucking tithe-pigs, in musical droves. 

Announced the Church poet whom Chester approves. 

Oh Horace, when thou, in thy vision of yore, 

Didst dream that a snowy-white plumage came o'er 

Thy etherealized limbs, stealing downily on, 

Till, by Fancy's strong spell, thou wert turn'd to a swan, (") 

IJttle thoughl'st thou such fate could a poet befall, 

Without any effort of fancy, at all; 

Little thought'st thou the world would in Ov-rt-n find 

A bird, ready-made, somewhat different in kind, 

But as perfect as Michaelmas' self could produce. 

By gods yclept mser, by mortals a goose. 

(') Sophocles. 

(a) album mutor in alitem 

Superne : nasciintiiriiue iieves 
Per digitos, humeiosque plumae. 



128 TRIFLES, REPRIATED. 

SCENE FROM A PLAY, ACTED AT OXFORD, CALLED 
"MATRICULATION," 

[Boy discovered at a (able, with the Thirty-Nine Articles 
before him.— Enter ihe R^t. Rev. Doctor Ph— lip— ts.] 

Doctor P.— Theve, ray lad, lie the Articles— (Bo?/ begins io 
count them) iusi thirty-nine — 
No occasion to count — you 've now only to sign. 
At Cambridge, where folks are less High-Church than we, 
The whole Nihe-and-Thirty are lump'd into Three. 
Let 's run o'er the items ; — there 's Justification, 
Predestination, and Supererogation, — 
Not forgetting Salvation and Creed Athanasian, 
Till we reach, at last, Queen Bess's Ratification. 
That's sufficient — now, sign — having read quite enough, 
You "believe in the full and true meaning thereof?" 

(Boy stares). 
Oh, a mere form of words, to make things smooth and brief, — 
A commodious and short make-believe of belief. 
Which our Church has drawn up, in a form thus articular, 
To keep out, in general, all who 're particular. 
But what 's the boy doing ? what ! reading all through. 
And my luncheon fast cooling .'—this never will do. 

Boy {jwring over the Articles). — Here are points which— 
pray, Doctor, what 's " Grace of Congruity ?" 

Doctor P. (shwyly). — You '11 find out, young Sir, when 
you 've more ingenuity. 
At present, by signing, you pledge yourself merely, 
Whate 'er it may be, to believe it sincerely. 
Both in (liuing and signing we take the same plan, — 
First, to swallow all down, then digest— as we can. 



TRIFLES, REPRINTED. t2<) 

Boy (still reading).— I \e to gulp, I see, St. Alhanasius's 
Creed, 
Which, I 'm told, is a very lough morsel, indeed; 
As he damns— 

Doctor P. {aside). — Ay, and so would I, willingly, too, 
All confounded particular young hoohies, like you. 
This comes of Reforming ! — all 's o'er with our land, 
When people won't stand what they can't iturferstand ; 
Nor perceive that our ever-revered Thirty-Nine 
Were made, not for men to believe, hut to sign. 

Exit Doctor P. in a nassion. 



LATE TITHE CASE. 

"Sic vos non vobis." 

'"The Vicar of B — nih — m desires me to state that, iu consequence 
of the passing of a recent Act of Parliament, he is compelled to adopt 
measures which may by some be considered harsh or precipitate ; but, 
iu duty to what he owes to his successors, he feels bound to preserve the 
rights of the vicarage." — Letter from Mr. S. Powell, August 6. 

No, not, for yourselves, ye reverend men, 

Do you take one pig in every ten, 

But for Holy Church's future heirs, 

Who 've an abstract right to that pig, as theirs; — 

The law supposing that such heirs male 

Are already seized of the pig, in tail. 

No, Jiof for himself hath B— mh — m's priest 

His " well-beloved" of their pennies fleeced : 

But it is that, before his prescient eyes, 

All future Vicars of B— mh— m rise. 

With their embryo daughters, nephews, nieces. 

And 'I is for them the poor he lleeces. 



130 TRIFLES, llEPRINTED 

He heareih their voices, ages hence, 

Saying " Take the pig "— " oh take the pence; " 

The cries of Httle Vicarial dears, 

The unborn B—nih— mites, reach his ears ; 

And, did he resist that soft appeal, 

He would not like a true-born Vicar feel. 

Thou, too, L— ndy of L— ck— ngt— n ! 

A Rector true, if e'er there was one, 

Who, for sake of the L— ndies of coming ages, 

Gripest the tenths of labourers' wages. (■) 

'T is true, in the pockets of thrj small-clothes 

The claim'd ''obvention" (=) of four-pence goes; 

But iis abstract spirit, unconfined. 

Spreads to all future Rector-kind, 

Warning them all to their rights to wake, 

And rather to face the block, the stake. 

Than give up their darling right to take. 

One grain of musk, it is said, perfumes 
(So subtle its spirit) a thousand rooms, 
And a single four-pence, pocketed well. 
Through a thousanl rectors' lives will tell. 
Then still continue, ye reverend souls. 
And still, as your rich Pactohrs rolls, 

(') Fourteen agricultural labourers (oue of whom received so little as 
six guineas for yearly wages, one eight, one nine, another ten guineas, 
and the best-paid of the whole not more than i8/. annually) were all, 
in the course of tlie autumn of i832, served with demands of tithe at 
the rate of 4c/. in the i/. sterling, on behalf of the Rev. F. L — dy. Rector 
of ," etc. etc. — The Times, August i833. 

(') One of the various general terms under which oblations, tithes, 
etc. are comprised. 



TRIFLES, REPRIIXTED. 131 

Grasp every penny, on every side. 
From every wretch, to swell its tide : 
Remembering still what the Law lays down, 
In that pure poetic style of its own, 
" If the parson in ease submits to loss, he 
Inflicts tl»e same on the parson in poxse. " 



FOOLS' PARADISE. 

DREAM THE FIRST. 

I HAVE been hke Puck, I have been, in a trice, 

'J'o a realm lliey call Fools' Paradise, 

Lying N. N. E. of the Land of Sense, 

And seldom bless'd with a glimmer thence. 

But they want it not in this happy place, 

Where a light of its own gilds every face; 

Or, if some wear a shadowy brow, 

'T is the wish to look wise,— not knowing hoir. 

Self-glory glistens o'er all that 's there, 

The trees, the flovk^ers have a jaunty air; 

The well-bred wind in a whisper blows, 

The snow, if it snows, is covleur de rose. 

The falling founts in a titter fall. 

And the sun looks simpering down on all. 

Oh, 't is n't in tongue or pen to trace 
The scenes I saw in that joyous place. 
There were Lords and Ladies sitting together, 
In converse sweet, " Vv'hat charming weather ! 
You '11 all rejoice to hear, I 'm sure, 
Lord Charles has got a good sinecure ; 
And the Premier says, my youngest brother, 
( Him in the Guards) shall have another. 



132 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

Is n't this very, verij gallant ! — 
As for my poor old virgin aunt, 
Who has lost her all, poor thing, at whist, 
We must quarter her on the Pension List." 
Thus smoothly time in that Eden roll'd ; 
It seem'd like an Age of 7'eal gold, 
Where all who liked might have a slice, 
So rich was that Fools' Paradise. 

But the sport at which most time they spent. 

Was a puppets-how, called Parliament, 

Perform'd by wooden Ciceros, 

As large as life, who stood to prose. 

While, hid behind them, lords and squires, 

Who own'd the puppets, pull'd the wires; 

And thought it the very best device 

Of that most prosperous Paradise, 

To make the vulgar pay through the nose 

For them and their wooden Ciceros. 

And many more such things I saw 

In this Eden of Church, and State, and Law ; 

Nor e'er were known such pleasant folk 

As those who had the hest of the joke. 

There were Irish Rectors, such as resort 

To Cheltenham yearly, to drink— port. 

And bumper, " Long may the Church endure, 

Where the cure of souls is a sinecure, 

And a score of Parsons to every soul 

Is a fair allowance on the whole." 

There were Heads of Colleges, lying about, 

From which the sense had all run out, 

Ev'n to the lowest classic lees. 

Till nothing was left but qMantities; 



TRIFLES, REPPJi\TED. 133 

Which made ihem heads raosl fit to he 
Stnck up on a University, 
Which yearly hatches, in its schools, 
Such flights of young Elysian fools. 

Thus all went on, so snug and nice, 
In this happiest possible Paradise. 
But it was but too plain to see, alas. 
That a downfall soon must come to pass. 
For grief is a lot the good and wise 
Don't quite so much monopolize. 
But that {" lapt in Elysium" as they are) 
Even blessed fools must have their share. 
And so it happen'd:— but what befell, 
In Dream the Second I mean to tell. 



THE RECTOR AND HIS CURATE ; 

OR, ONE POUND TWO. 

" I trust we shall part, as we met, in peace and charity. My last 
payment to you paid your salary up to the 1st of this month. Since 
that, I owe you for one month, which being a long month, of thirty-one 
days, amounts, as near as I can calculate, to six pounds eight shillings • 
My Steward returns you as a debtor to the amount of seven pounds 
TEN THiLLiNGS FOR CON-ACRE GROUND, which leavcs some trifling La- 
lance in mv favour." — Letter of Dismissal from the Rev. IITarciis Beres- 
ford to his Curate, the Rev. T. A. Lyons. 

The account is balanced — the bill drawn out, — 
The debit and credit all right , no doubt— 
The Rector, rollins; in wealth and state, 
Owes to his Curate six pounds eight ; 



'•^4 TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED. 

The Cuiate, that least well-fed of men, 
Owes 10 his Rector seven pounds ten, 
Which niakelh the balance clearly due 
From Cuiate to Rector, one pound two. 

Ah balance, on earth unfair, uneven! 
But sure to be all set right in heaven, 
Where bills like these will be check'd, someday, 
And the balance settled the other way .- 
Were Lyons the curate's hard-wrung sum 
Will back to his shade with interest comej 
And Marcus, the rector, deep may rue 
This tot, in his favour, of one pound two. 



PADDY'S METAMORPHOSIS. 

About fifiy years since, in the days of our daddies, 
That plan was commenced which the wise now applaud. 

Of shipping off Ireland's most turbulent Paddies, 
As good raw material for settlers abroad. 

Some West-India island, wJiose name I forget. 
Was the region then chosen for this scheme so romantic , 

And such the success the first colony met, 
That a second, soon after, set sail o'er ihe Atlantic. 

Behold them now safe at the lon;,^-look\l-for shore, 
Sailing in between banks that the Shannon might greet. 

And thinking of friends whom, but two years before. 
They had sorrow'd to lose, but would soon again meet. 

And, hark, from the shore, a glad welcome there came— 
" Arrah, Paddy from Cork, is it you, my sweet boy?'' 

While Pat stood astounded, to hear his own name 
Thus hail'd by black devils, who cuper'd for joy! 



TRIFLES. REPIimXED 135 

Can it possibly be?— half amazenieiU— half doubt, 
Pat listens again— rubs his eyes and looks steady ; 

Then heaves a deep sigh, and in horror yells out, 

" Good Lord ! only think,— black and curly already !" 

Deceived by tiiat weil-mimickd brogue in his ears, 
Pat read iiis own doom in these wool-headed figures, 

And thought, what a climate, in less than two years, 
To turn a whole cargo of Pats into niggers ! 

MORAL. 

'T is ihus,— but alas! by a marvel more true 
Than is told in this rival of Ovid's best stories,- 

Your Whigs, when in office a short year or two, 
By a lusus iiaturie, all turn into Tories. 

And thus, when I hear them" strong measures"' advise, 
Ere the seals that they sit on have time to get steady, 

I say, while I listen, with tears in my eyes, 
"■ Good Lord ! only think,— black and curly already I" 



COCKER, ON CHURCH REFORM. 

FOUNDED UPON SOME LATE CALCULATIONS. 

Fine figures of speech let your orators follow. 

Old Cocker has figures that beat them all hollow. 

Though famed for liis rules Aristotle may be, 

lu but half of this Sage any merit I see, 

For, as honest Joe Hume says, the " tottle" (■) for me ' 

('j The total, — so pronounced by this industrious senator. 



r:s TRIFLES, REPFJIXTED. 

As for instance,— while others discuss and debate,— 

It is thus about Bishops I ratiocinate : 

In England, where, spite of the infidel's laughter, 

'T is certain our souls are look'd verij well after. 

Two Bishops can well (ifjudicionsly sunder'd) 

Of parishes manage two thousand two hundred,— 

Said number of parishes, under said teachers, 

Containing three millions of Protestant creatures,— 

So that each of said Bishops full ably controls 

Just one million five hundred thousands of souls. 

And now comes old Cocker. In Ireland we 're told, 

Haifa million includes the whole Protestant fold j 

Therefore, if, for three milUons of souls, 't is conceded 

Ttvo proper-sized Bishops are all that is needed, 

'T is plain, for the Irish /mif million who want 'em, 

One ihirdofone Bishop is just the right quantum. 

And thus, by old Cocker's sublime Rule of Three, 

The Irish Church question 's resolved lo a T ; 

Keeping always that excellent maxim in view. 

That, in saving men's souls, we must save money too. 

Nay, if,— as St. Roden complains is the case,— 

The half million oisoul is decreasing apace. 

The demand, too, for bishop will also fall off, 

Till the tithe of one, taken in kind, be enough. 

But, as fractions imply that we 'd have to dissect. 

And to cutting up Bishops I strongly object, 

We've a small fractious prelate whom well we could spare, 

Who has just the same decimal worth , to a hair ; 

And, not to leave Ireland too much in the lurch. 

We '11 let her have Ex— t— r, sole, (■) as her Church. 

(>) Corporation sole. 



TRIFLES. REPRINTED. m 

LES HOMMES AUTOMATES. 

"We are persuaded tliat this our artificial man will not only walk 
and speak, and perform most of the outward functions of animal life, 
hul (being wound up once a-week) will perhaps reason as well as most 
of your country parsons."— ili/e/no(>5 of Martimts Scriblerus, chap. xii. 

It being an object now to meet 

With Parsons tliat don't want to eat, 

Fit men to fill tliose Irish rectories 

Which soon will have but scant refectories, 

It has been suggested,— lest that Church 

Should, all at once be left in the lurch, 

For want of reverend men endued 

With this gift of ne'er requiring food,— 

To try, by way of experiment, whether 

There could n't be made, of wood and leather, (•) 

(Howe'er the notion may sound chimerical,) 

Jointed figures, not lay, but clerical, {') 

Which, woundup carefully once a-week, 

Might just like parsons look and speak. 

Nay even, if requisite, reason loo 

As well as most Irish parsons do. 

The expriment having succeeded quite, 
(Whereat those Lords must much delight, 

(') The materials of which those Nuremberg Savans, mentioned by 
Scriblerus, constructed their artificial man. 

(=) The wooden models used by painters are, it is well known, called 
" lay figures." 

6. 



13b TRIFLES, REPRIIVTED 

Who 've shown, by slopping the Church's food, 

They think 'I is not for her spiritual good 

To be served by parsons of flesh and blood), 

The Patentees of this new invention 

Beg leave respectfully to mention, 

They now are enabled to produce 

A large supply, for present use, 

Of these reverend pieces of machinery, 

Ready for vicarage, rectory, deanery, 

Or any such-like post of skill 

That wood and leather are fit to fill. 

N.B,— In places addicted to arson, 

We can't recommend a wooden parson : 

But, if the Church any such appoints, 

They 'd better, at least, have iron joints. 

In parts, not much by Protestants h;umted, 

A figure to look at 's all that 's wanted — 

A block in black, to eat and sleep, 

Which (now that the eating 's o'er) comes cheap. 

P.S. — Should the Lords, by way of a treat, 

Premit the clergy again to eat, 

The Church will, of course, no longer need 

Imitation -parsons that never feed, 

And these creatures of ours, broke up, will sell 

For secular purposes just as well— 

Our Beresfords, turn'd to bludgeons stout. 

May, 'stead of beating their own about, 

Be knocking the brains of Papists out; 

While our smooth O'Suliivans, by ail means, 

Sliould transmigrate into t((riii)i(/-maciiines. 



TRIFLES, REPRIKTED. 139 

HOW TO MAKE ONESELF A PEER, 

ACCORDING TO THE NEWEST RECEIPT, AS DISCLOSED IN A 
LATE HERALDIC WORK. 

Choose some liile that 's dormant— the Peerage hath many- 
Lord Baron of Shamdos sounds nobly as any. 
Next, catch a dead cousin of said defunct Peer, 
And marry him, off hand, in some given year, 
To the daughter of somebody,— no matter wlio, - 
Fig, tlie grocer himself, if you 're hard run, will do; 
For, the Medici j)ills still in heraldry tell, 
And why shouldn't loUypops quarter as well? 
Thus, having your couple, — and one a lord's cousin, — 
Young materials for peers may be had by the dozen ; 
And 't is hard if, inventing each small mother's-sonof 'era, 
You can't somehow manage to prove yourself one of 'em. 
Should registers, deeds, and such matters refractory 
Stand in the way of this lord-manufactory, 
I 've merely to hint, as a secret auricular, 
One grand rule of enterprise, — don't be particular. 
A man who once takes such a jump at nobility 
Must not mince the matter, like folks of niliility, (>) 
But clear thick and thin with true lordly agility. 

'T is true, to a would-be descendant from Kings, 
Parish-registers sometimes are troublesome things; 
As oft, when the vision is near brought about. 
Some goblin, in shape of a grocer, grins out; 
Or some barber, perhaps, with my Lord mingles bloods. 
And one's patent of peerage is left in the suds. 

(') "This we call pure nihility, or mere nothing." — fVatts's Logic. 



«^|0 TRIFLES, REPRINTED. 

Hut there are ways— when folks are resolved to be lords— 

Of expiirging ev'n troublesome parish records. 

What think ye of scissors? depend on 't no heir 

Of a Shamdos should go unsupplied with a pair, 

As, whate'er else the learn'd in such lore may invent, 

Your scissors does wonders in proving descent. 

Yes, poets may sing of those terrible shears 

With which Atropos snips off both bumpkins and peers. 

But they 're nought to that weapon which shines in the hands 

Of some would-be-Patrician, when proudly he stands 

O' er the careless churchwarden's baptismal array, 

And sweeps at each cut generations away. — 

By some babe of old times is his peerage resisted? 

One snip, — and the urchin hath never existed ! 

Does some marriage, in days near the Flood, interfere 

With his one sublime object of being a Peer? 

Quick, the shears at once nullify bridegroom and bride, — 

No such people have ever lived, married, or died ! 

Such the newest receipt for those high-minded elves, 
Who 've a fancy for making great lords of themselves. 
Follow this, young aspirer, who pant'st for a peerage. 
Take S— m for thy model and B— z for thy steerage, 
Do all and much worse than old Nicholas Flam does, 
And— H'/io knows but you '11 be Lord Baron of Shamdos? 



THE END. 



This book is DUE on ihe last 
date stamped below. 







iniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
AA 000 381 221 i 



I 



PLEA?1 DO NOT REMOVE 
THIS BOOK CARD :2 






^ 




%0JI]VDJO^ 
University Research Library 




0"^ 






\ 






vi 




Vi 




