HE  GATES  OF 

DOOM 


BY  RAFAEL 
SABATINI 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2010 


http://www.archive.org/details/gatesofdoomOOsaba 


THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 


THE 

GATES  OF  DOOM 


BY 

RAFAEL  SABATINI 

AUTHOR  OF 

THE  SEA  HAWK, 

SAINT  MARTIN'S  SUMMER, 

THE  STROLLING  SAINT,  ETC 


GROSSET   &    DUNLAP 

PUBLISHERS  NEW    YORK 


Printed  in  the   United  States  of  America 


NOTE 

THE  present  book  is  one  of  a  group  of  novels 
which  I  regard  as  the  sins  of  my  literary  nonage, 
and  which  I  have  desired  as  ardently  and  vainly  to 
bury  in  oblivion  as  in  age  we  desire  to  see  forgotten 
the  errors  of  our  youth. 

But  a  thing  once  uttered  is  irrevocable,  and  so 
these  books  will  persist  in  spite  of  any  efforts  of  mine 
to  revoke  them.  To  battle  against  the  inevitable  is 
vainly  to  dissipate  energies  which  might  more  pro- 
fitably be  addressed  to  other  tasks. 

If,  however,  I  cannot  restrain  the  circulation  of 
these  novels,  at  least  I  may  be  permitted  to  offer  an 
explanation  of  how  they  come  to  be  placed  before  my 
American  readers,  in  the  hope,  by  this  explanation, 
to  find  mercy  in  their  eyes  if  they  feel  themselves  de- 
frauded upon  discovering  how  far  this  work  is  below 
the  standard  which  Scaramouche  and  its  successors 
may  have  led  them  to  expect. 

The  kindly  reception  given  in  the  United  States  to 
Scaramouche  and  Captain  Blood  was  such  as  to  justify 
my  American  publishers  in  the  assumption  that  a 
welcome  would  be  assured  for  other,  earlier  books  of 
mine,  which  either  had  never  been  published  in 
America,  or  else,  if  published,  had  been  overlooked. 
We  took  counsel  together,  and  began  by  reissuing 
what  I  considered  the  best  of  my  pre-Scaramouche 
work:  The  Sea-Hawk^  The  Snare  >  The  Banner  of  the 
Bull^  and  The  Historical  Nights'  Entertainment.  Be- 
yond the  addition  of  two  historical  essays,  The  Life  of 
Cesare  Borgia  and  Torquemada  and  the  Spanish  In- 


vi  NOTE 

quisition^  it  was  not  my  intention  that  these  reissues 
should  include  any  further  titles.  In  my  anxiety  to 
retain  the  esteem  of  the  good  American  friends  I  had 
won,  it  was  natural  that  I  should  wish  to  offer  them 
only  of  my  best. 

But  the  demand  for  those  books,  when  they  ap- 
peared, so  far  exceeded  all  expectations  that  I  al- 
lowed myself  to  be  persuaded  to  make  a  further  selec- 
tion for  reissue  from  my  still  earlier  publications.  It 
was  a  fairly  extensive  selection,  comprising  as  it  did 
practically  everything  else  that  I  had  written  with 
the  exception  of  the  group  which  is  the  subject  of  the 
present  note.  I  intended  quite  positively  that  it 
should  be  final,  and  that  no  further  past  titles  of  mine 
should  be  added  to  my  list  of  American  publications. 

If  reasons  other  than  those  supplied  by  my  literary 
conscience  were  necessary  to  strengthen  this  decision, 
they  were  forthcoming  from  certain  quarters  of  the 
American  Press,  in  which  it  was  assumed,  a  little  too 
carelessly,  that  these  reissues  were  new  books  from 
my  pen.  My  supposed  prolificacy  became,  here  and 
there,  a  matter  for  jeers,  which  would  have  been  de- 
served enough  if  based  upon  fact  instead  of  being  ad- 
dressed to  an  author  whose  rate  of  output  has  hardly 
ever  exceeded  two  books  in  three  years. 

That,  however,  is  mentioned  in  passing. 

By  the  decision  stated  I  should  have  been  glad  to 
abide.  But  circumstances  have  defeated  me.  It  was 
impossible  for  me  to  prevent  certain  of  the  English 
editions  of  these  books  from  reaching  the  United 
States.  Their  existence  being  thus  advertised,  my 
American  publishers  found  themselves  in  receipt  of 
inquiries  for  these  novels,  and  they  invited  me  to  in- 
struct them  how  they  should  deal  with  the  matter. 


NOTE  vii 

It  was  mutually  determined  that  they  should  import 
of  each  of  these  titles  a  limited  number  of  sheets 
from  my  English  publishers,  solely  for  the  purpose  of 
satisfying  such  orders  as  might  be  thrust  upon  them. 
This,  however,  far  from  solving  the  difficulty,  as  I 
had  hoped,  merely  had  the  effect  of  increasing  it.  To 
my  infinite  dismay,  the  issue  of  those  copies  served 
to  spread  the  demand,  and  since  it  has  become  ap- 
parent that,  unless  I  sanction  their  publication  in  the 
ordinary  way,  the  American  orders  for  these  volumes 
will  be  supplied  direct  from  England,  I  have  no  choice 
but  to  retreat  from  the  position  which  I  had  taken  up. 

I  have  described  these  books  as  amongst  the  most 
flagrant  sins  of  my  literary  nonage.  They  are  the 
work  of  youth,  and  each  bears  upon  its  face  the  faults 
that  are  perhaps  to  be  expected  of  early  work:  im- 
maturity of  craftsmanship;  immaturity  of  historical 
scholarship;  and  lack  of  restraint  both  in  conception 
and  execution.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that 
they  may  contain  some  of  the  virtues  inherent  in  all 
young  things,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  we  commonly 
condone  the  shortcomings  that  usually  accompany 
them. 

These  virtues,  if  discoverable  at  all,  will  be  found 
in  the  stories  themselves,  and  not  in  their  treatment. 
The  historical  part  of  the  work  is  in  all  these  novels 
extremely  superficial.  At  the  time  of  writing  them,  I 
had  yet  to  make  the  discovery  that,  to  produce  an 
historical  romance  of  any  value,  it  is  necessary  first  to 
engage  in  researches  so  exhaustive  as  to  qualify  one  to 
write  a  history  of  the  epoch  in  which  the  romance  is 
set. 

Rafael  Sabatini 
London,  25th  July,  1925 


PREFACE 

REALISING  that  the  incidents  dealt  with  in 
Chapters  XIV  and  XVI  may  appear  to  tran- 
scend those  bounds  of  reasonable  possibility  to  which 
fiction  should  be  confined,  the  author  considers  it 
necessary  to  say  that  these  incidents  are  not  merely 
founded  upon  fact,  but  follow  fact  extremely  closely. 
For  parallel  happenings  the  doubting  reader  is 
referred  to  The  Flying  Post,  December  n/13,  1707, 
which  contains  an  account  of  the  strange  case  of  John 
Smith,  and  to  Plot's  Natural  History  of  Oxfordshire 
(pages  197  and  199),  where  accounts  will  be  found 
of  two  cases  still  more  remarkable. 

R.  S. 


CONTENTS 


I. 

The  Players 

3 

II. 

The  Game 

16 

III. 

Mr.  Second  Secretary 

26 

IV. 

Fate's  Agents 

41 

V. 

The  Warning 

61 

VI. 

The  Enchanted  Garden 

79 

VII. 

Evelyn's  Conscience 

94 

VIII. 

At  The  World's  End 

103 

IX. 

The  Alibi 

124 

X. 

Two  Letters 

136 

XI. 

Pauncefort's  Move 

149 

XII. 

Nature  Triumphant 

158 

XIII. 

In  the  Rose-Garden 

171 

XIV. 

The  Road  to  Tyburn 

185 

XV. 

Execution 

201 

XVI. 

Resurrection 

214 

XVII. 

Pauncefort  the  Sower 

227 

XVIII. 

In  Check 

243 

XIX. 

The  Captain  goes  into  Action 

257 

xii  CONTENTS 

XX.  Mr.  Templeton  in  Retirement  269 

XXI.  Lord  Carteret  Understands  280 

XXII.  Israel  Suarez  296 

XXIII.  The  Last  Throw  308 


THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 


THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 


CHAPTER  I 
THE  PLAYERS 

THE  room  —  somewhat  disordered  now}  at  the 
end  of  that  long  night's  play  —  was  spacious, 
lofty,  and  handsomely  equipped.  On  a  boldly  carved, 
walnut  side-table  of  Dutch  origin  there  was  a  dis- 
array of  glasses,  bottles,  plates,  and  broken  meats. 
From  a  mahogany  wine-cooler  beneath  this  table's 
arched  legs  sprouted  the  corkless  necks  of  a  half-score 
empty  bottles.  About  the  card-table  in  the  room's 
middle  stood  irregularly  some  eight  or  ten  chairs, 
lately  occupied  by  the  now  departed  players.  One 
overturned  chair  lay  neglected  where  it  had  fallen. 
Cards  were  still  strewn  upon  the  table's  cover  of  green 
baize  and  some  few  lay  scattered  on  the  scarlet 
Turkey  rug  that  covered  a  square  of  the  blocked  and 
polished  floor. 

Overhead  in  the  heavy  chandelier  of  ormolu  and 
crystal  the  candles  were  guttering,  caught  by  the 
draught  from  one  of  the  long  French  windows  which 
his  lordship  had  just  opened.  In  the  gap  he  stood, 
gazing  out  into  the  chill  grey  dawn  and  the  wraiths  of 
mist  that  hung  above  the  park. 

By  the  carved  overmantel,  his  shoulders  to  the 
shelf  and  the  ormolu  timepiece,  which  marked  now 
the   hour   of  three,  stood   Lord   Pauncefort's   only 


4  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

lingering  and  most  important  guest.  He  was  a  man 
of  rather  more  than  middle  height,  slender  as  a  rapier 
is  slender,  of  a  steely,  supple  strength.  He  was  simply 
yet  very  elegantly  dressed  in  black,  relieved  only  by 
the  silver  embroidery  on  his  stockings,  the  paste 
buckles  that  flashed  from  his  lacquered,  red-heeled 
shoes,  and  the  lace  at  his  throat,  among  which  a  great 
sapphire  glowed  with  sombre  fire.  Enough  remained, 
however,  in  his  erect  carriage,  his  Steinkirk,  the 
clubbing  of  his  hair  and  the  bronze  of  his  face  to 
advertise  the  soldier. 

His  keen  blue  eyes  were  upon  the  figure  of  his  host, 
and  in  them  was  reflected  the  faint  smile  that 
softened  the  somewhat  hard  lines  of  his  mouth.  Yet 
the  smile  was  scornful  —  of  his  host  and  of  the  night 
that  was  sped;  scornful  and  something  sad. 

Was  it,  he  mused,  upon  such  as  these  that  his  king 
and  master  relied  in  his  dire  need?  Was  it  to  gain 
such  support  as  my  Lord  Pauncefort  and  his  precious 
friends  could  offer  to  that  desperate  cause  that  he, 
himself,  had  ventured  once  more  into  England  where 
a  thousand  guineas  was  being  offered  for  his  head? 

The  play,  he  reflected  contemptuously,  they  had 
urged  as  a  wise  measure  of  precaution:  let  them  do 
their  plotting  about  a  faro-table,  had  been  their  plea; 
thus  should  they  pass  for  a  parcel  of  idle  gamesters, 
and  none  could  dream  that  the  game  was  a  pretence, 
a  mere  mask  upon  their  real  business.  Thus  had  they 
deluded  themselves,  but  not  him.  He  had  seen,  and 
soon,  that  the  plotting  was  the  pretence,  the  play  the 
business.  And  what  play!  A  gamester  all  his  life,  a 
man  who  had  beggared  himself  a  score  of  times  in 
twenty  different  lands,  never  had  he  known  such 
stakes  as  those  which  had  been  laid  that  night,  never 


THE  PLAYERS  5 

had  he  seen  such  sums  change  hands  across  the  green 
baize  of  a  card-table. 

He  checked  the  contemptuous  current  of  his 
thoughts  to  reflect  that  he  himself  had  plunged  as 
headlong  as  the  most  reckless  of  them  into  the  game 
that  was  afoot.  Had  he  not  won  a  fortune  'twixt  the 
commencement  and  the  abandoning  of  that  mon- 
strous play?  His  winnings  amounted  to  something 
over  ten  thousand  guineas,  and  at  no  one  time  in  his 
vagrant,  adventurous  life  had  he  been  master  of  half 
that  sum.  Yet  it  did  not  follow  that  he  was  quite  as 
they.  If  he  had  risked  that  night  certain  moneys  that 
he  scarce  dared  call  his  own,  so  did  he  hesitate  to  call 
his  own  the  vast  sum  which  he  had  won. 

Ten  thousand  guineas !  Ten  times  the  value  set  by 
the  Government  upon  his  own  poor  head,  he  reflected 
whimsically. 

And  then  Lord  Pauncefort  turned  from  the  window 
and  the  sight  of  his  lordship's  livid,  distorted  counte- 
nance drove  all  other  considerations  from  his  guest's 
mind,  brought  a  sudden  cry  of  concern  from  his  lips. 

'My  lord,  you  are  ill!' 

His  lordship  made  a  gesture  of  denial.  'It — it  is 
not  that,'  he  said,  and  his  voice  was  husky  with 
emotion. 

He  was  a  man  of  some  thirty  years  of  age,  of  a 
swarthy  male  beauty  that  was  almost  arresting.  His 
large  eyes  were  dark  and  liquid,  his  mouth  delicately 
limned,  his  nose  intrepidly  arched,  with  fine  sensitive 
nostrils.  But  the  brow  was  alarmingly  shallow  and 
there  was  a  cleft  in  the  square  —  the  too  square  — 
chin.  He  stood  now,  dabbing  his  moist  brow  with  a 
flimsy  kerchief  that  was  not  whiter  than  the  hand 
that  held  it. 


6  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Captain  Gaynor,'  he  explained  abruptly,  almost 
fiercely.  SI  am  a  broken  man.  t  have  ruined  myself 
this  night.' 

There  was  scarce  one  of  the  departed  guests, 
Captain  Gaynor  bethought  him,  who  had  not  left 
that  house  a  winner,  ai  d  in  all  his  lordship's  losses 
must  amount  to  almost  twice  the  sum  of  the  Captain's 
winnings. 

None  the  less,  his  lordship's  outcry  jarred  upon 
the  Captain's  nice  sensibilities.  Such  an  admission 
made  to  one  who  was  a  heavy  winner  —  and  that  one 
none  so  intimately  admitted  to  his  lordship's  private 
confidences,  when  all  was  said  —  seemed  to  Captain 
Gaynor  an  outrage  on  decorum.  He  held  that  the 
man  who  cannot  lose  with  calm  and  grace,  no  matter 
what  the  game  or  what  the  stakes  —  even  though  it 
should  be  life  itself —  has  not  the  right  to  enter  into 
play.  And  this  was  no  abstract  creed.  It  was  the 
one  by  which  the  Captain  lived. 

The  sight  of  the  stricken  man  before  him  moved 
him  to  no  pity.  Rather  it  inspired  in  him  a  contempt 
that  amounted  almost  to  physical  ill-being,  to  disgust. 
His  immediate  impulse  was  to  take  his  leave.  If, 
indeed,  he  had  lingered  at  all  after  the  departure  of 
his  fellow  guests,  it  had  been  in  the  hope  that  my 
Lord  Pauncefort  might  yet  have  something  for  his 
private  ear  concerning  the  real  business  that  had 
brought  him  to  England  and  to  that  house.  And 
perceiving  now  how  idle  had  been  this  hope,  observ- 
ing his  host's  suddenly  altered  condition.  Captain 
Gaynor's  inclination  was  to  depart. 

But  he  reflected  that  to  depart  abruptly  after  that 
confession  might  be  to  offend.  On  his  own  account 
this  would  have  troubled  the  Captain  not  at  all.   But 


THE  PLAYERS  7 

for  the  Cause's  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  service 
it  might  be  Pauncefort's  to  render  to  that  Cause,  he 
did  not  wish  to  give  offence  to  his  host  if  it  might  be 
avoided.  He  was  in  a  quandary,  and  vexed  thereby; 
for  quandaries  were  not  usual  in  the  life  of  this  man 
who  lived  by  swift  decisions  and  swift  action. 

He  shifted  uneasily  where  he  stood,  and  his  face 
assumed  a  mask  of  polite  concern.  His  lordship  had 
sunk  into  the  nearest  chair,  like  a  man  wearied  to 
exhaustion.  There  was  a  wildness  in  his  eyes,  and  he 
continued  nervously  to  dab  his  brow  —  that  brow 
whose  shallowness  belied  the  general  nobility  of  his 
countenance. 

'You  think,  maybe,  that  I  exaggerate,'  he  resumed 
presently.  'But  I  tell  you,  sir,  that  I  have  played  the 
knave  this  night.  I  have  lost  four  thousand  guineas 
to  Martindale,  another  two  to  Bagshot,  and  I  have 
lost  my  honour  too,  for  I  have  forfeited  all  chance  of 
ever  being  able  to  pay  those  losses.' 

The  concern  in  the  Captain's  face  appeared  to 
deepen. 

'They  are  your  friends,'  he  said  slowly.  'Surely 
they  will  be  glad  to  wait  upon  your  convenience.' 
In  his  own  breast-pocket  rested  his  lordship's  draft 
upon  his  bankers  for  the  eight  thousand  and  odd 
guineas  he  had  lost  to  the  Captain. 

'My  convenience?'  cried  Pauncefort,  and  his  white 
face  writhed  in  a  spasm  of  mocking  laughter.  '  I  tell 
you,  man,  that  in  all  the  world  I  cannot  claim  ten 
guineas  for  my  own.  You  are  a  gamester,  Captain 
Gaynor?'  he  ended  between  question  and  assertion. 

'So  rumour  says  of  me  —  I  confess  with  justice,' 
the  Captain  admitted,  and  the  faintest  of  ironic 
smiles  quivered  on  his  firm  lips.    'I  am  engaged  at 


8  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

present  in  a  game  wherein  I  have  staked  my  head. 
Has  your  lordship  ever  played  as  deep  as  that?' 

'Aye,  have  I.  Do  I  not  tell  you,  man,  that  I  have 
staked  my  honour;  and  honour,  surely,  is  more  than 
life.' 

'So  I  have  heard  say,  answered  Captain  Gaynor, 
like  a  sceptic. 

He  had  little  comfort  for  his  host,  little  encourage- 
ment for  the  confidences  that  Pauncefort  insisted 
upon  thrusting  on  him.  Indeed,  it  was  his  deliberate 
aim  to  stifle  them.  He  desired  them  not.  Although 
his  acquaintance  with  Lord  Pauncefort  was  con- 
siderable, it  was  not  an  acquaintance  that  had  ever 
ripened,  or  promised  to  ripen,  into  friendship.  The 
link  that  bound  them  was  their  common  devotion  to 
the  Stuart  Cause,  whose  agent  Captain  Gaynor  was. 
Beyond  that  they  had  no  common  interest,  although, 
when  all  is  said,  that  might  be  accounted  interest 
enough  to  bind  two  men  at  such  a  time. 

But,  despite  the  Captain's  chill  aloofness,  his  lord- 
ship was  not  to  be  repressed.  In  the  nature  of  this 
man  of  so  strong  and  noble-seeming  a  countenance 
there  was  a  strain  of  weakness  almost  feminine.  He 
was  of  those  who  must  for  ever  be  proclaiming  griefs 
and  grievances,  finding  it  impossible  to  bear  in  silence 
and  in  dignity  the  burden  of  their  woes.  He  was  of 
those  who  in  their  trouble  must  for  ever  be  confiding 
in  the  hope  of  lessening  their  oppression.  Moreover 
he  had  at  present  another  motive  for  his  confidence: 
a  faint  hope  that  it  might  bear  him  fruit,  as  you  shall 
see. 

'Listen,'  he  said,  and  upon  the  heels  of  that 
exhortation  swiftly  poured  out  the  tale  of  his  con- 
dition. 'I  was  broke  six  months  ago,  when  the  South- 


THE  PLAYERS  9 

Sea  Bubble  was  pricked.  I  gambled  heavily  in  the 
stock  and,  like  many  another,  woke  one  morning  to 
find  that  a  fortune  had  melted  in  my  hands.  This 
rascally  Whig  Government — '  He  was  beginning 
upon  a  side-issue,  when  he  broke  off  abruptly  to  re- 
turn to  his  main  theme.  'To  buy  that  stock  I  raised 
heavy  mortgages.  I  raised  still  more  to  clear  myself 
after  that  cataclysm,  and  I  mortgaged  what  was  left 
to  recoup  my  losses.  Instead —  But  there!  To-night 
I  played  for  my  immediate  needs.  I  played  to  twice 
the  extent  of  the  losses  I  could  meet,  and  in  that  I 
played  the  knave.  But  my  need  was  very  urgent, 
Captain.  Now  —  it  is  over.'  He  dabbed  his  brow 
again.  His  voice  grew  calmer  with  the  dead  calm  of 
despair.  'If  I  have  the  courage  to  be  alive  by  noon  to- 
morrow, the  spunging-house  awaits  me.'  He  shivered 
in  his  splendid  garments,  and  the  jewelled  buttons  of 
his  salmon-coloured  waistcoat  twinkled  roguishly  as 
if  conscious  of  the  irony  of  their  presence  in  the  ap- 
parel of  a  pauper. 

Captain  Gaynor  stood  considering  a  moment,  the 
expression  —  the  mask  —  of  studied  concern  upon 
his  face,  increasing  contempt  and  disgust  in  his  heart. 

Was  it  upon  such  men  as  this  that  his  master 
counted?  And  he  recalled  the  eulogistic  words  in 
which  his  prince  had  spoken  of  this  adherent. 

'Pauncefort  is  powerful  and  loyal,'  he  had  said. 
'He  is  ours  body  and  soul  and  to  the  last  penny  of 
his  fortunes.' 

That  was  the  dream  of  that  august  man  of  dreams. 
Here,  confronting  Captain  Gaynor,  was  the  reality  — 
a  broken  gamester  who  whimpered  over  his  losses. 

'Surely,  surely,'  said  the  soldier  slowly,  'there  is 
one  thing  you  have  forgot.' 


io  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Pauncefort  looked  up  quickly,  his  black  brows 
contracting.  'If  it  be  aught  I  can  raise  money  upon, 
in  God's  name  tell  it  me  quickly,'  said  he,  with  a  wry 
smile. 

'I  think  it  is,'  replied  the  Captain.  'You  have 
forgot  Miss  Hollinstone.' 

The  contraction  of  his  lordship's  brows  grew 
heavier  still,  and  the  fine  countenance  assumed  a 
something  of  haughtiness  and  of  challenge.  Unde- 
terred Captain  Gaynor  proceeded  to  make  plain  his 
meaning. 

'Your  betrothal  to  Damaris  Hollinstone  is  known 
to  all  the  world,  just  as  it  is  also  known  that  she  is 
the  wealthiest  heiress  in  England,  mistress  of  a 
fortune  that  is  colossal.  Surely,  sir,  with  such  a 
prospect  before  you,  your  creditors — ' 

He  was  interrupted  by  a  sharp  laugh. 

'You  have  had  no  dealings,  sir,  with  the  tribe  of 
Judah.  That  is  plain,'  said  his  lordship  bitterly. 
'Oh,  be  very  sure  that  I  have  attempted  it  —  to 
be  met  with  veiled  derision  and  open  insolence.  You 
do  not  know  the  Jew.  You  do  not  know  the  hatred 
of  the  Christian  that  underlies  his  dealings,  the 
vampire  spirit  that  actuates  him.  Shakespeare,  sir, 
knew  his  nature  when  he  limned  his  Shylock.' 

'Perhaps,'  suggested  Captain  Gaynor,  'the  Chris- 
tian has  deserved  no  better  at  his  hands.' 

It  was  a  point  of  view  so  revolutionary,  so  sub- 
versive of  all  the  notions  upon  which  Lord  Paunce- 
fort had  been  bred,  that  for  a  moment  it  drove  every 
other  consideration  from  his  mind,  leaving  his  face 
blank  with  astonishment.  But  his  own  affairs  swept 
back  upon  him  in  an  instant  to  turn  him  from  any 
disputing  upon  so  wild  a  matter. 


THE  PLAYERS  II 

'You  are  a  gamester,  Captain  Gaynor,  and  all 
gamesters  are  prone  to  come  to  such  a  state  as  mine 
to-night.  Let  me  give  —  it  is  all  that  remains  me  to 
bestow  on  any  one  —  a  piece  of  advice  upon  the 
subtle  art  of  raising  money.  See  to  it  ever  in  such 
affairs  that  betimes  you  raise  at  least  twice  as  much 
as  you  can  ever  repay  out  of  your  own  resources. 
Then  your  creditors,  for  their  own  purses'  sakes,  will 
afford  you  every  opportunity;  they  will  handle  you 
tenderly;  they  will  nurse  you  with  care;  they  will 
watch  over  you  as  never  mother  watched  her  babe  at 
its  first  steps. 

'Had  I  but  had  such  advice  given  me  and  acted 
upon  it,  I  should  not  be  in  such  case  as  this  in  which 
you  find  me.  Money  would  have  flowed  freely  to  my 
hands  upon  the  prospect  of  my  marriage,  because 
upon  the  consummation  of  that  would  have  de- 
pended my  creditors'  reimbursement.  As  it  is,  sir,  I 
have  fallen  into  the  error  of  borrowing  no  more  than 
my  estates  can  bear. 

'The  chief  of  my  creditors  is  a  Spanish  Jew,  one 
Israel  Suarez,  an  evil  rogue  of  fabulous  wealth  and 
destitute  of  mercy;  one  who  seems  to  draw  a  Satanic 
joy  from  the  torturing  and  breaking  of  such  men  as  I. 
I  tell  you,  Captain  Gaynor,  that  I  have  abased  my- 
self to  plead  with  him.  I  have  besought  him  in  terms 
I  cannot  recall  without  shame  that  if  he  will  not 
concede  me  a  loan  upon  my  marriage  prospects,  at 
least  to  postpone  his  demand  for  settlement  of  my 
present  debts  until  my  marriage  shall  have  taken 
place. 

'My  intercessions  have  been  met  with  the  sneers 
and  insolent  jests  of  this  usurious  dog.  He  holds  my 
mortgages  for  everything  that  is  not  in  the  entail. 


12  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

That  almost  covers  my  debt  to  him.  The  balance  he 
will  recover  from  the  interest  on  the  entailed  estates 
what  time  I  am  rotting  in  a  debtors'  gaol.  Frankly 
he  tells  me  this  —  that  since  he  can  retrieve  his  own 
he  will  run  no  risks.  And  so,  to-morrow  — '  He 
spread  his  hands,  shrugged,  and  sank  back  scowling 
again  into  his  chair. 

Captain  Gaynor  understood,  but  he  answered 
nothing.  What  answer  could  he  make?  He  looked 
towards  the  windows,  which  were  glowing  now  like 
moonstones  in  the  increasing  light.  Again  he  thought 
of  going,  and  vaguely  he  wondered  why  Lord  Paunce- 
fort  should  have  chosen  him  for  these  confidences. 
He  conceived  that  it  was  fortuitous  —  the  result  of 
his  having  lingered  after  the  others  had  departed. 
But  in  his  lordship's  next  words  he  had  the  correct 
answer  to  his  unspoken  question. 

'Had  I  refrained  to-night,'  his  lordship  was  saying 
presently  in  a  small,  unsteady  voice,  his  fingers 
plucking  nervously  at  a  card  which  he  had  picked  up 
from  the  floor,  'all  might  yet  have  been  well.  By 
meeting  a  bill  that  is  due  to-morrow  I  might  tempo- 
rarily have  satisfied  the  demands  of  that  foul  vulture, 
Suarez.  I  should  have  gained  time,  and  with  time 
salvation  might  have  come.  I  have  sunk  money  in  a 
trading  venture  which  may  yet  repay  me.  But  for 
this,  time  is  needed;  time  and  —  and  the  money  I 
have  lost  to-night.  I  held  it  in  readiness  for  this,  but 
the  cursed  cards  — ' 

He  broke  off  with  a  bitter  oath.  But  he  had  said 
enough.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  have  asked 
more  plainly  for  the  help  that  it  was  in  Gaynor's 
power  to  render  him. 

The  Captain  understood  at  last  the  reason  of  these 


THE  PLAYERS  13 

confidences.  Understanding  brought  with  it  some 
pity  and  more  contempt.  I  fear  me  his  nature  was  a 
little  hard.   He  spoke  out  plainly,  his  voice  crisp. 

'You  are  inviting  me,  my  lord,  to  return  you  this,' 
he  said,  and  from  his  breast-pocket  he  took  Lord 
Pauncefort's  draft  upon  his  bankers. 

He  was,  as  I  have  said,  a  man  of  swift  decisions, 
and  here  he  had  decided  swiftly,  but  not  at  all  as  his 
host  conceived. 

Pauncefort  threw  back  his  head  under  the  goad  of 
that  voice.  It  seemed  to  him  that  it  conveyed  a 
deadly  insult.  For  all  that  the  matter  was  true 
enough;  the  manner  could  not,  he  thought,  have  been 
more  outrageous. 

'  Sir ! '  said  he,  with  a  very  frosty  dignity,  and  upon  the 
word  he  rose,  frowning  darkly.   'Sir,  you  affront  me.' 

'Forgive  me,'  answered  the  soldier  gently.  'Such 
was  not  my  intent.'  He  replaced  the  draft  in  his 
pocket.  'And  yet,'  he  sighed,  'I  conceived  that  I 
saw  a  way  to  assist  you.' 

The  unexpectedness  of  this  withdrawal  scattered 
his  lordship's  fine  dignity  to  the  murmuring  winds  of 
dawn.  His  jaw  dropped  in  sheer  astonishment;  his 
eyes  stared  foolishly;  the  card  he  had  held  fluttered 
from  his  nerveless  fingers.  He  leaned  against  the 
table,  and  looked  at  his  guest. 

'Perhaps...'  he  said,  faltering  on  the  word, 
'perhaps  my  refusal  was  churlish.' 

'I  understand  it,'  said  Gaynor  quietly.  But  behind 
his  imperturbable  mask  he  was  laughing  at  his  lord- 
ship. 

'When  all  is  said,'  the  other  resumed,  'if  you  could 
—  if  I  might  so  far  trespass  upon  your  patience  and 
you  would  wait  until  a  more  convenient  season  — ' 


i4  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Captain  Gaynor  took  him  up  at  once.  'Wait?'  he 
echoed,  and  he  frowned  thoughtfully.  'Wait?'  He 
laughed,  a  little  laugh  that  was  singularly  pleasant 
despite  the  tinge  of  irony  that  invested  it.  'Ye  have 
indeed  mistook  me,'  he  said. 

'How?'  quoth  his  lordship,  flung  back  once  more 
upon  his  dignity. 

'Faith,'  said  the  Captain,  'you'll  agree,  I  think, 
that  I  am  in  little  case  to  wait.  If  it  please  me  to 
gamble  upon  my  own  life,  it  does  not  please  me  that 
others  should  do  the  same  —  leastways  without  ever 
a  stake  set  against  so  very  valuable  a  property.  You 
forget,  my  lord'  (and  instinctively  he  lowered  his 
voice),  'a  thousand  guineas  is  the  advertised  value  of 
this  head  of  mine.  At  any  moment  that  value  may  be 
claimed.  In  England  here  I  walk  amid  drawn  swords. 
If  I  consented  to  do  your  pleasure  in  this  matter,  at 
any  moment  one  of  these  might  liquidate  the  debt.' 
He  laughed  again.  'It  is  a  game  in  which  the  odds  are 
much  too  heavy  in  your  favour,  and,  moreover,  a 
game  in  which  you  adventure  nothing.' 

'I  —  I  had  not  considered  that,'  his  lordship 
exclaimed  with  earnestness.  '  'Pon  honour,  I  had  not.' 

'I  do  not  do  you  the  injustice  to  suppose  it.  But 
consider  it  now,  I  beg.' 

'I  do.  I  thank  you  for  enlightening  me.'  He  stood 
erect,  his  handsome  face  pale  but  quite  composed. 
'Captain  Gaynor,  there  is  no  more  to  be  said.' 

'Nay,  now,  I  think  there  is,'  returned  the  other, 
smiling  quietly. 

'I  do  not  understand.' 

'Pray  consider  further.  I  am  a  gamester,  as  you 
have  said,  as  every  soldier  of  fortune  is  perforce. 
And  being  poor  in  point  of  worldly  goods,  my  life  is  a 


THE  PLAYERS  15 

stake  for  which  I  am  well  used  to  playing.  Out  of 
consideration  for  your  straits,  I  will  permit  that  you 
too  play,  as  it  were,  upon  it  and  for  this  eight  thous- 
and guineas  that  I  have  won.  But  you  must  set  a 
stake  against  it,  my  lord  —  and  a  heavy  one  to 
balance  all  the  odds  that  are  in  your  favour.' 

He  spoke  quietly,  his  face  so  calm,  his  glance  so 
steady  that  none  might  have  suspected  the  excite- 
ment within.  Lord  Pauncefort  stared  and  stared.  At 
length  — 

'I  have  talked  in  vain,  it  seems,'  said  he.  'Yet  I 
have  told  you  plainly  that  I  cannot  claim  so  much 
as  ten  guineas  for  my  own.  What,  then,  have  I  to 
stake?' 

'Something  that  is  hardly  yours,'  came  the  gentle 
answer,  '  and  something  which,  if  I  win  from  you,  I 
shall  yet  have  to  win  another  way  and  may  altogether 
fail  to  win.'  He  smiled  a  wry  smile,  his  steely  eyes 
upon  the  other's  face.  'You  perceive,  my  lord,  that 
the  odds  are  all  with  you.  It  cannot  be  said  that  I 
lack  generosity  in  the  risks  I  take.' 

'  I  do  not  understand  you,'  said  his  lordship  bluntly. 
'What  stake  have  you  in  mind?' 

There  was  a  perceptible  pause  before  the  soldier 
answered  him.  He  squared  his  shoulders;  his  face 
became  set  and  stern;  his  glance  nickered  a  moment 
to  the  windows  and  the  dawn,  which,  from  the  pallor 
of  the  moonstone,  was  warming  now  to  opalescent 
fires.  Then  his  eyes  returned  to  Lord  Pauncefort's 
impatient  questioning  face. 

'Damaris  Hollinstone,'  he  said  quietly. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  GAME 

LORD  PAUNCEFORT  fell  back  a  pace,  as  if 
j  before  a  blow.  The  reflections  of  a  surge  of 
feelings  from  astonishment  through  contempt  to 
positive  anger  sped  across  his  heavily  featured  face. 
He  leaned  against  the  card-table  and  surveyed  his 
guest  with  eyes  that  from  their  first  gape  of  surprise 
came  to  blaze  with  unmistakable  malevolence. 

Captain  Gaynor,  cool,  erect,  with  something  of 
defiance  in  his  mien,  waited  patiently  until  his  lord- 
ship should  choose  to  break  the  brooding  silence.  At 
length  came  a  little  sneering  laugh  from  the  viscount, 
and  on  its  heels  the  sneering  words: 

'Blister  me!  You  play  strange  games,  Captain 
Gaynor.' 

'It  is  true,'  Gaynor  admitted,  'and,'  he  added, 
stung  a  little,  'with  strange  players  sometimes.  You 
will  admit  at  least  my  generosity  in  the  matter  of  the 
odds  ? ' 

"Fore  gad,  yes!'  the  other  exploded  in  a  storm  of 
contempt.   '  I  am  glad  ye  have  the  grace  to  admit  it.' 

'I  have  never  lacked  for  grace,'  said  the  Captain 
complacently. 

His  lordship  struck  the  table  with  his  clenched 
hand.  '  Let  us  understand  each  other,'  he  demanded 
savagely. 

"Tis  what  I  most  desire.' 

'  In  a  word  then :  What  is  Miss  Hollinstone  to  you  ? ' 

'  In  a  word,  my  lord  —  nothing.' 


THE  GAME  17 

'Nothing?  Nothing?  And  yet  you — ' 

'Spare  me  your  jealousy,  I  pray,'  the  soldier 
interrupted,  and  ran  on  undismayed  by  the  other's 
haughty  frown:  'There  is  no  need  for  it  here.  I  have 
never  so  much  as  set  eyes  upon  Miss  Hollinstone. 
You  see  in  me  no  rival  for  the  lady's  affections.  I 
know  not  whether  she  be  tall  or  short,  fair  or  dark, 
fat  or  lean.  I  know  her  as  the  greatest  heiress  in 
these  islands  —  a  lady  of  surpassing  wealth.  I  know 
her  in  no  other  way  and  in  no  other  way  do  I  desire  to 
know  her.' 

The  contempt,  the  disgust  in  the  nobleman's  face 
was  overwhelming. 

'By  God,  Captain  Gaynor!'  he  cried,  in  a  voice 
thick  with  passion,  'I  have  welcomed  you  to  my 
house.  I  have  sat  at  table  with  you.  I  have  deemed 
you  a  gentleman.' 

'Ah!  And  you  find  me?'  quoth  the  Captain, 
entirely  unruffled,  yet  with  a  challenging  note  in  the 
question. 

But  the  other  answered  him  undeterred.  'I  find 
you  a  —  a  jackal.  You  have  spoken  of  yourself  as  an 
adventurer,  a  soldier  of  fortune.  I  did  not  dream 
what  depths  of  degradation  the  term  could  imply. 
You  have  put  an  affront  upon  me  in  making  me  this 
proposal.  'Twas  to  consider  me  your  equal  in  base- 
ness. It  is  an  insult  for  which  you  shall  give  me 
satisfaction.   'Fore  gad,  you  shall!' 

The  soldier  of  fortune  stood  a  little  pale  before  that 
onslaught.  His  lips  were  set,  and  in  his  steely  eyes 
there  was  a  cold  glitter  before  which  men  of  bigger 
heart  than  Pauncefort  had  quailed  in  their  time.  He 
moved  at  length  from  his  position  before  the  empty 
fireplace,  and  sauntered,  a  graceful,  supple  figure,  to 


1 8  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

the  windows.  There  he  stood  a  moment  gazing  out 
upon  the  breaking  day,  what  time  his  host's  eyes 
followed  him,  angry  and  impatient. 

The  Captain  was  revolving  something  in  his  mind, 
debating  something  eminently  distasteful.  It  went 
against  his  wayward,  imperious  nature  to  explain 
himself  to  any  man.  Many  had  misunderstood  his 
motives  aforetime;  and  he  had  left  them  in  a  mis- 
understanding, for  which  they  had  not  infrequently 
paid  dearly.  Yet  here  was  a  man  whom  that  night's 
business  had  taught  him  to  despise,  and  he  found 
himself  urged  to  offer  explanations  of  his  conduct  to 
such  a  man.  It  was  repugnant  to  him;  yet  it  must 
be  done  if  he  were  to  have  his  way  in  this,  if  he  were 
to  carry  through  this  thing  upon  which,  with  his 
characteristic  swiftness,  he  had  determined. 

He  turned  at  last,  and  with  his  back  to  the  window 
he  faced  his  host. 

1  If  I  apprehend  you  aright,  my  lord,'  said  he  —  and 
the  calm  and  dignity  of  his  voice  and  mien,  the 
force  of  his  singularly  compelling  personality,  im- 
pressed the  other  into  lending  him  an  ear  notwith- 
standing the  disgust  and  impatience  that  possessed 
him  —  'if  I  apprehend  you  aright,  it  is  not  with  my 
proposal  so  much  as  with  my  motives  that  you 
quarrel.  If  I  had  been  able  to  say  to  you,  "I  love 
Miss  Hollinstone,"  you  would  have  viewed  my 
proposal  differently?' 

His  lordship  flung  out  an  arm  in  anger.  'Perhaps,' 
he  rasped.   'What  matter?' 

'Oh!  A  deal,'  replied  the  other.  'Had  I  been  able 
to  say  that,  then,  indeed,  would  my  proposal  have 
been  base  and  ignoble;  then,  indeed,  would  you  have 
been  right  to  deem  yourself  affronted  and  to  demand 


THE  GAME  19 

of  me  satisfaction.  You  are  surprised  at  my  point  of 
view,  my  lord?  I  do  not  think  we  are  like  to  see  eye 
to  eye  in  many  things;  but  I  would  you  could  see 
eye  to  eye  with  me  in  this,  that  you  could  understand 
—  as  you  are  very  far  from  doing  —  the  true  motives 
out  of  which  I  am  acting.' 

Lord  Pauncefort  bowed,  not  without  irony. 
'Proceed,  sir,'  he  invited  his  guest.  'If  anything  you 
can  say  will  mitigate  the  judgment  I  have  formed  — ' 

'I  care  nothing  for  your  judgments,  my  lord,'  came 
the  sharp,  almost  passionate  interruption.  'When 
men  have  lived  such  lives  as  mine,  believe  me,  they 
are  very  far  from  being  touched  by  the  judgments  of 
those  whose  lives  have  been  smooth  and  sheltered. 
In  all  this  world  there  is  but  one  thing  I  care  for,  one 
Cause  in  which,  were  I  not  prepared  to  lay  down  my 
life  to-morrow,  I  should  not  be  to-night  in  England. 
None  knows  that  better  than  your  lordship.  If  I 
have  a  hope  of  personal  fortune,  it  is  a  remote  and 
distant  hope,  to  follow  upon,  as  it  is  bound  up  with, 
the  fortune  of  another.  For  ten  years  have  I  waited, 
acquiring  knowledge  in  foreign  service,  steeling  and 
tempering  myself  for  the  great  service  that  is  to  come. 
I  am  in  the  twenty-ninth  year  of  my  age;  the  first 
flush  of  my  youth  is  over,  spent  without  regrets, 
consecrated  like  a  novitiate  to  fit  me  for  my  task. 
The  cup  of  youth's  pleasures  is  one  that  my  lips  have 
never  touched.  The  love  of  woman  has  passed  me  by. 
The  money  that  has  come  to  me  in  the  course  of 
services  that  I  have  hired  to  others  has  gone,  most  of 
it,  to  the  Cause  on  which  my  heart  is  set.  If  it  please 
Almighty  God  that  my  hopes  bear  fruit,  that  my 
labours  yield  return,  I  shall  have  my  reward  and  I 
shall  rest  me  at  last.  If  not'  —  and  a  shadow  crossed 


20  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

the  face  and  dimmed  the  almost  fanatical  glow  of  the 
blue  eyes  —  '  I  shall  still  have  my  reward  within 
myself  —  in  the  glory  of  the  memory  of  the  service 
rendered  to  that  exiled  one  in  Rome. 

'You  know  of  whom  I  speak,  my  lord,  to  what 
service  I  refer.  To-night  I  sat  down  to  play  here  with 
money  that  I  scarce  dared  call  my  own.  Had  I  lost,  it 
would  have  been  so  much  lost  to  the  Cause;  as  I  have 
won,  it  is  but  just  that  I  count  it  still  money  to  be 
devoted  to  this  sacred  enterprise;  and  under  no 
circumstances,  sir,  would  my  honour  have  permitted 
me,  as  for  a  moment  you  supposed,  to  return  you  the 
draft  and  await  a  convenience  that  may  never  come. 

'My  lord,  you  know  full  well  that  our  Cause  is 
most  desperately  in  need  of  funds.  His  Majesty 
lives  almost  upon  charity.'  There  was  something 
akin  to  a  sob  in  his  voice.  'Think  of  it,  my  lord!  You 
count  yourself  one  of  his  servants,  one  of  his  loyal 
adherents.  You  plot  and  scheme  and  pray  for  his 
return  because  you  believe  and  are  loyal  to  the  right- 
ful king.  Can  you,  then,  contemplate  his  straitened 
circumstances  without  feeling  yourself  humbled  and 
ashamed?  Consider  how  the  money  you  have 
dissipated  here — ' 

He  broke  off  suddenly.  'But  let  that  be!  I  am 
speaking  of  myself,  I  think.  I  have  said  that  this 
money  I  have  won  from  you  I  scarce  consider  mine. 
Yet  will  I  adventure  it  again  as  I  adventured  that 
other.  I  will  adventure  it  to  win  more  —  to  win  the 
fortune  of  Miss  Hollinstone,  that  I  may  turn  it  to  a 
like  sacred  purpose. 

'Now  sir,'  he  ended  abruptly,  'you  are  informed 
of  the  precise  height  and  depth  of  my  baseness;  you 
have  the  precise  measure  of  the  insult  I  have  offered 


THE  GAME  21 

you.*  And  he  turned  again  to  the  window  swiftly, 
that  the  other  should  not  see  the  scalding  tears  that 
welled  to  his  eyes,  man  of  iron  though  he  was. 

My  lord  sank  to  a  chair  and  took  his  head  in  his 
hands,  beaten  down  by  the  storm  of  that  man's 
fervour  —  that  man  whom  he  had  dubbed  in  scorn 
and  disgust  a  self-seeking  fortune  hunter. 

Something  of  the  soldier's  enthusiasm  had  stirred 
him,  and  in  its  wake  had  come  a  burning,  searing 
shame  at  the  reflection  of  what  were  Gaynor's 
motives,  what  his  own.  The  small  voice  of  his  con- 
science whispered  mockingly  that  it  was  he  was  the 
fortune  hunter,  he  that  was  vile  and  base,  he  that, 
without  faith  or  loyalty,  had  lent  himself  to  a  cause 
whose  prevailing  was  his  forlorn  hope,  the  last 
perceptible  means  by  which  to  mend  his  shattered 
fortunes. 

'Captain  Gaynor,'  he  said  at  last,  in  a  hushed 
voice,  '  I  ask  your  pardon  for  my  misapprehension  of 
you.' 

The  Captain  swung  round  and  faced  him  again  — 
master  of  himself  once  more,  calm  and  self-contained. 

'Is  it  your  pleasure,  then,  that  we  play?'  he  asked. 

But  here  his  lordship's  face  again  grew  dark,  re- 
flecting thoughts  of  which  the  soldier  could  have  no 
knowledge,  else  he  would  not  have  insisted  as  he  did. 

'Consider,  my  lord,'  he  cried,  'that  all  the  odds 
are  on  your  side.  On  the  one  hand  you  stand  to  win; 
on  the  other,  to  lose  nothing  that  is  not  lost  already.' 

My  lord  threw  up  his  head,  something  between 
amazement  and  anger  in  his  eyes.  '  How  ? '  he  cried  with 
extraordinary  vehemence.  '  What  is't  you  mean  ? ' 

To  himself  Captain  Gaynor  cursed  the  fellow's 
dullness.  He  proceeded  to  explain. 


ii  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'You  have  said  that,  unless  you  have  this  money 
to-morrow,  a  debtors'  gaol  awaits  you.  In  such  a  case 
will  not  Miss  Hollinstone  be  lost  to  you?  Do  you 
dream  that  her  uncle  and  guardian,  Sir  John  Kynas- 
ton,  will  permit  this  betrothal  to  continue?  It  is  your 
only  chance  that  I  am  offering  you,  my  lord.  For 
your  own  sake,  no  less  than  for  mine,  you  should 
consent.* 

It  was  so  clear  and  plain  that  Pauncefort  for  a 
moment  turned  the  notion  over  in  his  mind,  and 
something  else  —  a  further  unsuspected  advantage 
that  must  lie  with  him  in  such  a  game,  an  advantage, 
indeed,  which  made  a  mock  of  it  and  himself  no  better 
than  a  cheat  did  he  consent.  He  frowned  in  doubt 
and  perplexity.  The  perplexity  he  voiced  at  last. 

'How  do  you  look  to  profit  by  my  loss?'  he  asked. 

Captain  Gaynor  considered  a  moment.  He  came 
forward  and  leaned  upon  the  table  opposite  to  his 
lordship. 

'The  conquest  of  a  woman  so  wounded  in  her  pride 
and  vanity  should  not  be  an  insuperable  task.  Under 
the  urge  of  pique  she  may  welcome  a  suitor  who 
at  another  time  might  be  disdained.  That  is  my 
opportunity;  none  so  great,  as  you  may  judge;  so 
that  here  again  the  odds  are  all  with  you.  Given  the 
opportunity,  however,  I  am  not  unpersonable;  I  have 
seen  the  world,  and  I  could  no  doubt,  upon  occasion, 
develop  the  antics  which  delight  a  woman.'  He  spoke 
quite  coldly.  'For  the  rest,  not  only  is  her  uncle  on 
our  side,  not  only  does  he  expect  me  at  Priory  Close 
on  Thursday,  but  he  holds  me  in  some  affection;  so 
that  the  way  lies  open  to  me.' 

'You  speak  of  wounds  to  her  pride  and  vanity.' 

'Those   consequent   upon    your   lordship's   with- 


THE  GAME  23 

drawal  of  your  suit,'  said  Captain  Gaynor  crisply,  his 
steely  eyes  full  upon  the  other's. 

But  his  lordship  was  not  dominated  by  the  glance. 
He  smote  the  table  with  his  clenched  hand. 

'No!'  he  roared.   'Sink  me  into  perdition,  no!' 

It  was  a  cry  of  conscience;  the  repudiation  which 
common  honesty  demanded.  But  Captain  Gaynor 
rated  it  at  a  still  higher  value.  Slightly  he  inclined  his 
head.  He  spread  his  hands  a  little.  'Be  it  so,' said  he. 
'We  will  say  no  more.  I  think,  with  your  permission, 
I  will  take  my  leave.  The  sun  is  rising.' 

But  the  alternative  gaped  before  Pauncefort  like  a 
yawning  chasm  upon  whose  brink  he  tottered.  He 
clutched  the  soldier's  sleeve. 

'Stay!'  he  cried.  'When  a  man  has  lost  all  else, 
what  matters  honour?' 

'There  are  some  causes  to  which  one  may  sacrifice 
honour  and  remain  honourable.  You  will  remember 
that  should  I  win,  and  should  all  speed  thereafter  as 
I  desire  it,  you  will  have  done  the  Cause  perhaps  the 
best  service  that  lay  within  your  power.' 

'Should  you  win?'  said  the  other.  His  face  was 
ghastly.  'Ah,  but  should  you  lose — '  He  broke  off 
abruptly.   'How  shall  we  play?' 

'What  would  you  propose? '  quoth  Captain  Gaynor, 
controlling  the  exultation  that  strained  within  him 
like  a  hound  upon  the  leash. 

My  lord  rose,  his  dark  face  was  almost  sinister 
now.  He  passed  a  white,  jewelled  hand  over  his  long, 
cleft  chin. 

'Such  a  game  as  this,'  he  said,  'should  be  played,  I 
think,  with  other  tools  than  dice  or  cards.  Honour  is 
here  involved,  and  with  honour  should  go  life  as  well.' 

'That,'   said  the  Captain  composedly,   'depends 


24  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

upon  the  point  of  view,  and  you  and  I,  my  lord,  again 
do  not  see  eye  to  eye.  I  do  not  count  this  game  dis- 
honouring, else  you  may  be  very  sure  I  should  not 
engage  in  it.' 

'You  do  not  —  true!'  His  lordship  winced  as  he 
realized  the  difference,  dependent  upon  their  re- 
spective motives.   '  But  you  do  not  think  of  me.' 

'If  I  did  not,'  said  Gaynor  sweetly,  'I  should  accept 
the  game  with  the  tools  you  have  in  mind.  But 
those,  my  lord,  are  the  tools  of  my  trade,  and  they 
should  place  the  advantage  too  heavily  with  me.' 

He  uttered  it  as  a  commonplace;  there  was  no 
scintilla  of  boastfulness  in  his  cold  statement  of  an 
irrefragable  fact.  His  lordship  laughed,  short  and 
bitterly. 

'In  that  case,'  said  he,  'we  had  better  use  the  tools 
of  mine.'  And  he  gathered  up  the  cards  that  were 
spread  upon  the  table.  'You  are,  as  you  have  in- 
sisted, the  incarnation  of  generosity,  Captain  Gaynor.' 

*  I  am  glad  that  at  last  you  begin  to  perceive  it,'  said 
the  soldier  amiably.  '  Shall  it  hang  upon  a  single  cut  ? ' 
He  placed  my  lord's  draft  upon  the  table  as  he  spoke. 

His  lordship  glanced  at  it,  and  then  at  the  soldier. 
'Will  you  not  give  your  generosity  a  free  rein?'  said 
he.  'Will  you  not  add  to  that  the  other  two  thousand 
that  you  have  won  from  my  guests  to-night  ? ' 

Gaynor,  masking  his  contempt,  drew  from  his 
pocket  another  note  of  hand  and  a  heavy  purse. 
These,  too,  he  placed  upon  the  table. 

'  Shall  I  throw  in  my  head  as  well  ? '  he  asked.  '  It  is 
valued  at  a  thousand  guineas.' 

Pauncefort  looked  at  him  with  hostile  eyes,  resent- 
ful of  the  sneer  that  underlay  his  words.  '  I  am  con- 
tent,' he  said. 


THE  GAME  25 

Captain  Gaynor  smiled,  took  the  cards  from  his 
lordship,  shuffled  them  with  steady  fingers  and  placed 
the  pack  upon  the  table. 

'A  single  cut,'  he  repeated,  and  by  a  gesture 
invited  his  lordship  to  go  first. 

The  viscount  put  forth  a  shaking  hand,  cut,  and 
displayed  the  four  of  spades.  His  face  turned  ashen. 

'Sink  me!'  he  raged.  'I  was  a  fool  to  have  con- 
sented! God  knows  I  have  had  proof  enough  that  my 
luck  is  dead  to-night.' 

The  Captain  made  him  no  answer,  but  reaching 
for  the  pack  cut  in  his  turn. 

It  was  then  that  he  gave  his  lordship  the  sorely 
needed  lesson  in  the  art  of  graceful  losing.  He  smiled 
and  shook  his  head  in  deprecation  of  his  lordship's 
passion. 

'You  cursed  your  luck  too  soon,  my  lord,'  said  he. 

He  had  cut  the  three  of  diamonds. 

As  he  walked  along  Jermyn  Street,  flooded  now 
with  the  radiance  of  the  new-risen  sun,  he  smiled  pen- 
sively. The  gods  had  given  him  a  wondrous  chance 
and  a  little  fortune  of  ten  thousand  pounds.  He 
pondered  some  of  the  things  that  might  have  been 
accomplished  with  that  sum.  Then  he  dismissed  the 
matter  from  his  mind  without  another  regret. 

He  was  by  temperament,  you  see,  the  perfect 
gamester. 


CHAPTER  III 
MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY 

HOWEVER  undeniable  it  may  be  that  Captain 
Gaynor  was  a  man  enured  to  danger  and  pre- 
pared to  accept  all  risks  that  came  his  way,  yet  it  is  no 
less  undeniable  that  he  never  accepted  a  risk  that  was 
unnecessary.  Daring  he  was,  but  not  reckless.  The 
care  and  precaution  with  which  he  laid  his  plans,  the 
thought  which  he  devoted  to  their  formulation  and 
the  elaborate  pains  he  took  in  their  execution  were  all 
calculated  to  reduce  his  risk  to  the  lowest  fraction. 
He  overlooked  nothing,  neglected  nothing,  and  rarely 
moved  into  a  situation  from  which  he  had  not  pre- 
pared himself  an  avenue  of  retreat  in  the  event  of 
sudden  danger. 

As  a  result  of  all  this,  although  the  Government 
was  aware  of  the  existence  of  a  singularly  daring 
Jacobite  agent,  who  spied  and  plotted,  came  and 
went  between  the  Pretender's  Court  at  Rome  and  his 
adherents  in  England,  and  although  the  country 
was  sown  with  proclamations  offering  a  thousand 
guineas  for  his  apprehension,  the  identity  of  this 
agent  remained  unknown.  No  definite  description 
of  him  existed;  indeed,  the  descriptions  forthcoming 
at  various  times  offered  such  glaring  discrepancies 
one  with  another  that  it  almost  seemed  as  if  his  ex- 
ploits were  not  those  of  an  individual,  but  of  a  group. 

He  was  generally  known  as  'Captain  Jenkyn,' 
though  none  could  say  how  the  sobriquet  had  arisen. 
As  'Captain  Jenkyn'  he  was  referred  to  in  all  reports 


MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  27 

concerning  his  movements  which  the  Government 
spies  were  from  time  to  time  enabled  to  lay  before 
the  Secretary  of  State,  and  '  Captain  Jenkyn '  was  the 
name  in  those  proclamations  which  offered  a  thousand 
guineas  for  his  head. 

But  no  man  who  was  not  of  the  party  —  and  only 
one  or  two  who  were — had  ever  consciously  come 
face  to  face  with  Captain  Jenkyn.  On  the  day  when 
that  should  happen,  on  the  day  when  a  Government 
agent  or  emissary  should  hail  him  to  his  face  by  that 
nom  de  guerre ',  on  that  day,  he  was  resolved,  he  would 
sink  his  own  identity  —  cast  it  from  him  like  a 
garment  that  has  served  its  turn  —  for  the  sake  of 
the  many  whose  connection  with  Captain  Harry 
Gaynor  might  be  traced  and  whose  lives  might  in 
consequence  be  jeopardised.  On  that  day  his  career 
as  an  agent  would  be  at  an  end.  Even  if  with  the 
mask  plucked  from  him  he  should  succeed  in  making 
good  his  escape  from  the  perils  that  would  then 
surround  him,  another  must  thereafter  take  up  his 
work. 

Such  was  his  resolve  against  a  contingency  which 
the  elaborate  quality  of  his  plans  permitted  him  to 
account  remote. 

It  is  in  the  perfection  of  these  plans  that  towards 
noon  of  that  day  whose  dawn  saw  him  departing 
from  Pauncefort  House  we  find  the  Captain  in  one  of 
the  last  places  in  London  where  we  should  look  for 
a  man  engaged  upon  such  a  mission  as  his  own  —  in 
the  ante-room  of  Mr.  Second  Secretary  Templeton's 
residence  in  Old  Palace  Yard. 

Three  months  ago,  in  Rome,  Captain  Gaynor  had 
renewed  an  old  acquaintance  with  one  Sir  Richard 
Tollemache  Templeton,  who  had  served  with  him 


28  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

under  Marlborough  in  the  days  of  the  late  Queen  — 
days  in  which  Harry  Gaynor  had  been  acquiring  the 
rudiments  of  the  art  by  which  he  was  to  live.  Since 
then  Tollemache  Templeton  had  succeeded  to  the 
baronetcy,  left  the  service,  and  was  now  repairing  an 
omission  in  his  education  by  making  the  grand  tour. 

Sir  Richard  was  the  Second  Secretary's  cousin,  and 
Gaynor  had  been  quick  to  seize  upon  that  circum- 
stance, and  upon  their  old  acquaintance,  to  provide 
against  his  forthcoming  mission  into  England.  For 
a  month  he  had  flung  in  his  lot  with  the  lounging  Sir 
Richard.  Together  they  had  roamed  over  Southern 
Italy,  the  Captain  representing  himself  as  a  soldier  of 
fortune  out  of  work  just  then,  to  whom  time  was  of 
no  account  and  upon  whom  the  allurements  of  Sir 
Richard's  company  proved  compelling.  He  had  very 
materially  improved  the  acquaintance  between  them 
during  that  month.  It  had  warmed  and  quickened 
into  a  friendship,  very  genuine  on  Sir  Richard's  part, 
and  only  a  little  less  so  on  the  other's. 

Most  subtly  had  Captain  Gaynor  succeeded  in 
conveying  to  the  baronet  an  entirely  wrong  concep- 
tion of  his  aims.  So  cleverly,  indeed,  had  he  done  his 
work  that  in  the  end  the  suggestion  which  it  was  his 
intention  ultimately  to  make  to  Sir  Richard,  Sir 
Richard  actually  made  to  him. 

They  were  lounging  together  on  the  cliffs  at  Capri 
one  breathless,  languid  morning,  when  the  Captain, 
by  way  of  leading  up  to  what  he  had  in  mind,  fell  to 
bewailing  the  passing  of  the  need  for  the  soldier  of 
fortune  in  Europe.  He  deplored  his  own  enforced 
idleness;  states  were  at  peace;  employment  for  such 
as  himself  was  not  easily  to  be  discovered;  he  had 
come  hopefully  to  Italy,  looking  for  turbulence  in  the 


MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  29 

peninsula  to  afford  him  his  opportunity;  but  his  hopes 
were  proved  vain;  his  purse  was  growing  lighter  and 
no  prospect  showed  upon  the  horizon;  he  spoke 
gloomily  of  returning  to  the  East,  regretted  almost 
having  left  it.  Subtlest  of  all  was  the  last  touch  he 
added,  and  for  the  glaring  untruth  of  it  the  justifica- 
tion he  offered  to  his  conscience  was  the  great  Cause 
he  served,  the.  ultimate  good  to  be  achieved,  if 
necessary,  by  ignoble  means. 

'There  is  the  Pretender,  now,'  he  said  slowly,  'and 
I  have  thought  of  him.  Indeed,  he's  all  there's  left  to 
think  of  here.  But  there  is  little  to  attract  me  in  the 
thought.  I  may  be  a  follower  of  Fortune's  banner,  a 
man  who  makes  of  fighting  as  much  a  trade  as  others 
make  of  tinkering  or  haberdashery,  but,  on  my  soul, 
Dick,  there  are  limits  even  to  that.  The  Pretender  is 
the  enemy  of  England '  (he  prayed  Heaven  to  pardon 
him  that  necessary  blasphemy),  'and  Harry  Gaynor's 
sword  although  for  hire  shall  never  be  hired  to  any 
disloyal  cause.'  He  sighed  and  laughed  his  musical, 
self-mocking  little  laugh.  '  I  dare  swear  you'll  count 
me  foolish,  Dick,  to  strain  at  a  gnat  who  have 
swallowed  camels.' 

But  Sir  Richard's  face  was  very  grave;  approval 
shone  in  his  frank  eyes. 

'On  my  soul  I  do  not,  Harry,'  he  cried  heartily, 
like  the  thorough-paced  Whig  he  was.  '  I  honour  you 
for  your  feelings.  I  would  not  have  a  friend  of  mine 
hold  any  other.  But,'  he  continued,  frowning  thought- 
fully, 'since  you  feel  thus,  why  not  let  profit  and 
inclination  jump  together?  Why  not  find  employ- 
ment for  your  sword  in  the  service  that  enlists  your 
heart?' 

The  Captain's  pulses  throbbed  a  little  faster.   For 


30  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

here  from  Sir  Richard  came  the  very  proposal  to 
which  so  warily  he  was  leading.  But  since  Sir 
Richard  had  proposed  it,  Sir  Richard  should  persuade 
as  well,  and  thus  the  thing  would  come  to  stand  upon 
a  still  sounder  basis  than  ever  Gaynor  had  hoped. 

He  laughed  contemptuously. 

'Why  Dick!'  he  cried,  'what  is't  you  suggest? 
What  hire  can  England  offer  for  my  services  ?  Pshaw, 
man,  'tis  not  a  land  in  which  the  mercenary  grows 
anything  but  lean.' 

'But  there  are  the  colonies,'  Sir  Richard  insisted, 
'and  good  appointments  are  to  be  obtained  there  for 
her  adventurous  children.' 

'The  colonies?'  said  the  Captain,  in  a  different 
voice,  the  voice  of  one  who  muses  yieldingly.  '  True ! ' 
he  murmured.  And  then,  as  if  brushing  the  matter 
aside: '  But  even  there,'  he  concluded, '  to  obtain  such 
posts  as  are  worth  the  adventurer's  attention,  influ- 
ence, much  influence,  is  needed.' 

'Some,  I  agree,'  answered  Sir  Richard.  'And  that 
I  can  supply.' 

Captain  Gaynor  stared  at  him.  'You,  Dick?'  he 
cried,  and  laughed  in  mockery  of  his  companion. 

'You  forget  that  the  Second  Secretary  is  my 
cousin,'  Sir  Richard  reminded  him  without  resent- 
ment. 

'Why!'  exclaimed  the  Captain,  like  one  upon  whom 
bursts  a  sudden  revelation,  one  who  discovers  some- 
thing hitherto  entirely  overlooked, 'Why  that  is  true! 
And  you  think,  then  — ' 

'I  know,'  Sir  Richard  cut  in,  'that  what  my  cousin 
can  he  will  do  for  my  friend.  He  shall  do.  I  will  write 
to  him  this  very  day,  and  yourself  shall  bear  the  let- 
ter, Harry.' 


MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  31 

Thus  it  befell  that  the  amiable  Sir  Richard  penned 
his  glowing  panegyric  of  Captain  Gaynor.  He  de- 
livered it  to  the  adventurer,  urging  him  to  start  at 
once.  But  the  Captain  was  not  of  those  who  quit  the 
moment  they  have  gained  their  object,  and  thereby 
leave  behind  them  a  suspicion  of  what  their  object 
may  have  been.  He  lingered  on  a  full  fortnight  in  Sir 
Richard's  company,  as  if  reluctant  to  be  gone,  and 
this  in  spite  of  Sir  Richard's  constant  urgings.  In- 
deed, they  came  near  to  quarrelling  over  the  matter 
more  than  once,  the  baronet  holding  that  the  service 
he  was  rendering  was  being  lightly  treated,  the 
Captain  grumbling  daily  that  his  prospects,  after  all, 
were  none  so  bright,  that  the  English  service  was  a 
poor  one  at  the  best,  that  Heaven  alone  knew  how 
long  he  might  be  left  to  cool  his  heels  in  British  ante- 
chambers ere  aught  was  found  for  him;  that  he  de- 
tested the  English  climate  and  had  a  horror  of  ante- 
chambers, which  were  always  draughty,  and  that  he 
could  not  abide  draughts,  being  subject  to  the  rheum 
ever  since  a  fever  which  had  stricken  him  in  Con- 
stantinople three  years  ago. 

But  in  the  end  he  went,  though  reluctant  even  then, 
and  leaving  upon  Sir  Richard's  mind  the  unmistakable 
impression  that  he  regretted  having  ever  mentioned 
the  matter  and  that  he  would  not  go  at  all  were  it  not 
out  of  dread  of  offending  his  dear  friend  by  failing  to 
avail  himself  of  that  friend's  good  offices. 

In  his  soul  he  was  most  excellently  content.  He 
knew  this  Second  Secretary  Templeton,  whom  he  had 
never  met,  as  he  knew  every  member  of  the  British 
Government  and  what  each  stood  for.  Templeton 
was  the  very  man  for  him :  a  man  of  little  personal 
influence,  no  more  than  the  lackey  and  tool  of  my 


32  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Lord  Carteret,  the  Secretary  of  State;  a  pompous, 
self-sufficient  fellow  who  would  promise  much  and 
accomplish  nothing,  keeping  the  Captain  hanging 
upon  his  promises  and  thus  affording  him  an  excellent 
pretext  for  his  sojourn  in  England  should  it  chance  to 
be  questioned. 

Thus,  then,  do  we  find  him  amid  the  various  clients 
in  Mr.  Templeton's  ante-chamber  on  that  fair  June 
morning.  Of  the  seven  hours  that  are  sped  since  he 
departed  from  my  Lord  Pauncefort's  house  he  has 
devoted  six  to  sleep,  and  he  comes  alert  and  fresh  into 
the  great  man's  presence. 

If  last  night  there  were  about  him  indications  of 
the  soldier,  to-day  his  every  line  proclaims  it.  He 
wears  a  dark  blue  coat  with  narrow  silver  lace,  very 
full  in  the  skirt,  white  buckskins,  and  jack-boots  that 
are  equipped  with  silver  spurs.  The  hilt  of  his  sword 
is  of  cut  steel;  under  his  arm  he  carries  a  black  hat 
looped  and  plumed  in  military  fashion,  and  the  only 
jewel  visible  upon  his  person  is  the  sapphire  nestling 
in  the  fine  lace  of  his  Steinkirk. 

His  heels  together,  Captain  Gaynor  bowed  stiffly 
and  formally  to  the  Second  Secretary.  Mr.  Temple- 
ton  did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  rise  to  receive  this 
visitor.  He  nodded  to  him  across  the  littered  table  at 
which  he  sat,  nodded  with  the  perfunctory  nod  of 
majesty,  whilst  with  an  imperious  yet  languid  hand  he 
waved  away  the  usher  who  had  introduced  the  soldier. 

'You  bring  me,  sir,  I  understand  —  ah  —  letters 
from  my  cousin,  Sir  Richard  —  my  cousin,  Sir 
Richard/  His  voice  was  full  and  sonorous,  his  utter- 
ance leisurely;  his  rhetorical  tastes  were  polysyllabic, 
and  he  had  a  trick,  common  to  third-rate  orators,  of 
repeating  the  closing  words  of  a  period. 


MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  33 

Captain  Gaynor  considered  the  long,  sallow,  aristo- 
cratic face  under  its  imposing,  full-bottomed  wig. 
He  found  it  cold,  supercilious,  and  somewhat  for- 
bidding; for  it  wore  the  expression  that  Mr.  Temple- 
ton  reserved  for  those  who  had  aught  to  solicit  from 
him.  All  this,  the  Captain  reflected,  was  as  he  would 
have  it. 

He  produced  his  letter.  Mr.  Templeton  received  it 
languidly. 

'  I  think,'  said  he,  '  that  I  am  already  —  ah  — 
acquainted  with  its  contents.' 

'Dick  will  no  doubt  have  written  to  you  direct, 
sir,'  said  Captain  Gaynor  easily. 

Mr.  Templeton  nodded  shortly  and  broke  the  seal. 
This  he  did  elaborately,  as  he  did  all  things,  clothing 
himself  like  all  insignificant  folk  in  a  vast  importance. 
Thus  —  saving  for  certain  orthographical  eccentri- 
cities, whose  reproduction  were  unprofitable  —  had 
Sir  Richard  written: 

My  dear  Ned,  —  I  send  you  these  by  the  hand  of  one 
of  my  oldest  friends.  Captain  Harry  Gaynor  was  my 
brother-in-arms  aforetime  under  Marlborough,  and  is  a 
soldier  of  very  high  and  notorious  merit.  He  has  seen 
much  service  in  many  lands,  and  goes  now  to  offer  his 
sword  to  the  King,  who  has  no  more  loyal  devoted  subject 
than  himself.  His  experience,  whereupon  he  will  himself 
entertain  you,  entitles  him,  if  I  may  presume  to  judge,  to 
some  honourable  post  in  His  Majesty's  dominions  over- 
seas. If  you  can  help  him  to  his  ambitions  you  will  be 
serving  me  who  matter  little,  himself  who  matters  more, 
and  his  most  gracious  Majesty  who  matters  most.  Further 
still,  you  will  be  serving  yourself,  for  I  will  answer  for  it 
that  to  whatever  post  you  may  consider  well  to  appoint 
him  he  will  do  credit  upon  you  for  the  appointment.  As 
it  is  for  the  most  part  in  consequence  of  my  representations 


34  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

to  him  that  Captain  Gaynor  is  journeying  to  England  to 
seek  you,  I  hope  that  you  will  find  it  in  your  power  to 
accommodate  him  speedily  and  suitably,  and  thus  earn  the 
gratitude  of  him  who  is,  while  he  is 
Your  devoted  and  obedient  cousin 

Richard  Tollemache  Templeton 

The  reading  done,  Mr.  Templeton  levelled  a 
quizzing-glass  at  the  soldier,  and  looked  him  over. 
He  cleared  his  throat  ponderously. 

'My  cousin,  sir,  gives  me  here  a  very  good  account 
of  you  —  a  very  good  account.' 

Captain  Gaynor  bowed  in  silence. 

'A  fuller  account  is  contained  in  the  other  letter 
which  I  received  from  him,'  the  statesman  added. 
Then  after  a  slight  pause,  in  an  altered  tone  —  a  tone 
that  appeared  to  veil  something  —  '  I  understand 
that  you  met  my  cousin  in  Rome  —  in  Rome,'  he 
said. 

'That  is  so,'  replied  the  Captain. 

'  May  I  presume,  sir,  to  inquire  what  you  did  there  ? ' 

'I  perceive  no  presumption  in  the  question.'  And 
Captain  Gaynor  smiled  affably.  'I  was  idling  there 
for  some  days,  being  newly  come  overseas  from 
Turkey  and  still  undetermined  as  to  whither  I  should 
turn  my  steps,  where  seek  fresh  service.' 

'You  did  not  —  ah  —  peradventure,  consider  offer- 
ing your  sword  to  the  Pretender?'  And  ere  the 
Captain  could  answer  him  he  had  added:  'You  are  a 
mercenary,  Captain  Gaynor  —  so  I  construe  my 
cousin's  letter  —  and  to  a  mercenary  all  services  are 
—  ah  —  one.' 

'Not  quite,  sir.  The  mercenary  who  accepts 
service  against  his  loyal  sovereign  is  indeed  a  thing 
of  scorn.   A  man  mav  be  a  mercenary,  sir,  and  yet 


MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  3$ 

devoted  to  his  king  and  country.  Leastways,  such  is 
the  code  I  have  ever  followed.  And  that  were  cause 
enough  why  I  should  not  take  my  sword  to  the  Pre- 
tender. But  there  was  yet  another.'  A  wry  smile 
appeared  upon  his  clean-cut  face.  '  A  mercenary's  aim 
is  the  trader's  aim  —  profit,  sir;  and  Heaven  knows 
that  in  the  Pretender's  service  there  is  no  immedi- 
ate and  still  less  future  profit  to  be  made.  That,  sir, 
should  answer  you.' 

It  was  the  right  note:  the  note  of  confidence  in  the 
present  Government;  the  note  of  contempt  as  to  the 
prospects  of  the  Stuart  cause,  and  the  Captain  was 
glad  the  opportunity  had  been  given  him  of  striking  it. 
But  the  frigid,  pompous  mask  before  him  did  not 
relax,  for  all  that  the  great  head  nodded  its  solemn 
acceptance  of  the  statement. 

'During  your  sojourn  in  the  —  ah  —  immortal 
city,'  said  the  Secretary,  'you  would,  I  conceive,  have 
gathered  something  of  the  Court  which  the  Pretender 
keeps?'  He  paused  at  that.  But  there  was  a  question 
in  the  phrase,  a  question  which  Captain  Gaynor  did 
not  for  a  moment  misunderstand.  He  was  being 
invited  to  produce  what  information  he  might  have 
gleaned. 

He  was,  I  have  said,  a  man  of  swift  decisions,  and 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  he  weighed  the  matter,  and 
set  his  course.  A  man  of  nice  sensibilities  might  have 
affected  to  misunderstand  the  question,  unwilling  to 
play  a  part  that  might  savour,  though  remotely,  of 
the  spy's.  But  it  would  suit  him  better  to  display  no 
such  niceness. 

Therefore,  he  waxed  voluble.  He  poured  forth 
scraps  of  information  which  he  affected  to  have 
gathered  here  and  there  about  Rome.    He  plunged 


36  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

into  a  list  of  the  Englishmen  who  were  about  the 
person  of  the  Stuart  with  all  the  air  of  one  who  is 
eager  to  betray,  that  by  betrayal  he  may  curry 
favour.  As  he  proceeded,  the  mask  of  Mr.  Temple- 
ton's  countenance  warmed  a  little  into  life,  reflecting 
his  expectancy;  but  when  the  Captain  came  to  an 
end  of  his  disclosures  that  sombre  countenance  was 
cold  once  more.  For  Captain  Gaynor  had  betrayed 
no  man  that  was  not  betrayed  already,  had  conveyed 
no  single  piece  of  information  that  was  not  already 
the  common  property  of  the  British  Government  and 
of  every  lounger  in  town. 

Mr.  Templeton  told  him  so  in  blunt  terms,  where- 
upon his  face  fell  and  he  looked  the  picture  of  dejec- 
tion for  a  moment.  Then  the  Second  Secretary, 
considering  him  with  a  level  eye,  put  a  question  that 
turned  the  Captain's  stout  heart  to  ice: 

'Have  you  ever  heard,  sir,  of  Captain  Jenkyn?' 

Taken  unawares,  his  eyes  dilated  slightly.  But 
the  next  instant  he  was  frowning  thoughtfully.  'Why 
—  yes,'  said  he.  'An  agent  of  the  Jacobites,  is  he 
not?' 

'Aye,  aye!'  rapped  the  other  impatiently.  'What 
did  you  hear?   What  did  you  hear?' 

Captain  Gaynor's  fears  were  dispelled.  Yet  he 
wondered  was  there  some  purpose  more  than  general 
in  the  question,  and  he  made  an  answer  that  should 
test  that  point. 

'Why,  sir,  I  heard  it  said  —  I  cannot  call  to  mind 
by  whom  or  in  what  circumstances  —  but  I  heard  it 
said  that  Captain  Jenkyn  was  in  Rome  preparing  for 
a  journey  into  England.' 

And  then  Mr.  Templeton  betrayed  the  Govern- 
ment to  Captain  Gaynor,  unable,  after  the  fashion  of 


MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  37 

pompous  men,  to  conceal  any  particle  of  knowledge 
that  was  his  own. 

'  Pshaw ! '  he  snapped.  '  Stale  news,  like  the  rest  of 
your  fine  information.  We  have  known  it  for  a  week.' 

Not  a  ripple  crossed  the  Captain's  face  to  betray 
the  shock  of  his  surprise.  But  he  frowned,  and  drew 
himself  very  stiffly  erect. 

'Information,  sir?'  said  he.  'Mr.  Templeton,  it 
occurs  to  me  that  you  have  been  using  me  unworthily.' 
And  for  the  first  time  in  the  course  of  that  interview 
he  allowed  the  force  of  his  personality  to  envelop  the 
Second  Secretary,  his  blue  eyes  withering  the  man 
with  their  sudden  anger. 

Thus  a  moment.  Then  he  relapsed  into  the  syco- 
phant, the  humble  suitor  who  pockets  an  offence  and 
fawns  upon  the  offender.  His  wry,  almost  deprecatory 
smile  reappeared. 

'I  should  have  been  wary,'  he  said.  'I  am  but  a 
blunt  soldier;  stout  enough  at  blows,  sir,  I  assure  you, 
but  dull  enough  —  egad!  —  when  it  comes  to  a 
battle  of  wits  with  one  of  your  mettle.  You  should 
have  spared  me,  sir.  'Fore  gad,  you  should  have 
spared  me!'  he  lamented. 

Mr.  Templeton  smiled  at  last,  consented  at  last 
to  put  off  some  measure  of  this  frigid  importance, 
melting  as  it  were  in  this  warm  flattery. 

'Nay,  now,'  said  he,  "twas  in  your  own  interest 
that  I  questioned  you  —  in  your  own  interest.  Had 
you  been  furnished  with  any  piece  of  information  that 
we  could  account  of  value,  it  must  have  been  deemed 
that  His  Majesty's  Government  had  received  a  favour 
at  your  hands.  You  would  have  placed  the  Govern- 
ment in  your  debt,  as  it  were,  and  it  would  have 
smoothed  my  path  with  my  Lord  Carteret  in  ob- 


38  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

taining  the  —  ah  —  gratification  of  your  ambitions. 
You  understand,  I  am  assured  —  you  understand.' 

'  Sir,'  cried  Captain  Gaynor, '  I  have  again  betrayed 
my  dullness.  But — '  And  his  shrug  was  eloquent. 
It  said  as  plainly  as  if  the  words  were  spoken:  'How 
can  so  ordinary  a  man  as  I  attempt  to  fathom  the 
methods  of  one  so  extraordinary  as  you.' 

'Say  no  more,  sir;  say  no  more!'  Mr.  Templeton 
thrust  back  his  chair,  and  rose  —  a  tall  figure  that 
carried  itself  superbly,  with  head  thrown  back  and 
rather  to  one  side.  '  We  will  do  what  we  can  for  you. 
You  will  leave  me  your  —  ah  —  credentials?' 

Captain  Gaynor  had  them  ready  —  a  bulky  parcel 
which  he  now  drew  from  an  inner  pocket  of  his  coat 
and  laid  upon  the  Secretary's  table.  Of  these  cre- 
dentials some  few  were  genuine;  but  the  greater  part 
were  forgeries;  in  the  aggregate  they  accounted  for 
almost  every  day  of  his  time  during  the  past  ten  years. 

Adventurous  as  had  been  the  life  of  which  some  of 
these  documents  proclaimed  the  genuine  record, 
those  adventures  were  as  naught  to  that  which  lay 
before  him  ere  he  should  come  again  to  claim  that 
package. 

Mr.  Templeton  balanced  the  bundle  of  papers  in 
his  hands.  'If  these  speak  as  well  for  you  as  speaks 
my  cousin,  you  may  depend  upon  employment  being 
found  for  you  —  employment  worthy  of  your  —  ah 
—  attainments.  You  will  wait  upon  me  again,  I  hope, 
sir,  in  a  little  while.  Should  I  need  to  communicate 
with  you  in  the  meantime,  where  shall  I  find  you 
lodged?' 

'I  go  to  Chertsey  to-morrow,'  answered  the 
Captain,  '  to  Priory  Close.' 

'To  Sir  John  Kynaston's?'  quoth  the  minister. 


MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  39 

The  soldier  bowed.  'He  was  my  father's  friend 
many  years  ago,  sir,  and  he  has  offered  me  the 
hospitality  of  his  roof  for  some  little  time  during  my 
sojourn  here.' 

'Why,  that,  sir,'  cried  Mr.  Templeton,  whose 
geniality  seemed  to  increase  in  a  measure  as  the 
interview  drew  to  its  conclusion,  'that  is  a  further 
recommendation  in  your  favour  —  a  further  recom- 
mendation. Sir  John  stands  well  with  the  Govern- 
ment. He  has  the  ear  of  Lord  Carteret.  Now  a  word 
from  him  — ' 

The  Captain  bowed,  his  hand  on  his  heart.  'Like 
all  great  men,  sir,  that  I  have  ever  met  —  and  I  have 
travelled  more  than  most  —  you  account  mighty  the 
little  power  of  any  other  and  little  the  mighty  power 
that  is  your  own.  Mr.  Templeton,  I  am  content  to 
leave  my  petition  in  your  hands.  I  could  desire  no 
better  advocate,  even  as  I  could  not  find  a  greater.' 
He  bowed  again  before  the  smiling  Secretary;  for 
the  Secretary  was  smiling  broadly  now,  the  dissolu- 
tion of  his  iciness  complete.  '  I  have  the  honour,  sir, 
to  take  my  leave  of  you.  I  shall  keep  you  informed 
of  my  every  movement.  Sir '  (yet  another  bow)  '  your 
very  obedient  grateful  servant.' 

He  was  in  the  ante-chamber  at  last,  coughing  into 
his  handkerchief  as  he  went.  And  behind  him  he  left 
a  beaming  Mr.  Templeton,  who  rubbed  his  hands  and 
chuckled  and  told  the  Cupids  on  the  ceiling  what  an 
infernally  astute  fellow  he  was.  For  had  he  not  turned 
this  soldier  inside  out?  Had  he  not  wrung  him  dry, 
as  it  were;  sucked  him  like  an  orange,  ere  the  fellow 
had  apprehended  his  aims  and  become  duly  ferocious  ? 
But  even  that  ferocity  had  been  overwhelmed  by 
admiration  of  Mr.  Templeton's  superb  penetration. 


4o  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

The  Second  Secretary  resumed  his  seat  at  the 
littered  table,  and  his  smile  faded.  After  all,  he 
reflected,  this  adventurer  had  told  him  nothing  that 
was  not  known  already.  Still,  that  was  because  he 
possessed  no  further  knowledge,  else  most  assuredly 
it  would  have  been  drawn  out  of  him  with  the  rest. 

He  took  up  the  package  of  credentials.  These  must 
be  looked  through.  Something  must  be  found  for  a 
man  who  recognised  dignity,  authority,  and  intellect 
so  readily.  The  Secretary  became  conscious  of  a 
growing  affection  for  Captain  Gaynor,  a  desire  to 
exert  himself  to  serve  the  fellow  such  as  was  very  rare 
with  him. 

But  matters  of  State  impended.  He  smote  a  bell. 
The  usher  appeared,  and  the  mask  of  frigid  gravity 
once  more  descended  upon  the  lofty  features  of  Mr. 
Second  Secretary  Templeton. 


CHAPTER  IV 
FATE'S  AGENTS 

SO  excellent  an  impression  did  Captain  Gaynor 
leave  of  himself  upon  the  Second  Secretary  that 
there  reached  him  later  that  day  an  invitation  to  dine 
with  Mr.  Templeton  on  the  morrow,  which  was 
Wednesday. 

He  went,  and  used  the  occasion  well,  not  only  to 
advance  himself  further  in  the  favour  of  the  states- 
man, but  also  to  make  a  conquest  of  Mr.  Templeton's 
lady,  a  plump,  frivolous  woman  who  none  the  less 
governed  the  Second  Secretary  with  a  tyranny  that 
was  absolute.  Captain  Gaynor  departed  with  the 
conviction  that  Mr.  Templeton's  subjection  to  her 
rule  was  the  school  in  which  he  learnt  the  art  of 
subjecting  others. 

There  was  little  in  that  visit  that  calls  for  chroni- 
cling, unless  it  be  that  having  expressed  himself  like 
the  most  thorough-paced  Whig,  and  cursed  the 
turbulence  of  the  Jacobites  who  would  disturb  a 
realm  in  which  there  was  peace  and  prosperity,  the 
Captain  ventured  to  congratulate  Mr.  Templeton 
upon  the  vigilance  of  the  Government  and  to  marvel 
at  the  thoroughness  of  that  same  vigilance,  as  evi- 
denced by  the  circumstance  that  not  a  particle  of 
the  information  he  had,  himself,  been  able  to  bring 
straight  from  Rome  —  including  the  fact  that  the 
notorious  agent,  Captain  Jenkyn,  was  on  his  way  to 
England  —  but  was  already  known  to  the  omniscient 
Second  Secretary. 


42  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Captain  Gaynor's  aim  was  to  draw  from  Mr. 
Templeton  some  hint  which  should  enable  him  to 
place  his  finger  upon  the  leakage  that  obviously 
existed.  But  it  failed,  and  he  dared  not  insist;  nor 
did  he  consider  it  worth  while,  concluding  that  it  was 
very  possible  that  Mr.  Templeton  did  not  possess  the 
information  which  he  craved. 

He  deemed  it  well,  however,  to  set  Pauncefort  upon 
his  guard,  and  with  this  intent  he  called  upon  him 
on  the  following  afternoon.  His  lordship  received 
Captain  Gaynor's  news  with  obvious  consternation. 

'How  do  you  know  this?'  he  cried,  and  his  voice 
shook  with  a  sudden  panic  that  surprised  the  Captain. 

Captain  Gaynor  enlightened  him.   Then: 

'You  see,'  he  said  in  conclusion,  'there  is  reason  to 
fear  a  traitor  from  within.  For  how  else  could  this 
knowledge  have  reached  the  Government?' 

'Are  you  sure  that  it  had?'  questioned  the  scowling 
Pauncefort.  'May  it  not  have  been  yourself  who 
supplied  the  information,  and  Templeton's  assertion 
that  it  was  already  known  a  mere  pretence  to  give 
himself  importance — to  efface  his  obligation  to  you  ? ' 

Captain  Gaynor  smiled  his  amused  tolerance  of 
such  a  suggestion.  'I  did  not  begin  to  be  a  plotter 
yesterday,  my  lord,'  said  he. 

But  his  lordship  adhered  to  his  point.  'Yet  it  was 
a  folly  on  your  part  to  have  said  what  you  did  to 
him  —  rank  folly.' 

'I  think  not,  my  lord,'  was  the  suave  answer.  'I 
aimed  at  testing  the  extent  of  the  Government's 
information,  and  I  hold  that  I  succeeded  but  too 
well.' 

'Have  it  so,  then,'  said  Pauncefort.  'For  myself, 
I  am  content  to  hold  to  the  other  opinion.    I'  faith, 


FATE'S  AGENTS  43 

I  should  not  sleep  o'  nights  did  I  not.  Gad!  For  a 
moment  you  turned  my  stomach  with  your  talk  of 
traitors.' 

'None  the  less/  said  the  Captain  soberly,  'I  warn 
you  to  be  circumspect.  We  meet,  then,  at  "The 
World's  End,"  at  Chelsea,  this  day  se'nnight,  when 
the  work  to  do  shall  be  planned.  'Twill  be  safer  thus 
than  at  your  house  or  another's.' 

'Meanwhile,'  said  his  lordship,  'you  are  for  Priory 
Close  ? ' 

'I  am  on  my  way  thither.  I  but  stayed  to  give  you 
this  information.   I  shall  see  you  there,  no  doubt?' 

My  lord  checked  the  answer  he  was  obviously  upon 
the  point  of  making.  He  flushed  and  hesitated  a 
moment.  Then,  recovering  from  his  confusion,  and 
attempting  to  gloze  it  over  — 

1 1  think  not,'  he  answered  slowly.  '  My  affairs  here 
require  attention.  There  is  much  to  do  if  I  am  to  set 
this  tangle  to  rights.' 

'I  rejoice,'  said  the  Captain,  'to  infer  that  it  is 
amenable  to  endeavour.' 

'  Indeed,  yes  —  thanks  to  the  trick  that  Fortune 
played  you  here  two  nights  ago.  To  that  I  owe  it  that 
a  way  has  been  opened  for  me.' 

'I  am  glad,'  said  Gaynor  pleasantly.  'It  would 
seem,  then,  that  your  affairs  were  scarce  as  desperate 
as  you  feared.   I  am  heartily  glad,  sir.' 

His  tone  was  so  amiable  and  sincere  that  none 
might  have  guessed  that  he,  himself,  had  been  the 
loser  in  the  transaction.  Thereupon  he  took  his  leave 
of  Pauncefort.  But  as  he  was  departing,  his  lordship 
stayed  him.  The  nobleman's  face  was  troubled. 

'At  Priory  Close  you  will  meet  Miss  Hollinstone,' 
said  he.   '  Commend  me  to  her  and  to  Sir  John.  And 


44  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

—  touching  the  lady,  and  the  game  we  played  here, 
you  will  remember  that  — that— '  He  fumbled 
vainly  for  the  expression  that  might  inoffensively 
convey  his  meaning. 

The  soldier  stiffened.  'That  I  lost,  you  would  say, 
my  lord,  and  that  you,  therefore,  continue  in  the 
claim  which  every  man  has  upon  his  betrothed.' 

'You  put  it  — bluntly,'  his  lordship  deprecated. 

'It  is  a  blunt  matter.  But  you  may  quiet  your 
alarms.'  The  Captain  all  but  sneered.  'They  do 
little  honour  to  the  lady  and  still  less  to  myself.' 

Their  farewells,  thereafter,  were  repeated  with  some 
restraint,  and  Captain  Gaynor  took  his  departure. 

He  had  engaged  himself  a  valet,  a  shrewd-faced 
little  fellow  named  Fisher,  recommended  to  him  by 
the  landlord  of  the  'George'  as  a  person  of  so  much 
fidelity  and  honesty  that  the  Captain  had  despatched 
him  ahead  by  the  stage  to  Chertsey  with  his  baggage. 
The  Captain  himself  rode  forth  alone  and  came,  an 
hour  or  so  after  taking  leave  of  Pauncefort,  to  the 
dreary  spaces  of  Hownslow  Heath. 

In  the  distance  ahead  of  him,  a  solitary  horseman 
moved  slowly  along  the  skyline.  Captain  Gaynor 
would  have  observed  him  perhaps  more  closely  could 
he  have  known  that  this  horseman  was  one  of  Fate's 
agents  to  himself.  For  had  not  that  horseman  been 
present  there  in  that  lonely  tract  of  country,  the 
Captain's  career  would  have  run  a  vastly  different 
course  from  that  which  gives  occasion  to  this  chronicle. 
A  signpost  threw  a  lengthening  shadow  athwart  the 
ribbon  of  road  that  wound  through  the  parched  spaces 
of  the  Heath.  The  sun  was  no  more  than  a  glowing 
disc  upon  the  horizon.  A  black  silhouette  against  it, 
the  horseman  passed  and  dipped  out  of  sight. 


FATE'S  AGENTS  45 

Captain  Gaynor  rode  on,  his  thoughts  anywhere 
but  upon  that  fateful  figure.  He  gained  the  summit 
of  the  rise  and  dipped  in  his  turn,  steadying  his 
horse,  for  the  road  was  rough  and  deeply  ploughed 
with  ruts  of  clay  that  were  baked  into  stony  ridges. 
There  was  no  sign  now  of  the  other  horseman,  no  sign 
of  living  thing  in  all  that  lonely  place.  But  suddenly 
from  the  screen  of  a  clump  of  cedars  that  spread 
funereally  a  hundred  yards  ahead,  the  rider  re- 
appeared. His  back  was  towards  the  Captain.  He 
never  so  much  as  turned  his  head,  seeming  entirely 
unconscious  of  the  other's  rapid  approach.  Such 
indeed  was  his  unconsciousness  that  Captain  Gaynor, 
as  he  drew  nigh,  was  moved  to  scrutinise  him. 

He  was  a  heavy  fellow,  mounted  upon  a  clumsy 
piebald  horse.  From  under  a  round  hat  wisps  of  black 
hair  floated  raggedly  in  the  breeze.  He  wore  a  long 
black  riding-coat  and  dirty  buckskins;  and  that  was 
all  that  the  Captain  could  perceive  until  presently  he 
drew  alongside  and  observed  in  addition  a  wolfish, 
lantern-jawed  face  above  a  dirty  neck-cloth  and  a 
still  dirtier  green  satin  waistcoat  with  ragged  and 
tarnished  gold  lace. 

He  was  as  unprepossessing  a  ruffian  as  could  be 
met  with  in  the  length  and  breadth  of  England,  and 
nowhere  could  that  meeting  have  been  less  welcome 
than  on  the  lonely  stretch  of  Hownslow  Heath. 

"Tis  a  fine  evening,  your  honour,'  said  he  in  an 
accent  that  proclaimed  an  Irish  origin. 

' A  fine  evening  it  is,'  replied  the  Captain,  coldly 
courteous.  He  rode  steadily  amain,  and  must  have 
sped  past  the  other  but  that  the  fellow  touched  up 
his  piebald  and  kept  level. 

1  'Tis  a  mighty  lonesome  place,  this  Heath,'  said  he, 


46  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

as  if  explaining  his  action,  'and  if  there's  a  thing  in  all 
the  world  I  hate  'tis  lonesomeness.' 

'It  is  a  distaste  which  I  do  not  share,'  said  the 
Captain  curtly. 

'D'ye  not?'  cried  the  other.  'Now  if  there's  a 
living  man  knows  a  hint  when  he  hears  it,  'tis  myself, 
bedad.  So  I'll  not  be  troublin'  you  farther  with  a 
company  that's  unwelcome.  But  there's  a  word  or 
two  I'd  be  speakin'  to  you  first.  Will  ye  draw  rein 
awhile?  Hold,  I  say!  Hold  or  I'll  be  blowin'  your 
head  inside  out!' 

Captain  Gaynor  reined  in  sharply.  The  ruffian 
had  levelled  a  heavy  pistol  with  a  long,  polished 
barrel  —  the  only  polished  thing  about  him  —  on 
which  the  last  rays  of  the  vanishing  sun  threw  a 
blood-red  gleam. 

'What  d'ye  want  with  me?'  quoth  the  soldier 
sharply. 

The  ruffian  grinned.  'Why,  now,  there's  a  plain 
question,  and  here's  a  plain  answer  for  you  —  faith, 
'tis  a  trifle  I'm  wanting:  just  your  purse  and  that 
jewel  at  your  throat  and  your  watch  if  so  be  ye  have 
one.' 

Captain  Gaynor  seemed  to  be  measuring  the  other 
with  his  eyes  as  one  who  considers  resistance.  The 
wolfish  face  continued  to  grin,  and  there  was  a 
confident  gleam  in  the  hungry,  bloodshot  eyes.  Here 
was  no  bungler;  but  a  practised,  self-confident  knight 
of  the  toby,  who  would  have  no  more  qualms  about 
holding  up  a  soldier  than  a  dowager,  and  still  less 
about  shooting  either  if  expediency  advised  it. 

Gaynor's  wry  smile  appeared  at  last.  'Faith,'  said 
he,  'ye  have  the  advantage  of  me,  I  think.' 

'I'm  thinkin'  the  same,  and  I'm  glad  ye're  reason- 


FATE'S  AGENTS  47 

able;  for  I'd  be  mortal  sorry  to  shed  the  blood  of  such 
a  broth  of  a  boy  over  a  paltry  matter  of  a  handful  of 
guineas  and  a  jewel  or  two.  "Live  and  let  live"  is  my 
motto,  your  honour.' 

The  Captain  produced  his  purse.  It  was  of  black 
silk  and  bulky,  and  through  the  straining  meshes  of 
the  knitting  there  appeared  a  yellow  gleam. 

The  tobyman  brought  his  nag  a  pace  nearer. 
With  pistol  levelled  and  eyes  that  never  left  the 
Captain's  face,  he  held  out  his  left  hand  to  receive  the 
purse.  But  it  seemed  that  Gaynor  relinquished  it  too 
soon;  just  as  the  ruffian's  fingers  touched  it,  in  fact;  so 
that  it  dropped  and  fell  between  them  with  a  re- 
sounding chink. 

The  tobyman's  eyes  were  instinctively  lowered  to 
follow  its  fall  —  a  deplorable  error  this  in  one  so 
practised  in  his  trade.  An  instant  later  the  pistol  was 
dashed  from  his  hand  by  a  blow  that  almost  shattered 
his  knuckles.  Before  he  could  attempt  to  defend 
himself,  before  he  could  properly  realise  what  was 
befalling  him,  that  blow  was  followed  by  a  second, 
this  time  upon  his  head,  so  shrewdly  delivered  that 
he  reeled  in  his  saddle. 

Captain  Gaynor  was  standing  in  his  stirrups,  which 
gave  him  the  advantage  of  being  above  the  thief.  He 
grasped  his  heavily  mounted  riding-crop  like  a  cud- 
gel and  like  a  cudgel  he  used  it  with  a  dexterity  and 
rapidity  such  as  the  other  had  never  encountered  in 
all  his  adventurous  career.  Before  he  had  recovered 
from  that  dazing  blow  across  the  crown  a  shower  of 
others  had  fallen  upon  his  body,  and  lifted  a  cloud 
of  dust  from  his  coat.  Bewildered  by  the  suddenness 
and  thoroughness  of  the  onslaught,  he  was  beyond 
all  thought  of  defence  or  retaliation. 


48  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

As  arrant  a  coward  without  his  pistol  as  he  was 
valiant  with  it,  he  realised  that  he  had  grasped  a 
scorpion.  He  stayed  for  no  more.  He  gathered  up 
his  reins  and  ploughed  the  piebald's  flanks  with  his 
spurs.  The  maddened  horse  half  reared,  then  flung 
forward  as  from  a  catapult  and  broke  into  a  gallop. 
But  Captain  Gaynor  was  not  yet  content.  He  started 
in  pursuit,  brandishing  that  formidable  crop. 

The  tobyman,  flying  with  terror  in  his  soul,  was 
rendered  desperate.  There  remained  him  yet  an- 
other pistol.  He  plucked  it  forth  with  his  half- 
shattered  hand,  swung  round  in  the  saddle  and  blazed 
at  his  pursuer. 

His  aim  was  wild  and  his  pistol-hand  in  no  case  to 
serve  him  accurately.  None  the  less  the  shot  did  all 
that  was  necessary  to  arrest  pursuit.  The  charge,  at 
fairly  close  range,  entered  the  breast  of  Captain 
Gaynor's  mare.  The  poor  beast  screamed  and  reared 
and  collapsed  in  a  heap  from  which  the  soldier  was  no 
more  than  in  time  to  leap  clear. 

He  stood  in  the  road,  cursing  the  highwayman 
and  his  own  folly  in  having  given  chase.  Thus  a 
moment.  Then,  his  wounded  horse  demanding  his 
attention,  he  drew  one  of  his  pistols  from  its  holster 
and  made  an  end  of  the  beast's  agony.  That  done, 
he  walked  back  to  the  spot  where  the  encounter  had 
taken  place,  and  recovered  the  purse  which  in  his 
zeal  to  punish  he  had  all  but  forgotten.  Then, 
slowly,  he  retraced  his  steps  to  his  fallen  horse,  and 
considered  his  position.  He  was  still  a  good  nine 
miles  from  his  destination,  and  dusk  must  overtake 
him  before  long. 

He  stood  pondering  there  when  his  ears  caught  a 
distant  clank  and  rattle,  accompanied  by  the  pound- 


FATE'S  AGENTS  49 

ing  of  hoofs.  The  sounds  drew  rapidly  nearer  along 
the  road  by  which  he  had  come;  soon  a  chaise  ap- 
peared upon  the  ridge  behind  him,  and  came  down 
the  incline  swaying  and  jolting  alarmingly  over  that 
execrable  road. 

The  Captain  stood  now  awaiting  it,  the  object  of 
suspicious  glances  from  the  coachman,  and  from  the 
footman  who  hung  by  a  strap  behind  the  approach- 
ing vehicle.  As  it  came  up  with  him,  he  raised  his 
hand,  and  the  chaise  was  brought  gradually  to  a 
standstill,  for  the  fallen  horse  announced  plainly 
enough  that  here  was  a  traveller  in  distress. 

From  the  window,  thrusting  aside  the  leather 
curtain,  a  wondrously  coiffed  head  protruded.  A 
feminine  voice,  high-pitched  and  querulous,  assailed 
the  Captain's  ears. 

'What  now,  Gilbert?  Why  do  we  stay?'  Then 
the  lady's  glance  fell  upon  Captain  Gaynor,  and  with 
a  little  scream  of  fear  the  wondrous  head  vanished 
hurriedly  into  the  carriage. 

Smiling,  the  Captain  advanced,  hat  in  hand,  to  the 
door  of  the  chaise. 

'Pray  do  not  be  alarmed,'  he  said.  'I  am  a  sup- 
pliant, not  an  assailant.' 

"Tis  a  gentleman  what's  'ad  'is  'oss  killed,' 
announced  the  well-nourished  Gilbert  from  the  box. 

Another  head  appeared,  and  the  Captain  found 
himself  confronted  by  a  young  face  that  was  ex- 
tremely good  to  look  upon  —  a  delicate  little  face 
under  an  elaborate  arrangement  of  golden  curls;  the 
eyes  that  met  his  own  so  frankly  were  very  blue  and 
invested  with  a  look  of  innocence;  the  little  chin  was 
sharply  pointed,  and  the  mouth  was  very  small  and 
delicately  arched.  It  was  such  a  face  as  Greuze  loved 


50  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

to  paint,  the  pretty  advertisement  of  a  trivial  little 
soul. 

The  Captain  bowed  gravely.  'Ma'am/  said  he,  'I 
have  met  with  a  mischance.  My  horse  has  been  shot 
under  me.' 

Alarmed  concern  flickered  into  the  blue  eyes. 
'Shot!'  she  cried,  in  a  slender  treble.   'La,  sir!' 

Over  her  shoulders  reappeared  the  face  of  the  elder 
lady. 

'Shot,  did  ye  say?'  she  cried.  'Lard  a'  mercy! 
Who  shot  it,  sir?' 

*A  rogue  of  a  tobyman,  ma'am.' 

'A  tobyman!'  The  voice  shrilled  on  the  word. 
'Ye  hear!  What  have  I  ever  said,  and  ye  would  never 
heed  me!  But  'tis  the  last  time  that  ever  I'll  cross 
the  Heath.  Lard,  now!  'Tis  a  miracle  we  are  not 
murdered  —  a  miracle ! ' 

'I  have  some  distance  to  go,  ma'am,'  said  the 
Captain,  'and  I  should  be  most  profoundly  obliged 
if  you  would  permit  me  to  sit  with  your  coachman 
as  far  as  the  next  post-house,  where  I  can  repair  my 
loss.' 

The  younger  lady  was  first  thrust  aside,  then 
entirely  eclipsed  by  the  elder,  whose  presence  came 
once  more  to  fill  the  window.  She  surveyed  the 
suppliant  with  an  air  of  grim  suspicion. 

'How  far  d'ye  travel,  sir?'  she  questioned  him. 

'To  Chertsey,  ma'am,'  he  replied. 

Upon  that  she  seemed  to  eye  him  more  attentively. 
A  voice  murmured  behind  her  in  the  coach.  She 
turned  a  moment. 

'It  is  possible,  Damaris,'  he  heard  her  say.  'He 
has  the  air  of  it.' 

Damaris!  The  name  hummed  through  his  brain. 


FATE'S  AGENTS  51 

'May  I  ask,  sir,'  came  his  questioner  again,  'whom 
we  shall  have  the  honour  of  assisting?' 

'My  name,  ma'am,  is  Gaynor  —  Captain  Harry 
Gaynor,  your  obedient  servant  to  command.' 

'Why,  'tis  so,  then!'  she  cried,  and  smiled  —  a 
comely,  well-featured  woman.  'La,  now!  'Tis  the 
oddest  of  encounters.  You  are  for  Priory  Close.' 

The  Captain  confessed,  and  added  the  assumption 
which  had  flashed  into  his  mind.  'You  will  be  Lady 
Kynaston.   'Tis  an  odd  chance,  indeed.' 

'James,  you  lout,'  she  called  to  the  gaping  footman, 
who  had  swung  himself  down  from  his  perch, '  the  door.' 

The  lackey  sprang  to  let  down  the  steps.  Her 
ladyship  alighted,  leaning  upon  his  shoulder.  She 
proved  now  to  be  of  a  good  height  and  presence,  and 
to  carry  herself  well.  And  not  only  was  she  comely 
in  herself,  as  I  have  said,  but  most  fully  appreciative 
of  comeliness  in  the  other  sex.  She  dropped  the 
Captain  a  half-curtsy,  and  met  him  now  with  the 
most  engaging  of  smiles. 

'We  count  ourselves  fortunate  to  be  of  service  to 
you,  sir,'  said  she,  and  proceeded  to  present  him  to 
her  companions.  This  presentation  she  performed,  as 
she  did  all  things,  in  a  superficial  manner.  'These,' 
she  said,  half  turning  from  him  and  with  a  wave  of  the 
hand  towards  the  occupants  of  the  chaise,  '  are  Miss 
Hollinstone,  my  niece,  and  my  daughter,  Evelyn. 
She  is  my  only  child,  sir,  a  matter  which  sorely  vexes 
Sir  John,  for  he  would  dearly  have  loved  a  son.  'Tis  a 
thousand  pities  that  Heaven  should  not  have  gratified 
his  wishes,'  she  ran  on,  garrulous  and  inconsequent. 
'  But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  the  rearing  of  sons  in 
these  disordered  days  is  so  grave  a  responsibility  that 
sometimes  I  think  perhaps  Heaven  knows  best.' 


52  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

The  Captain  had  scarce  heard  a  word  of  it.  His 
eyes  were  upon  the  two  ladies  who  remained  in  the 
coach  —  the  golden-headed  child  with  whom  already 
he  had  spoken,  whom  he  assumed  to  be  Damaris 
Hollinstone,  and  another,  who  was  taller  and  dark, 
and  of  a  very  different  type  of  beauty.  He  surveyed 
them  both,  it  is  true,  and  made  his  bow  to  them.  But 
it  was  upon  the  supposed  Miss  Hollinstone  that  his 
eyes  rested  with  the  more  profound  interest,  and 
certain  odd  stirrings,  which  were  entirely  consequent 
upon  the  strange  game  he  had  played  three  nights  ago 
with  my  Lord  Pauncefort. 

Perceiving  at  last  that  the  girl  was  growing  con- 
scious of  his  scrutiny,  the  Captain  turned  to  Lady 
Kynaston  with  polite  inquiries  touching  Sir  John. 
She  replied  at  long  length  with  a  catalogue  of  Sir 
John's  real  and  fancied  ailments,  the  conclusion  to  be 
drawn  from  which  seemed  to  be  that  her  husband  was 
in  excellent  health  and  looking  forward  with  pleasure 
to  his  visitor's  arrival. 

'It  is  growing  late,  mother,'  said  the  dark  lady 
from  her  corner  of  the  chaise,  '  and  Captain  Gaynor, 
no  doubt,  will  be  in  haste  to  arrive.' 

'Where  one  may  journey  so  pleasantly,'  said  the 
Captain,  as  courtesy  dictated,  '  there  can  be  no  haste 
to  arrive  anywhere.' 

'La!'  said  the  fair  Damaris,  and  laughed.  'Yet, 
indeed,  mother,  you  are  detaining  him,'  she  added. 
And  Captain  Gaynor,  reflecting  that  the  child  had 
indeed  been  as  a  daughter  to  Lady  Kynaston,  found 
the  mode  of  address  a  proper  and  pretty  tribute. 

Expressing  herself  in  tritely  caustic  terms  upon  the 
pertness  of  the  age  and  the  deplorable  lack  of  defer- 
ence to  elders,  her  ladyship  none  the  less  acted  upon 


FATE'S  AGENTS  $3 

the  hints  of  her  daughter  and  her  niece,  and  permitted 
the  Captain  to  assist  her  into  the  chaise  once  more. 
Captain  Gaynor  followed  her,  and  took  his  seat 
beside  her.  The  steps  were  raised,  the  door  closed, 
and  once  more  the  carriage  lurched  drunkenly  along. 

By  her  whom  he  had  assumed  to  be  Damaris  the 
Captain  was  invited  to  relate  the  details  of  his  adven- 
ture. He  responded  to  the  invitation,  but  in  doing 
so  it  was  to  Lady  Kynaston  and  her  daughter  that  he 
chiefly  addressed  himself. 

In  this  he  obeyed  the  somewhat  peremptory  dic- 
tates of  his  sense  of  honour.  After  what  had  passed 
between  himself  and  Pauncefort,  he  felt  that  the 
greatest  circumspection  was  incumbent  upon  him. 
In  no  case  could  he  have  looked  upon  Miss  Hollin- 
stone  as  a  conquest  to  be  attempted,  knowing  her 
betrothed  to  another.  But  since  she  had  been  the 
subject  of  a  game;  since  he  must  look  upon  her  as  upon 
a  stake  for  which  he  had  played  and  which  he  had  lost, 
it  was  as  if  a  wall  had  been  set  up  between  them,  as  if 
she  had  become  in  some  still  more  emphatic  manner 
the  property  of  another,  which  he  should  be  no  better 
than  a  thief  did  he  attempt  to  filch. 

Reclining  in  the  chaise  when  his  tale  was  done, 
and  considering  his  position,  what  time  the  ladies 
chattered  of  highwaymen,  the  perils  of  the  Heath 
and  his  own  singular  address  in  turning  the  tables 
upon  one  who  had  held  him  at  such  disadvantage,  the 
Captain's  thoughts  strayed  again  to  the  matter  of 
that  game.  A  swift  judge  of  character,  he  found  much 
in  that  fair  face  and  in  that  too  perfect  rosebud  mouth 
to  be  deplored.  If  at  some  time  in  his  life  a  man  must 
think  of  mating,  let  him  then  mate  with  one  who 
will  be  prepared  to  give  as  well  as  to  receive.     So 


54  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

held  the  Captain.  And  this  Damaris,  he  judged  to 
be  of  those  who  cannot  give  because  they  possess 
nothing  of  their  own.  Being  one  who  seeks  upon  the 
surface  some  indication  of  what  may  lie  below,  the 
Captain  was  not  merely  left  indifferent  by  the  girl's 
undoubted  winsomeness,  but  he  found  in  it  some- 
thing that  actually  repelled  him.  That  fair  exterior 
he  at  first  accounted  a  false  lure.  But  this  impression 
he  soon  corrected  as  too  harsh;  falseness  implies  at 
least  some  activity  of  personality;  and  here  was  one 
whom  he  judged  to  be  entirely  passive.  He  likened 
her,  at  length,  to  the  camellia  —  and  was  well 
pleased  with  the  image  —  perfect  and  graceful  in 
shape  and  colouring,  yet  exhaling  nothing  and  wilting 
to  the  touch. 

These  swift  deductions  and  the  consequent  slight 
aversion  which  the  child  inspired  in  him,  led  him 
naturally  enough  to  wonder  what  course  he  would 
have  taken  had  he  won  that  game  which  he  had 
played.  Would  he  have  claimed  the  stakes?  He 
thought  of  his  master,  waiting  patiently  in  Rome, 
subsisting  almost  upon  the  charity  of  strangers,  and 
he  concluded  that  had  he  won  he  must  have  sought 
to  pouch  his  winnings  for  the  sake  of  that  king  to 
whom  he  owed  all  sacrifices.  But  on  the  whole  he 
was  content  that  this  particular  sacrifice  had  not  been 
imposed  upon  him  by  the  cards.  Perhaps  he  was 
also  relieved  because,  that  game  being  lost  by  him, 
he  found  the  task  of  abiding  by  its  issue  an  easy  one 
to  discharge. 

There  was,  then,  no  reluctance  on  his  part.  But  he 
opined  that,  further,  there  must  not  even  be  the 
semblance  of  it;  and  to  that  end  he  adopted  now  the 
course  that  must  be  his  during  his  sojourn  at  Priory 


FATE'S  AGENTS  $S 

Close.  He  addressed  himself  almost  entirely  to  Lady 
Kynaston  and  her  daughter.  As  he  looked  at  the 
latter,  he  could  not  refrain  from  contrasting  her  with 
Miss  Hollinstone  entirely  to  Miss  Hollinstone's  dis- 
advantage. He  considered  this  pale,  thoughtful  face, 
with  its  liquid  brown  eyes  that  were  gentle  to  the 
point  of  wistfulness,  he  observed  the  sensitiveness  of 
the  lips,  the  nobility  of  the  brow,  and  he  caught  him- 
self thinking  that  had  this  been  Damaris  — 

In  the  fading  daylight  they  rumbled  over  a  great 
bridge,  which  spanned  the  river  below  the  thundering 
waters  of  a  weir,  and  soon  thereafter  the  wheel- 
ploughed  roads  gave  place  to  cobbles;  houses  loomed 
on  either  hand;  they  were  entering  the  town  of 
Chertsey. 

The  Captain  had  desired  to  be  set  down  at  the 
Giant's  Head  —  the  hostelry  where  his  servant 
awaited  him  with  the  baggage,  that  he  might  give  the 
fellow  his  commands.  So  the  chaise  came  to  a  stand- 
still before  the  inn,  and  stood  there  some  five  minutes, 
what  time  the  Captain  went  within. 

Now  it  happens  that  those  were  five  as  momentous 
minutes  as  any  that  he  had  spent  that  day.  They 
completed  for  Fate  the  work  which  her  agent,  the 
highwayman,  had  begun  on  Hownslow  Heath. 

In  her  corner  of  the  chaise  the  golden-headed  child 
sat  brooding  with  an  ill-humoured  droop  in  the  lines 
of  her  pretty  mouth.  If  there  was  in  life  an  influence 
to  which  every  nerve  and  thread  of  her  was  sensitive, 
that  influence  was  the  interest  she  excited  in  the  male. 
The  attraction  of  the  other  sex  seemed  to  be  the  very 
mainspring  of  her  being,  and  where  she  failed  entirely 
of  this,  her  natural  object,  the  failure  fretted  her, 
leaving  her  vanity  raw  and  aching,  her  little  spirit 


$6  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

bitter.  She  was  accustomed  to  see  her  cousin  reap 
the  greater  harvest  of  such  interest,  but  she  was  not 
enured  to  it,  although  she  accounted  that  for  this  an 
explanation  existed  which  nowise  reflected  upon  her- 
self. But  never  yet  in  all  her  experience  had  she  failed 
more  signally  than  on  the  present  occasion;  never 
had  she  seen  a  man  more  entirely  absorbed  by  her 
demure  cousin  than  this  Captain  Gaynor,  never  one 
who  had  treated  herself  with  such  utter,  such  almost 
calculated  disregard. 

With  burning  cheeks  and  quivering  lips,  like  a 
whipped  child,  she  huddled  herself  miserably  in  her 
corner.  Twice  she  had  addressed  the  Captain,  and  he 
had  scarce  answered  her,  so  intent  was  he  upon  her 
cousin.  It  was,  she  vowed,  not  to  be  borne.  He  was 
an  insufferable  boor.  When  he  alighted  at  the  inn  at 
Chertsey  she  exploded  —  not  noisily,  but  with  a  quiet, 
stinging  scorn  that  she  knew  how  to  employ  upon 
occasion. 

'Heigho!'  she  sighed.  'I  do  thank  Heaven, 
Damaris,  that  when  I  am  wooed  'twill  be  for  myself 
and  not  my  money-bags.' 

And  by  this  speech  you  learn  of  the  misapprehen- 
sion under  which  Captain  Gaynor  had  laboured  as  to 
the  respective  identities  of  the  two  girls  —  a  mis- 
apprehension buttressed  by  the  circumstance  that 
both  girls  addressed  Lady  Kynaston  alike  as  'mother.' 

The  pale  face  of  Damaris  showed  ghostly  almost 
in  the  deepening  gloom.  A  shadow  crossed  it. 

'How  unkind  in  you,  Evelyn,'  was  her  gentle 
rebuke.  'And  it  is  an  unkindness  of  which  you  never 
weary.  Is  it  not  enough  that  I  know  I  am  wooed  and 
won  for  what  I  have?'  she  inquired,  and  there  was  an 
oddly  bitter  note  in  the  question,  arguing  a  convic- 


FATE'S  AGENTS  57 

tion  acquired  in  suffering.  'Do  you  consider  that  to 
be  so  enviable  an  estate  that  you  must  for  ever  be 
reminding  me  of  it?' 

'My  dear!'  purred  Lady  Kynaston  to  soothe  her, 
'Evelyn  is  heedless,  no  more.' 

'It  were  kinder  to  be  less,'  said  Damaris. 

But  Evelyn's  little  laugh  was  sharp  and  unpleasant. 

'  La ! '  said  she.  '  You  will  for  ever  be  misapprehend- 
ing me.  'Twas  not  to  Lord  Pauncefort  that  I  referred, 
but  to  this  Captain  Gaynor,  who  is  an  ensample  of  all 
the  others.' 

'What  have  I  done?'  cried  Damaris. 

"Tis  not  what  you  have  done,  my  dear;  'tis  what 
your  fortune  does  for  you.  That  is  why  I  am  thankful 
to  be  as  I  am.' 

'I  have  always  said,'  put  in  the  inconsequent  Lady 
Kynaston, '  that  we  all  have  a  deal  more  to  be  thank- 
ful for  than  we  are  aware.'  The  good,  dull  woman 
scented  no  quarrel  here.  'Twas  not  by  hints  that  facts 
were  to  be  brought  to  the  notice  of  her  ladyship. 

'Evelyn,  I  do  not  understand  you,'  said  Damaris. 

Miss  Kynaston  moved  petulantly.  She  sat  for- 
ward, so  that  a  shaft  of  light  coming  from  one  of  the 
windows  of  the  inn  threw  the  golden  head  and  win- 
some face  into  sharp  relief  against  the  gloom  of  that 
interior,  and  revealed  the  bitter  lines  in  which  the 
perfect  —  the  all- too-perfect  —  mouth  was  set. 

'The  man  had  no  eyes  save  for  you,'  she  sneered. 
You  see,  she  was  not  subtle. 

'Should  that  be  my  fault  even  were  it  true?'  quoth 
Damaris,  and  she  put  out  a  hand  to  take  her  cousin's, 
in  her  sweet  desire  to  conciliate. 

But  Evelyn  was  quick  to  avoid  the  contact. 

'Nay,'  she  answered,  'not  your  fault.   'Tis  what  I 


58  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

am  saying.  *Tis  the  fault  of  other  things;  the  penalty 
of  being  so  great  an  heiress.' 

'I  have  always  said  that  there  is  no  station  in  life 
but  has  its  penalties,  my  dears,'  murmured  Lady 
Kynaston,  still  all  unconscious  of  the  duel  that  was 
being  fought  there  under  her  very  nose. 

And  now  Damaris  answered  as  she  would  not  have 
answered  —  for  her  nature  was  all  compounded  of 
gentleness  —  but  that  she  was  stung  to  it  by  this 
persistent  gibe,  and  yet  more  by  Evelyn's  avoidance 
of  her  hand.  More,  that  gibe  had  wounded  her  as 
only  truth  can  wound;  for  she  had  more  than  cause 
to  perceive  the  truth  of  it,  and  her  gentle  soul  was 
all  raw  from  a  cruel  humiliation  lately  suffered,  as 
presently  you  shall  learn. 

'Why,  as  for  Captain  Gaynor,'  said  she,  'I  do  not 
believe  that  he  knew  which  was  Damaris  Hollinstone, 
which  Evelyn  Kynaston.' 

A  laugh  was  her  cousin's  only  answer  —  very 
eloquent  of  incredulity  of  so  preposterous  a  state- 
ment. 

'I  can  tell  you,  at  least,'  said  Damaris,  'that  twice 
he  addressed  me  as  Miss  Kynaston.' 

'Did  he  so?'  cried  her  ladyship.  "Twas  an  odd 
mistake!' 

'Odd,  indeed!'  sneered  Evelyn.  If  she  had  been 
hurt  before,  she  was  in  torment  now,  until  vanity 
came  to  reassure  her,  and  confidently  to  assert  that 
this  was  a  deliberate  untruth.  She  estimated  herself 
highly,  and  she  accounted  preposterous  and  fatuous 
any  assumption  that  in  equality  of  circumstances  she 
could  fail  to  carry  an  easy  victory  over  her  cousin. 
This  and  her  resentment  drove  her  now  to  her  out- 
rageous proposal. 


FATE'S  AGENTS  59 

*  If  that  be  so,  if  he  is,  indeed,  not  clear  which  of  us 
is  Damaris  Hollinstone,  the  lady  of  fortune,  shall  we' 
—  she  paused,  and  her  voice  assumed  a  note  of  sly- 
ness—  'shall  we  convey  to  him  the  impression  that 
I  am  she?  —  that  you  are  just  penniless  Evelyn 
Kynaston  ? ' 

'My  child,  what  are  you  saying?'  broke  in  her 
mother.  '  You  are  very  far  from  penniless;  you  are  — ' 

'I  speak  comparatively,  mother  dear  —  as  com- 
pared with  Damaris  here.  Come,  Damaris,  what  do 
you  say?' 

'Say?'  echoed  Damaris,  amazement  ringing  in  her 
voice.  '  I  say  that  you  are  out  of  your  senses,  Evelyn.' 

Evelyn  hummed  a  moment  through  closed  lips; 
then  her  scornful  little  laugh  trilled  forth  again. 
'Heigho!  I  fear  me  you  are  a  boaster,  Damaris.' 

'Evelyn!'  interjected  her  shocked  mother. 

'A  boaster  —  I?'  quoth  Damaris  warmly. 

'What  else  —  since  you  dare  not  put  your  assertion 
to  the  test?' 

'Dare  not?'  Damaris  was  moved  to  something  al- 
most approaching  anger.  Gentle  she  was;  but  she  was 
also  conscious  of  what  was  due  to  herself;  and  here 
it  seemed  was  one  who  craved  a  lesson  on  that  subject. 

'  Dare  not,'  Evelyn  insisted,  snapping. 

'But,  my  dears,  it  would  be  so  vastly  confusing!' 
protested  Lady  Kynaston. 

Damaris  took  her  resolve.  '  'Twill  be  only  for  a  day 
or  so,'  said  she.  'And  you  must  induce  Sir  John  to 
countenance  this  pretence.  'Tis  for  your  daughter's 
good,  I  assure  you,'  she  added,  something  grimly. 

'You  —  you  consent,  then?'  cried  Evelyn,  a  little 
breathlessly,  gripped  now  that  the  matter  was  to  be 
tested,  by  a  sudden  fear  of  failure. 


60  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'  You  leave  me  no  alternative.  Be  Damaris  Hollin- 
stone,  then,  and  should  you  fail  in  the  unworthy  task 
you  have  in  mind,  never  let  me  hear  again  this  taunt 
with  which  you  have  so  often  wounded  me.'  She  sank 
back  into  her  corner. 

Evelyn's  answer  was  a  laugh.  Her  momentary  fear 
had  passed.  If  in  addition  to  the  beauty  Heaven  had 
bestowed  upon  her,  she  had  the  embellishment  of  a 
fortune,  there  was  little  cause  to  fear  that  she  would 
fail. 

But  at  this  point  her  mother  intervened,  grasping 
at  last  the  drift  of  what  was  afoot  and  whither  it 
might  lead. 

'But,  my  dears,'  she  cried,  'I  do  not  desire  Captain 
Gaynor's  wooing  of  my  daughter.  I  will  not  have  it, 
Evelyn;  leastways  not  until  I  know  more  of  this 
gentleman.  I  am  not  sure  that  he  is  a  desirable 
husband.  He  is  a  very  gallant,  handsome  gentleman, 
to  be  sure,  and  that  is  something  almost  unusual  in 
these  days;  but  I  understand  that  he  is  a  soldier  of 
fortune.' 

'A  soldier  of  fortune!'  breathed  Evelyn.  'He  is  a 
soldier  of  fortune,  and  yet  you  would  have  me 
believe  that  he —  But  here  he  comes!  Chut! 
Henceforth  I  am  Damaris  Hollinstone,  mother  — 
please  remember.' 

The  footman  opened  the  door  of  the  chaise  for  the 
Captain,  who  ascended  briskly,  breathing  apologies 
for  the  delay. 


CHAPTER  V 
THE  WARNING 

IT  would  really  seem  as  if  Fate  were  determined  to 
leave  the  Captain  no  way  of  escape  from  the 
situation  into  which  she  had  thrust  him.  Her  agents 
had  been  first  the  highwayman  and  then  Miss 
Kynaston.  What  the  acquisitiveness  of  the  one  had 
begun,  the  vanity  of  the  other  had  continued.  Even 
so,  however,  circumstances  had  not  yet  gone  so  far 
astray  from  the  proper  road  but  that  a  word  from  Sir 
John  Kynaston  must  presently  have  set  all  to  rights 
once  more.  But  here  again  Fate  was  at  hand  to  round 
off  her  ironic  work.  When  the  chaise  bearing  the 
Captain  and  the  ladies  arrived  at  Priory  Close,  they 
found  Sir  John,  spurred  and  booted,  on  the  very  point 
of  departure,  summoned  an  hour  since  by  a  courier 
to  the  bedside  of  his  brother  who  lay  ill  at  Bath.  The 
baronet  had  but  waited  to  welcome  Captain  Gaynor 
ere  he  set  out. 

It  was  twenty  years  since  the  Captain  last  had 
visited  Priory  Close.  He  had  retained,  however,  a 
very  vivid  recollection  of  the  house  to  which,  as  a 
little  lad  of  nine,  he  had  been  taken  by  his  father. 
Between  his  father  and  Sir  John  the  very  deepest 
friendship  had  existed,  and  Harry  Gaynor  himself 
was  conscious  of  an  inheritance  in  this  respect,  for  Sir 
John  had  ever  treated  him  with  almost  parental 
affection.  Nevertheless,  on  no  single  one  of  the 
occasions  of  his  visit  to  England  during  the  last  seven 
years  (his  father  had  followed  James  II  to  France  and 


62  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Harry  had  gone  with  him,  his  mother  being  dead) 
had  Captain  Gaynor  set  foot  at  Priory  Close  or  made 
the  acquaintance  of  the  baronet's  lady  and  daughter. 
This  had  been  by  his  own  desire,  and  lest  in  the  event 
of  his  apprehension  and  the  discovery  of  his  business 
Sir  John  should  come  to  be  implicated  with  him.  And 
when  Sir  John  had  formerly  pressed  him  to  make  of 
Priory  Close  his  headquarters  during  his  sojourn  in 
England,  pointing  out  that  he  would  receive  additional 
shelter  from  the  circumstance  that  the  baronet  him- 
self stood  high  above  all  suspicion,  was  a  Justice  of 
the  Peace  and  universally  accounted  the  most  solid 
of  Whigs,  Captain  Gaynor  had  ever  made  answer  that 
these  were  but  additional  reasons  why  a  person  so 
very  valuable  to  his  master  should  not  jeopardise  the 
position  which  he  held. 

On  the  present  occasion,  however,  the  Captain  had 
considered  that  in  view  of  the  more  than  ordinarily 
elaborate  precautions  he  had  taken  and  the  excellent 
pretext  upon  which  he  was  in  England  —  a  pretext 
which,  if  the  worst  befell,  might  clearly  be  urged  to 
have  imposed  upon  Sir  John  as  much  as  upon  any 
other  —  he  was  justified  in  accepting  the  hospitality 
which  the  baronet  was  so  affectionately  eager  to 
extend  to  him. 

Sir  John  received  him  now  with  a  welcome  of  quite 
extraordinary  warmth. 

Vigour  of  constitution,  tranquillity  of  conscience, 
clean  living  and  abundance  of  exercise  had  marvel- 
lously preserved  Sir  John  against  the  undermining 
work  of  time.  In  this,  his  sixtieth  year,  he  had  the 
air  of  a  man  of  little  more  than  forty.  True,  he 
inclined  to  portliness,  but  not  unduly  so;  and  being 
tall  of  body  and  erect  of  carriage  his  portliness  seemed 


THi  "G  :; 

■„".  zi~  Z'i.  2~  i:i~  :  i:e  : :  •". r:  -".  ~;s  ::;?e":;  ~  e*e 
ceir.  xrt~  i  ~  i  2iiiii2_7  r.i.iii .":_:  .:  ~i.s.  i_iee-.i. 
his  ere;  :iii:  ~:e  :>.:e">r  TtiZ'ZZi.z'.t  :::  his  7:  -iii'_ 
-  :  • . :h  :ir.-ii,  :  :  :  .  . ;  -:  ihe 
—  niei  reri~i.z  ~ hi:h  he  L-ririihl-  ~  :re7  his 
c.:u-:e-u-.:e  "is  n:':ir  2-1  ze1.i2.ii7  :.:•:::-:. 

E.s:ee~;nz  ^ 2: :i: "  jri"~:r  .mz-~-7  15  ~e  i_i.  ::r 
iniiiies  ::'  ~h:<.e  e:ds:e.-.:e  11  hi_~  ~:~e  —1.5  i-errer 
2~ir=  :h.2-  Sir  ,T:'"_-  K7-15::-.  111  h2.vi.-z  1 :  5,:- 
::  z_s  :~-  ::  s~i::eei  .~i.~.  r.e  :. .- :  ::r  s.:~e  nrr.e 
-:  irishezi  :h.e  se.re:  \:  ihe 

^  1  r : 2 :-  ~  z .-. :  : :  ~  r  : :  ~  2 /. e  1  :..::::.  :  e : ~ een  ~.~. t ~ . 
7:  :h.e  :'ic:  111:  ur-:n  his  :~r.  rr.eri:  ihere  -is  1:  zr.iz 
~h:~  Si-  J:h_-  ~ niizi  ~:re  :  ::ii  -  _;  hvt  ~ eii:~  eh 
-'•:    r  .s    s:  Tie 

r'rienshii  :e~-ee-  :h.e  birrr.r:  211  hie  eiier  Sivrirr, 
i~i  :he  :h:--iz:h:  11.2:  51:1  1  111:1  ~~:__i  :::  ~.~ . ".: 
:ri  =  r.hshir's  5 ike  .-. :. •  ■;  i=_izh:;-i  H21T7  3:~-;;s 
r*2:h.e.-  hn  he  i _   ei. 

Sir  J:ij:  ~ ;i_ii  hi~e   :iii:   ::  r -hi  en  li  7    .:?•:-    :hiii 

e.  ':.:::': :  :     :  :        z  —  lis  _    :  =  -      .  v  I    r 

:ie  :i:ii  in  ihe  sn.zr1i2.-i7   :.:.::.i;   117   ::  lis  _:e 

-   z.---z/':\.    hi:   iherishei  1 :    iehii::ii    ::r.:i":    :z 

her.  He  knew  the  dangerous  extent  of  her  inherent 

.  _ :      :     : "~ en 

her  rc.-h.2r5  :'r.t  ~:re  11:215;   : ;  :n  very  ::.... 1:5. 

1   2ife-:::::i   ihi:  ~ 21   riei:       :h   y  1     :'::   .■-.- 

'"  es.. 

:  s:  hii  :-.;  1  r.^.-Jii 


in  :h.e  ~:: 

si  .1:  z'.~..~. 

-""■  21    ;  "•  r  7 


64  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

had  occasioned  him.  He  thrust  from  his  sight  her 
shortcomings.  He  magnified  to  himself  her  virtues 
of  docility  and  simple  good-nature,  and  sturdily  he 
took  consolation  in  them.  To  his  councils,  however, 
she  was  not  admitted.  She  knew  no  more  of  the 
inward  workings  of  his  mind  than  she  knew  of  any 
other  man's;  she  had,  for  instance,  the  same  notion 
of  his  politics  as  had  Mr.  Templeton  and  the  other 
gentlemen  into  whose  eyes  he  flung  dust  with  the 
hand  of  calculation. 

Where  another  might  have  inveighed  against  his 
wife  and  attached  to  her  the  blame  for  the  short- 
comings which  her  daughter  had  inherited,  Sir  John, 
with  a  rare  fortitude  and  breadth  of  outlook,  in- 
veighed against  himself  alone,  and  neither  upon  wife 
nor  daughter  did  he  visit  a  fault  that  proceeded  from 
his  own  error.  Sir  John,  you  will  have  gathered,  was 
something  of  a  philosopher. 

There  remained  Evelyn's  future  to  concern  him. 
Being  as  she  was,  he  foresaw  an  ocean  of  trouble  in 
her  married  life  unless  he  could  contrive  for  her  a 
husband  at  once  tender  and  dominant,  a  tried  man 
whose  patience  and  strength  would  mould  her  perhaps 
as  he,  himself,  had  failed  to  do,  and  at  the  same  time 
cherish  and  shelter  her  and  steer  her  clear  of  those 
shoals  of  life  upon  which,  without  strong  guidance, 
she  seemed  foredoomed  to  suffer  shipwreck. 

In  Harry  Gaynor  he  believed  that  he  had  found  the 
very  man  for  his  purpose,  and  if  at  times  he  deemed  it 
impossible  that  Harry  Gaynor,  being  as  he  was, 
should  bestow  so  much  as  a  thought  upon  Evelyn,  yet 
at  others  —  being  a  philosopher,  as  I  have  said  —  he 
would  reflect  that  in  Nature's  inscrutably  admirable 
way  it  was  often  ordained  that  precisely  such  men 


THE  WARNING  65 

should  be  attracted  by  just  such  women.  Upon  this 
slender  foundation,  then,  he  would  build  his  hope 
what  time  he  waited. 

When  so  much  is  understood  some  notion  is  formed 
of  the  affectionate  quality  of  the  welcome  which  Sir 
John  extended  to  his  guest  and  of  the  concern  for  his 
guest's  welfare  which  inspired  him.  Being,  as  he  was, 
in  some  haste  to  depart,  and  as  some  days  might 
elapse  ere  he  returned,  he  was  yet  anxious  to  know 
how  fared  with  Captain  Gaynor  the  dangerous  matter 
which  had  occasioned  his  visit  to  England. 

So,  with  little  more  than  a  word  of  explanation  and 
apology,  he  at  once  carried  off  his  guest  to  the  seclusion 
of  the  library.  There,  having  again  expressed  his 
regrets  at  this  urgent  need  for  departure  in  the  very 
hour  of  his  guest's  arrival,  and  having  satisfied  him- 
self, as  indeed  any  might  do  at  a  glance,  of  Harry's 
physical  well-being,  he  questioned  him  solicitously 
on  the  score  of  his  mission.  For  however  urgent  the 
unfortunate  circumstance  that  called  Sir  John  away, 
he  esteemed  scarcely  less  urgent  the  thing  he  had  to 
say  to  Captain  Gaynor. 

In  the  golden  candle-light  from  a  silver  cluster 
that  stood  upon  the  library  table,  the  Captain's 
bronzed  face  showed  overcast.  He  confessed  that 
so  far  he  had  no  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  pro- 
gress of  his  master's  Cause  in  England. 

Sir  John  nodded  slowly,  his  own  face  thoughtful. 
'There,'  he  said,  'you  do  not  surprise  me.  There  are 
moments  when — '  He  paused,  and  looked  at  the 
young  man  with  eyes  of  the  very  kindliest  concern. 
'Has  no  doubt  ever  crossed  your  mind,  Harry?'  he 
inquired  gently.  'Have  you  never  asked  yourself 
whether  you  may  not  have  wedded  your  young  life, 


66  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

your  energies  and  enthusiasms  to  a  dream  —  to  the 
fruitless  service  of  a  company  of  dreamers?' 

1  Sir  John ! '  exclaimed  the  other  sharply,  the  faint- 
est flush  stirring  under  the  tan  of  his  cheeks.  Then, 
almost  sadly,  he  asked:  'Are  you,  too,  failing  him?' 

Sir  John  smiled;  his  blue  eyes  were  steadfast.  'I 
was  speaking  of  you,  Harry;  not  of  myself.  You  are 
young,  full  of  enthusiasm,  ability,  and  energy.  Life 
lies  before  you.  The  world's  your  very  oyster.  I  am 
an  old  hulk,  who  matters  nothing  —  or  very  little. 
Being  this,  I  am  content  to  abide  where  I  am,  and  to 
continue  to  hold  by  what  I  have  held.  But  were  I 
you  —  had  I  my  youth  and  all  my  life  before  me  — 
I  am  not  sure  that  my  loyalty  would  stand  the  strain 
of  its  fruitless  sacrifice.' 

'Fruitless?'  cried  the  young  man  hotly.  'Have  you 
lost  faith  in  us?  Do  you  think  that  we  shall  not  pre- 
vail ? ' 

Sir  John  sighed.  Slowly  and  thoughtfully  he  shook 
his  head.  '  I  hope  it,  I  pray  for  it,  as  every  decent  man 
must  hope  and  pray  for  right  and  justice.  But  what 
you  have  just  perceived  has  been  under  my  eyes  for 
some  time.  It  fills  me  with  despondency.  It  well 
might  cause  me  to  turn  aside  if  I  were  younger  and 
mattered  more.' 

'It  is  that  you  see  this  and  nothing  else,'  the 
Captain  argued.  'If  I  saw  no  more  than  this  I  might 
share  your  fears.  As  it  is,  I  confess  that  gathering  at 
Pauncefort's  house  three  nights  ago  was  a  saddening 
spectacle.  There  we  assembled  most  of  those  upon 
whom  His  Majesty  depends  —  a  round  dozen  of  the 
men  he  believes  to  be  his  most  stalwart  and  energetic 
supporters.  I  was  his  accredited  agent,  coming 
amongst  them  for  the  first  time,  adventuring  my  neck 


THE  WARNING  67 

to  bring  them  news  and  receive  theirs.  Yet  they  had 
naught  for  me.  The  night  was  spent  in  gaming,  and  I 
saw  such  sums  staked  and  won  and  lost,  that  when  I 
considered  the  plight  of  our  gracious  king,  his  urgent 
need  of  funds,  I  could  have  broken  that  table  into 
shivers  under  their  eyes  as  some  small  protest  against 
their  foul  supineness.' 

*  Ah? '  said  Sir  John.  He  was  profoundly  interested. 
'And  the  play  ran  high?' 

'Myself  I  won  and  lost  again  upwards  of  ten 
thousand  guineas/  said  the  Captain  coldly. 

The  baronet  gasped.  He  raised  his  hands  —  in  one 
of  which  he  held  his  hat  and  riding-crop  —  to  let 
them  fall  again  to  his  sides.  He  laughed  softly,  sadly 
contemptuous.  'Aye!'  he  said.  'Aye!  And  yet, 
Harry,  when  such  is  the  attitude  of  those  whose  very 
interest  it  should  be  to  support  and  encompass  the 
return  of  our  exiled  king,  what  hope  can  remain  that 
the  Cause  will  ultimately  prevail?' 

'None  if  we  could  not  look  farther  than  this.  But 
we  can.'  His  eyes  glowed,  and  his  voice  rang  with  a 
sudden  confidence.   'Scotland  will  rise  again/ 

'Scotland!'  said  the  baronet.  'Build  not  overmuch 
on  Scotland.  It  rose  before.  You  were  in  the  rising 
yourself.  It  is  not  so  very  long  since.  You  were  there; 
you  saw,  and  yet — '  He  smiled.  'Oh,  to  be  young 
and  have  youth's  eternal  faith  in  the  fulfilment  of  its 
desires!' 

'Things  shall  be  better  planned  another  time/  was 
the  Captain's  confident  assurance.  '  And,  after  all,  per- 
haps we  despond  too  soon  concerning  the  conditions 
of  things  here.  London  is  not  England  when  all  is  said.' 

'It  is  the  heart,  at  least;  and  from  the  movements 
of  the  heart  you  may  gauge  the  liveliness  of  the  body.' 


68  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

But  Captain  Gaynor  disregarded  this.  'I  must  to 
Rochester  and  talk  with  Atterbury  one  of  these  days. 
I  have  messages  for  him  from  His  Majesty.  And  on 
this  night  week  I  am  to  confer  with  a  party  of  our 
friends  again  in  London.  Pauncefort  is  sending  word 
to  them.' 

Sir  John's  brows  came  thoughtfully  together.  He 
turned  aside,  and  with  hands  clasped  behind  him  he 
paced  the  room  to  the  window  and  back  until  again 
he  was  standing  before  his  guest.  Then  he  placed 
hat  and  whip  upon  the  table  and  set  his  hands  upon 
the  young  man's  shoulders. 

'I  speak  to  you  as  to  a  child  of  my  own,'  he  said. 
'Consider  well  ere  you  go  further.  You  owe  it  to 
yourself.  Did  I  see  any  reasonable  hope  I  were 
indeed  the  very  last  to  dissuade  you.  But  here  I  see 
you  wasting  yourself  upon  a  dream/ 

'Have  not  you  done  the  same,  Sir  John?' 

'It  is  out  of  that  very  experience  that  I  warn  you. 
I  have  been  fortunate  and  come  scatheless  through 
so  far.  But  were  it  all  to  do  again  —  who  knows?  I 
am  old,  I  say,'  the  baronet  repeated,  smiling  — '  too 
old  to  change,  and  of  too  little  consequence.' 

'And  of  what  consequence  am  I?'  cried  Gaynor. 
'  I  am  a  soldier  of  fortune,  without  kith  or  kin  in  all 
the  world.* 

'If  you  had  these?'  quoth  the  baronet  quickly,  a 
sudden  gleam  in  those  clear,  youthful  eyes  of  his  — 
'if  you  had  these?' 

'It  were  different,  perhaps.  But  I  have  them  not, 
nor  want  them  —  which  is  as  well,  for  I  have  no  right 
to  them  while  this  duty  stands  before  me.  You  speak 
to  me  as  a  father,  Sir  John  — ' 

'I  do,  my  dear  boy.' 


THE  WARNING  69 

'And  yet  you  know  that  my  father  would  not  have 
spoken  so.'  It  was  said  in  a  sad  tone  of  remonstrance, 
of  argument,  that  contained  no  offence. 

The  answer  startled  Harry  Gaynor. 

'I  am  not  sure.'  Sir  John's  voice  was  calm  and 
steady.  '  I  try  to  speak  to  you  as  I  believe  your  father 
would  speak  were  he  alive  to-day.  You  see,  I  knew 
him  very  well,  Harry;  better  far  than  ever  you  knew 
him.  But  there!  We  will  talk  no  more  to-night.  I 
have  far  to  ride.'  He  took  up  hat  and  whip  once  more. 
'  Use  this  house  as  your  own  home  till  I  return,  and  — 
and  go  warily,  lad.'  He  patted  the  Captain's  shoulder 
affectionately.   'Go  warily.' 

CI  shall  go  warily,  never  fear,'  was  the  easy  answer; 
'the  more  so  since  the  Government  is  already 
acquainted  with  my  presence  in  England.' 

Sir  John  threw  up  his  head  in  alarm,  the  habitual 
joviality  fading  from  his  countenance. 

'Oh,  not  in  my  own  name,'  the  Captain  reassured 
him.  'They  dream  of  no  connection  between 
"Captain  Jenkyn"  and  Captain  Gaynor,  and  Mr. 
Templeton  is  seeking  to  find  for  Captain  Gaynor  a 
post  in  the  Colonies.  But  he  knows  that  Captain 
Jenkyn  is  in  England,  and  his  spies  are  searching  for 
that  Jacobite  agent  very  diligently.' 

'You  are  sure  —  you  are  quite  sure  that  Mr.  Tem- 
pleton does  not  connect  you  with  — ' 

'Nay,'  laughed  the  Captain,  'I  should  be  laid  by 
the  heels  already  were  that  the  case.'  And,  further  to 
reassure  his  host,  he  related  the  friendly  entertain- 
ment he  had  received  from  the  Second  Secretary.  'It 
is  not  fear  that  concerns  me,'  he  ended.  'What 
concerns  me  is  to  discover  this  traitor  who  is  so 
singularly  well  informed.' 


70  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

1  Well,  well ! '  sighed  the  baronet,  and  upon  that  he 
seemed  to  dismiss  the  subject.  He  held  out  his  hand 
in  farewell. 

'I  devoutly  hope,'  said  the  Captain,  'that  you  will 
find  your  brother's  condition  improved  when  you 
arrive  at  Bath.' 

'I  trust  so,  indeed,  Harry.  I  shall  return  as  soon 
as  may  be.' 

He  had  reached  the  door  when  he  paused  again. 
He  turned  once  more,  and  his  face  was  very  grave, 
his  clear  eyes  oddly  troubled.  He  came  slowly 
back. 

'A  last  word,  Harry  my  boy,'  said  he,  in  a  low  voice. 
'Be  wary  how  far  you  trust  my  Lord  Pauncefort.  I 
do  not.' 

The  Captain's  surprise  stared  from  his  eyes. 
'How?'  he  cried.   'What  is't  you  imply?' 

'Ah,  don't  ask  me,'  returned  the  other,  shaking  his 
head.  'I  have  no  clear  cause,  perhaps,  for  saying  so 
much.  Yet  I  say  it  urgently  —  beware  of  Pauncefort. 
Good-night.' 

But  the  Captain  would  not  let  him  go  on  that.  He 
caught  the  baronet's  sleeve.  'Sir  John!'  he  cried. 
'You  cannot  leave  it  there.' 

Gaynor's  every  instinct  was  to  brush  the  warning 
aside.  But  he  was  never  a  man  to  obey  his  instincts. 
He  required  reasons  ere  he  judged,  and  for  reasons  he 
now  pressed  Sir  John.  He  put  it  that  his  life  might 
be  hanging  in  the  balance,  which  rendered  him  ir- 
resistible. 

Sir  John  sighed  and  frowned.  He  flicked  his  boots 
abstractedly  with  his  whip,  and  looked  the  very 
picture  of  reluctance. 

'God  knows,'  he  said  at  last,  'it  is  against  my 


THE  WARNING  71 

nature  to  heap  up  molehills  into  mountains  that  will 
entomb  a  man's  honour,  and  it  is  what  you  are  asking 
of  me,  Harry.' 

'Nay.  What  I  ask  you  is  to  produce  your  reasons 
that  I  may  combat  them.  If  these  are  but  molehills  I 
shall  recognise  them  and  kick  them  over,  never  fear. 
I  cannot  credit  what  you  imply;  but  neither  can  I 
credit  that  you  would  imply  it  without  good  grounds 
—  or  grounds  that  you  consider  good.  I  beg  you  to 
let  me  have  a  sight  of  these  that  I  may  judge  them  for 
myself.' 

'Why,  then,'  said  Sir  John,  though  still  with 
obvious  reluctance, '  to  be  quite  frank,  first  and  fore- 
most —  indeed,  first  and  last  —  Pauncefort  is  a 
desperate  gamester,  a  gamester  rendered  desperate 
by  disastrous  speculation.  There  are  excellent 
reasons  why  I  should  have  informed  myself  of  his 
affairs,  and  I  know  that  he  totters  upon  the  very 
brink  of  ruin,  that  he  is  in  the  clutches  of  a  money- 
lender named  Israel  Suarez,  who  never  yet  spared 
any  man,  and  who  certainly  will  not  spare  his  lord- 
ship. Now  add  to  this  that  I  dislike  him  —  by  in- 
stinct and  by  reason  —  and  you  should  understand 
why  I  mistrust  him.' 

'Not  quite,'  said  Captain  Gaynor  slowly. 

'You  are  determined  not  to  spare  me,  Harry,' 
said  the  baronet  with  a  sad  smile.  'My  knowledge  of 
human  nature  has  taught  me  that  a  broken  gamester 
is  never  a  man  to  be  trusted.  When  in  addition  the 
man  is  one  in  whose  character  I  have  found  the  grav- 
est shortcomings,  you  will  understand  that  I  would 
have  you  be  as  wary  of  my  Lord  Pauncefort  as  I  am 
myself.' 

'As  you  are  yourself?'  cried  the  Captain  in  amaze- 


72  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

ment.   '  But,  then,  how  come  you  to  have  consented 
that  he  shall  marry  your  niece?' 

'I  have  not  consented  that  he  shall  marry  her,' 
answered  Sir  John.  'Had  I  done  so  they  would  have 
been  married  months  ago.' 

'  But  their  betrothal  ?  Surely  it  has  your  sanction  ? ' 

'Their  betrothal,  yes.  I  have  not  the  power  to 
withstand  it.  But  as  far  as  goes  the  power  conferred 
upon  me  by  my  brother-in-law,  the  late  Geoffrey 
Hollinstone,  I  have  exerted  it  and  I  shall  continue  to 
exert  it  to  oppose  this  union.  Let  me  explain,  Harry. 

'Damaris  Hollinstone,  as  all  the  world  knows,  is 
heiress  to  as  stout  a  fortune  as  any  in  England.  But 
by  the  terms  of  her  father's  will  she  does  not  enter 
into  the  enjoyment  and  control  of  it  until  she  shall 
have  reached  the  age  of  one  and  twenty,  or  until'  — 
he  added,  with  slow  emphasis  —  'she  shall  marry, 
provided  that  she  does  so  with  my  consent  and  ap- 
proval of  her  choice.  Should  she  marry  against  my 
wishes  before  she  attains  that  age,  she  receives  under 
her  father's  will  rather  less  than  a  tenth  of  his  estate 
—  a  modest  fortune  still,  but  negligible  when  com- 
pared with  the  colossal  total.  The  rest  of  it  is  to  be 
divided  amongst  a  parcel  of  cousins. 

'It  is  now  six  months  since  Pauncefort  first  wooed 
her.  She  was  a  child  of  little  more  than  nineteen,  with 
no  worldly  knowledge,  dazzled  by  so  imposing  a 
personality,  and  so  she  fell  an  easy  conquest.  But 
when  the  question  of  her  marriage  arose  I  deemed  it 
my  duty  to  oppose  it,  knowing  his  lordship's  ways  of 
life,  as  all  the  world  knows  them.  I  told  them,  how- 
ever, that  the  matter  was  not  one  that  need  drive 
them  to  despair.  If  my  Lord  Pauncefort  and  the  lady 
were  of  the  same  mind  in  a  year  and  a  half's  time  from 


THE  WARNING  73 

then  —  a  year  from  now  —  I  should  have  no  power 
to  oppose  their  union. 

'Damaris  was  content  to  wait.  Pauncefort,  how- 
ever, attempted  to  hector  me  in  private,  and  thus 
betrayed  something  of  his  real  aims  —  aims  concern- 
ing which  I  had  never  entertained  a  delusion.  In  the 
end,  however,  he  was  forced  to  take  me  strictly  at  my 
word.  He  asked  me  did  I,  meanwhile,  consent  to  their 
betrothal.  I  answered  that  I  had  not  the  power  to 
oppose  it. 

'I  was  content,  you  see,  to  leave  it  to  time  to  reveal 
his  lordship's  true  character  to  Damaris,  and,'  he 
added  slowly, '  I  think  that  at  last  she  has  discovered 
it. 

'Something  happened  a  week  ago,'  the  baronet 
continued,  smiling  rather  grimly,  'to  open  her  eyes, 
and  also  to  open  mine.  It  is  this  more  than  aught 
else  that  has  led  me  to  utter  my  warning  to  you. 

'His  lordship  sought  me  here.  He  was  a  little  wild 
and  not  quite  master  of  himself,  and  being  informed 
as  I  was  of  the  state  of  his  affairs,  I  did  not  marvel  at 
his  condition  or  his  visit  or  the  object  of  it.  He 
desired  me  to  consent  that  the  marriage  should  take 
place  at  once.  Oh,  he  was  very  vehement,  and  even 
very  plausible  in  all  that  he  urged.  I  answered  him 
that  I  did  not  account  it  my  duty  to  Damaris  and  to 
her  late  father,  in  whose  place  I  stand,  to  modify  the 
determination  taken  six  months  ago.  Thereupon  he 
demanded  haughtily  and  angrily  to  know  upon  what 
grounds  I  opposed  a  marriage  that  all  the  world 
accounted  eminently  suitable.  I  begged  him  not  to 
press  me,  but  I  was  not  sorry  that  he  insisted.  Know- 
ing what  I  knew  of  his  affairs,  I  knew  also  that  I  could 
hold  him  in  a  cleft  stick  did  I  so  choose. 


74  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'"Be  it  so,  then,"  I  answered  him.  "I  will  tell  you, 
but  in  the  presence  of  Damaris." 
n  'I  summoned  her;  and  when  she  came  I  told  her 
upon  what  manner  of  errand  his  lordship  had  visited 
me.  In  answer  she  assured  me  that  it  had  her  entire 
concurrence,  and  she  all  but  taxed  me  with  abusing 
the  power  which  her  father's  will  conferred  upon  me. 

'"Wait,  Damans,"  I  said.  "My  Lord  Pauncefort 
has  desired  me  to  state  my  reasons  for  opposing  this 
wedding,  and  I  have  desired  your  presence  that  you 
may  hear  my  answer." 

'He  was  standing  by  that  window,  yonder,  and  as  if 
to  mark  her  indifference  to  any  arguments  of  mine, 
she  crossed  to  his  side,  whilst  he  put  an  arm  about  her 
as  if  to  guard  her  from  me.  Oh,  it  was  vastly  touch- 
ing, I  assure  you;  but  there  was  something  more  to 
follow. 

'"Of  the  reasons  that  move  me,"  said  I,  "I  need  to 
state  but  two  —  the  two  most  tangible  and  irrefutable 
ones.  The  first  is  the  unsuitability  of  my  Lord 
Pauncefort  on  the  score  of  his  age.  He  is,  by  almost 
fifteen  years,  your  elder,  Damaris.  The  other  is  that 
I  am  persuaded  that  the  main  object  of  your  suit,  my 
lord,  is  not  my  niece  herself,  but  my  niece's  fortune." 

'They  cried  out  upon  me  together  at  that  de- 
nunciation. 

"'It  is  a  foul  untruth!"  thundered  my  lord  in  a 
great  passion. 

'"I  shall  rejoice  to  be  convinced  of  that,"  said  I. 
"I  am  to  understand,  then,  that  my  niece's  fortune 
weighs  for  nothing  in  your  calculations?" 

"'No  single  jot  —  I  swear  it,"  he  answers  me, 
mighty  hot. 

"'That  your  love  for  Damaris  is  entirely  dis- 


THE  WARNING  75 

interested?  That  you  would  make  her  your  vis- 
countess were  she  penniless?"  I  pursued. 

'"Yes,"  he  answered  me  fiercely,  "'pon  honour." 

"'You  swear  it  glibly  enough,"  said  I.  "But  will 
you  prove  it?" 

'"Prove  it?"  quoth  he,  and  I  saw  a  change  creep 
over  his  face.  He  was  quick  enough  to  discern  the 
trap  into  which  I  had  lured  him. 

'"It  is  within  your  power  to  do  so,"  I  assured  him. 
"You  know  the  terms  of  her  father's  will.  I  have  no 
power  to  withstand  the  marriage  if  you  are  both  set 
on't.  All  that  I  have  power  to  do  is  to  withhold  and 
disperse  the  inheritance.  But  since  that  counts  for 
nothing  with  you,  since  it  is  Damaris  you  want  and 
nothing  more,  since  your  love  for  her  knows  naught 
of  interest,  why,  take  and  marry  her  in  spite  of  me, 
and  God  give  you  joy  of  each  other."' 

Sir  John  paused  a  moment,  and  shook  his  head  in 
melancholy  retrospection. 

'Poor  Damaris!'  he  sighed.  'You  should  have  seen 
her  at  that  moment,  Harry  —  her  eyes  aglow  with 
confidence  in  herself  and  her  lover,  with  gladness  at 
the  prospect  upon  which  I  had  opened  that  crafty 
window.  What  cared  she  for  her  fortune,  poor  child  ? 
Gladly  would  she  forfeit  it  to  prove  her  love.  I  was 
turned  almost  sick  with  pity  at  the  sight  of  that 
joyous  transfiguration,  what  time  she  waited  for  that 
swift,  ardent  answer  upon  which  so  confidently  she 
counted  from  her  lover. 

'Alas!  It  never  came.  He  stood  stricken  there,  a 
little  pale,  staring  at  me  in  anger  and  dismay,  until 
at  last  she  raised  her  eyes  in  inquiry  to  his  face, 
wondering  why  the  answer  was  delayed.  Before 
what   she   saw   written   on    that   countenance   she 


y6  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

blenched,  and  with  a  little  cry  of  pain  she  drew  away 
from  his  arm,  which  had  grown  as  limp  as  all  the  rest 
of  him. 

'He  turned  to  her.  "Damans!"  he  cried.  "Hear 
me!  Wait!  You  do  not  understand." 

'"I  think  that  I  understand  at  last,"  she  answered, 
and  her  voice  was  like  a  knife.  I  could  have  wept  for 
the  poor  child. 

'And  Pauncefort  still  sought  to  reason  with  her,  to 
explain  that  which  was  clear  already  beyond  all  words. 
"Don't  you  see,  Damaris,"  was  his  plea,  "that  if  we 
do  this,  we  give  Sir  John  the  victory  —  that  it  is  the 
very  thing  he  desires  since  'twill  be  to  his  benefit." 

'It  was  true  enough,  though  I  had  not  given  the 
matter  a  thought.  And  yet  he  could  not  have  em- 
ployed an  argument  that  must  more  surely  have 
completed  his  damnation. 

'"To  his  benefit?"  she  questioned,  snatching  at  a 
straw  of  hope.   "How  to  his  benefit?" 

"'Why,  of  the  inheritance  that  is  to  be  dispersed 
under  such  circumstances,  ten  thousand  pounds  will 
go  into  his  own  coffers." 

'"It  shall  go  instead,"  said  I,  "to  Chelsea  Hos- 
pital." 

'  But  not  even  so  much  defence  was  needed  to  such 
an  imputation.  She  looked  at  him,  and  never  have  I 
seen  a  deadlier  smile  on  living  face. 

'"You  are  marvellous  well  acquainted  with  the 
terms  of  this  will,"  said  she,  and  struck  him  breathless 
by  the  unexpectedness  of  that  overwhelming  blow. 
"You  must  have  given  it  some  hours  of  study."  With 
that  and  a  little  laugh,  she  turned  again,  and  left  us 
here  together.' 

Once  more  Sir  John  paused.    He  looked  at  his 


THE  WARNING  77 

companion  with  a  wan  smile.  Captain  Gaynor  met 
the  look  with  eyes  that  were  gleaming  oddly;  his  lips 
were  very  tightly  pressed.  He  had  listened  intently  to 
every  word,  and  he  was  reflecting  that  the  question- 
able game  he  had  played  at  Pauncefort's  had  been 
still  more  questionable  than  he  had  deemed  it  since; 
for  Pauncefort,  it  seemed,  had  staked  something  that 
could  not  be  called  his  own.  And  what  faith  can  be 
reposed  in  a  man  who  stoops  to  a  practice  so  dis- 
honourable ?  But  Sir  John's  story  had  not  yet  reached 
the  end. 

'It  was  after  she  had  gone  that  he  revealed  him- 
self,' he  resumed.  'He  stormed  and  raged,  and 
finally  he  threatened  me.' 

'Threatened?'  echoed  the  Captain,  haled  sud- 
denly out  of  his  musings  by  that  word. 

'Aye,  threatened  —  covertly.  He  swore  that  I 
should  bitterly  repent  me  of  that  day's  work.  I  ask 
you,  Harry:  To  what  could  his  threats  have  refer- 
ence? What  could  be  in  his  mind?' 

The  Captain  expressed  his  disgust  and  amazement 
in  an  oath.  'You  think  he  would  prove  such  a 
dastard?' 

'At  least  he  considered  it  —  that  is  quite  plain. 
Between  considering  a  villainy  and  performing  it 
there  is  but  a  step.  But  there  is  little  occasion  for 
alarm  on  my  behalf.  I  have  been  too  cautious;  there 
is  not  a  scrap  of  evidence  against  me  in  existence.  I 
am  well  viewed  by  the  Government;  any  story  of  my 
defection  must  be  discredited,  and  any  man  that  bears 
it  must  place  his  own  neck  in  a  noose.  So  do  not  give 
it  thought.  But  give  thought,  I  beg  of  you,  to  a  man 
who  stoops  to  consider  such  means  of  vengeance,  and 
ask  yourself  whether,  being  dishonourable,  as  this 


78  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

proves  him,  and  desperate  —  more  desperate  than 
ever  now  —  he  would  hesitate  to  use  such  means  for 
profit,  to  extricate  himself  from  his  difficulties,  to 
save  him  from  the  spunging-house.' 

Aghast,  the  Captain  looked  at  Sir  John.  Then  his 
expression  changed;  he  frowned  in  perplexity.  He 
was  considering  something  —  considering  Lord 
Pauncefort's  assertion  that  his  difficulties  were  less 
desperate  than  he  had  feared.  Could  this  mean, 
wondered  the  Captain,  that  to  resolve  them  he  had 
already  taken  some  such  measure  as  the  baronet  was 
suggesting? 

'I  have  made  a  long  tale  of  it,'  said  Sir  John,  'that 
you  may  judge  for  yourself  whether  my  warning  was 
well-advised  or  not.' 

'I  thank  you,  Sir  John,'  replied  the  Captain. 
'Indeed,  indeed,  I  fear  me  the  grounds  for  your 
suspicions  are  most  just/  Then  his  face  cleared,  and 
he  smiled.  '  Be  assured  that  I  shall  move  with  caution 
—  with  more  than  caution,  where  his  lordship  is 
concerned.' 

And  upon  that  they  parted  at  last,  and  Sir  John 
rode  away,  attended  by  a  couple  of  grooms,  to  seek 
his  brother  who  lay  ill  at  Bath. 


CHAPTER  VI 
THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN 

THROUGH  the  grounds  of  Priory  Close  a  brook 
winds  in  its  course  on  its  way  to  the  Abbey 
River.  It  flows  in  a  little  ravine,  which,  moat-like, 
almost  completely  encircles  a  wonderful  old  garden. 
You  approach  it  by  a  path  that  runs  through  a 
plantation  of  firs  on  the  south  side  of  the  mansion. 

By  this  path,  through  the  green  shade  that  was 
shot  here  and  there  by  golden  sunlight,  Captain 
Gaynor  took  his  idle  way  on  the  following  morning. 
It  brought  him  to  a  rustic  bridge,  some  twenty  paces 
long,  spanning  the  gap  at  a  height  of  fifteen  feet  or 
more  above  the  stream.  Over  this  he  sauntered 
leisurely.  He  paused  midway,  and  leaning  upon  the 
rail,  he  admired  the  dense  tunnel  of  foliage  formed  by 
the  intertwining  of  the  trees  that  stood  on  either  side 
of  the  ravine. 

It  was  a  cool,  sequestered  spot,  fragrant  with  the 
perfume  the  sun  was  drawing  from  the  pines.  Some- 
where near  him  throbbed  the  full-throated  song  of  a 
thrush;  below  him  was  the  murmur  and  babble  of  the 
brook  as  it  glided  swiftly  over  the  mossy  boulders  of 
its  bed.  Never  had  the  Captain  lingered  in  a  spot  more 
peaceful.  To  his  senses  it  seemed  invested  with  an 
air  almost  of  enchantment.  He  could  understand  that 
to  one  dwelling  there  the  world  and  the  affairs  of  men 
must  shrink  to  infinitesimal  proportions,  must  seem 
puny  and  unworthy,  and  ambition  the  emptiest  of 
human  bubbles. 


80  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

He  could  understand,  he  thought,  Sir  John's  own 
lukewarmness  towards  the  Cause.  The  baronet,  no 
doubt,  would  judge  the  country's  peace  from  the 
ineffable  peace  of  these  surroundings,  and  would 
tremble  at  the  thought  of  its  being  disturbed,  at  the 
thought  of  all  the  bloodshed  and  misery  that  must 
come  ere  the  upheaval  was  complete  and  the  erstwhile 
tranquillity  restored. 

Captain  Gaynor  sighed  thoughtfully,  and  went  on 
across  that  enchanted  bridge  into  the  enchanted 
garden  beyond.  Through  another,  lesser  plantation 
on  the  farther  side,  over  a  carpet  of  pine-needles,  he 
came  into  the  blazing  sunlight  and  a  riot  of  colour, 
backed  by  colossal  boxwood  hedges.  These  hedges 
were  the  garden's  pride.  It  was  divided  by  them  into 
a  series  of  quadrangular  courts  on  his  right,  and  they 
stood  at  a  height  of  some  ten  feet,  each  with  an 
entrance  in  the  form  of  an  arched  gap  so  narrow  that 
but  one  person  could  enter  at  a  time. 

On  the  left  of  the  pathway  which  he  followed,  and 
which  ran  the  garden's  full  length  to  the  distant  red- 
brown  wall,  was  spread  an  orchard,  all  pink  and 
white  with  blossom,  and  through  the  trees  in  the 
distance  he  espied  his  host's  niece  and  daughter. 

They  stood  near  the  brook,  in  a  conversation  that 
the  Captain  might  have  accounted  earnest  had  not 
the  high,  trilling  note  of  Evelyn's  laughter  reached 
him  across  the  distance.  Thereupon  he  took  his  way 
towards  them,  never  dreaming  that  he  came  to  inter- 
rupt an  argument  whereof  he  was  himself  the  subject. 

It  had  sprung  from  Damaris's  desire  to  make  an 
end  of  the  deceit  which  had  been  practised  yesterday 
upon  their  visitor.  She  had  come  to  Evelyn  that 
morning  with  expressions  of  regret  for  her  own  share 


THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN  81 

in  it,  for  having  consented  to  it;  she  had  urged  the 
unworthiness  of  the  thing,  the  loss  of  dignity  that 
must  attend  its  ultimate  dissipation,  especially  if  this 
were  now  delayed. 

'Let  us  tell  Captain  Gaynor,'  she  ended,  'that  in 
jest  we  permitted  him  to  persist  in  the  error  into 
which  of  his  own  accord  he  fell.' 

'We  can  tell  him  to-morrow  or  the  next  day,' 
answered  Evelyn  airily.  'Besides,  I  do  not  admit 
that  the  error  was  originally  his  own.  That  is  the 
incense  you  offer  to  your  vanity.'  And  thereupon 
had  trilled  out  that  flute-noted  laugh  which  had 
caught  the  sauntering  Captain's  ears. 

A  little  colour  showed  in  Damaris's  cheeks. 

'Confess,'  Evelyn  mocked  her,  'confess  now  that 
your  concern  is  reluctance  to  show  yourself  without 
your  gilding.' 

'You  are  vastly,  cruelly  unkind,  Evelyn,'  an- 
swered Damaris  in  gentle  rebuke,  and  this  answer 
took  her  cousin  by  surprise.  For  neither  Evelyn  nor 
her  mother  knew  of  that  happening  in  the  library  a 
week  ago,  knew  or  guessed  of  the  wound,  the  deep, 
cruel  wound  that  Damaris  had  sustained  in  her 
affection  and  her  pride.  Damaris  was  not  of  those 
who  wring  their  hands  and  cry  out  their  wrongs  in 
public  or  in  private.  She  had  kept  her  chamber  for 
two  days  upon  the  pretext  of  a  passing  ailment,  and 
in  that  time  she  had  schooled  herself  to  the  dis- 
simulation of  her  feelings.  Contempt  had  come  to 
her  rescue,  the  coldly  fierce  contempt  that  is  the  off- 
spring of  disillusion.  She  was  conscious  even  of  a 
certain  thankfulness  that  circumstances  had  vouch- 
safed her  a  glimpse  of  the  real  man  into  whose  keep- 
ing she  would  so  trustingly  have  delivered  up  her  life, 


82  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

a  thankfulness  for  the  timeliness  of  that  revelation. 
In  time,  no  doubt,  this  thankfulness  would  come  to 
be  the  only  abiding  feeling  so  far  as  my  Lord  Paunce- 
fort  was  concerned.  But  for  the  present  it  had  not 
yet  come  to  dominance  over  her  pain  and  her  sense  of 
utter  loss. 

Desolation  and  listlessnesswere  her  present  portion. 
But  of  this  the  unpercipient  Evelyn  had  no  suspicion, 
for  Evelyn  studied  no  countenance  searchingly  save 
her  own. 

'Unkind?'  quoth  Evelyn.  'La!  In  what  now  am  I 
unkind?' 

'In  your  estimate  of  me.   If  Captain  — ' 

A  rustle  behind  her  caused  her  to  turn  her  head,  and 
thus  they  became  aware  of  the  Captain's  approach. 

Last  night  he  had  come  to  table  in  a  dove-coloured 
suit  and  with  heavily  powdered  hair,  looking  —  save 
for  his  bronzed  face  —  the  very  perfect  courtier. 
This  morning  he  had  resumed  his  military  exterior. 
He  wore  his  laced  blue  coat,  uncompromisingly 
buttoned  from  chin  to  waistband,  disdaining  the 
pigeon-breasted  mode  which  left  the  upper  part  to 
gape  and  reveal  a  bulging  mass  of  lace  and  linen. 
White  buckskins  and  spurred  jack-boots  encased  his 
legs.   He  even  wore  his  sword. 

Coming  up  with  them  he  doffed  his  feathered  hat 
and  made  a  leg  with  a  certain  distant  stiffness,  craving 
their  leave  to  bear  them  company. 

It  was  granted  him  by  Evelyn,  with  a  flutter  of 
eyelids  and  the  demure  air  of  challenge  that  most  men 
knew  in  her.  And  then,  with  mischievous  intent  to 
perpetuate  the  confusion  of  identities  — 

'Evelyn,'  said  she,  indicating  Damaris,  'is  all  pride 
in  her  garden.' 


THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN  83 

'Then,'  said  the  Captain,  'pride  is  well  placed  for 
once.  I  have  seen  many  gardens  'twixt  here  and  far 
Cathay,  but  never  one  in  which  there  dwelt  a  peace 
so  joyous.  Madam,'  he  addressed  himself  to  Damaris, 
and  the  serious  sincerity  of  his  speech  robbed  it  of 
any  construable  impertinence,  'your  garden  repays 
your  pride,  for  I  think  that  it  does  justice  to  its 
mistress.' 

The  brown  eyes  of  Damaris  met  his  own  a  moment, 
as  if  she  were  appraising  the  full  value  of  his  words; 
then  they  passed  on;  a  faint  smile  crossed  her  face, 
which  was  of  the  warm,  lustreless  pallor  of  old  ivory, 
and  slightly  she  bowed  her  head  as  if  in  courteous 
ackno  wledgmen  t. 

Now  although  her  eyes  had  met  his  own  for  but  a 
moment,  yet  in  that  fleeting  glimpse  Captain  Gaynor 
had  caught  the  wistfulness  that  inhabited  them,  and 
something  within  him  had  leapt  in  response  to  some- 
thing that  was  near  akin  to  an  appeal.  This  appeal, 
he  knew,  was  not  to  himself;  it  was  to  nature,  to  the 
world,  to  heal  her  of  a  sorrow  or  to  satisfy  a  longing, 
he  knew  not  which.  But  it  touched  him  and  in  touch- 
ing seared  him  and  branded  him  her  servant,  to  heal 
or  satisfy  as  her  need  might  be  when  he  should  come 
to  understand  it,  and  if  so  be  that  she  would  accept 
the  service  that  should  be  hers. 

Evelyn  had  looked  on  with  slightly  parted  lips,  a 
straining  anxiety  in  her  glance,  born  of  fear  lest 
Damaris  should  there  and  then  repudiate  the  identity 
once  more  thrust  upon  her.  With  her  cousin's  silence 
and  its  tacit  acknowledgment  her  anxiety  passed,  and 
her  rippling,  ever-ready  laugh  expressed  her  pleasure 
and  relief.  Also  it  served  to  dissemble  her  vexation 
that  the  first  compliment  to  fall  from  this  somewhat 


84  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

chill  and  distant  soldier's  lips  should,  in  spite  of  all, 
have  been  addressed  to  her  cousin. 

A  more  sweet  and  fragrant  picture  of  maidenhood 
than  Evelyn  presented  this  morning  it  were  not  easy 
to  discover.  She  was  arrayed  in  palest  lilac,  and  her 
waist,  amazingly  slender  in  its  firm  encasement,  sprang 
from  a  white  furbelow  that  hung  about  her  lightly  as 
a  cloud  of  vapour.  The  flimsiest  of  lace  tuckers  dis- 
creetly veiled  the  white  beauties  of  neck  and  bosom, 
which  the  low-cut  bodice  must  otherwise  reveal.  Her 
hair,  very  carefully  massed  and  curled,  was  of  the 
colour  of  ripe  corn;  her  eyes,  questing,  unrestful  and 
provoking,  reflected  the  flawless  sky  of  June;  her 
cheeks  put  to  shame  the  apple  blossom  under  which 
they  stood.  She  was  soft  and  silky  and  very  insistently 
feminine;  the  very  maid,  you  would  suppose,  to 
compel  response  in  a  man  so  very  masculine  as  the 
Captain.  Yet  it  was  to  Damaris  that  he  chiefly 
addressed  himself,  upon  Damaris  that  his  eyes  would 
linger.  She  stood  a  full  half-head  taller  than  her 
cousin,  who  was  small  and  of  an  exquisite  roundness. 
She  was  dressed  now  for  riding,  in  a  brown,  high- 
necked  habit  laced  with  gold,  than  which  no  raiment 
could  have  done  more  justice  to  her  graceful  height, 
and  she  wore  a  looped  hat  of  black  beaver,  from  which 
a  golden  feather  trailed  over,  to  mingle  with  her  dark 
brown  hair.  There  was  in  every  line  of  her  something 
cool,  determined,  and  well-knit,  as  Captain  Gaynor 
noted,  for  all  that  it  was  not  his  way  to  note  the  points 
of  any  woman. 

Their  talk  was  still  of  that  garden  and  of  other 
gardens  which  the  Captain  in  his  travels  had  beheld, 
to  all  of  which  Damaris  contributed  but  little,  and  that 
little  only  when  she  was,  herself,  directly  addressed. 


THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN  85 

'I  knew,'  he  said,  'when  I  stepped  upon  that  bridge 
that  I  was  coming  at  last  into  the  enchanted  garden 
that  we  have  all  heard  of  in  our  early  youth,  and  of 
whose  real  existence  the  bitter,  all-desecrating  know- 
ledge of  later  years  has  made  us  sceptical.' 

'And  you  have  discovered  its  enchantment?' 
murmured  Evelyn,  scenting  here  the  prologue  to  a 
speech  of  gallantry. 

'I  think  I  have,'  he  answered,  with  an  amazing 
seriousness,  looking  straight  ahead.  He  sighed. 
'The  spell  of  it  is  already  upon  me,  I  think.  Did  I 
unwisely  linger  I  fear  that  it  must  overwhelm  me 
utterly.' 

He  was  so  sober,  so  solemn,  that  Damaris  glanced 
at  him,  her  keen  ears  informing  her  that  behind  these 
words  of  his  lay  prepared  no  such  trifling  speech  as 
her  cousin  still  expected. 

'What  is  it?'  she  asked.  It  was  the  first  time  she 
had  spontaneously  addressed  him,  and  his  glance  met 
hers  again,  held  it  a  moment,  and  then,  still  meeting 
it,  seemed  to  look  beyond  and  away.  Thus  may  the 
poet  or  the  fanatic  look. 

'It  is,'  he  said  —  and  his  voice  sank  reverently  — 
'it  is  that  God's  peace  —  God's  disregarded,  priceless 
gift  to  man  —  is  here.  Somewhere  here,  too,  is  the 
tree  of  true  knowledge,  for  its  essences  hang  heavily 
upon  the  air.  To  inhale  them  is  to  achieve  perception 
of  the  true  meanness  of  worldly  things,  the  horror  of 
strife  and  bloodshed,  the  contempt  of  ambition,  which 
is  but  a  euphemism  for  striving  selfishness  and  vain- 
glory. Who  that  could  dwell  here  would  dwell  else- 
where? Who  that  once  has  breathed  deep  of  this 
fragrance  would  ever  again  suffer  the  world's  stews  to 
offend  his  nostrils?' 


86  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Evelyn  —  disappointed  Evelyn  —  laughed  on  her 
high  note,  a  little  mockingly.  'I  vow,  sir,'  she 
minced,  'that  you  are  vastly  poetical!' 

His  eye,  cold  and  inscrutable,  rested  upon  her  for  a 
moment.   He  bowed. 

'I  thank  you,  Miss  Hollinstone,'  said  he,  'for  hav- 
ing broke  the  spell.  Had  it  persisted  it  might  well 
have  proved  the  undoing  of  a  poor  soldier.' 

'What  is  your  regiment,  sir?'  she  asked  him.  She 
had  something  of  her  mother's  inconsequence. 

'I  have  had  many;  but  I  have  none  now,'  was  his 
reply.  'My  last  commission  was  in  the  Sultan's 
army.' 

"The  Sultan!'  cried  both  girls  together,  so  taken 
aback  were  they. 

'The  Grand  Turk,'  he  explained  easily.  'His 
cavalry  was  all  disjointed,  and  I  undertook  the  office 
of  instructing  it.  Also  I  saw  some  service  against 
Venice.' 

Damaris  looked  at  him  with  incredulous  eyes. 
'You  fought  against  Christians  in  the  service  of  the 
Infidel!'  she  cried. 

'  I  fought  against  rogues  in  the  service  of  rogues, 
ma'am.  That  is  the  pure  truth  of  it.  For  the  rest,  it  is 
not  the  mercenary's  to  do  more  than  choose  the 
service  that  offers  the  best  pay.' 

He  saw  the  scorn  gathering  in  her  glance.  But  he 
did  not  know  upon  what  bitter  pastures  it  had  been 
nourished.  He  did  not  know  that  in  his  own  case,  it 
was  the  sharper  because  she  accounted  that  she  had 
been  mistaken  in  him  a  moment  ago  when  he  had 
talked  of  the  garden. 

'And  do  you  always,'  she  asked  him,  'fight  for  the 
side  that  pays  you  best?' 


THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN  87 

'By  your  leave,  ma'am,  I  should  account  myself  a 
fool  to  fight  for  the  other.' 

He  had  not  winced  before  her  cool,  appraising  eye, 
nor  the  half-veiled  contempt  of  her  question.  He  had 
his  part  to  play  —  for  the  sake  of  that  master  to 
whose  service  was  to  be  yielded  up  the  fruit  of  all 
other  services.  It  wounded  him  —  unreasonably,  he 
held  —  to  appear  before  her  in  this  light.  But  the 
necessities  demanded  it. 

'I  have  made  arms  my  trade,'  he  explained.  'I  am 
a  soldier  of  fortune,  and  in  all  my  seeming  incon- 
sistencies of  service  I  have  been  consistent  at  least  in 
that  I  have  served  Fortune  always  —  more  stoutly,' 
he  added  ruefully,  'than  Fortune  has  served  me.' 

'How  odd!'  sighed  Damaris;  for  his  bold  frankness 
had  beaten  down  much  of  her  nascent  scorn,  yet  not 
quite  all.   'How  very  strange!' 

'In  what  is't  strange?'  quoth  Evelyn,  as  if  defend- 
ing him. 

'Strange  that  men  should  sacrifice  their  best  for 
gold,  imperil  their  lives  and  pawn  their  very  honour 
for  the  sake  of  profit.' 

'Not  all  men,'  said  the  Captain,  with  his  wry  smile. 
'There  is  no  lack  of  those  who  sacrifice  all  this  to 
dreams  and  moonshine  —  the  gratitude  of  princes, 
the  favour  of  the  people,  the  love  of  country,  im- 
mortal renown  and  other  such  intangibilities.' 

'Do  you  scorn  them?'  she  challenged  him. 

'As  soldiers,  yes,'  he  quibbled.  'Their  ardour 
detracts  from  their  value,  robs  them  of  the  proper 
calm,  and  I  have  found  that  they  make  but  poor 
opponents  to  the  trained  mercenary,  who  in  battle 
is  all  calculation  and  no  heat.' 

'I  speak  not  of  that,'  said  Damaris,  'but  of  their 


88  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

aims,  of  the  mainspring  of  their  actions  —  in  short, 
their  loyalty  and  devotion  to  the  ideal.  Do  you  scorn 
that,  sir?' 

He  met  her  glance  quite  calmly.  'No,  ma'am,  I 
do  not,'  said  he. 

'Then,'  she  cried,  warmed  a  little  by  the  argument 
upon  which  she  was  embarked  —  and  the  subject 
was  one  very  near  to  her  poor,  wounded  heart  these 
days  —  '  then,  surely,  you  must  scorn  the  others, 
these  mere  helots.' 

'Such  as  myself?'  said  he,  no  shadow  of  offence  in 
tone  or  voice.  '  Believe  me,  did  I  do  so  I  should  change 
my  ways.   I  think  that  it  is  possible  to  respect  both.' 

Again  she  measured  him  with  those  cool,  appraising 
eyes.  She  judged  him  to  be  good  and  clean;  honest 
he  had  already  proved  himself  by  the  very  frankness 
of  his  admissions  in  the  face  of  a  scorn  that  she  had 
scarce  attempted  to  dissemble.  She  considered  his 
firm  mouth  and  steely  eyes,  the  very  poise  of  his  head 
and  uprightness  of  his  carriage,  and  from  it  all  she 
gathered  intuitively  a  sense  that  he  was  true  metal  — 
a  man  to  be  relied  upon,  a  man  to  whom  the  weak  and 
the  oppressed  would  turn  by  very  instinct,  a  man 
who  would  never  hurt  the  honour  of  a  fellow-man,  a 
man  in  whom  a  woman  might  place  her  trust. 

Because  her  intuitions  showed  her  all  this  in  him, 
she  desired  to  understand  a  point  of  view  that  seemed 
to  contradict  it  all;  perhaps  she  even  thought  to 
combat  his  views,  to  reveal  to  him  the  unworthiness 
in  his  aims  which  was  all  so  clear  to  her. 

'I  cannot  think,'  answered  she,  'I  cannot  think 
that  respect  is  due  to  one  who  makes  a  trade  of  that 
which  should  be  the  expression  of  profound  con- 
victions. Life  is  surely  as  sacred  a  gift  as  honour,  and 


THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN  89 

to  adventure  it  for  gold  cannot  be  other  than  un- 
worthy. If  war  must  be,  if  men  must  fight,  surely  it 
should  be  in  defence  of  liberty,  of  right,  of  high  ideals. 
Surely  there  is  naught  else  can  justify  the  risk  of  life; 
and  to  risk  life  from  any  other  mainspring  must  be 
at  least  a  little  —  base.' 

She  would  have  added  more,  but  meeting  his 
glance  again,  seeing  him  so  calm  and  so  entirely  un- 
ruffled, the  ghost  of  a  smile  hovering  upon  his  tight 
lips,  she  checked.  A  wave  of  colour  swept  across  her 
face.  'Forgive  me,'  she  begged,  'if  I  have  said  more 
than  I  should.  After  all,  I  think  I  am  not  so  much 
reproving  —  to  which,  indeed,  I  have  no  shadow  of 
right  —  as  seeking  information.' 

He  laughed  gently,  on  that  deep  musical  note  of 
his.  'Indeed,  I  am  relieved,'  said  he.  'For  I  began  to 
fear  you  lacked  for  charity  in  your  judgment.' 

'Indeed,  yes,'  put  in  Evelyn,  who  perceived  at 
last  a  chance  of  intervention.  'And  particularly  now 
that  you  are  come  to  offer  your  sword  to  your  own 
country.' 

'Nay,  but  that  is  worse!'  he  exclaimed.  'It  is  to 
say  that  I  see  the  error  of  my  ways,  and  am  come  to 
mend  them.' 

'And  is't  not  so?'  she  asked. 

'Why,  no,'  said  he.  But  it  was  to  Damaris  that  he 
seemed  to  speak.  'It  is  that  I  lack  employment  else- 
where.' 

He  found  her  troubled  eyes  regarding  him  with  less 
of  scorn  than  pity  now,  and  it  was  that  glance  he 
answered  when  he  said:  'And  yet  I  do  not  say  that  if 
I  found  a  cause  that  were  worth  serving  for  its  own 
sake  I  should  be  slow  to  serve  it,  perhaps  even  to  my 
loss.' 


S>o  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'I  think  you  would,'  said  Evelyn,  those  questing, 
provoking  eyes  of  hers  enveloping  him  in  their  regard. 

He  bowed  somewhat  formally  in  acknowledgment. 
'Meanwhile,'  said  he,  'I  must  beware  the  seduction 
of  this  enchanted  garden  ere  its  magic  prove  the  un- 
doing of  a  wandering  mercenary.' 

A  liveried  groom  approached  them  through  the 
trees,  and  Evelyn,  who  was  the  first  to  see  him,  an- 
nounced his  coming,  and  its  object. 

'Here  is  Gibbs,  sweet  cousin,'  said  she,  'to  inquire 
if  you  will  ride  the  nag  you  bade  him  saddle.' 

She  conceived  that  at  last  she  would  be  rid  of 
Damaris  and  would  have  the  Captain  entirely  to 
herself.  From  this  you  are  not  to  gather  that  the 
Captain,  per  se,  was  of  any  account  to  her.  He  was  of 
account  in  that  he  was  a  male,  and  so,  thought  she, 
a  proper  person  to  burn  incense  on  the  altar  of  her 
little  vanity;  further  he  was  of  account  that  she  might 
make  good  upon  him  her  challenge  to  her  cousin  —  a 
challenge  which  at  the  moment  was  proving  a  source 
of  considerable  alarm  to  her. 

But  it  so  chanced  that  the  Captain  had  not  come 
forth  in  jack-boots  and  spurs  to  saunter  all  the 
morning  in  a  garden.  He  too  was  minded  to  ride,  as 
he  now  announced. 

'And  so,  Miss  Kynaston,'  he  ended,  addressing 
Damaris,  '  if  you  will  suffer  me  to  be  your  escort,  you 
may  repay  me  by  acting  as  my  guide  over  a  country- 
side with  which  I  am  unacquainted.  You  see  that  in 
all  things  I  am  true  to  my  mercenary's  character.' 

She  hesitated  a  moment,  whereupon  he  bowed  sub- 
missively, as  to  a  refusal. 

'It  was  presumptuous  in  me  to  proffer  even  for  pay- 
ment a  service  which  I  had  not  first  ascertained  to  be 


THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN  91 

desired,'  he  said.  'Ladies,  I  am  your  obedient,  grate- 
ful servant.' 

He  swept  them  both  a  bow,  and  was  turning  to 
depart,  when  Damaris  stayed  him. 

'You  are  very  quick,  sir,  to  suppose  me  churlish.' 

Evelyn's  eyes  were  sparkling  angrily,  and  Damaris 
observed  it,  but  was  not  deterred.  It  were  a  gross 
discourtesy  to  a  guest  to  allow  him  to  depart  thus.  '  I 
shall  be  glad  to  ride  with  you,  sir,'  she  smiled,  'upon 
the  terms  you  name.' 

What  time  the  furious  and  humiliated  Evelyn  — 
for  humiliated  she  felt  herself  by  the  turn  events  were 
taking  —  was  inveighing  to  her  sympathetic  mother 
against  the  shameless  wiles  of  Damaris  and  her  brazen 
conduct  towards  the  other  sex,  Damaris  and  the 
Captain  rode  through  the  green  lanes  of  Surrey 
attended  by  the  groom  Gibbs,  who  followed  at  a  re- 
spectful distance. 

It  proved  a  fruitful  ride  for  both  of  them,  and  for 
Damaris  even  more  than  for  him.  She  drew  him  into 
talk  of  himself,  of  his  travels,  the  countries  he  had 
seen  and  the  many  services  in  which  his  mercenary's 
sword  had  been  engaged.  And  he  talked  frankly  and 
entertainingly.  The  absence  of  that  boastfulness  of 
exploits  so  usual  in  his  kind  went  far  to  impress  her 
favourably,  confirming  much  of  the  judgment  of  him 
which  already  she  had  formed. 

That  ride  did  much  to  heal  the  bruises  that  her 
gentle  heart  had  taken  a  week  ago.  In  the  Captain's 
company  she  seemed  to  be  regaining  something  of 
that  buoyancy  which  but  yesterday  she  fancied  had 
left  her  for  all  time. 

The  image  of  Pauncefort  faded  in  her  mind  to  a 
proper  insignificance.    She  drew  a  parallel  between 


92  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

him  and  this  man  beside  her,  and  she  seemed  to  dis- 
cover that  if  once  she  had  set  his  lordship  upon  a 
pedestal  and  gone  near  to  worshipping  him,  it  was 
because  in  the  seclusion  in  which  her  youth  had  been 
passed  it  had  been  hers  never  to  meet  a  real  man. 

But  at  the  root  of  all  was  that  foolish  compact  she 
had  made  with  Evelyn,  which  she  had  so  keenly 
regretted  and  to  which  that  very  morning  she  had 
sought  to  set  an  end.  Had  she  but  done  so,  how 
differently  must  she  now  be  feeling,  with  what  sus- 
picions, with  what  convictions  of  unworthy  motives 
in  him  must  she  now  be  regarding  the  frank  pleasant 
comradeship  of  this  soldier  of  fortune;  how  the  regard 
he  had  been  quick  to  show  her  must  have  but  served 
to  increase  the  bitterness  she  had  been  carrying  in  her 
heart  —  a  bitterness  of  which,  all  being  as  it  was,  he 
was  gradually  and  surely  effacing  all  trace. 

She  rejoiced  now  in  that  compact  —  rejoiced  as 
only  one  who  had  been  through  her  torment  of  dis- 
illusion could  rejoice.  What  matter  that  its  ultimate 
disclosure  must  be  attended  by  some  loss  of  dignity? 
Here  was  one  who  was  a  self-proclaimed  mercenary, 
a  man  whose  life  was  dedicate  to  Fortune's  service. 
In  such  an  one  the  pursuit  of  the  wealthy  heiress 
Damaris  Hollinstone  was  the  thing  to  be  expected. 
How  potent  then  must  have  been  the  magnet  that 
had  drawn  him  as  completely  from  her  whom  he 
believed  to  be  that  person  as  though  she  had  never 
been  in  existence. 

The  fact  is  that  Captain  Gaynor  had  come  into  the 
life  of  Damaris  Hollinstone  in  an  hour  of  crisis. 
Coming  then,  the  flattery  of  his  obvious  preference 
and  regard,  which  in  another  season  —  whether  he 
believed  her  to  be  Damaris  or  Evelyn  —  would  have 


THE  ENCHANTED  GARDEN  93 

been  to  her  a  very  trifling  matter,  was  now  a  flattery 
most  sweet  and  healing. 

By  the  time  they  reached  Priory  Close  again, 
Damaris  was  actually  grateful  in  her  heart  to  Evelyn 
for  the  deception  that  earlier  had  vexed  her.  And  she 
was  as  reluctant  now  as  earlier  she  had  been  eager,  to 
set  a  term  to  it. 


CHAPTER  VII 

EVELYN'S  CONSCIENCE 

IT  is  to  be  feared  that  in  the  week  that  ensued  the 
real  aims  of  Captain  Gaynor's  visit  to  England 
engaged  his  attention  but  indifferently.  The  spell  of 
the  garden  was  upon  him,  or  else  the  spell  of  one  of  its 
most  constant  inhabitants.  The  brook  that  wandered 
through  it  became  to  him  symbolical  of  the  Lethean 
waters.  Oblivious  of  past  and  future,  he  lived  but  in 
the  present  like  any  lotus-eater,  and  if  there  was  a 
thing  to  vex  him  in  those  brief,  happy  summer  days, 
it  was  the  consideration  of  the  character  —  truthful 
in  much  and  in  much  else  untruthful,  as  we  know  — 
in  which  necessity  had  demanded  that  he  should 
appear  to  Damaris.  Yet,  when  all  is  said,  it  did  not 
seem  that  he  must  suffer  for  it  at  her  hands;  notwith- 
standing her  betrayal  of  scorn  when  he  had  first 
divulged  it  to  her,  yet  he  observed  that  she  did  not 
on  that  account  avoid  him.  But  he  was  not  to  know 
that  it  was  on  that  very  account  that  his  society  was 
welcome  and  that  she  admitted  him  to  her  confidence. 

Meanwhile  the  deception  on  the  score  of  identities 
continued  to  be  practised  upon  him,  though  more 
than  once  it  had  gone  very  near  to  shipwreck  at  the 
hands  of  servants  and  in  other  almost  inevitable 
ways.  But  it  was  Evelyn  who  steered  it  clear  in 
every  shallow,  compelled  to  it  for  all  the  reluctance 
and  vexation  that  had  now  come  upon  her.  For  she 
found  the  tables  most  ludicrously  turned. 

Supported  by  her  mother,  she  had  taxed  Damaris 


EVELYN'S  CONSCIENCE  95 

with  unmaidenliness  of  conduct  when  on  the  second 
morning  of  the  Captain's  visit  her  cousin  had  made 
her  appearance  dressed  again  for  riding. 

Quite  calmly  had  Damaris  stood  to  listen  to 
Evelyn's  denunciation.  She  had  wasted  upon  it  no 
shadow  of  indignation.  Conscious  in  her  own  mind 
that  her  conduct  was  above  criticism,  conscious  no 
less  of  the  true  mainsprings  of  the  criticism  that  was 
offered,  she  received  it  with  the  contempt  it  merited, 
met  it  with  a  bantering  defiance  that  revealed  how 
swiftly  now  she  was  recovering  her  habitual  spirit. 

'Why,  Evelyn,'  she  protested,  'I  am  doing  no  more 
than  you  have  forced  upon  me.' 

'Forced  upon  you?  I?'  cried  Evelyn,  round  eyes 
staring. 

'Did  you  not  insist  that  you  would  be  Damaris 
Hollinstone  and  that  I  should  be  Evelyn  Kynaston? 
As  the  supposed  daughter  of  his  host,  the  Captain  has 
a  right  to  look  for  certain  attentions  from  me  in 
my  father's  absence.  To  withhold  them  were  to  be 
neglectful  of  the  common  duties  of  hospitality,  and  I 
would  not  be  that  for  Sir  John's  sake.' 

'Why,  that  is  true  now,'  purred  Lady  Kynaston. 
'Yes,  that  is  very  true.  I  have  always  said  that 
hospitality  is  the  duty  of  an  English  lady.' 

Evelyn  almost  choked  with  anger.  'I  think,'  said 
she,  'that  the  sooner  we  resume  our  proper  identities 
the  better  will  it  be.' 

Alarm  leapt  in  the  soul  of  Damaris  —  this  Damaris 
who  had  been  so  reluctant  to  lend  herself  to  the 
duplicity,  who  had  considered  it  unworthy  and  un- 
dignified. But  her  face  remained  calm,  her  eyes  even 
smiled. 

'  Tis  what  I  have  always  held,  and  I  am  glad  that 


96  THE  GATES  OF  DOOiM 

at  last  you  agree  with  me.  I  shall  leave  you,  then,  to 
enlighten  the  Captain.' 

'Why  not  enlighten  him  yourself?' 

1  Because  I  am  sure  it  will  become  you  better.  Let 
us  consider  now  what  you  shall  say.  You  will  tell  him 
that  misliking  such  admiration  as  you  have  observed 
bestowed  upon  your  cousin  Damaris,  but  being 
persuaded  that  this  was  a  tribute  entirely  to  her 
fortune,  you  induced  her  to — ' 

'Am  I  mad,  d'ye  think?'  cried  Evelyn,  with  an 
angry  stamp  of  her  satin-clad  foot. 

'Well,  then,  say  what  you  please;  but  be  very  sure 
that  such  is  the  construction  which  he  must  place 
upon  anything  that  you  tell  him.  There  is  not  room 
for  any  other.' 

'I  think  you  wish  the  deception  to  continue,' 
Evelyn  announced. 

'I  am  indifferent,'  answered  Damaris.  'You  have 
forced  me  into  a  part,  and  I  must  play  it  until  you 
relieve  me  of  it  again.  Throughout  I  have  been 
entirely  passive.  Never  so  much  as  once  have  I 
addressed  you  as  "Damaris"  to  aid  the  deception.' 

'What  deceit!'  exclaimed  the  scandalised  Evelyn. 
'What  unworthy  quibbles!  You  have  aided  it  by 
your  silence.' 

'  So  much  I  admit,  and  by  your  leave,  Evelyn,  my 
dear,  I  will  continue  in  silence.' 

'From  the  first  I  disapproved  of  it,'  sighed  Lady 
Kynaston.  'You  see  in  what  a  difficulty  it  has  placed 
you:' 

'I  understand,'  said  Evelyn  slowly.  Her  cheeks 
were  burning,  as  were  her  eyes.  'Oh,  I  understand 
you!' 

'I  gravely  doubt  it,'  answered  Damaris. 


EVELYN'S  CONSCIENCE  97 

But  Evelyn  laughed  her  confidence  and  her  scorn. 
Judging  all  women's  natures  by  her  own,  conceiving 
that  the  admiration  shown  by  the  other  sex  must  be 
the  mainspring  of  every  woman's  being  as  it  was  of 
hers,  she  fancied  that  she  held  the  explanation  of  her 
cousin's  indifference  on  the  score  of  the  revelation  to 
be  made.  Damaris,  having  won  the  Captain's  regard 
in  the  character  of  Evelyn  Kynaston,  was  confident 
of  holding  it  still  more  securely  as  Miss  Hollinstone 
the  heiress.  Thus  Evelyn  judged,  and  judging  thus 
her  anger  increased.  It  increased  further  at  the 
reflection  that  there  was  no  way  out  of  the  situation 
she  had  herself  created  save  that  which  Damaris 
indicated.  She  even  exaggerated  the  matter,  for  she 
was  not  true-sighted.  In  no  way,  she  thought,  could 
the  explanation,  when  it  came,  be  hurtful  or  humiliat- 
ing to  Damaris;  but  it  might,  it  must  be  humiliating 
to  herself.  Finding  that  the  weapons  she  had  hitherto 
employed  were  shivered  in  her  hands,  she  turned  to 
snatch  fresh  and  more  formidable  ones. 

'You  are  forgetting  Lord  Pauncefort,'  she  said 
tartly. 

'I  am  endeavouring  to  do  so,'  Damaris  admitted, 
though  in  a  fuller  sense. 

Evelyn  stared.  'You  confess  it!'  she  exclaimed. 
'Mother,  you  hear  her!  Oh,  never  could  I  have 
believed  you  so  shameless,  Damaris,  so  lost  to  all 
sense  of  what  you  owe  yourself.  Never!' 

'I  am  glad  you  should  have  held  me  in  such  high 
esteem,'  was  the  smiling  answer.  And  then,  suddenly 
realising  the  pettiness  of  this  battle,  the  unworthiness 
of  it,  her  manner  changed  and  she  advanced  towards 
Evelyn  with  hands  outheld.  'Come,  Evelyn  dear, 
let  us  call  a  truce,'  she  besought  her  cousin. 


98  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

1 A  truce  ? '  echoed  Evelyn.  '  A  truce  to  what,  pray  ? ' 

'To  foolish,  bitter  words  and  unfriendly  glances.' 

1  Cease,  then,  to  deserve  them,'  was  the  ungracious 
answer. 

A  wan  little  smile  crept  into  Damaris's  face,  her 
patience  inexhaustible.   She  turned  to  her  aunt. 

'Mother  dear,'  she  besought  her,  'can  you  not 
move  her  to  a  gentler  mood?' 

'She  means  you  well,  dear  Damans,'  was  Lady 
Kynaston's  answer.  'Hence  her  concern  for  you.  I 
must  confess  that  I  do  not  think  you  show  a  proper 
regard  for  your  betrothal  to  Lord  Pauncefort.  He 
would  not  be  pleased  did  he  know  how  you  receive 
Captain  Gaynor's  assiduous  attentions.' 

'How  she  receives  them!'  Evelyn  apostrophised  the 
ceiling.   'Ola!' 

'My  betrothal  to  Lord  Pauncefort — '  Damaris 
began,  and  there  she  checked.  She  could  not  submit 
herself  to  all  the  examination  which  her  announce- 
ment must  provoke;  she  could  not  suffer  to  parade 
before  Evelyn's  eyes  the  shame  that  in  secret  she 
had  endured,  the  humiliation  she  had  borne.  Since 
yesterday  that  shame  had  been  diminished,  the 
humiliation  fading.  But  these  feelings  were  strong 
again  within  her  now  that  she  came  to  the  point  of 
alluding  to  them.  Therefore  she  paused.  'Heigho!' 
she  sighed,  with  a  rueful  smile.  And  upon  that  she 
moved  leisurely  towards  the  door. 

'Do  you  intend  to  ride  daily  with  Captain  Gaynor?' 
her  cousin  flung  after  her. 

'You  mistake,  Evelyn,'  came  the  soft  answer.  'It 
is  not  a  question  of  what  I  intend,  nor  have  I  any 
intentions  in  the  matter.  But  should  Captain  Gaynor 
desire  to  ride  daily,  as  the  daughter  of  his  host  I  am 


EVELYN'S  CONSCIENCE  99 

under  the  necessity  of  showing  him  some  attention 
in  my  father's  absence.  Blame  none  but  yourself  for 
this  if  you  do  not  find  it  meet  with  your  approval.' 
And  upon  that  she  took  her  departure,  leaving 
Evelyn  in  a  mood  of  which  her  poor  mother  was  to 
appreciate  the  bitterness. 

Saving  for  similar  daily  scenes,  that  week  to 
Damaris  was  as  happy  a  season  as  it  was  to  Harry 
Gaynor.  Ere  it  was  sped,  the  desolation  left  in  her 
soul  by  Lord  Pauncefort's  self-revelation  was  changed 
to  a  glad  thankfulness. 

From  Sir  John  in  Bath  came  letters  to  announce 
that  his  brother's  condition,  although  still  critical, 
was  hopeful,  and  that  soon  he  trusted  to  be  able  to 
return.  For  Captain  Gaynor  came  a  brief  special  note, 
in  which  the  baronet  gracefully  regretted  his  con- 
tinued absence  at  such  a  season  and  closed  with  a 
veiled  reminder  of  his  warning  touching  Pauncefort 
—  a  warning  which  roused  the  soldier  from  the  dream 
in  which  he  had  been  living  to  a  consciousness  of  the 
perils  that  surrounded  him,  for  the  morrow  was  the 
day  appointed  for  that  fateful  meeting  at  'The 
World's  End.' 

So  when  the  morrow  came  —  it  was  a  Thursday, 
completing  the  little  cycle  of  a  week  since  his  advent 
at  Priory  Close  — ■  he  announced  to  the  ladies  that  he 
must  ride  to  town  that  afternoon;  that  he  desired  to 
see  the  Second  Secretary  and  spur  his  memory  on  the 
matter  that  lay  between  them. 

'Your  idleness,  no  doubt,  is  fretting  you,  sir,'  said 
Evelyn. 

'And  you  must  find  life  very  dull  in  this  quiet 
corner  of  the  world,'  her  mother  added  as  a  corollary. 

'Not  dull,  ma'am,  but  too  happy,'  he  replied.    'I 


ioo  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

dare  not  forget  that  sooner  or  later  other  things  —  of 
a  vastly  different  quality  —  await  me.' 

Damaris  said  nothing.  As  she  sipped  her  chocolate 
her  mind  lost  itself  in  the  mazes  of  a  dream.  She  was 
wondering  whether  it  was  the  mercenary's  nature  to 
rest  contentedly,  to  abandon  the  adventurous  life  for 
one  of  peace.  If  it  were  not  —  Ah,  if  it  were  not  — 
That  was  a  thought  she  dared  not  pursue.  She  feared; 
her  soul  faltered  when  she  had  got  thus  far,  and  there 
she  halted,  content  to  wait. 

That  morning  she  rode  forth  alone  —  save  for  her 
groom  —  for  the  first  time  since  the  Captain's  com- 
ing. An  appalling  loneliness  —  a  loneliness  that  was 
full  of  amazing  and  disquieting  self-revelation  —  kept 
her  company. 

She  thought  of  Pauncefort  that  morning,  and  she 
thought  of  him  with  kindness.  She  owed  him  a  debt, 
she  discovered.  For  without  the  lesson  that  she  had 
received  at  his  lordship's  hands  she  would  never  have 
come  by  so  swift  a  knowledge  of  the  sterling  qualities 
of  her  Captain  —  this  mercenary  who  moved  ad- 
venturously without  ideals  and  whom  she  had  begun 
by  despising  for  his  avowed  pursuit  of  fortune. 

She  saw  Captain  Gaynor  again  at  dinner  —  they 
dined  at  three  o'clock  at  Priory  Close,  too  early  by  at 
least  an  hour  to  satisfy  the  mode.  And  from  her 
window,  discreetly  hidden,  she  watched  him  ride  out 
on  his  great  black  horse,  watched  his  blue-coated 
figure  along  the  white  ribbon  of  road  until  it  vanished, 
and  so  left  her  lonely  again. 

And  whilst  she  sat  alone  in  her  chamber  there, 
below  stairs  Evelyn  was  spurring  her  mother  to  per- 
form what  Evelyn  conceived  to  be  her  mother's 
duty  in  the  absence  of  Sir  John. 


EVELYN'S  CONSCIENCE  101 

'You  must  write  to  his  lordship,  mother,'  she  was 
saying,  'and  inform  him  of  what  is  taking  place.' 

'Nay,  now,  but  what  is  taking  place?'  quoth  her 
mother  querulously.  She  had  a  distaste  for  being 
drawn  into  situations  that  might  afterwards  require 
to  be  eased  by  explanation. 

Evelyn  shrugged  impatiently.  Those  hungry, 
questing  eyes  of  hers  were  very  angry.  '  Do  you  need 
to  ask  me,  mother?' 

'Let  us  await  your  father's  return,  child,'  the 
mother  pleaded.  'He  will  know  best.  And  meanwhile 
the  Captain  has  gone.' 

'But  he  will  return  to-morrow.' 

'How  do  you  know  that  ?  He  may  be  given  this  ap- 
pointment he  is  seeking,  and  so  may  return  no  more.' 

Evelyn  smiled,  contemptuous  in  her  assurance  that 
there  existed  at  Priory  Close  a  magnet  to  draw  him 
back  in  spite  of  anything  that  might  betide. 

'Then  I  will  write  myself.' 

'Evelyn,  I  forbid  you.' 

'My  father  is  absent,  and  my  mother  will  not  use 
her  eyes.  What  help  have  I?  I  hope  I  have  a  con- 
science. It  is  for  Damaris's  sake.  What,  after  all,  do 
we  know  of  this  adventurer?' 

'Nay,  now,  you  must  not  speak  so  of  him,'  her 
ladyship  remonstrated.  'His  father  was  your  father's 
dearest  friend.  Your  father  loves  the  Captain  as  a 
son.' 

Evelyn  looked  at  her  mother  a  moment.  Then  she 
turned  away  and  went  without  another  word  to  write 
the  following  letter: 

My  Lord,  —  My  great  regard  for  your  lordship  bids  me 
delay  no  longer  in  writing  to  tell  you  that  if  you  would  not 
see  that  which  you  most  value  lost  to  you,  you  had  best 


102  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

make  haste  to  come  to  Priory  Close.  There  is  one  here  who 
is  very  like  to  steal  away  from  you  that  which  you  cherish 
most  in  all  the  world.  I  send  you  this  timely  warning. 

Evelyn  Kynaston 

Having  written,  Evelyn  paused.  Within  her  a 
voice  —  a  little  mocking  voice  —  was  proclaiming 
that  what  she  performed  was  an  act  of  purest  spite. 
She  crimsoned  and  took  up  the  sheet  to  tear  it  across. 
Then  she  paused. 

'I  am  too  sensitive,'  she  assured  herself.  'Clearly  it 
is  my  duty,  since  my  mother  will  not.  Damaris's 
future  happiness  depends  on't.'  Which,  after  all,  was 
very  true. 

But  it  was  not  until  next  morning  that  the  letter 
sped  to  London  by  her  messenger. 


CHAPTER  VIII 
AT  THE  WORLD'S  END 

STANDING  on  the  outskirts  of  the  pleasant  village 
of  Chelsea,  as  one  of  London's  western  outposts, 
The  World's  End  was  a  house  of  great  comings  and 
goings,  of  much  bustle  and  consequence.  Hence  had 
it  been  preferred  by  Captain  Gaynor  to  any  quieter 
hostelry  for  the  business  which  he  desired  to  transact. 
In  the  constant  ebb  and  flow  of  travellers  to  and 
from  the  Metropolis  there  was  but  little  chance  that 
any  particular  man  or  group  of  men  would  attract 
more  than  passing  notice.  Moreover,  Maclean,  its 
Scottish  landlord,  was  a  circumspect  but  ardent 
Jacobite,  and  the  house  had  yet  the  additional 
advantage  of  being  —  both  on  the  score  of  its  remote- 
ness and  of  its  traffic  —  a  most  unlikely  place  for  such 
a  meeting. 

It  stood  a  little  way  back  from  the  King's  Road  — 
which  runs  from  Saint  James's  to  Hampton  Court  — 
fronted  by  a  patch  of  turf  on  which  were  planted  a 
couple  of  trestle-tables  flanked  by  plain  wooden 
forms,  and  it  looked  out  over  a  stretch  of  meadowland 
that  sloped  gently  to  the  river. 

Before  its  doors  on  this  June  evening  the  wonted 
bustle  was  toward.  A  great  black  and  yellow  stage- 
coach on  its  way  to  London  was  drawn  up  on  the  very 
edge  of  the  patch  of  turf,  and  the  hoarse-voiced  driver 
passed  the  time  of  day  with  the  ostler  in  terms  which 
knew  little  of  decorum  and  less  of  dainty  ears.  A 
nobleman's  travelling-chaise,  a  sombre  mass  of  wood 


io4  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

and  leather  drawn  by  six  horses  and  with  bold  es- 
cutcheons on  its  panels,  stood  cheek  by  jowl  with  the 
stage,  but  facing  westward. 

About  these  was  a  huddle  of  lesser  craft,  a  post- 
chaise,  a  couple  of  hackney  coaches,  a  carrier's  cart, 
and  lastly,  stretching  adown  the  road  in  line  like  the 
tail  of  a  kite,  some  half-dozen  waggons  on  their  way 
to  market  for  the  following  day.  To  increase  the 
general  bustle  and  to  swell  the  throng  there  were  men 
on  horseback  and  men  on  foot,  watermen  from  the 
moored  barges  and  wherries,  grooms,  ostlers,  drivers 
and  waggoners,  whilst  a  motley  company  derived 
from  all  of  these  sat  about  the  trestle-tables  over  their 
ale,  a  noisy,  babbling,  quarrelling,  laughing  assembly. 

Into  this  scene  of  activity  rode  Captain  Gaynor  at 
a  little  after  eight  o'clock  of  that  summer  evening  — 
the  hour  appointed  for  the  meeting  of  those  six 
confederates  who  were  to  receive  from  him  and  in  their 
turn  disseminate  those  messages  of  which  he  was  the 
bearer  and  of  which  he  carried  upon  him  a  note  in 
cipher.  The  substance  of  those  messages  has  not 
survived,  and  there  are  no  means  to-day  of  ascertain- 
ing the  details  of  the  precise  plot  that  was  the  object 
of  this  particular  mission  of  Captain  Gaynor.  Whilst 
regrettable  from  the  point  of  view  of  historical  re- 
search, from  our  own  it  is  a  matter  of  little  moment, 
since  we  are  here  concerned  with  the  personal  history 
of  Captain  Gaynor  and  not  with  that  of  any  of  the 
perennially  budding  Jacobite  conspiracies. 

We  gather  from  stray  records  that  have  come  down 
to  us  —  and  more  particularly  from  the  bulky 
memoirs  which  were  penned  by  Mr.  Second  Secretary 
Templeton  to  while  the  tedium  of  his  subsequent 
retirement  from  office  —  that  this  was  one  of  the 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  105 

earlier  of  those  conspiracies  which  ultimately  were  to 
prove  the  undoing  of  that  ambitious,  plotting  cleric, 
Atterbury;  for  we  are  able  very  plainly  to  trace  that 
this  mission  of  the  notorious  Jacobite  agent,  'Captain 
Jenkyn '  —  who  was  hanged  at  Tyburn  under  the 
extraordinary  circumstances  with  which  we  are 
directly  concerned  —  was  undertaken  at  the  Bishop's 
urgent  instances. 

To  receive  Captain  Gaynor,  as  he  drew  rein  on 
the  outskirts  of  that  throng,  came  a  shock-headed, 
sweating,  surpliced  ostler,  who  was  thrust  aside  al- 
most immediately  by  a  younger  man.  That  the  ostler 
submitted  without  demur  showed  that  the  youth 
who  usurped  his  functions  on  this  occasion  was  a 
person  of  some  authority,  as  did  indeed  the  latter's 
garments  which,  though  of  plain  homespun,  indicated 
a  station  superior  to  a  groom's.  He  was,  in  fact, 
Maclean's  son,  set  by  the  vintner  to  watch  for  the 
Captain's  coming. 

Harry  Gaynor  tossed  his  reins  to  the  youngster, 
and  swung  himself  lightly  from  the  saddle. 

'I  stay  but  a  little  while,'  he  said,  'so  keep  my  nag 
saddled  for  me.' 

With  that  he  pushed  forward  through  the  throng 
about  the  door,  a  throng  which  before  his  brisk, 
authoritative  manner  opened  a  way  for  him  readily 
enough.  He  strode  into  a  narrow,  flagged  passage 
upon  which  the  taproom  door  stood  open.  From  this 
issued  sounds  of  voices  and  a  reek  of  tobacco.  Under 
the  lintel  leaned  a  tall,  loose-limbed  man  in  his  shirt- 
sleeves with  an  apron  girt  about  him.  He  turned  at 
the  sound  of  the  Captain's  steps,  and  disclosed  the 
mellow,  jovial  face  of  Maclean. 

His  eyes  welcomed  the  guest,  and  the  Captain's 


106  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

returned  that  welcome.  It  was  as  if  they  had  clasped 
hands.  With  the  other  Jacobites  who  were  assembled 
above-stairs  there  had  been  question  and  answer  on 
the  score  of  wants  to  veil  the  giving  of  password  and 
countersign.  But  Captain  Gaynor  was  known  to  the 
vintner. 

'Ha,  landlord!'  quoth  the  soldier,  after  that  real 
greeting  of  the  eyes.  'A  pint  of  claret  laced  with 
Nantes!' 

'At  once,  your  honour,'  replied  Maclean,  in  formal 
landlord's  tones. 

The  Captain  stood  halting  upon  the  threshold  of 
the  taproom. 

'Ye're  somewhat  crowded  here,'  he  said,  and 
coughed  as  if  the  smoke  had  jarred  his  windpipe. 

'There  is  another  room  above,'  Maclean  replied, 
approving  the  Captain's  easy  acting.  'Will  you  be 
pleased  to  go  up,  sir?' 

The  soldier  turned  and  made  for  the  stairs.  'The 
first  door  to  the  right,  your  honour,'  Maclean  called 
after  him.  'I'll  bring  the  claret.'  He  coughed 
significantly,  and  Captain  Gaynor,  turning  as  he  went 
up,  caught  from  the  host's  quick,  expressive  gestures 
that  the  door  he  was  to  take  was  on  the  left  instead. 
He  nodded  his  understanding,  and  went  on.  He  knew 
the  chamber  from  another  visit  some  two  years  ago. 
It  was  peculiarly  well  fitted  for  a  secret  meeting  in 
such  a  place,  access  being  gained  to  it  across  another 
room,  through  a  door  that  looked  for  all  the  world  like 
that  of  a  cupboard  in  the  wall. 

But  as  he  went  he  was  puzzled  by  the  almost 
excessive  caution  which  the  landlord  had  shown,  by 
the  loud  announcement  that  the  door  was  on  the 
right  followed  by  a  correcting  gesture.  Maclean,  the 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  107 

Captain  reflected,  must  have  some  good  reason  for 
this,  some  notion  that  there  was  a  spy  at  hand. 

Such  a  notion  Maclean  had,  indeed,  and  his  sus- 
picions on  that  score  were  almost  immediately 
changed  to  certainty.  For  as  he  turned  he  found  him- 
self confronted  in  the  doorway  of  the  taproom  by  the 
very  object  of  his  suspicions  —  a  burly  fellow  in  snuff- 
coloured  clothes,  in  whom  he  had  sniffed  a  Bow 
Street  messenger.  This  man  had  sat  apart,  un- 
obtrusive, in  a  corner  of  the  taproom  whence  he  could 
command  the  passage,  and  for  all  his  unobtrusive- 
ness  —  or,  perhaps,  because  of  it  —  Maclean  had 
furtively  watched  him  with  increasing  mistrust.  He 
had  taken  care  when  Captain  Gaynor  entered  so  to 
place  himself  before  the  soldier  as  to  screen  him  from 
the  prying  eyes  of  that  suspected  spy.  And  it  was 
with  the  intention  of  misleading  that  same  watcher 
that  he  had  uttered  aloud  his  misdirection. 

Confronted  now  by  the  man,  and  his  every  sus- 
picion thus  confirmed,  Maclean,  affecting  to  await 
the  fellow's  commands,  effectively  barred  his  way 
until  it  should  be  too  late  for  him  to  perceive  the  real 
direction  taken  by  the  Captain. 

'What  d'ye  lack,  sir?'  was  his  formal  question, 
smiling  his  anxiety  to  supply  the  needs  of  this  guest 
—  and  in  that  smile  dissembling  the  greater  anxiety 
which  this  guest  occasioned  him. 

The  fellow  coughed  affectedly.  'This  reek  of 
tobacco  smoke,'  said  he,  'is  more  than  I  can  suffer. 
I'll  go  upstairs  to  this  other  room  of  yours.' 

Maclean  made  way  with  a  bow  and  a  readiness  that 
were  entirely  disarming. 

'Pray  do  so,'  said  he,  and  waved  a  hand  towards 
the  stairs.    'The  room  is  on  the  right.    You'll  find 


108  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

some  company  there.  I'll  send  a  drawer  to  wait  on 
you.' 

The  burly  spy  —  for  a  spy  he  was,  and  moreover 
had  a  warrant  in  his  pocket  and  six  men  at  his  orders 
outside  at  the  trestle-tables  —  felt  himself  checked  by 
the  landlord's  ease  and  the  readiness  with  which  the 
way  was  opened  for  him.  Maclean  was  a  born 
conspirator,  a  man  who  knew  how  a  plot  should  be 
laid  if  it  were  to  baffle  discovery.  To  mask  that 
meeting  above-stairs  against  precisely  such  a  con- 
tingency as  the  present  one,  he  had  placed  a  room 
above  at  the  disposal  of  such  of  his  guests  as  ap- 
peared to  be  persons  of  quality,  and  it  was  into  this 
room  that  the  spy  now  thrust  himself,  notwithstand- 
ing the  loss  of  confidence  occasioned  him  by  the  land- 
lord's imperturbability. 

He  found  himself  in  the  company  of  some  dozen 
gentlemen  who  eyed  him  somewhat  askance,  a  cir- 
cumstance which  reawakened  fading  suspicions.  The 
assembly  was,  it  is  true,  rather  more  numerous  than 
he  had  been  led  to  look  for,  and  he  observed  that  it 
was  broken  into  detached  groups  of  twos  and  threes. 
These,  surely,  could  not  be  his  quarry.  Yet,  being  a 
man  so  suspicious  of  ruses  that  he  saw  ruses  where 
none  existed,  considered  innocence  itself  the  most 
damning  mark  of  guilt,  the  messenger  sat  down  in  a 
corner,  and,  when  presently  approached  by  a  drawer, 
ordered  himself  a  nipperkin  of  ale.  But  the  scrutiny 
to  which  he  furtively  submitted  each  separate  group 
and  each  member  of  it  gradually  convinced  him  that 
either  he  had  been  deliberately  led  or  else  was  fallen 
into  error.  This  conviction  was  complete  when  anon 
the  door  opened  to  admit  a  couple  of  fresh  arrivals, 
the  first  of  whom  was  a  portly,  pompous  man  in  a 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  109 

full-bottomed  wig,  in  whom  the  messenger  recog- 
nised Sir  Henry  Thresh,  one  of  the  Middlesex  jus- 
tices. 

Meanwhile  Captain  Gaynor  had  crossed  the  empty 
room  on  the  left  of  the  passage,  and  through  that 
deceptive  narrow  double-door  had  entered  the  farther 
apartment,  where  his  friends  awaited  him. 

This  was  a  small  chamber  facing  westward  and 
flooded  now  with  the  roseate  glow  of  sunset.  It  was 
very  plainly  furnished,  and  about  a  polished,  oblong 
walnut  table  in  mid-apartment  sat  four  gentlemen 
over  their  wine.  A  crystal  bowl  of  water  —  inevitable 
appendage  to  every  Jacobite  gathering  —  occupied 
the  middle  of  the  board  and  shed  upon  it  a  wedge  of 
prismatic  light.  Near  this  pipes  had  been  placed,  a 
tinder-box  and  a  leaden  jar  of  cut  tobacco;  but  only 
one  member  of  the  company  —  an  extremely  tall  and 
slender  young  man,  very  fine  in  a  green  riding-suit 
with  white  satin  linings  —  was  smoking.  This  gentle- 
man had  dark,  vivacious  eyes  and  a  pleasant  face 
under  an  extremely  modish  and  ample  periwig;  his 
name  was  Partridge,  and  he  was  said  to  be  a  person 
of  considerable  importance  in  Wiltshire. 

Of  the  other  three,  two  were  men  of  forty  or  there- 
abouts. One  was  Viscount  Harewood,  a  gentleman 
with  whom  allegiance  to  the  Stuarts  was  a  family 
matter,  since  he  claimed  the  patriarchal  second 
Charles  for  his  grandsire.  Indeed,  some  resemblance 
to  that  too-merry  monarch  was  to  be  discerned  in  his 
lordship's  swarthy  tint  and  saturnine  cast  of  counte- 
nance; the  other  was  Mr.  Stephen  Dyke,  a  pale,  hawk- 
faced  man  in  a  brown  bag-wig.  The  last  member  of 
that  quartette  was  the  staunch  and  almost  brazen 
Jacobite,  Sir  Thomas  Leigh.  He  was  much  older  than 


no  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

his  companions,  very  tall  and  straight  nevertheless, 
with  something  military  in  his  air  and  carriage,  and 
something  military  too,  in  the  vigorous  oaths  with 
which  his  speech  was  peppered,  for  he  had  seen 
service  in  the  late  queen's  days.  In  countenance  he 
was  fresh-complexioned,  frank  and  jovial. 

They  rose  to  welcome  Captain  Gaynor,  who  came  a 
full  quarter  of  an  hour  behind  the  time  appointed  for 
the  meeting;  yet,  as  he  perceived,  he  was  not  the  last 
to  arrive.  Lord  Pauncefort  and  an  Irishman  named 
O'Neill  were  still  awaited.  He  made  his  excuses  and 
sat  down  to  await  with  them  their  missing  confed- 
erates, giving  them  meanwhile  such  news  as  they 
sought,  until  they  were  interrupted  by  the  entrance 
of  Maclean  with  the  Captain's  claret. 

Having  set  down  the  jug  and  glass,  the  vintner 
leaned  a  hand  upon  the  table,  and  addressing  himself 
more  particularly  to  Captain  Gaynor,  he  gravely  an- 
nounced the  presence  in  the  house  of  one  whom  he 
suspected  of  being  a  spy. 

They  listened  in  consternation  and  in  silence,  with 
the  exception  of  old  Sir  Thomas,  who  let  fly  a  volley 
of  sulphuric  oaths  which  no  one  heeded. 

'What  do  you  counsel  us  to  do,  Maclean?'  was 
Captain  Gaynor's  quiet  question. 

'Why,  do  the  business  upon  which  you  are  come, 
gentlemen.  The  rogue  is  safe  bestowed  for  the 
present,  watching  the  guests  in  another  room  across 
the  passage.  I  had  disposed  against  any  such  surprise 
as  this.  And,  after  all,'  he  ended,  'it  is  not  impossible 
that  he  is  after  other  quarry  than  yourselves.  Still,  I 
thought  it  well  to  set  you  on  your  guard.' 

He  withdrew  upon  that,  leaving  relief  behind  him; 
for  all  but  one  accepted  as  certain  the  supposition  that 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  in 

the  Bow  Street  messenger  might  be  on  the  spoor  of 
other  game. 

'It  must  be  so,  egad!'  cried  Harewood.  'Else  were 
we  betrayed,  and  that  is  not  possible.' 

'Not  possible,  indeed,'  agreed  Sir  Thomas.  'The 
fellow  will  be  some  thief-taker  on  the  trail  of  a  toby- 
man  belike.   Maclean  starts  at  shadows.' 

But  Captain  Gaynor  did  not  share  their  confidence. 
Pauncefort's  absence  fretted  him.  The  mistrust  im- 
planted in  his  breast  by  Sir  John  Kynaston  and  what 
he  had  learnt  from  him  was  stirring  uneasily  now. 

'I  wonder  where  the  plague  these  others  tarry,'  he 
muttered,  and  then  almost  immediately  to  answer 
him  the  door  opened  and  O'Neill  reeled  into  the  room. 

There  is  no  other  way  in  which  to  describe  his 
entrance.  He  was  a  red-headed  youngster,  whose  face 
was  usually  florid  and  mischievously  good-humoured. 
It  was  of  a  deathly  pallor  now,  and  clammy;  his  blue 
eyes  were  a  thought  wild.  His  boots  were  white  with 
dust,  and  all  about  him  there  was  an  air  of  haste,  dis- 
order, and  alarm. 

His  advent  brought  the  others  to  their  feet. 
Questions  rained  upon  him  on  the  score  of  his 
condition. 

He  sank  to  a  chair,  snatched  up  a  glass  of  Nantes 
that  belonged  to  Sir  Thomas,  and  unceremoniously 
drained  it.   Then  he  explained  himself  quite  tersely. 

'The  game  is  up,  gentlemen.'  He  rolled  his  eyes 
about  the  company  that  stood  above  him.  "Tis  be- 
trayed we  are;  undone  entirely.' 

There  fell  a  pause,  all  eyes  upon  this  bearer  of  ill 
tidings.  Then  Lord  Harewood  fired  a  question. 

'  By  whom  ? '  quoth  he,  so  fiercely  that  had  the  be- 
trayer heard  him  he  must  have  looked  to  his  skin. 


ii2  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

*I  don't  know,'  was  the  answer,  'and  faith  'tis  the 
only  thing  I  don't  know.  We've  been  sold  —  devil  a 
doubt  of  that,  and  'tis  a  miracle  I  am  here  to  tell 
you  of  it.  Clinton,  Brownrigg,  Holmdale,  Spencer 
Gamlin  and  Sir  Vernon  Bewick  have  been  arrested  to- 
day upon  warrants.  Other  arrests  are  to  follow  — 
yours,  Harewood,  and  yours,  Sir  Thomas.' 

'Let  them  arrest  me  and  be  damned  to  them,'  said 
the  stalwart  veteran.   'What  else?' 

'There's  a  warrant  for  myself  too,  bedad,  and  you 
may  be  thankful  for't,  as  otherwise  I  should  never 
have  had  warning  at  all.' 

Came  a  fresh  volley  of  questions,  quelled  at  last  by 
Captain  Gaynor.  He  spoke  for  the  first  time  since 
O'Neill's  arrival. 

'Shall  we  discuss  this  matter  calmly,  gentlemen,' 
said  he.  'Thus  shall  we  make  the  better  speed,  and 
time  may  be  of  more  consequence  than  we  deem. 
Will  you  be  seated?' 

He  spoke  in  a  crisp  voice  of  authority.  Outwardly 
he  was  the  calmest  —  indeed,  the  only  calm  —  man 
in  that  room.  He  was  instantly  obeyed.  They 
realised  that  in  this  extremity  a  leader  was  needed, 
and  the  natural  leader,  as  much  by  the  position  which 
his  mission  gave  him  as  by  his  natural  endowments, 
was  Captain  Gaynor.  They  sat  down  at  once,  and 
the  Captain  sat  down  with  them. 

He  was  familiar  with  desperate  situations,  and  he 
had  been  too  long  an  actor  to  permit  himself  now  to 
be  surprised  into  a  betrayal  of  his  true  feelings.  And 
so  he  remained  outwardly  as  unmoved  as  if  the  thing 
before  them  were  but  of  trifling  import.  Inwardly  his 
soul  sickened.  Years  of  planning  were  overthrown 
thus  at  a  blow.    All  was  to  do  again,  it  seemed;  and 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  113 

Heaven  alone  knew  whether  he  would  live  to  be  in  at 
the  ultimate  victory  which  he  was  assured  God  must 
accord  the  right.  Yet  nothing  of  this  showed  in  his 
countenance.  If  it  was  stern  and  singularly  hard,  it 
had  all  the  calm  that  goes  with  hardness. 

He  took  up  one  of  the  long-stemmed  pipes,  and 
began  deliberately  to  fill  it  from  the  leaden  jar. 

'Firstly,'  he  said,  his  voice  very  quiet  and  even, 
'will  you  tell  us,  Mr.  O'Neill,  how  you  come  by  your 
knowledge  ? ' 

'I  have  it,'  answered  O'Neill  at  once,  leaning 
forward  across  the  table,  'from  my  cousin,  Jocelyn 
Butler,  who  is  my  Lord  Carteret's  private  secretary. 
'Twas  his  own  hand  prepared  the  warrants  by  my 
lord's  directions,  and  had  not  my  own  been  among 
the  names  we  should  never  have  had  this  warning. 
As  it  was,  Jocelyn  came  to  me  soon  after  six  this 
evening,  as  I  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out  —  in  fact, 
'tis  what  delayed  me.  At  first  he  told  me  no  more 
than  that  there  was  a  warrant  out  for  my  arrest  on  a 
charge  of  conspiring  against  the  peace  of  the  realm,  and 
urged  me  to  take  horse  and  begone  at  once.  But  I 
swore  I  wouldn't  stir  a  foot  until  he  had  told  me  all 
there  was  to't. 

'He  demurred  awhile,  but  bethinking  him  that 
'twill  be  the  talk  o'  the  town  by  morning,  and  that  as 
most  of  the  arrests  were  made  already  'twas  little  he'd 
be  betrayin',  he  spoke  out,  and  told  me  all  he  knew, 
or  leastways  all  that  I  asked  him,  and  I  asked  him  all 
that  mattered.  Thereupon  I  rode  hither  as  fast  as 
horse  could  bring  me,  for  amongst  other  things  my 
cousin  told  me  that  the  messengers  from  Bow  Street 
were  on  their  way  hither  to  surprise  a  meeting  of 
plotters.' 


ii4  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

There  was  a  stir  about  the  table. 

'Ah!'  said  Captain  Gaynor.  'That,  too,  was  known 
then,  eh?'  He  reached  for  the  tinder-box  as  he 
spoke. 

'Faith,  yes.  But  glory  be  to  Heaven,  I've  arrived 
ahead  of  them.' 

"Sblud!  But  ye've  not,'  roared  Sir  Thomas  Leigh, 
and  hubbub  broke  out  afresh,  through  which  O'Neill 
listened  in  increasing  alarm  to  the  announcement  that 
one  of  the  messengers  was  here  already. 

'And  what's  to  be  done,  then?'  he  cried. 

'That  we  will  now  consider,'  said  the  Captain,  and 
by  the  very  tone  of  his  voice  restored  order  about  the 
table.  He  struck  steel  against  flint,  and  having 
kindled  a  flame  applied  it  to  his  pipe.  Then  —  'You 
did  not  learn,'  he  inquired,  'whether  Lord  Pauncefort 
had  been  arrested?' 

'I  learnt  that  he  had  not.' 

'But  a  warrant  will  have  been  issued  for  him,  of 
course  ? ' 

'Not  so.  I  asked  that,  too,  and  I  was  relieved  to 
learn  that  he,  at  least,  has  been  overlooked.' 

'Overlooked?  How  very  fortunate,'  said  Captain 
Gaynor,  with  the  faintest  note  of  irony.  Sir  John 
Kynaston's  warning  was  humming  now  in  his  mind. 
'This  being  so,  can  any  here  suggest  why  my  Lord 
Pauncefort  is  not  with  us?' 

A  hush  followed  that  significant  question,  broken 
at  last  by  Harewood,  who  was  Pauncefort's  friend. 

'Now,  sink  me,  Captain  Gaynor,  what  is't  you 
mean  by  that  ? '  And  his  swarthy  face  was  flushed  by 
sudden  anger. 

'Before  I  answer  you,  my  lord,'  said  the  soldier, 
maintaining  his  outward  calm,  'let  me  ask  you  all  a 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  115 

question.  Has  any  one  of  you  mentioned  to  a  living 
soul  that  we  were  to  assemble  here  to-night?  If  any 
has,  I  entreat  him  to  speak  frankly  now  in  the  interest 
of  us  all.' 

Followed  a  little  spell  of  silence;  then  from  one  and 
another  broke  firm  and  sturdy  denials. 

'I  will  remind  you,  then,'  said  the  Captain,  'that 
no  living  man  knew  of  this  meeting  save  those  who 
were  to  assemble  —  ourselves  present,  and  one  other 
who  is  absent.' 

'There  is  yet  one  other  —  Maclean,'  Mr.  Partridge 
reminded  the  Captain. 

'  Aye ! '  roared  Harewood.   '  What  of  Maclean  ? ' 

Gaynor's  smile  and  a  little  gesture  with  the  fin- 
gers that  held  his  pipe  brushed  aside  the  question  as 
frivolous. 

'Maclean  did  not  know  the  names  of  those  who 
were  to  assemble,  and  you  will  bear  in  mind  that 
Mr.  O'Neill  has  told  us  that  the  warrants  are  out 
with  those  names  set  forth.  Maclean  could  not  have 
possessed  such  knowledge.  Nor  yet,  had  he  possessed 
it,  could  he  have  betrayed  it  without  running  his  own 
neck  into  a  noose,  and  there  is  still  the  further  trifling 
matter  in  his  favour  that  'twas  he,  himself,  brought 
us  word  of  the  presence  of  the  messenger. 

'You  must  see,  sirs,  that  there  is  but  one  person 
could  have  betrayed  us  to  this  extent;  his  absence 
more  than  confirms  the  suspicion  —  a  suspicion  which 
amounts  to  certainty  with  me.  And  I  am  not  a  man 
to  form  hasty  judgments.  I  will  further  remind  you 
that  my  Lord  Pauncefort  is  a  gamester,  broken  and 
desperate,  and  —  I  do  not  suggest,  I  state,  and  I  will 
maintain  my  statement  wherever  and  whenever 
opportunity   is   afforded   me  —  he   has   taken    this 


n6  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

dastardly  course  to  mend  his  shattered  fortunes.  In  a 
word,  gentlemen,  he  has  sold  us;  and  I  make  no  doubt 
that  he  has  obtained  a  handsome  price  from  the 
Secretary  of  State  for  his  Judas  services.' 

Harewood  got  angrily  to  his  feet.  'By  God!' 
he  swore,  'I'll  not  hear  a  man  thus  abused  in  his 
absence!' 

'You  shall  not  find  me  slow  to  accuse  him  to  his 
face,'  said  the  Captain.  'The  opportunity  of  that,  I 
think,  is  all  that  I  can  now  ask  of  Fortune.' 

Harewood  looked  round  with  glaring  eyes,  in  appeal 
to  the  others  to  repudiate  this  hideous  charge  against 
his  friend;  but  on  every  face  he  saw  conviction 
written.  The  thing  was  all  too  plain.  The  viscount 
felt  that  conviction  being  borne  in  upon  his  very  self, 
yet  loyally  he  sought  to  hold  it  off. 

'I'll  not  believe  it!  Sink  me,  I'll  not  believe  it!'  he 
exclaimed  although  his  voice  almost  broke  on  the 
words. 

'The  decision,'  said  the  Captain,  'does  your  heart 
more  credit  than  your  judgment.  Yet,  my  lord,  lest 
you  or  any  here  should  think  that  I  judge  rashly,  let 
me  add  something  that  is  known  to  me  —  something 
that  I  confess  has  spurred  me  on  to  this  conclusion.' 
And  briefly  he  informed  the  company  of  the  threat 
which  Pauncefort  had  uttered  to  Sir  John  Kynaston. 
'Now,'  he  concluded,  'I  hold  that  in  such  a  matter 
there  is  no  ground  for  thinking  that  the  man  who  is 
so  lost  to  honour  as  to  threaten  will  hesitate  to 
perform.' 

Convinced,  Harewood  sat  down  and  took  his  head 
in  his  hands.  'He  was  my  friend,'  he  said  in  a  dull 
voice. 

Smoking  quietly,  Captain  Gaynor  turned  again  to 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  117 

O'Neill.  'You  have  not  said  that  there  is  a  warrant 
out  for  me/ 

'I  was  coming  to't,'  was  the  answer,  and  the  Irish- 
man's face  quickened  with  excitement.  'There  is  and 
there  is  not.' 

'How?'  Gaynor  looked  at  him  with  knitting  brows. 

'There  is  a  warrant  issued  for  Captain  Jenkyn,' 
was  the  explanation, '  and  it  is  expected  that  he  will 
be  taken  here  with  the  rest  of  us.' 

The  soldier  stiffened  visibly.  Here  was  the  last 
ounce  of  proof  against  Pauncefort.  For  but  two  men 
in  England  knew  of  his  identity  with  the  bearer  of 
that  sobriquet  —  his  lordship  and  Sir  John  Kynaston. 
Not  even  these  gentlemen  gathered  here  together  had 
hitherto  suspected  it.  At  the  announcement  now 
there  was  an  outcry,  dominated  by  Leigh's  outflung 
hand  and  thundered  monosyllable  — 

'You!' 

The  Captain  smiled  at  them,  and  slowly,  depre- 
catingly,  shook  his  head. 

'Sirs,'  he  said,  'you  cannot  really  think  that 
Captain  Jenkyn  is  any  particular  individual.  Rather, 
I  think,  is  it  a  title  conferred  by  the  Government  to 
fit  any  Jacobite  agent  who  visits  England.  On  this 
occasion,  from  what  O'Neill  tells  us,  it  would  seem 
they  thrust  the  honour  upon  me.  But,'  and  he  turned 
again  to  the  Irishman,  'I  am  not  specified  by  name 
in  the  warrant?' 

'By  no  other  name  —  no.' 

'That  is  very  odd.' 

'Aye,'  returned  O'Neill,  'until  we  have  the 
explanation,  which  is  still  more  odd,  bedad.  You 
were  specifically  accused  to  the  Secretary  of  State. 
But  when  he  desired  Mr.  Templeton  to  issue  a  warrant 


n8  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

in  due  form,  Mr.  Templeton  urged  that  there  was 
some  mistake  —  that  his  lordship's  informer  was  per- 
force in  error;  that  Captain  Harry  Gaynor  was  no 
Jacobite,  but  a  soldier  of  fortune  whose  entire  record 
and  whose  credentials  were  in  his  hands,  a  man  who 
had  no  sympathy  with  the  Stuart  Cause,  and  who  had 
been  recommended  to  him  by  his  own  cousin,  Tolle- 
mache  Templeton,  an  old  friend  of  your  own. 

'Lord  Carteret,  it  seems,  sought  to  combat  Mr. 
Templeton's  confidence;  but  the  Second  Secretary  is 
an  obstinate  man  who  claims  that  he  is  never  at  fault. 
He  laid  Captain  Gaynor's  credentials  before  Lord 
Carteret,  and  when  his  lordship  suggested  that  such 
documents  could  be  forged,  Mr.  Templeton  took 
coach  and  visited  the  embassies  of  two  of  the  Govern- 
ments from  which  certain  of  those  credentials  pro- 
ceeded.' 

'What  embassies?'  quoth  the  Captain,  his  eyes 
preternaturally  bright. 

'The  Austrian  and  the  Turkish.' 

The  Captain  sighed  his  instant  relief  from  that 
sudden  tension.  He  even  smiled  as  the  Irishman 
continued: 

'Mr.  Templeton  was  assured  at  both  that  the 
documents  presented  were  entirely  genuine.  The 
Turkish  Ambassador,  indeed,  claimed  a  personal 
acquaintance  with  Captain  Gaynor  made  in  Con- 
stantinople four  years  ago,  and  spoke,  I  am  informed, 
in  terms  of  high  praise  of  you  to  the  Second  Secretary. 
With  this  information  Mr.  Templeton  returned  to 
Lord  Carteret,  and  boldly  informed  his  lordship  that 
he  would  resign  his  office  ere  he  made  himself  the 
laughing-stock  of  the  town  by  issuing  a  warrant 
against  a  gentleman  so  unimpeachable  and  accredited. 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  119 

This,  sir,  in  my  cousin's  own  presence.  My  Lord 
Carteret  was  swayed  by  that  assurance;  he  bowed 
before  it  to  the  extent  of  consenting  that  the  warrant 
should  be  made  out  for  "Captain  Jenkyn"  —  whose 
identity,  he  was  informed,  was  one  with  your  own. 
To  this  Mr.  Templeton  made  no  objection,  confident 
that  the  result  must  prove  the  correctness  of  his  own 
and  the  error  of  his  lordship's  information.* 

'It  is  a  confidence,'  said  the  Captain,  smiling,  'in 
which  we  must  see  to't  that  Mr.  Templeton  is  en- 
couraged.' It  gratified  him  to  observe  the  good  fruit 
borne  by  the  thoroughness  of  his  dispositions,  and  he 
was  thankful  for  it  in  this  extremity. 

'And  how  is  that  to  be  accomplished  now?'  quoth 
Mr.  Dyke  from  the  other  end  of  the  table. 

The  Captain  smoked  in  silence  an  instant.  Then 
he  removed  the  pipe  from  his  lips,  and  spoke. 

'Let  us  for  a  moment  consider  our  position.  I  do 
not  think  that  it  is  one  that  need  cause  us  any  undue 
alarm.' 

'Do  you  not,  by  God!'  growled  old  Sir  Thomas. 
'Then  you're  monstrous  slow  at  taking  alarm,  sir.' 

'When  you  have  heard  me  perhaps  you  will  abate 
your  own,'  the  soldier  answered  him,  and  with  that 
proceeded:  'If,  gentlemen,  you  have  been  properly 
cautious,  you  should  not  now  stand  in  any  grave 
peril.'  He  was  thinking  swiftly,  speaking  almost  as  he 
thought.  'These  arrests  are  premature.  In  a  month's 
time  they  might  have  occasioned  concern.  As  it  is, 
what  can  be  proved  against  any  man  of  you? 

'Return,  then,  quietly  to  your  homes,  and  pursue 
your  avocations.  Should  you  be  arrested,  suffer  it 
in  patience,  and  in  the  conviction  that  your  liberty 
must  very  speedily  be  restored  to  you.   It  would  not 


120  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

surprise  me,'  he  continued,  'if  this  prematureness 
were  deliberate.  It  is  Lord  Carteret's  policy  to  stifle 
our  work  at  its  very  source,  and  to  strike  terror  into 
our  leaders  by  a  display  of  the  Government's  omni- 
science rather  than  allow  any  treason  to  spread  to 
punishable  lengths.  It  is  devilish  shrewd  of  him,  for 
he  knows  that  martyrs  to  a  cause  beget  sympathy  for 
that  cause,  and  ten  emulators  for  every  one  that  falls. 
Therefore,  he  does  not  desire  martyrs.  Should  you  be 
arrested,  the  matter  will  probably  end  in  a  private 
admonition  from  Lord  Carteret  to  each  of  you  ere 
you  are  restored  to  liberty.  That,  sirs,  I  think,  is  the 
position.' 

His  calm,  so  admirably  dissembling  his  own  inward 
despair  —  fell  like  a  balm  upon  those  five  disordered 
minds. 

But  Sir  Thomas  Leigh  found  an  objection  to  his 
reasoning. 

'You  do  not  overlook,  I  trust,  that  our  betrayal 
proceeds  from  within?' 

1 1  do  not,  Sir  Thomas.  But  it  would  be  unreason- 
able to  suppose  that  our  ranks  have  yielded  more  than 
one  traitor,  and  the  word  of  one  man  alone  — 
actuated,  no  doubt,  from  motives  of  self-interest  — 
whilst  serving  the  ends  of  Lord  Carteret  to  damp  us 
with  terror  of  his  omniscience,  as  I  have  said,  is  very 
far  from  sufficing  to  produce  the  conviction  of  any 
who  does  not  betray  himself. 

'You  are  further  to  remember  that  it  is  in  the  last 
degree  unlikely  that  our  betrayer  will  come  forward  to 
accuse  us.  That,  indeed,  would  be  a  foolish  procedure 
on  every  count.  Pauncefort  must  have  made  it  a 
condition  of  his  bargain  with  the  Government  that  he 
shall  remain  in  the  background,  and  the  Government 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  121 

itself  must  have  desired  this,  for  once  the  informer 
were  proclaimed  his  value  would  be  at  an  end  —  and 
a  man  in  Pauncefort's  position  is  of  very  great  value, 
so  great  that  the  Government  may  well  desire  to 
retain  his  services  for  the  future  —  that  is,  assuming 
that  Pauncefort  is  to  live.  But  I  think  we  owe  it  to 
ourselves  in  this  case  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure.' 

His  voice  rang  with  so  sinister  a  note  that  all  eyes 
were  turned  to  search  his  countenance.  It  was  hard 
now  to  the  point  of  cruelty. 

'It  should,  I  think,  be  a  point  of  expediency  and 
honour  with  any  who  is  so  fortunate  as  to  escape  the 
trap  laid  for  us  here  to-night  to  seek  out  my  Lord 
Pauncefort,  and  — '  A  swift,  trenchant  gesture  with 
the  pipe-stem  completed  his  meaning. 

There  was  a  gasp  from  Mr.  Partridge;  dismay  was 
written,  too,  upon  the  face  of  Harewood. 

'We  are  not  children,  sirs,'  said  the  Captain  in  a 
rasping  voice,  'and  our  game  is  not  a  child's  game. 
When  a  man  betrays  us  we  have  a  duty  to  discharge 
to  ourselves,  to  one  another,  and  to  the  Cause  we 
serve.  For  a  traitor  there  is  but  one  punishment  all 
the  world  over.  That  punishment  Lord  Pauncefort 
has  incurred,  and  I,  for  one,  pray  Heaven  that  I  may 
be  spared  long  enough  from  the  clutches  of  the  law  to 
administer  it  myself.  So  would  I  have  each  of  you 
think.' 

The  white  hawk-face  of  Mr.  Dyke  looked  singularly 
vicious  as  he  swore  what  he  would  do,  given  the 
opportunity,  and  he  was  followed  instantly  by  O'Neill 
and  old  Sir  Thomas. 

'One  risk,  however,  we  do  run,  sirs,  in  spite  of 
what  I  have  said,'  the  Captain  resumed,  'and  it  is 
somewhat  serious  —  the  risk  of  my  being  taken  in 


122 


THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 


your  company.  If  I  am  so  taken,  the  identity  of 
Captain  Jenkyn  is  established  and  attached  to  Harry 
Gaynor,  and  Mr.  Templeton  is  proven  wrong  in  his 
assurance.  Whatever  happen  to  the  rest,  for  Captain 
Jenkyn  there  will  be  no  mercy;  he  will  receive  the  very 
shortest  shrift. 

'If,  then,  I  am  taken  in  your  company,  I  am 
destroyed  by  being  found  with  you,  as  was  promised 
by  our  betrayer;  and  similarly  you  may  suffer 
grievously  for  being  found  with  me.  Our  chief  danger, 
then,  lies  there.  If  you  are  taken  without  me,  your 
danger  is  reduced  to  insignificant  proportions,  as  I 
have  said.  If  I  am  taken  anywhere  but  here,  my  own 
risk  also  is  lessened  to  vanishing-point.' 

Their  agreement  with  this  reasoning  was  immediate 
and  unanimous. 

'And  therefore,'  added  Mr.  Dyke,  'it  is  of  the  first 
importance  that  we  should  be  rid  of  you  and  you  of 
us.' 

'Precisely,'  the  Captain  agreed.  'All  that  remains 
to  be  determined  is  how  we  shall  achieve  that  most 
desirable  consummation;  and  the  means,  I  confess, 
do  not  seem  quite  ready  to  our  hands.  Can  any  of 
you  propose  a  course?' 

'Where  the  devil  is  that  rascal  Maclean?'  roared 
Sir  Thomas. 

"Tis  what  I've  been  wonderin'  myself,'  said  O'Neill 
'for  savin'  the  brandy  I've  filched  from  you,  Sir 
Thomas,  'tis  devil  a  thought  has  been  bestowed  upon 
my  thirst.' 

'Is  there  no  safe  way  of  calling  him?'  quoth 
Partridge. 

'No  way  that  is  not  fraught  with  danger  in  a  house 
that  is  watched,'  said  the  thoughtful  Mr.  Dyke.   'If 


AT  THE  WORLD'S  END  123 

he  has  left  us  alone  'tis  a  sign  he  is  convinced  we  are 
besieged  and  fears  to  come  to  us  lest  he  should  show 
the  way  to  others.' 

And  then,  at  last,  the  door  opened,  and  Maclean 
himself  came  in.  He  was  rather  breathless,  and  his 
broad  face  had  lost  much  of  its  habitual  florid  tint. 


CHAPTER  IX 
THE  ALIBI 

TWICE  before  had  Maclean  attempted  to  repair 
to  the  conspirators,  but  each  time  prudence  had 
compelled  him  to  abandon  the  attempt.  On  the  first 
occasion  he  was  crossing  the  outer  room  when  he 
heard  the  door  open  softly  behind  him,  and,  looking 
over  his  shoulder,  found  himself  observed  by  the  spy. 

He  betrayed  no  uneasiness,  but  affecting  to  con- 
tinue on  his  way,  reached  the  overmantel  and  took 
thence  a  couple  of  candle  branches,  with  which  he 
returned. 

The  face  of  the  Bow  Street  messenger  betrayed  the 
extent  to  which  he  was  intrigued.  He  had  been  on  the 
watch,  and  observing  Maclean's  cautious  approach 
he  had  inferred  from  it  that  at  last  he  was  to  be  put 
upon  the  trail  of  his  quarry.  Instead  he  found  the 
landlord  seeking  a  pair  of  candle  branches  in  an 
empty  room.   The  spy  felt  naturally  aggrieved. 

'D'ye  lack  aught,  sir?'  Maclean  had  asked  him, 
between  landlordly  solicitude  and  challenge. 

'I  do,'  replied  the  spy,  practically  at  bay.  'I  am 
seeking  some  friends  o'  mine  who  are  expecting  me 
here.  One  is  Sir  Thomas  Leigh;  belike  you'll  be 
acquainted  with  him?' 

Maclean's  expression  was  that  of  one  who  innocently 
searches  in  his  memory.  He  shook  his  head.  'Not 
by  name,'  said  he  slowly.  'Have  ye  looked  in  the 
room  yonder?'  And  he  indicated  the  room  across  the 
passage  to  which  he  had  earlier  directed  the  spy. 


THE  ALIBI  125 

*I  have.  And  he's  not  there.' 

'Perhaps  he'll  be  below-stairs,  then.' 

'Neither  is  he  below-stairs.'  The  messenger's  tone 
was  grim;  his  eyes  intently  watched  the  landlord's 
baffling  face. 

'Then,  sir,  I'm  afraid  he'll  not  be  here.' 

'Ah!'  said  the  spy.   'Very  odd!  Ve-ry  odd!' 

But  the  face  of  the  dour  Scot  remained  politely 
blank.  Clearly,  the  spy  considered,  there  was  naught 
to  be  made  of  this  fellow,  and  to  push  insistence 
further  just  then  might  be  to  give  an  alarm  that  must 
result  in  the  flight  of  his  game. 

'I'll  wait,'  he  added  shortly,  and,  turning,  made  his 
way  back  to  the  room  which  he  had  lately  quitted. 
But  he  did  not  enter  it.  Maclean  had  bowed  and 
passed  on  down  the  stairs.  The  spy  stood  watching 
him  with  a  certain  hope.  This,  however,  was  frus- 
trated. He  was  completely  baffled  by  the  circum- 
stance that  never  once  did  Maclean  so  much  as  turn 
his  head.  Such  indifference  argued  a  quiet  conscience. 
Was  it  possible,  he  wondered,  that  Maclean  might  be 
in  ignorance  of  the  meeting  that  was  taking  place 
under  his  roof?  The  fellow's  obvious  unconcern 
scarcely  admitted  of  any  other  conclusion. 

He  wandered  down  the  passage,  listening  outside 
doors  as  he  went,  but  gaining  no  useful  information 
until  he  came  to  the  end,  where  he  found  a  door  ajar. 
He  gently  pushed  it,  and  made  the  discovery  that  it 
opened  upon  a  narrow  staircase.  He  peered  down 
and  ascertained  that  this  led  to  the  kitchen  and  to  the 
garden  at  the  back  of  the  inn.  He  realised  to  his 
dismay  that  this  back  staircase  formed  an  emergency 
exit  of  whose  existence  he  had  been  in  ignorance. 
Was  it  possible  that  while  he  had  been  wasting  his 


126  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

time  in  that  room  on  the  right,  the  landlord,  smoking 
his  business,  had  got  the  plotters  away? 

He  turned  and  came  thoughtfully  back.  And  now 
he  perceived  the  host  coming  upstairs  again.  Straight 
towards  him  came  Maclean. 

'  Is  your  friend  a  tall,  elderly  gentleman  with  a  red 
face?'  he  asked. 

'Aye,'  said  the  spy.   'He  answers  that  description.' 

'Then  he  is  in  the  taproom  below  there.' 

The  spy  thanked  him,  and  descended,  leaving  the 
host  upon  the  landing.  But  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  the  fellow  was  imposed  upon.  He  simply  availed 
himself  of  this  petard  of  Maclean's  to  hoist  Maclean 
himself.  He  turned  into  the  taproom.  But  the  next 
instant  he  had  thrust  out  his  head  to  see  what  course 
Maclean  was  taking,  and  he  was  just  in  time  to  see  the 
landlord  again  vanish  into  that  room  on  the  left  where 
earlier  he  had  surprised  him. 

The  messenger  flung  out  of  the  house  at  once  to  his 
men  who  sat  sipping  their  ale  at  one  of  the  trestle- 
tables.  He  was  a  shrewd,  calculating  fellow,  and  he 
made  not  the  slightest  doubt  about  what  must  follow. 
He  took  his  six  bullies  round  to  the  pleasant  garden 
at  the  back,  and  bestowed  them  and  himself  very 
carefully  behind  a  hedge  of  laurel,  the  gathering  dusk 
assisting  his  manoeuvre. 

Meanwhile  Maclean  had,  at  last,  penetrated  to  the 
inner  chamber  where  the  conspirators  were  gathered, 
and  had  announced  to  them  that  beyond  all  doubt 
the  Bow  Street  messenger  was  seeking  themselves, 
having  gone  the  length  of  asking  for  Sir  Thomas  Leigh 
by  name. 

'There's  a  pack  of  ruffianly  fellows  outside,  and  it's 
not  a  doubt  but  they  will  be  his  followers.   Ye  must 


THE  ALIBI  127 

take  t'other  way — by  the  back;  and  now  is  your 
opportunity,  whilst  the  spy  is  gone  on  a  fool's  errand 
for  me.' 

They  were  on  their  feet  at  once,  readv  and  anxious 
to  be  gone. 

'Your  horses  are  ready  for  you  in  the  stables,  and 
my  lad  awaits  you  there.    Come,  sirs.' 

They  moved  at  once,  but  Captain  Gaynor  detained 
them  yet  a  moment. 

'We  part  here,'  he  said.  'I  will  wait  until  you  are 
safely  away.  If  I  succeed  afterwards  in  making  my 
own  escape,  I  shall  be  found  at  White's  at  noon 
to-morrow.' 

'Will  not  you  go  first,  Captain?'  suggested  Mr. 
Partridge. 

'No,  no,'  he  answered.  c  I  have  something  yet  to  do 
ere  I  can  run  the  risk  of  capture.  Away  with  you, 
then,  and  good  luck  go  with  you.' 

When  they  had  departed,  Captain  Gaynor  took  a 
taper  from  the  overmantel,  lighted  it  and  reduced  to 
ashes  certain  papers  which  he  carried  between  the 
leathers  of  his  sword-belt.  He  sighed  over  the  act,  for 
it  marked  the  end  of  the  business  upon  which  he  was 
come.  Since  that  was  discovered  there  was  an  end  for 
the  present  to  the  need  of  such  papers,  and  since  his 
own  arrest  perhaps  impended,  their  destruction  was 
imperative. 

Leaving  a  little  heap  of  ashes  in  the  grate,  he  quitted 
the  chamber  in  his  turn,  went  swiftly  across  the  outer 
room,  and,  having  assured  himself  with  due  precaution 
that  the  coast  was  clear,  he  stepped  out  into  the 
corridor,  and  made  his  way  to  the  door  at  the  head  of 
the  back  staircase. 

He  reached  it  without  encountering  anyone,  and 


128  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

having  pushed  it  open  he  was  on  the  point  of  descend- 
ing when  a  sudden  uproar  below  brought  him  sharply 
to  a  halt.   Above  the  din  of  voices  rang  the  call: 

'In  the  King's  name!  Surrender!  In  the  King's 
name!'  Lastly  came  a"  cry  of:  'Hold  there,  or  I 
fire!' 

Gaynor  rapped  out  an  oath.  His  friends,  it  was 
plain,  had  walked  into  a  trap.  The  house,  he  con- 
cluded, was  surrounded,  or,  at  least,  both  back  and 
front  were  being  watched.  He  was  thankful  for  the 
others'  sake  as  much  as  for  his  own  that  he  had  not 
accompanied  them.  He  caught  the  sound  of  a  scuffle; 
a  pistol-shot  cracked  suddenly  and  was  followed  by  a 
cry.   Then  the  din  gradually  receded. 

But  there  was  now  commotion  within  doors,  for 
the  inmates  of  the  house  had  been  disturbed  by  these 
sounds  of  battle.  He  heard  steps  and  voices  in  the 
corridor  behind  him,  and  he  was  grateful  to  the  gloom 
that  gave  him  cover.  He  must  not  be  found  there; 
that  was  of  the  first  importance  now,  and  it  would  be 
more  than  probable  that  there  were  other  tipstaves 
in  the  approaching  company. 

There  was  a  door  on  the  Captain's  right.  Un- 
hesitatingly he  turned  the  handle.  It  yielded.  He 
slipped  in,  closed  the  door  softly  and  turned  the  key, 
which  he  was  thankful  to  find  on  the  inside.  Then  he 
faced  about  to  make  the  discovery  that  he  was  in  a 
bedroom.  It  was  untenanted  at  the  moment,  but 
there  was  no  lack  of  evidence  that  it  possessed  a 
tenant. 

A  cloak  was  thrown  over  the  back  of  a  chair,  and 
under  it  stood  a  pair  of  feminine  shoes  with  high 
French  heels.  On  the  bed  lay  a  petticoat  and  a  wrap. 
A  valise  gaped  on  the  floor,  its  contents  bulging,  and 


THE  ALIBI  129 

among  these  the  Captain  noted  a  prodigious  display 
of  laces  and  ribbons. 

Through  the  window,  facing  eastwards  towards 
London,  he  had  a  glimpse  of  trees  and  fields  and 
hedgerows,  backed  by  the  fine  grey  pile  of  Beaufort 
house,  all  very  soft  and  mellow  in  the  evening  light. 

And  then,  from  a  curtained  alcove  hitherto  unper- 
ceived  by  him,  came  a  clear,  young  voice  to  freeze  him 
where  he  stood  by  its  unexpectedness. 

'Is  that  you  at  last,  Henry?' 

His  recovery  was  instantaneous.  Reflecting  that 
Henry  was  indeed  his  name,  he  had  no  hesitation  in 
answering  the  question  with  the  shortest  affirmative 
in  the  language. 

*Yes.' 

'Where  have  you  tarried  so  long?'  came  the  voice 
again,  and  it  contained  a  note  of  petulance.  'You 
knew  that  I  stayed  for  you.  And  I  am  hungry,  and  — ' 

Quite  suddenly  she  appeared  between  the  parted 
curtains,  her  speech  cropped  short  at  sight  of  him.  It 
had  been  his  dread  lest  she  should  be  in  an  incom- 
plete condition  of  toilet,  in  which  case  he  thought  that 
outraged  modesty  combined  with  alarm  would  most 
surely  set  her  screaming.  To  his  relief,  however,  she 
appeared  before  him  fully  dressed,  save  for  a  slight 
and  very  charming  disorder  of  her  hair  and  the 
absence  of  tucker  from  her  alabaster  neck. 

She  was  a  handsome,  regal  woman,  and  she  made 
a  very  engaging  picture  standing  there  between  the 
parted  curtains  of  red  velvet.  But  it  was  a  picture 
which,  however  delightful  in  itself,  delighted  Captain 
Gaynor  not  at  all.  Before  she  could  give  expression 
to  the  alarm  that  stared  in  her  eyes  and  blenching 
face,  the  Captain  bowed  low  and  most  reassuringly. 


130  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Most  profoundly  do  I  crave  your  indulgence  for 
my  error,  ma'am,'  said  he. 

His  voice  was  so  serene  and  courteous,  his  air  and 
manner  so  much  that  of  the  fine  gentleman  that  her 
fears  sank  down  a  little;  but  not  quite. 

'Who  are  you?'  she  demanded,  her  voice  vibrating. 
'What  do  you  here?' 

'I  am  just  a  blunderer  who  has  strayed  into  the 
wrong  room,'  he  explained. 

'You  have  locked  the  door,'  she  accused  him,  and 
her  alarm  appeared  to  rise  once  more. 

"Twas  that  I  desired  to  be  alone,'  he  answered. 

'You'  —  her  voice  was  growing  shrill  —  'you 
answered  to  the  name  of  Henry,'  she  remembered. 

'  My  name  is  Henry,  ma'am,'  he  assured  her. 

There  fell  a  pause.  She  stood  with  knitted  brows 
and  quickened  bosom,  waiting.  At  last  —  'Why  do 
you  stay,  then?'  she  challenged  him,  and  as  she  spoke 
she  came  forward  towards  where  the  bell-rope  hung. 

'I  but  await  your  leave  to  go,'  he  answered  her. 

'My  leave?'  said  she,  pausing  in  her  amazement. 
'Depart  at  once,  sir.' 

'At  once,  ma'am,'  said  he  submissively.  But  on  the 
words,  greatly  to  her  alarm,  he  advanced  resolutely 
into  the  room.  'By  your  leave,'  said  he  quite  coolly, 
'I  should  prefer  to  go  by  the  window.' 

'By  the  window?'  she  echoed,  and  began  to  wonder 
was  he  mad. 

Along  the  passage  outside  the  door  sped  hurrying 
feet;  a  murmur  of  voices  reached  them  through  the 
panels. 

'You  hear,  madam,'  he  said, waving  a  hand  in  that 
direction.  'I  hope  I  am  not  so  utterly  lost  to  con- 
sideration for  the  fair  name  of  a  lady  as  to  permit 


THE  ALIBI  131 

myself  to  be  seen  issuing  from  her  chamber.  You  will 
agree,  I  am  sure,  that  the  window  is  most  opportune.' 

She  eyed  him  narrowly,  barring  now  his  way.  And 
he  admired  her  spirit  as  much  as  the  ripe  beauty  of 
her. 

'Do  you  know  who  I  am,  sir?'  she  asked.  'I  am 
Lady  Tresh.  My  husband  is  Sir  Henry  Tresh,  one  of 
the  Middlesex  justices.' 

'Sir  Henry  is  a  man  to  be  envied,  ma'am,'  said  he, 
no  whit  abashed.  Indeed,  the  situation  was  becoming 
humorous.  He  made  her  a  leg,  his  hat  upon  his  heart. 
'I  should  have  preferred,  ma'am,  that  we  had  met 
under  circumstances  more  auspicious  to  myself.  But 
even  so,  I  am  honoured  —  profoundly  honoured.' 
And  he  bowed  again.  He  was  in  no  haste  to  depart 
either  by  door  or  window.  Indeed,  the  longer  he 
delayed,  the  better  would  it  suit  him.  Already,  he 
observed,  the  sounds  in  the  corridor  were  receding. 

'Unlock  that  door,  sir,'  she  commanded,  standing 
before  him  like  a  queen  of  tragedy,  with  one  arm  out- 
flung  to  emphasise  her  stern  command. 

'It  were  so  unwise,'  he  deprecated.  'And  the 
window  is  so  very  opportune.  It  cannot  be  more  than 
a  dozen  feet  above  the  ground.' 

Her  queenly  bosom  heaved  in  agitation.  'Will  you 
tell  me  who  you  are?'  she  demanded  once  more. 

He  shrugged,  his  eyes  smiling  ruefully.  He  was  on 
the  point  of  answering  truthfully,  accounting  that 
perhaps  the  best  course  might  be  to  cast  himself  upon 
her  mercy,  when  suddenly  he  saw  a  fresh  alarm  leap 
into  her  eyes  and  one  hand  fly  to  her  bosom. 

Down  the  corridor  came  a  heavy,  lumbering  step  — 
a  step  to  which  she  was  listening  and  which  was 
known  to  her.  It  paused  at  the  door,  and  the  handle 


132  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

turned  with  a  rattle.  Then  a  double  knock  rapped  on 
the  panel  and  a  gruff  voice  called: 

'  Kate!' 

'My  husband!'  She  no  more  than  breathed  the 
words.  i 

The  Captain  spread  his  hands,  and  his  face  showed 
concern  for  her.  'You  see,'  he  whispered  back,  'that 
the  window  becomes  more  opportune  than  ever.' 

She  wrung  her  hands.  Her  eyes  were  upon  him  in  a 
look  that  was  between  distress  and  anger. 

'I  am  undone!'  she  moaned. 

'Nay,  nay!'  He  tiptoed  past  her  to  the  window, 
and  flung  it  open. 

Raps  more  numerous,  louder  and  more  insistent 
came  again  upon  the  panel.  Again  the  handle  of  the 
door  was  rattled.  '  Kate ! '  that  gruff  voice  was  yelling 
now. 

'Is  it  you,  Henry?'  she  called  back.  The  intruder 
was  already  astride  of  the  sill. 

'  Whom  else  were  you  expecting? '  growled  the  voice. 
'Damme!  Why  must  women  for  ever  be  locking 
themselves  in?' 

She  crossed  the  room  leisurely,  and  fumbled  an 
instant  at  the  key.  Captain  Gaynor  had  vanished. 

He  dropped  from  the  window  —  a  good  fourteen 
feet  to  the  ground  —  and  landed  somewhat  shaken. 
But  he  did  not  stay  to  consider  it.  He  found  himself 
in  the  stable-yard,  and  he  sped  across  it  like  a  hare,  to 
find  cover  in  the  stable  itself.  He  gained  it  before  Sir 
Henry  had  crossed  the  threshold  of  the  room  above. 
He  found  there  young  Maclean  in  a  state  of  consider- 
able perturbation. 

The  young  Scot  muttered  a  short  thanksgiving  at 
sight  of  the  Captain. 


THE  ALIBI  133 

'Your  horse  is  ready/  was  his  greeting.  'Come, 
sir.' 

From  him  now  Captain  Gaynor  learnt  that  his  five 
friends  had  all  been  taken.  They  were  gone  in  hackney 
carriages  to  London  with  the  tipstaves.  Sir  Thomas 
Leigh  had  drawn  his  sword,  and  had  been  shot  through 
the  arm  in  consequence.  Mr.  Dyke,  too,  had  at- 
tempted to  resist  the  messengers,  and  had  received  a 
broken  crown.  Maclean,  the  elder,  his  son  assured 
the  fugitive,  need  occasion  the  Captain  no  concern;  he 
would  know  how  to  answer  any  awkward  questions 
he  might  be  asked. 

Having  heard  all  that  the  young  man  could  tell 
him,  the  Captain  took  his  decision.  He  would  leave 
his  horse  where  it  was  until  he  called  for  it  again.  In 
its  place  he  desired  to  be  supplied  with  a  post-horse. 

The  bitterness  which  had  assailed  Captain  Gaynor 
when  first  he  had  learnt  of  the  shrewd  blow  with 
which  the  Government  had  demolished  for  the  present 
any  Jacobite  development  was  not  dispelled.  It 
would  return,  no  doubt,  anon,  and  be  the  sharper 
perhaps  for  this  respite.  But  for  the  moment  he 
rode  in  a  spirit  of  elation  born  of  the  adventure  upon 
which  he  was  now  set. 

He  reached  Charing  Cross  some  time  after  nightfall, 
and  having  surrendered  his  horse  at  the  post-house, 
he  disappeared  to  execute  the  project  in  his  mind. 

A  half-hour  later  he  was  leaning  in  the  shadow  of  a 
tree  near  Whitehall  steps,  observing  with  interest  a 
watchman  who,  with  lanthorn  and  staff,  was  pacing 
the  river-front  not  far  from  his  hutch.  Captain 
Gaynor  produced  from  his  breast-pocket  a  flask 
containing  close  upon  half-a-pint  of  brandy,  which  he 
had  procured  at  parting  from  young  Maclean.    He 


134  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

drank  rather  less  than  half,  poured  the  remainder  into 
his  waistcoat,  and  flung  the  flask  into  the  river.  Then 
he  reeled  forth  until  he  was  level  with  the  watchman's 
box.  Into  this  he  hurtled,  sat  down  and  —  apparently 
fell  fast  asleep.  At  least  he  was  discovered  to  be 
breathing  stertorously  a  minute  later. 

The  watchman  swore  at  him,  prodded  him  with  his 
staff,  shook  him  and  bellowed  in  his  ear,  to  all  of 
which  the  Captain  remained  as  insensible  as  a  stone 
image. 

From  these  signs  and  from  the  overpowering  fumes 
of  brandy  which  the  fellow  exhaled,  the  watchman 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  very  drunk.  Now 
there  was  an  Act  promulgated  under  the  late  queen 
which  accounted  all  drunkards  to  be  disturbers  of  the 
peace,  and  enjoyned  upon  watchmen  their  appre- 
hension and  consignment  to  gaol.  If  you  were  not 
drunk  beyond  all  speech,  you  might  for  a  shilling 
or  two  obtain  instead  that  the  watchman  should 
abandon  his  post  to  escort  you  to  your  residence.  But 
in  such  a  case  as  the  Captain's  there  was  but  one 
course  to  pursue,  and  that  course  this  member  of  the 
law  pursued. 

He  very  carefully  picked  the  Captain's  pockets  as 
a  preliminary,  a  proceeding  which  yielded  him  a  profit 
so  disproportionate  with  the  Captain's  dress  and 
appearance  —  the  Captain  having  previously  be- 
stowed his  valuables  beyond  the  reach  of  prying 
fingers  —  that  the  old  rascal  was  forced  to  conclude 
that  those  pockets  had  been  picked  already.  Then 
he  whirled  his  rattle  and  brought  up  the  constable 
and  a  posse  of  other  watchmen,  besides  a  small  crowd 
of  watermen  from  the  riverside  and  several  loiterers. 
Into  the  hands  of  his  brethren  he  delivered  the  inani- 


THE  ALIBI  135 

mate  body  of  the  Captain,  informing  the  constable  in 
a  whisper  of  the  state  of  the  gentleman's  pockets,  so 
as  to  save  the  constable  the  trouble  of  going  through 
them  on  his  own  account. 

Thus  Captain  Gaynor  was  carried  off  to  the  Gate- 
house at  Westminster,  which  was  the  nearest  prison. 
There  he  was  flung  into  a  dank,  noisome  chamber, 
tenanted  already  by  some  dozen  of  the  very  foulest 
scourings  of  the  streets.  These  would  have  gone  over 
the  Captain's  person  for  the  sake  of  any  pickings  that 
the  constable  and  watchman  might  have  left,  but 
that  the  Captain,  growing  partly  sobered  as  the  first 
filthy  fingers  touched  him,  roused  himself  sufficiently 
to  crash  his  fist  into  the  face  of  their  owner.  The 
fellow  sank  down  with  a  howl  that  turned  into  an 
agonising  cough.  His  few  remaining  teeth  had  been 
loosened  by  the  blow. 

Thereafter  the  Captain  was  left  in  peace.  For  a 
man  who  could  smite  such  blows  when  too  drunk  to 
stand  must  be  terrible  indeed  when  sober,  and  they 
might  so  have  to  reckon  with  him  did  they  abuse  his 
present  condition. 

He  reclined,  then,  against  the  wall  with  his  legs 
stretched  straight  before  him;  and  thus  he  spent  one 
of  the  most  horrible  nights  of  his  existence.  But  to 
comfort  him  he  had  the  knowledge  that  all  had  fallen 
out  precisely  as  he  had  planned,  and  that  there  re- 
mained but  little  doubt  that  its  sequel  in  the  morning 
would  fully  compensate  him  for  his  present  dis- 
comforts. 


CHAPTER  X 
TWO  LETTERS 

MR.  SECOND  SECRETARY  TEMPLETON 
sat  at  breakfast  in  the  dining-room  of  his 
stately  mansion  in  Old  Palace  Yard.  It  was  a  spacious, 
sunny  chamber,  panelled  in  white  with  an  abundance 
of  gilding,  and  its  long  French  windows  stood  open 
to  the  terrace,  over  whose  grey  stone  balustrade 
surged  a  riot  of  roses  and  geraniums. 

The  statesman  was  at  his  ease  in  a  bed-gown  of 
blue  brocade,  his  cropped  head  swathed  in  a  silk 
kerchief,  whose  rich  colouring  exaggerated  the 
sallowness  of  his  long,  aristocratic  face.  Facing  him 
across  the  round  table  sat  Mrs.  Templeton,  short, 
long-waisted  and  inclining  to  stoutness.  Like  her 
husband,  she  was  dark-complexioned,  and  age  had 
rendered  masterful  and  rather  too  aquiline  a  face 
that  in  youth  had  been  accounted  beautiful.  Between 
them  sat  the  Second  Secretary's  cousin,  Sir  Richard 
Tollemache  Templeton,  returned  but  yesterday  from 
his  foreign  travels. 

Although  the  baronet  was  quite  ten  years  the 
statesman's  junior  —  Sir  Richard  cannot  have  been 
more  than  thirty  at  the  time  —  Mr.  Templeton, 
whose  manner  was  patronising  with  all  the  world, 
treated  him  with  the  deference  due  to  the  head  of  a 
family  into  which  he  accounted  it  his  greatest  honour 
to  have  been  born.  Family  was  a  religion  with  Mr. 
Templeton,  and  before  the  head  of  his  own  he  unbent 
to  a  most  extraordinary  degree;  upon  occasion  he 


TWO  LETTERS  137 

went  even  the  length  of  courting  his  approval  and 
sympathy.  He  was  courting  them  this  morning.  He 
made  philosophy  for  the  purpose. 

'In  this  world,  my  dear  Tollemache,'  he  was  say- 
ing —  he  considered  '  Richard '  a  form  of  address 
much  too  familiar  to  be  used  towards  one  who 
occupied  his  cousin's  exalted  position  —  'in  this 
world  the  truly  great  but  too  seldom  receive  the 
recognition  that  is  their  due.  The  vulgar  —  ah  — 
undiscerning  crowd  will  ever  believe  what  it  is  told. 
It  has  no  judgment,  no —  ah  —  percipience  of  its  own. 
It  considers  great  those  who  proclaim  themselves 
great,  without  reflecting  that  too  true  greatness  such 

—  ah  —  such  a  proclamation  must  be  in  the  last 
degree  repugnant  —  in  the  last  degree  repugnant.' 

'It  is  a  repugnance,  undiscernible  in  your  own  case, 
Edward,'  said  his  lady,  with  a  gleam  almost  of  malice 
in  her  pale  eyes. 

'  My  dear  —  my  love ! '  His  mellow,  sonorous  voice 
quivered  with  emphatic  protest  at  such  an  impli- 
cation. 'Here  in  the  —  ah  —  sacrosanct  intimacy  of 
my  own  domestic  hearth,  it  may  be  permitted  me  to 

—  ah  —  denude  myself.' 

'It  will  nevertheless  be  more  becoming  in  you  to 
retain  your  gown,'  she  snapped,  in  reproof  of  his  too 
florid  rhetoric,  and  Sir  Richard  could  not  repress  a 
smile. 

'I  do  not  speak  of  the  body,  madam,  but  of  the 
soul  —  the  mind,'  her  husband  boomed.  '  Surely,  I 
say,  at  his  own  table,  to  his  own  wife  and  to  the  head 
of  his  own  family,  in  the  presence  of  his  Lares  and 
Penates,  a  man  may  speak  with  complete  freedom,  and 
without  the  —  ah  —  encumbrance  of  excessive  mod- 
esty.   Modesty  is  a  garment  that  every  decent  man 


138  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

must  wear  in  public.  But  the  public,  knowing  naught 
of  decency,  account  him  truly  great  who  goes  without 
it.' 

Thus  he  swung  back  to  the  subject  from  which  his 
wife's  interruption  had?  all  but  diverted  him.  'Now 
here  is  my  Lord  Carteret,  and  here,  Tollemache,  am  I. 
To  Lord  Carteret  the  rich  emoluments,  the  fawning 
sycophancy,  the  smile  of  majesty,  the  great  honours 
of  his  office  as  Secretary  of  State:  to  me  —  in  com- 
parative obscurity  —  the  labour  that  preserves  him  a 
fame  which  he  himself  does  naught  to  merit  —  naught 
to  merit.'  And  angrily  he  fell  to  stirring  his  chocolate. 

'But  your  own  turn  will  come,  Ned,'  said  the 
amiable  Sir  Richard. 

Mr.  Templeton  paused  in  the  stirring  that  he  might 
level  a  denunciatory  spoon  at  his  cousin.  'And  who 
will  warrant  me  that?'  quoth  he.  He  laughed  almost 
angrily.  'You  do  not  apprehend,  I  see,  with  what 
buttresses  my  lord  props  up  his  greatness.  Let  me 
explain,  Tollemache,  let  me  explain. 

'In  affairs  of  State  my  Lord  Carteret  stands  in  the 
same  relation  to  me  as  the  —  ah  —  figure  at  the  prow 
of  a  ship  stands  to  the  —  ah  —  navigator.  No,  no!' 
he  reproved  himself.  'My  metaphor  is  too  broad. 
Were  it  so,  indeed,  all  would  be  well  —  all  would  be 
well.    But  I  have  drawn  you  a  false  image.' 

'You  would  be  more  intelligible,'  said  his  wife,  'if 
you  dispensed  with  images.  What  you  mean  is  that  it 
is  you  who  steer  the  ship  of  State,  whilst  my  Lord 
Carteret  takes  the  credit.' 

He  nodded  thoughtfully.  He  was  impervious  to  the 
veiled  sneer  in  her  words. 

'You  put  it  —  ah  —  crudely,  but  truthfully  — 
truthfully.  But  it  should  be  made  clear  to  Tollemache 


TWO  LETTERS 


U9 


that  his  lordship  takes  the  credit  when  there  is  credit 
to  take.  One  of  these  fine  days  —  mark  me !  —  one  of 
these  fine  days,  as  a  result  of  his  unceasing  interfer- 
ences with  the  —  ah  —  navigator,  the  ship  of  State 
will  run  aground.  Do  you  think  his  lordship  will  take 
the  blame  of  that  as  he  takes  the  credit  of  all  smooth 
sailing?   Do  you  think  so?'  # 

His  eye  roamed  from  Tollemache  to  his  wife,  and 
told  them  plainly  the  opinion  he  should  hold  of  their 
wit  if  they  did  think  so. 

'No!'  he  boomed,  having  reached  his  climax. 

'You  are  spilling  your  chocolate,'  said  his  wife. 

'No!'  he  repeated,  ignoring  the  frivolous  inter- 
ruption. 'On  that  day,  at  last,  my  lord  will  point  out 
that  he  has  a  helmsman  to  steer  for  him;  he  will 
protest  that  the  shoal  upon  which  we  founder  was  one 
of  whose  presence  his  helmsman  should  have  been 
aware.  Will  any  blame  him?  Will  majesty  cease  to 
smile  upon  him  or  sycophants  to  fawn?  No!  The 
obloquy  will  fall  where  never  fell  the  credit  —  where 
never  fell  the  credit.  In  short,  upon  myself.'  He  sat 
back  in  his  chair,  and  stroked  his  massive  chin.  'That, 
Tollemache,  is  the  way  reputations  are  made  and 
reputations  blasted.' 

He  was  almost  in  a  towering  passion. 

'  But,'  said  Sir  Richard  soothingly,  '  so  long  as  you 
are  at  the  helm,  you  can  guard  against  any  such 
disaster.' 

'Ah!  There's  the  rub,  Tollemache  —  there's  the 
rub.  I  could,  were  I  left  —  ah  —  untrammelled;  were 
I  left  to  follow  my  own  judgment;  did  his  lordship 
not  perpetually  interfere  with  me,  and  suggest 
courses  that  are  undesirable  and  sometimes  perilous. 
Now  take  this  Jacobite  business.    You  are  a  man  of 


i4o  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

the  world,  Toilemache  —  head  of  a  great  family,  a 
soldier  and  a  scholar.'  (Sir  Richard  dropped  his  eyes 
before  Mrs.  Templeton's  stony  stare.)  'I  ask  you, 
Toilemache,  were  you  Secretary  of  State,  would  you, 
could  you  commit  a  blunder  so  —  ah  —  ineffable?' 

'I  think,'  said  Sir  Richard,  not  without  some 
hesitation,  'that  I  can  perceive  the  drift  of  Lord 
Carteret's  policy.' 

Mr.  Templeton  frowned;  then  his  features  relaxed 
into  a  smile. 

'"Drift!"'  he  cried,  and  again,  '"drift!"  My  dear 
Toilemache,  I  thank  you  for  teaching  me  that  word. 
It  is  most  excellent,  most  apposite.  It  precisely 
describes  his  lordship's  policy.  It  suggests  that  —  ah 
—  driving  before  the  gale  of  circumstance  that  is  so 
characteristic  of  his  statesmanship.  "Drift"  expresses 
it  completely  —  completely.' 

'Fiddlesticks!'  said  his  wife.  'Y'are  a  clever  man, 
no  doubt,  Edward,  but  you  fall  into  the  grave  error  of 
considering  all  other  men  fools.' 

The  statesman  spread  his  hands.  He  apologised  for 
her  to  his  cousin. 

'Woman's  logic,  Toilemache!'  quoth  he,  and  cast 
an  upward  glance  at  the  ceiling.  Then,  to  his  wife: 
'My  dear,'  he  said,  'do  you  not  perceive  that  the  two 
propositions  may  not  be  reconciled.  If  I  am  a  clever 
man  such  an  error  is  not  possible  to  me.' 

'Then  perhaps  you  are  not  a  clever  man,'  said  she. 

'That,  my  dear,  represents  a  retraction  inadmissi- 
ble in  intelligent  argument.  You  —  ah — you  merely 
interrupt,  my  love.'   He  was  unusually  bold. 

'But  is  it  not  possible,'  suggested  Sir  Richard,  his 
frank  young  eyes  upon  his  cousin,  'that  in  stifling 
these  Jacobite  smoulderings,  in  stamping  them  out 


TWO  LETTERS  141 

before  they  can  show  a  flame,  his  lordship  is  discharg- 
ing an  easier  task  than  that  of  quenching  a  later 
possible  conflagration?' 

'You  think  so?'  Mr.  Templeton  was  as  sardonic  as 
he  dare  be  with  so  august  a  person  as  the  head  of  his 
family. 

'I  merely  ask,'  said  the  baronet.  'I  am  not  a 
statesman.' 

'A  loss  to  England,  my  dear  Tollemache  —  a  loss  to 
England.  But  you  ask,  and  you  shall  be  answered.' 
He  cleared  his  throat  that  he  might  deliver  himself 
without  physical  hindrance.  'The  contention  you 
make  is  his  lordship's  own.  It  is  —  ah  —  specious, 
but  delusive.  If  —  if  what  you  suggest  were  possible, 
the  course  would  be  an  excellent  one;  but  it  is  not 
possible.  The  thing  has  no  legal  sanction  —  it  is  al- 
most illegal,  for  it  is  premature.  And  this  is  shown 
by  the  consequences.  We  arrest  these  men,  but  do 
we  put  them  upon  their  trial?  Aha!  We  dare  not. 
We  have  not  the  means.  The — ah — accusation  ema- 
nates generally  from  a  single  informer.  We  keep  our 
captives  in  prison  for  a  week  or  so,  and  then  his  lord- 
ship has  them  severally  brought  before  him,  reads 
them  a  homily  upon  the  heinousness  of  disloyalty,  the 
folly  of  Jacobitism,  dwells  upon  the  narrowness  of 
their  escape,  which  he  attributes  to  His  Majesty's 
clemency  instead  of  to  his  own  lack  of  elements  for 
preparing  an  impeachment.  Is  that  a  dignified  course 
for  a  Government  to  pursue?  I  ask  you,  Tollemache.' 

'  Perhaps  not,'  ventured  Tollemache.  '  But  it  serves 
its  purpose.  It  instils  fear  into  these  plotters,  and 
turns  them  from  their  plotting.  Thus,  as  I  perceive 
it,  the  peace  of  the  realm  is  preserved.' 

Mr.  Templeton  sipped  his  chocolate,  swallowing 


i42  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

with  it  some  of  his  rising  indignation  and  chagrin  at 
the  obtuseness  of  the  head  of  the  family. 

'You  are  not  a  statesman,  my  dear  Tollemache, 
and  there  are,  therefore,  excuses  for  your  shortsighted- 
ness which  cannot  possibly  be  urged  for  my  Lord 
Carteret,'  he  said  presently.  'So  long  as  Fortune 
favours  these  —  ah  —  operations;  so  long  as  —  to 
use  your  own  most  excellent  image  —  we  drift  before 
a  favourable  breeze  of  chance,  all  goes  well.  But  one 
of  these  fine  days,  my  lord  will  put  his  hand  upon  an 
innocent  man,  and  there  will  then  be  a  blazing 
scandal,  indemnities  will  be  claimed,  heaven  alone 
knows  what  may  follow;  but  I  know  that,  whatever 
it  is,  'twill  be  upon  my  own  head.  Now,  take  this  case 
of  your  friend  Captain  Gaynor — ' 

'That,  of  course,  was  a  most  foolish  misapprehen- 
sion,' Tollemache  admitted. 

'You  see  —  you  see!'  cried  the  Second  Secretary, 
rubbing  his  long  hands.  'Yet  had  it  not  been  for  me 
—  had  I  not  bethought  me  of  your  own  introduction, 
of  your  knowledge  of  this  man's  life;  had  I  not  seen 
the  —  ah  —  preposterousness  of  such  a  charge;  had 
I  not  been  in  possession  of  his  unimpeachable  cre- 
dentials and  had  I  not  exercised  the  prudence  of  seek- 
ing their  confirmation  at  two  of  the  embassies  (ab  uno 
disce  omnes)  —  Captain  Gaynor  had  been  under 
arrest  by  now  as  a  Jacobite  agent.' 

'Preposterous!'  said  Sir  Richard.  'The  man  is  a 
soldier  of  fortune,  first  and  last.  I  have  it  on  his  own 
word  that  he  had  thought  of  taking  service  with  the 
Pretender,  but  that  the  service  could  not  yield  him 
enough  to  live  upon,  whilst  as  for  future  guerdon  he 
had  no  faith  in  the  ultimate  success  of  the  Pre- 
tender's cause.' 


TWO  LETTERS  143 

'And  yet,'  cried  Templeton,  'in  spite  of  all  that  I 
could  say,  his  lordship  persists  in  his  assurance  that 
the  information  he  has  received  is  not  to  be  doubted, 
and  that  Captain  Gaynor  and  the  agent  Captain 
Jenkyn  are  one  and  the  same  man.  It  is  only  as  a 
consequence  of  my  insistence  and  as  a  result  of  the 
information  obtained  from  the  Austrian  and  Turkish 
Embassies  that  his  lordship  consents  that  the  warrant 
shall  be  made  out  for  Captain  Jenkyn  only,  confident 
that  he  would  be  taken  last  night  at  The  World's 
End  with  the  other  plotters,  and  that  when  taken 
he  would  be  discovered  to  be  Captain  Gaynor.' 

A  footman  entered  and  came  to  proffer  Mr.  Temple- 
ton  a  letter  bearing  an  official  seal.  He  took  it 
abstractedly. 

'An  extraordinary  error/  said  Sir  Richard,  smiling. 
'I  would  we  knew  the  source  of  it.  I  vow  that  Harry 
Gaynor  will  be  vastly  diverted  when  I  tell  him  —  yes, 
and  grateful  to  you,  Ned,  for  a  judgment  and  per- 
spicacity which  have  saved  him  this  annoyance.' 

'Oh,  but  for  obstinacy,  commend  me  to  his  lord- 
ship—  commend  me  to  him!'  cried  Mr.  Templeton. 
'When  he  learns  that  no  Captain  Gaynor  —  no 
Captain  Jenkyn  in  any  form  —  was  taken  with  the 
plotters  —  if,  indeed,  they  are  plotters,  which  is  yet 
to  prove,  does  he  admit,  think  you,  that  there  has 
been  an  error?  Not  he.  "The  Captain  must  have 
escaped,"  he  says.  "These  rogues  have  done  their 
work  badly."  There  is  no  arguing  with  such  a  man.' 

He  had  broken  the  seal  of  the  letter  whilst  speaking. 
He  scanned  now  its  contents,  and  as  he  did  so  his  face 
was  seen  to  empurple.  He  struck  the  table  with  his 
clenched  hand. 

'Now  sink  me  into  —  ahem!   There  is  no  answer, 


144  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Jones.  Say  that  I  will  answer  it  myself,  in  person, 
later.'   The  servant  vanished. 

'What  is  it,  Edward?'  asked  Mrs.  Templeton,  who 
had  observed  the  alteration  in  her  husband's  counte- 
nance, l 

'What  is  it?'  he  echoed.  'It  is —  But  listen  for 
yourselves?  Egad!  If  I  had  required  a  proof  of  what 
I  was  saying  this  could  not  have  come  more  oppor- 
tunely to  my  hands.   Listen.   And  he  began  to  read: 

Dear  Mr.  Templeton,  —  Acting  upon  the  opinions 
which  you  know  me  to  entertain,  I  despatched  last  night 
a  messenger  to  Sir  John  Kynaston's  place  in  Surrey  to 
ascertain  whether  Captain  Gaynor  continued  there.  This 
messenger  has  just  brought  me  the  information  that 
Captain  Gaynor  left  Chertsey  in  the  afternoon  of  yesterday 
and  has  not  yet  returned.  I  shall  be  obliged  if  you  will 
take  such  measures  as  may  be  necessary  to  ascertain  not 
only  Captain  Gaynor's  present  whereabouts,  but  also  the 
particular  business  which  brought  him  yesterday  from 
Chertsey.  It  is  greatly  my  fear  that  as  a  result  of  my 
having  lent  an  ear  to  your  assurance  that  this  person  is  not 
the  Jacobite  agent  I  am  informed,  he  may  slip  through  our 
hands  and  escape  the  country.  I  shall  be  surprised,  indeed, 
if  he  is  not  on  his  way  to  the  coast  or  even  at  sea  by  this 
time. 

Believe  me  to  be  your  obedient  servant 

Carteret 

He  flung  the  missive  down  with  an  oath.  'Blister 
me!'  he  bellowed,  and  he  was  by  no  means  a  man 
addicted  to  such  expletives.  'He  blames  me  already, 
you  see.  I  have  enabled  a  Jacobite  agent  to  win  clear, 
and  this  is  coldly  stated  with  no  more  proof  that 
Captain  Gaynor  is  a  Jacobite  spy  than  that  I  am.  The 
man  may  not  leave  Chertsey  but  it  is  a  proof  to  his 


TWO  LETTERS  145 

lordship  that  he's  a  Jacobite  and  on  his  way  to  the 
coast  if  not  at  sea  already.  Here,  my  dear  Tollemache, 
you  may  observe  for  yourself  the  mind  of  one  of  the 
world's  great  men  —  ah  —  dissected,  as  it  were,  for 
your  inspection.   What  do  you  think  of  it?' 

Sir  Richard  was  frowning.  'I  am  certainly  of 
opinion  that  my  Lord  Carteret  is  a  man  of  very  rash 
and  hasty  conclusions.' 

'How  long,  I  ask  you,  Tollemache,  how  long  do 
you  suppose  that  such  men  could  keep  their  positions 
were  it  not  for  such  as  I  who  do  their  work  like  moles 
underground  where  none  perceives  them?  Pah!'  He 
flung  himself  back  in  profoundest  disgust. 

'Is  it  impossible  that  his  lordship  should  be  right 
for  once?'  quoth  Mrs.  Templeton. 

The  question  was  as  a  cold  douche  to  her  husband. 
He  cringed  under  it. 

1  Right  ? '  he  gurgled.  He  tossed  his  arms  to  heaven. 
'Is  he  ever  right?' 

'He  is  certainly  wrong  in  this  case,  I'll  stake  my 
life  on't,'  said  Sir  Richard,  carrying  conviction  to 
Mrs.  Templeton  and  extinguishing  her  nascent 
doubts. 

'Aye,  and  in  every  other  case,'  pronounced  the 
fuming  Second  Secretary.  'You  may  stake  your 
life  on  that  too  —  with  confidence.  I  told  him  yes- 
terday that  if  he  was  entirely  —  ah  —  positive,  he 
might  issue  the  warrant  himself  and  take  the  conse- 
quences. Did  he?  Bah!  He  answered  me  that  that 
was  my  function.  My  function  —  to  run  all  risks  and 
stand  between  ridicule  and  this  man  who  takes  all  the 
glory  that  is  shed.' 

Sir  Richard  rose  from  the  table.  'The  situation 
may  be  awkward  for  my  friend  Gaynor,'  he  said. 


146  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'You  have  to  find  him,'  Mrs.  Templeton  reminded 
them. 

The  door  opened,  and  again  the  footman  appeared. 
Again  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  letter,  and  Mr.  Temple- 
ton  frowned  prodigiously  upon  perceiving  it. 

'What  now?'  quoth  he. 

'A  messenger,  sir,  from  the  Gatehouse,  West- 
minster.  He  stays  for  a  reply.' 

'From  the  Gatehouse?  What  a  plague  have  I  to  do 
with  the  Gatehouse?  Am  I  at  the  beck  of  every 
magistrate's  clerk?'  He  snatched  up  the  letter 
peevishly,  and  cut  the  thread  that  bound  it.  It  bore 
no  seal. 

He  spread  the  sheet,  read,  frowned,  then  dropped 
it  from  hands  that  were  suddenly  limp.  He  bore  those 
hands  to  his  sides.  He  seemed  to  breathe  stertorously 
for  a  moment,  then  he  exploded;  and  never  in  the 
experience  of  living  man  had  the  solemn,  decorous 
Second  Secretary  been  heard  to  laugh  as  he  laughed 
then.  Peal  upon  peal  of  it  reverberated  to  the  ceiling. 
Gradually,  at  last,  it  weakened  to  a  splutter.  Mrs. 
Templeton,  Sir  Richard  and  the  very  footman  re- 
garded him  with  eyes  of  increasing  alarm.  At  last 
the  power  of  speech  was  restored  to  him. 

'He  —  he's  found!'  he  cackled  weakly.  'Oh  —  oh! 
He's  found!  He's  not  at  sea  —  not  even  on  his  way  to 
the  coast.  He's  —  he's —  Oh,  sink  me!  Wheie  do 
you  think  he  is?  Where  do  you  think  he  has  been  all 
night?' 

'  Where  ? '  quoth  Sir  Richard,  staring;  but  having  no 
doubt  concerning  the  person  to  whom  Mr.  Temple- 
ton was  referring. 

'Listen!'  The  statesman  took  up  the  letter.  'It  is 
from  the  magistrate,  Sir  Henry  Tresh.'  And  once 
more  he  read  to  them: 


TWO  LETTERS  147 

Honoured  Sir,  —  There  is  brought  before  me  this 
morning  a  gentleman  who  has  spent  the  night  in  the 
Gatehouse,  having  been  found  early  last  evening  by  the 
watch  dead-drunk  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Whitehall 
Steps.  He  gives  the  name  of  Captain  Harry  Gaynor, 
claims  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance,  and  presumes  to 
say  that  you  will  speak  for  him.  I  venture  to  send  you  a 
note  which  he  himself  has  penned  to  you,  to  inform  you  of 
his  circumstances,  and  I  shall  be  honoured  by  a  word  to 
guide  me  in  dealing  with  him. 

He  paused  to  wipe  his  eyes,  still  faintly  tittering 
at  the  thought  of  Lord  Carteret's  discomfiture.  Sir 
Richard,  too,  was  smiling,  as  was  even  Mrs.  Temple- 
ton. 

'But  listen  further  to  what  the  rascal  writes,  him- 
self. The  rare  impudence  of  this  rogue  to  desire  a 
Secretary  of  State  to  go  bail  for  him!  Listen: 

Dear  Mr.  Templeton,  —  Such  muddled  memories  as 
I  retain  of  what  befell  me  yester  evening  at  The  Cock  in 
Fleet  Street  are  at  your  disposal  when  I  have  the  honour  of 
meeting  you,  for  I  judge  that  you  may  require  to  know 
more  of  how  I  am  come  to  such  a  pass  as  this.  What 
concerns  me  chiefly  at  present  is  the  circumstance  that 
whilst  I  was  in  an  unconscious  condition  some  rogues 
cleaned  out  my  pockets  of  such  monies  as  I  had,  my  watch 
and  seals,  the  silver  lace  on  my  coat,  and  everything  else  of 
value.  But  for  this  I  should  make  shift  not  to  disturb  you 
upon  so  trifling  a  matter.  I  shall  be  vastly  your  debtor  if 
you  will  send  a  line  to  Sir  Henry  Tresh,  as  warranty  that  I 
shall  pay  the  fine  imposed  so  soon  as  my  liberty  is  restored 
me. 

Your  most  obedient  — ' 

'And  that,'  cried  the  jubilant  Second  Secretary,  'is 
the  Jacobite  plotter,  the  agent  who  yester  evening 


148  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

was  conspiring  in  a  tavern,  the  desperate  Captain 
Jenkyn!'  His  laughter  swelled  again,  and  it  was 
joined  now  by  his  cousin's. 

'That  should  answer  my  Lord  Carteret,  egad!' 
cried  Richard. 

'It  should.  It  shall— -ecod!  it  shall.  I'll  send  him 
these  letters  forthwith,  and  then  straight  to  the  Gate- 
house to  release  this  rogue  of  a  plotter.' 

He  pushed  back  his  chair,  and  rose.  He  turned  to 
the  waiting  servant. 

'Say  to  the  messenger  that  I  shall  follow  him  in 
person  to  wait  upon  Sir  Henry  so  soon  as  I  am 
dressed.' 

'By  your  leave,  I'll  go  with  you,  Ned,'  said  Sir 
Richard. 

'So  you  shall.'  He  strode  briskly  to  the  door  in  the 
wake  of  the  departing  lackey.  'Oh,  'slife!'  he  cried 
over  his  shoulder.  He  was  most  flippantly  profane 
that  morning.  'I'd  give  a  deal  to  see  his  lordship's 
countenance  when  he  receives  this  testimony  of  an 
alibi  —  and  such  an  alibi!' 

He  went  out  laughing,  overjoyed  at  the  discomfi- 
ture in  store  for  his  superior,  and  loving  Harry  Gay- 
nor  as  a  son  for  having  provided  him  with  so  very  apt 
and  crushing  an  answer  to  that  haughtily  couched 
imputation. 


CHAPTER  XI 

PAUNCEFORT'S  MOVE 

CAPTAIN  GAYNOR,  duly  enlarged  from  dur- 
ance by  the  good  offices  of  Mr.  Templeton,  and 
looking  somewhat  jaded  and  hollow-eyed  as  a  result 
of  his  unpleasant  night  in  the  Gatehouse  —  an  ap- 
pearance which  lent  colour  to  the  debauch  of  which  he 
claimed  to  be  victim  —  was  an  object  of  mirth  and 
the  butt  of  a  deal  of  spurious  wit  on  the  part  of  the 
very  jubilant  Second  Secretary. 

When  this  had  somewhat  spent  itself,  the  Captain 
explained  the  object  of  his  visit  to  town. 

'  I  was  on  my  way  to  wait  upon  you,  sir,  when  this 
befell  me,'  he  announced  unblushingly.  '  I  am  hoping 
that  by  now  you  may  have  found  some  commission 
for  me.' 

The  statesman's  face  lengthened.  In  Lord  Cart- 
eret's present  mood  it  would  be  worse  than  futile  to 
approach  him  on  such  a  subject.  But  he  refrained 
from  saying  so.  He  contented  himself  with  deploring 
that  so  far  naught  of  a  quality  worthy  of  the  Cap- 
tain's high  attainments  had  offered  itself;  but  he  pro- 
tested that  it  was  a  matter  he  must  not  be  thought  to 
be  neglecting,  and  soon  he  hoped  to  have  the  good 
fortune  of  offering  Captain  Gaynor  something  that  he 
would  consider  acceptable.  The  Captain  expressed 
his  profound  indebtedness. 

'Meanwhile,'  said  he,  'I  am  for  Scotland.  I  have 
friends  there  whom  I  desire  to  visit,  whom  I  have  not 
seen  for  years.' 


150  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

His  destination,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  was  Rome  and 
his  master's  Court,  to  report  his  failure.  But  to  an- 
nounce that  he  was  returning  abroad  at  such  a  mo- 
ment must  call  for  explanation,  might  even  savour  of 
flight,  and  were  therefore  imprudent  in  the  extreme. 

'You  will  keep  me  ao* vised  of  your  whereabouts?' 
said  Mr.  Templeton. 

'I  shall  be  roaming,'  was  the  answer.  'So  perhaps 
'twill  be  best,  should  you  have  letters  for  me,  that  you 
address  to  me  at  Childe's  —  my  bankers  here  — 
with  whom  I  shall  be  in  communication.  I  shall  re- 
port myself  to  you  immediately  on  my  return  to 
town.' 

On  that,  with  the  compliments  which  the  occasion 
called  for,  they  parted. 

Mr.  Templeton  hired  a  chair,  and  went  to  wait 
upon  Lord  Carteret,  whilst  Gaynor  and  his  friend  Sir 
Richard  sauntered  off  together. 

Upon  the  pretence  of  repairing  the  loss  he  had 
suffered  by  the  picking  of  his  pockets  yesternight, 
Captain  Gaynor  paid  a  visit  to  Childe's,  upon  whom 
he  had  a  letter  of  credit.  He  drew  there  a  sum  suffi- 
cient for  the  journey  that  lay  before  him.  Next, 
towards  noon,  they  looked  in  at  White's;  and  for  an 
hour  or  so  they  lounged  there  in  amiable  talk  of  the 
pleasant  season  they  had  spent  in  Italy  in  each  other's 
company,  and  of  other  matters. 

At  the  end  of  that  hour  they  parted,  the  Captain  to 
return  to  Chertsey  and  Sir  Richard  announcing  that 
upon  the  morrow  he  was  for  his  seat  in  Devonshire, 
where  he  hoped  that  Harry  would  visit  him  ere  he  left 
England  for  the  post  in  the  Colonies  that  was  to  be 
obtained  him. 

Captain  Gaynor  detested  the  deception  he  was 


PAUNCEFORT'S  MOVE  151 

practising  upon  his  friend,  detested  having  used  him 
in  his  need.  He  would  have  liked  at  parting  to  tell 
him  the  truth  of  matters,  but  he  dared  not  for  his 
very  life's  sake. 

He  walked  from  White's  to  the  post-house  at  Char- 
ing Cross  and  thence  rode  post  to  The  World's  End 
at  Chelsea,  where  he  but  stayed  for  a  word  with 
Maclean  and  to  recover  his  own  horse. 

Heavy-hearted,  now  that  the  adventure  was  at  an 
end,  with  all  the  burden  of  a  sense  of  failure  upon 
him,  he  rode  on  to  Chertsey;  and  heaviest  of  all  was 
the  knowledge  that  to-morrow  he  must  look  his  last 
upon  that  sweet  lady  he  had  met  in  the  enchanted 
garden.  Never  again,  it  seemed  to  him,  would  he  ride 
fancy-free,  never  again  find  the  cup  of  adventure  all- 
satisfying,  never  again  be  content  to  wander  and  take 
pleasure  in  the  wandering.  All  was  changed.  All  was 
very  dark  ahead  in  a  world  that  but  a  little  week  ago 
had  been  so  full  of  sunshine. 

Meanwhile  Mr.  Templeton  had  gone  to  lay  before 
Lord  Carteret  the  desired  evidence  of  Captain  Gay- 
nor's  whereabouts,  together  with  conclusive  proofs  of 
the  error  under  which  the  Secretary  of  State  had 
laboured. 

This  he  performed  with  an  abundance  of  smirks,  an 
occasional  chuckle  and  many  a  'Did  I  not  tell  your 
lordship  how  it  was?'  Finally  he  withdrew  in  mag- 
nificent, dignified  triumph,  his  knowledge  and  per- 
spicacity entirely  vindicated,  leaving  his  superior  not 
only  discomfited  but  extremely  raw  at  his  discomfi- 
ture. For  to  be  guffawed  over  in  such  a  manner  by 
your  underling,  and  to  be  forced  almost  to  admit  that 
you  have  sneered  at  warnings  which  an  intelligent 


152  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

man  would  have  heeded,  is  not  to  be  endured  com- 
placently by  any.  Least  of  all  is  it  to  be  endured  by  a 
Secretary  of  State  when  the  chastening  falls  from  such 
soft,  pompous  hands  as  those  of  a  Mr.  Templeton. 

Lord  Carteret,  as  is  the  wont  of  men  in  high  office, 
looked  about  for  some  one  upon  whom  he  might  visit 
his  ill-humour  and  to  whom  he  might  impart  some  of 
his  own  rawness.  To  him  in  this  questing  mood 
comes  that  morning  my  Lord  Pauncefort,  very  re- 
splendent in  black  periwig  and  saffron-coloured  coat. 

'Good-morning,  my  lord!'  the  statesman  greeted 
him,  in  a  tone  that  implied  that  he  wished  the  vis- 
count anything  but  a  good  morning.  '  I  was  about  to 
send  for  you.'  Lord  Carteret  —  a  man  of  a  comfor- 
table habit  of  body,  with  a  hooked  nose,  a  crafty 
mouth,  and  small  round  eyes  that  were  singularly 
penetrating  and  level  —  scowled  upon  his  visitor. 
'What  cock-and-bull  tale  was  this  ye  brought  me 
concerning  one  Captain  Gaynor?' 

'Cock-and-bull  tale?'  echoed  Pauncefort,  taken 
aback  by  the  question  and  still  more  by  the  tone  of  it. 
He  drew  himself  up  to  the  full  of  his  magnificent 
height,  and  stared  down  haughtily  upon  the  Secretary 
of  State.  He  was  not  accustomed  to  being  addressed 
in  the  manner  that  Lord  Carteret  employed  this 
morning. 

But  he  did  not  long  maintain  his  stare  or  his 
haughty  poise.  The  thin  lips  of  the  minister  wore  a 
sneer  and  the  round  little  eyes  flashed  a  contempt 
before  which  Lord  Pauncefort  was  forced  to  lower  his 
own.   A  slight  flush  crept  into  his  swarthy  cheeks. 

Men  such  as  Lord  Carteret  may  use  men  such  as 
Lord  Pauncefort;  but  from  the  moment  they  so  use 
them  equality  ceases  between  them  and  is  never  again 


PAUNCEFORT'S  MOVE  153 

to  be  resumed.  To  Lord  Carteret,  the  viscount  was 
just  a  vulgar  spy,  to  be  used  with  contempt,  paid  his 
dirty  wages  and  scorned  as  was  his  proper  due.  All 
this  he  showed  in  that  faintly  sneering  mouth  and  dis- 
dainful eyes. 

'Those  were  my  words,'  he  said  steadily,  and  he  re- 
peated them.  'Cock-and-bull  tale.  This  Captain 
Gaynor  was  not  at  Chelsea  last  evening,  and  it  has 
been  made  plain  to  me  that  it  is  impossible  he  should 
be  Captain  Jenkyn,  as  you  have  said.  It  was  made 
plain  to  me  yesterday;  but  I  persisted  under  your  as- 
surances, and  as  a  consequence  I  have  enabled  that 
coxcomb  Templeton  to  laugh  at  me  this  morning. 
Now  His  Majesty's  Government,  my  lord,'  he  con- 
tinued mercilessly,  'is  not  paying  you  for  fictions,  but 
for  exact  —  for  scrupulously  exact  —  information.' 

'And  you  have  had  it,'  answered  Pauncefort  in  a 
dull  voice. 

The  statesman  rapped  the  table  impatiently  with 
his  knuckles.   'In  this  case  we  have  not.' 

'In  this  case  more  than  in  any  other,'  Pauncefort 
insisted.  'What  should  it  profit  me  to  accuse  an  inno- 
cent man  who  can  prove  his  innocence  as  soon  as  he 
speaks  ? ' 

'  Yet  that  precisely  appears  to  be  Captain  Gaynor's 
case.' 

'Appears  to  be  —  aye.  The  fellow  is  slippery  as 
Satan  himself.' 

Lord  Carteret  pooh-poohed  the  statement.  He 
proceeded  to  relate  where  and  how  Captain  Gaynor 
had  spent  the  night.  Pauncefort  listened  atten- 
tively. 

'At  what  hour  did  the  watch  discover  him?'  he  in- 
quired. 


154  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'At  nightfall,  I  am  informed.' 

'That  would  be  at  about  half-past  nine.  And  at 
what  time  were  the  arrests  effected  at  Chelsea?' 

'At  something  before  nine.  He  can  hardly  have 
been  in  both  places  within  the  time  and  drunk  him- 
self into  a  stupor  in  between.  Besides,  why  should 
he?' 

'To  set  up  an  alibi,  in  case  it  should  be  necessary. 
Was  he  drunk  at  all  ? ' 

Lord  Carteret  shrugged  impatiently.  'The  watch 
affirm  it;  they  should  know,  and  Templeton  swears  he 
still  stinks  of  brandy.' 

'And  yet,  that  he  is  Captain  Jenkyn  I  know;  and 
that  he  was  at  Chelsea  last  night  I'll  make  oath.' 

'Had  he  been  taken  with  the  others,  the  fact  that 
he  is  an  agent  of  the  Pretender  would  have  been  es- 
tablished, and  we  could  have  dealt  with  him.  As  it  is 
—  why,  as  it  is,  I  must  believe  that  Templeton  is 
right  and  that  he  is  — ' 

'He  is  Captain  Jenkyn,  my  lord,'  Pauncefort  in- 
sisted still. 

'You  are  becoming  plaguily  monotonous,  sir,' 
snapped  Carteret.  'If  you  would  prove  a  little  more 
and  affirm  a  little  less  I  should  be  better  pleased  with 
you.  Ye  see,  we  can't  hang  the  fellow  on  your  bare 
word.  Indeed,  anybody's  word  would  be  almost  bet- 
ter in  the  ears  of  a  court  than  that  of  an  informer. 
You  understand?' 

That  he  understood  his  countenance  showed.  'My 
lord,'  he  burst  out  angrily, '  you  are  putting  an  affront 
upon  me!' 

The  minister  surveyed  him  coolly.  'I  am  calling 
things  by  the  names  that  belong  to  them,'  he  an- 
swered icily.  And  my  lord  was  compelled  to  swallow 


PAUNCEFORT'S  MOVE  155 

that  added  insult  —  his  very  proper  and  inevitable 
wage. 

'I'll  wish  your  lordship  a  good-morning,'  he  said 
stiffly.  He  bowed  curtly  and  gained  the  door.  There, 
a  thought  striking  him,  he  turned.  'You  said,  I  think, 
that  Sir  Henry  Tresh  was  the  justice  before  whom 
Captain  Gaynor  was  brought  at  Westminster?' 

'That  is  so,'  said  his  lordship.  'Come  to  me  again 
when  your  information  stands  upon  better  founda- 
tions.' 

The  viscount  went  out  raging,  and  kicked  a  flunkey 
out  of  his  way  to  vent  a  little  of  the  fumes  with  which 
he  was  swollen  to  bursting-point. 

He  straightway  sought  the  magistrate  upon  a  pre- 
tence of  being  a  friend  of  Captain  Gaynor's  who  had 
just  received  news  of  his  arrest.  Sir  Henry  informed 
him  that  the  Captain  was  already  at  large,  whereafter 
his  lordship  lingered  in  talk  concerning  the  erstwhile 
prisoner,  and  in  the  course  of  their  entertainment 
Chance  favoured  Pauncefort  in  a  manner  entirely  un- 
expected. He  learnt  that  Sir  Henry  had  been  at  The 
World's  End  at  Chelsea  last  night  when  the  arrest  of 
the  plotters  was  being  effected,  and  he  learnt  some- 
thing further,  something  which  was  imparted  that 
evening  to  Sir  Richard  Tollemache  Templeton  by  his 
cousin. 

'What,  think  you,  is  my  Lord  Carteret's  present 
view  of  your  friend  Gaynor?'  inquired  the  Second 
Secretary. 

'Does  he  hang  there  still?'  quoth  Sir  Richard  in 
surprise. 

"Tis  an  obsession  with  him  —  an  obsession!  Oh, 
'tis  incredible  that  fatuity  should  go  to  such  lengths 
—  incredible!  And  the  story  itself  would  be  incredible 


156  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

to  any  but  a  man  who  is  —  ah  —  lost  to  all  sense  of 
the  ridiculous.  Why,  listen  to't.  It  transpires  that  by 
an  odd  chance  Sir  Henry  Tresh  was  at  The  World's 
End  last  night  when  the  arrests  were  made.  He  was 
sitting  over  his  wine  with  a  friend  when  the  stir  took 
place.  Having  witnessed  it  he  goes  to  his  wife's  room, 
finds  the  door  locked,  and  believes  that  he  hears 
voices  within  the  room.  He  knocks;  there  is  a  delay, 
and  finally  the  cuckold  is  admitted.  He  demands  an 
explanation  of  those  sounds,  of  the  delay  and  of  the 
extraordinary  agitation  in  which  he  finds  her.  Where- 
upon she  tells  him  that  a  gentleman  unknown  to  her 
entered  her  room  and  locked  the  door,  leaving  there- 
after by  the  window. 

'Sir  Henry  —  a  most  obliging  husband,  this  —  be- 
lieves her  implicitly,  assumes  that  like  enough  the 
fellow  would  be  one  of  the  Jacobites  who  escaped  the 
general  arrest.  To-day  my  Lord  Carteret  hears  the 
story,  and  concludes — -can  you  credit  it?  —  that 
here,  at  last,  is  the  explanation  of  why  Captain 
Jenkyn  was  not  taken  with  the  others.  If  he  were  to 
pause  there,  I  could  credit  him  still  with  an  —  ah  — 
with  a  remnant  of  sanity.  But  straightway  Captain 
Jenkyn  becomes  Captain  Gaynor  again,  in  spite  of  the 
alibi,  the  credentials  and  all  else.  What,  I  ask  you, 
Tollemache,  can  you  say  to  such  a  man?' 

'God  help  England,  I  think,'  answered  Sir  Richard. 

'And  the  worst  of  it  all  is  that  he  threatens  to  exe- 
cute the  warrant  for  Captain  Jenkyn  upon  Captain 
Gaynor.' 

'Is  he  quite  mad?'  asked  Tollemache. 

'Quite  —  oh,  quite!'  And  Mr.  Templeton  shook 
his  great  head.  'He'll  be  in  Bedlam  before  the  year  is 
out.  But  I've  washed  my  hands  of  the  affair.   I  have 


PAUNCEFORT'S  MOVE  157 

told  him  so.  I  have  warned  him.  Let  the  conse- 
quences of  it —  if  indeed  he  goes  so  far  —  recoil  upon 
his  own  head.  I  shall  take  measures  to  protect  mine. 
I  shall  publish  it  broadcast  that  in  this  blunder  at 
least  I  am  not  concerned,  that  indeed  I  have  done  all 
in  my  power  to  avert  it.  Then,  when  his  lordship 
rightly  becomes  the  —  ah  —  laughing-stock  of  the 
country  for  an  alarmist  who  sees  Jacobite  agents  in 
every  shadow,  then  we  shall  see  —  we  shall  see.'  And 
Mr.  Templeton  washed  his  hands  in  the  air,  his  eyes 
glowing  upon  a  vision  of  power  that  should  be  trans- 
ferred to  his  own  more  capable  hands  as  a  proper  and 
fitting  result  of  his  chief's  disgrace  and  downfall. 


CHAPTER  XII 
nature  Triumphant 

ON  the  morrow  Captain  Gaynor  made  his  pre- 
parations for  leaving  England. 

He  had  learnt  upon  returning  to  Priory  Close  of  the 
messenger  who  had  sought  him  there,  and  thus  real- 
ised how  narrow  had  been  his  escape.  For  the  pre- 
sent, however,  he  had  obtained  —  thanks  to  Mr. 
Templeton  and  his  own  wit  —  a  temporary  respite, 
and  that  respite  he  proposed  to  employ  in  giving  my 
Lord  Pauncefort  his  quietus.  He  looked  upon  this  as 
a  sacred  duty,  and  he  could  not  account  himself  at 
liberty  to  depart  out  of  England  until  he  had  dis- 
charged it.  His  intention,  therefore,  was  to  return  to 
London,  and  that  very  day  seek  out  his  lordship  and, 
wherever  he  found  him,  force  upon  him  a  quarrel  de- 
manding immediate  adjustment.  He  reflected  that 
the  affair  would  serve  him  well,  and  would  leave  Mr. 
Templeton  with  an  obvious  explanation  of  his  subse- 
quent flight  from  England.  He  should  be  glad  of  that, 
for  he  had  no  reason  to  embroil  the  Second  Secretary, 
who  had  been  so  very  good  a  friend  to  him. 

He  began  that  morning  by  desiring  his  valet, 
Fisher,  to  pack  his  few  belongings,  and  by  informing 
Fisher  that  once  London  were  reached  he  would  be 
obliged  by  circumstances  to  dispense  with  a  body 
servant.  The  valet,  who  in  the  week  during  which  he 
had  served  the  Captain  had  found  him  not  only  a 
kind  and  considerate  master,  but  further  had  been 
drawn  to  him  by  that  magnetism  which  the  Captain's 


NATURE  TRIUMPHANT  159 

strong  personality  irradiated,  was  so  distressed  as  to 
seek  the  reason  of  this. 

' 1  am  very  sorry,  sir,'  he  said.  '  I  hope  your  Honour 
has  no  cause  to  be  displeased  with  me.  I  have  done 
my  best,  but  there  has  been  little  opportunity — ' 

'It  isn't  that/  said  the  Captain.  He  laid  a  hand 
upon  the  little  man's  shoulder,  and  looked  kindly  into 
his  sharp  face.  'You  have  done  very  well,  and  I  am 
sorry  to  part  with  you.  But  —  to  take  you  into  my 
confidence,  which  you'll  respect,  I  know  —  I  have  an 
affair  on  my  hands.' 

'Oh,  sir!'  the  fellow  cried,  with  quick  understand- 
ing, and  Gaynor  was  moved  by  the  look  of  concern 
that  leapt  into  those  keen  eyes. 

'If  it  end  one  way,  Fisher,'  the  Captain  continued, 
'I  shall  require  no  more  servants.  If  it  end  the  other 
—  as  I  am  trustful  it  will  —  I  shall  be  put  to  it  to  fly 
the  country,  and  I  cannot  take  you  with  me.' 

'But  why  not,  sir?'  cried  the  valet.  'I've  travelled 
aforetime.  I  was  in  France  and  Italy  with  his  Grace  of 
Wharton  when  I  had  the  honour  to  serve  him.  I 
know  foreign  ways.   I  — ' 

'I  do  not  doubt  it  at  all,  my  friend,'  the  Captain  in- 
terrupted him.  '  But  there  are  reasons  why  I  cannot 
take  you,  reasons  for  which  you  must  not  press.' 

'I  shouldn't  dream  of  such  a  liberty,  sir.' 

'Then  we  must  leave  it  there.  I  am  sorry,  Fisher, 
sorry  to  part  with  you.' 

'And  I  am  sorry,  sir,'  said  the  little  man  with  pro- 
found sincerity. 

'Thank  you,  Fisher.' 

'Thank  you,  sir.' 

Then  the  Captain  went  downstairs.  He  was 
touched  a  little  by  the  valet's  manner.    It  seemed  to 


160  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

increase  the  burden  that  was  upon  him.  He  was  al- 
most obsessed  by  a  sense  of  imminent  evil,  born,  no 
doubt,  of  the  impending  farewell  that  he  must  make 
to  one  with  whom  he  must  leave,  it  seemed,  a  part  of 
himself —  and  that  the  tetter  part  —  when  he  rode 
away  that  day. 

He  was  exercised,  too,  by  the  continued  absence  of 
Sir  John  Kynaston.  There  was  news  that,  Sir  John's 
brother,  being  now  out  of  all  danger,  the  baronet 
would  be  returning  on  the  morrow  or  the  day  after. 
But  Captain  Gaynor  dared  not  wait  and  the  abrupt- 
ness of  his  departure  demanded  an  explanation;  more, 
the  events  which  had  transpired  in  these  last  few  days 
made  it  necessary  to  convey  a  warning  to  the  baronet. 
Yet  how  was  he  to  accomplish  it?  Write,  he  dared 
not;  for  letters  are  ever  dangerous  and  liable  to  mis- 
carriage, and  the  things  he  had  to  say  might,  if 
written,  come  to  prove  a  deadly  witness  against  Sir 
John.  Thus  he  was  driven  to  the  decision  that  he 
must  entrust  his  messages  by  word  of  mouth  to 
Evelyn  —  by  whom,  of  course,  he  meant  Damaris. 

He  reflected  that  Sir  John  might  prefer  her  to  re- 
main —  like  the  rest  of  the  household  —  in  ignorance 
of  her  father's  slight  association  with  the  Jacobite 
Cause;  but  he  had  no  alternative.  It  was  a  choosing 
of  the  lesser  of  two  evils;  and,  after  all,  he  had  per- 
ceived in  this  sweet  lady  such  admirable  qualities  of 
head  and  heart  that  he  was  comparatively  easy  in  his 
mind  at  the  thought  of  confiding  in  her.  Moreover, 
he  would  so  put  it  as  not  to  betray  Sir  John  even  to 
her  in  any  unnecessary  degree.  With  this  intent  he 
sought  her  now. 

He  was  informed  by  a  servant  that  Miss  Kynaston 
was  with  her  ladyship  in  the  latter's  withdrawing- 


NATURE  TRIUMPHANT  161 

room.  Thither  he  went,  to  find,  of  course,  Lady 
Kynaston  and  Evelyn.  They  accorded  him  a  pleas- 
ant, friendly  welcome.  He  hesitated  to  ask  for  the 
lady  whom  he  sought,  and  he  was  spared  the  need,  for 
through  the  window  he  espied  her  walking  in  the 
garden. 

Yet  for  all  his  haste  to  join  her  there,  he  must  linger 
awhile  in  a  properly  deliberate  exchange  of  courtesies 
with  his  hostess.  She  had  been  perusing  The  Daily 
Courant  of  yesterday  when  he  entered,  and,  pre- 
sumably for  lack  of  other  matter,  she  alluded  to 
something  she  had  read. 

'Did  you  hear  aught  in  town,  sir,  of  these  knavish 
Jacobites  who  are  again  attempting  to  undermine  the 
peace  of  the  realm? '  she  asked  him,  and,  in  the  main, 
she  was  quoting  words  that  she  had  read. 

'I  heard  something,  madam/  he  answered  lightly. 

'Ah!'  said  she.  'You  do  not  treat  the  matter  with 
a  proper  seriousness.' 

'Is  it  very  serious,  ma'am?'  he  asked  her. 

' Serious?  Why,  the  notorious  Captain  Jenkyn  is  in 
England  again.' 

'Pooh!  A  rumour,  no  doubt/ 

'Nay,  sir,  no  rumour —  a  report.' 

"Tis  all  one,  mother  dear,'  said  Evelyn  from  the 
window,  where  she  was  standing.  'I  hope  they  will 
not  take  him,'  she  added,  and  paid  that  gallant  un- 
known the  tribute  of  a  sigh. 

'You  hope  they  will  not  take  him,  Evelyn!'  Her 
ladyship  was  outraged  by  such  a  sentiment.  'The 
man  is  a  dangerous  and  pernicious  rebel.  And  they'll 
take  him,  never  fear.' 

'I  wonder!'  said  Captain  Gaynor. 

'Look  at  this,'  she  bade  him,  and  held  out  The 
Courant. 


1 62  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

He  took  the  news-sheet,  and  followed  the  indica- 
tion of  her  finger.  But  there  was  not  the  need  of  it. 
The  bold  announcement  at  the  foot  of  the  second 
column  challenged  every  eye: 

ADVERTISEMENT 

WHEREAS  it  is  reported  to  His  Majesty's  Government  that  the 
notorious  rebel  and  Jacobite  spy  and  agent  who  is  known  as  Captain 
Jenkyn  is  at  this  present  time  in  England,  His  Majesty's  Secretary 
of  State  hereby  gives  notice  that  any  who  shall  bring  such  information 
as  will  lead  to  the  arrest  and  conviction  of  the  said  rebel  shall  receive 
from  His  Majesty's  Treasury  the  sum  of  TWELVE  HUNDRED 
GUINEAS  in  REWARD. 

'His  value  is  increasing,  it  seems/  said  the  Captain, 
returning  the  sheet  to  her  ladyship.  'Poor  devil!'  he 
added,  and  soon  afterwards  found  an  excuse  upon 
which  he  might  withdraw  and  go  to  join  Damaris  in 
the  garden. 

'Madam,'  he  said,  bowing  formally  before  her,  'I 
am  come  —  alas!  —  to  take  my  leave  of  you.  But  ere 
I  go  there  is  something  I  desire  to  say  for  your  private 
ear,  if  you  will  so  honour  me.' 

He  saw  the  quick  blood  leap  to  her  cheeks  and  ebb 
thence  again,  leaving  her  very  white;  he  saw  the  droop 
of  the  brown  eyes,  the  sudden  agitation  of  her  breast, 
the  little  quiver  of  her  hand  upon  the  briar  from  which 
she  had  been  about  to  break  a  rose. 

He  knew  then  how  she  misunderstood  his  aims; 
knew  that  she  cared;  and  the  knowledge  was  as  a 
sword  in  his  flesh. 

'Yes,'  she  answered  faintly.  'I  am  listening,  Cap- 
tain Gaynor.' 

He  hesitated  yet  a  moment.  Then:  'Will  you  walk, 
madam?'  he  invited  her,  his  voice  oddly  subdued, 
faltering  a  little  even. 


NATURE  TRIUMPHANT  163 

She  turned  at  his  bidding,  and  together  they  took 
their  way  at  a  gentle  pace  towards  the  plantation; 
they  crossed  the  bridge,  and  followed  the  main  valley 
of  the  glorious  garden;  and  all  this  with  no  word 
spoken  between  them,  yet  such  a  communion  of  soul 
and  soul  as  gladdened  her  and  left  him  sick  with  fierce 
despair. 

She  imagined  that  she  understood  why  he  led  her  to 
the  garden.  She  remembered  how  he  had  spoken  of  it 
as  enchanted,  a  place  wherein  a  man  might  be  content 
to  lay  down  ambition  and  have  done  with  strife.  It 
was  here,  too,  that  they  had  first  talked  to  any  pur- 
pose. It  was  almost  as  if  they  had  met  there,  under 
the  apple-blossom,  for  until  that  talk  they  had  been 
as  utter  strangers.  There  it  was  that  he  had  first  re- 
vealed himself  with  all  that  stark  honesty  which  she 
found  so  admirable  in  him,  that  it  more  than  made 
amends  for  his  avowed  lack  of  great  ideals.  She  was 
touched  by  his  desire  that  they  should  talk  now  in 
such  a  place;  that  he  should  have  chosen  this  garden 
of  enchantment,  in  which  he  had  erst  revealed  him- 
self, to  reveal  himself  yet  more  fully  unto  her  alone. 

Rejoicing,  she  went  with  him  thither,  as  she  would 
have  gone  with  him  wheresoe'er  he  bade  her.  Was  she 
not  his  to  claim?  And  in  that  hour  she  was  glad  in- 
deed of  the  deception  that  had  been  practised,  glad 
that  he  had  not  known  her  for  the  heiress,  Damaris 
Hollinstone.  For  thus  was  she  brought  to  the  sweet 
and  tranquil  conviction  that  here  was  one  who  desired 
her  for  her  own  self  and  not  for  aught  that  she  might 
have  to  give.  She  was  glad,  too,  that  she  was  Damaris 
Hollinstone  and  rich,  and  glad  that  he  was  poor. 
Thus  should  be  increased  the  joy  and  blessing  that 
would  be  hers  in  giving  —  for  she  was  of  those  selfless 


164  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

ones  who,  where  they  love,  desire  to  give  and  give. 
She  knew  that  she  was  good  to  look  upon;  and  in  this 
too  she  took  joy  that  morning,  since  this  too  had  she 
to  give. 

She  was  dreaming  as  she  stepped  along  beside  him, 
a  happy  dream  whose  fulfilment  she  deemed  impend- 
ing. Why  did  he  not  speak?  she  wondered.  Did  he 
hesitate,  poor  lover?  Did  he  doubt  her?  God  wot, 
there  was  but  little  need  for  that.  Furtively,  shyly 
she  glanced  aside  at  him,  to  observe  at  last  his  hag- 
gard look  and  wrinkled  brow. 

Dear  heart !  How  needlessly  was  he  torturing  him- 
self! How  fondly  she  longed  for  the  uttered  word  that 
should  give  her  the  right  to  drive  forth  his  fears,  to 
transfigure  his  face  and  smooth  away  those  lines.  Yet 
she  loved  him  the  more  for  this  most  sweet  timidity 
towards  her  in  one  whom  she  judged  of  a  nature  that 
normally  was  bold  and  fearless. 

And  then,  at  last,  he  spoke,  his  voice  singularly 
small  and  quiet;  and  his  first  words  shattered  that 
dream-paradise  of  hers  so  abruptly  that  for  an  instant 
she  was  stunned  and  numb. 

'It  is  of  Sir  John  that  I  desire  to  speak  to  you, 
madam,'  he  said.  'I  have  a  message  for  him  of  grav- 
est import  —  so  grave  that  I  dare  not  write  it,  lest  an 
ill-chance  should  put  it  into  hands  that  might  use  it 
against  him.' 

Mechanically  she  walked  on.  She  was  choking. 
Her  face  was  deathly  pale;  her  eyes  seemed  suddenly 
enlarged  in  it  and  very  dark;  her  mouth  was  tremb- 
ling. But  he  observed  naught  of  this.  He  did  not  ob- 
serve her  at  all.  He  was  looking  away  through  the 
sun-drenched  orchard  on  their  right. 

Followed  a  little  spell  of  silence,  in  which  they  came 


NATURE  TRIUMPHANT  165 

to  the  first  of  those  courts  enclosed  in  their  tall,  box- 
wood settings.  He  stood  aside  to  let  her  pass  first 
through  the  narrow  archway  in  that  massive  hedge. 
He  followed,  and  they  stood  in  the  rose-garden,  which 
was  now  all  fire  and  snow  with  petals  red  and  white. 

'You  will  tell  him,  madam,  that  I  am  grieved  be- 
yond all  mention  that  I  may  not  stay  another  day  for 
his  return,  to  take  my  leave  of  him  in  person;  that  I 
dare  not;  that  with  every  hour  I  tarry  now  in  England 
the  shadow  of  the  gallows  falls  more  heavily  across 
my  path.' 

She  came  out  of  her  stupor,  awakened  by  the  sin- 
ister image  he  had  employed. 

'The  gallows?'  she  cried,  horror  in  every  line  of  her 
lovely  face.    'You  are  in  danger!' 

Deliberately  had  he  spoken  so,  hoping  that  his 
words  would  convey  not  only  the  intended  message  to 
Sir  John,  but  a  message  to  her  too  that  should  explain 
his  need  to  preserve  silence  upon  the  subject  on  which 
she  looked  to  hear  from  him.  Yet  now  that  he  saw 
and  interpreted  her  alarm,  his  soul  was  torn  with  sobs 
unuttered.  His  eyelids  flickered.  But  beyond  that  he 
gave  no  sign  of  the  terrible  ordeal  he  was  sustaining, 
must  sustain  for  honour's  sake.  His  every  nerve  and 
fibre  shrieked  imperatively  that  he  should  take  her  in 
his  arms,  and  claim  her  —  who  stood  so  ready  for  sur- 
render —  for  his  own.  But  the  calm,  cold  voice  of 
Honour  warned  him  not  to  heed  those  treacherous  be- 
hests of  heedless  Nature  —  of  Nature,  who  knows 
naught  of  honour  and  such  human  shibboleths. 

What  manner  of  knave  would  he  be,  Honour  de- 
manded, to  return  the  good  that  Sir  John  had  ever 
done  him  by  the  evil  of  such  a  deed?  To  repay  the 
baronet's  trust  and  affection  by  stealing  away  his  only 


1 66  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

child  and  bearing  her  with  him  upon  his  hapless 
wanderings? 

Were  Sir  John  here,  things  might  be  different. 
Captain  Gaynor  could  have  gone  to  him  and  loyally 
spoken  what  was  in  his,  heart,  loyally  abided  by  the 
baronet's  decision.  But  without  the  baronet's  con- 
sent —  a  consent  which  Gaynor  deemed  extremely 
unlikely  —  he  must  not  speak  to  her  of  this  thing 
with  which  his  heart  was  bursting.  And  linger  until 
Sir  John's  return,  he  dared  not;  not  merely  for  the 
danger  that  he  ran  —  that  danger  he  would  have 
faced  most  gladly  —  but  because  his  presence  in  Eng- 
land might  place  in  jeopardy  those  arrested  Jacobites, 
against  whom  little  could  be  enacted  if  he  remained 
undiscovered,  he  must  depart  at  once.  The  voice  of 
Honour  was  very  clear,  and  not  to  be  misunderstood. 
It  bade  him  be  silent,  and  so  depart. 

So  in  that  swift  flicker  of  his  eyelids  he  determined. 
He  brushed  aside  with  a  disdainful  gesture  the  sugges- 
tion that  the  danger  he  ran  was  one  to  occasion  con- 
cern. 

'The  danger  is  naught,'  he  said,  'or  will  be  naught 
so  that  I  depart  at  once.  And  I  mean  not  only  danger 
to  myself,  but  danger  to  others  who  would  be  impli- 
cated were  I  taken.  Please  remember  this  that  you 
may  tell  him.  And  that  the  principal  ones  of  my 
master's  friends  have  been  prematurely  arrested;  that 
no  great  harm  threatens  them,  but  that  for  the  pre- 
sent I  have  been  obliged  to  abandon  my  mission;  that 
I  shall  not  go  to  Rochester,  nor  indeed  take  any 
further  steps,  but  shall  return  immediately  to  Rome. 

'That,  I  think,  is  all  that  I  need  say.  The  rest  he 
will  infer.  But  add  that  there  is  a  warrant  out  for  my 
arrest  —  though  not  in  my  own  name,  as  the  Govern- 


NATURE  TRIUMPHANT  167 

ment  is  not  yet  assured  that  my  identity  and  that  of 
the  person  sought  are  one  and  the  same.  And  before 
the  Government  has  such  assurance  —  if  indeed  it 
ever  has  it  —  I  hope  to  be  very  far  away.  Bid  him 
spare  himself  anxieties  on  my  account.  My  plans  are 
soundly  laid,  and  I  have  a  friend  at  Court  upon  whose 
offices  I  am  depending. 

'Tell  him  just  that,  madam,'  he  concluded,  his  eyes 
ever  avoiding  hers,  'just  that  and  my  deep  devotion. 
He  will  understand  why  I  was  forced  to  this  precipi- 
tate flight,  and  he  will  know  how  to  guard  himself 
from  any  consequences  of  having  sheltered  me  in  the 
event  of  my  being  ultimately  identified  with  —  with 
the  man  for  whom  the  warrant  has  been  issued.' 

'  I  will  remember  all,'  she  said  —  indeed,  every 
word  of  it  was  seared  upon  her  memory  —  'and  I  will 
tell  him.  But  you,  sir'  —  her  voice  dropped  a  little, 
and  her  tone  by  its  gentleness  seemed  to  belie  the 
words  she  uttered  —  '  you  have  deceived  me.' 

He  looked  up  sharply.   '  Deceived  you  —  I  ? ' 

'You  represented  yourself  to  me  as  an  adventurer, 
a  follower  of  Fortune's  banner,  a  mercenary  who  sold 
his  sword  to  the  highest  bidder.' 

'All  this  I  have  been  —  all  this  I  am,'  he  answered. 
'I  practised  no  deceit.' 

'You  practise  it  still,'  she  said,  her  pride  in  him  in- 
creased a  thousandfold  by  her  discovery.  'You  spoke 
but  now  of  a  mission  and  of  your  master  in  Rome. 
You  are  a  Jacobite,  that  much  you  have  made  plain 
—  one  who  in  the  pursuit  of  an  ideal  imperils  his  life 
and  moves,  in  your  own  words,  under  the  shadow  of 
the  gallows.  Yet,'  she  reproached  him  almost  fondly, 
so  caressingly  protesting  was  her  tone,  'you  repre- 
sented yourself  to  me  as  a  hireling;  you  provoked  and 
submitted  to  my  scorn.' 


1 68  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

He  trembled,  looked  at  her,  then  looked  away 
across  the  flaming  roses.  His  first  impulse  was  to  say 
that  in  this  too  he  was  a  mercenary;  that  what  he  did, 
he  did  for  gold.  First  the  falsehood  stayed  him;  then 
the  reflection  that  even  that  falsehood  could  not  serve 
him  now.  He  had  won  her  love;  her  every  word  and 
look  assured  him  of  it.  Should  he  then  be  so  ungener- 
ous as  to  maintain  this  hateful  pretence  that  she  was 
nothing  to  him?  Could  that  serve  any  but  a  hurtful 
purpose?  Was  it  not  better  that  he,  too,  should  let 
her  see  how  it  was  with  him?  Was  it  not  better  that 
she  should  know  that  where  unwittingly  he  had  con- 
quered he  had  been  conquered  also?  That  she  should 
hold  this  knowledge  would,  he  felt,  comfort  him;  and 
her  too  it  might  comfort.   Some  day  —  who  knew? 

But  there  he  went  too  fast.  He  would  convey  it, 
but  not  utter  it.  To  utter  it  were  to  break  down  the 
barriers  which  Honour  had  raised  up. 

'You  are  right,'  he  said  gently.  'I  crave  your 
pardon.' 

1  My  pardon  ? '  she  echoed.  '  My  pardon  —  for  be- 
ing noble  where  I  deemed  you  base!' 

'Nay,  for  the  deceit  I  put  unworthily  upon  you.' 

'Why  did  you?'  she  asked  him,  the  intimacy  be- 
tween them  growing  now  with  an  odd  and  alarming 
swiftness. 

'To  be  consistent  in  the  part  I  played.  Had  any 
known  my  secret,  all  must  know  it.  Yet  there  was  no 
untruth  in  my  deceit.  I  was  a  mercenary  in  all  other 
services  but  this.  And  of  this  I  dared  not  speak  —  at 
least  not  then.' 

'And  now?'  she  asked  him  without  shyness. 

'Now?'  He  looked  at  her,  full  into  her  steadfast 
eyes  that  were  drawing  his  very  soul  from  him.  'No\f 


NATURE  TRIUMPHANT  169 

to  make  amends  I  will  place  my  life  in  your  gentle 
hands.  God  knows  it  is  all  I  have  to  give.'  He  laughed 
a  little  ruefully.  She  was  trembling.  '  I  am  he  whom 
the  Government  knows  by  the  name  of  Captain 
Jenkyn.' 

She  fell  back  with  a  little  cry.  She  needed  no  ex- 
planation. She,  too,  had  seen  The  Daily  Courant  that 
morning  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  announcement. 
She  turned  white  to  the  lips,  realising  at  last  to  the 
full  the  overwhelming  peril  in  which  he  stood.  She 
clasped  her  hands. 

'Oh,  God  of  pity!'  was  her  moan.  And  then,  in  an 
agony:  'Why  —  oh,  why  did  you  tell  me  this?' 

The  appeal  was  more  than  he  could  endure.  Im- 
pulse shattered  Honour's  barriers  at  a  blow,  and 
struck  Honour  herself  silent,  whilst  Nature  swept  on 
triumphant  and  irresistible. 

He  strode  to  her,  caught  her  in  his  arms  and 
crushed  her  to  him.  His  voice  shook  with  mingled 
pain  and  exultation. 

'Because  I  love  you,  oh,  my  lady!'  he  cried.  'Be- 
cause all  that  I  have,  all  that  I  am  I  would  place  in 
your  sweet  hands  in  pledge  of  it.' 

'I  asked  not  any  pledge,'  she  sobbed  in  a  gladness 
that  mounted  and  overrode  her  terror.  His  head 
drooped  to  her  upturned  face,  and  they  kissed.  '  Dear 
love,'  she  murmured,  as  she  lay  there  happily  upon  his 
breast,  'I,  too,  must  make  confession.' 

'  Confess,  dear  sinner,'  he  replied, '  and  be  very  sure 
of  shrift.' 

'I  am  glad  that  you  deceived  me,  for  I  too  have 
practised  a  deceit  on  you.' 

'Deceit  —  thou?'  his  voice  was  scornful. 

'I  am  not  Evelyn,'  she  confessed,  watching  his  face, 


170  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

observing  the  cloud  that  gathered  on  his  brow.  'I  am 
Damaris  Hollinstone.' 

The  cloud  grew  darker,  then  suddenly  it  vanished 
utterly  and  he  laughed. 

'Faith,  then,  I'm  glad,'  said  he,  'for  Damaris  is  a 
sweeter  and  more  fitting  name.' 

'And  for  no  other  reason?'  she  inquired. 

'What  other  could  there  be?  You  are  you  under 
whatever  name  you  please.' 

And  so  they  hung  there,  the  world  and  all  its  perils 
sunk  many  a  fathom  deep  into  oblivion,  conscious  of 
naught  but  each  other  —  just  man  and  woman  in  a 
garden. 

From  behind  the  boxwood  hedge  stepped,  soft- 
footed,  a  hidden  watcher.  Another  —  a  golden- 
headed,  fragile  slip  of  womanhood,  fled,  shuddering 
and  weeping  softly  in  an  agony  of  remorse  at  the 
catastrophe  she  had  invoked,  a  catastrophe  that 
overleapt  her  expectation  and  spread  grim  tragedy 
where  she  had  thought  to  set  a  comedy  with  a  spice  of 
malice. 

Through  the  archway  into  that  Eden  stepped  the 
inevitable  Satan,  wearing  the  handsome  outward 
seeming  of  my  Lord  Pauncefort.  He  paused  an  in- 
stant, himself  unobserved,  to  consider  the  idyll  that 
he  came  to  shatter  with  a  bloody  hand.  And  what 
time  he  paused,  he  set  upon  his  seething  rage  the  mask 
of  a  sardonic  humour. 

'Soho!'  he  announced  himself.  'Here  is  not  merely 
a  rebel,  but  a  rebel  in  arms,  it  seems.' 


CHAPTER  XIII 
IN  THE  ROSE-GARDEN 

ALARMED,  confused,  the  lovers   sprang  apart; 

Ji\.  Yet  not  so  far  aPart  Dut  tnat  the  Captain's  arm 
continued  to  encircle  —  protectingly  now  —  the 
waist  of  Damaris. 

There  followed  a  spell  of  silence  during  which  the 
two  men  measured  each  other  with  their  eyes,  like 
swordsmen  about  to  engage.  And  there  was  some- 
thing more  in  the  Captain's  glance;  there  was  satis- 
faction to  see  before  him  the  man  who  was  become  his 
quarry.  No  need  now  to  go  afield  in  search  of  him. 
With  a  smouldering  eye,  with  something  that  was 
almost  a  smile  on  his  lips  did  Gaynor  ponder  now  his 
enemy. 

But  it  was  Damaris,  standing  tense  and  white,  who 
was  the  first  to  break  the  silence. 

'By  what  right,  sir,  do  you  thus  insolently  thrust 
yourself  in  here?'  she  challenged  the  intruder. 

'Do  you,  madam,  question  my  right?'  quoth  he, 
eyebrows  raised. 

It  was  Captain  Gaynor  who  supplied  the  answer  to 
her  question.  '  By  the  right  of  his  nature,  Damaris. 
He  can  no  more  help  being  a  spy  than  the  fox  can 
help  its  smell.' 

His  lordship's  eyes  swung  back  to  the  Captain's 
face,  and  betrayed  by  their  startled  look  how 
shrewdly  this  blow  had  caught  him.  But  he  made  a 
swift  recovery,  throwing  back  his  handsome  black 
head  in  arrogance. 

'What  shall  that  mean,  sir?' 


172  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Mean,  you  base  Judas!'  The  Captain's  passion 
was  overmastering  him  at  the  sight  of  this  man  whose 
falseness  had  wrought  such  fearful  havoc,  had  ruined 
for  a  season  his  beloved  master's  every  hope.  Thus 
that  fierce  burst  of  rage  escaped  him.  But  he  con- 
trolled himself  almost  at  once. 

'Let  me  present  to  you,  Damans,'  said  he,  in  a  cold, 
sneering  voice,  'the  most  infamous  spy  in  England, 
who  in  the  discharge  of  that  office  has  thrust  himself 
here  upon  us.  You  may  have  conceived  that  in  my 
Lord  Pauncefort  you  beheld  a  nobleman,  a  gentle- 
man, a  man  of  honour.  So  have  others  thought  to 
their  undoing.  Instead,  you  behold  there  a  broken 
gamester  who  for  a  handful  of  gold  has  betrayed  the 
men  who  trusted  him  and  counted  him  their  friend, 
has  sold  the  Cause  in  which  he  himself  believed,  has 
bartered  his  honour  and  brought  everlasting  shame 
upon  the  name  he  bears.' 

'Be  silent!'  thundered  Pauncefort,  advancing  a 
step  and  checking  there,  his  countenance  writhing. 
'It  is  false,  I  say!' 

'You  perjured  hound!  False,  is  it?  Aye,  the  deed 
was  false  and  foul  as  hell,  in  which  it  shall  be  ex- 
piated.' 

'Was  it  he  betrayed  you?'  quoth  Damaris,  her 
voice  most  singularly  calm  and  quiet. 

'Aye  was  it.  Look  on  him,  Damaris.'  He  flung  out 
an  accusing  arm.  'Look  on  him,  for  you  may  never 
again  see  such  another  —  a  man  who  was  born  a 
gentleman  and  is  reduced  to  infamy,  a  man  who  has 
pawned  his  soul  to  keep  his  body  in  luxury.' 

Pauncefort  was  lividy  stricken  by  the  unexpected- 
ness of  this  attack,  for  he  had  been  very  far  from 
dreaming  that  his  treachery  was  detected. 


IN  THE  ROSE-GARDEN  173 

'And  now,  sir,'  said  Damaris,  'now  that  you  have 
received  what  was  here  your  due,  perhaps  you  will 
depart  again?' 

Her  contempt  struck  him  more  keenly  than  the 
Captain's  bitter  denunciation.  It  stirred  him,  awak- 
ened him  from  his  stupor.  Swiftly  he  mastered  him- 
self to  play  his  part  in  this  game;  and  he  was  suddenly 
heartened  by  the  knowledge  that  he  had  a  card  in  his 
pack  should  trump  this  whirling  Captain's  trick. 

He  turned  upon  Gaynor  very  haughtily,  every  inch 
of  him  the  great  gentleman. 

'  Sir,'  he  said, '  base  as  you  are  and  as  I  know  you  to 
be,  you  have  said  that  to  me  here  which  is  not  to  be 
borne  by  any  man,  however  high-placed,  from  an- 
other, however  low.  Elsewhere  we  will  continue  this 
discussion.' 

'We  shall,  by  God!'  said  Gaynor.    'I  so  intend  it.' 

'And,'  his  lordship  added,  'you  shall  eat  the  lies 
you  have  uttered.'  Upon  that  his  gesture  signified 
that  he  had  done  with  him.  '  But  you,  Damaris  — 
oh,  that  you  should  have  lent  an  ear  to  this  infamous 
defamer!  that  you  should  have  believed  these  things 
against  me,  myself  unheard!  This  is  what  stings  and 
cuts  me  to  the  very  soul ! ' 

She  surveyed  him  with  an  eye  that  pierced  this 
miserable  artifice.  She  disdained  him  any  answer 
other  than: 

'Will  you  go  now,  sir?' 

He  stared  at  her  as  if  this  fresh  dismissal  were  be- 
yond belief.  He  played  his  part  with  vigour  and  in- 
tensity. But  it  was  quite  futile.  Yet  in  the  face  of  his 
indifferent  audience  he  maintained  it,  enheartened  by 
the  confidence  that  his  finest  line  was  yet  to  utter; 
saving  this  skilfully  for  his  climax,  a  climax  that 


174  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

should  overwhelm  and  conquer  her  for  all  her  present 
scorn  of  him. 

'No,'  he  answered,  'I  will  not  go.  My  place  is  here 
beside  my  affianced  wife.' 

'Your  —  ?'  She  checked,  her  cheeks  aflame.  'You 
do  well,  I  think,  to  remind  me  of  my  shame.  But  that 
is  past.   I  am  your  affianced  wife  no  longer.' 

'Ah?'  he  said.  He  was  quite  himself  by  now,  be- 
traying no  least  sign  of  heat.  'Since  when  this 
change?' 

He  got  his  answer  pat.  'Since  you,  yourself,  failed 
in  wit  to  conceal  from  me  that  it  was  my  fortune,  not 
myself,  you  wooed.' 

He  considered  her,  and  his  eyes  were  melancholy. 
He  sighed.  'I  feared  you  had  thus  misunderstood 
me!' 

'Oh,  I  did  not  misunderstand  you,'  she  answered. 
'  I  understood  you  for  the  first  time.  And  that  is  how 
it  happens  that  Captain  Gaynor's  further  revelation 
of  your  ways  does  not  surprise  me.' 

This  was  a  blow  between  the  eyes.  But  his  lordship 
did  not  stagger  under  it.  He  preserved  a  calm  front. 
'For  that,  too,'  said  he,  'you  shall  contritely  and  of 
your  own  free  will  yet  seek  my  pardon.' 

'I?'    Her  contempt  withered  him.    'Oh,  will  you 

go!' 

And  seeing  him  still  making  no  shift  to  depart:  'I 
think,'  said  the  Captain, '  this  lady  bids  you  go.  Must 
I  compel  you  to  obey  her?' 

'Very  well,'  he  said  to  Damaris,  entirely  ignoring 
the  Captain.  'Very  well.'  He  bowed  to  her.  'An- 
other season  will  perhaps  serve  me  better.  I  should 
indeed  prefer  to  clear  myself  in  your  eyes  when  there 
are  no  witnesses  at  hand.  Yet  ere  I  go,  I  will  ask  you 


IN  THE  ROSE-GARDEN  175 

to  remember  that  however  you  may  have  misunder- 
stood my  motives,  you  are  pledged  to  me,  and  I  have 
not  redeemed  you  from  that  pledge.' 

'Myself  have  cancelled  it,'  she  answered  him.  'I 
will  not  wed  a  thief.' 

'Ha!'  cried  the  Captain.  "Tis  the  very  word  — 
the  very  word  I  sought.  A  thief!  Ha!' 

The  swarthy  face  flushed  heavily,  the  eyes  were 
venomous  in  the  glance  they  flashed  upon  the  Cap- 
tain. My  lord  drew  a  deep  breath  with  a  little  hissing 
sound,  thereby  acknowledging  the  hit. 

'How  wanton  can  a  woman  be  when  her  mood  is 
cruel!'  he  exclaimed.  'How  wanton  is  her  injustice! 
This  injustice,  madam,'  he  continued  sadly,  his  head 
bowed,  'yourself  shall  come  to  acknowledge.  As  I 
know  you  to  be  a  true  and  generous  woman  where  you 
are  not  misled,  so  do  I  know  that  you  will  sue  for 
pardon  to  me.  You  think  to  fling  me  aside  because 
you  imagine  —  oh,  so  mistakenly,  dear  God!  —  that 
I  was  a  fortune-hunter,  that  (in  your  own  cruel 
words)  I  wooed  your  fortune  and  not  yourself.  And 
yet  —  and  yet,  such  is  a  woman's  blindness  —  you 
replace  me  by  one  who  is  an  avowed  adventurer,  a 
self-confessed  fortune-hunter,  a  mercenary  in  all 
things;  one  who  openly  and  without  disguise  or  shame 
sought  to  win  you  for  what  you're  like  to  bring  him  in 
worldly  estate.' 

He  had  begun  at  last  to  play  his  trumps,  and  Cap- 
tain Gaynor  stiffened  as  he  listened,  stiffened  in  sud- 
den horror  of  a  picture  that  leapt  before  the  eyes  of 
his  memory. 

'Have  you  quite  done?'  was  all  Damaris's  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  lordship's  scathing  words. 

'Quite,  if  you  do  not  believe  me,'  he  answered  with 
grim  confidence. 


176  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Had  she  but  preserved  silence,  had  she  but  main- 
tained her  haughty  indifference,  all  might  yet  have 
been  well.  There  would  have  been  no  more  to  say, 
and,  his  rebuff  complete,  he  must  have  taken  his  de- 
parture. But,  woman-like,  she  must  have  the  last 
word  in  this;  she  must  come  down  a  little  from  those 
frosty  heights  to  utter  it,  and  in  uttering  it  must  open 
the  door  to  more. 

'I  do  not  believe  you,'  she  said,  to  which  he  re- 
turned the  obvious  answer: 

'And  if  I  could  prove  it  to  you?' 

'Prove  it?'  she  cried,  and  now  her  pride  and  con- 
fidence in  her  lover  were  as  much  to  blame  as  any 
other  sentiments.  'Prove  it?  You  poor  deceiver! 
Why,  I  can  prove  the  very  contrary.  Until  this  hour, 
until  he  knew  that  he  had  won  me  —  for  I  am  his,  my 
lord  —  he  did  not  know  my  name;  he  deemed  me 
Evelyn  Kynaston,  as  a  result  of  a  poor  deceit  we  put 
upon  him;  and  for  that  I  thank  Heaven,  since  it  gives 
me  this  easy  means  of  showing  how  fully  I  account 
you  what  Captain  Gaynor  says  you  are.' 

But  his  lordship  brushed  the  insult  aside.  It  was 
insignificant,  then;  a  mere  piece  of  detail.  The  fact  to 
which  it  was  attached  arrested  him.  For  a  second  it 
checkmated  him.  And  then  he  saw  how  it  might  be 
turned  to  account. 

'He  thought  you  Miss  Kynaston?'  he  cried.  'He 
has  succeeded  in  making  you  credit  even  that?  Now 
what  a  most  complete  and  finished  liar  have  we  here!' 
Then,  in  a  voice  of  thunder,  a  voice  whose  very  weight 
and  volume  seemed  to  increase  the  burden  of  his 
overpowering  words,  he  let  her  have  it. 

'Why,  this  man'  —  and  he  shook  a  quivering 
finger  at  the  Captain  —  'this  dastard  came  here  of  set 


IN  THE  ROSE-GARDEN  177 

intent  to  woo  you,  ere  ever  he  had  seen  you.  In  his 
own  words,  ma'am,  he  knew  not  whether  you  were 
tall  or  short,  dark  or  fair,  plump  or  lean,  neither  did  he 
care;  he  knew  you  for  the  wealthiest  heiress  in  all 
England,  and  in  no  other  way  did  he  desire  to  know 
you.'  He  swung  upon  the  Captain,  smiling  grimly. 
'You  see  that  I  have  treasured  the  remembrance  of 
your  every  word,  sir.' 

'You  hound!  You  jackal!'  said  the  Captain 
through  his  teeth. 

But  my  lord  ran  on:  'And  because  he  knew  me  be- 
trothed to  you;  because  he  knew  me  in  straits  for 
money,  in  the  clutches  of  a  merciless  usurer,  a  debtor's 
gaol  awaiting  me,  he  availed  himself  of  my  despair  to 
propose  to  me  that  I  should  play  him  for  the  right  to 
wed  you,  which  was  mine.  To  my  undying  shame,  I 
confess  that  I  succumbed.  He  set  against  you  ten 
thousand  guineas,  and  he  lost.  Yet  in  spite  of  that,  so 
false  a  dastard  is  he,  he  cannot  abide  by  that  issue  of 
the  cards,  but  comes  here  to  steal  a  thing  which  is 
doubly  lost  to  him  in  honour.  And  yet  you  call  me  a 
thief,  and  fling  yourself  into  the  arms  of  such  a  thief 
as  that!' 

He  paused,  and  still  she  answered  nothing.  Her 
calm  was  impregnable.  She  just  looked  at  him  with 
eyes  of  coldest  scorn,  eyes  that  seemed  to  say  she  but 
suffered  him  to  talk  that  he  might  be  done  the  sooner, 
that  she  but  waited  to  be  rid  of  his  unwelcome  pre- 
sence. Yet  he  had  not  quite  done.  The  card  was 
played;  but  its  force  and  value  were  not  yet  realized. 

'I  have  been  in  a  very  hell  of  shame  since  I  lent 
myself — induced  in  my  despair — to  such  a  thing. 
But  however  shameful  you  may  deem  me,  I  am  not 
shameful  as  is  he.  I  at  least  desired  you  because  first 


178  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

and  last  I  loved  you.  It  was  not  your  fortune  that  I 
staked  upon  the  board  when  I  gambled  for  my  right 
to  wed  you  —  not  your  fortune,  but  my  very  life,  my 
every  hope.  But  he  —  Well!  I  have  told  you  what 
words  he  uttered.  He  will  not  deny  them  if  you  ask 
him.   He  cannot,  bold  liar  though  he  is.' 

He  had  finished.  If  he  had  ruined  himself,  at  least 
he  had  ruined  the  Captain.  And  yet  for  himself  he 
had  a  glimmer  of  hope.  If  on  the  recoil  from  himself 
she  had  tumbled  into  the  Captain's  mercenary  arms, 
might  he  not  win  her  yet  upon  this  second  recoil  that 
must  inevitably  follow  now?  It  was  just  possible,  and 
he  had  the  means,  he  thought,  to  compel  Sir  John's 
assistance.  He  could  not  think  that  he  had  talked  in 
vain.  He  preened  himself  upon  his  knowledge  of  the 
ways  of  women,  and  here  he  was  confident  of  having 
taken  a  course  that  no  woman  could  disregard.  Yet, 
it  seems,  there  was  one  woman  whom  he  had  not 
gauged.  For  all  that  Damaris  answered  him  even 
now  was: 

'Will  you  go  at  last,  sir;  or  can  you  think  of  aught 
else  to  say  —  though  I  warn  you  'twill  be  so  much 
wasted  breath.' 

He  gasped  and  blenched.  His  eyes  bulged  as  he 
stared  at  her. 

'You  —  you  do  not  believe  me!'  he  cried,  as  he  had 
cried  before,  but  without  the  confidence  that  had  in- 
formed the  earlier  question. 

'  Believe  you  ? '  she  said,  and  smiled.  '  I  see  that  you 
have  thought  me  mad.' 

'Ask  him!'  he  barked,  and  flung  out  a  hand  again 
towards  Gaynor. 

'There  is  not  the  need,'  she  said,  with  quiet  con- 
fidence. 


IN  THE  ROSE-GARDEN  179 

For  a  moment  he  continued  to  stare  at  her  —  her 
loyalty  —  her  foolish,  headstrong  loyalty  had  de- 
feated him,  he  thought.  How  she  must  love  this  fel- 
low Gaynor  that  no  doubt  of  him  could  find  admit- 
tance to  her  mind  however  spurred. 

'You  are  right,'  he  said  at  last.  'There  is  not  the 
need  to  ask.'  And  he,  too,  was  smiling,  never  so  wick- 
edly. 'You  have  but  to  look.  Look!' he  commanded. 
'Look  in  his  face  and  see  for  yourself  what  is  written 
there;  see  for  yourself  whether  I  have  lied.  Oh,  in- 
deed, there  is  no  need  to  ask.' 

She  looked  as  he  bade  her.  Captain  Gaynor's  con- 
tinued silence  under  that  long  and  formidable  accusa- 
tion occurred  to  her,  perhaps,  to  cause  her  at  last  to 
do  his  lordship's  bidding  and  turn  her  head  to  look 
upon  her  lover's  face. 

What  she  saw  there  struck  all  her  proud  confidence 
to  earth,  left  her  frozen  and  panic-stricken.  His  face 
was  as  the  face  of  a  dead  man;  the  very  eyes  were 
gone  lustreless,  and  they  could  not  meet  her  own. 

'Harry,'  she  said,  and  the  steadiness  of  her  voice 
surprised  her.  She  considered  that  steadiness  almost 
critically,  just  as  she  considered  the  circumstance 
that  this  was  the  first  occasion  on  which  she  used  his 
name;  and  to  think  that  she  must  use  it  to  ask  him  — 
to  ask  him!  —  to  refute  a  grotesque  and  foolish  accu- 
sation. Yet  ask  him  she  must,  which  meant  that  the 
accusation  had  ceased  of  a  sudden  to  seem  to  her 
grotesque  and  foolish.  She  was  as  one  who  looked  on 
at  herself  and  at  her  fellow  actors  in  this  scene.  It 
was  as  if  her  spirit  were  disembodied,  to  become  a 
cold  and  critical  spectator. 

'Harry,  you  will  tell  me  that  he  lies.  That  is  all 
that  you  need  tell  me.' 


180  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Were  I  the  man  to  have  done  what  he  says  I  have 
done,  then  I  should  be  a  liar,  too,  and  I  should  not 
scruple  to  answer  you  as  you  desire,'  he  said.  His 
voice  was  husky  and  unsteady. 

She  did  not  understand.  There  was  a  confusing 
paradox  in  his  words.  She  weighed  them  in  her  mind, 
repeated  them  to  herself,  and  found  them  meaning- 
less.  She  said  so. 

'But  you  mean  that  it  is  untrue?'  she  pleaded. 

'Untrue,  as  there  is  a  God  above  me,'  he  answered, 
'yet  every  word  of  it  is  true.' 

She  drew  away  from  him.  In  the  half-benumbed 
condition  of  her  mind  she  could  set  but  one  inter- 
pretation upon  his  stricken  condition,  his  husky, 
vibrant  voice;  she  saw  nothing  but  subterfuge  and 
quibble  in  his  words. 

'True?'  she  echoed.   'You  gamed  for  me?' 

He  did  not  answer.  He  stood  rigid,  with  hands 
clenched  at  his  sides.  The  temptation  to  explain  as- 
sailed him  for  a  moment;  but  he  allowed  it  to  pass  on 
unheeded  and  despised,  as  she  must  despise  it  did  he 
attempt  to  offer  it.  It  were,  he  realised,  but  to  make 
himself  seem  viler  and  more  pitiful.  It  could  not  be 
believed,  could  carry  no  conviction;  rather  must 
every  word  of  such  explanation  as  he  had  to  offer 
seem  the  obvious  pretence  put  forward  by  a  rogue  and 
liar;  every  word  and  act  that  had  passed  between 
them  since  his  coming  must  add  confirmation  to  the 
thing  that  Pauncefort  told  her,  since  fundamentally 
that  thing  was  true  —  the  blackest,  foulest,  untruest 
truth  that  was  ever  uttered. 

She  waited,  then,  in  vain,  waited  until  his  silence 
bore  the  only  answer. 

'O  God,  pity  me!'  she  wailed.   She  stumbled,  and 


IN  THE  ROSE-GARDEN  181 

put  a  hand  to  her  brow.  He  flung  out  a  hand  to  save 
her,  and  that  act  revived  her;  with  fresh  panic  she 
shrank  from  the  touch  of  it  as  though  it  had  been 
red-hot  iron,  and  in  shrinking  she  stiffened  and  re- 
gained a  wonderful  composure. 

Torn,  lacerated,  anguished,  she  stood  before  these 
beasts  who  had  fought  for  her  and  mangled  her  very 
soul  in  the  strife,  and  she  determined  in  her  pride  to 
let  them  see  nothing  of  her  hurt. 

She  turned  very  quietly,  and  with  figure  erect, 
though  her  head  drooped  a  little,  she  passed  down  the 
narrow  alley  of  that  court. 

'Damaris!'  cried  Pauncefort  as  she  approached 
him,  his  flaming  eyes  devouring  her.  But  before  her 
glance  he  quailed  and  fell  back.  There  was  something 
awful  and  forbidding  there  that  he  dared  not  brave. 

She  continued  on  her  way  unhindered  further.  But 
as  she  was  passing  underneath  the  archway  in  the 
hedge  she  heard  her  name  again. 

'Damaris!   Damaris!' 

It  was  the  cry  of  one  in  mortal  agony.  It  was  a 
voice  that  had  grown  more  dear  to  her  than  any 
human  voice,  than  the  sum  of  all  other  human  voices. 
She  might  account  him  vile  and  faithless;  but  his  call 
could  still,  it  seemed,  compel  her.  For  she  paused  and 
turned  her  head  —  turned  to  him  that  lovely,  stricken 
face,  those  deep  brown  eyes  in  which  so  lately  he  had 
seen  his  own  reflection,  those  pale  trembling  lips  that 
so  lately  he  had  kissed.  Thus,  her  head  turned,  she 
waited,  hoping  madly  even  now  against  all  reasonable 
hope. 

'One  thing,  at  least,  believe,  O  Damaris!'  he  cried. 
'One  thing  I  swear  —  and  it  is  a  thing  that  should 
efface  all  else.    Until  this  hour  I  did  net  know  that 


1 82  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

you  were  Damans  Hollinstone.  That  much  I  do 
swear  by  the  God  above  us,  who  is  my  witness.' 

If  that  were  so,  then  indeed  did  it  efface  all  else,  as 
he  had  said.  If  that  were  so,  then  all  else  could  mat- 
ter nothing.  She  tried  to  think,  to  weigh  his  words. 
And  then,  to  help  to  falsify  her  scales,  came  a  little 
wicked,  scornful  laugh  from  my  Lord  Pauncefort. 

'Of  course,'  scoffed  his  lordship,  'the  gentleman 
must  be  believed.  Has  he  not  deserved  to  be?  Is  he 
not  the  very  soul  of  honour?' 

That  gave  her  the  right  perspective,  she  opined; 
and  listlessly  she  continued  on  her  way,  and  so  out  of 
their  sight. 

Like  a  sleep-walker  she  made  her  way  to  the  house 
and  ascended  the  broad  steps.  Straight  and  evenly 
she  held  upon  her  course,  up  the  great  staircase,  to 
her  own  chamber.  By  the  narrow  white  bed  she  sank 
down  upon  her  knees.  Then  pent-up  nature  had  its 
way  at  last  and,  kneeling  there,  she  swooned  away. 
And  thus,  perhaps,  she  saved  her  reason. 

Outside,  in  the  rose-garden,  my  Lord  Pauncefort 
and  Captain  Gaynor  eyed  each  other  in  silence  for  a 
moment  after  Damaris  had  vanished.  The  Captain 
listened  to  her  footsteps  intently  until  they  had  faded 
in  the  distance.  Then,  as  if  some  arresting  influence 
were  removed,  as  if  a  spell  were  shattered,  he  shook 
himself  and  his  sword  flashed  lividly  from  its  scab- 
bard. 

'Now,  you  —  you  lackey!'  he  snarled.  'It  is  my 
turn.'  And  on  the  words  he  sprang,  trampling  a  bed 
of  roses  in  his  haste  to  come  upon  his  enemy. 

Pauncefort  would  have  avoided  this.  He  was  no 
coward,  but  to  fight  a  man  in  the  Captain's  white- 
heat  of  rage  were  utter  suicide.  He  saw  his  death  in 


IN  THE  ROSE-GARDEN  183 

the  blazing  eyes  that  looked  out  of  that  livid,  dis- 
torted countenance. 

He  flung  up  a  hand  to  arrest  the  other's  attention. 
'This  is  neither  time  nor  place,'  he  cried,  'and  the 
man  that  prevails  will  be  indicted  for  murder.' 

The  Captain  laughed. 

'Send  your  friends  to  wait  upon  me,'  his  lordship 
insisted,  'and  you  shall  have  what  satisfaction  you 
desire.' 

But  as  well  might  he,  like  Canute,  have  attempted 
to  arrest  the  tide. 

'Draw,  damn  you,'  was  his  answer.  'Draw  or  I 
spit  you  as  you  stand.' 

As  my  lord  still  hesitated,  that  long,  thin  blade 
flashed  up  and  its  point  came  level  with  his  heart. 
The  sweat  broke  out  cold  upon  his  brow.  He  drew 
perforce,  and  threw  himself  on  guard. 

The  Captain  pressed  him  wildly,  a  maniac,  panting, 
sobbing,  jeering  as  he  fought.  He  was  terrific,  and 
terror  of  him  went  deep  into  his  lordship's  soul.  He 
was  vengeance  incarnate,  a  bloodhound  upon  its 
prey;  and  in  imagination  already  my  lord  felt  that 
bright,  cruel  steel  tearing  at  his  throat. 

'What  place  or  season  could  be  better?'  the  Cap- 
tain mocked  him,  as  he  drove  his  lordship  back  into 
a  rose-bed,  across  it,  and  plump  into  another,  that 
dancing  point  hovering  ever  with  its  deadly  menace 
along  the  line  of  his  lordship's  Adam's  apple.  'You 
are  fastidious  indeed,  if  my  lady's  rose-garden  will 
not  suit  you  for  a  death-bed,  a  dunghill  would  better 
meet  your  merits.' 

His  lordship  crashed  backwards  through  a  rose- 
bush, stumbled,  recovered  and  fought  on  in  desperate 
defence.   He  had  caught  a  sound  of  running  feet  to 


i84  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

hearten  him.  The  Captain  heard  them  too,  a  mo- 
ment later. 

'You  hear  them  running/  he  mocked  the  other. 
'So  run  your  sands.  Your  wages  are  due,  my  lord, 
and  shall  be  paid  you  -y-  thus!'  He  beat  aside  the 
other's  impotent  blade,  and  his  own  point  leapt  out 
to  end  the  matter.  But  as  it  leapt,  his  lordship  leapt 
too,  back  and  aside,  and  then  fled  in  utter  panic. 

'O  coward!'  roared  the  Captain.  'Coward  that 
cannot  even  face  his  death.  Take  it,  then,  from  be- 
hind.' And  he  sprang  to  follow.  His  foot  caught  and 
tangled  in  the  root  of  a  brier.  He  plunged  forward, 
and  fell  upon  his  face.  As  he  struggled  to  rise,  a  hand 
came  to  help  him,  a  hand  which  retained  its  hold  upon 
his  arm  after  assisting  him  to  his  feet. 

As  through  a  mist  he  saw  the  weather-beaten  face 
of  one  of  the  gardeners;  another  stood  on  his  other 
side.  He  strove  to  throw  off  the  grip  that  held  him. 
But  the  second  man  came  to  the  assistance  of  the 
first.  Between  them  they  overpowered  him  and  de- 
prived him  of  his  sword,  muttering  apologies  the 
while  for  the  force  they  were  employing. 

My  Lord  Pauncefort,  limp  and  breathless,  leaned 
against  a  hedge,  and  looked  on,  until  one  of  the 
gardeners  respectfully  advised  him  to  be  gone.  Act- 
ing upon  that  excellent  advice,  he  sheathed  his  sword 
and  withdrew,  mopping  his  livid  brow. 

'You  may  go  now,'  Gaynor  called  after  him, '  but  do 
not  think  to  escape.   It  is  but  a  postponement.' 

Lord  Pauncefort,  something  recovered  by  now, 
turned  to  his  antagonist. 

'In  a  regular  manner  I  will  meet  you  when  you 
will,' he  panted.  'I  shall  expect  you.'  And  upon  that 
he  took  his  departure. 


CHAPTER  XIV 
THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN 

THAT  afternoon  Captain  Gaynor,  once  more 
completely  master  of  himself,  and  showing  no 
least  outward  sign  of  the  storm  through  which  his 
spirit  had  so  lately  passed,  of  the  rage  that  for  a  while 
had  so  entirely  governed  him,  took  his  leave  of  Lady 
Kynaston,  informing  her  that  business  of  some  ur- 
gency compelled  him  to  depart  at  once  without  await- 
ing Sir  John's  return. 

Her  ladyship  made  no  allusion  to  the  fracas  in  the 
rose-garden,  of  which  her  servants  had  brought  her 
word;  but  she  did  not  doubt  that  his  departure  was 
concerned  with  it,  and  that  this  urgent  business  which 
he  pleaded  was  the  continuation  of  that  quarrel. 
Upon  what  grounds  it  had  arisen  she  had  formed  the 
obvious  opinion,  but  dared  not  ask  its  confirmation. 
The  Captain's  manner  was  respectfully  forbidding. 
She  did  not  go  so  far  as  to  connect  with  it  the  fact  that 
both  her  daughter  and  her  niece  had  kept  their  re- 
spective chambers  since  the  event. 

Unquestioned,  then,  he  was  permitted  to  go  his 
ways.  He  did  not  see  Damaris  again,  which  caused 
him  no  surprise.  To  the  circumstance  that  he  did  not 
see  Evelyn  again  he  gave  no  thought,  perturbed  as  he 
was. 

He  put  up  at  an  obscure  inn  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Charing  Cross,  and  there  he  dismissed  Fisher. 
That  done  he  cast  about  him  for  a  friend  who  would 
wait  upon  Lord  Pauncefort  on  his  behalf,  and  he  be- 


1 86  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

thought  him  of  Sir  Richard  Templeton,  whose  resi- 
dence in  St.  James's  Street  was  within  a  stone's- 
throw  of  Pauncefort  House.  It  was  possible  that  the 
baronet  had  already  departed  for  Devonshire.  But  he 
would  ascertain. 

He  went,  then,  to  make  the  discovery  that  in  Saint 
James's  Street  he  was  already  expected  —  not,  in- 
deed, by  Sir  Richard,  who  had,  in  fact,  departed  al- 
ready, but  by  the  tipstaves  set  to  watch  for  him  by 
Lord  Pauncefort,  who  counted  upon  a  visit  to  him- 
self. As  the  Captain  was  turning  out  of  Pall  Mall 
he  was  suddenly  confronted  by  a  couple  of  burly, 
coarsely  garbed  fellows,  the  foremost  of  whom  desired 
a  word  with  him. 

'With  me?'  he  said,  stiffening  haughtily,  yet  more 
than  guessing  their  business. 

'I  have  a  warrant  for  you  here,'  said  the  taller  of 
the  twain  —  the  very  man  who  had  been  the  leader 
of  that  raid  at  The  World's  End.  He  produced  his 
parchment,  and  thrust  it  under  the  Captain's  very 
nose. 

'I  think  ye'll  be  the  person  mentioned  there  — 
Captain  Jenkyn.' 

What,  Captain  Gaynor  asked  himself,  could  it 
avail  him  to  deny?  They  held  him,  and  they  would 
not  be  like  to  let  him  go  upon  a  denial,  however  em- 
phatic. Moreover,  it  came  to  him  suddenly  that  he 
did  not  want  to  go.  The  Cause  he  served  was  ruined 
for  the  time  being,  set  back  for  many  a  year,  perhaps, 
if  not  for  ever.  The  woman  he  had  come  to  love  — 
he,  who  hitherto  had  held  himself  aloof  from  all 
women,  being  wholly  wedded  to  his  master's  service 
—  deemed  him  base  and  unworthy,  and  must  so  deem 
him.  What,  then,  remained  in  life?  —  the  avenging  of 


THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN  187 

their  betrayal  upon  that  traitor  Pauncefort;  and  that, 
he  knew,  another  hand  than  his  would  execute  ere 
long. 

This  arrest  seemed  to  him  in  that  despondent  hour 
to  resolve  his  difficulties,  to  remove  from  him  a  heavy- 
burden.  He  had  sickened  at  the  very  thought  of  re- 
turning to  Rome  with  the  dismal  report  of  his  failure; 
he  had  sickened  further  at  the  thought  of  living  on,  a 
dastard  in  the  eyes  of  the  only  woman  whose  esteem 
he  courted. 

He  considered  his  captors,  and  his  glance  was  al- 
most friendly.  Were  they  not  good  friends  of  his,  the 
best  he  had  ever  known,  friends  who  came  to  him  in 
the  hour  of  his  most  urgent  need? 

"Tis  so,'  he  said  quite  simply.  'I  am  the  man  you 
seek.   I  am  Captain  Jenkyn.' 

The  trial  of  Captain  Jenkyn  —  which,  under  in- 
structions from  the  Secretary  of  State  was  hurried 
forward,  so  that  it  took  place  within  three  days  of  his 
arrest  —  attracted  little  notice  at  the  time. 

As  in  the  case  of  all  matters  relating  to  Jacobite 
plottings,  it  was  the  desire  of  the  Government  that  it 
should  be  disposed  of  as  quietly  and  speedily  as  pos- 
sible. Therefore  the  nev/s  of  his  capture  was  not 
allowed  to  transpire  until  his  trial  was  over,  and  he 
himself  under  sentence  of  death. 

The  prisoner's  admission  that  he  was  Captain 
Jenkyn  had  saved  the  court  both  time  and  trouble, 
for  all  that  it  was  exercised  not  a  little  by  this  sudden 
supineness  in  one  whom  they  had  every  reason  to  be- 
lieve bold  and  resolute.  They  accounted  for  it  upon 
the  assumption  that,  being  caught,  his  resourceful- 
ness and  courage  had  deserted  him,  and  that  perhaps 


1 88  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

he  had  hoped  by  pleading  guilty  to  the  charges  pre- 
ferred to  earn  the  clemency  of  his  judges.  Lord  Cart- 
eret was  relieved  to  learn  that  the  fellow  had,  himself, 
admitted  his  identity,  since  that  disposed  of  the 
necessity  of  unmasking  *so  very  valuable  a  Govern- 
ment spy  as  Pauncefort.  Under  the  circumstances 
sufficient  evidence  was  afforded  by  the  three  tip- 
staves who  had  arrested  him,  and  Sir  Henry  Tresh's 
lady,  who  came  forward  to  identify  him  with  the  man 
who  had  invaded  her  chamber  at  The  World's  End 
on  that  evening  when  the  plotters  were  taken  there. 

The  affair  was  a  very  brief  one,  summarily  dealt 
with,  as  you  may  see  by  consulting  the  'State Trials,' 
where  you  will  find  all  the  details  of  it  if  you  have  a 
mind  for  them.  The  prisoner  himself  seemed  intent 
upon  assisting  the  court  at  every  turn,  readily  ad- 
mitting, one  after  another,  the  charges  brought 
against  him  —  whether  concerned  with  previous 
visits  to  England  or  with  the  present  one  —  charges 
which  had  long  been  drawn  up  in  preparation  for  and 
awaiting  such  a  day  as  this  —  a  preparation  which 
explains  the  Government's  ability  to  expedite  the 
affair. 

On  one  point  only  was  the  prisoner  stubborn. 
Whilst  ready  to  admit  that  he  was  Captain  Jenkyn, 
he  would  not  admit  that  his  real  name  was  Captain 
Gaynor.  He  did  not  deny  it;  but  he  refused  to  admit 
it.  They  had  arrested  him,  he  said,  as  Captain 
Jenkyn,  and  as  Captain  Jenkyn  he  was  indicted.  Let 
that  suffice  them. 

This  apparently  curious  attitude  was  based  upon 
the  reflection  that  to  admit  his  real  identity  might  be 
to  assist  the  Government  in  proceedings  against  many 
of  those  who  were  known  to  have  been  the  associates 


THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN  189 

of  Captain  Gaynor  and  against  whom  there  was  no 
independent  evidence  of  Jacobitism.  He  did  not 
know  to  what  extent  the  absence  of  positive  know- 
ledge would  hamper  the  Government;  but,  in  any 
event,  he  was  resolved  to  make  no  admissions  that 
might  assist  it. 

The  court  did  not  press,  obedient  always  to  its  in- 
structions. It  could  have  done  so,  obviously.  It  could 
easily  have  produced  witnesses  to  swear  that  he  was 
Captain  Gaynor;  it  could  have  fetched  Sir  John 
Kynaston  and  his  family  from  Chertsey;  it  might 
even  have  thrust  the  discomfited  Second  Secretary 
Templeton  into  the  humiliating  position  of  saying  by 
what  name  he  had  known  this  man  who  had  so  im- 
posed upon  him.  But  the  Government  desired,  above 
all,  that  the  matter  should  be  swiftly  and  quietly  de- 
termined, with  as  few  witnesses  and  as  little  stir  as 
might  be  necessary  to  procure  the  conviction  and  sen- 
tence of  so  very  desperate  and  dangerous  a  rebel. 

So  the  court  waived  this  minor  point,  and  as  Cap- 
tain Jenkyn  our  Jacobite  was  duly  sentenced  to  be 
hanged  at  Tyburn  like  any  common  cutpurse. 

There  was  calculation  even  in  this,  and  wise  calcu- 
lation. He  was  to  die  obscurely,  at  the  hands  of  the 
common  hangman;  this,  too,  it  was  deemed  must 
prove  a  deterrent  —  that  is  to  say,  not  merely  the 
death,  but  the  inglorious  manner  of  it. 

There  were  few  people  in  court  when  the  sentence 
was  passed,  and  no  single  face  did  Captain  Gaynor 
see  with  which  he  was  acquainted.  Pauncefort,  he 
imagined,  might  have  looked  in  to  gloat  over  his 
plight.  But  Pauncefort  wisely  had  kept  away. 
Templeton,  he  had  fancied,  might  have  desired  to 
come  there  and  satisfy  himself  of  a  thing  that  to  him 


190  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

must  seem  incredible.  He  marvelled  at  the  Second 
Secretary's  absence;  but  then  he  did  not  know  that 
the  Second  Secretary  found  the  ridicule  which  he  had 
sought  to  heap  upon  Lord  Carteret  concerning  Cap- 
tain Gaynor  all  recoiling  upon  himself;  that  he  had 
taken  to  his  bed,  announcing  himself  assailed  by  gout. 
(When  Templeton  came  to  hear  that  sentence  had 
been  passed  upon  the  prisoner,  he  immediately  re- 
signed his  office,  as  the  only  possible  step  remaining 
to  his  tattered  dignity.) 

Sir  John  Kynaston,  the  Captain  had  thought, 
would  surely  have  come.  For  he  did  not  know  that 
Sir  John,  like  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  was  in  igno- 
rance of  the  fact  that  the  trial  was  taking  place,  con- 
ceiving that  a  trial  upon  charges  so  complex  and  dif- 
ficult to  establish  must  be  long  in  preparing. 

Captain  Gaynor  heard  his  sentence  entirely  un- 
moved. He  had  expected  nothing  else.  He  was  no 
trivial  foolish  plotter,  but  an  accredited  agent,  the 
disturber  —  as  the  indictment  had  it  —  of  the  peace 
of  the  realm,  a  man  who  aimed  at  the  overthrow  of 
the  dynasty  and,  if  necessary,  at  the  death  of  the 
reigning  sovereign,  a  man  who  was  looked  upon  as  a 
spy  of  the  Pretender's,  and  for  whom  there  could  be 
no  fate  but  the  spy's. 

Nor  was  his  immobility  merely  external,  or  born  of 
pride  as  it  is  with  so  many  who  show  themselves  out- 
wardly undaunted  at  the  prospect  of  an  early  death. 
His  pulses  remained  calm,  his  heart  tranquil.  It  was 
no  more  than  he  desired.  Standing  in  the  face  of 
death  he  was  enabled  to  do  a  thing  he  could  not  have 
done  with  life  before  him  —  a  thing  to  be  done  at  all 
costs,  even  at  the  cost  of  life  itself,  as  he  was  doing  it. 

His  trial  took  place  on  a  Monday  —  the  last  Mon- 


THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN  191 

day  in  June  —  and  he  was  informed  that  same  eve- 
ning that  he  was  accorded  three  days  in  which  to  set 
his  affairs  in  order  and  make  his  soul.  On  the  follow- 
ing Thursday  he  was  to  hang. 

The  time  was  more  than  he  desired;  certainly  more 
than  he  required  for  what  remained  him  to  do.  Rela- 
tives, who  mattered,  he  had  none.  With  his  friends 
he  did  not  dare  to  communicate  for  fear  of  implicating 
them.  To  his  master  in  Rome  it  would  have  pleas- 
ured him  to  send  a  dying  message  of  devotion.  But 
he  knew  that  no  such  message  would  be  allowed  to 
reach  its  destination.  There  remained,  then,  but  the 
letter  to  Damaris  to  indite.  When  that  was  done,  he 
would  be  done  with  all  matters  of  this  world,  and  that 
was  the  thing  v/hich  the  near  approach  of  death  en- 
abled him  to  do,  the  thing  he  could  not  have  done  had 
the  way  of  life  been  open  still  before  him. 

But  it  was  not  until  the  evening  of  Wednesday  that 
he  asked  for  pen,  ink,  and  paper.  He  desired  to  make 
that  communion  with  her  almost  the  very  latest  act 
of  his  swiftly  ebbing  life,  setting  at  last  to  paper  the 
thoughts  that  since  his  trial  had  almost  entirely  occu- 
pied his  mind. 

He  headed  his  epistle:  'From  my  cell  in  Newgate, 
on  the  eve  of  my  death.' 

That  done  he  was  fretted  awhile,  as  he  sat  pen  in 
hand,  to  know  how  to  address  her.  He  solved  the 
riddle,  at  last,  by  confining  himself  simply  to  her 
name. 

Damans  [he  wrote],  when  you  read  these  lines  I  shall 
have  gone  where  neither  execration  nor  compassion  can 
pursue  me,  and  for  that  reason  if  for  no  other  I  have  the 
consolation  in  these  my  last  hours  of  hoping  that  you  will 
read  what  assuredly  you  would  not  read  were  I  still  living 


1 92  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

and  at  large.  For  that  reason  alone  I  think  that  I  am  glad 
to  die,  since  death  gives  me  certain  privileges  and  rights 
that  are  denied  the  living.  Further  still,  since  I  stand  upon 
the  dread  threshold,  since  the  gates  of  doom  are  opening  to 
admit  me,  and  I  am  on  the  eve  of  facing  my  Eternal  Judge, 
I  have  a  claim  to  be  believed  when  I  write  of  things  that 
might  seem  to  you  incredible  did  I  still  walk  the  great  high- 
way of  life.  For  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  I  should  in 
such  an  hour  and  for  no  possible  temporal  profit  sully 
myself  with  falsehood  in  matters  whereupon  I  might  with- 
out temporal  loss  continue  silent  to  the  end.  When  you 
consider,  then,  how  little  falsehood  can  avail  me  now, 
when  you  consider  how  repellent  it  is  even  to  the  most 
abandoned  to  deal  in  falsehood  with  the  cold  eye  of  death 
upon  him,  the  icy  scythe  severing  him  already  from  all 
earthly  hopes,  desires  and  aspirations,  I  die  content  in  the 
knowledge  that  what  I  am  writing  here  you  must  believe, 
and  believing  will  come  to  give  me  dead  that  treasure  of 
your  loving  thought  which  living  I  could  never  have 
claimed  again. 

All  that  my  Lord  Pauncefort  told  you  was  true,  yet  no 
less  true  was  my  assurance,  when  you  asked  me  to  deny 
his  story  —  that  only  were  I  the  dastard  he  represented 
me  could  I  have  saved  myself  by  the  falsehood  of  such 
denial.  You  did  not  understand.  You  do  not  yet.  For  in 
these  words,  until  all  is  known,  must  seem  to  dwell  nothing 
but  confusion.  Yet  in  them  dwells  the  whole  and  absolute 
truth.  For  never,  O  Damaris,  was  truth  more  untruly  told 
than  by  Lord  Pauncefort  on  that  evil  day. 

It  is  true,  then,  that  I  played  with  him  that  ill-considered 
game.  It  was  on  a  night  when  he  had  lost  to  me  some  eight 
thousand  guineas,  and  he  was  bewailing  that  he  stood  upon 
the  brink  of  utter  ruin  and  in  peril  of  a  debtor's  gaol.  In 
that  ill-omened  hour,  I  bethought  me  that  he  had  some- 
thing yet  to  stake  —  his  right  to  wed  you  —  for  I  believed 
him  still  betrothed  to  you  —  and  it  is  true  that  when  I 
made  him  that  proposal  I  had  no  thought  of  winning  your 


THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN  193 

own  self,  and  that  your  fortune  was  the  real  stake  I  saw 
upon  the  board.  But  it  is  not  true  that  by  this  —  assuming 
that  I  succeeded  with  you  did  I  win  that  game  with  him  — 
I  was  an  adventurer  seeking  your  fortune  for  myself.  My 
only  thought  was  to  devote  that  fortune  to  the  service  of 
my  master,  who  is  in  such  dire  straits  for  means  to  his 
high  ends.  It  was  for  him  that  I  played  that  game,  as  my 
Lord  Pauncefort  well  knows.  That  I  should  sacrifice  you  to 
a  cause  to  which  already  I  had  sacrificed  myself,  in  which 
I  was  imperilling  the  life  that  at  last  I  am  about  to  lose,  did 
not  then  —  nor  does  it  yet  —  seem  so  heinous  and  unfor- 
givable a  thing. 

His  lordship  won  the  cut.  I  paid  him  his  guineas,  and 
there  the  matter  ended,  or  would  have  ended  but  for  the 
deception  which  for  reasons  that  I  cannot  fathom  you 
thought  it  well,  with  your  cousin,  to  play  upon  me.  For 
here  we  touch  upon  a  truth  which  should  efface  all  other 
things  in  this  mistaken  enterprise,  a  truth  which  already  I 
have  uttered.  I  did  not  know,  nor  ever  dreamt,  that  you 
were  other  than  you  represented  yourself  to  be.  I  did  not 
know,  nor  ever  dreamt,  that  you  were  Damaris  Hollinstone 
until  you  told  me  so  in  the  garden  a  moment  before  his 
lordship  came  upon  us.  I  looked  upon  your  cousin  as  the 
heiress  —  as,  I  suppose,  you  intended  that  I  should  — 
and  from  the  hour  in  which  I  met  you  I  was  glad  that  it 
was  so,  that  it  was  not  you  —  you,  Damaris  —  whom  I 
was  pledged  by  the  fortune  of  the  cards  to  abstain  from 
wooing.  I  was  glad  in  that  hour  to  think  that  I  had  not 
won  a  game,  whose  stakes  my  honour  must  have  compelled 
me  to  take  up  —  for  my  honour  is  so  bound  up  with  the 
service  of  my  king  and  master  that  I  must  account 
dishonourable  all  measures  that  do  not  aim  at  its  advance- 
ment. 

There,  my  beloved,  you  have  all  the  truth,  and,  it  is 
my  hope  as  I  write  —  nay,  it  is  my  certainty  —  that  the 
knowledge  will  help  to  comfort  you.  You  need  not  take 
shame  in  any  thought  that  you  were   the  mere  prey  of 


i94  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

an  unscrupulous  fortune-hunter,  that  you  gave  the  pure 
and  holy  treasure  of  your  love  to  an  adventurer,  a  mer- 
cenary and  a  scoundrel. 

The  thought  that  you  will  come  to  know  and  to  under- 
stand enheartens  me  and  irradiates  a  season  that  must 
otherwise  be  very  dark  indeed.  It  warms  and  gladdens  me 
in  this  hour,  and  I  shall  go  blithely  to  my  end,  knowing 
that  it  is  the  modest  price  I  pay  for  the  sublime  good  of 
sending  you  this  undoubtable  assurance. 

To-morrow,  for  as  long  as  thought  can  hold  a  place  in 
this  poor  head,  that  thought  will  be  of  you.  What  is  to 
follow  after  I  do  not  know,  nor  do  I  fear.  But  if  memory  of 
life  is  still  to  be  retained  in  the  great  beyond,  one  memory 
will  linger  to  make  my  heaven  —  the  memory  of  you,  the 
consciousness  that,  knowing  all,  you  will  hold  the  memory 
of  me  in  tenderness  until  we  meet  again,  if  there  be  meet- 
ings yonder. 

And  so,  my  sweet  lady,  my  dearest  love,  good-night! 

It  was  late  when  the  letter  was  concluded.  He 
folded  the  sheets,  tied  them  together,  sealed  them  and 
placed  them  in  his  breast-pocket.  Then  he  lay  down, 
and  soon  was  very  peacefully  asleep. 

Before  the  hangman's  minions  came  to  seek  him  in 
the  morning,  he  had  given  the  letter  into  the  hands  of 
a  friendly  gaoler,  together  with  his  purse,  containing 
some  twenty  guineas  in  recompense  for  the  service  the 
fellow  had  promised  to  do  him. 

Soon  after  eight  the  ordinary  was  introduced.  He 
was  a  short,  stoutish  man  with  mild  eyes  but  a  heavy 
jowl,  and  the  stubble  of  beard  —  a  week's  growth  at 
least  —  that  blackened  his  face  lent  him  an  almost 
ferocious  aspect.  He  wore  a  soiled  surplice;  there  was 
a  peck  of  snuff  hanging  about  his  bands  and  in  the 
stubble  of  his  upper  lip. 


THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN  195 

Captain  Gaynor  gave  him  a  very  courteous  if  some- 
what distant  welcome,  presuming  upon  which  the 
parson  straightway  fell  to  talking  of  the  Captain's 
soul.    In  this  the  Captain  cut  him  short. 

'By  your  leave,  good  sir,'  said  he,  'I  am  of  opinion, 
look  you,  that  I  know  more  of  my  own  soul  than  any 
man  can  tell  me.  So  leave  me,  I  entreat  you,  to 
search  it  for  myself.  Meanwhile  I  can  minister  to 
your  body.  You'll  find  some  passable  Hollands  in 
that  jar,  and  there  is  a  bottle  of  Burgundy  which  the 
gaoler  has  just  procured  me.  Pray  honour  me.'  And 
the  Captain  waved  him  to  the  rude  table  where  stood 
the  vessels  and  a  couple  of  drinking-cans. 

Thereafter  he  was  but  little  troubled  as  he  paced  to 
and  fro  in  his  cell,  awaiting  with  some  impatience 
the  coming  of  those  who  should  take  him  for  his  last 
ride.  They  arrived  at  last,  at  a  little  before  eleven. 
They  conducted  him  to  the  courtyard,  where  the  cart 
was  waiting,  a  company  of  redcoats  drawn  up  about 
it,  and  every  window  of  the  gaol  packed  with  villain- 
ous faces,  their  eyes  greedy  of  as  much  of  the  coming 
spectacle  as  it  might  be  theirs  to  witness. 

He  leapt  lightly  into  the  cart,  and  the  ordinary, 
somewhat  flushed  with  Burgundy,  clambered  after 
him.  Gladly  would  he  have  dispensed  with  the  fel- 
low's company;  but  the  rules  did  not  permit  it.  The 
parson  must  be  with  him  to  the  end  —  must,  indeed,  in- 
tone the  psalm  that  would  be  sung  at  the  turning-off. 
So  perforce  he  submitted  with  the  best  grace  possible. 

The  driver  stood  up  and  turned  to  the  prisoner. 
He  held  a  length  of  whipcord  in  his  hand,  and  with 
this  he  pinioned  the  doomed  man's  wrists  behind  his 
back.  Then  he  took  up  a  length  of  hempen  rope  with 
a  running  noose  in  it,  and  defdy  flicked  this  noose 


196  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

over  the  Captain's  head,  leaving  the  end  of  the  rope 
to  hang  behind  him.  That  done  —  and  with  the  ut- 
most nonchalance,  the  ruffian  puffing  meantime,  a 
short  and  very  foul  pipe  —  the  gates  were  opened. 
The  Sheriff's  Deputy,'-  a  splendid  figure  in  a  gold- 
laced,  scarlet  coat,  gave  the  word  of  command,  and 
the  procession  formed  up  and  started. 

Ahead  went  the  military  in  their  red  coats  and 
mitre-shaped  hats,  opening  a  way  with  their  musket- 
butts  through  the  mob  that  had  collected  about  the 
prison  gates.  Out  into  that  seething,  human  ocean 
rolled  the  cart.  With  dispassionate,  almost  pitiful 
eyes  the  Captain  looked  upon  that  surface  of  up- 
turned faces.  One  bestial  fellow  was  singing  an  ob- 
scene song  allusive  to  the  Captain's  grim  condition. 
The  Captain's  eyes  fell  upon  him  in  a  look  so  pro- 
foundly compassionate  that  the  rascal  broke  off  short 
in  the  middle  of  his  ditty,  and  after  a  moment's  silence 
loosed  a  volley  of  lewd  oaths  at  him. 

Looking,  the  Captain  had  wondered  in  what  cir- 
cumstances death  would  come  to  find  such  a  man, 
and  he  had  seen  —  with  that  extraordinary  vision 
which  is  vouchsafed  to  men  who  stand  upon  the 
Threshold  —  an  image  dreadful  beyond  words,  an 
image  that  had  informed  that  profound  compassion  of 
his  glance. 

They  pushed  on.  Crowds  everywhere  along  the 
cart's  way;  every  window  held  a  little  mob,  assembled 
there  to  see  a  man  pass  to  his  death.  To  Harry  Gay- 
nor,  though  ever  dispassionate  now  and  beyond  re- 
sentment of  such  trifles,  there  seemed  something  foul 
and  obscene  in  this  curiosity. 

He  turned  his  gaze  from  it  at  last  and  met  the  mild 
eyes  of  the  ordinary.  They  were  full  of  tears.  This  he 


THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN  197 

deemed  very  odd.  He  was  almost  touched  by  it,  for- 
getting entirely  the  amount  of  Burgundy  which  the 
chaplain  had  consumed  and  in  which  his  heart  had 
been  softened  so  that  the  death  of  a  stray  dog  would 
have  rendered  him  maudlin. 

'Sir,'  he  said  very  gently,  'I  beg  that  ye '11  not  weep 
for  me  who  do  not  weep  for  myself.' 

'That  is  the  very  reason  of  my  weeping,'  the  parson 
answered  him,  and  a  tear  detached  itself  at  last,  ran 
down  his  ample  cheek  and  joined  the  snuff  on  his 
neckband,  all  of  which  the  Captain  observed  with 
extraordinary  interest. 

'This  is  very  odd,'  he  said.  'Do  you,  then,  not  be- 
lieve in  what  you  teach?  Do  you  not  believe  in  a 
joyous  and  glorious  hereafter?' 

The  ordinary  stared  at  him,  and  in  his  surprise  for- 
got his  weeping. 

'Or  is  it  that  in  your  own  experience  this  world  has 
proved  it  so  extraordinarily  delectable  a  place  that 
you  will  not  barter  it  for  any  other?' 

'Nay,  nay,  sir.  But  you,  so  young — '  the  fellow 
mumbled  inconclusively. 

'Am  I  not  fortunate  therein,  since  I  shall  be  spared 
the  infirmities  of  age?' 

'But  to  be  cut  off  in  mid-life,  thus!  It  is  so  mon- 
strous pitiful.  Oh,  sir,'  he  implored,  'turn  your 
thoughts,  I  beg,  to  other  things.' 

'They  are  so  turned,'  the  Captain  answered  quietly. 
'  'Tis  yours,  sir,  that  seem  to  be  earth-bound,  else  why 
this  grief  in  which  I  cannot  share?  Sir,  I  do  think  you 
lay  too  much  store  by  this  little  moment  we  call  life.' 
And  lo!  it  was  the  doomed  man  who  set  himself  to 
offer  spiritual  comfort  to  the  parson.  'Since  go  we 
must  in  the  end,  what  shall  it  signify  that  we  go  to- 


198  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

day  or  tarry  until  to-morrow?  Shall  we  bewail  a  day? 
Let  me  tell  you  a  story  I  heard  once  in  the  East.' 

'God  forbid!'  ejaculated  the  ordinary.  'In  such  an 
hour!'  he  cried,  all  scandalised.  'Would  you  still 
dwell  upon  your  past  when  your  thoughts  should  be 
all  of  the  future?' 

The  Captain  smiled  a  little,  and  said  no  more.  Still 
overlooking  the  Burgundy,  he  accounted  this  fellow 
unfit  for  the  ordeal  of  bearing  solace  to  the  doomed. 
The  task,  it  was  evident,  confused  him.  There  fell  a 
silence  between  them.  The  cart,  at  a  snail's  pace,  was 
crawling  up  Holborn  Hill,  and  everywhere  surged  the 
same  brutal,  unfeeling  crowd,  staring,  shouting,  jest- 
ing, jeering. 

Do  not  suppose  that  in  this  was  any  political  ran- 
cour. Few,  indeed,  had  any  notion  of  the  offence  for 
which  the  Captain  was  to  suffer.  He  was  just  a  man 
going  to  be  hanged,  and  a  man  going  to  be  hanged  was 
ever  an  interesting  and  often  a  somewhat  amusing 
spectacle,  always  sufficient  to  justify  a  holiday. 

The  ordinary,  watching  his  face,  saw  its  almost 
contemptuous  wonder,  and  misinterpreted  it. 

'  I  marvel  vastly,  sir,'  he  said, '  that  you  did  not  get 
leave  to  come  in  a  coach.' 

'Could  I  have  done  so?'  asked  the  Captain,  with 
but  indifferent  interest. 

'At  your  own  expense,'  the  parson  assured  him. 

'Ah,  well,  'tis  little  matter.' 

But  now  another  thought  occurred  to  the  ordinary. 
He  had  just  observed  that  the  cart  contained  no 
coffin. 

'Have  you  no  friends?'  he  asked  abruptly.  He  was 
obliged  to  shout  almost  that  he  might  be  heard  above 
the  din. 


THE  ROAD  TO  TYBURN  199 

'Friends?   I  hope  so.' 

'Where  are  they,  then?' 

The  Captain's  brows  were  knit  an  instant.  'Would 
you  have  them  here  to  swell  this  dreadful  throng  ? '  he 
asked. 

'Nay,  nay;  but  what  provision  have  they  made?' 

'Provision,  sir?' 

'Aye,  for  your  burial.  Have  they  obtained  leave  to 
bury  you?' 

The  Captain  looked  at  him,  and  smiled.  'The 
thought  has  never  engaged  me.  I  had  imagined,  if  I 
imagined  anything,  that  all  this  was  the  concern  of 
those  that  hang  me.' 

'Then  ye  were  mistaken,  sir.' 

'Does  it  signify  so  much?'  he  asked. 

And  before  the  extraordinary  calm  of  the  sol- 
dier's eyes,  the  ordinary  became  suddenly  aware 
that  he  was  very  far  astray  from  the  path  of  his 
duty,  that  his  thoughts  were  all  for  this  wretched, 
perishable  body  instead  of  for  the  imperishable 
soul. 

He  uttered  some  commonplaces  of  religion,  some  of 
the  minor  currency  that  it  was  his  trade  to  circulate. 
The  soldier  sat  silent,  his  thoughts  far  away,  thankful 
for  this  respite  from  the  man's  more  trivial  chatter  of 
trivial  things.  He  turned  his  head  to  look  forward, 
and  he  heard  the  ordinary's  sudden,  alarmed  'Don't 
look!' 

But  it  did  not  deter  him.  They  were  trundling 
downhill  now,  the  mob  growing  more  and  more  dense, 
the  houses  thinning.  Below  there,  at  the  hill's  foot, 
the  ground  was  black  with  swarming  humanity,  and 
from  the  midst  of  it,  a  dark  triangular  object  reared 
itself —  the  sinister  triple  beam. 


aoo  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Captain  Gaynor  eyed  it  steadily,  then  turned  him 
to  the  ordinary  once  more. 

'We  approach  the  journey's  end,'  he  said,  and 
smiled.  '  It  is  very  well,  for  the  journey  itself  is  none 
so  pleasant.'  * 


CHAPTER  XV 
EXECUTION 

OFTEN  has  it  been  written  that  death  is  life's 
greatest  adventure.  A  paradox  lurks  subtly  in 
the  statement,  which  may  be  the  reason  why  the 
phrase  has  been  esteemed  of  so  many  writers.  But  of 
the  death  Captain  Gaynor  was  to  die  that  day  at 
Tyburn,  the  statement  can  be  made  in  its  literal 
meaning,  and  without  paradox,  that  it  was  the  great- 
est adventure  of  his  life. 

I  am  tempted  at  this  stage  of  my  history  to  inter- 
polate here  a  memoir  from  the  pen  of  the  somewhat 
famous  Doctor  Emanuel  Blizzard.  And  if  upon  due 
consideration  I  have  resolved  not  to  quote  this  docu- 
ment verbatim,  it  is  because,  despite  its  wealth  of  de- 
tail, this  record  is,  after  all,  an  incomplete  one;  for 
there  was,  of  course,  much  concerning  Captain  Gay- 
nor's  history  with  which  the  famous  professor  was 
never  made  acquainted. 

I  write,  however,  with  the  Doctor's  memoir  before 
me  —  indeed,  in  its  absence,  it  would  be  impossible 
for  me  to  fill  in  the  details  of  this  most  extraordinary 
part  of  the  history  I  am  relating.  Much  of  that 
memoir  —  and  my  reader  will  be  quick  to  discern  the 
passages  —  I  transcribe  almost  literally,  save  that 
here  and  there  I  have  been  able  to  elaborate  from 
other  records  at  my  disposal  certain  points  which  to 
the  Doctor  remained  perforce  obscure.  Moreover,  it 
will  better  contribute  to  the  lucidity  of  my  own 
narrative  if  I  marshal  the  events  in  the  order  of  their 


202  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

happening  —  an  order  by  no  means  observed  by  the 
professor. 

As  the  cart  bearing  Captain  Gaynor  came  under 
the  fatal  beam,  the  vociferations  of  the  crowd  abated. 
They  sank  to  a  mere  murmur,  to  a  subdued  hissing 
whisper,  as  of  a  breeze  stirring  through  a  forest,  and 
lastly  into  an  absolute  and  deathly  silence  —  the  im- 
pressive, expectant  hush  of  nature  when  a  storm  im- 
pends. 

The  ordinary  was  reading  aloud  the  Office  for  the 
Dead.  Jack  Ketch,  the  ruffianly  driver  of  the  cart, 
was  on  his  feet.  He  took  the  end  of  the  rope  that 
hung  from  the  noose  round  Captain  Gaynor's  neck, 
swung  it  a  moment  to  gather  the  required  momen- 
tum, then  threw  it  over  the  beam  and  deftly  caught  it 
again  as  it  came  round  and  down.  In  an  instant  he 
had  knotted  it.  In  another  he  had  resumed  his  seat, 
taken  up  his  whip,  and  with  a  sudden  stinging  cut 
sent  his  horse  at  a  half-gallop  down  the  lane  which  the 
military  had  opened  out  for  him  in  the  mob 

Captain  Gaynor  found  himself  alone  now  in  the 
cart.  The  parson  had  vanished,  though  he  could  not 
remember  at  what  precise  stage  of  the  journey  the 
fellow  had  left  him.  All  round  the  vehicle  seethed  the 
crowd,  yelling,  shouting,  cursing,  laughing  once  more, 
but  they  seemed  no  longer  to  heed  him. 

Onward  the  cart  rolled,  with  a  thundering  rumble 
now,  which  increased  in  volume  as  they  went,  and 
the  Captain  observed  with  faint  curiosity  that  those 
who  were  not  quick  to  avoid  it  went  down  under  its 
wheels.  Theirs  were  the  curses  and  foul  oaths  with 
which  his  ears  were  being  deafened. 


EXECUTION  203 

Soon,  however,  these  and  all  other  sounds  began  to 
fade.  They  had  left  the  crowd  behind,  about  that  tri- 
angular structure  which  he  knew  stood  some  way  in 
the  rear.  They  were  coming  into  the  open  country. 
The  wheels  of  the  cart  still  rumbled,  but  less  noisily 
now,  and  as  they  rolled  presently  over  a  soft  spread  of 
emerald  turf  this  sound  faded  almost  entirely. 

The  Captain  discovered  that  his  hands  were  no 
longer  pinioned,  and  this  was  as  mystifying  as  that 
sudden  disappearance  of  the  parson,  for  he  could  not 
recall  at  what  particular  stage  of  his  progress  the 
bonds  had  been  removed. 

He  turned,  and  saw  before  him,  sitting  upright 
upon  his  plank,  the  immobile  figure  of  the  driver  in 
his  ragged  three-cornered  hat  and  coat  of  rusty  black. 
The  fellow  still  puffed  his  short  clay  pipe,  for  the 
smoke  of  it  hung  in  wreaths  about  his  head.  He 
marvelled  at  his  unconcern  and  apparent  disregard  of 
his  prisoner. 

They  were  ambling  gently  now  down  a  lane  be- 
tween hedgerows  that  were  aflame  with  extraordi- 
narily rich  blossoms.  The  sunlight  was  dazzling.  It 
shone  upon  the  waters  of  a  pond,  which  he  perceived 
through  a  gap  in  the  hedge,  so  brilliantly  that  his  eyes 
were  hurt  and  dazzled. 

It  occurred  to  him  then  that  since  Jack  Ketch  was 
so  unobservant  and  unconcerned,  and  since  there  was 
none  other  by  to  hinder  him,  he  need  not  continue  in 
the  cart.  He  threw  a  leg  over  the  rail  at  the  back,  and 
leapt  lightly  to  the  ground. 

The  vehicle  rolled  on.  He  stood  watching  it  as 
with  incredible  swiftness  it  diminished  in  size  down 
that  interminable  avenue.  When  it  was  no  more  than 
a  speck  in  the  far  distance,  he  turned  and  went 


!2o4  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

through  the  gap  in  the  hedge  with  that  unbearable  re- 
flection of  sunlight  on  water  beating  upon  his  eyes; 
and  turn  which  way  he  would  he  could  not  avoid  it. 
There  was  water  all  about  him  now,  and  it  all  shone 
fiercely,  like  a  mirror  in  the  very  eye  of  the  sun.  At 
last  he  perceived  a  bridge.  He  advanced  towards  it, 
and  crossed  it,  shutting  his  eyes  to  exclude  that  fierce 
glare,  yet  still  conscious  of  it  even  through  closed  lids. 
He  opened  them  again  to  make  the  discovery  that 
this  bridge  which  he  had  crossed  was  the  rustic  struc- 
ture leading  into  the  garden  of  Priory  Close.  Strange, 
he  thought,  that  he  should  never  before  have  ob- 
served what  a  deal  of  water  flowed  down  the  little 
ravine  it  spanned.  And  then  he  ceased  to  wonder 
about  anything,  for  before  him  stood  a  radiant 
Damaris  with  arms  held  out  in  welcome. 

He  plunged  forward  with  a  cry,  and  sank  into  her 
embrace. 

'My  dear,'  she  said,  'why  have  you  left  me  so  long 
to  my  bitter  thoughts  of  you?' 

He  sought  to  answer  her,  but  could  not;  her  arms 
were  laced  so  tightly  about  his  neck  that  he  could  not 
speak.  She  was  strangling  him.  Had  he  been  able  to 
speak  he  would  have  told  her  so.  But  he  could  not. 
Yet  although  the  choking  was  hurting  him,  he  did 
not  attempt  to  struggle.  It  was  so  good  to  lie  there. 
He  was  very,  very  weary.  He  nestled  his  head  more 
closely  upon  her  breast.  A  great  drowsiness  over- 
came him,  and  he  fell  asleep. 

Between  two  of  the  three  uprights  of  that  trian- 
gular structure,  the  body  of  Captain  Gaynor  swung 
gently  to  and  fro,  as  if  the  warm  summer  breeze  made 
sport  with  it. 


EXECUTION  205 

About  the  foot  of  the  gibbet  there  was  an  open 
square,  maintained  by  a  hedge  of  men  in  scarlet  coats 
and  mitre-shaped  hats.  The  drums  had  long  since 
ceased  to  beat. 

Came  a  sharp  word  of  command,  and  a  line  of 
muskets  flashed  up  and  rattled  to  rest,  each  upon  the 
shoulder  of  its  owner;  another  word  of  command,  and 
the  redcoats  manoeuvred  into  marching  order,  four 
abreast.  Then  the  drums  rolled  out  again,  and  the 
scarlet  phalanx  swung  briskly  away  through  the 
tumultuous  crowd. 

The  show  was  at  an  end. 

Into  the  open  square  which  the  military  had  main- 
tained at  the  gallows'  foot  sprang  now  some  half- 
dozen  resolute  and  bustling  ruffians.  The  crowd 
surged  after  them,  like  waters  suddenly  released,  and 
a  cart  pressed  forward  with  the  foremost. 

The  tallest  of  these  ruffians,  with  a  knife  between 
his  teeth,  shinned  up  one  of  the  vertical  timbers  and 
threw  a  leg  over  the  cross-beam  from  which  the  Cap- 
tain's body  was  swinging.  With  his  knife  he  slashed 
through  the  rope,  and  the  body  tumbled  into  the 
arms  of  his  companions  below.  Two  of  them  bore  it 
away.  The  others  plied  elbows  and  tongues  to  force  a 
passage  through  the  rabble  with  their  prize.  They 
gained  the  cart,  flung  in  their  limp  burden,  and  as  one 
of  them  vaulted  after  it,  the  driver  cracked  his  whip 
and  cursed  the  people  volubly  and  obscenely.  A  way 
was  reluctantly  opened,  and  into  this  the  little  cart 
pressed,  driven  forward  like  a  wedge.  Slowly  it  won 
through. 

Some  little  distance  from  the  gallows  a  chaise  had 
been  drawn  up.  In  this  sat  an  elderly  gentleman,  who, 
with  a  grey   face  and  dull,   pain-laden   eyes,   had 


206  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

watched  the  execution.  His  aspect  was  so  profoundly 
grief-stricken  that  the  crowd  about  his  carriage  had 
feJt  the  influence  of  it,  and  had  preserved  an  almost 
utter  silence.  They  resented  being  constrained  to  this 
despite  themselves,  for  they  felt  that  their  enjoyment 
of  the  show  had  been  marred;  but  for  all  their  resent- 
ment they  had  not  been  able  to  shake  off  the  spell  of 
that  anguished  old  countenance. 

Suddenly,  as  the  body  was  being  borne  away,  Sir 
John  Kynaston  —  for  he  it  was  —  seemed  to  rouse 
himself  from  his  trance.  He  uttered  a  cry  and  carried 
a  trembling  hand  to  the  carriage  door.  He  fumbled  at 
it  for  some  moments,  opened  it  at  last,  and  sprang 
down,  shouting.  But  his  voice  was  lost  in  the  terrific 
uproar.  He  attempted  to  struggle  through  the  crowd. 
But,  spent  as  was  his  strength  by  grief,  he  was  un- 
equal to  the  effort,  and  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour's 
striving  he  had  got  no  farther  than  the  foot  of  the 
gallows,  whilst  the  cart  was  vanishing  into  the  Edg- 
ware  Road. 

He  implored  those  about  him  to  pass  the  word  along 
that  he  would  pay  the  snatchers  handsomely  for 
their  booty.  An  attempt  was  made  to  do  his  will,  and 
the  message  traveled  some  little  way,  but  it  was 
scattered  and  lost  at  last. 

In  the  end  he  was  forced  to  give  up  the  attempt. 
Blaming  himself  for  not  having  thought  of  the  matter 
sooner,  he  made  his  way  with  feeble,  unsteady  steps 
—  his  vigour  all  sapped  —  back  to  his  carriage.  The 
crowd  was  growing  thinner  now.  He  regained  his 
chaise,  and  so  returned  in  sorrow  to  Chertsey,  deriv- 
ing, if  possible,  an  added  grief  from  the  reflection  that 
he  had  neglected  to  perform  the  last  rites  by  the  body 
of  his  old  friend's  boy. 


EXECUTION  207 

Priory  Lodge  in  those  days  was  haunted  by  an 
atmosphere  of  gloom.  Evelyn  and  Damaris  remained 
both  invisible  even  to  Sir  John,  both  pleading  indis- 
position. 

Evelyn  was  overcome  with  terror  at  the  ruin  she 
had  wrought,  for  she  accounted  that  Captain  Gaynor's 
arrest  and  execution  had  all  resulted  from  the  dis- 
closure of  his  identity  when  Lord  Pauncefort  spied 
upon  the  lovers  in  the  garden.  She  it  was  who  had 
fetched  his  lordship  to  Chertsey  by  her  letter,  and 
she,  herself,  had  conducted  him  to  the  garden  that  he 
might  surprise  his  betrothed  in  the  arms  of  another. 

It  had  been  with  her  no  more  than  an  act  of  petty 
vengeance,  she  could  scarce  have  said  for  what.  But 
she  had  intended  that  it  should  remain  petty;  she  had 
never  dreamt  of  such  tragic  consequences  as  these. 
She  was  prostrated  by  them  and  by  her  consciousness 
of  guilt;  and  it  went  as  near  to  making  a  woman  of  her 
and  arousing  her  dormant  intelligence  as  anything 
could  do.  She  had  not  seen  Damaris  since  the  happen- 
ing —  now  some  ten  days  old  —  in  that  garden.  She 
had  been  afraid  to  face  her,  and  now  her  fear  had 
increased  to  terror  since  Sir  John  had  brought  word 
three  days  ago  of  the  sentence  of  death  that  had  been 
passed  upon  their  whilom  guest.  That  had  been 
terrible  enough.  But  now  came  the  still  more  terrible 
news  —  again  brought  by  Sir  John  —  that  Captain 
Gaynor  had  been  hanged. 

In  her  anguish,  in  her  overwhelming  panic,  Evelyn 
wanted  to  die.  She  could  never  again  meet  the  eyes  of 
Damaris.  She  was  —  she  told  herself  that  night,  as 
she  lay  wide-eyed  upon  her  bed  —  a  murderess.  Once, 
in  the  grey  hour  of  dawn  she  rose  from  her  bed,  fell  on 
her  knees  beside  it,  and  prayed  —  not  to  heaven,  but 


208  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

to  the  spirit  of  Captain  Gaynor  —  for  forgiveness. 
Conceiving  that  this  spirit  being  disembodied  must 
be  now  all-knowing,  she  cried  out  to  it  that  she  had 
not  meant  to  work  this  havoc,  that  her  deed  had  been 
light  and  heedless,  that  never  would  she  have  per- 
formed it  could  she  have  dreamed  of  such  conse- 
quences to  himself  as  these. 

Some  comfort  she  took  in  the  reflection  that  he 
must  know,  and  that  knowing  all  he  must  forgive,  as 
all  must  who  know  all. 

It  was  on  the  morrow  that  Sir  John  brought  himself 
to  question  his  wife  on  the  subject  of  the  Captain's 
sojourn  at  Priory  Close.  His  wife,  with  habitual 
irrelevance  and  her  passion  for  the  unimportant, 
related  to  him  the  deception  that  had  been  practised 
by  the  girls.  He  gathered  from  this  and  from  what 
else  she  added  that  Harry  Gaynor  had  wooed  Damaris 
under  the  impression  that  he  was  wooing  Evelyn;  he 
learnt  that  Pauncefort  had  been  at  Priory  Close  on 
the  very  morning  of  the  day  upon  which  the  Captain 
had  been  arrested;  and  he  was  able  for  himself  to 
piece  together  the  event,  save  that  he  knew  nothing 
of  the  revelations  that  had  driven  Damaris  away  in  a 
loathing  of  Harry  Gaynor  as  great  almost  as  had  been 
that  which  earlier  had  turned  her  from  Pauncefort. 

He  sat  in  the  library  pondering  it  all,  and  thinking 
of  the  elder  Gaynor  who  had  been  his  friend,  his  more 
than  brother,  and  thanking  God  that  he  had  not 
lived  to  see  this  day  of  sorrow.  He  pondered  the  hope 
he  had  nourished  of  wedding  his  only  child  to  Harry. 
That  hope  must,  he  saw,  in  any  case  have  been 
frustrated.  It  mattered  little  now.  For  Evelyn,  in- 
deed, it  was  better  as  it  was;  better  that  she  had  not 
loved  him.  And  then  he  sat  up  sharply  with  a  sudden, 


EXECUTION  209 

a  terrible  thought.    It  moved  him  to  rise  and  go  in 
quest  of  his  wife  again. 

'What  ails  Evelyn?'  he  inquired. 

'I  do  not  know,  my  dear.  The  child  is  very  odd  al- 
ways, and  very  headstrong.'  Lady  Kynaston  sighed. 
'I  never  had  her  confidence.' 

'How  long  has  she  been  ailing?  How  long  has  she 
kept  her  chamber?' 

Her  ladyship  considered  a  moment.  'Why,  ever 
since  Captain  Gaynor  left  us,'  said  she. 

He  was  answered,  he  thought.  His  daughter,  too, 
was  stricken  by  the  same  blow.  She  had  conceived 
for  the  Captain  an  unrequited  passion.  His  heart  bled 
for  her,  and  in  his  compassion  he  went  at  once  to  seek 
her. 

He  found  her  sitting  listlessly  by  the  window  of  her 
room,  her  hands  idle  in  her  lap.  The  roses  had  all  fled 
from  her  cheeks;  she  looked  haggard,  so  haggard  and 
woebegone  that  even  her  air  of  intense  femininity  had 
departed  from  her.  She  raised  heavy  eyes  to  her 
father's  face,  and  he  observed  the  dark  lines  under 
them  that  told  the  tale  of  sleepless  nights. 

'My  dear!'  he  said.  'My  poor  child!'  He  held  out 
his  arms  to  her,  and  there  were  tears  in  his  old  eyes. 

His  pity  stabbed  her.  She  did  not  understand  it, 
but  she  understood  that  it  was  sprung  from  some  mis- 
apprehension. 

'Ah,  don't  touch  me,  father!'  she  cried.  'You  don't 
know,  you  don't  know!' 

'I  think  I  do,'  he  answered  very  gently. 

'You  do?'  He  saw  horror  in  the  eyes  so  suddenly 
lifted  to  stare  at  him.  At  once  she  realised  that  he  had 
no  knowledge  of  the  truth,  that  something  very 
different  was  in  his  mind.   He  came  upon  her  very 


210  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

ripe  for  confession,  at  a  point  where,  did  she  not  share 
her  burden  with  another,  she  must  sink  under  it  and 
die,  she  thought.  She  rose,  flung  herself  upon  his 
breast,  and  there,  through  a  storm  of  sudden  weeping, 
in  a  voice  broken  by  sobs,  she  poured  out  her  misera- 
ble story. 

He  listened,  frowning  awhile.  But  when  the  end 
was  reached  he  did  not  put  her  from  him  in  aversion, 
as  she  had  feared.  Gently  he  stroked  her  golden  head. 

'For  the  unworthy  thing  you  did,  Evelyn,  you  have 
been  punished  enough,'  he  said.  'Do  not  torment 
yourself  with  the  supposition  of  a  greater  sin.  It  was 
not  you  who  gave  Captain  Gaynor  to  the  hangman, 
nor  did  Lord  Pauncefort  do  it  in  consequence  of  what 
he  witnessed  here,  nor  yet  did  he,  as  you  suppose,  dis- 
cover Captain  Gaynor's  identity  as  a  result  of  what 
you  enabled  him  to  overhear.  He  knew  it  already.  He 
was  himself  a  Jacobite  who  had  betrayed  his  fellow 
plotters.  So  comfort  you  at  least  with  the  knowledge 
of  that.' 

She  comforted  herself  very  speedily  and  completely, 
as  such  natures  can.  She  slept  soundly  that  night, 
and  on  the  morrow  when  she  made  her  appearance 
at  the  breakfast-table  she  had  resumed  much  of  her 
habitual  air. 

Nor  was  she  any  longer  oppressed  by  the  fear  of 
meeting  Damaris,  since  in  no  degree  now  did  she 
account  herself  guilty  towards  her  cousin.  It  was 
true  that  she  had  done  a  meanness  in  writing  to  Lord 
Pauncefort  and  bringing  him  to  spy  upon  the  lovers, 
but  for  the  rest  she  had  her  father's  word  for  it  that 
her  action  had  nowise  altered  the  inevitable  course  to 
which  the  events  of  these  last  days  had  been  fore- 
ordained.   But  if  she  no  longer  feared  to  meet  Dama- 


EXECUTION  211 

ris,  yet  she  could  not  go  the  length  herself  of  seek- 
ing Damaris,  nor  for  that  matter  could  Sir  John, 
despite  the  urgings  of  his  deeply  sympathetic  nature. 

There  was  not,  however,  the  need.  Damaris,  of 
her  own  accord,  came  forth  on  the  following  evening 
from  her  retirement,  and  sought  her  uncle. 

He  was  in  the  library,  writing  to  his  brother,  when 
suddenly  she  stood  before  him,  almost  ghostly  in  her 
intense  pallor  as  she  paused  among  the  shadows  by 
the  door  for  his  leave  to  intrude  a  moment.  He  sprang 
up  at  sight  of  her  and  went  to  meet  her,  and  even  as 
he  was  shocked  by  the  change  that  grief  had  wrought 
in  her,  so  was  she  shocked  by  the  greyness  of  his  face, 
the  haggard  air  where  joviality  had  ever  sat  and  the 
dullness  of  those  blue  eyes  that  usually  were  so  bright 
and  smiling. 

He  held  out  his  hands  and  she  took  them,  her 
fingers  tightening  upon  them.  But  for  this  man  who 
had  been  more  than  father  to  her,  her  loneliness  must 
be  utter  now. 

'How  cold  you  are,  my  child,'  he  murmured.  Then 
his  voice  broke.  'Oh,  my  poor  Damaris!'  His  voice 
told  her  that  —  no  matter  how  —  he  was  informed  of 
all,  or  at  least,  of  all  that  mattered. 

'I  came  to  talk  to  you  of  him,'  she  said  quietly,  her 
voice,  as  controlled  as  her  face,  like  her  face  showing, 
despite  her,  the  suffering  through  which  she  was  pass- 
ing.     , 

He  led  her  forward  to  a  chair,  and  when  she  was 
seated  he  went  to  stand  by  the  overmantel.  So  had 
he  stood,  she  remembered,  on  that  day  when  at 
Pauncefort's  side  by  the  window  there,  she  had  looked 
upon  him  as  her  enemy,  and  defied  him.  How  bitterly, 
now,  she  repented  her  that  momentary  defection! 


ill  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

How  profoundly  she  loved  him,  since  to-day,  in  his 
affection  for  Harry  Gaynor,  she  discovered  a  fresh 
and  very  solemn  bond  between  them. 

'He  desired  me  to  give  you  certain  messages  when 
he  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out,'  she  said,  and 
neither  of  them  deemed  it  strange  that  she  should 
find  no  need  to  mention  any  name.  'They  do  not 
amount  to  very  much,  but  he  dared  not  write  them, 
he  said,  lest  his  letter  should  miscarry.  As  it  is,  you 
no  doubt  will  have  guessed  what  he  would  wish  to 
say.'  And  she  repeated  with  a  rare  fidelity  the  words 
he  had  entrusted  to  her. 

'Yes,'  he  said  heavily,  when  she  had  done.  'All 
that  I  understood.' 

'I  —  I  have  since  had  a  letter  from  him,'  she  said. 
'He  wrote  to  me  from  Newgate,  on  the  eve  of — on 
Thursday  last.  You  —  you  were  with  him  —  at  the 
end?'  she  asked. 

'I  was  there,'  replied  Sir  John.  ' But  he  did  not  see 
me.' 

She  swayed  on  her  chair.  She  passed  a  hand  over 
her  brow,  her  face  strained  with  the  effort  of  self- 
control.   'How  —  how  did  he  die?'  she  asked  at  last. 

'Happily,  I  think,'  Sir  John  replied.  'He  was 
smiling  at  the  end,  when  —  when  he  stood  up.  What 
had  he  to  fear?'  cried  the  baronet,  a  sudden  vigour 
returning  to  his  voice,  a  defiance  almost.  'What  had 
he  to  fear?  He  was  as  brave  and  gallant  a  gentleman 
as  ever  drew  the  breath  of  life,  a  man  whom  all 
honoured  and  loved,  and  he  died  a  martyr  to  truth 
and  right.  What,  then,  had  he  to  fear  in  death?'  The 
tears  ran  down  the  old  man's  cheeks,  and  his  voice 
sank  again,  as  he  concluded:  'Had  the  poor  lad  been 
my  own  son  I  should  have  been  as  proud  of  him  as  I 


EXECUTION  213 

was  of  the  affection  with  which  his  father  honoured 
me.' 

She  rose  and  came  to  him.  She  reached  up  to  put 
her  arms  about  his  neck,  drew  down  his  head,  and 
very  gently  kissed  him.  And  so,  quietly,  her  sorrow 
ever  silent  and  contained,  she  left  him. 


r  d 


CHAPTER  XVI 

RESURRECTION 

R  almost  all  the  matter  contained  in  this 
chapter  I  acknowledge  an  indebtedness  that  will 
presently  be  apparent  to  that  memoir  of  Doctor 
Blizzard  which  I  have  mentioned,  and  upon  which  al- 
ready I  have  drawn  for  those  dream-sensations  experi- 
enced by  Captain  Gaynor  when  he  was  turned  off  and 
left  swinging  after  the  cart  had  drawn  away  from 
under  him. 

I  closely  followed  that  portion  of  the  memoir  up  to 
the  point  at  which  the  Captain  lost  consciousness,  or 
—  to  adhere  strictly  to  his  own  impressions  —  at 
which  he  sank  to  sleep,  his  head  pillowed  upon  the 
bosom  of  Damaris. 

When  next  he  awakened  it  was  in  surroundings 
vastly  different  from  those  under  which  he  had  sunk  to 
slumber,  as  he  believed.  Here  was  no  sunlit  garden, 
but  a  square,  whitewashed  chamber,  lighted  not  only 
by  a  window  in  one  of  its  walls,  but  also  from  an- 
other —  and  a  very  large  one  this  —  in  the  ceiling 
immediately  above  him. 

Someone  was  bending  over  him,  and  a  face  was 
peering  into  his.  But  it  was  not  the  lovely,  beloved 
face  of  Damaris.  Instead,  it  was  a  keen,  lean,  almost 
wolfish  face,  with  leathern  cheeks  and  very  piercing 
little  eyes  that  were  considering  him  through  horn- 
rimmed spectacles. 

He  lay  quite  still  and  only  half  conscious  as  yet, 
looking  up  into  that  face,  and  neither  wondering  nor 


RESURRECTION  215 

caring  to  whom  it  might  belong.  Then,  as  his  awaken- 
ing proceeded,  he  was  conscious  that  his  body  was 
cold  and  stiff  and  that  there  was  a  strong  taste  of 
brandy  in  his  mouth.  His  left  wrist,  he  discovered, 
was  in  the  grip  of  this  wizened-faced  man;  but  it  was 
a  very  gentle  grip,  with  a  finger  pressing  lightly  upon 
his  pulse. 

Then,  quite  suddenly,  memory  like  a  flood  poured 
in  upon  his  consciousness,  and  his  awakening  was 
complete. 

He  attempted  to  rise  from  his  recumbent  position, 
and  the  effort  set  a  thousand  hammers  swinging  in 
his  brain.  His  head,  he  found,  was  just  an  ache,  a 
globe  of  pain,  no  more.  The  window  above  him 
appeared  to  slide  to  and  fro,  the  couch  upon  which  he 
lay  heaved  under  him,  and  the  wizened  face  of  his 
companion  dilated  and  contracted  horribly  as  he 
watched  it.  He  groaned  and  closed  his  eyes.  The  pain 
spread  downwards  through  his  body,  which  lay  stark 
there  upon  a  table  —  for  such  was  the  nature  of  his 
couch.  Then,  at  last,  the  tide  of  torment  slowly 
ebbed  again,  leaving  him  bedewed  from  head  to  foot 
with  sweat. 

He  opened  his  eyes  once  more.  He  attempted  to 
speak,  and  this  fresh  effort  centralised  the  pain  in  his 
throat  and  tongue.  They  seemed  swollen  to  elephan- 
tine proportions. 

The  leathern  mask  of  a  face  above  him  appeared 
suddenly  to  crack  across.  A  very  wide  and  quite  lip- 
less  mouth  had  opened,  and  from  it  issued  a  queer, 
clucking  sound. 

'Tut,  tut!  Tut,  tut!  Better  keep  still!  Better  keep 
still!' 

The  hand  had  already  left  his  wrist,  and  now  the 


216  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

figure  turned  and  moved  away  a  little  to  another 
table  under  the  window  in  the  wall.  Captain  Gaynor 
was  able  to  follow  it  with  his  eyes  without  moving  his 
head.  He  observed  the  man  to  be  of  middle  height 
and  very  thin.  He  wore  black  velvet  breeches,  black 
silk  stockings  and  shoes  with  steel  buckles.  He  was 
without  a  coat,  and  the  sleeves  of  his  waistcoat  and 
shirt  were  rolled  up  to  the  elbows  of  two  long,  thin, 
sinewy  arms.  His  waistcoat  itself  was  concealed  by  a 
coarse,  yellowish  apron  in  which  there  were  several 
dull,  brown  patches.  This  apron  covered  him  in  front 
from  chin  to  waist;  the  remainder  of  it  had  been  rolled 
into  a  rope  and  was  twisted  round  his  middle.  The 
table  to  which  he  had  moved  was  of  a  good  size  and  of 
plain  deal.  Part  of  it  was  encumbered  by  phials  of  all 
forms  and  sizes;  but  in  a  clear  space  in  the  middle, 
upon  a  spread  cloth,  was  an  array  of  very  bright 
instruments  of  queer  shapes,  whose  purpose  the 
Captain  could  not  have  guessed  had  his  mind  been  in 
a  condition  to  attempt  the  task. 

Doctor  Emanuel  Blizzard — for  this  was  the  iden- 
tity of  the  man  —  took  up  a  short-stemmed  lily- 
shaped  glass,  and  held  it  up  in  one  of  his  enormous, 
bony  hands.  From  one  of  the  phials  he  poured  into  it 
a  ruby-coloured  liquid;  from  another  he  added  some- 
thing else  that  was  quite  colourless,  and  he  did  this 
with  great  care,  pausing,  adding  another  drop  or  two, 
pausing  again,  and  yet  again  adding  a  drop.  Then  he 
set  the  phial  down,  and  carrying  the  glass  he  once 
more  approached  the  table  where  the  Captain  lay. 

He  thrust  hL  left  hand  under  his  patient's  head, 
and  raised  it  very  slowly  and  gently.  But  for  all  his 
gentleness  those  great  hammers  were  set  to  swing 
again,  and  they  crashed  forward  and  backward  in 


RESURRECTION  217 

Harry  Gaynor's  brain.  The  rim  of  the  glass  was 
brought  to  his  lips. 

'Drink  this,'  said  the  gruff  voice,  and  obediently, 
without  any  will  of  his  own,  the  Captain  painfully 
swallowed  the  fluid.  He  was  not  conscious  of  any 
flavour  in  it  at  the  time.  But  afterwards,  when  his 
head  had  been  lowered  once  more,  and  the  room  had 
ceased  to  swing  about  him  like  the  cabin  of  a  ship,  he 
became  aware  of  a  fresh  pungency  in  his  mouth, 
soothing  and  cooling  and  seeming  to  reduce  its 
inflammation. 

In  the  moment  that  his  head  had  been  raised,  he 
had  perceived  in  a  subconscious  way  that  he  was 
quite  naked,  that  there  was  blood  on  his  left  leg,  that 
a  ribbon  of  this  blood  ran  to  the  little  puddle  reaching 
to  the  table's  edge.  Now,  as  he  lay  back  once  more, 
he  noticed  a  faint  dripping  sound,  recurring  at  very 
brief  and  very  regular  intervals.  Dimly,  and  without 
much  interest,  he  connected  this  sound  with  the 
puddle  he  had  observed. 

The  events  of  the  morning  were  coming  back  to 
him  now  in  detail.  He  remembered  the  cart,  the 
crowd,  his  pinioned  wrists,  the  parson  who  had  ridden 
with  him,  the  glimpse  he  had  of  the  gallows  when  he 
had  turned  his  head  as  they  were  going  down  the  hill. 
What  happened  afterwards,  he  could  not  remember 
until  he  came  to  that  point  where  he  had  found  him- 
self in  the  open  country,  still  in  the  cart  at  first,  and 
later  crossing  a  bridge  over  a  great  expanse  of  glaring 
water  to  find  Damaris  awaiting  him. 

He  could  not  distinguish  between  the  real  and  the 
imagined.  That  all  this  had  happened  to  him  he  never 
doubted;  but  he  could  not  explain  it,  any  more  than 
he  could  explain  how  he  came  to  be  lying  stark  naked 


ai8  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

upon  a  deal  table  with  blood  flowing  from  his  leg 
and  dripping  into  some  vessel  on  the  floor  whilst  a 
stranger  tended  him. 

It  would  seem  as  if  he  had  not  been  hanged  after  all, 
and  he  wondered  why  was  this.  But  he  did  not  won- 
der with  any  great  activity;  there  was  no  vigorous 
mental  effort  to  resolve  this  mystery.  His  brain  was 
too  tired  and  indolent  for  the  exertion.  The  indo- 
lence gained  upon  him;  it  became  a  torpor,  and  very 
gently  he  sank  once  more  into  oblivion. 

His  next  awakening  was  very  different.  It  took 
place  some  twelve  hours  later,  early  in  the  morning 
of  the  following  day.  He  was  abed  now  in  a  solid 
furnished  room  that  was  full  of  sunlight,  and  for  some 
moments  he  lay  still,  staring  up  at  the  white,  flat 
canopy  overhead.  Then  quite  suddenly  he  sat  up. 
Pain  shot  through  his  head  once  more,  to  bring  back  a 
dim  memory  of  his  last  awakening.  But  it  was  en- 
durable now,  though  still  acute. 

His  sudden  movement  had  been  answered  by  an- 
other. From  a  chintz-covered  settle  ranged  against 
the  wall  on  his  right  sprang  now  the  slender  figure  of 
the  doctor.  An  arm  went  round  the  Captain  to 
support  him  in  his  sitting  posture;  the  little  piercing 
eyes  considered  him  again  through  those  spectacles 
with  their  great  horn  rims,  and  Gaynor  observed  that, 
for  all  its  wolfishness,  the  face  was  genial  and  kindly. 

The  wide  lipless  mouth  opened,  and  as  before  it 
emitted  that  clucking  sound;  but  the  leathery,  close- 
shaven  countenance  was  wrinkled  in  a  smile. 

'Eh,  and  how  do  we  feel  now,  eh?  Better?'  And 
as  he  spoke,  the  professor  stamped  his  foot  three 
times  upon  the  floor  —  an  obvious  signal  to  someone 
below. 


RESURRECTION  219 

'Who  are  you?'  the  bewildered  patient  asked  him. 

'Eh?  My  name  is  Blizzard  —  Doctor  Emanuel 
Blizzard,  Professor  of  Anatomy,  eh?  And  you're  safe 
and  snug  in  my  house.' 

'In  your  house,  Doctor ' 

'  Blizzard,  sir  —  Emanuel  Blizzard.' 

'And  how  came  I  here?'  the  Captain  asked,  his 
wonder  and  bewilderment  increasing.  His  voice  was 
so  husky  that  he  could  not  speak  above  a  whisper, 
and  he  was  conscious  still  of  a  numbness  of  tongue 
and  throat. 

The  Professor  clucked  again.  'Tut-tut!  'Tis  a  long 
story  that,  and  a  strange.  You  shall  hear  it  when  you 
are  more  recovered.  Ye're  weak,  eh?  Ye  will  be.  I 
bled  you  very  thoroughly.  But  we'll  soon  renew  what's 
lost.' 

A  knock  fell  on  the  door.  The  anatomist  set  the 
pillows  behind  his  patient  so  that  they  supported  him 
in  an  upright  position.  Then  he  sped  to  the  door, 
opened  it,  and  returned  with  a  tray  on  which  was  a 
bowl,  a  flagon  of  red  wine  and  a  glass.  This  tray  he 
placed  upon  a  table  by  the  head  of  the  bed.  He  took 
up  the  bowl,  which  was  filled  with  steaming  broth. 

'  Ye'll  be  hungry,  eh? '  he  said,  his  head  on  one  side. 
The  Captain  nodded  weakly.   'Aha!   'Tis  very  well.' 

He  approached  the  patient,  and  with  a  horn  spoon 
proceeded  himself  to  feed  him.  Then  he  carefully 
measured  him  a  half-glass  of  Burgundy,  and  he 
held  it  to  his  lips,  what  time  the  Captain  slowly 
drained  it. 

'Another?' he  asked.  'Tut,  tut!  Better  not.  Better 
not,  eh?  We  must  go  slowly.  Piano  si  va  sano,  as  the 
Italians  say.  For  the  present  —  ne  quid  nimis,  eh?' 

Gently  as  a  woman  might  have  done,  he  replaced 


iio  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

the  pillows,  and  induced  his  patient  once  more  to  lie 
down.  Captain  Gaynor  obeyed  him,  too  feeble,  too 
utterly  bewildered  to  resist.  Something  had  happened 
to  him;  something  altogether  inordinate;  but  what 
that  something  might  be  he  had  no  faintest  concep- 
tion, and  least  of  all  could  he  conceive  how  he  came 
into  the  house  of  a  professor  of  anatomy  who  treated 
him  with  such  tenderness  and  solicitude.  There  was 
one  point,  however,  that  so  plagued  him  that  he  must 
have  enlightenment  upon  it.  He  looked  up  into  that 
wolfish  yet  kindly  countenance. 

'Then  —  I  was  not  hanged?'  he  inquired  feebly. 

'Hanged!' cried  the  other.  'Tut,  tut!  Go  to  sleep. 
You'll  be  stronger  when  next  you  wake.  Go  to  sleep 
now.' 

The  prediction  proved  true  enough.  The  broth  and 
the  wine  spreading  warmth  through  that  debilitated 
frame  bore  a  torpor  with  them,  to  which  the  Captain 
very  shortly  succumbed,  notwithstanding  the  ques- 
tion with  which  he  still  plagued  himself. 

When  next  he  opened  his  eyes  upon  that  room,  the 
sunshine  had  left  it.  By  the  mellow  light  and  the 
tepid  air  that  came  through  the  open  casement  he 
knew  it  to  be  eventide.  A  stout,  middle-aged  woman 
with  red  polished  cheeks,  that  gave  her  face  the 
appearance  of  a  giant  apple,  occupied  a  chair  near  the 
bed.  She  smiled  reassuringly  when  she  encountered 
his  questioning  gaze,  and  she  rose  at  once. 

'Better  now?'  she  greeted  him. 

Captain  Gaynor  was  better  indeed,  and  he  was 
conscious  of  an  appetite  that  was  keen  as  a  razor's 
edge.  He  said  so,  and  found  his  voice  much  stronger, 
whilst  there  was  hardly  any  of  the  sensation  of  pain 
in  tongue  and  throat.  His  head,  too,  was  clearer,  and 


RESURRECTION  221 

it  no  longer  ached  when  he  moved  it,  as  he  did  by  way 
of  testing  its  condition. 

'I'll  go  call  the  Doctor,'  she  said.  'He's  resting 
below.' 

In  a  very  few  minutes  the  anatomist  was  at  his 
patient's  bedside.  In  another  few  minutes  there  was 
more  broth  and  Burgundy  for  the  Captain,  and  even 
a  few  slices  of  capon's  breast  and  a  little  wheaten 
bread. 

'And  now,'  said  Captain  Gaynor,  reclining  com- 
fortably among  his  heaped-up  pillows  when  he  had 
consumed  a  meal  which  he  found  all  too  spare,  'will 
you  tell  me  how  I  come  here,  and  how  it  befell  that  I 
was  not  hanged?  What  happened  to  me?' 

The  Professor  looked  at  him,  meditatively  stroking 
his  smooth  chin. 

'  It  did  not  befall  that  you  were  not  hanged,'  he  said 
slowly.   'Ye  were  hanged  —  two  days  since.' 

'Hanged?'  The  Captain  started  up.  Horror  and 
incredulity  were  blent  in  his  countenance. 

'Tut,  tut,  now!'  clucked  Doctor  Blizzard.  'Let  us 
be  calm,  eh !  There's  not  the  need  to  start  and  cry  out. 
It's  over,  and  it's  not  to  do  again.  Nemo  bis  punitur 
pro  eodem  delicto,  remember.   That  is  the  law,  eh?' 

But  the  impossibility  of  punishing  a  man  twice  for 
the  same  offence  was  the  last  thing  that  exercised  the 
Captain's  thoughts  just  then. 

'  But  if  I  was  hanged,'  said  he,  his  face  an  utter 
blank, '  how  —  how  come  I  to  be  alive,  for  I  am  alive, 
am  I  not?  I  am  not  dead  and  dreaming,  perchance?' 

'Eh!  Why,  to  be  sure  you're  alive,  and  in  a  week  or 
so  I  make  no  doubt  but  ye'll  be  about  again  as  sound 
as  ever  you  were.' 

'But  how  —  how,  if  I  was  hanged?' 


222  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'  Because  if  a  man  won't  drown  who's  born  to  hang, 
neither  will  a  man  hang  who's  born  to  drown,  eh? 
'Tis  the  best  reason  I  can  think  of,  faith!  And,  faith! 
it's  reason  enough.' 

Still  understanding  little  or  nothing,  the  Captain 
stared  at  the  Doctor. 

'I  —  I  don't  understand  even  now,'  he  said  weakly. 
'How  came  I  here?' 

'Eh?  Ah,  that  is  another  matter,  and  well  may  it 
exercise  you.  It  was  this  wise.'  The  Doctor  took  snuff 
in  prodigious  quantities,  then  snapped  and  pocketed 
his  box,  and  sat  upon  the  edge  of  the  bed  facing  his 
patient.  'It  was  this  wise.  When  you  had  hanged  for 
the  term  of  twenty  minutes  —  as  by  law  prescribed  — 
you  were  cut  down  by  a  couple  of  rascals  who  know 
where  to  obtain  a  guinea  or  two  for  the  fruit  of  the 
leafless  tree,  as  they  humorously  term  it.  And  here  let 
me  say  that  ye  were  mighty  fortunate  in  that  ye  gave 
no  thought  to  your  own  burial  and  that  no  friends  of 
yours  saw  to  the  reparation  of  that  omission.  He,  he ! ' 
he  laughed  on  a  thin  high  note.  'But  for  that  — 
faith!  —  ye'd  not  be  sitting  there  drinking  Burgundy. 
Ye'd  have  been  snug  under  a  tombstone  by  now,  eh! 

'Well,  then/  he  pursued,  'these  rascals  brought 
you  hither  in  a  cart,  and  never  was  there  living  man 
who  looked  more  dead.  Ye  deceived  even  myself, 
when  I  had  you  lying  stark  upon  my  table,  for  you'll 
understand  that  I  had  bought  you  to  dissect  you,  and 
I  never  so  much  as  suspected  how  I'd  been  swindled 
—  that  ye  were  not  a  corpse  at  all  —  until  I  had  run 
my  scalpel  across  your  breast;  you'll  feel  the  sting  of 
the  scratch  belike.  It  was  not  a  cut;  'twas  no  more 
than  skin-deep,  to  mark  the  line  I  was  to  follow.  But 
behold!  this  line  I  had  drawn  turned  suddenly  bright 


RESURRECTION  223 

crimson.  If  I  say  that  I  was  amazed,  I  say  nothing.  I 
ran  my  finger  along  it  and  withdrew  it  moist  with 
blood. 

'There  could  be  no  doubt  then  that  ye  were  not 
dead,  eh?  But  whether  you  had  travelled  too  far  into 
the  dark  valley  ever  to  be  dragged  back  again  to  the 
world  of  the  living  was  what  I  could  not  say.  I  held  a 
mirror  to  your  lips,  and  found  it  filmed  with  moisture 
after  a  moment.  I  set  my  finger  to  your  pulse,  but 
could  discover  no  movement  in  it.  So  I  opened  a 
vein  in  your  leg  to  stimulate  the  heart  by  setting 
the  blood  a-flowing;  and  within  ten  minutes  you 
had  opened  your  eyes  and  were  endeavouring  to 
sit  up. 

'Since  then  I've  done  little  more  than  leave  you 
to  the  vis  medicatrix  natures.  For  Nature,  sir,  has 
endowed  you  very  richly;  so  richly  that  I  could  almost 
regret  the  loss  of  the  two  guineas  I  gave  those  rascals 
for  your  anatomy  —  for  ye've  defrauded  me,  sir,  in  a 
most  heartless  fashion,  eh!' 

The  Captain  smiled  feebly  at  the  jest.  But  it  was 
something  that  he  was  able  to  smile  at  all,  now  that 
he  had  the  full  account  of  this  most  extraordinary 
adventure. 

'But  you  repay  me  richly  in  another  way,'  the 
anatomist  pursued. 

'I  can  assure  you,  sir,  you  shall  not  be  out  of  pocket 
in  any  way,'  said  the  Captain. 

'  Pish !  Tut,  tut ! '  The  professor  waved  one  of  his 
great  bony  hands  contemptuously. 

'Tell  me,'  said  the  Captain  presently,  'is  it  not  a 
very  extraordinary  thing  to  have  happened  ? ' 

'Extraordinary?  Godso!  Ye're  not  supposing  that 
it  happens  every  week,  eh?' 


224  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Have  you  ever  known  such  another  case?' 

'As  to  that,  why,  yes  —  though  never  in  my  own 
experience.  Did  ye  never  hear  of  John  Smith  the 
housebreaker  —  a  few  years  ago  —  who  was  re- 
prieved after  he  had  been  turned  off  and  hanged  for  a 
quarter  of  an  hour?  When  the  reprieve  arrived,  it 
scarce  seemed  worthwhile  to  make  haste  to  cut  him 
down,  he  looked  so  dead.  Yet  to  all  the  world's 
amazement  the  rogue  revived  to  return  to  his  house- 
breaking trade.  Then  there  was  the  case  of  Anne 
Green  at  Oxford,  over  fifty  years  ago.  She  was 
hanged  for  over  half-an-hour,  and  like  yourself  fell 
into  the  hands  of  an  anatomist  —  a  Doctor  Petty  — 
who  revived  her.  And  there  have  been  others.  Still, 
the  event  is  rare  enough  —  so  rare  that  a  man  should 
be  thankful  when  it  serves  him,  eh!' 

The  Captain  lay  back  among  his  pillows  and 
abandoned  himself  freely  to  his  amazement,  and  to 
the  thoughts  and  speculations  born  of  his  astounding 
situation. 

As  the  Doctor  had  said,  'Nemo  bis  punitur  pro 
eodem  delicto' ';  and  so  from  the  law  of  England  he  had 
nothing  more  to  fear,  even  should  his  identity  be  dis- 
covered.  But  he  did  not  think  that  it  need  be. 

Very  soon  his  thoughts  turned  to  Damaris,  and  it 
was  with  a  sudden  fearful  doubt  that  he  asked  himself 
what  result  his  revival  would  have  there.  How  had 
she  received  his  letter?  There  was,  he  thought,  but 
one  way  in  which  she  could  receive  it.  Yet  his  being 
alive  again,  or  alive  still,  must  alter  everything  and 
might  modify  her  feelings  if  they  were  —  as  he 
thought  they  must  be  —  of  forgiveness.  The  doubt 
was  most  cruelly  tormenting.  He  turned  suddenly  to 
the  Doctor. 


RESURRECTION  225 

'How  soon,'  he  inquired,  'shall  I  be  in  case  to 
depart  ? ' 

'  Tut ! '  clucked  the  Professor.  '  Here's  a  great  haste, 
now!  Why,  if  you  are  quiet  and  obedient  to  me, 
perhaps  in  a  week  or  a  little  longer  you  will  sufficiently 
have  regained  your  strength.  You're  healthy,  amaz- 
ing healthy.  But  I've  half  drained  your  veins,  ye'll 
remember,  and  ye'll  need  wait  until  they  are  re- 
plenished, eh.' 

'A  week!'  he  groaned. 

'Tut!  'Tis  but  a  little  while.  Be  thankful  ye're  not 
dead  and  buried.  And  if  ye've  any  friends  with  whom 
you'ld  wish  me  to  communicate — ' 

'No,'  said  the  Captain.  'My  friends  can  wait.  It 
will  be  better.'  Then,  shifting  the  subject:  'Sir,'  he 
said, '  there  is  a  debt  between  us  that  it  would  tax  my 
wit  and  my  resources  to  liquidate.' 

'It  need  not.  Tut!  No.  What  else  could  I  have 
done?  Carved  you  up,  as  it  was?  Faith!  every  doc- 
tor is  not  a  murderer,  whatever  the  vulgar  may  say. 
Besides,  ye're  a  more  interesting  experiment  alive. 
Tell  me  now,  d'ye  not  actually  remember  hanging?' 

'I  do  not,'  said  the  Captain. 

The  anatomist  nodded.  'Aye,  aye;  'twas  just  so 
with  John  Smith  when  he  revived.  Tell  me  what  you 
remember.' 

Readily  the  Captain  complied,  relating  those 
dream-sensations  that  had  been  his,  and  suppressing 
no  more  than  the  name  of  the  lady  who  had  awaited 
him  in  the  garden  and  in  whose  embrace  he  had 
seemed  to  choke. 

'A  warning  that,'  snapped  Doctor  Blizzard,  'a 
warning  of  the  perils  that  may  lie  in  a  woman's  arms. 
Still,  men  will  run  the  risk.  Tut!  the  pity  of  it!' 


226  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

But  the  anatomist  treasured  those  details  of  the 
Captain's  perilous  passage  through  the  gates  of  doom, 
and  he  incorporated  them  in  that  memoir  he  prepared 
of  the  curious  resurrection  of  Captain  Jenkyn,  a 
memoir  which  —  as  I  have  said  —  has  supplied  me 
with  most  of  these  particulars. 


CHAPTER  XVII 
PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER 

ON  the  Monday  of  the  following  week  —  four 
days  after  the  execution  of  Captain  Gaynor  — 
came  my  Lord  Pauncefort  to  Priory  Close  for  the  first 
time  since  that  encounter  in  the  garden  in  which  his 
lordship  had  all  but  lost  his  life. 

Of  that  encounter,  too,  Sir  John  was  informed  by 
now,  and  of  the  intervention  of  the  gardeners,  which 
had  saved  Lord  Pauncefort  —  an  intervention  which 
Sir  John  deplored  as  profoundly  as  any  of  the  events 
of  the  past  week.  Indeed,  but  for  that  intervention 
Harry  Gaynor  might  still  have  been  among  the 
living,  and  the  world  would  have  been  the  sweeter  for 
being  purged  of  a  villain. 

It  was  again  in  the  library  that  the  interview  took 
place  between  Sir  John  and  his  unwelcome  visitor. 
The  baronet's  first  impulse  had  been  to  deny  himself 
to  his  lordship.  But  he  had  thought  better  of  it,  and 
had  repaired  to  that  lofty,  book-lined  chamber  where 
his  visitor  awaited  him.  Yet  his  greeting  had  been 
sufficiently  uncompromising. 

'Do  you  not  think,  sir,'  he  said,  'that  you  have 
wrought  evil  enough  here  already  and  that  so  you 
might  have  spared  us  this  intrusion  upon  the  grief 
you  have  occasioned?' 

His  lordship,  hat  under  arm,  and  leaning  lightly 
upon  his  amethyst-headed  cane,  had  looked  the  very 
picture  of  injured  innocence. 

'Sir  John,'  he  protested  quietly,  'assuredly  you 
speak  under  a  grievous  misapprehension.' 


228  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Is  it  a  misapprehension  that  you  delivered  Captain 
Gaynor  to  his  death?' 

'A  gross  one,'  cried  his  lordship  instantly.  'Though 
I  can  see  upon  what  grounds  you  base  it.  I  am  the 
more  glad  I  came  since  I  may  now  dispel  your  error. 
You  have  supposed,  I  see,  that  Harry  Gaynor's  ar- 
rest was  the  result  of  his  unfortunate  quarrel  with 
me  here.  That  is  not  so,  sir.  The  warrant  had  been 
out  some  days  already,  and  he  must  have  been  taken 
when  he  was.  And  the  real  fact  is  I  came  to  warn 
him.' 

'To  warn  him  that  you  had  betrayed  him?'  Sir 
John's  blue  eyes  were  hard  and  cold  as  they  played 
over  his  lordship's  handsome,  swarthy  face,  which 
flushed  now  under  that  regard. 

'You  use  harsh  words,  sir,  and  untrue.' 

'In  that  you  lie,  my  lord,'  answered  the  baronet. 
'Do  you  hear  me  —  you  lie!' 

His  lordship  stiffened.  He  drew  himself  up  very 
rigid,  and  Sir  John  watched  him  with  eyes  that 
gleamed  almost  wickedly. 

'Were  you  twenty  years  younger,  Sir  John,  I 
should  ask  you  to  prove  your  words  upon  my  body. 
But  you  are  an  old  man,'  he  added,  in  tones  that  be- 
came a  very  insult  of  tolerance,  his  tall  figure  relaxing 
its  menacing  rigidity,  'and  so  I  must  even  bear  with 
you  and  attempt  to  prove  to  you  in  more  peaceful 
ways  the  ineffable  injustice  of  your  words.' 

'Spare  me  more  of  this,'  flashed  Sir  John  im- 
patiently. 'You  may  disregard  my  insult  on  the 
score  of  my  years,  and  I  may  lack  the  means  to  force 
you  to  regard  it  —  for  you  would  swallow  a  blow  even 
as  you  swallow  all  else  — ' 

'Sir  John!'  the  other  cried,  suddenly  roused,  'do 


PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER  229 

not  urge  me  too  far  or  I  may  forget  the  years  that  lie 
between  us.' 

'There  is  not  the  need.  There  are  younger  swords 
in  plenty  to  call  a  reckoning  with  you.  What  of 
O'Neill  and  Leigh,  your  sometime  friend  Harewood, 
Clinton,  Brownrigg,  and  Mr.  Dyke,  who  is  said  to 
play  the  deadliest  sword  in  England?  Have  you  be- 
thought you  what  will  happen  when  presently  these 
and  the  others  you  have  betrayed  into  gaol  are  re- 
stored to  liberty?  —  as  restored  they  must  be  for  lack 
of  satisfactory  grounds  upon  which  to  impeach  them. 
Do  you  think  they  will  be  slow  to  avenge  upon  you 
the  base  treachery  you  performed  in  selling  them?  Or 
do  you  perhaps  consider  them  in  ignorance  or  doubt 
of  their  betrayer?' 

Ever  since  his  encounter  with  Gaynor,  Pauncefort 
had  been  plagued  by  the  thought  of  this;  for  Gaynor 
had  made  it  more  than  plain  that  his  lordship's 
treachery  was  revealed,  and  it  was  odds  that  what 
Gaynor  knew  was  known  to  all  the  plotters.  And  yet 
it  was  possible  that  it  might  not  be;  and,  Gaynor 
being  dead,  his  lordship  had  clung  to  that  possibility. 
As  for  Sir  John,  he  was  aware  of  the  source  of  the 
baronet's  suspicions;  he  knew  that  they  sprang  from 
the  veiled  threat  he  had  uttered  at  their  last  meeting. 

Slowly  now  he  shook  his  head  under  its  heavy 
black  periwig.  His  large  eyes  looked  almost  sorrow- 
ful. 

'How  sadly  are  you  mistaken/  said  he.  'As  for 
those  you  name,  I  cannot  think  they  would  so  mis- 
judge me.  But  if  any  should,  he  will  find  me  ready  for 
him  —  ready  to  satisfy  him  in  any  manner  he  desires. 
Meanwhile,  however,  Sir  John,  there  is  the  business 
upon  which  I  am  come.' 


230  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Ah,  true!'  snapped  the  baronet.  'I  detain  you,  no 
doubt.  Pray  state  this  business.  Thus  shall  I  be  the 
sooner  rid  of  you.' 

1 1  bring  you  a  warning,'  said  his  lordship. 

'Such  a  warning,  I  make  no  doubt,  as  that  which 
you  bore  Harry  Gaynor,'  was  the  stinging  answer. 

Lord  Pauncefort  considered  him  with  those  sorrow- 
ful eyes  of  his.  '  Even  so,'  he  said  quite  simply.  Then 
he  sighed.  'Indeed,  I  think  that  I  had  better  go  my 
ways,  leaving  you  to  the  fate  that  hangs  over  you, 
since  you  have  naught  but  insults  for  me.  And  yet, 
sir,  I  will  beg  you  to  consider  —  since  there  is  no  other 
way  of  convincing  you  of  my  good  faith  —  that  I  can 
stand  to  gain  little  or  nothing  by  my  warning  to  you, 
and,'  he  added  with  slow  emphasis, '  that  I  might  gain 
a  deal  by  your  impeachment.' 

'You  mistake,'  said  Sir  John,  'I  am  in  no  danger  of 
being  impeached.' 

'It  is  you  who  mistake,  Sir  John;  for  you  are  in 
danger,  in  grave  danger,  not  only  of  impeachment, 
but  of  conviction.  Against  those  others  whom  you 
have  named  I  gladly  admit  that  the  Government  can 
take  no  proceedings  and  will  be  forced  to  let  them  go 
for  lack  of  evidence,  and  also  because  such  is  the 
Government's  policy.  But  you,  sir,  are  in  far  different 
case.' 

'I  am,'  Sir  John  agreed,  'because  against  me  there 
is  not  even  the  shadow  of  an  accusation  to  be  pro- 
duced.' 

'Ah!  You  build  on  that?'  said  his  lordship  sadly, 
and  again  he  shook  his  handsome  head  and  sighed. 
'There  is  something  you've  forgot.  You  have  forgot 
that  you  harboured  here  one  Harry  Gaynor,  the 
notorious  Jacobite  agent  and  spy  —  I  use  the  Govern- 


PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER  231 

merit's  terms  —  who  has  been  convicted  and  hanged.* 

It  was  quite  true.  If  Sir  John  had  not  overlooked 
the  fact  itself,  at  least  he  had  overlooked  the  conse- 
quences it  must  have  for  himself  did  the  Government 
elect  to  move  against  him.  It  was  a  matter  to  which 
he  had  never  given  thought,  and  finding  it  thrust  upon 
his  notice  thus  abruptly  by  Lord  Pauncefort,  he  per- 
ceived his  danger  as  clearly  as  one  may  perceive  a 
chasm  that  has  opened  in  one's  path. 

He  stood  with  hands  clasped  behind  him,  his  tall, 
portly  figure  somewhat  bowed  and  his  face  suddenly 
troubled,  all  the  fine  arrogance  gone  out  of  him.  For 
there  were  not  only  the  consequences  to  himself  to 
consider,  there  were  the  consequences  to  his  wife  and 
child  —  the  consideration  of  which  had  made  him 
cautious  to  the  point  of  lukewarmness  in  his  support 
of  that  Cause  in  which  at  heart  he  believed.  Were 
he  convicted  of  treason  —  as  it  was  very  clear  now  he 
might  be  —  part  of  his  punishment  would  be  a  fine 
that  must  leave  Lady  Kynaston  and  Evelyn  all  but 
destitute. 

A  deep  silence  ensued.  Sir  John  stood  pondering 
with  bowed  head.  When  at  last  he  raised  it,  and  his 
troubled  glance  once  more  rested  upon  his  visitor, 
Lord  Pauncefort  observed  that  his  countenance  was 
ashen.  But  if  there  was  no  longer  any  arrogance  in 
his  bearing,  it  was  still  in  his  tone  and  his  uncom- 
promising words. 

'And  it  is  of  that  that  you  are  come  to  warn  me?' 
he  asked. 

'Indeed,  I  would  that  were  all/  replied  his  lordship. 
'  I  am  come  to  tell  you  that  my  Lord  Carteret  has  at 
present  under  consideration  the  issuing  of  a  warrant 
for  your  arrest  upon  that  charge.' 


232  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Sir  John  smiled  bitterly.  '  Your  information  would 
serve,  at  least,  to  resolve  any  doubt  that  might  linger 
in  my  mind  concerning  your  own  connection  with  the 
Government.' 

A  shadow  crossed  his  lordship's  face,  but  he  re- 
mained quite  unmoved. 

'You  persist  in  your  opinion  of  me.  It  is  so  deep- 
seated  that  all  things  must  serve  to  confirm  it.  But 
you  are  mistook,  Sir  John.  My  information  springs 
from  my  personal  relations  with  the  Secretary  of 
State,  relations  which  have  permitted  me  aforetime  to 
serve  my  friends,  and  which  have  permitted  those  — 
such  as  you,  sir  —  who  are  not  my  friends,  to  mis- 
construe my  aims.  I  will  add,  sir,  that  in  your  own 
case  this  warrant  would  already  have  been  issued  but 
for  the  exertions  which  I  have  used  with  his  lordship. 
I  have  played  upon  his  friendship  for  me  by  drawing 
his  notice  to  the  fact  that  I  must,  myself,  suffer  by 
your  arrest  since  I  am  hoping  for  the  honour  of  be- 
coming related  to  you  by  marriage  before  long.' 

'Ah!'  said  Sir  John  dryly,  'I  thought  we  should 
come  to  that  in  the  end!' 

Pauncefort  frowned.  'The  disinterestedness  of  my 
motives  must  be  so  apparent,  even  to  a  mind  preju- 
diced against  me,  that  I  marvel  you  still  remain  in 
doubt,  sir.  You  conceive,  I  fear,  that  I  am  come  to 
bargain  with  you.  You  expect  me  to  say:  "Sanction 
my  wedding  with  your  ward  and  niece,  and  my 
influence  with  my  Lord  Carteret  shall  be  employed 
to  obtain  the  suppression  of  this  warrant."  That  is 
what  you  expect  of  me,  is  it  not?' 

'Some  such  proposal,  I  admit,'  answered  the 
baronet,  'though  I  am  sure  you  will  cloak  it  in  more 
specious  terms.' 


PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER  233 

His  lordship  stroked  his  cleft  chin  thoughtfully, 
and  his  eyes  narrowed  as  they  surveyed  Sir  John. 

'Let  me,'  he  said  very  gently,  'let  me  beg  you  to 
observe,  Sir  John,  that  to  serve  such  aims  as  you  im- 
pute to  me,  I  need  in  this  matter  but  to  stand  aside 
and  suffer  the  warrant  to  be  executed.  Nay,  more: 
were  I  first  and  last  the  self-seeker  you  account  me 
and  do  not  scruple  to  pronounce  me,  I  should  be 
employing  such  influence  as  I  have  with  the  Secretary 
of  State  to  urge  the  warrant's  instant  execution.  For 
reflect,  I  beg,  that  upon  your  inevitable  conviction  of 
treason  must  follow  your  outlawry.  The  powers 
conferred  upon  you  by  the  will  of  the  late  Mr. 
Hollinstone  will  be  determined;  you  will  no  longer 
have  any  voice  at  law  in  any  matter  whatsoever,  and 
your  sanction  to  my  union  with  your  ward  may  be 
dispensed  with,  for  it  is  a  thing  you  will  have  power 
neither  to  confer  nor  to  withhold.  That,  Sir  John,  is  a 
reflection  which  may  lead  you  to  judge  me  in  a  spirit 
of  some  justice.' 

But  Sir  John  did  not  seem  at  all  disposed  to  do  so, 
notwithstanding  that  he  perceived  the  irrefragable 
fact  to  which  his  lordship  drew  his  attention. 

'I  see,'  he  said  slowly.  'I  see!  What  you  have  to 
propose,  then,  is  that  subject  to  my  giving  my  sanc- 
tion you  will  so  exercise  your  influence  with  my  Lord 
Carteret  as  to  achieve  the  suppression  of  the  warrant, 
eh?  And  thus — ' 

'Not  so,'  Pauncefort  interrupted,  loud  and  im- 
periously. 'I  make  no  bargain.  I  have  nothing  to 
propose.  I  merely  desire  to  indicate  that  by  serving 
me  you  will  best  serve  yourself.  In  any  event  my 
efforts  can  never  be  addressed  to  any  end  but  that  of 
saving  you  from  your  impending  fate  —  and  this,  not- 


234  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

withstanding  the  insults  you  have  heaped  upon  me 
now.  But  those  efforts,  which  would  be  almost  cer- 
tain of  success  if  exerted  by  one  who  is  become  your 
relative,  are  almost  equally  certain  of  failure  coming 
from  one  who  is  no  mors  than  your  friend.' 

The  impudence  of  it  struck  Sir  John  speechless  for 
a  moment.  He  found  in  it  matter  for  laughter  almost, 
despite  the  overwhelming  peril  at  which  his  heart  was 
sickening. 

'My  friend?'  he  said,  and  his  lip  curled  ominously. 
'Too  great  an  honour.'  And  he  bowed  ironically. 
'And  there  is  one  trifle  that  has  escaped  your  atten- 
tion, too,  in  this.  You  have  forgot  to  consider  Miss 
Hollinstone  herself  and  her  inclinations.' 

His  lordship  was  on  the  point  of  answering  that 
those  inclinations  might  easily  be  swayed  when  she 
knew  of  Sir  John's  peril.  But  from  that  false  step  he 
saved  himself  betimes.  He  was  none  of  your  clumsy, 
superficial  intriguers,  but  one  who  went  to  work  skil- 
fully in  the  depths.  He  contained  himself  and  bowed, 
his  face  wearing  an  expression  of  concern  and  sorrow. 

'It  is  true,'  he  said.  'I  have  not  sufficiently  con- 
sidered how  those  inclinations  will  have  been  swayed 
against  me  in  a  household  so  permeated  by  a  spirit 
hostile  to  myself —  in  a  household  where,  despite  all 
that  I  can  protest  and  all  that  I  can  do,  I  am  looked 
upon  as  a  man  who  has  not  kept  faith.  It  is  mon- 
strously unjust;  but  it  seems  there  is  naught  I  can  do 
to  combat  it.' 

Suspicious  of  this  half-resignation,  Sir  John  eyed 
his  visitor  shrewdly. 

'You  betrayed  yourself  to  her,  my  lord,  in  this  very 
room,'  he  answered  slowly.  '  You  betrayed  the  true  for- 
tune-hunting motives  by  which  you  were  animated. 


PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER  235 

Can  you  wonder  that  she  looks  upon  you  now  with  — ■ 
with  the  contempt  you  merit?' 

His  lordship  sighed.  He  dabbed  his  red  lips  with  a 
flimsy  kerchief  ere  he  answered.  Then  he  shrugged 
despondently. 

'I  was  mad  that  day,'  he  said.  'That  infamous 
money-lender,  Israel  Suarez,  had  been  almost  violent, 
and  I  was  driven  to  the  verge  of  despair.  But,  Sir 
John,  if  I  showed  myself  eager  for  control  of  your 
ward's  fortune,  it  was  not  thence  to  be  construed  that 
I  was  not  eager  for  herself,  that  I  did  not  love  her  for 
herself.'  He  turned  his  large,  handsome  eyes  upon 
the  baronet.  They  were  heavy  with  sorrow.  'I  would 
give  my  life  to  efface  that  hour,'  he  said. 

'Do  so,  then,'  said  Sir  John,  'and  perhaps  you  will 
efface  it.  If  not,  being  dead,  it  will  signify  less  to  you. 
You  will  cease  to  suffer.' 

'You  rally  me,  sir!'  was  the  indignant  cry. 

'Neither  yourself  nor  the  Government,'  said  Sir 
John,  'can  deprive  me  of  the  right  to  laugh.  Soon  it 
may  be  the  only  right  remaining  me.' 

His  lordship  took  up  his  hat  from  the  table,  tucked 
it  under  his  arm,  and  drew  on  his  heavy  riding-gloves. 
His  face  was  set,  his  lips  tight-pressed.  But  all  this 
was  purest  comedy.  He  realised  that  he  had  said  all 
that  need  be  said.  He  had  sowed  his  seeds,  and  it  were 
well  now  to  depart  without  further  disturbing  the  soil, 
leaving  those  same  seeds  to  sink  in.  He  was  fairly 
sanguine  that  they  would  put  forth  roots  ere  long. 
And,  meanwhile,  as  some  recompense  for  his  services 
and  some  compensation  for  the  injustice  done  him  in 
the  case  of  Harry  Gaynor,  Lord  Carteret  was  willing 
to  delay  Sir  John's  arrest  until  Pauncefort  should  give 
the  word.   So  that  there  was  no  desperate  haste. 


236  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'In  spite  of  all,  Sir  John/  he  said,  'I  cannot  forget 
that  for  a  season  we  were  good  friends.' 

'My  memory  is  not  so  good  as  yours,'  quoth  the 
downright,  uncompromising  baronet. 

'So  I  perceive,'  said  the  viscount,  smiling  bitterly. 
'Mine  is  not  only  long,  but  grateful.  And  so,  despite 
the  unworthy  manner  in  which  you  have  used  me  to- 
day, I  shall  continue  to  strain  every  effort  with  my 
Lord  Carteret  to  procure  your  immunity  from  the  con- 
sequences of  your  meddling  with  treason.' 

Sir  John  strode  to  the  bell-rope,  and  tugged  it  with 
a  violent  hand. 

'I  should  loathe  to  be  beholden  to  you/  he  said. 
'Pray  leave  my  affairs  to  care  for  themselves.' 

'I  understand,  Sir  John/  replied  the  other,  with  a 
resumption  of  his  air  of  resignation.  'Oh,  I  under- 
stand.' Then  he  bowed  stiffly.  '  I  have  the  honour  to 
give  you  good-day.' 

Sir  John  waved  a  hand  in  almost  contemptuous 
dismissal.  A  footman,  summoned  by  the  bell,  stood  in 
the  doorway.  'Reconduct  his  lordship/  said  the 
baronet  shortly. 

But  once  alone,  his  manner  changed  as  abruptly  as 
if  he  had  thrown  off  a  cloak  in  which  he  had  been 
wrapped.  He  walked  heavily  to  the  writing-table, 
sank  into  the  chair,  leaned  his  head  upon  his  hand  and 
stared  dully  into  vacancy.  Then  something  that  was 
almost  a  sob  shook  his  massive,  vigorous  frame. 

'My  poor  Maria!'  he  groaned  aloud.  'My  poor 
Evelyn!  God  help  you  both!' 

But  he  had  been  wiser  if,  instead  of  groaning 
impotently  there,  he  had  retained  awhile  his  cloak  of 
defiant  self-possession,  and  himself  escorted  my  Lord 
Pauncefort  to  the  chaise  which  awaited  him  in  the 


PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER  237 

avenue.  Thus  might  he  have  averted  the  ill-chance 
which  came  to  serve  his  lordship.  For  as  Pauncefort 
was  descending  the  steps,  he  encountered  Miss 
Kynaston  herself. 

He  paused  a  moment  to  give  her  greeting.  His  air 
was  gloomy  and  preoccupied.  But  what  engaged  him 
now  was  a  new  thought  that  had  flashed  into  his 
opportunist  mind.  True,  he  had  accounted  ample  the 
seed  he  had  sown;  and  yet  he  knew  that  Sir  John 
could  be  very  obstinate,  that  he  might  immolate  him- 
self out  of  that  obstinacy  upon  the  altar  of  what  he 
accounted  a  sacred  trust  from  the  dead.  There  could 
be  no  harm,  his  lordship  opined,  in  sowing  a  little 
more  seed  in  this  very  pretty  and  fertile  soil  so 
opportunely  thrust  before  him. 

'Alas,  Miss  Kynaston,  I  fear  that  I  have  been  the 
bearer  of  but  indifferent  tidings  to  your  father,'  he 
said,  and  the  gloom  of  his  face  was  most  tragically 
deepened. 

It  alarmed  her,  as  that  subtle  gentleman  intended 
that  it  should.  He  noted  the  flutter  of  colour  in  her 
cheeks,  the  startled  look  in  her  eyes. 

'What  is  it?'  she  asked  him  a  little  breathlessly. 

He  glanced  aside  at  the  footman  who  stood  by  the 
door.  She  read  the  look,  and  understood  his  meaning 
when  he  invited  her  to  walk  the  length  of  the  avenue 
with  him. 

'Drive  on,'  he  bade  his  coachman.  'Stay  for  me  at 
the  gates.' 

Down  the  avenue  of  elms,  in  the  dappled  shade, 
stepped  dainty  Evelyn  beside  his  handsome  lord- 
ship. 

'It  is  well,  perhaps,  that  I  should  tell  you,'  he  was 
saying  musingly,  'most  opportune,  indeed,  that  I 


238  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

should  have  met  you.  You  may  be  able  to  accomplish 
something  in  which  I  greatly  fear  me  that  I  have 
failed,  and  in  which  my  failure  involved  your  father 
in  grave  peril.' 

Piqued,  alarmed,  flattered  by  the  suggestion  that 
she  might  achieve  something  in  which  he  had  failed, 
Evelyn's  sweetly  timid  eyes  fluttered  him  an  upward 
glance  of  inquiry. 

'Your  father,  madam,  has  involved  himself  very 
seriously  by  having  harboured  here  one  who  has 
been  convicted  and  hanged  as  a  traitor  and  spy. 
Such  an  action  subjects  a  man  to  penalties  scarcely 
less  grave  than  those  imposed  upon  the  actual  traitor, 
because  in  itself  such  an  action  implies  an  almost 
equal  degree  of  guilt.' 

'What  do  you  tell  me?'  she  cried,  now  all  alarm. 

'The  brutal  truth,  ma'am.  But  there  is  not  yet  the 
need  for  alarm.  What  friend  can  do  I  am  doing  to 
obtain  the  suppression  of  the  warrant  which  the 
Secretary  of  State  has  already  signed  for  your  father's 
arrest.' 

'  For  his  arrest ! '  She  stood  still,  one  hand  clutching 
his  lordship's  sleeve,  and  her  lovely  empty  face  was 
blenched. 

'Nay,  now,  nay!'  he  soothed  her.  'I  entreat  ye, 
ma'am,  do  not  give  way.  I  am  hopeful  that  I  may 
prevail.  I  have  much  influence  with  my  Lord  Car- 
teret; he  listens  to  me,  and  you  may  be  sure  that 
all  such  influence  shall  be  employed  to  serve  you.' 

'What  —  what  could  they  do  to  him  if  he  were 
arrested?'  she  asked. 

'Ah!'  he  said,  and  rubbed  his  chin.  'They  would 
hardly  hang  him,  I  think.  No,  no,  there  is  no  danger 
of  that.   But  they  will  mulct  him  very  heavily  —  so 


PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER  239 

heavily  that  it  may  almost  amount  to  a  complete 
confiscation  of  his  estates  and  possessions.' 

A  vista  of  poverty,  of  destitution,  was  instantly 
opened  out  before  the  eyes  of  her  imagination.  It 
terrified  her,  for  all  that  the  picture  was  far  from  life- 
like. She  had  looked  upon  so  few  of  the  realities  of 
life  that  she  was  incapable  of  adequately  conceiving 
this  one.  But  she  conceived  enough  of  it  to  undergo 
almost  an  increase  of  terror. 

'Oh!'  she  moaned,  and  again:  'Oh!' 

'But  you  are  not  to  be  alarmed,'  he  repeated. 
'Oddslife,  now,  did  I  not  say  that  I  would  exert  my 
influence,  and  that  my  influence  is  great?  Bear  that 
in  mind  to  set  against  your  fears.'  He  spoke  cheer- 
fully and  confidently,  and,  reflective  as  she  always 
was,  she  felt  herself  cheered  and  her  confidence 
returning.  Then  his  face  clouded.  'If,'  he  ran  on, 
'your  father  had  but  chosen  the  way  I  showed  him, 
I  could  make  his  immunity  a  certainty.  Unfortu- 
nately — ' 

'What  way  was  that?'  she  questioned  eagerly. 

He  looked  down  at  this  frail  slip  of  womanhood,  ob- 
served the  elegantly  coiffed  golden  head  that  scarce 
reached  the  level  of  his  shoulder,  and  he  sighed. 

'As  you  know,'  he  said,  'I  am  betrothed  to  Da- 
maris.' 

'  Yes,  yes,'  said  she,  for  even  now  she  had  not  learnt 
of  the  grounds  upon  which  that  betrothal  had  been 
dissolved.  The  readiness  of  that  'yes,  yes,'  informed 
him  of  this  fact,  and  made  things  easier  for  him.  His 
eyes  glowed  a  moment  with  satisfaction. 

'You  may  not  know  that  your  father  is  opposed  to 
the  marriage;  that  he  will  not  allow  it  to  take  place 
until  Damaris  is  of  full  age.' 


24o  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'But  why?'  she  cried. 

*  Some  trifling  scruple  of  adherence  to  her  father's 
wishes,'  he  answered  lightly.  'This  scruple  I  have 
begged  him  to  put  aside.  I  have  assured  him  that 
were  I  his  relative,  instead  of  his  friend,  it  would 
strengthen  my  hands  to  serve  him,  it  would  render 
Lord  Carteret's  suppression  of  the  warrant  certain. 
For,  you  see,  madam,  he  loves  me  too  well  to  wish  to 
hurt  any  who  might  stand  in  a  degree  of  relationship, 
however  slender,  towards  myself.' 

'Then  —  then  it  is  easy.  He  is  safe,  and  there  is  not 
any  cause  for  fear,'  she  exclaimed,  and  her  face  was 
upturned  to  his. 

He  gloomed  down  at  her  sorrowfully,  and  shook 
his  head. 

'Unfortunately,  your  father  will  not  waive  his  idle 
scruples,'  he  said.  Then  he  brightened  again.  'But 
do  not  let  it  concern  you.  After  all,  I  do  not  doubt  but 
that  I  shall  be  able  to  prevail  even  as  it  is.  Still,  the 
other  way  would  be  safer.  But  I  dare  not  press  your 
father  on  the  point;  nor  yet  dare  I  press  Damaris, 
because  —  This  is  a  confidence  that  you'll  respect, 
Miss  Kynaston?' 

'Yes,  yes,'  she  assured  him  eagerly. 

'Because,'  he  resumed,  'Damaris  once  did  me  the 
injustice  to  think  that  I  wooed  her  out  of  mercenary 
motives,  and  I  could  not  for  all  the  world  give  her 
cause  to  think  so  again.' 

'How  could  she  in  this?'  cried  simple  Evelyn. 

He  smiled  the  bitter,  knowing  smile  of  the  man  of 
the  world,  of  the  man  who  has  looked  into  the  human 
heart  and  studied  its  proneness  to  unworthy  sus- 
picions. 

'It  might  be  construed  that  I  sought  to  make  a 


PAUNCEFORT  THE  SOWER  241 

bargain,  and  I  could  not  suffer  that.  Therefore,  I 
may  not  insist.  Perhaps,  indeed,  I  have  failed  to 
represent  to  your  father  the  full  extent  of  your  peril. 
If  I  tell  it  you,  it  is  because,  thinking  highly  as  I  do  of 
—  of  your  wit,  you  may  perhaps  consider  well  to  give 
a  hint  in  the  proper  quarter.  But  do  not  on  any 
account  say  that  I  urged  it,  and  —  and  perhaps  you 
had  best  say  naught  to  your  father.' 

It  was  as  plain  an  invitation  to  tell  Damaris  as  he 
could  well  have  uttered;  yet  she  did  not  perceive  his 
subtleties. 

'I  understand,'  she  cried.  'Oh  yes,  I  will  do  what  I 
can.' 

'I  am  sure  of  it,  and  thus  you  will  bring  me  the 
happiness  of  having  served  not  only  your  father,  but 
yourself —  for  it  involves  your  own  future  as  well!' 
Doffing  his  three-cornered  hat,  he  bowed  low  over  her 
hand.  He  kissed  it  in  farewell,  and  also,  as  it  were,  to 
seal  a  bond  between  them. 

They  had  reached  the  chaise  by  now.  He  entered 
it,  whilst  she  stood  by  the  gate-post  watching  him, 
somewhat  bemused  by  all  that  he  had  said.  The 
coachman  gathered  up  his  reins,  when  suddenly  his 
lordship  checked  him.  He  thrust  his  head  from  the 
carriage  window. 

'Upon  second  thoughts,  Miss  Kynaston,  perhaps  it 
were  best  if  you  said  naught  to  any  one.  Leave  the 
matter  in  my  hands  to  deal  with  as  best  I  can.  I'  — 
he  faltered,  and  shrugged  his  shoulders  helplessly. 
'I  so  dread  the  danger  of  unworthy  motives  being 
imputed  to  me.   So  best  forget  what  I  have  said.' 

Again  he  gravely  saluted  her,  and  without  waiting 
for  an  answer  he  sank  back  into  his  chaise.  But  as  the 
carriage  rolled  away  he  smiled,  well  satisfied  to  reflect 


242  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

that  his  meeting  her  had  been  a  most  fortunate 
chance,  and  that  he  had  sowed  more  than  he  had 
looked  to  do  when  he  came,  and  some  of  it  on  very 
fertile  soil. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 
IN  CHECK 

AS  my  Lord  Pauncefort  calculated  so  did  things 
j^J^  fall  out.  No  sooner  had  she  seen  his  carriage  roll 
away  in  a  cloud  of  dust  towards  London  than  Evelyn 
went  in  quest  of  Damaris. 

She  found  her  seated  by  the  window  of  her  room  — 
she  would  sit  there  by  the  hour  now  in  apparent  idle- 
ness —  and  in  her  hand  Damaris  held  Captain 
Gaynor's  letter,  which  already  she  had  read  so  often 
that  its  every  character  was  seared  indelibly  upon  her 
memory.  She  thrust  the  epistle  into  the  bosom  of  her 
corcage  when  Evelyn  entered,  still  pale  and  breathless 
now  from  the  haste  she  had  made,  and  she  listened 
quite  calmly  to  the  tale  that  Evelyn  brought. 

At  the  mention  of  Sir  John's  danger  her  gentle  face 
had  hardened  and  she  had  frowned.  Her  quick  mind 
perceived  it  instantly.  Whatever  else  might  be  false 
in  the  message  of  which  her  cousin  was  the  bearer, 
there  could  be  no  question  as  to  the  truth  of  that  part 
of  it.   Yet  she  remained  singularly  quiet. 

'I  see,'  she  said,  when  Evelyn  had  done.  'And  of 
course  Lord  Pauncefort  bade  you  tell  me  this.'  The 
faint  sneer  gave  the  words  their  intended  meaning, 
and  Evelyn  grasped  it  instantly. 

'Not  so,'  she  cried,  her  cheeks  flushing  with  indig- 
nation for  one  whom  she  felt  it  her  duty  —  since  he 
had  so  openly  and  honestly  confided  in  her  —  to 
champion.  '  Not  so  —  though  he  feared  that  you 
would  think  so.' 


244  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Then  of  course,  he  did  intend  that  you  would  tell 
me.' 

'He  did  not!'  Evelyn  stamped  her  foot.  She  was 
angry  now. 

'Why  all  this  heat,  my  dear?' 

'Because  you  are  so  unjust,  so  meanly  suspicious. 
And  you  go  too  fast  in  your  suspicions.  It  was  just 
because  he  feared  that  you  might  impute  unworthy 
motives  to  him  that  he  begged  me  as  he  was  setting 
out  to  forget  all  that  he  had  said  and  to  mention  it  to 
no  one.' 

'  Being  quite  confident,  of  course,  that  you  could 
not  keep  it  to  yourself,'  said  Damaris.  'Nay,  Evelyn, 
be  not  angry  with  me.  My  scorn  is  not  for  you,  child.' 

'  I  am  as  old  as  you  are,'  flashed  Evelyn  back,  with 
something  of  her  mother's  irrelevance. 

'  But  you  have  been  saved  some  of  the  bitter  experi- 
ence which  has  been  mine,'  added  Damaris,  with  a 
pale  smile,  'else  my  Lord  Pauncefort  would  not  so 
easily  have  made  a  tool  of  you.' 

'A  tool  of  me?  Lord  Pauncefort?'  Her  indignation 
was  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  charge.  For  she 
magnified  it  into  an  insult  —  a  slight  upon  her  shrewd- 
ness. 

'  Do  you  not  see,  Evelyn  dear,  that  if  he  had  no  ends 
to  serve  by  telling  you  this,  he  would  not  needlessly 
have  harassed  you  by  showing  you  your  father's  peril  ? 
It  is  precisely  because  he  sought  to  strike  a  bargain 
with  Sir  John,  and  because  Sir  John  failed  him  en- 
tirely, that  he  sent  me  this  message  by  you.' 

'He  sent  no  message,'  Evelyn  insisted.  "Tis  hate- 
ful to  be  so  suspicious.  He  told  me  not  to  mention 
what  he  had  said,  just  because  he  feared  you  would 
so  construe  his  ends.' 


IN  CHECK  245 

'That  fear,  at  least,  was  shrewd  in  him.* 

'I  see  that  it  is  idle  to  make  you  understand.'  And 
on  that,  with  flaming  cheeks,  Evelyn  swung  on  her 
heel  and  left  her  cousin. 

To  have  been  told  that  Lord  Pauncefort  had  made 
a  tool  of  her,  as  though  she  had  no  wit  of  her  own ! 
It  was  monstrous,  and  it  sent  her  very  angry  to  her 
chamber.  Had  she  known  in  what  frame  of  mind  she 
left  poor  Damaris,  perhaps  her  own  had  been  less 
bitter. 

To  the  burden,  already  almost  overwhelming,  of 
her  grief  was  added  this  fresh  horror —  the  knowledge 
that  over  her  only  remaining  friend  hung  this  terrible 
peril  in  which  his  very  life  might  be  involved,  and  the 
further  torturing,  agonising  knowledge  that  it  lay 
within  her  power,  by  self-immolation,  to  rescue  him. 

She  rose,  and  remained  standing  for  some  time  by 
the  window,  her  hands  pressed  against  her  brow,  as  if 
seeking  to  stimulate  the  numbed  brain  within.  Did  it 
greatly  matter  what  befell  her  now?  Did  it  greatly 
matter  that  she  should  deliver  herself  to  Pauncefort 
as  a  ransom  for  Sir  John?  Was  it  not,  perhaps,  the 
best  use  to  which  she  could  now  devote  her  otherwise 
wasted  and  useless  life?' 

Heavy-footed  she  went  below  in  quest  of  her 
guardian.  She  found  him  still  seated  at  the  table  in 
the  library,  bowed  down  in  expectation  of  the  descent 
of  that  impending  sword.  He  looked  up  as  she 
entered,  and  the  sight  of  that  grey  face,  and  the  dumb 
pain  investing  those  eyes  that  were  wont  to  gleam  so 
clear  and  jovially,  strengthened  her  in  her  purpose 
by  showing  her  the  great  good  to  be  achieved. 

She  came  to  him,  and  set  an  arm  about  his  shoulder, 
her  smooth  warm  cheek  against  his  own. 


246  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'  Father  dear,'  she  murmured  —  and  since  it  was 
not  her  custom  to  address  him  by  that  name,  her 
present  use  of  it  lent  her  a  greater  tenderness  — 
'father  dear,  you  are  troubled,  and  I  have  come  to 
help  you  if  you  will  let  me.' 

'Trou —  troubled!'  he  faltered,  with  a  poor  at- 
tempt to  bluster.  'Nay,  now,  what  should  be 
troubling  me?' 

'This  thing  that  my  Lord  Pauncefort  came  to  tell 
you.   You  see  that  I  know  all.' 

He  attempted  to  swing  round  in  her  embrace  that 
he  might  face  her. 

'  Who  told  you  ? '  he  growled.  '  Did  you  see  Paunce- 
fort?  Did  he  make  you  this  infamous  proposal?' 

'No,'  she  answered;  'he  saw  Evelyn.' 

'And  he  told  her  to  the  end  that  she  might  tell 
you!'   His  voice  was  shaking  now  with  indignation. 

'Be  not  angry  with  her,  father  dear.'  Her  cheek 
pressed  his  own  yet  more  closely.  'Evelyn  is  but  a 
child.  She  never  realised  that  my  Lord  Pauncefort 
used  her  to  this  end.  I  do  not  think  that  she  fully 
realises  your  danger  even  now.' 

'Indeed,'  he  answered  bitterly,  'it  is  well  written 
that  the  father  of  a  fool  hath  no  joy.'  For  in  his  mind 
at  that  moment  was  the  fact  that  his  child,  informed 
of  this  horror  that  menaced  him,  had  never  given  a 
thought  to  the  condition  in  which  «t  must  have  left 
him,  had  never  attempted  to  seek  him  out,  to  bring 
him  at  least  the  comfort  of  her  affection  and  sympathy. 
It  had  been  left  for  Damaris  to  discharge  a  consoler's 
duty,  and  more,  to  seek  him  with  the  offer  to  immo- 
late herself  that  she  might  rescue  him  —  for  already 
he  guessed,  with  heavy  foreboding,  the  nature  of  the 
help  which  she  announced. 


IN  CHECK  247 

It  must  be  as  Damaris  said.  It  must  be  that  this 
frivolous,  irresponsible  child  he  had  brought  into  the 
world  had  not  the  wit  to  understand  his  position.  He 
sighed  heavily  as  he  reflected  that  she  was,  after  all, 
his  offspring  —  his  and  his  foolish  wife's  —  and  that 
he  had  not  the  right  to  complain. 

'Do  not  grieve,  my  sweet  Damaris,'  he  said 
presently.  'Your  sympathy  has  consoled  and 
cheered  me.  It  makes  me  realise  that  perhaps  all  may 
not  yet  be  lost.' 

'Nothing  is  lost,'  she  answered  him,  'since  we  have 
it  in  our  power  to  —  to  ransom  you.' 

'Not  that!'  he  cried,  in  a  voice  of  thunder.  'I  for- 
bid it.  Do  you  hear  me,  child  ? '  He  disengaged  him- 
self from  her  arms,  and  threw  back  his  great  head 
that  he  might  regard  her  fully.  Then  in  a  milder, 
tender  voice,  he  pursued:  'Ah,  it  is  sweet  in  you  to 
offer  it;  it  is  noble  in  you,  and  I  am  proud  and  happy 
in  this  earnest  of  your  love,  my  dear.  But  it  may  not 
—  it  shall  not  be.' 

'  I  am  but  a  husk,'  she  said  slowly,  her  voice  a  little 
wistful,  her  eyes  resolute.  'All  that  was  Damaris 
Hollinstone  perished  at  Tyburn  a  week  ago  —  all 
save  this  little  of  me  that  I  have  kept  for  you.  What, 
then,  can  it  signify?  Let  my  lord  have  this  husk. 
It  is  all  that  he  seeks  of  me  —  more  than  he  seeks, 
since  my  fortune  is  his  real  desire.  And  how  better 
could  that  fortune  be  applied  than  to  ransoming  the 
man  whom  to-day  I  honour  most  in  all  the  world. 
Ah,  father  dear,  you'll  not  deny  me.  Did  you  know 
how  gladly  I  will — ' 

'No!'  he  roared  again,  and  his  great  hand  crashed 
heavily  upon  the  table.  'It  shall  not  be.  I  would  not 
permit  it  were  it  to  save  me  from  being  quartered 


248  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

alive.  What  manner  of  knave  should  I  be,  Damaris? 
What  respect  for  me  could  linger  with  you  or  with  any 
honest  soul  did  I  become  a  party  to  so  infamous  a 
bargain  ? '  He  waved  a  hand  of  peremptory  dismissal. 
'Let  come  what  will.  I  am  an  old  man,  and  in  any 
event  I  should  not  have  many  more  years  of  life 
before  me.  The  Government  will  get  but  little,  when 
all  is  said,  and  for  such  a  little  the  ransom  you  pro- 
pose were  altogether  absurd  and  disproportionate.' 

'Can  it  be  that  you  think  only  of  yourself?'  she 
asked  him. 

He  stared.  '  My  dear,  I  hope  I  think  of  you  as  well.' 

'There  are  those  who  have  a  prior  claim  to  mine 
upon  your  thoughts.' 

She  saw  the  sudden  spasm  of  pain  that  crossed  his 
face;  noted  the  little  pause  before  he  spoke  again. 
But  when  he  did  speak  his  tone  and  manner  were 
unshaken. 

'And  am  I  so  base  that  I  will  purchase  their  wel- 
fare at  the  price  of  your  prostitution?'  he  asked 
her. 

But  she  did  not  flinch.  '  I  have  toid  you  that  I  am 
but  a  husk,'  she  said.   'Do  you  not  believe  me?' 

'O  my  God! '  he  groaned,  and  for  a  moment  he  was 
limp  and  helpless.  But  in  the  next  he  had  mastered 
himself.  'Not  another  word  of  this,  my  child,'  he 
said,  and  his  voice  was  now  one  of  utter  finality.  'As 
you  love  me  do  not  attempt  to  pursue  this  subject 
further.  I  will  not  listen.  Ah,  don't  think  me  harsh, 
don't  think  me  slow  to  perceive  your  nobility,  your 
greatness,  my  sweet  Damaris.'  He  rose,  took  her  in 
his  arms,  and  kissed  her  very  tenderly.  'For  that  I 
thank  you  from  my  soul.  You  have  brought  such 
comfort  and  gladness  to  my  grey  hairs  this  day  as  I 


IN  CHECK  249 

have  never  known.  To  the  end  I  shall  thank  God  for 
the  treasure  of  your  affection.' 

'Ah,  but,  father  dear!'  Her  face  was  upturned  to 
his,  and  he  saw  the  tears  brimming  her  eyes. 

'No  more,'  he  said  gently.  'No  more  of  this.  You 
cannot  constrain  me,  for  even  if  you  consented  of 
your  own  accord  to  the  sacrifice,  even  did  you  in  your 
foolish  nobility  seek  that  hound  Pauncefort  and 
announce  your  readiness  to  pay  the  price,  yet  should 
I  withhold  my  consent  to  the  union,  and  exercise  my 
rights  under  your  father's  will.  I  must,  as  I  believe  in 
God  and  in  honour.' 

She  perceived  then  how  irrefragable  was  his  resolve, 
perceived  with  her  true-sightedness  that  did  she  urge 
him  further  he  might  perhaps  make  an  end  by  impal- 
ing himself  upon  the  sword  that  threatened  him.  So 
she  went  her  way,  praying  heaven  to  afford  her  the 
means  of  saving  him  yet,  despite  himself.  Indeed,  so 
engrossed  was  she  in  the  thought  that  she  realised  but 
indifferently  its  meaning  to  herself,  had  little  leisure 
in  which  to  dwell  upon  the  horror  of  the  price  that 
she  must  pay. 

One  day,  a  week  later,  she  thought  that  her  chance 
had  come,  when  Evelyn  brought  her  word  that  my 
Lord  Pauncefort  was  again  closeted  with  Sir  John  in 
the  library. 

Again  as  on  the  occasion  of  my  lord's  previous  visit, 
Sir  John's  first  impulse  had  been  to  deny  himself. 
But  he  reflected  that  it  were  best  to  receive  his  lord- 
ship and  learn  —  as  he  supposed  he  would  —  the 
precise  present  degree  of  the  danger  threatened.  Yet 
his  reception  of  Pauncefort  was  again  as  uncom- 
promising as  before. 

'You  are  not  welcome,  my  lord,'  he  said,  rising  to 


250  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

receive  his  visitor,  and  keeping  him  standing  through- 
out the  interview,  'and  if  your  visit  has  the  same 
object  as  your  last  you  had  been  better  advised  to 
have  spared  yourself  the  trouble.' 

'  I  deplore,  Sir  John,"'  returned  the  viscount,  with 
his  almost  miraculous  equanimity,  'to  find  you  still  in 
the  same  obdurate  humour.  But  I  think  I  shall  have 
the  felicity  of  mending  it.'  He  advanced  slowly, 
gracefully  into  the  room,  whilst  Sir  John  took  his 
habitual  stand  with  his  shoulders  to  the  carved  over- 
mantel. 'Had  I  not  conceived,'  he  continued,  'means 
of  removing  your  unworthy  suspicions,  of  proving  to 
you  how  disinterested  is  my  action,  how  dictated 
purely  by  my  profound  affection  for  your  ward,  I 
should  not  again  have  intruded  where  —  as  you  do 
not  omit  to  tell  me  —  I  am  unwelcome.' 

He  had  waited  from  hour  to  hour  in  London, 
confident  that  there  would  come  to  him  a  letter  from 
Damaris.  Unable,  however,  longer  to  endure  the 
suspense;  knowing,  too,  that  he  could  not  much 
longer  delay  action  in  the  matter  of  advising  Sir 
John's  arrest,  lest  it  should  occur  independently  to 
Lord  Carteret  to  order  it  (from  which  will  be  gathered 
the  falsehood  in  which  his  lordship  had  been  dealing), 
he  had  returned  to  the  attack,  armed  now  with  a 
fresh  weapon. 

'I  am  listening,  my  lord,'  was  the  baronet's  cold 
answer.  '  But  I  warn  you  that  the  matter  will  need  a 
deal  of  proof,  and  I  conceive  that  your  invention  is 
more  like  to  be  strained  than  my  credulity.  But 
proceed,  my  lord.' 

'You  have  said,  sir,  that  to  the  end  you  would 
withhold  your  sanction  to  my  marriage  with  your 
niece?'  His  lordship's  statement  was  interrogative 
rather  than  affirmative. 


IN  CHECK  251 

'I  have  said  so,'  answered  Sir  John. 

'And  I  hope,'  said  his  lordship,  'that  you  adhere  to 
that  resolve.' 

'You  are  justified  of  that  hope,  at  least,'  was  the 
dry  answer. 

The  door  opened  gently  and,  unobserved  by  either 
of  the  men,  Damaris  appeared  under  the  lintel. 

'I  rejoice  in  that,'  answered  his  lordship,  his  face 
lightening  suddenly,  'since  thus  I  can  prove  to  your- 
self and  to  Damaris  my  penitence  of  my  past  atti- 
tude and  the  sincerity  of  my  feelings.  I  am  willing,  Sir 
John,  willing  and  eager  to  marry  your  niece,  as  you 
once  invited  me,  without  your  sanction.  And  so,  the 
devil  take  her  fortune!' 

'And  the  devil  take  your  offer!'  was  the  imper- 
turbable reply. 

'No,  no,  Sir  John!'  It  was  Damaris  who  spoke. 
She  advanced  quietly  into  the  room. 

'  Damaris ! '  cried  Sir  John,  and  his  brows  grew  dark. 

His  lordship,  a  fine  figure  in  bronze-green  satin, 
bowed  until  the  curls  of  his  periwig  almost  met  across 
his  face. 

'Since  his  lordship  offers  this  proof  of  his  sincer- 
ity—  'she  began,  and  Lord  Pauncefort's  eyes  were 
aglow  with  triumph.  But  this  triumph  was  not  yet 
complete. 

'His  sincerity!'  the  baronet  interrupted.  'Are  you 
deceived  by  these  smooth  words?' 

'Sir  John,  you  go  too  far,'  my  lord  reproved  him, 
very  haughty  now.  'Consider,  pray,  that  I  do  no 
more  than  take  you  at  your  word,  as  I  should  have 
taken  you  when  it  was  uttered  but  that  I  was  a  fool. 
Thus,  at  least,  I  had  saved  Damaris  and  myself  much 
fruitless  pain.    I  am  here,  sir,  to  repair  a  fault  for 


252  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

which  I  have  never  ceased  to  feel  the  most  profound 
contrition,  and  if  there  is  deception  in  my  words  I 
challenge  you,  sir,  to  unmask  it.' 

He  flicked  a  handkerchief  as  he  finished,  applied  it 
to  his  lips,  and  with,  head  thrown  back,  gallant 
defiance  in  every  line  of  him,  he  waited  for  Sir  John's 
answer.   It  came  hard  and  swift. 

'Why,  what  a  foolish  rogue  is  this!  It  passes  belief! 
That  he  should  think,  Damaris,  to  cozen  us  with 
transparent  falsehoods  that  would  not  deceive  a 
child!  And  you  would  listen  to  him?  Be  it  so;  but  at 
least  let  me  help  you  to  understand  him.  He  will  take 
you  without  my  sanction,  he  says;  by  which  he  means 
that  he  will  take  you  without  your  fortune,  and  that 
in  withholding  my  sanction  I  am  to  dispose  of  your 
inheritance  as  your  father's  will  directs.  But  am  I? 
Shall  I  be  allowed  to  do  so?  If  they  arrest  me  and 
make  an  outlaw  of  me,  what  power  have  I  to  execute 
any  such  deed?  And  that,  Damaris,  is  what  my  lord 
is  counting  on.  Oh,  he  is  subtle,  but  not  subtle 
enough  to  match  his  villainy.' 

Lord  Pauncefort's  face  was  black  with  anger. 
'Your  injustice,  sir,  is  the  only  thing  that  passes 
belief.'  He  swung  to  Damaris.  'I  am  employing 
every  effort  of  which  I  am  capable  to  restrain  the 
Secretary  of  State  from  issuing  a  warrant  against 
your  uncle,  as  I  have  told  him;  and  all  that  he  can 
find  for  me  on  his  side  is  insult.  I  think  I  had  much 
better  wash  my  hands  of  the  affair,  and  leave  him  to 
his  fate.' 

'No,  no!' she  cried.  'Wait,  my  lord.  Do  you  under- 
take that  Sir  John  shall  have  complete  immunity 
from  any  proceedings?' 

'From  any  proceedings  resulting  from  his  having 


IN  CHECK 


*S3 


harboured  Captain  Gaynor,'  said  his  lordship.  'That 
is  what  I  have  promised.  I  do  not  wish  this  to  be  a 
bargain  between  us,  Damaris.  In  no  sense  do  I  make 
it  a  bargain.  But  loving  you  as  I  do/  he  continued, 
affecting  not  to  observe  how  she  winced  under  those 
words,  'loving  you  as  I  do,  how  can  I  refrain  from 
pointing  out  that,  were  I  Sir  John's  relative  by  mar- 
riage, my  Lord  Carteret,  out  of  his  affection  for  me, 
would  be  more  easily  induced  to  refrain  from  pro- 
ceedings against  him?  This  I  can  promise.' 

'Aye,  and  prove  as  false  to  your  promise  as  you 
have  proven  false  to  all  else,'  stormed  Sir  John.  'Oh, 
do  not  heed  him,  Damaris.' 

'Nay,  you  must  heed  me,  mistress,'  said  his  lord- 
ship. '  You  were  right  to  —  to  have  despised  me  once 
for  an  altogether  unworthy  hesitation.  That  hesi- 
tation I  am  now  amending,  and  I  implore  you  not  to 
make  me  suffer  more  for  it  than  I  have  done.  I  am 
ready  and  eager,  as  I  have  said,  to  waive  Sir  John's 
sanction,  and  thus  consent  that  your  fortune  be 
bestowed  elsewhere.  What  greater  proof  can  I  afford 
of  the  sincerity  of  my  intentions?' 

'He  waives  my  sanction,'  said  Sir  John,  'knowing 
full  well  that  once  I  am  laid  by  the  heels  he  can  dis- 
pense with  it  at  law  to  appropriate  your  inheritance. 
Do  you  not  see,  Damaris,  that,  far  from  helping 
me,  as  you  suppose,  by  such  a  sacrifice,  you  will 
but  imperil  me,  you  will  make  my  doom  doubly 
assured  ? ' 

This  was  checkmate  indeed;  and  his  lordship  saw  it 
—  saw  it  reflected  on  her  face.  Her  shrewd  wit  had 
straightly  followed  Sir  John's  shrewd  indication. 

'Then  you  must  give  your  sanction,  Sir  John,'  she 
cried.   'You  must!' 


254  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Never!'  he  answered,  and  his  lips  closed  firmly,  his 
face  became  a  stone. 

Lord  Pauncefort  perceived  the  doom  of  his  hope  as 
far  as  the  present  line  of  attack  was  concerned.  But 
from  her  attitude  he  perceived  where  and  how  a 
flanking  movement  might  be  made  that  should  carry 
him  to  easy  victory.  At  once  he  flung  off  his  hypo- 
critical mask  of  resignation,  and  showed  now  a 
countenance  that  was  evil  and  menacing. 

He  bowed.  'There  is  no  more  to  be  said  at  present,' 
he  murmured.  'You  are  too  old  a  man  to  call  to 
account  for  your  words.  It  but  remains  for  me  to 
withdraw  from  further  insult.' 

As  on  the  former  occasion  Sir  John  pulled  the  bell- 
rope. 

'I  am  glad,  sir,  that  you  perceive  it,'  was  his  scorn- 
ful answer. 

Deliberately  his  lordship  turned  his  shoulders  upon 
him,  and  with  bowed  head  he  stood  respectfully  before 
Damaris. 

'I  will  beg  you  to  judge  more  mercifully  than  does 
your  uncle.  Believe  me,'  and  his  voice  vibrated  with 
an  apparent  sincerity  that  almost  deceived  her,  'I 
have  not  deserved  so  much  opprobrium,  and  I  am 
honest  in  my  love  of  you.' 

He  swept  her  a  profound  bow,  and  was  gone. 

She  ran  to  Sir  John,  and  put  her  arms  about  his 
neck. 

'Why  did  you  refuse?'  she  wailed.  'You  have 
doomed  yourself.' 

'Not  more  than  I  was  doomed  before,'  he  answered 
gloomily.  He  stroked  the  dark  head,  and  looked  wist- 
fully into  her  brown  eyes,  that  were  now  so  troubled 
for  his  sake.    'Indeed,  my  only  chance  is  to  stand 


IN  CHECK  255 

firm,'  he  said,  to  comfort  her.  'If  I  give  way,  I  am 
destroyed.  But  as  long  as  I  refuse  him,  I  may  hold 
him  off;  he  may  hope  and,  hoping,  may  not  denounce 
me  —  for  it  is  upon  his  denunciation  that  my  arrest 
depends.  The  rest  is  all  a  fable  of  his  own.  He  has 
convinced  me  of  that  do-day.' 

'Oh,  no,  no;  never  that!'  she  cried. 

'  I  know  my  Lord  Carteret.  We  have  been  almost 
friends.  And  I  know  that  he  is  not  the  man  to  stand 
like  a  lackey  at  that  fellow's  beck.  Pish!  It  is  as  I 
say.  He  pretends  to  stand  between  me  and  arrest. 
He  does  —  by  not  denouncing  me.  He  denounced  all 
the  others.   He  denounced  Harry  Gaynor.' 

She  cried  out  at  that.  It  was  a  shrewd  thrust,  well 
calculated  to  pierce  her  armour  of  self-sacrifice,  as  Sir 
John  intended. 

'Aye,  it  is  true  enough,  as  God  hears  me,'  he  in- 
sisted. 'And  that  is  the  man  you  would  have  married! 
You  see  how  impossible  'twould  be?  You  had  not 
quite  understood  this  until  now,  eh?  But  do  not  fret, 
dear  child.  By  opposing  him  we  may  still  weather 
this.' 

She  was  deceived.   '  You  believe  that  ? ' 

'I  do,'  he  answered,  lying  bravely.  And  so,  some- 
what comforted  by  his  assurance,  she  departed. 

But  when  alone  he  went  again  to  sit  at  that  table, 
as  he  had  sat  before  after  the  last  interview  with  Lord 
Pauncefort.  And  if  on  that  occasion  he  had  ac- 
counted himself  in  grave  danger,  to-day  he  accounted 
himself  irrevocably  doomed.  The  end  would  not  be 
long  in  coming,  and  he  wondered  again  what  would 
betide  his  helpless  child,  and  still  more  helpless  wife, 
when  the  blow  fell.  From  his  heart  he  sent  up  a  silent 
prayer  to  God  to  guard  them. 


256  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Still  sitting  there,  quite  idly,  a  lackey  found  him 
half  an  hour  later  when  he  entered  with  a  letter  for 
Sir  John,  which  a  messenger  had  just  brought  from 
London. 

l 


CHAPTER  XIX 

THE  CAPTAIN  GOES  INTO  ACTION 

SIR  JOHN  broke  the  seal,  and  spread  a  sheet  of 
yellowish  paper,  on  which  a  crabbed  and  spidery 
hand  had  written: 

Honoured  Sir, —  I  have  a  communication  to  make, 
that  I  think  you  will  consider  of  importance,  concerning 
your  friend  Captain  Harry  Gaynor,  and  as  I  am  in  some 
haste  to  deliver  it,  which  you  will  consider  quite  natural 
when  you  shall  have  received  it,  I  hope  that  you  will  find 
it  possible  to  do  me  the  honour  of  visiting  me  here  at  once. 
The  bearer  of  these  presents  has  my  order  to  reconduct 
you  hither  should  you  desire  to  give  my  request  the  im- 
mediate compliance  which  I  solicit.  Should  this  not  be 
possible  or  convenient,  he  is  to  bring  me  word  on  what  day 
and  at  what  hour  I  may  look  for  the  honour  of  your  visit. 
My  house  is  situate  in  the  Gray's  Inn  Road,  three  doors 
from  The  Weeping  Woman,  as  you  go  from  Holborn. 

I  am,  honoured  sir,  your  obedient,  respectful  servant 

Emanuel  Blizzard 

Sir  John  read  the  letter  twice  with  knitted  brows. 
A  communication  concerning  Harry  Gaynor!  And 
the  writer  did  not  so  much  as  say  'the  late  Harry 
Gaynor.'  It  flashed  through  his  mind  at  the  first 
reading  that  here  might  lurk  some  trap  for  him.  But 
that  omission  of  'the  late'  —  with  its  inevitable 
suggestion  that  the  writer  was  in  ignorance  of  the 
Captain's  death  —  was  in  itself  almost  sufficient  to 
dispel  any  such  fear.  Assuredly,  anyone  preparing  a 
snare  for  him  would  not  have  fallen  into  such  an 


258  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

omission  as  that.  A  doubt  still  lingered.  But  he 
crushed  it  aside.  What  need  was  there  to  lay  traps 
for  him?  If  his  conviction  was  desired,  the  grounds 
already  afforded  were  ample. 

He  rose  abruptly,  his  decision  taken.  He  could 
form  no  conception  of  the  nature  of  this  promised 
communication,  seek  as  he  might;  but  it  could  not  be 
his  to  be  slow  to  inform  himself.  He  looked  at  the 
respectfully  waiting  servant. 

1  What  like  is  the  messenger  who  brought  this  ? '  he 
inquired. 

'Just  a  plain  youth,  Sir  John,'  the  man  replied. 
'He  came  on  horseback.' 

'Tell  him  I  will  accompany  him.  Bid  them  saddle 
Jessie  for  me,  and  send  Bird  to  help  me  on  with  my 
boots.' 

He  said  nothing  to  Damaris,  and  to  his  wife  no 
more  than  that  he  was  summoned  to  London  upon  a 
matter  of  some  urgency  and  that  he  would  return  that 
night. 

A  couple  of  hours  later  he  was  standing  in  a  dark 
room  on  the  ground  floor  of  the  doctor's  dingy  house 
in  the  Gray's  Inn  Road.  Into  this  room  came  the 
slim  little  professor,  moving  swiftly  and  jerkily,  as 
was  his  habit,  and  clucking  as  he  came. 

'Tut,  tut!  This  is  kind  in  you,  Sir  John.  I  should 
be  distressed  to  think  I  had  caused  you  inconvenience, 
eh?  I  trust  I  have  not.'  He  washed  his  great  bony 
hands  in  the  air,  his  gimlet  eyes  gleaming  through  his 
spectacles. 

'I  should  not  consider  any  inconvenience  of 
account  to  receive  a  communication  touching  one 
who  was  almost  as  a  son  to  me,  Mr.  Blizzard.' 

'Doctor — Doctor  Blizzard,'  amended  the  Profes- 


THE  CAPTAIN  GOES  INTO  ACTION       259 

sor.  'Your  obedient  servant.  But,  will  you  not  sit, 
eh?' 

Sir  John  took  the  armchair  to  which  the  Doctor 
waived  him,  and  set  his  hat  and  whip  on  the  table  at 
his  side.  The  Professor  leaned  against  the  table, 
clucking  for  a  moment.  He  thrust  his  spectacles  up 
on  to  his  forehead  until  they  almost  joined  the  rim  of 
his  grizzled  bob-wig,  and  he  peered  at  his  visitor  with 
short-sighted  eyes  that  had  lost  all  apparent  powers 
of  penetration. 

'The  communication  I  have  for  you,  sir,  is  very 
extraordinary  —  ve-ry  extraordinary,  eh;  in  fact, 
startling.' 

'  Yes,  yes,'  said  the  baronet.  'I  will  beg  you  not  to 
prolong  my  suspense.' 

'Tut!  I  should  not  dream  of  it.  But  it  may  be 
necessary  to  prepare  you  somewhat,  eh?' 

'To  prepare  me?' 

'Godso!  yes.  Have  I  not  said  that  my  communi- 
cation is  of  a  startling  character,  eh?  It  amounts,  sir, 
to  this:  that  the  gallows  at  Tyburn  proved  to  your 
friend  the  gate  of  life  in  a  sense  other  than  that  in- 
tended by  the  prophet,  psalmist  or  theologian,  or 
whoever  it  was,  who  made  the  phrase  —  mors  janua 
vitcey  ye  know.' 

Sir  John  stared  at  him  blankly.  Had  he  to  do  with 
a  madman? 

'Will  ye  tell  me,  Doctor  Blizzard,  in  plain  terms, 
what  ye  mean?' 

'In  plain  terms?  Ah!  In  plain  terms,  then.... 
But  wait !  I  am  a  doctor,  as  I  have  told  you,  sir.  I  am 
a  professor  of  anatomy,  and  therefore  a  student  of 
anatomy.  By  great  good  fortune,  sir,  your  friend's 
friends  neglected  to  provide  a  funeraj  for  him,  and  I 


260  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

bought  the  alleged  corpse  from  the  snatchers  for  a 
couple  o'  guineas,  and  —  well,  then,  to  put  it  in  plain 
terms,  as  ye  desire,  I  found  that  he  wasn't  dead  at  all/ 

Sir  John  sat  very  still.  Slowly  the  colour  faded  from 
his  face.  His  lips  parted,  but  he  made  no  sound. 
Then  he  began  to  tremble  from  head  to  foot. 

'There,  there!  Tut,  tut!'  cried  the  Doctor,  slipping 
his  spectacles  once  more  on  to  his  nose,  and  observing 
his  visitor.  'I  told  you  'twould  startle  you.  Ye  would 
have  it  in  plain  terms.' 

'I  .  .  .'  The  baronet  gulped.  CI  am  quite  myself, 
sir,'  he  said,  striving  valiantly  to  master  his  agitation. 
He  drew  out  a  handkerchief,  and  mopped  his  clammy 
brow.  'But  I  confess  you  startled  me.  In  fact,  I 
hardly  understand  you  even  now.  Do  you  mean  that 
Harry  Gaynor  is  —  is  alive  ? ' 

'Not  only  alive,  but  almost  well.  Mending  rapidly. 
In  a  day  or  two  he  will  be  in  case  to  go  his  ways  again/ 

There  followed  a  silence  which  the  Professor  did 
not  attempt  to  interrupt.  He  understood  that  such 
news  as  this  must  be  given  time  for  assimilation  by 
any  ordinary  brain. 

'But  this  is  a  miracle!'  cried  Sir  John  presently,  yet 
he  spoke  without  heartiness.  Obviously  he  was  still 
incredulous;  obviously  he  still  but  half  understood 
the  thing  he  had  been  told. 

'Tut!'  clucked  the  Professor.  'There  are  no 
miracles  in  nature.  A  miracle  is  a  thing  out  of  nature; 
and  the  thing  I  tell  you  is  a  thing  in  nature.  Suffi- 
ciently rare  to  look  like  a  miracle;  but  no  miracle  at 
all,  eh! ' 

'Where  is  he?'  was  Sir  John's  next  question,  his 
voice  trembling. 

'Above-stairs,  awaiting  you,'  was  the  answer,  and 


THE  CAPTAIN  GOES  INTO  ACTION       261 

it  was  an  answer  that  seemed  to  dispel  at  last  the 
mists  that  were  obfuscating  the  baronet's  under- 
standing. 

Harry  Gay  nor  was  alive,  above-stairs,  and  awaiting 
him.  Those  facts  he  grasped  clearly,  and  for  the 
moment  nothing  more.  He  came  instantly  to  his  feet. 

'  Why  was  I  not  told  of  this  before  ?  Why  did  your 
letter  convey  no  hint  of  it?' 

'You  must  ask  the  Captain,'  said  the  Professor, 
smiling.  'I  would  have  communicated  with  his 
friends  at  once.  But  he  would  not  have  it.  A  very 
cautious  fellow  for  all  his  recklessness.  But  I  detain 
you,  eh?  This  way,  sir.' 

He  led  Sir  John  from  the  room  and  up  a  steep,  dark 
staircase.  He  paused  on  the  narrow  landing  above, 
and  after  a  preliminary  tap  he  threw  open  a  door.  The 
baronet  entered  and  then  halted  abruptly,  as  if  in 
spite  of  what  he  had  been  told  he  still  could  not 
believe  his  eyes,  which  showed  him  Captain  Gaynor 
in  a  quilted  bed-gown  standing  smiling  to  receive  him. 

Behind  him  the  Doctor  had  closed  the  door  on  the 
outside,  leaving  the  two  friends  alone. 

'Harry!'  cried  Sir  John,  his  voice  husky. 

'My  dear  Sir  John!'  said  the  Captain,  and  he  held 
out  a  hand  in  welcome.  But  the  baronet,  under  the 
impulse  of  his  overmastering  feelings,  thrust  aside  the 
hand,  and,  opening  wide  his  arms,  clasped  the  young 
man  to  his  heart. 

'My  boy,  my  boy!'  he  mumbled  brokenly,  and  the 
tears  stood  in  his  eyes.  '  We  have  wept  you  dead,  and 
you  are  restored  to  us  alive.' 

Presently,  when  the  Captain  had  soothed  Sir  John's 
emotion  and  brought  him  by  slow  degrees  to  the  full 
acceptance  of  this  amazing  state  of  things,  they  sat 


262  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

and  talked  at  length,  and  Gaynor  expounded  his 
plans,  which  were  concerned  with  little  more  than  his 
immediate  departure  from  England. 

'  The  law  may  run  that  a  man  shall  not  suffer  twice 
for  the  same  offence,'  he  said,  '  but  I  am  by  no  means 
sure  that  an  exception  might  not  be  made  in  the  case 
of  a  dangerous  Jacobite  agent,  that  the  Government 
might  not  find  ways  of  disposing  of  me  did  it  leak  out 
that  I  have  escaped  my  doom.' 

'Yes,  yes,'  the  baronet  agreed.  'You  are  wise  in 
that.   You  will  need  money,  perhaps?' 

'I  have,'  was  the  answer,  'a  letter  of  credit  upon 
Childe's,  under  which  I  can  draw  something  a  little 
short  of  two  thousand  guineas.  But  I  think  it  would 
be  wiser  not  to  use  it.  For  all  that  the  identification 
of  Captain  Jenkyn  with  Captain  Gaynor  might  not 
have  been  complete,  yet  it  is  generally  understood,  no 
doubt,  that  they  are  one  and  the  same,  and  Childe's 
might  account  it  their  duty  to  advise  the  Govern- 
ment/ 

'You  are  right/  said  Sir  John.  'You  must  use  my 
purse  to  any  extent  you  need.' 

'Thank  you,  sir,'  the  Captain  replied,  without 
hesitation.  'A  hundred  guineas  will  suffice  to  get  me 
to  Rome.' 

'  I  will  bring  you  the  sum  to-morrow.' 

'Then,  I  think,  if  Doctor  Blizzard  will  permit  it,  I 
will  set  out  on  the  following  day.  And  now  of  your- 
self, Sir  John?' 

Sir  John  looked  at  him,  and  marvelled  that  there 
had  been  so  far  no  word  of  Damaris;  yet  he  thought 
he  understood  the  Captain's  hesitation. 

'Damaris,'  he  said  slowly,  'will  be  as  one  bora 
again  when  I  bear  her  these  glad  tidings.' 


THE  CAPTAIN  GOES  INTO  ACTION       263 

He  saw  the  clear-cut  young  face  grow  white,  and 
he  observed  the  falter  in  the  voice  that  asked  him: 

'  She  —  she  has  grieved  ? ' 

'Grieved,  lad?  She  has  been  almost  as  lifeless  as 
we  deemed  yourself.  Oh,  but  this  will  be  great 
medicine.  It  will  bring  back  the  roses  to  her  cheeks, 
and  the  sparkle  to  her  eyes.  And '  —  he  stopped  short 
smitten  of  a  sudden  by  a  great  thought  —  'it  will 
make  an  end  of  all  danger  of  any  such  sacrifice  as  she 
has  been  contemplating.' 

'Sacrifice?  What  sacrifice?' 

Too  late  Sir  John  perceived  that  his  words  had 
exceeded  prudence.  He  could  not  now  withdraw,  and 
so  he  was  forced  to  confide  in  Captain  Gaynor,  to  lay 
his  own  troubles  before  him.  Nor  was  he  reluctant 
so  to  do;  for  upon  the  young  man's  resourcefulness  he 
founded  a  faint  hope  that  some  way  might  yet  be 
perceived,  not  apparent  to  Sir  John  himself,  out  of  the 
danger  that  hung  over  him. 

Captain  Gaynor  listened  inscrutably  to  the  tale 
that  Sir  John  unfolded;  the  only  outward  sign  he  made 
was  to  nod  shortly  when  the  baronet  pointed  out  the 
quality  of  the  mesh  in  which  Pauncefort  was  enfolding 
him.  When  Sir  John  had  done  the  young  man  rose, 
and  with  hands  clasped  behind  him,  head  bent  in 
thought,  he  slowly  paced  the  length  of  the  chamber 
from  door  to  window  and  back  again.  He  was  pro- 
foundly touched  by  the  nobility  of  Damaris  in  her 
proposed  sacrifice  and  the  nobility  of  Sir  John  in  his 
determination  to  frustrate  her. 

'  For  the  present,'  Sir  John  had  said,  in  conclusion, 
'I  have  succeeded  in  persuading  her  that,  far  from 
removing  the  peril,  she  will  but  increase  it  by  con- 
senting to  marry  that  villain.   If  to  this  were  added 


264  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

the  knowledge  that  you  have  been  so  incredibly,  so 
miraculously,  spared,  I  think  our  work  would  be 
complete;  for  I  am  convinced  there  would  be  an  end 
to  the  despair  upon  which  her  courage  of  self-sacrifice 
is  founded.'  % 

'It  —  it  amounts  to  that?'  cried  the  Captain 
incredulously. 

'  My  dear  Harry,  had  you  heard  her  say  to  me,  "  I 
am  but  a  husk  —  all  that  was  myself  perished  at 
Tyburn,"  you  had  so  gauged  the  depth  of  that 
despair  that  you  had  been  moved  to  tears.' 

He  was  not  far  from  moved  to  them  by  the  repe- 
tition of  those  words.  He  paced  on,  resolving  all  that 
Sir  John  had  told  him,  seeking  a  way  through  this 
baffling  tangle.  At  last,  as  he  approached  the  win- 
dow for  the  second  time,  he  paused  and  his  face 
lighted. 

A  course  which  he  had  earlier  considered,  but  which 
he  had  discarded  as  too  desperate  where  it  was  only 
calculated  to  serve  himself,  recurred  to  him  now.  It 
was  a  reckless,  adventurous,  audacious  course,  which 
yet  might  succeed  by  virtue  of  its  very  audacity.  He 
threw  back  his  head  and  laughed  his  full-throated, 
musical  laugh.  Sir  John  looked  up,  almost  startled 
by  the  sound. 

'I  think,'  said  the  young  man,  'that  it  was  high 
time  that  Captain  Gaynor  should  come  to  life  again.' 

Sir  John,  completely  bewildered,  continued  to  stare 
at  him,  whereupon  that  keen  face  became  once  more 
inscrutable. 

1  Look  you,  Sir  John,'  he  cried, '  this  danger  of  yours 
has  been  exaggerated  to  you.  Let  us  say  that  they 
arrest  you.  To  convict  you  they  must  still  prove  that 
Captain  Gaynor  and  Captain  Jenkyn  were  one  and 


THE  CAPTAIN  GOES  INTO  ACTION       265 

the  same  man,  and  that  fact  has  not  yet  been  entirely 
established.' 

'Pish!'  said  the  baronet.  'From  the  moment  that 
it  becomes  necessary  to  advance  proof  of  that,  the 
Government  can  have  no  difficulty  in  doing  so.' 

'Let  us  say  that  it  can;  let  us  say  that  witnesses 
could  be  found  —  though,  I  confess,  I  know  not 
whence.  The  Government  must  still  prove  that  you 
knew  of  my  connection  with  the  Jacobite  movement, 
that  you  knew  me  for  an  agent  of  the  King  over  the 
Water,  and  that  I  did  not  impose  upon  you  as  I  im- 
posed upon  so  many  others  —  including  Mr.  Second 
Secretary  Templeton.' 

'Oh,  Harry,  Harry!  These  are  but  straws  that  will 
never  float  me  through  those  waters,  and  you  know 
it.' 

'  I  do  not  know  it,'  said  Harry,  and  he  was  smiling 
now.  '  But,  even  so,  I  have  a  sort  of  raft  in  the  back- 
ground that  may  serve  you  better.' 

'What  is  it?' 

The  Captain  reflected  a  moment.  Then  —  ( I  have 
yet  a  little  work  to  do  upon  it  to  render  it  seaworthy,' 
he  said  thoughtfully.  '  But  I  hope  to  have  all  in  readi- 
ness by  to-morrow,  when  you  come  again.  I  will  tell 
you  then.' 

And,  despite  Sir  John's  entreaties,  not  another 
word  would  the  soldier  add  until  the  morrow,  when 
Sir  John  not  only  promised  to  return  but  to  bring 
Damaris  with  him,  a  promise  which  kept  the  Captain 
awake  for  most  of  the  night  in  mingling  joy  and  fear 
at  the  coming  meeting. 

But  on  the  morrow,  which  was  Tuesday,  there  was 
no  sign  of  Sir  John.  The  Captain  had  made  the  best 
of  himself  with  the  black  suit  in  which  he  had  been 


266  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

taken  and  hanged  —  the  only  suit  he  had.  He  had 
procured  flowers  —  baskets  of  roses  and  tall  virginal 
lilies  —  to  deck  his  chamber  for  so  wondrous  an 
occasion.  The  morning  went  in  preparation;  the 
afternoon  in  expectation;  the  evening  in  sick  dis- 
appointment and  vain  clingings  to  hope  even  after 
the  candles  had  been  lighted.  Eventually  he  went  to 
bed,  still  buoyed  by  the  conviction  that  they  must 
come  to-morrow. 

But  the  morrow  again  went  by  in  the  same  man- 
ner, and  still  there  was  neither  sight  nor  sign  of  Sir 
John. 

On  the  Thursday  morning,  worn  out  by  this  sus- 
pense, utterly  unable  to  bear  more  of  it,  the  Captain 
borrowed  the  anatomist's  apprentice,  who,  on  that 
former  occasion,  had  carried  a  message  to  Priory 
Close,  and  despatched  him  this  time  with  a  request  by 
word  of  mouth  for  news. 

The  youngster  returned  with  a  tale  of  a  desolated 
house  and  the  information  that  Sir  John  had  been 
arrested  on  returning  home  on  the  Monday  night. 

The  Captain  drew  a  deep  breath  at  the  news;  not  a 
breath  of  dismay,  but  of  resolve,  almost  of  relief.  He 
thanked  the  messenger,  and  when  the  lad  had  gone 
he  turned  to  the  anatomist,  who  sat  with  him. 

'Decidedly,'  he  said  grimly,  'it  is  time  I  came  to 
life  again.  What's  o'clock?' 

'Eh?' said  the  Professor.  'O'clock?  Why, 'twill  be 
nearly  two.' 

'Then  it  is  time  I  took  my  leave  of  you.' 

'Tut!'  clucked  the  Professor,  rising.  'D'ye  mean 
ye're  going,  eh?  Where  are  ye  going?' 

'  Back  to  life,'  said  Harry  Gaynor. 

'But   in    your   condition?'    cried    the    dismayed 


THE  CAPTAIN  GOES  INTO  ACTION       267 

anatomist,  who  was  reluctant  to  part  with  so  amiable 
a  guest.   '  Y'amaze  me!' 

'What  ails  my  condition?'  Gaynor  asked  him. 
'Look  at  me,'  he  commanded. 

Down  came  the  spectacles  from  the  Professor's 
forehead  to  his  nose. 

'Ye've  a  somewhat  feverish  air,'  said  he. 

'That  is  anticipation,'  said  the  patient.  He  took 
the  Doctor's  hand.  'There  is  a  debt  between  us,  my 
friend,  that  it  would  tax  me  to  discharge.' 

'Tut  — tut!' 

'Ye've  been  more  than  friend  to  me.  And  I  hope 
that  friends  we  may  remain,  and  that  if  at  any  time 
Harry  Gaynor  has  it  in  his  power  to  serve  you  ye'll 
not  forget  to  make  him  happy  by  acquainting  him 
with  the  circumstance.' 

'My  dear  sir,  my  dear  lad!  Tut  —  tut!  Tut  — 
tut!' 

'I  leave  your  hospitable  and  kindly  roof,  sir,  with 
profound  regret.  But  this  is  not  a  parting.  We  re- 
main friends,  and'  —  he  hesitated  an  instant  — 
'  there  is  the  matter  of  the  charges  to  which  you  have 
been  put  — ' 

'Sir!'  the  Doctor  exploded  in  the  simulation  of  a 
towering  rage.  'Am  I  a  vintner?  Do  I  keep  a 
tavern  ? ' 

The  Captain  pressed  his  hands.  'Forgive  me,'  he 
said.  'My  inability  to  repay  the  real  debt  rendered 
me  the  more  eager  in  the  matter  of  this  other  trivial 
one.' 

'Not  another  word  or  ye'll  affront  me,  eh!' 

They  parted  the  best  of  friends  in  the  world,  and, 
after  the  Captain  had  gone,  that  lonely  anatomist 
realised  for  the  first  time  in  all  his  absorbed  and 


268 


THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 


studious  years  that  his  house  in  the  Gray's  Inn  Road 
was  dingy,  dull  and  dismal. 

The  Captain  in  his  black  suit  and  a  hat  that  had 
been  procured  for  him  by  the  Professor's  apprentice, 
with  a  couple  of  guineas  in  his  pocket  borrowed  from 
Doctor  Blizzard  at  parting,  walked  briskly  down  the 
road  across  Holborn  and  on  until  he  came  into  the 
slush  and  filth  of  Temple  Bar. 

Here  he  hired  him  a  chair,  and  was  carried  to  that 
inn  in  Chandos  Street  where  he  had  alighted  a  fort- 
night ago,  and  where  his  baggage  would  still  be  lying. 


CHAPTER  XX 

MR.  TEMPLETON  IN  RETIREMENT 

SIR  RICHARD  TOLLEMACHE  TEMPLETON, 
in  his  distant  lonely  seat  in  Devonshire,  received 
from  his  cousin,  the  Second  Secretary,  a  letter  which 
produced  in  him  the  greatest  consternation. 

My  dear  Tollemache  [wrote  the  Second  Secretary],  — 
De  profundis  —  out  of  the  very  depths  of  despondency  I 
write  to  you,  smitten  down  by  a  malignancy  of  fortune 
which  I  find  it  difficult  even  now  to  credit  should  have 
encompassed  me.  It  has  demanded  of  me  the  resignation 
of  that  high  office  which  I  held  under  the  Crown,  and  to- 
day I  am  a  man  who  hides  his  head  in  shame  from  the 
gloating  stare  of  the  vulgar,  whose  envy  is  ever  gladdened 
by  the  spectacle  of  one  fallen  from  high  estate. 

It  is  a  full  week  since  the  untoward  event  befell  which 
has  been  the  occasion  of  this  overwhelming  disaster,  yet 
it  is  only  to-day  that  I  am  able  sufficiently  to  take  heart 
and  summon  the  courage  necessary  to  indite  to  you  this 
miserable  epistle,  giving  you,  as  is  your  due  as  the  head  of 
our  honourable  house,  news  of  my  condition.  It  solaces 
me  almost,  my  dear  Tollemache,  that  in  such  an  hour, 
with  the  burden  of  ridicule  and  disgrace  upon  my  shoulders, 
I  am  able  to  reflect  that  some  of  the  blame  for  this  attaches 
to  yourself  as  well.  You  are  not  to  suppose  by  this  that  I 
presume  to  censure  you.  We  have  both  been  the  sport  of 
malign  Fate  and  of  a  villain  who  has  already  expiated  on 
the  gallows  the  perversity  of  his  existence.  But  that  you 
should  have  been  cozened  with  me,  that  my  cozening 
should  in  part  have  been  a  natural  sequel  to  your  own, 
rather  than  an  independent  error  of  mine,  is  a  helpful 
reflection  to  me  in  this  dark  hour.    But  for  this  merciful 


270  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

circumstance  I  should  never  be  able  to  show  you  my  face 
again,  I  should  not,  indeed,  have  the  courage  to  indite 
these  lines  to  you. 

The  villain  to  whom  I  am  referring,  my  dear  Tollemache, 
is  one  who  imposed  himself  upon  you  and  abused  the 
confidence  with  which,  a^little  indiscriminatingly,  I  fear 
(though  it  is  an  error  to  which  all  men  are  liable),  you 
honoured  him.  I  speak  of  Henry  Gaynor  —  or  the  man 
who  called  himself  by  that  name.  Strong  in  my  faith  in  his 
loyalty,  a  faith  rooted  in  your  own  absolute  assurance  of  it, 
I  defended  him  to  the  utmost  of  my  strength  when  imputa- 
tions were  cast  upon  that  loyalty,  when  it  was  first  whis- 
pered that  he  was  none  other  than  the  elusive  Jacobite 
agent  who  has  been  known  by  the  name  —  for  want  of 
knowledge  of  his  real  one  —  of  Captain  Jenkyn. 

So  positive,  you  will  remember,  were  these  assurances  of 
yours  that  I  stood  between  that  man  and  arrest,  pledging 
my  credit  and  my  very  honour  for  his  loyalty.  But,  as  I 
have  said,  we  have  both  been  most  grossly  abused.  There 
came  a  moment  when  it  was  impossible  to  defend  him  any 
longer.  His  arrest  was  ordered  and  effected,  and  regarding 
himself  as  lost  he  took  the  course  so  common  with  desperate 
men  who  are  cornered:  he  weakly  confessed  his  treason 
and  meekly  submitted  to  his  fate.  He  was  hanged  a  week 
ago,  as  he  more  richly  deserved  than  any  man  I  have  known 
of. 

Need  I  add  more?  Need  I  tell  you  how  this  honour  of 
mine  which  I  had  pledged  was  all  but  lost  to  me  by  my 
rashness,  how  nothing  remained  me  but  to  resign  my  office 
and  retire  before  the  storm  of  contempt  and  ridicule  which 
my  Lord  Carteret  directed  upon  my  luckless  head?  I  am  a 
broken  man,  my  dear  Tollemache,  and  never  was  there 
one  in  greater  need  of  sympathy  and  pity,  never  one  more 
lonely.  Though  I  hide  me  from  the  world,  here  among  my 
books,  I  cannot  hide  me  from  Emily,  whose  tongue  these 
days  is  as  a  sword  of  sharpness  to  my  flesh. 

I  can  write  no  more.    But  if  you  will  take  pity  on  my 


MR.  TEMPLETON  IN  RETIREMENT       271 

loneliness,  and  permit  me  to  come  to  you  in  Devonshire  for 
a  season,  until  this  matter  shall  be  forgotten  and  I  can 
again  show  my  face  among  men,  I  shall  be  your  deeply 
grateful  as  I  am  your  affectionate  and  unfortunate  cousin, 

Edward  Templeton 

To  Sir  Richard  this  news  had  been  altogether  in- 
credible. That  Lord  Carteret,  persisting  in  the  absurd 
mistake,  or  urged  on  by  mistaken  advisers,  should,  in 
spite  of  all,  have  gone  the  length  of  arresting  Harry 
Gaynor  as  Captain  Jenkyn  was  not  perhaps  surpris- 
ing. But  that  Harry  Gaynor  —  the  Harry  Gaynor  he 
knew,  of  whose  career  he  conceived  that  he  was 
acquainted  with  every  phase,  whose  every  year,  in- 
deed, was  accounted  for  by  his  credentials  —  that 
this  man  should  have  admitted  himself  to  be  the 
Jacobite  agent  in  question  was  impossible  to  believe. 

Sir  Richard  scouted  the  notion.  His  cousin  was 
mad,  or  else  some  monstrous  error  lay  at  the  bottom 
of  the  affair. 

He  did  not  trouble  to  answer  the  letter.  So  over- 
whelmed was  he  by  its  contents  that  two  days  after 
its  receipt  —  so  soon  as  he  could  set  in  order  certain 
affairs  on  his  estate  that  demanded  his  immediate 
attention  —  he  set  out  for  London.  He  arrived  there 
two  days  later,  having  travelled  post-haste  all  the 
way,  and  the  very  Thursday  that  saw  Captain  Gay- 
nor leave  the  house  of  Professor  Blizzard  saw  Sir 
Richard's  dusty  chaise  drawn  up  before  his  cousin's 
door  in  Old  Palace  Yard. 

He  found  the  Second  Secretary  in  his  library.  Ed- 
ward Templeton  was  in  deshabille,  although  it  was 
already  past  noon.  He  wore  a  bed-gown  of  wine- 
coloured  satin,  and  his  cropped  head  was  hidden  in  a 
nightcap  of  the  same  hue.    His  long  countenance 


272  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

seemed  to  have  grown  longer,  sallower  and  hollower  in 
these  last  few  days.  His  chaps  hung  dolefully.  He 
looked  uncommonly  like  a  blood-hound  that  has  been 
whipped,  and  his  deep-set  eyes  were  singularly  dolor- 
ous. To  look  at  him  was  to  perceive  that  here  was  a 
fellow  who  pitied  himself  damnably. 

He  was  standing  to  receive  his  cousin,  and  he  went 
to  meet  him  with  both  hands  held  out. 

1  My  dear  Tollemache '  (his  deep  voice  boomed  like 
the  note  of  an  organ  and  was  laden  with  a  profound 
melancholy),  'it  is  kind  in  you  to  respond  so  readily  to 
my  appeal;  to  seek  me  here  in  my  —  ah  —  tribula- 
tion.' 

'I  could  not  wait  for  you  to  come  to  me,'  was  the 
answer.  'Your  news  was  so  wild  and  utterly  beyond 
belief  that  I  must  come  in  person  for  its  explanation 
ere  I  carry  you  back  to  Devonshire  with  me.' 

'Wild  and  utterly  beyond  belief  it  may  be,  but  it  is 
true  none  the  less.' 

Sir  Richard,  still  in  his  travelling  clothes,  flung 
himself  into  a  chair. 

'Tell  me  of  it,'  he  said  impatiently. 

'What  remains  to  tell?  My  letter — ' 

'Yes,  yes,  but  your  letter  gave  me  no  more  than  the 
broad  fact.   I  want  the  details  ere  I  can  believe.' 

'The  details?'  Mr.  Templeton  paced  the  room 
with  bowed  head.  He  came  at  last  to  stand  by  the 
writing-table  where  he  could  face  his  cousin.  He 
looked  through  the  window  behind  his  cousin,  and 
observed  the  grey  sky  and  drizzle  of  rain  under  which 
the  shrubs  in  his  garden  were  drooping. 

He  told  the  tale  with  all  that  wealth  of  rhetoric  that 
he  used,  thus  rendering  his  cousin's  impatience  almost 
frantic. 


MR.  TEMPLETON  IN  RETIREMENT       273 

1  Is  that  all  ? '  quoth  Sir  Richard,  when  the  tale  was 
done. 

'Is't  not  enough?'  demanded  the  sometime  Second 
Secretary.  'It  has  been  enough  to  procure  my  ruin, 
Tollemache.' 

'And  yet,  weighed  against  my  own  knowledge  of 
the  man,  it  is  not  enough  to  carry  conviction.' 

'Oh,  he  was  deep  —  infernally,  subtly  deep,' 
boomed  Mr.  Temple  ton.  'He  completely  bubbled 
you.' 

Sir  Richard  rose,  and  in  his  turn  began  to  pace  the 
chamber,  whilst  his  cousin  now  let  himself  sink  into  a 
chair,  and  sat,  knees  on  elbows  and  chin  cupped  in  his 
palms. 

'He  was  averse  to  coming  to  England,'  Sir  Richard 
reasoned,  '  and  it  was  naught  but  my  own  insistence 
fetched  him  hither.  Even  when  I  had  prepared  the 
letter  for  you,  he  must  still  idle  there  at  Naples,  and 
I'll  swear  he  would  be  idling  there  yet  but  for  the 
insistence  which  I  employed.' 

'Aye  —  he  was  deep,'  was  all  that  Mr.  Templeton 
could  find  to  answer. 

'But  his  credentials!'  Sir  Richard  insisted.  'His 
credentials!  They  were  an  almost  complete  record  of 
his  career,  and  not  a  year  of  it  since  he  was  nineteen 
but  was  employed  in  some  service  between  here  and 
the  Far  East.' 

'Forgeries!'  growled  his  cousin. 

'Forgeries?  Not  so.  Did  not  yourself  test  two  of 
them  at  the  proper  embassies  here  in  London?' 

'Two  —  aye.   But  what  of  the  others?' 

*  Ab  uno  disce  omnes? 

Mr.  Templeton  crashed  fist  into  palm.  'The  very 
argument  I  used  to  my  Lord  Carteret  —  the  very 


274 


THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 


words  I  uttered!  'Sdeath,  how  he  has  laughed  at  me 
since!  Oh,  blister  me!  you  do  not  know  what  a  butt 
for  mockery  I  am  become.' 

'You  say  that  he  confessed?'  Sir  Richard's  voice 
was  laden  with  ineffable  incredulity. 

'Abjectly.' 

'Y'amaze  me!  How  did  he  bear  himself  at  the 
trial?' 

'Well,  I  am  told.  He  was  one  of  your  cool,  calm 
villains.' 

'Were  ye  not  present?' 

'Present!'  cried  Mr.  Templeton.  'Do  you  not 
understand,  man,  that  from  the  hour  of  his  arrest  I 
durst  not  show  my  face  i'  the  town?  Do  you  think  I 
would  go  to  Court  to  be  pointed  at  by  every  jacka- 
napes Us  the  man  who  was  bubbled,  the  statesman 
who  was  this  traitor's  sponsor?  I  may  count  myself 
fortunate  that  I  was  not,  myself,  impeached.' 

And  then  Fate,  that  ironical  stage  manager,  dis- 
played its  interest  in  this  comedy. 

There  was  a  tap  at  the  door,  and  a  footman  entered. 

'Captain  Gaynor  is  below,  sir,  and  begs  leave  to 
wait  upon  you,'  he  announced. 

The  two  men  stared  at  him,  as  if  they  were  both 
stricken  into  stone. 

At  length,  in  a  croak,  came  Mr.  Templeton's  voice: 
'What  the  devil  did  ye  say?' 

The  footman  stolidly  repeated  his  announcement. 

'Captain  Gaynor?'  echoed  Mr.  Templeton,  with 
an  accent  on  every  syllable.  'Cap-tain  Gay-nor!'  he 
repeated.   'Are  ye  mad  or  drunk?' 

'Neither,  sir,'  replied  the  footman,  his  manner  as 
near  pert  as  any  underling's  manner  dare  be  with  the 
overawing  Mr.  Templeton. 


MR.  TEMPLETON  IN  RETIREMENT       275 

Mr.  Templeton  screwed  his  face  as  he  shot  out  the 
next  question:  'D'ye  know  Captain  Gaynor?  I  mean 
—  have  ye  ever  seen  him  here  before  ? ' 

'Why,  yes,  sir;  several  times.' 

'And  d'ye  say  this  is  he?* 

'Yes,  sir.  Leastways,  I  think  so,  sir.' 

Sir  Richard  interposed.  He  was  visibly  as  agitated 
as  his  cousin. 

'Best  desire  him  to  step  up,  Ned,'  he  suggested. 

Mr.  Templeton  gave  the  order,  and  the  intrigued 
footman  vanished. 

'What  can  it  mean,  Tollemache?  What  can  it 
mean  ? ' 

'It  seems  to  mean  that  I  am  right  and  that  you  and 
your  Government  are  wrong.  For  if  this  is  really 
Captain  Gaynor,  then,  obviously,  he  is  not  Captain 
Jenkyn.' 

'  You  mean  that  Lord  Carteret  is  mistaken ! '  cried 
the  other,  a  dazzling  vista  of  reinstatement  with  the 
last  and  the  best  laugh  on  his  side  opening  suddenly 
before  him.  He  heaved  himself,  excited,  from  his 
chair,  to  collapse  into  it  again  an  instant  later.  'But 
it  is  absurd!'  he  said,  and  sneered.   'Impossible!' 

On  the  word  the  door  reopened  and  Captain  Gay- 
nor was  ushered  in.  He  wore  his  close-fitting  military 
blue  coat  buttoned  to  the  chin,  canon  boots  and  steel- 
hilted  sword,  and  under  his  arm  he  carried  his  looped 
and  feathered  hat. 

Undoubtedly  this  was  the  man  himself.  Yet,  as  the 
cousins  stared  at  him,  Edward  Templeton  disbelieved 
the  evidence  of  his  own  eyes. 

The  soldier  advanced  easily  into  the  room,  then 
bowed  formally,  his  heels  together.  'I  trust,  Mr. 
Templeton,  that  I  do  not  intrude.   Why,  'tis  you, 


276  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Dick!*  he  cried,  perceiving  who  it  was  that  stood 
there.  'I  am  indeed  fortunate.  I  was  considering  a 
jaunt  into  Devonshire,  unless  by  now  your  cousin's 
efforts  on  my  behalf  have  borne  the  fruit  we  hope  for. 
But  what's  amiss?'  he" cried  on  a  sudden,  different 
note,  looking  from  one  amazed  face  to  the  other. 

'Will  you  tell  me  who  the  devil  you  are?'  asked 
Mr.  Templeton. 

The  Captain  stiffened  slightly;  perplexity  crept 
into  his  face. 

'Who  the  devil  I  am?'  said  he.  'Why,  who  the 
devil  should  I  be  but  Captain  Harry  Gaynor,  your 
obedient  servant.  I  trust,'  he  added,  as  if  he  suddenly 
suspected  a  possibility,  'I  trust,  sir,  that  I  have  not 
unwittingly  had  the  misfortune  to  offend  you.' 

Mr.  Templeton  looked  at  his  cousin.  'By  God!' 
said  he.   '  'Tis  the  man  himself.' 

'So  it  is,'  said  Sir  Richard,  and  on  that  he  exploded 
into  laughter. 

Captain  Gaynor  looked  from  one  to  the  other.  His 
expression  of  perplexity  changed  to  one  of  annoyance. 

'Gentlemen,'  said  he,  very  distant,  'you'll  forgive 
me  if  I  say  that  I  find  you  vastly  odd.  And  you, 
Dick—' 

Sir  Richard  sprang  to  him  and  wrung  his  hand. 
'Oh,  my  dear  Harry,'  he  cried,  'although  my  manner 
seem  odd,  I  swear  I  never  was  more  pleased  to  see  you 
—  or  any  man.' 

'Nor  I  —  oddslife!  —  no,'  roared  Mr.  Templeton, 
who  savoured  already  in  imagination  the  triumph 
that  was  in  store  for  him,  his  complete  vindication 
and  the  turning  of  those  malicious  shafts  of  satire 
upon  the  fatuous  Lord  Carteret  —  their  proper  butt. 
'But  can  ye  explain  it?'  he  demanded. 


MR.  TEMPLETON  IN  RETIREMENT       277 

'Explain  what,  sir?'  asked  the  apparently  bewil- 
dered soldier. 

Mr.  Templeton  changed  his  tone.  'Where  the  devil 
have  ye  been  this  fortnight  past?' 

'Where?  Why,  did  I  not  announce  to  you  my  de- 
parture for  Scotland  when  last  I  came  to  take  my 
leave  of  you?  I  should  have  tarried  longer  in  the 
north,  but  that  I  was  unable  to  find  any  of  the  friends 
I  went  to  visit.  So,  as  the  north  of  itself  has  little 
attraction  for  one  who's  accustomed  to  softer  cli- 
mates, I  came  south  again  forthwith.'  He  lied  glibly 
and  smoothly,  and  with  little  hurt  to  his  conscience. 
Again  he  observed  that  his  audacity  had  conquered 
completely  here.  Would  it  conquer  as  completely 
elsewhere?  He  had  little  doubt  of  it  now. 

'And  you  have  had  no  news  of  London  in  your 
absence  ? ' 

'Who  should  send  me  news?  I  have  so  few  friends 
in  England  nowadays.' 

'Then  he'll  not  have  heard  that  Captain  Jenkyn 
was  taken  and  hanged?' 

'Captain  Jenkyn?'  echoed  the  soldier,  after  the 
manner  of  one  who  searches  his  memory.  '  D'ye  mean 
the  Jacobite  agent?  Faith,  then,  the  world's  well  rid 
of  a  meddlesome  fool.  But  — '  He  paused  to  stare  at 
them,  bewildered.  'You  tell  me  this,  I  see,  with  some 
purpose.' 

It  was  Richard  who  interposed  to  tell  him  the  story 
—  suddenly  become  so  monstrously  comical  —  that 
upon  Captain  Jenkyn,  whose  real  identity  was  un- 
known, had  been  thrust  the  identity  of  Captain 
Gaynor. 

The  Captain  laughed  a  little  at  first.  Then  he 
checked  himself,  and  grew  very  sober. 


278  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

1  But,  'tis  a  monstrous  thing  you  tell  me! '  quoth  he. 
4 1  cannot  lie  under  so  absurd  an  error.  It  must  be 
corrected  forthwith.  I  shall  look  to  you,  Mr.  Temple- 
ton,  to  do  me  justice.' 

'To  me?'  said  Templeton.  'Ye've  further  to  learn 
that,  as  a  consequence  of  my  jeopardising  myself  by 
denying  the  possibility  of  your  being  Captain  Jenkyn, 
I  am  no  longer  a  member  of  the  Government.  I  have 
resigned  my  office.  But  there  are  reprisals  in  store  — 
egad!   Reprisals!' 

'Then  I  must  see  Lord  Carteret  at  once,'  cried  the 
Captain. 

'So  you  shall  —  and  I'll  come  with  you.'  Mr. 
Templeton  was  recovering  his  habitual  breadth  of 
manner.  'If  ye'll  but  stay  for  me  till  I  am  dressed,  we 
will  go  together.  And  you  had  best  come  with  us, 
Tollemache.' 

'Faith!  I  ask  no  better  entertainment,'  laughed 
Sir  Richard. 

But  Captain  Gaynor  had  yet  a  question  to  ask  ere 
he  would  allow  Mr.  Templeton  to  withdraw.  'But 
how  came  this  mistake  about,  sir?  Was  the  fellow  — 
Did  he  resemble  me?' 

"Tis  more  than  I  can  say,  and  less  than  matters 
now.  I  think  my  Lord  Carteret  took  too  much  upon 
assumption.  It  is  all  the  work  of  that  fellow  Paunce- 
fort.' 

'Pauncefort!'  cried  the  Captain,  and  alarm  flashed 
into  his  face.  'Pauncefort!  By  Heaven,  then,  I  sus- 
pect some  villainy  here !  Gad!  'Twas  no  mistake  this; 
'twas  deliberate!  I'll  post  to  Priory  Close  and  see  Sir 
John  Kynaston  the  moment  I  leave  my  Lord  Cart- 
eret's. Heaven  send  I  am  not  too  late.  I  curse  the 
hour  I  ever  thought  of  Scotland.' 


MR.  TEMPLETON  IN  RETIREMENT       279 

'Sir  John  Kynaston!'  exclaimed  Mr.  Templeton 
very  solemnly.   'Why,  what  do  you  fear  for  him?' 

'For  him  —  nothing.  'Tis  not  himself  I'm  thinking 
of.' 

'  Then  d'ye  not  know  —  But  of  course  you  do  not. 
Sir  John  was  arrested  two  days  ago.' 

Consternation  spread  on  the  face  of  that  comedian. 
'Arrested?   Sir  John?  Upon  what  charge?' 

'Why,  upon  the  charge  of  having  harboured  a 
traitor  and  spy  —  upon  the  charge  of  having  har- 
boured Captain  Gaynor.' 

The  Captain  smote  his  brow  with  his  clenched 
hand.  'I  see  it  all,  then!'  he  cried.  'Let  us  waste  no 
time,  sir.  Sir  John  must  instantly  be  restored  to 
liberty.' 

'All  things  considered,'  said  Sir  Richard  dryly,  'I 
think  my  Lord  Carteret  will  be  very  pleased  to  see 
you.' 

'He'll  be  the  laughing-stock  o'  the  town,'  said  Mr. 
Templeton,  and  he  went  out,  chuckling,  to  make 
ready  for  that  momentous  visit. 


CHAPTER  XXI 
LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS 

THE  arrest  of  Sir  John  Kynaston  had  been 
brought  about,  of  course  —  like  all  the  others  — 
by  the  agency  of  the  renegade  Pauncefort.  It  was  the 
last  desperate  throw  he  made  in  the  game  of  mending 
his  fortunes,  a  game  which  had  reduced  him  to  the 
treacherous  infamy  which  he  had  perpetrated.  But 
he  intended  that  it  should  be  no  more  than  the  means 
to  his  end.  It  was  no  part  of  his  purpose  that  Sir  John 
should  ultimately  suffer.  That  is  to  say,  it  was  no 
part  of  his  present  purpose. 

He  had  pointed  out  to  the  Secretary  of  State  the 
grounds  upon  which  Sir  John  should  be  arrested,  and 
he  had  further  informed  against  him  out  of  his  own 
knowledge  of  Sir  John's  association  —  however  slight 
—  with  the  Jacobite  intriguers.  But  once  the  arrest 
was  effected,  he  had  come  again  to  my  Lord  Carteret 
with  the  request  that  Sir  John's  fate  should  be  placed 
in  his  own  (Lord  Pauncefort's)  hands.  He  claimed 
this  as  part  of  the  recompense  due  to  him  from  the 
Government  for  the  signal  services  he  had  ren- 
dered. 

Lord  Carteret  had  listened  to  his  request  with  that 
frank  contempt  which  the  Secretary  of  State  never 
failed  to  use  towards  this  man  who  had  turned  in- 
former. This  contempt  was  rendered  the  more  bitter 
on  this  occasion  by  the  regard  in  which  his  lordship 
had  ever  held  Sir  John  Kynaston,  against  whom,  in- 
deed, he  had  performed  his  duty  most  reluctantly  — 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS         281 

a  feeling  this  which  Lord  Pauncefort  had  omitted 
from  his  calculations. 

The  statesman  pursed  his  thin  lips  and  considered 
the  viscount  in  silence  with  that  cold  glance  of  his, 
which  my  Lord  Pauncefort  found  it  so  difficult  to 
endure  with  equanimity. 

'I  find  your  request  more  than  extraordinary,  sir,' 
said  he. 

Lord  Pauncefort  laughed.  'If  your  lordship  had 
my  own  unfortunate  acquaintance  with  the  requests 
of  creditors,  you'd  find  little  extraordinary  in  mine.' 

'By  which,'  said  the  minister  quietly,  'you  remind 
me,  of  course,  that  you  are  my  creditor;  or,  rather, 
that  I  am  your  debtor  for  services  rendered  to  the 
State.   Ah!' 

'  I  think,  my  lord,  that  I  deserve  some  recompense 
beyond  the  small  sums  of  money  which  the  Treasury 
has  paid  me.' 

Lord  Carteret  leaned  back  in  his  armchair,  his 
finger-tips  resting  upon  the  edge  of  the  writing-table 
before  him.  'These  small  sums,  my  lord,  amount  to 
close  upon  twelve  thousand  pounds.  And  in  addition 
you  are  kept  out  of  a  debtor's  gaol  by  my  warranty  to 
your  creditors  that  your  debts  will  be  liquidated  on 
your  marriage.  I  confess,  sir,  that  you  appear  to  me 
to  have  been  more  than  well  paid  already  for  the 
services  that  you  have  rendered.  Some,  indeed,'  con- 
tinued the  statesman,  with  the  faintest  note  of  scorn 
in  his  quiet  voice,  'would  account  that  you  have  been 
paid  far  above  the  value  of  those  services,  although  I 
am  not  of  those.  I  recognise  the  position  which  you 
occupy,  the  estate  to  which  you  were  born,  and  the 
fact,  hence,  that  you  require  to  be  bribed  upon  a 
higher  scale  than  does  the  ordinary  —  informer.' 


282  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

The  viscount  swallowed  that  last  insult  as  best  he 
could.  He  had  swallowed  so  many  of  Lord  Carteret's 
already,  in  the  course  of  these  very  turpid  transac- 
tions, that  one  more  or  less  was  of  little  account.  He 
kept  his  head  high,  and  preserved  a  smiling  front. 

'I  will  admit,  my  lord,  that  the  payment  has  been 
generous,  provided  that  it  is  completed.  I  mean,  pro- 
vided that  I  am  enabled  to  redeem  the  warranty  your 
lordship  has  given  my  creditors.' 

'I  am  not  sure,'  said  the  minister  slowly,  'that 
"warranty"  is,  after  all,  the  proper  word.  But 
your  creditors  understand  me,  and  so,  I  think,  do 
you.' 

'Perfectly,  my  lord.  You  have  honoured  me  by 
giving  your  word  as  bail  for  me  to  Israel  Suarez  and 
the  others.' 

'And,'  Lord  Carteret  added,  'it  is  entirely  as  a  re- 
sult of  this  that  you  continue  to  elude  imprisonment 
for  debt.' 

'And,'  Lord  Pauncefort  added  on  his  own  side,  'it 
is  precisely  that  your  lordship  may  be  relieved  of  your 
pledge  for  me  that  I  prefer  my  present  request  touch- 
ing Sir  John  Kynaston.' 

'You  do  not  forget,  I  trust,  that  I  retain  the  right 
of  withdrawing  my  pledge  at  any  moment,  should  it 
appear  to  me  that  you  may  no  longer  continue  in  the 
assurance  of  being  ultimately  able  to  satisfy  your 
debts.  But  that  is  by  the  way.  The  thing  you  now 
propose  is  exceedingly  distasteful  to  me.  Indeed,  I 
am  not  sure  that  I  can  honourably  accede  to  such  a 
request.  I  could  do  so  only  if  I  were  satisfied  that  — ' 
He  broke  off,  and  sat  forward.  'But  we  talk  in  the 
dark,'  he  said  more  briskly.  '  Let  me  understand  what 
ends  you  seek  to  serve  by  such  a  thing.' 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS        283 

'Reasonable  ends,  my  lord/  replied  Pauncefort 
easily.  €  I  have  already  had  the  honour  of  informing 
your  lordship  of  the  terms  of  the  late  Mr.  Hollin- 
stone's  will,  under  which  it  is  in  Sir  John  Kynaston's 
power  to  withhold  his  sanction  to  his  ward's  marriage 
until  she  is  of  full  age  — ' 

1  Yes,  yes,'  the  statesman  cut  in.  '  You  have  already 
told  me  all  that.  Moreover,'  he  added,  with  another 
of  his  quietly  incisive  manifestations  of  mistrust,  '  I 
have  obtained  independent  confirmation  of  the  fact. 
Pray,  continue.' 

'I  have  also  had  the  honour  of  informing  your  lord- 
ship that  my  betrothal  to  Miss  Hollinstone  does  not 
receive  Sir  John's  sanction.' 

'  Knowing  and  respecting  Sir  John  as  I  do,  I  am  not 
surprised,'  was  the  withering  comment.  'Well,  what 
then?' 

'Sir  John,  my  lord,  is  under  arrest.' 

'By  your  contriving  —  yes,'  said  his  lordship.  'It 
is  a  matter,  let  me  tell  you,  concerning  which  your 
true  motives  have  never  intrigued  me.  I  was  aware 
that  your  betrothal  to  the  lady  was  not  sanctioned  by 
her  guardian'  (his  lordship  was  not,  it  seems,  aware 
that  the  betrothal  had  been  cancelled),  'and  I  per- 
ceived clearly  enough  that  his  conviction  as  a  rebel 
would  disqualify  him  from  exercising  his  rights  under 
the  will.  What  I  do  not  perceive  is  the  reason  of  your 
present  intervention.  I  hope  you  are  attempting  no 
double-dealings  with  me,  sir.' 

'Double-dealings?  I,  my  lord?' 

'You  don't  know  what  they  are,  I  suppose? 
Pshaw,  sir!  These  virtuous  airs  are  unnecessary  here. 
Who  has  betrayed  once  will  betray  again.  But  I  have 
no  desire  to  recriminate,  my  lord.   All  I  desire  is  to 


284  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

warn  you  to  be  frank  with  me.  What  is  your  aim?  — 
briefly  now,  and  clearly.' 

The  viscount  was  forced  to  swallow  this  peremp- 
toriness  with  the  rest.  He  was  a  knave  unmasked, 
dealing  with  a  man  of  honour. 

1  My  lord,'  he  answered, '  I  should  have  thought  my 
aim  would  have  been  clear.  I  have  no  ill-will  against 
Sir  John.  If  I  am  to  wed  his  niece  I  would  not  be  the 
one  to  compass  his  ruin.  I  hope,  sir,  to  be  able  to  in- 
duce him  to  change  his  mind  on  the  subject  of  my 
marriage  with  his  niece  either  before  or  after  the  mar- 
riage has  taken  place.  I  conceive,  sir,  that  if  I  can 
visit  him  in  prison  and  offer  to  use  my  influence  to 
procure  his  release  and  pardon,  natural  gratitude 
should  inspire  Sir  John  no  longer  to  — ' 

'Fiddlesticks!'  the  statesman  interrupted.  'Natu- 
ral gratitude,  faith!  Why  can  you  not  be  frank  and 
tell  me  it  is  your  intent  to  drive  a  bargain  with  Sir 
John?' 

Pauncefort  permitted  himself  a  wry  smile.  'It 
amounts  to  that,  of  course,'  he  confessed.  'And  if  I 
had  the  pardon  in  my  pocket  it  would  perhaps 
strengthen  my  hand.' 

The  statesman  sat  back  again,  toying  thoughtfully 
with  a  quill,  and  from  that  hesitation  Lord  Paunce- 
fort gathered  hope.  He  knew,  as  we  know,  that  if 
there  was  one  thing  more  detestable  to  Lord  Carteret 
than  these  persistent  Jacobite  intrigues  that  sim- 
mered under  the  peaceful  surface  of  the  realm  it  was 
their  disclosure.  His  policy  was  to  stifle  them;  to 
strike  alarm  into  the  plotters  and  to  disband  them, 
effecting  this  with  as  little  publicity  as  possible. 

Now  it  was  far  from  the  Secretary  of  State's  desire 
to  procure  Sir  John's  conviction,  since  that  must 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS        285 

mean  an  increased  publicity  for  the  Jacobite  Cause. 
Ample  for  the  Government's  purpose  was  his  arrest. 
He  might  now  be  liberated,  sufficiently  shaken,  no 
doubt,  to  leave  plotting  alone  in  future.  And  if  there 
were  plausible  grounds  for  his  enlargement,  so  much 
the  better  would  the  Government  be  served.  Now 
Lord  Pauncefort's  proposal  afforded  just  those  plaus- 
ible grounds;  through  his  agency  Sir  John  might  be 
left  under  the  impression  that  his  release  had  been  the 
result  of  a  personal  intervention.  Nothing,  then,  but 
the  statesman's  mistrust  of  Pauncefort  caused  him 
now  to  hesitate,  whilst  in  his  mind  he  cast  about  him 
for  any  other  possible  end  which  the  informer  might 
seek  to  serve.   Presently  a  thought  occurred  to  him. 

'You  do  not  by  any  chance  require  this  pardon  as 
an  instrument  with  which  to  compel  the  lady?'  he 
inquired  in  his  cold,  level  voice. 

Pauncefort  was  aghast  at  the  minister's  shrewd- 
ness, for  Lord  Carteret  had  dropped  plump  upon  his 
real  aims.  That,  indeed,  was  the  last  card  that  he  pro- 
posed to  play,  confident  that  it  was  strong  enough  to 
win  the  game  for  him.  But  if  his  face  showed  any- 
thing, it  showed  indignation  of  such  a  suggestion. 
That  seeming  indignation  kept  him  silent  for  a  mo- 
ment. Then  he  smiled  slowly,  as  it  were  in  contempt 
of  Lord  Carteret's  mistake. 

'With  the  lady,  sir,  no  compulsion  is  necessary, 
seeing  that  we  are  betrothed  already,  and  have  been 
these  six  months,  as  all  the  world  knows.' 

It  was  a  convincing  answer,  and  yet  it  did  not  con- 
vince the  statesman;  for  none  knew  better  than  Lord 
Carteret  the  crookedness  of  the  man  with  whom  he 
dealt.  Slowly  he  shook  his  head,  though  for  a  mo- 
ment he  said  nothing.  At  last: 


286  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'When  is  this  marriage  to  take  place?'  he  asked. 

'To-morrow  evening  at  my  place  in  Surrey,'  replied 
his  lordship  promptly  —  and,  indeed,  subject  to  his 
production  of  the  pardon  in  question,  such  was  the 
agreement  he  had  that  very  morning  wrung  from 
Damaris.  His  lordship  fingered  his  quill  a  moment, 
then  threw  it  down  like  one  who  has  taken  his  re- 
solve. 

'Come  to  me  again  when  you  are  married,  then,'  he 
said,  'and  we  will  return  to  the  subject.  Very  possibly 
I  may  do  as  you  desire.' 

Almost  Lord  Pauncefort  committed  the  impru- 
dence of  protesting,  and  thus  betraying  himself  com- 
pletely to  one  so  shrewd  as  the  Secretary  of  State. 
He  caught  himself  betimes.  There  was  no  more  to  be 
said,  and  the  more  readily  he  professed  his  entire 
acquiescence  the  better  must  it  serve  him. 

He  was  checked  for  the  moment.  A  fresh  difficulty 
confronted  him.  Nevertheless,  he  smiled  as  he  rose  to 
take  his  leave. 

'  Be  it  so,  then,  my  lord,'  said  he.  '  I  shall  have  the 
honour  of  waiting  upon  you  again  betimes  on  Friday.' 

Lord  Carteret  nodded.  'Give  you  good-day,'  he 
said  coldly,  and  Lord  Pauncefort  withdrew,  a  smile 
on  his  lips  and  rage  in  his  heart,  to  think  out  the  situ- 
ation and  discover  a  means  to  surmount  this  obstacle 
which  had  presented  itself  where  he  had  expected 
none.  That  means  he  was  not  slow  in  discovering,  for 
a  half-hour  later  he  penned  and  despatched  from  his 
house  in  Saint  James's  Street  the  following  epistle  to 
Miss  Hollinstone: 

My  dearest  Damaris,  —  I  have  but  left  my  Lord 
Carteret,  and  I  take  pen  at  once  to  send  you  these  to  dispel 
the  anxiety  in  which  I  know  you  to  be  lying.  The  Secretary 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS        287 

of  State  has  lent  an  ear  to  my  insistence,  and  is  preparing 
Sir  John's  pardon.  It  will  receive  his  Majesty's  signature 
to-morrow,  and  it  shall  be  my  wedding  gift  to  you  when 
you  come  to  Woodlands  to-morrow  evening. 

This  was  followed  by  protestations  of  undying 
passion  and  delirious  anticipation  with  which  we  are 
not  concerned,  but  in  which  Lord  Pauncefort  must  be 
done  the  justice  of  being  acknowledged  sincere.  He 
did  with  most  delirious  anticipation  look  forward  to 
his  emancipation  from  Israel  Suarez  and  this  night- 
mare of  a  debtor's  gaol  that  was  with  him  day  and 
night,  and  had  made  a  villain  of  him. 

Now  all  this  happened  on  the  Wednesday  of  that 
very  momentous  week. 

On  the  Thursday  his  lordship  departed  for  his  seat 
in  Surrey,  to  complete  the  preparations  for  the  recep- 
tion of  the  bride,  and  he  took  with  him,  to  serve  his 
needs,  a  poor  hedge  parson  of  the  name  of  Pugh. 

At  about  the  same  hour  that  his  chaise  rolled  up 
Saint  James's  Street  and  turned  into  Piccadilly,  an- 
other carriage  drew  up  at  Lord  Carteret's  door  and 
deposited  there  Mr.  Templeton,  Sir  Richard,  and 
Captain  Gaynor,  who  thus  descended  upon  the  Secre- 
tary of  State. 

Mr.  Templeton  came  to  explain  —  a  sort  of  chorus 
to  this  comedy,  and  something  more;  Captain  Gaynor 
came  to  seek  explanation;  and  Sir  Richard  came  as  an 
important  witness  to  certain  matters,  should  it  be 
found  that  they  required  investigation. 

They  did  not.  The  mountainous  fact  that  Captain 
Gaynor  stood  there  in  the  flesh  entirely  crushed  the 
absurd  allegation  that  a  fellow  convicted  of  being 


288  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Captain  Jenkyn,  the  Jacobite  spy,  and  hanged  at 
Tyburn,  a  fortnight  since,  had  been  this  same  Harry 
Gaynor. 

Obviously  a  most  colossal  blunder  had  occurred. 
Lord  Carteret's  consternation  flamed  quickly  to  anger 
under  the  deft  fanning  of  Mr.  Templeton. 

'Had  your  lordship  but  honoured  me  with  atten- 
tion, this  —  ah  —  deplorable  mistake  had  not  oc- 
curred; had  not  occurred.'  His  voice  rolled  and 
boomed.  '  I  strove  with  all  my  power,  but  your  lord- 
ship would  not  be  guided.  Even  when  I  produced 
unimpeachable  evidence,  your  lordship  still  —  ah  ■ — 
preferred  to  give  heed  to  other  counsellors.  If  you 
should  now  incur  the  —  ah  —  ridicule  of  the  malev- 
olent and  of  your  political  enemies,  your  lordship  will 
perhaps  feel  some  sympathy  for  me  in  what  I  have 
undergone  most  undeservedly.' 

'You  are  within  your  rights,'  answered  his  lordship 
bitterly,  his  little  eyes  like  gimlets  upon  Mr.  Temple- 
ton,  '  to  point  out  to  me  the  error  against  which  you 
warned  me,  and  into  which  I  fell,  that  warning  not- 
withstanding. But  I  will  beg  you,  sir,  not  to  turn  the 
sword  in  the  wound.' 

'Oh,  my  lord!  I  should  be  the  last  to  be  guilty  of 
such  an  —  ah  —  inhumanity.  If  I  have  said  so  much 
it  has  been  to  justify  the  insistence  of  my  warning.' 

'With  Captain  Gaynor  before  us  it  requires  no 
justifying,'  said  his  lordship. 

'I  pledged  my  honour,'  Mr.  Templeton  continued, 
'and  I  accounted  my  honour  forfeit.  I  resigned  my 
office  under  that  assumption,  and  under  that  assump- 
tion your  lordship  accepted  my  resignation.  I  have 
been  the  butt  of  every  scandalous  tongue  in  town  — 
of  every  scandalous  — ' 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS         289 

'It  is  possible,'  cut  in  his  lordship,  who  felt  it  neces- 
sary to  bribe  Mr.  Templeton  into  silence  not  only 
here  but  hereafter, '  that  your  successor  in  office  might 
be  —  induced  to  resign  to  the  end  that  justice  be 
done  and  yourself  reinstated.' 

'In  that,'  said  Mr.  Templeton,  bowing,  'I  recog- 
nise your  lordship's  high  sense  of  justice.' 

'To  you,  sir,'  continued  his  lordship,  turning  to 
Captain  Gaynor,  who  stood  stiffly  at  attention,  'I 
shall  see  that  proper  reparation  is  made  by  publishing 
the  error  there  has  been  —  an  error  which  even  now, 
I  confess,  is  entirely  baffling.' 

Upon  audacity  Captain  Gaynor  now  piled  audacity. 

'It  is  possible,'  said  he,  'that  I  may  be  able  to 
elucidate  the  matter.' 

'  Do  you  suggest  one  of  those  freaks  of  nature  by 
which  two  men  are  given  such  identical  features  that 
one  is  not  to  be  told  from  the  other?' 

'No  such  matter  is  in  my  mind.  Though  I  am  un- 
able to  speak  as  to  a  likeness  between  myself  and  this 
Captain  Jenkyn,  for  I  have  never  consciously  stood 
face  to  face  with  him,  I  think,  my  lord,  that  the 
matter  goes  deeper.  From  what  Mr.  Templeton  has 
told  me  I  understand  that  Sir  John  Kynaston  has 
been  arrested  for  having  harboured  me  —  always 
upon  the  assumption  that  I  was  the  man  who  was 
hanged  a  fortnight  ago.' 

His  lordship  grimaced.   'Aye!'  he  said,  irritably. 

'That  will  be  another  error  to  correct,'  put  in  Mr. 
Templeton  quietly.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Mr. 
Templeton  was  enjoying  himself. 

'And  I  gather  further  that  this,  as  well  as  the  con- 
fusion of  the  late  Captain  Jenkyn  with  myself,  is  the 
work  of  my  Lord  Pauncefort.' 


290  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'Yes,'  said  his  lordship,  and  he  confirmed  the 
affirmative  by  an  oath. 

'I  find  this  the  more  extraordinary  in  that  I  am 
perfectly  well  known  to  his  lordship  —  at  least,  on 
that  score  I  should  find  It  the  more  extraordinary  did 
I  not  believe  that  I  hold  the  explanation  of  his  most 
singular  behaviour.' 

'What  d'ye  tell  me?'  demanded  Lord  Carteret 
sharply.   '  D'ye  say  that  Lord  Pauncefort  knew  you  ? ' 

'He  knows  me,  my  lord,  as  well  as  he  knows  Dick 
Templeton  there,  who  is  one  of  my  oldest  friends.' 

'Then  —  what  the  devil!  — '  His  lordship  paused. 
His  friendship  for  Sir  John  Kynaston,  combining  with 
his  mistrust  of  Pauncefort,  spurred  him  suddenly  to 
incredible  conclusions.  'D'ye  suggest  he  did  this 
thing  —  that  he  made  a  tool  of  me  —  to  serve  ends  of 
his  own  ? ' 

'I  will  suggest  nothing,'  said  Captain  Gaynor.  'I 
will  state  the  facts.' 

He  played  boldly  now.  He  saw  that  he  held 
Pauncefort  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  he  would 
have  played  as  boldly  and  unwincingly  had  Paunce- 
fort, himself,  been  present  —  for  not  all  that  noble- 
man's protestations  and  oaths  could  annihilate  the 
overwhelming  fact  that  the  man  whom  he  had  alleged 
to  be  Captain  Gaynor  had  been  hanged  a  fortnight 
ago  at  Tyburn,  whilst  Captain  Gaynor,  himself,  was 
alive. 

'I  shall  need  to  trouble  your  lordship  with  some 
purely  personal  details,'  he  said.  'When,  upon  the  in- 
stances of  Dick  Templeton  here,  I  came  to  England  a 
month  ago  with  letters  to  his  cousin,  the  Second  Sec- 
retary, and  in  the  hope  of  finding  employment  for  my 
sword  in  the  service  of  my  own  country,  I  sought  the 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS        291 

hospitality  of  one  who  had  been  my  father's  dearest 
friend.  I  am  speaking  of  Sir  John  Kynaston.  Whilst 
there,  my  lord,  being  in  Sir  John's  confidence,  I  learnt 
that  a  betrothal  which  had  existed  between  his  ward 
and  my  Lord  Pauncefort  had  lately  been  determined 
in  consequence  of  the  discovery  of — of  certain  un- 
worthy motives  in  his  lordship's  suit.' 

'Determined?'  cried  the  minister.  'Determined, 
did  ye  say?'  And  swiftly  his  suspicions  grew  to  cer- 
tainty. '  But  I  beg  you  to  proceed,'  he  added,  almost 
grimly.    'You  promise  to  be  very  interesting.' 

Some  vague  fraction  of  what  was  passing  in  his 
lordship's  mind  was  perceived  by  Captain  Gaynor. 
It  served  to  encourage  him. 

'It  happened,  sir,'  he  resumed,  'that  I  met  the  lady, 
and  —  and,  in  short,  that  his  lordship  had  reason  to 
behold  in  me  a  rival  whom,  under  the  circumstances 
of  his  own  disfavour,  he  had  cause  to  fear.  Shortly 
thereafter,  and  in  my  absence  from  town,  my  name,  I 
find,  is  given  to  a  notorious  rebel,  the  report  of  my 
execution  set  abroad,  and  my  friend  Sir  John  arrested 
for  having  harboured  me.' 

Upon  the  faces  of  his  listeners  he  saw  clearly 
stamped  the  impression  he  had  made  and  the  conclu- 
sion to  which  all  three  had  instantly  jumped. 

'  Do  you  imply,  sir,  that  it  was  to  serve  such  ends 
as  these  that  the  villain  so  abused  my  confidence?' 
said  the  statesman  in  a  voice  that  was  like  a  knife's 
edge. 

Captain  Gaynor  shook  his  head,  his  face  inscru- 
table. 

'Far  be  it  from  me  to  imply  anything,  my  lord,'  he 
answered.  'Naturally  I  must  draw  my  own  infer- 
ences; but  those  inferences  you  will  permit  me  to  keep 


292  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

to  myself.  It  would  be  unfair  in  me  to  utter  them, 
since  I  am  an  interested  party,  and  —  like  all  in- 
terested parties  —  subject  to  the  sway  of  interest. 
Therefore  I  state  the  facts  —  no  more.  Your  lordship 
must  draw  the  inferences  for  yourself.  You  have 
acted  in  this  matter  upon  certain  information.  You 
will  hold,  no  doubt,  that  my  presence  here  to-day, 
alive,  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  falseness  of  such  in- 
formation. When  in  conjunction  with  that  you  con- 
sider what  else  I  have  now  told  you,  you  will  be  able 
to  judge  clearly  for  yourself  the  truth  of  this  mat- 
ter.' 

In  his  anger  at  seeing  his  every  suspicion  confirmed 
—  at  discovering,  as  he  believed,  that  he  had  been  so 
unscrupulously  used  —  the  Secretary  of  State  came 
suddenly  to  his  feet. 

'Oh!'  he  cried,  like  a  man  who  stifles,  'it  —  it  is 
incredible  —  as  incredible  as  it  is  undeniable.' 

'Not  so  incredible,  perhaps,  when  your  lordship 
knows  what  else  is  behind,'  said  the  Captain.  'Sir 
John's  consent  to  Pauncefort's  marriage  with  Miss 
Hollinstone  is  necessary,  as  otherwise — ' 

'I  know,  I  know,'  the  minister  interrupted.  'Sir, 
you  can  add  nothing  that  I  do  not  know  already; 
nothing  that  I  cannot  now  perceive  for  myself.' 

It  was  the  Captain's  turn  to  be  astonished.  But  he 
was  careful  to  show  nothing  of  it. 

'Oddslife!'  swore  Lord  Carteret.  'I  suspected  yes- 
terday that  he  required  Sir  John's  pardon  for  pur- 
poses of  coercion  with  the  lady.  I  did  not  know  that 
the  betrothal  stood  annulled.  But  you  have  made  all 
clear  to  me.  My  Lord  Pauncefort  shall  be  taught  a 
lesson  that  will  last  him  all  his  life.  As  for  you,  sir, 
it  remains  for  you  to  see  to't  that  the  lady's  credulity 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS        293 

is  not  abused  as  mine  has  been.  I  could  desire  no 
better  agent  than  yourself.  That  rascal  Pauncefort  is 
to  marry  her  this  evening.' 

The  Captain's  self-possession  all  deserted  him 
on  the  instant.  He  changed  colour;  his  eyes  di- 
lated. 

'This  —  this  evening!'  he  faltered. 

1  Do  not  be  alarmed,'  his  lordship  smiled.  'You  will 
be  in  time  to  prevent  it.'  He  resumed  his  seat. 
Under  an  exterior  now  of  habitual  iciness,  anger  still 
raged  fiercely  in  Lord  Carteret's  bosom  at  the 
thought  that  he  should  have  been  no  more  than  a 
tool  —  as  he  was  forced  to  infer  —  in  the  hands  of 
that  spy  whom  he  despised.  Thus  Lord  Pauncefort 
was  overwhelmed  by  the  peril  that  ever  threatens  a 
traitor.  The  very  hand  that  hires  such  men  to  their 
work  is  the  very  first  to  turn  against  them  at  the  sug- 
gestion that  they  betray  their  present  as  they  be- 
trayed a  former  trust. 

'Even  were  I  too  late  to  prevent,  I  should  not  be 
too  late  to  amend  it,'  said  the  Captain  through  his 
teeth. 

But  the  statesman  held  up  a  hand  in  warning. 

'Do  not  misapprehend  me,  Captain  Gaynor.  Do 
not  assume  that  I  am  sanctioning  any  such  step  as 
you  have  in  mind.  All  that  I  desire  is  that  you  inter- 
vene in  time  to  save  a  lady  from  marrying  a  black- 
guard. The  rest  you  can  very  safely  leave  to  others.' 
He  paused,  then  added:  'If  this  wedding  does  not 
take  place  to-night,  the  world  will  be  little  troubled 
by  my  Lord  Pauncefort  hereafter.'  Then,  taking  up 
a  pen,  and  speaking  in  a  brisk  voice:  'I  will  issue  an 
order  for  Sir  John  Kynaston's  instant  release,'  he  an- 
nounced, '  and  yourself,  sir,  shall  be  the  bearer  of  it, 


294  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Possibly  Sir  John  may  see  fit  to  accompany  you  to 
Woodlands.  Possibly,  also,  he  may  show  a  proper 
gratitude  for  the  very  timely  service  you  have  ren- 
dered him  in  returning  so  opportunely  from  your 
wanderings.' 

He  wrote  rapidly,  almost  whilst  speaking;  then, 
having  sanded  the  document,  he  rose,  and  handed  it 
to  Captain  Gaynor. 

'There  is  the  order,'  he  said.  He  turned  to  Mr. 
Templeton  and  desired  him  to  stay  for  a  word  in 
private,  and  then  he  escorted  the  other  two  as  far  as 
the  hall. 

'You  were  seeking  an  appointment  in  the  Colonies, 
sir,  I  understand,'  he  said  to  the  Captain  at  parting, 
'  but  no  doubt  you  will  be  changing  your  mind  on  that 
score  if  you  think  of  marrying.  If  not,  pray  command 
me.' 

Captain  Gaynor  thanked  him,  and  took  his  leave. 
But  as  he  went  down  the  steps  of  the  mansion,  arm  in 
arm  with  Sir  Richard: 

'Whatever  betide  me,'  said  he,  'I'll  never  abide  in 
England.  Ye  did  me  an  ill  turn  in  sending  me  hither, 
Dick.  'Tis  too  unsettled  a  country;  too  full  of  plot- 
tings  and  schemings  and  intrigues  to  suit  my  simple 
nature.' 

'I  think  you're  right,'  said  Sir  Richard.  'You  men 
of  action  are  no  match  for  schemers.' 

'Aye,  aye!'  said  the  Captain  sadly,  and  he  shook 
his  head.  Presently  he  sighed.  'Heigho!'  And  Sir 
Richard  was  not  to  guess  that  this  was  regret  for 
dissimulation  and  intrigue  of  a  singularly  subtle  sort 
—  a  regret  occasioned  by  the  reflection  that  for  his 
very  life's  sake  —  and  for  the  sake  of  others  —  he 
dare  not  tell  the  truth  to  this  good  fellow  and  best  of 


LORD  CARTERET  UNDERSTANDS        295 

friends,  who  was  so  uplifted  to  know  him  alive  and 
well. 

'I  am  coming  to  Woodlands  with  you  to-night,' 
said  Sir  Richard  presently,  'to  see  the  end  of  this 
affair.' 


CHAPTER  XXII 

ISRAEL  SUAREZ 

WOODLANDS,  my  Lord  Pauncefort's  seat  in 
Surrey,  was  a  handsome,  red-brown  Tudor 
mansion,  situated  in  a  park  of  some  two  hundred 
acres,  within  a  couple  of  miles  to  the  north  of  the 
town  of  Guildford. 

His  lordship  had  dined  late  on  that  July  evening, 
for  he  had  been  late  in  arriving  from  town,  and  even 
then,  ere  he  would  dine,  he  must  perform  an  elaborate 
toilet  as  befitted  the  bridegroom  he  hoped  to  be  ere 
the  night  was  out.  He  went  below  at  length,  an  ele- 
gant, resplendent  figure  in  a  suit  of  grey  satin  with 
silver  lace  and  dark  purple  linings;  his  pearl-grey  silk 
stockings  were  decorated  with  ramifications  of  silver 
thread;  diamonds  hung  like  prismatic  drops  of  water 
in  the  fine  Mechlin  lace  of  his  cravat,  and  his  long, 
graceful  hands  were  almost  hidden  in  his  ruffies; 
buckles  of  French  paste  flashed  on  his  shoes,  and  he 
wore  a  powdered  tie-wig  of  the  very  newest  mode, 
which  emphasised  the  swarthy,  male  beauty  of  his  face. 

When  he  stepped  at  last  into  the  long  panelled 
dining-room,  where  the  Reverend  Thomas  Pugh  — 
the  seedy  hedge  parson  he  had  brought  from  London 
—  waited  impatiently  with  his  hunger,  the  clergy- 
man had  gasped  his  admiration  of  so  very  dazzling  an 
apparition,  and  had  all  but  forgotten  his  inner  gnaw- 
ings  in  the  feasting  of  his  eyes.  And  had  my  Lord 
Pauncefort  been  at  pains  to  find  a  foil  that  should 
throw  his  own  splendour  into  greater  relief,  no  selec- 


ISRAEL  SUAREZ  297 

tion  could  have  been  more  happy  than  that  of  this 
squat  fellow,  black  as  a  crow  in  his  rusty  parson's 
livery,  his  lantern  jaws  blue  from  the  razor. 

His  lordship  ate  but  little,  and  spoke  still  less  dur- 
ing the  repast.  He  was  in  a  state  of  obvious  nervous- 
ness; vexed  by  the  incompleteness  of  his  preparations 
and  anxiety  lest  he  should  fail  to  ruffle  through  and 
conquer  Damaris  in  spite  of  this. 

The  dinner  came  to  an  end;  the  cloth  was  raised 
and  the  candles  were  lighted;  still  the  two  men  sat  on, 
over  their  wine  now,  with  but  little  talk  passing  be- 
tween them.  Pauncefort  reclined  in  his  chair,  frown- 
ing gloomily  at  the  globular  decanter  of  port,  from 
which  the  candles  struck  fire,  so  that  it  glowed  like  a 
gigantic  carbuncle.  The  long  windows  stood  open  to 
the  stifling  air,  and  the  twilight  sky  was  of  a  velvet 
blackness  streaked  with  a  fading  but  ominous  purple. 
Not  a  breath  stirred.  The  candles  in  their  gilt 
sconces  on  the  wainscoting  burned  steadily,  throwing 
long  shafts  of  reflection  upon  the  polished  timbers  of 
the  dark  brown  floor. 

At  last,  from  the  distance,  faintly,  came  the  sound 
of  hoofs.  It  approached  rapidly,  and  with  it  now 
came  the  grind  of  wheels  advancing  up  the  avenue. 
His  lordship  listened,  and  he  seemed  to  have  ceased  to 
breathe.  His  eyes  glowed  feverishly.  She  came  at 
last! 

'I  think  'twill  be  the  bride,'  ventured  the  parson 
timidly  —  for  these  long  spells  of  silence  and  the 
moodiness  of  his  host  were  fretting  his  ill-conditioned 
nerves. 

My  lord  paid  no  heed  to  him;  so  the  reverend 
gentleman  sipped  his  wine  and  uneasily  eyed  his  com- 
panion from  under  shaggy  brows. 


a98  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

The  carriage  halted.  Unable  longer  to  remain  still, 
his  lordship  rose,  thrusting  back  his  tall  chair.  He 
glanced  at  the  timepiece  on  the  overmantel.  It 
wanted  a  few  minutes  td  nine;  and  nine  was  the  hour 
appointed.  This  trifling  earliness  augured  well,  he 
thought. 

The  door  opened  quietly  behind  him.  He  swung 
round  in  sudden,  trembling  eagerness  to  face  the  liv- 
eried servant  who  entered,  and  to  receive  an  an- 
nouncement which  was  as  a  shower  of  cold  water  upon 
his  feverish  impatience. 

'Mr.  Suarez  is  here,  my  lord,  asking  to  see  you.' 

'Suarez?'  His  lordship's  voice  rasped  harshly  with 
sudden  anger.  Yet  his  dilating  eyes  and  loosened 
mouth  were  evidences  of  still  another  emotion. 
'Suarez?'  he  repeated. 

'I  told  him,  my  lord,  that  your  lordship  could  see 
no  one  to-night.  But  he  insists  that  his  business  is  of 
the  greatest  urgency.' 

'And  so  it  is,  my  lord,'  came  a  deep  voice  from  be- 
hind the  servant,  and  immediately  the  heavy  figure 
and  ovine  face  of  the  usurer  made  its  appearance  in 
the  doorway. 

He  had  followed  the  lackey,  determined  to  force 
himself  into  his  lordship's  presence  and  fearing  that 
did  he  wait  for  permission  he  might  wait  in  vain. 

The  servant  attempted  now  to  detain  him:  but  it 
was  too  late.  The  Jew  thrust  the  fellow  contemptu- 
ously aside,  and  rolled  into  the  room. 

'What  do  you  want?'  his  lordship  challenged  him. 
His  face  was  white  with  anger  and  his  eyes  were 
murderously  set  upon  the  intruder. 

'Vat  do  I  vant?'  echoed  Mr.  Suarez,  his  manner 
excited  and  his  speech  thick  with  passion.   'Vat  do  I 


ISRAEL  SUAREZ  299 

vant?  I  vant  a  deal,  my  lord,  I  promise  you.  To  be- 
gin vit',  I  want  an  explanation/ 

'By  God!'  swore  his  lordship.  'Ye're  a  daring 
rogue  to  thrust  yourself  in  here  in  this  fashion.' 

The  other  waved  a  fat,  powerful  hand.  'Bah!  I 
don't  vant  vords,  and  I  don't  vant  ugly  names.  I 
charge  for  ugly  names,  my  lord,  and  the  rate  of  in- 
teresht  on  t'em  is  heavy.  Shall  I  speak  before  t'ese?' 
And  he  waved  his  hand  again,  to  indicate  servant  and 
parson.  'Or  vill  you  see  me  alone ?  'Tis  all  one  to  me,' 
he  added  contemptuously. 

His  lordship  considered  the  man  an  instant,  master- 
ing his  rage.  Then  he  turned  to  the  servant. 

'Leave  us,'  he  said  shortly,  'and  you  too,  Pugh. 
Go  wait  in  the  library.' 

The  parson  finished  his  wine,  and  departed  with 
the  servant. 

Suarez  looked  on,  a  sneer  on  his  heavy  face.  'Ha!' 
he  commented.  'Very 'igh  and  mighty!  Ve-ry  lordly 
for  a  damned  pauper!' 

Israel  Suarez  was  none  of  your  gabardined,  be- 
whiskered,  cringing  Jews,  overconscious  of  belonging 
to  a  despised  race.  Himself  proud  of  his  Jewish  blood, 
he  had  naught  but  contempt  for  those  who  despised 
it.  Being  enormously  wealthy  and  knowing  the 
power  of  wealth,  he  used  that  power  remorselessly, 
and  upon  none  so  remorselessly  as  upon  those  who 
dared  to  show  their  scorn  of  him  on  the  score  of  race. 
To  these  he  repaid  contempt  with  contempt,  insult 
with  insult;  and  since  he  had  the  power  on  his  side,  his 
contempt  and  his  insult  usually  proved  the  more  hurt- 
ful and  crushing  in  the  end. 

In  appearance  he  had  almost  the  air  of  a  man  of 
fashion,  saving  perhaps  that  with  his  natural  taste  for 


300  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Oriental  splendour  he  rather  overdressed  the  part. 
His  claret-coloured  coat  was  stiff  with  gold  lace,  as 
was  the  crimson  waistcoat  under  it,  every  button  of 
which  was  a  ruby  of  prjce.  Brilliants  flashed  in  his 
lace  neckwear  and  on  two  fingers  of  each  hand.  A 
gold-hiked  sword  hung  at  his  side. 

Massive  and  powerful  of  frame,  with  large  liquid 
eyes,  a  pendulous  nose  and  a  shaven  olive-tinted  skin, 
this  Spanish  Jew  was  a  somewhat  extraordinary  and 
compelling  personality.  The  consciousness  of  power 
he  derived  from  his  vast  wealth  lent  him  a  forceful 
air.  Obviously  he  was  not  a  man  with  whom  it  would 
be  safe  to  trifle.  Save  for  a  trouble  with  the  aspirate, 
the  '  w'  and  the  '  th,'  his  English  was  fluent  and  good. 

My  Lord  Pauncefort  had  made  the  mistake  of 
undervaluing  him.  He  had  trifled  with  him;  he  was 
trifling  with  him  now,  running  a  scornful,  critical  eye 
over  the  man's  person  and  apparel,  and  expressing  his 
contempt  for  one  and  the  other  by  the  deliberate  curl 
of  his  lip. 

The  Jew's  watchful  eyes  observed  all  this.  His  an- 
swer to  it  was  not  long  delayed.  He  strode  to  the 
table  and  poured  himself  a  glass  of  port  without  hesi- 
tation or  'by  your  leave.'  He  tasted  it,  smacked  his 
lips  and  paused  appraisingly. 

"Tis  a  good  vine,'  he  said,  with  marked  satisfac- 
tion. 'I  'ope  I  'ave  a  good  stock  of  it  in  my  cellar 
ere. 

'What  the  devil  do  you  mean  —  damn  you!'  said 
Pauncefort. 

Mr.  Suarez  coolly  drained  the  glass,  and  sat  down 
unbidden,  leaving  his  lordship  standing. 

'I  suppose  I  can  drink  my  own  vine  in  my  own 
'ouse  vit'out  explanations  to  you  —  damn  you!'  he 


ISRAEL  SUAREZ  301 

answered  in  the  same  tone.  He  had  his  anger  under 
control  by  now.  Indeed,  although  by  nature  of  a  hot 
and  fiery  temper,  he  was  your  deadly  fellow  who 
knows  how  to  be  cold  in  the  expression  of  it. 

And  then,  before  Pauncefort  had  recovered  from 
that  blow,  Suarez  crisply  added  enough  to  show  his 
business  there  that  night. 

'Ye  see,  I've  'ad  vord  from  my  Lord  Carteret  t'at 
'is  varranty  for  you  is  vit'drawn.  So  my  man  Cohen 
is  in  possession  of  your  'ouse  in  town  and  I  am  'ere. 
I  'ave  a  varrant  in  my  pocket  and  t'ree  men  vit'  me  — 
in  t'e  'all  now.  An  agent  of  mine  is  on  'is  vay  to  your 
place  in  Yorkshire.  Ye  see,  I  vaste  no  time.'  He 
smiled  up  at  his  lordship,  who  was  too  stricken  to 
answer  him.  Presently  he  resumed.  'You  owe  me 
t'irty  t'ousand  pounds,  my  lord.  Voodlands  'ere  vill 
bring  four  t'ousand;  your  'ouse  in  town  perhaps  t'ree, 
and  your  Yorkshire  estate  seven  or  eight  t'ousand 
vhen  I  sell  it.  For  t'e  rest  I  must  take  your  body  until 
you  or  your  friends  see  a  vay  to  ransom  it.  Now  you 
know  vat  I  vant,'  he  leered.  'Now  you  know  vat  a 
damned  impudent  rogue  I  am,  t'rusting  myself  into 
my  own  'ouse,  eh!' 

Pauncefort  leaned  heavily  against  the  overmantel 
to  steady  his  trembling  body.  He  was  limp.  His 
blood  had  turned  to  water.  Of  all  that  the  money- 
lender had  said,  but  one  sentence  remained  with  his 
lordship.  This  sentence  he  echoed  now  in  a  husky 
voice. 

'Lord  Carteret  has  withdrawn  his  warranty!' 

'Just  so,'  said  Mr.  Suarez.  'Myself  I  marvel  t'at 
he  ever  gave  it.' 

'But  — '  faltered  Pauncefort,  ceasing  to  wonder  or 
to  seek  a  cause  for  this,  and  coming  straight  to  the 


302  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

urgent  effect  of  it  —  'but  even  so!    What  does  it 
matter?' 

'It  matters  just  t'irty  t'ousand  pounds,'  said  Mr. 
Suarez.  'You  know  t'a±  not'ing  but  his  lordship's 
varranty  has  kept  me  from  claiming  my  own  t'is 
mont'  past.' 

'But  my  marriage  is  to  take  place  to-night,'  cried 
his  lordship.  He  was  white  and  drops  of  perspiration 
stood  upon  his  shallow  brow  —  that  one  deplorable 
feature  of  his  handsome  face. 

And  now  Mr.  Suarez  returned  the  other's  late  silent 
sneer  of  his  apparel. 

'Ah!'  said  he,  sneering  in  his  turn.  'Ye  look  very 
festive,  codso!  A  very  pretty  fellow  in  your  bride- 
groom finery!' 

His  lordship  attempted  to  stiffen,  but  failed.  The 
other  was  too  much  the  master  of  this  situation. 

'You  know  —  it  is  your  business  to  know  —  the 
wealth  of  Miss  Hollinstone.  Is  not  that  warranty 
enough  for  you  ? ' 

'T'at?  Pish!  No  marriage  prospects  are  varranty 
enough  for  me,  as  you  veil  know.  Not  only  vould  I 
not  advance  you  a  shilling  on  such  prospects,  but  t'ey 
vould  never  have  kept  me  from  foreclosing  on  you  if 
you  'adn't  obtained  me  Lord  Carteret's  varranty  that 
you  vould  be  in  a  position  to  pay  —  failing  which, 
your  estates  and  your  person  — ' 

'But,  my  God!  you'll  give  me  until  to-morrow?' 

'Not  an  'our,'  said  Suarez.   'Vhy  should  I?' 

'Because  you'll  be  a  fool  if  you  don't.' 

Suarez  laughed  shortly.  'I  vas  never  a  fool  yet  in 
business,  my  lord.   Never!' 

His  lordship  advanced  to  the  table  and  flung  him- 
self into  a  chair.  He  faced  Mr.  Suarez  with  the  board 


ISRAEL  SUAREZ  303 

between  them.  He  leaned  across,  and  his  white, 
clammy  face  glistened  in  the  golden  candle-light. 

'Suarez,'  he  said,  'consider,  pray,  that  all  I  have 
had  from  you  in  actual  cash  does  not  amount  to  over 
fifteen  thousand  pounds.  You  hold  Woodlands,  my 
town  house,  and  my  place  in  Yorkshire,  and  you 
know  —  in  spite  of  what  you  have  said  —  that  they 
will  yield  more  than  that  sum.' 

'Ye  don't  suppose  I  should  'ave  advanced  the 
money  unless  I  vas  satisfied  of  t'at?  Or  do  you  im- 
agine money-lending  to  be  a  philant'ropy,  my  friend  ? 
It  is  a  risky  business,  and  in  risky  businesses  the 
profits  must  be  heavy  to  compensate.  And  ye  leave 
out  of  all  account  the  interesht  my  money  vould  'ave 
yielded  me  elsewhere.' 

"Tis  you  leave  that  out  of  account  when  you  come 
here  with  a  warrant  to  seize  my  person.  If  you  seize 
me  you'll  never  see  your  filthy  interest.' 

Mr.  Suarez  closed  one  eye.  'T'ere's  t'e  interesht 
from  the  entailed  property,'  he  reminded  his  lordship. 
'  It  is  close  upon  fifteen  'undred  pounds  a  year.  Now, 
nicely  lodged  in  the  Fleet,  my  lord  —  and  ve'll  make 
you  as  comfortable  as  you  can  expect  —  you  can  live 
luxuriously  on  fifty  pounds  a  year.' 

'D'ye  mean  I'm  to  spend  ten  years  in  a  spunging- 
house?'  roared  his  lordship,  turning  savage. 

'Rather  more,'  said  Mr.  Suarez,  with  pursed  lips. 
'Interesht  will  be  running  on  the  unpaid  balances,  ye 
see.  But  your  lordship  is  very  'ealthy,  and  should 
easily  last  the  time.' 

'Suarez,'  raged  his  lordship,  'ye're  a  dirty  Jew.' 

'Pauncefort,'  answered  Mr.  Suarez  imperturbably, 
'ye're  a  dirtier  Christian  to  incur  debts  ye  cannot 
meet.' 


304  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

His  lordship  leapt  to  his  feet  as  if  he  had  been 
struck.  To  be  insulted  thus  by  this  scum  of  Israel! 
It  was  past  endurance,  past  belief! 

He  was  unarmed  at  the  moment,  or  assuredly  he 
would  have  drawn  upon  the  fellow.  As  it  was,  his 
hand  flew  to  his  side  where  his  sword  should  have 
hung.  The  Jew  watched  the  movement  with  a  cold 
smile.  With  a  steady  hand  he  poured  himself  another 
glass  of  wine. 

'I  vonder,'  he  said,  smiling  reflectively,  'vhen  your 
lordship  vill  learn  t'at  unprofitable  insult  is  t'e  sport 
of  fools?  I  am  endeavouring  to  teach  you.'  He 
drained  his  glass,  and  rose.  'Shall  ve  be  going  now?' 
he  asked,  and  his  question  had  all  the  ring  of  a 
command. 

Pauncefort  steadied  himself,  his  hands  upon  the 
table,  leaning  so  heavily  that  his  knuckles  showed 
white  as  marble. 

'Going?'  he  echoed. 

'Did  I  not  say  t'at  I  'ave  a  varrant  for  you  in  my 
pocket  and  t'ree  men  to  execute  it  for  me?  Ye'd  never 
be  so  mad  as  to  try  resistance!' 

'D'ye  mean — '  His  lordship  moistened  his  lips. 
'D'ye  mean  ye'll  take  me  now  —  now?  That  ye'll  not 
wait  until  to-morrow;  until  I  am  married  and  can 
repay  you?' 

'Married?'  sneered  the  Jew.  'D'ye  still  seek  to 
bubble  me  vit'  t'at?' 

'Bubble  you?   It's  the  truth,  man.' 

Mr.  Suarez  considered  him  with  brooding  eye.  'If 
it  vere  the  trut',  vy  did  Lord  Carteret  vit'draw  his 
varranty  for  you?  Pshaw!' 

'It  is  the  truth,  nevertheless,'  the  viscount  insisted 
vehemently.   'I  await  the  lady  now.' 


ISRAEL  SUAREZ  3°5 

But  Suarez  was  still  incredulous.  'To  be  sure  you 
do,'  said  he.  '  But  I  t'ink  a  bird  in  t'e  'and  is  vort'  — ' 

'Listen,  Suarez/  cried  the  other  desperately. 
'Leave  me  free  to  make  this  marriage,  and  you  shall 
be  paid  in  full  by  Monday  next  if  not  before.  More, 
from  now  until  the  debt  is  liquidated  I'll  pay  you 
further  interest  at  the  rate  of  a  thousand  pounds  a 

day.' 

Now  this  was  business,  and  to  business  Mr.  buarez 
could  listen.  Also  the  earnestness  of  the  proposal 
seemed  to  argue  that,  indeed,  his  lordship  counted 
upon  being  married.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
might  be  counting  upon  something  very  different.  It 
might  be  a  ruse  to  elude  the  money-lender  and  flee 
the  country.  He  did  not  trust  this  gentleman  who 
had  manifested  slipperiness  already  in  the  past.  So 
he  sighed  over  the  offer,  and  shook  his  head. 

1  I'll  make  it  two  thousand  —  two  thousand  a  day!' 
his  lordship  clamoured. 

But  now  the  money-lender's  every  doubt  was  dis- 
pelled. He  laughed.  _       (      t 

'Ye're  over-reckless  to  be  'onest,'  he  said.  'Ye  re 
lying  about  t'is  marriage.' 

A  sound  in  the  stillness  of  the  night  caught  his  lord- 
ship's ears.  His  face  flushed  suddenly. 

'Am  I  lying?'  he  cried.  'Am  I?'  He  was  almost 
exultant.  'Listen!'  And  he  flung  an  arm  towards  the 
open  window  and  the  night  beyond. 

Mr.  Suarez  heard  the  sounds  of  a  carriage  coming 
up  the  avenue. 

'That  will  be  Miss  Hollinstone,'  his  lordship  an- 
nounced with  confidence. 

The  usurer  stared  at  him  for  a  long  moment  in 
silence. 


306  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

'  D'ye  still  doubt  me? '  cried  Pauncefort.  '  D'ye  still 
think  that  no  marriage  will  take  place.  Why,  man, 
did  ye  not  see  the  parson  here?  Why  else  should  I 
have  sat  at  table  with  fthat  crow?' 

It  was,  indeed,  something  whose  significance  the 
Jew  had  overlooked.  Quietly  he  resumed  his  seat  at 
the  table. 

'I'll  stay  to  see,'  he  announced.  His  lordship 
heaved  a  sigh  of  relief,  and  fell  to  mopping  his  brow. 
A  pause  followed,  ended  at  last  by  Mr.  Suarez.  'Two 
thousand  pounds  a  day  further  interesht  you  pro- 
posed, I  t'ink,'  he  said. 

'Yes,  yes,'  was  the  eager  assent. 

'I'll  consider  the  proposal,'  said  Mr.  Suarez  coolly. 

'Will  you,  by  God!'  cried  Pauncefort,  who  was 
rapidly  recovering  from  his  terror.  'Ye'll  accept  it 
now,  or  ye'll  refuse  it.' 

'T'en  I'll  refuse  it,'  said  Mr.  Suarez. 

'No,  no!  I  meant  not  that.  Consider  it,  sir,  by  all 
means.   But  decide  quickly  —  for  Heaven's  sake!' 

Mr.  Suarez  laughed.  'Ye're  all  'ot  and  cold  in  a 
moment,'  he  sneered.  'If  I  consider  it  at  all,  'tis 
purely  to  oblige  you.   Veil,  veil  — ' 

The  servant  entered,  and  his  lordship  turned  to 
him  a  white,  excited  face. 

'Miss  Hollinstone  has  arrived,  my  lord.' 

Pauncefort  flashed  a  glance  of  triumph  upon  the 
usurer.   'Well?'  he  demanded.   'You  accept?' 

'  Ye-es  —  when  I  am  sure  of  t'e  business  vich  brings 
t'e  lady.' 

Lord  Pauncefort  stared  at  him.  Then,  in  disgust: 
'Ye're  a  reckless  fellow,  Suarez!'  he  said. 

'I  'ave  to  deal  vit'  so  many  rogues,'  said  Suarez  in 
explanation.  Then  he  looked  towards  the  servant. 
'Ah?'  said  he  significantly. 


ISRAEL  SUAREZ  307 

'Wait  without,'  barked  his  lordship,  and  the  man 
vanished,  closing  the  door. 

'You  tell  me  t'at  t'e  lady  comes  to  marry  you  now?' 
Suarez  questioned. 

'Yes,'  answered  his  lordship.  'You  saw  the  parson.' 

'Ah!  Veil,  t'en,  my  lord,  you  shall  'ave  t'is  chance. 
I  vill  accept  your  proposal  if  t'e  marriage  takes  place 
to-night,  and  I,  myself,  am  one  of  t'e  vitnesses.' 

Pauncefort  glared  at  him  between  impatience  and 
anger.  But  he  mastered  his  feelings.  'Be  it  so,'  he 
consented.  'Meanwhile,  will  you  join  the  parson  in 
the  library,  and  wait  there  until  the  ceremony  is  to  be 
performed?'  And  catching  a  fresh  look  of  doubt  in 
the  money-lender's  eye:  'You  can  place  one  of  your 
men  outside  that  door,  another  under  the  window, 
and  another,'  he  added,  sneering,  'on  the  roof,  if  you 
please,  to  see  that  I  don't  go  up  the  chimney.  Arm 
them,  and  thus  you  should  be  sure  that  I  shall  not 
escape  you.' 

Mr.  Suarez  bowed.  'Very  good,'  was  all  that  he 
answered. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

THE  LAST  THROW 

MY  LORD  PAUNCEFORT,  alone  in  the  dining- 
room,  with  pulses  throbbing,  partly  from  an- 
ticipation and  partly  from  the  stress  of  the  recent 
interview,  awaited  the  coming  of  Damaris. 

Mr.  Suarez  had  left  him  shaken  and  rather  dazed. 
He  realised  the  imminence  of  his  danger,  the  possi- 
bility that  after  all  he  might  be  unable  to  constrain 
Damaris  into  the  wedding,  seeing  that  he  could  not 
produce  the  pardon,  which  was  the  price  agreed  upon. 

He  beat  down  his  fears  almost  angrily.  He  crossed 
to  the  massive  sideboard  and  poured  himself  a  glass  of 
brandy  to  quiet  his  tremors.  Scarce  had  he  drained  it 
when  the  door  opened  and,  in  wimple  and  hood, 
Damaris  stood  before  him. 

He  sprang  to  meet  her,  at  once  the  eager  lover  with 
no  thought  in  the  world  that  was  not  of  herself. 

'My  dearest  Damaris!'  was  his  greeting,  and  he 
would  have  caught  her  to  him  but  that  something  in 
her  face  and  bearing  held  him  off  as  if  a  barrier  stood 
between  them. 

She  was  very  pale,  and  under  her  eyes  there  were 
dark  lines  that  told  of  the  anguish  in  her  soul.  She 
stood  erect  and  with  a  calm  that  was  something  like 
the  calm  of  the  martyr  in  the  hour  of  doom.  Her  long, 
black  cloak  had  fallen  open,  disclosing  a  deep  purple 
gown  below.  He  observed  it,  and  almost  shuddered  at 
the  omen  of  such  colours  on  a  bride. 

'You  have  obtained  Sir  John's  pardon,  my  lord?' 
she  asked  him. 


THE  LAST  THROW  309 

'I  have/  he  answered  promptly. 

She  drew  a  deep  breath,  and  for  a  moment  closed 
her  eyes.  It  was  almost  as  if  his  answer  occasioned 
her  a  shock  —  as  if  she  had  hoped  that  he  would  fail. 
Though,  had  he  answered  her  in  the  negative,  it  is 
possible  that  she  would  have  experienced  a  stab  no 
less  acute.  Before  her  had  lain  a  choice  of  evils  so 
terrible  that  the  abiding  one  must  ever  seem  the 
worse  because  the  more  imminent.  In  either  case 
must  she  have  steeled  herself  to  resignation. 

She  held  out  a  hand.  'Let  me  see  it,'  she  begged, 
her  voice  expressionless. 

He  showed  no  slightest  hesitation,  such  as  might 
convey  to  her  that  all  was  not  as  he  would  have  her 
believe. 

'It  is  not  here,'  he  replied,  quite  at  his  ease  —  as  if 
what  he  had  to  say  was  what  under  the  circumstances 
should  be  expected.  'It  has  gone  to  His  Majesty  for 
signature,  and  will  be  delivered  to  me  to-morrow.' 

She  looked  at  him  stonily  a  moment.  Then  she 
gathered  her  cloak  about  her  again. 

'You  are  sure?'  she  asked.  'There  is  no  doubt  of 
this?' 

'No  shadow  of  doubt,'  he  answered  firmly.  'My 
Lord  Carteret  has  pledged  me  his  word  that  I  shall 
have  it  to-morrow.'  And  so,  indeed,  Lord  Carteret 
had  all  but  done  —  subject  to  the  marriage  taking 
place  to-night  in  proof  that  the  pardon  was  no  part  of 
any  bargain  between  Pauncefort  and  the  lady. 

'In  that  case,  my  lord,  I  will  come  again  to- 
morrow.' 

'You  will  come  again  to-morrow?'  he  cried,  the 
blank  look  in  his  face  advertising  the  sudden  dashing 
of  his  rising  hopes-   'But,  Damaris  —  consider!  You 


310  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

are  here  now  —  in  the  house  of  which  you  are  to  be 
the  mistress.  Need  a  few  hours  matter,  then?' 

'No,'  she  answered, '  they  will  not  matter.  Will  you 
ring  for  someone  to  reconduct  me  to  my  chaise  ? ' 

He  held  himself  very  hard,  to  play  the  considerate, 
to  show  naught  but  solicitude  for  her.  He  smiled  in- 
gratiatingly, and  Heaven  alone  knew  what  that  smile 
cost  him  in  such  an  hour. 

'In  a  moment,  if  you  will,'  said  he.  'Though  I  still 
hope  that  you  will  not.' 

'  'Tis  a  very  unreasonable  hope,  my  lord,'  said  she. 

'Will  you  not  sit?'  He  advanced  a  chair.  'A  glass 
of  wine  ? ' 

She  declined  one  and  the  other  by  a  gesture. 
'There  is  no  reason  why  I  should  linger.  I  should  not 
have  come  at  all  but  for  your  positive  assurance  that 
the  pardon  would  be  in  your  hands  to-night.  I  —  I 
would  I  had  not  trusted  to  your  word,'  she  ended, 
displaying  the  first  sign  of  weakness. 

'  You  have  no  cause  to  say  that,'  he  reproached  her 
very  gently.  'I  have  fulfilled  my  part.  I  have  done 
all  that  I  promised,  and  to-morrow  when  His  Maj- 
esty's signature  shall  have  been  appended  to  the 
document,  Sir  John  will  be  released.  You  cannot, 
surely,  doubt  me?' 

'If  I  doubted  I  should  not  have  said  that  I  shall 
return  to-morrow.  You  understand,  my  lord  —  I 
have  sought  to  make  it  plain  to  you  —  that  this  is  a 
bargain  between  us;  and  when  you  perform  your 
share,  I  —  I  shall  be  ready  to  perform  mine.' 

He  turned  from  her  a  moment,  biting  his  lip  in  his 
vexation.  He  was  nonplussed,  hard-driven.  A  post- 
ponement was  impossible.  Outside,  Mr.  Suarez  and 
his  bailiffs  watched  and  waited.  Unless  this  marriage 


THE  LAST  THROW  311 

took  place  to-night,  he  was  wrecked  and  ruined  for 
all  time,  beyond  all  hope. 

What,  he  wondered  in  a  frenzy  of  stifled  rage,  could 
have  induced  Lord  Carteret  to  play  this  scurvy  trick 
upon  him  —  to  withdraw  that  shielding  warranty 
thus,  in  the  eleventh  hour? 

He  whipped  a  handkerchief  from  the  silver-laced 
pocket  of  his  coat,  and  mopped  his  clammy  brow. 
The  heat  seemed  to  increase;  the  air  of  that  summer 
night  had  grown  more  stifling.  Suddenly,  outside, 
there  was  an  ominous  rustle  of  wind  among  the 
laurels  and  a  moment  later  the  candle-flames  in  the 
room  were  beaten  over  by  the  draught. 

'Damans,'  he  said  presently,  'you  use  me  very 
cruelly.  Can  nothing  that  I  do  win  me  back  the  place 
I  held  in  your  regard  ?  —  the  place  from  which  a 
moment's  folly  made  me  outcast?  I  love  you,  Dam- 
aris!'  His  voice  shook  with  emotion;  he  was  very 
humble,  entirely  the  suppliant  lover;  and  he  was  a 
very  handsome  and  gallant  figure  of  a  man.  'There  is 
naught  in  all  this  world  I  would  not  do  to  pleasure 
you,  no  sacrifice  I  would  not  make  to  win  your  regard 
—  no  sacrifice,  I  swear,  whatever  it  may  be.' 

But  he  failed  to  move  her.  Not  by  his  humility,  nor 
his  protestations,  nor  yet  his  personal  beauty  could  he 
achieve  it.  She  was  but  the  husk  she  had  proclaimed 
herself.  She  stood  silent  for  a  little  moment,  so  that 
her  words  might  not  seem  a  direct  and  offensive  reply 
to  his  appeal.  Then:  'I  will  go  now,'  she  said,  and 
again  she  begged  him  to  ring  for  a  servant  to  escort 
her  to  her  waiting  carriage. 

His  manner  changed  on  that.  He  had  tried  hu- 
mility, and  since  that  had  failed  with  her,  she  should 
see  him  in  his  real  mood.   He  had  been  a  suppliant; 


312  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

but  since  she  had  no  ear  for  his  entreaties,  she  should 
listen  now  to  the  proclamation  of  his  will. 

'Nay,'  he  said  quietly,  coldly  almost,  and  he  smiled, 
but  no  longer  ingratiatingly.  'Nay,  Damaris,  you  are 
here,  and  here  you  stay.  Take  off  your  cloak,  child.' 

Alarm  gleamed  in  her  eyes.  Faintly  her  bosom  be- 
gan to  stir.  It  seemed,  then,  that  she  was  not  quite 
the  insensible  thing  she  accounted  herself. 

'What  do  you  mean?'  she  asked  him,  her  voice 
straining  a  little. 

'You  promised  to  come  hither  and  wed  me  to-night 
if  I  obtained  you  Sir  John's  pardon.  I  have  obtained 
it.  To-morrow  it  shall  be  in  your  hands,  if  you  require 
it.   For  that,  however,  you  must  take  my  word.' 

'Your  word?'  she  cried,  a  world  of  scorn  in  her 
tone. 

'My  word,'  he  answered  firmly.  'You  came  hither 
to  become  Viscountess  Pauncefort,  and  Viscountess 
Pauncefort  shall  you  be  within  the  hour.  All  is  ready 
and  the  parson  is  waiting.   So  take  off  your  cloak.' 

She  felt  herself  turn  a  little  dizzy.  The  room 
seemed  to  sway  about  her,  and  one  word  boomed  and 
reverberated  through  her  mind.  'Fool!  Fool!  Fool!' 
was  that  word.  'Fool'  —  to  have  trusted  herself 
alone  into  the  house  and  power  of  such  a  man. 

He  strode  over  to  the  bell-rope  and  pulled  it 
sharply.   In  the  distance  a  tinkling  note  was  heard. 

'I  will  not!'  she  cried.  'Let  me  depart!'  And  she 
turned  to  the  door. 

He  sprang  after  her,  and  seized  her  wrist.  Through 
the  open  windows  came  a  sound  of  heavy  raindrops 
pattering  on  the  leaves. 

'Listen,  Damaris,'  he    implored  her,  his  face  now 
within  a  foot  of  hers,  awakening  horror  and  sickly 


THE  LAST  THROW  313 

dread  in  her.  '  There ! '  he  cried  suddenly.  '  You  hear 
the  rain !  There  is  a  storm  coming.  You  cannot  go  on 
such  a  night  as  this  is  like  to  be.'  Even  as  he  spoke  a 
vivid  flash  of  lightning  illumined  the  terrace  and  the 
gardens  beyond  it.  'The  very  elements  conspire  to 
make  you  mine  at  once.' 

'I  will  not  marry  you  until  the  pardon  is  in  my 
hand/  she  answered,  with  a  brave  attempt  to  steady 
her  voice.  'Not  even  then,  if  you  attempt  further  to 
detain  me  now.' 

'You  will  not?'  he  said,  and  gently  seemed  to  mock 
her.  'Very  well!  But  depart  you  cannot.  You  see, 
there  is  a  storm.'  And  his  mockery  increased.  'Be  it 
as  you  will.  Do  not  marry  me  until  you  have  the 
pardon.  But  for  your  own  sake  I  suggest  —  no  more 
—  that  it  were  better  you  married  me  to-night  than 
in  the  morning.' 

'Do  you  threaten  me?'  she  cried,  and  wrenched 
herself  free  of  his  clutch. 

'Threaten  you?  Nay,  sweeting,  I  do  not  threaten. 
I  warn.  I  admonish.  Assume  that  by  morning, 
wearied  by  your  cruelty,  I  change  my  mind.  Assume 
that  I  then  no  longer  desire  to  marry  you.  What 
then,  eh?' 

She  looked  at  him,  and  there  was  utter  loathing 
now  in  her  glance.  He  saw  it;  perceived  that  in  his 
desperate  haste  he  was  playing  his  game  clumsily; 
wherefore,  being  rendered  still  more  desperate,  he 
plunged  recklessly  on  to  issue  his  ultimatum. 

'Nay,  now/  said  he,  'I  swear  to  Heaven  that  unless 
you  marry  me  this  night,  Sir  John's  pardon  shall  be 
cancelled.  I'll  not  be  toyed  with  in  this  fashion.  You 
shall  not  blow  hot  and  cold  upon  me  at  your  pleasure, 
mistress.' 


3i4  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

She  put  her  hands  to  her  face  an  instant;  then 
looked  at  him  again. 

'You  are  a  dastard,  my  Lord  Pauncefort,'  she  told 
him.  * 

'I  am  a  lover,  madam,'  was  his  answer.  'Choose 
now,  and  advise  me  of  your  choice.  Shall  Sir  John  go 
the  way  of  Captain  Gaynor?' 

Overhead  at  that  moment  came  a  terrific  crash  of 
thunder,  and  instantly  the  pattering  rain  was  changed 
to  a  torrential  downpour. 

'Here  is  the  storm,'  said  he.  'Perhaps  it  will  help 
you  to  a  wise  decision.' 

The  door  opened  and  the  servant  summoned  by  the 
bell  stood  to  receive  his  lordship's  orders. 

'  Bid  them,'  he  ordered,  '  put  up  Miss  Hollinstone's 
chaise.' 

There  was  terror  now  in  her  face,  the  terror  of  the 
trapped  creature. 

'Very  good,  my  lord.' 

'And  —  wait.'  He  turned  to  her  again.  'Shall  we 
have  the  parson  in  or  not  ? '  he  asked  her.  '  'Tis  as  you 
please.' 

But  she  swung  round  to  the  servant.  'No,  no!'  she 
panted.  '  I  am  departing  now.  Take  me  to  my  chaise. ' 

Bewildered,  the  lackey  looked  at  his  master.  Be- 
hind Damaris,  Pauncefort  was  signalling  the  fellow  to 
depart.  He  did  so  instantly,  closing  the  door  after 
him. 

At  bay  now,  she  turned  once  more  upon  her  captor. 
'My  lord,'  she  said,  'you  dare  not  do  this  thing.  I  will 
not  marry  you  now  or  ever.  You  do  well  to  show  me 
from  what  I  have  escaped.  Let  me  depart!  Let  me 
depart  at  once,  or  you  shall  suffer  for  it  as  there  is  a 
law  in  England.' 


THE  LAST  THROW  315 

'You'll  be  none  so  eager  to  depart  in  the  morning/ 
said  he.  'As  for  the  marriage,  I  use  no  coercion.  If 
you  will  not,  you  will  not.  Yet  to-morrow  you  may 
sing  in  a  different  key,  my  sweeting.'  The  mask  was 
off  him  now.   He  was  frankly  brutal  and  menacing. 

She  fronted  him  intrepidly.  'You  shall  rue  it,  my 
lord,'  she  promised  him  with  conviction.  'Terribly 
shall  you  rue  it.' 

'Rue  what?'  he  mocked  her,  with  false  pleasant- 
ness. 'Rue  it  that  I  could  not  commit  the  inhospi- 
tality  of  suffering  a  lady  to  ride  forth  in  so  wild  a 
night?  Come  now,'  he  added,  with  an  attempt  at 
rough  good-humour,  'think  better  of  it,  Damans. 
See,  here  comes  the  parson.  Do  not  send  him  empty- 
handed  away.' 

She  heard  the  door  open  behind  her,  supposing,  as 
did  his  lordship,  that  it  was  the  parson  who  now  en- 
tered. She  did  not  turn,  but  using  his  lordship's 
countenance  as  a  mirror,  she  realised  that  in  the  door- 
way at  her  back  stood  not  the  parson  but  some  un- 
expected and  terrific  apparition. 

She  saw  Pauncefort's  whole  body  twitch  convul- 
sively, his  flushed  face  turn  livid,  his  mouth  fall 
loosely  open,  whilst  his  eyes  bulged  and  bulged  as  he 
stared  past  her  at  that  something  in  the  doorway. 
Some  of  his  unutterable  horror  communicated  itself 
to  her,  so  that  she  dared  not  turn  to  look  behind  her, 
but  stood  there  with  aching  head  and  throbbing 
pulses,  waiting  for  this  thing  to  reveal  itself  to  her 
senses. 

And  then,  after  a  long  pause,  that  revelation  came. 
It  was  borne  to  her  by  a  voice  —  a  pleasant  voice  that 
rang  now  with  sinister  crispness,  a  voice  at  whose 
sound  her  heart  leapt  wildly  and  seemed  to  stand  still, 


316  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

whilst  a  great  fear  took  possession  of  her;  for  surely  it 
was  the  voice  of  one  who  was  dead. 

'For  a  man  engaged  in  villainy,  Pauncefort,'  said 
that  voice,  'you  are  singularly  careless  of  your  doors. 
I  had  not  hoped  to  find  so  easy  an  admittance.' 

Pauncefort  answered  nothing.  He  continued  to 
stare,  wide-eyed,  at  the  ghost  of  the  man  who,  by  his 
agency,  had  been  hanged  at  Tyburn  a  fortnight  since. 
But  Damaris  staggered  as  the  voice  ceased;  she  ut- 
tered a  little  moaning  sob,  and  swayed  there  until  a 
strong  arm  came  suddenly  about  her  waist  to  steady 
her.  The  voice  spoke  again,  in  her  very  ear  now  and 
scarce  louder  than  a  whisper. 

'  Be  not  afraid,  Damaris.   'Tis  I.' 

She  looked  up  at  last,  fearfully,  to  meet  the  gleam- 
ing eyes  of  Captain  Gaynor.  Although  she  had 
known  what  vision  to  expect,  yet  the  sight  of  it  al- 
most drew  a  scream  from  her.  But  she  controlled  her- 
self. All  this  was  a  dream,  she  knew  now,  the  bitterly 
ironical  conclusion  of  a  nightmare. 

Then  Pauncefort  found  his  tongue  at  last.  'In 
God's  name,  who  are  you?'  he  cried,  in  a  quavering 
voice. 

1  Captain  Henry  Gaynor  —  at  your  service/  said 
the  apparition.  'I  think  I  am  as  opportune  as  un- 
welcome,' he  added,  smiling. 

At  last  my  Lord  Pauncefort  awoke  to  the  realisa- 
tion that  here  was  no  apparition  from  beyond  the 
tomb,  but  a  living  man;  formidable,  perhaps,  and 
damnably  inopportune,  yet  to  be  dealt  with  in  human 
fashion  and  at  once. 

By  what  miracle  the  Captain  had  been  preserved  to 
present  himself  at  such  a  season  was  a  matter  whose 
explanation  could  wait.    Meanwhile,  for  the  second 


THE  LAST  THROW  317 

time  that  night  his  lordship's  hand  stole  to  his  side, 
where  his  sword  should  have  hung,  and  for  the  second 
time  he  cursed  its  absence. 

Captain  Gaynor  observed  the  gesture,  and  smiled 
his  understanding. 

'That  shall  be  amended  presently,'  he  said,  with 
meaning.  '  There  was  a  foul  game  we  played  one  night 
a  month  ago  at  your  house  in  town,  my  lord.  We 
played  it  with  cards,  and  Fortune  favoured  you  —  a 
cheat.  We  will  resume  that  game  in  a  moment,  my 
lord,  and  it  shall  not  be  played  out  with  cards  this 
time.' 

He  felt  Damaris  tremble  as  she  lay  against  him, 
supported  by  his  arm.  She,  too,  was  beginning  to 
realise  that  this  was  not  the  dream  she  had  supposed 
it,  but  an  amazing  reality;  that  the  heart  that  beat 
just  where  her  shoulder  rested  was  the  heart  —  the 
living,  throbbing  heart  —  of  one  who  was  believed  to 
be  dead. 

'Besides,'  Captain  Gaynor  was  continuing,  'I  have 
another  score  to  settle  with  you.  It  seems  that  you 
have  been  giving  my  honourable  name  to  a  Jacobite 
rascal  known  as  Captain  Jenkyn,  who  was  hanged  at 
Tyburn,  and  on  the  strength  of  that  spurious  identity 
you  foisted  upon  me,  you  procured  the  arrest  of  Sir 
John  Kynaston  for  having  harboured  me.' 

Pauncefort  leaned  heavily  against  the  table.  He 
understood  nothing.  His  amazement  effaced  for  the 
moment  every  other  consideration. 

'But  that,'  Gaynor  resumed,  'is  a  matter  upon 
which  Sir  John  himself  is  here  to  question  you.' 

'Sir  John?'  Pauncefort  muttered,  despite  himself. 

'Sir  John  is  here?'  exclaimed  Damaris,  too. 

'Why,  yes.    When  I   presented  myself  to  Lord 


318  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

Carteret  to-day,  my  presence  was  in  itself  sufficient  to 
reveal  the  absurdity  of  the  charge  against  your  uncle. 
He  was  instantly  released,  and  since  I  was  informed 
by  my  Lord  Carteret  th^t  you  were  to  be  coerced  into 
a  marriage  here  to-night,  upon  certain  false  pretences 
of  this  trickster,  we  came  straight  hither  from  town, 
bringing  with  us  an  old  friend  of  mine,  in  case  we 
should  require  support.  I  left  them  in  talk  with  a 
parson.    But  I  think  they  are  here  now.' 

And  as  he  spoke  they  entered,  Sir  John  first  and  Sir 
Richard  Templeton  close  upon  his  heels. 

And  now  Pauncefort  understood  at  last  the  thing 
that  ever  since  the  admission  of  Mr.  Suarez  had  been 
plaguing  him:  the  reasons  that  had  led  my  Lord 
Carteret  to  withdraw  his  warranty.  Plainly,  seeing 
Captain  Gaynor  alive  and  hearing  him  disclaim  all 
connection  with  that  Captain  Jenkyn  who  had  been 
hanged,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  concluded  that  he, 
himself,  was  being  imposed  upon.  Whatever  else  re- 
mained impenetrable  to  Pauncefort,  at  least  he  real- 
ised to  his  dismay  that  not  all  the  protesting  in  the 
world  could  now  induce  Lord  Carteret  to  think  other- 
wise; that  not  all  the  proof  that  he,  himself,  might 
produce,  could  stand  against  the  overwhelming,  self- 
evident  fact  that  whoever  Captain  Jenkyn  might 
have  been,  he  was  not  Harry  Gaynor. 

Sir  John  took  in  the  situation  at  a  glance.  'Ha!' 
said  he.  '  I  gather  from  the  parson  that  we  arrive  in 
good  time.  Damaris,  my  dear  child,  this  was  —  a 
little  wild  in  you  —  I  mean,  to  trust  this  villain.' 
Then  he  turned  to  the  viscount.  'Pauncefort — '  he 
began,  and  there  he  ended.  Abruptly  he  turned  his 
shoulder  upon  the  fellow.  'Pshaw!'  said  he.  'To 
what  end  recriminations?  Let  us  begone,  Harry.' 


THE  LAST  THROW  319 

'If  you  will  take  Damans,'  said  the  Captain,  'and 
Dick  will  remain,  I  have  yet  something  to  say  to  his 
lordship,  a  —  a  little  game  to  conclude.' 

But  Damaris  suddenly  swung  round  and  clutched 
his  arm,  looking  up  fearfully  into  his  face. 

'No,  no,  Harry!' she  pleaded.  'Leave  him!  Let  us 
go!  Come  with  us.' 

LTpon  that  my  Lord  Pauncefort  spoke  at  last.  'If 
he  is  the  coward  I  deem  him,'  he  said,  in  a  voice  that 
choked  with  rage,  'he  will  give  heed  to  you.' 

'You  hear  him,  sweet,'  said  Captain  Gaynor,  with 
his  wry  smile. 

'And  is  your  courage  a  thing  that  can  be  blown 
upon  by  the  breath  of  such  a  man  as  that?'  she  asked 
him.  'Oh,  Harry,  I  have  suffered  for  you  —  you  can 
never  know  what  I  have  suffered.  You  are  restored  to 
me,  I  know  not  how.  I  understand  nothing.  My 
senses  are  all  confused.  But  I  understand  that  you 
are  here  and  alive.  Presently  I  shall  thank  God  for  it, 
and  seek  to  understand  the  nature  of  this  miracle. 
Meanwhile,  my  dear,  I  ask  this  of  you.  'Tis  the  first 
thing  I  have  ever  asked  of  you.  If  you  love  me, 
Harry,  you  will  come  with  us  now.' 

'Not  a  doubt,'  sneered  Pauncefort,  'but  he'll  shield 
himself  behind  a  woman's  plea.' 

'It  seems  to  me,'  said  a  fresh  voice,  a  rich,  oily 
voice, '  t'at  my  Lord  Pauncefort  is  so  ill-advised  as  to 
seek  to  pick  a  quarrel.' 

They  swung  round,  startled.  In  the  doorway  now 
stood  Mr.  Israel  Suarez.  Behind  him  loomed  the 
shadows  of  his  three  bailiffs.  He  bowed  to  the  com- 
pany. 

'Forgive  my  intrusion,  madam  and  gentlemen. 
But  it  is  timely.  My  lord's  life  is  vort'  fifteen  t'ousand 


320  THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

pounds  to  me  —  to  be  obtained  t 'rough  veary  years 
of  vaitin'.   I  cannot  permit  'im  to  jeopardise  it.' 

'And  who  the  devil  may  you  be?'  quoth  Sir 
John.  % 

'  My  name,  sir,  is  Israel  Suarez.  Ye  may  'ave  'eard 
of  me.  I  'old  a  varrant  for  t'is  'andsome  young  noble- 
man, who  is  my  debtor  and  cannot  meet  'is  debt.  I 
am  sorry,  gentlemen,  to  interfere,  sorry  to  baulk  you 
of  a  very  vort'y  object,  sir'  (this  to  Captain  Gaynor), 
'but  my  lord  belongs  to  me;  'e  belongs  to  t'e  law;  'is 
life  is  sacred;  and  if,  knowing  t'at,  'e  persists  in  insult- 
ing you,  vhy  —  codso!  —  'tis  to  'is  greater  shame.  In 
fifteen  years  or  so,  it  is  possible  t'at  I  may  'ave  done 
vit'  'im.  Your  little  affair  must  vait  until  t'en.  T'e 
first  satisfaction  must  alvays  belong  to  t'e  law.' 

'Ha!'  said  Sir  John.  His  blue  eyes  twinkled.  He 
turned  to  Captain  Gaynor.  '  I  think  his  lordship  will 
be  quite  safe  with  Mr.  Suarez.' 

'Quite,'  said  the  Captain,  who  understood  now  to 
the  full  what  Lord  Carteret  had  said.  'Though  I 
think  he  would  have  found  me  more  merciful.  Shall 
we  be  going,  Damaris  ? ' 

'In  God's  name,  yes!'  she  sobbed. 

With  a  dull  roar  of  anger  Pauncefort  sprang  after 
them.  The  towering  bulk  of  Mr.  Suarez  rose  suddenly 
before  him,  an  insuperable  barrier. 

'Be  calm,  my  lord;  be  calm,'  said  the  money-lender 
affably.  "Tis  but  a  lost  trick  in  t'e  game  of  life. 
Patience,  t'en!  T'e  gods  love  a  good  loser.' 

Pauncefort  fronted  him  a  moment,  cursing  foully; 
then,  exhausted  and  sobbing,  he  collapsed  into  a 
chair. 

Over  him  stood  the  benign  Suarez,  like  a  protecting 
but  very  proprietary  deity. 


THE  LAST  THROW  321 

It  was  Sir  John  who  proposed  that,  as  the  night  was 
wild  and  the  roads  becoming  difficult,  the  party  had 
best  divide  itself,  since  they  had  two  carriages  —  the 
one  which  had  brought  Damaris  and  the  other  in 
which  Captain  Gaynor  and  his  friends  had  come  to 
town.  That  proposal  was  well  enough,  but  when  in 
his  further  proposal  for  the  division  of  the  party  he 
sent  Damaris  and  the  Captain  ahead  in  one  carriage 
and  himself  followed  with  Sir  Richard  in  another,  he 
showed  a  very  culpable  and  reckless  disregard  of  the 
proprieties. 

Said  Damaris  to  her  Captain,  'You  are  regretting 
the  intervention  of  that  man,'  by  which  she  meant  the 
intervention  of  Mr.  Suarez  to  avert  the  meeting  be- 
tween the  Captain  and  his  lordship. 

'Nay,  sweet,'  he  answered  her,  'I  am  glad  on't.  It 
made  it  easier  for  me  to  follow  my  heart,  and  do  your 
bidding.' 

'You  confess,  then,  that  you  hesitated?* 

'If  I  did  'twas  because  his  life  was  a  menace  to  me 
and  to  others.  But  gaoled  and  discredited  as  he  is,  his 
fangs  are  drawn  and  we  may  now  be  easy  on  that 
score.  I  think  we  are  the  more  sweetly  avenged,  and 
—  and  my  hands  are  not  soiled.' 

'  There  is  much  I  do  not  understand !  so  much ! '  she 
said. 

Thereafter  he  explained. 


THE  END 


There's  More  to  Follow! 

More  stories  of  the  sort  you  likej 
more,  probably,  by  the  author  of  this 
one;  more  than  500  titles  all  told  by 
writers  of  world-wide  reputation,  in 
the  Authors'  Alphabetical  List  which 
you  will  find  on  the  reverse  side  of  the 
wrapper  of  this  book.  Look  it  over 
before  you  lay  it  aside.  There  are 
books  here  you  are  sure  to  want — some, 
possibly,  that  you  have  always  wanted. 

It  is  a  selected  list;  every  book  in  it 
has  achieved  a  certain  measure  of 
success. 

The  Grosset  &  Dunlap  list  is  not  only 
the  greatest  Index  of  Good  Fiction 
available,  it  represents  in  addition  a 
generally  accepted  Standard  of  Value. 
It  will  pay  you  to 

Look  on  the  Other  Side  of  the  Wrapper! 

In  case  the  wrapper  is  lost  write  to 
the  publishers  for  a  complete  catalog 


RAFAEL  SABATINI'S  NOVELS 

May  be  had  wherever  books  are  sold.     Ask  for  Grosset  &  Donlap's  list 

JUST  a  diminutive  city  of  the  Italian  Marches,  was  the 
birthplace  of  Rafael  Sabatini,  and  here  he  spent  his 
early  youth.     The  city  is  glamorous  with  those  centu- 
ries the  author  makes  live  again  in  his  novels  with  all  their 
violence  and  beauty. 

Mr.  Sabatini  first  went  to  school  in  Switzerland  and  from 
Lycee  of  Oporto,  Portugal,  and  like  Joseph  Conrad,  he  has 
never  attended  an  English  school.  But  English  is  hardly 
an  adopted  language  for  him,  as  he  learned  it  from  his 
mother,  an  English  woman,  who  married  the  Maestro- 
Cavaliere  Vincenzo  Sabatini. 

Today  Rafael  Sabatini  is  regarded  as  "  The  Alexandre 
Dumas  of  Modern  Fiction." 

THE  TRAMPLING  OF  THE  LILIES 

THE  GATES  OF  DOOM 

THE  STROLLING  SAINT 


THE  BANNER  OF  THE  BULL 
THE  CAROLINIAN 
SAINT  MARTIN'S  SUMMER 
MISTRESS  WILDING 


FORTUNE'S  FOOL 

BARDELYS  THE  MAGNIFICENT 

THE  SNARE 

CAPTAIN  BLOOD 

THE  SEA-HAWK 

SCARAMOUCHE 


GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,  Publishers,    NEW  YORK 


DETECTIVE  STORIES  BY  J.  S.  FLETCHER 

May  be  had  wherever  books  are  sold.     Ask  for  Grosset  &  Dunlap's  list 

THE  KANG-HE  VASE 

THE  ROOT  OF  ALL  EVIL 

THE  AMARANTH  CLUB 

THE  GREAT  BRIGHTON  MYSTERY 

THE  COPPER  BOX 

FALSE  SCENT 

THE  SECRET  OF  THE  BARBICAN 

THE  ANNEXATION  SOCIETY 

THE  WOLVES  AND  THE  LAMB 

GREEN  INK 

THE  LOST  MR.  LINTHWAITE 

THE  MILL  OF  MANY  WINDOWS 

THE  HEAVEN-KISSED  HILL 

THE  MIDDLE  TEMPLE  MURDER 

THE  SAFETY  PIN 

THE  SECRET  WAY 

THE  VALLEY  OF  HEADSTRONG  MEN 

yjsk  for  Complete  free  list  of  G.   &  D.   Popalar  Copyrighted  Fiction 
GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,    Publishers,   NEW  YORK 


