Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



^< 



I 




IP 



• ?• •-■* 



w 







\vM^ • •■ 



». . 




THE HOUSE IN 
DOR MER FOR EST 

MRS. MARY WEBB 



«< 



Let the sleeping soul 



Awake 



•> 




THE HOUSE IN 
DORMER FOREST 






BY 

MRS. MARY Y^EBB 

AUTHOR OF ''tBB SPUWO OF JOT,** 

^TBB OOLDBW A&ROW/' 

''OOITB TO BABIV." XTC 



1 






• « • « 



~ TTTTr 



NEW ^PJy YORK 
GEORGE H. DORAN CXDMPANY 



PUBLIC LlBuARY 

37418A 



ASTOR. LENOX AND 






OOPnUOHT, li21« 
BY QBQBGB H. DOBAN OOHPANT 






PBIKTED IN TBB UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 




CONTENTS 



BOOK ONE: THE HOUSE 



I Dormer 



H The Family at Suppkr 
in Jasper Comes Home 
IV Night in Dormer . 
y, Family Prayers 
VI The Advent op Ernest 
Vn Harvest Preparations 
VIII Ernest Speaks 



• to 



• • 



IX How They Went to the Keep 



X The Wedding . 
XI Marigold's Warning 
Xn The Grotto. 
Xni The Beast Walk . 



• « 



• « 



• • 



9 

13 

30 

40 

55 

64 
79 

89 
xoo 

no 

129 

162 



n 



CONTENTS 



BOOK TWO: THE FOREST 



XIV The Upper Woods 



XV Mr. Cantlop Comes Home 



XVI Peter's Letter 
XVII The Gods Assemble 



XVIII Jasper Breaks Pasture 
XIX Philip Arkinstall Smujss 



XX The Marble Christ 



XXI Amber Go£s to the Forest 
XXII Funeral Pi^eparations 
XXIII Mb. Caktlop Achieves Fame 



XXIV A Forest Bridal 



PAGE 

. 183 

. 200 

. 211 

. 223 

. 232 

. 241 

. 247 

^ 253 

. 261 

• 269 



273 



XXV Grandmother Has an Inspiration . 281 





BOOK ONE: THE HOUSE 



CHAPTER I: DORBfER 

*r\ORMER Old House stood amid thd remnants of 
^ primeval woodland that curtained the hills. These 
rose steeply on all sides of the house, which lay low by 
the water in the valley. This was called Oolert's 
Dingle, and there were plenty of owls to justify the name. 

I On a moonlit night, passing, high up, from side to side 
of the cuplike valley, they looked like breeze-blown 
leathers. Higher still, on the very rim of the cup, the 
fer-travelled winds shouted across to one another, all 
winter, news of the world. When the bats slipped from 
their purlieus in the cobwebby outbuildings and climbed 
toward this rim, they had to ascend step after grey step 
of the windless air, and only attained their ambition after 
kmg flying. 

From these heights, in fine weather, the house and its 
gardens lay open to the view, small but clear, beside the 
white thread that was Dormer brook. The place had 
been patched and enlarged by successive generations, very 
nmch as man's ideas are altered, the result in both cases 
being the same — a mansion to the majority, a prison to the 
few. On clear evenings, when the westering sun struck 
up the valley and set the windows on fire, one could see 
the centuries in the house, like ferns in a fossil. There was 
the timbered black-and-white centre, once the complete 
bouse, with diamond lattices and the unassuming solidity 
of an Elizabethan manor; there was the small Queen Anne 
wing on the left— one room down and two up— built by 
a rich ancestor of the Darke family; there was the solemn, 

9 



10 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Georgian porch with its rounded, shell-like roof and 
Grecian pillars. The right wing, hideously stuccoed, con- 
sisted of one large room with many-paned sash-windows 
and a steep red roof, and had been built by the father of 
Solomon Darke, the present owner. At the back, peril- 
ously clinging to the Elizabethan farm, was an ancient 
cottage, which seemed to be the nucleus of the whole, and 
was built of stone and thatched. When the ambitious 
Elizabethan set about building his manor, no doubt the 
two bottle-glass windows of this cottage eyed him re- 
proachfully, as a Vandal and a despiser of his ancestors. 
It was neglected now, and remained, weighed down by tho 
large-leaved ivy, haunted by its whisper year after year, 
and used only by Enoch, the gardener, who stored apples 
there, and by the mice, who consumed the apples. The 
house, as a whole, had something of a malignant air, as of 
an old ruler from whom senility takes the power, but not 
the will, for tyranny. 

All these things you cotdd see in clear weather; but 
when it was misty — and mist lingered here as of inalien- 
able right — ^the house was obliterated. It vanished like a 
I>ebble in a well, with all its cabined and shuttered wraths 
and woes, all its thunderous "thou shalt nots." At such 
times it did not seem that any law ruled in the valley 
except the law of the white owls and the hasty water and 
the mazy batdances. Only those who slept there night 
by night could tell you that the house was overspread 
with a spider's-web of rules, legends and customs so com- 
plex as to render the individual soul almost helpless. It 
is the mass-eeo that constructs dogmas and laws; for I 
while the individual soul is, if free at all, self-poised, the 
mass-mind is always uncertain, driven by vague, wander- 
ing aims ; conscious, in a dim fashion, of its own weakness, 
it builds round itself a grotesque structure in the everlast- 
ingness of which it implicitly believes. When each unit 







DORMER 11 

oi humanity merges itself in the mass, it loses its bearings 
and must rely on externals. The whole effort of evolu- 
tion is to the development of individual souls who will 
dare to be free of the architecture of crowd-morality. 
For when man is herded, he remembers the savage. 

Round the House of Dormer stood the forest, austerely 
aloof. The upper woods had never known the shuddering 
horror of the axe, the bitter and incurable destruction of 
the day when gnomes of ugly aspect are let loose with 
flashing weapons among the haughty sons and daughters 
of the gods, hacking and tearing at the steadfast forms 
of beauty, until beauty itself seems to have crashed earth- 
wards. Successive Darkes had threatened to fell the 
forest; but there was always plenty of wood from the 
reaping of the storms and from trees that fell from the 
rottenness of great age; so they had let it alone. The 
trees looked down upon time-shattered hulks of others in 
every stage of gentle decay. There were some mouldered 
trunks yet standing with a twig or two of green on them, 
especially among the yews, which must have weathered 
the winters of a thousand years. Others were of such 
antiquity that only a jagged point showed where once the 
Jeif-shadows flickered on the wolf litters. Among these 
giants in their prime and in their dignified dissolution 
rose on all sides in supple grace the young trees and sap- 
lings. From the lissom creature that only needed the 
gradual massing of maturity to make its beauty perfect, 
down to the baby stem with two absurd, proudly-waving 
leaves, all took part in that slow attainment of perfection 
through stages of beauty on which all Nature seems 
intent They stood, rank on rank, with rounded or 
pointed tops, their foliage sometimes heavy and solemn, 
as in the yew and the oak, sometimes fluflfy as in the elm, 
or transparent and showing the sky through its traceries 
as in birch and larch. They seemed to peer at the VvoM'&e 



12 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

over one another's shoulders like people looking at some- 
thing grotesque, not with blame or praise, but in a kind of 
disdainful indifference. 

For it does not seem that Nature, as some divines would 
have us think, was built to stage man's miracle plays, or 
created as an illustration of his various religions. Nature 
takes no account of man and his curious arts, his weird 
worships, but remains dark and unresponsive, beetling 
upon him as he creeps, ant-like, from his momentary past 
to his doubtful future, painfully carrying his tiny load of 
knowledge. But indifference is not ll^pering, as inter- 
ference is; therefore those that feel within them the stir 
of a growing soul prefer the dour laws of earth to the 
drag of the herd of mankind, and fly from the house of 
man to the forest, where the emotionless silence always 
seems to be gathering, as waves mount and swdl, to the 
disclosure of a mystery. 






CHAPTER n : THE FAMILY AT SUPPER 

THE Darkes had just finished supper, the event of the 
day. The red woollen bell-rope still swung from 
Peter's onslaught; for when, at Mrs. Darke's morose 
order, "Ring for Sarah," he kicked his chair aside and 
strode across the room, he always seemed to wreak a 
suppressed fury on the bell-rope, and more than once the 
tarnished rose to which it hung had been torn from the 
iRall. 

'The room. Drat itl'" said Sarah in the kitchen, like a 
person proposing a toast 

Armed with a large tin tray, she burst into the dining- 
room. Qearing was, in her hands, a belligerent enter- 
prise in which her usual sulky manner in the presence of 
ber mistress gave place to more open hostility. She 
wrested the plates {rom their owners, and had been known 
to leave Ruby, who liked two helpings, stranded, with no 
plate for her last fruit stones. To-night it was Mr. Darke 
iho cried, '"Howd yer, Sarah 1'* and clung to his plate. 

"Don't say 'Howd yer!' like any old waggoner, Solo- 
mon r Mrs. Darke spoke with exasperation. 

'Waggoner, Solomon T' echoed a less irritated, thinner, 
inore tiresome voice, that of Mrs. Darke's mother, Mrs. 
Vdindrc. 

Solomon Darke, a man of sixty, sat with his shoulders 
bent; his jaw, of the kind sometimes called "jowl," rested 
on his Gladstone collar and large "made" tie. The 
expressionless heaviness of his face was redeemed by 
something of the patience of oxen, and rendered intimi^ 

15 



14 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

dating by a hint of the bull-dog in the mouth's ferocious 
tenacity. It was obvious that his one idea in any crisis 
would be to resort to physical force. Between him and 
Peter sat Catherine Velindre, a distant relation who lived 
at Dormer as a paying guest, calling Solomon and his 
wife "uncle" and "aunt" as terms of respect. Her pointed 
face, her chestnut hair, demurely parted and pinned roimd 
her head in a large plait, her small and thin-lipped mouth, 
might have belonged to a Chaucerian nun. But her eyes 
were not those of a nun ; they were too restless. They were 
peculiarly long, of the type called almond-shaped, with 
very little curve in them ; the lids, being large and heavily- 
lashed, added to the air of secrecy and awareness that was 
Catherine Velindre's chief expression. 

In extreme contrast with Catherine were Ruby Darke, 
a tall, plump, pretty girl of eighteen who was sprawling 
across the table, and her elder sister. Amber, who was in 
no way a success according to Dormer standards. Her 
manner, when she was at ease, had charm, but it was spoilt 
by shyness. Her hair was of an indeterminate brown, and 
her complexion was ruined by ill health, due to the per- 
petual chafing of the wistful mind longing for things not 
in Dormer. 

Peter, black-eyed, silent in the presence ot his parents, 
and — for all his twenty years — full of the sullenness of 
early adolescence, had the look of a creature gathered for 
a spring, but he was without sufficient concentration to 
know in what direction he wished to go or what he wanted 
to grasp. The air of repression which brooded over the 
family, putting a constraint on emotion and impulse, 
seemed to act as an irritant to Peter. He was vaguely 
aware of something inimical, as animals are, but he knew 
nothing about atmosphere and would have flushed scarlet 
if anyone had spoken to him of emotion. 

Peter, Ruby, Amber and Jasper — ^who was not here to- 




THE IPAMILY AT SUPPER 16 

nigfat— came by their names in a curious way. Mrs. 
Darke had been so bored by the advent of each child ( for 
she had married Solomon not because she loved him, but 
because she hated the Velindre household) that she had 
refused to think of any names for them. There had been 
many long silent conflicts when her husband sat, moody 
and obstinate, staring at the mute bundle in the majestic 
cradle which was a Darke heirloom, and saying at long 
mtervals : "Give it a 'name, Rachel 1" 

Mrs, Darke, equally obstinate, on her large sofa with 
its uncomfortable ornaments of carved mahogany leaves, 
silently tore calico. The argument, wordless on one side, 
always ended without a name having been found; and, 
though Solomon's nerves were those of a ploughman, they 
at last became irritated by the harsh, regular tearing, and 
hj that in his wife's character which lay behind the tear- 
ing and caused it. 

'What are you making, tearing so?" he would ask 
angrily. And she would reply, like scissors snapping, 
"Binders!" 

^ Afterwards Solomon generally took his gun and strolled 
towards the Rectory, which was at some distance from the 
church and the House of Dormer. The Rectory, a few 
cottages and an immense, overbearing rookery made up 
the village. Entering the Rector's study with a couple 
of rabbits pendant in his hand, Solomon would say 
sheepishly : 

"Give it a name, Rector I" 

Now the Rector was an authority on seals and gems. 
Nobody knew why he had given his life to this study, 
but it was generally felt at Dormer that he was an honour 
to the village and must be known all over the world. As 
Mr. Mallow, the constable and chief member of the choir, 
8aid with unintentional irony, "The Rector's gort a pow- 
oiul burden of laming, and he's first in that line, no 



16 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

danger; for who else ever wanted to know about a stoned* 

After these visits of Solomon the Rector would spend 
2L happy morning, poring over his lists of jewds, and 
— Shaving dined frugally on the rabbits — ^would write 
a long, allusive letter to Solomon in beautiful pointed 
script Solomon, having extracted the name from it, 
would light his pipe with it and say to his wife in an off- 
hand tone: 

"What d'you think of Amber, Ruby, or Jasper?" 

Whereupon Mrs. Darke said : 

"That's the Rector 1" and Solomon was very crestfallen. 

Rachel Darke was grimly amused that her children 
should be called by the names of precious stones; but to 
protest would have been to upset her attitude of aloofness. 
Three gems headed the family, but, when the Rector sug- 
gested "Garnet'' for the fourth, Solomon rebelled and 
said: 

"Call him Peter. It was good enough for his grand- 
father." 

The Rector comforted himself with the reflection that 
Peter, a rock, was only a jewel in the rough, and Peter had 
been true to this from his cradle. As Mrs. Cantlop, the 
Rector's cousin, said with one of her helpless sighs, 
"Peter's such a knobby baby!" Mrs. Cantlop knew the 
children's idiosyncrasies far better than Mrs. Darke did. 
She knew that Ruby could absorb the crudest paint from 
her toys and still flourish; that Amber, though an ailing 
child, was always ready to gurgle into laughter; that 
Jasper, even at the age of three, required reasons for obey- 
ing an order, and that he would, after pondering on them, 
behave "like a Christian lamb.'* She knew also, though 
neither Mrs. Darke nor Mrs. Velindre noticed it, that 
Catherine, from the moment of her first arrival — ^white- 
pinafored, reserved — ^ruled the nursery. Of all the chil^ 
dren, Peter was most like his mother. He had the same 




THE FAMILY AT SUPPER 17 

long, obstinate chin and the same smouldering black eyes. 

To-night, while Sarah clattered at the sideboard, Mrs. 
Darke sat staring at the tablecloth, drumming on it with 
her long, restless fingers. She was just beyond the circle 
of lamplight, and the dimness made her seem even taller 
than she was. Her thin lips, very pale and straight, were 
dosed with almost painful firmness. Her forehead was 
covered with lines, both vertical and horizontal, and an 
expression of frigidity combined with exasperation made 
her face sinister. 

Away from the table, in an armchair by the fire, sat 
Mrs. Velindre. She was grotesquely like her daughter. 
She had the same close-set black eyes, long pale face and 
lined forehead; but her eyes had no expression. If one 
penetrated them, there seemed to be something stealthily 
in wait behind them. It was like walking in a lonely wood 
and becoming aware of something running in and out 
among the trees, silent, invisible, and gradually being con- 
vinced that it is a ghost. There was a ghost hiding in 
Mrs. Velindre's eyes — a cadaverous, grisly thing which 
had looked at her out of other people's eyes when she was 
a child ; slowly possessing her in womanhood ; finally 
absorbing" her whole personality — eating into it like a 
worm into a rotten fruit. As she sat, hour after hour, in 
her high, straight chair, with her white cap and black 
ringlets, two on each side, this ghost brooded with bat- 
like wings above her failing mind and endowed her with 
something of awe, something that proclaimed her kin to 
the ancient gods of vengeance and slaughter. For in her, 
more than in any other at Dormer, except her daughter, 
the herd panic, which drives man to be more cruel to his 
brother than are the wild beasts, held undisputed domin- 
ion. As a young woman she had known generous instincts, 
hut now, at eighty, she could have refused without a 
ftualm the request of a dying man, if he disagreed with 



18 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

her religious views. Yet she could scarcely be blamed 
She had lived so long by fear and not by love, that her 
capacity for crueky had grown in proportion to her 
capacity for panic She had for so many years been try- 
ing to be like other people, that she was now like nothing 
in heaven or earth. For the more a soul conforms to the 
sanity of others, the more does it become insane. By 
oontinually doing violence to its own laws, it finally loses 
the power of governing itself. Mrs. Velindre, who was 
the oracle of the family, never used either intdlect or in- 
tuition in giving her verdicts. She simply echoed her 
ancestors. If anything occurred without precedent in her 
tradition, she was flustered and incompetent, until she 
had fotmd some text which could be made to bear on the 
question. Then she would give her ultimatum. 

Beneath the hanging lamp, which lit the large room 
vaguely, the six faces, drawn in heavy chiaroscuro against 
the brown wall-paper, shone out dimly as from an old 
picture. They might have belonged to a pre-renaissancc 
Italian family or a household newly converted to Calvin* 
ism. But though they might have belonged to any country 
or period, they could only, it was clear, belong to one 
spiritual atmosphere. Perhaps it was the weight of this 
atmosphere that gave the room its medieval gloom. Fot 
the kernel of medievalism was fear— of God, devils, man« 
and all the laws, customs and fetishes invented by maiti 
And this antique negation seemed to find in the House oi 
Dormer a congenial dwelling. Thick shadows clung tc 
the ceiling like hovering night-birds, eliminating th^ 
comers and all furniture not within the lamp's radius, 
obscuring detail and giving the room a measure oi 
gloomy dignity. 

"I wish Jasper would comet*' said Amber suddenly 
"He's late." 



THE FAMILY AT SXJPPER 19 

would be almost better/' said Mrs. Darke, ''if Jas- 
per came at alL" 

icked I A wicked boy 1 Never came at all/' mat- 
grandmother. 

i isn't, grandmother Y* Amber was all on fire witli 
and love. 

in't contradict your elders/' said Mrs. Darke. 'It 
r tiresome of Jasper, with Ernest taking the curacy 
o come home an infidel.'' 

you mean to say we've got to have that fool Ernest 
here ?" queried Solomon, 
lo. He is to be a paying guest" 
rd I The house'll be like to bust" 
\rstl Burstr corrected Mrs. Darke vat exaspera- 

wstr echoed grandmother from the fireside. 

ist!" repeated Solomon. 

er gufiFawed. Any defiance of authority was a 

[unent to his tethered spirit Amber was pink with 

sssed laughter. Her grandmother's voice was so 

lat of a distant, ruminative bird answering a near 

and her father's explosiveness was so funny and 

ible that her perpetually simmering glee at the 

iirs of life almost boiled over. A strain of what 

Darke called vulgarity in her husband was one of 

ost lovable qualities in Amber's eyes. She always 

rted it of being at least half compotmded of humour. 

herine looked pained. 

sally, Solcmion, I wish you wouldn't be so vulgar !" 

lis wife. 

Tiat've I said? Bust Well, the house will bust 

n't hold Jasper and Ernest together/' 

"ah, at the sideboard, gave a smothered chuckle. 

irahl I said, clear I" Mrs. Darke spoke with 

«re anger. 



fO THE HOUSE IN DOBMER FOREST 

''Clearr came the faitfafal echo from the hearth, i 

Sarah, with sabdued passion, oooduded her enterpn 
and was heard dealing hardly with the crockery in td 
kitchen. l 

'"Aren't you going to have any sapper left, manunai| 
asked Ruby. I 

"I am not." * 

^What a wdcomer cried Amber. « 

*'Is it a time for welcome?" 

''A time to dance and a time to weep • • /' quoted Mili 
Velindre, with the buoyancy given by the knowledge of 
having made a quotation to the point 

'1 don't see that poor Jasper can expect a very cordial 
welcome, after his behaviour/' said Catherine. 

At that moment Sarah was heard roaring (there waN 
no other possiUe description of Sarah's voice whe^ 
raised) , "The gim-dogs' supper's ready, sir !" 

"The dogs get supper — the verv dogsl" Ruby spoto 
obstinately. 

'The dogs eat of the crumbs!" said grandmother 
again buoyant 

"The dogs will enjoy their supper, won't they, father ?* 
asked Amber. 

"Ay, ay. They mop it up." 

"Jasper will be hungry, father. 

But Solomon had gone. He would not be drawn int< 
open hostilities with his wife. 

"Jasper deserves to be hungry," said grandmother. 

"Why must a fellow starve because he's expelled? 
cried Peter angrily. "If the old fools expel him, it's thei 
look-out; it's not his fault" 

"What is Jasper's fault," said Catherine softly, "is th 
sin of denying his Maker." 

Peter was silenced. He was susceptible to physica 
beauty, and, in the absence of more obvious charms, thos 



If 




THE FAMILY AT SUPPER 21 

his cousin held him. The devout air, the "preachy'* 
ice that he would have ridiculed in his sisters, he 
ired in Catherine. By one of the ironies of things, 
lerine's religious words and looks were acceptable, not 
they were real, but because she looked and spoke 
Irith the eyes and lips of a courtesan. Not that Catherine 
Ms anything but innocent and ignorant; she was virginal 
k the point of exasperation; but there was something 
odd m the allure of her eyes, something knife-like in her 
mile, that recalled the loveless sisterhood. Grandmother 
bpoke again : 

''A jealous God !" she said in her most sepulchral voice. 
^A jealous God r 

If he doesn't think there's a God, how can he say 
ttere is?" Peter asked irascibly. It was easy to see that 
he did not argue for a principle, but because arguing was 
in outlet for his volcanic dislike of things in general. 

''Why not just say there is and be comfy?" murmured 
Ruby sleepily. 

Mrs. Darke turned and looked at her, and the look was 
eooogh to wither her. But Ruby was not of the easily 
wiked souls. She was a complaisant creature. She 
returned her mother's look contentedly, ruminatively, and 
went cm eating apples. Catherine watched her. 

''You cat a great many apples," she remarked. 

That's why she has such a lovely complexion," said 

Catherine's eyes, narrow and lustrous, came round upon 
Amber, who immediately became conscious of her own 
bad complexion. 

She looked round the room, wishing she could make it 
more homelike for Jasper. Dormer was not a comfort* 
aUe house, though there were plenty of material neces* 
sities. No one need ever be hungry; but no meal ever 
partook of the nature of a sacrament Amber often 



«e THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

thought wearily that here food and drink were only so 
much solid and liquid matter put into the body in order to 
strengthen it so that it should once more acquire sdid 
and liquid matter. In many a poor home she had seen a 
light that never shone at Dormer; seen the chalice lifted in 
whose mingled wine is agony and ecstasy; heard those 
bells pealing out into the rainy^ windy night of time which 
swing only in the mysterious belfries of the human heart 
Sometimes when she came 'late through the village she 
would see an oblong of crocus light that seemed to come 
not only from the cheap lamp and (he carefully tendered 
fire. It might be a young wife who stood in the door- 
way, while the eldest child, with stem concentration, 
wielded the toasting fork. Or an old woman strained her 
faded eyes to embrace with their love the old man coming 
heavily up the path. When these vanished into the soft 
glow that was their rightful country. Amber was filled 
with a strange, wild longing. Once she talked of this to 
Ruby, and she was so wistful that Ruby cried : "I'll m^ 
you toast, Ambie! Yes, I will — scold who may!" In 
her childish way she strove for the inner grace by first 
attaining the outer sign. The toast caused trouble, but 
Ruby had a capacity for obstinacy, and the war of the 
toasting-fork became an institution. But the Dormer 
meals still failed to be sacraments. 

To-night the room looked exactly as usual. Catherine 
had brought out one of her hobbies, a device by whidi 
ink was sprayed through a wire comb by a tooth-brush 
on to white cardboard where ferns had been pinned. The 
resulting white fern silhouettes were varnished and made 
into blotters for bazaars. Catherine pinned the ferns on 
with great precision, but Amber preferred Ruby's blotters, 
which were blotters in every sense. The ink, in Ruby's 
hands, seemed to become exceedingly wet, and the spray, 
which should have been fine as pepper, ran into pools. 



THE FAMILY AT SUPPER 28 

Amber, seeing Ruby's large hands doubtfully poised over 
the work, her indeterminate mouth slightly open, some- 
times thought that Catherine — ^neat, competent, her dark 
eyes slanted amusedly towards Ruby — willed her to make 
Uots. To-night the regular, metallic brushing worried 
Aoiber. She wanted to think about Jasper, but the room 
vas full of small irritating sounds. Listening to them, it 
seemed to her that they were the essence of the people that 
made them— each little noise the complaint of the spirit 
within. Peter was whittling elderwood for whistles, 
drawing his breath through his teeth meanwhile. Mrs. 
Velindre's four steel knitting needles made a nervous 
imdersong to the brushing. Ruby's regular munching 
iras occasionally drowned by a rending noise as Mrs. 
Darice tore rags to stuff cushions. This sound predom- 
inated over the others because of its very relentlessness. 
Each tear was a momentary shridc. No one spoke for a 
kng time. They seldom talked over their evening em- 
ployments. When Solomon came in, Amber felt grate- 
].| fal to him because his amusement was a silent one. Every 
evening except Sunday he read The Golden Chance, a 
fopct consisting chiefly of puzzles, graded for varying 
intellects. Some required the creati(m of a compete 
couplet of verse. Solomon looked askance at these. 
Others only needed an intuitive knowledge as to which 
lady would marry which gentleman in a line of pictured 
beads. But by some black decree of fate Solomon was 
sever able to win a prize. Each Saturday, when he 
de|M-essedly ascertained that he had again failed, Amber 
loved him more passionately. She resolved that next week 
le should win if she had to sit up all night. But she was 
not good at puzzles. She thought the man with a box- 
like chin would marry the hectic lady; Solomon was sure 
he loved the lady with the excessively developed figure ; 
whereas the perfidious young man really burned for her 



24» THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

of the diamonds. "Wc might have known!" SolomoQ 
would say gloomily, and Amber always wished that she 
wasn't too reserved to throw her arms round him. She 
used to wish the same when Peter came home from school 
as a tiny boy with a bad report. To-night she wished it 
more intensely about Jasper. For he had made in the 
eyes of Dormer a signal failure. None of his puzzles had 
come right His riddle remained unguessed. She re- 
membered him as a small boy having been placed on the 
stool of repentance by Mrs. Cantlop— who had taught 
them all till they outstripped her in knowledge, which 
happened early — and standing there insecurely in a curi- 
ous little yellow tunic, his shoulders htunpy with a sense 
of injustice. When she remembered Jasper's keen love 
of fairness, the wild rages that shook him at the lack of 
it; when she thought how he would come home to-night, 
already frayed to breaking point by the failure of the 
world of college to see his side of the question, she fdt 
dismayed. She knew exactly how they would all look 
at Jasper, how the souls would lean out from their faces 
like crowds watching a criminal — grandmother peering, 
Mrs. Darke glaring. Ruby and Peter curious, her father 
glowering, Catherine hypercritical Her hemming grew 
large and wild. 

'Father ?" she said questioningly. 
'Um ?" Solomon lodced up from the page he was por- 
ing over. 

"When will he be here r 

The question had been quite different, but the room 
was too strong for her; she fell back upon time. Time 
was a god at Dormer. Qocks ticked in every room with 
fury or with phlegmatic dogmatism, and their striking 
cut through every conversation. Mrs. Velindre's grand- 
father clock was especially dictatorial. At five minutes to 
the hour it hiccupped, and, when people had just for- 



"] 




THE FAMILY AT SUPPER «5 

gotten this, it gave forth the hour in deliberate and stri- 
dent tones that only ceased at five minutes past; so that 
it <^ically took ten minutes from every sixty in order 
to preach the fleetingness of time. Mrs. D;arke owned a 
black marble timepiece like a tomb, which ticked irritably 
on the cold black marble mantelpiece in the dining-room. 
In the hall was a tall clock which chimed and would have 
been pleasant if the chimes had not been slightly cracked. 
Sarrah possessed a cuckoo clock, which shouted as un- 
emotionally as if it knew that here at Dormer its cry did 
not mean, summer. In all the bedrooms were alarums, 
bee clocks, carriage clocks. To anyone standing in the 
haH on a quiet afternoon, the multiple whisper of all these 
time-keepers was very ghostly. They rustled like autimm 
leaves; they hushed the living into the sleep of death. 
IThey increased Amber's feeling that Dormer was too full 
of people; for, where man is massed, there he seems 
(doomed to live by rule and by time. Those who dare to 
be themselves are not so bounded. For the lover time is 
changeable; a moment of absence wears on him like a 
grear, and a year with the beloved is gone like^a falling 
star. For the mystic also time does not exist; already he 
idreams into eternity. When man is self -poised, he awakes 
Irom the hallucinations of time and law, and stealing out 
into the silence of his own being hears a voice sound be* 
yond mortality, telling him that place and time are but 
bubbles; that the nervous counting of moments and years 
is foolish; that he is free and has never been in prison, 
Bince the walls that he thought loomed about him, strong 
end opaque, are nothing; that he is, even now, one with 
tiie immense freedom in which these bubbles float 

Solomon looked at the marble clock. "Not for twenty 
minutes. Enoch's slow," he replied. "And what I say 
ift, the lad should have thought of the family. What's 
it matter what A^ thinks? God's God. The Saviour's the 



26 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Saviour. Anyone that denies it — tzt *im and featiier 
'im!" 

Amber was puzzied. She herself would have beta 
willing to assent to any dogmai for the sake of one she 
loved, for she f dt that to sacrifice the human being who 
was dear to her for a creed, an idea, would be criminal. 
In her; love had a way of flaring up like a beacon, chang- 
ing the world and consuming even herself. But ^e knew 
that Jasper would regasd this as l3ring. As she recalled 
his sensitive, scornful face, the heinousness of what he 
had done faded before a sense of romance. He had been 
out into strange places. He had fought a ghostly war- 
fare on the shadowy slopes of the souL Had he lost or 
won? Lost, was the verdict xd Dormer; but Amber 
dared to think not 

'1 admire Jasper for not being afndd to say what he 
thinks," she said, conscious of temerity. 

'Admire!" cried Catherine, with pretty horror. 

'Admire 1" edioed grandmother subterraneously. Mrs. 
Darke said nothing, but her spirit seemed to weigh on 
them all like an iceberg silently pressing upon a ship. Her 
silence was alarming. The less she said, the more she 
seemed to say. Sometimes it seemed as if she were a ven* 
triloquist, and talked through her mother. So when 
'Amber, almost in tears, beating herself against the blank 
wall of their imperviousness as the winter robins would 
beat against the Dormer windows in terror at finding 
themselves in pris(Mi, cried : ''Yes I Admire ! It's brave of 
him to tell the truth 1" — ^it was grandmother who looked 
bleakly across the room, gripping her needles of polished 
steel with fingers of polished bone, and said: ''Jasper, 
until he repents, is damned." Her voice, with its metallic 
lack of emotion, seemed to hack the air and leave it 
jagged. Solomon breathed stertorously over his puzzle; 
even Ruby felt the tension, and sighed. No one contra- 



il 

it 



THE FAMILY AT SUPPER 87 

dieted grandmother. The room, with its heavy shadows, 
fell again into silence. 

Sarah's activities had died away in the kitchen, and the 
house lay dumb under the night To Amber it seemed 
that its quiet had the quality of the spider's, mutely 
awaiting the faintly vocal fly. As she thought it, a soft 
regular sound became audible, the fateful sound of a 
horse trotting. She sprang up with a defensive feeling 
and went into the hall. As she pulled open the heavy 
door, the voice of the stream, swollen by the autumn 
rains, smote upon her suddenly, full of sad foreboding. 
It was deepened by the low, sonorous sound of the Four 
Waters, half a mile away — a monotcmous and bee-like 
note that seemed to have been struck before the beginning 
of time. Dormer, in its cup at the bases of the hills, was 
always full of damp air and the sound of water. 
Besieged by this grievous music— and what is there in 
nature sadder than the lament of falling water? — she 
felt as if she had opened the door not to the night and 
the stream, but on to a future full of doubt and drea4 
veiled in mist. 

She went back into the hall. Jasper could not be here 
for a few minutes, and she found the light reassuring. 
From the dining-room came Mrs. Velindre's voice read- 
ing passages from The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, a 
paper which dealt exclusively with the vexed question of 
the lost tribes. She persisted in regarding the Jews not 
as one of the finest nations the world has seen, but as 
people requiring a missionary. This paper was her 
spiritual and intellectual fodder, and she read it nightly, 
with praiseworthy perseverance, to a totally indifferent 
family. She also read it to Sarah while she lit her fire 
on winter mornings, and Sarah had been heard to say 
that ''if the tribes must be daft and mislay themselves, 
she wished they'd mislay themselves for good and all, and 



28 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

not like hunt the thimble — ^no sooner lost than it's wenit^ 
•werrit, werrit to find it." But it was useless for Sarab 
to rattle the fire-irons; useless for the family to talk ia 
raised voices ; for grandmother had a voice of great carry- 
ing power when she liked, and she was not afraid of 
using it. The good seed was sown. To-night it was 
being sown. Jasper's arrival was unmarked, whether by 
design or accident Amber did not know. She opened 
the door again and heard the wheels suddenly mtifHed as 
the gig turned into the sandy drive: She had put on 
her best frock, a white cashmere, old-fashioned in make, 
and she showed as a thin, insignificant figure between 
the large brown hall and the large blue night 

So deeply had her genius for loving been stirred by 
Jasper's forlorn condition — she knew he would be un- 
^>eakably forlorn at Dormer; so greatly had the innate 
chivalry of the individualist (who believes in the essen- 
tial beauty that is beneath the froth of action, speech 
and motive) been aroused by hearing the absent abused, 
that it almost seemed as if she might triumph over the 
constrictions of Dormer and express herself to Jasper. 

''My dearl oh, my dearl" she whispered, as Enoch, 
^th a ''Be good, pcHiy I" drew up at the door, and Jasper 
Humped out. 

He kissed her perfunctorily, locked restlessly past her 
into the hall, and said : 

"Where's Catherine?" 

Amber, alone in the porch, twisting her hands together 
:with a crushing sense of failure and futility, murmured 
with a kind of smouldering passion "Oh, I wish I were 
his mother !" 

She was realizing the perpetual denial of spiritual truth 
by crude fact She was feeling that it was of no avail 
that she loved Jasper maternally, protectingly, percep- 
tively. He would neither expect nor welcome these 



THE FAMILY AT SUPPEB 89 

frc»n her. From Catherine he would expect them but 
would he get them? From Mrs. Darke he would not 
even expect them. Amber raged, but her rage consumed 
herself only. For in the House of Dormer, with its hol- 
low-echoing chambers, ascendancy is given to bodily and 
not spiritual ties; to propinquity and not affinity; to the 
shout of the crowd and not the faint, far voice of the 
soul. 

Jasper disappeared in the glo<xny doorway, and Amber, 
with the second-sight tiiat always comes to those who 
ponder anxiously upon a loved on^ knew, at least in 
part, what he must endure; she guessed also that her 
conflict for his happiness with the personality of the 
House, with the thing that hung, like a haunting demon, 
from the old roof-tree, would be k>ng and hard and 
would perhaps bring defeat in the end. 



CHAPTER m: JASPER COMES HOME 

JASPER stood in the dining-room doorway and 
thought that the room looked like a caive — a dark 
cave from which anything might emerge, devils or 
angels. As he thought this he was gazing at Cathe- 
rine. As a little boy, he had adored the tall white 
resurrection angel on its golden badcground in Amber's 
Sunday book. He had been unusually fond of church and 
of Bible pictures, and, while Peter was busy in the 
kitchen, salting the raisins with which Sarah enlivened 
her Sabbath, he would be wrapt in contemplation of the 
resurrection angel. Now, having discarded angels, he 
needed something to put in their place. His mind had 
not yet cast away the old religious phraseology. Per« 
haps the hardest thing from which to break free in being 
bom to the life of individual honesty is this protecting 
caul of ancient phrases and observances. To Jasper's 
temperament these were peculiarly dear. At his first 
communion, when the Rector had read the plaintive "In 
the same night that He was betrayed • . • ." Jasper 
had sobbed, and Mrs. Velindre, who was there in an 
armour of solemnity that frightened him, had eyed him 
suspiciously, thinking that he had a secret sin. 

The dark sweetness of eucharistic dawns, the spiritual 
vitality of Christianity's best ideals — these he had 
resigned. But there, in the restricted lamp-light. With 
demure, down-bent head and bright hair, bound in the 
manner of religious art, was Catherine Velindre, tangible 
and beautiful. Her white hands, just plump enough tn 

80 



JASPER COMES HOME SI 

be graceful, moved to and fro quietly. Her shoulders, 
wtich sloped a good deal beneath her dark silk blouse, 
gave her an air of fragility and gentleness. It seemed 
to Jasper that her face brc^e upon him like a radiant 
landscape seen from a forest, or a flower thrown from 
a dark window. He had always been rather sentimental 
about Catherine. That Peter also was, though only by 
fits and starts, encouraged him. So also did the fact 
that his elders thought it "very suitable^' that she should 
marry Peter; for Catherine possessed a small independent 
income which would help the Dormer property, to which 
it was arranged that Peter should succeed, Jasper having 
diosen the churdi. Her money was a barrier in Jasper's 
eyes. He wished she were a beggar and he the lord of 
the manor. He thought her face would be adorable in 
a ragged setting, like the crescent moon on a wild night. 
He had always been eager to be her lover, but to-night 
he b^;an to care for her in an intenser way. He put her 
in the empty niche in his spiritual life and took her for 
his guardian angel, who was to lead him along hard 
paths by the fascination of sheer whiteness. She would 
stnile down at him in his tourney for Truth; she would 
be proud of him when he gave up material welfare for 
conscience' sake. 

He had an idea that they would all be proud of him, 
though possibly deprecating his views. During the uproar 
^ the training college, which followed his outburst, dur- 
^ the sleepless nights when he mourned his cherished 
future (he had wanted to be a scholarly, cultured, yet 
Poetical vicar of some huge, wicked parish which he was 
to convert) in the midst of exasperating misconstruction 
of his motives; in all these he had comforted himself with 
ftc thought that Catherine, and in a lesser degree the rest 
^f the home people, would know that his motives had 
l>een of the highest. He had thought that they vio^4 ^ 



8JB THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

agree that honesty was the one course open to him. So 
little do we know the personalities with which we arc 
most intimate! 

Jasper looked very handsome, very vital, very young, 
and therefore very pathetic, standing in the dusk beyond 
the furthest lamp-ray. His eyes dwelt eagerly and 
dreamily on Catherine, until he suddenly remembered 
that he had not, in Dormer phraseology, "been the 
rounds." The curious coldness of his reception was 
rather lost upon him, he was so dazzled by the halo he 
had just created for Catherine, the beauty of which he 
ascribed entirely to her, and not at all to his own imagina- 
tion. 

Mrs. Darke silently suffered his embrace; but so she 
always did. Ruby gave him one of her indifferent, wet 
kisses. Peter said "Hullo !" which was, for him, demon- 
strative. Then, just as he reached Catherine, his father 
looked up and said the sentence he had hammered out as 
being suitable. 

"I'd have been better pleased to see you for a better 
reason." 

Grandmother raised her head, and Amber, tearful in 
the hall, thought that she looked, with her small, bright 
eyes, like a snake about to strike. 

"Why hast thou brought down my grey hairs?" 
queried grandmother rather inappositely, for her ringlets 
were as black as sloes. This was by courtesy of a cer- 
tain mixture called "Uzit," or through lack of the emo- 
tions, for the emotions turn more heads grey than does 
old age. It is not the Isouds and the Teresas of the world 
that conserve their youth, but the Aphrodites. 

"I've done nothing to be ashamed of," said Jasper. 
Mrs. Darke looked up. 

"You have sinned against the Holy Ghost !" 

"Ghost — ^ghost!" muttered Mrs. Velindre. 



JASPER COMES HOME 86 

"There's no such person," said Jasper, defiuit because 
he was alarmed at his own daring. 

"Blas[diemer1" Mrs. Darke eyeA her son with what 
an onlooker, who did not know their relationship, would 
have called venom. 

Jasper stuck out his chin; it was long, like his mother's. 

"Blasphemer against what? Sinner against what?" 
he asked with exasperation. "You can't blaspheme 
against a lie." 

Solomon flung The Golden Chtmce across the room 
and banged his Bst on the table. 

"Silence, sir 1" he shouted. 

"Father," said Jasper, his voice shakily witii passion 
and disappointment, "I won't be silent It's lying to say 
I believe the idiotic hotch-potch of the churches." 

"Silence I" roared Solomon again. 

"Oh, why does Jasper rub them up the wrong way?" 
whispered Amber. 

"I won't be treated like a naughty b(^ 1" said Jasper 
{uriously. 

"A naughty boy! Yes! A very naughty boy I" sud 
grandmother. "When I was young, caning was the 
cure." 

Grandmother had been brought up on "Cautionary 
Tales for the Young." 

"Yes, a good stout stick'II find God for most of 'em,*' 
remarked Solomon, adding with an air of great reason- 
ableness, "God's God." 

"Oh, can't you understand? Won't jrou understand?" 
Jasper's voice was pleading. 

"We understand," said Mrs. Darke, "that you must 
have done something wicked and don't vtant to believe." 

Jasper's lips quivered. So they thought all his spiritual 
conflicts mere fleshly lusts! This misccncepticm irritated 
him as much as it hurt him. 



84 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

^You're not angry with me because I don't believe hi 
IGod," he said, "but because I'm different from you." 

He had hit upon the truth. What they hated him for 
—-and Mrs. Darke's feeling, like Mrs. Velindre's, did 
reach a silent vindictiveness — ^was that he had disparted 
himself from the gelatinous mass of the social ego, as the 
one live moth from a heap of dead larvae. Their quarrel 
virith him was wholly material, though it was disguised 
as a spiritual warfare. (Grandmother often referred to 
herself as one of a militant band warring against 
^'Midian," an impersonal and mysterious foe as to whose 
identity no one ever evinced the slightest curiosity.) It 
was the inchoate obstructing formative power; the inert 
pressing down upon life. They were not aware of it, but 
Jasper saw it, and it made him miserable. If he could 
have felt that his father and mother and grandmother 
find all the hostile faces he glimpsed beyond them were 
really fighting for an ideal, however dim and rudimen- 
tary, he would have been able to respect them, and even 
like diem, though they tore him to pieces. There would 
also have been the chance that they were right, that they 
might convince him. He would have liked to be con- j 
vinced of some of the things they professed to believe. ' 
Failing that, a definite adversary, a hope of either victory 
or defeat, would have been welcome. What more could 
a young man ask ? Jasper asked it, but he did not get it. 
An amorphous mass is not definite; it gives no hope of 
anything but blind, aimless struggling. He was horri- 
fied at his sudden vision of the vast crowd-egoism which 
says: "You are not as we, so we crush you." He felt 
this in grandmother's eyes when she gazed owlishly upon 
him out of her twilight Still more he felt it reaching 
cut to him from his mother's mind. She had no need to 
speak or look. It was enough that she was in the room; 
the silent air grew sinister with an unspoken threat. 




JASPER CX>MES HOME «| 

'Different?" said Solomon slowly. "Ay, you ai^ 
morc's the pity." 
"Well, father, that's how the world gets on. You ga 
L a step higher than your father. I go a step higher than 

"Conceited ass!" Peter spoke roughly. He was 
annoyed that Jasper could talk above his head. 

Jasper turned on him furiously, and their eyes met 
across Catherine's bent head with mutual antipathy. Jas- 
per despised Peter as a reactionary and a lover of the 
fleshpots of orthodoxy. Peter disliked Jasper because he 
had more imagination than himself. Each, feeling the 
atmosphere of the house lowering over him, mistrusted 
the other. Left to themselves, they would probably have 
been interested in each other's differences. At least, they 
would have been tolerant. But an inimical atmosphere 
creates quarrels. 

Catherine raised her eyes to Jasper's. 
''Who put those dreadful ideas into your head, Jas- 
per?" she asked. "You can't have thought of them your- 
sdf." 

"Why not?" 

He looked at her pleadingly with his brilliant hazel 
eyes. As she watched him, Peter slowly lost his lustre > 
for her. Yes. Jasper was distinguished. There was 
something in his face that had not been there a fe^ 
months ago, that was not in any of the other faces round 
the table. She could not exactly name it, not understand- 
ing that it was the essence of Jasper's being unveiling 
itself to her. What she did see very clearly was that he 
would have been a great success in the Church. '*Nol 
a miserable little backstairs curate," she reflected, ''nor 
a fat fool like Ernest Swyndle. He would have been 
asked everywhere. He would have ended with a bishop- 
ric Idiot! Theatrical idiot 1 He shidl end with m 



1 



S6 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



f»- 



bishopric He shall give up this nonsense, or els 
the tip of her tongue just moistened the comers of her 
pointed mouth — "or else he shall be punished. He shall 
suffer." 

"You are too nice for such silly ideas," she said. "Tdl 
me who talked to you about them?" 

"I thought things out for myself," said Jasper patiently. 
To anyone else he would have been haughty. "But I 
have got a friend whose views are in most ways the 



same." 



€t^ 



Is he expelled, too?" 

Jasper shrank into himself at her tone. Then he 
reflected that Catherine could never be intentionally 
unkind, and pulled himself together. 

"It's no disgrace to be expelled for an idea. He would 
have been glad to be expelled with me, only he was a 
lecturer, not a student He left of his own accord because 
lie disagreed with the Head." 

"What about?" 

^'Everything. He hates all the things the Head likes, 
only he keeps his temper better than I do. He's older." 

**Age always tells I" cried grandmother. "Quality and 
age go together." 

**A fine chap!" Jasper flushed with enthusiasm. 
**He's all for the anarchic state." 

"* Anarchists 1" Solomon was irate almost to apoplexy. 
'^Look you, my lad, no more of that. Your thoughts 
are your own; if you want to be damned, you will be 
damned " 

"Be damned," said grandmother, but without expletive 
Intention. 

" — But I can and will stop you fouling the house with" 
such talk. Board and lodging you can have, but no more 
argufying. Behave and stay, or argufy and go. See?" 

Jasper saw only too well that life at Dormer was going 




JASPER COMES HOME 8*7 

to be unbearable. He was in the white-hot missionary 
and martyr stage. His message might be one of nega- 
tion, but it was none the less precious to him. 

"I won't be muzzled !" he cried violently. 

"Mad dogs always are," remarked Peter. 

Jasper glared at him. 

"ru go!" he said. "I'll go dean away and never seo 
any of you again." He choked. The first crepuscular 
oncoming of the fog of misunderstanding and miscon^ 
struction is very hard to bear. When the blackness has 
engulfed and numbed the soul, rebellion dies and the soul 
sinks into painless despair. 

Cttherine laid down her comb and tooth-brushy 
straightened herself, and looked at Jasper. It would not 
suit her at all for him to go away. How could she, if 
he went away, save his soul ? She rested her chin on het 
hands and let her eyes absorb him. He was, for the 
moment, saturated with, engulfed in her will. He was 
fascinated and rather alarmed. She had never looked at 
him like that before. No one seemed to observe then\ 
all being intent on their own interests. Mrs. Darke wati 
tearing a piece of linen in a way that was reminiscent of 
a cat tearing feathers out of a bird. Catherine's eye9 
remained steady, and Jasper, as if drawn by a cord, slowly 
leaned toward her till, with dbows resting on the tabl^, 
he almost touched her. 

"Cathy!" he whispered. "Cathy ?^^ 

His lips moved and remained parted. The first fever- 
ish glow of passion swept over his facei leaving it 
troubled. 

"Stay — ^with me !" she whispereidlf 

-a can't, I can't!" 

"I want you.'^ 

"They'll drive me mad if I stay.* 



THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Once more, Catherine submerged him under her gaze 
Che room was quite silent at the moment. 

"* Jehovah !'' said grandmother suddenly. She believed 
in ejaculatory prayer, and her style was coloured by her 
literature. 

^Tch !'' said Catherine irritably. But Jasper had heard 
nothing. 

**I want you to star more than anything in the world, 
fasper. Will you?" 

"I'll stay if I die for it," whispered Jasper. 

He knew that there was nothing more solid, iron and 
«oul-destroying than an inimical atmosphere. It kills 
more quickly than fire or sword. It is more ferocious 
than a wild beast To live among people who have a 
lalse and unfriendly estimate of one's character, who mis- 
construe motives, against whose changeless prejudice the 
iwretched spirit flings itself in vain — ^this is a refinement 
t>t torture with which few sympathize. Then Catherine 
imiled up at him and the room seemed to grow peaceful 
Again. The sudden outbreak, thunderous and threaten- 
ing, had sunk to calm. He knew it would come round 
afresh in the manner of tempests; for the people of Dor- 
mer could see only one point of view — ^their own. This 
is the hot-bed from which strife, national and individual, 
always springs — ^narrow mentality, shrivelled emotions, 
overweighted with physical strength, brooded upon by a 
Btill narrower mentality, that of the past. This, because 
It is effete, is considered immortal, and has been glorified 
by man into a god of vengeance. 

Jasper, on his side, had the roughness of the conscious 
outlaw, the elan of the growing plant, the necessitated 
fierceness of a creature outnumbered. He could see their 
point of view, but he was afraid to put off his armour of 
combativeness, and if he had done so there was no com- 
mon ground where they could have met, for the family 



JASPER COMES HOME 89 

never would see his. His virtues were crimes in their 
eyes, his hopes a madman's raving. 

"Ring for prayers 1" said Mrs. Darke suddenly. 

Peter plunged at the bell. Ruby yawned. Solomrai 
woke up, and in the kitchen "Onward Qiristian S<ridiers" 
came to an abrupt end. 



Caa[APTER IV : NIGHT IN DORMER 

DURING prayers Amber could think of nothing but 
Jasper's footsteps pacing backwards and forwards in 
his bedroom, which was above the dining-room. Long 
after everyone had gone to bed she stood by her window, 
trying to gather courage to go and comfort Jasper. As 
a consciously plain woman she was deprecatory in action ; 
as a sensitive woman she was tender to the reserves of 
others. She knew Jasper would be awake, going up and 
down like a caged creature. It was pathetic that he 
should feel so deeply a thing that seemed to her a trifle. 
That he should be homesick for a God and not able to 
find a God — ^this was tragic, terrible. But to-night the 
main point had been simply that he was expelled. On that 
Everyone had harped. Atx)ut that Jasper was defiant and 
wretched. Because of that he was tramping his room. 
She would go to him and tell him how greatly she 
admired him and sympathized with him. But no! The 
reserve that chained them all at Dormer and that often 
binds members of large families (so that the legends of 
chains rattling and fetters clanking in their haunted 
houses seem to have an allegorical significance) held her 
now a prisoner. Yet she could not sleep. The strange 
clashing of antagonistic temperaments, more obviotis 
Co-day than ever before; intuitive fear for Jasper, since 
she saw that his nerves were inadequate to the life before 
him — these things troubled her. She knew, because she 
loved him, that Jasper was one of those who need 
the woolly wrappings of convention — small, ordo'ed 

40 



NIGHT IN DORMER 41 

thoughts, tx>unded desires, mediocre faiths, safe, com- 
munal rights. These would have kept his too sensitive 
spirit and easily frayed nerves warm and intact She 
knew also that Jasper's tragedy lay in the fact that he 
could not have these safe things. His passionate love 
of truth sliced them away and left him shivering in the 
cold air of individual effort; committed him to wild 
adventures in quest of God, to insensate hopes and black 
despairs. Jaded by these Alpine wanderings, he was 
unfit to bear the strain of life at Dormer, and was, as he 
once said with bitterness, "any man's fool." 

Amber looked out into the chill moonlight On the 
silver lawn there lay, black and sharp as carved ebony, 
the shadow of the House of Dormer. Its two heavy, 
rounded gables of dark red brick topped with grey stone, 
the sclid, massed chimneys and the weather-vane (a 
gilded trumpet supposed to be blown by the winds) were 
painted, large and far-spreading, on the grass. The 
house gave a sense of solidity even by its shadows. From 
outside came the muttering and crying of the weir and 
die Four Waters. Through this continual plaint broke, 
at times, the mutterings of the herds that peopled the 
k)w, misty meadows, their dim shapes moving porten- 
tously in the vague moonlight Their inarticulate malaise 
with autumn or the night, with their unknown destiny or 
the quality of their herbage, burst forth at times into a 
smothered bellow, an incipient roar, broken and muffled 
as a tide on rocks. Sometimes one would startle the air 
with a high note that was almost a shriek; sometimes 
there would rise a deep, low chorus akin to the melody 
of milking-time. Never, for long together, was the 
round, hollow Dormer valley without some rumour of 
their calling, like the herds of htunankind, out of their 
tentative darkness, for they knew not what. The mist, 
which lay lightly on the fields, thickened along the stream 



42 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

into an opaque curtain, standing about the domain of 
Dormer like the bands of an old enchantment. Mist 
alwa3rs haunted Dormer* Sometimes the house stood 
knee-deep in it, like a cow in water; sometimes it was 
submerged far below, like a shell on the sea floor, the 
mist — ^white, weighty, stirless — ^brimming nearly to the 
tops of the surrounding hills. At these times, when the 
morning cocks crew sharp and sweet from the xickyard, 
the plaintive sadness of their thin music pricked Amber 
to tears. It was as if a city long dead, for infinite ages 
forgotten, were summoned from ancient oblivion by a 
resurrection trumpet so faint and inward-sounding that 
only the eager spirit heard, while the clay-bound sleepers 
never knew that the moon had slipped down behind the 
western hill and the grey world flushed for dawn. 

Amber listened to the faint night-sounds that came and 
went beneath the singing of the water and the grumbling 
of the herds. There was the sea-murmur of the woods 
that climbed the hills and chanted in winter a song more 
mysterious, though of less volun\e, than that of summer. 
There was the lisp and rasp of dry leaves that came about 
the house on the doubtful night-wind. There was the 
sibilant whisper of large-leaved ivy that clothed the walls 
in heavy layers. And within the house, from their bed-* 
room across the landing. Amber could hear the voices 
of her father and mother uplifted in their evening prayer. 
They always said their prayers aloud, perhaps for the 
sake of example, and their voices — ^lugubrious and pene- 
trating — seemed to Amber to issue from their room like 
her father's setters from their kennel, dour, passionless^ 
acquisitive. She felt shocked at herself for having had 
the idea, but with each rise in their inflexion the resem- 
blance grew more distinct. At last they were still, and 
silence fell upon the house. Amber waited, hesitated, 
sought for some pretext for going to Jasper. 



NIGHT IN DORMER 43 

The time crept on to midnight. She opened her door^ 
and straightway it seemed that the house was alive with 
noise, muted, but none the less noise. The echoing whis- 
per of the clocks seemed very loud and full of meaning. 
The ticking of the one in the hall was like the falling of 
heavy drops of water. Then the grandfather clock hic- 
cupped, and in a few minutes a storm of sound came up 
and along the passages. All the striking clocks gave out 
the hour, and from the kitchen — far down, as if from a 
cavern — the hoarse cuckoo shouted. Afterwards, in the 
comparative silence, as if in satiric jest, began a new 
tickings— the ticking of the death-watches. The old walls, 
hollowed and tunnelled by rats and mice, were so full of 
these little beetles that nobody took any notice of them 
except Sarah, who put cotton-wool in her ears nightly. 
But this was more than half in plain physical fear of 
earwigs, which she thought would penetrate to her brain, 
s She had even been heard to say (in daylight) that "death- 
•; watches were poor feckless things, traipsing and yammer- 
j ing like a blind beggar with a stick.'* As Amber listened 
I to these eerie tickings she was reminded of the sound of 
I grandmother's watch at night, and of the curious ebony 
* watch-stand on which it hung. She thought whimsically 
I of all the death-watches ticking busily, each on a minia- 
\ tnre stand, carved with an hour-glass and a skull. 

As if at the signal of midnight, there now began a 
new sound, more disturbing and grotesque than the noise 
of the death-watches — sl human stir and murmur, prob- 
aUy started by the sound of the clocks. But the sounds 
ivere those of sleep, not of waking life. It was as if the 
spirits of those in the house, slumbering during the bod/s 
activity, half awoke, and tried to pierce the silence around 
them. Amid a continual stir of restless movement, toss- 
ing and turning and creaking of beds, there began a low 
munnur from which at intervals a stray voice would 



44 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

emerge. Amber could hear Mrs. Darke talking, as she 
generally did in sleep, with a ceaseless monotony of self- 
expression. It was the reaction from her unnatural wak- 
ing life. She who preserved all day an iron control of 
word and look and impulse committed herself all night 
'But even in unconsciousness she spoke with characteris- 
tic reserve, in a voice expressionless and secret. No one 
outside the room could ever have distinguished a word, 
and her husband, who might have heard, slept heavily and 
stertorously, his snores resounding through the viralls. 
Amid Mrs. Darke's indistinct babble and Solomon's 
snores, Amber could hear Peter, whose door was ajar, 
grinding his teeth. This came at more or less regular 
intervals, and at other intervals, from the far end of the 
passage, came grandmother's voice, thin but awe-inspir- 
ing, crying "Gideon I" and "Jehovah I" Only from Cath- 
erine's room no sound ever came. Amber wondered 
what she herself contributed to this concert, and was 
smitten with silent, irrepressible laughter. But she 
became serious again when Ruby cried out in some dream 
terror. There was something wrong here, she felt, some- 
thing sinister and unwholesome. Lost voices came along 
the tortuous passages, uplifted as if in complaint from 
amid murky dreams, and as if in baffled longing for 
some undiscovered good. Even so the nations sleeping, 
drugged by tradition, among the bones of their ancestors, 
stir restlessly and utter vague scattered cries, mutterings, 
a low lament, a sudden far shriek. The midnight house 
seemed like a graveyard where the tremendous "I say 
unto thee, arise!" had been spoken and then revoked; 
where the dead stirred and uttered strange plaints and 
groanings, but could not cast aside their cerements nor 
rise up into the light of morning. Under the panic of 
the thought that they were like people in a vault, and 
that she and Jasper were the only ones alive. Amber fled 



NIGHT IN DORMER 45 

along fhe passages to Jasper's room. She heard as she 
came near, with great reassurance, his restless tramping, 
comfortingly commonplace. Its very wrathfulness and 
irregularity brought relief. Hef seemed to her like the 
I watchman in some ancient lightless town, where goblin 
l hosts crush in from every side upon the shelving air, 
which strains and is fissured under the weight of evil 
until, to the terrified people in their nightmare chambers 
[ under the threatened roofs, comes the watchman's voice, 
I querulous with reality, telling them that the night is ooldi 

and rainy. 
[ Amber, with her mouse-coloured hair and her face grey 
I with weariness, looked, as she stood in the doorway, 
wrapped in her brown dressing-gown, like the priestess 
of some occult worship. Jasper did not see her. At Ae 
moment when she came in he was kneeling in front of 3 
^ little table on which he had placed a photogaph of Cathe- 
rine with a vase of flowers in front of it In the shock of 
dus discovery, Amber's face at first expressed disgusted 
surprise, then, as she saw that he had, from very exhaus- 
tion, fallen into a doze on his knees, her look melted into 
fttifcd love. At such times the intensity of her expression! 
was so great that the outer self melted, like the crust of 
rock when fire breaks through, and was fused in the inner 
sdf. No matter what the face is, when the young spirili 
shines tfiere exultant, it will be beautiful. For the spirit, 
the centre of the ego, is eternally vital, youthful, free 
It has a thrilling life, never dreamed of by the earth- 
noorished body. So Amber's face in these rare moments 
was beautiful as are few faces in this world of pale emo* 
tioiis. For Amber Darke was something of a mystic, 
though not exactly a religious mystic, nor that wilder, 
ladder creature, an earth-mystic. Sometimes she was 
deeply stirred by the beauty of Nature, but she did not 
five for it alone, as does the true child of the weeping 



46 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

god. Somettmes it was music that stirred her, or a strajr 
sentence from the Bible» or the stars, or poetry; but most 
often it was the sudden rapture or the sudden pain of 
loving. Love would leap up in her at a chance touch of 
pathos in the most unpromising people. At these times 
she left the shallows of beauty that is heard and seen, 
and slipped out into the deep sea where are no tides of 
change and decay, no sound, no colour, but <mly an 
essence. In those waters nothing is but the spirit She 
alone knows the immortal waste. She only, in a voice 
lamenting and sweet, cries across it as the curlew cries 
in spring. She only, circling above its darkling peace; 
eyes its mystery that haply she may find God. 

Amber stood and looked at Jasper for a moment, then 
softly went away. She was bitterly disappointed to find 
Catherine thus enshrined as a divinity, when she herself 
had only asked to be as a servant It was grievous to 
see her perception and love refused and herself rejected 
for one whom, she could not help thinking, had little to 
give. But stronger than her disappointment was her need 
of doing something practical for Jasper. For the m]rstic, 
whatever received opinion may say, is always practical. 
He arrives at his ideas more quickly than others, reach- 
ing the centre while they grope in a circle. And to grasp 
the essential is to be triumphantly practical. The world 
never credits the mystic with quick sight in mundane 
things, forgetting that, for his long gazing into infinity, 
better sight is necessary than for grasping obvious and 
clumsy facts. The mystic understands sex better than 
the sensualist. He can analyse malice, greed, hypocrisy, 
better than those who swim obscurely in their own Uack 
passions. A saint and not a devil can best unravd the 
psychology of evil. 

Amber's heart said: "Warmth and comfort!" She 
remembered that Jasper had probably had no food aU 



NIGHT IN DORMER 47 

day. With careful haste she went down the shallow, 
creaking stairs, followed by sighs, indistinct words, 
coughings desolate as the coughing of sheep on the wide 
moors, welcomed in the hall by the stem ticking of 
grandmother's clock and its growling, which was caused 
by some defect in its striking arrangements. In the 
kitchen the cuckoo defiantly announced the hour of one. 
>This big, shadow-ridden place always filled Amber with 
panic at night. It was all so cavernous ; the housfe seemed 
50 haunted by broken voices. She hastened her prepara- 
tions, hearing the auttmm wind breathing beneath the 
door with the soft, long-drawn melancholy with which a 
horse sighs. 

When she got back to Jasper, he was tramping up and 
down again, and the photograph was put away. 

•THulloI What d'you want?" he asked, in the 
unfriendly tone of those in stress of mind. But Amber 
knew that beneath the frown and the gruffness was a 
being who was very glad of sympathy. She saw his spirit 
like a little weeping boy, round-shouldered with vexation, 
baddng into the darkest comer to avoid condolence, 
while watching with a concealedly eager eye for the fol- 
lowing of love, for the outstretched hand and the care- 
fufly ordinary voice. She knew Jasper valued these 
things, for she had found by chance in his handkerchief 
drawer, carefully treasured, a letter she had once slipped 
under his door when he was in durance after falling foul 
of grandmother. She had comforted him then, so she 
could comfort him now ; for whose nerves are more sensi- 
tive in trouble, who is more unreachable than a boy ? She 
made a cheerful wood fire, put the kettle on and spread 
the little meal on two chairs. Jasper, interested in spite 
of himself, walked about in a moodiness that showed 
signs of disappearing when the ingratiating scents of tea 
and frizzled bacon filled the room. 



48 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



''Now, dear!" announced And>er, oonsdons of rede* 
lessness, for in the atmosphere of Donner endearments 
seemed out of place. 

Warmed and comforted, Jasper spoke Amber waited, 
breathless, for the long-desired talk about the events at 
coll^;e from Jasper's point of view, for a word of illu- 
mination as to his own ideas; for — possibly — a touch of 
affection for hersdf. She loved both boys; but Jasper 
she idolized 

'Tton't you think," said he, "that Cathy's an angeir 

That Amber did not burst into tears argued a* certsun 
strength of character in her. That she lied cheerfully, 
heartily, and immediately, proclaimed her a great lover. 
For if there was a person on earth that Amber mis- 
trusted, saw through and feared, it was Catherine 
Velindre. 

^'So noble and above common things!" went on the 
adorer, chumbling bacon with wholescxne relish. 

Amber clenched her hands. 

"Anyway, he likes his supper;" she told herself. "You 
are very fond of Catherine, I know," she said aloud. 

The room was comfortably reassuring. Amber recep- 
tive, but not inquisitive (curiosity is a weed-killer to 
young confidence). The barriers came down. 

"Fond, Ambie ! Fond ! I'd die a thousand deaths for 
her. I'm not good enough even to be her friend, and 

yet " his voice went from him in an undignified husk, 

for it is only in grand opera and in bird-land that the 
lover's inmost heart is spoken with unwavering tuneful- 
ness. In the daily life of man huskiness hovers round the 
gates of expression with humiliating insistence, and the 
helpful lozenge is not always handy. 

"Jam ?" queried Amber practically. "You like straw- 
berry." 

Jam acting as a demulcent, Jasper took up his tale. 



NIGHT m pOBBlER 40 

"I wish we were back in the cAd days, and I could 
gallop away with her colours on my hdmet and tilt with 
everybody in her honour!" 

His face was exalted, flushed with the embairassment 
of self-expression, his dark hair ruffled. He looked 
younger than ever, and he always locked too young for 
his years. The idealist, if the world lets him alone, keeps 
his childhood until he dies. He only loses it if some 
great emotional tempest ravages his being to the depths. 
Amber thought : "He loc^ like a dear fluffy chicken I" 
She said : "I'm glad you can't You'd get so knocked 
about. They always did." 

"I want to do hard things for her." 

"It seems to me that you have something quite hard 
enou^ to do — living here at Dormer with Peter put above 
you, and not quarrelling with him or with Ernest. Not 
giving in and yet not arguing, nw irritating them all." 

"O Lord I What a lifer 

"If I were you, I should go out into the world." 

"If shecaiat tool" His beautiful eyes had such a look 
of rhapsody and blazing passion that Amber, flushing, 
turned away.^ The old slumbering longings, the old 
unconquerable desires flamed up within her anew. No I 
She would never have a lover. Catherine, with her 
beauty; Ruby, with her abundant health — lovers were for 
them. But who would ever seek in Amber Darke, so 
still, of so sad-coloured an exterior, the creature of fire 
and tears that could feed a man's heart with faery food 
and call him into Paradise with songs wild as fliose of 
hawks on the untrodden snowficlds? 

"Of course," said Jasper, "you don't know how a thap 
feels. But to me it would be heaven just to pile up every- 
tiiing I had in front of her — if I had anything worth 
givmg." 

"She'd take it," said Amber. 



60 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"And fiell would be — ^hcr misunderstanding mc" 

"You think she understands you now ?" 

"Oh yes I She doesn't approve, but she understands. 
She's got such a lot of sympathy." 

"H'm I" 

"As long as she' believes in my motives, everybody ds« 
can go hang." 

"I believe in you, Jasper." 

"Do you?" His tone was grateful, but indifferent 

Amber sighed audibly. 

"Would Catherine, now that they all think you so 
wicked, marry you?" 

"Marry me ? Marry me ?" Jasper tasted the delicious, 
commonplace phrase as if it were new honey. "Marry 
me?" 

All the flutes of the morning were playing fantasias in 
his head. How soft and persuasive they were! How 
sweet and maddening ! They were like the birds in Dor- 
mer forest when the April madness had them under its 
spell. And Amber, commonplace, sisterly, dull. Amber 
had started them. He looked at her ruminatively. He 
had never, until now, thought of Catherine as his wife. 
He had dwelt upon her with the selfless imagination of a 
poet's first love. Amber's stray words had altered his 
whole point of view, as stray words will. Catherine 
Velindre would never again find the completely malle- 
able metal with which she had been accustomed to deal. 
A hardening alloy had been introduced, and Catherine's 
clever fingers would find their work no longer easy. 
Despondency fell again on Jasper. 

"No," he said. "I don't believe she ever would." 

He was once, more wrapped in reserve; the flutes had 
made him shy, aloof. What should Amber know of 
them? What could she know of the music of passion? 



NIGHT IN IK}RBIER 61 

rhe cries of the Venii^rg, so shrill and fierce were not 
Eor sisters' cars. 

"And you wouldn't cbai^ your views, Jasper? Not 
rven for her?" 

Jasper's chin came out Immediately it seemed to 
^b^ that her motiier had impinged on their talk. 

"No! Not even for her I" said Jasper. His face took 
on a sombre and forlndding look — a to<^ that boded ill 
[or his happiness. Then his eyes brightened. 

"But she wouldn't ask it She's too large-minded. 
Although she's very rdigious, she'll understand that my 
way is right for me. She'll be tcderant." 

"Like Ernest I" . Amber said it with a smile. 

"Tolerant, great-aunt, tolerant I" quoted Jasper. His 
mimicry of Ernest was so inimitable that Amber bad to 
stifle her laughter in the pillow. She had a rare capacity 
for mirth. Her aspect of controlled gleefulness was con- 
tinually apt, without notice, to break out into laughter as 
violent as that of Isoud of fragrant memory, who, as the 
naive chronicle remarks, "laughed till she fdl down," 
This v^ole-hearted laughter and the Irrepressible humour 
behind it had stood her in good stead at Dormer. She 
had been known, in moments of grave family crisis, when 
the atmosphere was heavy and electric, and all minds 
were sternly exercised over a ddinquent, to collapse into 
hdpless and infectious laughter. Grandmother would 
sp^ of "the crackling of thorns," and Mrs. Darke would 
say, in her green-ice tone, "I hate a laugher I" Catherine 
would merely look pained. 

"You know Ernest's coming next week?" asked 
Amber. 

Jasper nodded glumly. 

"And I think, I'm afraid, he wants to marry Rul^." 

"Great Heavens ! Can't it be stopped ?" Jasper spcix 
with such real disgust, as if at something uima.txinX va& 



52 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

indecent, that Amber was again overwhelmed in laughter. 
But her eyes grew mournful when she thought of Ruby. 

"I'm afraid not," she said. "You see, they all want 
it, and Ruby's such a child. She thinks of things like 
rings and dresses." 

"Don't you ?" Jasper was momentarily curious about 
his elder sister. 

"Oh, no." 

"Would Cathy?" 

"No. Shes zbove that/' 

What Cathy was not above remained unspoken; for at 
that moment the cocks began to crow down in the misty 
morning fields, and within the house the passing of time 
became audible; for the clocks struck in every room, and 
it was as if Time's robe had rustled. 

'T must go," said Amber. "Sarah will be down soon." 

When she had taken back the supper tray and rq^ained 
her own room, 9he looked at her face in the mirror. It 
gazed back at her, twenty years older for the niglit of 
watching. For perceptiveness and emotional beauty, 
even the gift of humour, must be paid for to the last 
idrop of vitality. Hence die poet very often dies in early 
youth, the lover of humanity is smitten by disease, those 
who would be the Christs of the world have "faces marred 
more than any man's." 

"Ah, well! what does it matter ^ she thought ''No- 
body notices what I look like." 

Yet the irony of the fact that, in growing nearer to tiie 
spiritual ideal hinted by her own face in diildhood, she 
had lost the physical expression* of it, was bitter. The 
spirit, after all its wild burning, had left her face not 
gaunt and riven (she would not have minded that) but 
commonplace. Her eyes should have been, according to 
poetic justice, clear pkx)ls for God and His tremukms 
retinue of shadowy woes and glimmering joys to lean 



R 

i^ 



NIGHT IN DORMER 6S 

across and watch their delicate reflections. But they were 
dull and sad. This is often so with minds of peculiar 
rtitDgth or tenderness. The world lays such heavy bur- 
dens on them that something must break. The soul is 
impregnable, so the body breaks. The people whose eyes 
are clear pools are usually those who, being completely 
vacant in soul, put all their vitality into physical well- 
being and have a good digestion. 

She leant from her window into the twisted, ancient 
pear tree that grew round it, watching the yellow leaves 
floating, hesitant, to the wet, brown soil ; hearing the late 
pears, left ungathered a day too long, falling with faint 
drads, as their stalks, severed by damp and the slight 
£rost, gave way one by one. 

*1 must tell Enoch,'' she thought. For out-of-doors 
Ejioch was the providence of the family, as Sarah was 
within. Amber lay down, but she could not sleep, seeing 
ahead of Jasper the rocks he could not see, the inevitable 
conflict that must arise when two entities wish to go 
linked through life, but are attracted to opposite paths. 

'1 wish I didn't know Catherine quite so well," 
thoctg^t Aipber. 'Terhaps I misjudge her." 

But cold, smooth as a well-cut mirror, changeless as 
&te, Catherine's personality floated up before her. She 
heard the clash of wills, the baying of the pack of bitter 
tfaonghts, warped loves, disillusionments, despairs. The 
scene was laid for tragedy — not necessarily overt tragedy, 
but a drama of the spirit, more devastating, more sear- 
ing. How was she, with her small strength, to avert it ? 

She heard Sarah wrestling with the bolts and shutters, 
and knew that the day had begun. From the pear tree 
came the courageous shrilling of a robin who, having 
breakfasted with alderman's pomp on half a pear, 
intended to give his audience something handsome in the 



54 



THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



way of music. And from Dormer Woods away across 
the water, an autumn thrush fluted pensively, like a voice 
calling from another world, the song of one of the elder 
gods out of the daedal forest 



CHAPTER T: FABflLY PRAYERS 

AMBER was ^te .or prayers. These were an insti- 
. tution at Donner. It seemed to Amber that every- 
one was unwillingly obliged, for fear of everyone elstfs 
displeasure, to take part in them. Even Enoch's cousin. 
Marigold, was under orders from Mrs. Darke to attend 
and be saved, because she worked daily at Donner. His 
aunt, Mrs. Gosling, however, who oily put in a few 
hours' work each week, might presumably absent hersdf 
and be damned. Enoch Gale himself, in spite of all rep- 
resentations, steadfastly refused to hear the Word. He 
was put down as "simple" by everyone but Sarah, who 
would say to him on Ash Wednesday or Good Friday: 
"Wdl, we've bin through a long sitting to-day. Ni^ on 
half an hour. There's more sense at the back of them 
calf's eyes of yours than a body 'ud think, Enoch 1" 

She hoped that these veiled compliments would lure 
Enoch to commit himsdf as to his reason for avoiding 
prayers. Mrs. Velindre said it was secret sin, but Sarah 
scouted this, saying: "He inna 'cute enough to sin." 
Enoch never committed himself, being, facially and 
vocally, as immune from self-expressicHi as a young owl. 
It was quite useless for Mrs. Darke to send for him, and 
say: "You are expected to attend prayers. Gale," or for 
grandmother to add; "Watch and pray. Gale!" When 
Solomon said: "D*you hear the missus, Enoch?" he 
replied, "Ah, sir, I yeard the missus." But next day, as 
usual, he failed to watch and pray. 

This morning Ja^>er was also absent, and there was 



S6 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

more nervous tension than usual as the family watched 
Amber's flurried entrance. 

Sarah and Marigold sat apart like lepers on the other 
side of a stretch of neutral-tinted carx>et Solcxnon read 
the Bible in the gruff, protesting voice of a man of action 
confronted by literature. Every day he gave them a 
chapter, and said the same number of prayers. But he 
was not the kind of man to make such gatherings seem 
a mystic meeting of all the wistful souls in the House of 
Life. There are some beautiful and benignant person* 
alities that can do this, glorifying even a function which' 
has been spoilt by respectability. They can infuse into 
the forms of Christianity so grave and sweet a loveliness^ 
as to allure the mind—even a mind that knows them to 
be weaving dreams on the loom of legend, preaching the 
Godhead of Christ as the old alchemysts preached the 
elixir of life. 

On Sundays Solomon went once to church. Once a 
month he attended '^he second service.'* On ordinary 
occasions he put a shilling in the offertory; at Christmas, 
half a crown ; at Harvest Thanksgiving, gold. He was 
considered a good diurchman, and a good business maa 
He had been a land agent, but had retired on his f ather^s 
death to the ancestral house of Dormer. Perhaps the 
most lovable thing about him was his honest indifference 
toward every member of his household except his two 
setters. 

'Traise Him in His name Jah !" read Solomon, uncon- 
sciously hurrymg and blurring the words a little, as the 
suave scent of hot bacon stole in from the kitchen. Sarah 
was the only person who showed any interest in the 
remark, and she spelt the divine cognomen with an ^r.** 
Amber observed that Ruby was asleep, that her mother 
was busily tearing an envdope into small pieces* that 
Sarah was diumbling coffee berries, to which she was 



FAMILY PRAYERS 67 

partial, and that Peter was staring at the isolated Mari- 
gold with extraordinary fixity. Marigold's chedcs, 
always of a bright cherry laid very definitely oa the 
crcsam, were much pinker than usual, and her whole body 
droc^ed. Her eyes had a curious expression for which 
Amber could find no name. Peter looked older than his 
years. His rather hawk-like and fierce face had lost its 
round boyishness, and his quick, imperious dark eyes 
were those of the bom adventurer. Brought up in an 
atmosphere of things outworn, sent to a school where 
the same atmosphere brooded, he could find no outlet 
Hcf was possessed of the same passion as his mother for 
impressing his personality on something or somebody, 
only his mind was not yet warped. But no one had ever 
told him of the great adventures of the soul; of the 
taraddess paths of imagination; of philosophy and its 
brave search for truth; of love and its golden abnega- 
tions, its supreme rewards. Peter would have made, a 
martyr for any cause that had enough life in it He was 
fnU of the defiant "I will,*' which in unity with "I love," 
moves mountains. But his temperament, his abilities and 
budding promise, had not been discovered or treasured, 
so he lounged about at home, full of urgent, aimless 
vitality, and spent the moments of enforced stillness at 
prayers in staring Marigold out of countenance. This 
morning Amber noticed that while Peter stared at Mari- 
gold, Catherine was watching Peter, intent, yet g^uarded, 
witii an occasional glance to spare for Marigold, who 
seemed almost to writhe under Catherine's aloof, oold^ 
virginal glance, strongly tinctured with criticism. Once 
Peter caught Catherine's eye and scowled; but she met 
the aoowl with a half smile. 

*l>t us pray P' said Solomon, and they all went down, 
with more or less grace, on to tiidr knees^ 

When the others knelt, grandmother remained seated, 



58 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

like a stone idol which is immune, through its veiy stom- 
ness, from human movement It was understood that 
grandmother could not kned. Only grandmother and 
her Creator knew that not her knees but her pride of 
years deterred her from this religious exercise; that, in 
fact, she did not choose to kned. This remaining upright 
amidst a grovelling family gave her a satiric glee. Her 
gaze, travelling over the kneeling figures, seemed to 
say : ''Don't you wish you were older ?" She triumphed 
in the fact that her dau^ter— even she, the cold, the 
dreaded — ^humbly knelt, while, by an unsuspected artifice 
she herself escaped. She enjoyed her leisurely scrutiny 
of shoulders and backs of heads, noticing with secret 
amusement that Ruby's blouse was undone. Amber's hair 
untidy, Rachd's quite white over the ears. She perceived 
also that Sarah sat on her beds instead of kneeling (sh« 
often spoke to Sarah about this, but without effect), an4 
that Peter was making ''mice" with his handkerchief, to 
the delist of Marigold 

Serene above the array of backs, Mrs. Velindre was 
also able, in her leisurely privacy, to have an occasional 
game of solitaire, for which she had a passion. She made 
this right in her own eyes by telling herself that she was 
simply passing the marbles through her fingers as nuns 
handle their beads, only without the wickedness of Rome 
The lugubriousness of some of grandmother's Amens 
was not due, as Amber once pityingly thought, to a sense 
of the tragedy of age, nor, as Sarah thought, to indiges- 
tion. It was due to the game going badly. Amber knew 
the truth now, for since grandmother had decided to sit 
next the lamp (for the better management of the mar- 
bles), her shadow had utterly betrayed her to the two 
girls sitting near her, and had gone grotesquely mopping 
and mowing— coal-black on to the dun carpet-^like a 
long-armed imp, first to the feet of Amber, and then to 




FAMILY PRAYERS 69 

die feet of Catherine, while the marbles made themselves 
elongated shadows, like little pillars. Amber never 
divulged this, though she longed to share with Jasper a 
joke that made her crimson with laughter night after 
night. Catherine's silence had a different motive. She 
regarded such chance bits of knowledge as so many trump 
cards to be kept for moments of need. She was not at 
all amused, but slightly irritated, that grandmother should 
consider her foolish ruse successful. 

Amber wondered, as her father went through the usual 
prayers, in the usual way, what they were all there for. 
iWhen they all joined in a prayer, their voices seemed 
to her so discordant — tuned by duty and not by love, 
each going loudly on its own way — ^that she was reminded 
of a dog show. She was sorry for a God who was 
compelled, every day at eight, to hear this, infinitely mul- 
tiplied, when He might have been listening to trees or 
running water, or the song of birds created for joy. 

"Amen V* said Solomon, with a note of triumph, and 
in a moment, as by a conjuring trick, all except Sarah 
and Marigold were in their chairs, eating. 

Mrs. Darke poured out coffee as remorselessly as if it 
Were poison. Perhaps she was bored with the multitude 
of cups, but she never accepted hdp. 

''What about Jasper?" she asked, when the cups had 
gone round. 

Jasper looked nervous. He hated these family discus- 
rions that always came at meals. He had manoeuvred to 
sit by Catherine. This was Amber's "place." Every- 
body at Dormer had a "place," and it was sin to take it. 
Amber, however, said nothing, but sat down by grand- 
mother. This position no one coveted, as grandmother 
emphasized her wishes by a very sharp elbow in the side 
of her neighbor. 

"Wdl?" said Mrs. Darke sharply. 



60 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Solomon looked at his eldest son ruefully. 

"I dunno/' he said. 

''What's he to dor asked his wife. 

''I don't see that he can have the place now. I can't 
take it off Peter." 

''From, Solomon I'* Mrs. Darke spoke with exaspera- 
ti(Mi. 

"From!'' echoed grandmother* in a cautionary tone^ 
addressing the lumps of sugar that she was drowning in 
her cup When she did this, her parchment face had an 
expression that might have been worn by a medieval lady 
drowning another lady in the moat. 

''Seeing that Peter's gone straight, and Jasper^s gone 
crookedt" added Solomon. Jasper, lodcing at Peter's 
self-righteous expressu>n, wanted to spring at him. The 
two 3roung men, with their straight, rather Egyptian pro* 
files, glared at one another across Catherine's head, grace- 
fully bent. They always seemed to be one on either side 
of Catherine. This morning the three of them made a 
striking frieze like one on an ancient vase, Catherine 
managing to look like gracious femininity between two 
types of predatory manhood. 

"But Jasper will go into the Church,'' she said softly. 
••He won't disappoint us all." 

"He can't if they turn him out of coU^^e," said Peter» 
with a loud laugh. 

"He can go to another coOege," murmured CatfaerinflL 
••He can retrieve his mistake." 

"Retrieve! Ha! Good girl I" said Solomon, fedinf 
at home with the word. 

"I wish you'd talk to md and not at me," remarked 
Jasper. 

"Why not go for tfie Army?" asked SolonKXi. 

'Tight the good fight," added Mrs. Vdindrc. 

"Die for your country !" Peter put in. 



FAMILY PRAYERS 61 

"Not die, Jasper!" cried Ruby, with great concern. 
'*No, you must live and get very fat, like the old sergeant 
at the Keep, and wear a medal, and remember battles a 
irandred years ago," 

Mrs. Darke looked as if she thought dying for some 
fespectable object was the only thing left for Jasper 
to do. 

'WeU, my lad," suggested Solomon, "suppose we buy 
you a commission ?" 

Catherine silently turned her eyes on Jasper, and his 
pale, regular face suddenly reddened, like a statue in a 
stormy sunrise. 

'Td rather stay at Dormer, father," he said. 

**He's afraid!" shouted Peter, and received, above 
CaAerine's head, what Sarah would have called a clout. 

In a moment Peter was on his feet, his chair upset 
tirith the violence of his rising. 

Sarah, who came in at that moment to "gather for 
washing-up," afterwards remarked to Marigold : 

'The young gentlemen's ravening sore; like two furi- 
oos cats they be. I never saw the like I" 

'^'se reckon Master Peter'll be king o' the midden if 
iioomes to fisses," remarked Marigold. 

^Wringing clothes gives you a very red face, Marigor 
■"-e very red face it does. Maybe, it's your 'eart I" Sarah 
ipoke with fine irony. 

In the dining-room the storm had been qudled by 
Sokxnon's command, and the conversation continued in 
t highly electric atmosphere. 

^If he stays, he'd better work at Arkinstall's,'' said 
Mrs. Darke. 

''What for?" asked Solomon. "I can't set him up as 
E farmer.' 

To earn his keep," said his mother. 

'In the sweat of his brow," added grandmother. She 






62 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

felt that this work, which Jasper was known to (detest, 
would be a fitting judgment from the Lord. 

"But I don't want to be a farm labourer I'' Jasper was 
dismayed. 

"No. The lad must have a respectable trade," said 
Solomon, who had some rudimentary ideas of fairness 
"You'd better be a land agent, boy." 

"But I've no gift for such things, father. Can't I go 
on with my books?" 

"If you go into the Church." 

"Never!" 

''Jasper !" Catherine's voice was caressing. "Jasper ! 
Think how much good you could do." 

"It's useless to argue, Cathy." 

"She's a sensible girl," remarked Solcmion. 

"I thought," Jasper spoke hesitatingly, "I could get a 
job at the Keep, and bicycle there every day." 

"I can't be thwarted!" grandmother suddenly broke 
out She had a theory that, if crossed, she would die. 
She was fond of saying : "I've got a weak 'eart, Rachel !'^ 
<— stropping her "h" not because she could not aspirate if, 
but because she did not see why, at her age, any letter 
of the alphabet should be her master. She said it now, 
adding : "In the sweat of his brow. It is the judgment 
of the Lord." 

"But can you stand such hard manual work, Jasper?'^ 
asked Amber. 

"He looks remarkably wdl„" said Mrs. Darke. She 
had said the same at the death-bed of each of her early 
wilting sisters, for she was that curio which one meets 
very frequently — ^a stoic to the pain of others. 

"Take it or leave it," said Solomon, getting upi 
"Board and lodging and training at Arkinstall's, or— 
get oat" 

Jasper opened his mouth to say he would get out. But 



FAMILY PRAYERS 



es 



Catherine, with a slanting look shot with green fire chill 
as ice^ caught his glance in a cold spdl, as the sirens 
caught the ships of lost mariners. Stranded and fasci- 
nated, he felt as the weaker does in the presence of the 
strong, that there was only one thing to do. Catherine's 
thin lips slid into a smile that made a dimple in her right 
cheek; her hair had a living and conquering ripple, with 
a sheen like copper-coloured armour. 

**! never could have believed," thought Jasper to hinv 
sdf, his eyes dwelling on her face, ''that anything could 
be so white and so warm at once— -except a rose, a hedge- 
top rose, out of my reach." 

Then, realizing that Peter was in ecstasies of laughter, 
pointing at them with a shaking finger, he forcibly with- 
drew his eyes, and said simply : 
'Arkinstall's, then, so be it" 
^Ameh," said grandmother. 



4i 



€* 



CHAPTER VI: THE ADVENT OF ERNEST 

ERNEST was arriving. He was biqrcling from Mal- 
lard's Keep— the scene of his recent ministrations. 
It was twelve miles away, but as Ernest said, he was 
'Vigorous, vigorous !" He believed very strongly in ath- 
letics of all kinds, and one of his mottoes was : '^Mens 
Sana in corpore sano/' Whatever he achieved witb 
r^;ard to mens, corpus was a triumphant success. Some 
of the family waited in the hall to welcome him. The 
hall was large and dusky, with a stone staircase. The 
walls were adorned with horns, hoofs, heads, tails, feet, 
fur, and occasionally, with complete corpses of wild 
creatures. It was a savage spectacle and when the house 
had been shut at night it smelt as atrocious as the most 
indignant ghost of a hunted animal could desire in the 
way of vengeance. These trophies, and various guns 
and whips made, with a large dinner bell, the furniture of 
the hall. Brown drugget ran from door to door, that 
leading to the drawing-room little trodden, that leading 
from kitchen to dining-room worn white by Sarah's 
emphatic feet 

Amber, seeing the group, felt indignant when she 
remembered Jasper's homecoming. Punctually almost to 
a moment, Ernest came pedalling up the drive. As he 
entered, he said: "Peace be to this house," and raised 
his right hand. He was tall and stout. "A mountain of 
a man," according to Sarah. He was florid in com- 
plexion. 

"Yes I His eyes are crafty," thought Amber, peering 



THE ADVENT OF ERNEST 65 

biannisters. His hair was very fair, and his head 
aped. The sparseness and paleness of his hair 
n the oviform effect. Peter and Jasper had been 
in their youths to rush kitchenwards at Ernest's 
shouting, "An egg-cup V* This joke was greatly 
ted by Sarah, who always flung her apron over 
I, placed one hand on her heart and one on her 
>;ni, and rocked in an agony of laughter, 
t rather waived the clerical in his dress. It was 
et blend of the ecclesiastical and the sporting, 
expanse of his waistcoat shone a Maltese cross, 
1 with the cryptic remark : "All in one." Why 
this, what it meant, who first thought of it, were 
s. Probably the phrase pleased him because of 
dedness. He was, as he often said, "Gregarious, 
gregarious !" 

y had the first greetings been interchanged, when 
)ther's penetrating voice was uplifted, 
t-nephew I I hear you I" 

matter of fact, Ernest was so distantly related 
mily as hardly to be connected, but they believed 
es of blood, and grandmother liked to be called 
unt." They all repaired to the dining-room, 
re not so deaf as you sometimes seem, grand- 
" said Catherine. 

r 

re not deaf, mamma !" said Mrs. Darke coldly. 
t, you're only deaf when you wish it." 

wind Woweth where it listethl" quoted Mrs. 

airily. She had a gift for apparently pointless 
is which, by their very inappositeness, quelled 
Tsary, and were usually found, on examination, 
I sardonic fitness. 

t-aunt Velindre! Yoaag as ever! Wonderful! 
:ul I" cried Ernest 



66 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"Too old to kneel," said grandmother, with what Sarah 
called her "downy" glance. 

"When the heart adores," said Ernest mcllifluously, 
"the feeble knee is pardoned." 

Grandmother looked pleased. "D'you know," she con- 
fided in her sounding whisper, "Jasper's been a naughty 
boy. A very naughty boy ! He's an infidel !" 

She said it in the tone of concealed glee, with which 
one child will sometimes speak of another's misde- 
meanours. 

"Ah, yes. Pity! Pity!" Ernest replied. "Give him 
line!" 

He was rather a predatory shepherd. He always spoke 
of "catching them young," "hauling them in," "spread- 
ing the net wide." 

"It's a sign of the times," said grandmother. 
'What is, granny?" asked Amber. 
'Unbelief. The end is upon us. Day of wrath! At 
midnight, or at cock-crowing, or in the morning." This 
sentence of grandmother's had, in Aml)er's chilcfiiood, 
kept her awake night after night, afraid to go for com- 
fort to her father, lest he should endorse grandmother's 
words. When sheet-lightning played across the vdvct 
night, she would be paralyzed with terror, momentarily 
expecting the rending blast of the trumpet. When shoot- 
ing stars wandered to annihilation across her little win- 
dow, she covered her head with the pillow and waited 
tensely, as one always awaits an expected sound, for the 
terrible stir of resurrection. Terrible indeed it all seemed 
to her, coming as it did, wrapped in the grave-clothes of 
grandmother^s creed. Her sanity might have been threat- 
ened, but for Sarah's coming into her room one nigfat» 
to find her hysterical with fear. 

"'s Amber, 'ush your roaring," she said decidedly, 
when she had heard the story. "Would 'im above finish 






THE ADVENT OF ERNEST 67 

up the 'orld with all the harvest about so untidy, and the 
turkeys but half grown ? Not likely ! When He finishes, 
it'll be done proper. And I ask you, 's Amber, what 
time o' the. year there inna summat in the doing ? Come 
to think on it, I don't see when the 'orld could end, for 
even in January there's the ewes near lambing, and the 
early rhubarb coming on and what not." 

This peculiar theology had greatly comforted Amber. 

"Great-aimt," said Ernest, "he must find God! He 
shaU Snd GodV* He had just added : "Persuasion! Per- 
suasion!" when Jasper came into the room,^ not looking 
very open to suasion. 

"A little talk, a quiet little talk, Jasper!" said Ernest 
••That's what we need ; that's what we must have !" 

To do him justice, he meant to help, and tried to be 
tolerant. But his bedside manner was too much for 
Jasper. 

•A friendly talk?" he concluded. "You'd like that?" 
'Enormously! Enormously!" replied Jasper/ 

Amber gave an irrepressible little gurgle, which might 
have passed unnoticed but for Mrs. Velindre, who 
pointed an accusing finger at Amber. 

••Risible !" she said. "Always was I Laughed at her 
baptism. Blessed are they that weep !" 

At this point Sarah rang the tea-bell. She always 
seemed to enjoy these moments, four times a day, when, 
instead of listening in silence as she handed dishes, she 
was able, ex officio, to drown the voices of the familjj 
in torrents of noise. > 

Solomon and Peter came in. 

••They've spared you from the Keep, then," was Solo* 
moa's greeting. 

••Yes, my Vicar was land, very kind. Let me come 
witfiout a murmur." 

••Willingly — willingly!" muttered Jasper. 







68 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Grandmother, who had been watching Solomon carve 
ithe»gameipie, fortunately created a diversion at this point 
by calling out in a tone of anguish : 

'1 like the tid-bitsi Give me the tid-bitsi Fm so 
oldr 

"Well, you see, ma'am," — Solomon always spoke 
respectfully to Mrs. Velindre. She filled him with an 
almost religious awe — "You see, Ernest's the guest" 

"But he don't need the tid-bits," said grandmother 
argumentatively. "He's as fat as butter already. Now 
Tm thin !" 

She was indeed cadaverous and meagre. 

Amber, with difficulty controlling her laughter, looked 
to see how Ernest received this. But he was talking to 
Ruby and had not heard. 

He was saying in his usual cumulative style: 

"Cousin Ruby, pink is your colour. You should always 
wear pink. You must always wear pink !" 

Ruby was looking flushed and pretty. Colour was her 
one claim to beauty, and the pale, chiselled face of 
Catherine looked scorn at her on this account 

"Last piece," said Peter, pushing the bread-and-butter 
plate towards Ruby, "last piece and a handsome hus- 
band." 

Ernest blushed. 

Ruby was pleasantly aware that he admired her. To 
her eighteen years, this was sweet. She began to dreaxn 
of wedding cake and dresses; to imagine how the three 
church bells would ring — Ting Tang Tong! Ting Tang 
Tong! She could see the lines of villag^ers (very sparse 
lines, for the parish was small) watching her triirniphant 
progress to the carriage. Amber and Catherine woukl 
be her bridesmaids (Catherine would not like her being 
married first), and they would help her to dress. Then 
her father would say something funny, and the Rector 



THE ADVENT OF ERNEST 69 

something solemn, and her mother — (No. On seoond 
thoughts, it was quite impossible to imagine her mother 
crying). Then they would drive away, and she would 
have "done well for herself." She would be a success 
according to Dormer ideas. It did not occur to her that 
this conception of marriage was like an elaborate box 
with nothing in it. 

She decided that Ernest's forehead was intellectual; 
that the egg-cup joke was unjust. She giggled so much 
at everything Ernest said — and he said a good deal — ^that 
Mrs. Darke frowned ominously. Then, being an astute 
woman, she considered the matter and frowned no more. 

Ernest was patronizingly absorbed, and his cold eyes 
rested on Ruby. Amber, from her unnoticed comer, saw 
in them an expression only to be described as greed. She 
could not help thinking of a toad travelling over a straw- 
berry bed. If Ernest had known her thoughts, perhaps 
he would have modified his summing-up of her person- 
ality, which was: "Colourless, great-aunt, colourless I" 
It was a trick of his to sum-up people in this way. Hav- 
ing done so, nothing but a portent would shake his belief 
in his own decree. Amber felt more and more, that, in 
spite of his good nature, she did not like Ernest Her 
eyes wandered to Jasper, sunk in gloom because Cathe- 
rine was talking to Peter. She wondered why none of 
them were happy at Dormer. It occurred to her that 
they were apt to treat each other as society treats the 
poor — as criminals. Especially was this so if the inner 
self of any member of the family dared to peer out of its 
hiding— dared to show what it was, instead of remaining 
concealed in what they all thought it was. It was seldom 
attempted, for there are few things so strong as mass- 
atmosphere. Half a dozen people can build about a soul 
walls stronger than those that were built around erring 
nuns; in that prison the living is as helpless as if he were 



70 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

dead Let these people decide that a sane man is mad 
Xhe being different from them) and his most reasonable 
actions will be twisted to madness. If he is sensitive, 
he will probably be driven mad in the end, from a con- 
sciousness of injustice, antipathy, and of the hopdessness 
of all his struggles for understanding. So at Dormer 
Amber was colourless, Jasper had a secret sin. Ruby 
needed moulding, and Enoch was "simple." 

Amber's further reflections were cut short by the ring- 
ing of the front door bell, and by the appearance of Sarah, 
who remarked in her usual stony manner : 

"The Rectory!" 

To Sarah, the man without his house was a poor, flac- 
cid thing, like a snail without its shell. She, therefore, 
made a practice of announcing houses and not people. 
To such as Sarah, bricks and mortar mean a great deal, 
the mind very little. So in the village it was never "Mr. 
Darke's lugging the hay," or "ArkinstalFs cutting'*; it . 
was "Dormer's lugging," and "The Wallows is cutting." 
I've put 'em in the drawing-room," Sarah remarked. 
Tight the fire," said Mrs. Darke. 
'Done 1" replied Sarah, who loved to be able to meet 
a command in this way. It was one of her few satisfac- 
tions in a life of drudgery performed for people to most 
of whom she was indifferent, while some she actively dis- 
liked, and one — ^her mistress— she hated. 

A crowd of people shut up together in one house, one 
creed, one strait view of life, must eventually wear each 
other out. Good nature is ground down by constant 
friction. Hatred leaps out like sparks from flint and 
iron. Society thinks that mistakes are made and crimes 
committed through the human soul being too much itself, 
going its own way. But crimes really happen through 



"] 

"] 



TEIE ADVENT OF ERNEST 71 

the soul being too little itself, striving to conform, or 
being crushed into conformity. 

The family adjourned to the drawing-room, where the 
Rector stood, hands behind him, examining the one pic- 
ture in the room (excepting portraits) with the critical, 
astute air of one at an Art exhibition — ^the same look 
with which he had regarded the same picture on every 
visit to Dormer in the last twenty years. 

Mrs. Cantlop sat by the fire. Her hair, snow-white and 
always untidy, was crowned by a lace cap adorned with 
a tremendous ultramarine bow. These bows of Mrs. 
Cantlop's desolated Mrs. Velindre, for she could not wear 
such things herself. She had once, in emulation, donned 
a large velvet bow; but her daughter had heaped such 
bitter scorn upon it, that the poor old lady had given up 
the attempt, almost in tears. Tears were difficult to con- 
nect with grandmother Velindre; one expected them to 
be less like rain than hail. Since that day, grandmother's 
small, round, hard head was always decked with the 
unambitious caps that suited her best. She confided to 
Amber how much she felt this, and how greatly she 
resented the fact that Mrs. Cantlop (a younger woman; a 
much less important woman) could outshine her in cap- 
wear. Not that Mrs. Cantlop did exactly wear her caps. 
They seemed rather to have alighted unexpectedly, like 
birds in a high wind, on her hair,. and they were always 
on one side. About all her clothes there was this air of 
separate volition, as if she were perpetually saying to 
them, in the words of her favourite hymn, "Thy will, 
not mine, be done." 

Mrs. Cantlop was engaged in tatting — a curious and 
ancient occupation, which seemed to have for her a pecu- 
liar fascination. Every blind at the Rectory was edged 
with it; the legs of the armchairs were decently veiled 
with it; cushions bristled with it; her own room might 



72 THE HOUSE IN DORBfER FOREST 

fairly be said to reek of it; and things had come to such 
a pass that the Rector had to lock up his dressing-gown. 

"Well, Rector I" said Ernest, entering boisterously, 
"I've come !" 

"Yes," replied the Rector depressedly. He did not like 
Ernest very much, and he had been more or less forced, 
by Mrs. Darke's representations, Ernest's bland bullying 
and his own good nature, to give him the curacy. Pull- 
ing himself together, he endeavoured to infuse into his 
manner an air of delight, for he was a kindly man. 

"Welcome to our little community, Sw)mdle," he said 
cordially. "I look forward to hearing you read many a 
good sermon in our ancient pulpit.'' 

"Extempore I Extempore!" Ernest corrected. 
As you please, of course." 

The Rector himself managed to preach excellent ser- 
mons, and to keep people awake, through being a first- 
rate raconteur. By virtue of this gift he could make 
the most insipid, dull or coarse narrative seem cultured 
and interesting, with a gentle aroma of the walnuts and 
the wine. 

"I should like," said Mrs. Cantlop in her crooning 
voice (it was always a croon except when, under the 
visitation of heaven, it was a wail), "to add my mite of 
welcome, Mr. Swyndle. And so, if he were here, would 
Keturah's father." Here Mrs. Cantlop's voice faltered, 
and grandmother eyed her with contemptuous interest 

The gentleman alluded to was Mr. Cantlop. He was 
not, as mi^'iic be supposed, defunct He was, to use his 
wife's words, "looking for gold in the wickedest place in 
the world." He had been thus engaged for the past thirty 
years, but so far there was no indication of his having 
found any. In their early married life he had set up as 
a tea merchant at Dormer. He and his Maker alone 
knew why he thought he could get a living in this way. 



THE ADVENT OF ERNEST W 

He did not make a living. Solomon's father, a very 
arbitrary old gentleman, rated him soundly and told him 
if he couldn't make gold he'd better "go and scrat for 
it" As Mr. Cantlop afterwards told his wife, "Incom- 
petence was mentioned, and the name of California." 
It was useless for Mr. Cantlop to say he did not want 
gold, or for Mrs. Cantlop to say she wanted Mr. Cantlop. 
Public opinion was too strong for them. They tried to 
be cheerful. 

"My dear," said Mr. Cantlop, "I'll seek it. I'll find it. 
I'll bring it." He had a gift for terse and energetic 
expression ; but there it usually stopped. Under the stem 
eye of Solomon's father the poor little man did really set 
out with a carpet bag and a red pocket-handkerchief and 
eyes even redder from the parting with Amelia, and a 
ticket provided by the Rector. Mystery had flung her 
curtains over his doings after this, though from his 
yearly letters it was known that he had arrived in Cali- 
fornia. In these letters he always spoke of the gold as 
being just at hand. Mrs. Cantlop nearly always alluded 
to him as "Keturah's father," seeming to feel that his 
personality, taken alone, was rather misty. Keturah had 
ceased to exist a few hours after she began her earthly 
race (during the tea period), so her personality was, at 
best, doubtful. But taken together, rolled into a ball 
and shaped by her imagination, they became quite intimi- 
dating and attained a kind of ghostly awfulness, a spook- 
like majesty. With them— or, rather, with it, for Mrs. 
Cantlop had made out of two nonentities an entity — the 
timid old lady was even able to enter the lists with grand- 
mother. That lady held her in unutterable scorn, because 
she was "nesh," and because she was not a grandmother. 
To Mrs. Velindre her own life seemed eminently right 
and laudable. She was a mother and a grandmother. It 
did not occur to her to wonder, before engaging in these 



74 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

occupations, whether she was fitted for them. Nor would 
she ever have thought, as she looked at her daughter's 
face— chill, secret and expressionless as granite — that 
perhaps she was a greater failure than Mrs. Cantlop. 

The two old heads nodded at one another across the 
large, chilly room. They were like generals in a battle- 
field many times contested. The Dormer drawing-room 
was, in some curious way, reminiscent of a mausoleum. 
The vault-like air; the white marble mantlepiece recall- 
ing tombs; the wreath of wax camelias made by Mrs. 
Velindre in early youth and by her jealously treasured; 
the heavy curtains of purple cloth and the immense val- 
ance, weighted with balls and fringe, that concealed their 
union with the curtain rod as if it were an indecency — 
all these, and the solemn hush that pervaded it, slowly 
gathering Sunday by Sunday like a rising sea, made it 
less like a sitting-room than a grave. It was obviously 
•furnished out of the bequests of a great many people 
with tastes that agreed, as a rule, only in being execrable. 
The room seemed full of the waste products of ineffectual 
lives — full, indeed, to repletion. The wills had been 
thorough; everything had come. Great- Aunt Darke's 
two emu eggs, her alabaster vase and its red wool mat 
were here as well as her Chinese cabinet and her own 
harsh portrait Another great-aunt, who seemed to have 
been gentler than most of them, and not well-dowered 
with this world's goods, had left a sampler and three 
shells with ^'the sea in them," as Amber used to say. 
"You mean, the mighty sea," Catherine corrected, for 
she liked things on a grand scale. And Jasper, Sunday 
after Sunday, irritated his mother and suffered severe 
slappings by reason of his unceasing question, uttered 
in a low but obstinate voice : "Why is thie sea in the shells. 
Mamma? Who put it there, Mamma? Who made it 
sing 



7w 



THE ADVENT OF ERNEST 76 

There were a few beautiful things in the drawing- 
room, but they were obscured by the rest. An exquisite 
Chinese plate hung among a crowd of others painted 
with flowers by ladies of Dormer; a delicate French fan 
was nailed up between two of grandmother's home-made 
ones, constructed of fowls' breasts and wings not always 
very perfectly cured. In these, which appeared all over 
the house, were immortalized many excellent dinners, 
when the Plymouth Rock or the Dorking had given its 
flesh for the physical and its feathers for the aesthetic 
well-being of the family. A small carved chest, that 
looked as if it might once have sheltered love-letters, held 
grandmother's feather duster, with which she daily stirred 
the ancient dust that settled on all these things as of 
indisputable right. On a work-table near the fire were a 
few silver trinkets, which caused great vexation to Mrs. 
Cantlop. This good lady had become, perhaps through 
ceaseless concentration on the desirability of Mr. Cant- 
lop's finding gold, a harmless kleptomaniac. She was 
what Sarah called "a magpie to metal." Though she 
was the most transparently honest soul in Christendom, 
it always happened that her large black silk apron was 
quite lumpy with things concealed beneath it by the end 
of the evening at Dormer. Sometimes Mrs. Velindre 
pounced upon the first offence; sometimes she waited. 
To-night she pounced. 

"What are you doing with my grandson's christening 
spoon, Amelia Cantlop?" 

"Doing ?" said Mrs. Cantlop, very flustered, and obvi- 
ously extracting it from her apron, "I was just minding 
me what a sweet baby Jasper was!" 

She melted into tears. She did this as naturally and 
easily as snow melts in a warm spring. The feat was very 
mysterious to Mrs. Velindre, whose emotions were in 
perpetual cold storage. 



76 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"Not your baby, any way," said Mrs. Velindrc. 

"And eh ! how the poor child cried when the Sign was 
put on him ! It seemed like something boded." 

"That was Sattan coming out!" said grandmother 
complacently. "He's in all young children." 

"Not in Jasper, I'm sure! For Keturah's father 
said " 

"He couldn't say. He'd gone to look for geld ten 
years back when the child was bom. You've no head 
for dates, Amelia: Cantlop!" 

"I was always thought a great one at my bode," said 
Amelia valiantly. 

"You can't mind the big holly being felled !" 

"I can ! And I mind Keturah's father picking a leaf 
off it and writing with a pin: 'Love, honour and 
cherish!'" 

"H'm! Fine words! But he didn't act up to 'enL** 

"We are all weak mortals," said Mrs. Cantlop. "Only 
the Spouse never faileth." 

While Ernest said "The Captain." Sarah— "'im 
above," Mrs. Gosling — "the Lamb," and grandmother — 
"the lion of Judah," Mrs. Cantlop said "The Spouse." 
She let it be tacitly understood that in Mr. Cantlop's 
place, the Spouse would long ago have found gold. 

Ernest came softly up to Jasper, leaning over him, lay- 
ing a large white hand on his shoulder, murmuring with 
his slight lisp — 

"My dear fellow, remember your baptism!" 

Jasper flung round. "What the deuce has my baptism 
to do with you ?" 

"You cannot annul it ; you cannot spoil it ; you cannot 
get away from it. What we have, we keep." 

"Shut up I I won't argue." 

"I hope we shall be fast friends," said Ernest. He 
held that a clergyman's work was threefold — to persuade^ 



THE ADVENT OF ERNEST 77 

to punish and to pardon. At present he was trying the 
first. 

"You only want to be friends in order to convert me 
to your peculiar superstition." 

Ernest waived this. "I am gregarious," he said. 

This was so true, as all Ernest's acquaintances knew to 
their cost, that Jasper smiled. Encouraged by this, 
Ernest added: 

"Also, I am responsible, dear lad, for your eternal 
welfare!" 

"Who gave you authority over me ?" 

"The voice of ordained authority," said Ernest, in what 
he judged to be the typical tone of that authority, "is 
the voice of God." 

"What did you get ordained for?" Jasper inquired. 

"I took Holy Orders because I was called." 

"You took them," said Jasper, "because Great-Uncle 
Swyndle left his money to the first relation to t^e 
orders." 

Ernest was saved the necessity of a reply by the 
departure of the guests. This was always thrilling when 
Mrs. Cantlop was present. To-night grandmother sud- 
denly shouted "The Rector's going I" in her sleepy ear, 
and then waited eagerly, her eyes fixed on Mrs. Cantlop's 
apron. There was a silvery clatter of spoons, paper 
knives and matchboxes and Mrs. Cantlop departed, 
drowsy, tearful and under a cloud, leaning on the Rec- 
tor's kindly arm. The Rector himself was depressed, 
for he found conversation with Ernest a great strain. 

"Great-Aunt," said Ernest, when they had gone, "you 
may like to see my little paper on h}mins. I read it at 
the.Keep. Comprehensive, we hope. Tolerant, we know. 
I have included the hymns of other churches as well as 
Mother Church." (He had given a quarter of a page 
to all hymns other than those of the English Church.) 



78 



THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



''They are outside salvation/' said grandmother. 
'They can't write hymns." 

"Well, well, great-aunt, they try. We must not quench 
the smoking flax. We must sympathize even with then 
that are without." 

"Without are dogs!" said grandmother succinctly. 



PTER VH: HARVEST PREPARATIONS 

vas the vigil of the Harvest festival, a week after 
nest arrived. The days preceding Harvest or 
tmas were red days at Dormer — 2l time of fluttered 
30sts and agitated pig-sties, when the air was full 
leks and the yard ran with blood. In Sarah's calen- 
liey were called "skriking-tide." Sarah's calendar 
)eculiar. She had red-letter days unknown to the 
hes. She was accustomed to say : "When the geese 
stubbling, I take to my linsey petticoat. When the 
flick cracks out, I cast my cross-over." In the har- 
)reparations she stalked about the yard grimly, her 
reinforced with pattens, accomplishing, with Mrs. 
ig's help, feats of skill and muscle — Shacking pork 
oints, trussing the goose, dressing fowls, 
s. Gosling dressed fowls with the air of important 
tation with which she always brooded over death, 
ler that of a near relation, a king or a spring chicken. 
ufs "layer-out" for the neighborhood. Dressing 
■y was only her secondary gift, but she surrounded 
h the same pomp and ceremony. 
» would murmur : "A beautiful corpse in the coffin, 
! The tidiest I ever laid out." Or: "A grand 
Ml the table. Mum ! The best I ever drew." And 
th sentences her voice was exactly the same. She 
{mall and quiet. She seldom made a direct state- 
It was a symbol of her apologetic attitude to life 
he most obvious fact was modified in deference to 
istener. She "liked a drop of something hearten- 

79 



I 




80 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

ingf" and was down in the Rector's private parish book 
as "oinos." There Solomon figured as "sound;" Peter 
had a capital D, for difficult; Jasper only possessed a 
large query. This book was jealously guarded by the 
Rector. He locked it with a silver key which he regu- 
larly left in his trouser pocket when he changed into his 
Sunday suit, thus enabling Mrs. Cantlop to have some 
interesting reading. 

Sarah sat by the kitchen fire. She was expecting Mrs. 
Gosling, Marigold and Enoch, who lived across the water 
at the foot of the woods and sometimes came in when 
they had "cleaned" themselves. This was the happiest 
moment of Sarah's day, for she was exercising her artis- 
tic faculties. On the table stood a large stone ball, such 
as ornaments old gateways.^ Beside it was a heap of 
broken crockery. On the hob simmered a pot of glue. 
Sarah was fixing bits of china, reduced to the required 
size with a hammer, to the stone ball. This she called 
her "world." It was, so far, her most ambitious effort 
She had done a seven-pound jam-pot, a "pair o' vawses" 
and other works, which shone with varnish on the mantel- 
piece. The kitchen, dusky and draughty, was paved with 
large grey flags, cracked and chipped at the comers. In 
the centre of the high mantelpiece stood a mortar and a 
pestle, round the white end of which the mouths of all 
the young Darkes had been stretched. Flanking this 
were the vases. To the right hung the cudcoo clock, 
with which Sarah found herself very much in accord, 
for it startled the air like a summons to battle, and the 
kitchen was the scene of a deadly daily battle between 
Sarah and inanimate things. Opposite the dock was 
Sarah's one picture — ^the photograph of the grave of a 
little girl (unknown to Sarah) who had distinguished 
herself by dying from the effects of pushing a bead into 



HARVEST PREPARATIONS 81 

her ear. This lugubrious oddity suited a vein of religious 
fatalism in Sarah and Mrs. Gosling. They were never 
so content as when, over cups of very strong tea, they 
solemnly regarded the photograph in its frame of var- 
nished chestnuts and remarked, shaking their heads: 
"Ah ! Poor thing ! It was to be. 'Im above was 'ware 
of that bead afore ever it was blowed. Some met think 
it was for this. Some met think it was for that. But 'e 
knowed as it was for Jemima Onion's ear and a sum- 
mons to glory !" 

As Sarah hammered, conscious of a large batch of suc- 
cessful cheesecakes in the oven, she heard Enoch come 
across the yard from milking. Then he rubbed one 
shoulder against the door, which was his way of knock- 
ing. Having taken the pails to the dairy, he sat down 
and began to steam, diffusing an atmosphere of manure, 
and watching Sarah frcnn his shechinah with a wonder- 
ing stare. 

"Well ?" said Sarah, operating on half a teacup. 

"Well?" 

"Enoch Oddman ! You'm the most aggravating man. 
All eyes and no tongue !" 

"Eh?" 

"There he goes ! 'Eh ?' Words met be gold the way 
you 'usband 'em." 

Enoch's contemplative gaze wandered round the 
kitchen. 

"What dun you want me to say ?" he asked. His voice 
had a sing-song tone which always made Amber think 
of wind in the pine-tree. Enoch was a silent soul. Solo- 
mon chose to consider him daft, and acquired him 
cheaply on that account. His name was Gale, but he was 
called after his profession, as is often the case in the 
country. Sarah did not reply to his question, but opened 
the oven door and took out the cheesecakes. 



St THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''When I wed,'' she said dreamily, breakiiig off a bit I 
of crust for Enoch, " 'im as I choosell get a pleoty of 
these— a plenty/' I 

''Dear now!" Enoch spoke in the midst of dtombliiig. 
"It eats short" 

"Short? Ah! Vd as lief some folks 'nd be as short. 
They take as long, some folks do, axin to wed, as if they 
were saved in Paradise with all eternity to sing in nnder j 
their wings/' I 

"Serious things/' said Enoch slowly, "inna able to be 
done quick. They mun be gone into in good sadness." 

"Mr. Ernest inna of your mind." 

"Eh?" 

"Any oonty can sec he's after 's Ruby. Nor *e wmms 
let the time pass like some does. Tick, tadcl Tick, 
tack I and the hours hooting and nought done. And 
Mr. Ernest's an example to go by, seeing he's a stu% 
plussed clergyman (and a good few yards it takes to 
go round 'im) and seeing as he can preach the whiskers 
off a cat" 

"Oh!" 

"And I'll tell you this, Enoch Oddroan, though yon 
dunna deserve to know ought, for Mr. No-eyes is your 
name. I'll tell you tl^is" (she lowered her voice to the 
awed and mysterious tone in which one might speak of 
elocutionary marvels such as the self-expression of 
Balaam's ass), " 'e'll speak to-morrow ! Ah ! I seed him 
telling it over to himself very solemn/ not out loud, but 
talking to 'is mommets ! Sarah, my girl, I says, to-mor- 
row in the flush of words (for it's like a cloudburst when 
Mr. Ernest preaches the Word) his tongue being oiled, 
and the words boiling in his yead, he wunna be able to 
stop, and he*ll speak." 

"Ah I" Enoch was still indifferent. 
'Eh, oh, ah!" mocked Sarah. "Eh, oh, ah! You're 



4«1 



HARVEST PREPARATIONS 8S 

like the Christian Minstrels Rector got down to liven us 
up, choir treat It was twang, twang! and eh, oh, ah! 
and thrum! thrum! like 'earts at a Hiring Fair, till I 
was fair melancholy/' 

Enoch smiled, but his eyes did not lose their wistful, 
rather bemused expression — ^the look of one just awak- 
ened from sleep-walking. This made him kin to the 
animals, for it is in their eyes, from the humblest to the 
fiercest. What are animals but souls walking in their 
sleep— personalities still overdone by matter, prisoned in 
the early stages of evolution amid the necessities of lust 
and blood? Yet there, even in the eyes of a cat as it 
laps the blood of its victim, you may see the disquieted 
spirit kx^ing on with the startled wonder of a child 
that has set the house afire. It is as if the animals saw, 
confused as the reflections in running water, what they 
are and what they would be; as if they glimpsed the pos- 
sibility of breaking loose from the vast madiine of mul- 
titudinous physical bondage — from bloodshed, wrath, the 
competitive struggle for life — and saw their little spirits, 
shivering and afraid, but free, on the dark hills of futur- 
ity. Anyone who cared to study Enoch came upon a 
mystery, discovering a being so near the animal world 
that he could easily interpret the vague half-thoughts of a 
sheep or a cow, yet so far advanced along the road of 
psychic development that most of the other inhabitants 
of Dormer were pigmies OMnpared with him. None of 
them, except Jasper and, perhaps. Amber, were conscious 
of their own souls; they were still asleep, and in their 
sleep they mouthed the old righteousness of their fore- 
fathers. Enoch was awake. Though he had not been 
roused by the sharp, clear tnmipet of intellect, he had 
heard in the twilight of semi-consciousness the drowsy 
bell of intuition. 

Enoch was never quite at his ease in Dormer. He liked 



84 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

lo be out on the huge purple hills under the towering 
sky, where the curlews cried out strange news to him 
in passing, and the little brown doves murmtu'ed of a 
hidden country, a secret law, more limited than those of 
man, yet more miraculous. For there, to dream a nest 
is to build it. To desire the sea, or an orange tree in 
Africa, is to obtain it. Genius and love are the nearest 
approach we have made to this wholly mysterious life. 
They are akin to it, though they are at once greater and 
more subject to mistakes. There is something in that 
blind shaping of nests and cocoons and cells, in that 
strange swinging out in sightless faith into the limitless 
air that we have not yet understood. 

Sarah stirred her glue like a dark-browed witch. She 
was what is known as hard-favoured. 

"What's Master Jasper lay tongue to when he comes 
round along of you ?" she asked. 

Enoch contemplated her in silence. Sarah stamped 

'^Deaf as a post and dumb as mutton What a manT 

There was a soft fumbling at the door. 

'That's ours,*' remarked Enoch. This was his usual 
way of indicating his aunt, while Sarah was ''the 
'ooman." Mrs. Gosling entered, saying that she partly 
thought it was seasonable weather. Sarah was^beghming 
work on a vase that seemed quite intact 

"You're never going to take and break that?* said 
Mrs. Gosling. Enoch looked from the vase to Sarah with 
an expression that said, "There's nothing she won't do !" 

"It's 's Catherine's,'* explained Sarah. "I'm obleeged 
to break more things for her than for any of *em, though 
the old lady runs her pretty close.** 

"I partly think the old lady's grave-ripe, poor thing,** 
said Mrs. Gosling, " *er's looking very middlin'.** 

"She's looking what she is," remarked Sarah, "and 



HARVEST PREPARATIONS 85 

downy's the word. The things she'll do f Ah ! There's 
a good few of 'cr Uzit bottles on the World ! But this 
vawse of 's Catherine's I'm obleeged to break along of 
her making game of me in that letter to her auntie. 'Poor 
Sarah !' she says. Toor vawse !* says Sarah." 

Sarah was obliged to break people's china when they 
offended her. It was not spite. It was a judgment, 
inevitable, just, as the judgment of God. You offended 
Sarah — ^you lost a vase. And, by the poetry of things, 
your loss was Sarah's gain, and your forfeited ornament 
went to the building of Sarah's magnum opus. 

"She's sleek, is 's Catherine," continued Sarah. "But 
she's got sharp claws, like a little cat ! I can't abide cats ! 
Out, you cats !" 

She seized a broom and dislodged a tabby cat and kitten 
from the fender. Then the dining-room bell rang, and 
Sarah, after some grumbling, answered it. Returning 
she said : "They're ravening sore in the room. Master 
Jasper red as a layer's comb, and 's Amber roaring 
crying." 

"What ails 'em ?" asked Mrs. Gosling. 

"'Im above knows! But it's always passion-tide in 
this 'ouse, I'm thinking." 

^'There'll come a day," said Enoch in: a low and sing- 
ing voice, "when this bitter old 'ouse will fa-a-al." 

"Fall?" said Sarah. "When the walls are six bricks 
through and solid as my aunt Sophy, that weighed four- 
teen stone on her wedding day, so when it came to * 'ave 
and 'old' the bridegroom looked right scared. B^t the 
best man nudged and the parson gave the word, so he 
spit on his 'ands and said it like a man." 

"It'll fa-a-1," said Enoch, "like a waspy apple. If 11 
fa-a-al like rotten leaves. And it'll fa-a-al in the night 
with a weight of shadows on it." 

"But that dunna tell us why they're chevy-chasing lV\ft. 



86 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

lad/' Sarah said, fetching refreshments as Marigold 
came in. 

Marigold was very young, very dewy, a limpidly sweet 
nonentity — a soulless fairy still asleep in the dawn-cold 
flower of youth. She sat down by her mother and b^gan 
without more ado to eat pig's chitterlings and onions. 
As nobody thought of chitterlings with anything but 
respect, nobody thought Marigold was doing violence to 
her beauty. 

"I partly think," said Mrs. Gosling, "as Master Jas- 
per's taken on soft and got religious. There's a tidy few 
does. Old Lady Camperdine got it and went for a Cath- 
olic The last Sunday she ever come to Dormer Church, 
she took and shied the gathering bag at the Rector's 
yed, with folks' money in it and all. A beautiful corpse 
she made, too I Maybe Master Jasper's found God all of 
a sudden I" 

"Oh, God." Sarah spoke with an air of indifference. 
Her religion took the colour of her mind — materialistic. 
Like a pool, it recdved whatever was dropped into it 
Every Sunday she tolerated the Rector's sermon. She 
understood that if she committed no overt act of disobedi- 
ence against certain arbitrary laws, benefit would accrue 
to her. Heaven would, she felt, be difficult, but worth 
while, because so many people wanted to get there and 
never would. God, in her eyes, was a person who dis- 
pensed limited favours for the pleasure of observing the 
antics of humiliation in which the recipients were obliged 
to indulge. Respectability was the end and aim of life. 
To be in comfortable circumstances was a great credit 
to anyone. Such things as love, sacrifice, spiritual beauty, 
when mentioned in the Bible, must be taken with a grain 
of salt, as being written by men who lived in a very hot 
place and were nesh. The kind of love that meant arms 



HARVEST PREPARATIONS 8T 

round waists, smacking kisses and an eventual wedding 
waSy of course, different 

"To my mind/' she said, "it's more like love than 
religion." 

She privately thirsted for love affairs, though usually 
denouncing them in public. 

"Miss Catherine?" asked Marigold. 

**Maybe yes. Maybe no. But she wunna stay true to 
Master Jasper. She's for Master Peter and the 'ouse." 

'That she never is!" Marigold spdce suddenly and 
violently. 

"You know a deal," said Sarah. 

•'Where you bin since you cleaned yoursdf?" asked 
Mrs. Gosling. "And what'r you bin doing ?" 

"Nowt." 

Marigold's cheeks were very red. 

•Enoch's eyes, dwelling on her, were troubled. 

At this moment the prayer bell rang. Marigold got up 
to go with a light in her eyes. Sarah also got up with 
"Prayers, drat 'em !" 

But before they could go, Ernest entered. 

"My man," he said, "how is it I never see you at family 
prayers ?" 

Enoch preserved his far gaze and his silence. 

Sarah, anxious to get the day's work done, said in 
commiserating tones : 

"Seems like he's got a lattance in the speech, sir. He'll 
sit the daylong mum as a Luke-tide fly. The mouth- 
mauling as I gave un ! And all wasted !" 

Ernest looked at Enoch with the interest of a doctor 
diagnosing a difficult case. 

"An impediment !" he exclaimed, and added with mili- 
tant cajolery, "A man in the Bible had an impediment. 
It need not frighten you away. Keep together ! All in 
one!" 



88 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

These encouraging phrases beat upon Enoch's placidity 
like waves on a granite promontory. Sarah's stem mouth 
so far relaxed as to smile at the cheesecakes. 

"Remember," Ernest concluded, with authority tem- 
pered by benevolence, "I shall look for you. I shall 
expect you. Don't be afraid. 'J^st as I am,' you know, 
'just as I am.' " 

Ernest retired, confident of victcMy. 

"Got 'im ?" queried grandmother sharply, as she would 
have questioned a rat-catcher. 

"I think so— I trust so," said Ernest blandly, looking 
out for the evening's reading the chapter about the man 
with the impediment. 

"I think not" murmured Jasper. He wandered out to 
the kitchen and sat down opposite Enoch. He found rest 
in the company of this being who neither asserted nor 
denied, but remained aloof, a soul crude and simple, but 



its own. 



They had the kitchen to themselves, for Mrs. Gosling 
had gone to take her nightcap in luxurious solitude. 
Enoch was waiting for Marigold. He knew that these 
walks through the star-fruited wood were soon to end, 
for now that the Dormer family was larger. Marigold 
was to "live in," sharing Sarah's attic 

The kitchen door was open and that of the dining* 
room ajar. A hive-like murmur came along the passage. 
'Enoch," said Jasper, "are we astray or are they?" 
'Master Jasper, if Mr. Ernest was astray he wunna'd 
stray far. They'd find un by his blaating." 

'No, but, Enoch, seriously, what do you think?" 
'Oh, if it's to be in good sadness. Master Jasper I canna 
say fairer than — ^'I dunna know.' May-'appen we'm all 
strays. Maybe we'll ne'er find out till Time's gone by. 
But I canna see as if s to be found out," he nodded side- 
ways towards the murmur, "that-a-way. Nor yet from 
a bit of a four-leaf clover on Mr. Ernest's belly." 



"] 






CHAPTER Vni: ERNEST SPEAKS 

WHEN Ruby woke next morning, the early harvest 
bells were ringing up the valley, the rooks were 
loquacious in the upper woodlands, and Sarah was thun- 
dering on Ernest's door. 

''Mr. Ernest shanna say Sarah Jowel started 'un late 
the day he's askin' to wed !" she said to Marigold "For 
ask to wed he will, afore dark." 

Soon Sarah appeared with an unwonted cup of tea for 
Ruby, and Ruby's happiness increased. For she loved a 
cup of tea, strong and creamy, and a picture bode and a 
soft pillow ; and at the back of her mind was the thought 
that Ernest would certainly "speak" to-day. She raised 
her beautiful and indolent body sufficiently to drink. 

"Has Miss Catherine had some?" she asked. 

" 's Catherine's not," was the reply. "For she's gone 
to the seven o'clock, and when 'er goes to that 'er clems. 
Though why 'im above shpuld take it unkind if she went 
full, is more than Sarah Jowel knows. I'm as earnest 
after religion as most, but my stomach's my own." 

So saying, she flung back the curtains, and there was 
Ruby in a flood of yellow sunshine, friendly to her young 
splendor, but cruel to Amber, who was leaning from her 
window drinking the golden day. 

Eimest also was up, looking very pink and clean, read- 
ing in a new little manual he had brought with him, 
which was a service of prayer for those contemplating 
marriage. It began with a prayer before the proposal, 
and went straight on, as it were, on the crest of the wave, 

89 



90 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

to the banns, the wedding, and the children. What Hap- 
pened if "the answer was no/' as Enoch would say, did 
not appear. Only the successful were catered for. To do 
Ernest justice, he meant very well in reading this booL 
He nearly always did mean well. He wished to do right 
and he wished others to do right in his way. What 
would have happened if his church, instead of tdling him 
that what he wanted was right, had told him that what 
he wanted was wrong, it is not easy to say. Fortunately, 
it had never yet happened. Ernest knew it was right for 
him to marry Ruby, and rear a large family. Ruby's 
point of view never occurred to him. 

"Well, 's Ruby," said Sarah, "you do take the eye!" 
She felt romance tingling in the ^r. Romance, to 
her, did not depend on anything so ephemeral as love. 
So long as the dresses, the cake, and some sort of a bride- 
groom were got together, what else mattered ? 

And Ruby, sipping her tea, basking in the sunshine^ 
idly admiring the texture of her skin under the light, and 
the full curve of her breast, was of very much the same 
opinion. 

That which Sarah had prophesied duly came to pass. 
After the service Ernest hurried out of the vestry in his 
cassock and detained Ruby, who was lingering rather 
expectantly. They wandered beneath the swart yews, 
which canopied the churchyard mournfully, shadowing 
the grotesquely shaped tombs— obelisks and sarcoj^iagi, 
needles of stone, an immense triple-tiered round erection 
of fluted marble, like a wedding cake, and a stout stone 
boy, apparently of negroid extraction. All these tombs 
were greened over by lichen, and as Ruby and Ernest 
walked under the trees their faces took a greenish tint, 
as if upon them also it had gathered. Keturah Cantlop's 
grave was smothered with waxen wreaths in glass cases. 



ERNEST SPEASB 91 

for Mrs. Cantlop added a new one every Easter. She 
thought them far more beautiful than real flowers. The 
little mound, thus decorated, lying so darkly by the water 
under the heavy yews, had given Ruby a great distaste 
for white flowers. 

When they came to it she shivered and turned away. 
Ernest did not notice. He was flushed and heated with 
the service and with the consciousness of having preached 
a successful sermon. As Sarah would have said, he was 
"flow^n with words." Mrs. Cantlop, who enjoyed many 
a half-hour's nap under the mellifluous ebb and flow of 
Ernest's self-expression, said, when Ernest's preaching 
was criticized in her presence: ''Ah, well! He has a 
gift for imparting knowledge." To this Catherine had 
rather tartly replied: "If only he had any to impart 1" 

'Ernest was, therefore, pleased with himself, Ruby and 
their background of the world in general. He was only 
waiting to gravitate again to the scene of his triumph 
until Solomon and Mr. Arkinstall had gone. These two 
found the vestry convenient for their weekly talk. Before 
church they argued. During the service they seethed. 
Afterwards they quarrelled bitterly. 

When they came out, Ernest said: "Come into the 
vestry, cousin Ruby." She was not his cousin, but Ernest 
liked what he called the homely ties and titles of relation- 
ship, and if they were not there, he invented them. The 
atmosphere of the vestry, though not so sacrosanct as 
that of the church, was still sufficiently hassocky. Ernest 
sniffed it and found it very good. The vestry was under 
the belfry at the west end, and was curtained off from the 
church, so that the choir (who came in humbly one by 
one in ordinary dress, conscious of their inferiority as 
mere men) might robe in decent seclusion and emerge 
suddenly, surpliced and looking quite different from their 



92 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

week-day selves, when the sexton flung back the curtain 
with his dramatic gesture. 

"Sit down, Ruby," said Ernest', proffering the sexton's 
carved chair and himself taking the small one with the 
rush seat (a great concession). 

Ruby felt embarrassed and alarmed, and rather as if 
she were going to have an operation. 

In the dark-stained window above, blue-bottles buzzed, 
drunk with the fruit of the harvest decorations. Rub/s 
eye^ strayed upwards. She caught herself thinking, as 
she watched them crawling, so tight and well-found, that 
they looked as if they wore cassocks. 

Ernest did not hesitate. He knew what he intended 
to say, and he said it 

"Cousin Ruby, you mus^ be mine! You shall be 
mine f " 

"Whyr 

Ruby was pieasantly conscious of a very pretty open- 
work yoke, and she looked up disconcertingly through a 
long, loosened strand of bright hair. 

"Is it because you think I'm pretty, Ernest?' 

Ernest moistened his ll^s. 

"Looks are nothing. Ruby. It is a meek and quiet 
spirit that I ask in woman." 

"Would you love me if I was like Mrs, Gosling?' 

"Don't be flippant. Ruby." 

"But don't you like people to be pretty?" 

"If lodes are an index to the mind But bodily beauty 
interests me very little." 

He looked long at the bright hair, the cream-and-roses 
skin, and licked his lips again. 

"Amber says, if you love a person, you love them 
because of the me in them. Because they're them and 
nobody else. Will you love me that way and never say 
•clumsy!' or 'stupid!' or 'foolish'?" 



ERNEST SPEAKS 9S 

Ernest thought it best to refrain from all mention of 
movldingf and not to give her any hint that her value 
lay in her ductility to the hand of the potter. 

"So it is yes, Ruby?" He took her hand in his large 
white one. 

"(Ml, it isn't real,'' cried Ruby, suddenly. "Amber 
said you felt all different, and I don't It will be dull 
being married, if I feel just the same as I do now." 

For a moment Ernest's soul, or his conscience, or his 
essential self was pricked into a mistrust of itself. The 
'Sense of tears" which, in a world brimful of tears, must 
visit the most self-satisfied at times, stirred in him as he 
looked at Ruby's childish face and heard her callow ques- 
tionings. Then he pulled himself together, cast aside 
his doubts and fell back upon custom and the letter of the 
law. Once more his spirit lay inert, a partially atrophied 
organ embedded in the fatty deposit of expediency. 

"Of course I Of course !" he said comfortably. "We 
feel diflFerent. Quite, quite different." 

This was true. He was feeling uncomfortably warm 
and was perspiring a gxxxi deal. 
"Yes, Ruby?" he suggested helpfully. 
Ruby indicated that it was yes, and Ehiest kissed her. 
Ruby edged away. 

"Oh, your mouth is hot. Earnest! Hot and slow 
lik e " she had almost said — "like a blue-bottle." She 
felt as if the row of surplices that hung in folds charac- 
teristic of their wearers, watched and criticized There 
was the Rector's, straight and spare, seeming to depre- 
cate tatting; Mr. Arkinstall's, long, with a kind of smug 
droop; Ernest's own, starched and robust; Mr. Dank's 
(he was organist) almost hidden beneath that of Mr. 
M^low, the constable. Mr. Mallow's was the largest 
of all. It was his astral self. It hung in the swelling 
folds admired of Sarah. It was like a football from 



94 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

* 

which the inside is removed — a touch will collapse it» 
but until the touch comes, it seems to be the same roimd, 
hard ball as ever. By virtue of it Mr. Mallow's pres- 
ence, breathing Law, still haunted the vestry. 

Ernest was huffy, with some excuse. He took off his 
cassock and said ''Home I'' while Ruby still eyed the blue- 
bottles with fascinated disgust. Going out, in her con- 
fusion and hurry, she stepped on one of the trailing bell- 
ropes, and down from the belfry came a tiny mournful 
toll. Going out between the sheaves of com, Rub/s 
eyes, which had been vacant and asleep, took a gleam of 
wakefulness, and within the wakefulness was a seed of 
fear. 

When they told their news to the family, grandmother 
smacked her lips. To the old, or the mentally unoccu- 
pied, or the spiritually slumbrous, events are a stimulant 
— almost their only stimulant. Grandmother was not at 
all interested in the thoughts of those she lived wiA, 
but she was absorbedly interested in their doings. Let 
them fall from heaven to hell in the life of the soul- 
grandmother would not be aware of the slightest chax^ 
in their condition; but let them cease to take sugar in 
their tea — grandmother was all agog in a moment So 
now it was she and not Mrs. Darke who questioned m 
to the date of the wedding. 

Ruby giggled 

''Soon, great-aunt, soon!'" said Ernest 

"Where'll you live?*' asked Solomon, who, as he said, 
scented mischief. 

"Well, if convenient ** Ernest looked at Mrs. 

Darke, with whom he had already prudentiy arrangied 
matters. 

"They'll live here,'' said Ae. 

"Until I attain my vicarage." 

Ernest always spoke of this vicarage as if it wete 



ERNEST SPEAKS 96 

a building for him in some terrestrial foretaste of Para- 
dise» and were his for the taking. This attitude annoyed 
Catherine, her contempt for Ernest being extreme. 

"You've had one offered you, then ?" she asked, in the 
smooth, Persian-cat manner which made Sarah so 
wrathful. 

"Well, to be accurate, not yet, not exactly." 

Ernest generally went to pieces when in conflict with 
Catherine. Then he reflected that Catherine vras perhaps 
jealous of Ruby; he rallied. 

'Though, until I get my vicarage, I shall not need a 
helpmeet, I do want a companion," he explained. "It is 
not good for man to live alone." 

"Alone? In this house?" Jasper spcke with a kind of 
bitter wonder. His eyes, travelling round the room, were 
so full of mingled disgust and half-comic dismay that 
Amber with difiiculty kept her gravity. 

"Never alone !" said grandmother. "There is an Eye 
that watches. There is an Ear that hears." 

Ernest adjusted his collar, beaming. "I'm gregarious 
— gr^^arious," he said. 

Jasper groaned. 

"I love my fellows, and I hope — ^I may say I think — 
that my fellows love me." 

He had the unconscious conceit of those temperamen- 
tally gregarious people with whom companionship has 
become a lust; who think they are always wanted; who 
mistrust and hate the lonely soul that does not want them. 
Eventually, these people become exasperated with th^ 
non-social being and (by way of a cure) shut him up with 
a great many other people in some prison of the body or 
of the mind. Very often the first time in his life when 
the unfortunate being is allowed the privilege of loneli- 
ness is when he lies, at last, in his grave. 

"Yes, I am sociable — ^very sociable. But one needs 




96 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



more. One needs, in short, a wife, one with whom to 
share the lifelong eucharistic sacrament of marriage." 

"No popery!" cried grandmother suspiciously. The 
word eucharist always annoyed her. She and Ernest did 
not agree very well, he being "High" and she "Low," he 
saying "Ah-braham," while she said "Ay-braham." Such 
a difference even religion could not bridge. At this point 
Ruby, who had been staring at Mrs. Darke like one hyp- 
notized, suddenly burst into a torrent of words. 

"Live here ? Live here ? But when people are married, 
they have their own house, and furnish it and have pres- 
ents and a 'storeroom ^" 



"When Ernest gets his bishopric you'll have all that, 
dear," said Catherine. But Ruby took no notice. She 
was stirred to the depths of her not very deep personality. 

"If I can't have a house and a storeroom and a trous- 
seau, what's the use of getting married ?" 

She burst into loud crying. Ernest came forward and 
laid his well-kept right hand on her shoulder. 

"You will have me," he said with suave simplicity. 

Ruby looked up at him with an expression that seemed 
to Amber to say that Ernest was the fly rather than the 
ointment. She cried louder. But grandmother saved 
the situation. She tapped her stick with authority. 

"Clothes I The child must have clothes for the credit 
of the family. She's gotten what she has in a pretty 
pickle ! Hey I She's a tomboy, and so you'll find, great- 
nephew !" 

Ernest looked as though he were prepared to mould 
any quantity of tomboys into patterns of wif diness. 

"Gowns ! She shall be brought unto him in a raiment 
of needlework. I must have a new one too, and a cap." 
She eyed her daughter, conscious of temerity. 

"No bow," said Mrs. Darke. 



«1 



ERNEST SPEAKS 97 

"I wiU have a bow f My grand-daughter's being mar- 
ried, ain't she?*' 

"You're too small, mamma." 

"Son-in-law!" cried grandmother. 

"Ma'am r 

"You must have out the closed carriage and Enoch 
must drive us to the Keep. There are some nice new 
caps at Mrs. Griffin's, with small bows" — this with a 
pleading glance at her daughter — "for Sarah saw 'em 
last time she was there. When was it, Sarah ?" 

"Monday was a week, mum," said Sarah, sweeping 
crumbs with the action of a mower. 

'So you'll order the carriage, son-in-law?' 
'I suppose so, ma'am; eh, Rachel?" 

Mrs. Darke nodded At once the closed carriage, 
Enoch and Mrs. Griffin became enrolled in the book of 
destiny. 

Ruby brightened. Edging away from Ernest's hand, 
she sat down at her grandmother's feet with a confiding 
air. 

"Will you buy me frocks, granny?" 

Among Mrs. Velindre's good qualities was a certain 
generosity which, though perverse and variable, could 
always be counted on at an occasion like this. For she 
loved a merrymaking almost as much as a funeral. She 
was just going to assent when Mrs. Darke said : "You 
will have what's proper, Ruby." 

"There! Kiss your mother. Ruby," said Ernest Ruby 
did so, murmuring : 

"White satin and a veil?" 

"Is white satin suitable to a country girl?" asked 
Catherine non-commitally. She had a way of managing 
people through these vague questions. ^'Why not mus- 
?" she added. 



98 THE HOUSE IN DORBiER FOREST 






^'Ruby would look very nice in satin/' said Amber, 
''and not nearly so nice in muslin." 

Mrs. Darke hesitated. It was really a satisfactory 
match. The economy of it pleased her, for it was only a 
case of telling Sarah to move Ruby's things into Ernest's 
room, and of having Ruby's food paid for by Ernest 
Yes. It must be encouraged. But white satin was absurd. 
What does great-nephew say?" asked grandmother. 
I don't care what he says I" cried Ruby, stamping, and 
drowning a murmured — "Nat in putting on of apparel"— 
"if I can't have satin, I won't marry you, Ernest There 1" 

Ernest moistened his lips slightly. Decidedly moulding 
was required. But for the present 

"Well, great-atmt, I think Ruby would look well, very 
well, in satin. It would do for parties after/' he added 
frugally. 

"At the Palace," murmured Catherine. 

"Very well. Ruby," said Mrs. Darke. ''White satin 
and no nonsense." 

"No nonsense!" echoed grandmother firmly, but with 
a sneaking fear that caps with bows— even small one»— 
were nonsense. 

"Can we go soon?" Ruby's spirits were risii^ fast 
"Can we have the band to dance with, and a knife and 
fork tea?" 

"I don't see why not," said Solomon. "Tlie first to go 
and all." 

"Only I'm not going!" Ruby's lips trembled again. 

"Very well," said Mrs. Darke, seeing another outbreak 
imminent. 

Ruby was pacified, and Solomon and Ernest were able 
to retire and discuss the financial side of the affair. For 
in respectable houses marriage by barter is still the 
fashion instead of the much more interesting marriage by 



ERNEST SPEAKS 



99 



capiare and the rare, seemingly almost unattainable, mar- 
riage for love. 

Ruby fixed the day, early in November, after very 
little persuasion. She was dull and her mind was not 
8u£Eiciently furnished to be any entertainment to her. So 
the prospect of excitement, a stir, new possessions, was 
very attractive. As Sarah said, it was all fixed up as 
neat as egg-and-bread-crumbs. 

It never occurred to Ruby that in her passioQ for the 
acquisition of goods she was losing herself. 



3741 8A 



CHAPTER IX: HOW THEY WENT TO THE KEEP 

IT was beneath one of the grieved skies of early Octo- 
ber that the five women set forth to buy Ruby's 
finery. Amber noticed how the clouds lay in long bars of 
faded lilac on a background of pale, irradiant yellow, 
wherein faint veinings were visible, like those in a sweet 
pea. Across the lilac and the yellow and the pale golden 
lines floated on the damp westerly wind small tear- 
coloured clouds. 

Amber's thoughts were sad-coloured also, as she looked 
out of her window at grandmother's piercing call : 

"Grandchildren, Fm waiting!" 

Ruby was so boisterously gay, so full of song, so lavish 
of confidences and childish hugs, that she seemed pathetic, 
almost tragic. Amber reflected that Ruby lived on the 
smooth surface of life — a surface that covers all the griefs, 
the boiling hatreds, the wild impossible loves and the 
white-hot despairs under a decent exterior. But for all 
its smoothness, Amber thought, it was only a lava crust 
The volcanic fires might break through at any moment, 
consuming, terrible. She was afraid for Ruby. She 
felt, as she had felt for Jasper, a creeping dread of some- 
thing sinister, not coming from without, but lying dor- 
mant — ^a seed of evil — somewhere in the ghostly recesses 
of the house itself. She hastily counted up her podcet 
money, destined to be spent at the jeweller's on a watch 
for Ruby. For, as if there were not enough time-pieces 
&t the Keep, Ruby wanted another. Ernest suggested 

100 



G 



HOW THEY WENT TO THE KEEP 101 

silver; Catherine gun-metal. But Amber was determined 
that whether Ruby's life were golden or not she should 
at least have a gold watch. 

Grandmother's voice being again uplifted, Amber ran 
down. The closed carriage was drawn up before the 
door, and revealed itself as a small brake, to which had 
been fast^ied a frame with a brown waterproof top, and 
curtains all round. Thus was attained the maximum of 
convenience with the minimum of extravagance. On the 
box sat Enoch, arrayed for the occasion in his fawn livery 
coat with silver buttons, and a kind of baby top-hat, rather 
rough in the nap, trimmed with corded ribbon. The 
horse-rug discreetly hid his corduroy trousers. Amid all 
the changes and chances of Enoch's upper garments — 
working coat, Sunday coat, livery — his nether garments 
remained immutable, as if to symbolize his scornful atti- 
tude towards these ceremonial robes. 

'Tm up, and in!" cried g^ndmother, peering like at 
brown bird through the brown curtains, rustling from 
side to side across the straw-covered floor, leaning on her 
tall stick. She wore her winter cape, a creation of Mrs. 
Cantlop's, made of multitudinous flounces of brown wool. 
It was really a charity to give Mrs. Cantlop work of this 
kind, for without tatting or crochet she was as restless as 
a sugarless canary. Instead of the usual black satin sun- 
bonnet, Mrs. Velindre wore her state bonnet, a helmet of 
net and beads tied under her witch-like chin with a huge 
purple bow. 

Ernest, Solomon and Sarah came to ''send'' the party, 
while Marigold and Mrs. Gosling hovered in the shadows 
of the hall. 

"Well, Marigol'," said her mother, as Ruby dashed 
downstairs with ribbons, veil and scarf flying, 'Tm in 
behopes the poor thing'll live. She eats hearty and she 
looks hearty, but I partly think the stra:|^^m^ >3sv% ^ 



102 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

quickest There was Polly of the Mill, and there was 
Mary Anne of the World's End Public, as faded with the 
fadmg of the first year, and died at Tummas^tide. But 
they do say she laughed at a blind man at the lych-gate 
as stood to bless the bride, so it served un right, seeing 
the poor fellow was dark.'' 

''Dunna crake so. Mother. It's easy talking for you 
with troubles done and nought in mind but dresssing poor 
folk for Judgment But for them with their troubles to 



oome ** 



Mrs. Gosling meditated. Then she said : 
' "Enoch looks grand to-day I The livery sets him off, 
and that majenty tie." 

Marigold tilted her nose scornfully, muttering : ^'Enoch, 
indeed!" and a burning Uush ran from neck to fore- 
head. 

"'s Ruby!" commanded Sarah. "Wait till I fettle 
you, or th^U say at the Keep as Dormer folk goes to 
town with their things daggly all about But it's Mr. 
Ernest as ought to tie the laces, for luck." 

Ernest did so with no very good grace; for when be 
knelt, he liked a hassock. 

"I wish Sarah would know her place," muttered Mrs. 
Darke. 

"Know your place, Sarah!" piped grandmother, who 
was very much excited. 

Sarah folded her arms. 

"I thank 'Im above as I know my place as well as 
most, mum," she said, mentally selecting one of grand- 
mother's Spode vases for oblation to the "world." 

Solomon, who had watched them get in and who now 
scented a domestic disturbance, said : "Gee-hup, Enoch 1" 
*Vp, Solomon I Not 'hup,' " said Mrs. Darke. 
'Up! Up!" shrieked grandmother, like Debor/ah 
arousing the Israelites. They swung out of the gate, Vthe 



"1 



HOW THEY WENT TO THB| KEEP 103 

curtains flapping; Ruby chattering, losing her purse and 
finding it again; Catherine sitting, very cool and polite, 
opposite grandmother, who indulged, at every declivity, 
in ejaculatory prayer, and took the more mimdane pre- 
caution, at the worst hills, of prodding Enoch with her 
stick to remind him to be careful. Meanwhile Solomon 
took the gundogs into the dining-room, which was for- 
bidden, and sat down with a stiff whisky and soda to 
concoct a letter to Mr. Arkinstall which should, without 
bringing him under the law, convey to that gentleman 
exactly what he (Solomon) thought of his proposed fee 
for teaching Jasper to farm. 

Sarah, Mrs. Gosling and Marigold retired to the 
kitchen, where they revelled on cold pie, colder prognos- 
tications and green tea, which Mrs. Griffin procured 
especially for grandmother. Mrs. Velindre always drank 
this, not because she particularly liked it, but because it 
reminded her of her youth, which had receded so far 
into the past that she revered it almost as much as the 
bible. If ever Mrs. Griffin was ^'out of green tea, being 
a very complaisant person, ^e hated to say so. She, 
therefore, put down "green tea" in the bill. But, being 
very honest, she only charged the price of black. Where- 
upon grandmother cried jubilantly: "Green tea's gone 
down !" and enjoyed the black inordinately. 

Ernest went to his room to touch up a little book of 
sermons which "friends at the Keep'' had asked him to 
publish. No one could ever find out who these friends 
were. Catherine suggested that they must have been his 
landlady, who couldn't read, and her son, who was deaf 
and had not heard them. It was to be called "Gleanings 
from the Sermons of a Parish Priest." Sarah, dipping 
into it while doing Ernest's room, remarked to Marigold : 
"If this is only the leasing, God save us from the stooks." 

Meanwhile the equipage trundled along through the 



104 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

lomdy, deep, dim-burning countryside. First through the 
outer precincts of Dormer forest, where the tall beeches 
and the mountain ash trees, slender and haughty in their 
flaming scarlet, seemed to give as little heed to the pass- 
ing of the carriage, with its tumult of human tongues, as 
to the crawling of a brown beetle in the grass, but 
remained, wrapped in their age-long meditation. Here 
the road lay beside Dormer brook, which flowed — mute, 
brown, and covert — beneath trees so close and heavy that 
they plunged the road into green twilight Tall, early- 
tinted poplars pricked up, covered with beaten gold, like 
spires belonging to a worship secret and remote. Sparsely 
in the hedges grew the pale, infragrant flowers of early 
autumn — ^wild snapdragon, scabious, purple and blue, 
wan yarrow and the forlorn harebell. Amber gathered 
some of these for Ruby as they walked up the long hill at 
the foot of which Jenny always stopped, looking round 
with an appealing air and the expression of a reasonable 
person putting the case to another reasonable person. 

'Tabor on a bit, Jenny, my girl !" said Enoch, and the 
carriage meandered up the hill. 

Amber thought : "It's autumn with me, cold autumn; 
and it's never been summer." It was of the sadness of 
autumn that she thought — of the tearful harebell and not 
of the golden spire. For a moment she envied Ruby. 
She was, at least, plunging into life of some sort. Then 
suddenly the affair appeared to her startled mind exactly 
as it was — a compact between ignorant vanity and cal- 
culating lust 

"'Do you love Earnest ?" she asked in a tremor. 

Ruby was not offended. 

"Well enough," she said. 

•'Oh, turn back ! Turn back ! It's not too late." 

"Too late for what r 

"To save yourself." 



HOW THEY WENT TO THE KEEP 105 

**But I don't want to be saved. I want to be married." 

"Oh, you don't know — ^you don't think " 

"How do you know ?" 

Amber paused; she tried to find the explanation of 
what she knew, how she knew it 

"It's scHnething deep down," she said, "far down, like 
a pool in a mountain hollow. I look down; I see things 
pass there, faces looking up, hands beckoning. It's as if 
the things other people have felt come and lean over 
me. And I see them, far down and faint ^" 

Ruby laughed, startling the little birds that feasted in 
the hedges. 

"I suppose that's some of Jasper's stuff," she said. 
.The family always took it for granted that Amber's 
remarks must be derivative. 

"Oh, Ruby! Don't laugh. Think! Wake up ! Marry- 
ing a man you don't love is being hired at a hiring fair 
for wives." 

"What things you say ! But Ernest does love me." 

"How much?" 

"As much as his nature lets him, I expect" 

"Then tell him to go away and increase his capacity." 

Once more the little tnrda fled up before Ruby's 
laughter. 

"How could he go away when he's curate of Dormer ? 
What would mamma say ? Oh, Ambie, it's a good thing 
you're going to be an old maid I You would give your 
young man an awful time!" 

An old maid — ^an old maid! Ruby was unconscious 
of the sharp pain she had given; of the passionate rebd- 
Uon she had aroused. 

"Yes I She is right," thought Amber. "She is marry- 
tr^. Catherine will marry. Marigold, even Sarah, will 
marry. But never Amber — ^who would want Amber 
Darke?" 



106 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

She knew her limitations. Yet in some occult way she 
knew herself sad, not with the grief of emotional sterility, 
but with the sorrow of the honeyed flower that no bee 
visits. 

"Still," she said aloud, 'T)etter be lonely for ever than 
marry without love." 

"Eio stop croaking, Ambie, and be nice !" 

They walked on in silence^ eyed from the leafy layers 
above by wood-pigeons who lamented in tones impersonal 
yet impassioned, monotonous yet arresting. It seemed 
as if that for which they mourned were too old to be re- 
menfbered, and had vanished, leaving nothing but a moan. 

"What are you thinking of?" asked Amber, hoping 
that Ruby was repenting of her decision* 

Ruby looked dreamy. ^ 

"I was thinking," she said, "that Catherine will be 
talking mamma into muslin, and I zvUl have satin !" 

Amber sighed, looking away across the plain that was 
rimmed with sorrowful blue — ^the blue of swallows that 
flash and are gone; the blue of drowned forget-me-nots; 
the faded blue of old men's eyes; the blue, lucent and 
pure, of a child's veins; all mingled, running into one 
another beyond the cloud shadows, all gathered into one 
sad, perfect circle. 

"She wants gold for the maids' dresses I" cried grand- 
mother, gesticulating wonderfully. 

Catherine had evidently made good use of her time. 
She never walked uphill. Her theory was that Jenny was 
a beast of burden and should therefore have burdens. 
As for the dresses, gold would not suit Amber. It would 
show up all her bad points. But herself it would suit It 
would make her look like a richly- jewelled Madonna. 

"Get in !" said Mrs. Darke. "Let's get there and get 
done." 

They climbed in and sat in an atmosphere of displea- 



HOW THEY WENT TO THE KEEP 107 

sure, knowing, without Mrs. Darke saying it, that Mrs. 
Grifiin ought to have come to Dormer, instead of Dormer 
taking an unnecessary outing and going to Mrs. Grifiin. 
Four times a year, in the spring, at midsummer, at the 
turn of the year, at Christmas, Mrs. GriflRn's head young 
man visited Dormer in his gig, bringing an evangel of 
fashion-designs, r(rils of material, all kinds of feminine 
gear. Mrs. Gosling still called him "the outrider." 

As they neared the Keep, they met gigs and various 
cows and sheq>, the latter wearing the expression of 
nervous tension which attendance at an auction gives to 
animals. They adopted the sensible plan, at the Keep, 
of doing all their buying and selling on one day. The 
farmer brought his cattle and the wife her butter and 
both invested in such things as farm and family needed — 
a sack of flour, a pig, a roll of scarlet flannel. The latter 
would be purchased from Mrs. Griffin after a sitting of 
half-an-hour or more. As Sarah said: "Mrs. Griffin 
never stinges words. Whether you lay out ten pound or . 
ten farthings it's all one, she'll talk till your yead sings." 
When they passed Mrs. Griffin's on their way to the inn, 
there she was in the midst of a crowd of ladies buying for 
dear life, while their husbands had a final glass. 

Dinner was awaiting them, for Mrs. Darke was no 
niggard where her own dignity wias concerned, and liked 
to order things in style. They sat down in a panelled 
parlour with so many comers that hardly a panel was of 
the same size. This had been a great coaching inn, and 
in Mrs. Velindre's youth, several times a week, it blos- 
somed with high-born ladies in delicate dresses. 

'*I mind," said grandmother, "how my Aunt Deborah 
brought me here to buy a white gown to be bishopped in. 
I was but eleven. The Bishop didn't come often, and you 
had to get rid of Sattan when you could. I hid an apple- 
cob in my pocket f Sattan being in me at the time), and 



it 



I 



108 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

the grease showed. Aunt Deborah said : 'Bishopped jon 
may be. That's the will of the Lord. Birched you 
shall be. That's mine.' A very brisk woman was^my 
Aunt Deborah." 

When dinner was over, they went down the short, 
steep village street to Mrs. Griffin's. When Ruby had 
emerged from her congratulations (like a strong swim- 
mer from a high sea) business was begun. Then those 
who came for buttons and those who came for pins were 
little accounted of; everyone gathered round the Dormer 
family. 

^'I want/' said grandmother, ''a purple gown and cap 
with a purple bow/' 

From the window three caps were fetched, Mrs. 
Griffin's windows were very fascinating. They were 
many paned, high up from the ground, and bent very 
slightly into a gentle bow. Within, everything, from 
boots to velvet, from sugar to sheets, was arranged in 
neat boxes piled in pigeon-holes. Nothing disdained the 
neighbourhood of anything else on die counter, and there 
was a delicious scent of new calico, soap, tea, apples and 
leather. It was, in fact, the thing dearest to Mrs. Griffin's 
heart, a blend. From tea to shot silk, from ooffee to 
wine, she loved a blend. 

Grandmother sat on a high rush chair, like a thin fittle 
bird, balancing one of the caps on her head. } 

Mrs. Griffin looked at the others. 

"A thought — ^just a thought — ^too large?" Ae sug- 
gested. 

'It would suit Mrs. Cantlop," said Catherine. 

*Ah ! Mrs. Cantlop's a fine figure," said the nulliner. 

Mrs. Griffin frowned at her. Grandmother was here, 
and Mrs. Cantlop was not. 

"Bulk!" she murmured reassuringly. ^'What is bulk 
to brain?" 



HOW THEY WENT TO THE KEEP 109 

'The cap is too large," said Mrs. Darke. "Take it 
iway !" 

Finally the right cap was foupd, the yellow silk and 
the white satin chosen, and all the other fineries bought. 
They left the shop with a conquering air, conscious that 
there was comparatively little that they had not bought. 
The assistants, worn and exhausted, bowed them out. 
Mrs, Griffin, fresh as ever, talkative as ever, bowed them 
out, looking at Ruby— cause of all this honourable out- 
lay—with the tranced admiration with which Mr. Cant- 
lop would have looked at a gold mine, could he have 
found one. Enoch, without emotion, loaded up. Jenny, 
without emotion, watched him. Only, as she started, she 
shook her head sadly, patiently, as the Rector might have 
shaken his over some choirboy's peccadillo. So much 
usdess lumber to be dragged to Dormer ! And Amber, 
tired and quiet in her comer, thinking of Ruby's reason 
for marrying, and of the bridegroom, central figure to 
all this pomp, and of her own dreadful appearance in the 
ydlow dress, was inclined to agree with Jenny. 

The trees, dark, leafy still, but with the rasping music 
of autumn in their withering boughs, leaned and mut- 
tered above them as they passed. As the night wind 
rose, they seemed to shout a message, a message with no 
words, a thought expressed in music and moanings. But 
the voices were so loud within the carriage, raised in al- 
tercation about the purchases, that Amber could not listen 
to it. She only thought : "The forest is a great artist, 
ft is never paltry, never mean." Then she drew her coat 
■Jore closely round her, for cddly with the cold wander- 
ing wind came^ the thought : 

'The forest will sing like this when I am dead. I 
*aU die, but I shall not have lived." 



CHAPTER X: THE WEDDING 

THE great day dawned, as such days often do, in a 
tumult reminiscent of spring cleaning, preparaticms 
for a family holiday, and sudden death. At seven, by 
,way of adding her mite to the confusion, grandmother 
rang for Sarah. 

^'What is it now, mum?*' asked that soreiy tired prop 
of the household. 

Grandmother nodded sideways at her new cap, which 
sat on a knob at tlie foot of the bed in much the same way 
as it was to sit on her head, so that knob and cap together 
looked like grandmother's elf. 

"I don't like it," said Mrs. Vdindrc. "My greatniece 
chose it, and I don't like it. I don't like her either." 

"She's as 'Im above made 'er, mum, but I doubt He 
didna give full mind to tiie job. Seconds she is^ like the 
teaset she gave *s Ruby." 

"Is the mistress up ?" 

"Not yet, thank God 1" 

"She don't like a merrjrmaking, Sarah I She pretends 
she does, but she don't, Sarah !" 

Her daughter was the one person of whom she* did 
not speak possessively. It was always "Rachel," or "the 
mistress." With others it was, "my greatniece once re- 
moved," "my husband's nephew." These people, she 
tacitly implied, had no place in the world except in re- 
lation to herself. Possibly the sinking of the possessive 
in her daughter's case was an unconscious act of homage 
to an egoism even stronger than her own. These two bad 

110 



THE WEDDING 111 

been meant for individualists. This not being allowed, 
they had become egoists, which always happens on the 
principle that if you deny a child sugar it will steal from 
the sugar basin. The human mind, unless it is to remain 
nescient, must have itself, must develop and explore 
itself. The more vital, the more awake it is, the more it 
must turn inwards. For within, deep in the tenebrous 
recesses of sub-consciousness, man hopes to find God. Not 
in churches, not in his fellows, not in nature will he find 
God until he has seen all these things mirrored in that 
opaque and fathomless pool lying within his own being, 
and of which, as yet, we know nothing. 

''Tell my eldest granddaughter to come and furbish 
it up," said Mrs. Velindre. 

" 's Amber's along of 's Ruby in the* attia 's Ruby's 
roaring crying." 

"What? What? What? On the wedding day?" 

"It met be she likes the taste of salt, but I know my 
place too well to inquire, mum." 

"Sarah! Has Mrs. Cantlop got a new one?** 

Sarah clicked her tongue. 

" 'Ow should I know, mum ? I'll send *s Amber to 
3roa." 

She departed, arriving in the hall just as Enoch stag- 
gered up to the door with a huge wedding post 

"Well, you've lugged us a power of things!" said 
Sarah, arms akimbo. 

'I do sweat," remarked Enoch. 
'Ho! You've not begun yet. Come you in and lend 
a hand!" 

Enoch's eyes took on their most cryptic, most bee-like 
expression, and he was just beginning to say : "It wunna 
be able to be done," when Marigold appeared. She 
rushed from the kitchen, all dishevelled pink and gold, 
ydlow hair waving, rosy print dress flying. 



"] 

4i^ 



118 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''Oh, Enoch, Enoch t You mun put the leaves in table 
for us, they'm going to have the wold big cloth with the 
farmyard border, and sit down seventeen all told; and 
there's the trestles in the bam and the yums to lug from 
the Rectory " 

Beneath that bewildering smile Enoch became as wax, 
and spent an hour labouring devotionally. 

''Enoch can work as well as one here and there when 
he likes/' Sarah remarked, pleased with the activity | 
though not with the cause. She turned to Marigold. 

"Now, Marigol' Gosling, what ails you, smiling at 
Master Peter's picture? You met dean the mantd 
brasses. Anybody 'ud think you'd been to Gauby Market 
and lost yourself." 

"I've done 'em. They wunna come better !" 

"I'll show 'em to come better!" cried Sarah. "From 
rust to dust, from vardigris to kettle-collow, every dirt's 
'ware of its own master. Go and get the kitchen break- 
fast I'm clemmed." 

So the battle raged, above and below, the kitchen fire 
roaring; Sarah shouting; the cuckoo striking every hour 
too soon; Rectory-Lucy and the other helpers rushing 
about like frightened hens; Sarah turning out the cats; 
Enoch bringing them in again; the gundogs howling; 
Peter lying in wait to startle Marigold, making her drop 
the Crown Derby sugar-basin; Sarah saying "it was to 
be," and storing fragments for the "world" ; Mrs. Darke 
seven times frozen; Mrs. Cantlop seven times thawed; 
Marigolci in tears for fear she would have to leave ; Ruby 
in tears for fear she wouldn't; Ernest, Solomon, Peter and 
Jasper all fetching hot water for shaving at different 
times, each taking, as Mrs. Gosling said, "the one poor 
drop I kep' to scalt the gizzards"; grandmother ringiiig» 
unanswered, till the bell broke, when she took refuge ii 
the ipiprecatory psalms ; Amber trying to keep her ten- 



THE WEDDING 118 

per, which was always apt to be hasty, and greatly desir- 
ing someone to laugh with; and Enodi, hugpe, silent, calm, 
like some carved figure of a god contemplating the hot 
fury of a market placd 

When Amber went to Mrs. Velindre's room, the trouble 
of the cap was not abated. Box after box had to be pulled 
out from under the vast bed in the search for cap decora- 
tions. Grandmother kept innumerable boxes stored in 
this way, imagining that the dark green valance would 
discourage burglars. Sarah knew of the treasures, but 
as she always freely and openly alluded to them as bon- 
fire fuel, grandmother did not fear for her honesty. What 
with the boxes, the Christmas-card screens, the feather 
fans, old gowns, and stacks of The Lion tied up with 
wool, the room was quite stuffed with possessions, which 
seemed to elbow grandmother's thin body almost out of 
existence. 

When the cap was done, it was time to dress, and then, 
before she had half finished, there were the carriages — 
lent for the occasion by various neighbours — and there 
was Ruby with her veil half on and a very red face re- 
fusing to go downstairs unless she could have a definite 
promise from Ernest as to her dress allowance. Ruby 
was no weakling, and she seized the strategic hour. So 
Ernest had to be fetched from the drawing-room, where, 
before the greenish mirror, he was practising the saying 
of — ^**I will" — ^soft, loud, modulated, mellifluous, gentle, 
virile, stentorian. He tried it all wa3rs, and had 2|lmost 
decided upon stentorian, when in came Peter, very sulky, 
saying: "The little fool says you're to promise a dress 
allowance or she'll chuck it" Poor Ernest felt that per- 
haps "modulated" would be best. He went up. 

"Dear Ruby," he said, "such thoughts must not trouble 
us in this solemn hour. Nay, they shall not." 



114 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"Fix it!" cried Ruby dramatically. "Fix it, or no 
wedding !" 

"She seems unstrung; she is unstrung," said Ernest 

"Obstinate !" said her mother. "Obstinate as a mule" 

"A mule — ^a mule !" sang grandmother. 

"The price of a good woman is above rubies," said 
Ernest helplessly. 

"Fix it!" cried his bride. 

So fixed it was. But Ernest was so much disheartened 
that he could scarcely remember whether, after all, it was 
to be stentorian or mellifluous. Everything, however, 
went well in church. Mr. Mallow sang "Oh, that I had 
the wings of a dove, for then would I flee away." This 
was always a serious strain on Sarah's allegiance to 
Enoch. On the way back to the house Catherine re- 
marked — "He sings that same thing at every festival, 
and every time he sings it louder." 

"And better," said Amber, for though Mr. Mallow 
amused her, she did not like Catherine's bitter humour. 

"And every time he sings it he is fatter, and his dream 
more impossible," finished Catherine. 

She was looking even more attractive than she had 
hoped. The dress was one of those that for some un- 
known reason endow the wearer with new niysterious 
beauty. Jasper thought she was like a gold-encrusted, 
richly jewelled saint in a niche in some dim cathedral 
She had seemed (as she intended) much more like a 
bride than the bride, much more full of charm and tender- 
ness and delicate femininity. Her figure had a slender 
grace that made Amber's mean and gave the bride a kind 
of brawny truculence. The lurid colours of the East 
window, which represented Death and Hdl with gloomy 
realism, were powerless to sadden her cowslip-tinted 
gown, but they fell on the bride's white dress in wan, 
forlorn, and gloomy purples, and as the mid-day sun 



THE WEDDING 116 

shafted in through the Southern facet of the East window, 
it laid a derisive bar of corpse-Hke blue across her hot, 
red face and on her hand, stretched out to receive the ring. 
Jasper thought : "How lovely my dear is ! How sweet ! 
The devotion of a life, of a whole life, is not enough." 

Catherine thought: "What a cow-like creature Ruby 
is! She'll give herself such airs, being a bride. She 
shall not." The white teeth snapped. 

Peter thought, "Marigold would look nice in a veil — 
all that yellow hair — I'll try and get hold of Ruby's veil 
and put it on Marigold for fun." 

Ruby thought, "Ernest's hand is too hot, and I wish 
he wasn't so stout." 

Ernest thought "She must learn not to pant I must 
tdl her about it this evening. Still, she has a well de- 
veloped figure. That is good. She has a better figure 
than Arober or Catherine." He was able to say with 
truth and placidity, "With my body I thee worship." 
Fortunately the wedding service says nothing about the 
love of the soul. 

The tremendous wedding breakfast, with its mountains 
of flesh, its rows of little corpses of various sizes — ^tur- 
key, goose, duck, chicken, pheasant — ^all tastefully laid 
out by Mrs. Gosling; its rather solid cake and its rather 
hollow gaiety ; its health-drinking, widi Solcnnon's heavy 
mirth, the Rector's cultured con^liments, Ernest's ful- 
minating eloquence and Jasper's shy and flowery little 
q)eech to which nobody listened, was not over till well 
on in the afternoon. 

The party separated for a short time before tea, and 
Peter took his opportunity to fling the veil over Man- 
gold. Ernest also took his c^portunity to give Ruby his 
caution as to panting. Jasper decided that the moment 
had come for tiie presentation to Catherine of the wrcatb 



1 



"] 

«1 



116 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

of yellow jessamine that he had persuaded Marigold to 
make for him. He sought for Marigold. 

"Here, Master Jasper," came a mu£9ed voice from tiw 
dairy, and' a very pink Marigold emerged, leaving Peter 
behind the door with the veil. 

"The wreath !" whispered Jasper. 

Marigold fetched it. 

^Don't tell of me, Master Jasper,** she implored 
Tell what?" said Jasper, in a lover's dream. 
^He's daft about Miss Catherine," said Marigold, ta 
the cautiously emerging Peter. 

"And Fm daft about you !" said Peter with a smacking 
kiss so loud that Sarah, getting tea in the kitchen, cried: 

"Enoch! Enoch!" 

But hearing that Enoch was not present, she subsided. 
The whole world might give smacking kisses to all and 
stmdry if Sarah's "intended" was not among them. 

The day wore on. Tea was over. The villagers' knife 
and fork tea in the bam was over, and the dining-room 
cleared for the dance. Ruby, trying not to pant, sat ex- 
pectant by her mother awaiting the guests. 

First came Mr. Arkinstall, followed by his family in 
Indian file. 

Mr. Arkinstall taught Peter and Jasper to farm, Solo- 
mon to keep accounts, and the Rector to manage the 
parish. He was Solomon's fellow-warden. He had a 
broad pale face, drooping moustaches, which Catherine 
said give him a Chinese look, and a sniggering laugh. 
He also had a gift for devious conversation which con- 
cealed undeviating views. He had proved undeviating 
about his daughter's engagement. Alice had been en- 
gaged to the new organist for fourteen years. He was 
still the new organist; no one was considered even a 
moderately old resident at Dormer unless he had lived 
there sixty years. When Charles was really new, being 



THE WEDDING 117 

a florid young man of twenty, he! had ''asked for'' quiet 
Alice Arkinstall. Mr. Arkinstall had immediately for- 
bidden it, with devious reasoning. Qiarles, on weekdays, 
was clerk to the solitary lawyer at the Keep. But as no 
one ever went to law there (not because they did not 
quarrel, but because they were economical) there was 
not very much for the lawyer, and there was very little 
indeed for the clerk. Mr. Arkinstall said that financially 
the marriage was impossible; thait Charles must have 
saved at least a Hundred pounds before he would even 
consider it, and that, in short, he'd die before he'd hear of 
it Charles' father — a very much more scarlet exaggera- 
tion of Charles — ^really did die; for when he interviewed 
Mr. Arkinstall, he was so exasperated by the Chinese 
expression, the snigger and the devious talk that his old 
enemy, apoplexy, overwhelmed him. All this discour- 
aged the young couple. They only had spirit enough just 
to keep on being engaged. Alice collected vast quanr 
tities of d'oyleys and antimacassars, and became a victim 
to Mrs. Cantlop's tatting. Charles looked for a house. 
That is to say, he looked at the only house that fell vacant 
during the fourteen years, but it was beyond his means. 
Every Sunday Alice listened a little more quietly, but 
always with the same admiration, to his rendering of 
the voluntary. This became, every Sunday, a little more 
explosive. Alice knew exactly the places where he went 
wrong and where he missed ^ few bars, for his playing 
had now lost the variable elasticity of youth. As the 
Rector said with his accustomed tact, it had matured. 
Like Charles it had gone to seed before it reached per- 
fection. The denial of love and fulfilment and the heart's 
desire will cause even a genius to run to seed. Charles 
in maturity was more pathetic than Charles in youth, 
and he was most pathetic of all when he played dance 
music, which he was to do to-night. He was to be at 




118 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

the piano, Mr, Greenways had taken an evening off in 
order to play the flute, and Mr. Mallow was to manage 
the clarionet Amber, as she lodced at Alice, whose plain, 
unlit face wore the vaguely jaded air of a woman who 
nears forty and has never lived, thought that Mr, Arkin- 
stall had much to answer for. Then she reflected that 
Alice was happier than she was herself, for someone 
cared whether Alice lived or died. Certainly, it was a 
muted love. They met once a week, at diurch, and 
walked circumspectly back to the Wallows, There, as 
no one invited Charles to tea, they parted. Charles did 
his duty in both walks of life. He sat in the office all the 
week, and was greatly admired by the vague, infrequent 
old ladies who wandered in to make their wills. As one 
of them said, ^To see the young man's heartening. He^s 
like a geranium in the window, makes you nigh forget 
the wrench of 'I give and bequeath/ " 

Mrs. Arkinstall was a small, pebbly woman of inex- 
haustible (and quite necessary) obstinacy. She wore 
a royal blue dress immensely trimmed with braid, and 
a high comb in her black, polished hair. Young Philip 
Arkinstall followed. Philip was innocent of Chinese 
moustaches and devious conversation. He was direct co 
bluntness. But he had his father's changelessness of 
purpose. He went through life like a hound cm the 
scent. What he wanted, that he would have. He would 
follow it until he or the desired object expired of ex- 
haustion. His philosophy was simple. Men's respect 
was an aid to power; respect was won by money; money 
was gained by chicanery and bullying. Woman was 
created because a monastic life was not good for man. 
One special woman had been created for him, and that 
woman was Catherine Velindre. He had polished hair 
like his mother's, a square head, a fighting mouth, and 
hot grey eyes. He was the only person at Dormer from 



THE WEDDING 119 

whom Catherine had ever been known to hide. He sat 
down and stared at the door where she would come in. 
Jasper also stared at the door. He had presented the 
wreath and had seen it starrily crowning the smooth, 
auburn hair. His face had been quite pale with adora- 
tion, and he had snatched her hand and kissed it. 

"Alice!" whispered Amber. "If I were you I should 
run away with Charles." 

Alice's face became faintly rosy. 

"Where?" 

"Anywhere!" 

"But how could we live? Where could we live?" 

'IJndcr a haystack — ^anjrwhere." 

"But the crochet, and the d'oyleys?" 

"Bum them." 

AKce sighed. What would be the good of life with- 
out d'oyleys ? 

Amber thought, "She doesn't love him. If she loved 
him she wouldn't care what sort of house she had." If 
she herself loved — ^ah! but that would never be. She 
was lonelier than ever to-night. Even Ruby's infantile 
friendship was gone, monopolized by Ernest. The man 
of her dreams, how different from anyone here! The 
k>vc of her life, how far removed from the lukewarm, 
the mercenary, the lustful ! "That love is made in fairy- 
land," she thought, "and in fairyland it st ys." 

Then she forgot her own untold story in seeing the 
stories of others unfold. The two men watching the 
door stiffened, their eyes gathered intensity. Catherine 
swept in. She had a boyish figure, except for her breast, 
which was full and feminine. The starry crown suited 
her. On her bare neck was Philip Arkinstall's last 
Christmas present, a locket and chain; on her arm was 
Jasper's, a forget-me-not bracelet. Her long eyes, her 



{ 






ItO THE HOUSE IN DOBMER FOREST 

long fingers, her long, daboratelj bound hair were in- 
stinct with provocation, self-esteem, hanteor. 

1i shan't give that gd much more tether," said Philip 
to himsdL 

'^Vhat can I do for her to show how mnch I love her?" 
thought Jasper. 

Sarah, peering in from the door of the bade hall, 
whispered to Marigcdd that ''if 's Catherine took on like 
that, she'd know trouUe." Marigold nodded with the 
immense wisdom of partial experience: 

Jasper and Philip got op at the same vaomeoL 
'Sit here/' said PhiHp. 
'Here!" whispered Jasper. 

His eyes were a prayer. Bttt when he turned them 
on young Arkinstally they were positivdy f erodous. 

Catherine took Jasper's chair. The two young men 
stood beside her. 

'l-aw !" said Sarah. "She's the girl for lovers. Young 
Arkinstall, Master Ja^)er, and Master Peter. Fancy 
three lovers !" 

"Two," said Marigold 

"Many and many 'ud be glad of one and that one as 
miserable and poor-spirited as you like, but 's Catherine's 
got three as wdl set up as ever I see." 

"Two," said Marigold. 

"You strike two as rc{;ular as a dock,** said SaraU. 

The musidans began. 

"Mr. Mallow plays like a saved soul in Paradise,*' said 
Sarah. 

Mr. Mallow was much redder, much more inflated in 
the cheeks than even the most rotund of cherubs. He 
did not spare himsdf. He played loudly and with regu- 
larity. Mr. Dank was explosive. Mr. Greenways was 
plaintive. The dancing began. 

"Here's bride and bridegroom," said Sarah. "She 



THE WEDDING 121 

looks down already. But what a couple I Well-matched 

they are. The good beef that's gone into them two 

bodies!" She was lost in admiration. "Eh! There's 

. the bell. That'll be the Rectory and a drove of visitors." 

Grandmother sat with her chin resting on the silver 
knob of her stick, looking at the dancers with a mingling 
of curiosity, displeasure and goblin mirth. She watched 
Mrs. Cantlop gloomily. 

"I knew she'd have a new one 1" she thought, watching 
the flamboyant rose-red bows with a wistfulness that 
turned to glee as the mass of silk and lace alit like a 
large migratory bird on the Rector's shoulder, and floated 
to the floor. Mrs. Cantlop was, in grandmother's phrase, 
roistering. Her white hair seemed in half a mind to 
follow the cap; her plump face was red and damp from 
hearty exercise; her purple dress had been more than 
once caught by one of Solomon's firmly-planted feet, and 
a long loop of the lavish tatting on her petticoat trailed 
in her wake and threatened the venturesome Rector with 
headlong downfall. The good man knew it was reckless 
to dance with Mrs. Cantlop. The experience of years 
told him so. Observation of others told him so. It was 
like the race in the fairy tale ; defeat was sure, the penalty 
immediate. Yet he did it, like the kind soul he was. 
And while he gyrated under the continually falling 
shadow of the cap he often wondered why it was tiiat 
Mrs. Cantlop kept her eternal juvenility. He came to 
the conclusion that it must be because she loved so much 
the personality she had created — ^the Keturah-cum-Ket- 
urahVfather ghost on which she spent her devotion. And 
sometimes the Rector's conventional ideas, firmly planted 
by school and university — ^the idea that a man's first duty 
is to maintain his wife in physical (not psychical) com- 
fort, that a woman is admirable in proportion to the 
number of her progeny — sometimes these ideas flickered 



lift THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

in the wind of doubt. Then he was almost tempted to 
think Mr. Cantlop would have done better for his wife 
by giving her what she wanted, his own company; that 
Mrs. Cantlop was perhaps doing more for humanity by 
simply loving Keturah-cum-Keturah's-father than Mrs. 
Darke had done by lovelessly producing four children. 

Sarah, looking through the crack oi the door, eating 
raisins, whispered to Enoch (tip-toeing through the hall) 
that the Rector was dancing to his doom. But Enoch 
did not hear this, nor did he hear her subsequent observa- 
tions. 

"Mr. Ernest's the lad at the sugar-plum shop to-night! 
The missus makes a funeral of every randy, 's Catherine 
goes well !" 

Catherine might have been a toy train by the way 
Sarah spoke. "It was a pity I was obleeged to break 
that fan Mr. Philip give her for her birthday," she con- 
tinued to Mrs. Gosling. 

"Miss Amber ought to get a jroung chap to lug her 
round," said Mrs. Gosling, already mellow with good 
marriage wine. No miracle ever struck her as so truly 
divine as that of Cana. 

Look at Mrs. Cantlop's cap !" murmured Sarah. 
The old lady's grinding-mad with Mrs. Cantlop for 
getting it." 

Where's Master Peter?" said Mrs. Gosling. 
The quieter that lad is," replied Sarah, "the further 
he's in mischief, like the cat in the cream jug." Enoch 
was also silently asking that question. He was wonder- 
ing why Marigold, so sweet in her new spotted muslin 
apron and the cap with the little streamers, had vanished 
and left him in the cold. Being a practical person, he 
was at present engaged on a tour of investigation. 

"Oh!" said Sarah', suddenly, "look 's the Rector! I 
knew he'd meet trouble." 



if 



THE WEDDING 18S 

"It was to be/' said Mrs. Gosling devoutly, looking 
compassionately at the prone figure of the gallant Rector. 

The musicians, dumbfounded at the cataclysm, 
wavered into silence. Grandmother laughed, and her 
laugh was like the sound of the winter wind in the old 
ivy of Dormer, like the sigh of freezing water lapping 
in the rustling reeds. Ernest came forward with prof- 
fered help, showing by his expression that he could have 
better upheld rectorial dignity. Solomon hoisted the 
unfortunate gentleman to his feet, ran a practised hand 
from knees to ankles and remarked : ^'Sound I" 

Mrs. Cantlop, breathlessly penitent, fanned everyone 
near her with a highly-scented handkerchief, and Sarab 
advanced with the hall clothes' brush and the instinctive 
tnotherliness which awakes in all but the most hardened 
men and women at the sight of prostrate misfoAune. 

Grandmother pondered complacently on the retributive 
punishment of vanity. She watched the dance begin . 
again. There they were, slowly whirling, softly lighted, 
gliding in a perpetual-seeming June, floating dreamily 
as the dandelion clocks under tiie dreamy suns of her 
youth. Blown by soft winds now ! Lit by bright lamps 
now ! But she knew, ah ! she knew well, that winds grow 
wild at summer's end; that the night turns cold and 
grey; that the frost settles. And the dandelion clocks, 
where are they? Rotting — trotting I The hand of old. 
age was heavy on her, and she did not hear the plaintive 
flute, the loud piano, the shrewdly blown clarionet. She 
heard only, out of the dark forest, out of her dim heart, a 
voice full of trouble, crying : "It is ended !" 

Perhaps it was something of this trouble reflected in 
her face that brought Amber across the room to sit by 
her. They watched the dance go by. Ruby passed, pink 
as a tulip. Catherine came by, creamy as a guelder rose. 
She was in the arms of young Arkinstall. J^^V^^^ ^"^^^^ 



124 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

brilliant as sunny brook water, followed her as she floated 
by. His face, ardent and wistful when it dwelt on her, 
grew tense with jealousy when it turned to Philip. Bat 
his was the next dance! It seemed to Amber that tbtj 
were all like creatures under a spell, like the mist in 
midges that dances, whirling, in a tiny vortex, beneadi 
the humid, dusky branches of the yew. They dance, bat 
they remain in one place. They whirl for a few moments 
as if enclosed in an invisible cone. Then, in the midst 
of their dance, they die as they have lived, beneath the 
humid, dusky branches of the yew. So at Dormer thqr 
danced, as it were, in prison. They were like the com- 
panies of knights and ladies who wandered of old into 
the airless halls of enchantment, and drinking night- 
shade wine, and hearing a music full of popi^es, drowsed 
into an everlasting motion more deathly than deadi. 
iThere was just this -quality of airlessness about the Dor- 
mer revels. Around them, below, above, like the invis- 
ible air about the mic^es, pressed the faces of their an- 
cestors—earth-pale, unassuaged, as must be the ghosts 
of the unhappy; merciless as must be the unperceptive 
mind They had lived by the laws of others. They had 
danced in the slumbrous prison of tradition. They would 
enforce these things. In the dusky comers of the ceilii^ 
ashen faces seemed to linger; beyond the dividmg door- 
way, from the twilight gloom of the drawing-room, 
mournful eyes seemed to peer; through every note of the 
music there seemed to murmur voices of genial. Like 
bees on an interloper they pressed in on the^nall picture 
of life, crowding silently, ceaselessly, till the very aif 
seemed ready to crack. Ruled by the dead, held by the 
dead in eternal copyhold, filled by the dead until there 
,was no room for the living, the house seemed to have 
gone mad with its own antiquity, and antiquity is 
predatory. 



THE WEDDING 125 

Suddenly grandmother spoke, mtittering to fierself , and 
Amber's curious vision faded 

"All young," said grandmother, "all f toward, and all 
damned !" 

Meanwhile, in the kitchen, Mrs. Gosling brooded over 
cooking ducks, and Enoch brooded over Marigold 
Where was she? 

''Enoch, you look a dreamt" said Sarah, coming in. 

'Enoch wore a discarded coat of Solomon's, something 
between covert and frock, and a coloured waistcoat and 
a pair of check trousers (once belonging to Mr. Gosling, 
who had been a publican) . To crown all, Marigold had 
tied round his neck (oh, the rapture of that tying!) one 
of her own blue ribbons. 

"Mumchandng again!" cried Sarah, irate that Her 
homage was ignored. "When the angel Gabriel calls out 
the name of Enoch, I believe you'll mumchance and lose 
your turn for Paradise 1" But Enoch was gone. 

He wandered along the stone passage until fie came 
to the dairy, and at the dairy door, in the shadows, he 
stopped, stricken and forlorn. 

For there, in the damp, sweet-smdling place, at i£e far 
end, lighted by a flickering candle, he saw two graceful 
shadows dancing along the whitewashed wall, and one 
shadow had a cap with little streamers. They did not 
care for the music of flute or violin, for they heard the 
voice of youth singing as he swayed in the apple-treo— 
the tree laden with rosy fruit, where Ehre gathered — 
and his song came thrilling to them across the pans of 
faintly crinkled cream, and made the rough dairy floor 
as smooth as glass. 

"Eh, Master Peter ! Master Peter!" whispered Enodi 
His hands shook; his legs trembled as he turned and 
stole away. Tears were on his face as he came back to 



it} 

B 



126 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

the kitchen and sat down heavily. He must think — and 
thinking was strange to him. le^ 

^What, rainin'?" asked Sarah, seeing his wet fact 

'Ah! Rainin' sore/* said Enoch. 

But Sarah, going to the door, said : ] 

'Why, it's fine as May! A lover's nig^t if ever! ^ 
You're mooning, Enoch." ». / 

A lover's night — a lover's night ! Ah ! but it was Ik 
for other lovers, not for him, not for him. 

In the dining-room, Mrs. Darke still looked on like a 
queen watching the revds of an alien race. Granchnodier 
still frowned at Mrs. Guitlop, and Mrs. Cantlop stiD 
danced. Catherine still gave her eyes to Philip Arkifl- 
stall, her thoughts to Peter's whereabouts and her errands 
to Jasper. 

"Cathy ! Cathy !" said Jasper, at the end of a danoe. 
"Mine's the next." 

"Did you find out where Peter was?* 

"Yes." 

"Where?" 

"I can't give him away, Cathy." 

"Very well, I shall use your dance to find out." 

She went away. Returning with a gleam in her eyes, 
she whispered to grandmother : 

"Cheesecakes in the dairy !" 

Now if there was a thing grandmother liked, it w» 
cheesecakes. 

Slipping off into the next dance^ Catherine watched 
her departure with satisfaction. 

Amber went across to Jasper. 

"I suppose you wouldn't dance with me, dear?" 

"You aren't much good at it, are you ?" said Javier, 
sullen with misery. 

Amber sighed, feeling that tragic sense of her omi 



THE WEDDING 187 

incompetence which is peculiarly letter when the desire to 
lielp is strong. 

They sank into depression. * 

In the dairy the dance went on with giggling and 
laughter. But upon the laughter and the dance and the 
fluting of ys. uth broke suddenly, like the sound of doom, 
Mrs. Velindre's voice. 

"Great-grandson!" said Mrs. Velindre; and the two 
culprits were stricken into stillness. 

"Great-grandson/ how dare you dance with a servant ! 
Woman — go !" 

Marigold went, and as she went grandmother's voice 
followed her. 

*The abomination and the mouse 1'* said Mrs. Velin- 
dre, and she hobbled away, leaving Peter still speech- 
less with astonishment For why, in the name of all 
things malevolent, should grandmother have come to the 
dairy — a place to which she hardly came twice a year? 

"Now there'll be the devil of a row !" he thought with 
irritation. "And all about nothing !" 

As a matter of fact, neither he nor Marigold had had 
the slightest thought of harm. Grandmother's stick came 
tapping across amid the dancers. Catherine's long eyes 
turned towards her over Philip Arkinstall's shoulder, 
watched her go up to Mrs. Darke, watched the two go 
away togtlher. She would teach Peter to ignore her, 
Catherine Velindre, for a servant! She would teach 
Marigold to aspire where she, Cathmne, might haive set 
her eyes I She laughed softly. 

"Stupid, people are !" she said. 

"Damn stupid!" said Philip. 

He thought, "She's scheming again. Wdl, let her 
scheme! Meanwhile, I bide my time." 

In his thoughts he knew what he would do. He knew 



128 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Catherine better than she ever dreamt He knew her 
schemes, her determination never to marry him. He 
knew her brain was worth ten of his, and that ^e was 
powerful because she had no weak spot of love for any- 
one. He knew that she used him only as a rod to bring 
Jasper to his senses. Very well. He would take the 
only course by which he could outwit her. He would 
bide his time, and he would compromise her. 

"They never see where they are being led," said Cath^ 
rine, who was still simple enough to take a transparent 
delight in her own schemes. 

"No," said Philip. 

"Blind as bats!" 

"All but you, Cathy. You see everything." He per- 
mitted himself to laugh, and the laugh partook of his 
father's. 



3 



ft 

Ii4 



CHAPTER XI : MARIGOLD'S WARNING 

CATHERINE knocked at Mrs. Darke's door. There 
was an appreciable silence, then a curt, "Come in/' 

Mrs. Darke's room was large, tidy and cold. It was 
tidy with the inhuman neatness of an hotel bed-room and 
a conventional mind, a neatness that came from, empti- 
ness. A woman's life history is generally written in her 
room. But in Mrs. Darke's room nothing was written. 
All the world might have come and peered in without 
learning a single thing about her. There was nothing to 
show that she had a husband or children — ^no mementos, 
no gifts from Solomon — as a matter of fact, Solomon's, 
gifts were infrequent. This was not from meanness, but 
because on his rare visits to the Keep there were always 
cartridges and dog biscuits and such things to buy. 
There was no picture of him either as a young man or a 
middle-aged one. Perhaps this did not matter very 
much, for Solomon's soul at the age of twenty had beoi 
exactly the same as Solomon's soul aged sixty, therefore 
no particular interest could attach to his face. His 
motiier, in a fit of family pride, had once suggested his 
having his portrait done like the Squire of the next par- 
ish, in hunting pink. Mrs. Darke, caught between the 
precipice of a direct statement on one hand and the whirl- 
pool of needless expense on the other, chose the precipice, 
and said : ''However expensive it was, it would still be 
only Sokxnon, and I have Solomoa" 

There were none of those reassuring little indulgences 
^nd luxuries which, by proclaiming a person to be some- 

120 



180 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

thing of a sybarite, generally give security of a certain 
dependableness. From the sybarite you are more sure of 
mercy than from the ascetic, because he is a creature of 
the emotions, and desiring passionately the good things 
of life, he can guess the tragedy of being without them. 
The furniture was severe and gloomy, for Solomon's 
mother, to whom the room had belonged, held Calvinistic 
views, and Mrs. Darke had not troubled to alter it She 
went in and out like a stranger, leaving no impress on 
anything in the house, for the desire for artistic self- 
expression comes of a healthy individualism and not 
from the disease of egotism which is stunted develop- 
ment. Mrs. Darke was quite unindividual. She was a 
part of her class and creed, just as a bit of meteorological 
stone is part of a sun or a star. But it will never be a 
world unless it has movement. Nor would Mrs. Darice 
ever be an individual, because she had no living impulses. 
Her longing to be bowed down to, her greed of power, 
were also the results of this lack of growth. It was as 
if, very far away in the mists of the subconscious self, 
she heard a voice cry that she did not exist, never had 
existed, and in fear of being nothing had resolved to seem 
to be everything. The outer form was all in all to her. 
She was one of those for whom ceremonial is made. She 
had always done her duty by her husband and children. 
She had seen to it that Solomon's winter coat was pat 
away with pepper in the summer, and that his frayed 
cuffs were mended by Marigold or her predecessors. Her 
offspring had all suffered vaccination, baptism, dentistry, 
and confirmation at the correct times. She ruled Solo- 
mon's house in the orthodox manner. She had a gift 
for autocratic rule, and was a staunch believer in matri- 
archy. She disliked her own mother, who bored her, bat 
she would never confess it even to herself. She had a 
certain dour loyalty to the dour laws she obeyed. That 



MARIGOLD'S WARNING 181 

she did not love Mrs. Velindre was not astonishing, for 
in nothing but physical fact was that lady her mother. 
For the real mother is, first, a passionate lover of her 
children, recklessly spending herself in the manner of all 
lovers. The idea of either Mrs. Velindre or her daughter 
in the guise of a reckless lover had in it more of mirth 
than conviction. They had somehow missed the gift, for 
it does not go inalienably with the production of offspring, 
and it is sometimes found in strange places — in the eyes 
of spinsters or invalids, in the smile of some whom tiie 
world despises. 

"Well, what is it now?*' asked Mrs. Darke as Cathe- 
rine entered with her usual circumspect softness. If any* 
one had ever wanted to confide in Rachel Darke, they 
must have found it an uphill road. She looked at Cathe- 
rine now very much as a Squire looks at a poacher. But 
Catherine was quite undismayed. Like a smoothly pol- 
ished statue, she was impervious to rough weather. 

"Forgive me for intruding, dear aunt," she said ami- 
ably, looking round for a comfortable chair. Not find- 
ing one, she lay down on the bed, for she liked to be as 
comfortable as possible. This was the first time for some 
years that she had interviewed her aunt in this room, 
but she had remembered the cold and had put on her win- 
ter coat. She lay very blandly on the ancestral birth and 
death bed, her fur collar well up, setting off her rich hair. 

Mrs. Darke looked more than ever like a squire con- 
templating a poacher. She paced to and fro, hands 
locked, tormenting one another. So might a lady abbess 
walk, as she pondered on the penance of an impenitent 
nun. A lady abbess was what Mrs. Darke should have 
been, since power was what she thirsted after — ^power 
for its own sake, not necessarily over many, but com- 
pletely over a few. Having been allowed no power in 
her youth, even over herself; no responsibility w^xi V^x 



US THE HOirSE IX DQBMEE FOUEST 

htr owhk actions (Cor At had been dominated bjr Mis. 
Vdindrt and Camilj opinioo) Att desire had grown into 
a lasL To tjiauiiLi e was m e thqgliu ta her, and dmigs 
had cxme to sodi a pass that die had the habitnal drunk- 
aid's nsul and ciinnn^ ciaiii^ only what she wantod 



the hnman sooL On that she fed, on that she gloated 
as anj cannibal might. If it fled from her» she dotcfacd 
at it; if it escaped, she used all her finesse to catch it 
again; haying cai^^ it, she tore it in hitter, silent ragc^ 
Catherine was aware of this idiosyncrasj. She under- 
stood her aunt (for beneath their l e sp e Uiv e man ners of 
dullness and snavitj thej were both savages) and she 
wielded a pecnliar power over her by pretending to offer 
herself as an unconscions sacrifice; like a phnnp^ gay- 
feathered bird. Innumerable times did Mrsl Durke 
im a gine that she had sent Catherine quivering with men- 
tal pain to spend a night in tears, and on all those occa- 
sions Catherine had nestled into bed very happily, mur- 
muring, as she opened her favourite devotional book, 
'Tooled again, dear anntr 

'"Are you ill?~ inquired Mrs. Dark^ and her eye told 
that she would give short shrift to malingering. 

"Never better. Aunt Rachd." 

'^ho have you quarrdled with?^ 

'T never quarrel, dear aunt" 

"Are you in debt r 

"Solvent, auntie." 

"Then why come to me?" 

"For all you know, Aunt Racfad, I may want to see 
more of you." 

Mrs. Darke laughed— 4i short and cutting laugh. Who 
had ever wanted to see more of her, anything of her? 
Certainly not Solomon, who in his loud and hearty way 
ignored her existence whenever it was possible. Not ha 
mother, for she was in the position of abdicating monarcfat 



MARIGOLD'S WARNING 18S 

and in an absolute monarchy that is an unpleasant posi- 
tion. She mingled, in her treatment of her daughter, 
pathetic echoes of autocracy with equally pathetic shivers 
of fear. When Mrs. Velindre irritated her, Mrs. Darke 
said, in her incisive voice: 

"I shall lock you up!" 

To grandmother, who loved to hobble about with her 
tall, knobbed stick, and peer into everyone's affairs, going 
softly in list shoes, this threat had a creeping horror. She 
avoided her daughter whenever she could. For each 
member of the family, Mrs. Darke had an especial rod, 
except perhaps for Sarah. Sarah feared nothing, and 
had the courage of her convictions. There were times 
when she even lingered near Mrs. Darke, "singing for 
trouble,'^ as Mrs. Gosling said, like one queen wasp meet- 
ing another. On one such memorable day Sarah broke 
a kitchen cup, thus laying herself open to her mistress's 
icy satire. Mrs. Darke had concluded her speech with : 

*T, think, as the old Derby jug is never in your hands 
bat once a year, it may outlast you if you die soon.'' 

Whereupon Sarah, in scarlet wrath, had seized the 
heirloom with a shriek of: "Outlast me, will you?" and 
had dashed it on to the flags. Strangely enough, she did 
not get notice for this. After all, who else would have 
done so much work in so short a time for so little money? 
Later, dabbing bits of it on to her "world," she had been 
shamed into partial rq)entance by Enoch's reproachful 



"Well, aunt," said Githerine, curling herself more 
comfortably, "it's about Mrs. Gosling's girl." 

She never called Marigold by her name, thinking it 
foolish and knowing Marigold to be proud of it. 

Mrs. Darke started. So Catherine knew I The last 
person who should have known. 

"What about her?" 



184 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



•'Granny told mc/' 

"I shall lock her up!" muttered Mrs. Darke. "Tdd 
you she's in trouble?" she asked Catherine, her mouth 
sneering, for she found these unruly emotions of youth I 
contemptible 

"Yes. It's very sad, aunt." 

"Did she name the man ?" 

"Ahal Aha!" thought Catherine. "You didn't want 
me to know!" Aloud she said: "I am sorry to say 
she did" 

If Mrs. Darke cared for anyone it was Peter. He was 
superficially very like herself. She had planned his mar- 
riage with Catherine years ago. Catherine would live 
here under her rule, produce children, and uphold with 
her money the falling fortunes of Dormer. The way in 
which her controlled rage shook her was horrible to 
witness. Catherine watched, amused. Mrs. Darke was 
whelmed in dass hatred — a futility of the human race 
even more devastating than the foolishness of national 
hatred. It was well for herself and for Marigold that 
the girl was not in the room at the moment. Mrs. Darke 
tore her handkerchief in two. Catherine winced, disliking 
the noise. Then, seeing that it was going to happen 
again, she said : "Dear aunt?" 

"Well?" 

"What will Peter do?'' 

"It's a mistake — a mistake. It must be Jasper.^ 

"I know it isn't Jasper." 

"How?" 

"Jasper has proposed to me." 

Mrs. Darke's face was again distorted. The one son 
wouldn't marry Catherine, and must. The other son 
must not, and would. 

"Did you refuse him?" 






MARIGOLD'S WARNING 186 

"Of course, aunt How could I marry an infidd?" 
This at leas^ was hopeful. 

*'Shall you send the girl away?" 

"Shall I? Shall I? She will go packing at once. 
Prostitute that she is T' 

"Oh, dear aunt I" 

"Nonsense. You are not so innocent as all that, 
Catherine/' 

"And will Peter go also?" 

"He will not. He will stay here as arranged. His 
fother and Ernest are talking to him/' 

Catherine shook with silent laughter. She could so 
wdl imagine the conversation. 

'WiU Peter marry her?" 

'Marry her ? I'd sooner see him deaid." 

"Will he marry someone else?" 

"Of course. The family must go on." 

A curious look tenanted Catherine's eyes for a moment 
It had in it both anger and fear. At the back of her 
mind was always a lurking intuition that she was doomed 
to carry on some man's family. She emphatically did 
not want to. She wanted to be a queen in her own right, 
to rule men, to enslave, but never to be enslaved. 
' "Suppose the girl you have thought of won't take Peter 
at second-hand? Who is the girl, auntie? You always 
have plans. I'm sure you have decided." 

Mrs. Darke walked across the room, flinging over tier 
shoulder : 

•That is not your affair !" 

'1 think it is," said Catherine. "Beliold the lamb for 
tKe burnt offering." 

Once more Mrs. Darke's handkerchief suffered. Things 
were going worse and worse. She had not dreamed that 
Catherine guessed. And now she had not only guessed. 



186 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

she had found out about Marigold. Mrs. Darke almost 
raved, 

Catherine enjoyed the upper hand for a while Then 
she administered balm. 

'If the girl went away — right away for good, and 
Peter was sorry, and turned from this low affection to 
a higher — well, it's a woman's duty to forgive." 

''He's about as good as you'll get," muttered Mrs. 
Darke. 

''A woman should hdp him to turn the new {»age and 
choose the new road." 

Mrs. Darke's usually expressionless face, winter-pale 
and at the same time volcanic, expressed relief. She had 
planned this match, and her plans were her career. 

But Catherine knew, in her heart, that she never would 
marry Peter, never forgive him. She would bring pres- 
sure to bear on Jasper, bend him to her will, marry him. 

"Have 3rou interviewed the girl, aunt?" 

"Not yet." 

"Could you send for her now?" 

Mrs. Darke, for once, was obliged to submit She 
would rather have seen Marigold alone, but she rang the 
bell. 

"House afire, mum ?" queried Sarah, looking in. She 
wished to emphasize the undesirability and unusualncss 
of ringing bedroom bells. 

Mrs. Darke felt that the house was afire 

"Send Mrs. Gosling's girl up," she said. 

"Almighty God take pity on 'er," said Sarah devoutly, 
as she went downstairs. 

Marigold stood in the doorway — a washed-out Mari- 
gold, with crumpled apron and dejected little streamers. 
She was dazed by the storm that had descended on her. 
For the last two hours her mother had scolded, Sarah had 
looked askance, Rectory-Lucy had sniffed, even Enoch 



MARIGOLD'S WARNING 187 

had been silent. Master Peter had "caught a holt of 
her'' and pranced across the dairy, and she hadn't thought 
any harm. She had cried till she thought she could cry 
no more. 

"That's warning !" said Sarah when the bell rang, and 
sure enough it was. She stood shaking, wondering what 
they all ^thought she had done. 

"Take a week's notice I" said Mrs. Darke. 

**Yes'm, thank you." 

Marigold had something of her mother's apdogetic 



manner. 



Go and hide your head away from respectable people." 
•Tlease'm, I partly think I'm respectable." 
*'Don't bandy words, you bad woman! You may be 
thankful to get off so lightly." 
Marigold tried to avoid Catherine's pitiless eyes. 
"Why do you tremble if you have not done wrong?" 
said Catherine. 

It was a hopeless question. It has been a hopeless 
question to the simple for many a long year. The sensi- 
tive and the timid always do trenri>Ie, being in tl^ie right, 
and by so doing put themselves in the wrong. Being 
accused of evil, they are crushed, and immediately this 
is taken for guilt. 

"How long have you cohabited with my son?" asked 
Mrs. Darke in a terrible voice, regardless of Catherine's 
expostulation. 

"I don't rightly understand, mum!" said Marigold. 

"How long is it since you slept with my son first ?" 

Marigold was suddenly faint, for all her robustness. 
Her face was scarlet, pulses beat all over her. She 
swayed as she stood and hid her face in her hands. 

"Ah 1 that's clear to you, is it?" said Mrs. Darke; "that 
finds the weak spot" 



u 
tr 

it 



188 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"The spot — the spot ! Wash out the spot of sin V said 
grandmother, entering. 

'Answer, girl!" said Mrs. Darke. 

'Yes, answer !" said Catherine, curious. Life interested 
her; so did Peter. 

'Answer! Answer!" piped grandmother. 

But Marigold could find no voice. To think that of 
her ! And she never so much as let a man kiss her — ^not 
even Enoch under the mistletoe. Only Master Peter had 
kissed her that once unbeknown. 

"She daren't answer !" was the verdict. 

Marigold raised her head, and out of the confusion and 
terror looked pride, the simple pride of a country girl to 
whom her good name is all. 

"I didn't never do such a thing," she said on a shocked 
sob. "Master Peter wouldn't lower 'isself to ask it, nor 
me to say yes to it." 

They laughed. They did not believe her. Rectoiy- 
Lucy did not either, nor her mother. She b^;an to cry 
again. 

"If you're a respectable girl, why do you cry?" 
inquired Catherine. 

"Weeping and gnashing of teeth ! You'll go to hell!" 
said grandmother. 

"I'll goo away from this place!" said Marigold, with 
a flash of spirit "And I won't never come back. I'll 
goo to my auntie !" 

"I wish her joy !" said Catherine. 

"And when the brat's bom, don't bring it here/' said 
Mrs. Darke. "To the workhouse with it !" 

"There wunna never be no brat, and there inna no 
wrong, and there wunna — ^never, never !" cried Marigold 
again. "And what for you should all think ill of me as 
never done you no wrong " she sobbed. "Ask Mas- 
ter Peter !" she cried suddenly. Again the three laughed. 
Ask Peter ! How mdeewvVX 'Row Vk^ -^ common giri 



MARIGOLD'S WARNING 189 

to suggest It! Besides, of course, Peter would deny it, 
like any other young man. 

"Do not dare to speak my son's name!" said Mrs. 
Darke. "We know the truth. Be grateful I don't send 
you off to-night. It is not for your sake I keep up 
appearances, but for the family's. Your wages are here. 
Take them and go." 

"I dunna want 'em, mum." 

"The stick! The stick!" said grandmother. "In the 
old days it would have been the stick across your 
shoulders !" 

Marigold turned to go. Her plump figure, supple and 
strong, annoyed Mrs. Darke by its independence even in 
the midst of confusion. 

"Your dress is tight already!" she said, "You know 
what that means !" 

Catherine was horrified. SHe had never thought her 
aunt could be so coarse. In fact, Mrs. Darke never was, 
but in her rage and hate Ihe had forgotten herself. 
Catherine went out of the room in expostulatory silence, 
brushing past Marigold in pale, derisive purity. 

Marigold, as she went downstairs, came slowly and by 
gradual steps to the conclusion that being good did not 
pay. And a faint, fluttering regret was bom in the 
depths of her heart — regret that she had suffered the pen- 
alty without having tasted one crumb of the joy. 

Peter, in the deserted dancing room, was feeling mubh 
the same thing. There sat his father and Ernest, the 
judges. There stood he, the culprit. 
^Here's a splother," said Solcxnon. 
Tity— pity !" said Ernest 

'What have you got to say for yourself?" asked 
Solomop. 

"Nothing," replied his son. 

"An illicit connection with one of the servants! I'm 
damned !" said Solomon. 



"] 

4t^ 



140 THE HOUSE IN DOBMER FOREST 

"A hallowed love — a sacred love," ocHitinued Ernest 
"Ah ! how diflferent from this I" 

"I don't love anybody!" said Peter. 

*'Then there is no excuse." 

"There's no need of excuse; I've done nothing." 
• "Lies — lies! I know young men!" Solomon spoke 
with a kind of gruff tolerance. 

"The human heart is desperately wicked," added 
Ernest "All we like sheep——" 

"I tell you I've done nothing. Tve not gone astray 90 
far. But I will I I will I" Peter added. 

"A love that society can countenance/' Ernest 
remarked) "is safe because it is sanctioned, and sanc- 
tioned because it is safe." 

'*You make my head ache," said Peter. 

"Give the girl up," ordered Solomon. 

"I can't." 

"Don't say 'canY to me!" 

"I can't give up what I haven't got" 

"If Catherine knew, she wouldn't marry yoiL** 

Peter laughed. 

"She needn't I don't want her. PaJe thing r* 

"If she knew you had danced with a servant in die 
dairy " 

"I don't care who knows. There was no harm." 

"If there'd been no harm, would you have wanted to 
dance?" said Solomon. 

"Well, I'll go to bed, father. It's no good arguing. 
Good-night" 

He was gone, a tumult of new ideas and perscmalized 
emotions in his mind. As he and Jasper were going to 
bed, he said : 

'Marigold's pretty, isn't she?" 

Tassable," said Jasper with a yawn. 

If you were me, should you marry Catherine?^ 



"] 
"] 



MARIGOLD'S WARNING 141 

Jasper sat up in bed with a bounce. 

'"If you say that again I'll knock your head off/' he 
remarked. 

Peter sighed. Everyone was very combative to-day. 
But as he fell asleep, he thought again of Marigold. 
Decidedly she was pretty, very sweet to kiss. And he 
had only kissed her once ! They all blamed him. Very 
well. He would have a few more — a good many more. 

The house settled down. The night sounds began. 
Death-watches, creakings of furniture, the ticking of 
docks like the falling of water-drops. 

Suddenly in the comparative silence a door opened and 
a figure rushed across the landing to Amber's room. ButL 
the door was locked. Another figure, stqut and clad Li 
pyjamas, followed. 

"I'm going to Amber!" said a voice, low but deter- 
mined. 

"You shall not make me look ridiculous," said another 
voice, low but very angry. 

Another door opened silently, to the width of an inch. 

"I don't like being married. I don't like you," said 
the first voice. 

The second voice tried persuasion. 

^All that marriage means— companionship, love, chil- 
oxeo* 

*1 hate children!" 

*'Alittie replica of me!" 

At that the first voice dissolved in laughter. A third 
door opened. 

''What is this noise?" said Mrs. Darke.. She stood 
tiiere in a bar of moonlight in a grey dressing-gown, grey 
of hair and face. And it seemed as if a mental greyness 
gave a deeper tone to all the rest. 

"She is hysterical, hysterical," said Ernest '*We must 
be patient." 



14S THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

He stood there in his new pajama suit, dignified and 
with a consciousness of being in the right 

'Tatient!" said Mrs. D&rke, who had no more 
patience after the tronUes of the day. ''Don't be a fool, 
Ernest Loose that door. Ruby, and go back to your 
room. You have made the bargain. You must keep it" 

'1 won't! I won't! He lodes so fat in pyjamas!" 
answered Rut^ in a sibilant and infuriated whisper. 

Catherine, watching through her indi-wide opening, 
shook with laughter at the scene. 

As Mrs. Darice and Ernest, taking each an arm, pro- 
pelled Ruby across the landing, she gently shut her door, 
chronicling the scene in her mind as a useful rod for 
Ernest in the future. 

The long day was done. The house watched over its 
sleeping children, careless, it seemed, as to whether they 
dreamed happily or sadly. If the house stood, what mat- 
tered the single soul? Let Ruby be bound to a hated 
bargain, let Marigold be cast out, Peter marry without 
love, Jasper be broken in spirit. Amber lonely, and the 
rest malformed in soul. What matter, if the house went 
on? The house must go on, just as it was, just as it 
had been for so long. It would go on surely, for ever. 
It lay under the dim forest, regarding the flashing stars 
with its many eyes. And all around it through the night 
the forest whispered, muttered, fir and spruce and pine 
with their dark creative music, and with harsher voices 
the bare trees that had forgotten leaves with summer. 
They sang, and the lipping ivy on the house sang with 
them, of things that had been before the earliest wattle 
hut They sang of lichens and mosses and dm samaras 
and rosy seed of pines already preparing for the day when 
Dormer should be taken back into the earth, curtained in 
green. For nothing that is built by man for the std>juga- 
tion of the single soul can stand. 



CHAPTER XH: THE GROTTO 

ON the day after the wedding Catherine went to tea 
at the Rectory. She liked to look her best, even for 
a middle-aged man and woman, which was one of her 
pleasanter qualities^ Sometimes also, young Arkinstall 
would vault over a stile as she came home, and walk with 
her. She despised him, but he enlivened the tedium of a 
walk. To Catherine a lonely walk was intolerable. She 
had no kinship with the wild, and if there WM one thing 
she disliked more than walking alone, it was walking with 
Amiber, for Amber insisted on talking about trees and 
birds. 

To-day Catherine did not, as usual, ask Marigold to 
wave her hair. She went down to Sarah in the kitchen. 
Marigold knew how great a slight this was, for she knew 
Catherine disliked Sarah. 

"Aunt," said Catherine before she started, "they will 
wonder at the Rectory what the fuss was about Can 
I tell them?" 

"Tell that hurdy-gurdy of a woman I Not a word!" 

Catherine smiled. She liked to "draw" her aunt. 
Then she departed, looking her best. And her best, as. 
poor Jasper knew, was very good indeed. Mrs. Darke 
went to call on Mrs. Arkinstall in order to comfort her- 
self for the tiresomeness of her married daughter by 
reminding Mrs. Arkinstall that her daughter was still 
unmarried. An unhappy, sullen Ruby had been taken 
for a drive by a hurt and dignified Ernest. 

Marigold sat in the old school-room, where she sewed 

145 



144 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

every afternoon, and the November sun lingered on her 
bright head. As she sewed, she cried, and as she cried, 
she pricked her finger, so that the shirt she was mending 
was bedewed with little points of red. Everything was 
very quiet. Grandmother was in the dining-room, asleep, 
and ^jnber in her own room, reading. Sarah was clear- 
ing up the kitchen and singing: 'There is a foun- 
tain . . ." 

Marigold sewed and sobbed, for she had "warning^' 
to go in a week, and her heart was here 

Suddenly the French window was opened cautiously, 
and in walked Peter. 

"I knew you'd be crying," he said. "They told me— 
the governor told me— you were going. So I just walked 
off from the Wallows to see you. I'm damned sorry, 
^arigold." 

"Oh, Master Peter, I misdoubt someone'U come!" 

"They're all safe. Marigold?" 

"Master Peter?" 

"Since they started on me, talking and that, I've 
thought about you a lot. I didn't before." 

"No, Master Peter." 

"You're pretty when you cfy. Ruby looks like a great 
paeony." 

"Oh! Master Peter !" 

"Don't 'Master Peter' me ! Say Peter !" 

"I couldna ! No, never could I." 

"You must." 

He knelt in front of her and took away the sewing. 

"What's this you're doing?" 

"The cuffs on your blue and white shirt. Master " 

He put a hand on her mouth. 

"Peter ! The last I'll mend for you." She sobbed. 

"Do you love me. Marigold? Say 'Yes, Peter! 
He had both hands now. The pretty head drooped. 



19 9f 



THE GROTTO 146 

Peter kissed Her. He was not in love with her, bat his 
father's talk of an illicit connection and Ernest's talk of 
unholy love had kindled in him a curiosity and awakened 
in him a kind of emotionless and almost impersonal pas- 
sion. He was aroused and inspired by their groundless 
suspicions to make the suspicions true; 

"Say 1 love you, Peter' !" 

With trembling lips and swimming blue eyes she said it 

In the midst of his kisses she suddenly stiffened. 

"Husheel Husheel There was a door slammed. You 
mun goo." 

Her voice was like a pigeon's. 

"Meet me in the wood when you've washed up teal" 
aaid Peter. 

He was gone, but by the entrance to the woods he was 
vraiting for her in the evening, and every evening until 
her last In the last sweet moment of the last sweet hour, 
^hen Sarah could be heard down by the gun-dog^s ken- 
nd crying, "Marigol' I Marigol' !" Peter spoke with the 
cruelty that can dwell with passion ( for in the last week 
lie had learnt a young passion, not the love-rayed gift of 
the great gods, but the woodland passion of a faun). 

"You are going to-morrow," he said. 

*To-morrowday ! Oh, I wish I met be dead afore 
to-morrowday !" cried Marigold suddenly, in a voice 
broken with love. "If it 'ud thunder now, and a bolt 
ia-al, or a wind come out o' the sky, and this wold yew- 
tree fa-all" 

"Silly! What d'you want to die for? I don't want 
to die." 

"Master Peter! Oh, my darlin', what'n you done to 
le more than the world an' all ?" 

"I dunno!" Peter laughed shortly and rather shyly. 

'I'd as lief be under the daisies if I canna bide in 



146 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Dormer valley ! And that new girl mindin' your things 
and all r 

She cried again heartbrokenly. 

"Well, you've got to go, so there's an end/' said Peter. 
"But perhaps I'll come and see you.'* 

The sun came out in Marigold's face. 

"And if you're sorry to leave me, and if you're as fofld 
of me as you say " 

"What, Master Peter?" 

"You won't say good-bye now/' 

"Oh, but I mun — I'm agoing at five and it's prayers 
after supper and then bed — and there's Sarah hollering 
agen." 

Peter whispered. 

"Oh, I couldna! Not in the black o' night I Not all 
up to the grotto!' 

'Good-bye, then/ 

'Oh, no, no !' 



I" 
"Good-bye, the- " 
"Oh, no, no!" 
"Then come ! I'll make a fire." 
"What'd Sarah and Rectory-Lucy say?" 



"They won't know. Besides, they all thought harm of 
us when there wasn't any harm. Let's give 'em some- 
thing to cry for." 

"Oh, Master Peter, the things you say I" 
"You and me, Marigold, you and me in the grotto as 
if it was our house !" He conjured a picture of terror and 
fascination. 

"P'raps you'll never see me again after to-morrow." 
"Dunna say that, oh, dunna ! There's Sarah all of » 
boost, skriking, I mim goo." 

"Come then, as soon as Sarah's asleep. Say I" 
"Maybe I wunna," said Marigold, turning to run down 
the wood, "and maybe I 'ool." 

Going to bed in Sarah's scintillating attic, MarigtM 



1 



THE GROTTO 14*r 

lost in the thought of to-morrow. Sarah eyed her 

in no unfriendly spirit. Before, Marigold had been 

Si. powerful and permanent rival. Now, since the fateful 

><l^our of the dance, she was obliterated. Her "intended" 

Was now hers only. She always spoke of Enoch as her 

^itended, thus attaining that to which fine literature 

•Aspires — the expression of the precise truth. When asked 

^^hether she was Enoch's intended also, she replied: 

*Oh, he treasures up his dark designs!" Now all was 

"^ell. Mere resistance on the part of E-noch was, she felt, 

* r^tnimportant. In a lavish mood she had lighted two tal- 

**^ow dips, and in their wavering light she surveyed her 

txmi with complaisance. It was a scene of almost bar- 

.^ric splendour. The multi-tinted crockery- work glit- 

**^'*ercd savagely; the patchwork quilt was bewildering in 

^ts variety; the scarlet rug, made from the scraps of 

Numerous flannel petticoats, defied the pink glazed calico 

^at draped the dressing-table. A good room, Sarah 

felt, and good ornaments, very suitatrie for setting up 

Iiouse. 

'^ Marigold sat with her head leaning against the white- 

^ ^washed wall beneath a huge text worked in wool. She 

was feeling the burden of the fact that, when one is very 

miserable, somebody always lights two tallow dips. 

"Ah, you cry I" said Sarah. "It'll do you good. So 
you're away to your auntie's. Well, 's Catherine'll be 
glad. If Sarah Jowel's got eyes, 's Catherine's had more 
to do with it than she'd care to say. She gets to what 
she wants cross-lookards, does 's Catherine, like a bird 
to crumbs." 

"Somebody's made right wrong," sobbed Marigold 
*T wish I was dead." 

"Ah! I'm that-a-way myself, times," said Sarah. 
"Love's so lungeous i It chums up your innards summait 
crud!" 



148 THE HOUSE IN DOBMER FOREST 

She began to sing in her resounding voice, "There is 
a fountain filled with blood" This chirurgic hymn was 
a favourite of hers. 

Marigold went on crying. The lungeousness of love 
had become very apparent to her. Everyone was angry. 
Miss Catherine blazed at her with eyes of haughty virtat 
The old lady had a text for every meeting, and did not 
mince her words. The mistress — ^Marigold shivered at 
the thought of Mrs. Darice's glacial r^ard. And the 
angrier they were, the more furiously did Peter make 
love. He snatched her hand as she went in to prayen 
He waylaid her at every dim turn of the stairs. He was 
strange and wild. And now she had practically promised 
to go to the grotto. She was trepidant, jubilant; bat 
chiefly she was afraid. When Sarah breathed deeply and 
the house had sunk into silence, and night had flung her 
purple curtain over the forest, she must steal out and 
meet Peter at the grotto. 

"If you'd give your word to do a thing, would 3rou do 
it if it wunna right according to catechism ?" she asked 

"Well," said Sarah judicially, "I met, if I bettered 
myself by it, and if it was respectable." She was arrang- 
ing the cottonwool in her ears for the night 

**When true lovers part, it's a bad "day for 'cm," she 
said. "Put out the candles, if you're only crying^. Tean 
want no tallow. But if I was you, Fd come to bed, 
Christian. And see, Marigol', FU give you one of those 
jars. No, seeing I'm sorry for jrou, I'll give you the 
pair. A bit of property's a grand medicine for all ills." 
She clapped in the last piece of cotton-wool and got into 
bed. 

Marigcdd also got into bed and lay there inertly. 
The lover, faced with parting, becomes a dumb creatnie 
beneath a heavy mallet She listened to the rats 
gnawing and scurrying within the walls. They were 



THE GROTTO 149 

like the unholy things that harbour in outworn forms — 
"the petty hates, the t}rrannies, the deceit and fear. The 
attics were alive with their stealthy goblin noise; it was 
ss if they knew the night was theirs and that none would 
.gainsay them. There they were, and. there they would 
stay. Only if Dormer fell would they depart Their shrill 
squeaking and quarrelling, their occasional falls when 
they dislodged a quantity of loose mortar, the perpetual 
iear that they would gnaw through into the room kept 
Marigold in a fidget At last she heard, through the half* 
open door, very faint, coming along the echoing passages, 
the voice of the dictatorial clock announcing twelve. She 
must go. In spite of her dread of the dark woods, of the 
judgment of her fellows, the sorrowful to-morrow had 
receded, and there flowered in the lightless room the wild 
rose of love's ecstasy. Sarah heard Marigold stirring, 
for her sleep was what she called ''a dog-sleep.'' She 
guessed where Marigold was going, and as the faint 
creakings of the attic stairs were hushed, she turned over 
restlessly, as if to shufHe off responsibility, and mur- 
mured : "I've got 'ool in my ears, hanna I ? For all Fm 
supposed to know, the girl's in bed and asleep." 

Marigold, passing the door of Ernest and Ruby, won- 
dered why it was right for them to be together, not loving 
each other (for she was sure they did not care for each 
other), and why it was wrong for Peter and herself to be 
together, when they did love each other. For Marigold, 
In common with other lovers, quite forgot to find out 
whether'her gift was returned. She envied the sleeping 
house, which was foolish of her, for sleep is only a 
shadow. Those who go out of the dreaming house into 
the forest are at least awake, however dark the forest 
fliay be. 

The solid pilasters of the stone porch looked ghostly 
in the moonlight, and from each one, as she opened the 



160 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST I 

door, sprang a rod, lying darkly on the floor of the hai I 
In the cold air her breath stood up, white, small audi 
palpable, as men have imagined the soul to stand at its I 
passing. I 

She went swiftly down to the bridge and along by the I 
water, and as she went, accompanied by her vagrant I 
shadow, another shadow, taller and less vacillating id- 1 
lowed under the lee of the bare woods. The black ^- 1 
houettes of the lower trees lay, spectral and large, half | 
on land and half on the water. Marigold's shadow and I 
the shadow that followed her threaded them. The wind 
made a snake-like, hissing sound in all the yews of the 
hillside as Marigold sped upwards. As she neared the 
grotto, a voice, low but imperative, called her from beside ] 
the water : 

"Marigold! Marigold!" 

And the echoes that haunted the cup where Dormer 
lay took up the music of the word and played with it, 
sending it like a ball from slope to slopdL 

"Marigold — ^gold — gold !" 

But the broken echoes were flung back with a mocking 
sound into the silver water, for she did not hear. Already 
Peter had stepped from the grotto, already she was in his 
arms. "You are late!" he said crossly. Then in the 
sweetne!Ss of kissing her he forgave her, and they went 
into the grotto. A red fire of logs blazed on the rough 
hearth that used to warm the Dormer ladies when, in a 
day long gone, they spent their maiden leisure in Iming 
the grotto with shells. On the table was such a repast 
as Peter deemed suitable. Marigold eyed the collation, 
recognizing the contents of the larder. Her breathless 
pallor gave way before her laughter. 

"There'll be nought for dinner to-morrowday f They'll 
all be clemmed !" 

And a peal of laughter startled the stony grotto as she 



THE GROTTO 161 

saw, beside to-morrow's pudding and the ham, Mrs. 

"Velindre's beloved quince marmalade and the potted meat 

"without which Ernest could not breakfast. Peter shouted, 

tossing back his head with his wild faun air, snapping his 

£ngers. To-night the wood-god was predominant in him. 

It was in his cheeks ; in the straight, eager profile in which 

he resembled Jasper; in the wave of his hair that was 

flung back like a crest, as if to cool an over-hot forehead. 

It was in his loose-knit figure, which had, in spite of the 

gaucherie of youth, the grace that is given even to the 

clumsy by primal impulse. He had the touch of prince- 

liness which passion, even the callowest, the crudest, gives 

to the young. 

"Apron!" he cried. "Cap! What do we want with 
them ? OS with 'em ! Ho 1 I like you better without 
acapr 

He held the plait of hair, coloured like sunburnt 
bracken, in both hands. The logs blazed, and every pale 
shell flushed in the red light. Had the staid ladies, who 
set them one by one in place, known for what festival 
they built that beauty of mother-of-pearl, had they heard 
echoes of that laughter which now leapt with the leaping 
flames, maybe they would have stayed their hands. Little 
would be done in this life if men knew for what they built. 
So a great king may set forth to build a palace of black 
basalt for the god of war. And behold ! When he has 
finished it. Fate says : "This is not what I wanted. Come, 
3rou tendrilled things, you blossomy things, wreathe this 
basalt into beauty 1 Come, you white and golden doves, 
make a nest here, make a music here ! For this is a bower 
for the peaceful spirit of brotherhood." 

Here was a place meant for the tame revellings of con- 
ventional ladyhood, and behold! that rough, wild thing, 
young passion, took possession. Marigold's head, out- 
lined by the iridescent wall; her face, thrown into relief 



16S THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

by the dancing light, faintly rose-tinted; her eyes, dark 
with present joy and future sorrow, made a picture so 
sweet that the last remnants of caution left Peter. He 
would forget that he was to marry pale Catherine and 
consolidate Dormer. All that would come in time. But 
now, here was Marigold and here was he, and the red 
light surged over shells of saffron, of salmon pink, of 
veined purple and scarlet 

Peter stooped to a great conch that was the central 
ornament above the fireplace, and shouted into -its sound- 
ing hollow, "Marigold I" 

The confident music seemed to defy that other musk 
without, the music that had fallen into the water. 

^'Oh, hushee now," said Marigold. But she siniled, for 
she too refused to parley with the morrow, and who 
should hear them, safe in their magical house in the dim 
lost centre of night ? 

Outside, climbing with- ^low and heavy steps, a great 
knobbed stick in his hand, Enoch heard the laughter- 
very faint and maddening, like the provocative voice of 
an unkind love who had betaken herself to the submerged 
halls of faery. 

He stood still, and the attentive trees stood about him 
on this side and on that, surveying him as though they 
questioned. His face was dark and drawn with rage, 
and the fierceness of a creature defrauded. That he was 
of so quiet a nature made this volcanic fire more terrible. 
So wild a fury shook his massive body, that it seemed to 
conjure a visible picture on the dim screen of night— a 
picture of two lovers dead amid broken shells and scat- 
tered fire. But even as his hand was stretched towards 
the door, he paused. Far down, in startled silver, out of 
startled mist, a cock crowed. The sound was a key that 
opened within his mind the great door of nature. He 
paused, and the trees seemed to question him. They sum- 



THE GROTTO 16S 

moned his soul, his deqyest, most mysterious sdf; and 
when it came at their call they communed with it, creat- 
ing with its help a better thing than the desire of killing 
which had grown up like a dark fungus in his mind He 
had watched, knowing this hour would oome. He had 
waited in the garden, sure that one night she would steal 
forth. To be up ail night was nothing to him. He was 
always out before the light. He could not have borne 
to miss the intoxicating secrecy of those hours when who 
knows what strange things are out and about — ^hours 
haunted by inexplicable sounds, significant happenings. 
Those are the hours when sheep and cattle do as they list, 
and look upon the world with eyes different from those 
that humans know; for at this time they have not yet 
called in their souls for the day-^their timid souls that 
must be barred in the shippen of silence, where they sleep 
bdiind eyes shuttered with sullen or wistful inexpresJ 
siveaess. In dew-dark summer mornings Enoch loved 
to be among them as one kin to them, and at the first 
shrilling of the sunrise chorus, when each beast was 
startled (walking at ease with its soul) by its sudden 
shadow flung blue before it by the early ray, Enoch also 
went as three — his broad and sturdy body, his half-tamed 
soul, and his pansy-tinted shadow. 

An hour less or more mattered little to him. He had 
meant to save Marigold from the obloquy that in the 
House of Dormer falls on a generous lover. He had 
intended to follow her and threaten them both with di^ 
Govery and drag her from the very arms of passion, 
carry her if need be to her mother's house. 

And now here he was, foiled by his own personality, 
tied hand and foot by his own rage. For he knew that 
if he put his hand on the door he would kill Peter Darke. 
He would strike from those black eyes the glow of tri- 



164 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

uxnph, trample in the pine-ne^es that haughtj figure 
that hawklike air. 

He gazed round him at the mtdtitudinous witness of ! 
his temptation, at the secret yews peering over one another 
with tiieir great stooping shoulders and their appearance 
of having their heads hidden. Yews are the owls of the 
tree-world; they have the same curious look of having 
drawn down their heads into their bodies. Beyond the 
yews he saw a dead holly, stark and pale, with arms flung 
up as before an inevitable, incurable horror. A little fir 
tree kept up a low descant, caressing with its finger-tipi 
the side of the grotto. It was well for those within that 
they did not laugh at that moment A laugh would have 
meant three lives. But Peter was drinking deep in the 
grey wells of Marigold's eyes, and no sound disturbed 
the night 

''Killing^s alius untimely," muttered Enodi, and it 
seemed to his soul that the unheard echoes were crying 
with a sweet chiding : ^'Untimely, untimdy I" But it was 
not on the sandstone that their silver voices struck; it was 
on the cllfTs and crannies of his deep and unknown sdf. 

The heavy stidc shook with the grip of his hands, his 
hands that hated Peter. Marigold, his little girl, aboot 
whose life every root of his being turned. Marigold was 
stolen from him. He had loved her as unconsdouslj 
as the willow-wren loves Africa when winter winds are 
in the sedges. His slow mind had not known it His 
slow tongue had not spoken it But now, too late, he 
understood. His quarrel with Peter was not that, being 
of "the gentry" with "money in pocket and money to 
oomd,'' he had used his superiority to dazzle Marigold. 
Nor was it that Peter was anticipating marriage. It was 
that he intuitively knew Peter's intention of marrying 
Catherine in the future. This secret and others were 
known to him and to the rest of the dependents at Dor- 



THE GROTTO 165 

«er. Men are the toys of their underlings, who feed 
them and clothe them, wake them and put them to bed, 
knowing beneath the outer manner of subservience the 
autocracy of a child with its dolls. For he that supplies 
the stark human need, whether of body or spirit, is king 
of the world. Peter would marry Catherine and be well 
thought of. And what of Marigold? Thi; wtis the core! 
of his rage, but it was not the innermost core. Deeper 
tiian that lay the knowledge that Peter, in pushing him 
aside, had denied Marigold the best love. For he knew 
that Peter's affection for her was now, whatever it might 
be some day, a thing flimsy as a cobweb; and that his own 
love was genuine and solid as the heart of a young tree. 
Love which is only strong enough to increase the lover's 
hapiHness is a poor thing. The love that is worth giving 
is fire in the giver's hand, a thing of woe and insufferable 
ecstasy. 

'IQU and swing for it, Enoch Galei Kill and swing T 
So cried a voice that came he knew not whence. The 
Bight wind stirred iif the black tree, but it was not the 
sight wind spoke. Was it the ancient mutter of the herd 
pasturing in the dead ages before it found a soul ? 

Suddenly Enoch flung the stick as far as his stren gt h 
could send it. It fell crashing into the undergrowth. 

Within, Marigold stirred. 

'Ilusheer' she whispered ''Imungooi There^s sum- 
mat bad in the 'ood I" 

"Go ? You shall never go." 

'TMdna you hear the crackling? That was the gfaosses 
breaking through from underground" 

"Silly! ril take care of you." 

Enodi was running with clumsy haste away from the 
grotto, uphill, eyes shut to escape the red glow from the 
slit of a window. He plunged through the spinny of 
dead hollies, where the livid boles shone like unlit corpse 



156 THE HOUSE IN DORBfER FOREST 



i 



candles. At last he came to the place called by Amber 
the Birds' Orchard. There in a grassy hollow beneath 
a crab-tree he flung himself upon his laiees. The Uack, 
complex traceries of branch and twig came and went 
upon his upturned moonlit face with the flowing motion 
of water. All things below in the valley grew small, 
shrank to nothing. The voices of the owls, echoing |c 
among the glades, came up thinly; the song of the water 
sank to a low humming. Dormer lay far below; he could 
see its dim blur through the traceries of the mist-beaded 
woods like a sleeping creature curtained with dew-qum- 
gled cobwebs. Deep in mist was Dormer valley. E)veo 
the grotto was half obliterated. But here upon the open 
hill were no mists, no sounds, nothing to distract tiie 
qiirit waiting attent and eager for what would oome 
upon it out of the unfathomaUe. 

Enoch spoke, and his v(Mce with its tree music seemed 
to possess the air long after he had spoken. 

'"Durnia leave me stray in the dark night T' he said 
'T bin nought but a poor beast in a big pasture.** 

¥niether the comfort for which he waited was to oome 
fnam beyond the stars, or from the mysterious hillside 
or from within himself, he did not trouMe to ask. He 
simply waited in the silence, while the keen air fingered 
his face. It was one of those winter nights that mourn 
for Bethlehem — ^a night on which the spirit longs to 
traverse low green hills, strewn with sheep, under shaken 
gusts of music; a night on which to meet what is rarer 
to-day than a miracle — a few simple men caught in a 
spell of wonder: a night on which to reach at last a 
place low and small, full of sweet breath and the tram- 
pling of clear-eyed cattle, and holding, as the seed holds 
the tree, the very core of life. Alas, alas for us who in 
these latter days find the wan hills all silent and deserted, 
irith none to beckon us to certain peace, with no noise 



THE GROTTO 167 

of angels in the silver clouds. Yet, when the scJemn 
wind begins to move along the mountain, walking in the 
heavy trees ; when every dewy leaf has a gleam of recog- 
nition for the wet-eyed stars, does there not come upon 
08 a sweetness greater than the fragrance of flowers, a 
desire — passionate and vague — for a beauty that is not 
less real because its revelations are subtle and its essence 
beyond the reach of the senses ? 

It was for this that Enoch, all unconsciously, waited 
with upturned face caressed by shadows. It was on 
account of these hours of ecstasy that he was called 
"simple." It was by virtue of this strange sacrament 
of which he partook — a fruit that never apple-tree bore 
nor sun ripened — that he turned to go downhill again 
in the dim morning with a light in his face. He was not 
in aspect a likely candidate for saintship. He shambled, 
and he wore, as usual in damp weather, an old potato sack 
draped over his shoulders. His eyes were full of grief, 
for he had seen joy go singing past, and he knew that 
it was lost to him. He was no more an ascetic than is any 
primitive creature. He was not of those whose spirits, 
cadaverous with long exile in material things, sit mourn- 
fully in the garden of earthly beauty, laying no finger on 
the rose and gold, waking the hollow echoes with the cry : 
"All these shall perish !" 

He wandered down toward the water. 'It'll be sobbin' 
wet to-morrowday !" he said. 

A laugh rang out in the forest, falling into the stream 
like a flower thrown from the tree-tops. The gibing 
echoes laughed lightly, dfishly. 

"Eh, Marigol' !" muttered Enoch, the sweat standing 
on his forehead so that the chill fingers of the breezes 
pricked him like electric needles. 

Thev came, the two young lawless creatures, one love- 
leu^ down the quiet sloping path where the red elder 



IB THE HOUSE IV T>01»fER FOREST 

kovcs still lamg. They came in the panoply of earij 
fdiysial beauty. But it was on Eaodi, dooked in his 
sadL, kaden-eycd, dank with grie^ that the greatest light 
of beauty rested. 

SVhen she saw him standing there. Marigold screamed, 
and the echoes screamed like frightened fairies. But it 
did not matter; if anjrone heard they would not heed» for 
the woods were said to be haunted by shridcs. Not oolj 
were the voices of the hedgdiog and the bat heard here; 
and that of the Death's-head moth — a bewitched whiq)cr 
— but legend said that here the mandrake cried, and that 
in this hollow of ancient g rce ncf y the v(Hces of creatures 
trampled by the multitude lived within the echoes. 

'^eD?" said Peter, red and awkward and therefore 
Mustering. ''What are you dcMug, spying here?*' 

^Sir, you best know what Fm here for/' 

•Wdir 

TTo see our Marigol' righted." 

^Kighted?" queried Peter with a forced hngit Mari- 
gold had crept into the shadow of the elder tree where 
Enoch stood. 

'Tve yeard tdl as you're to marry Miss Catherine one 
fine day/' said Enoch. ''No offence. Master Peter/' 

*'Well, what if I do?" 

"Miss Catherine's posy-ring wtmna be bought with 
your gold," said Enoch, with a flash in his brown eyes. 
'If you come to Miss Catherine's chamber it'll be lover, 
not 'usband she'll call you/' 

"What do you mean?" 

"I mean this-a-way, Master Peier. YouH wed our 
Marigol' to-morrowday." 

"I won't/' 

"Master Peter!" Enodi spdce sadly, reasonably, but 
with a latent anger. "Master Peter! You've took my 
Marigol' oS me. For you was my Marigol', my dear" 



THE GROTTO 169 

turned to the weeping girl — "and that you know. 
You've brought her low. Master Peter — ah ! she'll be low 
in the eyes of men when this night's doings come to 
Ught/' 

"Dunna say it, Enoch ! Dunna say it V* cried Marigold. 

''I mun say it to-night, my dear, and then never no 
more," said Enoch, "If so be you was fond of me, I'd 
marry you to-day in spite of all — ^marry you and love 
you true." 

She clung to his sleeve in a passion" of grief. 

"But seeing she dunna, and seeing as any bit of love 
she's got to give (for she is but young. Master Peter) 
is for you and no other, it 'ud be no manner use. So 
you'll marry our Marigol' to-morrowday." 

"I tell you I can't!" 

Peter tiiought of his parents, of Catherine, of Ernest 
and the neighbors, of the wrath and laughter. Why, life 
would not be livable at Dormer. And all for a servant 
— a very pretty servant, of course, but still only a servant. 
Marigold had now ceased to be wildly exciting. She was 
no longer forbidden fruit The fire in him was slaked. 
But Catherine was still forbidden fruit. Catherine could 
send a rarefied excitement through his veins. There was 
something alluring in those long eyes of hers. No— he 
could not tie himself for life to this pretty little thing, so 
shrinking and so yielding. He had won her; she would 
soon bore him. 

But Enoch's unmoved, equable voice broke in on him. 

"You'll marry her to-morrowday. Master Peter. If 
pocket-money's short, I've got a bit saved for the license 
and that." 

Peter stamped with rage. 

"I won't I You can't make me I'* 

"Oh! I thought you was fond of met" sdbbed 
Marigold. 



160 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"It j(m duniia/' said Eaodi stilly, '^joffU not see 
to-fnorrow's soil'' 

Marigold screamed again, and agam the echoes bandied 
the sound from one to another. 

Peter looked dazed 

'It's this-a-way/' said EnodL ^ dmma care fior life 
now, not a farden. If you wunna do my bidding and 
right my girl, I'll drown you like a kitten in Donner 
brook, and hang for it" 

''Oh, God I Oh, God r cried Marigold 

Peter's eyes looked dangerous. 

''Dunna make un do it, Enoch, if be dnnna want tof 
pleaded Marigold. 

"I be stronger than you," said EnodL ^ ooold break 
you in two, easy. And I'd do it'" 

Suddenly Peter sprang at him, for his temper was up 
and meekness was not in him. But a grip of iron was 
on his arms in a moment; he was helpless in the grasp 
of muscles hardened by years of toil. 

He realized defeat He understood that Enoch was 
that invincible creature, a man who does not care whether 
he lives or dies. He made terms. 

''Well, look here I If I do it, nobody's to know. She 
must go away ^" 

"Ah I I'll goo to my auntie^s." 

Enoch looked at Peter with mingled scorn, envy and 
Mger. 

"Go away I You've a chance to be near Marigold and 
you say go away !" he murmured. 

"Yes. She must go," said Peter. "Nobody most 
know." 

"Till when?" 

"Never." 

"You'll come to a better mind But still, if youll go 
and see her now and again ?" 



THE GROTTO 161 

"All right" 

"So be it I" said Enoch with a great sigh. "But mind 
you. Master Peter, no randies. No goings on with Miss 

Catherine, or " he gave a significant sideways nod 

towards the water. 

Peter was aghast That Enoch, of all people, should 
develop these murderous tendencies ! Then he suddenly 
felt sorry for Enoch. He remembered the dancing fire- 
light in the grotto, and the hawthorn freshness of Mari- 
gold. He turned to go. Then he came impulsively and 
boyishly back. "Wish it hadn't happened,'' he said 
gruflSy. 

"It inna your fault so much, lad, as the fault of the 
bitter old house," said Enoch. 

His voice rang over the water as they went across the 
bridge, and the house loomed up in the first sombre day- 
light The mists, herded by a rising^ wind, passed before 
it like strange creatures with an uncertain wandering 
motion. . Almost it seemed that the solid walls trembled, 
so that the watcher might expect at any m6ment a sliding 
collapse inevitably fated. For the falling of houses and 
cities and empires — ^all the solidities of man's invention — 
is not with a crash of masonry in the hour when all men 
flee. Years, centuries, before the crowded humanity 
inhabiting them feels a flicker of disquiet, with less 
sound than a midge makes, they have fallen in the echo- 
ing soul under the owl-light of dreams. 



i 



CHAPTER Xni: THE BEAST WALK 

WHEN something dramatic happens, people are 
usually too busy to notice it. On the morning after 
Enoch's vigil by the grotto, two dramatic things hap- 
pened. Jasper went to purgatory for Catherine's and the 
truth's sake, for it was his first day at Mr. Arkinstall's; 
and Marigold set forth on the journey which was to make 
her the bride of Dormer's heir. 

Ernest reasoned with Jasper at breakfast — the denuded 
meal with no potted meat — for he was really a kind- 
hearted man, and Jasper's miserable face worried him. 
Catherine pointed out how much easier was the life of a 
country curate than the life of a farm-hand. But Jaspa 
"hardened his face," to use a quotation of Sarah's, and 
turning to Peter said: "Coming?" 

"In a minute." Peter was cross and absent-mindeiL 
He was wondering how the day off to-morrow was to be 
managed, and he wanted to say good-bye to Marigold. 

"Well, I'll go on," said Jasper. He strode oflF down 
the drive, his shoulders bent like those of a man carrying 
a heavy burden. 

"Lord !" said Solomon, "I'm sorry for ArkinstalL Not 
but what he deserves it." 

"Deserves what, uncle ?" asked Catherine: 

"The worst farm-hand ever man had," said Solomon. 
"And he's got it." 

Peter pushed back his chair. "Can I ask off to-mor- 
row, father?" he said. 

"What for?" 

162 



THE BEAST WALK 16S 

"I thought I'd get some new leggin's." 

"They're quite good," said his mother. 

"And a few cartridges." 

"Plenty in the house," said his father. 

"And I want to see about Christmas presents/' 

"Too early !" said his grandmother. 

"Damn !" said Peter. 

"What's that? What's that?" Solomon was particu- 
lar as to swearing. 

"Swearing is an ugly habit," Catherine swept frcxn the 
room. 

"There, now you've offended the girl !" 

'T-et me have a day off, and I'll buy her a present." 

This extreme cunning won his point He departed, but 
not to the Arkinstall's. He went down the lane towards 
the Four Waters, and there he awaited the cart. 

Meanwhile, Marigold was seen off by Sarah and her 
mother. She slipped away like dew from a flower, and 
the house seemed to take no cognisance of her going. 
Only the forest sang its old, low song, and the water 
murmured of mountains and the sea— of things greater 
than Dormer. 

"Well," said Sarah, "I shall miss you, Marigol.' Her 
that's coming is but a poor thing. Gowk's her name and 
suUen's her ways. I'll miss you proper." 

Her protestations were the more genuine as she knew 
the dq)arture to be inevitable. 

"When you've raught back, Enoch, you can lug up the 
new girl's box," she said. "And to-morrow you met as 
well chum, seeing I'll be drove for time." 

"To-morrow'U be a day off." 

"A day offl" When had Enoch ever w^ted a 
day off? 

'Ay. That's the colour of it," said Enoch. To him- 



ii 



164 THE HOUSE IN DOBMER FOREST 

self fie said : "FU miss you proper, Marigx)!' ! Ay, IH 
miss you proper!" 

"I partly think you'd better be a quieter girl at yoar 
auntie's than what you've been at this 'ouse/' said Mrs. 
Gosling. 

"Scrat onl" Enoch remarked to Jenny, feeling that 
things were getting strained. They drove away, and the 
house was unaware that any dissolution had begun within 
it Enoch was glad to remember the five pounds in silver 
which he had given to Marigold as a wedding present, 
and the bunch of violets that reposed inside his hat, to be 
presented at the station. Thinking of these things^ be 
smiled his queer melodic smile. At a turn of the road, 
there was Peter. 

"Good-bye, Goldie I" he cried. "Give us a kiss !" In 
the manner of young lovers they forgot the feelings of 
Enoch. "I'm coming to-morrow, you know where," said 
Peter. 

"I know you be," replied Enoch, with a grim mouth. 
While Marigold journeyed on in hope and Enoch jour- 
neyed back in despair, things grew very strained at the 
Wallows. Mr. Arkinstall became more and more devi- 
ous, more and more subtle as the day wore on and as he 
realized Jasper's incompetence. Philip, for his part, had 
determined to drive Jasper away. A pretender to the 
hand of Catherine should not receive anything of encour- 
agement at the Wallows. So if a dirty job had to be done, 
Jasper did it. If anything fell, it fell on Jasper. If a 
young horse had to be harnessed, Jasper harnessed it 
Sometimes he looked up towards Dormer and thought 
how near heaven was to hell — ^for Dormer would be 
heaven, he felt, if Catherine would only love him. If 
he might have her and his books and a chance of success 
in life what a glory there would be on the days I As it 
was, there seemed no chance of anything but a choice of 



THE BEAST WALK 165 

two evils. Either he must go (''and go he shall I'* said 
Philip), or he must stay and bear it. He gritted his 
teeth and decided to stay. 

He came home from his first day with worn nerves 
and in a state of black depression. Like many common- 
place men of his type, Mr. Arkinstall had a hatred for 
anyone in the least unusual or above the ordinary stan- 
dard. He kept Jasper loading turnips till he was almost 
sick with exhaustion. When Ja^er flagged, he wove 
sarcasms of an amazing circuitousness, indulging in an 
orgy of insults to which his oriental expression gave a 
subtlety not their own. 

All day Jasper promised himself that he would go up 
to his room after tea and work. He could pass exams, 
even if he worked alone. If he passed the exams., 
Catherine would surely see the foolishness of his working 
at the Wallows. Then perhaps she would come with him 
into the^ world. So he comforted himself with lonely 
enthusiasm. After tea he fetched a candle and lit it 
Grandmother eyed him over the top of the Lion. Then, 
as he was going out unseen by the others, she announced 
with startling suddenness : 

''He's gotten another wax candle I*' 

Mrs. Darke looked up. 

''Why do you bum so many candles ?*' she aaked 

"To do my work." 

"What work r 

"Books." 

^'You don't want to work at books. You are learning 
farming. You are not to be a scholar." 

"Not a scholar ! Never a scholar now !" Grandmother 
harped, in the manner of the insensitive, on the one unen- 
durable thing. 

"I can't spare you candles," said Mrs. Darke. 

Jasper turned and went out. He would buy the can- 



166 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FORIBST 

dies himself. But he had no money. He went to loolc 
for his father and found him feeding the "gun-d<^." 
They received their supper with imperturbable pessimism, 
as if they had been soured by their life-work of putting 
others in the way of getting what they themselves wanted, 
and as if they knew that Solomon liked them not for 
iwhat they were, but for what they did. And as they 
trailed after Solomon on their leads, day by day, they 
had an air of being two very old people playing with a 
small boy. It was evident that when his back was turned 
glances of amused tolerance were exchanged. 

"Father 1" said Jasper with a mighty effort; ''oonld 
yoiu let me have some pocket money ?" 

Solomon was rufHed by Peter's affair and by the gro- 
Bpective inconvenience of Enoch's holiday. 

"I'll find the cash," he said, "when you find God.** 

At this moment Ernest loomed above the kennel waH 
He had a way of appearing above Jasper's horizons like 
a round, red sun, persisting in shining on the evil and od 
the good. He breathed forgiveness on Jasper at evety 
turn. He insisted on loving him. He said : 

"One cannot do much for the poor f ellow, but one can 
at least give him companionship." 

Jasper, finding this unbearable, tried hints, silence, 
finally rudeness. But they had no more effect than paper 
darts flung at an elephant At the present moment Ernest 
made things worse by sa3ring : 

"Right, sir I Right! That's cricket! First things 
first." 

"If fools held their tongue s  " exploded Jasper. 

'Though I can't forgive an insult to my cloth," said 
Ernest, "I can forgive an insult to myself, freely— 
freely." ' 

"In the devil's name," shouted Jasper, "stop this dams- 
able forgiving." 



THE BEAST WALK 167 

"If you want to quarrel," remarked Solomon, "quarrel 
elsewhere. You're disturbing the dogs." 

Jasper went back to the house. As he flung the door 
open Ernest, following, said : 

"I want to be friends, Jasper." 

"Well, I don't r 

"Refuse a friend!" 

"I don't want friends just now. I want m3rself. I want 
to be let alone and have room to breathe." 

Ernest expanded his immense chest. The chain on 
which dangled his Maltese cross was tried to the utter- 
most 

"/ am always able to breathe," he said. '7 am never 
conscious of stifling. It is life — ^the true life — ^that you 
want Mens sana in corpore sano. ''Tis Life, more 
life, for which we pant' Come to the Captain." 

Jasper looked at him, and his expression verged on the 
murderous. He was reminded of a frog which Peter 
(who had been cruel as a small boy from lack of imagina- 
tion) had inflated by putting a straw into its mouth and 
blowing. He felt that Ernest would like to put a straw 
into his (Jasper's) mind and blow until he was inflated 
with all the orthodox views that Ernest held. Ernest 
was quite unconscious of any criticism. 

"I am only trying to cheer you, my dear fellow — ^to 
cheer you and draw you out of your gloom," he said. 

"If you cheer me any more, I shall go melancholy mad." 

"What you want, my dear Jasper, is to be more robust 
— ^less morbid; to be less (if I may say so, as (your 
spiritual pastor) less conceited and more obedient. 
Obedient to the Captain, to myself and to the Rector." 

"Obedience is a vice," snapped Jasper. "It is a pet 
vice of stunted personalities who can't act for themselves, 
having no ideas, and who claim merit for copying the 
ideas and actions of others." 



168 THE HOUSE IN DOBMER FOREST 

He went into the dining'-rooai, oomf oited fay the knowl- 
edge that he had turned his sentence quite passably. The 
epigram has never been given its due as a tonic agains: 
the ills of life; but a tonic it certainly is, or why are so 
many books written? 

In the dining-room no one had moved since Jasper 
went ouL Catherine locked up with disapproving raised 
eyebrows. Jasper sat down and turned over the leaves of 
an old magazine which had lived on the side taUe with the 
family Bible since a chance visitor left it there. Sitting 
thus, humped in his chair, sullen as a winter bird, and 
feckless with the lack of spiritual food, he glowered round 
at the others. Not one of them, he diought, understood 
or wanted to understand his primal needs. He had not 
the faintest idea that Amber followed his weary road 
step by step, footsore when he was footsore, hungry 
when he was hungry. Catherine he regarded as too far 
above him to be able to Sjrmpathize with his troubles^ 
They could not, he thought, glimpse in the mistiest way 
the kind of life that was home to him. He was different, 
as a freak bird is different; so they disliked him. As he 
sat there, he felt, below the desultory conversation and 
the fixed expressions of their faces, their spirits stalking 
his spirit in the silence of semi-consciousness; snapping 
at him; coiling like snakes; peering out from the ambush 
of their creed and from the stronghold of received 
opinion at him, walking defenceless through the night. 

In this cellar of being, where he sometimes came, he 
felt them all to be totally different from the everyday 
people he knew. Even Catherine, when he descended into 
this crepuscular chamber, lit so startlingly by flashes of 
insight, seemed alien to herself. Once even, he had 
glimpsed on that angelic profile a sneer. As for grand- 
mother, she was a fierce adversary tilting at him with the 
armed, exuberant hate of a knight of the middle ages, 






THE BEAST WALK 169 

and with the face of an angry wasp. He chuckled when 
he thus envisaged grandmother. But at the thought 
of his mother he did not laugh. His face grew wan with 
the tormented expression of neuralgia. Only his was a 
neuralgia of the soul. 

'You fidget a good deal, Jasper," said Catherine. 
Tidget ! Fidget ! Fidget I" said grandmother. 

Jasper threw the magazine into the fire and went into 
the kitchen. 

"A bad-tempered boy — ^a very bad-tempered boy,'* mut- 
tered grandmother. 

"Sarah," said Jasper coaxingly, "give us two or three 
candles I" ^ 

But Sarah was in no mood to bestow candles. 

"Don't talk of candles to a woman tormented, Master 
Jasper!" said she. "I've no mind to give you candles. 
And what's the use of this wilful nonsense of book- 
learning? If you've got a big print Bible for duty and 
the death and birth column every week for pleasure, what 
more is there ?" 

Jasper was beginning an argument, but at that moment 
Enoch came in and Sarah's wrath fell on him. She had 
found the rough draft of the letter Enoch had written 
for presentation with the violets. 

"Love you, you says ! And darling, you says I Part- 
ing for evermore, you says! Who are you to say love 
and darling, as knows no more of love than a calf new- 
bom? And you sitting and locking at Jemima Onions 
day in, day out, mum as a mouse in cheese. To go and 
write the like of this all unbeknownst, and to a girl as 
canna do crockerywork and makes pastry as hard as a 
lawyer!" 

Jasper felt th!at others besides himself were inoom- 
pletely happy. 



170 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"I'll go to the Beast Walk," he thought "At least 
they're not alive." 

He was falling back upon a habit of his childhood 
(When people misunderstood him, refused to reply to his 
questions, insisted upon conforming to their standards, 
llien he went to the Beast Walk — the place he loathed 
more than any place on earth. To climb this path har- 
rowed his soul, made his face even at ten years look quite 
wizened. But now, in his young manhood, the dark spell 
was infinitely stronger. He drank, here of a charm thick 
as black honey made from purple poison flowers by bees 
in hell. This curious psychic state was mysterious to him 
as are the instincts of all animals — man and brute. No 
one else felt it, though the place was certainly not cheer- 
ful. It was one of those admixtures of man and nature 
which has somehow gone sour in the making. To reach 
it you crossed the wooden bridge at the back of the house, 
turning to the left under the trees in the shadowy path 
that led towards the Four Waters. Halfway between 
the bridge and Mrs. Gosling's cottage the Beast Walk 
went straight uphill from the water. There was some- 
thing significant in the way in which this broadband 
rather pompous walk ended in the soft, thick stream with- 
out reason or explanation. 

Nobody knew when the Beast Walk was first thought 
of. Only grandmother could remember, as a little girl, 
being told by her grandmother that it had been finished 
in her own archaic childhood. The walk, during the 
whole of its ascent, was bordered on each side by strange 
beasts and birds cut out of gigantic yew trees. It ended 
at the grotto, which dominated it. Just here, the wood 
was composed of yews and hollies so old that they gave 
the impression of having existed in the primeval forest. 
The upper woods were equally old, and much more 
lovely; for there, in sheltered dingles of the hillside, oak 



TIJE BEAST WALK 171 

and beech, the silver flickering birch, the true-service tree 
and the scarlet-fruited spindle stood in an elfin age that 
transcended youth, because the age of trees does not imply 
loss of beauty. But down near the water the hosts of 
the yews spread their black tents, like the dwellings of 
gnomes. 

In each generation the regnant Darke had cut one or 
two of these into such shapes as pleased him. Swans, 
horses, fowls, peacocks, cattle and sheep crowded the 
walk, and there was one very malevolent-looking monkey. 
But the Darke idea of an animal's body seemed almost 
as wide of the mark as their idea of its soul. Some were 
almost indistinguishable. All had a nightmare touch. 
This was accentuated by the fact that they had not been 
trimmed for a long time, so beak and claw were exag- 
gerated, and the outlines of head and wing and udder 
became vague and ominous. They were like a herd of 
prehistoric beasts trooping down to drink at the stream. 
Jasper thought, as he looked at their lowering ranks, that 
it was as if each ancestor had breathed such ferocities as 
were in his soul into his especial creation. So the walk 
had come to s}rmbolize in his mind the Lares and Penates 
of Dormer, and the beasts were pictures of hoary tradi- 
tion, prescription, decrepit and unwieldy laws, custom 
grown senile, a predatory collectivism. It was this pre- 
datory atmosphere that most impressed him at Dormer. 
He felt sometimes as if he had come into a wild beast 
show and found all the beasts loose. He was realizing 
that there are depths of savagery in the human heart 
deeper than that of killing; that when law is put before 
love and the material before the spiritual there is nothing 
left wherewith to combat evil; that the commonplace is 
the soul's peril; that a person with low aims, paltry 
pleasures and an inability to love or hate passionately is 
more dangerous than any beast of prey ; that Vv\s t\gVv\55saos» 



172 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

and respectable relations and ndgbbours were going to 
be lions and tigers in his path. 

The walk was always impressive— cm a lurid evening 
of thunder when the heavy air pressed upon the woods 
and the beasts were tinged with reddish Ught; on a foggy 
December day when they loomed through yellow cur- 
tains; in snow, when each lumpish shape wore with ironic 
mirth a white chlamys; in windy weather, when thcj 
were like creatures silently reaching out for a victim, 
having in them something of the horrific and the obscene 
The grotto, built of grey stone and flat as a tortoise, 
might have been a sacrificial altar. But it was on a moon- 
lit night such as this that Jasper most detested them, and 
most nearly attained through their sorcery creative 
expression. As he turned up the walk, leaving the silver 
water behind him, the grass seemed to be strewn with 
broken idols. But it was only the inky shadows, even 
more grotesque than the trees, prone upon the greenish 
moonlight. He thought of his grandmother, as he gener- 
ally did in this place. He also thought how strange it 
is that man can so easily create that which becomes a 
god of terror to him, and with what eager celerity he 
sets to work to make nightmares for his fellows. Tliose 
at Dormer now, those at Dormer in the past, had made 
and were still making springs for the souls of people like 
himself. Because his soul was alive and would fly they 
wished to cage it. Because it sang its own song they 
wanted to kill it. Spiritually they were cannibals. Jasper 
had a particular passion for freedom, a wild, bird4ike 
need of personal liberty. If he could not grow as be 
would, live as he willed, something told him that he would 
cease to grow, cease to exist. 

"Fd go away to-night," he thought, "if it wasn't for 
Cathy. If she wasn't what she is — beautiful in soul and 
body — ^I shouldn't care what became of me, but she is 
-^sheisr 



THE BEAST WALK 178 

The mis-shapen monkey, its eye a hole through which 
shone the greenish sky, mopped and mowed before the 
moon and seemed to contemplate him with ironic humour. 
Suddenly it came to him that here he was, a single, friend- 
less soul, in the wide, worn spoor of his ancestors — of 
the herd that gallops because its neighbour gallops, is 
afraid with its neighbour's panic, rushes on, flank to 
heaving flank, each goring its neighbour in the agony 
of its own terror at the spectres of its own imagining. 

Jasper shivered, feeling the woods cold and ghastly 
and companionless without the retinue of summer. 
Already the autumn tree-music had dwindled to the thin, 
eerie murmur of winter. With a shrug at his own 
expense, Jasper walked on moodily between the crouch- 
ing forms, and sitting down on the stone bench outside 
the grotto, took out his treasure, a photograph Catherine 
had had taken of herself in her confirmation veil. She 
had turned up her eyes and drooped her mouth, knowing 
with her unfailing sense for artistic effect that what would 
in Amber have seemed a grimace would in herself merely 
look devout. And, as Jasper was gazing at this with pas- 
sionate intentness, suddenly Catherine herself was there 
in a long white cloak. 

"Like a moth," said Jasper quietly, "like a beautiful 
moth, you came." 

She smiled, sitting beside him. 

"Oh, come with me, Cathy, out into the world !" he 
cried. "You don't know, you wouldn't dream, how well 
I can do in the things I want to do. Hated labour is bad 
labour. I can do no good here. Marry me, Cathy ¥* 

"When you become a Christian again.'' 

Jasper was kneeling beside her, his right arm along 
the back of the seat, touching her shoulders. 

"God, whoever He is, wherever He is, must be greater 
than you make Him, Cathy— -too great to be a bc»x<^ ol 
contention between lovers.'' 



174 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''If you become a Christian again, yoti could kned bj 
me like this every night; you could put your arms round 
me; you " 



"Take care, Cathy. I*m not a boy now." 

"You could kiss me." 

She gleamed palely on him. She would witf, ibao^ 
it cost her a blush. But Jasper had no more patience— 
his arms were round her ; he kissed her hands, her fo^^ 
head, her mouth, with a kind of wrathful reverence. She 
remained still and silent in a cold rage. 

"Well?" she said. "Have you done?" 

Jasper came to himself. But he still kndt there like a 
penitent awaiting the lash. 

"You are not even a gentleman," said Catherine. **I 
shWll not speak to you again for a month — ^not till Christ- 
mas." 

He received the sentence in silence, absorbed in won* 
der at his own temerity, letting his impenitent eyes dwdl 
on the lips he had kissed. 

Catherine rose and drew her cloak about her, leaving 
him kneeling there. Then suddenly she came back, her 
hands outstretched: "If you'll become a Christian, IH 
marry you at Christmas." 

She waited. 

"If you asked me to change from one religion to 
another," said Jasper, "if you asked me to steal for you, 
perhaps even to murder for you, T6 do it But I can't 
invent a God for you, Cathy. I can't make the truth in 
myself a lie — even for you." 

She went with a scornful smile. Long after she had 
gone he watched the space between the trees where she 
had disappeared. 

"It's a long way to Christmas," he thought And a 

long way it was. Peter, whose room he now shared, was 

very moody. Sometimes he whistled till Jasper threw a 

book at him, sometimes \ie ^w^% ^o^»oc«j. Kv^t after 



THE BEAST WALK 176 

night, Jasper woke up to hear the door close softly. 
With a brother's loyalty he never gave the slightest hint 
of this to anyone, nor did he question Peter. If Petef 
forgot to make his bed look as if it had been slept in, 
Jasper did it. He tried to be as incurious as he could, 
but privately he glimpsed a romance. And when he heard 
Jenny's soft footfalls on the sandy drive and her staccato 
gallop far off on the road; he felt lonelier than ever. He 
spent his time in avoiding Ernest and trying not to let 
the family find out that Catherine was not speaking to 
him. Only Amber was left to him, and even of her he 
was rather afraid, for to the sensitive open sympathy is 
often painful. 

Then one day even Amber's comradeship was taken 
away. She and Catherine were going to tea at the 
.Waltows. They always went early because Alice liked 
chat. They had to leave a note at the Rectory, and so 
did not go by the most direct road, but skirted the 
Dormer and Wallows land. They noticed the cattle 
bunching, and coming up to them saw that their heads 
were down, and all turned inwards toward something 
on the ground. Low moanings and angry snortings made 
the scene more alarming. Suddenly Amber cried : 

"It's Hetty! They're goring Hetty!" 

Hetty was a new acquisition at Dormer — a little Jersey 
cow, timid and wild. She had evidently strayed into the 
Wallows land, and as she was different from the tng 
Herefords they had gored her. 

"Help me to drive them off, Cathy, quick !" 

"I shouldn't go too near," said Catherine. 

"Oh, she's hurt to death," murmured Amber. "She 
must be shot. Run, Cathy, and fetch one of the boys. 
I'U keep them off." 

Catherine thought this preferable to stiaying. Amiber, 
confronted with the groaning animal, its e^ei^ ^tcSl^ 
appealing, was full of wild pity. She wrung Yvtt Vv^xi^^, 



176 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''Oh, be quick, Cathy ! Be quick !*' she whispered Sbe 
ran to the brook and fetched water in her hat to naoista 
the poor dry tongue. But it was too late. She stood on 
th^ bank and watched for Catherine. How long she was! 
Oh, why could she not run faster ! Half an hour went 
by, an hour. Sixty minutes of watching hdpless agony 
is not pleasant At last after an hour and a quarter she 
saw Catherine with Jasper and Philip coining leisurely 
along. Philip had a gun. She beckoned. She ran to 
meet them. 

"What a long time!" she cried. 

"What a fuss !" said Philip. 

"Hurry up, now you arc here." 

"My dear Amber, youVc quite excited/' Philip spoke 
banteringly. 

"Oh, don't talk. Shoot her quickly. What has she 
ever done that she should suffer so?" 

"First let's see if there's more money in her patched 
up than there is in her dead," said Philip. 

"You shan't, ycwi shan't," Amber sobbed. "Shoot her 
now, I say. She shall not suffer sa" 

Amber in this mood was new to them. Philip snig- 
gered. Catherine looked haughty. 

"Best get on with it," said Jasper. "It's our cow 
anyway." 

"Yes, but your govemor'U want damages." 

"Give me the gun," said Jasper. It was enough that 
Philip wanted delay; immediately Jasper wanted haste 
Also his natural instincts were the siiame as Amber's. 

He took the gun and shot Hetty, and she laid down her 
tormented head and forgot life and its sorrows. 

"And now," said Amber, "I should like to know what 
yovi were thinking of, Catherine, not to hurry as I asked 
you." 

"I felt faint." 

'Taint! Whatbvisvtit&%VttA>fCfa\s^^'^aAfe^^ Tbfft 



THE BEAST WALK 177 

was a creature in agony, and you, a perfectly strong, 
healthy woman, felt faint. Nonsense ! I don't believe it" 

Catherine looked pathetic The two young men looked 
at Amber as if she were inhtunan. 

"You have no sympathy, Amber," said Catherine plain- 
tively. "You think more about a soulless creature than 
you do about me." 

"You are too selfish for any words," said Amber, turn- 
ing away and walking on alone. In a few minutes Jasper 
caught her up. 

"You mustn't say such things to Cathy," he said 

"They are true." 

"Cathy is an angel." 

"I know Catherine very wdl, dear." 

"If you want me to be your pal, you mustn't criticiztf 
Cathy either to me or to herself or to anyone. Cathy is 
as far above you and me as — 



ft 



"Never mind the illustration, old boy !" 

Amber laughed, but her laugh was rueful. 

"Well," said Jasper irritably, "you've changed. That's 
all I can say. I can't feel to you as I did." 

He turned and waited for the others. Amber, with a 
bitter sense of frustration, went on alone, while the two 
young men eyed one another across Catherine's hat with 
flashes of hostility, veiled on the part of Philip, unveiled 
on the part of Jasper. 

So it was that Jasper became doubly lonely. He fdt 
this most at Christmas. As Amber said, Christmas was 
the time when they gave each other all the things they 
had bought at the bazaar at the Keep, which things 
would be convenient for the summer sale at the Rectory. 
But Jasper had no presents to give, for he not having yet 
found a God, money had not been forthcoming from his 
father. Ernest, Catherine and Mrs. Velindrc all gave 
him devotional hooks which he put on Vv\s m^Tilf^v^«» 




178 TllE HOUSii: IN £K>HA1£K FOREST 



and contemplated with dismay. But neither this nor the 
fact that he had no gifts to bestow was what chiefly 
troubled him. What grieved him was that on account 
of a philost^hical difference of opinion he was tacitly shut 
out from all share in the sweet humanities of Christmas. 
It was understood that he would not care for carol silv- 
ers, would not care to go with Peter as of old to hdp the 
ringers. The idea was that he was a sinner wilfully n^- 
lecting God. He knew in his own heart that he was 
homesick for God and could not find Him. 

It was the time of a winter day when the lonely heart 
aches ; when dusk has fallen, but the lights are not yet lit; 
when the last sounds of day come sadly across the mead- 
ows with a forlorn, lost music, already becoming muted 
under the outspread hand of night. 

Jasper felt bitterly alone when the family went off to 
church at half-past three. He had felt it when they went 
to the choral celebration in the morning, for that service 
had been one of his greatest joys. He felt the irony of 
the fact that he, who could appreciate these things, was 
shut away from them by his desire to do right. Another 
irony was that they all took it for granted that laziness 
was at t^e root of his absence. He had tried to find com- 
fort on Sundays in lighting a fire in the grotto and get- 
ting Enoch to come and sit with him, for Enoch was 
another absentee. He was firm against all reasoning, 
frwn the Rector's mild: "\Vhat have you against us, 
Enoch?" to Mrs. Gosling's "Well, what I say is, on a 
cold morning a sup of wine is a sup of wine!" But 
Enoch had been less companionable lately. So Jasper sur- 
reptitiously followed the others down the drive, along 
the few yards of lane, into the churchyard. The yews 
were piled with sugary white; Mrs. Cantlop's wreaths 
were buried; the negro boy had a warm snow vest alt 
down one side. The church windows glowed warmly 
and invitingly, and Charles Dank was playii^^, "Ob, 



THE BEAST WALK 17» 

come, all ye faithful!" with an explosiveness never 
attained except at Christmas. It was all very human, 
very peaceful, Jasper thought — ^peaceful, that is, for those 
who believed in it. As the voices rose within, he could 
distinguish Catherine's clear, metallic soprano. He 
thought how lovely she had lodced as she came to him 
in the hall in her winter coat and the cap with violets 
that showed her hair to such advantage. "Put away 
your pride and come!" she smiled. "Come with me I" 

As if he had any pride ! 

And then Ernest had come up behind him and whim- 
pered: "Only come! Only have faith!" 

Ruby said nothing ; she spoke very little now. 

"Faith ? What is faith ?" said Jasper to himself. And 
it seemed to him that his friend Hallowes was right when 
he said that faith was generally an effervescent froth ris- 
ing out of the bubbling contentment of the more com- 
fortable classes of humanity; rendered to an essence; 
bottled, and offered peremptorily to the less fortunate, 

Jasper looked up at the angry reds and purples of Death 
and Hell which stained the passing snow. It was too 
eerie here, so he went round to the porch. Sitting there, 
a little sheltered from the wind, he could be more inti- 
mately in touch with the service. Ernest was intoning 
prayers now; Jasper could hear Mrs. Cantlop's voice in! 
the responses, very slow and hearty, and Mr. Arkinstairs, 
turning the simplicity of the service into subtlety. He 
smiled when Sarah set about the creed as she would about 
a day's washing. Finally, the Rector gave out his text: 
"When He maketh up His jewels." 

When who made up what jewels? Jasper wondered. 
For, to some minds, the more concrete religion is the 
less they can take hold of it. What did all these pec^e 
want ? he wondered. What did they really expect ? Was 
their reward that they would die with the creations of 
their own minds so thick about them that tVve:^ >no>3^^ xtf*. 



180 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

hear the snow-wind mourning: "It is the end?" Would 
the Rector dose his eyes for the last time to see within 
himself multitudinous jewels of layed splendour? Woul<t 
the woman whCKn no man had loved die with the kiss of 
passion on her grey lips? Would trees whisper in 
Enoch's failing consciousness, and mountains of dressed 
poultry cheer his aunt across the dark river, and gold 
mines set their allure for Mr, Cantlop? Or was there 
something real, though vague and inexpressible, await- 
ing them ? If so, it seemed to him a pity that they should 
cumber the window of vision with all this stu£F of thdr 
imagining. 

There was do comfort here. He went back to the 
house, fetched his flute, and played himself up the Beast 
Walk. And as he went, he smiled wryly at his own 
expense, thinking how Sarah had said :' "It's wail, wail, 
wail with you, Master Javier, like the Willypeewits 
weep-weeping tn the mocmshine, wanting summat to cry 
for." 

Jasper felt that he had a good deal to cry -for. His 
music fell like tears on the waters. He had learnt tha 
rudiments of the flute years ago from Mr. Greenways, 
but had outstripped turn by virtue of a greater capacity 
for misery. Mr. Greenways was of so cheerful a dispo- 
sition that it was doubtful whether the heights and depths 
of music would ever be completely unveiled to him. But, 
as Sarah said, "with these whistles, what you want is a 
tune, summat as goes with a hop, skip and jump, and not 
shuffle, shuffle, like a tramp's wedding." 

"I wish," said Jasper aloud, as he looked down the vista 
of beasts from the grotto, and >Jown the vista of his om 
Ufe, "I wish to God Hallowes would comer 



BOOK TWO: THE FOREST 



CHAPTER XIV: THE UPPER WOODS 

WHEN the atmosphere of the house became too 
thunderous and Amber's nerves were strained to 
breaking-pointy she crept away to the upper woods. This 
she had learnt from Enoch, for she noticed that when 
the kitchen rang with battle, when the butter did not 
"come/* or some of his daily jobs went wrong, then, at 
the first leisure moment, he went to the woods. He had 
imconsciously fostered a love of nature in her, for he 
^:wo>uld bring her the rarely beautiful treasures of earth 
— a primrose plant all a-blossom in a nest of moss, a 
branch of grape-like buckthorn fruit, a jroung robin for 
her to set free from a cage of rushes. He never kept 
birds in cages, and his only pets were two tame hedge- 
hogs that wandered about after him in a blind sort of 
devotion, and were fed like cats with saucers of milk. 

Amber loved to think in winter of the life that ran in 
the dark tree trunks, of the muffled laughter in every 
grass-root and crocus bulb; to hear the thrush chanting 
his prophetic vision of spring far-off in the southern val- 
le3rs. She loved to watch for the purple, and gold and 
green marvels of elf-land that blossomed out of the dead- 
black branches; to kneel by the rockery and slip her 
finger into a corolla of the blue gentian, where it was 
warmer than the outer air. She waited eagerly to see, 
every 3rear, the blackthorns float like clouds along the 
copper-coloured slopes; to hear on a spring evening, sing- 
ing in the bare ash tree against a sky of dewy purple, the 
first blackbird. It seemed to her that while Donmer lived 

188 



184 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

by law, the forest lived by impulse. Through a gradnal 
awakening to natural beauty, she reached a perception of 
beauty peculiar to herself. She began to perceive analo- 
gies. Nature became for her, not a fortuitous assemblage 
of pretty things, but a harmony, a poem solemn and 
austere. It was for her no longer a flat painting on the 
wall of life. Beauty breathed there, light shone there that 
was not of the flower or the star. A tremor, mysterious 
and thrilling, seemed to run with the light through all 
matter, through a single open blossom of the wild gean 
tree and through the whispering forest. 

Something watched there; something waited; on this 
side or on that, always a little above her, a little beyond 
Was it there, where the quicken burned, or there where 
the yellow snapdragon crowded— «very small mouth half 
open, as if about to tell her the secret ? Young and fugi- 
tive it seemed, as the baby thrush that hopped in calloir 
dignity across her path, yet darkling and terrific as the 
core of a thunderstorm. When she turned quickly, it was 
gone, like the shy emmet, slipping under the layers of the 
leafy, ferny wood; it was fled like the nigiit-wandering 
moth into the topmost, heavy platform of the pine; fused 
in fierce moonlight So her going out into the green 
world had in it something of a religious rite. 

On a still morning of early June she went up to the 
Birds' Orchard. She often did this before the day of 
petty irritation began. For everything was still the same 
at Dormer. Its inhabitants rasped on one another like 
rocks grinding beneath the tides. Ruby lay on the ances- 
tral sofa most of the day now, and she had become almost 
as tearful as Mrs. Cantlop. The family was much exer- 
cised about Peter, who did not show the eagerness for 
Catherine's hand which they expected. Jasper, very 
tiresomely, did. He and Amber had drifted further 
apart. Amber was now in the unfortunate predicament 



THE UPPER WOODS IM 

of having no one to laugh with, but she found some com- 
fort in the inconsequences of the bird people. 

She did not care for the lower woods; they were so 
near the house, so much under its influence. The huge 
fissured boles of the yews, dull red, each one a scheme 
of clustered columns, upheld the massive black-green 
foliage, so that the wood seemed like a low chamber 
with a heavy carven .-oof, under which twilight always 
brooded. The floor of this place was deep with the leaves 
of many centuries, which had gathered with the thicken- 
ing years till they muffled the footsteps. When Amber 
thought how the contemporaries of Harold Hardrada had 
probably walked in this very wood, under trees which 
now were jagged stunts, and considered their fragile 
joys, their tiny griefs, so huge to them, she shivered, feel- 
ing antiquity to be fearful — almost cynical. The hollies, 
the bcries livid, grotesquely twisted and writhing, were 
<^d but dwarfish. Their leaves, with the hard, light- 
refracting polish (breaking the light as granite breaks 
water) were sparse. They were in flower, but the thin 
grey froth of blossom hardly seemed to belong to spring, 
though it possessed, like everything in nature, its own 
individual beauty. This wood, in its silence and still- 
ness, with its massive yew foliage, like wrought iron, 
might have been part of a petrified forest. Through 
arcades that seemed like the recesses of time Amber 
hurried upwards, avoiding the Beast Walk. Through a 
company of fir trees set with points of bright green flame 
she came at last to the uf^r wood, and was instantly at 
grips with beauty. There was for her literally something 
of wrestling, of the mood which says: "I will not let 
thee go until thou bless me," in her communings with 
nature. 

■Suddenly a blackbird fluted, and the notes, liquid and 
glassy, made room for themselves and their silver echoes, 



186 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

seeming to need all space in which to expand, to rise in 
full tide, submerging everything. The bracken, stiB 
unopened, stood ranked in bright green slender pillars, 
and Amber thought that the troops of hyacinths that 
marched in and out among them were like the procession 
of a Lord Mayor's Show in faery. It was very earlj, 
and the wood was in a charmed stillness. The Uackbird 
fell into a long meditation, and Amber shut her eyes, 
listening, not with the ear, but with the soul. Here, 
where the sounds of the world died away like a lapsing 
tide, she heard the sad rtunour that life makes, stirring 
and murmuring in the silver hush of nonentity. She 
heard the moth-flicker of worlds slipping out into their 
age-long life, and their return — faint as the hum of a 
spent bee — to their everlastingly mysterious cause. 
Leaning against a wild pear tree, she was aware,' by 
her inward hearing, of the tidal wave of sap that rose so 
full and strong that she could almost imagine it roaring 
like the sea. Then a tremor of wind shook the flowering 
tree-tops, and she awoke again to the senses, to the 
strangeness of these utterances of the leaves. For the 
forest tree keeps in her heart secrets of days long gone- 
days when the little bruit of man was drowned by the 
infinite grave forest murmur; when the trees spoke alond 
the things that now they only whisper. Every tassel and 
streamer, every rosette, and cluster and catkin, all the 
minute, unnoticed bloom of the woodland, seemed to 
envelop her in scent and rustling music. Qose about her 
she had the bloom of the wild fruit trees in the Birds' 
Orchard. It was steep and green as the hills in a dream, 
and up the slope, poised in attitudes of wind-blown grace, 
climbed a company of crab trees. Their brown and fis- 
sured trunks were lichened and mossy; their tops were 
broad, and low and rosy. Standing on the slope, Amber 
could see them, mushroom-like, spread with pink tapestry. 



THEUPPER WOODS 187 

She could see the burnished bees, tethered by desire, hov- 
ering in thousands, falling in and out of the rose-oJoured 
cups. She was drenched in the scent which, althou^ 
more delicate than that of an orchard tree, is not less 
heady — the scent of wild apple in the early sun. The 
pale flowers and the bright, close-fisted buds were packed 
layer upon layer in the exquisite freshness of romance. 
From the middle of a cup-shaped hollow rose a wild pear 
tree, forty feet high, flowering late on its windy hillside. 
It was white as a summer cloud, with its cymes of large, 
rose-like blossoms. Its scent, more unearthly than tiie 
apple, wandered down with the breezes that stole along 
the dazzling terraces. Amber loved pear blossom; she 
delighted in the creamy, nut-like buds, each with its cross 
of soft rose-colour, a little paler than the velvety stamens 
of the open flower, and contrasting delicately with the 
stiver calyx. She listened to the bees, crazed with the 
liigh tide of honey, sounding up and down the pillared 
whiteness their effortless monotone. But she oould not 
linger by the pear tree; there were so many other things 
to see. She had the feeling, almost of greed, that such 
days bring — days with something glistening in them, a 
touch of the eternal. She felt like a child on the sea 
beach, loaded with shells veined with rainbow tints, 
pearly, fiery, and all with the sea in them — all remember- 
ing the deep water. Every petal, every leaf, seemed to 
be conning some memory of profundities whence it had 
come. Every curving flower seemed full of echoes too 
majestic for its fragility. She climbed to the buckthorn 
grove. There they stood, creatit^ their own atmosphere, 
as do all groups of trees. They dwelt in green fire, for 
their leaves — thin as those of beeches — were young and 
fresh. Their stems were of regal purple. Their creamy 
flowers, long-stalked, five-petalled, sweet, starred the 
bases of the leaf clusters. Near by were the spindles. 



188 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

gracious with shining leaves and mysterious fourfoM 
flowers. At the top of the inclosure was an old hedge oi 
white beams, that had ceased to be a hedge and become 
trees. The upward, springing boughs, the soft and downy 
leaves, were drifted over by flowers, so that each tree 
seemed to stand amazed at its own whiteness, like a young 
bride in an ample veil. A breath of scented aijr came 
from the hill tops and stole among the benches. That 
which had form, and knew the mortality which is in form, 
trembled before that which passed, formless and immor- 
tal. It seemed content to linger here for a little whik, 
before the momentary existence of this visible beauty 
slipped into nothingness; but it did not commit its whole 
self to any creature of matter, neither to dew-dark peild 
nor gold^eyed bird. It passed in the wood, as sunlight 
passes, or as the wind goes by, lifting the leaves witb 
indifferent fingers, or like the rain, stroking the flowers 
in childlike carelessness. Because of it the place became 
no mere congregation of trees, but a thing fierce as stdlar 
space. Yet in the wood it never nested, never came hem- 
ing to the spangled meadow. For it possesses itseif for 
ever in a vitality withhdd, immutable. It was this that 
drew Amber with breathless curiosity into tiie secret 
haunts of nature. It was this that struck her now into a 
kind of ecstasy, so that she neither saw nor heard the 
stranger who came down the hill and stood watching her 
beneath the blossom. 

So it came to pass that he surprised the very self d 
Aniber Darke abroad in the blue day, hovering like a 
bee in the foam of flowers. Who knows where the spirit 
lodges, in what grey cell or dawn-cold turret of the 
mind ? Wherever her lodging, Amber was playing truant, 
wearing, for all her thirty years, a loveliness to which her 
physical self did not entitle her, and to which Catherine 
would have denied her ri^ht But beneath Gatherine'i 



THE UPPER WOODS 189 

critical eyes it would have folded like the evening pim- 
pernel. 

The stranger came nearer, in a kind of eagerness, as 
though impelled. He snai^)ed a stick, and she turned 
with a little cry. They looked at one another, and their 
look was that of friends who have met a long while since, 
in other lands, to the sound of wilder music, but with 
the same remembered ecstasy. Dim thoughts came to 
them of primeval forests which it seemed that they two, 
wandering hand in hand, had traversed ; of antique seas 
far away on whose loud shores they had, as childish play- 
mates, slept; of huge, serrated mountains where they had 
climbed — ^mountains now worn to low green hills. Where 
were those forests and those roaring seas? They could 
not tell. In this world ages since; in other worlds; ia 
the strange Saharas of Aeir own secret souls — ^it did not 
ooncem them to know. What they cared for was the 
knowledge that they had always known each other. 
Amber knew that all her thirty years at Dormer had been 
a holding of the breath in expectation of this moment 
Michad Hallowes knew that his harsh and chequered 
career had been one long search for this woman who now 
stood before him, tremulous and alight. To him Ae 
j ec med as lovely sls a sun-drenched peial, in which neidier 
colour nor texture can be seen, all being steeped in radi- 



She, looking up at him, saw only his eyes, in which 
<dwdt an energy of vitality not of physical origin. His 
mind had the qualities of flame. He was one of tfiose 
men who, passing through filthy places, bum up evil as 
they go. His face had the strong sweetness that belongs 
to a man who has been through the mire of human sin, 
and has come through widi his spirit intact. All the 
trees, metal-green, jewd-green, dawn-green, splashed and 
flecked with rose, and mooned over with patiti«& cA cxtaxck- 



100 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

colour, regarded them benignantly over each over's 
shoulders. They seemed to crowd together, even to nudge 
one another, for all their tall dignity, that they might 
look upon a marvel. The bird-cherries sent down peace 
in pale flakes. The little crofts, the bays of half-culti- 
vated grass land bounded by lavish hawthorns, the steep 
yivid slopes where cool, chicory-coloured shadows blos- 
somed, were all swimming in ox-eye daisies, white as the 
wake of a ship. Across them swallows flashed, very low, 
and their sharp wings seemed to chum up foam from the 
daisies. A scent came up, so keen that it made the heart 
aehe, as did the fresh, amazing colours — ^the flushed flow* 
ers, the blanched flowers, the empurpled swallows, tinted 
like the thunder-douds that haunted the horizons oi 
Dormer. 

"Tell me your name !" said Michael, in a voice at once 
commanding and caressing. 

"Amber Darke." 

"Jasper's sister." 

"Then you are Jasper's friend?" 

Her heart sang. For if he was Jasper's friend, he would 
come to Dormer. He would sit in those shadowy rooms^ 
she would rest in the protection of his voice, his smile; 
in the aura of his presence. All that the house meant-- 
the iron barriers between one and another, Catherine's 
lacerating personality, Mrs. Darke's arctic eyes — fsM 
and became unimportant 

Michad stretched out his hand in a sudden impabe 
toward her, then caught himself back into immobilitji 
and said only : 

"He never told me." 

"What?" 

"That you lived at Dormer." 

At the idea of Jasper thinking her so wonderful, 'Anba 
laughed her dear andmttt^\»>i^\S[valvras like a child's. 



THE TIPPER WOODS 191 

Uit^ael was not offended Already he heM the essence 
of her personality within his own, and when one human 
soul does that with another, misunderstanding is impos- 
sible. 

"If I had known, I should have come sooner," he said. 

Amber neither flushed nor trembled. She was not the 
queen-woman recriving homage, nor the slave-woman 
awaiting subjugation. She was not consciously a thing 
of sex or of physical existence at that moment. That 
Michael should come to Dormer and find her, was to 
Amber as inevitable as the fusion of colours or the pull 
of stars one upon another. 

"Why should you have come?" 

"You know." 

"Tell me!" 

"To find you and fetch you away." 

"Ah!" 

"As children find the first primrose. Why do they loolc 
for the first primrose, Amber Darke?" 

A smile curved her mouth mischievously. She was not 
going to be led down that road. 

"Why do they lode for it ? Very well, I'll tdl you. 
Because it is beautiful." 

"But I am not beautiful." 

"Not beautiful I" 

He stepped back with half-closed eyes. 

"I suppose, if one could get past your soul and look 
at your features, you might even be plain," he said. 
"But your soul sheds such a light, Amber. I shall never 
be able to sec your features." 

Amber sighed in utter content, and her sigh was like the 
soft lifting of young sycamore leaves. Here was a man, 
stroi^, sane, cognisant of the world — one that must have 
seen many beautiful women — ^telling her that she was 
beautiful, proclaiming himself by every glance her lover. 



19i THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 
Her lover I The tints of the apple blosssom deepened In 
her checks. She kx>ked round her at the old familiar 
nooks of the Birds' Orchard, and her eyes were f ull ot I 
tears. She stopped and gathered an ox>eye daisy, for 1 
Michael's long gaze began to make her shy. 1 

"Give me that daisy !" said he 

She gave it, and [ucked another. ' 

"And that !" 

Thdr eyes met, and they broke into laughter. A rabbit 
that had washed its face several times in an endeavour \ 
to decide whether they were harmless, decided in tne 
negative, and was gone. From below, the descant of 
many birds ascended, and far down amid the maze of 
fluty voices the stable clock struck eight Amber started 
at the didactic whisper of sound. 
"I must go!" she said. 
"May I come?" 

Might he come ? Might he have the keys of her life, of 
her heaven and hell ? Might he take her and all she was 
or hoped to be ? Oh, yes I Oh, yes ! But might he know 
all this now? Oh, no I Amber's Quaker spirit primmed 
its mouth, and Amber's little goblin of humour shoc^ its 
head. 'And what Michael Hallowes received in lieu of the 
outspoken passion of a lifetime, was: 

"We shall be pleased tf you will come to breakfast, Mr. 
Hallowes." 

But possibly Michaei was not deceived. For he, tob, 
possessed a goblin of humour. 

Amber did not see the expression of his eyes as he 
replied, following her retreating figure: 
"I shall be pleased to accept I" 

Nor did she know that two brown and rather possessive 
hands were stretched towards her muslin shoulders, and 
as suddenly taken away again. 
"I won't startle her," he resolved. 



THE UPPER WOODS 19S 

"But I shall not call you Miss Darke/' he added. 

'•No?'' 

"No, ma'am. I shall call you Amber." 

"Very well, Mr. Hallowes." 

Michael smiled across Amber's hat, as if the haw- 
thorns understood his mind, and could appreciate the 
quizzical situation. 

As they neared the house, faces appeared at the lower 
windows and watched their advent. 

"Amber with a man!" said Catherine, as if she stated 
an impossibility. 

"A nice one, too," said Ruby wistfully. 

"An untidy fellow," remarked Ernest. 

"Too thin !" judged grandmother. "Now, you'ra too 
fat, great-nephew." 

Ernest ignored this. 

"He looks like chapel," he said. 

Pressed to the kitchen window were the faces of Mrs. 
Gosling, Sarah, and she of the sullen temper. Said Mrs. 
Gosling : 

"Miss Amber's met her fatal. Hark at 'em laughing !" 

But at this moment Jasper saw them. Amber, watch- 
ing his tempestuous welcome, thought : "If anyone can 
save Jasper, here is the man to do it." 

They went in to find Solomon preparing to read 
prayers. 

"No prayers!" said Michael, and disappeared with 
Jasper. Amber, hearing about Abimelech, b^an to real- 
ize that there were going to be clouds even in this extraor- 
dinarily blue and sunny day. 

"That gentleman's eyes," said Sarah, as she sternly 
fried the bacon, "probes your innards. If I'd ever took 
so much as a button, I wouldn't dare meet 'em." 

"Did you see the fray on his shirt cuffs?" asked the 
sullen one. 




194 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"Ah ! but 's Amber's a good one at the needle," replied 
Sarah, and even the sullen one was able to see tbe 
connection. I 

In the dining-rocHn conversation flourished tnore than 
it usually did. Amber was silent, for she was conscious 
of Catherine's vivisecting eye, and she was still tremulous 
from the sense of Michael's presence beside her, and 
aware of his long, eager gaze, demanding that her spirit 
should reveal itself to his completely, and without any 
shadow of reserve. The finding of such a gaze on her- 
self is, to a plain woman, both disquieting and delicious — 
disquieting because sha knows her limitations; more 
delicious than a woman of many lovers can ever guess. 
The woman of many lovers seldom experiences it, for 
passion — pure, crude and vital — is a gift that cc»nes to 
very few. As the meal went on in the usual way, Peter 
sulking, Solomon saying the same things, her mother 
looking the same things, grandmother eyeing Michad and 
flinging at his head ever and anon extracts from the Lion, 
Amber found it more and more difficult to believe in 
Michael's reality. She told herself that she must be 
imagining the different tone in which he spoke to her. It 
surely could not be true that, while to everyone else he 
spdte coolly and indifferently, to her he spoke with the 
caressing command of the Birds' Orchard. Then Amber 
realized that Catherine intended Michael for her own. 
Catherine's face was becomingly flushed; her pointed lips 
had pricked two dimples in her cheeks; her eyes turned- 
leisurely green, speaking an etiolated sex — towards 
Michael's sMnbre ones. Sombre Michael's were, but in 
their depths laughter lurked. 

"Are they laughing at Catherine?" Amber wondered, 
adding characteristically: "Are they laughing at me?" 

It was obvious that Catherine liked his curt voice, his 
downright way of expressing himself. Ernest had just 



THE UPPER WOODS 196 

remarked that he believed in the greatest good of the 
greatest number, to which Michael, without any 
ceremony, replied : 

"Bosh! If each individual is allowed to be himself, 
he'll attain his own good ; and you can't co-ordinate indi- 
viduals imtil you've got individuals to co-ordinate." 

"That doesn't sound right," said Solomon. "I dunno 
what's wrong, but it doesn't sound right." 

They pondered on that. 

"Why are you so foolish as to go out early. Amber, 
when you are always ailing?" asked Catherine, and 
received a full, ruminative glance from Michael. 

"Don't encourage her, Mr. Hallowes !" she finished. 

"If she wants to go to the Birds' Orchard, it is not ouri: 
business," said Michael. r 

Catherine frowned. She would show him whether he 
could contradict Catherine Velindre! She would lure' 
him, she would bind him. She would lull him — and 
then? Ah, well ! Maybe she would reward him. 

A strange man. A queer, wild, seamy, passion-stirring 
being. Those eyes could be kind, but they could also be 
merciless. They could express passion— -a deva(stating 
love for one woman. 

''And I will be that woman !" said Catherine Velindre. 

"When people are over thirty, they should be a little 
careful. Amber," she said. 

Amber's eyes grew hot with tears. What man would 
look at a girl again, even with passing interest, when he 
had been told she was over thirty, and when he could see 
that she was plain ? That look, which had rested upon her 
in the forest, would not rest on her again. She did not 
look up when Michael spoke : 

"Dear me," he said, with speculative interest, "I should 
not have thought you were more than twenty-nine. Miss 
Vdindre." 



196 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

If ever a face lcx>ked vengeance, hers did. He shook! 
suffer for that — when she bad bound him. 

But instead of replying angrily, she disserved into melt- 
ing femininity. She leaned on the table, so that her wdl- 
moulded arm and shoulder were shown to advantage. Her 
head drooped submissively. Her eyes-^-secret, with the 
expression of the com-tesan vaguely lingering about them 
— looked up at Michael under their thick lids and lashes 
with such an expression that he was reminded of a 
picture of an Egyptian slave-market. As she had laid 
snares for Jasper, so she laid them for Michael; but she 
had a very different man to deal with now. Michael 
looked at her coolly, with a purposely irritating air of 
appraising and depreciating goods, and a faint dismay 
was born in Catherine's mind 

He turned to Amber, and immediatdy. the thrilled and 
thrilling look was there. She thought, as she shyly 
glanced at him, that it was the look a little boy might wear 
if he was suddenly set down outside a faery town — heard 
the bells ringing, saw the golden minarets within, the 
nodding poppies on the walls, the shadowy people pass- 
ing inside the fretted gates — and was told, ''Soon, in a 
little while, perhaps you shall have the key.'' 

''Can it be I myself — ^Amber — ^that has aroused tfos 
passion ?'' she thought She could not believe it. 

Suddenly on this hidden, tumultuous joy 
Solomon's voice : 

"What's your trade or profession, any way ?" 

"None." 

'But what d'you doT' 

I'm learning to look after sheep," 

"But you're an educated man." 

"Looking after sheep gives me time to thinf 

"Time? What d'you want time for?" 

"To explore myself and look for God." 






THE UPPER WOODS 19T 

"Look for gold, ilid he say?" cried grandmother. 

"No, God." 

"But He's in church. You needn't put yourself oat 
looking for Him." 

"I never found Him in church." 

"Young man 1" — grandmother eyed him with disfavour 
— "you've got a devil !" 

"So have we all, ma'am I" 

"What was your father?" a^d Solomon. He had 
become very suspicious of Michael, and was determined 
to sift him, host or no host 

"He was a good many things," replied Michael. 

"But what did he make his money at?" 

"Well," said Michael judicially, "sometimes I think he 
made most as a chimney sweep, and sometimes I think 
he did best at the fried potato business." 

His eyes, for all their quiet sombreness, could not con- 
ceal their gleeful laughter, as he glanced from one face to 
another. There was a silence so deep and so long that 
Amber wanted to scream. She felt that the ancestors on 
the walls would, if it lasted much longer, begin to talk 
from very nervousness. There was not a sound except 
the distant voice of Sarah sin^ng to an obligato of 
tinny crashes: 

"Fodish sheep, why will you scatter?" 

Ernest was the first to recover; he came to the surface 
with a long sigh and an "Interesting! — interesting!" 

Ruby giggled. She could always be relied on for that. 

"Jolly good trades, both," said Peter, feeling that he 
himself had made a specialty of the working classes. 

Without a word Solomon got up and went to the gun- 
dogs. Hq always did this under strong excitement. 
Catherine's eyes dwelt upon Michael. Was he telling the 
truth or was he not ? It was difficult to know. If it were 
the truth — what then ? She who had dreamed o£ bishops 



198 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

— ^was she to fall so low as fried potatoes? It spob 
something for Catherine Vdindre's strength of character 
that she swallowed the fried potatoes. It also said a good 
deal for Michael's personal magnetism that a woman of 
her stamp could continue, after such harsh treatment, to 
smile provocatively on him. Jasper pushed his chair bad. 

"I'm off now; coming, Hallowes?" he asked. He was 
bitterly disappointed that Michael had so soon offended 
Dormer. He had hoped to see so much of him. Noir 
he would not be asked. . 

In the general movement Michael leaned down, and 
eaid: 

"You'll come with Jasper to sec me. Amber?" 

"Yes.'' 

"I live at the Shepherd's Hut at Forest Gate Yon 
know ?" 

"Yes." 

"You'U Kke coming?" 

"Yes." 

He was gone. As she ran up to her own room she 
reflected that she had said yes to everything — ^would have 
said yes, she feared, to anything he had asked her. He 
was, it seemed, a person who dealt in affirmatives. He 
was also a person, she knew, as she looked at her burning 
cheeks in her little mirror, to whom Amber Darke could 
not say no. 

She flung herself upon the bed and hid her face in the 
pillow. 

"Oh, yes — ye^ — yes, Michael Hallowes!" she 
whispered. "Yes, and yes a hundred times. Yes and 
yes for all the years of my life. Yes — ^yes — ^yes — to any- 
thing — to everything — " She burrowed deeper in the 
pillow — "to everything you ask of me, for ever and ever." 

She stayed there, still and silent, for a Icwig while. Then 
sht sat up, and said with decision: "But you shall not 



THE UPPER WOODS ' 199 

know that, Mr. Michael Hallowes. Aha I You shall 
think it is no and no ! Yes, you shall think it is no for a 
long time. When will he ask us to go ? Will it be to^ 
morrow ? Will he say 'Amber' again ? Will he look down 
at me and smile again?" 

"What ails you, 's Amber?" queried Sarah, entering, 
intent on bed-making. 

"Nothing, Sarah." 

But when Sarah got down to the kitchen again, she 
nodded to Jemima's grave. 

^'IVe know what ails her, girl I" she said confidentially. 
'Xove's so lungeous." 

And Amber, feverishly sewing new frills into her best 
Uouse, thought so also. But it was a very different kind 
of lungeousness from that which Marigold bad felt 






CHAPTER XV: MIL CANTLOP COMES HOME 

IT was on Saint Swithin's day tliat Amber received bcr 
first love-letter. Since the June morning when her 
real life began she had only seen Michael once. Ja^er 
had refused to go and see his friend oftener. This 
puzzled Amber. It also struck her as suicidal. If there 
was one person to whom Jasper, drowning' in the tides 
of intolerance and misunderstanding, spiritual despair 
and fear, could look for help, it was Michad. And now 
he refused to see Michad. Amber could not know that 
Catherine, white and regal in her favourite frock, had 
come on Jasper in the Beast Walk, and had penalized anj 
intimacy with Michad. 

"If you love me," said Catherine, "you do not want 
him. If you want him, you do not love me." Catherine 
was aware that Jasper's going to tea with Michad meant 
Amber's going to tea also. 

"If I don't go and see Michad, will you be— as I want 
you to be?" asked Jasper. He had grown thinner, 
browner, a good deal sterner. He bargained where te 
had pleaded. 

"As you want me to be?" Catherine pondered. 

"You know what I want you to be." 

"Do I ?" 

"Now, look here, Catherine, you shall not say joo 
dcMi't know." 

He grasped her hands, and she was aware that the 
Wallows had at least given him some very serviceable 
musdes. 

800 



MR. CANTLOP COMES HOME SOI 

**I want you to be my wife, now — ^next week — ^to-mor- 
row. I want you to put aside everjrthing, your religion, 
your old-maidish point of view (it is old-maidish, Cathy !), 
everything, and give yourself to me. Now you know." 

He laughed ruefully, but he did not loose her hands. 

"I have given up a good deal for you, Cathy. No, it's 
no use trying to get your hands away. I am sorry if I 
am hurting you, but you have hurt me. You say you love 
me. You say you want my good. I tell you the only way 
you can compass my good is by giving yourself to me. 
Will you, Cathy? Will you?" 

Perhaps if Catherine had not met Michael, the young 
manhood of Jasper would have won her, struck from her 
all her poses. But she had become aware of a harder 
metal, tasted a stronger meat. She was afraid of Michael 
Hallowes, and of all the strange blossoms in the garden 
of woman's love for man, this purple blossom of fear is 
the most fascinating to a nature such as Catherine's. 

"If I give up Michael — ^though God knows why I 
should — will you fix a limit to this hell ?" 

Catherine pondered again. She must keep Amber 
away from Forest Gate. Therefore, she must] ktcp 
Jasper away. 

"I will tell you, yes or no, in two mociihs^" said 
Catherine." 

"Say six weeks— that's too long." 
'Very well." 

'And you do love me? If you don't» I won't go on 
with this. Do you ?" 

It was necessary to say yes. 

"Loose my hands now, Jasper." 

He kissed them and let them go. 

"I shall count the days. It will be the last Sunday in 
August." 

"Yes." 






20« THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

'"And as you do really love me, and it's only a nmtter 
of conflicting ideas, I shall hope for the best. Say you 
love me!" 

Catherine flushed. Jasper was becoming an intoleraUe 
difficulty. Well, it must be said. 

"I love you !" said Catherine Velindre. 

But as she fled across the water she saw sombre eyes 
with mocking laughter in their depths; heard 'a voice 
deeper than Jasper's and more inflexible; glimpsed a 
character of which the main fabric was wrought in iron. 

That had happened yesterday, and to^lay Amber 
received her letter, unofficially, through Enoch. 

* "J^^P^^ is "^ coming to see me for six weeks, God 
knows why. Will you come to-day ? I will meet you at 
the gate of the Forest at ten o'clock. 

As she read those words, so few and sinrple, her heart 
grew turbulent as the silver passion of July wfaeat-fidds 
under the wind. 

At tto o'clock. So early! She stole away over the 
silken water, under the stmimer lapping of the leaves. 
What would Dormer say to her? Let it say what it 
would when the grave, beautiful day was over. Bttt 
now — Michael awaited her — ^herself and not another. 
As she went, all beautiful things seemed to run to meet 
her. Already there had come the faint dusking-over of 
the wheat-fields with the soft^ rosy fawn which steals 
away the green of summer; which glows and flushes 
through hot days and yellow-moon nights until at last, 
through every phase of saffron, tawny, almost salmon* 
colour, they have reached the time when they can hold no 
more beauty. The ripples that swept over them, water- 
green and pale, whetv thfe fit^t clover flowered, now 



MR. CANTLOP COMES HOME 208 

flowed in a slower rhythm, each wave longer and stiffer, 
less like water than honey. She thought, as her gaze 
lingered on the plain, that there a shadow wavered which 
was not painted by any tree, slipping away before the eye 
of man like dew from a lifted leaf. It seemed, as she 
looked ahead at some green-veiled arch of the forest, that 
the curtain might be twitched aside at any moment, and 
some revelation of the divine peer out upon her. But 
when she passed the archway there was only the leafy, 
mazy pattern of summer green. As she listened to the 
law breathing of the forest, she half thought she heard an 
echo fall — ^like the striking of a wing on soft resistant 
air, or the music of wild swans passing above the roof of 
doud, sounding upon their muffled golden gongs. 

But Amber's meditations did not last long. A very 
long time before she reached the gate of the Forest, there 
was Michael lying on his elbow across the path, gazing 
up into the blue crevices between the leaves, smoking an 
enormous briar. 

''Come and sit by me," said Michael. She spread her 
white skirts among the beech mast and the pine needles. 

"Have you ever had a love letter. Amber?" he asked. 

She reflected that unexpectedness was one of his great 
charms. 

"No." 

"One? Surely?" 

His smiling eyes dwelt on her so long that she turned 
away with a shy laugh. 

"One?" persisted Michael. "A short, sharp, practical 
thing — ^but surely one ?" 

"Perhaps one," she assented. 

It was then that the doves began their fairy mischief- 
maldng. Not the wood-pigeons ; this was not a haunt of 
theirs; but the little fawn-coloured doves that purr with 



«04 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

a continual velvet softness, an iteration wUdi txpvts M 
everything for the lover. 

Michael sat up and threw his pipe into the pine needkn 

''Say — 1 had a love letter this morning, Michad, and 
though it said nothing, it brought a man's life with it' ** 

Amber smiled to herself. Those hours with her own 
passionate heart in her little room at Dormer most be 
concealed. 

It was yes — ^inevitably and gloriously — but not ytL 

"I had a letter from a very authoritative man this 
morning, Mr. Hallowes," said she. '"But it was not a 
love letter — I hope." 

"You hope it was !" said Michael, ''You do ! It is no 
use looking prim. Amber, and you may say Mr. Hallowcs 
a hundred times, but it won't defend you." 

Amber was examining a wild rose. 

"This attack is unmerited, Mr. Hallowes," ibe 
remarked, after a long silence. 

The wood pigeons purred, the wind ran lightly like an 
aerial squirrel in and out of the tree-tops. 

Michael took away the wild rose. 

"I have been patient," he said. 

"Patient!" 

"But now it's time for that gnome of mischief to whidi 
you give house-room to go to sleep. I want to talk to 
you." 

"Yes." 

It was the vaguest whisper of sound. 

"You know you and I arc one, don't you?" 

Silence. 

"Don't be demure. Amber; you know it You kncir 
it in the Birds' Orchard." 

"Perhaps." 

"How soon can jrou come to me?" 

"Oh, MichaeW" 



MR. CANTLOP COMES HOME «06 

"Well, how soon?" 

"Do you mean, marry you?*' 

**Yes. If marriage is what you approve of. We ore 
tied faster than marriage. I am not prejudiced either 
way." 

He leaned on his elbow and regarded her. 

"Yes. I should like you to marry me, please, Amber." 

"I will think about it" 

Michael smiled. He found her reserves almost more 
fascinating than any other quality. 

"And now home!" he said. "I've cooked the dinner." 

It is true that the happy have no history. And as 
Michael and Amber could not have said how the day 
passed, what they said or thought, neither can the reader 
expect to know. Instead, he must be content to return 
to Dormer, where, at three o'clock on this same Sunday 
afternoon, the Rectory surveyed its glebe in drowsy 
peace. Into the silence fell at long intervals the croaking 
caw of a rook, intensifying the quiet. In the garden 
the rambler roses blazed, the lilies stood each in 
an aura of stillness that was about the flowers like light 
round the moon. Nothing stirred except the Rector's 
bees, who seemed to think of taking an unfair advantage 
of his siesta by swarming. The Rector, in his cool, 
green-lit drawing-room, was having his usual consci- 
entious Sabbath slumber over Paley's "Evidences." The 
good man always did violence to his wishes on Sunday, 
patting away all his books on gems, not so much as 
cutting the leaves of the latest brochure on diamonds, 
though it had only arrived on Saturday. Paley was duti- 
fully opened after dinner, but the house was so quiet 
(Rectory-Lucy being out and even the cat sleeping the 
deep of repletion) that a bland complacency came over 
his thoughts. He pondered on his good fortune in having 
avoided matrimony, and a great peace overwhelmed bkcv« 




20G THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

so that Paley remained where Paley had been opened at 
half-past two. This weakness of the Rector's was Utttf 
to Eraest, who was unable to see what a mudi better 
parish priest the Rector made simply because he could not 
read Paley. When the Rector sat in his armchair and 
slept rosily, the veriest sinner must have confided in him; 
and while his intdlectual light gave an uncertain ray, his 
humanity shone like a lighthouse upon all who came 
near him. 

Mrs. Cantlop— who was not equal even to locddng at 
an unread Paley — was asleep upstairs with her windows 
tightly shut and curtained. 

The afternoon wore on very pleasantly. It was at 
about half-past four that the Rector with a little start 
opened his blue eyes on a sight so surprising that he 
pc^shed his glasses for several minutes. 

Seated in the corner of the sofa, in the shadow of the 
Japanese screen, was Mr. Cantlop, with a bundle is a 
red handkerchief beside him, and the expressicm of a 
Buddhist seeking to be absorbed into the One. It seemed 
that if Mr. Cantlc^ could have transformed his smalli 
spare self into one of the buttons of the upholstery, he 
would have done so and been thankful. He sat so quiet 
that the Rector was reminded of ghosts, and he had an 
air of not having come from anywhere. 

"Is that you, Cantlop?** asked the Rector. 

"Yes, it's me," said Mr. Cantlop. 

"My dear man ! I'm delighted I" 

The Rector discarded Paley and shook hands violeDtlj. 

"Well, well I This is delightful! TU go and tdl your 
wife." 

"ril go," said Mr. Qntlop faintly. 

But the Rector felt that if Mrs. Cantlop woke to find 
her husband materializing in the room — materializing 
was the only word lot \v\s ^aVraciRfc— JsJaa. vcould have a 



MR. CANTLOP COMES HOME 207 

heart attack from sheer joy. So he left Mr. Cantlop in the 
drawing-room, which seemed emptier for his presence. 
After warning Mrs, Cantlop— warning seemed to him 
the right word — ^the Rector went into the kitchen, mur- 
muring — "AH across the Atlantic, poor little man I Tea I" 
— as if some kind fairy would procure it. 

Then he poked the fire till the lower part of the grate 
fell out with all it upheld. "Now, now !" said the Rector 
with tolerant reproof. He found an oil stove and boiled 
the kettle on that. Then he fetched all the eatables out 
of the larder and conveyed them, the cat proudly serving 
as acolyte, into the dining-room. Finally, Mrs. Cantlop 
came down in tears, brooches, her best cap and a great 
deal of lace, and utterly overwhelmed Mr. Cantlc^. When 
the Rector, perspiring, slightly sooty, and with a new and 
deep respect for Lucy, triumphantly announced tea, he 
found Mrs. Cantlop and the red bundle in possession of 
the sofa, and a crushed Mr. Cantlop just existing be- 
tween them. 

"A remarkable man!" thought the Rector, who was 
something of a psychologist, and who found Mr. Cant- 
lop's consistent self-annihilation more remarkable than 
other people's self-assertion. 

They went in to tea, Mrs. Cantlop sugaring the 
Rector's cup lavishly, and the Rector, who hated sugar, 
drinking it uncomplainingly. Mr. Cantlop enjoyed his 
meal furtively. He could, in eating a dinner for which 
he had not only paid, but overpaid, look as stealthy as a 
fox that has robbed the hen-roost ; and no burglar, medi- 
tating the acquisition of another's gold, could have looked 
as sly as did Mr. Cantlop in lawful possession of his own. 

Not that he was in possession of his own, unfor- 
tunately; for when the Rector said: "Well, Cantlop, I 
suppose you've brought a sack of nuggets ?" Mr. Cant- 
lop was heard to whisper : "Lost !" 



808 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST | 

And lost it apparently was — the whole gleaning of his I is 
twenty years. lie. 

The Rector sighed, reflected that hi^ means must be ki 
stretched to include the three of them, and mumiaredftiB 
something about treasure in heaven. For this Mr. Cant- 1 '' 
lop seemed very eligible, for he certainly would never k 
have any on earth. I *" 

After tea they went to Dormer House, for the Rector Ite 
had news to give Ernest There had came this very daj k 
at lunch a note from a neighbouring vicar with a hint I ^ 
that a distant relation of his own thought of presendng ■! 
a living to Ernest This meant an immediate move for I " 
Ernest and Ruby, and though Ruby would rather not have 1 1 
moved just now, she was so pleased to be leaving Donner i 
that she made no complaint k 

Ernest's success and Mr. Cantlop's future career wm n 
discussed at length. 

"Why not sexton?" asked grandmother, and evcryooc b 
knew that this was Mr. Cantlop's true vocation. It was 
tacitly understood that Mr. Cantlop would perform his 
duties in so secretive a manner that no one would guess SI 
his occupation, the village presumably thinking that it 
was done by gnomes in the night A 

"You're no bigger than when yoa went I" said grancK 5 
mother. \ 

Mr. Cantlop writhed under a sense of incurable i 
insufficiency. f 

"Where's the gold?" she continued '*You've gotten t 
none, I do believe, William !" 1 

"No, ma'am." 

"Then what good are you ?" 

To Mr. Cantlop, who thought nothing of his own good 
qualities and had alwa3rs been ready to acquiesce in puUic 
opinion, this dictum that mcmey was the end-all and b^ 
all seemed unanswerable. 



MR. CANTLOP COMES HOME !e09 

It was not until An^>er came in, looking almost pretty, 
and so full of happiness that she infected all she came 
near, that Mr. Cantlc^ really fdt his bome-cocning to be 
a festival 

"You have come back to her I" she said. "That's better 
iQian gold, isn't it, Mrs. Cantlop?" 

"It is, it is, my dear I" She wept again for joy, adding, 
"And dear William might have got entangled with those 
foreign ladies I" 

Amber's silent delight in this picture was cut short 
by Catherine's voice, asking: 

"Where have you been?" 

Then the storm broke, and Amber began to disbelieve 
m her own happiness. It was borne in upon her that 
she was plain, that she was not young, that no man would 
want to marry her. It was pointed out that the son of a 
chimney-sweep without money or influence was not the 
husband for a daughter of Dormer. Catherine summed 
it all up. 

"But, of course, it is just dear Amber's imaginatiort. 
She is too much alone." 

No OTie believed in it Did she believe in it herself? 
Amber wondered when she leant into the purple mid- 
night from her window, and looked up towards the forest. 
Not In this house she oould not believe in it This dull, 
tired, insignificant woman that looked back at her from 
tiie eyes of those at Dormer was not the same creature 
that had wandered, free, happy, beautiful, with Michael 
Hallowes in the golden sunlight. And as she heard the 
stealthy noises of the house, she began to wonder whether 
she would ever see Michad Hallowes alone again. 
Intuitively she knew that they would watch her, that mis- 
understanding would be fostered, that Catherine would 
spread her charms. A terror of Catherine grew up in her 
mind. Alas 1 Alas ! Catherine was so beautiful. 



210 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Remorseless and lovely, the pale face floated before ha 
mind; lovely and cold, the green eyes lo(4ced into hers. 

"She is stronger than 1 1" was Axvixa^s thoi^^fat as she 
fell into a restless sleep. 

And Catherine, watching the stars ride up from beyood 
the forest, strengthened herself for the binding of Micfaad 
Hallowes. 

Hour by hour the clocks uplifted their voices, preach 
ing of mortality, of striving, of busy anxieties. And hour 
by hour Amber lay awake rejoicing that, whatever came 
to her, she was no longer their bondswomaiL For today, 
in the large silence of the forest, coming home sofdy ora 
the dewy moss, to-day, for the first time, Michael had 
kissed her. It was not the selfish kiss of the faun, nor th 
bluebottle kiss of marital duty. It was the kiss of a low 
Before his hands were laid gently on her shoulders, befon 
his eyes took their fill of hers, she had been a plain dot 
woman in a plain dull world. He kissed her, and sb 
stood in the rose-Ugbt of immortality. 



CHAPTER XVI: PETER'S LETTER 

IT was mid-August, and hot, thunderous weather, when 
the stonn centre at Dormer began to whirl with some 
activity. Michael and Amber had only seen each other 
once, but Enoch had acted as letter carrier. Ernest and 
Rul^ had gone. Jasper welcomed the begimiing of com 
lurvest as a means of killing time by hard work. Peter, 
nrged by his elders to make some advances to Catherine, 
M a harried life, avoiding Mrs. Gofiling, Enodi, Cath- 
erine and his parents. 

On this blazing August day at breakfast, after the girb 
had gone, Solomon said : 

"My lad, you ought to marry." 

"Marry or bum !" said grandnxxther. 

"I don't want to marry," said Peter with dncerity. Ha 
fdt already too much married. 

"You're young for your age," said Solomon, "a young 
innocent." 

Peter smiled as he went off to work. But he would not) 
have smiled, if he had known the surprise fate had pre- 
pared for him. 

It began when Mr. Greenways gave Enoch the letters. 
As a rule he sorted the letters in almost unbroken silence 
Sometimes on a Saturday he would say, as he flung the 
Golden Chance across to Enoch : 

"Another three ha'pence thrown away. He never wiia 
anything." 

But as a rule Enoch watched him in silence; H« 
admired the arbitrary way in wfaidi Mr. Gnenway* 




AIS THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

allocated the letters. But to-day there was one ova 
which Mr. Grcenways pondered long, and which he finally 
handed to Enoch with raised eyebrows. As his face was 
of the kind that expresses surprise very readily, lotddng 
amazed even in sleep, the impression Enoch now lecdved 
-was that Mr. Grcenways was going to have a fit. 

"Look!" said Mr. Greenways. 

Enoch looked, and his face was dismayed. 

"That's Mrs. Gosling's Marigol'," said Mr. Greenways. 
Then he read the address very slowly : 

"Peter Darke, Esq," 

There was no mistaking Marigold's lai^ round letters, 
which ran across the envelope like fat boys playing leap- 
frog. "If this roof opened out into the, kingdom of 
heaven," said Mr, Greenways, "or if my missus spoke me 
fair, I couMna be more struck of a heap. It beats all!" 

"It's a good thing you're one for keeping counsel, Mr. 
Greem/ays," said Enoch. 

"Mum!" said Mr. Greenways. "Mum as a mnm- 
nifllin 1" He still locked like a startled gnome. All die 
way to the house, with the summer-faint song of the Four 
Waters tn his ears, Enoch puzzled. What ailed Marigdd 
to forget herself like that? But now that she had for- 
j;otten herself, what sbouM he do? Peter might be gone 
to the Wallows when he got back. He went early in 
harvest-time. He had better keep the letter and slip down 
to the Wallows with it It was a thing he had never done 
—to keep back a letter. He had the translucent honesty I 
of the majority of country people who woric for their ; 
bread, and he had a sense of responsibility. He duly ' 
delivered the Dormer letters at the Dormer front door, 
and if anybody ever wanted their letters in any other way, 
they had to go to Mr. Greenways for than. But this 
was ati occasion of extreme urgency, for someone would 



PETER'S LETTER 218 

recc^ftiize the postmark, even if th^ did not know the 
writing. 

Enoch delivered the letters withotit it, and put it into 
tfie breast pocket of his coat, carefully wrapped in his 
handkerchief. There were generally a few odd jobs to do 
before his day's work, and while be did them he hung his 
coat in the kitchen. 

Now it was Sarah's daily practice to go through the 
pockets of this coat with a view to finding out any secrets 
Enoch mi^t have. Whom she loved, she chastened. 
Enoch was her intended, and she regarded his pockets as 
potentially hers. No sooner, therefore, had Enoch gone 
across tite yard than Mangold's letter was in her hands. 
She saw with relief that it was not addressed to Enoch. 

"What a brazen piece I" she murmured to the kettle as 
she pot it on the hottest part of the fire. "Now boil, you I 
«nd look sharp, or Enodi'll be back." 

The kettle having complied, she b^an to steam the 
letter open. But first she ousted the cats, for there was 
something about the opening of letters which made her 
dislike those four lucently amtised eyes. 

"Ill learn you to outface your betters 1" she said. Thea 
Ae read the letter. 



"My Dear Husbawd, 

"I write to say as there is a little Girl. Nine 
* pounds and eyes your ccjour. Sunday was a month since 
you came; Flcase to come: It's a very nice little Girl. 
"Your dutiful wife, 

"Marigold." 

Sarah turned her pebble-ct^oured eyes up to Jemima 
Onions' grave. 

"You could blow me to Paradise with a puff," she said, 
"if you'd a mind." 



214 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

She did not see Catherine glance in as she passed the 
kitchen door. 

Suddenly Solomon shouted for the gun-dogs' break- 
fast. Sarah jumped ''like something scalted'' and put the 
letter into the top dresser drawer. It was unfortunate 
that Enoch called for the ''fowls' meat'' at the moment, 
so that Sarah was absent for some time. It was also 
unfortunate that Catherine knew of Sarah's drawer. In 
a moment the letter was in her hand. In another moment 
she had realized that Peter, who had preferred a working- 
girl to herself, was in her hands. Let him pay for his 
impertinence! She was bored with Jasper, but Jasper 
had not swerved in his alliance. Let Jasper have Dor- 
mer! Certainly Peter would not get it if this were 
known. She did not care what they did with Donner. 
She wanted nothing more of it nor of the Wallows. She 
wanted (oh, strange fate for Catherine Velindre) a hard 
life on a lonely hill-top with a penniless man who proudly 
owned for father a seller of chip potatoes. As she stood 
in the kitchen with Marigold's letter in her band, a fierce 
jealousy overcame her. For Marigold had given a child 
to the man she loved. To live in that bare hut on the hill- 
top—with Michael ; to experience passion — ^with Michad 
— such was the desire of Catherine Velindre, the proud, 
the ambitious. She struggled against it; she despised 
herself for it; but there it was, unalterable. 

She put the letter down on the table and went to tiie 
dining-room. 

"Grandmamma!" she said, "did you give Sarah any 
copies of the Lionf" 

It was a vexed question between Mrs. Vdindre and 
Sarah — the status of the Lion. Sarah refused to regard 
it as literature, and treated it merely as paper. Out went 
Mrs. Velindre, and Catherine smiled one of her long; 
secret smiles. 



PETER'S LETTER 216 

Very soon grandmother came tapping back. 

"Fetch my daughter I" she said. 

"What for, grandmamma?" 

"Do as you're bid !" said the old lady. 

She remained, while Catherine was away, murmuring 
to herself : 

"Pounds ! Nine pounds ! Little girl 1 Gideon ! Mari- 
gold Gosling! Hell fire I" 

It was characteristic of Mrs. Darke that when Mrs. 
VeUndre took the letter from her beaded reticule and 
placed it before her, she only said : 

**Ring for Sarah, Catherine." 

When Sarah came, she ordered breakfast, deciding to 
discard prayers for to-day. 

"Fetch the master," she said, "and tell Gale to fetch 
Master Peter and Mrs. Gosling." 

She began to eat an egg, but it was less like a meal 
than an execution. Mrs. Velindre drowned her lumps 
of 9Ugar one by one, as if they were both Marigolds. 

Sarah returned to the kitchen and sat down heavily. 

"There's only one thing as there's a God's plenty of 
for Sarah Jowel," she remarked. "And that's trouble. 
It must be 's Catherine. She's as deep as Dormer pond. 
Shell lose a brother when the devil dies, no danger! 
There they'll all be, ravening and roaring, and Enoch'll 
ne'er overlook it. I may plead and better plead, but he'll 
be as sullen as a daylight owl." 

She rocked in her chair, until the cuckoo clock, striking 
in loud and ribald tones, reminded her of her errands. 
**You're wanting in the room, sir," she said to Solomon, 
awaking him from a long, bland siesta on the wall of the 
gun-dogs' kennel. 

"Read that !" said Mrs. Darke, when Solomon went in. 

"Well, the lad's got himself in a pretty fix," said Solo- 
mon. "But what's to be done?" 



816 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''Done— done— done r' said grandmother, like a bd 
tolling. 

"I dunno/' 

'Teh I'' said Mrs. Darke, and tore the letter across and 
across. 

"Teh ! Teh/! Teh !" echoed grandmother, till the room 
seemed full of elfin sneezes. 

And now, as if they had not enough to think of| is 
walked Ernest, announcing weightily: 

"I have a child." 

"So has Peter, confound him !" said Solomon. 

"I am a great grandmother!" said Mrs. Velindre. It 
was left to Amber to ask: 

"How is Ruby?" 

"Physically well," said Ernest ''But mentally, strange 
— strange. She does not like the child." 

"Why not?" 

"Her reason is the most curious thing about it She 
sa3rs it is because the child is like me. A strange abem- 
tion — ^it will pass." 

Amber was thankful that Michael was not there: SIm 
was also glad that Solomon returned to Peter's affain 

"Uncle," said Ernest smoothly, "hush it up ! Hush it 
up!" 

He spoke so mellifluously, that it was like a lulbbjr. 
The scandal seemed already asleep, like a cross but pc^ 
suaded baby. 

"Hush It up, eh? But how?" 

"Money, sir. Give the girl money and let fier p 
away." 

"Let her look for gold, like Mr. Cantlop!'* said grand- 
mother. 

"But suppose she loves Peter?** cried Amber. 
"Oh, lovcl Sentiment 1" said Solomon. 



PETER'S LETTER «17 

^'Suppose she won't go. She seems to be legally 
married," suggested Catherine. 

"Money! A great deal of money I** reiterated Ernest 

There was a deprecating tap, and Mrs. Gosling crept in. 

"Well, Gosling, what have you to say?" asked Mrs. 
Darke. 

"What about, mum, please?" 

"You know quite well. Your girl and Master Peter.** 

"It wuima my fault, mum ! I'd neither part nor lot in 
it I says to Marigold : 'Dunna you take on soft with 
Master Peter! You'll look very old-fashioned,' I says, 
'when that 'appens as will 'appen!' And I partly think 
it was Enoch's doing as Master Peter married Marigold." 

"Whoever was to blame, you go." 

"Go?" 

"Go." 

"But you wouldna make me leave my cottage, mum 
and sir ! I never thought to leave it till I went in cvery- 
man's carriage. Some like moving. It inna Lady Day 
with them unless they move. But I canna-abear it And 
all them lickle gooseberry bushes I put in!'* She wept 
into her blue and white check apron. "I partly think the 
old maister wouldna have given me warning, with no 
fault of mine." 

"Well, well, missus, I'll sec you don't lose by it,*' said 
Solomon gntffly. 

He fetched his cheque book and wrote under Eniest's 
tutelary eye. 

'Nough?" Ije queried, pushing it toward Ernest 

'More than enough !" murmured Ernest reverentially. 
Money always made him feel devout He took his share 
in the contemplated betrayal of a soul without a qualm. 
To do him justice, it never occurred to him that Marigold 
might prefer Peter to money, nor that it was as great an 
honour for Peter to be loved by Marigold as to be loved 






S18 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

by any lady in the county. His comment on the matdb 
,was : "Preposterous, my dear sir, preposterous I" 

He thought Solomon's cheque wildly generous. After 
all, it was a great deal more than what was paid for 
another betrayal of love a long while since, in Jerusalem, 
the account of which Ernest always read with such fine 
elocution. 

"There, Mrs. Gosling !" said SoIomonL "Now you can 
both start afresh somewhere." 

"Well, I'm sure, sir !" Mrs. Goring was quite dazzled 
by the vast sum, even though it was only "picture money." 
She thought how she would convert it into real, convinc- 
ing half-crowns and shillings, and make wash-leather 
^hsigs to hold it. "And thank you kindly, sir !" she said. 
''Imua-stir myself to move for Marigold's sake. I partly 
think I needna be idle. For there's a time for each and 
every when they want fettling for the Lord And maybe 
I met take the gooseberry trees along of me?" 

She came out from her apron. Her attitude had com- 
pletely changed. 

"If Marigold's willing, Anne Gosling^s willing," she 
said. "So long as you can make it all right about let 
no man put asunder.' " 

"Here's Mr. Ernest He's a parson." 

"Quite all right, Mrs. Gosling," said Ernest ''Circum- 
stances alter cases." 

Mrs. Gosling retired, cx)mforted and "ticking for 
gossip," as Amber said. She was in the condition of 
the clock in the hall, which when it had gurgled nnisf 
speak at once all that was in its mind. No sooner was 
she gone than Peter came in, handsome, flushed and 
sullen. He leant against the door, aware of storm and 
*— as Sarah said — smelling trouble. Most of the faces 
in the room^ook the expression of a cat at a mouse-hole 
when a whisker appears. 



PETEB'S LETTER SIS 

"Wdl, you, Mr !" shouted Solomon. "What have you 
fot to say?" 

Apparently the happy father had nothing to say. 

"A pretty pickle t" 

"Nine pounds I Gideon 1" 

"Nonsense I" 

"How old is it?" 

"Husband of a servant I" 

So the chorus ran. 

"My dear fellow ! Unwisel Unwise!'* soothed Emest 
"What possessed you to do such a thing?" 

"They did it in the Bible," said Peter. 

"Hold your tongue, sir I" stoiroed Solomon. 

"I meant, why did you marry her?" amended Ernest, 
apparently unaware of the deductions to be drawn from 
^remaric 

Amber laughed, and Peter, perhaps for the first time 
IB his life, became aware of her as an individual, and not 
M a mere part of the furniture of wconen that garnished 
Dormer. He looked across at her with a whimsical 
•■ule. Something in his comely ntmchalance annoyed 
Catherine. 

"Marigold has eyes like Muebottles and chedcs like 
raw meat," she said, with pale and pensive satire. 

"If you were a man, I'd knock you down," said Peter, 
banning to appreciate Marigold. 

Catherine laughed disdainfully. 

"Now, good people," said Emest, "let us be calm. I-et 
v» ask ourselves — 'What would the Captain do?" " 

Whenever Emest was confronted by a problem, be 
said this. When people were restive and inquired how 
they could find out what the Captain would do, he simply 
»aid : "Ask the Captain." 

"The long and the short of it is," said S(rfomon, "that 
]r<ou must separate." 



MO THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Immediately Peter decided that he wanted to live wiA 
Marigold and no one else. 

"She's going. It's settled/' said Mrs. Darke. 

"It must be unsettled then," replied Peter. 

"No one will know, said Ernest "There will be no 
scandal. All will be well." 

He felt that he would not be able to breathe again with 
comfort till all was really well and Marigold on the sea. 
In all his professions of willingness to bear crosses, it 
had not occurred to him that the Captain could invent 
anything so horrible as this. 

"You all talk as if I'd done wrong," said Peter. "I'n 
not done wrong. I've acted honourably. She's my wife 
I suppose I can marry whom I please." 

He happily forgot, at the moment, that he had married 
to please Enoch. Mrs. Darke looked at him, and around 
her seemed to boil the thunderclouds of class hatred and 
matriarchy. 

"Never," she said, "will I have the woman here !" 

Had she known that her hatred of Marigold was weav- 
ing Marigold's future happiness she would have died 
father than say it. 

"Then out I go!" said Peter. "I'll go to Marigold." 

"If you go, you'll never come back, mind that!" said 
Mrs. Darke. 

"Very well. I'll go to^lay." 

"But are we, am I, never to see your little girl ?" asked 
Amber. 

' "Bless me !" Peter gave an amused chuckle. "I haven't 
seen the little beggar myself yet !" 

He turned toward the window as the swiftest means 
of exit 

"How will you get your living?" asked Solomon. 

"You've no money. You will have to stay here," said 
Bin. Darke in a tone oi livraro^h under which ran, like a 



PETER'S LETTER tSl 

creature in the grass, something of forebckling, something 
even of fear. What was it, she wondered, this unbidden 
stirring in her stony heart? Was this what they called 
love? oh, no I Nol Let it not be love. Could it be that 
Rachel Darke, in this late hour, was to be tormented by 
this feckless, unreasoning, routine-destroying phantom? 

"You are dependent on us," she said again. 

"Don't go, Peter 1" Amber spoke anxiously. "Surdy 
something can be done ?" 

"You've no profession and no money,'' said Catherine. 
"You can't go." 

"Money! Money!" chanted grandmother "Money 
rules the world." 

"I'll go to the West and sell knives!" said Peter. 

"Knives ? What for ?" cried everyone. 

"To cut loose with — to get free with. Yes, that's what 
I'll do— go to the West and sell knives." 

He vaulted out of the window. As he went across the 
blazing lawn with his young, defiant shadow, the house 
seemed to fling its own shadow after him, standing like 
a moated grange eyeing with its unsunned western win- 
dows the first of its children to burst from its prisoning 
shelter. It seemed to gaze after him when he had long 
disappeared. As the day grew hotter, the walls begaa, 
ever so slightly, to shake in the haze. 

Inside the house all was still, until the clocks b^;an to 
stir and mmrnur on the silent air, that was full of the 
hot scents of thunder weather. Their clamour seemed to 
arouse those in the dining-room. 

A child of Sattan," said grandmother. 
Satan," corrected Ernest 

There was a rubbing on the door, and Enoch walked 
in. He held his purse, made by Sarah of corduroy bound 
with black tape and fastened with a large linen button. 

"I've druv plough for you, sir, from a lad " V«. v^vi^ 






USt THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"and my fcythcr for 3roum. I wish yoa wdl, and (he 
family well. But I wmma take your money — tiot a fardoi 
piece of it/' He drew the cheque out and gave it to 
Solomon. "What me and mine needs, we can yearn," 
he said. 

In his eyes was an angry sparkle seldom seen there. 

"And though you've given ours warning to go from 
Dormer Valley, I wunna go from the village." 

"But, surely, my good man, you'll not refuse money?" 
said Ernest 

"You'll listen to reason, Enoch ?" added Solomon. 

"It wunna be able to be done," said Enoch, answering 
both together, r 

He turned and went out into the kitchen, where Mrs. 
Gosling and Sarah sat crying on either side of the kitdica 
fire under the shadow of Jemima Onions. 

As Enoch's steps died away across the yard, Sarah 
said : 

"Enoch's worse than 'im above when he's roused; for 
you can plead pardon of 'tm above throu^^h a third party, 
and say you never meant it But Enoch knows 3rou meant 
it, and there inna no third party. I feel so bad, youll be 
bound to fetch the doctor to me-^only I fed too bad for 
the doctor. Fetch me the beast-leech 1" 



CHAPTER XVn: THE GODS ASSEMBLE 

THE last Sunday in August came» and still Dormer 
lay under the burning and airless heat It was the 
weather tiiat wakes in all animals a strange restlessness, 
when the young ponies on the mountains fear they know 
not what, galloping furiously hither and thither, without 
aim or destination; when the sheep cry all night long; 
when in the sullen evenings the young gnats mind them 
of their wings and volley upwards to their mating; when 
the woodpecker's laugh grows hysterical; when it has 
even been known, in the hot, moonwhite midnights, for a 
hive to seethe with such unrest, and for the late-hatched 
queen to wake with such a wildness in her blood, that a 
swarm has gone raging up into the molten, silver sky. 

For many days there had loomed, around and above 
Dormer Valley, gigantic clouds which grouped them- 
selves beyond the circle of darkly wooded, rooky hills, 
like people in an amphitheatre. Some towered like gods 
in white mantles, with folded arms; others seemed to 
lean forward upon the woods, as on a granite balustrade, 
brooding on the house of Dormer. Some appeared to 
rest, chin on hand; some were hump-backed, ponderous; 
others, like stealthy little gods of mischievous intent, crept 
and climbed, peeping over the shoulders of the giants. 
They were mostly of that terrific pink peculiar to thunder- 
clouds, and fiercer than grey or black — a very pale brick- 
colour tinged with yellow — ^which seems like a caricature 
of all the rosy and firelit and flesh-tinted pinks, which is 
at once awful and ghoulish. With these, rooted in the 

£2< 



ftM THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

tempestuous navy-blue low on the horizon, grew op ^ 
clouds of a blanched ash-colour, very melancholy and 
wan. Sometimes the colours varied as in limeligbt 
Violet, stark silver, leaden grey-green — ^thesc passed ovtr 
them like changing tints over a group of. statuary. 
Occasionally at night they would move slowly round the 
horizon, and Jasper would think with relief that they 
were gone. But in the morning they were back again, 
taller and more majestic, more intent, with the same air 
of patient waiting for a drama in which — so his feverish 
fancy told him — he was destined to enact a tragic part 
On this Sunday the sun rose coppery above the stifling 
valley, and sometimes there came a hot gust from the 
east more oppressive than stillness. The swallows fdt 
this oppression and flew seldom, languorously and low» 
over the water. The warblers hid themselves. The silent 
pigeons made no stir amid the leaves. It was one of 
those days when dry places ice full of acrid scents, and 
damp places are foetid; when the fresh fragrances of 
spring seem to have been changed into scents unhealthy 
and oppressive ; when summer curdles, and the year turns 
rancid from very richness. 

Jasper was thankful that to-day he need not go into i 
Mr. Arkinstall's molten harvest fields. He felt utterly 
exhausted under the pressure of a doubt which, even at 
its vaguest, is torture— doubt of the beloved. He had 
watched Catherine's face when Michael's name was men- 
tioned and when she had not been on her guard. 

He wandered out into the yard and met Enoch takinf 
the pigs to consume windfalls in the orchard. 

Jasper paused, hesitant, wanting sympathy, but not 
knowing how to ask for it. Enoch, characteristically, 
gave it without being asked, and by talking of something 



Having given a \qci^ t^aBcmtiative look at Jasper's face 



( 



44 
it 



THE GODS ASSEMBLE SS5 

he turned squarely round with his bade to him. This 
was his custoni when ptoplt were in trouble. He would 
not have thought it delicate to ''outface" them. Thus 
posed, with a bit of half-ripe wheat to chew, and a wary 
eye on the heavy eastern sky — as one who expected some 
demon to materialize there — ^he said : 

"The sun's dealing straidy with us. Master Jasper. 
Very straidy, he be." 

"Yes." 

"It makes the beasts mortal fratchety. They wumia 
step where they're put. Ours broke pasture last night, 
and her at the World's End public got out, and she hanna 
raught back yet." 

The person referred to was not the landlady, but a 
much more important person in Enoch's eyes — ^hfer cow. 
And Wallows broke out, and Rectory," he went on. 
Pond's dry at Rectory, but I canna see what for they 
wanted to break out at the Wallows. It's the weather 
goes to their yeads. No beast can stand it." 

He turned sidewa3rs and indicated one of the sows. 

"Now that un," he said, "what d'you think she'd done 
when I came to the pigsty but now, Master Jasper? 
Qomb right over the door, and there she was, bompass- 
ing and boasting, and the rest screaming 'housen afire!' 
I never heard such a belownder. But she alius was a 
restless piece." 

"D'you think it'll rain soon, Enoch? I hate this 
weather." 

The tenseness behind the commonplace remark made it 
almost electrical. 

"Well, Master Jasper, it met, and agen it metna. But 
the more of a frizzle now, the more of a souse after. And 
the more things go calljrwessen now, the more they'll 
drive a straight fun ow after." 

With this he finally swallowed the much endutvng \^vt 



226 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

of corn, removed his eye from the east, turned round, and 
perceived that the "piece" had set off for the Wallows^ 
leading with her the rest of the pigsty population. 

If Jasper had not been so miserable, he would have 
shouted with laughter at the picture, of svelt bodies, thin 
perky tails and willing little feet vanishing down the laoe, 
while Nemesis with a long bean stick followed wiA 
obstinate, unhasting tread. 

Jasper went into the dim drawing-room, where only the 
motes stirred in narrow shafts of sunlight that strud 
across the dust-coloured carpet through defective slats in 
the Venetian blinds. It was airless, for all the windows 
were shut, but it was shady, and the shrouded piano with 
its tidy sheaf of sacred music seen^ed to promise a reassur- 
ing muteness. A bluebottle that had caught its wing in 
the web of a spider so old and crafty that it had even 
managed to elude Sarah, made an intermittent, forlorn 
buzzing, as if it saw and did not like the ghostly company 
of departed bluebottles to which it was to be gathered 
Jasper got up and released it. Then he lay down on the 
sofa. It was Uncle Thomas Hilary's bequest, and it still 
bore the marks of Uncle Thomas's occupation, for being a 
ponderous gentleman he had "sat through" the springs, 
as the Darkes of several generations knew. Jasper curled 
himself into the attitude which best avoided the springs, 
and tried to read But even that anaesthetic failed him. 
Catherine's face, oval and almost faultless, so clear in 
complexion that it seemed to imply clarity of soul, floated 
across his vision with the floating motes. He shut his 
eyes and saw her as she had looked at the dance— die 
graceful head, the gentle outlines of shoulder and breast, 
the softly lifted frill of her dress. He remembered how 
his hands had been full of an ungovernable desire to touch 
her; how he had fought wth the desire and conquered it 
,What good had it been? Did she love him any better for 



THE G0D3 ASSEMBLE tStT 

it? She said so. Did she understand him? He doubted 
it He had kissed her that day at the grotto, he had out- 
soared Peter's scornful — "I wouldn't take up with a giri 
I daren't kiss." Catherine had not kept her supremacy 
without some cost to herself. But her eyes remained coldly 
clear and untroubled when they dwelt on him, unchanged 
in their liquid greenness, through his most impassioned 
moments. And those same eyes had lighted at the name 
of Michael Hallowes. He had seen the chill mermaid 
glance quiver and warm to a green flame. He had seen 
the vexed, confused, red flush in her pale chedcs. Or 
was it his imagination? "Oh, God I" he thought, "let it 
be imagination I" 

He pulled out Catherine's portrait and kissed it many 
times. 

"Who's eating lozenges?" said grandmother frwn the 
inner room, whence she emerged, feather-brush in hand, 
nodding inquiringly like a Chinese queen with a gaudy 
fan. 

"I see you, great-^:randsonr' she remarked, tapping- 
her way to the sofa. "You've gotten a touch of the sun." 

S4ie nodded again, and a little stone idol of missic^ary 
extraction (made with a detached head strung on wire) 
which nodded all day in the empty, silent room in per- 
petual afHrmation of a negation, gravely returned her 
bow. The two round, hard faces, the two hard, curiously 
decorated heads, greeted one another aCross Jasper'* 
body with an air of affinity. Jasper thought as he looked 
at them that grandmother was old enough and grotesque 
enough to have shared a temple with the idol somewhere 
in the bat-haunted past. 

Grandmother began to dust the (uano, saying: "Our 
God is a jealous God I" And the four chanddiers of 
'Aunt Charlotte-Lucy (deceased) which flanked the idol,. 
seemed to echo her with an elfin, accusing dash. 

Jasper got up and went out He wandered along tiic 



«S8 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

streamy dreaming upon the deep, interfusing shadow 
beneath the twisted thorn, where lay within the water, 
in a kind of tragic beauty, cross on brown cross and 
multiple thorny crowns. He wished that he could see 
ijiere the reflection of the Man of Sorrows passing by 
across the world. Ah ! if only that fair and fiercely vital 
story were true, could he not follow with bleeding feet— 
anywhere, anywhere I But lyith a fated beauty, even as he 
looked, the reflections quivered and were gone, as the 
may-tree felt the furtive electric wind that roams the 
world before thunder; the crosses were softly shivered; 
the crowns melted and failed upon the water. 

Nothing was left but the marginal swords of tbt 
rushes; the faint motions of water insects; the shadowy 
head of a swimnung rat. 

Slipping into an hypnotic dream, Jasper imagined that 
he saw within the water, moving with the weird dignity 
ivith which a herd of cattle pass in a pool, the people c^ 
Dormer. But their faces were not the faces of daily life; 
some necromancy had brought them out of their hiding. 
A wild and changeling company they seemed; but he 
scarcely noticed any face except Catherine's. Her c^fcs 
looked chill and crafty as the eyes of a sea-queen, dwd- 
ling cold in the oold green ocean, never winning through 
to a souL 

The water wearied Ja^>er almost as much as the house. 
There were too many people in the house; there were 
too many minnows in the water, the warm stream was 
alive with them. There was no rest here. And above, 
under the branches of the dark green, heavy trees, already 
tinged with edges of yellow, danced in languid mazes the 
multitudes of midges. The air was so heavy, the water 
ran so oily-thick, that Jasper felt stifled. He decided to 
go to the grotto. It would be cool there. He wocdd take 
a jug of tea and stai^y \3\<ete all day, until blessed evening 
liroug^ht Catherine aivAYieT VKi^-N«i\\.^^w^^^, 



THE GODS ASSEMBLE 229 

As he went up the Beast Walk, the st^nge shapes 
seemed silently to jest and jape at him, alternately stirless 
and whispering. A vacillating air wavered over them in 
the heat, sthred them to multiple sibilations and fell to a 
calm that held in it, like a narcotic solution, the scent of 
the green yew and of the deep layers of dead yew beneath. 
Jasper liked it better when the trees were still; for to the 
derided soul even the voice of the forest is derision. 
Lugubrious and hollow-sounding, it roars upon him in 
winter like the voice of a ghoul, hotmding him from glade 
to glade under the complex traceries of grey coral. And 
in sunmier, when the green tongues lisp and murmur as 
they did to-day, so that the curtained woodland is full of 
a volume of soft noise, he is even more keenly reminded, 
if he is inclined to be introspective, of the ridicule of his 
fdlows — ^as if each one laughed softly behind his hand 
Now, as he thought of his own life, of the way he had 
been fooled by fate and was being, so he imagined, fooled 
by everyone, his face grew wild and bitter. When dart- 
ing doubts of Catherine flashed like lizards in and out of 
the crevices of consciousness, the stark holly trunks 
seemed to him like the pillars of a torture chamber. What 
was his life? A round of drudgery among people some 
of whom he detested. What was his future? Instinct 
began to tell him that it was to be either a long wrestle 
of wills between himself and Catherine, or blank despair. 
He saw life without glamour, without romance; and to 
see it thus is like living in rocky and barren deserts. He 
heard the shrilling of age in its wintry skeleton tree. He 
heard the weak crying of infancy in its bleak, windy nest 
He saw the callow fledglings a-row, earnest, incompetent, 
doomed to innumerable downfalls and unthinkable 
labours to attain — ^what? Simply to attain the anxious, 
restless preoccupation of parenthood. The songs of ma- 
turity, so sweet, so compelling to the heatex, 'wVsal'vtx^ 
they to the singer? ^'ITiey are what my \oNe tot C;a&v 



i 



ieSO THE HOUSE IN DORBiER FOREST 

«rine is to me/' be thought, '^terror and ecstasy, and very 
little ecstasy/' Fools! these poets, who imagined the 
blackbird singing in April because he was happy. He was 
not happy. He was full of a passion he did not under- 
stand 9nd never wanted. He shouted in a wild despera- 
tion, hoping to get rid of his unrest by the outcry of his 
soul. If he won his mate, he was triumphant; but ym 
he happy ? Jasper doubted it. Where did all the laboar 
of home-building lead — the carrying of heavy burdens-* 
the feeding of unsatisfied young ? In. his present mood he 
felt that Nature worked her creatures like slaves, and, 
with her ironic smile — so suave and so secret — fooled 
them into believing that they were masters of the worid. 
X Unconsciously Jasper endowed Nature with the vet; 
.smile of Catherine. ) And when the play was done, smr 
mer over, fruits gone and song faded — what then? 
Nothing. Only the shrilling of age in its wintry, skektoo 
tree. 

"Curse it!" said Jasper furiously, "curse itr 
trhere was in his voice the agony of a straying creatore 
1>enighted in the wilderenss. 

The forest remained aloof, not tadtum, but indifferent 
Only the echoes, in tones light and oold as the voices of 
gibing fairies, faintly cried from the rocks and the walls 
of woodland, "Curse ! Curse!" 

He knew that, if he stayed at Dormer, he could not 
resist the sleepy poison of the place, where they were so 
full of material preoccupations; where they destroyed the 
impalpable; where, for him, madness lurked like a snake 
in the egg. Jasper, as he looked with loathing at the 
leprous trunks of the dead hollies, thought : "It's all the 
joke of a goblin jester, without sense, without mer^, 
without even humour. And he's got us in his clutdia» 
Ixxly and soul !" 

By which it vnll be sem that Mrs. Cantlop was right 
"When she said, "32^^^ t«ftAs^\s»cae' 



THE GODS ASSEMBLE 281 

He did, but it was not the kind that is sold in bottles. 
He had the misfortune — it is sometimes a misfortune — 
to love wildly and yet steadfastly. Therefore, Catherine 
being what she was, he moved in a circle, and his strug- 
gles were fruitless. He saw life as a dark ravine, a place 
where the bitter-berried juniper tangled the feet; where 
liie streams made a wintry clamour of wrath and sadness; 
where the cr3ring of the flock echoed from the white water 
to the crag, fell, broken, from the cold night sky» shiv- 
ered into silence in the hollows where gleamed the white 
bones of sheep. This crevasse of the mind Jasper knew 
wdl. Thither, at a chance word of any callous tempera- 
ment, he was driven, lamenting and lost. It is strange 
that those who speak such words never dream that they 
have sent a fellow creature forth into a place so wikl, so 
deathly. Jasper sat down on the stone bench outside the 
grotto, and looked towards the house. He wondered 
why so many of the people down there were warped by 
tiie very things that should have made them weathered 
timber. Yet, in a way, he k>ved them. One side of him 
loved them, the other was irritated by them almost to 
frenzy. 

He went into the grotto to avoid the intense heat and 
to be out of sight of the contemplative, witnessing clouds. 
For the human mind, when it nears the day of despair, 
can only think with equanimity of the mysterious crea- 
tures of space — stars, cloud, light — ^when it imagines a 
personal God behind them. 

Jasper went through into the tiny inner room where 
no one ever came, fetched the rug and lay down, utterly 
weary. The green light that filtered in through the smalt 
ivied window was soothing, and after an hour or two 
the book dropped from his hand, and he fell into the 
dreamless sleep of those who are superlatively wretched. 



It^ 



CHAPTER XVm: JASPER BREAKS PASTURE 

CATHERINE stood, wrapped in a long cloak of 
vibitt which she affected, just outside the small 
ung^lazed window of die grotto, in the wild, tetnpestaoas 
evening light She had just seen Aniber come from the 
outer room of the little stone house, now dark and . 
uncanny; so she did not trouMe to look inside, as was | 
usually her prudent habit before sitting down on the 
bench. She kxdced after Amber's retreating figure from 
iwhich even the shadows could not take the look of dowdi- 
ness, or, as Catherine, thought, of dumpiness. Amber 
yfOTt her usual summer afternoon dress — spotted mustin, 
iwith flounces, made by herself, and not very weU made. 

''What a Mother Bunch !'' thought Catherine, supfms- 
sing a titter. 

She guessed where Amber was going. She was going 
further into the wood, so that Michael Hallowes shooU 
come out and look for her. Amber did this because tte 
sweetness of being looked for was heady as faery wine 
to her, and because she needed its reassurance — ^for she 
was subject to the swift darts of sdf-depreciatlon wbJ ' 
make a plain woman withdraw from her love 'n a pi' 
rooted in humility. 

To-night Catherine had other views for Micfaad. She 
etood, swaying a little on her daintily shod feet, in the 
centre of a small circle of yew trees. This was, in its 
lum, ringed by the immense amphitheatre of statuesque 
cloud, very intent now, giving to Michael, as he came 
down through the Birds' Orchard, _a..sense of oppressivdy 



I 



JASPER BREAKS PASTURE S33 

courteous attention. What were they waiting for up 
6iere, in that sad, pale, red light of theirs, like people 
expectant before the curtain as it rises on the chief scene 
of a play? Catherine, seeing that Amber had quite dis- 
appeared in the dark yews, whispered : 

"You can wait, and wait, and wait, my dear! He 
shall not come !'' 

She clicked her white teeth with finality, and sat down 
on the bench, looking up the path down which Michael 
.would come. 

He came. 

She clasped her hands in the intensity of her passion for 



4i' 



'Oh, he is a man — a man 1" she thought. 
'How he is glooming on the grotto! I can see he is 
not pleased. Is it I he is not pleased with ? Oh ! I would 
rather have his anger than other people's praise ! I would 
rather be his mistress than tiie wife of a duke.'' 

Michael paused by the grotto, and glanced in at the 
ivied window, for an intuition told him that Jasper would 
he there. Jasper lay in a half-waking state. Surely, he 
thought, Catherine could not be harsh to him. He remem- 
bered the feminine droop in the graceful figure. Surely 
she must lay aside cold theory for love — ^the womanly, 
the warn^, the starry ! Then the long conflict would be 
S«r. SUt should keep fler Christ. He would never lay 

?ingera/rn her creed. She should keep that; he would 
xeep L.^ lesty; all would be well. He did not see 
Michael. ' " 

The hush that lay on the world thickened round the 
grotto, as Michael stood and looked at Catherine; bats 
began to appear, uttering, amid their half-C3mical activ- 
ity, soulless cries. They were so eerie that even Cathe- 
rine, who had too glassy a mind to be, as a rule, affected 
by nature, shivered and felt tiie place lonely. 



Se84 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"It is the only way," thought Michael. "Crud; tot 
the only way. It must be the knife." 

The stone walls seemed to grow greyer with the shad- 
ows of disillusionment CNd lost dreams and hopes came 
flocking, cold as snowflakes, stealthy as bats, and clung 
danldy in the comers. Down below, tiie water made 
its continual plaint; and once, from the outskirts of the 
wood, there rang out the high, nervous cry of one of 
the strayed animals. 

"You have been a long time coming/' said Catherine 
softly. 

Jasper stirred, rolled over, got up. There she was, his 
guardian angel, come at last to comfort him. How sweet 
ehe was, with her dimly coiled hair softly resting on the 
large cavalier collar I 

He peered out, and was just going to speak when be 
saw Michael. He sat down, holding on to the table with 
both hands in a rush of jealousy so savage that he could 
not move. He did not hear Michael ask briskly : "AVhere 
is she?" 

He only heard the reply, which was not a reply, in the 
unmistakable voice of a woman speaking to the man 
whom she passionately loves. HorriUe ages of suffering 
rolled over Jasper as he heard those few words : 

'Why didn't you come sooner ?" 

'Why did you want me to oome sooner?" asked 
Michael. 

Catherine's head drooped. Dared she be frank? She 
looked swiftly at Michael. No! She must hint; ^ 
dared not be outspoken. 

She slipped from the white cloak and stood before him 
in her green dress, made of silk and closely fitting. He 
thought as he watched her that she had the conciliatory 
air of a new wife in a harem. She trembled as she stood, 
for she who had \a\d stoit^^ lot 'J^.'&^^r was snared herself. 



4t^ 



JASPER BREAKS PASTURE 285 

'1 have been told/' she said diffidently, ''that I am 
beautiful/' 

Michael^ said nothing. 

She laughed nervously. 

''Do you thinS: so?" she said, glad that the shadows hid 
her burning blush. 

"Well, as you are now, looking less cold than ordi- 
narily, I think you are/' he said. 

"Really beautiful?" 

"Quite/' 

"Am I/' said Catherine, "the kind of woman a man 
would like to see in his house?" 

"I should think so." 

"And would want to see with his children round her ?" 

("Oh, he is cruel— cruel l" thought Catherine. "He 
will not help me. He makes me give myself to him!") 

Then, as Michael did not answer, she said : 

"Amber is not strong. Perhaps she will never have 
children. 

"I did not cocne here to discuss Amber/' 

"Poor Amber! She is cut out for an old maid/' 

"She has the qualities which make old maids, as a rule, 
the Madonnas of the world" 

"Marriage with any but the right woman must be so 
dulL" 

"Damnably/' 

*Tm afraid dear Amber is growing too fond of you." 

"You're a witch, Catherine Velindre." 

"But witches were ugly !" 

"You're not a witch, then." 

Catherine sat down on the bench. "What am I ?" 

"Jasper will tell you that jtou are his future wife." 

Catherine sprang up in rage and dismay. "What, that 
fool?" she cried. 

'What was that sound/' asked Michael^ "l\kfc ^xclowxT' 



uy 



S86 THE HOUSE IN DORBfER FOREST 



''I hear nothing — nothing but you! I see noCfaing— 
nothing but you I" 

Catherine spoke with still intensity. 

From the uttermost darkness beyond the serried gods 
of cloud there darted, yellow and silent as a lizard, the 
first forked lightning flash. It seemed to lick Catherine's 
passionate pale face before it slid into the dark grotto. 

From far down the woods, near the house, came 
Sarah's voice, sharp and miniature, keeping on two nerve- 
wracking notes, the echo repeating the second syllaUe d 
each word. 

"Enoch — noch! Enoch — nochi You're wanted- 
wanted." 

"You are wanted, Michael," burst from Catherine's 
tremulous lips, "you are wanted by- ** 

"It is Enoch that's wanted, not me," corrected MidiaeL 
"And now tell me about Jaq>er. He is very fond of you, 
is old Jasper. And you ?" 

"And I," said Catiierine, "if I saw him burning on a 
slow fire, and knew that a word of love could save him, 
would give that word to——" 

Again Michael saved her. 

"Would give that word, of course," he said. "It's oily 
a matter of principle that has gone wrong between jcn 
and jasper. It will come right, because love is a primi- 
tive thing." 

"I only said it was his views to get rid of him." 

"If he had given up his honesty, his soul, for yon, 
would you have spoilt his life?" 

"His life? What's his life? I don't care that for his 
lifel Foolish boy— with his empty face, and his *Cathy 
this' and 'Cathy that!'" 

Thunder had muttered round the horizon for a kxig 
time. Now the fest i^XlXm^ ^^ftal iril from heaven. 



JASPER BREAKS PASTURE S37 

Jasper burst from the grotto. 

There are times, especially under moonlight, when the 
human face takes the look of white flowers, and when the 
personality is effaced, leaving simply human pathos. So 
Jasper looked, as he came from the low dark house into 
the immense, tenebrous night — as though his whole self 
had become transparent, and were being washed away on 
some roaring flood 

Catherine's face also, blanched and tragic as she looked 
after Michael, had this quality of helplessness. She had 
risked all and lost. For the moment she was beaten. 
She, the passionless, had been stricken, as the weak never 
are, by this overwhelming love which ruled her — ^who had 
always ruled herself and others — ^until she was terrified. 
Instinct had said — "Win this man ! Make him love you !" 
She had failed, and her love had turned to a predatory 
beast, consuming her vitality. She never took her eyes 
from Michael's retreating figure. Thunder crashed and 
echoed above; but she was not afraid of the thunder. 
Jasper's eyes burnt upon her from his ravaged face; but 
she was not afraid of Jasper. She had seen with awful 
clearness exactly what Michael thought of her, felt for 
her, in the one long look he had given her before he 
turned on his heel and left her with Jasper. She was a 
haughty woman, and she writhed as she saw again (she 
would see it all her life) the expression of scorn in 
Michael's eyes — worse, the expression of amusement. 
She could have killed him as she realized that he found 
her laughable. She had offered him herself, and he had 
waved away the gift as one might discourage a persistent 
beggar. She knew that if she could have won Michad's 
love, she might have become, by virtue of it, a simple 
direct creature, living sweetly in the sunlight. Though 
she had been, in the house of Dormer, a cold and cynical 
egoist, love could have awakened her, pet^AiaAvcvg^ coiccir 



jess THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

manding, dragging her into happiness through pain. Tbt 
lover must suffer infinitely, the egoist not at all. 

She looked up at the tormented trees, where ran the 
furious, electric wind, like a hunting leopard. She looked 
at die dark sky, where only a central clarity of dim air 
was left as the cloud-gods crowded inwards, their mooD- 
silvered heads almost meeting. From the bases of their 
thrones, where night was thickest, came the continuous, 
terrific peals; and flashes coruscated there like electric 
sparks struck by their feet from the granite hills. 

At last she was obliged to look at Jasper, whose k»g 
stare, full of curiosity, wonder, disgust and horror, had 
never left her. 

So might one of the cave-dwelling hermits have looked 
if, after opening his low door to a purple-winged seraph, 
he had turned and beheld, where the seraph had stood, 
an ape. His soul was sick; his face had a hollow look— 
the look of winter, of withering and decay. 

A small thing to make shipwreck on, perhaps, a 
woman's ridicule. But it was enough, she had revealed 
herself. 

So they stood for a moment, alone among the sounding 
shadows. Unbearably, from far below, catne Sarah's 
call: 

'Eenoch — ^noch ! Henoch !*' 

Jasper took a step towards her. 

''Liar !" he said, and brought his open hand down in a 
stinging blow upon her mouth. 

Then with a sob he turned and went dovm the Beast 
Walk. As he fltmg himself onward in the mopping and 
mowing of the shadows, he saw beneath him a kindlj 
velvet greyness, heard the soft "lap-lap-lap" of Dormer 
brook, swollen by thunder rain that had fallen on the 
lulls early in ^S^<t ^. T^afc N<i\cfc ^i \ivR Four Waters, 



JASPER BREAKS PASTURE 239 

bee-like still, and still saying what it had said before the 
banning of man, had grown loud and commanding. 
What with its imperious summons and the cajoling mur- 
mur of the little waves below, it seemed that the water 
was rising like a silver wraith and softly enclosing him. 
Liquid sounds were all about him — drippings and gur- 
glings, splashes, the rush of little eddies. His soul seemed 
to be globed in water, like a tiny insect in a rain drop. 
As he went, he did not think of Catherine, with her pred- 
atory purity; nor of Dormer, with its vault-like air; 
nor of his love, trampled and dead. He thought of water 
— green, saffron, blue, brown, white, every colour. His 
mind became for those moments the mind of a water- 
creature. He dreamed the dreams of the long-rooted lily, 
the darting trout, the caddis, moving on its secret enter- 
prises, clad in its brook-finery of little stones and nestling 
in the sand. The coot and the vole, the water scorpion, 
and the bull-head that hides under the stones — these were 
his intimates. He knew them in a flash of time — their 
desires, their passion. They lived for the silver water; 
in the water they died. He also was impassioned for 
water — since it gave a velvet-soft wound, opened a green, 
easy corridor down into death. Yes! That was where 
he would go, down where the water-buttercup rooted, and 
the rosy-budded milfoil swayed, and that strange, sor- 
cery-breathing bloom, the buckbean, planted its feet in 
the mud. Peace was there — golden peace, where the 
great clumps of tansy and figwort made all day long a 
brown and yellow blur upon the sheet of steel; dark blue 
and silver peace, where a rift of night sky slashed the 
grey current and held far within it the sad, clear eye of 
a star; black, stirless peace, where a yew tree laid its 
great bulk upon the pale water, like a weary giant on 
his bed. Weary ? Ah, but Jasper was weary ! He was 
so infinitely tired of trying to make people M\v4Rx^\asA 



240 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

that he was not either an idiot or a villain, but jnst 
plain, simple youth wanting to make his own destiny 
his own way. Why wouldn't they see that? But, ev 
as he thought of it, the indomitable faces rose before hii 
hard with the inevitable hardness of spiritual ignoran 
as unable to get out of their superstitions as he was to { 
back into them. He saw that, and he was sorry for the 
realizing that they were the victims of their own Jugg 
naut. But for Catherine he was not sorry. He wisb 
he had killed her. 

"If she had gone on the streets," he thought, "anc 
had found her plying her trade in some filthy den, I ooi 
have forgiven her, brought her home, worshipped 1 
still. But this — ^there is no cure for this. Her very a 
is putrid. There is no cure for me but the water. £ 
will never follow me into the water." 

He stood beneath the yew tree that was shaped lik 
monkey, and let his eyes dwell on the murmuring flo 
while he tried, with youth's bepuzzled frown, to visual 
Dormer without himself in it There they would all 
busy, absorbed in outward observance, and Gather 
would buy a becoming black dress. Suddenly he reali: 
that, instead of his personality being fainter because 
his death, it would for the first time be really ponderal 

He laughed at that — ^the wild laugh of a soul unmoa 
by some great shock from the safe and homely things 
life. 

Then he heard Sarah, back in the garden, callii 
"Henoch!" 

It brought the world in, and the fear of being afn 
of being once more tied down to the daily life he hat 

The water dosed over him with a soft, assenting li 



i 



CHAPTER XIX : PHILIP AREINSTALL SMILES 

WHILE fhese things were happening, Ernest had 
arrived. He had come to say that ''something 
must be done" about Ruby. She was "queer.'' 

"Great-aunt," said Ernest, "she said she did not like 
the child. I said that in her husband a woman sees the 
ideal to which her child will attain, and she laughed — 
laughed immoderately. Ruby seems insane; she is 
insane She has delusicms; she thinks I am not a nice 



man." 






He felt hurt. He had done his duty by God and his 
fellows in giving them a living likeness of himself^ and 
this was his reward I 

'She must be shut up," said Mrs. Darke. 
1 fear so, I deeply fear it," said Ernest. Then, as 
conversation flagged, he went out to find the younger 
members of the family. 

He could walk as softly as a cat, and had often, while 
living at Dormer, "beaten" the woods for lovers, in the 
cause of morality. He had approached Mr. Mallow about 
this, but Mr. Mallow said : 

"I've no instructions as to lovers, sir. If they like to 
go daggling about in the nasty, muddy 'ood when they 
met be comfortable by the fire, I says, let 'em go dag- 
glin' I" 

Catherine, as she saw Ernest looming over her, almost 
before Jasper had disappeared, hegaLtt to cry. It was the 
last intolerable insult of fate that Ernest should witness 
her humiliation. Ernest, who had never thought of 

f4I 



242 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Catherine as one who could cry, became very muc 
interested. 

"Confide in me," he said, "I may say I make a sp 
cialty of grief." 

Catherine was prevented from replying by sobs of rag 

Ernest, feeling that he must be broadly human, tri< 
facetiousness. "Suppose I guess?" he suggested. 

"Suppose," said Catherine, springing up in a vortex ( 
wrath and silken gleams, "suppose you mind your ow 
business, Ernest, instead of coming purring over me !" 

"You are my business," said Ernest, "all in one, yo 
know." 

He acted as a tonic She stopped crying and came oo 
of her inertia. 

"If you worry me," she said, "I shall tell everybod 
what I saw on the night of your wedding, and what 
heard." 

"Heard? Saw?" 

"Between twelve and one, on the landing," said Catiii 
rine incisively. 

Ernest sat quite still. So she had seen it all ! The la: 
person who should have done so, that dreadful little cai 

He sat in deep dejection like a pricked balloon. 

But in a moment they sprang to their feet A a 
rang out from the trough of night, mournful, wild ar 
hoarse. It was snatched up by the echoes in the fore 
and hanselled by them as though it were a new, stranj 
toy. 

"Drownded ! Drownded !" 

The two words arrested Catherine's heart witH the 
sickening, fatal sound, and, as Ernest went to see wh 
was the matter, she sank down on the bench agai 
Enoch also heard them. He retired to the apple-roo 
now in his leisure, refusing to respond to Sarah's repen 
ant blandishments. He sat there in great peace, makii 



PHILIP ARKINSTALL SMILES MA 

thatdiing-pegs amid the pleasant scent of summer apples, 
while the storm came nearer and brtAe over the house. 
His unglazed window looked on the water and the woods, 
and he could dimly see his aunt's cottage which stood 
near the foot of the Beast Walk. He thought how the 
rose-and-white figure of Marigold used to preside ovef 
the winter tea-table, and how he used to hurry through 
the wild, wet wood so that he could see her sitting hy the 
fire with her sewing. He fell into a Iwig reverie about 
her and her child. He did not notice the darkening sky; 
the mice ventured out; Sarah's call came unheeded from 
the wood. 

It was not until Mrs. Gosling's cry sounded from her 
garden, coming wildly across the water, that Enoch w<^e 
to the world. 

"There's ours hollering," he thought "The 'oman's 
been at it this long while, but what ails ours?" He 
listened. Again came the melancholy lament — 

"Drownded! Drowndedl" 

He sprang up and ran. 

"I knowed they'd drive un to it," he thought "Ay, 
Master Jasper's broke pasture this night." 

He ran beside the full stream which churned against its 
banks. Mrs. Gosling was inarticulate and wild. She 
wrung her hands and wailed, her chedt shawl and grey 
hiur blown by the wind, her face running with rain. 

"Oh,'my 'ouns, EnochI I thought you'd ne'er come!" 
she cried. "Get un out, EnochI Get un out!" 

Enoch snatched up a pole and ran downstream, for the 
current was strong, and he thought Jasper must have 
been carried with it. He was joined by Ernest, compe- 
tent and energetic. To'do him justice, Ernest was always 
ready to spend himself for the general good. In a 
physical crisis he was at his best 




«44 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



"What's that?" he cried. "In the water there, wading 
white as a ghost?" i 

It was Airba. But not as anyone had ever seen be I 
before. Wet to the waist, dishevelled, sobbing', calling |> 
upon Jasper, she stood in the water, and her voice wai i 
driven down the wind. 

She had waited a loag while for Michad. When the : 
storm broke, she had started to go back to the grotta | 
Then that awful shriek rang out, and with a cry of— ' 
"Jasper I" — she had rushed to the water. 1 

"Where are you ? ^, where are you P" she called; and ': 
the echoes, in ghostly chorus, toc^ up the questioning i 
«adnes5 of her cry. The night seemed full of voices utter- I 
ing a lament ancioit as love itself. But only the clucking 
of the stream against its banks rqdied to her, the moan- i 
ing wind, the hushing rain. ' \ 

"If you was to fetch the maister. Miss Amber," said ; 
Enoch with his swift intuitive perception of the right 
thing to do for people in trouble; "it ud be hdpful-like." ,^ 

In his own heart he feared that Jasper was bqrond all  
help. Amber ran along die path where yellow leaves, j, 
loosened by the storm, fell sadly from the chestnuta , 
Streaming with rain and hmdk water, shuddering with | 
the deep horror of death, she ran blindly. Anyone meet- 
ing her would have thought her crazed; for love has no , 
thoughts for its own a^tpearanoe, its own entity, when the ; 
beloved is threatened. So, in a world absorbed in outei 
forms, love is often hooted as an imbecile. Surely on 
Olympus the comfortable gods smiled behind their hanth : 
at Eros, wandering careless down buttercup ways. And | 
we know that among his own people Christ was looked 
upon askance as one vbom it was kinder to r^iaid as 



The ttonn had spent its rage: The thunder had 



PHILIP AKKINSTALL SMILES «46 

retreated into hollow caverns far away, leaving^ the night 
safe and quiet Only Jasper was not safe, Amber thought 
Only Jasper was not there to see the moon set in the dear 
washed heavens. The gods, who had waited around the 
horizon so patiently, had departed. Not (xie remained. 
The iMgniy tragedy was over; leaving the little actors yet 
oo the dim, disordered stage, they had stojen away, it 
seemed, in the stately silence of indifference. 

Amber opened the dining-room door. 

"We shall have to forgive Jisper," her father was say- 
ing. "Now Peter's gone, he mast have the place. We 
must have one son here. It most be Jasper." 

"Jasper I" said grandmother. 

"Jasper is drowned T' said Amber, and ber voice 
startled the drowsy walls, the londy pasai^ies. with the 
emptinesa of loss. 

Still Catherine sat, as if paralysed, on her bench. And 
as she sat, Philip ArkiostaU watcbad b«r from the yew- 
tree shade. All the evening he had been awaiting this 
hour. Now he heard, comii^ \xp from the water, Sarah's 
voice calling Enoch, Sarah's heavy feet trampling the 
bracken. She had heard i/Lrs. Gosling's cry, and was 
taking a short cut to the cottage. 

In a moment she would pass the grotto. 

He toc^ two strides to the bencb, snatdied Catherine 
into his arms, scattered her hairpins, ripped the green silk 
off one shoulder. Holding her arms round his neck with 
one hand, he clasped her with the other, crushing her to 
him with a grip that very ably mimidced passion. 

Then he said loudly enough for Sarah to hear: 

"Thank you, darling, for all the ha^^ness you have 
given me I" 

"Well," said Sarah to herself as she hastened by, "you 




246 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

met kill me with a bit of grass 1 's Catherine! — as was 
so mim and so prim, with her 'air all down and dress near 
ofFl" The smile of one completely satiated with venge- 
ance for many wrongs dawned upon her rocky face. 

"I hate you !" whispered Catherine. "I'll pay you for 
this, Philip!" 

"Yes, my dear. You'll pay with the gift of yourself F' 

"How dare you I" 

"I'm sorry to have inconvenienced you," he said imper- 
turably, picking up the hairpins. "But you're such a 
damned clever woman. A man's got to fig^t with his . 
own weapons." 

"I'll never speak to you again I" j 

"But you'll marry me." i 

"You?" Her voice was like a knife. "When I marry, j 
it will be a gentleman." \ 

"It will be me. But I don't claim to be your lover, m; i 
dear." r 

"Claim? What do you dare claim to be?" | ^ 

"Your master." i 

"Never I" 

"We shall see; but I will tell you this — Sarah saw!" ji 

Philip Arkinstall, as he went in a leisurely manner to i i 
help in the search for Jasper, smiled. ! ^ 



CHAPTER XX t THE MARBLE CHRIST 

WHEN Catherine reached her own room, she stood 
transfixed in the doorway. For, at this late hour, 
)fae moon, slanting in at her window, laid the shadow of 
lier large marble crucifix along the floor. The figure of 
Uie crucified, in contorted, purple-black shadow, stretched 
its arms across the room. It seemed to her that they 
IRrere outspread not to save, but to grasp; that the head 
.'was bent not in love but with the menace of a bird of 
(>rey. This Christ that she had set up in a half-conscious 
(x>se of religiosity had never been anything but a pic- 
•faresque detail of her room. Now the tortured white 
£gure seemed to her to be real, yet not with the reassur- 
ing^ actuality of every day, but with the feverish vividness 
of a nightmare. 

Catherine heard someone coming wearily and heavily 
t^stairs. She peered out. It was Amber, looking, in the 
-wavering light of the candle she carried, as grey and limp 
as if she, as well as Jasper, had been drowned. Her wet 
clothes and the cold night air had chilled her so that her 
face was almost blue. Catherine, as usual, was able to 
look all the things that Amber really was. While Amber 
only looked bedraggled, Catherine looked tragic, and she 
might easily have been imagined as she stood there in her 
(white dressing-gown, to be Jasper's guardian angd. 
"What has happened ?" asked Catherine. 
"Jasper is drowned,'* said Amber. "And you are his 
murderess." 
"Arc you mad ?* 

247 



1 



jM8 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''I wish I were. I should have forgetfulness in my sool 
if I were." 

"Then what do you mean, calling* me by that cfii 
name?" 

''Evil names are for evil people. You murdered Ja^ 
just as much as if you had pushed him into the stream. 
Your spirit did push him in." 

"The poor boy was crazy." 

"I think the same people are responsiUe for what is 
called madness — ^the people, that is, who think themsdYCs 



sane." 



"Could I help it if he loved mc? Could I hdp it if 
they both loved me?" 

"Both?" 

There was a silence. They heard Sarah's steps go bj, 
and the faint rattle of the silver-basket. Whoever (ficd 
the silver must be looked after. Custom decreed (hat it 
should sit on Sarah's chest of drawers, covered with & 
wash-leather, the plated mustard-pot outside, like a Idfid 
of Ishmael which the burglar might take if he liked 
Though Sarah did not mean to go to bed, she felt tlat 
the silver would be safe in her room in the comfortable 
aura of ancient usage. 

"Jasper and Michael," said Catherine. 

"Michael?" 

"Yes." 

"Do you meati that you think Michael loves you?" 

'T>oes a man quarrd with his best friend about i 
woman unless he loves her?" 

"Did they quarrel?" 

"Did Michael keep you waiting to-night ?*' 

"Yes." 

"He was at the grotto— with me." 

Amber thought — 'There is some mistake; I will not 
believe it." 



"] 



THE MARBLE CHRIST 249 

'Then Jasper came; there was a quarrel." 

"About you?" 

"Yes." 

'^ou are mistaken, Catherine. Michael loves me." 

"You!" 

Catherine took Amber by the arm and led her to the 
mirror. 

"Look!" she said. 

Amber looked, quailed, and turned away. But she 
repeated, as if it were a charm, "Michael loves me." 

"He said to-night what a nice old maid you would 
make." 

If he said that, he did not mean it as you mean it." 
'He was laughing at you. Have you no pride? Give 
him up !" 

"No." 

"You must. He would only have a miserable half-life 
with you. With me" — she stretched out her arms so that 
one hand touched the icy marble of the cross — "with me 
he would be happy." 

"I can't," repeated Amber. "He and I could sooner 
give up living, than each other." 

Into Catherine's face came a lode at once frantic and 
shrewd. It was intolerable to think of Amber marrying 
Michael Whatever happened to herself, that must 
not be. 

"You spoke of my pushing Jasper in," she said. "Sup- 
pose I told you that your lover — or the man you persist 
in regarding as your lover — ^pushed Jasper in ?" 

The room slipped into a darker silence, and as the 
moon sank from the window, the shadow of the Crucified 
seemed to enlarge and engulf Catherine. 

"I should not believe it." 

"And if I saw it?" 

''I should say you imagined it.^ 



»» 



"] 



«60 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Catherine remembered Ernest and his fear of her 
ridicule. 

"If I could bring a witness?" 

Her voice was a knife, cutting the silence with delicate 
strokes. Outside, the pear tree rustled and sighed in the 
wet wind that drew out of the east, where the first grey 
of dawn appeared. The docks struck three with forceful 
meaning, as though to say that Time was still unap- 
peased, still seeking his prey in the bodies of poor mor- 
tality. 

1 should say your witness lied,*' said AnAer. 

'And if my witness was of such standing in the world, 
so respected, that his witness would be taken against that 
of others ?*' 

*'I should not care." 

"To-morrow, then, I shall accuse Michael." 

Catherine found some relief for her misery in tor- 
menting Amber. 

"You would not try to do such a thing?" 

"On one condition I won't. Give him up." 

''Catherine! Catherine 1 I never thought you were 
wicked !" 

"It is not I that is a murderer." 

"Oh, you are as calm as a frozen sea !" 

"You have only to give him up." 

Amber groped for the matches. The room was very 
dark, and she felt afraid of Catherine. She found the 
matchbox, a liuninous one with Jestis on its white surface, 
and lit the candles. 

She looked almost old. Anyone with a spark of pity 
would have waived all discussion and simply put her to 
bed. But in Catherine's face, as the candles lit it with 
an eerie glow, was no relenting. Cold as a mermaid 
languidly breasting the green water, inexorable as a sav- 
age queen demamdm^ ^acT\&Kft, Vxsc innermost being 



THE MARBLE CHRIST 261 

looked out on Amber. Her god — a god of marble — 
stood unheeded behind her with tragic eyes, and dying, 
drooping head. He meant nothing to her, had never 
been real to her, any more than He is real to half His 
devotees. For Christianity, beautiful as it was in its 
precarious early days, is now too often simply a ticket of 
respectability that is credited by the mob. 

Catherine looked at Amber with a careless scorn which 
yeiled a devouring eagerness. 

"You have only to give him up," she repeated. 

"As soon tell the earth to give up feeling the pull of 
the sun." 

"You talk quite well when you're roused," said 
Catherine. 

"No. I am not a good talker. I only feel," said 
Amber quietly. 

But she did not feel quiet. She was out in the wild, 
scarred wilderness that lies beyond the pleasant meadow- 
country of convention. She felt the sharp rock, cruel and 
cold. Catherine's soul appeared to her naked; more 
sterile than the waste, more cruel than the rock, inhabit- 
ing the desolation like a white demon. Catherine the 
devout, she that had communicated fasting, was nothing 
more than a beast of prey. The two women, lodced in 
spiritual combat, breathed heavily. Their remote selves 
confronted one another. 

"You tortured Jasper! You put him in a cage and 
tortured him," said Amber. "Now it is to be Michael." 

"Jasper was foolish. He insisted on being different. 
He had to be made like other people." 

"So you used his leve for you to torture him. You 
made him want to die. You ought to be in hell, Cathe- 



* 9f 

rme. 



"Hell is for unbelievers." 
"Are you a believer?" 



X6t THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''Yes " 

"In what?" 

"Jesus Christ, and Him crucified/' 

Amber laughed wildly. 

"Don't do that!" said Catherijie nervously. 'Teppk 
will hear yoit" 

"No one but your marble god. Oh, it is right that He 
should be made of marble! If He were made of any- 
thing less cold. He would dik>wn you." 

'If you will give up Michael," said Catherine, return- 
ing to her point and playing her best card, "I will give 
him up, too." 

"It is impossible." 

Amber turned and went out. 

Catherine was dismayed. She had not really meant to 
do it, though, when she remembered Michael's quiet, 
maddeningly quiet eyes, with their mockery, she felt thai 
she would like to do it But Ernest would be trouble- 
some. Not even fear of ridicule, she was afraid, would 
make him bear false witness. Still, she had frightened 
Amber. Then, as she curled up in bed, the r emembrance 
of Jasper came back — the intolerable i^membrance of Us 
face as she had last seen it 

"He was unhinged!" she whispered "It was not my 
fault!" 

Harkt What was that? The clocks were beginuifl^ 
again. How they growled and wheezed and rustled! 
How they ticked her away from Michael into the anns 
ofPhilipArkinstalll 

She lay and contemplated her future in the grey dawn. 
And as she thought of it, the spirit of fear, that brooded 
CO the rooftree of Dormer and hooted through the kmg 
night of superstition, lodged in her heart. 

She lodced stonily at the marble Christ, and the marUe 
Christ looked stomV^ baick ^1 her. 



CHAPTER XXI: AMBER GOES TO THE FOREST 

AMBER did not go to her rocnn. She went softljr 
downstairs into the hall. Her plans were made; she 
had (Hily to carry them out She was going to Michad. 
She did not know whether Catherine's threat carried any 
weight; so she was gcring to Michad to make sure. But 
could she do it? She was faint and sick with exhaustion 
and felt a growing feverishncss coming on. Love rose 
tq>, as it can in the most weary txxly, and told her she 
could do it, however ill she was. A sense of calm came 
over her as she went to the door. She had a strange 
feeling that if Michad were here, all would be well with 
Jasper. Where was Michael? Why had he not stayed 
to help in the search F Had he already been out of csu> 
ahot when Mrs. Gosling's cry nuig out ? 

While she softly undid the bolts, she heard alon^ the 
passages echoing voices. Sarah and Mrs. Gosling and 
Enoch were sitting up in the kitchen, Enoch having just 
come in to say that all search had been useless. At thb 
eerie time, down amid the elfish rustling of the clodcs in 
the Made, hollow-sounding hall, where dawn bad not 
penetrated, they mi^t have been the voices of strange 
^rits. 

"The body— where be the body?* 

"Gone I Alostl" 

"Deep watterl Ah, Donner tKook's de^ watter after 

"He inna there, 1 say) He inna there r 
'Where bin 't, thenr' 



£54 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

''Gonel Washed away. Washed down to the sea." 

"Gone to the sea V 

Amber caught her breath as if she herself had suddenly 
been flung into deep water. As-she went across the hmk 
she felt overwheUningly weak. She was a being who 
needed joy. Having joy, she could triumph over the 
most desperate physical ills. But when joy flickered and 
went out, then she remembered the grave. Now, as she 
went softly over the bridge and began to clin^ the woods^ 
joy seemed fled forever. 

She looked round her in a kind of terror, for she had 
come to the moment, which all sensitive people must 
reach at some time, when the soul perceives simuItaxl^ 
ously the life of man — ^its small comforts, its upholstery 
of everyday — ^and the infinite ; when it asks, bemused and 
anxious, "Which is the dream?" They cannot both be 
true, it seems, for they are in flat contradiction. Yrt 
daily life is true. There it is, with its duties and meals 
and wordy meetings; with its sweetness of affectiooate 
glances and homely jests. That is no dream. Yet, when 
the beloved is dead, the daily life shrinks and withers; 
the infinite presses in. There it is, with all its indifferent 
stars, fearfully real, utterly unknown. With this intro- 
sion of the infinite there come all the strange instincts of 
the spirit that have no part in daily life. These also are 
no dream. So there the soul stands, browbeaten and 
stunned by antithesis, murmuring: *' Which is true? Is 
anything true?" 

So it is at the deathbed of a loved one. He was here 
but a moment ago. He is gone. Yet there are the lids 
ready to open; there is the mouth just curving to a snde 
But where is the love that will bring the smile? It is 
here no more. The room is chill. Yet it is indissolobly 
one with the beloved iA.ce. It cannot exist without it 
Neither can it, we iVvvt&l, cfta&^ v^ ^vsx, ^^^x^ Vs.^e oM 



AMBER GOES TO THE FOREST 266 

inveterate antithesis again. If too long dwelt upon, it 
leads to madness, unless same merciful half-solution rides 
up out of chaos. 

Amber was tormented by the impossibility of imagin- 
ing Jasper passive. He had always been so rebelliously 
himself. She felt like an actor in an unreal play. She 
Icx^ed round for some convincing thing which, by its 
quiet linking of yesterday with to-day, might bring her 
the grief she ought to feel and could not feel. But there 
were no homely things. This was no longer a forest of 
familiar trees, carpeted with friendly flowers, under 
known skies. It was an unknown country — that which 
encircles the world of fact, holding it as a demon might 
hold a crystal glass. Great [rillars stood vaguely ranked 
on every side. Strange avenues led away forever. 
Motionless, solemn, clad in weeds of mist, the trees stood 
beneath a heaven utterly sad. There was no shadow and 
little light. Mournfully the slow drops fell from the wet 
leaves. Mournfully an owl cried across the grey pastures. 
Here and there, against a dark curtain of massed foliage, 
white tormented arms were flung up, as if in appeal. 
They were no longer silver birches, but creatures of the 
beyond, imaging her thoughts. Those larches, what were 
they? Strange vegetation rising from unknown deeps 
of mud and rock; waving curious branches; bearing fruit 
of weird, primordial form; standing in a transparent, 
miraculous medium that men called "air," on a ball whiri- 
ing through the void. "Larches," "oaks" ; how impudent 
seemed the little words! Amber wondered if the cave- 
dwellers ticketed with their puny names the great bc^ 
plants, the primeval beasts. The sky was no longer a 
blue ceiling, where named stars went upon their ordered 
way. It was a waste from which might spring at any 
moment wild rushing fires. All things had lost their 
names, their homely identity. They cried to het, -wVJb. 



256 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

muffled, moddng voices: ''You know us not! Yos 
never knew usf' She was bewildered, in this worid 
where trees melted into ideas, thoughts hardened into 
actuality. She stood beside a dark red pillar that broke, 
high up, into an ominous heaviness of black, and had 
once been called a pine. Around her stood multitudes o( 
other such pillars, neither interrogating nor welcoming. 
She stood on the threshold of the unknown. Everything 
seemed immortal with an everlastingness that cried for 
merciful death. The world seemed a mirage, made of 
nothing by a phantom, dreaming he was a god. 

iShe looked down towards the house. It seemed no 
longer her home, but an assemblage of materials tfazt 
might crumble at any moment like an anthill. Within, 
more disma3ring than the fires of tiie sky, were beings 
come she knew not whence nor how; gathered for some 
unspoken purpose; full of concealed desires, hatreds, 
appetites^ That which lay behind their innermost motive, 
was it friendly ? She thought it was the same thing that 
lingered beyond the last star in the sky, that haimted the 
uttermost pale tint where colour vanished. Was it per- 
sonal, or was it merely naked life — nothing but matter, 
motion and heat? She understood why thousands of 
lives had been spent in the attempt to solve this appar- 
ently fathomless mystery. For to know the cosmos as 
nothing but impersonal force is to dwell in an intellectual 
hell compared with which the Christian's hell is Nirvana. 

It was light now, but the valley lay under a deep sea 
of mist Down at Dormer would soon begin a g^reat sdr, I 
like the stir in a hive when a hornet enters. They would 
wake and remember that Death had taken one of tbeni 
away; each would unconsciously rejoice that it was not 
he or she; they would call to one another, running quest- 



AMBER GOES TO THE FOREST SOT. 

ingly up and down the groaning stairs in such a ftuy 
of vitality as might almost have roused the dead. 

"But I can't believe they wanted to rouse him," thou^t 
Amber, with bleak and ccmcentrated bitterness. "It 
always seemed more as if they wanted to bury him." 
She thought that, in the strange medley of qualities 
bequeathed to man by the beast, one of the most horrible 
was the instinct of the burying beetle. On few things 
does man lavish so much care as on the shovdling of his 
fellows into nothingness; and a man has only to state that 
he is dying, and his friends will flock from every CMner 
of the world to watch. Sometimes the throng becomes sa 
thick that the poor soul has much ado to get out of the 
world at all. 

From all the trees felt heavy argots of silver. Ambar 
thought how, in the perfection of youth, Jasper's life had 
fallen earthwards like a spilt raindrop or a trodden leaf. 
To her c^;er temperament, the worst of Jasper's tragedy 
was that he had died without having lived. She had an 
unquenchable thirst for life, and it seemed to her a fear* 
ful irony that he should have left the banqueting hall 
without having tasted of the feast. She knew that she 
could obey death's call with equaiumity if she had first 
lived fully. Let Life come, bringing Death <m his heels 
if need be; but let him comet 

Life had not even touched Jasper with his rosy finger* 
tips before the bony, bruising hands of death grasped 
hiqi. Where was Jasper now? That soft, hesitant 
sound in the forest, coming down the glades from very 
far away — ^was that Jasper? No. It was only morning 
stirring in the treetops, and the vacillating footsteps of 
the water-drops descending from the trees. That finger^ 
ing of the wind in her hair, lifting it gently — was that 
|[asper, a wandering essence, feeling after life and love? 



258 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

In the lamenting water she thought she heard him itnploi^ 
ing her for she knew aot what 

The pity of it all 1 It was one of those tragedies that 
could so easily have been averted, she thought. Yet — 
could it? Did it not grow naturally out of all that Dor- 
mer stood for? It seemed to her not so much a gash 
across its routine as the logical fulfilment of its princi- 
ples. She thought that with individuals and with empires 
such tragedies are not breaks in continuity, but simply 
the herd-panic at its zenith. 

At last she came out on the open hills. For though 
Michael's hut was in the forest it was at its highest point, 
and the shortest way there lay across the heather. The 
bracken waved wild arms in beautiful abandon, not quite 
of summer, but not yet tinted by autumn, having attained 
the transparent golden-green that comes before the burn- 
ing colours of September. As she walked, she watched 
the nusty plain. , Away in (the east, where the land was 
cold and low, it seemed as if the sky had fallen — as if she 
was looking down on the mysterious u[^r sides of the 
clouds — thick, lavish, of a weighty whiteness. The ris- 
ing sun struck the upper layers into colours of mother-o'- 
pearl. To the west the mist thinned and was like pale 
water. Upon it, with delicate dignity, the trees floated, 
like water-birds of faery, gravely and magically tinted. 
Some were brown-green like grebes, others of the ashy 
tint of coots, the soft grey of cygnets. The chestnuts, 
where the sun struck them, were like sheldrakes with their 
deep bronzes; and the beeches had the glossy green of 
teal. The white sea was populous with these fairy crea- 
tures, floating head under wing. 

It was at this moment, when her bodily self was refined 
by exhaustion and her spirit keener than ever before, that 
she felt for the first time within the thrilling poignancy 
of beauty a sense of intimacy — as if she were beginning 



AMBER GOES TO THE FOREST U9 

to know not only the face of beauty, but her essence. Shd 
knew, in the belated silver owl that passed hurriedly, as 
if ashamed that the eye of day should behold its quest, 
something more than a bird of prey, something wistfulj 
immortal, kind. She knew in the silver spire of Dormer 
Church, suddenly smitten by a lancing sunray, something 
less than an oracle — something often pathetic, but withal 
lovable. As she watched the long vermilion clouds in the 
east, and the luminous intervals between the colours (for, 
as in a rainbow, so in a sunrise, though they inundate 
one another tvex so gently, there is an interval between 
them, where it often seems that beauty dwells) there swept 
into her half-expectant mind a vast, all-hushing peace. 
It was not personal; but it enfolded personality. It 
enfolded everything. A sigh, contented as that of a tired 
but comforted child, went up from the pale earth to the 
pale sky. But whether the bracken sighed, or the forest, 
or she herself, Amber hardly knew. She only knew that 
every tree and leaf and meadow shared with her in a 
stupendous quietude where only the miraculous seemed 
possible. 

She saw the strong line of hill above Michael's dwdl- 
ing lit with sunlight, shining like a wedge of unpolished 
silver. The rough cart track that led to it seemed like a 
silver road for the chariots of almighty love. She thought 
this place was like the land of heaven where silver-footed 
creatures wandered, bemused with joy. Love was the 
core of the morning ; the unreasonable, unreasoning beati- 
tude that nestled in it as a germ does in the rosy pollen) 
the central fire round which all paler fires whirled. There 
seemed no disloyalty to Jasper in this love. The mist 
slowly ascended in lilac wreaths and veils. The hilltops 
ik>wered like purple pansies, and the serene sky seemed 
to soothe the earth like a father's hand 




THE HOUSE m DORMER FOREST 



Amber's ideas of God were vague, and shadowy. The | 
moment she tried to materiahze them, they vanished. Bnt | 
now she felt, with a shock of reality, that there was more 
here, on this airy hill, than could be seen or touched or 
heard. 

She knocked at the Shepherd's Hut, and tAidoA, 
shirtsleeved, with a kettle in his hand and a light of km 
in his eyes, opened the door. 



«1 



CHAPTER XXH: FUNERAL PREPARATIONS 

ON the morning after the storm, Mr. Greenwa}rs, 
having sorted the letters, was sitting in the sun, 
piping like a blackbird. He was a cheerful soul, and 
while he produced, with puckered' brow, pleasant little 
trills and grace notes, he had a sense of deep content But 
he stopped immediately at the sight of Enoch's face and 
the tremendous black bow that Sarah had tied for him. 
It may be said that, although this stood out to his ears, it 
was unable to rob him of dignity. 

The old lady ?" queried Mr. Greenways. 
'Master Jasper,'' said Enoch. 

In the flush of lifel Ah, when I piped at Miss 
Ruby's wedding, I knew I piped for trouble. Was it at 
the Wallows?" 

''No. In Dormer brook. Drownded." 

**Lawsl When's the funeral ?*' 

**We hanna f otmd un," 

^Not f otmd un I Does Mallow know ?" 

*Tm going after Mallow now." 

'If there's aught to find, Mallow'U find it/' said Mr. 
Greenways. "Trust the Law." 

When Enoch had gone, Mr. Gi^eenways pondered 
awhile. Then he bethought him to dispatch youths to 
various quarters to bear the tidings. 

Meanwhile Enoch went to Mr. Mallow. 

"Somebody drowndcd ?" said Mr. Mallow, turning the 
words over on his tongue as if he rather liked them. 

"Ah I" said Enoch, with his pine-tree cadence, 
^'drownded dead and never found." 

C61 



test THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Mr. Mallow fetched a pair of handcuffs. 

"We'll find un," said Mr. Mallow, "and the murderer." 

"There's no murderer," said Enoch. He was troubled 
by these dark happenings. They were to him, as to all 
contemplative people, so many axes felling the trees that 
grew in his soul. 

"No murderer!" Mr. Mallow eyed Enoch as if be 
suspected him of fraud. "There must be a murderer I" 

The Dormer kitchen was full of the smell of burnt por- 
ridge, which showed that something was wrong. Sarah 
never burnt anything except under the influence of strong 
emotion. 

As they came in, Mrs. Gosling and Sarah were feeding 
a great flapping sheet. 

"What's that?" asked Mr. Mallow briskly. 

"A winding sheet," said Mrs. Gosling. "God send the 
poor young gentleman's found 1" 

"Found!" said Mr. Mallow, looking squarely at 
Jemima's grave. "I'll lay I'll find un. And the 
murderer !" 

"Master Jasper fell in 'isself," said Mrs. Goslmg. "I 
seed un." 

"Woman!" said Mr. Mallow. "When the Law comes 
in, your eyes go out." 

"There was a man once," said Mrs. Gosling, "wanted 
to find the murderer, and I partly think he was the 
murderer." 

She did not like Mr. Mallow's curtness. Mr. Mallow 
said he would see the family. 

"They're going in to their breakfasses, poor things," 
said Sarah protectingly. She was mothering everybody 
in this crisis. She was the kind of person who could 
make even crime homely, and create in a house riddled 
with ghosts a reassuring atmosphere of the commonplace 



FUNERAL PREPARATIONS S6S 

**Lct 'em enjoy their victuals on this diay of days I" she 
said, ''and take Dite and sup yourself, Mr. Mallow t" 

"W^U, I don't mind if I do taste a bit of fleshmeat 1" 

''Anything that's breathed, Mr. Mallow likes 1" said 
Sarah admiringly. "None of your snibs of vegetables 
nor snabs of eggs !" 

"You can partly tell when folks be fed o' that'n/' said 
Mrs. Gosling, ready to make peace. "Poor measly things 
they be!" 

"Ah 1 But Mr. Mallow likes a tuthree pounds of juicy 
steak," said Sarah. 

"Ours did too." Mrs. Gosling spoke with melandiolj 
pride. 

"Anything as the life's been took off violent," added 
Sarah. "I could telf Mr. Mallow anywhere for a brave 
fellow." 

Mr. Mallow received this ovation as if gold and 
Frankincense and myrrh were his by right, and fell to 
m the meal. He being incapacitated for conversation, it 
p^as kept up by the others. 

"Mr. Mallow'U find out what there is to find out. He 
loves crime. I partly think 'e hankers for crime." 

"Mr. Mallow'd make as good a chief constable as one 
bere and there/' Sarah remariced. "He's got it on hia 
Sngers." 

"It's to be 'oped Master Jasper'll be found," said Mrs. 
Giosling. "Such a beautiful corpse he'd make!" 

She did not judge people by the world's standards in 
;>roportion to their usefulness, lovableness or beauty; nor 
even according to their wealth or the number of their 
progeny. She judged them solely by their nascent gift 
for making good corpses. 

"I said the same to young Jim Cardingly as went for a 
lailor," said Mrs. Gosling, "'A beautiful corpse you'll 
make," I says. 



t#l 



164 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

'* I'll diddle you yet, Mrs. Gosling/ says he; and, sore 
enough, he took cm soft and went to Paradise the watery 
way. Tost at sea and never found/ says the paper. 
'Obstinate to the last t' says Anne Gosling." 

Here the dining-room bell rang, and Sarah went to the 
call like a hen to her chickens. 

When the clocks in their leisurely way strudc twelve, 
there seemed to be something more sardonic than osoal 
in their dilatory enunciation. The house had become a 
seething hive. Sarah, in her excitement, was lajring din- 
ner an hour too early. Mrs. Gosling, in the kitchen bast- 
ing the beef, kept murmuring : '" 'In the midst of life we 
are in death/ " smacking her lips gently because the text 
was so suavely in her own vein. Mrs. Cantlop had come 
to condole. She sat opposite to grandmother, with her 
heart — as usual — ^in the right place, and her bonnet-^as 
usual — not so. Mr. Cantlop lurked in the shadow of the 
Welsh dresser, where, being so very thin, he attained Ae 
eff acement which to him was fulfilment Sarah flung the 
doA across the table with a sound like wind in a sail and 
dealt out the knives and forks with her habitual air of 
disillusionment Did she not know as much about the 
knives and forks^— their nicks, their flaws, the two wHh 
loose handles — as she did about the peoole in the boose? 
But to-day there was also something of the high-priestess 
in her manner. 

There were so many people in the room that she had 
difficulty in getting about. In the general tmnult no ooe 
had so far missed Amber. The Rector sat by Mrs. Daike, 
and such fragments as "When He maketh up His jcwds" 
. . . ''sardine stone . . ." were audible. These left Mis. 
Darke cold. Solomon sat in his arm^-chair aiid once or 
twice shook his head, murmuring : 

"Both gone I Both lads gone!" 

Grandmother, hearing this, spoke her thought aloni 



FUNERAL PREPARATIC»f S S66 

"rmaliver she said. 

Except for occasional sobs from Mrs. Cantlop and 
texts from grandmother the room was quiet. A few 
scuffles occurred when Sarah fell over Mr. Cantlop as she 
might have fallen over one of the cats. Ernest sat 
moodily in the window. He had spent an unpleasant 
half*hour with Catherine. She had mocked him unmerci- 
fully. "Portrait of a parish priest in the role of a satyr !" 
she had said. Being not very highly educated, she had 
said "satire." Ernest, even in his misery, had corrected 
her. He had also permitted himself to murmur : "Jeze- 
bel !" Afterwards he had given his verdict as to Jasper 
to the family. 

"Jasper is in an intermediate state. I have prayed, 
and I know." 

The Rector had expressed no opinion. He was one of 
those rare beings who, being full of a gentle faith, never 
dogmatize. 

There was a double knock. ''Church bdls and organ V* 
Sarah announced. 

Mr. Dank came in, followed by the ringers. They 
were the first-fruits of Mr. Grecnways* activities. When 
should the "Dead March" be played? When should the 
muffled peal be rung? 

Solomon thought he would wait to decide until Mr. 
Mallow came back from his examination of the stream. 
So Mr. Dank sat down just inside the door, and the ring- 
ers sat down just outside, such being their own idea of 
their subtle difference in rank. 

Hardly had they done so when there was a sound of 
wheels, and the activity of Mr. Greenways became again 
apparent. Everyone beheld Mrs. Griffin's gig, the horse 
in a lather; Mrs. Griffin's dressmaker, in complimentary 
black; Mrs. Griffin's little boy, almost intoxicated with 



r 



S66 THE HOUSE IN DC»MEat FOREST 

rxcitftngnt, looking, in his neat ramd collar, modk noR 
like a cherubic illustraboii to an epoiiialamniiii tta& i 
moumcr; Mrs. Griffin hersrif, be mgn ant, Uaod, sjaft 
tfaetic, Uxidng as if she knew that hie and dodi vcrea 
blend 

The black r cried giandmocher. ^nTfacj'w gotta tk 
Uackr 

They staggered in with their kads^ Boe bees vki 
pc^en-flowers abound, and began to ^ircad the Voi 
materials over the taUe. Master Griffin sat wA Ac 
ringers in the hall, where he eyed the animals' hewisaDd 
feet, and played cat's cradle with a bit <rf black tape. 

** 'Mourn, mourn for Jerusalem !' " said giandoodiff, 
tiding on bonnets at the mirror. 

It was at this dramatic moment that Mkjiad ^ 
Amber came up the drive. 

Catherine saw that Micfaad's arm was round AnAer 
as they came in. Like a gunshot, without her own foB- 
tion, came the words : 'Tie pushed Jasper in f* 

They all seemed frozen in their seats. Midiad stood 
and looked at Catherine, and she confronted him vtt 
blazing cheeks and eyes in which was no shadow d 
relenting. 

"I saw Mr. Michael running down the 'ood far eaoagb 
away when Mrs. Gosling shriked," said Sarah. 

What were you doing ?" asked Mrs. Darke. 

^Looking for my intended, mum." 

'She torments our Enoch cruel, mum!" said Mn 
Gosling, who had been talking to the ringers. ''Even 
meals he canna be easy at, he's that nervous, staring 
round like a frightened coney." 

"Well, well, never mind that!" said Solomon. "IM 
anyone else see what you saw, Catherine ?" 

She turned to Ernest, who looked as if he wished he 
iwere as small as Mr. Cantlop. 



"] 



FUNERAL PREPARATIONS 867 

"Say what you saw, EmestI" 

But at this moment Michael and Amber broke into 
helpless laug^hter, and even as the family still stared and 
Mrs. Darke .nurmured, "Madl" there at the window 
stood Jasper. 

Catherine fainted. Whether the faint were real or 
simulated, it served her need, for it saved her from taking 
any further part in the scene. Mr. Mallow, entering with 
the handcuffs, stood aghast. Ernest looked pained, for 
this was not the intermediate state. 

Mr. Mallow bent over Catherine. 

"It's not fracture nor a lacerated wound/' he said, 
"nor stroke, nor a foreign body in the ear" (he remem- 
bered Jemima). "What took her?" 

Solomon shook Jasper by one hand while the Rector 
shook him by the other. Mr. Cantlop stole from his 
comer, gave Jasper a surreptitious pat on the back, and 
vanished again. Mrs. Cantlop enveloped him in her com- 
plimentary half-mouming. Eight eyes looked in from 
the hall, and Master Griffin made such a mess of the cat's 
cradle that it had to be discarded. Mrs. Griffin b^aa 
very tactfully to fold up the blade. 

"Not my bonnet !" said grandmother. 

Jasper surveyed the room — the chairs littered with rrfls 
of bl^; the table laid for dinner; the crape; the black 
kid gloves and black-edged handkerchiefs. He looked 
at the faces in the room with an inscrutable expression. 
He felt as if he were his own disembodied spirit. He 
thought: "Self-destruction may be the one sane action 
of a lifetime." To look at Catherine, white on the sofa, 
was exquisite torture, knowing as he did that she was a 
hollow shell. The room, all the familiar things, gave him 
the sick distaste that a man feels for a room where he has 



^,.. 



S68 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

been desperately ilL He would never sleep again under 
the shadow of the old gods of Donner. Everything 
seemed paltry, savourless, twice-told. He wished Death 
had given him his sable livery, his dole of tears, swqit 
him up in his pageantry. 

''You've forgotten the coffin,'' he said, and, turning, 
went out into the hall and up into his own rocxn to padc, 
leaving Michael to e3q)lain. ''He fell in, and I pulled him 
out," was all that Michael vouchsafed. The Griffin partj 
and the ringers melted away. 

"Then Michael took him home,'' added Amber, "not 
thinking anyone had seen him faU in. For when Mn. 
Gosling called out, he had just run down the wood and 
jumped in. He had seen Jasper fall in higher up. So be 
did not think we should be anxious, as Jasper stayed with 
him diat night before, when it rained.'' 

"Where were you ?" asked Mrs. Darke. 

"I went to Michael's." 

"Not knowing Jasper was there ?" 

"Not knowing." 

'Then if Jasper had not, by chance, been tfaere^ ^ 

"We should have had to be married," finished Michael 
"We'll consider that Jasper was not there." 

Catherine, who had been "brought rotmd" by Sarah, 
got up at this. 

"You may all like to know," she said, "that I hare 
promised to marry Philip Arkinstall. I am going to stay 
at the Keep to get my trousseau." 

So she made a dramatic exit against heavy odds. 



CHAPTER XXin : MR. CANTLOP ACHIEVES FAME 



""^^OUR wedding morning, 's Amber/* said Sarah, 
jL "and may the course of true love go smoother 
for you than for somel True love's a treasure!" She 
wiped her eyes on her sacking apron and felt that its 
harshness was as her own fate. For Enoch had been 
hard to mollify since the unfortunate accident of the 
letter. 

'"A sore man I Neither to drive nor to leadT she 
reflected. 

"You deserve to be happy, Sarah," said Amber, stroke 
ing the muslin folds* of the dress in which she was to go 
to Michael. 

''Desert's a beggar, 's Amber, generally speaking," said 
Sarah. ''When people's intendeds be like horse and mule 

'* She was so overcome that she went "to rouse up 

the old lady." 

Grrandmother wanted her to wrap up a present for 
Amber. It was a plaque on which was painted a ptar- 
migan, head downwards. ' 

Returning to the kitchen, Sarah found Mrs. Gosling 
already busy. 

"Ah, Sarah!" said she, "a wedding, when it ii a 
wedding, takes the eye! With the half-dozen brides- 
<naids giggling, the mothers fighting each the other like 
wild cats, the bridegroom champing to be off (ours 
champed terrible when I was wed. A meek manner had 
ours, but a great sperrit) . There's bridegroom hollering 
for coachman ; and coachman lashing up, very fresh; and 

269 



ano THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

even parson a bit fresh — ^leastways in the olden days. Bat 
thisl No champing, no maids and men, no coachnian, 
and nobody fresh I Give me a funeral, say I ! And a 
funeral we met ha' had, but for Mr. Michad lugging 
Master Jasper out. We met ha' had great black fearers 
waving, and crape without stint, and old men walking 
two by two, as grievous as the gun-dogs ! I'd liefer a 
funeral than an outing I I mind when old Mr. Mtxjde- 
wick deceived me sore that way. He went into a swonnd, 
and they took un for jead. So they made un a coffin. 
He was alius bone-idle, was Mr. Mucklewick, and he 
stayed in that swound till they came to nail un down. It 
was touch and go, then 1 But he stirred the little finger, 
so they knew their trouble was for nought. 'Poor AnncF 
says he. Always one for a joke was Mr. MucklewidcT 

"Well, auntie !" said Enoch, coming in, "your breath's 
your own to spend and squander. But I wouldna waste 
so much of mine all at once, not in a week of years!" 

He took the pails to the dairy, where he was ran to 
earth by Sarah. 

"Mr. Michael said to 's Amber,'' she remarked, "in the 
little drawing-room (as I couldna help but hear, being 
dusting in the big un), as folks that was married wanna 
married if they didna love each the other. Eh I I £d 
laffl" 

She looked at Enoch to see how he took thi& 

"Outlandish notions, folks get," she added. 
' "I dunna see as its outlandish." 

'*Well," said Sarah, surprisingly and firmly, "I tote 
you, Enoch, and so I tell you straight !" 

She advanced with the streaming skimmer in her hand 
He backed towards the door. 

"We'll walk out from this day on," said Sarah. 

But from the passage, with the sound of retiring booti> 
came Enoch's voice: "It wunna be able to be doner 



MR- CANTLOP ACHIEVES FAME J871 

Sarah was obliged to comfort herself with the beautiful 
rendering of "The wings of a dove," by Mr. Mallow at 
the wedding service. Mr. Cantlop was there — ^a shadowy 
sexton, with a whisper faint as the rustle of leaves, hover- 
ing in the dark corners, smuggling people into their seats 
with the air of a conspirator, and handing them prayer- 
books as if they were ill-gotten gain. Mrs. Cantlop's 
bonnet towered and shone, lustily outfacing the colours 
of Death and Hell. Grandmother insisted on wearing 
the funeral bonnet. As Amber came down the path on 
Michael's arm in the sweet September sunshine, he 
ivhispered : 

"Handfasted now, eh, little girl?" 

**I would have trusted you without/' she answered 

It was at the wedding breakfast that Mr. Cantlop, 
accidentally, unintentionally, alarmedly, attained everlast- 
ing fame. 

He covertly stuffed into Amber's hand a shabby little 
bag, which, when she opened it, contained some dull 
j)ebbly things. 

"To make a necklace," explained Mr. Cantlop apolo- 
getically, and disappeared into his glass. But the Rector 
behaved strangely. He started; stretched his neck like an 
eager hen; came round the table; snatched up the pebbly 
things; shouted: 

"My God, Cantlop! You're not a poor man any 



more! 



f" 



€i^ 



Swear not at all !" said grandmother. 

Where did you get them?" cried the Rector, shaking 
Mr. Cantlop in his eagerness. 

"An old man, very ill," murmured Mr. Cantlop. 
^'Looked after him. He gave me those. No value. 
Make a necklace." 

Have you any more of them ?" shouted the Rector. 



<r 



I 



■l, 



1*72 THE HOUSE IN DOBMER FOBEST 



"( 



'Another bag." 

'Give it here ! You're a rich man, my dear fcUow.** 

'What are they?" breathed Mr. Cantlop. 

amonds !" said the Rector. "It's a good thing yoa 
didn't know, Cantlop. You thought they were valueless, 
and so you kept 'em. If you'd known their value, you'd 
have lost 'em." 

"You must give those back, Amber/' said Michael. 

Amber obediently did so. 

"Keep 'em!" said Mr. Cantlop distractedly, "oh keep 



em." 



"She's my wife now, Mr. Cantlop, and I'm vowed to 
poverty," said Michael. 

"Suppose you keep one or two, just to rent a cottage 
till you start work in earnest," said the Rector. 

"Very well, as a loan," said Michael. "Thank ycm 
kindly, Mr. Cantlop." 

Mr. Cantlop beamed, blushed, coughed, murmured 
something about a hiccup, and fled. 



CHAPTER XXIT: A FOIUE^ST BRIDAL 

MICHAEL took his bride home without pomp or 
ceremony, leaning on his arm, walking under the 
green roof of the woodland. The forest and man, who 
dwells within the forest, sleep. When they wake they 
wake together. The forest slumbers; its green walls are 
the walls of a palace enchanted, far gone in spells. Every 
tree has its own dream; the flowers drowse with eyes 
open or closed, and the dew gathers insensibly on their 
heavy eyelids. All things have an air of suspension, as if 
once, long ago, they were awake — amoved freely with 
their large gestures; spoke in their own esoteric 
language ; and were then tranced in the gracious attitude 
of their last waking moment. When the leaves fall, the 
trees loose them as a sleeper drops his book. Inanimate 
Bature sleeps without pulses. Her creatures go their dim 
ways in hypnotic ambulations. So, when in this spell- 
bound place the soul wakes, a conscious entity, it is afraid 
in its loneliness. But as it stands under the frescoed 
arches, a creature small but vital, the spell is broken; all 
nature wakes with it, rises with it. The flower's eye is 
no more vacant ; the trees stretch their arms in the luxury 
of waking; the forest sings with multiple voices; the 
supine earth finds a soul. 

So it was with Michael and Amber. Arms were 
stretched forth in welcome. Flute notes fell from thick- 
ets. The eyes of bird and insect, the dewy gaze of a few 
late flowers, peered on them with new meanings. Along 
hy the stream the willows, clad in silver-dusted feathers, 

279 



274 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

meditated like stately birds. Willows are of all trees the 
most mysterious. It is said that they were the first of 
trees, that before a bird sang or a bee quested for honey 
the world was full of willow forests. There the wind 
went in spring, a visible golden wave, deeply laden with 
yellow pollen. There, in the glistening air, with none but 
their own silver tongues to break the silence, the willows 
waited. They waited for the insects to come to tieir 
yellow aments; for the birds to flash in and out, making 
low music in the dusk. But they awaited also the percep- 
tion which should complete their creation. The flowers 
that bloom unknown for a thousand years only exist 
when at last one flower blossoms under a perceptive eyt 
For that flower the pollen was launched spring after 
spring, the nectar gathered, the seed rounded. So the 
understanding of beauty is ^a priesthood. Amber and 
Michael gave to the forest almost as much as tbqr 
gathered from it, as they wandered in the warm and mel- 
low harvest weather. 

The shadows were richly blue, of the tint of a chaf- 
finch's head. There were breakers in the standing com, 
where Philip Arkinstall rode up on the reaper which rose 
beyond the tall wheat like a ship over the horizon. From 
every nook in the forest came to meet them the benignant 
scent of wet moss. The very hills were mossy in the sna 
They were like brown star moss ; pale yellow sphagnum; 
bright green, red, green-white, acorn-coloured, or purple 
moss. They lay in clear and gentle colours under the 
periwinkle sky, and far off in the south a green-tinted 
rain-storm wandered along their sloping sides. 

A quintessence of the whole year's sweetness was dis- 
tilled upcHi the cool air. The atmosphere was of the 
unmixed gold of summer's maturity, yet the landscape 
lay in the colours of childhood — swimming rose, sappUit, 



I i 



A FOREST BRIDAL f7fi 

mauve, frail gold, and again rose — all gathered within 
the dark-blue silence of the horizon. 

Vague rumours came over the plain, murmuring the 
vast content of summer's end. Yet the air was quick as 
April is with the scents of growing things; with warm 
poplar resin, and the smell of earth and leaves churned up 
by rain; with the fragrance of the late white clover that 
came to meet them like a friend. 

The sheep, clean and white, fed in mown pastures, and 
the geese, wild with the hint of autunrn in the air, went 
with a flapping of white wings to the rain-wet grass. 

Already there had come in many trees a faint penura* 
bra of gold, and over all things lay the beauty that brings 
tears. The lovers came to the Birds' Orchard and sat 
beneath a tree hung with little painted apples. 

"I wish I could be beautiful for you," said Amber. "I 
wish I had Catherine's eyes and hair 1" 

''What colour are your eyes and hair?" asked Michael. 
•TU be damned if I know r 

'The rudiments of courtship have not been taught to 
you." 

"Your spirit shines so, I can't see your features. Crude 
soul, that's what shines." 

"We must pray for a great deal of crude soul, then." 

"The windward side of an April orchard, that's what 
kissing you is like," said Michael. 

So they sat, ringed in pale fire; for them bloomed red 
roses that had in their petals no essence of decay; to them 
spoke in low, melodious voices, the birds that roost in 
faery forests. Softly and slowly the fragrant evening 
fell around them. The plain slept, and over the rosy 
plough-lands, the quiet forest, the golden, ever-stirring^ 
wheat, were drawn thin, dusky veils. As the silence 
deepened, a thrush began to sing somewhere uv t]\t.H(^jc^A& 




i 



tie THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 



autumn thrush, more plaintive than those of spring. 
The music ascended like spirals of light smoke, and tfat 
soul that haunts the depths of the forest began to spin 
from itself the frail thread of beauty. 

Over their hut, as they came towards it, stood a white 
doud like a shield of silver. 

As they came to the door, there was Jasper, pale and 
wistful, but smiling; and there by the fire was Ruby, with 
Ernest junior (domed even at this early age with 
Athanasian dignity) on her knee. 

"I brought her for the day I" whispered Jasper. *lfi 
supervision that's wearing her out." 

Jasper was going to live at the Keep and work for hb 
exams. Mr. Cantlop had insisted upon paying the 
expenses of these. He had also paid for Peter's and Mari- 
gold's passage to America. 

"We're going now," said Ruby, who understood tiiat 
tiiere might be men so different from Ernest that a 
woman would like to be alone with them. 

"You must stay to tea— or supper/' said Axriber. She 
thought Ruby terribly pathetic. . "What a dear babjrr 
she said. 

^Is itr 

"Yes. A darling r* said Amber, determinedly seetof 
only baby and not Ernest. 

When the sound of Jenn/s feet died on the soft greea 
turf, and the shrill complaints of Ernest junior were 
hushed by distance, Michael and Amber stood beneadi i 
spreading larch tree, watching the sunset The west was 
a lake of luminous crocus yellow, clear and translucent 
as water. In this, like green lilies, floated minute flakes 
of cloud. Among them, peaceful and motionless^ laj 
water birds of soft grey cloud, sleeping among the Ulio 
with folded wings. 

In the woods *\t ^» ^Tt:^^^ dcoak^ «xul^ as they looked 



A FOREST BRIDAL S77 

^wn towards the plain» they saw lights spring out there, 
shining between the interstices of the branches like glow- 
worms. 

"Amber/' said Michael, "what are you going to do 
with your life?" 

**Give it to you and to— all this/' 

She waved an arm round the dark horizon, whence a 
fresh wind came. 

"I have a confession to make, Amber/' 

She smiled and waited. 

"These things may not content me. I knew it to-day, 
when Cantlop and the Rector were hobnobbing about our 
cottage. Think of it I They and Arkinstall, your 
father, all of 'em, just the same, year by year. And out 
yonder — the world." 

He looked at Amber keenly. The expression he had 
expected darted into her face — surprise, almost agony. 
So might a devout Catholic look, being excommunicated. 
Michael, watching her, wondered if she would pass the 
lest. It was characteristic of him to test her thus, 
through pain. He was a hard man; hard to himself, to 
Hbc world, hardest of all, perhaps, to the woman he loved. 
Vot even on her wedding day did he spare her, chiefly 
because he so greatly wished to know how much she 
cared for him. She had the shuddering air of a tendrilled 
plant torn from its support* He waited. No crisis of the 
struggle was hidden from him. Her face was clear and 
familiar to him as a flower's nectary to the bee. 

She clasped her hands, hot with the stress of passion. 
For the love of nature is a passion for those in whom it 
«nce lodges. It can never be quenched. It cannot change. 
It is a furious, burning, physical greed, as well as a state 
•f mystical exaltation. It will have its own. 

Amber thought of June mornings when polished birds 
with flaming jrellow bills made large tracks in the dew- 




fftS THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

white grass. She thought of the subtle changes of the 
seasons, breathlessly fair, not one to be spared. She 
remembered dawns that bloomed like a hedge of roses 
above the amethyst hills, and the bank of white violets 
which had never missed her yet in ApriL These things 
were her home, not Dormer. As one saying good-bye to 
home for ever, she sat with drooping head. She felt in 
her fingers the stalks of all the flowers she had ever 
picked — hyacinths, cool and brittle; smooth cowslips; 
hollow mallows; warm comfrey. She heard in her heart 
the individual leaf-song of every tree. These things were 
of her essence now. But Michael also was of the forest 
These things belonged to her; but she belonged to 
Michael. 

She looked up at last, and found his eyes on her. Vfiih 
a catch of the breath she said : 

"Of course, Michael. We must go— away/* 

Her voice trembled into lostness. 

Michael sighed. The tension had been almost 
unbearable. 

"You love me enough to be willing to go?" 

"I have said so. You are stem to-night" 

"You're a very beautiful woman. Amber. And if we 
go, ril make it up to you." 

He spoke with self-reliance, having enough insight to 
know that the man a woman loves can make up to her 
for anything on earth. 

"What fairing shall I buy you, out in the world, 
Amber?" 

"Nothing." 

"Is there nothing that will repay you — ^the ddights of 
big cities? Finding yourself?" 

"No." 

He was silent. Around them the forest took up its 
night-spinning of multitudinous little sounds. Sigh and 



A FOREST BRIDAL 879 

rustle and soft footfall, ruffled feather, falling of early 
seed vessels, and that dream of a sound, the stealing of 
dew on to every leaf and blade and mossy bed — all blend* 
ing in a vague half-music 

Michael brooded on the leafy layers below them, on 
the glow-worm lights which were all of the world that he 
could see. While she groped intuitively, he saw the situ- 
ation starkly and clearly. The temptation to let this 
nioment pass, to let the crisis remain unspoken, to let 
their lives go on with the important things tacit, unex- 
pressed, took hold of him fiercely. But he had never 
treated life in this way. He took a little medallion out of 
his pocket, and striking a match on his boot, held it 
before her. 

"That?" he asked. 

"Yes, Michael." 

"In poverty and discomfort? In crude places beyond 
the sea ? In the squalor of big cities ?" 

"You make it all very hard, Michael'' 

"Life is hard." 

"Well, then, yes!" 

"Risking death?" 

"Michael, Michael I Let me be happy to-night f Let 
me!" 

She was crying. 

"Risking death?" His voice was harsh. "Do 3roa 
think I shall let you say 'Yes, yes!' in your eager way, 
without first making you realize ?" 

"There are some things in life that cannot be bought 
except at that risk, Michael. They are worth it." 

Her voice sank in the purple silence. The little medal- 
licm of the Madonna and Child slipped from her lap. 

"Don't think I care about it at all. Amber." 

"No?" 

"I'd just as soon — ^not." 



t80 



THE HOUSE IN DOBICBK VOKBiT 



''What a dreadful Ue, Michadr 

He looked up with the shyly gisukf wBrmiz. small iddb* 
<juent She loved that look. 

''And so brazen V she added, ttroktng Ma hair. Miduid 
knelt on the moss with his anna about her. He ^m 
silent, but the forest, svith a dee^ and aoknni mannv, 
qK)ke his heart 



CHAPTER? XXV: 6RANDM0TECER OAS AN 

INSPIRATION 

THE house of Dwrocr was very quiet after the lovers 
left it Even Ernest was gone. Sarah, coming 
down from putting Mrs. Velindre to bed, said: "She's 
very sullen, Mrs. Gosling.*' 

Mrs. Gosling was lugubriously washing up. Not only 
had it been a shabby wedding instead of a grand funeral, 
but Marigold had written to say she would not take the 
money, but was going to live with Peter. 

"All that money to slip through the fingers, Sarah!" 
ihe said. "Give me a sup of spirit *' 



Upstairs, grandmother locked very small in her large 
bed, very withered and puzzled. There was something 
she wanted. She moved her lips, but the only words that 
came were: 

"Perverse I 'A perverse generation T* 

The feeble glow of the nightlight and the flicker of the 
■nail wood fire lit the room vaguely, lighting up a 
feather fan in one place, a stuffed bird in another; throw- 
ing into sudden relief the watch-stand with its skull and 
hour-glass, and the white, round face of her watch. It 
VIS a comfortable room, she reflected; but it was 
crowded It occurred to her that there were so many 
ihiags in it that there was no room for her. Hour after 
imir, being too much excited by the wedding to sleep, she 
Ulj and thought of all the things in this room, in the 
4niwing-room, in the hall. The clocks^ the portraits, the 
■odding idol, the stuffed animals, die Bibles and prayer- 
SSI 



282 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

books in their special bookcase — all these things seemed 
to crowd on her till she could not breathe. She fdt at 
enmity with them. She wanted to get rid of them. Lying 
there in the increasing darkness, she heard Solomon and 
Rachel come, up ; heard their muffled voices prajring as 
usual; and the chink of Sarah's silver-basket She 
thought of calling Sarah to remove the crowding things 
that troubled her. But Sarah was gone before she called 
She had an idea. She would look in the Bible. She lit 
the candle and opened the BiUe. Her eyes f dl oo a 
heavily underlined text 

"Burning and fuel of fire.** 

That was it! There was her answer! She looked 
round triumphantly. Now she would show them ! 

She got up, took the candle, and went downstairs. The 
house was full of noises — the rats, the clocks, the rising 
night-wind, the little death-watches, ticking till the land* 
ing was like a clockmaker's. If anyone had met grand* 
mother they would have been likely to faint with fright 
With her huge nightcap, bare feet, and angry face she 
made a quaint picture. She lit a bonfire in the drawing- 
room, and another in the hall. Then she went back to 
bed very happily, feeling that she had removed all zxm(rf 
ance through the inspiration of a text. Upstairs, they aD 
slept. Downstairs, the little fires crackled and blazed 
under the amazed eyes of the ancestors, and the glassy 
ones of the stuffed birds. The nodding idol disappeared 
in a welter of flame. The ancestors curled up in their 
frames. 

The rising moon laid the black shadow of the house on 
the lawn for the last time. Inside, it was already hollow. 
And now, within the shadow of the lawn, another 
shadow seemed to gather and stir and grow, so that what 
had been a quiet pool of darkness became like water 
when the wind goes ONtt W \\. ^^Tv^^UdaLted, and then 



GRANDMOTHER HAS AN INSPIRATION S8S 

hcgm very slowly to flo^ across the lawn. The rats 
were leaving Dormer, coming from cellar and attic and 
from their haunts in the thick walls. They passed away 
in the direction of the churchyard like the shadow of a 
cloud The lower windows were all illumined now, and 
Enoch, who was wakeful, having the sense of impending 
calamity shared by animals and poets, saw the angry, red 
glare. 

When^ he arrived at the house, all the clocks that 
remained were striking with solemn tones the hour of 
twelve, and from the kitchen the cuckoo hooted wildly. 
Enoch smashed a window and got in. 

''Sir !" he cried, hammering at Solomon s door, ''Dor- 
mer's burning!" 

"Save your mother, Rachel," said Solomon, "while I 
loose the gun-dogs." 

Enoch thundered on Sarah's door, which seemed to 
deprecate this rude disturbance of a maiden's bower. 
Within, all was in its usual order, Sarah's clothes neatly 
folded, the silver-basket palled in its wash-leather. 

Sarah woke, and heard Enoch's voice, but the cotton- 
wool kept her from distinguishing the words. 

"Enoch taboring at my door, and it midnight!" she 
said. 

She had heard of lovers doing such things in the old 
days when there were rope ladders; but that it should 
happen to her ! She smiled in the darkness and wondered 
what Enoch would do next She decided to be very 
righteous, moral and self-respecting. 

"Sarah Jowel ! Sarah Jowel !" cried Enoch. 

"Ah ! I hear, never fear," murmured Sarah. 

"Get up, woman I" shouted Enoch. 

"What a belownder i It's no use you shouting, Enoch, 
for I'm a self-respecting woman," she said, "and let you 
in I never will. I'd die first" 




284 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"Die! Of course you'U die! You'U be roasted il 
you're so pig-headed !*' • 

'"Now don't you make such suggestions to me/' s^ 
Sarah, "for I wunna listen to 'em." 

She took the cott<xi-wo(^ out of her ears to listem 
better. 

"I tdl you Dormer's burning I" 

"Oh, is that all?" 

It seemed a small thing to hear that Dormer was 0m 
fire when she had thought Enoch was on fire. 

Enoch carried grandmother downstairs, looking, in his 
large embrace, like a Red Indian's doll. Her dark, 
pleased, slightly malicious face was lit by the red lig^ 
as they passed through the danger zone. 

"I did it! I did it r sheened. 

"Most a pity if you did, mum, as you can boast of it/' 
said Sarah. But grandmother only laughed her rustling 
laugh. Enoch set her down in the church porch, where 
she huddled like a winter bird, only her eyes alive, with 
their old look as of unknown creatures stalking in their 
depths. She surveyed the Uazing house with ooi»-. 
plaisance. Then she said : 

"A burnt offering to the Lord. Hannah Velindre abd 
be called blessed. Dormer's falling!" 

There was something prophetic and portentous abotti 
her voice; but as she met her daughter's eyes — ^frozen and 
scornful — ^it trailed away. Her concluding "I did it" had 
a childlike tremor. 

"She must be shut up," said Rachel. Her eyes brooded 
on the house, that shone like a firework picture. The 
chimneys lit from below, seemed made of solid gold. 
Every window was illuminated as if for a festival. They 
summoned with ironic hospitality to a feast of death, 
where that wild creature, fire, was host and revdler. As 
one by one the squares of daffodil and red and primroot 



GRANDMOTHER HAS AN INSPIRATION 1886 

^rang out of the blackness, they seemed to be saying that 
erery house not lit by love is desolate. 

l^och, coming through the wicket, met Sarah with her 
arms full of salvaged goods. 

"Did you send for the Silverton engine ?* asked Sarah. 

^*Ah ! but I doubt it's too late. The bitter old place'll 

He returned to the house and came back to Sarah with 
•omething in his hand, which he presented to her. 

"Woman !" he said. "Your world !" 

"Oh !" cried Sarah, "what's a world ? I want you, and 
so I tell you straight V* 

"Softly, Sarah, softly!" said Enoch. "It wunna be 
able " 

"What did you save it for if you didna mean keeping 
company?" 

"It was to be instead of me. It'll be company for you. 
It'll outlive you and me. 'The grass withereth/ but the 
like of that never gets broke." 

He spoke without irony. 

"Enoch Gale!" said Sarah, "do you mean to tell me; 
after the coaxing and the driving I've been obliged to do, 
and the promises you've almost give me, that you're 
going to creep out of it again, ypu miserable man?*' 

"I saved your world." 

Sarah was swept by a wave of hatred of art for art's 



"So I'm to have this, am I ? And it's to outlast me; is 
itr I'll learn it to outlast me!" 

She lifted the round varnished thing, with its juUlant 
colours, and flung it, crashing, at the feet of the negro 

fX3J. 

"What a furious, ravening woman you are, Sarah!" 
laid Enoch. 

Sarah, whose equilibrium was upset by ihi^ ^^ tcooNiL 
anzis round his neck. 



286 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

"It's like the 'ymn, Enoch r she said. " 'All the yain 

things that charm me most ' I've given it up lot joa, 

Enoch! You canna say 'no' nowl" Enoch started l&ea 
trapped rabbit. 

"It wunna be able *' he began lamentably, with a 

very red face, less from embarrassment than from the 
constriction of Sarah's muscular arms, which were firm 
as her resolve. 

But Enoch remembered Marigold's maytree freshness 
— all her rose and gold and white — ^and he hardened his 
heart against Sarah. 

" — ^to be done !" he finished, freeing himself by a dex- 
terous twist. He backed away towards the safer regions 
of the fire. Sarah followed, still a good deal upset 

"You've broke my spirit, Enoch," she said. "And 
Mallow must mend it! Mallow's a disappointed man 
since Mr. Michael turned out not to be a murderer. Til 
marry Mallow I" 

Nothing was heard in the churchyard but the roar of 
the fire and the cropping of Mr. Arkinstall's two goats. 
He had voted himself the right of grazing the churchyard, 
and they were tethered beyond the yew-trees. Their 
grotesque, bearded shadows stretched across the graves, 
black and stark. Grandmother clapped her hands as a 
chimney fell. Into her strait, emotionless life had comti 
an impulse, the first for numberless years. She rejoiced 
greatly. 

Over the house stood a pillar of smoke, towering into 
the sky and flattening out into the shape of a Druidical 
altar. Behind it the dark trees of the Beast Walk were 
scarlet from the reflected glow, as if they too were bunt- 
ing. 

Rachel was stunned as a long-caged animal is at the 
sight of open doot^. SVvt 'Tiould never hear the solemn, 
deathly night sounds oi Xiottofcx ^^vbv\ x«>*^ t^w^. te 



GRANDMOTHER HAS AN INSPIRATION 887 

grey bedroom. Grandmother had destroyed it all. Here 
she was, shivering, outcast, lonely, the house she trusted ^ 
in dissolved, the restrictions that upheld her removed. 
She had lived according to the ghostly will of the house 
until her faint desire for freedom and development had 
died. Freedom was a dream ; when it had gone, she slept 
the better. And now, here she was, with nothing between 
her and the stars. She was exasperated. She put her 
hands on grandmother's shoulders and shook her till her 
ringlets swayed. "I'll lock you up !" she said, and loosed 
her. Grandmother sat crookedly, in her grey tippet, 
against the wall. 

Rachel awaited a harsh word. None came. Only the 
leaves lapped upon the silence, wave upon wave, with a 
sound of peace. Only the pearl-grey dawn began to 
build very slowly, with an architecture at once mighty 
and sweet, a house of many vistas. This immense free- 
dom, opening majestically and relentlessly around a cow- 
ering soul that did not want it, held a kind of irony. For 
Rachel Darke did not want it. She wanted the old vam- 
pire dwelling. 

She nudged her mother. 

"Wake up !" she said. 

Grandmother fell in a stiff heap at her feet. She lay 
there like a broken idol that no man remembers. She was 
never to go tapping round with her stick again. It is ill 
to look upon the old gods in their last pitiful downfall. 
With a vertiginous horror Rachel knew that her mother 
was dead. Brown, wrinkled, hard, the old face lay, smil- 
ing in the secure knowledge that Hannah Velindre was to 
be called blessed. 

It was at this moment, when dawn brooded like a 
silver-grey pigeon over the world, that two odd figures 
appeared in the churchyard. A hint of light from the 
cast revealed them as William and Ktcv^Cva. C,'m>J&no\. 



288 THE HOUSE IN DORMER FOREST 

Amelia had been awakened by the red light or by soor 
instinct of disaster. 

"Dormer's burning, 'WHliam, my dear f* she said with 
composure. Real disaster found her possessed by a deeper 
self that slept within the feckless, frustrate Amelia and J| 
woke when people were in trouble. 

"Brandy, my dear," she said. 

Mr. Cantlop cunningly decanted it, Mrs. Cantlop col- 
lected wraps, her idea being that people's clothes would 
be burnt off their backs and decency outraged. They set 
forth, Amelia's bonnet not even attempting a tmioa with 
herself; only the strong corded strings prevented it from 
darting eagerly skywards. Mr. Cantlop stole akmg in 
the shadow of the hedges, noiseless as a homing owl. 
They seemed more at home in the wide morning than 
Rachel, for they had no possessions except a mere living. 

"She's dead," said Rachel. 

It was as if some poor wandering ghost had spoken of 
another ghost. The goats looked up sharply, like bearded 
men consulting on a knotty point 

From its height the forest conten:q)lated diem. It had 
its own preoccupations, its dreams of bronze and copper 
and clear gold. It was cold to the death of humans and 
of houses. For the god of the forest is not a following 
god; not one that stands at the door and knocks. To 
those that seek him in the forest he gives a welcome. To 
those that sleep he speaks no word. They may lie in their 
mole-like chambers for ever, and slip from slumber into 
death. 

The autumn wind, gay and eager, fluttered Mrs. Go** 
ling's apron as she went into the church to keep vigi^ 
beside the dead. Then with a swift onrush it broke upor 
the forest, where the lovers woke as day enlarged the 
world 

TRE END 



V 



V >• 



1 

•J 

1 




I 1 



f 



I 



JUL 2 



ma 



