HE HAVEN 



N PHiLLPOTTS 




1 



ll : l I si 



* \ 



THE HAVEN 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR 

LYING PROPHETS 

CHILDREN OF THE MIST 

SONS OF THE MORNING 

THE RIVER 

THE AMERICAN PRISONER 

THE STRIKING HOURS 

THE SECRET WOMAN 

THE PORTREEVE 

KNOCK AT A VENTURE 

THE MOTHER 

THE WHIRLWIND 

THE VIRGIN IN JUDGMENT 

THE THREE BROTHERS 

THE FUN OF THE FAIR 



THE HAVEN 



BY EDEN PHILLPOTTS 



LONDON 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W. 

1909 




COPYRIGHT IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



TO 

THE LADY CHURSTON 

WITH VERY SINCERE REGARD 



BOOK I 



THE HAVEN 



CHAPTER I 

WITHIN the unfinished breakwater, where it stretched 
waiting for some strong man to wake goodwill 
between State and people, and so complete it there 
floated half a hundred fishing ketches at their moor- 
ings. The ' Jack and Lydia,' a fine dandy-rigged 
trawler of fifty tons, rode among them ; but while 
the other vessels were mostly manned and about to 
sail, this one showed no sign of human life or activity. 
Her canvas was down and stowed. All was snug 
aboard. Only a row of gulls sat along her trawl 
beam, stretched their wings over their claws, preened 
their neck feathers, and chattered among themselves. 
A little square of black cloth shivered half-mast 
high on the ' Jack and Lydia ' ; and men in other 
ships marked the mourning flag and expressed regret 
at the cause as they passed her. The * True Vine ' 
and the ' Silver Spray,' the ' Gratitude,' the * Alpha,' 
and the ' Ocean's Gift ' cast off moorings and slipped 
away under their ochre-coloured sails to sea. The 
' Try It, 1 the ' Pilgrim,' the ' May Queen,' the 
'Provider' followed; and from the inner harbour 
came dinghy after dinghy with the crews of other 
trawlers. But none visited the 'Jack and Lydia.' 
Dandies and cutters trimmed sail and departed on 
the tide, until a long line of boats in vanishing per- 
spective stretched from Brixham to Berry Head, from 



4 THE HAVEN 

the Head to a grey horizon ; but the sea fowls still 
made toilet and enjoyed seclusion on the boat with 
a mourning flag. 

And, elsewhere, those two, who had linked lives in 
the past and given their joint names to this vessel, 
were parting for all time, and Jack stood beside his 
Lydia' s dust. 

The churchyard sloped southerly in steps up a 
green hill, with every step a grave ; a grey stucco- 
faced tower arose in the midst of the burying-place, 
and over the porch there flashed out red stone battle- 
ments that brightened the drab of the building. 
From this entrance to the pit was not many yards, 
and now a stream of people, following a brightly 
polished coffin like a black caterpillar with a yellow 
head left the church, reached an open grave and 
curled round it. 

John Major and his son and daughter, Edward and 
Lydia, stood first, nigh the clergyman. Behind them 
came a drooping black smudge, with her face hidden 
in a handkerchief. This was Emma Michelmore, the 
widowed sister of Mr. Major. A dozen relations and 
the hands of the * Jack and Lydia ' completed the 
funeral party ; but many came uninvited, because 
Mrs. Major had been approved and esteemed as a 
kindly, large-hearted spirit, ever ready to befriend 
others less prosperous than herself. 

William Gilberd, and Arthur and Harry Michel- 
more made up John Major's crew. The first and 
and second were men ; the third, a boy. All wore 
black and all displayed a genuine sorrow. The 
master showed less emotion than they. After his 
wife's funeral was ended, and he had looked his last 
upon her coffin lid, he went apart and stood quietly 
with his hands in his pockets until the people were 
gone. Then he came back and talked with two men 
who filled the grave. He moved a number of little 
wreaths and crosses out of the way until the mound 



THE HAVEN 5 

was made and the red earth slapped into shape. 
Then he set the tributes of spring blossoms upon it 
in order of their importance. Some exotic flowers 
puzzled him. There was no card attached to them, 
but he placed the wreath with the rest. 

Mr. Major was fifty-three years old a square, 
sailor-like man, with hair in small grey curls, and a 
face stern of expression, clean-shaved, and under- 
hung. His jaw belied him, for he was not a hard 
spirit. Scarred and tanned as the mainsail of a 
trawler ; and disfigured by a cicatrix where his 
cheek-bone was once laid bare by a breaking rope, 
his countenance was yet distinguished by nature of 
its eyes. They were hazel-hued, bright, sanguine 
the home of large faith. Trust, adamant and un- 
shakable, belonged to John Major as a constituent 
of character. He sprang from a long line of Chris- 
tian fishermen, and rejoiced that such men had been 
among the first friends of his Lord. He was cradled 
in the tradition of a watching Saviour ; his life stood 
thereon ; it survived all strain and left him serene, 
even here and now before the master-sorrow of his 
days. He had been married twenty years and got 
three children. One son was dead, and there re- 
mained to him his daughter, Lydia, seventeen years 
old, and his boy, Edward, just turned of fourteen. 

Mr. Major was one of the ' Quay Lords ' of 
Brixham, the most famous and the largest fishing 
village in Devonshire. A division of the manor into 
quarters took place during ancient time, and at a 
subsequent period, that portion which descended to 
the family of the Gilberts passed by purchase into 
the hands of twelve fishermen. Their shares have 
been divided and subdivided times without count 
since then ; and so it comes about that the village 
under Berry Head, within the sheltering, western arm 
of Torbay, numbers more lords and ladies of the 
manor than any other town in England. 



6 THE HAVEN 

In addition to his little portion of land, John Major 
owned his own vessel, and no mortgage, pawn, or 
plight stood between him and possession. He 
worked hard, was counted prosperous, and admitted 
to be a fisherman fully equipped in the knowledge 
of all grounds. The greater part of his life passed 
in his vessel, and he slept better afloat than ashore. 
His nickname was ' Holy John,' but this title none 
ever used as a term of offence. The people felt the 
adjective to be just, and used it accordingly. 

At Mr. Major's direction the funeral party dis- 
persed and left him alone. His sister, Emma 
Michelmore, walked away beside her nephews, Arthur 
and Harry Michelmore, and the mate of the * Jack 
and Lydia,' William Gilberd, accompanied them ; 
while in the front of the group went Lydia Major 
with one Mrs. Honey will an old friend of the dead. 
Behind them followed Nicholas Honeywill, of Berry 
Farm. His little daughter, Deborah, and Edward 
Major, came with him. This boy and girl were 
very fast friends, and now, each with a hand in Mr. 
Honeywill's, they wept he for grief and she for 
sympathy. 

Emma Michelmore also shed tears, but, like the 
south wind, it was her nature so to do. She magni- 
fied the troubles that fell upon her, and forgot the 
benefits. She loved best to retrace the past, and, 
by judicious suppression of lights and heightening of 
shadows, she succeeded always in displaying a very 
dark picture. She displayed it now for the benefit 
of Mr. Gilberd. 

" We buried four, and then I buried my husband, 
who fell off the pier-head owing to darkness, though 
evil tongues said drink ; and then there was Uncle 
Stocks went mad, so we buried him ; and then there 
was poor young Bolder, tokened to sister Sarah he 
was throwed out of one of Hancock's swinging-boats 
to Brixham regatta ten years ago, and broke his 



THE HAVEN 7 

neck ; so we buried him and nobody else ever 
offered for Sarah. And now my brother's wife be 
gone, and I ax : Who next ? " 

" You might say death dogs the family, like the 
gulls after the boats when we be gutting fish," ad- 
mitted Mr. Gilberd ; " but there 'tis sooner or later, 
'tis all one death will have the last breath, like a 
woman will have the last word, so I always tell 
my missis." 

" Why wasn't Mrs. Gilberd to the burying ? " asked 
Emma, with moist voice and watery eyes. The 
historic widow's cruse of oil had been but a mild 
wonder to this widow's cruse of tears. 

" She sat up all night with my youngest. Her's 
got the whooping cough, and doctor says if we don't 
watch her terrible close she'll slip through our fingers. 
But, I say, she's got a fighting heart a'ready, though 
but a year old. When the Gilberds come in the 
world, they come to stay and she's come to stay ; 
and when she coughs she clenches her fist and goes 
pretty well black in the face, and doubles up her li'l 
carcase like a woodlouse. But round she comes 
again. 'Tis a fine sight to see her." 

Mr. Gilberd's flat face and pale eyes grinned at the 
spectacle of his infant's fight for life. He was a dirty 
man, and, being of fair complexion, could not conceal 
the fact. An odour of the ugly things of his calling 
hung about him. To pass him was to be reminded 
of the heaps and waste places beyond the city gates. 

"You may be in the churchyard again afore you 
think to be," said Mrs. Michelmore ; " ban't one babe 
in twenty catching the whoops so young ever gets 
over 'em." 

" I'm like your brother John," answered Mr. 
Gilberd. " Jack Major have the faith that moves 
mountains. Mr. Munday said that very word, and 
a truer never was said. And I've got a very fair 
dollop of faith too though not so much as him. 



8 THE HAVEN 

My faith goes under afore a head wind and a head 
tide ; and so would the faith of shining angels if they 
went trawling ; but Jack Major 'tis all in the day's 
work to him. Lord never made such a wonder afore. 
Whether he's afloat or ashore, or carrying away a net 
and gear, or running afore foul weather, or making a 
record catch, or burying his wife 'tis all one : 
whatever happens be right to happen. And nothing 
will ever make him think otherwise." 

" That's him," she admitted. " He challenges the 
Almighty, as I often tell him. ' If you won't smart 
under life, as you're meant to, the Lord will go on 
till you do smart, John ' that's my word to him. 
Tis like a schoolboy pretending he don't feel the 
rod a fool's trick ; for the schoolmaster only lays it 
on the harder. The wise boy be like the wise dog 
he hollers so soon as the whip comes out of the 
corner ; and he gets off with a lighter dose in con- 
sequence ; but Michelmores and Majors be always 
roughly handled, and so 'twill ever be so long as any 
of 'em are left." 

Elsewhere the wife of Nicholas Honeywill spoke 
to Lydia Major, and reminded her of the new 
significance of life, and the new duties now awaiting 
her. 

" You must try and take her place, so far as a 
daughter may. You knew her ways, and you must 
show yourself worthy of such a good mother and 
born cook as she was." 

Lydia nodded. 

" So I will then if Aunt Emma will let me." 

The girl was dark and good-looking. The shadow 
of her father's underhung jaw belonged to her, but 
only just enough to show a likeness to him. Her 
nature was resolute, courageous, and passionate. 
She loved her father dearly, but she loved another 
man better. Mr. Major's simple philosophy puzzled 
her. Young though she was, Lydia could mark 



THE HAVEN 9 

injustice and cruelty at the corner of every tortuous 
street of her home. She smarted at many things 
and doubted much. She was clever, and had once 
hoped to become a schoolmistress ; but love had 
made a secret dawn for her of late, and her previous 
ambitions to teach were now perished. She had 
sucked somewhat from the spirit of the hour a 
fact that made her father sad. 

Ned Major, the boy, awoke another sort of anxiety 
in his parent. John's son was destined for the sea, 
and the time had come that he should go to it. But, 
as yet, Ned had not displayed that spirit vital to 
success afloat or ashore. The ' fighting heart/ that 
Mr. Gilberd applauded, by no means appeared in 
him. The small sea-dogs in harbour his peers, who 
panted for the day that would find them off with the 
boats called him a landlubber, and flung dead fish 
at him. He loved the shore, and longed for a farmer's 
life ; but it was not to be. Already the cry of the 
deep had sounded for Ned, and the darkness of his 
destiny was only hidden for the moment by this 
greater darkness of his mother's death. Warp and 
woof he had been hers. Her strength and her weak- 
ness belonged to him. He was gentle and tender- 
hearted, and not very brave in a boat. He could 
trust the crags and the trees, and climb after sea- 
gulls' eggs on Berry Head, where even the fisher-boys 
hesitated to follow ; but the sea, albeit it environed 
his life and home the sea, though his infant eyes 
had opened upon it, and the shout and murmur of 
it were the earliest sounds to be stamped into his 
ears was no friend to him. 

He loved his father's patch of land ; but he hated 
his father's boat. His heart was with the plough and 
the horse that tugged it ; but the trawl that ploughed 
the sea bottom and the vessel that tugged it these 
were things that woke no joy in Ned. He feared the 
sea and he loathed all death, though he knew that 



io THE HAVEN 

the geater mortality of good fish, the happier must 
be his home. 

He was fair, well knit and physically strong. Some 
shadow of imagination belonged to him through his 
mother. She had found leisure for reading rhymes, 
and sucked a sort of dim, sentimental pleasure from 
them ; he read no rhymes ; but he read a girl's eyes, 
and here, at fourteen, in the shadow of puberty, 
already felt his heart quicken and his eyes mist at 
the voice of one little maid. 

Mr. Honeywill talked to him now as they went 
along. Then they reached the bereaved home of 
John Major, and the farmer stood at the threshold 
and still talked. 

" Life's chiefly occupied in making the best of a 
bad job, if you're wise ; and in making bad worse, 
if you're a fool," he said. " But you're not a fool, 
Edward, as I know very well, and so you'll make the 
best of it, as becomes a brave boy and the son ot 
your father. You'll make the best of your dear 
mother's going, and know 'tis best for her and, loving 
her, feel 'tis best for you too. And you'll make the 
best of going to sea, and larn how to be your father's 
right hand, and larn how to trust the ocean same as 
he does. I speak as a landsman and a farmer who 
wouldn't trust it, deep or shallow, myself; but you 
come of seafaring stock, generation after generation, 
so 'tis fitting for you." 

" I be going to try and do my duty, Mr. Honey- 
will," snuffled the boy. 

" And who can try and do more? And please to 
tell your father, when he gets back, as I'll come down 
over to-night and smoke a pipe with the poor man, if 
he's equal to it." 

Nicholas Honeywill, his wife, and his little daughter 
went their way ; Emma Michelmore, with Lydia 
and Ned, stood before the door of her brother's 
dwelling. 



THE HAVEN u 

Mrs. Michelmore looked about her and displayed a 
liquid indignation. 

11 All the blinds up again, I see all round ! A 
wicked pretence of sorrow a mockery, I call it. 
Not one decent soul among the lot and her scarce 
covered in her grave." 

" You couldn't ask them to keep in the dark till 
evening," said Lydia Major. 

" No," answered her aunt, " I couldn't, and I 
shouldn't have ; but manners is manners, and no 
proper-mannered woman would have lifted an inch o' 
blind afore ours had gone up." 

" I'll go in, then, and pull them up," answered her 
niece. 

" Do it, and let the sun in." 

Ned said nothing, but at his young heart was a 
thought that even the great sun's self, shining again 
upon his mother's couch, and finding it empty, would 
miss her a little. 



CHAPTER II 

JOHN MAJOR'S house stood on the main road from 
Brixham to the promontory of Berry Head. Here, 
lifted a hundred feet above the haven, a bird's-eye 
view of it, stretched beneath his dwelling, might 
be seen. In plan like the wards of a key, the 
harbour lay with wharves thrust into the midst and 
running round about. Here rose a harmony of 
yellow masts and medley of rich tones upon them. 
Cordage and nets and sails slung to dry, ascended 
above the boats ; the tide was in and the craft floated 
bulwark to bulwark closely packed, on the still, 
grey-green water. Opposite the terrace, whence Mr. 
Major's house looked down, there rose Overgang 
a network of steep, winding steps that ran amid small 
homes. The houses ascended tier upon tier ; while 
beneath, along the quay, stretched a row of small 
shops and inns and spread the red roof of the auction 
mart. To seaward, beneath the hill, there ran the 
first great landing-place of the harbour and extended 
the rialto of the fishermen a pier, upon the inner 
side of which berthed the boats, or any chance vessels 
whose business brought them here ; while along the 
outer wall there passed a raised foot-walk protected 
from the east by a parapet breast-high. This parapet 
had been polished by the elbows of generations of 
fishermen. 

Without there stretched the haven and danced the 

12 



THE HAVEN 13 

waters of Torbay ; within, extended the harbour, and 
prospered the life of it. 

Upon Brixham quay a marble statue stands, sup- 
ported by two cannon. Its hand is on its breast and 
its back is turned toward the sea. This unconscious 
jest in stone has a face half parrot and half fish. It 
stares fatuously from heavy-lidded eyes at the 
opposite house-front ; and it purports to be William, 
Prince of Orange, who landed here at a nation's call 
to fill an empty throne. 

The unlovely houses with shining roofs climb 
round about. Mostly grey they are grey and 
leaden under their slates ; yet sometimes break out 
buff and russet faces to brighten the house rows ; 
sometimes a glitter of sign-writing or flapping fold 
of flag vary the monotonous terraces. A feather of 
steam often floats above the railway station perched 
as a crown to Overgang ; a red-roofed church towers 
among the grey roofs westward ; and behind the 
village, valleys open into a world of pleasant coombs 
and denes that fade to the forest-clad hills beyond 
them. Here now, dimly through a haze of morning 
light, there glimmered the first glory of wakening 
larches ; there bulked the darkness of fir woods ; 
there stretched many a rounded slope of good red 
fallow to the skyline. 

With his eyes upon these familiar objects, John 
Major left his home on the morning after the funeral 
and went his way to the harbour. He was starting 
on a fortnight's cruise ' round land,' for there had 
come tidings of heavy catches in the North Channel. 
Certain fishing grounds extending from Lundy to 
the Irish coast had been under a cloud, and a time 
of depression from which John Major and his neigh- 
bours suffered, was attributed to the fact that the 
North Channel had so long proved barren. Pessi- 
mists declared those seas were fished out, even as the 
famous Dogger Bank is sometimes trawled in vain ; 



14 THE HAVEN 

but now good news of heavy nets in the old waters 
was sending all Brixham's larger craft round the 
Land's End once more, and Mr. Major prepared to 
depart with the rest. Behind him, along the quay, 
-came his son, Ned, and the boy, Harry Michelmore. 
They carried the skipper's little tin box, for John was 
particular and liked clean clothes when long from 
home. Lydia followed also, and the brother and 
sister presently saw their father and his crew afloat. 
Mr. Gilberd, Arthur Michelmore, Harry, and the 
captain put off to their vessel together ; and in half 
an hour the { Jack and Lydia ' was away and off on 
her long cruise. She sailed fast and Mr. Major knew 
that long before Lundy was sighted she would over- 
haul many a sister boat that had set out before her. 

Lydia saw the little black flag pulled down and the 
great mainsail drawn up. 

" Next time you'll have to go too, Ned," she 
remarked to her brother. 

" No need to remind me of that," he answered. 

" But 'tis settled that Harry takes one more cruise 
along with father, ,to show you your work and to 
help you." 

" So he should." 

Lydia's eyes were about the quay and she looked 
not seldom at a cutter-rigged trawler lying in the 
harbour with a wet net drawn up to the main-mast 
head. It glistened in the morning light, and here 
and there a scrap of weed shone from it. The boat 
was empty and the crew ashore. 

"The 'Night Hawk,'" she said. "Mr. Broken- 
shire's vessel." 

Ned nodded and replied : 

"Sam Brokenshire always fishes by night, so 'tis 
a very good name for his ship." 

They returned homeward by way of the market, 
and Lydia ventured to ask a salesman what Mr. 
Brokenshire had done. 



THE HAVEN 15 

The man was young and cheerful. He winked 
at her, and took out a pocket-book. 

" I sold 'em, so I can tell you just what you want 
to know, Miss Major. Here you are a nice lot of 
plaice quite out of the common and some other 
first-class fish five pound three shilling. What luck 
some people have eh ? " 

The young salesman winked again and turned 
to his labours, where a catch of hake awaited him, 
stretched grim, staring-eyed, and grey upon the 
stone altar of auction. 

" Come up to Berry Head, Lyddy," said her 
brother. " There's nothing to do for the minute 
ban't eight o'clock yet. 'Tis all so lonely and 
wretched to home. Do 'e come along, and us '11 
gather a few cowslips down in the cliffs. I know 
where they grow to. And we'll take 'em to the 
grave. Do come. You'm fond enough of walking 
there alone." 

She reflected. 

" 'Twill be something to take us out of reach of 
Aunt Emma for a bit. She'll be glad to be rid of 
us. She's going over all your sea clothes this 
morning." 

His face fell. 

" I know it. I'm to try 'em on to-night." 

He sighed deeply, and his sister pitied him. 

" 'Tis hard that you have to go for a fisherman, 
hating it like you do. A pity for some things that 
father won't let you work on shore ; but, then, what's 
to be done with the boat? 'Tis all that he'll have 
to leave you, because I'm to have the land." 

" Don't keep on about it," repeated her brother. 
"Tis all right and proper. It have got to be. I 
don't grumble, but I can't help hating it, all the 
same. And I shall hate it always the sea, I mean 
though I shan't bide on it always." 

" I'll come up on the Head for a bit, if you like," 



16 THE HAVEN 

declared Lydia. " We'll see the boat out of sight, 
and pick a few cowslips, if you know where to find 
them." 

They returned home, told their aunt that they 
would be back again before noon, and then departed 
together. Ned declared that he knew a haunt of 
flowers in the cliffs, and would take his sister to 
see it. 

As they went Lydia talked of time to come, and 
the boy listened. The world was very dark for him 
at this season, and he wondered how Lydia could 
face the future with such courage and confidence. 

"How 'tis that you ban't feeling so low as 
me, I can't understand," he said. " But I suppose 
it is because poor mother was more to me than 
you." 

" She liked you best," answered Lydia. " But I 
loved her well enough, Ned, and I'm sad enough, 
though I may not make so much fuss as others. 
To see Aunt Emma would dry anybody's tears. 
Look at father he don't weep, yet who can feel 
what he feels?" 

The boy argued from his fourteen years, and 
seemed more childish than usual to the girl. She 
had much to support her that he knew not of. The 
future for her, love-lighted, dawned as brightly as 
his glowered dark before him. She considered now, 
while they advanced among the slopes of the cliffs, 
whether she should reveal her secrets. Then she 
remembered that he who shared them had com- 
manded her for the present to tell none. 

" There's the ' Jack and Lydia/ " she said. " That's 
Mr. Mogg's boat, just astern of father. I know her 
by the slice of white in the foresail. It hasn't been 
barked yet." 

Ned regarded the vanishing fishers without interest. 
His spirits were at their lowest ebb. 

" I reckon I shan't find no cowslips," he de- 



THE HAVEN 17 

clared. " Somebody's been down here and gathered 
'em." 

" Nonsense," she answered. " You know very well 
nobody's been down there. There aren't a dozen 
boys in Brixham brave enough to go down." 

He cheered a little at this praise, flung off his 
coat, and made a descent over a great shelf of lime- 
stone, where scanty hold offered for hands and toes. 
His sister watched him, and marked how the 
exertion and difficulty woke his spirit to cheerful- 
ness. The return was easier, and anon Ned shinned 
up to the top of the cliff through a chink among the 
rocks not far distant In his mouth he bore five 
cowslips. 

" Mother always had the first," he said. " And 
now she'll have no more. And I wouldn't have 
minded much if I'd slipped and broke my neck, 
Lydia, for now she's gone " 

" Don't you say those foolish things. And for that 
matter she shall have the flowers. And like enough 
she'll be near enough to see them too. We'll put 
them on her dear grave this afternoon." 

They sat for an hour upon the forehead of a 
southern-facing precipice, and saw the trawlers fade 
away westward. Lydia kept her eyes on the sea ; 
Ned lay upon his stomach, supported his face on his 
hands, mournfully chewed young clover, and stared 
inland. Speech ceased between them. Presently 
they rose and went home together. 

Where ploughed land sloped to the cliff edge and 
stretched out in rich meadows, sung over by the lark, 
a solitary house appeared. Here stood the farm of 
Nicholas Honey will, blinking with deep windows to 
the sea, and snugly set in its proper thicket of old 
giant laurels. A grove of elms, wind-blown, and 
thickened now with carmine inflorescence, rose about 
it, and the farmyard extended beneath them. 

" Would you like to go up to Berry Farm and ask 



18 THE HAVEN 

Mrs. Honeywill for a drink of cider and see De- 
borah ? " ventured Ned's sister as she helped him 
into his jacket. 

But he shook his head. 

" No, I won't go there no more only makes me 
feel wicked to see Tommy messing about with the 
things 1 and doing the work that I'd like for to do. 
I wish to God as he'd been father's boy and I'd been 
farmer's." 

" Maybe you won't wish any such wish some day," 
answered Lydia, thinking of little Deborah Honey- 
will. 

"Yes, I shall, then. I heard Deb's father say a 
bit agone that the sea weren't no use except for 
sea-weed ; and that's the truth. I've hated it and 
hated the sight of it ever since I corned into the 
world, and 'tis a cruel hard thing as I've got to go 
on to it, and 'tis cruel of father to force me." 

He relapsed again after this outburst, and his 
sister, not used to seeing the boy so cast down, made 
further attempts to hearten him. She could not 
share his aversion from the sea ; indeed, of late her 
spirit was often there, and chiefly at the time when 
other maidens slept. Not seldom a fearful joy kept 
Lydia waking, and after midnight, or before the 
dawn, she looked out of her window at the few glow- 
worms of fire in the harbour below, and pictured a 
certain boat and a certain skipper who ran more 
perils and incurred more dangers than those merely 
incidental to night and darkness. 

Every incident of that most sorrowful day com- 
bined to cast down Ned. As if the awful void 
following on his mother's death and burial was not 
an evil sufficient, there haunted him the doom of 
life, now but a fortnight distant ; and this, when 
accident had eased his mind of it for a while after 
dinner, was thrust back upon him by his aunt. 
1 Things cattle, sheep, or swine. 



THE HAVEN 19 

" Us'll try on the toggery when you've finished 
your meat," she said. " No doubt 'tis all right, but 
we'll go through it and get you rigged out. The 
last boy as I helped to fit was poor Billy Truscott's 
son him as went down in the ' Sweetheart ' on his 
very first voyage. I can see his mother now when 
they brought the news. She raved against the sea 
and shook her fist at it, as if 'twas a living creature. 
She tore her hair likewise. 'Twas a thing I'd often 
heard of, as being done by frantic women, but I never 
seen a she do it afore, and hope I never shall again. 
An ugly, red-eyed woman, but her grief made her 
stand a foot higher on the quay." 

Into his 'fear naught' coat and trousers Ned 
presently struggled. The solid blue cloth so thick 
that it could almost stand alone chafed him and 
made him miserable ; but Aunt Emma decided that 
the garments fitted well, and was equally pleased 
with the worsted jersey, the ' boot-stockings ' of thick 
white wool, the underwear, and the worsted hose. 
Against the drawers and vest Ned cried out that 
they would scratch his skin to pieces ; but Mrs. 
Michelmore bade him wait till he had to work on 
the water at dead of night in winter under a north- 
east wind. 

" You'll cry out for more to cover you then," she 
said. " 'Tis only such things as these stand between 
the seafaring man and his death as you'll find afore 
you've been on the water a week." 

The sea boots proved too small, and the tarpaulins 
too large ; so after dinner Mrs. Michelmore took her 
nephew to the shops and rectified these adjuncts 
of outfit. 

When all was done they returned home, and later 
in the day, with Lydia and his aunt, Ned walked to 
the churchyard and spent an hour there. The chil- 
dren bustled themselves about the mound, cast from 
it flowers already perished, swept the earth from the 



20 THE HAVEN 

bruised grass, and set Ned's cowslips on the head 
of the grave. Ned openly wept the while, and 
Lydia's lip trembled, and her face was cast down, 
but she shed few tears. As for Mrs. Michelmore, 
she found matter for grief less in the tomb of her 
sister-in-law than those round about it. She pointed 
out with considerable emotion that the husband of 
the dead had chosen this spot ill. 

" If he'd but used his eyes ! " she cried. " Just look 
that uncertain woman, Jessie Crang, within six feet 
of her a light creature that she never could abide ; 
and, at her very shoulder, old Saul Pepperill, him as 
used to sail in the ' Smiling Morn ' as famous an 
evil liver as ever came out of Brixham. And now 
the first sight as her eyes will catch, come the Trump, 
must be that bad young woman and worse old man 
creeping out of their pits together. And only a span 
up the hill she might have gone beside Jane Tribble, 
a saint of God and her bestest friend. But of course 
he didn't know what he was doing. After all 'tis 
something to know where your partner lies. Look at 
poor Martha Brokenshire, sleeping here safe enough ; 
but her husband, Michael as was, have got all the 
English Channel for his grave. He went down when 
a tramp steamer cut the ' Warrior ' in half by night 
off Portland Bill. Three married men drowned and 
only one boy saved, and he lived to turn his mother's 
hair grey afore she dropped." 

Lydia flashed a lightning look of anger at the back 
of her aunt's withered black bonnet ; but Emma 
Michelmore maundered on oblivious. 

She sketched a dozen tragedies ; and then she 
struck upon an immediate problem that caused her 
great uneasiness. 

" Us'll have to sit in the mourners' pew Sunday 
without father ! I never thought of that. He ought 
to have remembered it. He never ought to have 
sailed till after Sunday. And now us three will be 



THE HAVEN 21 

there and every eye will mark us and every tongue 
will say : * Where's John Major to ? ' Tis a most 
unheard of thing, and he must have been pretty well 
daft to forget it. What that man will forget next, 
only his God knows." 

A world of misery sat on her face and her voice 
ascended shrill among the tombs as she stared aghast 
at the pending tragedy ; but Lydia and Ned paid no 
attention to her concern. 



CHAPTER III 

MR. MUNDAY, host of 'The Sailor's Knot' on 
Brixham Quay, was wont to describe his public-house 
as a museum. 

" 'Tis far more than an inn," he declared, " for 
you'll find the walls hidden by the wonders of the 
sea and the Lord's doings in deep waters. There's 
sermons, you might say, look out at the customer 
on every side, to show the littleness of man and the 
greatness of his Maker." 

To Mr. Munday the trawlers brought those strange 
things their nets drew off the floors of the Channel, 
and he had filled his bar and festooned walls and 
ceiling with them. Works of man and nature mingled 
grotesquely. Here stood the dummy head of a 
torpedo and two gigantic vertebrae of a whale ; here 
hung masses of ore with ' sea trees ' growing upon 
them, and a rocket tube from a man-of-war. Mr. 
Munday would show you old grapnels, an ancient 
sextant, and half a steering-wheel all of which he 
vowed were remains of the Spanish Armada ; he 
would then call your attention to a score of bottles 
that hung above the bar. They were of every 
shape and included Dutch, flat-bellied spirit jars and 
Italian wine-flasks. Oysters and barnacles decorated 
them all ; while other oysters of original mind were 
also exhibited. One of these had made its home on 
a wooden tobacco-pipe, and another was fastened to 

22 



THE HAVEN 23 

the heel of a woman's boot. Here hung a diver's 
marine lamp, and here a bunch of candles half-petrified 
by long immersion ; here were wooden pictures and 
carvings of ships, wrought with the best art that Jack 
Tar knows. 

Of natural things, Mr. Munday's museum included 
the skull of a grampus ; masses of coral and ' ross ' 
a sort of coraline, razor-edged, that plays havoc with 
the nets ; sea urchins of great size starred the walls, 
and an angler fish, with his rod and lure nodding 
above his gigantic jaws, hung amongst them. The 
tail of a thresher and the dagger of a swordfish, the 
eggs of skates and the mouths of many rays close 
set with teeth like seed, also adorned the bar. A 
shark's dorsal fin and a sucker fish ; enormous red 
spider crabs, with coral growing on their backs ; 
a monster that had shed one claw and grown seven 
little pairs of pincers in place of it ; a ' nickel ' ray 
rarest of marine creatures, with a face like a toad and 
a tail like a long bootlace these and much else of 
like nature graced the collection of Mr. Munday. He 
was always ready to add fresh curiosities, and the 
preparation of his specimens he undertook himself. 
He varnished and painted many horny creatures, 
made the ' bull dogs ' in the carapaces of cray-fish 
stare out upon the beholders, and added rich tones 
of scarlet and umber to the legs of the giant crabs. 
Corals and shells struck coldly upon all this wealth of 
warm colour and bright varnish spread round them ; 
yet the general effect was exceedingly rich and 
remarkable. Not only the inn-keeper himself, but 
his patrons also felt personal pride in the bar of ' The 
Sailor's Knot.' Hardly a man of the many who 
drank there but had contributed something to the 
show from his trawl. 

A great black and white gannet in a case above the 
door appeared to reign over the museum ; and at this 
moment the fisherman who had shot it, and presented 



24 THE HAVEN 

it to Mr. Munday in time past, regarded the bird and 
spoke : 

" You'll have to do something to this here fowl," 
he said. " The tail feathers be dropping off him. I 
always told you that fool to Dartmouth couldn't stuff 
a bird." 

Samuel Brokenshire was a sturdy sailor with broad 
shoulders and a thick neck. He was fair, his eyes 
were blue, his mouth well turned and handsome. 
His hair was crisp, curly, and cut very close to his 
head. His expression appeared at once humorous 
and insolent. Great resolution marked it and obvious 
impatience of control The most casual spectator 
might have guessed that here was a man who 
brooked no better master than himself. Brokenshire 
was five-and-twenty, lawless and popular. Nobody 
disliked him, for he was merry, genial, well-spoken, 
and good to look at ; nobody respected him, because he 
ran his life on doubtful models, chose worthless friends, 
and lived an irregular existence. He was an orphan 
and dwelt in a small cottage half-way up Overgang. 
His grandmother kept house for him and he prospered, 
yet hovered for ever in the shadow of calamity. Sam 
owned his own boat, but all guessed it was deeply 
mortgaged. He kept his cutter, the ' Night Hawk/ 
very smart ; he worked hard ; but the manner of his 
work was a mystery. Most men suspected poaching, 
yet few of his companions blamed him overmuch, and 
many did not hesitate to declare that, but for the 
danger to wives and children, they would take like 
risks with Sam and do as he was guessed to do by 
night in protected waters. 

This business of poaching now formed matter for 
debate, and Mr. Brokenshire, taking a glass of beer 
off the counter, went into a corner where another 
man sat beside a little stove. 

Richard Varwell, more generally known as ' Tumble- 
down Dick/ was a strange object a village Dionysian, 



THE HAVEN 25 

superior to decency but not to dirt. His decayed 
clothes hung about him rather than covered him ; 
his matted hair was long, his face filthy. Bright eyes 
flashed from this grimy countenance and hair hung 
about it and over his forehead, like a Skye terrier's. 
His beard fell in two ragged peaks upon an open 
shirt. Grey was sprinkled plentifully there, while the 
point of his Roman nose and a part of his moustache 
had become bright yellow from the countless 
cigarettes that he smoked. His fingers were also 
stained to orange colour with tobacco juice. The 
man was more than fifty and boasted that he had 
not done a stroke of work that he could help for 
thirty years. He regarded himself as a socialist, and 
loved to hold forth on social questions to all who 
would listen. Politics he never wearied of discussing, 
and at election times he was always the first to be 
ocked up for inciting to riot. Tumbledown Dick 
had one sermon, which he preached daily from the 
quay parapet, whenever a man or two could be got 
to listen. He would point across the bay to Torquay 
and contrast the leisured class of that wealthy con- 
geries with the workers of Brixham, to the disadvan- 
tage of the former. He was always ripe for mischief, 
always ready to share his broken meat and shreds of 
tobacco with anybody. Few knew how or where he 
lived. It was believed that he robbed the farmers' 
scarecrows for clothes and their pig-troughs for food. 
The tall, lean, fantastic figure of him always woke 
a grin on the faces of easy men and begat a frown 
where minds were serious. Dick, in fact, was a 
skeleton at the feast of life in Brixham. Vicars had 
striven and police inspectors had threatened alike in 
vain. He was incorrigible, and yet the law never 
wearied of correcting him. He had preached to 
many Justices of the Peace and laid unanswerable 
arguments before them for many years. As he said 
himself, ' fourteen days' hard is no argument ' ; yet it 



26 THE HAVEN 

seemed the only one their worships knew. Tumble- 
down Dick deliberately courted seclusion in the 
winter ; but when the weather was fine he enjoyed 
the open air. Brixham had come to regard him as 
an institution ; and such spirits as Brokenshire, who 
themselves warred in secret against society, found 
Mr. Varwell an exhilarating and congenial com- 
panion. 

Sam whispered to the loafer, and Dick drew the 
smoke of a cigarette up through his yellow nostrils 
and blew it out of his mouth. Then he finished his 
beer flinging it down his throat rather than drinking 
it and sucked his ragged moustache. 

" In a word," said Brokenshire, " Billy Trust 
you know ; him that always sails with me have 
broke his finger and they say at the 'orspital he 
must rest his hand a week. He's cruel vexed, but 
his wife will see he does what doctor bids him. 
And you know all about it ; so you'd better come 
and put in a few nights with me till he can sail 
again." 

"If 'twas just the every-day business, I wouldn't 
come," said Dick. " Not I not to work like the 
tame trawler-men. But you're different. You've got 
your knife into law and authority and injustice, and 
if you mean " he sank his voice " Start Bay, then 
I'm with you, as a protest against them that would 
keep honest folk from their own." 

A big man not far off heard the words " Start 
Bay," and took up the parable. He was noisy and 
hammered the table with his fist, but his sentiments 
won the approval of the others. 

"'Tis a crying sin and disgrace that you fellows 
are kept out of that Bay, and I don't care who hears 
me say so." 

He thumped the table, and Sam and Dick thumped 
the other end. 

" Hear, hear, Mr. Tribble ! " said Brokenshire. 



THE HAVEN 27 

As a fish salesman I know what I'm talking 
about," continued Mr. Tribble, "and I say that to 
keep our home boats the ' mumble-bees ' l out of 
Start Bay for the sake of a beggarly gang of long- 
shore crabbers, is a disgrace to the nation. Look at 
it. 'Twas shut up in the time of Noah, for the pro- 
tection of half-grown fish, and since then generations 
of good flat-fish have lived and died in it, and still 
'tis shut, despite the cruel badness of the times." 

" They're all rogues together them crabmen," 
said Brokenshire. " They stick their pots out in the 
fairway of craft in mid-channel, you might almost 
say and then, when some ocean-going ship sweeps 
the lot away to hell, what do they do ? They cry 
out that 'tis us with our trawls inside the limits have 
done it." 

" Put a light on the bell buoy at the Skerries," said 
a dark, black-bearded man sitting near Mr. Tribble. 
" Do that and all's as plain as a pikestaff. Then 
open the north side and you'll not be within a mile 
of the pots. However, it won't be done while some 
of us laugh at the bye-laws and go in the* bay on 
dark nights." He looked at Sam Brokenshire, but 
the younger man showed no concern. 

" Thank goodness we have got a few brave free- 
traders yet among our two hundred skippers," cried 
Dick Varwell. "And I'm proud to think that I'm 
getting more and more of you chaps to see the 
foolishness of keeping out of the Bay. Why Lord 
deliver us ! what be a dirty bye-law to stand between 
a strong man and five or six pounds made between 
sundown and dawn ? We'm a poor-spirited order of 
creation or we wouldn't sit down under it. If I was 
commodore of the fleet, I'd up-sail some fine morning 
and lead the way into that Bay and not rest till 
I seed two hundred boats ploughing there. Then 
we'd see what the Board of Fisheries would do 
1 Mumble-bees the smaller trawlers. 



28 THE HAVEN 

' Keep the bye-laws ; keep the bye-laws ' ; that's 
what they're always bleating, whereas what I say in 
my large way, as a true friend to human nature, is 
this : ' Damn the bye-laws and don't let any man as 
is a man think about keeping 'em.' " 

"'Tis in a nutshell," summed up Mr. Tribble, 
" Start Bay was shut to improve the fishing, and now 
the fishing's so good as gold 'tis still shut not for 
the fishing, but for the crabbers." 

" And they do what we ban't allowed to do," 
added Brokenshire, " for if their drag seines ban't 
trawls, what are they ? The whole popilation comes 
out to get 'em in, and you'll see twenty men at one 
arm of the net and twenty women at t'other. But 
nothing's said against that." 

The conversation grew more technical and more 
noisy. The salesman thundered on the table ; Mr. 
Munday begged him to argue with less energy. 

" I'm very much against you, and you know it," 
he said. " So long as the poachers among us go to 
the Bay, so long will it be closed against us, and the 
righteous will suffer for the guilty." 

" The cowards will suffer for the brave and let 
'em ! " answered Dick. " They always have in the 
world, and they- always will. If the people would 
list to me, Brixham would rise like one man and 
have its rights and set an example to the North Sea 
and open the eyes of England." 

" You oughtn't to air such silliness, Varwell," said 
Mr. Munday from behind the bar. He was a bald, 
stout man of settled opinions. 

" Of course you don't think so. You've only got 
three ideas in that glittering, bald noddle of yours, 
Thomas, and they are the Throne, the Church, and 
the Beer Barrel. But 'tis different with me. 'Twas 
my great-great-grandfather, or some such fool, carried 
that foreign chap, William the Dutchman, ashore 
when he landed in England. Brought him through 



THE HAVEN 29 

the mud with the tide out, no doubt ; and if he'd let 
him drop for the harbour crabs to eat, this country 
would be happier to-day than what it is. A disgrace 
to the name of Varwell was that man. I'm shamed 
every time I think his blood runs in my body." 

" Get along with you," answered Mr. Muriday. 
" Tis a great question whether I ought to let you 
in my bar, Dick, for you'm a thorn in the side of the 
young men, and a blot on the country-side. You to 
talk about work for all and manhood's rights ! I'm 
much like to see the work you'd do, even if 'twas 
offered you." 

" No, you wouldn't, Thomas," answered Dick. Then 
he winked at Mr. Brokenshire and rose to depart. 
4< Let work worthy of my thinking parts be put afore 
my notice, and I dare say some of you toilers would 
be a good bit astonished to see how I did it," he 
concluded. " I'm waiting for the red revolution, 
Thomas ; I'm biding my time. It may come while 
I'm still trotting about, or it may not ; but if it does, 
then you bet your boots I shan't be idle." 

With these great promises Tumbledown Dick 
marched off, and the master of the ' Night Hawk ' 
soon followed him. But they went different ways, 
for the loafer proceeded to some unknown haunt 
inland, while Sam looked at his watch, then quickened 
his pace, and set out briskly to Berry Head. 

He climbed the hill, cast a glance at the house of 
the Majors as he passed it, walked by the coastguard 
station, and then, leaving the road, disappeared 
among the furzes, thorn trees, and limestone bluffs 
beyond. Presently he stood by one of the ruined 
cottages that still lift their fragments here ; then Sam 
leapt through an empty portal and met a girl. She 
was sitting very patiently on the edge of a broken 
mantelpiece, waiting for him, but as he rilled the 
doorway she jumped from her perch and ran to him. 
In a moment his arms were fast round her, and he 



30 THE HAVEN 

was rubbing his red cheek gently against her brown 
one. 

"I'm late, Lyddy," he said; "but I know you'll 
forgive me, like the dinky dear you be." 

" All the same, I wouldn't have waited much longer 
for you," declared Lydia Major. "You may laugh, 
Sam, but I promise you I wouldn't." 



CHAPTER IV 

THE lovers, as lovers will, revealed themselves un- 
consciously in their hopes and fears. Lydia's 
courtship had been secret, for her father was no 
admirer of Mr. Brokenshire or his ways. But the 
girl loved Sam with passionate joy, and not the less 
for a mystery that shadowed his name. He talked 
much nonsense to her on the subject of the rights 
of man ; while she believed all that he said, and, 
through the eyes of love, saw him a great hero. 
Sometimes his rumoured performances struck upon 
a moment of unclouded perception, and showed Sam 
to Lydia in a different light ; but his presence 
banished doubt, his voice awoke new trust. 

To-night he talked of the future, and indicated 
his intentions. She sat on his lap, and he broke his 
speech with many kisses. 

" After your eighteenth birthday I'm going to 
beard the lion and come afore your father and ax 
him to let me marry you all fair and square," began 
Sam. " He's got his knife into me and another 
here and there, because we work late and think 
our own thoughts and won't be under the heel of 
other people ; but he's a fair man, and I mean to 
show him the world can't stand still because he 
wants it to." 

"That's all very fine, Sam, but what about Start 
Bay?" 



32 THE HAVEN 

"You mind your own business," he said, and 
hugged her. " No man has ever proved that I've 
been inside the limits have they ? Very well, then 
wait till they do prove it. Hearsay's only believed 
by fools, and threats only frighten children. If I'm 
caught on the wrong side of the marks, then let your 
father think and speak what he likes. Till that 
happens, no man has any right to say anything ; 
and if I bring better fish to morning market than 
t'others then I say I'm a better fisherman. No 
call for me to tell my secrets. Tis every one for 
hisself; and I'm for you, and I'm going to get 
you, spite of Jack Major, or fifty such. But I do 
hope he'll be reasonable. No living man can 
prove hookem-snivey dealings against me. My boat's 
my own, I've got a few pound saved, I'm steady 
as time, and I've never done another chap a bad 
turn in my life." 

" That I'm sure you haven't." 

"And never will. And because me and your 
father think different in politics and such like, that's 
no reason why he should refuse me." 

"He will, however." 

Sam shrugged his shoulders and played with 
Lydia's hair. 

"If you can say that so hopeful as you generally 
be then no doubt he will. And then, if words 
won't do it, I must take to deeds. And, for that 
matter, I'm always better pleased to be doing than 
talking, though 'tis often brought against me by 
people that I'm lazy. ' Lazy ' ! Me lazy ! Don't 
I breed my own trawl-nets ? Can't I make my own 
irons as well as the blacksmith, and my own beams 
as well as the carpenter, and bark my own sails as 
well as Uncle Peach? But if your father says I 
ban't to have you then he'll get his eyes opened 
very sharp, I warn you of that, Lydia, though he is 
your father. I'll stand injustice from no man while 



THE HAVEN 33 

I can lift my hand. Whatever else I may or may 
not be, I'm going to be your husband God judge 
me if I ban't ! " 

She caressed him and returned to the problem. 
Danger and difficulty delighted her at this dis- 
tance. 

" But what would you do, Sam, if father's firm and 
won't give in about it ? " 

" I know very well what I'd do. I've got an 
invention all ready. But we'll leave that for a bit. 
We'll hope he'll listen to sense, though he's the 
sort that reckons all sense but his own be nonsense. 
We'll see what the pair of us can come at before your 
birthday. And by the same token, what be I to buy 
you against it ? " 

" I don't want you to spend your money on me, 
Sam." 

" Who should it go on then ? No other girl but 
you will ever get a penny of mine never again. Did 
your father see me at the funeral ? But I know he 
did. I took very good care that he should." 

" Yes, he did. Ned mentioned it and asked him if 
he'd seen you." 

" What did he think of it ? " 

" Never mind that." 

"But I want to know. He couldn't say nought 
against that, surely ? " 

" He said that he was a good bit surprised to find 
that you had Sunday black ; and that he shouldn't 
have expected it." 

" I'll surprise him more than that presently. Surely 
he thought 'twas a civil and respectful thin? in me to 
be there?" 

" He didn't think about it." 

" And what about they grand roses and lilies and 
ferns on the grave ? " 

" What about them ? " she asked, starting. 

" Well, I put them there for your sake, Lyddy." 



34 THE HAVEN 

" You ! Father was pleased, in a quiet way, over 
them. He knew they were glass-house flowers and 
thought that they'd come from one of the quality." 

" Not at all," said Sam. " They corned from me." 

" Wherever did you get them ? " 

" No matter. They won't be missed. I know 
an under-gardener or two, in a place where they keep 
ten." 

She was troubled. 

" 'Tis things like that, Sam, make people fearful 
for you." 

" Let 'em mind their own business." 

"Well, I am father's business at any rate he 
thinks so. And if he liked you which he doesn't 
he'd never let us wed till I'm up twenty-five." 

" Good Lord ! How d'you know that ? " 

t( 'Tis one of his fixed sayings, that no woman 
should go into married life sooner not if he could 
prevent it." 

" Cold-blooded old devil ! " 

" Sam ! " 

" I don't mean that, but there ! such opinions 
make me wild. I'm twenty-five this minute very 
near twenty-six and be I to wait till I'm an old man 
for'e? No, by God!" 

She grew tearful. 

" Well, I put you first in the world and always 
shall," she said. " I hope 'tisn't wicked ; but so 'tis, 
and very well you know it. First first always and 
for ever." 

He crowed and cuddled her. 

" You'm the true, faithful sort, Lyddy." 

" But are you, I wonder ? " 

"Fathful as the sun." 

She jumped off his lap at this assurance and 
bade him strike a match, for it was growing 
dark. 

" There's plenty of light to kiss by," he said. 



THE HAVEN 3$ 

" Strike a match," she repeated. " I want to show 
you something." 

He obeyed and she took the light from him and 
held it up to the broken plaster of the wall. On 
a smooth spot appeared two hearts overlapping and 
transfixed with an arrow. Upon one the initials of 
Lydia appeared, while " S.B." adorned the other. 
Beneath was a date. 

" That's all right," said Sam. " I set it there the 
day you said you'd take me. Don't you remember ? " 

" Yes, I remember," she answered. " But do you 

remember ? Give me the matches and come 

into this little chamber. Mind the floor it has 
rotted away and the ceiling's half down too." 

She led him into another room of the ruin. The 
lath and plaster above was partly fallen and hung 
in a great threatening sheaf from broken rafters ; 
the floor was full of holes ; the walls still supported 
drooping and rotting paper. 

" Look here, Sam," said the girl, as she struck 
another match, "there's a lot of lovers have writ 
their letters here, and I know most of 'em well 
enough ; but who are these ? " 

She held up the flickering light to another emblem 
of hearts and arrow. It closely resembled Mr. 
Brokenshire's recent record in the outer chamber ; 
but it differed in the particulars of the date and 
one pair of initials. The record was nearly a year 
old. 

" Cuss the little cat ! " said Sam. " But you know 
that story well enough, Lyddy. I never hid it." 

" I didn't know it had gone so far as that." 

" In a sort of a way it had. She but there, I 
can't speak against women. I liked her well enough 
till she gave up liking me. 'Twas the money that 
t'other chap had. And he hid behind his money, 
so she couldn't get a true sight of him. And 
now she finds 'twas all a bait, for he only dangled 



36 THE HAVEN 

it, and then he drew it in again when he'd caught 
her." 

" Mr. Harris wasn't the man to let her handle his 
money." 

(< No ; and she've found that out by now. She's 
poorer than she'd have been with me, for all her 
husband's cash and the shop, too. I don't wish 
her no worse than she's got, though she did treat 
me bad. She wasn't worthy to black your shoes 
at her best ; and the luckiest thing that ever hap- 
pened to me was when she chucked me." 

" Perhaps 'twill be your turn to pay us women 
back for what she did to you, and fling me off, 
Samuel ? " 

" If I do, Lyddy, let 'em fling me off the top 
of Berry Head. You'll be my wife afore this time 
next year, or I don't know myself." 

"You were the first I ever loved, and you'll be 
the last," she said. 

" And you was the first I ever loved with my 
whole heart and soul I swear that afore the Lord. 
Her cruel love of money always did make me savage 
with Sarah. And oft we quarrelled over it" 

" We've never had a word, Sam." 

" And never shall. Never was a pair built for each 
other like us." 

The dusk had drawn down, and now Brokenshire 
helped Lydia from the ruin and prepared to see her 
home. 

" I wish I could ask you in to supper," she said ; 
" but father wouldn't allow that." 

" I reckon not. The first time him and me sits 
at a table together 'twill be at mine by the look 
of it." 

"You'll show him you're different to what he 
thinks." 

Sam lit his pipe and did not answer. 

4 Are you going to sea to-night ? " she asked. 



THE HAVEN 37 

" Ess ; if you peep from your chicket window half 
afore midnight you'll see the 'Night Hawk' and 
another hard-working boat, perhaps, taking the tide. 
Venus be chasing the moon just now, and the wind's 
set for good and all in the north-east by the looks 
of it." 

" How's Mr. Trust ? " 

" He's broke his finger, and has to bide home. 
Who do 'e think be coming in his place ? Tumble- 
down Dick ! " 

"What's the good of that bunch of rags in a 
boat ? " 

" More than you'd think. I know all about Dick. 
'Tisn't the first time he's been to sea nor the first 
time he's been in the * Night Hawk/ for that matter. 
There's nothing that man don't know behind his dirt 
and chatter. He's taught me a lot worth remem- 
bering, Lyddy." 

" Better that you don't tell father so. Dick Var- 
v.ell is the only man I ever saw who makes him 
right down angry. He says 'tis a shameful thing 
that such as Dick are allowed to cumber the quay 
and lead young men astray." 

" I know. But let them that be angry with him 
answer him. 'Tis because they've got nothing to 
reply to his arguments that they be angry." 

" Father says he's worse than one of the radical 
newspapers ; but I'm not with father about such 
things. I thought a lot when there was talk about 
me going for a school teacher." 

" You come and teach me ; and the sooner the 
better." 

(( Don't be caught with Varwell, any way," 
she said. " Be warned against that ; for the 
justices would judge you by the company you 
kept, Sam." 

" I shan't be catched at all. And more wouldn't 
Varwell, if he didn't choose. That man arranges 



3 8 THE HAVEN 

to go into klink just as cool as me and you will 
arrange to go for a honeymoon afore long." 

" Home is very different without poor mother. 
And 'twill be worse still when Ned's gone, and 
there's nothing but Aunt Emma and the horrors 
from morning till night." 

" I'll soon take you out of it. Be Ned pulling a 
very long face about sailing ? " 

" Yes, he can't bear the thought of it." 

" Poor toad ! He'll never make a fisherman ; and 
it shows your father's foolishness to think he will. 
When I was nine year old, hosses wouldn't have kept 
me out of my father's boat ; and though I saw him 
drowned and only got saved by the skin of my teeth, 
when the ' Warrior ' was sunk off Portland, I was 
to sea again inside a month. But Ned a good 
ploughboy spoiled ; that's what he'll be." 

Then they reached the door of Lydia's home, and 
as Mrs. Michelmore happened to be standing at it 
talking to a postman, Sam's farewell was brief. A 
letter had arrived from Mr. Major. He was working 
off Lundy Island and making good catches. He 
intended to be back, however, in the course of ten 
days ; and he directed that Ned should be equipped 
and ready to accompany him when next he went 
to sea. 

" I was hopeful as the North Channel would keep 
father a good bit yet," confessed the boy to Lydia. 
" Any way, he promised me that my first cruise 
shouldn't be round land, and that it should not last 
above three days." 

" You'll surely like it so well as the other boys 
after you're used to it," declared his sister ; but he 
shook his head mournfully. 

"I'm a land bird, and always shall be," he told 
her. 

" Think of Deborah," said Lydia, laughing. She 
already saw the dawn of a romance between Ned 



THE HAVEN 39 

and Mr. Honeywill's small daughter, and took some 
delight in it. 

But even the thought of Deborah could not cheer 
her brother at this season. 

" Deb hates the sea worse than what I do," he 
declared. 



CHAPTER V 

BERRY FARM stood half a mile from the cliff edge 
west of Berry Head, and only a pathway wound 
between its outlying acres and the scarps and crags 
of limestone that here hemmed in earth and lifted it 
two hundred feet above ocean. The land was good, 
though Nicholas Honeywill, after the manner of his 
class, found little to praise in it. He did not lack 
intelligence, yet clung to ancestral nonsense about 
sea blights that cankered the corn, and sea winds 
that brought anbury upon the root crops. But 
despite these and other disasters, he fared well, and 
the mutton he raised on Berry Head was second 
only to that bred upon the mightier promontory of 
Portland. 

To-day, under conditions of rare atmospheric 
clarity, Portland itself loomed like a low cloud far 
to seaward of Torbay. It was just visible to those 
who knew where to look for it, and Tom Honeywill 
pointed it out now to his sister. The children were 
making holiday in honour of their friend, Ned Major, 
because it was the last holiday that he would get 
for many a day. Deborah differed at every point 
from her brother, for he was fat and rosy, and she 
was thin and brown. Her bright eyes, quick move- 
ments, pretty little wistful face set in rough black 
hair, and thin brown hands, always put Ned in mind 
of a marmoset monkey that he had once seen. He 

40 



THE HAVEN 41 

was frankly attached to her, and she liked him 
dearly too, and admired his opinions and his person. 
They were both silent children, and both took 
pleasure in the same simple amusements ; but 
Tommy belonged to a different and more usual 
order. He declared a contempt for girls and his 
sister did not escape it. He tolerated her for her 
usefulness, but that Ned could like her and enjoy 
her company, without any advantage gleaned there- 
from, lowered young Major not a little in the esti- 
mation of Deborah's brother. 

There were manly things, however, that Ned could 
do much better than Tommy, and one was the 
climbing of cliffs. In this branch of sport Ned had 
won a well-deserved fame, and to-day he proposed to 
practise it for the delight of Deborah. Nor did he 
forget the admiration that must fall to him as a 
reward. It was fortunate for the sea-gulls that Ned's 
sentimental nature stood between him and substantial 
thefts. To their nests he reached in a way that 
few boys dared ; but he seldom did more than 
study the homes of the great birds, while they 
stormed and shrieked round his head. When 
Deborah wanted an egg, she had it ; but she shared 
his dislike of death, even in the potential form of 
bird-nesting, and Tommy, while his respect for Ned 
was not withheld, when he scaled this ledge or 
reached that crevice by exercise of mysterious skill, 
felt nothing but contempt for the climber if he re- 
turned empty-handed to safety again. 

Where the limestone in great sloping scales and 
shields, like the armour of a dragon, overlaps upon 
the sides of the headland and slopes with increasing 
precipitation to the sea, these children had their 
playground. Among crags and precipices, amid the 
abrupt undulations of the land, was a wild region 
shattered and broken by steps of stone and brakes 
of furze and blackthorn. Here teasels, tree mallow, 



42 THE HAVEN 

hounds-tongue, and the everlasting pea, sprang and 
trailed in tangled rivalry. Sappy crucifers, with 
glaucous foliage and violet blossoms, rose beside 
them ; the meadow-rue throve in the gorse, and rarer 
plants might also be found by seeing eyes. Ned and 
his friends shared this playground with the rabbits 
and raptorial birds. Sometimes the young folk 
played upon the downs, and sometimes in the em- 
brasures of those virgin forts lifted about the Head in 
hasty terror, when Napoleon's shadow fell upon our 
shores. The cliffs chimed and rang with the mewing 
and laughter of countless gulls. The same birds that 
waddled with easy, fearless insolence in the harbour 
offal, and fought, almost under the fishermen's feet, 
for orts and abominations, here swept and wheeled 
and hovered, like sea spirits, about the uplifted 
boundaries of earth. Their grey feathers and white 
flashed against the sunny sky ; and they were wild 
and wonderful again scavengers no more, but lovely, 
fearful things, crying at the sight of man and 
trembling for their nests and nurseries. 

The limestone is fair to see at Berry Head. Its 
giddy turrets and needles, its broken faces, scarps, 
and counterscarps, girt with the transparent green of 
a calm sea or the flashing foam of wind-driven waves, 
are a home and haunt of light. On sunny days light 
indeed makes revel among them, leaps and twinkles 
in the networks of delicate clefts, weaves patterns on 
the flat faces of the crags, touches their jags and 
angles with silver fire at noon, and floods them with 
rosy gold when the day wanes. The light leaps 
upward by stone stairways and falls by dark but- 
tresses and acclivities to twinkle out again beneath. 
It loses itself among the hollow places, then flashes 
forth once more in those dazzling lines and splashes 
that sunshine on marble alone can scatter. Light 
inspires these great cliffs with apparent levity. They 
seem to float, and the foam fringes wrapped about 



THE HAVEN 43 

them suggest a movement in the advancing earth 
rather than impulse of tide or wind on water. Each 
rock and lifted mass fades in the sun haze seaward 
and dreams out of the foam, as though wrought of 
some imponderable, pearly staple, lifted from beneath 
the ocean and ready to shake out sails and soar. 
Painted in all colours, through the metals to the 
gems, these great cliff faces shine from the glow of 
the fire opal and the glitter of rosy quartz to the 
blue of the turquoise, where sea light is thrown up 
into some shadowy cavern. Iron flushes the stone in 
veins and percolations, and the plants that love the 
lime make great splendour : of flame yellow in the 
stonecrops ; of rose, where the thrift hangs in clumps 
and cushions to the edge of dizzy slopes ; of silver 
and purple when sea campion and sea lavender star 
the steep places ; of chrysoprase, where the samphire 
lolls from nook and niche. Unnumbered lesser things 
mottle the cliffs largely with their minute life, and 
lichens ivory and ebony, grey and gold wash the 
rocks with faint or rich colours to gladden the sun- 
light that seeks them and reveals their beauty. 

Sovereign among those earth giants, that clasp 
hands to make the girdle of Devon, is marble., The 
chalk can tell no such rainbow story ; the genial 
sandstone varies little ; the dark foreheads of the 
northern cliffs speak less of beauty than of power ; 
the lime alone is always fair in colour and splendid in 
form. No sunrise wakens, no gloaming fades upon it, 
but some fresh wonder of light is blazoned here, or 
some new mystery of darkness shadowed. 

Now Ned began to climb and Tommy followed 
him. Surefooted and sure-eyed the taller boy went 
out along a broken ledge, jumped to a lower one and 
then scrambled round a projecting point on to the 
ragged face of the cliffs. Deborah, from a station 
above, watched him, but she felt no fear for Ned. 
Her heart beat quicker only on her brother's account. 



44 THE HAVEN 

Ned made the rocks look as easy as a flight of stairs, 
but Tommy's methods were very different, and by 
his caution and tardy advance ; by his set lips and 
frowning face, he indicated a danger that the other 
boy's skill concealed. 

" For goodness* sake come back, Tom ! " cried his 
sister. " You know mother's told you a hundred 
times to keep off the cliffs." 

Tom did not answer, but climbed on, and presently 
very hot and very short of breath he stood beside 
his friend on a little platform, with a stark drop of a 
hundred feet beneath it, and a furrowed penthouse of 
the rocks above. The gulls whirled round them, and 
their outcry rose to a crescendo of despair, for here 
were the nests, and Ned now pointed out how the 
birds had brought scurvy grass, stonecrops and other 
green things, and worked this material into the usual 
fabric of twigs and feathers. Great eggs, mottled 
with all tones of chocolate colour, reposed here, and 
Tommy opened an old tobacco-tin, full of cotton wool, 
that he had brought for the purpose. He wanted to 
empty the three nests now within their reach, and 
declared that his mother liked nothing so well as a 
sea-gull's egg ' to her breakfast ' ; but Ned doubted 
this and, in any case, as the leader of the expedition, 
refused such wholesale robbery. 

" You may take one, and no more," he said. 

" And one for Deborah," said Tommy. 

" No ; she don't like 'em." 

A solitary egg was picked up and packed in the 
tobacco-tin ; then Ned started back the way that he 
had come. The return journey was more difficult 
and, much against his will, the sturdier boy had to 
shout for aid at one awkward place. 

" I be just a thought too short to reach this here 
rock ! " he cried. " You'd best to come back, Ned, 
and give me a hand." 

Ned returned, and soon the climbers rejoined 



THE HAVEN 45 

Deborah. She praised them both and begged them 
to do no more ; but there was more to do. Tommy 
wanted some jackdaws' eggs, and Ned believed that 
he knew the eyrie of a hawk in the cliffs to westward. 
They climbed and incurred very real risks until they 
were weary ; then Ned found another sea-gull's nest, 
in a spot so easily reached that he decided Deborah 
herself must come to see it. She started without 
fear, but found herself giddy and miserable in a 
moment. With some difficulty Ned got her to the 
nest, and then her thoughts ran so entirely upon the 
problem of how she was to get back again, that she 
took no pleasure or interest in the discovery. Finally, 
she shut her eyes tightly, left her feet and hands 
entirely to the disposal of the boys and so, panting 
and distressed, returned to the head of the cliff 
again. 

Tommy was triumphant, and Ned concerned. 

" That'll larn you to know what climbing means ! " 
said Deborah's brother. " You think 'tis so easy, but 
now you see how me and Ned risk our necks every 
time we go down over, and make nought of it." 

The girl had indeed perceived this fact, and it was 
unfortunate, for she could no longer watch either of 
them without acute concern. Ned strove to comfort 
her. As they ate their meal in a shadow of the rocks, 
where Mr. Honeywill's field ended and the cliffs 
began, young Major declared that climbing, like 
immunity from sea-sickness, was an accident. 

" Some would never turn a hair, even if they was 
standing where them gulls be," he said ; " and some 
won't go down a flight of stairs without holding the 
banisters." 

They ate and planned new adventures, while 
Deborah begged them to do no more. 

" You've frightened the poor birds enough," she 
said ; " and you've frightened me too." 

Where they sat, among the budding tussocks of 



46 THE HAVEN 

sea-pinks, the birds still swooped about them and 
great gulls circled above and below, crying danger 
from lemon-coloured bills. They fluttered in a cloud, 
and turned and shot this way and that. They 
balanced on pinnacles and turrets, then furled their 
wings, and so stood to make proper fmials for the 
wild architecture of the cliffs ; they flung themselves 
off again into the air and slid away seaward, to float 
together and star the green water below with little 
galaxies of brightness. 

Ned and Deborah had a game that they played. 
Sometimes, sitting on a marble throne together, 
among the wrinkles on the cliff's dawn-facing brow, 
they pretended to be king and queen of the sea-gulls. 
Here they reigned very happily, sent the birds on 
flying messages to land and ocean, and claimed all 
as subjects, from the mightiest adult to the least 
downy squab just out of the egg. 

The childish amusement shadowed life, though 
they knew it not ; for these distrustful things of air 
and water judged them and their intrusion even as 
they, presently, would judge those world forces of 
time, chance, change that the days to come must 
bring. The fate that might threaten their little airy 
castle, the shadow that might fall upon their highest 
hope, would win from their young hearts anon even 
such cries as these of the great fowls before their 
harmless advent. Unwinged, untrusted, strange to 
the bird people and their city, the children sat here 
not seldom together, thought kindly of the wild 
things that feared them, and would have done them 
nothing but good had they known how. 

Tommy, struck with an inspiration, declared 
presently that the day was done and that he meant 
to go home. Deborah doubted, but Ned, the least 
suspicious of boys, did not think again upon the 
matter. Tommy therefore marched off, hid behind 
a clump of furze until the other children were out of 



THE HAVEN 47 

sight, and then returned to the nests that Ned had 
found in the morning. The adventure of climbing 
to them alone, and helping himself with greater 
generosity than his friend had permitted, had flashed 
upon Tom as a grand possibility ; and now he 
carried it out. Complete success attended the 
achievement. He packed four eggs into his tobacco 
tins, broke two more, sucked one, and caught an 
infant gull. Sport of this varied description appealed 
much to Tommy. Indeed he decided that in future 
he would come to the cliffs alone. Then he returned 
to Berry Farm as the sun began to set, and narrated 
his adventures at great length to his mother. Not 
until darkness fell did Deborah come home to find 
Tom trying to make his unhappy young gull eat 
Indian corn. 

Deborah was tearful, and in her mind dwelt a 
parting that had been very sad to her. She and Ned 
stopped upon the cliffs until the sun sank and the 
wind sank with him. Under the glow of fading 
light they looked at the sea and marked a boat or 
two almost becalmed on their homeward way. Ned 
knowing the cut of the * Jack and Lydia/ saw that 
she was among the rest. 

"Tis the third," he said. " They'm all 'round 
land ' boats back from the North Channel. And the 
next time father sails, I've got to go too." 

She tried to cheer him, and in some measure 
succeeded ; but then, when he seemed happier, she 
herself grew miserable, and it became his task to 
comfort her. 

Under the gloaming they turned towards home. 
The day had been one of almost summer heat, and 
while yet the sky burnt red along the purple haze 
of earth, a thin mist crept over their path where 
it crossed green meadows in a coomb. Beyond 
these rose Berry Farm and its elm trees, all dark 
against the ruddy sky. Under dying glimmer of 



48 THE HAVEN 

twilight seven white ducks were working in a row 
down the meadow. The grassland was dark as 
wine, where it sloped upward to a high hedge that 
divided it from the light of the sky. The ducks, 
sunk to uncertain splashes of chill grey, waddled 
onwards, feeding upon the slimy life that evening 
and moisture had tempted forth. None interfered 
with her neighbours ; and when they reached the 
limits of the pasture, they turned almost simul- 
taneously, quacked, and set forth down the field 
again. In the dim hedgerow, beside which the boy 
and girl presently! moved, primroses lifted small wan 
faces ; the stars came out above them, and both felt 
their young hearts full. 

" Oh, the beautiful land, and all the creatures ! " 
sighed Ned. 

" The sea be full of creatures too," she said. 

" But so different. The cows and sheep and even 
they ducks there they be all warm and trust to the 
air like us. But the sea things I hate 'em. They 
glaze at you out of their dead eyes ; and when they'm 
alive they'm still as cold as death ; and yet I don't 
like to see 'em die, for nobody takes the trouble to 
kill 'em when they're dragged up." 

" You can trust your father to do the right thing." 

" Yes, I can but " 

Presently he uttered a wish that made her laugh. 

"If only Tom could get into my skin and I could 
get in his ! " 

The time and place were come for them to part, 
yet Ned dreamed not of any formal leave-taking. 
He had never shaken hands with Deborah in his 
life, and intended no such ceremony at this moment. 
But she was a girl ; Ned was her hero ; her emotions 
suddenly quickened before this most sorrowful 
departure and farewell. She had wit to feel that it 
meant a great change in Ned's life ; she had heart 
enough to know that the change would also be felt 



THE HAVEN 49 

very keenly by her. Now, before he could exclaim 
or protest, the little thing kissed him. He felt her 
sunbonnet touch his ears, and her lips upon his cheek. 

" Well, I never ! " cried the boy and stood, stupid, 
staring and hot, under the darkness. 

But she was gone. 

" I'll come up over first minute that I come back, 
to tell you all the news ! " he shouted after her ; but 
she did not answer. His heart throbbed ; he watched 
her flutter away, like a soft night moth, through the 
dimpsy light, and then he went home. Once or 
twice he stood still upon the road ; once or twice he 
stumbled. His thoughts were bigger, stranger, more 
wonderful than any thoughts that had ever wandered 
through his young brains until that hour. 



CHAPTER VI 

A LARGE patience with life distinguished John Major. 
He expected little from it and took good fortune and 
bad in simple belief that both belonged to his 
destiny, and that the proportions were perfectly 
mingled by Providence. His faith in religion was 
absolute, and he regulated his existence by the 
precepts of Christianity to the best of his power. He 
was a Christian man who followed his direction 
logically, so far as life allowed it, and he made 
no demur when others succeeded and prospered 
far better, in proportion as they conformed to 
the actual practices of social intercourse and the 
actual code of human relations in business and 
affairs. 

Perhaps the man had but one ambition : that his 
son should carry on the family tradition at sea and 
preserve the unbroken line of the Majors as Brixham 
fishermen. This, in that it was seemly and reason- 
able, he expected to happen. Of his boy he knew 
little, save that he was gentle and kindly and 
exceedingly like his mother. That no mighty desire 
to join the boat existed in Ned was, of course, clear 
to his father, and that he took an active interest in 
the land, John Major also perceived. He had always 
preferred to work on their half-acre of earth, than 

ut off to help paint or polish the * Jack and Lydia ' ; 

e liked better the flowers than the fishes, and 

So 



THE HAVEN 51 

showed on land an inquiring and active spirit that 
the sea only served to dull. But the significance of 
these facts was but dimly perceived by the father, 
and if he marked it, an explanation always occurred 
to him. The sea for Ned meant work, and he knew 
that ; the land was only play. Naturally, therefore, 
with a human instinct proper to youth still unbroken, 
he turned to the pleasant things and shunned those 
that must stand for real life and its labours and 
cares. 

" If he'd been a farmer's boy, now," explained John 
to Emma Michelmore, " I lay my life he'd have hated 
the sight of a plough, and only been happy messing 
about with the boats ; but because he knows that 
the boats for him mean work and not play, he turns 
to the things of the soil. 'Tis the usual contrariness 
of human nature, and I set no store by it. He's not 
afraid of work and knows the meaning of duty, as 
every Christian boy did ought to know at fourteen, 
if his parents have done their duty by him." 

The truth, however, lay deeper than John had a 
mind to plumb. It belonged to his boy's character : 
it arose out of far-off hereditary causes and a personal 
variation from the old stock. Perhaps in the an- 
cestry of his mother a very good answer to the 
mystery might have been found ; but the material 
cause mattered little : the fact remained that Ned's 
bent was the earth, and that not merely did he feel 
no desire toward the sea, but experienced an active 
aversion from it. Whether environment might 
modify this aversion ; whether his future life might 
presently strike down the barriers of personal feeling 
and instinct, now standing between Ned Major and 
his predestined calling, remained to be seen. At 
present the prospect dulled his sensibility and made 
his heart heavy. He faced the inevitable in a spirit 
sad for such a young boy. Seldom has a youth set 
out upon life with so little gladness and such in- 



52 THE HAVEN 

different ambition. The thing that his father sup- 
posed to be an end of life, he regarded as a means 
only. But that was his secret and he hid it close. 
He hesitated even to think of it himself, for something 
whispered to Ned that to harbour this ultimate hope 
was disloyal to his father ; yet no young heart can 
beat at all without some guiding star. A goal was 
as vital to Ned as meat and drink ; and his hope 
took shape of the good red earth, seen dimly and afar 
after dreary years of tossing upon the sea. Even in 
that remote ambition lurked grief, because this boy 
had a measure of sensitive feeling handed to him 
from his mother's race ; and when he thought of 
some homestead in the distant hills far beyond 
reach of the sound or sight of any sea he suffered. 
John Major was the first great reality of life to Ned. 
He had sense already to understand, and power to 
appreciate a little of his father's high nature. A 
better man he knew not, or a man more different 
from the rest. He hastened often to the company 
of his father after some chance hour in the harbour. 

There was something fearful in the presence of 
fishermen to Ned during his early boyhood. As 
they came off the boats, climbed the steps and stood 
again on shore, they looked to him less than men. 
The sea moulded them hideously. They were scarred 
and stained and seared with the salt of life and the 
tribulations and toils of it. Their hands were not 
like human hands. They had been cut to pieces by 
wet ropes, and were often distorted and maimed. 
Here was a thumb lopped off and here a finger. 
The arms of the men ended in hairy claws rather 
than hands ; they looked metamorphosed to the 
likeness of the crabs and crayfish that came out of 
the sea. Their faces were terrible to him different 
to the faces of the men on the land. Some looked 
as though hacked out of wood ; some seemed stamped 
from grey iron ; some were grotesque and hairy as 



THE HAVEN 53 

the cocoanut faces in the shop windows. Stained 
and written with all manner of stories that he could 
not read, they passed along. Wounds and scars 
of wounds were upon them. Some had lost an eye, 
some had broken a nose, some went lame, many 
were lashed and torn to the bone with strange 
gashes that forked like lightning upon their fore- 
heads and their cheeks. They were terrible when 
they swore and cursed, and poured filthy language 
out of their lips ; and they were more terrible when 
they laughed and jested about things he could not 
understand, yet guessed must be of ill repute. 
Dreadful in reality, demonian in his dreams, were 
the fishermen to Ned at the time of his callow 
youth. But that stage passed. They frightened 
him no more. He knew that they were brave and 
nearly always kind. 

Ned hungered for manliness as much as any other 
natural boy ; yet the manliness of these men seemed 
to him only brutishness. The very reek and stench 
of them, as they came filthy and unshorn off the sea, 
was not so dreadful to his mind as their eyes 
heavy, soulless, like the horse that ploughed or the 
sheep that grazed. Dogs had more answering light 
in the faces of them than these weary, wave-beaten 
creatures. They lumbered ashore, shouldered their 
way upon the quay, sold their fish, and vanished to 
their dens, their females, and their cubs on the hills 
round about. The splendour of it and the irony of 
it the underlying facts, that this dull race of strong 
men was justifying existence finely, yet toiling for 
too small a reward, and winning from life far less 
than their desert these things Ned knew not. He 
had the clear eye of the child, but had no art to 
glean the inside meaning of what he saw so perfectly, 
so painfully from outside. His senses received the 
spectacle of the fisherman's life, and his heart was 
sickened. He saw Arthur Michelmore and William 



54 THE HAVEN 

Gilberd, his father's hands, and he marked that they 
were like the rest. Their life had made them ugly, 
and their speech, when John Major was not by to 
overhear it, resembled the others. And Harry 
Michelmore, the boy now turned man, whose place 
Ned was soon to take in the boat he showed the 
stamp of the sea also. Already he was furrowed and 
weather-beaten ; already he rolled in his walk and 
went heavily in his great sea-boots, and filled his 
speech with cursing and coarseness. 

Thus, at fourteen, Ned was unusually thoughtful ; 
and his ultimate hopes accordingly suffered some 
clouding of regret, because there was in him a 
suspicion that his father's life should be good enough 
and high enough for him also. His father showed 
how a man might go to sea and keep his body as 
clean as his soul ; his father wished him to be a 
fisherman, and who was Ned to feel any desire 
contrary to his father's desire, or hunger for a life 
other than his father's life ? His green spirit debated 
these things with misery ; and sometimes a sort of 
dim thankfulness brooded in it, because his father 
had decided, and that for him remained only to obey. 
He knew of boys who had run away to sea ; but never 
of one who had run away from sea, or even thought 
of such a thing. He, indeed, had thought of it, but his 
mind was not built in that pattern ; he felt no desire 
toward adventures; his instinct was to obey those 
set in authority over him. So now he turned his face 
to the sea, and made good resolutions and trusted 
the larger wisdom of his father in this matter. 
Happily the first crisis of his life left him without 
much immediate possibility of more suffering before 
the second. His mother's death had taxed his powers 
of sustaining grief to the uttermost, and before that 
paramount shock, when it returned to him in its full 
significance fitfully, even the sea looked a lesser evil. 

And now the day had come, and somewhat self- 



THE HAVEN 55 

conscious in his new clothes, Ned walked beside his 
father to the harbour at six o'clock, while the slate 
roofs of his home flashed back the first fires of 
morning, and a riotous east wind tore ragged foam- 
ridges along the bay. He passed resolutely forward, 
but spoke not. He was full of a great determination 
to quit himself like a man. He did not look at the 
sea ; but he remembered that his father had said at 
breakfast that they should find something more than 
a trawling breeze outside the bay. The remark was 
intended for Mrs. Michelmore, but he heard it. 

Ned glanced up at King William's statue as he 
came on to the quay, and its bulbous eyes and 
melancholy beak did nothing to hearten him. It 
seemed that the grotesque stone was taking a gloomy 
farewell, that a prediction of woe emanated from its 
mournful countenance. He stood still a moment and 
stared at it, as though the white monster was a new 
thing to him blown hither by the east wind in the 
night. 

The harbour was alive ; the wharves were awake ; 
and their tympany of noises, familiar enough to Ned, 
yet struck his ear with a new meaning to-day. The 
breezes met him here cold enough and sweet, from 
their journey through the harbour heads. A bustle 
and confusion reigned on every side. Twenty big 
dandy ketches were just away for the journey round 
the Land's End to St. George's Channel, and men 
put off to them with loaves and food and parcels and 
fat canvas kit-bags that held their clothes. Carts 
rolled and rattled along the streets laden with gear. 
Here came a trawler's beam, to be thrown with a 
mighty splash into the water, and then towed to the 
boat that needed it ; here were a pair of irons, here 
a length of trawl-warp. Sails were coming down 
from the barking yards, bright with new ochre ; boxes 
and crates clattered to the quay on handcarts ; from 
the boats in harbour came thud of hammers, clank 



56 THE HAVEN 

of chains, and rattle of blocks. Men shouted and 
bawled ; boys yelled and raced about ; dogs were 
busy as the busiest, noisy as the noisiest ; and above 
all, wheeling everywhere, with heads turning this way 
and that, the grey gulls and the brown gulls floated 
serene, bright-eyed, to mew and utter their dry, 
chuckling laughter. In harbour the air was drenched 
with the odour of tar and twine ; light glittered and 
rioted over the harmony of bright mud, with the red 
hulls reposing upon it ; over the bright amber- 
coloured masts that sprang dense as a giant reed-bed 
above them. A hazy mist of cordage shone here, 
and the naked poles were capped with little golden 
weather-vanes, from which, like flowers, flashed scraps 
of fluttering bunting, scarlet and yellow and green. 

In blue jerseys and russet overalls in sea colour 
and sail colour the fishermen were clad. They 
stumped and hurried about so full of their own 
business that not one had leisure to give Ned a 
welcome or to wish him well. 

Dick Varwell, who, among his virtues, was an early 
riser, already occupied his usual place on a swinging 
chain between two stone pillars at the quay. He was 
smoking and watching other men work. 

" Ah ! Ned so you're off, my bold hero. Well " 
he winked out at the wild sea "good luck to 
your breakfast ! " 

" Tis terrible rough eh ? " asked the boy. 

" Get along with you ! " cried Michelmore, who 
stood by the steps waiting for the rest of the crew, 
" no more than a good trawling breeze wi' a reef in." 

John Major, who had stopped to talk to a salesman, 
next came along. He answered Varwell's salutation 
with the slightest nod ; yet the father in him made 
his heart a little warmer when Tumbledown Dick 
spoke kindly of Ned and declared that he had never 
seen a finer youngster set out to sea. 

" Worthy to carry on the name," he said, " and I 



THE HAVEN 57 

hope there'll be Majors to sail out of Brixham as long 
as there be fishing-boats to carry 'em." 

" Thank you, thank you. 'Tis a kind speech sure 
enough," answered John, doubtfully gazing at the 
man who uttered it. Then he went down to the 
boat, wondering how it came about that this worth- 
less creature, swinging on the chain above, could speak 
so good a thing to him. At any rate no other had 
thought to say as much. 

" 'Tis a lesson that we can't keep good out of 
anybody," he confided to Gilberd, who sat beside him 
while the younger men rowed. " Good will creep 
into the human heart. For why ? It be built to 
hold it, and 'tis no more to be kept out of us than 
bolts and bars can keep out light." 

William Gilberd, however, shook his head. 

"Tis because he had the craft to say what he 
k no wed would please a father's ear," he answered. 
" Nought but his cunning. There ban't more good 
hid in Tumbledown Dick than marrow in a dry 
bone." 



CHAPTER VII 

OUT went the boat, grinding the green water under 
her bow as she rounded the harbour head and rolled 
into the lop of a running sea. Past the ice-house, 
where white, frozen bars climbed aloft on an endless 
stairway, past the slips, where a growing boat thrust 
her yellow ribs aloft at water's brink, they rowed ; 
then Ned set his teeth to see the great foam-headed 
waves racing furiously at them out of the bay beyond. 
They felt the drag of the tide before they reached the 
' Jack and Lydia.' It seemed to pull the boat's nose 
down into the water ; but she came up again with a 
leap like a cork, and the slap of the spray only struck 
sun-fire from the tarpaulins of Arthur and Harry 
Michelmore, where they tugged at the oars. 

No friendly message from the sea came to Ned ; 
hidden in his heart, yet not hidden from his father's 
eye, was fear. He fought it, and supposed that none 
had seen ; but his furtive eye told the tale to the man 
at the helm. John Major was merciful, yet he smarted 
before the sight. 

In twenty minutes, and not without a struggle, the 
boat had reached the trawler and was soon dragged 
aboard. Here seemed a strong fortress against the 
waves compared with the cockleshell that had brought 
him hither, and Ned set to work with prompt obedi- 
ence. He knew the name of everything, and showed 
a promise of smartness as yet beyond the power of 

58 



THE HAVEN 59 

his staggering land-legs to execute. But the fisher- 
men were transformed, and he could not fail to mark 
it. They, who rolled like porpoises ashore and seemed 
scarcely able to drag their mighty sea-boots along the 
quays or up the winding stairways, were agile and 
swift with a rolling deck under their feet. They 
hopped about like monkeys, worked magically, 
brought life and order into the ropes and rattling 
spars. They had eyes in the backs of their heads for 
swinging booms ; they had ten hands apiece ; they 
anticipated every order, toiled together, each at his 
proper task, like the wheels and cranks of an engine. 
Ned was bade to go aft and watch Harry, whose place 
afloat henceforward he would take. 

The stiff north-easter hummed overhead, and Mr. 
Major's craft rolled to her gunwales in the following 
seas ; but five minutes had not passed when all was 
changed. At a touch the dead timber, screaming 
ropes, and flapping canvas were tuned to work. The 
' Jack and Lydia ' cast off her moorings, made sail, 
steadied to the wind, and woke. She lifted like a 
giant to the first billow, and Ned felt a sort of fearful 
exultation at the mighty leap of her as she heeled 
over, crashed into the seas, and ground them foaming 
beneath her. 

When the water came a foot deep into the lee 
scuppers, Ned looked at his father, who was at the 
helm ; but this bubbling, hissing rush of sea over the 
sloping decks seemed a matter of no moment to any- 
body. The 'Jack and Lydia' held on with a welter 
of white at her bowsprit and a flood of water racing 
upon her deck far into the stormy bay. Then she 
tacked, and Arthur Michelmore roared to Ned to 
mind the main boom as it swung across over his cap. 
It touched him, but no more, and his father was con- 
cerned, and bade him keep awake. Then began the 
long, slow beat to the fishing-grounds, and the trawler 
pitched heavily with her head as near the wind as she 



60 THE HAVEN 

could sail. Ned endured the ordeal well, and Michel- 
more the younger felt a secret disappointment that 
his successor had paid no toll. 

" You'll never be sick," said William Gilberd ; " you 
can swear to that. 'Tis a very fair dusting for a 
beginner, and you're Major all through. No Major 
was ever knowed to be sick at sea eh, John ? " 

The skipper substantiated this fact. 

" I didn't fear for him," he said. " He'll eat his 
meat, come presently, along with the best of us." 

Now the boat went staggering on with a dry deck. 
She rose well to the sea on this tack, and Ned felt 
her lift like a feather over the mighty rollers. Above, 
the sails scarcely fluttered, thanks to the hand at the 
helm, but his father's skill was wasted on Ned as yet. 
He seemed to do nothing but hold the tiller. 

William, however, drew his attention to what 
steering on this tack really meant. Ned was invited 
to take the helm a moment, and the 'Jack and 
Lydia ' instantly behaved like a wilful steed weakly 
guided. 

Ned set to work to peel potatoes presently and, by 
ill fortune, at a sudden staggering fall of the trawler's 
nose into a trough, slipped his knife and cut himself 
to the bone. It was his first sharp pang that day, 
but his father doctored the hand, stopped the blood 
flow, and explained that Stockholm tar might be 
trusted as a sure and safe medicament in all such 
cases. His hand bound up, Ned took the knife again 
and went on with greater care. 

His wound ached less than his heart. Far away 
astern, the white water danced in a waving, spouting 
girdle about the shore, and soon the cliffs sank lower ; 
while the red earth above them faded away. The 
ploughed lands signalled the last things that were 
good to Ned, and dimmed to grey shadows, their 
sanguine colour all sucked out by the magic of the 
wind. The hard silver mist of the north-easter shut 



THE HAVEN 61 

down on the hills and valleys, and the solid things 
of his life were gone with the shore. There remained 
to him bare existence on the hateful sea. 

So he felt then. 

To the ' Scruff ' for ray was the * Jack and 
Lydia* bound. This submarine bank of shell and 
shingle extends east and west from Portland Bill to 
the south of Berry Head. Mr. Major knew his marks 
as no man knew them, and while to Ned the land 
seemed huddled to a mere colourless ghost, peering 
fitfully, cloud-like, over the caps of the near waves, 
his father saw much more upon it and could tell 
where a tree clump, dwarfed now to a dot, fell into 
line with a lesser speck a church tower on a cliff. 
He knew to a mile when the broken ground of the 
'Scruff' stretched beneath the bottom of his boat, 
though his imagination had perhaps never pictured 
that strange, crepuscular world itself; he knew the 
ridge as well as he knew the way home ; but his 
mind's eye had not seen his trawl-beam ploughing up 
that kingdom, or his net frightening before it or 
capturing the mingled population thereof. 

The men had been making ready for a while, 
and Ned, having set the potatoes on a little stove in 
the cabin, v/ent forward to talk with Mr. Gilberd, 
who was mending a small hole in the net. 

"The new net be nearly ready, I hope," said 
William. "This here one's very near played out. 
It have seen eight months' work, and that be out 
of the common long a very good life for a net." 

" The new one's waiting at home," answered Ned. 

Then John Major cried, " Down trawl, boys ! " and 
the business of getting the great beam overboard in 
a rough sea began. 

Net stood aside to watch the younger Michelmore's 
part in this operation. Then he saw his chance and 
hastened unasked to lend a hand with the after 
bridle. His father, well pleased, shouted this order 



62 THE HAVEN 

and that. The sails flapped and thundered ; a wave 
broke over the boat. All was riot and confusion for 
a few moments. Two great ropes, the fore and after 
bridles, ! run twenty fathoms from the irons of the trawl- 
net and meet at the main mighty cable a hundred 
and twenty fathoms long that holds all. Now the 
great trawl-beam, nearly as long as the 'Jack and 
Lydia ' herself, crashed into the sea, and Ned tumbled 
over the steam winch forward and barked his right 
shin from knee to ankle. The fleeting agony of 
it made him reel, but he picked himself up, and 
the men, not knowing that he had hurt himself, 
laughed at the mishap. He knew that his father 
was watching all the time, so he laughed also, grinned 
with set teeth to hide his agony, and toiled away at 
the warp as it came crawling like a snake round the 
winch from below. The net was sent after the 
beam ; the after iron of the great mass hove up astern 
for a moment ; then the whole sank slowly, the 
bridles were swallowed up and the warp strained on 
the bulwark. 

Then a great change seemed to come over the sea 
and the boat. Ned fancied that it had grown 
calmer as the pace moderated. The ketch skimmed 
along no more with lee scuppers awash, but steadied 
down, like a horse to the harrow. Another reef was 
taken in and the * Jack and Lydia/ at trawling pace, 
began to drag her net over the ' Scruff.' Then came 
a time of rest. 

" No tack for an hour," said John Major. " You'd 
best turn in, Arthur, and get forty winks." 

He left the helm, which Gilberd took. Arthur 
Michelmore, who had an abscess in an aching tooth, 
went to his bunk ; the skipper lighted his pipe and 
watched Harry and Ned make dinner ready. 

" Now let's see how much your aunt have taught 
you," he said to his son. 

A scrag of mutton and some onions were added to 



THE HAVEN 63 

the potatoes, and Harry showed Ned the lockers, 
the place for salt and pepper, tea and bread. All 
drank tea in this boat, for the skipper was a fanatic 
upon the subject of liquor, and more than one good 
man had left the ' Jack and Lydia ' because of it. 
Michelmore and Gilberd, however, had been with 
Mr. Major three years. Both professed the strongest 
opinions, and Arthur Michelmore practised them 
also ; but Mr. Gilberd, in the profound seclusion of 
his home, permitted himself an occasional glass of 
spirits or pint of beer. 

Presently John Major climbed on deck with Harry, 
and Ned was left in the silence of the cabin. He 
mixed the stew and boiled a kettle, while Arthur 
Michelmore snored in the bunk above him. He too 
went on deck presently, and watched the warp break- 
ing out of the waves with a beard of foam for ever 
dripping from it. He listened to the noise it made as 
it ripped out of the rolling seas. There was something 
dreary and monotonous in the sound, and it added 
to his low spirits. The sea had spoken no friendly 
word to him that day, and he hated it as he had 
never hated it before. He felt greater peace of mind 
and body below, out of the sight and sound of it; 
therefore, down he went again to his cooking. His 
leg tormented him and now, looking at the injury, 
he found a raw red scrape from his knee half-way 
to the ankle, and a stocking blood-soaked. The sight 
depressed him still further. He decided that he must 
put on another stocking. He fetched down his 
canvas kit-bag and was opening it, when a sudden 
and violent lurch of the boat threw him head first 
at the stove. Ned thrust foward his hand to save 
his face, and burnt himself all over the palm of it. 
Then he fell back on the settle, throbbing and 
vibrating with pain and misery in body and in mind. 
He felt all the misfortunes of the world on his young 
shoulders. Wild, frantic thoughts seized him ; 



64 THE HAVEN 

fleeting indignation and even ferocity woke in his 
mild spirit. All things combined to torture him ; 
he was baffled at each turn ; even his resolution to 
behave like a man was crushed. The cursed boat 
and the cursed sea between them had knocked it 
out of him. For a few minutes Ned lost his nerve, 
and longed to rush on deck and fling himself into 
the water and have done with it. He cowered on the 
settle and wept and wrung his tormented hand. 

" 'Twill be the death of me," he sobbed to himself, 
" and the sooner the better." 

Overhead feet tramped, and Arthur still snored in 
his bunk. Then a man darkened the ladder, and 
Ned strove to recover his self-possession. He was 
glad that Harry Michelmore and not his father had 
found him in this plight. Now the boy of seventeen 
comforted the boy of fourteen, yet not without some 
secret satisfaction at Ned's trouble. 

" Ban't all beer and skittles eh ? You'll get your 
sea-legs come presently. Burned too ? Dear, dear ! 
Poor toad ; you're catching it proper for a first day. 
Grease be the stuff for a burn. Things always come 
three to a time at sea ; but 'tis bad luck as you've 
gone and done for t'other hand, for now you'm good 
for nothing." 

Ned, however, declared that his hurts were not 
very great. Harry doctored him, and then told him 
to get out of the way on to a bunk while he served 
out the dinner. 

The cabin was a marvel of much in little. Every 
hole and corner had something stowed in it, and all 
things were in their places. There were four bunks 
two on each side. The cooking-stove stood forward, 
a clock ticked on the bulkhead. 

Now young Michelmore looked at it, and said that 
dinner-time was come. The trawler had been on one 
tack for an hour, and all hands went on deck to shift 
the trawl. This elaborate business was watched by 



THE HAVEN 65 

Ned, with all its apparent hopeless confusion of 
shifting sails and tangled ropes. Then the steady 
drag and lop began again, and all went below to 
dinner, save Harry Michelmore, who took the helm. 
Land was out of sight ; one or two other trawlers 
worked five miles distant ; a full-rigged ship with 
white sails went down Channel, snowy and grand 
against the grey. 

They ate, and Gilberd praised Ned's cooking ; but 
he could not take this commendation to himself. 

" Twas Harry did most," he declared. " 1 was 
thro wed against the stove, and I've cut my leg too, 
and, when Harry came below, I was down on my 
luck, and had forgot all about the dinner for a bit." 

They ate and drank ; then Arthur and William 
went on deck, and Mr. Major was left with his son. 

" Twas the will of Providence, Ned, as you should 
sail for your first voyage in heavy weather. And so, 
as any landsman would, you've been knocked about 
a bit. But 'tis quite likely that you'll be months at 
sea afore you scratch yourself again. 'Twill all come 
natural as the shore presently. I see signs that 
you'll be very handy afore long. And, of course, it 
must be so, for the sea's in your blood for genera- 
tions. 'Twill be your second nature afore a year's 
out, because our line be born to sea as surely as men 
in general be born to sorrow." 

Ned's heart told him that the sea and sorrow were 
one ; but he did not say so. 

" I'm going to do my level best at it, father," he 
answered, " though 'twill never come as second nature 
to me, I'm afraid, because I'm so terrible fond of the 
land and the ways of working it." 

But John Major shook his head. 

"That feeling will fade out of you," he declared. 
" You don't know nought about the sea yet, and 
when you do, you'll find 'tis far more to you than 
ever the shore can be, because of the race you spring 

5 



66 THE HAVEN 

from. I've seed it work in other seafaring families. 
Now and then there comes a sport, as takes to land 
work I grant you that ; but they be rare, and you 
ain't that sort, though you may think 'tis so for the 
moment. I'll hear you talk about the land when you 
know the sea, and not sooner. And don't you think 
we're always in rough water. Tis smooth oftener 
than not, and I've no fault to find with storms and 
losses, for they come in their appointed times and 
for the Lord's purpose, to remind us that life be life 
and not all fatness and prosperity. It ban't God 
A'mighty's purpose to make us out of conceit with 
Eternity, as of course we should be if this life was all 
we could wish to make it." 

Ned felt the truth of these reflections. He had 
never been less out of conceit with Eternity in his 
own short life than during the past few hours. One 
thing was absolutely certain, and the Bible explicitly 
stated it : that there would be no more sea in heaven. 
Ned knew, however, that to his parent, this assurance 
was the most distressing within the covers of the 
Word. 



CHAPTER VIII 

AFTER noon the wind moderated, the sun that had 
retired behind a dark haze broke out again, and 
threw a fret of gold upon the foam crests and of 
silver where the wind roughened the shadowed 
troughs of the waves. Ned watched Harry get up 
steam in the little winch-engine forward, because 
the time was come for bringing in the trawl. The 
result of five hours' dredging would now be known. 
But recovering the great beam and net was a 
weightier matter than casting them forth. 

At four o'clock the 'Jack and Lydia ' dropped 
her foresail, came up nose to wind, and began to 
wind in the trawl warp. Clink clink clink went 
the winch, and yard by yard the rope came home 
to the rise and fall of the boat. Then, when to Ned 
it seemed that a mile of warp must have run aboard, 
wound off the winch and slipped like a glittering 
snake below, the forehead of the trawl hove up 
through the green sea, and the beam soon appeared 
white and glimmering with its image broken by 
the water. Tackle was waiting on the fore-halyard 
block, and as all hands bore upon it a merry clucking 
reminded Ned of the yard at Berry Farm, and the 
busy hens crowding and feeding there. Then from 
the water flashed the fore iron of the trawl, and the 
after iron was visible a minute later. They had 
gone into the sea rusty red ; they emerged glittering 

67 



68 THE HAVEN 

like silver from the long hours of polishing on the 
shell and sand of the ' Scruff.' 

The beam was made fast ; beneath, the reticula- 
tions of the net shimmered black through the 
swinging foam and water, and sank away under it. 
The Michelmores and Gilberd donned tarpaulin 
aprons lashed with yarn about their middles. Then 
they ranged along the bulwark, and began to get 
in the net. 

Foot by foot it came glimmering out of the deep, 
bediamonded with running rows of drops, shining 
with rags and tags of red and green seaweed. 

Mr. Major looked over the side and shook his 
head. 

" Terrible dirty," he declared. " This ground wants 
cleaning cruel. Gaff the polk line, Ned, and help 
rig the bag rope." 

Quickly the cod of the net rose gunwale high, 
like an enormous dripping sponge of matted weeds. 
Here and there in the midst the white belly of a 
fish gleamed silvery, jammed against the meshes. 
Then the bulging mass was dragged aboard ; Gilberd 
threw off the cod line, and a downpour of mingled 
matter, dead and living, showered, slithered, spread, 
and streamed every way on the deck. 

To Ned the things that belonged to humanity 
rather than the sea came first in interest. He 
shuddered at all the strange and gasping, creeping 
and crawling life that spread here. He was sorry 
for the creatures torn from the depths to die, because 
he hated death with the vague hate of youth, and 
his heart was naturally pitiful ; but the man-of-war's 
fire bar, the scrubbing brush, the tarpaulin hat, the 
cake of soap, the boot, the clay pipe these familiar 
things interested him. They belonged to the light, 
and they returned to the air again somehow richer 
and stranger for their sojourn under sea. The prey 
of the trawl declared itself; a legion of little brown 



THE HAVEN 69 

and yellow crabs, like ants from a nest, began to 
thrust out of the mass and hurry sideways off in 
every direction. Horrors crawled here also strange, 
nightmare things without faces, whose eyes were 
perched on stalks, whose ways and motions seemed 
awful to the mind that could not picture their 
propriety in their own environment. 

Ned noted the monsters, and cried out that they 
were hideous ; but his father had wit to laugh at him. 

" You'd look just so hideous to them, if you was 
at the bottom of the sea," he said. 

Spider crabs and hermit crabs red and green and 
grey were here, with starfish, shells, eggs, and a 
swarm of useful things as yet too small to kill. A 
few fine plaice, brown and scarlet spotted, went into 
the first fish-box, and proved the pick of the venture. 
Then the men sorted two score of ray from the 
writhing heap. A heavy hake followed, and there 
emerged also some fluke, dabs, and rock ling. 
Hundreds of immature flat fish were shovelled up 
in the seaweed and returned to the sea. 

Ned could not help much, but he used his injured 
hands as best he might to rescue the little crabs 
that had crawled to all manner of corners. Many 
had been crushed to death under the feet of the 
men, and the boy's sentimentality tortured him at 
the sight. He saved many small creatures, and his 
father watched him but made no comment. 

William Gilberd offered Ned an uncommon spiny 
shell as a keepsake and memento of his first day at 
sea ; and this he took for Deborah. Yet, as William 
scraped the pulpy mass of life out for him, the boy 
felt sorry that his pleasure in making the gift was 
marred by this death of the shell's first possessor. 
He strove the harder to rescue other lives, and when 
none was looking he dropped overboard two gigantic 
prawns which Arthur Michelmore had thrown to him 
from the heap. 



70 THE HAVEN 

But many of the frail, stranded creatures were 
dead before they returned to their element, and many 
had perished in their long drag over the bottom ; 
and now the gulls, that came in a squalling storm 
after the boat and hurtled astern with wild flutter of 
wings, fed and fought over all this food. 

John Major pointed out the fact to Ned. 

" No call to mourn such a lot of killing," he said. 
"'Tis all quite proper and the Lord's work. Every 
creature lives on life, and life comes out of death. 
All you eat has been alive once, whether 'tis bread, 
or green stuff, or butcher's meat, or a bit of fish. 
And the gulls have got to be fed by their Maker so 
well as every one else. He breeds the worm for the 
fish and the fish for the bird. I've thought these 
things out, you may be sure, Ned. You might fancy 
there was a lot of waste of life and a cruel deal of 
needless death made by the trawl as it works and 
grinds the sea bottom down under ; but if you think 
that, you think wrong. The trawl brings food to 
countless scores of nameless creatures made for His 
own good reason by the Maker. The trawl tills up 
the bottom of the sea, like the plough turns up earth 
and lets in the frost to sweeten and the rain to make 
fat. All this the trawl does, and the more the 
fishing, the better the fish, as I always will hold to. 
So you can learn from me that us, in the ' Jack and 
Lydia,' be doing our proper share of the world's 
work, and slaying only what the Lord wants to be 
slayed, and catching only what the Lord wants to 
be catched." 

While his father preached, Gilberd and Harry 
laughed at Ned and made the boat shipshape ; 
Arthur set about cleaning the fish, and the gulls, 
on sun-rosy wings, came closer for their familiar 
meal, to justify John Major's argument that without 
death life cannot be. 

Presently the trawl went down once more and was 



THE HAVEN 71 

ploughing the 'Scruff' again as the sun sank upon 
his wide road to the west. 

With darkness the wind died awhile and the 
fishermen knew that it might rest until dawn ; but 
for once the untiring thing took little rest. It sprang 
up before midnight, shifted a point or two southerly, 
and blew as hard as ever. 

Ned turned in and slept soundly enough until the 
sea grew rough again and wakened him. Then he 
rose and got into his garments as best he could, 
while Gilberd and Michelmore descended to their 
sleep. 

The boy went on deck to share the morning watch 
with his father. A waning moon hung red over the 
cloud-banks on the horizon ; the dawn wind came 
chill. Lights glimmered and swung round about 
where other boats were working, and Ned was glad 
to see familiar stars above him ; but they paled 
presently and dayspring whitened along the east. 
It promised well, then seemed to die again, smothered 
by clouds. The day hesitated to declare itself and 
Mr. Major, giving Ned the tiller, went below to look 
at the weather-glass. 

When he returned on deck, father and son talked 
together of the dead and of the eternal life to which 
both believed that she had gone. The husband won 
a real but rare consolation in the picture of Lydia 
Major for ever at rest and for ever in joy ; but Ned 
could not imagine it, and his own sorrow surged up 
in the still morning hour, dominated his mind, and 
rose greater than the picture of his mother's ceaseless 
happiness. The man, however, possessed a quality 
of faith great enough to see his wife in bliss and 
to keep that vision undimmed by any personal sense 
of the awful void in his own days. The logic of 
faith seldom attains any height so perfect. But since 
her happiness had ever been his first thought and 
care, there remained no room in his mind for sadness 



72 THE HAVEN 

at his own plight, while he reflected on her absolute 
escape from suffering and her new state of perfection 
beyond the mind of man to conceive. Such was the 
power of his belief a sort of faith once common 
when Crusaders fought and martyrs perished ; but 
now winnowed away by the fierce winds of know- 
ledge, whittled thin by the knife of proof. John 
Major's spirit was an anachronism and belonged to 
a period obsolescent in the history of man's mind. 
But the faith of his fathers still lived and moved and 
regulated his being, though the faith of his children 
was destined to be that dwarfcr futility descended 
from the past giant : that feeble, emasculated rule 
feigned to regulate the conduct of Christendom 
to-day : that unreal shadow of a substance vanished 
for ever, and lifeless now as the perished fresco of 
a mediaeval sanctity. 

Presently Ned gave his father something of acute 
mundane interest to think about. Day waxed ; the 
trawler's lights were extinguished ; the time ap- 
proached for emptying the net again. 

Then young Major asked John what he thought of 
Sam Brokenshire. 

" I don't think of him," answered the elder. " I'm 
sorry to the heart that his father ever got such a 
son. He deserved a better son, so far as man might 
say so. There's a kink in his strand, and I hope 
life may still set it right. He's young, and that's the 
only excuse I can bring up for him." 

" I believe he's cruel fond of our Lydia," said 
Ned. 

"Good powers! What do you tell me? I'd 
sooner there ! Who ever heard of such a foolish 
thing? And my Lydia her mother's daughter ? " 

" I seed them about a lot here and there ; and I 
axed Lyddy what she thought of him, and she 
seemed a good bit niffed regular cross she was 
and told me to mind my own business." 



THE HAVEN 73 

" Young Brokenshire's a very fine man to the eye 
the sort to take but what be a child like you 
to talk about such things ? " 

" I'm sure 'tis natural for him to like Lydia," de- 
clared the boy. " Anybody might." 

" Say no more," replied his father. " There's some 
things you remind me of. I'm both her parents to 
my girl from now. She must trust me and 
and But " 

This shadowy trouble occupied Mr. Major's 
thoughts and silenced him. He knew that his 
daughter was fair and would leave him presently ; 
but he forgot the passage of the years and continued 
to regard that certain parting as a thing still remote. 
Now the shock of this news put the suitor out of his 
reckoning for a moment. Brokenshire, in any case, 
was not to be thought of as a husband for Lydia ; 
but a husband was to be thought of. A husband 
would soon come knocking at the door. His wife 
had gone ; must another of the household vanish too ? 
The man sighed to himself. 

" A babby girl yesterday and wife-old wife-old 
now ban't possible surely ! " 

He spoke aloud to himself and Ned heard 
him. 

Then accident thrust the intruding thought of 
Brokenshire himself on the father's mind. Morning 
found the ' Jack and Lydia ' off the Start ; and as 
day lifted a cutter-rigged ketch on her trawl ap- 
peared five miles nearer the shore. 

Gilberd and Arthur Michelmore were now on deck 
to get in the net, and it was William who marked 
the boat. 

"Brokenshire's 'Night Hawk' terrible near the 
limits as usual," he said. 

" And she was on t'other side of 'em a few hours 
back along when 'twas dark," answered Michelmore. 
" You'll find him picking his way very clever among 



74 THE HAVEN 

the crab- pots come most moonless nights, I reckon. 
Five and six pounds at a trawl he've got many a time 
since Christmas." 

Ned looked at his father and the latter spoke. 

" Of the two hundred and odd boats to Brixham, 
there ban't above half-a-dozen that poaches perhaps 
not so many since Davy Mogg went to prison ; for 
he've never gone there since. But still they've got 
to shut the Bay against honest men and punish all 
for a handful." 

He looked across at the poacher, now sailing 
innocently outside the protected area, and shook his 
head. 

The ' Night Hawk's ' foresail fell. 

"Ah," said Michelmore, "she'll draw it in free 
water ; but where did she drop it ? " 

" Tumbledown Dick's sailed along with Sam for 
a few trips lately," said Ned. " Lydia told me that 
he had, because Billy Trust be laid by. I never 
knowed as Dick Varwell could do anything." 

" Quite the contrary," answered Gilberd ; " he can 
do everything. The cleverness oozes out of him ; 
but he hates work like he hates soap and water. 
However, he's made a good few pounds the last 
fortnight." 

" There'll be trouble for them all with the crabbers 
afore long," declared Arthur Michelmore. " They'm 
getting terrible restive and rash over it at Torcross 
and round about. They'll board Sam some dark 
night, and then there'll be broken heads." 

" Us'll have made perhaps four pounds for two 
trawls by the look of it," said Gilberd ; " and that rip 
over there will have got half as much again for one. 
Just the night for him 'twas." 

Major marked the envy in the other's voice. 

" Ill-gotten gains carry a high rate of interest, 
William," he said. 

"Turbot and sole be turbot and sole notwith- 



THE HAVEN 75 

standing," murmured Mr. Gilberd, but not for his 
skipper's ear. 

The ' Jack and Lydia ' having steam, was quicker 
with her trawl than Brokenshire's boat. The last 
haul was made, and William's estimate of the pro- 
bable market value confirmed by Mr. Major. But 
John never prophesied, nor was it wise, as none afloat 
could guess what fish had gone into the harbour before 
them. Now Ned was homeward bound, and as they 
came back into the bay, the * Night Hawk,' in full 
sail with foam flying and the decks awash, caught the 
bigger ketch and passed her. 

" How he do carry on, that man ! " said young 
Michelmore. " He'll shipwreck his boat some day. 
Yes, there's Tumbledown Dick aboard of her sure 
enough." 

Ragged as a moulting sea-gull, with his pipe in his 
mouth and his legs drawn up out of the water, sat 
Varwell aft beside the steersman. He waved a hand 
to Ned as the c Night Hawk ' forged past and 
hastened to her anchorage. She was at moorings 
under the breakwater before the ' Jack and Lydia ' 
arrived, but some delay followed aboard her, and so 
it chanced that the two dinghies were launched 
simultaneously, and soon drove oar to oar, as they 
were paddled in between the harbour heads. Here 
there fell a collision and shock not between the 
boats, but the opinions of those that came to land 
in them. 

Ned, however, had no thoughts for anything but 
home. Brixham never looked so fair to him before. 
He saw the lines of slant roofs glittering under the 
sun, all veiled in mist of morning fires that softened 
many an outline. Clothes on drying lines fluttered 
like flags and made merry movement aloft. The 
world of little windows glistened tier on tier to the 
sky's edge and the water's edge. In harbour the 
boats with flapping sails sent great streaks and 



76 THE HAVEN 

streamers of orange light over the water. Ned noted 
the familiar names and found a magic and meaning 
in them never guessed till now. The ' Sweet Home ' 
how much that meant to-day ; the ' Faithful,' the 
' Provider,' the ' Courage,' the ' Bread-Winner/ the 
'Try It,' the 'Pilgrim/ the 'Smiling Morn,' the 
' Antelope,' the ' Brown Mouse,' the ' Victorious '- 
these had all arrived, and others foamed behind, soon 
to return. A risen sun glowed on the land's wel- 
coming face for Ned ; it flushed and warmed all 
things, his heart among the rest. The conditions 
were almost identical with those in which he had 
departed four-and-twenty hours before ; but his spirit 
transformed them. He looked afar while light 
wakened on the distant hills ; he marked the green 
of larches and a verdant bloom where corn was 
breaking the earth. And presently, upon the quay, 
he saw the small shape of Deborah Honeywill, 
standing by King William's statue. He had forgotten 
her promise to come down and meet him when he 
returned ; but she had not forgotten ; and here she 
was a little drab thing in a blue sun-bonnet at the 
foot of the lofty lump of marble. 

Meanwhile, thanks to the exuberance of Tumble- 
down Dick, words passed between the boats. 

" Good morning to you, Mr. Major ! " he shouted. 
" No doubt you're a bit astonished to find me among 
the wonders of the deep. I hope you haven't come 
empty-handed. Me and Sam here have done wonder- 
ful well all high-priced fish, strange to say ! And 
only in one haul ! " 

John Major did not reply, but Gilberd made answer. 

" How's that? " he asked. " 'Tis different to what 
we've got." 

Dick shrugged his shoulders. 

" No doubt the Lord looks after His own," he said 
a reply that proved too much for the skipper of the 
' Jack and Lydia.' 



THE HAVEN 77 

" You Godless rascal ! " he shouted out " And you 
so ready to take the Name in vain. Will nought lift 
you to better manners and better ways ? If you'd 
open your mouth less and your Bible more, there 
might be hope even for you ; but you talk treason on 
every subject and look into the truth of none. You 
sit in the sun at the street corner, or go drinking with 
any who'll offer you a drink, and say what God do 
and what He don't do, arid what He ought to do and 
ought not to do, and think your drunken dreams are 
wisdom and your loose opinions sense. Even when 
you work, 'tis not honest work, for well you know 
where you were trawling last night." 

Mr. Varwell, in no way annoyed, laughed and 
retorted ; but Sam Brokenshire held his peace, for 
Lydia's father was the last person he desired to 
quarrel with at this season. 

"We can't all think alike, master," said Dick. 
" Many men, many opinions ; but charity's a sheet 
anchor none can sail without. That's where you 
ban't in it with me and Sam here. Lord bless your 
life, that charitable we are that when we ran into 
some crabbers' pots right out in mid-ocean, you 
might say did we cuss and cut all adrift ? Not us ; 
we stopped and cleared though we lost an hour by it. 
'No doubt the poor fool's got a wife and children/ 
said Sam here. ' We won't hurt him/ That's live 
religion, Mister Major, and I'm sure you'd have done 
no less. But there ! " concluded Dick as the boat's 
nose bumped the steps, "of course what you don't 
know about religion ban't worth knowing. Only this 
you mightn't know, perhaps : that 'tis a matter of 
fit, like clothes. If this sort or that sort fits your 
mind, well and good ; if not, you might as well go 
naked for it. You might just as well offer a plough- 
man this here oar for a spade as thrust your pattern 
of prayers upon a chap that can't stomach 'em." 

" You'll live to know wiser, I hope, for your own 



78 THE HAVEN 

sake," answered the elder man. " And as for charity, 
every rascal nowadays hides under the cloak of it. 
There's only one truth and there's only one true 
religion that teaches it ; 'tis us that have got to bend 
to that and not fling it over and seek a new thing, 
because the truth bruises our stiff backs at the first. 
And, good or evil, right well you know, Richard 
Varwell, that your life's a bad argument for your 
opinions and a shame to the nation as well." 

The men landed. Dick and the owner of the 
* Night Hawk ' carried a basket of fine soles and 
some heavy turbot ashore ; the crew of John Major's 
boat began flinging ray on to the half-way platform 
of the steps, where stood a man to receive them. 



CHAPTER IX 

A GRIM, blood-bespattered man with a pronged fork, 
stabbed one by one, or two by two, the great ray, 
and hurled them aloft over his head on to the quay. 
Here they lay in a slithering pink and white mass, 
and presently Ned and Harry set to work to arrange 
them. The choicer fish were also spread, and John 
Major's catch came to auction. A dozen buyers 
assembled about it ; a shambling salesman one Mr. 
Memery appeared, book in hand. He was bearded, 
grizzled, shabby and round-shouldered. He cast a 
lack-lustre eye upon the fish. Then he opened a 
corner of his mouth, but not the whole of it, and 
croaked out his news like a corncrake. 

" Here you are ! Here you are six dozen fine 
ray very fine ray ! What price for these fine 
ray ? " 

The sale proceeded like magic, for despite his dim 
eyes and drooping head, the salesman marked the 
buyers. Ned marvelled, for he saw no exchange of 
signs and heard no sound save the croaking of Mr. 
Memery ; but that practised worthy knew by the 
movement of a finger, the turn of a head, the lift of 
an eyebrow when his price had gone up. 

"One pound for these fine ray one pound one 
pound, one pound one pound for these ray ! One 
pound, two ; one, three ; one, four one four, one 
four for these ray. Where's Tim Blake ? He'd not 

79 






8o THE HAVEN 

mess about at this money. One, four ; one, four ; 
one pound five for these ray." 

A woman watching the sale, without personal 
interest in it, sighed in an abstract way and addressed 
anybody who might listen. 

" Ah ! rays be going down something cruel. 
They'll never fetch what they did no more," she 
said. 

Mr. Gilberd, who was at her elbow, made answer : 

" No, ma'am ; and more won't nothing else out of 
the sea ever fetch what it did. Everything's going 
to the dogs along of Free Trade." 

Meantime Mr. Memery grated on. 

" One pound, six ; one pound, six ; one, six for 
these fine ray ; going for one, six ; one, six, six ; one, 
six, six, for these ray ; going for one, six, six ; going 
for one, six, six; going going last chance going 
for one, six, six gone! Truscott." 

Ned stared. Mr. Truscott had been standing on 
the pavement several yards away from the ring of 
buyers ; yet by some mysterious telegraphy he had 
communicated with this bent, dim-eyed corncrake of 
a man, who conducted the sale. Now the purchaser 
came forward and affixed his note to the ray, so that 
the giant of the catch reposed amidst the corpses 
of his lesser kindred with the respected name of 
' Truscott ' printed across a scarlet label upon his 
white abdomen. Boxes of pounded ice appeared and 
the ray soon vanished to make room for others. 

The 'Jack and Lydia's' better fish were next 
disposed of, and fetched fair prices. All had been 
sold in five minutes, and Ned learned that his first 
trip afloat represented in money the sum of four 
pounds, five shillings, and sixpence. It seemed an 
enormous figure to him and only sank a little before 
the fact that Sam Brokenshire's soles and turbot 
brought nearly three pounds more. Another sales- 
man disposed of these, and Ned watched and heard 



THE HAVEN 81 

some jokes, and saw a few men frown and scowl at 
the successful trawlers. Mr. Varwell was more than 
a match for them, however ; and Ned perceived that 
at market, the question was not where a fish had 
come from, but its value. 

"You see," said Tumbledown Dick, winking at 
Ned, when his father had passed beyond hearing, 
"the harvest of the sole can be gathered a thought 
nearer than Lundy, if Providence is on a poor fisher- 
man's side ! " 

And then, peeping from behind the men, where 
she had waited long, Ned saw Deborah and shouldered 
to her and rolled with a fine sea gait along the quay 
at her side. 

She cried out at his black face and injured hands ; 
but he said it was the steam winch that had made 
him so dirty, and declared that his wounds, though 
deep and tremendous, were in a fair way to heal 
again. She consoled him and made much of him. 
A few older sailor boys joked at the sight of the 
ingenuous Ned and a girl ; but he did not note or 
hear them. Deborah had brought him a little bunch 
of primroses, and the scent of them was heaven in 
the lad's nostrils. 

" I never knowed afore how sweet primrosen could 
smell," declared he. 

Lydia greeted her brother with congratulations, 
while his aunt, gloomily rejoicing that her predictions 
of disaster had been fulfilled and the historic ill- 
fortune of the family maintained, dressed his wounded 
hands and doubted whether the burned one would 
ever heal again. Two days of rest now awaited Ned ; 
for, in consideration of his injuries, Mr. Major let him 
off certain necessary work to be done on the ' Jack 
and Lydia ' before she sailed again. 

A long afternoon the boy spent at Berry Farm, 
and Tom Honeywill felt the spirit of envy scorch 
him as Ned told of his adventures on the sea. The 



82 THE HAVEN 

children walked together in the lanes, and young 
Major related his experiences and the lore gleaned 
from his father and the men. 

" Trawling be good for fishing so Mr. Gilberd 
says. The more you scratch up the bottom of the 
sea, the more food there is for the fish, and the more 
they come, and the bigger they grow. 'Tis like 
ploughing land. And another terrible interesting 
thing is that the poor fish have their ways and ideas 
just the same as us. Some be foolish and some be 
clever." 

" I didn't know as they'd got any brains at all," 
said Deborah. 

" More didn't I ; but they have some of 'em. A 
dog-fish haven't, and a hake haven't, but some of 
they flat-fish be cruel clever. A sole's so cunning as 
a hawk, if you'll believe it ! " 

Tom laughed. 

" You won't make game of me with that stuff, so 
you needn't think to," he declared. 

" Wish I may die if it ban't true ! " answered the 
other earnestly. " You'd never guess it to look at 
'em for their faces be silly, sure enough along of 
them having both eyes on one side ; but they take 
an awful deal of catching terrible driving fish they 
be, and they'll nose and wriggle into every corner of 
the cod, and fight to their dying hour to escape. 
Even the little young soles us brought up would 
squirm off into every hole and corner, and work 
along deck faster than the crabs, to find their way 
back to sea." 

" I hope you put 'em back," said Deborah. 

" Scores of 'em, Deb. The men laughed at me ; 
but if I seed a creature anywheres about fighting for 
its life, I couldn't help picking it up and heaving it 
back. Some I was most feared to touch, for there 
be terrible queer, evil-looking things come up from 
the 'Scruff.' Still, though they was horrid to look 



THE HAVEN 83 

at, you could see very clear as they all liked being 
alive, and wanted to keep alive terrible bad. And, 
as father said, if they looked nasty to us, what must 
we have looked to them ? " 

" I lay you didn't drag up nothing finer than them 
things at the * Sailor's Knot,' " declared Tom. " But, 
all the same, next time you go, I do hope as you'll 
fetch back some of they beasts for me. I should 
like to have 'em stuck up all over the walls in my 
sleeping-place." 

" You'd never sleep a wink for 'em," answered Ned ; 
but the other boy scoffed at this prophecy. 

" You'm so soft," he answered. " You couldn't 
even go to sea as 'twas, without knocking yourself 
about and wounding yourself, as if you was a girl. 
If I'd gone, I lay I shouldn't have chopped my fingers 
or fallen against the stove." 

" Perhaps you wouldn't," answered Ned mildly ; 
but Deborah could not stand this, and she rated Tom 
with some warmth. 

"You silly, fat thing!" she cried. "As if you'd 
have done half so well as Ned ! You know what 
you are. Why, in them great waves, you'd have been 
rolling about that ill that you'd have been no more 
use than a pig. And Ned never turned a hair, and 
he even cooked the dinner. I'd like to have seen 
you do that!" 

Tom sobered down. 

"'Tis a gert gift not to be sick," he admitted; 
"and I'll grant you I should have been pretty queer 
at the start ; but I'd have very soon got over it, and 
if Ned have lamed to cook, so could I." 

" No doubt you could," answered the other boy, in 
his usual peace-loving fashion. 

Then he vouchsafed more knowledge. 

" When Venus be chasing the moon and the tide's 
running then is the properest time for dabs, so 
Arthur Michelmore says. And, for his part, he 



84 THE HAVEN 

declares that he'd sooner have a good large dab even 
than a sole or brill. That's his taste ; and Gilberd 
says he's for a plaice afore any fish that ever came 
out of the sea ; and his wife says the same. Flat- 
fish in general run in veins under the water, and 
if you have the luck to fetch the trawl into a 
vein, you'll catch more fish in an hour than you 
might catch in a tide another time. But we didn't 
hit no vein. 'Tis just good luck, and don't often 
happen." 

" I wish terrible often as your father would let me 
go for a voyage just once," burst out Tom. " 'Twould 
be a very gert thing for me, and I'd be so handy 
as I knew how. I be sick for my life of the land, 
and if there's one thing I hate more than another 
'tis shedding out manure over the turnip seed, and 
tramping back and forward on the fields, and looking 
out at the sea, same as I've been doing of late." 

" Curious," answered the other. " And here's me, 
as would a lot sooner look out at the sea than be 
on it any day of the week." 

" I've got a mighty fine lot of gulls' eggs, however," 
continued Tom, " and I had a pretty fair adventure 
under the Head, for a masterpiece of a bird largest 
ever I seed corned so close in his rage that he 
flipped my hat off with his wing ! I seed the glare 
in his eye, and he chittered at me proper, and used 
the worst bird-language that he knowed. And if 
I'd been flustered, down I should have gone and 
been dashed to a million pieces without doubt. But 
I was a match for him. ' You've took my cap,' I 
says to him, ' so be damned if I won't take all your 
eggs ! ' And I did, and then crawled back and left 
him in a proper tear." 

" Twas a very wrong thing," replied Ned, " and if 
you understood about the gulls and their usefulness 
you wouldn't have gone for to do it." 

" The eggs be useful for my mother's breaksis, so 



THE HAVEN 85 

I shall go on getting 'em till they'm all hard set," 
retorted Tom. 

Then Ned told about the ways of the birds at 
sea. 

" Clever ban't the word for them," he declared. 
'* They bide patient in the water till the cod of the 
net's aboard ; then they know to the minute when 
'tis their turn, and they rise up and hang aloft ready 
to pounce upon the stuff. And sometimes you'll 
see 'em righting over the fish, head and tail, like 
dragons." 

" A cruel fine sight, and I'd give all I've got in 
the world to see such things," sighed Tom. 



CHAPTER X 

THUNDER rain fell heavily, and a past storm still 
growled over the sea ; yet weather gleams were 
breaking out of the west, and soon the grey lightened 
to silver, and the silver fretted away and showed a 
tattered scrap of sky. 

"At last!" said Mr. Brokenshire. "There's blue 
enough to make a sunbonnet for 'e now, my dinky 
dear, so we'd best to get homeward afore it comes 
again." 

A thunderstorm had broken and soaked the way 
by which Lydia Major and her lover passed an hour 
before. In the deep woods by Dart they had secretly 
wandered ; and Lydia felt a little frightened, yet 
fluttered with joy, at these stolen hours spent in 
Sam's company ; while the fisherman was tri- 
umphant. 

Now they tramped homeward, and talked of a 
great thing to be done when next the 'Jack and 
Lydia 1 came from sea. 

" Father's going round land pretty soon," ex- 
plained Lydia. " He'll be away for a month 
very likely if the North Channel's still fishing 
well." 

"But I can't wait no more till I hear his 
answer." 

" I know his answer," said the girl gloomily. 

" No, you don't. I'll promise anything and per- 
86 



THE HAVEN 87 

form it, too. He's got no fair ground against 
me." 

Start Bay." 

"All nonsense. What's Start Bay against a 
hundred pound in the bank and my own boat?" 

" Is it yours?" 

"Honour bright. There's not a rope mortgaged. 
On Sunday afternoon I shall fetch along, and my 
tongue's been a good friend to me afore now, and I 
hope to God it will be again. D'you know what 
stands to me for more hope than aught else ? You, 
Lyddy. Can a big-hearted man like your father say 
' no ' to you ? Never ! " 

But she knew more of Mr. Major's views than her 
lover, and felt very far from sanguine. 

"Tis all duty with father, remember. He loves 
me very well, and thinks a lot of me, and does many 
and many a kind, fatherly thing. And I'm more 
and more to him since my mother died, though he 
doesn't hold with many of the things I learned at 
school, and says the world's a school that will soon 
show me how much I learned wrong. But he's got 
very hard and fast ideas about young men, and 'tis 
no good pretending that he's friendly to you, for he 
isn't, Sam." 

" I'll make him." 

She shook her head, and presently, without the 
radius of Brixham windows, they parted, in a 
sequestered place. Lydia returned home, and Broken- 
shire, who proposed to visit Start Bay that night, 
went down to the harbour. He had been doing well, 
and fortune fooled him into a little carelessness, for 
after many satisfactory trips there came now a 
failure. 

Trawling at two in the morning off Tor Cross with 
lights out, the * Night Hawk ' fouled some crab pots, 
and did a great deal of mischief in a very few 
minutes. Then, two nights later, Sam went to the 



88 THE HAVEN 

Bay again, and had the misfortune to be found by a 
boat that was on the look out for him. 

The weather failed him. It changed unexpectedly, 
and a breeze that should have held all night did no 
such thing ; and between two and three o'clock in 
the morning a waning moon revealed the ' Night 
Hawk ' as a black silhouette on a bright sea nearly 
two miles nearer the shore than she had any business 
to be. Long grey beaches stretched northerly, and 
within them a sheet of silver marked Slapton Ley 
and the sedges whispering there ; while beyond rose 
up the thickening heads of elm-trees and swelled a 
line of low hills. 

Sam and his mates, Billy Trust and Saul Mutter, 
viewed this unexpected change with some con- 
cern. The poachers were about to get home their 
trawl and work to sea as fast as the wind would 
let them, when necessity arose for more urgent 
measures. 

" Be damned if they ban't putting off ! " cried Mr. 
Mutter. He was a little black man, almost dwarfed, 
but famed for his strength and bull-dog courage. 
His record was vague, and he had not dwelt long at 
Brixham. 

" They'll board us in twenty minutes ! " added 
Trust. 

A boat rasped on the distant shingle, and so still 
had grown the night that the sound of her launching 
came clearly over the sea. 

Sam sniffed, and the pirate in him rejoiced, but the 
lover's heart sank. 

" Couldn't have come at a worse moment for me ; 
but there's a good chance to get out of it yet. They 
don't know you, Mutter, so you'd best to face 'em. 
Buoy the trawl and let it go. There's no time to get 
it. And I'll do the rest." 

They worked hard yet with method, as though 
these sudden operations were not unfamiliar. Billy 



THE HAVEN 89 

Trust fastened a buoy to the trawl- warp and flung it 
overboard ; Sam lighted the port and starboard 
lanterns, then fetched a piece of wood on which in 
white letters and figures were painted a trawler's 
number. This lie he hung over the bow and made 
fast above the real number of his boat. Next, with 
Mutter's help, he lowered the mainsail on which the 
true number also appeared, and to hooks let into the 
sail for this purpose, Sam hung a square of tanned 
canvas also carrying the false number and covering 
the true. The sail was up and Sam had disappeared 
before the boat laden with five angry crabbers came 
alongside. 

Brokenshire now stood hidden on the companion 
ladder leading down to his cabin. Trust went 
forward and concealed himself in the shadow of the 
foresail, while Mr. Mutter -stood at the helm. He 
was disguised with a heavy false beard, carried for 
such an event as this. 

"Who are you?" cried a voice from the stern 
sheets of the boat. 

" Use your eyes and find out," answered Saul 
gruffly. His purpose was to suggest an angry 
man in trouble, and indeed this was not far from 
the fact. 

A lantern flashed from the shore boat, and in its 
blaze the ' Night Hawk ' stood sharply forth. The 
light 'swept over it ; then settled on Mr. Mutter's 
face. 

" What are you doing in here ? " 

" Going home, I should think. I don't live among 
you mangy crabbers." 

" Where's your trawl ? " 

" At the bottom of the blasted sea two miles south 
of the Start. Better go and find it." 

The men in the boat murmured together ; Mutter 
preserved a sulky silence ; the trawler crept on her 
way, and Sam grinned out of sight. 



90 THE HAVEN 

A few strokes and the boat was beside the 
4 Night Hawk' again. Her lantern ranged over 
the mainsail and the bows. The false number was 
noted. 

" I want your name, please," said the skipper of the 
boat. 

"Jeremiah Wilson, 9, Overgang, Brixham, Master 
of the * Silver Star/ Number nought one two seven. 
Is there anything else you want? " 

Still the man in the boat doubted. 

"If 'tis a false number, you know the penalty," he 
said. 

" Go to hell and find the true one, then," answered 
Saul Mutter with fine fury. " Ban't it enough for 
a man |to lose his trawl without being blackguarded 
by a lot of longshore sweeps that feed and fatten 
in this bay, where better men ought to be allowed 
to fish?" 

High words passed ; then the boat fell away and 
presently she vanished. 

Sam roared with laughter, and debated tacking for 
the trawl ; but it was too light and dawn had already 
broken. 

" I know where 'tis to a hair," declared Mr. Trust ; 
" but I can't swear to the place unless there's a blink 
of light enough to see the marks." 

" We'll come back to-morrow night and hope for 
luck," answered Sam ; " and till then we must run 
south out of the way. We can't go home without 
the trawl. Sorry to be out of hearing too, for those 
cheerful toads will send a policeman to call at No. 9, 
Overgang, I reckon ; and they'll find that Mr. 
Wilson's like number nought one two seven not 
very generally known ! " 

They stood to sea when beyond the vision of the 
crabbers, and before morning were out of sight of 
land. Not until dark did they creep back again ; 
and fickle Fortune now relented and served their 



THE HAVEN 91 

purpose with a clear but dark night. Before the 
moon rose Trust had picked up his marks with 
amazing accuracy. The Start lighthouse was one ; 
a rock off the mainland beneath it was another ; 
while these, taken with a bluff above a village and 
a church spire in line, brought the ' Night Hawk ' 
to the desired spot. They anchored then, put out 
their boat, and worked with a leaded line from the 
trawler to the dinghy till they struck the little barrel 
buoy, where it floated submerged on the trawl-warp 
two feet under water. 

In half an hour the * Night Hawk ' was trawling 
steadily ; but long before the late moon rose and lit 
a burning hearth on the edge of the sea, the poacher 
had vanished. 

" It might be a good thing to give the Bay a bit 
of a rest now," said Mutter. And Sam agreed with 
him. 

" Us shan't be there for a month or more," he 
promised. " I've got other fish to fry for a bit. 
Come Sunday I'm going up over to ax Major to let 
me marry his darter." 

" Should never have thought you could sink to be 
such a hopeful fool," answered Billy Trust. " Still 
everybody's got their weak spot and the girls was 
always yours. However, the answer won't take holy 
John very long." 

But Mr. Brokenshire's sanguine spirit could not 
be easily discouraged. 

" Reason is reason," he answered ; " and whatever 
else John Major may be, he's always got the name 
of a man that listens to reason. I've a lot of cast 
iron facts for him, and nobody can get round money 
in the bank." 

"And you can't get round where most of the 
money came from," answered Billy ; " and what's 
more, you won't get him round it neither." 

Sam shrugged his shoulders. 



92 THE HAVEN 

" I hope you're wrong there ; but, whether or no, 
there's other ways of getting a thing besides axing 
for it." 

" That's true," admitted his mate ; " and if me and 
you don't know it, who should ? " 



CHAPTER XI 

MR. BROKENSHIRE made an unusual toilette when 
the Sunday of his great adventure ashore arrived. 
His cheeks were shining with soap, his curls with 
pomatum. He wore Sunday black, a hard hat, and 
a linen shirt. Prosperity reigned about him, and his 
handsome face won many a sly and admiring glance 
as he proceeded from his cottage at Overgang to the 
home of Lydia. 

Chance threw him upon Tumbledown Dick hard 
by the statue of King William. The quay was 
silent and quiet, for the hour of Sunday dinner had 
not yet passed, though it was waning. 

" Ah ! " said Dick, " flourishing like the green bay 
tree, I see. A pity you wasn't home yesterday 
morning. 'Twas very interesting. Two of they 
poor crabbers from Tor Cross and a policeman came 
to Overgang to find a gentleman by the name of 
Jeremiah Wilson ; but nobody had ever heard of him 
seemingly. All they could tell was that he had 
a black beard and a brave assortment of crooked 
words. But, as I said to the policeman, 'there's a 
score of fishermen in Brixham that would answer to 
that ! ' Then they came down to hear tell about 
a cutter-rigged ketch called the 'Silver Star.' But, 
strange to say, none hadn't heard of her either not 
under that name." 

Sam told Mr. Varwell the truth, and Dick regretted 

93 



94 THE HAVEN 

that he had not been aboard at the time to enjoy the 
experience. 

Then Brokenshire announced his news. 

" I'm off to tackle John Major about my girl. And 
I hope he hasn't heard this yarn from Start Bay ; 
because he's got his knife in me a'ready, and I'm 
afraid he'll be too likely to think I was the party." 

" Bluff it," answered Dick. " You'll often surprise 
a man if you take for granted a thing he meant to 
refuse. Don't go begging and scraping to Major, 
like a beggar praying for a meal. Come afore him 
as an equal and a prosperous chap, as good as him. 
Carry it with a high hand. None could do it 
better." 

Sam nodded. 

" That's proper advice, I do believe," he said. 

" Why, of course. Don't you always have the 
cream of my sense ? Be bold as brass ; march to 
the man with flags flying and drums beating. Don't 
go wanting him to be so kind as to let you marry 
his daughter ; but tell him you're going to be so 

food as to do it, and ask him if she's to have three 
gures of his savings or only two." 

Mr. Brokenshire laughed till neighbouring sea- 
gulls rose in alarm and fluttered further off. 

" A fine thought without a doubt, though I'm 
afraid he's not the kind to be swept off his legs that 
way. But the hint is like to help for a start." 

"You never know. Be it as 'twill, I'll come in 
and have a bit of supper with you, if you please, and 
hear how it goes. I was asked to pick a bone with 
the Mayor of Torquay to-night, but declined the 
invitation owing to my principles." 

" Come and welcome," said Sam. " And if the 
old boy's contrary, I can tell you what I shall do 
next." 

The lover went forward and left Tumbledown Dick 
singing his famous and only song. There was none 



THE HAVEN 95 

to hear but the birds ; yet he warbled with his usual 
gusto while he swung on the pier chain. 

" Three things will be scratching, 
I'll tell you if I can : 
A cat, a brier and a woman. 
Though 'tis my delight both night and day 
To praise the women so much as I may." 

Ten minutes later Sam knocked at the door of 
Mr. Major's dwelling, and the fisherman, who had 
just taken off his coat to smoke in greater corrifort, 
put it on again, while Ned answered the knock. 

He stared at sight of Mr. Brokenshire, yet guessed 
at his reason for being here. Lydia was gone for 
the day to friends at Paignton, and now her brother 
perceived why she had done so. 

Sam winked. 

" Father home ? " he asked. 

" Yes, Mr. Brokenshire." 

" Call me Sam ; you'm a sailor now and so good 
as any of us. Arthur Michelmore tells me you be 
getting very handy in the boat already." 

"Very kind to say it, I'm sure. This here's the 
parlour. Father's smoking in the kitchen." 

" I'd sooner come there and smoke also, if 'tis all 
the same to him." 

But it was not. Mr. Major granted to the suitor 
none of that friendly and familiar intercourse which 
pipe and kitchen and shirt-sleeves may be supposed 
to represent. Instead he kept Sam waiting for five 
minutes in the parlour while he donned his coat, 
put down his pipe, and buttoned and braced himself 
for the coming encounter. The old man guessed 
what was about to happen and so did his sister, 
Mrs. Michelmore. She was washing up in a scullery 
adjoining the kitchen and heard Ned announce the 
visitor. 

" Mark me," she said, " that chap have come after 



96 THE HAVEN 

our Lydia. 'Tis all explained her lack-a-daisy way 
of late even off her precious books she've been. 
And him to find her out the biggest rascal in 
Brixham by all accounts. Just the family luck and 
her mother took at the time a girl most wants a 
mother. And, as for me, I might so soon tell to the 
wall as advise. But what do a man know of their 
cunning ways to fox them in authority over them ? " 

She whined on until her nephew stopped her. 

" Father's gone," said Ned from the kitchen. 

Mr. Major was indeed already in the company of 
Sam. When he entered, the younger offered his 
hand and John took it ; but the start was not hopeful. 

" For the sake of your dead father I shake your 
hand, Samuel, not for your own," began John Major. 
" And now please sit down in thicky chair and tell 
me what you want of me in so few a words as 
possible." 

" I don't know why for you should speak so short," 
answered the other ; " and I don't see why you should 
deny to me what you granted to my father. I'm 
a plain-dealing, hard-working man, and I thought 
that I hadn't got an enemy in Brixham, or anywhere 
else. But I'll leave that. So soon as you know 
me better, Mr. Major, you'll like me better, I hope ; 
and if you don't the fault shan't be with me." 

" I don't want to know you better not as you are. 
But that's your own fault, Samuel, not mine." 

" Well, I can't guess what you've got against me, 
and if anybody have been telling lies, that's no reason 
why such a man as you a head and shoulders above 
us all in goodness should believe 'em. But, as to 
knowing me better, that you must do, so far as I can 
see ; and I hope when you do, you'll find that I have 
been misjudged." 

" I should be very glad to find it so. And now 
tell me what you're here about," answered John. 

" With a message, you might say. A 



THE HAVEN 97 

from your own daughter. Girl-like, before a big 
happening she couldn't bring her lips to tell you. 
Nothing would do but I must myself. And I'm sure, 
Mr. Major, I'm a proud man to do it. And I hope 
you'll be so pleased as us. In a word, we'm tokened. 
You know how these things fall out. You was 
married yourself. We'm made for each other, I'm 
sure, and though 'tis a bad turn to take such a 
daughter away from you, yet so it happens all the 
world over." 

" You dare to sit here in my house in my chair 
and tell this stuff?" 

" ' Dare ' ? That's a hard word ! Of course I dare. 
Why shouldn't I dare ? If I've got your daughter 
to promise to marry me, which I have done and 
she's your sort and won't go from her word neither 
if I've had the luck to win such a girl, why should 
I be feared or over-daring to tell it again ? I'm 
terrible proud of it, and so's she. And between you 
and me as between man and man there's no 
question of daring or fearing." 

" Go on," said Mr. Major ; " finish what you've got 
to say, Samuel, and then hear me." 

" Well, naturally I want a bit of news for mine. 
I'm going to marry Lydia, and proud I am to think 
so, and I'm here to tell you that I've got a hundred 
and thirty pounds in the bank and a boat that no 
man can claim a timber of. You know how many 
can say as much. Well, I thought when you heard 
the good news, that you might be inclined to open 
your month a bit too as became a father surely. 
She's been a very good darter to you, as all the world 
knows, and you're snug, so I should guess you might 
give her three figures for my three. Or perhaps 
'twould please you better to help us with the new 
furniture ? I leave all that to you ; but I only wanted 
to find you in a friendly spirit, as became the news, 
and leave you in a still friendlier one, when you'd 



98 THE HAVEN 

heard all about it. That's all I've got to say, and 
there's not a word from first to last that you've got a 
right to quarrel with, if you're a fair-minded man." 

For some moments Mr. Major merely regarded 
Sam without speaking. The lover therefore added 
a word. 

" I know you're going round land o' Tuesday, so I 
thought as this might be a very good minute to 
mention the matter. You'd have time to turn it 
over in your mind while you're away in the North 
Channel." 

" As for that," began the elder at length ; " as for 
that, Samuel, there's no need to turn it over. I knew 
your father, him as went down off Portland, and a 
better man, and a man more ready to meet his God 
of a sudden, I never did know ; and I knowed 
your man-of-war uncle, as was drowned when the 
* Eurydice ' capsized a good man too. But you're 
different and very different. You didn't have them 
for models, worse luck, because you was only a young 
youth when they died. Now thus it is : I believe in 
my fellow-creatures, Samuel you among the rest. 
The Lord wouldn't have saved you, when He 
drowned your father, if He hadn't had work for you 
to do in the world. Michael Brokenshire's work was 
done, and well done, when he went out of it; for 
though still a man under middle age, the length of 
the thread be no business of ours ; but only the 
spinning. He spun true. But you what be you 
spinning? When be you going to do what you 
was born to do ? " 

"A fair question and I'm glad I can give a fair 
answer," replied Sam. " I'm working in my father's 
steps and winning my way against odds, for you 
know well there's too many boats in Brixham fleet 
and too many women and children depending on 
'em. I'm doing my work and saving money. And 
. what more can I do ? " 



THE HAVEN 99 

" I'll tell you. You can go straight. Ban't for me 
to preach to you 'tisn't my business ; but you can give 
ear to them whose business it is. You can go to the 
Lord's House, which you never do ; you can keep the 
eighth commandment, which you're a deal too fond 
of breaking. And until you do these things, and 
make your peace with your Maker, and show me that 
you're a changed man in them particulars of honesty 
and religion, I'll have nought more to say to you. 
Mend your ways and don't turn your mind to 
marrying my daughter or any other honest girl, till 
you're honest yourself." 

" I never heard better advice, Mr. Major," answered 
Sam ; " and the only thing the matter with it, in my 
case, is that 'twasn't called for. No man can prove 
that I've ever dropped my trawl a yard inside the 
limits in Start Bay or elsewhere, and so long as none 
can prove it and I deny it, not you nor another has a 
right to bring it up against me, or believe it. As to 
church-going, if you'll let me have Lydia, I'll become 
so regular a church member from to-day onwards as 
you are yourself. No doubt 'twould be a very good 
thing for me, and I'm quite willing to meet you there." 

" Don't think to throw dust in my eyes," answered 
the other sternly. " I'm ashamed of you that you 
can lie, here on the Lord's Day, with such a glib and 
easy tongue. No man has seen you poaching, per- 
haps ; but right well you know your Maker has ; 
and man can see the fish. We're not fools to be 
deceived by you and hoodwinked in this matter. 
'Tis evil evil every way an improper and dishonest 
thing. None be more for the opening of the Bay 
than I am ; but law's law, and the law of the land 
says ' no ' ; and, what is more, the people respon- 
sible have made it very clear that, until you and the 
likes of you give up this fishing there, the Bay won't 
be opened again. False numbers have been shown 
only last week there, and false names given ; and 



ioo THE HAVEN 

each case puts back our hope of having the Bay 
again." 

" The politics of the Bay don't matter then, as we 
shan't agree about that, master ; but I'll come back 
to my question. Will you let me marry your 
daughter if I settle one hundred pound and my boat 
upon her ? " 

" No, I will not" 

"Why not?" 

" Because your manner of life be up against every- 
thing I think clean and honest and proper and God- 
fearing." 

" 'Tis 'no/ then, without a loophole? Can't you 
think of her so well as me ? " 

" 'Tis of her I do think. I've heard nothing of her 
side. But I take it for granted that she's fond of 
you." 

" That she is, and I'd sell my soul for her, Mr. 
Major." 

" A silly speech and a wicked. That's the sort of 
easy, evil thing, the likes of you say without thinking 
what it means. 'Tis for you to save your soul, not 
to sell it. You say ' no loophole.' That's the point 
Be you in earnest, or ban't you? I don't want to 
do injustice to you or wrong to my child. 'Tis for 
the old to teach patience and justice to the young ; 
for if you can't learn from us, where shall you learn ? 
I say this : Come back to me about Lydia in a 
year a full year from now. And, in the meantime, 
show if you're in earnest I promise nought, mind. 
I'll bind myself to nothing at all ; but I'll watch the 
pair of you and see what this talk be worth and what 
you be worth. There's your loophole, Samuel, and 
you can take it or leave it. That's all I can say. 
You do your part and I'll do mine." 

Mr. Brokenshire reflected. 

" Make it six months and it's a bargain," he said 
at last. 



THE HAVEN 101 

" I've spoken and generously. Tis no sign of 
hope in you that you should seek to chaffer. A year's 
all too little." 

" I wanted Lydia by midsummer." 

Mr. Major rose. 

"You needn't keep me no longer," he answered, 
" and I won't keep you. Tisn't many men as would 
have been so patient with you as I have, and I say 
again that 'tis more for your dead father's sake than 
yours that I've been at the trouble to talk reason to 
you. But your sort won't hear reason : you must 
go out in the world and dance your own fool's dance 
till reason falls like a scourge on your backs. Be 
off with you, and don't you pay any more attention 
to my daughter, because I forbid it." 

" Let's split the difference and say nine months," 
suggested Sam. 

He preserved a perfect temper through Mr. Major's 
reproof. 

" Go," answered the elder. " And let me hear no 
more of this." 

" Say nine months, and I'll start church worship 
this very evening ! " 

" Go ! " repeated Mr. Major. 

" I can't go yet ; I " 

Then I will," said John. 

He rose and left the lover alone. 

Sam reflected a moment, then he departed. He 
went down to the * Sailor's Knot,' drank a pint of 
beer, laughed and chaffed with a dozen fishermen and 
exhibited the best of spirits. Then he set off to 
Churston, for it was arranged between him and Lydia 
that she should walk back from Paignton and that 
Sam should meet her on the way. 

Mr. Major, meanwhile, received another visitor, and 
while his mind revolved upon the coming grief of 
his daughter, he found himself confronted with the 
present tribulations of his son. 



102 THE HAVEN 

William Gilberd it was who called upon his skipper 
out of a large kindness for youth. During the past 
few voyages he had watched Ned only less closely 
than his father had watched him ; but William saw 
more than the skipper, because his eyes were un- 
biassed and open to every aspect of the case. Un- 
consciously John was blind in some particulars. He 
magnified the indications of promise that Ned re- 
vealed ; he passed over without observation those 
other implicit evidences that the boy still heartily 
disliked the sea. 

The fault was partly Ned's own, for from love of 
his father he hid much ; while, before Michelmore 
and Gilberd, there was no need to do so. His fate 
did not rest with them, and his discomfort was no 
concern of theirs. Therefore they saw more than 
Mr. Major did ; and while Michelmore a young 
man with his own life and ambitions before him 
took no interest in Ned's troubles, Gilberd, who had 
boys of his own, perceived the truth, and saw that 
the skipper's son was not destined to follow in the 
skipper's shoes. He liked Ned well ; he doubted 
whether Ned would ever forgive him for this inter- 
ference ; he felt uncertain also how John himself 
might be disposed to view it ; yet now he lumbered 
up to state his opinions on this delicate subject ; and 
for a little while John Major forgot his daughter's 
affairs while he listened to how the position and 
prospects of his son, Ned, struck the mind of a 
friendly and impartial observer. 

u 'Tisn't for me, in a general sort of way, to offer my 
views to a wiser man than what I am myself," said 
Gilberd ; " but your sense be great enough even to 
listen to me, because you know I ban't a meddler. 
In a word, 'tis your boy. He hides from you what he 
shows me, and 'tis more than likely that if you'd seen 
what I've seen, you'd think the same as me. He've 
no call for the sea, master ; and when you look 



THE HAVEN 103 

around and see what fishing be coming to, you did 
ought to be glad and not sorry 'tis so. Brixham's not 
what it was. None of the fishing-places be what they 
was. All on the down grade, and if they last our time, 
they won't be much use to our children, let alone our 
grandchildren. Take Mousehole down in Cornwall. 
Ten year agone there was seventy big luggers sailed 
from there. Now there's not much above thirty. 
You can't man the boats. And that's why my eldest 
boy's a plasterer and my second be going into a 
shop." 

" You speak as one without a boat of your own, 
however," interrupted John. 

" Granted, and if what I've said was all I'd got to 
say, I wouldn't have come. But there's more than 
that : there's Ned hisself. I tell you that you can't 
put a square peg into a round hole, and you can't 
make a farmer turn sailor. There 'tis, and you'll 
excuse my rough way of speaking, John. But never 
did a boy go to sea as was less likely to stop there. 
Not but what he'll be useful enough, and clever 
enough. Packed with brains he is. But I've said 
enough. I'm sorry for him such a civil, active, 
willing chap as he is ; but 'tis like one of they Italian 
monkeys chained to a barrel-organ to see him aboard 
of us. You feel as his place be somewhere else alto- 
gether. And so it is so it is, if I've got two eyes in 
my head." 

Mr. Major nodded at Gilberd's full stops, and when 
he had done continued to keep silence. 

" And now I'll be gone," said the fisherman, " and I 
hope to God as I haven't made a hole in my 
manners ; but I felt called to speak, though in justice 
to my wife I must tell you she advised me not." 

" One thing's sure," answered the other. " 'Twas 
nought but goodwill opened your mouth, and I thank 
you for it. I've seen a bit of all this. I've given a 
deal of thought to it. I'm too well used to giving up 



104 THE HAVEN 

my own way, to fight for it in the matter of Ned's 
future. But I won't deny that I hope still with my 
whole heart to make a fisherman of him. He's young 
yet ; 'tis too early, William, to say that he won't grow 
to like the sea. I mark signs that he's getting to care 
for it. I hope on. Twill be a hard knock to me if 
he turns against it presently ; but I trust for the right 
to happen, and I know the right will happen, because 
it always does." 

" Enough said, then," replied the other. " You've 
got enough faith for a crew, if not a fleet, and I can 
only trust that such a power of faith will get properly 
rewarded both here and hereafter. And no offence, 
I hope." 

" None," declared Mr. Major, and William de- 
parted. 

Darkness crowded down upon the evening of the 
day, for Ned, ignorant of the other matter involving 
his sister, showed some depression at the thought of 
the coming journey ' round land ' and the long 
absence from home. Then returned Lydia. She 
crept to her room unseen ; but her father called her 
to him and, alone, heard of her grief. He was firm 
and patient ; she wept and exclaimed against her 
fate ; he told her of his interview with Mr. Broken- 
shire; she, fresh from Sam's company and Sam's 
gloss on the truth, showed little present inclination 
to listen to reason, and cried out that her father 
was unjust. 

He left her at last, and when the sad day ended 
and his children were both gone to bed, he smoked in 
the kitchen and opened a little of his mind to his 
sister. 

From John Major's own simple clarity of heart 
he saw what was best in another's. He knew 
the good qualities of his children and had always 
fostered them. But to-night the weakness of youth 
weighed upon him ; the responsibilities of a father 



THE HAVEN 105 

to a motherless girl struck him as before it had 
never done. 

Mr. Major puffed his pipe, pulled alternately at his 
gold earrings, and stared into the fire. Emma was 
lachrymose. 

" Tis all of a piece with the family's usual luck," 
she said. " Not a pinch of good fortune ever got into 
the pot when Michelmores and Majors were brewing. 
The boy hates the sea worse than you hate sin, and 
here's Lydia, almost afore her mother be cold in the 
grave, breaks loose and chooses that good-looking 
dare-devil of a fellow. And not the first that's cried 
her eyes out for the scamp. I wonder he had the 
honesty to come to you for her ; 'twould have been 
more his way to go crooked over it. 'Tis all a miz- 
maze, I'm sure ; and the grave's the only place of 
peace as I can see offering for any that bear our 
name." 

" We must be patient, however." 

" Good Lord ! you needn't tell me that. Ban't 
patience the marrow in my bones ? Don't I live on it ? 
'Tis all I've got left. Haven't I starved on patience ever 
since my childer died? But it don't get the world 
on that I can see ; it don't mend the bad. Patience 
won't build Brixham breakwater, nor open Start Bay. 
Patience be very well for old women like me, but no 
vartue in your children. However, I know nothing 
except that I hope God Almighty will do a little 
more for our family in the next world than He has 
in this to say it civilly." 

Mr. Major shook his head. 

" That's not patience, and nothing like patience, 
and it don't become you at all, Emma," he answered. 
" You ban't in a very Christian spirit to-night. You'll 
do well to go to bed." 

Mrs. Michelmore sniffed. 

" If you expect to hear cheerful things, you didn't 
ought to come to me," she answered. " We all know 



106 THE HAVEN 

you've got a faith out of the common, and the harder 
you'm smitten, the more you offer t'other cheek ; but 
but as for me " 

She lost the thread of her argument, ceased, and 
relapsed into familiar tears. 

" Don't," he said. " Ban't your usual time for 
weeping. After supper you'm cheerful as a rule, and 
I beg you'll continue so. 'Tis only because it's 
Sunday, and there's nought for your busy hands to 
do. I'll read you the second lesson as we had 
to-night. If you'd come to church, instead of stopping 
at home messing about, you'd have heard it better 
read than I can read it." 



CHAPTER XII 

WHERE two flights of steps fall irregularly to the 
street, there stands a coffin house at Brixham. It 
boasts itself of a phoenix rarity, but though others 
cast in the same grim pattern exist, a better example 
may not easily be found. The shape of his home, 
however, had no effect on the actual tenant of the 
coffin house. Mr. Frederick Bolder was a barber ; 
his pole, striped red, white, and blue, thrust jauntily 
from the side of his shop ; and his face, when seen at 
the doorway, invariably wore an expression of content. 
Mr. Bolder was young and stout and prosperous. He 
shaved the fishermen on Sunday mornings, and at 
that time a dozen men would often be loafing at 
the entrance of the coffin house, awaiting each his 
turn. 

There came a Sunday, one month after that on 
which Mr. Brokenshire made his appeal to John 
Major, when Sam with other fishermen stood about 
the door of the barber's shop. Then Dick Varwell 
passed, and Billy Trust, who was also of the party, 
chaffed him. 

" Why for don't you get your hair cut, Dick ? " he 
asked. " 'Tis half-way down your back, like a 
woman's. But I suppose you think that if it grows 
a bit longer, you'll look like one of they holy blades 
in the glass windows to church." 

Mr. Bolder paused, razor in hand. 
107 



io8 THE HAVEN 

" Dick's waiting to get his hair cut for nothing 
ban't you, Dick ? " he asked, and a laugh rose at the 
expense of the tramp. 

Mr. Varwell stopped and laughed with the rest. 

" Gimme a cigarette, Sam," he said. " Freddy 
Bolder here ought to get in a few new jokes, or else 
try to make some for himself. 'Twas I said that 
against another man a year ago. However, we must 
be tender with poor Freddy. He's going to be 
married ; and I hear of one or two other cases of the 
same kind among us. Marriage be catching as 
measles, as I've always said." 

He winked at Brokenshire, and took tobacco from 
him. 

Another man joined the group. He was elderly 
and pock-marked ; he had a high, narrow forehead, 
and round, simple eyes of the colour of horn. A 
reddish beard and moustache, streaked with grey, 
belonged to him, and they hid a little mouth and 
feeble chin. 

" Hullo, uncle!" cried Brokenshire, "didn't know 
you was a customer of Freddy's." 

Mr. Titus Peach, Sam's maternal uncle, a bachelor 
and the owner of the biggest barking yard in Brixham, 
exhibited some nervous concern. He had not ex- 
pected so large a company, and was about to move 
on, when the barber, who never lost a customer, 
arrested him. 

" Come in and sit down, Mr. Peach. These 
gentlemen ban't in no hurry, and won't mind if I 
take you next. Beard wants trimming again, I see. 
'Tis wonderful how thick and strong it comes." 

" Blessed if here ban't another ! " declared Tumble- 
down Dick. " So you've come to it at last, Titus, 
after half a century of the single state ? And who's 
the lucky creature, if we may ask ? Don't tell me it 
ban't so. When a man takes to fussing about his 
beard, there's a wife in the wind always." 



THE HAVEN 109 

Mr. Varwell, who spoke much nearer the truth 
than he had any idea, was now told by the barber to 
shut his mouth and not block the gangway ; but he 
refused either to be silent or to move on. 

" No, no, Freddy. Let me talk to these here 
marrying men, including yourself. You're all hood- 
winked just as the men already married be hood- 
winked for that matter. Not that the women can 
help it. They'm born to play a double part. Women 
be like cats wild creatures pretending to be tame. 
'Tis all pretence to gain their own ends and get their 
fish and milk regular. Angels without claws, when 
they be hungry or thirsty. But that's only one side 
the side they show us. They live in a different 
world to ours really ; and if you could see your wife's 
heart or your cat's heart, as it is, 'twould be a proper 
eye-opener for some of you married men. If you 
want to skim the cream off women, keep a bachelor. 
To marry be like jumping into a river because you're 
thirsty. You'll do a lot better to bide on the bank, 
pick your drinking-place careful, and then, when 
you've had enough, go on your way." 

" You speak as a man that no decent woman would 
touch with a pair of tongs," said Mr. Bolder. 

" Curling tongs," suggested Varwell. " And as to 
that, even I could marry if I pleased. There's females 
within my knowledge who would marry a scarecrow 
if it had power of speech to ax 'em." 

" 'Tisn't for the likes of you to preach, whether or 
no," said Billy Trust. " 'Tis better for a young man 
to go courting than to go drinking, any way." 

The proposition interested Dick and he disputed 
it. 

" That shows how little you've thought out things," 
he answered. " That's the stuff you poor fishermen 
hear your betters say ; and then you say it again in 
company and think 'tis wisdom. To be drunk is a 
matter between a man and his own affairs ; but to be 



i io THE HAVEN 

in love is a matter between a man and 
and that may mean the next generation. Let the 
State look after the lovers, Billy Trust : the drunkards 
can look after themselves. Who do I hurt if I lift 
my elbow too high ? Only myself. But here's Jack 
Stockman going to marry a woman whose mother's 
in a lunatic asylum, and nobody says a word to 
prevent it. 'Tis Jack ought to be locked up, not me. 
Now if I get drunk, they lock me up ; but if I marry 
and get a child, everybody would say I was a re- 
formed character. But I know better. I'm not the 
sort to have any hand in the next generation, and 
well I know it ; and so I'd no more start out 
in that direction than I'd put a match to Sam's 
boat." 

" What jargon you talk, and expect sensible men 
to listen ! " retorted Trust. " And such a life as 
yours ! I wonder you've got the face to utter your 
opinions." 

" So do I," answered Mr. Varwell ; " I'm often 
more astonished at my own sense than you could be, 
Billy, or the like of you. But I don't expect Brixham 
fishermen to understand. I'm afore my time, like 
John the Baptist was, and a few other heroes. The 
treason of to-day's the reason of to-morrow. I'm 
quite accustomed to be a voice crying in the wilder- 
ness now drunk, now sober. But you can't chop 
my head off nowadays for my opinions, though I 
dare say that a few of you noodles you that pin 
your silly faith to money-grubbing parsons and 
money-spending squires would like to do so." 

" I won't have no more of that trash here," said 
Mr. Bolder, from his saloon. " Go away, Varwell, 
and take your evil opinions along with you." 

The barber was now engaged upon Mr. Peach's 
ragged beard, and when Tumbledown Dick, singing 
his one and only song, went off unruffled, attention 
turned to Titus. That he should exhibit any con- 



THE HAVEN in 

cern about his appearance gave rise to some merri- 
ment. His simplicity was notorious, and he had no 
enemies. Experience had often shown him the 
safety of silence, and he could be obstinate in this 
particular. Now, under a fire of questions and 
suggestions, humorous and coarse, Mr. Peach pre- 
served a taciturn attitude. Even his nephew could 
get no answers out of him. 

Presently his toilette was completed ; his beard and 
hair were trimmed, and he put on his hat and coat 
and departed. To the quay Mr. Peach went ; but 
when he was out of sight from the group at the 
coffin house, he made a detour, worked round behind 
them again, and presently proceeded in a direction 
exactly opposite to that on which he had appeared to 
journey. His way now took him past the dwelling 
of John Major, and here he stopped, cast suspicious 
eyes in every direction, and then approached the 
entrance. But a couple of fishermen came down the 
street, whereupon Mr. Peach slipped away from the 
door and pretended to take no interest in it. When 
the men had passed out of sight, however, he crept 
back again. Thrice he was frightened off and thrice 
he returned. His manner suggested a timorous bird 
that has found a treasure but dare not take the risk 
of possession. Anon the folk began to come back 
from their places of worship, and Mr. Peach lost 
heart altogether. His enterprise, whatever that might 
have been, was abandoned for the present. 

" I'll try again when 'tis the quiet time after dinner, 
and the people be in their houses," he said to 
himself. 

The man then went home to his abode on the 
outskirts of the town and walked in a little garden, 
where every grass-blade kept its place. Here were 
roses, day-lilies, larkspurs, and pasonies, arranged with 
desolate precision and exactitude. Over the iron 
wicket-gate drooped a laburnum, and screwed to the 



112 THE HAVEN 

gate was a brass plate with the name of Titus Peach 
upon it. During these uneasy moments, before 
further endeavour, Mr. Peach found peace in the 
contemplation of his growing things. He visited his 
kitchen garden presently, frightened away a blackbird 
from his cherry tree, destroyed three caterpillars, and 
then went indoors to dinner. He ate in the kitchen, 
and the old servant who waited on him shared the 
meal. She was inquisitive, but Mr. Peach remained 
very taciturn. The meal ended, he went back to 
his garden and smoked his pipe in a little grotto 
made of shells, splinters of quartz, and pieces of 
coral. This erection, the work of his own hand 
through a space of eight years, always soothed the 
spirit of Mr. Peach, and it did so to-day. He started 
presently with renewed energy and renewed hope ; 
and as Sam Brokenshire had recently knocked at 
John Major's door, so now did Titus boldly announce 
himself. But he did not come to see the fisherman. 
Indeed, he knew very well that the 'Jack and 
Lydia ' was far away somewhere between Lundy 
and Wales. 

Mrs. Michelmore answered the door. She wore her 
usual black Sunday gown and her customary long- 
suffering expression. 

" Master's ' round land,' " she said. 

He extended his hand and she shook it. They 
were very slightly acquainted, though Emma some- 
times used Mr. Peach, in conversation, as an example 
of the prosperous sort whose fortune never fails. 

" I know," answered Mr. Peach. " I know your 
brother's away, and I hope he's doing well, as he 
deserves to do. But, if I'm not here at a wrong 
moment, I'd like to have a bit of a tell with you, Mrs. 
Michelmore." 

" And welcome. You can't be worse company than 
my own thoughts," she answered. " Lydia's gone 
mooning out somewhere. She's very much changed 



THE HAVEN 113 

from herself since her father said she shouldn't take 
your nephew. So I'm alone as far as one can be 
with such ghosts as I've got in my mind always. 
Come in the parlour and I'll dust a chair for you." 

They sat together presently, and Mr. Peach allowed 
his round, amber-coloured eyes to rest on the figure 
of Mrs. Michelmore. He thought it neat and 
shapely. 

" I could wish my nephew was worthy of your 
niece," he said. " But I won't talk about that, though 
I've got a great opinion of Samuel myself." 

"There's something in the wind, and I wish her 
father was home again. 'Tis all of a piece, and will 
end in confusion and tears and the bread of sorrow 
like everything else belonging to us." 

" Don't say such dreadful things, I beg of you." 

" What's the use of pretending ? Have you ever 
heard our history ? I'll tell it to you if you can bear 
to hear it" 

" Anything about your family be very interesting 
to me," declared Mr. Peach. "In fact, much more 
so than you might guess." 

" Then take my life my married life. We buried 
four ; and then I buried my husband, who fell off the 
pier-head in the dark, though a liar here and there said 
drink. And then there was Uncle Stocks went mad, 
so we buried him. And then there was poor young 
Bolder, the barber's brother, tokened to my sister 
Sarah throwed off one of they swinging boats of 
Hancock's to Brixham regatta, he was, and broke his 
neck ; so we buried him and none ever lifted a 
finger for Sarah again. And then there was my 
sister-in-law she went home a bit back along and 
left John a widow-man and helpless as a sheep. And 
then comes this business of Sam Brokenshire ; and 
I've cried rivers over it, and so have my niece; 
and what will be the next blow only the watching 
Lord can tell." 

8 



114 THE HAVEN 

" Terrible interesting ; but perhaps there's a bit of 
good luck coming," ventured Titus. " Surely 'tis 
time and more than time the wind set into a milder 
quarter like." 

She looked at him with wonder. 

" You can say that with such a history laid bare 
afore you ! Never no good luck for us, Mr. Peach. 
'Tis too late to hope for it or expect now. Such a thing 
would throw us off our balance very like, and make 
us lose our heads altogether. I doubt if we could 
stand it after all these years. No, no ; evil fortune 
be our food, and we can't expect any other meat 
now." 

" But of course it depends a lot on what you call 
luck," argued the man. " Now you might say that I 
had good fortune. I don't deny it, mind you in a 
way. The barking yard does very well, and every- 
body knows that I use the best stuff I can buy, and 
so I get twice the number of sails that any other 
barker gets. And there's my house up the street out 
of the town all my own. In fact, I've got property 
and so on. And yet I'm not satisfied, I assure you." 

" That's to say, you're a human creature. Who is 
satisfied?" 

" The question in my mind be this : Whether my 
luck will run to the high water-mark of a man's good 
fortune and get me the wife I want or stop short of 
that ? " 

" 'Tis most unlikely," she declared, " and you'll 
tempt fortune once too often if you try it. A wife you 
can pick up, no doubt : they be commoner than cast 

horseshoes ; but However, I suppose you didn't 

come to ax my opinion on such a question as that ? " 

" Just what I did do," he answered. " I'm a 
bachelor without much knowledge of 'em ; you're a 
widow, and a wise one. I've always felt a great 
respect for you, though so little acquainted. And 
that was because you ban't one of they laughing, 



THE HAVEN 115 

prattling women the sort that are never cast down, 
but always pretend to be gay and hopeful. I couldn't 
abide a creature as never had her solemn moments ; 
and for that matter I'm no laugher myself ; and for 
all my luck I ban't feared to face the dark side, as we 
all should. In fact, my wife must have a character 
and experience. I'm not a very fine figure of a man, 
and I don't rely upon myself so much as upon what 
lies behind me. There's the barking-yard and my 
house and garden all solid things that won't run 
away. And any sensible creature must take the 
rough with the smooth." 

" You must find somebody as could get to care for 
you yourself, however ; for if her soul was set 'pon 
your goods only, you'd feel all the time she wanted 
you to die and make room for another a very 
common thing in Brixham." 

He looked uneasy. 

" I couldn't stand that, I'm sure. 'Twould spoil 
life without a doubt if I felt the woman had no use 
for me," declared Mr. Peach. 

" Then what you've got to do is to find somebody 
capable of liking you apart from the property," she 
explained. 

He shook his head. 

" 'Tis almost too much to expect ; but I ought to 
be thrown in, certainly. I've a right to ask to be 
took as a serious item. I'm an immortal soul, what- 
ever may be the matter with my mortal body." 

Mrs. Michelmore regarded him in doubt. 

" I don't exactly see why you should cry stinking 
fish at your age. You're thin and homely ; but 
you've got a spry way with you, and plenty of 
manhood. Nobody goes cleaner to church of a 
Sunday. Your voice is a thought weak and piping 
for a male, but any sensible woman would soon get 
used to it. I suppose you'll be sixty or there- 
abouts ? " 



Ii6 THE HAVEN 

" Fifty-eight to-day. In fact, I chose the day for 
luck." ' 

" Ah ! Well, I wish you a few happy returns of it 
yet. Between sixty and seventy we break up as a 
rule, and feel the grave beginning to yawn for us. 
But such a man as you healthy to the eye, though 
no doubt you've got your secrets may hope to enjoy 
life a bit longer, I dare say." 

" Thank you, I'm sure. And I feel the same. 
Such a word from you means a great deal, because 
you never was one of they dashing, hopeful women ; 
and never known to chatter about every dark cloud 
having a silver lining, and such-like." 

" No, you won't hear nothing about silver linings 
from me. I only tell what I know." 

" And so and so," continued Mr. Peach, after a 
pause, " I've felt, though but slightly acquainted, that 
you and me have a mournful lot in common, and 
should never get above ourselves, or take our happi- 
ness for granted, or think that we was going to 
make earth what only heaven can be. In fact, in a 
word, after thinking upon it for two years, I be so 
certain as a man can be certain of anything with 
his poor feeble intellects, that you and me eh ? 
Don't look at me like that, there's a good creature ! 
At least I've a right to speak 'tis a free country. 
And I can't pay you no more respect than by axing 
you." 

" Do you mean an offer of marriage ? " she asked. 

" I do with all my heart." 

" And you haven't spoken a dozen words to me in 
your life ! " 

" But I've thought the more. You can't make that 
a grievance. I've worked up to a terrible high pitch 
of respect for you ; and if you'll take me I shall be 
a proud man. And as for a husband, you know 
what a husband should be better than I can your 
first was a very upstanding figure but I'll be the 



THE HAVEN 117 

best I know how, and very glad to learn, and always 
terrible anxious and willing to fall in with your views 
and opinions in general." 

" Say no more/' she answered. " Tis far too 
crushing and sudden. I can't grasp it. Besides, 
why for should I be so selfish ? 'Tis so sure as 
death that my luck won't change at sixty-one 
for that's my age, though I dare say it surprises 
you a good bit to hear it. But if I was to take you, 
you'd have to share my dark prospects, and I think 
too well of you to wish any such thing." 

" I'll chance your luck and back mine," he said 
hopefully. "If you think well of me, that is very 
good fortune for me in itself. The only bad luck 
that can come to me at this minute is for you to 
say ' No.' " 

She murmured something about " Michelmore 
luck," and was then silent. He urged his suit. 

" Don't decide in a hurry ; be fair to yourself, if 
not to me. Wait, any way, till you've seen the house 
and garden. You've only had a look at me yet, and, 
as I said afore, I'm out and away the worst part of 
the bargain. I've got money surprises for you, too. 
Of course, you've heard of my grotto ? Who hasn't ? 
It took me years and years every shell and crystal 
and lobster-claw put in its place by my own hand. 
'Tis a masterpiece cool in summer and warm in winter. 
And " Laburnum Villa " be that peaceful that you 
wouldn't know yourself after this noisy street. Fruit, 
too, and my own well of sweet water, and everything. 
In justice you ought to see the place afore you decide 
against me." 

" John would never suffer it." 

" Don't you say that. He's a fair man afore every- 
thing and religious a burning light and a lesson 
to us all, and a married man himself, though he's lost 
her now. He'd never stand between you and a home 
of your own and such a home. And remember 



I IS THE HAVEN 

this : I'm out every day of the week but Sunday. 
You'd have a great respite from me. 'Twouldn't be 
like they men who live over their shops and muddle 
and fuss about at home all day. I shouldn't be in 
the way ; you'd have the house to yourself to do 
with as you pleased. And another thing: I never 
come in the rooms after I've been barking. I've got 
a shed down at the bottom of the garden, and there 
I change every stitch of clothes. You won't see a 
spot of ochre or grease in the house not a spot." 

"You wander in your speech so," she answered. 
" My brother was the subject. How can I leave him 
a forlorn wretch with none but a love-sick daughter 
to look after him ? " 

"Well, I'm a forlorn wretch, if it comes to that. 
He can do what I want to do and get a wife after 
a decent space of time." 

" Not John. He's had one prize ; he won't risk 
another trial." 

Mr. Peach began to lose heart. 

" At any rate, you might think it over," he said. 
" I grant I sprang it on you. But the thought to 
offer suddenly came upon me, like a giant in the 
night ; and though I was most afraid of my own 
shadow in the morning, yet I managed to get through 
with it, as you see. So I ask you, Emma Michel- 
more yes, I will call you * Emma ' without fear 
I ask you to do nothing in haste. Think about it 
and my great respect for you. And reedy though 
my voice may be, I'm a brave fashion of man behind 
it, and can look all the world in the face. And why 
shouldn't I ? So consider of it, and ax your brother 
his opinion, and get him to tell you how I stand in 
the town. 'Twill come better from him than me. 
And walk over and see round the house and garden. 
You might do that, any way, without committing 
yourself." 

" That's true," she said. " I'll see the house and 



THE HAVEN 119 

garden, since you so much wish it ; but don't hope. 
I hold out no hope at all quite the contrary. I'm 
not hopeful myself and never was, and I won't, if I 
can help it, make anybody else hopefuller by so much 
as a shadow. However, me and my niece will come 
over Wednesday afternoon, if that's convenient." 

" Tea shall be ready in the grotto. I've often 
and often wanted for to invite you, and I'm glad that 
you'll come. And you'll think about all I've said, 
and look round every side of the subject every side. 
Of course, it's got a many." 

" Yes, you've a right to say that I'll look round 
every side ; and if I find a terrible dark side to it 
as I certainly shall do you mustn't blame me for 
telling you." 

" But try and see the bright side, too, Emma," he 
urged. 

" You needn't fear that. I'm only too ready to 
pounce when chance offers a bright side to anything. 
But blind I won't be not at my age and least of 
all in such a matter as this." 

" I shall pray every morning and evening on my 
knees about it," he said, " for that sort of man 
am I." 

Then he left her. 



CHAPTER XIII 

BEFORE John Major went to St. George's Channel 
for a period of uncertain length, he had ordered 
Lydia to see no more of Sam Brokenshire, and for 
a week she obeyed him. Then love conquered ; 
youth burned to youth. Convinced that her father 
was cruelly wrong in this matter, the girl threw in 
her lot with her lover, and henceforth trusted Samuel 
to plan their united lives. He rejoiced in the task 
and undertook it instantly. The preliminary adven- 
ture, with its scorn of authority and flagrant romance, 
was very good to Sam. He arranged everything, and 
submitted his scheme to Lydia ; whereupon she, not 
without tears, admired its perfection, yet modified it 
and improved it in certain particulars. 

There was none to interfere, and only five people 
knew of the enterprise. 

Lydia, having through stress and toil made up her 
mind, did not turn again. She preferred, indeed, to 
look forward rather than back ; and she assured 
herself that, with time, her father must come to per- 
ceive that Samuel was a rare spirit misunderstood, 
arid that such a wife as she intended to make him 
was all that he needed to complete his education and 
perfect his character. She longed for months to fly 
that these things might appear. 

There came an evening when her aunt spoke to 
the girl, and, at another time, the proposition would 

120 



THE HAVEN 121 

have astonished Lydia not a little; but to-night 
there was room in her mind for one secret thing 
alone. 

"That Titus Peach be at me to go and see his 
garden, and take some of his gooseberries," said Mrs. 
Michelmore. " I've told him that pleasuring and 
fruit-eating be for birds and not an old woman 
wading through a sea of troubles like me ; but Peach 
won't take ' no ' for an answer. He've got ideas, 
for strange things come into the heads even of the 
least of God's creatures, and nothing will do but that 
I drink a dish of tea in his shell grotto, though I 
dare say I'll be chilled to the marrow by it. And 
to-morrow's the appointed day, and I shall be glad if 
you'll please to bear me company." 

" I'm very sure he don't want me," said Lydia. 
Sam had told her what was in his uncle's mind ; 
indeed, the matter had caused her lover a little 
concern, since he was Mr. Peach's heir. 

" I want you, however. I've told him you're to be 
there." 

"Then of course I'll come gladly with you some 
day, Aunt Emma," the girl answered. 

She had lived a big lie for three weeks, yet her soul 
hesitated at telling a little one now. 

" 'Tis to-morrow, not ' some day,' " answered Mrs. 
Michelmore ; " and we'll start in our second best to 
the man about four of the clock. Please agree to 
come. Ban't often I ax you to do anything for me 
or any other living creature either. But seeing the 
aunt I've been, I reckon that 'tisn't much to beg." 

" Of course if you speak like that " said Lydia. 

But when the morrow came, many startling things 
had fallen out, and among them Mr. Titus Peach, 
his roses, his gooseberries, and his grotto were all 
forgotten. He waited long, brewed a second pot of 
tea, invented a thousand excuses for the widow ; but 
the sun sank and she came not. Then a mild irrita- 



122 THE HAVEN 

tion settled upon the heart of Titus, and it was only 
lifted when the truth reached him. 

Upon the morning of her promised visit to Mr. 
Peach, Emma Michelmore rose at six o'clock, and 
doubted not that, as usual, she was at work an hour 
before her niece had wakened ; but for once she erred. 
Two letters, with their directions in Lydia's writing, 
lay upon the kitchen table. They caught her eye as 
she pulled up the blind, and she saw that one was 
addressed to Mr. Major and one to herself. Mrs. 
Michelmore opened the window and a yellow cat 
came in, rubbed against her and purred loudly. She 
then sat down with her letter, and while she read it 
the effusive cat jumped on to her lap and continued 
its morning salutations. 

During the brief hours of darkness, after midnight 
in late May, King William, with moonlight on his 
ridiculous head, might have observed from his harbour 
perch the unusual spectacle of a girl hastening along 
the sleeping quay. There had been a night auction 
two hours earlier, and the selling place had echoed 
with the croaking tones of Mr. Memery and flashed 
with glare of many lights ; but now all was silent, 
empty, dark, save for the moonlight shining steadily 
on earth and dancing in sheets and splashes upon the 
sea. The houses of Brixham ascended ridge on ridge 
with glimmering roofs ; and here and there a window 
caught the light and stared like a blind eye over the 
silence. Where men were wont to polish the parapet 
with their elbows, the moonlight now flashed, and 
in the harbour, among the boats, it wove many a 
beautiful, intricate pattern, while reflections and 
shadows and the movement of the ebbing tide 
worked together. 

Then came a footfall under the statue, and Lydia 
Major made haste beside the houses and kept her 
way as much as possible in the darkness of the 



THE HAVEN 123 

shadows. Long before, Sam had come up, after 
Mrs. Michelmore was in bed, and secretly taken 
her box away on his shoulders. And now he met 
her at the steps, where stood two other men. Tumble- 
down Dick was one, Saul Mutter the other. 

" A very fine bit of work," declared Dick, taking 
off his ragged cap to Lydia ; " and so long as there 
are girls like you in the world, we shall no doubt 
continue to have a good sporting pattern of boys ; 
and if you and Sam here ban't the parents of some 
useful, go-ahead rascals in fulness of time, then you 
ought to be. Have no fear, my dear. You're in the 
right, for you've got Nature on your side, and holy 
John I mean your father will be the first to see 
presently that two young heads are often better than 
one old one. I'll tell him all about it when he comes 
home ; and I'll break it to him gently." 

" He'll know long before that," said Sam. "Lydia's 
left a letter for her aunt, and another for him ; and 
of course Mrs. Michelmore will send a telegram to 
Ilfracombe to the * Jack and Lydia ' the first thing 
to-morrow. So the next time they go ashore to land 
their fish, Mr. Major will get to hear what we've done. 
Then hell come back by train most likely and set 
to work to find us." 

" No doubt ; but since I shall be the only man in 
Brixham as knows where you both are, he'll look 
in vain." 

" And now the tide's turned and and we'd best to 
be gone," said Sam. " Dawn '11 break out of the sea 
afore we'rn clear of the Bay as 'tis." 

Mr. Varwell wished them all good fortune and 
shook hands both with Lydia and Samuel. He 
watched awhile as the dinghy, pulled by Mr. Mutter, 
crept out of harbour ; then, like some nocturnal 
beast before the warning finger of dawn, he shambled 
away to his lair. 

On the 'Night Hawk' Billy Trust was waiting. 



I2 4 THE HAVEN 

The trawler's sails were up, her lights were lit. Soon 
Lydia was helped aboard and then Samuel escorted 
her below. Much rough comfort had been planned 
for her. A little fire burnt in the stove. Her box 
was lifted to a bunk. The opposite bunk had been 
covered with a white counterpane. A pot of tea 
simmered on the stove. Hardly a trace of the 
skipper and crew of the boat appeared anywhere in 
the cabin. 

The men were prepared to let Lydia have the 
cabin to herself, and intended to spend the night on 
deck ; but she desired no such thing, and soon 
arranged a programme that better suited them all. 
She drank some tea ; then with Mr. Mutter's aid 
brewed a large pot for the rest ; and presently, much 
to their satisfaction, Saul and Billy Trust were 
permitted to turn in until morning, while Sam took 
charge and Lydia sat beside him at the tiller, snugly 
wrapped in tarpaulins. The night reigned very still 
at sea. An off-shore breeze held steadily, and the 
Night Hawk,' with her waking lovers and sleeping 
crew, stood quietly away to the east. 

Lydia and Samuel dreamed brave dreams, yet 
planned the future with great sobriety. To the 
woman it seemed a most natural and proper thing that 
she should be here in Samuel's keeping ; the weather 
helped largely to add to the glory and fascination 
of her act. She thought upon her brother, and 
marvelled that he could hate the sea. Lydia found 
herself in love with the kindly element. She watched 
the morning break ; she saw the stars vanish and the 
sky take on a tone as of old ivory. It spread clear 
and pure above the twilit sea. Then light kindled 
on the horizon, flamed aloft rosily and flung great 
single burning flakes of fire upon the water. At 
the zenith the firmament grew very blue ; ahead 
Portland Bill loomed misty and vast out of the 
morning. But their goal lay beyond it. 



THE HAVEN 125 

Lydia Major's attitude of mind in this first great 
defiant action of life was her own. Sam himself 
would not have inspired her to it had her instincts 
echoed her father's reasons and admitted their 
justice ; but out of mingled emotion rose the con- 
viction that Mr. Major was not just ; that, indeed, 
he was absolutely and hopelessly mistaken in this 
matter. Lydia was now eighteen years old ; she 
had enjoyed an education superior in every respect 
to her father's ; she felt that in matters of the world 
few had less knowledge than he, and that conse- 
quently few were less justified in forming opinions. 
Yet over this crucial business of love, he claimed 
his authority and commanded her to do impossible 
things. She had argued long with him ; she had 
brought messages from Samuel to him ; but for once 
his patience had forsaken John Major, and he had 
blamed Lydia bitterly for speaking with Mr. Broken- 
shire again after being forbidden to do so. And 
then, wounded at heart, her father went off to sea 
for an indefinite space of time, and Lydia, also 
wounded, brooded at home. After a week of 
thought only one thing caused her to hesitate, and 
when he heard it, her lover uttered a solemn promise. 
He swore that he would never go fishing in Start 
Bay again. Then, believing him and convinced that 
by no right or reason need she decline longer to be 
Sam's wife, Lydia consented and they planned the 
future with utmost speed. 

The first step was to marry, and, in order to 
complete this business safely and evade risk of 
interruption, Sam decreed they must disappear and 
give no sign of their destination until the deed was 
done. Flight in the 'Night Hawk' was of course 
his notion ; and he vowed that his boat henceforth 
would possess an additional value and sentimental 
worth by reason of this noble achievement. 

They meant to hide until the necessary days were 



126 THE HAVEN 

past. During the time Lydia would keep ashore, 
Samuel with his crew intended to fish waters well 
beyond the beat of the Brixham boats. Then, once 
married, Sam and Lydia would sail back boldly to 
their home ; she would ascend the steps of Over- 
gang and henceforth reign in Mr. Brokenshire's little 
cottage until fate enabled them to take a better. The 
place was to be renovated, re-papered and re-painted 
during their absence. Mr. Peach had undertaken to 
superintend these duties for his nephew ; but of 
course he knew not where or why Sam was going 
from home so long. 

Here, too, it may be noted that accident prevented 
Lydia's letter to her father. It came about that John 
Major did not receive it or learn what had happened 
until his return home. He had changed his plans, 
and, finding the North Channel fishing badly, 
determined to leave it and go east. Thus, a telegram 
despatched to Ilfracombe by Mrs. Michelmore on 
the morning of Lydia's disappearance was not 
delivered, as her brother did not return to that port, 
and Lydia's letter had grown more than a week old 
before he opened it on the day that he sailed home 
again to Brixham. 

But the news fell upon him by word of mouth 
before he left the harbour. Then he heard from Mr. 
Varwell that Lydia had taken her life into her own 
keeping and run away to marry Brokenshire ; that 
she meant to return at once after the ceremony ; and 
that she begged her father to make no attempt 
to interfere with her plans, because her conscience 
was clear in this matter, and she knew that she was 
doing right and following the road that Providence 
had planned for her. 

Lydia had been absent from her home for eight 
days before her father and brother returned and 
heard the news. 



CHAPTER XIV 

ALONG the familiar parapet that stretches to sea- 
ward of Brixham harbour a dozen loafers were 
assembled. They smoked and said harsh things 
concerning local government and the times. For 
generations upon this lifted pathway has the world 
of Brixham been set right by word of mouth ; for 
generations have the fisherman's life and conduct, 
present hope and future prospects, been the theme. 
The debaters are usually vague and lack all synthetic 
power. According to inherited instincts, or acquired 
prejudices built on personal experience, they speak. 
A few of better education and intellect feel out dimly 
to the secret of their troubles ; but none goes to the 
root ; none admits to himself that the industry as 
here pursued is doomed. They take each problem 
singly ; they fail either to relate them, or to perceive 
that the slow but steady deterioration of their out- 
look, and the decrease of their prosperity, are caused 
by various forces working together upon different 
aspects of the question. Little light comes to these 
theorists, and they live in extreme mental confusion. 
The religious cast their troubles on an Almighty's 
shoulders ; the majority give man the blame and 
attribute their difficulties and disabilities to the 
shortcoming of the governing class. These would 
fight, but dare not for fear of immediate ruin. They 
recognise none of the efforts made in so many 

127 



128 THE HAVEN 

directions on their behalf; they credit neither 
individuals, councils, nor associations with any desire 
to advance their welfare ; a sense of gratitude, always 
extremely rare among the folk, is in danger of 
disappearing under the stress of the times. The 
men are jealous, narrow-minded, and suspicious ; and 
it was to these qualities that the philosophy of Mr. 
Varwell sometimes ministered. His hearers had 
no wit to winnow Dick's grain of wheat from the 
bushel of chaff in which he was accustomed to 
present it. They listened to him, half in scorn, half 
in doubt, but many believed that he spoke wisdom 
and was a friend of the people despite his worthless 
life and manners. 

He sat now on the parapet beside half a score of 
men, smoked, spat, and listened with open contempt 
to their conversation. 

Each advanced his theory of the situation, and 
some were sentimental, and some were scientific, and 
none agreed together save in this : that Brixham 
was going to the dogs a good deal quicker than the 
rest of the world. 

"Look at wages," said a fisherman who kept at 
home with a broken shoulder-blade ; " can any man 
deny that they be dropping to starvation pitch ? 
Week after week now 'tis silver, where it used to be 
gold. How are we to go on living, and how are the 
owners to go on keeping boats seaworthy ? That's 
the puzzle." 

"Tis this cursed Free Trade in the Channel," 
declared an old man with a forehead like an ape's. 
His hair was bristling and came almost to his eye- 
brows ; his eyes were very small and dim ; his 
chin was shaven, but from the extremity of it there 
sprouted a small, grey fan-shaped beard. 

" What I say is, that if England rules the waves, 
why the hell be they French and Belgian steam 
trawlers allowed in sight of us ? They swarm where, 



THE HAVEN 129 

in my youth, none dare show theirselves but Plymouth 
and Brixham boats. If we'd met a foreigner there, 
us would soon have sent his trawl to the bottom, and 
his boat after it, if he'd showed fight ; but now, along 
with their steam, they laugh at us and sweep the 
sea. And the men we vote into Parliament help 'em 
to ruin us." 

" To hear you silly old fools ! " exclaimed Tumble- 
down Dick. " Haven't you larned yet that England 
don't rule the waves and don't rule nothing ? Man 
alive, she can't rule herself ! She's like a big horse 
whipped by a little jockey. The beast's eyes do 
magnify, so that he don't know how small the chap 
that rides him really be. And 'tis like that along 
with us : we think the governing body is far bigger 
and stronger than it is. Our silly eyes magnify it 
out of all truth, and so we suffer the scourge and 
spur, and don't know yet and God knows when we 
shall know that we be England arm and head and 
leg not these here puny puppets danced over us. 
As for French and Belgian trawlers, I'm all for the 
rights of man myself, and, if they've got more sense 
than you chaps, and more industry, and can put 
steam into their boats, they deserve to lick you. The 
battle's to the strong." 

" 'Tisn't they foreigners at all," declared another 
man. He was thin and hawk-like, with a bent nose, 
bright eyes, and withered cheeks. " 'Tis these here 
north winds be responsible. I've marked 'em, though 
nobody else seems to see it. They blow off and on 
for weeks and weeks through the winters nowadays, 
and they bring down a monstrous body of icy cold 
water from the North Sea. That's why fish be that 
scarce. The Channel's too cold for 'em, and they go 
south to deep water and they never come back. 
More and more go every year, and a time will come 
in the future when there won't be a marketable fish 
left in our waters. You mark my words." 



130 THE HAVEN 

" No such thing," argued a man with one leg. 
" There's a plenty of fish more than ever there was ; 
but we've got into a custom of using a wrong mesh. 
Because some people thought that whiting could get 
through a small mesh, we got making mesh smaller 
and smaller, and now we kill millions and millions 
of undersized dabs and plaice and such like. 'Tis 
that folly be cutting our throats. Whiting's re- 
sponsible for the whole mischief. If we was to leave 
whiting alone and let 'em slip and be damned to 'em ! 
and make our mesh half so large again, in two years' 
time we'd all be getting gold once more instead of 
silver." 

" We talk, but we do nought," said the man with 
the fan beard. " You may hear good sense and deep 
arguments here any day, and I dare say many a 
thing be said among us that's well worth minding 
and acting upon ; but unless we gather ourselves 
together and let the nation hear our opinions, nought 
will ever be done. Who knows that we'm discon- 
tented ? Nobody, except our wives and the salesmen. 
So, of course, not a hand is lifted." 

" The Lord knows," said a very dark, hirsute, 
sullen -looking man who stood a little apart with his 
eyes on the sea. " The Lord well knows we'm 
discontented, and He knows or should do that 
well we may be. And He'll keep us in trouble till 
we mind His commands. You chaps get together 
and talk a lot of silly stuff about winds and weather 
and foreigners and no fish. 'Tis the old ' keep holy ' 
question that be ruining Brixham ; and so long as we 
put business afore religion and break the command- 
ment, just because others do, so long we'll get 
punished for it. Tis very well for Lowestoft men 
to meet Newlyn men and have a great palaver about 
Sunday fishing ; and 'tis very well for Newlyn men 
not to fish o' Sunday ; but they keep off it on 
account of the market, not because of God Almighty's 



THE HAVEN 131 

orders. And now the Lowestoft men will do like- 
wise ; but not for religion, and they won't hoodwink 
their Maker, though they may think to. As for us, 
the time has gone when the Lord would spare a place 
if a dozen righteous men were found in it. Such 
miracles don't happen now ; and so we all go down 
to the pit together." 

His eyes blazed, and he shook his fist at Brixham 
with prophetic indignation. 

" Hold hard ! " cried Dick Varwell ; " that's not 
worthy of you, Mr. Larkin. Why, even John Major 
wouldn't go so far as that Do you think the 
righteous are to suffer for the guilty and still call 
your God a sportsman ? Would He do things that 
you'd duck a welsher for doing ? would He do things 
you'd warn a jockey off for doing ? These here 
troubles come from quite a different cause, and I'll 
tell you what 'tis. The fault lies in all you knock- 
kneed creatures that dursn't put out a hand to 
your own. You fish in the wrong place that's 
what's the matter. Larkin, here, points to Brixham 
and blames it, and I do the same not because 
Brixham ban't frightened to work Sunday, but 
because " 

He broke off and stuck his long, thin arm out over 
the parapet. 

" There there that's Torquay, that is : the home 
of fat horses and fat lap-dogs and fat old maiden 
ladies like the lilies that toil not neither do they spin ! 
Go and fish there ! Go and trawl in the villas and 
take back a bit of your own ! You risk your lives to 
keep sole and turbot going on the plates of their tame 
cats and you call yourselves men ! " 

" Stop that evil stuff, if you don't want to be struck 
from heaven for it, as you deserve," retorted the man 
with one leg. " 'Tis a scandal to civilisation every 
time you open your mouth, and the things that you say 
wouldn't deceive a gull. You say they toil not and 



132 THE HAVEN 

spin not over there ; but didn't their fathers toil and 
spin ? " 

" Spin yes, I'll swear they did," added another ; 
" for half they rich people over the water be lifted up 
by cotton." 

" And if the men as sweated and schemed for the 
money shouldn't leave it to their sons and daughters, 
where should they leave it ? " 

" That's your awful ignorance to ask such a 
question," answered Varwell. " Why, the State 
should have it. 'Tis the very backbone of Socialism 
that no one man has the right to keep another in idle 
fatness, just because he happens to be his son. If I 
make a fortune, be that any good reason why my sons 
and darters should batten like maggots in a pear, and 
squander my money on luxuries, and lead idle, worth- 
less lives, and not do so much good in the world as the 
man that brushes their boots or the woman that 
combs their hair ? Everybody will have to justify his 
existence come presently, and them that don't work 
shan't eat ; and no human being shall be allowed 
to crawl about after an old woman's poodle or 
wash her Persian cat, because manhood cries out 
against such a shameful waste of life. Such mean- 
minded curs as can do a flunkey's work, and mess 
about indoors all day with women servants we shall 
turn them out into the fresh air and send 'em to sea 
or to the land ; and if they sink under it, no loss 
they'll be making room for their betters. And the 
women shall be taught self-respect also. It shall be 
a crime, I tell you, for one female to wait upon 
another unless she's sick. Only babbies shall be 
dressed and washed and have their hair done for 'em 
not grown men and women. It makes the soul creep 
to think there be thousands and thousands of females 
living to-day as don't get into their own clothes. To 
hell with the gowns that a woman can't put on for 
herself! To hell with the men that can't shave their 



THE HAVEN 133 

own chins ! The world's boiling over with human 
energy and we let it boil over. We let the young 
waste their youth and the old waste their money. 
We let millions of our fellow men and women earn their 
livings in a way that's enough to make their Maker 
blush, if He's not past blushing ; and we let thousands 
more never lift one ringer to help the world forward, 
but suffer them to cumber the roads with their rotten- 
ness and spend tons of money on their own toys and 
passions human trash that would be better manuring 
the grass than walking on it. Larkin can talk of 
Sunday fishing. What's that to what a thousand 
over-fed, useless human slugs on t'other side of the 
Bay do every day of the week? We'm men and 
women in Brixham, at any rate, and we get our 
bread by the sweat of our brows ; but there pah ! 
half the folk on the earth can only live by fawning 
on t'other half. A puppet show, that's what 'tis ; 
and fthe shop-keepers bow and scrape and wink at 
one another, and pretend they want nought so much 
as the custom of the villa people ; and all the while 
they go on moving with the times and making new 
laws and building new buildings and catering for the 
masses. Why ? Because they know the classes are 
doomed. The villa people will be at the end of their 
long rope before they can look round. They've got 
to go like last year's bluebottles have got to go. 
They may sit drowsing in the sun a little while yet, 
and keep their fat on their idle bones ; but there's a 
sharp frost coming the frost of reason and justice 
and equality ; and when the sun rises in a clear sky 
after that frost what then? Why, they'll all be 
gone, like last year's prize stock." 

" Yes," said the one-legged man ; " and then them 
tradesmen, as be so bent on driving them away, will 
find they've killecl the goose that laid the golden eggs. 
And damned fools they'll look ; and I hope for one 
I shall live to see it. My son's in a shop over there, 



134 THE HAVEN 

and I know what I'm talking about The masses 
may make the trams pay perhaps ; but they won't 
make the shops that charge too much for everything 
pay. They traders will have to come down to honest 
profits and no more, then same as the rest of the 
world will." 

" Money's money, however, and 'tis no use your 
crying out against it, because the world can't go on 
without it now," argued the old man with the fan- 
shaped beard. 

" It did once and it could again," declared Tumble- 
down Dick. " 'Tis the root of all evil, and the root 
of all inequality. It puts a false value on things 
and makes class distinctions. They all rose out of 
it. If you go to the bottom of things, you'll find 
class be only another word for cash now. A rag 
and bone merchant can have all the Upper Ten in 
his house, if the house be big enough and full enough 
of good cooks. I'm not saying anything against that, 
mind. There's no worth in the accident of coming 
from ancient stock. Sane people know that now. 
The worth is to be worthy of that ancient stock, and 
go one better than your grandfather, and two better 
than your great-grandfather, according to modern 
sense and modern wisdom and the advantages of the 
nineteenth century. In my case I've set my fore- 
bears a better example than they set me, thank God ; 
and every fifth of November I get drunk as a fly 
just for shame to think that a Varwell once carried 
a king on his shoulders and saved William from 
wetting his Dutch shoon." 

He babbled on ; then the dark and fiery Larkin 
took him to task. 

" You to dare to talk of justice and wisdom and 
duty ! " he said. " You to tell of setting an example ! 
When was you ever known to do an honest day's 
work ? When did you ever justify your outraged 
God for bringing you into the world ? When did 



THE HAVEN 135 

you ever toil or spin either except to spin a tangle 
of wicked words and nonsense such as you be doing 
now?" 

" A very proper question," answered the vagabond. 
" And don't you think I'm contented with myself 
my dears, because I ban't. Far from it. I'm what 
a rotten society has made me a failure ; a signpost, 
showing how wrongly things be planned. When I'm 
sober, I can see myself so clear-eyed as the best 
among you, and 'tis a shameful sight, sure enough." 

" You ought to be ashamed without a doubt" 

" I am ashamed of the nation that can let a man 
like me sleep under a haystack and go in rags while 
many another, here and there as be clay to my 
gold rides in purple and fine linen and bleats about 
the old religion and the new politics, and keeps 
the world back, and makes this generation a laughing- 
stock to them as shall follow us in the days of 
sense coming all too slowly." 

He broke off and looked to sea. 

"Be that John Major's boat?" he asked. 

" Yes," answered a fisherman. " Tis the ' Jack 
and Lydia' sure enough, back from the North 
Channel. She's home sooner than she meant to 
be." 

" Don't let nobody say I don't work, then," con- 
tinued Mr. Varwell. " Now I've got a very un- 
pleasant job before me, and I'd far sooner any other 
man here had to do it ; but I promised Brokenshire, 
and I'll keep my word. I've a message from Samuel 
for * Holy John,' and it won't please him none too 
well. But I'm hoping he knows the facts and finds 
himself ready to face them. His great gift of faith 
will come in handy for once." 

" He knows nothing at all," explained the one- 
legged man. " I was up over and passed the time 
of day with Mrs. Michelmore but yesterday. Of 
course she's taking rather a dark view of the business, 



136 THE HAVEN 

as her manner is. In fact, she says that they'll 
never be married. She's sure they never will. She 
gave me a list from memory of every girl that's 
slipped here for the last twenty years ; and 'twas 
rather a long one. But the point is that her brother 
had sailed too soon to get her telegraph or his 
daughter's letter. So 'twill all be news to him from 
start to finish." 

" Then my job's like to be a good bit trickier than 
ever I thought," declared Tumbledown Dick. " So 
I'll go in the * Sailor's Knot ' and have a pint to 
brace myself afore the good man arrives." 



CHAPTER XV 

THE crew of the 'Jack and Lydia' came ashore 
presently with some good fish caught on the way 
home. 

Then, as John Major stumped up the steps and 
nodded to Mr. Memery, who awaited him, there 
stepped forward Dick. He bade the fisherman 
" Good morning," and beckoned with his yellow 
fingers. 

" I want a few words with you, and they'd better 
be spoken out of the way," he said. 

" Speak 'em here," answered John ; " there's no- 
thing I'm like to want to hear from you, Richard 
Varwell." 

" You're right, skipper ; 'tis the last thing you'll 
want to hear. But I promised to bring you a mes- 
sage, and I've put myself out of the way above a 
bit to do so; and I hope you'll kindly listen to 
me." 

" Go on, then." 

" Better come over here out of the row. I'm only 
thinking for your comfort, I assure you," answered 
Varwell. 

" If you want my comfort, say what you've got 
to say quick. And let any hear it as care to hear 
it," answered Mr. Major. 

Ears were pricked at this. Ned stood beside his 
father ; Gilberd and Arthur Michelmore had just 



138 THE HAVEN 

brought up the baskets of fish, and they, too, waited 
to learn what Tumbledown Dick might have to 
impart. Others were within earshot. Mr. Memery 
waited for a market, and buyers were dropping in, 
Mr. Peach happened to come down from his barking 
yard ; he had business with John Major, and now 
approached. Thus a small crowd saw Lydia's father 
receive the news of her flight. Probably every man- 
among them knew it, save only the crew of the 
'Jack and Lydia.' 

" In a word," said Varwell, well accustomed to be 
the centre of a listening throng ; " in a word, my 
friend, Sam Brokenshire, has unfortunately not been 
able to see with your eyes, Mr. Major. Youth 
cleaves to youth, and whether for sense or folly, the 
one thing about youth is that it must be doing. 
We older blades stop to think, and very often we 
think wrong; but the young especially the young 

in love You're impatient to be gone, I see. 

Then here's the message : Brokenshire's took your 
daughter. They'll be married all right and regular 
as quickly as the law allows, and then they'll come 
back and settle down to do their part in the world 
as man and wife. But they can't ask you to the 
wedding, unfortunately, because ' 

Major turned from him and stared at the people 
round about. Ned felt himself grow cold all over.. 
He could not take his eyes off Varwell's face. 

Now Dick shrugged his shoulders, declared that 
his friend Brokenshire had done well, and then 
laughed at John Major's blank countenance ; but for 
this ill-timed amusement he paid upon the spot. 
While other men were explaining to the fisherman 
that his daughter had fled and that the ' Night 
Hawk ' and her crew were away, none knew where^ 
rough hands fell on Mr. Varwell, and Arthur Michel- 
more a man of peace in most affairs grew suddenly- 
zealous for John Major and lost his temper at the 



THE HAVEN 139 

insolence of Richard. He was a bachelor, and had 
long hidden at the bottom of his heart some shadowy 
image of Lydia as a possible helpmate in the future, 
when he could afford to take a wife. But it was on 
behalf of the skipper, not himself, that now he acted. 
The old man's rueful face impressed Arthur, and 
some fragment of imagination touched him as he 
gazed upon that stricken countenance. Then he 
looked at Mr. Varwell's ragged beard, impudent eyes, 
and bibulous nose ; whereupon a rare though furious 
wrath shook him into violence. The fit passed 
speedily ; but in its passage it spurred Arthur to a 
deed. He clenched his fist, rushed at Tumbledown 
Dick and hit him full and fair in the middle of his 
ragged waistcoat. The victim was quite unprepared 
for such an assault, and went down like a straw before 
the stroke. His hat flew in one direction, his cigarette 
in another, and he himself, collapsing backward, fell 
head first and heels in air over the quay. Happily 
for Varwell he missed the gunwale of a boat below 
and soused into four feet of water. 

It was the supreme action of Arthur's life, and one 
of the most unpleasant experiences in Richard's. 
But Dick touched bottom, waded to the steps and 
came ashore again. 

A roar of laughter greeted him as he ascended 
to the quay with his rags clinging to his thin body 
and his long hair and beard streaming ; but he 
laughed as loudly as the rest, shook himself among 
them like a dog, picked up his hat, and asked for 
his cigarette. 

Major, Ned, and a few men had moved along the 
quay. Gilberd was left to see the fish sold. A crowd 
collected round Varwell and jeered at his plight. 

u Thank the Lord I wasn't wearing my gold watch 
this morning," he said ; "and since Arthur wanted 
me to have a bath, he ought to have knocked me 
over t'other side of the quay, where they ban't quite 



140 THE HAVEN 

so many dead fish at the bottom. And now one of 
you good, working Christians had better show what 
you be worth and lend me a few dry clothes while 
this here court suit be dried." 

None offered to serve him, so Dick crossed the 
road and entered the * Sailor's Knot.' 

For such a customer Mr. Munday reluctantly be- 
stirred himself, and presently Dick, clad in some of 
the landlord's most ancient clothes, marched radiant 
into the world once more. 

" We live and learn," he said to the men on the 
quay who greeted his return. " Now, to-day I've 
learned that 'tis a great mistake to carry other men's 
messages. You see, all that I wanted for to do 
was to let the blow fall so light on Holy John as 
possible to spare him, in fact, everything that could 
be spared him. And what happens ? He turns his 
back on me as if I was a bad smell, and that yellow- 
haired, mild young tea-drinker, Arthur Michelmore, 
suddenly finds his manhood and scats me tail over 
head into the water ! I'd never have thought 'twas 
in him. But human nature can still surprise me 
seemingly much though I've larned about it." 

At home John Major met his weeping sister and 
heard, not only the truth, but the reason why the 
truth had missed him until now. To seek Lydia 
was vain, for she might be hidden at any port in 
England ; while any news of the * Night Hawk ' 
must be equally difficult to glean. His powerlessness 
chiefly smote Mr. Major. Only one man in Brixham 
knew where Brokenshire was to be found, and that 
man, godless though he might be, was the least 
likely to sell his friend. Nor, indeed, did Lydia's 
father feel in any strong mood to stir himself about 
her. He felt her action as a thing beyond power 
of belief. For a girl brought up as she had been 
and educated and instructed as she had been ; for 
a girl who had enjoyed advantages of learning 



THE HAVEN 141 

and religion ; for her mother's daughter to do this 
thing, staggered Mr. Major with the force of a 
revelation. He was sore and he was much startled. 
That the close, sacred relation between Lydia and 
himself, that a tie extending through her whole 
short life, could be broken so lightly and so un- 
reasonably, filled the fisherman with amazement. 
To see that what had happened was for the best, 
exceeded even his eye of faith, because, in John's 
judgment, there promised no shadow of happiness 
for the wife of any dishonest and irreligious man ; 
but a time came when Mr. Major's roaming and 
grief-stricken spirit reached the limits of its chain, 
and the old rivets of his faith stood the test. Even 
this event could _not loosen the shackles or free 
him from his unreason. Before Lydia returned to 
Brixham as the wife of Brokenshire, her father had 
satisfied himself that this thing was destined to happen 
for purposes by him not understood. 

11 'Tis evil," he said to his son, "and, as such,, 
I'll not condone it or meddle in it, and I'll not 
know Lydia or own her any more until her husband 
is found steady on the side of righteousness. Evil 
happens in the world, and it's suffered to happen ; 
but remember this, Ned : the Lord has the last 
word. Therefore I'll not rage vainly like the 
heathen, and make bad worse. The reason for 
many and many a thing that happens to men and 
women is hidden from our short range of sight ; but 
faith have got something grander to do than look 
for reasons. 'Tis enough that we know nought 
happens without a reason ; and that though some- 
times the reason be showed us clear enough, yet 
oftentimes it is not. For you and me and Aunt 
Emma, we've got to take this terrible hard stroke 
in a right spirit. The power has been took from 
me to stop the marriage, else I would stop it. 
And Lydia will marry him, and we must go on 



142 THE HAVEN 

and watch what the Lord means to do with her ; 
and we must pray for her ; and we must not lose 
a chance to help her in the future if God offers us 
a chance to do it." 

As for Ned, his mild, forgiving heart felt little 
emotion beyond one of great interest to know how 
Lydia would feel as the wife of Brokenshire. He 
perceived that she must have been magnificently 
fond of Samuel to do so great a thing ; and, on 
the whole, he felt rather proud of his sister's pluck. 
He looked forward to meeting her again, and 
wondered whether she would be much changed. 
He was quite overcome by the strangeness of feeling 
that Brokenshire would be his brother ; yet he rather 
rejoiced in the thought. 

Ned proposed to ask his father whether he might 
visit Lydia when she came home, but he desisted 
from his intention. He was shy, and decided that 
he would not risk a refusal. Mr. Major had explicitly 
stated that he did not intend to know Lydia any 
more until her husband changed his manner of life ; 
and therefore it was probable that further friendly 
relations between Lydia and her brother would be 
forbidden. Ned, therefore, kept his own intentions 
a secret in this matter. He went next day to see 
Arthur Michelmore, who lodged with a man and 
his wife at Overgang, and was subsequently able 
to report that Sam Brokenshire's house began to 
shine like the sun in the hands of painters and 
paper-hangers. 

" He's having the place done up inside and out 
seemingly," said Ned. " I met Mr. Peach outside, 
and he told me that Brokenshire was spending 
twelve pounds on the house and as much more 
for furniture." 

" That's true enough," declared Emma Michelmore, 
" for I was up over myself, to see Mrs. Gilberd, 
before you came back, and I ran against that busy 



THE HAVEN 143 

man, Titus Peach ; and nothing would do but I must 
hear what he was planning for his nephew. And, 
despite all the bitter load of misery on my heart, I 
couldn't deny that no bride in a small way was ever 
known to go into a better little house and find more 
flame-new things around her. Titus had twenty 
pounds from Samuel Brokenshire to spend, and he's 
added five, being the young man's uncle ; and for my 
part I never would have thought that five-and-twenty 
sovereigns could work such wonders." 

" What did Mr. Peach have to say about it ? " 
asked John Major. 

" Nothing," answered his sister. " Said nought and 
knew nought. You know the caution of the man. 
He wouldn't tread on a snail till he've looked all 
round it. Not a word he dropped concerning them, 
and when I began about the family luck, he ventured 
to believe 'twas more than time the luck changed. 
He even thought it was going to do so. He wants 
for me to go and see his garden and things, and 
I'd even promised foolish though it may sound ; 
but then this blow fell, and I knew too well, that 
it was a reminder sent to me to remember my place 
and not go seeking to gad about in flower gardens. 
Flowers, indeed ! ' Leave the flowers to the butter- 
flies,' I said to Peach last time we met and he 
asked me again. ' The only flowers that ever come 
within my sight be at funerals.' But he wouldn't 
have it. For an oldish creature he's far too cheerful, 
and even this tragic come-along-of-it wouldn't shake 
a strong word out of him. There's some dreadful 
doom hanging over Titus so like as not ; for when 
a man gets up to his age without a blow and without 
a care, it all comes to once, and he's generally in 
the dust afore he knows it never to lift his battered 
head again." 



CHAPTER XVI 

WHEN next John Major went to sea, he stopped 
from shore a fortnight, and during that time the 
' Night Hawk ' came back to port. Lydia returned 
to Brixham as she left it, by water ; but her state 
had changed, for she was now the wife of Samuel 
Brokenshire. 

Into the little street of Overgang she came, and 
from the first applied herself very thoroughly to 
the cares and duties of a fisherman's wife. To the 
work she brought energy, excellent home training, 
and an education superior to her station. She felt 
indeed, not seldom, that much of her knowledge 
must evermore be wasted now ; but that looked 
a small matter set against possession of Samuel. 
Him she loved with all her young heart, and nothing 
could shadow her pride and wifely joy in the new 
dignities. 

Her neighbours held off awhile ; then, finding that 
Lydia gave herself neither airs nor gaces, went to 
the other extreme and forced their friendship. The 
romance of the situation stimulated Overgang and 
formed a great topic for debate. Some held that 
John Major was to blame in his attitude ; others, 
remembering Brokenshire's irregularities, considered 
his father-in-law justified. The future of Samuel 
particularly interested Overgang, and his friends, who 
were many, declared that, after this great step in 

144 



THE HAVEN 145 

his career, he would, without doubt, abandon the 
picturesque errors of his youth and take his place 
in the ranks of responsible manhood. Others, less 
sanguine or less kindly disposed, did not imagine that 
the fisherman would change, and prophesied no 
fair things for Lydia Brokenshire. 

To his sister Ned presently came upon a Sunday 
afternoon. By stealth he visited her ; but she 
welcomed him with rejoicing, and made him stay 
longer than he intended. His shadowy anger against 
her she quickly smothered ; he was, indeed, soon on 
her side, and he even promised to do what he 
could with their father. Lydia was full of Samuel's 
goodness ; and since he happened to be out, she 
could descant on this fine theme to her heart's 
content. 

" He's all and a thousand times more than all 
I thought him," she declared. "Oh, Ned, I'm 
prouder and prouder of his cleverness and his pluck 
and his sense ! If father only knew the man he 
was but he must know ; I'll never lie easy in my 
bed till he does know and always ready to do 
anything to please me Sam, I mean. He went 
to church with me this morning, and I was terrible 
disappointed father didn't see him there." 

But Ned had not reached the point of these 
generalities. He wanted particular information, and 
bombarded Lydia with questions as to her plot, her 
hiding-place, her manner of flight, her wedding, and 
the occasion of her return. 

She told him how she had departed, and how lived 
in lodgings at Weymouth, while the { Night Hawk ' 
had worked at sea and made various unsatisfactory 
experiments in the use of the flying trawl for 
mackerel. She then described her marriage. 

" Sam wanted the registry office, but I would have 
it done in a church, and he made no fuss and came 
like a bird. And Mr. Trust and Mr. Mutter came 

10 



146 THE HAVEN 

too ; and Saul Mutter gave me away. And Sam 
surprised me wonderfully at the last moment, for 
he'd brought his best clothes unknown to me, and 
he looked so fine and I was such a dowdy that I 
could have been quite vexed about it. Then the 
four of us went and had a little wedding breakfast 
at an inn, and by three in the afternoon we'd set 
sail for home." 

" Aunt Emma said you ought to have come back 
by train." 

" Sam wanted to ; but somehow I wouldn't. I'd 
got a feeling that as I went, so I'd come back ; and 
I think he was glad I chose that way. Besides, the 
expense ! We've got to be careful, I promise you, 
Ned. A lot has been spent, and Sam won't let me 
touch a penny of my own little bit of money. Come 
and see the house now everything new and bright. 
He had it all done while we were away for a surprise ; 
and a great surprise it was. All the same, I hope 
presently that we shall get a semi-detached house at 
least with just a scrap of garden. Overgang's 

rather Though the friendliness of everybody is 

wonderful." 

She shrugged her shoulders, and Ned agreed with 
her. 

" Of course he'll soon raise himself in the land and 
take a better place." 

Then she planned a pleasure for her brother. 

" Next time you come home I'll ask Deborah and 
Tom," said Lydia. " We'll have a good feast. Tom 
is after my husband to let him go to sea with him 
for just one trip some day ; and if Mr. Honeywill 
has nothing to say against it, I expect Sam will let 
him go." 

" 'Twill be meat and drink to Tom," declared the 
fisherboy, " and I'm sure 'tis very kind of you to 
think of axing Deb and me to tea some time, Lyddy. 
I shall be very glad to come, and right well you know 



THE HAVEN 147 

Deb will be too ; but I'm just a thought uncertain 
as to father." 

" You're here now," she said. " I suppose you 
wouldn't have come without his leave? That's why 
I was so deeply glad and thankful to see you. For 
I said to myself, * If he'll let Ned come, surely it 
can't be very long before he'll forgive us and come 
himself.' " 

" I don't say that he wouldn't let me come," 
answered the boy ; " for that matter, why shouldn't 
I come ? We'm brother and sister, and and but 
there 'tis : I felt 'twas just a possible thing that father 
might say ' no ' if I axed him outright, so I didn't." 

Lydia was disappointed. 

" Then my hope's vain," she said. " At any rate, 
don't do anything again that can annoy him. I've 
done enough, and I should be very sorry to turn him 
from you as well as from Sam and me. Tell him 
just what you've done and just what you've seen, 
when you go home. Hide nothing. If he forbids 
you to come again, then mind you do just what he 
says, Ned. But still, I hope he won't I hope he 
won't. It's lovely to see you sitting there, eating in 
my house." 

Before Ned went away his brother-in-law returned, 
and greeted him with friendship. 

" How's the governor, and how's he standing up 
against this shock ? " was his first question a question 
that Lydia had not put. 

Ned's command of language was not equal to 
answering with much delicacy or diplomacy. Natural 
tact he had, but it could not modify the truth. 

" He's very downcast about it still ; but all the 
same he knows it was for the best, because nothing 
can happen that ban't. Only he doesn't see the 
reason, and he's going to keep away from the pair 
of you till light shines on him and he's told what 
to do." 



148 THE HAVEN 

" He'll come round such a sensible and far-seeing 
man. You tell him that we're so happy as a pair 
of song-birds, and that I'm turned good as gold, and 
might actually have been seen and heard to church 
this morning if he'd been there and used his eyes 
and ears." 

" He's been reading the Bible all day to old 
Blight." 

" I know will read him to death so his wife 
whispered. But a very good death, no doubt, if it 
has to be. Well, you can tell him that I'm a re- 
formed creature, and that the ' Night Hawk ' is quite 
a reformed craft, and will never have a shadow upon 
her name no more. Though how such a straight 
boat and such a straight crew was ever so badly 
misunderstood by your father will always be a puzzle 
to me. He must go his way and I'll go mine ; but 
if he's not under my roof and proud of me for a 
son-in-law afore we're all a year older, then the fault 
will be his. And you can tell him that Lydia's 
happy as a queen can't he, Lyddy? And that I'll 
be a good husband to her, and think of her welfare 
and happiness from now for ever, just as much as 
he did for your mother. And if there's any more 
he wants to know, or wishes altered, he's only got 
to say the word and I'll do everything in my power 
to oblige him." 

" And what living man could speak fairer or 
kindlier?" asked Ned's sister. 

Primed with these opinions and messages, he 
departed presently, and Lydia kissed him and Sam 
shook his hand and gave him a cigarette. The boy 
returned home much impressed with what he had 
seen and heard. Lydia seemed altogether more 
interesting and important than of old ; while as for 
his brother-in-law, Ned felt a sort of pride in being 
henceforth related to such a personage. 

He told his father everything, and did not even 



THE HAVEN 149 

forget the number of rooms in Lydia's house or the 
pattern of the wall-paper in the parlour. This led to 
a confession, for Mrs. Michelmore inadvertently cor- 
rected Ned upon some minor particulars, and thus 
revealed the fact that she, too, had seen the house. 
She had not told Mr. Major that this was so, and 
now, upon his questioning gaze and lifted brows, she 
hastened to explain that she had indeed dropped in 
on the day before the Brokenshires returned home. 
To end the importunities of Titus Peach, she had 
allowed herself to do this frivolous thing. 

" For reasons best known to himself the man 
pestered me to see the place, and to be rid of him I 
did so. But that was afore the pair came back. 
And as for the future, John, your word's my law, as 
it always will be in family matters, so long as any 
of us be left. If you command that I'm not to visit 
my niece, I won't visit her ; if you say I am to do so, 
then I shall." 

The master took no notice of his sister, but 
addressed a question to his son. 

" Why for did you go up over to 'em without 
asking me first ? " he inquired. 

Ned hesitated; then told the truth. 

" Because I was terrible interested to see Lyddy 
again, and I felt that very likely you wouldn't let me 
go, father." 

John nodded. He pardoned some of Ned's replies 
by virtue of the honesty behind them. The boy 
often did wrong in his father's eyes, as a youngster of 
fifteen was sure to do ; but the truth he always 
told, and their differences were few and of short 
duration. Only in the matter of his life at sea had 
Ned ever attempted any sort of deception, but that 
was for John Major's sake. 

" Upon the whole," said his father, " 'twill be 
better and more seemly for this household to do 
what the conscience directs. 'Tisn't a case where I 



ISO THE HAVEN 

have a right to order any among us. At least, so I 
see it. For my part, as one cruelly wronged by a 
daughter who has had nought but love and kindness 
from me since the day they put her in my hands 
for my part, I say, I shall hold off from them, 
because I've got my self-respect, and I've got my 
own spoken word behind me. I made my views very 
clear to both of 'em, and neither will expect to have 
any truck with me. Not even Brokenshire's cheek 
would rise to that. Tis for him to show I'm mis- 
taken ; and if Lydia wants to win back my respect, 
she knows how best to set about it. Forgive her I 
have, because I'm ordered so to do by my Lord and 
Saviour ; but a great lot of sorrow and displeasure 
at her undaughterly and froward conduct will be 
marked by me. I can have nothing whatsoever to do 
with her or her husband yet awhile. Upon that 
subject I'm fixed and shall not change. Still, I don't 
mean to go beyond myself in this matter. You'll 
do what you think right, Emma ; and as for you, my 
son, 'tisn't for you to take my burden upon your 
shoulders. You can know her as formerly ; and since 
the least of us have our measure of power, you can 
use what sense and proper feeling you've got to help 
that man to do right." 

" Thank you, father." 

" As for me," said Emma, " I shall do the same as 
you, John. I've got my grievances too, God knows, 
against Lydia, though they look small beside yours. 
But she've forgotten how to treat a good aunt these 
many days, and I can't forget she suited herself and 
went off on the very day I axed her to do me a 
favour and go to a sort of party to see Mr. Peach's 
grotto. No doubt 'twould all have been a dreadful 
failure ; still she did ought to have gone ; and so I'll 
cool off on my side and let her see the world don't 
blow all one way, like the west wind. If us can't 
have giving and taking between niece and aunt, then 



THE HAVEN 151 

all I say is that the rising generation will be a selfish 
and horrid race as they certainly promise to be ; and 
I hope I shan't be left much over my three score 
and ten to clash with 'em. They'll be no better than 
a lot of hungry sea-gulls fighting for the best pieces, 
by the promise of 'em ; and when their time arrives, 
the likes of me and the maidenly daughters and 
motherly wives of the old days will be much better 
dead and buried from the wrath to come. So I 
shan't go anigh Lydia not for nine months any 
way. But I dare say afore then she'll find the 
older generation has got its uses even yet, and knows 
a thing or two they don't teach at school. Perhaps 
though, afore long, these here toads of girls as be 
coming on around us nowadays, without manners or 
modesty or anything but the stuff they've sucked 
up from the school-board perhaps they'll have no 
use for children when they grow up ; and then the 
whole human race will die out, owing to the men 
turning against the class of flat and harsh and bony 
and pushing females that you'll see ramping round 
everywhere in another generation or two." 

" You mustn't let your tongue run away with you 
as you do," answered her brother. " Here's Ned all 
eyes and ears, wondering what the mischief you 
mean. But be as 'twill, there's no harm can come of 
your standing off from my daughter for a bit. She'll 
find what home meant presently, and what a good, 
patient, work-loving aunt meant. Let her work now 
and taste the meaning of work, and get health of 
mind through it to see the great wrong she has done 
in disobeying me." 

" Yes," added Lydia's aunt ; " and if it don't come 
through sense, 'tis bound to come through sorrow. 
Is Samuel Brokenshire going straight because he's 
married a man ever crooked as a sickle ? She'll 
wish her cake was dough again afore she's a year 
older ; and even if he'd been a different sort and so 



152 THE HAVEN 

trustworthy as yourself, it must have come out all 
wrong in the end. We'm a cankered race ; and to 
suppose that your children were likely to make suc- 
cessful marriages, is as foolish as to fancy that fish 
will ever again fetch what it did in the 'sixties." 



END OF BOOK I 



BOOK II 



CHAPTER I 

ANOTHER spring had come and the labour of the 
time occupied all hands at the haven. None was 
busier during this season than Titus Peach, and 
though anxieties of a personal character hung heavy 
upon his mind, yet so much cried to be done at his 
place of business that he had no leisure to dwell on 
private problems. 

The barking yard lay under a grey cliff upon the 
harbour road, northerly. Here, in a sheltered nook 
half-way up the hill, Titus prospered. In the midst 
was a wide open space of cemented floor sloping at a 
gentle angle to the sea. Round about stood wooden 
buildings, where the sails were stored until their turn 
came ; in one corner appeared a boiler and cauldron ; 
and at hand were barrels containing Mr. Peach's 
stock in trade. Above the spot there towered two 
lofty masts with running gear. The place was a 
harmony of red and yellow colours. 

Sails, that looked no larger than bright autumn 
leaves at sea, extended mighty areas when spread 
here on the cement floor. Even a jib proved a very 
considerable piece of canvas stretched for treatment 
in the barking yard. 

Now a big mainsail filled the entire cemented 
space while Mr. Peach and an assistant boy laboured 
upon it. 

In the cauldron was brewed a decoction of oak 



156 THE HAVEN 

bark, that spouted like strong tea from a leather pipe 
when the cock was turned ; the barrels contained 
Stockholm tar, grease, and ochre of different shades. 
Fishermen who brought their sails to this annual 
process of preservation, selected their own colour ; 
and so the harmony of a fleet at sea was secured by 
divers hues that ranged from the favourite nankeen 
yellow to a russet red. 

Cased in tarpaulin trousers that were fastened 
under his armpits, protected also by an old jersey 
and an aged deerstalker cap that fastened in flaps 
under his chin, Mr. Peach paddled about on the 
canvas, like an unlovely insect crawling over an 
orange lily. He carried a mop and a pail, and he 
scattered a boiling mixture of rich colour round about 
him as he went. The preparation was of that fine 
yellow most popular with Brixham fishermen. It 
ran streaming and steaming over the great sail, and 
there was no sound but the slop, slop of the two 
mops. The hissing liquid spread by them trickled 
in great fingers over the sail, and Mr. Peach's straw- 
shod feet padded, with a sort of sucking splash, like 
a goose in mud, as he stumped about yard by yard 
over the canvas. Anon more dressing became 
necessary, and with the boy's aid Titus brewed a few 
more gallons. He was said to possess a secret 
hidden from any Brixham barker but himself, and 
some alleged that an addition other than tar, grease, 
or tan, gave to a Peach dressing its distinguished and 
durable quality. He did not deny it ; but it was his 
way neither to deny nor affirm. In truth the man's 
sole secret was to leave nothing to subordinates, but 
supervise all with magisterial thoroughness and know- 
ledge. From mixing of ingredients to application of 
them, Mr. Peach took the sole responsibility of his 
barking yard. He charged a little more than lesser 
men ; but he could afford to do so, and experience, 
extending over three decades, had convinced the 



THE HAVEN 157 

fishermen that Titus ensured their canvas an extra 
lease of life. 

Now he looked over the boy's work, brought him 
back to a point or two, and then, one side of the 
great sail being completely dressed, it was dragged 
over and the other side similarly treated. 

<"Tis a very good thing," said Mr. Peach, "that 
the weather has kept so brisk and dry, for this here 
mainsail will be ready for Mr. Major by dawn. 
Providence knows its own without a doubt, just as 
the opposite party is always said to do so. And 
'twas only to be expected that such a man shouldn't 
be kept off the sea at such a time an hour longer 
than could be helped." 

He dabbed away steadily, and soaked every thread 
of the canvas. 

" Ten year old, and good for ten more thanks to 
me," he said, regarding the sail with friendship. 

Then appeared, suddenly, Samuel Brokenshire about 
his own affairs. He was off the sea, and the time 
had come when the ' Night Hawk's ' feathers called 
for attention from Mr. Peach. 

Sam lent a hand with the gear on the great masts, 
and soon John Major's fine mainsail was dragged 
dripping aloft for the east wind to work upon it. 
Then a foresail took its place, and Titus continued 
his work while he talked to Sam. 

" If you bring your sails come Tuesday, I'll not 
keep you waiting more than I can help, but you 
know what 'tis now. If I had ten pair o' arms and 
ten pair o' legs, I couldn't keep pace with the work. 
'Tis Brixham's way never to look ahead. Nobody 
thinks nothing about barking till the moment comes ; 
then lo and behold ! everybody wants the thing 
done in a minute, and nobody can be kept waiting 
for anybody else. And how I get through and carry 
all the work off without making enemies, I wonder 
more and more from year to year." 



158 THE HAVEN 

" Nobody but you could do it," said Sam. " Tis 
your high cleverness, uncle, to keep 'em all friends 
and all satisfied. And if you were less than the man 
you are, and just rough and ready and like that 
* take-it-or-leave-it ' chap t'other side the bay, why, 
even then they'd all come to you all with any brains 
in their heads ; for well they know that none can tan 
a sail within a mile of you." 

Mr. Peach was gratified. 

" What you say is true enough, no doubt," he 
admitted. 

"And everybody says it. And what's more, Uncle 
Titus, you ought to begin to think of finding some- 
body to hand down your secret to. Because 'twill be 
a very bad day for Brixham if 'tis lost." 

Mr. Peach told his boy to go out of earshot ; then 
he broke a private grievance to Samuel. 

" I suppose you've come to choose your colour ? 
And you're welcome to the best I can do, as your 
mother's son always has been. But now list to me. 
I've found myself a good bit niffed of late in a certain 
quarter. Time flies and a lot of things fly with it. 
We ban't none of us getting younger, and, in some 
directions, a man up over fifty be saying ' good-bye ' 
to a lot more than he'll ever get the chance to 
welcome. In a word, she still holds off Mrs. 
Michelmore, I mean. I've made my intentions 
perfectly clear. I've even gone into figures. She's 
had tea in the parlour once, and in the grotto once. 
Still she says there don't seem any call to do anything 
definite, owing to the badness of the times and the 
shortness and uncertainty of life, and so on. But I 
had her there. ' Guy Fawkes, my dear creature ! ' I 
said to her John was at sea at the time * Guy 
Fawkes ! ' I said, ' 'tis just because of that very thing 
'tis because of the shortness of life and the un- 
certainty that I ax for you to make up your mind. 
I can wait as well as any man, and better than some,' 



THE HAVEN 159 

I told her. * I've waited for a wife till winter was at 
the door, and a few more years at this stage be 
nothing ; but the latter end often comes like a thief 
in the night/ I said, * and I don't want mine to find 
tne still in the single state.' She listened, and declared 
that if I was one of them rash, hasty men, I'd better 
seek elsewhere." 

" Run away with her ! " said Samuel. " I'll lend 
you my boat." 

" I don't want you to make fun about it," replied 
his uncle. " Things are coming to a climax, and 
I've decided not to wait after next autumn. But if 
I can get something definite sooner, so much the 
better. Now it strikes me that a man with your 

experience and cheek Besides, your wife's her 

niece eh ? " 

Samuel winked. 

" I see ; but 'tis a kicklish thing for the younger 
generation to go meddling with the love affairs of 
their grandfathers and grandmothers. However, for 
you, Uncle Titus, I'll do that, and more than 
that." 

" And I'll tan your sails for nought," said his uncle. 
"Yes, I will. I know the one task be harder than 
t'other, and if by any cunning word you could fetch 
her round and get her to say something final, 'twould 
be well worth the cost of your canvas." 

" A bargain then." 

"Not that I'm hopeful," continued Titus. "To 
get either * yes ' or ' no ' from some women be as 
hard as to fetch figs from thistles. I'm losing heart 
about her. She's very fond of saying, * Ah, that'll 
happen when Start Bay's open ! ' She says it when- 
ever you name an unlikely thing. And it looks to 
me that she'll make up her mind, where my business 
is concerned, then, and not sooner." 

"Start Bay! I thought it was open," exclaimed 
the poacher, winking again. 



160 THE HAVEN 

Mr. Peach shook his head. 

" You're a rogue,' he said, " and 'tis a great grief 
to me that you are. A good nephew, but a bad 
man ; and you owe it to me and your wife and your 
coming child to turn over a new leaf." 

"That's all right. Words don't break any bones. 
Let 'em find me in Start Bay before they lecture 
me." 

" And that they will do sooner or late. You can't 
defy a whole country-side. The Watch Committee 
knows all about you, Samuel. There'll be a terrible 
ugly day of reckoning. And that brings me back 
to Emma Michelmore. 'Tis doubtful, after all, 
whether you'd be the best to have a tell with her." 

" I've promised ; and you've promised to tan the 
sails. I'll go up next time the old man's to sea. 
I've long wanted an excuse to tackle her, and I may 
do some good for myself as well as you. And Lyddy 
shall come too. She've often hinted at going over 
to see her aunt, because she never thought Mrs. 
Michelmore would keep away ; so we'll go together, 
and I'll put in a good stroke for you and tell her 
what a damned old fool she is to keep such a man 
as you hanging about." 

" Be careful," said Titus ; " and before all else 
don't use language. At an impatient moment 
more shame to me I rapped out an oath in her 
company. Last winter 'twas, and I thought I'd lost 
her for good and all. 'Tis along of living with her 
brother, whose conversation is no more than ' yea ' 
and ' nay,' in the Bible phrase." 

" And what he says he sticks to," added Samuel. 
" Holy, I grant, but hard as the nether millstone 
too. Not a hand lifted all these months. Not a 
word or a message, though he knows he may be a 
grandfather any minute." 

" 'Tis you, not your wife. He's spoken and won't 
draw back. The remedy's in your hands." 



THE HAVEN 161 

Sam's blue eyes grew sulky. 

" We'll see we'll see," he answered. " I'll wear 
him down yet. And I'll go my own way also." 

" Well, use your best wits on my behalf, and you 
won't hurt yourself anyway," concluded his uncle. 
" If I gather that woman and make her into Mrs. 
Peach, there'll be another on our side against your 
father-in-law. In fact, he'll stand alone. And now 
you'd best to come and look at my ochre and choose 
your colour afore the daylight's faded out." 

Twilight was at hand, and gentle easterly breezes 
roamed under a red sky, toyed with the smoke from 
many hearths and spread it in a blue veil over 
the outlines of the houses. Tender dusk was down, 
and lights already twinkled through the waning 
light. Above the barking yard ascended Overgang, 
clustered close, lifting to points, threaded by steep 
stairways like some ancient rock village on a southern 
hill. 

Samuel chose a genial auburn tone for his canvas : 
the colour of the dead brake-fern. 

" I've painted the town red in my young days," he 
declared, " and why for shouldn't I paint my sails 
red now ? 'Tis a very good shade for a night 
hawk's wings any way. And you remember, Uncle 
Titus, that if you want to do the same that I done, 
and take your widow by force and carry her off 
out of reach of her righteous brother, my boat's 
always at your service." 

" 'Tis the very last thing that I'd be wishful to do," 
said Mr. Peach. " She's not the sort of woman ever 
to be thought of in such a lawless way. When you 
get to her ear, remember her bent of mind, and 
remind her of the man I am and the views I hold. 
And touch on the house and garden and the comforts 
of having your own well of water, and the easy steps 
up to the station. These things all carry great 
weight with her, naturally, and I've dwelt on 'em 

II 



162 THE HAVEN 

many and many a time. But she's prone to forget 
them again, so soon as I'm out of sight." 

" I'll rub it all in, I promise you. And now you'd 
best to come up and have a cup of tea with us. 
Lyddy said that I must be sure and make you." 

Mr. Peach was very fond of his niece and he never 
refused her invitations. 

" Nothing will please me better," he said. " Your 
wife be one in a thousand, and little enough you're 
worthy of such a clever creature." 

Then Titus stopped work for the day, emerged 
from his greasy and ochreous tarpaulins, and pre- 
sently climbed beside Samuel to Mr. Brokenshire's 
lofty dwelling. 



CHAPTER II 

ON a day in July there came a holiday for Ned, 
and he spent it to splendid purpose at Berry Farm 
and Berry cliffs. He and Deborah roamed through 
many familiar haunts, and at last, when noon was 
far past and they had eaten their meal of bread 
and cheese and cake, they sat together high up on 
broken ground west of the Head. Beneath there fell 
a steep footpath to the sea, and here there toiled an 
old man, who came and went with a wheelbarrow. 
He brought up seaweed from the olive-green and 
umber masses ranged by the tide along grey beaches 
below, and he piled the treasure at a point three 
parts up the cliff. Hither a horse and cart would 
presently come and remove the weed to the land 
above. 

" Sit here on the green side and tell a bit, Deb," 
said the boy. " What a brave sight 'tis to watch old 
Warner fetching up that seaweed." 

" Father thinks that 'tis the only excuse for the 
sea to help fat the land. Yet our Tom's happy 
enough upon it. Such a sailor he is now ! You can 
spot him for a fisherman a mile off ; and he rolls in 
his going as if he'd always got a slanting deck under 
his feet. ' Why, you'm more of a sea-dog than 
Brokenshire himself! ' father said to him last time 
he was ashore. He's learning his business very 
fast." 

163 



1 64 THE HAVEN 

" Does Samuel take him out by night ? " asked 
Ned. 

" No ; father won't suffer that, though Tom's always 
praying for it. But Mr. Brokenshire don't really 
want my brother in his boat. 'Tis too small a vessel 
to need a boy. And he declares he can't do with 
Tom when he's at night-fishing." 

Ned said nothing. He knew the ill repute of 
his brother-in-law ; but it was none of his business, 
and he never spoke of it or listened to others when 
they did so. Indeed, the matter concerned his 
thoughts even less than usual to-day. He had 
risen that morning full of enterprise, and his pur- 
pose argued no small precocity for a boy. But he 
stood firm, and now prepared to approach his task. 
A sort of fear drove him to it, as he presently 
explained. 

The place where they sat was lonely and close 
hidden. Days of heat began to scorch the sea- 
facing cliffs and wither the small creatures that 
found roothold in them. They seemed to gasp and 
shrivel and make haste to set their little seeds before 
perishing. Below broke the ripple of a still sea, and 
the limestone cliffs shed off a milky opalescence into 
the pure green water. Where Ned and the girl 
sat the slope was coated with close herbage and 
trefoils, starred with pink centaury, danced over by 
shaking grasses and the frail loveliness of cathartic 
flax. Within reach of Ned's hand a rare and lovely 
flower opened its golden eye amid snow-white petals. 
The cushion of it was a grey green, and it dwelt 
tucked into a cleft of the limestone. 

He twisted the white rock-rose about until the 
petals had fallen, and only the golden eye of it 
remained. Then he flung it from him. A grass- 
hopper made husky music hard by ; bees droned at 
their sweet business ; insects flashed and gleamed 
hither and thither ; butterflies opened and shut their 



THE HAVEN 165 

wings on the sunny stones and blossoms of the 
bramble. 

Ned was alert for a long time ; then he began to 
approach his subject in a devious way. 

" You see, Deb, you mustn't think because I'm 
a fisherman now that I shall always be one. I know 
you feel the same as me, but when you think upon 
it, you must remember 'tis all only a passing thing. 
Though I'm to sea all my time, I don't belong to 
it, and I shall break off from it presently." 

" No need to tell me that, Ned." 

" Yes, but there is. You'll know why in a moment. 
Of course, for father's sake, things must go xm as 
they're going yet awhile. He doesn't kfjow the 
truth about it, and I don't mean him to, for if he 
did, he'd feel terrible sad and cast down. Tis his 
great want in life for all Majors to be fishermen. 
I can't see why they should myself, but they have 
been for countless years, so father says, and I'm the 
last of the breed ; and so I'll stick to it yet awhile 
for father's sake. And I'd rather bite my tongue 
out than let him know how I feel about it. When 
first I went to sea, I couldn't help showing it a bit ; 
but I hide it now very clever." 

" From everybody but me, Ned." 

" That's it, Deborah. 'Tis that I'm coming to. I 
began to get afraid as you'd think with the rest, 
and suppose the sea was all I wanted. And then 
what would you have felt ? " 

She looked up at him from under the blue sun- 
bonnet that she always wore. She crossed and 
re-crossed her feet in their small shoes. 

" 'Twasn't for me to feel about it. At least -" 

" But you did feel if 'twas only to feel sorrow 
for me a little eh, Deb ? " 

" Of course I did. I'd feel sorry for anybody 
forced for to lead a life that was all against the 
collar. I felt sorry enough for Tom when I used 



1 66 THE HAVEN 

to see him plodding the fields with his eyes and 
his thoughts on the water." 

"But more for me more for me. Say more for 
me, Deb ! " 

" Yes more for you." 

The boy answered nothing, and neither spoke for 
a little while. The dawn of mighty things fluttered 
in their hearts, but so gradual had been that day- 
spring, so slowly had it risen out of their united 
childhood, that neither yet wholly realised it. Ned 
now spoke great words yet half that they meant 
and the height and depth and fulness of them were 
hidden from him, for he was still a boy. 

"Deb," he began presently, "you and me are 
sixteen year old. And you be a child still, as 
maidens should be so young as that; but with me 
'tis very different. I've come to be a man full 
growed. Yes, 'tis solemn truth. The sea have 
done that for me, whatever else it may have done. 
And now now I'm filled with wonnerful thoughts 
that work in me like barm in dough and you'm 
in the midst of them, Deb. Oh, Deb, darling, I 
think of nobody else but you ! " 

She shivered strangely and blinked gave half 
a look at him love and alarm mingled. But she 
said nothing, only locked her little brown hands 
tight in her lap. 

"And I've got in a terrible fright, Deb; and 
'tis fright making me say what I'm saying. I I 
you see, you're ashore and I'm afloat, and God, 
He knows how many people see you when I'm 
away ; and it's got to be a dread and terror with 
me each time I sail out o' sight of land that some- 
body better, of course, than me, and wiser, and 
well-to-do, and a landsman in fact can't you see 

how the fear of hearing you'm gone ? That's 

why I say these things, though 'tis too soon for 
you to hear 'em. Yet I'll swear some other chap 



THE HAVEN 167 

cleverer than me will come along and say 'em in 
a minute, better than I can ; and then I shall get 
back from a voyage and hear that you that you 
are walking out with somebody, Deb. 'Twould be 
the last straw for my life. I couldn't stand it, 
Deb." 

He stopped, and she spoke with a small voice 
that fluttered. 

"Oh, Ned, how wonderful how wonderful to 
hear you speak like a grown man ! " 

"That's it," he said. "That's what I can't do, 
though I wish to God I could ; for I'll never want 
to speak like one more than now. 'Tis man's love, 
Deborah. I ban't too young to feel that. I love 
you ban't nonsense and trash I swear 'tis faithful, 
true love else what can it be? The very name 
of you be a light to my dark nights. I say it 
under my breath to myself when I'm watching. I 
say it when the bolts cry out or the boom creaks 
I say it out loud then, because the sound's hidden 
from all ears but mine. I love you, Deb ; I swear 
it can't be nothing else your voice and your li'l 
grey eyes and your mouth. Specially your mouth. 
And you kissed me once remember that and 
I've never forgot it all these years and years, if 
you have. Don't don't, for God's sake, take a 
grown man when I'm away to sea, Deb. Don't 
do that till we'm grown a bit ourselves and you'm 
wife-old. And I'll soon be old enough to set up a 
home for you and all that. 'Tis all nothing to 
me beside you, but 'tis part of being married, I 
see. Only don't let somebody older than me do 
it for you ; don't let a man come and take you 
while I'm to sea. I couldn't bear it, Deb ; I 
should kill him." 

He prated of manly emotions, but did not dream 
how much older the girl was than himself, or how 
she glowed to her little heart's heart before this 



168 THE HAVEN 

worship. She gasped ; she looked up at the sun. 
Life had put a crown of joy suddenly upon her 
young head. Every word that he faltered was 
beautiful to her : his humility, his fear, his promises ; 
the name of her spoken at sea by night while she 
slept. How much she had to tell him too ! But 
she could not begin in a moment. She knew not 
where to begin; and where was her voice? She 
was quite silent. To her it seemed that if he only 
looked and listened, everything round about would 
answer for her. The bees made mellow music and 
voiced her ; the gulls cried out her happiness in 
their laughter ; the grasshoppers chirruped it ; the 
waves danced and flashed it. Heaven spread above 
her, and the great westering light aloft was not toe 
large to tell of her delight. 

She yearned to touch his hand. Her love tingled 
in her little veins ; her voice throbbed with pride. 

" Ned ! To think such a small, poor thing as 
me ! No no 'tis because you're not a man at all 
yet, though you think you are and yet right well 
I know you're very nearly a man. Oh, Ned, how 
beautiful ! " 

" J Tis proper grown-up love, Deborah." 

" For ever and ever and ever I'll love you, you 
blessed Ned!" 

"You can? Truth? And can wait till I get 
away from the sea ? " 

" Sea or land what's that to me ? I love you 
and long, long I've loved you ! And I'll wait for ever 
for you, Ned." 

Now she was more fervent far than the boy, for 
her sixteen years meant more than his. She woke 
him a little, and at last he kissed her as a cherub, 
not as a lover kisses. But her ardour was a thought 
earthier. She held him tight, and fired him with 
the pressure of her slim figure till the world spun 
round merrily for them. She would not let him go ; 



THE HAVEN 169 

she made him hold his arm round her ; he felt her 
cheek pressed up to his. 

He grew almost dazed and drunken with this 
mighty experience, and she said, again and again, 
that 'twas only his arm round her and his cheek 
against hers that made her understand what had 
happened. 

Their love was artless and sweet as dayspring on 
the sea. The light that presently painted the cliffs 
with the tender tones of ripe fruit spread over them 
also, and their hearts throbbed in the roseal gentle- 
ness of evening. They could not part ; they could 
not move. 

"If us might but sit here just loving each other 
for ever, through sunlight and moonlight ! " said 
Deborah. 

"If but we might ! But there's man's work to be 
done, Deb. And I swear you've made me feel 
terrible manlike to-day. But not manlike enough 
to tell it out, eh ? You don't bid me to tell father 
about it yet, Deborah ? " 

" Only tell about it to me," she answered. " You'll 
have to tell me about it a thousand, thousand times 
more afore ever I can believe such a beautiful thing. 
But none else. We'll hug it close for a long while. 
'Tis loveliest so. I don't feel I could tell anybody 
yet save the birds and the butterflies and such, as 
won't blab it again." 

" Ah ! " he said, " how we think alike ! I feel the 
very same. 'Tis a thing I won't trust out of our 
keeping. None shall know it till some poor man 
comes to you to say the same. Then you'll have to 
tell him that you'm tokened." 

"Tokened tokened the loveliness of the word, 
Ned!" 

He held her tightly again and kissed her 
cheek. 

"So 'tis, then when it happens to yourself 



1 70 THE HAVEN 

though, somehow, nought much it you hear it about 
other people." 

" A secret what a secret ! But how if it jumps 
out ? You'm so strong that you can hide anything,, 
like a grown man, as you say ; but I'm only a weak 
thing, and 'twill be on my tongue to sing it and my 
lips to laugh it And my very eyes will say it, Ned, 
when I think suddenly upon it." 

" You'll soon get used to the idea, Deb. Perhaps, 
after the first fun of it be gone, you'll feel sorry you 
was in such haste to take such a poor chap as me." 

" You dare say that ! No, never, never will I 
change. You're more like to. I've always loved 
you remember that, Ned always. Didn't I kiss 
you when you had to go to sea and me only a 
dinky maid of fourteen then ? But 'twas love of you 
made me, though maybe I didn't know it myself." 

" And I I didn't know neither ; but when you 
kissed me in the dimpsy that night, it made me hate 
the sea worse than ever." 

" Then I'm sorry I did it." 

He held her hand without speaking. Then she 
surprised him. 

" The loveliest things be so cruel short ! The sun 
was up yonder when you axed me, and now it's 
sinking. Ax me again, ax me again, Ned, afore 
'tis out of sight. Say it all over again ! 'Twill not 
be like the first time ; but 'twill be good to hear it 
again." 

He laughed. 

" Things said can't come back. I couldn't go over 
it again, more than you could go back on your 
promised word." 

" But try just offer for me again just once ! " 

"Well, so 'tis. I want you, Deborah, to be my 
wife come presently, and I ax you now, for mortal 
fear there'll come another stronger than me, and " 

" ' Wife ' ' wife 'what a fine word ! And so I 



THE HAVEN 171 

will then be your wife, and you'll be my husband 
my husband, Ned Major. * Mrs. Deborah Major ' 
to think of it such a slip of a thing as me under- 
sized and good-for-nought but to love you and then 
suddenly ' Mrs. Deborah Major ' ! " 

The rapture and the flame of these great moments 
silenced them presently. They sat together, close as 
the rock and the flower, hand in hand, linked heart 
to heart with shared joys and hopes and longings. 
Nothing passed between them but intermittent 
squeeze of fingers. The magic message of an abso- 
lute understanding throbbed back and forward with 
their pulses. Love forgot that they were children. 
A fine dignity marked their attitude now. They 
were content to kiss no more or speak no more, but 
silently follow thoughts in a communion closer than 
words could weave or eyes signal. Their young 
spirits were never nearer than then ; the shared life 
of years to come ; the shared happiness and sorrow, 
triumph, and failure, served only as the visible crown 
and spire of that dual fabric whose foundations were 
welded now and for ever in this boy-and-girl glory 
of pure devotion. 

He loosed her hand presently and turned and 
picked a flower. 

" Here," he said, " I can't give you no ring, Deb, for 
I haven't got no money to buy one, if I dared ; but 
this'll do for the present. Press it in a book, and 
take it for tokening." 

" They'm terrible tender flowers," she said. " Pick 
another as will last better." 

" Here's a bit of clover then." 

" And I'll give you one, Ned." 

" No, you won't. I want something better for 
myself something closer to you a bit of your own 
precious self, Deb." 

He took out his knife and sawed off a little lock of 
her hair. 



THE HAVEN 

" There," he said. " That'll keep so close to me as 
I know how to make it. I've got an old locket at 
home as belonged to my mother. Lydia didn't want 
it when the things was gone through, so I took it on 
the quiet and hid it in my treasure-box. There's hair 
in it my great-grandmother's, or some such bygone 
party. But that I'll fling away, and put in this here 
little dear, darling black curl ; and 'twill go next my 
skin for ever, Deb." 

They talked on, and knew not hunger or the 
passage of the stars. Then darkness thrust itself 
upon them, and they perceived that, save for them- 
selves, the great cliffs slumbered. The insects were 
silent, the flowers were closed, the birds had gone 
to rest. 

"They'll fear for you," said Ned. "I'll see you 
home quick. We ought to have got off this place by 
light, for 'tis tricky half-way up." 

But love held a lantern to her feet ; she passed 
unfearful upward, and only grew timid when he pre- 
pared to leave her. 

" I hate for you to go," she said. " The time will 
seem so cruel long. There's rising up a dreadful fear 
in me that you'll be a grey-headed old man afore I 
see you again ! " 

" A fortnight's long, and awful long," he admitted, 
M but 'tis a fortnight nearer to getting you." 

" I'll never be patient enough and brave enough to 
be worthy of such a wonder, Ned." 

" Kiss me once more, if you ban't tired of it," he 
answered. " God knows, however I can hide this out 
of sight. 'Tis only a question in my mind which of 
us be likely to let it out first." 

" I won't trust me for that," she promised. 

Then they parted, and within ten minutes life 
fell harshly on Deborah's dream, and yet a word 
was said that delighted her and made her forgive 
the rest. 



THE HAVEN 173 

" I won't have you gadding about like this after 
dark with young Major, or anybody else," said Mrs. 
Honeywill. " Here's Ned three parts a man ; and we 
all know what sailors are when they come off the sea ; 
and though you'm small, you'm getting on now up 
home sixteen years old ; and 'tisn't right ; so don't 
you do it again." 

Deborah promised ; then she went up to her room 
and put Ned's clover into her hymn-book at her 
favourite hymn. 



CHAPTER III 

THOUGH Ned honestly supposed that his aversion 
from the sea was closely hidden and that his father 
had no suspicion thereof, he erred ; and now the 
time had come for Mr. Major to let him know it. 
Years had passed, and the experiment might be con- 
sidered conclusive. But John postponed the in- 
evitable truth so hard to accept from his point of 
view. At length, however, his sense of justice smote 
upon him and rendered him uneasy. Ned was just 
seventeen, and his father knew that a life pursued 
upon the wrong road is folly. He could not re- 
concile himself to keeping his son at sea. The battle 
was hard, but this man, long schooled to yield before 
the pressure of an active and superstitious conscience, 
soon concluded with himself and set about planning 
Ned's future upon more reasonable principles. The 
boy he did not tell ; but he took the problem to one 
well able to answer it, and visited his friend Nicholas 
Honeywill at Berry Farm. Sore he was at heart, 
yet quite affirmed to give his son full liberty. It 
seemed to him that the last lawful ambition was 
gone out of his life. He thought of the * Jack and 
Lydia ' sailing without a Major in her,! and the 
picture struck him into a settled gloom, hard to 
indicate for those who have not similarly clung to 
some natural mundane hope and found it fail them. 
He could not understand, and soon ceased to attempt 



THE HAVEN 175 

to do so ; but he knew well enough how the matter 
stood, and very accurately defined the situation to 
Nicholas Honeywill as they walked upon Berry 
cliffs together on a Sunday afternoon in early winter 
time. 

"'Tis said in a few words, and as you have had a 
son who turned from the life he was born to, and 
looked elsewhere you'll understand. My Ned be 
like your Tom can't settle to what you might say 
was the calling planned by Providence. But if a 
lad won't grow into a sailor, despite all efforts made 
to make him one, then we must agree Providence 
don't want him at sea, but have cut out his work for 
him ashore." 

" That's all true," admitted Mr. Honeywill, who 
was an easy man, with more common sense than 
religion. " Everybody's found it out but you long 
ago." 

" I was slow to do so, for my wish and hope 
my last hunger this side of heaven, you might say 
was to see Majors carrying on the name. But, so 
far as one can say at the moment, it isn't to be." 

" Of course not ; your lad's a born farmer." 

" For the moment," repeated John Major, " it looks 
as if I wasn't to have my dearest will. And I'm 
going to yield the point without more words. Mind 
you, I don't give up hope never. None but God's 
self can say what's hidden in time, and I may yet 
live to sail with my own blood, and live to give up 
the tiller to them of my own loins. The ways of 
the Lord be past understanding, Nicholas, but not 
past trusting." 

" That's where we differ, Jack," answered the 
landsman. " If I've got a vartue, 'tis plain speech, 
and, without offence, I tell you that I never have 
and never will trust the Lord a yard. And what's 
more, on the showing of life and the things that 
happen, He's no right to ask it of us. Nought 



i;6 THE HAVEN 

happens but the unexpected that's common know- 
ledge, and even got to be a proverb then why 
trust the Lord more than anybody else ? Why, 
there's a score of men yourself included I'd trust 
sooner ! Ive seen too much of His ways afloat 
and ashore, Jack. A woman's trustworthy beside 
Him ; the sea's trustworthy beside Him aye, and 
spring weather and the promise of autumn. Let 
dogs trust man's a fool to do so." 

" I wish you'd hold off saying such things ; but 
you'll know better soon or late, and your eyes will 
be opened. Too many farmers think as you think, 
though few would care to say it out as you do." 

" Well, the upshot is, I suppose, that you be going 
to let your boy come ashore for good and all ? 
Quite right, Jack the more that drop out of your 
business, the better for them left in it. Trawling 
without steam be a played-out game ; and none 
knows it better than you." 

But Mr. Major contested this assertion with all his 
might. 

" You can tell nothing about it," he answered. 
"You be far too ready to hear the talk of them 
that have failed." 

" I hear your son-in-law him that's taught my 
Tom his business ; and whatever Brokenshire may 
be, not even you can deny that he's a good fisher- 
man," 

" No need to name him to me. As for him, take 
care he don't teach Thomas more than you want 
the boy to learn. And as for our fishing in general, 
only let 'em finish the breakwater, and there'll be 
such a return of prosperity that the young men will 
be crowding to the boats again." 

" Yes let 'em finish it. Let's see the Government 
that will do that for you." 

" I grant that trawl-fishing be fickle in a manner of 
speaking," admitted John. " You can't say where 



THE HAVEN 177 

you'll meet dearth or hit on plenty. Even the 
Dogger's trawled barren off and on. I can mind in 
my youth when hake swarmed inside Penlee Point 
off Plymouth, and herrings schooled in the Sound as 
a matter of course. But 'tis all up with Plymouth 
now, along of great gun-firing and torpedo practice. 
As for the open sea, 'tis a matter of fashion. Every- 
body cries out for Mount's Bay just now. Yet 
Penzance be a terrible far market." 

" All very interesting," answered the farmer, " but 
it don't alter my argument, that the game's played 
out, and we oughtn't to put our sons in it onless 
they chance to be pig-headed fools like my Tom, and 
will go whether we want 'em to or not." 

" Wait a bit, I'm only just beginning. You're like 
most other landsmen, and think a fish be just a fish, 
and that one fish is as good as another ; but that's 
the big mistake you all make. This here's a trawlers' 
harbour, and a trawlers' and liners' harbour is quite 
a different thing to a netters' and drifters' harbour. 
At least it should be so. 'Tis not the netters that 
catch the valuable fish, remember. The white fish 
trade is what belongs to us, and the stuff we fetch 
ashore is worth just half as much again as what the 
netters and drifters bring." 

Mr. Major then grew technical, examined the 
relative prosperity of Grimsby and Hull, North 
Shields and Stornoway, Milford and Lowestoft. 
He argued at great length, and proved to his own 
satisfaction, if not to Mr. Honeywill's, that Brixham 
continued to be the first of the demersal fishing 
ports. 

" The harbour's the thing," he wound up ; " and 
only let us have our harbour finished, the rest will 
follow in its order. Deny us the harbour, and I 
grant that the fight may end by going against us." 

Anon the talk returned to family matters, and 
John summed up. 

12 



i;8 THE HAVEN 

" For such as me, Nicholas, 'tis always a blessing 
to feel that whatever does happen is always better 
than what I might wish to happen. And so it falls 
out that now, just on seventeen years old, my boy 
must leave the sea. He knows his business, and he 
hates his business. He's got considerable craft to 
hide it from me, and he tries, in a very manlike way, 
to be a fisherman ; but it won't do no more. He 
must come ashore, and, in a word, farmer, I ax you 
to take him. He mustn't ruin his usefulness to give 
me pleasure." 

" A thousand pities you didn't see all this sooner, 
like everybody else, my dear. However, better now 
than later. I've always offered for him to come here, 
and very glad I shall be to take him. He's the stuff 
to make a farmer, and the softness that was in him 
I dare say the sea have stamped out. So let him 
come. 'Twill fit in very suent, because my Tom can 
take his place along with you." 

" I was going to propose it. There's room with 
me, when Ned goes, and your boy's been with 
Brokenshire long enough." 

"You'll find him all that he ought to be. And 
I'd rather he was with you than any other man." 

" I know he's all he should be as we've a right to 
expect from your wife's child, if not yours. And if 
I can larn him to trust in the Almighty, I shall do 
so. I warn you of that, Nicholas." 

" Why not ? Larn him everything in your power," 
said Mr. Honeywill. " 'Tis a great accomplishment 
to be able to trust, and a useful thing also. We've 
only got to look at you to see that. So let it be, 
then. After Easter will make a very good time for 
all parties. And I'll send off a young, useless man 
that I've got here for the moment, and have the way 
clear for Ned." 

" Tell none until it happens," concluded John 
Major. " I'll let my boy hear come presently." 



THE HAVEN 179 

" And I'd give a bushel of oats to see his face when 
you tell him and my Deb's also. They'm thick as 
thieves, and always have been. You mark me, John, 
that couple will be man and wife afore many years 
have passed over 'em, if all goes easy ! Well, I hope 
you'll like such a plan a bit better than your daughter's 
arrangements. She've brought Samuel a fine boy, 
anyway." 

The other was silent, and Nicholas continued. 
But he spoke with caution, for he trod dangerous 
ground. 

" A grandchild's a great thought. It puts a man 
in his true position, and reminds him that two 
generations have slipped by, and that he belongs 
more to the past than the future. Life begins to 
race when you'm past the half-century. You'll 
forgive an old friend for telling about it ; but I 
suppose now, Jack, you can't bury the hatchet over 
this youngster and forgive 'em ? I know your son- 
in-law better far then you do, and this I will say for 
him : he's a good sportsman, brave as a lion, and 
generous too. He've been very straight and fair to 
my Tom, and taught him something amazing. Quite 
above-board, too, in the matter of his night games. 
He've never risked Tom's good name." 

" When you say ' night games,' you say all that's 
to be said," answered Mr. Major. " I take it in very 
good part that you should mention the matter, and 
you do it from nought but kind feeling to me and 
my daughter. That I know. But never have I 
gone willingly from my word, Nicholas ; and until 
the man can show a clean record and stand above 
suspicion, I'll do what I said I'll do and not know 
him. Don't you think 'tis a light thing to feel the 
years slip by and I can't kiss my own daughter. 
Don't think 'tis a light thing to pass Lydia in the 
street and turn my eyes from her. I've seen her 
go by in all the glory of this here coming child, 



i8o THE HAVEN 

and I've longed cruel deep to speak to her and 
be a father to her ; but it shan't never be till that 
man gives over his bad ways." 

" He goes to church, however." 

" Not now," corrected Mr. Major. " He went to 
church, 1 grant you regular as clockwork for why ? 
to get round me. But weren't no use going to 
church of a Sunday night and to Start Bay after 
dark the same evening. Tis the case of the green 
bay tree ; and his prosperity, which can't be denied, 
is built on dishonesty." 

" I wish to God they'd open Start Bay and have 
done with it," said Mr. Honeywill. " I for one, mind 
you, be very much on Brokenshire's side in the 
matter ; and 'tisn't as if he was the only man as 
fetches his living out of it at great risk. Many 
another does the same and nothing said." 

" If they opened it to-morrow, Brokenshire would 
have no more use for it," answered John. " Don't 
think that I haven't sized him home pretty close 
all these years. He's the stuff that law-hating and 
law-breaking men be made of. 'Tis a poison that 
be in the blood, and sometimes it works off with 
years and cares, and sometimes it never does. I've 
known old men smugglers by nature as will take 
more trouble to get an unlawful dram or a contra- 
band pipe of tobacco than fifty straight ones would 
have cost 'em. And this here Brokenshire 'tisn't 
so much the money, 'tis the risk and what he'd call 
the sport of the thing that makes him what he is." 

" He's growing older. He's a father now. Belike 
'twill steady him." 

But the fisherman was not sanguine. He regarded 
the future of the Brokenshire family with very keen 
discomfort. Life, indeed, and its few remaining 
issues looked grey to the old man as he returned 
home presently. His wife was gone out of it taken 
from the evil to come as it seemed ; his daughter 



THE HAVEN 181 

had married a man of whom little good from John 
Major's point of view could be asserted ; his son 
would sail with him no more. 

He fell back upon his recent phrase to the farmer, 
and repeated it to himself. 

" 'Tis well to remember always always that 
what happens is better than what we would like to 
happen. Shall them as be three parts blind by 
nature question the All-seeing ? " 



CHAPTER IV 

THE fishing fleet was home for Easter, and Brixham 
harbour suffered a great congestion. By ill chance 
strong winds prevailed from the south-east and the 
outer anchorage did not serve. Many boats lay at 
Dartmouth, and the old, vexed subject of the in- 
complete breakwater filled men's mouths and rose 
in a grumbling storm wherever half a dozen fisher- 
men were gathered. 

The tide was out, and Ned, Gilberd, and Michel- 
more, in their jack-boots, worked on the hull of the 
' Jack and Lydia.' She was shored up high and 
dry between two sister boats not far from the statue 
of King William. In closely packed rows the 
trawlers filled the harbour, and their masts ascended 
in a brown jungle of bright poles sloping every 
way. 

Painting and repairing occupied two hundred men. 
Arthur Michelmore and William Gilberd worked 
hard with pots of white and black paint upon the 
bulwarks of their vessel ; Ned scraped away at her 
shapely hull, for that was also to be re-painted before 
she sailed again. 

While they worked they talked, and Gilberd told 
of the prosperity of his younger son and the failure 
of the elder. 

" My plasterer boy can't find a job," he said. 
" Plastering be down on its luck for the moment ; 

182 



THE HAVEN 183 

yet you see houses springing up like mushrooms 
everywhere you look." 

" Perhaps 'tis him and not the business," suggested 
Michelmore. " Why did he leave his last job afore 
'twas finished?" 

" There's two sides to that," replied William, " and 
I daresay you've heard but one." 

" I heard " began Arthur. Then he stopped. 

" I know what you heard, and 'twas a full-sized 
lie. A better workman never lived, nor yet a 
soberer." 

" I lay he'll get another good job soon," suggested 
Ned. 

" If not, he'll do well to follow my second son," 
continued Gilberd, " and go in a shop if he can 
find one. There's nothing like a shop. You always 
have a roof over you for one thing ; and if you're 
a sharp man, you get on and save money, and 
reach a point when you can very likely start your- 
self. I wish I had a bit of cash. I'd start one of 
they little shops where you can buy everything yes, 
to-morrow I'd start it." 

The other laughed at the spectacle of the horny 
and grimy Gilberd behind a counter. Then came 
along John Major and called his son to him. 

Why he had chosen this morning and this moment 
to tell Ned of his release, the man could not have 
explained. He had been sowing seeds in his plot 
of land, when the smell of the earth and the labour 
of turning it brought Ned forcibly to his mind. 
He had left his spade and rake, therefore, donned 
his coat again, and gone down to the harbour, where 
his son was working. 

" I've got to talk to you," he said. "Come to the 
end of the pier, and I'll sit on yonder bollard and 
you can stand and listen." 

Mr. Major lit his pipe. No spark of humour 
belonged to his composition, yet on this occasion 



1 84 THE HAVEN 

of all others, when such a thing might least have 
been expected, some accident of mood cast his mind 
into a jovial bent. Such accidents belong to thought. 
His own long pains before this conclusion had 
numbed him. He could now find it in his sad and 
disappointed heart to make a sort of jest. The joke 
was, however, lost upon his son ; because Ned had 
neither ears nor observation for any light or shade 
that might lurk in the father's speech. The terrific 
fact now uttered was all that he could receive. 
Indeed, it overwhelmed him, and left him in doubt 
whether he woke or dreamed. 

" List to me," began John. " You're a fisher- 
man now, and you know your business after a 
boyish fashion ; but I'm not satisfied with you. 
I see younger lads going ahead of you. I don't 
want to turn you off, Ned, for you're a very good 
son and always have been ; but somehow 'tis borne 
in upon me of late that you might shine better 
ashore. I don't want to have you out of the boat, 
mind but the time is come for you to decide. You 
must set to work to get your ticket and pass the 
examination before long ; but what's the use of that 
if you'd sooner do something else ? " 

Ned stared, and his heart beat hard. 

" I try to do my best, father." 

" Who can do more ? But can you do your best 
in my boat ? Would you like to sail with somebody 
else?" 

" Father ! " 

" No, you wouldn't. Then the question is, Can 
you do your best in any boat ? A man's best 
power belongs to him as a gift from his Maker, and 
none have a right to turn him out of that road 
into another that leads him astray ; none have 
a right to choke him off the thing he's built to do. 
That I've learned in the night watches. When you 
say you do your best, I say you don't. You try 



THE HAVEN 185 

your best ; but you don't do it. For why ? Because 
you ban't built to do your best on the water. Now 
here it is. The sea have piped to you, Ned, but you 
haven't danced. And I tell you seriously that 'tis 
a solemn question in my mind whether you've a 
right to be on the sea any longer." 

The boy felt stifling. He took off his cap and 
dropped it. Vivid emotion flashed over his face. 
Mr. Major cast a side glance at him, then recrossed 
his legs and sucked his pipe. 

" Don't think I want to drive you ashore. Don't 
think I want to go on working without you. But 
my voyage is three parts made, and the harbour 
lights will luff up afore many more years be over. 
Yours is but begun. You've got to think of the 
port from the time you set your course. In a word, 
I'd have you seriously consider whether you wouldn't 
be doing your God's work better on the fields than 
along of me. Come now would it be a very terrible 
wrench if I said you wasn't to sail again after 
Easter ? Would it go very cruel against the grain 
of your nature, Ned, if I told you as I'd spoken with 
a friend of mine by the name of Nicholas Honeywill, 
and that, out of his kindness, he'd promised to find 
you work at Berry Farm ? " 

Ned became unnerved. His father realised how 
much more tremendous was this news than he had 
guessed. 

" There there," he said. " Don't be a girl about 
it and you seventeen ! I ought to have told you 
out of sight of the world. But perhaps 'tis because 
you don't want to leave me and come ashore, after 
all ? If that's so, you can try once more." 

He strove to laugh. 

" You'll be in sight of the sea, Ned. The noise of 
it and the smell come up to the farm. And if you 
change your mind again why, you're welcome to 
your father's boat as none else on earth or water 



1 86 THE HAVEN 

could be welcome. But from what I see it don't look 
too likely." 

The boy swallowed and gurgled, picked up his cap 
and drew long staggering breaths. 

" I won't leave you, father," he said. " I can't do 
it and you what you are to me and Lydia gone 
from you and everything." 

" Not everything, Ned. No, you won't leave me, 
my lad. It won't be leaving me to do what you're 
called to do. There's no fault in you. You've done 
your duty by me, and shan't I do mine by you ? Get 
back to your work now, and after evening we'll go up 
to the land, and we'll finish seed sowing to-morrow. 
To-morrow's Good Friday, and though a many would 
laugh at such a thing, yet 'tis true that seed sown on 
that day do prosper amazing. I've proved it over 
many years by careful note." 

" I'll live to make you proud of me, father ; and if 
ever you want me back in the boat, I'll come, and 
gladly I'll come." 

" Shake hands on that then. And if ever you want 
yourself back in the boat, your billet's open. And 
and on Sunday we go up and have a tell with 
Nicholas." 

Mr. Major sat on awhile upon the bollard. Then 
he rose, ascended to the harbour parapet and entered 
into conversation with other men. 

Meantime Ned had returned to the ' Jack and 
Lydia ' with the world all changed for him. A 
strange, suffocating medley of emotions made him 
fight for breath. He scraped away and did not heed 
the glances cast at him by Gilberd and Michelmore. 
At last he could hold in no longer, but had to speak, 
and blurted out his news. 

" I be going, William. I'm leaving the boat. I 
don't sail with her again." 

But Mr. Gilberd was not much surprised. 

" Well, well, I dare say you'll bear up against it," 



THE HAVEN 187 

he said. " You take my advice, Edward, and go in 
a shop of all sorts. Tis the sure way to a fortune. 
You'll be so poor as a gull if you stop at sea." 

" I bet you're for digging and delving, ban't you ? " 
asked Arthur Michelmore. " Some like it better than 
any other walk of life, and you're of 'em." 

" Yes, I am," declared Ned. 

" Ah ! you'd sooner be steering a sparky cow or a 
score of pigs than a fishing trawler. We've all got 
our tastes," added Arthur. " I wonder what'll be 
done about your clothes? I know a young boy 
whose mother would offer a fair price for a good few 
things. They'll be too big ; but she'd make 'em 
ship-shape, and 'twould save her a pound or two." 

This practical thought gave Ned pause. It seemed 
to bring the future closer. He would soon doff his 
fisher garb for the last time, and the idea silenced him. 
He was still more bewildered than joyful. Even 
sorrow mingled with his emotions as he thought upon 
his father. 

"And who will come along of us, I wonder?" 
asked Arthur. 

They speculated upon this point and advanced 
various incorrect theories. 



CHAPTER V 

MR. TITUS PEACH was a patient and persistent 
man. Though his nephew had promised to serve 
him, if possible, in the direction of Mrs. Michelmore, 
yet Sam did nothing, and much time passed. Then, 
feeling such continued delay unseemly, Titus visited 
John Major's sister again and reminded her that they 
were not growing younger. She admitted it and, 
ever in extremes, declared the reverse was the case. 
<( Both you and me be wearing cruel badly," she said. 
This, however, he denied ; and then he won from her 
a promise to give the matter close thought with a 
view to some conclusion within the year. 

Anon Mr. Peach approached his nephew again, and 
Samuel explained that only a rare press of circum- 
stances had come between him and his promise. 

" The boy arrived and put everything else out of 
my head, and then months slipped by and such a lot 
happened, and you didn't remind me." 

" But I did the sails for nought gratis on that 
account," said Titus. " And I hold you to your 
promise, and I'm inclined to think that Lydia could 
help. We're very good friends your wife and me 
and there was the christening spoon I gave you 
besides." 

Brokenshire declared that nothing should longer 
keep him from fulfilling his obligations. 

" I'll talk to Mrs. Michelmore like a parson," he 
188 



THE HAVEN 189 

said, " and show her that 'tis worse than madness to 
keep such a man as you on the hooks a day longer." 

" Do so. I've seen her again of late and she's 
friendly, but won't come to anything one can hold 
by. You might say that in your opinion there's a 
slight change come over me too. I wouldn't ask 
you to say it if it wasn't the truth ; but there is. 
I should call it a cloud no bigger than a man's hand. 
Yet I can't deny 'tis there. Not that I like her less, 
but I can't help feeling that her state of mind is a 
thought cool and calculating. She ought to feel a 
little more for the fiery nature of the male creature. 
In fact, 'tisn't kind, and 'tisn't affectionate to keep 
putting it off year after year. At least, so I think ;, 
and you might just hint, in the most guarded language 
you can find, that I've got a fit of impatient manhood 
on me and be looking round. Don't say it in a way 
to hurt her. But 'tis true. I begin to feel that a wife > 
isn't the only interesting thing in the world." 

" I quite understand," declared Sam, with great 
confidence ; " and the matter falls very pat, because 
me and Lydia have been planning a great adventure 
already. She wouldn't do it at first, but now I've 
got her to carry war into the enemy's country, in a 
manner of speaking ; and 'tis quite settled between 
us that next time my father-in-law's at sea, me and 
my wife and the baby will all go and swoop down on 
Widow Michelmore, and put our arguments before 
her." 

" Tis a very bold move," declared Titus. " And 
I'd think twice and again before you risked it." 

"We have. 'Twas Lydia's own idea for that 
matter, and Ned didn't see any cause against. So 
it's going to be ; and then, when she's got over her 
astonishment, I'll have a slap at the old woman on 
your account." 

Brokenshire kept his promise, and, much to her 
amazement, Emma Michelmore, upon going to 



190 THE HAVEN 

answer a knock at the front door ten days later, 
found Samuel and Lydia drawn up outside it. The 
latter carried her baby. 

Emma fell back and held up her hands feebly, 
whereupon the visitors entered with great boldness, 
and Samuel shut the door behind them. 

It was Lydia who explained this conduct. 

" I heard from Mrs. Gilberd that you'd taken a 
lot of kindly interest in my little boy, Aunt Emma, 
and it seemed to me and Sam only right and proper 
that you, who are one of the child's nearest relations 
and always a very kind and good aunt to me kinder 
than I deserved, I'm sure should be the first to see 
him. Sam doubted ; but I said that you had no quarrel 
with your great-nephew, and that we should be doing 
actual wrong to keep him away from you. And now 
that he's old enough to take notice and know people, 
I felt it was more than time to bring him. And I 
hope you feel the same, I'm sure." 

Lydia kissed her aunt, resolutely laid her sleeping 
bundle in the old woman's arms, and looked round 
at the familiar scene. 

" And we've come for a bit of a tell and a cup of 
tea, and no offence, I hope," concluded Samuel. 

"You take my breath away," began Mrs. Michel- 
more. " Can such things happen ? This morning 
I'd have said they couldn't. Yet now they actually 
have." 

"You must blame baby if anybody," declared 
Lydia, taking off her hat. " In a sort of a way you 
might say it was the child's thought. We've come 
out of respect to you, Aunt Emma, and for no other 
reason at all." 

" If you have," she answered, " the point is not 
what I think, but what your father would think." 

" He couldn't think different. I shouldn't come and 
stand before him, because I must wait his good 
pleasure, and I'm sure Sam and me are patient 



THE HAVEN 191 

enough, and go on being slighted by him in a way 
that very few would. But you're different. Ned 
told me ages ago, when I first married, that father 
had laid down no rules for anybody but himself. 
And you can't say I wronged you, Aunt Emma 
you can't, dear Aunt Emma, say that." 

The bundle stirred in Mrs. Michel more's arms. 

" And if I did, that little heavenly angel never 
did." 

Mrs. Michelmore, who had been the mother of 
four children and lost them all, looked into the baby's 
face and then examined him generally. 

" He's over-heavy for his age. Is the doctor 
satisfied ? His vaccinations have took, I see," she 
said. 

" Doctor was delighted from the first," declared 
Lydia. 

" What's the name of un ? " 

" John after father." 

" I settled that," said Brokenshire, with a virtuous 
and long-suffering air. " * No matter that Mr. 
Major had treated me so harsh,' I said, ( his firstborn 
grandson shall be called after him ' ; and so it is. 
And, for all I've had to put up with, I'm a fair man, 
and an hour after the boy was born, I said to Lydia, 
* Well, I only hope he'll be as good a man as his 
grandfather 'didn't I, Lyddy?" 

" I wasn't attending much just then ; but I've no 
doubt you did, Samuel," answered she. 

Emma Michelmore surveyed the infant cheerlessly. 
She asked technical questions, and was not satisfied 
with the answers. The child showed great amiability, 
however, and this she could not deny. It was 
happy with her a fact that Mrs. Michelmore put 
down to lack of vitality and other distressing causes. 
Samuel made himself at home and Lydia laid 
the cloth for tea. She knew the contents of every 
drawer and cupboard, and offered to make all 



192 THE HAVEN 

necessary preparations for the meal while Samuel 
retired awhile with Emma to the parlour. 

" I've got a very important and private subject 
to talk on," explained Mr. Brokenshire. " I'm sorry 
to trouble you, and, if it was on my own account, 
I should not presume to it ; but 'tis for another, 
and you're an interested party, and so I must ask 
you, as your nephew-in-law, to listen. My family 
have always had a very great respect for you, 
missis. My mother thought a lot of you, I do assure 
you, and always taught me to do the same." 

Thus Sam flattered and chattered and did the 
best in his power for his uncle. 

" You might think 'twas pretty fair cheek on my 
part to interfere in such a subject," he concluded. 
"But you know what it is to be married, and so 
do I. Poor Uncle Titus, however, does not, though 
much he wants to. And he's not a man of any 
great pluck at the best of times, though in the first 
flight for wisdom ; and now, to be honest with you, 
he's got his tail between his legs and feels the fight 
is going against him." 

" I'm a good deal astonished," she said, " that he 
could have mentioned the matter to you, or any 
other body." 

" Twas in his desperation that he done it. You 
can't deny that you gave him great encouragement, 
ma'am." 

"I do deny it," she answered. "I've never given 
any human creature great encouragement in my 
life not in any direction. What is there to be 
encouraging about? I told him once, and I told 
him again, the family history ; and there's nothing 
very encouraging about that, I can assure you, young 
man. Many and many a hopeful creature I've 
chastened with the story of the Majors and Michel- 
mores your uncle among the rest. And if you'd 
like to hear it ? " 



THE HAVEN 193 

"Certainly I should," said Samuel. "Very glad 
and proud to hear anything you care to tell me." 

" I should have thought that your wife would 
have set it out afore you, same as I did afore your 
uncle ; but be that as 'twill, the story don't get no 
cheerfuller for the telling though truth's truth. To 
begin with there's me. I buried my four almost 
before you might say I'd settled down into married 
life. And then my husband died a sudden death 
by falling off the pier-head through darkness not 
drink, as more than one said, and the Lord will 
remember it against them. Then come Uncle 
Stooks, who went mad, and so we buried him ; and 
him not cold in the earth before poor Arthur Bolder, 
brother of the barber and tokened to sister Sarah, 
what did he do but fall out of one of they swinging 
boats at Brixham regatta and break his neck ? So 
we buried him ; and nobody ever offered again 
for Sarah " 

" So you buried her ? " said the rash listener. 

Emma drew herself up. 

" No, Brokenshire, my sister's living as you very 
well know, or ought to. She's to Dartmouth, and 
a better, wretcheder woman never did live there 
or anywhere ; and the man that would make fun 
of what I'm telling would dance on his mother's 
grave." 

" Sorry," said Samuel. " It slipped out more 
shame to me." 

" Then my sister-in-law died went through the 
doctor's fingers, you might say. They couldn't 
give the disease an honest name anyway ; and they 
couldn't save her, because she'd married into our 
family. Faded out like a forgotten fire, that woman. 
And so we stand ; and whose turn next ? Your 
uncle, in his silly, hopeful way, pretends that we've 
come to the end of our ill fortune ; but I know 
better. You wait and watch your baby. And as 

13 



194 THE HAVEN 

for Titus Peach, I won't say ' yes ' and I won't say 
' no ' till I see if he's right and if there's any sign 
of our luck lifting." 

" What does Mr. Major think, if I may ask ? " 

" What he thinks I can't say. He won't utter an 
opinion." 

" Of course he wants for you to stop with him and 
keep his house. But all the same, I'm sure he 
wouldn't stand in the way of your happiness. He's 
a very good friend to Mr. Peach." 

A moment later Lydia called them to tea. She 
whispered to Sam, and he put his hand in his 
pocket. 

" If I didn't forget all about it ! " he said. " Tis 
a gift for you from my uncle. You know what a 
humble .sort he is hadn't the courage to give it to 
you when last he saw you, though he'd got it on 
him all the time." 

Samuel handed Mrs. Michelmore a little packet, 
and she opened it immediately. 

A fat red book appeared : ' Culpepper's Herbal.' 
She turned over the pages. 

" So he's got it," she said. " He was full of it a 
bit ago. 'Tis thought a lot of in some places, so he 
told me, and he's won good from some of the recipes, 
I believe." 

" He's put your name in it, too, and said I was to 
hope you'd give him the pleasure of accepting it, 
though he trusted you'd never need to use it." 

The widow turned to the front leaf of her grotesque 
gift, and read : ' To Mrs. Emma Michelmore with the 
respectful regards of Titus Peach' 

"I'll accept of it," she said. " Tis a book I've 
often wanted to get hold on. You can tell him it's 
got safely to my hand, and I'm obliged to him." 

Lydia ventured upon a suggestion. 

" I suppose you wouldn't write uncle a letter of 
thanks, Aunt Emma ? He was saying last time he 



THE HAVEN 195 

came to see us that he'd never had a sight of your 
penmanship, and I told him what a beautiful and 
out-of-the-common hand you wrote. I happen to 
know that he took a great deal of trouble to get that 
little book from a friend of his up in Derbyshire, 
where everybody believes in herbs ; and I'm sure 
he'd be very proud to think you could spare the 
time to send him a letter." 

"You know, or you ought to know, how much 
time I've got to spare," answered her aunt. "But, 
all the same, I'll do as you say, and drop the man 
a line after I've read a bit of the book." 

Tea was taken, and under the influence of it Mrs. 
Michelmore shed a few softening tears. 

Sam took his leave, and, after he h?td gone, Emma 
fixed her dewy eyes upon the baby and admitted 
that his appetite was good. She even hoped that 
his maternal fortunes might be balanced by a better 
history on the father's side. 

" Not that you've a right to expect so, Lydia, for 
the Brokenshires are a drowning family." 

Her niece, however, disputed this assertion, and 
presently the elder was forced to admit that she had 
confused them with some other people. 

"With the exception of Sam's father and uncle, 
no Brokenshire was ever drowned in living memory," 
declared the fisherman's wife. 

" So much the more likely the next generation 
will be," retorted her aunt. "And don't think to 
keep that child off the sea if he's spared to grow old 
enough to go on it. For you never will." 

Lydia washed up, strove to cheer Mrs. Michelmore, 
spoke a kindly word for Mr. Peach, with whom she was 
on excellent terms, and then put in a plea for herself. 

" If you only could," she said " if you only could 
speak a few words for Sam and me to father. 'Tis 
such cruel work, and the years slipping away, and 
him growing older, and Ned gone from him now." 



196 THE HAVEN 

" Cruel work, as you say ; and 'tis your husband 
as is the cruel party. Father don't go from his 
word." 

" But Sam's as straight as any living man can be 
now. Since the baby was born he's solemnly pro- 
mised and he went to the christening, and he'd go 
back again to church as regular as possible if he 
thought that any good would come of it." 

" It's reached to your father's ears that you've 
give up going too." 

" Well, I pray you to say a word, and ask him to 
let the past be forgotten. See how he takes it when 
you tell him about this visit, and if he's kind over it ; 
and if he's interested in hearing about the baby, you 
might go a step further." 

" He may be very angry, however. I won't 
promise how he'll take it." 

"A lot depends on your cleverness," answered 
Lydia, with much diplomacy. "You know what a 
power you are over him naturally. Indeed, when I 
think of what father would be without you in fact, 
I can't think of it ; and so, though I like Mr. Peach 
very much and he's a good uncle to me yet I can't 
see you gone from here. But do be bright when 
father comes home ; do, dear Aunt Emma, tell him 
about this visit as if you'd liked it. For I'm sure 
you did like it ; and I'm sure you want us to come 
again, now we've broken the ice ; and I'm sure you 
can't say a word to dear father about the baby that 
won't please him. And you might tell him that 
it knows his photograph already. Which is perfectly 
true." 

" I don't say I'm sorry you came," answered the 
other ; " but you mustn't expect me to visit you 
in return, because when John holds off, I hold 
off." 

" Then get him to come if only for the child's 
sake." 



THE HAVEN 197 

" I'll promise nothing at all. A lot will depend 
on the state of mind he's in when he comes back." 

Lydia kissed her aunt and was kissed in return. 
Then she departed, and her heart upon the whole 
felt sanguine. She knew that not upon her father's 
mood, but Mrs. Michel more's, must depend the result 
of this visit. John Major was always the same ; his 
sister would colour her story according to her 
emotions at the time of telling it. And so she did ; 
but being upon the whole in a state of mental 
amiability after perusal of the extraordinary nonsense 
in Culpepper, Mrs. Michelmore told her story rather 
cheerfully and with close attention to facts. She did 
not excuse Samuel or Lydia for calling, but neither 
did she condemn them ; and she left her brother to 
judge of the incident without any attempt to influence 
him. 

Mr. Major, home from a voyage of a month's 
duration, heard all without comment ; then he ex- 
pressed only surprise. His sole questions related to 
the child. 

"Twas christened the day you sailed," she said. 
"His name is John -just plain 'John' and nothing 
else. A very fine child I can't deny it with his 
father's blue eyes." 

The grandfather nodded and preserved a long 
silence. Indeed, he did not break it again that night, 
and, when his sister went to bed, he remained deep 
in thought and took no notice, though she bade 
him ' Good-night.' Some time after she had retired, 
his thoughts then running on Samuel Brokenshire, 
he ascended to her room, knocked at her door, opened 
it and asked a question. 

" Sorry to trouble you, but did Brokenshire say 
anything about Tom Honeywill leaving him and 
coming to me." 

Mrs. Michelmore was not asleep. 

" Yes, he did ; he specially mentioned it. He said 



198 THE HAVEN 

that he was sorry to lose Thomas ; but that he'd 
teached him all he could, and it was lucky for him 
that he should go to the one man in the fleet that 
could teach him more meaning you. No doubt 'twas 
his cunning to get round you that made him say it ; 
but them were his words." 

The fisherman thanked her and went down to 
smoke his last pipe. Many of late had declared 
better things concerning Brokenshire, and before he 
slept Lydia's father almost determined with himself 
to believe them. 

" My grandson, John my grandson, John," whis- 
pered the old man to himself. He went to sleep 
upon the thought ; for in his heart, with faith still 
harboured hope faith's twin. 



CHAPTER VI 

MR. MAJOR'S mind moved very slowly, and it was 
some months before the strong desires within him 
led to action. His lonely spirit cried out for the 
companionship of his children, now both taken from 
him. He did not repine or regret the ordinary 
course of events, but he asked himself often whether 
it was necessary that he should continue to be so 
entirely cut off from Lydia ; and he decided that it 
was not longer necessary. Much stress of mind and 
many prayers aided the decision, and, stronger far 
than argument or appeal, was the under-tow of his 
heart, pulling him, unknown to himself dragging 
the old man where his new-come grandson might be 
found. As for Ned, he saw his father every Sunday 
when Mr. Major was at home upon that day, and 
Ned too, played his part in breaking down the barrier 
between his sister and her parent. All conspired in 
the same direction ; all did what lay within their 
power to bring father and daughter together again ; 
but perhaps if the work of each had been examined 
on its merit, and the weight of each determined as 
a separate factor in the aggregate force that decided 
the fisherman, certain assertions sprung on shipboard 
by William Gilberd might have been found of first 
importance. Arguments, indeed, they were not. 
William did no more than state facts that had come 
to his wife's knowledge ; and startling though his 

199 



200 THE HAVEN 

pronouncements were, they looked so likely to be 
true that his listener felt a call for instant activity. 
And Mr. Major's last conscientious doubt was swept 
away at the same time ; for in this nightly con- 
versation, held between John, in the port bunk of 
the trawler, and William, on his back in the star- 
board bunk, other matters touching the husband of 
Lydia Brokenshire also arose, and Gilberd strained 
a large point on the side of charity in connection 
with them. 

Both men would have to rise for the morning 
watch, and now, awake, they waited their hour and 
talked together while the boat with her trawl down 
fought steadily through a lumpy sea under a sky 
of stars. 

" Tis a curious thing," said William, " why fathers, 
and still more mothers, have a sneaking fondness 
for their boys over their girls. Of course we all 
cry out very loud 'tisn't so, and that we care for 
'em all the same ; but we don't And since there's 
a reason for everything, I'd like to know the reason 
for that." 

Mr. Major reflected. 

" In the first place what you say is true," he 
admitted. " Perhaps it didn't ought to be so ; but 
none can deny it falls out like that most times. 
And I'll tell you for why, William. 'Tis a form of 
vanity in us ; because, you see, the boys come, they 
grow up, carry on our own race ; but the girls 
they only carry on some other man's. That's why 
we hanker for boys, so that we may be carried on 
by 'em. And yet for my part, being used to dis- 
appointments in many a different line, I've turned 
of late with a sort of hungering to my daughter's 
boy, though he's not a Major." 

Gilberd pondered these remarks. He had not 
raised the subject with any purpose to become 
personal, but since his skipper now related his own 



THE HAVEN 201 

attitude in the direction of the Brokenshire baby, 
William followed that theme. 

" And what more natural ? " he asked. " That's 
surely what anybody might expect from a grand- 
father, I should think. The child's half Major, 
whether or no, and so like as not he will be all 
Major, for you never can tell whether the father or 
the mother will reign in a young creature. He'll 
go for a sailor, if not a fisherman that be a sure 
truth." 

" Why do you say so ? " 

" First, there's his havage o' both sides ; and then 
there's hisself. My wife sees a bit of your daughter, 
I must tell you. Mrs. Brokenshire's friendly and 
kind to all, and though, along of her education and 
intellects, she's above most fishermen's wives, she 
gives herself no airs on that account. And the 
boy's a dinky boy a'ready, and loves a bit of a toy- 
boat his father gave him, and won't let it out of his 
sight, so I hear. Goes to sleep sucking of it and 
won't take his bath without it." 

" A fine boy, so my sister says." 

" A masterpiece of a young boy by all accounts." 

" To a trustful and hopeful pattern of man like 
me," said Mr. Major, "a generation don't really 
make so much difference as you might think. And 
for the life of me, since my own boy have decided 
for the shore, I can't help turning my mind to this 
here child." 

" What more natural ? But of course 'tis all 
moonshine so long as you hold to what's unnatural, 
and keep away from your own flesh and blood like 
you do. Pardon my free speech." 

" Moonshine is a hard word," declared Mr. Major ; 
" a very hard word to bring up between a grand- 
father and his grandson." 

" Not at all, and with all respect. How must 
the father of the child feel ? But there, 'tis no 



202 THE HAVEN 

business of mine, and you'll tell me so if I say much 
more." 

Mr. Gilberd rose and began to draw on his boot- 
socks. 

u Speak your mind," answered John. " You can't 
say that I've ever been vexed at hearing a word 
in season from you, William far from it. And, 
touching Brokenshire, I'm only too ready to hear 
good things God A'mighty knows that. I turn a 
deaf ear to company now when his name comes up. 
Yes, I turn away rather than hear what I don't want 
to hear. If any understanding man could say to 
me that Samuel is mending, that Samuel is going 
straight, and that he's given over his dishonest 
ways and dishonest opinions if anybody could tell 
me that, I should be very thankful." 

"Well," answered the other, "and what if they 
could? And how d 'you know they couldn't? You 
say yourself that you stop your ears or flee if the 
man's name be named. Perhaps if you oped your 
ears and bided, you might hear what would please you. 
I don't flee afore his name, and I can tell you that 
since Sam's come to be a father, he's growed a very 
respectable and self-respecting person. He takes 
himself a lot more serious than he did. He's got 
his pride, too ; and, come to think of it, I don't know 
that he's much better pleased with you than you 
are with him. He says you've held off so long that 
no doubt you'll hold off for ever, and he must find 
friends for his family and himself elsewhere." 

Mr. Major showed uneasiness. 

" You tell me he's bettered his ways ? " 

" Without a doubt," declared Gilberd. 

" I'm sore tempted sore tempted to " 

" As to that, 'tis nobody's business but your own. 
Only this I will say, because my wife said it to me, 
and she can see farther through a brick wall than I 
can, or any other man, for that matter. She said, 



THE HAVEN 203 

meaning you, ' Best he looks sharp, anyway, or else 
the child will slip through his fingers.' " 

" What did she mean by that ? " inquired Mr. 
Major. 

He had also risen, and was making ready to go 
on deck. A star or two seemed to fly backward and 
forward across the aperture of the companion ladder 
as the ' Jack and Lydia ' rolled. 

" She means," explained William, " nothing against 
the child's health, for a finer child don't breathe ; but 
she means that if there's no gran'father, there's still 
a very useful gran'uncle ; and that uncle's name is 
Titus Peach, the sail tanner. You wouldn't guess he 
could care much for a newborn infant, or that such a 
thing could care for him ; but my wife tells me that 
Titus and your darter's young one be thick as thieves 
a'ready. And their little hearts ban't big enough to 
make very many friends at that tender age. And if 
the child once gets set on thicky tanner, he won't 
have no use for you." 

" My bowels yearn upon him, and I won't deny it," 
said Mr. Major. " And if you can in solemn honesty 
assure me that Brokenshire's reported all right and 
above suspicion by those that know, then what's to 
stop me from going to 'em ? And if Titus Peach, 
good man though he is, thinks to come between me 
and my grandson John, he's very greatly mistaken 
very greatly." 

Gilberd was bending over his boots, and he winked 
to himself before this statement. 

" Let your mind be at peace," he answered. " 'Tis 
the last thing that any sensible man would do to 
thrust between such as you and your own flesh and 
blood. What better companion for the little boy 
than you? I'm sure neither his mother nor father 
nor Peach nor anybody would wish him a finer 
friend." 

"You see," said the skipper, "when you are up 



204 THE HAVEN 

home sixty odd, the time slips by very quick, and in 
ten years or so from now, if he's an on-coming sort 
of boy, he'll be ready for sea. And what more natural 
than that his own grandfather " 

" Nothing in the world," declared William, " nothing 
in the world more natural than that." 

" If 'tis God's will." 

" There's another thing," added the younger man. 
" And, since you opened the subject, you may as well 
hear my wife's opinion once more. Here's words that 
your daughter said to her not in anger, mind you, 
but in sorrer ; and I've had it in my mind to report 
'em afore ; but then I didn't, doubting whether I'd 
the right to do so. Mrs. Brokenshire, speaking of 
that same Peach, said that he was a kindly and a 
good and a simple man, and very fond of her, and 
that, if she couldn't be of any use to her father, she 
might be some to her husband's uncle." 

" Things be clearly coming to a climax," said Mr. 
Major, " and 'tis no good denying it." 

" Of course a husband's uncle is a very cold and 
distant form of relation compared with your own 
parent," admitted William ; " but the heart of a fine 
girl like your daughter is no doubt big enough for her 
husband's uncles and aunts ; and nature's nature, and 
it will out ; so the long and short is that if you hold 
off much more, she'll find an outlet in Sam's relations, 
and you'll lose both her and her child as well. God 
forbid that I should say these things to fright you 
into acting against your conscience; but if, on top 
of it all, 'tis solemn truth that Sam Brokenshire have 
turned over a new leaf, then, as a plain man, I can't 
see what's keeping you back from them an hour 
longer." 

" Things be clearly coming to a climax," repeated 
Mr. Major. " In fact, 'twouldn't be straining the 
truth to say they've come to a climax." 

And at that identical instant, by a coincidence, 



THE HAVEN 205 

another climax was reached, and a serious misfortune 
overtook the ' Jack and Lydia.' 

Suddenly her pace changed. From the steady 
grind of towing she leapt forward like a greyhound 
off the leash and heeled to the wind, while the cabin 
lamp swung and the sound of water hurtling over 
deck came to their ears. 

" Good powers ! " cried Gilberd, " we've parted ! " 

They hastened on deck, to find his words true. 

Michelmore was bringing the boat round in a 
rough sea : the boy fought with the foresail forward ; 
the trawl warp had broken and the trawl and gear 
were gone. They had been almost new, and repre- 
sented a sum of seventy pounds. 

None spoke, for there was nothing to be said. A 
misfortune which soon or late meets every trawler 
had overtaken them. 

" Two in three years, and this not six months old ! " 
cried Michelmore. 

The day had just broken, and easterly a serrated 
ridge of waves ran jagged against a thin lattice of 
purple cloud that hid grey dawn. Aloft all was clear 
and the morning star shone brilliantly. 

" 'Bout ship and home," said Mr. Major. " The 
Lord gives and the Lord takes away." 

" I wish He'd took away the old one, all the same," 
growled Gilberd, but not loud enough for the skipper 
to hear him. 

John Major strove to note their bearings in the 
crepuscular gloom. Far away to the north came a 
glimmer as of lightning under the horizon. It was 
the pharos of the Start, and they laid their course 
for it. 



CHAPTER VII 

ON the day of Brixham Regatta the haven kept 
holiday, and none reaped more benefit from this fact 
than Mr. Thomas Munday of ' The Sailor's Knot/ 
Old friends and customers patronised him throughout 
the day, and many visitors also swelled his gains and 
admired the attractions of his museum. During an 
interval of the afternoon, when the big craft were 
racing and the minor contests of rowing and 
swimming had not begun, a company of familiars 
assembled in the public bar of the inn. Mr. Tribble, 
the noisy fish salesman, who smote the table with his 
fist, was there, and Mr. Memery, another fish sales- 
man, kept him company ; Brokenshire and his crew 
spoke with Dick Varwell, who had got a new pair of 
trousers and was making many jests at his own 
expense. Titus Peach sat apart with the fanatic, 
Larkin, and discussed ethical questions. They seemed 
largely out of place in the reek and din of ' The 
Sailor's Knot,' but fishermen are fond of religious 
argument, and few can listen to a debate upon morals 
without presently uttering their own opinion. 

Varwell was talking to Brokenshire about his 
brother-in-law, Ned Major. 

" I've always had a high opinion of the young 
shaver, and I'm very glad he's settled to the shore. 
Too many round pegs in square holes as it is. The 
world's full of 'em ; that's why it wobbles so. Look 

206 



THE HAVEN 207 

at me. I don't belong to this world at all really, any 
more than this pair of tweed bags belonged to my 
legs yesterday. I'm a round peg in a square hole, if 
ever there was one far, far ahead of my time like 
all great men. But young Ned Major is built for 
the land, and when I was up that way, taking the air 
on the cliff, I met him in the corn and gave him some 
good advice." 

" And what did you get for it ? " asked Billy Trust, 
of the ' Night Hawk.' " Tisn't much you'd do for 
nought." 

" You're wrong there : for my opinions I've never 
been known to charge. The worth of advice depends 
on them that take it. But, with my vegetarian views, 
I'm glad to have Ned up on Berry Head, because 
now, if I chance to want a fresh turnip from the 
earth, or a handful of kerning corn, I can help myself. 
'Tis little enough to ask from my fellow man, yet 
some have denied it, as you know. I've gone to 
prison before to-day for eating a swede that's grand 
old England ! " 

"You wasn't sent to quod for eating a swede," 
declared Mr. Munday, from behind the bar. " You 
was sent for stealing a swede." 

" And what if nature makes my belly hungry and 
man keeps my pocket empty at the same time ? 
Here am I, an immortal soul on one side of a hedge, 
and here's the fruits of the earth on t'other. There's 
nobody in sight to explain my views to, and Nature 
says, ' Eat and go on your way and be useful. You 
owe it to the human race to act a man's part and fit 
yourself for the battle of life.' If 'twas a sinner's act 
to take one small swede, so that I might support my 
system till I got to the next licensed house, then let 
it be so. But 'twould have been a fool's act to have 
refused Nature's offer. And, be it as 'twill, I suppose 
every sane man would rather be a sinner than a 
fool." 



208 THE HAVEN 

" That's a nice question," said Mr. Memery, who 
was metaphysical when he had leisure. " 'Twould 
stand a lot of argument for and against. Which 
would you rather be reckoned, James Tribble ? " 

" I'd rather be reckoned what I am neither one 
nor t'other," replied the big man. 

"That's no answer. Present company excepted, 
of course but, for argument's sake, which would 
you choose for to be ? " 

" I'd be a fool," declared Thomas Munday ; 
"because heaven looks after them, whereas t'others 
are the devil's job." 

"A very good answer," admitted Mr. Memery. 
" Who'll better it ? " 

" It may be a very good answer, but it isn't true,' 
observed Mr. Peach. 

One or two men laughed. 

" Be you on the side of the knaves then, Titus ? " 
asked Dick Varwell. 

" I hope not in fact, you all very well know I'm 
not," answered the sail tanner. "But 'twas on this 
very subject me and Larkin here were speaking. He 
says that Jehovah's active as ever He was, only not 
so much in men's eyes shy like, and not showing 
Hisself so free in bush or mount as of old. And 
I say that God don't interfere with us nothing near 
so often as He did in the days of the Book." 

" Right you are, Titus ! " cried Tumbledown Dick* 
" I never guessed you'd got the wit to mark that ; 
and yet how can any man-jack of you but see it, if 
he knows his Bible ? Every jolter-head that's learned 
to read must know it is so. The Almighty always 
took good care to have the last word with they Jews 
and Gentiles. He hit 'em, waking and sleeping ; He 
kept 'em stewing in their own juice from the day 
they was born till the day they died ; and a natural 
death was about the last thing the poor toads could 
expect or hope for. Life was a nightmare for 'em, 



THE HAVEN 209 

and tne knaves didn't get any show at all by all 
accounts in them days ; but now they're up on top 
every time with the oysters and champagne, whereas 
the fools be only their footstools, to be kicked out 
of the road when not wanted." 

" There's the next world, however you seem to 
forget that," said Larkin. 

" Is there ? " asked Dick. " You say so, but 
a good many people quite as clever as you, and a 
good few even cleverer, say there isn't the next 
world. And I'm one of them." 

" So much the nastier surprise you'll have when 
you get to it," retorted Larkin. " Who's going to 
read the riddle of this world away from the light 
of heaven and hell ? What's this world but an un- 
finished thing without a head or a tail ? But I tell 
you that 'twill have both afore 'tis burnt up ; and 
the head of it be in heaven and the tail of it be in 
hell. And that's justice. And if even such worms 
as us can see that heaven and hell be part of the 
plan for common fairness, then how much more can 
God A'mighty see it ? " 

" Justice be the thing, and I ask for no more," 
declared Mr. Tribble, banging the table. 

" 'Tis what we all pretend we want, but what we 
none of us would have for the world," answered Dick. 
"Show me the man who's just come from getting 
stark justice, and I'll show you somebody that's 
raw inside and out whosoever he is. Justice be the 
last thing a sensible man would cry for, if he could 
see what it looked like and feel what it felt like 
first" 

" Such as you have reason to say that, no doubt," 
answered Tribble ; " because, if you got justice, 
they'd put you away once for all as a disgrace to 
civilisation and a blot on the earth in general ; but 
you stand for yourself and not for anybody else." 

" No man ought to be afraid of justice not if 

14 



210 THE HAVEN 

he's a good working Christian," shouted Larkin. 
" Tribble's right there ; and that's why true Christian 
men are content and go their way and wait their 
turn. Because they know that time is nothing 
beside of eternity, and that, afore eternity begins, 
naked justice will be done on every human creature." 

" And don't you hope you'll be there to see ? " 
asked Brokenshire. 

" Yes, that he does," answered Dick. " Larkin 
and Tribble would like to sit one on each side of 
the Seat of Judgment and watch their friends come 
up, and shake their heads when the balance was on 
the wrong side of the books. I can see 'em shrugging 
their shoulders and smacking their lips. ' Ah ! there 
goes Tumbledown Dick to his hot corner ! And 
there's Brokenshire's frying-pan making ready. Dear, 
dear! But a fine thing justice/ There'll be no 
dismissing with a caution on the Last Day ; there'll 
be no letting off with a fine. Mercy be a man-made 
article. The God of Jimmy Tribble and Larkin 
here haven't got no use for that. And if He tried 
it on, they'd be the first to pull His holy sleeve 
one each side and remind Him that justice was 
justice and mustn't be tampered with." 

Here Mr. Munday intervened. 

" No more evil speaking and slandering, or out 
you go, Dick," he said. 

" 'Tis these men are slanderers, not me," answered 
the tramp. " I'm only showing 'em how they look 
and how their dirty little thoughts look in decent 
eyes. Justice, indeed ! Don't let any man as values 
his skin or his peace of mind, call out for that ! 
The world at large ban't ripe for it, and I swear 
Brixham ban't." 

They wrangled on. Then a gun fired in the 
harbour and some departed to follow the sport, but 
others remained to talk and drink. 

Mr. Larkin resented Tumbledown Dick's scornful 



THE HAVEN 211 

speeches, and they were still exchanging fierce 
arguments when there entered an unusual visitor in 
the shape of John Major. 

" You must excuse me, Thomas," he said ; " but 
you know I'm teetotal. I've looked in because I 
want to speak to Memery here. But I can take a 
bottle of ginger beer for the good of the house, if 
you please." 

" You'm very welcome, drink or no drink," answered 
the publican. 

Then Mr. Major went and sat by the fish salesman. 
Their talk was personal, and only related to a beam 
and irons for the new trawl of the ' Jack and Lydia.' 

Suddenly, Brokenshire, who had by evil chance 
stayed longer in the public-house than was wise, 
decided that here opened a good opportunity 
to approach his father-in-law before an impartial 
throng. His uncle, seeing him rise and walk towards 
Mr. Major, endeavoured to stop him, but Sam shook 
off Mr. Peach and went away. Therefore Titus, who 
of all things most dreaded a quarrel, crept out that 
he might not be criminated. 

No worse moment could have been chosen by 
Samuel for his challenge. Only the accident of the 
lost trawl had prevented John Major from completing 
a reconciliation at the end of his recent voyage, but 
he had delayed owing to press of work occasioned 
by the accident ; and now that happened which 
postponed any immediate hope of peace. 

" Morning, Mr. Major," began Samuel. " Sorry 
to hear about the trawl. I lay Michelmore got off 
the marks. Some men can't see in the dark." 

" That's never been brought against you, however," 
said Mr. Tribble, and both Dick and Brokenshire 
laughed at the jest. 

John Major seemed in doubt whether to answer. 
At another time and in another place he might have 
yielded. In his heart, indeed, he had already yielded 



212 THE HAVEN 

and had planned to visit his daughter's home within 
the week. But this was neither the place nor 
the moment for that complete return to friendship 
which he proposed. 

Brokenshire's attitude appeared aggressive ; his 
sympathy was not real and was not intended to 
sound real. The criticism of Arthur Michelmore 
contained offence. Moreover, Samuel obviously 
laboured under too much beer. 

On this count his father-in-law was minded to 
ignore him, but the younger man would not be 
ignored. 

" 'Twas all in the night's work and had to be," 
John Major answered. 

" Well, so long as you're pleased, there's no need 
for other folk to be sorry. And, since we're here 
in company, perhaps you'll let me speak further 
and ax you, if I may dare to lift my voice afore 
you, why you treat me and your daughter like 
dirt under your feet ? I've a right to know, and you 
can't deny me the right. Patient ban't the word 
for what I've been ; but 'tis time your stiff will 
bent a bit, and I'll tell you for why. I don't want 
your friendship, God knows, and more don't your 
daughter. You're no father to her and never will 
be, and others can take your place and be proud 
to have what you don't want. But outward civility 
and respect, we that are civil and respectful ourselves 
have a right to ask. And there's another generation 
rising up ; and what's my child done that, when 
he's old enough to toddle down the quay, his own 
grandfather won't look at him? We'm as good as 
you and a sight more Christian-minded, for all 
your psalm singing and stuff about God A'mighty. 
We'm as good as you, and as prosperous, and as 
honest, and as well thought upon. And I say 'tis 
a scandal you hold off, and these here men will bear 
me out If I've been crooked, ban't you taught to 



THE HAVEN 213 

forgive crookedness? If I've been young, ban't you 
taught to forgive youth ? I've married your daughter 
without your leave, and that's the sum total of my 
crime ; and if you can't forgive it and forget it, then 
you're no true Christian man for all you think 
you are." 

Samuel swayed on his legs during this attack, and 
sat down abruptly in Tumbledown Dick's lap at the 
finish. This accident rather spoiled the effect, and 
some men laughed ; but Mr. Major did not laugh. 
He was impressed with Brokenshire's volubility, and 
perceived that beer had loosened his tongue. 

" 'Tis a pity you spoke thus to me to-day, Samuel," 
he answered quietly. " How great a pity you may 
come to know later. I've nothing to say to you at 
present, for 'tis my rule not to waste words on a man 
in drink. You may bluster as you will, but your 
own self is your answer. I don't know what I shall 
do now ; what I was going to do don't much matter 
neither. I can only say again that, for all our sakes, 
'tis a very unfortunate thing we met to-day." 

He ceased and left the bar a moment later. 

Thereupon arguments of a fierce and fiery de- 
scription broke out among the men ; but most took 
Brokenshire's side and held that he and his wife 
were much wronged by Mr. Major's attitude. Larkin, 
Mr. Munday, and Mr. Memery, however, found it not 
in them to cast blame on Mr. Major. 

The problem presently reduced itself to a question 
whether Samuel might be considered drunk or sober, 
and Varwell instituted a variety of delicate tests with 
which he was familiar ; but Brokenshire failed to 
pass even the least exacting ordeal, and, amid noise 
and laughter, Dick pronounced his friend to be 
intoxicated. 

" 'Tis no good denying it," he said ; " you're in a 
case betwixt market-merry and talkative drunk, Sam. 
Only an early stage, but a very unfortunate one to 



2i 4 THE HAVEN 

reach just when that cast-iron, saintly creature came 
along. Now I guess you'll have to wait a few more 
years afore he'll trust you, and no doubt a condition 
of forgiveness will be the pledge." 

At this moment another familiar figure appeared 
in shape of Mr. Bolder, the barber. 

" I'm going, boys," he said, *' and I'm sorry to 
go ; but the business in Torquay's cheap at the 
money, and my wife won't stop in the Coffin House 
another winter." 

" Tis a great come down," declared Dick. " Now, 
instead of shaving the chins of the honest sons of 
toil, Frederick, you'll scent the hair of the upper 
classes, and lie, and tell 'em they ban't getting thin 
on top, when right well you know that they are. 
I couldn't trust myself with a razor at the throat of 
the classes patriot that I am." 

" Why for d'you want to leave us, Frederick ? " 
asked Mr. Munday. " You're doing well, and every- 
body knows it" 

" I don't want to go," declared Mr. Bolder. " I'm 
Brixham born, and should be very well content to 
stop among you, and very likely go on the County 
Council in course of time ; and I never did think to 
leave. But when a man's married, he can't live to 
himself alone not if he is a man. In a word, the 
wife is sick to death of Brixham, and, whether or no, 
the Coffin House she will not live in after Michael- 
mas." 

" Silly superstition," declared Dick ; " and you, as 
a rational creature, ought to knock it out of her, 
Frederick." 

" You, as a bachelor, may think so," answered the 
barber. " I've never yet met the husband as can 
knock superstition out of his wife ; and more have 
you that I will swear. Besides, there's a sort of a 
reason in what she says. Our child very complete 
and perfect in everything though she is- have cer- 



THE HAVEN 215 

tainly a sort of a something you might easily mistake 
for a picture of a coffin-lid on her left shoulder. One 
and all can come and see it, if they doubt. There 
'tis ; and what the wife says is this : Where will the 
next be marked ? And when that woman don't get 
an answer, she very quickly pushes argument to 
extremes. There's another coming, I may say in 
confidence, and in the wife's opinion 'twill have a 
coffin pattern from head to heel. She sees it staring 
out of her dreams ; and I'm short of sleep in con- 
sequence." 

"Mark your childer with the sign of the Cross," 
snapped out Larkin, " and no other mark matters." 

He was a propagandist without self-consciousness 
or tact. But Mr. Bolder could not be considered a 
religious-minded man, and he put the interruption 
aside impatiently. 

" I say 'tis all arrant nonsense, and I have no 
doubt whatever that our next will be white as lather ; 
but that's no use against the wife's dreams. I've got 
to bend, and, in a word, we're off." 

" She ought to trust more in her God," asserted 
Mr. Larkin, and Mr. Tribble agreed with him. 

" I hate to hear of such things in our midst," said 
the latter. "A woman in the family- way should 
look above, and not fret herself because her dwelling- 
house happens to be in the shape of man's last long 
house underground. 'Tis to challenge God and vex 
Him." 

" You know nothing about it, Jimmy," struck in 
Dick, who always argued against Mr. Tribble. " The 
barber's missus is quite right, and there's no call to 
drag in God at all. 'Tis a matter of science, and if 
breeding women get a bee in their bonnets, a lot 
of harm may come out of it. We owe it to the 
unborn to give 'em every chance, and not handicap 
'em by worrying their poor mothers afore they are 
hatched. The lasting surprise is that women with 



216 THE HAVEN 

child keep their nerve so well as they do. The 
pluck they show is one of the wonders of the world." 

"They show it, because they mostly know where 
to trust," answered Larkin. " The Lord's on their 
side, and they do well to be trustful." 

" So you say. But I say different. 'Tis a toss up 
with the strongest and best of 'em, and cruel often 
are they left in the lurch, as we all know. Nature's 
nature, and nature runs off the rails in childbirth 
very easy indeed ; and God don't interfere, because 
He can't. He's started the machine, and the machine 
have to go its appointed way, for the machine be a 
lot stronger than its Maker, just as a runaway steam- 
roller be stronger than the man that started it." 

" In a wiser and more religious world than ours, 
you'd be burnt to death for that," said Mr. Tribble. 
" But nowadays there's not enough believers left to 
get the whip-hand of you atheists, and so we be 
forced to leave you to your outraged Maker. But 
though you dare to deny that God's all-powerful, we 
know where we stand and what's the worth of your 
argument." 

"That nobody can deny," declared Mr. Munday. 
" And now I'll ask you to change the subject and 
hand me them empty glasses.'* 

" I do deny it," answered Dick. " God can't do 
everything, and never pretended He could. Tis 
only silly men, like Tribble, that think He can. 
Here's my pint-pot, Thomas empty as you say. 
Well, let your God put a quart in it, and I'll call 
back everything as ever I spoke against Him, and 
go to church, and live there. There's my score on 
the slate, I see thirteen, is it ? Well, let your God 
add it up and make it twelve, and I'll join the 
Rechabites." 

"Whether or no," concluded Mr. Bolder, "we're 
going, and the Coffin House will be in market after 
Michaelmas." 



THE HAVEN 217 

" So like as not I'll take it." 

" You, Tumbledown Dick ? " asked Billy Trust, of 
the ' Night Hawk.' " And what's the use of a shop 
to such as you ? " 

" For a meeting-house," declared Mr. Varwell, as 
he reached back his full pot. " I'm tired of talking 
sense in this bar. 'Twould be a fine thing to start 
in my own pulpit eh ? And take up a collection 
afterwards." 

"'Tis you would be took up, not a collection," 
foretold Mr. Trust. 



CHAPTER VIII 

LIFE, that had dragged at sea for Ned Major, began 
to race ashore. His days were full and joyous. The 
future looked radiant ; and, though he was at the age 
when humanity demands most from the days to 
come and still trusts them, yet even sanguine and 
happy Ned could sometimes find it in his heart 
to wonder whether more than his share of good 
fortune had not already fallen to him. 

The labour he delighted in was not labour. Weary 
and rejoicing he came to the end of each day ; 
hungry to be on the land, he woke and went forth 
again. Mr. Honeywill declared that such ardour 
and enthusiasm could not last. When Ned set to 
work to read agriculture by night, after he had 
practised it all day ; when, more than once, he 
actually fell asleep over his master's ( Encyclopaedia 
of Farming,' Nicholas Honeywill announced that the 
thing was absurd, and warned Ned that there would 
presently come a revulsion and an anti-climax. 

" Go easy," he said. " You can't larn all there is 
to larn 'twixt now and Christmas. I won't have you 
taking it to heart in this way, because if you do, 
there'll be a rebound, and presently you'll hate the 
earth under your feet and cry out for the sea 
.again." 

Ned laughed at the idea and redoubled his efforts. 
He had more in his life than the farmer guessed, 

218 



THE HAVEN 219 

and when autumn came and the corn was reaped, 
when the hunter's moon rode golden aloft and the 
roots were drawn from the earth, Ned did not work 
in loneliness. For the blue sun-bonnet of Deborah 
might generally be seen like a belated flower not far 
from her lover's point of toil. They were much 
together, and the girl's father felt contented and 
indifferent ; but her mother began to grow uneasy. 

Mrs. Honeywill belonged to the ordinary type of 
mother whose eyes are blinded by the wonderful 
spectacle of their offspring. Did they rest upon 
another woman's boy or girl, they saw clearly, but 
in the matter of Tom and Deborah she had ever 
perceived latent possibilities hidden from other 
observers. Thus it came about that when Tom 
went to sea, his mother suffered a very poignant 
disappointment ; and when she began to suspect 
an attachment between her daughter and John 
Major's boy, she endured a new and even greater 
uneasiness. The mother held that Deborah might 
reasonably look higher than Ned. Against him, 
indeed, she had no objection to offer ; but after all, 
he was only a fisherman's son and a paid labourer 
at Berry. His good qualities and general worthiness 
she did not deny ; yet many young men not possible 
to consider in connection with Deborah were as good 
and as worthy. She saw a growing danger, guessed 
Deborah's secret, and decided that her husband 
must be told. Before the event, however, another 
happened, and it was Ned himself and not Mrs. 
Honeywill who confessed to the farmer that he 
wanted to pay court to Deborah. 

The time flew, and much that Ned had hoped 
would be brought about by time did not happen. 
He saw his father on Sundays as a rule, and from 
him learned how that he was going to visit Lydia 
and the baby, but had been prevented by an un- 
happy accident. 



220 THE HAVEN 

" I'd made up my mind and fixed the very day," 
explained John. " Then, by ill chance, I fell upon 
Samuel Brokenshire drunk at ' The Sailor's Knot/ 
And so it all went to the ground, and still I bide 
and wait in patience. I'm sorry to the heart for my 
child, and I'm sorry for myself; but the fault isn't 
with me." 

" I thought Sam was as good as gold now," 
declared his son. " I'm sure he's straight enough, 
father. Everybody will tell you the same now. 
'Twould have been a very cruel disappointment for 
Lydia, if she'd known the good in store." 

" He's put it off six months by his own act," 
declared Mr. Major. " When I saw him bosky-eyed 
and heard him talk to me without respect or proper 
tone of speech, 1 resolved to change my mind. If 
they want me, they must win me ; and they know 
how 'tis to be done. And this you can tell Lydia 
too : That 'tis a very great grief and regret to me 
to keep away. I'm a lonely old man according to 
the will of Providence, and I don't repine at it ; but 
if she and her husband will to make me easier, 
then they know how they can bring it about. When 
certain people can tell me they haven't seen Broken- 
shire so much as fresh for six months, to Overgang 
I go ; but not sooner." 

Ned promised to convey these conditions, and 
took it upon him to declare they would be fulfilled. 
And then he touched his own affairs and told his 
father what he had done and what he hoped to do. 

" Tis for them to say," declared Mr. Major. Of 
course 'tis a thing of the far future. For my part 
I think she's a very good, kind-hearted little girl. 
But won't they look higher ? " 

" Farmer will be very well satisfied, I do believe," 
said the youth. " He married when he was nineteen 
and never regretted it, for I've heard him say so. 
But Mrs. Honeywill sets terrible store by Deb, as 



THE HAVEN 221 

well she may do, and I ban't so sure how she'll take 
it. Deb says I'm to tell J em on my eighteenth 
birthday ; and that I'm going to do." 

The great hour duly came and with it Ned's 
announcement. He put it off until after supper at 
Berry Farm, and then, at a nod from Deborah, 
exploded their secret in the ears of her parents. 
Ned insisted upon the girl being beside him at 
the moment of the confession, though she did not 
wish to be ; for at such moments of revelation a 
maid's own mother may seem a stranger, since when 
it comes to the unveiling of the heart's heart, no 
human intimacy or relationship is ever close enough 
to make the thing easy. To many high natures, 
indeed, it is never possible, and only their own soul 
can know its secrets. 

But here was a .thing that certainly had to be told 
a thing of every day, a circumstance only fraught 
with precious wonder to Ned and Deborah them- 
selves. 

" We've got a tremendous piece of news, master," 
said the young man. " And how you'll take it, and 
how missis will take it, I can't guess. I'm feared to 
tell you ; but 'twas long since ordained betwixt me 
and Deb that come my eighteenth birthday, it should 
out. In a word, we'm tokened, and have been this 
longful time ; and we do hope and pray there's 
nothing against it. We're cruel fond of each other, 
and nothing will do but we marry, come presently. 
Long ways off still, of course. We wouldn't hurry 
it for anything, and for that matter I can't make a 
home for Deborah yet. But there it is ; we won't 
keep it hid no more, and we've found it terrible 
difficult to keep it hid at all, owing to rejoicing 
so much about it." 

" And we're an old engaged couple, dear mother," 
said Deborah. " You'd never believe it, but Ned 
offered for me two years agone. And I couldn't 



222 THE HAVEN 

believe it myself such a bit of a girl as me. But 
he would have it. And I love him with all my heart, 
and I hope you'll have nought to say against it, for 
we've long known we couldn't live our lives apart, 
haven't we, Ned ? " 

"Yes, we have; and the day I don't see her be 
a blank day for me ; and I do hope, Mrs. Honey will, 
you'll not set your face against it ; for 'twould knock 
all the life out of us, I do assure you. There never 
was two creatures more wrapped up heart and soul 
in each other." 

Deborah went to her mother and mutely continued 
the attack, by putting her face against the woman's 
and rubbing her little brown cheek on her mother's 
ear. 

By a sort of intuition boy and girl both felt where 
the danger lay. Neither doubted that Nicholas 
Honeywill would yield. Ned's relations with his 
master were of the most friendly description, and 
Nicholas never could deny his daughter anything. 
Indeed, he was not ill pleased. He had no particular 
ambition for Deborah, and to see her happy and 
married to a healthy, simple-minded, and steady 
youth was all that he desired or expected. She 
would be well off, and was to be regarded as a very 
eligible partner, even for a prosperous man ; but her 
father waived prosperity in the case of Ned. He 
liked young Major well, and felt no concern for his 
future. With his gifts of health and energy and 
enthusiasm he must go far. He was a born farmer, 
and, as such, his master felt nothing but kindly 
interest and hearty belief in him. He had not the 
slightest objection to Ned as a son-in-law. Indeed, 
he looked farther ahead than the boy and girl, and 
saw that such an alliance might serve to suit him in 
more directions than one. His wife was a weakly 
woman, and in all probability would pass many years 
before Mr. Honeywill himself. Already, therefore.. 



THE HAVEN 223 

with ordinary human selfishness, he weighed the 
chances of content and comfort for old age, and 
saw in this proposition a very satisfactory solution 
to certain ultimate problems. 

With Deborah's mother, however, it was otherwise. 
Before her husband's frank and friendly reception of 
the news ; while he congratulated both the lovers, 
hugged Deborah, shook Ned's hand, and availed 
himself of the opportunity to pour out an extra 
nightcap of spirits, his wife could say but little. Her 
attitude, however, served to damp the splendour of 
the occasion, and, weighing her mother's silence 
against Mr. Honeywill's noise, Deborah went doubt- 
fully to bed. Her betrothed also slept ill. 

Because, while the weaker lamp, Mrs. Honeywill 
none the less carried the stronger flame. There were 
nightly conferences heard often, as a murmur, into 
the small hours by Deborah, who slept in a little 
chamber immediately above her parents ; and these 
nocturnal conversations were often known to change 
the outlook of Nicholas Honeywill, so that the 
promise or undertaking over the last pipe had not 
seldom vanished before the breakfast cup of tea. 

When Mr. Honeywill announced that he had 
' slept on ' such and such a proposition, it meant in 
reality that he had slept a good deal less than usual, 
and that his wife had succeeded in changing his in- 
tentions or opinions before she suffered him to enter 
oblivion. 

To-night Deborah knew that the murmur would 
be heard in her parents' room, and she was not mis- 
taken. Without, of course, distinguishing any word, 
she was generally able to form an accurate guess at 
the discussion and its course. First there usually 
happened the gentle sound of her mother's voice, 
followed by loud, emphatic utterances from her 
father. Then the gentle voice ran on, like water, 
and the loud voice gradually changed and thinned 



224 THE HAVEN 

off, as though somebody was slowly drowning in the 
current. The duration of the contest varied ; the 
climax was usually the same. There came single 
notes from the husband, and at last a few very 
loud, exasperated explosions. Sometimes an oath 
penetrated the ceiling and reached Deborah's ear. 
These frenzied expletives indicated that her father 
had given in. Then followed a last ripple from the 
gentler throat, and silence dropped her curtain on 
the play. 

But to-night Deborah could not understand the 
trend of events. She anticipated a very long dis- 
cussion, and in her own bosom burned defiance of 
maternal authority or any other. She told herself 
that though her father might yield a score of times, 
yield she would not. For once her humble spirit was 
affirmed beyond any gainsaying or argument, for did 
not Ned signify her life ? In this frame of mind she 
lent an indifferent ear to the parental duet, and told 
herself that, though her father and mother might 
discuss the situation until morning, the event was 
sure and beyond any human power to interrupt. 

To-night, however, Mrs. Honeywill herself was 
half hearted, and made but a weak objection to the 
plans of the young people. She appealed to Mr. 
Honeywill's pride a poor choice, because pride was 
no quality of his. He lacked even that measure of 
the emotion to be called a virtue ; and when, there- 
fore, his wife considered the importance of looking 
higher for Deborah, reminded him of Deborah's 
expensive education, and dwelt upon their daughter's 
physical charm, spiritual grace, and many-sided 
fascination, Nicholas cut her short. He admitted all 
these things, but declared that they had no right 
or reason to look higher than a good, healthy, 
hearty, and honourable young man in their own 
station of life. 

"Which Ned Major is," he declared; "and if 



THE HAVEN 225 

you've a fault to find in him, I'll give it all up and 
send him about his business, and forbid the marriage 
to-morrow ; but right well you know there's no real 
fault in him, and you're far too straight a woman to 
pretend that there is one. And what you'd like, in 
plain English, is for Deb to marry above her station ; 
and that's a lapse from your usual lofty common 
sense. Besides all that, I'll be honest with you and 
tell you that I'm thinking of myself as well as them. 
The Lord's willed, seemingly, that I'm to be a 
widower, and outlive you by a doubtful number of 
years. Well, of course the man that had been your 
husband would never have no use for another woman, 
so I can't get away from the thought that, if I can 
keep Deborah, 'twould be a comfort to me and 
doubtless a comfort to you to know it from your 
shining place. And if, in the years to come, Ned 
took her and took over Berry, I could bide with them 
and watch over 'em ; and Deborah would do what 
a daughter can to ease my declining years." 

Mrs. Honeywill turned away from him in her bed 
and gasped against the wall. 

She was wounded to the very heart. Her husband 
had revealed a side of his nature unexposed until 
now, and unseen through nineteen long years ol 
wedded life. 

" I see your plans," she said. " I'm sorry that I 
should linger here, but that's no fault of mine. 
Doubtless I shall be carried away pretty soon, then 
you can make your own arrangements ; but you 
must excuse me for waiting the Lord's time. Cer- 
tainly I've no further wish to stop not after what 
I've heard to-night." 

It was his turn to protest ; but she refused to hear 
any apologies ; in fact, bade him be silent rather 
sharply. 

They lay in wretchedness side by side, and heaved 
alternate windy groans. 

15 



226 THE HAVEN 

Their misery of soul was great until sleep had pity 
on them. The man was ashamed of what he had 
revealed, and felt quite crushed beneath her satire ; 
the woman suffered two troubles. She was concerned 
to think her little maid must fall far short of the 
great match that she had sometimes hoped and 
dreamed ; because, mother fashion, she had never 
perceived that Deborah was not for all markets ; and 
she felt cruelly perturbed and amazed at her husband's 
cold-blooded calculations for a future she would not 
share. 

Meanwhile, Deborah, with small ears pricked to 
listen, was puzzled that the usual melody of a talk 
between her father and mother after they had retired 
fell now into 'such unfamiliar cadence and such speedy 
peace. 



CHAPTER IX 

AN evening came, but not until six months were 
past, when Mr. Major actually set out to visit 
Overgang and make friends with his own. With 
some serious qualms that desire was defeating 
conscience did he go, but none could say a word 
against the conduct of Samuel ; indeed, all united 
to praise him, and Samuel himself, who heard from 
a friend concerning his father-in-law's express de- 
termination, had faced the probation in undeviating 
virtue, and he had nearly come well through it. 
But his evil star led him twice into Start Bay a 
fortnight before the six months were ended, and, 
unknown to Samuel, much of an unpleasant character 
was destined to happen as the result of this error. 
Now he and Lydia knew that the time set by Mr. 
Major was past, and they waited with no small 
anxiety for his advent. It was thanks largely to 
Lydia that Sam had come through the ordeal so 
successfully. Indeed, she felt proud of herself, and 
believed that, after so long a period of well doing, 
her husband would backslide no more. In the matter 
of beer, his behaviour had certainly been beyond all 
praise, and even at Christmas time none saw Sam 
so much as exhilarated. He had worked hard and 
saved money. All this Lydia knew, but she did not 
know of the recent nocturnal raids on Start Bay. 
Indeed none at Brixham so much as guessed it, for 

227 



228 THE HAVEN 

the reputation of the c Night Hawk ' had undergone 
a change. It was the unscrupulous Billy Trust who 
thus tempted his skipper on certain dark winter 
nights to trade upon their improved credit, and 
excellent financial results rewarded them. The fish 
taken in these hauls were sold at Torquay ; therefore 
none happened to be the wiser. The sequel rested 
with other men directly involved. 

It was half-past eight o'clock when John Major 
set out, and his way took him along the quay past 
' The Sailor's Knot. 1 He had come back unex- 
pectedly from the Land's End, and it struck him 
that his visit, partaking thus of a surprise, might be 
all the more welcome to Lydia and her husband. 

Now, however, as he approached the inn, Mr. 
Major perceived two fishermen in front of him. 
They passed ahead under a lamp-post, and the light 
flashed upon their hats and shoulders. He did not, 
however, recognise them until he was quite close ; 
but then they spoke, and he heard Samuel Broken- 
shire bid the other go and return quickly. There- 
upon Billy Trust went his way down to the harbour 
and Samuel entered ' The Sailor's Knot.' 

This unexpected incident arrested Mr. Major's 
progress. He could not find reasonable fault with 
Brokenshire for calling at an inn, but he had counted 
upon finding him at home to-night. He considered 
his course, and determined to leave Sam a clear half- 
hour. Then he would satisfy himself that he had 
left Mr. Munday's bar. 

As he hesitated, the ragged form of Dick Varwell 
glowed for a moment in the stream of light that 
shone out of ' The Sailor's Knot ' ; then he entered 
and disappeared. Others followed him, and the 
burly Mr. Tribble was of the number. 

John Major lighted his pipe, looked at his watch, 
and went down the quay. A slow and heavy feeling 
of disappointment at this incident got hold upon 



THE HAVEN 229 

him. No spark of imagination could be said to 
belong to Mr. Major, and yet he had often dwelt 
through the night-watches on this reconciliation ; he 
had anticipated it with interest and not without 
emotion. He thrust the present accident out of his 
mind as a thing of no account. He tramped the 
deserted quay, marked Billy Trust return and enter 
the inn, heard a clock chime twice. 

Upon the stroke of nine, assuring his soul very 
steadfastly that Samuel was now home again, Mr. 
Major knocked out his pipe and set off for Over- 
gang. But he had to pass the public-house before 
he reached it, and it happened now that he did not 
pass, but entered. 

Much had fallen out while the fisherman walked 
up and down under King William's statue, and now 
John Major found himself thrust into the very heart 
of a broil that shattered his own project and sent 
him home an angry and unhappy man. 

A tragedy burst upon ' The Sailor's Knot ' while 
Lydia's father smoked his pipe, and an evening that 
began in peace ended with such a storm as Mr. 
Munday's house of entertainment had never known 
until that night. 

When Brokenshire went in, his second hand, Mr. 
Mutter, with another fisherman or two, had already 
arrived, and the innkeeper was bargaining for a very 
singular crab taken in a trawl on the preceding day. 
He offered a shilling, but the owner demanded 
eighteenpence. The bargain was struck at one and 
three, with a pint of beer thrown in. Then Dick 
Varwell and Mr. Tribble arrived. The latter had 
news for Brokenshire. Tribble usually declared him- 
self on the side of those who made free with Start 
Bay ; but he was a timid spirit in war, though noisy in 
peace, and now he came with a warning to Samuel. 

He beckoned Brokenshire aside, and broke to him 
some bad news. 



230 THE HAVEN 

" You'll do well to clear out of this and get home, 
or else to sea afore the trouble comes. There's an 
ugly storm brewing for you, and it's like to burst 
here any minute. Your last little jaunt have given 
you away, and since they can't catch you on the 
sea, they be coming to have it out ashore." 

" Let 'em. We're good enough for all the crabbers 
at Hall Sands and Bee Sands too, I reckon," 
answered the master of the ' Night Hawk/ 

" Well said, Sam ! " cried Dick. 

" That resolute black beggar, Chris King, he is 
bringing 'em over ; and there's spies about that ban't 
on your side, so they'll know where to find you. 
King's got proofs, and he says he's going to have 
' forty shillings or a month ' out of you into the bar- 
gain," continued Tribble. 

Sam's eyes blazed. He and King had long been 
foes. 

"By God, he shall then! And I'll see what we 
can do for our side." 

Brokenshire called Mutter, and when, some minutes 
later, Billy Trust and other friends joined the throng, 
they heard the news and felt acutely interested. 

Mr. Munday, quite ignorant of the pending 
catastrophe, showed his new crab to a fisherman. 

And then four strangers entered together. They 
whispered at the door, looked about them, marked 
Brokenshire with his companions, and then came up 
to the bar. 

Munday knew none of them, but Tribble did. 
The big man already began to feel alarm. But after 
his many valiant utterances concerning Start Bay 
and illegal fishing, he could not well retreat at this 
crisis. 

King paid no heed to Tribble. He began a general 
discourse intended for other ears, but addressed to 
Mr. Munday. 

" We've stepped over from Tor Cross to say 




THE HAVEN 231 

a thing or two to a man not a mile from this bar. 
And we've come to do what the law's too weak 
to do by the look of it. It may seem a very fine 
joke to sneak the living of other men by night, 
and hang out false numbers and hide your lights, 
and tell lies if you're caught at it ; but we at Tor 
Cross reckon it's neither worse nor better than dirty 
shop-lifting ; and we also reckon the man that would 
steal other men's fish, would just so soon steal the 
watches out of their fobs. That's what we think, and 
we want a certain crooked chap who sails out of 
Brixham to know it." 

"And who might he be, Chris King?" asked 
Samuel, gripping an empty pot. 

" He's a hookem-snivey blackguard called Sam 
Brokenshire," answered the big black man ; " and 
I've come here to-night to pay off a score or two 
against him ; and see if he's so brave face to face 
with an honest man as he is by night on the sea 
with them other rascals that go in his boat." 

" Well, I won't keep you waiting," answered 
Brokenshire. "You've been fretting your heart 
out for this a longful time, and I've heard what 
you've been saying all about too. I've laid low 
of late, for private reasons, but this lets me out I 
reckon ; and the man as calls me a hookem-snivey 
blackguard's put himself outside law." 

He walked up to King and hit him on the chest. 
The longshoreman countered on Sam's head and 
knocked his cap off. In a moment, as though this 
was the signal, the others fell on Saul Mutter, 
Trust, and Varwell, and the din and dust of battle 
swiftly rose. Mr. Tribble, whose great fists had 
banged many a table, but nothing else, got into 
a corner, where he escaped with a few kicks as the 
fighters whirled round him. He towered there with 
his sheep's eyes rolling and his red, shaking wattles 
turned to white. Dick Varwell had no power of 



232 THE HAVEN 

muscle, and his lean carcase was soon in the saw- 
dust with a bloody nose ; but the other men were 
more equally matched. A Brixham fisherman 
quickly engaged Dick's conqueror, while Billy Trust 
and Mutter fought each his furious crabber ; but 
the middle of the public bar was entirely occupied 
with Sam and Mr. King. They were both too 
large for such a narrow arena. Pots and glasses 
rolled and crashed upon the floor, while the men 
swayed this way and that against the walls. As often 
as this happened, Mr. Munday's museum suffered, 
and before the battle was ended many of his 
treasures, in splintered ruins, strewed the bar. A 
policeman had run up in response to the publican's 
shrill summons ; but he was elderly, and doubted 
the powers of one among so many. Therefore he 
looked in and then hurried out again and blew his 
whistle. Loafers ran up from the darkness at 
sound of the hubbub, and the combatants were 
forcibly separated, long before any but Mr. Varwell 
could be said to have had enough. Mr. Mutter had 
nearly beaten his crabber, while another Start Bay 
man was getting the better of Mr. Trust. King 
and Brokenshire punished each other very badly, 
and when John Major elbowed his way through 
the crowd, he saw his son-in-law sitting in a corner 
bleeding from mouth and ears. The men had closed 
and fallen just before being separated, and King's 
arm was broken by contact with an iron-legged 
table. Immense damage to the decorations of the 
bar were also done, and a space of time, not much 
exceeding two minutes, had sufficed largely to ruinate 
the famous chamber. 

John Major did not stay. He marked the scene, 
learnt that certain crabbers had come over to fight 
with the crew of the ' Night Hawk,' and observed 
that they had effected their purpose. Then he 
abandoned his own enterprise and went home. He 



THE HAVEN 233 

was much distressed and especially puzzled before 
the ways of Providence in connection with his 
daughter. 

The police appeared a few minutes after John 
Major left 'The Sailor's Knot/ but several of the 
combatants had departed before they did so. Billy 
Trust, with Saul Mutter and their opponents, escaped 
through a side door. Mr. Tribble also succeeded in 
doing the like ; but King had to go to the cottage 
hospital, and two policemen desired to convey 
Samuel to the station. 

He absolutely declined to go, however, and Dick 
Varwell, rising from his temporary resting-place 
under the table, argued with wide technical know- 
ledge to show why Mr. Brokenshire should be 
allowed to depart in peace. It was explained and 
admitted that the Start Bay men first outraged law 
and order. They had indeed come over with that 
object. To punish a man who, under gross provo- 
cation, had defended his good name in the only 
possible manner, was an outrage and quite contrary 
to law. Moreover, everybody knew where Samuel 
dwelt, and if a warrant was issued, it must be easy 
to serve it. Tumbledown Dick gained his point, and 
Samuel, blind in one eye, was led home to vinegar 
and brown paper. The inn was shut up an hour 
before closing time, and Mr. Munday did not disdain 
to drop a tear amid the ruins of so many unique 
treasures. 

Next morning policemen arrived on the hillside 
at Brixham, and every casement framed a woman's 
head, from the top of Overgang to the bottom, as 
the officers drew up at Mr. Brokenshire's home. 
Samuel was wanted, not for the riot of the preceding 
evening, but for poaching in Start Bay, and the 
evidence amply justified a warrant. The battered 
Brokenshire knew it and raised no question. 



234 THE HAVEN 

" 'Twill be the choice of a fine or a fortnight," he 
said to his distracted wife ; " the pitcher's went to 
the well once too often. Keep up your pecker and 
don't expect me again for a bit. I've often counted 
on this happening, and I shall go to prison as a 
protest. Uncle Titus will look after you." 

She wept and called upon him to consider his 
child, and a second presently to be born. But Sam 
was firm. 

" Right's right," he said, " and I'm going to brave 
it out ; and very likely they'll change the law upon 
what I shall tell 'em in open court." 

After a few personal directions as to money and 
credit while he was away, Samuel departed ; and on 
the following morning Lydia learned that her husband 
had only erred in one particular of his prophecy. 
Despite his explanations and arguments, an irate 
Bench had ordered Samuel to prison for a month. 
He was indeed offered the option of a fine, but he 
refused to pay it. 



CHAPTER X 

AMONG the many issues involved by Brokenshire's 
misfortune was a minor one affecting his uncle. It 
came about curiously, and originated in the altered 
demeanour of Lydia's father. After his bitter 
experience, Mr. Major took life so much to heart 
for a time and sank in a taciturnity so unusual and 
so extreme, that many were concerned for him. A 
man of ready speech and cheerful countenance under 
the hard strokes of chance, he endured this last blow 
ill, and though he preserved silence on the subject, 
and rarely discussed it, even with Mr. Gilberd, his 
first familiar, none could fail to note a change. She 
who felt this most nearly was John's sister, and 
her brother caused Emma many uneasy hours. At 
first Mrs. Michelmore was concerned for him, though 
his melancholy and silence were not in themselves 
unpleasant to her. The melancholy she actually 
enjoyed, and the silence gave her a larger personal 
freedom of speech. She talked and wept more than 
usual, and she felt better for it; but the sustained 
gloom of John, together with his unexampled patience 
under her conversation, left its mark presently, and 
she began to wish that he would be himself once 
more. He was well in body, but a foreign gloom, 
unbroken by any dayspring of light or evening glow, 
crowded down upon him. He came and went from 
sea, and displayed a stolid and unbroken darkness 

235 



236 THE HAVEN 

and indifference of spirit. On Sundays he attended 
church and saw Lydia and her boy there ; but 
prayer did not visibly change or cheer him. Ned 
came to see his father when he could, and his visits 
were also powerless to lift Mr. Major. The young 
man confessed to Mrs. Michelmore that he was much 
concerned before this phase. 

During three weeks this state of things continued, 
and then Emma, from uneasiness waxed into despera- 
tion. With an effort she even essayed a little 
cheerfulness ; but John, perceiving the attempt, 
turned upon her and bade her be not light-minded, 
an admonition that caused his sister acute annoyance 
and even woke her to anger. 

There occurred between them two further scenes 
of a nature unpleasant, and then Emma began 
seriously to fear for her brother's mind, and to doubt 
if life could much longer run upon this painful 
pattern. She pondered much with herself by night, 
and the vision that filled the foreground of her 
melancholy cogitations was that of Titus Peach, A 
sort of slender thread bound them still, but, on 
reviewing the events of the last year, Mrs. Michelmore 
perceived that his visits had been few and far between. 
Even when accident brought them together, she 
could not remember any very recent ardour or 
persistence in the attitude of the tanner to herself. 
For this, however, she did not blame Titus. She 
surveyed a period of three years, and observed that 
for two-thirds of it he had persevered gamely in his 
attentions. It was only of late during the last 
twelve months or so that he had cooled, or appeared 
to cool. 

Mrs. Michelmore now felt that she had taken Titus 
too lightly. She experienced no immediate desire 
to become much more friendly, but she told herself 
that she respected Mr. Peach for his good qualities 
and simple-heartedness ; she assured herself that a 



THE HAVEN 237 

little more suavity on her side was called for at this 
juncture. She had a growing and dreadful conviction 
that her brother was about to become mentally 
afflicted, and she felt that, when this final disaster 
descended upon the family, her lot, if still unfriended, 
must be heavier than she could bear. She decided 
to show a little consideration for the old admirer, and 
even offer some slight scraps of fuel to his dwindling 
flame. She did not, however, propose to commit 
herself over much, or encourage him to anything like 
a definite hope. Her design was to move cautiously, 
with one eye upon her brother, one upon Mr. Peach. 
If John presently returned to his true self, Titus 
might be suffered to recede again ; but if, on the 
other hand, her brother became insane and vanished 
from among men, then she believed that Mr. Peach 
would still rise to be the evening star of her own 
unfortunate days, and even bring with him a little 
peace at the last. 

Her design matured within the recesses of Mrs. 
Michelmore's despondent soul ; but to execute it 
proved less easy than she anticipated. She had not 
seen Mr. Peach for a month, and though she now 
looked for him pretty sharply, when she went out 
shopping or upon other business, he did not appear. 
Once the widow actually went out of her way to 
pass the barking yard, but Titus happened to be else- 
where ; and once she saw him approaching down 
the high street of Brixham, and made certain that 
he had seen her ; yet the event appeared to prove 
Mrs. Michelmore mistaken, for Peach, with his face 
full of business, hurried down a side street before 
he reached her. 

Time passed, and John did not mend. He seemed 
to be travelling through a dark valley of mental 
trouble, and his sister felt confirmed in her opinion 
that Mr. Major was about to lose his mind and sink 
into living death. 



238 THE HAVEN 

Then her long-sought opportunity arrived, and she 
met Titus Peach emerging from his own dwelling. 
They were bound in the same direction, and he suited 
his pace to hers. 

She was somewhat agitated at the beginning of the 
conversation, and a certain air of preoccupation about 
the man did not help her to calmness ; while he, little 
knowing the mind of Mrs. Michelmore, failed to 
understand her tremor. But he, too, was not 
altogether sorry for the meeting. He had long 
anticipated it, and designed now to indicate a definite 
modification of his own attitude. 

They discussed the weather and the prosperity of 
the country-side. Then Mrs. Michelmore found her 
opportunity, and began to talk of John Major. 

" No doubt a man such as yourself have marked 
the difference that's come over him of late," she said. 
" Not that he was ever what you'd call a light-hearted 
creature no Major was ever that from the cradle 
onward. Still, for calm sense and patience and trust 
in Providence, he stood alone till the day your poor 
nephew was locked up. But now he's a changed 
man, and 'tis my belief that Providence have pretty 
well done with him, and he've seen his best days." 

"You oughtn't to say any such thing," declared 
Mr. Peach. "Providence have never done with 
anybody so long as they've got a spark of life left 
in 'em least of all with such a man as your brother. 
If he's dark, 'tis along of his daughter ; and, until he 
forgets and forgives, he'll bide dark. I know what 
she feels about it none better ; for she's grown to 
be a daughter to me now, you might say." 

Mrs. Michelmore's heart sank a little. 

" Have you seen John lately ? " she asked. 

" Can't say I have." 

" Then you can't judge. But I know only too well 
what's in store, if something don't happen soon. 
He'll go like Uncle Stocks went. Yes, he'll go that 



THE HAVEN 239 

way sure as death, and we shall lose him. I see it 
coming." 

But Mr. Peach was strangely lacking in sympathy. 

" I've got to hate gloomy subjects a good bit of 
late," he answered. " One looks to the young more 
and more as one grows older. Our own generation 
do take such a black view of everything, and it's bad 
for the nerves, and shocking bad for faith. Now 
Lydia, with all her troubles thick upon her, have got 
a bit of her father's hope, and she bears it bravely, 
and looks forward to this job being the turning-point 
in my nephew's career. She wouldn't let me have 
any peace till I forgave him ; so I've done it, and 
I hope with her that Samuel will be a reformed 
character when he comes back." 

Mrs. Michelmore felt a flutter of actual resentment 
at this speech. Titus quite failed to please her ; yet, 
after a moment's silence, she determined to make one 
more effort. 

" Yes, the young are very well, despite the cares 
and worries of 'em ; but I can't say myself I've ever 
been in the habit of turning to 'em for peace and 
quiet. 'Tis strange how things come to pass, and 
we never know where wisdom lies. Us haven't 
chanced to meet now for a good bit, though I've 
often had my mind upon you ; and of late, since 
John got into such a terrible gloomy vein of mind, 
and his voice seemed to go out of him, as if dumb- 
ness was to be the next thing, I've called home 
oftener and oftener the many bits of wise wisdom 
that I've heard fall from you." 

Mr. Peach acknowledged the compliment, but it 
astonished him, and he did not conceal surprise. 

" My word ! " he said. " I should never have 
thought it." 

"Yes, I feel so," she told him. 

He puffed out his breath uneasily. Life had not 
stood still with Mr. Peach, and in its progress the 



240 THE HAVEN 

figure of Emma Michelmore no longer filled a pro- 
minent position. He had definitely abandoned all 
idea of marriage. An immense new interest was 
awakened by Lydia Brokenshire and her child. 
The little boy had taken mightily to Mr. Peach, 
and had also shown a tactful fondness for the shell 
grotto in his great-uncle's garden. Lydia and her 
son frequently visited him, and he assured her that 
they could not come too often. 

" I'm hearing things," replied the sail- tanner after 
a pause. " Who knows ? 'Tis just possible that if 
you'd spoke to me like that eighteen months to 
two years since, that history would have been altered 
long ago ; but I'm like your brother here and there, 
and I'll always trust Providence to bring about the 
right thing in its own way and its own time." 

The utterance admitted of two constructions, and 
Mrs. Michelmore took the wrong one. 

" You're right, as you generally find yourself, I 
suppose. It have been a great blessing to me in 
my woful life to know that I'd won your high 
opinion. But, of course, 'twasn't for me to push 
the friendship faster than you thought proper. Still, 
I'm very glad to hear I've still got a place in your 
thoughts, I'm sure. No doubt the right thing will 
happen in God's good time." 

But Titus objected strongly to this line of argu- 
ment. Despite Emma's vagueness, he perceived 
that she now desired to revive a friendship that he 
had long regarded as dead. His ambitions and 
inclinations were changed completely ; he even 
marvelled that he could have courted this care- 
worn and mournful-voiced woman. Personally, Titus 
was feeling himself to be a good deal younger and 
brisker of late ; but Mrs. Michelmore, on the con- 
trary, appeared to have aged in body if not in mind 
since last he enjoyed conversation with her. He 
grew a little impatient under these advances. He 



THE HAVEN 241 

resented them, and even told himself that they were 
indecent. He strove to hit on some delicate, but 
definite, speech that should make clear to her it 
was impossible to renew even the old nebulous 
understanding. She had always preserved a studious 
vagueness towards the problem ; and she was evi- 
dently prepared to continue in it. In coarse words 
Mrs. Michelmore was hedging ; but Mr. Peach had 
long wearied of that attitude. To clear the air 
and extricate himself for ever was the immediate 
task before him. 

He considered, and answered in a parable. 

" My seafaring cousin him that's captain of a 
Dieppe cargo boat nowadays was to the Indies 
in early life, and he picked up many a bit of Indian 
wisdom there," began Titus. " And one thing he 
dearly liked to repeat was this : ' You never can 
tell the mind of a woman or a cow.' On the 
surface such a saying don't sound civil to the female 
sex ; but it's better than civil : it's true. And so 
it came about that I never knew your mind, do 
what I would and try as brave and obstinate as I 
might to get at it. And, as years passed, I said, 
' Such good things be not for me ' meaning you. 
So there it is ; though as to respect, I shall never 
lose a terrible far-reaching respect for you. And 
here's my way, and I've been greatly pleased to 
have a bit of a talk again, and I hope John will 
mend afore long. Such men as him be almost so 
scarce as such women as you. Good morning, good 
morning, Mrs. Michelmore ! " 

He hurried from her, and did not look back. He 
just heard her say " Good morning " faintly ; and, 
when he was round a corner and out of sight, he 
uttered a great expiration of breath, took off his 
hat, and wiped his forehead. 

As for the woman, she stared after him a moment. 
Then she tightened her lips and went on her way. 

16 



242 THE HAVEN 

She was exceedingly glad that none had seen this 
interview or marked the sequel. She was moved, 
and even indignant. She hurried home presently, 
secreted herself, and wept. When her brother re- 
turned from sea on the evening of that day, she 
was still perturbed. She felt an injured, almost an 
outraged woman ; but John Major, upon whose ears 
her wrongs were poured, filled his sister's cup, for 
he showed no sympathy whatever, and, indeed, 
blamed her and not the sail-tanner. He said several 
severe things, and ended thus : 

" 'Tis all in vain you speak so acidly against Titus 
now. You ought to have remembered a bit ago that 
men ban't built of patience. And if patience be a 
vartue most times, 'tis little better than madness 
where a wife's the question, and you've got well into 
your second half-century. How could you expect 
him to wait while you blew hot and cold, and age 
tightened, like a vice, on the pair of you ? " 

" Hot I never did blow," said Emma. " I know 
what becomes a self-respecting woman, if I know 
nothing else." 

" Well, then, if you blew cold, how the mischief 
did you think any man was going to stand it for 
two years ? Of course he reckoned you was against 
marriage, and of course he gave up the thought of 
it. And now, because you find his mind turned to 
other things, you talk this nonsense about him." 

" I'm sorry I troubled you, I'm sure," said Mrs. 
Michelmore. " You'm changing yourself that quick 

and cruel, that soon in fact, 'twas only because I 

feared for the future I tried to give the man a helping 
hand. However, there was no call to him to be 
rude nor you either. I believe I can take a hint 
so quick as any other female." 

"Well, then, take it and leave the poor soul in 
peace. Peace, I say ; but how's there going to be 
peace for him with his nephew locked up? And as 



THE HAVEN 243 

to my changing we're all changing, Emma. And if 
you've changed your mind touching Peach, what is 
there strange that he should have changed his mind 
touching you ? " 

Mrs. Michelmore's bosom rose and her eyes grew 
moist with anger rather than sorrow. 

"If you can't see how it looks to a modest woman, 
I can't show you," she answered. " And since you've 
made up your mind to trample on me to-day like 
everybody else, seemingly I may as well give you 
a bit of the truth too. And that is that Titus Peach 
be taking your place in your daughter's affection. 
You've flung her off, along of some silly, far-fetched 
nonsense only known to your God ; but Peach, faulty 
and false though he may be, is drawn close as wax 
now to Lydia and to Lydia's child. He's took your 
place, in a word, and you'll never be able to win it 
back now never never ! He's a better father to 
your daughter than ever you was ; so that's tit for 
your tat ; and since you can so far forget your man- 
hood as to say that I let Titus Peach dangle like a 
puppet on a Christmas-tree for two years, I can 
turn on you and tell you that you've lost your 
daughter and your grandson both ; and serve you 
right ! So now, then ! " 

She panted after this long speech, but it provoked 
no heated retort. Mr. Major was too astonished at 
the actual information to be angry with the informer. 
Great issues to him were involved in this revelation ; 
immense secret hopes were threatened. He stared 
at Emma, and put his hands up to his forehead as 
though she had struck him upon it. If she had 
desired to create a sensation, her wish was amply 
gratified ; but the luxury of further speech did not 
follow. Indeed, John Major said not a single word. 
He rose, regarded Mrs. Michelmore as one might 
regard a telegraph-boy who has brought ill news, 
and then walked out of the house. He departed full 



244 THE HAVEN 

of a design to see Titus Peach before he slept ; but the 
night air cooled his mind, spoke reason to him, and 
indicated the justice of the situation. He throbbed to 
think of Lydia a daughter to any man but himself ; 
he did not trust himself to think at all about his 
grandchild. He made no effort to see Mr. Peach at 
once. For two hours he tramped a lonely road 
under Overgang ; then he changed his mind again, 
and every instinct cried out to see Peach and hear 
him talk of Lydia. 

It was now half past ten o'clock, and John Major, 
fearing that Titus might be in bed, made haste to 
reach him. 

A light burned in the hall ; but none answered his 
ring. Then a woman looked out of an upper 
window. 

" Mr. Peach be out to his nephew's house to Over- 
gang," she said, not recognising the visitor. "If you 
want him, you'll find him at Mr. Brokenshire's. He's 
mostly there comforting the poor young wife till 
Samuel Brokenshire's out of prison again." 

The father heard, hesitated, and then returned to 
his home. 



CHAPTER XI 

NED and Deborah found the time of waiting begin 
to torment them, and Mr. Honeywill cared not how 
soon they married, since it was now understood that 
their union would make no difference to the work 
of Berry Farm. Both would stop there, and Nicholas 
doubted not that his son-in-law must in the progress 
of time succeed him. But Deborah's mother desired 
delay. She had, however, grown accustomed to the 
engagement, and perceived that no power of hers 
could change her daughter's purpose. 

There fell a day, one week before Brokenshire 
returned to his home, when young Major went to 
see Lydia with a twofold object. He desired some 
sympathy for himself, and he wished to bestow 
sympathy upon his sister. She was not well, and he 
arrived on a Sunday afternoon to learn whether her 
health mended. 

" Only six more days," she said, " though they will 
seem more like years than days to me. Then Sam 
comes home again. Oh, Ned, you'll do what you 
may, won't you? Everybody who loves him must 
help all they can to keep him straight after this." 

" Don't you worry," he answered, picking up little 
John and dancing him on his knee. " Sam's had 
his lesson. He'll take jolly good care not to run 
into a fix like this again." 

" 'Tis the cruel disgrace of it." 

245 



246 THE HAVEN 

"Don't you believe that nonsense. There's no 
disgrace to name. Law and order have come to be 
such strict things that 'tis very hard to help kicking 
over the traces and breaking them. But a few years 
back Sam would have been the most law-abiding 
chap. He's only sporting never wicked." 

She shook her head. 

"That's the rubbish Dick Varwell talks. I wish 
my husband would drop that man. He's a bad 
friend for any respectable person." 

" Don't believe it," answered her brother. " Dick's 
all right. He only says the things he does say to 
shock people and make 'em wake up. Of course he 
don't believe the half of them himself. And, any 
way, out of friendship for Sam, he's working in the 
1 Night Hawk ' till the skipper comes back. Billy 
Trust told me that there's not a cleverer chap in the 
fleet than Tumbledown Dick when he likes. And you 
oughtn't to blame Dick, for he's doing this only for 
your husband's sake. You know how he hates work." 

But Lydia was not grateful. 

" You mind what you're doing, Ned. Nobody has 
ever had cause to thank Varwell in the long run for 
anything. He's a dangerous, useless, wicked man, 
and I'm very sure that but for him Sam would never 
have come into this cruel trouble at all." 

" Be cheerful and hopeful," he said. " I heard you 
was poorly, so I thought I'd come to cheer you up 
a bit." 

" I'm all right. The new baby is promised in a 
funny sort of way to Uncle Titus. He's wrapped 
up in Johnny ; but just because he is Johnny, Mr. 
Peach won't regard him as his very own. But if 
baby's a boy, he's to be called * Titus,' and his 
fortune will be made, I reckon. Mr. Peach is a kind, 
gentle creature and I'm very fond of him. He's 
taken father's place in my life, you might say." 

Ned sighed. 



THE HAVEN 247 

" You don't know, and never will know, the times 
that I've been at father to come ; and I don't 
suppose you know how terrible near he was to 
coming actually on the way. He'd got his con- 
science clear about Sam, and he was longing with 
all his heart after you and Johnny here. Then 
actually on the way, Lydia he ran right into that 
row at ' The Sailor's Knot ' three weeks ago. And 
he turned iback, and 'twas the hardest struggle that 
ever he had with himself to do so, for so he told me. 
He's a changed man since, I do believe." 

" I can't understand and never shall. What have 
I done ? That's the hard thing. He's forgiven 
me for running away with my husband. Then 
what's to keep him off me ? I'm not Sam's keeper : 
he keeps me. And because he's made a good few 
foolish mistakes, as the big-hearted men best worth 
loving most often do, why should father stop away 
from me and my child ? I can't see the sense of it, 
or the religion of it, or anything." 

" You know what a stickler he is, and what faith 
he's got. He believes that nought can happen but 
for good." 

" Then how could it be but for good if he came 
here ? Of course it would be for good." 

Ned shrugged his shoulders. 

" He'll come : that I do believe ; but 'twill depend 
on Samuel when and how." 

" He'll see me changed enough." 

" He's terrible interested in the child. Such simple 
hope as he's got. He said to me once that 'twouldn't 
surprise him to sail with his own flesh and blood 
in the * Jack and Lydia ' yet, afore he comes ashore 
for good. Of course he meant your Johnny here." 

" He needn't count on that," answered the mother. 
" Johnny's fond enough of the water, but Samuel isn't 
fond of it for him. Sam often says that no son 
of his shall go to sea if he can stop it." 



248 THE HAVEN 

"You can't stop it if 'tis in 'em. Any child of 
his be like to love the sea." 

" Johnny does ; but he'll never go that way, I 
hope." 

After further talk and some failure on Ned's part 
to prophesy smooth things, he turned to his own 
affairs and explained how Mrs. Honeywill stood 
between him and early marriage. 

" Deb's father is all for it, and of course we are," 
he said ; " but Mrs. Honeywill seems to think that 
waiting is easy, though we've tried pretty hard to 
undeceive her. We shall have to borrow Sam's 
' Night Hawk,' like you did, Lyddy, if she holds 
out against us much longer." 

At the name of his father's boat Johnny made 
energetic efforts to leave his uncle's knee, and, when 
set down, he paddled off to a corner, picked up 
a little model ketch and held it up. 

11 Night Hawk ! Night Hawk ! " he said. 

"So it is, then, and a real good likeness, too," 
declared Ned, examining the toy. 

" Mr. Mutter made it for him. He's a very clever 
man with his hands. All the same, I didn't much 
like Johnny having it, for I don't want anything near 
him that's likely to make the child care for the sea. 
I hope he'll be like you and hate it, Ned." 

" You mustn't wonder if he loves it," answered the 
other, handing his treasure back to Johnny. " If his 
father can't choke him off, none will. Tis very 
certain our father will try to egg him on to seafaring. 

Why talk of There's father himself coming up 

the steps ! " 

It was true. In the silence of the Sunday hour, 
while Overgang drowsed save for the squeak and 
grunt of a harmonium in one cottage, there fell 
the sound of heavy feet climbing the four steps 
that led from the footway to Mr. Brokenshire's front 
door. John Major had come at last. He knocked, 



THE HAVEN 249 

then turned his back on the entrance and tapped out 
his pipe on the rail. He was clad in Sunday black. 

Lydia rose and turned very pale. Ned thought 
that she was going to faint, but the shock quickly 
passed and she prepared to go to the door. 

" I'll hook it by the back way," said her brother. 
" Of course, father knows I come here ; but it isn't 
for that. I'll run for it now, because nobody's any 
right to be by when he comes to you. Thank God 
he has ! 'Tis great news, Lyddy, and 'twill rejoice 
Deborah more than anybody." 

His sister hesitated. 

" Go if you must. Perhaps you'd better. 4 ' 

The child heard the knock. 

" Uncle Titus come ! " he said. 

" Tisn't Uncle Titus, Johnny ; 'tis dear grand- 
father," answered his mother. 

A third summons sounded, and Lydia prepared to 
answer it. 

" Don't you cry," urged Ned ; " nought to cry 
about." 

Then he went away through the back yard, and 
Johnny, who had learned of late to turn the handle 
of the front door, now marched out to do so. 

A moment later he had opened it, and his grand- 
father's eyes were lowered to his face. The child 
resembled Samuel Brokenshire ; he looked up 
fearlessly, and laughed when Mr. Major put a heavy 
hand on his head. 

" Be your mother in, John ? " asked the old man. 

At the same moment Lydia approached, and her 
father took her into his arms. 

"At last ! " he said. " I've long wanted to come 
to you, and I've long prayed to be allowed to come, 
my Lyddy, but the prayers have been answered but 
now. I've had to hold off all these years, and hard 
very hard it's been. And at last, when I'd pretty 
well given up hope, and when them as cared was 



250 THE HAVEN 

tired of telling me I was wrong at last I've got 
-orders from Headquarters, Lyddy. Your father be 
going to look after you now for so long as he've got 
the power." 

Lydia broke down, and her son howled to see her 
do so. He doubled his fists and began to beat Mr. 
Major's leg with all his strength. 

" Beast ! Beast ! " he shouted, " to make my muvver 
cry!" 

They sat together presently, and Mr. Major, after 
the fashion of his kind, was egotistical, and explained 
at great length the mysterious workings of Providence 
upon his responsive spirit. No egotism marked the 
recital. He felt that it was only a proper prelude to 
this sequel. He desired to explain to Lydia why he 
had held aloof from her for so long, and why at last 
in this crisis he had come. 

She listened to the story with deep interest. 
Particularly did she lend ear to her father's descrip- 
tion of his spiritual tribulations since Samuel's 
disgrace. 

" So heavy has it weighed upon me, that I've been 
no company for man or woman," he told his daughter. 
" I've liked the night better than the day, which in 
itself be the sign of a mind in trouble ; I've shunned 
men and hidden myself from them ; I've rebuked 
my sister for pestering me with her silly affairs ; and 
then she's turned the tables on me by telling me that 
-another has taken my place in your heart, and that 
poor, dear Mr. Peach as good a man as ever walked, 
however was coming to be a second father to you." 

" Never, never ! " vowed Lydia, though in her heart 
she hid the knowledge that the thing was true. 

" But don't think 'twas Aunt Emma finally did the 
trick, Lyddy. No ; nothing could from without. And 
for a good few days I withstood even the cruel, sad 
thought of Titus Peach taking my place where I 
ought to be ; but then last night, in fact came the 



THE HAVEN 251 

blinding light. 'Twas even so Paul seed it. And a 
voice come too, and I knowed, though no words 
exactly reached my senses, what the sound of the 
voice meant. It signified that I was to hold off no 
longer, and that I wasn't to let Samuel and his ways 
and works stand any more between me and my 
daughter and my daughter's child." 

"We called him John," said Lydia. 

" Ay ; and if you knew what I felt when I heard 
tell on it, you'd be very glad to think that you did 
so," he replied. 

"And if the baby coming is a boy, he will be called 
Titus," she continued. 

" VVhy not? But this here brave Johnny do you 
mark how friendly we've grown a'ready ? Look how 
he walks right up and comes betwixt my legs to 
my waistband God bless his brave eyes ! Do he 
go up to Titus like that ? " 

" Just the same." 

" But he didn't at first ? " 

" He's always known Uncle Titus since he was a 
baby." 

"But he'll soon know me better and like me 
better. 'Tis only nature, Lyddy. Let me see thicky 
boat, my hero." 

Mr. Major pointed to the model of the ' Night 
Hawk,' and his grandson brought it to him. The 
old man was soon busy setting it to rights ; and while 
he did so he talked to his girl. 

" Never again ; never again shall any earth-born 
cloud come between me and my own. You can't 
know what a cruel trial it have been. And I'm glad 
you can't I've fretted, Lyddy ; I've fretted at sea 
and ashore, and I've lifted up my eyes to my Maker, 
like a dumb dog to his master, and axed a thousand 
times why for both my young ones had to be took 
from me. But here's the answer ; and now I know 
that neither of you be took, and that these things 



252 THE HAVEN 

happened because they was the best that could 
happen for all of us." 

Johnny now sat on Mr. Major's knee and showed 
the most fearless friendship. His curly hair stuck 
upon and spread over the old man's Sunday coat. 
He was playing with his dead grandmother's wedding- 
ring that Mr. Major carried on his watchchain. 

" A brave boy, wi' fine limbs and a deep chest, 'an 
eyes so blue and honest as heaven. A fine, stout 
child ; but you must cut off these here curls, Lyddy : 
they make him girlish." 

" So Sam says ; but he's so tiny yet. I've told my 
husband he must keep 'em till he's four. Uncle Titus 
is on my side. He likes them." 

" Well," answered the fisherman frankly, " don't 
let's have no more of ' Uncle Titus ' for the minute. 
Tis ' father ' and ' grandfather ' now, and a blessed 
minute to me, I warn 'e. God, He knows how I've 
hungered after it. But I haven't half looked at you 
yet, nor seen what the little chap's got of you in 
him." 

" He's all Samuel, they say." 

The child suddenly laughed long and loud. He 
had just discovered Mr. Major's earrings. 

" And they was put in my ears afore you was 
born, or your mother either, you butivul handful ! " 
said his grandfather. Then, in an access of sheer 
animal love, the old man rubbed his grey muzzle 
against the child's cheek and felt its round softness 
thrill his heart-strings. Johnny wondered, round- 
eyed, but he took it well ; and he took the three- 
penny-piece that Mr. Major had stowed away for 
this purpose still better. He waved it in his fat 
hand, and his mother put it safely away for 
him. 

John Major relinquished the boy reluctantly, for 
Johnny would not stop alone with him while his 
mother went to make tea. 



THE HAVEN 253 

Lydia insisted on serving the meal in the parlour, 
though her father begged for the kitchen. They 
ate and drank ; the woman grew light-hearted and 
happy ; Mr. Major talked of nothing but the child. 

" Seafaring blood o' both sides," he said. " 'Tis 
as certain as anything in this world can be certain, 
Lyddy, that's he's cast for it. The very build of a 
fisherman. Stuggy and solid, like his old grand- 
father, that boy will be. Look at his short ringers 
and square hands. And see how he can hold ! " 

" He loves the harbour." 

" Of course he does. And very proper he should 
like all right-minded boys." 

Lydia turned the conversation to her husband 
presently, but failed to keep it there. 

" Upon the subject of Samuel I'm not come to 
speak, Lyddy not yet. When he's back to his 
work, I mean to have a talk along with him not as 
his father-in-law or anything of that sort, for he 
won't stand advice ; but as your father and this boy's 
grandfather. I shall say my say in due season, and 
forget what he said to me a bit ago. But he must 
listen to reason now, and I'm going to make him 
do it. Have you got one of they li'l blue guernseys 
for this child ? " 

" Yes, father. He puts it on before he goes out to 
play." 

" I'd much like to see him in it," said her parent, 
and the garment was brought. 

" Every inch a fisherman ! " declared Mr. Major. 
" There ban't many inches yet, but a fisherman 
a'ready to his socks. Have 'e marked how clever 
he furls the sail of his boat ? 'Tis in him, Lyddy ; 
'tis in him ! " 

"Samuel " began Lydia, but John raised his 

hand. 

" Let it be sufficient that I've forgiven him even 
this last thing. And that was a good deal to do 



254 THE HAVEN 

for me ; because you know how jealous I am for 
Brixham and its good name and such-like. Tell 
him that I want to see him so soon as he can come ; 
so no more on that head now. We've got to make 
up for a deal of lost time, you and me ; so you'd 
best begin and tell me all about this boy and his 
ways 'tis a treat to see him let down his food and 
what he thinks of life. A good son now, I warrant^ 
though such a babby ? " 

"The best little son that ever walked, I'm sure," 
declared Lydia. " And he loves the very shadow of 
his father." 

" And I hope he'll have better cause to do so 
henceforward. I wish we lived a bit nearer, but he'll 
soon find his legs carry him along to me when I'm 
home. Do he know my boat ? " 

" Yes," said Johnny's mother. " What's grand- 
father's boat called, lovey ? " 

The child had made a mighty meal and was now 
lying drowsy in Mr. Major's lap. 

" I doan't knaw," he said. 

" Yes, you do. Think a minute. What's mother's 
name ? " 

" Mrs. Bokensheer." 

" Don't worry him," said John. " He shall come 
in the boat himself some day. Then he'll never 
forget the name no more." 

" ' Jack and Lyddy,' < Jack and Lyddy,' ' Jack and 
Lyddy,' " cried the child suddenly. 

He repeated the words like a parrot. His mother 
had whispered them to him under her breath while 
her father was talking. 

" So it is, then ! ' Jack and Lydia ' ! Clever 
boy ! " 

Mr. Major talked long, and rejoiced in the sound of 
his daughter's voice. He was very happy, and when 
Johnny fell asleep in his arms he refused to put him 
down. 



THE HAVEN 255 

He did not leave his daughter till night had fallen,, 
and then found it difficult to say good-bye. 

" I'm at home till evening to-morrow, so 'tis under- 
stood you eat your dinner along with us you and 
that amazing child," said Mr. Major. He started,, 
but turned back before Lydia had shut the door. 

" Good-night again, my purty girl," he said. " And 
please your father by reading the ninety-eighth 
Psalm afore you shut your eyes. If 'twasn't fallen so 
late, I'd stop and read it to 'e, but my sister will be 
growing oneasy, and so I'd best get back-along with 
my news." 

She promised to obey, and he went off repeating 
verses of his favourite paean aloud : 

" ' Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof ; the 
world and they that dwell therein. Let the floods 
clap their hands ; let the hills be joyful together before 
tJte Lord: " 



CHAPTER XII 

THOUGH her reconciliation went far to brighten 
Lydia's heart, yet it did not serve to shorten the 
days that dragged between her and the return of 
Samuel. Not a few kindly spirits chiefly men 
cheered her loneliness, and said what they might 
to modify the situation. Tumbledown Dick, from 
his wide experience, scoffed at the punishment, and 
held it rather a feather in Mr. Brokenshire's cap. 

" You mark me," he told Lydia, " Sam's sacrificed 
himself for the public good, and I'll bet you, or any 
other man or woman, my next pair of new boots 
that this business will call general attention to the 
wicked injustice of shutting Start Bay against 
Brixham. Such scandalous doings can't be carried 
on now that your husband has thrown a bit of 
light on 'em. And for his comfort, when he comes 
out, he shall hear that Trust and Mutter and me 
have been as busy as beavers lately. We've got 
some right down masterpiece of fish, and we've 
sold 'em for top prices. But I shall be glad when 
Sam's ready to sail again. This hard work be very 
bad for me, and it prevents my using my brain- 
power. It makes me hungry and sleepy, whereas 
I never want to be anything but thirsty." 

Lydia always felt uneasy in the company of Mr. 
Varwell, but she had to suffer it on several occasions 
while Samuel was from home ; and she was forced 

256 



THE HAVEN 257 

to listen to the vagabond's opinions. Sometimes 
they made her angry, sometimes they made her 
laugh. Unconsciously she was influenced by his 
mingled sense and folly to a general modification 
of views. 

And then Sam returned on an evening in autumn ; 
and he was escorted to his home by a company of 
well-wishers, which included Varwell, Trust, Mutter, 
and Mr. Tribble. They saw him to the door, and 
raised a cheer when Sam greeted Lydia on the 
top step. 

" Now we've seen the man into the bosom of his 
family we'll be off and drink good luck to justice 
and down with all tyranny," declared Dick. " You've 
been a good deal divided, as the worm said, you 
two have ; but Sam's sworn off prison for evermore 
haven't you, Sam ? Yes, I've got his words for it." 

"Never, never again," cried the sinner devoutly. 
" Bear me out, Dick, that the first thing I said was 
that I'd never go to prison no more. Next time 
I'll pay the fine ! " 

They laughed and shouted, and then sank away 
and left Overgang to regain its customary peace. 

Then the husband discoursed at length upon his 
experience, and Lydia remarked that disgust was 
the sole emotion he had brought home. Samuel 
declared himself as one grown savage with authority ; 
he echoed Varwell, but he blamed Varwell exceed- 
ingly for letting him go to prison. 

"I'd rather have sold the boat," he said, "than 
submit to such treatment. But I'll pay them back 
to the last insult let me be hung if I don't" 

She implored him to take another view, and told 
him how Tumbledown Dick prophesied that this 
incident would be likely to waken a general atten- 
tion concerning Start Bay. But he raged on until 
weary of the subject ; then he seemed suddenly to 
realise that he was at home again, and cast his 

17 



258 THE HAVEN 

wrongs behind him, and inquired after his wife and 
her health and the manner in which she had passed 
her lonely days. 

Lydia kept the great news of Mr. Major's visit 
until Sam was tuned to hear it. Then she told 
him all, and he rejoiced, and desired, then and 
there, to speed off that he might share in John 
Major's amity. But his father-in-law was at sea, 
and a meeting had to be delayed. 

" He took that kindly to Johnny that I thought 
he'd never turn away from him," related Lydia. 
" Dear father couldn't put him down ; and he said 
that never did he see such a young boy carry the 
very mark of the sea upon him. I do believe he'd 
like Johnny to be handed over to him to-morrow ! " 

" More fool him ! He's daft about it, and always 
was. But I know a trick worth two of that. The 
bottom's knocked out of sail-trawling, and no sane 
man would bring up his son to any such dog's 
life or dog's wages. I'd sooner choke the kid than 
let him go to sea ; and what's more, I'm properly 
sick of it myself." 

Lydia stared at him. 

" What else can you do ? " she asked. 

"That's what I want to find out," he answered. 
" But don't you heed me to-night ; I'm full of 
prison air still. When I get on the water to-morrow, 
'tis very likely I'll sing a different song. 'Tis too 
late I suppose for me to think of anything else 
now ; but Johnny shan't be led no such wild-goose 
chase by his grandfather not while his father's 
here to stand between. I'd plan a sporting life 
for him, if I could." 

"Time enough, time enough," declared Johnny's 
mother. But she was saddened at this firm de- 
claration. Samuel had not seen the old man and 
the child together ; otherwise she thought he might 
have spoken less positively. 



THE HAVEN 259 

" 'Tis all a miz-maze about children," summed up 
Samuel ; " and a man's a fool to plan their lives 
afore they'm out of short coats. I say I'll do this 
and I'll do that with Johnny ; but the time will 
come when he'll take the bit in his own teeth, 
like I done myself, and like every decent boy does ; 
and he'll go his own way along with his own 
generation. The young lead the young nowadays 
I've marked that. They haven't got no use for 
the older people ; and they're right. The older 
folk be always a long span behind the age ; that's 
why I was locked up. You've got to be in hot 
water half your time if you're on the side of pro- 
gress so Dick says, and 'tis true enough. Men 
like me and Varwell get all the kicks and none of 
the half-pence ; but them that come after will see 
what we were and what we stood for ; and they'll 
pull down that long-nosed marble monkey on the 
quay some day, and put up statues to such as us 
instead. We may not live to see it ; but our 
children may." 

The spectacle of Tumbledown Dick in marble on 
Brixham Quay made Lydia laugh ; and laughter 
it was that ended the day of Sam's return to her. 



CHAPTER XIII 

ANOTHER year passed by, and insensibly Ned 
Major grew to be more than a unit among the 
small band of workers at Berry Farm. Apart 
from the position he occupied as betrothed to 
Mr. Honeywill's only daughter, there had awakened 
between the farmer and the young man a very 
close and intimate friendship, based on sympathy 
and understanding. Ned, though he knew it not, 
exercised a growing power in the control of the 
farm that made older labourers jealous. But, when 
it came to argument, none was able to deny the 
youth's ability or his learning. He read, and re- 
membered what he read. He applied his acquired 
knowledge for the good of his master, and Mr. 
Honeywill, who at first laughed at little innovations 
as harmless jokes, now laughed no more, but yielded 
old uses for new, and had the sense to admit that 
in some directions, if not in all, the modern way 
was better. 

Ned, despite this energy, woke no lasting enmity 
among Mr. Honeywill's older hands. He was so 
ingenuous and simple hearted that no man could 
long quarrel with him. Moreover, others saw farther 
than could the youth himself see at present. Mr. 
Honeywill appeared well content to leave more and 
more in Ned's hands, and it required no great 
foresight to perceive that anon the farmer, always 

260 



THE HAVEN 261 

an easy man, would be well content to let his son- 
in-law reign in his stead. 

Nicholas Honeywill was prosperous. Some guessed 
that but for his wife he would have felt inclined to 
leave Berry Farm on Deborah's marriage and retire 
to a smaller establishment ; but Ned was still very 
young to thrust into authority. He had no natural 
power of managing men, and rather chose a sub- 
servient position. Amiable to weakness he remained, 
and Mrs. Honeywill observed this clearly, so that 
when her husband speculated on the propriety of 
leaving their present home for some inland place 
beyond the din of the sea, his wife protested, and 
declined to consider any such step until another six 
or eight years had passed. 

" He's still a child, for all his cleverness," she said. 
" And to put him in power would be as unkind to 
him as silly to us. He'll have his hands full with 
a wife in a year, and you can't expect him to set 
the farm afore Deborah till love have calmed down 
into use after the usual fashion. You've got to bide 
here a bit yet. And why not ? You're as hale as 
most men of ten years younger, and, if you left here, 
you'd only be a nuisance to yourself and to me and 
to Ned Major and everybody else. You go on 
ruling till he's a bit older and you've found out if 
he's built to rule. For my part I reckon he's the 
sort that's happier with a stronger man over 'em 
than on his own hook. I may not be here to see, 
though my advice is good for all that." 

This counsel the master followed ; but in the 
matter of marriage he sided with Deborah against 
her mother. She and Ned desired no more delay, 
and, at last, they had their will. It was understood 
the youthful pair should wed after the coming 
harvest. 

" When I married your mother, we'd saved the 
corn and the roots also," said Nicholas to his daughter. 



262 THE HAVEN 

" Our honeymoon was the hunter's moon. A very 
good season for taking the yoke on your neck. So 
let it be. And you can both go off and enjoy 
yourselves to Exeter, or even Lunnon, if you like, 
for a week or two. Your mother ban't our side 
yet ; but you'll have to win her round and prove 
to her you're wiser than she thinks you, if not 
older." 

The parents met when these details were settled. 
John Major told what he could do for Ned, and 
Mr. Honeywill explained his views as to the future. 
All parties to the match, indeed, were satisfied save 
Mrs. Honeywill and Aunt Emma. The former hid 
her disappointment, since it was vain ; the latter 
openly mourned any marriage union of a Major, and 
predicted that for that blighted race to seek per- 
petuation was open flouting of Providence. She had 
been more than usually lachrymose of late, a fact 
that Mr. Major marked when Ned and Deborah 
came to visit him one Sunday a month before their 
marriage. 

The fisherman was now grown most cheerful, and 
his happiness contrasted sharply with Mrs. Michel- 
more's misery. He explained his sister to her face, 
and then went on to show the reason for his own 
content. 

" 'Tis no good asking your aunt not to be down- 
cast," said John to his son. " You might so well 
ask me not to be trustful, or Deborah here not to be 
happy. 'Tis Emma's nature you know 'tis so, 
Emma. And, mind you, long afore your own 
troubles fell thick and fast, you was the same. You 
was born courting trouble and stretching out your 
hands for it. You was always like a sporting dog 
on the scent, and you could sniff out coming misery 
weeks afore anybody else had catched sight of it. 
Her tears, however, roll off her like water off a shag's 
back. She sheds 'em as the tree sheds its leaves 



THE HAVEN 263 

in autumn because she's got to do it, and can't 
help it. Her meat and drink turn into tears, as 
another person's may turn into fat or muscle, and 
she's bound to shed 'em when they run over ain't 
you, Emma ? And besides that, certain curious 
things have happened to her lately however, that's 
a delicate subject and no concern of yours." 

" 'Tis all true," said Mrs. Michelmore, " and I won't 
quarrel with your way of putting it. But one thing 
I will deny. I wasn't born with a black view of life. 
On the contrary, till marriage crushed it out of me, 
as well it might, I felt as gay as a bird. But to breed 
childer for the grave and to see all four drop, and 
their father after 'em I'd like to meet with the 
woman as could ever be hopeful and cheerful again 
after such a come-along-of-it. And so, if them about 
to wed want people to clap 'em on the back and say 
'tis a fine thing, and that they'm in for a life-long 
holiday, they'd better not come to me, because I 
know different. Not that I want to be a cloud over 
anybody ; only us must speak what we know, if we'm 
honest either that or keep our mouths shut. And 
so will I do when I hear the name of marriage or 
the whisper of babbies. And for a Major to enter 
into these things after hearing the history of his 
family however, the new generation larns by its own 
experience, not by ours." 

" We know what a cruel time you had, Aunt 
Emma," said Deborah ; " but 'tisn't given to us all 
to suffer so bad, I'm sure. Never was the like of 
what you had to put up with. You're a right down 
monument of trouble, and, as such, are a regular 
figure in the eyes of Brixham people." 

Mrs". Michelmore was pleased by this flattery, but 
it would not make her yield the main point. 

" True enough. I've borne what would have broke 
most females, and perhaps 'tis only right the people 
should know it and give me my share of credit ; but 



264 THE HAVEN 

my case be only the worst the pick of the Major 
basket, of course. I had the Michelmore luck as well 
to fight against too, and, being only a mortal woman, 
couldn't do it, and went down according." 

" Honeywills have very good luck," declared 
Deborah. 

" Have they ? " asked Mrs. Michelmore, regarding 
her nephew. " Don't you speak too soon as to that. 
If 'tis good luck to wed a Major, then signs and 
wonders may happen in the land ; but I haven't 
heard of 'em doing so." 

Thereupon Mr. Major bade his sister go and make 
the tea. 

" I won't have these children frightened no more 
by you, you old night-bird," he said. "There's a 
very fair hope for 'em, and for all Christian creatures ; 
and as for me, I'm glad to the heart that you young 
things be what you are and be going to do what you 
mean to." 

Mrs. Michelmore left them, and John, after a few 
more general speeches, struck into the subject now 
grown nearest his ambition. 

" They be coming to tea all of 'em the Broken- 
shires. I arranged to have us all together, because 
'tis the last time till the wedding that we shall do so. 
Have 'e marked Johnny of late, Ned ? Bless the child, 
you can see him grow." 

" He's growing broad if not high," said Johnny's 
uncle. " He's a wonderful solid youngster, and always 
cheerful, so Lyddy says." 

" A Major in all but colour," declared the old man. 
" And if a Major, then a seafarer." 

" What about Ned, father ? " asked Deborah. 

" The exception to prove the rule," he answered. 
" Ned was a sport ; but he'll throw true, and if ever 
you have a son, Deborah, he'll have his business 
on the water, and you must make up your mind 
to it." 



THE HAVEN 265 

Samuel, Lydia, their boy, and their new baby 
arrived in a few minutes, and the family party was 
soon sitting at tea in the kitchen. They had hardly 
begun to eat before Mr. Major returned artlessly to 
his favourite theme. Johnny sat on his lap, and 
formed the text. 

" As I was saying to my son, you can't alter 
human nature. 'Twill out ; and if 'tis banked up in 
one generation, or slips into some strange channel 
owing to those accidents that none can help, you'll 
soon find the race coming back to its own again." 

" You can train the young shoot," answered his 
son-in-law. " And so shall I. You reckon that limb 
there " he pointed to his son " is cast for the sea. 
I reckon not. If I can show him how much better 
'tis to keep ashore, I shall do." 

"You won't frighten me, however," answered 
Johnny's grandfather. "Time was when I'd have 
agreed with you, and said the tree grows as the twig's 
inclined, but life have taught me wiser. 'Tis the 
fruit we can't alter, and the bed-rock pattern that 
a child's mind be built on. Take Ned here didn't 
I strive to bend him to the sea ? But 'twas beyond 
human power to do it. Only a miracle could have 
made him a fisherman ; only some direct meddling 
with the clay he's mixed of. And to do that would 
have been beyond all power but God's. So with 
this here blessed boy, not you will keep him off the 
sea if the blood calls to be afloat, and not I will make 
him a sailor if the land holds him." 

" Who belongs to the sea but wouldn't come off 
it if he could ?" asked Brokenshire. " We go into, it 
green boys, and think 'tis all that silly books and 
silly parents tell us ; but come we grow into men, 
we long to put away childish things ; and a childish 
thing is the sea for any sane man. Let the sort as 
never grow up go for sailors. 'Tis no life for a man 
with brains. I'd sooner see Johnny in a good corner 



266 THE HAVEN 

public house than sailing to sea even with you, 
Mr. Major. And if you was to offer to exchange 
a snug little business ashore with him for his boat, 
there ban't a fisherman in Brixham, barring yourself, 
that wouldn't jump at the chance." 

" Tis what fell out last year, Samuel, that makes 
you say these things," answered John Major. 

" 'Twas a blessing in disguise then, if it have 
opened my eyes here and there," answered Sam. 
" 'Twill be a fair fight, and no favour, over thicky 
youngster. I shall try to keep him ashore, and you'll 
try to drive him to sea. And time will show if he's 
got brains or not" 

"You oughtn't to say that, Sam," cried Lydia. 
" 'Tis as much as to say father haven't got brains." 

" I haven't got strong ones," admitted Mr. Major. 
"All my intellects run into faith and trust. And 
that's a more restful way than fretting. The more 
brains, after a certain pitch, the more misery. Take 
Mr. Memery ; take parson ; take that poor mis- 
taken creature, Dick Varwell. Such men think 
over- much and are miserable for it. They may 
pretend otherwise, but miserable they are ; and even 
sensible beings, like Memery and the reverend 
Bewes, can't get contentment. Of course Varwell's 
another order of creation : he's a good brain gone 
wrong. 'Tis the dreadful spectacle of a man turning 
his best gift against the God that gave it." 

He prattled on ; then Samuel stood up for 
Tumbledown Dick, and the converastion became 
political and heated. Ned strove to silence Samuel, 
and presently succeeded ; but the amity of the 
entertainment was strained, and when the Broken- 
shires presently took their leave, Mr. Major shook 
his head and confessed that his son-in-law continued 
to cause him very great uneasiness. 

" I thought last year would be the great lesson 
to bring Samuel in," he said ; " but his opinions 



THE HAVEN 267 

are in a very parlous state, as you see. They're 
the sort of dangerous gas that a match will set 
a light to. He's ripe for mischief; and the sooner 
that amazing child can get away to sea and escape 
from hearing such mistaken rubbish, the better for 
him here and hereafter. I shall watch after him like 
a cat watches a mouse." 

" Lydia's on your side too," suggested Deborah ; 
w and of course Ned is." 

" I dare say Sam will change all his opinions again 
afore long, father." 

" No, Ned ; 'tis more than that. He's got a 
lawless vein, and there he's weak and there the 
mischief lies. There's an objection in the man to 
making money honestly. 'Tis commoner than you 
might think ; 'tis at the bottom of all betting and 
such like. The money you get without earning it 
have a terrible strong attraction for such as Samuel. 
'Tis what we call the sporting instinct. I've seen a 
lot of Sam lately, remember, and I've summed him 
up so well as I could. He went to Start Bay more 
because Start Bay was shut against him than for 
any other reason. If 'twas opened to-morrow, he'd 
have no more use for it. And if he gives up the sea 
vain talk, of course but if he did, what would 
be the next thing? Well, I won't answer the 
question, because you might say 'twas a very un- 
christian act to doom a man to wrong-doing. But 
so far as I've got with Brokenshire, my faith in 
man's goodness have been put to a great pinch, and 
only come out of it whole by a wonder." 

" I believe Sam will go as straight as a line from 
now, whatever stuff he may talk," declared Ned, 
" And after all, father, if you was to hear Dick 
Varvvell talk when he's sober and in deadly earnest, 
you'd be the first to say there was a lot of reason 
in the things he tells about." 

" Not at all," answered Mr. Major. " He's one oi 



268 THE HAVEN 

the vain sort that take reason for guide a blind 
guide too, as Varwefl shows in his own life and 
character. Distrust reason, like an ageing man 
distrusts his eyesight or his strength of arm. Our 
reasoning powers be the devil's playground. 'Tis 
there he's the busiest, and the less we reason and 
the more we believe, the weaker we make the enemy 
of man. Faith's the rock for every wise soul to 
stand upon, and if you two want to be a happy 
married pair, and a credit to your folk, and worthy 
of having a hand in the next generation, nail texts 
to your walls and nail texts into your hearts, and 
never go into your bed at night or leave your 
chamber in the morning before calling upon the God 
of your fathers to keep your hearts pure and your 
faith strong as a winged lion. Only so will you rise 
above all the mists and troubles that every day 
brings to erring man. Take your stand beside the 
Cross of Christ, and let no Jack o' Lantern light of 
reason tempt you to budge from it. Trust where 
you can't understand, and don't waste time praying 
to have the dark made light. Take the dark, like 
brave men take a dangerous road or sail out trusting 
into stormy seas. Pray for one thing Faith and 
all the rest will be added to you. I know it ; I've 
proved it. Trust the laws of God to be just, and 
remember that we know less of His mysterious path 
than the fly drowning in my eye at this moment do 
know of me. Come here, Deb, and take the thing 
away." 

With the corner of her handkerchief Ned's 
betrothed tended to Mr. Major's trouble ; then he 
blew his nose, wiped his watering eye, and kissed her. 

" I didn't ax you young creatures to come here 
to preach to you," he declared ; " but Brokenshire 
and his views led up to it. We must all do what 
we can for that man, and strive to settle his mind 
to a braver and honester outlook." 



THE HAVEN 269 

" Tis the subject of property he's doubtful about," 
said Ned. 

" So be all that haven't any," answered Mr. Major. 
" You ask him if he'll give up the < Night Hawk ' to 
better the boatless men, and see what reason he's 
got to give for not doing so." 



CHAPTER XIV 

ON a day when the marriage date was fixed and 
Deborah had gone to Newton with her mother to 
spend money, Ned Major made holiday, and wandered 
alone at the cliff edge full of happy dreams. The 
harvest was ripe for the sickle and promised well. 
He moved where glory of royal gold flashed brilliantly 
against the blue background of the sea. A breeze 
cooled the sunshine, and he heard the mingled song 
of wave below and wheat above. Turning his back 
on the fields presently, he sat on a stone high over 
the 'sea, stretched his idle limbs under the blaze, and 
dwelt in spirit on Deborah. 

Then, fifty yards away, where he had been sleeping 
in a sun-bath among cushions of dead sea-pinks, a 
brown and ragged object moved, turned over, and 
stretched out hand to a battered hat and a tobacco- 
pipe. 

It was Mr. Varwell, who spent many of his days 
in summer weather upon the limestone ledges of 
Berry Head. Now, moved by hunger, he awoke, 
girt his rags tighter about him and crept upwards 
to the yellow corn. Ned guessed his purpose, and 
remained silent and motionless until Dick, on hands 
and knees, with only his forlorn hat visible, wound 
into the field and began picking off the heads of the 
harvest ; then, striving to make his voice harsh and 
gruff, the young man shouted roughly to him: 

270 



THE HAVEN 271 

" Hi, you rascal there ! Get out of that, or I'll 
send policeman after you ! " 

The hairy and crapulous countenance of Tumble- 
down Dick peeped cautiously out of its shining 
setting. He perceived Ned, grinned with evident 
relief, rose to his feet, and began shamelessly to pluck 
the ripe ears. 

He gathered a heavy handful, then approached 
young Major, beamed cheerfully upon him, wished 
him well, and sat down beside him. 

" In the very nick of time I find you," he said. " I've 
been sleeping ever since the sun rose out of the sea, 
and now my nature calls aloud for food and company. 
And here's both at my service, for I know you 
wouldn't hold a handful of corn from a hungry man." 

"You're welcome, though poor fare." 

"Not at all. A little corn, plucked out of the 
husk and warm all through with sunshine, is very 
good and pleasant food for a plain liver like me. 
But for the fruits of the earth I shouldn't be here 
now. If you understood Nature like what I do, 
you'd know that she never gives anything for 
nothing, Ned. That's where man have got the pull 
over her. He's larned to do it ; but he can't teach 
her. Hard hard she is. And so, as I take it out 
of Nature by drinking rather more than enough to 
quench thirst, I have to pay it back by eating poorly. 
My appetite for food is a mere shadow. However, 
let's talk about you. So you're in sight of the 
married state? Well, I wish you nothing but good. 
I know a lot about it, for naturally 'tis them outside 
that get the best view, and I've been much interested 
in the ways of married people ever since my father 
kicked me out of doors at fifteen for trying to show 
him how to manage my mother." 

Varwell rubbed corn in his hands and blew away 
the husks. He collected fifty grains and put them 
into his mouth. 



272 THE HAVEN 

"Tis a glorious thing, Dick," declared the lover. 
" 'Tis most too good to be true, for everything goes 
right with me and nought goes wrong. I'm growing 
feared of such terrible good luck. The future's as 
clear for me as the edge of the sea." 

" And, like the edge of the sea, have got clouds 
under it. Don't you fancy that marriage is all beer 
and skittles, my fine chap. I'll grant that it works 
above the average well in Brixham ; in fact our 
fishermen get on pretty fair with their wives in 
about fifty per cent, of cases. But why? Because 
they are away from them five days out of six ! Now 
you landsmen can't do that. You've got to show your- 
selves all the time, till you're a weariness of the flesh 
to the women. They get properly bored to death 
with you and your parrot voices and parrot repe- 
titions and parrot opinions ; and, as for you, you 
come to know them that cruel well to every dimple 
and mole and tone of voice and whim and fancy 
that after a doubtful number of years you both cry 
out to your God for a little change of air. I've 
seen it. 'Tis nothing to bleat about 'tis nature, and 
a thing of every day. And if 'tis a fault, then it 
must go against the Maker's score, like a tidy number 
of others." 

" 1 don't believe a word of such stuff," said Ned 
stoutly. " 'Tis the whole joy and glory and pride 
of my life every minute every minute of it : to 
know me and my girl are going to live together for 
evermore. Such a girl ! Good Lord, Dick ! you 
don't know what you're talking about. To get 
weary of the woman you love with your whole heart 
and soul ! It's not to be thought upon." 

"In your present state it is not. But a lot of very 
decent, orderly men, if they turned their hearts inside 
out, would show my pattern of thought stamped on 
'em. No disrespect to a good wife, mind not at all. 
Nought but the human craving for a little variety, 



THE HAVEN 273 

and to get a wider experience of a very wonderful 
creature. Tis the women's fault. They'm the most 
interesting things God ever made, and the earth's full 
of 'em ; yet a man's told by the parsons he must put 
all his human nature and thirst for information under 

his heel because 'tis naughty and However, this 

ban't the moment to tell you these things. And 
'twould only be waste of time if I did. For you 
won't believe 'em these twenty years yet, I dare say." 

" Marriages are made in heaven that's true as 
Gospel," said the lover. 

" ' True as Gospel ' ? Yes just about as true," 
admitted Tumbledown Dick. " Made in heaven 
eh? Well, then, 'tis wholesale, and quality not 
guaranteed. Still, you've got the genuine article 
that I can't deny. A nice little girl as ever anybody 
need wish to see. Take her, and thank your luck ; 
and long may you hoodwink each other into thinking 
this here is the best of all possible worlds. And see 
that your cup of fortune runs over not to waste, but 
to good use. Think of the likes of me a voice in 
the wilderness and let it be your pride now and 
again to give me a shake-down and a full cup. 
We're all doing our proper work, and 'tis only a 
question which seed springs up quickest. I be sowing 
seed in the ears of the next generation ; you be 
sowing seed in the earth. To every man his rightful 
toil." 

Mr. Varwell chewed more corn. 

" Oh, Dick, 'tis true enough that, if you've got more 
luck than you deserve, you long tremendous to make 
other people a bit luckier too. I wish I wish, Dick, 
that I could make you luckier." 

The tramp regarded him kindly. 

" So do I," he said. " But don't you judge by your 
own thoughts or your own conscience of another 
person's comfort and ease. I dare say you fancy 
there's not a young fellow in Brixham as wouldn't 

18 



274 THE HAVEN 

change places with you this minute ; and yet, if you 
could take a poll of 'em, you'd find there's not a boy 
in the place that would. We each know our lot, and 
though we're all yelping to change it, few sane folk 
would make a change blind. They'd want to learn 
a bit first. They'd want to take just one peep at 
t'other man's skeleton cupboard before they changed 
places. Life shows that envy be often terrible mis- 
placed. And I envy no man anything but his liver. 
Give me a new liver, and I ax for nothing beyond 
that. But Nature gave me a very fine organ at the 
start, and now that I've ruined it, she's not interested 
in it no more. My life's running out like the tide ; 
but it has suited my taste, and I'd do pretty much 
the same if I had to begin again to-morrow. We're 
built in a pattern, and most men be contented with 
their own pattern, and some be delighted with it 
There's not a sneaking cur or empty-headed ass in 
Brixham but ban't a bit of a hero in his own eyes. 
'Tis only the real great men ban't happy about 
themselves. For my part, I've took my pinch of 
clay, and used it without thanks or cusses. It might 
have been a darned sight better ; but, on the other 
hand, it might have been a darned sight worse. I've 
cracked it pretty bad ; but it will hold together five 
or six more years, I dare say ; and if, in that time, 
I can upset the silly ideas of a few well-meaning 
young fellows, like you, and make you see sense, and 
feel the sting of the world's injustice, and teach you 
what real truth and real liberty be like, then I shall 
peg out on the sunshiny side of some haystack, or 
'pon the moss of some lonely wood very well 
satisfied with what life and liquor have done for me." 

" 'Tis all wild and wrong what you tell, Dick so 
my father says. And how should I be better or wiser 
than him to give ear to you ? " 

" Escape from the tyranny of your father's opinions," 
said Mr. Vanvell. " I'd sooner see a man tethered 



THE HAVEN 275 

to his mother's apron-strings than his father's opinions. 
They'll harm him less. Let the last generation lie 
behind you, not be a blind wall stuck in front across 
your proper path. 'Tis flying in the face of evolution, 
Ned, to cleave to your father's opinions. He stands 
self-condemned by having opinions. The useful man 
be like me ; he don't deal in opinions ; he's got 
nought but ideas, and he wants nought but ideas. 
He goes about with his ears and his heart open for 
ideas. Opinions be the letter that kills, my son ; 
and ideas be the spirit that quickens. All this is hid 
from you, because you ban't turned twenty yet, and 
you're also in love, which be a great breeder of hard 
and fast opinions ; but you remember what I say, 
and don't let John Major pious blade though he 
be steer your ship for you. Strike out on your 
own account, and keep your own tiller in your own 
hand." 

"If he has got a good model under his eyes, a 
man's a fool not to follow it, Dick." 

" Not at all. You're a fool if you do a fool 
and a slave in the bargain. We wasn't put into 
the world to imitate our fathers. Life ban't writing 
in a copy-book. Go your own way, and help to 
make history. Let them follow as can't lead ; but 
try to lead, and give your brains up to the world's 
wisdom, not your father's. He don't know every- 
thing. I know a million times more than him. 
And I see a million times better what's coming : 
wonnerful things that will send your father's opinions 
down the wind like this chaff I fling on the air. 
I'll tell you one thing that you've heard a'ready ; 
and 'tis a brave truth from my point of view. 
They laugh longest who laugh last, Ned. And 
them that I stand for the outcasts and the scorned 
and the publicans and sinners and harlots will 
laugh last. It may be a cruel long time yet afore 
we socialists get there ; but when we once begin 



276 THE HAVEN 

to laugh, 'twill be a smile that will outlast all the 
grinning of the past a smile that will be copied by 
every living mouth. Then, three parts of humanity 
won't be laughing on the wrong side of its face, 
Ned like it is now in this poor little, ill-mixed 
pill of a world." 

The boy laughed. 

" 'Tis wonderful amazing wonderful to hear you 
run on, Richard Varwell. If you can say these 
fine speeches on a handful of corn, I'd like to hear 
what you'd rise to on turtle-soup and such things. 
Perhaps you'd change round then, and reckon pro- 
perty was the rightful sign of them that possess, 
and that class and all the rest of it was the work 
of evolution just as much as progress. You put 
me in mind of our cart-horse, * Neptune.' When 
he's on hay, he'll plough ; but give him corn and 
he won't plough for anybody. Must feed him low 
to take humble opinions ; but with high feeding, 
he gets high notions. If us give him a few beans, 
he'd want to go hunting ! " 

" You confuse your own argument, Ned, and play 
into my hand," answered Mr. Varwell. " Keep men 
on the food that God made for all men, and they 
bide rational and do man's proper work ; but upset 
the balance and flout nature and stuff the lazy ones 
with chicken and champagne, and they lose their 
sense and cry out for nought but chicken and 
champagne for evermore, and don't care who the 
devil they trample on to get it. I tell you this, 
as one who's tasted both : there's no proper or 
innocent place in this world for chicken or cham- 
pagne outside a hospital ward. In a well-regulated 

world, luxuries However, this be really too large 

a subject for a dry day." 

"Other people's luxuries, Dick not ours. Have 
a pipe of my tobacco ? " 

Richard instantly helped himself from Ned's pouch. 



THE HAVEN 277 

It was made of green plush, and his initials had 
been worked on it in yellow silk by Deborah. 

Tumbledown Dick smiled leniently at the toy. 

" Time was when women's hands would do such 
things for me. And to return to the main argument, 
you thought it very clever to offer me baccy when 
I spoke of luxuries, Ned. But don't go wrong there, 
too. Tobacco's a necessity not a luxury at all. 
After Queen Elizabeth's time and the Spanish 
Armada, and all that, the nerves of the British man 
began to get so cruel stretched and tormented that 
his Maker saw 'twas high time a soothing sedative 
came to the country. Now we couldn't do without 
it any more than we could do without tea and 
coffee. So there's your argument blown up. And 
now I be going to pluck a few score more of these 
here wheat-heads, by your leave ; and then I must 
go and see how my figures stand at the nearest 
house of refreshment. The great secret of successful 
and cheap drinking is to have a score running in a 
lot of different houses at once. Then, when figures 
get a bit steep in one place, you can give it a long 
rest till they begin to grow afeared you've forgot 
'em altogether. But presently, when you beam 
among 'em again, with a shilling or so perhaps, 
they'm that overjoyed to see you that drinking 
becomes a pleasure once more, instead of just a 
duty, as it too often is with men that don't under- 
stand it." 

" These branches of laming don't interest me," 
declared Ned. 

" Not yet ; not yet. But all laming is useful. 
However, in view of your coming marriage, next 
time we meet we'll talk of women and nought 
else." 

" I ban't sure if I want to hear you on that 
subject, Richard." 

" Have no fear, Ned. I'm always on their side 



278 THE HAVEN 

so's Providence and religion and all the powers' of 
the world, the flesh, and the devil. So long! I've 
been very interested listening to you. But leave 
go the opinions, like you'd mistrust a rotten bough 
when climbing a tree. Ideas be the firm things : 
they fly on strong wings." 

He moved away, and behind him waves of light 
rippled over the cornfields, where they rolled to the 
pathway upon the cliffs. As a sudden flaw of wind 
upon the sea dims and ruffles it, so in the wheat, these 
breezes came and went and flashed upon the amber 
stems ; while, as the water-waves, sweeping onwards, 
suffer the growths of the sea to become visible 
in a ruby ribbon or spring-green streamer, so 
here also flamed up lovely weeds as the harvest 
nodded and swayed and bent, then lifted its myriad 
heads again. Poppies and gipsy roses and corn- 
flowers lit the ripe-brown surfaces of the wheat-field. 
They sparkled with scarlet or lavender or deep sky- 
blue as Dick began to pluck again. 

While he helped himself he sang, and young Major 
heard the words. 



" Three things will be scratching 
I'll tell you if I can, 
A cat, a brier, and a woman. 
Though 'tis my delight both Night and Day 
To praise the women as much as I may." 



END OF BOOK II 



BOOK III 



CHAPTER I 

THERE fell a rare and radiant night of January, 
with the full moon on high and a strange mild- 
ness of temperature knit into the purity of the 
winter air. The stars aloft and the stars in the 
village windows alike shone clear and steady, while 
delicate hazes made one of earth and the firma- 
ment above it. Neither did the sea know any 
boundaries. It melted to the sky and stole wave- 
less upon the shore, as though unwilling to break 
by one least ripple the moon image mirrored 
there. A peace profound haunted cliff and crag, 
the farmlands above and the hamlet clustered 
beneath. But far away, under a flood of silver, 
floating there like a flock of sleeping birds, the 
trawlers lay becalmed. And aboard was impatience 
of this peace, and a hungry cry for the moon to set 
and the morning wind to waken. 

John Major and William Gilberd watched on the 
'Jack and Lydia,' while young Tom Honey will and 
a new hand slept. Michelmore had left his old 
skipper, and was now possessor of a trawler. 

" Speak quiet," said Mr. Major. " Very like Tom's 
awake, and I wouldn't add a grief to his young 
mind." 

" He knows his mother ban't long for this world, 
however in fact, 'twas him told me a month ago 
what you tell now. His father be a man that looks 

281 



282 THE HAVEN 

ahead, and he's made it all clear to Tom what will 
hap when Mrs. Honeywill goes. Your son, Ned, and 
his wife bide on, and Ned will be sub-tenant under 
Nicholas Honeywill for three year till the lease is 
out. Then, if he pleases to renew on his own 
account, he can do so. But Mr. Honeywill will 
drop out then ; he wants to get away from the 
sound of the sea." 

" All true. Strange that any man can wish 
such a thing ; but he's never been shamed of his 
opinions, rash and reckless though they are in many 
directions. There it stands then. And Ned's 
wrapped up in Berry Farm. I doubt he'll take it 
on and be master three years hence, if he can afford 
to do so." 

" He's been married two year," said Mr. Gilberd. 

" Yes, and he's saved just short of fifty pound, and 
he's got one child. That's pretty good for two years 
of work." 

" I lay you was sorry the child didn't hap to be 
a boy?" ' 

" No, no ; us must have maids so well as men. 
My Lydia have got two boys to one girl ; and no 
doubt Ned's next will be a boy, William." 

" They'll none be to you like Johnny Brokenshire, 
however ? " 

"That's true. I won't deny it, because I cannot. 
He was the first of the new generation, and he'll 
always be the first in my eyes. So perfect as faulty 
human nature can be in my opinion. Titus Peach 
says that the second boy have a better disposition, 
but that's his bias. He's all for the second child 
just because it's called Titus, and because it takes 
kindly to the tanning business and can be seen every 
working hour of the day messed up to its li'l eyes 
in red and yellow ochre. A good and pleasant 
child, but the moon to t'other's sun. Have 'e marked 
the way Johnny can drive a skiff through the 



THE HAVEN 283 

harbour ? The very daps of the way I done it fifty 
year agone ! And there's not a boy in Brixham his 
age who can swim like him." 

" His father taught him that." 

Mr. Major sighed. 

" That man ! The most uneven spirit, William 
the most uncertain creature that ever walked among 
us. One day, to hear him, you'd think there never 
was a wiser head on young shoulders ; but the 
next, his sense be scattered to the winds. You 
don't know where to have him that's the trouble. 
'Tis always some new thing, and his opinions touch- 
ing the State be enough to set an honest man's teeth 
on edge." 

" He's sick to death of the sea, and his boat's on 
offer to anybody that will buy it." 

" I know I know it is so. And I'm hopeful that 
none will offer, though, with all his faults, he keeps 
his boat so well as we keep our own. And a very 
good boat too." 

"How often has he been up?" 

"Four times," answered Samuel's father-in-law. 
" First time, as you may remember, he went to 
prison. Since then he's paid the fine ; and last time 
he came afore them he was warned that next time 
he'd be put away without any option for six months 
or more very likely." 

" There'd be one good thing come of his selling 
the boat," declared Gilberd. "He couldn't go 
poaching in Start Bay, on anywhere else." 

" Just what I said to myself a bit ago ; and then 
I said it to Lydia. But she says 'tis in the blood of 
him. You can poach ashore as well as afloat, for 
that matter, and there's things more valuable than 
fish. But she hopes he'll bide to sea, and reckons he 
can do less harm there than on land. There's no 
other women there anyway." 

" Your girl's too good a wife for the, man." 



284 THE HAVEN 

" She is. She's got a lot to put up with, yet, from 
the husband point of view apart from all the larger 
duties that go to make a good man she don't 
quarrel with him. She says he's a faithful husband 
to her. I hope 'tis true, I'm sure. And if it is, 
then us must thank my daughter's cleverness, not 
the man's goodness. That I will say, though her 
father. Not many women would have held that 
light man. He's given over church again now ; 
and when I taxed him with it, he said that change 
is the salt of religion, same as it is of life in general, 
and he must give heed to t'other side a bit if only 
for fairness." 

They talked long on the subject of the unstable 
Samuel, and a very wide tolerance marked their 
conclusions. Mr. Major believed that six months 
in prison might save Brokenshire ; but Gilberd 
declared that such an experience was enough to turn 
any high-spirited man into a criminal. 

" He don't understand that 'tis wrong to fish in 
Start Bay," said William. "And not all the law 
and order in the land can make him change his 
opinion." 

"Then it must happen to him as to the other 
wrong-headed men in the like case. The strength of 
the land lies in its laws, and though we may not 
always hold with this turn or twist of things as 
when they sentence a girl to death for killing her 
child and let the man go free that got it yet, safety 
lies in numbers, and what the majority have settled 
is best for sartain. If it wasn't best, it wouldn't 
happen, and that's where faith comes in, William. 
So Start Bay is shut, and them who think 'twould 
be better open must bow to their betters who, always 
under divine Providence, have decided that it shall 
be shut." 

The night deepened, and though it grew colder 
after set of moon, no hoped-for breeze came as 



THE HAVEN 285 

herald of dawn. Anon the skipper and Gilberd 
were relieved by Tom Honeywill and the new hand. 
The latter was a loose-limbed, hearty young giant, 
called Paul Larkin, who claimed relationship with 
Mr. Larkin, the propagandist. These two watched 
oncoming day while the elder men slept ; but light 
brought poor promise with it. A fitful easterly air 
rose and died on the sea in weak catspaws. Mist 
rolled up with it, and morning found pallid sunshine 
vainly struggling with great fog-banks out of which 
from time to time screeched frightened steamers 
feeling their way at half-speed up and down Channel. 
Not until after noon did the vapour thin and the 
wind rise. Then the fleet, now scattered over a ten- 
mile radius, trimmed sail and lowered trawls. It 
chanced that another boat came within reach of the 
* Jack and Lydia ' half an hour after she had dropped 
her net. The newcomer was not yet fishing, and so 
she overtook Mr. Major's boat. 

" 'Tis the ' Bread-winner,' " said Paul Larkin, " and 
she wants to hail us by the look of it." 

Now John and his crew, together with most of the 
fleet, had been from shore two days at work over 
the * Scruff' for sole, whiting, and plaice ; but the 
' Bread-winner' was only out of port on the preceding 
night. She carried the last intelligence from shore, 
and as it nearly concerned the boat now in sight, 
the skipper of the ' Bread-winner ' went a little out 
of his way to tell it. 

" Jan Major, ahoy ! " he bawled presently. " We'm 
out o' Brixham last night, and there's bad news 
for 'e." 

" Ax what it is," said John to young Larkin, 
and the man lifted his voice and roared over the 
water. 

" What is it, then ? " 

The ' Bread-winner ' sailed nearer, then put her 
helm up and flapped into the wind fifty yards away. 



286 THE HAVEN 

" 1 be sorry to tell you that a Government boat 
catched the ' Night Hawk ' again two mornings 
agone. SheVe been down off the Islands fishing so 
they said ; but there was a lot of contraband found 
in her 'baccy, I believe. And they fear that we've 
said good-bye to Brokensheer for a month of Sun- 
days!" 

Gilberd scowled across the water at the man who 
had brought this news. 

"Like you, you croaking raven, to go out o' the 
way to tell this," he shouted ; " but I lay 'tis a lie 
all the same." 

"'Twas Jan Major I be telling, not you," cried 
back the other. " And 'tis true enough onless 
the Daily Mercury's a liar. And besides that, 
Mrs. Brokensheer had a telegram, and so have 
Saul Mutter's wife. They'm all in quod to Wey- 
mouth." 

The 'Bread-winner' fell away, took the wind, and 
dropped her trawl. Thus, until night fell, Lydia's 
father was confronted with the bearer of the ill news 
steadily fishing beside him. 

His first thought had been to return home im- 
mediately, but he changed his mind. This blow was 
hardly unexpected. Not twelve hours before the 
advent of the news he had predicted to Gilberd that 
trouble was yet in store for his son-in-law. It had 
come quicklier and darklier than might have been 
foretold, and on second thoughts John Major was 
not sorry to find himself at sea in the moment of 
the catastrophe. Time now offered for thought, and 
he had leisure to mature his plans for Lydia and her 
children. 

" I'm cruel afraid he'll get six months, if not twelve," 
declared William Gilberd. " I remember very well 
my wife's brother, who was a rip much in the 
pattern of Sam, and he done this very thing; and 
they catched him through his own foolishness in 



THE HAVEN 287 

getting drunk afore he got ashore. And he had 
hard labour for his fun ; but that was owing to 
complications. He showed fight, and so did the 
other free trader that was along with him. I hope 
they ' Night Hawk ' chaps was too sensible to do 
anything like that." 

" His sense wouldn't ballast a very big boat," 
answered Major. " I haven't got no time to spare on 
him for the minute. I'm thinking of his home and 
my daughter and her eldest." 

" Have he saved money ? " 

"Yes, he has. How much I didn't feel I could 
ax. And now 'twill be broken into, I suppose. It 
looks to me as if " 

He broke off. 

"But 'tis no use my making plans for my 
daughter," he added. " She'll have her own plans 
cut and dried against this trouble afore I see her 
again. One thing is certain : I shall offer for to 
take Johnny off her hands till his father's back." 

"Tis when his father's back that he's best out of 
the house, I reckon." 

" You're right, William ; but that won't be allowed. 
His father and me pull different ways over that boy ; 
yet so far, thank the Lord in a prayerful spirit, I pull 
strongest." 

Chance after all modified Mr. Major's plans. He had 
purposed fishing through another four-and-twenty 
hours before returning to shore ; but before midnight, 
in the fair way under clear weather and with a 
steady wind, the ' Jack and Lydia ' was suddenly 
spoken. A mighty mass of darkness loomed up out 
of the night and stopped a cable's length distant, 
churned waves seethed ghostly round the fishing boat, 
and an ocean-going steamer, bound down Channel, 
stood by and called to John Major to pick up her 
pilot. The trawlers are often asked at sudden 
notice to carry a pilot ashore ; and this is what now 



288 THE HAVEN 

happened. A man came aboard and the boat that 
brought him returned to the steamship. Then 
Mr. Major drew up his trawl and set sail for 
Plymouth, his nearest port. None grumbled at the 
event, for this act of marine courtesy was worth two 
pounds. 



CHAPTER II 

SAMUEL Brokenshire was sent to prison for six 
months, and his comrades, Trust and Mutter, received 
lesser sentences. The ' Night Hawk ' was laid up, 
and darkness settled upon the dwelling in Overgang. 
Thereupon Titus Peach came forward and made 
a proposal that had long been in his heart. So 
expeditious was he, that Lydia's father had not seen 
his child before the undertaking was settled in every 
particular. The tanner, indeed, called upon Mrs. 
Brokenshire within an hour of her ill tidings. His 
scheme was not newborn. He had carried it with 
him for many weeks, yet hesitated to declare it. 
The disaster to his nephew gave him his opportunity, 
and he came before Lydia with a fixed determination 
to carry the point. 

" Don't take on," he said. " 'Tis no surprise to me ; 
but I'm not a man to hit anybody when they are 
down ; and, before I speak to you, I want you to under- 
stand that your husband is a very good nephy whatever 
he may be as a citizen. We must judge of folk as we 
find 'em ; and if the law finds Samuel an enemy to it, 
then the law must shut him up and punish him ; and 
if you find him a good husband, as I hope you have, 
then you must stick up for him through thick and 
thin, as becomes your duty ; and if I've always found 
him a good boy to me, then in his hour of trouble I 
must come forward and stand up for him." 

289 I 



290 THE HAVEN 

" You always knew Sam's big, generous heart," said 
Lydia. 

Johnny was at school on the occasion of this 
meeting ; but the boy Titus now held his mother's 
hand, and her infant daughter slept hard by, oblivious 
of disaster. 

" His character I understand better than your 
father does, if I may say so. 'Tis natural, for the 
same blood as mine flows in Samuel's veins. He's 
like us all, a patchwork of good and bad ; but the 
good side's most outward in my dealings with him, 
and I shan't quickly forget how he worked in the 
tanyard when I was ill at the very top of the season 
last spring." 

" He was glad to do it for you. He's very 
interested in the business." 

" And what's more, he did the work in a way that 
only I myself could have bettered. You might have 
thought such a gnat-brained, dashing chap one all 
for speed and risk and recklessness would have 
scamped sail-tanning. But he done it like a master, 
and so my credit didn't suffer a hair with customers. 
And now 'tis my turn, and, in a word, I've come to 
take you out of this. 'Tis all planned to the last 
detail. Next week my old woman as looks after me 
is going into one of they almshouses. She's earned 
it, and the fag end of her life will be calm and cared 
for. But who's to look after me, Lydia ? " 

He paused, but she did not reply. 

"In a word, you are ! Yes ; you and your children 
be all coming to ' Laburnum Villa ' ; and there's the 
grotto for them ; and you'll take care of me and 
keep house for me against the time your husband 
come out." 

" He'd never hear of it, uncle." 

" Make no mistake as to that. Samuel will be only 
too pleased. 'Twill take a very great load of care off 
his shoulders while he's put away ; and, when he 



THE HAVEN 291 

comes home, you'll be so well and comfortably fixed 
up along with me that 'twill be beyond even a 
husband's power to drag you away any more. And 
what follows from that? Why, Samuel will have 
to come and bide with me too. I'm not ashamed of 
him ; he can come if he will." 

Lydia was too much astonished at this suggestion 
immediately to accept it. One fatal objection 
presented itself. 

"The children," she said. 

" Well, ban't I a wonder with them ? And don't 
they dote upon me ? Come here, Titus, and say if 
you'd like to live along with Uncle Peach and play 
in the grotto." 

Titus signified that nothing would suit him better. 

" He's my boy, and he ought to be there. And 
the dinky girl be so welcome as her mother ; while 
as for Johnny, he's no trouble to nobody but the 
schoolmaster, though I do hear tell that he's a terror 
in class and not built to carry any lasting store of 
book learning. Why for not let his grandfather 
have him ? 'Twould be such a joy to John Major 
that he'd even forgive your husband for making this 
trouble. Yes, he would ; if he got Johnny under his 
roof, he'd say that Providence had worked it all, and 
that 'twas far and away the best thing that could 
have happened. Then, mark me, in his delight 
he'd pardon Samuel everything and be happy as a 
lark." 

" Yes, he would," admitted Lydia. 

" Mind you, I'm not saying I can't do with Johnny. 
Far from it. He's welcome as Titus ; but I'm that 
crafty and far-seeing in some directions, that I'm 
bound to point out, if your father has the child, 'twill 
soften him a lot towards Brokenshire and make 
things easier all round when Sam comes out." 

" I expect it would," she admitted. 

" You'd see him every day if you liked. And I'm 



292 THE HAVEN 

not to be named for righteousness beside your father, 
so Johnny would be brought up in a high and proper 
spirit to correct any light opinions he gathered from 
Samuel." 

" You're to be named beside the best and kindest 
of men, Uncle Titus," she answered. "This is too 
great a thing you offer. I can very well go on living 
here." 

" On your savings. Much sense in that. Now 
I must have a housekeeper and one as can cook and 
scour ; so why not you ? You're doing me a great 
favour by coming. 'Tis not I be offering anything 
beyond the roof over your head and and a little 
bit of a present now and again till your husband 
comes back to you." 

She hesitated, but he persuaded her. Lydia had 
little love for Overgang, and felt no sentimental 
regrets at leaving it ; yet her dignity was dear to her, 
and she sorrowed at losing her own home and the 
personal control that she had exercised therein. 
Then the practical side of the question faced her 
ind left no room for doubt. She was not justified in 
spending a penny of Samuel's savings now. 

" We take on this house by the month," she said. 
" I can come to you in February, if you can be ready 
then." 

" Come to-morrow," he answered. " Come to- 
night ! All's ready and more than ready. I'll have 
Johnson's van up over for your things Monday, 
we'll say. By that time your father will be back 
off the sea." 

"'Tis very like he'd have offered me just what you 
have, Uncle Titus." 

"And don't I know it? And isn't that why I 
skipped up here at the first breath of the news ? 
First come, first served. You've promised, Lyddy, 
and if you was to go to Mr. Major now, I'd not 
forgive you, and Sam would be the sufferer." 



THE HAVEN 293 

" I've promised," she replied ; " and it isn't in the 
power of any words of mine to thank you enough 
for such a generous thing. I'm very, very grateful, 
and you'll find that out if my pair of hands can 
show it." 

" Tis an ill wind that blows nobody good," he 
answered ; " and the wind that's blown Samuel into 
clink has blown you to my house. Out of evil comes 
good, say what you will, and I hope and trust your 
father will see the same." 

" He will if I let Johnny go to him." 

" He'll think he's dreaming." 

" Samuel doesn't deserve to have such an uncle as 
you, and such a father-in-law as my father." 

" Don't say that. Remember John Major's opinion : 
that we get our deserts to a grain. And if Samuel 
have such a brave pair of old men to look after his 
family as me and Major, then he deserves to have 
'em ; and if he deserves to have 'em, he must be a 
much better and worthier young chap than people 
have fancied he was." 

Upon this triumphant conclusion Ned Major 
appeared. He had heard the news during the dinner 
hour, and when Deborah read it, he broke off in the 
middle of the meal, took some bread and cheese in 
his hand to eat upon the way, and started instantly 
for his sister. He had already planned to help Lydia 
with her future ; but before Mr. Peach's proposal 
Ned felt that he could say nothing. Samuel's uncle 
was reported to be very prosperous, and he had 
evidently determined upon this solution of the 
problem. 

When Lydia's father returned home, therefore, he 
found the main problem solved. He came two nights 
later, as his daughter had foretold, and finding the 
home in Overgang already dismantled, he seemed in 
doubt as to his own action. 

" 'Tis the very thing I meant to do myself, Lyddy, 



294 THE HAVEN 

and I don't deny that the thought of you and your 
childer under your father's roof seemed a likely thing 
and acceptable to God ; but that spry old man has 
hopped in afore me. Still, a father " 

" I knew you'd offer this," she said ; " I told him 
so. I didn't act without thinking, and you mustn't 
be hard on him either." 

" Hard ? No ; I hope not. He's very quick to 
see his own interests, as we all are. A clever even 
a cunning man in some things to say it not un- 
kindly. But after all, you had right of choice, Lydia, 
and you naturally lean towards Peach, because he's 
always been over-easy where Samuel was concerned. 
I dare say if he'd been harder when Samuel was a 
fatherless boy, and used his authority where he could, 
your husband would have kept in the ranks of law 
and religion to-day." 

Lydia felt her bosom rise. 

" He said he wouldn't cast a stone at a man when 
he was down. That's all Uncle Peach said." 

" And more would I, or any other Christian. No, 
no ; if you've lifted more prayers for Sam than I 
have, Lyddy, since I heard this sad news, then you've 
prayed a lot. Don't let me anger you, my love, for 
that's the last thing your father wishes for to do. It 
will happen right ; it will be the turning-point. 
When he comes back and finds his home gone " 

" His home will never be gone while I'm alive to 
make it," answered she. " So soon as he's back, his 
home shall begin again, where and how he pleases. 
He shall never say he's had " 

She broke down, and her father comforted her. 
Then they entered upon a more placid argument. 
He was patient and full of plans. At last he asked 
cautiously after the two boys. 

" I suppose he's got room for you all ? 'Tis quite 
a mansion of a house so my sister told me long ago, 
when she was on terms with him." 



THE HAVEN 295 

" Plenty of room. And he honestly likes children 
about the place." 

" Queer that in an old bachelor. However, if he 
says so " 

" But he proposed one thing, and i suppose I ought 
to tell you, father. Johnny's to school now, and 
though he gives a deal of trouble there, none can 
say he's not a good boy at home. And Aunt Emma 
has taken to him a good deal of late." 

" I should think she had, and every other sensible 
person. He's the talk of the quay." 

" And Uncle Titus is a very sensible man where 
children are concerned." 

" Don't go on about him ! " 

" But I must. It was his idea about Johnny." 

" Look here," said the old man sternly ; " I'm 
patient and I'm yielding, and none can say I carry 
matters with a high hand over my neighbours ; but 
I've got my limits, like everything mortal, and where 
that child's concerned I won't hear Peach not one 
word will I hear. Johnny's father has a right to 
speak, though little enough sense does he utter on 
the subject, and I live in hopes to convert him to 
my view afore the accepted time comes ; but Peach 
no. He's got the second boy, and let him be 
thankful. He can plan as he pleases for your Titus, 
and a very nice li'l boy he is, and wonnerful like our 
Ned in my opinion. Born for the shore without a 
doubt. But Peach shall keep his hands and his ideas 
off Johnny, or he'll have to reckon with me with me 
and Providence both ; for if ever I was allowed to 
look far ahead and see what the Lord has planned 
for me of His own, 'tis in the matter of that beautiful 
king of a boy. So ' hands off him,' is what I say to 
your uncle, or any other man." 

" I know how fond you are of him, and how fond 
he is of you ; and so does Uncle Titus ; and he 
thought that, till Samuel comes home, it might be 



296 THE HAVEN 

a very fine thing for Johnny, if it was possible, to 
live with his grandfather. Mr. Peach always says 
there's nobody like you. He bade me ask you if 
you would like to have Johnny in your keeping for 
six months well knowing that it might be the 
making of the child." 

Mr. Major gasped, and his daughter's eyes twinkled 
with tears. Yet a ghost of laughter lurked in them 
too. 

" Of course you rate uncle's judgment so low that 
you may not think this a very good thought. I'm 
not sure what I think either. But I had to tell you. 
I should be after Johnny every day, so Aunt Emma 
wouldn't have much trouble. He can clean himself 
now." 

" 'Twas Peach proposed that? " asked her father. 

" Yes ; he seemed very sure that it would work 
well." 

" ' Work well ' ! 'Twill work to a miracle ; and 
you can tell Titus that he's a blessed man, for he's 
become the mouthpiece of Providence, if ever man 
did. He's higher and wiser than us all. He's a 
wonder of the world, Lydia ! I've always known 
him for a strong and steady Christian, but such 
wisdom as this ! 'Tis an eye-opener to me. You 
was right to admire the man and love him. And 
you tell him from John Major that he's a burning 
light of sense, and that I'm shoulder to shoulder 
with him, and and where's the boy where is he ? 
Let me be after him ! Let me tell him, Lydia ; let 
mine be the voice to tell him he's coming to live 
along with me till his father's back again." 

She sighed, and thought of her husband. 

"It hardly seems fair to Sam," she said. "But 
you won't influence him, father not while Samuel's 
away? 'Twouldn't be just." 

" You're right," he declared. " I'll put righteous- 
ness afore him if I know how ; but he shall hear no 



THE HAVEN 297 

more than can be helped of the sea not till Sam's 
back pulling the other way." 

The happy old man trudged off to find Johnny, 
who was playing in the harbour. It had struck 
Mr. Major when he first learnt of his son-in-law's 
tribulation that six months was a severe punishment. 
At this moment, however, he did not think so. He 
acknowledged, not without shame, to his secret heart 
that he could have wished the sentence twice as 
long. 



CHAPTER III 

TIME brought about the things that Titus Peach 
and John Major desired ; but it stood not still, and 
presently there happened further changes, and Mr. 
Peach was left happy, but Lydia's father suffered a 
great loss. 

When Brokenshire came out of prison he found 
his wife settled at ' Laburnum Villa ' and his uncle 
absolutely determined that she should never leave 
it again. To Brokenshire's independent spirit such 
a plan did not commend itself, but he was not 
dead to the main chance ; and when Mr. Peach 
made the question a matter of finance, Samuel con- 
sented to stop. 

" I can't do without her kindness, and I can't do 
without her cooking," confessed the tanner. " She 
has worked a great deal of difference to my life's 
comfort, as I well knew she would do, and I'm 
not going to let you take her away, Samuel. Why 
for should you ? I'm your own uncle, and getting 
up in years. What more natural than that you and 
your wife should stay along with me ? " 

"People will say 'tis for what we can get that 
we come; and I'm not that sort," answered the 
fisherman. 

"Then you ought to be," declared Titus; "for 
the sake of your wife and your growing family, you 
ought to be. There's lots of room for one and all, 

298 



THE HAVEN 299 

and I've become so used to the childers' noise that 
I should miss it something terrible now. Let it 
be a matter of business if not of convenience. If 
for your own peace you'd rather be away from me r 
then sell your peace and be content to take money 
value for it You can see my last will and testa- 
ment if you like." 

" I know that's all right," answered his nephew ; 
" and so long as you look after my Titus and give 
him a chance in the world " 

" That and more that and more. If the Lord 
don't send you sons, the devil will send you nephews 
eh? Nephews and great-nephews; and I'm very 
well pleased with the childer, and ready for one 
or two more, for that matter. So let it be settled 
so." 

" There's one thing, however," explained Samuel ; 
" you'll have to put up with Johnny too ; and he's 
as bad as they make 'em the living daps of me at 
his age." 

" What ! Take him away from his grandfather ! " 

" Yes ; I won't be ridden on rough-shod all round 
just because the ' Night Hawk ' ran foul of a 
damnation excise boat. Curse the sea and every- 
thing on it that's what I say. And Johnny's not 
going to be fetched up in Major's notions that I 
will swear whatever falls out." 

" As to cursing the sea, I say nothing," answered 
Titus. " The less you go on the sea, the better 
you'll please me, because I hope it means the more 
time you'll spend in the barking yard. But don't 
quarrel over the boy. Your father-in-law's given 
his word to Lydia and to you for I heard him that 
he's not pressing the sea. He's only making the 
child straight and God-fearing. Besides that, when 
all's said, 'tis silly to think none of your boys 
will have seafaring in 'em. 'Tis bound to come 



300 THE HAVEN 

" All boys may like it ; but what man does ? I'm 
not going to have no child of mine apprenticed to 
that dog's life, and then, when he's grown to years 
of sense and sees the folly, turn round on me and 
ax why I let him throw away his time for cleverer 
men than himself to make fortunes out of fish. 
'Tis all wrong, and a sin and shame. We get too 
little for the danger and pain of the work, and 
them that eat the fish pay a darned sight too 
high for it. But between us and them be full 
pockets, and 'twill ever be that way. You hear 
Tumbledown Dick tell about it, and show what 
barefaced robbery goes on. He shan't take no 
hand in that business Johnny shan't and from 
his grandfather he's coming. So, if you can't do 
with him, we must all go." 

Thus it came about that, to his bitter disappoint- 
ment and Johnny's furious grief, the child left Mr. 
Major and returned to his parents. Samuel proved 
stubborn upon the point, and the growing boy and 
his father quarrelled, much to the misery of 'La- 
burnum Villa ' and the grief of John Major and his 
sister. 

But now life ran with fewer jolts. Samuel was at 
sea less than formerly, and the friction lessened when 
his eldest son was sent to a day school at Dartmouth, 
and boarded there with Emma Michelmore's spinster 
sister of that town. He returned home every Satur- 
day, and went back again on Monday morning. 
The child yearned more and more for the sea, while 
his father remained obdurate and refused to give any 
hope to that ambition. 

A year and more was passed, and Lydia had borne 
Samuel another son ; then came the long-pending 
changes at Berry Farm, and the kinsfolk and friends 
of Nicholas Honey will met together at the funeral 
of his wife. A dozen men, including the landlord, 
strolled back to 'The Sailor's Knot' after burial 



THE HAVEN 301 

rites were ended and the mourners had returned 
home. Mr. Peach and his nephew appeared among- 
them, while Mr. Memery and Mr. Tribble joined 
the company together, and Larkin was also 
there. 

" Never seed so many black coats on a week-day," 
he declared. " Tis a sure sign of the high fame of 
the woman ; though the less said of the husband 
the better, for I've had it from a personal friend 
of the man's that he believes in nought." 

None heeded Mr. Larkin. 

" There's been no nature in the woman for years," 
said Mr. Munday, as he took off his black coat and 
began to pour out drink for the company. " She 
sank and sank until she drooped to nought. Her 
sense was the last thing to leave her. 'Tis a great 
shock, though so long expected. Nicholas be all in 
a mizmaze, as anybody might have seen by the grave 
to-day." 

" White as a dog's tooth the man was," declared 
James Tribble ; " and when they flung the mould, 
he jumped as though it had been thrown in his face 
instead of on the lid." 

" He's lucky, however, in having Ned up there,' 5 * 
declared Brokenshire. " The chap's young, but " 

"Too young too young," answered Tribble 
" If Honeywill's got any sense, he won't do the 
thing he plans to do and go afore his lease runs 
out. How can a youth so meek and mild as Ned 
Major ? " 

Mr. Memery's corncrake voice interrupted the 
other salesman. 

" Don't you say that. Young Major's wise enough 
and strong enough to run a farm now." 

Then a bundle of rags in the corner suddenly 
turned and spoke. Tumbledown Dick was sitting 
beside a fire with his back to the company, and none 
had noticed him. He seemed to have shrunk some- 



302 THE HAVEN 

what of late, and was grown feebler and less 
enterprising than of old. A chronic cough shook 
him ; but his uneven mind still belonged to him, 
and, when sober, he possessed his old power to anger 
or amuse any listener. 

" You know just nothing at all of the man any of 
you," he said. " Sam's the only one that's near right. 
But Ned Major and me be very understanding friends, 
and I'm better up in the chap than he is in himself. 
I've read his character and know what he is. He's 
no good in a world of crooked men ; but if the 
world was full of honesty and straightness, then he 
might be up top. I was sitting along with Ned on 
the lew side of a linhay up to Berry Farm two weeks 
afore Mrs. Honeywill went out of it. The sun was 
shining, and the spangled fowls was pecking the pips 
out of a great mass of pomage turned out of the 
cider mill. I'd just had a drink from the vat, for 
there's no better medicine than half a pint of apple 
juice afore 'tis racked ; and I was loading my pipe 
and thinking my thoughts when up comes Ned. 
4 She's going,' he said. * So are we all,' I told 
him. Then we talked, and he axed me if I thought 
he was a strong enough man to run Berry, and 
explained to me that 'twas pretty sure Nicholas 
would never stop there after his wife was gone, 
though farmer had always thought to do so before 
the thing really happened. ' He couldn't stand 
seeing the ghost of her round about the place, 1 
explained Ned ; and I understood. And it shows 
the greatness of man, for to say it without un- 
kindness, the grey mare that's gone was the better 
hoss up over. But it seems Honeywill really 
can't stop no more. And when Ned axed me 
whether I thought he was man enough to reign 
there, I said 'twas too big a question to answer 
in a moment." 

" He's meek as Moses," said Mr. Tribble, " and 



THE HAVEN 303 

meekness be a virtue that's out of date now-a- 
days." 

" * The meek shall inherit the earth, however/ " 
answered Titus Peach. " That comes from a Book 
that's not out of date anyway." 

Larkin and Mr. Munday applauded, but Dicky 
Varwell bade them be silent. 

" Let me talk and say my say afore I begin to 
bark. Well, I thought upon Ned's question, and 
gave it all the benefit of my brains, for I'm fond of 
the boy and he's been a good friend to me for a long 
time and his wife too. And I've told 'em to stay, 
and promised 'em my help so long as I'm here to 
give it. Ned's learnt a deal from me, same as you 
all have ; but he ban't too proud to admit it, like 
most of you be." 

" You'm a looker-on at life, and if you hadn't 
learnt a bit about it, 'tis pity, Dick," said Samuel. 

" I'd sooner play the game than watch it, for 
my part," said Larkin. " And after all's done, 
when it comes to saving your soul, you've got to 
play the game; for that's a game none can play 
for you." 

"Wrong again on your own showing," answered 
the vagabond. "That's the game Christ plays for 
every Christian ; and so far as I can see, most 
of you be quite content to look on and let Him 
play it." 

" Leave the Name off your drunken lips," answered 
Larkin fiercely, " and don't try to teach me, or any 
Christian man, on that subject. Who be you an 
unbelieving dog that you are to talk about the 
Lord? I wonder you don't " 

But Mr. Munday silenced Larkin, and the angry 
fisherman went out with threats that he would never 
return. 

" You'm always on the side of the heathen," he said 
to the publican ; " so I'll take my custom elsewhere, 



304 THE HAVEN 

where I can speak my mind with the rest and not 
be shut up like a telescope the minute I stand up for 
the true faith." 

" What can you do with such a man ? " asked 
Dick. " And there's scores like him never can 
mention holy things without losing their tempers 
and getting narrow-minded and mean." 

" He's well-meaning, but not well-educated," said 
Mr. Peach ; " and you might say the same of most of 
us. We mean well none better than Ned Major. 
And for my part I'm with Samuel here : I think 
he'll make a safe master for a fair-sized farm." 

" He's a lot more sensible than his father, anyway," 
declared Brokenshire. " He thinks a thing out ; he 
don't talk about leaving a thing to Providence one 
minute and then do all he can to change the mind 
of Providence the next. Take my boy Johnny. If 
ever Providence and me was at one about anything, 
'tis about keeping John off the sea ; but how the 
mischief can you do aught with a grandfather 
obstinate as a pig to have his grandchild sail along 
with him ? I've had to have a right down row at 
last, and now of course 'tis said that I'm interfering 
with the child's natural bent." 

"Every boy has a natural bent to the sea," said 
Varwell. " 'Tis common and catching as measles 
or whooping-cough. But it can he cured, and it did 
ought to be. Sam's right in theory and wrong in 
practice. If I had a child as wanted to taste traw- 
ling, I'd let him. I'd drive him to it with a whip 
and set him under the hardest, cruellest man among 
you. I'd wear him to the bone and keep him at 
it night and day till I'd choked the complaint out 
of him. The boy would soon be on his knees to 
come ashore then." 

The party drank and presently scattered. Broken- 
shire went out with Varwell, and Dicky repeated his 
advice ; but the other was obdurate. 



THE HAVEN 305 

" My boy's going to be apprenticed to a shoe- 
maker," he said. " Abraham Guzzwell's the man. 
What he don't know ban't worth knowing." 

Dick nodded. 

" I can't offer a word against him. And his chief 
cleverness is a still tongue. He's a man out of the 
common and he's got a memory like iron. He's 
built up his knowledge on books and on people. 
Everybody can trust Guzzwell." 

" And many of the swells get their shooting boots 
from him. I've heard the gamekeepers say how 
they've listened at shooting parties, and Guzzwell's 
boots be the talk of the countryside. He've got the 
lasts of some very big people, Dick." 

" He have. And 'tis wonderful what the man 
reads into a foot. Talk about fortune-tellers and 
hands ! Guzzwell can do more with a foot than half 
they swindlers who pretend to tell the palm. 'Tis 
the humblest that get the closest view of the highest 
in this world, Samuel ; and Guzzwell would bear 
me out in that. If you want to know a bit of the 
inner truth touching the quality, ax their washer- 
woman, not their friends and flatterers. Rich men 
go to Guzzwell for his sense as well as his shoe 
leather. I've not been above taking his opinion 
before now, though his boots are beyond my in- 
come." 

Tumbledown Dick stopped suddenly and fell into* 
a fit of coughing. He bent over a granite bollard 
on the quay, then sat down, with heaving chest and 
watering eyes, to rest and recover his breath. 

" The advice you ought to take> and won't, is to 
go in the hospital," said .his friend. " You're not the 
man you were, and another winter loafing out of 
doors and turning out of hot pubs on wet nights will 
settle you." 

" Not yet not yet," answered the tramp. " I 
reckon there's a good two year left, if I'm reasonably 

20 



306 THE HAVEN 

careful of my carcase. When I go in hospital, 'twill 
be to stop, Sam. And I mean to take very par- 
ticular care that my last illness shall be short and 
swift. A deathbed's rather a painful sort of a place, 
even to a wise man like me ; and I shan't be on 
my own a day longer than I can help, I do assure 
you." 



CHAPTER IV 

THE passion of love is a heritage of youth, while 
the sentiment of love remains for those who are 
young no more. To the one belongs the brief, 
ineffable glory of the lightning ; the other is moon- 
light on the deep, still sea. And in some hearts 
passion flows into sentiment under withering age 
as surely as the torrent into the lake or the colours 
of the rainbow melt upon a mountain's bosom. 
Mr. Nicholas Honeywill was much surprised to find 
how deeply he felt his wife's death. It revived 
emotions that her actual presence had a little 
obscured ; and looking backward through avenues 
of five-and-twenty years, the widower saw his loss 
clearly, and perceived how that he had underrated 
the significance of the dead's companionship. Some- 
times, after acute differences of opinion and days 
of discomfort, he told his secret spirit that her release 
would be supportable to him ; but when nature did 
release her, his life was changed and he found him- 
self stricken and helpless. He lacked faith, and was 
not religious ; but sentiment belonged to him, and 
sentiment now, feeding full upon the past, reduced 
him to a condition of misery, from which Deborah and 
her husband strove in vain to lift him. 

His plans and projects for the future, that had 
all promised well in the past, now took upon them 
a tasteless flavour. The things he had arranged 

307 



308 THE HAVEN 

for his own autumnal days seemed good to him no 
longer. He missed his wife as he had never dreamed 
that he could miss her, and henceforth Berry Farm 
and his dwelling place and sleeping chamber, her 
chair and her favourite position by the kitchen 
window, were haunted for him for ever. He had 
thought to bide very comfortably along with his 
daughter and Ned. The issue proved that a plan, 
satisfactory enough while his wife was alive, became 
violently impossible after her death. 

He broached the subject to John Major, and the 
fisherman assured him that time would dim these 
sentimental torments, and that, as the days passed, 
from sorrow he would rise into quiet happiness, still 
to move where his wife had moved and still to see her 
in memory, a link with the blessed eternity that he 
might hope presently to share with her. But Nicholas 
Honeywill had no consolation in that kind. He 
endured much, and finally determined to change 
his plans and leave Berry Farm, in hope that 
the sorrowful images awakened there might fade 
from him among other scenes. His children strove 
with him, but they failed to shake his purpose, 
and, guessing that the distractions of change might 
do her father good, Deborah soon opposed him no 
more. 

A house was found not far from ' Laburnum Villa ' ; 
for, while he was determined to leave his old home, 
Mr. Honeywill refused to put many miles between 
himself and his daughter. To Brixham he came ; 
but he brought nothing with him that belonged to 
his past. Berry Farm was left unchanged to Ned 
and his wife ; while Tom Honeywill, who still sailed 
with the 'Jack and Lydia,' shared his father's new 
dwelling. 

The change made no impression on Nicholas at 
first, yet with lapse of months he grew more cheerful ; 
and a circumstance that added not a little to his 



THE HAVEN 309 

improved peace of mind was a friendship that sprang 
up between him and Titus Peach. The humility of 
Titus and his simple rule of life attracted the farmer. 
He enjoyed the company of Mr. Peach, and spent 
no little time on summer days smoking his pipe in 
the grotto of ' Laburnum Villa.' Hither also came 
Deborah often with her little daughter ; and as John 
Major derived an impetus to life from his eldest 
grandson, so now, Nicholas Honeywill found in that 
tiny reproduction of Deborah she had borne to Ned 
a growing delight. 

Lydia and Deborah had ever been good friends, 
and there grew at this stage of their stories a union 
very close between them. To the stronger woman 
her small sister-in-law seemed almost a pathetic 
object in her innocent joy and trust. Ned was 
Deborah's life ; it seemed that her being was merged 
in his, and that her existence held no purpose apart 
from him. She drooped like a thirsty flower when 
he was away from her ; she woke to the fulness of 
her small life and the highest brightness of her 
humble mind when he was by. Her trust and faith 
and pride in Ned were absolute. He was sun and 
moon and stars to her. He guided her going always ; 
she did not think for herself at all. 

Mentally she seemed an echo of her husband 
to most people that and no more. His thoughts 
were on her lips ; his ideas actuated her con- 
versation ; his opinions guided her in every act 
of conduct. Ned deplored his father-in-law's vague 
views, and so did Deborah ; Ned wished that his 
girl had been a boy, and so did Deborah. Lydia, 
who found herself so often at wide variance with her 
husband, once felt almost sorry for Ned's wife. She 
had suspected that difference of opinion and active 
clash of convictions were seemly and wholesome in 
wedded life ; she had held that they kept the home 
sweet ; she had guessed that a stagnancy and dead- 



3io THE HAVEN 

ness might be born of the ingenuous unity subsisting 
between Deborah and her husband. But time now 
made Lydia envy the younger wife. She, in her 
relations with Samuel, might rise to higher ecstasies 
than Deborah could feel, when her husband showed 
signs of improvement and set about the business of 
living in a worthier spirit ; but, against that, Lydia 
knew well that she had suffered as Deborah would 
never be called upon to suffer ; that she endured 
suspicions, fears, and jealousies that Ned's wife could 
never know. 

The Brokenshires were reaching that crucial time 
in married life when the link has been forged for 
ten years ; and Lydia had heard women say that 
if the fetters threaten to begin galling then, hus- 
band or wife must prepare to suffer. She was 
anxious as she had never been anxious until now; 
she began to feel an unfamiliar anger making 
her forehead burn when Samuel stayed long from 
home. She caught herself thinking mean thoughts 
concerning him ; and once or twice she did a mean 
thing. 

She steeled herself to unlock one of his private 
drawers on a certain occasion. But it was empty, 
and the suffering she endured was other than she 
expected ; for her own act stung her, no act of his. 
Her pride tormented her often ; and while she grew 
daily less happy, all men united in praising her 
husband and proclaiming his complete reformation. 
Titus Peach, his own uncle, voiced the general 
opinion. But Lydia perceived that men may con- 
tinue to admire a man though his wife has long since 
ceased from so doing. She strove to be honest and 
fair ; she looked upon the bright side of him ; but 
things were happening that began to poison her life. 
She could confide in none ; and she hesitated to fall 
out with her husband. Samuel's fourth child would 
soon be born, and, as the hour of its advent 



THE HAVEN 311 

approached, he became more solicitous for her 
welfare, and gladly obeyed her behests. He spent 
most of his time ashore now, and there was a 
whisper in Brixham that Mr. Peach designed to take 
his nephew into partnership. 

With Nicholas Honeywill's departure from Berry, 
life began in earnest for Ned. He lifted the burden, 
yet not without some dread of such responsibility. 
For many weeks he was never without the purlieus 
of the farm. Even on Sundays he would not go 
away, and those who desired to see him came to his 
home to do so. Deborah watched over him and her 
father too. The folk said that her blue sunbonnet 
was never still, and that she knew the secret of being 
in two places at once. But Ned saw most of her ; 
she and the baby usually found their way to him at 
midday. 

The roots failed, owing to prolonged summer 
droughts, during the year that followed Mr. 
Honeywill's retirement ; and Ned began farmer with 
some very special difficulties in an unfavourable 
season that eclipsed profit with loss. 

Thus it happened that every member of the family 
of Major had tribulation mingled in their cup ; and 
each, only knowing the extent of their own cares, 
felt disposed to envy the larger apparent happiness 
of the others. The father, indeed, coveted none's 
prosperity, and rejoiced to see Ned's achievements 
and Lydia's prospects ; but himself he mourned not 
a little to think that Johnny, designed in every 
sturdy limb for the sea, must now hide his grand 
virtue of courage and his rare possession of un- 
common physical strength within the shop of 
Abraham Guzzwell. 

Upon the day that Johnny was destined to take 
his first lesson in the uses of awl and leather, John 
Major sailed with many a sigh. He held it a cruel 
and improper circumstance thus to turn in the face 



312 THE HAVEN 

of those natural instincts that Providence had im- 
planted in his grandson. 

" The end, of course, will be the same," he said to 
Mr. Gilberd. "We may oppose our puny wills to 
the purpose of our Maker, and, for a moment, we 
may fondly guess that we be going to have our way ; 
but it never happens. Right is done, and right will 
be done for Johnny. I may not live to see him a 
fisherman, though fain I would do ; but to that he'll 
come, as sure as did both his grandfathers afore him. 
'Tis in the Books, and I can read it there so clear as 
though the angel was allowed to ope 'em under the 
spectacles on my nose." 

"'Tis the sea that's made the land, after all," 
confessed William. " I don't say I feel to it what 
you feel, because I do not; but 'tis a fact that 
without sailors and adventurers, and them as have 
felt the cry of the ocean and answered it and gone 
forth in the name of man's curiosity without such 
the world would have stood still and the heathen 
would never have had the light." 

"Very well said, William. 'Tis the first life and 
the best life. Else why did Jesus Christ go to the 
sea for His mates and to the fishers for His disciples? 
He knowed, none better, what the sea does for the 
human creature. And when a boy have the very 
call of the sea in his blood, when he pretty well spits 
Stockholm tar, as you might say, and knows more 
of the workings of wind and weather than many 
a grown man ; when he's handier with the rope than 
anything, and loves foul weather better than fine, I 
say 'tis a flouting of common sense and reason to coop 
his curly head under a roof and put a cobbler's 
awl in his hand and make him learn to build boots 
instead of wear 'em." 

" I lay he fought against it," said Tom Honeywill, 
who was now full fledged, and sailed as second hand 
of the ' Jack and Lydia.' 



THE HAVEN 313 

" He fought and he fought, and I don't say he've 
done fighting," answered Mr. Major. " He's a fisher- 
man at heart, and after he's spoiled a bit of good 
leather and showed Guzzwell the manner of child 
he happens to be, I'm hopeful that shoemaker 
will make my son-in-law see more sense than 
I can." 

As he spoke the trawler's boy, a stout youth 
of fourteen, suddenly climbed out of the fore- 
castle. 

His freckled face had turned very pale and his 
brown eyes were full of terror. His knees shook 
beneath him and his mouth hung open. 

Honeywill ran forward and steadied him. 

" Good powers, Frank ! What's the matter ? " he 
asked. 

Frank's teeth chattered. He clutched Tom Honey- 
will's arm and looked behind him. 

" There's something alive forward ! " he said at 
last. " There's some gert monstrous thing stowed 
away under the sails ! " 

" A rat, I warrant." 

" A rat ban't big enough to heave up a sail. 'Tis 
so big as a bear, and I heard un grunting." 

The 'Jack and Lydia ' was now standing off 
Plymouth on her way ' round land.' The North 
Channel happened to be fishing well again after 
two barren years, and John Major was among 
the first of Brixham men to avail himself of the 
news. 

A moment later, before Tom could reach the 
forecastle ladder, the mystery of the unknown 
passenger was solved. A small, filthy-faced boy, 
with yellow curly hair and blue eyes, climbed on 
deck, rose to his feet and came aft. He panted 
defiance, and, before he spoke, cast his eyes ashore 
that he might learn how much green water rolled 
between him and the hated land. 



314 THE HAVEN 

Johnny!" cried Mr. Major, "Johnny .Broken- 
shire ! What does this mean ? " 

" Lord ! The sinful imp ! A stowaway on his 
own gran'father's boat ! Whoever heard the like ? " 
cried William Gilberd, from the tiller. 

Johnny preserved a courageous manner and stated 
the situation from his standpoint. 

" I made it up to come more'n a month ago, when 
my father said as old Abe Guzzwell was to get hold 
on me. I didn't tell nobody ; and last night, an 
hour afore you was going to sail, I rowed out with 
Mr. Coombes him as hates father. And afore he 
went off in the ' Brown Mouse,' he put me aboard 
the ' Jack 'n' Lyddy,' an' told me to lie doggo for'ard 
till us was well away. And I shouldn't have come 
out for a good bit yet, but I was groaning wi' hunger, 
and Frank heard me. An' God's my judge I won't 
go for a shoemaker ! So now then ! " 

Tom Honeywill was eating. He broke a pasty in 
two and gave Johnny the larger portion. 

" Three cheers for you, John ! I'm with you, and 
I'd have done the same," he said. 

Then Mr. Major spoke, and his words struck chill 
upon his grandson's ear. 

" Honour your father that your days may be long 
in the land, John Brokenshire. Don't think that 
'tis any joy to me to see you here ; and your father 
mad, and your mother breaking her heart for fear. 
You'm a bad, bad boy." 

Then he turned to Gilberd. 

" Us'll run into Plymouth this instant moment," 
he said. 

The sullen Johnny was sent forward while William 
and the child's grandfather held earnest speech. 
Then the trawler, with a fair wind, foamed under 
the Mewstone and soon cast anchor off the Bar- 
bican. 

But the time, though short, had sufficed to modify 



THE HAVEN 315 

Mr. Major's plans. A new hope suddenly dawned 
in his sanguine heart. 

The skipper went ashore presently, and sent a 
telegram to his daughter's husband. He explained 
that Johnny had hidden by night in the * Jack and 
Lydia.' He offered to bring him home, and gave 
Samuel an hour to decide whether Johnny should 
return or set sail again. 

It happened that on the morning of his boy's 
disappearance, Samuel had a lengthy conversation 
with Mr. Guzzwell while he waited to hear news of 
the runaway. Brokenshire was not anxious. He 
knew Johnny's rare power of self-preservation, 
and he doubted not that the boy had taken law 
into his own hands and would presently be caught 
and sent home. But that he was at sea he did 
not guess until the shoemaker himself prophesied 
the truth. 

" He's gone with the boats," said Mr. Guzzwell. 
" I'd lay the price of a pair of my best uppers to a 
brad that he's afloat. And, if you're a wise man, 
you'll let him stop there. I called him in the shop a 
week agone, and he told me, quite civil, that he'd 
never be any use to me or any shore-going trades- 
man. And he meant it all. Let him try. Call 
home your own green youth. What pair of horses 
could ever have dragged you out of your father's 
boat when you was big enough to go in it ? " 

" He's useless yet only ten year old." 

" Let his grandfather judge of that." 

They were still arguing when Lydia hastened 
from home with John Major's telegram ; and, in less 
than an hour later, Johnny's grandfather received a 
reply. 

" Let him stop and be damned. S.B" 

With beating heart and eagerness almost tremulous 
Mr. Major took his grandson to a slop shop and 
made a hasty choice of garments* 



316 THE HAVEN 

When darkness came the Eddystone was flashing 
its far-flung beam upon Johnny's eyes. He felt a 
very great and a very successful man ; but during 
the night, in a short, choppy sea, the runaway fell 
exceeding sick a circumstance that cast some gloom 
upon his triumph. 



CHAPTER V 

THE adventures of Johnny Brokenshire in the North 
Channel the things that he saw and the things that 
he learned came duly to his mother's ears when,, 
after a fairly successful month at sea, the * Jack and 
Lydia' returned to her port. But Johnny's father 
took a strong line, and to his wife's sorrow and Mr, 
Major's satisfaction refused to have anything more 
to do with his eldest son. Samuel did not bargain 
without his host, and a measure of his anger was 
doubtless affected ; but it answered the purpose : 
John Major solemnly undertook the career of 
Johnny, and received him into his house from that 
day forward. The boy was still too young to go 
to sea, and his grandfather decreed that two full 
years must elapse before he could take his place in 
the 'Jack and Lydia.' Therefore Johnny, much to 
his regret, was sent back to school and kept strictly 
to his books. 

"In two years," said Samuel, u he may have gathered 
enough sense to refuse fishing when the time comes." 
But John Major feared no such thing. Johnny was 
inoculated with a month on deep water ; he would 
never turn back now. 

He lived with the Majors, and was brought up on 
his grandfather's pattern. Him the boy loved well,, 
trusted, and exalted into a great hero. The steady 
strain of Mr. Major's fixed opinions and masterful 

317 



318 THE HAVEN 

belief in Providence bore fruit even upon a heart so 
young. Samuel doubted when his wife gave details 
of Johnny's goodness ; but all responsibility had 
been shifted from his shoulders, and he felt well 
content to let his boy develop under conditions so 
admirable. 

Mrs. Michelmore was fond of Johnny, but while 
not secretly averse from his permanent return, yet 
openly declared that this was an added anxiety and 
another cross. 

" The straw will come which will break the camel's 
back," she assured her brother ; " and this may very 
likely be the one. If I sink under this boisterous 
young creature, you needn't mind. I shall do my 
duty to him and to you as long as I'm spared. But 
how you can think that you are doing yours by 
taking him from his lawful guardian and beginning 
the business of being a father all over again, I sup- 
pose you know ; I don't pretend to know. He shall 
find a pious and a Christian great-aunt in me, of 
course. And if I can steady his over-hopeful, cock- 
sure character it shall be done." 

" 'Tis better he should cheer you up than you 
should cast him down," answered her brother. " 'Tis 
a great responsibility to have a young thing on your 
hands ; but to me 'tis also a great joy and delight. 
You can't grow old while you've got a bit of youth 
like him in the house. You can't be for ever looking 
on the dark side while such a bit of live hope 
harbours with you." 

" 'Tis very well ; but if you don't look after the 
shadows, they'll soon mar the sunshine," declared 
Mrs. Michelmore. " You don't see no faults in him, 
and 'tis ever my thankless task to point 'em out." 

" The faults of youth the faults you expect with 
the higher virtues. I want to have faults of a sort 
in a decent boy. I'd rather he fought than not, 
and I'd rather he played truant now and again than 



THE HAVEN 319 

not. And other things, too small to call faults in 
my opinion. But he's honest and straight, and he's 
generous, and shares with his school-mates ; and, 
though dull at his books, he's amazing rich in brain 
power for practical purposes, and he can argue in a 
way that much amazes me." 

" You didn't ought to let him argue. Who ever 
heard of a young boy arguing? " 

" You'll find one in the New Testament," answered 
Mr. Major. " Given the intellects, 'tis our duty to 
lift 'em up and enlarge 'em. And that's what I 
do with Johnny. He's laming something wonderful 
in all branches. I want to bring out the Major in 
him and baffle the Brokenshire, and that's what 
I'm doing ; because the Major blood is sound, but 
there's a streak in the Brokenshire blood that we 
all know must be kept under if he's to be a successful 
man in the eyes of his Maker." 

" Brokenshire's successful enough," she answered. 
<f He've crawled up the sleeve of that weak-willed 
tanner, and without a doubt the barking yard will 
go to him when Titus passes away." 

" Why not ? He's Peach's first heir. For my part 
I shan't be sorry to see Samuel come ashore for 
good and all. He does less and less afloat, and 
once he gives it up, the temptation to come by money 
dishonestly may leave him. He's not drinking, and 
he's going straight at present." 

Mrs. Michelmore sniffed. 

" Is he ? I think he's only going straight in one 
direction, because it makes it all the easier for him 
to go crooked in another," she said. "What he's 
after just now belongs to the shore, not the sea. 
I don't keep my ears open for bad news ; but all 
the same I'm not deaf. One can't help hearing the 
rumours, and one can't help seeing the trouble, where 
'tis plain for any understanding creature to see 
on your daughter's face." 



320 THE HAVEN 

Thus the cares of Lydia first came to Mr. Major's 
ear after his grandson had, for six months, been 
living with him. But more Mrs. Michelmore refused 
to say. She left her brother concerned and sus- 
picious ; yet when John saw Lydia, asked her to 
put her trust and confidence in him, and told her 
frankly that her aunt believed her unhappy, she 
declared that it was not so, and assured her father 
that she had nothing to confide. 

" Men are men, not angels," she said. " I haven't 
been well educated for nothing, and I'm not going to 
take narrow views, though it may be very surprising 
to see a wife and a mother take broad ones. Sam's 
a good husband, and I have his money ; and the 
children are being brought up as well as we can 
afford. Tell Aunt Emma not to listen so much to 
silly gossip ; and if you want to know what a good 
man thinks of Samuel, ask Uncle Titus. We all 
live here together, and if each one of us have a 
little trouble here and there well, as you say so 
often, this is earth, not heaven, and if earth was 
heaven, none would want to set their hopes any 
higher." 

Mr. Peach came in at this moment, and Lydia 
referred to him. 

" Here's father come for Samuel's character," she 
said. " And I've told him that I'm prejudiced in 
my husband's favour, perhaps, but that you can give 
him the truth." 

" I can I can," answered Titus. " And the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth, I can relate. In a 
word, Samuel has come to his own character at last, 
and, as a bit of a student of human nature, I've 
proved that 'tis a case where the sea was a bad 
companion for a man, and led him into mischief. 
You shake your head, Major, but I'm right for once 
in a way. The sea may drive the fear of God into 
some natures, and I don't deny it ; but for some 



THE HAVEN 321 

there's no place like the shore, and a character that's 
flighty with the sea dancing under it, will settle down 
on the solid earth and become a credit to his friends 
and neighbours. Samuel was faulty in the past 
nobody would admit it quicker than him ; but that 
was only because he hadn't found his proper calling. 
He was on the wrong road just like Ned was, only 
he didn't see so quick as Ned. But now 'tis clear as 
light that my nephew was born to be a sail-tanner ; 
and though he've come into the profession late in 
life, as you might say, still 'tis in him ; and I believe 
he'll make inventions and be known widely in the 
sail-tanning world afore any of us are much older. 
Where is he now, for instance?" 

"Gadding about in London, they tell me," said 
Mr. Major. 

"Not at all," answered the trustful Titus. "In 
London he certainly is ; but why ? Not to gad about, 
I do assure you. He's looking into the way they 
dress the sails of the Thames barges, and I'll lay my 
life he'll pick up some useful crumbs of learning all 
on my account You can't deny of Samuel that he's 
thorough, and when he wants to know about a thing, 
he leaves no stone unturned to come at it. Why, 
such is his zeal on my account, that he's away from 
home as often, if not oftener, than a fisherman isn't 
he, Lyddy?" 

' He's away a great deal now," she admitted. 

" Here, there, and everywhere," continued Titus. 
" Busy as a bird bringing food to its young. And 
already we be taking up with new ideas at the 
works me and Samuel." 

" Very large-minded in you," said Mr. Major, " for 
men at our age find it hard to do with new-fangled 
notions. And, be it as 'twill, your own way of 
tanning won't be beat in a minute, and I hope you 
won't allow Samuel or any other man to meddle 
with it." 

21 



322 THE HAVEN 

"Have no fear. He knows what my system be 
worth." 

Lydia had left her father and uncle together, and 
Mr. Major took the opportunity to ask a further 
question. 

" My sister was hinting, as she often do, that she'd 
heard Sam was a little neglectful of his wife, and 
didn't pay her all the attention she ought to have. 
They live along with you, Titus, so perhaps you'll 
tell me if 'tis so." 

" No, most certainly not," declared Mr. Peach 
stoutly. " I speak as a bachelor, and know nought 
of the married state and its secrets," he added ; " but 
I can say this : that my nephew's a loving husband 
and a most affectionate father. Lydia has the best 
his purse can bring ; and he's frank and open and 
cheerful, and, in fact, a very reasonable, proper man 
since he's come ashore. And though you've got his 
firstborn, don't you think he isn't keen as a hawk 
about the child. He often inquires at the school 
how he's getting on, and he often, unseen, has a peep 
of him ; and Lydia has to tell him everything about 
the boy from week to week. Not that your Johnny's 
a patch on my Titus, as I've always said. Why, 
Titus have passed John in book-larning a'ready, 
and he've a head for figures that's far beyond his 
father's ! " 

" He gets it from Lyddy," answered the fisherman. 
" She has a touch with 'rithmetic unknown in my 
family, but common in her mother's. I'm very glad 
it have come down to your Titus, for 'twould have 
been a pity for such a useful art to drop out of the 
race." 

The chat did not terminate immediately, but Mr. 
Peach, from his own somewhat sexless standpoint, 
quite reassured Sam's father-in-law. He applauded 
Samuel's energies, and did not dream that his motives 
were double, or that private need for more money 



THE HAVEN 323 

was possibly responsible for increased activity in 
making it. 

Another topic rose before the old men parted, and 
the owner of ' Laburnum Villa ' spoke of his new 
neighbour, Nicholas Honeywill. 

" Tis strange how we be all wrapped up together 
your family and mine," he declared. " For, since 
farmer left Berry Head and came down beside me, 
I've seen a deal of his daughter and your son. And 
their child have took to the grotto something 
wonderful just like all children do. In fact, if a 
child didn't like my grotto, I should guess there was 
something wrong with its nature. And Honeywill 
himself ban't above smoking a pipe in it of a Sunday 
afternoon." 

" I hope you say the word in season, Titus, and try 
and get him into a properer view of religion." 

" No," answered the other ; " I haven't your clever- 
ness in that direction. Honeywill be fixed in his 
opinions, and, what's more, there's something you 
can say for them." 

Mr. Major was perturbed. 

" If you can't shake him, for God's sake don't let 
him shake you," he said. " See what his views do 
for a man in sorrow. Look how his wife's death 
wrecked him. Whereas, if he'd known what it all 
meant as I did when mine went on before he'd 
have " 

" Make no mistake," interrupted Mr. Peach. " The 
man's going on very well, and he's a deal more 
cheerful also. So much have he improved and 
steadied down, that Ned tells me he talks of 
actually going up to Berry Farm and spending a day 
or two there presently." 

" You astonish me, for he vowed, not two months 
ago, as nothing would ever drag him there no more. 
' I should see her at every turn I should fancy I 
heard her voice calling from every corner.' That was 



324 THE HAVEN 

his word to me, Titus. And he meant it, for tears 
failed down his whiskers as he spoke." 

" Time works wonders, and the merciful God Who 
invented time meant it to do so," answered Peach. 
" No doubt Honeywill felt like that a bit ago, and 
the spirit often returns yet ; and sometimes, if we'm 
sitting late, as our manner is, and the fire burns 
low, and he'd had his second tot which always does 
away the good of the first he'll sink back and take 
the dark view. But, speaking generally, when the 
rheumatism holds off him and the weather's fair and 
Ned's news is good, Honeywill takes -brighter views. 
He's fatter since his wife died, and though he seems 
to hold 'tis treason to her in a measure, that he should 
be so, yet he can't deny it. And fat means an easy 
spirit, when all's said." 

But though the widower had in truth promised 
to visit Ned at Berry Farm and even stop some days 
with his own, the actual event was put off from 
month to month until another half-year had slipped 
by. Then, yielding to the importunities of Deborah, 
Mr. Honeywill nerved himself for what was destined 
to be no small ordeal, and returned to his old home. 
He purposed staying for a week, if his sentiments 
rendered it possible, and he little guessed the plot 
which Ned and his wife had hatched in secret. Their 
urgent hope and ambition was to bring the old man 
back again to Berry ; and they trusted that renewed 
experience of the ancient life and its comforts and 
familiar happenings, might achieve a change in 
Nicholas Honeywill and tempt him to return. They 
believed that the vision of his wife had dimmed for 
him, and that now, after more than a year was spent, 
it might be possible for him to live again amid the 
scenes where her days had passed. 

He came, and found the sharpest pinch at first. 
The young people had more love than tact, and the 
things that hurt Mr. Honeywill they could neither 



THE HAVEN 325 

feel nor guess. A thousand strands bound him to the 
inanimate objects round about him ; a thousand 
heartstrings vibrated to the spectacle of this familiar 
environment. To them a chair or a table was no 
more than the thing that it appeared ; to them a 
picture or a china ornament said nothing more than 
it said to any other beholder ; but to the man 
these household trifles dated back full often to a 
time before his children were born : they wakened 
memories, some gracious, some beautiful, all sad from 
his present standpoint. 

Despite his rational survey of life, despite the fact 
that his wife had never rilled his days or made the joy 
of them, now he mourned her, and believed that his 
grief was largely remorse. He accused himself of 
having valued her too little ; he judged himself very 
hardly ; his discomfort was too acute to be endured. 

The old man, indeed, erred in his estimates, and 
attributed to his wife's death much of the misery 
of this return home that belonged rightly to other 
causes. He missed her indeed, but he missed 
more the atmosphere which she had created and 
which had now vanished for ever from the home 
of youth. 

Deborah and Ned strove to hearten him ; and while 
unconsciously they hurt also, yet the balance was to 
the good. In process of time Nicholas began to be 
accustomed to the new order and less often to regret 
the old. With admirable intentions Deborah had 
hidden away numberless memorials of her mother, 
but Mr. Honeywill seemed to retain each one of 
them in his memory, and desired them again in their 
familiar places. Thus, little by little, he brought 
back the old conditions and set things as they were 
wont to stand. His selfishness hid from him the 
fact that by so doing he altered the arrangements 
that seemed good to Ned and Deborah ; but they 
grudged no rehabilitation, for each seemed to promise 



326 THE HAVEN 

that the old man was becoming reconciled to his 
return. 

Now, some pang or discomfort prompted Nicholas 
to depart ; and now, some agreeable incident tempted 
him to stay. Deborah never wearied of pressing her 
father to leave them no more, and Ned, too, was very 
anxious that he should remain. 

Mr. Honeywill hesitated long, and finally determined 
to come back. 



CHAPTER VI 

Now upon the secure hour and happy life of Ned 
Major there dawned an evil day. Mr. Honeywill 
settled into some twilit happiness again as the months 
passed at Berry Farm. He revived old ways, and 
Deborah, albeit she thought the new ones best, had 
no heart to raise any question. Among other customs 
that his father-in-law begged Ned to retain was the 
old fashion of gleaning, and the young man, without 
a rueful thought, consented. Thus it happened that 
in early September there came to the great cornfield 
on Berry Head a little crowd of the humblest folk, 
and Nicholas Honeywill, looking back through an 
avenue of fifty years, remembered his younger days 
and dwelt again among them. 

He came down to the cornfields himself, and 
chatted with ancient women who were there to 
carry the wheat that their grandchildren gleaned. 

The yellow fields glittered with stubble spread 
under a bright sky, and, above, rrtasses of broken 
cloud flew, like wild birds, before a furious wind. 
The sun was in Libra once more, and a forerunner 
of autumnal storms had already struck land and sea. 
To-day a man could not look into the eye of the 
wind, a woman could barely stand against it ; but 
the children enjoyed such a rough salutation. They 
shouted to each other over the sheared cornfields, 
and their little shapes were bent everywhere as they 

327 



328 THE HAVEN 

gathered the last of the harvest. Some elder maidens 
also worked among them, and others, making pleasure 
of it, talked with their companions and gleaned not 
very diligently. Here and there a lonely figure 
toiled in earnest for this gift of bread, and gathered 
a stout sheaf before evening fell. 

The wind made the cliff- edge dangerous, and 
anxious mothers kept an eye upon their venturesome 
little ones. But children have a magical way of 
vanishing from the fondest eye ; and a child it was 
that vanished now. 

Low walls ran to the west of Berry Farm corn- 
fields, and under one of them several persons were 
collected to shelter from the riot of the wind. The 
footpath along the cliff traversed this wall by a rift 
therein, and beyond was a strange place called the 
' Cup,' where the little track ran above a deep and 
hollow depression on the cliff. This slope met the 
wind and shone, for it was silver-bright just now 
with countless calyces of the knapweed. They 
sparkled under the sunshine and made brilliant the 
sides of the hollow. On this steep there throve also 
little autumn squills and the rare splendour of goldi- 
locks. The place was purple and gold with these 
flowers, and, as a blossom will tempt insects to their 
death with insidious splendours that lead to a heart 
from which there is no return, so now this treacherous 
and beautiful slope, slippery to the foot under its 
dead grasses and scoured by sudden fierce gusts of 
the wind, offered dire peril to any small adventurer 
who might descend upon it. The sides of the Cup 
were very steep. They broke off abruptly at a 
precipice fifty feet high, and beneath them deep 
water ran when the tide was up, while many rocks 
were revealed at the ebb. To the left of the 
aperture ascended crags fringed with samphire and 
great tree mallows ; to the right, abruptly fell another 
cliff to the sea. A little bay subtended this spot, 



THE HAVEN 329 

and to-day, the furious wind and dazzling, storm- 
broken sunshine, weaving together upon its face, 
fretted strange and beautiful patterns over it. Like 
some silken fabric of blue all fire-shotten, the bay 
rolled to the cliffs, and there the heavy water leapt in 
volume, thundered among old caverns, and spouted 
aloft to deck the ledges with feathers of foam. These 
ascended until sunshine set a thousand jewels glitter- 
ing upon their crests, and then they sank tumultuous 
down upon the turmoil beneath. 

The sea, in a great, white-capped welter of running 
billows, fled before the wind, and only a close-reefed 
sailing ship or two rolled up Channel. Wide shadows 
of purple raced over the green-silver waters ; here 
and there sped solitary squalls that tore the heads off 
the waves, lashed up their hollows, and then, in grey 
clouds of rain, hid the whole seething whirl that they 
had created. Such storms passed swiftly and the 
sky cleared again behind them. 

Beneath the Cup an old man worked in a boat 
under the cliffs. He was dragging up crab-pots and 
running some risk of getting swamped. The rocks 
overhung above him, and crying gulls circled about 
them or swooped in great curves round the boat. 
The wind treated them roughly, and rising from time 
to time, their grey breasts caught the shock of it 
and they slid away along its planes and turned half 
over in air and shot aloft, then fought up against 
it again, or cheated it by sinking into the partial 
shelter of the bay. 

Deborah Major, her husband and her child, came 
down after noon to watch the gleaners. Ned gazed 
somewhat doubtfully at the generous masses of corn 
he had sacrificed to Mr. Honeywill's tradition ; his 
wife fell into speech with a neighbour, and for the 
space of half a minute she loosed the hand of her 
little girl, a baby nearly three years old at this 
time. 



330 THE HAVEN 

The ancient gammer now interested Ned's wife 
with pictures from the past. Deborah laughed once, 
then restrained her face to sadness while the speaker 
told of sorrow. 

Death's dark hand already lifted over the young 
woman and the old one ; but it was the girl that he 
had come to gather. Deborah missed her baby, and 
turned round just in time to see the child pass through 
the wall and trot round to the other side, where the 
pathway skirted the flowery slope beyond. She 
called to Ned, but he was too far off to reach his 
little one as quickly as Deborah herself might do 
so. Therefore she started to run, and presently 
stood on the rim of the Cup. Her child was already 
half-way down it. The small thing looked up and 
laughed. She was deliberately rolling over and 
over among the flowers for delight of rolling, as 
children love to do. 

The mother shrieked, and her husband heard and 
came running ; but he was too late, and all that 
he saw, when he hastened into the Cup, was 
Deborah's sunbonnet, like a blue butterfly, caught 
and fluttering at the edge of the cliff. 

She had reached the precipice at the same moment 
as her child. She had clutched at it, and gone 
over with it. 

Ned heard a man shout below, and at risk of his 
own life went down the cliff to the beach fifty yards 
further on. A moment later, and the boat came 
up to him with his wife and child in it. The baby 
was screaming ; but her mother had entered eternal 
silence. 

" They corned over like two mortal birds, and me 
not ten yards from the place they failed. A bit 
nearer, and, God's my Judge ! they'd have failed in 
the boat and stove her in. And the li'l cheel 
dropped on deep water, and I grabbed her in a 
moment, and I don't think she's hurt, though her 



THE HAVEN 331 

wits may be gone for ever ; but the little woman 
she corned on a rock on her back, and 'twas a terrible 
cruel scrunch, master. She'm dead, poor lamb, 
without a doubt." 

A life, colourless to all save the man who loved 
her, was gone out ; a small flower that few had 
ever turned to regard was broken off the stalk and 
destroyed. But with this uneventful, unregarded 
existence there passed the portion of another. Ned 
stood dazed, and many people came crowding down 
to the bay. When they reached him he had his 
wife in his arms, and his breast and chin were 
bathed in her blood. 

This man once believed that the world had never 
known such joy as his ; he once had thought that 
none had ever felt such bliss ; and now he supposed 
his sorrow the awfullest that had yet stricken man. 
He cried out, as countless young spirits have cried 
out down the ages in their hours of highest grief 
and joy, nor knew that at life's feast only the diners 
change, not the dishes. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE blow that untimely chance had struck Ned 
Major was the more severe in that his short life 
had been so free of misfortune. At three-and- 
twenty a man is not tuned to suffer all that man 
can suffer. An age so tender offers some sort of 
shield against the full possibilities of human agony 
that face the adult. But so much the more, on 
one side, was his present woe augmented. He 
looked ahead into life, and felt that without Deborah 
it must prove an eternity of torment. He pictured 
perhaps threescore years dragged through without 
her, and, not knowing that memory is the plaything 
of time, believed he must go mad. 

Tumbledown Dick, now crawling out his fag-end 
of ruined days, gave Ned better advice than any 
other man. 

They met, and Varwell expressed grief and 
showed it. 

" Nobody can say anything ; nobody can do any- 
thing," he told Ned. "Don't think there's con- 
solation in this world, or any other, for the fix 
you're in. Man be just as dumb and useless afore 
your plight as they were afore your poor wife's 
when she dropped over the cliff. But call home 
this, and I can say it better than some folk, since 
I'm at death's door myself and only waiting for 
him to open it. Remember that 'tis no great hard- 

332 



THE HAVEN 333 

ship for the happy to die like she died. Don't 
trouble about her. She's all right, and if there's 
a good time coming, she's there waiting ; and if 
there's nought coming, then she's gone out like a 
candle, and with no more feeling. Whether or no, 
the dead be quite untroubled ; so the misery's only 
yours, and other men have had to go through as 
bad and worse. What you've got to do is to work 
like hell work day and night work till nature 
shuts your eyes and makes you sleep. And, when 
you waken, rise and work on. You're a Christian, 
ban't you ? Well, now's the time to see what 'tis 
all worth, and what you really believe, and what 
you only thought you believed. Work work 
work, Ned. When a man's happy, then let him 
take a bit of holiday, and see the best life can show 
him ; and when he's hit hip and thigh like you, 
then let him work. Work at anything work at 
everything. Put yourself in the plough and pull 
it, and let the horse eat up the hedge. Work ; and 
if you can get a pinch of peace out of prayer, then 
pray too, and go to sleep on your knees for weari- 
ness. But work's best. You've got to put time 
between you and this trouble, and nought makes 
time fly like work. That's one of the good reasons 
why I never did none. An idle man's life lasts 
twice as long as a busy one's. You ax a bee or a 
butterfly whose time slips away the quickest." 

Dick talked and jested, and Ned suffered it, coming 
from him, and felt the belter for hearing him. In- 
stinct had already driven the bereaved spirit of the 
youth to toil, and toil, joining with time, presently 
brought a new psychologic train of impressions and 
revelations to Ned. 

Anon, he became sick to weariness and loathing 
of work. He resented it, and found himself in revolt 
against it. For some days he desisted and roamed 
idle ; then his thoughts became as giants to torture 



334 THE HAVEN 

him, and he turned again to hard labour as the only 
anodyne. Thrice this happened, and with winter a 
spirit of extreme restlessness mastered him, so that 
he could not toil long at any one thing, but became 
desultory and irregular. Then he found himself 
hating the work that he had loved, and seeking 
labour of a different character. 

He separated himself largely from his kind at this 
season, and turned from his father and his sister to 
Nicholas Honeywill. It was a dumb, blood instinct 
that took him to the old farmer. He cared best 
to be with him, because this man was the father of 
Deborah, and she had won from him some of her 
little ways. Grotesquely he glimpsed her in the 
man, and won a refinement of torture from accidental 
trifles that reminded him of his wife. His love took 
no shape of fuss and pother about her grave ; he 
kept away from it. Neither did any cruel association 
of ideas alter his affection for his child. The little 
thing suffered slight evil from her fall and shock ; 
and Ned spent much time with her, and spelled out 
daily in her face the writing of her mother. But 
she had nothing in common with Deborah, and 
promised to be cast in the Major mould of character 
and form. 

His father's sturdy piety and faith made Ned's 
gorge rise for a season, and he avoided John Major. 
Lydia was more comfort to him, because she had 
sorrow to bear of her own, and the prosperity of her 
husband was embittered for her, and made of no 
account. Her pride in success and worldly advance- 
ment had perished. She was monogamous to the 
core of her heart, and she could ill endure to be less 
than all to Samuel. That his conduct towards her 
was always generous and loving, kind and chivalrous, 
did not condone his native instincts. They made 
them the more trying to bear. 

Ned was a little troubled by this position, and even 



THE HAVEN 335 

put his own chaotic outlook from his mind and strove 
with Brokenshire. But Samuel could not be in- 
fluenced in this particular, and could not see that 
blame attached to him. He held himself an admir- 
able husband and a good father. He contended that 
every hard-working man had a right to a measure 
of amusement, and that if his pleasure hurt nobody 
else, none had a right to criticise it. To the obvious 
retort that it hurt his wife, he replied that her point 
of view alone was to blame, not his conduct. 

" If I'd been a Turk, or one of them Indian kings, 
I might have had a score of wives, and been as well 
thought upon as you," he said. " And I would have 
had," he added. "For why? because the older I 
live the more I see that God A'mighty never made 
nothing so interesting as females. They was the 
last thing He did make, and, as Tumbledown Dick 
said, 'twas natural they should be His masterpiece and 
crowning bit of cleverness." 

Against this attitude the exhortations of Lydia's 
family beat in vain, and it remained only to see 
what Lydia herself would do about it. As for Titus, 
he refused to discuss the matter, and declared that 
such problems were quite outside his experience or 
power of criticism. 

The situation dragged on without solution. Lydia 
hoped against hope ; Ned, having spoken, turned in 
upon himself once more, and came gradually to a 
frame of mind wherein he could regard consciously 
and deliberately his own emotions from week to 
week. He found that he had good days and bad 
days. At times, such was his agony and hopeless 
torment, he seemed to be living again in the hours, 
now six months old, that followed Deborah's death. 
And sometimes there fell to him passages of broken 
peace, wherein grief beat only intermittent out of 
memory, like a seventh wave from the sea or a minute 
gun breaking woefully upon the wastes of night. 



336 THE HAVEN 

The change wrought in his whole outlook and 
disposition was immense ; but it could only appear 
very gradually. Whether a catastrophe of pro- 
found character has power permanently to vitiate 
radical instincts and predilections, is unknown ; 
whether terrific experiences can alter disposition ; 
whether the clash of harsh environment may change 
human temperaments and cast a character into some 
mould that shall be enduring as well as novel this 
may be doubted ; but for the present, in the case of 
Ned Major, his sentiments suffered a transilience and 
unpheaval wherein the old passions were smothered 
and sunk deep, the old prejudices robbed of their 
former poignancy. He began to feel an earthquake 
of the mind ; he grew more restless and more 
in sympathy with restless things. The solid land 
no longer spoke to him of its comfort and comeli- 
ness, its fertility and endurance ; the sea no longer 
made him shudder as of old before its unconquerable 
spirit. 

He found himself staring out over the water for 
hours together. To his own conscious amazement 
he discovered that the thing he hated in joy was 
hated no more now that joy had winged away for 
ever and sorrow was henceforth his portion. Indeed, 
the sad alone had power to draw him now ; human 
griefs were the only matters that held him ; the 
harrowed hearts or broken bodies of his kind alone 
drew him from the monotony of his own wounds. 

On a day in late winter, when as yet the fallow 
was lifeless and the furrow brown, he looked out 
over the cliffs and fancied that the sea also was 
stricken with grief. His gentle mind, always tinged 
with sentimentality, now, in the days of misery, 
offered a fit theatre for pathetic fallacies. And he 
wove them here, while he stood and looked down 
at the grey bitterness of troubled waves driven by 
an east wind. 



THE HAVEN 337 

A strange experience overtook him in that hour, 
and, for the first time since his wife's death, he set 
out very resolutely to the scene of it. He descended 
the Cup and reached the edge ; he retraced each 
frantic moment of the past, and saw, in the weeping 
eye of his mind, her sunbonnet caught fluttering 
aloft when she went down to death. 

Below, sheltered from the wind, water lapped stone 
with a gentle susurration. The little waves cried of 
helplessness. Crestfallen they crept back from the 
rocks that spurned their embraces and tore their 
hearts out. These were the waves that had saved 
Deborah's baby ; these were the rocks that had slain 
her. He speculated morbidly on the difference to 
him if Deborah had fallen in the deep water and 
her child upon the stone. She might have been 
with him now, and the mound in the churchyard 
would have been smaller. Agony gripped him then, 
and he flung himself, face downward, on the cliff, 
unseen save by the sea-birds. They, too, entered 
into many a weary vigil. He remembered how, as 
children, he and Deborah had pretended to be 
their king and queen. A thousand, thousand times 
they had seen him and his wife together ; and 
now the gulls were watching him alone he who 
was never alone. Doubtless they wondered where 
the other part of him had gone to, and when it would 
come back again. 

Then came spring, and he found the old songs 
thereof were changed. The waking earth and the 
wonder of it cried to him in vain. His heart was 
hard. He turned his back on the green veils of 
growing corn, for they spoke of gleaning ; he felt 
poisonous trickles of hardness and cruelty run with 
his blood. There rose great trouble from the sea, 
and two boats had been lost in the rage of vernal 
equinox. He read the details, measured the sorrow 
of two homes, and found that it fell far short of his 

22 



338 THE HAVEN 

own. But daily he looked on the sea with deeper 
interest and an altered spirit. It could strike back 
as well as suffer ; it was not always conquered by 
the cliffs or ground under the keels of the ships. 
He recalled his youthful attitude, and wondered 
what mad thing had overtaken his soul to change it 
so. Every day he expected to waken and find that 
he hated the sea as of yore ; but the old fear and 
detestation returned not. Instead, he grew to feel 
a sort of kinship with it a fraternity of hunger and 
unrest, of woe and secret yearning to strike back. 

He told himself that the sea might understand 
him ; he dreamed that the sea might even soothe 
him out of her own misery ; but the prosperous and 
jocund earth neither knew nor cared. The wail of 
the sea-mew was closer to his heart than the song 
of the lark or the happy throbbing of the thrush ; 
the spume, that flew cliff-high on a March gale, held 
more subtle consolation in its quivering torment than 
the budding snow on the blackthorn or the first 
primrose in the lane. These things were for ever 
a part of his precious one ; and, for him, they were 
indeed as dead as the girl in her grave ; but the sea 
did not claim her, the sea had not slain her. It was 
possible to brood upon the water without remembering 
Deborah or the natural things that she had joyed in. 

The man could no at first credit his own strange 
revulsion of soul in this matter, and he hid it from 
others. His father's love of the sea and Honey- 
will's hatred of it alike found him impassive before 
them. Now he neither differed from the first nor 
agreed with the second. He was very silent at this 
season, and kept much alone with his work in the 
open air. Children had more power to please him 
than any adult. He saw Lydia's family, and shared 
his father's special love of the boy Johnny. 

There was coming a day now, three months hence, 
when Johnny would go to sea, and John Major 



THE HAVEN 339 

awaited this great event with a fervour and anticipa- 
tion as keen as his grandson's ; but, like all who 
loved Ned, his days had been clouded before his 
son's sorrow. 

It was a question what Ned would do, and he 
seemed incapable of deciding. His father-in-law 
desired him to stay at Berry Farm ; but he disliked 
the thought. The sea now beckoned him to bide 
within sight and sound of it ; while other forces 
drew him strongly off from the stage of his life's 
tragedy. 

So he endured, and time hastened with him. 
Years instead of months seemed to be piled upon 
his bent head until women declared that it was 
terrible to mark a youth thus age under their eyes, 
and men the thing put before them perceived its 
truth, and also grieved. As yet were manifest only 
the sad signs of his experience ; the result would 
take longer to ripen, and longer to render its account. 

So life broke in Ned Major, and, after the manner 
of life, gave what was precious in exchange for what 
was also precious. To learn is also to lose ; and 
whether the thing gained is better than the thing 
lost, who shall declare for another? And whether 
the rapture of youth is the true wine of life, and 
manhood's grey awakening only the dregs of it, who 
shall determine? 



CHAPTER VIII 

WITH passage of time the subtle seeds sowed by 
tribulation in young Major's spirit began to bear fruit ; 
and as he gathered up his forces at the inevitable 
call of life, he discovered that old interests were 
weakened to death and new ideas now reigned in 
their stead. The sea had delivered its first message 
to him without avail. His youthful soul loved the 
land, and the things that belonged to his father's 
life repelled and even appalled him. But now, after 
this master blow, a new atmosphere seemed to 
envelop Ned's spirit, and the earth, together with 
the labours of the earth, suffered a mighty declension 
in his regard. This abatement was not gradual, it 
came harshly and abruptly ; but, buried in his 
agricultural routine, week by week and month by 
month, the young man did not immediately perceive 
it. For some time he failed to realise so improbable 
a revulsion. Then he found it out and perceived 
that it must be reckoned with. More than once he 
put the claim aside as a thing too fantastic and 
unreal to regard ; more than once he strove to slight 
this strange metamorphosis of every instinct and 
passion, as some freak, bred of great sorrow and 
destined surely to pass away with flux of time. But 
it would not pass ; instead it gathered strength, and 
grew, and forced itself strenuously upon him. It 
cried out of the briny air and called from the wave- 

340 



THE HAVEN 341 

beat on the cliff ; it shook his casement window when 
the wind blew by night, and by day, in letters of fire 
or foam, shone out upon the sunlit spaces of the 
sea. 

He might not thrust it away, nor did he long wish 
to do so. Since it would not depart, he received it 
and accepted it, as of the cup that he must drink. 
He hearkened to the sea's second message, and out 
of his restless misery awakened a birth of desires 
antagonistic to all that he believed radical within 
him. The leading principle of his being had 
apparently perished with the light of his being, and 
died when Deborah died. He made no haste, but 
let the new-fledged spirit win its way. He waited 
and watched himself, and sometimes the call of the 
water grew faint and far off, and he fancied that it 
was dying, as green grief turned grey and a measure 
of fitful rest sometimes brooded on his soul ; but 
then, with renewed force, awoke the trumpet and 
rolled the beckoning wave. And with this strange 
coaction of the element that he had once abhorred, 
there waned in him his old ardour for the soil. It 
seemed, when the precious little piece of earth that 
he had loved was restored to the Mother, all earth 
changed vitally. His broken soul found earth no 
longer constant, and turned therefrom to the shifting 
and unstable kingdoms of the sea. They promised 
nothing, and pretended to offer no sure foothold or 
abiding place for man. The sea was honest ; the 
earth had betrayed him. And his torn heart bent 
steadily toward the misery of the waters ; cried with 
a newborn instinct for their companionship ; trusted 
that from them, in their power and their powerless- 
ness, might some patience and return to peace be 
won again. 

He hesitated long, and it was to Dick Varwell that 
he first explained the transformation of his spirit. 

The tramp had succumbed, and was gone into 



342 THE HAVEN 

hospital to die there. He sent for Ned and the 
young man went to see him. 

" Times be changed since we used to sit on the 
green side and tell all the wisdom that we'd gathered 
up," whispered fading Dick. " I've tumbled down 
for good and all now, Ned, and all the king's hosses 
and all Munday's bottles won't set me up again. I 
shall only tumble down once more, old chap, and 
that is off this here wonderful bed into my pit. The 
luxuries of this place ! I'm awful sorry I didn't give 
'em ' a call long ago. And the kind hearts here ! 
'Tis a most remarkable affair, and, Lord knows, I 
give 'em a lot of trouble, but they make nought of 
it, and nobody appears to wish to hasten my going 
by an hour. There's a masterpiece of a nurse what 
looks after me. A grand wife wasted is that 
woman." 

" I hope there's a chance for you yet, Dick," said 
Ned. 

" Not half a chance, or I wouldn't be here. They 
don't deal in incurables as a rule, but they be making 
an exception in my favour. I've promised I shan't 
be long. But the kindness in the world the kind- 
ness and humanity that one never knows be lurking 
in it ! And I pay 'em with laughter. Anybody can 
make a man laugh, but it takes something to make 
a woman. However, I've done it. They are all the 
better for a bit of fun, for there's not much of it 
going on here ; and there's nought like seeing the 
world through strange spectacles sometimes." 

He talked intermittently, and wandered in his 
speech. He spoke of his past, and uttered thoughts 
broken out from the silent web of their context in 
his mind. Ned listened, and said little until Varwell 
was weary. 

" Ah ! if we but saw what the trawl sees ! Why, 
then our mouths would water yes and sometimes 
our hair would stand on end. Awful things on the 



THE HAVEN 343 

floor of the ocean without a doubt all the graveless 
dead, for instance. I wish they'd dump me there to 
join 'em. A pleasant company of bones, Ned. We'd 
soon rub up a friendship, I promise you ! But in a 
pit all by oneself? A lonely thought eh ? " 

The listener was interested. 

" I've felt terrible kind to the sea again since my 
trouble, Dick." 

" And why for not ? Tis the way of nature to 
fly from what smites it. The solid land's hit you ; 
so you turn from it ; and the unsolid sea have broken 
many a widow and orphan, so they cuss it. 'Tis the 
point of view. Now I've got no quarrel with any of 
the elements not one. They've all been good to 
me after their kind even water." 

Presently he spoke again. 

" No, by God ! and I won't blame myself either ; 
I won't be so damned mean at the end as to turn 
round on ' Tumbledown Dick ' and call him my worst 
enemy. I've been a worthless, useless piece of goods ; 
and I've lived a blackguard's life ; and I've enjoyed 
it something wonderful. Lord! how I have enjoyed 
it ! I don't much want it to come back, mind you, 
because nought that tasted good once ever reaches 
quite up to the same flavour twice ; but if I had to 
go through it all again, I'd wish for nothing better 
nothing better or more interesting or spicy in its 
way. I'd even have the Justices of the Peace just 
the same. I should miss 'em and their well-meant 
babble poor, bumbling, pudding-headed things. 
'Twas part of the fun of the fair the Bench and 
the mummies rigged up on it." 

He stopped, and Ned was going to speak, but 
found no words. 

" And now the fun of the fair's over, and the lights 
be turned out for me, and the music done, and the 
last pipe smoked, Ned, and the last square drink 
drunk. They'll paint my lips with brandy on a 



344 THE HAVEN 

feather presently at the finish. A dying man can't 
drink more than a babby can. Tis a pity that, and 
seems about the saddest side of death I can picture. 
I only quarrel with them on the subject of liquor 
here. Soup ! what's soup to me ? " 

" I believe you've got a lot of life in you yet, 
Dick." 

Varwell shook his head and kept silence. Then 
Ned Major found something to say. 

" I'd like to know if the Christian faith have come 
to mean more to you of late. I don't ask out of no 
rude curiosity, Richard ; but 'tis terrible interesting 
to learn how anything wears at a great pinch, and 
I was wondering how much it had done to help me 
through the awful trouble I've had ; and then I fell 
to wondering if it had catched hold of you at all, now 
you're on your beam ends." 

" No doubt your father was in great form when 
your poor girl broke her back ? " 

" Yes, he was. 1 think I might have got a deal 
more consolation out of religion if my dear father 
had gone a bit lighter on it." 

" 'Twas a rare chance for Holy John, and I can 
hear him talking. Parson have been terrible busy 

at me too. What with him and the bluebottles 

But they all mean well men and flies and such 
poor, brainless things can't be made to understand 
that you'd rather they kept away. No doubt your 
parent thinks that 'twas the loving, watching Lord 
took your wife over the cliff; no doubt he's told 
you 'tis the same Almighty Party makes my dear 
friend Brokenshire so large-hearted over the girls ; 
and no doubt he thinks that my days was all planned 
for me and my luck arranged by the Old Gentleman 
he prays his prayers to. Perhaps so ; only I can't 
see it. I shook up parson but yesterday. I told him 
what I'll tell you, Ned ; and 'tis this: Christianity be 
like Free Trade a very fine thing if us all played 



THE HAVEN 345 

at it in earnest ; but as only a handful do and all the 
rest do not, then you see what a mess of a place 
the world is, and you find the truest Christians 
like the truest Free Traders being left farthest behind. 
What we call Christianity is all ugly make-believe 
nowadays all trying to hunt with the hounds and 
run with the hare. A prosperous Christian is 
bunkum, for not one of 'em have any more right to 
be prosperous than Christ Hisself was ; and if a 
man's well up in the world, and if a nation be on 
top, then you may bet your boots that 'twasn't 
Christianity put 'em there, but cash, or cannon, or 
brains, or luck anything but the stark teaching 
of the Lord. And if a nation yelps to a God of 
Battles, and bleats parson's stuff and sings hymns 
when it launches its righting ships, and gives God 
the praise when it cuts another nation's throat, and 
so on then you can swear that nation's fooling 
itself and its people ; and them that run that nation 
know it very well too. Christianity be nearly so 
dead as I am dead-alive, you might say, same as 
me. They be flinging half they did ought to stick 
to overboard to lighten the ship ; but, do as they 
will, it can't float much longer. The pumps are 
choked. I told chaplain these things, and he said 
'twas a pity I allowed myself to think in such an 
unlawful manner at my latter end. Christianity's 
gone/ I said to him, ' and there's nought but imita- 
tions in the market ; and folk parsons included 
be so ignorant of the real thing nowadays that they 
think the imitations are genuine.' He got nifty then, 
and answered 'twasn't for me to argue with him. 
And he hoped my eyes would be open afore they 
were shut poor young man ! He never had taken 
a drop of liquor in his life, and he never had smoked 
a shred of baccy ; and he wouldn't believe it when 
I told him I used to puff my cigarette between 
drinks afore I was weaned." 



346 THE HAVEN 

" Lydia's more comfort to me in a way than father," 
said Ned, after a pause. 

"And Samuel's more comfort to me than doctor. 
We both run on our own affairs, you and me, Ned. 
That's the way with wretched men. All you care 
about for the minute be dead, and all I ever did care 
about be going to die ; so 'tis natural that us should 
both be a bit down in the mouth. But we'll put out 
to sea together. I'll go with the tide, and so will 
you ; and my voyage be to peace and silence, beyond 
thirst or hunger or warmth or laughter ; and yours 
Lord knows where 'twill take you. Into the 'Jack 
and Lydia' for a start, I suppose. What does the 
old man say ? " 

" I've told none yet. I've only hinted of the thing 
to Lydia. ' 'Tis known that I give up at Berry Farm ; 
but my father thinks I'm going to take another small 
place somewhere ; and so does Nicholas Honeywill." 

" Tell John Major that you want to go back in his 
boat Tell him that, and then come and tell me how 
he takes it. I'd dearly like to hear of the large joy 
of that man when you break the news. He've got 
the real thing, he have the right down, earthquake 
faith that moves mountains and what's harder 
men's hearts. And if you was to do that and go to 
sea along with him, 'twould whitewash God properly 
at any rate in one man's eyes. Not that Major 
ever doubted anything that happened wasn't the best 
and properest that could happen. You tell him, Ned ; 
and come and tell me what he says, for I'd like to 
hear it." 

Mr. Varwell's conversation was cut short and Ned 
departed. But he did as Dick advised, for his mind 
had already determined upon the step, and during 
the following Sunday young Major visited his father 
and declared the thing his spirit yearned to do. 

" I suppose you'll say 'tis put into me by God, not 
by grief and restless, hopeless misery," he said. " I 



THE HAVEN 347 

don't know as to that. I only know that 'tis nearly 
a year now since my Deborah went, and I'm no 
better than I was the day after. And somehow, the 
sight of the sea be the one thing that makes 
me bear up with my life, father ; and I've got 
gradually to think that the thing I hated may be the 
only cure now. I've felt a strange, growing wish to 
be out on it, tossed by it, driven afore it, tumbled and 
stricken by it drowned by it if need be. I want to 
go back. I must go back in your boat, if you'll 
have it so ; and if not, in another." 

The deeps of the older man were shaken, and he 
doubted. His son spoke again of the desires that 
had now dominated him ; and presently, from a 
fleeting shadow of fear that this was some mental 
disaster in Ned, the father ascended on strong 
pinions of his faith and believed. Light beamed 
upon him ; to his eyes this thing appeared as a 
wonder planned from creation by the Maker of earth 
and sea. For Ned he mourned not at all. He did 
not waste a word of commiseration upon his son ; he 
did not remotely fathom the long-drawn mental tor- 
ments from which this negation of principles and in- 
stincts had been born. 

" It is the Lord's doing ! " he cried ; " but it is not 
marvellous in my eyes, Ned, because what happens 
is the seemly, proper, planned thing always and 
every time ; and it never can be marvellous to the 
eye of faith. I accept it. Your berth will be waiting 
for you this day month." 

John Major was very quiet then. He said little 
more, and felt glad when his son left him ; but his 
fervour reached a wonderful height in secret. For 
long hours he knelt and thanked the Lord that He 
had remembered His servant. At no time did he 
spend a sigh upon Ned. He rejoiced on his own 
account, and there was not a corner in his mind for 
any suspicion that the thing to happen could be other 



348 THE HAVEN 

than very good. That this birth had been torn from 
a matrix of awful ill-fortune, from bitter griefs and 
from heartshaking sorrows, he did but partly recog- 
nise. He saw it, rather as a deed predestined for 
his son's justification and eternal welfare. Therefore 
he received it with deep religious joy. He never 
wondered why it had come about ; he only marvelled 
that God was pleased so mightily to bless him and 
crown his white hairs with this unutterable boon. 

From John's standpoint the propriety and seemli- 
ness of such a progression were absolute. William 
Gilberd called to visit him during the evening of this 
day, and Mr. Major explained the inevitable fitness 
of the thing that Ned was doing. 

" Earth be a haven to him no more : the sea's his 
haven henceforrard. J Twas always planned so, and 
intended so, but he couldn't understand, and the 
Lord was forced to make it plain. All has changed, 
William, and the voice of the sea that frightened 
his childhood, calls to his manhood now. Life has 
altered the meaning of earth and sea to my Ned. 
Spirit to spirit he comes back to the water, because 
he'm grown restless, like the sea, and 'tis the only 
thing that can give him peace, and 'tis the only thing 
that his Maker ever meant to give him peace." 

" Such affairs be a mystery, no doubt ; but the 
world's full of 'em, and the sea's fuller still," declared 
Gilberd. " And so Paul Larkin will have to find 
a job in another boat ; and that'll be a troublesome 
mystery to him, for certain, because he thought 
that he was good for years along with us." 

" There's no puzzle in nothing at all," answered 
John Major. " Mystery, as you call it, be only a 
veil drawn between human life and faith in the 
Almighty. Trust him and the sky's always clear. 
Sometimes, fishing, us can't behold the earth or sea 
for fog, William ; but you'll find 'tis often blue over- 
head if you only look that way. 



THE HAVEN 349 

" And now you and your son and your grandson 
will all be sailing in one boat a thing as looked far 
beyond any earthly power to bring about. Three 
generations together ! Ban't that a mystery, John ? " 

" No, William ; a wonderful act of the watching, 
loving God that's all. Nothing to His power, but 
amazing in our eyes, though it didn't ought to amaze 
us. 'Twas written in the Book from the first ; and 
now our lives have come to that page, and 'tis there, 
turned over for us to read," 

" You'll be gay and proud about it, I reckon. It 
means a deuce of a lot to you ? " 

Upon that aspect the elder could not speak. He 
held up his hand and shook his head. Then he put 
his hand over his eyes, and soon a tear rolled down 
from under it, 



CHAPTER IX 

SMOKE from many chimneys reddened beneath a 
setting sun, and Brixham lay, mellowed to beauty, 
in the roseal evening hour. Boats were passing out 
from the harbour on the tide. They sailed from the 
deep shore shadows, they took the light upon their 
sails and glowed all russet and tawny. 

Ned Major came along the quay with his father, 
descended a flight of steps and entered the dinghy 
that waited for them. Gilberd and the boy, Johnny, 
rowed, and soon Ned found himself approaching the 
* Jack and Lydia/ where she tugged at her moorings 
in the running tide. Seaward a fine trawling breeze 
blew, and sunset colours rained in red gold over the 
fretted water. 

Ned marked the old familiar names as he came 
again among the fishing-boats. Here were the 
'Pilgrim' and the 'Bread Winner/ the 'Provider' 
and the ' Smiling Morn/ the ' Alpha/ the ' Ocean's 
Gift/ the 'Silver Spray/ the 'True Vine.' These 
craft and the names of them now uttered a harmony 
upon one man's heart, and Ned appreciated some- 
thing of the spirit that had inspired their sponsors. 
The ' Night Hawk ' got to sea ten minutes before 
them. She belonged to Trust and Mutter now, and 
Brokenshire was interested in her no more. 

Then John Major and his son and his grandson 
sailed out together. The old man found it hard to 



THE HAVEN 351 

preserve self-restraint. Only when a strong easterly 
breeze freshened at nightfall did the business of the 
boat distract him. 

Berry Head died away and land was lost to sight. 
After dark the trawl went overboard and Ned lived 
again through the old sensations arid experiences. 
One by one the sounds and sights and smells came 
back to him, and came close. It seemed impossible 
that more than ten years separated him from his last 
voyage. Nothing was altered but his stature and 
his soul. He kept aloof a little, and neither his father 
nor Gilberd thrust themselves upon him. Johnny 
had been in the boat a month, and his grandfather 
declared him equal to any brace of ordinary boys. 

After the trawl was shot, Ned went forward and 
sat alone, with his spirit bare to the sea, that her salt 
sting might touch his wounds and torment them to 
healing. 

He ate of the hot supper presently, and was 
cheerful and content. He did not fail to see his 
father's subdued exaltation, and felt glad that an old 
man could be so happy. Johnny chattered and 
essayed to teach Ned his business. The youthful 
mind but partially understood that his uncle had 
worked in the ' Jack and Lydia ' before he was born. 
The trawler had shifted her winter sails when last 
in harbour, and was now under her larger summer 
canvas. It needed some shortening. 

John Major and his son took the morning watch, 
and after the trawl had been drawn and shot again, 
they turned in while Gilberd and the boy kept the 
deck. 

His highest hopes and longings satisfied, the elder 
first prayed, then stretched upon his bunk and heaved 
a great sigh that echoed the sigh of the sea at his 
ear. Absolute contentment was in the sound of it. 
He said a few words to Ned, and felt glad when his 
son prayed also. To be thus brought into the 



352 THE HAVEN 

intimacy of the past to see Ned upon his knees 
beside him consummated the old man's happiness. 
There was no room in his heart for one sad thought. 

He slept soon and spoke in his sleep. He laughed 
and turned, and Ned heard broken fragments from 
the exulting psalm that his father loved. 

" ' He hath done marvellous things : his right hand 
and his holy arm hath gotten him the victory. . . . 
Let the floods clap their hands. . . . Let the sea 
roar. 

The younger could not sleep. He rose, therefore, 
went on deck, and told Johnny to turn in. The boy 
at first refused, but quickly realised that here was 
one who must be obeyed. He was ordered to go 
below, and vanished in some surprise, for discipline 
from his uncle he had not expected or tasted until 
now. 

Gilberd was at the helm, and spoke of the weather. 
Ned made some vague remark of no purpose, then 
went forward to watch the glimmer that roams a 
nightly sea and hear the mournful sounds that come 
up therefrom. Was this great change in his life to 
do the thing he hoped ? Would peace return to him 
presently as the result of it? He felt less certain 
now than he had felt before he overturned his life and 
came back to his father. To-night his mind misgave 
him. 

A great steamer passed, and the watcher knew that 
perhaps five hundred souls were sleeping on her. 
Her wash was heavier than the running sea, and he 
felt his father's boat rise upon it. The steamer dropped 
into the darkness so suddenly that but for the thud 
of her propellers and the hiss of her wake she might 
have been thought to founder. 

The man considered his sister and her children and 
her troubles. Then he brooded upon his own child. 

He felt the night's cold breath begin to chill him, 
therefore he rose and walked up and down the 



THE HAVEN 353 

narrow deck. Gilberd thought that Ned had turned 
for companionship and spoke again. 

" What do 'e make of it, my son ? " he asked. " I'll 
lay my life now you'm all in a miz-maze just at 
first ? " 

" No, William not with the boat. It comes back 
very natural and clear to me. Tis more real, you 
might say, than than a lot that's happened since. 
I'm only wondering " 

" Wondering if ever you'll be able to bide at it ? " 

" I shall bide." 

"Did you hear tell that Tumbledown Dick died 
last Sunday evening ? " 

" I was along with him. Saw him through it." 

" Did he say anything to catch hold of? Now and 
again, at the last gasp, Ned, a man will tell out 
a good useful thing, as if he'd already picked up the 
lights of the land he was bound for and had the 
pilot aboard. Though, of course, us have no right 
to say ezacally what sort of lights that poor chap 
picked up. Did he speak ? " 

" He said nought." 

Presently Ned Major went forward and stood in 
the bows. At turn of tide an old moon rose and 
cast some light into the margins of the cloudbanks ; 
but she was soon swallowed up. The morning watch 
had come, and already, along the ridges of the sea, 
there trembled a first, faint shudder of to-morrow. 



THE END 



Printed by Hasell, Watson & Viney, Ld. t London and Aylesbury. 

23 



