The Inquisitor; or, Invisible Rambler, Volume 2 . . . (1793)
Author: Rowson, Susanna.
Publication info: The Inquisitor . 072-132. Philadelphia: William Gibbons, 1793.

Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
Title Page
THE
INQUISITOR;
OR,
INVISIBLE RAMBLER.
IN THREE VOLUMES.
By Mrs. ROWSON, author of Victoria .
THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.
VOLUME II.
PHILADELPHIA—
1793.
Preliminaries
[Page ]
Main text
[Page ]
THE
INQUISITOR;
OR,
INVISIBLE RAMBLER.
IN THREE VOLUMES.
By Mrs. ROWSON, author of Victoria .
THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.
VOLUME II.
EAST INDIAN continued.
Poor fellow! ſaid I, looking at him with an
eye of compaſſion as he went out of the apartment—
Poor fellow! thou haſt been hardly uſed by one
man who called himſelf a Chriſtian, and it makes
thee ſuſpect the whole race—But, ſurely, ſaid I, it is
not a man's barely proſeſſing Chriſtianity that makes
him worthy that character; a man muſt behave
with humanity, not only to his fellow-creatures, but
to the animal creation, before he can be ranked with
propriety among that exalted claſs of mortals.
The man who with unmerciful hand ſcourges his
ſlave, does he then remember that the perſon he is
chaſtiſing is endowed with the ſame ſenſe of feeling
as himſelf, and is as ſenſible of pain, hunger, thirſt,
cold, aye, and all the ſocial bleſſings of life? has
filial, conjugal, and paternal affection?—then why,
becauſe he is a ſlave, ſhould you beſtow on him painful
ſtripes, when yourſelf would ſhrink to receive
but the ſmalleſt of them—Does the name of Slave,—
Slave! ſaid I, riſing as I ſpoke, while the sanguine
tide that plays about my heart ruſhed unbidden
to my cheeks—
Why did I bluſh, why did I tremble, as I pronounced
the word ſlave?—It was becauſe I was
aſhamed of the appellation—It is a word that ſhould
never be uſed between man and man—The negro
on the burning ſands of Africa was born as free as
[Page 072]
him who draws his firſt breath in Britain—and ſhall
a Chriſtian, a man whoſe mind is enlightened by
education and religion, for a little ſordid pelſ, ſell the
freedom of this poor negro, only becauſe he differs
from him in complexion—what right has an European
to ſell an African? do they leave their native
land and ſeek our coaſt, by arts entice our countrymen
away, and make them ſlaves?—
The SLAVE. I walked out and endeavoured to diſſipate the
diſagreeable reflection; but the idea of ſlavery pursued
me ſtill.
Unhappy man, ſaid I, as buſy fancy drew out the
ſad ſcene.
She held up to my mind's eye a man born to a good
inheritance, and ſurrounded with all the comforts,
all the bleſſings, he deſired—but he was a negro.
He was ſitting in his little hut, his jetty companion
by his ſide; one infant at her breaſt, two others
prattling at her knee; ſhe looked, ſhe felt happy.
Her huſband, her children, were with her; ſerenity
played on every countenance; content had fixed her
habitation in their dwelling—Some Europeans enter—
they deck his beloved children with baubles—
they tie beads round the arms of his wife—and ornament
her jetty locks with glittering toys—He is
charmed with their courteſy—He walks with them
to the ſea ſide, and takes his boy, his eldeſt darling,
with him—they invite them on board the veſſel—
Poor ſoul! unſuſpecting their treachery, he goes,
and bids adieu to liberty for ever—His wife, taking
advantage of his abſence, trims up their hut—lays
her dear babes to ſleep—and then prepares a supper
for her love, compoſed of wholeſome roots and
fruit—She wonders why he ſtays—She leaves her
[Page 073]
home and walks toward the ſea, ſhe ſees him embark—
her child goes too—the ſailors ſpread the ſails—
the veſſel moves—ſhe ſhrieks—but there my heart
was wrung ſo keenly, I could go no farther.
I left the wife, and followed the poor negro—he
had no comfort but the idea that he ſhould be with
his child; that he ſhould have it in his power to eaſe
him if heavy taſks were impoſed, to guard him from
dangers, and teach him to be reſigned and contented.—
They arrive at Barbadoes—they are expoſed
to ſale and allotted to different maſters.
Alas! poor man, tears and intreaties are vain; you
are in the hands of the ſons of Mammon.
Fancy ſtill led me forward—I ſaw him when age
and infirmities came on without one comfort, without
one friend, on a miſerable bed, ſickneſs and
ſad ren embrance his only companions—he is weary
of life—he offers up a prayer for his ſtill dear
companion, for his children, his hapleſs enſlaved child—
He dies—and is thrown into the grave without a
prayer to conſecrate the ground, without one tear of
affection or regret being ſhed upon his bier.
Had not that poor negro a ſoul?
Yes—and in futurity it ſhall appear white and
ſpotleſs at the throne of Grace, to confound the man
who called himſelf a Chriſtian, and yet betrayed a
fellow-creature into bondage.
It would give me a great deal of pleaſure, ſaid I,
to have the hiſtory of the Eaſt Indianſbut when I
have got it, how ſhall I tranſlate it—I know nothing
of the language; but, perhaps I may be able to procure
a perſon to tranſlate it for me.
How do you do? my good friend, ſaid a man,
rather ſhabbily dreſſed—Now I make it a rule never
to turn my back on a man becauſe he had rather
wear a thread-bare coat than run in debt with his taylor;
ſo I turned about to preſent my hand to the
[Page 074]
perſon who addreſſed me with ſuch cordiality, and
perceived in him the features of an old ſchool fellow.
The CLERGYMAN. Ifear , ſaid I, as we went forward—I fear you
have not been ſucceſsful in gaining any permanent
ſettlement—pray how have you diſpoſed of yourſelf
theſe laſt ſeven years?
I have, he replied, been ſtrangely toſſed about, beheld
various ſcenes, tried many different plans, and
been unſucceſsful in all.
When I left Oxford, I was recommended by a
friend of my father's to be preceptor to the only ſon
of a man of large fortune—he was a ſprightly, sensible
lad, but exceedingly capricious in his humour,
which was owing to his parent's never allowing him
to be contradicted. For a month or fix weeks we
went on very well; my young gentleman was fond
of learning, took every thing with ſurpriſing facility,
and gave me little or no trouble in obliging him to
attend his book—but the unbounded applauſe he received
from his parents, the careſſes and indulgences
they were continually heaping on him, and the
praiſe every caſual gueſt was obliged to beſtow on this
darling of the family, ſoon made him think he was
as learned as any of the ſeven wife men of Greece,
and therefore had no farther need of a preceptor.
When I found he grew careleſs and neglectful,
I thought a little correction might be neceſſary; but,
on trying the experiment, was called by the over fond
mother, an inhuman monſter; and the father thought
his boy had a genius too bright to require ſuch rough
methods of proceeding. In ſhort, Sir, having no
power over the child, he ſoon loſt what little learning
he had at firſt attained; and I was diſmiſſed with
the character of having ruined the boy's genius by ill-timed
and unmerciful correction.
[Page 075]
As I had taken orders, I lived for ſome time by
occaſionally reading prayers, or preaching for a vicar
who was very old and infirm, but having a large
family, could not well afford to pay a conſtant curate.—
In the courſe of this time I became acquainted
with a young lady poſſeſſed of every virtue that
might render her a deſirable companion; add to this,
ſhe had two hundred pounds in her own poſſeſſion,
and lived with an uncle, who, beſide an affluent fortune,
had an excellent living in his gift—the old incumbent
of which was in a very declining ſtate of
health—had Maria been poor I ſhould have loved
her; but I ſhould never have thought of marrying
her in the circumſtances I then was, as I knew it
muſt involve us both in miſery. She was all gentleness;
and while ſhe thought the ſentiment ſhe felt
for me was only pity for my precarious, disagreeable
ſituation, it by degrees ripened into a tender and
laſting affection.—Her uncle had ever ſtudied her
happineſs, and thinking it would ſoon be in his
power to ſettle us both in an eaſy, deſirable living,
he encouraged my pretenſions, and in a few months
made me the huſband of Maria.
It would be needleſs to mention the happineſs I
enjoyed for eight months with this amiable woman;
ſuffice it to ſay, I envied not the wealthieſt or moſt
oppulent man in Europe. But our happineſs was
too great to be permanent—her uncle had ever been
a man of ſound conſtitution, and though then in the
ſixtieth year of his age, gave no ſigns of infirmity or
decay: but, alas! who can depend on ſo frail a
thing as life.—One morning having waited breakfast
till near ten o'clock, ſurpriſed at the old gentleman's
lying ſo long, as he was in general an early
rifer, I tapped at his chamber door, but received no
anſwer. I opened it, and went in, and ſound he
had taken his final leave of this world. I felt
[Page 076]
myself extremely ſhocked; but fearing for Maria, who,
at that time was pregnant, I compoſed myſelf, and
going down, told her, that her uncle being rather indisposed,
deſired not to be diſturbed.
On pretence of going for an apothecary I went
and informed an intimate friend of Maria's with the
melancholy affair. We determined ſhe ſhould call
and take Maria out, and by various methods keep
her from home all day; when in the evening we
would, by degrees, acquaint her with the ſad tidings—
But all theſe precautions were vain. During my
abſence, one of the ſervants had entered the room,
which in my agitated ſtate of mind I had forgot to
lock, and inſtantly alarmed her miſtreſs. At my
return I found my poor Maria in an agony of grief,
which, however, was happily of no ill conſequence
to herſelf or the infant.
When my uncle was buried, we examined his
papers, and no will being found, a diſtant male relation
took poſſeſſion of the whole eſtate. I removed
with my wife from the houſe; ſtill flattering myself
when the old incumbent died I ſhould have the
living; but I was miſtaken. In a few months the
old man paid the debt of nature, and the living was
diſpoſed of to another perſon.
Our diſappointment was very great—but the two
hundred pounds Maria poſſeſſed hindered us from
being immediately expoſed to want, but that ſum
was gradually decreaſing—beſide a child which
was born ſoon after my uncle's deceaſe, Maria promised
to make me father of another. At any other
time this would have given me great pleaſure—
but the unſettled ſtate of my affairs made me regret
that this poor little infant was coming into a world
to inherit nothing but penury.
About this time I was recommended to Lord
Ernoff, whoſe eldeſt ſon was going abroad, and
[Page 077]
wanted a governor; however painful it might be to part
with Maria, yet the promiſe of a handſome ſalary
led me to accept the propoſal.
I left the dear woman, and ſet out to make the
tour of Europe with my young Lord.—I had been
abſent from my native country three years, and
found myſelf highly in favour with the young gentleman
abroad, and his father at home—who, to
recompenſe my fidelity to his ſon, was continually
heaping favours on Maria and the children.
We were at Madrid, when my Lord commenced
an intrigue with a woman of rank and reputation.—
It was in vain I repreſented to him the dangerous
conſequences that might enſue from ſuch an illicit
amour.—The more I remonſtrated, the more
obſtinate he appeared; and unfortunately ſoon succeeded
in ruining the object of his diſhonorable pursuit.
Having obtained every favour from the eaſy,
thoughtleſs Leonilla, he was preparing to leave Madrid.—
She was informed of his deſign (and the revenge
of a Spaniſh woman, when injured, being always
adequate to the love they once bore their seducer)
ſhe hired bravoes to diſpatch this young nobleman
the night preceding that appointed for our
departure.
We had dined out—and the evening being fine,
preferred walking home rather than going in a carriage.
I perceived two men watch and follow us through
every ſtreet, till coming to one that was dark and
unfrequented, one of the men came up and attempted
to ſtab my Lord.—I drew my ſword, and aiming
at the villain's heart, threw myſelf before the young
nobleman, and received the poniard of the ſecond assassin
in my own boſom.
[Page 078]
This little ſcuffle having made ſome noiſe, people
ſoon gathered round, when the ruffians finding themselves
diſappointed in their aims, made off.—My
Lord thinking a longer ſtay at Madrid would be
dangerous, left me to the care of a ſurgeon and nurſe,
and departed next morning for Paris, from whence
he propoſed returning to England.
The MOURNER. My friend was proceeding in his narrative, when
our attention was engaged by the appearance of a
woman habited like a pilgrim, but in deep mourning—
ſuch an appearance being uncommon in England,
it naturally excited our curioſity.
We were in Kenſington Gardens.—
The mourner's ſtature was above the lower ſize,
and there was a certain dignity about her which
ſpoke her of no common rank—her features had
once been lovely; and even now, though pale and
marked with grief, there was a ſomething in them
that engaged the affections, and inſenſibly drew the
heart towards her.—She ſeated herſelf upon the
ground; and reſting her elbow on the root of a tree—
her head reclining penſively on her hand—ſhe
plucked up ſome wild daiſies that grew round her—
it amuſed her for the moment, but recollecting herself,
ſhe cried—
They will ſoon die, and I have killed them.
The thought ſeemed to give her exquiſite pain.—
She dropped the daiſies on the ground, and burſt into
tears.
I will not look at them, ſaid ſhe, riſing, and bending
her ſteps another way.
Alas! poor ſoul, ſaid I, it is not theſe flowers you
would fly from, it is yourſelf and your own painful
reflections.
[Page 079]
That is very true, ſaid ſhe (turning towards me,
and laying her hand on my arm) I would fain forget
that I was the murderer of an innocent man—I am
trying to expiate my fault by faſting and hard penance.
I have come a pilgrimage of many hundred
miles on foot, nor reſted my weary limbs, but when
neceſſity obliged me to croſs the ſea.—If I could find
the woman I have made a widow, and the children
I have rendered orphans, I would do ſomething to
make their lives happy, and then return home, and
devote myſelf to the Bleſſed Virgin.
Alas, continued ſhe, ſtill reſting on my arm, and
laying her other hand on her heart—alas, you know
not what a ſad thing it is to be an orphan. I once
had a father—had he lived—but, poor man, he had
been to the wars; and when he returned, he met my
mother's corpſe juſt going to the grave.—He wept
not—he never once complained, but following in
ſilence, ſaw her interred—then laid himſelf down on
the cold turf that covered her, and never roſe again.
Here ſhe ſeemed quite loſt—and leaving me abruptly,
walked to a retired part of the garden.
I never felt my pity ſo ſtrongly excited as at this
moment.—The whole tenor of the mourner's discourse
and actions diſcovered the diſorder of her
mind. She ſeemed to have experienced a variety of
misfortunes which had banithed fair reaſon from her
throne. Poor girl, ſaid I, how ſeverely muſt your
heart have been wrung before you were drove to this
miſerable ſituation!
But come, ſaid I, turning to my friend, finiſh your
recital.—He attempted to ſpeak, but was forced to
ſtop—ſomething roſe in his throat—I felt the ſame
in mine—but what that was, I will leave to the imagination
of every reader of ſenſibility.
[Page 080]
The COURTIER.
My Lord's departing from Madrid without me,
continued my friend, occaſioned a report to be
ſpread that I had died of my wounds, and indeed never
was a man nearer the confines of the grave than
I was—but by the care and attention of the people
that were about me, I was in ſix weeks able to go
into the country, where I remained above two
months in a languid, weak ſtate, during which time
I received not one line from my Lord—as ſoon as I
found myſelf able to bear the fatigue of travelling, I
ſet forward for England, where I arrived about ten
months ſince, and found my dear Maria in a situation
truly deplorable—The old Earl was dead, and
his ſon daily expected from Paris, where he had
made a longer ſtay than he at firſt intended—Maria
had been ſix months without receiving any money
on my account, as my Lord had wrote to his father's
ſleward, informing him that I choſe to be left at
Madrid—I endeavoured to get employ; and, after
many fruitleſs attempts, at laſt got a curacy of thirty
pounds a year, which is but trifling to ſupport a
wife and two children—I have frequently wrote to
my Lord who has been at his ſeat in Eſſex ever ſince
his arrival in England; but either has been prevented
from anſwering my letters by a multiplicity of business,
or he does not chooſe to be troubled with an
indigent friend—Yet I cannot bring myſelf to think
it poſſible for a human being to be ſo ungrateful as
to turn a deaf ear to the complaint of a man who
once ſaved his life, at the hazard of his own—He
arrived in town three days ſince; and this day at
two o'clock I propoſe waiting on him, and requesting
his aſſiſtance.
We will take an hackney coach, and I will ſet
you down at his door, ſaid I.
[Page 081]
When we arrived within ten yards of the houſe I
ſtopped the coach, and getting out, wiſhed my friend
a good morning, and turned down a ſtreet only to
put on my ring—when quickening my pace, I was
at the Earl's door as ſoon as he was.
A ſervant appeared, whoſe inſolent carriage bespoke
the character of his Lord.
You may always judge of a man's general demeanor
and diſpoſition by the behaviour of his ſervant,
the lower claſs of mankind always aping the manners
of their ſuperiors.
After ſome heſitation, and a few leering, ſaucy
looks at the ruſty garb of my friend, he left him
ſtanding in the hall, and went up to my Lord.
Having waited full a quarter of an hour, he again
made his appearance at the top of the ſtairs, and
reaching his body partly over the balluſtrades, called
out, You may come up.
I followed him into the chamber of the young
Earl—He was ſitting in an eaſy chair, dreſſed in a
long robe de chambre, a diſh of chocolate in one
hand and the newſpaper in the other;—his back was
partly toward the door;—and on my friend's being
announced, he neither turned his head nor raiſed his
eyes from the paper—
I have taken the earlieſt opportunity to wait on
your Lordſhip, ſaid my friend bowing.
Oh, Mr. Teachum, ſaid my Lord, I am glad to
ſee you—Set Mr. Teachum a chair—ſaid he to the
ſervant—and when did you arrive in England, Mr.
Teachum?
I had the honor of informing your Lordſhip by
letter, he replied, about ſix months ſince, and of the
miſtake that was made concerning my ſalary, which
was ſtopped from the time your Lordſhip left Madrid.
[Page 082]
Why, Teachum, ſaid my Lord, lifting up his
eyes for the firſt time from the paper, and looking
at my friend with a ſort of ſurpriſe, I thought from
that time you was free from my ſervice.
Very true, my Lord; but the wound I received in
your Lordſhips ſervice confined me to my apartment
for a long time; and the attendance I received
was very expenſive—I had nothing to depend on
but your Lordſhip's bounty.
Well, I will ſee and recompenſe you for your salary's
being ſtopped—
Pray how have you lived ſince your return to England?
But poorly my Lord; I have but thirty pounds a
year.
My Lord again looked up; but it was a look of
diſbelief.
And how many children have you?
Two, my Lord; a boy and a girl.
Well, I will ſee and do ſomething for the boy—
and let me think—yes, there's the living at Wiltham,
about three hundred a year—that will juſt ſuit
you—call on me again in a day or two; I ſhall always
be glad to ſee you.
So ſaying, he got up, and, without farther ceremony,
walked into the next room—my friend departed,
and I followed my Lord—He pulled the bell—
John, ſaid he to the ſervant that entered, I deſire
you will tell the porter never to admit that ſhabby
parſon again; I don't like to be teazed with viſits
from ſuch mean-looking people.
Mr Bauble waits below, ſaid the ſervant.
Deſire Mr. Bauble to walk up—and when Miſs
L'Eſtrange comes, let me know.
The jeweller entered, and in a few moments after,
Miſs L'Eſtrange; whoſe levity of carriage, ſtudied
[Page 083]
negligence, and confident ſtare, at once ſpoke her
profeſſion.
A number of jewels were diſplayed; and this
Lord who had not a guinea to ſpare for the poor
man who ſaved his life, laviſhed four hundred pounds
on jewels for an infamous ſtrumpet.
And is ſuch a man, ſaid I, as I left the houſe, is
ſuch a man as this a peer of the realm? can he, who
ought to ornament the nation, thus ſhamefully disgrace
it!—Of all the crimes man can commit, ingratitude
is the blackeſt; It argues a depravity of
heart, a mind ſtupid and inſenſible; it ſets a man
below the brute creation—the animal word in general
are grateful, affectionate, and faithful—But man—
man, whoſe boaſted reaſon makes him lord over
thoſe who act merely from inſtinct, loſes his superiority
by folly and ingratitude—I am certain that
the man who is unmindful of a benefit conferred on
him by a brother mortal, is totally deſtitute of gratitude
toward the great ſource of his life, health and
proſperity.
The VISIT. I will go and ſee Teachum, ſaid I, one day,
after having recounted his ſtory to my Emma—She
would accompany me—
Their habitation was ſmall, but every thing about
it was neat to exceſs; there was nothing to be ſeen
that ſpoke diſtreſs; the children were clean; Maria
herſelf, though her attire was plain, appeared the
model of elegance—ſhe was hearing her children
their leſſon; they ſtood before her, reading each alternately
a verſe from the ſacred writings.
Teachum was leaning over the back of her chair,
gazing at his children, with eyes expreſſive of as
[Page 084]
much pleaſure, and far more ſerenity, than the miſer
who contemplates his hoarded treaſure—
We are come to ſpend an hour with you, ſaid I,
leading my Emma into the room.
Maria was embarraſſed; but ſhe was too polite to
make unneceſſary excuſes concerning her dreſs or
apartment—I always think ſuch apologies are a ſort
of reproof for an untimely viſit.
Have you ſeen my Lord lately? ſaid I.
He is never at home, replied Teachum.
I am ſorry for it, ſaid I; and believe me, my
friend, I think your attendance on him is entirely
unneceſſary, and your hopes from that quarter fruitless—
I have taken the liberty of calling, to offer you
any ſervice that is in my power, and to beg you will
look upon me as your friend. I ſhall hope to ſee
you often at my houſe.
And I hope, ſaid Emma, that Mrs. Teachum and
my little friends here will always accompany you.
I have been ſadly perplexed for theſe few days,
ſaid I, changing the converſation—I have got a manuscript
in my poſſeſſion written in the Eaſtern language;
I am certain it contains ſome extraordinary
incidents, but cannot get at the particulars, being
almoſt entirely unacquainted with the characters it
is wrote in.
It is lucky, ſaid Teachum, that you have mentioned
it to me; I ever took great pleaſure in ſtudying
the Eaſtern languages, and am a great admirer of
their ſtile; it is ſimple and elegant, and though we
may tranſlate it with tolerable correctneſs, we can
never entirely preſerve its native purity—If you will
put the manuſcript into my hands I will uſe my endeavours
to tranſlate it. I have many leiſure hours,
in which I amuſe myſelf with my pen.
I was highly pleaſed with the idea of having the
adventures of the poor Indian in my native language,
[Page 085]
and deſired Teachum to call on me next day; when
fearful of paining them by a longer viſit, we reluctantly
took our leave.
Emma, at parting, put ſomething into the hand
of the girl; and ſeeing I obſerved her, ſhe took my
hand when we were ſeated in the carriage—it was
but a trifle, my love, ſaid ſhe; and I had ſaved it
from my own private expences.
Had ſhe juſt been giving away half my fortune,
the look, the manner in which ſhe pronounced
theſe words, would have inſtantly obtained forgiveness.
The METHODIST. Emma intended to call on ſeveral of her acquaintance.—
I hate viſits of ceremony—ſo alighting
from the carriage, I ſtrolled into the fields.
An itinerant preacher was mounted above a listening
multitude, bawling out the virtues and excellencies
of charity, and ſtrongly recommending brotherly
love among the elect—all his cry was faith and
charity; at the ſame time he declared every one to
be in a ſtate of perdition that differed from his ſect
in their opinion concerning religious matters. I
never was partial to people of this perſuaſion; not
that I condemn the whole claſs—no, far be it from
me to cenſure a large body of people, becauſe ſome of
the members are hypocrites.—I have known many
people who proſeſs Methodiſm, humane, charitable,
and juſt; but they were people of enlarged ideas,
and liberal education—the ſolemn gait—ſanctified
air—upcaſt eyes—and tongue ever ready with scripture
phraſes and quotations, are by no means the
ſigns of genuine piety.—A chearful, contented
diſpoſition—a heart grateful for every bleſſing, and
reſigned to the all-wiſe diſpenſations of Providence
[Page 086]
—and an hand ready to beſtow on others part of the
bleſſings we enjoy ourſelves;—theſe are the reſults
of pure religion—theſe are acceptable ſacrifices in
the ſight of our Creator.
When the preacher had finiſhed his oration, he
deſcended from the tub on which he had ſtood; and
with his hat in his hand, walked round to his numerous
congregation, every one warm with the impression
made by his diſcourſe, readily contributed
ſomething towards the ſupport of a man who was ſo
eloquent in recommending them to ſeek the right
way to eternal happineſs.
The collection that was made muſt have amply
repaid him for the time and breath he had ſpent in
exhorting them to charity.
I ſhould like to know, ſaid I, whether this man
practiſes the virtue himſelf, he ſo ſtrongly recommends
to others.
I put on my ring and followed him home.
His habitation was at Chelſea—at his door he was
met by a woman decently dreſſed, but dejected in her
countenance—her eyes were ſwolen with tears.
Well ſaid the man, puſhing rudely by her, is he
gone?
He is gone, ſhe replied—gone for ever.
What, is he dead?
Yes.
And in my houſe—why was he not removed to
the work houſe?
Alas, Sir, replied the woman, the pariſh officers
came to take him away; and the exertions he made
to riſe and dreſs himſelf being too much for his
weak frame, he expired as they were putting him into
the chair.
And, who will pay for the funeral?
The pariſh will.
[Page 087]
And, do you think he ſhall go out of this houſe
till I am paid my rent?—No, no, as he has died here,
he ſhall ſtay till every farthing owing me is discharged.—
Have you got any money now?
Not one halfpenny, or a morſel of bread for my
poor children—But I will ſell my bed—it is the laſt
thing I have left, and we will henceforth ſleep on
ſtraw.
You ſhall ſell nothing—touch nothing till I am
paid.—What, do you think I am to loſe a whole
year's rent?
Have you no compaſſion on a poor widow and ſix
fatherleſs children? ſaid the woman.
I do not know what buſineſs ſuch poor folks have
to get children, he replied. Go, go along, woman;
I am going to dinner, and cannot be troubled with
your whining and complaints.
I took off my ring; and following the poor woman
up ſtairs, gave her ſomething to quiet the apprehensions
her inhuman landlord's diſcourſe had inspired.
As I paſſed from the ſtaircaſe to the ſtreet door, I
heard this teacher of charity pouring forth a long
grace over his meat.
Hypocritical wretch! ſaid I, doſt thou think this
lip ſervice is acceptable to God?—Miſtaken man,
thou art mocking the Lord of the univerſe.—Go,
divide your meal with the widow and the fatherleſs—
it is the beſt way of ſhewing your gratitude to him
who gave it you.
Such men as this, ſaid I, as I left the houſe, are
a great deal more prejudicial to ſociety than the professed
libertine. When we ſee a man neglect all
religious duties—break through all ties moral and
divine, we naturally turn from him with horror and
deteſtation.—But, when a man under the cloak of
piety and virtue, who profeſſes a juſt ſenſe of
[Page 088]
religion, is diſcovered to be hard-hearted—oppreſſive—
avaricious—ſelfiſh—in ſhort, living in the private
practice of every vice he publicly declaims againſt;
is it not enough to make the generality of the world
conclude that religion is no more than a ſpecious
maſk put on to deceive mankind?
Religion, in her own native ſimplicity, is truly
lovely—ſhe attracts admiration—charms the ſoul by
her precepts—and paſſing with us through life
blunts the points of thoſe arrows of affliction which
it is the lot of every mortal to experience.
But, hypocriſy too often puts on her pleaſing garb;
and, when diſcovered, leads mankind to think the
angel face of piety hides the foul fiend beneath.
The STUDY. Mr. Teachum was in my ſtudy full half an hour
before I came down.—Well, my friend, ſaid I, as
I entered, don't you think I have got a fine parcel of
writings?—Here in this drawer, pointing to one
that was partly open, I keep all my heroic poetry—
here is another for plays—another for odes, sonnets,
paſtorals, &c.—What a charming prize
theſe would be to ſome garreted author; he might
ſell all this waſte paper for at leaſt two pence a
pound—it would then turn to ſome account, for
it might ſerve to wrap penny worths of tobacco—
light pipes, fires, &c. or, in ſhort, be applied to any
other uſe the poſſeſſor might want waſte paper for.
What an humiliating idea! ſaid my friend, smiling.
Not at all, ſaid I; in following the dictates of
imagination, and employing my pen, I pleaſe, I amuse
myſelf—but if my writings are not ſo lucky as
to pleaſe and amuſe others, why ſhould I be mortified?—
every man has a peculiar taſte; and
[Page 089]
between you and I, my friend, every man has a peculiar
hobby-horſe, on which he frequently mounts,
and rides away poſt haſte, without once conſidering
who he may diſcompoſe, overturn, or offend in the
wild career.
I know one man, who, though poſſeſſed of a very
moderate fortune, and who has had but a confined
education, is ſo fond of aping the inſolent carriage
of a Lord, that he is continually diſtreſſing his companions
by affected grimaces, and ſtudied geſtures—
then he ſpeaks in ſuch a pompous ſtile, and aſſumes
ſuch an air of conſequence, that while he thinks he
is received with admiration, every man of ſenſe muſt
laugh at his folly.
Another is fond of diſplaying his profound learning
in the different ſciences—at one time he is a professor
of muſic—at another time he ſtudies logic;
and when by chance you mention either of thoſe sciences,
he will run on at leaſt two hours without either
taking breath, or giving you an opportunity to
edge in a ſingle word.
Theſe are their hobby horſes—writing is mine.
I would not give up the pleaſure of writing for any
pecuniary gratification that could be offered.
That is, ſaid my friend, becauſe you ſtand in
need of no pecuniary favours; but, aſk the poor author,
who, in an airy apartment, three ſtories from
the ground, ſits invoking the coy muſes to aſſiſt him
in writing ſomething to gain him a few guineas that
might ſerve to ſatisfy his butcher, baker, &c.—aſk
him, my good friend, if he will give up the pleaſure
of writing, to enjoy a ſettled ſalary of ſixty pounds
a year.
He might readily promiſe to do ſo, ſaid I; but
take my word for it, the very firſt time pen, ink, paper,
and opportunity ſell in his way, he would write
[Page 090]
an eulogium on the man who had thus generouſly
raiſed him from diſtreſs.
Oh, ye ſweet tuneful ſiſters, may ye never forſake
my manſion; but when on the wing to viſit your
favourites—Burney, Moore, and Inchbald—ſtop for
a moment, and dart a ſingle ray of your ſacred fire
upon the humbleſt of your votaries—in a ſad hour
it will enliven me—in a lonely hour, amuſe—and,
when happineſs deigns to be my companion, it will
increaſe every pleaſure.
But come, ſaid I to Teachum, here is the ſtory I
wiſh you to tranſlate.—I am going out for a few
hours, and ſhall hope to ſee it in fair Engliſh characters
when I come back.—You ſhall ſee part of
it at leaſt, ſaid he. So I left him; and mounting
my horſe which was at the door, rode into Hyde
Park.
The FRACAS. On my entering the Park, I ſaw at a diſtance, a
multiplicity of people, ſome running one way, ſome
another, and all in the utmoſt confuſion.—I rode up
to the place, and the firſt thing that preſented itſelf to
my view, was Miſs L'Eſtrange in a fit; and a few
paces from her, a young man laying on the ground,
bleeding. By his ſide knelt the fair mourner whom
I had ſeen in Kenſington Gardens—ſhe was endeavouring
to ſtaunch the blood that iſſued from his ſide,
with her handkerchief—it ſeemed a ſcene of confusion,
for no one was paying the leaſt attention to the
wounded man but this unhappy woman.
I called my ſervant, and giving him my horſe,
raiſed the young man from the ground; and presently
perceived it was Lord Ernolf, whom Teachum
had attended abroad.
I aſſiſted the fair mourner to bind up his wound
with our handkerchiefs, and a ſervant at that
[Page 091]
moment arriving with a ſurgeon and a litter, we lifted
him on it, and proceeded to the neareſt houſe—the
ſurgeon thinking the ſooner his wound was dreſſed
the better.
The mourner followed penſively—often croſſing
herſelf, ſighing, and weeping bitterly—no one attempted
to obſtruct her entrance into the houſe with
us.
The wound was dreſſed, and the ſurgeon pronounced
it not dangerous, provided a fever could be
prevented.
Lord Ernolf had fainted through loſs of blood;
and during the time of his wound being dreſſed, remained
in a ſtate of inſenſibility.
It was judged proper that he ſhould be immediately
put to bed; but, when the ſervant attempted
to move him, the mourner came to me and entreated
that ſhe might not be ſeparated from him—
for, indeed Sir, ſaid ſhe, I heartily forgive him—I
do not wiſh his death now, though once I ſought to
have aſſaſſinated him; but I have ſince been taught that
we ſhould forgive thoſe who injured us. Alas! if
it were not for the reflection that I am not at enmity
with any mortal breathing, how ſhould I have hope
to obtain pardon of my Creator for the heinous
crime I have committed whilſt in purſuit of my
revenge!
I thought from theſe few words that this hapleſs
mourner could be no other than poor Leonilla.—
I entreated the people of the houſe to let her
remain with the wounded nobleman; and attended
her up to his chamber, where he was in bed, and juſt
recovering his ſenſes.
She approached the bed, and ſitting down on the
ſide, took one of his hands—kiſſed it, and preſſed it
to her boſom.
He lifted his languid eyes, and fixed them on her
[Page 092]
face—at firſt they ſpoke amazement and terror—but
at laſt, grief.
Where am I? ſaid he—am I paſſing the bounds
of mortality; and art thou, bleſt ſhade, ſuffered to
conduct me through the gloomy vale?—I know
why you look ſo mournful—you died of a broken
heart—but, I ſhall be puniſhed for my crimes.
Compoſe yourſelf, my Lord, ſaid the mourner—
you are in no danger, I hope you may yet live many
years, and be happy.
Do you talk of happineſs, ſaid he; and do you
wiſh me happy?
I do! I do! So Heaven hear my prayers.
But, tell me, ſaid he, how came you here?—am
I not in England?
She was going to anſwer—when I interpoſed and
begged they would both be ſilent, and conſider of
what dangerous conſequences a violent exertion of
ſpirits might be to the young gentleman. She promised
obedience, drew the curtains round the bed,
and ſat down in an eaſy chair that ſtood at the head.
A nurſe entering, I took that opportunity to go and
inquire what had been the cauſe of this unhappy
affair.
The ſervant who attended Miſs L'Eſtrange and
his Lordſhip in their ride that morning, gave me the
following account:
That a ſtrange gentleman rode up to Miſs L'Estrange,
and accoſting her in a very haughty manner,
inquired why ſhe had left him at Paris, and what ſhe
had done with a miniature picture which ſhe had
taken from his cabinet the morning before the left
him; the Lady pretended not to know him, and
complained to my Lord that ſhe was inſulted; upon
which, high words enſued between the ſtranger and
Lord Ernolf, when the former, having a pair of
piſtols ready in his pocket, offered one to my Lord,
[Page 093]
who being naturally of a warm diſpoſition, took it,
and before any interpoſition could be made, they
both fired; my Lord's piſtol took no effect, but the
ſtranger's wounded him in the manner you have ſeen.
At the diſcharge of the piſtols Miſs L'Eſtrange fainted;
but I believe, it was more for fear of the life of
the gentleman than my Lord's. I ran as faſt as I could
for a ſurgeon.—
The ſervant was proceeding in his ſtory when he
was called away.
Having gained this intelligence, I determined to
go immediately to Miſs L'Eſtrange, who was now
become an inmate of Lord Ernolf's houſe, and ſee
in what manner ſhe behaved, and whether the servant's
ſuſpicions were well founded.
I repaired immediately to his Lordſhip's houſe—
inquired for the lady, but was denied admittance—a
chariot and four was at the door—I feared ſome ſoul
play; and thinking there was no time to be loſt, I
watched my opportunity, and, putting on my ring,
went into the houſe, and up to the Lady's apartment.
I found her ſitting on a ſopha with a large quantity
of jewels, &c. on a table before her; the was buſied in
packing them up, but often turned and addreſſed
ſome endearing expreſſions to an officer who ſat beside
her, entreating him never to forſake her again,
and telling him what riches the had heaped together
ſince ſhe had lived with Lord Ernolf.
I examined the features of the pretended officer,
and in ſpite of a large black patch which he had over
one eye, and his eye-brows and complexion being
ſtained, I ſoon diſcovered it to be the villain Cogdie,
who had eſcaped from the officers of juſtice as they
were conveying him from Gretna Green to London.
I learned from the converſation that paſſed between
Cogdie and Miſs L'Eſtrange, that ſhe was
in reality his lawful wife; but, being of a looſe
[Page 094]
disposition, had broken the matrimonial bonds ſome
years ſince, and viſited moſt of the capitals in Europe
with a young nobleman, whoſe fortune ſhe had
ruined, and finding him no longer able to ſupport
her extravagance, ſhe had left Paris with Lord
Ernolf, with whom ſhe had lived for this twelve-month
paſt.
I found, alſo, that chance had thrown Cogdie in
her way; and that he, ſeeing her in ſo proſperous a
ſituation, and being himſelf at a very low ebb of fortune,
had perſuaded her that his paſſion for her was
ſtronger than ever, and endeavoured to prevail with
her to rob the Earl, and decamp with him.—But
L'Eſtrange was a woman whoſe avarice was not ſo
eaſily gratified: ſhe, by feigning the moſt paſſionate
tenderneſs for the Earl, had worked upon his temper
till ſhe perſuaded him to make a will greatly in her
favour; and then the inſult, &c. which happened in
the Park, was planned and executed by Cogdie. He
had marked the piſtols; the one he gave to Lord
Ernolf was charged only with powder, but that which
he retained himſelf was loaded with ball.
I was greatly at a loſs how to act, as I feared to
leave the houſe to procure proper perſons to ſecure
Cogdie, left in the mean time he ſhould eſcape.
L'Eſtrange told him he ought to prepare for
flight; and giving him ſeveral bank notes, ſome jewels,
and other valuables, ſtepped into another room
and brought out a gown, petticoats, &c. for him to
put on.—I was quite undetermined in what manner
to prevent his departure, when L'Eſtrange recollected
there was ſome more money in a bureau in Lord
Ernolf's apartment, which was in a diſtant part of
the houſe; I followed, and ſeeing her ſafe in the
cloſet, in which there was no bell, and only a ſmall
high window, and that ſecured with bars; I pulled
to the door, locked and bolted it; I then returned in
[Page 095]
haſte to the apartment where Cogdie was, and ſeeing
him totally abſorbed in the pleaſure of contemplating
his treaſure, faſtened both the doors without being
obſerved.
Having ſucceeded thus far, I left the houſe with
precipitation, and procured proper people to apprehend
them; I returned within half an hour, and demanded
entrance. Though I had been abſent ſo
ſhort a time, five minutes longer had been too late;
Cogdie and L'Eſtrange had by their cries alarmed
the ſervant; for each fearing the other intended information
againſt themſelves, were in the utmoſt
conſternation; and violent were their cries for liberty—
the ſervants had burſt open the doors, and
Cogdie was on the ſtairs in order to depart when I
entered.
I committed them both to the charge of the constable;
having firſt eaſed them of the weighty concern
of having ſo much money and jewels to take
off. I waited on them to the houſe of a neighbouring
juſtice, made my accuſation in proper form, and
being certain that apartments in a ſtrong, well-built
manſion, would be prepared for their reception till
farther inquiry ſhould be made concerning the affair,
I left them, and returned to the wounded Noblemen;
and from thence home.
The REPARATION. I thought you were loſt, my love, ſaid Emma,
as I entered the parlour about eleven o'clock, and
found her ſeated at ſupper with Teachum and his
Maria.—In my hurry and confuſion in the morning,
though I had ſent my ſervant home, I had not
ſent any meſſage by him: I was therefore not surprised
at my Emma's exclamation. The adventures
of the day had ſo entirely taken up my mind, that
[Page 096]
the Eaſt Indian had not once intruded; and even
when my friend mentioned having almoſt completed
the tranſlation, I felt no ſort of curioſity to ſee it.—
We will take a walk to-morrow, ſaid I to Teachum;
I have ſeen Lord Ernolf to-day, and if you
like, I will take you to viſit him early.
We were at the houſe where he was before ten
o'clock.
As we entered the room without noiſe, we ſaw
the fair Leonilla in the higheſt act of devotion; his
Lordſhip was ſitting in the bed, ſupported by pillows,
his eyes fixed with a mixture of love and veneration
on her face, we were unwilling to diſturb them, ſo
drew back behind the curtains. When ſhe had finished
her morning oriſons—Oh, my dear Lord,
ſaid ſhe, what a relief do you give my almoſt bursting
heart, by informing me that your governor is not
dead. How ſevere has the reflection always been,
that my raſhneſs had ſent a deſerving man out of the
world; a man who had honor, courage, affection,
ſufficient to make him value his own life as nothing
when the life of his Lord was in danger. It is that
cruel idea, and the remembrance of my dear father
and mother, that at times deprives me of my reaſon;
but I will be thankful to that good Providence that
has taken this mighty load off my heart.
I hope you have provided for Mr. Teachum, ſaid
ſhe, after a little pauſe.
It is a ſhame to own I have not, ſaid my Lord;
but I will endeavour to repair all my errors.
Mr. Teachum is come to ſee you, my Lord, ſaid
I, ſtepping forward.
Ernolf ſtretched out his hand, and taking hold of
Teachum's, cried, this wound, my good Dr. Teachum,
is an excellent thing.
Indeed, my Lord, replied Teachum, I do not believe
any body but yourſelf thinks ſo, all your friends
regret it.
[Page 097]
I rejoice in it, ſaid his Lordſhip, it makes me
feelingly remember my own ingratitude.
Teachum walked to the other end of the room—
he was too much of a Chriſtian to rejoice in the pain
of a fellow mortal, though it might be productive of
good to himſelf. After our noble patient's wound
was again dreſſed, he requeſted Leonilla to inform
him why ſhe had left her native country.
She ſaid, that when ſhe found by the rumour then
prevailing at Madrid, that Mr. Teachum was killed
in defending his Lordſhip, it lay very heavy at her
heart, and ſhe grew melancholy and ſickly.—I never
went to ſleep, ſaid ſhe, but I fancied the ſhade
of the innocent man my raſhneſs had murdered, was
reproaching me. I thought my mind would be easier
after confeſſion, and went to my holy father,
confeſſed my firſt deviation from duty, my grief, anger,
revenge, and all its fatal conſequences.—The
good father rebuked the ſpirit of revenge that ſtill
was harboured in my boſom, and taught me that penitence,
faſting, and tears, were the only methods to
gain the pardon of the Creator for my heinous offences—
but alas! Sir, I could not pray—my mind
was in a ſtate of horror, not to be deſcribed—remorse,
love, and rage, by turns tormented my ſoul;
but Heaven offended at my obſtinacy and folly, visited
me with a dreadful judgment.—I had a favourite
dog which you had given me; on this poor inoffensive
animal did I vent the various changes of my
temper, one moment careſſing it, the next uſing it
with the utmoſt barbarity. My dear mother had never
ſuſpected my diſhonour; ſhe wondered at the
alteration ſo viſible in my health and diſpoſition;
and frequently chid me for my unkindneſs to this
poor little animal. I fear I uſed it very ill; but,
indeed I hardly know what I did, my mind was ſo
diſordered.
[Page 098]
My dog ran mad, and bit my dear mother; all
medical aſſiſtance was tried without effect—ſhe expired
in the greateſt agony. My father who was
on a campaign againſt the Turks at the time this
happened, unfortunately retured the day before my
mother was buried—he was unrepared for the ſtroke
he ſaw my mother's corpſe—he ſaw me deprived of
my ſenſes.
In my delirium I told him how I had diſhonored
his houſe—It was too much; he was not equal to
the mighty load of ſorrow, but ſunk under it.
Since that, I have wandered about, over barren
hills and deſert plains, ſeeking content, but ſhe fled
from me as I purſued her. I thought ſhe might
dwell with charity; ſo I divided my portion with
the fatherleſs and the widow; but alas! I could never
find her—ſhe is buried in the grave with my dear
parents!
I ſaw that the recital of her misfortunes had occasioned
a return of her unhappy malady; ſo taking her
by her hand, I led her into another apartment, and
perſuaded her to take ſome repoſe.
About ſix weeks after, I had the pleaſure of bestowing
her in marriage on the repentant Lord Ernolf.
Teachum performed the ceremony; and his
Lord gave him as a marriage portion, the promiſed
living of Wiltham.
Leonilla never after relapſed into her former disordered
ſlate of mind. She entreated that Cogdie
and his compantons might be forgiven. Her Lord
complied with her requeſt; and ſhe gave them a
ſum of money, to prevent poverty being an incentive
to future vice. But they were too far immerged
in all manner of deceit to think of amendment,
and ſoon returned to their old practices.
I cannot help here relating a circumſtance that
happened many years after.—The ſon which Olivia
[Page 099]
brought into the world, the fruit of her unfortunate
attachment to Cogdie, as he advanced in years, shewed
no ſigns of any of his father's vices in his disposition,
except a propenſity to gaming.—This propensity
he once indulged at a public gaming houſe,
where an old man having won from him a considerable
ſum of money, which the young ſpark imagining
was not won by fair play; high words aroſe, and
a challenge was given.
They met, fired, and the old man was wounded.—
The ſon of Olivia, though haſty in his temper,
was generous, humane, and forgiving; he wiſhed
not to take the life even of the man who had wronged
him.
He had him carried to his lodgings; and finding
him in a poor ſituation, he ſent for a ſurgeon, and
ſupplied him with all the neceſſaries and comforts of
life at his own expence.
A ſervant in the family who obſerved the frequent
viſits of Olivia's ſon to this mean, obſcure lodging,
told it as a ſecret to Olivia's maid, who directly told
it to her miſtreſs.
Olivia was then at my houſe; ſhe had often wished
an union might take place between her ſon and
Lucy Heartfree, my fair petitioner. The idea of a
ſecret miſtreſs immediately alarmed her.—She desired
me to go with her to the place the ſervant had
mentioned.
I complied.
When we entered the room, the firſt object that
ſtruck our ſight was her ſon helping a woman to lift
an infirm, ſickly old man from a chair to the bed;
he was, to all appearance, near his end.
The old man no ſooner ſaw us than he breathed
a dreadful groan, and fell back in his chair. Olivia
was greatly agitated—ſhe applied her ſalts to his
noſe.—He recovered—he gazed feebly on her. It
[Page 100]
is Olivia, ſaid he.—She ſtarted.—Do you not know
me, Olivia? have you forgot the wretched Cogdie?
Gracious Heaven! cried Olivia, catching hold of
her ſon's hand, it is your father.
My father! ſaid the youth; then I am a parricide.
Not ſo, my ſon, anſwered Cogdie; you have only
revenged your mother's injuries.—But, will you forgive
me.
May heaven forgive you as freely, ſaid Olivia.
Her ſon knelt, and craved forgiveneſs of his dying
father.
It is enough ſaid Cogdie. I forgive, and hope to
be forgiven.—His head ſunk on Olivia's ſhoulder—
he groaned and expired.
The CHILDREN. I think you have never read Mr. Teachum's
tranſlation, ſaid Emma, one evening, as I was sitting
by her, liſtening to the innocent prattle of Harriet
and her little companion—I had ſome months
before committed them to the care of Mrs.—of
Hammerſmith.
Though I had always heard the higheſt character
of this lady and her ſchool, yet my dear Harriet, who
at this time was at home for the holidays, raiſed it in
my opinion—Lucy, ſaid he, let us play at ſchool—
you ſhall be Mrs.—, and I will be a scholar.
You may always judge by the play of children
what company, regulations, and converſation, they
are uſed to.
Come here, Miſs Harriet, ſaid Lucy; I hope you
are very well this morning, and quite prepared to
ſay your taſk; you know I ſhall take no excuſe.
[Page 101]
Come, Ladies, it is eight o'clock, and not all
dreſſed yet!—Oh ſye! Miſs, your face and hands
are not waſhed!—how indelicate that is!—well, now
we are all ready—ſo you muſt kneel down and ſay
your prayers.
Do you always ſay your prayers at ſchool, Harriet?
ſaid I.
Oh, yes, Papa; Mrs. — not only makes us
ſay our prayers, but ſhe ſays her own prayers with
us.
Do you love Mrs. —, my dear?
Yes, indeed, Papa—I don't know any body but
what does love her, ſhe is ſo good to us all.
I was ſo pleaſed with the account the children
gave of this amiable woman, that by means of my
ring I frequently viſited her unſeen—there was always
the ſame decent regularity obſerved through the
whole houſe.
She had a relation lived with her—I would mention
ſome acts of humanity which I have ſeen this
relation perform, but I fear to hurt her delicacy—
Yet there is one which will never be eraſed from
my mind. It was the kindneſs ſhe ſhewed to a poor
young woman who was diſtreſſed, calumniated, and
beſet with dangers—Yet ſhe knew not the full force
of her benevolence; But I, who viſited, unſeen, the
object of her humanity, know, that ſhe drew her
from an horrid precipice, from whence ſhe muſt
have ſoon plunged into the gulf of infamy.
Oh! thou gentle pattern of benevolence and piety,
judge not the poor young woman from appearances—
could'ſt thou but ſee her heart, thou would'ſt
there read gratitude to thee written in indelible characters—
and when ſhe prays for thee, whoſe bounty
ſhe has received,ſhe humbly aſks of Heaven the power
to return it.—But I am always running from the
ſubject I begin with.
[Page 102]
My Emma had requeſted me to read Teachum's
tranſlation of the Eaſtern tale; ſo diſmiſſing the
children to the nurſery, and ſtirring up the fire, for
it was a cold evening in December, I ſtepped into
my ſludy, and brought out the manuſcript.
SADI and ZELIA. Sadi , the ſon of Mahadan, the rich poſſeſſor of
a ſertile valley, watered by a beautiful river—who
had ſlaves at his command, and was called by the
ſons of the Eaſt, Sadi the Happy.—Ah! what avails
poſſeſſions and treaſure?—and what is terreſtrial happiness
to man?—It vaniſheth like a dream—it departeth
like the miſt of the morning before the beams
of the ſun.
Sadi, the once rich and happy, is a ſlave and
wretched.—Go tell this to the daughters of joy—
ſound it in the ears of the ſons of pleaſure; for prosperity
has hardened their hearts, and made them callous
to the feelings of humanity.
Zelia was the faireſt among the daughters of Arabia;
ſhe was tall, and ſtraight as the pine tree;
ſtately as the young cedar; her ſkin was like the ripe
olive; her eyes, bright ſtars; her locks were like
the poliſhed ebony; and her teeth, fair rows of
pearl; her lips were the colour of the ruby; and
her breath like the breezes blowing from the ſpicy
iſlands.
I built a bower for my Zelia; I adorned it with
beautiful flowers, and planted ſweet ſmelling ſhrubs
around it.
With lofty trees I fenced out the ſun beams; and
the birds dwelt in their branches.—In the receſs was
a ſilver ſtream; the oſiers and wild flowers hung upon
its banks, and the ſwans ſported on its boſom.
I ſought my love among the daughters of the
[Page 103]
plain—I wooed her in the ſhady places—I brought
her to the bower I had planted—I culled for her the
choiceſt fruits—I brought her ſilks from the looms
of Perſia—I platted her hair with freſh flowers—I
put coſtly jewels in her ears—and with pearls made
bracelets for her arms.
We were the happieſt among the happy; in the
morning we aroſe together and worſhipped the
bright luminary of day.—We ſtrayed over the fertile
valleys—we ſported with the young ſawns; or retired
from the heat, and repoſed in the thick ſhade.
If I was in pain, ſhe would ſooth me.—I liſtened
to her angel voice all day; and at night I repoſed on
her boſom.
The curtain of night had fallen over us—the
ſtars ſhot their beams through the Heavens—the
voice of diſtreſs met our ears—the plaints of ſorrow
invaded our dwelling—we went forth from the
bower—we ſaw a Chriſtian overpowered by his
adverſary. The blood iſſued from his boſom—his
face was the picture of terror.
We bore him to our peaceful bower—we poure I
oil upon his wounds, and Zelia bound them up with
her hands.—She watched him with the care of a
ſiſter—ſhe gave him a part of our fruits, and brought
him milk from the young camels.—He was grateful
for the kindneſs we ſhewed—he ſwore by his
God it ſhould not be forgotten.—But, the word of a
man is like unto the wind; it maketh a ſound, passeth,
and is no more remembered.
He left our bower once at early dawn—he tarried
till the cloſe of evening.
Zelia had retired to reſt—the moon beams played
upon her face—I contemplated her ſleeping beauties.
The Chriſtian I had ſaved, entered the bower—
be brought with him a band of ruthleſs ruſſians.—
[Page 104]
He ſeized upon my lovely Zelia—he liſtened not unto
her cries—he put a chain upon her feet, and
bound the hands which had healed his wounds.
They took our coſtly ornaments and pearls—they
bound me with an heavy iron chain, and led us like
two ſlaves towards the ſea.—They put us on board a
ſhip he had prepared—they ſpread the ſails—the
wind blew from the ſhore, and in the morn we ſaw
the main before us.
They took the chains from off my hands and feet—
they gave me food, but parted me from Zelia.
I heard her lift up a voice of terror—I heard her
call on Sadi for aſſiſtance—I ruſhed into the room
where they confined her—I ſaw her in the embraces
of a villain—I ſnatched a poniard from his ſide—I
bade him inſtantly forego his prey.
Zelia like lightning darted from his arms—ſhe
cried, Now, Sadi!—Sadi, follow me!—then, from
the window ſprang into the ocean.
I ſent the poniard to the traitor's heart.—I felt its
warm blood guſh upon my hand; then haſtily obeyed
my charming Zelia.—I called her as I plunged
into the ſea—I ſought my Zelia in the world of waters;
but the ſpirits of bleſſed ſaints had ſeen her
virtue—they caught the lovely victim as ſhe fell, and
bore her on their wings to paradiſe.—I called for
death to take a wretched life—I ſought the friend of
miſery, but he fled from me.
Some other Chriſtians ſaved me from the ſea;
they gave me food, and treated me with kindneſs—
but the kindneſs of a Chriſtian is like the ſong of the
Syren, it ſooths the ſenſes, gains upon the heart;
then, unſuſpected leads to deſtruction.—They took
me with them to the Weſtern world—they fold the
wretched Sadi for a ſlave.
My haughty ſpirit was not uſed to bondage.—I
heard that England was the land of freedom—I hid
[Page 105]
myſelf on board an Engliſh ſhip, and ſailed unſeen
into the boundleſs main.—I left my hiding place,
and ſought the captain, and bowed my face toward
the deck, before him.
He told me, I no more ſhould be a ſlave—he
brought me with him to this land of freedom.
But, here I found I alſo was deceived; for, here
mankind are ſlaves to vice, to avarice, to luxury, and
to folly.—The man who brought me from the Western
world, demanded payment for my paſſage over.
Alas! I had been rifled by the Chriſtians.—I had
nought to give but grateful thanks and prayers.—
He who had ſaid I ſhould not be a ſlave, confined
me in a loathſome priſon houſe—this was my welcome
to the land of freedom.
For ſeven long years I never felt the air, nor ever
ſaw the chearful face of Heaven—but the angel of
death that viſits all the earth, then ſtopped the breath
of my hard perſecutor. I then was freed from out
the loathſome priſon, and for a moment I rejoiced in
liberty; but ſoon I felt the gnawing pangs of hunger.
I had no friend whoſe pity might relieve me—
the ſpacious city was to me a deſert, and I was
ſlarving in the land of plenty.—But, who can bear
the griping hand of famine; who can ſink under it
and not complain? I laid me down upon the damp,
cold ground—I groaned aloud, and tore my hair
through anguiſh; but many paſſed by, nor once regarded
me; and others ſcoffed and called me an impostor.
I thought the end of all my woes was come—
I ceaſed to groan, and waited death's approach;
but pity had not wholly fled the world; ſhe dwells
within the hearts of Chriſtian women—one brought
me ſomething to allay my hunger; another put
ſome money in my hand.—One ſeeming almoſt
as wretched as myſelf, looked at me, ſhook her head,
and dropt ſome tears. I felt her kindneſs more than
[Page 106]
thoſe before—the tear of pity healed my bleeding
heart.
But, the woes of Sadi ſoon will have an end; ſoon
ſhall I ſleep, and be at reſt for ever, for the ſorrows
of my heart overpower me, and pain and ſickneſs
bow me to the earth.—The lamp of life is very near
exhauſted; and when each night I lay me down to
reſt, I think not to behold another morning.
And what, alas! has wretched Sadi done? and,
who reduced him to this ſtate of miſery? Go tell the
tale to all the Eaſtern world—Go warn them to beware
of truſting Chriſtians; for Sadi ſaved one from
the jaws of death, and thus was his humanity rewarded.
The CONVERSATION. This is a ſtrange world, ſaid I, laying down the
manuſcript, and addreſſing my dear Emma—
The world, my love, ſhe replied, laying one hand
on my ſhoulder, and with the other wiping away a
drop which poor Sadi's ſtory had excited—the
world, my love, in itſelf is a charming place—it is
the people in it that makes it uncomfortable. Let
us view it at firſt coming from the hands of the Creator;
what beauty, what regularity and order! but
no ſooner was man created, than pride—avarice—
envy—revenge—and a long train of evils—
Not forgetting female vanity and curioſity, ſaid I,
looking archly at her.—
Nay, my dear, ſaid ſhe, don't attribute all your
evils to our ſex; for I am certain, that had not Adam
had a little curioſity in his own compoſition, he never
could have been prevailed on to ſtray from his
duty—but we are running from the ſubject, continued
ſhe.
[Page 107]
My remark was, that it is the vile diſpoſition of
many people in the world, not the world itſelf, that is
ſo diſagreeable to thoſe who are poſſeſſed of humanity
and feeling. What a delightful place it would
be, ſaid I, if harmony, peace, and love univerſally
reigned around us; if there was no ingratitude, no
revenge, no rapine, murder, theft, or perjury.
It would, ſaid ſhe; but it is not for us to ſay why
are things thus? let us, my love, endeavour to perform
our duty, and, as far as example will go, lead
others to do the ſame; and let us be thankful that
the world is not ſo full of allurements as to prevent
our preparing and hoping for a better; for my own
part, continued ſhe, paſſing her arm round my neck,
while her lovely countenance beamed with gratitude
and love, my cup overflows with bleſſings; I feel no
ſorrow except it is when I reflect on the vices or sorrows
of my fellow creatures; yet, I muſt not expect
to paſs this life exempt from woe.—Poor Sadi has
had a life of miſery, it is true, but ſhall we arraign
the power omnipotent, and ſay, why was it ſo?
My dear, Emma, ſaid I, I did not mean to complain
of the diſpenſations of Providence when I ſaid
it is a ſtrange world; but does it not appear wonderful
that a man can ſo far forget a benefit as to treat
his benefactor with cruelty?
It is unaccountable, ſaid ſhe; and yet we hear of
it in more inſtances than one—what a ſtriking proof
of ingratitude is related in Addiſon's pathetic ſtory
of Incle and Yarico—
Oh, a propos, ſaid I, you never gave me your opinion
of the opera taken from that ſtory—
I was greatly pleaſed with it, ſhe replied; I think
the author ſhews great judgment in the management
of his plot; for after having excited in our
imagination a proper horror for the avarice and ingratitude
of Incle, by contraſting it with the blunt
[Page 108]
honeſty of Trudge, he makes his hero repent, and,
by unexpectedly bringing him to act with honor and
humanity towards his kind preſerver, leaves no impression
on the mind of the audience but an entire
love and admiration of virtue.
I think the remark extremely juſt, ſaid I, which
Incle makes in the concluſion of the piece—that, his
contracted ideas, and graſping diſpoſition, was chiefly
owing to his education.—
There is nothing, replied my Emma, which, in
my opinion, ſhould be ſo carefully inculcated in the
mind of a child as humanity—there are many parents
who, out of a miſtaken fondneſs for their children,
will ſuffer them, by way of amuſement, to rob
birds neſts, catch butterflies, &c. and transfix them
with pins, and a thouſand other whims and fancies
which are the height of cruelty; theſe things by degrees
harden their hearts, and they can afterwards
practiſe cruelty on their fellow creatures without repugnance.—
I would always teach my children to be
tender even to the ſmalleſt inſect that has life; if,
indeed, they are obnoxious or poiſonous, and selfpreservation
leads us to deſtroy them, let them be
diſpatched quick and with as little pain as poſſible.—
Then opening a volume of our immitable Shakespeare,
ſhe read the following paſſage in Meaſure
for Meaſure:
The poor blind beetle which we tread upon,
In corporeal ſuff'rance feels as much
As when a giant falls.
Hail, humanity! fair daughter of Heaven, it is
thou, bright angel, that can ſmooth the bed of pain,
and blunt the ſharpeſt arrow of diſtreſs: come, thou
celeſtial gueſt! and dwell with me, and with thee
bring thy ſweet companion gratitude.
[Page 109]
Almighty Power! creator of the univerſe, ſaid I,
teach me to ſhew my gratitude to thee by practiſing
humanity towards my fellow creatures.
The REGISTER OFFICE. I hope you will not diſappoint me, Madam,
ſaid a young woman to an old fat dame, who kept a
Regiſter Office for hiring of ſervants—I had entered
the houſe by means of my ring.
The young woman was ſomething below the middle
ſize, her countenance was dejected, and ſhe appeared
not to be uſed to ſervitude.
You had better ſit down and reſt yourſelf, my
dear, ſaid the old woman.
I will, if you pleaſe, replied the other; for it is a
long walk from Lambeth.
She entered a little parlour, and ſat down; when
I learnt from their converſation that the young woman,
whom I ſhall henceforth call Mariana, was applying
for a place as governeſs to one or two young
ladies, and was promiſed by the woman who kept
the office that ſhe ſhould be recommended to Lady
Allworth, who wanted a governeſs for her two
daughters.
It is now ſix weeks, ſaid Mariana, ſince I was
firſt propoſed to Lady Allworth, and I ſhould be glad
to know whether ſhe will have me or no, for my circumstances
are ſuch as render it abſolutely neceſſary
that I ſhould have ſome place in a ſhort time—To-morrow,
Mrs. L—y, I hope you will go with me.
The old woman promiſed faithfully to attend her,
and at ten o'clock the next morning was appointed
for her to call.
Then to-morrow I will ſee thee again, poor, gentle
Mariana, ſaid I.
[Page 110]
I was by no means pleaſed with the woman who
kept the office; for while Mariana was reſting herself,
two young men of faſhion came into the room.
I bluſh to think, that their being young men of
faſhion rendered me uneaſy on the poor girl's account.
There were ſome very intelligent looks paſſed between
them and the old woman; and immediately
on their leaving the room Mariana was invited to
dine the enſuing day.
At ten, the next day, Mariana again repaired to
the office, and was again diſappointed of waiting on
Lady Allworth.
I know not what to do, ſaid ſhe, as ſhe left the
houſe; and a tear ſtole down her cheek—She had
refuſed the invitation to dinner, and was proceeding
with melancholy ſteps towards her home—I followed
her.
When ſhe entered the houſe ſhe was wet, cold,
and hungry; but there was neither fire nor refreshment.
She ſat down at the end of a long table, and leaning
her head upon her hands, the tears flowed plenteously
down her pale face—ſhe looked the picture of
dumb deſpair.
I was thinking of ſome method to relieve her,
when a ſhort, fat old gentleman entered the room.
I read in your face, Mariana, ſaid he, that you
have had no ſucceſs to-day.—
She ſhook her head, and aſked his advice how to
proceed.
I would adviſe you to go to Lady Allworth yourself—
write a letter, ſend it up, and wait for an answer
from her ladyſhip.
Mariana wiped her eyes, wrote a letter, and then
proceeded to meaſure back the weary ſteps ſhe had
trod before.
[Page 111]
Poor girl! ſaid I, as I followed her, I ſhould like
to know how you were reduced to this ſituation;
but I will not leave you till I ſee you are likely to
get ſome ſettlement—Youth and innocence without
friends or money, in ſuch a place as London, muſt
have a hard ſtruggle to keep free from vice; and
will find it impoſſible to keep free from cenſure.
I wiſh Lady Allworth may be as much prepossessed
in your favour as I am—but perhaps ſhe will
not ſee you; and ſhould ſhe not, you ſhall not be
loſt for want of a friend.
I do verily believe, that during our walk from
Lambeth to St. James's Street, I was almoſt as much
agitated as Mariana herſelf.
She tapped modeſtly at the door; but I could ſee
it was humiliating to her.
A ſervant appeared, and ſhe was inſtantly admitted—
Will you deliver this to Lady Allworth? ſaid ſhe,
preſenting the letter.
The ſervant looked at her with compaſſion—I
thus tranſlated his looks: this poor girl is come to
entreat a favour of my Lady; I will not be the
means of her not obtaining it; I wiſh ſhe may meet
with ſucceſs.
Sir James Allworth, ſaid I, is a benevolent man:
he never ſuffers a petitioner to be treated with rudeness
or diſreſpect: I can read his humanity in the
countenance of his domeſtic.
I had hardly time for the reflection before Mariand
was deſired to walk up ſtairs—I perceived that
ſhe trembled as ſhe aſcended; but had her fears been
ever ſo great, they muſt all have vaniſhed at the ſight
of Lady Allworth.
[Page 112]
The DRESSING ROOM.
She was an elegant woman, though arrived to an
age when the bloom and ſprightlineſs of youth is
paſt; yet her face had a benignity about it that diffused
itſelf over all her features, and ſeemed enlivened
by a ray of celeſtial light; her fine black eyes
were of that ſort that would pierce the inmoſt recesses
of a guilty ſoul, but withal, tempered with ſo
much benevolence, that to the innocent they ſeemed
to beam only with humanity and compaſſion.—Her
form was majeſtic, and in her manner was a mixture
of dignity, eaſe, and ſweetneſs.
Mariana's countenance brightened up when ſhe
ſaw this lovely woman—ſhe curtiſed, and a feint
bluſh tinged her cheeks—
You are the perſon who wrote this letter? aſked
her Ladyſhip.
Yes, Madam.
Pray, who was it that pretended to recommend
you to me?
Mariana informed her.
Good God! cried Lady Allworth; I know nothing
of the woman; I never applied to her for a
ſervant in my life; and ſhould never have thought
of applying to an office for a governeſs.
Mariana turned pale, and with difficulty reſtrained
her tears.
But pray, continued her Ladyſhip, pray, Ma'am,
inform me how you came to apply to an office:—
have you no friends?
But one, Madam, and ſhe is not in a line to recommend
me.
Poor girl! ſaid Lady Allworth, ſoftly—ſhe
thought the exclamation of pity too humiliating to
[Page 113]
be addreſſed to Mariana herſelf: it was an involuntary
motion of the lips dictated by a feeling
heart.
Pray, ſit down, Ma'am continued her Ladyſhip,
and, if it is not diſagreeable, inform me how you
came into ſuch a place as London without friends:
I feel myſelf intereſted in your behalf, and if it is
in my power I will ſerve you.
Mariana ſat down, and with a voice of timidity,
accompanied with a look of gratitude, in a few words,
acquainted Lady Allworth with her ſtory.
My father, Madam, is an officer in the army;
my mother dying while I was yet an inſant, my father
married a lady in America, who brought him an
ample fortune—he took me over to America when
only eight years old, and we remained there in the
utmoſt harmony till the unhappy breach between
Great Britain and her Colonies. My father refusing
to join the Americans, his property was confiscated,
and he returned with his family to England
in a diſtreſſed ſituation.—We have been in
England ſeven years; the family has been ſickly and
expenſive—my poor father was involved in debt—
I could not bear the idea of adding to his expences
I left my home, which is in the country, and came
to town to a diſtant relation, in hopes, by induſtry,
to obtain a living; this relation I have undeſignedly
offended; as alſo ſome who were nearer allied—
my efforts to live by induſtry have failed, and I find
myſelf under the neceſſity of ſeeking a ſervice—I had
flattered myſelf with the hopes of being engaged in
your Ladyſhip's family; but alas! I am disappointed
in all my undertakings.
Has the woman who pretended to recommend,
got any money from you? ſaid her Ladyſhip.
Indeed, Madam, ſhe has got all I had.
[Page 114]
Lady Allworth drew forth her purſe—Mariana
aroſe to take her leave.
Stop a moment, ſaid Lady Allworth—ſit down
again—you muſt want ſome refreſhment.
A glaſs of wine and a biſcuit was ordered.
Call on me again in a day or two, ſaid her Ladyship;
I will try to do ſomething for you; in the
mean time accept of this trifle.
I could not ſee what ſhe put into her hand; but I
am ſure it was the manner of the giver, not the gift
itſelf, that ſunk ſo deep into Mariana's heart: it was
that which made her exclaim as ſhe left the houſe—
Dear Lady, when I forget my obligations to thee,
may I ceaſe to live.
Lady Allworth kept her word, and recommended
Mariana to a Lady in whoſe family ſhe remained
till ill health obliged her to quit it.
Ye fair daughters of Britain, whoſe charms are
the theme of every tongue, the admiration of every
eye, and whoſe praiſe is ſounded to the moſt diſtant
kingdoms, learn from the amiable behaviour of a
Lady Allworth, how to attain thoſe charms which
neither time nor accident can diminiſh—the beauties
of that Lady's perſon might have rendered her
univerſally admired; but it is the goodneſs of her
heart alone that could create univerſal love and veneration.
The FASHIONABLE FRIEND. As I paſſed a houſe in the cloſe of the evening,
the window ſhutters being open, I ſaw a woman sitting
by a table, her cheek reſting upon her left hand,
and a pen in her right—ſhe wrote—then pauſed—
then wrote again: it ſeemed to be a ſubject that required
reflection. A genteel young woman
[Page 115]
knocked at the door—I had time on my hands, ſo being
rather curious to be preſent at a female tete-a-tete,
I put on my ring, and when the door was opened I
entered with the viſitor.
She was hardly ſeated, before, obſerving the writing
apparatus, ſhe ſays, So my dear Ellen, you are
exerciſing your fertile genius—you are certainly a
charming girl!—what would I not give to poſſeſs
ſuch a talent—pray, may I ſee your performance,
or will you be ſo obliging as to read it to me?
Ellen took up the paper, threw it on the window,
and ſaid, it was only a ſonnet not worth looking
at—
Oh, you ſad girl? how can you mortify me ſo?
I am ſure if the ſonnet is the production of your
own genius it muſt be delightful—pray do let me ſee
it.
If it will give you any pleaſure, ſaid Ellen, I will
read it to you;—but, I aſſure you, it is but a trifle—
ſhe took it up and read—
From the day of my birth until now,
                           I've ſtill been accuſtom'd to grief;
My mother ſhe nurs'd me in woe,
                           Her ſorrows admit no relief;
She lull'd me to ſleep with her ſighs,
                           Tears mix'd with the milk of her breaſt;
For oft would they ſtart in her eyes,
                           At the ſight of an object diſtreſs'd.
To feel for another man's woes,
                           Is a bleſſing to Britiſh hearts giv'n;
A bleſſing which pity beſtows;
                           And pity's the daughter of heav'n.
All nature rejoic'd at her birth;
                           Humanity foſter'd the child;
[Page 116]
And when ſhe appear'd upon earth,
                           Each virtue approvingly ſmil'd.
Oh, 'tis divine! exclaimed the viſitor, whoſe
name I found was Greenham;—pray, my dear Ellen,
favour me with a copy of it.
Ellen promiſed to comply with her requeſt.
I wonder, ſaid Mrs. Greenham, why you don't
publiſh your works; it is a thouſand pities ſuch
charming poems as you in general write ſhould be
buried in oblivion.
I ſometimes, ſaid Ellen, think I will lay ſome of
my little productions before the impartial public;
but I am quite terrified at the idea of expoſing myself
to the ridicule of my own ſex or the ſatire of the
other.—
You are too humble, my ſweet friend, cries Mrs.
Greenham, there is not the leaſt occaſion for your
fears—I am certain your works would be universally
read and admired; and it will be injuſtice both to
yourſelf and the world, to deprive them of the gratification
of peruſing them, and yourſelf of the ſame
you would certainly acquire and undoubtedly deserve.
It is rather ſurpriſing, thought I, that one woman
ſhould be ſo liberal in the praiſes of another.—I
looked intently in Mrs. Greenham's face; and methought
I read diſſimulation in every feature—I took
an attentive view of Ellen, and plainly diſcovered
that ſhe ſaw through the thin veil of her viſitor's
flattery; and though ſhe could not but liſten to her
with ſilent civility, ſhe, in her heart, deſpiſed her envy
and ill nature much leſs than the ſpecious arts
with which ſhe endeavoured to cover them.
When Mrs. Greenham took her leave, I followed
her; determined to hear in what manner ſhe
[Page 117]
ſpoke of Ellen when abſent from her. She went
immediately home and entertained her huſband and
ſeveral viſitors at the expence of the inoffenſive Ellen.
I found her, ſaid ſhe, ſcribbling as uſual: I
praiſed her extravagantly, and adviſed her to publiſh
her works—ſhe ſaid ſhe had ſome thoughts of it.
I wiſh ſhe would to my heart, for I ſhould like to
ſee her heartily laughed at—I am ſure women have
no buſineſs with pens in their hands, they had better
mend their cloaths, and look after their family.
And pray, why not Madam, ſaid an old gentleman
who had liſtened attentively to this loquacious
harangue, why may not a woman if ſhe has leiſure
and genius, take up her pen to gratify both herſelf
and friends. I am not aſhamed to acknowledge
that I have peruſed the productions of ſome of our
female pens, with the higheſt ſatisfaction; and am
happy when I find any woman has ſo large a fund
of amuſement in her own mind. I never heard a
woman who was fond of her pen complain of the
tediouſneſs of time; nor, did I ever know ſuch a
woman extravagantly fond of dreſs, public amusements,
or expenſive gaiety; yet, I have ſeen many
women of genius prove themſelves excellent mothers,
wives, and daughters.
But, Sir, replied Mrs. Greenham, the Lady in
queſtion only fancies herſelf poſſeſſed of genius; her
writings are the moſt inſipid things in nature.
If I could ſee ſome of them, ſaid the old gentleman,
I ſhould be a better judge.
Then you ſhall preſently, for I expect ſhe will
come and ſpend an hour or two with me this evening,
when I can eaſily prevail with her to ſhew you
ſome of her pretty ſcrawls.
Ellen ſoon after made her appearance.—Mrs.
Greenham received her with a vaſt ſhow of
[Page 118]
affection, and ſoon began a converſation which led to literary
productions.
I know of nobody ſo clever in this way, ſaid ſhe,
as my little friend Ellen here—do, my dear, oblige
the company by reciting ſome of your poems; or,
perhaps, you may have ſome in your pocket—I know
you always have a treaſure there.
Indeed Madam, ſaid Ellen, I only write for amusement;
nor can it be ſuppoſed my performances
have any merit worthy the attention of this company.
Oh, you are always ſo diffident—
It is a ſure ſign of merit, ſaid the old gentleman.—
But, pray Madam, addreſſing himſelf to Ellen, do
you devote much of your time to your pen?
I am ſo ſituated, Sir, ſhe replied, that I am unavoidably
obliged to paſs many hours entirely by myself—
In the former part of my life I have been engaged
in many ſcenes, the remembrance of which,
in theſe ſolitary hours, would be extremely painful,
were it not for the relaxation and amuſement I find
in the exerciſe of my pen —I have but few acquaintance,
ſhe continued, and even thoſe few might, by
too frequent viſits, grow tired of my company. I
ſeldom go out but I meet with ſome object to engage
my attention; and often when reflecting on
the various ſcenes around me, I fall into a train of
ideas which I feel a ſort of pleaſure in committing
to paper; and in general they ſerve to occupy the
next leiſure or ſolitary hour.
And an excellent way of ſpending time too, replied
the old gentleman.—I am certain, Madam, you
are never leſs alone than when by yourſelf.
It is true, Sir, ſaid ſhe, I do find a great deal of
entertainment from this method of employing myself;
but it is no reaſon for me to ſuppoſe, becauſe
[Page 119]
I am amuſed in writing, another perſon ſhould be
amuſed in reading what I have written.
But, I do aſſure you, ſaid Mrs. Greenham, it will
give us all a great deal of ſatisfaction to hear a little
of your performance.—Now do, Ellen, oblige us.
Ellen was of a temper that could not bear entreaties—
ſhe had not power to refuſe a requeſt made
with any tolerable degree of ſincerity and earnestness.
I am always in pain for people of this disposition;
they often do things abſolutely diſagreeable
to themſelves, becauſe they have not ſtrength of mind
to refuſe peremptorily, but do it ſo faintly, and with
ſuch evident marks of pain, that a ſecond or third
requeſt always conquers.
I know a young man of this diſpoſition who is
intoxicated two or three times a week, though he
is not naturally addicted to inebriety, and in general
ſuffers exceedingly after it, merely becauſe he
cannot reſiſt the earneſt importunities of his
friends.
I know a woman too, who, whenever ſhe goes
into a ſhop, lays out twice as much money as ſhe
intended, becauſe the ſhop-keeper intreats her to
have this, and that is ſo vaſtly pretty, or amazingly
cheap—and ſhe imperceptibly launches into extravagancies
which ſhe afterwards heartily repents.—
Now, though ſuch a pliability of temper may be extremely
pleaſing and agreeable in domeſtic life, it
expoſes a perſon to a thouſand inconveniencies, improprieties,
and irregularities. I would have a man
or woman maintain an opinion of their own; and
when reſolved to refuſe a requeſt which they may
judge imprudent or improper to grant, refuſe it with
ſuch ſteadineſs and dignity as may at once prevent
their being teized into an action which their reaſon
revolts againſt.
[Page 120]
But, this is by way of digreſſion, ſo I beg pardon,
and return.
Ellen, urged by the united requeſts of the company,
and a little female vanity which dwelt in her
own boſom, at length complied, and recited in a
graceful manner, a ſhort, pathetic tale, written in the
elegiac ſtile, and greatly in the manner of Shenstone.
The old gentleman beſtowed no praiſes on it, but
he honored the recital with a tear, and ſoon after
left the company—when the inoffenſive Ellen became
a butt for the ſatire, ridicule, envy, and ill-nature
of thoſe that remained, and whoſe tongues had
only been reſtrained by his preſence. Yet Mrs.
Greenham profeſſed an unbounded friendſhip for
her, and declared there was nothing but what ſhe
would freely do to ſerve her—but ſhe was a fashionable
friend.
Friendſhip is a word univerſally uſed, but little
underſtood; there are a number of people who
ſtile themſelves friends, who never knew what it
was to have an anxious thought for the perſon for
whom they pretend this violent friendſhip, in the
female world in particular. I make no doubt but
there are numbers of women who, ſhould they be
informed whilſt at cards, of the greateſt misfortune
having befallen one of their moſt intimate friends,
would cry, Poor thing, I am vaſtly ſorry—I had a
great regard for her—and then inquire what is
trumps? or how gows the game? I can divide the
world into five diſtinct claſſes of friends, for there is
hardly any one perſon breathing but boaſts of feeling
that exalted attachment for ſome one or other of
their fellow mortals.—Among the men, is the professing
friend and inſidious friend; among the women,
the oſtentatious, and the envious friend; and
[Page 121]
a ſmall parcel may be culled of both ſexes and ſet under
the denomination of real friends.
The PROFESSING FRIEND. I will try him, however, ſaid Lavinia, wiping
her eyes, for I have often heard him ſay he valued
my dear Ferdinand above all other men—and ſure
he will not let him languiſh in a priſon for the want
of ſuch a trifle, and which we can ſo ſoon repay.
It was a day or two after I was in poſſeſſion of
my ring.—I had ſtepped into a ſhop to buy a pair
of gloves, when a young woman behind the counter
addreſſed theſe words to her companion:
You may try him, Lavinia, ſaid her companion,
but I do not think you will ſucceed; beſide, my dear,
your circumſtances are not ſo bad as to lead you to
fear your huſband's confinement.
They are worſe than you imagine, Eliza, ſaid
ſhe; we have, beſides this bill, ſeveral more to pay,
which we are equally unable to provide for.—Mr.
Woudbe has profeſſed the warmeſt friendſhip for
my huſband, and I think he will be glad of the opportunity
to convince him it was not merely professional.
I had by this time purchaſed my gloves; and being
anxious to know how Lavinia would ſucceed in
her undertaking, I juſt left the ſhop, put on my
ring, and returned.
Lavinia had left the ſhop, and was in the parlour.
A perſon came in, who from his appearance I
ſhould have ſuppoſed a man of faſhion; yet, I
knew him to be a mechanic—his affected air and
gait ſpoke him a finiſhed coxcomb—it was the
identical Mr. Woudbe; he aſked for her huſband;
[Page 122]
he was not at home—he ſat down, fell into conversation,
frequently intimated his ſervent wiſhes for
their proſperity, and declared he deſired nothing
more than an opportunity to convince his worthy
friend Ferdinand how much he had his intereſt and
happineſs at heart.
Lavinia's eyes beamed pleaſure and gratitude;
ſhe thought it a favourable, golden opportunity—ſhe
told him her huſband's circumſtances were embarrassed,
but the loan of eighty or an hundred pounds
would ſet them quite at eaſe; and they ſhould by industry
and oeconomy ſoon be enabled to repay it.
She pleaded with the moſt perſuaſive eloquence;
love animated her countenance; an anxious tear
glittered in her eye—but the profeſſing Mr. Woudbe
had none of the finer feelings which dignify the
man; he loved oſtentation, ſhow, and grandeur;
but he had no idea of any pleaſure in life ſuperior
to that he felt when dreſſed in a finer coat than his
neighbour.—Two guineas was not too much for a
ticket for a ball, but a ſhilling was extravagantly
thrown away in relieving the wants of a diſtreſſed
fellow-creature.
To ſuch a man, the tearful eye, the anxious countenance
alternately red and pale, the trembling
frame, and ſtruggling ſigh of Lavinia, pleaded in
vain; he heard her with indifference; he conſoled
her in language in which was an equal mixture of
pity and contempt; and I was informed by a person
who knew him, that it was the laſt viſit he ever
paid his friend Ferdinand.
This is a ſort of friend which the world ſwarms
with—profeſſions coſt nothing—give me the man
whoſe heart, alive to every dictate of humanity,
ſtays not till he is aſked to do a favour, but eagerly
ſeeks out opportunities to render ſervice to mankind.
[Page 123]
Anxious for the fate of Lavinia, a ſhort time after,
I made another inviſible viſit—when I entered
the houſe, every thing was in confuſion; and Lavinia
herſelf looked like Melancholy muſing on a
ſcene of woe. I was caſting in my own mind fifty
different plans to find out the real cauſe of her distress,
and, if poſſible, relieve it without hurting her
feelings, by letting her know that her neceſſities
were diſcovered by a ſtranger, when a little man
entered the houſe, whoſe features, however plain,
and, to the generality of the world, unintereſting,
immediately prepoſſeſſed me in his favour.
Lavinia, ſaid he, I hear you are moving, and am
come to ſee if I can be of any ſervice to you—
where is your huſband?
A guſh of tears was all ſhe could anſwer.
Dear girl, do not weep, ſaid he—is it pecuniary
matters that diſtreſs you? ſpeak Lavinia; will twenty
or thirty guineas be of any ſervice to you?
She heſitated; but at laſt confeſſed that they were
greatly diſtreſſed for money; and that her huſband
was obliged to keep out of the way of his creditors.
I will be with you again in a few moments, ſaid
he, darting out of the houſe.
I waited his return.
In leſs than half an hour he came back, and put a
ſum of money into Lavinia's hand, which entirely
calmed her fears.
Oh! Sir, ſaid ſhe, how ſhall I ever return this
obligation.
By never mentioning it, he replied: let me beg it
may be buried in oblivion—I ſhall be offended if
ever I hear it talked of—it gives me pleaſure that I
had it in my power to ſerve ſo worthy a man as your
huſband; and reſtore tranquility to two hearts which
were formed for love and domeſtic happineſs.
[Page 124]
He ſhook her hand cordially and left her.
How does thy humility exalt thee, my generous
friend, ſaid Lavinia, when he was gone; but actions
like thine cannot be hid; it would be an injury to
mankind to conceal them—yet it is not an action to
be blazoned from the trump of common ſame, but
gratitude ſhall ſnatch a gentler clarion, and tell thy
virtues to the liſtening few who know how to admire
and imitate them.
I left her with a heart at eaſe.
It was the cloſe of the evening—paſſing through a
public ſtreet, I heard the ſound of muſic, and ſaw a
room in an houſe of entertainment elegantly illuminated—
I took the advantage of my ring, and
went in—It was an entertainment given at the expence
of Mr. Woudbe—the kind, the friendly, Mr.
Woudbe, was laviſhing in folly and diſſipation a
ſum which might have lightened the hearts of the
miſerable, and dried the tear of deſpondency—But
he could not ſhew his taſte in giving or lending money—
he could diſplay his elegant fancy by ſpending
it on trifles, or, in reality, throwing it away.
The ATTORNEY. You muſt not loſe a moment, Sir, ſaid a foot-man,
addreſſing a man in the coffee room, whom I
knew to be an attorney—You muſt make all poſſible
haſte, for my maſter cannot live three hours.
The attorney was a tall, meagre man; had a great
deal of ſervile politeneſs and outward ſanctity in his
manner; yet there was an under deſigning caſt with
his eyes, which made me ſuſpect the integrity of his
heart.
He is going to make a will, ſaid I—perhaps ſome
rich, old miſer is at the point of death, and is willing
[Page 125]
to diſpoſe of his hoards in the beſt manner he can—
I will accompany the attorney.
We were ſat down at the door of an handſome
houſe, and I followed Mr. Vellum unſeen into the
chamber of the ſick man.
He appeared to be between the age of forty and
fifty; his looks were venerable, but his features were
marked by the hand of death—behind his pillow,
ſupporting his head, ſat a lovely girl about fourteen
years old, who while ſhe, with her hand, wiped away
the ſweat which ſtood upon the forehead of the dying
man, bedewed it again with her tears—At the foot
of the bed ſtood a youth ſomething older than the
girl; he leaned againſt the ſupporter of the bed;
the curtain partly hid his face, but the part which
was expoſed to view, ſpoke filial love, anxiety and
ſorrow.
My good friend, Mr. Vellum, ſaid the ſick man,
ſeebly ſtretching out his hand, I am glad you are
come: I feel the ſprings of life almoſt worn out,
and I wiſh to ſettle my worldly affairs, that my dear
Julietta and Horace may have no trouble from my
relations.
You know, Mr. Vellum, I married their mother
contrary to the inclination of my father, and on that
account, at his deceaſe, found myſelf poſſeſſed of but
a ſmall patrimony: willing to provide, not only for
the preſent moment, but alſo for futurity, I entered
into partnerſhip with an eminent merchant, and my
ſucceſs being beyond my hopes, I not only lived in
affluence, but am enabled to leave my beloved children
ſufficient to place them above temptation, and
give them the exalted pleaſure of adminiſtering to
the neceſſities of their fellow creatures—I have experienced
ſo much malignity and envy from my own
relations, that I think them by no means fit
[Page 126]
guardians for my children. My wife was poor, and an
orphan; ſhe had many relations, but no friends.
Thoſe who will not befriend a deſolate orphan, are
not proper people to be entruſted with the care and
management of young, volatile minds—You, my
friend, have a ſon, about the age of Horace; and a
daughter ſome years older than Julietta; they will
be ſit companions for each other. I do not think my
children can be happier than under your guardianship
and protection—I have in the funds thirty thousand
pounds— I deſire you will divide it equally between
my children; and in caſe of their dying
without iſſue, it ſhall devolve to you and yours—I
ſhall leave you other teſtimonies of my regard, and a
few legacies to my ſervants—pray be quick, I am
haſtening toward my end—
Mr. Vellum wrote the will, the old gentleman
ſigned it, and two of the ſervants witneſſed it.
Mr. Vellum ſeemed greatly affected, profeſſed
much eſteem for the lovely children, and declared the
whole ſtudy of his life ſhould be to make them happy—
he embraced, and pretended to weep over his
friend, but methought there was more of joy than
ſorrow in his tears—The will in his poſſeſſion gave
him greater ſatisfaction, than the death of his friend
gave him pain.
The DEPARTURE. The old gentleman deſiring to be left to himself
a few moments, the attorney and the children
withdrew—He offered up ſome pious ejaculations,
requeſting the bleſſings ſo abundantly ſhower'd on
himſelf might be continued to his children; his
heart overflowed with gratitude for the many mercies
he had enjoyed; he petitioned health and
[Page 127]
prosperity for his friends, penitence and pardon for his
enemies, and finiſhed his prayer by ſervently recommending
his ſoul to the mercy of that Being who
had guided and ſupported him through life. This
eſſential duty finiſhed, he again called for his children.
My dear Horace and Julietta, ſaid he, I am summoned
from you; early, my children, you are bereſt
of the love, attention, and advice of a parent, who had
no other regard for life than as it contributed to
your happineſs—I have but one precept I with to
inculcate and impreſs upon your minds: deal by all
mankind as you wiſh and expect them to deal by
you; let nothing, my children, alienate your affections
from each other; and remember to reſpect
your brother and ſiſter mortals, not according to the
homage which the miſtaken world may think due
to wealth and grandeur, but according to their own
intrinſic worth and merit.
Horace, reſpect virtue wherever you find it; nor
dare on any account uſe the wealth of which Heaven
has appointed you ſteward, to corrupt integrity, or
pervert innocence; ſhun the ſociety of the licentious,
though dignified with titles; regard not the ſcoffs of
the libertine, but preſerve unſhaken your integrity
to God and man.
Julietta, my beloved girl, fly from the voice of adulation;
beware of inſidious villains, who ſpread their
ſpecious ſnares for youth and innocence; guard
with unceaſing vigilance your honor and your ſame;
yet, my dear girl, exult not in the pride of your own
virtue, nor triumph over the wretched fallen of your
ſex; be uniformly good; be innocent yourſelf, but
pity and lament the miſery of thoſe who have forfeited
that ineſtimable jewel; pour the balm of comfort
into their bleeding hearts, and learn from their
errors to rectify your own.
[Page 128]
Oh, I am going—one more embrace—Almighty
Father bleſs—bleſs my—Children, he would have
ſaid, but the ghaſtly monarch ſealed up his lips for
ever.
Oh! take me with you, dear ſaint, cried Julietta,
wildly claſping her hands—ſhe threw herſelf on the
bed and fainted.
The grief of Horace was manly, but expreſſive—
the tears rolled down his cheeks—he walked about
the room in ſilent agony—till ſeeing his ſiſter's situation,
he forgot his own ſorrows, and endeavoured
to revive and comfort her.
The ORPHANS. Lovely children, ſaid I, as I left the houſe, you
are now launched into a world full of temptations to
vice, which will approach you under the faſcinating
form of pleaſure.—May you avoid the rocks and
quick ſands on which ſo many youths of both ſexes
are wrecked.
I do not like Mr. Vellum, ſaid I, making a quick
tranſition from the orphans to the guardian.—I wiſh
he may diſcharge his truſt faithfully.
Hang this ſuſpicion, continued I, it is an uncharitable,
unchriſtian-like thing that has crept into my
mind under the ſhape of anxiety for the welfare of
thoſe poor orphans.—There's another fooliſh idea
now; how is it poſſible a perſon can be poor who has
fifty thouſand pounds to their fortune; it may ſeem
an inexplicable riddle to the narrow minded race of
mortals who place the ſummum bonum of ſublunary
happineſs in an oſtentatious diſplay of wealth and
grandeur: but I can aſſure them a perſon poſſeſſed
of fifty times that ſum, may be poor, and ſo poor as
to be miſerable.
[Page 129]
Impoſſible, exclaims pretty Miſs Biddy, the
tradeſman's daughter, who juſt returned from boarding
ſchool, is informed by mamma that ſhe is to have
five thouſand pounds for her fortune.
Impoſſible, had I ten more added to that five, I
ſhould be the happieſt mortal breathing—and it is
quite out of the queſtion to think of ever being poor
again.
A well-a-day, ſaid I, 'tis a ſtrange thing; but, to
me, poverty of ideas and meanneſs of ſpirit are greater
afflictions than poverty of purſe and meanneſs of
birth.
When a man is alone, and in a thinking mood,
his imagination inſenſibly runs from one thing to
another, till he entirely wanders from the ſubject
that firſt engaged his attention.
Now, this being my caſe, I had got into ſuch a
train of thought on the various kinds of poverty with
which the world is infeſted, that it was with difficulty
I brought my mind back to Horace and Julietta;
and, when I did, that deviliſh ſuſpicion of
their guardian's integrity would creep along with
them.
Pſhaw ſaid I, what buſineſs have I to ſuſpect a
man of baſeneſs, to which, perhaps, he may be an
entire ſtranger. I declare, weak mortal as I am, I
find ſufficient employ in correcting my own errors,
without ſearching out the errors of others.
I endeavoured to give my thoughts another turn,
but in vain, they involuntarily turned back to the
orphans, and I wandered on, muſing on the uncertainty
of their future happineſs.
[Page 130]
The GIRL of the TOWN.
For ever curſed be that deteſted place, ſaid a
wretched daughter of folly, as ſhe paſſed a tavern in
Holborn; and for ever execrated be that night on
which I firſt entered it.
She caught my hand as I paſſed her.
Give me a glaſs of wine, ſaid ſhe.
The watch had juſt gone ten.
I looked in her face—ſhe was pretty; and I thought
her features were not of the ſort which never expreſs
ſhame; her eyes were caſt down—I thought I ſaw
a tear ſteal from them—I touched her cheek, it was
wet, yet ſhe forced a ſmileſ—I took hold of her hand,
it was cold, it trembled.
My compaſſion was ſtrongly excited—by an involuntary
motion I drew her hand under my arm, and
walked on in ſilence till we came to another houſe of
entertainment.—I then gave her ſomething to procure
refreſhment, and bade her good night.
Then you will not go in with me, ſaid ſhe, in tremulous
accents.
I muſt not, ſaid I, I have a wife.
Go, then, ſaid ſhe, letting go my arm. Yet, I
thought I had found a friend, and would have told
you ſuch a tale—but, no matter—I am wretched—
I have made others ſo—I will not ſin againſt conviction.
While this laſts, ſaid ſhe, I will live unpolluted—
when it is gone I muſt either ſtarve or ſin
again.
Now let the icy ſons of philoſophy ſay what they
pleaſe. I could no more have left this poor girl after
ſuch a declaration, than I could travel bare-foot over
the burning deſerts of Arabia.—So, without once
aſking the advice of Madam Prudence, or ſuffering
Suſpicion to hint that her affliction might be aſſumed
[Page 131]
—I again took hold of her hand, and we entered the
houſe together.
And now for your tale, my poor afflicted, ſaid I,
after ſhe had eaten an hearty ſupper of cold veal and
ſallad.
To engage your friendſhip, Sir, ſaid ſhe, I muſt
be open and candid, and often condemn myſelf—I
know I ſtand convicted before the world, but the
world fees not the heart.—Credulity was my fault;
a vile platonic ſyſtem my ruin.
Yet, had I been ruined alone, it were but little
conſequence; but, alas! I have involved others in
miſery—I have ſown thorns on the conjugal pillow
of a worthy woman—I have torn the heart of a parent
with all the dreadful pangs an injured wife, a
doating mother can feel, who ſees the huſband of her
affections, the father of her children eagerly purſuing,
and encouraged in a guilty paſſion.
Gracious God, cried ſhe, claſping her hands, let
my ſorrows, my miſeries, my unfeigned penitence
expiate this fault, and for the reſt thy will be done.
I know not how it was; but, though ſhe ſo
ſtrongly accuſed herſelf, and of ſuch heinous offences,
for my ſoul I could not but pity her; and ſo did my
dear Emma too, when I told her the tale; ſo I bade
her to be comforted, and I would ſerve her in every
thing that lay in my power—
But to the tale—
You ſhall have it directly, good ladies—I know
you love a little private hiſtory.
Mercy on me! cried Miſs Autumn, what ſort of
a ſtory are we to have now? the hiſtory of a filthy
creature who lived with another woman's huſband,
and then turned ſtreet walker?
Even ſo, dear Madam; and if your immaculate
modeſty will be too much ſhocked at the recital in
[Page 132]
public, double down the page, take it up into your
chamber, and read it when you are alone; it will
ſave you the trouble of a bluſh—
And do you think, Mr. Inquiſitor, that your
works will be proper for the peruſal of youth?
I hope ſo, Madam; Heaven forbid that I ſhould
ever write a page whoſe tendency might make me
bluſh to own it, or in my lateſt hour wiſh to blot it
out—my narrative is calculated to inſpire at once
pity and horror—
Pity! good Lord—I never heard the like—pity
for an abandoned huſſey who merits the moſt flagrant
puniſhment?
You'll pardon me, Madam, if I differ from you
in opinion—I would have every woman to feel a
proper horror and deteſtation of the crimes this unhappy
girl has committed; but, at the ſame time,
pity the weakneſs that led her into them, and the miseries
the commiſſion of them has entailed upon her.
I have no patience, Sir; I inſiſt upon it, that the
breach of chaſtity in woman deſerves the moſt rigorous
puniſhment.
Unfeeling woman! if thou art really virtuous
thyſelf, boaſt not thy ſuperiority over thy afflicted,
fallen ſiſters; but retire to thy cloſet, and thank thy
Creator that he gave thee not a form that might lead
thee into temptations, or endued thee with fortitude
to withſtand them—
But now for Annie's ſtory.—
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
$$$
