The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Luck of the Vails, by E. F. Benson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Luck of the Vails
       A Novel

Author: E. F. Benson

Release Date: August 14, 2018 [EBook #57690]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUCK OF THE VAILS ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire








THE LUCK OF THE VAILS




BY E. F. BENSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Luck of the Vails.

12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

This romance of modern life is characterized by intense and culminating
interest and remarkable dramatic power. The reader's attention is
absorbed at the outset, and he is held in suspense to the last of these
vivid and fascinating pages.

Mammon and Co.

12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

This novel by a popular author deals with personages living in the same
society that was characterized by "Dodo" and "The Rubicon." Mr. Benson
is thoroughly acquainted with the society in which he places the scenes
of his novels of London life. In "Mammon & Co." the good genius of the
tale is an American girl. The book will be found to be one of exceeding
interest throughout.

Dodo.

_A Detail of the Day._ 12mo. Cloth, $1.00; paper, 50 cents.

"'Dodo' is a delightfully witty sketch of the 'smart' people of
society.... The writer is a true artist."--_London Spectator._

The Rubicon.

12mo. Cloth, $1.00; paper, 50 cents.

"The anticipations which must have been formed by all readers of 'Dodo'
will in no wise be disappointed by 'The Rubicon.' The new work is well
written, stimulating, unconventional, and, in a word, characteristic.
Intellectual force is never absent, and the keen observation and
knowledge of character, of which there is abundant evidence, are aided
by real literary power."--_Birmingham Post._

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.




THE LUCK OF

THE VAILS

       *       *       *       *       *

_A NOVEL_

       *       *       *       *       *

By E. F. BENSON

AUTHOR OF DODO, MAMMON AND CO.

ETC.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1901




COPYRIGHT, 1901,

BY D. APPLETON and COMPANY.




CONTENTS


PART I

  CHAPTER                                           PAGE
     I.       THE SHADOWS DANCE                        1
    II.       THE COMING OF THE LUCK                  13
   III.       THE SPELL BEGINS TO WORK                25
    IV.       THE STORY OF MR. FRANCIS                42
     V.       A POINT IN CASUISTRY                    53
    VI.       THE POINT SOLVED--THE MEETING           63
   VII.       THE POINT IN CASUISTRY SOLVES ITSELF    81
  VIII.       THE SECOND RETURN TO VAIL               95
    IX.       CARDIAC                                109
     X.       MR. FRANCIS IS BETTER                  124
    XI.       MR. FRANCIS SEES HIS DOCTOR            141
   XII.       THE MEETING IN THE WOOD                154
  XIII.       HARRY ASKS A QUESTION                  177
   XIV.       LADY OXTED'S IDEA                      193

PART II

     XV.       FROST                                 209
    XVI.       FIRE                                  234
   XVII.       A BIRD OF NIGHT                       255
  XVIII.       RAIN                                  284
    XIX.       GEOFFREY LEAVES VAIL                  302
     XX.       DR. ARMYTAGE ARRIVES                  321
    XXI.       GEOFFREY MEETS THE DOCTOR             335
   XXII.       LADY OXTED HAS A BAD NIGHT            357
  XXIII.       THE MEETING IN GROSVENOR SQUARE       376
   XXIV.       JIM GOES TO BED                       393
    XXV.       MR. FRANCIS SLEEPS                    424
               EPILOGUE                              439




THE LUCK OF THE VAILS

       *       *       *       *       *

PART I




CHAPTER I

THE SHADOWS DANCE


The short winter's day was drawing to its close, and twilight, the steel
and silver twilight of a windless frost, falling in throbs of clear dusk
over an ice-bound land. The sun, brilliant but cold as an electric lamp,
had not in all the hours of its shining been of strength sufficient to
melt the rime congealed during the night before, and each blade of grass
on the lawns, each spray and sprig on the bare hedgerows, had remained a
spear of crystals minute and innumerable. The roofs of house and cottage
sparkled and glimmered as with a soft internal lustre in the light of
the moon, which had risen an hour before sunset, and the stillness of
great cold, a thing more palpably motionless than even the stricken
noonday of the south, gripped all in its vice. Silent, steadfast lights
had sprung up and multiplied in the many-windowed village, but not a
bird chirped nor dog barked. Labourers were home from the iron of the
frozen fields, doors were shut, and the huge night was at hand.

This sequestered village of Vail lies in a wrinkle of the great
Wiltshire downs, and is traversed by the Bath road. The big inn, the
Vail Arms, seems to speak of the more prosperous days of coach and horn,
but now its significance to the shrill greyhounds of the railway is of
the smallest, and they pass for the most part without even a shriek of
salute. About a mile beyond it to the outward-bound traveller stands the
big house, screened by some ten furlongs of park, and entering the gate
he will find himself in a noble company of secular trees, beech in the
majority, and of stately growth. Shortly before the house becomes
visible a spacious piece of meadow land succeeds to the park; thence the
road, passing over a broad stone bridge which spans the chalk stream
flowing from the sheet of water above, is bounded on either side by
terraced lawns of ancient and close-napped turf, intersected at
intervals by gravel walks, and turning sharply to the right, follows a
long box hedge once cut into tall and fantastic shapes. But it seems
long to have lacked the shears and pruning hand, for all precision of
outline has been lost, and what were once the formal figures of bird and
beast have swelled into monstrous masses of deformed shape, wrought, you
would think, by the imagination of a night hag into things inhuman.
Here, as seen in the dim light, a thin neck would bulge into some
ghastliness of a head, hydrocephalous or tumoured with long-standing
disease; here a bird with dwindled body and scarecrow wings stood on
the legs of a colossus; here conjecture would vainly seek for a
reconstruction.

The end of one of the wings of the house, which was built round three
sides of a quadrangle, abutted on to this hedge so closely that a
peacock with thick, bloated tail, peered into the gun-room window; in
the centre of the gravel sweep rose a bronze Triton fountain bearded,
like an old man, with long dependence of icicle. A bitter north wind had
accompanied the early days of the frost, and this icy fringe had grown
out sideways from the lip of the basin, blown aside even as it
congealed. Flower beds, a ribbon of dark, untenanted earth, ran
underneath the windows, which rose in three stories, small-paned and
Jacobean. As dark fell, lights sprang out in the walls as the stars in
the field of heaven, but to right and left of the front door there came
through a row of windows, yet uncurtained, a redder and less constant
gleam than the shining of oil or wax, now growing, now diminishing,
leaping out at one moment to a great vividness, at the next suddenly
dying down again, so that in the corners of the room there was a
continual battle of shadows. Now, as the flames from the wood burning on
the great open hearth grew dim, whole battalions of them would collect
and gather again; with the kindling of some fresh stuff, they would be
routed and disappear. This fitfulness of illumination played also
strange tricks with the tapestries that hung on two of the four sides of
the hall; figures started suddenly into being and were blotted out
before the eye had clearly visualized them, and in the inconstancy of
the light a nervous man might say to himself that stir and movement were
going on among them; again they rode to hounds, or took the jesses off
the hawk.

The present is the heir of all the achievement of former ages, and while
this great house with its mile-long avenue, its tapestries, its
pictures, its air of magnificent English stability, finely represented
all that had gone before, all that was going on now was inclosed in the
two large arm-chairs drawn close to this ideal fire, in each of which
sat a young man. They talked, but in desultory fashion, with frequent
but not awkward pauses of some length, for any social duty of keeping
the conversation going was to them quite outside a practical call. They
had been shooting all this superb, frosty day, and the return to warmth
and indoors, though productive of profound content, does not conduce to
loquacity.

"Yes, a bath would be a very good thing," said one; "but it is perhaps a
question whether in the absolutely immediate future tea would not be a
better!"

This was too strong a suggestion to be merely called a hint, and the
other rose.

"Sorry, Geoffrey," he said, "I never ordered tea. I was thinking--no, I
don't think I was thinking. Tea first, bath afterward," he added,
meditatively.

Geoffrey Langham stroked an imperceptible mustache.

"That's what I was thinking," he said; "and I am glad to see you
appreciate the importance of little things, Harry. Little things like
tea and baths matter far the most."

"Anyhow they occur much the oftenest," said Lord Vail.

"I was beginning to be afraid tea wasn't going to occur at all," said
Geoffrey.

Harry Vail appeared to consider this.

"You were wrong then," he said, "and you are on the way to become a
sensuous voluptuary."

"On the way?" said Geoffrey. "I have arrived. Ah! and tea is following
my excellent example."

The advent of lamps banished the mustering and dispersal of the leaping
shadows and threw the two figures seated on either side of the tea table
into strong light, and, taken together, into even stronger contrast. The
birthright of a good digestion, you would say, had been given to each,
and for no mess of pottage had either bartered the clear eye and firm
leanness of perfect health; but apart from this, and a certain lithe
youthfulness, it would have been hard at first sight even, when
resemblances are more obvious than differences, to see a single point of
likeness between the two. Geoffrey Langham, that sensuous voluptuary,
seemed the seat and being of serene English cheerfulness, and his face,
good-looking from its very pleasantness, contrasted strongly with that
of the other, which was handsome in spite of a marked and grave reserve,
that a stranger might easily have mistaken for sullenness. Indeed, many
who might soon have ceased to be strangers had done so; and though Harry
Vail had perhaps no enemies, he was in the forlorner condition of having
very few friends. Indeed, had he been made to enumerate them, his list
would have begun with Geoffrey, and it is doubtful whether it would not
also have ended with him.

But these agreeable influences of tea and light seemed to produce a
briskening effect on the two, and their talk, which, since they came in,
had touched a subject only to dismiss it, settled down into a more
marked channel.

"Yes, it is a queer sort of coming-of-age party for me," said Lord Vail,
"and it really was good of you to come, Geoffrey. I wonder whether any
one has ever come of age in so lonely a manner. I have only one relative
in the world who can be called even distantly near. He comes this
evening--oh, I told you that."

"Your uncle," said Geoffrey.

"Great-uncle, to be accurate. He is my grandfather's youngest brother,
and, what is so odd, he is my heir. One always thinks of heirs as being
younger than one's self."

"Cut him off with a shilling," said Geoffrey.

"Well, there isn't much more in any case, except this great barrack of a
house. What there is, however, goes to him. And it can hardly be
expected that he will marry and have children now."

"How old is he?" asked Geoffrey.

"Something over seventy."

"And after him?"

"The Lord knows! Anybody; the first person you meet if you walk down
Piccadilly perhaps; perhaps you, perhaps the prime minister. Honestly, I
haven't any idea."

"Marry then, at once," said Geoffrey, "and disappoint the man in the
street, and the prime minister, your uncle, and me."

Harry Vail got up and stood with his back to the fire, stretching out
his long-fingered hands to the blaze behind him.

"What advice!" he said. "You might as well advise me to have a Greek
nose. Some people have it, some do not; it is fate."

"Marriage is a remarkably common fate," remarked Geoffrey, "commoner
than a Greek nose. I have seen many married people without it."

"It is commoner for certain sorts of people," said Harry; "but you know
I----" and he stopped.

"Well?" asked the other.

"I am not of those sorts--the sorts who go smiling through the world and
are smiled on in return. It was always the same with me. I am not
truculent, or savage, or sulky, I believe, but somehow I remain
friendless. I should be a hermit if there were any nowadays."

"Liver!" said Geoffrey decidedly. "The fellow of twenty-one who says
that sort of thing about himself has got liver. 'Self-Analysis, or the
Sedentary Life,' a tract by Geoffrey Langham. Here endeth the gospel."

Harry smiled.

"I don't think about my character, as a rule," he said. "I don't lead a
sedentary life, and I haven't got liver. But if one is a recluse it is
as well to recognise the fact. I haven't got any real friends like
everybody else."

"Thank you," said Geoffrey; "don't apologize."

"I shall if I like; indeed, I think I will. No one but a friend would
have come down here."

"Oh, I don't know about that," said the other; "I would stay with people
I positively loathed for shooting no worse than we had to-day. In the
matter of friends, what you said was inane. You might have heaps of
friends if you chose. But you don't find friends by going into a room
alone and locking the door behind you."

"Ah! I do that, do I?" said Harry, with a certain eager interest in his
tone.

"Just a shade. You might have heaps of friends."

"That may be, or may not. It is certain that I have not. Oh, well, this
is unprofitable. Take a cigarette from the recluse."

They smoked in silence a minute or two.

"Your uncle?" asked Geoffrey; "he comes to-night, you said."

"Yes; I expect him before dinner. You've never seen him?"

"Never. What is he like?"

Harry pointed to a picture that hung above the fireplace.

"Like that," he said--"exactly like that."

Geoffrey looked at it a moment, shading his eyes from the lamp.

"Fancy-dress ball, I suppose?" he said.

"No; the costume of the period," said Harry. "It is not my uncle at all,
but an ancestor of sorts. The picture is by Holbein, but, oddly enough,
it is the very image of Uncle Francis."

"Francis Vail, second baron," spelled out Geoffrey, from the faded
lettering on the frame.

"Yes, his name was Francis, too."

"What is that great cup he is holding?" asked the other.

"Ah! I wondered whether you would notice that. I will show it you this
evening. At least, I am certain that what I have found is it."

"It looks rather a neat thing," said Geoffrey. "But I can't say as much
for the second baron, Harry. He seems to me a wicked old man."

"There is no doubt that he was. Among other charming deeds, he almost
certainly killed his own father. He was smothered in debt, came down
here to try to get his father to pay up for him, and met with a pretty
round refusal, it appears. That night the house was broken into, and the
old man was found murdered in his bed. The burglar seems to have been a
curious man; he took nothing--not a teaspoon."

"Good Lord! I am glad I'm not of ancestral family. Which is the room,
_the_ room?"

Harry laughed.

"The one at the end of the passage upstairs. Shall I tell them to move
your things there?"

"That is true hospitality," said Geoffrey; "but I won't bother you. Do
either of them walk?"

"Francis does. So if you meet that gentleman about, and find he is
unsubstantial, you will know that you have seen a ghost."

"And if substantial, it will only be your uncle."

"Exactly; so you needn't faint immediately."

Geoffrey got up and examined the picture with more attention.

"If your uncle is like that," he said, "I'm not so sure that I wouldn't
sooner meet the ghost."

"I'm afraid it is too late to put him off now," said Harry; "and, unless
there is a railway accident, you will certainly meet him at dinner. But
I don't understand your objection to my poor old ancestor's portrait. I
have always wondered that such an awful old wretch could be made to look
so charming."

"There is hell in his eyes!" said Geoffrey.

Harry left his chair and leaned on the chimney-piece also, looking up at
the picture.

"Certainly, if you think he looks wicked," he said, "you will see no
resemblance between him and my uncle. Uncle Francis is a genial,
pink-faced old fellow, with benevolent white hair. When I used to come
down here, years ago, before my father's death, for the holidays, he
always used to be awfully good to me. But he has been abroad the last
three years, and I haven't seen him. But I remember him as the most
charming old man."

"Then, in essentials, he is not like that portrait," said Geoffrey,
turning away. "Well, I'm for the bath."

"After you. Turn on the hot water when you're out, Geoff."

Harry did not immediately sit down again when his friend left him, but
continued for a little while to look at the second baron, trying to see
in it what Geoffrey had seen, what he himself had always failed to see.
He moved from where he stood to where Geoffrey had been standing, still
looking at it, when suddenly, no doubt by some curious play of light on
the canvas, there flitted across the face for a moment some expression
indefinably sinister. It was there but for a flash, and vanished again,
and by no change in his point of view could he recapture it. Soon he
gave up the attempt, and, with only an idle and fleeting wonder at the
illusion, he sat down, took up a book and yawned over a page that
conveyed nothing to him. Then frankly and honestly he shut it up, and
lay comfortably back in his chair, looking at the fire. He must even
have dropped into a doze, for, apparently without transition, in the
strange unformulated fashion of dreams, he thought that his uncle had
come, dressed (and this did not seem remarkable) in the fashion of the
Holbein portrait, and having greeted him with his well-remembered,
hearty manner, had sat down in the other of the two arm-chairs; and,
though unconscious of having gone to sleep, he certainly came to himself
with a start, to find the chair opposite untenanted, and the sound of
his own name ringing in his ears. Immediately afterward it was repeated,
and, looking up to the gallery that ran across one side of the hall and
communicated with certain of the bedrooms, he saw Geoffrey leaning over
in his dressing-gown.

"Bath's ready," he said; "and the portrait is looking at you."

"Thanks. I've been to sleep, I think. Did you call me more than once,
Geoff?"

"No; the other time it was the second baron."

Harry was still a little startled.

"You really only called once?" he asked again.

"Yes; only once. Why?"

"Nothing. Halloo! I hear wheels. That must be my uncle. Turn the hot
water off, there's a good chap. I must just see him before I come
upstairs."




CHAPTER II

THE COMING OF THE LUCK


The dining room at Vail was of the same antique spaciousness as the
hall, and, as there on the lounger, so here on the diner, looked down a
spacious company of ancestors. For so small a party it had been thought
by the butler that conviviality would be given a better chance if, on
this frosty night, he laid them a small table within range of the fire
rather than that the three should be cut off, as it were, on a polar
island in the centre of that vast sea of floor. And, indeed, though
naturally a modest man, Templeton felt a strong self-approval at the
success of his kind thought, for, from the moment of sitting down, a
cheerful merriness had held the table, rising sometimes into loud
hilarity, and never sinking into the content of growing repletion, which
is held in England to be the proper equivalent for joviality. But if it
was Templeton in part who was responsible for so desirable an
atmosphere, there was credit to be given to at least one of the diners.

Pleasant and pink was Mr. Francis's face; his hair, though silver, still
crisp and vigorous, his mouth a perpetual smile. In absolute repose
even a sunshine lingered there, as in a bottle of well-matured wine, and
its repose left it but to give place to laughter. All dinner through he
had been the mouthpiece of delightful anecdote, of observations shrewd
but always kindly, rising sometimes almost to the dry levels of wit, and
never failing in that genial humour without which all conversation, not
directed to a definite end, becomes intolerable. Though talking much, he
was no usurper of the inalienable right of the others to wag the tongue;
and though his own wagged to vibration, he was never tedious. Even in
the matter of riddles, introduced by Geoffrey, he had a contribution or
two to make, of so extravagant a sort that this ordinarily dismal mode
of entertainment was for the moment rendered delightful. He unbent to
the level of the young men, to the futility of most disconnected
conversation, without ever seeming to unbend; you would have said that
his narrow, clerically opening shirt, with its large cravat and massive
gold studs, covered the heart of a boy, that the brains of a clever
youth lay beneath that silver hair, prematurely white, indeed, yet not
from grief or the conduct of a world long unkind. In person he was
somewhat short, "without the inches of a Vail," as he himself said, and
pleasantly inclined to stoutness, but to the stoutness which may come
early to a healthy appetite and a serene digestion, for it was not
accompanied either by pallid flabbiness or colour unduly high, and by
the artificial light scarcely a wrinkle could be scrutinized on his
beaming face. His dress was precise and scrupulous, yet with a certain
antique touch about it, as of one who had been something of a buck in
the sixties; his linen far more than clean and fresh, and of a snowiness
which certainly implied special injunction to the washerwoman. His
trouser pockets were cut, we may elegantly say, not at the side of those
indispensable coverings, but toward the front of the bow window, and
there dangled from the lip of one a fob of heavy gold seals. His watch
chain he wore round his neck, and at the bottom of his waistcoat pocket
there reposed, you may be sure, a yellow-faced watch, large and
loud-ticking--an unerring timekeeper.

They had now approached the end of dinner; decanters glowed on the
table, and a silver cigarette box, waiting untouched, at Mr. Francis's
request, till the more serious business of wine was off the palate,
stood by Harry's dessert plate. Already, even in this second hour of
their acquaintance, the three felt like old friends, and as the wine was
on its first round, the two young men were bent eagerly forward to hear
the conclusion of a most exciting little personal anecdote told them by
Mr. Francis. He had to perfection that great essential of the
narrator--intense interest and appreciation of what he was himself
saying, and the climax afforded him the most obvious satisfaction. In
his right hand he held his first glass of untasted port, and, after an
interval accorded to laughter, he suddenly rose.

"And," he said, "comes the pleasantest moment of our delightful
evening. Harry, my dear boy, here is long life and happiness to you,
from the most sincere of your well-wishers. And for myself I pray that a
very old man may some time dance your children on his knee. God bless
you, my dearest fellow!"

He drank the brimming glass honestly to the last drop, and held out his
hand to the young man with a long and hearty grasp. Then, with quick
tact, seeing the embarrassment of remark-making in Harry's face, he sat
down again, and without pause enticed the subject off the boards.

"How well I remember your dear father coming of age!" he said. "Dear me,
it must be forty years ago, nearly twice as long a time as you have
lived; there's a puzzle for Mr. Langham, like the one he gave me to do.
It was this very port, I should say, in which we drank his health. The
yellow seal, is it not, Harry? Yes, yes; your grandfather laid it down
in the year forty-five, and we used to drink it only on very great
occasions, for he would say to me that it was a gift he had put in
entail for his grandchildren, and was not for us. And so it has turned
out! He was very fond of port, too, was dear old Dennis; it was not a
gift that cost him nothing. You would scarcely remember your
grandfather, Harry?"

"I just remember him, Uncle Francis," said the lad, "but only as a very
old man. I don't think he liked children for whenever he saw me he would
have no more than a word or two to say, and then he would send for
you."

"Yes, yes, so he would, so he would," said Mr. Francis; "and we used to
have great games together, did we not, Harry? Games, did I say? Indeed,
we seemed to be real red Indians in the wilderness, and Crusaders, with
paper lances. Dear me! I could play such games still. Hide-and-seek,
too, a grand business. It requires, as poor Antrobus used to say, all
the strategy of a general directing a campaign, combined with the
unflinching courage of the private who has to go straight forward,
expecting artillery to open on him every minute. Yes, and the old man
felt it, too; I have seen him playing it with his grandchildren when he
was prime minister, and, upon my word, he was more earnest about it than
the young people!"

Coffee had come in, and after a few minutes the three passed out into
the hall. At the door, however, Harry paused, and stayed behind in the
dining room. Mr. Francis took Geoffrey's arm in his affectionate way and
the two strolled into the hall.

"It has been so pleasant to me to meet you, my dear boy," he was saying;
"for years ago I knew some of your people well. No, I do not think I
ever knew your father. But, you must know, I am bad at surnames: one
only calls the tradespeople Mr. So-and-so, and I shall call you
Geoffrey. You are Harry's best friend; I have a claim upon you. Fine
hall, is it not? And the pictures--well, they are a wonderful set. There
is nothing like them for completeness in England, if one excepts the
royal collections; and, indeed, I think there is less rubbish here."

The portraits were lit by small shaded lamps which stood beneath each,
so that the whole light was thrown on to the picture and the beholder
left undazzled. Mr. Francis had strolled up to the fireplace, still
retaining Geoffrey's arm, and together they looked at the picture of
Francis, second baron.

"A wonderful example of Holbein," said Mr. Francis; "I do not know a
finer. They tried hard to get it for the exhibition a few years ago, but
it couldn't leave Vail. I should have been quite uncomfortable at the
thought of it out of the house. Now, some people have told me--Ah! I see
you have noticed it, too."

"Surely there is an extraordinary likeness between you and it," said
Geoffrey. "Harry just pointed to it when I asked him what you were
like."

Mr. Francis's eyes pored on the picture with a sort of fascination.

"A wonderful bit of painting," he said. "And how clearly you see not
only the man's body, but his soul! That is the true art of the portrait
painter."

"But not always pleasant for the sitter," remarked Geoffrey.

"I am not so sure. You imply, no doubt, that it was not pleasant for
this old fellow."

"I should not think his soul was much to be proud of," said Geoffrey.

"You mean he looks wicked?" said Mr. Francis, still intent on the
canvas. "Well, God forgive him! I am afraid he must have been. But that
being so, I suspect he was as much in love with his own soul as a good
man is for he does not look to me a weak man--one who is forever falling
and repenting. There is less of Macbeth and more of his good lady in old
Francis. Infirm of purpose? No, no, I think not!"

He turned abruptly away from the picture, and broke out into a laugh.

"He was a wicked old man, we are afraid," he said, "and I am exactly
like him."

"Ah! that is not fair," cried Geoffrey.

"My dear boy, I was only chaffing. And here is Harry; what has he got?"

Harry had come after them as they spoke thus together, carrying in his
hand a square leather case. The thing seemed to be of some weight.

"I wanted to show you and Geoff what I have found, Uncle Francis," he
said. "I thought perhaps you could tell me about it. It was in one of
the attics--of all places in the world--hidden, it seemed, behind some
old pictures. Templeton and I found it."

Mr. Francis whisked round with even more than his accustomed vivacity of
movement at Harry's words.

"Yes, yes," he said, with some impatience. "Open it, then, my dear boy,
open it!"

An old lock of curious work secured the leather strap which fastened
the case, but this dangled loose from it, attached to its hasp.

"We could find no key for it," explained Harry, "and had to break it
open."

As he spoke, he drew from the case an object swathed in wash leather,
but the outline was clearly visible beneath its wrappings.

"Ah! it is so," said Mr. Francis, below his breath, and as Harry
unfolded the covering they all stood silent. This done, he held up to
the light what it contained. It was a large golden goblet with two
handles, of a size perhaps to hold a couple of quarts of liquor, and
even by lamplight it was a thing that dazzled the eye and made the mouth
to water. But solid gold as it was, and of chaste and exquisite
workmanship, there was scarce an inch of it that was not worth more than
the whole value of the gold and the craft bestowed thereon, so thickly
was it incrusted with large and precious stones. Just below the lip of
the cup ran a ring of rubies of notable size and wonderful depth of
colour; and below, at a little interval, six emerald stars, all
clear-set in the body of the cup. The lower part was chased with
acanthus leaves, each outlined in pearls, and up the fluted stem climbed
lordly sapphires. Sapphires again traced the rim of the foot, and in
each handle was clear-set a row of diamonds--no chips and dust, but
liquid eyes and lobes of light. Halfway down the bowl of the cup,
between the emerald stars and the points of the acanthus leaves, ran a
plain panel of gold on which was engraved, in small, early English
characters, some text that encircled the whole.

Harry was standing close under the lamp as he took off the covering, and
remained there a moment, holding in his hand the gorgeous jewel, and
looking at it with a curiously fixed attention, unconscious of the
others. Then he handed it to his uncle.

"Tell me about it; what is it, Uncle Francis?" he asked; and
involuntarily, as the old man took it, he glanced at the picture of
Francis, second baron, who in the portrait held, beyond a doubt, the
same treasure that they were now examining.

Mr. Francis did not at once reply, but handled the cup for a little
while in silence, with awe and solemnity in his attitude and expression.
As he turned it this way and that in his grasp, jewel after jewel caught
the light and shone refracted in points of brilliant colour on his face.
The burnished band on which was engraved the circling of the text cut a
yellow line of reflection across his nose and cheeks, which remained
steady, but over the rest of his face gleams of living colour shone and
passed; and now as a ruby, now an emerald, sent their direct rays into
his eyes, they would seem lit inside by a gleam of red or green. At
length he looked up.

"Hear what the thing says of itself," he said. "I will read it you."

Then, turning the cup till he had found the beginning of the text, he
read slowly, the cup revolving to the words:

  "When the Luck of the Vails is lost,
  Fear not fire nor rain nor frost;
  When the Luck is found again,
  Fear both fire and frost and rain."

"Very pretty," said Geoffrey, with a critical air, but Mr. Francis made
no reply. His eyes were still fixed on the jewel.

"But what is it?" asked Harry.

"This? The cup?" he said. "It is what I have read to you. It is the Luck
of the Vails."

Geoffrey laughed. "You've got it, Harry, anyhow," he said, "for weal or
woe. How does it run? Fear fire and frost and rain. Take care of
yourself, old man, and don't smoke in bed, and don't skate over deep
water."

Mr. Francis turned to him quickly, with a sudden recovery of his
briskness.

"You and I would risk all that, would we not, Geoffrey," he said, "to
have found such a beautiful thing?--Yes, Harry, I see you have noticed
it. There it is in old Francis's hand in the picture. Where else should
it be if not there? Whether he made it or not I can't tell you, but that
is its first appearance, as far as we know."

Still holding it, he looked at the portrait, then stretched it out to
Harry.

"There, take it," he said quickly.

"But tell us all about it," said Harry. "What happened to it afterward?
How is it I never heard of it?"

"Your father would never speak of it," said Mr. Francis; "nor your
grandfather either. Your father never saw it, and your grandfather only
once, when he was quite a little boy. Neither could bear to speak of it
when it was lost. And so it was in the attic all the time!"

Harry's eyes were sparkling; a sudden animation seemed to possess him.

"Tell us from the beginning," he said.

He was already wrapping the goblet up again, and Mr. Francis looked
greedily at it till the last jewel had been hidden in the wash leather.

"Well, it is a strange story, and a short one," he said, "for so little
is known of it. It has appeared and disappeared several times since
Holbein painted it there, as unaccountably as it has appeared again now.
In the attic all the time!" he exclaimed again.

"But the legend; what does the legend mean?" asked Harry.

"I have no idea. Perhaps it is some old rhyme, perhaps it is a mere
conceit of the goldsmith. But, be that as it may, those of your house
who have possessed the Luck always seemed to think that it brought them
luck. It was in old Francis's time, you know, that coal was found on
your Derbyshire estate, which so enriched him for a while. In his son's
time certainly the Luck disappeared, for we have a letter of his about
it, and as certainly the field of coal came to an end. It appeared
again some eighty years later, and again disappeared; and then the
grandfather of your grandfather found it. He, you know, married the
wealthy Barbara Devereux, and it was he who showed the Luck to your
grandfather. Then it was lost for the last time, and with it all his
money, in the South-Sea Bubble."

Harry looked a shade disappointed at this bald narrative.

"Is that all?" he asked. "Where do the fire, and frost, and rain come
in?"

Mr. Francis laughed.

"Well, oddly enough, old Francis was burned to death in his bed, and
Mark Vail was drowned. Harry Vail, the last holder of it, was frozen to
death in his travelling carriage crossing the St. Gothard. But a man
must die somehow; is it not so? Poor, wicked old Francis, he thought to
bring a curse on the house, if it was indeed he who made the Luck, but
how futile, how futile! Did he think that the elements were in league
with some occult power of magic and darkness that he possessed? Ah! no;
beneficent Nature is not controlled by such a hand. He knows that well
maybe now, and perhaps therein is his chastisement, for, indeed, he was
a man of devilish mind."




CHAPTER III

THE SPELL BEGINS TO WORK


Mr. Francis was by choice an early riser, and next morning, before
either of the young men were awake, he had been splashing and gasping in
his cold tub, had felt with the keenest enjoyment the genial afterglow
produced on his braced and invigorated skin by the application of the
rough towel, and was now out on the terrace, pacing briskly along the
dry gravel walk on this adorable winter morning, waiting cheerfully for
his desired breakfast. Now and then he would break into a nimble trot
for fifty paces, or even give a little skip in the air as a child does,
from the sheer exhilaration of his pulses. His thoughts, too, must have
been as sparkling as the morning itself, as brisk and cheery as his own
physical economy, for from time to time he would troll out a bar or two
of some lusty song, or stop to chirrup with pursed lips to the stiff,
half-frozen birds, and his pleasant, close-shaven face was continually
wreathed in smiles. Here was one at least in whom old age had brought no
spell of freezing to laggard blood, no dulling of that zest of life
which is so often and so erroneously considered as an attribute of youth
only; life was still immensely enjoyable, and all things were
delightful to his sympathetic eye.

Such a buoyancy of spirits is a most engaging thing, provided only it be
natural and unforced. But too often the old, who remain young, have the
aspect as of grizzly kittens; their spirits are but a parody of
youthfulness, their antics broken-winded and spasmodic. In a moment they
fall from the heights of irresponsible gaiety to an equally
unwarrantable churlishness; they maintain no level way; their tempers
are those of jerking marionettes, a performance of jointed dolls.

But how different was the joyousness of Mr. Francis! Nothing could be
more native to him than his morning exhilaration. Authentic was the
merriment that sparkled in his light-blue eyes, authentic the lightness
of his foot as it tripped along the gravel walk; and none could doubt
that his fine spirits were effortless and unaffected.

To reach so ripe an age as that to which Mr. Francis had attained means,
even to those whose life has lain in the pleasantest lines, to have had
to bear certain trials, sorrows, misunderstandings, necessarily incident
to the mere passage of years. To bear these bravely and without
bitterness is the part of any robust nature; to bear them with unabated
cheerfulness and without any loss of the zest for life is a rarer gift;
and the silver-haired old gentleman who paced so gaily up and down the
terraced walks, while he waited for young men to have their fill of
sleep and make a tardy appearance, was a figure not without galantry.
Here were no impatient gestures; he was hungry, but the time of waiting
would not be shortened by fretfulness, nor had he any inclination to so
unamiable a failing, and for nearly half an hour he pursued his cheery
walk up and down. At length the welcome booming of the gong sounded
distantly, and he tripped toward the house.

Harry was down, the clock pointing to an indulgent half past nine, but
the youthful moroseness of morning sat on his brow. To so old a
traveller through life as his uncle, the ways of weaning this were
manifold, and he broke into speech.

"Splendid morning, my dear boy," he said; "and the ice, they tell me,
bears. What will you do? What shall we do? Are you shooting to-day, or
skating? And will you like to take a tramp round the old place with me,
as you suggested last night?"

Harry was examining dishes on the side-table with a supercilious air.

"Very cold, is it not?" he said. "We were thinking of shooting. Do you
shoot, Uncle Francis?"

"I will shoot with pleasure, if you will let me," he said. "Yes, it is
cold--too cold for pottering about, as you say. Fish cakes, eggs and
bacon, cold game. Yes, I'll begin with a fish cake. What a hungry place
Vail is! I am famished, literally famished. And where is Geoffrey?"

"Geoffrey was going to his bath when I came down," said Harry. "It is to
be hoped he will be more nearly awake after it. He had one eye open
only when I saw him."

"Fine gift to be able to sleep like that," said Mr. Francis; "I heard
you two boys go up to bed last night, and sat an hour reading after
that. But I awoke at eight, as I always do, and got up."

Harry's morose mood was on the thaw.

"And have you been waiting for us since then, Uncle Francis?" he said.
"Really, I am awfully sorry. We'll have breakfast earlier to-morrow. It
was stupid of me."

"Not a bit, not a bit, Harry. I like a bit of a walk before breakfast.
Wonderful thing for the circulation after your bath. Ah, here's
Geoffrey.--Good-morning, my dear boy!"

"We'll shoot, to-day, Geoff, as we settled," said Harry. "Uncle Francis
will come with us. Wake up, you pig."

Geoffrey yawned.

"How's the Luck?" he said. "Lord! I had such a nightmare, Harry! You,
and the Luck, and Mr. Vail, and the picture of the wicked baron all
mixed up together somehow. I forget how it went."

"Very remarkable!" said Harry. "I dreamed of the Luck, too, now you
mention it. We must have dreamed the same thing, Geoff, because I also
have forgotten how it went."

"And I," said Mr. Francis, "dreamed about nothing at all, very
pleasantly, all night. And what a morning I awoke to! Just the day for a
good tramp in the woods. Dear me, Harry, what a simpleton your dear
father used to think me! 'What are you going to do?' he would ask me,
and I would only want a pocketful of cartridges, a snack of cold lunch,
and leave to prowl about by myself without a keeper, no trouble to
anybody."

"Yes, that's good fun," said Geoffrey. "Now it's a rabbit, or over the
stubble a partridge. Then a bit of cover, and you put up a pheasant.
Let's have a go-as-you-please day, Harry."

"The poetry of shooting," said Mr. Francis. "Cold partridge for any one
but me? No? You lads have no appetites!"

The keeper had been given his orders the day before, and very soon after
breakfast the three shooters were ready to start. They went out by a
garden door which gave on a flight of some dozen stone steps leading to
the lawn; Mr. Francis, leading the way, nearly fell on the topmost of
them, for they were masked with ice, and half turned as he recovered
himself, to give a word of warning to the others. But he was too late,
and Harry, who followed him, not looking to his feet, but speaking to
Geoffrey over his shoulder at the same moment almost, had slipped on the
treacherous stone and fallen sprawling, dropping his gun, and clutching
ineffectually at the railing to save himself. Mr. Francis gave one
exclamation of startled dismay, and ran to his assistance.

"My dear fellow," he cried, "I hope you are not hurt?"

Harry lay still a moment, his mouth twisted with pain; then, taking
hold of the railing, pulled himself to his feet, and stood with bowed
head, gripping hard on the banister.

"All sideways on my ankle," he said.--"Just see if my gun's all right,
Geoff.--Yes, I've twisted it, I'm afraid." He paused another moment,
faint and dizzy, with a feeling of empty sickness, and then hobbled up
the steps again.

"An awful wrench," he said. "Just give me your arm, Uncle Francis, will
you? I can hardly put my foot to the ground."

Leaning on him, he limped back into the hall and dragged off his boot.

"Yes, it feels pretty bad," he said; "I came with my whole weight on to
it. I shall be as lame as a tree."

Mr. Francis was on his knees, and in a moment had stripped off Harry's
stocking with quick, deft fingers.

"What bad luck! what awfully bad luck!" he said. "Put a cold-water
compress on it at once, my dear boy. It is already swelling!"

Harry lifted his leg on to a chair opposite.

"It's just a sprain," he said. "Go out, Uncle Francis, you and Geoffrey.
I'll put a bandage on."

Templeton had answered Mr. Francis's ringing of the bell, and was
dismissed again with orders for cold water and linen.

"Not till I have seen you comfortable, my dear fellow," said Mr.
Francis. "Dear me, what bad luck! Does it hurt you, Harry?"

"No, no, it is nothing," said the boy rather impatiently, irritated both
by the pain and the fussing. "Do go out, Uncle Francis, with Geoffrey,
and leave me. The men are waiting by the home cover. I can look after
myself perfectly."

Mr. Francis still seemed half loath to leave him, and, had he followed
his inclinations, he would have instituted himself as sick-nurse, to
change the bandage or read to him. But it was the part of wisdom to
humour the patient, who quite distinctly wished to be left alone; and as
even the most solicitous affection could not find grounds for anxiety in
the sprain, with a few more sympathetic words, he followed Geoffrey, who
was chafing to be gone. The latter, indeed, might have appeared somewhat
cold and unsympathetic in contrast with Mr. Francis and his repeated
lamentations; but his "Bad luck, Harry!" and Harry's grunt in reply, had
something of telegraphic brevity, not misunderstood.

In spite of his protestations that he was no more than an indifferent
shot, it soon appeared that Mr. Francis was more than a decently capable
performer with the gun, and his keenness and accuracy as a sportsman
were charmingly combined with the knowledge and observation of a
naturalist. He pointed out to his companion several rare and infrequent
birds which they saw during the morning, and implored the keeper that
they might not be shot for curiosities.

"Half the time I am shooting," he said to Geoffrey, "I am of a divided
mind. Is it not a shame to kill these beautiful and innocent things? I
often wonder--ah!" up went his gun, and a high pheasant was torn from
the sky, leaving a few light neck feathers floating there.

"And even while the words are in my mouth, I go and contradict my
sentiments," he said, ejecting the smoking cartridge. "What a bundle of
incongruous opposites is a man!"

They shot for not more than a couple of hours after lunch, for the sun
set early, and Mr. Francis confessed to a certain unreasonable desire to
get home quickly and see how Harry had fared.

"Indeed, I was half minded to stay with him in spite of his wish," he
said, "for the hours will have been lonely to him. But he is like all
the Vails--self-reliant, and beholden to no one."

They were crossing the last meadow before they should again reach the
garden, and, even as he spoke, a hare got up from its form in the
tussocky grass not more than ten yards from them and scuttled
noiselessly, head down, across the field. Geoffrey had already taken the
cartridges from his barrel, and Mr. Francis raised his gun to his
shoulder, hesitated a moment, and then fired. He hit the beast just as
it gained the fence of the cover from which they had come; they saw it
bowled over, and drag on a pace or two into cover; then suddenly, from
where it had disappeared, there came a screaming horribly human. Mr.
Francis paused, then turned quite pale, and Geoffrey, seeing his
stricken face, imagined he thought that he had wounded a beater.

"It is only the hare," he said; "the men were all out two minutes ago."

Mr. Francis turned to him.

"Only the hare!" he cried; "yes, only the hare! How dreadful, how
dreadful! I have wounded it," and he started off running to where the
beast had been last seen, and disappeared in the cover.

Geoffrey sent a couple of beaters to assist in the search, but himself
went on to the house, wondering a little at the inconsistency which
would allow a man to shoot at a hare running straight away in a bad
light, and yet send him hot foot after it when wounded. Yet the
inconsistency was pleasing; keenness was responsible for the doubtful
shot, an indubitable horror of causing an animal pain prompted the
pursuit of it. He found Harry lying up, his ankle somewhat severely
sprained, but it no longer pained him, and he asked after his uncle.

"Just at the last moment he shot a hare, wounding it," he said, "and ran
back to try to recover it. He will be in at once, I should think."

But half an hour passed, yet still he did not come, and Harry was
already wondering what could have happened, when he appeared, all smiles
again.

"Dear lad, have you had a very tedious day?" he asked. "The thought of
you has been constantly in my mind. I should have been in half an hour
ago with Geoffrey, but I wounded a hare, and had to go and look for it.
Thank God, I found it. The poor beast was quite dead. But it screamed:
it was terrible, terrible!"

There was a good piano, by Bechstein, standing in the hall, and that
evening, after dinner, as Harry lay on the sofa nursing his injury,
while his uncle sitting by him recalled a hundred little reminiscences
of his own young years which he had spent here, Geoffrey, who was an
accurate performer of simple tunes, played idly and softly to himself,
listening half to his own music, half to the talk of the others. Now he
would indicate some graceful, inevitable fragment of Bach, now a verse
of some chevalier song, all with a tinkling, elementary technic, but
with a certain facility of finger and decided aptitude for the right
notes. By degrees, as this went on, a kind of restlessness gained on Mr.
Francis; he would break off in the middle of a story to hum a bar of the
tune Geoffrey was playing, beating time to it with a waving hand, or
turn round in his chair to say over his shoulder: "A graceful melody, my
dear boy; please play us that again."

But before long this restlessness grew more emphatic, and at last he
jumped nimbly out of his chair.

"I must fetch my flute," he exclaimed, "I must positively fetch my
flute. I play but indifferently, as you will hear, but it is such a
pleasure to me! What a charming instrument is the flute, so pastoral;
the nearest thing we know to the song of birds! Be indulgent, my dear
Geoffrey, to the whim of an old fellow, and play some easy
accompaniments for me. I have a quantity of little pieces for the flute
by Corelli and Baptiste."

He hurried to the door, and they heard his step quickly crossing the
gallery above. In a few moments he reappeared again, a little out of
breath, but with a beaming face. He fitted his flute together with
affectionate alacrity, turned to the piano, and opened a volume of easy
minuets and sarabands.

"There, this one," he said; "it is a breath of heaven, a real breath of
heaven. You have two bars of introduction. Ah! a shade slower, my dear
boy; it is an antique measure, you must remember. Graceful, leisurely.
Yes, that is exactly right."

He knew the music by heart, and when once they were fairly started,
turned from the piano toward Harry. His cheerful, ruddy face composed
itself into an expression of beatific content, his eyes were half
closed, the eyebrows a little raised, and his body swayed gently to the
rhythm of the tune. The formal delicacy of the composition enthralled
him; perhaps it brought with it the aroma of his youth, the minuets he
had danced fifty years ago, perhaps it was only the sweet and certain
development of the melody which so moved him. At the end, in any case,
he could not quite command his voice, and he patted Geoffrey gently on
the shoulder by way of thanks.

"The next," he said; "we can not pass by the next. The two are complete
only together."

They played then some half dozen little pieces, ending with a quick
ripple of a gavotte, to put them in good spirits again, so said Mr.
Francis; and at the last he lovingly packed up his flute again and left
it on the piano, saying that they must be very indulgent to him and let
him play again.

Two or three days after this, Harry was sufficiently recovered to be
able to go out again, though still limpingly, and it was arranged that
they should shoot certain of the covers near the house which might be
expected to furnish them with a good day's sport, and at the same time
would entail but little walking. The frost had, twenty-four hours ago,
completely broken before a warm and violent wind from the southwest, and
the dead leaves which had lain in glued and compacted heaps were once
more driven about in scurrying multitudes. The sky was low and ominous,
a rack of torn and flying cloud, and scudding showers fell ever and
again. But the sport was excellent, and they little heeded the angry
fretfulness of the heavens.

Their beats took them at no time far from the house, and they returned
there for lunch, but by this time the weather had grown so vastly more
inclement that Mr. Francis cried off the resumption of the day; but
Harry, eager for out-of-doors after his two days' imprisonment,
persuaded Geoffrey to come out again. The rain was a steady downpour in
the slackened wind, but his argument that they were not made of paper
carried weight.

They returned, drenched indeed, but with a satisfactory report of
themselves and the birds, to find Mr. Francis performing very
contentedly on his flute before the hall fire. But he jumped up briskly
as they appeared.

"Dear boys, how wet you are!" he cried. "Of course, you will change your
clothes at once, will you not? and I should recommend a glass of hot
whisky and water. Shall I ring the bell? I told Templeton to see that
there was abundance of hot water for your baths."

This incessant solicitude of his uncle, however clearly arising from
affection, was on the way to get on Harry's nerves and arouse
opposition. At any rate, the suggestion that he should guard against a
chill predisposed him not to be in any hurry to go upstairs.

"Oh, tea first," he said, not meaning it; "one can change
afterward.--Are you going now, Geoff? Ring the bell as you pass, will
you?"

A positive cloud dimmed the brightness of Mr. Francis's face.

"Dear boy, you are being horribly imprudent," he said; "do let me
persuade you to change at once."

This drove determination home. Harry was unpleasantly conscious of the
clinging flabbiness of soaking clothes, but had their touch shaken him
with an ague it would not have moved him from his chair. He intended to
do that which he chose to do.

"Oh, I'm all right, Uncle Francis," he said. "I never catch cold."

Tea came, and Harry ate and drank with studied leisure, and conversed
politely to his uncle. Already he felt the premonitory prickling of the
skin which precedes a chill, but it was nearly half an hour before he
lounged upstairs. He did not intend to be fussed over and treated like a
child; the advice to go and change had been so obviously sensible that
it should never have been offered, and to the contrariness of youth was
impossible to accept. Thus the well-meant but ill-timed counsel drove
him into an opposite.

Again, after dinner, the evening was melodious with the breathings of
Mr. Francis's flute, but the childlike pleasure which the performer had
taken before in his own performance was sensibly dimmed. He played with
a wandering attention and an uncertain finger, without the gusto of the
artist, and his eye ever rested anxiously on Harry, who had more than
once complained of the cold, and now sat huddled up by a mountainous
fire, bright-eyed and with a burning skin, which seemed to him to cover
an interior of ice. At last Mr. Francis could stand it no longer, and
laying down his flute came across to where he sat, and with an
extraordinary amenity of voice, yet firmly----

"I insist on your going to bed, Harry," he said. "You have caught a
chill; it is idle to deny it. Dear lad, do not be so foolish. I have
troubled and worried you, I am afraid, with my fussy care for you, and I
am very sorry for it. But do not make a bad matter worse, and do not
punish me, I ask you, as well as yourself, for my ill-timed suggestions.
I have apologized; be generous."

Harry got up. It was impossible that a mere superficial boyish
obstinacy, of which he was already ashamed, should stand out against
this, and besides he felt really unwell.

"Yes, I am afraid I have caught a chill," he said. "It was foolish of me
not to change as you advised me when I came in. It was even more foolish
of me to have been annoyed at your excellent suggestion that I should."

Mr. Francis's face brightened.

"Now get to bed at once, my dear boy," he said, "and I have no doubt you
will be all right in the morning. You have plenty of blankets?
Good-night."

But Harry was by no means all right in the morning, and it seemed that
for his uncle the joy of life was dead. There was no brisk early walk
for him to-day. Vail was no longer a hungry place, and his breakfast was
but the parody of a meal. Unreasonably, he blamed himself for his
nephew's indisposition, and the morning passed for him in blank turnings
over of the leaves of undecipherable books, in reiterated visits to the
kitchen with suggestions as to a suitable invalid diet, and disconnected
laments to Geoffrey over this untoward occurrence.

"Ah! this will teach a foolish old man to hold his tongue," he said. "It
will teach him, also, that old fellows can not understand the young.
How excellent were my intentions, but how worse than impotent, how
disastrous! It is a cold job to grow old, Geoffrey; it is even colder to
grow old and still feel young. Poor Harry simply thought me a meddling
old fogy when I wanted him to take precautions against catching a chill,
and I ought to have known that he would think me so. I forget my white
hairs. How are you, my dear boy, this morning? I hope you have not a
chill, too? I am anxious and unsettled to-day."

"Oh, Harry was an ass," said the other. "But there's nothing at all to
be anxious about. He has a chill, rather a sharp one, and, with greater
Wisdom than he showed yesterday, he stops in bed. Is that Punch there?
Thank you very much."

Mr. Francis walked to the window, lit a cigarette, and threw it away,
barely tasted.

"I wonder if Harry would like me to read to him," he said.

Geoffrey looked up with an arrested smile.

"I think I should leave him quite alone," he said. "I've just been up to
him. He's as cross as a bear, and wouldn't speak to me. So I came away."

"But that is so unlike him!" said Mr. Francis. "He must be ill, he must
be really ill."

Geoffrey began to understand Harry's feelings the day before.

"If I were you I wouldn't fuss either him or myself," he said. "People
don't die of a cold in the head."

"Shall I send for the doctor?" asked Mr. Francis. "We might tell Harry
that he happened to call about some case of distress in the village, and
wished to consult him about it. Then we could get his opinion. I think,
under the circumstances, one might venture on so small an equivocation."

Geoffrey closed his Punch.

"I shouldn't do anything of the kind if I were you," he said. "What an
abominable morning! I'll play some accompaniments for you, if you like."

"Thank you, my dear boy," said Mr. Francis, "but I haven't the heart to
play this morning. Besides, Harry might be dozing; we should run the
risk of disturbing him."




CHAPTER IV

THE STORY OF MR. FRANCIS


Harry Vail owned a plain, gloomy house in Cavendish Square, forbidding
to those who looked at it from the street, chilling to those who looked
at the street from it. It was furnished in the heavy and expensive early
Victorian style, and solid mahogany frowned at its inmates. During his
minority it had been let for a term of years, but on his coming of age
he had taken it again himself, and here, when the gloom and darkness of
February and swollen waters made Vail more suitable for the amphibious
than the dry-shod, he came to receive in exchange the more sociable fogs
of London. Parliament had assembled, the roadways were no longer
depleted, and Harry was beginning to find that, in spite of the
friendlessness which he had been afraid was his, there were many houses
which willingly opened their doors and welcomed him inside. Friends of
his father, acquaintances of his own, were all disposed to be pleasant
toward this young man, about whom there lingered a certain vague
atmosphere of romance--a thing much valued by a prosaic age. He was
young, attractive to the eye; he stood utterly alone in the world, with
the burden or the glory of a great name on his shoulders, and people
found in him a charming, youthful modesty, mixed with an independence of
the sturdiest, which, while accepting a favour from none, seemed to cry
aloud for friendliness and bask therein when it was found, with the
mute, unmistakable gratitude of a dumb animal. His own estimate of his
loneliness had probably been accentuated by the year he had spent just
before he came of age in studying languages in France and Germany, but
in the main it was, when he made it, correct. But at his time of life
change comes quickly; the young man who does not rapidly expand and
enlarge, must, it may be taken for certain, be as rapidly closing up.
Within a month of his arrival in London it was beyond question that the
latter morbid process was not at operation in Harry.

He and Geoffrey were seated one night in the smoking room in the
Cavendish Square house talking over a glass of whisky and soda. They had
dined with a friend, and Harry had inveigled Geoffrey out of his way to
spend an hour with him before going home.

"No, I certainly am not superstitious," he was saying, "but if I were, I
really should be very much impressed by what has happened. I never heard
of a stranger series of coincidences. You remember the lines engraved
round the Luck:

  "'When the Luck is found again,
  Fear both fire and frost and rain.'

"Well, as you know, two days after I found the Luck, I slipped on the
steps as we were going out shooting, and sprained my ankle--in
consequence of not looking where I was going, say you, and I also, for
that matter. The Luck, say the superstitious: that is the frost. As soon
as I get right, I go out shooting again, get wet through, and catch a
pretty bad chill--because I didn't go and change, say you. The Luck, say
the superstitious: that is the rain. Finally, the very day you left, I
tripped over the hearthrug, fell into the fire, and burned half my hair
off. Well, if that isn't fire I don't know what is. 'Fear both fire and
frost and rain,' you see. Certainly I have suffered from all three, but
if old Francis could only give me a cold, and a sprained ankle, and a
burn, I don't think much of his magic. Well, I've paid the price, and
now there is the Luck to look forward to. Dear me, I'm afraid I've been
jawing."

"I wonder if you believe it at all," said Geoffrey. "For myself, I
should chuck the beastly pot into the lake, not because I believed it,
but for fear that I some day might. If you get to believe that sort of
thing, you are done."

"I am sure I don't believe it," said the other, "and so I shall not
chuck the beastly pot into the lake. Nor would you if it were yours.
But, if I did believe it, Geoff, there would be all the more reason for
keeping it. Don't you see, I've been through the penalties, now let me
have the prizes. That's the way to look at it. I don't look at it, I
must remind you, in that way; I only say, what a strange series of
coincidences! You can hardly deny that that is so."

"What have you done with it?" asked Geoffrey.

"The beastly pot? It's down at Vail. Uncle Francis is there, too. I
wanted him to come up to London with me, but he wouldn't. Now, there's a
cruel thing, Geoff. My God, it makes my blood boil when I think of it!"

"Think of what?"

"Of the persistent ill luck which has dogged my uncle throughout his
life. Of the odious--well, not suspicion, it is not so definite as
that--which seems to surround him. I was at Lady Oxted's the other
night, and mentioned him casually, but she said nothing and changed the
subject. Oh, it was not a mere chance; the thing has happened before."

Geoffrey squirted some soda water into his glass.

"Suspicion! what do you mean?" he asked.

"No; suspicion is the wrong word. Uncle Francis told me all about his
life on the last evening that I was at Vail, and I never heard anything
so touching, so cruel, or so dignified. All his life he has been the
victim of an ill luck so persistent that it looks as if some malignant
power must have been pursuing him. Well, I am going to try to make it up
to him. I wonder if a rather long and very private story about his
affairs would interest you at all?"

"Rather. I should like to hear it."

"Well, this is almost exactly as he told it me, from the beginning. He
was a twin of my grandfather's; there's a piece of bad luck to start
with, and being just half a minute late about coming into the world, he
is a younger son, which is no fun, I can tell you, in our impoverished
family."

"That may happen to anybody," said Geoffrey; "I'm a younger son myself,
but I don't scream over that."

Harry laughed.

"Nor does he. Don't interrupt, Geoff. Then he married a very rich girl,
who died three years afterward, childless, leaving all her money back to
her own relatives. It was a most unhappy marriage from the first; but
don't aim after cheap cynicism, and say that the real tragedy there was
not her death, but the disposition of her property. I can tell you
beforehand that this was not the case. He was devoted to her."

"Well?"

Harry's voice sank.

"And then, twenty-two years ago, came that awful affair of young
Harmsworth's death. Did you ever hear it spoken of?"

Geoffrey was silent a moment.

"Yes, I have heard it spoken of," he said at length.

Harry flushed.

"Ah! in connection with my uncle, I suppose?" he said.

"Yes; his name was mentioned in connection with it."

"It is a crying shame!" said Harry hotly. "And so people talk of it
still, do they? I never heard of it till he told me all about it the
other night. That is natural: people would not speak of it to me."

"I only know the barest outline," said Geoffrey. "Tell me what Mr.
Francis told you."

"Well, it was this way: He was staying down at our house in Derbyshire,
which was subsequently sold, for my grandfather had made him a sort of
agent there after his wife's death, and he would be there for months
together. Next to our place was a property belonging to some people
called Harmsworth, and at this time, twenty-two or twenty-three years
ago, young Harmsworth--his name was Harold--had only just come into it,
having had a very long minority like me. Uncle Francis used to be
awfully good to him, and two years before he had got him out of a scrape
by advancing to him a large sum of money. It was his own, and it was
this loan which had crippled him so much on his wife's death. The
arrangement had been that it should be paid immediately Harold
Harmsworth came of age. Well, he was not able to do this at once, for
his affairs were all upside down, and he asked for and received a
renewal of it. For security, he gave him the reversion of his
life-insurance policy."

Again Harry's voice sank to near a whisper.

"Two days after this arrangement had been made, young Harmsworth and
Uncle Francis were pottering about the hedgerows alone, just with a dog,
to get a rabbit or two, or anything that came in their way, and, getting
over a fence, Harmsworth's gun went off, killing him instantly. Think
how awful!"

"Why people will get over fences without taking their cartridges out is
more than I could ever imagine," said Geoffrey; "but they will continue
to do so till the end of time. I beg pardon."

"Well, here comes the most terrible part of the whole affair," went on
the other. "There was an inquest, and though my uncle was scarcely fit
to attend, for he says he was almost off his head with so dreadful a
thing happening, he had to go. He gave his account of the matter, and
said that he himself was nearly hit by some of the shot. That, he tells
me, was his impression, but he is willing to believe that it was not so,
for, as he says, your imagination may run riot at so ghastly a time. But
it was a most unfortunate thing to have said, for it seemed to be quite
incompatible with the other evidence. Then, when it was known about the
insurance policy, horrible, sinister rumours began to creep about. He
was closely questioned as to whether he knew for what purpose young
Harmsworth wanted the money he had advanced him, and he would not say.
Neither would he tell me, but I understood that there was something
disgraceful; blackmail, I suppose. He had an awful scene with Mrs.
Harmsworth, Harold's mother. His friends, of course, scouted the idea
of the possibility of such a possibility, but others, acquaintances,
cooled toward him, though not exactly believing what was in the air;
others cut him direct. It was only the medical evidence at the inquest,
which showed that the injury of which Harmsworth died could easily have
been inflicted by himself, that saved my uncle, in all probability, from
being brought to trial. He said to me that it would have been better if
he had, for then he would have been completely cleared, whereas now the
matter will never be reopened."

"What an awful story!" said Geoffrey.

"Yes, and that was not the end of his trouble. Ten years later he had to
declare bankruptcy, and my father gave him an annuity. But since his
death it has not been paid; I never knew anything about it, and he would
not allow that I should be told, and he has lived in horrible _pensions_
abroad. That seems to me such extraordinary delicacy, not letting me
know. I never found out till I came of age."

"You have continued it?"

"Of course. I hope, also, he will live with me for the main part. I have
offered him a couple of permanent rooms at Vail, for he would not come
to London. O Geoffrey, it was the most pitiful story! And to think of
him, bright, cheery, as we saw him down there, and know what an
appalling load of undeserved misery he has supported so long! Now, it
seems to me to be a brave man's part to bear misfortune calmly, without
whimpering, but one would think it required a courage of superhuman kind
to be able to remain sociable, cheerful, merry, even. But, oh, how
bitter he is when he shows one all his thoughts! He warned me to rely on
nobody; he said there was not a man in the world, even less a woman, who
would stick to you if you were in trouble. Trouble comes; they are
vanished like melting snow; a heap of dirt is left behind. Then he
suddenly burst into tears and told me to forget all he had said, for he
had given me the outpourings of a disappointed, soured man. I was young;
let me trust every one as long as I could, let me make friends right and
left; only, if trouble came, and they fell away, then, if I could find
consolation therein, I might remember that the same thing had happened
to others also."

Geoffrey was staring absently into the fire; his cigarette had gone out,
and his whisky was untasted.

"By Gad!" he said. "Poor old beggar!"

And Harry, knowing that the British youth does not express sympathy in
verbose paragraphs, or show his emotion by ejaculatory cries, was
satisfied that the story had touched his friend.

Day by day and week by week Harry moved more at his ease in the world of
people of whom hitherto he had known so little. The wall of the castle
which he had erected round himself, compacted of his own diffidence and
a certain _hauteur_ of disposition, fell like the fortifications of
Jericho at the blast of the trumpet, and it was a young man, pleasant
in body and mind, pleased with little, but much anxious to please, that
came forth. His dinner invitation to some new house would be speedily
indorsed by the greater intimacy of a Saturday till Monday, and the days
were few on which he sat down to a cover for one in Cavendish Square.

Among these more particular friends with whom previous acquaintance soon
ripened into intimacy, Lady Oxted, an old friend of Harry's father,
stood pre-eminent. Here he soon became _ami de la maison_, dropping in
as he chose, well knowing he was welcome; and such a footing, speedily
and unquestioningly gained, was to one of a life previously so recluse a
pleasure new and altogether delightful; for Lady Oxted had the power of
creating the atmosphere of home, and home was one of those excellent
things which Harry had hitherto lacked. He had not consciously missed
it, because he had never yet known it, but his gradual understanding of
it made him see how large an empty room there had been in his heart. To
come uninvited, and to linger unconscionably long; to say firmly that he
must be going, and yet to linger, he found to be an index to certain
domestic and comfortable joys of life, not lightly to be placed low in
that delightful miscellany. His nature, from his very youth, was not yet
enough formed to be labelled by so harsh an epithet as austere, but
hitherto he had not known the quiet monotonies which can be the cause of
so much uneventful happiness. Even for those whose bulk of enjoyment is
flavoured with the thrill of adventure and the frothier joys of living,
who most need excitement and crave for stimulus, there yet are times for
the unbending of the bow, when the child within them cries out for mere
toys and companionship, and the soul longs to sit by the meditative fire
rather than do battle with winds and stern events. And Harry was not one
of those who need home least; simply, he had been frozen, but now, for
the first time, the genial warmth of living began to touch him; he was
like a plant put in some sunned and watered place, and its appropriate
buds began to appear in this time of the singing bird. Here, too, he met
romance with tremulous mouth and the things of which poets have sung.




CHAPTER V

A POINT IN CASUISTRY


One evening, toward the end of June, Lady Oxted was driving home from
Victoria Station, where she had gone to meet the arrival of the
Continental express. By her side sat a girl of little more than twenty,
who, by the eager, questioning glances which she cast at that inimitable
kaleidoscope of life as seen in the London streets, must probably have
been deprived of this admirable spectacle for some time, for her gaze
was quickened to an interest not habitual to Londoners, however deep is
their devotion to the town of towns. The streets were at their fullest,
in this height of the season and the summer, and the time of day being
about half past five, the landau could make but a leisurely progress
through the glittering show. The girl's cheek was flushed with the warm,
healthy tinge which is the prerogative of those who prefer the air as
God made it to the foul gases which men shut up in their houses, and, as
they drove, she poured out a rapid series of questions and comments to
Lady Oxted.

"Oh, I just love this stuffy old London!" she said; "but what have they
done with the Duke of Wellington on his horse? The corner looks quite
strange without it. Oh! there's a policeman keeping everybody back. Do
you think it's the Queen? I hope it is. Why, it's only a fat little man
with a beard in a brougham! Who is he, Aunt Violet, and why aren't we as
good as he? Just fancy, it is three years since I have been in
London--that's not grammar, is it?--and I had the greatest difficulty in
making mother let me come. Indeed, if it hadn't been for your letter,
saying that you would let me stay with you, I never should have come.
And then the difficulties about the time I should stop! It wasn't worth
while going for a month, and two months was too long. So I made it
three."

"Well, it is delightful to have you, anyhow, dear Evie," said Lady
Oxted. "And it really was time you should see London again. Your mother
is well?"

"Very--as well as I am; and that means a lot. But she won't come to
England, Aunt Violet, except for that one day every year, and I am
beginning to think she never will now. It is twenty-one, nearly
twenty-two years ago, that she settled at Santa Margarita--the year I
was born."

"Yes, dear, yes," said Lady Oxted, a little hurriedly, and she would
seemingly have gone on to speak of something else, but the girl
interrupted her.

"You know her reason, of course, Aunt Violet," she said quietly, but
with a certain firm resolve to speak. "No, let me go on: she told me
about it only the other day. Of course, poor Harold's death must have
been terrible for her, but it is awful, it is awful, I think, to take it
the way she does. She still thinks that he died by no accident, but that
he was intentionally shot by some man with whom he was out shooting. I
asked her what his name was, but she would not tell me. And for all this
time, once a year, on the day of Harold's death, she comes to England,
puts red flowers on his grave, and returns. Oh, it is awful!"

Lady Oxted did not reply at once. "She still thinks so about it?" she
asked at length.

"Yes; she told me herself. But I hope, perhaps, that her refusing to
tell me the man's name--I asked only the evening before I left--may mean
that she is beginning to wish to forget it. She wished, at any rate,
that I should not know. Do you think it may be so?"

"I can't tell, Evie. Your mother----" and she stopped.

"Yes?"

"Only this. Your mother is hard to get at, inaccessible. It is almost
impossible to know what she feels on subjects about which she feels
deeply. I once tried to talk to her about it, but she would not. She
heard what I had to say, but that was all."

The girl assented, then paused a moment.

"Poor mother, what an awful year for her!" she said. "She had only
married my father, you know, a few months before Harold's death, and
before the year was out Harold, her only son, was dead, and she was
left twice a widow and childless. I was not born for six months after my
father's death. How strange never to have seen one's father!"

They drove in silence for a space. Then the girl said suddenly:

"Aunt Violet, promise me that you will never tell me the name of the man
who was out shooting with Harold. You see my mother would not tell me
when I asked her; surely that means she wishes that I should not know."

Lady Oxted felt herself for the moment in great perplexity. She had the
rational habit, now growing rare, of thinking what she was saying, and
meaning something by what she said, and, as her answer was conceivably a
matter of some importance, she paused, thinking intently.

"I am not sure that I had better promise you that," she said at last.

Evie looked surprised.

"Why not?" she asked.

"I can't quite tell you," she said. "Give me time, dear--I will either
make you the promise you ask, or tell you why I do not make it, this
evening. In the meantime, Evie, I ask you, as a favour, to avoid
thinking about it as far as you are able. Ah! here we are."

Indeed, the sight of Grosvenor Square was very welcome to Lady Oxted,
for just now she had no clearness of mind on the question which the girl
had put to her, but very great clearness as to the fact that there were
delicate though remote issues possibly at stake. Here was she with a
three months' charge of Evie Aylwin, the half sister of poor Harold
Harmsworth, daughter of his mother, whose attitude toward Mr. Francis
admitted of no dubiety, while the most constant visitor at their house
was the nephew of the man to whom so terrible a suspicion attached. That
the two should not meet verged on impossibilities; and was it fair,
either on one or the other, that they should run the ordinary chances of
an attractive girl and a handsome boy together, without knowing in what
curious and sombre prenatal ordination of Fate they were cast? It would
be like indicating summer rain in hard lines of ink to say that Lady
Oxted expected them to fall in love with each other, but among the
possibilities such a contingency could not be reckoned very remote or
unlikely. Probable, the most hardened matchmaker could not call it, but
where was the celibate who would say it was impossible? The sudden,
unexpected demand of the girl, "Promise me you will never tell me his
name," had been, unknown to her, a request which presupposed the
solution of a problem of a most complicated kind. Lady Oxted, it is
true, had asked for time--already, she was afraid, unwisely; that,
however, was done, and she had until the evening the power of making or
refusing to make that promise. If she made it, she shouldered herself
with the responsibility of countenancing the free intercourse of the
two, and the mutual attraction to which it might easily give rise, and
of seeing it pursue its course to its possible evolution in love and
marriage. The girl was staying with her; Harry Vail was so assiduous in
his presence that he could scarcely be called a visitor; both were
supremely eligible. It was clearly idle to overlook the possibility.
Given that these things occurred, she foresaw a moment, possibly very
unpleasant, and certainly to be laid to her door, when Mrs. Aylwin heard
of the engagement of her daughter to the man on whose name, in her mind,
rested the stain of so intimate a bloodguiltiness.

But this unwelcome conclusion brought with it a sudden reaction of
hopefulness. Evie Aylwin had asked her mother the name of Harold's
companion on that fatal morning, and had been denied the information.
Did not that argue a loophole of encouraging amplitude? Surely, to the
weaving feminine mind it meant that the mother, though perhaps neither
repenting nor regretting the black influence which this suspicion,
founded or unfounded, had had on herself, yet wished her daughter to
move in absolute freedom, avoiding none, open to all; to conduct her
life with perfect liberty, not knowing more, being prevented by her own
mother from knowing anything with definite label of that tragic affair.
Else how was it conceivable that she should not have said those two
words, "Francis Vail"? Mrs. Aylwin, so reasoned this acute lady, must
have known--for who did not know?--the strange, solitary history of the
last, and the head of the house, and was not her refusal to mention the
uncle's name a silent recognition, if rightly interpreted, that the two
might meet?

The thought was a pleasant one, for she was much attached to both Harry
and the girl, and for a moment she let her fancy build a fantastic dome
in air. If Mrs. Aylwin had recognised this, and the inference was not
unreasonable, did not the recognition imply a hope, though of the
faintest and most unformulated, that now she saw her long, bitter
suspicion to have been a mistake? Then her silence would amount even to
a wish that the two might meet, and that one of her blood might, in the
remote possibilities, wipe away by this union that of her blood which
had been shed.

To take the other side, if she did not make this promise, she had to
refuse, with what softenings and limitations you will, to bind herself.
In case, then, of what event, to meet what contingency, would she make
the reservation--under what circumstances, that is to say, did she
desire to leave herself free? Clearly, in case of the possible
happening, of the two falling under the spell of each other. But in that
case (clearly, also, she was afraid) it would be far better to tell the
girl now, at once, and save her the greater shock. To hear the name Vail
now, this moment, would be nothing to her. To hear the name Vail in its
more sinister connection, when already it had a vital sound to her ear,
was a pang that might be saved her now, but not hereafter.

Again, still dealing with these remote possibilities, in which
connection alone her decision had any significance, was it conceivably
fair to Harry to reveal, though in the most intimate way and the most
pain-sparing words, the stain that hung over his name? Long ago Lady
Oxted had settled with herself that the affair was dead and buried. At
the time, even, it had been no more than an unproved and dark suspicion,
though endowed with all the mysterious vitality of evil; but was she, of
all women, who held that to repeat an evil tale is only one degree
removed from inventing it, to stir, for any purpose, that coiled worm of
suspicion? The thought was an abhorrence to her, and Evie's mother, it
seemed, in her own dealings with her own child, had indorsed her
unwillingness. But it was certain that, if the name had to be told, it
must be told now, for, supposing the two remained strangers to intimacy,
there would be no greater harm done now than afterward; but if intimacy
was otherwise to be, it was better to kill it in the womb than to let it
live and destroy it afterward.

A third alternative remained: to write to Mrs. Aylwin, saying quite
simply that Harry Vail was an intimate friend of hers, that he was
attractive and of unblemished character and reputation (so much she was
bound to say for the young man's sake), and what did the mother want
done? But such a letter, she felt, would be a thing to blush over, even
when alone. How demented a matchmaker she would appear!

Back swung the balance. She was in the position of mother to the girl,
and the mother, out of her own mouth, had desired that she should not
know the name. That desire had reached Lady Oxted casually, not knowing
to whom it journeyed; but it had arrived, and she was bound to respect
it. The promise was as good as made.

Evie had gone to her room after tea, and these various fences faced Lady
Oxted on all sides till the ringing of the dressing bell. But that sound
suggested the dinner table to her, and at the thought of the dinner
table she suddenly felt the conclusions wrested from her, for she
remembered for the first time that Harry dined with them that night. And
though she did not expect that, on entering the drawing-room, he would
immediately throw himself on his knees at Evie's feet, it seemed to her
that, as a controlling power, she was put on the shelf; that the issues
of things were in younger and stronger hands than hers.

She found a letter or two for her in the hall, and taking these in her
hand she went upstairs.

"'The Luck of the Vails,'" she said to herself, and the phrase shaped
itself to her steps, a step to a syllable.

Still, with her letters in her hand, she looked in at Evie's room, and,
finding her "betwixt and between," went on to her own; and, as her maid
did her hair, she opened them. The first was from Harry.

"The greatest luck," it ran. "The Grimstones have influenza in the
house, and have put me off. So I can and will and shall come to you for
Sunday at Oxted. I shall see you this evening, but I can't resist
writing this."

"Kismet!" murmured Lady Oxted, "or something very like it."




CHAPTER VI

THE POINT SOLVED--THE MEETING


Dinner was over, and of Lady Oxted's party there only remained by eleven
o'clock but a couple of her guests. There was a ball at one house, an
evening party at another, a concert at a third, and each claimed its
grilling quota, leaving even at this hour only Harry Vail and Geoffrey
Langham. Lord Oxted, as was his wont, had retired to his study, as soon
as his duties as host would permit, without positively violating
decency, but the two young men still lingered, making an intimate party.

During the last few months Harry had continued to so expand that it
would have been difficult to recognise in him the hero of that recluse
coming-of-age party but half a year ago. But this change was the result
of no violent revolution; his nature had in no way been wrested from its
normal development, merely that development had been long retarded, and
was now proportionately rapid. For years his solitary home had ringed
him with frost, the want of kindly fireside interests had led him on the
path that leads to the great, unexplored deserts of the recluse; but the
impulse given, the plunge into the world taken, he had thriven and
grown with marvellous alacrity. Indeed, the stunted habit of his teens
remained in him now only as shown in a certain impression he produced of
holding himself still somewhat in reserve; in a disposition, notable in
an age which loves to expose its internal organism to the gaze of
sympathizing friends, to be his own master; to retain, if he wished, a
privacy of his own, and to guard, as a sacred trust, his right to his
own opinion in matters which concerned himself.

Lady Oxted, however, on this as on many other occasions, felt herself
obliged to find fault with him, and the presence of her niece, it would
appear, did not impose bounds on her candour.

"You are getting lazy and self-contented, Harry," she remarked on this
particular evening. "You are here in London professing to lead the life
of the people with whom you associate, and you are shirking it."

Harry looked up with mild wonder at this assault, and drew his chair a
little closer up to the half circle they made round the open window, for
the night was stifling, and the candles had drooped during fish.

"I never professed anything of the kind," he said; "and I don't yet
understand in the slightest degree what you mean. But, no doubt, I soon
shall."

"I will try to make it plain to you," said Lady Oxted. "You have chosen
to come to London and lead the silly, frivolous life we all lead. That,
to begin with, is ridiculous of you. There is no need for you to be in
London, and why any fairly intelligent young man ever is, unless he has
business which takes him there, passes my understanding. You might be
down at Vail, looking after your property, or you might be travelling."

"I still don't understand about my professing to lead the life of the
people among whom I move," said Harry.

"I am coming to that. You have chosen to spend these three months in
London without any better reason for it than that everybody else does
so. That being so, you ought to behave like everybody else. For
instance, when Mrs. Morris wanted to take you to her sister's dance
to-night, you ought to have gone; also Lady Wraysbury asked you to go to
the concert at the Hamiltons'. Again you refused."

"She wanted you to come too," said Harry, "at least, she asked you," he
added, getting in a back-hander.

"I'm an old woman, and I choose to sit by my own fire."

"Won't you have it lit?" asked Harry. "And I chose to sit there too. But
I will go away, if you like."

"And will you go to the dance?"

"Not in the least; if you send me away, I shall go to bed."

"You speak as if you were all the six great powers, sending an ultimatum
to Heligoland," said Lady Oxted.

"Not in the least; if you send me away, I shall go."

Lady Oxted laughed.

"Heligoland replies that the six great powers may wait ten minutes," she
said.

Harry turned to Evie Aylwin.

"Yes, I feel just as you do," he said eagerly, reverting at once to the
conversation which had been interrupted by Lady Oxted's strictures. "I
love the sense of being in the middle of millions of people, each of
whom, just like you and me, have their own private paradise and joy of
life, which the world probably never guesses."

Evie looked at him quickly.

"Have you a private joy, Lord Vail?" she asked. "Do tell me what it is.
A thing that is private is always interesting."

Harry laughed.

"It is called the Luck," he said; "the Luck of the Vails."

"Are you really beginning to believe in that nonsense, Harry?" asked
Lady Oxted.

"I have begun," said he.

"O Aunt Violet, how horrid you are!" cried Evie. "Do let Lord Vail tell
me about it. It is private: I am dying to know."

"Shall I? I will make it short, then," said Harry, "for Lady Oxted's
sake."

"I would rather that you made it long for mine," said the girl; "but
that is as you please."

Lady Oxted gave a loud and quite voluntary sigh.

"Poor, dear Harry!" she said. "Geoffrey, let us talk about something
extremely tangible the while. You are on the Stock Exchange. Speak to me
of backwardation and contango. That may counteract the weakening effect
of Harry's nonsense. Are you a bear?"

Harry smiled, and drew his chair closer to the girl's. "I will talk
low," he said, "so that we shall not offend Lady Oxted, and you must
promise to stop me if you get bored. Anyhow, you brought it on yourself,
for you asked me about my private joy. This is it."

Blue eyes, deepened by the shaded light to violet, looked into his as he
began his tale; into hers looked brown eyes, which seemed black. He told
her of the ancient history of the cup, and she listened with interest to
a story that might have claimed attention even from a stranger. Then he
came to his own finding of it in an attic upon a winter's day; to the
three accidents to himself, each trivial, which had followed the
finding; and her eyes--which up till now had been at one time on his, at
another had strayed with a certain consciousness and purpose (for he
never looked elsewhere than at hers) now this way, now that, had
superintended the disentangling of a piece of lace which had caught in
her bracelet, or had guided her finger as it traced the intricate ivory
of her fan handle--became absorbed. They saw only Harry's big, dark
eyes, or, at their widest circuit, his parted lips, from which the words
came. Her own mouth, thin, finely lipped, drooped a little at the
centre with interest and expectation, and the even line of teeth showed
in the red a band of ivory set in pomegranate. Once she impatiently
swept back a tress of hair which drooped over her ear, but the playing
of her fingers with her fan had become unconscious, and her eyes no
longer followed them. And it would seem that Harry had forgotten his
promise to make the story short for Lady Oxted's sake, and had rather
acceded silently to the girl's request to make it long for hers, for the
startling revelations about backwardations and bears had long languished
before the tale was done.

At last Harry's voice stopped, and there was silence a moment, though
both still looked at the other. Then Evie gave a little sharp,
involuntary sigh, and her eyebrows met in a frown.

"Throw it away, Lord Vail," she said sharply. "Throw it away at once,
where it will be lost, lost. It is a terrible thing! And yet, and yet,
how can one believe it? The thing is gold and gems, that is all. Ah! how
I should like to see it! It must be magnificent, this Luck of yours. All
the same, it is terrible. How can it be your private joy?"

Harry rose. If he was not in earnest, it was an admirable counterfeit.

"Do you not see?" he said. "'Fear both fire and frost and rain,' runs
the rhyme. But think what the cup is called: it is the Luck of the
Vails, and the Vails are--well, they are I and my uncle at least. Ah! I
forget one more thing. Only two days ago my uncle found the key of its
case. It was locked when I found it; it had to be broken open. Well, I
fell into the fire; I caught a chill in the rain; I sprained my ankle,
owing to the frost. I have paid the penalties of the Luck. Now, don't
you see I am waiting for the Luck itself? Indeed, perhaps it has begun,"
he added.

"How so?" asked the girl with security, for she knew he was not the kind
of man to pay inane compliments.

"Since I found it, I have begun to become human," he said gravely.
"Indeed, six months ago I had no friend in the world except Geoffrey."

"What's that about me?" asked Geoffrey, who was playing piquet with Lady
Oxted.

"I was only saying you weren't such a brute as you appeared," said
Harry, without looking round; "I'm a true friend, Geoff." Then, dropping
his voice again, "Then, on the finding of the Luck, I became--oh, I
don't know what I became--what I am, anyhow!"

He leaned back again in his chair, blushing a little at his own
unpremeditated burst of egotism.

"Of course, soberly, and in the light of 9 A.M., I don't believe in it,"
he continued. "But my having those three little accidents was a very
curious coincidence, following as they did on the heels of my finding
the Luck. Anyhow, it pleases me to think that there may be one
coincidence more--that those three little bits of bad luck will be
followed by a piece of very good luck. That is my private joy--the
thought of some great, good thing happening to me. And then, oh, then,
won't I just take the Luck, and stamp on it, and throw the rent pieces
to the four winds of heaven!"

There was a moment's silence as his voice, slightly raised, gave out the
blindly spoken words, which had yet a certain ring of truth about them.
But as soon as they were spoken Evie's mood changed.

"Oh, you mustn't!" she cried; "you could not bring yourself to destroy
such a lovely thing. Those stars of emeralds, those clear-set diamond
handles, oh! it makes my mouth water to think of them. I love jewels!"

Lady Oxted at this point was deep in the heavily swollen waters of
Rubicon, and her tone was of ill-suppressed acidity.

"Is the nursery rhyme nearly finished?" she asked.

Harry advanced to her and held out his hand.

"Make it up, Lady Oxted," he said. "My fault entirely!"

Evie followed him.

"Dear Aunt Violet," she said, "shake hands with Lord Vail this moment.
He has given me the most exciting half hour; and you may die in the
night, and then you'll be sorry you spoke unkindly to him. And now we'll
talk about liquidation as much as you please. Oh! you are playing
bezique.--Really, Lord Vail, your story was one of the most interesting
I have ever heard; you see it isn't over yet; you still have the Luck.
That makes all the difference; one is never told a ghost story till the
house is pulled down, or all the people who have seen the ghost are in
lunatic asylums. But your story is now only at the beginning. Upon my
word, I can't make up my mind what you ought to do with the Luck. But
I'll tell you some day, when I feel certain. Oh! I shall never feel
certain," she cried. "You must act as you please!"

"I have your leave?" he said, quite gravely and naturally.

"Yes."

At that again their eyes met, but though they had looked at each other
so long and so steadily on this first evening of their acquaintance, on
this occasion neither of them prolonged the glance.

Presently after, the two young men left and strolled back to Geoffrey's
rooms in Orchard Street, on the way to Cavendish Square. Both were of
the leisurely turn of mind that delights in observation and makes no use
whatever of that which it has observed; and scorning the paltry saving
of time and shoe leather to be secured by a cab, they went on foot
through the night bright with lamps of carriages and jingling with bells
of hansoms.

"Well, I've had an awfully nice evening," said Harry. "Extra nice, I
mean, though it is always jolly at the Oxteds."

"I thought you were enjoying yourself," said the other, "when you
refused to go to the concert, for which, as you remember, only this
afternoon you were wishing for an invitation. Afterward, also, I thought
you were enjoying yourself."

"Oh, for God's sake don't try to be sly!" exclaimed Harry. "I wish I was
a better hand at telling a story. But all the same I think it didn't
bore Miss Aylwin. After all, the Luck is a very curious thing," he
added.

"You are going to Oxted for the Sunday, are you not?" asked Geoffrey.

"Yes; the Grimstones have the flue in the house, bless them! And you go
home, don't you? Oh, I never saw such wonderful eyes in my life!" he
cried.

"You are alluding to mine, apparently?" said Geoffrey.

"Yes, of course I am. Deep violet by candlelight, and soft somehow like
velvet."

"Very handsome of you. I'll look to-night when I go to bed. My hair,
too, soft and fluffy, and the colour of the sun shining through a mist."

Harry laughed.

"The habit of being funny is growing on you, Geoff," he said. "Take it
in time, old chap, and see some good man about it. Oh! it's rot going to
bed now; let's come to the club; it's only just down Park Lane. I'm not
feeling like bed just yet."

Meantime, at the house they had just left, Evie had gone up to bed,
leaving Lady Oxted to do what she called "write two notes," a simple
diplomatic method of stating that she did not herself mean to come
upstairs immediately. These written, she announced, she would come to
talk for five minutes, and they would take, perhaps, a quarter of an
hour to write. In other words, as soon as Evie had gone, she went
downstairs to seek her husband in his room, where she would be sure to
find him sitting by a green reading lamp in mild exasperation at
anything which the Government might happen to have done with regard
either to a kindly old President of a South African republic or the
second standard for board schools.

"Violet, it is really too bad," said he, as she entered. "Have you read
the Home Secretary's speech at Manchester? He says--let me see, where is
it?"

"Dear Bob," said his wife, "whatever he said, you would quite certainly
disagree with it. But never mind showing it me this minute. I want your
advice about another matter."

A faint smile came over Lord Oxted's thin, sharp face; he usually smiled
when his wife came to him for advice. He put down his paper and crossed
one leg over the other.

"What sort of advice?" he asked. "Be far more explicit before you
consult me. Do you want to tell me of some decision you have made, and
wish me to agree with you, or is it possible that you have not yet made
your decision? It is as well to know, Violet, and it may save me from
misunderstanding you."

Lady Oxted laughed.

"I am not yet sure which it is," she said. "Let me tell you my story,
and by that time, you see, I may have made up my mind, in which case I
shall want the first sort of advice; but if I have not, the second."

"That sounds fair," he assented.

In a few words she told him all that had passed between her and Evie.

"And now," she concluded, "am I to promise or not?"

Lord Oxted was a cynic in a certain mild and kindly fashion.

"Certainly promise," he said. "And, being a woman, you will probably at
the very back of your mind--the very back, I say--reserve to yourself
the right to break it if it becomes inconvenient to keep it."

"Don't be rude, Bob. I think I shall promise, but at the same time write
to Mrs. Aylwin."

Her husband chuckled quietly.

"That is precisely what I meant," he said, "only I did not put the
reservation quite so far forward in your mind. Did the two young people
get on well together?"

"Too well. Harry has developed an amazing knack of getting on well with
people. And he is coming to us for the Sunday."

"Then most likely you are already too late. You should have thought of
these things before, Violet. Your after-thoughts, it is true, are often
admirable, but, so to speak, they never catch the train. Bear this also
in mind: if anything happens, if the two get engaged, we shall be liable
at any moment to a crushing descent from Mrs. Aylwin. If she comes, I
go. That is all."

"But she is charming."

"And completely overpowering. I will not be made to feel like a child in
my own house. Dear me, you have probably got into a mess, Violet.
Good-night, dear."

"You agree with me, then?" she asked.

"Completely, entirely, fervently, for it is clear to me that you want
the first sort of advice."

Lady Oxted went slowly upstairs and to Evie's room. Her maid had already
left her, and the two settled themselves down for a talk. The night was
hot, and Evie, in a white dressing gown with a touch of blue ribbon,
lounged coolly by the open window. The hum of ambient London came up to
them like the sound of drowsy, innumerable bees, and the girl listened
in a sort of ecstasy.

"Hark! hark!" she cried; "hundreds and thousands and millions of people
are there! Lord Vail felt just as I do about it. Oh, what a host of
pleasant things there are in the world!" she cried, stretching out her
arms as if to take the whole swarming town to her breast. Then she
turned quickly away into the room again.

"Now, dear aunt," she said, "before we settle down to talk, and I have
lots to say, let me know that one thing. Do you promise never to tell me
the name of that man?"

Lady Oxted did not pause.

"Yes, I promise," she said.

"Thank you. So that is all right. It would be dreadful, would it not, if
I had been obliged to be afraid that every particularly delightful
person that I met was the son, or the nephew, or the cousin of that man,
or even the man himself? But now that is all right; mother would not
tell me, and you (knowing her wish, is it not so?) also will not. O Aunt
Violet, I intend to enjoy myself so! What a jolly world it is, to be
sure! I am so glad God thought of it! Is that profane? No, I think not."

Lady Oxted, it has been said, had anticipated one unpleasant moment.
This, she considered, made two. And though it was not her habit to
question the decrees of Providence, she wondered what she had done to
deserve a position where the converse of candour was so sorely in
demand. But she had not much time for thought, for Evie continued:

"Only one evening gone," she said, "and that not yet gone, and what
pleasure I have already had! Aunt Violet, how could you want Lord Vail
not to tell me the story of the Luck? It was the most exciting thing I
have ever heard, and, as I told him, he is only at the beginning of it.
Italy, the South, is supposed to be the home of romance, but I do not
find it there. Then I come to England, and in London, in Grosvenor
Square, I hear within an hour or two of my arrival that story. I
think----" She stopped suddenly, got up, and sat down on the sofa by
Lady Oxted.

"Lord Vail--who is he?" she asked. "What pleasant people you have at
your house, Aunt Violet! He is so nice. So is his friend--Mr. Langton,
is it not? So was the man who took me in to dinner. What was his name? I
did not catch it."

There was not much comfort here. The girl had forgotten, or not heard,
the name of the man who took her in to dinner; she had got Geoffrey
Langham's name wrong, and out of all these "nice people" there was only
one name right.

"Langham, dear--not Langton," said Lady Oxted, "and the man who took you
in to dinner was Mr. Tresham. Surely you must have heard his name. He is
in the Cabinet. Really, Evie, you do not appreciate the fine people I
provide for your entertainment."

The girl laughed lazily, but with intense enjoyment.

"Not appreciate?" she said. "Words fail me to tell you how I appreciate
them all. Mr. Tresham was simply delightful. We talked about dachshunds,
which I love, and what else--oh! diamonds. I love them also. Aunt
Violet, I should like to see the Luck: it must be a wonderful thing. So
Mr. Tresham is a Conservative?"

"It is supposed so," said Lady Oxted, with slight asperity. "When the
Conservatives are in power, dear, the Cabinet is rarely composed of
Liberals."

The girl laughed again.

"Dear Aunt Violet, you are a little hard on us poor innocents this
evening. You blew up Lord Vail in the most savage manner, and now you
are blowing me up. What have we done? Well, now, tell me about Mr.
Langham."

"Geoffrey is a younger son of Lord Langham," said the other. "He is on
the stock exchange, and is supposed to know nothing whatever about
stock-broking."

"How very good-looking he is!" said Evie. "If I wanted to exchange
stock, I should certainly ask him to do it for me. Somehow, people with
nice faces inspire me with much more confidence than those whom I am
assured have beautiful minds. One can see their faces: that makes so
much difference!"

Lady Oxted assented, and waited with absolute certainty for the next
question. This tribute to Geoffrey's good looks did not deceive her for
a moment: it was a typical transparency. And when the next question
came, she only just checked herself from saying, "I thought so."

"And now tell me about Lord Vail," said Evie, after a pause.

"Well, he seemed to be telling you a good deal himself," said Lady
Oxted. "What can I add? He is not yet twenty-two; he is considered
pleasant; he is poor; he is the head of what was once a great family."

"But his people?" asked Evie.

"He has no father, no mother, no brothers or sisters."

"Poor fellow!" said Evie, thoughtfully. "But he doesn't look like a
person who need be lonely, or who was lonely, for that matter. Has he no
relations?"

"Of his name only one," said Lady Oxted, feeling that Providence was
really treating her with coarse brutality; "that is his uncle, his
great-uncle, rather, Francis Vail," and, as she spoke, she thought to
herself in how widely different a connection she might have had to use
those two words.

"Do you know him?"

"I used to, but never intimately. He has not lived in the world lately.
For the last six months he has been down at Harry's place in Wiltshire.
The boy has been exceedingly good to him."

"Is he fond of him?"

"Very, I believe," said Lady Oxted. "He often speaks of him, and always
with affection and a tenderness that is rather touching."

"That is nice of him," said the girl with decision, "for I suppose he
can not be expected to have much in common with him. And so the old man
lives with him. He is old, I suppose, as he is Lord Vail's great-uncle."

"He is over seventy," said Lady Oxted, turning her back to the storm.

"And Harry Vail is poor, you say?"

"Considering what the Vails have been, very poor," said Lady Oxted. "But
you probably know as much about that as I, since Harry took so very long
telling you the story of the Luck. It was lost once in the reign of
Queen Anne, and during the South-Sea Bubble----"

"Yes, he told me about that," said Evie. "It is strange, is it not?"

Suddenly she sat up as if with an effort.

"Oh! to-morrow, and to-morrow, and lots more of them!" she cried. "Tell
me what we shall do to-morrow, Aunt Violet. I am sure it will all be
delightful, and for that very reason I want to think about it
beforehand. I am a glutton about pleasure. Will you take me somewhere in
the morning, and will delightful people come to lunch? Then in the
afternoon we go to Oxted, do we not? I love the English country. Who
will be coming? Is it a beautiful place? What is the house like? Tell me
all about everything."

"Including about going to bed and going to sleep, Evie?" asked the
other. "It is long after twelve, do you know?"

The girl got up.

"And you want to go to bed," she said. "I am so sorry, Aunt Violet! I
ought to have seen you were tired. You look tired."

"And you--don't you want to go to sleep? You were travelling all last
night."

The girl looked at the smooth pillow and sheet folded back. "Ah! it does
look nice," she said. "But, indeed, I don't feel either sleepy or tired.
Anyhow, Aunt Violet, I am not going to keep you up. Oh, I am so glad you
got mother to let me come and stay with you! I shall have a good time.
Good-night."

"Good-night, dear. You have everything?"

"Everything--more than everything."




CHAPTER VII

THE POINT IN CASUISTRY SOLVES ITSELF


Lady Oxted always breakfasted in her own room, and before she appeared
next morning she had spent a long hour in wrestling over her letter to
Mrs. Aylwin. She had been desirous to tell the unvarnished truth, and
yet to steer clear of a production by a demented matchmaker, and her
letter, it must be confessed, was an admirable performance. Evie had
told her, so she wrote, of her mother's refusal to let her know the name
of the man at whose door she laid, or used to lay, Harold's death, and,
taking this to mean that Mrs. Aylwin, for any reason, did not wish Evie
to know it, the writer had, at Evie's request, promised on her own part
not to tell her. The present Lord Vail, she must add, Mr. Francis's
nephew, was a constant visitor at her house, and he and Evie had already
met. Mrs. Aylwin, she was bound to understand, put no prohibition on
their meeting in the way they were sure to meet during the season. Lord
Vail was a young man, pleasant, attractive, and of excellent
disposition.

Lady Oxted laid down her pen for a moment at this point, then hurriedly
took it up to add an amiable doxology, and sign it. She felt convinced
she could not do better; convinced, also, that if she gave the matter
further consideration, it would end in her doing much worse. Then she
took Evie out with a warm and approving conscience.

That afternoon they left London, as had been originally planned, to
spend the Sunday at their country house in Sussex. During the hours of
the night, Lady Oxted had sternly interrogated herself as to whether she
ought, on any lame or paltry excuse, to put Harry off; but on the
strength of her promise given to Evie, and the letter she was about to
write to Mrs. Aylwin, she felt she could not take any step in the matter
till she received her answer. To put him off, argued the inward voice,
was to act contrary to the spirit of her promise, which entailed not
only silence of the lips, but abstinence from any manoeuvring or
outflanking movement of this kind. This reasoning seemed sound, and as
it went in harness with her instinct, she obeyed it without question.

The house stood high on a broad ridge of the South Downs, commanding
long views of rolling fields alternating with the more sombre green of
the woods. To the east lay the heathery heights of Ashdown Forest,
peopled with clumps and companies of tall Scotch fir; southward the
smooth austerity of the hills behind Brighton formed the horizon line.
Thatched roofs nestled at cosy intervals beside the double hedgerows
which indicated roads; a remote church spire pricked the sky, or an
occasional streamer of smoke indicated some train burrowing distantly
at the bottom of valleys, before it again plunged with a shriek into the
bases of the tunnelled hills; but, except for these, the evidences of
humanity were to be sought in vain. The house itself was partly
Elizabethan, in part of Jacobean building, picturesquely chimneyed, and
high in the pitch of its outside roofs; inside, it was panelled and
oaken-beamed, spacious of hearth, and open of fireplace. Round it ran
level lawns, fringed with flower beds, wall-encompassed, which as they
receded farther from the house gradually lost formality, and merged by
imperceptible steps into untutored Nature. Here, for instance, you would
pass from the trim velvet of the nearer lawns into the thick lush grass
of an orchard planted with apples and the Japanese cherry; but the grass
was thick in spring, with the yellow of the classical daffodil; and
scarlet of the anemone was spilled thereon, and the dappled heads of the
fritillary rose, bell-shaped. Here, again, in a different direction the
lawn farther from the house was invaded by a band of lilac bushes, and
to the wanderer here a Scotch fir would suddenly stand sentinel at a
turn of the grassy path, while, if his walk took him but fifty yards
more remote, the lilacs would have ceased, and he would be treading the
brown, silent needles of the fir grove, exchanging for the sweet,
haunting smell of the garden shrubs the clean odour of the pine. In a
word, it was a place apt to reflect the moods of the inhabitants: the
sombrely disposed might easily see in the pines a mirror of their
thought; the lilacs, whose smell is ever a host of memories, would call
up a hundred soft images in hearts otherwise disposed; while, for the
lover of pointed conversation, what _milieu_ could be more suitable than
the formality of the lawns nearer the house, which, clean and trim cut
as French furniture, irresistibly gave to those who sat and talked there
a certain standard of precision? Beyond, again, the orchard was every
evening a singing contest of nightingales, and through the soft foliage
of fruitful trees, moon and stars cast deep shadows and diapers of
veiled light into grassy alleys.

The party was but a small one, for influenza had for the last month been
pursuing its pleasant path of decimation through London, and, as Mr.
Tresham remarked, while they drank their coffee in the tent on the lawn
after lunch next day:

"Those of us who are not yet dead are not yet out of its clutches."

Lady Oxted sighed.

"I had it once a week throughout last summer," she said. "It is such a
consolation, when it is about, to know that the oftener you have it the
more liable you become to it!"

Mrs. Antrobus finished her coffee, and tried to feel her pulse.

"I never can find it," she said, "and that is so frightening! It may
have stopped, for all I know."

"Dear lady," said Mr. Tresham, "I will promise to tell you whether it
has stopped or not, not more than a minute after it has done so. Alas!
it will then be too late."

"Ah! there it is," said Mrs. Antrobus at length. "One, two. It _has_
stopped now. Take the time, Mr. Tresham, and tell me when a minute has
gone."

"Your mother is the only really healthy person I know," said Lady Oxted
to Evie. "Whether she is ill or not, she always believes that she is
perfectly well. And as long as one fully believes that, as she does, it
really matters little how ill one is!"

Lord Oxted got slowly out of his chair.

"Some doctor lately analyzed a cubic inch of air in what we should call
a clean London drawing-room," he said. "He found that it contained over
two hundred bacilli, each of which, if they lived carefully and married,
would, with its family, be soon able to kill the strongest man. I
surrendered as soon as I heard it!"

"Quite the best thing to do," said Mr. Tresham, "for otherwise they
would kill you. It is better to give yourself up, and be taken alive!"

"It is certainly better to remain alive," said Mrs. Antrobus. "That is
why we all go to bed now when we get the influenza. We surrender, like
Lord Oxted, and so the bacilli do not kill us, but only send us away to
the seaside. It is the people who will not surrender who die. Personally
I should never dream of going about with a high temperature. It sounds
so improper!"

Evie was sitting very upright in her chair, listening to this
surprising conversation. She had seen Mrs. Antrobus for the first time
the evening before, and had made Lady Oxted laugh by asking whether she
was a little mad. It had been almost more puzzling to be told that she
was not, than if she had been told that she was. And at this remark
about her temperature, Evie suddenly looked round, as if for a
sympathizing eye. An eye there certainly was, and she felt as if, in
character of a hostess, she had looked for and caught Harry Vail's. At
any rate, he instantly rose, she with him, and together they strolled
out of the Syrian tent on the lawn, and down toward the cherry-planted
orchard.

For a few paces they went in silence, each feeling as if a preconcerted
signal had passed between them. Then Evie stopped.

"I wonder if it is rude to go away?" she said. "Do you think we ought to
go back?"

"It is never any use going back," said Harry. "Certainly, in this case
it would not do. They would think----" and a sudden boldness came over
him; "they would think we had quarrelled."

Evie laughed.

"That would never do," she said, "for I feel just now as if you were an
ally, my only one. What strange things Mrs. Antrobus says! Perhaps they
are clever?" She made this suggestion hopefully, without any touch of
sarcasm.

"Most probably," said Harry. "That would be an excellent reason, anyhow,
for my finding them quite impossible to understand."

"Don't you understand them? Then we certainly are allies. You know I
asked my aunt last night whether she was at all mad, and she seemed
surprised that I should think so. But, really, when a woman says that
she wishes she had been her own mother, because she would have been so
much easier to manage than her daughter--what does it all mean?" she
asked.

"Oh, she's not mad," said Harry. "It is only a way she has. There are
lots of people like her. I don't mind it myself: you only have to laugh;
there is no necessity for saying anything."

"And as little opportunity," remarked Evie.

She paused, then pulled a long piece of feathery grass from its sheath.

"England is delightful," she said with decision. "I find it simply
delightful, from Mrs. Antrobus upward or downward. Just think, Lord
Vail, I have not been here for three years! What has happened since
then?"

"To whom?"

"To anybody. You, for example."

"Have I not told you? I have come of age. I have found the Luck."

Evie threw the grass spearwise down wind. She had not exactly meant to
speak so personally.

"Ah, the Luck!" she exclaimed. "Lord Vail, do promise to show it me!"

Thereat Harry again grew bold.

"Nothing easier," he said. "I have to go down to Vail next week.
Persuade Lady Oxted to bring you down for a day or two. The Luck is the
only inducement, I am afraid; it and some big, bare, Wiltshire downs."

"Big, large, and open?" she asked.

"All that. Does it please you?"

"Immensely. I should love to come. And the Luck is there? You must know
that I am horribly inquisitive; perhaps, if you were indulgent, you
would say interested, and leave out the horribly, in other people's
concerns. So, tell me, what do you hope the Luck will bring you?"

"I don't dare to hope. I am inclined to wait a little."

Evie frowned.

"That would be all very well for a woman," she said, "but it won't do
for a man. It is a woman's part to sit at home and wait for the luck.
But it is a man's to go and seek it."

"I am on the lookout for it. I am always on the lookout for it," he
said.

Some shadow passed across the brightness of Evie's eyes; again the
personal note had been a little too distinct in her speech, and she
replied quickly:

"That is right. I should go for the highest if I were you. I think I
should plot a revolution, and make myself King of England. Something big
of that sort!"

"I had not thought of that," said Harry; "and I sometimes wonder--it is
all nonsense, you know, about the Luck, and of course I don't really
believe in it--but I sometimes wonder----"

He paused a moment.

"I wonder whether you would care to hear some more family history?" he
said at length.

"Is it as exciting as the Luck?" asked the girl.

"I don't know if you will find it so. It is certainly more tragic."

"Do tell me!" she said.

"Promise me to exercise your right of stopping me, as before."

"I never stopped you!" she exclaimed.

Harry laughed.

"No. I meant that you had the right to," he said. "Do you really want to
hear it? It is intimate stuff."

"Indeed I do," she said.

Harry paused a moment, then began his story.

"There lives at Vail," he said, "a man whom I honour as much as any one
in the world, my great-uncle, Francis Vail. He is old, he has led the
most unhappy life, yet, if you met him casually, you would say he was a
man who had never seen sorrow, so cheerful is he, so full of kindly
spirits."

"He is your only relation, is he not?" asked the girl.

"He is. Who told you?"

"Lady Oxted. I beg your pardon. I did not mean to interrupt."

"He has led a life of continuous and most unmerited misfortune," said
Harry, "and when I began just now 'I wonder,' I was going to say, I
wonder whether the Luck will come to him? You see it is a family thing.
He, one would think, might get the good, not I. And I honestly assure
you that I should be more than delighted if he did."

"It is about him you would tell me?" asked Evie.

"About him. I need not give you the smaller details. His unhappy
marriage, his sudden poverty, his bankruptcy even, for there is one
thing in his life so terrible that it seems to me to overshadow
everything else."

They had come to a garden seat at the far end of the orchard, and here
Evie sat down. Harry stood beside her, one foot on the bench, looking
not at her, but out over the creamy, sleeping landscape.

"It is nearly twenty-two years ago," he said, "that my uncle was staying
down at an estate we used to have in Derbyshire, which has since been
sold. The place next us belonged to some people called Harmsworth--
What?"

An involuntary exclamation had come to Evie's lips, but she checked it
before it was speech.

"Nothing," she said, quietly. "Please go on.

"And young Harmsworth," continued Harry, "who had just come of age, was
a great friend with my uncle, who was as kind to him as he is to all
young people, as kind as he always is, and that I hope you will soon
know for yourself. Well, one day the two were out shooting
together----"

Evie made a sudden, quick movement.

"And Harold Harmsworth accidentally shot himself," she said.

Harry paused in utter surprise.

"You know the story?" he said.

"Yes, I know it."

"You, too!" he cried. "Good God, the thing is past this more than twenty
years; and people still talk of it. Oh, it is monstrous! So I need not
tell you the rest."

"No," said Evie quietly. "Your uncle was unjustly--for so I fully
believe--unjustly suspected of having shot him. It is monstrous, I quite
agree with you. But I am not so monstrous as you think," she added,
rather faintly.

In a moment Harry's heightened colour died from his face.

"Miss Aylwin, I did not say that!" he exclaimed earnestly. "Forgive me
if I have said anything that hurt you. But, indeed, I did not say that."

Evie looked at him a moment. She knew the thing which she had so much
desired not to know, but the knowledge, strangely enough, did not
frighten or affect her.

"No; in justice to you, I will say that you did not. But you broke out,
'It is monstrous,' when I told you I knew the story."

Again the colour rose to his face, but now not vehement, only ashamed.

"I did," he said; "it is quite true. I spoke violently and
unjustifiably. But if you knew my poor uncle, Miss Aylwin, I do not
think you would find it hard to forgive me; you would see at once why I
spoke so hastily. He is the kindest and best of men, and the most
soft-hearted. Think what that suspicion must have been to him, the
years, so many of them and all so bitter, in which it has never been
cleared up!"

"I do think," she said softly, "and I like you for your violence, Lord
Vail. You are loyal; it is no bad thing to be loyal. But----" and she
looked up at him, "but you must not think that I am a willing listener
to gossip and old scandal that does not concern me."

"I do not think that," cried Harry. "Indeed, I never thought that."

His words rang out and died on the hot air, and still the girl made no
answer. This way and that was her mind divided: should she tell him all,
should she tell him nothing? The latter was the easier path, for his
last words had the ring of truth in them, convincing, unmistakable, and
she, so to speak, was acquitted without a stain on her character, did
she decide not to speak. But something within her, intangible and
imperative, urged other counsels. Her reason gave her no account of
these, but simple instinct only called to her. What prompted that
instinct, from what deep and vital source it rose, she did not pause to
consider. Simply, it was there, with reason warring on the other side.
The battle was brief and momentous. Immediately, almost, she spoke.

"I am sure you never thought that," she said, "but I wish"--and her
pulse ticked full and rapid--"I wish to prove to you how it was not
through gossip that the knowledge came to me, for this is how I heard
it: My mother was Harold Harmsworth's mother."

Harold drew a long breath which hung suspended in his lungs. His eye was
fixed on the eyes of the girl in a long glance of sheer astonishment,
and hers were not withdrawn. At last--

"God forgive us all!" he said. "And do you forgive me?"

Evie got up quickly, with a glowing face.

"Forgive you? What is there for which I can forgive you, Lord Vail?" she
said. "And I honour you for your championship of your kinsman, who has
suffered, as I believe, unmeritedly and most cruelly," and her heart
spoke the words which her lips framed.

They walked back in silence toward the house, for to each the moment was
too good to spoil by further speech, and the silence was spontaneous and
desired, the distance of the poles away from awkwardness. To Harry, at
any rate, it seemed too precious to risk of it the loss of a moment; he
would not have opened his lips, except that one word should issue
therefrom, for all his Luck could bring him, and that word he dared not
utter yet; he scarcely even knew if, so to speak, it was there yet. And
in Evie the triumph of her just speech over a more conventional
reticence filled her with a deep and secret joy. She ought to have said
what she had said, she could have said no less, and she felt it in
every beat and leaping pulse of her body. The recognised and proper
reserve of a girl to a young man meant to her at that moment less than
nothing; her words, she knew, had put her on to a new and more intimate
footing with him, but she could not have spoken otherwise, or have
spoken not at all. She had said what was due from one human being, be he
boy or girl, or man or woman, to another human being, king or peasant.
She had said no more than she need, but, humanly speaking, she could not
have said less. The thing had been well done.

But just before they reached the lawn again she spoke.

"My mother, of course, told me the story," she said. "I asked her for
the name of--for your uncle's name, but she would not tell me. It is
better," and again her blood spoke, "it is better thus."

Next moment they turned the corner, and found the party as they had left
it, for they had been gone scarcely ten minutes. Mrs. Antrobus was
lighting one cigarette from the stump of another.




CHAPTER VIII

THE SECOND RETURN TO VAIL


It was the day following Lady Oxted's return to London from the Sunday
in the country that she received the expected letter from Mrs. Aylwin,
in answer to her own. The opening of it, it would be idle to deny, was
made with an anxious and apprehensive hand. Already it was plain to her
with how swift and strong a movement, as of flood water hastening toward
sluice-gates, the first attraction between the two was speeding into
intimacy; and had she known what had passed between them in the orchard,
she would have guessed that its swiftness had outrun her eye. Already it
would have been far better that, if the girl was to know the name her
mother had refused to tell her, she should have known it on the night of
her arrival. But these things were past prayer, and Lady Oxted drew the
sheet of paper from its envelope and found, at any rate, that the
communication was short.

"I leave it entirely to your judgment," wrote Mrs. Aylwin, "whether you
tell Evie or not. You say that you have promised not to: in that case,
supposing at some future time you consider it advisable, and you can
accept this quibble, tell it her not in your name, but in mine. My
reason for not telling it her you may easily have guessed: the
knowledge, or so I thought it, that Harold was murdered, has poisoned my
life, and now I question myself as to whether I have been certainly
right about it. But remember this: if there arises between the two--the
thing is possible, as evidently you foresee--a friendship which
develops, as is natural between a man and a maid, it is certain that
some time Evie will know. I leave it to you to decide whether it is
better that she should know now or later. I thank you, dear Violet, for
your care for her."

"Dear Violet" heaved a sigh of relief. Mrs. Aylwin had been known to
stagger those who were dear to her by sending them letters which partook
of the nature of an ultimatum. But there was no ultimatum here; she was
willing to treat, and this letter, though couched with the precision of
an official despatch, was not without amenity.

She hurried downstairs to join Evie, for they were going out to lunch,
with the sense of a burden removed. Such being the attitude of Mrs.
Aylwin, she determined that her own promise to the girl should certainly
stand; and she thought, with scornful wonder of her husband's diagnosis,
that at the very back of her mind she would reserve to herself the right
to break it. Men's idea of women, she told herself, was incredibly crude
and elementary. They reserved for themselves a monopoly of certain
qualities, like courage, justice, and honour, and simply took it for
granted that such things did not exist for women. Poor, dear Bob, and
after so many years, too!

Evie was somewhat silent as they drove down Bond Street, and though her
gaze at the jostling crowds was not less intent than usual, it seemed to
have lost the sparkle of its avidity, and to dwell rather than alight
and be gone again. She looked this morning at the seedy toy sellers and
flower vendors more than at their fragrant or painted wares, and,
instead of finding fascination in the little tin figures that moved
their scythes over the surface of an absolutely smooth pavement, with
the industry of those who reap the whirlwind, or commenting on the
phenomenal cheapness of collar studs, it was rather the tragic meanness
of their exhibitors which to-day attracted her.

"How do you suppose they live, Aunt Violet?" she asked. "Look at that
man with studs: six a penny. I know, because I bought six on Saturday.
Well, supposing he sold sixty a day, which I imagine he does not, and
that they cost him absolutely nothing, in the evening he would have
tenpence. Yet they are not beggars; they work for their bread. Now, in
Italy, we have nothing like them; their place is taken by the smiling,
picturesque _lazzaroni_, who would not stir a finger to help themselves.
They just sit in the sun and smile, and get fed. Oh, dear!"

"What is it now, Evie?" asked Lady Oxted.

"Nothing. I suppose I am just realizing that it takes all sorts to make
a world, and that extremes meet, and so on. Look at me now: here am I
in this comfortable victoria, much more like the _lazzaroni_ than the
toy sellers, and who shall say how far the toy sellers are above the
_lazzaroni_? I sit in the sun, and if there is no sun I sit by the fire,
and, to do me justice, I generally smile. Yet, supposing I had to work
for my bread, should I do it cheerfully, do you think? Should I maintain
even a low average of industry? Supposing there came some great call on
me for courage or resolution, should I respond to it? I have no reason
whatever for assuring you, or myself either, that I should."

Lady Oxted's mind flew back with an inward smirk of satisfaction to her
own heroic determination to keep the promise she had made to Evie.

"Probably you would," she said. "Probably we are not so bad, when it
comes to--when we have an opportunity for behaving abominably, as we
thought we were going to be. The thought of the dentist poisons my life
for days beforehand, yet I go all the same, and ring the dreary bell,
and behave, I believe, with average courage under the wheel. Morally,
too, I suspect, we are better when a thing has to be done than we were
afraid we were going to be. Also, on the whole, one is more honourable
than one thinks--more honourable certainly," she added, with a sudden,
irrepressible spurt of indignation against her husband--"than those who
know us best believe us to be."

Evie laughed.

"Dear aunt, have you been very honourable lately?" she asked. "Or has
Uncle Bob been doubting your fine qualities?"

"Cynicism always ends in disappointment," remarked Lady Oxted, leaping a
conversational chasm, "but since it is cynical, I suppose it expects
it."

"Is Uncle Bob a cynic?" asked Evie, dragging her back over the chasm
again.

"Well, I made a promise the other day," said Lady Oxted, "and asked him
his advice about it. He told me that I should probably reserve to myself
the right to break it." Evie sat up suddenly, and toy makers and
_lazzaroni_ were swept from her mind.

"A promise?" she said. "Not the promise you made me?"

Lady Oxted looked up in surprise.

"Yes, the same. Why, dear?"

Evie deliberated with herself for a moment.

"For this reason," she said slowly: "because I now know what I asked you
not to tell me. Your promise has had the kernel taken out of it."

"You know? Who told you?"

"Lord Vail," she replied.

Lady Oxted looked at the girl's heightened colour, wondering what
emotion flew that beautiful standard there.

"I will never waste a dram of resolution again in determining to abide
by my word," she announced.

Evie laughed again, with a great ring of happiness in the note.

"Then you will confirm Uncle Bob in his cynicism," she replied, "and
disappoint him of all his pleasant little disappointments."

It was not long before Lady Oxted found that to be chaperon to a very
considerable heiress could not be regarded, even by the most negligent,
as a sinecure, while to fulfil its duties at all adequately cost a vast
deal of time and thought. Had the girl been dull, heavy, serious, or
plain, her task would have been lighter; but as it was, Lady Oxted
became, before a fortnight was past, a really hard-worked woman. Evie's
appetite for gaiety was insatiable; she took to London like a bird to
the air; found everybody charming, and everybody returned the
compliment. Indeed, the girl seemed to bring, wherever she went, a
breath of spring and morning, so utterly sincere and spontaneous was the
pleasure that bubbled from her; and, since nothing pleases people so
much as to find themselves pleasing, London in general was exceedingly
glad that Santa Margarita was the poorer for Evie's presence here. With
the eager avidity of youth, and with youth's serene digestion, she
gathered and devoured the heaped-up feast of daily and nightly gaiety.
Self-consciousness for once seemed to have been left out of the
composition of a human being, and she played, and laughed, and enjoyed
herself among these crowds as a child may play with daisies by itself in
some spring meadow, not brooding and reflecting on its happiness, but
simply happy. Parsifal with the flower maidens was not more
unreflective than she, surrounded by the well-dressed hosts, her charm
in the mouths of all.

It might have been hoped, thought Lady Oxted, that since so large a ring
was always assembled to see her smile, the smiles would have been,
considering the number and variety of the circle, distributed with
moderate evenness. In this she was not disappointed, but a thing far
more disconcerting to the responsible chaperon. Evie's seriousness
certainly was not impartial. For all the world but one she seemed to
have no seriousness, but about that one there could be no mistake. For
already, between her and Harry, there existed a relation, clear and
indefinable, to be dwelt on with silent wonder. Some alchemy, secret and
subtle, untraceable as the curves of the swallow's flight, was at work;
an effervescence already had begun to stir, brightening the dark well of
destiny within them by a hundred points of light; a mysterious
luminosity was growing in tremulous flame.

Until the receipt of Mrs. Aylwin's letter, Lady Oxted had felt a little
uncertain as to whether she could accept Harry's invitation for herself
and the girl to Vail. In any case the next two Sundays were impossible,
and the matter had been left undecided. But now that all restriction was
withdrawn, she arranged to take Evie down in three weeks' time, at the
end of the month. Harry himself, however, had business at his home which
could not be postponed, and toward the end of the week he went down
there with the intention of clearing it off as quickly as might be, and
returning again to London.

Mr. Francis had been at Vail almost continuously since the winter, and
Harry found him in the enjoyment of his usual merry spirits. He looked
even better in health and younger to the eye than when his nephew had
seen him last, and the briskness of his movements, the clear, scarcely
wrinkled skin of his face, were indeed surprising in one of his years.
He had driven to the station to meet Harry, and the train being stopped
on an inside curve just before reaching the platform, the lad, leaning
out of the window, saw him standing there. Mr. Francis caught sight of
the face, and pulling out his handkerchief continued to wave it till the
train finally drew up at the platform.

"And how are you, my dearest boy?" he cried effusively, before Harry was
out of the carriage. "How late your train is! It is scandalous and
abominable! I should have found two sharp words for the station-master,
I suspect, if I had not been so happy to think you were coming. How well
you look, Harry! London seems to suit you as much as the country suits
me."

"Indeed, that is saying a great deal," said Harry, looking at that
cheerful, healthy face. "I have never seen you looking better, Uncle
Francis."

A smile of great tenderness played round the old man's mouth.

"And for that I have to thank you, my dear boy," he said, "in that it is
to you I owe my quiet retreat, my days of busy tranquility. Ah, Harry,
it has been worth while to grow old, if at the end you find such peace
as is mine."

They drove briskly up the mile of deep country lane which separated the
station from the high road, and Harry found an unlooked-for pleasure in
the wreaths of honeysuckle which embowered the hedge in their fragrant
curves, and in the clean, vigorous tendrils of the dog-rose starred with
the delicacy of its pink blossom. Something in that young unfolding of
simple loveliness, which had never really struck him before, now smote
on his heart with a pang of exquisite pleasure. How wonderful was youth
and the growth of young things; how like, in some subtle and intimate
way, were the springing sprigs of blossoms to a girl on the verge of
womanhood! For instance--and he turned to his uncle again.

"Yes, London suits me," he said, the thrill and surprise of his thoughts
glowing in his handsome face. "People are so kind, so friendly! Oh, it
is a warm, nice world!" and his hand shook the two horses to a swifter
trot.

"You will always find people kind and friendly to you, Harry," said Mr.
Francis, "if you look at them as you looked at me just now. Men and
women know nothing so attractive as happiness. My dear boy, what have
you been doing to yourself? You are more radiant than Apollo!"

Harry laughed.

"I would not change places with him," he said; "I will take my chance as
Harry Vail. I have done nothing to myself, if you ask, but I have found
many friends. But I do not forget, Uncle Francis, that the first friend
I found was you, and I do not think I shall find a better."

They turned into the blare of the white high road, and Mr. Francis, who,
while they were in the shadow of the deep lane banks, had carried his
hat on his knee, letting the wind blow refreshingly through his thick
white hair, put it on again.

"Ah, Harry, I hope you will some time, and soon, find a friend, and
dearer than a friend, for life," he said, "who will speedily make you
forget your old uncle. But give him a seat in the chimney corner, that
he asks, though he asks no more, and let him nurse your children on his
knee. He has a way with children; they never cry with him. I pray, I
often pray," he said, lifting his hat as he spoke, with a gesture
touching and solemn, "that I may do that. That, dear Harry, would be the
crowning happiness of many happy days."

The words died gently on the air; no direct reply was needed. For a
moment Harry was half determined to tell his uncle of his dream and his
hope--longing, with the generous warmth of youth, for the sympathy which
he knew would so fully be his; and the words were even on the threshold
of his lips, when Mr. Francis suddenly straightened himself from his
attitude of musing and plunged into less intimate talk.

"I have not been idle, dear Harry," he said, "while you have been away,
charging about the world, as youth should. I think you will find--I may
say it without undue complacence--that the home farm is in better order
and is more profitable than it has ever been. There is no credit due to
me; it is simply the work of a bailiff I had the luck to find an
invaluable man; and in the autumn I can promise you better
pheasant-shooting than there has been for many years."

"I am sure it is so," said Harry, "and we will prove it together, Uncle
Francis. Really I can not thank you enough; it is too good of you to
devote yourself as you have been doing to the estate. Dear me, it is
four months since I was here! I am an absentee landlord, but a better
landlord than I has been on the spot, and I am not afraid that I shall
be shot at."

They turned in at the lodge gates and bowled swiftly along under the
huge trees. The hay was standing high in the fields to the left; on the
right the pasturage of the park was grazed by sleek kine, already
beginning to leave the midday shadows of the trees for their evening
feed in the cool; and the senses of smell and sight alike drank deep of
the plentiful and luxuriant summer. Rooks held parliament in their
debating houses in the high elms, round the coops of the
pheasant-rearing hens cheeped innumerable young birds, and the breeze
that should blow at sundown was already stirring to try its wings.
Extraordinarily pleasant to Harry was the sense that all this was his,
yet there was neither vainglory nor selfishness in his delight, for he
valued his own not for the thought of what it was to him, but for the
joy another, perhaps, should take in it. Then, emerging from the
mile-long avenue, they came to the shining lake, and the sound of
coolness from the splashing sluice. Swans and water lily repeated
themselves on the surface, and, as they turned the corner, a moor-hen
made its water-legged scurry to the cover of the reed beds. Then, with a
hollow note from the wheels, they rolled over the bridge and turned in
under the monstrous shapes of the cut-box hedge to the gravel sweep in
front of the house. There it stood, the shadow of one of the wings
fallen half across the courtyard, stately and grave, full of dignity and
grave repose, surely no unworthy gift to offer to any. And at that
thought a sudden pulse leaped within him.

"It is all unworthy," Harry said to himself, banishing with an effort
that irrepressible thrill of joy, "and I the unworthiest of all."

He lingered a moment at the door, and then followed Mr. Francis into the
house. Again the joy of possession seized him: his were the tall, faint
tapestries of armoured knights and garlanded lovers, his the rows of
serious portraits which seemed to-day to his eye to have a freshness and
welcome for him which had never been there before. He contrasted, with
keen relish of the change, his last home-coming and this. What a
curious, dreamlike month that had been which he had spent here at his
coming-of-age. How gray and colourless life seemed then if looked at in
the light of all that had passed since! He had pictured himself, he
remembered, slowly putting spadeful after spadeful of time, heaped
gradually from month to year, on the grave of his youth, spending a
quiet, often solitary existence here in the house of his fathers. Uncle
Francis--so he had planned it in those days when he had been alone here,
before his arrival and Geoffrey's--no doubt would be glad to come here
sometimes; Geoffrey, too, would very likely spend a week with him now
and again in the shooting season. Otherwise, it would be natural for him
to be much alone, and the prospect had called up in him no emotion even
so lively as dislike. He would be out of doors a good deal, pottering
and poking about the woods; he would read a good deal, and no doubt the
years would slip away not unpleasantly. In course of time the portrait
of Henry Vail, twelfth baron, and of seemingly morose tendencies, would
gloom from the wall, for that series must not be broken; a little
longer, and moss would be green in the lettering of his tombstone.

But now he could scarcely believe that the lad who had meditated thus
six months ago, not dismally but without joy, could be the same as he
who stood with a kindled eye beneath old Francis's picture. He looked at
his own hand as he raised his teacup, he looked at his boots and his
trousers. Yes, they were certainly his, and he it had been who had drunk
tea here before. What then had happened, he asked himself? He had
discovered the world, that was all; and Columbus had only discovered
America. And the world was quite full of charming things and people in
particular; to descend to details, or to generalize on the whole, he
hardly knew which was which; it was full of one person.




CHAPTER IX

CARDIAC


Mr. Francis soon joined him for tea, and, after proposing a stroll in
ten minutes' time, had gone to his room to answer an urgent letter.
Harry was well content to wait, for nothing could come amiss to a mood
so harmonious as his, and, lighting a cigarette, he strolled round the
walls, beholding his forbears. Opposite the portrait of old Francis,
second baron, he stood long, and his eye sought and dwelt on the Luck as
a familiar object. The sun, streaming through the western windows, fell
full on to the picture, and the jewels, so cunning and exact was their
portrayal, sparkled with an extraordinary vividness in the gleam. The
Luck! Was it the Luck which had given him these days of wonderful
happiness, with so great and unspeakable a hope for the days to come?
Was this the huge reward it granted him, for which he had paid but with
a cold in the head, a burn on the hand, a sprain of the foot? How
curious, at the least, those three coincidences following so immediately
on the finding of the Luck had been. How curious, also, this awakening
of his (dating from the same time) from the solitary lethargy of his
first twenty-one years! For the awakening had come with the coming of
Uncle Francis, and his own instant attachment to him. It was indeed
he--he and Geoffrey, at any rate, between them on their visit here--who
had started him on the voyage which had already resulted in the
discovery of the world. It was then that his potential self had begun to
rustle and stir in the chrysalis of isolation which had grown up round
it, very feebly and tentatively indeed at first, but by degrees cracking
and bursting its brown bark, then standing with quivering and momently
expanding wings, which gradually unfolded and grew strong for flight.
The Luck! Was it indeed the gems and the gold which had done this for
him? It was much, it was very much, but to him now how infinitely more
than he had, did he desire! Six months ago he had desired nothing, for
he was dead; but now, being alive, how he yearned for more, one thing
more!

A sudden idea seized him, and he rang the bell, and, until it was
answered, looked again at the picture. Old Francis's face, he thought,
and old Francis's hands, did not fare so well in the sunlight as the
glorious jewel which he held. The hands clutched rather than held the
cup; the lines of them were greedy and grasping, they gripped the
treasure with nervous tension, and in the face there were ugly lines
which he had never noticed before, but which bore out the evidence of
the hands; avarice sat on that throne, and cunning as deep as the sea,
and cruelty and evil mastery. Still looking and wondering, he suddenly
saw the face in a different light; it was no longer a vile soul that
looked from those eyes, but the kind, cheerful spirit of his own uncle.
He started, for the change had the vividness of actuality, and at the
moment the bell was answered by the old butler.

"Ah, Templeton," he cried, "I am glad to see you. All well? That's
right. I rang to say that I wanted you to get out the Luck--the big cup,
you know, which you and I found in the attic last Christmas, and put it
on the table to-night as a centrepiece."

"Mr. Francis has the key, my lord," said Templeton. "It is on his
private bunch."

"Ask him to give it you, then. Say it was by my order. Oh, here he
is!--Uncle Francis, I want the key of the case in which is the Luck. I
want to have it on the table to-night."

"Dear boy, is it wise?" said Mr. Francis. "Supposing the house was broken
into: you know the thing is priceless."

"But burglars can not take it from under our noses while we sit at
dinner," said Harry, "and, as soon as dinner is over, even before we
leave the room, it shall be put back again.--See to that, Templeton.
That is the key, is it?--Why, it is gold, too! Old Francis knew how to
do things thoroughly."

Uncle and nephew strolled out together, Harry with his head high and
leading the way. An extraordinary elation was on him.

"I have a feeling that the Luck is bringing me luck," he said. "Oh, I
don't seriously believe it, but think how strange the coincidences have
been! Fire, and frost, and rain! I had a turn with all of them. And you
know, Uncle Francis, since I found it, I have had more happiness than in
the whole of my life before."

"What happiness, Harry?"

"Friends, you the first; the joy of my life; the conscious feeling that
one is alive, which I suppose is the same thing. All, all," he cried,
"the world, men, women, things--all!"

Mr. Francis did not reply at once, but went forward a few steps, his
eyes on the ground.

"Don't believe it, Harry," he said. "I would never have told you about
the foolish old tale if I had thought that there was the slightest
chance of your paying more attention to it than one gives to a fairy
story. My dear boy, you are really quite silly. You caught cold because
you would not listen to my excellent advice and change your clothes when
you got in from shooting; you sprained your ankle because you did not
look where you were going, and see that the steps were covered with ice;
you burned yourself because a careless housemaid had forgotten to tack
down the carpet! I do not believe in magic at all; there is, I assert,
no such thing; but even if one did, it would be a very childish, weak
kind of spell that could only bring curses of that sort."

"That is just what I think," said Harry; "the evil, perhaps, has run
down, so to speak; it is nearly impotent. Oh, I am only joking. But if
that is the price I have paid for my present happiness, I consider it
dirt cheap. And if the Luck can give me more happiness, I hereby declare
to the powers that work it that I will take any amount more on the same
scale of charges."

Mr. Francis laughed, and took Harry's arm affectionately.

"Dear lad, you were only jesting, I know," he said. "But it is not well
to dwell on such fantastic things too much, though we constantly remind
ourselves that they are nonsense. The human mind is a very wonderful and
delicate piece of mechanism, and if once we begin playing experiments
with a thing of which we understand so little, it may get out of order,
and strike the wrong hour, and fail to keep time. Lead your wholesome,
honourable life, dear boy, and take gratefully what happiness comes in
your way, and do not forget where it comes from. Then you will have
nothing to fear from the Luck."

"No, and nothing to gain from it," said Harry, "for I suspect magic can
not touch those who do not believe in it."

"Dear boy, enough," said Mr. Francis, with a certain earnestness. "You
have told me you do not believe in it. Ah, what a wonderful evening!
Look at those pink fleeces of cloud in the west, softer than sleep,
softer than sleep, as Theocritus says. How I wish I was a painter! Think
of the privilege of being able to show those sunset glories; to show,
too, as the true artist can, the feelings, infinite and subtle, which
those rose clouds against the pale blue of the sky produce in one, to
show them to the toiler of the London streets. Ah, Harry, what a wealth
of senses has been given us, what diverse-facing windows to our souls,
and how little we trouble to look out of any, or to keep bright and
clean even one! The gourmet even, the man who eats his dinner, using his
palate with intelligence, is a step above most people. He has trained a
sense, and what exquisite pleasure that sense, even though it be the
most animal of all, gives him! And who can say that each sense was not
given us in order that we should cultivate it to the fullest?"

Suddenly he raised his hat, and in a low, clear voice he cried:

  "O world as God has made it, all in beauty,
    And knowing this is love, and love is duty,
      What further can be sought for or declared?"

For a long moment he stood there, his face irradiated by the fires of
sunset, his eyes soft with gentle, unshed tears, his hair stirred by the
caress of the evening breeze, with who knows what early dreams and cool
reveries of boyhood reminiscent within him? His harsh, untoward past had
gone from him; he had lived backward in that moment to the days before
troubles and darkness came about his path; aspirations seemed to have
taken the place of memory; he was a youth again, and Harry's face, as he
looked at him, was loving and reverent.

It was already deep dusk when they turned back, and only the faint
reflections of the fires of sunset lingered in the sky. The green of
grass and tree had faded to a sombre gray, and the green of the
fantastically cut box hedge had deepened to black when they again passed
under its misshapen shapes and monstrous prodigies. Somehow the look of
it, cut out against the unspeakable softness and distance of the sky,
struck Harry with something of an ominous touch.

"That must be seen to," he said, pointing to it. "Look at the horror of
its shapes; it is like a collection of feverish dreams!"

"The old box hedge?" asked Mr. Francis. "If I were you I should not have
it touched. See how Nature is striving to obliterate the intruding hand
of man. How grotesque and quaint it appears in this light! How
delightfully horrible!"

"Horrible, certainly," said Harry, "but I do not find delight there.
Come, Uncle Francis, let us go in. It is already close upon dinner time,
and one has to dress."

But the box hedge seemed to have a strange fascination for Mr. Francis,
and he still lingered there, standing in the road, with his eye
wandering down the lines of that nightmare silhouette.

"Indeed, I would not touch it, dear Harry," he said; "it is so grotesque
and Gothic. What a thickness the hedge must be--eight feet at the
least!"

"But it is hideous," replied the lad. "It is enough to frighten
anybody."

"But it does not frighten you and me, or the gardeners either, we may
suppose. At least, I have heard of no hysterics."

"That is probably true, but---- Well, come in, Uncle Francis. We shall
be so late for dinner, and I am dying for it."

An hour later the two had finished dinner, and were waiting for coffee
to be brought. Harry, after finishing his wine, had lit a cigarette,
which had been the occasion of some playful strictures from his uncle,
who still held his unkindled in his soft, plump fingers.

"One sip, only one sip of coffee, first, Harry," he said. "It is almost
wicked to light your cigarette till you have had one sip of coffee. That
is the psychological moment. Ah, that dazzling thing! How it sparkles!
It was a good idea of yours to have it on the table, Harry. It makes a
noonday in the room. How the Luck welcomes you home, my dear boy! But
though I can not sparkle like that, not less do I welcome you."

Indeed, that winking splendour in the centre of the table was enough to
strike sight into blind eyeballs. The candles that lit the table, though
shaded from the eye of the diner, poured their unobtruded rays on to it
from fifty angles, and each stone glowed with an inward and ever-varying
light. The slightest movement of the head was sufficient to turn the
blue lights of the diamonds into an incandescent red; again, a movement,
and the burning danger signals were changed to a living green. The
pearls shone with a steady lustre, like moons through mist; but even
the sober emeralds caught something of the madness of the
diamond-studded handles, and glowed with colours not their own. The
thing had fascinated Harry all dinner time, and the spell seemed to
grow, for suddenly he filled his glass again.

"The Luck," he said; "I drink to the Luck," and he put down an empty
glass.

An affectionate remonstrance with his folly was on Mr. Francis's lips,
when the servants entered with coffee. Behind the footman, who carried
it, walked a man with liqueurs, whom Harry could not remember having
seen before. He looked at him a moment, wondering who he was, when he
recollected that his uncle had spoken to him about his own man, whom he
proposed should wait on him at Vail. Last came Templeton, carrying the
leather case of the Luck.

Harry took coffee and liqueur, and had another look at his uncle's
valet. The man wore the immovable mask of the well-trained servant; he
was no more than a machine for handing things.

"Yes, take the cup, Templeton," said Harry. "Have you the key of it?"

"No, my lord; it is on Mr. Francis's bunch."

"Would you give me the key, Uncle Francis? I will lock it myself, and
keep the key."

Mr. Francis did not at once answer, but continued sipping his coffee,
and Harry, thinking he had not heard, repeated his request. On the
repetition, Mr. Francis instantly took the key off his bunch.

"By all means, dear boy," he said. "It is much better so, that you
should have it."

Templeton packed the jewel in its case, and Harry turned the key on it.

"Lock it up yourself, Templeton," he said, "in one of the chests. I must
have a new case made for it, I think. This is very old, and it would be
much too easily carried away--eh, Uncle Francis?" and he swung the
locked case lightly in his hand.

"It is the original case, Harry," he said. "I should be sorry to change
it."

The men left the room, Templeton going last, with the case containing
the Luck. The candles still burned brightly, but half the light seemed
to have been withdrawn from the room, now that the great jewel no longer
gleamed on the table; it was as if a cloud had hidden the sun. Harry
still held the key in his hand, looking curiously at its chased and
intricate wards, and for a few moments neither spoke. Then he put it
into his pocket, and, pushing his chair a little farther from the table,
flung one leg over the other.

"I propose to stop here four or five days, Uncle Francis," he said, "but
not more, unless we can not get through our business. But, indeed, I can
not see what there is to do. The place looks in admirable order, thanks
to you. There is the box hedge; that is positively all I can see that
wants looking to."

Mr. Francis laughed gaily.

"Dear Harry," he said, "if you are not careful you will become as absurd
on the subject of this box hedge as you are in danger of becoming about
the Luck. The dear, quaint, picturesque thing! How can you want it
trimmed and cut?"

Harry laughed.

"As you say, it does not frighten you or me, or the gardeners," he said;
"but, as I was about to tell you as we drove from the station, when
something put it out of my head, I shall have to consider others as
well."

Suddenly he stopped. In the intense pleasure with which he had looked
forward to the visit of Evie and Lady Oxted--which should be, so he had
figured it, hardly less welcome to his uncle, as a sign, visible and
pertinent, of how utterly dead and discredited was the lying rumour
which at one time had so blackened him--he had not consciously reckoned
with the moment of telling him. But he went on almost without a pause:

"At the end of the month Lady Oxted has promised to come and spend a
Sunday here, and with her will come--O Uncle Francis, how long this or
something of the sort has been delayed, and how patiently you have
waited for it!--with her will come her niece, Miss Aylwin, who has just
come to England from Italy."

He looked not at his uncle as he spoke, but, with a delicacy unconscious
and instinctive, kept his eyes on the ground. Such an announcement as
the visit of Harold Harmsworth's sister must, he knew, be momentous to
the old man, and perhaps would give rise to an emotion which it was not
fit that other eyes should see. His uncle would know that in the mind of
one at least most intimately connected with the tragedy, suspicion was
not. This visit would be a reconciliation, formal though silent. It was
right that the hearer should have as great a privacy as might be, and
so, both when he spoke and after he had finished speaking, Harry kept
his eyes on the ground.

There was a moment's silence, broken by the crash of breaking china,
and, looking quickly up, Harry saw the coffee cup fallen from his
uncle's hand, and the brown stains leaping over the white tablecloth.
The spoon clattered metallic in the shattered saucer and jumped to the
floor, and Mr. Francis's hand dropped like lead on the edge of the
table. The candles were between him and his uncle; he could see no more;
and he sprang up with a sudden pang of horror insurgent within him.

There, with his head fallen over the back of the chair, lay Mr. Francis,
sprawling and inert. His face was of a deadly, strangled white, the
wholesome colour had fled his cheeks, and only on the lips and below the
eyes lingered a mottled purple. His breathing was heavy and stertorous;
you would have said he snored, and from the corner of the slack mouth
lolled the protruding tongue. His hands lay limp upon his lap, gray and
purple.

Harry made one step of it to the bell, and rang peal after violent
peal, scarce daring to look, yet scarce able not to look at that
masklike horror of a face at the end of the table. "What had he done?
What if he had killed him? Death could not be more ghastly!" ran the
shrill voice of terror-stricken thought through his head. His instinct
was to go to him, though his flesh shrank and shivered at the thought of
approaching that, to do something, but he knew not what, yet meddling
might only cause damage irreparable, instead of giving relief. Still he
did not cease ringing, and it seemed to him that the muffled clanging of
the bell he rang had sounded for years, when steps came along the
passage and burst into the room.

"There, there! look to him! What is the matter?" cried Harry, still
working on the bell like a man demented. "Send for the doctor. Send for
his servant; perhaps he knows what to do. Ah, there he is!" and he
dropped the bell handle.

Mr. Francis's valet, of the masklike face, had gone straight to his
master, and, lifting him bodily from the chair, laid him flat on the
floor. Then with deft fingers he untied his cravat and collar, and told
them to open all doors and windows wide. He tore open his shirt and vest
so as to leave his breathing absolutely free, and then paused. The great
rush of warm summer air that poured in gently stirred the hair on Mr.
Francis's head, and rustled the folds of the tablecloth, yet, in spite
of this, and the heavy, stertorous breathing of the stricken man, it
seemed to Harry that an immense silence reigned everywhere--the silence
of waiting. Maid servants had gathered in the doorway, but Templeton,
with a guttural word, sent them scurrying down the passages, and the
three watched and waited round the one.

Then, by blessed degrees, the breathing grew less drawn and laboured,
and by the light of the candles which Mr. Francis's man had placed on
the floor near the body it was possible to see that the colour of the
face was less patched. Then the valet turned to Harry, who, white-faced
and awe-struck, stood at his shoulder.

"He will do well now, my lord," said Sanders. "It was lucky you did not
touch him. Mr. Francis has had these fits before; cardiac, the doctors
say; but the right thing is to lay him flat."

"He is not dead? He will not die?" cried Harry, shaking the man by the
shoulder, as if to make him hear.

"Lord bless you! no, my lord," he said. "As like as not he'll be dressed
to-morrow before you are awake. Cardiac weakness," he repeated, as if
the words were a prescription, "and all agitation to be avoided."

"Oh, my God! I never meant to agitate him," cried Harry. "I told him
something which I should have thought he would have given his right hand
to hear."

The man smiled.

"Just the sort of thing which would agitate him, my lord," he said, "if
you'll excuse my saying so.--And now, Mr. Templeton, if you'll be so
kind as to get a shutter or something, we'll move him up to bed, keeping
him flat. I'll sit up with him to-night."

"You're a good fellow, an awfully good fellow!" cried Harry. "And there
is no further anxiety. Shall I not send for the doctor?"

"Quite unnecessary, my lord. See how quiet his breathing has become. As
like as not he will sleep like a child. He's had these attacks before,
and I know well when the danger is over--cardiac. You can go to sleep
yourself, my lord, as if nothing had happened."




CHAPTER X

MR. FRANCIS IS BETTER


The cheerful optimism of Sanders was borne out by events, if not in
letter at any rate in spirit, and Harry, on waking, received the most
encouraging reports from the sick-room. Mr. Francis had slept well for
the greater part of the night, and though he would take his breakfast in
bed, he expected to be down by the middle of the morning. He
particularly desired that Harry should be told, as soon as he woke, how
completely he had recovered from his attack, and sent him his dear love.

Here, at any rate, was great good news. Again and again during the night
Harry had woke from anxious, feverish dreams of that ghastly, masklike
face and sonorous breathing; all the earlier hours seemed a constant
succession of agonized awakenings. Now it would be the white, mottled
face which grew ever larger and nearer to his own, that tore him almost
with a shriek from his uneasy slumber, after long, paralyzed attempts to
move; now it would be the breathing that got louder and yet more
guttural till the air reverberated with it. Again and again he had sat
up in bed with flying pulse and damp forehead, and lit a match to see
how much more of the night there was still to run; or looking for any
sound of movement from his uncle's room at the end of the passage, he
would think he heard steps along the corridor, and a stealthy opening or
shutting of midnight doors. Once it was a spray of jasmine tapping at
his window which woke him with a start, and thinking that some evil news
was knocking at his door, it was with an effort that he controlled his
throat sufficiently to bid the knocker enter. But about the time of the
first hint of the mid-summer dawn, when birds were beginning to tune
their notes for the day, and the bushes and eaves grew merry with
chirrupings, he fell into a more peaceful sleep, and woke only on the
rattle of his blinds being rolled up.

His heart leaped as he received his uncle's message, and he got up
immediately, and putting on only a dressing gown and slippers, went out
with a rough towel over his arm for a dip in the lake before breakfast.
The sluice at the lower end of it, where a cool ten feet of water
invited him, lay not more than a couple of hundred yards from the house,
across a stretch of nearly level lawn, and hidden from both road and
house by a screen of bushes. Sleep still lingered like cobwebs in drowsy
corners of his brain, but all the horror of the evening and its almost
more horrible repetitions during the earlier hours of the night had been
swept away by the news of the morning, and it was with a thrill of
pleasure, as indescribable as the scent itself of this clean morning,
that he drank deep of the freshness of the young day. The sun was
already high, but the grass that lay in the shadow of house and bush was
still not dry of its night dews, and a thousand liquid gems brushed his
bare ankle. The gentle thunder of the sluice made a soft low bass to the
treble of birds and the hum of country sounds, that summer symphony
which pauses only for the solo of the nightingale during the short, dark
hours. The lightest of breezes ruffled the lake, scarcely shattering the
mirrored trees and sky that leaned over it, and Harry stood for a
moment, white and bare to the soft wind, with the sun warm on his
shoulders, wondering at the beauty of his bath. Then, with arms shot out
above his head, and his body braced to a line, he sprang off the stone
slab of the sluice and disappeared in a soda water of bubbles and flying
spray.

Surely that moment, he thought, as he rose again to the surface, was the
crown and acme of bodily sensation. The sleep had been swept from him;
house, bed, pillows, and darkness had gone; he was renewed, starting
fresh again, cool and clean, with all the beautiful round world waiting
for him. Expectancy and hope of happiness, interest, awakening love,
were all strung to their highest pitch in his completeness of bodily
well-being; his soul was moulded in every part to its environment, freed
of its bodily burden, and with a song in his mouth he stepped out of the
water for the glow of the towel.

He sauntered leisurely back to the house, purring to himself at the
delight which the moment gave him. How could there be men who found
their pleasure in eating and drinking, in the life of crowded rooms and
smoky towns, when in half the acres of all England and round all its
coasts were such possibilities? How, above all, was it possible to exist
for a moment, if one had not the privilege of being violently in love?
Then, with a laugh at himself, he suddenly found that he was hungry,
ravenous, and his step quickened.

Half an hour later he was seated at breakfast, but already the first
mood of the day was past. He had for an hour gone free, untrammelled by
all the obligations which events and circumstances entail, but now he
was captured again. One thing in particular wove a heavy chain round
him. He had seen with amazed horror the effect on his uncle of that news
that he had thought would be so welcome. Was it reasonable to suppose,
then, that if a name alone produced so ill-starred a result, he could
bear the sight of the girl? After the catastrophe of the night before it
would be cruelty of a kind not to be contemplated to return again to the
subject. The disappointment was grievous. That visit of Lady Oxted's and
Evie's, so bright in anticipation that his mind's eye could scarcely
look on it undazzled, must be given up. Plain, simple duty, the
ordinary, incontrovertible demands of blood and kinship, compelled him
to it. His own happiness could not be purchased at the cost of
suffering to that kindly old man; and who knew how much he might be
suffering even now?

Then, with the mercurial fluctuation of those in love, he fell from the
sky-scraping summits into a black, bottomless gulf of despondency. Evie
could not come here, she could never come here, he told himself. And at
that, and all which that implied, he pushed his chair quickly back from
the table, and left a half-eaten breakfast. His reasonable mind could
not make itself heard; it told him that he was pushing things comically
far; that he was imagining an inconceivable situation, when he concluded
that a young man must not marry because of the feeling of his
great-uncle on the subject; but his mood was not amenable to reason. The
world had gone as black as an east wind, and all the flowers were
withered.

He heaved a lover's sigh, and, going out of the glass door into the
garden, walked moodily up and down the lawn for a space, consumed with
pity, half for himself, half for his uncle. Directly above were the
windows of his own bedroom, wide open, and a housemaid within was
singing at her work. Farther on were the two rooms in which his uncle
chiefly lived, a big-sized dressing room in which he slept, and next
door the bedroom which he had turned into a sitting room. These windows
were also open, and Harry, even on the noiseless grass, trod gently as
he passed them, with that instinct for hushed quiet which all feel in
the presence of suffering. "Poor old fellow! poor, dear old fellow!" he
thought to himself, with a pang of compunction at the shock he had so
unwittingly caused that cheerful, suffering spirit.

Then, suddenly, as he passed softly below, there came from the windows,
mingling in unspeakable discord with the housemaid's song, a quick
shower of notes from a flute.

Harry paused. The player was evidently feeling his fingers in the
execution of a run, and a moment afterward the dainty, tripping air of
"La Donna  mobile" came dancing out into the sunlight like a summer
gnat. Twice the delicate tune was played with great precision and
admirable light-heartedness, which contrasted vividly with the
listener's mood, and was instantly succeeded by some other Italian air,
unknown to the lad, but as gay as a French farce.

Harry had paused, open-mouthed, with astonishment. His own thoughts
about his kinsman, sombre and full of tenderness, were all sent flying
by the cheerful measure which the kinsman was executing so delightfully.
A smile began to dawn in the corners of his mouth, enlightenment
returned to his eye, and, standing out on the gravel path, he shouted
up.

"Uncle Francis!" he cried; "Uncle Francis!"

The notes of the flute wabbled and ceased.

"Yes, my dearest fellow," came cheerfully from above.

"I am so glad you are so much better! May I come up and see you?"

"By all means, by all means. I was just on the point of sending Sanders
down to see if you would."

Harry went up the stairs three at a time, and fairly danced down the
corridor. Sanders, faithful and foxlike, was outside, his hand on the
latch.

"You will be very careful, my lord," he said. "We mustn't have Mr.
Francis agitated again."

"Of course not," said Harry, and was admitted.

Mr. Francis was lying high in bed, propped up on pillows. The remains of
his breakfast, including a hot dish, of which no part remained, stood on
a side table; on his bed lay the case of the beloved flute.

"Ah, my dear boy!" he cried, "I owe you a thousand and one apologies for
my conduct last night. Sanders tells me I gave you a terrible fright.
You must think no more of it, you must promise me to think no more of
it, Harry. I have had such seizures many times before, and of late,
thank God, they have become much rarer. I had not told you about them on
purpose. I did not see the use of telling you."

"Dear Uncle Francis, it is a relief to find you so well," said Harry.
"Sanders told me last night that he knew how to deal with these attacks,
which was a little comfort. But I insist on your seeing a really
first-rate doctor from town."

Mr. Francis shook his head.

"Quite useless, dear Harry;" he said, "though it is like you to suggest
it. Before now I have seen an excellent man on the subject. It is true
that the attack itself is dangerous, but when it passes off it passes
off altogether, and during it Sanders knows very well what to do.
Besides, in all ordinary probability, it will not recur. But now, my
dear boy, as you are here, I will say something I have got to say at
once, and get it off my mind."

Harry held up his hand.

"If it will agitate you in the least degree, Uncle Francis," he said, "I
will not hear it. Unless you can promise me that it will not, you open
your mouth and I leave the room."

"It will not, it will not," said the old man; "I give you my word upon
it. It is this: That moment last night when you told me what you told me
was the happiest moment I have had for years. What induced my wretched
old cab horse of a constitution to play that trick I can not imagine.
The news was a shock to me, I suppose--ah! certainly it was a shock, but
of pure joy. And I wanted to tell you this at once, because I was
afraid, you foolish, unselfish fellow, that you might blame yourself for
having told me; that you might think it would pain or injure me to speak
of it again. You might even have been intending to tell Miss Aylwin that
you must revoke your invitation. Was it not so, Harry?" and he waited
for an answer.

Harry was sitting on the window sill playing with a tendril of intruding
rose, and his profile was dark against the radiance of the sky outside.
But when on the pause he turned and went across to the bedside, Mr.
Francis was amazed, for his face seemed, like Moses's, to have drunk of
some splendour, and to be visibly giving it out. He bent over the bed,
leaning on it with both hands.

"Ah! how could I do anything else?" he cried. "I could not bear to be so
happy at the cost of your suffering. But now, oh, now----" And he
stopped, for he saw that he had told his secret, and there was no more
to say.

Mr. Francis, seeing that the lad did not go on with the sentence, the
gist of which was so clear, said nothing to press him, for he
understood, and turned from the seriousness of the subject.

"So that is settled," he said, "and they are coming, you tell me, at the
end of the month. That is why you want the box hedge cut, you rascal.
You are afraid of the ladies being frightened. I almost suspected
something of the kind. And now, my dear boy, you must leave me. I shall
get up at once and be down in half an hour. Ah, my dear Harry, my dear
Harry!" and he grasped the hand long and firmly.

Harry left him without more words, and strolled out again into the
sunlight, which had recaptured all its early brilliance. Had ever a man
been so ready and eager to spoil his own happiness, he wondered. Half an
hour ago he had blackened the world by his utterly unfounded fears, all
built on a fabric of nothingness, and in a moment reared to such a
height that they had blotted the very sun from the sky, and like a
vampire sucked the beauty from all that was fair. A thought had built
them, a word now had dispelled them.

He went round to the front of the house, where he found a gardener busy
among the flower beds, and they went together to examine the great
hedge. It would be a week's work, the man said, to restore it to its
proper shape, and Harry answering that it must therefore be begun
without delay, he went off after a ladder and pruning tools. Then,
poking idly at its compacted wall with his stick as he walked along it,
Harry found that after overcoming the first resistance, the stick seemed
to penetrate into emptiness, though the whole hedge could not have been
less than six or eight feet thick. This presented points of interest,
and he walked up to the end, far away from the house, and, pushing
through a belt of trees into which the hedge ran, proceeded to examine
it from the other side. Here, at once, he found the key to this strange
thing, for, half overgrown with young shoots, stood an opening some five
feet high, leading into the centre of the hedge, down which ran a long
passage. More correctly speaking, indeed, the hedge was not one, but
two, planted some three feet apart, and this corridor of gloomy green
lights led straight down it toward the house. At the far end, again, was
a similar half-overgrown door, coming out of which one turned the corner
of the hedge and emerged on to the gravel sweep close by the house,
immediately below the windows of the gun room.

To Harry there was something mysterious and delightful about this
discovery, which gave him a keen, childlike sense of pleasure. To judge
from the growth over the entrances to the passage, it must have been
long undiscovered, and he determined to ask his uncle whether he
remembered it. Then, suddenly and unreasonably, he changed his mind; the
charm of this mystery would be gone if he shared it with another, even
if he suspected that another already knew it, and, smiling at himself
for his childish secrecy and reserve, he strolled back again to meet the
gardener to whom he had given orders to clip it. There must be no
possibility of his discovery of the secret doors; the box hedge should
be clipped only with a view to the road; the other side should not be
touched--a whited sepulchre. These orders given, he went back to the
house to wait for the appearance of Mr. Francis.

The latter soon came downstairs, with a great Panama hat on his head,
round which was tacked a gaudy ribbon; he hummed a cheerful little tune
as he came.

"Ah, Harry!" he said, "I did not mean you to wait in for me on this
glorious morning, for I think I will not go fast or far. Long-limbed,
lazy fellow," he said, looking at him as he sat in the low chair.

Harry got up, stretching his long limbs.

"Lazy I am not," he said; "I have done a world full of things this
morning. I have bathed, I have breakfasted, I have listened to your
music, I have given a hundred orders to the gardeners, at least I gave
one, and I have read the papers. Where shall we go, Uncle Francis?"

"Where you please, as long as we go together, and you will consent to go
slowly and talk to me. I am a little shaky still, I find, now that I try
my legs; but, Harry, there is a lightness about my heart from your news
of last night."

"It is good to hear you say that, for I can not convey to you how I
looked forward to telling you. And you feel, you really feel, all you
said to me?"

Mr. Francis paused.

"All, all," he said earnestly. "The past has been expunged with a word.
That burden which so long I have carried about is gone, like the burden
of Christian's. Ah! you do not know what it was! But now, if she--Miss
Aylwin--believed it, she would not come within a mile of me; if her
mother still believed it, she would not let her, and Lady Oxted would
not let her. A hard, strange woman, was Mrs. Aylwin, Harry. I told you,
I remember, what passed between us. But it is over, over. Yes, yes, the
healing comes late, and the recompense; but it comes--it has come."

"I do not know Mrs. Aylwin," said Harry. "I have never ever seen her.
But I can answer for it that Miss Aylwin believes utterly and entirely
in your innocence."

"How is that? How is that?" asked Mr. Francis.

"She told me so herself," said Harry. "How strange it all is, and how it
all works together! I told her, you must know, the first evening I met
her, about the Luck, and last week, when I was down with the Oxteds, I
told her, Uncle Francis, about the awful troubles you had been through,
particularly--particularly that one. At the moment I did not know that
she was in any way connected with the Harmsworths. I knew of her only
what I had seen of her. And then, in the middle, she stopped me, saying
she knew all, saying also that she entirely believed in you."

Mr. Francis walked on a few steps in silence, and Harry spoke again.

"Perhaps I ought not to have told her," he said, "but the Luck held. She
was the right person, you see. And somehow, you will agree with me, I
think, when you see her, she is a person to whom it is natural to tell
things. She is so sympathetic--I have no words--so eager to know what
interests and is important to her friends. Yes, already I count myself a
friend of hers."

"Then her mother had not told her all?" asked Mr. Francis, with the air
of one deliberating.

"Not all; not your name. She had no idea that she was talking to the
nephew of the man about whom she had heard from her mother."

Mr. Francis quickened his pace, like a man who has made up his mind.

"You did quite right to tell her, Harry," he said, "quite right. It
would come to her better from you than from any one else. Also, it is
far better that she should know before she came here, and before you get
to know each other better. I have always a dread of the chance word, so
dear to novelists, which leads to suspicion or revelations. How
intolerable the fear of that would have been! We should all have been in
a false position. But now she knows; we have no longer any fear as to
how she may take the knowledge; and thank you, dear Harry, for telling
her."

The next two or three days passed quietly and busily. There were many
questions of farm and sport to be gone into, many balancings of
expenditure and income to be adjusted, and their talk, at any rate, if
not their more secret thoughts, was spread over a hundred necessary but
superficial channels. Among such topics were a host of businesses for
which Mr. Francis required Harry's sanction before he put them in hand;
a long section of park paling required repair, some design of planting
must be constructed in order to replace the older trees in the park,
against the time that decay and rending should threaten them. All these
things and many more, so submitted Mr. Francis, were desirable, but it
would be well if Harry looked at certain tables of estimates which he
had caused to be drawn up before he decided, as he was inclined to do,
that everything his uncle recommended should be done without delay.
Items, inconsiderable singly, he would find, ran to a surprising total
when taken together, and he must mention a definite sum which he was
prepared to spend, say, before the end of the year, on outdoor
improvements. Things in the house, too, required careful consideration;
the installation of the electric light, for instance, would run away
with no negligible sum. How did Harry rank the urgency of indoor
luxuries with regard to outdoor improvements? If he intended to
entertain at all extensively during the next winter, he would no doubt
be inclined to give precedence to affairs under the roof; if not, there
were things out of doors which could be mended now at a less cost than
their completer repair six months hence would require.

Mr. Francis put these things to his nephew with great lucidity and
patient impartiality, and Harry, heavily frowning, would wrestle with
figures that continually tripped and threw him, and in his mind label
all these things as sordid. But the money which he could immediately
afford to spend on the house and place was limited, and he had the sense
to apply himself to the balancing. At length, after an ink-stained and
arithmetical morning, he threw down his pen.

"Electric light throughout, Uncle Francis," he said, "and hot water
laid on upstairs. There is the ultimatum. The house is more behindhand
than the park. Therefore the house first."

"You see exactly what that will come to?" asked Mr. Francis.

"Yes; according to the estimates you have given me, I can afford so
much, and the park palings may go to the deuce. One does not live in the
park palings, and, since you mention it, I daresay I shall ask people
here a good deal next winter. Let's see; this is mid-June. Let them
begin as soon as Lady Oxted and Miss Aylwin have been, and they should
be out of the house again by October; though the British workman always
takes a longer lease than one expects. I shall want to be here in
October. Oh, I wish it were October. Pheasant-shooting, you know," he
added, in a tone of apology.

He tore up some sheets of figures, then looked up at his uncle.

"You will like to have people here, will you not, Uncle Francis?" he
asked. "There shall be young people for you to play with, and old people
for me to talk to. And we'll shoot, and, oh, lots of things."

He got off his chair, stretching himself slowly and luxuriously.

"Thank goodness, I have made up my mind," he said. "I thought I was
never going to. Come out for a stroll before lunch."

Whether it was that the multiplicity of these arithmetical concerns came
between the two, or, as Harry sometimes fancied, his uncle was not
disposed to return to that intimacy of talk which had followed his
strange seizure on the first night, did not certainly appear. The
upshot, however, admitted of no misunderstanding, and, engrossed in
these subjects, the two did not renew their conversation about Miss
Aylwin and all that bordered there. As far as concerned his own part,
Harry did not care to speak of what was so sacred to him, and so near
and far; she was the subject for tremulous, solitary visions; to discuss
was impossible, and to trespass near that ground was to make him silent
and awkward. No great deal of intuition was necessary on Mr. Francis's
part to understand this, and he also gave a wide berth to possible
embarrassments.

The Sunday afternoon following, Harry left again for London, for he was
dining out that night. He said good-bye to his uncle immediately after
lunch, for at the country church there was a children's service which
Mr. Francis had to attend, since he was in charge of a certain section
of the congregation--those children, in fact, who attended his class in
the village Sunday school.




CHAPTER XI

MR. FRANCIS SEES HIS DOCTOR


Harry had held long sessions in his mind as to whether he should or
should not ask other people to Vail to meet Lady Oxted and Miss Aylwin
at the end of the month. It was but a thin hospitality, he was afraid,
to bring two ladies down to Wiltshire to spend a country Sunday, and
provide for their entertainment only the society of himself and his
uncle; and this fear gradually deepening to certainty, he hurriedly
asked four or five other guests, only two days before the projected
visit, in revolt all the time at the obligations of a host. All of
these, however, as was not unnatural at this fullest time in the year,
were otherwise engaged, and he opened each letter of regret with
increasing satisfaction. He had been balked in the prosecution of his
duty; it was no use at this late hour trying again.

There were also other reasons against having a party. His uncle's
health, for instance, so he wrote to him, had not been very good since
his attack. He had been left rather weak and shattered by it, and though
his letter was full of that zest and cheerfulness which was so habitual
a characteristic with him, Harry felt that it might be better,
particularly since his first meeting with Miss Aylwin would of necessity
be somewhat of an emotional strain to him, not to tax him further,
either with the arrangements incidental to a larger party or with their
entertainment. These dutiful considerations, it must be confessed,
though perfectly genuine, all led down the paths of his own desires, for
it was just the enforced intimacy of a _partie carre_ in the country
from which he promised himself such an exquisite pleasure. With a dozen
people in the house, his time would not be his own; he would have to
look after people, make himself agreeable to everybody, and be
continually burdened with the hundred petty cares of a host. But, the
way things were, all that Sunday they would be together, if not in fours
then in pairs, and the number of possible combinations of four people in
pairs he could see at once was charmingly limited.

But, though to him personally the refusal of others to come to his feast
was not an occasion of regret, an excuse to the two ladies as to the
meagreness of the entertainment he was providing for them, however
faltering and insincere, was still required. This he made with a
marvellously radiant face, a few evenings before their visit, as he sat
with them in Lady Oxted's box at the opera.

"I have to make a confession," he said, drawing his chair up at the end
of the second act of Lohengrin, "and, as you are both so delighted with
the music, I will do so now, in the hopes that you may let me off
easily. There is absolutely no one coming to meet you at Vail; there
will be my Uncle Francis and myself, and that is all."

Evie turned to him.

"That is charming of you," she said, "and you have paid us a compliment.
It is nothing to be asked as merely one of a crowd, but your asking us
alone shows that you don't expect to get bored with us. Make your
courtesy, Aunt Violet!"

"But there's the Luck," said Lady Oxted. "I gathered that the Luck was
the main object of our expedition, though how it was going to amuse us I
don't know, any more than I know how Dr. Nansen expected the north pole
to amuse him. And why, if you wanted to see it, Evie, Harry could not
send for it by parcel post, I never quite grasped."

"Or luggage train, unregistered," said Evie. "Why did you not give it to
the first tramp you met, Lord Vail, and ask him to take it carefully to
London, for it was of some value, and leave it at a house in Grosvenor
Square the number of which you had forgotten? How stupid of you not to
think of that! And did you see the Luck when you were down last week?"

"Yes; it came to dinner every night. I used to drink its health."

"Good gracious! I shall have to take my very smartest things," cried
Evie. "Fancy having to dress up to the Luck every evening!"

"Give it up, dear, give it up," said Lady Oxted. "The Luck will
certainly make you look shabby, whatever you wear. Oh! those nursery
rhymes!--Ah! here's Bob.--Bob, what can have made you come to the
opera?"

Lord Oxted took his seat, and gazed round the house before replying.

"I think it was your absolute certainty that I should not," he replied.
"I delight in confuting the infallible; for you are an infallible,
Violet. It is not your fault; you can not help it."

Lady Oxted laughed.

"My poor man," she said, "how shallow you must be not to have seen that
I only said that in order to make you come!"

"I thought of that," he said, "but rejected the suspicion as unworthy.
You laid claim, very unconvincingly I allow, the other day to a passion
for truth and honour. Indeed, I gave you the benefit of a doubt which
never existed.--And you all go down to Vail on Saturday. I should like
to come, only I have not been asked."

"No, dear," said Lady Oxted. "I forbade Harry to ask you."

"Oh! you didn't," began Harry.

"I quite understand," said Lord Oxted; "you refrained from asking me on
your own account, and if you had suggested such a thing, my wife would
have forbidden you. One grows more and more popular, I find, as the
years pass."

"Dear Uncle Bob, you are awfully popular with me," said Evie. "Shall I
stop and keep you company in London?"

"Yes; please do," said he.

"But won't it be rather rude to Lord Vail?"

"Yes, but he will forgive you," said Lord Oxted.

"Indeed, I sha'n't, Miss Aylwin," said Harry. "Don't think it. But will
you then come to Vail, Lord Oxford? I thought it would be no use asking
you."

"I may not be popular," said he, "but I have still a certain pride."

Here the orchestra poised and plunged headlong into the splendid
overture of the third act; and Lady Oxted, whose secret joy was the hope
that she might, in the fulness of time, grow to tolerate Wagner by
incessant listening to him, glared furiously at the talkers and closed
her eyes. Lord Oxted, it was observed by the others, thereupon stole
quietly out of the box.

The curtain rose with the Wedding March, and that done, and the lovers
alone, that exquisite duet began, rising, like the voices of two larks,
from height to infinite height of passion, as clear and pure as summer
heavens. Then into the soul of that feeblest of heroines began to enter
doubt and hesitation, the desire to know what she had promised not to
ask grew in the brain, until it made itself words, undermining and
unbuilding all that on which love rests. Thereafter, the woman having
failed, came tumult and death, the hopeless lovers were left face to
face with the ruin that want of trust will bring upon all that is
highest, and with the drums and the slow, measured rhythm of despair,
the act ended.

"The hopeless, idiotic fool of a girl!" remarked Evie, with extreme
precision, weighing her words. "Oh! I lose my patience with her."

"I thought your tone sounded a little impatient," said Lady Oxted.

"A little? Why, if Lohengrin had said he wanted to write a letter, she
could have looked round the corner to see that he was not flirting with
one of the chorus, and have opened his letter afterward. If there is one
thing I despise, it is a suspicious woman."

"You must find a great many despicable things in this world," remarked
Lady Oxted.

"Dear aunt, if you attempt to be cynical, I shall go home in a hansom by
myself," said Evie.

"Do, dear; and Harry and I will follow in the brougham. Do you want to
stay for the last act?"

"No; I would sooner go away. I am rather tired, and Elsa has put me in a
bad temper. Good-bye, Lord Vail, and expect us on Saturday afternoon;
please order good weather. It will be enchanting; I am so looking
forward to it!"

Harry himself went down to Vail on Friday afternoon, for he wished both
to satisfy himself that everything was arranged for the comfort of his
visitors, and also to meet them himself when they came. The only train
he could conveniently catch did not stop at his nearest station, and he
telegraphed home that they should meet him at Didcot. This implied a
ten-mile drive, and his train being late on arrival, he put the cobs to
their best pace in order to reach Vail in time for dinner. Turning
quickly and rather recklessly into the lodge gates, he had to pull up
sharply in order to avoid collision with one of his own carriages which
was driving away from the house. A stable helper not in livery held the
reins, and by his side sat a man of dark, spare aspect, a stranger to
him. As soon as they had passed, he turned round to the groom who sat
behind.

"Who was that?" he asked.

"I don't know his name, my lord," said he, "but I drove him from the
station last Monday. He has been staying with Mr. Francis since then."

Harry was conscious of a slight feeling of vexation, arising from
several causes. In the first place (and here a sense of his dignity
spoke), any guest, either of his or his uncle's, ought to be driven to
the station properly, not by a man in a cap and a brown coat. In the
second place, though he was delighted that Uncle Francis should ask any
friend he chose to stay with him, Harry considered that he ought to have
been told. He had received a long letter from his uncle two days ago, in
which he went at some length into the details of his days, but made no
mention of a guest. In the third place, the appearance of the man was
somehow grossly and uncomfortably displeasing to him.

These things simmered in his mind as he drove up the long avenue, and
every now and then a little bubble of resentment, as it were, would
break on the surface. He half wondered at himself for the pertinacity
with which his mind dwelt on them, and he determined, with a touch of
that reserve and secrecy which still lingered in corners and angles of
his nature, that if his uncle did not choose of his own initiative to
tell him about this man, he would ask no questions, but merely not
forget the circumstance. This reticence on his own part, so he told
himself, was in no way to be put down to secretiveness, but rather to
decency of manners. His uncle might have the Czar of all the Russias, if
he chose, to stay with him, and if he did not think fit to mention that
autocrat's visit, even though it was in all the daily papers, it would
be rude even for his nephew to ask him about it. But he knew, if he
faced himself quite honestly, that though good manners were sufficient
excuse for the reticence he preferred to employ, secretiveness and
nothing else was the reason for it. Certainly he wished that the man had
not been so disrelishing to the eye; there was something even sinister
about the glance he had got of him.

Mr. Francis was in the most cheery and excellent spirits, and delighted
to see him. He was employed in spudding plantains from the lawn as the
carriage drove up. But, abandoning this homely but useful performance as
soon as he heard the wheels on the road, he ran almost to meet him.

"Ages, it seems literally ages, since you were here, dear boy!" he said.
"And see, Harry, I have not been idle in preparing for our charming
visitors. Croquet!" and he pointed to a large deal box that lay
underneath the clipped yew hedge. "Templeton and I found the box in a
gardener's shed," he said, "and we have been washing and cleaning it up.
Ah! what a fascinating game, and how it sets off the ingenuity of the
feminine mind! I was a great hand at it once, and I think I can strike
the ball still. Come, dear boy, let us get in; it is already dinner
time. Ah! my flute; it would never do to leave that," and he tripped
gaily off to a garden seat near, on which lay the case containing the
favourite instrument.

It happened that at dinner the same night Mr. Francis passed Harry
through a sort of affectionate catechism, asking him to give an
exhaustive account of the manner in which he had spent the hours since
he left Vail a fortnight ago. Harry complied with his humour, half shy,
half proud of the number that had to be laid inside Lady Oxted's door,
and when this was finished:

"Now it is my turn, Uncle Francis," he said. "Begin at the beginning,
and tell me all as fully as I have to you."

"Well, dear Harry, if I have not galloped about like you, taking ditch
and fence, I have trotted along a very pleasant road," he said. "All the
week after you left me I was much employed in writing about estimates
and details with regard to the electric light. You must look at those
to-morrow; they will be rather more expensive than we had anticipated,
unless you have fewer lights of higher power. However, that business was
finished, I remember, on Saturday; on Sunday I had my class, and dawdled
very contentedly through the day. And all this week I have been busy in
little ways--one day will serve for another; at the books all the
morning, and in the afternoon pottering about alone, doing a bit of
gardener's work here, feeding the pheasants there--and they are getting
on capitally--or down at the farm. Then very often a nap before dinner,
and a blow on the flute afterward. A sweet, happy, solitary time."

The servants had left the room, and as Mr. Francis said these words, he
looked closely at Harry, and saw his face, so he thought, harden. The
lips were a little compressed, the arch of the eyebrows raised ever so
little; something between surprise and a frown contracted them. He had
already thought it more than possible that Harry might have met the
other trap driving away from the house, and he thought he saw
confirmation of it in his face. He sighed.

"Ah, Harry," he said, "can you not trust me?"

Mr. Francis's voice was soft, almost broken; his blue eyes glistened in
the candlelight, but still looking intently at his nephew. And, at the
amenity and affection in his tone, the boy's reserve and secretiveness,
which he had labelled good manners, utterly broke down.

"You have read my thoughts," he said, "and I apologize. But why, why not
have told me, Uncle Francis? You could not have thought I should mind
your having who you liked here?"

Mr. Francis sighed again.

"I will tell you now," he said, slightly accentuating the last word. "I
did not tell you before; I purposely concealed it now; yes, I even used
the word solitary about my life during the last week, in order to save
you anxiety."

"Anxiety?" asked Harry.

"Yes; you met, probably somewhere near the lodge gates, one of your
carriages going to the station. A man out of livery drove it; a man of
middle age sat by him. He was my doctor, Harry, and he came here on
Monday last. I wished"--and his tone was frankness to the core--"I
wished to get him out of the house before you came; I did not know you
were coming till this afternoon, and I saw he could just catch the train
to town. I ordered the carriage to take him instantly, and the man had
not time to get into livery. That is all."

At once Harry was all compunction and anxiety; he left his chair at the
end of the table, and drew it close beside his uncle.

"Dear Uncle Francis," he said, "what was his opinion of your health? He
was satisfied?"

"Fairly well satisfied," said Mr. Francis. "The upshot was that I must
live very quietly, and take no great exertion, and guard against quick
movements. I might then hope, I might certainly hope, to live several
more years yet. At my age, he said, one must not go hurdle-racing.
Seventy-three! Well, well, I am getting on for seventy-three!"

Harry was tongue-tied with a sort of vague contrition--for what, he
could hardly tell. He had been put in the wrong, but so generously and
kindly that he could not resent it. He had had no suspicions of any
kind, and his uncle's simple frankness had made him wear the aspect of
the suspector. Indeed, where could suspicion look in? Suspicions--what
of? The gist of his feeling had been that he should have been told, and
here was the considerable reason why he had not--a reason sensible,
conclusive, and dictated by thoughtful affections. Yet he felt somehow
ashamed of himself, and his shame was too ill-defined for speech. But
there was no long pause, for Mr. Francis almost immediately got up from
his chair, with a nimbleness of movement which perhaps his doctor would
not have liked.

"Well! a truce to these sombrenesses, Harry," he said. "Indeed, I am
brisk enough yet. Ah, what a pleasure to have you here instead of that
excellent, kind, unsociable fellow! I have such a good story for you;
let us go to the billiard room; I could not tell you before the
servants, though I have had it on the tip of my tongue all the evening.
The doctor recommended me billiards after dinner; gentle, slow exercise
like that was just the thing, he said. Well, that story----"

Harry rose too.

"One word more," he said. "Is your doctor a really first-rate man? You
remember, I wanted you to see a good man. What is his name?"

"Dr. Godfrey," said Mr. Francis, "32 Half-Moon Street. He is a
first-rate man. I have known him since he was a boy."




CHAPTER XII

THE MEETING IN THE WOOD


The two ladies were to arrive about tea time next day, and, as the hour
drew on, a lively restlessness got hold of Harry. He could neither sit,
nor stand, nor read, but after a paragraph of a page, the meaning of
which slipped from his mind even as his eyes hurried over the lines, he
would be off on an aimless excursion to the dining room, forget what he
had gone about, and return with the same haste to his book. Then he
would remember that he wanted the table to-night in the centre of the
room, not pushed, as they had been having it, into the window; and there
must be a place left for the Luck in the middle of the table. Again he
would be off to the dining room; there was the table in the centre of
the room, and in the centre of the table a place for the Luck, for he
had given twenty repetitions of the order to Templeton, which was
exactly twenty repetitions more than were necessary. Harry, in fact, was
behaving exactly like the cock sparrow in mating time, strutting before
its lady--an instinct in all young males. But there were not enough
flowers; there must be more flowers and less silver. How could Dutch
silver be ornamental in the neighbourhood of that gorgeous centrepiece,
and how, said his heart to him, could the Luck be ornamental,
considering who should sit at his table?

He went back again to the hall, after giving these directions, where tea
was laid. Mr. Francis was out on the lawn; he could see his yellow
Panama hat like a large pale flower under the trees; the windows were
all open, and the gentle hum of the warm afternoon came languidly in.
Suddenly a fuller note began to overscore these noises in gradual
_crescendo_, the crisp gravel grated underneath swift wheels, and next
moment he was at the door. And, at sight of the girl, all his Marthalike
cares, the Dutch silver, the position of the table, slipped from him.
Here was the better part.

"Welcome!" he said; "and welcome and welcome!" and he held the girl's
hand far longer than a stranger would; and it was not withdrawn. A
little added colour shone in her cheeks, and her eyes met his, then fell
before them. "So you have not stayed to keep Lord Oxted company," he
said. "I can spare him pity.--How are you, Lady Oxted?"

"Did you think I should?" asked Evie.

"No; I felt quite certain you would not," said Harry, with the assurance
which women love. "Do come in; tea is ready."

"And I am ready," said Evie.

"And this is the hall," continued Harry, as they entered, "where every
one does everything. Oh! there is a drawing-room: if you wish we will
be grand and go to the drawing-room. I had it made ready; but let us
stop here.--Will you pour out tea, Lady Oxted."

Lady Oxted took a rapid inventory of the tapestry and portraits.

"I rather like drinking tea in a cow shed," she remarked.

In a few moments Mr. Francis entered with his usual gay step, and in his
hand he carried his large hat.

"How long since we met last, Lady Oxted!" he said. "And what a delight
to see you here!"

"Miss Aylwin, Uncle Francis," said Harry, unceremoniously.

The old man turned quickly.

"Ah! my dear Miss Aylwin," he said--"my dear Miss Aylwin," and they
shook hands.

Harry gave a little sigh of relief. Ever since his uncle's attack, a
fortnight ago, he had felt in the back of his mind a little uneasiness
about this meeting. It seemed he might have spared himself the pains.
Nothing could have been simpler or more natural than Mr. Francis's
manner; yet the warmth of his hand-shake, the form of words, more
intimate than a man would use to a stranger, were admirably chosen--if
choice were not a word too full of purpose for so spontaneous a
greeting--to at once recognise and obliterate the past. The meeting was,
as it were, a scene of reconciliation between two who had never set eyes
on each other before, and between whom the horror of their vicarious
estrangement would never be mentioned or even be allowed to be present
in the mind. And Mr. Francis's words seemed to Harry to meet the
situation with peculiar felicity.

The old man seated himself near Lady Oxted.

"This is an occasion," he said, "and both Harry and I have been greatly
occupied with his house-warming. But the weather--there was little
warming there to be done; surely we have ordered delightful weather for
you. Harry told me that Miss Aylwin wished for a warm day. Indeed, his
choice does not seem to me, a poor northerner, a bad one; but Miss
Aylwin has perhaps had too much Italian weather to care for our poor
imitation."

"Lord Vail refused to promise," said Evie; "at least he did not promise
anything about the weather. I was afraid he would forget."

"Ah! but I told my uncle," said Harry. "He saw about it: you must thank
him."

Evie was sitting opposite the fireplace, and her eye had been on the
picture of old Francis which hung above it. At these words of Harry's
she turned to Mr. Francis with a smile, and her mouth half opened for
speech. But something arrested the words, and she was silent; and Harry,
who had been following every movement of hers, tracing it with the
infallible minute intuition of a lover to its desiring thought, guessed
that the curious resemblance between the two had struck with a force
that for the moment took away speech. But, before the pause was
prolonged, she answered.

"I do thank you very much," she said. "And have you arranged another day
like this for to-morrow?"

She looked, as she spoke, out of the open windows and into the glorious
sunshine, and Harry rose.

"Shall we not go out?" he said. "Uncle Francis will think we do not
appreciate his weather if we stop in."

Evie rose too.

"Yes, let us go out at once," she said. "But let me first put on another
hat. I am not in London, and my present hat simply _is_ London. O Lord
Vail, I long to look at that picture again, but I won't; I will be very
self-denying, for I am sure--I am sure it is the Luck in the corner of
it."

She put up her hand so as to shield the picture from even an accidental
glance.

"Will you show me my way?" she asked. "I will be down again in a
minute."

Harry took her up the big staircase, lit by a skylight, and lying in
many angles.

"Yes, you have guessed," he said. "It is the Luck: you will see the
original to-night at dinner. Did anything else strike you in the
picture? Oh, I saw it did."

"Yes, a curious false resemblance. I feel sure it is false, for I think
that portrait represents not a very pleasant old gentleman. But your
uncle, Lord Vail--I never saw such a dear, kind face!"

Harry flushed with pleasure.

"So now you understand," he said, "what your coming here must mean to
him. Ah! this is your maid, is she not? I will wait in the hall for
you."

The two elder folk had already strolled out, when Harry returned to the
hall, a privation which he supported with perfect equanimity, and in a
few minutes he and his companion followed. As they crossed the lawn,
Harry swept the points of the compass slowly with his stick.

"Flower garden, kitchen garden, woods, lake, farm, stables," he said.

Evie's eye brightened.

"Stables, please," she said. "I am of low horsey tastes, you must know,
and I was afraid you were not going to mention them. We had the two most
heavenly cobs I ever saw to take us from the station."

"Yes, Jack and Jill," said Harry. "But not cobs--angels. Did you drive
them?"

"No, but I longed to. May I, when we go back on Monday?"

"Tuesday is their best day," said Harry; "except Wednesday."

They chattered their way to the stables, where the two angels were even
then at their toilets.

"There is not much to show you," said Harry. "There are the cobs that
brought you.--Good-evening, Jim."

The man who was grooming them looked up, touched his bare head, and
without delay went on with the hissing toilet, as a groom should. Evie
looked at him keenly, then back to her companion, and at the man again.

"Yes, they are beautiful," she said, and as they turned, "is Vail
entirely full of doubles?" she asked.

Harry smiled, and followed her into the stables of the riding horses.

"Jim is more like me than that picture of old Francis is like my uncle,"
he said. "I really think I shall have to get rid of him. The likeness
might be embarrassing."

"I wouldn't do that," said Evie. "Our Italian peasants say it is good
luck to have a double about."

"Good luck for which?"

"For both. Really, I never saw such an extraordinary likeness."

They spent some quarter of an hour looking over the horses, and returned
leisurely toward the house, passing it and going on to the lake. The sun
was still not yet set, and the glory of the summer evening a thing to
wonder at. Earth and sky seemed ready to burst with life and colour; it
was as if a new world was imminent to be born, and from the great
austere downs drew a breeze that was the breath of life, but dry,
unbreathed. Evie appropriated it in open draughts, with head thrown
back.

"Aunt Violet was quite right, Lord Vail, when she said you should never
come to London," she exclaimed. "How rude she was to you that night, and
how little you minded! Even now, when I have been here only an hour, I
can no longer imagine how one manages to breathe in that stuffy, shut-in
air. Winter, too, winter must be delicious here, crisp and bracing."

"So it would seem this evening," said Harry, "but you must see it first
under a genuine November day. A mist sometimes spreads slowly from the
lake, so thick that even I could almost lose my way between it and the
house. It does not rise high, and I have often looked from the windows
of the second story into perfectly clear air, while if you went out at
the front door you would be half drowned in it. Higher up the road again
you will be completely above it, and I have seen it lying below as
sharply defined as the lake itself, and if you walk down from that wood
up there, it is like stepping deeper and deeper into water. A bad one
will rise as high as the steps of those two buildings you see to the
right of the house, like kiosks, standing on a knoll, under which the
road winds in front of the trees."

"And the house is all surrounded like an island? What odd buildings!
What are they?"

"One is a summerhouse; I couldn't now tell you which. We used to have
tea in it sometimes, I remember, when I was quite little. The other is
the ice house--a horrible place: it used to haunt me. I remember
shrieking with terror once when my nurse took me in. It was almost
completely dark, and I can hear now the echo one's step made; and there
was a great black chasm in the middle of the floor with steps leading
down, as I thought, to the uttermost pit. Two chasms I think there were;
one was a well. But the big one was that which terrified me, though I
dare say it was only ten or twelve feet deep. Things dwindle so
amazingly as one grows up! I wish I could see this lake, for instance,
as I saw it when I was a child. It used to appear to me as large as the
sea seems now; and as for the sluice, it might have been the Iron Gates
of the Danube."

"I know: things do get smaller," said Evie, "but, after all, this lake
and the sluice are not quite insignificant yet. What a splendid rush of
water! And I dare say the ice-house chasm is still sufficient to kill
any one who falls in. That, after all, is enough for practical purposes.
But then, even if they grow smaller, how much more beautiful they
become! When you were little, you never saw half the colour or half the
shape you see now. The trees were green, the sky was blue, but they gave
one very surface impressions to what they give one now."

"Oh, I rather believe in the trailing clouds of glory," said Harry.

"Then make an effort to disbelieve in them every day," said Evie.
"Shades of the prison house begin to grow around the growing boy, do
they? What prison house does the man mean, if you please? Why, the
world, this beautiful, delightful world. Indeed, we are very fortunate
convicts! And Wordsworth called himself a lover of Nature!" she added,
with deep scorn.

"Certainly the world has been growing more beautiful to me lately," said
Harry.

"Of course it has. Please remind me that I have to cut my throat without
delay if ever you hear me say that the world is growing less beautiful.
But just imagine a person who loved Nature talking of the world as a
prison house! Who was it said that Wordsworth only found in stones the
sermons he had himself tucked under them, to prevent the wind blowing
them away?"

"I don't know. It sounds like the remark of an unindolent reviewer."

Evie laughed.

"Fancy talking about reviewers on an evening like this!" she said. "Oh,
there's a Canadian canoe. May we go in it?"

The far end of the lake was studded with little islands only a few yards
in circumference for the most part, but, as Evie explained, large enough
for the purpose. And then, like two children together, they played at
red Indians and lay in wait for a swan, and attempted to stalk a moor
hen with quite phenomenal ill success. No word of any tender kind was
spoken between them; they but laughed over the nonsense of their own
creating, but each felt as they landed that in the last hour their
intimacy had shot up like the spike of the aloe flower. For when a man
and a maid can win back to childhood again, and play like children
together, it is certain that no long road lies yet to traverse before
they really meet.

Lady Oxted was doomed that night to a very considerable dose--a dose for
an adult, in fact--of what she had alluded to as nursery rhymes, for the
Luck seemed absolutely to fascinate the girl, and Harry, seeing how
exclusively it claimed her eyes, more than once reconsidered the promise
he had made her to have it to dinner the next evening as well. She would
hardly consent to touch it, and Harry had positively to put it into her
hands, so that she might read for herself its legend of the elements.
They drank their coffee while still at table, and Evie's eye followed
the jewel till Templeton had put it into its case. Then, as the last
gleam vanished:

"I am like the Queen of Sheba," she said, "and there is no more spirit
left in me. If you lose the Luck, Lord Vail, you may be quite sure that
it is I who have stolen it; and when I am told that two men in plain
clothes are waiting in the drawing-room, I shall know what they have
come about. Now for some improving conversation about facts and
actualities, for Aunt Violet's sake."

Sunday afternoon was very hot, and Lady Oxted, Evie, and Harry lounged
it away under the shade of the trees on the lawn. Mr. Francis had not
been seen since lunch time, but it was clear that he was busy with his
favourite diversion, for brisk and mellow blowings on the flute came
from the open window of his sitting room. Harry had mentioned this
taste of his to the others, and it had been received by Lady Oxted with
a short and rather unkind laugh, which had been quite involuntary, and
of which she was now slightly ashamed. But Evie had thought the thing
pleasant and touching, rather than absurd, and had expressed a hope that
he would allow her to play some accompaniments for him after dinner. If
Aunt Violet, she added incisively, found the sound disagreeable, no
doubt she would go to her own room.

Harry was in the normal Sunday afternoon mood, feeble and easily
pleased, and the extreme and designed offensiveness of the girl's tone
made him begin to giggle hopelessly. Evie thereupon caught the
infection, for laughter is more contagious than typhus, and her aunt
followed. The hysterical sounds apparently reached Mr. Francis's ears,
in some interval between tunes, for in a moment his rosy face and white
hair appeared framed in the window, and shortly afterward he came
briskly across the grass to them.

"It is getting cooler," he said gaily, "and I am going to be very
selfish and ask Miss Aylwin to come for a stroll with me. My lazy
nephew, I find, has not taken her through the woods, and I insist on her
seeing them.--Will you be very indulgent to me, Miss Evie, and accept a
devoted though an aged companion?"

Evie rose with alacrity.

"With the greatest pleasure," she said.--"Are you coming, too, Aunt
Violet?"

"Not for the wide, wide world," said Lady Oxted, "will I walk one
yard!--Harry, stop where you are, and keep me company."

The two walkers went up under the knoll on which stood the ice house,
talking and laughing in diminuendo. Harry saw Mr. Francis offer the girl
his arm for the steep ascent, and it pleased him in some secret fashion
to see that, though her light step was clearly in no need of exterior
aid, she accepted it. With this in his mind he turned to Lady Oxted.

"It is a great success," he said. "They are delighted with each other.
Think what it must mean to my uncle!"

Lady Oxted stifled a yawn.

"Who are delighted?" she asked.

Harry pointed at the two figures halfway up the slope.

"You knew whom I meant perfectly," he remarked.

"I did. I really don't know why I asked. By the way, Harry, I apologize
for laughing just now. Your uncle is the most charming and courteous old
gentleman. And he is devoted to you. In fact, I got just a little tired
of your name yesterday evening before dinner."

Harry did not reply; he was still watching the two. They had surmounted
the knoll, and in another moment the iron gate leading into the ride
through the wood closed behind them, and they passed out of sight among
the trees.

Mr. Francis was, as has been indicated, very fond of young people, and
those who had the pleasure of his acquaintance always found him a
delightful companion. He had an intimate knowledge of natural history,
and this afternoon, as he walked with the girl, he would now pick some
insignificant herb from the grass, with a sentence or two on its notable
medicinal qualities, now with a face full of happy radiance hold up his
hand while a bird trilled in the bushes in rapt and happy attention.

"A goldfinch, Miss Evie," he whispered; "there is no mistaking that
note. Let us come very quietly, and perhaps we shall catch sight of the
beauty. That lazy nephew of mine," he went on, when they had seen the
gleam of the vanishing bird, "he was saying the other day that there
were no goldfinches in Wiltshire. I dare say he will join us here soon.
He almost always comes up here on Sunday afternoon. It used to be his
father's invariable Sunday walk."

They strolled quietly along for some half hour, up winding and zigzag
paths which would lead them presently to the brae above the wood, and
disclose to them, so Mr. Francis said, a most glorious prospect. Below
them, down the steep hillside up which they had circuitously made their
way, lay the blue slate roof of the stables; in the yard they could see
a retriever sleeping, and the sound of a man whistling came up very
clear through the stillness of the afternoon. Then they turned a
corner--the last, so Mr. Francis said--and the path which had hitherto
been all loops and turns straightened itself out as it gained the end
of the ridge up which the wood climbed. But here they were no longer
alone, for not fifty yards in front of them they saw a girl in a pink
dress, and with her a young man in straw hat and dark blue serge, of
strangely familiar figure; his arm was about her waist. On the instant
the man turned, and Evie, to her indescribable amazement, saw that it
was Lord Vail. He said a word hurriedly to the girl, and turned off down
a side path, while the girl walked quickly on. The glance had been
momentary.

A short, stifled exclamation came from Mr. Francis.

"Ah, the foolish fellow!" he cried; and then, without a pause: "Yes, as
I told you, there are only beeches up here, Miss Evie. Those oaks which
you were admiring so much seem to stop as suddenly as if you had drawn a
line of demarcation halfway up the hill. Now why is that, I wonder? The
oak is the harder of the two, yet it is the beeches that prefer the
colder situation. Strange, is it not? There used to be oaks here, but
they have all died."

They soon came out at the top of the hill, where the glorious prospect
which Mr. Francis had promised Evie spread largely round them. But he
had grown silent and distrait, quite unlike himself, and instead of
rhapsodizing over the magnificence of the rolling hills, he gazed for a
moment but sadly, pointed out to his companion various distant
landmarks, as if he did not expect her to be interested, and remarked
that it was time for them to turn. Nor was Evie much more talkative; the
sight of Harry with that girl had strangely wounded her. Little had she
thought, when Mr. Francis said he often spent his Sunday afternoons
here, that she would see him thus! She told herself that he was
perfectly at liberty to walk in his own woods with any one he pleased,
but that he had availed himself of that liberty she felt like an insult
offered to her. Her quick eye had taken in the girl in a moment; her
dress, the way she put her feet down when she walked, all spoke of a
certain class. Ten to one she was the daughter of the gamekeeper or
butler. Ah, how disgusting men were!

Mr. Francis walked by her in silence, with a frown on his usually serene
brow, and, it would seem, some matter in debate. Suddenly he turned to
her.

"Dear Miss Evie," he said, "will you allow a very old man to take a very
great liberty? Do not think too hardly of Harry, poor fellow, I beg of
you! He has been much alone, without companions, and young men will be
young men, you know. And I would stake--yes, I would stake all I
have--that what you and I have seen was a mere harmless little
flirtation, a few words said on either side, not meant by either, a kiss
or two perhaps changing owners. Harry is young, but he is a good fellow,
and an honest. You are disgusted, naturally, but I have never
known--believe me, I have never known--these little foolishnesses of
his mean anything. They are altogether superficial and innocent."

He spoke with a very kind and serious voice, and with much of entreaty
in his tone. But Evie's eyes were still hard and angry; she thought she
had never heard so tame a defence.

"This sort of thing has gone on before, then?" she asked.

"Ah! do not force me," pleaded Mr. Francis. "I will go bail, I tell you,
on Harry's honesty."

"Certainly I will not force you," she said. "Come, Mr. Francis, this is
not a nice subject. Let us have no more of it. That was really Oxford we
saw just now, was it? How wonderfully clear the air must be here!"

They passed down through the wood and to the house, where they both
turned in. But in a minute or two Evie found she had left a book on the
lawn, and went out to fetch it. Tea was laying there, and under the
trees, where she had left them an hour ago, were Lady Oxted and Harry,
at full length in their garden chairs, both, it would seem, fast asleep.
And at that sight a sudden question asked itself in the girl's mind: How
could it possibly be Harry they had seen in the wood? And before the
question was asked the answer came, and she said softly to herself,
"Jim."

Her book was lying close to the sleepers, but she had already forgotten
about it, and she turned quietly away, casting one glance at Harry,
whose straw hat was lying on the grass, and noticing with a faint,
unconvincing sense of justification that his clothes were also of
dark-blue serge. But habitually honest, even with herself, she knew that
her self-judged case would be summed up dead against her, and she set
her teeth for a lonely and most humiliating ten minutes. Without
definite purpose in her mind, except that association should be an added
penance, she went to the lake, and sat down in the Canadian canoe in
which they had played red Indians the evening before.

How could she, she asked herself, have been so distrustful, so
malicious, so ready to blacken? She had seen a young man walking with a
girl, and she had been knave enough, and also fool enough (which was
bitter), to accept the shallow evidence of her eyes when they told her
that he was Harry. Had she not been warned against such wicked
credulity, even as Elsa had been warned by Lohengrin, by the sight of
that slim, handsome groom last night in the stable yard? Had she not
said to Harry, "Is Vail full of doubles?" Out of her own mouth should
she be judged. A worse than Elsa was sitting in the Canadian canoe. For
half an hour at least she had believed that Harry was flirting with a
servant girl, that he was capable of leaving her to suppose that he was
going to keep Lady Oxted company under the trees, and as soon as her
back was turned set off to meet his village beauty. Loyalty! a feeling
she professed to admire! How would any girl in her position, who had an
ash of what had once been loyalty, have acted? She would have flatly
refused to believe any evidence; sight, hearing, every sense would have
been powerless to touch her. Harry could not do such a thing. How did
she know that? For the present that was beside the point; she knew it,
and that was enough. Perhaps--and the warm colour came to her
face--perhaps she would come to that presently.

She sat up, and beat the water with the flat of the paddle. "Fool, fool,
base little fool!" she whispered, a syllable to a stroke.

Suddenly she stopped, the paddle poised.

"I have never known these little foolishnesses of his mean anything,"
rang in her ears. So! This sort of thing had happened before.... What?
Was she again skulking and suspecting, even after the lesson she had
received? She had believed, though only for half an hour, the evidence
of her own eyes, and she had suffered for it. Was she now to believe the
evidence of somebody else's tongue? Yet Mr. Francis had said it, that
dear old fellow, who was evidently so devoted to Harry, so pained at
what they had seen. No, it did not matter if the four major prophets had
said it. She knew better than all the stained glass in Christendom, and
again she belaboured the water to the rhythm of "Fool, fool, base little
fool!"

For a few moments her thoughts flew off to Mr. Francis. He must have
known that Harry's twin brother was a groom in the stables, yet he had
been as certain as she that it was Harry they had surprised in the wood.
He had been at pains to persuade her that the fault was venial, to
assure her that young men would be young men, that Harry was honest. Why
had he felt so certain on so slight a glance that it was Harry? What did
it mean? Then she whisked Mr. Francis from her mind. He was as
despicable as she, neither more nor less. He was as great a fool as she.

Was he? Was he? Did he know Harry as well as she--he who had known him
all his life, she who had known him a month, no more? Certainly he did
not, could not. She, who knew him so well, had rightly accused herself
of disloyalty to him, compared herself to Elsa, and him.... Did she then
owe him loyalty? Ah! a big word.

She put the dripping paddle back in the boat, for she was in wider
fields than self-reproach has ever hedged about, and leaned forward,
hearing the ripples lap and cluck on the sides. Supposing any one
else--Geoffrey Langham, for instance--had chosen to walk in a wood with
a dairymaid, would she have cared? would it have stung her? Not a jot.
Then why----

At this she rose, slipped out of the boat, and for a moment looked at
the wavering outline of her reflection in the lake. Then she stood
upright, her arms fallen by her side, and a little voice spoke within
her, which she tried to tell herself was not she.

"I surrender," it said.

She walked back to the lawn, proud and shy of the revelation she had
made to herself, and with a mind once more unshadowed. Lady Oxted
apparently had just awoke, and was looking distractedly round, as if she
found herself in a strange bedroom. Harry, with one arm thrown behind
his head, still slumbered.

"Unconscious innocent, tea!" said Lady Oxted, truculently poking him in
the ribs with her parasol.

Harry opened both his eyes very wide, like a mechanical doll awaking.

"Why did you do that?" he said; "I have been lying here quietly,
thinking. Have they come back from their walk?"

"No," said Lady Oxted, "they are lost. A search party went out about
three hours ago to look for them. Rockets and other signals of distress
have been seen intermittently from the downs."

Harry sat up and saw Evie, and instantly turned his back on Lady Oxted.

"Did you have a nice walk?" he asked. "I wish I had come with you.
I"--and he looked round to see whether the parasol was within range--"I
have been terribly bored this afternoon. Lady Oxted has positively no
conversation."

Evie looked first at him, then at her aunt.

"Well, you both look all the better for your--your silence," she said.
"Yes, Lord Vail, we had a charming walk. And we surprised your double
love-making in the wood."

"Oh, yes, the dairymaid," said Harry. "She's as pretty as a picture."

"I always wonder where the lower orders get their good looks from," said
Lady Oxted, parenthetically.

Harry picked up his straw hat.

"Probably from the lower orders," he remarked. "Let's have tea. Sleeping
is such hungry work, is it not, Lady Oxted? I am sure you must be
famished."

"Elephantine wit," sighed that lady. "When Harry is so kind as to make a
joke, which is unfortunately not so rare as one might wish, I always
feel as if heavy feet were trampling about directly overhead."

"And when Lady Oxted makes a joke," said the lad, "which is not so often
as her enemies would wish, she always reminds me of a sucking spring
directly under foot. I give one water-logged cry, and am swallowed up.
Do pour out tea for us, Lady Oxted. You are such an excellent
tea-maker!"

"The score is fifteen all," remarked Evie.

"When did Harry score?" demanded Lady Oxted, seating herself at the urn.

"Just now, dear aunt.--And so Jim is to marry the dairymaid, Lord Vail."

"And who is Jim?" asked Lady Oxted.

"My double. I wish I knew as much about horses as he. Yes, Jim is
walking out with the dairymaid."

"I have heard enough about Jim," said Lady Oxted decisively. "Here is
Mr. Francis.--Mr. Francis, take my side: there is a league against me.

"A charming one," said Mr. Francis, directing his gay glance to Evie.

But the girl did not meet it; she looked quite gravely and deliberately
away.




CHAPTER XIII

HARRY ASKS A QUESTION


Harry was leaving next morning with the two women, being unable to
induce Lady Oxted to stop another day, and in consequence he sat up late
that night after they had gone to bed, looking over the details of the
expense of putting in the electric light. The cheapest plan, it
appeared, would be to utilize the power supplied by the fall of water
from the lake, for this would save the cost of engines to drive the
dynamos. In this case it would be necessary to build the house for them
over the sluice; but this, so wrote the engineer, would not interfere
with the landscape, for the roof would only just be seen above the belt
of trees. Or, if Lord Vail did not mind a little extra expense, a
tasteful erection might be made, which, instead of diminishing, would
positively add to the beauty of the view from the house. Then followed a
horrific sketch of Gothic style.

Harry's thoughts were disposed to go wandering that night, and he gave
but a veiled and fugitive attention to the figures. The lake suggested
other things to him brighter than all the thirty-two-power lamps of this
electric light. The latter, it appeared, could be in the house by
September, but the other was in the house now. In any case there should
be no horrors, ornamental or otherwise, over the sluice; and he turned
to the second estimate, which included engines, with a great
determination to think of nothing else.

The scene of this distracted vigil was his uncle's sitting room, where
all the papers were to hand. Mr. Francis had sat up with him for half an
hour or so, but Harry had then persuaded him to go to bed, for all the
evening he had appeared somewhat tired and worried. Then from the next
door there came, for some half hour, the faint sounds of brushings and
splashings, that private orchestra of bedtime, and after that the house
was still.

Harry settled down again to his work, and before long his mind was made
up. He would have, he saw, to screw and pinch a little, but on no
account should anything, Gothic or not, spoil the lower end of the lake;
then pouring himself out some whisky and soda, he took a last cigarette.

The table where he worked was fully occupied, but orderly. A row of
reference books--Bradshaw, The Peerage, Whitaker's Almanac, and
others--stood in a green morocco case to the left of the inkstand; to
the right, in a silver frame, a large photograph of himself. Among other
books, he was amused to see a Zadkiel's Almanac, and he drew it from its
place and turned idly over a leaf or two. There was a cross in red ink
opposite the date of January 3d, on which day, so said this
irresponsible seer, a discovery of gold would be made. Harry thought
vaguely for a moment of South Africa and the Klondike, then suddenly
gave a little gasp of surprise. That had been the day on which he had
found the Luck.

The coincidence was strange, but stranger was the fact that his uncle,
who had so often remonstrated with him on his half-laughing,
half-serious notice of the coincidences which had followed its
discovery, should have a Zadkiel at all; strangest that he should have
noted this date. Then suddenly a wave of superstitious fear came over
him, and he shut Zadkiel hastily up, for fear of seeing other dates
marked. Two minutes later he was already laughing at himself, though he
did not reopen Zadkiel, and as he took his candle to go to bed his eye
fell on a red morocco "Where is it?" which lay on the table. He knew
that there was some address he wanted to verify, but it was a few
minutes before he had turned to G. There was the name "Dr. Godfrey, 32
Wimpole Street," and on each side of it minute inverted commas. He
looked at it in some astonishment, for he would have been ready to swear
that his uncle had told him 32 Half Moon Street.

He went straight to his room, however, without wasting conjecture or
surmise over this, undressed and blew out his candle. Outside, a great
moon was swung high in heaven, no leaf trembled on the trees, but
through the summer night the songs of many nightingales bubbled
liquidly.

A few nights afterward he and Geoffrey were sitting alone in the house
in Cavendish Square. Harry had been full of figures, wondering what was
the least sum on which this London house could be made decently
habitable. One room wanted a fresh paper, distemper was essential to
another, most required fresh carpets, and stamped leather was
imperatively indicated for the hall. Geoffrey listened with quiet
amusement, for Harry was talking with such pellucid transparency that it
was difficult not to smile. Then the question of electric light at Vail
was touched upon, and suddenly he stopped, rose, and beat the ashes of
his pipe out into the grate.

"By the way, Geoff," he said, "supposing you looked out the name of a
man whom you did not know, and had only once heard of, in a 'Where is
it?' belonging to a friend, and found the name in inverted commas, what
inference, if any, would you draw? No, it is not a riddle; purely a
matter of curiosity."

Geoffrey yawned.

"Even Sherlock Holmes would not infer there," he said; "and even his
friend Watson could not fail in such a perfectly certain conclusion."

"What conclusion?"

"Wait a moment; let us be an obtuse detective. Is the person from whom
you have heard the name the same as the person to whom the 'Where is
it?' belongs? Lord, I give points to Watson!"

"It happens that it is so. Does that influence your conclusion?"

"It only makes it even surer; no, it can't do that, but it leaves it as
sure as it was. Of course, the name in the 'Where is it?' is not the
man's real name; not the name he goes by, anyhow."

"So it seemed possible to me."

"Then you were wrong. There is no question of possibility. It is dealing
with absolute certainties. Now satisfy my curiosity. I have not much,
but I have some."

"Bit by bit," said Harry. "Have you ever heard of a Dr. Godfrey, heart
specialist, I take it, who lives at 32 Wimpole Street?"

"Never. But Wimpole Street is just round the corner. I imagine he will
have a plate on his door. I thought your heart was in a parlous state."

"Oh, don't be funny," said Harry, "but come along."

Geoffrey got up.

"Shall I have to hold your hand?" he asked.

"No; I am not going to consult him. Indeed, there is no mystery about
the whole matter. Simply Dr. Godfrey is my uncle's doctor, and he
consulted him the other day about his heart. I happened to look out the
doctor's address in his 'Where is it?' and found the name in inverted
commas. Oh! by the way, there is a red book by you. Look out 32 Half
Moon Street. Does Dr. Godfrey live there?"

Geoffrey turned up the street.

"Certainly not," he said. "But why?"

"Nothing," said Harry, unwilling to mention the different address.
"Come, Geoff."

They were there in less than a couple of minutes: Harry had not even put
on a hat for the traversing of so few paving stones. An incandescent gas
lamp stood just opposite the door, and both number and plate were
plainly visible. On the plate in large square capitals was "Dr. G.
Armytage."

They read it in silence, and turned home again. Geoffrey had pursed up
his lips for a whistle, but refrained.

"We spell it Armytage, and pronounce it Godfrey," he said at length.
"Sometimes we even spell it Godfrey. Or perhaps G. stands for Godfrey.
Not that it makes any difference."

Harry laughed, but he was both puzzled and a little troubled. Then the
remembrance of the evening when he had seen the strange and distasteful
man--Dr. Armytage it must now be supposed--driving away from the house,
came to his mind. How excellent and kindly on that occasion had been the
reasons for which his uncle had desired that the visit should remain
unknown to Harry! And after that lesson, should not the pupil give him
credit for some motive, unguessable even as that had been, but equally
thoughtful? He had given him a wrong name and a wrong address; in his
own reference book that same wrong name, but with inverted commas,
appeared. Harry, being human and of discreet years, did not relish
being misled in this manner, but he told himself there might be
admirable reason for it, which he could not conjecture. He had intended,
it is true, to see Dr. Godfrey privately, so as to get his first-hand
opinion on his uncle's condition; but he was not at all sure that he
would ring Dr. Armytage's door-bell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lady Oxted, a few days after this, fell a victim to influenza, and after
a decent interval, Geoffrey, who for the remainder of the summer had let
his own rooms in Orchard Street and lived with Harry, called on the
parts of both to ask how she was, was admitted, and taken upstairs to
her sitting room. Her voice was very hoarse, a temperature thermometer
lay on the table by her, and he felt himself a very foolhardy young man.

"It is no use your being afraid of it," said that lady to him by way of
greeting, "because on the one hand the certain way to get it is to be
afraid of it, and on the other you have to stop and talk to me. I have
seen no one all day; not even Bob, as I don't want fresh cases in the
house, and of course I haven't allowed Evie near me. Oh, I am reeking of
infection: make up your mind to that."

"But I don't matter," said Geoffrey.

"Not the least scrap. Really, it is too provoking getting it again. I
believe every doctor in Wimpole Street has seen me through at least one
attack. I shall begin on Cavendish Square soon. Now talk."

The thought of Dr. Armytage and the strange confusion of names and
addresses had often been present in Geoffrey's mind since he and Harry
had made that short and inconclusive expedition to number 32 Wimpole
Street, and here, perhaps, was an opportunity for adding a brick to that
vague structure that was in outline only in his mind.

"Have you tried Dr. Godfrey?" he asked.

"I never heard of him. Otherwise I should have tried him. Where does he
live?"

"It is not quite certain," said Geoffrey; "personally I believe at 32
Wimpole Street."

"Is this supposed to be bright and engaging conversation?" asked Lady
Oxted, "which will interest the depressed influenza patient?"

"It may interest you in time," said Geoffrey. "To continue, have you
ever heard of a Dr. G. Armytage, heart specialist, of 32 Wimpole
Street?"

The effect of this was instantaneous. Lady Oxted sat up on her sofa, and
her shawl whisked the temperature thermometer to the ground, smashing
the ball.

"Yes, of course I have," she said; "so have you, I imagine. Or perhaps
you were not born. How detestably young, young men are!"

"They get over it," said Geoffrey.

"Yes, and become middle-aged, which is worse. Now tell me all you know,
categorically, about Dr. Armytage."

"I don't know that there is one for certain," said Geoffrey. "True, his
plate is on the door. I don't know if I have a right to tell you. In any
case, really, I know nothing."

Lady Oxted made an impatient gesture.

"It concerns Francis Vail, of course," she said.

Geoffrey stared.

"How did you know that?" he asked.

"I will tell you when you have finished your story," she said, "which, I
may remind you, you have not yet begun."

Harry had told his friend about his chance encounter at the lodge gates
with the doctor, and Geoffrey could pass on the story complete; Mr.
Francis's silence about his visit there; his excellent reason for
silence; the false name given to Harry, and, so he thought, the false
address; the false name in his reference book with the Wimpole Street
address; and finally their visit to the door. Lady Oxted heard him with
gathering interest, it would appear, and long before the end she was off
her sofa and walking up and down the room.

"And now for your story," said he. "How did you know that it concerned
Mr. Francis?"

Lady Oxted sat down again.

"G. Armytage is Godfrey Armytage," she said, "a side point only. You
have told your tale very clearly, Geoffrey. But there is one weak point
in the evidence."

"Evidence? What evidence?" asked Geoffrey.

"Yes; evidence is the wrong word--chain of circumstance, if you will.
The weak point is that there is no certain proof of the identity of Dr.
Godfrey with Dr. Armytage. It is certain to you and me, I grant you, but
still-- Did Harry say what this man he met driving to the station was
like?"

"'Not a canny man' were his words," said Geoffrey; "'dark, clean-shaven,
forty, and distasteful.'"

"That is on all fours," said Lady Oxted.

"You haven't answered my question," Geoffrey reminded her.

"No--I will. Did you ever hear of the Harmsworth case--the death of
Harold Harmsworth?"

"Yes. Harry told me about it."

"All? The evidence of the doctors?"

"No, not that."

"Harold Harmsworth was shot, you will remember. At the coroner's inquest
the whole question naturally turned on the distance from his head at
which the gun which killed him was fired. This, you will easily
understand, was of the utmost importance, for if the muzzle of the gun
was not more than, say, a yard or four feet off, it was certainly
possible that he had shot himself accidentally. But imagine the gun to
have been ten feet off, it becomes certain that some gun not his own
shot him. Now, his head was shattered; it looked to the ordinary mind as
if the injury must have been done by shot that had already begun to
spread--I can not speak technically. But the doctor who maintained that
the shot might easily have been fired within the shorter distances--who
was responsible, in fact, for the case not going beyond the coroner--was
Dr. Godfrey Armytage."

Geoffrey was silent a moment.

"Well, it is all natural enough," he said at length, "Mr. Francis, on
your own showing, has probably known the man for a long time; it is
natural also that he did not wish to tell Harry his real name, for it
was connected with that dreadful tragedy. It is also natural, if Dr.
Armytage is an eminent man, that he should wish to consult a doctor he
knew about his condition. Why not?"

"For this reason," said Lady Oxted: "Dr. Armytage is not a heart
specialist any more than you or I. He is a surgeon, and not a very
reputable one. I needn't go into details. But it would be as sensible to
go to him, if you suffered from the heart, as to go to a cabinetmaker."

Geoffrey frowned.

"What does it all mean?" he asked sharply.

"I have no idea at all," said Lady Oxted. "Probably it means nothing.
Things seldom do. In any case, say nothing to Harry."

Tea came in at this moment, and they talked of other matters till the
man had left the room. Then:

"One thing more," said Lady Oxted, "and the last. I hardly like to say
to you that I suspect nothing and nobody, because that sounds as if
there was possibly something to suspect. There is nothing. But this is a
curious circumstance, and it has interested me."

Geoffrey walked back to Cavendish Square, feeling vaguely sombre and
depressed. A tepid drizzle of rain was falling, making the pavement
slippery; the air was hot and thundery, suggestive of expectancy and
unrest, and this accentuated his mood. He had no clew of any kind as to
what these secret dealings could possibly mean, and nothing that his
ingenuity could suggest was even a faintly satisfactory solution.

Every moment the sky seemed to be pressing more heavily on to the earth,
and it was as if the very tightness of the air prevented the breaking of
the storm. By the time he had reached Cavendish Square a faint, thick
twilight showed overhead, the drizzle of rain had ceased, and only a few
large drops fell sparingly. He let himself in with his latchkey, and
found himself immediately face to face with Harry, who was just coming
out. And at the sight of him he suddenly felt that his vague fear was
going to be at once realized, for in his eyes sat a miserable despair.

"Harry! Harry! what is the matter?" he cried.

Harry did not look at him.

"Nothing," he said. "Where have you been?"

"Sitting with Lady Oxted."

"Then perhaps she will see me. She is better, I suppose. Tell me,
Geoff," and he fidgeted with the door handle, "did you see Miss
Aylwin?"

"No. Lady Oxted does not allow her to come to her room, for fear of her
getting the influenza."

"Thanks. I shall be back for dinner, I expect. But don't wait," and he
opened the door.

Geoffrey laid his hand on his arm.

"You are not going to do anything foolish, Harry?" he asked, in a sudden
vague spasm of alarm.

"No, you idiot! Let me go."

"Is there nothing I can do?" he asked.

"Nothing, thanks."

Geoffrey went into the smoking room and sat down in a bewilderment of
distress and anxiety. What could possibly have happened? he asked
himself. If anything had gone wrong at Vail, if Mr. Francis, to imagine
the worst, had even died suddenly, surely Harry would have told him.
Then why did he wish to see Lady Oxted, but apparently not wish to see
Miss Aylwin? For the moment he thought there might be a light here: it
was conceivable that he had proposed to her and been refused. But when,
where? For Geoffrey had left him not two hours ago in his accustomed
good spirits. Again, if he had ever felt certain of anything, it was
that, unless the girl was the most infernal and finished flirt ever made
for the undoing of man, the attraction between the two was deep and
mutual. And no girl had ever seemed to him less like a flirt than Evie.
Even if this was so, why should Harry at once wish to go to Lady Oxted?
These things had no answer; there was nothing to do but wait, wait
drearily, and listen to the hiss of the faster-falling rain.

Harry drove to Grosvenor Square through the blinking lightning, and was
shown up. Like Geoffrey, Lady Oxted was appalled at that drawn and
haggard face; like Geoffrey, too, the question whether Evie had refused
him suggested itself to her, but was instantly rejected.

"My dear boy, what is the matter?" she cried. "Have you bad news from
Vail?"

Harry took a letter from his pocket, and folded it down so as to leave
some ten lines of large, legible hand for her to read.

"Will you read that?" he said, giving it her.

She took it from him, and he sat down in the window.

"... must prepare yourself," it ran, "for a great shock. I saw with such
pleasure your intimacy with Miss Aylwin, and I know--I am afraid I
know--what you hoped. Harry, dear boy, you must not allow yourself any
fond feelings there. She is already engaged, so I heard this morning,
from a friend near Santa Margarita, to a young Italian marchese. So make
a great effort, and cut her out of your life with a brave and
unfaltering hand. She has treated you ..." and the exposed page ended.

Lady Oxted read it through, and tossed it back to Harry.

"There is not a word of truth in it," she said; "though it is true
enough that a certain Italian marchese, not very young, fell in love
with her last winter, and was refused. I suppose your correspondent has
got hold of some muddled version of that."

Harry was white to the lips, but a gleam had returned to his eye.

"Are you sure?" he asked tremulously. "Are you quite sure? I trust very
deeply the person who wrote this letter."

"I don't pretend not to guess whom it is from," said Lady Oxted, "but I
am quite sure. If you don't believe me, ask Evie herself. Indeed," she
added, looking suddenly at him, "I think that would be a most excellent
plan, Harry."

Harry got up. There was no mistaking this, and Lady Oxted had not meant
that there should be. Only last night she had told her husband that the
two had been philandering quite long enough, and announced her intention
of pushing Harry over the edge as quickly as possible. Her opportunity
had not delayed its coming, and she meant to use it.

"Where is she?" asked Harry, almost in a whisper; "perhaps, perhaps----"

"She has just come in," said Lady Oxted, feeling a violent desire to
take Harry by the scruff of the neck and hurl him into Evie's presence;
"she is in the drawing-room."

"Alone?" asked Harry.

"I don't know. Go and see."

Harry hesitated no longer, but left the room. Lady Oxted heard his step
first of all slow on the stairs, then gradually quickening, and it would
seem that he took the last six steps in a jump.

Evie was alone when he entered, seated at the far end of the room--ten
miles away, it seemed to him. He felt his head swim, his knees were
unloosed, his mouth was dry, and his heart hammered creakily in his
throat. Then he raised his eyes again, and met her glance. And at that
his courage coursed back like wine in his veins; she flooded and
overflowed his heart; he was lost in an amazement of love, a man again.
In two steps he covered those ten miles.

"You told me to aim at being the King of England," he said. "I have
aimed far higher, and I have come to you for the crown."

Then no word was said at all about the Italian marchese, no longer
young.




CHAPTER XIV

LADY OXTED'S IDEA


Lady Oxted, in spite of her husband's general reflections upon her
character, could not reasonably be called an ungenerous woman; and when,
ten days after these last occurrences, it was her painful duty to visit
the convalescent sofa of Geoffrey Langham, she said without
circumlocution, or any attempt to shirk due responsibility, that she
supposed it was she from whom he had caught the influenza. Geoffrey, on
his side, did not regard this as anything but a certain conclusion, but
added, with the irritable resignation which accompanies convalescence,
that he did not suppose she had done it on purpose. The effect of this
was to make Lady Oxted wonder whether she had really given it him at
all.

"You speak as if it was quite certain," she said. "But when one comes to
think of it, Harry came to see me the same day, in great depression,
which predisposes you to catch it, and he hasn't, so to speak, blown his
nose since."

"Very well, then; you did not give it me," said Geoffrey. "Please have
it your own way. It was my own idea: I evolved influenza for myself.
Besides, Harry was deeply in love. You can't do two things at once."

"Hush-a-bye, baby," said Lady Oxted. "Geoffrey, I didn't come here to be
contradict----"

"No, to contradict, it appears."

"Primarily, not even that, but to propose that you and I and Bob should
go down to Oxted to-morrow, or rather to tell you that Bob and I are
going, and propose that you should join us; we shall get well in half
the time down there."

"Are you not well?" asked Geoffrey. "You look a picture."

"A picture of a boiled rag," said Lady Oxted, "treated, with extreme
realism. Well, will you come?"

"Of course I will, with pleasure. I long to get out of this frouzy town.
What does Miss Aylwin do?"

"She will go to the Arbuthnots while I am away, poor dear!"

"She might do worse. And Harry?"

"Harry will probably go to the Arbuthnots too, a good deal," remarked
Lady Oxted.

She got up.

"I am glad you promised to come without any hesitation," she said,
"because otherwise I should have had to press you, which is degrading.
Harry's engagement has given me a lot to think about, and I want to
express my thoughts to some very slow, ordinary person like you, in the
same way as Molire used to read his plays to his housekeeper. I have
got a sort of idea in my head, and I wish to see how it impresses the
completely average mind."

"I hope it is a nice idea," said Geoffrey. "But one can't tell with you.
You have such an inconvenient sort of mind!"

"It isn't nice," said Lady Oxted; "in fact, it is just the opposite.
However, you will hear more of it to-morrow evening. Here's Harry. I
shall go. Dear me, I wonder whether Bob looked as idiotic as that when
we were engaged? I don't think he can have, or I should have broken it
off."

Harry's face in fact wore a smile of intensely inane radiance, but his
desire to score off his aunt, as he now called her, caused it to fade
off like the breath off a razor.

"No, dear aunt," he replied, "but you see he wasn't engaged to a person
of--well, of the same class as Evie.--Ah! fifteen love, Geoff, old boy.
That will rankle by-and-bye in the mind of our aunt."

Lady Oxted put her nose in the air, as if she had caught the whiff of a
bad smell.

"Can you explain the idiocy of your smile when you entered?" she asked.

"Rather. I was just going to, when you began to be personal. Three
Sundays ago, when Evie was down at Vail, she went out walking, after
lunch, with Uncle Francis. Do you remember, dear aunt, and you snored
loud and long under the trees on the lawn all that blessed afternoon?
Yes, I see you remember. Well, they met--O Lord! you can't beat
this--they met Jim and the dairymaid walking out all properly in the
wood, and Evie thought, until she came back and found me on the lawn,
she seriously thought Jim was me. She was furious: I got her to confess
that she was furious. Great Scott! she thought I was flirting with the
dairymaid. I knew a maid worth two of her!"

Lady Oxted began to attend suddenly in the middle of this.

"And what did Mr. Francis say?" she asked. "Did he also think it was
you?"

"I don't know. Evie didn't mention him, and then we began talking--well,
we began talking about something else.--Poor old Geoff, how goes it? If
you give me the flue, I'll poison your beef-tea, and you may lay it to
that. It's all the Luck."

Lady Oxted sighed.

"Jack and Jill went up the hill," she remarked.

"Yes, you may laugh if you like," said Harry, "but I'm beginning to
believe in the Luck. I paid my penalty, and now I'm getting the reward.
Oh, a big one! Did anybody ever hear of such Luck?" he demanded.

"Laugh?" cried Lady Oxted. "Who talked of laughing? Of course, if Evie
chooses to marry a man with unmistakable signs of incipient mania, and
Mrs. Aylwin doesn't object, it's her own affair. But I wish I was her
mother."

"Yes, that would be something," said Harry, in a tone of extreme
indulgence. "It would be charming for you, as you can't be her husband.
Poor aunt!"

"Thirty love," said Geoffrey.

Lady Oxted gathered up her card case and parasol.

"You just wait, my boy, till I get you to Oxted," she said truculently.

"Is Geoff going to Oxted?" asked Harry, throwing himself extravagantly
on the sofa by him. "Geoff, Geoff, would you leave me alone, alone in
London, like Jessica's first prayer? I will follow you, if it be on foot
and begging my bread. I can not live without you. See Wilson Barrett,"
he explained, sitting upright again, and smoothing his tumbled hair.

Lady Oxted shrugged her shoulders, and shook a despairing head.

"Poor Evie!" she said. "Poor, dear Evie!"

Harry sprang up and stood with his back to the door.

"Now why 'Poor Evie'?" he asked. "Explain precisely why. You don't leave
the room until you have explained."

"If you don't come away from that door and let me out," said Lady Oxted,
"I shall ring the bell, Harry, continuously. This sort of bully-ragging
is so good for a man with a splitting headache, and shattered by
influenza! I always tell everybody how considerate you are."

"Geoff, have you got a headache?" asked Harry.

"No. Fight it out."

Lady Oxted cast one baleful glance at him, advanced to the bell, and
made an awkward, unconvincing movement to indicate that she was pressing
it. Harry burst into loud, rude laughter.

"Try again," he said. "You have to press the button in the centre of the
bell, not a spot on the wall paper. More to your left."

"Forty love," said Geoffrey.

Lady Oxted turned away from the bell with dignity.

"I don't understand the difficulty some people feel about apologizing,"
she said. "I apologize fully for all I have said."

"Explain it," said Harry.

"There is no explanation known to me. I spoke at random; I have not the
slightest idea what I meant. Let me out, Harry."

At this he granted her liberty, saw her to the door, and ran upstairs
again.

"O Geoff!" he said. "She had on a big, broad-brimmed hat and little
yellow shoes. I saw them."

"That all?" said Geoffrey. "Rather South-Sea islander for the park."

Harry sighed.

"Yes, I once used to think that sort of thing funny, too," he said.
"Never mind; you can't know. However, there was the hat, and her face
was underneath it."

"Now that is really extraordinary," said Geoffrey.

"The face? I should just think it was. It's the most extraordinary thing
in the world. And it's mine, and mine is hers. Lord! whatever can she do
with such an ugly mug?"

"Is that the end?" asked Geoffrey, without any show of impatience.

"No, you blamed idiot; that's only the beginning. She was walking, do
you understand, with Mrs. Arbuthnot. So I thought, 'None of that now,
woman!' and I just said so flat. At least I didn't say so, but they
understood what I meant, and so we sat down on two little green chairs,
and I paid twopence for them. Dirt cheap!"

"You and Mrs. Arbuthnot and she. I quite follow."

"Of course; oh! I'm not sure what happened to Mrs. Arbuthnot. She didn't
go to heaven; at least I didn't see her there, so I suppose--oh, well, I
suppose she stopped where she was. I dare say she's there now. So I
said, 'Evie.'"

"And she said 'Harry,'" remarked Geoffrey.

Long brown fingers stole round his neck.

"Now, tell me the truth, like George Washington," said Harry, "were you
listening?"

"No; I guessed. Take your hand away."

"Devilish smart of you, then! She did say 'Harry,' and I won't deny it.
My name, I tell you, you malingering skunk; she meant me! She called me
Harry. O Lord!"

"Well, it's altogether the most remarkable thing I ever heard," said
Geoffrey. "And as the bell for lunch sounded ten minutes ago, I propose
that you should tell me the rest afterward."

It was Geoffrey's first attempt at stairs since he had gone to bed, and
he threw an arm round Harry's neck, and leaned his weight on him.

"And ten days ago," he said, "I met death and despair in the hall, and
that was you. 'This is what comes of the Luck' thought I. O Harry, if I
wasn't so shaky I'd fetch you such a whack in the ribs!"

And after the manner of the British youth, they quite understood each
other.

The influenza party left London next day after lunch. Lord Oxted had
brought a whole library of blue-books with him, out of which he hoped to
establish an array of damaging facts against the Government, and his red
pencil, as they sped out of London, had no sinecure. Mile after mile of
the inconceivable meanness of house-backs fell behind them, and at last
Lady Oxted consented to the partial opening of one of the carriage
windows.

"There, that is a proper breath of air," she said. "Sniff it in,
Geoffrey. But I will have no suburban microbes flying into my face. Oh,
we are wrecks, we are wrecks, but we will stop at Oxted till we are
refloated."

Lord Oxted frowned heavily, and scored the offending page.

"Is the man Colonial Secretary," he asked, "or is he the autocrat of all
the Englands? And it never occurred to any of them, apparently, that
there might be something in those grand pianos. I should have thought
that somebody might have guessed that this immense importation of huge
cases implied something. But I am wrong; nobody guessed it. They said
they could not be expected to see through stone walls. Stone walls,
indeed! They couldn't see through plate-glass windows."

"So the pianos turned out to be stone walls," said his wife.

"Yes; they were put up round Pretoria."

The heat in London had been intense; perhaps it was not less at Oxted;
but there was a difference in its quality unnoticed by the thermometer,
and after tea the two wrecks made themselves exceedingly comfortable on
the lawn, and Lady Oxted, without warning, began the statement of her
idea to the very ordinary person.

"Harry's marriage is fixed for the middle of November," she said. "Evie
will have to go back to Santa Margarita first, and I hope she may
persuade her mother to come over for it. It is now the middle of July;
there are four months before he will be married. Much may happen in four
months."

"As a rule very little does," remarked Geoffrey.

"In this case I sincerely hope that very little will," said she.
"Geoffrey, I am not altogether happy about it."

"Why not?" he asked. "You told me you pushed Harry till he went and
asked her. Did you mean him to be refused? Or are you afraid that
either of them will think they have made a mistake? Of course, they are
both young."

Lady Oxted laughed.

"You funny old maid!" she said. "No, I am not afraid of that."

"Never mind me," he said. "What are you afraid of, then?"

Lady Oxted was silent so long that Geoffrey would have repeated his
question had he not felt quite certain that she had heard it. As it was,
it was a full half minute, an aeon of a pause in conversation, before
she replied. Then:

"Of Mr. Francis," she said.

Geoffrey had just lit a match for his cigarette, but he held it so long
that it burned down, and he threw it hastily away, as the flame scorched
his finger-tips. The cigarette he put very carefully and absently back
in his case.

"What on earth do you mean?" he asked.

"It was to tell you that--that I particularly wanted you to come down
here. Listen."

Lady Oxted felt herself suddenly nervous, even when her only audience
was the very ordinary person. She had thought the matter over in her own
mind so constantly that she hoped she was familiarized with it, but when
it came to speaking of it, she found she was not. Thus it was that she
began very haltingly, and with frequent pauses.

"I feel sure that he is essentially opposed to the marriage," she said,
"for reasons which I will soon tell you; and when he professes to be so
much delighted with it I conclude he is acting a part. Now one has
always to be cautious in dealing with a man who is acting, until you
know both what his part is and what he himself is. As regards Mr.
Francis I know neither. I feel sure, however, that he is a very clever
old man. Well?"

"But is it not pure assumption that he is acting a part?" asked
Geoffrey.

"No; it is reasoned truth. I will tell you how I know it. The Sunday
that Evie and I were down at Vail, Mr. Francis and Evie (Evie told me
this, and Harry, as you heard yesterday, corroborated a part of it)
walked in the afternoon in the wood just above the house, and suddenly
came on one of the grooms--Jim, yes, his name was Jim--walking out with
his young woman, who is dairymaid. Now, Jim, in appearance--you have
seen him many times probably--is the very spit and image of Harry. Evie
(they only had the most momentary glance of him) thought it actually was
Harry, till she saw him half an hour later sleeping under a tree on the
lawn. But it appears that Mr. Francis also thought it was Harry, for he
said to himself half aloud, 'Ah, the foolish boy!' Now you, Geoffrey,
have known Harry some time, and, well--have you ever known him behave as
many young men do behave: talk to barmaids, flirt with waitresses, all
that kind of thing?"

"Never; he never did such a thing. At Oxford we used to call him the
womanthrope."

"Then explain to me what follows. Mr. Francis begged Evie not to be too
hard on him. He said that Harry was honest, that his 'previous
foolishnesses'--the exact expression, Evie tells me--had never been
anything serious. Now you say there never were any."

"No, never," said Geoffrey, "not to my knowledge at least. Oh, I can go
much further than that: I know there can not have been. Harry simply is
not that kind of fellow."

"Then it appears to me that Mr. Francis only alluded to the harmless
nature of Harry's previous foolishnesses in order to set Evie against
him. A nice girl, you know, does not like that sort of thing. And how
was it that it never occurred to Mr. Francis that the two figures they
saw were Jim and his young woman? It is impossible that it should not,
it seems to me. The two are engaged, Harry tells me; they often walk out
together. Mr. Francis must have known that; he must also have known of
Jim's extraordinary likeness to Harry."

"But the likeness deceived Miss Aylwin. By the way, had she ever seen
Jim?"

"Yes; the evening before only."

"Yet she was deceived. Why not Mr. Francis also?"

Lady Oxted paused.

"It is very unlikely, but I grant you that it is possible. Take what I
have told you alone, and it proves nothing. But there is more."

She was speaking less lamely now; the words had begun to come.

"You met Harry in the hall when you came back from having tea with me a
fortnight ago," she said. "How did his face strike you? Was it very
happy? And do you know the cause of it?"

"No; Harry did not tell me, though I asked him."

"Then I shall tell you," said Lady Oxted. "I know how his face struck
me, for he came to see me immediately afterward. I thought all was over
between him and Evie. Harry thought so, too, and his reason for it was a
letter he had just received, of which he showed me a piece. In it Mr.
Francis--I know it was he, Harry told me so afterward--said that Evie
was engaged to an Italian marchese. Here again there was a certain
foundation for his thinking so. It was true at any rate that last winter
an Italian in Rome fell very violently in love with her, that he
proposed to her. But Evie refused him point blank. The thing was talked
about, for it was a very good match. But Mr. Francis tells Harry she is
engaged. He may have been told so; again it is just possible, though not
more than possible. Now take these two incidents together; in each Mr.
Francis made, let us say, a mistake: on one occasion he mistook the
groom for Harry; on the other he says that Evie is engaged to an
Italian, whereas that was never true; she refused him. Now does a common
motive seem to lie behind those two mistakes? Supposing for a moment
that these mistakes were--well--deliberate mistakes, very cleverly
founded on fact, I grant--can you account for both of them by supposing
one desire in Mr. Francis's mind?"

"I see what you mean," said Geoffrey.

"Say it, then; I want it said."

"You mean that Mr. Francis wished to prevent their engagement. Is that
bald enough?"

"Yes; that will do. It is a possibility which must not be overlooked. He
has failed, but I see no reason to suppose that anything has since
happened which reconciles him to their marriage. His letter to Harry in
answer to the announcement of his engagement was charming, perfectly
charming. But so was his letter, in which he urged him to be brave and
cut Evie out of his life with a firm hand. So also, no doubt, was his
manner when he begged Evie to overlook Harry's Platonic little walk with
a dairymaid."

Geoffrey felt vaguely uneasy. Now that these things were said to him, he
knew that somewhere in the very inmost recesses of his brain there had
lurked for some time a feeling of which he was ashamed--a secret,
unaccountable distrust of this kind old man. It had been emphasized by
the curious adventure of Dr. Armytage's door, and since then it had
grown more alert, more ready to put up its head.

"Now why," continued Lady Oxted, speaking rapidly, "should he wish to
separate the two? You would have thought--Harry thought and still
thinks--that by this marriage Mr. Francis will feel that the old stain
of suspicion that for so long had been on his name, ever since the
Harmsworth affair, will be removed. And Harry has good reason for
thinking so: Mr. Francis himself told him that Evie's coming to Vail was
the happiest thing that had happened to him for years. Why, then, should
they not marry?"

"Perhaps Mr. Francis finds that the continual revival of those memories,
which Miss Aylwin calls up, is too painful," said Geoffrey.

"Does that seem to you reasonable?" asked Lady Oxted, "and if
reasonable, can mortal mind invent a more awful piece of selfishness?"

Geoffrey considered a moment.

"No, it does not seem to me reasonable," he said; "I recant that."

"Can you think of any other motive?"

"Ah! you are monstrous," said Geoffrey suddenly; "you suggest monstrous
things."

"I have suggested nothing. I want to hear your suggestion. What is it,
Geoffrey?"

"You mean that Mr. Francis does not want Harry to marry at all. You
remember that he is Harry's heir. Do you not see how absurd such an idea
is? Who ever heard of an old man, over seventy, trying to make his
grand-nephew a celibate? You might as well hope to rear a child who
should never see a fire or a book."

"Ah! you are shocked," said Lady Oxted, "but wait a moment. Do you
remember what you told me about Dr. Godfrey and Dr. Armytage? Geoffrey,
what is that sinister man doing at Vail? He is appalling, I tell you.
He is one of the black spots on the medical profession. Heart
specialist! He is a surgeon of terrible dexterity--unscrupulous, venal.
What does Mr. Francis want with him?"

Geoffrey got up in great excitement.

"I will hear no more," he said, in a tremulous voice. "It is you who
suggest things that I have to put into words. Tell me what you mean; say
straight out what you suspect?"

Lady Oxted rose too.

"If I knew what I suspected, I would tell you," she said. "But I can't
make out what it is. At any rate we have talked long enough for the
present."

She paused a moment, then broke out again, her own anxiety--how deep she
had never known till this minute--breaking all bounds.

"Promise me this," she cried. "Promise me you will be a good friend to
Harry. Be much with him, be observant--not suspicious, but observant.
Remember that I am afraid, though I do not know what of. See if you can
not find out what it is that I fear. There, that is enough. You promise
me that, Geoffrey?"

"I will not play detective," said he. "I both like and honour that old
man."

"I do not ask you to play detective," she said. "I pray that your liking
and honour for Mr. Francis may never be diminished. But be much with
Harry, and be full of common sense. Come!"

"Yes, I will promise that," said he.




PART II




CHAPTER XV

FROST


Harry left London at the end of the month, paid a couple of visits in
England, then went to Scotland for the remainder of August, and loitered
there, since he was at the same two houses as Evie till September had
reached its second decade of days, and then travelled south again with
her. She was on her way straight to Santa Margarita to spend the
remainder of the month of months with her mother, and Harry saw her off
by the boat express from Victoria, she having sternly and absolutely
refused to let him do anything so foolish as to travel to Dover with
her.

"You would propose coming to Calais next," she said, "and Calais is but
a step to Paris. I know you, Harry. And--and how I hate the journey, and
how I should love it if you were with me!"

"Oh, let me come!" said he.

"Not even to Herne Hill," and the train slid out of the vaulted gloom of
the station.

Geoffrey joined him late on the same day, and next afternoon they set
off together down to Vail. Stock brokering, it appeared, was like
pheasants, quite impossible in September, and he was going to spend the
remainder of the month with Harry, unless some unforeseen urgency called
him back. This, he considered, was not in the least degree likely to
happen, for the unforeseen so seldom occurs.

"The house is all upside down, Geoff," said Harry to him as they drove
from the station; "and all the time which you do not employ in getting
severe electric shocks over unprotected wires, you will probably spend
in falling into hot and cold water alternately upstairs. The housemaids'
closets seem to me just now the only really important thing in England.
I thought it better not to tell you all this before we started, for fear
of your not coming."

"Oh, I can always go back," said Geoffrey. "Is Mr. Francis there?"

"Just now he is, but he is going away in a few days," said Harry. "In
fact, he is only waiting till I come, to put the unprotected wires into
my hands."

"Is he well?"

"Yes, extraordinarily well, and he asked after you in his last letter to
me. Also he seems wonderfully happy at the thought of my marriage. So we
are both pleased. Well, I'm sure I don't wonder; it will be a sort of
death blow to that tragedy twenty years old and more now, a sort of seal
and attestation of the vileness of the suspicion. Besides, you know,
it's pretty nice for any one to have Evie in the house always."

"Is he going to continue being with you, then?" asked Geoffrey.

"Certainly; as much as he will. Evie and I settled all that without any
disagreement, thank you. He is also thinking of having a little _ventre
 terre_, as somebody said, in town, a sort of little independence of
his own. I am delighted that he will; six months ago he couldn't bear
the thought of going about among people again, but now it is all
changed: he will begin to live again, after all these years. Dear old
fellow, what a good friend he has been to me! Fancy caring about people
of twenty or so, when you are over seventy. What wonderful vitality!"

Whatever shadow of approaching cloud, so thought Geoffrey, might darken
Lady Oxted's view of the future, it was clear that to Harry there could
not have been a more serene horizon. Since that first afternoon down at
Oxted he had not exchanged a further word with her or any one else on
the subject, and by degrees that ghastly conversation had grown
gradually fainter in his mind, and it was to him now more of the texture
of a remembered nightmare than an actual experience. For several days
afterward, it is true, it had remained very unpleasantly vivid to him;
she had been so ingenious in her presentation of undeniable facts that
at the time, and perhaps for a fortnight afterward, it had nearly seemed
to him that Mr. Francis had been plotting with diabolical ingenuity
against this match. If such were the case, his apparent delight at it
assumed an aspect infinitely grave and portentous; his smiles would
have been creditable to a fiend. But as the sharper edge of memory grew
dulled, these thoughts, which had never been quite sufficiently solid to
be called sober suspicions, became gradually nebulous again. Two
circumstances had been the foundation of Lady Oxted's theory, each
separately capable of explanation, and in making a judgment so serious
it was the acme of unfairness, so it seemed to him now, to put the two
together and judge. Each must be weighed and considered on its separate
merits, and if neither had weight alone, then neither had weight
together. There had been darker insinuations to follow; at these
Geoffrey now laughed, so baseless appeared their fabric. Dr. Armytage
might or might not be a reputable man, but the idea of connecting his
visit to Vail, when one remembered how long he had known Mr. Francis,
with something sinister and unspoken with regard to Harry, was really a
triumph for the diseased imagination which is one of the sequel of
influenza.

Oddly enough, as if by thought transference, Harry's next words bore
some relation to this train of ideas which had been passing through
Geoffrey's mind.

"Do you remember that evening when we went to find Dr. Godfrey, Geoff?"
he said. "Well, I have so often thought about it since that I have
determined to tell Uncle Francis about it, and ask him to explain it
all."

This appeared an excellent plan to Geoffrey, for, little as he believed
in the solidity of Lady Oxted's bubbles of imagination, it would still
be a good thing to have them pricked.

"Do," he said. "Ask him some time when I am there. I should like to see
his face when his little _ruse_ is exposed. It might be a useful lesson.
Personally, I never know how to look when my little _ruses_ are
discovered."

Harry laughed.

"There's an excellent explanation behind, you may be sure of that," he
said.

Accordingly, at dinner that night, in a pause in the conversation, Harry
suddenly asked:

"Seen Dr. Godfrey again, Uncle Francis?"

"No, I have had no occasion to send for him, I am thankful to say," he
answered. "I have been wonderfully well these last two months."

"Geoff and I went to see him one night at 32 Wimpole Street," continued
Harry. "Oh, we were not going to consult him. But we just went to his
house."

It would have been hard to say whether a pause followed this speech. In
any case it was but a moment before Mr. Francis broke out into his
hearty, cheerful laugh.

"And I'll be bound you didn't go in!" he cried. "Dear Godfrey, he would
have been delighted to see you, though. Ah, Harry! what a good thing you
and I are friends! We are always finding each other out. So you actually
went to 32 Wimpole Street, and found not Dr. Godfrey on the plate, but
Dr. Armytage. How did you get his address, you rascal?"

"Your 'Where is it?' was lying on your table the last night I was here,
when I worked at the electric-light estimates. I turned to G."

"Simple," said Mr. Francis. "Everything is simple when you know all
about it. And my explanation is simple too. I didn't want you to go to
Armytage, and fuss yourself about me, so, when you asked me for his
name, I told you, if you remember, his Christian name--Godfrey--and I am
afraid I gave you the wrong address. He is a dear fellow, a dear good
fellow, but the sort of man who warns you against tetanus, if you cut
yourself shaving. He would certainly have alarmed you, how unnecessarily
look at me now and judge. He knows too much; I am always telling him so.
He knows how many things may go wrong, and he bears them all in mind.
Yes, my dear boy, I deceived you purposely. Do you acquit me? I throw
myself on your mercy, but I beg you to bear in mind how kindly were my
intentions."

"Without a stain on your character," said Harry.

Coffee was brought in at this moment, Templeton as usual bearing the
case of the Luck, which had been the centrepiece at dinner.

"Ah! they are going to put the Luck to bed," said Harry. "I drink to the
Luck. Get up, Geoff."

Geoffrey rose in obedience to the toastmaster, and, looking across at
Mr. Francis, saw that his hand trembled a little. His genial smile was
there, but it seemed to Geoffrey, in that momentary glance he had of him
over the flowers, that it was a smile rather of habit than happiness.
His glass was full, and a few drops were spilled as he raised it to his
mouth. The thing, trivial as it was, struck him with a curious sense of
double consciousness: it seemed to him that this was a repetition of
some previous experience, exact in every particular. But it passed off
immediately, and the vague, rather uncomfortable impression it made on
him sank below the surface of his mind. It was already dim as soon as it
was made.

"So we are together again, we three," said Mr. Francis, when he had
drunk to the Luck, and carefully watched its stowage in its case. "It is
like those jolly times we had last Christmas, when this dear fellow came
of age. What a chapter of little misfortunes he had too! When he was not
slipping on the steps, he was falling into the fire; when he was not
falling into the fire, he was catching a severe chill!"

"Not my fault," said Harry. "It was all the Luck!"

"Dear boy, you are always jesting about the Luck! Do be careful, Harry;
if you do not take care, some day you will find that you have fancied
yourself into believing it. Six, eight months have passed since then;
what have you suffered since at the hands of fire and frost and rain?"

"Ah! don't you see?" cried Harry. "The curse came first; then the Luck
itself. I met Evie. Is not that stupendous? Perhaps the curse will wake
up again, and I shall sprain my ankle worse than before, and burn my
hand more seriously, before--before the middle of November. I don't
care; it's cheap, and I wonder they can turn out happiness at such a
trifling cost. I suspect there's no sweating commission at the place
where the old scoundrel who made the Luck has gone!"

Mr. Francis looked really pained.

"Come, come, Harry," he said gravely. "Let us go, boys. They will be
wanting to clear away."

This implication of rebuke nettled Harry. He was a little excited, a
little intoxicated with his joy of life, a little headstrong with youth
and health, and he did not quite relish being pulled up like this, even
though only before Geoffrey. But he did not reply, and with a scarcely
perceptible shrug of his shoulders followed Mr. Francis out. Shortly
after, his uncle got out his flute, and melodies of Corelli and Baptiste
tinkled merrily under the portraits of the race.

Next day uncle and nephew had estate business to occupy them; "their
work," Mr. Francis gaily declared, 'twould, like topmost Jargarus, take
the morning, and Geoffrey was given a dog and a keeper and a gun to
amuse himself till lunch time. He wanted nothing better, and soon after
breakfast he was off and away for all he could find in wood and
hedgerow. The stubbles only and the small brown bird were dedicated for
to-morrow.

Mr. Francis and Harry worked on till one, but on the striking of that
hour the latter revolted.

"I can't go on any more," he said. "I simply can't. Come out till lunch,
Uncle Francis; it is only an hour."

Mr. Francis smiled and shook his head.

"Not to-day, dear boy," he replied; "there is this packet of letters I
have to get through before the post. But do you get out, Harry, and
sweep the cobwebs away."

Harry stood up, stretching himself after the long session.

"Cobwebs--what cobwebs?" he asked.

"Those in your curly head."

"There are no such cobwebs. O Uncle Francis, as we are talking of
cobwebs, I want to get that summerhouse on the knoll put in order--the
one close to the ice house, I mean. Have you the keys? By the way, which
is which?"

Mr. Francis was writing, and, as Harry spoke, though he did not look up,
his pen ceased travelling.

"Yes, a very good idea," he said, after a moment. "The keys are in the
cabinet there; two of the same, the same key fits both. Indeed"--and his
pen began slowly moving again--"indeed, you will find plenty of cobwebs
there. The summerhouse is the one on the left as you ascend the knoll
going from the house. Don't go plunging into the ice house by mistake.
They are both shuttered on the inside; it would be a good thing if you
were to open all the windows, and let them get a good blow out. Shall
I--oh, no! I must stick to my work."

Harry found the keys, and as he turned to leave the room--

"The one on the left is the summerhouse?" he asked again.

"Yes, the one on the left," said Mr. Francis, again fully absorbed in
his writing.

Harry, key in hand, went out whistling and hatless. The morning was a
page out of heaven, and as he strolled slowly up the steep, grassy bank,
where the two outhouses stood, with the scents and sounds of life and
summer vivid in eye and nostril, he felt that his useful occupation of
the hours since breakfast had been a terrible waste, when he might have
been going quietly and alert with Geoffrey through cover and up
hedgerow, to the tapping of sticks and the nosing of the spaniels.
However, he had been through the farm accounts with minute care; there
would be no call for such another morning till the closing of the next
quarter.

The two buildings toward which he went were exactly alike, of a hybrid
kiosk sort of appearance, fantastic and ridiculous, yet vaguely
pleasing. Each was octagonal, with three blank sides, four windows, and
a door. Still whistling and full of pleasant thoughts, he fitted the key
into the lock of the one to the left hand, and turning it, walked in.
The interior was dark, for, as Mr. Francis had told him, all the
windows were shuttered inside, and coming out of the bright sunlight,
for a moment or two he saw nothing. For the same reason, no doubt, it
struck him as being very cold.

He had taken three or four rather shuffling steps across the paved floor
when suddenly he stopped. Somehow, though he saw nothing, his ear
instinctively, hardly consciously, warned him that the sound of his
steps was not normal. There should have been--the whole feeling was not
reasoned, but purely automatic and instinctive--no echo to them in so
circumscribed a building, but an echo there was, faint, hollow, and
remote, but audible. At this his whistling stopped, his steps also, and
drawing a loose match from his trousers pocket he struck a match. Less
than another pace in front of him was a black space, on which the match
cast no illumination; it remained black.

Harry felt a little beady dew break out on his forehead and on the short
down of his upper lip, but his nerves did not tell him that he was
afraid. He waited exactly where he was, till the match had burned more
bravely, and then he chucked it forward over the blackness. It went
through it, and for two or three seconds no sound whatever came to him.
Then he heard a little expiring hiss.

Still not conscious of fright, he went back, with the light of another
match, for the door had swung shut behind him, and in another moment
was out again, with the sweet, soft sunshine round him and the firm
grass beneath his feet. He looked round; yes, he had gone to the
left-hand building, the one his uncle had told him was the summerhouse.
He had nearly, also, not come out again.

At this sobering reflection a belated spasm of fear, for he had felt
none at the moment of danger, seized him, but laying violent hold of
himself he marched up to the other door, unlocked it, and throwing it
open, waited on the threshold till his eyes had got accustomed to the
darkness. Then seeing a couple of wicker tables and some garden chairs
peer through the gloom, he went in turn to each window, unshuttered it,
and threw it open.

At this moment the iron gate leading into the woods close behind clanged
suddenly, and with a jump that testified to his jangled nerves he looked
out. It was Geoffrey, gun on shoulder, coming back to the house. Harry
leaned out of the window.

"Come in here, Geoff," he said.

Geoffrey looked round.

"Halloo; have you been opening the old summerhouse?" he asked.

"Yes," said Harry, very deliberately, "I've been opening the old
summerhouse."

Geoffrey handed his gun to the keeper, who was close behind him, and
vaulted in through one of the open windows.

"Rare good morning we've had," he said. "You should have come, Harry.
Why, you look queer! What's the matter?"

Harry had sat down in one of the garden chairs, and was leaning back,
feeling suddenly faint.

"I've had the devil of a fright," he said. "I went gaily marching into
the ice house by mistake, and only just stopped on the lip of the ice
tank or the well--I don't know which it was. Either would probably have
done."

"Lord! how can you be such an ass?" cried Geoffrey. "You knew that one
of the two was an ice house, and yet you go whistling along out of the
sunshine into pit-mirk, and never reflect that the chances are exactly
even that next moment you will be in Kingdom Come."

"Give me a cigarette, and don't jaw," said Harry, and he smoked a minute
or two without speaking.

"Say nothing about this to my uncle," he said at length. "I believe it
would frighten him to death. I asked him just before I came out which
was the summerhouse, and he told me the left-hand one of the two as you
go up from the house. Well, he made a mistake. It turns out that the
left-hand one is the ice house."

"What?" shouted Geoffrey, his whole talk with Lady Oxted suddenly
springing into his mind like a Jack-in-the-box.

"Can't you hear what I say?" asked Harry, rather irritable from his
fright. "Uncle Francis had forgotten which was which, and I nearly
went, as you put it, in Kingdom Come in consequence. There's nothing to
shout about. For God's sake, don't let him know what happened! I really
believe it might be the death of him."

"It was nearly the death of you," said Geoffrey.

"Well, it wasn't quite, and so there's the end of it. Anyhow, don't tell
him; I insist on your not telling him. Come, let's go down to the house.
I'm steadier now; I don't remember being frightened at the moment, but
when there was no longer any reason to be frightened my knees withered
under me."

As they approached the house across the upper lawn, they saw Mr.
Francis, some distance off, in one of the shady alleys going down to the
lake, walking away from them. The Panama hat with its bright ribbon was
on his head, at his mouth was the flute, and quick trills and runs of
some light-hearted southern dance floated toward them. Suddenly, it
would seem, the gaiety of his own music took irresistible hold on him,
for, with a preliminary pirouette and a little cut in the air, his feet
were taken by the infection, and the two lads lost sight of him round a
bend in the path, performing brisk impromptu steps to his melody.

They looked at him, then at each other a moment, in silence, Harry with
a dawning smile, Geoffrey with a deepening frown.

"I wouldn't tell him about the ice-house affair for ten thousand
pounds!" said Harry. "Geoff, I wonder if you and I will be as gay as
that when we are over seventy years old?"

"It is highly improbable," said Geoffrey.

It still wanted a quarter of an hour to lunch time, and Harry went
indoors to finish up. Geoffrey, however, remained outside, and, as soon
as Harry was gone, began playing a very curious and original game by
himself. This consisted in stalking Mr. Francis, and was played in the
following manner: He hurried over the grass to the entrance of the path
where they had last seen him, and followed cautiously from bush to bush.
Soon he had the sound of the flute again to guide him, but after a
little, hearing that it was getting louder, he retired on his own steps,
and from the shade of certain rhododendrons observed the cheery old
gentleman coming back again along the path he had taken. Mr. Francis
passed not thirty yards from the stalker; then the music ceased, and he
crossed the lawn in the direction of the two kiosks. At that a sudden
nameless thrill of horror took hold of Geoffrey, and creeping after him
till both kiosks had cleared the angle of the house, he observed his
doings with a fascinated attention.

Mr. Francis went first to the ice house and turned the handle of the
door, but apparently found it locked. He stood there a few seconds,
flute in hand, and, taking off his Panama hat, passed a handkerchief
over his forehead, for the day was very warm. Then it would seem that
the open windows of the summerhouse caught his eye, and in turn trying
that door, he found it open. He did not, however, enter, but merely held
the door open, standing on the threshold. Then he turned, and rather
slowly--for the grass, maybe, was slippery from a long drought--began to
descend again toward the house. Geoffrey, on his part, made a wide
circuit through the shrubbery, and emerged on to the gravel in front of
the house just as Mr. Francis entered. The latter saw him, but
apparently had no word for him, and on the moment the bell for lunch
rang.

Their meals usually were merry and talkative: lunch to-day, perhaps,
only proved the rule, for it was eminently silent. Geoffrey was gloomy
and preoccupied, his mind in an endless tangle of indecision, shocked,
horrified, yet ever telling himself that this nightmare of a morning
could not be true. Harry also, his nerves still on edge with the
experience of the last hour, was inclined to brevity of question and
answer; while the brisk cheerfulness of Mr. Francis, which as a rule
would cover the paucity of two, seemed replaced by a kind of dreamy
tenderness; he sighed, ate little; it was as if his mind dwelt on some
regret of what might have been. Perhaps the weather was in part
responsible for this marked decay of elasticity, for the clear warmth of
the morning had given place to a dead sultriness of heat; the atmosphere
had grown heavy and full of thunder. At last, as they rose from a very
silent meal--

"I went up to the summerhouse this morning, Uncle Francis," said Harry,
with the air of a man who had thought carefully over what he was going
to say. "It wants putting in order, for it is damp and very cobwebby, as
you warned me. But it would be worth while to do it; there is a charming
view from the windows. I shall send a couple of servants up to clean it,
and make it a bit more habitable."

"Do, dear boy, do," said Mr. Francis. "Dear old place, dear old place!
Your father used to be so fond of it!"

The threatening of a storm grew every moment more imminent, and the two
young men, who had intended to ride over the downs, decided to postpone
their expedition. They stood together at the window of the smoking room,
watching the awful and mysterious mobilization of cloud, the hard black
edges of thunder, ragged as if bitten off some immense pall, coming up
against what wind there was, and rising higher every moment toward the
zenith, ready to topple and break. Once a scribble of light, some
illegible, gigantic autograph was traced against the blackness, and the
gongs of thunder, as yet remote, testified its authenticity. Before long
a few large drops of rain jumped like frogs on the gravel path below the
windows, and a hot local eddy of unaccountable wind, like a grappling
iron let down from the moving vapours above, scoured across the lawn,
stirring and rattling the dry-leaved laurels in the shrubbery, and
expunging as it passed the reflections on the lake. It died away; the
little breeze there had been drooped like a broken wing; the willows by
the water were motionless as in a picture; a candle on the lawn would
have burned with as steady a flame as in a glass shade within a sealed
room. The fast-fading light was coppery in colour, and the darkness came
on apace as the great bank of congested cloud shouldered its way over
the sky, but, despite the gloom, there was a great precision of outline
in hill and tree.

Harry turned from the window.

"We shall have to light the lamps," he said. "It is impossible to see
indoors. Really, it looks like the day of judgment! Shall we have a game
of billiards, Geoff?"

As he spoke, the door was opened with hurried stealth, and Mr. Francis,
pale and strangely shrunken to the appearance, came in.

"Ah! here you are," he said; "I was afraid you had gone out, and that I
was alone. Is it not horrible? We are going to have a terrific storm.
What a relief to find you here! I--I should have been so anxious if you
had been out in this!"

"We were just going to the billiard room," said Harry. "Come with us,
Uncle Francis; we will play pool, or cut in and out."

"Thank you, dear Harry, but I could not possibly play with the storm
coming on," he said. "Thunder always affects me horribly. But if you
will let me, I will come with you, and perhaps mark for you. I can not
bear being alone in a thunderstorm."

They went to the billiard room, and Harry lit the lamps, while Mr.
Francis, creeping like a mouse round the walls, and taking advantage of
the cover of the curtains, began hurriedly closing the shutters.

"Oh, why do you do that?" asked Harry. "We shall not see the lightning."

Even as he spoke a swift streamer of violet light shot down, bisecting
the square of window where Mr. Francis was nervously tugging at a
shutter, and for a moment showing vividly the dark and stagnant shapes
of the drooping trees. Mr. Francis's hand fell from the shutter as if it
had been struck, and with a little moaning sigh he covered his face with
his hands. Almost simultaneously a reverberating crash, not booming or
rumbling, but short and sharp, answered the lightning, and Mr. Francis
hurried with crouching steps to the sofa.

"Put up all the shutters, I implore you, Harry!" he said in a stifled
voice. "Shut them quickly, and draw the curtains over them. Ah!" he
cried, with a whistling intake of breath, "there it is again!"

His terror was too evident and deep-seated not to be pitied, and the two
young men hastily closed all the shutters, drawing the curtains over
them, as Mr. Francis had requested.

"Is it done? is it done?" he asked in a muffled voice, his face half
buried in a sofa cushion. "Be quick--oh, be quick!"

For an hour he sat there with closed eyes and finger-muffled ears, while
the storm exploded overhead, the picture of cowering terror, while the
other two played a couple of games. From time to time, if there had been
a comparatively long interval of quiet, he would begin to take a little
interest in the play, and once, even when for some five minutes the
steady tattoo of the rain on the leads overhead had continued unbroken
by any more violent sound, he went to the marking board. But next moment
a dirling peal made the rest drop from his hand, and at a shuffling run
he went back to the sofa, and again hid ears and eyes.

The storm passed gradually away, the sharp crack of the overhead thunder
gave place to distant and yet more distant rumblings; and the afternoon
was not over when Mr. Francis, cautiously opening a chink of shutter,
let in a long, dusty ray of sunshine. The heavens were clear again,
washed by the rain, and of a most pellucid blue, and Mr. Francis,
recovering with mercurial rapidity, went gaily from window to window,
unshuttering.

"What a relief, what a blessed relief!" he cried. "How delicious is this
freshness after the storm! Ah, the beauty of the world! I drink it in;
it is meat and drink to me."

He nodded to the others.

"I must go out," he said; "I must go out and see if this horrible storm
that is past has done any damage. I am afraid some trees may have been
struck by that cruel lightning, in all their strength and beauty. It is
terrible to think of, that exquisite, delicate life, rent, shattered in
a moment by the flame!"

He went out, and the two others looked at each other like augurs.

"Nerves," said Harry.

"Bad conscience," said Geoffrey, and these were all the comments made by
either on Mr. Francis's hour of purgatory.

It was too late when the storm was over to go the intended ride, and
after tea Harry and Geoffrey sauntered aimlessly out, played red Indians
again among the islands of the lake (a game which, on the present
occasion, was far less delightful to Harry than when he had played it
last), and finally came homeward as dusk fell. As they passed down the
box hedge, it suddenly occurred to Harry (so imaginative had been the
realism with which his friend had played red Indians) that Geoffrey was
perhaps capable of seeing the secret of the inside passage in a suitably
romantic light, and he took him round to the back of the hedge.

"A mystery, Geoff, a deep, dark mystery," he said, and shutting his eyes
against the springing twigs which had overgrown the door, jumped into
the hedge. The elastic fibres of the box flew back like a spring into
their normal position; and Geoffrey, who for the moment had been intent,
with back turned, on the lighting of a cigarette, looked up when that
operation was over, and found that Harry had vanished as suddenly and as
completely as any lady in the cabinet trick. In the dusk it was
impossible, except to any one who knew where to look, to see any
difference of uniformity in the texture of the hedge, and the illusion
of his vanishing was complete.

"Here, Geoff, come in," said Harry, still invisible, "and don't put out
that match. It is darker than the plague of Egypt!"

"Come where--how? Where are you?"

Harry laughed, and held back the twigs.

"That was a great success," he said. "And--O Geoffrey--if you have a
spark of the romantic left in you, and I think you have, for you were a
masterly red Indian, this ought to make it blaze. Look! a tunnel right
down the hedge. Isn't that secret and heavenly? Think how many plots we
might overhear, if people were only kind enough to make them as they
went down the road! Think of the stirring rescues you could make, hiding
here till the pursuit went by!"

Geoffrey was quite suitably impressed.

"I call this really ancestral," he said. "Talk low, Harry; we may be
overheard. Where does it lead to?"

"Right down to the house, and comes out by another door like the one we
went in by, just opposite the gun-room window. Geoff, if you'll conceal
yourself here all to-morrow I'll bring your meals when I can slip away
without attracting attention. You mustn't smoke, I'm afraid."

"Oh, if only there was the smallest cause for doing so!" said Geoff.
"Does no one know it, except you and me?"

"I don't think so. I daren't ask Uncle Francis if he does, for fear he
does. I shall tell Evie, but no one else. Lord! what a baby one is! Why
does this give me pleasure? There! just peep out at the end, Geoffrey,
so that if you are pursued from the house you will know where the door
is; but be cautious. Now we'll walk up again inside, and steal softly
out where we came in, else some one from the house might see us. No, I
think not another match. It's too risky."

"I should like to give one low whistle," said Geoffrey.

"Just as a signal. All right."

Even as the whistle was on his lips, there came from somewhere close at
hand a sudden gush of notes from a flute, and the two stood there
huddled against each other in the narrow passage, petrified into sudden
silence and immobility, but shaken with inward laughter. Peering, on
tiptoe as it were, through the hedge, they could just make out the
figure of Mr. Francis, walking airily along the grass border by the edge
of the drive, on his way to the house. Soon his feet sounded crisp and
distant on the gravel, and the two idiots breathed again.

"A near thing," said Harry. "Let us go back. Geoff, if you had lit that
match, we should almost certainly have been discovered."

Mr. Francis left early the next morning for London, to see two or three
little flats, one of which he thought might perhaps be compassable by
the modest sum he was prepared to give for a _pied--terre_ in town.
None of them were in very fashionable districts; the one which seemed
to him most promising was in Wigmore Street, and this held forth the
additional advantage of being near Cavendish Square. Harry had
telegraphed to the care-taker there to get a couple of rooms ready for
his uncle, and without his knowledge (for he would certainly have
deprecated such a step) he had sent up from Vail a kitchen maid, who was
also a very decent cook, in order to make him more comfortable. Mr.
Francis had breakfasted, and the trap to take him to the station was
already at the door when the two young men came down, and he hailed them
genially from the threshold as his luggage was put up.

"Good-morning, dear boys!" he cried. "You will have a lovely day for
your shoot. It is perfect after yesterday's storm. Yes, I am just off, I
am sorry to say. I shall stop at least a week in town, I expect, Harry;
but I will let you know when I am thinking of coming back."

Harry went out just as his uncle climbed nimbly up into the dogcart;
Geoffrey had stayed in the hall, and was glancing at the paper.

"Uncle Francis," he said, "do take that more expensive flat in De Vere
Gardens, if you find it suits you better. Don't consider the extra
expense at all; I can manage that for you perfectly."

"You are too generous to me, dear Harry," said the other, stretching
down and grasping his hand. "But no, dear boy, I could not think of it.
I shall be immensely comfortable in that one in Wigmore Street. But
thank you, thank you.--Luggage all in? Drive on, Jim," he said abruptly.

Harry turned indoors and went across the hall to the dining room. But
Mr. Francis, after having driven not more than a couple of hundred
yards, stopped the cart, and descending, began to walk toward the house.
Halfway there he stopped, and stood for a moment lost in thought; then,
with an air of a taken decision, went on more quickly. On the threshold
again he stopped, biting his lip, and frowning heavily.

At that moment Geoffrey got up from his paper, and crossing the door
into the entrance hall, on his way to join Harry in the dining room, saw
him through the glass door, standing like this, and went to see why he
had come back. And the face that met him was the face of old Francis--a
wicked, malignant mask, even as Harry had seen it that day when the sun
shone brightly on the picture. But next moment it changed and melted.

"I thought you had gone," said Geoffrey. "Have you forgotten something?"

"Yes, my flute," said Mr. Francis, not looking at him; and picking it up
from where it lay on the piano, he went out again, and walked quickly up
the drive to where the dogcart was waiting.

"That was not what he came for," thought Geoffrey to himself.




CHAPTER XVI

FIRE


Harry was in the most extravagantly high spirits this morning, and at
breakfast the two laughed over the most indifferent trivialities like
schoolboys. Stories without wit and of the bluntest kind of point, rude
personal remarks, repartees of the most obvious and futile kind, were
enough to make one or other, and usually both, fit to choke with
meaningless laughter. To Geoffrey, at least, there was great and
conscious cause for a mounting spiritual barometer in the departure of
Mr. Francis. All yesterday, since he had seen him tripping up to the ice
house after Harry's escape, he had grown increasingly aware of a
creepiness of the flesh which his neighbourhood or the thought of him
produced. He had not slept well during the night, and had kept awaking
from snatches of nightmare dozing, in which sometimes Mr. Francis,
sometimes the figure of the portrait of old Francis, would be enticing
Harry on to some dim but violent doom. Now, like some infernal piper of
Hamelin, Mr. Francis would precede Harry, playing on his flute and
drawing him ever nearer to a bank of lurid cloud, out of which from time
to time leaped crooked lightning; now he would have him affectionately
by the arm, and walk with him chatting and laughing toward a little
house that stood on rising ground. The house, to the tongue-tied dreamer
who longed to warn his friend, but could not, kept changing in form: now
it would stand alone, now it would be but one in a countless row of
houses all alike, stretching to left and right, from horizon to horizon,
but whether solitary or among a hundred identical with it, he knew that
there lurked there a danger of vague and fatal kind. Sometimes it was
the beams and very stones of it that were ready to fall as soon as the
door was opened; sometimes every window of it he knew would bristle with
shooting flames as soon as Harry set foot within it; sometimes he could
see that it was in reality no house at all, but a black pit, infinite in
depth, from which rose an icy miasma. Yet, in whatever form Harry's
companion appeared, and in whatever form the house, when they were close
to it Mr. Francis would push Harry suddenly forward with an animal cry
of gratified hate, and Geoffrey would start from his dream in a sweat of
terror. Then there was another shocking point: the man who walked with
Harry was indefinite and changeable; he would start with him in the
image of Mr. Francis, and they would yet be but a stone's throw on their
walk, when it was Mr. Francis no more, but the old baron of the Holbein
picture. Sometimes, Evie's face would look out in panic terror from an
upper window, and the dreamer could see her wave her hands and hear her
scream a warnings but the two apparently could neither see nor hear her,
and drew steadily nearer that house of death.

But the sanity of the morning sun, the crisp chill of his bath, above
all, the departure of Mr. Francis, restored Geoffrey to his normal
level, and the normal once reached, the pendulum swung over to the other
side by as much as it had fallen short during these nervous terrors of
the night; and he ate with a zest and appetite more than ordinary, and a
keen and conscious relish for the day. Even at the end of this
ridiculous meal, when he had already laughed to exhaustion, a fresh
spasm suddenly seized him, and Harry paused, teacup in hand, to know the
worst.

"Oh, it is nothing," said Geoffrey; "indeed, it didn't strike me as at
all funny at the time. But as I came across the hall, there was Mr.
Francis at the door, though I had heard the dogcart start. He had come
back for something he had forgotten. Guess what it was--I only give you
one guess."

Harry's hand began to tremble and the corners of his mouth to break
down.

"His fl--flute!" he said in quivering tones.

"Right!" shouted Geoffrey. "And I wonder--oh, oh, I hurt!--I wonder
whether he will do steps round Cavendish Square to-night, playing on
it!"

Harry had begun to drink his tea a moment too soon.

They smoked a cigarette in the hall, Geoffrey eager to be off; Harry,
contrary to his habit, strangely inclined to loiter. Their talk had
veered to the more serious subject of shooting, and Harry was expressing
his old-fashioned preference for a gun with hammers to the more usual
hammerless.

"I can't think why I do prefer it," he said, "but there it is. I put a
gun at half cock instinctively if I have to jump a ditch, but I do not
feel quite at home with that little disk uncovering 'safe.' Supposing it
shouldn't be? Come along, Geoff; we'll start, as you are in such a
hurry. The men meet us at the lodge: we'll just get our guns and go!"

They went down the stone-flagged passage to the gun room, which looked
out on the box hedge. There were two guns lying on the table, and
Geoffrey, after looking at the other, took up his own.

"You're a consistent chap," he said to Harry. "After all you tell me of
your preference for hammers, you shoot apparently with a hammerless."

Harry picked up the gun and looked at it.

"Not mine," he said; "Uncle Francis's. Ah! there's mine."

Another gun with hammers was leaning nearly upright in a rough gun
stand, more like a stand for sticks, in the corner. Harry took hold of
it some halfway up the barrels, and then seemed to Geoffrey to give a
little jerk as if it had stuck. On the moment there was a loud
explosion, a horrible raking scratch was torn in the wooden panelling
of the wall, and an irregular hole opened in the ceiling. The charge
could not have missed Harry by more than three inches, but he stood
there, the smoking gun in his hand, without a tremor. Then he turned to
Geoffrey.

"The Luck is waking up," he said. "Frost yesterday--that was the ice
house; and this looks awfully like fire."

Several panes of glass in the window had been shattered by the
concussion, and Harry pointed the gun out.

"Now for the second barrel," he said, and the click of the falling
trigger was the only answer. He opened the breech, and took out the
smoking cartridge case.

"One cartridge only," he said; then, looking down the barrels, "and the
left barrel is clean. It looks rather as if the gun had been cleaned,
and a cartridge put in afterward. Odd thing to happen. Now we'll go
shooting, Geoff!"

But Geoffrey was holding on to the table, trembling violently.

"You're not hurt?" he said.

"No. I shouldn't go shooting if I were. Come, old chap, pull yourself
together: there's no harm done. I shall make inquiries about this. Don't
you say anything, Geoff. I am going to look into it thoroughly,
detective fashion."

"But--but aren't you frightened?" asked Geoffrey feebly.

"No, funnily enough, I'm not. It's the Luck: I firmly believe it's the
Luck, and the poor old devil who put the curse in it is doing things in
a thoroughly futile manner. I am ashamed of him."

"Ah, destroy the beastly thing!" cried Geoffrey. "Burn it, smash it,
chuck it away!"

"Not I. Oh, it's cheap, it's awfully cheap! A hole in the ceiling, and a
penny for the cartridge, and November coming closer."

"Do you mean to say you believe in it all?" asked Geoffrey.

"Yes, I believe in it all."

"But, good God, man! somebody put the cartridge there. Somebody told you
that the summerhouse was on the left----" and he stopped suddenly.

"Yes--Uncle Francis told me that," said Harry, "and who made him forget
which was which of the two houses? Why, the Luck, the blessed Luck!" he
cried almost exultantly.

At this all the nightmares of the last twelve hours swarmed round
Geoffrey, flapping about his head.

"And who put the cartridge in that gun?" he cried, not thinking how
direct an accusation he was making.

Harry's face grew suddenly grave; the smile was struck from it. A flash
of anger and intense surprise flamed in his eyes, and his upper lip
curled back in an ugly way. Then seeing Geoffrey holding on to the
table, still dazed and white, he recovered himself.

"Come, old boy," he said, "don't be so much upset. Yet, Geoff, you
shouldn't say that sort of thing even in jest. Have a whisky and soda
before going out; you're all shaky. Believe in the Luck, like me, and
you'll take things more calmly. Yes, I mean it; at last I really mean
it. I am the inheritor of a curse and a blessing. So I take the good
with the bad, and, oh, how much the one outweighs the other! By the way,
the painters are in the house; they must patch up the paper here, and
mend that hole in the ceiling. Shall I order a whisky for you at the
same time?"

"No; I'm all right," said Geoffrey, and he followed the other out.

Harry was at all times a good shot, to-day he verged on brilliancy.
Geoffrey, on the other hand, who as a rule was more than good, to-day
was worse than bad. His gun was a laggard; he shot behind crossing game,
below anything that was flying straight away from him; he was not
certain about the easiest shots, and he was only certain to miss the
more difficult ones. It seemed indeed that the two had divided between
them the accident in the gun room; the infinitely short moment in which
Harry had felt the hot breath of the fire, sharp and agonizing like a
pulled tooth, was his, but the reaction, the retarded fear, the
subsequent effect on nerve and brain, were entered to Geoffrey. He was
utterly unstrung by this double escape; twice during the last
twenty-four hours, in this peaceful country house, had Harry looked in
the very face of death; yesterday stepping gaily toward the lip of the
ice tank; to-day by as little a margin escaping this shattering
extinction. A foot more, a foot less--and as he thought of it, Geoffrey
bit his lip for fear of screaming--and brain and bone would have been
shredded over the gun-room floor. Accidents would happen; there had
always been accidents and there always would be, but, unlike
misfortunes, they nearly always came singly. What was this malignancy
that haunted Harry, dogging his steps? What dim figure, deadly and full
of hate, hovered on the wing by him, ready to strike? Cartridges do not
automatically find their way to guns that are cleaned and placed in the
stand, as dust collects in corners. They have to be placed there, a
human hand has to open the breech, stuff it with death, close it, and
put the gun down again. These things must inevitably happen before a gun
goes off. Who in this case did them?

They came by one o'clock to one of the prettiest pieces of rough
shooting on the ground--a long, very narrow strip of moorland country
bounded on both sides by reclaimed fields, tufted thickly with heather,
diversified by young clumps of fir and dense, low-growing bushes, and
honey-combed with rabbit burrows. It was scarcely more than sixty yards
across, but full half a mile in length, and the sport it afforded was
most varied and unconjecturable. On warm days partridges would be here,
covey after covey, sunning in the sandy little hollows bare of growth,
or busy among the heather, and from the thickness of the cover and the
undulations of the ground, a big covey would seldom take the air
together, but rise one by one, or in couples, without general alarm
being given, to right or left of the guns, or even behind them, so close
had the birds lain in the long grasses. Here and there attempts had at
one time been made to bring the land into cultivation, and as you
tramped through heather, you would suddenly come on a vague-edged square
of potato-planting, the vegetable run riot with great wealth of thick
leaf; or a strip of corn already half wild, and with a predominant
ingredient of tares, would make you go slowly on the certainty of the
break of brown wings, or the delayed and head-down scurry of a hare.

To those happily old-fashioned enough to care for the sober joys of
walking up, it was the very poetry of sport, but to-day it appeared to
Geoffrey a barren and unprofitable place. For the last hour the
questions that tormented him had been volleying even more insistently;
horrible doubts and suspicions, no longer quite vague, flocked round his
head like a flight of unclean birds, and he desired one thing only--to
get to the gun room alone and clear up a certain point.

They had to walk over a bare and depopulated stubble to get to this
delectable ground, and Harry, as they neared it, looked first at
Geoffrey's lacklustre face, then at his watch.

"I had no idea it was so late, Geoff," he said; "I think we'll take the
rough after lunch. We're only half a mile from the house, and you look
as if lunch would do you good."

He took the cartridges carefully out of his gun.

"No mistake this time," he said. "We'll start over the rough at
two--Kimber, meet us here. Oh, by the way, come up to the house; I want
to ask you something."

Geoffrey gave up his gun with a sigh of relief.

"Yes; let's do that piece afterward," he said; "I can't hit a sitting
haystack this morning, Harry."

"There's one; have a shot at it," said Harry. "O Geoff, don't look so
awful! What has happened? There is a hole in the gun-room ceiling. You
didn't do it, and I'm not going to send the bill to you."

"But aren't you frightened?" asked Geoffrey. "Are you made of flesh and
blood?"

"I believe so. But haven't you ever had a shave of being shot? I'll bet
you didn't give it a thought half an hour afterward."

"I know; but it's more cold-blooded indoors, happening the way it did.
And coming on the top of your ice-house affair yesterday!"

"It's the Luck!" cried Harry; "that's the explanation of it, and it's
proved to the hilt. Fire and frost: they are done; scratch them out; and
now there remains the rain. I'm afraid we shall not get the rain to-day,
though. If one has to go through a thing--and I certainly have--it is
better to get it over quick, as I, to do me justice, am getting it
over. And, O Geoff, there's a good time coming!"

Harry had to see the foreman who was in charge of the electric light, as
well as the keeper, when he got in, and Geoffrey, after seeing him go
upstairs, went quickly through the baize door at the end of the passage
from the hall, and down to the gun room. He wanted to find out what had
caused Harry to give a jerk to the gun when he took it up. He had
consciously seen him, the moment before it went off, put his hand to
lift it out of the stand, then give an additional effort, as if it had
stuck. All the morning he had been wondering about that. The obstacle,
whatever it was, must, he felt certain, have been in connection with the
trigger, for it was that jerk which had caused the gun to go off.

The men had already been at work over the damage, but they had gone to
their dinner, and the room was empty. He went to the rack where the gun
had stood, and next moment he gave a sudden little gasp, though not of
surprise, for he had found only what he expected he should find, or
something like it. Round the post at the corner of the rack was tied a
piece of cotton. Two ends, each some six inches long, came out from it;
the extremities were ragged, as if the piece had been broken.

Another gun with hammers stood in a glazed cupboard at one side of the
room; Geoffrey took it out, and leaned it in the rack as nearly as
possible in the position in which he remembered Harry's gun to have
stood. Then kneeling down, he stretched the two broken ends of cotton in
its direction. They just went round the right trigger.

He had a momentary impulse to call Harry and show him this, but decided
not to. Harry, as he had said, was going to investigate the mysterious
presence of a cartridge in a cleaned gun, and if he could trace how it
got there, then would be the time to throw on this fresh evidence. Till
then it was far better that he should not know, for at present he was
inclined to treat the affair as an accident, due no doubt to some gross
negligence, but nothing worse. This matter of the looped cotton,
however, gave a far more sinister aspect to the affair, and the
knowledge that there was foul work here was a burden that could be
spared him at any rate till further light was cast. So, very carefully
he unknotted the cotton from the post of the rack and put it in his
pocket. The knot, he noticed, was the ordinary reef so familiar to the
fly-fisher.

Somehow the certainty of what he had feared and suspected, even though
the worst of his suspicions was confirmed, served to steady him. He knew
now exactly what was to be faced--a deliberate and very cunningly
devised attempt on Harry's life. Look at it which way you would, this
could not conceivably be an accident. Taken alone, the presence of a
cartridge in a cleaned gun had been a difficult mouthful even for an
imagination in favour of accident to swallow; taken in conjunction with
the piece of looped cotton, it could not be tackled.

He went over all the circumstances slowly and carefully, as he put the
piece of cotton in his cigarette case. There had been two guns on the
table--his, and, as it turned out, not Harry's, but Mr. Francis's.
Harry's gun, loaded, a trap of nearly certain death to any one who took
it up, was leaning in the gun rack. Here were the thoughts of the brain
which had contrived these things.

The bell for lunch made him hurry out of the room, and in the hall he
found Harry.

"Our reporter has been visiting the scene of the dastardly attempt," he
said; "something spicy for the evening papers, Geoff? Oh, by the way, I
asked Kimber what he could tell me about that gun of mine. He could tell
me a lot. Come in to lunch."

"And what could he tell you?" asked Geoffrey.

Harry looked at the servants a moment.

"Later," he said. "Oh, how I bless the man who invented lunch! Do you
remember saying to me once that little things like baths and tea were
much more important than anything else?"

"Yes, and you called me a sensuous voluptuary," said Geoffrey.

"I believe I did. So you are. So am I."

The sensuous voluptuaries went out again as soon as lunch was over, to
shoot the rough, and as they walked Harry told his friend what he had
learned from the keeper.

"I asked him first," he said "(without telling him what had happened),
who put those two guns, yours and my uncle's, on the table, and he
didn't know. He had come in early to get cartridges and put the guns
out, and found them there. So he took the cartridges and went. Now,
until this morning, I haven't shot here since last February, and I
didn't take the gun that behaved so--so prematurely to-day, to Scotland.
So I asked whether any one had used it since I went away, and it
appeared that Uncle Francis had several times, for his own gun, the
hammerless one which we found on the table, had gone to the maker's to
have a rust hole taken out. Do you follow?"

"Perfectly."

"Well, two days ago, the day we came down here, Kimber was feeding the
pheasants, and he heard a shot near at hand, and a moment afterward a
wounded hare ran across the clearing, followed immediately by Uncle
Francis. He was almost crying, said Kimber: do you remember how he
wounded a hare last Christmas, and was out for an hour trying to recover
it? Well, the same thing had happened, and it was his first shot,
remember that; Kimber was certain there had been only one. But this time
the hare had run into thick cover, and there was really no chance of
getting it, for it had been hit, Kimber saw, only in one leg. Now
attend, Geoff, very closely; it's quite a detective story. As they stood
there, Kimber saw Uncle Francis take the discharged cartridge case out
of the right barrel and slip the unused cartridge from the left into it.
Now that bears all the stamp of truth on it. I have seen Uncle Francis
do just that a dozen times, when he had killed with his first barrel,
and does not immediately expect another shot. To continue. Then he drew
another cartridge from his pocket, but suddenly said, 'I can shoot no
more with that poor wounded thing unfound.' And he snapped the breech
to, and went home. Now do you see?"

"But didn't Kimber clean the gun afterward?"

"No," said Harry. "Uncle Francis's man always cleans his gun, and he
probably, seeing him return to the house almost immediately after he had
set out, and go into the garden, naturally thought that he had decided
not to shoot, and did not clean the gun. That is why the second barrel
was clean; no shot had been fired from it, and Uncle Francis simply
forgot that he had left one cartridge in. The whole thing hangs
completely together. Then came I, picked up the gun quickly, no doubt
hitting the trigger against something, and there is a hole in the
ceiling."

Once again Geoffrey thought of the looped cotton, and once again decided
not to tell Harry. There was no use, at present, especially since Mr.
Francis was not here, in giving him so sinister a piece of information.

"That certainly clears up a lot," he said, conscious of the
deadly-double meaning of his words.

"It clears it all up," said Harry, "and I'll tell you now that I felt
horribly uncomfortable about it all morning, though I was not
frightened. Of course it was awfully careless of Uncle Francis to leave
that cartridge in, and awfully careless of his man not to look to the
gun. He thought Uncle Francis had not been shooting, for he must have
returned to the house not more than a quarter of an hour after he set
out, but he would have saved some lath and plaster if he had made sure.
Here we are. Now for the rough!"

Mr. Francis, Geoffrey now believed beyond doubt, in his secret mind, was
no less accountable for this gun-room explosion than for the mistake
about the ice house; and Harry's story, proof to the other of his direct
hand, was in a way a relief to him. All the morning he had feared and
dreaded indications of a second hand, of a gamekeeper privy to the deed,
of a servant suborned, and in particular his fancy had fixed on that
dark man of Mr. Francis's, him with the foxlike face and tread of a cat.
About him there was something secret and stealthy, so said his
imagination, heated by the horrid occurrences of these two days; yet his
secrecy and stealth were less abominable than the smiles of his master,
his sunny cheerfulness, his playings on the flute. So lately as this
morning Geoffrey had laughed when he thought of that flute; flutes in
connection with white hairs and old age had seemed to him amusing,
ridiculous. But now the memory of his own merriment amazed him; no tears
were bitter enough for the contemplation of this deadliness of hypocrisy
and hate; and he thought of the Italian airs and the tripping step of
the performer with a bewilderment of horror. He had not known how
finished an article could be turned out of the workshops of Satan.

But at this the full relief occasioned by Mr. Francis's absence came
upon him with a great taste of sweetness. True, this last attempt had
been made when the old man was not actually in the house; but so long as
he was away, Geoffrey did not fear another trap. It would not be like a
man of that infernal cunning to leave lying about, as it were, a series
of nooses into which any one might step; his desire would not so far
outstrip his prudence. It had been by the merest chance that Geoffrey
had noticed that slight check to the lifting of the gun from the rack,
by the merest chance that he had found the looped cotton; but apart from
this, had either attempt succeeded, no evidence of any kind to implicate
anybody would have remained. And not the least of his cunning was shown
in the way that he took advantage of Harry's credulity in the power of
the Luck. By frost and by fire he had schemed his death, and Geoffrey
would have laid odds that if either by the arrow by day or the terror by
night Harry's life again stood in jeopardy, in some manner, vague
perhaps, but simple to trace, rain would be the agent. Here, then, he
told himself was a clew of a kind. To guard against rain, it is true,
was a vast and ill-defined project, for such an agency might be held to
include many forms of death, from drowning to pneumonia, but it was, he
felt sure, through the supposed potencies of the Luck that Mr. Francis
was striking.

They spent a most rewarding hour that afternoon over the rough, and the
evening passed, as is the privilege of shooters, in lazy, dozing
content. One game of billiards had been succeeded by a nominal reading
of the evening papers, and Harry had gone upstairs to bed at eleven,
yawning fit to wrench off a jaw not firmly muscle-knit, but Geoffrey, on
the excuse of being too comfortable in his big chair to move just yet,
had sat on in the hall, not ill pleased to be alone, for he had many
things to ponder, and he had not yet made up his mind what he ought to
do. Conclusive as the evidence seemed to him, Harry, he well knew, would
not possibly listen to it; to tell Harry what he believed, meant simply
that he left the house. Something far more conclusive must occur before
he told Harry, and Geoffrey prayed silently that nothing more conclusive
should ever be on foot: he was quite satisfied with the demonstration as
it stood. And he curled himself more closely in his chair and began to
think.

What, after all, if this series of events was due to the Luck?
Certainly, immediately after its finding, three accidents, by fire and
frost and rain, had happened to Harry, for none of which could Mr.
Francis be held remotely responsible. What if, now, these more serious
accidents were to be referred to the same agency? Geoffrey found himself
smiling at the absurdity of the thought, yet he still continued to
consider it. He did not believe it, so he told himself; his reasonable
mind entirely rejected the possibility that a thing inanimate, the work
of men's hands, be it made of wood and stone, or gold and precious
stones, could control destiny. It mattered not, as far as the Luck was
concerned, how one thought of destiny: it was the laws of Nature, if you
will, unalterable, of an inexorable logic, or, to refer the matter one
step back, it was the will of God, who had set these natural laws at
work. Yet were not the sins of the fathers visited on the children? Was
it not possible, though ever so dimly and unconjecturably, that some
subtle law of this hereditary kind governed the destinies of the Vails,
and that without supposing that a cup of gold could be responsible for
danger, sudden death, and, on the other hand, for the meting out of
great happiness and prosperity, yet that the belief in some man's mind
as he watched the chasing of the legend on that plaque of gold was true?
He had observed, let us suppose, and correctly observed, some tide in
the affairs of the Vails; he had embodied it allegorically in that rhyme
on the cup, and the allegory was true, because that which it illustrated
was true.

Indeed, he had put his allegory into a form extraordinarily vivid.
Night after night the gorgeous goblet had stood before the diners in the
light of the candles, and night after night it had seemed to grow more
and more alive. What if some occult force lurked there? if some
unsleeping presence dwelt in those diamonds? From immemorial time men
had believed that certain powers and qualities dwelt in precious stones.
There was danger in opals, and warning; they turned stale and dim in the
presence of an enemy, and no opal, he remarked, was set in bowl or
handle or foot of the cup. Else--here his thought was confused, for the
Luck was the potency--it might have sickened and paled when Mr. Francis
ate his dinner near it. The amethyst drove away the fumes of wine; in
diamonds there was sovereignty; sapphires conferred judgment deep and
clear as themselves on their possessor. What if there was truth, however
small a residuum, in these tales, and how might the potency of the
stones be increased if they were put in their appointed settings with a
blessing and a curse?

He sat up in his chair, conscious that he had been half dozing, for the
chime of a clock lingered on the vibrating air, yet he had not heard the
hour strike, and, still sleepy, he leaned back again with a strong
determination to go to bed instantly. Suddenly and without cause, so far
as he knew, he became broad and staring awake; his eye might
unconsciously have seen something, or his ear unconsciously heard a
movement, yet not have forwarded it in full to the brain. But every
sense told him that he was not alone.

He sat up hurriedly and looked around. Peering cautiously into the room,
round the door leading to the stairs, and barely visible in the shadow,
was the face of Mr. Francis.




CHAPTER XVII

A BIRD OF NIGHT


For a moment neither spoke.

"Dear boy, how late you sit up!" said Mr. Francis, coming into the room;
"it has already struck one. You were asleep, I think, when I came in,
and I was unwilling to awake you. But now tell me, is Harry all right?"

Geoffrey by this time had every sense alert: he felt perfectly cool and
collected, and saw his policy stretching away in front of him like a
level, well-defined road.

"Yes, Harry, by a miracle almost, is alive and unhurt," he said.

"Ah! I knew it, I knew it," said Mr. Francis below his breath.

Geoffrey paused a moment.

"You knew what?" he asked very deliberately.

"I knew he had been in great danger," said the other; "I had the
strongest premonition of it. You remember seeing me this morning come
back after I had started? I came back to warn Harry. Yet how absurd he
would think it! I was deliberating about that when you saw me at the
door, and wondering what I could say to him. Then I told myself it was
a ridiculous fancy of mine, which would pass off. But all day it has
clung to me; do what I would, I could not shake it off; and this evening
I came down here to see if all was well. You spoke of Harry having been
in great danger. Tell me what happened, my dear boy."

"He nearly shot himself in the gun room this morning," said Geoffrey.
"He took up his gun, which was standing in a rack close to the window,
and it went off, narrowly missing him!"

"But it missed him completely?" asked Mr. Francis. "He was not touched?"

"If he had been touched he would not be alive," said Geoffrey, lighting
a cigarette, and looking at Mr. Francis very intently. "The velocity of
shot at such very short range is considerable."

Mr. Francis made a very slight movement in his chair, more of a tremor
than a voluntary motion.

"Terrible, terrible!" he said. "What awful fate is it that dogs poor
Harry?"

Geoffrey paused with mouth half open, a little wreath of smoke curling
from the corner of it.

"In what other way has an awful fate dogged Harry?" he asked.

Mr. Francis replied almost immediately.

"Those three accidents he had last spring," he said. "How strange they
were! They quite unnerved me."

"He was thinking of the ice house," said Geoffrey to himself with
absolute certainty. "That was a mistake." Then, aloud. "They were not so
very serious," he said.

"No, but uncomfortable. And then to-day!"

"Yesterday, you mean," said Geoffrey, trying to trap him.

Mr. Francis looked up inquiringly.

"True, yesterday. How exact you are, my dear fellow! I had forgotten
that it was, as the Irish say, to-morrow already. But how awful, how
awful! That was what my strange premonition meant."

"It is odd that your premonition should have lasted all day," said
Geoffrey, "when the danger was over by half past ten this morning."

For half a second Mr. Francis's face altered. The perturbed, anxious
look which he had worn throughout the interview gave place, though but
for a moment, to a trouble of a different type. Annoyance, you would
have said, became more poignant than his anxiety.

"Yes; the whole feeling I had was unaccountable," he said. "But poor
Harry! What an awful moment for the dear lad! But how could a cartridge
have been in the gun? What frightful carelessness on Kimber's part! He
can not have cleaned it after Harry used it last."

Again Geoffrey paused with his mouth slightly open. Mr. Francis, he
considered, was on dangerous ground.

"That was in February," he said; "eight months ago. I can not imagine,
somehow, the cartridge being there all this time."

"He was shooting in Scotland, was he not?" asked Mr. Francis.

"Yes; but a man would not carry a loaded gun in the parcel rack," said
Geoffrey. "It is more usual for a gun to be taken to bits, and put in
its case when one goes by train. Besides, as a matter of fact, Harry
didn't take that gun to Scotland. There are other circumstances as well
which lead me, at any rate, to a different conclusion--a different way
of accounting for the accident," he corrected himself.

"What circumstances?" asked Mr. Francis. "Do get on, my dear boy: I am
in dreadful anxiety to learn all about this awful thing. Oh, thank God,
there was no harm done!"

Before the words were out of his mouth Geoffrey, who for the moment had
hesitated what to tell him, made up his mind. He stifled a yawn, and
splashed some whisky and soda into his glass.

"Oh, various circumstances," he said in a slow, well-balanced tone of
indifference, as if the subject were wearisome. "One, of course, must be
well known to you. You had used Harry's gun yourself two days ago--the
day we came down here. You wounded a hare, do you not remember, close to
the pheasant feed, and returned home after firing only one shot? You
also, unconsciously no doubt, transferred the second cartridge from the
left barrel to the right. You will hardly remember that? But it
explains, at least, why the left barrel was clean. Then your idle
rascal of a man, who I am told always cleans your gun, omitted to do it,
and there remained a cartridge in it. That, at least, is how Harry and I
put the thing together!"

Mr. Francis's hands went suddenly to his head, as if they had been on
wires, and he clutched despairingly at his hair.

"It is true--it is all too true!" he moaned. "I did use Harry's gun. I
did fire one shot only two days ago. Can I have left the other cartridge
in? It is possible, it is terribly possible. Ah, my God! what an awful
punishment for a little piece of carelessness! Ah, what a lesson, what a
lesson! Supposing he had shot himself--oh! supposing----"

Geoffrey watched him for some few moments in silence, as he rocked
himself backward and forward in his chair.

"Well, well," he said at length, "there is no harm done. A few
shillings' worth of lath and plaster will pay for the damage; oh, yes,
and an extra penny for the cartridge, as Harry said. But it nearly
filled the bag and something more at one shot, like Mr. Winkle."

This very cold and unsympathetic consolation had an astonishing effect
on Mr. Francis. His rockings ceased, his hands left his head, and by
degrees his face again assumed a sad smile.

"Dear lad," he said, "you have such invaluable common sense! There is
certainly no use in crying over milk which is not spilt. What you said
was like a douche of cold water over an aching head; yes, and an aching
heart. But, tell me, is Harry very angry with me? Does he blame me, as
he has every right to do, very severely?"

"No, he is inclined to laugh at the whole thing," said Geoffrey. "He
knows, of course, what a simple and in a way a natural accident it all
was. He is no more angry than he was yesterday, when----" and he stopped
suddenly, remembering his promise to Harry not to tell Mr. Francis of
the ice-house occurrence. But dearly would he have liked to have broken
his word.

Again a remarkable change took place in Mr. Francis's face; and
Geoffrey, even in the middle of this midnight fencing match, thought
what a marvellous quick-change artist he would have made if only he had
decided to devote his undeniable talents to that innocuous branch of
art. His smile was not: a frightened man sat there, moving his lips as
if his mouth were dry.

"Yesterday--what of yesterday?" he asked.

"Nothing," said the other shortly. "I, like yourself just now, had
forgotten that it was already to-morrow. Do you know, I am very sleepy?"

This was not ill done, for Mr. Francis could scarcely refuse to accept
an excuse which he had himself offered, and Geoffrey could scarcely
prevent smiling. But as soon as Mr. Francis spoke again, he was again
absolutely intent on their conversation.

"It is too bad to keep you up," said he, "but positively you must tell
me more about this dreadful accident. What else, what else?"

"There is nothing more--to tell," said Geoffrey, pausing designedly, for
his immediate object was now to thoroughly frighten Mr. Francis, and he
meant to do it slowly and firmly. "What more, indeed, could there be? It
was over in a moment. Partly, I am afraid, by your fault, partly by your
man's, a cartridge was left in Harry's gun. Oh! by the way, since you
are anxious for minuti, there is one more tiny point that might
conceivably interest you. There seemed to me--I happened to be looking
at Harry--some slight resistance somewhere when he took the gun up. He
took hold of it, you understand, and then gave it a jerk. It has
occurred to me, very forcibly in fact, that this resistance, whatever it
was, was the cause of the gun going off."

"The trigger perhaps caught in the edge of the carpet," suggested Mr.
Francis.

"I don't think so," said Geoffrey carelessly.

"Well, something of the kind," said Mr. Francis. "Or, again, it may have
been pure imagination on your part."

"I don't think that either," said Geoffrey. "A gun even when loaded and
at full cock, as this one must have been, does not naturally go off when
handled. Besides, I found, when I examined the place----" He stopped
suddenly, and looked up at Mr. Francis. Quick as a lizard, fear
unmistakable and shaking leaped there for a moment, and was as quickly
gone.

"You found--?" he asked, under his breath.

"Ah! you remind me: I found a little thing, a very little thing, which
may, however, turn out to be important. Oh, it is ridiculous! I can not
really tell you. I will keep it to myself, please."

"Really, my dear Geoffrey," said Mr. Francis, "you tell a story, and
stop when you come to the point."

"I know," said Geoffrey, "and I apologize. Anyhow, I have made a
scrupulous examination of the place, and have taken note of a small
circumstance. Again I apologize."

Suddenly this nocturnal visit began to show in a different light in
Geoffrey's mind. Mr. Francis had come here, it is true, at an hour when
he might reasonably expect the house to be in bed, but it was still
unlikely that he had taken this trouble, and run even so small a risk of
detection, simply to learn the result of the morning's accident. What if
he had come here for something more reasonable--to destroy, perhaps,
some little piece of evidence, the evidence it might be which lay even
now in Geoffrey's cigarette case?

"Of course I will not press you, my dear Geoffrey," he replied. "But
consider whether it would not be better to tell me."

Geoffrey paused, this time because he really wanted to think.

"Why?" he said at length. "Either this occurrence was pure accident, or
it was a foul attempt on Harry's life. Yes, that sounds horrible, does
it not? But certainly it was either the one or the other. Now,
carelessness seems to account very largely for it. You left a cartridge
in the gun, your servant did not clean it. But supposing one had reason
to think that there was foul play, I should take this evidence to the
police; and you may be sure, at whatever cost to Harry's feelings, and
of course yours, at making the affair public, I will do so at once, the
moment I can form, or that I think they can form, a conclusive series of
evidence."

He got up on these words and turned to light a bedroom candle.

"Well, good-night," he said; "we shall see you at breakfast."

"No, my dear boy, you will not," said Mr. Francis; "and, Geoffrey, you
must not tell Harry I have been here. I am almost ashamed of my
foolishness in coming, but that presentiment of evil, which was so
strong in me all day, drove me. No, I shall be gone again, before any
one is stirring, and breakfasting in town while you lazy fellows are
still dressing, I dare say."

Geoffrey thought a moment.

"As you will," he said. "By the way, how did you get in?"

"I got in by the front door," said Mr. Francis. "It was left unlocked;
very careless of the servants."

"Very, indeed. Did you lock it?"

"Yes, and I was just stealing upstairs when you awoke. I had meant to
go very quietly to Harry's room, and just look at the dear lad, to
satisfy myself he was all right. If I had not had the good fortune to
find the door open, I should have passed the night in the summerhouse,
and just seen that all was well in the morning. I hope Harry will speak
to Templeton about the door."

"But how will Harry know, unless he knows of your coming?"

"Ah!" Mr. Francis paused a moment. "I will leave it unlocked; indeed I
must, when I go out. You can then call his attention to it. Good-night,
my dear boy; I shall go to my room too. I will sleep on the sofa very
comfortably."

Geoffrey turned into his room with slow and sleepy steps, shut the door
and locked it. Then he undressed very quickly, and over his nightshirt
put on a dark coat. He was too full of this appearance of Mr. Francis,
and of wonder what it really meant, to waste time in mere idle
contemplation of it, and he sat on his bed, following out end after end
of tangled conjecture.

Harry's safety during the hours which had to pass before morning was his
first thought, but that he speedily dismissed. "I have frightened the
old man," he said to himself with strong satisfaction. "I have made him
tremble in his wicked shoes. No, he dare do nothing to-night. There is a
witness that he is here, that he arrived secretly after dark, and left
before morning. No, Harry is all safe for to-night, but I am glad I
woke."

Geoffrey lay back on his bed, keenly interested in what lay before him,
but astounded by the possibly imminent issues. Hitherto his life had
always run very easily, a pleasant, light business; but now suddenly
there were thrust into his young and inexperienced hands the red reins
of life and death, reins that governed or governed not horses that he
could but indistinctly guess at. But the reins were in his hands; it was
his business, and now, to steer as well as he could between God knew
what devils and deep seas. A thousand directions were open to him; in
all but one, as far as he could forecast the future, lay disaster. A
solution and a rescue he felt there must be, but in what direction did
it lie? To go now to Harry's room, what risk was there, what fear of
eyes behind curtains; and once there, what sort of reception would he
meet? Harry had gone to bed nearly three hours ago, and must he be
plucked from his sleep to hear this wild tale--a tale so full of
conjecture, so scant in certainties? And if he heard it, what, to judge
by Geoffrey's previous knowledge of him, his only guide in this lonely
hour, would be his manner of taking it? One only, he knew it well:
bewildered surprise and scorn that one whom he had accounted friend
should bring him so monstrous a tale. That he must certainly expect,
indignant speech, or silence even more indignant, and a rupture that
could not easily be healed. No, to go to Harry now would in all
probability mean to sever himself from him, and this in the hour of dark
need and danger.

Geoffrey got up from where he was lying and walked silently with bare
feet up and down the room. Then he stripped off coat and nightshirt, and
sluiced head and neck with cold water. He felt awake enough, but stupid
from sheer perplexity, and he was determined to give his faculties, such
as they were, every opportunity for lively and wise decision. There had
been, for instance, some train of instinctive thought in his mind when
he had shut the door, but dressed himself for possible action. His brain
had told him that he did not mean to go to bed yet; had it not told him
something more? His action in putting on dark coverings had been perhaps
involuntary; it was his business now to account for it.

Ah! the door by which Mr. Francis had entered--that was it. He did not
believe that he had come in, as he said, by the front door, for the
noise of its opening and shutting--the noise, too, of the lock which he
said he had turned after he had come in--must have awoke him from a
sleep that had never quite become unconsciousness. A clock had struck,
it is true, the moment before he was completely roused, and he had not
heard it; but how often, he reflected, do one's ears hear the clock
strike, yet never convey the message to the brain! It was far more
likely that the slight stir of movement made by Mr. Francis as he peeped
round the inner door leading to the staircase had awoke him. How, then,
was it possible that he should have opened, shut, and locked the heavy
front door, have crossed the hall, and yet never have broken in upon his
doze? Besides, the face that looked at him was that of a man peeping
into a room, not of one leaving it. It seemed then very likely that Mr.
Francis had not entered by the front door; it was also hardly possible
that it should not have been locked at nightfall by the servant who put
up the shutters.

Then another difficulty occurred. Since Mr. Francis had by his own
account locked the front door when he came in, it would be locked now.
But he intended to leave the house before the servants were up, and
would unlock it then, leaving it unlocked when he left. On the other
hand, supposing that Geoffrey's suspicions were correct, and he had not
come in by the front door, nor intended to leave the house that way, he
would certainly unlock it before any one was about in the morning. This,
then, was the first point: Would Mr. Francis unlock the front door
before morning, and would he leave the house that way? If not, how had
he got in, and how would he get out? It was likely also, more than
likely, that if Geoffrey's darker suspicions were well founded, Mr.
Francis would pay a visit to the gun room, for there was no question
that "the little circumstance" which he had hinted at had been of more
than common interest to the other.

At this moment, in his soft pacings and thoughts, there came a little
gentle tap at his door. He stood exactly where he was, frozen to
immobility, a step half taken, in his hand the towel with which he had
been mopping his hair. A second or two later the tap was repeated, very
softly.

Geoffrey was in two minds what to do. It was possible that this
small-hour intruder was Harry, some nameless terror at his heart; it was
possible, again, that Mr. Francis was outside, ascertaining whether he
was asleep, with some specious excuse on his lips in case he was awake.
But if it was Harry, whatever he needed, some louder and more urgent
summons was sure to follow--a rattling of his door handle, his own name
called. But after the second tap there was silence.

Geoffrey knew how long a waiting minute seems to the watcher, and
deliberately he looked at the hands of the clock on his mantelpiece till
two full minutes had passed. Then he slipped on his coat again, little
runnels of water still streaming from the short hair above the neck, put
the matches in his pocket, blew out his candle, and with one turn of
each hand held his door unlatched and unlocked. The wards were well
oiled, the noise less than a scratching mouse, and he stood on the rug
of the threshold warm and curly to his bare feet. Next moment he had
closed the door behind him, though without latching it, and was in the
long, dark corridor running from the top of the main stairs by the hall
to the far end of the house where were Mr. Francis's two rooms.

Geoffrey's bedroom was close to the head of the stairs, and the faint
glimmer of the starry night filtering through the skylight by which they
were lit made it easily possible to find his way down. These stairs lay
in short flights, with many angles sufficiently luminous, but on
getting to the first corner he stopped suddenly, for on the wall in
front of him was a pattern of strong light and shade: the many-knobbed
banister was imprinted there, cast by a candle. But in a moment the
shadow began to march from left to right; the light therefore was moving
from right to left; some one else, and well he knew who, was also going
downstairs at this dead hour, three turns of the staircase ahead of him.
Silently moved the shadow; no sound of the candle-bearer reached him,
and he might reasonably hope that his own barefooted step was as
inaudible to the night-walker as the night-walker to him. Then the
shadow of the banister was suddenly turned off, another corner had been
passed by the other stealthy tread, and Geoffrey moved on again and
down.

This staircase at its lower end gave on to a corridor parallel and
similar to the one upstairs from which the row of bedrooms opened.
Immediately on the right was the door into the hall, round which, but an
hour ago, Mr. Francis's face had peered; to the left were drawing-room
and dining room, and at the far end the baize door leading into the
flagged passage to the gun room. Two panes of glass formed the upper
panels of this door, and Geoffrey, having reached the bottom of the
stairs, saw two squares of light cast through these on to the ceiling of
the corridor. They lengthened to oblongs, diminished again to vanishing
point, and disappeared, leaving him once more in the dim filter of
starlight. Mr. Francis, it was clear, had gone to the gun room. Here was
the first point.

Opposite the foot of the stairs, but on the other side of this corridor,
stood a tall verd-antique pedestal, on the top of which was a bust of
Harry's father. A dark curtain hung behind this, setting off the
whiteness of the Carrara bust, and Geoffrey was just considering the
value of this curtain as a hiding place in case Mr. Francis (the other
point) went through the hall for any purpose of juggling with the front
door, when the square of light through the glass panels again
reappeared, silent as a dream, but growing very rapidly brighter. In two
steps he was across the corridor, but he had not yet got behind the
curtain when the baize door opened again, and Mr. Francis reappeared.
But now his step was quick and careless of noise, and Geoffrey, casting
one glance at him before he stepped behind the curtain, saw rage and
hunted fear in his face. And at that the thrill of the tracker awoke in
him, and he hugged himself to think of the little piece of cotton in his
cigarette case; its value, to judge by the baffled hate that came up the
passage, was immeasurably increased. Then he slid behind the curtain.

The steps came nearer very quickly, muffled but audible, and paused
opposite Geoffrey's hiding place. Then for a moment his heart stood
still, for they turned not toward the hall, but pattered swiftly
upstairs. He had thought Harry safe for the night, at any rate, but
what could be safe from that mask of rage and hatred he had just seen?

In another moment he would have followed at all costs, when light again
shone round the corner of his curtain, and the unseen steps passed where
he stood and into the hall. Instantly Geoffrey slipped from his hiding
place, stepped silently across the corridor, and mounted a few stairs.
From there he could see Mr. Francis's movements in the hall; from there
also he had a good start of him to the upper floor again. The snap of a
lock, the grating jar of a bolt, drawn or withdrawn, followed, and
having heard that he waited no more, but went swiftly up again to his
room and closed the door behind him quickly but with elaborate
noiselessness. Soon light footsteps came along the passage outside; they
went by his door, by Harry's, and grew fainter. The closing of a distant
latch was just audible, then all was darkness and silence. The first
part of the night's work was over.

Geoffrey lit his candle again, smiling with a certain grimness to
himself. His next move, evolved during this last half hour of waiting
and listening, had a simple ingenuity about it which pleased him. It
meant another journey to the hall, after a precautionary pause, and the
only apparatus required was a little piece of stamp paper. So at the end
of a quarter of an hour he went downstairs again and examined the front
door. Bolt and lock were undrawn: Mr. Francis's visit, then, had been
to undo them, so that they should be found unlocked in the morning. This
was on all fours with his private theory, and after a little
consideration he secured the door again, partly for the safety of the
house, partly for the sake of giving Mr. Francis something to think
about, if he did leave the house that way. Then, standing on a chair and
reaching up to his full height, he stuck the piece of stamp paper across
the meeting of the door and jamb. Thus no one could open it without
tearing the paper.

One thing more remained, and that for the sake of his own peace of mind.
At risk of waking him he went to Harry's room and looked in. Harry was
lying on his side fast asleep, and, shading his candle, Geoffrey waited
till he heard two evenly-taken breaths. So far, then, all was well.

He slept but lightly and in broken snatches after the excitements of
these hours, and it required no great deed of violence on his
inclinations to enable him to get up early. In the cool, accustomed
daylight the things of the night seemed to have more of the texture of
dream than reality, but proof of them awaited him when he went to the
front door, for the little piece of stamp paper was whole and unbroken,
the door still locked and bolted. Then, to make doubly sure of the
reliability of his experiment, he himself undid the door and opened it,
and the stamp paper was torn in half. It was not by this exit, then,
that Mr. Francis had left the house.

Harry made his appearance at an hour not unusually late, with a
perfectly normal face and manner; no sound of last night's excursions
had reached him. They talked in their usual desultory fashion, but
Geoffrey's mind was preoccupied with the yet unsolved problem. He felt
certain that Mr. Francis had some secret way in and out of the house,
and it should be the next piece of business to discover what that was.
Had he come in by some back door, or through an unbolted window, he
would have told him so last night; but he had said he came through the
front door, a thing impossible. But the subject of a secret door was
easy to approach.

"I'm working all the morning, Geoff," said Harry; "what will you do with
yourself? Poke and potter with a gun, if you like. We'll ride this
afternoon."

"I'll poke and potter," said he, "but without a gun, I think. I feel
yew-hedgy this morning."

"I thought you did," said Harry cordially, "but I have no idea what you
mean."

"That is just a little slow of you," said Geoffrey. "It means that I
shall look behind tapestry and tap panelling, and find a secret
staircase."

"Do. I'll give you a shilling for every secret stair you find."

"Done. Anything extra for a secret door?"

"Door is two," said Harry; "concealed will be ten, skeleton fifteen;
Other objects will be valued by arbitration. Baron von Vail has kindly
consented to be arbitrator," he added, in a burst of futility.

"Fifteen is a little too low for a skeleton," said Geoffrey. "It would
fetch more than that at a medical shop."

"Well, twenty, if you like, but you don't raise me again. Well, I'm
off."

"Where to?"

"To work, you lazy cow."

"Yes, but where?"

"Smoking room. If you want to do any panel-knocking there, come and do
it at once. What a baby you are!"

Geoffrey rose.

"The search is going to be exhaustive," he said. "I'll begin with the
smoking room."

There ensued a couple of dusty and hope-deferred hours. From the smoking
room, which yielded no results at all, he went to Mr. Francis's rooms,
which he had fixed upon as being the most likely place for the
conjectured passage to communicate with, but the strictest scrutiny of
the panelling revealed nothing. He tapped every foot of it, and every
foot sounded promisingly hollow, yet nothing of any sort could he
discover which should yield him even a sixpence. There were cupboards of
the most alluring probability; all wore the aspect of concealment, yet
all declined to yield their secret.

Geoffrey had never been in this room before, and after a fruitless
search he took a look round before leaving it. Orderly and industrious
were the indications of its master; docketed papers lay neatly in little
heaps, and the appurtenances of its stationery were finished and
complete. Each set of papers had its elastic band, each its note of
contents in red ink; two sets of penholders lay in separate trays, and
the examination of the nibs showed that Mr. Francis was of that rare
type of man who dedicated without violation certain pens to black ink,
certain others to red. The pencils were all well sharpened, ink eraser
was there as well as India rubber, and a taper of green wax was ready
for the sealing of important envelopes. All this had a curdling
fascination for Geoffrey, but at present he was on the hunt for
shillings, and a detailed examination of a writing table brought him no
nearer them.

The whole of the second floor he searched without success, except in so
far that the discovery of gaunt, chilly bedrooms, in which a lively
imagination might conjure up a pleasing thrill, could be reckoned a
reward to his labours. Over most was the trail of the plumber; electric
bells and light had been newly introduced, and these modern improvements
jostled strangely with the faded medival discomfort of large, gloomy
beds and tapestried hangings. Like the poor lion with no early
Christian, these seemed to mourn the absence of murderous deeds; a
suitable stage was set, but no actor trod the boards.

It was a somewhat disheartened adventurer who began his search on the
ground floor, for the ground floor, he could not but remember, would
bring but a small bill of steps to swell his revenues, unless, indeed,
the yet undiscovered staircase proved to lead into the basement, and
that possibility lent him fresh vigour. But dining room, billiard room,
and both drawing-rooms were searched without result, and the hall was
become practically the last cover. Here, indeed, something might be
expected; tapestry covered two sides, the other two carried portraits,
and again his search became minute. But half an hour was fruitlessly
spent, and there remained only the fireplace side, where hung the
portrait of old Francis.

Geoffrey looked at this a moment for inspiration.

"He knew all about it, I'll be bound," he said to himself. "Why can't
the old brute speak?"

Looking at it thus, he noticed for the first time that the panel in
which this picture hung was different from the panelling over the rest
of the hall, which was all of linen pattern. But this one panel was
plain, except for a row of small circular bosses which ran round it at
wide intervals; and Geoffrey, goaded by the thought of his last good
chance, mounted a chair and handled each of these in turn. The second he
tried moved to the touch, and as, with a sudden upleap of hope, he
turned it, something clicked within, and the whole panel, portrait and
all, swung slowly out on a hinge. There seemed to be a narrow passage in
the wall, continuing to right and left of the picture.

Geoffrey stood a moment on the chair, holding the panel from swinging
farther, puzzled.

"He can't have jumped down from there," he said to himself. "Perhaps
there is another door somewhere else. Anyhow he has his exits and his
entrances," and the quotation seemed to him extraordinarily apt.

He got down, after securing the panel again, and started to tell Harry.
But after a few paces his legs literally refused to carry him in that
direction. The secret was his by right of trove, he must make the first
joyful exploration alone. Again he turned the knob, and from his chair
vaulted easily into the panel. The passage led right and left into
darkness, and he would have jumped down again to get matches, when he
saw in a little recess in the wall a candle with matches by it. This was
eminently convenient, and due no doubt to Mr. Francis's thoughtfulness,
and after lighting up he pulled the panel ajar, and, after satisfying
himself that the catch was of the simplest kind, latched it back into
its place.

Two thoughts were in his mind as he waited for the red wick of the
candle to grow black again: the one, the further tracking of the game he
had definitely roused during the night; the other, sheer childish
pleasure in a story of adventure come true. Alas for the stockbroker! he
cared no more for the shillings; there was a dark passage in the wall,
and the imperishable child within him trembled and smiled; Mr. Francis,
the man felt sure, had used this passage last night. Here was double
cause for excitement and joy. The candle burned more bravely, and two
ways were open. Like all right-handed folk, his impulse was to turn to
the left, and, obeying it, he travelled six yards or so of a level,
rough-floored passage. On his right ran the courses of bricks in the
main wall, a little dark and mildewy, on his left the panelling of the
hall. A turn at right angles, at the corner no doubt of the hall,
disclosed a flight of wooden steps leading downward. Here the
stockbroker awoke; he greedily counted them, and ten shillings were his.
But the stockbroker, it seemed, was a gentleman of second-rate vitality;
he awoke from his torpor but to count, and slumbered again, leaving the
child and the hunter to go their way.

At the bottom of these steps Geoffrey paused a moment to recollect his
bearings. He had entered the secret way on the short side of the hall;
the steps therefore were on the long side of it, and on the garden side
of the house. But inasmuch as the passage, when he entered it, was some
six feet above the ground level of the hall, these ten downward steps
would bring him back to ground level again. He was therefore walking in
the outer wall of the hall on a level with the floor. This clear, he
went slowly on.

Suddenly he was confronted by a blank brick wall, straight in front. But
on the right hand the regular courses of the brick were interrupted by a
panelled wooden oblong, some five feet high; beyond this, up to the wall
that ended the passage, the courses went on again. In the middle of it
was a round wooden handle; straight below it on the floor ran two
flanged metal lines. Laying hold of this handle, he pulled at it, and on
each side of the wooden panel opened a jagged edge of light, irregular
and full of angles. It drew inward some three feet till it reached the
end of the metal lines, running smoothly but with a sense of great
weight. Sunlight poured in, and Geoffrey stepped on to the lawn outside
and regarded his discovery. Indeed, it had been a cunning brain and hand
that had devised this. The house wall outside here ran in courses of
small brick, and the opening of this door drew these inward irregularly.
The top of the door, for instance, was four bricks in length, but the
second row of bricks detached numbered six; below that again was a
course of four withdrawn, then one of five, then one of six again. The
joining was fitted with extreme accuracy; here the interspace of mortar
between the bricks would move with the withdrawn piece of wall, here it
would remain on the wall in place; detection of the line of the door to
one who did not know where to look, even to one who did, would be nearly
impossible.

Regarding it more closely, another thing struck him: halfway down the
withdrawn portion was a broken edge of brick, and taking hold of this he
drew the door back into its place again. Seen thus, as part of the whole
wall, detection appeared impossible; there was no line to follow, and,
though he had closed it but a moment before, he could not trace the
junctures. The thing fitted as well as a jaw full of good teeth.

But he surveyed it only for a moment; then with an effort pushing it
back again, he re-entered, closed it behind him, and took up his candle
to explore the branch of the passage that led to the right of the
picture. Again he mounted the ten steps, again came opposite the hinged
panel, and passed on. Ten similar steps again led down to the ground
level of the hall, and at the bottom of these the passage ended in a
wooden panel, by the side of which was a latch exactly resembling that
by which the picture-panel was shut and opened. He turned it, and the
hinged woodwork opened, giving on the short space between the stairs
where he had watched last night and the door into the hall round which
Mr. Francis's face had first appeared to him when he awoke from his
doze. This, then, explained all; it was here, not from behind the
picture, that the old man had entered; from here, seeing a light in the
hall, he had peeped round the corner.

Geoffrey stepped out into the corridor, and examined the hinged panel
from outside; it was in deep shadow, but round it ran bossed circles
similar to those in that which held the portrait over the mantelpiece;
the second on the right in the same manner raised and lowered the latch.

He blew out the candle, leaving it on the bottom step of the secret way,
closed the door, and went to the smoking room. Harry was still at work,
ill at ease with figures.

"And seven," he observed truculently, as Geoffrey entered.

"Twenty," said the other, "and two secret doors--I beg your pardon,
three. Twenty-six bob, Harry. Stump up."

Harry raised a malevolent face for a moment, and finished his column.

"Any skeletons?" he asked, with pungency.

"No; no skeletons. Will you come and see it now?"

Harry sprang up.

"Look here, Geoff, are you playing the fool?" he said. "If so, are you
prepared to die?"

"Neither," said Geoffrey, "but don't let me interrupt you. Better get on
with your work; the passage won't run away."

"Nor will the work. I wish it would. Do you really mean it, Geoff? There
is a holy awe about your face."

"Come and see," said Geoffrey.

They went together to the panel by the staircase, and entered. Geoffrey
lit the candle he had left there, and preceding Harry, who made no
comment beyond unintelligible mutterings, stopped opposite the back of
old Francis's portrait.

"The second secret door," he said, opening it; "the door I discovered
first. I'll show you afterward how to get in from the outside. And
here," he said, pointing to the recess, "here I found this candle and
the matches. Convenient."

"That candle," said Harry; "why, it is nearly new; it is not dusty, and
the matches, too--used they to use matches----" and he stopped
suddenly. "Give me the candle a minute, Geoff," he said.

He looked at the crest and monogram on it, and returned it.

"Come on," he said, with something of an effort. "Let's see where the
passage leads."

"What's the matter?" asked the other.

"Nothing; get on."

They went down to the outer door, and looked at it again from the
outside. Though he had been through it twice that morning, yet, when it
was closed, Geoffrey could not see where it was, so perfect was the
joining of it.

"And the bit of broken brick is the handle to pull it to," said Harry,
with interest. But he was visibly preoccupied, and his delight was
clouded; there was no childish joy in him. Geoffrey guessed the reason
for it, and at lunch afterward Harry spoke.

"That was a candle of Uncle Francis's, Geoff," he said. "It was his
monogram," and he looked up as if expecting that his information was
surprising. But Geoffrey went on eating quite calmly.

"So I supposed," he said.

"Then you think he knows of the secret passage?"

"I feel sure he does."

Harry's face clouded a little more; it was dark already.

"Are you weighing your words?" he asked. "Do you mean exactly what you
say?"

"Exactly. Is not the new candle and the matches proof enough for you?"

"It ought to be. Yet I don't know. I suppose you mean that you have
further proof."

"I don't suppose anything would convince you if that candle doesn't,"
said Geoffrey, not yet wishing to tell Harry of Mr. Francis's nocturnal
visit.

Harry pondered this awhile.

"No, I don't suppose it would," he observed at length. "Anyhow, Geoff,
if he didn't tell us he knew of the passage, we won't tell him that we
do. You used to call me secretive, I remember. I dare say you were
right."

"It seems to run in the family," said the other.

"You mean that Uncle Francis is secretive, too. Well, I think he might
have told me of the passage. Halloo! there are the horses. Just wait; I
must go through it again. The candle spoiled all my pleasure this
morning, and it is heavenly, simply heavenly. Twenty-six bob, you say.
Dirt cheap, too."




CHAPTER XVIII

RAIN


Two mornings after this discovery of the passage, as they were sitting
at breakfast, a telegram was brought in for Harry.

"Brougham to meet the evening train," he said to the man, after reading
it, "and tell them to get Mr. Francis's rooms ready."

"He comes to-night?" asked Geoffrey.

"Yes; I did not expect him so soon. But he is only coming for a couple
of days, he says. He has taken the flat in Wimpole Street; I suppose he
means to go back there."

"What is he coming here for?"

"Can't say--to get some furniture and things, I suspect. Then the
passage is to be a secret, eh, Geoff?"

"Why, surely," said Geoffrey; "like a box hedge. I shouldn't take the
slightest pleasure in it if I thought other people knew----"

"But you said you were sure that Uncle Francis did know," interrupted
Harry.

"Let me finish my sentence, if you don't mind. I was about to say that I
shouldn't take the slightest pleasure in it if I thought that other
people knew that I knew."

Harry broke a piece of toast meditatively.

"I'm not sure about it," he said. "Personally I felt rather aggrieved
that Uncle Francis had not told me anything about it. Well, wouldn't he
as naturally feel aggrieved if I don't tell him?"

"It is superfluous to tell him," said Geoffrey, "because he knows
already. Secondly, it will spoil all my pleasure if he knows we know,
and I shall wish I hadn't found the thing at all. Fifthly and lastly,
you never paid me that twenty-six bob; and, thirdly, it is your house,
after all."

Harry was silent. Then suddenly:

"Geoffrey," he said, "tell me what further proof you have, apart from
the candle, that Uncle Francis does know about it. I'll draw you a
cheque after breakfast; haven't got any money."

"Is that a bribe?" asked Geoffrey.

"Yes."

"And you really wish to know?"

"Yes, I ask you," said Harry. "No, it is not a bribe. If soberly you
would rather not tell me, don't."

For a moment Geoffrey could not make up his mind whether he wished Harry
to know or not. If only the tale would have put him on his guard, he
would have had no hesitation about telling him all--his conversation
with Lady Oxted, the looped cotton, the midnight visit. But he felt that
the right time had not come, though it might come any day. On the other
hand, it was difficult to speak merely of Mr. Francis's visit without
betraying some hint of his suspicions, and this he did not want to do.
But the balance of advantage seemed to incline toward telling him; for
if he did not, in answer to so direct an invitation, Harry would not
unnaturally accuse him, though silently no doubt, of unfounded
suspicions against a man whom he himself honoured very highly. So he
determined to speak.

"Three nights ago," he said, "on the evening of the gun-room affair, you
went to bed early, and I sat in the hall and dozed. I awoke suddenly and
saw Mr. Francis's face looking round the corner by the staircase."

Harry pushed back his chair.

"What!" he said.

"Oh, I was not dozing then. We talked for some time, and he told me why
he had come with this secrecy. He also asked me not to tell you. But I
don't mind."

"And why had he come?" asked Harry.

"All day, he said, he had been haunted by a strong premonition of evil,
and he had come to make sure you were safe."

"That's odd," said Harry. "On the day of the gun-room affair--well?"

"For one reason and another," continued Geoffrey, "I felt sure he had
not come in by the front door. At any rate, I proved that he did not
leave by it, for I put some stamp paper over the joining, and in the
morning it was still untorn. And then, if you remember, I said I felt
yew-hedgy, and found the passage."

Harry got up, and began pacing up and down the dining room.

"But how ridiculous!" he said. "Why couldn't he have told me? Was he
ashamed of his premonition?"

"He told me he was."

Harry felt unreasonably annoyed.

"I won't have my house burglariously entered by anybody," he said,
"Uncle Francis or another. I shall tell him so."

"As you will," said Geoffrey, inwardly anxious that he should not.

"Then I shall not tell him so," said Harry, "and I sha'n't tell him that
I know about the secret passage. But next time he tries to use it, he
shall find no candle there. I've a good mind to block the place up,
Geoff."

"Oh, don't do that! 'Tisn't fair on me."

"I shall do exactly as I damn please!" said Harry. "We'll be finding it
full of kitchen maids next. No, I can't block it up before I've shown it
Evie. But I shall go there every day and take away his candle if he puts
fresh ones. Lord, I got quite heated about it!"

"That's right," said Geoffrey; "don't be sat upon by anybody."

"Anyhow you'd better not try," said Harry viciously.

He continued quarter-decking about the room for a few times in silence,
and his annoyance subsided.

"And the old fellow really came down because he had a presentiment
about me," he went on. "Geoff, that's an odd thing now. It looks as if
the Luck touched more than me; it gave Uncle Francis a hint of what it
was doing. You know the Luck's getting on; it is making more reasonable
attempts on me. Do you think I've been encouraging it too much? Perhaps
I have; we won't drink its health to-night."

"I would if I were you," said Geoffrey. "Perhaps in that way you have
put the old thing in a good temper. Well, keep it up; it can't avoid
having shots at you, but it always manages to miss."

"Ah, you are beginning to believe in it too."

"Not a bit. All the effect the Luck has is to make you talk arrant
nonsense about it. I believe in it, indeed! I was just humouring you."

"Your notions of the humorous are obscure," observed Harry.

Mr. Francis arrived late that night, full of little anecdotes about his
house-hunting, and loud in praises of his flat. He had only come, as he
had said, for a couple of days, to collect some books and sticks of
furniture, and by the end of the month at the outside he hoped to have
it completely habitable. His pleasure in it was that of a child with a
new toy, delightful to hear, and they sat up late, listening to his
fresh, cheerful talk, and hearkening between whiles to an extraordinary
heavy rain which had come on before sunset and was beating at the
windows.

This deluge was continuous all night, and next morning they woke to the
same streaming heavens; the sky was a lowering arch of deluge, the rain
relentless. Harry and Geoffrey, who regarded the sky and the open
heavens as the proper roof for man, and houses merely as a shelter for
unusual inclemency, had felt not the smallest inclination to stir
abroad, but Mr. Francis at lunch announced his intention of walking,
rain or no rain.

"It doesn't hurt me," he said; "a brisk walk, whatever the weather. So
neither of you will come?"

Harry looked out on to the soupy, splashing gravel.

"Geoff, shall we go for a swim?" he said.

"Thank you, no. I'm too old for mud pies."

Mr. Francis laughed heartily.

"So am not I," he said.--"Well, Harry?"

"It certainly is raining," said the lad.

"Not a doubt of it," assented Mr. Francis.

Geoffrey turned to Harry suddenly.

"Fear both fire and frost and rain," he said, in a low tone.

Harry went briskly toward the door.

"Thanks, Geoff, that settles it," he said. "An excellent reason for
going, and getting it over to-day if possible.--Yes, Uncle Francis, I'll
put on my boots and come. I'm not made of paper any more than you."

Geoffrey followed him into the hall, a sudden vague foreboding filling
him.

"Don't go, Harry!" he said.

"You are beginning to believe in it, you know," said Harry.

"Indeed I am not."

"Looks like it," and Mr. Francis joining them, he went off whistling.

Very much rain must have fallen during the night, for yesterday the lake
was not notably higher than its normal limits, whereas now, so few hours
afterward, it had swollen so as to over-top the stonework of the sluice,
and a steady rush of water fell over the ledge into the outlet below.
This, ordinarily a smooth-flowing chalk stream, was now a riotous race
of headlong water, sufficient to carry a man off his feet, and, as they
paused a minute or two to watch the grand rush of it, they could see
that, even in so short a space, the flow of water over the stonework was
increasing in volume, showing that the lake was rising every minute. The
gate walls of the sluice were not very thick, and seemed hardly built
for such a press of water; in one or two places Mr. Francis observed
that there appeared to be cracks right through them, for water spurted
out as from a hose. The sluice itself seemed to have got somewhat choked
with the _dbris_ of branches and leaves with which the storm had
covered the surface of the lake, and a Saragossa Sea of drift stretched
out to a considerable radius from it.

Adjoining the main lock was a small wooden water gate, designed, no
doubt, for the relief in time of flood, but this was shut down, and
Harry, splashing through the water, tried to pull it up, in order to
give an additional outlet, but the wood was swollen with the wet, and he
could not stir it. Mr. Francis observed his actions with some attention;
his feet were firmly planted on the stone slab that covered the sluice,
and the water rose like a frill over his boots, as, with bent and
straining figure, he exerted his utmost force to raise the gate. Once,
as for firmer purchase he wedged his right foot against the side of the
water channel and bowed to a final effort, the block of stonework on
which he stood seemed to tremble. A cry of warning rose to Mr. Francis's
lips, but it remained unuttered; only his face wore an expression of
intense conflicting expectation. But Harry's efforts were fruitless, and
soon desisting, he splashed his way back. Elsewhere the lake was rapidly
encroaching on the outskirts of the lawn; pools of rain lay in the lower
undulations of it, and these, joining with its swollen waters, formed
long, liquid tongues and bays. Here a clump of bushes stood out like an
island in a lagoon, here an outlying flower bed was altogether
submerged, and the dark soil was floated by the water in a spreading
stain over the adjoining grass.

"This will never do," said Harry; "the place will be in a mess for
months if we don't get the water off somehow. It is that choked sluice
which is doing all the mischief. We had better go up to the farm, Uncle
Francis, and send some men to clear it. Lord, how it rains!"

"Yes, that will be the best plan," said he. "Stay, Harry, I will go,
and do you run back to the sluice, my dear fellow, and see if it is
raised quite to the top; we never looked at that. You might get a big
stick also, and begin clearing away the stuff that chokes it. And have
another pull at the wooden gate. If you can get that open, it is all
right. Go and break your back over it, my dear boy; it seemed to yield a
little that last pull you gave. What muscles, what muscles!" he said,
feeling his arm. "Try again at the wooden sluice, and be quick. There is
no time to lose; we shall have the water up to the house in less than an
hour if this goes on."

Mr. Francis went off at a rapid amble in the direction of the farm, and
Harry returned to wrestle with the wooden sluice. Even in the few
minutes that they had been away the water had risen beyond belief, and
when again he splashed across the stone slab of the sluice to the
smaller gate, the swift-flowing stream over the top of it was half
knee-deep, and pressed against him like a strong man. It was no longer
possible to see the spouting escape beneath, for the arch of turbid
water was continuous and unbroken from side to side.

He wrapped his handkerchief round the ring which raised the gate, and
again putting shoulder and straining back into it, bent to his task. One
foot he had braced against the stone coping of the side, the other he
pressed to the ironwork of the main sluice, and, pulling firmly and
strongly till he felt the muscles of his spine stand out like woven
cords, he knew that something stirred. At that he paused a moment, the
strong flood pouring steadily round him, and collecting himself, bent
down again and called on every sinew for one sudden effort. On the
instant he felt the stone slab on which he stood reel under his left
foot, and half guessing, for the moment was too brief for conscious
conclusion, that the sluice had given way bodily, sprang for all he was
worth from the overturning mass. But the effort was an effort made in
air; his right foot slipped from the edge of the coping, and the whole
sluice wall turned under him, throwing him, as luck would have it, clear
of the toppling mass, but full into the stream below. As he fell he
caught at the masonry of the sides of the channel, to prevent himself
being carried down.

For one half second his grasp was firm; at the next, with an incredible
roar of water, the released flood poured down from the lake, brushing
his hand from its grasp as lightly as a man whisks a settling fly from
sugar, and rolled him over and over among the screaming _dbris_, now
tossing him into mid stream, now burying him in the yellow, turbulent
flood, now throwing him up on the top of a wave like chaff in a high
wind, as helpless as a suckling child in the grip of some wild beast.
Impotently and without purpose he snatched at hurrying wreckage, even at
the twisted ropes of water that hurled him along, conscious only of the
wild excitement of this foregone battle, without leisure to be afraid.
He seemed to himself to be motionless, while the banks and lawns shot
by him with an inconceivable swiftness, but bearing toward him, as he
suddenly remembered, with the same giddy speed, the bridge over which
the road to the lodge passed. How often had he stood there, watching the
trout poise and dart in the clear, flowing water!

A turn in the stream bed, and he saw it rushing up toward him like an
approaching train, the water already nearly on a level with its arch,
and soon to be how vastly higher with the wave of the flood that carried
him, he in the van of the torrent from the broken sluice. His first
instinct was a resolve to clutch at it, in order to stop himself; but in
a moment realizing that, if he wished to make death certain, this was
the way of it, he huddled himself together, burying his head in the
water. He just saw the first of the flood strike against the bridge in a
huge feather of broken turbulence, and then came a darkness full of loud
chucklings and suckings, as if the water laughed inwardly with evil
merriment. Once, in that blind moment, his shoulder was banged against
the gorged arch, once he felt his coat catch against some projecting
stone, and it was as if the weight of the whole world was pressed
against him, as for a half second he checked the stream, the next he was
torn free again, and out into daylight once more.

Not till then did the chance of his possible ultimate escape strike him
with a sense that he might possibly have a share in that matter;
hitherto the wild pace had given a certain bewilderment to his thoughts
not unpleasant in itself. All reasoning power, all remembrance of what
had gone before, all realization of what might follow after had been
choked; his consciousness, a mere pin point, did not do more than
receive the sensation of the passing moment. But after the bridge had
been passed it sprouted and grew, he became Harry Vail again, a man with
wits and limbs that were meant to be used, and therewith the will to use
them. But the power to use them was a thing arbitrarily directed by the
flood; breath was the prime necessity, and it was a matter requiring
both effort and an ebb of the encircling wave to fling his face free
from that surging and broken van of water and get air. Only with this
returning increase of consciousness was he aware that he was out of
breath with his prolonged ducking, for, broadly speaking, he had not
decently breathed once since he had tumbled with the tumbling sluice. So
with a downward and backward kick, the instinct of treading water, he
raised his head from the yellow race, and felt the air sweet and
essential. Three long breaths he took, throat-filling, lung-filling,
like a man half dead with drought, and, as he struggled to overlook the
water for the fourth time, it was for the purpose of using eyes as well
as lungs; and what he saw caused hope to leap high in his heart, though
he had not known he had been hopeless. For here the stream had already
widely overflowed its banks, now no longer held in by the masonry of
the first stretch below the sluice, and every gallon of water that came
down spread itself over a widely increased area; speed and the
concentrated volume were even now diminishing. The sense that he was
bound and helpless, a swathed child, passed from him, and, pushing
steadily with his arms and feet (so random a stroke could scarcely be
called swimming), he soon saw that he was appreciably leaving the main
rush of the stream. Before long he was brought up with a violent jerk;
his foot had struck the ground, and the water stood up over his head
like a yellow frill. But that was no more than a playful buffet, after
the grimness of his struggle; he staggered to his feet again, and, now
no longer swimming, after a few more splashing efforts, stood firm and
upright in waist-high water, leaning with all his weight against the
press of the flood. Then step by plunging step he got to land, and at
last stood utterly free on the good safe earth.

He stood and dripped for a moment, the water running from all points of
himself and his clothes, as if off the ribs of an umbrella; then
wringing out the baggier folds with his hands, he tried to start running
toward the house. But twenty paces told him he was dead beat, and
dropping to a soberer pace, he made his splashing way across the fields.
Suddenly he stopped.

"The Luck," he cried aloud to the weeping sky; "it was the rain that did
it! Blooming old, futile old Luck! It couldn't kill a bluebottle."

This was an inspiring thought, and he went the more lightly for it,
taking note, with a delightful sense of danger past, of the distance of
his water journey. And what was that spouting column of yellowness and
foam three hundred yards farther up, standing like a fountain in mid
stream? And with a sudden gasp of reasoned recognition he knew it to be
the bridge over which the road passed, under which so few minutes ago he
had himself been whirled. Cold and shivering as he was, he could not
resist a moment's pause when he came opposite it, and he turned away
again with a sense of respect for the Luck which his last words, shouted
to the streaming heavens, had lacked. Under that he had blindly
burrowed, helpless as a baby in an express, to stop his headlong course.

"Not such a bad attempt of the Luck, after all," he said to himself.

Five minutes later he had cast his water trail over the gravel and into
the hall. Geoffrey was deep in an armchair, reading.

"Geoffrey, old chap, the Luck's been having another go," he cried,
almost triumphantly. "But it can't pull it off, it simply can't. Get me
some hot whisky and water, will you, and come to my room. I'm going to
get between blankets a bit. Nothing like taking care of one's self, and
running no risks. I'll tell you all about it. Can't stop now."

Geoffrey's book flew on to the floor as he sprang out of his chair.

"O Harry, what has happened?" he cried; "what has he done now?"

"Old Francis?" asked Harry, pointing at the picture. "He's used the rain
this time. Penny squirt, you know. Hurry up, and come to my room. Whisky
rather strong, please."

Harry was out of his clinging clothes in a couple of minutes, and,
dropping them into an empty hip bath where they could lie innocuous to
carpets, got into blankets, and sipping his whisky, told Geoffrey all
his story from the moment of the dismemberment of the sluice to his
staggering landing half a mile downstream.

"And if ever you want to travel expeditiously by water," he said, in
conclusion, "I recommend you a six-foot flood in a narrow channel. But
avoid a water-choked bridge ahead of you. Man, it gives you a wambling
inside, and no mistake. All the same it makes you feel an A-1 hero
afterward, I can tell you that for cert. Why, I'm choking with pride,
just choking, though what the particular achievement is I can't tell
you. I had to go underneath it, and there were no two words to it. Well,
I went."

"But what had happened to Mr. Francis?" asked Geoffrey. "Couldn't he see
that the thing was tottery?"

"No, of course not, you dolt; he'd gone trotting off to the farm. Oh, I
didn't tell you that part, so you're not a dolt. We went out together,
as you saw, and I took a haul on that old stricken sluice, but I
couldn't make it budge. So we began walking away, to get men from the
farm, but the water was rising so fast that he went on there alone, and
I went back to have another pull at it--which I did, with this blessed
result; and, O Geoffrey, how dry and warm the rain felt when I had got
out of that flood race! Lord! I thought I was done; no, I didn't think
it, I only knew I was. But not till I got out did the blessed solution
strike me: it was the Luck having another shot. And again it has
failed--fire and frost and rain. We've had the whole trio again, and be
damned to them! But there's a hitch somewhere; old Francis can't pull it
off. Really, I am almost sorry for him!"

Harry's voice was resonant with conviction and triumph; it was as if he
had won a battle that was inevitable between him and a subtle foe. The
danger he had been through was swallowed up in the victory he had
gained. But this lightness of heart found no echo in Geoffrey.

"I don't like it, Harry," he said; "I don't like it one bit. I do not
believe in the Luck; it is childish, and you do not believe in the Luck.
We have played at make-believe like children, as we played with the
discovery of the passage in the yew hedge. And the passage in the yew
hedge is far the more real of the two. But it is time to stop all that.
Why should these things come to you in such damnable continuity? Why
within a few days should you nearly fall into an ice house, then go
within an ace of blowing your head off, and finally be carried down in
that mill-race of death? There is no use also in saying it is
coincidence. Things do not happen like that."

"No, you are right, not by mere coincidence," said Harry; "but they do
happen; they have happened to me."

The windows of the room looked out straight over the lawn on to the
lower end of the lake, where the sluice lay, and Geoffrey, as Harry
divested himself of the blankets he had swathed round him and rubbed
himself down with a rough towel, went and sat in the window-seat,
looking out.

"And it's no use saying that I don't believe in the Luck," he went on;
"I do believe in it, at least I think I do, which, as far as I am
concerned, comes to exactly the same thing. Oh, it is nonsense!" he
cried suddenly. "I don't think I really believe in it, but I like to
think I do. There is the truth as near as I can get it. And yet,
perhaps, that isn't the truth; perhaps I do believe in it. Oh, who knows
whether I believe in it or not? I'm sure I don't."

Geoffrey did not reply for a moment. He had felt morally certain after
the gun-room accident that, if danger of death again looked into Harry's
face, it would be Mr. Francis who brought it there; he had even said to
himself that it would be by rain that danger would come. By rain,
indeed, it had been, but where, taxing ingenuity to the utmost, did Mr.
Francis come in? Harry had been alone, Mr. Francis halfway to the farm.
What if Harry was right?--and the thought challenged his reasonable
self.

"How can you talk such utter nonsense?" he said angrily. "How can that
pewter pot break down a sluice, and put a cartridge in your gun, and
make you go to the ice house instead of the summerhouse?"

"'Tain't pewter!" said Harry's voice, muffled in the shirt he was
putting on.

At that moment Geoffrey's eye caught sight of the figure of Mr. Francis
trotting gaily through the rain down the side of the lake, from the
direction of the farm, and he disappeared behind the bushes that
screened the sluice from the house. Almost immediately he reappeared
again, this time coming toward the house with the same lightness of
step. He must have seen, thought Geoffrey, that the flood had carried
away the sluice. Harry, he must have known, was probably there when it
was carried away. What reconstruction of facts would fit these factors?
At present none, but perhaps Mr. Francis could supply them. He rose.

"Mr. Francis is just coming in," he said, "but I do not see the farm
men."

Harry came across to the window.

"They are probably following," he said. "Go down to him, Geoff, and tell
him I'm all right."

"You will be down soon?"

"Yes, in a couple of minutes. You might order tea, too."




CHAPTER XIX

GEOFFREY LEAVES VAIL


Geoffrey went slowly downstairs, reciting to himself exactly all he
knew. One point was salient: Mr. Francis had certainly seen the broken
sluice. And he entered the hall.

Mr. Francis had taken off his waterproof, and was sitting comfortably in
a chair. He looked up with his cheery smile when Geoffrey came in.

"Ah! my dear boy," he said, "you were quite right not to come out. The
weather was odious; I have never seen such rain. But one feels better,
after all, for a breath of air."

"I preferred the house," said Geoffrey. "Was the water in the lake very
high?"

"Yes, it was a good deal swollen. In fact, it has carried away a
considerable portion of the sluice. It must be seen to."

"A dangerous moment," observed Geoffrey, picking up a magazine and
turning over the pages.

"Yes, I wish I had seen it go. A fine sight it must have been, six feet
of water in that narrow channel. But we were on the way to the farm, I
suppose, when it happened. I must talk--I must talk to Harry about it
this evening. It will want mending at once."

At this moment Geoffrey heard Harry's foot on the stairs just outside
the hall. Though he knew nothing of psychology, he believed this to be a
psychological moment.

"Is he out still?" he asked, seeing out of the corner of his eye that he
was even now entering the hall.

"I suppose so," said Mr. Francis. "He left me on the way up to the
farm."

Harry had now entered the hall, and his step was noiseless on the thick
carpet. Mr. Francis, with his chair facing the fire, could not see him,
but another half-dozen paces would bring him close.

"You are wrong," said Geoffrey slowly, "for he seems to have come in.
This is he, is it not? Or his ghost?"

Mr. Francis, contrary to the doctor's orders, made an exceedingly brisk
movement, springing to his feet and facing about. He saw Harry; he cast
one brief look at Geoffrey, to which fear and a devilish enmity
contributed largely, and turned to his nephew again in perfect control
of himself and without further hesitation. Geoffrey had scarce time to
tell himself that there was an awkward choice he had to make.

"Ah! my dear boy," he cried, "so you are all right. I felt sure you
would be. But for a moment, for one moment, I was anxious, when I came
back from the farm with the men and we found the sluice broken."

Geoffrey stared in sheer astonishment at the man's glibness.

"With the men?" he asked. "Surely not."

"Dear fellow," said Mr. Francis, with the most natural manner, "how
pedantically exact you are! I must be exact, too, it seems. I was a
little ahead of them, for I ran back from the farm, being just a little
uneasy about the weight of water that I knew must be pressing on the
sluice. I thought, indeed, that when Harry made his first attempt to
pull it up, it was a little unsafe for any one to stand there."

Suddenly all his doubts and certainties surged up in Geoffrey's mind.

"Did you warn him?" he asked.

Geoffrey saw Harry's eyebrows knit themselves together in a frown of
perplexity which he could not decipher. But Mr. Francis turned to him
with the eagerness of a boy anxious to confess.

"I did not," he said, "and all the time that I was going to the farm the
thing weighed on me. I ought to have--I ought to have given way to my
old-maid feeling of insecurity. But I was afraid--yes, dear lad, I was
afraid Harry would laugh at me. Ah, how I repented my silence when I
came back and found the sluice gone--gone!" he repeated.

"Yes, it went," said Harry. "I went too."

Mr. Francis looked at him a moment with eyes of horror diminishing to a
pin point; then he gave a little low cry and sank down in his chair
again.

"What do you say? what do you say?" he murmured. "You were there; you
were----"

"Oh, the sluice broke as I was standing on it, having another pull at
the wooden gate, as you suggested, and down I went," said Harry. "The
flood took me right under the bridge, rather a difficult matter, and a
quarter of a mile farther down. Then I got out."

Mr. Francis lifted up his hands in a weary, uncertain manner.

"Under the bridge--under the bridge!" he said hoarsely.

"It would not take him over," remarked Geoffrey.

Mr. Francis seemed not to hear this comment.

"What can I say?" he cried. "What can I say or do? And to think that it
was my fault! I ought to have warned you; I ought to have been on the
safe side. I did not with my reasonable mind think that there was any
danger, but I was uneasy. Harry, do not blame me too much: I remember
advising you one day last winter when you came in wet from shooting, to
go and change, and indeed, my dear boy, you did not receive my advice
very patiently. I thought of that; I thought I would not weary you with
my meddling misgivings."

"I don't blame you in the least, Uncle Francis," said Harry. "You didn't
think the sluice looked sufficiently unsafe to make it better that you
should warn me. I also did not realize that it was in a dangerous
condition. There is no harm done."

"I can not forgive myself," said Mr. Francis.

Harry laughed.

"Ah! there I can not help you," he said. "For my own part I can only
assure you that there is nothing to forgive. There, that's all right,"
he added rather gruffly, desiring to have no scene.

Geoffrey had listened to this with a look of pleased attention, as a man
may regard a little scene in a play, which he knows well. Mr. Francis
had been through his part with great dexterity: here another
actor--himself--should appear.

"And now for your story, Mr. Francis," he said very cheerfully, "as
Harry will not give us curdling details. Let me see: you went to the
farm, and ran back again, and I saw you go to the sluice. You found it
gone. Dear, dear, how terrible for you! So you came quietly back to the
house and sat yourself down in front of the fire, where I found you ten
minutes ago."

Mr. Francis looked up with a scared eye.

"I hoped and trusted no accident had happened to him," he said. "I came
to the house to make sure that he was safe. Ah! I can not talk of it, I
can not talk of it," he cried suddenly.

"But ten minutes ago you told me that you supposed that Harry was still
out," persisted Geoffrey. "What a strange thing is the human mind!
Here, for instance, I do not follow your thoughts at all. You were
uneasy for Harry's safety, for fear of the sluice giving way, and as
soon as you saw for certain that it had given way, you felt no further
anxiety. You sat here in front of the fire, though, as you told me, you
supposed Harry was out still."

Mr. Francis rose from his chair in great agitation.

"What do you mean? What are you saying?" he cried in a high, tremulous
voice. "Do you know what your words mean?"

"My words mean exactly what they appear to mean," said Geoffrey quietly,
feeling that the signal had been given and the time was come. "Hear me:
how curious a thing, I said, is the human mind! The sluice you thought
looked a little unsafe, and you were uneasy for Harry's safety as you
went to the farm, for he was making at your suggestion an attempt to
raise the wooden gate. You come back, and find symptoms of the
confirmation of your fears: the sluice is broken. Harry is not there.
Then you walk quietly back to the house, and tell me you suppose that
Harry is out still. I repeat that I do not follow your train of thought.
It is curious.--Harry, does not this seem to you also to be curious?"

Harry looked from one to the other a moment, puzzled and bewildered.
Geoffrey spoke so quietly and collectedly that it was impossible not to
listen calmly to what he said, impossible also not to understand what he
meant. On the other hand, he was saying things that were absolutely
incredible. From Geoffrey he looked to Mr. Francis, who was standing
between them. The old man's mouth quivered, his agitation was
momentarily increasing. Then suddenly he recollected the doctor's
warning that all agitation was bad for him, and he was his uncle, his
friend, and an old man.

"Stop, Geoffrey!" he cried; "don't speak.--Uncle Francis, don't listen
to him: he doesn't mean what you think he means. There is some ghastly
misunderstanding.--Geoff, you damned idiot!"

Mr. Francis's face grew paler and more mottled, his breathing was
growing short and laboured, and Harry was in an agony of terror that
another of those awful seizures would come upon him. But in a moment he
spoke, slowly, and with little pauses for breath.

"Harry," he said, "either your friend--apologizes unreservedly for--what
he has said--or one of us--leaves the house--now, this evening. It will
be for you--to decide--which of us leaves it."

At these words another terror seized Harry--the terror of the precipice
at the edge of which all three of them stood. Whatever happened now, it
seemed to him, a catastrophe must be: one friend or the other (and as he
thought of the two, his mind veered backward and forward like a shifting
weathercock) must go. But the primary necessity was, by any means in his
power, to stop further words just now, for he feared each moment that
Mr. Francis would be seized as he stood.

"Uncle Francis, come away," he said, taking his arm, "you are agitated;
so is Geoffrey; so am I. It is no use talking about a thing in heat.
Wait, just wait.--Geoffrey, if you say another word I'll knock your
silly head off!"

But Mr. Francis regarded his nephew no more than he regarded the fly
that buzzed in the pane.

"What do you mean?" he said, coming closer to Geoffrey and shaking off
Harry's hand; "what do you mean by what you have just said? Apologize
for it instantly; do you hear? Indeed, it seems to me that I am very
good-natured to be willing to accept an apology."

Harry put in a word he knew to be hopeless.

"Go on, Geoff," he said, impatiently, anxious for the moment only about
his uncle. "Uncle Francis has understood what you said in some different
way from what you meant. I don't know what it's all about, but let's
have no more nonsense."

Geoffrey turned on that eager face but an absent and staring eye, hardly
hearing his words, for they called up nothing whatever in his mind which
answered to them--only collecting himself to speak fully and without
excitement. He hardly gave a thought to how Harry might take it, so
large and immediate was the need of speaking, so tremendous the part in
this horrible nightmare inevitably his.

"I do not apologize," he said, "not only because I do not wish to, but
because I am simply unable. I indorse every word I have said. I have
also more to say. Will you hear it, Harry? I should prefer to tell you
alone, but I suppose that is impossible."

"Quite impossible, I assure you, you young viper!" said Mr. Francis, in
a voice so cool and self-contained that Harry looked at him in utter
surprise. The bursting agitation of a few minutes ago had passed; his
voice, horrid and cold, was the faithful index of his face. And at his
words Harry suddenly saw the futility of trying to interfere. The thing
was gone beyond his reach; it was as impossible now to stop what was
coming as it would have been to stop that hustling flood from the lake
by a word to it. He waited, frozen almost to numbness with dread and
nauseous misgiving for what should follow, till Geoffrey, in response to
Mr. Francis's assurance, spoke.

"Your uncle," he said, "has for months past been plotting and scheming
against you, your happiness, your life. He tried in the first place, by
every means in his power, to prevent your marriage with Miss Aylwin. On
the Sunday last June when she was down here they walked in the wood
together, and saw----"

"I know all about that," said Harry.

"I doubt it. Do you know, for instance, that Mr. Francis tried to
persuade Miss Aylwin to overlook the fact that she had seen you walking
with a dairymaid? Do you know that he never suggested to her that the
supposed 'you' might be Jim, that he told her that all 'your previous
little foolishness'--the exact phrase--had been quite innocent? I think
you did not know that."

The whole scene still seemed utterly unreal to Harry; he could not
believe that it was going on. He turned to his uncle.

"Well?" he said.

"Ah, I am on my trial then!" said Mr. Francis, very evilly. "Harry, my
dear boy, it is only because this fellow has been your friend that I
stop and listen to these monstrous insinuations. I am asked, I believe,
what I have to say to this. Well, what has been said is literally true.
I mistook the groom for you. So did Miss Aylwin. We both made a mistake.
As for 'previous little foolishnesses,' that of course is a pure
invention on the part of some imaginative person."

"Miss Aylwin told Lady Oxted; Lady Oxted told me," said Geoffrey, as
quietly as if he was giving a reference to some small point of business.

Mr. Francis just shrugged his shoulders.

"I remember last winter," he said, "that we used to play a very
diverting game called Russian scandal."

"The next move you know, Harry," continued Geoffrey, still taking the
smallest notice of Mr. Francis. "He wrote to tell you that Miss Aylwin
was already engaged."

Harry wore an inscrutable face.

"Go on," he said.

"That also did not come off," said Geoffrey, "and you were engaged. Ten
days ago we came down here. On the first morning you asked Mr. Francis
which of the two houses on the knoll was the ice house and which the
summerhouse----"

"Ah, you have broken your word to me!" cried Harry. "You promised to
keep that secret from my uncle."

A violent trembling had seized Mr. Francis.

"What! What!" he murmured, half rising from his chair.

"I have broken my word to you," said Geoffrey, still seemingly
unconscious of the presence of a third person. "I am sorry, but I can
not help it. You followed the directions he gave you, and nearly met
your death. We came back together, and found him playing the flute in
the garden, dancing to it as he played. Then you went into the house. I
remained outside and watched him. He went up the knoll to the two
houses, and tried the door of the ice house. He found it locked, opened
the summerhouse and looked in. Try to reconstruct what was in his mind.
He made no allusion to his mistake. Had he already forgotten that he had
given you a direction that nearly sent you to your death? Or was the
mistake yours? He told you to go to the left hand of the two houses, so
you said to me. Is that the case?"

Harry did not at once reply; he looked eagerly, imploringly at his
friend, but he could find no words to express a feeling he could not
comprehend; he did not know, ever so vaguely, what he thought. In
despair and utter perplexity he faced quickly round to his uncle. Mr.
Francis was sitting with half-closed eyes; his hands, like the hands of
a blind man, groped and picked at the buttons in the arm of his chair,
stricken, helpless. Suddenly, as if with a drowning effort, he threw his
head back and saw Harry.

"No, no," he said, "not the left hand, not the left hand! I never said
that. Oh, the Luck, the cursed, cursed Luck! I could not--indeed, I
could not have said the left hand. 'Do not go to the left hand by
mistake'; I can hear myself saying the words now. Oh, weary, weary day!
But you went there, you went to the ice house instead of the
summerhouse; you went from the brightness of God's sunshine into the
dark--to that edge--to the edge of the well. O my God! my God! Eli!
Eli!" and the cry was wrung from him like water from a twisted cloth.

The old man buried his face in his hands, collapsing like a broken doll.
He regarded neither Harry nor his accuser; the anguish of his spirit
covered him like a choking wave, and into it he went down without a
struggle, but only that moaning sob, a sight and a sound to stagger the
unbelief of an infidel. And Harry--no infidel, but a lad of kindly heart
and generous impulse, quick to believe good, a laggard to impute
harm--could not but be moved.

Geoffrey neither looked at the bowed figure nor wavered, and his face
was flint. But though that moaning cry, that passionate incoherence did
not move him, yet the sight of Harry's face, with its bewilderment of
perplexity and compassionate trouble, filled him with a sudden fear. To
himself, that bent and venerable head was a mockery of grief, a fraud
finished and exquisite, and he was more afraid of Harry's divided mind,
on which Mr. Francis played as on an instrument of music, than he had
been of the evil and hunted face that had come down from the gun room,
as he stood behind the curtain, in those dead hours ten days ago.

Mr. Francis sat huddled in his chair, his face invisible, his fingers
clasped in his white head, and long, dry sobs lifted and relaxed his
figure, like the pulsation of a wave. And though Geoffrey, so few
minutes ago, had turned himself to steel, he could not go on speaking
with that silent stricken figure in front of him. The low, heart-broken
murmuring, the silent sobs, filched resolution from him. Once and twice
he began to speak, but no sentence would come. As many times he told
himself that he must go on, that he knew that this feigned anguish was a
thing to awake horror or laughter, but never pity. Yet it affected him
as a scene in the play affects the stalls. It was all unreal, he knew it
was unreal, yet he could not immediately speak. Suddenly, and long
before--it seemed while he was still cursing his infirmity of
purpose--Harry came to his side.

"Go away, Geoff; go away," he whispered. "Leave me with him. Whatever
you have to say, you can not and must not say it now. Look there and
judge! It may kill him. Go away, there's a good fellow!"

He got up at once: that was enough. Harry was still willing to hear him,
now or at another time, it did not matter. All he wanted was that Harry
should hear him to the end, and then his part was done. Exposure--there
was no pleasure in the act of it; he only wanted that it should be
there. Truly the man was vile, and an enemy, but he did not covet the
post of executioner as such. By him, it is true, justice was done, the
murderer was put out of a world with the welfare of which his presence
was incompatible, and a man to do it there must be, but who did not
shudder at the shadow of the hangman? That dry, inarticulate sobbing,
which he had no need to tell himself was but a counterfeit grief, yet
wore the respectable semblance of woe. What, again, if remorse had at
length touched Mr. Francis? What if the imminence of his exposure had at
last revealed to him his immeasurable enormity? If such a possibility
was within the range of the most distant horizon, how contemptible would
be his own part in trampling in a truth that was realized! All that was
generous within him, and there was nothing that was not, revolted from
so despicable a rle.

But against that possibility how large and near loomed the probability
that these grovelling pangs were but of the same texture as the rest!
No, he was not taken in; he registered privately the unalterable
conviction that Mr. Francis was Mr. Francis still, for no opprobrious
word conveyed to him half the horror of all which that canonized name
implied. Yet Harry was by him, asking him, not bidding him to go. That
was sufficient; and even as he told himself it was sufficient, back
swung the balance again. What duty could be more obvious, more staring
than to finish now, at once, with that ineffable old man? Yet he sat
there sobbing. And without another word Geoffrey turned and went,
leaving uncle and nephew together.

It was not long before Harry joined him in the smoking room.

"Uncle Francis has gone to his room," he said. "He is quieter now; I
could leave him safely. But I have telegraphed for the doctor; I daren't
take the responsibility of not sending for him. He kept asking me one
question, Geoff; he kept repeating and repeating it: Which of you two is
to go. He says he will not stop here another night if you remain here.
God knows whether I have decided right!"

"It is I who go, you mean?" said Geoffrey.

"Yes, it is you."

Harry sat down wearily, as if tired out; that, too, was his prevailing
feeling; body and mind were dead beat. Geoffrey rose.

"Since that is so," he said, "I ask you, before I go, to hear the rest
of my story--indeed, I must tell it you. Then I shall have done all I
can. Oh, it will not take long," he added, with a sudden inexpressible
bitterness. "In half an hour I shall be gone!"

Harry sprung up as if he had been stung.

"I do not deserve that from you, Geoff," he said. "Do you think I want
to get rid of you? Do you think it is fine fun for me to tell you to go?
I am not conscious of any great pleasure in it."

"No, I am sorry," said Geoffrey. "I had no business to say that or to
think that. But--O Harry, before I go, for the dear Lord's sake, hear
me! I have not been speaking idly. Do you think, in turn, that it is
fine fun for me to get up and bring these awful accusations against Mr.
Francis?"

"Of course I don't. But the whole thing I have to put on one side for
the present. Uncle Francis will not stop in the house while you are
here, Geoff, and I can not let him go, whatever the truth may be, while
he is like this. I dreaded every moment that a seizure might come on him
again. Besides, he is an old man; he is my uncle. For the present, then,
I am like this: I neither believe what you have told me nor do I
disbelieve it; I put it aside; though, before long, when my uncle is
recovered, I shall have to do the one or the other. Either I shall
believe, be convinced you are right, and then God knows what I shall do,
or I shall think your accusations wild and incredible, and, I warn you,
too infinitely base for words. And then, too," he added, suddenly, "God
knows what I shall do! But at present, as I tell you, there is no
question of that. My certain and immediate duty is to look after Uncle
Francis."

"I ask you then, before I go," said Geoffrey, "to hear the remainder of
what I have to say."

"Certainly; but whatever you tell me, I shall not attempt to judge of it
now. You had just spoken about the confusion which came in somewhere
between the ice house and the summerhouse."

So Geoffrey told him of the loop of cotton he had found round the post
of the gun rack; of Mr. Francis's visit to the gun room, and finally of
his own finding him in the afternoon, after the breaking of the sluice,
sitting before the fire in the hall "supposing" that Harry had not yet
come in. And Harry heard in silence and without comment.

"That is all?" he asked, when Geoffrey had finished. "You are sure there
is nothing more? You are sure, also, you have been exact throughout?"

"That is all," said Geoffrey, "and I have been exact."

"Then, dear old boy," said Harry, "let us for the present put it from
our minds. Your carriage will be round in ten minutes; I told them to
pack for you. And tell me that you agree with me when I have to ask you
to go. I feel--I know--that I can not do otherwise."

"Yes, you are right, and God guard you!" said Geoffrey.

Then suddenly the whole flood of fears and suspicions and certainties
surged in his mind together and overflowed it. He was leaving Harry
alone with that hellish man. Who knew what he might not attempt next?
Every fibre in his being cried aloud to him that danger of subtle and
deadly sort hung suspended over Harry, imminent to fall so long as that
white-haired old man was under the same roof. But what could he do? He
could not force Harry to see the clearness of that which was so clear to
him; he could not even make him exercise his judgment upon it. And his
anxiety for him broke bounds.

"Yes, you are right," he said. "But I can not persuade myself that I am
right to go. O Harry! I ask you once again, Do you tell me to go?"

Harry got up and leaned his head on the chimney-piece.

"Don't make it harder for me, Geoff," he said.

Here was a ray of hope.

"I will make it as hard as I can," said Geoffrey. "I appeal to anything
that will move you. We are old friends, Harry. Wiser and better friends
you will find, but none more faithful. You are doing a cruel thing."

Harry turned round suddenly.

"Stop," he said. "I tell you to go. O Geoff! who is doing the cruel
thing? You know--O my God! won't this nightmare cease?"

Geoffrey saw his lips quivering; his own also were not steady. He came
close to him, and laid his hands on his shoulders.

"What have we done, Harry," he said, "that this should happen to us? You
have answered me. But promise me one thing. I insist on that."

"I will promise you anything you think right to ask me, Geoff," said he,
"and you know it, provided only it does not make me cancel what I have
said, and what I have decided to do."

"It does not. It is simply this: Three times within the last ten days
you have been in imminent danger. God knows what it all means, but it is
certain that many dangers surround you on all sides. I ask you to
promise to be careful. I don't ask you to consider all I have told you
now; you must do that when you feel that you can. You promise me this?"

"Willingly."

"And let it be soon that you consider what I have said. Judge the thing
as you would judge for another, and God send you the right judgment!
That is all I want."

"Amen to that," said Harry.




CHAPTER XX

DR. ARMYTAGE ARRIVES


Dr. Armytage, for whom Harry had telegraphed, arrived about nine that
night. He had left London immediately on receipt of the summons without
dining, and having seen his patient, came downstairs to join Harry in a
belated meal. In appearance he was a dark man and spare, his chin and
upper lip blue-black from a strong crop of hair close shaven; heavy
eyebrows nearly met over his aquiline nose; his mouth had a certain
secrecy and tightness about it. But his manner was that of a man
reserved but competent; his thin, delicate hands were neat and firm in
their movements; and Harry, torn and distracted by a world of
bewilderment, found it an unutterable relief to have put one out of all
his perplexities, the care of his uncle, into such adequate hands. For
the moment, at least, the boon of the doctor's arrival quite overscored
that sinister impression he had formed of him when, in the summer, he
had passed him driving to the station.

With regard to his patient he was grave, but not alarming. Grave,
however, one felt he would always be, and Harry remembered Mr. Francis's
criticism of him, that he knew too much, and had always in his mind the
most remote consequences of any lesion, however insignificant.

"I can give you no certain account of him to-night, Lord Vail," he said.
"I found Mr. Francis in a lethargic state, the natural reaction from, so
I understand, an agitating scene that took place this afternoon. I did
not even speak to him, for I thought it better not to rouse him, as he
seemed in a fair way to get a good night's rest. But I spoke to his man,
who told me that he thought something agitating and painful had taken
place. May I ask you if this is the case?"

"Yes," said Harry, "a friend of mine, Mr. Francis, and I, had a terrible
scene this afternoon."

"Can you tell me about it; the merest outline only? You see, if Mr.
Francis experiences any return of this agitation, which is, to put it
frankly, so dangerous, it might be very likely useful that I should know
about it, and be able to soothe him with something more specific than
wide generalities."

Harry paused; they were alone over dessert.

"It is all very horrible," he said at length, "and I can hardly speak of
it. But I can tell you this: Within the last ten days I have had three
very narrow escapes from a violent and sudden death."

Dr. Armytage put down with neat haste the glass he was raising to his
lips, and gave Harry one quick glance from below his bushy eyebrows.
Startling though the words were, you would hardly have expected such
sudden alertness and interest from so self-contained a man.

"Yes?" he said.

"Well, for one at least of these my uncle blames himself," said Harry.
"That certainly was one of the causes of his agitation, though perhaps
not the greatest immediate cause. Oh, it is awful to speak of it!" he
cried. "Tell me what you advise. Had I better tell you everything?"

"I repeat, it may possibly be of use to me," said the doctor. "All you
say, of course, will be under the seal of my profession."

The servants had entered the room with coffee, and Harry did not
immediately reply. Templeton, as usual, carried the case of the Luck,
and even as he took the jewel into his hand, Harry hurriedly filled a
wineglass.

"The Luck," he said in no very cordial tone. Then turning to the doctor.

"Please excuse me," he said. "It is a custom I have got into. Yes, that
is the Luck; my uncle may have spoken to you about it. You would like to
look at it?"

The doctor waved it away.

"Another time, another time," he said, and waited till the servants had
left the room. Then:

"Yes," he continued, "I have heard Mr. Francis speak of it. An
extraordinary delusion in so clear-headed a man, is it not? He thinks--I
hope I am not intruding into family secrets, Lord Vail--he soberly
thinks that the Luck brings blessings and curses on your house. I may
say the idea almost possesses him."

"Surely you are mistaken," said Harry. "He is always laughing, sometimes
even he is distressed at my believing--ah! not believing, but thinking I
believe in it. But very curious things have happened," he added.

"There is doubtless some mistake," said the doctor. "But to return: All
you tell me will be under the seal of my profession."

"You mean that I speak to one who is necessarily as silent as the
grave," said Harry. "You will pardon my insistence on this."

"I give you my word on it," said the doctor.

"Well, it is a strange, dark story," said Harry, "and if I speak a
little incoherently, you will know by the end what perplexities I am in.
Now there are two kiosks--sort of places near the house; one is a
summerhouse, one an ice house. I got the keys one morning, and asked my
uncle which was which. He told me quite distinctly that the left-hand
one was the summerhouse. He made a mistake, and I went whistling into
the ice house--they were both shuttered and quite dark inside--and came
within an ace of falling into the big tank. I am quite sure I went to
the one he told me was the summerhouse."

"Number one," said the doctor.

"Next morning he went up to London," continued Harry, "and I and
Geoffrey Langham, this friend of mine who left to-day, were going out
for a day's shooting. My gun was standing in the rack, and as I took it
up it went off, narrowly missing me. The last person who had used that
gun and who had left the cartridge in it was my uncle."

"Number two," said the doctor.

"To-day he and I went out together and looked at the flooded lake. I
tried to raise an extra sluice that we have, and finding that I could
not make it move, we went up toward the farm to get men to help. But,
again at his suggestion, he went on to the farm, and I went back to have
another try at it. As I was standing on the main sluice, pulling, the
whole thing gave way, and I went down with the flood-water, as near to
being drowned as any one can wish to be. My uncle had thought the sluice
not very safe, but he had not thought it worth mentioning."

The doctor was silent awhile.

"You bear a charmed life, Lord Vail," he said at length. "But I think
you have more to tell me."

Harry gave him one dumb, appealing glance, and met eyes which were grave
but not unkind, firm and deeply interested. He had the impression that
they had long been watching him.

"Yes, I have more--I have more," he said, with agitation, "and it is
horribly painful! Dr. Armytage, I have two great friends--or so I
think--my uncle, and this Geoffrey Langham, a fellow of my own age or
thereabouts. This afternoon, to my uncle's face, though I am bound to
say he would have preferred to tell me privately, Geoffrey made
horrible insinuations--accusations. He said that Uncle Francis had long
been my enemy; that he had tried to prevent my engagement; that he had
failed there, and that in this affair, for instance, my uncle had
intentionally--had intentionally----" and a strangling knot tied itself
in his throat, choking utterance.

The doctor pushed the water-bottle gently a little closer to Harry, and
he poured himself out some and drank it, unconscious that any suggestion
had been made to him.

"Then there was an awful scene," he went on. "My uncle was nearly off
his head, I believe, with remorse and horror for those words which had
so nearly sent me to my death, and this was aggravated, I must suppose,
by black, ungovernable rage against Geoffrey. I felt that I had never
seen an angry man before. He refused to stay another night in the house
with him; he asked me continually which of them it was who should go. He
could not, of that I was convinced, in that state, and I sent Geoff off.
Besides, I can not--simply I can not--believe in Geoff's accusations. It
is flatly impossible that Uncle Francis should be guilty of the least
intention which Geoff attributed to him. Do I not know him? There must
be some other explanation. And if you want to know what my other
explanation is, it has stood in front of you at dinner. It was the Luck:
fire and frost and rain--the ice house, the gun, the sluice. Oh, it has
happened once before like that."

"Yes, Mr. Francis told me," said the doctor, still looking very intently
at him.

Harry flicked the ash off his cigarette.

"Here am I, then," he said. "Of my two best friends, one lies upstairs;
the other, God knows if I shall ever see the other again! I have to tell
him whether I believe what he said. And I can not believe it. It is
monstrous; he is monstrous to have thought it. Yet I see why he thought
it; to any one not believing in the Luck, there was no other
explanation. There are other things too. I need not trouble you with
them. He came to the conclusion, for instance, that my uncle wished to
stop my engagement--prevent it rather, for I was not engaged then. They
were specious--good Lord! they were specious enough. But I have been
considering them all, and I simply can not believe them. It is not that
I wilfully shut my eyes; I hold them open with pincers and chisels, so
to speak, but I am unable--that is clear--to believe anything of this.
How could it be possible? God does not allow such things, I tell you."

"That is your verdict, then. You believe nothing against your uncle,"
said the other with an intonation absolutely colourless.

"I can not."

"May I tell your uncle this, Lord Vail?" asked the doctor presently. "If
his agitation returns, I can think of nothing which would so much tend
to soothe it as the assurance that these accusations are to you
absolutely void and empty. These vile accusations," he added in a
moment.

"Yes, they are vile," said Harry, half to himself.

"May I then use my discretion to tell him so, if I think it desirable?"
asked the doctor, pressing his point. "It would be better, I think, for
me to tell him than you. That would be agitating work for both of you,"
he said, watching the lad closely.

"Oh, you may tell him whatever you damn please!" cried Harry, with the
sudden petulance of nerves utterly overwrought.

Instantly the doctor's face changed. The symptom for which he had been
waiting had come.

"Now, then, Lord Vail," he said, with a peremptoriness which startled
Harry, "I do not want two patients instead of one. You were on the verge
of hysterics, let me tell you. We will have none of that, please."

This treatment was shrewd and prompt. Judging rapidly and correctly, he
saw that any word of sympathy or kindness would be likely to throw Harry
altogether off the balance, and he was justified when, in answer to this
rough speech, he saw an angry flush spring to his face.

"I am not accustomed to be spoken to like that," he said hotly.

"No, it was a liberty on my part," said the doctor. "Please excuse it.
But I think you will acknowledge that I was right. You are your own man
again now."

Harry considered this a moment, then smiled.

"Yes, you were perfectly right," he said candidly. "But I have had
rather a trying time to-day."

"Indeed you have, and I may say now that I am very sorry for you. I
recommend you therefore to go to bed, and not to write to your friend
to-night, nor to think what you will say to him when you do."

"And to go to sleep very quietly and soundly till morning," said Harry.
"Excellent advice, Dr. Armytage."

"Oh, you will do all these things if you follow my directions," said the
doctor.

"I should like to hear them, then."

"To drink the dose I will send you up to your room," he said quietly.

At that moment, as if by a flash-light suddenly turned on, Harry saw
himself again meeting at the lodge gates this man for whom, at first
sight, he had conceived so violent and instinctive an antipathy, and
simultaneously the curious adventure in the search for Dr. Godfrey shone
in his mind. What if, after all, Geoffrey was right, and he himself was
alone in this house with a man such as his friend had pictured Mr.
Francis to be, and his mysterious confederate physician, whose ways were
so dark? The suspicions which had seemed to him so utterly beyond the
horizon of credibility leaped suddenly nearer. And when he spoke,
though he tried to make no alteration in his tone, even to himself his
voice sounded unusual.

"I don't think I shall require any doses," he said. "I dare say I shall
sleep all right. Thanks all the same."

"Ah, you don't trust me," said the doctor in the same quiet tone.

This exceeding frankness both pleased and offended Harry.

"Is it not a pity to say a thing like that?" he asked, "when you really
have no warrant for it? To show you how wrong you are, I will take your
dose with pleasure."

The doctor's grave face relaxed.

"That is right, Lord Vail," he said. "But do you think that your now
consenting to take it proves that I was wrong? Might not a man consider
that it showed I was right?"

Harry smiled also.

"A man of sufficient ingenuity can make plausible the most extravagant
conclusions," he said, rather enjoying this tiny fencing match.

"True; we will not draw any at all, since there is no need," he said.
"And now, with your leave, I will go up and see Mr. Francis again. I
hope and trust I shall find him asleep."

"I shall be in the hall," said Harry; "please give me your report as
soon as you have seen him."

Dr. Armytage went upstairs, and Harry lit a cigarette and waited his
return. Dinner and the presence of this capable man had to a large
extent quieted his jangled nerves, and he was conscious, more than
anything, of a great weariness. The acuteness of his perplexities had
for the moment worn off a little, and though their aching weight was no
less, they pressed on him, so it seemed, without the fret of sharp
edges. He resolutely set himself not to think of them, but rather of
that exquisite point of happiness which was day by day coming nearer to
him. Evie would be in England in less than a fortnight now; five weeks
brought him to that day to which his whole life hitherto seemed to have
been leading up. But suddenly the claws and teeth again recaptured him:
Geoffrey was to have been his best man, and now-- And with that his
feverish mill-race of bewildering possibilities began again, and it was
a relief when the doctor reappeared.

"Mr. Francis is sleeping, I am glad to tell you," he said. "Thanks. I
will smoke one cigarette before I go upstairs; and when I go, you go
too, if you please, Lord Vail. I have put your dose in your bedroom."

"Thanks. I am dead tired; one cigarette will see me."

The doctor settled himself in a chair.

"Yes, that tiredness is exactly what my dose will give a chance to," he
said. "You are tired and excited--a horrible combination; and your
excitement would certainly keep you awake. That I hope to remove by this
sedative draught, and let your tiredness act naturally. But I must
really congratulate you on your nerves. In the last ten days you have
had enough escapes to last a lifetime, and, upon my word, you don't look
used up. A very fine nervous constitution. Mr. Francis also used to have
the same power of going through things that would have caused most men
to break down utterly."

"Yes, he has been through awful trouble," said Harry, "and really he
does not seem more than a man of sixty."

"Trouble of the most horrible kind," said the doctor. "May I ask you,
Lord Vail, if Miss Aylwin is any relation to----"

"Yes," interrupted Harry; "her mother was Mrs. Harmsworth."

"I see you know the story. I was associated somewhat closely with it; I
was, in fact, the doctor who gave evidence at the coroner's inquest."

Again Harry forgot his own perplexities.

"Ah, tell me about that," he said.

"There is little to tell. The conclusion I arrived at was that the death
of Mr. Harmsworth might easily have been accidental or self-inflicted;
that it was, in fact, the gun he carried which killed him. That, of
course, was the crucial point. The nature of the wound appeared to me
compatible with that interpretation."

"I knew that you were an old friend of my uncle's," said Harry. "But I
did not know that your association with him was so intimate as that."

The doctor was silent a moment, and threw his smoked-out cigarette away.

"I tell you this," he said at last, "as a sort of testimonial,
recommendation, what you will: I came here as a stranger to you; you
have received me with very cordial hospitality, and I present," he
added, "my credentials."

Harry rose, and held out his hand.

"They are extremely satisfactory," he said. "And now for my dose and
bed. You sleep in my uncle's sitting room, I think you said. I hope they
have made you comfortable."

"I have everything," said the doctor. "By the way, speaking of your
friend Mr. Langham, I may tell Mr. Francis that he has left, if I think
it wise?"

"Certainly, if you wish."

"That he has gone to London?" suggested the doctor casually.

"As a matter of fact he has gone to his father's house for a few days,
down near Sevenoaks. Lord Langham, you know."

"Ah, yes," said Dr. Armytage. "Good-night, my dear Lord Vail. I am
convinced you will sleep well."

       *       *       *       *       *

Half an hour afterward the house was dark and quiet. Harry had drained
his dose, and was sleeping deeply and dreamlessly; Mr. Francis was not
more wakeful. The night was warm and mellow after the heavy rain, and
Dr. Armytage sat long at his window looking out with fixed, undeviating
eyes into the blackness. At intervals, some real or fancied stir from
the sick room would make him rise mechanically, and, crossing the
floor, look in on his patient; once Mr. Francis in his sleep called out,
"Harry, Harry! take care!" in a strangling, agonized voice. But even
then he did not wake, and the doctor returned again to his seat in the
window and still gazed out into the night. The rain had ceased soon
after sunset, and now the sky was nearly clear, and star in-wrought; in
the east the moon would soon be rising. But he regarded not nor saw
either stars or the climbing crescent.

At length a striking clock aroused him, and he got up.

"No, no, and a thousand times no!" he said to himself.




CHAPTER XXI

GEOFFREY MEETS THE DOCTOR


Dr. Armytage, despite Lady Oxted's round and uncompromising definition
of him as a dexterous surgeon of sinister repute, proved himself during
the next day or two to be far more intimately acquainted with the vital
structure of the animal called man than is at all necessary for one who
only concerns himself with dissection of artery and muscle, and the
severing of bones. Under his wise and beneficent care Mr. Francis
rapidly rose again to his accustomed surface, and, no less testimony to
his skill, Harry once more looked the world squarely and courageously in
the face. These inner and spiritual lesions require for their healing
not only a skilful diagnosis, but a mind of delicate and certain touch,
and of his two patients the doctor was inclined to think that Harry made
the more flattering recovery. During these days he kept uncle and nephew
studiously apart; he would allow no visits to the sick room, and
communication was limited to messages passed to and fro by the doctor
himself. Mr. Francis, on the one hand, was bidden to keep his bed for
three days, and quiet was insisted on; quiet, on the other hand, was
sternly forbidden to Harry. For him the prescription was to go out as
much as possible, and busy himself with any employment--all were
good--which he found congenial, and when indoors to apply himself
slavishly to all the businesses which Mr. Francis had hitherto managed
for him.

"Oh, you have plenty to do," said the doctor to this harassed young
gentleman; "go and do some of it."

But among these things which had to be done was an affair of difficulty,
the letter which must be written to Geoffrey. This, when he put his hand
to it, Harry found to be a black, bitter business, and sheet after sheet
was begun and abandoned. Had he realized it, he was attempting the
impossible, for he had set himself to write a letter which should at
once be thoroughly friendly, and yet spit on the allegations which his
friend had made. The writer alone did not see that such a letter could
not be written even by Solomon, Shakespeare, and the original serpent in
conjunction. Thus, for a couple of hours one evening Harry wrote and
tore, reducing wooden penholders to match wood, and quires of fair white
paper to grist for the housemaid in her fire-lighting, yet still the
envelope was no nearer to its postage stamp; and the dressing bell
indeed showed him only a brimming waste-paper basket. He could not write
this letter; here was the flat truth.

At this juncture the doctor entered the smoking room, which Harry had
chosen to be the arena of these futile endeavours, and a glance at his
clouded face seemed enough for him.

"It is difficult, I admit," he said. "Ah, you must not be offended with
me, Lord Vail. I have guessed right. I know: we doctors have to be
thought-readers. You have been making"--and his eye fell on the
paper-basket--"many unsuccessful attempts to write to your friend.
Perhaps I ought to have saved you that trouble."

Harry turned a dark face on him.

"I'm sure there is no secret about it," he said. "As like as not I
should have told you. I can't write this letter, I just can't write it.
Yet I must. But when I begin to tell Geoff the truth, that he has done a
dastardly thing, and that I can never see him again, and that I love him
just as much as ever--well--the whole thing becomes unreal at once."

"Yes, those are hard words to a friend," said the doctor.

"I know, and I'm not hard. I love that chap, I tell you. You don't know
him; so much the worse for you, for you don't know the best old fool God
ever made. I'm just hungry to see him, and I've got to tell him that he
is a base cad. Oh, confound the whole round world! By the way, you said
you should have spared me this trouble. What do you mean?"

Dr. Armytage took a chair close to the table where Harry was failing to
write.

"Three days ago, Lord Vail, when I first arrived," he said, "I offered
you a sleeping-draught, which you refused. I suggested that you refused
it because you distrusted me. Tell me now, was I right in suggesting
that?"

Harry looked straight, as his wont was, at the dark, secret face he had
once thought so sinister. To him now it appeared only sad.

"What has that got to do with it?" he asked.

"Was that suggestion right?" repeated the doctor.

"Yes, quite," said the other frankly.

"Just so. Eventually you did trust me, or, at any rate, behaved as if
you did, and you found your confidence not misplaced. You awoke, in
fact, after a good night's rest. And now, if you grant that, you owe me
the benefit of a doubt."

"Well?"

"I ask you to trust me again," said the doctor, "for the fact is I have
already written to your friend myself, telling him not to expect a
letter from you yet. I knew, I was completely certain, that you would
find it impossible to write to him, and it seemed to me that if I wrote
at once, as I did, it would save him some anxious hours. That is my
confession."

Again Harry tried to feel what he told himself was a just resentment,
but the sentiment that he raised in his mind was but a phantom. He
ought, so he considered, to feel that his liberty was being tampered
with, but this curiously self-possessed man appeared to have the gift of
impeccable meddling. Then he laughed outright.

"I simply do not know what to say to you," he said. "You take it upon
yourself to interfere with affairs of mine that do not in the least
concern you, and yet I don't really resent it."

"In that you are quite wise," remarked the doctor.

Harry threw down his pen.

"And not content with that, you patronize me, and pat me on the back,"
he said. "I am not at all sure that I intend to stand it. Pray, if I may
so far interfere in your concerns, what did you say to Geoffrey?" he
asked, with a show of spirit.

"I told him not to expect a letter from you yet," said the doctor. "I
told him not to be impatient and wish for knots to be cut as long as
there was the faintest hope of their being unravelled."

"Ah, there is not the faintest," broke in Harry.

"You too, then, acquiesce in the cutting. I hope your friend is more
reasonable; less he can not be. You have no right to say, while the
thing is yet so recent, that a reconciliation of your friend with Mr.
Francis is impossible. And if that were possible it would comprehend, I
take it, a reconciliation with you."

"Oh, you don't know Geoff, I tell you," said Harry. "He will never
apologize. He is not given to rush at conclusions; but when he has
concluded, he is more obstinate than all the beasts that perish. You
waste your trouble if you expect him to recant."

The doctor rose.

"I repeat, it is too early to expect anything," he said. "A difficult
situation takes time. If it does not take time, it is not difficult. Be
sure of that. One thing alone I was certain of: that any letter from
you, believing as you do so utterly in your uncle's absolute
innocence--if I could put your feelings more strongly I would--could
not tend to mend matters. It would only accentuate your
estrangement--temporary, I hope--with your friend. And now have I your
pardon for doing what I have done?"

"Not yet," said Harry. "What else did you say?"

"I said that you were as safe here as in the Bank of England. I asked
him to be reasonable. Supposing his wild surmise was true, and that you
had a very bitter enemy of your own blood in this house, how could he be
so foolhardy as to make another attempt on you just now, when three had
so conspicuously miscarried, and such suspicious circumstances were in
Mr. Langham's knowledge? For the circumstances," he said, looking
gravely at Harry, "were suspicious."

"I know they were," said Harry. "Poor old Geoff! Well, I couldn't have
written that letter if I had tried till midnight."

He got up also, as the dinner gong sounded.

"That's dinner, and we are not yet dressed," he said. "But you were
quite right to do it for me, Dr. Armytage," and frankness became him
infinitely better than reserve. "And you might have added that I have a
very good friend here, who looks after both my uncle and myself."

Dr. Armytage smiled rather grimly.

"I came to the conclusion that such a statement would not have increased
his confidence," he said, "either in me or in your safety. There is no
sense in gushing, particularly if one gushes about one's self."

That night, when the doctor made his last visit to Mr. Francis, he
brought him as usual some small, affectionate message from Harry, and
Mr. Francis yawned, for he was sleepy, and made no immediate reply. But
in a moment or two he roused himself.

"My love, my very best love," he said, "and any convincing tenderness
you please. By the way, how do you and he get on together? Is it very
trying? I am afraid so. But it is of the utmost importance that you
should gain Harry's confidence, that you should make him trust you."

"So you told me, and, without boasting, I think I may say that I have
been fairly successful. I made a good beginning, you know, the first
night I was here."

"Ah, yes, that sleeping-draught," said Mr. Francis appreciatively. "A
little bromide of potassium you told me; quite simple and harmless. A
charming drug, and an ingenious idea. Yes, Harry's consenting to take a
sleeping-draught from your hands certainly showed that if he was
disposed not to trust you, he was fighting that inclination. And you
have improved your advantage, dear Godfrey?"

"Yes, we are on excellent terms. And, to tell you the truth, I do not
find it trying at all. Your nephew is both amiable and intelligent."

"Poor Harry!" said Mr. Francis softly. "Yes, his very simplicity has a
certain charm, has it not? It is also a very convenient quality. Well, I
am to go to sleep I suppose: I sleep so well now! And you intend to take
me to London at the end of the week?"

"That was the proposal," said the doctor.

"And you, being an autocrat--for, indeed, doctors are the only autocrats
we have left--insist on it. I assure you it will be the best plan. That
young cub who left the other day has wits of a kind; he is rather sharp.
It will quiet his outrageous suspicions, I think, if I leave Vail soon.
I hope Harry will not be very dull alone," he added.

"He may not choose to stop here," said the doctor.

"It does not matter," said Mr. Francis. "He is certain to come back here
before his marriage, to see that the house is quite ready to receive
them after their honeymoon--'honeymoon! honeymoon!'" he repeated. "I
count on that. By the way, do you call him Harry yet?"

"No."

"Dear Godfrey, how short and glum you are! I do not suppose I have had a
monosyllabic reply for ten years: they are so unnecessarily curt. But
try to call him by his Christian name: it produces an admirable effect,
and so cheaply. Practise saying, 'Harry, Harry,' when you are alone. You
will find it makes it easier. Ah, well, I must go to sleep. Good-night,
my dear man."

It was therefore definitely settled and announced to Harry that Mr.
Francis and the doctor would leave for London at the end of the week. He
would be the better, so said the doctor, for a change, for the very dark
and autumnal weather which had settled down on Vail during the last day
or two was a depressing influence, and he strongly recommended a week in
London, where the little arrangements and excitements incident to
settling into the flat would keep him agreeably occupied.

Mr. Francis dined downstairs on the last night before he left, and
seemed his buoyant self again. During the afternoon incessant bubblings
from the flute had come from his room, and that sound had been to Harry
like the voice of some familiar friend returned. His uncle indeed had
playfully prefaced his own entry into the hall, after the gong had
sounded, with the tune of "See, the conquering Hero comes," a little
thin on this solo instrument, but he had marched in time to it with an
incomparable gaiety, with foot high-lifted and a pointed toe.

"And you, dear Harry," he asked, as they had seated themselves, after
Mr. Francis had said grace, "what are your plans? I was half inclined
to rebel when our dear autocrat gave me my marching orders, and I heard
that you, perhaps, would be left here alone, but my disaffection was
quelled by a look. Has Godfrey given you any of his quelling looks, I
wonder? But how long do you stop here?"

"Three or four days only, now," said Harry. "Then I go to the Oxteds'
for a week, and come back here again by the beginning of November for
ten days. After that, London till the 15th."

"Dear fellow, so near as that, so near as that, is it?" said Mr.
Francis. "Ah, Harry!"--and he held out his hand to him. Then, seeing
that the serious note was slightly embarrassing to the young man:

"Ah! good Templeton has given us the Luck again!" he cried, changing the
subject abruptly. "Upon my word, the thing seems to grow brighter and
more dazzling each time I see it.--This nephew of mine, I must tell you,
my dear Godfrey, is a very foolish fellow in some ways. He almost--I may
say almost, Harry--believes in that old legend. Really, a remarkable
survival of superstition among the educated classes. I shall write to
the Psychical Research about it. That amiable society collects
nightmares and superstitions, I am told. A quaint hobby."

"I have drunk obediently to the Luck, night after night, have I not,
Harry?" said the doctor.

"Of course. It is a rule of the house. By the way, let us set that point
at rest. Dr. Armytage told me that you believed in the Luck, Uncle
Francis. I simply couldn't credit it. You have always ridiculed me for
even pretending to."

Mr. Francis laughed.

"Harry, that medical man can not keep a secret," he said. "No, my dear
boy, I am only joking, but it is quite true that I have found myself
wondering, after your extraordinary series of accidents early in this
year, whether it were possible that there could be anything in it."

He paused a moment, and then went on quite naturally. "And these last
three horrible escapes of yours," he said. "How strange! The ice house,
frost; the gun, fire; the sluice, rain. There are more things in heaven
and earth-- Well, well!"

Here was proof, at any rate, that Mr. Francis knew how entirely Harry
trusted him, and though at the thought of that awful scene between
Geoffrey and his uncle the lad was startled for the moment at so direct
a mention of that which had caused it, it was something of a relief to
know that the subject did not cause Mr. Francis pain.

"Yes, taken all round, it would be sufficient to convince the most
hardened sceptic," he said. "Poor old Luck! What an abominably futile
business it has made of it all!"

Mr. Francis suddenly covered his face with his hand.

"Ah! it won't do to jest about," he said. "I spoke lightly, without
thinking, but I find I can not quite stand it, dear Harry. It is too
recent, too terrible!"

At this the talk veered to less intimate subjects, and before a couple
of minutes were passed Mr. Francis was again in that exuberance of
spirits which had made him play "See, the conquering Hero comes." He had
always some contribution apposite and gay to make to the conversation,
capable of fantastic development and garnished with pleasant conceits.
But for him the meal would have somewhat languished, for, whether it was
that Harry's old habit of reserve had returned to him, or that his
thoughts were again a prey to the perplexities which his uncle's words
might have recalled, he was unwontedly silent; while on the part of the
doctor it seemed that a somewhat absent assent or dissent, and that only
when directly appealed to, was all he had to give. But Mr. Francis was
the man for the moment; he rose to the social emergency, and he told a
hundred little anecdotes, diversified and amusing, and the growing
silence of the other two was but a foil to the amazing agility of his
tongue. But the most capacious measure is emptied at last, and about the
time of dessert, spent and dropping shots, without effect, were the only
remnant of that loquacious artillery. And it was in silence that the
first glasses of port were poured out, and to break a notable hush that
Harry rose.

"The Luck," he said. "I drink to the Luck."

The doctor and Mr. Francis rose to the toast, the latter with too eager
an alacrity. His napkin, which he had flung on the table, caught his
glass, and the wine was spilled.

On the same day that the doctor and Mr. Francis were travelling up from
Vail, Geoffrey was also going to London, in consequence of a strangely
unexpected summons. He had duly received the doctor's letter a week ago,
and this had been followed three days later by a shorter note, informing
him that he and Mr. Francis were leaving Vail for London on the Thursday
following, and asking if Geoffrey would give the writer an opportunity
of seeing him on a matter the importance of which could not be
estimated. Dr. Armytage would be at his house that evening between five
and seven, or, if these hours would not suit, he asked Geoffrey to name
any time which was convenient to him after their arrival in London, and
he would make a point of being in then, laying any other engagement he
might have aside. Then followed a notable sentence:

"It occurs to me," wrote the doctor, "that you, following the thread of
the suspicions of which Lord Vail has spoken to me, may see in this
request a deep-laid scheme for insuring your presence in London on a
given day and hour, and your certain absence from any other place. But I
beg you to ask yourself why, if such were the case, I should have
written to you at all. I may add that Mr. Francis Vail and I reach
Paddington at 12.37 (midday) on Thursday. Be at the station, if you
will, and assure yourself that we have left Vail."

So far the letter ran with the precision and orderliness of a despatch.
Then followed the signature, and after the signature a strange
postscript:

"I must see you--I must see you," read Geoffrey, and the writer's pen
had spluttered with the underlining of the words.

No very long consideration was necessary, but knowing from Lady Oxted
what he did of the doctor's antecedents, it was clearly possible that he
might be placing himself in a position of some personal danger. To
attempt to form any accurate idea of the scheme which might conceivably
lie latent behind this letter was an idle task; but what he saw, and
that without shadow of doubt, but with a certain exultation, was, that
it was he above all men whom Mr. Francis had most reason to fear, and as
long as he was at large with all the circumstantial evidence that he
held, it was clearly very unlikely that any further attempt could be
immediately contemplated against Harry, for the risk would be
prodigious. So far, then, it looked that this letter might be a bold and
cunning scheme to get him too into the power of this hellish man. On the
other hand, he could not neglect the possible chance: the letter might
conceivably be genuinely inspired. Looking at it coolly, as was his
habit of mind, he thought that the balance of probability dipped to the
sinister side: this Dr. Armytage was far more likely to be Mr. Francis's
confederate than a disinterested doctor, or a foe. Yet there was a
certain touch of truth about the spluttering pen of the postscript, and
Geoffrey's debate was but of short duration.

Then, with wonderment at his own slowness of wit, next moment the
obvious safeguard struck him, and he telegraphed to the doctor at 32
Wimpole Street, saying that he would meet him at five o'clock at the
junction of Orchard Street with Oxford Street. This was conveniently
near to his own lodgings, where they could retire to hold conference if
it appeared that there was reason for it, while it would be scarcely
possible for any one, even with the legions of hell to back him, to
spirit away an active young man from that populous thoroughfare without
attracting public attention.

Geoffrey arrived in London late in the forenoon, and spent a couple of
hours in writing out with the most minute particulars the account of all
those incidents on which his suspicions were founded, and which had led
to his scene with Mr. Francis. This he sealed up in an envelope, and
wrote directions on the outside that, in case nothing more was heard
from him till Monday, midday, it was to be opened. He put this into a
larger envelope, addressed it with a short note to his father, and
posted it. Finally, before he set out for his rendezvous at the corner
of Orchard Street, he slipped a loaded revolver into his breast pocket,
to guard against the very remote possibility of his being attacked in
his own rooms. Its presence there, though not unattended with qualms,
for he was something of a stranger to this branch of firearms, yet
filled him with a secret glee of adventure.

Punctually at five he arrived at the appointed corner, and a few
moments' observation of the shifting and changing crowd was enough to
enable him to single out a man spare and dark who also lingered there.
It was evident, too, that he had observed Geoffrey, no less than
Geoffrey had observed him, and, on the third or fourth occasion that
their eyes met, the man crossed the street to him.

"Mr. Geoffrey Langham?" he asked, and to Geoff's silent gesture of
assent, "I am Dr. Armytage."

They turned and walked a little way down Oxford Street before either
spoke again. Then said the doctor:

"Your plan was reasonable, that we should meet in some public place: it
was natural that you should not wish to trust yourself to my house. But
I would suggest that if we are to talk in public, we get into a hansom,
or I should prefer a four-wheeler."

"Why?" asked Geoffrey.

"Because we are dealing, or I hope shall soon be dealing, with a very
subtle man, who for aught I know may be watching either you or me."

Geoffrey wheeled round quickly.

"Come to my rooms in Orchard Street," he said--"No. 12. I will walk on
the other side of the road."

The distance was but a few dozen yards, and three minutes later the two
were in the sitting room, which overlooked the street. Geoffrey pointed
to a seat, and waited for the other to open the conversation.

"I repeat," said the doctor, "that your amendment of our plan was
reasonable, for you have little reason to trust me."

"It seems to me so," said Geoffrey. "I thought it wise to take that and
other precautions. But it was you who asked for this interview. Kindly
tell me what you have to say."

"It is told in two words," said Dr. Armytage. "Your friend Lord Vail
has, by almost a miracle of luck, escaped from three well-devised
schemes against his life. Thrice has Mr. Francis failed. We can not
expect such luck to continue."

Not a muscle of Geoffrey's face moved.

"You mean he will make another attempt," he said.

"He will certainly make another attempt."

Geoffrey's hands were playing with a box of cigarettes on the table,
opening and shutting the lid in a careful and purposeless manner.

"Here, smoke," he said, "and give me a minute to think."

The doctor took a cigarette, lit it, and waited. He had smoked it half
down before Geoffrey spoke again.

"You see my position," he said at length. "There is no harm that I can
see in my telling you that I know how intimate you are with Mr. Francis.
I am wondering whether possibly I may be aiding him and you by seeing
you; that is the truth. For your intimacy with Mr. Francis was very
close as long as three-and-twenty years ago--at the time, let us say, of
the violent death of Harold Harmsworth. That is so, I believe."

"Certainly," said the doctor. "I received, I may tell you, two thousand
pounds for the service I did Mr. Francis at the coroner's inquest."

Geoffrey looked up quickly.

"Ah! that sounds genuine," he said.

"About that you must decide for yourself," said the doctor.

Geoffrey snapped down the lid of the cigarette box, took out of his coat
pocket the revolver he had put there, and laid it on the table close to
the doctor's hand.

"I have decided, you see, to trust you," he said. "Perhaps my parting
with that revolver is an unconvincing proof, for it would certainly be
incautious of you to shoot me here and now, but I can think of nothing
better. There it is, anyhow."

Dr. Armytage took up the revolver and opened it.

"Six chambers, all loaded, I perceive," he said. "Let me return it you
as I received it. I have no use for it."

Geoffrey took it from his hand and put it back in the table drawer.

"And now let us talk," he said.

An extraordinary look of relief crossed the doctor's face; the whole
man seemed to brighten to the eye.

"I hardly dared hope you would trust me," he said, "and your affection
for your friend must have been strong. But let us waste no more time.
Yes, your suspicions were quite correct. Harry Vail has no bitterer
enemy than his uncle. He has made no less than three attempts to put him
out of the way."

"You speak as if you were sure of it," said Geoffrey.

"I am; but what evidence have we? It would not take a barrister ten
minutes to tear it to shreds, for it is entirely circumstantial, and
weak at that. There is the devilish cunning of the man. Again, if we are
to save Harry, we must save him in spite of himself, for he believes not
a word of it, and we deal with a man who is cunning and utterly
unscrupulous--far more cunning, probably, than you and I put together.
But we have one great advantage over him."

"What is that?" asked Geoffrey.

"The fact that he counts on me to be his accomplice. If we succeed, I am
to have ten thousand pounds."

At these words, distrust again flared high in Geoffrey's mind, refusing
to be darkened--a beacon.

"God give you your portion in hell," he cried, "if you are playing a
double game!"

The doctor showed no sign of resentment, but he did not immediately
reply.

"This will not do at all," he said at length. "Either you trust me, or
you do not. If you do not, I will go: we are but wasting words. I may
remind you, however, that if I am playing a double game, my conduct in
wishing to see you is utterly unaccountable; but if not, that it will be
barely possible for me alone to save your friend, for it is my strong
impression that Mr. Francis's man--Sanders, is it not?--will help his
master. Come, which is it to be?"

"Yes, I trust you," said Geoffrey in great agitation. "I ought never to
have said that. Please go on."

"I can give you no certain details yet," said the doctor, "but the
attempt will be made between Harry's return to Vail from Lady Oxted's,
where he goes in a few days, and his moving to London before the
marriage. So much I have gathered from Mr. Francis. It is, you will
understand, of the utmost importance to him that the marriage should
never be consummated. More exactly than that I can not tell you, but I
want you, in any case, to hold yourself in readiness to come to Vail, or
anywhere else, at a moment's notice, and at a word from me."

"Yes, I promise that," said Geoffrey.

"The particulars I can not give you," continued the doctor, "for I do
not yet know them; indeed, I doubt whether Mr. Francis has yet worked
them out himself. But to-day, as we were coming up in the train, he blew
on his flute a long time, and then said suddenly to me: 'I have a new
hobby; the properties of certain powerful drugs. We will have some great
talks about drugs when we are in London.' From this I gathered that he
means to poison Harry."

"The damned old man!" exclaimed Geoffrey.

"Precisely. Now, his motive you know or guess: he is heir. But from what
I have seen of him lately, he sets less store by that than on the fact
that Harry's death will give him the Luck."

"The Luck! He doesn't believe in the Luck!" cried Geoffrey. "I have
heard him laugh at Harry a hundred times for pretending to believe in
it."

"There you are wrong," said the doctor. "I should be rather tempted to
say that the Luck is the only thing in the world he does believe in. I
tell you this for an obvious reason: he is not sane on the point; we are
dealing with a monomaniac, and he is more to be feared than a sane man.
He will run greater risks to secure his end. But it is late: I must go.
During the next week I shall certainly learn the whole of Mr. Francis's
plans, for I shall refuse to help him in any way unless I know all.
Good-bye. You will please stop in London till you hear from me."

Geoffrey got up.

"Tell me," he said, "when did you determine to help Harry?"

"I do not think that if I told you, you would trust me the more," said
the doctor.

"I assure you I shall not trust you less."

Dr. Armytage took his umbrella from the corner.

"A fortnight ago only," he said, "on the day I first saw Harry. Think of
me as you will, so long as you do what I tell you. I really care very
little about anything else, even whether you trust or mistrust me,
provided only you behave as if you trusted me. Yes, till I saw him, and
spent the evening with him on the day you left; prescribed for his
agitated nerves, and gave him a sleeping-draught----"

"I'm glad I didn't know that before," said Geoffrey frankly.

"It might certainly have caused you some uneasiness. But not till then
did I decide to save him if I could, and not to do--the other thing. And
every day strengthened my decision, and the thought of the ten thousand
pounds grew less attractive. My reason is hard to give you,
convincingly, at any rate. It was due, perhaps, to a great charm and
attractiveness which Lord Vail possesses; it was due, perhaps, to an
idea in my own mind that I would not commit murder. That sounds a little
crude, does it not? But we are dealing with crudities. Good-bye again."

Geoffrey held out his hand.

"I trust you," he said, "quite completely. And so, it seems, does Harry.
I do not believe that we are both wrong."

Dr. Armytage turned quickly away without a word. A moment afterward the
street door banged behind him.




CHAPTER XXII

LADY OXTED HAS A BAD NIGHT


Harry was sitting cross-legged on the hearth rug after dinner, poking
the fire in an idiotic manner with the tongs. Gun cotton would have
smouldered out under so illiterate a stroke. He was also talking with
about equal vivacity and vacuity to Lady Oxted and Evie, but while his
conversation was not more than difficult to bear, his poking of the fire
was quite intolerable. Lady Oxted got swiftly and silently up from her
chair, and, in the manner of a stooping hawk, took the instrument from
him.

"We can attend better, dear Harry," she said, "to your most interesting
conversation if you do not distract our minds by making a bayonet of
improper fire irons. You can do that after we have gone to bed."

"They are improper," said Harry, "but my sense of delicacy forbade my
telling you so. How a respectable woman like you could tolerate their
presence in the house has been more than I was able to imagine. But now
the ice is broken-- Oh, I never told you about the ice house! 'More I
did."

Lord Oxted looked up from the evening paper which he was reading
distractedly but diligently, and made a bee line for the door. His exit,
though made without protest, was somewhat marked. He had no manners, as
his wife often told him.

"The ice house," said Harry, as if he were giving out a text to a
diminishing congregation, and a spicy emphasis was required to retain
the rest, "and the gun, and the sluice."

The shadow of Lord Oxted lingered a moment in the doorway at this
alluring selection, but immediately disappeared on the next words: "I'll
make your blood run cold!"

"Has the Luck been singing its nursery rhymes?" asked Lady Oxted,
uncertain what to do with that white elephant, the tongs.

"Singing!" cried Harry, digging the shovel into the fire. "Singing quo'
she! My good woman, I can and will a tale unfold which, if you have
tears, prepare to shed them now," said he, with a felicitous air.

Lady Oxted annexed the shovel also. Thus there were two white elephants.

"I am not the washerwoman, Harry," she remarked with reason.

"No, dear aunt," said he, growing suddenly grave. "And if I hadn't been
so absurdly happy to-night, I shouldn't have made a joke of it, for,
indeed, it was no joke. Anyhow, the doctor congratulated me on my
admirable nerves."

"Some people when they prepare to tell a story," said Lady Oxted, "begin
at the beginning. Others--this is without prejudice--begin at the end
and work laboriously and slowly backward. Let me at least ask you,
Harry, not to be slow. Tell us about the doctor, as we are to go
backward. Did his name begin with an A?"

"Quite right," said Harry, "and it went on with an R."

Lady Oxted dropped her white elephants on the carpet and sat down by
Evie.

"Armytage?" she asked, and the fooling was gone from her voice.

"Right again. You had much better tell the whole story for yourself,
hadn't you?"

"No; when other people begin to talk about the Luck, I take no part in
the conversation," said she, "except, at least, when Geoffrey is here,
and then I talk of bears and bulls."

The Harry who had played bayonet with the tongs had by this time
vanished; vanished also were the flying skirts of farce, and in absolute
silence on the part of his audience, and in gravity on his own, he told
them the three adventures, narrating only the salient facts, and
alluding neither directly nor otherwise to Geoffrey or his uncle. But
while his tale was yet young, Evie crossed from the sofa where she had
been sitting with Lady Oxted and joined Harry on the hearth rug. One
hand held her fan, the other was on her lap. Of the latter Harry easily
possessed himself, and the tale of the gun was told with it in his. But
as he spoke of the raking gash that riddled the cornice and ceiling of
the gun room, it was suddenly withdrawn and laid on his shoulder.

"O Harry, Harry!" she murmured.

He turned and stopped, spontaneously responsive.

"My darling," he said, "I ought never to have told you. Only I could not
help telling you some time, and why not now? Was it not better to tell
you like this, making no confidence of it?"

If ever a word ought to have carried the weight of a hint, the word was
here. But Lady Oxted showed not the slightest sign of following her
husband, or saying she must write two notes.

"Go on, Harry," she said. "We are waiting. So the gun went off?"

But Harry turned to the girl.

"It is with you," he said. "Will you have the third adventure or not?
Simply as you wish. Here am I, anyhow."

"Yes, tell us," she said.

At the end Lady Oxted rose crisply.

"I never heard of such impotent magic in all my life," she said.
"Really, Harry, if you must tell us supernatural experiences in the
evening, we have a right to expect to be pleasantly frightened. But I
have never been less frightened. You whistled your way into an ice
house; you took up a gun carelessly; you stood on a piece of unsafe
stonework.--If I were you, Evie, I should buy him a nice leading-rein."

These brutalities were effective, and banished the subject, and, without
pausing to comment or let others comment, Lady Oxted sent for her
husband, and they sat down to a table of bridge.

"The only thing I insist on," he said, "is that my wife shall be my
partner. Her curious processes of thought, when she is engaged in this
kind of brain work, are a shade less disconcerting and obscure to me
than they would be to others. _Aimer c'est tout comprendre._ And if I do
not quite understand them all," he added, as he cut for deal, "I
understand more than anybody else.--Eh, dear Violet?"

Lady Oxted's brow was always clouded when she played bridge, and
to-night the blackness of the thunderstorm that sat there was not
appreciably denser than usual. She played with a curious and unfortunate
mixture of timorousness when the declaration was with her, and a lively
confidence in the unparalleled strength of her partner's hand when the
declaration was passed to her. Thus at the end of two hours, as these
methods to-night were more marked than usual, the house of Oxted was
sensibly impoverished. But with the rising from the card table her
disquieted looks showed no betterment, and her husband offered
consolation.

"We can easily sell the Grosvenor Square house," he said, "if it is that
which is bothering you, Violet; and if that is not enough we can give up
coffee after dinner, and have no parties. The world is too much with
us."

"And with the proceeds we can buy a handbook on bridge," said she with
spirit. "I will give it you for a present at Christmas, Bob. Let us go
to bed."

Lady Oxted employed, in the almost daily conduct of her life, methods
which she characterized as diplomatic. A less indulgent critic than
herself might have labelled them with a shorter and directer word, yet
not have felt that he was harsh, for the diplomatic methods did not
exclude what we may elegantly term evasions of the truth. To-night, for
instance, she talked with Evie for a few minutes only in her bedroom,
and exacted a promise that she would go to bed at once, for she looked
very tired. For herself she would have it known that her head was
splitting, that if she got influenza again she would turn atheist. With
these immoderate statements she secured herself from interruption, and
went, not to bed, but to the smoking room, where she found Harry alone.
The rustling of her dress made him look up quickly, and the most
undiplomatic disappointment was evident on his face.

"No, I am not Evie," remarked this clear-sighted lady. "She is tired and
has gone to bed, so I came for a chat with you. Dear Harry, it is so
nice to see you again! But what terrible adventures you have been
through! I want to hear of them more particularly, but I thought it
would frighten Evie to talk of them longer. That is why I was abrupt to
you."

"And so she is tired! Diplomacy?" said Harry.

"Yes, just a touch of diplomacy," assented Lady Oxted, "for she looked
scared and frightened. Now were you alone when all these things
happened, or was Dr. Armytage there? And how did Dr. Armytage come to be
at Vail at all?"

"He came to Vail," said Harry, "on the evening of the third affair, the
breaking of the sluice. I telegraphed for him because I was frightened
about my uncle. He is liable, you know, to cardiac attacks, and I was
afraid of one coming on."

"He was naturally agitated at your series of escapes," said Lady Oxted.

"Naturally," said Harry.

Lady Oxted rose with some impatience, and threw diplomacy aside.

"Your efforts at dissimulation are pitiable, Harry," said she. "If you
won't tell me what happened, say so: I am going to fish no more."

Harry did not immediately reply, and Lady Oxted continued.

"Seriously speaking," she said, "I think I ought to know. If there is
nothing more, if your conscience allows you to say that there is nothing
to tell, I am content. If you can not say that, I think you ought to
tell me."

"Do you not think that you are putting an unfair pressure on me?" asked
Harry.

"No, for you are no longer only your own master. You must consider not
only yourself, but Evie. In her mother's absence I have a certain duty
toward her. I do not ask you from curiosity, but because of the
relations in which both you and I stand to her. You have within the
last few weeks been in three positions of extreme personal danger. Can
you, however vaguely, account for this? Have there been no suspicious
circumstances of any kind which might lead any one to think that these
were not entirely accidents? You say that Geoffrey was in the house on
all these occasions. Did he take it all as lightly as you seem to?"

"I would rather not bring Geoffrey into it," said Harry.

"Have you quarrelled?"

"Yes, I suppose you may say that we have quarrelled," he replied.

"Harry, why will you not tell me, and save my asking you all these
questions? I intend to go on asking them. Was your quarrel with Geoffrey
connected in any way with these accidents?"

"Oh, give me a minute!" cried Harry. "I want to make up my mind whether
I am going to tell you or not. I suppose, if I did not, you would go to
Geoff."

"Certainly I should," said Lady Oxted promptly, although this had not
occurred to her.

"Well, it is better that I should tell you than he," said Harry, and
without more words he told her all that he had purposely left unsaid,
from the mistaken direction which had sent him to the ice house instead
of the summerhouse, down to the scene in the smoking room when he had
parted with Geoffrey. She heard him in silence without question or
interruption, and when he had finished, still she said nothing. Apt and
ready as she was for the ordinary social emergency, she could frame
nothing for this. She could not say what she thought, outspokenly like
Geoffrey, for Harry's sake; she would not say what she did not think, in
spite of her diplomatic tendencies, for her own.

At last the silence became portentous, and Harry broke it.

"Have I then lost another friend in addition to Geoffrey?" he said, in a
voice that was not very steady. He could not have given her a better
lead.

"Ah! do not say things like that, Harry," she said. "You do not think it
possible, in the first place, and even if you did it would be no part of
wisdom to say it. But I tell you frankly that, though Geoffrey seems to
me to have spoken most hastily and unwisely, yet I can understand
what he felt. There are, I don't deny that I see it, many curious
circumstances about all these adventures, which lend
reasonableness--pardon me--to his suspicions."

"I know--I know all that," said Harry, "but I find it a sheer
impossibility to believe them in any degree at all. Geoffrey's
suspicions are out of the question. That being so, I can not away with
what he has done, with the speaking to my uncle like that; I can not
away with that condition of mind to which, however plausible the idea,
the idea was possible."

Lady Oxted was a quick thinker; she knew, moreover, that to decide wrong
was better than not to decide at all; and before Harry had finished
speaking, she was determined on her line of action. Geoffrey, she
rightly guessed, had at least as much influence with Harry as herself,
yet even Geoffrey, in all the heat and horror of these adventures, had
been powerless to move him. Her chance, then, speaking at this cooler
distance, had scarcely the slightest prospect of success, and secret
coalition with Geoffrey was evidently preferable to open collision with
Harry.

"I see--I quite see," she said; "but, O Harry, do not throw away a
friend lightly! Geoff is a good fellow, and you must remember that it
was for your sake that he risked and suffered a quarrel with you.
Friends are not so common as sparrows! You will not find them under
every house-roof. Don't do anything in a hurry: wait. No situation is
hopeless until you have given time a chance to work. Don't write, if you
have not already done so, any angry letter; or worse, any dignified,
calm, world-without-end letter. It is so easy to make an estrangement
permanent! You can always do that."

"I haven't written at all," said Harry. "I tried to, but I could not do
it. There is no hurry; besides, Geoffrey will not expect to hear from
me; Dr. Armytage wrote to tell him not to."

Lady Oxted just succeeded in suppressing the exclamation of surprise
that was on her lips. "That was very kind of him, and wise as well," she
said.

"He is both the one and the other," said Harry. "He was down at Vail a
week. I liked him immensely. But I don't mind telling you that I was
glad to get away, to part with him, with Uncle Francis, with the Luck
for a time. I felt as if there were some occult conjuncture against me,
and I didn't like it. I had continually to keep a hold on myself, to
make an effort not to be scared. But here I am being beautifully
relaxed. I feel secure--yes, that's the word."

Lady Oxted continued her diplomatic course.

"There is nothing so catching as superstition," she said, "and all the
evening, since you told Evie and me about it, I have been wondering--
Oh, it must be all nonsense!" she cried.

"You mean the Luck?" asked Harry. "Is Saul also among the prophets?"

"Yes, I mean the Luck. How does the nursery rhyme go? Fire and frost and
rain, isn't it? Well, there they all were, and it is no use denying it."

"Not the slightest," said Harry.

"Certainly it is very strange. Harry, I don't like the Luck at all. It's
uncanny. I wish you would smash it, or throw it into the sea. Yet,
somehow, I feel as if you were safe as long as you are here, away from
it. I wish you would stop here till your marriage. Then you go away, you
see, for six weeks, and in the meantime some burglar might be kind
enough to steal it."

Harry shook his head.

"No, I put the good things it has brought me much higher than the evil,"
he said. "And it is going to bring me another very good thing--the
best. After that, if you like, I will smash it."

"Well, stay here till your marriage, anyhow."

"I must go down to Vail once, to see that they have finished up. The
house was upside down when I was there. But, barring a couple of days
then, there is nothing I should like better. You will have nearly a
month of me, though. Consider well."

"Then stop till I tell you I can not bear you any longer. I am a candid
woman, and fond of giving pain, and I promise to speak out. Dear me, it
is nearly one! I must go to bed, and if I dream of the Luck it will be
your fault."

Lady Oxted did not dream at all for a very long time that night: she was
at her wits' end what to do. All Scotland Yard, with all the detectives
of improbable fiction thrown in to aid, were powerless to help, for the
evidence against Mr. Francis in Harry's story, though conclusive to her
own mind, would weigh lighter than chaff in cross-examination. And no
further evidence was procurable until Mr. Francis made another attempt,
and at the thought she shuddered. What, too, was that sinister doctor
doing at Vail? What was the meaning of the seeming friendliness in
averting a final rupture between Harry and Geoffrey? He had written,
according to his own account, a letter to Geoffrey which should avoid
this, but what did his letter really contain? It was far more likely
that he had told him that the rupture was final, for clearly he and Mr.
Francis would not want to risk the possibility of Geoffrey, who knew
all, and whose attitude was so avowedly hostile, coming down to Vail
again. The only consolation was that Harry for the present was safe, and
that she could go up to London next day and see Geoffrey. But what could
they do even together? What defence was possible when the blow might
fall at any moment from any unsuspected quarter?

By degrees, as she paced her room, a kind of clearness came to her. Mr.
Francis's design was evident: he had shown his hand by the nature of his
earlier attempts, in which he had tried to stop Harry's marriage. Then,
in the miscarriage of that, he had turned to directer deeds--fouler they
could scarcely be, but of more violent sort. There had been a species of
awful art in his doings; he had taken, with a fiend's gusto and pleasure
in the ingenuity of it (so she pictured), Harry's avowed superstition in
the power of the Luck, to compass his ends. As a musician takes a
subject, and on this theme works out a fugue; as an artist paints a
portrait in a definite preconceived scheme of colour, so had Mr. Francis
taken the Luck, and the dangers it was thought to bring to its
possessor: these he had elaborated, put into practical shape. It must
have dwelt in his mind like a lunatic's idea; not only, as in the case
of the gun, did he make his opportunity, but, as in the affair of the
ice house, he must have been alert, receptive, instinctively and
instantaneously turning to his ends whatever chance put in his way.

This thought brought her a certain feeling of relief on the one hand,
but on the other it added an indefinite terror. No man morally sane
could devise and steadily prosecute so finished a scheme; the very
thoroughness and consistency of the three attempts stamped them as the
work of a madman. Nine tenths of the blood murderously shed on the earth
was to be put down to a spasm of ungovernable anger and hate, which at
the moment possessed the murderer; this long premeditation, this careful
following of one idea by which frost, fire, and rain should be the
direct causes of Harry's death, was not to be attributed--so devilish
and so finished was the application--to a sane author. Here lay the
consolation: her shuddering horror of the white-haired old gentleman,
with his flute-playing and his boyish yet courtly manner, was a little
assuaged, and gave way to mere human pity for a mind deranged. But
simultaneously, as if with a clash of cymbals, her fear of him,
defenceless, bewildered, broke out: that cunning of a madman was far
more formidable than the schemings of a sane man. He would soon,
maddened by failure, reck nothing of what happened to him, so that he
attained his object.

What, then, looking at it thus, was his object? The mere death of Harry,
merely the lust for blood? That seemed hardly possible. She could not
put him down as a homicidal maniac, since it seemed that he had no
desire to kill for killing's sake, and the world was not yet staggered
with a catalogue of subtle, undetected murders. Nor was the explanation
that he wished to inherit Vail and its somewhat insufficient revenues
more satisfactory. He was old; he had, so far as any one could guess, no
wish for more of this world's goods than he possessed under Harry's
generosity; the motive could scarcely be here. Then in a flash a more
likely solution struck her. The Luck--perhaps he wanted the Luck! A year
of ownership, so she told herself, had already affected even Harry's
sanity in this regard. What if here was a man, old and already poised on
the edge of his dug grave, who all his life long had dreamed of and
itched for it, believing God knew what was in store for its possessor?
This, she guessed, was the taint of blood, the same that so
mysteriously, though uncriminally, possessed Harry. Here, perhaps, was
the cause, not the fire and the frost and the rain, but the belief in
their perils, coupled with the belief in great and unwonted good fortune
which the possession of it gave. Mr. Francis had more than once, in her
hearing, laughed at Harry for his fantastic allegiance to the heirloom,
but this, if anything, confirmed Lady Oxted in her theory. This cunning
was of consistency with the rest.

Long since she had dismissed her maid, and tired with fruitless thought,
and baffled with but dimly cipherable perils, she finished her
undressing and blew out the lights. But through all the dark hours she
was clutched by the night-hag. Now the Luck appeared to her like the
Grail in Parsifal, emitting an unearthly radiance, but even as she
gazed she would suddenly be stricken with the knowledge that the
brightness of it was not of heavenly but of diabolic birth; a piercing
light emanated therefrom, but of infernal red, and voices from the pit
moaned round it. Then it would be gone, and for a little while a
wriggling darkness succeeded, but slowly the break in the blackness
which heralded its coming would begin to shine again and grow
intolerably bright; faint lines where it would shortly appear, stretched
themselves upon the fields of vision, growing momentarily more distinct,
but instead of the Luck, there came, first in outline, then in awful and
indelible vividness, the features of Mr. Francis, now very kind and
gentle, now a mask of tormented fury.

Next morning she found that her resolve to see Geoffrey without delay
had not been diminished by the scattered phantoms of the night, and some
lame toothache excuse served her end. She did not certainly know whether
he was in London or not, and for safety's sake she sent him two
telegrams--the one to his father's house in Kent, the second to his
lodging in Orchard Street--both bidding him come to lunch that day in
Grosvenor Square without fail. The one addressed to London found him
first, since, after his interview with Dr. Armytage, he had stayed on
there; and this, followed after an hour's interval by the other sent on
from his father's house, constituted a call of urgency. He therefore
obeyed the summons, leaving a note for Dr. Armytage, as had been agreed
between them, to say when he should be in again, and where he had gone.

The conference began after lunch. Each found it in a measure a relief to
be able to confide the secret haunting sense of peril to another. Each,
on the other hand, was horrified to find that some one else shared the
apprehensions each still hoped might be phantasmal. Geoffrey, on his
part, had his account of his dealings with Dr. Armytage to add to Lady
Oxted's information; she her own conviction that they were dealing with
a man not morally sane, whose one desire was to have and to hold the
Luck. To her, this alliance with Dr. Armytage, of which Geoffrey told
her, seemed but a doubtful gain.

"What does one know of him?" she asked. "Nothing that is not bad. Mr.
Francis could not have chosen a more apt or a more unscrupulous tool. He
got two thousand pounds, you tell me, for his services in connection
with the Harmsworth case: what will he not do for ten? Oh, we may be
dealing with a cunning of which we have no conception! What if all this
was told you simply to blind you? Nothing can be more probable, and how
admirably it has succeeded! Already you trust the man--their object, as
far as you are concerned, is gained."

"I had to trust him or distrust him," said Geoffrey, "and I chose to do
the former. If I had chosen the latter, the door would have closed on
him, and I do not see that we should be any better off than we are now.
If he is dealing straight with us, we have an immense advantage in
knowing all he knows of Mr. Francis's plans; if he is not, he can, at
the most, give us misleading information, which is not worse than none
at all."

Lady Oxted considered this in silence a moment.

"Yes, that is true," she said; "yet, somehow, my flesh misgives me to be
allied with that man. O Geoffrey, is it because this awful Luck has cast
a spell on us that we imagine Harry surrounded by these intimate and
immediate perils? Are our fears real? Let us tell ourselves that we are
ordinary people, living in an age of prose and police-men; we are not
under the Doges! This is the nineteenth century," she said, rising, "or
the twentieth, if you will; we look out on Grosvenor Square--a hansom is
driving by."

She stopped suddenly.

"I am wrong," she said; "it is not driving by. It has stopped at the
door. And Dr. Armytage has rung the bell. Oh, what shall I do?" she
cried. "God in heaven! what are we to do? What has he come to tell us?"

Geoffrey got up.

"Now quietly, quietly, Lady Oxted," he said. "He has come on a matter of
importance, or he would have waited till I returned to Orchard Street. I
have decided to trust him, and I suggest, therefore, that we see him
together. It is our best chance; it may be our only one."

"But I don't trust him," said Lady Oxted. "I distrust him from head to
heels." And she bit her finger nails, a thing she had not done since the
days of the schoolroom.

"Very well; then I shall run on my own lines," and he got up to leave
the room.

"Wait, Geoffrey," she said. "You are absolutely determined?"

"Absolutely."

"I yield, then. You, at any rate, have some plan, and I have none.--Yes,
show Dr. Armytage in," she said to the man who had brought his card.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE MEETING IN GROSVENOR SQUARE


The doctor entered with the brusqueness of a man who had no knowledge
of, or at any rate no regard for, the usages of polite society. He
treated Lady Oxted to little more than his profile and an imperceptible
pause, which indulgence might construe into a bow, then walked straight
up to Geoffrey, with a face businesslike, concentrated.

"I had important information," he said, "which I was desirous of telling
you without delay. My hansom is waiting."

Geoffrey felt his heart thump riotously, a heavy repeated blow.

"We have to act immediately, you mean?" he asked.

"No, not that," said the doctor. "I only thought----" and he looked for
a brief moment at Lady Oxted. She rose.

"How do you do, Dr. Armytage?" she said. "Mr. Langham and I were, when
you entered, talking about the same business as that on which you have
come. Harry Vail, I must tell you, is a great friend of mine; he is
staying with me now. Last night he told me the history of the past
fortnight very fully. It will not therefore surprise you to learn that
I came up to London to-day to see Mr. Langham."

"It does not surprise me in the least," he said. "I take it, then, that
you wish me to speak before you. If that is so, I will send my hansom
away."

He was back again immediately, and waited till the others had sat down,
warming his hands at the fire, with his back turned to them. The
silence, so to speak, was of his own making, and neither thought to
interrupt it. Then, facing them, he spoke.

"There is no need, therefore," he began, as if continuing his private
train of thought, "that I should speak at any length of what has already
happened. Harry, I gather, has told you, Lady Oxted, of his three
escapes; he has told you also of his quarrel with his friend here, and
the reason of it."

There was something in this bald abruptness which pleased Lady Oxted. It
looked genuine, but at the same time she made to herself the conscious
reservation that it might be a piece of acting. If acting, it was a very
decent performance. She gave a silent assent.

"You have asked me to speak before you," he went on, "but in doing so I
am somewhat at a personal disadvantage. I have no reason to suppose that
you trust me; indeed, there is no reason why you should. You know of me,
probably, as an intimate friend of Mr. Francis, and when it appears
that I am a traitor to him you naturally ask yourself if I am really so.
But"--and he paused a moment--"but I do not think that this need much
concern me. I am here to tell you in what manner Mr. Francis hopes to
kill his nephew. It is our object, I take it, to prevent that."

There was something in his tone that smacked of the lecture, so dry and
precise was it. But a clearer observer of him than either of his present
audience, to whom the words he said were so much more just now than the
man who said them, would have seen that an intense agitation quivered
beneath the surface. The man was desperately in earnest about something.

"There is one more preliminary word," he went on. "We are dealing, so
far as my observations go, with a man who is scarcely sane. In the
psychology of crime we find that such patient, calculated attempts to
take life are usually associated with something else that indicates
cerebral disorder--some fixed idea, in short, of an insane character,
which is usually the motive for the homicidal desire. That symptom is
present here."

"The Luck!" exclaimed Lady Oxted.

"Precisely. The idea of owning the Luck possesses our--our patient. He
believes that it brings its owner dangers possibly, and risks, but
compensations of an overwhelming weight. He believes, I may tell you,
that it will keep off death, perhaps indefinitely. And to an old man
that is a consideration of some importance, especially if he has such
an exuberant love of life as Mr. Francis has. On the other hand, we must
remember that before the last outbreak, if we may call it such, Mr.
Francis procured the death of a man who stood in no relation to the
Luck. Yes, he shot young Harmsworth," he said slowly, looking at Lady
Oxted, "for nothing more nor less than the insurance money. One may have
doubts whether all crime of violent kind is not a form of insanity. But
that particular form of insanity is punished with hanging."

It is by strange pathways that a woman's mind sometimes moves: she may
take short cuts of the most dubious and fallacious kind to avoid a
minute's traversing of the safe road, or walk a mile round in order to
avoid a puddle over which she could easily step, but she at any rate
knows when she has arrived, and at this juncture Lady Oxted got up and
held out her hand to the doctor.

"I entreat your pardon," she said, "and, in any case, I trust you now."

A certain brightness shone in those dark, sad eyes, as he took her hand.

"I am glad to know that," he said, "and I advise you, if possible, to
continue trusting me. You will have a trial of faith before long."

Geoffrey moved impatiently; all three seemed to have forgotten their
manners.

"Oh, go on, man--go on!" he exclaimed.

"Bear in mind, then," said the doctor, "that we may be dealing with a
lunatic. This fixed idea inclines me to that belief; the murder of
young Harmsworth pulls the other way. But Mr. Francis has now made his
plans; he told me them this morning, for I, as you will see, am to
figure in them. And what he will do is this."

The doctor again paused, and adjusted his finger-tips together.

"He expects Harry," he said, "to return to Vail before the end of the
month; he and his servant will return about the same time, or perhaps a
day or two earlier, for there will be a few arrangements to make. I
shall also accompany Mr. Francis, so he tells me, on the ground of his
continued ill health."

"Ah, those heart attacks!" said Lady Oxted; "are they genuine?"

"Perfectly; they are also dangerous. To continue: On the night
appointed--that is to say, as soon as we are all there--I am to
administer to Harry a drug called metholycine. In all respects it is
suitable for Mr. Francis's purpose, and a small dose produces within a
very few minutes complete unconsciousness, to which, if no antidote or
restorative is applied, succeeds death. It also is extremely volatile,
more so even than aconite, and a very few hours after death no trace of
it would be found in the stomach or other parts of the body. The drug,
however, is exceedingly hard to get; no chemist would conceivably give
it to any unauthorized person; but a few years ago I was experimenting
with it, and it so happens that I still have some in my possession. Mr.
Francis has a most retentive memory, and though I have no recollection
of having ever mentioned this fact to him, he asked me this morning
whether I had any left. He did so in so quiet and normal a voice that
for the moment I was off my guard, and told him I had. But perhaps,
after all, it was a lucky occurrence, for he seemed very much pleased,
and played on his flute for a time. Then he came back to me and told me
what I have already told you, and what I shall now tell you."

There was something strangely grim about the composure of the doctor's
manner. You would have said he spoke of Danish politics; more grim,
perhaps, was this mention of the flute-playing. Certainly it added an
extreme vividness to his narrative, and the flute-player was more
horrible than the man who planned death.

"In this respect, then, first of all," continued the icy voice, "I am
useful to him. In the second place, Mr. Francis seems to have a singular
horror of doing himself--actually, and with his hands--this deed. In
another way also I shall be of service to him, and here I must touch on
things more gruesome, but it is best that you should know all. The drug
is to be administered late at night, after the servants are out of the
way. It is almost completely without taste or odour, and Mr. Francis's
suggestion is that a whisky and soda, which he tells me Harry always
takes before going to bed, should be the vehicle. Ten minutes after he
has taken it he will be unconscious, but he will live for another half
hour. During that time we shall carry him down to the plate closet,
where the Luck is kept with the rest of the plate; there Sanders will
be. That part will be in Sanders's hands, but he will not use firearms,
for fear of the noise of the report reaching the servants, and the blow
that kills him, you understand, looking at the occurrence from the point
of view of the coroner, must be dealt while he is still alive.
Otherwise, the absence of effusion of blood and other details would show
a doctor that he was already dead when his skull was broken--this is the
idea--by a battering blow. Here, again, Mr. Francis anticipates that I
shall be of use to him in determining when unconsciousness is quite
complete, and death not yet immediate. He has a curiously strong desire
that Harry should feel no pain, for he is very fond of him."

Lady Oxted and Geoffrey alike were glued to his words, both paler than
their wont. As the doctor paused they sought each other's eyes, and
found there horror beyond all speech.

"Some of the most valuable of the plate," continued the doctor, "will be
taken, and, of course, the Luck. The plate will be the perquisite of
Sanders; the Luck Mr. Francis will keep secretly, the presumption being
that it was stolen also. Why, then, you may ask, should not Mr. Francis
simply steal the Luck? For this reason: that as long as Harry lives it
is his; on his death it becomes Mr. Francis's. Thus, morning will show
the plate closet rifled, and Harry, clubbed to death, on the floor. The
plan is complete and ingenious; indeed, it has no weak point. It will
appear that Harry, after the servants had gone to bed, drank his whisky
and soda, and, hearing something stirring, went downstairs. Finding the
door of the plate closet open, he entered, and was instantly felled by a
blow on the side of the head, which killed him. The burglars did not
arouse any one else in the house, and escaped (even the details are
arranged) by the same way as they entered--through the window of the gun
room, which looks out, you are aware, on to the garden beds which adjoin
the sweep of the carriage drive. Footprints of large, heavy boots will
be found there; Mr. Francis bought a pair to-day at some cheap,
ready-made shop."

Again, a horror palpable as a draught of cold air passed through the
auditors, seeming to each to lift the hair upon the scalp. These trivial
details of boots and flute-playing were of almost more intimate touch
than the crime itself; they brought it at any rate into the range of
realities, to the time of to-day or next week, to a familiar setting.
Again the doctor spoke.

"I have already taken one precaution," he said. "I have emptied from its
bottle the real metholycine and substituted common salt. I went to my
house hurriedly, after seeing Mr. Francis, to get it, and I brought it
away in my pocket. I shall be glad to dispose of it; it is not a thing
to carry about."

He drew out a small packet, folded up with the precision of a
dispensing chemist, and opened it. It contained an ounce of white
coarse-grained powder, very like to ordinary salt, and, without more
words, he emptied it on the fire. The red-hot coal blackened where he
poured, then grew red again, and for a moment an aura of yellow flame
flickered over the place.

"And Mr. Francis will not find it easy to get more," said the doctor.

The effect of this was great and immediate. Both Lady Oxted and Geoffrey
felt as much relieved as if an imminent danger had been removed, though
the logic of their relief, seeing that they both trusted Dr. Armytage,
in whose domain the poison lay, was not capable of bearing examination.
At any rate, Lady Oxted sat briskly up from the cramped huddling of the
position in which she had listened to the doctor's story, and clapped
her hands.

"Ha! check number one," she said. "And what next, Dr. Armytage?"

"That depends on what end you have in view," said he. "Is Harry's safety
all?"

"Yes, but his safety must be certain," she said. "I must see that man in
a criminal lunatic asylum, or in penal servitude. Harry will never be
safe till he is behind bars."

"I agree with you," said Geoffrey.

Dr. Armytage left the fireplace, where he had been standing since the
beginning of the interview, and sat down.

"Do you realize what that demands?" he said. "It means that Mr. Francis
must be allowed to make the attempt."

"Which we have already frustrated," said Lady Oxted, pointing to the
fireplace.

Dr. Armytage shook his head.

"If the idea is to catch him red-handed, that is not sufficient," he
said. "Harry takes whisky and soda and salt one night, very little salt,
for the drug is potent. He may or he may not notice the salt. What then?
Sanders, meantime, is waiting in the plate closet. No doubt we can thus
catch Sanders. But that is all."

Lady Oxted rang the bell.

"We can do nothing," she said, "except go straight to Scotland Yard and
put the whole matter in the hands of the police. You will please come
with me, Dr. Armytage--Geoffrey too. To us, of course, the evidence is
overwhelming: look at it, from the Harmsworth case onward--" and she
stopped suddenly and looked at the doctor. "Good heavens! I never
thought of that!" she said.

The doctor rose.

"I, as you may imagine, have thought a good deal of that," he said.

"Is it possible by any means to get hold of this man Sanders?" asked
Lady Oxted at length.

"Get me a hansom," she said to the man who answered the bell.

"I should prefer to try that first," said the doctor, "and I will see
what I can do. It may be possible to buy the man; he may be scamp
enough to be venal. But if we have to go to Scotland Yard, we have to go
to Scotland Yard. But for the moment we need not; Harry is safe with you
for ten days more, and Mr. Francis is not thinking of leaving London for
ten days. Something, perhaps, may turn up in the interval. If not, I am
ready."

Lady Oxted felt that no words could meet the situation, and did not make
the attempt.

"Then the hansom shall take me to the station instead," she said. "I
have just time to catch my train.--Drive with me there, Geoffrey."

She stood up, drawing on her gloves.

"Please let me hear from you, Dr. Armytage," she said, "or if you have
any communication to make which had better not be written, come down to
Oxted, or wire for me to come up. At present, then, there is nothing
more to be said."

She shook hands, and the three went out through the hall and across the
broad pavement to where the hansom was waiting. Lady Oxted got in first,
and Geoffrey was already on the step to follow, when a man crossing the
road came from behind the hansom and stepped on to the pavement close to
where the doctor was standing.

"Dear fellow," said a very familiar voice, "what a glorious afternoon!"

The thing was so sudden that the doctor had literally no time to lose
his nerve.

"Get in and don't look round," he said very low to Geoffrey.

But he was too late. At the sound of that voice, Geoffrey had already
looked round, and he and Mr. Francis for one stricken moment stared at
each other. But the pleasant smile did not fade from the old man's face;
rather, it seemed fixed there.

Simultaneously, from inside the hansom came Lady Oxted's voice.

"Get in, Geoff," she said; "we haven't too much time."

Mr. Francis advanced a step, so that he could see into the hansom.

"Ah, and Lady Oxted too!" he remarked gently.--"Drive on, cabman."

The horse broke into a rapid trot, and he and the doctor were left
standing together.

Mr. Francis stood looking after the diminishing vehicle for a moment,
still smiling.

"And Lady Oxted, and Lady Oxted," he continued to murmur to himself.
Then he turned briskly to his companion and in gentle, low-modulated
tones and without haste:

"A charming woman--one whom one is delighted to call friend," he said.
"And dear Geoffrey too--dear Geoffrey, Harry's great friend. How nice to
have even so short a glimpse of him! What good fortune to meet you all
together like this! Well, well, I must go on. Good-bye, for the present,
my dear man."

He turned from him, walked three paces away, then stopped and faced
round again. For the moment the doctor thought his eye or his brain had
played him some inexplicable trick; he could barely credit that the face
now looking at him was the same as that which two seconds ago had been
so smiling a show of sunlit urbanity. Now it was scarce human; a fiend
or a wild beast, mad with passion and hate, glared at him. The iris of
the eye seemed to have swelled till the white was invisible; from each,
a pin-point of a pupil was focused on him. Great veins stood out on his
forehead and neck, blue and dilated; the lips were drawn back from the
mouth till the gums appeared, showing two rows of white and very even
teeth. The pleasant rosiness of the face was blotched and mottled with
patches of white and purple, the forehead and corners of the quivering
mouth were streaked with corrugations so deeply cut that the dividing
ridges of flesh cast shadows therein. The stamp of humanity was
obliterated.

He stood there for perhaps five seconds, his lower jaw working gently up
and down as if chewing, and a little foam gathered on his lips. Each
moment the doctor expected him either to fall senseless on the pavement
or to spring upon him, for it seemed impossible that any human frame
could contain so raging an energy of emotion, and yet neither break nor
give it outlet. Then the horrible chewing of the jaw ceased, and the man
or beast wiped the froth from his lips.

"You black, treacherous scoundrel!" he said, very softly. "Do you think
I am the sort of man to be thwarted by a faithless subordinate?"

He came a step nearer; his mouth still seemed to be forming words, but
it was as if the human nature of the man had been so effaced as to
preclude speech, and he stood chattering and gesticulating like some
angry ape. Yet the resemblance roused in the doctor no sense of the
ludicrous, but only a deep-seated horror at this thing which had doffed
its humanity like a cloak and become part of the brute creation. He
summoned all his courage to his aid--an empty effort, for he knew within
himself that if this travesty of a man came but one step nearer he
would, in spite of himself, simply turn tail and run from it.

But Mr. Francis came no nearer, nor did he speak again, and before the
lapse of another five seconds he turned away and walked quickly down
toward the corner of the square without looking back. The doctor
followed him with his eye, and saw him hail a hansom at the end of Upper
Grosvenor Street, get in, and drive northward. He himself stood there,
his brain a tumult of bewildered conjecture, and did not see who it was
rapidly approaching him till the figure was by him, and he heard his own
name called.

"I got down as soon as I could stop the cab," said Geoffrey. "He has
gone? Where? What has happened?"

"He knows I have betrayed him," said the doctor. "That is all. And for
the moment he was no longer human. In this mood he will not stop to
weigh risks or consequences. Before anything else we must find out where
he is going--probably to his own flat, where we must watch
him--possibly first to my house--ah! yes, for the metholycine. Thank
God, that is harmless!"

There were no cabs about, so they started to walk northward in the
direction Mr. Francis had taken. At the corner of Green Street they
found a disengaged hansom, and drove to 32 Wimpole Street. Here the
doctor got out.

"Drive on to his flat in Wigmore Street," he said to Geoffrey, "and ask
the porter if he has come in. Then come back here."

Three minutes later Geoffrey returned.

"He came in a minute or two before me," he said. "He has kept his cab."

The doctor pointed to a row of bottles on a shelf in his cabinet.

"The metholycine is missing," he said. "He came here, where he is known
to the servants, told the man he had instructions from me to take a
certain bottle from my cases, and was allowed. I asked if he appeared in
any way strange or excited. Not a bit of it; he had a smile and a joke
as usual. Come on!"

"Where?" asked Geoffrey.

"To see where his cab goes. By the way, what of Lady Oxted?"

"She went on to catch her train. It is far better she should be with
Harry. I told her I would telegraph all that happened."

"Quite so. Here is Wigmore Street. We will wait in this entry. There is
his cab still at the door. Ah! we must have a cab waiting too."

He stepped out of the entry, hailed a cab from a rank a little way down
the street, and said a few words to the man, pointing out to him the
hansom he was to keep in sight. He drew up at the curb opposite their
place of observation. Not forty yards in front was Mr. Francis's hansom.

The sober, respectable street dozed in the haze of the afternoon sun
with the air of a professional man resting for a little from his work.
Vehicles were but few, the pavements only sparsely populous, and the
roadway nearly empty. The driver of Mr. Francis's cab had got down from
his perch, and was talking to the hall porter of the house of flats and
pulling at a laggard pipe. Then suddenly both porter and cabman looked
up as if they had been called from within, and disappeared into the
entry, to come back with various small pieces of luggage. Then the
cabman mounted his box, and with the other's assistance drew up a
portmanteau on to the roof. At that moment Mr. Francis stepped across
the pavement and entered the cab. He had on a straw hat, in his hand was
the morocco flute case, on his mouth a smile and thanks to the porter.
Sanders followed, and, after a word, got in after him. At the same
instant of time the doctor and Geoffrey had sprung into their places,
and the two cabs started together.

The passage of half a dozen streets was sufficient to make their
destination tolerably certain, and when Mr. Francis's cab turned into
the steep decline leading to the departure platform at Paddington, the
matter was practically beyond doubt. Here the doctor stopped the cab,
and they got out.

"It is certain," said Geoffrey, though no word had passed between them.
"Look! it is ten minutes past five; the fast train to Vail will start in
seven minutes. Now what are we to do?"

"Harry is at Oxted," said the doctor, as if speaking to himself. "Yes, we
only want to be perfectly certain that Mr. Francis goes to Vail."

"I will find that out," said Geoffrey.

He walked down the incline, past Sanders, who was busy with the luggage,
and into the booking office. There was a considerable number of
passengers waiting, but Mr. Francis was already high up in the queue.
Geoffrey waited with his back turned till he heard him speak to the
clerk.

"One first and one second single to Vail," he said.

With this their information was complete, and he rejoined the doctor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Harry at Oxted, Mr. Francis with luggage for a prolonged stay at Vail,
here was the sum of it, and the movements were duly telegraphed to Lady
Oxted. So far all was well, in such degree as anything could be well in
this dark business, and by mutual consent they determined to leave all
further deliberations till the morrow. They were fully informed and
prepared for all moves. To-morrow, it might be, Mr. Francis would show
for what reason he had gone to Vail.




CHAPTER XXIV

JIM GOES TO BED


Geoffrey, in spite of, or perhaps owing to his anxieties, slept long and
late, and it was already after ten when he came half dressed from his
bedroom to the adjoining sitting room, in quest of letters.

But there was no word either from Dr. Armytage or Lady Oxted, and here
no news was distinctly good news. No fresh complication had arisen;
Harry, it might be certainly assumed, was safe at Oxted, Mr. Francis, as
certainly, at Vail, though his safety was a matter of infinitesimal
moment. Yet, in spite of this, Geoffrey had no morning face; an
intolerable presage of disaster sat heavy on him, and he brooded
sombrely over his meal, reading the paper, yet not noting its contents,
and the paragraphs were Dutch to him. Even here in London, the fog
centre, one must believe of created things; the morning was one of fine
and exquisite beauty. Primrose-coloured sunshine flooded the town, the
air was brisk with the cleanly smell of autumnal frost. How clearly
could he picture to himself what this same hour was like at Vail, how
familiar and intimate was the memory of such mornings, when he and
Harry had stepped after breakfast into the sparkling coolness of the
young day, and the sunshine from without met with a glad thrill of
welcome the sunshine from within! The lake lay level and shining--the
brain picture had the vividness of authentic hallucination--a wisp of
mist still hanging in places over it. Level and shining, too, were the
lawns; a pearly mysterious halo moved with the moving shadow of the
head. Blackbirds scurried and chuckled over the grass, the beeches were
golden in their autumn liveries, a solemn glee even smiled in the gray
and toned red of the square house. At that, regret as bitter as tears
surged up within him; never again, so he thought, could the particular
happiness of those unreflecting days be his; tragedy, like drops from
some corroding drug, had fallen in sting and smoke upon him; over that
fair scene slept on the wing the destroying angel; between himself and
Harry had risen the barrier of irreconcilable estrangement. And, like a
monstrous spider, spinning threads God knew where, or to catch what
heedless footstep, Mr. Francis stretched his web over every outlet from
that house, and sat in each, malign and poisonous.

These vague forebodings and the mordancy of regret grew to be
unbearable, and, taking his hat, Geoffrey walked out westward, aimlessly
enough, only seeking to dull misgivings by the sight of many human
faces. The crowd had for him an absorbing fascination; to be in the
midst of folk was to put the rein on private fancies, for the spectacle
of life claimed all the attention. But this morning this healthful
prescription seemed to have lost its efficacy, or the drugs were stale
and impotent, and the air was dark with winged fears that came to roost
within him, chatting evilly together. Yet the streets were better than
his own room, and for nearly two hours he wandered up and down the
jostling pavements. Then returning to Orchard Street, he entered his
weary room, and his heart stood suddenly still, for on the table was
lying a telegram.

For a moment he stood by the door, as if fearing even to go near it;
then with a stride and an inserted finger the pink sheet was before his
eye.

"Harry has just left for Vail," it ran, "passing through London. Sanders
has telegraphed that his master is dangerously ill, and he must come at
once to see him alive. Take this direct to Dr. Armytage."

The shock was as of fire or cold water, disabling for the moment, but
bracing beyond words. All the brooding, the regret, the dull, vague
aches of the morning had passed as completely as a blink of summer
lightning, and Geoffrey knew himself to be strung up again to the level
of intelligent activity. As he drove to Wimpole Street he examined the
chronology of the message: it had been sent off, it appeared, three
hours ago; it was likely that even now Harry was passing through London.
A cab was standing at the doctor's door, which was open, a servant by
it. At the same moment of receiving these impressions he was aware of
two figures in the hall beyond, and he stopped. One was with its back to
him, but on the sound of his step it turned round.

"O Geoff," said Harry, holding out his hand, "Uncle Francis is ill, very
dangerously ill. I am going to Vail at once, and was just coming to see
you first. But now you are here."

By a flash of intuition, unerring and instantaneous, Geoffrey saw
precisely what was in Harry's mind, and knew that next moment an
opportunity so vitally desirable, yet vitally dishonourable to accept,
would be given him, that he had no idea whether in his nature there was
that which should be strong enough to resist it.

"Won't you come with me?" asked Harry, low and almost timidly. "Can't
you--in case we are in time--just ask his forgiveness for the wrong you
did him? He is very ill, perhaps dying--dying, Geoff."

At this moment the doctor stepped forward, Bradshaw in hand, to the
brighter light by the open door. In passing Geoffrey, he made a faint
but unmistakable command of assent. His finger was on the open page, and
he spoke immediately.

"We can catch the 3.15, Harry," he said. "Shall I telegraph to them to
meet it?"

"Please," said Harry, still looking at the other.--"Geoffrey!" he said
again, and touched him on the arm.

Geoffrey heard the leaf of the Bradshaw flutter, and the sound of his
name lingered in his ears. Much, perhaps, was to gain by going, and the
price? The price was just deliberate deception on a solemn matter. To
say "yes" was to declare to his friend that he desired the forgiveness
of that horrible man whom he soberly believed to be guilty of the most
monstrous designs. But the momentous debate was but momentary.

"No, Harry, I can not," he said.

The two turned from each other without further words, and Geoffrey took
a step to where the doctor stood.

"I came to have a word with you," he said, and together they went into
the consulting room.

Scarcely had the door closed behind them, when Geoffrey drew the
telegram from his pocket.

"I have just found this from Lady Oxted," he said. "Probably she has
telegraphed the same to you. Now, how did Harry come here, and what has
passed between you?"

The doctor glanced at the sheet.

"Yes, she telegraphed to me also," he said. "Harry's coming was pure
luck. He wanted me to go with him down to Vail, to see if anything can
be done for Mr. Francis. I hope," he added, with a humour too grim for
smiles, "to be able to do a great deal for Mr. Francis."

"So you are going, thank the Lord!" said Geoffrey. "And do you believe
in this illness?"

"He may have had another attack," said the doctor with a shrug; "indeed,
it is not improbable after the agitation of yesterday. Again, he may
not, and it is a subtle man."

"It is a trap, you mean, to get Harry there."

"Possibly, and if so, a trap laid in a hurry. Else he would never have
telegraphed to Harry at Lady Oxted's. He might have guessed it would be
passed on to us. I am sorry, by the way, that you could not manage to
say 'yes' to his wish that you should go with him. But I respect you for
saying 'no.'"

"I couldn't do otherwise," said Geoffrey. "All the same, if it appears
desirable, I shall come to Vail."

"Ah, you will come secretly on your own account, just as you would have
if you had not seen Harry. That will do just as well. Now I can give you
three minutes. I shall be in the house; you, I suppose, will not. How
can I communicate with you?"

Geoffrey thought a moment, and his eye brightened.

"In two ways--no less," he said. "Listen carefully, please. At any
appointed time, tap at the portrait of old Francis in the hall. I shall
be just behind it, and will open it. Or, secondly, go to the window of
the gun room, open it and call me very gently. I shall be within three
yards of you, in the centre of the box hedge just outside. I will do
whichever seems to you best."

"Does Mr. Francis know of either?" asked the doctor after a pause.

"He knows of the passage inside the house; of that I am sure. I don't
know that he knows of the box hedge."

"Then we will choose that. Now, how will you get to Vail? You must not
go by the same train as we. You must not run the risk of Harry seeing
you."

"Then I shall go by the next, 5.17, same as Mr. Francis went by
yesterday. It gets in at half past six. I will be at the box hedge soon
after seven."

"Very good," said the doctor. "Now, in turn, listen to me. Mr. Francis
believes he has the metholycine with him; he has also Sanders. It seems
to me therefore probable that he will attempt to carry the thing out in
the way he indicated to me, which I told you and Lady Oxted."

Geoffrey shook his head.

"Not likely," he said. "You hold the evidence of the metholycine he has
taken from your cabinet."

"Yes, but he is desperate, and the drug almost untraceable. Also the
fact that he has the metholycine from my cabinet may be supposed to shut
my mouth. It looks very much as if I was his accomplice, does it not? He
will guess that this is awkward for me, as indeed it would be, were not
the metholycine common salt."

"Ha!" said Geoffrey. "Go on."

"I suspect--I feel sure, then--that his plans are more or less the same
as before, only he and Sanders will have to carry it through alone. I
see no reason why they should alter the idea of the supposed burglary.
It is simple and convincing, and my mouth is sealed in two ways."

"How two?" asked Geoffrey.

"Two--so Mr. Francis thinks: Harmsworth and metholycine. Now the
metholycine will fail, and they will have to get Harry into their power
some other way. Also, Mr. Francis will be very anxious, as I told you,
that he should not suffer pain. Of that I am certain; it is a fixed idea
with him. Probably, also, the attempt will be made as planned, late,
when the servants are in bed. Now, is there not a groom in the stables
very like Harry?"

Geoffrey stared.

"Yes, the image of him," he said. "And what about him?"

"Go down to the stables as soon as you get to Vail, and tell him he is
wanted at the house. He knows you, I suppose. Walk up with him yourself,
and let him be in the box hedge with you."

For a moment the excitement of adventure overpowered all else in
Geoffrey's mind.

"Ah, you have some idea!" he cried.

"Nothing, except that it may be useful to--have two Harrys in the house.
Allowing time for this, you should be at the box hedge by eight. That
shall be the appointed hour."

"But what shall I tell Jim?"

"Jim is the name of the groom? Tell him that it may be in his power to
save his master from great peril. Harry is liked by his servants, is he
not? All that we know at present is that he must wait in the box hedge
with you in case we need him. But supposing he is swiftly and secretly
needed, how are we to get him into the house?"

"By the secret passage within," said Geoffrey, quick as an echo.

"Good again. It looks as if the Luck was with us. And this passage comes
out at the back of old Francis's portrait? Bad place."

"Yes, but also at the bottom of the main stairs, through a panel between
them and the hall."

"That is better. There, then--O God, help us all! And now you must go.
Harry is waiting for me. I dare not risk trying to convince him. He
quarrelled with you, his best friend, for the suspicion--I can serve him
better by going with him."

They went out together and found Harry in the hall. He detained Geoffrey
with his hand, and the doctor passed on into the dining room.

"You will lunch here, Harry," he said. "It is ready."

From outside the lad closed the door. Geoffrey knew that a bad moment
was coming, and set his teeth. But the moment was worse than he
anticipated, for Harry's voice when he spoke was broken, and his eyes
moist.

"O Geoffrey," he said, "can not you do what I asked? If you knew what it
meant to me! There are two men in the world whom I love. There, you
understand--and I can not bear it, simply I can not bear it!"

The temptation had been severe before; it was a trifle to this.

"No, I can't!" cried Geoffrey, eager to get the words spoken, for each
moment made them harder to speak. "O Harry, some day you will
understand. Before your marriage--I give it a date--I swear to you in
God's name that you will understand how it is that I can not come with
you to ask Mr. Francis's forgiveness!"

Disappointment deepened on Harry's face, and a gleam of anger shone
there.

"I will not ask you a third time," he said, and went into the dining
room.

Geoffrey had still three hours to wait in London before the starting of
his train, and these were chequered with an incredible crowd of various
hopes and fears. At one time he hugged himself on the obvious
superiority of their dispositions against Mr. Francis; he would even
smile to think of the toils enveloping that evil schemer; again mere
exhilaration at the unknown and the violent would boil up in
effervescence; another moment, and an anguish of distrust would seize
him. What if, after all, Dr. Armytage had been playing with him, how
completely and successfully, he writhed to think? A week ago the sweat
would have broken out on him to picture Harry travelling down to Vail
with that man of sinister repute, to be alone in the house with him, Mr.
Francis, and the foxlike servant. Had he been hoodwinked throughout?
Was the doctor even now smiling to himself behind his paper at the
facility of his victim? At the thought, London turned hell; he had taken
the bait like a silly staring fish; even now he was already hauled, as
it were, on to dry land, there to gasp innocuously, impotent to stir or
warn, while who knew what ghastly subaqueous drama might even now be
going on? He had trusted the doctor on evidence of the most diaphanous
kind, unsupported by any testimony of another. The sleeping-draught
given to Harry, the brushing aside of the revolver he had passed to him,
when to shoot was impossible--these, with a calculated gravity of face
and an assumption of anxious sincerity, had been enough to convince him
of the man's honesty. He could have screamed aloud at the thought, and
every moment whirled Harry nearer, helpless and unsuspecting, to that
house of death!

Meantime the journey of the two had been for the most part a silent
passage. Each was absorbed in his own thoughts and anxieties: Harry,
restless, impatient, eager for the quicker falling behind of wayside
stations, while the doctor brooded with half-closed eyelids, intent, it
would seem, on the pattern of the carriage mat, his thoughts
inconjecturable. Once only, as the train yelled through Slough, did he
speak, but then with earnestness.

"Don't let your uncle know I have come, Harry," he said. "It may be that
Sanders has unnecessarily alarmed you. So see him first yourself, and
if this has been a heart attack like to what he had before, and he seems
now to be quietly recuperating, do not let him know I am here. It may
only alarm him for his condition."

"Pray God it may be so!" said Harry.

The doctor looked steadfastly at the carriage mat.

"Medically speaking," he said, "I insist on this. I should also wish
that you would guard against all possibility of his knowing I am here.
Sanders, I suppose, looks after him. I should therefore not wish Sanders
to know."

"Oh, he can keep a secret," said Harry.

"Very likely; but I would rather he had no secret to keep. I am not
speaking without reason. If, as you fear, and as the telegram seems to
indicate, this attack has been unusually severe, I must assure you that
it is essential that no agitating influence of any kind should come near
him. If he is in real danger, of course I will see him."

"Would it not be likely to reassure him to know you are here?" asked
Harry.

"I have told you that I think not," said the doctor, "unless there is
absolute need of me. I hope"--and the word did not stick in his throat
"that quiet will again restore him."

A trap was waiting for them at the station, driven by Jim, and the
doctor had an opportunity of judging how far the likeness between the
two might be hoped to deceive one who knew them both. Even now, with the
one in livery, the other in ordinary dress, it was extraordinary, not
only in superficialities, but somehow essentially, and he felt that it
was worth while to have arranged to profit by it, should opportunity
occur. The groom had a note for Harry, which he tore open hastily.

"Ah! that is good," he said, and handed it to the doctor.

It was but a matter of a couple of lines, signed by Templeton, saying
merely that the severity of the attack was past, and at the time of
writing Mr. Francis was sleeping, being looked after by Sanders, who had
not left him since the seizure. And to the one reader this account
brought an up-springing of hope, to the other the conviction that his
estimate of Mr. Francis's illness was correct.

Harry went upstairs immediately on his arrival, leaving the doctor in
the hall. Templeton, usually a man of wood, had perceptibly started when
he opened the door to them and saw the doctor, and now, instead of
discreetly retiring on the removal of their luggage, he hung about,
aimlessly poking the fire, putting a crooked chair straight, and a
straight chair crooked, and fidgeting with the blinds. All at once the
strangeness of his manner struck the doctor.

"What have you got to tell me?" he asked suddenly.

The blind crashed down to its full length as the butler's hand dropped
the retaining string. The rigid control of domestic service was snapped;
he was a frightened man speaking to his equal.

"This is a strange illness of Mr. Francis's," he said.

The doctor was alive to seize every chance.

"How strange?" he asked. "Mr. Francis has had these attacks before."

"I sent for the doctor from Didcot, as soon as it occurred, unknown to
him or Sanders," said Templeton, "but he was not allowed to see him. Why
is that, sir? There was Sanders telegraphing for his lordship, and
saying that Mr. Francis was dying, yet refusing to let the doctor see
him. But perhaps he was expecting you, sir."

"He does not know I am here, Templeton, nor must he know. Look to that;
see that the servants do not tell Sanders I am here. Now, what do you
mean? You think Mr. Francis is not ill at all."

"Does a man in the jaws of death, I may say, play the flute?" asked the
butler.

"Play the flute?"

"Yes, sir. It was during the servants' dinner hour--but I had no stomach
for my meat to-day, and went upstairs--when we might have been at dinner
perhaps five minutes, and along the top passage to his lordship's room
to see if they had it ready. Well, sir, I heard coming from Mr.
Francis's room--very low and guarded, so that I should have heard
nothing had I not stood outside a moment listening, you may say, but I
did not know for what--a little lively tune I have heard him play a
score of times. But in a minute it ceased, and then I heard two voices
talking, and after that Mr. Francis laughed. That from a man who was
sleeping, so Sanders told us."

"This is all very strange," said the doctor.

"Ay, and then the door opened, and out came that man Sanders; black as
hell he looked when he saw me! But little I cared for his black looks,
and I just asked him how his master was. Very bad, he told me, and
wandering, and he wondered whether his lordship would get here in time."

The doctor came a step nearer.

"Templeton," he said, "I rely on you to obey me implicitly. It is
necessary that neither Mr. Francis nor Sanders know I am here. Things
which I can not yet tell you may depend on this. And see to this: let me
have the room I had before, and put his lordship into the room opening
from it. Lock the door of it which leads into the passage, and lose the
key, so that the only entrance is through my room. If he asks why his
room is changed, make any paltry excuse: say the electric light in his
room is gone wrong--anything. But make his usual room look as if it was
occupied; go up there during dinner, turn down the bed, put a nightshirt
on it, and leave a sponge, brushes, and so on."

"Master Harry!" gasped the butler, his mind suddenly reverting to old
days.

The doctor frowned.

"Come," he said, "do not get out of hand like that. Do as I bid you, and
try to look yourself. I can tell you no more."

Harry came down from the sick room a few minutes later, with a brow
markedly clearer.

"He is much better, ever so much better, Sanders thinks," he said. "He
was sleeping, but when he wakes he will be told I have come."

"Ah! that is good," said the doctor. "Did Sanders tell you about the
attack?"

"Yes, it came on while he was dressing this morning. Luckily, Sanders
was with him; but for an hour, he tells me, he thought that every breath
might be his last. He's a trump, that man, and there's a head on his
shoulders too. He has hardly left him for five minutes."

"Will Sanders sleep in his room to-night?" asked the doctor.

"Yes, he has his meals brought to him there too, so that it will be easy
for you not to be seen by him, since you make such a point of it. Oh,
thank God, he is so much better! Ah, look! we are going to have one of
those curious low mists to-night."

The doctor followed Harry to one of the windows which Templeton had left
unshuttered, and looked out.

The autumn twilight was fast closing in, and after the hot sun of the
day, the mist, in the sudden coolness of its withdrawal, was forming
very thickly and rapidly over the lake. There was a little draught of
wind toward the house, not sufficient to disperse it, but only to slide
it gently, like a sheet, over the lawns. It lay very low, in thickness
not perhaps exceeding five feet over the higher stretches of the lawn,
but as the surface of it was level, it must have been some few feet
thicker where the ground declined toward the lake. It appeared to be of
extraordinary density, and spread very swiftly and steadily, so that
even while they watched, it had pushed on till, like flood water, it
struck the wall of the house, and presently lawn and lake were both
entirely vanished, and they looked out, as from a mountain-top, over a
level sea of cloud, pricked here and there by plantations and the higher
shrubs. Above, the night was clear, and a young moon rode high in a
heaven that silently filled with stars.

Geoffrey, meantime, had followed two hours behind them; his train was
punctual, and it was only a little after seven when he found himself,
having walked from the station, at the edge of the woods, looking down
on to this same curious sea of mist. The monstrous birds of the box
hedge stood out upon it, like great aquatic creatures swimming there,
for the hedge itself was submerged, and the descent into it was like a
plunge into a bath. Not wishing to risk being seen from the house, he
made a wide circuit round it toward the lake. Here the mist rose above
his head, baffling and blinding; but striking the edge of the lake, he
followed it, guided as much by the sobbing of the ripples against the
bank as by the vague muffled outline, till he reached the inlet of the
stream which fed it. From this point the ground rose rapidly, and in a
few minutes he could look over the mist again and see the house already
twinkling with scattered lights, moored like some great ship in that
white sea. A few hundred yards more brought him to the stables, and,
conveniently for his purpose, at the gate stood Jim and a helper, their
work over, smoking and chatting. Geoffrey approached till it was certain
they could see who he was.

"Is that you, Jim?" he said. "They want you at the house."

Jim knocked out his pipe and followed. His clothes had "evening out"
stamped upon them, and there seemed to be an unpleasing curtailment of
his liberty in prospect.

"Come round by the lake," said Geoffrey in a low voice, when the groom
had joined him. "I have something to tell you."

He waited till they were certainly out of ear-shot.

"Now, Jim," he said, "it's just this. We believe that an attempt will be
made to-night to murder Lord Vail. I want your help, though I can't yet
tell you in what way you can help, because I don't know. But will you do
all you can or are told to do?"

"Gawd bless my soul!" said Jim. Then, with a return to his ordinary
impassivity, "yes, sir, I'll do anything you tell me to help."

"Come on, then. You can trust me that you shall run no unreasonable
risks."

"I'm not thinking you'll let them murder me instead, sir," said Jim.
"And may I ask who is going to do the murdering?"

Geoffrey hesitated a moment, but on reflection there seemed to him to be
no reason for concealing anything.

"We believe--Dr. Armytage and I, that is--that Sanders, Mr. Francis's
man, will attempt it."

Jim whistled under his breath.

"Bring him on," he said. "Lord! I should like to have a go at that
Sanders, sir! He walks into the stable yard as if every horse in the
place belonged to him."

They had by this time skirted the lake again, and the booming of the
sluice sounded near at hand. Then, striking for higher ground, they saw
they had already passed the house, and close in front of them swam the
birds of the box hedge. The mist had sunk back a little, and now they
sat, as if in a receding tide, on the long peninsula of the hedge
itself, visible above the drift, and black in the moonlight.

"This way," said Geoffrey, and groping round to the back of it they
found the overgrown door and entered. Thence, going cautiously and
feeling their way, they passed down the length of it, and soon saw in
front of them, like a blurred moon, the light from the gun-room windows.
The time had been calculated to a nicety, for they had been there
scarcely five minutes, when a shadow moved across the blind, which was
then rolled up, and the window silently lifted a crack. The figure,
owing to the density of the mist, was indistinguishable, but Geoffrey
recognised the doctor's voice when it whispered his name. He touched
Jim to make him follow, and together they stood close by the window.

"Good you have Jim with you," said the doctor, "and you have told him we
may need him. I want him inside the house; so go with him through the
secret passage, and open the panel by the stairs which you told me of. I
shall be there, and I will tell you what we are going to do. Harry has
gone to dress, and the house is quiet. Wait, Geoffrey. Take this."

And he handed him out a rook rifle and eight or ten cartridges.

"Put these inside the hedge," he whispered, "and come round at once with
Jim."

Five minutes later Geoffrey gently opened the panel of the door, and the
doctor glided in like a ghost, latching it noiselessly behind him. His
face brooded and gloomed no laugh; it was alert and active.

"There is very little time," he said; "so, first for you, Geoffrey. Go
back for the rifle and cartridges, and get somewhere in cover where you
can command the front of the house. What course events will take outside
I can not say. But the Luck and the plate will be stolen, and they will
have to get them away somehow. You must stop that. Sanders, I suspect,
will try to remove them."

"Beg your pardon, sir," put in Jim, "but Sanders was down at the stable
this afternoon, and said that the door of the coach house and one of the
loose boxes was to be left unlocked to-night, in case a doctor was
wanted for Mr. Francis. He said he could put to himself, sir, so that
none of us need sit up."

The doctor's keen face grew a shade more animate, his mouth bordered on
a smile.

"Good lad!" he said.--"Well, that's your job, Geoffrey: you must use
your discretion entirely. You may have to deal with a pretty desperate
man, and it is possible you will feel safer with that rifle."

"Where shall I go?" asked Geoffrey.

"I thought the summerhouse on the knoll would be a good place; it stands
above the mist."

"Excellent. And for Jim?"

"We must be guided by the course of events. Jim will have to wait here,
in any case, probably till eleven, or even later. Then I expect he will
go to bed in Harry's room, where I--I can't tell you: it is all in the
clouds at present. I want to spare Harry horror. Anyhow, he will stop
here until I tap twice on the panel outside. Now I can not wait. Harry
may be down any minute; we dine at a quarter past. Ah! this is for you,
Geoffrey," and he handed him a packet of sandwiches--"and this for you,
Jim.--Now, you to the summerhouse, Geoffrey--Jim waits here: I dine with
Harry. Yes, your hand, and yours. God help our work!"

Though never a voluminous talker, the doctor was even more silent than
usual at dinner that night, and, despite the alertness of his eye,
confessed to an extreme fatigue. Thus it was that, soon after ten, he
and Harry went upstairs; he straight to his room, the latter to tap
discreetly at the door of the sick room and learn the latest of the
patient.

The change of Harry's room from the one he usually occupied to that
communicating with the doctor's caused no comment, either silent or
spoken, from him, nor did the loss of the key seem to him in any way
remarkable. He came straight from his visit to Mr. Francis, to give the
news to the doctor.

"Still sleeping," he said, "and sleeping very quietly, so Sanders tells
me. And I--I feel as if I should sleep the clock round! I really think I
shall go to bed at once."

He went through the doctor's room and turned on his light, then appeared
again in the doorway.

"Got everything you want?" he asked. "Have a whisky and soda?"

A confused idea of metholycine, a distinct idea that he did not wish
Harry to run the risk of being seen by Sanders going to another room
than the ordinary, made itself felt in the doctor's reply.

"Not for worlds!" he said. "A poisonous habit."

"That means I mustn't have any, does it?" asked Harry from the doorway.
"Now that is hard lines. I want some, but not enough to go and fetch it
from the hall myself. Do have some: give me an excuse."

"Not even that," said the doctor.

"Well, good-night," said the lad, and he closed the door between the two
rooms.

For so tired a man, the doctor on the closing of the door exhibited a
considerable briskness. Very quickly and quietly he took off dress coat,
shoes, and shirt, and buttoning a dark-gray coat over his vest, set his
door ajar, and switched off his light. The hour for action, he well
realized, might strike any moment, but he was prepared, as far as
preparation was possible. Outside there was waiting Geoffrey with the
rook rifle; inside the secret passage the spurious Harry--both, he knew,
calm and bland for any emergency. Meanwhile the real Harry was safe for
the present; none but he and Templeton knew of the change of room, and
none could reach him but through the chamber he himself occupied. But an
intricate and subtle passage was likely to be ahead, and as yet its
windings were unconjecturable. As a working hypothesis, for he could
find no better, he had assumed that Mr. Francis's plans were in the main
unaltered. Harry, drugged and unconscious, was to be taken to the plate
closet at some hour in this dead night, where Sanders would be waiting.
Yet this conjecture might be utterly at fault; in any case the drugged
whisky, mixed as it now was with innocuous salt, could not have the
effect desired, and for anything unforeseen (and here was at least one
step untraceable), he must have every sense alert, to interpret to the
best of his ability the smallest clew that came from the room opposite.
Mr. Francis and Sanders were there now, firearms were not to be feared:
here was the sum of his certainties. This also, and this from his study
of Mr. Francis he considered probable to the verge of certainty, Harry
would be unconscious when the death blow was given.

In the dark, time may either fly with swallows' wings or lag with the
tortoise, for the watch in a man's brain is an unaccountable mechanism,
and the doctor had no idea how long he had been waiting, when he heard
the latch of a door open somewhere in the passage outside. Two noiseless
steps took him to his own, and through the crack, where he had left it
ajar, he saw a long perpendicular chink of light; bright it seemed and
near. Without further audible sound this grew gradually fainter, and
with the most stealthy precautions he opened his own door and peered
out. Some fifteen yards distant, moving very slowly down the passage,
were two figures--those of Mr. Francis and his valet. The latter was
dressed in ordinary clothes, the former, vividly visible by the light of
the candle the servant carried, in a light garish dressing gown and red
slippers. At this moment they paused opposite the door of the room Harry
usually occupied, and here held a word of inaudible colloquy. There was
a table just outside the door, fronting the top of the stairs, and a dim
lamp on a bracket hung above it. On it Mr. Francis put down a small
bottle, and what looked like an ordinary table napkin, and the two went
down the stairs.

It was the time for caution and rapidity; already, as he knew, luck had
favoured him, in that neither had entered Harry's room, and after giving
them some ten seconds' law, he went noiselessly over the thick carpet of
the passage to the table and opened the bottle Mr. Francis had left
there. The unmistakable fumes of chloroform greeted his nostril, and he
stood awhile in unutterable perplexity. Fresh and valuable as this
evidence was, it was difficult to form any certain conclusions about it.
Conceivably, the chloroform was an additional precaution, in case Harry
had not drunk the whisky; conceivably also the metholycine idea had been
altogether abandoned in the absence of a skilled operator. That at least
he could easily settle, and turning into the bedroom Harry usually
occupied, he switched on the electric light. Templeton had followed his
instructions about making the room look habitable, but on the dressing
table stood what was perhaps not the work of Templeton. A cut-glass
bottle was there on a tray, with a glass and a siphon. He spilled a
teaspoonful of the spirit into the glass and tasted it. Salt.

So much, then, was certain: one or both of the figures he had seen go
downstairs would return here, with the chloroform; and still cudgelling
his brains over the main problem, as to why Mr. Francis had gone
downstairs at all, he lingered not, but felt his way down to the bottom
of the flight. Here he paused, but hearing nothing, tapped twice at the
panel which opened into the secret passage. It was at once withdrawn,
and Jim stepped out.

"Come!" he whispered.

With the same rapid stealthiness they ascended again, crossed the
landing, and entered Harry's bedroom. The bed stood facing the door in
an angle between the window and the wall, and the doctor drew the
curtain across the window, which was deep and with a seat in it.

"Undress at once," he said to Jim. "They might notice that your clothes
were not lying about if they have a light. Quick! off with them--coat,
waistcoat, shirt, trousers, boots, as naked as your mother bore you.
There is a nightshirt, put it on. Now get into bed, and lie with your
face half covered. Do not stir or make any sound whatever till I turn up
the light or call to you. I shall be behind the curtain."

There were two electric lamps in the room, one by the door, the other
with its own switch over the bed. The doctor had lit both, and as soon
as the groom was in bed, extinguished the one by the door. Then,
crossing the room, he got up behind the curtain in the window seat, and
from there turned off the other.

"And when I turn up the light, Jim," he whispered, "throw off anything
that may have been placed over your face, and spring up in bed. Till
then be asleep. You understand?"

"Yes, sir," said Jim softly.

At that moment, with the suddenness of a long-forgotten memory returned,
the doctor guessed why Mr. Francis had gone downstairs. The glory of
the guess was so great that he could not help speaking.

"He has gone for the Luck," he said.

"Yes, sir," said Jim again, and there were darkness and silence.

Interminable eons passed, or may be ten minutes, but at the end of
infinite time came scarcely sound, but an absence of complete silence,
from the door. From behind the thick curtains the doctor could see
nothing, but a moment later came the gentle sigh of the scraped carpet,
and from that, or from the infallible sixth sense that awakes only in
the dark, he knew that some one had entered. Then from closer at hand he
heard the faintest shuffle of movement, and he knew that, whoever this
was in the room besides the groom and himself, he was not a couple of
yards distant. After another while the least vibration sounded from the
glasses in the tray, as if a hand had touched them unwittingly, and
again dead stillness succeeded, till the doctor's ears sang with it.
Then from the bed his ear suddenly focused the breathings of two
persons--one very short and quick, the other a slow, steady respiration,
and simultaneously with that his nostril caught the whiff of chloroform.
Again the rustle of linen sounded, and hearing that, he held his breath
and counted the pulse which throbbed in his own temples. Twenty times it
beat, and on the twentieth stroke his finger pressed the switch of the
light, and he drew back the curtain.

Already Jim was sitting up in bed, bland and impassive in face, and his
left hand flung the reeking napkin from him. By the bedside crouched a
white-haired figure clad in a blue dressing gown; close by it on the
floor stood the leather case which held the Luck; the right hand was
still stretched over the bed, though the napkin which it had held was
plucked from it. His face was flushed with colour; the bright blue eyes,
a little puckered up in this sudden change from darkness to the glare of
the electric light, moved slowly from Jim to the doctor and back again.
But no word passed the thin, compressed lips.

Suddenly the alertness of the face was gone like a burst bubble; the
mouth opened and drooped, the eyes grew staring and sightless; the left
hand only seemed to retain its vitality, and felt gropingly on the
carpet for the Luck. Then, with a slow, supreme effort, the figure half
raised itself, drawing the jewel tight to its breast, folding both arms
about it, with fingers intertwined in the strap that carried it. Then it
collapsed completely, rolled over, and lay face downward on the floor.

For one moment neither of the others stirred; then, recovering himself,
the doctor stepped down from the window seat.

"Put on your coat and trousers, Jim," he said, "and come with me
quickly. Yes, leave him--it--there. I will come back presently. We have
to catch Sanders now, and we must go without a light. You behaved
admirably. Now follow me."

"Is it dead, sir?" whispered Jim.

"I think so. Come!"

In the eagerness of their pursuit they crossed the passage without
looking to right hand or left, and felt their way down the many-angled
stairs. The hall was faintly lit by the pallor of moonshine that came
through the skylight, and without difficulty they found the baize door
leading into the servants' parts. But here with the shuttered windows
reigned the darkness of Egypt, and despairing of finding his way, the
doctor lit a match to guide them to the farther end of the passage where
was the plate closet. But when they reached it, it was to find the door
open and none within. In all directions stood boxes with forced lids.
Here a dozen spoons were scattered on the floor, here a saltcellar; but
the rifling had been fairly complete.

"How long do you suppose we were waiting in the dark?" he asked Jim.
"Anyhow, it was long enough for Sanders and Mr. Francis to have taken
most of the plate. I had thought they would do that after--afterward.
Now, where is the plate, and where is Sanders?"

"Can't say, sir," said Jim.

The match which had showed the disorder of the place had burned out, and
the doctor, still frowning over the next step, had just lit another,
when from outside there rang out the sharp ping of a rifle shot.

"That is Geoffrey!" he said, "and what in God's name is happening?
Upstairs again."

They groped their way back along the basement to the door leading into
the hall. Close to this went up the back stairs forming the servants'
communication with the upper story, and, seeing these, the doctor
clicked his tongue against his teeth.

"That's how we missed him," he said; "he went this way up to Mr.
Francis, while we were going down the front stairs."

"Yes, sir," said Jim.

They passed through into the hall, and a draught of cold air met them.
There was no longer any reason for secret movements, and the doctor
turned on the electric light. The front door was open, and the wreaths
of dense mist streamed in.

"Go and see if you can help Mr. Geoffrey, Jim," he said, "if you can
find him. It is clear that Sanders has left the house: who else could
have opened that door? I must see to that which we left upstairs."

He ran up. The room door as they had left it was open; on the floor
still lay what they had left there. But it was lying no longer on its
face; the sightless eyes were turned to the ceiling, and the Luck was no
longer clasped, with fingers intertwined in its strap, to the breast.

The doctor fought down an immense repugnance against touching the body;
but the instinct of saving life, however remote that chance, prevailed,
and taking hold of one of the hands, he felt for the pulse. But as he
touched it two of the fingers fell backward, dislocated or broken.

Then, with a swift hissing intake of his breath, he pressed his finger
on the wrist. But the search for the pulse was vain.




CHAPTER XXV

MR. FRANCIS SLEEPS


It was about a quarter past eight when Geoffrey left Jim in the secret
passage, and, in accordance with his instructions, went back to the box
hedge where he had concealed the rifle and cartridges. With these he
skirted wide up the short grassy slope that led to the summerhouse, and
trying the door, found it unlocked. It stood, as he had supposed, some
fifteen feet above the level of the mist that lay round the house below,
and was admirably situated for the observation of any movement or
manoeuvre that might be made, for it commanded a clear view past the
front of the house down to the lake, while the road from the stables
passed not fifty yards from it, joining the carriage sweep: from the
carriage sweep at right angles ran the drive. Clearly, then, if Jim's
account of Sanders's visit and order to the stables covered a design,
the working out of it must take place before his eyes.

The summerhouse stood close to the background of wood in which last
summer Evie and Mr. Francis had once walked, a mere black blot against
the blackness of the trees, and Geoffrey, pulling a chair to the open
door, sat commandingly invisible. His rifle he leaned against the wall,
ready to his hand, and it was in more than moderate composure that he
ate the sandwiches with which the doctor had provided him. There was, he
expected, a long vigil in front of him before any active share in the
operations should stand to his name; the first act would be played in
that great square ship of a house that lay anchored out in the sea of
mist. What should pass there in the next two hours he strenuously
forbore to conjecture; for it was his business to keep his brain cool,
and avoid all thoughts which might heat that or render his hand
unsteady. That short interview with the doctor had given him a
confidence that made firm the shifting quicksands of fear which all day
had quaked within him, for the man had spoken to him with authority,
masterful and decided, which had stilled the shudderings and
perplexities of the last twelve hours. He had to see to it that they
should not awake again.

At intervals of seemingly incalculable length the clock from the stable
drowsily told the hour, and but for that and the slow wheeling of the
young moon, he could have believed that time had ceased. No breath of
wind stirred in the trees behind, or shredded the opaque levels of the
mist in front; a death and stagnation lay over the world, and no sound
but the muffled murmur of the sluice from the lake broke the silence.
The world spun in space, and the sound of the invisible outpouring
waters might have been the rustle of its passage through interstellar
space.

Then the spell and soothing of the stillness laid hold of him; the hour
of action was near, the intolerable fret of anxiety nearly over. Inside
the house that dark, keen-eyed man was not one whom the prudent would
care to see in opposition (and on which side he was Geoffrey no longer
entertained a doubt's shadow), nor, for that matter, was his lieutenant,
the impassive, spurious Harry. By his unwilling means last summer had
Mr. Francis made the first of his vile attempts; by his means, perhaps,
this should be the last. Geoffrey could rest assured that they would do
all that lay in the power of two very cool heads: his business was to
see that his own part should not be less well done.

Some years ago--or was the stroke still resonant?--half past ten had
struck on the stable clock; and since eleven had not yet sounded, it was
earlier than he had suspected, when there came a noise which sent his
heart hammering for a moment in his throat. He could not at once
localize or identify it, and, though still obscure and muffled, he had
only just decided that it could not be very far off, before he guessed
what it was. Its direction and its nature came to him together: some
vehicle was being cautiously driven over the grass toward the house from
the stables, and on the moment he caught sight of it. It was moving at a
very slow pace, more than half drowned in the mist, and all he could see
of it was the head and back of a horse, the head and shoulders of the
man who led it, and the box seat and rail of some vehicle of the
wagonette type. It reached the gravel walk with a crisp, crunching
sound, and drew up there. Then he heard the unmistakable rattle of the
brake being put hard on, and the man, tying the reins in a knot, looped
them round the whip-holder. He then left it, not forty yards from where
Geoffrey sat, and was swallowed up in the fog going toward the house.
The curtain was up for the second act. What had the first been?

The thing had passed so quickly and silently that he could almost have
believed that his imagination had played him some trick, were it not for
the sight of that truncated horse and carriage which testified to its
reality. There, without doubt, was the carriage from the stables, of
which Jim had told them; but he could not have sworn to the identity of
the man who led it, in the uncertain light. And he picked up his rifle
and laid it across his knees, prepared again to wait.

Soon afterward eleven struck, and, while the strokes were still
vibrating, came the second interruption to his silent waiting. Out of
the mist between the wagonette and the house dimly appeared two heads
moving slowly toward the carriage, and rising gradually as they climbed
the slope above the level mist, till they were distinct and clear as far
as the shoulders. They walked about a yard apart, and words low and
inaudible to the watcher passed between them. Arrived at the carriage,
they seemed to set something down, and then with an effort hoist it into
the body of the vehicle. And as they again raised themselves, Geoffrey
saw that the one head sparkled whitely in the moonshine, and he well
knew to whom those venerable locks belonged. Then there came audible
words.

"Come back, then, Sanders," said Mr. Francis, "and wait at the top of
the back stairs, while I go very gently to his room to see if it is all
right. In any case I shall use the chloroform. Then, when I call you,
come and help me to carry him down to the plate closet. There I shall
leave you, and go back to bed. Afterward, drive hard to the village,
leave the plate at the cottage I told you of, and bring the doctor back.
Are you ready? Where is the--ah! thank you. No, I prefer to carry it
myself. The Luck! the Luck! At last--at last!"

He raised a hand above his head; it grasped a case. The man's face was
turned upward toward the moon, and Geoffrey, looking thereon, could
scarcely stifle an exclamation of horror.

"It is not a man's face," he said to himself. "It is some mad
incarnation of Satan!"

In another minute all was silent again, the inhuman figures had
vanished; again only the section of horse and cart appeared above the
mist. For a moment Geoffrey hesitated, unwilling by any possible risk to
lose the ultimate success, but the chance of being heard or seen by
those retreated figures was infinitesimal, and he crept crouchingly down
the slope to where the wagonette stood. Then, opening the door, he
lifted out, exerting his whole strength, the load the two had put
there, and, bent double under the ponderous weight, made his way back to
the summerhouse. The burden clinked and rang as he moved: there could be
no doubt what his prize was.

He had not long been back at his post when muffled, rapid footsteps
again rivetted him, and he saw a moving dark shape coming with great
swiftness up from the house. As before, with the rising of the ground,
it grew freer of the mist, till when it reached the carriage he could
easily recognise the head and shoulders of Sanders. Somehow, and if
possible without the cost of human life, he must have stopped. He had
already swung a small case easily recognisable by the watcher on to the
box, and he himself was in the act of mounting, when an idea struck
Geoffrey. Taking quick but careful aim, he fired at the horse, just
below the ear. At so short a range a miss would have been an incredible
thing, and with the report of the rifle the head sank out of sight into
the mist.

Then he stood up.

"If you move, Sanders, I fire!" he cried. "This time at you!"

But even as he said the words, the box was already empty. The man had
slipped down with astonishing rapidity behind the wagonette, and when
Geoffrey next saw him dimly through the mist he was already some yards
away. Even while he hesitated, with another cartridge yet in his hand,
he was gone, and waiting only to put it in, he ran down to the cart. The
case, the same beyond a doubt as was in Mr. Francis's hand ten minutes
ago, which he had seen Sanders swing on to the box just now, before
mounting himself, was gone also.

At that he ran down, at the top of the speed he dare use, after the
vanished figure. Once he heard the crunch of gravel to the right, and
turned that way, already bewildered by this blind pursuit in the mist;
once he thought he heard the rustle of bushes to his left, and turned
there. Then, beyond any doubt, he heard his own name called. At that he
stopped.

"Who is it?" he cried.

"Me, sir--Jim," said an imperturbable voice close to him.

"Ah! is Harry--is his lordship safe?"

"Yes, sir, quite safe. The doctor sent me out to see if I could help
you."

Before Geoffrey could reply, a sudden wild cry rang out into the night,
broken short by the sound of a great splash.

"My Gawd, what's that?" cried Jim, startled for once.

"I shouldn't wonder if it was Sanders," said Geoffrey. "Come to the
lake, Jim. God forgive us for trying to rescue the devil! I wonder if he
can swim?"

"Like a stone, sir, I hope," said Jim cheerfully.

The roar of the sluice was a guide to them, but they had lost each
other twenty times before they reached the lake. In that dense and
blinding mist, here risen high above their heads, even sound came
muffled and uncertain, and it was through trampled flower beds and the
swishing of shrubs against their faces that they gained the edge and
stood on the foaming sluice. The water was very high, the noise
bewildering to the senses; and yet, despite the fact that five minutes
ago Geoffrey had been hesitating whether or not to shoot at that vague
runner through the fog, caring nothing whether he killed him, yet now he
did not hesitate to run a risk himself, in order to save from drowning
what had been within an ace of being the mark for his bullet.

"He must be here," he said to Jim; "the pull of the water would drag him
against the sluice."

"You're not going in after that vermin, Mr. Geoffrey?" asked Jim
incredulously.

Geoffrey did not reply, but kicked off his boots and threw his coat on
the grass.

"Stand by to give me a hand," he said, and plunged out of sight.

"Well, I'm damned!" said Jim, and took up his stand close to the edge of
the water gate. The risk he had been willing to run for his master he
had faced without question, indeed with a certain blitheness of spirit;
but to bear a toothache for Sanders's life appeared to him a bargain
that demanded consideration. But even as he wondered, a voice from close
to his feet called him.

"Give a hand," bubbled Geoffrey from the water; "I've got him. I dived
straight on to him."

Jim caught hold of Geoffrey first by the hair, and from that guided his
grasp to a dripping shirt collar. Then, after Geoffrey had got a
foothold on the steep bank, between them they dragged the nerveless and
empty-handed figure from the water and laid it on the grass.

"Dead or alive, that is the only question," said Geoffrey. "Get back to
the house, Jim, and bring the doctor here. I don't know what to do to a
drowned man."

Jim made an obvious call on his resolution. To stay here with that
dripping clay at his feet was a task that demanded more courage than he
had needed to get into Harry's bed.

"No, sir," he said. "You run back to the house and get your wet things
off. I'll stay here!" and he set his teeth.

Geoffrey could not deny the common sense of this, nor indeed had he any
wish to, and shuffled and groped back to the house. As yet he knew
nothing except that Harry was safe, and for the present his curiosity
was gorged with that satisfying assurance. The hall door he found open,
the hall empty and lit, and running upstairs, he saw the door of Harry's
bedroom open, and went in. The doctor was there; he was just covering
with a sheet that which he had removed from the floor on to Harry's bed.
He turned round as Geoffrey entered.

"Quick!" said the latter. "Go down to the sluice. Sanders lost his way
in the fog, and fell in. We fished him out, alive or dead I don't know."

His eye fell on the covered shape on the bed with an awful and sudden
misgiving, for it was Harry's room.

"Not----" he began.

The doctor turned back the sheet for a moment, and then replaced it
quickly.

"Go to my room very quietly, Geoffrey," he said, "for Harry is asleep
next door, and get your wet things off. Put on blankets or something, or
clothes of mine. By the sluice, you say?"

It was some half hour later that Geoffrey heard slow, stumbling steps on
the stairs, and barefooted and wrapped in blankets he went out into the
passage. Jim and the doctor were carrying what he had found in the ooze
of the lake into Harry's room, and they laid it on the floor by the bed.

"It was no use," said the doctor. "I could not arouse the least sign of
vitality. Cover the face. Let us leave them."

He stood in silence a moment after this was done.

"So they lie together," he said, "in obedience to the inscrutable
decrees of God. In his just and merciful hands we leave them."

So the three went out, leaving the two there.

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor led the way down into the hall, Geoffrey in his blankets
following him. Jim had brought the rest of his clothes out from the
chamber of death, and stayed in the passage dressing himself, for it was
better there than in the room. No word passed between the others till he
had joined them. Then said the doctor:

"None of us will be able to go to bed till we have pieced together what
has happened in the last two hours. So----"

"Two hours!" interrupted Geoffrey.

"Yes, it is now only a little after twelve. It was soon after ten that
Harry went to his uncle's room, before going to bed, and found him
sleeping.

"He sleeps now," said Geoffrey. Then in a whisper, "Tell me, did Sanders
kill him?"

The doctor shook his head.

"No; Mr. Francis, I feel sure, was dead when--when Sanders came. But he
took the Luck, so I imagine, from him. I left him clasping the Luck; I
returned to find it gone. And two fingers of his hand were broken. But
where is the Luck?"

"That I think I can tell you," said Geoffrey, "when my turn comes. But
begin at the beginning. I left Jim before dinner in the secret passage."

So, in a few words, the doctor told all that had happened inside the
house from the moment when he opened his door and saw the two, who now
lay upstairs, talking in the passage, down to his return from the plate
closet to find the Luck torn from Mr. Francis's death grip. Then
Geoffrey took on the tale to its completion. At the end he laid his hand
on the groom's shoulder, with the action of a friend and an equal.

"We have done the talking," he said, "but here's the fellow who did the
hard thing in this night's work. I could no more have borne that--that
man creeping across the room to where I lay in bed----"

"Than I could have jumped into the lake in the dark, sir," said Jim,
"when all that was to be found was-- Lord love us all!"

Then there was silence for a while, for the events were still too awful
and too close for chattering. The doctor broke it.

"There are two more things to be done," he said: "one, to bring back the
plate from the summerhouse; the other, Harry. He must be told
everything, but to-morrow will be as well as to-night. By the way,
Geoffrey, where will you sleep?--You too, Jim? Can you get into the
stable so late?"

"Yes, sir; thank you, sir," said Jim. "I'll wake the helper.--I brought
in the rifle, Mr. Geoffrey; you left it by the lake.--Shall I help bring
in the plate, sir?"

"No, we must get Templeton and another man in any case," said the
doctor. "It must be stowed somewhere to-night; the lock of the plate
closet is forced. So get you to bed, Jim. Shake hands like a man, for
you are one."

"Jim, you devil, say good-night to a man," said Geoffrey, and pleasure
and pride made the groom laugh outright.

"But you won't tell Harry to-night?" said Geoffrey, after a moment.
"Hush! What's that?--My God, Harry!"

The gleam of a candle shone through the door leading to the staircase,
and Harry advanced two steps into the hall.

"I woke just now," he said, speaking to the doctor, "and--Geoffrey!"

"Call Jim back," said the doctor.--"Steady, Harry. Not a word!"

Geoffrey gathered his blankets round him and went to the hall door,
which the groom had just closed behind him. He came back at once in
answer to the call.

"But what is it? What is it all?" cried Harry. "Where is my uncle? I
woke, as I began to tell you, and thought I heard people moving about,
and got uneasy. I thought he might be worse, or something. Then I went
through into your room, Dr. Armytage, but you were not there. His door,
too, was open, and there was a light burning, but he was not there.
Where is he? What is it?" he cried again. "Geoffrey--Jim--what are you
doing here?"

He looked from one to the other bewildered, but for a moment none could
speak.

"Oh, for the love of God, tell me!" he cried again.

Jim's right hand went to his head in salutation.

"Please, my lord, it's late; I'd better go," he said feebly.

"No, wait," said Harry. "Damn it all, do what you are told! The doctor
wishes you to stop, so stop. But why and how is Geoff here, and Jim? And
where is he?"

Both of the other young men looked at the doctor, and without more words
he told the story for the second time, with as direct a brevity as was
possible. No word of any kind interrupted him, but in Harry's eyes a
wondering horror deepened and grew convinced. Once only did any sound
come from him, and that when the doctor said that beyond doubt Mr.
Francis was not sane; but then a long sigh, it would seem of unutterable
relief, moaned from his lips. He heard of the plot, as originally told
by his uncle to the doctor, of all the business of the metholycine, of
all the communications going on between his uncle's supposed accomplice
and Geoffrey, of the scene on the pavement of Grosvenor Square. Then
came for the second time that evening the events of the last two hours,
but Harry's head had sunk on his hands, and the eyes of the others no
longer looked at him, for it was not seemly to behold so great an
amazement of horror and grief.

At length the words were all spoken, and for a long space there was
silence, while the truth, bitter and burning as vitriol, ate into the
poor lad's brain. Then said Harry, his face still buried:

"As God sees you, Dr. Armytage, this is true?"

"It is true, Harry," said he.

"Geoffrey?" asked the same hard cold voice.

"God help you, yes!"

"And Jim?"

"Yes, my lord, as far as this night's work goes."

Harry got up from his chair, quietly and steadily. He advanced to the
groom and grasped both his hands in his. Still, without a word, he
turned to the doctor with the same action. Then, still steadily, he
walked across the hearth rug to Geoffrey, and the doctor moved from
where he stood, touched Jim on the shoulder, and withdrew with him. Not
till then did Harry speak, but now his mouth quivered, and the tension
grew to snapping point.

"Geoff, Geoff!" he said, and the blessed relief of tears came to him.




EPILOGUE


Evie was sitting in one of the low window seats in the hall at Vail,
regarding with all the gravity due to the subject her two months' old
baby, that soft little atom round which revolved the world and the stars
and all space. Her discoveries about it were in number like the sands of
the sea, but far more remarkable. This afternoon they had been, and
still continued to be, epoch-making.

"His nose," she said, after a long pause, to Lady Oxted, who was sitting
by the fire, "is at present like mine--that is to say, it is no
particular nose, but it will certainly be like Harry's, which is
perpendicular. That's a joke, dear aunt, the sort of thing which people
who write society stories think clever. It isn't, really."

Lady Oxted sighed.

"And his brains exactly resemble both yours and Harry's, dear," she
said--"that is to say, they are no particular brains."

Evie took no notice whatever of this vitriolic comment.

"And its eyes are certainly Harry's eyes," she went on. "Oh, I went to
see Jim's wife to-day, you know the dairymaid whom Harry was
supposed---- Well, I went to see her. Jim was there too. I love Jim. You
know the resemblance to Harry is simply ridiculous. I was in continual
fear lest I should forget it was Jim and say, 'Come, darling, it's time
to go.' And then Harry might have behaved as I once did. Oh, here's
nurse.--What a bore you are, nurse, O my own angelic!"

Evie gave up a kiss-smothered baby, and went across to where Lady Oxted
was sitting.

"And Mrs. Jim's baby, I must allow, has its points," she continued.
"That's why I'm sure that Geoff's eyes are like Harry's, because Geoff's
eyes are exactly like Jim's baby's eyes, and Jim is Harry. By the way,
where is the spurious Geoff,--the old one, I mean?"

"The old one went out within five minutes of his arrival here," said
Lady Oxted. "I tried to make myself agreeable to him, but apparently I
failed, for he simply yawned in my face, and said, 'Where's Harry?'"

"Yes, Aunt Violet," said Evie, "you and I sha'n't get a look in while
those men are here, and we had better resign ourselves to it, and take
two nice little back seats. In fact, I felt a little neglected this
morning. Harry woke with a great stretch and said, 'By gad, it's
Tuesday!--Geoff and the beloved doctor come to-day,' and he never even
said good-morning to the wife of his bosom."

"He's tiring of you," remarked Lady Oxted.

"I know; isn't it sad, and we have been married less than a year? As I
was saying, he got up at once, instead of going to sleep again, and I
heard him singing in his bath. Oh, I just love that husband of mine,"
she said.

"So you have told me before," said Lady Oxted acidly.

"What a prickly aunt!" said Evie. "Dear Aunt Violet, if Geoffrey and the
beloved physician and Jim weren't such darlings, all of them, I should
be jealous of them--I should indeed."

"What a lot of darlings you have, Evie!" said the other.

"I know I have. I wish there were twice as many. For the whole point of
the world is the darlings. A person with no darlings is dead--dead and
buried. And the more darlings you have, by so much the more is the world
alive. Isn't it so? I have lots--oh, and the world is good! All those I
have, and you, and Harry even, and I might include my own Geoff. Also
Uncle Bob, especially when he is rude to you."

The prickly aunt was tender enough, and Evie knew it.

"Oh, my dear!" she said. "It makes my old blood skip and sing to see you
so happy. And Harry--my goodness, what a happy person Harry is!"

"I trust and believe he is," Evie said, "and my hope and exceeding
reward are that he may always be. But to-day--to-day----" she said.

Lady Oxted was silent.

"Just think," said Evie, "what was happening a year ago. At this hour a
year ago Harry was here with the doctor and his uncle and his uncle's
servant. And then evening fell, as it is falling now. Later came
Geoffrey and Jim. Oh, I can't yet bear to think of it!"

"I think if I were Harry I should be rather fond of those three," said
Lady Oxted. "Being a woman, I am in love with them all, like you."

"Of course you are," said Evie. "Oh, yes, Jim was just going out when I
was with his wife, to meet the others."

"To meet them?" asked Lady Oxted.

"Yes; Harry said it was a secret, but it's such a dear one I must tell
you. They were going together--it was Harry's idea--to the church. The
two graves, his uncle's and that other man's, are side by side. I asked
if I might come too, but he said certainly not; I was not in that
piece!"

"And then?"

Evie got up.

"I think they were just going to say their prayers there," she said.
"Oh, I love those men. They don't talk and talk, but just go and do
simple little things like that."

"And the women sit at home and do the talking," said Lady Oxted.

"Yes, you and me, that is. Oh, I daresay we are more subtle and
complicated--and who knows or cares what else?--but we are not quite so
simple. One must weigh the one with the other. And who cares which is
the best? To each is a part given."

"You had a big part given you, Evie," said the other.

"I know I had, and feebly was it performed. Ah, that morning! Just one
word from Dr. Armytage, 'Come!'"

Evie returned to the fire again and sat down.

"If Geoffrey had not been here the night before," she said, "the night
when it took place, I don't know what would have happened to Harry.
There would have been a raving lunatic, I think. As it was, he just
howled and wept, so he told me, and Geoff sat by him and said: 'Cheer
up, old chap!' and 'Damn it all, Harry!--yes, I don't care,' and gave
him a whisky and soda, and slapped him on the back, and did all the
things that men do. They didn't kiss each other and scream, and say that
nobody loved them, as we should have done. And as like as not they
played a game of billiards afterward, and felt immensely better. I
suppose David and Jonathan were like that. Oh, I want Harry always to
have a lot of men friends," she cried. "How I should hate it if he only
went dangling along after his wife! But he loves me best of all. So
don't deny it."

"Oh, I don't anticipate his eloping with the doctor," said Lady Oxted.

Outside the evening was fast falling. It was now a little after sunset,
and, as a year ago, a young moon, silver and slim, was climbing the
sky, where still lingered the reflected fire from the west in ribbons
and feathers of rosy cloud. But to-night no mist, low hanging and
opaque, fit cover for crouching danger, hung over lake and lawn; the air
was crisp with autumnal frost, the hoarse tumult from the sluice subdued
and low after a long St. Martin's summer. The four men--Jim, servantlike
and respectful, little distance from the rest--had left the churchyard
and strolled slowly in the direction of the stable and the house.
Opposite the stable gate Jim would have turned in, but Harry detained
him.

"No, Jim," he said, "come with us a little farther," and like man and
man, not master and groom, he put his arm through that of the other.
Then, by an instinctive movement, the doctor and Geoffrey closed up
also, and thus linked they walked by the edge of the lake, and paused
together at the sluice.

"And it was here," said Harry, "that one day the sluice broke, and down
I went. Eh, a bad half hour!"

"Yes, my lord," sad Jim, grown suddenly bold, "and here it was that Mr.
Geoffrey jumped in of a black night after a black villain."

"And somewhere here it is," said Geoffrey, "that the Luck lies. How low
the lake is! I have never seen it so low."

They had approached to the very margin of the water, where little
ripples, children of the breeze at sunset, broke and laughed on the
steep sides of ooze discovered by the drought. Their sharp edges were
caught by the fires overhead, and turned to scrolls of liquid flame.

"And that was the end of the Luck," said the doctor.

"The Luck!" cried Harry. "It was the curse that drove us all mad. I
would sooner keep a cobra in the house than that thing. Madness and
crime and death were its gifts. Ah, if I had guessed--if I had only
guessed!"

Even as he spoke, his eye caught a steadfast gleam that shone from the
edge of the sunken water. For a moment he thought that it was but one of
the runes of flame that played over the reflecting surface of the lake,
but this was steady, not suddenly kindled and consumed. Then in a flash
the truth of the matter was his: the leather case had rotted and fallen
away in the water. Here, within a foot of the edge of the lake, lay his
Luck.

He disjoined himself from the others, took one step forward and bent
down. With a reluctant cluck the mud gave up the jewel, and he held it
high, growing each moment more resplendent as the ooze dripped sullenly
from it. The great diamonds awoke, they winked and blazed, sunset and
moon and evening star were reflected there, and who knows what authentic
fires of hell? There was a glow of sapphire, a glimmer of pearl, a gleam
of gold. But two steps more took Harry on to the stone slab that covered
the sluice, and there on the scene of one of its crimes he laid the
priceless thing. Then, as a man with his heel crushes the life out of
some poisonous creeping horror, he stamped and stamped on it, and
stamped yet again. This way and that flew the jewels; diamond and
sapphire were dust; the pearls, unbroken, leaped like flicked peas, some
into the lake, others into the outflowing thunder of the sluice. Then,
taking the crumbled and shapeless remnant, he flung it far into mid
water.

"And the curse is gone from the house!" he cried.

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Luck of the Vails, by E. F. Benson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUCK OF THE VAILS ***

***** This file should be named 57690-8.txt or 57690-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/6/9/57690/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

