The Late Mr. Sheridan
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: The Examiner, A Sunday Paper, on Politics, Domestic Economy, and Theatricals ; London [London]. 01 Jan 1816: 823, [4] p.

The Late Mr. Sheridan [in, The Examiner. No. 446. Sunday, July 14, 1816] THE LATE MR. SHERIDAN. The friends of this celebrated person, it is said, intend to publish his works by subscription,—a collection which will richly repay the purchasers, if they have any taste for wit and eloquence. To the account of him, which will no doubt be prefixed, we must refer our readers for the details of his life. The object of the present article is merely to give a sketch of him altogether; and to put down the general impressions he has left upon one who admired without knowing him, and often without applauding.
Richard Brinsley Sheridan was born in 1751 at Quilea near Dublin,—a residence immortalized for its ragged accommodations by Dean Swift . His father, Thomas Sheridan , who was born at the same place, was at different times an actor, a manager, and a teacher of elocution; in which latter profession he so well surmounted the awkwardness attached to itinerant lecturing, as to acquire the degree of Master of Arts from Dublin and Cambridge. His Pronouncing Dictionary is well known; and he got considerable reputation, we believe, for his mode of teaching how to read the Church Service. Thomas Sheridan's father was the facetious Dr. Sheridan , the associate of Swift , and one of the rainy-day wits who helped to beguile his existence. He was unquestionably a man of learning and humour, though inferior enough to his illustrious friend not to tread much upon the sore point of his companionship. Mr. Sheridan was thus of a literary stock; and to complete it, his mother was no mean writer herself, having produced, besides a comedy (of which we only know the title) the popular romance of Noùrjahad , and the excellent novel of Sidney Biddulph 1 .
Mr. Sheridan was sent early to Harrow, which, by the way, does not seem to have produced its proportion of celebrated men in common with the other great schools. The only other names of eminence that we are aware of are Sir William Jones and Lord Byron ; and Sir William's reputation as a man of genius, appears to us more than doubtful. His best thing was his early political promise, which was merged in a judgeship and the bad taste of Indian literature. His poems, which exist by the grace of Chalmers , are mere gentlemanly repetitions.
But to return.—Mr. Sheridan entered himself of the Middle Temple, but was not called to the Bar,—the drama having drawn him away from the sand-digging of law, as it did a much greater genius, though a much less dramatist, just before him,— Henry Fielding . At that period he is said to have engaged with another gentleman in a translation of the love-epistles of Arist Æenetes , which we have never seen. There was every reason for his doing them well; for soon after, at the age of 22, he married Miss Linley , an amiable and accomplished young lady, with a fine taste for music, for whom he had entertained an ardent passion. The duel which he fought for her is well known, and is said to have been very fierce and determinate, after the manner of the old gallant sword fighters. Two years after his marriage, he brought out his first play the Rivals ;—the farce of St. Patrick's Day followed, and all his original dramas, the Duenna, School for Scandal , &c, appear to have been produced within four or five years afterwards. Most probably it was his dramatic talent that made him a manager of Drury-lane Theatre, which he became in 1776: for we believe he began with as little riches as he concluded; and a delicacy, natural perhaps to a man of taste, prevented him letting his wife turn her musical talents to account.
In those days, as is likely to be the case again, when people are tired out of being led by statesmen who have no taste but for Divine Right and good dinners,—politicians, generally speaking, were men of letters; and they and the wits were found together,—often were one and the same. Mr. Sheridan , on producing, we believe, the School for Scandal , became a member of the celebrated club, which consisted of Burke, Goldsmith, Johnson , Sir Joshua Reynolds , and others. The same causes no doubt, and a taste for pleasure as well as wit, led him into an intimate acquaintance with Charles Fox , at that time wasting a large quantity of talent and animal spirits upon what is called the Town. The consequence was, that having to push a fortune, and seeing what figures men of talent in other respects can cut in the political world, he offered himself to the borough of Stafford, and in the year 1780 became its representative in Parliament.
Here Mr. Sheridan instantly took a high and remarkable rank, as a man uniting brilliancy and solidity to a degree never before witnessed. We shall not pretend to follow him through all the history of the times. In the course of his life, during that gradual ascendancy of Toryism, which has terminated as we all see in again threatening us with the political jargon of the age of James the First, he was four short times in office; and never ceased, whether in or out, to be a staunch Whig;—denouncing oppression, defending the right of Revolution, which he did not desert, even for the Bourbons ,—and always the advocate of what was tasteful, liberal, and manly:—but as long as he chose to retain the best though not the most potent kind of influence, he always had it to a certain degree by means of the striking union above-mentioned; and for a series of years, Sheridan , the reasoner and the wit, was the dread of the Ministers, and the delight of every other man in the house.
In 1788 Mr. Sheridan lost his father, who by a piece of good fortune which does not often fall to the lot of parents. had just lived long enough to see his son at the most elevated and lustrous point of his reputation, enjoying the
[Page 434]
suffrages, nay the absolute homage of men of all parties,— Burke , Fox, and Pitt ,—for the eloquence he exhibited against Warren Hastings . This was touching the old gentleman too in the very finest part of his paternal self-love.
In 1792, death also deprived him of his lady, of whom Mr. Wilkes , no mean judge perhaps in these matters, however coarse in many, is reported to have said, that she was “the most modest, pleasing, and delicate flower he had seen.” We have heard of some very interesting but painful circumstances connected with this union, which, whether we had proof of them or not (and we pretend to speak only from report) we should not think ourselves at liberty to write about. People should know every thing in these matters; or the probability is, that they will know worse than nothing; and the best way is to abstain from attempting to know any thing. We certainly should not have alluded to the circumstances at all, had not the result been such as to leave favourable impressions with regard both to husband and wife.
It was after a lapse of some years that Mr. Sheridan married his second wife, Miss Ogle , a lady said to be beautiful and interesting. Of her beauty, never having seen her, we cannot speak; but that she had the finer beauty of interestingness we can well imagine, if it is true that notwithstanding great feebleness on her own part, she watched him as much as she possibly could in his late illness, and especially chose to receive his dying breath. With this lady's fortune, we are told, he purchased the estate of Polesden, in Surrey, and soon afterwards was appointed Receiver-General of the Prince of Wales's Duchy of Cornwall, an office which he held till his death. For the last four years, owing to various circumstances, partly to his consistent politics, but chiefly no doubt to personal habits which it would be folly as well as affectation to deny the knowledge of, if we would estimate his character, he had had to struggle more than ever with pecuniary embarrasments: and not being as usual in Parliament, was even troubled on his dying bed with the vulgar unmercifulness of the law. His death, the papers say, was not occasioned by the cause generally reported, an imposthume, though he had been affected by one. The disease was in the stomach, which had been gradually losing it's tone, and at last had so completely lost the use of it's functions, as to render him liable to suffocation on the least food being put to his mouth. The cause, at least the immediate cause of this disease, must be obvious. Mr. Sheridan died on Sunday noon last, about five minutes after twelve. His strength had been so exhausted some time previous, that he is supposed to have slumbered into death, not the least convulsive movement having been discernible at his dissolution. “The Bishop of London ,” it is said, “attended him on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday;” but nothing is added.
It remains for us to speak of Mr. Sheridan as an orator, a wit, and a man.
As an orator, his finest displays are agreed to have been made on occasion of the impeachment of Warren Hastings . Of one of his speeches of accusation, Mr. Pitt said, that it had “surpassed all the eloquence of ancient and modern times;” and that “it possessed every thing that genius or art could furnish to agitate and controul the human mind.” Of another, Mr. Fox said that “all he had ever heard, when compared with it, dwindled into nothing:”—and the same speech produced the following lofty and elaborate compliment from Mr. Burke , which may be repeated, if it be only as a specimen of a certain architectural style in eloquence, proceeding step by step, one point built upon another, till you come to an apex that will not bear another pin:—
“He has this day surprised the thousands who hung with rapture on his accents, by such an array of talents, such an exhibition of capacity, such a display of powers, as are unparelleled in the annals of oratory; a display that reflected the highest honour upon himself, lustre upon letters, renown upon Parliament, glory upon the country. Of all species of rhetoric, of every kind of eloquence that has been witnessed or recorded either in ancient or modern times; whatever the acuteness of the bar, the dignity of the Senate, the solidity of the Judgment-seat, and the sacred morality of the pulpit, have hitherto furnished, nothing has surpassed, nothing has equalled, what we have heard this day in Westminster Hall. No holy seer of religion, no sage, no statesman, no orator, no man of any description whatever, has come up, in any one instance, to the pure sentiments of morality; or, in the other, to that variety of knowledge, force of imagination, propriety and vivacity of allusion, beauty and elegance of diction, strength and copiousness of style, pathos and sublimity of conception, to which we have this day listened with ardour and admiration. From poetry up to eloquence, there is not a species of composition of which a complete and perfect specimen might not from that single speech be culled and selected.”
These eulogies, the bestowers of which seem rather to have vied with each other how little they could leave to be said after them, and which were not at all unwarrantable in the enthusiasm of the time, are not calculated to do their object a real service. The reader, on turning to the speeches for himself, will infallibly think the homage exaggerated. The written eloquence of our countrymen alone, who flourished in former times, would make Mr. Burke appear on this occasion as if he spoke out of the mere enthusiasm of ignorance. But then the speeches are unquestionably excellent, —sound in reasoning, industrious and perspicacious in detail, terse in style, and happy in the counter-play of wit. We also think him superior to his contemporaries in elegance. Mr. Fox was hardly to be called an orator,—certainly not in the usual sense of that term. He was too simple and off-hand, and would lose an effect for the dread of being thought to seek it. Mr. Burke , on the other hand, was too elaborate, and studious of effect. He was very eloquent, and had a world of ideas at command; but he summoned them up with too theatrical an air; and as to his wit, or his talent for pleasantry, we may be in a very great minority, but we really cannot put faith in it. There are many things like it; but we miss the reality. They appear to us to be unfelt by the orator himself. His pleasantry seems destitute of all animal spirits or native taste for it; and only to be good, inasmuch as he was an accomplished man of letters, and could imitate whatever he chose. With regard to Mr. Pitt's oratory, we look upon it to be just as much as his sort of talent in other respects could imitate also:—it is the eloquence of strait-forward authority, or rather of contemptuous success;—the persuasiveness of a man in power.
Now Mr. Sheridan was more painstaking than Mr. Fox , and had much less the appearance of it than Mr. Burke ; and though he had not sufficient natural genius to push his excellence on the side of Mr. Fox so as to become
[Page 435]
great and beyond him in nature, nor enough idea of the importance and dignity of politics to overstep Mr. Burke on the Ciceronian side of Art, yet his wit and judgment united enabled him to recal a point of artificial perfection superior, we think, to both. You recognize in him a man turning to account all the graces of school erudition and modern wit,—a classical speaker, in the best and most winning sense of the term.
His political opinions were worthy of this character of his eloquence. We have already mentioned that he was a Whig, and he was so with all a Whig's liberality in theory, and without any of his tendency to offensiveness in contradicting it by his conduct. He loved that sprightly ease in politics, which he did in every thing else; and was a Whig, in short, not out of impatience at Tories, but of affection for freedom. He had too much of the humanity of wisdom in him, partly perhaps from conscious tendency to infirmity, to quarrel with a cause, because he happened to be contradicted or disappointed by it's adherents. Thus he has left a political memory, unshaken by the rude shocks of a period every way revolutionary;— a praise almost confined, in the late annals of public life, to himself and Mr. Fox. Thus he was the unalterable friend of liberty in general,—of the freedom of the press in particular. Thus he advocated, instantly and warmly, the principle of the French revolution,—an event which he even characterized (and we repeat it for the benefit of certain changelings among us, who are so shocked at every country's revolutions but their own) as being “as just a revolution as ours, proceeding upon as sound a principle, and a greater provocation. With the same feeling for political consistency, he adhered to certain private connexions, the Prince of Wales in particular, to the very last, or rather till he was too feeble to keep his personal hold; and then he found, if he had not found out before, what was the difference between adherence and a thing adhered to. If we have had some quarrels with him on account of Reform, and of the manner in which his habits sometimes laid him open to popular censure, we now call to mind in what public and private spheres he was brought up; and are rather inclined to wonder that he was not totally spoiled, than that he retained so much pertinacious public honesty.
But Mr. Sheridan's reputation with posterity will arise from what posterity will feel most interested in, and what fortunately constitutes his chief claim upon them,—his dramas. The best of these, the Rivals , and the School for Scandal , he wrote, as well as the rest, when young; and indeed there is a young sort of feeling in them, though not altogether of the most unsophisticated description. There is something too much of the town about them, and a portion of that bravado spirit in the morality and gallantry, which betrays it's time of life by it's over-intenseness; as is the case with the dramas of Beaumont and Fletcher , the former of whom died about thirty. There is a tendency of the same kind observable even in the poems of the romantic Sir Philip Sidney , whose life was about as short. But like most productions of this character, Mr. Sheridan's dramas are full of animal spirit; and this, together with a well-educated style, and a great taste for humour and contrast, gives life to their principal excellence, which is rather that of a witty elegance,— a tact for the best of what he found to his hand,—than of originality. He had not even a distinct character enough of his own, personally speaking, to give him the next thing to originality,—perhaps the same thing in it's degree, if originals are narrowly analyzed. The newest though not the most entertaining thing in his plays is the character of Falkland in the Rivals , which is even said to have been drawn from himself. It is also to very good satirical purpose, aiming at one of those teazing qualities in private life, which after all make up the greatest sum of human disquietude, and which are not sufficiently handled by the assaulters of the social vices, sacred or profane. There has always appeared to us a great comic field almost totally unploughed, in what are called tempers, and in the contradiction between appearances and realities. Yet even Falkland , in one respect, has a forerunner in the old story of the Nut-brown Maid , which was turned into modern verse by Prior in his Henry and Emma . The other characters in Mr. Sheridan's plays,—the gallant Jack Absolute , the would-be gallant Bob Acres , the most absolute and entertaining Sir Anthony , the perversely ingenious Mrs. Malaprop , the Irishman, the Friar, and the Duenna, and the two brothers Charles and Joseph Surface , are happy casts from prototypes to be found in hundreds of other Irishmen, Friars, and Duennas, in the gallants, and pretenders, and bullies, of preceding dramatists, and in the Slipslop, Tom Jones , and Blifil , of his precursor Henry Fielding . He seems indeed to have had Fielding continually in his mind, or unconsciously in his associations. Even the consistent and retributive Mr. Fag , the footman, who while complaining of his master's injustice kicks the footboy for being troublesome, is traceable to Philosopher Square and Parson Adams . But enough is added, as well as exquisitely kept, to give the author a lasting reputation; and in his operatic songs,—though he had nothing essentially in him to be called poetry,—he has exhibited a very clear and compact vein of after-dinner wit versifying. —enough certainly to have put him in the chair whenever he chose to honour with his company the choice spirits of Carey and Morris.
Of the moral character of his plays, as affecting society, less need be said, we think, than might be supposed. The effect of the drama upon real life appears to us to be of a very general cast, not a particular one; and to keep alive a certain softness and sociality of spirit, without which, among other helps, a nation might relapse into brutality. We believe we have before expressed our particular admiration of that phrase in Ovid, where he speaks of a taste for the liberal arts—“hæc sinit esse feros”—It will not suffer men to be barbarous. The extreme of the stage, when there is one, is only an antidote, we conceive, to the extreme of reserve and bigotry. A man should not be the author of lax dramas, if his conscience is doubtful about it:—he cuts up a deeper principle by so doing, than any into which he might sophisticate himself;—but the general result of this part of the stage's character we conceive to have done no more harm in the long run than the authors intended. We know how profligate men can be, during periods of relaxed morals:—we know how profligate they can be also during periods of tightened ones, and in the worst and most inhuman species of profligacy:—and we prefer the excess on the kind side, if we must have one.
[Page 436]
But there is no need to have either; and no age need be afraid of it, if superstition will let us alone.
We now come to the last, and not the most pleasant part of our task, Mr. Sheridan's private character, or rather a part of it. This subject must more or less however be inevitably handled when a name is left to posterity; and it may not be amiss, if those who begin with being the most explicit about it, should be found also not the most wanting in charity.
When we speak of a part of Mr. Sheridan's character, we mean to let it be understood that we only know what has been long known to the public; and we would infer also, that what has not been known, has been very likely not obnoxious to censure. It says a great deal for him, that his Wife and Son were so unremitting in their attentions during his last days, and that he took so much pleasure in the consciousness of it. But Mr. Sheridan was notoriously careless of his finances, and fond of his bottle; and these two vices, it is said, were the ruin of him. We believe they were. Mr. Sheridan also was notoricusly consistent and liberal in his politics, and has produced some delightful dramas; and for these two features in his repulation, we have to be thankful to him. Providence has weighed the evil with the good. Let it be our parts to weigh the evil with the causes of it, and the objection with the gratitude.
And here we must pay attention to a new species of liberality that has started up in the superabundant crop of excellent things which this age has produced, and warn the dealers in people's characters that in professing charity for the faults of Mr. Sheridan , we really are not asking it for similar ones of our own. We wish these gentlemen and ladies, in the intervals of their tea, could by any process be persuaded, that it is possible to be a little charitable without being iniquitous.
Let the person that condemns Mr. Sheridan ,—we mean, uncharitably and with little knowledge of human nature,—look at the early circumstances of his life. He came, in the first place, of an improvident stock; and though we do not mean to blame his father, who we believe was rather negatively than positively careless, and who came of the same stock himself, yet these things have their effect. In many instances indeed, the parent, by his selfish avoidance of trouble in forming proper habits, is altogether to blame, if any one is; and doubly so, because the mischief is all his, and the odium his offspring's. We repeat that we do not mean to apply this censure to Mr. Thomas Sheridan in it's extent. His father, we believe, was the greatest defaulter this way; and in him the vice is probably traceable to causes which have stamped so much of the careless desperation of poverty on the Irish in general. But this was certainly part of a character that had otherwise many excellent points about it. Swift , in one of his copies of verses to him, says—
“Friend Sheridan , when will you know your own good?” In the next place, Mr. Sheridan was sent with an hereditary carelessness and little means to a great school, containing the sons of many rich people; and this we hold, under such circumstances, to be very dangerous. He was then launched upon the town, with a disposition rather to enjoy a fortune than to make one,—which latter propensity, by the way, is the actual enjoyment of many a person who values himself on his self-demals;—a remark that may serve for a world of similar want of self-knowledge. He here was led by the turn of his genius into the most dangerous society such a temper could meet with. From this he got among the politicians, and clubs, and wits about town, the drinkers and sitters-up at night; and here, delighting every body with his talent, repaid with unlucky usury by their wine, and feeling at graver times those exhausted calls for refreshment which the over-exercise of the intellectual faculty occasions, to an extent that can be appreciated only by its fellow-labourers, he wanted the admonitions of solitude, the counteraction of early and better tastes, and the more fortunate pressure of imperious necessity, and became habitually lax, discomposed, self-indulgent, self-reproaching, disreputable.
That the case was so, is a melancholy truth, which those who can turn it to advantage for the happiness of themselves or others are unquestionably at liberty so to use. Let it be done properly, and nobody will be to blame. The wit will try to take care of his hours and habits;—the philosopher will speculate upon the evils to which we are subjected in a world nevertheless full of beauties and delight, and seemingly interwoven with them; —the gentle will regret,—the humble be self-doubting,— the generous find out what to admire:—the ignorant and uncharitable alone will be contemptuous, and retire to their respective stupidities.
And here, before we finish, we cannot but allude to the circumstance hinted at in a former paper; and ask those who talk of Mr. Sheridan's incorrigible habits, in answer to that hint, what their observations have to do with his death-bed, and the persons who never came near it? For this is the only complaint made by observers; and they only were the complainers. Mr. Sheridan , we believe, from first to last, disdained to breathe a word of it. It is very probable, that twenty Receiverships would not have benefited him, any more than twenty Lordships and Dukeships would benefit some of his old acquaintance; but what then? Were they of all the exemplary person breathing to desert him on his death-bed? to send wretched messages from the midst of their pleasures; and not have a hand to extend, a last look to give, to the man that had been the sole ornament of their lives, as well as unceasing advocate of their interests? We may here be reminded of moral lessons again, and also of our charity;— and so be it. The instance, we confess, is striking. But then let truth, if it must be broadly spoken, be spoken of the prosperous as well as the unfortunate; and let us own, that if ever our charity is put to a severe test, it is in favour of those who seem heartless to friendship.
To sum up the character of Mr. Sheridan ,—he was a man of wit, a lively and elegant dramatist, a winning and powerful orator, a sound politician, a lover of real freedom, a careless liver; an Irishman, in short, with much of the worst, and more of the best, of his naturally lighthearted but unfortunate countrymen. His worst can affect but few;—his best will redound to the good of his country, and be the delight of thousands to come.
NOTES
1 We speak from the recollections of our boyhood; but this is the general opinion; and Sidney Biddu'ph is among the books we have never forgotten.
$$$
