The Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott, Vol.17: Periodical Criticism: Poetry (1835)
Author: Scott, Walter.
Publication info: The Miscellaneous Prose Works Of Sir Walter Scott, Vol.17: Periodical Criticism: Poetry . 366 p. London: Whitaker & Co.--Robert Cadell, 1835.

The Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott, Vol.17: Periodical Criticism: Poetry
[Page ]
ARTICLE I. ON ELLIS'S SPECIMEN OF THE EARLY ENGLISH POETS. THIRD EDITION. 3 VOLS. 1803.
[ George Ellis, Esq ., to whom the 5th Canto of Marmion is inscribed, was the coadjutor of Messrs Canning and Frere , in the Anti-Jacobin, and the author of various separate works, distinguished by extensive antiquarian knowledge, and elegant critical taste. He died in 1815, at the age of 70. The following passages are from an Article in the Edinburgh Review for 1804.]
It is obvious to every one who has studied our language, whether in prose or poetry, that a luminous history of its rise and progress must necessarily involve more curious topics of discussion than a similar work upon any other European language. This opinion has not its source in national partiality, but is dictated by the very peculiar circumstances under which the English language was formed. The other European tongues, such at least as have been adapted to the purposes of literature, may be divided into two grand classes—those which are
[Page 2]
derived from the Teutonic, and those which are formed upon the Latin. In the former class, we find the German, the Norse, the Swedish, the Danish, and the Low Dutch, all of which, in words and construction, are dialects of the Teutonic, and preserve the general character of their common source, although enriched and improved by terms of art or of science adopted from the learned languages, or from those of other kingdoms of civilized Europe. The second class comprehends the Italian, the Spanish, and the French in all its branches. It is true, the last of these has, in modern times, owing to the number of French writers in every class and upon every subject, departed farther from its original than the two others; but still the ground-work is the Latin; and the more nearly any specimen approaches to it, it may be safely concluded to be the more ancient; for, in truth, we know no other rule for ascertaining the antiquity of any particular piece in the Romanz language, than by its greater or slighter resemblance to the speech of the ancient Romans, from which it derives its name. Thus every language of civilized Europe is formed of a uniform pattern and texture, either upon the Teutonic, or upon the Latin. But the same chance which has peopled Britain with such a variety of tribes and nations, that we are at a loss to conceive how they should have met upon the same spot—and that, comparatively, a small one—has decreed that the language of Locke and of Shakspeare should claim no peculiar affinity to either of these grand sources of European speech; and that if, on the one hand, its conformation and
[Page 3]
construction be founded on a dialect of the Teutonic, the greater number of its vocables should, on the other, be derived from the Romanz, or corrupted Latin of the Normans. It is interesting to observe how long these languages, uncongenial in themselves, and derived from sources widely different, continued to exist separately, and to be spoken respectively by the Anglo-Norman conquerors and the vanquished Anglo-Saxons. It is still more interesting to observe how, after having long flowed each in its separate channel, they at length united and formed a middle dialect, which, though employed at first for the mere purpose of convenience and mutual intercourse betwixt the two nations, at length superseded the individual speech of both, and became the apt record of poetry and of philosophy.
The history of poetry is intimately connected with that of language. Authors in the infancy of composition, like Pope in that of life, may be said to “lisp in numbers.” History, religion, morality, whatever tends to agitate or to soothe the passions, is, during the earlier stages of society, celebrated in verse. This may be partly owing to the ease with which poetry is retained upon the memory, in those ruder ages, when written monuments, if they at all exist, are not calculated to promote general information; and it may be partly owing to that innate love of song, and sensibility to the charms of flowing numbers, which is distinguishable even among the most savage people. But, whatever be the cause, the effect is most certain; the early works of all nations have been written in verse, and
[Page 4]
the history of their poetry is the history of the language itself. It therefore seems surprising, that, where the subject is interesting in a peculiar as well as in a general point of view, a distinct and connected history of our poetry, and of the language in which it is written, should so long have been a desideratum in English literature; and the wonder becomes greater when we recollect, that an attempt to supply the deficiency was long since made by a person who seemed to unite every quality necessary for the task.
The late Mr Warton, with a poetical enthusiasm which converted toil into pleasure, and gilded, to himself and his readers, the dreary subjects of antiquarian lore, and with a capacity of labour apparently inconsistent with his more brilliant powers, has produced a work of great size, and, partially speaking, of great interest, from the perusal of which we rise, our fancy delighted with beautiful imagery, and with the happy analysis of ancient tale and song, but certainly with very vague ideas of the history of English poetry. The error seems to lie in a total neglect of plan and system; for, delighted with every interesting topic which occurred, the historical poet pursued it to its utmost verge, without considering that these digressions, however beautiful and interesting in themselves, abstracted alike his own attention, and that of the reader, from the professed purpose of his book. Accordingly, Warton's History of English Poetry has remained, and will always remain, an immense commonplace-book of memoirs to serve for such an history . No antiquary can open it,
[Page 5]
without drawing information from a mine which, though dark, is inexhaustible in its treasures; nor will he who reads merely for amusement ever shut it for lack of attaining his end; while both may probably regret the desultory excursions of an author, who wanted only system, and a more rigid attention to minute accuracy, to have perfected the great task he has left incomplete.
It is therefore with no little pleasure that we see a man of taste and talents advance to supply the deficiency in so interesting a branch of our learning, —a task to which Johnson was unequal, through ignorance of our poetical antiquities, and in which Warton failed, perhaps, because he was too deeply enamoured of them.
The elemental part of the English language, that from which it derives, not indeed the greater proportion of its words, but the rules of its grammar and construction, is the Anglo-Saxon; and Mr Ellis has dedicated his first chapter to make the English reader acquainted with it. The example of their poetry, which he has chosen to exhibit, is the famous war-song in praise of Athelstane's victory in the battle of Brunenburgh,—an engagement which checked for ever the victorious progress of the Picts and Scots, and limited their reign to the northern part of Britain. We cannot, from this poem, nor indeed from any other remnant of Anglo-Saxon poetry, determine what were the rules of their verse. Rhyme they had none; their rhythm seems to have been uncertain; and perhaps their whole poetry consisted in the adaptation of the words to some simple tune; although
[Page 6]
Mr Ellis seems inclined to think, with Mr Tyrwhitt, that the verse of the Saxons was only distinguished from their prose by “a greater pomp of diction, and a more stately kind of march.” To this specimen of Saxon poetry Mr Ellis has subjoined a translation of it into the English of the age of Chaucer, which we recommend to our readers as one of the best executed imitations that we have ever met with. It was written by a friend of Mr Ellis (Mr Frere, if we mistake not) while at Eton School.
“The Mercians fought I understond,
There was gamen of the hond.” ... &c.
“In Dacie of that gaming
Mony wemen hir hondis wring.
The Normannes passed that rivere,
Mid hevy hart and sorry chere.
The brothers to Wessex yode,
Leving the crowen and the tode.
Hawkes, doggis and wolves, tho
Egles and mony other mo,
With the dede men for their mede,
On hir corses for to fede.
   Sen the Saxonis first come
In schippes over the sea-fome,
Of the yeres that ben for gone
Greater bataile was never none,” &c.
This appears to us an exquisite imitation of the antiquated English poetry; not depending on an accumulation of hard words, like the language of Rowley, which, in every thing else, is refined and harmonious poetry, nor upon an agglomeration of consonants in the orthography, the resource of later and more contemptible forgers, but upon the style itself, upon its alternate strength and weakness, now nervous and concise, now diffuse and
[Page 7]
eked out by the feeble aid of expletives. In general, imitators wish to write like ancient poets, without ceasing to use modern measure and phraseology; but, had the conscience of this author permitted him to palm these verses upon the public as an original production of the fourteenth century, we know no internal evidence by which the imposture could have been detected.
From considering the state of the Anglo-Saxon poetry at and previous to the Conquest, Mr Ellis turns his consideration to that of the invaders, and treats at considerable length of what may be called the Anglo-Norman literature. It is well known, that the monarchs who immediately succeeded the conqueror, adopted his policy in fostering the language and arts of Normandy, in opposition to those of the Anglo-Saxons, whom they oppressed, and by whom they were detested. The French poetry was not neglected; and it is now considered as an established point, that the most ancient metrical romances existing in that language were composed, not for the court of Paris, but for that of London; and hence a British story, the glories of King Arthur, became their favourite theme. The ingenious Abbè de la Rue wrote several essays, printed in the Archæologia, which throw great light upon the Anglo-Norman poets; and of this information Mr Ellis has judiciously availed himself. But he also discovers, by the explanations attached to his extracts from Wace, that intimate acquaintance with the Romanz language, which is at once so difficult to acquire, and so indispensable to the execution of his history.
[Page 8]
In the third chapter, we see the last rays of Saxon literature, in a long extract from Layamon's translation of the Brut of Wace. But so little were the Saxon and Norman languages calculated to amalgamate, that though Layamon wrote in the reign of Henry II., his language is almost pure Saxon; and hence it is probable, that if the mixed language, now called English, at all existed, it was deemed as yet unfit for composition, and only used as a piebald jargon for carrying on the indispensable intercourse betwixt the Anglo-Saxons and Normans. In process of time, however, the dialect, so much despised, made its way into the service of the poets, and seems to have superseded the use of the Saxon, although the French, being the court language, continued to maintain its ground till a later period. Mr Ellis has traced this change with a heedful and discriminating eye, and has guided us through the harsh numbers of the romancers and the compilers of legends, and through the wide waste of prosaic verse, in which it was the pleasure of Robert of Gloucester and Robert de Brunne to record the history of their country, down to that period when English poetry began to assume a classical form, and to counter-balance, in the esteem even of the kings and nobles, the hitherto triumphant Anglo-Norman. This grand change was doubtless brought on by very slow degrees, and it is difficult exactly to ascertain its progress. The history of English Minstrelsy, in opposition to that of the Anglo-Normans, would probably throw great light on this subject; for these itinerant poets must have made use of the
[Page 9]
English long before it was thought fit for higher purposes.
The epoch from which English may be considered as a classical language, may be fixed in the reign of Edward III., the age of Gower and of Chaucer, in which it was no longer confined to what the latter has called “the drafty riming” of the wandering minstrel, but employed in the composition of voluminous and serious productions, by men possessed of all the learning of the times.
It has been warmly disputed in what particular manner the father of English poetry contributed to its improvement. Mr Ellis, with great plausibility, ascribes this effect chiefly to the peculiar ornaments of his style, consisting in an affectation of splendour, and especially of Latinity, which is not be found in the simple strains of Robert of Gloucester, or any of the anterior poets, nor indeed in that of Laurence Minot, or others about his own time.
In chapter ninth, the language of Scotland, and the history of her early poetry, comes into consideration. This is a thorny point with every antiquary. The English and Scottish languages are in earlier times exactly similar; and yet, from the circumstances of the two countries, they must necessarily have had a separate origin. Mr Ellis seems disposed to adopt the solution of Mr Hume, who supposes the Saxon language to have been imposed upon the Scottish, by a series of successful invasions and conquests, of which history takes no notice. To this proposition, in a limited degree, we are inclined to subscribe; for there is no doubt that the Anglo-Saxons of Bernicia extended themselves,
[Page 10]
at least occasionally, as far as the frith of Forth, occupied the Merse and Lothian, introduced into them their language, and, when conquered by the Scots and Picts, were in fact the Angli , to whom, as subjects of the crown of Scotland, our King's charters were so frequently addressed. But we cannot admit these conquests to be supposed farther than they are proved; nor do we conceive that one province, though a rich one, could have imposed its language upon the other subjects of the Kings who acquired it by conquest. There must have been some other source from which the Scoto-Teutonic is derived, than the Anglo-Saxon spoken in Lothian. This grand source we conceive to have been the language of the ancient Picts; nor would it be easy to alter our opinion. Those who are connoisseurs in the Scottish dialects, as now spoken, will observe many instances of words in the idiom of Angus-shire (the seat of the Picts) which can only be referred to a Belgic root; whereas those of South-country idiom may almost universally be traced to the Anglo-Saxon. The Norman, from which, as Mr Ellis justly remarks, the Scottish dialect, as soon as we have a specimen of it, appears to have borrowed as much as the English, was probably introduced by the influx of Norman nobles, whom the oppression of their own kings drove into exile, or whom their native chivalrous and impatient temper urged to seek fortune and adventures in the court of Scotland. Having traced the origin of our language, the earlier Scottish poets, Barbour and Winton, pass in review, with specimens from each, very happily selected, to
[Page 11]
illustrate at once their own powers of composition, and the manners of the age in which they wrote. These are intermingled with criticisms, in which the reader's attention is directed to what is most worthy of notice, and kept perpetually awake by the lively and happy style in which they are conveyed.
The merit of Occleve and Lydgate are next examined, who, with equal popularity, but with merit incalculably inferior, supported the renown of English poetry after the death of Chaucer. One specimen from the latter we cannot help extracting as irresistibly ludicrous.
“One of the most amusing passages in the Book of Troy relates to a well-known event in the life of Venus.
“The smotry 1 smith, this swarte Vulcanus,
That whilom in hearte was so jealous
Toward Venus that was his wedded wife,
Whereof there rose a deadly mortal strife,
When he with Mars gan her first espy,
Of high malice, and cruel false envy,
Through the shining of Phebus' beams bright,
Lying a-bed with Mars her owne knight.
For which in heart he brent as any glede, 2
Making the slander all abroad to sprede,
And gan thereon falsely for to muse.
“And God forbid that any man accuse
For so little any woman ever!
Where love is set, hard is to dissever!
For though they do such thing of gentleness,
Pass over lightly, and bear none heaviness,
Lest that thou be to woman odious!
And yet this smith, this false Vulcanus,
Albe that he had them thus espied,
Among Paynims yet was he defied
And, for that he so Falsely them awoke,
I have him set last of all my boke,
Among the goddes of false mawmentry,” 3 &c.
[Page 12]
“Upon this occasion, the morals of our poetical monk are so very pliant, that it is difficult to suppose him quite free from personal motives which might have influenced his doctrine. Perhaps he had been incommoded by some intrusive husband, at a moment when he felt tired of celibacy, and wished to indulge in a temporary relaxation from the severity of monastic discipline.”
From Lydgate our author proceeds to James I. of Scotland, upon whose personal qualities he pronounces a merited panegyric, accompanied with several extracts from the “Kingis Quair.” The next chapter is peculiarly interesting. It contains a retrospect of the conclusions to be drawn from the information already conveyed; and this introduces a well-written and pleasing digression upon the private life of the English during the middle ages. We learn that, even in that early period, the life of the English farmer or yeoman was far superior in ease and comfort to that of persons of the same rank in France. Pierce Ploughman, a yeoman apparently, possessed a cow and calf, and a cart-mare for transporting manure; and although, at one time of the year, he fed upon cheese curds and oat cakes, yet after Lammas, when his harvest was got in, he could “dress his dinner to his own mind.” We also learn, that the peasants were so far independent, as to exact great wages; and doubtless these circumstances, combined with the practice of archery, gave the English infantry such an infinite advantage over those of other nations, consisting of poor half-fed serfs, and gained them so many battles in spite of the high-souled chivalry of France, and the obstinate and enduring courage of our Scotish ancestors. Mr Ellis remarks, on this subject—“It is very honourable to the good
[Page 13]
sense of the English nation, that our two best early poets have highly extolled this useful body of men, while the French minstrels of the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries, universally seem to approve the supercilious contempt with which the nobles affected to treat them. We have also much curious information concerning the dress of the period, particularly of the ladies, who in the day-time seem to have been wrapt up in furs, and in the night-time to have slept without shifts. The serenades, the amusements, the food, the fashions, the manners of the period, are all illustrated by quotations from the authors who have referred to them; and, with the singular advantage of never losing sight of his main subject, Mr Ellis has brought together much information on collateral points of interest and curiosity, which will be new to the modern reader, and pleasing to the antiquary, by placing, at once, under his review, circumstances dispersed through many a weary page of black letter.
The reign of Henry VI., and those of the succeeding monarchs, down to Henry VIII., seem to have produced few poets worthy of notice. Two translators of some eminence occur during the former period, and the latter is graced by Harding (a kind of Robert of Glocester redivivus ); Hawes, a bad imitator of Lydgate, ten times more tedious than his original; the Ladie Juliana Berners, who wrote a book upon hunting in execrable poetry; and a few other rhymers, who, excepting perhaps Lord Rivers, are hardly worth naming. During this period, however, the poetry of Scotland was in
[Page 14]
the highest state of perfection; and Mr Ellis finds ample room, both for his critical and historical talents, in celebrating Henry the Minstrel, Henrysoun, Johnstoun, Mercer, Dunbar, and Gawain Douglas. Upon the works of the two last, Mr Ellis dwells with pleasure; and his opinion may have some effect in refreshing their faded laurels. In the reign of Henry VIII., the Scottish bards continue to preserve their superiority; for, surely, the ribald Skelton, and the tiresome John Heywood, cannot be compared to Sir David Lindsay of the Mount, or to the anonymous author of the Mourning Maiden.
We have already taken notice of the very extensive range of discussion which this sketch embraces. It was therefore almost unavoidable, that there should remain subjects on which we might have wished for farther information. The history of English Minstrelsy, in particular, makes too important a part of Mr Ellis's subject, for us to permit him to escape from it so slightly. As he has announced his intention to publish a second series of specimens, selected from the early metrical romances, we recommend strongly to him, to prefix such a prefatory memoir as may fill up this wide blank in the history of our language. We are the more earnest in this recommendation, because we know from experience that Mr Ellis will manage, with the temper becoming a gentleman, a dispute which, though the circumstance seems to us altogether astonishing, has certainly had a prodigious effect in exciting the irritable passions of our antiquaries, and has been managed with a degree of acrimony only surpassed by the famous
[Page 15]
and rancorous quarrel about the Scots and Picts. We observe with pleasure, that, in repelling some attacks upon his first and second editions, Mr Ellis has uniformly used the lance of courtesy , as a romancer would have said; and truly we have no pleasure in seeing his contemporaries spur their hobby-horses headlong against each other, and fight at outrance , and with fer emoulu . Mr Ellis's style is uniformly chaste and simple, diversified by a very happy gaiety which enlivens even the most unpromising parts of his subject. We have only to add, that no author has passed over his own pretensions with such unaffected modesty, or given more liberal praise to the labours of others.
From the works of voluminous authors Mr Ellis has selected such passages as might give the best general idea of their manner; but he has also been indefatigable in seeking out all such beautiful smaller pieces as used to form the little collections, called, in the quaint language of the times, Garlands. His own work may be considered as a new garland of withered roses. The list concludes with the reign of Charles II. The publication seems to have been made with the strictest attention to accuracy, except that, throughout the whole, the spelling is reduced to the modern standard, for which, we fear, Mr Ellis may undergo the censure of the more rigid antiquaries. For our part, as all the antique words are carefully retained and accurately interpreted, we do not think that, in a popular work, intelligibility should be sacrificed to the preservation of a rude and uncertain orthography.
[Page 16]
ARTICLE II. ON ELLIS'S SPECIMENS OF EARLY ENGLISH METRICAL ROMANCES. 3 VOLS. 1805. AND ANCIENT ENGLISH METRICAL ROMANCES, SELECTED BY JOSEPH RITSON. 3 VOLS. 1802. [ Joseph Ritson , the ingenious but whimsical and crabbed Antiquarian, died at Hoxton, 23d Sept. 1803. The article in which Sir W. Scott compared the Metrical Romances edited by him, and Mr George Ellis , appeared in the Edinburgh Review for 1806.]
_________________________ The history, the laws, and even the religion of barbarous nations, are usually expressed in verse. Whether poetry is preferred for the sake of the facility with which it may be committed to memory where written records are unknown, or whether the solemnity of these subjects is supposed to require a mode of expression the most distant from that of common life, would be difficult to discover, and superfluous to enquire. But it is sufficiently obvious, that what is preserved only by recitation, must soon be altered and corrupted, enlarged or compressed, so as may best suit the powers of the reciter's memory, or most readily arrest the attention of those whom he wishes to please by the repetition.
[Page 17]
Thus, in the course of a few generations, the religious poem becomes a mythological fable, and the history degenerates into incredible romance. Still, however, the poetry of an early age continues to be interesting to the moderns, even when entirely perverted from the purposes to which it was originally applied. The bard may have changed his subject from the facts occurring in his own period, or that of his father's, to the feats of foreign or imaginary heroes: but his work will not the less continue to reflect the manners of the time in which he composed. A Gothic poet, like a Gothic painter, discards all attention to local costume, and pourtrays his characters, his manners, his scenery, according to the characters, manners, and scenery of his own age. It is therefore no matter whether the scene be laid in Greece or in Taprobana; the description, however unlike what it is intended to represent, will always present a very just picture of the manners of France and England in the feudal times. Accordingly, since the attention of our antiquaries has been turned towards the metrical romances of England and Normandy, we have gained more insight into the domestic habits, language, and character of our ancestors during the dark, warlike, and romantic period of the middle ages, than Leland and Hearne were able to attain from all the dull and dreary monastic annals, which their industry collected, and their patience perused. In fact, to form a just idea of our ancient history, we cannot help thinking that these works of fancy should be read along with the labours of the professed historian. The
[Page 18]
one teaches what our ancestors thought; how they lived; upon what motives they acted, and what language they spoke; and having attained this intimate knowledge of their sentiments, manners, and habits, we are certainly better prepared to learn from the other the actual particulars of their annals. From the romance, we learn what they were; from the history, what they did; and were we to be deprived of one of these two kinds of information, it might well be made a question, which is most useful or interesting? In this point of view, we entirely lay aside the consideration which the metrical romances often claim as works of fancy, presenting to the imagination a pleasing detail of romantic adventure, and graced occasionally by poetical flights of considerable merit. With such ideas of the importance of these ancient legends of chivalry, we are bound to express our gratitude to those by whose labours they have been drawn from the dusty and chaotic confusion of public libraries, and presented to the public in a legible and attainable shape.
Bishop Percy, the venerable editor of the Reliques of Ancient Poetry , was, we believe, the first who turned the publicattention upon these forgotten hordes of antiquarian treasure, by an Essay upon Metrical Romance, prefixed to the third volume of his work, in which the merits and qualities of the poetry of chivalry are critically investigated, and a list given of such metrical romances as had come to the reverend editor's knowledge, to which we are now in a capacity to make large additions. Warton followed Bishop Percy in his taste for the
[Page 19]
ancient romance, of which he was an indefatigable student. Whenever he has occasion to mention a tale of chivalry, in his History of Poetry , it seems to operate like a spell, and he feels it impossible to proceed with the more immediate subject of his disquisition, until he has paced through the whole enchanted maze, and introduced his reader into all its labyrinths. Of the great variety of strange and anomalous digressions, with which that work abounds, and which, separately considered, possess infinite merit and curiosity, a large proportion arose solely from his attachment to this romantic lore. But although the curiosity of the public was in some degree excited by the references of these ingenious and inquisitive authors to the poetry of other times, it was not easy to procure for it adequate gratification. The ancient metrical romances were very early superseded by prose works upon the same subjects. These last, although far inferior, in interest and merit, to the poetical tales which preceded them, claimed and obtained a superior degree of credit, founded upon the fiction alleged to be inseparable from metre; upon the degraded state of the minstrels, whose province it was to recite these disparaged rhyming legends; and, above all, upon a grave pretext set up by the author of each prose work, that he had translated it verbatim et literatim from an ancient Greek or Latin original. As no such Greek or Latin original for a romance of chivalry has ever been produced, we may be safely allowed to doubt whether any such ever existed. But our ancestors received these accounts with unhesitating credulity, and
[Page 20]
gravely read the voluminous romances of Lancelot du Lac, and Palmerin of England, as translations from ancient annals, while they rejected with scorn the rhyming legends of the minstrels on the same subjects. Thus the metrical romances were obliged to give way to the prose works, which were, in fact, borrowed from them; and so complete was the substitution of the one species of fable for the other, that the press, which was then invented about the period of this revolution in public taste, groaned under the splendid folios of the former, while the latter remained in obscure manuscripts, or were only printed in the meanest manner and for the meanest of the people. Thus the very existence of the metrical romance, as a distinct, separate, and more ancient kind of composition, was unknown and unnoticed till the publication of the works which we have mentioned. Even long after that period, printed editions being as rare as manuscripts, remained very little disturbed by those who possessed them, and absolutely inaccessible to every other person. At length, as the taste for old ballads began to awaken that for romantic fiction, Pinkerton and others reprinted in their miscellanies some of the shorter and more ancient of our metrical tales of chivalry; and others were republished singly both in London and Edinburgh. But the first comprehensive and general work, upon this interesting subject, was undertaken by the late Mr Ritson. No one could, in some respects, have been more admirably qualified for the task. Although it is now three years since this publication appeared,
[Page 21]
yet the subject is so intimately and immediately connected with the more popular and elegant work of Mr Ellis, that, in reviewing the one, we think it a duty we owe to the public to take some notice of the other, and at least point out to their attention the undeserved neglect into which it has fallen.
This collection contains twelve metrical romances of chivalry, selected by the editor as those which, from a general acquaintance with such compositions, he deemed most worthy of publication. There is prefixed a long and elaborate dissertation on Romance and Minstrelsy; and learned notes are subjoined to the collection, with a glossary of obsolete words.
In the important task of arranging and correcting the text of these poems, it is impossible to bestow too much praise upon the editor. To an industry incapable of fatigue, and a fidelity which defied every power of temptation, the late Mr Ritson united acute abilities and an intimate acquaintance with every collateral source from which light could be thrown upon his subject. In possessing, therefore, a collection so important to our ancient literature, we have the satisfaction to know, that the poems published are most strictly and literally genuine, and that they are ably and clearly illustrated in the corresponding notes.
The first romance in the collection is Ywain and Gawain, a most beautiful tale of chivalry, from which Warton has given copious extracts in his History of English Poetry. It is certainly the finest romance in the work, perhaps the most interesting which now exists. It is of French origin, being
[Page 22]
written, or at least greatly enlarged, by the famous Chretien de Troye, who flourished in the twelfth century. We cannot resist giving a very short summary of the story. Guenever, the wife of the famous Arthur, hearing, upon a time, the knights who guarded her chamber-door, telling to each other their exploits of chivalry, suddenly issues from her apartment, and commands Sir Colgrevance, who was then speaking, to continue his narration. The knight unwillingly obeys, and tells a long and marvellous adventure which had befallen him beside an enchanted well, where he had been finally discomfited by a puissant knight, the guardian of the fountain, the wonders of which are described in strong Gothic painting. Sir Ywain resolves to undertake the adventure, and, having set forth in disguise, slays in single fight the champion of the fountain, upon the threshold of his own castle gate. But the victor, enclosed in the court by the fall of the portcullis, is in the utmost danger from the followers of the slain warrior. He is rescued at length by means of Lunet, a damsel belonging to the castle, who conceals him in a chamber. Here he obtains a sight of the widow of the knight of the fountain, and falls desperately in love. His passion is at length successful, through the intervention of the damsel, who very sensibly reminds her lady, that the conqueror must needs more than make up the loss of the vanquished. Sir Ywain marries the dame, with whom he lives in great happiness, until he obtains her permission to visit the court of Arthur, pledging his knightly word to return within the year. But Sir Ywain forgot his promise, a
[Page 23]
circumstance which did not prevent his becoming distracted for the loss of his lady, when reminded of his breach of faith by a damsel whom she despatched to the court of Arthur, to renounce her husband, and proclaim him dishonoured and truthless . He is restored to his senses by a sage lady, whose enemies he discomfits by his prowess, and then resumes his profession of knight-errantry. While wandering in quest of adventures, he observes a lion combating a dragon, and goes to his assistance, both because the lion was the more noble animal, and on account of the ancient and irreconcilable feud betwixt knights-errant and dragons. The dragon being slain, the grateful lion attaches himself to his ally, and maintains a great part in all his future adventures. They come to the enchanted fountain, where Ywain unexpectedly meets with Lunet, the damsel to whom he had formerly been so much indebted. She is bound to find a champion against a certain day, to fight with her mistress's false steward, who had accused her of treason. Their meeting under circumstances of mutual distress, is very happily described by the old minstrel. Sir Ywain promises to appear and defend her upon the appointed day. In the mean while, he is involved in a variety of adventures, from many of which he is extricated by the lion; so that the time is nearly past when he appears to combat the steward. Lunet is restored to life and liberty, and by her subsequent address, Sir Ywain is reconciled with his lady.
“And so Sir Ywaine and his wife
In joy and bliss they led their life;
So did Lunet and the lioun;
Untill that death have driven them doun.”
[Page 24]
The next romance, called Launsal, though a beautiful fairy tale, might have been as well omitted, as it is published by Mr Ellis in the notes to Way's translation of Le Grand's Fabliaux . We hope it was not inserted with the peevish purpose of pointing out supposed errors in Mr Ellis's edition, although we observe some explanations of the difficult passages, given with a “ not as Mister Ellis says; ” and that in cases where the justice of the correction is as uncertain as the dispute is insignificant. The second volume contains Sir Libius Disconius, i.e. Le Beau Decogneu (of which Bishop Percy has given an elegant précis in his Essay on Metrical Romance); Hornchild, the King of Tars; Emare, and a metrical Chronicle of England. The third volume contains Florence of Rome, the Earl of Tholouse, the Squire of Low Degree, and the Knight of Courtesy and Lady of Faguell. We believe that both the Chronicle of England, and the beautiful fairy tale of Sir Orpheo, might have been greatly enlarged by recourse to the Auchinleck MS. in the Advocates' Library of Edinburgh, to which Mr Ritson seems to have had ready access. Upon the whole, the romances are judiciously selected, and we have already praised the well-known accuracy of the editor.
We cannot confer the same unmixed praise on the introductory Essay on Romance and Minstrelsy. We were, on the contrary, about to bestow our very strongest and most decided reprobation upon the acrimonious spirit of vindictive controversy in which it is written, when we were in some degree disarmed by the avowal, that it was composed under the pressure of “continued ill
[Page 25]
health and low spirits;” and by the recollection, that the scene has been long since closed by the hand of death. But we must not, in our respect for the dead, altogether forget what is due to the living. Much coarse and insolent invective is poured on Bishop Percy, who seems to have incurred the editor's resentment in a double capacity, —as a dignitary of the church, and a successful publisher of ancient poetry. We do not think Mr Ritson imbibed this spirit from the works which he studied. Surely, neither the gallant Sir Lancelot, nor the courteous Sir Gawain, would have given a reverend Bishop the lie direct, on account of a disputed reading in the old song of Maggie Lauder! We would have antiquaries remember, that the ridicule which their pursuits are at all times apt to incur, becomes pointed in proportion to the indecent vehemence of their argument. Whether the controverted line (which refers to the dwelling of a certain bagpiper) ought to be read, “Come ye frae the border,” or “Live you upo ' the border,” or, finally, “ Ye live upon the border,” might surely have been debated, if, indeed, it was worth debating ( num pugna est de paupere regno ), with the temper and manners of a gentleman. The frequent charge brought by Mr Ritson against the editor of the Reliques of Ancient Poetry, of adulterating, by modern improvements, the ancient poems which he published, appears to us to be urged with far too much grossness. We do not, indeed, approve of this species of sophistication, by which the man of taste is sometimes a gainer at the
[Page 26]
expense of the antiquary. But when we consider, that the Reliques were published at a time when the public taste was far from encouraging the pursuits of the mere antiquary, we wonder not that the learned editor should have been tempted to render his ancient poetry more attractive by his own elegant interpolations. And we apprehend, that as few modern publishers possess the taste and judgment of Bishop Percy, so, even those as highly gifted, want, in the present day, the apology which we have pleaded for the editor of the Reliques.
In the general scope of Mr Ritson's essay, we discover much both of the defects and merits which characterise his lucubrations. The accumulation of materials bears witness to the undeviating and incessant labour of an antiquary zealously employed on a favourite topic. A number of curious facts are drawn together respecting the romances of all nations, but especially concerning those of England. The first part of the Essay treats of the origin of romances; and the author is particularly anxious to combat the system which deduces those fictions from the north of Europe. He produces some plausible arguments to prove that many of the Scandinavian romances were borrowed or translated from the French, and that the Edda of Sturleson has no claim to high antiquity. The author's ardour in controversy has, however, sometimes hurried him too far. Thus he informs us, when giving the history of Odin of Scandinavia, that this famous personage “attempts to kiss Rinda, daughter to the King of the Ruthes, and receives a slap on the face. According to Torfæus, he even ravished this young
[Page 27]
lady; but the passage, upon looking into Saxo, to whom he seems to refer, could not be found.” (Essay, p. xxxi.) Now, we have looked into Saxo, and found the passage at great length in the Paris edition of 1514, folio xxv. In several other instances, the authority of Saxo seems to countenance the mythology of the Edda, much more than Mr Ritson is disposed to admit. No positive opinion is given, in the Essay, upon the origin of romance, although the theories of former writers are combated with apparent success from an intimate acquaintance with authorities of the middle ages. Indeed, we have been long of opinion, that Mr Ritson was, both by talent and disposition, better qualified to assail the opinions of others, than to deduce from the facts which he produces a separate theory of his own.
In the second part of the Essay, English romance is treated of; and the author contends, with great ardour, for the superior antiquity of the French works upon that subject. Indeed, this is not surprising, when it is considered that French was not merely the court and law language of England, but was spoken universally by the nobles and gentry, from the Conquest, down to the reign of Edward III.
The third part of the Essay treats of the English minstrels, a race of men against whom Mr Ritson seems to have entertained a special malice, and whom he anxiously blends with the jugglers, whose tricks of legerdemain formed another branch of our ancestors' amusement. Now, although it is extremely probable that the same person might occasionally
[Page 28]
practise both arts, yet, in themselves, they were separate and distinct professions. Nor do we agree with Mr Ritson, in supposing that the minstrels, whose profession was music and the recitation of poetry, were not frequently themselves poets. Their daily bread depended upon their stock of tales and songs; and it must have been as natural for them to have composed the romances which they sung, as for a modern musician to compose the pieces which he performs. Above all, we cannot see why the arts of composition, which are admitted to have been exercised by the minstrels of France, should be supposed unattainable by those of England. Subsequent to the reign of Edward III., most of the popular French romances were translated into English, which then became the language, as well of the nobles as of the vulgar. Why the minstrels, who were most interested in these translations, should be deemed unequal to the task of accomplishing them, we can see no good reason for believing. A wandering and idle race of men, attendant on the barons who went to war in France, they had time to acquire both languages; and the art of rhyming must have been easy to persons who almost every day of their lives were employed in poetical recitation. Minstrels and bards are often employed as synonymous terms, although the poetic powers of the bards are indisputable. As late as the reign of Queen Elizabeth, this combination occurs in the poem of a Scottish satirist describing London.
“But yet the menstrallis and the bairdis ,
Thair trowand to obtain rewardis,
[Page 29]
About his ludgene loudlie played.”
Legend of the Bischop of St Androis.
A proof how far the task of the poet and of the reciter were required from the minstrel, occurs in a very ancient poem, of which there is one MS. in the British Museum, and another in the library of Peterborough cathedral. It contains the history of an intrigue betwixt Thomas of Erceldoune, called the Rhymer, and the Queen of Fairies, by whom, as every one knows, he was transported to the “Londe of Faeri,” and gifted with those supernatural powers of poetry and prophecy, by which he was afterwards distinguished. The following dialogue passes betwixt the bard and his faery leman upon this memorable occasion.
“ ‘Fare wel, Thomas, I wend my way,
    I may no longer stande with the.’—
‘Gif me sum tokyn, Lady gaye,
    That I may say I spake with the.’—
“‘To harp and carpe, Thomas, wher so ever ze gon,
    Thomas, take the these with the.’—
‘ Harping,’ he said, ‘ken I non ,
    For tong is chefe of mynstralcie .’—
“‘If thu wil spelle, or talys telle,
Thomas thu shall never make lye;
Wher so ever thu goo, to fryth or felle,
    I pray thu speke never non ille of me.’”
From this decisive declaration, which a poet and minstrel made on the nature of his own profession, it appears plainly, that, in more ancient times, the minstrel's principal and most honourable occupation referred to poetry, rather than music; and the Rhymer might have been justly described as one
[Page 30]
“who united the arts of poetry and music, and sung verses to the harp, of his own composing,” if he had not disdained the musical skill to which it was Mr Ritson's persuasion that the talents of the minstrel were exclusively limited. We should have been anxious to have heard what reply his keen and eager spirit could have suggested; but poor Ritson is now probably deciphering the characters upon the collar of Cerberus, or conversing in unbaptized language with the Saxon and British chiefs of former times;
                                         “With Oswald,
Vortigern, Harold, Hengist, Horsa, Knute,
Allured, Edgar and Cunobeline.”
Upon the whole, it occurs to us, from a careful perusal of his Essay, that Mr Ritson's talents were better adapted to research than to deduction, to attack than to defence, to criticism than to composition; and that he has left us a monument of profound industry and extensive study, undirected by any attempt at system, and tarnished by the splenetic peculiarities of an irritable temperament. Still let it be remembered to his honour, that, without the encouragement of private patronage, or of public applause; without hopes of gain, and under the certainty of severe critical censure, he has brought forward such a work on national antiquities, as in other countries has been thought worthy of the labour of universities, and the countenance of princes.
The work of Mr Ellis is of a nature adapted for general circulation, and for conveying a lively and pleasing picture of the contents of the ancient
[Page 31]
metrical romances, without literal transcription of their whole contents. With this view, the editor has analyzed each romance in prose, introducing. at the same time, occasionally, as a continuation of the narrative, such parts of the original as seemed to possess either peculiarities of expression or poetical beauty, sufficient to render their preservation desirable, as fair or favourable specimens of the whole composition. In transcribing these selected passages, Mr Ellis has discarded the antique orthography, preserving, however, carefully, every ancient word, while he reduces the spelling to the modern standard, according to the mode adopted in his previous publication, entitled, “Specimens of Ancient English Poetry.”
Such is the plan of the present work. It is obvious, that by adopting it, Mr Ellis voluntarily resigned the object of Mr Ritson's publication, who gave his romances entire to the world; a mode more acceptable, doubtless, to the antiquary, though infinitely less interesting and amusing to the general reader, as well as to the editor. We have no doubt that some more severe student of our national antiquities may censure the liberties which Mr Ellis has taken with his materials, and deprecate his scouring the shield of ancient chivalry. But, with great reverence for such grave judges, we presume to think, that the shield may be safely scoured, where there is no danger of its being proved, in the process of purification, to be no antique buckler, but a barber's bason, or a paltry old sconce. This is far from being the case in the present instance. The burnishing of the armour
[Page 32]
has only tended to ascertain the valuable materials of which it is sometimes composed, and which were heretofore obscured by cobwebs and rust. So far are we from thinking that the popular labours of Mr Ellis will supersede a complete edition of these curious legends, that, we doubt not, the wit and elegance with which he has abridged and analyzed their contents, will encourage many a gentle reader to attempt the originals, who would before have as soon thought of wearing the dress, as of studying the poems of his ancestors. Socrates is said to have brought philosophy from heaven to reside among men; and Addison claimed the merit of introducing her to the tea-tables of the ladies. Mr Ellis, in his turn, has brought the minstrels of old into the boudoirs and drawing-rooms, which have replaced the sounding halls and tapestried bowers in which they were once familiar; so that the age of chivalry, instead of being at an end for ever, may perhaps be on the point of revival. In this point of view, much is gained, and nothing lost by the plan of Mr Ellis. Those whom an abridgement cannot satisfy, may consult the originals with more convenience and facility, from a previous knowledge of their contents, and of the libraries where they exist, while curiosity is excited in others who would never otherwise have thought on the subject. This general interest may perhaps end in a complete edition of all that old bards
“In sage and solemn times have sung,
Of turneys and of trophies hung;
Of forests, and enchantments drear,
Where more is meant than meets the ear.”
[Page 33]
To the Romances, Mr Ellis has prefixed an introduction, which contains a more plain and comprehensive view of the rise and progress of the minstrels and their poetry, than we ever remember to have met with. As the subject is curious, we will endeavour to give the reader a short statement of their history, with such remarks as occur to us.
Normandy appears to have been the cradle of minstrelsy. The Northmen who wrested that province from the feeble successors of Charlemagne, had, doubtless, like all other barbarous people, especially the Scandinavian tribes, their national poets, under the name of scalds, or by whatever other term they were distinguished. On their settling in Neustria, their native speech speedily melted down into the more commodious and extended language used by the inhabitants of Northern France, which was called Romance , being, in fact, a corrupted Latin, introduced by the Romans into their Gallic province. In this language, the minstrels composed most of their works, until, from that circumstance, the word romance, from signifying the early Norman French, came at length to mean those chivalrous tales usually composed in that tongue. Of the authors of these compositions, Mr Ellis has given us the following concise, but excellent account.
“The following may perhaps be accepted as a tolerable summary of the history of the minstrels. It appears likely that they were carried by Rollo into France, where they probably introduced a certain number of their native traditions; those, for instance, relating to Ogier le Danois, and other northern heroes, who were afterwards enlisted into the tales of chivalry;
[Page 34]
but that, being deprived of the mythology of their original religion, and cramped perhaps, as well by the sober spirit of Christianity, as by the imperfection of a language whose tameness was utterly inapplicable to the sublime obscurity of their native poetry, they were obliged to adopt various modes of amusing, and to unite the talents of the mimic and the juggler, as a compensation for the defects of the musician and poet. Their musical skill, however, if we may judge from the number of their instruments, of which very formidable catalogues are to be found in every description of a royal festival, may not have been contemptible; and their poetry, even though confined to short compositions, was not likely to be void of interest to their hearers, while employed on the topics of flattery or satire. Their rewards were certainly, in some cases, enormous, and prove the esteem in which they were held; though this may be partly ascribed to the general thirst after amusement, and the difficulty experienced by the great in dissipating the tediousness of life; so that the gift of three parishes in Gloucestershire, assigned by William the Conqueror for the support of his joculator , may perhaps be a less accurate measure of the minstrel's accomplishments, than of the monarch's power and of the insipidity of his court.
“To the talents already enumerated, the minstrels added, soon after the birth of French literature, the important occupation of the diseur or declaimer . Perhaps the declamation of metrical compositions might have required, during their first state of imperfection, some kind of chant, and even the assistance of some musical instruments, to supply the deficiencies of the measure; perhaps the aids of gesture and pantomime may have been necessary to relieve the monotony of a long recitation; but at all events it is evident, that an author who wrote for the public at large, during the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, was not less dependent for his success on the minstrels, than a modern writer of tragedy or comedy on the players of the present day. A copyist might multiply manuscripts for the supply of conventlibraries! but while ecclesiastics alone were able to read, there was no access to the ears of a military nobility, without the intervention of a body of men who travelled in every direction, and who were every where welcomed as the promoters of mirth and conviviality.
“The next step was easy. Being compelled to a frequent exercise of their talent in extemporaneous compositions, the minstrels were probably, like the improvisatori of Italy, at least equal, if not superior, to more learned writers, in the merely
[Page 35]
mechanical parts of poetry; they were also better judges of the public taste. By the progress of translation they became the depositaries of nearly all the knowledge of the age, which was committed to their memory: it was natural, therefore, that they should form a variety of new combinations from the numerous materials in their possession; and it will be shown hereafter, that many of our most popular romances were most probably brought by their efforts to the state in which we now see them. This was the most splendid era of their history, and seems to have comprehended the latter part of the twelfth, and perhaps the whole of the thirteenth century. After that time, from the general progress of instruction, the number of readers began to increase; and the metrical romances were insensibly supplanted by romances in prose, whose monotony neither required nor could derive much assistance from the art of declamation. The visits of the minstrels had been only periodical, and generally confined to the great festivals of the year; but the resources, such as they were, of the ponderous prose legend were always accessible. Thus began the decline of a body of men, whose complete degradation seems to have been the subsequent result of their own vices. During the period of their success they had most impudently abused the credulity of the public; but it is a whimsical fact, that the same fables which were discredited while in verse, were again, on their transfusion into prose, received without suspicion. It should seem that falsehood is generally safe from detection, when concealed under a sufficient cloak of dulness.”— Ellis , i. p. 19–23.
By attending to this history, we may easily solve the difficulty which Ritson found in reconciling the degraded state of the minstrels to the high rewards and countenance which they sometimes received, even in preference to those of the clerical profession. It appears, on one occasion, that two mendicant friars, soliciting hospitality at the gate of a convent, were received with acclamation under the idea of their being minstrels, and kicked out again when they announced their real character. It is also proved, we believe, that one minstrel received four shillings for his performance, and six priests
[Page 36]
only sixpence at the same festival. 4 But such instances of extravagant reward to individuals of a class which dedicates personal exertions to public amusement, are consistent with the general disrespect to which this body in general is condemned. Individual instances excepted, the player and the musician of modern days, the genuine successors of the minstrels, incur a certain degree of contempt from their situation, which they are too often driven to merit. It is somewhat hard that, as society advances in civilisation, and as demands are made on this class of men for refinement and improvement in their respective arts, their seclusion from the society where that refinement is to be acquired, becomes proportionally more rigid and strict. We cannot stop to appreciate the moral causes of the fastidious harshness with which society requites those on whom it depends for its most exquisite amusements.
Having shortly traced the history of the minstrels, Mr Ellis proceeds to examine the progress of their compositions. Of these, as we have already hinted, the first seem to have been unadorned annals or histories, reduced to measure for the convenience of the reciter, who was to retain them upon his memory. This field, however, soon became too barren and uninteresting. Other sources of narration were sought for. Some occurred in the ancient songs of the scalds, the legitimate productions
[Page 37]
of the minstrels. Others, of Arabian origin, found their way to France through Spain. But a much more numerous class was derived from the tales of the Armoricans, the neighbours of the Normans, who derived themselves from a Welsh colony. From this source, the minstrels probably drew their first accounts of
                                         “What resounds
In fable or romance, of Uther's son,
Begirt with British and Armoric knights.”
This theme, however, acquired its chief popularity after the acquisition of England by William the Conqueror. It is now completely proved, that the earliest and best French romances were composed for the meridian of the English court, where that language continued to be exclusively used, at least till the time of Edward III. When the Norman race of monarchs had once secured themselves on the throne of England, and identified the honour of that country with their own, they began to feel an interest in its early history, and to listen with applause to the feats of its heroes. The legends of the Welsh, on these occasions, were much more acceptable than those of the Saxons. The latter were the people whom the Normans had conquered, and whose kings they had dispossessed; the praise, therefore, of their departed heroes revived sentiments of discord, better forgotten by all parties. But the exploits of the British were carried back to so ancient a period, and so intermingled with Celtic fable, that they recalled no sentiments of ancient independence, and suggested no ideas dangerous to the Norman race.
[Page 38]
The exploits of Arthur were therefore unanimously adopted, as the subject of tales and romances without end; and these were drawn by the Norman minstrels from the British traditions flowing from Wales, and floating in what had lately been the British kingdom of Cumberland; but especially from the works of Geoffrey of Monmouth. Mr Ellis gives us an abridgement of that author's Chronicle of Britain, and his Vita Merlini , a poem in Latin verse. This last work only exists in MS., which is much to be regretted, as, from very frequent reference to particulars of British story, it affords demonstrable evidence, that Geoffrey did not, as has been repeatedly affirmed, himself forge the incidents of his Chronicle, but really drew them from the Armorican Chronicle, put into his hands by Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford. The whole tissue of fables, therefore, concerning Arthur, which compose the most striking part of Geoffrey's history, and indeed the history itself, seem, in the words of our author, to be less a sudden fabrication, the work of any one man's invention, than “a superstructure gradually and progressively raised on the foundation of the history attributed to Nennius,” the purity of which, by the way, had been already sullied by the Monk Samuel. Mr Ellis next proceeds to show that the state of Wales, during the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, was favourable to an exchange of literary materials betwixt the bards of that country and the Norman minstrels, as well as between the former and their brethren of Armorica.
“But as there is reason to believe that the British lays were
[Page 39]
seldom if ever committed to writing, it might be expected that different minstrels would tell the same story with some variations; that, unable to retain in their memory the whole of a long narrative, they would carry off, in the first instance, detached adventures, which they would afterwards connect as well as they were able; and that a system of traditional history, thus imperfectly preserved through the medium of a very loose translation, and already involved in much geographical and chronological confusion, would assume the fabulous appearance which we find in the French narratives called romances.”— Vol. i. p. 117.
To conclude his account of the materials from whence English romance was drawn, the editor observes, that although we owe to the Norman minstrels the greater part of the romances now extant, which were avowedly translated into English, as soon as that language came to supersede the French; yet a small number were most probably originally composed in English for the use of the Scottish court, where French was never exclusively spoken, and afterwards imitated or translated by French minstrels. On this subject he gives an elegant summary of the system proposed by the editor of Sir Tristrem, which we had occasion to consider in our review of that volume. 5 Upon this hypothesis, it is curious to observe, that as the earliest French romances were written in England, so the earliest English romances were composed in Scotland.
We heartily wish Mr Ellis had continued his dissertation on the materials of our metrical romance to a later period, as we have not seen a more clear and comprehensive view of the subject, so far as it goes. This desideratum is, however, in
[Page 40]
part supplied by the arrangement of his romances into classes, with the general preliminary remarks upon each class. The Appendix to the Introduction contains an account of Petrus Alphonsus de clericali disciplina , by Mr Douce, an industrious and ingenious antiquary; and, secondly, a translation by Mr Ellis of the Breton lais of Marie, twelve in number, exhibiting much of that genius for romantic fiction, which has been always an attribute of the Celtic tribes. We would willingly extract one of them for our readers' amusement; but are obliged to hasten to the metrical romances, which are the principal object of the collection.
The first class comprehends romances relating to King Arthur. These, as we have already seen, are probably the earliest in order, and although once most popular and numerous, are now become, in their metrical shape, exceedingly rare; because their very popularity rendered them the first objects of imitation to the prose authors, whose works superseded those of the minstrels. One romance of formidable length has been still preserved in MS., and forms the first article of Mr Ellis's work. It is called Merlin and Arthur, and resumes the account of these worthies, from their birth to the marriage of Arthur, when the transcriber of one fragment resigned his task, after having copied 10,000 lines. This is a romance in the very best style of minstrelsy, so far as language, and even incident, are concerned. The marvellous birth of Merlin, surreptitiously begotten by a fiend upon a maiden, under the most extraordinary circumstances, is one of those feats of witchery which arrest the imagination. The mother is condemned
[Page 41]
to death by a rigid law of the British against such as infringed the rules of chastity. But Blaise, a holy hermit, by christening the child at the instant of its birth, baffles the hopes of the devil, who had expected, by means of engendering with a virgin, to create a semi-demon, who should be devoted to the powers of evil.
“The good man then returned with his infernal proselyte, and restored him by means of the basket to the midwife; who, carrying him to the fire, and surveying his rough hide with horror and astonishment, could not refrain from reproaching him for his unreasonable choice of a mother who had never taken the usual means to have a child.
“‘Alas,’ she said, ‘art thou Merlin?
Whether 6 art thou? and of what kin?
Who was thy father, by night or day,
That no man wite ne may?
It is great ruth, thou foul thing,
That for thy love (by Heaven's King!)
Thy mother shall be slain with woe!
Alas that staund 7 it shall fall so!
I would thou were far in the sea,
With that thy mother might scape free!’
When that he heard her speak so,
He brayed 8 up his eyen two,
And lodly 9 on her gan look,
And his head on her he shook,
And gan to cry with loud din;
‘Thou lyest!’ he said, ‘old quean!
My mother shall no man quell , 10
For no thing that man may tell,
While that I may stand or gon!
Maugré hem every one
I shall save her life for this.
That thou shalt hear and see, ywis.’” Vol. i. p. 213, 214.
We have no time to stop to trace the completion of this promise, nor the rest of Arthur's history, which Mr Ellis has taken from a poetical account of his achievements and death, occurring
[Page 42]
in the Museum. The downfall of the chivalry of the Round Table was completed by the death of Sir Lancelot, its most redoubted supporter. Mr Ellis transcribes from the Morte Arthur the following eulogium over that hero, which may be said to comprehend the cardinal virtues of a preux chevalier.
“And now I dare say—that, Sir Lancelot, ther thou lyest, thou were never matched of none earthly knight's hands. And thou were the curteist knight that ever bare shielde. And thou were the truest freende to thy lover that ever bestrode horse. And thou were the truest lover, of a synful man, that ever loved woman. And thou were the kindest man that ever stroke with swerde. And thou were the goodliest person that ever came amonge prece (press) of knyghtes. And thou were the meekest man and the gentillest that ever eate in hal among ladies. And thou were the sternest knight to thy mortall foe that ever put spere in the rest!”— Vol. i. p. 386, 387.
The next class comprehends what Mr Ellis has ventured to call Saxon Romances; that is, romances referring to Saxon subjects, and claiming, perhaps, some foundation in the history of that people. Horn-Child, which bears the most decided marks of Saxon origin, is omitted, as already published by Mr Ritson, in an entire state; but we could have wished Mr Ellis had extended his criticism to that poem, or favoured us with some general remarks upon the romance of the Anglo-Saxons. Guy of Warwick, and Bevis of Hamptoun, occupy this station entirely. The first is a very long romance, and in general as dull as may be, with even more than the usual huge proportion of battles and tournaments. Yet it may be read with pleasure in Mr Ellis's abridgement, though the original would have defied the patience of most antiquaries. The
[Page 43]
combat betwixt Guy and Colbrond the Danish champion, is told in a more animated strain, and in a different stanza. We suspect that this is the only part of the romance which has any claim to a Saxon origin, and that all the rest has been added by some minstrel after the crusades. Mr Ellis seems disposed to identify the redoubted Sir Guy with Egils a Norwegian pirate, who assisted Athelstan at the battle of Brunnanburgh. The Egils-saga, which contains an account of that chief's adventures, affords no countenance to this conjecture, which we incline to consider as fanciful. Bevis of Hamptoun resembles Guy of Warwick, but is of a far ruder and apparently more ancient manufacture. There is a harshness and barbarous tinge about this poem, which bespeaks its being composed in a very rude state of society, or for the amusement of the lower ranks; two points which it is sometimes very difficult to distinguish. Notwithstanding their demerits, Guy of Warwick, and Bevis of Hamptoun, equalled, or excelled in popularity, almost all the romances of the middle ages.
The next is entitled an Anglo-Norman Romance, and contains the adventures of no less a person than Richard Cœur de Lion. It has, for many reasons, great claims on our attention. In the first place, it tends to show the progress from metrical history to metrical romance; for, in its more ancient and simple state, as a fragment still exists in the Auchinleck Manuscript, it appears to have contained little more than an historical detail, not much exaggerated, of the actual transactions of Richard in the Holy Land. But the inventions of succeeding
[Page 44]
minstrels have grafted upon the original narrative a number of extraordinary and supernatural events of the wildest and most romantic kind, in order to render it more astonishing or interesting to their hearers. There is, in particular, a minute account of a marriage betwixt Henry II. and an unknown Princess, by whom he had three children, namely, Richard, John, and a daughter unknown to our genealogists, called Topyas. This queen of England being a fiend, or something very little better, was unable to be present at any of the sacraments; and being once compelled to remain till the elevation of the host took place, she made an elopement through the roof of the chapel, carrying with her Topyas and John. The latter fell from the air, and broke his thigh bone; the mother escaped with the former, and was never more seen. The legend thus engrafted upon the English history, is taken from an event said to have happened to Count Fulk of Anjou, often alluded to by our Scottish historians as a proof, that, by one side of the house, the kings of England were descended from the devil. Perhaps, however, the minstrel hinted a satire at Eleanor of Guienne, who was, in fact, a sort of devil incarnate. Of this fiendish parentage, according to the romance, came that
“King y-christened of most renown,
Strong Richard Cœur de Lioun.”
The feat by which he gained this well-known appellation is supposed to have happened during his confinement in the Austrian dominions, where he slew the Emperor's son by a box on the ear.
[Page 45]
The Emperor having scruples to accomplish his revenge, by dipping his hands in the royal blood of his prisoner, contented himself with introducing into Richard's company a hungry lion, under the conviction that he was guiltless of all consequences which might ensue from their meeting. Richard, who had armed his hand with a few ells of handkerchiefs, the gift of a loving princess, plunged it down the throat of the monster, tore out his heart, devoured it before the face of the Emperor, and thus acquired an ample title to the name by which he is known in history. Amid this wild farrago, there occurs a minute incident of truth, which has escaped our historians. It seems pretty clear that Richard, while travelling in disguise through Austria, amused himself with dressing his own dinner, with some assistance from Sir Foulk Doyley and Sir Thomas Multon (the ancestors of the Dacres of Dacre). While these three warriors were busied in roasting a goose, they were teazed by an intrusive female minstrel, whom they rudely dismissed, without allowing her to share their good cheer. In consequence, she betrayed them to the Duke of Austria. This strange anecdote is alluded to by Petrus d'Elrilo, a writer of the twelfth century, and by Otho de Saint Blaise, who maintains, that Richard himself turned the spit, forgetful that he wore a ring which announced the rank of the wearer to be far superior to his occupation. So strangely are truth and falsehood woven together in this curious performance. But this romance is also valuable, as a curious example of the change for the worse which the religious wars introduced
[Page 46]
into the European character. In the earlier romances, the heroes are no doubt sufficiently savage; they shed much blood in battle, and are determined enemies to giants and wizards. But the cause of these military exertions is generally one with which we can sympathize; the deliverance of a fair lady, the righting of a wrong done to the helpless, or the supporting the tottering throne of a lawful monarch. A certain generosity is also mingled in their valour; and they are generally as ready to forgive and spare the vanquished, as to quell the vaunting and resisting enemy. But the crusader discarded from his bosom all that was amiable and mild in the spirit of chivalry. He fought for the cause of God against unchristened heathen hounds, and had neither authority nor inclination to forgive their wrongs to Heaven, as he might have pardoned those offered to himself. This romance contains a lively detail of the bloody cruelties practised by the champions of Palestine upon an enemy. The following extraordinary specimen of what crusaders were supposed capable of performing, although totally fabulous, shows the idea which the minstrels conceived of such a character, when carried to the highest and most laudable degree of perfection:—
“The best leeches in the camp were unable to effect the cure of Richard's ague; but the prayers of the army were more successful. He became convalescent; and the first symptom of his recovery was a violent longing for pork. But pork was not likely to be plentiful in a country whose inhabitants had an abhorrence for swine's flesh.
“An old knight, with Richard biding,
When he heard of that tiding,
[Page 47]
That the kingis wants were swyche,
To the steward he spake privyliche.
‘Our lord the king sore is sick, I wis,
After pork he alonged is;
Ye may none find to selle:
No man be hardy him so to telle!
If he did, he might die.
Now behoves to done as I shall say,
That he wete nought of that.
Takes a Saracen young and fat;
In haste let the thief be slain,
Opened, and his skin off flayn;
And sodden, full hastily,
With powder, and with spicery,
And with saffron of good coloùr.
When the king feels thereof savoùr,
Out of ague if he be went,
He shall have thereto good talènt.
When he has a good taste,
And eaten well a good repast,
And supped of the brewis 11 a sup,
Slept after, and swet a drop,
Thorough Goddis help, and my counsail,
Soon he shall be fresh and hail.’
The sooth to say, at wordes few,
Slain and sodden was the heathen shrew.
Before the king it was forth brought:
Quod his men, ‘Lord, we have pork sought;
Eates and suppes of the brewis soote , 12
Thorough grace of God it shall be your boot.’
Before king Richard carff a knight.
He ate faster than he carve might.
The king ate the flesh, and gnew 13 the bones,
And drank well after for the nonce.
And when he had eaten enough,
His folk hem turned away, and lough. 14
He lay still, and drew in his arm;
His chamberlain him wrapped warm.
He lay and slept, and swet a stound,
And became whole and sound.
King Richard clad him, and arose,
And walked abouten in the close.”— Vol. ii. p. 225–227.
Shortly after this horrible banquet, the Christian
[Page 48]
camp is attacked. Richard flies to repulse the invaders, succeeds, and returns, wearied with slaughter, to his tent.
“A knight his arms gan unlace;
Him to comfort and solace,
Him was brought a sop in wine.
‘The head of that ilke swine,
That I of ate! (the cook he bade)
For feeble I am, and faint and mad.’
Quod the cook, ‘That head I ne have.’
Then said the king, ‘So God me save,
But I see the head of that swine,
For sooth, thou shalt lessen thine!’
The cook saw none other might be;
He fet the head, and let him see.”
“The swarte ris 15 when the king seeth,
His black beard, and white teeth,
How his lippes grinned wide,
‘What devil is this?’ the king cried,
And gan to laugh as he were wode.
‘What? is Saracen's flesh thus good?
For hunger ere I be wo,
I and my folk shall eat mo.’”— Vol. ii. p. 228, 229.
Soon after this incident, Saladin despatches an embassy to Richard to solicit the ransom of the garrison of Acres, including several persons of high rank, who, with the city, had fallen into the hands of the Christians. Richard receives the ambassadors courteously, and requests their company to dinner.
“The invitation was gratefully accepted. Richard in the mean time gave secret orders to his marshal that he should repair to the prison, select a certain number of the most distinguished captives, and, after carefully noting their names on a roll of parchment, cause their heads to be instantly struck off; that these heads should be delivered to the cook, with instructions to clear away the hair, and, after boiling them in a caldron, to distribute them on several platters, one to each guest, observing
[Page 49]
to fasten on the forehead of each the piece of parchment expressing the name and family of the victim.
“This horrible order was punctually executed. At noon the guests were summoned to wash by the music of the waits; the king took his seat, attended by the principal officers of his court, at the high table, and the rest of the company were marshalled at a long table below him. On the cloth were placed portions of salt at the usual distances, but neither bread, wine, nor water. The ambassadors, rather surprised at this omission, but still free from apprehension, awaited in silence the arrival of the dinner, which was announced by the sound of pipes, trumpets, and tabours; and beheld, with horror and dismay, the unnatural banquet introduced by the steward and his officers. Yet their sentiments of disgust and abhorrence. and even their fears, were for a time suspended by their curiosity. Their eyes were fixed on the king, who, without the slightest change of countenance, swallowed the morsels as fast as they could be supplied by the knight who carved them.
“Their attention was then involuntary fixed on the smoking heads before them; they traced in the swoln and distorted features the resemblance of a friend or near relation; and received from the fatal scroll which accompanied each dish the sad assurance, that this resemblance was not imaginary. They sat in torpid silence, anticipating their own fate in that of their countrymen; while their ferocious entertainer, with fury in his eyes, but with courtesy on his lips, insulted them by frequent invitations to merriment. At length this first course was removed, and its place supplied by venison, cranes, and other dainties, accompanied by the richest wines. The king then apologized to them for what had passed, which he attributed to his ignorance of their taste; and assured them of his religious respect for their character as ambassadors, and of his readiness to grant them a safe conduct for their return. This boon was all that they now wished to claim; and
“King Richard spake to an old man,
‘Wendes home to your soudan!
Say him, it shall him nought avail,
Though he for-bar us our vitail,
Bread, wine, fish, flesh, salmon, and conger;
Of us none shall die with hunger,
King Richard shall warrant,
There is no flesh so nourissant
Unto an English man,
[Page 50]
Partridge, plover, heron, ne swan,
Cow ne ox, sheep ne swine,
As the head of a Sarezyn.
There he is fat, and thereto tender;
And my men be lean and slender.’” Vol. ii. p. 232–6.
The other exploits of King Richard in the Holy Land were in a similar taste with this cannibal entertainment; and we are of opinion, that when such feats are imputed by way of praise and merit to the hero of the crusaders, and received, as doubtless they were, with no small applause by the audience, the fact will go a great way to ascertain, whether the European character was improved or debased by these Eastern expeditions.
The next class of Romances comprehend such as relate to Charlemagne and his Paladins. These are founded on the chronicle of the Pseudo-Turpin, a' collection of fables not very dissimilar to those brought together by Geoffrey of Monmouth, and which, like his chronicle, has become the source of innumerable romances. But they never seem to have been equally popular in England; nor, indeed, could it be expected, as the scene is usually laid in France, Spain, or Italy. The Italians, from the days of Pulci to those of Ariosto, and much later, have had very many poems founded on this basis. The romances which Mr Ellis has given under this class are three,—Roland and Ferragus, Sir Otuel, and Sir Ferumbras.
The next romance is of Oriental origin, being the earliest edition of the Seven Wise Masters, long known among the school-boys of this country. It is followed by ten miscellaneous romances:—Florice
[Page 51]
and Blancheflour; Robert of Cysille; Sir Isumbras; Sir Triamour; Ipomydon; Eglamour of Artois; Layle Fraine; Sir Eger and Sir Grahame; Roswal and Lillian; and Amys and Amylion;— all tales of doughty knights and ladies fair, once in high renown among the courtly and the gallant, but now condemned to an obscurity which, in some respects, is as underserved as their original supereminent reputation.
It would far exceed our limits, upon which we have already somewhat trespassed, to give a complete character of the ancient metrical romances. Their importance, in a historical point of view, we have already noticed. They hold out to us, like Shakspeare's players, the abstract and brief chronicles of the time, and demand the serious consideration of every historian. Even in a literary point of view, their merit is not contemptible. It is true, the story is generally rambling and desultory, utterly incapable consequently of exciting the pleasure arising from a well-conducted plan, all the parts of which depend upon each other, and tend, each in due degree, to bring on the catastrophe. So far is this from being the case, that, in a long romance, the adventures usually are all separated and insulated; only connected with each other, by their having happened to the same hero; just as a necklace of beads is combined by the thread on which they are strung. This arrangement, in fact, best suited the reciters, whose narration was to be proportioned to the time and patience of their audience; and whom this loose structure of story permitted to use freedom of compression or dilatation
[Page 52]
as best suited their purpose, since any single adventure might be inserted without impropriety, or left out without being missed. The same cause accounts for the loose and often tedious style in which the minstrels indulged. It was of consequence that their stanza should be so simple, as to be easily recollected, and their diction so copious, as not to suffer by any occasional deficiency of memory. For these reasons, Robert de Brunne tells us, that the common minstrels were unable to repeat tales written in a concise style and complicated stanza, and that such became nought in their imperfect recitation. To these faults, we have often to add those of extreme awkwardness of contrivance and improbability of incident; but which neither offended the taste, nor shocked the faith of our plain and hardy ancestors. On the other hand, there is a sort of keeping in these ancient tales, which did not depend upon the minstrel's inclination, and from which he could not have departed, if he had a mind to do so. This arises from his painting the manners of his own time as they passed before his eyes, and thus giving a truth and unity to the chivalrous events he relates, which the modern labourers in the vineyard of romance are utterly unable to imitate. With all the pains these last can use to deck their champions in the antique taste, they are perpetually confounding the past time with the present, and are guilty of anachronisms almost as gross as his who introduced a tea-table scene into the history of John of Gaunt. Neither is the language in which these legends are told altogether unworthy of our applause. There
[Page 53]
often occur passages, which, from the spirit of the poet rising with the situation, may justly claim a rank among the higher and more masculine orders of poetry. And although, as we have already noticed, the general conduct of the story is desultory and slightly put together, yet many of the individual adventures, of which each long romance is composed, are happily conceived and artfully executed. The gloom of superstition likewise added a wild and dismal effect to the wonders of the minstrel; and occasionally his description of supernatural events amounts nearly to sublimity.
To these ancient monuments of the past ages, Mr Ellis has rendered the same good service in English, which the Count de Tressan performed in France, by the Corps d'Extraits de Romans de Chevalerie . In some respects, the works resemble each other considerably. They are both executed by men of rank and fashion, who formed their style not merely by perusing the best authors, but by frequenting the first company in their respective countries. Both display an acute sense of the ludicrous, and can readily enliven, by a witty turn or lively expression, the dull or absurd details which they are occasionally obliged to narrate. We question, however, whether this is not sometimes too much indulged by both authors, since such license, when frequently taken, is rather irreverent, and looks as if the jest were levelled at once against the reader, the editor, and the original minstrel. In other respects, Mr Ellis has a decided superiority over Mons. de Tressan. He is infinitely more faithful as an editor; and, as an author, exhibits
[Page 54]
much deeper research; which appears from his having chosen the metrical romances for his subject: whereas the count has confined his attention to those in prose, though far less ancient, and in every respect less interesting. But Mr Ellis's introduction sufficiently illustrates his superior skill as an antiquary, although he has brought forward fewer materials than Mr Ritson, and makes no parade of those which he has acquired: it is evidently because he wished to be an architect, not a mere collector of stones and rubbish. Every thing which he quotes is adapted to fill a place in his system; and thus he avoids the great error of antiquaries, who are too much busied with insulated facts, to present to their readers a connected historical view of the subject under discussion.
Notwithstanding this ingenious and lively publication, we still desire even the more to see a genuine edition of these ancient poems. It is painful to reflect, that they, with many unedited chronicles, the materials of our national history, are lying unhonoured and unconsulted amid the rubbish of large libraries.
[Page 102]
ARTICLE V. HERBERT'S POEMS.
[ From the Edinburgh Review , 1806. On “Miscellaneous Poetry.” By the Honourable W. Herbert , 2 vols. 8vo . 1805.]
These little volumes contain a variety of translations from the Norse, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, German, &c., with a few original pieces. Those by which we have been most interested, are contained under the title of “Select Icelandic Poetry,” being versions of celebrated passages in the Edda of Sæmundar, and other specimens of Scaldic poetry. These translations form the first part of the first volume, and the second part of the second; a confused and capricious arrangement, which we wish had been avoided. They are, to a certain degree, a novelty in our literature; for although translations of many of these very pieces have been made by poets of different degrees of merit, from Gray to Amos Cottle, yet it has happened, rather perversely, that not one of these translators understood the original Icelandic, but contented themselves with executing their imitatons from the Latin version, and thus presenting
[Page 103]
their readers with the shadow of a shade. We can only estimate the injustice which the old Scalds sustained in this operation, by considering what sort of translation could be made of any Greek poet from the Latin version. Mr Herbert has stepped forward to rescue these ancient poets from this ignominious treatment; and his intimate acquaintance with the languages of the North is satisfactorily displayed in an introductory address to the Hon. C. Anker, Director of the Danish East Indian Company, executed in Danish poetry, as well as by many learned criticisms scattered through the work. We do not pretend any great knowledge of the Norse; but we have so far “traced the Runic rhyme,” as to be sensible how much more easy it is to give a just translation of that poetry into English than into Latin; and, consequently, how much is lost by the unnecessary intermediate transfusion. Indeed, the double difficulty of first rendering the Norse into the Latin, and then the Latin into the English, and thus interposing a version in a foreign and uncongenial tongue, between the original and the English, although this last is a kindred language, very similar, in its more ancient idiom to the Icelandic, has led to many, and some very absurd errors, in what has hitherto been given as Scaldic poetry. For example, in the famous death-song of Regnar Lodbrog, that renowned warrior has been made to assert, that the joy of a bloody battle, which he had just described, was superior to that of sleeping with a young virgin; and in another passage, he is made to aver yet more specifically, that the pleasure of
[Page 104]
battering the helmet with the keen falchion, was like that of kissing a young widow reclining upon a high seat. Now, whatever partiality Regnar might entertain for the sport of swords, the dance of Hilda, and for his favourite amusement of hacking with helmets, he had too much taste to give the preference imputed in these passages, which are thus justly rendered by Mr Herbert.
“Bucklers brast, and men were slain,
Stoutest skulls were cleft in twain.
'Twas not , I trow, like wooing rest
On gentle maiden's snowy breast.”
Again—
                                         “where falchions keen
Bit the helmet's polish'd sheen.
'Twas not like kissing widow sweet
Reclining in the highest seat.”
Such was the real and unbiassed opinion of Regnar with the Hairy Breeches; and truly we heartily join in it. The elegant Mason, as well as Bishop Percy, fell into a similar blunder in translating the love-song of Harold the valiant, which they understood to be a complaint, that, notwithstanding all the great deeds which he had performed, “a Russian maiden scorned his love.” Now, this burden is accurately rendered by Mr Herbert, after Perinskiold,
“With golden ring in Russian land,
To me the virgin plights her hand.”
Having noticed these gross errors, it is unnecessary to say how much of the spirit of the poetry, which is so much more volatile, must necessarily have escaped in versions, where even plain sense and meaning is so sadly corrupted. We therefore
[Page 105]
hail with pleasure an attempt to draw information from the fountain-head, especially where it is interesting both in point of intrinsic poetic merit, and as a curious source of historic investigation.
The character of the ancient Scaldic poetry is various. It is often, especially when mythological, so extremely obscure, that it defies interpretation. This seems to proceed chiefly from the metaphorical and paraphrastic style, which was considered as an high ornament in such compositions. Instead of giving the name of a person mentioned, it is the fashion to call him the son of such a one, or the brother or the spouse of such another; and as the said father, brother, or wife, had probably fifty names, it becomes extremely difficult, in many cases, to hit upon the individual who is intended. In like manner, a ship is the sea serpent, or the rider of the wave, or the ask or water-newt, or something else which still less readily conveys the meaning. In poems composed in this style, it seems to have been the object of the poet to convert every line into a sort of riddle, for the exercise of the ingenuity of the hearer, who was thus obliged to fight his way from one verse to another, having, for his sole reward, the pleasure of penetrating mystery, and conquering studied obscurity. Great part of the Edda of Sæmund is involved in this artificial darkness, and is therefore positively untranslateable. But in the more popular poetry, the romances, war-odes, and songs sung to the great in their festivals, when their Honours, like Mungo in the farce, probably wished to hear something which they could understand, another and more simple
[Page 106]
kind of poetry was adopted. The following very singular poem affords a curious specimen of this latter kind of composition; for though the personages are mythological, yet the tale is romantic, and the style of a simple kind, adapted to general comprehension. It is called the song of Thrym, or the Recovery of the Hammer, from the principal personage and incident. This hammer was a sort of sceptre or mace, used by Thor, the Mars of the Scandinavians, and on which much of his power depended. It was probably like those maces of arms which were used in war as low as the middle of the seventeenth century. 16 The translation is so admirably executed, that it might be mistaken for an original.
“Wrath waxed Thor, when his sleep was flown,
And he found his trusty hammer gone;
He smote his brow, his beard he shook,
The son of earth 'gan round him look;
And this the first word that he spoke;
‘Now listen what I tell thee, Loke;
Which neither on earth below is known,
Nor in Heaven above; my hammer's gone.’
Their way to Freyia's bower they took,
And this the first word that he spoke;
‘Thou, Freyia, must lend a winged robe,
To seek my hammer round the globe.’
Freyia sung.
‘That shouldst thou have, though 'twere of gold,
And that, though 'twere of silver, hold.’
Away flew Loke; the wing'd robe sounds,
Ere he has left the Asgard grounds,
And ere he has reached the Jotunheim bounds.
High on a mound in haughty state
Thrym the King of the Thursi sate;
[Page 107]
For his dogs he was twisting collars of gold,
And trimming the manes of his coursers bold.
Thrym sung.
‘How fare the Asi? the Alfi how?
Why com'st thou alone to Jotunheim now?’
Loke sung.
‘Ill fare the Asi; the Alfi mourn;
Thor's hammer from his thou hast torn.’
Thrym sung.
‘I have the Thunderer's hammer bound,
Fathoms eight beneath the ground;
With it shall no one homeward tread,
Till he bring me Freyia to share my bed.’
Away flew Loke; the wing'd robe sounds,
Ere he has left the Jotunheim bounds,
And ere he has reach'd the Asgard grounds.
At Midgard Thor met crafty Loke,
And this the first word that he spoke;
‘Have you your errand and labour done?
Tell from aloft the course, you run.
For setting oft the story fails,
And lying oft the lie prevails.’
Loke sung.
‘My labor is past, mine errand I bring;
Thrym has thine hammer, the giant king;
With it shall no one homeward tread,
Till he bear him Freyia to share his bed.’
Their way to lovely Freyia they took,
And this the first word that he spoke;
‘Now, Freyia, busk, as a blooming bride;
Together, we must, to Jotunheim ride.’
Wrath waxed Freyia with ireful look;
All Asgard's hall with wonder shook;
Her great bright necklace started wide.
‘Well may ye call me a wanton bride,
If I with ye to Jotunheim ride.’
The Asi did all to council crowd,
The Asiniæ all talk'd fast and loud;
This they debated, and this they sought,
How the hammer of Thor should home be brought.
Up then and spoke Heimdallar free,
Like the Vani, wise was he;
[Page 108]
‘Now busk me Thor as a bride so fair;
Let him that great bright necklace wear;
Round him let ring the spousal keys,
And a maiden kirtle hang to his knees,
And on his bosom jewels rare;
And high and quaintly braid his hair.’
Wrath waxed Thor with godlike pride;
‘Well may the Asi me deride,
If I let me be dight as a blooming bride.’
Then up spoke Loke, Laufeyia's son;
‘Now hush thee, Thor; this must be done:
The giants will strait in Asgard reign:
If thou thine hammer dost not regain.’
Then busk'd they Thor as a bride so fair,
And the great bright necklace gave him to wear;
Round him let ring the spousal keys,
And a maiden kirtle hang to his knees,
And on his bosom jewels rare;
And high and quaintly braided his hair.
Up then arose the crafty Loke,
Laufeyia's son, and thus he spoke;
‘A servant I thy steps will tend,
Together we must to Jotunheim wend.’
Now home the goats together hie;
Yoked to the axle they swiftly fly.
The mountains shook, the earth burn'd red,
As Odin's son to Jotunheim sped.
Then Thrym the king of the Thursi said;
‘Giants, stand up; let the seats be spread:
Bring Freyia Niorder's daughter down
To share my bed from Noatun.
With horns all gilt each cool-black beast
Is led to deck the giant's feast;
Large wealth and jewels have I stored;
I lack but Freyia to grace my board.’
Betimes at evening they approach'd,
And the mantling ale the giants broach'd.
The spouse of Sisia ate alone
Eight salmons, and an ox full grown,
And all the cates, on which women feed;
And drank three firkins of sparkling mead.
Then Thrym the king of the Thursi said;
[Page 109]
‘Where have ye beheld such a hungry maid?
Ne'er saw I bride so keenly feed,
Nor drink so deep of the sparkling mead.’
Then forward lent the crafty Loke,
And thus the giant he bespoke:
‘Nought has she eat for eight long nights,
So did she long for the nuptial rites.’
He stoop'd beneath her veil to kiss,
But he started the length of the hall, I wiss.
‘Why are the looks of Freyia so dire?
It seems, as her eyeballs glisten'd with fire.’
Then forward lent the craft Loke,
And thus the giant he bespoke;
‘Nought has she slept for eight long nights,
So did she long for the nuptial rites.’
Then in the giant's sister came,
Who dared a bridal gift to claim;
‘Those rings of gold from thee I crave.
If thou wilt all my fondness have,
All my love and fondness have.’
Then Thrym the king of the Thursi said;
‘Bear in the hammer to plight the maid;
Upon her lap the bruizer lay,
And firmly plight our hands and fay.’ 17
The thunderer's soul smiled in his breast,
When the hammer hard on his lap was placed;
Thrym first the king of the Thursi he slew,
And slaughter'd all the giant crew.
He slew that giant's sister old,
Who pray'd for bridal gifts so bold.
Instead of money and rings, I wot,
The hammer's bruises were her lot,
Thus Odin's son his hammer got.” Vol. i. p. 1–8.
In this little tale, the genius of the rude people, for whom it was composed, may easily be recognised. We were very much amused with the brutal stupidity of the giant, a quality which seems always to have been an attribute of the sons of Anak, with the rival obtuseness of intellect displayed by the godlike Thor, who, like Ajax, seems to have
[Page 110]
“worn his brains in his belly, and his guts in his head;” and above all, with the insinuating address of the crafty Loke, who devised such marvellous good apologies for the circumstances in the bride's conduct, which excited poor Thrym's astonishment. The whole is a very curious specimen of the Northern romance. The notes upon it, and indeed throughout, display an intimate acquaintance with Scandinavian lore, and lead us to expect with anxiety a promised dissertation upon the ancient history and literature of Iceland.
The other translations are less generally interesting than those from the Icelandic. There is, however, one poem from the Danish, which we transcribe as an instance how very closely the ancient popular ballad of that country corresponds with our own. It is said to have been taken down in the 17th century from oral recitation, and that the old people at Hoybye then pointed out the scene of the disastrous event, and the hill upon which divine service was performed, till the Pope recalled the interdiction.
“Sir Ebba lett bigg a bower so tall,
   As still each native knows,
There sing the small thrush and the nightingale,
   Two damsels within it repose.
Sir Ebba he must to Iceland go
   To bear his lord's behest;
That bower, I ween, his daughters two
   Will find no place of rest.
Sir Bonda and Sir Schinnild there
   Leagued with their mother came,
To harm Sir Ebba's daughters fair,
   And work them scath and shame.
[Page 111]
The younger brother trembled sore
   To work the damsels' shame,
‘Come Sir Ebba in peace to his native shore,
   He venges his daughters' fame.’
Then pale and wan grew his mother's face,
   And savage wax'd her heart.
‘Thou bear'st not the soul of thy father's race,
   But play'st a coward's part.
There's none within to check your might
   Beside two varlets small;
And, were they both in iron dight,
   They must before you fall.’
Early in the morning
   They whet the shining spear;
At the close of evening
   Before the bower appear.
Under the lofty chamber's tier
   In rush'd the knights amain;
They ask no leave, they know no fear,
   But fast the chamber gain.
Up then awoke those ladies fair
   To guard their maiden pride;
Sir Bonda and Sir Schinnild there
   Lay by their snowy side.
The damsels wept full bitterly
   With many a maiden tear;
And pray'd them for their modesty
   To dread their father dear.
Up rose the knights, and went forth, ere
   Day lit the mountain's side;
They thank'd for what they gain'd by fear,
   But dared not longer bide.
The younger sister wailed soon,
   For she fell first to shame;
‘Let us sink with a stone in the billows down,
   And bury our blighted fame.’
[Page 112]
The elder sister answer'd strait;
   ‘Nay, gentle sister, nay,
Our sire from Iceland we'll await;
   He'll venge us, if he may.’
It was the good Sir Ebba there,
   From Iceland home he came;
To meet him both his daughters fair
   All weeping went with shame.
‘Now welcome, welcome, father dear;
   So sore for you we cried;
Sir Bonda and Sir Schinnild here
   Have stained our maiden pride.’
Sir Ebba's heart wax'd sore with wo,
   To hear their mournful plight;
And, ‘Ill to Iceland did I go;
   Now come the deadly fight!’
‘You must not for our ravish'd fame
   Bear helm and weapons keen;
We will by craft avenge our shame,
   Though reft of honor sheen.’
It falls upon a Christmas night,
   To mass the people hies;
Betimes to whet their daggers bright
   Sir Ebba's daughters rise.
Now shall Sir Ebba's daughters do
   A deed of scath, I ween;
But they must not to the altar go
   Without their weapons keen.
Lady Metelill smiled, and a glowing hue
   Gleam'd under her rosy skin;
And, ‘Stand ye up, like ladies true!
   Let the brides of my children in!
Sir Bonda and Sir Schinnild there
   To join the mass had sped;
And Trunda young, and Zenild fair,
   Did fast behind them tread.
[Page 113]
North within the armory bright
   Young Trunda drew her blade;
South before the altar's light
   Sir Bonda's fallen dead.
South beside the altar's ledge
   Fair Zenild drew her knife;
North upon the grunsel edge
   Sir Schinnild lost his life.
‘Here stand we now as widows two,
   For neither is now a maid;
And, lady, take your children two
   To eat with salt and bread!’
Seven winters o'er that mournful place
   Sad interdiction hung;
Nor rite was done, nor holy mass,
   Nor funeral anthem sung.
On Helen's hill was a chapel built,
   And there went woman and man;
Till the Pope absolved the church from guilt,
   And loosed the fatal ban.”— Vol. i. p. 22–28.
In this curious specimen of the Northern ballad the traces of a very rude age may be discovered. The nature of the vengeance which Lady Metelill stimulates her sons to take upon the defenceless daughters of Sir Ebba, and the exulting insults with which she receives them at the church, are circumstances to be referred to a remote period of antiquity, and almost a savage state of manners. But we were most struck with its extreme resemblance, in style and structure, to the old ballads of our own country, which has been very dexterously preserved by the translator. We hope Mr Herbert will not confine his future researches to the Icelandic poetry, but will extend them to the popular
[Page 114]
poetry of Scandinavia, which we cannot help thinking is the real source of many of the tales of our minstrels. That there was a ready intercourse between the Northern romancers, and their brethren of the South, is evident from the titles of many of the MSS. which Wanley enumerates in his catalogue, as, for example, Sagun af Kerla Magnuse og Koppum Hans, i. e. the History of Charlemagne, and his Paladins; Sagan af Ivant Einglands Kappe, that is, the Adventures of Sir Ywain, a Champion of the Round Table, and others, whose titles obviously denote an English or French original. But on the other hand, we suspect that our stock of popular poetry, and even that of the Anglo-Normans, was much enriched by the Northern traditions. Ugger, or Ogier the Dane, as he is called by the French romancers, however he came to be accounted one of Charlemagne's Paladins, has evidently derived his original renown from some Northern saga. In King Lear, among other scraps of old songs quoted by Edgar, in his assumed madness, we have this fragment:—
“Child Rowland to the dark tower came,
–   –   –   –   –   –   –   –   –   –   –
The word was still fee faw fum,
I smell the blood of a Christian man.”
The ballad or romance to which this quotation belongs, is to be found in the Kæmpe Visier, a Danish collection of ancient popular poetry, which we would beg leave to recommend particularly to the learned translator of Sir Ebba. Proud Ellen Lyle had been carried off by a sort of sea-monster or demon, called Rosmer; and, like Chrystalline la Curieuse, in Count Hamilton's tales, was immured
[Page 115]
by him in an enchanted dwelling. Her brother, Rowland, having traversed the seas in quest of her, at length arrives at the place of her confinement, and she conceals him to prevent his being put to death by Rosmer. When that demon arrives, he greets his affrighted spouse with the two last lines of gigantic ejaculation—
“Fee faw fum!
I smell the blood of a Christian man.”
This curious old ballad has been lately translated by Mr Robert Jamieson of Riga, and published in a collection of Scottish ballads, with one or two others, which tend strongly to prove, that much of our popular minstrelsy was of Danish, at least of Scandinavian origin.
We have been so copious in our extracts from the Northern Poems, that we have little time to notice the others. Mr Herbert, from the formation of his style, seems to succeed best in those which he takes from the German. There is a very good translation of the Blandiné and Lenardo of Bürger, which is impressive, although strongly marked with the taste for outrageous sensibility, which disgraces most German poetry. The story is that of Tancred and Sigismunda; but Bürger, though he borrowed liberally, and without acknowledgment, from the English authors, 18 was unable to reach the manly vigour of Dryden, and therefore
[Page 116]
balladized the old tale as he found it in Boccacio. We are surprised to find, that some of our brother reviewers, upon the slight foundation of a verse or two in this translation, have taxed Mr Herbert with favouring revolutionary and levelling opinions. We should think it difficult to read far in his book, without seeing traces of very opposite politics, and would be more apt to number this ingenious poet with a party who must be allowed to possess a large share of literary merit, and of whom a professed dislike to innovation has been the leading and distinguishing principle.
In the translations from the Spanish and Italian, we are chiefly displeased with a want of pliability, as it were, in Mr Herbert's language. It seems as if he had laboured among the rugged rhymes of the Scalds, until his style had become too rigid for transfusing the elegance and melody of the Southern poetry.
The original poetry with which these translations are interspersed, displays no peculiar vigour of imagination. Indeed, the author has in general chosen subjects which have been too frequently the theme of the Muses to admit of any great novelty in the mode of treating them. Thus, we have an Ode to Despair, in the first volume, very well executed for that kind of composition; but we have now seen so many of these addresses to personified passions, and are so much accustomed to the routine of their being supplied with appropriate amusements, and a suitable pedigree, that a disagreeable and unimpressive similarity is their principal characteristic.
[Page 117]
Yet there are several instances of great felicity of expression in these original pieces; and we think the author excels in that very difficult class of which love in the subject. There is an elegance in some of these little pieces, which deserts him in his more sublime efforts; and, very contrary to the meretricious effusions of contemporary bards, we remark, with pleasure, that the passion which his verses express, is that pure and virtuous affection which sublimes and refines all that is connected with it. The piece, upon the whole, which we are inclined to consider as decidedly unworthy of the others, is a ballad called William Lambert—a Tale, which the author seems to have suspected was too simple for publication. But, however true and pleasing the incident which it contains, the account of a boy relieved from beggary by the liberality of the Lady Margaret, and who prefers being a gardener to going to sea, cannot be considered as generally interesting. In some of the verses, the author has in fact slid into that style of tawdry and affected simplicity, which we should have thought that he who has studied popular poetry upon the manliest models, would, of all persons, have been least likely to imitate. The choice of the orphan to stay with Lady Margaret is, for example, thus expressed.
“The little boy he hied him in,
   And busk'd him in the hall;
And soon he was all trimly dight,
   And waxed stout withal.
‘A boon (he cried), fair Lady mine!
   O send me not to sea!
[Page 118]
For thou must be mine only friend,
   And I must bide with thee.
‘O let me here thy garden tend,
   Hard by this pleasant bower;
Here deck the lawn with careful hand,
   And rear each scented flower:
The soft primrose, the violet blue,
   The glowing celandine;
And cuckoo-buds, and sorrel pale,
   And luscious sweet woodbine.’”— Vol. ii. p. 86.
This is not genuine ballad poetry, which Mr Herbert can write when he pleases; but that spurious kind, which trickles through the Sir Eldreds of the Bower, 19 and other legendary ditties of the eighteenth century. It is the very last refuge of those who can do nothing better in the shape of verse; and a man of genius should disdain to invade the province of these dawdling rhymers.
[Page 119]
ARTICLE VI. EVANS'S OLD BALLADS. [ Quarterly Review, May , 1810. On “ Old Ballads, Historical ,” &c. By Thomas Evans . Revised, &c. by his Son , R. H. Evans. 4 vols.: And “Vocal Poetry, or a select Collection of English Songs. To which is prefixed, an Essay on Song Writing .” By John Aikin , M.D.] We class these publications together, as being a species which characteristic simplicity and the powerful union of music render generally acceptable, as well to high-born dames in bower and hall, as to “the free maids that weave their thread with bones.”
The reviver of minstrel poetry in Scotland was the venerable Bishop of Dromore, who, in 1765, published his elegant collection of heroic ballads, songs, and pieces of early poets, under the title of Reliques of Ancient English Poetry. The plan of the work was adjusted in concert with Mr Shenstone, but we own we cannot regret that the execution of it devolved upon Dr Percy alone. It was divided into three volumes, each forming a distinct series of ancient poetry, selected with
[Page 120]
classical elegance, and interspersed with modern imitations and specimens of lyric composition. The various subdivisions of the work were prefaced by critical and curious dissertations upon subjects connected with or tending to elucidate the ancient ballads which they preceded. The arrangement of the specimens was so managed as to exhibit the gradation of language, the progress of popular opinions, the manners and customs of former ages, and the obscure passages of our earlier classical poets. The plan of this publication was eminently calculated to remove the principal obstacle which the taste of the period offered to its success. To bring Philosophy from heaven to dwell among men, it was necessary to divest her of some of her more awful attributes, to array her doctrines in familiar language, and render them evident by popular illustration. But Dr Percy had a different course to pursue when conducting Legendary Lore from stalls and kitchens and cottage chimneys, or, at best, from the dust, moths, and mould of the Pepysian or Pearsonian collections, to be an inmate of the drawing room and the study. The attempt was entirely new, and the difficulties attending it arose from the fastidious taste of an age which was accustomed to receive nothing under the denomination of poetry, unrecommended by flowing numbers and elaborate expression. To soften these difficulties, Dr Percy availed himself, to a considerable extent, of his own poetical talent, to alter, amend, and decorate the rude popular rhymes, which, if given to the public with scrupulous fidelity, would probably have been
[Page 121]
rejected with contempt and disgust. It was not, then, so much the question whether an ancient poem was authentic according to the letter, as whether it was or could be rendered worth reading; and it might be said of Dr Percy's labours as an editor, nihil quod tetigit non ornavit . It may be asked by the severer antiquary of the present day, why an editor, thinking it necessary to introduce such alterations, in order to bring forth a new, beautiful, and interesting sense from a meagre or corrupted original, did not, in good faith to his readers, acquaint them with the liberties he had taken, and make them judge whether in so doing he transgressed his limits. We answer, that unquestionably such would be the express duty of a modern editor, but such were not the rules of the service when Dr Percy first opened the campaign. His avowal of alterations, additions, and conjectural emendations, at the bottom of each page, would have only led his readers to infer that his originals were good for nothing; not to mention that a great many of those additions derived their principal merit from being supposed ancient. In short, a certain conformity with the general taste was necessary to introduce a relish for the subject; accuracy and minute investigation of the original state of the ballads was likely to follow, and did follow so soon as the public ear had been won by the more elegant and polished edition of Dr Percy. It had been well if the industrious Ritson, and other minute and accurate labourers in the mine of antiquity, had contented themselves with exhibiting specimens of the ore in
[Page 122]
its original state, without abusing the artist who had made the vein worth digging, by showing to what its produce might be refined.
The Reliques of Ancient English Poetry seem, shortly after their publication, to have exceeded even the expectation of the editor in giving a strong and determined impulse to public taste and curiosity, the effects of which have only abated within these very few years. Mr Thomas Evans, bookseller, was the first who endeavoured to avail himself of the taste which they had excited, by publishing the collection of which his son has now given us a second edition.
This publication, although intended as a supplement to the Reliques of Ancient Poetry, cannot be considered as continued upon the same plan. There are no dissertations prefixed, and the preliminary matter which prefaces the ballads is but meagre. The ballads themselves are chiefly such as the more cautious taste of Dr Percy had left unpublished, either because their rude structure was incapable of decoration, or because they were so well known as to render decoration unadvisable. The principal source from which they were taken is a small publication in three volumes, 12mo, entitled, A Collection of old Ballads, corrected from the best and most ancient copies extant, with Introductions, historical, critical, or humorous: illustrated with copper-plates . It is now, we believe, extremely rare, and sells at a price very disproportionate to its size. The volumes appeared separately, and from the edition now before us, the first seems to have been reprinted in 1723, the second in the
[Page 123]
same year, the third in 1725. The editor was an enthusiast in the cause of old poetry, and selected his matter without much regard to decency, as will appear from the following singular preface to one or two indelicate pieces of humour. “One of the greatest complaints made by the ladies against the first volume of our collection, and indeed the only one which has reached my ears, is the want of merry songs. I believe I may give a pretty good guess at what they call mirth in such pieces as these, and shall endeavour to satisfy them, though I have very little room to spare.” From this fountain the late Mr Evans seems to have drawn such supplies as it afforded. Most of his historical ballads are taken from it, and many of the tales of Robin Hood, although he probably used some of the Garlands respecting the hero of Sherwood, in correcting and completing that series. In the present edition these are materially improved by comparison with and reference to the black-letter copies.
But although Mr Evans did not imitate Dr Percy in the more learned and critical department of his labour, and although he stands acquitted of having taken the same license with originals of acknowledged antiquity; yet he not only followed his plan in admitting the compositions of modern authors in imitation of the ancient ballad, but the third and fourth volumes of his works contain also some pieces presented as ancient, which, from the orthography, language, sentiments, and numbers, are evidently spurious. These ballads, which we have always considered as the most valuable part of Mr Evan's collection, as far as poetry is concerned,
[Page 124]
are Bishop Thurston and the King of Scots, Battle of Cuton Moor, Murder of Prince Arthur, Prince Edward and Adam Gordon, Cumner Hall, Arabella Stuart, Anna Bullen, The Lady and the Palmer, The Fair Maniac, The Bridal Bed, The Lordling Peasant, The Red-Cross Knight, The Wandering Maid, The Triumph of Death, Julia, The Fruits of Jealousy, The Death of Allen. These seventeen ballads, which we believe have never been published except in this work, have a sort of family resemblance which indicates a common parent. The antique colouring in all of them originally consisted in the adoption of a species of orthography embarrassed with an unusual number of letters, and regularly exchaungynge the i for the y in the participle, which is, for further dignity, graced uniformly with a final e . These injudicious marks of imitation, which can no more render a modern ballad like an ancient than a decoction of walnuts can convert the features of an European into those of an Asiatic, are rejected by the present editor, Mr R. H. Evans, who thus leads us to infer that he does not consider the poems we have enumerated as authentic remnants of antiquity. We wish he had favoured us with some light upon their history. They appear to us to be the work of an author endowed with no small portion of poetical genius. Many marks of haste appear in the composition, which the writer probably considered as of little importance, since he never intended to be responsible for his offspring. But there are touches of great beauty of description, and an expression of sentiment peculiarly soft, simple, and
[Page 125]
affecting in almost every one of these neglected legends. The knowledge of history, too, which they display, argues that the author mingled the pursuits of the antiquary with those of the poet, and was enabled, by the information so collected, to realize and verify the conceptions of his imagination when employed upon the actual manners and customs of the feudal ages. To vindicate our eulogium, we beg leave to quote a few stanzas from the tale entitled the Bridal Bed.
“It was a maid of low degree
   Sat on her true-love's grave,
And with her tears most piteously
   The green turf she did lave;
She strew'd the flow'rs, she pluck'd the weed,
   And show'rs of tears she shed:
‘Sweet turf,’ she cried, ‘by fate decreed
   To be my bridal bed!
‘I've set thee, flow'r, for that the flow'r
   Of manhood lieth here;
And water'd thee with plenteous show'r
   Of many a briny tear.’
And still she cried, ‘Oh stay, my love,
   My true-love, stay for me;
Stay till I've deck'd my bridal bed,
   And I will follow thee.
‘Sweet turf, thy green more green appears,
   Tears make thy verdure grow,
Then still I'll water thee with tears,
   That thus profusely flow.
Oh stay for me, departed youth,
   My true love, stay for me;
Stay till I've deck'd my bridal bed,
   And I will follow thee.
‘This is the flow'ry wreath he wove,
   To deck his bride, dear youth!
And this the ring with which my love
[Page 126]
   To me did plight his troth;
And this dear ring I was to keep,
   And with it to be wed—
But here, alas! I sigh and weep
   To deck my bridal bed.’
A blithsome knight came riding by,
   And, as the bright moon shone,
He saw her on the green turf lie,
   And heard her piteous moan;
For loud she cried, ‘Oh stay, my love,
   My true-love stay for me;
Stay till I've deck'd my bridal bed,
   And I will follow thee.’
‘Be calm, fair maid,’ the knight replied.
   ‘Thou art too young to die;
But go with me, and be my bride,
   And leave the old to sigh.’
But still she cried, ‘Oh stay, my love,
   My true-love stay for me;
Stay till I've deck'd my bridal bed,
   And I will follow thee.’
‘Oh leave,’ he cried, ‘this grief so cold,
   And leave this dread despair,
And thou shalt flaunt in robes of gold,
   A lady rich and fair:
Thou shalt have halls and castles fair:
   And when, sweet maid, we wed,
O thou shalt have much costly gear,
   To deck thy bridal bed.’
‘Oh hold thy peace, thou cruel knight,
   Nor urge me to despair;
With thee my troth I will not plight,
   For all thy proffers fair:
But I will die with my own true-love—
   My true-love, stay for me;
Stay till I've deck'd my bridal bed,
   And I will follow thee.
‘Thy halls and castles I despise,
   This turf is all I crave;
[Page 127]
For all my hopes, and all my joys,
   Lie buried in this grave:
I want not gold, nor costly gear,
   Now my true-love is dead;
But with fading flower and scalding tear
   I deck my bridal bed.’
‘Oh! be my bride, thou weeping fair,
   Oh! be my bride, I pray;
And I will build a tomb most rare,
   Where thy true-love shall lay :’
But still with tears she cried, ‘My love,
   My true-love, stay for me;
Stay till I've deck'd my bridal bed,
   And I will follow thee.
‘My love needs not a tomb so rare,
   In a green grave we will lie;
Our carved works—these flow'rets fair,
   Our canopy—the sky.
Now go, sir knight, now go thy ways—
   Full soon I shall be dead—
And then return, in some few days,
   And deck my bridal bed.
‘And strew the flower, and pluck the thorn,
   And cleanse the turf, I pray;
So may some hand thy turf adorn,
   When thou in grave shall lay.
But stay, oh thou whom dear I love,
   My true-love, stay for me;
Stay till I have deck'd my bridal bed,
   And I will follow thee.’ ”
This dirge is certainly not ancient; but it is no treason to say it is better than if it were. We cannot suppress a suspicion that these legendary pieces flowed from the pen of a poet to whom neither his own nor this generation has been altogether just. We mean William Julius Mickle, the translator of the Lusiad. His Sir Martyn, written
[Page 128]
in imitation of Spenser's manner, with much of the copious and luxuriant description of his original, shows his attachment to the study of the ancient poetry of Britain; and his two beautiful ballads, entitled Hengist and Mey, and the Sorceress, have the same harmony of versification, the same simple and affecting turn of expression, with the imitations of the heroic legend which we are now considering. If Mr Mickle should have been a friend of the elder Mr Evans, as we believe, we consider that circumstance, joined to internal evidence, as sufficient to ascertain his property in the ballads in question.
We have also to complain, that in publishing some other imitations of the ancient ballads, the authors' names have been withheld where, perhaps, they were more easily attainable than in the case just stated. Thus the ingenious Mr Henry Mackenzie (author of the Man of Feeling) is well known to have written the beautiful Scottish ballad entitled Kenneth; and Michael Bruce that of Sir John Ross. The ballad of the Laidley Worm of Spindleston Heughs is also known to have been, in a very great measure, the production of the Rev. Mr Lambe, late vicar of Norham, and editor of the Battle of Flodden-field. It is founded upon a prevailing tradition in Bamboroughshire, and the author has interwoven a few stanzas of the original song concerning it, which begins,
“Bambro’ castle's built full high,
   It's built of marble stone,
And lang lang may the lady wait
   For her father's coming home,” &c.
[Page 129]
In revising his father's publication, Mr R. Evans has, with great judgment, discarded a number of sing-song imitations of the ancient ballad by Jerningham, Robinson, and other flimsy pretenders, who, seduced by the apparent ease of the task, ventured to lay their hand upon the minstrel lyre. For a different reason, he has omitted the contributions which his father levied upon Goldsmith, Gray, and other eminent moderns, whose works are in every one's hand. By this exclusion he has made room for a selection of genuine ancient poetry, compiled, by his own industry, from the hoarded treasures of black-letter ballads.
It is no disgrace to Mr Evans, that these veterans, whom he has introduced to recruit his diminished ranks, are, generally speaking, more respectable for their antiquity than for any thing else. Percy, Ellis, and other editors of taste and genius, had long ago anticipated Mr Evans's labours, and left him but the refuse of the market. Some of the ballads, indeed, exhibit such wretched doggrel as serves, more than the dissertations of a thousand Ritsons, to degrade the character of our ancient song-enditers.
The “Warning to Youth,” for example, “shewing the lewd life of a merchant's sonne of London, and the misery that at the last he sustained by his notoriousnesse,” might, notwithstanding the valuable moral attached to it, have been left, without injury to the public, to “dust and mere oblivion.” Had we known Mr Evans's curiosity in such matters, we could have supplied him with as much stale poetry of a similar description as would have made his four volumes twenty.
[Page 130]
But although Mr Evans's love of antiquity has occasionally seduced him into publishing what is no otherwise valuable than as it is old, a prejudice by which all antiquarian editors are influenced in a greater or less degree, we have to applaud the diligence with which he has traced and recovered some beautiful and some curious pieces of poetry, which possess intrinsic merit and interest. Among the former we distinguish the address to a disappointed, or rather a forsaken lover, which has, we think, a turn of passion that is new, upon a very thread-bare subject.
   “I am so farre from pittying thee,
That wear'st a branch of willow tree,
That I do envie thee and all,
That once were high and got a fall:
   O willow, willow, willow tree,
   I would thou didst belong to mee.
That wearing willow doth imply,
That thou art happier farre than I,
For once thou wert where thou wouldst be,
Though now thou wear'st the willow tree:
   O willow, willow, sweete willow,
   Let me once lie upon her pillow.
I doe defie both boughe and roote,
And all the fiends of hell to boote;
One houre of paradised joye,
Makes purgatorie seeme a toye:
   O willow, willow, doe thy worst,
   Thou canst not make me more accurst.
I have spent all my golden time,
In writing many a loving rime,
I have consumed all my youth
In vowing of my faith and trueth:
   O willow, willow, willow tree,
   Yet can I not beleeved bee.
[Page 131]
And now alas it is too late,
Gray hares, the messengers of fate,
Bid me to set my heart at rest,
For beautie loveth young men best:
   O willow, willow, I must die,
   Thy servant's happier farre then I.”
The “Symptoms of Love,” p. 246, is another very pretty song, and there are many scattered through the volumes which have considerable elegance of expression, or a quaintness rendered venerable by antiquity, and which, like the grotesque carving on a gothic niche, has a pleasing effect, though irreconcilable with the strict rules of taste.
These praises apply chiefly to the songs and minor pieces of lyrical poetry. The only ancient ballad, actually connected with history and manners, which Mr Evans's labours have presented to us for the first time, is the murder of the Wests, by the sons of the Lord Darsy. Its chief merit is its curiosity.
Among the poems which are deservedly inserted, we cannot help remarking that entitled “The Felon Sow and the Freeres of Richmond,” as belonging to a class of compositions which has been but lightly discussed by our antiquaries—we mean the burlesque romance of the middle ages, with which, doubtless, the minstrel and tale-teller relieved the uniformity of their heroic ditties. In these ludicrous poems, which are a kind of parody upon the metrical romances, churchmen and peasants are introduced imitating the knightly pastimes of chivalry; and their awkward mishaps and absurd blunders must have been matter of excellent mirth to the doughty knights and gallant barons
[Page 132]
who listened to the tale. Thus, in the case before us, the felon sow was the undisturbed tenant of the woods of Rokeby, and the romantic banks of the Greta—her size and ferocity are described with great emphasis. The Lord of Rokeby, a man of humour, gave her to the Friars of Richmond, provided they could catch her. Friar Middleton sets off with two wight men at musters to possess himself of the prize. They compel the sow to take refuge in a limekiln, where they hamper her with cords from above; but the felon sow breaks forth upon them, routs the escort, reduces the friar to conjuration out of his breviary, and at length to betake himself to a tree. Friar Middleton and his companions return in evil plight to the convent; and the warden, to redeem the disgrace, hires two bold men-at-arms to follow forth the adventure of the sow. They enter into solemn indenture to “bide and fight” to the death; and the warden, on his part, becomes bound to say masses for their souls if they miscarry. The men-at-arms, more successful than Friar Middleton, vanquish and kill the felon sow; and the convent sing “Te Deum” merrily, “that they had won the beast of price.”
“If you will any more of this,
In the Friery at Richmond written it is,
   In parchment good and fine,
How Freer Middleton so hende,
At Greta Bridge conjured a fiend,
   In likeness of a swine.” 20
This tale, which possesses some portion of Cervantic humour, resembles the “Tournament of Tottenham”
[Page 133]
(See Percy's Reliques, vol. ii.), in which the peasants of a village are introduced imitating all the solemnities of a tournament, and battering each other's heads with flails, as knights did with long swords and maces. Another remarkable example of this class of comic romances is entitled, “The Hunting of the Hare.” A yeoman, having found a hare sitting in the common field of a village, announces his discovery to the inhabitants. The peasants, resolving to course her, bring to the spot their great yard-dogs and mastiffs, “with short shanks, and never a tail.” The confusion and disarray which follow the congregating of this ill-assorted pack is described with great humour. The ban-dogs, more addicted to war than sport, fall foul of each other—their masters are gradually involved in the quarrel—and poor puss steals away, leaving her enemies engaged in a grand scene of worrying and wrangling. This poem has never, we believe, been printed. We could add largely to these examples, and show that low romance formed a distinct style of composition during the middle ages; but we have already exceeded our bounds, and must dismiss Mr Evans's publication, which, always curious, has been greatly improved by his personal taste and labour.
The next articles in our title, which are allied in subject to the Collection of Ballads, are two editions of the same work—Dr Aikin's well-known collection of songs, with the preliminary essay. Mr Evans, it seems from his preface, considered Dr Aikin to have given up any intention of reprinting his collection.
[Page 134]
“The many years which have elapsed since the publication of the last edition, seemed to leave no hope that Dr Aikin could be prevailed on to gratify the public by a revision and enlargement of his work. He had declined the task in the prime and vigour of life; and he might now think it unbecoming his years, to engage in a republication of these nuga canora. Turpe senilis amor , the Doctor might exclaim; and though he might be pleased to see his volume ranged by the side of those of Percy, Ellis, and some other similar publications, yet he has abandoned the friendly office of revision to other hands.”
Mr Evans has, however, reckoned without his host in this matter, and we are sorry that he did not take some more certain means of ascertaining the Doctor's intentions, considering his own labours; for we are not to suppose, that one who is an editor, as well as a bookseller, would have so far neglected the comitas due to a brother author, as to publish against him a rival edition of his own work. Dr Aikin prefaces his edition with the following account of his motives:—
“As enquiries were still, from time to time, made after it among the booksellers, the editor was asked the question whether he had any intention of reprinting it; accompanied with the intimation, that, as the copy-right was expired, should he decline the business, others would be ready to undertake it. Conscious that the essays were the juvenile attempts of one whose taste was by no means matured, and whose critical knowledge was circumscribed within narrow limits, the editor was unwilling that his book should again be given to the public with all its imperfections on its head. He was obliged, therefore, to declare, that if it were reprinted at all, it should be with many material alterations, corresponding to his own change of taste and opinion in various points during so long an interval.
“Under these almost compulsory circumstances, although he perhaps should not now have chosen for the first time to appear as the collector of productions, the general strain of which is more suitable to an earlier period of life, yet he thought he might, without impropriety, avail himself of the opportunity of making a new and much more extensive selection of compositions, which will not cease to
[Page 135]
be favourites with the lovers of elegant poetry, whatever be the vicissitudes of general taste.”
In the singular predicament of reviewing two rival editions of the same work, and without pretending to give a decision against Mr Evans, although we think he has treated Dr Aikin with somewhat less attention than his age, situation, and talents perhaps demanded, we cannot regret that we are possessed of both editions of the book, and trust, that (as the old song runs) “the world's wide and there's room for them all.” We are particularly glad to have an opportunity of comparing Dr Aikin's original ideas upon the subject of song writing with those which he has since adopted. His four essays upon songs in general, upon ballads and pastoral songs, upon passionate and descriptive songs, upon ingenious and witty songs, are now blended into one general essay; but we love the classical turn of these little discourses so well, that we are glad they are preserved in their original state. Such directions and rules of composition, whether in their separate and detailed, or in their new moulded shape, were never more necessary than at the present day. The marriage between harmony and “immortal verse” has, like fashionable wedlock, frequently made some very ill-matched pairs; and we suspect that poetry must soon sue for a separate maintenance. The ladies, who ought, in common charity, to feel for her situation, are those who aggravate her hardship; for it is rare to hear a fair songstress utter the words of the song which she quavers forth. But where taste and feeling for poetry happen to be united with a sweet
[Page 136]
and flexible voice, it is scarcely possible to mention a higher power of imparting and heightening social pleasure. We have heard Dr Aikin's simple ballad, “It was a winter's evening, and fast came down the snow,” set by Dr Clarke, sung with such beautiful simplicity as to draw tears even from the eyes of reviewers. But the consideration of modern song opens to the critic a stronger ground of complaint, from the degeneracy of the compositions which have been popular under that name. Surely it is time to make some stand against the deluge of nonsense and indecency which has of late supplanted, in the higher circles, the songs of our best poets. We say nothing of the “Nancies of the hills and vales.” Peace to all such!—let the miller and apprentice have their ballad, and have it such as they can understand. Let the seaman have his “tight main-decker,” and the countess her tinseled canzonet. But when we hear words which convey to every man, and we fear to most of the women in society, a sense beyond what effrontery itself would venture to avow; when we hear such flowing from the lips, or addressed to the ears of unsuspecting innocence, we can barely suppress our execration. This elegant collection presents, to those who admire music, a means of escaping from the too general pollution, and of indulging a pleasure which we are taught to regard as equally advantageous to the heart, taste, and understanding. Both editions are considerably enlarged by various songs extracted from the best modern poets, and in either shape the work maintains its right to rank as one of the most classical collections of songs in any language.
[Page 215]
ARTICLE VIII. CHATTERTON. [ From the Edinburgh Review, April , 1804. On “The Works of Thomas Chatterton ; containing his Life, by G. Gregory , D.D., and Miscellaneous Poems . 3 vols. 8 vo . London, 1803.] The works of Chatterton, whose life and death will be the lasting honour and indelible disgrace of the eighteenth century, are at length, after the lapse of more than thirty years, edited in a collected state. We were at some loss to conceive what could have occasioned the long delay of so interesting a publication; and the explanation has proved rather mortifying. A priori , such a work seemed particularly calculated to engage the public
[Page 216]
attention. To the internal merit of the poems, now at length published, is united all the interest excited by the romantic history and lamentable death of the wonderful author, as well as that which arises from the exercise of critical investigation, and the ardour of literary controversy. Nevertheless, the delay may be attended by its own advantages in aiding us to ascertain the real merits of the disputed question. The works of Chatterton, or the poems of Rowley, have survived the controversy which attended their appearance in 1770. Of the assailants and defenders of their originality, many have paid the debt to nature, and others will remember their ardour in the contest as the emotions of an agitating dream 21 It may therefore be supposed that the public will coolly and impartially determine the controversy (if it yet remains a controversy) upon the solid grounds of evidence; and it might also have been hoped, that circumstances of additional proof, suppressed or misrepresented while the feelings of being duped were yet too acute, might now have been recovered. We will endeavour to show how far we have been gratified by the present edition, and in what respects it has fallen short of our expectation.
The preface bears the well-known and respectable name of Mr Robert Southey; but we are informed that so much of the business has devolved upon Mr Cottle, that it becomes necessary to use the term editors in the plural. Both poets, and
[Page 217]
both natives of Bristol, we may suppose that these gentlemen felt a deep and peculiar interest in the task they have undertaken, of rendering a just homage to the genius of their wonderful fellow-citizen, and of contributing to the interest of his surviving relation. The purposes to which the profits of the publication are dedicated, are thus expressed in the preface; and the circumstances, while they do honour to the liberality of the editors and publishers, account for the delay of which we have complained, in a manner deeply disgraceful to the taste and feelings of the public.
“In the winter of 1799, a subscription edition of the works of Chatterton was publicly proposed for his sister's benefit. These works had hitherto been published only for the emolument of strangers, who procured them by gift or purchase from the author himself, or pilfered them from his family. From the interest which these circumstances, and the whole of Chatterton's history had excited, more success was expected than has been found. At the end of two years, the subscription would not have defrayed the costs of publication. An arrangement was then made with Messrs Longman and Rees, who have published the work at their own expense, and allowed Mrs Newton a handsome number of copies, with a reversionary interest in any future edition.”
The friends and patrons of Chatterton, as well as the former collectors of his poems, have been liberal in their communications to the present editors; and the book accordingly contains many of his productions which have been hitherto inedited. We do not aver that, in general, these additions to his works tend to augment his fame; on the contrary, as some of them have been written almost during infancy, as others are merely unfinished fragments, and as all seem incorrect and
[Page 218]
hasty productions, we cannot but consider them as far inferior to the poems ascribed to Rowley, and even to those which Chatterton was himself pleased to own during his life. But, in another point of view, these early and unfinished compositions are very interesting. In Chatterton, above all other poets, we would wish not merely to admire the works upon which he may safely rest his claim to immortal fame, but also to investigate the performances in which his exertions have been less successful; and, by comparing them together, to form, if it be possible, some idea of the strength and weakness of this prodigy of early talent. We therefore approve of publishing such pieces as Sly Dick and Apostate Will , which display the early satirical propensities of young Chatterton; with the elegies, songs, and burlettas, by which he endeavoured rather to supply his necessities, and postpone the dreadful crisis of his fate, than to indulge his genius, or extend his poetical fame. One of his juvenile productions, now published for the first time, is a hymn for Christmas-day, which, if really written about the age of eleven, bears ample testimony to the premature powers of the author. We extract a verse or two, which, when the harmony and ease of expression are contrasted with the author's boyhood, inexperience, and want of instruction, appear almost miraculous.
“Almighty Framer of the skies,
O let our pure devotion rise
   Like incense in thy sight!
Wrapt in impenetrable shade,
The texture of our souls were made,
   Till thy command gave light.
[Page 219]
The Sun of glory gleamed, the ray
Refined the darkness into day,
   And bid the vapours fly:
Impelled by His eternal love,
He left his palaces above,
   To cheer our gloomy sky.
How shall we celebrate the day,
When God appeared in mortal clay,
   The mark of worldly scorn,
When the Archangels' heavenly lays
Attempted the Redeemer's praise,
   And hailed Salvation's morn?
A humble form the Godhead wore,
The pains of poverty he bore,
   To gaudy pomp unknown:
Tho' in a human walk he trod,
Still was the man Almighty God,
   In glory all his own.
Despised, oppressed, the Godhead bears
The torments of this vale of tears,
   Nor bid his vengeance rise:
He saw the creatures he had made
Revile his power, his peace invade,
   He saw with mercy's eyes.”
Such was the early command of language displayed by a child, who, when a beardless youth, was to gull a whole synod of grizzled deans and antiquaries.
The life of Chatterton, prefixed to these volumes, was written by Dr Gregory of London, for the Biographia Britannica , and, by his permission, has been reprinted upon this occasion. Although it seems to be compiled with great fidelity, and probably contains all the material facts known upon the subject, we cannot suppress our hearty wish, that either of the present editors had himself undertaken
[Page 220]
the task of Chatterton's biographer. Many observations must have occurred to them while preparing these volumes for the press, which have escaped Dr Gregory, writing many years ago, and for a more limited purpose. This was the more incumbent upon the editors, because, from persons of poetical taste, so long employed in examining Chatterton's productions, the public must have expected some light upon the Rowleian controversy. Dr Gregory, unwilling, or unable to form a judgment upon this most important point of the life of the youthful poet, has arranged, with great impartiality, the arguments upon both sides, in battle array against each other, leaving his reader to draw such conclusions as his own taste or judgment may enable him to form. Now, this might be very excusable, in the original circumstances in which Dr Gregory's life of Chatterton was published; for the Biographia Britannica is not a natural field for literary controversy, though often occupied as such. But in publishing a formal edition of the whole works of Chatterton, in which those articles ascribed to Rowley are included, the public had a right to expect from the editors, their full sentiments upon the point of most essential interest to their author's fame, especially as Mr Cottle, at least, has formed and expressed a decided opinion upon the subject. Besides, without depreciating the labours of Dr Gregory, who has produced a plain and simple account of Chatterton's life, we must express ourselves disappointed, that we have not, from the hand of a poet like Southey, a memorial of his ill-fated brother bard. Few subjects of composition,
[Page 221]
equally affecting or elevating, can ever occur; for when we consider the strange ambiguity of Chatterton's character, his attainments under circumstances incalculably disadvantageous, and his wish to disguise them under the name of another; his high spirit of independence, and the ready versatility with which he stooped to the meanest political or literary drudgery; the amiable and interesting affection which he displays towards his family, with a certain looseness of morality which approaches to profligacy,—we cannot but regret that a subject, uniting so strong an alternation of light and shade, had not been sketched by the hand of a master. We will not suppose that Mr Southey, or his brother editor, retreated from the task of becoming Chatterton's biographer through mere indolence; for, the liberality of their purpose towards his sister, is a pledge to us, that they would not readily “wax weary in well-doing.” We content ourselves with lamenting that any reason should have occurred to deprive us of the satisfaction which we would have reaped in seeing a new life of Chatterton, with a full view of the Rowley controversy, upon which, in many particulars, the book before us, and the detached notes of the editors, throw so much light. One general remark we cannot help deducing from the melancholy picture of the life before us. The inconsistencies of Chatterton's conduct and character may be, in some measure, ascribed to his situation and extreme youth; yet we fear their original source was in that inequality of spirits 22 with which providence, as in
[Page 222]
mockery of the most splendid gifts of genius and fancy, has often conjoined them. This strange disorder of the mind, often confounded by the vulgar with actual insanity, of which perhaps it is a remote shade, is fostered by the workings of an ardent imagination as it is checked and subdued by mathematical or philosophical research. It is reconcilable (as is actual insanity) with the exertion of the greatest address in gaining a particular point, or in imposing upon the rest of mankind. In both cases, the object to be attained is usually, in the eyes of the world, either altogether undesirable, or totally inadequate to the trouble and address expended in attaining it. This disease (for such it is, and of a dreadful complexion) may also, like the extremity of mental derangement, be admitted to palliate the deviations from truth and moral rectitude, which it is peculiarly apt to occasion. Without considering the forgery of Rowley's poems in so heinous a light as if they had been a bill or bond, and pecuniary advantage the object of the fraud, we cannot regard the imposture as of an indifferent or harmless nature. Neither was the end proposed, being apparently the mere internal satisfaction of imposing upon the world, or, at best, the sullen obstinacy of maintaining an assertion
[Page 223]
which had been hastily made, apparently adequate to the immense labour necessary to sustain the credit of Rowley. But the ardent mind of Chatterton, who had pitched the standard of his honour on this particular ground, urged him to maintain it at the sacrifice of the poetical reputation he might have acquired by renouncing a phantom of his imagination, and at the yet more important dereliction of personal truth and moral rectitude.
The alternate fits of melancholy and bursts of high spirits which Chatterton manifested; the strange paper entitled his will , in which, with a mixture of levity, of bitter satire and actual despair, he announces a purpose of self-destruction; 23 above all, the extravagant hopes which marked his arrival in London, and the suicide which finally closed his short and eventful career,—all announce to us that irregular ambition, and impatience of the natural progress of society, which indicate an inflamed imagination and a precarious judgment.
Before leaving the life of Chatterton, we must intimate, that we are somewhat displeased with the recommendatory and laudatory scraps of verse and prose which, in revival of a good old custom, are tacked to the works of the author. Dr Vicesimus Knox leads the van with a heavy and dolorous imitation of Sterne (which lumbers along like Mr
[Page 224]
Shandy's chaise when it was dragged into Lyons without the wheels), followed in sorrowful procession by the Laureate, by Mrs Cowley, Mrs Robinson, Miss Helen Maria Williams, Mr Herbert Croft, and other persons (as the newspapers have it) of talent and distinction. We confess that we think Chatterton little honoured by their tribute of mawkish and affected sympathy. It is disgusting to hear blue-stocking ladies jingle their rhymes, and pedantic schoolmasters pipe upon their sentimental whistles a dirge over the grave of departed genius. We except from this censure a monody of Mr Coleridge, which, though very unequal, and carelessly executed, exhibits in many passages the feeling and poetical talent which that gentleman always possesses, and sometimes chooses to display. We also except some verses by Mr Hayley, the subject having raised him on this occasion considerably above the cold, correct mediocrity of his usual tone of poetry.
The poems of Chatterton may be divided into two grand classes—those ascribed to Rowley; for surely, to use Mr Cottle's expression, it is time to pluck the borrowed plumes from the fictitious monk, and to place them on the brow of the real poet;— and those which the bard of Bristol avowed to be his own composition. Of these classes, the former is incalculably superior to the latter in poetical powers and diction. This is a remarkable circumstance, and forms, we think, the only forcible argument in support of the existence and claims of Rowley. But there is a satisfactory answer, founded upon more than one reason, for the inferiority
[Page 225]
betwixt the avowed and concealed productions of Chatterton. He produced those antiquated poems which he ascribed to Rowley when a youth of sixteen; and his education had been so limited, that his general acquirements were beneath those of boys of the same age, since he was neither acquainted with French nor Latin. If, therefore, there is other evidence to prove that the poems of Rowley were his own composition, it follows, that the whole powers and energies of his extraordinary talents must have been converted to the acquisition of the obsolete language, and peculiar style necessary to support this deep laid deception. He could have no time for the study of our modern poets, their rules of verse, or modes of expression, while his whole faculties were intensely employed in the herculean task of creating the person, history, and language of an ancient poet, which, vast as these faculties were, was surely sufficient wholly to engross, though not to overburden them. When, therefore, due time is allowed for a boy of sixteen to have acquired the astonishing skill “in antique lore” necessary to the execution of this great project, it will readily be allowed that he must have come to the composition of modern poetry a mere novice, destitute of all adventitious support, and relying only on the strength of his own genius, which, powerful as it was, had hitherto been used in a different and somewhat inconsistent direction. In the poems of Rowley, therefore, we read the exertions of Chatterton in the line of his own choice, aided by all the information which his researches had enabled him to procure, and stimulated by his favourite
[Page 226]
ambition of imposing upon the literary world; but, in his modern poems, he is engaged in a style of composition to which he was comparatively a stranger, and to which the bent of his mind and turn of his studies had not naturally inclined him. Although this argument seems to account, in a manner sufficiently satisfactory, for the inequality of those productions in which Chatterton has thrown aside the mask of Rowley, it is not the only one which can be offered. Let it be remembered, that, admitting Chatterton to be engaged in a deception, he had pledged himself to maintain it; he was therefore carefully to avoid whatever might tend to remove the veil which he had spread over it; and such was his firmness of perseverance, that he seems to attest the originality of Rowley, even in the will which he wrote before his projected suicide. 24 Without therefore supposing that he had underwritten
[Page 227]
his own poems, in order to set off those of Rowley, it is obvious, that the former must have been executed under a degree of embarrassment highly unfavourable to poetical composition. As Rowley, Chatterton had put forth his whole strength, and exerted himself to the utmost, in describing those scenes of antique splendour which captivated his imagination so strongly. But when he wrote in his own character, he was under the necessity of avoiding every idea, subject, or expression, however favourite, which could tend to identify the style of Chatterton with that of Rowley; and surely it is no more to be expected that, thus cramped and trammelled, he should equal his unrestrained efforts, than that a man should exert the same speed with fetters on his limbs, as if they were at liberty.
Let it be further considered, that there exist persons to whom nature has granted the talent of mimicking, not merely the voice and gesture, but the expression, ideas, and manner of thinking of others, and who, speaking in an assumed character, display a fire and genius which evaporates when they resume their own. In like manner, Chatterton, with all his wonderful powers, appears, from the habit of writing as a fictitious personage, and in a strangely antiquated dialect, to have in some degree formed a character to his supposed Rowley, superior to what he was able to maintain in his own person when his disguise was laid aside. The veil of antiquity, also,—the hard, and often inexplicable phrases, which he felt himself at liberty to use under his assumed character of a poet of the fifteenth
[Page 228]
century, serve, in a considerable degree, to blind and impose upon the reader, who does not find himself entitled to condemn what he does not understand, and who is inclined, from the eminent beauty of many passages, to extend his gratuitous admiration to those which are less intelligible. But, when writing in modern English, the advantage is lost; and we are often shocked with a bald and prosaic tautology, with bombast, and with coarseness of expression—all the defects, not of Chatterton's natural genius, but of his extreme youth and deficient education; and many instances of which will be found to exist by curious enquirers, even under the seemly and antique Alban of the Deigne Thomas Rowleie, Preiste of St Johans, Bristowe .
When the believers in Rowley are driven from this strong ward, we apprehend they can hardly make good their footing in any other. Two or three gentlemen, companions of Chatterton while at school, have ventured to give it as their decided opinion, that, according to their estimation of his talents, he was unable to compose the poems of Rowley. Mr Cottle treats with well-merited contempt the evidence of these persons, who, from recollection of an opinion formed while schoolboys, conceive the plummet of their understanding adequate to fathom the depth of Chatterton's genius. A list is given of the parchments which have been produced as remnants of Rowley's MSS.; all of which, from the shape and texture, as well as from the handwriting, are very evidently forgeries by the unfortunate young man from whom they were recovered.
[Page 229]
Above all, the internal evidence arising from the poems themselves, has always appeared to us to convey decisive marks of modern origin. The smoothness of the verse,—which, in most cases, resembles the most correct modern poetry,—as well as the complicated nature of the stanza, are highly suspicious. It is no doubt true, that, in some compositions of a lyrical nature, the old English poets attained a considerable degree of ease and fluency, chiefly such as were adapted to the music of the minstrels, when the necessity of following the tune, compelled the poet to observe a regularity of rhythm. Such, for example, are the poems of Lawrence Minot. But these poems are flimsy songs, in which the same idea, and often the same words, are repeated and chimed upon, in order to attain the necessary smoothness. Take, for example, a verse of Minot, which, for the sake of the uninitiated, we have stripped of the antique spelling:—
“Sir David the Bruce
   Was at distance,
When Edward the Baliolfe
   Rode with his lance;
The north end of England
   Teached him to dance.
When he was met on the moor,
   With mikell mischaunce,
Sir Philip the valayse
   Might not him advance;
The flowers that fair were
   Ar fallen in France;
The flowers are now fallen,
   That fair were and fell;
A boar with his battaille
   Has don them to dwell.”
The ease of these lines is the smoothness of mere
[Page 230]
ballad, attained by the tenuity of idea, and the tautology of expression. But the smoothness of Rowley is combined with all the graces and refinement of modern poetry. Take two stanzas at hazard, divested of the artificial patina , or rust, of antique orthography:—
      “The sun was gleaming in the midst of day,
      Dead-still the air, and eke the welkin blue,
   When from the sea arose, in drear array,
      A heap of clouds, of sable, sullen hue,
   The which full fast unto the woodland drew,
      Hiding at once the sunnes festive face;
And the black tempest swell'd, and gather'd up apace.
—   —   —   —   —   —
   The gather'd storm is ripe; the big drops fall;
      The sun-burnt meadows smoke, and drink the rain;
   The coming ghastness doth the cattle 'pal;
      And the full flockes are driving o'er the plain.
   Dash'd from the clouds the waters fly again,
      The welkin opes, the yellow levin flies,
And the hot fiery steam in the wide flashing dies.”
Can any one read this beautiful description of a landscape overshaded by a thunder storm, and doubt for a moment that it is by a modern hand?— yet we have only discarded hiltring, fetyve, forswat , and smothe , all other differences betwixt our copy and the text being merely in spelling. Chatterton's answer to the strong objection arising from the smoothness of Rowley's poetry, when stated to him by Horace Walpole, is very remarkable,—“The harmony is not so extraordinary, as Joseph Iscam is altogether as harmonious.” Now, as Joseph Iscam is equally a person of dubious existence, this is a curious instance of placing the elephant upon the tortoise . It is not our wish to engage farther in the controversy. If any one resists the internal
[Page 231]
evidence of the style of Rowley's poems, we make him welcome to the rest of the argument; to his belief that the Saxons imported heraldry, and gave armorial bearings (which were not known till the time of the Crusades); that Mr Robert Canning, in the reign of Edward IV., encouraged drawing, and had private theatricals; that Mr Burgum, the pewterer of Bristol, derived his descent from Simon de Leynete Lyze, alias Senlez, who married Matilda, daughter of Waltheof, Earl of Northumberland, Northampton, and Huntingdon; that Mr Stephens of Salisbury drew his ancestry from Od, Earl of Blois and Holderness, who flourished about 1095; and that Chatterton himself represented the Sieur de Chasteautonne, of the house of Rollo, the first Duke of Normandy;—
Quibus si credideris,
Expectare poteris
Arthurum cum Britonibus.
Nothing can be more extraordinary than the delight which Chatterton appears to have felt in executing these numberless and multifarious impositions. His ruling passion was not the vanity of a poet who depends upon the opinion of others for its gratification, but the stoical pride of talent, which felt nourishment in the solitary contemplation of superiority over the dupes who fell into his toils. He has himself described this leading feature of his character in a letter to Mr Barret.
“It is my pride, my damned, native, unconquerable pride, that plunges me into distraction. You must know that 19–20th of my composition is pride. I must either live a slave—a servant— have no will of my own which I may fairly declare as such, or DIE.”—Vol. iii. p. 419.
[Page 232]
The art and avidity with which the youthful poet seized every opportunity, “through an excess of ingenuity in a literary sense, to impose on the credulity of others ,” is justly remarked by Mr Cottle to be “the predominant quality which elucidates his character, and is deserving of minute regard by all who attempt to decide on the Rowleian controversy.” We shall extract the instances, which the editor has brought together, forming a curious picture of a most active and powerful mind, imbued with a strange rage for the practice of literary imposture:—
“I. A new bridge is just completed over the Avon at Bristol. —Chatterton sends to the printer a description of the passing over the old bridge , for the first time, in the thirteenth century; on which occasion two songs are sung by two saints, of whom nobody ever heard, and in language precisely the same as Rowley's, although he lived two hundred years after the event was said to have taken place.
“II. Mr Burgum is a man attached to heraldic honours.— Chatterton gives him his pedigree from the time of William the Conqueror, and allies him to some of the most ancient families in the kingdom!
“III. Mr Burgum is one of the first persons who expresses an opinion of the authenticity and excellence of Rowley's poems. Chatterton, pleased with this first blossom of credulity, and from which he presaged an abundant harvest, with an elated and grateful heart, presents him with the Romaunt of the Cynghte , a poem, written by ‘ John De Bergham ,’ one of his own ancestors, about four hundred and fifty years before; and the more effectually to exclude suspicion, he accompanies it with the same poem, modernized by himself.
“IV. Chatterton wishes to obtain the good opinion of his relation, Mr Stephens of Salisbury, and, from something, which it is possible his keen observation had remarked in Mr Stephens, he deems it the most effectual way, by informing him that he is descended from Fitz-Stephen, grandson of the venerable Od, Earl of Blois, and Lord of Holderness, who flourished about the year 1095!
[Page 233]
“V. Mr Catcott is a worthy and religious man; and who from never intending to deceive, suspects no deception in others. —Chatterton, who is a skilful engineer, adapts the nature of his attack to the strength of the fortress, and gives him an ancient fragment of a sermon on the Divinity of the Holy Spirit, as wroten by Thomas Rowley !
“VI. Mr Barrett is zealous to prove the antiquity of Bristol. —As a demonstrable evidence, Chatterton sends him an escutcheon (on the authority of the same Thomas Rowley) borne by a Saxon of the name of Ailward, who resided in Bristow in the year 718!
“VII. Mr Barrett is also writing a comprehensive history of Bristol, and is solicitous to obtain all possible information concerning it.—Chatterton seizes the opportunity, and presents him, at different times , with an account of all the churches and chapels of Bristol, as they appeared three hundred years before, and accompanies it with drawings and descriptions of the castle; the whole of this information being unsupported by either document or tradition, and resting alone on the evidence of ‘the gode prieste Thomas Rowley ,’ between whom and Thomas Chatterton , prejudice itself must allow, there was a great equality of talent, as well as a great similitude of pursuits. They were both poets, both antiquarians, and both perpetually adverting to heraldry.
“VIII. Public curiosity and general admiration are excited by translations from the Erse of Ossian.—Chatterton, who gave precedence to none in ‘catching the manners living as they rise,’ publishes a succession of poems from the Saxon and Welch , indifferent to the inconsistency, or otherwise not aware, that he had professedly translated works in the same style, and with the same imagery, from the Teutonic and Celtic , two languages of different origin and genius, and whose poetry, of all their writings, has ever been considered as the most dissimilar.
“IX. Mr Walpole is writing the history of British painters.— Chatterton (who, to a confidential friend, had before expressed an opinion that it was possible , by judicious management, to deceive even this master in antiquities), with full confidence, sends him an account of eminent ‘Carvellers’ and ‘Peyncters,’ and informs him of others who once flourished in Bristol ! but of whom the present inhabitants of Bristol never heard!
“But these are all subordinate deceptions. Chatterton's ambition embraced a larger range, and was circumscribed by no other limit, than, in the person of Rowley, of deceiving the whole world. And, that he succeeded in a great and unaccountable degree, is attested by the voluminous controversies of
[Page 234]
antiquarians, historians, and poets. The object bespoke the comprehension of his mind; and its partial success is a lasting monument of what perseverance may effect when supported by genius.”—P. 509–514.
This curious detail of repeated imposture, regularly executed at the time when circumstances appeared to give an opening for them, may surely suffice to excite the suspicion of the most credulous believer in Rowley. Alike a forger of style, of MSS., and of drawings, nothing escaped the imitation of a youth, born as it were with the rare talents of executing such multiplied deceptions, and with a temper framed to delight in his success, which it may be hoped is still rarer. Of the merit of the Rowley poems, in a critical point of view, it is not here the place, or now the time to speak. They have been long subjected to the public; and in spite of their being written in a dialect which resembles the ancient or modern language of England, hardly more nearly than the vocabulary of George Psalmanazar did that of Formosa, they have been ever esteemed compositions of the highest merit. The drama called Ella , many parts of the Battle of Hastings , the Ballad of Charity , that of Sir Charles Bawdin (which somewhat resembles the antique style of minstrel poetry), the Dirge , and several of the Eclogues , may rank with the labours of our most distinguished poets. Pity it is, that the circumstances and temper of the author combined to shorten a life distinguished by such works of excellence during its limited career.
The poems avowed by Chatterton were, with a few exceptions, satirical or amatory. In the former
[Page 235]
line, his inclination for severity is more remarkable than his success. Perhaps he adopted this style of composition, not only in compliance with a natural acerbity of temper aggravated by his dependent situation, but also as most remote from the walk of the moral and heroic Rowley. Satire, however, in a polished age, requires more than mere genius and the force of numbers. General invective, however coarse and vehement, falls heavily to the ground, unless sharpened and guided by that accurate and discriminating knowledge of men and manners which is not often acquired in early youth, or easily obtained in obscure circumstances. The personal reflections which his satires level against those persons in Bristol to whom Chatterton is admitted to have owed the deepest obligations, do little honour to their author. We hardly know whether to laugh or grieve, when he reproaches Catcott, down whose throat he had crammed the improbable tale of Rowley, with gross credulity , because he was a believer in revelation! The amatory poems are pretty much what might have been expected from his declared intention “of making acquaintance with a girl in the neighbourhood, supposing it might soften the austerity of temper study had occasioned.” Accordingly, “he wrote a poem to her, and they commenced corresponding acquaintance.” Little was to be expected from verses written by a lover who had adopted his sentiments of preference pour se descennuyer . In some of his other poems, particularly the elegy upon Mr Fairford, traces are remarked, by Dr Gregory, of the descriptive and personifying powers exerted in the poems of Rowley.
[Page 236]
Of Chatterton's prose pieces, the less that is said, the kinder we shall be to his reputation. In the essays which he wrote for periodical publications, as, The Hunter of Oddities, Adventures of a Slave , and the like, he displays little humour, and great inclination to substitute in its place personal abuse and private slander. The imitations of Ossian, published as translations from the Saxon, are not only utterly incongruous with the style of the language from which he pretended to have rendered them, but are incalculably inferior to the sophisticated productions of Macpherson. This is not to be wondered at. Macpherson, with powers infinitely inferior to those of Chatterton, had the advantage of an intimate acquaintance with the Celtic poetry, much of which he probably interweaved with his own imitations. The bard of Bristol had only Macpherson to study; and, at an age when bombast is seldom distinguished from sublime, he caricatured, in his Saxon poems, the worst passages of the Pseudo-Ossian.
The present edition contains many prose imitations of the antique, published from Chatterton's MSS. in the British Museum. These are very important, as throwing light upon the Roweleian poems. Some curious passages occur in these documents. While Chatterton wrote plain narrative, he imitated, with considerable success, the dry, concise style of an antique annalist; but when any thing required a more dignified or sentimental style, he mounted the fatal and easily recognised car of the son of Fingal. Thus, in an account of St Marie Magdalene's chapelle, after informing us it “was ybuilden bie Elle, warden of the castle
[Page 237]
near Elle-gate, Sythina clessen, New-gate—yn this chapelle was ysworne a treatye betweene Goddwynne Erle or Abthane of Kent, Harold eftsoons Kynge of England,” &c. &c.; he of a sudden thus changes his tone in commemorating his favourite Elle—“Elle, descended from the kyngelie bloude of Mercyans, raged in the fyghte like a wilde boare in the woode; drearie as a blacke cloude yn ungentle wedder he sweept whole rankes to helle. Lyke to the castle of Bryghstowe was his mind gentle and meeke,” &c. &c. Again, in a very sober narrative of the Ryse of Peyncteyne in Englande , written by Rowley for his friend Cannynge, after a sort of matter of fact account of various artists, we come to one called Aflem, a notable perfourmer of the counynge mysterie of steineynge glass . This person was taken by the Danes, and ordered to be slain. The Dane to whom the execution was intrusted, discovered Aflem to be his brother. At this crisis, Rowley tucks up his monkish frock, and mounts the Celtic Pegasus. “Affrighte chaynede uppe hys soule; ghastnesse dwelled yn his breaste. Oscarre”—(a name of some import, as proving the existing idea in the mind of the author)—“Oscarre, the great Dane, gave histe he should be forslagen; no teares colde availe; the morning, cladde in robes of ghastnesse, was come,” &c. &c. An instance of a curious mistake committed by Chatterton, occurs in these excerpts from the Pseudo-Rowley prose writings. In a MS. in Chatterton's handwriting, in the Museum, there occur several excerpts from Chaucer, apparently culled to bolster out some intended imitations. Among others we find the two lines
[Page 238]
respecting the mormal on the leg of the pilgrim's cook.
“But great harm was yt, as it thought me,
That on his skinne a mormall had he.”
Skinne is here mis-copied for shin . This mistake, and another more whimsical, we can trace into the Rolle of Seyncte Bartholæmeweis Priorie , printed in Barret's History of Bristol, to whom it was communicated by Chatterton. Among a list of medical books, said to be preserved in the Infimary, or Ache-chamber of the Priorie, we find Gylbertines rolle of Ypocrates: the same fryarres booke of brenninge Johan Stowe of the cure of mormalles and the waterie leprosie: the rolle of the blacke mainger . In a note on these two last articles, we are told, “Chaucer says, on his skin a mormalle had he and a blacke manger.” Now, in the first place, Chatterton adhering to his erroneous transcript from Chaucer, of skinne for shinne , has made Johan Stowe lecture on the cure of mormalles, as if they were, like the leprosy, a cutaneous distemper, and not a cancer upon the bone. But, besides, he has so far mistaken his author, as to take blanc-manger a dish of exquisite cookery, which is pronounced by Chaucer to be the cook's masterpiece of skill, for blacke manger , some strange and nondescript disease, under which he laboured in addition to his mormal ; and upon which there was a roll or essay in the Ache-chamber of St Bartholomew's priory. Chaucer's words are,
“But gret harme was it, as it thoughte me,
That on his shinne a mormal hadde he,
For blanc-manger that made he with the best.”
[Page 239]
The principal ingredient of blanc-manger (if we recollect) was a cock brayed in a mortar. The resemblance of the letters n and u in the black-letter, probably led Chatterton to read blauc for blanc ; and as he understood no French, his judgment could not correct his eye. We are thus able decidedly to trace the taste and the errors of Chatterton into the productions of Rowley. We do not, however, suppose that all the information contained in the works of Rowley was actually the invention of Chatterton. The keen eye and ardent research of the young poet, probably traced and interweaved with his narrative traditionary anecdotes preserved in his native city. Nothing that had an antique or uncouth appearance seems to have escaped his notice. Mr Tyrwhitt detected a curious instance of his minuteness of remark. In the Ballad of Charité, mention is made of a horse-millanere , a phrase at which the reader has usually paused with surprise. In the town of Bristol, and precisely in the street through which Chatterton passed to school, is hung forth a wooden horse decorated with ribbons, purposing to be the sign of a horse- millanere .
Nothing can afford a stronger picture of the force and weakness of the human mind, than the readiness with which Chatterton supplied himself and his particular friends with flourishing trees of genealogy, in which the sextons and pewterers of Bristol are deduced from a line of ancestry, which Howards and Hastings might envy, and decorated with all the splendid emblazonment of heraldry. We are mute with astonishment at the grave and
[Page 240]
sober advice of the sexton's son of Radcliffe to his relation Mr Stevens of Salisbury: “When you quarter your arms, in the mullet, say Or, a fess, vert, by the name of Chatterton. I trace your family from Fitz-Stephen, son of Stephen, Earl of Aumerle in 1095, son of Od, Earl of Bloys, and Lord of Holdernesse.” If the imagination of Chatterton was not actually so far vitiated, as in some degree to believe the reveries which he imposed upon others, we cannot help thinking that as Johnson says of Milton, his impudence must have been at least equal to his stupendous abilities. We were also diverted with the conclusion of the pedigree made out for Mr Burgum of Bristol, which begins with the Conqueror, and very prudently concludes about the reign of Charles II., when Mr Burgum might perhaps know something of his ancestors. Chatterton linked and gilded this splended chain of ancestry through all the ages remote enough to leave unbounded scope for fiction: when he approached the regions of probability, he let the end loose, that his friend might attach himself to it the best way he could. There is in Cumberland an ancient family, who have long possessed and taken their name from the manor of Brougham, to which Chatterton seems to allude, when he mentions the Castle of Bourgham in Northumberland. But the castle was, we believe, an appanage, not of the De Bourghams, lords of the manor, but of the Veteriponts and Cliffords.
We now dismiss the works of the unfortunate Chatterton, heartily wishing they may experience from the public kinder treatment than their unfortunate
[Page 241]
and proud-spirited author. To the admirers of poetry they will ever be acceptable; nor can their history be heedfully perused, without imparting an awful lesson; for the fame of Chatterton is not merely a light to be wondered at—it shines as a beacon to point out the shoals upon which he was wrecked. The youthful reader, if conscious of powers which elevate him above his situation in life, may learn to avoid an overweening reliance upon his abilities, or an injudicious and unfair exertion of them. He may learn, that if neglect or contempt obstruct him in the fair pursuit of fame, it is better to prefer obscurity, than to attain, by the crooked path of literary forgery, the ambiguous reputation of an ingenious impostor. Above all, he may learn to guard against those sallies of an ill-regulated imagination, which buoyed up Chatterton with the most unreasonable expectations, only to plunge him into despair and suicide. 25 And if there be one who, conscious of inferior mental powers, murmurs at being allotted but “the single talent,” and looks with envy on the flights of superior genius, let him read the life of Chatterton, and remember of him it may be truly said—
“Largus et exundans letho dedit ingenii fons.”
[Page 242]
ARTICLE IX. RELIQUES OF BURNS. From the Quarterly Review for 1809. Reliques of Robert Burns. Collected by R. H. Cromek. 1808.] We opened a book bearing so interesting a title with no little anxiety. Literary reliques vary in species and value almost as much as those of the Catholic or of the antiquary. Some deserve a golden shrine for their intrinsic merit, some are valued from the pleasing recollections and associations with which they are combined, some, reflecting little honour upon their unfortunate author, are dragged by interested editors from merited obscurity. The character of Burns, on which we may perhaps hazard some remarks in the course of this article, was such as to increase our apprehensions. The extravagance of genius with which this wonderful man was gifted, being in his later and more evil days directed to no fixed or general purpose, was, in the morbid state of his health and feelings, apt to display itself in hasty sallies of virulent and
[Page 243]
unmerited severity: sallies often regretted by the bard himself; and of which justice to the living and to the dead, alike demanded the suppression. Neither was this anxiety lessened, when we recollected the pious care with which the late excellent Dr Currie had performed the task of editing the works of Burns. His selection was limited, as much by respect to the fame of the living, as of the dead. He dragged from obscurity none of those satirical effusions, which ought to be as ephemeral as the transient offences which called them forth. He excluded every thing approaching to licence, whether in morals or in religion, and thus rendered his collection such, as doubtless Burns himself, in his moments of sober reflection, would have most highly approved. Yet applauding, as we do most highly applaud, the leading principles of Dr Currie's selection, we are aware that they sometimes led him into fastidious and over-delicate rejection of the bard's most spirited and happy effusions. A thin octavo published at Glasgow in 1801, under the title of Poems ascribed to Robert Burns the Ayrshire bard , furnishes valuable proofs of this assertion. It contains, among a good deal of rubbish, some of his most brilliant poetry. A cantata in particular, called The Jolly Beggars , for humorous description and nice discrimination of character, is inferior to no poem of the same length in the whole range of English poetry. The scene indeed is laid in the very lowest department of low life, the actors being a set of strolling vagrants, met to carouse, and barter their rags and plunder for liquor in a hedge ale-house. Yet even in describing the
[Page 244]
movements of such a group, the native taste of the poet has never suffered his pen to slide into any thing coarse or disgusting. The extravagant glee and outrageous frolic of the beggars are ridiculously contrasted with their maimed limbs, rags, and crutches—the sordid and squalid circumstances of their appearance are judiciously thrown into the shade. Nor is the art of the poet less conspicuous in the individual figures, than in the general mass. The festive vagrants are distinguished from each other by personal appearance and character, as much as any fortuitous assembly in the higher orders of life. The group, it must be observed, is of Scottish character, and doubtless our northern brethren are more familiar with its varieties than we are; yet the distinctions are too well marked to escape even the South'ron. The most prominent persons are a maimed soldier and his female companion, a hackneyed follower of the camp, a stroller, late the consort of an Highland ketterer or sturdy beggar, —“but weary fa' the waefu' woodie!”—Being now at liberty, she becomes an object of rivalry between a “pigmy scraper with his fiddle” and a strolling tinker. The latter, a desperate bandit, like most of his profession, terrifies the musician out of the field, and is preferred by the damsel of course. A wandering ballad-singer, with a brace of doxies, is last introduced upon the stage. Each of these mendicants sings a song in character, and such a collection of humorous lyrics, connected by vivid poetical description, is not, perhaps, to be paralleled in the English language. As the collection and the poem are very little known in England, and as
[Page 245]
it is certainly apposite to the Reliques of Robert Burns, we venture to transcribe the concluding ditty, chaunted by the ballad-singer at the request of the company, whose “mirth and fun have now grown fast and furious,” and set them above all sublunary terrors of jails, stocks, and whipping posts. It is certainly far superior to any thing in the Beggars' Opera , where alone we could expect to find its parallel.
   “Then ou're again, the jovial thrang
   The poet did request,
To loose his pack an' wale a sang,
   A ballad o' the best:
He rising, rejoicing
   Between his twa Debórahs,
Looks round him, an' found them
   Impatient for the chorus.
Air.
See! the smoking bowl before us,
   Mark our jovial ragged ring!
Round and round take up the chorus,
   And in raptures let us sing.
Chorus.—A fig for those by law protected!
    Liberty's a glorious feast!
Courts for cowards were erected,
    Churches built to please the priest.
What is title? what is treasure?
   What is reputation's care?
If we lead a life of pleasure,
   'Tis no matter how or where!
                     A fig, &c.
With the ready trick and fable,
   Round we wander all the day;
[Page 246]
And at night, in barn or stable,
   Hug our doxies on the hay.
                     A fig, &c.
Does the train-attended carriage
   Through the country lighter rove?
Does the sober bed of marriage
   Witness brighter scenes of love?
                     A fig, &c.
Life is all a variorum,
   We regard not how it goes;
Let them cant about decorum
   Who have characters to lose.
                     A fig, &c.
Here's to budgets, bags, and wallets!
   Here's to all the wandering train!
Here's our ragged brats and callets !
   One and all cry out, Amen!
                     A fig, &c. ”
We are at a loss to conceive any good reason why Dr Currie did not introduce this singular and humorous cantata into his collection. It is true, that in one or two passages the muse has trespassed slightly upon decorum, where, in the language of Scottish song,
“High kilted was she
As she gaed ower the lea.”
Something, however, is to be allowed to the nature of the subject, and something to the education of the poet; and if, from veneration to the names of Swift and Dryden, we tolerate the grossness of the one, and the indelicacy of the other, the respect due to that of Burns may surely claim indulgence for a few light strokes of broad humour. The same collection contains Holy Willie's Prayer , a
[Page 247]
piece of satire more exquisitely severe than any which Burns afterwards wrote, but unfortunately cast in a form too daringly profane to be received into Dr Currie's collection.
Knowing that these, and hoping that other compositions of similar spirit and tenor might yet be recovered, we were induced to think, that some of them, at least, had found a place in the collection now given to the public by Mr Cromek; but he has neither risked the censure, nor laid claim to the applause, which might have belonged to such an undertaking. The contents of the volume before us are more properly gleanings than relics—the refuse and sweepings of the shop, rather than the commodities which might be deemed contraband. Yet even these scraps and remnants contain articles of curiosity and value, tending to throw light on the character of one of the most singular men by whose appearance our age has been distinguished.
The first portion of the volume contains nearly two hundred pages of letters, addressed by Burns to various individuals, written in various tones of feeling and modes of mind—in some instances exhibiting all the force of the writer's talents, in others only valuable because they bear his signature. The avidity with which the reader ever devours this species of publication, has been traced to the desire of seeing the mind and opinions of celebrated men in their open and undisguised moments, and of perusing and appreciating their thoughts while the gold is yet rude ore, ere it is refined and manufactured into polished sentences or sounding stanzas. But, notwithstanding these fair pretences, we doubt if
[Page 248]
this appetite can be referred to any more honourable source than the love of anecdote and private history. In fact, letters—at least those of a general and miscellaneous kind—very rarely contain the real opinions of the writer. If an author sits down to the task of formally composing a work for the use of the public, he has previously considered his subject, and made up his mind both on the opinions he is to express, and on the mode of supporting them. But the same man usually writes a letter only because the letter must be written—is probably never more at a loss than when looking for a subject —and treats it, when found, rather so as to gratify his correspondent, than communicate his own feelings. The letters of Burns, although containing passages of great eloquence, and expressive of the intense fire of his disposition, are not exceptions from this general rule. They bear occasionally strong marks of affectation, with a tinge of pedantry rather foreign from the bard's character and education. The following paragraphs illustrate both the excellencies and faults of his epistolary composition. Nothing can be more humorously imagined and embodied than the sage group of Wisdom and Prudence in the first, while the affectation of the second amounts to absolute rant.
“Do tell that to Lady M'Kenzie, that she may give me credit for a little wisdom. ‘I Wisdom dwell with Prudence.’ What a blessed fire-side!—How happy should I be to pass a winter evening under their venerable roof! and smoke a pipe of tobacco, or drink water-gruel with them! What solemn, lengthened, laughter- quashing gravity of pbiz! What sage remarks on the good- for-nothing sons and daughters of indiscretion and folly!—and what frugal lessons, as we straitened the fire-side circle, on the uses of the poker and tongs!”
[Page 249]
“Miss N. is very well, and begs to be remembered in the old way to you. I used all my eloquence, all the persuasive flourishes of the hand, and heart-melting modulation of periods in my power, to urge her out to Herveiston, but all in vain. My rhetoric seems quite to have lost its effect on the lovely half of mankind. I have seen the day—but that is a ‘tale of other years’—in my conscience I believe that my heart has been so oft on fire that it is absolutely vitrified. I look on the sex with something like the admiration with which I regard the starry sky in a frosty December night. I admire the beauty of the Creator's workmanship; I am charmed with the wild but graceful eccentricity of their motions, and—wish them good night. I mean this with respect to a certain passion dont j'ai eu l'honneur d'être un miserable esclave : as for friendship, you and Charlotte have given me pleasure, permanent pleasure, ‘which the world cannot give, nor take away’ I hope; and which will outlast the heavens and the earth.”
In the same false taste, Burns utters such tirades as this:—
“Whether in the way of my trade, I can be of any service to the Rev. Doctor, 26 is I fear very doubtful. Ajax's shield consisted, I think, of seven bull hides and a plate of brass, which altogether set Hector's utmost force at defiance. Alas! I am not a Hector, and the worthy Doctor's foes are as securely armed as Ajax was. Ignorance, superstition, bigotry, stupidity, malevolence, self-conceit, envy—all strongly bound in a massy frame of brazen impudence. Good God, sir! to such a shield, humour is the peck of a sparrow, and satire the pop-gun of a school-boy. Creation-disgracing scelerats such as they, God only can mend, and the devil only can punish. In the comprehending way of Caligula, I wish they had all but one neck. I feel impotent as a child to the ardour of my wishes! O for a withering curse to blast the germins of their wicked machinations. O for a poisonous Tornado, winged from the Torrid Zone of Tartarus, to sweep the spreading crop of their villanous contrivances to the lowest hell!”
These passages, however, in which the author seems to have got the better of the man, in which
[Page 250]
the desire of shining, and blazing, and thundering, supersedes the natural expressions of feeling, and passion, are less frequent in the letters of Burns than perhaps of any other professed writer. Burns was, in truth, the child of passion and feeling. His character was not simply that of a peasant exalted into notice by uncommon literary attainments, but bore a stamp which must have distinguished him in the highest as in the lowest situation in life. To ascertain what was his natural temper and disposition, and how far it was altered or modified by the circumstances of birth, education, and fortune, might be a subject for a long essay; but to mark a few distinctions is all that can be here expected from us.
We have said that Robert Burns was the child of impulse and feeling. Of the steady principle which cleaves to that which is good, he was unfortunately divested by the violence of those passions which finally wrecked him. It is most affecting to add, that while swimming, struggling, and finally yielding to the torrent, he never lost sight of the beacon which ought to have guided him to land, yet never profited by its light.
We learn his opinion of his own temperament in the following emphatic burst of passion:—
“God have mercy on me! a poor d---d, incautious, duped, unfortunate fool! The sport, the miserable victim, of rebellious pride, hypochondriac imagination, agonizing sensibility, and bedlam passions!”
“Come, stubborn pride and unshrinking resolution, accompany me through this to me miserable world!” In such language did this powerful but
[Page 251]
untamed mind express the irritation of prolonged expectation and disappointed hope, which slight reflection might have pointed out as the common fate of mortality. Burns neither acknowledged adversity as the “tamer of the human breast,” nor knew the golden curb which discretion hangs upon passion. He even appears to have felt a gloomy pleasure in braving the encounter of evils which prudence might have avoided, and to have thought that there could be no pleasurable existence between the extremes of licentious frenzy and of torpid sensuality. “There are two only creatures that I would envy.—A horse in his wild state traversing the forests of Asia,—and an oyster on some of the desert shores of Europe. The one has not a wish without enjoyment; the other has neither wish nor fear.” When such a sentiment is breathed by such a being, the lesson is awful: and if pride and ambition were capable of being taught, they might hence learn that a well-regulated mind and controlled passions are to be prized above all the glow of imagination, and all the splendour of genius.
We discover the same stubborn resolution rather to endure with patience the consequences of error, than to own and avoid it in future, in the poet's singular choice of a pattern of fortitude.
“I have bought a pocket Milton, which I carry perpetually about with me, in order to study the sentiments—the dauntless magnanimity, the intrepid, unyielding independence, the desperate daring, and noble defiance of hardship, in that great personage, Satan .”
Nor was this a rash or precipitate choice, for in
[Page 252]
a more apologetic mood he expresses the same opinion of the same personage.
“My favourite feature in Milton's Satan is his manly fortitude in supporting what cannot be remedied—in short, the wild, broken fragments of a noble, exalted mind in ruins. I meant no more by saying he was a favourite hero of mine.”
With this lofty and unbending spirit were connected a love of independence and a hatred of control amounting almost to the sublime rant of Almanzor.
“He was as free as Nature first made man,
Ere the base laws of servitude began,
When wild in woods the noble savage ran.”
In general society Burns often permitted his determination of vindicating his personal dignity to hurry him into unjustifiable resentment of slight or imagined neglect. He was ever anxious to maintain his post in society, and to extort that deference which was readily paid to him by all from whom it was worth claiming. This ill-judged jealousy of precedence led him often to place his own pretensions to notice in competition with those of the company who, he conceived, might found theirs on birth or fortune. On such occasions it was no easy task to deal with Burns. The power of his language, the vigour of his satire, the severity of illustration with which his fancy instantly supplied him, bore down all retort. Neither was it possible to exercise over the poet that restraint which arises from the chance of further personal consequences. The dignity, the spirit, the indignation of Burns was that of a plebeian, of a highsouled plebeian indeed, of a citizen of Rome or Athens, but still of a plebeian untinged with the
[Page 253]
slightest shade of that spirit of chivalry which, since the feudal times, has pervaded the higher ranks of European society. This must not be imputed to cowardice, for Burns was no coward. But the lowness of his birth, and habits of society, prevented rules of punctilious delicacy from making any part of his education; nor did he, it would seem, see any thing so rational in the practice of duelling, as afterwards to adopt or to affect the sentiments of the higher ranks upon that subject. A letter to Mr Clarke, written after a quarrel upon political topics, has these remarkable, and we will add manly expressions.
“From the expressions Capt. --- made use of to me, had I had nobody's welfare to care for but my own, we should certainly have come, according to the manners of the world, to the necessity of murdering one another about the business. The words were such as, generally, I believe, end in a brace of pistols; but I am still pleased to think that I did not ruin the peace and welfare of a wife and a family of children in a drunken squabble.”
In this point, therefore, the pride and high spirit of Burns differed from those of the world around him. But if he wanted that chivalrous sensibility of honour which places reason upon the sword's point, he had delicacy of another sort, which those who boast most of the former do not always possess in the same purity. Although so poor as to be ever on the very brink of absolute ruin, looking forwards now to the situation of a foot-soldier, now to that of a common beggar, as no unnatural consummation of his evil fortune, Burns was, in pecuniary transactions, as proud and independent as if possessed of a prince's revenue. Bred a peasant, and preferred to the
[Page 254]
degrading situation of a common exciseman, neither the influence of the low-minded crowd around him, nor the gratification of selfish indulgence, nor that contempt of futurity, which has characterised so many of his poetical brethren, ever led him to incur or endure the burden of pecuniary obligation. A very intimate friend of the poet, from whom he used occasionally to borrow a small sum for a week or two, once ventured to hint that the punctuality with which the loan was always replaced at the appointed time was unnecessary and unkind. The consequence of this hint was the interruption of their friendship for some weeks, the bard disdaining the very thought of being indebted to a human being one farthing beyond what he could discharge with the most rigid punctuality. It was a less pleasing consequence of this high spirit that Burns was utterly inaccessible to all friendly advice. To lay before him his errors, or to point out their consequences, was to touch a string that jarred every feeling within him. On such occasions, his, like Churchill's, was
“The mind which, starting, heaves the heartfelt groan,
And hates the form she knows to be her own.”
It is a dreadful truth, that when racked and tortured by the well-meant and warm expostulations of an intimate friend, he at length started up in a paroxysm of frenzy, and drawing a sword cane, which he usually wore, made an attempt to plunge it into the body of his adviser—the next instant he was with difficulty withheld from suicide.
Yet this ardent and irritable temperament had its periods, not merely of tranquillity, but of the
[Page 255]
most subduing tenderness. In the society of men of taste, who could relish and understand his conversation, or whose rank in life was not so much raised above his own as to require, in his opinion, the assertion of his dignity, he was eloquent, impressive, and instructing. But it was in female circles that his powers of expression displayed their utmost fascination. In such, where the respect demanded by rank was readily paid as due to beauty or accomplishment; where he could resent no insult, and vindicate no claim of superiority, his conversation lost all its harshness, and often became so energetic and impressive, as to dissolve the whole circle into tears. The traits of sensibility which, told of another, would sound like instances of gross affectation, were so native to the soul of this extraordinary man, and burst from him so involuntarily, that they not only obtained full credence as the genuine feelings of his own heart, but melted into unthought of sympathy all who witnessed them. In such a mood they were often called forth by the slightest and most trifling occurrences; an ordinary engraving, the wild turn of a simple Scottish air, a line in an old ballad, were, like “the field mouse's nest” and “the uprooted daisy,” sufficient to excite the sympathetic feelings of Burns. And it was wonderful to see those, who, left to themselves, would have passed over such trivial circumstances without a moment's reflection, sob over the picture, when its outline had been filled up by the magic art of his eloquence.
The political predilections, for they could hardly be termed principles, of Burns, were entirely determined
[Page 256]
by his feelings. At his first appearance, he felt, or affected, a propensity to jacobitism. Indeed a youth of his warm imagination and ardent patriotism, brought up in Scotland thirty years ago, could hardly escape this bias. The side of Charles Edward was the party, not surely of sound sense and sober reason, but of romantic gallantry and high achievement. The inadequacy of the means by which that prince attempted to regain the crown, forfeited by his fathers, the strange and almost poetical adventures which he underwent, the Scottish martial character honoured in his victories, and degraded and crushed in his defeat, the tales of the veterans who had followed his adventurous standard, were all calculated to impress upon the mind of a poet a warm interest in the cause of the house of Stuart. Yet the impression was not of a very serious cast; for Burns himself acknowledges in one of these letters that, “to tell the matter of fact, except when my passions were heated by some accidental cause, my jacobitism was merely by way of vive la bagatelle ,” p.240. The same enthusiastic ardour of disposition swayed Burns in his choice of political tenets, when the country was agitated by revolutionary principles. That the poet should have chosen the side on which high talents were most likely to procure celebrity; that he to whom the factitious distinctions of society were always odious, should have listened with complacence to the voice of French philosophy, which denounced them as usurpations on the rights of man, was precisely the thing to be expected. Yet we cannot but think that if his superiors in the Excise department
[Page 257]
had tried the experiment of soothing rather than of irritating his feelings, they might have spared themselves the disgrace of rendering desperate the possessor of such uncommon talents. For it is but too certain that from the moment his hopes of promotion were utterly blasted, his tendency to dissipation hurried him precipitately into those excesses which shortened his life. We doubt not that in that awful period of national discord he had done and said enough to deter, in ordinary cases, the servants of government from countenancing an avowed partisan of faction. But this partisan was Burns!—Surely the experiment of lenity might have been tried, and perhaps successfully. The conduct of Mr Graham of Fintray, our poet's only shield against actual dismission, and consequent ruin, reflects the highest credit upon that gentleman. We may dismiss these reflections on the character of Burns with his own beautiful lines.
“I saw thy pulse's maddening play,
Wild send thee pleasure's devious way,
   By passion driven:
But yet the light that led astray,
   Was light from heaven.”
The second part of this volume contains a number of memoranda by Burns, concerning the Scottish songs and music published by Johnson, in six volumes 8vo.—Many of these appear to us exceedingly trifling. They might indeed have adorned, with great propriety, a second edition of the work in question, or any other collection of Scottish songs; but, separated from the verses to which they relate, how can any one be interested
[Page 258]
in learning that Down the Burn Davie was the composition of David Maigh, keeper of blood-hounds to the Laird of Riddell; that Tarry woo was, in the opinion of Burns, a “very pretty song;” or even that the author of Polwarth on the Green was “Captain John Drummond MacGrigor, of the family of Bochaldie?” Were it of consequence, we might correct the valuable information thus conveyed, in one or two instances, and enlarge it in many others. But it seems of more importance to mark the share which the poet himself took in compiling or embellishing this collection of traditional poetry, especially as it has not been distinctly explained either by Dr Currie or Mr Cromek. Tradition, generally speaking, is a sort of perverted alchymy which converts gold into lead. All that is abstractedly poetical, all that is above the comprehension of the merest peasant, is apt to escape in frequent recitation; and the lacunæ , thus created, are filled up either by lines from other ditties, or from the mother wit of the reciter or singer. The injury, in either case, is obvious and irreparable. But with all these disadvantages, the Scottish songs and tunes preserved for Burns that inexpressible charm which they have ever afforded to his countrymen. He entered into the idea of collecting their fragments with all the zeal of an enthusiast; and few, whether serious or humorous, pass through his hands without receiving some of those magic touches, which, without greatly altering the song, restored its original spirit, or gave it more than it had ever possessed. So dexterously are these touches combined with the ancient structure, that
[Page 259]
the rifaccimento , in many instances, could scarcely have been detected, without the avowal of the bard himself. Neither would it be easy to mark his share in the individual ditties. Some he appears entirely to have re-written; to others he added supplementary stanzas; in some he retained only the leading lines and the chorus, and others he merely arranged and ornamented. For the benefit of future antiquaries, however, we may observe that many of the songs, claimed by the present editor as the exclusive composition of Burns, were, in reality, current long before he was born. Let us take one of the best examples of his skill in imitating the old ballad.— M'Pherson's Lament was a well-known song many years before the Ayrshire Bard wrote those additional verses which constitute its principal merit. This noted freebooter was executed at Inverness, about the beginning of the last century. When he came to the fatal tree, he played the tune to which he has bequeathed his name upon a favourite violin, and holding up the instrument, offered it to any one of his clan who would undertake to play the tune over his body at his lyke-wake: as none answered, he dashed it to pieces on the executioner's head, and flung himself from the ladder. The following are the wild stanzas, grounded, however, upon some traditional remains, 27 which Burns has put into the mouth of this despera do:—
[Page 260]
M'PHERSON'S FAREWELL.
Farewell, ye dungeons dark and strong,
   The wretch's destiny!
M'Pherson's time will not be long,
   On yonder gallows tree.
       Sae rantingly, sae wantonly,
          Sae dauntingly gaed he;
       He play'd a spring, and danc'd it round,
          Below the gallows tree.
O what is death but parting breath?—
   On mony a bloody plain
I've dar'd his face, and in this place
   I scorn him yet again!
                     Sae rantingly, &c.
Untie these bands from off my hands,
   And bring to me my sword;
And there's no a man in all Scotland,
   But I'll brave him at a word.
                     Sae rantingly, &c.
I've liv'd a life of sturt and strife;
   I die by treacherie:
It burns my heart I must depart
   And not avenged be.
       Sae rantingly, &c.
Now farewell light, thou sunshine bright,
   And all beneath the sky!
May coward shame distain his name,
   The wretch that dares not die!
                     Sae rantingly, &c.
How much Burns delighted in the task of eking out the ancient melodies of his country, appears from the following affecting passage in a letter written to Mr Johnson, shortly before his death.
“You are a good, worthy, honest fellow, and have a good right to live in this world—because you deserve it. Many a merry meeting this publication has given us, and possibly it may give us more, though, alas! I fear it. This protracting, slow,
[Page 261]
consuming illness which hangs over me, will, I doubt much, my ever dear friend, arrest my sun before he has well reached his middle career, and will turn over the Poet to far other and more important concerns than studying the brilliancy of wit, or the pathos of sentiment! However, hope is the cordial of the human heart, and I endeavour to cherish it as well as I can.”
Notwithstanding the spirit of many of the lyrics of Burns, and the exquisite sweetness and simplicity of others, we cannot but deeply regret that so much of his time and talents was frittered away in compiling and composing for musical collections. There is sufficient evidence both in the edition of Dr Currie, and in this supplemental volume, that even the genius of Burns could not support him in the monotonous task of writing love verses on heaving bosoms and sparkling eyes, and twisting them into such rhythmical forms, as might suit the capricious evolutions of Scotch reels, ports, and strathspeys. Besides, this constant waste of his fancy and power of verse in small and insignificant compositions, must necessarily have had no little effect in deterring him from undertaking any grave or important task. Let no one suppose that we undervalue the songs of Burns. When his soul was intent on suiting a favourite air with words humorous or tender, as the subject demanded, no poet of our tongue ever displayed higher skill in marrying melody to immortal verse. But the writing of a series of songs for large musical collections, degenerated into a slavish labour, which no talents could support, led to negligence, and above all, diverted the poet from his grand plan of dramatic composition.
To produce a work of this kind, neither perhaps
[Page 262]
a regular tragedy nor comedy, but something partaking of the nature of both, seems to have been long the cherished wish of Burns. He had even fixed on the subject, which was an adventure in low life, said to have happened to Robert Bruce, while wandering in danger and disguise after being defeated by the English. The Scottish dialect would have rendered such a piece totally unfit for the stage: but those who recollect the masculine and lofty tone of martial spirit which glows in the poem of Bannockburn, will sigh to think what the character of the gallant Bruce might have proved under the hand of Burns! It would undoubtedly have wanted that tinge of chivalrous feeling which the manners of the age, no less than the disposition of the monarch, imperiously demanded; but this deficiency would have been more than supplied by a bard who could have drawn from his own perceptions the unbending energy of a hero, sustaining the desertion of friends, the persecution of enemies, and the utmost malice of disastrous fortune. The scence, too, being partly laid in humble life, admitted that display of broad humour and exquisite pathos, with which he could interchangeably and at pleasure adorn his cottage views. Nor was the assemblage of familiar sentiments incompatible in Burns with those of the most exalted dignity. In the inimitable tale of Tam o' Shanter, he has left us sufficient evidence of his ability to combine the Iudicrous with the awful and even the horrible. No poet, with the exception of Shakspeare, ever possessed the power of exciting the most varied and discordant emotions with such rapid transitions.
[Page 263]
His humorous description of the appearance of Death (in the poem on Dr Hornbook) borders on the terrific, and the witches' dance, in the Kirk of Alloway, is at once ludicrous and horrible. Deeply must we then regret those avocations which diverted a fancy so varied and so vigorous, joined with language and expressions suited to all its changes, from leaving a more substantial monument to his own fame and to the honour of his country.
The next division is a collection of fugitive sentences and common places, extracted partly from the memorandum book of the poet, and partly, we believe, from letters which could not be published in their entire state. Many of these appear to be drawn from a small volume, entitled “Letters to Clarinda, by Robert Burns,” which was printed at Glasgow, but afterwards suppressed. To these, the observations which we offered on the bard's letters in general, apply with additional force: for in such a selection, the splendid patches, the showy, declamatory, figurative effusions of sentimental affectation, are usually the choice of the editor. Respect for the mighty dead, prevents our quoting instances in which Burns has degraded his natural eloquence by these meretricious ornaments. Indeed his style is sometimes so forced and unnatural, that we must believe he knew to whom he was writing, and that an affectation of enthusiasm in platonic love and devotion, was more likely to be acceptable to the fair Clarinda, than the true language of feeling. The following loose and laboured passage shows that the passion of Sylrander (a name
[Page 264]
sufficient of itself to damn a whole file of love-letters) had more of vanity than of real sentiment:—
“What trifling silliness is the childish fondness of the everyday children of the world! 'Tis the unmeaning toying of the younglings of the fields and forests: but where sentiment and fancy unite their sweets; where taste and delicacy refine; where wit adds the flavour, and good sense gives strength and spirit to all, what a delicious draught is the hour of tender endearment!— beauty and grace in the arms of truth and honour, in all the luxury of mutual love!”
The last part of the work comprehends a few original poems—epistles, prologues, and songs,— by which, if the author's reputation had not been previously established, we will venture to say it would never have risen above the common standard. At the same time there are few of them that do not, upon minute examination, exhibit marks of Burns's hand, though not of his best manner. The following exquisitely affecting stanza contains the essence of a thousand love tales:—
“Had we never loved sae kindly,
Had we never loved sae blindly,
Never met or never parted,
We had ne'er been broken-hearted.”
There are one or two political songs, which, for any wit or humour they contain, might have been very well omitted. The satirical effusions of Burns, when they related to persons or subjects removed from his own sphere of observation, were too vague and too coarse to be poignant. There are a few attempts at English verse, in which, as usual, Burns falls beneath himself. This is the more remarkable, as the sublimer passages of his “Saturday Night,” “Vision,” and other poems of celebrity,
[Page 265]
always swell into the language of classic English poetry. But although in these flights he naturally and almost unavoidably assumed the dialect of Milton and Shakspeare, he never seems to have been completely at his ease when he had not the power of descending at pleasure into that which was familiar to his ear, and to his habits. In the one case, his use of the English was voluntary, and for a short time; but when assumed as a primary and indispensable rule of composition, the comparative penury of rhymes, and the want of a thousand emphatic words which his habitual acquaintance with the Scottish supplied, rendered his expression confined and embarrassed. No man ever had more command of this ancient Doric dialect than Burns. He has left a curious testimony of his skill, in a letter to Mr Nicol, published in this volume; an attempt to read a sentence of which, would break the teeth of most modern Scotchmen.
Three or four letters from William Burns, a brother of the poet, are introduced for no purpose that we can guess, unless to show that he wrote and thought like an ordinary journeyman saddler. We would readily have believed, without positive proof, that the splendid powers of the poet were not imparted to the rest of his family.
We scarcely know, upon the whole, in what terms we ought to dismiss Mr Cromek. If the reputation of Burns alone be considered, this volume cannot add to his fame; and it is too well fixed to admit of degradation. The Cantata already mentioned, is indeed the only one of his productions not published by Dr Currie, which we consider as
[Page 266]
not merely justifying, but increasing his renown. It is enough to say of the very best of those now published, that they take nothing from it. What the public may gain by being furnished with additional means of estimating the character of this wonderful and self-taught genius, we have already endeavoured to state. We know not whether the family of the poet will derive any advantage from this publication of his remains. If so, it is the best apology for their being given to the world; if not, we have no doubt that the editor, as he is an admirer of Chaucer, has read of a certain pardoner, who
—“with his relics when that he fond
A poor persone dwelling up on lond,
Upon a day he gat him more moneie
Than that the persone got in monethes tweie.”
[Page 301]
ARTICLE XII. SOUTHEY'S CURSE OF KEHAMA. [ From the Quarterly Review, February , 1811. The Curse of Kehama. By Robert Southey . London: 1810.] Ever since the revival of letters, the learned world has been agitated by dissensions between two of its most distinguished classes, the poets and the critics, and each has in its turn made a plausible appeal to the public. The poets have urged, and with much appearance of justice, that their peculiar talent being of a nature singularly capricious and evanescent, it is not in the power even of the possessors to prescribe its exertions. That for this reason it has almost in every language borne a name implying inspiration, as if poetry were less the work of the author in his ordinary and imperturbed state of mind, than the effusion of a moment of enthusiasm, when the ideas are sublimed, and the imagination kindled by an impulse which he can neither guide nor withstand. They have proceeded in pathetic strains to state the hardship of
[Page 302]
a profession in which their exertions, if successful, are uniformly dogged by calumny, and, if otherwise, by contempt and disgrace. It is but fair, they allege, that in so disadvantageous a combat they should be allowed to choose their own ground, to make such experiments upon the public taste, and the principles of their own art, as change of times appears to demand; and that it is the height of injustice to confine their efforts to the subjects chosen by their predecessors which have now lost the gloss of novelty, and are become in a manner exhausted. They contend that themselves alone can be judges of the force and faculties of their own mind, and consequently of the most advantageous mode of employing their powers; and that urging them to a style of composition, which, however excellent in itself, is alien from their temper and studies, is as absurd as to compel David to use the armour which he had not proved, instead of his own pastoral stone and sling.—The object of poetry is pleasure; and if the old track has ceased to guide us towards it, fresh avenues must be opened. Nay, conceding that the style of their predecessors is more pure and excellent than their own, modern authors still plead that, like a popular melody “which the carmen whistle,” it has in some degree lost its effect by repeated and dull imitation. Let us, say they, yield to the usual revolutions of taste, and indulge the public with some variety in poetical composition. Those who succeed us, more fortunate than ourselves, may again resort to the imitation of purer models, and their efforts will not only have the renewed grace
[Page 303]
of novelty but all the advantages which can be gained by a contrast with our own.
The critics are not without their answers to these charges. They plead that poetry, like all the other fine arts, has its general rules, which, though strictly observed, will still leave endless scope for variety. That as the musician consents that his notes shall be arranged by the general laws of harmony, it does not become the poet to assume the license of framing his effusions according to the fantastic dictates of his own imagination. If, in a long succession of ages, the legitimate subjects of verse lose the charm of absolute novelty, the loss had better be supplied by an attempt to throw over them a polish and a grace to which the ancient models were strangers, than by capricious excursions into the realms of fancy. The form of a Grecian temple, they say, no longer boasts to our eyes the charm of novelty; yet that is no reason for supplying its place by the grotesque and puerile singularities of a Chinese pagoda. The plea of hardship they refute by an appeal to the experience of every other profession, where long study and early apprenticeship are as indispensable to success as genius and talent. To the personal objection against their judgment, they reply that the poet is seldom the best judge of his own compositions, or the most impartial arbiter of those of others; that in the glow of enthusiastic feeling he is apt to misuse his own talents and mislead the public taste; and that in all nations there has arisen, with the general diffusion of literature, a separate class of men neither professing to be poets themselves, nor
[Page 304]
to read poetry upon the usual motives of interest and amusement, but for the sake of justice to the dead and candour to the living, to mark the progress of the art itself, to correct the exuberances of its professors, to point out their excellences, to whisper to them the advice which they can never collect from the thunder of applause.
Amid these contending pretensions, it appears to us that the critic rests too much upon usage and authority, and that the poet allows too little to the general principles of taste. The former would tie down an author to the rules of Scaliger and Bossu, the latter claims an indemnity from all critical regulation whatever. It requires little acquaintance with poetry to know how few good epics have appeared; and we fear that of those which retain the greatest share of popularity, very few will be found to be written by poets who have left the beaten track, and endeavoured to produce something new and original. The ingenuity of critics has been strained to discover common rules, which should at once apply to the Iliad and Paradise Lost ; but whoever will fairly take a view of the subject, must be satisfied that although the talents of the two authors did in many material points resemble each other, yet the nature of their themes, the object of their poetry, the rules upon which it is conducted, differ as widely as possible; and if they had not both been called epic poets, scarcely another point of resemblance would be found between them. Virgil, it is true, has followed Homer more closely, reducing, however, to line and measure the exuberances of his model,
[Page 305]
and thus presenting the graces of regularity instead of the bold front of originality. But, although this attempt was crowned with success, and was in fact rather the introduction of a new species of writing, grounded upon the Grecian epic, than a strict imitation of Homer, the various bards who attempted to follow in the same path have been less fortunate.—Tasso, indeed, is an exception; but they who read him attentively will find they owe much of their pleasure to those passages in which the Æneid and Iliad are withdrawn from our recollection. The beautiful episode of Arminia is an incident of a pastoral nature, and the adventure of the enchanted forest a chapter in a metrical romance. To most Italians, and indeed to many other readers of poetry, Ariosto is more pleasing than Tasso; which certainly can only arise from the fatiguing corollary which the Jerusalem Delivered forms to the siege of Troy. Of later writers it is needless and would be invidious to speak. They load our shelves indeed, and are recorded in our catalogues; but who can say that the learned labours of Bossu, so admirably ridiculed by Pope, have added one readable poem to the literature of France or England? The harp of Mincio has made miserable music in the hands of Voltaire, Blackmore, and later worthies; and we may well use the expostulation of a living poet,—
“Must sleepy bards the flattering dream prolong,
Mechanic echoes of the Mantuan song,
From truth and nature shall we widely stray,
Where Virgil not where fancy leads the way?”
[Page 306]
Here, therefore, is one road to the temple of fame, not indeed blockaded, but broken up and rendered impassable by the numbers who have trodden it. Similar changes have happened in other professions; and as popularity is at present sought by varying from the classic subjects of the ancients, by describing Gothic castles, modern cottages, and, as we shall presently see, Indian pagodas, so the painter who can no longer succeed by imitations of Raphael and Guido, gains the public applause by groups of peasants, fishers, and smugglers. This may cost the antiquary a sigh, and draw from the critic a stern rebuke; but, after all, it is but a specimen of the eternal operation of change, to which literature, like the globe itself, is necessarily subjected.
“What man that sees the ever-whirling wheel
Of change, the which all mortal things doth sway,
But that thereby doth find and plainly feel
How mutability in them doth play
Her cruel sports to many men's decay?”
There are, however, as the same poet proceeds to inform us, laws by which mutability herself is regulated in her various and capricious movements, and which, therefore, may supply the critic with a code independent of her influence. Such laws, indeed, are to be drawn, not from the mechanical jargon of French criticism, but from an accurate consideration of the springs and movements of the human heart. These doubtless are changed and modified in the different stages of society, as the outward figure is disguised or altered by the progressive change of dress. But the nature of the human mind in the one case, as the conformation of the
[Page 307]
limbs in the other, remains in fact unaltered; and, making allowance always for the particular stage of society, it is that to which we must finally appeal in censuring or approving poetical composition. The writings of the ancients may be then properly consulted, not as containing the authority by which their successors must be regulated, but as affording the happiest illustration of those general principles upon which poetry ought to be written. We can only slightly glance at this subject at present; but should we ever recur to it, it may not be difficult to prove, that the elder critics, in their pedantic veneration for the ancients, totally overlooked the real advantage to be derived from studying them, and thus, to speak the language of the schools, confounding the accidental and formal qualities with those which were essential to their poetry—drew the canons of criticism from the former instead of resorting to the latter, which it is no easy matter to analyze and define. Hence it has been laid down as a rule, that a modern should imitate Homer and Virgil in the subject, incident, and conduct of the story; instead of requiring him to emulate their spirit, upon a theme adapted to his own times, studies, and peculiar bent of genius.
We have been unavoidably led into this general line of reflection by the volume before us. The verses prefixed announce a determination in the author to step out of the common road of composition, and to put himself upon his country for the issue of his trespass, if there be one.
“For I will for no man's pleasure,
Change a syllable or measure.
[Page 308]
Pedants shall not tie my strains
To our antique poets' veins;
Being born as free as these,
I will sing as I shall please.”
This bold avowal is followed by a narrative poem, in twenty-four sections, of a nature powerfully interesting, and at the same time the most wild and uncommon which has hitherto fallen under our observation. The story is founded upon the Hindoo mythology, the most gigantic, cumbrous, and extravagant system of idolatry to which temples were ever erected. The scene is alternately laid in the terrestrial paradise, under the sea—in the heaven of heavens—and in hell itself. The principal actors are a man who approaches almost to omnipotence; another labouring under a strange and fearful malediction, which exempts him from the ordinary laws of nature; a good genius, a sorceress, and a ghost, with several Hindostan deities of different ranks. The only being that retains the usual attributes of humanity is a female, who is gifted with immortality at the close of the piece. That nothing in this extraordinary poem might resemble what had been written before, the measure is of a kind absolutely new in narrative poetry. It resembles that of Thalaba in structure; but being in rhyme, although the coincidences are of irregular occurrence, it may be best compared to the pindarics of Donne and Cowley; a measure which, if it sometimes disappoints the ear, does at others unexpectedly form the happiest and most beautiful combinations of harmony, and is, upon the whole, by its very wildness, excellently suited to the strange and irregular
[Page 309]
magnificence of the descriptions which it is employed to convey.—But we hasten to give a sketch of the story.
It is necessary, first, to notice a peculiarity of the Hindoo religion, upon which Mr Southey has founded his poem. It is thus described in the preface:—
“Prayers, penances, and sacrifices, are supposed to possess an inherent and actual value, in no degree depending upon the disposition or motive of the person who performs them. They are drafts upon Heaven, for which the Gods cannot refuse payment. The worst men, bent upon the worst designs, have in this manner obtained power which has made them formidable to the Supreme Deities themselves, and rendered an Avatar , or incarnation of Vishnoo the Preserver, necessary.”— Pref . pp. vii. viii.
The reader, then, is to suppose that Kehama, a mighty rajah, had, by a course of austere penances and extraordinary sacrifices, extorted from the deities of Hindostan a power which upon earth was already equal to their own. Neither did he therefore cease his devotions, which although offered with the worst and most malignant designs, and accepted by the deities with reluctance and terror, did nevertheless authorize him to claim from them still farther accessions of power. The gods, who observed that he continued by new austerities and sacrifices to make daily encroachments on their prerogatives, anticipated with growing alarm the period of their final subjection to this inexorable aspirant. The dreaded moment seemed not far remote; for Kehama, having already acquired full power over the earth, was engaged in a series of mysterious sacrifices, the consummation of which would, by the conquest of Indra, subject the Swerga (the heaven of our earthly system), together with
[Page 310]
all its tenantry of gods, to his authority.—His next object of ambition is to be the conquest of the regions of Padalon, the Hindoo Tartarus, where the Amreeta or drink of immortality was deposited; when he shall have possessed himself of this divine liquor, it will only remain that he should scale the empyreum, and struggle for the full power of divinity with Bramah, Vishnoo, and Seeva—the Trimourtee of the Bramins. But though thus elevated in present power, and yet more by future prospect above the lot of humanity, this mighty being was not yet exempted from the evils which attend it. Arvalan, his only son, whom he had secured from steel and fire, was slain with a stake by a peasant whose daughter he was attempting to violate. The poem opens with the following rich and brilliant description of the young rajah's funeral rites.
                     “Midnight, and yet no eye
      Through all the Imperial City clos'd in sleep!
                     Behold her streets a-blaze
         With light that seems to kindle the red sky,
   Her myriads swarming through the crowded ways!
                     Master and slave, old age and infancy,
                     All, all abroad to gaze;
                     House-top and balcony
   Clustered with women, who throw back their veils,
                     With unimpeded and insatiate sight
      To view the funeral pomp which passes by,
                     As if the mournful rite
   Were but to them a scene of joyance and delight.
         Vainly, ye blessed twinklers of the night,
                     Your feeble beams ye shed,
Quench'd in the unnatural light which might out-stare
                     Even the broad eye of day;
                     And thou from thy celestial way
                     Pourest, O Moon, an ineffectual ray!
      For lo! ten thousand torches flame and flare
                     Upon the midnight air,
                     Blotting the lights of heaven
[Page 311]
                     With one portentous glare.
      Behold the fragrant smoke in many a fold,
                     Ascending floats along the fiery sky,
                     And hangeth visible on high,
                     A dark and waving canopy!
         Hark. 'tis the funeral trumpet's breath!
                     'Tis the dirge of death!
                     At once ten thousand drums begin
   With one long thunder-peal the ear assailing;
                     Ten thousand voices then join in,
                     And with one deep and general din
                     Pour their wild wailing.
                     The song of praise is drown'd
                     Amid that deafening sound;
                     You hear no more the trumpet's tone,
                     You hear no more the mourner's moan,
Though the trumpet's breath, and the dirge of death,
                     Mingle and swell the funeral yell.
                     But rising over all in one acclaim
         Is heard the echoed and re-echoed name,
                     From all that countless rout:
                     Arvalan! Arvalan!
                     Arvalan! Arvalan!
   Ten times ten thousand voices in one shout
      Call Arvalan! The overpowering sound
      From house to house repeated rings about,
                     From tower to tower rolls round.”
With equally glowing colours the author proceeds to describe the procession of the Bramins, and the appearance of the wives of Arvalan, who are doomed to share with him the funeral pile.—Their respective demeanour is marked with the masterly hand of genius, that loves to contrast the effects of the same fate upon different dispositions. Azla calmly takes her seat, while “young Nealliny” loudly invokes the compassion of the attendants, until she is bound by force to the dead body of her husband. The pile is fired with a solemnity at once awful and pathetic, by the hand of Kehama himself, amid
[Page 312]
the noise of a thousand instruments of music, and the shouts of the immense multitude, which drown the cries of the living victims. When all is in one mass of flame, Kehama, moving towards the table of the dead, evokes the spirit of his slaughtered son. He appears, and a scene of recrimination takes place, in which they mutually reproach each other. At length Arvalan, after being endowed with all the attributes of which his spirit could be made participant, demands the farther boon of exemplary and lasting vengeance. Kehama then turns again to the pile, raises his hand to command silence, and orders the peasant and his daughter, who had been dragged in the train of the funeral procession, to be brought forth. Kailyal, the female, flies for aid to a rude image of Marriataly, the protecting goddess of the poor, which stood on the banks of the Ganges, where the funeral rites were performed. A thousand hands strive to tear her from the sanctuary, but the offended deity at once displaces her idol, and plunges it with the suppliant maiden and the sacrilegious violators of her rights, into the broad and rapid torrent below. Kehama, nothing moved, turns the whole of his wrath against the father Ladurlad, upon whom he pronounces the doom which gives name to the poem. The pause which precedes his revenge is horribly sublime, as well as the curse itself.
      “I charm thy life
From the weapons of strife,
From stone and from wood,
From fire and from flood,
From the serpent's tooth,
And the beasts of blood:
[Page 313]
   From Sickness I charm thee,
   And Time shall not harm thee,
      But Earth which is mine,
      Its fruits shall deny thee;
      And Water shall hear me,
   And know thee and fly thee;
And the Winds shall not touch thee,
      When they pass by thee:
   And the Dews shall not wet thee,
      When they fall nigh thee:
      And thou shalt seek Death
      To release thee, in vain;
      Thou shalt live in thy pain,
      While Kehama shall reign,
         With a fire in thy heart,
         And a fire in thy brain;
      And Sleep shall obey me,
         And visit thee never,
   And the Curse shall be on thee
         For ever and ever.”
Under this anathema Ladurlad stands motionless, hearing the sounds which formerly rang in his ear, seeing the multitude dispersing, and the funeral solemnity almost concluded, yet feeling that his dreadful fate had already begun to operate. Devoted to inexpressible bodily torture, and deprived not only of hope during life, but of death itself, he staggers wildly from the spot, and losing sight of the decaying fires and the bands of priests and soldiers which surrounded them, he moves, in solitary contemplation of his misery, along the banks of the river. Here he spies an object borne down by the current,—it is the image of Marriataly, to which his daughter still clings. Full of hope and joy he dashes into the waters, which obeyed Kehama, and retreated before him.—Blind to the miracle, he only thinks of Kailyal, and drags her
[Page 314]
to shore, where the sad development of their lot forms the subject of some beautiful stanzas, replete with poetry and natural and affectionate feeling.
Repeated trials convince Ladurlad of the sad reality of his curse. The water avoids his hand— the wind, which waves every leaf around him, is unfelt:—sleep will doubtless know the Rajah's spell, and fly from his victim—even the grave, the last refuge of the wretched, is denied. Wandering yet farther into the forest, Kailyal and her father recline near a tiger's haunt. The scene which follows is as impressive and affecting as the subject is wild and extraordinary. Ladurlad, for his daughter's sake, silently mans himself to endure the raging pain which attended his singular destiny, while Kailyal almost persuades herself, from the regularity of his breathing, that heaven had lent some respite to his sorrow, and in this hope sinks to rest. Ladurlad, who was awake, and felt the whole effects of the curse, now resolved to withdraw from his daughter, and save her the sight of his misery. He had hardly executed his purpose ere she awoke, and pursued him with all the agony of filial affection driven to despair. Her path is crossed by the spectre of Arvalan, who gifted by his sire with power to execute the foul purpose, in attempting which he had perished, pursues his prey into the temple of Pollear. This potent deity, incensed at the sacrilegious intrusion, seizes Arvalan in his grasp, and whirls him to an immense distance. Kailyal, ignorant of the power who had saved her, continues her flight, till she stumbles at
[Page 315]
the roots of a manchineil, and lies like a corpse beneath its deadly shade. Here she must have perished; but a Glendoveer, or good genius, one of the most amiable of created intelligences, taking compassion on her forlorn state, bears her to Mount Himacoot, the abode of Casyapa, the Saturn of Hindostan, and father of all the inferior gods. The aged deity, who wants power to contend with Kehama, warns the Glendoveer of the risk of undertaking the protection of one persecuted by the tyrant, whose encroachments on the deities became every day more formidable. Charmed with the beauties and virtues which he has rescued, the Glendoveer determines not to abandon Kailyal, and conveys her in the “ship of heaven,” one of the most awkward contrivances of the poem, to the Swerga or terrestrial paradise, the abode of Indra. Here also he meets a cold reception, for Indra trembles at Kehama. Kailyal prays to be returned to earth, that she may assuage, by participation, the lot of her father; and Indra, affected by her virtue, finally resolves to afford her and Ladurlad a temporary asylum.
——“Where Ganges has its birth,
Below our sphere and yet above the earth;
There may Ladurlad rest beyond the power
   Of the dread Rajah till the fated hour.”
The hour apprehended by Indra was fast approaching. Ninety-nine steeds had already bled on Seeva's altar, and when another victim should complete the sacrifice, the power of Kehama must supersede that of the sovereign of the Swerga. The horse destined for this purpose was carefully guarded; but the troops watched him at a distance
[Page 316]
because the touch of human hand would render him unfit for the altar. He is driven forward by the contracting bands of archers, who only leave him a passage to the temple. His terror at the unaccustomed objects, and the deep silence with which an immense crowd watched for the completion of the sacrifice, are described in thrilling language. As Kehama lifts the axe, a man springs from the crowd to seize the hallowed steed. A thousand archers at once discharge their shafts; but they fall harmless from the invulnerable stranger, who mounts the steed, gallops round the circle, and renders the victim thus profaned totally unfit for the purpose of the sacrificer. The intruder is dragged to the feet of Kehama, but on him (for it was Ladurlad) the Rajah had already exercised all his vengeance. He therefore turned his fury on the troops, who did not prevent his intrusion; and a scene of blood ensues perfectly characteristic of Indian manners, and described with all the dreadful graces of poetry.
The consequences of this horrible massacre are painted with equal truth and sublimity.
                     “The steam of slaughter from that place of blood
                     Spread o'er the tainted sky.
                     Vultures for whom the Rajah's tyranny
                     So oft had furnished food, from far and nigh
                     Sped to the lure: aloft with joyful cry
                     Wheeling around, they hover'd over head;
                     Or on the temple perch'd, with greedy eye,
                     Impatient watch'd the dead.
                     Far off the tigers in the inmost wood,
Heard the death-shriek, and snuff'd the scent of blood.
                     They rose, and through the covert went their way,
Couch'd at the forest's edge, and waited for their prey.”
[Page 317]
Ladurlad mean while had wandered from the scene of cruelty, and almost unwittingly reached the habitation of his earlier days. This is one of the most beautiful passages of the poem, and displays, in an eminent degree, the art with which Mr Southey has contrived to unite the supernatural tone of his poem with the genuine feelings of humanity, and thus given the sufferings of Ladurlad an interest of which the utter impossibility of his case might otherwise seem to deprive him. The scene of former happiness, the recollection of his deceased wife and persecuted daughter, rush upon him with double force, at the sight of the desolation occasioned by his absence from what was once the spot of domestic peace. The distant mirth of his former neighbours, heard from the village market-place, is exquisitely described as acting upon the miserable man like an insult to his wretchedness, although he knew they were not aware of his presence. These sad reveries are interrupted by the apparition of Arvalan. This unrelenting spectre proceeds to new acts of insult, but is put to flight by Ereenia, the benevolent Glendoveer, who, in obedience to the commands of Indra, conveys Ladurlad to his daughter's temporary asylum at the holy source of the Ganges.
In the delicious groves which surround Mount Meru, the persecuted pair are joined by Yedillian, the deceased wife of Ladurlad, and mother of Kailyal; and the society thus strangely assembled, consisting of a genie, a ghost, and two mortals, continue a while in happiness, notwithstanding an attempt of the inveterate Arvalan, assisted by a
[Page 318]
potent enchantress, to intrude upon their place of refuge. But in the opening of the twelfth section they are disturbed by the intelligence that Kehama is about to renew the sacrifice which had been interrupted, and that there was no safety for them in Mount Meru. The mortals return, the fiery curse again occupies the heart and brain of Ladurlad, and hardly do they stand upon middle earth when the blow is struck, and the sacrifice completed.
                     “Around her Father's neck the Maiden lock'd
                     Her arms, when that portentous blow was given;
                     Clinging to him she heard the dread uproar,
And felt the shuddering shock which ran through Heaven.
                     Earth underneath them rock'd,
                     Her strong foundations heaving in commotion,
                     Such as wild winds upraise in raving Ocean,
                     As though the solid base were rent asunder.
                     And lo! where, storming the astonish'd sky,
                     Kehama and his evil host ascend!
                     Before them rolls the thunder,
                     Ten thousand thousand lightnings round them fly,
                     Upward the lengthening pageantries aspire,
Leaving from Earth to Heaven a widening wake of fire.”
Neither earth nor heaven was to afford Kailyal rest. A band of Yoguees or profligate priests seize her as a bride for Jaga-naut, in whose name they prosecute their infamous pleasures. Kailyal is led in a procession, which is described with magnificent luxuriance. She is imprisoned in the interior of the temple, and the chief Bramin approaches his prey, when he is anticipated by the spectre, who dashes him to earth, and occupies his dead body. The Glendoveer again appears, but is hurried off by the demons who attend the
[Page 319]
son of Kehama. Kailyal sets fire to the pagoda, and Arvalan, who was now sensible to the flames, flies in dismay; while Ladurlad, fenced by his enemy's curse against the rage of every element, rushes through the conflagration, and rescues his daughter from its fury.
In the next section the father and daughter proceed to the release of the benevolent Glendoveer. Kailyal had learned from the exulting expressions of Arvalan, that he had imprisoned his rival in the sepulchre of an ancient monarch, Baly by name, whose capital had been overwhelmed by the ocean. The obscure yet wondrous remains of the submarine city are displayed in the most glowing and romantic colours. Ladurlad, over whom the sea had no power, enters gardens where earthly vegetation was replaced by a thousand marine productions which emulated all the splendours of Flora, and penetrated to the caverns where the race of the mighty Baly were deposited in death.
      “Deep in the marble rock, the Hall
Of Death was hollowed out, a chamber wide,
      Low-roof'd, and long; on either side,
   Each in his own alcove, and on his throne,
   The Kings of old were seated: in his hand
         Each held the sceptre of command,
From whence, across that scene of endless night,
   A carbuncle diffused its everlasting light.”
At the extremity of this awful range of sepulchres he beholds Ereenia chained to the rock, and guarded by a huge sea monster, whose conflict with Ladurlad is one of the most (unnatural we cannot say) but unpleasing and useless prodigies in the poem. They struggle for a whole week,
[Page 320]
the one secured by the anathema of Kehama, the other by his invulnerable scales. The contest finds a singular termination: “the beast must sleep or die;” and as Ladurlad presses too closely on him to admit of repose, the latter alternative becomes inevitable. Ladurlad now frees the Glendoveer, and they joyously ascend to the earth, where Kailyal awaited their return on the shore. The pleasure of their meeting is checked by the reappearance of the eternal Arvalan, on whom all former correction had been thrown away. At this nice moment Baly, who, in consequence of his virtues, had been constituted judge of Padalon (the Hindoo hell), happened to be taking his yearly walk upon earth, and, espying his advantage, seized upon Arvalan, his confederate enchantress, and their assistants; and without waiting for Kehama, who was hastening to the rescue of his son, regained the infernal territories, yet inaccessible to the Rajah's power, and secured his prisoners. Kehama, thus anticipated, meditates new persecutions for the unhappy Kailyal, whose hand he now demands for himself, alleging that he and she alone were destined to partake of the amreeta, or cup of immortality, which he speedily hoped to compel Yamen, the Pluto of the Bramin Tartarus, to deliver. The description of Kehama, when he softened his terrors, reminds us of the Satan of Milton, yet stands the comparison.
                     “Pride could not quit his eye,
                     Nor that remorseless nature from his front
                     Depart: yet whoso had beheld him then
Had felt some admiration mix'd with dread,
[Page 321]
                     And might have said
                     That sure he seem'd to be the King of Men;
                     Less than the greatest that he could not be,
Who carried in his port such might and majesty.”
His suit, though backed by the proffered recall of the fatal curse, is steadily rejected by Ladurlad and Kailyal, and he leaves them with an aggravated anathema.
The daring Glendoveer mean while had scaled Mount Calasay, the empyreum where Bramah, Vishnoo, and Seeva dwell in an abyss of light. Here he is directed to descend to the kingdom of Yamen, and await the unravelling of the will of destiny. Though this seemed but indifferent consolation, the Glendoveer, with Kailyal and her father, undertakes the melancholy journey. They cross the sea which divides middle earth from the realms of Yamen, and find upon the opposite shore the crowds who wait admittance into his dreary kingdom. Padalon was encircled by an icy mound. Eight gates gave access to this region of punishment, and at each the warders mounted double guard, apprehensive of the invasion of Kehama, who, having conquered earth and sky, now threatened hell itself. The visitors enter Padalon in a chariot, which hung self-balanced on a single wheel. Here the scene was altered.
                     “Far other light than that of day there shone,
                     Upon the travellers, entering Padalon.
                     They, too, in darkness entered on their way,
                     But, far before the Car,
                     A glow, as of a fiery furnace light,
Fill'd all before them. 'T was a light which made
[Page 322]
                     Darkness itself appear
                     A thing of comfort, and the sight dismay'd
                     Shrunk inward from the molten atmosphere.
                     Their way was through the adamantine rock
                     Which girt the World of Wo; on either side
                     Its massive walls arose, and overhead
                     Arch'd the long passage; onward as they ride,
With stronger glare the light around them spread,
                     And lo! the regions dread,
The World of Wo before them, opening wide.”
The single-wheeled car crosses the fiery flood on a “rib of steel,” sharp as the edge of a sabre, while the screams and torments of the damned in the gulf beneath are described with all the gloomy power of Dante. Even a new feature of terror is afforded to these accursed regions by the apprehended insurrection of their inhabitants, who, expecting the descent of Kehama, their deliverer, are with difficulty retained in subjection by multiplied guards and additional tortures. Through such sounds and sights of terror, the suppliants at length reach the judgment-seat of Yamen. His golden throne is propped at the three corners by three figures red-hot, yet retaining the form and sensations of humanity: the fourth corner is unsupported. As in this tottering state it could not afford a secure seat for the monarch of Padalon, Yamen had placed himself upon a huge marble sepulchre, the abode of his consort Azyoruca, who received into her hundred arms the souls whose doom her husband pronounced.
Yamen had scarcely welcomed the fugitives, when the approach of Kehama to storm his realms became manifest, and the tumult of hell, the clang of the tormentors' scourges, and the shrieks of the
[Page 323]
sufferers, were lost in a dreadful interval of suspense.
                     “The voice of lamentation ceased in Hell,
                     And sudden silence all around them fell,
                     Silence more wild and terrible
                     Than all the infernal dissonance before:
Through that portentous stillness, far away,
Unwonted sounds were heard advancing on
                     And deepening on their way.”
This sublime passage announces the Rajah, and we could have wished that it had altogether superseded the account of his actual assault; which, though perfectly consonant to Hindoo superstition, is far too extravagant for a serious poem. Kehama, self-multiplied by the attribute of divine power which he had extorted from heaven, stood at the self-same moment before the eight gates of hell, stormed each of them at the same instant, and advanced, as it were, in eight columns over the eight causeways which led to the throne of Yamen. The penal fires grew pale before the lightnings which attended his career, and the thunders of hell were drowned in the louder terrors which proclaimed his march. The gates of the Hindoo pandæmonium are burst open, and the Rajah in all his forms surrounds its monarch.—The strife is judiciously veiled by darkness, but the issue is not long dubious. Kehama, having resumed his individuality, is discovered seated on the marble tomb, with Yamen under his feet. He demands of the three living statues who prop the golden throne, what they are, and for whom the fourth place is reserved. They answer by a description of their vices, and declare in chorus that the vacant corner is destined
[Page 324]
for one equal in guilt to themselves, and that they had long looked for that one in Kehama. The Rajah smiled contemptuously, and ordered the amreeta to be brought forth: obedient to his voice, the marble sepulchre opened, and “a huge anatomy within its womb” presented the “cup of immortality.”
The Rajah again invites Kailyal to partake his power, accompanied by a threat that if she refuses, her father shall supply the vacant place under the judgment-seat of Yamen. Both remain unmoved: “the resolute heart and virtnous will” oppose the tyrant even in the plenitude of his triumph over death and fate. Kehama had no sooner quaffed the amreeta, than he experienced the doom of his impious ambition:—immortality, happy immortality at least, could not be the meed of evil; the liquor ran through his veins in a stream of molten fire, torturing but not destroying his frame; and the Rajah, maugre his omnipotence, feels himself compelled to assume his place, the fourth burning column of the infernal throne. Kailyal now drinks; but the amreeta, of which the qualities were beneficent or malignant according to the properties of those who partook of it, did but consume the dross of humanity, and qualify her to enjoy immortal happiness with her beloved Ereenia. The god of death then casts his eye upon Ladurlad, who sinks at the glance into his last mortal slumber.
“Blessed that sleep, more blessed was the waking,
   For on that night a heavenly morning broke:
The light of heaven was round him when he woke,
      And in the Swerga in Yedillian's bower,
   All whom he loved he met to part no more.”
[Page 325]
Such is the termination of this singular poem, which, notwithstanding its wild and extravagant tenor, riveted our attention more powerfully than any thing which we have lately perused. It is difficult to adopt any certain rule of criticism with respect to a production so anomalous. In other cases we perceive the mark at which the author has aimed, and can therefore judge whether he has fallen short of it; but Mr Southey resembles Acestes, who shot merely to show the strength of his bow, and the height to which he could send his arrow.
—“Volans liquidis in nubibus arsit arundo
Signavitque viam flammis.”
In this point of view, it is impossible to read the Curse of Kehama without conceiving the highest opinion of the author's force of imagination, and power of expression. The passages which we have quoted will bear us out in asserting, that no bard of modern days possesses a more abundant share of imagination, the highest of poetic qualities. There is a glow, an exuberancy even in his descriptions, indicating a richness of fancy adequate to supply the waste not of use only, but of extravagance; and perhaps it is a natural consequence of such attributes, that, like Collins, “he loves fairies, genii, giants, and monsters—delights to rove through the meanders of enchantment, to gaze on the magnificence of golden palaces, and to repose by the water-falls of Elysian gardens.” To this taste we owe the “wild and wondrous tale” of Thalaba , and the still more wild and wondrous Curse of Kehama . If we compare these extraordinary poems
[Page 326]
we shall find, that though they bear the same relation to each other as those paintings which are termed companions, their leading features are nevertheless different. The mythology of Thalaba is drawn from a source with which we became early acquainted. Turbans and scimitars, caliphs and viziers, dervises and calendars, mosques and minarets, the practice and almost the theory of the Moslem religion, are familiar to us, from those delightful days when awakening fancy first rioted on the banquet of fictitious narrative. But what the Curse of Kehama wants in the charm of early prepossession, it enjoys in the more important quality of edification. The Hindoo religion, of which Europeans, nay, Indo-Europeans, know little, excepting from the ponderous labours of a few literati, is not only curious as one of the most ancient existing superstitions, but particularly interesting, as regulating the religious belief and moral practice of millions, whom treaty or conquest has united to the British empire.
But it must not be understood, while we are thus expressing our thanks for the form in which so much instruction is conveyed to us, that we consider Mr Southey as having employed the energies of his genius, and the treasures of his knowledge, in constructing a tale which should have no higher object than to introduce to the world the Hindoo mythology, made plain and easy to the meanest capacity . The poet, we apprehend, had discovered, that on this mythology he could raise such a fabric as he now presents to us—that he could reduce its unwieldy and disjointed parts into some kind of
[Page 327]
form—and, divesting of extravagance what he found in it of sublimity, employ the means, which a particular superstition offered to his hands, in the production of a work which should excite an interest as universal as that of the most probable fable. And here we feel that our highest tribute of praise is due to Mr Southey, as a poet and a man. In whatever degree the cause of virtue and of morals —and we must be blind indeed not to discover his uniform exertions on their side—has been indebted to him heretofore, it has now to acknowledge far more splendid services. His heroine does not owe triumph to supernatural interpositions, founded on principles of which the developement can neither increase our interest nor admiration. From the Gods she could derive but little assistance; for, till the final incident of the poem takes place, the victrix causa seems to be that of their enemy. Heaven itself stands in need of Ladurlad; and, together with him, she is identified with the interests of its inhabitants. Whence, then, springs this union ultimately so effectual in baffling the ambitious purposes of Kehama? The answer is obvious;—from the moral character of Kailyal, which is perpetually opposed to the inordinate attempts, and almost omnipotent wickedness of the Rajah. His persecutions serve only to increase her patience and piety, and to turn her mind into itself in search of means of defence against her singular calamities. To the moral agency of this principle the poem owes its grandeur, at once splendid and severe.
A work which combines with circumstances of this nature a powerful imaginative character, has
[Page 328]
certainly advanced far towards perfection in one of the chief objects of poetry—the elevation of the human mind; which is thus for a time lifted above the sphere of common life, its low pursuits and passions, and carried into an empyreum of fancy, where it may rove at will through blissful regions of its own creation. It is impossible for a reader of feeling to rise from such a poem without being sensible of this abstraction; without a consciousness that he has at least enjoyed a glimpse of virtue —that his heart has been warmed by her influence —and that, however transient this influence might be, it brought with it a conviction of the existence of that divine original from which it sprung. Poetry, indeed, cannot create a soil for virtue to take root in; but whenever it appears in its loftier character, it seldom fails to invigorate and enrich that in which it is already implanted.
Some remarks upon the conduct of the work will naturally be expected from us. In this Mr Southey had to struggle with two great difficulties. The poem being entirely mythological, and the agents, generally speaking, having little in common with humanity, it must, at first sight, seem difficult to preserve that interest in the action of the piece which forms the principal charm of narrative. The poet, whose heart is always true to moral feeling, has overcome this disadvantage by the beautiful picture of filial affection exhibited in the amiable and virtuous Kailyal. It is this secret charm which gives interest to the adventures of the persecuted pair, remote as they are from all resemblance to possibility. The purity, simplicity, and self-devotion
[Page 329]
of this injured female sanctify her, as it were, in our fancy; nor can we consider as overstrained the beautiful passage in which her virtue, like that of Spenser's Una, is described as subjugating brute ferocity:—
                     “A charm was on the leopard, when he came
                     Within the circle of that mystic glade;
   Submiss he crouch'd before the heavenly maid,
      And offered to her touch his speckled side;
   Or with arched back erect, and bending head,
And eyes half closed for pleasure, would he stand,
      Courting the pressure of her gentle hand.”
The portrait of Ladurlad is also interesting, though in a less degree. The imagination is unable to receive the idea of intolerable torture existing for such a length of time; and although the poet has judiciously broken the spell by intervals of repose, yet when we consider the exertions made in the delivery of the Glendoveer, we are led to suspect that the pain had become sufferable by endurance. The love of the Glendoveer reminded us of the Comte de Gabalis, and of Pope, who adapted to comic machinery the attachment of his airy beings. It is, perhaps, less fitted to serious poetry; for so inseparable are our ideas even of sentimental affection, from the pangs of jealousy and the tumults of desire, that we can hardly conceive love, in the sense usually affixed to the word, existing between two beings of different natures, any more than between two persons of the same sex. But as Satan is the hero of Paradise Lost, so Kehama, partaking of his haughty and ambitious character, and exceeding him in power, is far the most prominent figure in the poem. Mr Southey has happily embodied
[Page 330]
his conception of an human being approaching in power to a divinity, in malignity to the evil principle. Severer critics may, however, censure the passage in the seventeenth section, where Baly carries off Arvalan; and where the Rajah, instead of attempting his rescue, proposes himself as a suitor to Kailyal, and thus altogether changes the motive of her persecution. Even when Kehama had subdued the god of hell, we hear nothing of his releasing Arvalan, although his affection for him is the main cause of the curse of Ladurlad. But we are more inclined to censure the conclusion of Kehama's career, as inconsistent with the dignity of his character and the extent of his powers. Something like the same incident is to be found in one of the tales of the Genii, where the waters of oblivion prove the waters of death; but this is more ingenious than the expedient by which Seeva humbles Kehama in the very height of his triumph. After all, a similar objection would probably have occurred to any manner in which the tale could be concluded: for as Kehama had been almost raised to a level with Omnipotence, it would not be easy to devise any adequate mode of accomplishing his overthrow.
A second difficulty which Mr Southey had to encounter, is that of adapting the vast and clumsy fabric of Indian mythology to the purposes of English poetry. We have observed the advantages which this presented; and the inconveniences are pointed out by the poet himself, when he acknowledges the anti-picturesque exterior of the Hindoo deities, and the frantic extravagance of the fables in
[Page 331]
which they are agents. Neither does he disguise the obvious objection, that the English reader may be startled by being plunged at once into a new and unknown system. The last difficulty Mr Southey has removed by a list of those deities who occupy a place among his dramatis personæ, and by distinguishing the character and functions of each. The other inconvenience was not so easily parried. Mr Southey has, indeed, generally speaking, chosen the most pleasing of the Hindoo traditions. But while plunging into such an abyss of monstrous and outrageous fictions, the poet, perhaps, became more familiarized with the Eastern style than was quite consistent with the necessary severity of selection, and we have been not a little startled at some of the topics which he has chosen to celebrate. We have already stated our objections to the eight-days' combat of Ladurlad with the sea-monster, and to the self-multiplication of Kehama, on his storming Padalon. We would have included in our expurganda Indra's elemental palace, built partly of fire, partly of water, had not the poetry been so exquisitely beautiful as to excuse extravagance itself: but a globe which the sorceress Lorrinite composed of the pupils of human eyes, we must condemn without mercy. We would also send to the Remise a certain infernal car, which, as it only moved on one wheel, must have been a precarious vehicle, even if it had traversed a road broader than the edge of a scimitar. The description of Mount Calasay, a silver hill, with seven silver ladders, is too much like a tale of Madame D'Aunois; and we cannot help remarking,
[Page 332]
that Yamen-pur, the metropolis of the infernal regions, being made of a single diamond, is the more brilliant habitation of the two. Accustomed as we are to the Grecian Cupid, we cannot reconcile ourselves to Camdeo's bowstring, which being composed of live bees, must have been singularly ill adapted to the purposes of archery; nor are we at all pleased with the bees breaking off upon one occasion, and hiving upon Kailyal's head. These and similar imperfections, however, were almost inseparable from a plan laid in the wildest regions of fiction. The Greeks alone have contrived to reconcile to grace, and to a decent probability, their mythological fables, while the Hindoos have, of all nations, run farthest into the extremes of tumid and unimaginable absurdity.
We can the more readily pardon Mr Southey for following, in a few instances, the bad taste of his model; because one of his principal beauties is derived from the uncommon art with which he has maintained the character of a poet of Hindostan. We have scarcely been able to find a passage, in which we are reminded that the bard is a European. The ornaments, the landscape, the animals, the similes, the language, the sentiments, are Oriental; selected, indeed, and arranged with more art than any Eastern poet could have displayed; but still composed of the very materials which he must necessarily have employed. This observation of manners and costume, is carried still farther than in Madoc. There the poet established among his imaginary Atzeucas, various rites observed in different parts of America; but
[Page 333]
here, where materials were more amply supplied, his manners and sentiments are not merely Oriental, but so distinctly and exclusively Hindoo, that they could be properly ascribed to no other Indian faith, and would be misplaced, had the story respected Mahometans, Thibetians, or Parsees. The genius and moral feeling of the author are, indeed, visibly superior to the colours with which he works; yet this superiority cannot be perceived from the Englishman breaking forth in any particular passage; but from the general light diffused over the whole picture, like that communicated by the sun to nature upon those days in which his orb is not visible.
Weighing, therefore, the beauties, and the imperfections connected with the author's plan, the former will be found to preponderate in a very great degree. But could not Mr Southey have selected some subject, admitting all that is excellent, and excluding all that is extravagant in his poem? We should be deficient indeed in our art, if we could not answer in the affirmative. As Mr Southey himself, however, was to write the poem, it is only reverence for the reader's leisure, which prevents our demanding that he shall choose for his next theme, one which will allow him to display the sublimity of Homer, the majesty of Virgil, the fancy of Ariosto, the chaste taste of Tasso, the solemnity of Dante, and all the attributes of all the first poets. But would our advice be reasonable? Or rather, would it not resemble the resolution of the mad monarch, the execution of which he wisely commits to his ministers?
[Page 334]
“He shall have chariots easier than air,
Which I will have invented —
And thou shalt ride before him, on a horse
Cut out of an entire diamond,
That shall be made to go with golden wheels
I know not how yet.” —
This is the false gallop of criticism---it is not pointing out to an author any reasonable object to be attained; but insidiously hinting at some unknown point of excellence, with whose bearings we doubtless are acquainted, though we kindly leave the poet to find them out as he can. In this we see neither wit nor wisdom: and shame on our craft if this finesse be its excellence! In judging of every human production, we can only estimate how far it exceeds or falls short of the common exertions of humanity; and it shows equal ignorance and injustice to attempt reducing it to the imaginary standard of some beau idéal , of which neither the author nor the critic has any distinct or accurate perception.
We have already noticed the singular style of versification employed in this poem, which resembles the Pindarics of the seventeenth century. In the construction and return of his language, and even of his modulations, we observe a marked imitation of Milton, and there are passages in which the sense also approaches very nearly to that of our great classic. The flight of Arvalan, when
   “Thrice through the vulnerable shade
The Glendoveer impels the griding blade,” &c.
inevitably recalls the griding sword of Michael. The beautiful retreat of the celestial inhabitants
[Page 335]
from the profaned Swerga, reminded us of the secession of the Hamadryads in the hymn to the Nativity . But Mr Southey, though we can discern that Milton is his favourite poet, is in no respect a servile imitator of his sublime model. His picture of the infernal regions may stand comparison with any poetic vision of those penal fires, from the days of Homer to those of Klopstock. The description hovers between that of Dante and Milton; not exhibiting the tedious particularity of the former, yet more detailed than that of the latter. The approach of the mortals to Padalon seems to us equal in grandeur to any passage which we ever perused. We will quote a few lines and close our criticism, though our subject is far from being exhausted.
   “Far other light than that of day there shone
                     Upon the travellers entering Padalon.
   They, too, in darkness entered on their way,
                     But, far before the Car,
                     A glow, as of a fiery furnace light,
Fill'd all before them. 'T was a light which made
                     Darkness itself appear
      A thing of comfort, and the sight, dismay'd,
      Shrunk inward from the molten atmosphere.
      Their way was through the adamantine rock
      Which girt the World of Wo; on either side
                     Its massive walls arose, and overhead
   Arch'd the long passage; onward as they ride,
With stronger glare, the light around them spread,
                     And lo! the regions dread,
   The World of Wo before them, opening wide.
                     There rolls the fiery flood,
                     Girding the realms of Padalon around.
                     A sea of flame it seem'd to be,
                     Sea without bound;
                     For neither mortal, nor immortal sight,
Could pierce across through that intensest light.”
[Page 336]
The notes contain a profusion of Eastern learning, and the massive blocks which Mr Southey has selected as specimens of Bramanical poetry and mythology, give us at once an idea of the immense quarries, in which the author must have laboured, and of the taste, skill, and labour necessary to fashion such unwieldy materials into the beautiful forms which they exhibit in the text.
Every theme, however pleasing, has its bounds, and we must bid farewell to Mr Southey, grateful for the pleasure afforded us. We can presage nothing as to the popularity of the present poem. Its faults lie on the surface, and are of a kind obnoxious to sarcasm and malicious ridicule. But its beauties are infinite, and it possesses that high qualification for popularity, the power of exciting a painful and sustained interest. There are still, surely, among us those who will tolerate the eccentricities of genius, in consideration of its lofty properties —properties which distinguish all the works of the poet; but which shine forth with transcendant lustre, in the Curse of Kehama.
Before we quit the poem, we are bound to notice the novel and beautiful manner in which it is printed. In general a page of poetry is displeasing to fastidious eyes, from the irregular terminations of the lines; this deformity is not only obviated, but a remarkable elegance in the typographic art is introduced in its stead. The centre of every verse is so placed, as to preserve an equal breadth of margin on each side, and to give the page a kind of lapidary appearance, which is singularly striking and agreeable, even before the cause of it is discovered.
[Page 337]
We hope that every “wire wove, hot pressed” poem, composed upon this model, will be printed with the same attention to picturesque beauty, as the Curse of Kehama, which has led the way to the only improvement of which the art of printing, in its present advanced state, is, perhaps, susceptible.
[Page 337]
ARTICLE XIII.
CHILDE HAROLD'S PILGRIMAGE. CANTO IV. [ From the Quarterly Review for 1818. Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. Canto IV. By Lord Byron .]
   “Farewell! a word that must be, and hath been—
   A sound which makes us linger;—yet—farewell!
   Ye! who have traced the Pilgrim to the scene
   Which is his last, if in your memories dwell
   A thought which once was his, if on ye swell
   A single recollection, not in vain
   He wore his sandal-shoon, and scallop-shell;
   Farewell! with him alone may rest the pain,
If such there were—with you , the moral of his strain!”
This solemn valediction, the concluding stanza of Lord Byron's poem, forms at once a natural and an impressive motto to our essay. “There are few things,” says the moralist, “not purely evil, of which
[Page 338]
we can say, without some emotion of uneasiness, this is the last . Those who could never agree together shed tears when mutual discontent has determined them to final separation, and of a place that has been frequently visited, though without pleasure, the last look is taken with heaviness of heart.” When we resume, therefore, our task of criticism, and are aware that we are exerting it for the last time upon this extraordinary work, we feel no small share of reluctance to part with the Pilgrim, whose wanderings have so often beguiled our labours, and diversified our pages. We part from Childe Harold as from the pleasant and gifted companion of an interesting tour, whose occasional waywardness, obstinaey, and caprice are forgotten in the depth of thought with which he commented upon subjects of interest as they passed before us, and in the brilliancy with which he coloured such scenery as addressed itself to the imagination. His faults, if we at all remember them, are recollected only with pity, as affecting himself indeed, but no longer a concern of ours:—his merits acquire double value in our eyes when we call to mind that we may perhaps never more profit by them. The scallop-shell and staff are now laid aside, the pilgrimage is accomplished, and Lord Byron, in his assumed character, is no longer to delight us with the display of his wondrous talents, or provoke us by the use he sometimes condescends to make of them,—a use which at times has reminded us of his own powerful simile,
“It was as is a new-dug grave,
Closing o'er one we sought to save.”
[Page 339]
Before we part, however, we feel ourselves impelled to resume a consideration of his Pilgrimage , not as consisting of detached accounts of foreign scenery and of the emotions suggested by them, but as a whole poem, written in the same general spirit, and pervaded by the same cast of poetry. In doing this, we are conscious we must repeat much which has perhaps been better said by others, and even be guilty of the yet more unpardonable crime of repeating ourselves. But if we are not new we will at least be brief, and the occasion seems to us peculiarly favourable for placing before our readers the circumstances which secured to the Pilgrimage of Childe Harold a reception so generally popular. The extrinsic circumstances, which refer rather to the state of the public taste than to the genius and talent of the author, claim precedence in order, because, though they are not those on which the fame of the poet must ultimately rest, they are unquestionably the scaffolding by means of which the edifice was first raised which now stands independent of them.
Originality, as it is the highest and rarest property of genius, is also that which has most charms for the public. Not that originality is always necessary, for the world will be contented, in the poverty of its mental resources, with mere novelty or singularity, and must therefore be enchanted with a work that exhibits both qualities. The vulgar author is usually distinguished by his treading, or attempting to tread, in the steps of the reigning favourite of the day. He is didactic, sentimental, romantic, epic, pastoral, according to the
[Page 340]
taste of the moment, and his “fancies and delights,” like those of Master Justice Shallow, are sure to be adapted to the tunes which the carmen whistle . The consequence is, not that the herd of imitators gain their object, but that the melody which they have profaned becomes degraded in the sated ears of the public—its original richness, wildness, and novelty are forgotten when it is made manifest how easily the leading notes can be caught and parodied, and whatever its intrinsic merit may have been, it becomes, for the time, stale and fulsome. If the composition which has been thus hunted down possesses intrinsic merit, it may—indeed it will— eventually revive and claim its proper place amid the poetical galaxy; deprived, indeed, of the adventitious value which it may at first have acquired from its novelty, but at the same time no longer overshaded and incumbered by the crowd of satellites now consigned to chaos and primæval night. When the success of Burns, writing in his native dialect with unequalled vigour and sweetness, had called from their flails an hundred peasants to cudgel their brains for rhymes, we can well remember that even the bard of Coila was somewhat injured in the common estimation—as a masterpiece of painting is degraded by being placed amid the flaring colours and ill-drawn figures of imitative daubers. The true poet attempts the very reverse of the imitator. He plunges into the stream of public opinion even when its tide is running strongest, crosses its direction, and bears his crown of laurel as Cæsar did his imperial mantle, triumphant above the waves. Such a phenomenon seldom fails at first
[Page 341]
to divide and at length to alter the reigning taste of the period, and if the bold adventurer has successfully buffeted the ebbing tide which bore up his competitor, he soon has the benefit of the flood in his own favour.
In applying these general remarks to Lord Byron's gravest and most serious performance, we must recall to the reader's recollection that since the time of Cowper he has been the first poet who, either in his own person, or covered by no very thick disguise, has directly appeared before the public, an actual living man expressing his own sentiments, thoughts, hopes, and fears. Almost all the poets of our day, who have possessed a considerable portion of public attention, are personally little known to the reader, and can only be judged from the passions and feelings assigned by them to persons totally fictitious. Childe Harold appeared— we must not say in the character of the author—but certainly in that of a real existing person, with whose feelings as such the public were disposed to associate those of Lord Byron. Whether the reader acted right or otherwise in persisting to neglect the shades of distinction which the author endeavoured to point out betwixt his pilgrim and himself, it is certain that no little power over the public attention was gained from their being identified. Childe Harold may not be, nor do we believe he is, Lord Byron's very self, but he is Lord Byron's picture, sketched by Lord Byron himself, arrayed in a fancy dress, and disguised perhaps by some extrinsic attributes, but still bearing a sufficient resemblance to the original to warrant the conclusion that we
[Page 342]
have drawn. This identity is so far acknowledged in the preface to the Canto now before us, where Lord Byron thus expresses himself.
“The poem also, or the pilgrim, or both, have accompanied me from first to last; and perhaps it may be a pardonable vanity which induces me to reflect with complacency on a composition which in some degree connects me with the spot where it was produced, and the objects it would fain describe; and however unworthy it may be deemed of those magical and memorable abodes, however short it may fall of our distant conceptions and immediate impressions, yet as a mark of respect for what is venerable, and of feeling for what is glorious, it has been to me a source of pleasure in the production, and I part with it with a kind of regret, which I hardly suspected that events could have left me for imaginary objects.”— Pp. vi. vii.
But besides the pleasing novelty of a traveller and a poet, throwing before the reader his reflections and opinions, his loves and his hates, his raptures and his sorrows; besides the novelty and pride which the public felt, upon being called as it were into familiarity with a mind so powerful, and invited to witness and partake of its deep emotions; the feelings themselves were of a character which struck with awe those to whom the noble pilgrim thus exposed the sanctuary of his bosom. They were introduced into no Teian paradise of lutes and maidens, were placed in no hall resounding with music and dazzling with many-coloured lights, and called upon to gaze on those gay forms that flutter in the muse's beam. The banquet had ceased, and it was the pleasure of its melancholy lord that his guests should witness that gloominess, which seems most dismal when it succeeds to exuberant and unrestrained gaiety. The emptied wine-cup lay on the ground, the withered garland was flung
[Page 343]
aside and trodden under foot, the instruments of music were silent, or waked but those few and emphatic chords which express sorrow; while, amid the ruins of what had once been the palace of pleasure, the stern pilgrim stalked from desolation to desolation, spurning from him the implements of former luxury, and repelling with equal scorn the more valuable substitutes which wisdom and philosophy offered to supply their place. The reader felt as it were in the presence of a superior being, when, instead of his judgment being consulted, his imagination excited or soothed, his taste flattered or conciliated in order to bespeak his applause, he was told, in strains of the most sublime poetry, that neither he, the courteous reader, nor aught the earth had to show, was worthy the attention of the noble traveller.—All countries he traversed with a heart for entertaining the beauties of nature, and an eye for observing the crimes and follies of mankind; and from all he drew subjects of sorrow, of indignation, of contempt. From Dan to Beersheba all was barrenness. To despise the ordinary sources of happiness, to turn with scorn from the pleasures which captivate others, and to endure, as it were voluntarily, evils which others are most anxious to shun, is a path to ambition; for the monarch is scarcely more respected for possessing, than the anchoret for contemning the means of power and of pleasure. A mind like that of Harold, apparently indifferent to the usual enjoyments of life, and which entertains, or at least exhibits, such contempt for its usual pursuits, has the same ready road to the respect of the mass of mankind, who
[Page 344]
judge that to be superior to humanity which can look down upon its common habits, tastes, and pleasures.
This fashion of thinking and writing of course had its imitators, and those right many. But the humorous sadness which sat so gracefully on the original made but a poor and awkward appearance on those who
—“wrapp'd themselves in ‘Harold's’ inky cloak,
To show the world how ‘Byron’ did not ‘write.’”
Their affected melancholy showed like the cynicism of Apemantus contrasted with the real misanthropy of Timon. And, to say the truth, we are not sorry that the fashion has latterly lost ground. This species of general contempt of intellectual pleasures, and worldly employment, is more closely connected with the Epicurean philosophy than may be at first supposed. If philosophy be but a pursuit of words, and the revolutions of empires inevitable returns of the same cycle of fearful transitions; if our earliest and best affections “run to waste, and water but the desert,” the want of worthier motives to action gives a tremendous and destructive impulse to the dangerous Carpe diem of the Garden—that most seductive argument of sensual pleasure. This doctrine of the nothingness of human pursuits, not as contrasted with those of religion and virtue (to which they are indeed as nothing), but absolutely and in themselves, is too apt to send its pupils in despair to those pleasures which promise a real gratification, however short and gross. Thus do thoughts and opinions, in themselves the most melancholy, become incitements
[Page 345]
to the pursuit of the most degrading pleasures; as the Egyptians placed skulls upon their banqueting tables, and as the fools of Holy Writ made the daring and fearful association of imminent fate and present revelling— Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.
If we treat the humour less gravely, and consider it as a posture of the mind assumed for the nonce, still this enumeration of the vain pursuits, the indulged yet unsatiated passions of humanity, is apt to weary our spirits if not our patience, and the discourse terminates in a manner as edifying as the dialogue in Prior's Alma:
“‘Tired with these thoughts’—‘Less tired than I,’
Quoth Dick, ‘with your philosophy—
That people live and die I knew,
An hour ago as well as you;
What need of books those truths to tell,
Which folks perceive who cannot spell?
And must we spectacles apply,
To view what hurts our naked eye?
If to be sad is to be wise,
I do most heartily despise
Whatever Socrates has said,
Or Tully wrote, or Wanley read.’
‘Dear Drift! to set our matters right,
Remove these papers from my sight,
Burn Mat's Des-carte and Aristotle—
Here, Jonathan, your master's bottle.’”
But it was not merely to the novelty of an author speaking in his own person, and in a tone which arrogated a contempt of all the ordinary pursuits of life, that “Childe Harold” owed its extensive popularity: these formed but the point or sharp edge of the wedge by which the work was enabled to insinuate its way into that venerable block, the
[Page 346]
British public. The high claims inferred at once in the direct appeal to general attention, and scorn of general feeling, were supported by powers equal to such pretensions. He who despised the world intimated that he had the talents and genius necessary to win it if he had thought it worth while. There was a strain of poetry in which the sense predominated over the sound; there was the eye keen to behold nature, and the pen powerful to trace her varied graces of beauty or terror; there was the heart ardent at the call of freedom or of generous feeling, and belying every moment the frozen shrine in which false philosophy had incased it, glowing like the intense and concentrated alcohol, which remains one single but burning drop in the centre of the ice which its more watery particles have formed. In despite of the character which he had assumed, it was impossible not to see in the Pilgrim what nature designed him to be, and what, in spite of bad metaphysics and worse polities, he may yet be, a person whose high talents the wise and virtuous may enjoy without a qualifying sigh or frown. Should that day arrive, and if time be granted, it will arrive, we who have ventured upon the precarious task of prophecy—we who have been censured for not mingling the faults of genius with its talents—we shall claim our hour of heartfelt exultation. He himself, while deprecating censure on the ashes of another great but self-neglected genius, has well pleaded the common cause of those who, placed high above the crowd, have their errors and their follies rendered more conspicuous by their elevation.
[Page 347]
   “Hard is his fate on whom the public gaze
   Is fix'd for ever to detract or praise;
   Repose denies her requiem to his name,
   And Folly loves the martyrdom of Fame:
   The secret enemy, whose sleepless eye
   Stands sentinel, accuser, judge, and spy;
   Her for the fool, the jealous and the vain,
   The envious, who but breathe in others' pain:
   Behold the host delighting to deprave,
Who track the steps of Glory to the grave.”
For ourselves, amid the various attendants on the triumph of genius, we would far rather be the soldier who, pacing by the side of the general, mixes, with military frankness, censure amid his songs of praise, than the slave in his chariot to flatter his vanity by low adulation, or exasperate his feelings by virulent invective. In entering our protest therefore against the justice and the moral tendency of that strain of dissatisfaction and despondency, that cold and sceptical philosophy which clouds our prospects on earth, and closes those beyond it, we willingly render to this extraordinary poem the full praise that genius in its happiest efforts can demand from us.
The plan, if it can be termed so, hovers between that of a descriptive and a philosophical poem. The pilgrim passes from land to land, alternately describing, musing, meditating, exclaiming, and moralizing; and the reader, partaking of his enthusiasm, becomes almost the partner of his journey. The first and second Cantos were occupied by Spain and Greece—the former, the stage upon which those incidents were then passing which were to decide, in their consequence, the fate of existing Europe; the latter, the country whose sun, so
[Page 348]
long set, has yet left on the horizon of the world such a blaze of splendour. It is scarcely necessary to say, that in both countries, but especially in the last, the pilgrim found room for meditation even to madness . The third Canto saw Childe Harold once more upon the main, and traced him from Belgium to Switzerland, through scenes distinguished by natural graces, and rendered memorable by late events. Through this ample field we accompanied the Pilgrim, and the strains which describe the beauties of the Rhine and the magnificence of the Leman lake, are still glowing in our ears. The fourth Canto now appears, and recalls us to the immediate object of the present article.
The poem opens in Venice, once the mart of the universe—
   “I stood in Venice, on the Bridge of Sighs;
   A palace and a prison on each hand:
   I saw from out the wave her structures rise
   As from the stroke of the enchanter's wand:
   A thousand years their cloudy wings expand
   Around me, and a dying Glory smiles
   O'er the far times, when many a subject land
   Look'd to the winged Lion's marble piles,
Where Venice sate in state, thron'd on her hundred isles!”
The former greatness of this queen of commerce is described and mingled with the recollections associated with her name, from the immortal works of fiction of which she has formed the scene.
“But unto us she hath a spell beyond
Her name in story, and her long array
Of mighty shadows, whose dim forms despond
Above the Dogeless city's vanish'd sway;
Ours is a trophy which will not decay
With the Rialto; Shylock and the Moor,
[Page 349]
   And Pierre, can not be swept or worn away—
   The keystones of the arch! though all were o'er,
For us repeopled were the solitary shore.
   “The beings of the mind are not of clay;
   Essentially immortal, they create
   And multiply in us a brighter ray
   And more beloved existence: that which Fate
   Prohibits to dull life, in this our state
   Of mortal bondage, by these spirits supplied,
   First exiles, then replaces what we hate;
   Watering the heart whose early flowers have died,
And with a fresher growth replenishing the void.”
That this is true in philosophy as well as beautiful in poetry; that fiction as well as reality can impress local associations of the most fascinating kind, that not alone the birth-place or tomb of the man of genius, but the scenes which he has chosen for the action of his story remain dear “to our memories,” and have to our ears and eyes a fascinating charm, was repeatedly experienced during the Peninsular war. Spain, separated by the ocean and the Pyrenees from the rest of Europe, and seldom in collision with Britain, save when we have encountered her fleets upon the seas, lying also beyond the ordinary course of travellers and tourists, has little familiar to us as readers of history, or as members of British society. But the authors of fiction had given associations to this country of the most interesting kind, to supply the deficiencies of the slender list afforded by history or conversation. The British officers rushed with the eagerness of enthusiasm to find in the tower of Segovia the apartment from which Gil Blas, in his captivity, looked over the wanderings of the Ebro:—even the French dealt mildly with
[Page 350]
the city of Toboso, because it had given name to the celebrated Dulcinea; and amid the romantic deserts of the Sierra Morena the weary step was rendered lighter to the readers of Cervantes, who, at every turn of their march among the landscapes which he has described with such exquisite truth and felicity, expected to see the doughty knight-errant and his trusty squire, or the beautiful vision of Dorothea, when she was surprised in boy's attire washing her feet in the rivulet. Such is the prerogative of genius! and well may it be celebrated by one who has himself impressed associations upon so much scenery, which will never, while Britons speak their present language, be seen without recollecting the Pilgrim and his musings.
The contrast of the former and present state of Venice calls forth naturally a train of moral reflections suitable to the occasion; but the noble Pilgrim, standing on the Bridge of Sighs, and having beneath his feet the dungeons of the most jealous aristocracy that ever existed; in the vicinity also of the palace of the Council of Ten, and of those “lions' mouths,” by means of which the most treacherous and base of anonymous informers possessed full power over the life and fortune of the noblest citizens, might have spared his regret for the loss of that freedom which Venice never possessed. The distinction, in this and many other cases, betwixt a free and an independent nation, is not sufficiently observed. The Venetians were never a free people, though the state of Venice was not only independent, but wealthy and powerful,
[Page 351]
during the middle ages, by the extent of her commerce and the policy of her wise rulers. But commerce found a more convenient channel round the Cape of Good Hope for that trade which Venice had hitherto carried on. Her rulers overrated her strength, and engaged in a war against the confederated force of Italy, from the consequences of which, though gloriously sustained, the state never recovered. The proud republic, whose bride was the Adriatic, shared the fate of Tyre and Sidon—of all nations whose wealth and grandeur are founded exclusively on ships, colonies, and commerce. The “crowning city, whose merchants were princes, and whose traffickers were the honourable of the earth,” had long passed into a state of the third class, existing merely because not demolished, and ready to give way to the first impulse of outward force. The art of the Venetian rulers in stooping to their circumstances, and bending where they must otherwise have broken, could only protract this semblance of independence until the storm of the French Revolution destroyed Venice, among many other governments which had been respected by other conquerors from a reverence to antiquity, or from a regard for existing institutions, the very reverse of the principle which actuated the republican generals. It is surely vain to mourn for a nation which, if restored to independence, could not defend or support itself; and it would be worse than vain, were it possible, to restore the Signoria, with all its oligarchical terrors of denunciation, and secret imprisonment, and judicial murder. What is to be wished for
[Page 352]
Italy, is the amalgamation of its various petty states into one independent and well-governed kingdom, capable of asserting and maintaining her place among the nations of Europe. To this desirable order of things nothing can be a stronger obstacle than the reinstatement of the various petty divisions of that fair country, each incapable of defending itself, but ready to lend its aid to destroy its neighbours.
Of Italy, in its present state, it is impossible to think or speak without recognising the truth as well as the beauty of the following lines.
   “The commonwealth of kings, the men of Rome!
   And even since, and now, fair Italy!
   Thou art the garden of the world, the home
   Of all Art yields, and Nature can decree;
   Even in thy desert, what is like to thee?
   Thy very weeds are beautiful, thy waste
   More rich than other climes' fertility;
   Thy wreck a glory, and thy ruin graced
With an immaculate charm which can not be defaced.”
Through these delightful regions the Pilgrim wanders, awakening by the flashes of his imagination that of the reader, as the face of the country suggests topics of moral interest, and reminds us alternately of the achievements of the great of former days in arms and in literature, and as local description, mingles itself with the most interesting topics of local history. Arqua, “the mountain where he died,” suggests the name of Petrarch; the deserted Ferrara, the fame and the fate of Tasso, fitly classed with Dante and Ariosto, the bards of Hell and Chivalry. Florence, and its statues Thrasimene and Clitumnus, start up before us
[Page 353]
with their scenery, and their recollections. Perhaps there are no verses in our language of happier descriptive power than the two stanzas which characterise the latter river. In general, poets find it so difficult to leave an interesting subject, that they injure the distinctness of the description, by loading it so as to embarrass rather than excite the fancy of the reader; or else, to avoid that fault, they confine themselves to cold and abstract generalities. The author has, in the following stanzas, admirably steered his course betwixt these extremes. While they present the outlines of a picture as pure and brilliant as those of Claude Lorraine, the task of filling up the more minute particulars is judiciously left to the imagination of the reader; and it must be dull indeed if it does not supply what the poet has left unsaid, or but generally and briefly intimated. While the eye glances over the lines, we seem to feel the refreshing coolness of the scene—we hear the bubbling tale of the more rapid streams—and see the slender proportions of the rural temple reflected in the crystal depth of the calm pool:—
   “But thou, Clitumnus! in thy sweetest wave
   Of the most living crystal that was e'er
   The haunt of river-nymph, to gaze and lave
   Her limbs where nothing hid them, thou dost rear
   The grassy bank whereon the milk-white steer
   Grazes; the purest god of gentle waters!
   And most serene of aspect, and most clear;
   Surely that stream was unprofaned by slaughters—
A mirror and a bath for Beauty's youngest daughters!
   “And on thy happy shore a temple still,
   Of small and delicate proportion, keeps,
   Upon a mild declivity of hill,
   Its memory of thee; beneath it sweeps
   Thy current's calmness; oft from out it leaps
[Page 354]
   The finny darter with the glittering scales,
   Who dwells and revels in thy glassy deeps;
   While, chance, some scattered water-lily sails
Down where the shallower wave still tells its bubbling tales.”
By mountain and cataract, through this land of existing beauty and heroic memory, the pilgrim at length reaches Rome:—Rome, first Empress of the bodies, then of the souls, of all the civilized world, now owing its political, and, perhaps, even its religious existence to the half contemptuous pity of those nations whom she formerly held in thraldom—Rome is the very ground on which we should have loved to cope with Childe Harold
                     ---“in those sullen fits,
                     For then he's full of matter.”
Nor have we been disappointed in our wishes and expectations; for the voice of Marius could not sound more deep and solemn among the ruined arches of Carthage than the strains of the Pilgrim amid the broken shrines and fallen statues of her subduer. We can but touch partially upon these awful themes. The Palatine is thus described:—
   “Cypress and ivy, weed and wallflower grown
   Matted and mass'd together, hillocks heap'd
   On what were chambers, arch crush'd, column strown
   In fragments, chok'd up vaults, and frescos steep'd
   In subterranean damps, where the owl peep'd,
   Deeming it midnight:—Temples, baths or halls?
   Pronounce who can; for all that Learning reap'd
   From her research hath been, that these are walls,—
Behold the Imperial Mount! 'tis thus the mighty falls.”
And thus the Egerian grottos, with a classical allusion to the complaint of Juvenal, that art in adorning them had destroyed their simplicity, are described in the state of decay by which that simplicity has been restored.
[Page 355]
   “The mosses of thy fountain still are sprinkled
   With thine Elysian water-drops; the face
   Of thy cave-guarded spring, with years unwrinkled,
   Reflects the meek-eyed genius of the place,
   Whose green, wild margin now no more erase
   Art's works; nor must the delicate waters sleep,
   Prisoned in marble, bubbling from the base
   Of the cleft statue, with a gentle leap
The rill runs o'er, and round, fern, flowers, and ivy creep.”
The Coliseum is described in the midnight gloom of a cloudless Italian sky; its vast area recalls the bloody games of the Romans, and the poet has vied with the memorablesculptor who produced the Dying Gladiator,—superior in this, that equalling the artist in his faculty of impressing on the fancy the agonies, he can extend his power into incorporeal realms, and body forth not only the convnlsed features and stiffened limbs, but the mental feelings and throes of the expiring swordsman.
   ‘I see before me the Gladiator lie:
   He leans upon his hand,—his manly brow
   Consents to death, but conquers agony,
   And his drooped head sinks gradually low,—
   And through his side the last drops, ebbing slow
   From the red gash, fall heavy, one by one,
   Like the first of a thunder-shower; and now
   The arena swims around him—he is gone,
Ere ceased the inhuman shout which hail'd the wretch who won.
   “He heard it, but he heeded not,—his eyes
   Were with his heart, and that was far away;
   He reck'd not of the life he lost nor prize,
   But where his rude but by the Danube lay
    There were his young barbarians all at play,
    There was their Dacian mother,—he, their sire,
   Butcher'd to make a Roman holiday,—
   All this rush'd with his blood,—shall he expire
And unavenged?—Arise! ye Goths, and glut your ire!”
The Pantheon, the Mole of Hadrian, St Peter's,
[Page 356]
whose vastness expands and “renders colossal” the mind of the gazer, the Vatican, with its treasures of ancient art, are all placed before us with the same picturesque, and rendered real by the same earnest and energetic force of Lord Byron's poetry, in which the numbers seem so little the work of art or study, that they rather appear the natural and unconstrained language in which the thoughts present themselves. The deep-toned melancholy of the poet's mind at length rests on a theme where it must long find a response in every British bosom—on the event which cut down the hope of our nation, sparing neither bush nor blossom, when we most expected to have seen it fulfilled. Liberal as we have been in quotation we cannot resist the opportunity of meeting Lord Byron on a public ground, in which his exquisite strains are an echo to our own thoughts, and where we can join without any of those mental protests which we are too often compelled to make against the correctness of his principles even when admitting the power of his language, and the beauty of his poetry.
   “Hark! forth from the abyss a voice proceeds,
   A long, low, distant murmur of dread sound,
   Such as arises when a nation bleeds
   With some deep and immedicable wound;
   Through storm and darkness yawns the rending ground,
   The gulf is thick with phantoms, but the chief
   Seems royal still, though with her head discrown'd,
   And pale, but lovely, with maternal grief,
She clasps a babe, to whom her breast yields no relief.
“Scion of chiefs and monarchs, where art thou?
Fond hope of many nations, art thou dead?
Could not the grave forget thee, and lay low
[Page 357]
   Some less majestic, less beloved head?
   In the sad midnight, while thy heart still bled,
   The mother of a moment, o'er thy boy,
   Death hush'd that pang for ever; with thee fled
   The present happiness and promised joy
Which filled the imperial isles so full it seemed to cloy.
   “Peasants bring forth in safety.—Can it be,
   Oh thou that wert so happy, so adored!
   Those who weep not for kings shall weep for thee,
   And Freedom's heart, grown heavy, cease to hoard
   Her many griefs for One ; for she had pour'd
   Her orisons for thee, and o'er thy head
   Beheld her Iris.—Thou, too, lonely lord,
   And desolate consort—vainly wert thou wed!
The husband of a year—the father of the dead!
   “Of sackcloth was thy wedding-garment made;
   Thy bridal's fruit is ashes: in the dust
   The fair-haired daughter of the isles is laid,
   The love of millions!—How we did intrust
   Futurity to her! and, though it must
   Darken above our bones, yet fondly deem'd
   Our children should obey her child, and bless'd
   Her and her hoped-for seed, whose promise seem'd
Like stars to shepherd's eyes—'twas but a meteor beam'd.”
From the copious specimens which we have given, the reader will be enabled to judge how well the last part of this great poem has sustained Lord Byron's high reputation. Yet we think it possible to trace a marked difference, though none in the tone of thought and expression, betwixt this canto and the first three. There is less of passion, more of deep thought and sentiment, at once collected and general. The stream which in its earlier course bounds over cataracts and rages through narrow and rocky defiles, deepens, expands, and becomes less turbid as it rolls on, losing the aspect of terror and gaining that of sublimity. Eight years have passed between the appearance of the
[Page 358]
first volume and the present which concludes the work, a lapse of time which, joined with other circumstances, may have contributed somewhat to moderate the tone of Childe Harold's quarrel with the world, and, if not to reconcile him to his lot, to give him, at least, the firmness which endures it without loud complaint.—To return, however, to the proposition with which we opened our criticism, certain it is, that whether as Harold or as Lord Byron no author has ever fixed upon himself personally so intense a share of the public attention. His descriptions of present and existing scenes, however striking and beautiful, his recurrence to past actions, however important and however powerfully described, become interesting chiefly from the tincture which they receive from the mind of the author. The grot of Egeria, the ruins of the Palatine, are but a theme for his musings, always deep and powerful though sometimes gloomy even to sullenness. This cast of solemnity may not perhaps be justly attributed to the native disposition of the author, which is reported to be as lively as, judging from this single poem at least, we might pronounce it to be grave. But our ideas of happiness are chiefly caught by reflection from the minds of others, and hence it may be observed that those enjoy the most uniform train of good spirits who are thinking much of others and little of themselves. The contemplation of our minds, however salutary for the purposes of self-examination and humiliation, must always be a solemn task, since the best will find enough for remorse, the wisest for regret, the most fortunate for sorrow. And to this influence more than to any natural disposition
[Page 359]
to melancholy, to the pain which necessarily follows this anatomizing of his own thoughts and feelings which is so decidedly and peculiarly the characteristic of the Pilgrimage, we are disposed in a great measure to ascribe that sombre tint which pervades the poem. The poetry which treats of the actions and sentiments of others may be grave or gay according to the light in which the author chooses to view his subject, but he who shall mine long and deeply for materials in his own bosom will encounter abysses at the depth of which he must necessarily tremble. This moral truth appears to us to afford, in a great measure, a key to the peculiar tone of Lord Byron. How then, will the reader ask, is our proposition to be reconciled to that which preceded it? If the necessary result of an enquiry into our own thoughts be the conviction that all is vanity and vexation of spirit, why should we object to a style of writing, whatever its consequences may be, which involves in it truths as certain as they are melancholy? If the study of our own enjoyments leads us to doubt the reality of all except the indisputable pleasures of sense, and inclines us therefore towards the Epicurean system, —it is nature, it may be said, and not the poet which urges us upon the fatal conclusion. But this is not so. Nature, when she created man a social being, gave him the capacity of drawing that happiness from his relations with the rest of his race, which he is doomed to seek in vain in his own bosom. These relations cannot be the source of happiness to us if we despise or hate the kind with whom it is their office to unite us more closely.
[Page 360]
If the earth be a den of fools and knaves, from whom the man of genius differs by the more mercurial and exalted character of his intellect, it is natural that he should look down with pitiless scorn on creatures so inferior. But if, as we believe, each man, in his own degree possesses a portion of the etherial flame, however smothered by unfavourable circumstances, it is or should be enough to secure the most mean from the scorn of genius, as well as from the oppression of power, and such being the case, the relations which we hold with society, through all their gradations, are channels through which the better affections of the loftiest may, without degradation, extend themselves to the lowest.
Farther, it is not only our social connexions which are assigned us, in order to qualify that contempt of mankind, which, too deeply indulged, tends only to intense selfishness; we have other and higher motives for enduring the lot of humanity— sorrow, and pain, and trouble—with patience of our own griefs, and commiseration for those of others. The wisest and the best of all ages have agreed, that out present life is a state of trial, not of enjoyment, and that we now suffer sorrow that we may hereafter be partakers of happiness. If this be true, and it has seldom been long, or at least ultimately, doubted by those who have turned their attention to so serious an investigation, other and worthier motives of action and endurance must necessarily occur to the mind than philosophy can teach, or human pride supply. It is not our intention to do more than merely indicate so ample a
[Page 361]
topic for consideration. But we cannot forbear to add, that the vanishing of Lord Byron's Pilgrim strongly reminded us of the close of another work, the delight of our childhood. Childe Harold, a prominent character in the first volume of the Pilgrimage, fades gradually from the scene like the spectre associate, who performed the first stages of his journey with a knight-errant, bearing all the appearance of a living man, but who lessened to the sight by degrees, and became at length totally invisible when they approached the cavern where his mortal remains were deposited.
   “But where is he, the Pilgrim of my song,
   The being who upheld it through the past?
   Methinks he cometh late and tarries long.
   He is no more—these breathings are his last;
   His wanderings done, his visions ebbing fast,
   And he himself as nothing. If he was
   Aught but a phantasy, and could be class'd
   With forms which live and suffer—let that pass—
His shadow fades away into destruction's mass.”
In the corresponding passage of the “Tales of the Genii,” Ridley, the amiable author or compiler of the collection, expresses himself to the following purport,—for we have not the book at hand to do justice to his precise words,—“Reader, the Genii are no more, and Horam, but the phantom of my mind, fiction himself and fiction all that he seemed to write, speaks not again. But lament not their loss, since if desirous to see virtue guarded by miracles, Religion can display before you scenes tremendous, wonderful, and great, more worthy of your sight than aught that human fancy can conceive —the moral veil rent in twain and the Sun
[Page 362]
of Righteousness arising from the thick clouds of heathen darkness.” In the sincere spirit of admiration for Lord Byron's talents, and regard for his character, which has dictated the rest of our criticism, we here close our analysis of Childe Harold.
Our task respecting Lord Byron's poetry is finished, when we have mentioned the subject, quoted passages of superior merit, or which their position renders most capable of being detached from the body of the poem. For the character of his style and versification once distinctly traced (and we have had repeated occasion to consider it), cannot again be dwelt on without repetition. The harmony of verse, and the power of numbers, nay, the selection and arrangement of expressions, are all so subordinate to the thought and sentiment, as to become comparatively light in the scale. His poetry is like the oratory which hurries the hearers along without permitting them to pause on its solecisms or singularities. Its general structure is bold, severe, and as it were Doric, admitting few ornaments but those immediately suggested by the glowing imagination of the author, rising and sinking with the tones of his enthusiasm, roughening into argument, or softening into the melody of feeling and sentiment, as if the language fit for either were alike at the command of the poet, and the numbers not only came uncalled, but arranged themselves with little care on his part into the varied modulation which the subject requires. Many of the stanzas, considered separately from the rest, might be objected to as involved, harsh, and overflowing into each other beyond the usual
[Page 363]
license of the Spenserian stanza. But considering the various matter of which the poet had to treat —considering the monotony of a long-continued smoothness of sound, and accurate division of the sense according to the stanzas—considering also that the effect of the general harmony is, as in music, improved by the judicious introduction of discords wherewith it is contrasted, we cannot join with those who state this occasional harshness as an objection to Lord Byron's poetry. If the line sometimes “labours and the words move slow,” it is in passages where the sense is correspondent to these laborious movements. A highly finished strain of versification resembles a dressed pleasure ground, elegant—even beautiful—but tame and insipid compared to the majesty and interest of a woodland chase, where scenes of natural loveliness are rendered sweeter and more interesting by the contrast of irregularity and wildness.
We have done with the poem; we have, however, yet a few words to say before we finally close our strictures.
To this canto, as to the former, notes are added, illustrative of the contents; and these, we are informed, are written by Mr Hobhouse, the author of that facetious account of Buonaparte's reign of an hundred days, which it was our office last year to review. They are distinct and classical illustrations of the text, but contain, of course, many political sentiments of a class which have ceased to excite anger, or any feelings stronger than pity, and a sense of the weakness of humanity which, in all ages, has inclined even men of talents and cultivation
[Page 364]
to disgrace themselves, by the adoption of sentiments of which it is impossible they can have examined either the grounds or the consequences—whence the doctrines come, or whither they are tending. The mob of a corrupt metropolis, who vindicate the freedom of election by knocking out the brains of the candidate of whom they disapprove, act upon obvious and tangible principles; so do the Spenceans, Spa-fieldians, and Nottingham conspirators. That “seven halfpenny loaves should be sold for a penny,”—that “the three-hooped pot should have ten hoops,”—and that “the realm should be all in common,”—have been the watchwords of insurrection among the vulgar, from Jack Straw's time to the present, and, if neither honest nor praiseworthy, are at least sufficiently plain and intelligible. But the frenzy which makes individuals of birth and education hold a language as if they could be willing to risk the destruction of their native country, and all the horrors of a civil war, is not so easily accounted for. To believe that these persons would accelerate a desolation in which they themselves directly, or through their nearest and dearest connexions, must widely share, merely to remove an obnoxious minister, would be to form a hasty, and perhaps a false judgement of them. The truth seems to be, that the English, even those from whom better things might be expected, are born to be the dupes of jugglers and mountebanks in all professions. It is not only in physic that the names of our nobility and gentry decorate occasionally the list of cures to which the empyric appeals as attesting the force of
[Page 365]
his remedy. Religion in the last age, and politics in the present, have had their quacks, who substituted words for sense, and theoretical dogmata for the practice of every duty.—But whether in religion or politics, or physic, one general mark distinguishes the empiric; the patient is to be cured without interruption of business or pleasure,—the proselyte to be saved without reformation of the future, or repentance of the past,—the country to be made happy by an alteration in its political system; and all the vice and misery which luxury and poor's rates, a crowded population, and decayed morality can introduce into the community, to be removed by extending farther political rights to those who daily show that they require to be taught the purpose for which those they already enjoy were intrusted to them. That any one above the rank of an interested demagogue should teach this, is wonderful,—that any should believe it except the lowest of the vulgar, is more so,—but vanity makes as many dupes as folly.
If, however, these gentlemen will needs identify their own cause with that of their country's enemies, we can forgive them as losers, who have proverbial leave to pout. And when, in bitterness of spirit, they term the great, the glorious victory of Waterloo, the “carnage of Saint Jean,” we can forgive that too, since, trained in the school of revolutionary France, they must necessarily abhor those
                                         “whose art was of such power
It could control their dam's God Setebos,
And make a vassal of him.”—
From the dismal denunciations which Lord Byron,
[Page 366]
acting more upon his feeling than his judgment, has made against our country, although
“Were ne'er prophetic sounds so full of wo,”
we entertain no fears—none whatever.—
At home the noble author may hear of better things than “a permanent army and a suspended Habeas Corpus”—he may hear of an improving revenue and increasing public prosperity. And while he continues abroad he may haply call to mind, that the Pilgrim, whom eight years since, the universal domination of France compelled to wander into distant and barbarous countries, is now at liberty to travel where he pleases, certain that there is not a corner of the civilized world where his title of Englishman will not ensure him a favourable and respectful reception.
END OF VOLUME SEVENTEENTH.
NOTES
1 Smoky.
2 A burning coal.
3 Mahometry, i.e. idolatry. (Sign. L. i.)
4 [1] This is no doubt quite consistent with modern manners, as may appear, by considering, whether Young Roscius or a Welsh curate is best paid, and to which the gates of an episcopal palace would fly most speedily open.
5 [1] [In the Edinburgh Review, vol. iv.—The criticism referred to was written by Mr Ellis.]
6 Whence.
7 Time.
8 Raised suddenly—with a start.
9 Loathingly.
10 Kill.
11 Broth.
12 Sweet.
13 Gnawed.
14 Laughed.
15 Black face.
16 [1] Lithgow, the Scottish traveller, mentions maces as used by the English at the siege of Newcastle, in 1646, of which he gives a very curious account.
17 [1] Faith.
18 [1] Witness his generously adopting Bishop Percy's beautiful ballad of the Child of Elle; and having bestowed upon fair Ellen and her lover, the sounding names of Ritter Karl von Eichenhorst, and Fraulein Gertrude von Hochburg, his very gravely calling it an ancient German Tale.
19 [1] [Sir Eldred was an early performance of Mrs Hannah More.]
20 [1] [See the verses at length, in the Notes to the fifth canto of the poem of Roheby.
21 [1] [See at the end of vol. iii., Life and Works of Chatterton, a Catalogue raisonnée of Twenty-eight Publications relating to the Controversy. 1772–1795.]
22 [1] [Mrs Newton, sister of Chatterton, says, “he had been gloomy from the time he began to learn, but we remarked he was more cheerful after he began to write poetry.” “His spirits were rather uneven, sometimes so gloomy, that for many days together he would say but very little, and that by constraint. At other times exceedingly cheerful.” “We heard him frequently say that he found he studied best toward the full of the moon; and would often sit up all night and write by moonlight.”—Letter to Rev. H. Croft. Works, vol. iii. pp. 461–463.]
23 [1] [“Being sound in body, or it is the fault of my last surgeon; the soundness of my mind, the coroner and jury are to be judges of, desiring them to take notice, that the most perfect masters of human nature in Bristol distinguish me by the title of the Mad Genius; therefore, if I do a mad action, it is conformable to every action of my life, which savoured of insanity,” &c. &c. &c. Vol. iii. p. 451.]
24 [1] This circumstance is much founded on by the believers. To us it only affords an additional proof of the unconquerable and haughty perseverance of Chatterton's character. We attach no implicit faith to dying declarations; for, upon points in which fame is implicated, the voice of the passions is heard even in the hour of death. We disclaim every application of the illustration which can be disrespectful to the memory of Chatterton; but it is well known, that criminals, whose crimes are not of a nature to meet public sympathy, often at their death endeavour, by a denial of guilt most satisfactorily proved, to avert the odium attached to their persons and memory. It may be thought that Chatterton would have better consulted his own fame, by avowing these beautiful poems; but the pride of every one is not sustained by the same nutriment. He probably deprecated the doubtful fame of an ingenious but detected imposter, and preferred the internal consciousness, that, by persisting in the deception he had commenced, future ages might venerate the poems of Chatterton, under patronage of the fictitious Rowley.
25 [1] [“Chatterton, as appears by the Coroner's Inquest, swallowed arsenic in water, on the 24th of August, 1770, and died the next day. He was buried in a shell, in the burying-ground of Shoe-lane workhouse. Whatever unfinished pieces he might have, he cautiously destroyed before his death; and his room, when broken open, was found covered with little scraps of paper.” —Life by Gregory, p. 71.]
26 [1] Dr M'Gill, of Ayr. The poet gives the best illustration of this letter in one addressed to Mr Graham.—Dr Currie's Ed. No. 86.
27 [1] We have heard some of these recited, particularly one which begins—    “Now farewell, house, and farewell, friends,    And farewell, wife and bairus, There's nae repentance in my heart,    The fiddle's in my arms”—
$$$
