,-j, ;■''■ r"-^ i* 



:::J>,rfr;''^: 



'i'^ 'K '■^^^^•'■J'U''?'i•'^v.;'ij,^?^;::::J'*:';^ 




• ■■▼)-, 








http://www.archive.org/details/daughtertamisersOOainsrich 



\,-^ 




WIILILS:^0£ MiJEMI^.®2f- ASJTSWOmTM ESfC-? 



>j.-- 



LONDON ; PAKRY & C9 U^DBKHAtl. STRKJ-' 
prirjccd Im Jnf Tj;. . ■ 



THE MISER'S DAUGHTER: 



A TALE. 



WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH, ESQ. 

AUTHOR OF 
"THE TOWER OF LONDON," "OLD SAINT PAUL'S," ETC. 



" The delineation of sneli characters as these I consider as very moral instmction to mankind, and 
a lesson more demonstrative of the perfect vanity of unused wealth, than has lately been presented 
to the public." 

ToPHAH's I^e of Eltces. 



Mitl) Illustrations bg (Bm^t ODruilisJanfe. 

THIRD EDITION. 



LONDON: 

PARRY AND CO., LEADENHALL STREET. 

1848. 



C. WHITING, BEAUFOKT HOUSE, STKAND. 



U^i 






MY THREE DEAR DAUGHTERS, 



FANNY, EMILY MARY, AND BLANCHE, 



I OFFER THIS TALE. 



W. H. A. 



Kensal Manor House, 
Harrow Road, 

\bth October, 1842. 



ivi700107 



CONTENTS. 



23oofe ti)e jpirst. 

CHAPTER I. PAGE 
The Miser's Dwelling in the Little Sanctuary— Opposite Neighbours— Peter 
Pokerich and the Fair Thomasine — Jacob Post— Randulph Crew 1 

CHAPTER II. 
The Miser and his Daughter — Randulph delivers the Packet to the former- 
Its Reception 13 

CHAPTER III. 
The Brothers Beechcroft— Mr. Jukes— The Arrival— The Walk in St. James's 
Park — Randulph's Introduction to Beau ViUiers and Lady Brabazon 21 

CHAPTER IV. 
Abel Beechcroft's Sensibility— His Instructions to Mr. Jukes — A Second 
Nephew — The Loan — Mr. Cripps's Sense of Honour — The Bride 32 

CHAPTER V. 
Abel again cautions his Nephew against the Miser's Daughter 43 

CHAPTER VI. 
The Miser and Jacob — A Third Nephew — A Dinner at the Miser's — Hilda's 
Opinion of her Cousin 46 

CHAPTER Vn. 
The Payment of the Mortgage-Money 54 

CHAPTER Vm. 
The Mysterious Letter — The Landlord of the Rose and Crown— Cord well 
Firebras v 61 

CHAPTER IX. 

The Stranger at the Barber's 69 



VI CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER X. ' PAGE 
The Beau's Levee— The Breakfast— The Embarkation for the Folly 75 

CHAPTER XI. 
The Miser's Consultation with his Attorney — Jacob alarmed by his Master's 
Appearance at Night — The Visit of Cordwell Firebras 84 

CHAPTER XII. 
Hilda's Interview with Abel Beechcroft 94 

CHAPTER Xm. 
The Folly on the Thames — Kitty Conway— Randulph placed in an awkward 
Situation by Philip Frewin 100 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Randulph's Interview with Cordwell Firebras in the Cloisters of Westminster 
Abbey 107 

CHAPTER XV. 
Mrs. Clinton's Alarm — The Miser's unexpected Return — The Disappearance 
of the Mortgage-Money — Effrontery of Philip Frewin and Diggs 110 

CHAPTER XVI. 
Lady Brabazon deposits her Diamonds with the Miser — Gallantry of the 
Latter — He discovers the contriver of the robbery of the Mortgage-Money 121 

CHAPTER XVII. 
Mr. Cripps's alarming intelligence— Randulph's introduction to the Jacobite 
Club— Sir Norfolk Salusbury and Father Verselyn— The Treasonable Toast 
— Dangerous position of Randulph — His firmness— Punctiliousness of Sir 
Norfolk Salusbury , 129 

CHAPTER XVm. 
The Jacobite Club surprised by the Guard — The Flight and Pursuit — Mr. 
Cripps's Treachery — His Reflections 138 

CHAPTER XIX. 
Mr. Jukes 's notions of Domestic Happiness — Trussell a little the worse for 
Wine — Randulph receives a Note from Firebras— Jacob Post brings infor- 
mation to Abel 146 

CHAPTER XX. 
Abel's Interview with the Miser — Unexpected appearance of Randulph and 
Cordwell Firebras— Result of the Meeting 156 



CONTENTS. vn 



23oofe tf)e ^econti. 

CHAPTER I. PAGE 
Trussell's appearance after his Debauch — He proceeds with Bandulph to Lady 
Brabazon's— The Party go to Marylebone Gardens 167 

CHAPTER n. 

Mrs. Nettleship — Mr. Cripps personates his Master — Marylebone Gardens — 
Mr. Cripps detected 172 

CHAPTER ni. 

A Man-of-the- World's Advice on a matter of the Heart — The Visit to the 
Haymarket Theatre, and the Supper afterwards with Kitty Conway — 
Randulph again awkwardly circumstanced with Hilda 181 

CHAPTER IV. 
Randulph's Career of Gaiety — Abel's remarks upon it to Mr. Jukes 194 

CHAPTER V. 

Randulph receives a Letter from his Mother — Its effect upon him — His good 
resolutions defeated by Trussell 197 

CHAPTER VI. 
The Fair Thomasine's Visit to Hilda — Her Mysterious Communication — In 
what way, and by whom, the attempt to carry of Hilda was prevented — 
The Miser buries his Treasure in the Cellar 202 

CHAPTER VII. 
The Progress of Mr. Cripps's Love-affair — Mr. Rathbone appears on the 
scene— Stratagem of the VaJet — Mr. Jukes visits the Widow 213 

CHAPTER VIII. 
The Masquerade at Ranelagh, with the various incidents that occurred at it... 219 

CHAPTER IX. 
Jacob brings a piece of intelligence to Randulph — Trussell and Randulph go 
to Drury Lane' 236 

CHAPTER X. 
The Supper at Vauxhall — Beau Villiers's attempt to carry off Hilda defeated 
by Randulph 241 

CHAPTER XI. 
Randulph worsts Beau Villiers in a Duel in Tothill Fields; and is worsted 
himself in a second Duel by Sir Norfolk Salusbury 249 



Vill CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER I. PAGE 
What became of Randulph after the Duel — How Hilda receiyed the intelli- 
gence that Randulph had been wounded in the Duel; and what passed 
between Cordwell Firebras and the Miser 259 

CHAPTER n. 
Mrs. Crew — Her solicitude about her Son; and her conversation with Abel... 266 

CHAPTER ni. 
Detailing the interview between Cordwell Firebras and Mrs. Crew 279 

CHAPTER IV. 
Treats of the Miser's illness; — and of the discovery of the mysterious packet 
by Hilda 285 

CHAPTER V. 

Abel's conduct on learning the Miser's illness — Sir Singleton Spinke proposes 
to the Fair Thomasine — Randulph again dines with Lady Brabazon — He 
receives a note from Kitty Conway, and is assaulted by PhiUp Frewin and 
his myrmidons on his way to sup with her 296 

CHAPTER VI. 
By what device Philip Frewin got off;— and how Randulph and Trussell 
were locked up in the Watch-house 307 

CHAPTER Vn. 
Kitty Conway and the Little Barber play a trick upon the Fair Thomasine — 
Sir Singleton Spinke is deluded into a Marriage with the pretty Actress 
at the Fleet 313 

CHAPTER VIII. 
On the Visit of Philip Frewin and Diggs to the Miser and what they ob- 
tained from him 323 

CHAPTER IX. 
Mr. Rathbone divulges his plan to Mrs. Nettleship, and persuades her to act 
in concert with him in his design upon the Valet 331 

CHAPTER X. 
How Mr. Cripps's Marriage with the Widow was interrupted 338 

CHAPTER XI. 
" Stulte, hac nocte repetunt animamtuam; et quae parasti, cujus erunt." — 
Luccc, xii 346 



CONTENJS. IX 

CHAPTER XIL page 
Abel Beechcroft finds the body of the Miser in the Cellar — His Reflections 
upon it — Jacob's Grief for his Master 351 

cha:^ter xhl 

Diggs and Philip unexpectedly arrive — The Miser's Will is read, and Philip 
declares his intention of acting upon it — Abel unbosoms himself to Hilda.. 355 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Philip Frewin is dangerously wounded by Randulph— His last vindictive 
effort < 362 

CHAPTER XV. 
Mr. Cripps's altered appearance — He mystifies the Fair Thomasine about 
Lady Spinke — The Seizure of the Jacobite Club contrived 371 

CHAPTER XVI. 

The Summer-house at the Chequers — The Old Mill— Randulph overhears 
the Plot — Dispersion of the Jacobite Club, and fate of Cordwell Firebras... 376 

CHAPTER XVn. 

In which the Wedding-day is fixed 386 

« 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
Detailing an event which may possibly have been anticipated from the pre- 
ceding Chapter , 392 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



BANDULPH CREW DELrVEEING THE PACKET TO ME. SCARVE, to face tide. PAGE 

eandulph crew introduced to beau vtlijees on the mall 30 

sir bulkelet price bringing the mortgage monet to ms. scarve 57 

Hilda's visit to abel beechcroft 96 

the folly on the thames 104 

EANDULPH's interview WITH CORDWELL FIREBRAS IN THE CLOISTERS OF 

WESTMINSTER ABBEY 109 

THE MISER DISCOVERING THE LOSS OP THE MORTGAGE-MONEY 112 

EANCCTLPH REFUSING TO DRINK THE " KING's HEALTH OVER THE WATEe" .... 134 

THE JACOBITE CLUB PURSUED BY THE GUARD 142 

MR. CEIPPS ENCOUNTERING HIS MASTER IN MAEYLEBONE GARDENS 180 

THE MASQUERADE IN EANELAGH GARDENS 229 

BANDULPH AND HILDA DANCING IN THE ROTUNDA AT EANELAGH 233 

THE SUPPEE AT VAUXHALL 243 

THE DUEL IN TOTHELL FIELDS 254 

THE DISCOVEEY OF THE MYSTEEIOUS PACKET 293 

EANDULPH DEFENDING HIMSELF AGAINST PHILIP FBEWIN AND HIS MYRMI- 
DONS 305 

MR. CRIPPS DETECTED 343 

ABEL BEECHCROFT DISCOVERING THE BODY OP THE MISER IN THE CELLAR 353 

DISPERSION OF THE JACOBITE CLUB, AND DEATH OF CORDWELL FIREBRAS 385 

MARRIAGE OP EANDULPH AND HILDA 393 



THE MISER'S DAUGHTER. 

23oofe tfit jpirst. § 



RANDULPH CREW. 



THE MISER'S DAUGHTER. 



BOOK THE FIRST. 
RANDULPH CREW. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE MISEk's dwelling IN THE LITTLE SANCTUARY — OPPOSITE NEIGHBOURS — 
PETER POKERICH AND THE FAIR THOMASINE — JACOB POST — RANDULPH CREW. 

In a large, crazy, old-fasliioned house at the corner of the Little 
Sanctuary in Westminster, and facing the abbey, dwelt, in the year 
1744, a person named Scarve. From his extraordinarily penurious 
habits, he received the appellation of Starve^ and was generally 
denominated by his neighbours *' Miser Starve.'* Few, if any, of 
those who thus designated him, knew much about him, none of 
them being allowed to cross his threshold; but there was an air, 
even externally, about his dwelHng, strongly indicative of his parsi- 
monious character. Most of the windows in the upper stories, 
which, as is usual with habitations of that date, far overhung the 
lower, were boarded up ; and those not thus closed were so covered 
•with dust and dirt that it was impossible to discern any object 
through them. Many parts of the building were in a ruinous con- 
dition, and, where the dilapidations were not dangerous, were left 
in that state ; but wherever some repairs were absolutely necessary 
to keep the structure together, they were made in the readiest and 
cheapest manner. The porch alone preserved its original character. 
It projected far beyond the door-way, and was ornamented with 

B 



2 THE MISER S DAUGHTER. 

tHe arms of a former occupant of tlie habitation, carved in bold 
relief in oak, and supported by two mermaids sculptured in tbe 
same wood. All the lower windows were strongly grated, and 
darkened like the upper with long-accumulated dust. The door 
was kept constantly bolted and barred, even in the day-time ; ^d 
the whole building had a dingy, dismal, and dimgeon-like aspect. 

Mr. Scarve's opposite neighbour, who was as curious as opposite 
neighbours generally are, and who was a mercer named D^cle, 
used to spend hours with his wife and daughter, who were as curious 
as himself, in reconnoitering the miser's dwelling. But their curio- 
sity was rarely, if ever, gratified, except that they occasionally 
saw some member of the family go forth, or return. ■ Another 
constant spy upon the mysterious abode was Peter Pokerich, a 
young barber and perruquier, occupying the next house to the 
mercer, but whose motives were not, like the other's, entirely those 
of curiosity. Having completed his apprenticeship about a twelve- 
month before, Peter Pokerich had at that time settled in the Little 
Sanctuary, and had already obtained a fair share of business, being 
much employed in dressing the wigs of the lawyers frequenting 
Westminster Hall. He was a smart, dapper little fellow, with no 
contemptible opinion of himself, either as to mental or personal 
qualifications, and being determined to push his fortune with the 
sex, had, in the first instance, paid very marked attentions to the 
mercer's daughter, Thomasine, or, as she was styled by her ad- 
mirers, " the Fair Thomasine ;" and these attentions, it was pretty 
evident, were not altogether unacceptable. Just, however, as he 
was on the eve of declaring himself, and sohciting the hand of the 
fair Thomasine, with little apprehension of a refusal, he accident- 
ally beheld the miser's daughter, Hilda Scarve, and Hs inflammable 
heart taking fire at her beauty, which was indeed sufficiently 
ravishing to captivate a colder breast than his, he thenceforth 
became her slave, and could no longer endure the auburn locks, the 
hazel orbs, the pretty features, and plump little person, of the fair 
Thomasine, which had once appeared so attractive in his eyes. 
Another consideration was not -without its weight in turning the 
scale of his affections. Hilda's father was reputed to be of im- 
mense wealth; she was his only child, at least so it was generally 
understood, and would, of course, inherit the whole of his vast 
hoards; and as, furthermore, he was an old man, it could not, in 



THE miser's daughter. t 

the course of nature, be very long before the property must come 
to her. This consideration decided Peter in favour of the miser's 
daughter, and it was the hope of obtaining a ghmpse of her that 
made him play the spy upon her father's dwelling. 
. The repairs previously alluded to were made by the miser's ser- 
vant, Jacob Postj who, on this occasion, stepped over the way to 
borrow a ladder from Mr. Deacle. For reasons of his own the 
mercer readily complied with the request, and when Jacob's work 
was done, and he brought back the ladder, he was invited by its 
owner to his back-parlour, where Mrs. Deacle and the fair Thoma- 
sine were seated, and where a substantial repast was laid out. Jacob 
was requested to sit down, and with some hesitation complied. A 
plate, loaded with cold beef, was next offered him, and he cleared 
it in an inconceivably short space of time. The plate was again 
fiUed, and again emptied, and as his appetite seemed in no ways 
stayed, and the edge-bone was nearly bared, a large remnant of a 
potato-pie in a brown earthenware dish was substituted. To the 
astonishment of the party, he soon disposed of it. These viands 
requiring to be washed down, Mr. Deacle took a jug of ale, which 
stood at one comer of the table, and pouring out a large foaming 
glass, offered it to his guest, winking as he did so at his wife, as 
much as to say, *' We have him now." Whether or not Jacob saw 
the wink is of little import : he took the glass, drained it to the 
last drop, and sprang to his feet. 

" Why, you're not going?" cried Mr. Deacle. 

" Yes, I am," replied Jacob, in his deep, gruff voice. 

" Well — ^but stop a bit, I've something to say to you," rejoined 
Mr. Deacle. 

"Master '11 wonder what I'm doing here so long," returned 
Jacob. " He watched me cross over with the ladder." 

" You should have thought of that before you sat down," re- 
marked Mrs. Deacle, somewhat spitefully. "If you would draw 
another jug of ale, my love, I dare say Mr. Jacob would risk in- 
curring his master's displeasure, and stay a few minutes longer." 

" No, I wouldn't," replied Jacob, looking at the same time wist- 
fully at the jug. " No, I wouldn't," he added, slightly softening 
his tone. 

" Try him," whispered Mrs. Deacle to her spouse. 

Mr. Deacle took the hint, and Hkewise took up the jug, and 

b2 



4 THE miser's daughter. 

■winking at Hs "wife, proceeded to a side door, opening upon a flight 
of stone steps, evidently leading to tKe lower part of the premises, 
and disappeared. With true feminine tact, Mrs. Deacle had per- 
ceived Jacob's weak point. He seemed spell-bound. The temp- 
tation of the " other jug" was irresistible. He scratched his fore- 
head with the point of his greatthumb-nail, pushed up the little 
brown scratch wig covering the top of his head, still higher, 
glanced at the door, but did not attempt to withdraw. The figure 
he now cut was so ridiculous that both ladies burst into screams of 
laughter. Not in the slightest degree disconcerted, Jacob main- 
tained his position, and eyed them with a look so stern that their 
merriment speedily died off in a quaver. The Formidable certainly 
predominated over the Ridiculous in Jacob's appearance. He was 
six feet two in height, with a large-boned frame, not encumbered 
with too much flesh, and immense hands and feet. Though slightly 
in-kneed, he held himself as erect as an old soldier. He had a grim 
black muzzle, a wide mouth garnished with keen white teeth, the 
masticatory powers of which he had just so satisfactorily exhibited, 
thick and jetty eyebrows, and an enormous nose slightly tinged 
towards its extremity with a mulberry hue. He wore an old gray 
cloth coat, of the formal cut in vogue about twenty yeajs before, 
with a row of plate buttons extending from the collar to the skirts, 
as well as others on the pockets, and which, though it only reached 
to his knees, must have dangled down to its original owner's ancles. 
His waistcoat was of the same material as the upper garment, and 
evidently dated back to the same remote period. A dirty neck- 
cloth, looking positively white from its contrast with his swarthy 
chin, was twisted round his throat. He possessed great personal 
strength, and, indeed, was reported to have driven off, single-handed, 
three housebreakers, who had contrived one night to effect an en- 
trance into his master's habitation. It was thought that the miser 
retained him as much for self-defence as for his other services ; and 
it was even said that in some money-lending transactions in which 
Mr. Scarve had been engaged with suspicious characters, Jacob 
stood by on guard. 

By this time, the mercer had returned with a jug, whose frothing 
head made Jacob's mouth water. Seeing the effect produced on 
him, Mr. Deacle indulged in a sly chuckle. 

" Ah! Jacob," he said, feigning a commiserating tone, " I fear 



THE MISER S DAUGHTER. 5 

you don't get such liquor as this with your master. He don't brew 
over strong-— not too much malt and hops, eh ?" 
"That's true enough, sir," replied Jacob, gruffly. 
" Do you get any ale at all, Jacob?" inquired Mrs. Deacle. 
" No," replied Jacob, in a tone so abrupt that it made the good 
dame start, and elicited a slight scream from the fair Thomasine. 

" 'Odd's precious !" exclaimed Mrs. Deacle, " how the fellow does 
frighten one. And so you have no ale?" — (Jacob shook his head) 
— " nor small beer?" — -(another negative)—" then what do you 
drink, for wine or spirits must be out of the question?" 

" Treacle-beer," rejoined Jacob ; " and little enough of that." 
" So I should think," remarked Mr. Deacle, cunningly. " Come, 
come, friend Jacob ! — this may be very well for your master, but it 
won't do with me. Your nose would never keep its goodly colour 
on such thin potations." 

A grim smile crossed Jacob's face, and he tapped the feature in 
question. 

" I understand," replied the mercer, winking ; " private cellar, 
ah! Perfectly right, Jacob. Private larder, too, I'll be sworn. 
You couldn't live on Miser Starve's — I mean, Mr. Scarve's — 
allowance. Impossible, Jacob — impossible ! Take a glass, Jacob. 
Your master must be very rich, eh?" 

" I don't know," replied Jacob, after tossing off the glass; " he 
doesn't live like a rich man." 

"There I differ from you, Jacob," returned the mercer; "he 
lives like a miser, and misers are always rich." 
" Maybe," repHed Jacob, turning away. 

"Stop, stop!" cried the mercer — "you must finish this jug 
before you go. Are you the only servant in the house?" 

" The only wzaw-servant," replied Jacob, looking as if he did not 
relish the question; " but there's sometimes a cAee^-woman, and the 
two ladies does for themselves." 

" Do for themselves !" ejaculated Mrs. Deacle. " How dreadful !" 
" Dreadful, indeed !" echoed the fair Thomasine, with an ex- 
pression of ineffable disgust, theatrically fine in its effect. 

" Well, I should like to see the inside of your master's house, 
Jacob, I confess," pursued Mrs. Deacle. 

" You wouldn't wish to repeat the visit, ma'am, if you had once 
been there," he answered, drily. 



6 THE miser's daughter. 

"I hope the miser doesn't ill-treat his daughter," said the fair 
Thomasine. " Poor thing, how I pity her ! Such a sweet creature, 
and such a tyrant of a father !" ' 

" She's not ill-treated, miss," rejoined Jacob, gruffly; " and she's 
not so much to be pitied as you suppose ; nor is master a tyrant, 
by no means, miss." 

" Don't be oifended, Jacob," interposed the mercer, pouring out 
a glass, and handing it to him. " Women always fancy themselves 
ill-treated either by their fathers, husbands, or brothers — all except 
their lovers, eh, Jacob?" 

" I'm sure, my love, nobody can say /complain," said Mrs. Deacle. 

" Nor I, father," added Thomasine ; " as to lovers, 1 know nothing 
about them, and don't desire to know." 

" Bless me ! how you take one up," rejoined Mr. Deacle, sharply* 
" Nobody does say that either of you complains. Surely, Jacob, 
the old lady whom I always see with your master's daughter can't 
be her mother?" 

" No, she's her aunt," replied Jacob, 

" On the father's side?" 

" Mother's." 

"I thought as much; and her name is ?" 

Jacob looked as though he would have said, " What's that to 
you?" but he answered, " Mrs. Clinton." 

" You'll think me rather curious, Jacob," pursued the mercer, 
" but I should like to know the name of your master's daughter. 
What is it, eh?" 

" Hilda," replied Jacob. 

" Hilda ! dear me — a very singular name," cried Mrs. Deacle. 

" Singular, indeed ! but sweetly pretty," sighed the fair Tho- 
masine. 

" Probably a family name," remarked the mercer. " Well, Miss 
Hilda's a charming creature, Jacob, — charming," 

" She is charmin'," repeated Jacob, emphatically. 

" Not very well dressed though," muttered the mercer, as if 
speaking to himself; and then he added aloud — " She'll be a great 
catch, Jacob, — a great catch. Any engagement — any one in view 
— any lover, eh?" 

*' No one," replied Jacob. " Unless," he added, bursting into a 
horse laugh, " it's your next-door neighbour, Peter Pokerich, the 
barber." 



THE miser's DAUGHTEE. ^ 

" Peter Pokericli !" screamed the fair Thomasine, starting to Ker 
feet, and assuming an attitude of distraction. 

" Mercy on us! what's the matter, Tommy?" cried the mercer, 
in surprise. 

" Don't ask me, father," rejoined the young lady, gasping Hke a 
tragic actress, and passing her hand across her brow as if to clear 
off some imaginary hair, — her own auburn tresses being trimly 
secured beneath a pretty little fly cap. " Tell me, Jacob," she 
added, catching his arm, " is my — is Peter— is the faithless one 
Hilda Scarve's lover? — has he declared his passion? — is he 
accepted? — tell me all, Jacob, and whatever effort it may cost me, 
I will bear it." 

" I've nothing more to tell than this," repHed Jacob, who 
listened with imperturbable calmness to this passionate and touch- 
ing address; — " he has lately taken to folio win' young missis when 
she goes out to walk with her aunt." 

" But has not dared to address her, Jacob ?" cried the fair Tho- 
masine, breathlessly, 

"Not till t'other day," replied Jacob, " and then h^ stopped her 
just as she was enterin' the house. Luckily, I was there, and I 
guv' him a taste of my crab-stick, which I'll engage he'll re- 
member." 

"Cudgelled! — Peter false, and cudgelled! — cruel, yet kind, 
Jacob !" cried the fair Thomasine, relaxing her hold, and staggering 
back. " This is too much — support me, mother !" 

" What's the matter with you. Tommy, I say? — are you going 
distracted?" cried the mercer. 

" Fetch the ratafia, my dear, and don't ask questions," replied 
•his wife. " Don^t you see there's been a secret attachment?" she 
added, in an imder tone — " that deceitful Httle barber has played 
her false. But I'll bring him to his senses, I'll warrant him. Poor 
thing ! this is just the state I was thrown into when I heard of your 
.going to Stourbridge Fair with cousin Sally- The ratafia! the 
ratafia! — quick! quick!" 

The mercer opened a cupboard, took out the cordial, gave it to 
his wife, and then motioning Jacob to follow liim, rushed out of 
the room so precipitately, that he overset a person who was lis- 
tening at the door, and who proved to be no other than Peter 
Pokerich. 



H THE miser's daughter. 

" What ! you liere, sir," cried Mr. Deacle, in astonishment. 
" Then you've heard what has passed. Go in to my daughter, and 
make her mind easy directly." 

"If he doesn't I'll give him another taste of the crah-stick," 
added Jacob. 

*' But it would be highly indecorous — ^liighly improper, in me to 
go in just now, Mr. Deacle," remonstrated Peter. 

"Not more indecorous, or improper, than listening at the door," 
rejoined the mercer. " Go in directly, sir." 

" Ay, go !" added Jacob, menacingly. 

And Peter, seeing opposition in vain, opened the door and 
sneaked in. A stifled scream and an hysterical laugh succeeded 
his entrance. 

The mercer accompanied Jacob to the street door: and, as he 
passed through the shop, pointed out the different rich stuffs to 
him. 

" I wish you could induce your young mistress to come and look 
at my assortment of stuffs," he said ; "it is the choicest in town, 
though I say it, who shouldn't say it. I've garden silks, Italian 
silks, brocades, tissues, cloth of silver, ditto gold, fine Mantua silks, 
right Genoa velvets, English ditto, embossed ditto. Or if she 
wants commoner stuffs, I've fine thread satins, both striped and 
plain,, fine Mohair silks, satinets, burdets, Persianets, Norwich 
crapes, anterines, silks for hoods and scarfs, hair camlets, sagathees, 
shalloons, and right Scotch plaids. Can you recollect all these 
articles ?" 

" I should need a better memory than I have to recollect half of 
'em,'* replied Jacob. 

" I would send her some stuffs to look at, if you think her father 
wouldn't object," said the mercer: "this black velvet would suit 
her exactly, or this rich ItaUan silk." 

" It would cost me my place to take them," replied Jacob; " and 
yet, as you say, they would become her purely. But it's of no 
use thinkin' of them," he added, walking away. 

" One word more, Jacob," said Mr. Deacle, detaining him, and 
whispering in his ear, " I didn't like to ask the question before the 
•women — ^but they do say your master's a Papist and a Jacobite." 

" Who say so?" cried Jacob, loudly and gruffly. " Speak up and 
tell me !" 



THE miser's daughter. 9 

" Why, the neighbours," replied the mercer, somewhat abashed. 

" Then tell 'em from me that it's a lie," rejoined Jacob. And 
heedless of any further attempts to detain him, he strode away. 

One night, about a month after the incident above related, which 
took place at the latter end of April, 1744, just as Peter Pokerich 
was in the act of shutting up his shop, he observed a horseman 
turn out of King-street, and ride towards him. It was sufficiently 
light to enable him to discover, on a nearer approach, that the 
stranger was a young man, about one or two and twenty, with a 
tall, well-proportioned figure, at once vigorous and symmetrical, 
extremely regular and finely-formed features, glowing with health 
and manly beauty, and slightly, though not unbecomingly, em- 
browned by exposure to the sun. Apparently disdaining to follow 
the fashion of the period, or proud of his own waving brown 
locks, the young man suffered them to fall in their native luxuriance 
over his shoulders. The fashion of his dark green riding-dress — 
which, ill made as it appeared in the eyes of the knowing barber, 
revealed his fine figure to great advantage — as well as his general 
appearance, proclaimed him from the country. Looking hard at 
Peter as he advanced, the stranger drew up beside him. 

" Can you tell me where Mr. Scarve lives?" he asked. 

Peter started, and stared at his interrogator in speechless asto- 
nishment. The young man looked surprised in his turn, and re 
peated the inquiry. 

"Miser Starve — beg pardon! — Mr. Scarve? but he's generally 
known by the former name hereabouts," cried Peter. " Oh yes, 
sir, I do know where Mr. Scarve lives." 

**Then, probably, you will have the goodness to direct me to the 
house," returned the young man. " This is the Little Sanctuary, 
is it not?" 

"Yes, sir! yes!" replied Peter. " But what may be your 
business with Miser Starve — beg pardon again! — Mr. Scarve?" 

" My business is not of much consequence," rejoined the young 
man, somewhat coldly and haughtily, " but it refers to Mr. Scarve 
himself." 

" Beg pardon, sir — ^no ofience, I hope," returned Peter, in a de- 
precatory tone; " but Mr. Starve — ^bless me ! how my tongue runs 
— Mr. Scarve is such a very odd man. He won't see you unless 
your business is very particular. Will you favour me with your 
name, sir?" 



10 THE miser's DAUGHTEB. 

*' My name is Kandulph Crew," returned the stranger. 

*' Crew — Crew !" repeated Peter; " that should be a Cheshire 
name. Excuse the Kberty, but are you from that county, sir?" 

" I am — I am !" replied the other, impatiently. 

" Ah ! knew it at once, sir. Can't deceive me," rejoined Peter. 
" Fine head of hair, sir, very fine; but must lose it. Very well 
for Cheshire — but won't do in London. Ladies will laugh at you. 
Nothing so ungenteel as one's own hair. I have a fine head of 
hair myself, but can't wear it. Must have a peruke. Perukes are 
as essential to a gentleman now-a-days as lace to his clothes. I've 
wigs of all sorts, all fashions, all prices : the minor-bob ; the 
Sunday buckle; the bob-major; the apothecary's bush; the phy- 
sical and cliirurgical tie; the scratch, or blood's skull covering; the 
Jehu's Jemmy, or white-and-all- white ; the campaign; and the 
Ramellies ; Step in, and I'll show you the last new perriwig — the 
Villiers — brought in by the great beau of that name — heard of 
him, I dare say, sir, — and which all our brights, smarts, putts, and 
jemmies are wearing. I've the counterpart of Beau Villiers's own 
perriwig, which, between ourselves — for it must go no further — I 
obtained from his gentleman, Mr. Crackenthorpe Cripps. It's quite 
a wonder. Do step in, sir, and look at it. It'll quite ravish 

you." ^ ' 

" Thank you, friend, I am content with the covering nature has 
given my head," replied Randulph. 

" And with very good reason, sir," replied Peter; "but fashion, 
sir, — fashion is arbitrary, and has decreed that no man shall wear 
his own hair. Therefore, you must, perforce, sir, adopt the per- 
riwig." 

" Will you show me Mr. Scarve's residence, or must I apply for 
information elsewhere?" cried the young man, wearied with the 
barber's loquacity. 

" Not so fast, sir, — not so fast," replied Peter. " I must tefl 
you something about the old gentleman first. Do you know him, 
sirr 

Randulph Crew uttered a hasty negative. 

" Then / </o," pursued Peter. " Terrible miser, sir — terrible ! — 
denies himself all the comforts of existence — makes his family and 
servants live upon a bare bone for a week — thinks of nothing but 
his gold — and, as to his daughter — " 



THE miser's daughter. 11 

'* Oh, lie has a daughter, has he?" interrupted Randulph. " I 
was not aware of it. Is she at all like him ?" 

"Like him! — no!" echoed Peter. ''She's beautiful beyond 
description." But thinking such commendation rather injudicious 
in the present case, he checked himself as mal-adroitly as a horse 
pulled up too suddenly, and added, " At least some people say 
so ; but, for my own part, I can see nothing to admire in her." 

" Well, perhaps I may judge for myself," observed Randulph. 

" Perhaps you may," quavered Peter. " He's just the man to 
captivate her," he thought. ''I wish I could misdirect him; but 
most probably Jacob wont admit him." 

"And now, friend, will you show me the house?" cried 
Randulph. 

"With pleasure, sir — with pleasure," replied Peter, pointing to 
the opposite habitation; " there it is, at the corner." 

Vexed at having been so long and so unnecessarily detained, 
Randulph Crew turned his horse's head, and dismounting before 
the miser's door, knocked loudly against it with the butt-end of his 
heavy riding- whip. Peter anxiously watched his proceedings ; but 
as no answer was returned to the summons, he began to hope the 
young man would go away ; but in this he was disappointed, for 
the latter renewed his application, and did not desist tiU checked 
by the gruff voice of Jacob Post, who shouted from a little grated 
window, through which he reconnoitered the intruder, " Halloo ! 
what's the matter ? — who's there ?" 

" Is Mr. Scarve at home ?" asked Randulph. " I want to see 
Hm." 

" Then you can't," rejoined Jacob, in his harshest accents, but 
which sounded Hke music in the ears of the attentive Peter. 

" But I must, and will," rejoined Randulph, in a peremptory 
tone. "I have a packet to deliver to him — to his own hands — an 
important packet. Tell him that." 

" A Jacobite, I'll be sworn," cried Peter to himself. " I must 
watch him narrowly. I should feel gratified in being the means of 
hanging that young man." 

" Well, I'll take your message to my master," growled Jacob, 
after a short pause. " But I must scintinize you a Uttle before I 
admit you. You seem to me, as far as I can make out, to have a 
good deal of the cut of a highwayman about you." 



12 THE miser's daughter. 

**He, he, he ! — ^good, Jacob— good !" tittered Peter. 

Some minutes elapsed before Jacob, who had disappeared, re- 
turned. A heavy tread was heard along the passage leading to the 
door, succeeded by the rattling of a chain, the clanking of bars, 
and the shooting back of a couple of ponderous bolts. The door 
was then thrown open, and exhibited the great gaunt figure of 
Jacob, holding a lantern in one hand, the light of which he threw 
full upon the face of the young man, while he kept the other hand, 
which grasped the redoubted crab-stick, out of view. Satisfied, at 
length, with the investigation, he growled forth, " It'll do. Mas- 
ter'll see you. You may come in." 

" That for your trouble, friend," said Randulph, slipping a crown 
into Jacob's hand, as he tied his horse's bridle to a ring in the 
door-post. 

"I wonder what this is given for?" muttered Jacob, as he 
pocketed the coin. " It's the only suspicious thing I've noticed 
about him. I must keep an eye upon him. But I dare say he only 
wants to see young missis, and she's worth more than twenty crowns 
to look at." 

Thus ruminating, he admitted Randulph into the passage, locked 
and bolted the door, took the light out of the lantern, and placing 
it in a copper candlestick, led the way towards a back room. 

While the door was being fastened, Peter Pokerich darted across 
the way, shouting to Randulph, " I'll take care of your horse, sir.'* 
No attention, however, being paid to the oflfer, he hurried back for 
a light, and began carefully to examine the saddle, peering into the 
holsters, and trying to open the saddle-bags, to see whether he could 
obtain any clue to the supposed Jacobite principles of the owner. 



THE miser's DAUGHTEE. 13 



CHAPTER II. 

THE MISEB AND HIS DAUGHTER — RANDULPH DELIVERS THE PACKET TO THE 
FORMER— ITS RECEPTION. 

Following his conductor along the passage, the boards of which 
"being totally destitute of carpet or cloth, sounded hollowly beneath 
their feet, Randulph Crew glanced at the bare walls, the dusty 
and cobweb-festooned ceiHng, and the staircase, as devoid of cover- 
ing as the passage, and could not but admit that the account given 
him by the barber of Mr. Scarve's miserly habits was not exagge- 
rated. Little time, however, was allowed him for reflection. Jacob 
. marched quickly on, and pushing open a door on the right, ushered 
him into his master's presence. 

Mr. Scarve was an old man, and looked much older than he 
really was — ^being only sixty-five, whereas he appeared like eighty. 
His frame was pinched, as if by self-denial, and preternaturally 
withered and shrivelled ; and there was a thin, haggard, and almost 
hungry, look about his face, extremely painful to contemplate. His 
features were strongly marked, and sharp, and his eye gray, keen, 
and piercing. He was dressed in a threadbare cloth robe, trimmed 
with sable, and wore a velvet nightcap, lined with cotton, on his 
head. The rest of his habiliments were darned and patched in an 
unseemly manner. Beside him was a small table, on which was 
laid a ragged and dirty cloth, covered with the remains of his scanty 
meal, which Randulph's arrival had interrupted. Part of a stale 
loaf, a slice of cheese, and a little salt, constituted the repast. 

Every thing in the room bespoke the avaricious character of its 
owner. The panelled walls were without hangings or decoration of 
any kind. The room itself, it was evident, had known better days and 
richer garniture. It was plain, but handsome in its character, and 
boasted a large and well-carved chimney-piece, and a window filled 



14 THE miser's daughter. 

mth stained glass, displaying the armorial bearings of the former 
possessor of the house, though now patched in many places with 
paper, and stopped up in others with old rags. Tills window was 
strongly grated, and the bars were secured in their turn by a large 
padlock, placed inside the room. Over the chimney-piece were 
placed a couple of large blue and white china bottles, with dried 
everlasting flowers stuck in the necks. There were only two chairs 
in the room and a stool. The best chair was appropriated by the 
miser himself. It was an old-fashioned afiair, with great wooden 
arms, and a hard leathern back, polished, Hke a well-blacked shoe, 
by frequent use. A few coals, carefully piled into a little pyramid, 
burnt within the bars, as if to show the emptiness of the grate, and 
diffused a sHght gleam, like a mocking laugh, but no sort of heat. 
Beside it sat Mrs. Clinton, an elderly maiden-lady, almost as wintry- 
looking and pinched as her brother-in-law. This antiquated lady 
had a long, thin neck, a turned-up nose, and a skin as yellow as 
parchment ; but the expression of her countenance, though rather 
sharp and frosty, was kindly. She wore a close fitting gown of 
dark camlet, with short, tight, sleeves, that by no means concealed 
the angularities of her figure. Her hair, which was still dark as in 
her youth, was gathered up closely behind, and surmounted by the 
small muslin cap then in vogue. 

The object, however, that chiefly riveted Randulph's attention 
on his entrance was neither the miser himself, nor his sister-in-law — 
it was his daughter. Her beauty was so extraordinary that it acted 
like a surprise upon him, occasioning a thrill of delight, mingled 
with a feeling of embarrassment. Rising as he entered the room, 
she gracefully, and with much natural dignity, returned his saluta- 
tion, which, through inadvertence, he addressed almost exclusively 
to her. B[ilda Scarve's age might be guessed at nineteen. She was 
tall, exquisitely proportioned, with a pale, clear complexion, set 
off" by her rich raven tresses, which, totally unrestrained, showered 
down in a thick cloud over her shoulders. Her eyes were large 
and dark, luminous, but steady, and indicated firmness of character. 
Her look was grave and sedate, and there was great determination 
in her beautifully-formed but closely-compressed lips. Her aspect 
and deportment exhibited the most periect self-command, and 
whatever effect might be produced upon her by the sudden entrance 
of the handsome visitor, not a glance was suffered to reveal it, while 



THE miser's daughter, 1$ 

he, on the contrary, could not repress the admiration excited by her 
beauty. He was, however, speedily recalled to himself by the 
miser, who, rapping the table impatiently, exclaimed, in a queru- 
lous, tone, " Your business, sir? — -your business?" 

"I have come to deliver this to you, sir," replied Randulph, 
producing a small packet, and handing it to the miser. " I should 
tell you, sir," he added, in a voice of emotion, "that it was my 
father's wish that this packet should be given to you a year after 
his death — but not before." 

" And your father's name," cried the miser, bending eagerly for- 
ward, and shading his eyes so as to enable him to see the young 
man more distinctly, " was — was " 

" The same as my own, Randulph Crew," was the reply. 

" Gracious Heaven !" exclaimed the miser, falhng back in his 
chair, "and is he dead? — njy friend — my old friend!" and he 
pressed his hand to his face, as if to hide his emotion. 

Hilda bent anxiously over him, and tried to soothe him, but he 
pushed her gently away. 

" Having discharged my mission, I will now take my leave," 
said Randulph, after a slight pause, during which he looked on in 
silent astonishment. " I wiU call at some other time. Miss Scarve, 
to speak to your father respecting the packet." 

" No, stay !" cried Hilda, hastily. " Some old and secret spring 
of affection has been touched. I entreat you to wait till he re- 
covers. He will be better presently." 

" He is better now," rephed the miser, uncovering liis face; 
" the fit is past; but it was sharp while it lasted. Randulph Crew," 
he added, faintly, and stretcliing out his thin hand to him, " I am 
glad to see you. Years ago, I knew your father well. But un- 
happy circumstances separated us, and since then I have seen 
nothing of liim. I fancied him alive, and well, and happy, and 
your sudden announcement of his death gave me a great shock. 
Your father was a good man, Randulph — a good man, and a 
kind one." 

" He was, indeed, sir," rejoined the young man, in a broken 
voice, the tears starting to his eyes. 

" But somewhat careless in money matters, Randulph — thought- 
less and extravagant," pursued the miser. " Nay, I mean nothing 
disrespectful to his memory," he added; seeing the young man's 



16 THE MISEU'S DAUGHTER. 

colour helgliten. ** His faults were those of an over-generous 
nature. He was no man's enemy but his own. He once had a fine 
property, but I fear he dissipated it." 

** At all events, he greatly embarrassed it, sir," replied Ran- 
dulph ; " and I lament to say, that the situation of his affairs 
preyed upon his spirits, and no doubt hastened his end." 

" I feared it would be so," said the miser, shaking his head. 
*' But the estates were entailed. They are yours now, and un- 
embarrassed." 

*' They might have been so, sir," replied the young man; ** but 
I haVe foregone the advantage I could have taken of my father's 
creditors, and have placed the estates in their hands, and for their 
benefit." 

" You don't mean to say you have been guilty of such incredible 
folly, for I can call it nothing else !" cried the miser, in a sharp and 
angry tone, and starting to his feet. " What! give the estates to 
the very men who ruined your father ! Have you been rash and 
unadvised enough to break down the barriers the law had built 
around you for your protection, and let in the enemy into the very 
heart of the citadel ? It is the height of folly — of madness \" 

" Folly or not, sir," returned the young man, haughtily, " I do 
not repent the step I have taken. My first consideration was to 
preserve the memory of my father unblemished." 

" Unblemished ! — pshaw !" cried the miser. " You would have 
cleared the spots from your father's name much more efiectually if 
you had kept fast hold of the estates, instead of reducing yourself 
to the condition of a beggar." 

" Father !" exclaimed Hilda, uneasily — " father, you speak too 
strongly — much too strongly." 

"I am no beggar, sir," replied Randulph, with diflSculty re- 
pressing his anger, " nor will I allow such a term to be applied to 
me by you or any man. Farewell, sir." And he would have 
left the room, if he had not been detained by the imploring looks 
of Hilda. 

*' Well, then, you are reduced to the condition of a poor man, if 
you prefer the term — though I think it" synon3nQious with that of 
beggar — and therefore must be a dependent one," said the miser, 
who seemed utterly reckless of the pain he was inflicting. " But 
for your own folly, you might now be worth three thousand a- 



THE miser's daughter. 17 

year — ay, three thousand a-year ! — for I knew your father''s rental. 
Why, you are more thoughtless, more improvident than him who 
went before you. You have sold your birthright for less than a 
mess of pottage. You have sold it for a phantom, a shade, a 
word — and those who have bought it, laugh at you, deride you. 
Out upon such folly ! Three thousand a-year gone to feed those 
birds of prey — those vultures — that ravened upon your father's 
vitals while living, and now riot upon his offspring — it's monstrous, 
intolerable ! Oh ! if I had left my affairs in such a condition, and 
my daughter were to act thus, I should not rest in my grave !" 

" And yet, in such a case, I should act precisely as this gentleman 
has acted, father," rejoined Hilda. 

" You speak like one ignorant of the world, and of the value of 
money, Hilda," cried the miser, turning to her. " Heaven be 
praised ! you will never be in such a situation. I shan't leave you 
much — not much — ^but what I do leave will be unembarrassed. It 
will be your own, too ; no husband shall have the power to touch 
a farthing of it." 

" Have a care, father," rejoined Hilda, " and do not clog your 
bequest with too strict conditions. If I marry, what I have shall 
be my husband's." 

" Hilda," cried the miser, shaking with passion, " if I thought 
you in earnest, I would disinherit you !'^ 

"No more of this, dear father," she, rejoined calmly; "I have 
no thought of marrying, and it is needless to discuss the point till it 
arises. Recollect, also, there is a stranger present." 

" True," repHed the miser, recovering himself. " This is not 
the time to talk over the subject, but I won't have my intentions 
misunderstood. And now," he added, sinking into the chair, and 
looking at Randulph, " let me inquire after your mother? I re- 
member her well as Sophia Beech croft, and a charming creature 
she was. You resemble her more than your father. Nay, restrain 
your blushes, I don't mean to flatter you. That which is a beauty 
in a woman is a defect in man ; and your fair skin and long hair 
would become your sister, if you have one, better than yourself." 

" Really, sir," rejoined Randulph, again reddening, " you make 
strangely free with me." 

" I made free with your father before you, young man," rejoined 
the miser; " and it was for telling him a piece of my mind that I 

C 



18 THE miser's daughter. 

lost his friendship. More's the pity ! — more's the pity ! I would 
have served him if he would have let me. But to return to your 
mother. You acted unjustly to her, as well as to yourself, in not 
retaining the family estates." 

" My mother has her own private property to live on," replied 
Kandulph, who winced under the stinging observations of the 
miser. 

"And what's that?" rejoined Mr. Scarve ; "a beggarly — I 
crave your pardon — a pitiful hundred a-year or so. Not that a 
hundred a-year is pitiful, but it must be so to her, with her notions 
and habits." 

" There you are mistaken, sir," replied Randulph ; " my mother 
is entirely reconciled to her situation, and lives accordingly." 

" I am glad to hear it," rephed the miser, in a sceptical tone ; 
" I own I did not give her credit for so much self-governance, but 
I hope it is so." 

" Hope, sir !" cried Randulph, angrily ; " is my word doubted?'* 

** Not in the least," rejoined the miser, drily ; " but young peo- 
ple are apt to take things on trust. And now, as you have fooled 
away your fortune, may I ask what you are about to do to retrieve 
it ? What profession — or, rather, what trade do you propose to 
follow?" 

" I shall follow neither trade nor profession, Mr. Scarve," replied 
Randulph. " My means, though small, enable me to live as a 
gentleman." 

" Hum !" cried the miser. " I suppose, however, you would 
not object to some employment. An idle man is always an ex- 
pensive man. But what brought you to London?" 

" My chief motive was to deliver that packet to you," replied 
Randulph. " But I must own I was not altogether uninfluenced 
by a desire to see this great city, which I have never beheld since 
I was a mere boy, and too young to remember it." 

" You are a mere boy still," rejoined the miser ; "and if you 
will take my advice, you will go back more quickly than you came. 
But I know you won't, so it's idle to urge you. Youth will rush 
headlong to destruction. Young man, you don't know what is 
before you, but I'll tell you — it's ruin — ruin — ruin ! — d'ye hear 
me? — ruin!" 

" I hear you, sir," replied Randulph, frowning. 



THE miser's DAUGHTEE. 19 

" Hum !" said the miser, shrugging his shoulders, " so you "won't 
be advised? But it's the way with all young people, and I ought 
not to expect you to prove an exception. I suppose you mean to 
stay with your two uncles, Abel and Trussell Beechcroft?" 
*' Such is my intention," replied Bandulph. 
" I have not seen them for years/' pursued Scarve; "but if 
you are not acquainted with them, I will give you their characters 
in brief. Abel is sour, but sure — Trussell, pleasant, plausible, but 
hollow. And you will judge of my candour when I tell you that 
the first hates me, while the latter is well disposed towards me. 
You will take to the one and dislike the other, but you will find 
out your error in time. Mind what I say. And now let us look 
at the packet, for I have kept you here too long, and have nothing 
to offer you." 

" There's nearly a glass of wine left in the bottle in the cup- 
board," interposed Jacob, who had stood stock still during the 
whole of this interview, with the candle in his hand. " Perhaps 
the gentleman would like it after his journey.^' 

" Hold your tongue, sirrah," cried the miser, sharply, " and 
snuff the candle — not with your fingers, knave !" he added, as 
Jacob applied his immense digits to the tufted wick, and stamped 
upon the snuff as he cast it on the floor. " What can this packet 
contain? Let me see," he continued, breaking the seal and dis- 
closing a letter, which he opened, and found it contained a small 
memorandum. As he glanced at it, a shade came over his coun- 
tenance. He did not attempt to read the letter, but folding it over 
the small piece of paper, unlocked a small, strong box, that stood 
at his feet beneath the table, and placed them both within it. 

" It is time you went to your uncles, young man," he said to 
Randulph, in an altered tone, and more coldly than before ; "I 
shall be glad to see you some other time. Good night." 

" I shall be truly happy to call here again, sir," replied Ran- 
dulph, looking earnestly at Hilda. 

" Jacob, show Mr. Crew to the door," cried the miser, hastily. 
" Good night. Miss Scarve," said Randulph, still lingering. 
" Do you often walk in the parks?" 

" My daughter never stirs abroad," repKed the miser, motioning 
him away. " There, get you gone. Good night, good night ! — A 

2 



20 THE miser's daughter. 

troublesome visitor," he added, to Hilda, as Jacob departed with, 
the young man. 

Jacob having again placed the candle in the lantern, unbolted 
and unlocked the door, and issuing forth, they found Peter Poke- 
rich standing beside the horse. 

'' You may thank me that your horse is not gone, sir," said the 
latter. *' People in London are not quite so honest as the viDagers 
in Cheshire. Well, you've seen Mr. Scarve, I suppose, sir. What 
do you think of him, and of his daughter !" 

" I pity your taste in not admiring her," repHed Randulph. 

" Not admiring her !" cried Jacob, with a horse laugh. Did he 
tell you he didn't admire her ? Why, he's dying with love 
of her, and, I make no doubt, was jealous of your good looks — 
ho ! ho !" 

" You're insolent, Mr. Jacob," rejoined Peter, angrily. 

" What ! you want another taste of my crabstick, do you ?" 
said Jacob. " It's close at hand." 

" Don't quarrel, friends,'^ laughed Randulph, springing into the 
saddle. " Good night, Jacob. I shall hope, ere long, to see your 
old master and young mistress again." So saying, he struck spurs 
into his steed, and rode off in the direction of Westminster Bridge. 

" Well," said Peter, as he crossed over the way to his own 
dwelling, " I've managed to get a letter out of his saddle-bag, at 
all events. Perhaps it'll tell me who and what he is, and whether 
he's a Jacobite and Papist. If so, let him look to himself ; for as 
sure as my name's Peter Pokerich, I'll hang him. And now for 
the letter." 



THE miser's daughter. 2^ 



CHAPTER III. 

the brothers beechcroft — mr. jckes — the arrival — the walk in salnt 
James's park — ranbulph's introduction to beau villiers and lady 
brabazon. 

The two brothers Beechcroft, Randulpli's uncles, lived in a 
retired house in Lambeth, close to the river, and a little to the 
west of the palace. Both were middle-aged men, that is to say, — 
for it is difficult to determine what is the middle age now-a-days, 
though it was not quite so difficult to fix the period in the last cen- 
tury, — one was fifty-six, and the other ten years younger, and both 
bachelors. That they lived together, and in this retired way, was 
not so much matter of choice as of necessity on the part of the 
younger brother, Trussell, for he would have preferred, if it had 
been in his power, a gayer kind of life. But fortune decreed it 
otherwise. The father of the brothers was a wealthy merchant, 
who, being determined to make an elder son, left the bulk of his 
property, except some trifling bequests to his daughter Sophia 
(Randulph's mother) and Trussell, to his first-born Abel. Abel, 
however, behaved very handsomely upon the occasion. He in- 
stantly made over to his brother and sister what he considered their 
rightful share of the property. In neither case did the gift prosper. 
Trussell soon squandered away his modicum in gaming and every 
other sort of extravagance, while Sophia's portion was dissipated, 
though in a diiFerent way, by her thoughtless and improvident hus- 
band. There are, indeed, so many ways of getting rid of money, 
that it is difficult to say which is the most expeditious ; nor would 
it be easy to tell whether Trussell or his sister was longest benefited 
by their brother's bounty. A small sum had been settled upon 
Mrs. Crew by her father, at the time of her marriage, and on 
this she now lived. 

Completely reduced in circumstances, Trussell was thrown upon 



24. THE miser's daughter. 

the fault of that boy. I wisli I had never promised to receive him. 
I dare say some accident has happened to him. I hope it may turn 
out so." 

" You don't hope any such thing, sir," remarked Mr. Jukes, a 
little, round, rosy, good-humoured-looking man, in a plain livery — 
" you don't hope any such thing, so don't belie yourself, and do 
your kind heart an injustice. The wine's not corked," he added, 
taking the bottle to the sideboard, and tasting it. " Try another 
glass. Your palate's out of order." 

" And well it may be, Jukes," repHed Abel, " for my digestion 
has been sadly disturbed by this waiting. Ah ! I find I was mis- 
taken," he added, tasting the glass poured out for him; " there is 
nothing the matter with the wine." 

" On the contrary, sir, I think it an excellent bottle," remarked 
Trussell, " and I propose that we drink our worthy sister's good 
health — Heaven bless her ! how much I should like to see her ! — 
and her son's safe and speedy arrival." 

" Come, sir, you cannot refuse that pledge," said Mr. Jukes, 
fiUing his master's glass. " I must drink it myself," he added, again 
carrying the bottle to the sideboard. 

" Well, I wonder what we shall find Randulph like?" mused 

Trussell, " for we have not seen him since he was a little fellow 

. . . '' . 

not higher than this table, when his poor father brought him to 

town." 

" By the same token that his poor father borrowed two thousand 
pounds of me at the time, every farthing of which I lost," growled 
Abel. 

" Well, well — no matter, sir. You never felt the loss, so what 
does it signify ?" remarked Mr. Jukes. 

" I've no doubt Randulph mil be a very fine young man," pur- 
sued Trussell. " Sophia writes word that he is her exact image, 
and she was certainly the finest woman of her day." 

" Ay, ay !" cried Abel, shrugging his shoulders uneasily. 
" Change the subject, brother — change the subject." 

For some minutes there was a profound silence, which was at 
length broken by Abel. 

" I suppose you mean to take this young lad, if he comes, to see 
all the sights, brother?" he remarked. 

" Oh, of course, sir — of course," replied Trussell; " I must intro- 



THE miser's daughter. 25 

duce him to the world — show him all the public places and public 
characters — and give him a slight taste of town life." 

•' Let it be a very slight taste, brother," rejoined Abel, sharply, 
*' and not enough to give him an appetite for such pernicious food. 
Our nephew must be perfectly unsophisticated, and, I doubt not, 
from what I hear of him — and, indeed, know of him — a youth of 
excellent principles. I think his conduct, in surrendering his 
estates to his father's creditors, noble. I have great hopes of him, 
and if he turns out well, will take care he does not lose, in the end, 
by his disinterestedness. But that depends upon himself, and in 
some degree on you." 

" On me, sir! — how so?" asked Trussell. 

"Thus," replied the elder brother — "thus: he is coming to 
town ; you will give him certain introductions ; these may turn out 
to his advantage — may raise him in society, in the world. If so, 
well and good. But if you only teach him to ape the folKes and 
vices of those of a higher rank than himself — if you make him a 
weak and frivolous, and, perhaps, a vicious character — if, in short, 
you expose him to a test which he cannot bear, I cast him off, and 
will have nothing to do with him." 

" And provided he answers your expectations, do you propose 
to leave him a fortune, sir, or to give him one?" inquired Trussell, 
curiously. 

" Why do yo ask, brother — why do you ask?" demanded Abel, 
eyeing him narrowly from beneath his great bent brows. 

" Nay, I only asked out of mere curiosity, sir," replied Trussell, 
seizing the bottle in some confusion. " I could have no other mo- 
tive.'^ 

Abel coughed drily. 

"I'll bring you more wine in a moment, gentlemen," interposed 
Mr. Jukes ; " the bottle's empty, Mr. Trussell." 

'^So it is, Mr. Jukes," replied Trussell. "Well, I'll do my 
best, sir, to be a Mentor to him, and I hope I may succeed in car- 
rying him through the fiery furnace unscathed. But you mustn't 
be too hard upon him if he should be guilty of some slight indis- 
cretion. You must recollect, sir, that we have been young our- 
selves ; and that few men have their passions so much under control 
as yourself." 



26 THE miser's daughter. 

'*I !" exclaimed Abel, with bitter contempt. " You are mock- 
ing me, brother. But go on." 

" I've nothing more to add, sir," replied Trussell. 

" Then I have," said Abel, in a low, deep tone, and bending 
towards his brother. " Trussell, one word more on this subject, 
and I dismiss it. Whether I make my nephew my heir or not, 
will make no difference to you. What I have done, I have done, 
and I shall do no more. You can have no motive, therefore, for 
leading him astray." 

" I am grieved you should think me capable of such a base de- 
sign," replied Trussell, colouring deeply; "but I will take no 
offence at what you say. I know my own heart and intentions too 
well." 

" I only gave you a hint, brother," replied Abel, chuckling. " I 
know that a shrewd man of the world — that is, a clever scoundrel 
— ^would act in such a way; and if he succeeded, would be ap- 
plauded for his conduct. I am glad you take the caution in good 
part." 

Here, Mr. Jukes opportunely entered with a fresh bottle of 
wine, which proved in admirable condition ; and Abel having 
expended his ill-humour, the conversation was carried on in a much 
more agreeable manner for an hour, when both brothers adjourned 
to the garden, and smoked a pipe in the summer-house. It was a 
charming evening ; and the river, which was studded with boats, 
presented a lively and pleasant sight. As night drew on, however, 
Abel, in spite of himself, could not conceal his uneasiness. 

" Something must have happened to the lad, Jukes," he said: 
" my mind misgives me. He has been robbed, and perhaps mal- 
treated, by some of the highwaymen haunting Finchley Common." 

" Poh ! poh ! don't make yourself uneasy," replied Mr. Jukes. 
*' He'll be here presently, I'll warrant him. What has he to be 
robbed of?" 

" Nothing much — that's certain," replied Abel. " But it is 
getting late. It must be near ten o'clock. He wont be even in 
time for supper." 

*' I've ordered supper to be kept back an hour, sir," said Mr. 
Jukes. 

"The devil you have!" cried Abel, angrily. "And do you 



THE miser's daughter. 27 

think I'll submit to such an arrangement? Would you ruin my 
digestion, rascal ? My stomach is as regular as clockwork. Serve 
it directly, sirrah !" 

As Mr. Jukes departed to see his master's commands obeyed, 
he was agreeably surprised by a loud knocking at the outer door, 
and waddling thither, with the other servants, as fast as he could, 
was enchanted to find the summons proceeded from the expected 
guest. Randulph's horse was taken charge of, and he himself 
speedily ushered into the presence of his uncles, who both welcomed 
him warmly and affectionately — though Abel could not help mix- 
ing up with his greetings some reproofs for his late arrival. Ran- 
dulph explained that several delays had occurred to him on his 
journey, and concluded by an account of his visit to Mr. Scarve. 
At the mention of this name, Randulph observed both his uncles 
look extremely blank. Uncle Abel, in particular, seemed angry 
and disconcerted. 

" You must never go near that house again," said the latter, at 
length, in an authoritative tone. " Mark me — on pain of my 
displeasure, I forbid it." 

" Why so, uncle ?" asked Randulph, who had been schooled by 
his mother to treat Abel with great deference. 

" Don't ask me," rephed Abel. " It is sufficient that I forbid 
you." 

Randulph felt disposed to remonstrate, more especially as the 
figure of the beautiful Hilda rose before his recollection ; but uncle 
Abel at that moment turning away, his sleeve was plucked by uncle 
Trussell, who whispered in his ear, " Don't disobey him, or you 
will mar your future fortunes." 

Thus advised, the young man made no reply. Soon after this, 
supper was served. Many questions were put to his nephew by 
imcle Trussell respecting his sister, her state of health, and other 
matters, all of which were answered very satisfactorily. The time 
for parting, however, came, and Randulph was not sorry to retire. 
The only thing that dwelt in his mind, and clouded his satisfac- 
tion, was uncle Abel's peremptory interdiction against his visits to 
the miser, and he felt he should have difficulty in observing it. 

" It is strange," he thought, " that my mother should never have 
answered any of my inquiries respecting Mr. Scarve. She seemed 
as mysterious as my uncles. I don't much like the old miser. But 



28 THE misek's daughter. 

tlie daughter is charming. Heigho! I must positively see her 
again, even if I incur uncle Abel's sovereign displeasure." 

Next morning, the uncles and their nephew met at breakfast, at 
an early hour, when the subjects discussed on the previous night 
were renewed. Now that he had completely shaken off the fatigue 
of his journey, Randulph looked so handsome, that both his relations 
were greatly taken with him, and, on the conclusion of some re- 
mark, uncle Abel said, as if unconsciously, " He is, indeed, very 
like his mother." 

Some few hours were then spent by the young man in arranging 
his little wardrobe, and in looking out some letters which he had 
promised to deliver. He missed one, however, and after turning 
over every article he possessed more than a dozen times, concluded 
he had lost it. What made the matter more provoking was, that 
he could not recollect to whom it was addressed. As he had re- 
ceived it amongst others from his mother, to whom it had been 
committed by a friend, he mentioned its loss in a dispatch which 
he proceeded to write to her, and also detailed his safe arrival, and 
the impressions made upon him by his uncles, and by the miser 
and his daughter, whose beauty he highly extolled. His letter 
concluded, he went downstairs, and found both his uncles prepared 
for a stroll. Accordingly, they all three sallied forth, andj, crossing 
Westminster Bridge, shaped their course towards Saint James's 
Park. As they passed the Little Sanctuary, Randulph could not 
help gazing towards the dungeon-like dwelling which enshrined 
her who had made so deep an impression upon him. Uncle Abel 
noticed his look, and partly divining the cause of it, said, " Re- 
member what I told you. Disobey me, and you will rue it,^^ 

Randulph would have made some reply, but he was checked by 
a significant glance from uncle Trussell. 

Passing through the Gate House, they entered the Park by a 
small doorway at the end of Prince' s-court. It was now noon, and 
a warm and genial day. The avenues of trees then extending 
between this point and Rosamond's Pond were crowded with 
persons of both sex, and of all ranks, summoned forth by the 
fineness of the weather. 

Amused by the scene, Randulph gazed with much curiosity at 
all presented to his view. Passing by the Decoy, the party skirted 
the great canal, and, leaving Rosamond's Pond on the left, pro- 
ceeded towards Buckingham House. 



THE miser's daughter. 29 

Just at this juncture, uncle Trussell caught sight of a gay party 
approaching, and exclaimed, in a joyful tone, to his nephew, " As 
I live, we are most fortunate ! There is the leader of fashion, 
Beau Villiers, coming towards us. You shall know him, nephew 
— you shall know him ! The ladies he is walking with are Lady 
Brabazon and the Honourable Clementina Brabazon — a fine girl, 
Clementina — a remarkably fine girl; perfect in style and manners 
— quite a toast among the sparks. The old fellow at her side. Sir 
Singleton Spinke, was a great beau in his time, though never 
equal to Villiers, who far surpasses even his prototype, Beau Field- 
ing, in style and taste. You shall know them all." 

" And nice acquaintances you will make !" remarked uncle Abel, 
sneeringly. 

" Never mind him, Randulph," whispered uncle Trussell. " If 
you know this set, and they like you, you may know whom you 
please. Beau VilHers commands all society, from the highest down 
to— to " 

" Mr. Trussell Beechcroft," replied uncle Abel. 

" Well, down to me, if you please," rejoined uncle Trussell, 
" and that shows it does not extend too low. But, Randulph, I 
beg you to look at the beau. Did you ever see a finer man?" 

" He is very handsome, certainly," replied Randulph, *' and re- 
markably well dressed." 

" He is a great coxcomb, a great rake, and a great gamester, 
Randulph," said uncle Abel; " beware of him." 

" Tush, never mind what he says !" rejoined uncle Trussell, who 
really wished to have the eclat of introducing his handsome 
nephew to the beau. " Come along !" 

So sa3n,ng, he took his nephew's arm, and hurried him forward. 
Pushing their way through the throng, they soon approached the 
sentry-box opposite Buckingham House, near which they encoun- 
tered the party in question. 

Beau Villiers, who was, indeed, a remarkably handsome man, 
and dressed in the extremity of the mode, wore a light-blue em- 
bossed velvet coat, embroidered with silver, with broad cuffs 
similarly ornamented; a white waistcoat of the richest silk, like- 
wise laced with silver; and tawny velvet breeches, partly covered 
with pearl-coloured silk hose, drawn above the knee, and secured 



30 THE miser's daughter. 

■with silver garters. His dress was completed by shoes of Hack 
Spanish leather, fastened by large diamond buckles, and a superb 
Ramillies perriwig of the lightest flaxen hair, which set oj0f his 
brilliant complexion, and fine eyes, to admiration. He carried a 
three-cornered hat, fringed with feathers, and a clouded cane, 
mounted with a valuable pebble. 

Near the beau, walked Lady Brabazon, a gorgeous dame of 
about five-and-forty, and still possessed of great personal attractions, 
which she omitted no means of displaying. She wore a hoop, and 
a white and silver satin sack. Struck by Randulph's figure at a 
distance, she had pointed him out to the beau, who thereupon 
vouchsafed to look towards him. Behind Lady Brabazon, came 
her daughter Clementina, a very pretty and rery affected blonde 
of two-and-twenty, with an excessively delicate complexion, fair 
hair, summer blue eyes, and a very mincing gait. She was exqui- 
sitely dressed in the last new mode, with a small escaloped lace cap, 
her hair crisply curled at the sides, a triple row of pearls round her 
neck, and a diamond cross attached to the chain ; and though she 
pretended to be interested in the discourse of the old knight, it was 
evident her regards were attracted by the handsome young stranger. 

As to the old beau, he was, indeed, supremely ridiculous. He was 
attired in a richly-embroidered cinnamon-coloured velvet coat, with 
fur cuffs of a preposterous size, each as large as a modern muff. His 
pantaloon legs were covered with pink silk hose ; his wrinkled 
features were rouged and bepatched ; and his wig was tied with a 
large bow, and had such an immense queue to it, that it looked as if 
a Patagonian dragon-fly had perched on the back of his neck. 
Lady Brabazon was attended by a little black page, in a turban 
and eastern dress, who had charge of her favourite lap-dog. 

While uncle Abel drew on one side to allow the introduction to 
take place, and to witness it, uncle Trussell stepped forward, and, 
bowing obsequiously to Beau Villiers, pointed to Randulph, who 
stood on his right. 

" Permit me," he said, " to introduce my nephew, Mr. Randulph 
Crew, to you, Mr. Villiers. He is fresh from the country. But 
even there, your reputation has reached him." 

" I am happy to make his acquaintance," repKed the beau, 
courteously returning Randulph's bow, and eyeing him curiously 




St<^i}X G-ruulCsl<»,)vk! 



Randulph Crew introduced to Beau Villiers on the'Mal 



XONDUN; PARHIt * C? LiADEBHAIJ, STRJiET IS*? 



THE miser's DAUGHTEE. 31 

at the same time. " On my faitli, your ladyship," he added, aloud, 
to Lady Brabazon, " the young man is not amiss, but destroyed 
by his wretched equipments and rustic air." 

" I really think something may be made of him," returned Lady 
Brabazon, in the same loud and confidential tone. " Mr. Trussell 
Beechcroft, introduce your nephew." 

" With the greatest pleasure, your ladyship," replied Trussell, 
obeying her behest. 

" Come with us," said Lady Brabazon, to Randulph, after the 
ceremony had been gone through ; *' My daughter — Mr. Crew," 
she added as they passed along. " By-the-by, who was that strange 
old man I saw walking with you just now ?" 

" Who ?" rejoined Randulph, evasively, for he felt ashamed, he 
knew not why, of acknowledging his uncle. 

" There he is," said Lady Brabazon, pointing her fan backwards; 
" he is staring hard at us, and looks exactly hke a bailiflf." 

*' It is my uncle Abel," replied Randulph, in some confusion. 

" Your uncle Abel !" cried Lady Brabazon, with a scream of 
laughter. "Then the sooner you get rid of uncle Abel the better." 

Abel could not hear the words, but he heard the laugh, and saw 
the gesture, as well as his nephew's confusion, and knew that he 
was the object of it. He turned away in the opposite direction, 
muttering to himself as he went, " So, he has taken the first step." 



32 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER IV. 

, ABEL BEECHCROFT's SENSIBILITY — HIS INS'JKUCTIONS TO ME. JPKES — A SECOND 
NEPHEW — THE LOAN — MR. CKIPPS's SENSE OF HONOUR — THE BRIBE. 

Uncle Abel returned home by himself about two o'clock, in 
a very ill humour indeed, and, vouchsafing no answer to Mr. 
Jukes, who smilingly inquired where he had left the two gentle- 
men, proceeded at once to the library. Knowing the peculiarity 
of his master's temper, the discreet butler left him to himself, but 
ventured, unsummoned, into his presence in about half an hour, 
and found him in the act of tearing up a letter, and throwing the 
fragments into the grate. 

" What brings you here, sir?" cried Abel, turning sharply upon 
him. " I didn't ring the bell." 

" I know you didn't, sir," repHed Mr. Jukes; " but I "was certain 
you wanted me, nevertheless." 

" You were certain of no such thing, sirrah," rejoined Abel, in 
a tone that contradicted the asperity of his words, " and you pre- 
sume too much on your long services." 

*' I don't presume too much on your kindness/' rejoined Mr. 
Jukes, in accents oddly enough compounded of famiHarity and 
respect. " I see plainly that something has gone wrong, and per- 
haps I may be able to set it right." 

" Well, shut the door, Jukes," returned Abel, seating himself, 
" and put the window down, — why was it left open ? — you know 
I can't bear a draught. What do you think of my nephew ?" 

" That he's a remarkably fine young man, sir," repHed the butler. 
" I haven't seen a handsomer man this many a day. And Mr. 
Trussell was quite right when he said he was like your sister. He's 
the perfect picture of her as she was when — " 

"Nevermind the likeness. Jukes," interrupted Abel, hastily; 
*' I don't want to know what you think of his good looks. They're 



THE misee's daughter. 33 

obvious enough — too obvious by far — for, trust me, whatever you 
may think of the matter, it is a great misfortune in a man to be 
toD handsome. What I wish to have is your opinion of his dis- 
position." 

"I think it equal to his good looks, sir," replied the butler, 
promptly. " It will be strange indeed, if he doesn't turn out a 
fine character." 

" Hum !" exclaimed Mr. Abel, with one of his sneers, " so that 
is your opinion, Mr. Jukes. I thought you a better judge." 

"I see what you're driving at, sir," repUed the butler; " but it 
wont answer with me. You're displeased with your nephew, and 
want me to disparage him; but I tell you plainly, I won,t. And 
if I were foolish enough, and base enough to do so, no one would 
be more angry with me than yourself. I think Mr. Randulph a 
very fine yoimg man, and a very promising young man; and I'm 
truly happy to find, since you're never likely to marry, that you'll 
have such a worthy successor." 

Accustomed as he was to his master's fitful humours, Mr. Jukes 
was. not prepared for the effect which his words produced, or he 
would have cut off his tongue sooner than have uttered them. 
Abel, who was gazing at him fixedly as he commenced, cast down 
his eyes at the close of his speech, and pressed his hand convulsively 
to his brow. He remained silent for some moments, and then, 
giving vent to his suppressed respiration in a groan, walked to the 
window, and appeared to be looking out into the garden. Mr. 
Jukes allowed him to remain undisturbed for a few minutes, and 
then approached him. 

" I'm extremely sorry for what I said, sir," he remarked, peni- 
tentially; " I ought to have known better." 

"You said nothing. Jukes," replied Abel, sadly, yet kindly, 
" but what I ought to have heard unmoved, and I am ashamed of 
my own weakness. It is not because I shall go childless to the 
grave that I have exhibited this emotion, but because your a.llusion 
has opened old wounds, and brought the past too palpably and 
painfully before me. You know the secrets of my heart, and will 
understand what a train of emotion a chance word might awaken. 
I am an old man. Jukes, — callous in feehng on most points — but 
there is one point on which I am as sensitive as ever. It is that 
disappointment — that blighting which I met with from — from — I 

D 



^ 



34 THE miser's daughter. 

cannot bring myself to utter her name. The wound I then re- 
ceived is incurable. I shall bear it to my dying day." 
" I hope not, sir — I hope not," sympathised the butler. 
" I hate the sex. Jukes !" cried Abel, almost fiercely. " There 
is no faith, no honesty in it — any more than there is true friend- 
ship in men. I never yet knew a woman whom I could thoroughly 
esteem — nor a man on whose friendship I could entirely rely. If 
I could make an exception in the latter case, it would be in favour 
of yourself." 

" And if a servant was ever true to his master, I am true to 
you, sir," replied Mr. Jukes, earnestly. " But you expect too 
much from human nature. Our imperfect condition is to blame, 
not ourselves. In my opinion, there are more true-hearted women 
than the reverse; and I should be sorry to think otherwise. But 
if you search the world over for one who could come up to your 
notions of perfection, I fear you would not find her. The best of 
women have some faults, and the worst many redeeming qualities. 
But with all their faults they are the best part of creation. So 
at least I think, and so you would think too, sir, if your choice had 
not been so unhappily fixed." 

" Do not advert to it again. Jukes," cried Abel, -repressing a 
pang. e f 

*' Pve done, sir — I've done !" rejoined Mr. Jukes, hastily. " And 
now may I venture to ask what has displeased you with your 
nephew?" 

*' Perhaps I ought not to be angry with him," replied Abel ; 
" but I watched him closely during his introduction to Beau 
Villiers and Lady Brabazon on the Mall this morning, and saw that 
he was completely dazzled by them. Nay, I clearly detected, by 
certain looks and gestures that passed between him and Lady 
Brazen, for such should be her title, that she put him to the blush 
about his relationship to me. I do not blame him for this, because 
I know what effect appearances have upon young persons, and 
how difficult it is to understand real worth when set against the 
glitter of rank and fashion, however worthless or vicious the latter 
may be. I do not blame him, I say, but I lament that he did not 
bear his first trial better." 

" You should blame Lady Brabazon, not him, sir," rejoined Mr. 
Jukes. " iSome ladies of her rank have a way of abashing modest 



THE miser's daughter. 35 

young men, and delight in doing it. And then I'm sure I may 
tell you without offence, that your dress is scarcely becoming your 
real station in life. No, sir, I don't wonder Mr. Randulph felt a 
little embarrassed. I might just as well complain of my graceless 
nephew, Crackenthorpe Cripps, who serves Mr. Villiers, the very 
gentleman you've mentioned. The rascal will never own me if he 
meets me in the Park, though he's extremely glad to call me 
* nunks,' and wheedle me out of a crown at other times. But what 
do I care for his impertinence ? Nothing at all." 

*' Well, Jukes, perhaps you are right," said Abel, after a 
moment's reflection; " and perhaps I am guilty of as much weak- 
ness as my nephew himself, in feeling hurt by the matter. I had 
written to his mother on the subject; but I have just destroyed 
the letter." 

" I am glad to hear it, sir," replied Mr. Jukes. 
" And now there 4S another point, about which I feel consi- 
derable uneasiness," pursued Abel. " Randulph, as you know, has 
seen Hilda Scarve ; and, short as the interview was, it was long 
enough it seems for her to produce a strong impression 'upon him. 
Now," he continued, sternly, and emphatically, " he never shall 
marry that girl, with my consent! — never. Jukes! And if he 
should marry her, he shall never have a shilling of mine. I have 
forbidden him to visit the house ; but I am apprehensive he will 
disobey my injunctions. If he goes there without my knowledge, 
I will shut my doors against him." 

" If you do so, you will act very harshly and very unjustly sir," 
replied Mr. Jukes; " and so I tell you beforehand." 

" The fault will be his own," rejoined Abel, coldly. " I have 
warned him. It must be your part to see Jacob Post, if the 
fellow is still with the miser, and ascertain whether Randulph 
visits the house. D'ye understand ?" 

" Perfectly," replied Jukes, " but I don't like the job." 

" Like it or not, you will do as I bid you," continued Abel, 
peremptorily. " And you have not yet received the whole of 
your instructions. You say that your nephew serves Mr. VilHers. 
Bribe him to bring word what Randulph does in his master's 
society; whether he games, drinks, or riots — in a word, how he 
goes on." 

d2 



36 THE miser's daughter. 

" There will be no necessity to bribe Crackenthorpe to tell all 
tbis," returned Mr. Jukes. " But I repeat, I don't like such 
underhand proceedings. They're unworthy of you." 

" It is the only way of arriving at the truth," repHed AbeL 
" And now leave me. I must write to my sister about this Scarve 
■: — curse on the name — and will desire her to interdict her son 
from going near the house." 

" In my humble opinion you are taking the precise course to 
attract him thither, sir," rejoined Mr. Jukes. " If he never 
desired to go before, he will do so now. It's human nature, sir. 
Tell me not to open that cupboard, and I should long to do it. 
Recollect Bluebeard, «ir." 

"Bluebeard be hanged I" cried Abel, angrily. " Go and look 
after dinner. Serve it at four to a moment. I wont wait an 
instant for them — not an instant." 

The butler bowed and retired, while Abel commenced a second 
letter to his sister. 

As Mr. Jukes approached the butler's pantry, wliither he re- 
paired after quitting his master, he was startled by hearing a voice 
issue from it, singing with some taste, but in a very affected style, 
the following snatch : — 

" I have been in love, and in debt, and in drink, f 

This many and many a year ; 
And these are three plagues, enough, I should think, 
For one poor mortal to bear." 

" There's my rascally nephew, Crackenthorpe," muttered Mr. 

Jukes. " I wont see him. He's come upon his old errand." 

Here the singer again exalted his voice : — 

" There's nothing but money can cure me, 
And rid me of all my pain ; 
'Twill pay all my debts, and remove all my lets, 
And my mistress, that cannot endure me, 
Will love me, and love me again. 

Fal de ral." 

" Ay, money's always the burden of his song," muttered Mr. 
Jukes. " However, I must see him, I suppose. My master's 
orders are peremptory." 

With this, he pushed open the door, and discovered his nephew 
leaning in a very careless attitude against the table. Mr. Cracken- 
thorpe Cripps was a young man of about three-and-twenty, of very 
dissipated appearance, with a slim, well-proportioned figure, and 



THE miser's daughter. 37 

tolerably good features, only marred by an expression of cunning 
and assurance. He was dressed in a cast-ofFsuit of his master's, 
-and, being precisely the same height, and nearly the same make, 
^s the renowned beau, his clothes fitted him remarkably well. He 
would scarcely have been taken for a valet, for in defiance of the 
regulations against the wearing of offensive weapons by footmen, 
then somewhat strictly enforced, from the quarrels arising among 
those gentry, he carried a silver-hilted sword. His coat was of 
ficarlet, trimmed with gold somewhat tarnished, but still presenting 
a sufficiently gay appearance ; his waistcoat of green flowered silk; 
his breeches of yellow velvet ; his cravat was laced ; and the queue 
of his wig was left unfastened, allowing the hair to float neghgently 
over his shoulders, to add, no doubt, to the rakish air he afiected. 
A clouded cane, with a large silken tassel, completed his equipment. 
JFrom his air, his dress, and his pretensions, this coxcomb was 
inown amongst his fraternity as Beau Cripps — a title of which he 
,was not a little vain, and strove to support. On seeing his uncle, 
the valet did not alter his position, but contented himself with 
waving his hand condescendingly to him. 

" How are ye, nunks ?" he said. " Give you the hon jour, as 
we bucks say. Sweet old soul, how I love thee ! 'Pon rep ! 'tis 
a pleasure rather than a duty to visit thee." 

" I beg you'll never put yourself to any trouble on my account, 
nephew," replied Mr. Jukes, somewhat testily; " and I must 
request, whenever you visit this house in future, that you'll beac. 
in mind the situation I hold in it. Amuse yourself with your 
opera ballads elsewhere." 

" Cudslid, nunks!" cried Mr. Cripps, " you are far inore parti- 
cular than the Duke of Doncaster's gentleman himself. Why I do 
what I like when I visit him." 

" Perhaps so," rejoined Mr. Jukes ; " but you sha'n't do what 
you like here, I promise you." 

^' Devil take me, if I ever heard a better jest," cried Mr. Cripps, 
forcing a laugh ; "but you were always a wit, nunks. Try my 
€nush. You'll find it excellent. J It's the beau's own mixture, 'pon 
rep !'' 

" And the beau's own box, I'll be sworn, nephew," replied Mr. 
Junks, helping himself to a pinch. '* Well," he added, somewhat 



"38 THE miser's daughter. 

mollified by the attention, " will you take any tiling after your 
walk ?" 

" Walk, nunks !" echoed Mr. Cripps, with a look of supreme 
contempt. " Do you think I would walk while there was a con- 
veyance to be had ? No; a coach and a pair of skulls brought me 
hither. But since you press me, I don't mind a glass of Bordeaux, 
or Rhenish. I know old Abel has a prime cellar, so suppose we 
tap a flask. Mrs. Nicholson, our housekeeper, persuaded me to 
swallow a cup of green tea before I left home, and plague on't ! it 
has shattered my nerves sadly." 

" It's the punch you swallowed last night that has shattered your 
nerves, nephew, and not the tea," rejoined Mr. Jukes, shaking hi& 
head: "I can't give you claret, or hock, but if a glass of ale would 
sit well on your stomach " 

" A glass of ale !" repeated Mr. Cripps, with infinite disgust. 

*' Faugh ! I'll none of it. And as to punch, know, O ignorant 

nunks, that the liquors quaffed by me last night were champagne, 

burgundy, and hermitage. Thou starest, but 'tis a fact, 'pon rep I 

" Let us drink and be merry, 
Dance, joke, and rejoice, 
With claret and sherry. 
Theorbo and voice. 

" The changeable world ^ 

To our joy is unjust ; 
All treasure's uncertain, 
So down with your dust. 

" Apropos of ' dust,' it was on that very subject I came hither. I 
want you to post the cole, nunks — to come down with the rhino — 
to disburse." 

"I guessed your errand, Crackenthorpe," replied Mr. Jukes^ 
" You've been gaming, sirrah !" 

" Why, i'faith, nunks, I must confess to a trifle lost at picquet to 
the duke's gentleman," replied Mr. Cripps. 

" What do you call a trifle, eh, nephew ?" inquired Mr. Jukes. 

" Why — why — " hesitated Mr. Cripps, applying to the snuff- 
box, and endeavouring to carry off his embarrassment by addi- 
tional assurance — " twenty crowns — not a farthing more, 'pon 
rep!" 

"Twenty crowns!" exclaimed Mr. Jukes, raising his hands in 
»nfeigned astonishment. " A valet drink champagne and bur- 



THE miser's daughter. 39 

gundy, and lose twenty crowns at picquet ! Wliat will tbe world 
come to !" 

" No sermonizing, nunks," replied Mr. Cripps, " but down witli 
the dust, as I said before. What will you let me have ?" 

" A crown, if it will rid me of you?" rejoined Mr. Jukes, im- 
patiently. 

*' Devil take me if I stir without ten crowns !" replied Mr. 
Cripps. " Therefore, if you desire my absence, you wiU come 
down at once. Ten, by this light — ten." 

" Well, any thing to get rid of you," replied Mr. Jukes, "but 
this is the last advance I'll ever make;" 

" So you always say, nunks," laughed the valet ; " but I'll 
refund it in a week, 'pon rep !" 

" I don't expect it," rejoined Mr. Jukes, unlocking a cupboard, 
and opening a drawer within it, from which he took ten crown- 
pieces. " Remember, these are my savings, nephew." 

" And you couldn't apply them to a better purpose than in assist- 
ing your sister's son," returned the valet, coolly pocketing the 
money. " Mille remercimens ! — sha'n't forget the favour, 'pon 
lep ! But I've trespassed too much on your time. Au revoir ! I 
kiss your hand, nunks." 

" Not so fast, Crackenthorpe," replied Mr. Jukes. " You must 
do me a service in return for my loan. My master's nephew, Mr. 
Randulph Crew, has just been introduced to Mr. Villiers ; and my 
* master fears, and with reason, that this introduction will lead to 
little good. But, be that as it may, you must bring me accurate 
information of all their proceedings." 

" Rely upon knowing every thing, nunks," repHed Mr. Cripps. 
" I haven't done yet," pursued Mr. Jukes. " There is a certain 

Mr. Scarve who lives in the Little Sanctuary " 

" What, the miser, whom folks nickname Starve?" interrupted 
Cripps. " I know him. My master has borrowed large sums of 
money from him. But what of him, nunks?" 

" Why, I wish to ascertain whether Mr. Randulph ever visits 
the house — that's all," rejoined Mr. Jukes. 

*' What ! old Abel is afraid of his nephew borrowing money, eh ?" 
replied Mr. Cripps, laughing. " Well, that can be easily managed 
A perruquier whom I patronise, — Peter Pokerich by name, — lives 
opposite old Starve's dwelling, and must know his servant, if he 



^ THE miser's daughter. 

keeps one ; if not, lie must know the miser himself. I'll get what you 
want from him, never fear. Any further commands?" he added, 
cocking his hat jauntily, and gracefully twirling his cane, prepara- 
tory to his departure. 

Before Mr. Jukes could reply, the door was opened, and Abel 
Beechcroft entered the room. He stared so sternly at Mr. Cripps, 
that the confidence of the latter completely deserted him, and has- 
tily taking off his hat, he would have retreated if Abel had not 
stopped him. 

" What are you doing here, rascal?" he asked. 

" Only come to see my uncle, 'pon rep, Mr. Beechcroft!" stam- 
mered the valet. 

" Only come to rob him of his gains, knave, you mean,"" rejoined 
Abel, sarcastically. " But hark ye, sirrah ! I, like my butler, have 
a plague of a nephew, and he has just become acquainted with your 
master — your foppish, rakish, gambling master, — and I cannot hope 
will escape the taint of such infectious society. Now I want to 
know how quickly, and to what extent, he becomes corrupted by 
it. You must play the spy upon him, fellow." 

"My uncle has told me your request, Mr. Beechcroft," rejoined 
Mr. Cripps; "but really 'pon rep ! if you put the matter in such 
an objectionable light — if you term it ' playing the spy'-^r-I cannot, 
consistently with my — my rep-rep-reputation, comply with your 
request." 

" What, you are scrupulous, eh, rascal?" laughed Abel, derisively, 
" and affect as nice a sense of honour as your master? But, like 
him, you have your price. Bring me the information I require, 
and you shall have double the sum, whatever it may be, out of 
which you have just cajoled your uncle." 

"That will be twenty crowns, Mr. Beechcroft," replied Mr. 
Cripps. " You're a shrewd judge of human nature, sir, 'pon rep ! 
and have discovered my weak point. No Cripps was ever proof 
against a bribe." 

"Then the bargain is concluded," replied Abel, impatiently. 
" See him out of the house, Mr. Jukes. And then let this letter 
be taken to the post. Ah ! I hear my brother's and my nephew's 
voices in the hall. Point out Mr. Randulph to your nephew, 
Jukes." 

The butler nodded, and departed with the valet, while Abel re- 



THE miser's daughter. 41 

turned to the library. Trussell and Randulph were talking and 
laughing in the hall. On seeing Mr. Cripps, the former instantly 
directed his nephew's attention to him. 

" As I live," he cried, " there is Beau Villiers' gentleman, Mr. 
Cripps. You must knoAv him, Randulph. It is not amiss to be 
on terms, even with the servants of the great. Mr. Cripps, a word 
with you. There's a bow, Randulph, — the true diving bow, bring- 
ing the hair before, with the proper water-spaniel shake afterwards, 
to restore it to its place. Then did you ever see such a wig, such a 
cravat, or such a sword-knot?" 

" Never on a footman, unquestionably," replied Randulph. 

''Mr. Cripps," continued Trussell, "this is my nephew, Mr. 
Randulph Crew, a young gentleman new to the world, as I need 
scarcely tell you. He has just been presented to your master, and, 
I flatter myself, has already won his regards." 

" Delighted to hear it, Mr. Trussell— delighted," replied Mr. 
Cripps, with another diving bow, — " but not surprised. Fine 
young man, 'pon rep ! and only wants theje ne sgai quoi ah, which 
my m.aster will speedily impart to him, to be perfect. Egad, my 
master must look to his laurels, Mr. Trussell, or your nepliew may 
rob him of 'em — ha ! ha ! Condescend to try my snush, sir? It's 
the beau's mixture, with a slight improvement of my own." 

" Thankye, thankye, Mr. Cripps,'' said Trussell, plunging his 
fingers into the proffered box. 

" What is it to be to-night, sir?" inquired Mr. Cripps — "the 
ridotto at Ranelagh, the French play at the Haymarket, or Lady 
Fazakerly's drum ?" 

" I'faith, I don't know," repHed Trussell, a little embarrassed. 
" The truth is," he added, in an under- tone, " my brother is rather 
straight-laced. He has prejudices to which we must occasionally 
succumb." 

Mr. Cripps smiled significantly, and regaled his nostrils with a 
very large pinch of snufi". 

" You'll take care of my nephew's interest with your master, Mr. 
Cripps," whispered Trussell, slipping a crown at the same time into 
his hand. 

" As of my own, Mr. Trussell, 'pon rep !" replied Mr. Cripps, in 
the same tone. 

With this, he inclined his person almost to the ground, and de- 
parted. 




THE miser's DAUaHTEK. 

" Well, I've made a tolerable tiling of it to-day, 'pon rep !" he 

muttered to himself, as he whisked out of the house. " Done nunks 

out of ten crowns — got the promise of twenty from old Abel — 

received one from Trussell. This Randulph Crew seems to bring 

me good luck. On my way home I'll call on the Httle barber — • 

put him on the miser's scent. Something is to be made of this, I 

perceive. To-night I shall try my hand at the dice-box at the 

Duke's. 

" My fortune, I hope, is reserved for this cast, 
To make me a saver for all my life past ; 
Be lucky this once, dice ! 'tis all I implore, 
I'll reform then entirely, and tempt you no more." 

In this way, he went on soHloquizing and singing till he reached 
his boat, which lay off the stairs near the palace, and, jumping into 
it, ordered the waterman, with the air of a lord, and several very 
fashionable imprecations, to row to Parliament Stairs. 



THE miser's daughter. 43 



CHAPTER V. 

ABEL AGAIN CAUTIONS HIS NEPHEW AGAINST THE MISEb's DAUGHTEB. 

Uncle Abel did not join his nephew and brother till dinner 
was served, and took little part in the conversation that occurred 
during the meal. Habituated to his humours, Trussell was as 
lively and amusing as ever, and rattled away like a young man ; 
but Randulph could not help being oppressed by his elder uncle's 
grave looks. He also felt, he scarcely knew why, dissatisfied with 
himself, and wished to regain Abel's esteem. Thus the dinner 
passed off ; the cloth was removed, and the wine placed on the 
board. The glasses were filled by the attentive Mr. Jukes, who 
took especial care that on this occasion one of the oldest and choicest 
bottles should be brought forth, and his attention was speedily re- 
warded by a very beneficial change in his master's temper. 

" Well, Randulph," said Abel, while sipping his second glass, 
" how do you like your new society ?" 

" I have seen so little of it at present, sir," replied the young 
man, " that I can form no precise opinion ; but I must say, that I 
think Mr. VilHers the best bred man I have ever met with. Lady 
Brabazon a woman of infinite spirit and wit, and her daughter, 
Clementina " 

*' The most beautiful creature you ever beheld !" supplied Abel, 
laughing drily ; " and you have already lost your heart to her." 

" So far from thinking her the most beautiful creature I ever 
beheld," returned Randulph, " she is not to compare with — with 

He was about to add the name of the miser's daughter, but the 
looks of his uncles, both of which were fixed on him, though with 
a very different expression, checked him. 

" I know what you are about to say, Randulph," observed uncle 



f4 . THE miser's daughter. 

Abel, sternly; " you were going to mention Hilda Scarve. Once 
for all, let me caution you against alluding to her. I have a par- 
ticular reason for disliking her father — for hating him, indeed, for 
my feelings towards him are of the bitterest kind, and I cannot 
endure to hear of any one connected with him." 

" Well, sir, your wishes shall be obeyed, so far as it is in my 
power to obey them," replied Randulph ; " but I should not be 
dealing frankly with you, if I did not tell you that I think them a 
little unreasonable. I can easily understand that Mr. Scarve may 
have offended you, but his daughter " 

" Randulph," cried Abel, fixing his grey eye upon him, " you 
are in love|with that girl, or rather, you' fancy yourself so; for love, 
though sown at once, requires time to bring it to maturity. You 
must subdue this passion, if you entertain it. The daughter of such 
a man must inherit some of his bad qualities." 

" There I think you are unjust, sir," rejoined Randulph. " And, 
grant that the father may be objectionable, the mother, whom she 
evidently takes after, may have been " 

" Randulph !" exclaimed Abel, interrupting him with a sharp 
cry, *' would you drive me mad?" 

" What have I said, sir ?" asked the young man, in astonish- 
ment. 

" For Heaven's sake, hold your tongue !" whispered uncle Trus- 
sell, who had in vain been endeavouring to attract his nephew's 
attention. " Don't you see he can't bear to talk of these Scarves?" 

Randulph was greatly disconcerted. In vain he tried to rally ; no 
subject for conversation occurred to him ; but at last uncle Trussell 
came to his relief. 

" We are going to breakfast with Beau Villiers to-morrow morn- 
ing, sir," he said to his brother. " We were asked to Lady Faza- 
kerly's drum to-night ; and Lady Brabazon invited us to accom- 
pany her to Ranelagh." 

" And why didn't you go?" asked Abel, peevishly. 

" Because, sir, I thought it might not be agreeable to you," re- 
turned Trussell. 

" Pshaw ! what care I about it !" rejoined Abel. " Plunge your 
charge over head and ears in dissipation ! Surfeit him, as the 
grocers do their apprentices with sweets! Never mind me in 
future. Do what you will." 



1^ 



THE miser's daughter. 45 

Uncle Trussell winked at Kandulph. 

" We'll take him at his word," lie whispered. 

But Eandulph took no notice of the signal. His heart was too 
fully occupied with Hilda S carve ; and he felt a rising dislike to 
uncle Abel which he could not conquer. Excusing himself from 
taking more wine, he repaired to the garden, and entered the 
summer-house, where he gazed at the broad and beautiful river 
flowing past it, and the venerable Abbey on the opposite shore,. 
near which she dwelt whom he now began to acknowledge was 
mistress of his heart. 



46 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE mSEB AND JACOB — A THIRD NEPHEW— A DINNER AT THE MISER's — HILDA'S 
OPINION OP HER COUSIN. 

Nothing very particular occurred at the miser's dwelling after 
Randulph's departure. Mr. Scarve took a large account-book 
from the box beneath his table, together with several papers, from 
which he proceeded to make extracts ; and he thus employed him- 
self for more than an hour and a half, when, his farthing candle 
having burnt down into the socket, he intimated to his daughter 
and Mrs, Clinton that it was time to retire to rest. 

" You have sat up longer than usual," he said, " and I have 
been so busy that I quite forgot to bid you to go to bed. Hilda, 
your cousin, Philip Frewin, will dine here to-morrow." 

" You have told me that before, sir," she replied, coldly. 

" And I have told you also, that it is my wish you should Receive 
him graciously," rejoined the miser. " Don't say a word more on 
the subject. Good night, daughter — good night, sister Clinton. 
Here, Jacob, light the ladies up stairs ! I have settled my accounts, 
and don't want the candle." 

Jacob obeyed, and the ladies were conducted to their room, to 
retire to rest, as usual, in the dark. 

A moment afterwards, Jacob returned, and set the expiring 
candle on the table. 

" WeU, Jacob," said the miser to him, " what did you think of 
our visitor to-day ?" 

" What did you think of him, sir ?" returned Jacob, evasively. 

" Pretty well," replied Mr. Scarve. " Not wanting in good 
looks — but improvident — thoughtless in the extreme." 

" Don't think so," rejoined Jacob, gruffly. 

"You're no judge of character," rejoined the miser, sharply. 
" I read the spendthrift in his whole appearance and demeanour. 



THE miser's daughter. 47 

In short, Jacob, I would rather see no more of him. If he should 
call again, which is not unlikely, though 1 gave him a broad 
enough hint that his visits would be any thing but agreeable, you 
will deny me and my daughter to him." 

" What !" exclaimed Jacob, " do you mean to shut your doors 
against the son of your old friend? Is that acting like a gentle- 
man, let alone a Christian?" 

*' Tlie lad is a scapegrace, Jacob — a senseless, romantic, scape- 
grace," rejoined the miser. 

" Don't think so," replied Jacob. 
" He has given away his fortune," said the miser. 
" He'll get it back in time," was the rejoinder. 
"Jacob, you're a fool!" said the miser. 

" Fool or not," replied Jacob, " if I were you, I would marry 
my daughter to that young man." 

" When I ask your advice on the subject, it will be time enough 
to offer it," rejoined the miser. " You may now retire, Jacob. 
But first go over the house and see that all's safe. I thought I 
heard a noise in the cellar last night." 
" It was the rats, sir," replied Jacob. 

"Indeed!" replied the miser; " then the rats make a pretty 
clattering with their jaws. Jacob, I suspect it was you." 
" Well, then, it was me," replied Jacob, doggedly. 
"Oh! you confess it?"" replied the miser, uneasily. "Where 
do you get your victuals from? Who supplies you with them, 
eh?' 

" Never you mind, sir,'* replied Jacob ; "so as it doesn't cost 
you any thin', you needn't care." 

" True, true !" said the miser; " and yet I should like to know 
how you get your food." 

" I don't steal it," replied Jacob. *' But see, the candle's goin' 
out — ^you had better go to bed." 

" You're right, Jacob," said the old man. " Good night ! Be 
sure you look to the house." 

With this he crept off to his own chamber, and, just as he 
reached'it, the candle expired. 

Mr. Scarve always arose at daybreak, and generally spent two 
or three hours before breakfast at his accounts. On the morning 
following the events previously related, he remained longer than 



48 THE miser's daughter. 

usual in his own room, and when summoned to breakfast by Mrs. 
Clinton at nine o'clock, he descended with a large deed under his 
arm. The family breakfast consisted of milk and water, the pro- 
portions being one-third of the former liquid to two of the latter 
— a small loaf of bread, but neither butter nor meat. Of this 
meagre fare all parties partook sparingly, and the meal was soon 
ended. Hilda had generally little appetite, but on this occasion 
she ate less than usual, and her father remarked it. 

" I fear you are not well to-day," he said; " I am sorry for it, 
for I wished you to be in good looks to receive your cousin." 

" I have no wish to see him," she replied, with a look of inex- 
pressible disgust. 
■ " Then you have no wish to please me," he rejoined. 

The miser made no further remark at the time, but when the 
scanty remains of breakfast were removed, and he was left alone 
with his daughter, he said — ^' Hilda, I want a word with you. I 
have long desired to converse with you on a subject nearest my 
heart. It relates to your cousin, PhiHp Frewin. You can scarcely 
be ignorant that he seeks your hand. But if you are ignorant of 
his intentions, I must now acquaint you with them. I have a very 
high opinion of liim, not merely because he is my nephew, but 
because he is a very prudent, careful person, and will take care of 
what he has got. He is directly the reverse of the weak young 
man who was here last night." 

" So he appears, sir," replied Hilda, significantly. 

" Philip is very rich, Hilda,'' pursued the miser; " he is worth 
fifty thousand pounds, if he is worth a penny. And, in short, it is 
my pleasure, if he should propose to you, as I expect he will, that 
you accept him." * 

*' Then it is fit, dear father, that you should know what my 
answer will be to his proposal," she repHed. 

" What will it be?" asked the miser. 

" A positive and decided refusal," she returned. 

" Hilda !" exclaimed the miser, furiously — " Hilda !" 

" Do not urge me further, father," she rejoined, calmly; " upon 
this point I am firm." 

" You are captivated by the fair face and showy figure of the 
prodigal who was here last night," cried Mr. Scarve, carried away 
by his passion ; " but mark me, I will never consent to such a 



THE miser's daughter. 49 

match. If you wed hira, neither he nor you, nor any child or 
children of yours, shall ever have a penny of mine ! — I'll disinherit 
you all! He is a beggar, and a beggar's wife you shall be. If 
the fool had but kept fast hold of the estates, all might have been 
well — I might have consented; but as it is, I will never listen to 
his suit. No, Hilda," he continued, moderating himself, " the 
husband for you is Philip Frewin, my sister's son — one who knows 
the value of money, and will take care of it, — one who hates extra- 
vagance in all ways. I can commend him as a thoroughly well- 
principled, well-conducted young man." 

" He may be all you describe, — though I doubt it," she replied; 
** but I do not desire to marry." 

" Tush !" rejoined the miser, impatiently — " every woman desires 
to marry. It is her first object — what she is brought up for — the 
end and aim of her existence." 

" But surely, father," replied Hilda, with a half smile, " every 
woman desires to marry the man she loves. Her heart must have 
something to do with her choice." 

" Pshaw !" cried the miser, " mere idle talk, — mere girl's fancy. 
Before you have been married a week, you will love your husband 
better than any man in the world. A husband should not be 
chosen for his good looks, but for his good qualities ; for his 
pecuniary, rather than his personal advantages ; and for his ability 
to take care of you, your property, and your children. Such a 
one is Philip Frewin — such a one is not Randulph Crew." 

" I wish you would not mention Randulph Crew so often, 
father," replied Hilda, in some little confusion; " I do not under- 
stand why his name should be brought forward." 

" Nor I," rejoined the miser; " and I'll take care not to mention 
it again. But enough has been said on the subject. You know 
my wishes; don't dispute them. Go to your chamber, child; go 
to your chamber !" And he turned away from her to pore over 
the deed before him. Hilda gazed at him for a moment, irre- 
solutely, and then sighing deeply, withdrew. 

A guest being expected at dinner, some little preparation was 
made. The repast was to consist of a few ribs of beef baked upon 
half-a-dozen potatoes, followed by a small batter pudding, likewise 
baked. 

Punctually at two o'clock, at which hour the miser dined, a 



50 THE miser's daughter. 

knock was heard at tlie door, and Jacob, answering the summons, 
admitted a tall, thin young man, with very sharp features, dressed 
in an old worn-out grey cloth coat, with plated metal buttons, that 
might have belonged to his grandfather ; a tattered plush waist- 
coat; darned worsted hose; a scratch wig, looking as if it had been 
picked up in the kennel; and old shoes, with high quarters fastened 
by small iron buckles. This extraordinary personage was welcomed 
with great cordiaHty by his uncle, who seemed to contemplate his 
miserable appearance with the utmost satisfaction. 

Hilda, however, would scarcely behave civilly to him, though 
the young man paid her great attention, and whenever her father's 
back was turned, put on a manner that filled her with disgust. 
At the close of dinner, the miser called for wine, and a bottle was 
brought him, containing barely a glass, as was proved when Jacob 
poured it out. Mr. Scarve pressed his nephew to take it, but the 
young man declined. The miser then raised the glass to his lips, 
but put it down imtasted, observing — " No, I don't require it — 
indeed, I am better without it. Put it back again, Jacob. I drink 
your health, nephew, in a glass of water." 

" And I return the pledge in the same wholesome beverage," 
returned PhiHp Frewin. " I never take any other, sir," he added, 
oghng Hilda in an intolerable manner. " I drink to you, fair 
cousin," and as he spoke he gulped down a large draught, but 
with a very bad grace. 

*' I don't think for all he says that he's accustomed to such 
draughts," thought Jacob. " He doesn't look like a water- 
drinker." 

Dinner was no sooner over than Hilda withdrew with her aunt to 
her own room ; nor would she, though her father sent Jacob to 
summon her, return. 

" Girls have strange fancies, Philip," he said, to his nephew. 
" Her mother was just as whimsical. I don't think, though she 
married me that she cared for me." 

" Since I have your consent to the match, sir, that is all I care 
for," repHed PhiHp. " Love will come in good time. My cousin 
Hilda is a charming girl, and would be a prize without a penny, 
but with what you propose to give her — " 

" To leave her, PhiHp — to leave her— not to give her !" inter- 
rupted the miser, hastily. " I shall give her nothing during my 
lifetime." 



THE miser's daughter. 51 

"Not make any settlement?" asked Philip, uneasily. 

"None whatever," replied the miser; "but I shall require a 
settlement on your part. You are rich, Philip, and can make a 
good settlement." 

" No settlement on your part, uncle!" muttered Frewin, " and a 
large one demanded on mine ! This requires consideration." 

" No it doesn't," said the miser, sharply ; "for if you hesitate, 
you sha'n't have her. My daughter shall not be refused by any 
man, even by my sister's son. You shall take her on my terms, or 
not at all." 

" I will gladly take her so, uncle," replied Philip. 

" You will do wisely," rejoined the miser, more calmly. " And 
now I've good news for you, Phil — rare news ! You know — for 
our attorney, Diggs, will have told you — that I have advanced 
fourteen thousand pounds to Sir Bulkeley Price on the mortgage 
of one of his estates in Flintshire. Now, the estate is worth up- 
"Wards of twenty thousand pounds — perhaps more, because there 
are several copper mines upon it. Well, I have given Sir Bulke- 
ley notice to pay over the money. He has paid no attention to 
the application ; and if I do not receive the money at six o'clock, 
at which hour it must be paid or tendered, I shall foreclose — yes, 
foreclose, nephew — and the estates will become mine — ^your wife's 
hereafter, and your children's." 

" And mine," thought Philip. " I sincerely congratulate you, 
imcle,'' he added, aloud, " and hope nothing may happen to 
deprive you of your rights." 

" Nothing is likely to happen now, Philip," replied Mr. Scarve. 
** The estate is as good as my own — I have just been reading over 
the description of it in the deed of mortgage — and a noble estate 
it is. But since Hilda won't come down, it is scarcely worth while 
for you to stay longer. Come and dine with me this day week, 
and I will try and fix the day. Meanwhile, I will speak with my 
daughter, and bring her to her senses." 

" I am glad to hear you say so, uncle," rejoined Philip, " for I 
almost began to fear there might be a rival in the case." 

" A rival ! — pshaw I" cried the miser, with a slightly embarrassed 
look. " It is true that Mr. Randulph Crew called here last night; — 
lie is a very handsome young man, and fit to win a girl's heart. 
But I don't think Hilda heeded him." 

£ 2 



^2 THE miser's daughter. 

" Indeed, sir !" replied Philip, uneasily. " "Well, never mind 
what impression he made — she is mine, if you give her to me." 

" And that I do nephew — on the terms I have mentioned, but 
no other," rejoined the miser. " Tuesday next, at two. Jacob, 
show Mr. Frewin to the door. Good bye, nephew — good bye !" 

Philip was then ushered forth by Jacob, who eyed him surlily 
askance, as he conducted him to the door, and shook his hand 
behind his back as he departed. 

" That skinflint shall never marry my young missis/' he mut- 
tered, " if I can prevent it." 

On reaching King-street, PhiHp Frewin snapped his fingers 
derisively in the air, and quickening his pace, did not stop till he 
reached the door of a tavern in the Rhenish "Wine-yard, in that 
street, and entering it, proceeded at once to a private room. Then, 
bursting into a loud laugh, he dashed his old wig to the ground, 
and trampled upon it ; threw off his tattered coat and waistcoat, 
and proceeded to rid himself of the rest of his attire. He next 
equipped himself in a smart suit of green velvet, put on a campaign 
"wig, and added lace ruffles to his shirt. 

" I am glad to get rid of those horrid masquerade habiliments," 
he muttered ; " the part is a devilish disagreeable one to act. But 
no matter — it is worth playing ! My fair cousin will like me all 
the better when she knows my real character. And now I must 
hasten to Diggs, to tell him how I've prospered, and instruct him 
how to proceed." 

On being informed by Jacob of her obnoxious cousin's depar- 
ture, Hilda came down stairs with her aunt, and bore her father's 
reproaches with a meekness that, instead of allaying his fury, 
served to increase it. At length she ventured to say, " Why do 
you wish me married, sir ? I am quite content as I am, and could 
not be happier. I think — nay, I am sure — if I quitted you, you 
would feel very desolate." 

" "Weigh that over before it's too late," interposed Jacob. " I'm 
sure /should feel very desolate. I don't think I'd stop with you." 

" Hold your tongue, sirrah !" cried the miser, sharply. " I can 
live very well alone, Hilda," he added, turning to her, " and I 
should like to see you comfortably settled before I die. I don't 
want you to become the prey of an adventurer." 

»* If that is all you are afraid of, father, you may rest quite 



THE miser's daughter. 53 

easy," she replied. " And do not suppose I speak from any 
feeling of prejudice, but I think you are deceived in my cousin." 

" Deceived, Hilda ! In what way?" asked the miser. 

" By his apparent carefulness — by the manner in which he 
seems to adapt himself to your notions and peculiarities," she re- 
plied, " Recollect, too, that, owing to circumstances, you have 
seen and known so little of him, that, but for the fact of his being 
your nephew, he might be an entire stranger. Forgive me, sir, if 
I say you are not acting in this case with your usual caution. You 
trust too much to Philip's own representations." 

*' You think so," said the miser — " but you are wrong. I have 
made inquiries through one who would not deceive me — my attor- 
ney, Mr. Diggs — and I am assured that Philip is the most careful 
person breathing." 

" I hope you don't except yourself," muttered Jacob. 

"In fact, I hear nothing but good of him from Diggs," pur- 
sued the miser, not choosing to notice the remark; " and what is 
better, I know — for I have seen the will — that his father left him 
fifty thousand pounds — fifty thousand pounds, Hilda ! — twenty of 
which he shall settle on you." 

" Do not suffer this notion to get possession of you, I entreat, 
dear father," she replied. " If he had a million of money, I would 
never marry Philip Frewin." 

Here Mrs. Clinton, who had in vain endeavoured to throw in a 
word, interposed, and engaged Hilda in conversation. The miser 
referred to his mortgage-deed; and the description of the estate, 
which he looked upon as his own, restored him to good temper. 



64 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE PAYMENT OF THE MOKTGAGB MONEY. 

Nearly an hour having elapsed, Mr. Scarve arose, and called 
to Jacob, who had retired to the cellar. The summons not being 
answered as expeditiously as he desired, he called again, and Jacob 
made his appearance, brushing the moisture from his lips, and 
trying to swallow down a huge morsel that stuck in his throat. 

" You have been eating, rascal !" cried the miser, "and drinking, 
too ! Faugh ! how the knave smells of beer !" 

" If I have been eatin' and drinkin','' said Jacob, clearing his 
throat by a violent effort, " it hasn't been at your expense." 

" Well, go and see what's o'clock," said the miser, who did not 
appear particularly angry. 

" What's o'clock!" exclaimed Jacob, in surprise. " Why, I've 
lived with you these twenty years, and never was sent on such a 
message before. What do you want to know what's o'clock for?" 

" What's that to you, sirrah?" rejoined the miser, with more 
anger in his words than in his tones or looks. " But I'll tell you 
thus much, I never in my life wished a day to be passed so much 
as I do this?" 

" You excite my curiosity, father," said Hilda. " Why do you 
wish it passed ?" 

" Because, if a certain sum of money is not paid to me before six 
o'clock, I shall be the possessor of one of the finest estates in 
Wales," replied the miser. " It must now be five ; in another 
hour I shall be safe — safe, Hilda ! — the mortgage will be foreclosed 
— the estate mine ! Mr. Diggs will be here at six. If I obtain 
this prize, Jacob, you shall drink my health in the glass of wine I 
put back in the bottle." 

" Then it'll be the first time I ever so drunk it," replied Jacob. 

" Take care it isn't the last, you thankless varlet !" rejoined 



THE miser's daughtee. 55 

the miser. " Don't stand chattering there ! Go and see what's 
o'clock." 

As Jacob departed to obey his injunction, Mr. Scarve paced to 
and fro within the room, rubbing his hands, and chuckHng to him- 
self. Five minutes nearly elapsed before Jacob returned ; and when 
he did so, it was with a countenance of very peculiar significance. 

" Well, is it five?" cried the miser. 

" No ; it's fourteen," replied Jacob. 

" Fourteen !" exclaimed the miser. " What do you mean ? 
You're drunk, sirrah — drunk on the promise of a glass of wine." 

" No, I'm not," replied Jacob. " I mean that there's a troop of 
fourteen horsemen at the door. There! — don't you hear 'em? 
They make noise enough, I should think." 

And as he spoke, a loud knocking, mixed with shouts and 
laughter, came sounding down the passage. 

" It is the mortgage-money, father," said Hilda. 

" It is — damnation !" cried the miser, stamping on the ground. 

" At first I took the troop for a gang of highwaymen," said 
Jacob, " when their leader, a fat, bloated old fellow, calls out to 
me in an imperious tone, ' Tell your master, the miser,' says he, 
* that Sir Bulkeley Price has brought him his money. He is not 
yet owner of an estate in Flintshire.' And then all his followers 
burst out a-laughin' ; and I don't think they've done yet." 

" Curses on them !" cried the miser, furiously, " and on him too! 
They sha'n't enter my dwelling. I won't receive the money. Send 
them away ! Tell them I'm not at home, Jacob." 

*' It won't do, sir," replied Jacob; '* they know you're at home, 
for 1 told 'em so. And as to refusing the money, why should you 
do that ? They've brought it in great bags — bags of gold, of five 
hundred pounds each." 

" Five hundred devils !" cried the miser, foaming with rage. 
" What ! bring such a sum as that in broad day ! I shall be ex- 
posed to all my prying neighbours." 

"That you will," rejoined Jacob; " they're all at the windows 
looking on. There's Mr. Deacle, the mercer, over the way, and 
his wife and daughter; and the inquisitive little barber next door; 
and the ironmonger's wife and her family at the Blackamoor's Head; 
and the vintner's at the Man-in-the-Moon, and — " 

" Hold your peace," cried the miser, furiously, " or I'll strangle 



56 THE miser's daughter. 

you ! I'll not be insulted thus by any man ! Fetch me my 
sword !" 

"Father!" exclaimed Hilda, "why do you excite yourself 
thus? Sir Bulkeley Price has but done what was right; he has 
brought you back your money." 

"What is it o'clock, Jacob? — did you ascertain that?" cried 
the miser. 

" Not five, sir — not five," rephed Jacob. 

" Oh ! perdition seize him ! he is in time," cried the miser. 
" But I'll be revenged. I'll have his blood if I can't have the 
estate. My sword, Jacob ! What ! you won't move ? Nay, then, 
PU fetch it myself" And opening a side-door, he rushed up a 
small flight of steps leading to his bedroom. 

" Some mischief will happen, Jacob," cried Hilda, with a ter- 
rified look. " I never saw my father so agitated before. I'll go 
forth myself, and entreat Sir Bulkeley to depart." 

" Don't expose yourself to the insults of his servants, miss," re- 
joined Jacob. *' I did not tell master a quarter what they said of 
Mm." 

But despite his entreaties, and those of her aunt, who also en- 
deavoured to detain her, she rushed forth, followed by Jacob. 

On gaining the street, Hilda found Jacob's statement perfectly 
correct. A troop of fourteen horsemen, with Sir Bulkeley Price 
at their head, were drawn up in front of the house. Most of them 
were well mounted, though a few of the number rode stout Welch 
ponies. All had swords at their sides, and pistols in their holsters, 
as was needful from the amount of money they carried; every man 
having been provided with two bags, each containing five hundred 
pounds in gold, slung over his saddle-bow. A pile of these pre- 
cious sacks lay at the door, and some of the men were now adding 
to the heap, while others were unshnging bags from their comrades' 
saddles. The whole company were in high glee, and laughing 
loudly. The leader of the troop. Sir Bulkeley Price, was a stout, 
portly gentleman, whose swollen inflamed cheeks and mulberry 
nose showed he was by no means indifierent to the pleasures of the 
table. A claret-coloured velvet riding-coat, buttoned to the throat, 
displayed his full chest and rather commanding figure to advantage;, 
while a well-powdered, full-bottomed perriwig contrasted strongly 
with his rubicund and fiery visage. Hilda's appearance created a 



r 



THE miser's daughter. 57 

great sensation among the lookers-on, and especially attracted the 
attention of the barber, who was chattering with Mr. Deacle about 
the occurrence, and of the fair Thomasine, who was leaning out of 
an upper window, just above her father's sign of the Three 
Pigeons. 

" There's Miss Scarve !" cried Peter, calling to Thomasine. 

" I see her," replied the mercer's daughter. " Poor thing, how 
I pity her — to be exposed to such insults ! I long to fly to her 
assistance." 

" Do, do !" cried Peter. " I'll fly with you." 

" No, don't," said Mr. Deacle; " you had better not interfere. 
Lord bless me ! I wonder what it all means." 

Heedless of what was passing around her, for she heard her 
father's furious voice in the passage, HGilda rushed towards Sir 
Bulkeley Price, and, in a tone of the most earnest entreaty, cried, 
'* Oh, sir, I implore you to go away ! My father is fearfully in- 
censed — some mischief will happen !" 

" You are Mr. Scarve's daughter, I presume ?" returned Sir 
Bulkeley, poHtely taking off his hat. '* I should never have sus- 
pected him of owning aught so beautiful. But why should I go 
away, Miss Scarve ? I am merely come to pay your father a sum 
of money which I borrowed from him." 

" But it is the manner of paying it, sir, — the public manner, — 
the exposure that incenses him," cried Hilda. ** I would not for 
twice the amount, that this had happened." 

" I dare say not," replied Sir Bulkeley; " but your father has 
forced me into the measure. My estate would have been forfeited 
if I had not repaid the money by six o'clock. It is as unpleasant 
to me as it can be to him ; but I had no alternative." 

At this moment a loud, angry cry was heard at the door, and 
the miser appeared, brandishing his drawn sword at it. His mad 
career was opposed by Jacob, whose wig was knocked off in his 
endeavours to push him backwards. 

" Villain !" cried the miser, shaking his hand at Sir Bulkeley, 
" villain, you shall repent your insolence ! Release me, Jacob I 
J^et me get at him !'' 

. " No you sha'n't \" repHed Jacob, who had to exert all his 
strength, such was the miser's fury, to keep him back. 

Mr. Scarve's vociferations of rage were now drowned by the 



58 THE miser's daughtee. 

hootings and jeers of the WelcK baronet's attendants, who did all 
in their power to incense him further. Terrified hy the cries, 
Hilda clasped her hands in agony, and again addressed herself to 
Sir Bulkeley. 

" As you are a gentleman, sir, I beseech you to withdraw," she 
said. 

" Such an appeal, and from such lips, is irresistible," replied Sir 
Bulkeley, again raising his hat. 

" He is no gentleman, Hilda !" shrieked her father, who over- 
heard what was said. " Come away, girl, I command you — leave 
him to me !" 

" Well crowed, old cock !" cried one of the attendants, in 
mockery. And all laughed jeeringly, as before. 

" Hold your tongues, you saucy knaves !'' cried Jacob, fiercely 
regarding them ; " or, as soon as I'm at liberty, I'll break some of 
your addle pates." 

" For pity's sake, — go, go !" cried Hilda to the baronet, " and 
take the money with you. Another time will do for payment." 

" Pardon me, Miss Scarve," replied Sir Bulkeley; " another 
time will not do. I mustn't jeopardise my estate. — Mr. Scarve,'* 
he shouted to the miser, " here is your money — fourteen thousand 
pounds, in gold. — Friends," he added, looking round at the crowd 
of spectators in the street, and at the windows, " I call you all to 
witness, that this money is paid before six o'clock. I will take 
your word, Miss Scarve, for a receipt, and for the delivering up of 
the mortgage deeds." 

" Take hence your money, villain !" vociferated the miser, " I 
want none of it." 

This exclamation was followed by a roar of derisive laughter 
from the baronet's attendants. 

" Silence them — oh, silence them, sir !" cried Hilda, implor- 
ingly. 

Sir Bulkeley looked majestically round, and his attendants be- 
came instantly mute. At the same time, Jacob forced Mr. Scarve 
into the house ; and Hilda, hastily expressing her thanks to the 
baronet, withdrew. In a few seconds, the whole of the bags of 
money were collected, and placed on the threshold. Sir Bulkeley 
would not, however, depart till Jacob returned, when he committed 
the heap to his custody. 



THE miser's daughter. ' 59 

" What have you done with your master ?" he asked. 

" He has fainted, and his daughter is tending him/' replied 
Jacob. 

"Well, take him that restorative," rejoined Sir Bulkeley, point- 
ing to the money-bags ; " it will speedily revive him." 

So sajdng, he rode off with his followers, amid the acclamations 
of the spectators. The same persons next began to hoot Jacob, 
and even seemed disposed to assail him ; but being now provided 
with his crabstick, he presented such a menacing and formidable 
appearance, that those nearest him slunk off. 

In the hurry of the moment, it has been omitted to mention, that 
when Hilda retired, the fair Thomasine uttered a scream, and 
fainted. Made aware of the circumstance, both by the cry and 
the disappearance of the mercer and his wife from the windows, 
Peter Pokerich quitted his own dwelling, and flew to render aid. 
With some little difficulty, the sensitive damsel was brought to 
herself ; but when restored to consciousness, she was very palpi- 
tating and hysterical, and leaned against the wall, with her head 
upon her hand, in the attitude of a tragic heroine. 

" Oh, the indignities that that sweet creature has endured !" 
she gasped. " She is a model of filial piety, and more to be ad- 
mired than the Grecian Daughter." 

" Much more," said Peter, " though I don't recollect the parti- 
cular attractions of the lady you mention." 

" Would I were her friend !" cried the fair Thomasine. " Would 
I might pour my sorrows into her sympathetic bosom !" 

" What hinders you from doing so?" asked the barber. 

An hysterical sob was all the fair Thomasine's answer. 

"Fourteen thousand pounds!" exclaimed Peter, almost uncon- 
sciously. " What a fortune Hilda Scarve will be !" 

" She would be a fortune without a farthing," cried the fair 
Thomasine. 

Meantime the crowd dispersed ; but not before Jacob had noticed 
some suspicious-looking personages eyeing the bags of treasure 
lying at the door in a very alarming manner. 

" I shall have to keep strict watch to-night," he thought. " Such 
a public delivery of money as this is almost an inducement to 
robbery. We ought to have a couple of watchmen." 

Thus ruminating, he removed the whole of the bags, twenty- 



60 THE miser's daughtee. 

eight in number, and eacli containing five hundred pounds, into 
the passage. He then locked, bolted, and barred the door, and 
afterwards conveyed the treasure into the room generally used by 
Mr. Scarve. 

The miser, as he had stated to Sir Bulkeley, had fainted. The 
unhappy man recovered just as Jacob brought in the last two bags, 
and seeing the treasure before him, uttered a wild shriek, broke 
from his daughter and sister-in-law, who were tending him, and, 
throwing himself upon the heap, relapsed into insensibihty. 



THE miser's daughter. 61 



CHAPTER VIU. 

THE MYSTERIOUS LETTER — THE LANDLORD OF THE ROSE AND CROWN— CORDWELL 

riKEBBAS. 

It will now be necessary, for a short space, to retrace the current 
of our story. Peter Pokerich, as related in a previous chapter, 
crossed over to his own house with the letter he had abstracted 
from Randulph's saddle-bags, and immediately proceeding to exa- 
mine it, found it was addressed to Mr. Cordwell Firebras, at the 
Rose and Crown, Gardiner's-street, Petty France. This not tend- 
ing greatly to enlighten him, he tried to obtain a peep at its 
contents by pressing down the sides between his finger and thumb ; 
but not being able to make out any thing in this way, his curiosity 
got the master of him, and he broke the seal; but so dexterously 
and carefully, that he felt confident he could restore the letter to 
its original appearance if needful. He then yead as follows : — 

" Friend Cordwell, — The bearer of this letter is just the 
man you want. He's a bold rider ; always in at the death ; and 
as rash and daring as our young squire himself. The game I sent 
you was seized by the keepers, as perhaps you may have heard ; 
but I'll forward another basket shortly by a safer conveyance. Don't 
be in a hurry about coming over to us; and tell the young squire 
we can't promise him much sport this season. The game is plenty, 
but our kennel is but thinly stocked. The old pack is nearly 
broken up ; Talbot and Ringwood have been 'ticed away by old 
George's keeper ; and we shall do no good unless the great squire 
on t'other side of the river will send us a strong pack of harriers, 
of the best French breed. We want some Scotch terriers sadly, 
for the rats are greatly on the increase. If the young squire can 
manage this, the sooner he comes the better, but not otherwise. 
Meanwhile, I again advise you to engage the bearer of this letter. 

" Your assured friend, 

" Ned PoYNTON. 



68 THE miser's daughter. 

This letter was a complete enigma to tlie barber. He read it 
over and over again, but could make neither head nor tail of it. 
He could not help thinking that more was meant than met the eye, 
but still he could not penetrate the mystery. He determined, 
however, to call the next morning at the Rose and Crown to make 
some inquiries after Mr. Cordwell Firebras, whose name had some- 
thing mysterious and extraordinary about it that piqued his curio- 
sity. And with this intention he retired to rest. 

" After all," said Peter, as he laid his head on his pillow, " I 
shouldn't wonder if that young man turned out a poacher. Now 
I think of it, he certainly looks like one. Nobody but a poacher 
would prefer his own hair to a wig." 

Sallying forth betimes the next day, he repaired to the Rose and 
Crown, which was but a short distance from his own dwelling, and 
inquired of the potboy at the door whether a gentleman of the 
name of Cordwell Firebras lodged there. The potboy could give 
him no answer, but, applying to the chamberlain, he was told that 
Mr. Firebras frequented the house, but did not lodge there. 

"He generally comes in the evening," said the man; " and if 
you have any message to leave for him, I will deliver it." 

" What sort of a man is he ?" inquired the barber. 

Before the chamberlain could reply, the landlord made his 
appearance, and on being informed of the barber's inquiry, asked 
him what he wanted with Mr. Cordwell Firebras. 

*' A gentleman who has a letter for him called at my shop last 
night," said Peter, " and wished me to inquire whether he was 
still here, — that's all." 

*' Pray step this way, sir," rejoined the landlord, ushering Peter 
into an inner room. 

Here the landlord took up a chair, and, knocking it three times 
on the floor, without offering it to his guest, sat down. Not 
exactly knowing what to make of this singular reception, Peter 
took up a chair, knocked it in Hke manner, and sat down oppo- 
site the landlord. The landlord then tapped his nose, and Peter, 
not to be behindhand, imitated the gesture. 

^' All's right," said the landlord. 

« All's right," echoed Peter. 

" Where did you leave them ?" asked the landlord. 

" Leave whom ?" asked Peter, in surprise. 



THE miseb's daughtee. 63 

The landlord's countenance altered, and lie looked very hard at 
him. 

" What wigs do you wear, friend ?" he asked. 

" On week days a minor bob, and on Sundays or holidays, a 
bag," replied Peter, in increased astonishment. 

"Hark ye, friend!" said the landlord, eyeing his guest with 
some suspicion, "can you tell me where the king is ?" 

" At Saint James's Palace, I suppose," repHed Peter, inno- 
cently. 

"To be sure !" replied the landlord, laughing, and getting up; 
" to be sure ! Good morning, sir !" 

" Stop ! stop !" cried Peter, " I didn't come here to answer idle 
questions. I want to know something about Mr. Cordwell 
Firebrae." 

" I know nothing about him, sir," repHed the landlord, evasively 
— " you must apply elsewhere.'" 

Thus baffled, Peter was obliged to return to his own dwelling ; 
and his mind was so fully occupied with Randulph Crew and the 
mysterious Cordwell Firebras, that he could scarcely attend to his 
business. About four o'clock, as he was sitting in his shop, comb- 
ing out a flaxen perriwig, Mr. Crackenthorpe Cripps came in, and, 
flinging himself into a seat, said — " Scatter some pulvilio over me, 
Pokerich ! for the tar and paint of the wherry I have just quitted 
have quite overcome me." 

Having recovered breath, the valet then proceeded to explain 
the business with which he had been charged by his uncle, and he 
ibupd a ready agent in the barber, who, however, explained to him 
the difficulty of obtaining any precise information of what passed 
in the miser's dwelling. While discussing this matter, it occurred 
to Peter that Mr. Cripps was a proper person to consult about the 
mysterious letter. He knew that the valet was a person of no par- 
ticular scruples, and might be safely confided in. He therefore 
showed him the letter. Mr. Cripps read it over twice or thrice, 
and at last said — " Egad, I cannot tell what to make of it, but I'll 
soon find out the meaning of the riddle. Make it up again, and 
I'll deliver it myself to Mr. Cordwell Firebras." 

" When will you take it ?" asked the barber, after he had care- 
fully fastened up the seal. 



64 THE miser's daughter. 

" At once," replied Mr. Cripps. " I'm in the humour for an 
adventure. I'll return directly, and report my success." 

He accordingly set forth, and encountering an empty chair as he 
entered the area in front of the Abbey, got into it, and told the 
bearers to proceed to the Rose and Crown. Arrived there, with 
all the assurance he could muster, he strutted into the bar, and, 
flourishing his cane, inquired for Mr. Cordwell Firebras. The 
landlord stared at him somewhat suspiciously, but returned no 
answer ; and Mr. Cripps, calling to mind the barber's account of 
his interview, took up a chair, as if accidentally, and struck it 
thrice on the floor. This operation acted like magic on the land- 
lord. He made a pecuhar sign in return, and said — " He is not 
here now, sir ; indeed, he seldom visits us, except in an evening. 
But you'll find him at his lodgings, in Ship Yard, not a stone's 
throw from this." And he added in a lower tone, as Mr. Cripps 
bowed in acknowledgement — "The club meets here, sir." 

*' Oh, indeed!" exclaimed Mr. Cripps. "What ! every night?" 

" Every Friday night, at eleven," replied the landlord. " But 
may I ask you, sir, where the king is ?" 

" Over the water," rejoined Cripps ; and he thought to himself, 
** A nice Jacobite's nest I've stumbled upon now, i' faith." 

"I see it's all right," said the landlord, smiling. And he accom- 
panied the valet to the door, ushered him to his chair, and told the 
bearers where to take him. Mr. Cripps speedily arrived at his 
destination, and was deposited at the door of a small and unpre- 
tending-looking house. A middle-aged woman of respectable 
appearance answered his knock, and informed him that Mr. 
Cordwell Firebras lodged there, but she was not certain whether 
he was within. Judging from her manner that she only wished to 
ascertain whether her lodger would receive him, Mr. Cripps 
thought it better to secure the interview by dehvering his creden- 
tials. He did so accordingly, and the result was such as he antici- 
pated. She returned in a few minutes, eaying that Mr. Firebras 
was at home, and would be happy to see him. 

Mustering all his resolution, Mr. Cripps strutted after her, and 
was ushered into a small room, in which was a middle-aged gen- 
tleman, who immediately advanced towards him. Mr. Cripps had 
sufiicient knowledge of the world to see at once that he had a very 



THE miser's daughtee; 65 

dangerous person to deal with, and that it behoved him to be 
careful how he proceeded. Never had he seen such broad 
shoulders, such muscular legs, and such a burly frame, as were 
possessed by the individual before him. Mr. Cordwell Firebras 
was a little below the middle height, and his squareness of figure, 
aided by a loose coat of dark brown cloth, edged with silver, which 
reached half way down his legs, made him look almost as broad 
as long. His features were somewhat coarse, his cheek bones high, 
his complexion light, and his beard, brows, and eyelashes of a sandy 
hue. Altogether he had the look of a Scotsman. His chin was 
large and broad, evincing the utmost determination, mixed with 
considerable craftiness ; his mouth wide, his nose broad and flat, 
and his eyes of a light gray. He wore a flaxen bob wig, which har- 
monised well with his light complexion, and carried a broad-bladed 
sword, evidently intended more for use than ornament. To this 
not very prepossessing exterior, Mr. Cordwell Firebras added easy, 
affable, and almost graceful manners. It was quite clear to Mr. 
Cripps that he was acting upon the instructions of his correspon- 
dent, for he received him with the greatest cordiality, shook him' 
by the hand, and motioned him to be seated. It did not escape 
Mr. Cripps, in the hasty survey he took of the room, that there was' 
a basket-hiked s,word in the corner, too;ether with a brace of lonsf 
barrelled silver-mounted pistol's, and a Highland dirk. Nor did he 
fail to notice that the window opened upon a small garden, skirting 
Saint James's Park, thus offering a ready means of escape, if re- 
quired. These things considered, Mr. Cripps did not feel entirely 
at his ease, and it required all his eflrontery to enable him to go 
through with his part. Whether it was that Cordwell Firebras 
perceived his uneasiness, or that his quick perception of character 
detected the imposition attempted to be practised upon him, is 
immaterial, but his countenance suddenly changed, and the affable, 
almost courtier-like manner with which he had commenced, gave 
way to a stern scrutinizing glance and freezing demeanour that 
made the valet tremble. They were alone, for having ushered Mr. 
Cripps into the room, the elderly female retired, closing the door 
after her. 

" You are lately from the country, sir, I believe?" asked Firebras. 

'* Just arrived, sir," replied Mr. Cripps, taking out his snuff-box 
to hide his confusion — " allow me to offer you a pinch." 

P 



66 THE miser's daughter. 

Firebras bowed and accepted the offer. A peculiar smile, wliicli 
the valet did not like, crossed his features. 

" I must compliment you upon your air and manner, sir,*' said 
Firebras, in a tone of slight irony ; " they are any thing but rustic. 
But may I now ask whom I have the honour of addressing ?" 

" Mr. Randulph Crew !" replied the valet, confidently. 

" RandulphCrew !" exclaimed Firebras, almost starting. " What ! 
the son of my old friend, Randulph Crew? Impossible!" 

" I am not aware that my father enjoyed the honour of your 
friendship, sir," replied the valet, who began to fear he had got on 
ticklish ground, " but my name is Randulph Crew, and so was my 
father's before me." 

Though the day was by no means chilly, there was a small fire 
burning in the grate. Mr. Cord well Firebras placed the letter 
which he held in his hand before it, and certain lines of writing, 
traced in invisible ink, instantly appeared. These he eagerly 
scanned. 

"It is useless to trifle longer, sir," he cried, turning suddenly 
upon the valet. " You are an impostor. For what purpose are 
you come hither ? Answer me, or your life shall pay the forfeit of 
your rashness.'^ 

As he spoke, he drew his sword. Mr. Cripps, though greatly 
alarmed, drew likewise, but his blade was instantly beaten from his 
grasp by Firebras. 

" Raise a cry, and you are a dead man !" pursued the latter, lock- 
ing the door, and putting the key in his pocket. " Who are you, 
sirrah ?" 

" My name is Crackenthorpe Cripps, and I am chief valet to 
Beau Villiers," returned the other, bowing. 

" You are a spy, rascal !" cried Firebras. " You have come on 
an errand, of the danger of which you were ignorant. But you 
will get nothing for your pains." 

'* Pardon me, Mr. Firebras," said the valet, who was by no 
means destitute of courage, or, at all events, of the quahty next in 
value to it — self-possession. " I have gained my object. I have 
discovered the existence of a Jacobite club, of which you are a 
member. I have discovered that there is a plot hatching in 
Cheshire, and can easily find out who is implicated in it ; and I 
have only to give information to a magistrate, and your arrest must 
follow." 

" Well, sir,'* replied Firebras, calmly—" well, sir?" 



THE miser's daughter. 67 

" But I have no such intention," continued Mr. Cripps; " your 

secret is safe with me, provided " 

•' You are paid for your silence — ha ?" 

" Precisely, Mr. Firebras. I am not a Jacobite, neither am I 
an Hanoverian; and I care as little for the Elector as I do for 
young Perkin. The fact is, you are in my power, sir, and I shall 
make the most of my position. Buy me, and I will deal with you 
fairly." 

" Hum!" said Firebras, looking fixedly at him; " well, I will 
employ you, and will also make it worth your while to be true to 
me. Kandulph Crew has of course lost this letter. I will not 
inquire how it came into your hands ; but he cannot be aware that 
it has reached me. My correspondent says he is about to visit 
his uncle, Mr. Abel Beechcroft, and cautions me against that 
gentleman." 

" And with reason, sir," remarked Mr. Cripps; " I, also, advise 
you to beware of him. My uncle is Mr. Beechcroft's butler." 

*' Then, from your connexion, you may materially aid me in 
my designs upon this young man," said Firebras. " You must 
take a letter from me to him." 

" With pleasure,^' replied Mr. Cripps ; " and it fortunately hap- 
pens that he is to breakfast with my master to-morrow morning, 
when I can easily deliver it." 

" Good," replied Firebras, *' I will prepare it at once." 
With this, he sat down to a side table on which writing ma- 
terial| were placed, and with much dehberation penned a despatch, 
"land sealed it. He then opened a secret drawer, and took out five 
guineas, which he gave to the valet. 

" It is perhaps a needless piece of trouble to seal the letter," he 
observed, significantly ; " but you will learn nothing by opening 
it beyond the fact that I desire an interview with Mr. Crew. I 
know I can trust you.^' 

" Oh, you may trust to my honour, Mr. Firebras, 'pon rep?* 
said the valet, placing his hand upon his breast. 

" I trust to the value you place on your own safety, Mr. Cripps," 
replied Firebras, significantly. " Attempt to play me false, and 
nothing shall save you from my vengeance ! I have secret agents 
who will find sure means of reaching you." 

These words were pronounced in a tone and with a look that 
impressed Mr. Cripps with a full sense of the speaker's power of 
executing his threat. 



68 THE miser's daughter. 

" You need be under no apprehension about me, Mr. Firebras,"' 
lie said. 

** I am under none, fellow !" rejoined tlie otber, laugbing scorn- 
fully; "or you should never quit this room alive. Come to me 
to-morrow night, at ten. I may have more work for you." 

" Willingly," replied Mr. Cripps. 

Firebras then unlocked the door, and let out the valet, who was 
ushered to his chair by the elderly female. As he took his place 
within it, having first ordered the bearers to convey him to the 
spot where they took him up, he muttered to himself — " So the 
adventure has terminated very satisfactorily. This Randulph 
Crew seems destined to make my fortune. Every body pays me to 
play the spy upon him. That Cordwell Firebras is an awkward 
customer. He has an eye that looks through one, and seems to 
penetrate one's very soul. It won't do to play cross with him. 
But I must trump up some story to delude the little barber. 
I'll tell him that nothing is to be made of it — put him off in 
some way." 

Thus musing, he was conveyed to the entrance of the Little 
Sanctuary, where he alighted, discharged the chair, and bent 
his steps towards Peter Pokerich's shop, with the full determina- 
tion of putting his design into execution. v 



THE miser's daughter. 69 



i 



CHAPTER IX. 



THE STRANGEK AT THE BARBER S. 



Notwithstanding his engagement to Beau Villiers, Ran- 
dulpli, accustomed to early hours, and blessed, moreover, with a 
very healthy appetite, needed no urging on the part of Mr. Jukes 
to sit down at eight o'clock, on the second morning after his arrival 
in town, to a sort of preliminary breakfast with Uncle Abel. Glad 
of the excuse for a little extra indulgence in repose, Trussell did 
not rise till late, and Randulph was therefore left to a tete-a-tete 
with his elder -uncle. Whether it was that Abel was in a better 
humour than before, or that he was not fretted by Trussell,. whose 
remarks, however well meant, generally tended to excite his cynical 
propensities, Randulph could not tell, but he certainly found him 
more agreeable than he had previously thought him. Abel ques- 
tioned his nephew narrowly as to his tastes and pursuits, and seemed 
.pleased with the answers he received. In fact, things went on so 
prosperously, that Mr. Jukes, who was carving a fine Westphalia 
ham at the well-spread side-board, suspended his operations lo 
rub his hands with delight. Abel noticed his exhilaration, and 
guessing the cause, could not refrain from smiling, and Randulph 
thought he had never seen so pleasant a smile before. Abel's heart, 
indeed, it was evident, was warming towards his nephew; and he 
made no attempt to check the kindly feeling. Hediscantcd with much 
force and truth on the dangers to which a young man must be ex- 
posed on his first entrance into the world, but exhibited far less 
straightlacedness than might have been expected. He advised his 
nephew to mix with society, but not to become a part of it ; to use, 
but not abuse, the advantages nature had given him.; and to push 
his fortune to the utmost; displaying throughout the whole dis- 



TO THE miser's daughter. 

course a shrewdness of observation, a nice perception of character, 
and a knowledge of the world, for which Randulph had not given 
him credit, and which raised him materially in his opinion. On 
one point only the young man thought him guilty of injustice — 
namely, in the bitter and disparaging view he took of women. On 
this head, therefore, he ventured to differ with him, and his zeal 
and earnestness appeared to interest Abel. When he had done, 
the old man shrugged his shoulders, and contented himself with 
sajdng, " You'll think differently one day." 

Randulph would have replied, but a plate of ham, accompanied 
by a significant look from the discreet butler, warned him not to 
pursue the subject further. Accordingly, he was silent, and 
Abel returned to his exposition and dissection of society with the 
same earnestness as before. 

About half-past ten Trussell made his appearance. He was 
dressed with unusual care ; had a world of the finest lace at his 
wrists and on his breast ; and wore a green velvet coat, richly em- 
broidered, a satin waistcoat of the same colour, woven with gold, 
and diamond buckles at his knees, as well as on his shoes. The 
only part of his attire which appeared to be neglected was his pe- 
ruke, and this did not escape Abel's attention, as he scanned him 
contemptuously from head to foot. ^• 

" It's all very well," he said, drily; " you are suflSciently be-laced 
and be-scented to fit you for the beau's society; but your wig is 
out of order." 

" Why you don't surely think I am going in this old peruke, 
sir?" rejoined Trussell, smiling. " No, no ! I'm not quite so care- 
less. I've sent my best perriwig to be dressed by Peter Pokerich, 
the barber in the Little Sanctuary, and mean to put it on as we pass 
on our way to Spring Gardens, where, as you know, Mr. Villiers 
resides." 

" A barber in the Little Sanctuary !" cried Randulph; " why he 
must be the very person I met when — " 

Here a stern look from Uncle Abel stopped him, and called the 
colour to his cheeks. 

•' Why did you send it there ?" remarked Abel, angrily, to his 
brother. " Was there no other barber nearer at hand ?" 

"Oh yes, sir, plenty," replied Trussell; "but Pokerich under- 
stands the mode, and I desired to appear to advantage on this 



THE miser's daughter. '71 

occasion. I wish I could induce you to adopt the present fashion, 
Randulph. Your own hair is certainly very fine, but a perriwig 
would be far more becoming." 

" Be natural as long as you can, and keep your own hair, Ran- 
dulph," said Abel. 

" I intend to do so, sir," replied the young man. 

" But at all events, your dress must be improved," pursued Trus- 
sell. " I will introduce you to M. Desmartins, the French tailor, 
in Piccadilly. He will make you quite another thing." 

" And empty your purse at the same time," sneered Abel. 
" Wear out the dress you have on. It's almost new." 

"It is quite new," said Randulph, a little abashed. " It was made 
expressly for my visit to town, by Stracey, of Chester, who works 
for all the best people in the county." 

" Stracey, of Chester — ha ! ha !" exclaimed Uncle Trussell, 
jeeringly. " You had better put by Mr. Stracey for your return. 
But it is time we started. I must stop a few minutes at Poke- 
rich's." 

They then set forth, and it was with a throbbing heart that the 
young man again found himself beside the dwelling of the miser's 
daughter. He gazed eagerly at it, in the hope of catching a 
glimpse of Hilda, but could discern nothing through the barred 
and dust-begrimed windows. 

" May I ask what is the cause of Uncle Abel's aversion to Mr. 
Scarve ?" he inquired of Trussell. 

" I would rather not be questioned on that subject," replied the 
other, " because I am quite sure, if I told you, Abel would discover, 
from your manner, that I had disclosed his secret. By-the-by," 
he added, "is Hilda Scarve really a fine girl ?" 

Randulph returned a rapturous afiirmative. 

" Egad, then," pursued Trussell, as if debating some matter with 
himself, " I don't know whether one speculation would not be as 
good as t'other !" 

" What do you mean, uncle ?" inquired Randulph. 

" Why, that a marriage with Hilda Scarve might answer as well 
as waiting for Abel'^ money," replied Trussell; " the miser must 
be immensely rich — immensely ! Ill call on him one of these 
days, and sound him on the subject of the union." 

" Recollect your brother's injunctions, sir !" rejoiaed Randulph, 



72 THE miser's daughter. 

who was, however, so enchanted by the proposition, that he could 
have flung his arms round his uncle's neck, and hugged him — " it 
may be hazardous." 

" Tut — tut !" exclaimed Trussell, " he'll never hear of it. They 
have no sort of communication. Abel hates him like the devil — as 
well he may. But I must not say more. And here we are at 
Pokerich's/' 

With this he entered Peter's shop. The little barber was 
engaged at the moment in shaving a customer, and called to his 
apprentice to set chairs for the new comers. He did not at first 
notice Randulph, who was behind his uncle ; but when the young 
man came full into view, his hand trembled so much that the 
razor sUpped, inflicting a slight wound on the chin of the gentle- 
man he was shaving. 

*' Have a care, fellow!" cried this person, angrily; "you have 
cut me." 

" Ten thousand pardons, sir," apologized Peter; '*it is not much, 
sir — a mere trifle — a little sticking-plaster will set all to rights." 

So saying, he very dexterously wiped ofi" the lather, and bathing 
the gentleman's cheek with warm water, speedily succeeded in 
stanching the blood. He then finished shaving him, and taking a 
light flaxen wig from a block hard by, fitted it on his head.v This 
done, the gentleman arose, walked towards a glass, to ascertain the 
extent of the injury he had received, and finding it very trifling 
laughed good-humouredly. He was a middle-sized man, remarkably 
squarely and powerfully built; and as the barber assisted him to 
put on his coat, and fasten on his sword, Randulph could not help 
noticing his great apparent strength of frame. 

" You have not a very steady hand, friend," remarked the 
stranger, as he took out his purse to pay the barber. 

" I never made such a mistake before, sir," replied Peter, " never, 
on my honour." 

" Then I suppose it was this young gentleman who startled you," 
replied the other, laughing, " for the accident occurred just as he 
entered your shop." 

" Why, really, I was rather surprised to see him, I must own," 
returned Peter. " Mr. Randulph Crew, your most obedient.'* 

" What !" cried the stranger, with a look of astonishment. " Is 
,that Mr. Randulph Crew?" 



THE miser's daughter. 73 

It was now Randulph's turn to appear surprised. 

" You will wonder at my exclamation, sir," pursued the stranger, 
advancing towards him ; " but I knew a gentleman of your name, 
which is not a very common one, in Cheshire, years ago — knew 
him intimately." 

" Probably my father," said Randulph. 

" He is well, I hope?" asked the other. 

" Alas ! sir, I lost him a year ago," replied Randulph. 

Here the conversation dropped, for the stranger seemed a little 
embarrassed, as if he had something to say, and yet did not know 
how to set about it. He glanced at Trussell, who had taken his 
seat, and was submitting his bald pate to Peter, while the latter 
was adjusting upon it, with the utmost care, a very well-powdered 
peruke. 

" Is that a relative of yours?" asked the stranger of Randulph. 

" My uncle, sir," replied the young man. 

" Indeed !" exclaimed the stranger. And he again hesi- 
tated. 

"A very singular person," thought Randulph. 

" There," cried Trussell, rising, and looking at himself in the 
glass; " that'll do — capital — capital!" 

" Mr. Scarve lives over the way, barber, I believe?" said the 
stranger to Peter. 

" He does, sir," replied the latter. " That's the house. A very 
strange affair occurred there yester-evening." 

" What might that be?" inquired the stranger. 

" Why," replied the barber, " about five o'clock the whole street 
was alarmed by the arrival of a troop of fourteen horsemen, each 
with a thousand pounds in a couple of bags at his saddle-bow. 
Well, sir, these horsemen stopped at the miser's door, and threw 
down their bags before it ; and it turned out to be the payment of 
the sum of fourteen thousand pounds borrowed from old Starve — 
beg pardon, Scarve, — on mortgage by Sir Bulkeley Price, and 
which the latter was obliged to pay at a certain time, or his estate 
would have been foreclosed. It was a near run for Sir Bulkeley ; 
he only just saved his distance. Ah ! you should have seen how 
the old miser raved and swore when he found himself robbed of his 
prey. But for his daughter's interference, he would certainly have 
laid violent hands on the knight. Ha ! ha !" 



74 THE miser's DAUGHTEE. 

Randulpli, -wliose breast was agitated with conflicting feelings, 
was about to question the barber further as to Hilda's conduct on 
the occasion, when he was checked by the stranger, who, turning 
hastily to Peter, said, " This is an unheard-of mode of paying 
mortgage money, — and so large a sum, too. Are you sure it was 
as much as fourteen thousand pounds ?" 

" As that I have a comb in my hand," replied the barber. 
"And it was paid in gold, too; I heard the chink of the metal 
myself. Besides, Sir Bulkeley called upon me, together with the 
other spectators, to witness the payment." 

"You surprise me," exclaimed the stranger; "I must have a 
word with Mr. Scarve on the subject. — Good morning, gentlemen* 
Mr. Randulph Crew, we may possibly meet again." And raising 
his hat he walked across the street, and knocked at the miser's 
door. 

" Who is that strange person?" asked Trussell of Peter. 

" Haven't the least idea, sir," repHed the barber. " He came in 
here to be shaved ; that's all I know of him. Never ask customers' 
names." 

Randulph, meanwhile, ran to the door, to see how the stranger 
would be received, and was somewhat chagrined to find that Jacob, 
after reconnoitring him according to custom, and detaining him 
while he consulted his master, admitted him. 

" He will see Hilda," sighed the young man. 

"Come, nephew, come!" cried Trussell, impatiently. "We 
shall be late." 

Sorely against his will, Randulph suffered himself to be dragged 
away, and they proceeded along King-street, in the direction of 
Spring Gardens. 



THE miser's daughter. 75 



CHAPTER X. 

THE beau's levee — THE BREAKFAST — THE EMBARKATION FOR THE FOLLY. 

Beau Villiers's residence looked upon Saint James's Park, 
and had a small garden attached to it. It was by no means a large 
house, but exquisitely furnished; the whole of the internal deco- 
rations being French, and in the gorgeous taste of Louis the Four- 
teenth. The visitors were admitted by a couple of powdered 
lacqueys in rich liveries of scarlet faced with white, and passing a 
large, snow-white French poodle of a peculiar breed, lying on a 
rug near the door, traversed a hall crowded with busts, statues, 
bronzes, and large porcelain jars. A page, 'in a fanciful costume, 
who might have played a part in one of Watteau's pictures, met 
them at the foot of the stairs, and, mounting before them, ushered 
them along a corridor to the entrance of a chamber, before which 
stood two grinning Africans, arrayed in Oriental habiliments, and 
wearing great brass ear-rings, and large musHn turbans adorned 
with brazen crescents. One of them threw open the door, and the 
two visitors entered a waiting-room, in which a number of persons 
were assembled, most of whom being known to Trussell, he very 
courteously returned their salutations. 

" Ah, mon ami, Desmartins," he said, to a little bowing and 
cringing personage, very ill-dressed (as tailors are apt to be), from 
whose pocket depended a measuring-tape, while he carried a 
pattern-book under his arm, ** how are you? This is my nephew, 
Desmartins. I have told him he must put himself under your 
skilful hands." 

" Proud to undertake him, Mr. Trussell, — enchante V replied 
the Frenchman. " Your nephew has a very fine figure, ma foil 
But his dress is not at all a-la-mode. Very clownish — what you 
call it .'' — countrified — ^ha ! ha !" 



76 THE miser's daughter. 

" So I told him, Desmartins," replied Trussell. ** We shall look 
in upon you to-day or to-morrow, and put that to rights." 

" Enchanted to see you, Mr. Trussell, and you, sare," replied 
the tailor, bowing to Randulph. 

" Ah, Mr. Penrose, is that you?'^ pursued Trussell, turning to a 
slight, effeminate-looking young man, with a paper box and a 
casket under his arm. " I suppose you have got a new importation 
of gloves and perfumes — tuberose, orange, jasmine, essence 
d'Espagne — eh ?" 

*' I have just invented a new scent, sir," replied the perfumer, 
" and am come to solicit Mr. Villierss permission to give it his 
name." 

" And if he grants it your fortune is made," replied Trussell; 
" the bouquet a-la-Villiers will carry all before it. Ah, Chip- 
chase," turning to a little fellow, whose stunted figure, velvet cap, 
boots, and other equipments, left no doubt as to his being a jockey, 
*' what news from Newmarket? Has Lord Haversham won the 
cup, or Sir John Fagg?" 

" Neither, sir," replied the jockey. " Mr. Villiers is the 
winner." 

" Bravo ! bravissimo !" cried Trussell, clapping his hands; " that's 
famous ! Why, your news is worth twenty pounds to me^ Chip- 
chase. I backed Mr. Villiers against the field, though — I may 
now say it — without a notion he would win, but merely out of 
compliment." 

" The knowin' 'uns has been taken in this time, that's certain, 
Mr. Trussell," replied the jockey, with a sly wink. "Sir John 
thought himself safe, but he now finds he's on the wrong side of 
the hedge. I hope your honour will allow me the pleasure of 
drinking your health." 

" That I will," returned Trussell, taking out his purse, and 
giving him a piece of money; "and in a crown bowl of punch, 
too. Ah, Ned Oglethorpe," he added, passing on to another 
person in a white flannel jacket, and with an open collar; "how 
are the rackets? My nephew Randulph, Ned. We will come 
and play a match at tennis with you one of these days. Let me 
know when the next main is fought at the cockpit. — Captain Cul- 
pepper, your most obedient. Nay, don't walk away. Captain ; I'm 
not going to dun you for the few crowns you lost to me at trick« 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 77 

track, at the British. Randulph, this is Captain Culpepper, as 
brave a man as ever drew a sword, or brought off his friend from 
a street row, or," he added, in a lower tone, " ever revenged a 
secret quarrel. Egad, at Mr. Villiers's levees one is sure to meet 
all one's friends. Here, nephew, he added, addressing a lithe, 
active-looking man, in a close-fitting linen dress, with a couple of 
foils under his arm, " here is the first master of fence in the world 
— Mr. Hewitt. You must have a few lessons in carte and tierce 
from him." 

' Whilst Randulph was returning the fencing-master's bow, the 
door of the inner room was opened by Mr. Cripps. On discerning 
Trussell and his companion, the valet immediatclyhastened towards 
them, and entreated them to step in to his master, who, he affirmed, 
had been expecting them for some time. 

The apartment into which they were ushered was the beau's 
dressing-chamber, — that part of it, however, devoted to the toilette- 
table and its appliances being separated from the rest by a magnifi- 
cent Indian japanned screen. It was furnished with the most re- 
fined and luxurious taste. Rose-coloured curtains drawn across the 
windows subdued the hght, and threw a warm tint on all around, 
while the air was loaded with delicious perfumes. A very diminu- 
tive monkey, clothed in a scarlet coat, and wearing a bag- wig and a 
little sword, played its diverting tricks in one corner, while a gaudily 
plumaged macaw screamed in the opposite angle. Choice flowers 
in pots added their fragrance to the artificial odours, and a couple 
of exquisite little spaniels of Charles the Second's breed, with the 
longest and silkiest ears imaginable, and large, gazelle-like eyes, 
occupied a cushion on the hearth. At a table, covered with the 
whitest and finest linen, and glittering with silver of the rarest work- 
manship, together with a superb service of china, sat, or rather re- 
clined, in the easiest of easy chairs. Beau Villiers. He did not rise 
on the appearance of his guests; but moving slightly, and graciously, 
to them, though with somewhat, Randulph fancied, of a patronising 
air, motioned Mr. Cripps to set them chairs. He was quite in dis- 
habille ; his graceful figure being enveloped in a loose dressing-robe 
of the richest brocade, while the place of a peruke was supplied by 
a green silk cap, very becomingly put on. His shirt was open at 
the throat, and decorated with a profusion of lace at the bosom and 
wrists. Pink silk hose and velvet slippers completed his costume. 



78 THE miser's daughter. 

There were two other persons present ; Sir Singleton Spinke, and 
a very portly gentleman with puffed-out, inflamed cheeks, who was 
introduced as Sir Bulkeley Price, and whom Kandulph concluded 
must be the hero of the story he had just heard related by the 
barber — a circumstance which gave him a peculiar interest in his 
eyes. Meanwhile, Mr. Cripps, who, together with the page, offi- 
ciated at breakfast, proceeded to do the honours, and twirling the 
mill of a richly- chased silver chocolate-pot, poured out two well 
frothed cups of the unctuous beverage, and handed them to the new 
comers. 

A small modicum of a Strasbourg pate, washed down by a cup 
of green tea and a glass of claret, constituted the beau's breakfast. 
Sir Singleton Spinke took chocolate, picked the wing of a chicken, 
and wound himself up with a glass of usquebaugh. Ample justice 
was done to the cutlets, the broils, and various other dishes with 
which the covers were filled, by Sir Bulkeley Price; nor did 
Trussell or Randulph come far behind him, notwithstanding the 
preliminary breakfast of the latter. Just before the introduction of 
the usquebaugh. Sir Bulkeley, after looking round and coughing 
significantly, said, in a low tone, to the chief valet, " I suppose, Mr. 
Cripps, there is no ale in the house?" 

"No what! Sir Bulkeley?" rejoined Mr. Cripps, staring as if he 
could not possibly imagine he had heard aright. 

"'Ale, rascal — ale !" replied the knight, emphatically, and rather 
angrily. 

" No, Sir Bulkeley," replied Mr. Cripps, bowing; " there is no ale, 
but there is toasted cheese, if that will serve your turn." 

Angry as he was, the knight could not help laughing at the 
valet's impertinence; and a glass of usquebaugh, in which he 
pledged the old beau, entirely appeased him. The conversation 
during the meal was lively enough, and was chiefly maintained by 
the beau and Trussell, their discourse running upon all sorts of 
fashionable topics, scandal, women, play, and public amusements; 
in which, as he knew so little about the matters discussed, Ran- 
dulph took no great interest. His attention, however, was instantly 
aroused, when Trussell, turning laughingly to Sir Bulkeley, told 
him he had heard of his " new way of paying old debts." 

" I mentioned the matter to Villiers before your arrival," re- 
turned Sir Bulkeley ; " and it diverted him as much as it appears 



THE miser's daughter. 79 

to divert you. Egad ! we had to ride hard though. Several of 
my tradesmen met me at Highgate, and offered to escort me through 
the town, but I declined the attention, being of opinion that we 
were a sufficiently large party without them. You should have 
seen how the folks stared as we rode along the streets." 

" I don't wonder at it," replied Trussell, laughing; "I am almost 
surprised the train-bands were not sent after you." 

" The cream of the adventure was, as usual, the close," pursued 
the knight. " Never was fury equal to that displayed by the miser 
at his disappointment. I declare I almost pitied him. His daughter 
is a charming girl — beautiful as an angel, and rich — nay, i'faith, it 
is impossible to say how rich she must be. Villiers, you ought to 
take her off her father's hands." 

" I'll think of it," replied the beau, carelessly ; " for I am despe- 
rately in want of money. Like yourself, I have had some dealings 
with old Scarve, and know him to be as great an extortioner as 
Shylock or Sir Giles Overreach. I don't think, however, I could 
marry his daughter, if she had the wealth of the Indies." 

" But you have never seen her, or you would alter your opinion," 
replied Sir Bulkeley. " She is the most beautiful creature I have 
beheld for this many a day." 

** You pique my curiosity," rejoined the beau. " I must see this 
paragon of perfection. A propos of beauty," he added to Randulph, 
who could scarcely hide his uneasiness; "don't you think Clemen- 
tina Brabazon a fine girl, Mr. Crew?" 

" Remarkably so," replied the young man, distractedly. 

" She is nothing to what her mother was," observed Sir Single- 
ton. Twenty years ago, Lady Brabazon, then Miss Norbroke, was, 
with one exception, the loveliest creature in existence." 

*' And who might be the exception ?" inquired Trussell. 

" I am glad you have asked me," replied Sir Singleton; " be- 
cause it is a gratification to me to tell you it was your sister Sophia, 
— ^the mother of this young gentleman. Delicious creature, that 
she was ! She quite won my heart, Mr. Crew; and if she had not 
been insensible to. my suit, I might have had the honour of being 
your father." 

" The supposition is highly flattering," replied Randulph, 
smiling. 

" It makes one melancholy to think of the beauties of by-gone 



80 THE miser's daughter. 

days," continued the old beau, sentimentally, consoling himself at 
the same time •with a pinch of snuiF. " Not having seen the 
miser's daughter, I cannot speak to her attractions ; but Sir Bulkeley 
is a good judge, and his opinion may be relied on. To my taste, 
the prettiest woman of her day is Kitty Conway, the actress at the 
little theatre in the Hay market." 

" Kitty is certainly a vastly pretty creature," rejoined Trussell; 
" but you need scarcely sigh in vain there. Sir Singleton." 

And thus they rattled on, till the beau, rising, said — "Mr. 
Cripps, tell Antoine I shall now make my toilette. How shall we 
spend the morning, gentlemen ? At the cock-pit, the Groom 
Porter's, the Cocoa-tree, or White's?" 

" If you desire something new, sir," observed Mr. Cripps, who 
lingered for a moment, '* there is a grand musical entertainment 
this morning at the Folly on the Thames. 1 think you would be 
much diverted by going thither, 'pon rep !" 

" A good suggestion!" cried the beau. " I have often rowed 
past the Folly, but never have been inside it." 

" Then don't neglect the present opportunity," said Sir Single- 
ton. " It used to be a pleasant place, when we were young fel- 
lows, Trussell. Many a fine woman we have seen there, eh?" 

" Many a one — many a one — Sir Singleton," replied the other; 
" and made love to them too. I shall be glad to see the place 
again." 

" The Folly be it then !" cried the beau ; " and some folks would 
say it was a proper place for us. Excuse me for a few moments, 
gentlemen, I will dress as rapidly as possible." So saying, he 
retired behind the screen, which was drawn still further across the 
room. Not feeling much interest in the conversation which ensued 
after the beau's withdrawal, Randulph arose to look at some ex- 
quisite miniatures and other articles of vertu scattered about the 
room, and was engaged in examining a magnificent snufi*-box, 
when Mr. Cripps, who had returned from attending his master? 
came up to him, and said, in a low tone, " I am charged with a 
letter for you sir. Here it is." 

Randulph was prevented from making any remark by the signi- 
ficant looks of the valet, who, giving him to understand by sundry 
winks and slight gestures, that his uncle was to know nothing of 
the matter, glided away. Glancing at the group near the table, 



THE MISEK'S daughter. • 8l 

the young man perceived that Trusseirs back was towards him, 
and that he was, moreover, occupied in recounting some jest to the 
others. He therefore moved nearer the window, broke the seal of 
the note, and read as follows : — 

" Young Man, — The letter committed to your charge by your 
mother, and which was of the last importance, though you appear 
to have attached so little to it, has fortunately reached its destina- 
tion. Otherwise, the consequences might have been serious. It is 
necessary I should have an interview with you, and that without 
delay. I shall be in the south ambulatory of the cloisters of West- 
minster Abbey at six o'clock to-morrow, and shall expect you. 
Fail not in the appointment, as you regard your own safety and 
that of your mother. Not a word of this to your uncle, or to any 
one. The slightest imprudence will place you in jeopardy. 

" CORDWELL FlREBRAS." 

*' Cord well Firebras !" exclaimed Randulph, to himself "Ay, 
now I remember, that was the name of the person to whom the 
missing letter was addressed. The whole affair is most mysterious; 
and the language of this note strange, and even alarming. Til 
question Mr. Cripps about it. But hold ! I am desired not to 
mention the matter to my uncles, or to any one. Why should I 
observe the caution? And yet prudence tells me I had better do 
so. The note is dated yesterday. A few hours, therefore, will 
Bolve the riddle. I will keep the appointment." 

As he uttered the last words, almost unconsciously, aloud, and 
with some emphasis, he was startled by hearing a loud laugh 
behind him, and, turning at the sound, perceived Trussell's round 
face peeping over his shoulder. He instantly crushed the letter 
between his fingers. 

" Nay, you had better let me see it," laughed Trussell; " I over- 
heard your exclamation. What fair dame has fallen in love with 
you, eh? Not the miser's daughter, surely? And yet she is 
almost the only woman you can have seen. But I won't ask 
impertinent questions, or make impertinent remarks. I see they 
annoy you. You are right to keep the secret, as well as the 
appointment. Ha ! ha !" 

" You are mistaken, uncle !" cried Randulph, hastily ; " my 
appointment is with ," and checked himself. 

'^Poh, poh! boy, no excuses with me," interrupted Trussell. 

o 



82 THE miser's daughter. 

" Keep your own counsel. Fortunate dog ! I was as lucky myself 
when I was as young. Ha ! ha ! But," he added, with a look of 
some perplexity, " what Mercury brought you the billet?" 

" I did, sir," interposed Mr. Cripps, who, having observed what 
was going forward, flew to the rescue. " I was intrusted with it 
— by a lady, ahem ! Your nephew makes his way rapidly, Mr. 
Trussell, 'pon rep !" 

" So it appears," rejoined Trussell, laughing louder than ever. 
" Myself over again — ha ! ha !" 

Randulph was about to contradict the valet's assertion, and set 
his uncle right as far as he was able, but at this moment the screen 
was drawn aside, and discovered the beau fully dressed- He was 
habited in a coat of the finest scarlet cloth, richly embroidered with 
gold lace, a white waistcoat of the richest silk, flowered with gold 
in a large pattern, a point lace cravat, and "a full-flowing flaxen 
perriwig. On seeing his master, Mr. Cripps hastened to fetch his 
feathered hat and clouded cane, while the page brought him his 
gloves. Antoine, the French servant who had assisted him to 
dress, then advanced with his handkerchief, which was of the 
finest cambric, edged with lace, and on which he poured a perfume 
from a scent bottle ; while a fourth attendant handed liim his 
snufi'-box. ^ 

" And now, gentlemen, I am at your service," said the beau, 
carefully adjusting his hat. " Mr. Cripps, you will attend us. We 
may need you at the Folly." 

The favourite valet bowed, and opened the door of the ante- 
chamber. Mr. Villiers paused for a moment to exchange a few 
words with the assemblage, — applauding the jockey for his success, 
— announcing to the perfumer that he had just tried his scent, and 
would accord him permission to put his name to it, — commanding 
a court suit from the tailor, — and nodding to Ned Oglethorpe, 
Captain Culpepper, and the fencing-master. He then passed forth 
with his friends. 

The party first took a turn on the Mall. The morning being 
extremely fine, the walks were filled with a gay throng, as on the 
preceding day. Wherever they went. Beau Villiers drew all eyes 
upon him, and to Randulph's amusement, and Trussell's dehght, 
they were followed by a crowd of curious gazers. Among these, 
Randulph noticed the stranger whom he had met at the barber's 



THE miser's daughter. 83 

sliop ; but the latter did not seem to court his observation, and he 
soon afterwards lost sight of him. 

Having sauntered as far as Buckingham House, the party 
retraced their steps, and quitting the park, repaired to the cockpit 
at Whitehall. Here Sir Bulkeley Price quitted them, having first 
engaged Randulph and his uncle to dine with him at his house in 
Saint James's Square on the following day. A quarter of an hour 
was next whiled away at the Cockpit, after which they proceeded 
to the Groom-porter's, whose rooms closely adjoined it, where even 
at that hour they found high play going forward. Beau VilHers, 
who was a desperate gamester, and seldom liked to miss an oppor- 
tunity, approached the table where they were playing hazard, and 
in a short space of time came off the winner of a hundred pounds. 
Elated with his success, and in high good humour, he left the 
rooms, and repaired with his companions to Whitehall Stairs, 
where Mr. Cripps called a boat, in which they all embarked for the 
Folly. 

Randulph had detected the stranger among the crowd of 
lookers-on at the Groom-porter's, and their boat had not got 
many yards from shore, when he observed him descend the stairs, 
and get into another wherry, with the intention, as it appeared 
from his gestures, of following them. 



g2 



84 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XL 

THE miser's consultation "WITH HIS ATTORNEY — JACOB ALARMED BY HIS 
master's APPEARANCE AT NIGHT— THE VISIT OF COBDWELL FIREBRAS. 

By the combined attentions of his daughter and sister-in-law, 
the miser, after a little while, was restored to sensibility, and placed 
in his chair, where the glass of wine he had destined for Jacob 
being administered to him, mixed with hot water, completed his 
recovery. Still, he was very weak ; his gaze wandered from the 
heap of treasure on the floor to the mortgage deed on the table, and, 
unable to bear the sight of the latter, he ordered Jacob to place the 
little strong box in which he usually kept his papers on the table, 
and unlocking it with a trembling hand, deposited the deed within 
it. This seemed to be a great rehef to him, for he presently be- 
came more composed, and rising, with his daughter's assistance, 
stepped towards the pile of money-bags, and tried, but ineffectu- 
ally, to lift one of them. 

" Do not attempt it, father," said Hilda. " You had better let 
Jacob carry this money into your own room ; and let me also 
recommend you to retire to rest." 

" No, no," replied the miser ; *' I shall not sleep till I have counted 
the gold in each of those sacks ; and if I find any deficiency, let Sir 
Bulkeley look to it. Take them up stairs, Jacob." 

The injunction was promptly obeyed, and Jacob had just com- 
pleted his task, when a knock was heard at the door. 

"Who can it be?" cried the miser. "Ah! now I recollect, it 
must be my attorney, Mr. Diggs. He was to call about the fore- 
closure. Curses on it ! instead of being present at my triumph, 
he will witness my mortification. Jacob, if it should be Mr. Diggs, 
you may admit him, but no one else. Hilda, and sister Clinton, 
you had better retire to your own room. I have business to trans- 



I 



THE miser's daughter. S5 



act. You may as well say good night, for I shall go to bed as 
soon as Mr. Diggs leaves." 

Hilda looked anxiously at her father, and kissed his brow. 

" Have you any thing to say, child ?" he asked, touched by her 
affection. 

" Only that I wish you would not count the money to-night," 
she replied. " You need rest." 

" I shall sleep all the sounder for having counted it," he replied; 
" especially," he added, with great asperity, " if I find there is 
any mistake." 

" Well, I hope you will be better to-morrow," sighed Hilda, and 
she withdrew with her aunt. 

The next moment, Jacob ushered into the room a respectable- 
looking-middlc-aged man, with smooth, rosy features, somewhat 
disfigured in their expression by what is termed a cocked eye. 
Indeed, no power of vision seemed to reside in the orb thus unna- 
turally fixed. This blemish excepted, Mr. Diggs — for he it was 
— might be said to have a prepossessing countenance, except that 
there were some lines of treachery about the mouth, and that the 
chin was very cunningly formed. He was plainly but handsomely 
attired in a dark suit, and had neither the air nor the manner of a 
pettifogging attorney, which, indeed, he was not. His voice was so 
agreeably modulated, that it fell almost like notes of music on the 
ear ; and he had a very pleasing and very plausible address. 

" Well, sir, am I to congratulate you ?" he said, as he took the 
chair offered him by Jacob. *' Do I pay my respects to a Welsh 
squire ? Ha ! ha !" But perceiving from the other's countenance 
that something was wrong, he changed his tone, and added — " I 
hope you are well, sir? From what I heard from your nephew, 
who has just left me, I expected to find you in high spirits." 

The miser made no reply, but signed to Jacob to leave the 
room, which the latter did very reluctantly. 

" The mortgage money has been paid, Diggs," said Mr. Scarve, 
coldly, as soon as they were alone. 

" I am sorry to hear it," replied the other — '* very sorry. But 
I feared as much from your countenance." 

" Well, never mind it," replied the miser, forcing a smile. " It 
is a disappointment that can be borne." 

" I am glad you take the matter so pliilosophically, sir," rejoined 



86 THE miser's daughter. 

Diggs ; " but I confess I cannot view the loss witli equal indif- 
ference." 

" Why, what interest, except professionally, can you feel in the 
matter ?" said the miser, coldly. 

" I take as much interest in the affairs of my clients as in my 
own," rejoined Diggs ; " and it so happens, you are not the only 
party who may suffer by this untoward and vexatious occurrence." 

"Not the only party!" repeated the miser. "You perplex 
me." 

" I will explain myself, sir," returned Diggs. " Your nephew, 
as I told you, has just been with me. He spoke of his hopes of 
an union with your daughter, and of the settlement he proposed, 
in such an event, to make upon her ; and conchided by hoping 
you would assign this very estate in Flintshire to her as a marriage 
portion." 

"But I have it not, Diggs — I have it not!" cried the miser, 
pathetically. 

" So I am sorry to^ learn," replied Diggs, "but — " and he 
slightly paused, as if calculating how far he could safely go — " you 
have the mortgage money." 

" Mr. Diggs," replied the miser, fixing his keen grey eyes upon 
the attorney — " I told my nephew to-day that I would not give 
my daughter a farthing, and I am not one, you know, to waver in 
my resolution. What settlement does Philip propose to make 
upon her ?" 

" Nothing, sir," replied Diggs, affecting to be a little hurt — 
*' nothing, without a corresponding settlement on your part. Nor 
could I honestly advise him to do otherwise." 

" Then the match is at an end," rejoined Scarve ; " and you 
may tell him so." 

" I hope not, sir," replied the attorney ; " you are both good ^ 
clients, and having the interests of both sincerely at heart, I should 
like to see you more closely united. Your nephew would be a son 
to you, Mr. Scarve. He has a great regard as well as profound 
Irespect for you ; and having precisely the same careful habits as 
yourself, your property will undergo no diminution, if it should 
ever come into his hands. I need not remind you of the large 
fortune he inherited from his father, whose will you have seen, but 
I may tell you — because I have no interdiction from him against so 



i 



THE miser's daughter. 87 

doing — that by tKe fortunate disposition of that money, by loans 
and otherwise, he has abeady added twenty thousand pounds to 
the amount ; and in a few years, if he is equally fortunate, there is 
no doubt he will double it." 

" Philip is a very clever young man, unquestionably," said the 
miser, his eyes sparkling with pleasure — " there are few such." 

" You may truly say so, sir," repHed Diggs ; " and I should hesi- 
tate, if I were you, before I threw away the opportunity now offered 
of so good a match — one in all respects so accordant with your taste. 
You will at once perceive my meaning, sir, when I say that you 
would scarcely respect your nephew — certainly not give him credit 
for the prudence he possesses — if he were to accept your daughter 
without some marriage portion. It is not that he wants the money, 
nor that he doubts your ultimate intentions respecting her, but he 
deems it right, as a matter of propriety and fairness, that a sum 
equal to his own should be given." 

" And what amount does he propose to settle ?" inquired the 
miser. 

" Twenty thousand pounds," replied Diggs. 

" Hum !" exclaimed Scarve. And he continued for some time 
wrapped in thought, during which Diggs kept his single eye fixed 
upon him. " Well," he said, at length ; " all things considered, I 
am disposed to stretch a point, and to do more than I intended. I 
will behave handsomely to my nephew, who deserves to be so dealt 
with. He shall settle thirty thousand pounds — mind, thirty thousand, 
Diggs ! — on my daughter ; and I will give them fourteen thou- 
sand — the very sum I have just received from that accursed Welsh 
baronet — on the day of the nuptials." 

" I cannot, of course, take upon me to answer for Mr. Frewin, 
sir," replied Diggs, who could scarcely conceal his satisfaction, 
*' but I hope and trust he will agree to the arrangement — indeed, I 
am pretty sure he will do so. He is devotedly attached to your 
daughter, and I am convinced he would make a sacrifice for her." 

" He makes no sacrifice, sir," cried Scarve, sharply — " none 
whatever." 

" I mean merely in feeling, sir," interrupted Diggs, in a depreca- 
tory tone ; " but since we have in a measure agreed upon the mat- 
ter — for I will presume Mr. Frewin^s assent — I may add, it is his 
earnest wish that the marriage should take place as soon as pos- 
sible." 



88 THE miser's daughter. 

*' I myself am wisliful it should do so," replied the miser. 

*' In that case, there can be nothing to hinder it," rejoined. Diggs, 
*' always provided Mr. Frewin agrees to the arrangement, unless — 
but I presume you have consulted Miss Scarve on the subject?" 

*' My daughter has been accustomed to act in accordance with 
my wishes," returned the miser, coldly. 

" I am glad to hear it, sir," said Diggs. ''I merely threw out the 
suggestion, fearing an obstacle might occur in that quarter. My 
apprehension was, lest the young lady should not share in our good 
opinion of Mr. Frewin ; inasmuch as she might attach a little more 
importance than we do to external appearances, forgetting the 
more essential qualities. I am quite of opinion that a father has a 
right to dispose of his daughter as he thinks fit. All laws, divine 
and human, give him that power, and he is perfectly justified in 
exercising it." 

"I act as I believe for the best," replied the miser. "And 
now," he added, as if anxious to change the subject, " let us talk on 
other matters. There is the bond from Mr. Villiers; the annuity 
from Sir Thomas Lightfoot ; and the four thousand pounds Lady 
Brabazon wants to borrow." And he forthwith plunged into de- 
tails, into which it is unnecessary to follow him. 

At the end of half an hour, Diggs rose to depart, and Jacob 
was summoned to attend him to the door. There was a significance 
in the porter's manner that satisfied the astute attorney he had 
been playing the eaves-dropper. He thought it therefore expedient 
to make friends with him, and he accordingly slipped a crown into 
his hand as he went forth. Jacob did not refuse the gift, but 
growled out, as he fastened the door, " This and a thousand such 
sha'n't bribe me to betray my young missis. I overheard all their 
scheming, and she shall know it as well." 

On returning to the parlour, he found the miser preparing to 
retire, and assisted him, for he was still very feeble, to get up stairs. 
The miser's bed-room was not a whit better furnished than the 
lower apartment. An old bedstead, without hangings, stood at one 
side, while opposite it was a wash-stand, of the commonest descrip- 
tion. A number of old trunks, and one or two pictures, in a very 
dusty condition, were reared against the walls. The window was 
partly boarded up, partly grated. There was a small closet at the 
further end of the room, and a side door, though now fastened up, 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 8& 

communicated with the chamber occupied bj the two ladies. A 
small table, a stool, two large and stout oaken chests, clamped with 
iron, and a bureau of the same material as the chest, constituted 
the furniture of the closet. On the floor were laid the bags of gold. 
Having glanced at the heap, and "fcounted it with his eye, the 
miser dismissed Jacob for the night, with the strictest injunctions 
to keep on the watch, for fear of any attempt to break into the 
house. And the better to enable him to protect the premises, he 
gave him a pistol — one of a brace, which he always kept loaded at 
his bed-side. As soon as Jacob was gone, and he had locked the 
door, he set down the candle on the floor, and, with trembling 
eagerness, unfastened one of the sacks, and counted its glittering 
contents. The sum was right. He undid another, and found it 
correct; another, and another, and the same result, until all were 
emptied, and the floor was covered with gold. The miser gazed at 
the shining treasure, vainly trying to satiate his greedy soul with 
the sight; and then, at last, as if unable to contain himself, he 
threw himself upon the heap, in a species of delirium — clutching 
handfuls of the coin, and throwing them over him. His transports 
having subsided, he arose, again filled the sacks, tied them up, 
placed them in one of the chests, locked it, and, in a state of high 
nervous excitement that forbade any hope of sleep, sought his 
couch. 

Jacob, meanwhile, on quitting his master, crept stealthily to the 
ladies' chamber, and tapped against the door. The summons was 
immediately answered by Hilda, who anxiously inquired what was 
the matter. Jacob replied, in a low tone, that he wished to say a 
word to her before she retired to rest. Having delivered himself 
thus, he stole down stairs, and Hilda, who was a good deal 
alarmed, almost instantly followed him. He then told her what 
had passed between Mr. Scarve and his attorney, concluding 
thus: — "I ought to be ashamed of myself, I know, miss, for 
listenin', and it's not my habit, I assure you ; but being aware that 
Mr. Diggs is Mr. Philip's attorney, as weH as master's, and couplin' 
his visit with what occurred this morning, I had some misgivings 
as to his errand, and therefore I did as I've told you." 

Greatly disturbed by the intelligence, Hilda thanked the porter 
for his zeal, and returned noiselessly to her room, where she found 



90 THE miser's daughter. 

relief in a plentiful flood of tears. Mrs. Clinton tried to soothe 
her, but it was long before she could succeed in doing so. 

" What is to be done, dear aunt?" cried Hilda ; " I know my 
father too well to doubt that, having resolved upon this hateful 
match, he will leave nothing tindone to accomplish it. But I will 
die sooner than give my consent." 

" I scarcely know how to advise you, my dear niece," replied 
Mrs. Clinton. *' I do not like to counsel you to disobey your father, 
and yet I feel he ought not to force your inclinations." 

" Alas !" exclaimed Hilda, again bursting i^ito tears, " I have no 
friend to turn to." 

" Yes, you have one," replied Mrs. Clinton, " who will, I am 
sure, assist you, and protect you, if necessary. But do not ques- 
tion me further on the subject to-night — rest satisfied with my as- 
surance. And now, sweet niece, dry your tears, lay your head on 
the pillow, and try to compose yourself to slumber. Perhaps all 
will be right, and there may be no occasion to apply to any onC' 
God bless you! good night!" Hilda complied with her aunt's 
suggestions — but sleep shunned her eyeHds. 

Jacob, who was really apprehensive that an attempt would be 
made to break into the house that night, determined to remain on 
the watch, and with this view ensconsed himself in the miser's arm- 
chair, where, however, he found it impossible to resist the ap- 
proaches of the drowsy god. His slumbers were long and sound, 
but were at length broken by the creaking of a door. Instantly 
starting to his feet, he snatched up the pistol which lay on the table 
beside him, and presented it at the head of the intruder, who proved 
to be his master. Mr. Scarve was in his night-dress, over which he 
had hastily slipped the robe he ordinarily wore, and thus seen in 
the bright moonlight, for he had no candle, looked almost like an 
apparition. 

" Lord bless us!" exclaimed Jacob, lowering the pistol ; " how 
you do frighten one ! I took you for a housebreaker, and I'm not 
quite sure now you aren't a perturbed sperrit.'' 

" I almost wish 1 was dead, Jacob," replied the miser, dolefully. 
" I cannot sleep." 

" Don't wonder at it," replied the other, gruffly. " You've a 
bad conscience. I can sleep soundly enough, even in that cheery 

" I envy you, Jacob," groaned the miser. 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 91 

' And well you may," rejoined Jacob, " riches don't always bring 
peace, — especially if they've been unjustly obtained. But I'll tell 
you what'll make you sleep as sound as a rock. Give up all idea of 
marryin' your daughter to your miserly nephew, Philip Frewin. 
It's that as disturbs you. You know you're doin' wrong in harbourin' 
such a thought." 

" They're all leagued against me, — all !" shrieked the miser. 
" Scoundrel, you have been listening to what passed between me 
and Mr. Diggs.'^ 

" I won't deny it," replied Jacob, stoutly; " I have. And I tell 
you you're sacrificin' your daughter. Your nephew isn't what he 
seems, and Mr. Diggs is helpin' liim to deceive you. You'll find 
'em out when it's too late." 

" You are mad, or drunk, or both, Jacob !" cried Scarve, 
fiercely. 

*' If I am mad, it's a very composed and collected kind of mad- 
ness," rejoined Jacob ; " but I should like to know which of us looks 
most like a madman; you, who can't rest in your bed, or me, who 
can sleep like a top in that cheer?" 

" Well, well, I sha'n't bandy words with you," rejoined the 
miser, whose teeth were chattering with cold. " Is all safe ?" 

" I suppose so," answered Jacob. " Pve heard nothing. Have 
you?" 

" I thought I did," replied the miser, ''but it might be your 
snoring." 

" Well, go to bed," returned Jacob; " it's the best place for you. 
You'U catch your death o' cold standin' there. If it'll be any 
comfort to you I won't go to sleep again. I suppose it can't be far 
off midnight." 

" It has just gone two," rejoined the miser; "I've heard the 
Abbey clock strike all the hours." And, refusing Jacob's offer of 
assistance, he groped his way to bed. 

" I wouldn't be him for all his wealth," thought the porter, as 
he listened to his retreating footsteps. 

Jacob was as good as his word. He kept watch till it was broad 
daylight, and then, thinking all secure, betook himself to bed for a 
couple of hours. 

The family assembled at breakfast as usual. Tlie miser looked 
unusually haggard, and Hilda's countenance betrayed the mental 



92 THE miser's daughter. 

suffering slie had undergone. Little was said during tlie scanty 
meal; and as soon as it was over, Mr. Scarve signified that he 
wished to have some private conversation with his daughter, upon 
which they were left alone together. He then, without any cir- 
cumlocution, and in a much more peremptory manner than he had 
adopted before, told her he intended to give her to her cousin, and 
that he would listen to no further objections on her part. 

" I cannot believe you will persist in this cruel resolution, sir," 
cried Hilda. " What have I done to deserve sucff treatment? But 
do not think you will succeed in your design. I repeat what 1 said 
yesterday. Neither entreaties nor threats shall induce me to marry 
my cousin." 

" I will discard you, then," rejoined the miser, furiously. 

But finding her wholly unmoved by the menace, he commenced 
pouring forth a torrent of invectives against the sex in general; 
complaining of the anxiety and torment they occasioned all those 
with whom they were connected, whether in the relation of wife, 
sister, or daughter; charging them with wilfulness, perversity, and 
blindness to their own interests; and ended by ordering her off" to 
her own chamber, whither she was very glad to retreat. 

By no means satisfied with himself, he next tried to occupy his 
mind by referring to his account-book ; but it would not do^ and, 
unable to sit still, he paced the room to and fro. He hoped Jacob 
would show himself, that he might have an object to vent his 
anger upon ; but the porter, having some notion of the storm that 
awaited him, kept sedulously out of the way. He then resolutely 
returned to the account-book, and had at last fully succeeded in 
fixing his attention upon it, when a knock was heard at the door, 
and Jacob presently afterwards appeared, and informed him that 
Mr. Cord well Fire bras was without. The miser slightly started 
at the name, but hastily ordered Jacob to admit him. A friendly 
greeting took place between the miser and Firebras, at which Jacob 
was the more surprised, in that he did not remember having seen 
the latter before ; but he thought, in spite of all his affected cor- 
diality, that his master would have willingly dispensed with his 
visitor's company. 

Warned by what had occurred on the previous night, Mr. Scarve 
ordered Jacob to go below, and took the precaution to see that his 
injunctions were obeyed. Though the porter's curiosity was con- 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 93 



siderably excited by what was going forward, he did not dare to 
listen, for fear of a discovery, and he accordingly whiled the time 
by applying to his secret store of provisions. In about an hour 
and a half, he was summoned by his master, who told him he was 
going out on business, and desired him to attend him to his room, 
whither he proceeded. 

*' I suppose you want your coat, sir?" said Jacob. And opening 
a drawer in the chest, he took an old, sad-coloured garment from a 
faded handkerchief in which it was wrapped, and assisted his master 
to put it on* This done, he brought an old three-cornered hat, 
edged with tarnished lace, and dusting it, gave it to the miser, 
together with a crutch -handled stick. 

Having locked the door of the closet, removed the key, and 
put it in his pocket, Mr. Scarve next went tlirough the same 
operation at the door communicating with the gallery. 

" I shall not return till evening, Jacob," he said. " Take care 
of the house during my absence.^' 

" It must be important business to keep you out so long," re- 
plied Jacob, staring at the information. 

"The business zis important," rejoined the miser; "but I wish 
you would check your tendency to familiarity. It is growing 
upon you, and I am weary of it." 

With this, he descended to the lower room, and, taking some 
papers from Cordwell Firebras, which the latter had been reading, 
put them in his pocket, and they quitted the house together. 



94 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Hilda's interview with abel beechcroft. 

Jacob lost not a moment in communicating his master's de- 
parture to his young mistress, and Hilda, on hearing it, imme- 
diately came down stairs with her aunt. 

" And now, my dear niece," said Mrs. Clinton, " since such a 
favourable opportunity presents itself, I would advise you to apply 
for counsel as to how to act to the person I told you would be- 
friend you. This letter, committed to my care by my poor sister, 
and your mother, was written to be delivered in case of an 
emergency like the present — which she but too surely foresaw 
might arise — and it cannot fail of accomplishing its object." 

" It is addressed to Mr. Abel Beechcroft," said Hilda, glancing 
at the inscription on the letter as she took it from her aunt. 
" Why that must be the uncle of the young man who was here 
the night before last. I cannot take it to him." 

" Why not?" cried Mrs. CHnton. 

'^ Because it would look like — but why need I care what con- 
struction is put upon my visit, since my heart acquits me of any 
improper motive !" said Hilda. " Aunt, I will go — that is, if you 
think it will answer any good purpose." 

" I am sure it will," urged Mrs. Clinton. 

" But if my father should accidentally return during our ab- 
sence?" rejoined Hilda. 

" I do not think it likely he will do so," returned the aunt ; 
" but if he should, I must bear the brunt of his displeasure. Go, 
my love. Something tells me the visit will be productive of great 
advantage to you. Jacob will accompany you." 

" That I will," he replied; " I'll follow you to the world's end, if 
you wish it." 

Hilda yielded at length to her aunt's entreaties, and having 



THE miser's daughter. 95 

put on her walking attire, quitted the liouse with Jacob. Instead 
of going over Westminster Bridge they proceeded to Parliament 
Stairs, where Jabob said he had a friend a waterman, who would 
lend him a boat, in which they could cross the river. Nor did he 
assert more than the truth. On reaching the stairs, the first 
person he encountered was the friendly waterman in question, who, 
on learning his wishes, immediately ran down and got his skiff 
ready. Having placed Hilda within it, Jacob took off his coat, 
and plying the oars with as much skill as the best rower on the 
Thames could have done, speedily landed her at Lambeth, and 
secured the boat, where he inquired the way to Mr. Beechcroft's 
house. 

A walk of a few seconds brought them to it. Hilda's heart 
trembled as she knocked at the door ; but she was reassured by the 
kindly aspect of Mr. Jukes, who answered the summons. She 
stated her errand to the butler, who appeared not a little surprised, 
and, indeed, confounded at the announcement of her name. After 
a short debate with himself, Mr. Jukes said his master was at home, 
and she should see him; and, without more ado, he led the way to 
the library and entered it, followed by the others. 

Abel was seated beside an old-fashioned bookcase, the door of 
which was open, disclosing a collection of goodly tomes, and had 
placed the book-stand supporting the volume he was reading, in 
such a position as to receive the full light of the window. So 
much was he engaged in his studies, that he did not hear their 
approach. In the hasty glance cast by Hilda at the pictures on the 
wall, the most noticeable of which was a copy of Rembrandt's " Good 
Samaritan," and a fine painting on the subject of Timon of Athens, 
she thought she could read somewhat of the character of the owner 
of the house. Little time, however, was allowed her for reflection, 
for Mr. Jukes, advancing towards his master's chair leaned over it, 
and whispered a few words in his ear. 

"What! — who! — who did you say?" exclaimed Abel, half 
closing the book he was reading, and looking sharply and anxiously 
round. " Wlio did you say, Jukes?" 

" Miss Scarve, sir," replied the butler ; " she has brought you a 
letter." 

" Tell her I won't receive it — won't open it !" cried Abel. 
" Why did you not send her away? What brings her here ?" 



96 THE miser's daughter. 

" You had better put that question to her yourself, sir,*" replied 
Mr. Jukes, " for she is in this room." 

" Here !" exclaimed Abel, starting to his feet. " Ah ! I see — ^I 
see. O God ! she is very like her mother." 

; " Galm yourself, I entreat, sir," said Mr. Jukes ; " I would not 
have admitted her," he added, in a low tone, " but that she told 
me" the letter was written by her mother, and left to be delivered 
to you under peculiar circumstances, which have now arisen. I 
couldn't resist a plea like that, — nor could you, sir, I'm sure." 

" A letter written to me by her mother !" cried Abel, shivering, 
as if smitten by an ague. "Leave us. Jukes, and take that man 
with you." 

" Come, friend," said Mr. Jukes* to Jacob, who, with his crab- 
stick under his arm, stood gazing curiously on, "you had better 
adjourn with me to the butler's pantry." 

" Thank'ee, kindly, sir," replied Jacob, in tones a little less 
gruff' than usual, for he was somewhat awe-stricken; '^I would 
rather stay with my young missis." 

'* But don't you see you're in the way, my good man?" rejoined 
Mr. Jukes, impatiently; " they can't talk before us. Come along." 
And despite his resistance, he pushed Jacob out of the room, and 
closed the door after him. v 

" You have a letter for me, young lady, I believe," faltered Abel, 
in a voice hollow and broken by emotion. 

"1 have, sir," she replied, giving it to him. 
: Abel looked at the address, and another sharp convulsion passed 
over his frame. He, however, controlled himself by a powerful 
effort, and broke the seal. The perusal of the letter seemed to 
affect him deeply, for, staggering to his chair, he sank into it, and 
covering his face with his hands, wept aloud. It was some minutes 
before he arose. Hilda, who had watched him with much concern, 
was surprised to see how calm he looked. He had indeed regained 
the mastery he usually held over liis feelings. 

" Pray be seated, young lady," he said, handing her a chair. " I 
would have shunned this interview if it had been in my power, 
but as it has been brought about, I will not shrink from it. How 
can I serve you V* 

Hilda then proceeded to explain the object of her visit. Abel 




(Ujra< Qi-nuXslumkj 



Hilda's \nsit to A"bel Beechcroft. 



LOBDON PARRY A CO LEADBNHALL STKEET. 184' 



THE miser's daughter. 97 

listened to her recital with a quivering lip and flashing eye, and at 
its close got up, and took a quick turn round the room. 

" This is only what might be expected from him — scoundrel !" 
he ejaculated. " Sell his daughter ! — but that is nothing — he 
would sell his soul for gold ! I beg your pardon, young lady/' he 
added, checking himself, as he saw the pain his exclamations occa- 
sioned her, " but if you knew the deep and irremediable injury 
inflicted on me by your father, you would pardon this outbreak of 
passion. He has sacrificed others without scruple, but he shall not 
sacrifice you. You may count on my assistance, my protection, if 
you choose to confide in me." 

"I have my mother's injunction to confide in you, sir," she re- 
plied. 

" Your mother!" exclaimed Abel, in a voice of agony. " Oh, 
Hilda ! what a fearful spell is there in that word ! — what a host of 
feelings does it not summon up ! I see your mother again as I re- 
member her in her youth, — beautiful as you are, more beautiful, 
if possible — certainly more blooming. I hear the music of her 
voice as I listen to yours; I feel again the charm inspired by her 
presence. You shall learn my history one of these days, and you 
will then know why your mother addressed this letter to me — why 
it affects me thus." 

"I can partly guess the cause," returned Hilda, mournfully; 
" but be it what it may, it is plain she felt she had a strong hold 
on your affections, and that she thought she could rely on you 
when she could rely on no one else." 

" If she thought so, she judged rightly," replied Abel. " I con- 
sider her request as a sacred injimction, and will strive to comply 
with it. And now," he added, changing his tone, " I must tell' 
you that your name has been brought before me of late. My 
nephew, Tlandulph Crew, who visited your father the other nighty 
has spoken of you." 

Hilda slightly coloured. 

" He will much regret not being at home this morning," pursued 
Abel, " as he might have had an opportunity of further cultivating 
his acquaintance with you! But he is gone out with my bro- 
ther." 

'*I hope it will not oflfend you to say I am glad of it," replied 
Hilda ; *' I would not willingly have met him." 

H 



98 THE miser's daughtee. 

" Why so ?" asked Abel, who, however, looked somewhat re- 
lieved. 

" Because, sir, I will be frank with you," she replied, " and own 
that my father attributes my increased dislike of my cousin to a 
predilection for your nephew." 

" And may I expect equal frankness in the reply, if I ask whe- 
ther there is any trutli in your father's suppositions ?" rejoined 
Abel. " ♦ 

" You may," she answered. " Your nephew appears a very 
amiable and pleasing young man, but having seen him only for a 
few minutes, I cannot possibly feel an interest in him, beyond such 
as might be inspired by any stranger of equally prepossessing ap- 
pearance and manners. My aversion to my cousin arises from 
various causes. I half suspect him of acting a very base part to- 
wards my father, who resolutely shuts his eyes to the deception." 

" I will not affect to deny that I am pleased with what you say 
of your indifference to my nephew, Hilda," returned Abel, " be- 
cause I have other views in reference to him. As to your cousin, 
PhiHp Frewin, I will make strict inquiries about him, and if your 
suspicions prove correct, I wiU myself unmask him to your father, 
which may perhaps put an end to the matter. He lives in Fen- 
church- street, you say. It so happens that an old friend ofvmine, a 
widow lady, Mrs. Verral, — a friend of your mother's, by-the-by,- — 
resides in that street. She is an excellent woman, but a Httle of a 
busy-body and a gossip, and makes it her business to know her 
neighbours' concerns better than her own. I'll venture to say she 
is acquainted with your cousin's affairs. I haven't seen the old lady 
of late, because, as you may perhaps have heard, I have Httle inter- 
course witli your sex, — my habits, and indeed feelings, unfitting 
me for their society, — but I happen to know from my brother 
Trussell that she is well. You had better go to her yourself. I will 
give you a note of introduction — though, indeed, it is not needed, 
for, as I have told you, she is an old friend of your mother's. In 
addition to gaining all the information you may require respecting 
your cousin, you will make a friend with whom you may take 
refuge, if matters — which we will not anticipate — should unhappily 
render such a step necessary." 

" I will do as you suggest, sir," replied Hilda ; " but suppose I 
should encounter my cousin?" 



I 



THE misee's daughtee. 99 

" Tell liim wliere you are going," replied Abel ; " and depend 
upon it, if lie is not wliat he represents himself, he will be the first 
to take alarm. I will myself institute inquiries about him in an- 
other quarter." 

With this, he proceeded to a table on which writing materials 
were placed, and hastily penned a note, and gave it to Hilda. 

" And now, God bless you, my dear child !" he said, affection- 
ately. *' If called upon by circumstances, you shall never want a 
father or protector in me !" 

He then rang the bell, and Mr. Jukes presently appeared, who 
informed him that Jacob had just sat down to dinner with the other 
servants. 

"I think, sir," he added, in a low tone, "it is the first good 
meal he has had for many a day, and it would be a pity to disturb 
liim, if Miss Scarve is not in a very great hurry." 

Abel appealed to Hilda, and as she raised no objection, he pro- 
posed to her to take a turn in the garden till Jacob had finished 
his meal; and accordingly opened the window, and led her forth. 

By this time, Hilda had become more composed, and being 
quite easy with the old man, for whom indeed she felt a growing 
reo-ard, she entered readilv into conversation with him ; and thus 
more than half an hour flew by, almost without their being aware of 
its flight. At the end of that time, Mr. Jukes made liis appearance, 
and informed them that Jacob was ready. 

Abel attended his fair visitor to the door. 

" if you do not find Mrs. Verral at home," he said, " or if any 
thing should occur to make you wish to see me again, do 
not hesitate to come back. But, in any event, you shall hear from 
lYie — perhaps see me, to-morrow. God bless you, my child !" And 
taking her hand, he pressed it to his lips; and when Hilda with- 
drew it, she found it wet with his tears. 

While this was passing, Jacob shook the hospitable butler 
warmly by the hand, and then strode on before his young mistress, 
towards the stairs where he had left the boat. Having placed her 
within it, and divested himself of his coat, cravat, and hat, as 
before, he inquired where she meant to go, and being told to 
London Bridge, pulled off vigorously in that direction. 



h2 



100 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE POLLY ON THE THAMES — KITTY CONWAY — RANDULPH PLACED IN AN 
AWKWAKD SITUATION BY PHILIP FREWIN. 

The Folly on the Thames, whither Beau Villiers and his party 
were steering their course, was a large floating house of entertain- 
ment moored in the centre of the stream, immediately opposite Old 
Somerset House. It was constructed in the latter part of the reign 
of Charles the Second ; and thither the merry monarch, who was 
excessively fond of aquatic amusements of all kinds, would fre- 
quently repair with his courtiers and frolic dames. Thither, also, 
Queen Mary, the consort of William the Third, went on the occa- 
sion of a grand musical entertainment ; and the place continued in 
vogue for many years, until at length, degenerating in its. charac- 
ter, it became the haunt of a very disreputable part of the commu- 
nity. The Folly resembled a large one-storied house, very long in 
proportion to its width, built upon an immense barge. There was 
a platform at the top, defended by a strong wooden balustrade, and 
flanked at each corner, by a little turret with a pointed top, sur- 
mounted by a small streamer. These turrets constituted small 
drinking and smoking rooms, and were fitted up with seats and 
tables. In the centre of the structure was a sort of open belvidere, 
covering the main staircase leading to the roof. On this a large 
flag was planted. The Folly was approached from the water by 
steps on three sides. It was lighted by a range of large and hand- 
some windows, and entered by two doors, one at the end, and the 
other at the side. Within, it contained a long music-hall, with a 
frescoed ceiHng, gilded and painted walls, an orchestra, and the 
necessary complement of benches, chairs, and small tables. There 
was, moreover, a bar, where all sorts of hquors, materials for 
smoking, and other tavern luxuries were dispensed. The rest of the 



THE miser's daughter. 101 

structure was divided into a number of small apartments for private 
parties, and, in short, boasted every sort of accommodation afforded 
by a similar place of entertainment on shore. In summer it was 
delightful — the view of the Thames from its summit being enchant- 
ing. The coolness and freshness, combined with the enlivening 
influences of beauty, wine, and music, made it, on its first establish- 
ment, a charming place of recreation; and it cannot be wondered 
that the merry monarch, and his merrier court, found it so much to 
their taste. 

As the party approached the aquatic hotel, they perceived a 
number of persons, of both sexes, seated on the roof, and in the 
little turret parlours, smoking, drinking, or otherwise amusing 
themselves; while lively strains of music proceeded from within. 
Several small craft were landing their passengers, and from one, a 
tilt boat, there issued a very pretty young woman, though of rather 
bold appearance, who, as she took the hand of a young man in her 
ascent of the steps, displayed a remarkably neat foot and ankle. On 
reaching the deck, she turned for a moment to survey the scene, 
and her eye alighting on Randulph, his good looks appeared to 
livet her regards. 

This fascinating creature seemed to be about twenty ; had very 
regular features, auburn hair, a brilliant complexion — whether 
wholly unindebted to art might be questioned — but there could be 
no question as to the natural brilliancy of her hazel eyes; and wore 
a pink silk hooped gown, made very low in front, so as to display 
her beautifully formed and radiantly white neck and shoulders. 
Her sleeves were very short, probably so contrived with the view 
of exhibiting her rounded arms, and edged with lace. A white 
silk apron embroidered with silver, a pretty fly-cap, and a necklace 
of precious stones, from which depended a diamond cross, com- 
pleted her attire. The young man by whom she was attended, 
had a slight, thin figure, and sharp, disagreeable features, with 
rather an apish expression. He was dressed with much smartness, 
but had by no means the air of a gentleman, and seemed to be re- 
garded with indifference, almost amounting to contempt, by his 
female companion. 

" Who is that young lady?" asked Randulph of Sir Singleton, 
who happened to sit next him. 

" Let me see !" exclaimed the old beau, placing his glass to his 



102 THE miser's daughter. 

eye. " Ah ! gadzooks ! 'tis the deHcious creature I mentioned to 
you, — the little Haymarket actress, Kitty Conway !" 

*' Kitty Conway! where is she?" cried Trussell, who heard the 
remark, but whose back was towards the object of their admiration. 

Sir Singleton pointed her out, and upon the instant every eye 
was directed towards her. Whether unable to stand so fierce a 
fire, or whether, as is more probable, dragged away by her compa- 
nion, who did not appear to relish the notice she attracted, it is 
needless to inquire, but pretty Kitty suddenly vanished from their 
sight. 

" Well, isn't she dehcious?" cried Trussell to Randulph. " Egad ! 
you have made a conquest of pretty Eatty, my boy. I saw the 
parting glance she gave you over her shoulder as she whisked 
through the door. Don't lose sight of her. You can soon put the 
city beau, by whom she is attended, hors de comhatr 

Further remarks were interrupted by the arrival of the boat at 
the steps. A strange, black- muzzled fellow, in a Guernsey shirt, 
with bare arms and bare legs, and who was a regular attendant at 
the FoUy, helped them to disembark; and his request to "be re- 
membered" by the beau being met with a very munificent rejoinder, 
he well-nigh lost his balance in his glee, and got a tumble into the 
water. 

The party then entered the music-hall, and just as they passed 
through the door, Randulph chancing to look behind him, per- 
ceived that the stranger had Hkewise landed, and was mounting 
the steps. The novel scene, however, before him, so completely 
engrossed his attention, that he could think of little else. Up- 
wards of a hundred persons of both sexes thronged the room; 
many of the ladies were masked, and a good deal of freedom marked 
their conduct. They talked and laughed loudly and recklessly. 
At one end of the hall, the benches were taken aside to allow 
Kitty Conway and her companion, with some other couples, to 
perform the cushion dance. At the upper end of the room stood 
the musicians. The party made their way towards the dancers, 
and the beau and Sir Singleton praised Kitty's beauty in tones so 
loud, and in terms of admiration so strong, as would have occasioned 
confusion to any young lady troubled with a more oppressive sense 
of bashfulness than she Avas. Her partner did not know whether 
to look pleased or annoyed. He was evidently overpowered by 



THE miser's daughter. 103 

the presence of Beau Villiers, whom he regarded with a species of 
awe ; and as these applauses of Kitty gave a fancied consequence 
to himself, he was weak enough to be gratified by them. Towards 
the close of the figure, a particular step, executed by the pretty 
actress, elicited more than usual rapture from Sir Singleton, and he 
called to Randulph — " Look at her, Mr. Randulph Crew. Is it 
not delicious?" 

At the sound of this name, Kitty's partner started, and stared so 
hard at Randulph, that he could scarcely finish the dance. 

" Upon my word, Philip Frewin, you are a very stupid partner," 
said the actress to him. " If you do not exert yourself more, I shall 
ask that handsome young fellow, who is ogling me there, to take 
my hand in the next set." 

"I am quite fatigued, Kitty," replied PhiHp, confusedly; "let 
us have some refreshment — a little 'rack punch, or a glass of cham- 
pagne." 

Kitty Conway assented, and they moved off to one of the side 
tables, where a waiter speedily placed glasses before them, and 
opened a bottle of champagne. It must be confessed — unwilling 
as we are to admit it — that Randulph was not altogether proof 
against the undisguised admiration of the pretty actress, and that 
he could not help returning the tender glances she shot towards 
him. 

Meanwhile, the performances went forward ; an Irish jig followed, 
in which Randulph and Sir Singleton joined; this was succeeded 
by some comic songs; and Mr. Villiers, who did not altogether 
reHsh the entertainment, walked forth, and was soon after followed 
by the others. As they all stood leaning over the sides of the bark, 
laughing at what had occurred, and admiring the gaiety of the 
scene, a skiff, impelled by a vigorous rower, as was evident by the 
progress it made, and containing a young female, wrapped in a 
black silk scarf, and with raven traces, scarcely covered by a small 
bonnet, floating in the breeze, rapidly neared them. Various spe- 
culations were put forth as to whether this young female would 
prove as pretty on a nearer inspection as she looked at a distance; 
but in these Randulph took little part. To speak truth, his thoughts 
were running upon the fair syren within, and happening to cast 
his eyes towards the platform above, he perceived, leaning over the 
balustrade, and gazing at him, the stranger ! 



104 THE miser's daughter. 

At tliis juncture, Philip Frewin came forth to see whether his 
boat was in readiness, and admonished the watermen, one of whom 
was philandering with a buxom damsel who was leaning over the 
side of the deck, that he should start immediately. He had scarcely, 
however, issued the order than his eye fell upon the skiff containing 
the young female before mentioned, and which was now close at hand. 
He started as if an apparition had met his gaze, ducked down, and 
would have made his escape into the music-hall, if Kitty Conway 
had not placed herself in his way. Retreat was now impossible, 
and Philip's distress was heightened by the fair actress, who ex- 
claimed, somewhat pettishly, *' Why do you leave me here, sir? 
Why don't you hand me to the boat?" 

Philip was almost at his wits' end. The skiff containing Hilda 
and Jacob, both of whom he had too clearly recognised, though he 
could not account for their appearance, unless it were a trick of 
the fiend to convict him, was so near, that if he complied with 
Kitty's request, discovery would be inevitable. A plan suddenly 
occurred to him, by which he hoped to free himself from risk, and 
place Randulph, whom he had reason to regard as a rival, in an 
awkward dilemma. 

Without apprising Kitty of his intention, he drew her forward, 
and bending down as low as he could, to elude observation," said to 
Randulph — " Will you have the kindness, sir, to hand this lady 
into her boat? You will do me an infinite favour; I have dropped 
a pocket-book in the music-hall, and must go back to search for 
it." 

Kandulph was a good deal surprised by the proposal, but he unhesi- 
tatingly consented; and, taking Kitty's hand, which she very gra- 
ciously accorded, rewarding his attention by a slight squeeze, led her 
down the steps. All this occurred to the infinite amusement of Trus- 
sell, who stood a little back near the door, ogling a rather pretty dam- 
sel, and to the no slight chagrin of Sir Singleton, who, guessing the 
intention of Philip Frewin, had pushed forward to offer his services, 
but found himself supplanted. But these were not the only wit- 
nesses of the scene. By this time, the skiff, containing Hilda, had 
come up, and with a pang of jealous feeling, neither to be ac- 
counted for nor controlled, she beheld Randulph handing the 
pretty actress, whose character she could scarcely mistake, down 
the steps. Jacob saw what was passing as well as herself, but. 



THE miser's daughter. 105 

having no jealousy to divert liis attention from other matters, he 
detected PhiHp Frewin even in his disguise, and, resting on his 
oars, exclaimed, " Look ! miss, look ! — there is your cousin Philip. 
Is that the dress he wore yesterday? I told master he wasn't what 
he seemed. Look at him, I say I" 

But Hilda was too much agitated to heed these exclamations. 
She could see nothing but Randulph and the pretty actress. Nor 
was she without embarrassment on her own account ; for Mr. 
Cripps, having recognised her, pointed her out to his master, and 
the beau, being much struck with her beauty, favoured her with a 
very insolent stare. But if Randulph had been guilty of disloyalty 
towards the object of his affections, his punishment was not long 
delayed; for, as he handed Kitty into the boat, which was steadied 
by the black-muzzled Jack, before mentioned, his gaze encountered 
that of Hilda, and he was instantly filled with confusion. He tried 
to disengage himself from the actress, who, however, sportively 
detained him, and, unable to retreat, he cut a most ridiculous figure. 
Indeed, he was not a little relieved, though he felt how much he 
should sink in her esteem, when he saw Hilda bend forward, and 
order Jacob, who continued resting on his oars, to pass on. He 
continued gazing after the skiff till it was out of sight; but Hilda 
did not look back. 

Meanwhile, as Philip Frewin did not make his appearance, Kitty 
Conway became very impatient, and turning a deaf ear to all the 
high-flown compliments showered upon her by Sir Singleton 
Spinke, entreated Randulph to go and see what her friend was 
doing. The young man could not very well refuse compliance with 
the request, and he accordingly entered the music-hall, and returned 
in a few minutes with Philip, who, finding the coast clear, recovered 
his composure, and tendering his thanks, in a very abject manner, 
to Randulph, got into the boat with Kitty, and ordered the men to 
row to Savoy Stairs. Randulph was too angry with himself, and 
now too indifferent to the fascinations of the pretty actress to return 
the tender glance with which she favoured him on her depar- 
ture. 

The incident, however, afforded abundant merriment to his com- 
panions, Avho were greatly diverted by his looks, which they attri- 
buted to jealousy, and they endeavoured to remove the feeling by 
assuring him that Kitty had exhibited a decided preference for him. 



106 THE miser's daughter. 

His uneasiness was not relieved by the admiration expressed of the 
miser's daughter by Beau Villiers; nor was Trussell altogether 
pleased to find the beau so much captivated. That Hilda should 
have passed at the precise juncture seemed to surprise every 
body. 



THE miser's daughter. 107 



CHAPTER XIV. 

EANDULPH's INTEEVIEW "WITH COE»"WELIi EIREBEAS IN THE CLOISTERS OF 
■WESTMINSTER ABBEY. 

Shortly after this, the party entered their boat, and returned 
to Whitehall Stairs. Randulph had been so much engrossed by 
his own feelings, that he forgot the stranger, and only called him 
to mind a few minutes after he had landed, and when it was too 
late to look for him. He did not, however, forget his appointment 
with the writer of the mysterious letter, and, regardless of the con- 
struction that might be put upon it, told his imcle he had a parti- 
cular engagement, which he must keep, at six o'clock. Trussell 
smiled significantly at the announcement, but made no remark, and 
proposed that they should all dine at one of the French ordinaries 
in Suffolk Street. Beau Villiers pleaded an engagement, but 
Sir Singleton acquiesced, and the trio repaired to the ordinary, 
where an excellent dinner was set before them. 

Mindful of his appointment, Randulph, in spite of the jokes of 
his companions, who strove to detain him, got up from table at five 
o'clock, and took his way past Charing-cross and Whitehall, towards 
the Abbey. He could not resist the impulse that prompted him to 
pass through the Little Sanctuary, and felt half disposed to call at 
the miser's, and offer some explanation of his conduct to Hilda. 
Though the absurdity of the notion caused him to abandon it almost 
as soon as formed, he lingered before the house for a few minutes 
in the hope of discerning some of its inmates, but was disappointed. 

He then entered Peter Pokerich's shop, to inquire the way -to 
the Abbey cloisters. 

It chanced that the little barber was about to take an evening 
stroll with the fair Thomasine, who was waiting for him, and he 
offered to show Randulph the way ; but this the young man, who 



108 THE miser's daughtee. 

had his own reasons for not desiring the attendance of the inquisitive 
barber, declined, though in such a way as to excite Peter's curiosity, 
who secretly determined to follow him. As soon as Randulph was 
gone, he mentioned his design to the fair Thomasine, who was 
nothing loath to accompany him, and they set out together, taking 
special care to keep out of Randulph's view. The young man 
shaped his course towards the Abbey, and, skirting its western ex- 
tremity, passed under the archway leading to the play-ground of 
Westminster school. Here he paused, and, addressing a porter, 
■was directed towards another archway, through which he passed, 
and entered the cloisters. On seeing this, Peter, still accompanied 
by his fair companion, ran forward, and finding that Randulph was 
walking in the south ambulatory, they struck into the west, being 
still able to watch him through the open columns. 

Randulph, meanwhile, unconscious that he was the object of 
such scrutiny, slowly traversed the ambulatory, and, charmed with 
the exquisite groined arches of its roof, hoary with age, and the 
view afforded through the shafted windows looking into the quad- 
rangle, of the reverend buttresses and of the Abbey, almost forgot 
the object that brought him thither. He was arrested at the eastern 
extremity by the ancient inscriptions and brasses, pointing out the 
resting-places of the old abbots Laurentius, Gislesbertus, and YitaHs, 
when a heavy footstep sounded on his ear, and, looking up, he 
beheld the stranger. Before he could recover his surprise at this 
unexpected apparition, the new comer advanced towards him, and 
■with a slight inclination of the head, and a singularly significant 
smile, said, " So you have kept your appointment with me, Mr. 
Randulph Crew." 

"Are you, then, Mr. Cord well Firebras?" exclaimed Randulph, 
in surprise. 

*' I am so called," rephed the other. 

" 1 was little aware, sir, when I saw. you this morning at the 
barber's, how soon and how strangely we should be brought 
together again," rejoined Randulph: "but this in some measure 
accounts for the manner in which you have haunted me throughout 
the day. Perhaps, you will now explain your motive for doing 
so, as well as for summoning me hither." 

" All in good time, young gentleman," replied Cord well Fire- 
bras, gravely. " Before I advert to my own concerns let me say a 



# 




y^^y- 



^ njjj^S (Laiuw, 



llandulphs iiitervie'w with CoTdwcH Fi'-oliras in ihp rimsier.'^ 
of WesiTninster Abl)ey. 



I.ONTXIH : PARHX *C« IJUUIKHHJOJ. STVRUT lB*r. 



THE miser's daughter. 109 

word on yours. Answer mc truly — have you not conceived an 
affection for Hilda Scarvc? Nay, you need not answer. Your 
hesitation convinces me you have. Circumstances led you into 
acting very injudiciously this morning at the Folly, and I fear your 
conduct may have produced an unfavourable impression on Hilda's 
mind, — for I watched her closely. But heed not this. I will set 
all to rights. I have much influence with her father. He designs 
her for another — the apish gallant of the pretty actress who fasci- 
nated you this morning. But you shall have her, nevertheless, — on 
one condition." 

" Despite the singularity of your address, there is an earnestness 
in your manner that inspires me with confidence in you, sir, " re- 
joined Randulph ; " the rather, that you told mc this morning you 
were an old friend of my father's. I will freely confess to you that 
I am captivated by the miser's daughter, and that I would hazard 
much to obtain her. Now, on what condition do you propose to 
make her mine?" 

" You shall learn presently," replied Firebras, evasively. " Let 
us take a turn along the cloisters," he added, moving slowly for- 
ward. 

They marched on together in silence, until they reached the 
eastern angle of the ambulatory, when Firebras, suddenly halting, 
laid his heavy hand upon Randulph's arm, and fixed a searching 
look upon him. 

" Young man," he said, " I will tell you what you must do to 
gain the miser's daughter." 

"What? what?" demanded Randulph. 

"You must join the Jacobite party," replied Firebras; "to 
which her father belongs — to which your father belonged — and to 
which your mother also belongs." 

. Surprise kept Kandulph silent. But neither he nor his com- 
panion were aware that this treasonable proposition had been over- 
heard by Peter Pokerich and the fair Thomasinc, who, having 
stolen upon them unperceived, were ensconced behind the shafts 
of the adjoining arches. 



110 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XV. 

MRS. Clinton's alarm — the biiser's unexpected return — the disappeaeance 

OP THE MORTGAGE MONET — ^ErFRONTERT OF PHILIP FREWIN AND DIGGS. 

Day wore on, and Mrs. Clinton, wondering at lier niece's pro- 
longed stay, became extremely apprehensive lest Mr. Scarve should 
return before her, and discover her absence. She had just despatched 
her scanty dinner, having waited more than an hour for Hilda, 
removed the things, that they might not excite the miser's suspicion 
in case of his sudden return, and sat down to her needlework, on 
which she was diligently, though almost mechanically employed, 
when she was startled by a sound like the opening of a window, 
followed by a stealthy tread, in one of the rooms upstairs. The 
idea of robbers instantly occurred to her, for she recollected tlie large 
amount of gold in the house, as well as the pubHc manner in which 
it had been paid, and she felt how likely it was an attempt might 
be made to carry it off, especially if it had been ascertained that 
she was alone in the house. She had heard of murders committed 
in lone habitations in broad day, and, in most cases, upon de- 
fenceless females like herself ; and filled with indescribable terror, 
she rushed forth, with the intention of giving the alarm. Before 
she gained the passage, a knock was heard at the street door, 
and hurrying to it, she hastily, and with trembling hands, un- 
fastened it, and beheld the miser. If she was startled by his ap- 
pearance, he was not less so by hers ; and, fixing a terrible look 
upon her, he demanded why Jacob had not let him in ? Receiving 
no answer, he pushed her roughly into the passage, and clapping 
the door hastily to, proceeded to the parlour. 

Poor Mrs. Clinton scarcely knew what to do, but at last she 
followed him, and found him pacing to and fro within the room 
like one distracted. " Where is Jacob ?" he cried, running to- 



I 

H THE miser's DAUGHTER. Ill 

^Bwards her, and seizing her arm. " Is the rascal gone out without 
^^eave? Why don't you speak, woman ? Have you dared to 

send him out? — or has Hilda?" 
jfiL " He will be back directly," replied Mrs, Clinton, almost fright- 
I^B ened out of her senses. " I expected him long before this." 
Hpi " Then he is gone out," cried the miser, as if he was unwilling 
to credit what he heard ; "and Hilda, I suppose, is gone with 
him ?" 

Mrs. Clinton returned a terrified affirmative. 

" And where, in the devil's name, are they gone to?" roared 
the miser. 

" I am not at liberty to say," replied Mrs. Clinton. 

" I will have an answer !" cried the miser, glaring at her as if 
he would annihilate her. " Where is she gone ?" 

" You will extort nothing from me by this violence," returned 
Mrs. Clinton, firmly. 

" Then you shall quit my house to-night !" he rejoined, fiercely, 
"\ will not have my authority set at nought. Seek another 
home, madam, and another protector." 

The poor lady hung her head, but made no reply. 

*' Mrs. Clinton," he continued, with forced calmness, " I put 
it to yourself — and, unless I am altogether mistaken in you, you 
will not be insensible to the appeal — I put it to you, I say, 
whether, when I demand, as a father, to know what has become of 
my daughter, you can reconcile it to your conscience not to 
tell me ?" 

" I will tell you thus much, sir," she replied, after a pause— 
" Hilda has been induced to take this step solely in consequence 
of your determination to unite her to her cousin. She is gone 
to consult a friend." 

" What friend ?" cried the miser, springing towards her. " I 
insist upon knowing." 

" She is gone to see Mr. Abel Beechcroft," replied Mrs. Clinton. 

If a heavy blow had been dealt him, the unhappy man could 
not have been more staggered than by this information. He 
turned away in confusion, muttering — "Abel Beechcroft ! Why 
should she go to him?" 

" Because her poor mother left a letter to be delivered to him 
if circumstances should require it," rejoined Mrs. Clinton. 



112 THE miser's DAUGHTER. 

" And you gave lier that letter?" cried the miser. 

" I did," she replied. 

" And you sent lier to her father's bitterest enemy for ad- 
vice?" he continued. " It is well — it is well!" and he strode to 
the side door, as if with the intention of going up to his bed-room. 

Up to this moment, Mrs. Clinton had forgotten the circumstance 
that had so recently alarmed her, but she now recalled it, and 
ran after him, crying, " Sir ! sir !" 

*' What does the woman want ?" demanded the miser, turning 
fiercely upon her. 

The answer stuck in her throat. Dreading to provoke a fresh 
explosion of rage, she muttered some unintelligible excuse, and 
retired. 

The miser, meanwhile, having obtained access to his chamber, 
threw his hat upon the bed, passed on, and unlocked the door of 
the closet. Marching up to the large chest in which he had depo- 
sited the bags of gold on the previous night, he sat down upon it, 
and was for some time lost in deep and painful reflection. He then 
rose, and taking a bunch of keys from his pocket, applied one of 
them to the lock of the chest. It would not turn; and imagining 
that he must have made some mistake, he drew it out and tried 
another. This, however did not fit at all; and returning the first, 
he perceived, on examination, that it was the right one. Again 
applying it, and proceeding more carefully, he found, to his surprise 
and dismay, that the chest was not locked. Well knowing he had 
not left it in this state, he felt convinced that something must be 
wrong, and it was long before he could prevail upon himself to 
raise the lid. When he did so, he started back with a cry of 
anguish and despair. 

The chest was empty ! 

For some minutes he remained as if transfixed, with his hands 
stretched out, his mouth wide open, his eyes almost starting from 
their sockets, and fixed upon the void where his treasure should 
have been. 

At length he shrieked in accents of despair, " I have been robbed 
— robbed of my gold ! — robbed— robbed ! It is a wicked thing — 
a cruel thing to rob me ! Others do not love gold as I love it. I 
love it better than wife, child, mistress — ^better than Hfe itself! 
Would that they had killed me, rather than take my gold ! Oh ! 



k 


:- -^-1 




^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^M; .. 


jdH^I^Wh^ gHP*f^^jV-^^^^^^^^^^H|^ 



'^vurti^y^ Cnuk'ikivivtC_, 



The Miser discovering' the loss of the mortgage- moiic^/'. 



%- 



.r.ALiJ-Jlii."..,i. a'niEET.I847. 



THE miser's daughter. 113 

those fair shining pieces — so broad, so bright, so beautiful ! — what 
has become of them?" 

After a pause, during which he experienced the acutest mental 
anguish, he looked around to see how the robbery could have been 
effected. A moment's examination showed him that the iron bars 
in front of the little window opposite the chest had been removed. 

" The villains must have found entrance here !" he cried, rushing 
towards the window. And clambering up an old oaken bureau 
that stood near it, he pushed it wide open, and stretching his long, 
scraggy neck through it, gazed into the little garden beneath. 

Unable to discover any thing, he drew back, and casting his 
eyes over the bureau, perceived that the dust with which it was 
covered had been sliglitly brushed away ; but whether by himself or 
the depredators it was now, of course, impossible to determine. A 
bottle standing on one corner of the bureau had not been removed. 
It was clear that the plunderers had gone direct to the chest, of 
which they must have possessed a key, for the lock, though strained, 
had not been forced. Maddened by these reflections, and unable 
to account for the occurrence, he again vented his fury in words. 

*' I have it !" he shrieked, " it is that accursed Welsh baronet 
who has robbed me. He paid me the money in this pubHc way 
only to delude me. I'll charge him with the robbery — I'll prove 
it against him — I'll hang him ! Oh ! it would delight me to hang 
him ! I would give a thousand pounds to see it done ! A thousand 
pounds ! What is that to the fourteen thousand I have lost ? I 
shall go mad, and it were happy for me to do so. Philip Frewin 
will refuse to marry my daughter. Her portion is gone — ^gone ! 
Why was I tempted forth with Firebras ? I ought to have taken 
my seat on that chest — to have eaten my meals upon it — to have 
slept upon it ! Night nor day should I have quitted it ! Fool 
that I have been ! I have been rightly served — rightly served I 
And yet it is hard upon me, an old man, to lose all I held dear — 
very hard !" And falling upon his knees, with his hands clasped 
together, beside the vacant chest, he wept aloud. 

This paroxysm of rage and grief having subsided, he again rose 

and descended to the parlour, where he found Mrs. Clinton 

•anxiously waiting his re-appearance. She instantly divined what 

had happened, and retreated before him as he advanced, almost 

' fearing from^ his looks that he would do her a violence. Shaking 



114 THE miser's DAUGHTER. 

his clenclied hand, and foaming at the mouth, he attempted to 
discharge a volley of imprecations against her ; but rage took away 
the power of speech, and he stood gesticulating and shaking before 
her, — a frightful and pitiable spectacle. 

" For Heaven's sake, sir, compose yourself," she cried, " or you 

will have a fit of some dangerous illness. You terrify me to death." 

*'I am glad of it,"" he shrieked. "I have been robbed — the 

mortgage money is gone — the fourteen thousand pounds. D'ye 

hear, woman? I've been robbed, I say — robbed !" 

"I feared as much,"" replied Mrs. CHnton; "but the robbery 
cannot have been long effected, for just before you knocked at the 
door, I heard a window creak, as I thought, in your room." 

*' You did !" screamed the miser. " And why did you not tell 
me this before ? I might have caught them — might have got back 
the spoil." 

"If you hadn't frightened me so much about Hilda, I should 
have told you," rephed Mrs. Clinton, in a deprecatory tone; " but 
your violence put it out of my head." 

" Hell and fiends !" ejaculated the miser; " what is Hilda — what 
are fifty daughters compared with my gold ? If you had enabled 
me to recover it, I would have forgiven you all the rest. Don't 
stand trembling there, fool ! but come with me, and let lis see 
whether we can discover any traces of the robbers !" 

So sajring, he hurried towards a small back door in the passage, 
the bolts of which were so rusty that he had considerable difiiculty 
in removing them; and this effected, he passed into the garden. 

A most miserable and neglected place it was, and almost wholly 
over-grown with long rank grass, such as is to be seen in some city 
churchyards. But it had once been prettily laid out, as was proved 
by the fines of box bordering the flower-beds, and the trellised 
harbour and green-house. The appearance of the latter made the 
desolation of the place complete. The glass was removed from the 
frames, one of the walls had been pulled down, and the bricks and 
plaster were lying scattered about, together with a heap of broken 
flower-pots, and a number of worn-out and battered gardening 
implements ; the arbour was covered with the net-fike folds of a 
dead creeper, and the trellis-work was decayed and falfing to pieces; 
the Kttle window, to which access had been gained by the robbers, 
■was on the upper story, and about sixteen feet from the ground. 



THE miser's daughter. 1 15 

The miser- gazed anxiously and inquiringly at it. All the lower 
•windows, including that of" the parlour, which he usually occupied, 
were closely barred, and had evidently not been disturbed. Those 
in the attics were boarded up; while of the remainder in the first 
floor, only the small one in question was open. 

On examining the ground beneath it he found foot-prints upon- 
the soil and on the crushed grass, and, as far as he could ascertain, 
two or three persons must have assisted at the robbery. He traced 
the foot-prints across the garden to a wall about six feet high, at the 
back of which was a narrow passage, communicating between the 
adjoining house and the area in the front of Westminster Abbey ; and 
here, from certain indications in the soil, he had no doubt that the 
depredators had got over. His vociferations while conducting the 
search brought some of the inmates of the next house into the passage, 
and they told him they had seen and heard nothing, but begged him to 
come round and satisfy himself. This he instantly did, and found their 
representations perfectly correct. The only proof of the robbers 
having made their approach by the passage, rested in the fact of the 
door being left open. His investigations ended, the miser, who made 
no remark while conducting them, went back to his own house. 

To his surprise, he found that his daughter and Jacob had re- 
turned. The latter looked greatly disconcerted, and continued twirl- 
ing his hat between his fingers, but Hilda advanced towards him. 

"I am greatly distressed to hear of your loss, father," she said. 

" And to whom am I to attribute it?" he rejoined, bitterly. *' If 
you had remained at home, and Jacob had been on the watch, it 
would not have happened." 

" Perhaps not," she rejoined; " but I am not wholly to blame. It 
was your unkindness that compelled me to take this step." 

" Well, and what does good Abel Beechcroft — kind Abel 
Beechcroft say ?" cried the miser, tauntingly. ' ' What does he advise ? 
— will he receive you ? — will he adopt you? — will he give you to 
his nephew Randulph? He is welcome to do so if he pleases." 

"Do not let us speak on this subject now, father," rejoined 
Hilda ; " you have too much upon your mind without it. I pray 
you to believe that I have been guilty of no wilful disobedience 
towards you." 

" Pshaw !" cried the miser, contemptuously ; " I will not have 
my patience abused by such idle assertions. But, as you say, we 

I 2 



116 THE miser's DAUGHTER. 

will discuss the matter at another time. Answer me only one 
question — ^have you seen Randulph Crew?" 

" I have," replied Hilda, blushing deeply. 

*' At his uncle's ?" demanded the miser. 

"No," she rejoined; "but in a situation, and under circumstances 
that, if I had entertained the slightest regard for him, would have 
effectually obliterated it." 

" We saw your nephew at the same time, sir," interposed Jacob, 
who had now regained his self-possession. 

" Where did you see him ?" asked the miser, 

" At the Folly on the Thames," replied Jacob. " He was not 
in the miserable dress he wore on his visit to you, but in a fine 
suit and handsome peruke. I told you he was playin"* you false; 
and, if I'm not deceived, he was on good terms with the gay lady 
to whom Mr. Randulph Crew was payin' attention, and of whom 
Miss Hilda is so jealous !" 

" Jacob !" she exclaimed, again colouring. 

"Nay, no offence, miss," he returned; "but you know it's the 
truth." 

"What idle story is this?" exclaimed the miser, incredulously. 

Jacob''s reply was cut short by a knock at the door. 

*' Are you at home, sir ?" he asked. "^ 

"Yes — yes!" replied the miser; "in my present frame of mind 
I care not whom I see."" 

Jacob then departed, and in a few seconds returned, with a 
countenance fraught with vexation and surprise, ushering in Diggs 
and Philip Frewin. The latter was dressed in the same miserable 
suit, the same old wig, and the same old shoes with high quarters, 
that he had worn on the preceding day. The visitors appeared 
struck with the embarrassed air of the miser and his family, and 
Diggs inquired the cause of it. 

" Before I explain what has happened to myself, Mr. Diggs," 
said Scarve, "I think it right to state that my servant, Jacob Post, 
declares he saw my nephew on board the Folly on the Thames this 
morning, and very differently dressed from what he is at present." 

" I saw him, not two hours ago," replied Jacob. 

" Two hours ago must have been half-past two," rejoined Diggs, 
taking out his watch, "and at that time he was with me. You 
must, therefore, be mistaken, my good friend." 



THE miser's daughter. 117 

" I am quite at a loss to conceive what Jacob can mean," said 
Philip, " but I certainly was with Mr. Diggs at the time speci- 
£ed, as he has just stated." 

"You know well enough what I mean, Mr. Phihp," rejoined 
Jacob, gruffly — " you know you're deceivin' your uncle." 

Mr. Diggs smiled at the miser, and shrugged his shoulders. 

*' They're in league together, sir," said Jacob, " if you don't be- 
lieve me, ask Miss Hilda if she didn't see him." 

" I certainly thought I saw Philip," said Hilda, " but I confess 
I was too much confused at the time to observe accurately." 

*' May I ask how my fair cousin chanced to be in a situation to 
make such observations?" inquired Philip. 

" Ay, you may well ask that?" added the miser. 

" It can matter little why I was there," replied Hilda ; " nor 
do I conceive myself called upon to answer the question.^' 

"I can give you no explanation, Philip," said Scarve, "for I 
have received none myself. My daughter has chosen to go out 
without leave during my absence, and Jacob has accompanied her. 
I profess myself wholly in the dark as to where she has been." 

" That is not literally true, father," replied Hilda, " for I have 
already admitted that I have been to Mr. Abel Beechcroft, and 1 
may now add," she continued, looking at Philip, " that I have 
called upon Mrs. Verral, in Fenchurch-street." . 

" Mrs. Verral !" exclaimed Philip, starting. 

" Ay, you may well look surprised and dismayed, sir," pursued 
Hilda; "you anticipate what is to follow. She has made your 
real character and circumstances known to me. Father, your 
nephew is not more false in outward appearance than in reality. 
He is a ruined man, seeking an alliance with me only to repair his 
broken fortunes." 

" It is necessary for me now to interpose. Miss Scarve," said 
Diggs. " No one can Ipe better acquainted with your cousin's 
affairs than I am; and so far from being a ruined man, or in the 
slightest degree embarrassed, he is at this moment worth half a 
million of money." 

"Do you hear that?" cried the miser, triumphantly. 

" I shall not speak of myself," said Philip. 

" No, you had better not," interrupted Jacob. 



lis THE miser's daughter. 

*' Peace, sirrah !"" cried the miser; *' there is no need of asser- 
tions, nephew. I am quite satisfied. But what brings you here?^' 

" We come to conchide the marriage settlement, sir," rejoined 
Diggs. " My client is anxious to expedite the match."" 

" I regret to tell you a very unfortunate accident has just oc:- 
curred, which will prevent my giving the sum I intended," said 
-the miser. 

" How so, sir?" cried the attorney, with a disappointed look. 

" That's right, sir,"" said Jacob, drawing near his master; and 
twitching his coat tail, he whispered in his ear, " Touch 'em up 
on that." 

" Be quiet, sirrah !" cried the miser, aloud. " To put the matter 
at rest," he added to the attorney, " I must inform you, that during 
my absence I have been plundered of the whole of the large sum 
paid me yesterday." 

" What !" exclaimed Phihp, turning very pale, " the fourteen 
thousand pounds?" 

Mr. Scarve replied in the affirmative. 

" God bless me ! my dear sir, you don't say so?"" cried Diggs. 

*' Yes I do," rejoined the miser; " every jot of it is gone." 

" What an unheard-of robbery !" exclaimed the attorney — " but 
it must be inquired into. When did it happen — and how? "^Pray 
give me all the particulars. I must set the officers to work imme- 
diately." 

*' No," repHed the miser, mournfully — " it is gone, and employ- 
ing thief-takers and constables won't bring it back again, but, on 
the contrary, will involve further loss of money, as well as of time 
and patience. I meant to give it to my daughter on her marriage. 
But as,I have lost it, she must go without a portion." 

*' Without a portion, Mr. Scarve !" exclaimed Diggs. " The 
loss of fourteen thousand pounds is heavy, it is true, but it falls 
more lightly upon you than it would on i^ost men. You have still 
wealth sufficient to make the settlement you proposed upon your 
daughter without feeHng it." 

" Pardon me, Mr. Diggs," returned the miser, " I proposed to 
give my daughter a particular sum of money, which I had in con- 
templation at the time of making the offer. Of this I have been 
feloniously deprived, and it is no longer in my power to fulfil my 
agreement." 



THE miser's DAUGHTEK. 119 

" Well, my dear uncle," said Philip, " sooner than 



" I know what your generosity prompts you to say, Mr. Frewin," 
interrupted Diggs; "but I have a duty to you as well as to my 
worthy chent and friend, Mr. Scarve, and I must say, that if he 
departs from his word, on the present plea, I cannot advise you to 
proceed with the match." 

"I have not the money to give, Philip," said the miser, 
piteously. 

" Nay, uncle, if you put it on that footing, I myself must re- 
tract," rejoined Philip. " I am not ignorant of your wealth." 

" Nobody doubts it," remarked Jacob, "or you wouldn't be so 
xirgent for the match. Stick to your determination, sir," he added 
to his master. " Don't give your daughter any thing, and you'll 
soon see how the gentleman will hang fire." 

" Leave the room, sirrah !" cried the miser, angrily. And Jacob 
moved towards the door, but he did not go out. 

" Before I am disposed of in this way, father, and without my 
own consent," said Hilda, " I must beg that Mr. Philip Frewin's 
character may be fully investigated ; that you will hear what I have 
to say on the subject; and what Mrs. Verral has to say." 

" I will hear nothing !" cried the miser, furiously. " You are 
acting under the advice of Abel Beechcroft. Mrs. Verral is a 
friend of his. He sent you to her. Can you deny it?" 
" I cannot," replied Hilda. 

" Mrs. Verral may malign me as much as she thinks fit," said 
Philip, boldly. " But fortunately my character stands on too firm 
a basis to be shaken by a malicious woman's aspersions. I must 
entreat, sir," he added, turning, with an appearance of candour, 
towards his uncle, " that you will investigate this matter; that you 
will not put faith in Mr. Abel Beechcroft's assertions, or in those 
of Mrs. Verral ; but inquire among my friends — among those who 
know me well — as to how I stand. It is, perhaps, useless to refer 
to Mr. Diggs." 

" Not at all," replied the miser. " As I said before, I am quite 
satisfied with his assurance." 

"And I can give it most heartily, sir," replied the attorney. 
" Excepting yourself, I do not know a more careful, prudent, saga- 
cious man than my client, Mr. Philip Frewin. I feel called upon, 
by these attacks on his character, to say thus much for him. And 



120 THE miser's daughter. 

I can do what Kis calumniators cannot — I can give you proof of 
what I assert. I suspect, sir, you will find when you look into the 
matter, that some scheme is hatching against you." 

"To be sure he will," cried Jacob; " and he will find out who 
Is hatchin' it too !" 

" Nephew," said the miser, taking Philip's hand, " I am quite 
satisfied of the rectitude of your conduct, and the stability of your 
position." 

" Father," cried Hilda, " you are deceived. You are the dupe 
of a designer." 

But the miser turned a deaf ear to her, and exchanged a few 
words in a low tone with Philip and Diggs. Soon afterwards, as 
they took their departure, he accompanied them to the street-door, 
and fastened it after them. 



( 



THE miser's daughter. 121 



CHAPTER XVL 

LADY BRABAZON DEPOSITS HER DIAMONDS WITH THE MISER — GALLANTRY OF THE 
LATTER — ^HB DISCOVERS THE CONTRIVER OF THE ROBBERY OF THE MORTGAGE 
MONEY. 

When Mr. Scarve returned, the parlour was vacant, — Hilda 
and her aunt having retired to their own room, and Jacob having 
■descended to the cellar to get out of the way. The miser mounted 
to the ladies' room, and seeing the key in the door, turned it, and 
took it out. This done, he sat down in his chair, and remained 
for nearly two hours pondering on the events of the day. He was 
still wrapped in painful meditation, when a loud knock was heard 
without. Before an answer could be returned, the summons was 
repeated ; the street-door was opened by Jacob, footsteps resounded 
along the passage, and, as the miser raised his head in surprise. 
Lady Brabazon was announced. It is quite certain, that if Mr. 
Scarve had been consulted, he would have refused her ladyship 
admittance. But as it was not now in his power to deny himself, 
he rose with the best grace he could assume to receive her. Jacob 
xeceived a nod, and withdrew. 

" Well, Mr. Scarve," said Lady Brabazon, " I am come to know 
whether I can have the four thousand pounds to-night." 

" Impossible, your ladyship — impossible !" replied the miser, 
** If you will pay me twice the interest agreed upon — it cannot be. 
I have suffered a very heavy loss to-day — a very heavy loss, indeed." 

" Poll — poh ! that is always the way with you usurers," replied 
Lady Brabazon. "You are always suffering some heavy loss. 
But you don't expect me to believe you. You take a great deal 
too good care of your money to lose it. I must have a thousand 
pounds for a special purpose to-night. And if you will not let me 
have the four thousand, I must have the smaller amount, and on 
the security of these jewels." And she produced a case of diamonds. 



122 THE miser's daughter. 

" You see," she added, displaying them, " they are worth nearly 
double the amount." 

" They are very brilliant," replied the miser, gazing at them 
with the eye of a connoisseur. " But I cannot lend your ladyship 
the money." 

"Mr. Scarve," said Lady Brabazon, "I have a debt to pay 
to-night, and if I do not discharge it, my character will be en- 
tirely lost." 

" Your ladyship's character as a punctual paymaster will scarcely 
suffer by the delay of a night," said Scarve, drily. 

" But this is a debt of honour !" rejoined Lady Brabazon. ** I 
will redeem my jewels in less than a week." 

" Oh, if it is a debt of honour, that is quite another thing," said 
the miser. " This is certainly a magnificent set of diamonds. 
Your ladyship must look vastly well in them. Favour me by put- 
ting them on." 

" Certainly, Mr. Scarve, if you desire it," rephed Lady Brabazon, 
condescendingly. 

" I don't know which to admire most — ^your ladyship or the 
diamonds," observed the miser, gallantly. 

" The old fool has fallen in love with me," thought Lady Bra- 
bazon; " I must improve the advantage I have gained. You are 
very complaisant, Mr. Scarve," she added, aloud, and with one of 
her bewitching smiles — a smile which, in her younger days, had 
never failed of execution. 

" It would be strange if I were not, to so fascinating a person as 
your ladyship," replied the miser, with a strange leer, that sat 
Very ill on his withered features. 

Lady Brabazon cast down her eyes. 

" I almost forget what brought me hither," she observed, after 
a slight pause, during which she hoped the miser would follow up 
his gallant commencement. 

*' A proof it cannot be of great importance," rejoined Scarve; 
" but your ladyship has asked me a favour, and I will beg one in 
return. I have been disappointed in my dearest expectations of 
late. My daughter will not marry according to my wishes. What 
shall I do ? I am too old to marry again." 

*' Scarcely," replied her ladyship, trying to force a blush, but 
decidedly failing in the attempt. 



THE miser's daughter. 123 

" I will put a case," continued the miser, " merely for conside- 
ration. Suppose I were to offer myself to a person of your lady- 
ship's rank — and in your ladyship's position. What sort of 
reception should I be likely to meet with T' 

" That, I should say, would depend entirely upon the settlement 
you proposed to make, Mr. Scarve," replied Lady Brabazon, in a 
business-like tone. '^ You are reported to be immensely rich. You 
have some misunderstanding with your daughter, you say — which 
I can readily conceive — daughters are so very unmanageable — there 
is my Clementina, for instance, the sweetest temper in the world, 
but she gives me an infinity of trouble. But, as I was saying, you 
are immensely rich — money is no object to you; if, therefore, you 
were to settle upon a lady in my position somewhere about a hun- 
dred thousand pounds — but not less — I think — mind, I only think 
— for I offer a very hasty and ill-considered opinion — I think, how- 
ever, she might be induced to accept you." 

" Rather a large sum to pay for a wife at my time of life, your 
ladyship," observed the miser, drily. 

" Not a fraction more than would be required, believe me, my 
good sir," replied Lady Brabazon. 

*' Then I must abandon any views I may have entertained of 
an exalted alliance," sighed the miser. "But suppose we take an- 
other view of the case. Perhaps, for a hundredth part of the sum, 
there would be no necessity for marriage at all." 

*' That is a view of the case which I cannot for a moment con- 
template, Mr. Scarve," said her ladyship with a glance of indignation. 
*' Allow me to remind you that I came here on business." 

" True," replied the miser, in some confusion. " These diamonds 
are certainly very brilliant. Your ladyship shall have the sum 
you require upon them. And we will talk about the other matters 
at another time." 

With this, he unlocked the little chest beneath the table, and 
producing a small tin cash-box, took from it a rouleau of gold- 
smiths' notes, counted them, and delivered them to her ladyship. 
Lady Brabazon twisted the notes carelessly between her fingers, 
and then placed them in her bag ; after which she divested herself 
of the diamonds, gave them to the miser, and at the same time, as 
if to show she was not offended with liim beyond the possibiHty 
of reconciliation, she accorded him her snow-white hand, which he 



124 ' THE miser's daughter. 

pressed to his lips. This ceremony performed, he ushered her to 
the street door, where her carriage was waiting, and bowed her 
to its steps. 

** Mr. Villiers's," said Lady Brabazon, to the footman, as he 
closed the door. " The odious wretch !'' she added to herself ^ 
*' to dare to make such a proposal to me ! However, I have got 
the money." 

As the miser returned to the parlour, he rubbed his skinny 
hands together, and muttered laughingly to himself — " So she affects 
virtuous indignation, as if I didn't know she only wants the money 
for her lover, Beau Villiers. But I will try her yet more strongly. 
She is certainly a fine woman — a very fine woman. What do 
you want, sirrah ?" he added, raising his eyes, and perceiving 
Jacob standing before him. 

" Don't you mean to take some steps about this robbery ?' 
asked the porter. 

" What's that to you, rascal ?" rejoined the miser, angrily. 
" You can watch the stable when the steed's stolen, can you ? 
You shall quit my service in a week." 

" No, I won't," replied Jacob, doggedly. "This momin', I'd 
liave quitted you with pleasure, but now I'm sorry for you. 
You've been unfortunate, and I wont go." 

'* Curse your piry !" cried the miser. " I won't be plagued with 
you any longer." 

** You're not in a fit condition to judge for yourself just now,^' 
returned Jacob. " Think it over about discharging me when 
you're calmer. I'm sorry for you, I tell you — that is, I'm sorry 
for your loss, though I hope it may soften your obt/wrate heart to- 
wards your daughter. If you do turn me away, I hope you'll give 
me a recommendation to Mr. Abel Beechcroft. Ah ! his is a 
place worth livin** in. It would do you good to see the dinner I 
sat down to to-day with the servants. There was a cold sirline of 
beef, a hot potato-pie, a piece of pickled pork, and as much strong 
ale as I chose to drink. 

" Peace, sirrah !" cried Scarve. " What satisfaction can it be to 
rae to hear how a profuse gentleman wastes his substance on a set 
of thankless hirelings?" 

'* They're not thankless/' rejoined Jacob, " they all love him, and 
speak well of him." 



THE miser's daughter. 125 

"And what is their opinion worth?" sneered Scarve. "Full 
pockets are better than the empty praises of a set of idle, pampered 
menials.*' 

" I don't think so," replied Jacob; " and I only wish I was such, 
a pampered menial as Mr. Jukes." 

" Well, I'll recommend you to Mr. Beechcroft, with all my 
heart," rejoined Scarve ; " and I wish he may take you, for I couldn't 
do him a greater disservice. You'll soon eat him out of house and 
home. But come with me to my room." 

And leading the way up stairs, he pointed to the open window 
and the empty chest, asking Jacob with a bitter sneer, " Whether 
he could make any thing of them ?" 

Jacob gazed curiously at the window for some time without 
offering a remark, and then proceeded to examine the chamber. All 
at once, his eye alighted upon a small piece of paper, which he 
instantly picked up. A few lines were traced upon it in pencil, 
but before he could ascertain their import, the paper was snatched 
from him by his master, who read as follows: — " It must be done 
this morning. The money is in a chest in the dressing-room, which 
is accessible from the little garden at the back of the house. You 
can reach the garden by a small entry opening upon the area in front 
of the abbey. A rope ladder will do the rest. Alarm no one if 
you can help it; and, above all, use no violence, whatever may 
happen. If you are discovered I will take care no harm befals 
you." No signature was attached to this mysterious document, 
neither was it directed. The upper part of it had likewise been 
torn off. 

" You had better let me take the letter to Tom Blee, the thief- 
taker,^' said Jacob. " He'll make something of it. Til warrant you." 

"No," replied the miser, who remained gazing upon the paper, 
apparently wrapped in thought ; *' I shall stir no further in the 
matter.'^ 

" Well, if I was disposed to turn house-breaker," rejoined Jacob, 
" you're just the person I'd begin business with. I should feel 
sure of gettin' off easy." 

The miser raised his eyes, and fixed them sternly on him — 

" Take care what you say, Jacob," he remarked. " Many a man 
has been hanged for lighter words than you have just uttered.'^ 

He then pointed to the door, and Jacob withdrew. After 



k 



126 THE miser's daughter. 

remaining by himself nearly an hour, he prepared to go down stairs. 
As he passed his daughter's chamber, he heard her talking to her 
aunt, and put his hand into his pocket to see that the key was safe. 
Repairing to the parlour, he called to Jacob to bring him something 
to eat. A little cold meat and bread were placed before him by. 
the porter, of which he partook very sparingly, although he had 
eaten nothing since the morning, and quenched his thirst with a 
glass of water. The eatables removed, he took out his account 
book, and some other papers, and began to occupy himself with 
them. About eight o'clock another knock was heard at the door, 
and Jacob came to tell him Mr. Cordwell Firebras was without, 
having come by appointment to see liim. 

'* Admit him,'^ replied the miser. 

Thus empowered Jacob departed, and presently afterwards re-^ 
turned with the individual in question. 

" I am punctual you see, Mr. Scarve," said Firebras, with a smile, 
as he entered the room. 

" You are, sir,^' replied the miser, gravely. Aoid while his 
visitor threw himself into a chair, he got up to ascertain that Jacob 
descended to the cellar. 

" And now, Mr. Scarve," said Firebras, " let us proceed at once 
to business. I conclude you have got the five thousand pounds for 
me. 

The miser shook his head, and proceeded to detail the robbery 
that had taken place in his house. Firebras heard the narration 
with a smile of incredulity. 

" This story may do well for some persons, Mr. Scarve," he said, 
at its close; "but I am too old a hand to be duped by it. You 
had better confess at once, and frankly, that you have changed your 
mind, and will not advance the money." 

" I have already explained the cause of my inability to do so," 
rejoined the miser, with stern significance; " and it must suffice." 

" Well, sir," cried Firebras, " you have grievously disappointed 
me, — and you will disappoint others as grievously. You know that 
if the good cause prospers, you will have a hundred per cent for 
your money — and you profess to wish it well. I must have a 
thousand pounds to-night." 

" That, I may possibly manage,^' rejoined Scarve; " but I cannot 



THE miser's DAUGHTEE. 127 

give it you in cash. Lady Brabazon has just deposited her jewels 
mth me for that amount." 

■ " Oh ! you can lend her ladyship money, though you refuse it to 
me," returned Firebras, reproachfully. " Your admiration of the 
fair sex is greater than your devotion to the good cause, I perceive. 
But I must put up with the jewels, since better may not be !" 

" Here they are,^' replied Scarve, producing the case. " You 
must give me a receipt for them.'* 

" Willingly," said Firebras, taking up a pen. " I shall put 
them down as a thousand pounds in money.'* 

" You must put them down as fifteen hundred," cried the miser, 
hastily. " I am not to run all this risk for nothing." 

" Extortioner !" exclaimed Firebras, between his teeth. '^ How- 
ever, it shall be as you will. King James the Third is your debtor 
for fifteen hundred pounds. There." 

"How very strange!" ejaculated the miser, with well-feigned 
surprise, as he took the memorandum. "Your writing is exactly 
like that of a letter I found in my closet just now, and which was 
evidently dropped by one of the robbers." 

"A letter!" exclaimed Firebras, uneasily. "Have you got it? 
Let me look at it." 

The miser produced the scrap of paper, and placed the memo- 
randum beside it. The handwriting was precisely similar in both 
cases. 

" That handwriting is rather like mine, undoubtedly," said Fire- 
bras, with the most perfect composure. "But do you mean to 
say this paper was found in the room where the robbery was 
committed?*' 

"It was found there by Jacob," rejoined the miser. " Shall I 
call him to add his testimony to mine ?" 

" Oh, by no means !" replied Firebras. " Well, Mr. Scarve, as 
I may be considered the indirect means of your losing this money, 
I will take care, if the good cause prospers, that the amount is 
made up to you." 

" You had better confess at once that you caused it to be taken," 
said the miser. 

" You are resolved I shall criminate myself," replied Firebras, 
laughing — " but I won't do so. Pve no doubt, however, your 
money is in good hands." 



128 THE miser's daughter. 

"Then I am satisfied," rejoined Scarve. "Now, mark me, Mr. 
Firebras. In the event you have named, I shall expect that four- 
teen thousand pounds to produce me twenty thousand. Give me a 
memorandum to that effect. Nay, you can write it at the back of 
the letter." 

Firebras smiled, and complied, and Mr. Scarve smiled, too, as he 
compared the memorandum with the writing on the other side of 
the paper. And this was all that passed on the subject. 



THE miser's daughter. 129 



CHAPTER XVII. 

MB. CRTPPS'S ALARMING INTELLIGENCE — RANDULPH's INTRODUCTION TO THE 
JACOBITE CLUB — SIR NORFOLK SALUSBURY AND FATHER VERSELYN — THE TREA- 
SONABLE TOAST— DANGEROUS POSITION OF BANDULPH— HIS FIRMNESS — PUNC- 
TILIOUSNESS OF SIR NORFOLK SALUSBURY. 

CORDWELL FiREBRAS, on quitting the Little Sanctuary, bent 
his steps towards Tothill Street. He was laughing to himself, pro- 
bably at what had just occurred, when, hearing quick footsteps 
behind hira, he turned, and beheld Mr. Crackenthorpe Cripps, 
The valet's looks so much alarmed him, that he instantly stopped, 
and inquired what was the matter. 

" Oh, lud ! I'm quite out of breath," gasped Mr. Cripps, putting 
one hand affectedly to his side, while with the other he held a 
scented handkerchief to his nose. 

" Speak, sirrah ! and don't keep me in suspense !" cried Fire- 
bras — "what's the matter, I say?" 

*' Danger — a dungeon — death on the scaffold is the matter," 
xeplied Mr. Cripps. " You have betrayed yourself most indiscreetly, 
Mr. Firebras — you have, 'pon rep !" 

" In what way ?" demanded the other, uneasily. 

" Your conversation with Mr. Randulph Crew, in the cloisters 
yonder, has been overheard," returned Mr. Cripps ; " yes, you may 
well start, sir — I repeat, it was overheard by Peter Pokerich, the 
barber, and his sweetheart, Thomasine Deacle, the mercer's fair 
daughter. The little fellow was planning how to make the most of 
the discovery, when fortunately I chanced to call upon him, and 
with great ingenuity — though I say it — contrived to throw dust 
in his eyes, as he has done into those of so many of his customers. 
Ha! ha!" 

"This is awkward," said Firebras, thoughtfully. "Will the 
barber join us, think you? And if so, can he be trusted?" 

K 



130 THE miser's daughter. 

" Hum !'* exclaimed Mr. Cripps, throwing liimself into a musing 
posture ; " that requires consideration. [I think I might manage 
him. But I must be paid for the service, Mr Firebras — well 
paid, sir." 

"Unquestionably," returned the other. "Your reward shall 
always be in proportion to your utility.^' 

" Then there's the fair Thomasine,'^ pursued Mr. Cripps. " She 
must be silenced, too. Egad, 1^11 make love to her. But I must 
be paid for that likewise." 

" Surely the lady will be reward enough," laughed Firebras. 

" On the contrary, I shall have her on my hands," replied Mr. 
Cripps. " But I won't demand more than my due, sir, — 'pon rep ! 
Allow me to offer you a pinch of snuff. I shall now go back to 
the barber, and, when matters are settled, you may expect me at 
the Rose and Crown." And raising his hat, and making a profoimd 
bow, he strutted off. 

Ruminating on the intelHgence he had received. Cord well Fire- 
bras proceeded to Petty France, where he struck off on the right 
into Gardiner's Street, and entered the Rose and Crown. Nodding 
familiarly to the landlord, who came from the bar to greet him, he 
marched on towards a back room, where Randulph was seated. 

" I am sorry to have quitted you so long, my dear young friend," 
he said ; " but I have been detained by Mr. Scarve." 

" Have you seen Hilda ?" asked the young man. 

" No," replied Firebras ; " but I intimated to her father that I , 
had a good match in view for her; and that I should speak to him 
on the subject to-morrow." 

Further conversation was interrupted by the landlord, who 
ushered in Sir Bulkeley Price. The Welsh baronet hurried for- 
ward, holding out both his hands towards Firebras; but he started, 
and looked exceedingly surprised on beholding Randulph. 

" I need not present my young friend, Mr. Randulph Crew, to 
you. Sir Bulkeley/^ said Firebras ; " for I believe — nay, indeed, I 
know — ^you are already acquainted with him." 

" I have passed a great part of the morning with Mr. Crew," 
said Sir Bulkeley, bowing; "but I was not aware he belonged to 
our party. I am extremely glad to find it is so." 

Before Randulph could reply, the door again opened, and a 
gaunt, tall personage entered the room, who was announced by the 

i 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 131 

host as Sir Norfolk Salusbury. Never had Randulph. seen so extra- 
ordinary a figure as that now presented to his gaze. Sir Norfolk 
was more than six feet high, with a very meagre, hut withal mus- 
cular-looking frame, and large, prominent features. He held him- 
self so exceedingly erect, that he seemed in imminent danger of 
falHng backwards. He was dressed in a cinnamon-coloured coat of 
rather antiquated fashion, a scarlet waistcoat edged with gold, black 
velvet breeches, and white silk hose. He had large lace ruffles at 
his wrists, and a fl.owing lace frill at his breast. His well-powdered 
peruke was terminated by a long thick queue, which, by its per- 
pendicular descent, showed how much the small of his back was 
taken in. His features were rather harsh, and rigid as if carved in 
mahogany, nor did they seem capable of being unbent by a smile. 
His eyes were gray and cat-like, and surmounted by black bushy 
brows. But it was 'not so much his dress, his features, or his 
figure, that attracted attention, as his extraordinarily formal deport- 
ment. No' Spanish hidalgo ever moved with greater solemnity and 
dignity. His limbs creaked like rusty hinges, and there was some- 
thing in his whole air and manner that irresistibly reminded Ran- 
dulph of Don Quixote. 

" Welcome, Sir Norfolk,^^ exclaimed Cordwell Firebras, advanc- 
ing towards him ; " allow me to present my young friend, Mr. 
Randulph Crew, to you." 

*' I am happy in the acquaintance of the representative of so 
ancient a name," returned Sir Norfolk, bowing stiffly. " Eum 
cognoscere gaudeo. Sir Bulkeley Price, I salute you. It did not 
enter into my expectations to meet you. I conceived you were 
still montivagous and eremetical in the principality." 

" I arrived yesterday, Sir Norfolk," said Sir Bulkeley, advancing 
towards him, and shaking him by the hand. " How long have 
you been in town ?" 

" My sojourn in the capital hath not as yet exceeded the septim- 
anal limit," rephed Sir Norfolk. 

" In plain Enghsh, you have not been here more than a week,'* 
laughed Sir Bulkeley. " But I am as much surprised to see you 
as you can be to see me." 

" My advent was inopinate and repent. Sir Bulkeley," rejoined 
Sir Norfolk. " Affairs of state drew me hither." 

Again the door opened, and two grave-looking personages, 

K 2 



132 THE misek's daughter. 

announced as Father Verselyn and Mr. Travers, -were usiiered in, 
Father Verselyn, the foremost of these, was a tall, thin, middle- 
aged man, with a dark complexion, and a sinister and perfidious 
expression of countenance. He was habited like a layman, — in- 
deed, it would not have been safe, from the laws then in force 
against Romish priests, to appear in any other dress, — in a sober- 
coloured suit, a full-bottomed black wig, which he wore without 
powder, and spectacles. Mr. Travers was a short, square-built, 
broad-faced person, and had a searching, severe look. He was 
likewise very plainly attired, but had nevertheless the appearance 
of a person of condition. 

Courteous greetings were interchanged by the new comers and 
the others; and Randulph was secretly entertained by the formahty 
with which Sir Norfolk returned their salutations. He was, in 
turn, introduced to the strangers; but could scarcely repress the 
dislike with which Father Verselyn inspired him. The party then 
broke up into little groups, and much whispered conversation 
ensued, in which Randulph took no part. In about a quarter of 
an hour, the landlord entered the room, and, bowing to the com- 
pany, said, " I believe, gentlemen, you are all assembled ; the 
room up stairs is ready, if you are disposed to adjourn to it." 

The proposition being assented to, the landlord threw open the 
door, and a slight contest occurred between the two baronets as to 
which should offer the other precedence. 

" I pras, Sir Bulkeley," said Sir Norfolk ; " I will scale the stair- 
case after you.^' 

Thus exhorted, Sir Bulkeley, who thought it good breeding not 
to dispute a point of needless ceremony, went on. Sir Norfolk 
marched after him with majestic steps, and the rest of the party 
followed. The landlord ushered them into a large room, lighted 
by a chandeher suspended from the ceiling, in the centre of which 
was a circular table covered with bottles and glasses. Having 
hung up their hats against the wall, the company sat down, and a 
few bumpers went briskly round. While they were thus carousing, 
a tap was heard at the door, and the landlord, opening a recon- 
noitring hole within it, spoke to some one without. He next pro- 
ceeded to convey the information he had received, in a low tone, 
to Cordwell Firebras, who immediately said aloud, "Oh, yes, 
admit him by all means. Gentleman, a new brother I" 



THE miser's daughter. 133 

The door was then opened, and Randulph recognised in the 
gaily-attired, self-possessed coxcomb who was admitted, Mr. Crack- 
enthorpe Cripps. 

^' Take a glass of wine, Mr. Cripps," said Firebras, filling a 
bumper, and handing it to the new comer. " It is Beau Villiers's 
chief valet,'^ he added, in an under tone, to Sir Norfolk, who had 
made a polite though formal bow to the stranger. 

" What I" exclaimed Sir Norfolk, almost shuddering at the 
inadvertence he had committed ; " a waiting-man in such costly and 
nitid attire. Why, his master, the Petronius Arbiter of the day, 
can scarcely be more studiously refined in the taste and style of 
the vestments wherewith he adorncth his person." 

" Not a whit so," laughed Firebras ; " the only difference between 
them is, that Beau Cripps wears in May the coat which Beau 
Villiers has worn in April." 

" Mehercle !" exclaimed Sir Norfolk. " Such prodigality almost 
exceedeth belief." 

" Landlord, it is time !" cried Father Verselyn, who performed 
the part of chairman, and occupied the principal seat. 

"I am ready, your reverence," replied the landlord. And he 
forthwith proceeded to a cupboard, from which he produced a large 
china bowl, apparently filled with punch, and placed it with great 
care and solemnity in the centre of the table. 

*'Why, it is water," exclaimed Randulph, gazing; at the clear 
lymph, with which, on nearer inspection, he perceived the bowl 
was filled. 

" To be sure !" cried Firebras; *' and we are about to drink the 
king's health — over the water. And now, gentlemen," he con- 
tinued, filling Randulph's glass and his own, " fill, I pray you, to 
the brim.^' 

" I have filled, even to the summit of the vase," said Sir Norfolk, 
rising and holding up his glass. 

" And I," cried Sir Bulkeley, likewise rising. 
"And 1" added the landlord, who stood next to the last-named 
baronet, and was allowed to join in the ceremony. 
" And I — and I," chimed Mr. Travers and the valet. 
"Then give the word, my son," said Verselyn, addressing 
Firebras. 

" With the greatest pleasure, father," replied Cord well. And 



W4 THE miser's daughteb. 

lie held his glass over the bowl, while his example was imitated 
by all the others except Randulph. " Here is the king's health 
' over the water.' Why don't you do as we do ?" he added, 
turning to Randulph. 

" Ay, stretch forth your arm over the scyphus, young gentle- 
man," cried Sir Norfolk, pointing to the bowl. 

" You must drink the toast— it's the rule of the club,'' added 
Sir Bulkeley. 

" It is a rule I cannot subscribe to,'' replied Randulph. 

" How ! — am I mistaken in you, young man?" said Firebras^ 
regarding him menacingly. 

" Do as they bid you, or you'll have your throat cut, 'pon 
rep I" whispered Mr. Cripps, popping his head over Firebras's 
shoulder. 

" Will you drink the toast, or not ?" demanded Firebras, 
fiercely. 

" I will not !" replied Randulph, firmly. " It is treasonable, 
and I refuse it." 

Randulph's bold declaration had well nigh cost him dear. Cries 
of "spy!" "traitor T' "Hanoverian !" "down with him !" 
resounded on all sides ; the landlord rushed to the door,„ and 
placed his back against it, to prevent any attempt at egress in that 
way ; while Sir Norfolk Salusbury, plucking his long blade from 
its sheath, and making it whistle over his head, kicked a chair 
that stood between him and the young man out of the way, and 
badie him, in a stern tone, defend himself. The confusion was 
increased by the vociferations of Mr. Cripps, and by an accident 
caused by Sir Bulkeley Price, who, in hurrying round the table, 
contrived to entangle himself in the cover, and dragging it off, 
precipitated the bottles and glasses to the ground, drenching the 
lower limbs of his brother baronet in the contents of the fractured 
bowl. The only two persons apparently unmoved in the midst of 
this uproar were its author and Cordwell Firebras. The latter 
made no hostile display, and did not even alter his position, but 
kept his eye steadily fixed upon Randulph, as if anxious to ob- 
serve the effect of the incident upon him. The young man main- 
tained his firmness throughout. He retreated a few steps towards 
the wall, and put himself in a posture of defence. The nearest 
of his antagonists was Sir Norfolk Salusbury ; but seeing the others 




Kandnlpli refusing to driiik the Knigs kealth "over the water! 



LON DON. PARra &C° l.EADENHAI.i 3T1U:ET, 1047. 



i 



THE miser's daughter. 135 

press forward, the chivalrous Welsh baronet declined commencing 
the attack. 

" Singulatim ! — one at a time, Mr. Travers," he cried. " Ne 
Hercules contra duos. It shall never be said that any man, how- 
ever unworthy of fair treatment, fought against odds in the presence 
of a descendant of Adam de Salzburg. Stand aside, therefore, sir, 
— and you, Father Verselyn, — and leave him to me, or I must 
relinquish the right of combat, which I have in some measure 
acquired, as being the first to claim it, to you." 

" Let the young man swear to keep silence touching all he has 
seen and heard, or he shall not quit this room ahve," rejoined 
Travers. 

*' Trust him not — trust him not ?' cried Father Verselyn ; " his 
oath will not bind him. Fall upon him altogether, and slay him? 
That is the only way to insure his silence and our safety. I will 
absolve you of his blood. The imminence of the danger justifies 
the deed.^^ 

"Proh pudor!" cried Sir Norfolk, sternly. "That would be 
trucidation dedecorous and ignave ; neither can I stand by and see 
it done." 

" Nor I," cried Sir Bulkeley, who had by this time recovered 
from the embarrassment occasioned by the accident. " I disapprove 
of Father Verselyn's counsel entirely. Let us hear what the young 
man has to say. I will question him." 

" Haudquaquam, Sir Bulkeley," replied the other, gravely. " I 
gave you precedence on a recent occasion, but I cannot do so on 
the present. I claim this young man as my own, — to interrogate, 
to fight, and, perchance, to slay him." 

" Fight him as much as you please, Sir Norfolk, and slay him if 
you think proper, — or can," rejoined Sir Bulkeley, angrily; "but 
you shall not prevent my speaking to him." 

" Sir Bulkeley Price," returned Sir Norfolk, raising his crane 
neck to its utmost height, " I pray you not to interfere between me 
and Mr. Crew, otherwise — " 

"Well, Sir Norfolk, and what then?" cried the other, his hot 
Welsh blood mounting to his cheeks, and empurphng them more 
deeply than usual. " What then, Sir Norfolk?" 

" I shall be compelled to make you render me reason for it,* 
replied the other, sternly. 



136 THE miser's daughter. 

Cordwell Firebras now thought it time to interfere. 

" Gentlemen," he said, advancing towards tliera, *' we have 
plenty of other quarrels to settle without disputing among ourselves. 
I brought Mr. Kandulph Crew here, and will be responsible for 
his silence." 

" What saith the young man?" demanded Sir Norfolk. " If he 
will oppignerate his word for taciturnity, I will take it." 

" So will I," added Sir Bulkeley. 

" I thank you for your good opinion of me, gentlemen," returned 
Randulph. " I have been, almost unwittingly, a party to your 
counsels, and ouglit perhaps to have declared my sentiments sooner ; 
but I hoped the meeting would pass off without rendering any such 
avowal necessary, in which case, though I certainly should never 
have joined your club again, the secret of its existence would have 
rested in my own bosom, — as it will now if I am suffered to depart. 
I could not avoid expressing my disapproval of a toast, which in 
common with every loyal subject of King George the Second, I 
hold to be treasonable." 

" You cannot be the subject of a usurper, young man," said 
rirebras. " Your allegiance to King James the Third is unaHen- 
able." 

" Compel him to avow allegiance to his rightful sovereign, Mr. 
Firebras," interposed Father Verselyn. 

" I will sooner lay down my hfe than comply," cried Randulph, 
resolutely. 

Firebras looked slightly disconcerted; and Sir Norfolk, who 
had lowered the point of his sword, again raised it. 

" It is in vain to reason with him, my son," whispered Verselyn. 
" Our safety demands his destruction. If he goes hence we are 
denounced; and an irreparable injury will be done to the good 
cause." 

" I have promised him safe-conduct, father," rejoined Firebras; 
*' and, at all risks, I will keep my word. Mr. Randulph Crew you 
are at liberty to depart. You give up all hopes of the miser's 
daughter?" he added, in a deep whisper. 

" I must if she is only to be purchased in this way," repHed 
Randulph, in the same tone. 

" Take time to consider of it," rejoined Firebras. " I will find 



THE miser's daughter. 137 

means of communicating with you to-morrow. Landlord, attend 
Mr. Crew to the door." 

" You are wrong in letting him go," cried Verseljn. " You 
will repent this blind confidence. Sir Norfolk, I entreat you to 
interfere — Sir Bulkeley, I appeal to you." 

But they both turned from him and sheathed their swords ; while 
the landlord, having received a sign from Firebras, obeyed his in- 
structions. 

As soon as Randulph was gone, Firebras addressed himself to 
the two baronets: — "I hope no unkindly feeling — none, at least, 
that cannot easily be set to rights — subsists between you, gentle- 
men?" he said. 

"I shall never quarrel with my good friend Sir Norfolk, except 
about a matter of punctilio,^' replied Sir Bulkeley, who was as 
easily appeased as roused to anger. 

" And I ought never to quarrel with one who knows how to 
make so handsome a concession as Sir Bulkeley Price," replied Sir 
Norfolk, with a gracious bow. 

"Then the storm has blown over," laughed Firebras. "I 
feared this more than the other." 

A long discussion then took place among the members of the 
club, as to Randulph's introduction to it, and Firebras was severely 
censured by Father Verselyn, for admitting the young man without 
testing his political principles. 

"I do not repent what I have done, father," returned Firebras, 
" because I am satisfied no harm will come of it ; and it was an at- 
tempt to gain a very useful ally to our cause. He is a brave lad, 
as his firmness during this affair proved, and it would be a great 
point to win him over. Nor do I yet despair of doing so." 

" I hope we have seen the last of him," muttered Father Ver- 
selyn; "and I beg it may be borne in mind that it was against 
my advice that he was suffered to depart." 

Cordwell Firebras darted an angry look at the priest, but he 
made no reply; and the cloth having been replaced by the land- 
lord and Mr. Cripps, the former proceeded to fetch a fresh supply 
of flasks and glasses; after which, the company once more ga- 
thered round the table, and began to discuss anew their projects. 



ISd THE miser's DAUGHTEB. 



OHAPTER XVm. 

THE JACOBITE CLUB STIRPBISED BY THE GUARD— THE FLIGHT AND PUBSUIT — MB. 
CEIPPS'S TREACHEBY — HIS REFLECTIOKS. 

Midnight arrived, and found the party still in deep debate. 
Suddenly, a quick and continuous knocking was heard at the 
door. 

All instantly started to their feet, gazing at each other in alarm. 

*' "We are betrayed," said Firebras, in a deep whisper. 

" We are," replied Father Verselyn; ** and by the spy you in- 
troduced among us." 

" It is false !" cried Firebras, angrily. " But this is no time for 
dispute. We must provide for our safety. Who is it, landlcard?" 
he cried to the host, who, on the first alarm, had rushed to the 
door, and opened the reconnoitring-hole within it. 

" O lud! we're all lost!" rejoined the landlord, closing the 
trap-door, and returning to them with scared looks and on tiptoe, 
as if afraid of the sound of his own footsteps. 

" Who is it — what is it?" demanded Firebras. 

" A dozen grenadier guards, headed by their captain and lieu- 
tenant, come to search the house," rephed the landlord. " They're 
mounting the stairs now." 

" Zounds !" exclaimed Sir Bulkeley, " this is awkward !" 

** There is nothing to fear," said Firebras, calmly. " We have 
plenty of time for flight." 

" Yes, you can fly, gentlemen, but I am ruined," exclaimed the 
landlord. " I can never return to my own dwelUng !" 

" Pshaw ! you shall never be the worse for it," replied Firebras. 

" But what will become of me, if I am taken?" cried Mr. Cripps, 
feigning a look of despair. " I am sure to be the worse for it." 

"Silence!" cried Firebras, authoritatively — "Don't you hear 



THE miser's daughter. 139 

them? — they are at the door. Be quick, gentlemen. Not a mo- 
ment is to be lost." 

While this was passing, Father Verselyn hurried to the lower 
end of the room, and mounting a ladder placed against the wall, 
passed through a trap-door in the ceiHng above it. The landlord, 
Mr. Cripps, and Mr. Travers, next ascended; then Sir Bulkeley 
followed; then Sir Norfolk, whose equanimity not even the present 
danger could disturb ; while Firebras brought up the rear. 

" 'Sdeath, Sir Norfolk," cried the latter, as the baronet slowly 
scaled the steps before him — " move on a little more quickly, or 
we shall certainly be captured. They're breaking open the door. 
Don't you hear them ?" 

*'Perfecte," replied Sir Norfolk, coolly. But he did not on 
that account accelerate his movements. 

Knowing it was in vain to remonstrate, Cord well Firebras waited 
till Sir Norfolk had worked his long frame through the trap-door, 
which he did with the utmost dehberation, and then ran up the 
steps himself, with much more activity than might have been ex- 
pected from a person so weighty. Just as he was quitting the 
ladder, the door was burst open with a tremendous crash, and two 
officers of the guard rushed into the room, sword in hand, followed 
by a dozen grenadiers armed with muskets, on which bayonets 
were fixed. 

Firebras's first object, on securing a footing on the floor of the 
garret above, was to try to draw up the ladder, and he was assisted 
in the endeavour by Sir Norfolk ; but their design was frustrated 
by the foremost officer and a tall grenadier bearing a halbert, both 
of whom sprang upon the ladder, and kept it down by their joint 
weight, and all that those above could do was to shut down the 
trap-door before it could be reached by their foes. A dormer 
window opened from the garret upon the roof of the house; but 
an unexpected difficulty had been experienced by the first detach- 
ment of fugitives in unfastening it. All ought to have been in 
readiness for an emergency Hke the present, and Sir Bulkeley and 
Mr. Travers bitterly reproached the landlord for his negligence. 
The poor fellow declared that the mischance was not his fault — 
that he had taken every possible precaution — and, in fact, had ex- 
amined the window that very morning, and found it all right. 

At length, it was forced back ; and all but Sir Norfolk and 



140 THE miser's daughter. 

Firebras got tlirough it. Tliey were detained by the necessity that 
existed of guarding tlie trap-door. Unfortunately, there was no 
bolt on the upper side of it, so that they had to stand upon it to 
keep it down, and this plan being discovered by the officer below, 
he ordered two of his men to thrust their bayonets through the 
boards, while the tall grenadier tried to prize open the door with 
his halbert. The manoeuvre compelled Firebras and Salusbury 
slightly to alter their position, to avoid being wounded by the 
bayonets, and in doing so, they necessarily gave admittance to the 
point of the halbert. The efforts of the assailing party were re- 
doubled, and the trap slightly yielded. 

*' Lose not a moment 1 fly, Sir Norfolk !" cried Firebras, 
apprehensive lest the baronet's deliberation, which he well knew 
nothing could shake, should prevent his escape. 

But true to his principles, Sir Norfolk would not move an inch. 

" I cannot leave you in angusto," he said. 

" But I am the stronger of the two, as well as the more active," 
rejoined Firebras. " My weight will suffice to keep down the 
trap-door till you have got through the window, and then I can 
make good my retreat. Fly ! fly I" 

But Sir Norfolk continued immovable. 

" I shall be the last to quit this place," he said, in a tone of 
unalterable determination. " But do not, I pray you, tarry with 
me. The trifurciferous myrmidons of the Hanoverian usurper 
shall never take me with life." 

"I must leave the punctilious old fool to his fate," muttered 
Firebras, observing that the greater part of the head of the halbert 
was forced through the side of the trap. " God protect you. Sir 
Norfolk," he cried, rushing to the window. 

The brave old Welsh baronet essayed to hew off the head of the 
lialbert from the staff — but in vain ; and finding that the enemy 
must gain admittance in another moment, and that Firebras had 
cleared the window, he turnedaway and strode majestically towards 
it. His retreat was so suddenly made, that the grenadier who held 
the pike, and was prizing with all his force, lost his balance, and 
tumbled off the ladder, causing such confusion among his comrades, 
that Sir Norfolk had time to get through the window unmolested. 

It was a beautifully bright night — the moon being at the full, 
and the sky filled with fleecy clouds. On the left, lay ridges of 



THE miser's daughter. 141 

pointed-roofed houses, covered witli tlie warm-looking and mellow- 
tinted tile, so preferable to the cold blue slate — broken with stacks 
of chimneys of every size and form — dormer windows, gables, over- 
hanging stories, and other picturesque and fantastic projections; 
and the view being terminated, at some quarter of a mile's 
distance, by the tall towers and part of the roof of Westminster 
Abbey. 

Viewed thus, the whole picture looked exquisitely tranquil and 
heautiful. The fires in the houses were almost all extinguished, 
and little or no smoke issued from the chimneys to pollute the clear 
atmosphere. Above the venerable and majestic fane hung the 
queen of night, flooding its towers — seen at such an hour to the 
greatest advantage — with silvery light, and throwing some of the 
nearer buildings and projections into deep shadow, and so adding 
to the beauty of the scene. On the right, the view extended over 
other house-tops to the gardens and fields of Pimlico. Behind, was 
Saint James's Park, with its stately avenues of trees, its long canal, 
and Rosamond's Pond glimmering in the moonlight ; while in front 
lay the New Artillery-ground, and the open and marshy grounds 
constituting Tothill Fields. But it will be readily imagined that 
neither Firebras nor his companion looked to the right or to the 
left. They were only conscious of the danger by which they werq 
menaced, and were further discouraged by Father Verselyn, who 
at that moment scrambled over the roof they were about to cross, 
to inform them that the door by which they hoped to escape, could 
not be got open. 

" Every thing seems to have gone wrong !" cried Verselyn, in 
an ecstacy of terror. ' ' What will become of us ?" 

" Jacta est alea,"' replied Sir Norfolk, composedly. " We must 
fight for it, father." 

" Heaven and all its saints protect us," cried the priest, crossing 
Jiimself. 

" Be composed, father," rejoined Firebras, sternly. " You ought 
to be equal to any circumstances in which you may be placed. 
Ha!" 

The latter exclamation was occasioned by a joyous shout, 
announcing that their friends had succeeded in opening the door; 
and the next moment the good news was confirmed by Sir Bulkeley 
Price, who clambered over the roof to acquaint them with it. On 



142 THE misee's daughter. 

hearing this, the party instantly heat a retreat; and their flight 
was accelerated by the officer and the tall grenadier, who, at 
that moment, sprung out of the windo\y. Even Sir Norfolk was 
urged to a little more expedition than usual, ; and two or three of 
his mighty strides brought him to the top of the roof. Cordwell 
Firebras would not have been much behind him, if Father Verselyn 
had not caught hold of his coat-tails to help himself up the ascent, 
which he felt wholly unable to accomplish without assistance. 
. By this time, the officer was well nigh upon them ; and, finding 
his summons to surrender wholly disregarded, he made a pass at 
the priest, which took effect in the fleshy part of his leg, restoring 
him at once to more than his former agility. Uttering a loud yell, 
and clapping his hand to the wounded limb to staunch the blood, 
Father Verselyn bounded over the roof, and made to the door, 
through which the landlord and Mr. Travers had already disap- 
peared, and through which Mr. Cripps was now darting. 

Between the two roofs lay a small flat space, used by its former 
proprietor as a place for drying clothes, as was evident from the four 
tall posts at the corners. Here, Firebras and Sir Norfolk came to a 
stand, resolved to dispute the passage with their pursuers. Sword in 
hand, and calling to them to surrender, the foremost officer dashed 
down the roof; but his precipitation placed him at the mercy of 
Firebras ; for his foot slipping, the latter struck his sword from his 
grasp. Sir Norfolk, in the interim, had encountered another foe- 
man with equal success. This was the tall grenadier, who, as he 
descended made a thrust at the baronet with his halbert which the 
latter very adroitly parried, and, lounging in return, disabled his 
adversary by a wound in the arm. At the same moment, too, the 
tiles gave way under the weight of the grenadier, and he sank 
above the knees in the roof. 

Other foes were now at hand. The second officer, carrying a 
lantern in one hand, and a drawn sword in the other, appeared on 
the roof; while the tall caps and bayonets of the rest of the grena- 
diers were seen above it. Though Sir Norfolk, whose blood was 
up, would have willingly awaited the advance of these new oppo- 
nents, he yielded to the entreaties of Firebras, and followed him 
through the door, which was instantly secured behind them by a 
couple of strong bolts. 

The house in which the Jacobites had taken refuge was expressly 




(Uo-TYt Q-rVjutCika/nMl/ 



The Jaco'bite CMb pursued ^j me guard. 



.l.QJ)DON-. f^ARRY AC9 .l.f,AlJtjrjlM.I, 3T1<E£T 1841 



THE miser's daughter. 143 

hired by them for an occasion like the present, and kept wholly 
uninhabited. The mode of communication between it and the 
Rose and Crown will, it is hoped, be sufficiently understood from 
the foregoing description. That so many unforeseen accidents 
should have occurred at a time when, if ever, things ought to have 
been in readiness, almost drove the poor landlord distracted; but 
if he could have watched Mr. Cripps's manoeuvres, he would have 
speedily found out the cause of the delays. In the first instance, 
a penknife, dexterously slipped by the valet into the groove of the 
window, prevented it from moving, and had well-nigh, as has been 
seen, occasioned the capture of the fugitives. This difficulty having 
been overcome by the strenuous efforts of Sir Bulkeley and Mr- 
Travers, Mr. Cripps was the first to scramble through the window. 

" Which way?" he cried to the landlord, who was following. 

" Over the roof, and to the door opposite,'* was the reply. 

Nimbly as a cat, the agile valet bounded over the roof, and in- 
stantly perceiving the door, made towards it. A key was in the 
lock ; he turned it, took it out, and dropped it into the street below. 
He then began to shake the door violently, and shouted to the 
landlord, who at that moment came in sight. 

" Unlock it — unlock it !" cried the host. 

" I can't," cried Mr. Cripps; "there is no key. 'Pon rep! we 
shall be all taken." 

" No key !"" exclaimed the landlord. " Impossible ! I saw it 
there this morning myself. It must have dropped down. Look 
about for it." 

Mr. Cripps feigned compliance, and the landlord coming up, 
poured forth a torrent of imprecations on finding his statement 
correct. Father Verselyn, as has been related crept back to Fire- 
bras, while the others used their efforts to open the door. Nor 
were they long in effecting their purpose. Finding all other 
attempts fail, the landlord stepped back on the leads, and running 
to give additional impetus to the blow, dashed his foot against the 
door, and the lock yielded with a loud crash. 

Baulked in his schemes, the plotting valet would fain have 
practised some new trick upon them ; but the presence of Cord well 
Firebras, whose suspicions he was fearful of arousing, restrained him. 
Indeed, he had little opportunity for further display of his art. 



144 THE miser's daughter. 

Ordering tKe others to go down stairs, Firebras only tarried to lock 
an inner door, and then followed them. 

The house, as already stated, was perfectly empty, and opened 
at the back into a court, which branched off into several of those 
intricate alleys with which Petty France abounds. Two minutes 
had not elapsed before the fugitives found shelter in this court, 
and were rapidly threading it, and though they were noticed by 
some of the neighbours, who had been alarmed by the shouts of 
the soldiery, and took them for a gang of housebreakers, they 
effected their retreat without further molestation. The officer and 
his followers succeeded in breaking into the garret ; but before they 
could burst open the inner door, the party had quitted the house. 

Guided by the landlord, the priest and Mr. Travers scudded 
through a labyrinth of passages leading in the direction of the New 
Chapel, which building they skirted on the left, and crossing 
Stretton's Ground, found a secu^ asylum at a small public house 
in Duck Lane, where the landlord was known, and where the 
unfortunate priest, who had become very faint from the loss of 
blood, was enabled to get his wound dressed. 

Sir Bulkeley Price, Sir Norfolk, and Firebras, took the opposite 
direction; and after traversing several narrow passages, reached 
James Street, where, finding they were not pursued, they slackened 
their pace, and entering the park at the gate near the lower end of 
Rosamond's Pond, proceeded to Firebras's lodgings. A slight tap 
against the window speedily procured them admittance. The 
shutters were then closed, and Firebras threw himself into a chair, 
and for some minutes maintained a profound silence, which neither 
of his companions seemed disposed to break. 

" Well, gentlemen," he said, at length, " our meetings at the Rose 
and Crown are over. We must find some other place of rendez- 
vous. This is a most unlucky chance." 

" There never was a plot nor conjuration but experienced some 
contrarious accident, Mr. Firebras,^' replied Sir Norfolk, calmly. 
" I am in nowise astonied at it." 

" In my opinion, treachery has been practised upon us," re- 
marked Sir Bulkeley; "and I suspect the landlord is the author 
of it." 

** My suspicions attach to Mr. Villiers's gaudily ornate serving- 



THE miser's daughter. 145 

man," remarked Sir Norfolk. " I own I misdoubted him ab 
incepto." 

Firebras said nothing; but rose, and opening a cupboard, took 
out a bottle of rosa solis and glasses, and set them before liis guests. 
Sir Bulkeley quickly tossed off a couple of glasses; but Sir Norfolk, 
who was a pattern of sobriety, as he was a model of punctilio, 
declined to drink. They then fell into debate, and it was broad day- 
light before they separated, — Sir Bulkeley taking his way across 
the Park to his residence in Saint James's Square, and Sir Nor- 
folk proceeding to his lodgings in Abingdon Street. 

It now only remains to inquire after Mr. Cripps. He followed 
the landlord and his party for a short distance, and then coming to 
a halt, held a brief communion with himself. 

" I have failed this time," he thought; "but it is all owing to 
the bad management of that brainless little barber. However, I'll 
take care he has the full blame of it with the Jacobites ; and the next 
time I attempt their capture, I'll make sure work of it. It will be 
no use lodging information against any of them, for no proof 
can now be obtained of their presence at the meeting. No, no ; I 
must keep upon terms with them, and abide my time. They must 
all be taken in the fact; and then my reward will be proportionate. 
I wonder whether Pokerich is in safety. I saw the little rascal 
among the guard on the house-top, and he looked almost as much 
frightened as Father Verselyn. By-the-by, something may be 
made of that priest. He's a double dealer, Pll be sworn. 'Pon 
rep ! I like these nocturnal adventures vastly. They remind me 
of the romances Fve read, and make me fancy myself a hero. A 
hero ! Egad, the heroes of romance don't generally betray their 
friends. But that only shows the authors of such works don't draw 
from real life. But I must go home and get a little rest, or I 
sha'n't be in trim for Marylebone Gardens and my dear Mrs. 
Nettleship to-morrow.'' 



146 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XIX, 

MB. JUKES'S NOTIONS OF DOMESTIC HAPPINESS — TEOSSELL A LITTLE THE WORSE 
rOR WINE — KANDULPU RECEIVES A NOTE FROM FIREBRAS — JACOB POST BRINGS 
INFORMATION TO ABEL. 

Shortly after Hilda's departure, Abel Beeclicroft summoned 
Ms butler, and informed him he was going out. " I shall be back 
in time for dinner," he said. " If Miss Scarve should call again 
during my absence, which is not impossible, though I think it 
unlikely, show her into the library, and take care that Randulph 
does not see her." 

" I was in hopes, sir, that your interview with that dear young 
lady might have altered your views in regard to your nephew,'^ 
replied Mr. Jukes. " I've been pleasing myself ever since she 
went away with the idea of the nice wife she'd make Mr. llan- 
dulph. They seem cut out for each other — just of an age — and 
it's difficult to say which is the handsomest. Bless my heart ! if 
the marriage should take place, what a feast we should have, and 
how busy I should be ! And then, of course, you'd have the 
young folks to live with you; and you'd get so fond of your 
new niece, that you wouldn't bear her out of sight for an. 
instant, but would be happier than you've been before. And 
then, in due time, you'd have to turn one of the upper rooms into 
a nursery, and I should see you sitting in your easy chair, not 
with a book before you, bhnding your eyes, but with young Mas- 
ter Crew on a rocking-horse on one side, and young Miss Crew 
on t'other, while the nurse would be bringing you a third crowing 
little banthng in long petticoats, encoiiraging the growth of its 
teeth, and cultivating a taste for music at the same time with a 
silver rattle." 

*' Heaven forbid !" ejaculated Abel, who had allowed the butler 
to ramble on in his own way. " Your notions and mine of do- 



THE miser's daughter. 147 

mestic happiness dijBfer materially. I've always treated you with 
great confidence, Jukes," he added, gravely ; " and I confess I 
should be glad to see Randulph well and happily married. But 
I am in no hurry about it. It is desirable that he should see some- 
thing of the world — something more of female society, in order 
that he may understand his own tastes better before he takes a step 
on which the whole happiness, or misery, of his future life will 
hang. It's a sad thing for a man to discover, when too late, that 
he hasn't chosen well." 

"It must be rather disagreeable, no doubt," rejoined Mr. Jukes; 
"but I don't consider an old bachelor like you a competent judge 
in the matter. However, if Mr. Randulph chooses Miss' Hilda, 
he'll choose well — that I'm prepared to maintain." 
• " Jukes," said Abel, sternly, " it is time to check your loquacity. 
Much as I am pleased with Hilda Scarve — and I assure you she has 
won upon my affections in an extraordinary manner — I do not 
desire, for reasons which it is needless to explain, that she should 
become the bride of my nephew." 

" Those reasons of yours He so deep, sir, that I can't fathom 
them," replied Mr. Jukes; "unless — but I should have thought 
you too old." 

"Too old for what. Jukes?" said Abel. 

" At all events, I should have thought her too young," pursued 
the butler. " But stranger things have happened." 

"What the deuce do you mean to insinuate, sirrah?" cried 
Abel. 

" Why, I fancy you want to marry Miss Hilda yourself, sir," 
replied the butler. " And I'm sure I've no objection — none on 
earth — if you can get the lady's consent. Only I think there's a 
little too much disparity, that's all." 

Abel flushed to his very temples, and then became pale as death. 
He made no reply, however, but walked quickly towards the win- 
dow, returning the next moment with his wonted composure. 

" I scarcely know whether to laugh at you, or reprove you for 
your strange supposition. Jukes," he said. ^' In any other case 
than this, I certainly should have been angry; but here," he 
continued, in a slightly tremulous tone, "my feelings are too 
deeply interested. No, Jukes, I shall never marry — least of all, 

the daughter of " here his utterance failed him. 

L 2 



148 THE miser's daughter. 

" I understand, sir," resumed Jukes, hastily. *' Don't say 
another word. I see my mistake." 

" Then repair it," rejoined Abel, recovering himself. " Mind, 
I will have no excuse for neglecting my instructions." 

With this, he proceeded to the hall, and taking up his hat and 
stick, reiterated his injunctions to the butler, and went forth. 

Mr. Jukes returned to his pantry, ruminating on what had 
occurred, and muttering to himself, " I almost wish our quiet house 
hadn't been disturbed by these young folks. I perceive plainly 
that Randulph will fall over head and ears in love with Hilda — 
if he hasn't done so already — and then my master'll quarrel with 
him, and then — ^but no, he's sure to pardon him, just as I always 
overlook the faults of my graceless nephew, Crackenthorpe. How- 
ever, it won't do for me to bring 'em together; and I hope the 
young lady mayn't come back." 

His apprehensions were groundless. At the very time he was 
thinking of her, Hilda was passing the Folly on the Thames. 

At a little before four o'clock, Abel Beechcroft returned, and 
seemed much relieved to find that nothing had occurred during 
his absence. He sat down to dinner by himself at the appointed 
time, discussed the meal in silence, and even when the wine was 
placed before him, evinced so httle disposition to talk, that Mr. 
Jukes took the hint, and left him alone. He continued in the 
same mood during the whole evening ; reading as long as the light 
permitted, and then repairing to the garden, where he remained 
till summoned to supper. In reply to his inquiries whether his 
brother and nephew had come back, he was told that the former 
had returned about an hour ago, alone. 

" Alone !" echoed Abel, shrugging his shoulders, and glancing 
triumphantly at Mr. Jukes. " I told you how it would be. Ran- 
dulph's career of dissipation has begun with a vengeance. Where 
will it end, eh? — where will it end. Jukes? Tell me that." 

*' I wish I could," responded the latter, with something like a 
groan. 

Abel found his brother in the supper-room, and at once per- 
ceived, from his uncertain movements and flushed looks, that he 
had taken too much wine. 

" So you have not brought your charge home with you," he 
observed, drily. *' Where is he?" 



THE miser's daughter. 149 

" Ton my soul, that's more than I can tell !" laughed Trussell. 
" He dined with Sir Singleton Spinke and myself at a French 
ordinary in SuiFolk Street, and left us to keep an appointment — 
he ! he I — soon after five o'clock. I expected to find him here 
on my return; but I suppose he has been detained. You must 
make allowances for young men, sir. It is his first indiscretion — 
ha! ha!" 

" I hope it will be his last," replied Abel, seating himself. 
And as the supper proceeded, he elicited from Trussell, whose 
condition rendered him exceedingly communicative, a full account 
of all that occurred during the morning, including even the 
glimpse they had obtained of Hilda, at the time of her passing the 
FoUy. 

" And did she see Randulph?" asked Abel, quickly. 

" To be sure," replied Trussell, laughing; " she couldn't help it. 
The boat was close to us. And, egad! I must say, if I am any 
judge of such matters — which I flatter myself I am — she looked 
desperately annoyed at seeing him with the pretty actress — he ! he ! 
Your health, brother I" he added, raising a bumper of claret, poured 
out by the butler, to his lips. 

" I'm not sorry for the rencounter," muttered Abel. " A glass 
of white wine. Jukes. Brother, I drink to you. And how did 
Randulph behave on the occasion?" 

"It embarrassed him devilishly," rejoined Trussell; "and, in 
fact, he didn't recover himself during the whole day." 

"Indeed!" exclaimed Abel, thoughtfully. "And is he gone 
to visit the pretty actress, Kitty Conway, to-night — eh?" 

" I'faith, I can't say," replied Trussell, laughing. " I left him 
to his own devices. But we shall have him back presently, and 
then you can catechise him yourself — ha ! ha !" 

Trussell continued talking, laughing, and quaffing, during the 
whole of supper. He was in far too jovial a mood to notice — or 
heed, if he did notice them — the grave looks of his brother, at his 
boasts of the introductions he should give his nephew — the sights 
he should shew him — and the perfect gentleman he would make 
him. Abel's brow grew dark as the clock struck eleven, and Ran- 
dulph had not returned. He made no remark, however, but rising, 
called for a light, and, wishing his brother good night, he retired 
to rest. 



150 THE miser's daughtee. 

" I'm afraid Mr. Randulpli has displeased his uncle, Mr. Trus- 
sell," said Mr. Jukes. '* I wish he had come home before the old 
gentleman went to bed." 

" I wish he had, Mr. Jukes," repHed Trussell, laughing; " but 
it can't be helped. Boys will be boys. I needn't tell you I was 
just such another at his age." 

" You were a great deal worse than he'll ever be, I hopej" re- 
plied the butler, shaking his head. 

" Ha ! ha ! I fear so, Jukes," replied Trussell, smiling, as if a 

high compliment had been paid him. " I was a sad fellow — a sad 

fellow ! I've been talking over old times and old adventures with 

Sir Singleton Spinke ; and I fear we were terrible rakes — he ! he ! 

The young men of the present day have sadly degenerated. They 

haven't half the spirit of the beaux of good Queen Ann's days, 

when I was young — that is, when I was a boy, for Tm young still. 

Tlie bottle's empty, Jukes. But perhaps you think I've had wine 

enough. And, iYaith, I almost think so myself. So I'll e'en seek 

my pillow. 

" The man that is drunk is void of all care, 
He needs neither Parthian quiver nor spear; 
The Moor's poison'd dart he scorneth to wield. 
The bottle alone is his weapon and shield. 

Tolderol 

" This world is a tavern with liquor well stored, 
And into't I came to be drunk as a lord; 
M7 life is the reck'ning, which freely I'll pay, 
And when Tm dead drunk, then I'll stagger away! 

Tol de vol. 

Sit up for Randulph, Jukes. I'll lecture him in the morning. 
Carry the candle, old fellow, and lend me your arm, for I don't 
feel quite so steady as usual. 

" If I live to be old, for I find I go down, 
Let this be my fate in a country town; 
May I have a warm house, with a stone at the gate, 
And a cleanly young damsel to rub my bald pate. 

Derry down f 

And singing and laughing in a maudlin manner, he was conveyed 
up stairs to bed. 

Abel's first inquiry, when Mr. Jukes entered his room on the 
following morning at seven o"'clock, was as to the time at which 
his nephew returned overnight, and he received for answer, 



THE miser's DAUGHTEK. 151 

''Oh ! somewhere about half past eleven, or twelve, sir, I didn't 
•exactly observe." 

" You took care not to do so," rejoined Abel. " But what 
account did he give of himself ?' 

"I really didn't question him, sir," returned Mr. Jukes — " He 
went to bed almost immediately. But if he retired late, he's up 
early enough ; for he's in the garden already." 

" The deuce he is !" cried Abel, getting up. " "Well, come, that's 
something in his favour, at all events. My dressing-gown, Jukes." 

" If I might offer an opinion, sir," said the butler, as he assisted 
his master to put on his morning-robe, " I should say Mr. Randulph 
hasn't been at a gay party. He looks very thoughtful, and as if 
he had something in his mind. I hope he isn't going to fight a 
duel." 

" I hope not !" cried Abel, hastily. " That may account for his 
getting up so early. I must see him, and prevent it. Don't let 
him go out, on any account, till I come down. " 

Having dressed himself as expeditiously as he could, he pro- 
ceeded to the garden, where he found his nephew looking quite as 
pensive as he had been described by the butler. 

" You were late home, last night, Randulph ?" he said, after 
'ihe usual greeting had passed between them. 

" I was, indeed, much later than I intended, uncle," replied 
the young man; "but I was unavoidably detained." 

*' May I ask in what way?" rejoined Abel. 

" Pardon me, uncle, if I do not answer the question,'^ replied 
Kandulph. 

" I will not press you," rejoined Abel, severely. " But upon one 
point I require a direct answer. You have not, I trust, an affair of 
honour, so called — but most mistakenly — on hand?" 

" I have not !" replied Randulph, emphatically. 

"I believe you," rejoined Abel. " And so I am told you saw 
Hilda Scarve yesterday, and under circumstances not very agreeable 
to yourself?" 

The young man blushed deeply. 

" I am not sorry to find you have some shame left," said his 
uncle; "and trust the occurrence may prove a wholesome lesson 
to you. And now, while I am lecturing you, let me add that there 
are other dangers to which you may be exposed, besides those 



152 THE miser's daughter. 

arising from pretty actresses, and dissipation. I mean political 
dangers — dangers springing from the secret societies and their 
agents. Your father, I am aware, inclined to the Jacobite cause; 
and I am aware, also, that your mother had, and still has, the same 
bias. But she gave me to understand you were a staunch Hano- 
verian. Has she misrepresented you?" 

" Most assuredly not !" replied Randulph. " But I have troubled 
myself so Httle about the matter, that it is only lately that I have 
discovered her opinions were adverse to my own. I am obliged 
to you for the caution you have given me. Do you chance to know 
a gentleman named Cordwell Firebras ?" 

" The name seems familiar to me," replied Abel, musing. " Ah ! 
now I recollect it. It belonged to a person who was concerned in 
the Rebellion of '15, and had well-nigh involved your father in it. 
But what of him ?" he continued, regarding Randulph fixedly. 
*' Do you know him ? Have you met him since you came to 
town ?" 

*^I must again decline answering the question, uncle," replied 
Randulph. 

" Your declining to do so is an answer in this case," rejoined 
Abel; "and I must warn you against him as a most dangerous 
person. Thirty years have elapsed since this Firebras placed your 
poor father in fearful jeopardy. But if he is the person I have 
heard described, they will not have changed him." 

" Set your mind at rest as to his influence over me," replied 
Randulph. " I shall never waver in my loyalty." 

"I am glad to hear it, nephew," returned Abel; "for rely 
upon it, if, unhappily, another rebellion should break out, it 
will end as disastrously as the first. And now let us go t(!> 
breakfast." 

And leading the way to the house, they sat down to the well- 
spread board. Trussell did not make his appearance, and the meal 
passed off satisfactorily enough, until, towards its close, Mr. Juke» 
brought a note, which he dehvered to Randulph. 

" By your leave, uncle," said Randulph, glancing in some con- 
fusion at the superscription, and recognising the hand. 

He then broke the seal, and read as follows : — 

" I am going to Mr. Scarve ; and if I have an assurance of regrei 



THE miser's daughter. 153 

from you for your hasty conduct last niglit, and an undertaking 
that you will join us, I -will engage to procure you the hand of his 
daughter. Your determination must be speedily made; for to-day 
he is about to sign a marriage-contract with his nephew, Philip 
IFrewin. The bearer will bring you to me, if you desire to see 
me. " C. F." 

" You seem agitated, nephew," observed Abel. " Are the con- 
tents of that note secret?" 

" Indeed, sir, they are," replied Randulph. " And, what is 
more, I must answer them in person." 

" Oh, by all means do so," replied Abel, testily. " But remem- 
ber my caution." 

Randulph then hurried out of the room, and found, in the 
hall, the landlord of the Rose and Crown, who had brought him 
the note. 

*' Are you going with me, sir?" asked the landlord. 

Randulph replied in the affirmative ; and they quitted the house 
together. 

Abel was a good deal surprised and annoyed at his nephew's 
departure, and repaired to his library, where he endeavoured to 
compose his thoughts with a book. But the remedy in this instance 
proved futile ; for when Mr. Jukes entered the room about an hour 
afterwards, he found him pacing to and fro within it, with a dis- 
turbed air. 

" Well, is Randulph returned?" he asked, quickly. 

"No, sir," replied the butler. " I am come to say that Mr. 
Scarve's servant, Jacob Post, is without, and wishes to speak with 
you.'' 

" What's his business?" demanded Abel, sharply. 

"I didn't inquire, sir," replied Mr. Jukes; "but something, I 
should fancy, relating to Miss Hilda." 

" Most likely," said Abel. " Show him in." 

And the next moment Jacob was admitted. He had his crab- 
stick under his arm, and twisted his hat between his fingers as 
before, looking in any way but direct at Abel, Seeing his pre- 
sence was desired by neither party, Mr. Jukes retired. 

" Well, friend, what has brought you hither?" asked AbeL 



154 THE miser's daughter. 

Jacob coughed, and tried to clear away the huskiness that im- 
peded his articulation. 

" I'm come to see whether you've a situation for me, sir," he said, 
after sundry ineffectual attempts at plain speaking. " Wages isn't 
an object with me, sir, — they isn't, indeed. And I should like to 
serve you better than any other gen'l'man I know of." 

" What ! have you left Mr. Scarve?" said Abel. 

*' Not yet, sir," replied Jacob. " But he's given me notice. And 
if he hadn't, I think I should have done the same by him. He's 
grown worse than ever. He promised to give me a recommenda- 
tion to you ; but I don't think he meant what he said." 

" Well, I'll see what can be done for you," rejoined Abel; 
" that is, if Mr. Jukes can find you a place, — for I must leave the 
matter entirely to him. But what about your young mistress?" 

" I was comin' to her, sir," replied Jacob; " but I thought I'd 
settle my own affairs first. I've no good news to tell you about 
her. Master locked her in her own room last night, and he declares 
he won't let her out till she consents to marry his ne'vy," 

Abel uttered an angry exclamation. 

" Within these few days he's grown a downright barbareous 
domestic tyrant !" continued Jacob. " There's no bearing him. But 
to be sure he had enough to put him out of his way yesterday ; for 
you must know, sir, he was robbed of fourteen thousand pounds 
during our absence. However, he took it more quietly than one 
might expect; and I can't help thinkin' as how one Mr. Cordwell 
Firebras, a strange gentleman who visited him yester-mornin', knew 
somethin' about it." 

" Cordwell Firebras ! Has he been with him?" asked Abel, in 
surprise. 

" He was with him twice yesterday," replied Jacob. " And a 
note came from him this morning, which I know, from some words 
let fall by the old feUow concernin' it, related to your ne'vy and 
his daughter." 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Abel. 

" I almost fancy Mr. Firebras advised him to make up a mar- 
riage between 'em," pursued Jacob. 

" 'Sdeath !" exclaimed Abel, furiously. " How dares he make 
such a proposition? Who commissioned him to interfere?" 

" That's more than I can tell," rephed Jacob. " But howsome- 



THE miser's daughter. 1*55 

dever, I don't think master'll pay much attention to him, for he is 
going to sign a marriage counteract with Mr. Phihp Frewin and his 
attorney this mornin'." 

" It must not be," rejoined Abel. " That Frewin is an impostor." 

" So I thought from the first," returned Jacob; "but yesterday 
It was confirmed to me.^' And he proceeded to detail what he had 
witnessed at the Folly on the Thames. 

Abel heard him in silence, and at the close of his narration said, 
"Much as I dislike your master — painful as the interview will be 
to me, I will see him myself. Do not announce my coming, but 
take care I obtain admittance. Get some refreshment as quickly 
as you can, and then make the best of your way home.'' 

Jacob was not slow in obeying the injunction. Repairing to the 
kitchen, in less than five minutes he laid bare a cold shoulder of 
lamb, despatched half a dozen lettuces, which he plunged into a 
salt-stand, and then thrust almost whole into his capacious mouth, 
disposed of rather better than half a loaf, and washed all down with 
a large jug of strong ale. He then set ofiT to the stairs by the river 
side, where his boat awaited him, and jumping into it, pulled off as 
swiftly as he could to the opposite bank. 



156 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XX. 

Abel's interview with the miser — unexpected appearance of Randolph 
and cordwell firebras — result of the meeting. 

Half an hour afterwards, Abel Beechcroft set forth ; and 
taking his way beneath the trees of the Bishop's Walk — his own 
favourite promenade, where he used to pass the greater portion of 
each day, gazing at the broad and beautiful stream flowing past 
it, — proceeded along the Stangate, and crossing Westminster 
Bridge, directed his steps towards the Little Sanctuary. As he 
approached the miser's dwelling, a tide of tumultuous feeling 
pressed upon him, and he almost doubted his power of sustaining 
the interview he was about to seek ; but stringing himself up to 
the task, he knocked at the door. The summons was instantly 
answered by Jacob, who was in readiness, and who, without a 
word, admitted him. 

" You're just in time,^ sir," said the latter, in a deep whisper, 
as he shut the door ; " he's with him." 

" Who ! — Philip Frcwin ?" demanded Abel, in the same tone. 

" Ay, ay," replied Jacob. " Philip Frewin, and his attorney, 
Mr. Diggs." And striding along the passage, he threw open the 
door, and bellowed out, — " Mr. Abel Beechcroft !" 

This unlooked-for announcement, followed by the entrance of 
the old man, whose stem features were charged with a menacing 
expression, and who did not remove his hat, caused the utmost 
surprise and consternation among the trio. The miser was seated 
at the table, listening to a clause in a legal instrument which had 
been drawn up by Diggs, who was reading it to him, but who 
instantly stopped on hearing the name of his visitor. Philip, 
whose back was to the door, turned round in some confusion, and 
the miser, though greatly disconcerted, made an effort to command 
himself, and said in a voice of forced politeness, though suppressed 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 157 

rage, — " May I ask to what I am to attribute the honour of this 
most unexpected visit, Mr. Beechcroft ?" 

*' You will attribute it solely to the interest I take in your 
daughter's welfare, Mr. Scarve," replied Abel. " I would preserve 
her from the arts of a scoundrel, to whom you are about to 
consign her." 

" You are not perhaps aware in whose presence you stand, 
Mr. Beechcroft ?" cried Philip, rising, and furiously regarding him. 

" I believe you are Mr. Philip Frewin, the very person I referred 
to," replied Abel, coldly. 

" Then I am to understand you applied the opprobrious term 
you have just used, to me ?" cried Philip. 

*' Most distinctly !" rejoined Abel. " And I am wilHng to 
repeat it — to strengthen it — if you desire it.'' 

" Sir, you shall render me an account for this insolence !" cried 
Philip, clapping his hand to his side, and betraying by the move- 
ment — for he was disguised in his tattered apparel — that he was 
accustomed to carry a sword. 

" Let the law deal with him, my good sir,'' interrupted Diggs. 
*' You have a fair ground of action for defamation. As a profes- 
sional man, I warn you to take heed what you say of my respect- 
able client, Mr. Beechcroft." 

" You and 'your respectable client' will pursue whatever course 
you think proper," replied Abel; "but doSiot imagine your menaces 
will prevent me from disclosing the truth to Mr. Scarve.'' 

" If you come to defame my nephew to me, Mr. Beechcroft, 
your errand will be fruitless," said the miser, who had by this time 
fully recovered his composure. " I must decline hearing any thing 
you have to say. After what passed between us, years ago, I am 
surprised you should come here at all ; and I am still more surprised 
that you have obtained admittance, which you certainly would not 
have done if my inclinations had been consulted. But it seems I am 
no longer master of my own house, or of my own servant." 

*' Mr. Scarve," said Abel, in a commanding tone, and with a 
look that made the miser quail, " I have been called upon — 
solemnly called upon — to take this step. You well know the 
opinion I entertain of you, and the abhorrence in which I hold 
you, and that nothing would have brought me near you but a 
matter of the utmost urgency. I have been called upon, I repeat. 



158 THE miser's daughter. 

by an appeal which I could not resist" — ^his voice slightly trembled 
— "to befriend your daughter, and at the sacrifice of all personal 
consideration, I will befriend her. She herself has told me ^he 
has the strongest dislike to your nephew, and never will marry 
him." 

" All this may be very true, sir," replied the miser; " but I am 
at a loss to understand the right you have to mix yourself up in 
my affairs." 

" He has no right whatever, legal or otherwise, to do so," 
interposed Diggs. 

" I shall assume the right, then," replied Abel. " Mr. Scarve, 
if you are deaf to the appeal I have made to you, if you can resist 
the dying wish of your much-injured wife, for hers is the charge 
laid upon me, and are determined to force the inclinations of your 
child — if neither of these instances have weight with you, at least 
exercise the prudence which has hitherto been supposed to guide 
your conduct. You know me too well to suppose for an instant 
that I would deceive you. I therefore, in your presence, and in 
his presence, denounce your nephew as an impostor — a cheat — a 
swindler !" 

" 'Sdeath ! sir, if you go on thus," cried Philip, fiercely, 
" neither your years nor my uncle's presence shall protect you.^ 

" Let him pursue his own course," said Diggs, taking up a pen, 
and making some hasty memoranda on a sheet of paper. " We 
shall have swingeing damages — swingeing damages." 

" Mr. Beechcroft,^^ said the miser, " the opinion you have ex- 
pressed of me is fully reciprocated. You cannot hate me more 
than I hate you. Nevertheless, I am free to admit that you are 
incapable of advancing a deliberate falsehood; and I therefore 
believe that you think what you tell me of my nephew. But you 
are completely deceived; and some one, for a base purpose, has 
practised upon your creduHty. Mr. Philip Frewin is a careful and 
a prudent man — far too careful to please you — and has, in a few 
years, saved a large sum of money. This, his attorney and mine, 
Mr. Diggs, will, I am persuaded, testify to you." 

" Unless bonds, mortgages, and leases, to the tune of twenty 
thousand pounds and upwards go for nothing, I certainly can do 
so," replied Diggs. " Mr. Philip Frewin is worth that sum, besides 
fifty thousand pounds left him by his father, and which I have 



THE miser's daughter. 159 

every reason to believe lie holds in his possession. I agree with 
you, Mr. Scarve, Mr. Beechcroft must be the dupe o£ some 
designing person. But I can soon convince him of his error.*" 

" You will, perhaps, convince my attorney, Mr. Plaskett, of 
Lincoln's Inn, whom. I have instructed to make inquiries on the 
subject, sir," returned Abel, incredulously. " Meantime, I am 
satisfied that I have sufficient warrant for my opinion, and I there- 
fore adhere to it. I also give you warning, Mr. Diggs, that I shall 
hold you accountable for your statement. You say that Mr. Philip 
Frewin is wealthy — that you have deeds of his in your possession 
proving him worth twenty thousand pounds and upwards. Let 
those deeds be exhibited to Mr. Scarve." 

" There is some reason in this, Diggs," remarked the miser. " I 
should like to see them." 

" If my cUent permits it, and you desire it, I can have no ob- 
jection," repHed Diggs, readily, yet with a certain uneasiness; " but 
I am grieved to think such a degrading course should be necessary 
to support a character which ought to be above all suspicion." 

" Circumstances seem to render it necessary," said the miser. 
" And it must be as satisfactory to my nephew, as it will be agree- 
able to myself, that his character should be cleared from these 
aspersions." 

" Undoubtedly," rephed Philip; " and I will not rest till I have 
so cleared it." 

" And to reduce the charges to a distinct form," said Abel, 
sternly, " I declare you, Philip Frewin, to be a ruined spendthrift 
and debauchee, seeking, under the disguise of a wretched miser, to 
delude your uncle into giving you his daughter. I charge you, 
also, Mr. Diggs, with assisting him in the cheat. As a professional 
man, you well know what the consequences of your fraudulent con- 
duct will be." 

" Aware that I have nothing to fear, I deride your threat," said 
Diggs, boldly. 

" And so do I," added Philip, with a quavering laugh. 

" May I hope, then, that you will suspend all further negotiations 
respecting your daughter's marriage till you are further satisfied on 
these points, Mr. Scarve ?" said Abel. 

" I will," replied the miser. 

" Mr. Beechcroft may appear very disinterested in this matter," 



160 THE miser's daughter. 

said Philip ; " but in my opinion, the main object of his interference 
is to obtain my cousin's hand for his own nephew, Mr. Randulph 
Crew." 

" So far from that being the case," said Abel, " I would as soon 
consent to her union with yourself as with him." 

" Hum !" exclaimed the attorney. 

" Don't alarm yourself on that score, nephew," said the miser. 
* Make good your own case, and Hilda is yours. But come what 
may, depend upon it, she shall never be the wife of Randulph Crew 
with my consent, or with a farthing of mine." 

" Or of mine," subjoined Abel. 

As these words were uttered, the side door opened, and Hilda 
entered, followed by Mrs. Clinton. 

"Ah!" exclaimed the miser, darting an angry look at her. 
" What do you want here? — who let you out of your room ?" 

" Jacob unlocked the door, and informed me that Mr. Beechcroft 
was below," she replied ; " and 1 therefore came down to see him." 

" I trust I have opened your father's eyes to the trick attempted 
to be practised upon him," said Abel. *' He has promised not to 
proceed in the matter till a satisfactory explanation is given him 
respecting your cousin's affairs. And as I know that can n^ver 
be done, the match is virtually at an end." 

*' If it were not so," replied Hilda, " it would make no dijBference 
with me; for I here declare before you, that even if my cousin 
should prove to be what he represents himself, I will never wed him." 

*' After such a declaration, young man, is it possible you can 
desire to prosecute the match ?" 

" Is my cousin in earnest ?" asked Phihp, eagerly catching at 
the opportunity of escaping from the dilemma in which he found 
himself placed. 

" You could scarcely doubt it," she replied. " But if you require 
a reiterated assurance, take it." 

" Then, sir, if Hilda retains these opinions," said Philip, to his 
uncle, " there is an end of the affair." 

" How so ?" cried the miser. " You have my concurrence. 
Hilda will not dare to disobey me — to brave my displeasure." 

" I will not take her on those terms," replied Philip. " I will 
have her by her own free consent, or not at all." 

" Ah ! you are more scrupulous than you were yesterday," ob- 



THE miser's daughter. 161 

served the miser, suspiciously. " You shrink from your barsfain. 
There is some truth in what Mr. Beechcroft has stated." 

*' Take care, sir," observed Mr. Diggs to Philip. " Your mo- 
tives will be misconstrued." 

" I care not," replied Philip. *' I should be worse than Mr. 
Beechcroft represents me, to pursue a match, when the lady ex- 
presses so decided an opinion against it. I therefore beg to resign 
all pretensions to her hand." 

" Nephew !" exclaimed the miser, in surprise. 

" I am grateful for the good opinion you have entertained of me, 
uncle," pursued Philip; " and though I thus deprive myself of all 
chance of becoming your son-in-law, I will take care that you are 
fully satisfied of my title to that honour. Mr. Diggs shall wait 
upon you with the deeds." 

" You are hasty, Philip — " 

" Not so, uncle. I wish you good morning." 

And he was about to depart, when the door was again opened 
by Jacob, admitting Cord well Firebras and Randulph. It would 
be difficult to say whether the new comers, or those to whom they 
were introduced, were the most surprised at the meeting. Amid . 
the confusion, however, Randulph contrived to approach Hilda. 

" I fear," he said, — " indeed, I know I must have lowered my- 
self in your opinion by my conduct yesterday. But, though it may 
be no exculpation, permit me to state that the situation in which 
you perceived me was the result of accident." 

" No apologies are necessary to me, sir!" said Hilda, haughtily 
and distantly. "It cannot be other than matter of indifference to 
me who are your associates." 

" Yet hear my explanation," pursued the young man. *' The 
lady you saw me with was committed to my care by — as I live, 
by the very person who stands there, except that he was differently 
dressed at the time." 

'* I never saw you before, sir," said Philip — " never !" 

" I am satisfied you are the person," cried Randulph — " I would 
swear to your voice." 

" After this, sir, can you longer question the cheat attempted to 
be played upon you ?" said Abel to the miser. 

" If he does doubt it," said Firebras, " I will open his eyes." 

" It is plain I am tricked by some of you, and trifled with by 



162 THE miser's daughter. 

all!" cried the miser, angrily. "I would my house were rid of 
you!" 

" You shall be rid of me, at all events, uncle," said Philip, eager 
to escape. " Again I wish you good morning. Come, sir," he 
added, to the attorney. And they left the house together. 
' "I am glad he is gone," said Firebras. "Mr. Scarve, I have 
the pleasure to tell you your nephew is a consummate rascal, and it 
is well you are rid of him. Mr. Abel Beechcroft, I did not expect 
to meet you here, but your presence is singularly opportune." 
" For what, sir ?" demanded Abel, coldly. 
" Why, to come to some arrangement respecting a matter in 
which the happiness of your nephew is materially concerned," 
repHed Firebras. " I hope, sir, if these young people," pointing 
to Randulph and Hilda, " can understand each other, you will 
throw no obstacle in the way. And you, friend Scarve,^' he 
added, turning to the miser, "I counsel you to place this young 
man in the position of your nephew. He will make her a far 
better husband, and — " he whispered a few words in the miser's 
ear. 

" The condition, I presume, which you annex to the union is, 
that my nephew should join the Jacobite cause, Mr. Firebras,'* 
demanded Abel. 

Firebras made no reply. 

" Is it not so, Randulph ?" pursued Abel, sternly. 
" Uncle," replied Randulph, rushing towards him, and flinging 
himself on his knee before him, " I love Hilda passionately, and 
would sacrifice my life for her I" 

" But not, I hope, your honour," rephed Abel, coldly. " Recol- 
lect to whom you owe allegiance. Maintain your loyalty unsulHed, 
or I discard you." 

" Be not too hasty, sir," cried Randulph; "more than my life 
hangs on your breath !" 

" Randulph Crew," said the miser, " I have sufiered things to 
proceed thus far without interruption, because I have been taken 
by surprise ; but no importunities of yours, your uncle's, or Mr. 
Firebras's, shall prevail upon me to consent to your union with 
my daughter; and I positively interdict you from seeing her 
again." 

" And I lay the same injunction upon him,*^ said Abel. 






THE miser's daughter. 163 

** Hilda !" exclaimed the young man, looking at her — " Hilda !" 
But she averted her gaze. 

" Come with me, Randulph !" cried Abel, authoritatively, and 
moving towards the door. 

And, heaving a deep sigh, Randulph followed his uncle out of 
the room. 

" Hilda," said Cordwell Firebras, as soon as they were left 
alone — " you have lost a true lover — you, Mr. Scarve, have lost a 
good son-in-law — and I and the Jacobite cause have lost an excellent 
partisan." 



END OF THE FIRST BOOK. 



M 2 



THE MISER'S DAUGHTER, 



TRUSSELL BEECHCROFT. 



TRTJSSELL BEECHCROFT. 



CHAPTER I. 

TEUSSELL's appearance after his debauch — HE PROCEEDS WITH BANDCLPH TO 
LADY BBABAZOn's — THE PARTT GO TO MABTLEBONE GARDENS. 

Neither Randulph nor his uncle felt disposed for conversation 
during their "walk to Lambeth, whither they proceeded on quitting 
the miser's habitation; and, in fact, Abel thought it desirable to 
let the events that had just occurred work their own effect on 
his nephew's mind, without any assistance from him. Half an 
hour saw them home, and Mr. Jukes looked from one to the other 
as if anxious to learn what had happened; but he received no infor- 
mation. They found Trussell in the breakfast-room, reclining in 
an easy chair, sipping a cup of cold green tea to tranquillize his 
nerves, and reading the fashionable movements and intelligence in 
a morning paper, by the aid of a pair of spectacles, which he hastily 
took off on hearing their approach. He had on a loose brocade 
dressing-gown, a crimson silk night-cap, slippers down at heel, and 
imgartered hose hanging loosely about his legs. Altogether he had 
a very rakish and dissolute appearance. His eyes were red and in- 
flamed, and his face flushed with the previous night's debauch. 
An open note lay beside him on the table sealed with a coronet. 
He looked up with an air of fashionable languor as his brother and 
nephew entered the room, and asked yawningly, where they had 
been, but receiving no answer, jumped up, and repeated the inquiry 
with real interest. 

" Don't ask, brother," replied Abel, significantly — " Let it 
suffice that all is now right." 

" I am glad to hear it," replied Trussell, " though I don't know 
what has been wrong. I've just received a note from Lady 
Brabazon, Randulph, inviting us to accompany her to Marylebone 
Gardens this afternoon. You know we are engaged to dine with 
Sir Bulkeley Price." 



168 THE miser's daughter. 

*' Go to Marylebone, by all means," said Uncle Abel, kindly — 
*' it will serve to distract your thoughts." 

" I ventured to answer for you, Randulph," pursued Trussell, 
*' because there is a fete there to-day, and you are sure to be much 
amused. You'll find Marylebone very different from the Folly 
—ha! ha!" 

*' Only folly under a different name and in a richer garb — that's 
all," laughed Abel. 

" I'll now go and dress," said Trussell. " Lady Brab has sent us 
a subscription ticket," he added, pointing to a silver medal, about 
the size of a modern ivory Opera ticket, or " bone," stamped with 
designs in bold bas-relief, numbered, and inscribed " Marybone — 
ADMIT TWO," with the date, 1744. 

Abel took up the ticket, glanced at it, and laid it down with a 
smile. Randulph made an excuse for retiring to his own room, 
and on reaching it threw himself into a chair to indulge his reflec- 
tions. And bitter and crushing they were. Till wijhin the last 
hour, when he fully believed he had lost her for ever, he had not 
known the extent of his passion for Hilda. Now he felt — as all 
who have loved deeply have felt on some such occasion — that his 
existence had become a blank to him — and that he should never 
be entirely happy again. Again and again he reproached himself 
for his folly in respect to Kitty Conway ; and he almost resolved, 
like Uncle Abel, to forswear a sex that occasioned him so much 
torment. 

A tap at the door aroused him from his meditations, and Mr. 
Jukes entering, informed him that his Uncle Trussell was ready, 
and waiting for him. Randulph said he would be down in a 
moment; and making some slight change in his attire, which 
he scarcely thought suitable to the gay scene he was about to join, 
descended, and found his uncle in the hall fully equipped in a 
snuff-coloured velvet coat, laced ruffles, diamond buckles, a well- 
powdered bag-wig, and a silver hilted-sword. Trussell appeared 
rather impatient, and declared they were behind time : and he pro- 
ceeded at a rapid pace to the stairs near Lambeth Palace, where he 
called a boat, directing the waterman to row as quickly as he 
could to Whitehall Stairs — the nearest point to Pall Mall, where 
Lady Brabazon resided. 

As soon as they were gone, Abel summoned Mr. Jukes, and 



THE miser's daughter. 169 

having partaken of a biscuit and a glass of wine, ordered the 
butler to prepare to attend him to Marylebone Gardens. Mr. 
Jukes, who was well enough pleased by the proposed expedition, 
made as little delay as was consistent with his dignity ; and having 
delivered full instructions to the under-servant respecting dinner, 
presented himself in a well-powdered bob-major wig, a well-brushed 
brown coat, white waistcoat, and black velvets; and what with his 
round, rosy face, his swag paunch, and shapeless legs, looked the 
model of a well-considered, well-fed, and most respectable servant. 

Attended by the butler, Abel proceeded to Lambeth Stairs, 
where, as luck would have it, the ferry boat chanced to be crossing 
at that moment. Accordingly they got into it, and in a few minutes 
were transported together with a crowd of passengers of both sexes, 
and no less than six horses, in safety to the opposite side of the river. 
At the corner of Abingdon Street, they found a coach which Abel 
instantly engaged, and got into it, while Mr. Jukes with some 
difficulty clambered up to the box. They then drove along the 
Horseferry Road ; passed at the back of Buckingham House, and 
proceeded along Hyde Park Lane to their destination. 

Meanwhile, Trussell and Randulph, having arrived at Lady 
Brabazon's, were ushered into a magnificently-furnished drawing- 
room, where they found Beau Villiers, Sir Singleton Spinke, 
Clementina, and her ladyship; by the latter of whom they were 
very graciously received. Lady Brabazon instantly perceived 
Randulph's dejection, and exerting all her powers of wit and rail- 
lery soon raised his spirits. Whenever Lady Brabazon, indeed — 
mature coquette as she was — was determined to please, she seldom 
failed in accomplishing her purpose; and she directed her artillery 
with such tact and skill on the present occasion, that Randulph, 
armed as he conceived himself against such attacks, was not quite 
proof against her. It was quite evident, whether her feelings were 
interested or not in the conquest, that she was determined to cap- 
tivate the young man. This was so apparent, that a slight feeling 
of jealousy was roused in the breast of the beau, and he somewhat 
abruptly intimated his intention of giving up a drive to Richmond, 
which he had meditated, and of accompanying them, instead, to 
Marylebone Gardens. This change of plan was not altogether to 
her ladyship's taste ; but she affected to be delighted with it. 

"By -the -by, Mr. Crew," she said to Randulph, "you must 



170 THE miser's daughteb. 

attend my Drum to-morrow night. I have asked the new beauty 
whom Villiers has discovered — I mean Miss Scarve , the miser's 
daughter. She's perfectly charming, Villiers says — ^but I forget ; 
I needn't describe her, for you have seen her. As I live, I have 
called a blush to your cheeks ! Ha I ha ! don't you envy him his 
power of blushing, VilUers? Mr. Tnissell Beechcroft, I suspect 
your nephew is in love with Miss Scarve. See how he crimsons 
at the mention of her name." 

" Your ladyship forgets that my nephew is but newly imported 
from the country," replied Trussell. " He is not accustomed to 
the raillery of persons of your ladyship's wit.'^ 

" There's something more than bashfulness in his confusion," 
replied Lady Brabazon. " Mr. Crew is smitten by Miss Scarve — 
let him deny it if he can. And so for that matter is Villiers." 

" I' faith am I," replied the beau; " and if her father will give 
her fifty thousand pounds, which I know he can do, I will make 
her a present of my name and person." 

" You don't think it necessary to ask the young lady's consent?" 
said Randulph, scarcely able to conceal his displeasure. 

" Assuredly not," replied the beau, with a self-sufficient smile, 
which Randulph thought perfectly intolerable — " I fancy I'm 
pretty certain of that." 

" You see you've no chance, Mr. Crew," laughed Lady Bra- 
bazon — " your only resource is to get some other fair dame or 
damsel to take compassion on you !" 

" Your ladyship, for example/' said the beau, in a sarcastic 
and significant whisper. " But the young man doesn't seem dis- 
posed to profit by the suggestion." 

Randulph's thoughts, indeed, were elsewhere at the moment. 

" Well, I suspect Miss Scarve won't turn out half so beautiful 
as Mr. Villiers represents her," said Clementina, who couldn't bear 
to hear any other beauty spoken of except her own. — " I've gene- 
rally been disappointed in the objects of his admiration, and make 
no doubt she will be like the rest of them — very common-place 
and very vulgar." 

" She is neither one nor the other," said Randulph, with some 
vivacity. 

" Didn't I tell you he was in love with her !" cried Lady 
Brabazon, screaming with laughter, and displaying her brilliant 



THE miser's daughter. 171 

teeth. " She has refused him, and that accounts for his dejec- 
tion." 

Randulph's cheeks literally burnt with shame. « 

" Egad ! Lady Brab, I believe you have hit the right nail on 
the head this time," whispered Sir Singleton Spinke. 

" Your ladyship is a little too hard on my nephew," interposed 
Trusselt. " Spare him, I entreat of you." 

" Indeed, I sha*'n't," replied Lady Brabazon ; *' he must learn 
to take such matters with indifference." 

" Well, I hope we shall have an opportunity of seeing this fair 
creature," said Sir Singleton; " but I fear her father won't let her 
come. I'm told he watches her like a green dragon." 

" I've asked him to bring her," said Lady Brabazon, " and I 
know he won't refuse me. Shall I confess to you, Mr. Crew?" 
she added, laying her small white hand on his arm, " I've an 
admirer in this miser, whose heart is supposed to be fixed on his 
gold. Is not that a triumph?" 

" A glorious one !" laughed Trussell. " But I don't wonder at 
any conquest on the part of your ladyship. Saint Anthony him- 
self would not have been proof against you." 

" If Mr. Scarve should propose, I advise your ladyship to accept 
him," said the beau. 

" In that case, it won't do for you to make an offer to his 
daughter, Villiers,"" rejoined Lady Brabazon; " for I shall require 
him to settle all his property on me." 

" Then I must get beforehand with you," said the beau, " for 
I'm resolved to have her."" 

At this moment, a footman entered, and informed Lady Braba- 
zon that her carriage was at the door. He was followed by the 
little black page, leading the lap-dog by a silken cord. 

*' I shall not want you to-day, Mustapha," said her ladyship, 
taking the cord from him. " I will give Sappho an airing myself." 
She then arose, and taking Randulph's arm, and quitting the room 
with him, proceeded, through a line of powdered and richly-habited 
lackeys, to her carriage. 

Clementina was escorted by Sir Singleton, and the two ladies 
being seated, Randulph was requested to take a place beside them. 
Mr. Villiers accommodated the two other gentlemen in his gilt 
chariot — the admiration of the day — and the carriages were ordered 
to drive to Marylebone Gardens. 



172 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER II. 

MBS. NETTLESHIP — MR. CRIPPS PERSONATES HIS MASTER — MARTLEBONE 
GARDENS — MR. CRIPPS DETECTED. 

Before repairing to Marylebone Gardens, it will be needful to 
inquire into the proceedings of another person who proposed to 
visit it — namely, Mr. Cripps. Mr. Villlers, it will be remembered, 
had intended to drive over to Richmond on the day in question — 
to fulfil an engagement of more than a week's standing — but had 
suddenly, from jealousy or whim, changed his mind. Calculating, 
however, upon his master's adherence to his original plan, the 
valet had determined to profit by his absence to visit Marylebone 
Gardens. 

Mr. Cripps, it has been shown, was a A^ery great person in his 
own estimation; but he sometimes represented himself as a far 
greater person than he had any title to be considered, and induing 
himself in his master's clothes, laid claim also to his master's title; 
in other words, sinking the vulgar name of Cripps, he assumed the 
aristocratic one of Villiers. His displays of this kind were chiefly 
confined to the eastern side of the metropolis, where he was pretty 
certain not to meet either his master or his master's friends; liis 
principal places of resort being White Conduit-house, Sadler's 
Wells, Hockley -in-the-Hole, Islington, Hogsden, and certain other 
places of entertainment on the Surrey side of the water. 

One Sunday, when he was so disporting himself at White Con- 
duit-house, he contrived to strike up an acquaintance with a very 
showy dame who happened to be there, and who was dazzled by 
his brilliant exterior and airy manners — so superior, she thought, 
to those of the vulgar throng around her. Having attended her 
during her stay, Mr. Cripps called a coach for her, led her to it, and 
was rewarded by a tender look and a tenderer squeeze of the hand 
at parting. He had previously ascertained that the lady's name 



THE miser's DAUGHTER. , 173 

was Nettlesliip, that slie was the relict of a tallow-chandler, and 
resided in Billiter-square ; that she possessed a handsome property, 
bequeathed to her by her deceased spouse, the tallow-chandler 
aforesaid; and moreover, that she was without incumbrances. 
Fortune thus appeared to have thrown a rich prize in his way, if 
he could but obtain it. He found, however, on further inquiry, 
that Mrs. Nettleship was under a marriage engagement to her late 
husband's partner, Mr. Rathbone, who was at that time in the 
country collecting debts, and settling his affairs. But though this 
circumstance certainly appeared untoward, he determined to per- 
severe, being firmly persuaded that in love matters to dare was 
generally to succeed. With this view, he contrived to meet Mrs. 
Nettleship as often as he could, and had been exactly half a dozen 
times in her company prior to the opening of this history, during 
which period he contrived to heighten the agreeable impression he 
had produced on their first acquaintance, and in a great degree to 
obliterate the image of Mr. Rathbone. 

Mrs. Nettleship was a lady rather below the middle size, but not 
altogether destitute of personal attractions. She had a very full 
and very comely figure, very white and very rounded little arms, 
with pink dimpling elbows; and though she had no neck, or at 
least none that was perceptible, from the wreaths of fat above and 
below it, she had cheeks large and round enough to make up for 
the deficiency. Her eyes were as small as those of a Chinese lady, 
but very black and bright — bright enough, her late husband used 
to say, "to light a candle at;" and her nose had the prettiest 
turned up point in the world. It was this feature, in especial, that 
called forth the descriptive powers of Mr. Cripps, who appeared in 
a state of ecstasy whenever he contemplated it or thought of it, and 
having a slightly turned up nose himself, contended, reasonably 
enough, that no beauty could exist without such a formation, and 
that Grecian noses, and above all, Roman noses, were detestable, 
and unendurable. It was not difficult to bring Mrs. Nettleship to 
his opinion; and though she flustered and blushed at his compli- 
ments and fine speeches, and professed to think them too extrava- 
gant, it was evident she swallowed them as easily as if they had 
been strawberries and cream. 

Mrs. Nettleship was at an age when, more than any other, such 
compHments are estimated ; she was exactly forty-five, and she 



174 THE miser's daughter. 

therefore knew the full value of her attractions. During their 
interviews, she had often expressed a strong desire to visit Ranelagh, 
Marjlebone Gardens, or Vauxhall, in company with her admirer ; 
but Mr. Cripps constantly evaded the request, under some plea or 
other, until an opportunity appeared to present itself, in his master's 
proposed drive to Richmond, and he resolved to hazard a visit to 
Marylebone Gardens with her, fervently praying it might decide 
his hopes. 

So soon, therefore, as the coast was clear, he repaired to his 
master's dressing-room, and with the assistance of Antoine, the 
French valet, ransacked the wardrobe, and attired himself in the 
richest habiliments it contained. Thus the embroidered scarlet 
coat, the flowered silk waistcoat, the black velvet breeches, the 
pearl-coloured silk hose, that had decorated the beau's own person on 
the previous day were now transferred to his own. To these he 
added one of his master's finest laced shirts, and a point-lace cravat. 
A pair of large diamond buckles were fixed to his shoes, and a 
silver hilted sword to his side. He next selected a large and bril- 
liant ring from the beau's jewel-box, which he placed upon his 
finger; covered his cheeks and chin with patches; put on a full 
flowing Raraillies perriwig; thrust a magnificent gold snuff-box 
into his pocket, together with a fine cambric handkerchief; chose 
the handsomest clouded cane he could find ; took up a feathered hat 
which had only been once before worn by his master, and which 
he himself had prevented him from wearing on that day; and 
having contemplated himself with great complacency in the large 
cheval-glass before him, declared to Antoine that he thought he 
should do ! 

Receiving a confirmatory reply from the French valet, he went 
down a back staircase, which he had often traversed before when 
bent on secret expeditions, and quitted the house. A coach was 
waiting for him at the comer of Spring Gardens, into which he 
got, and ordered the coachman to drive for very Hfe to the top of 
Harley Street, where he had appointed to meet Mrs. Nettleship, 
and where, in fact, he found her waiting for him. 

Discharging his own vehicle, he handed the lady out of hers; and 
apologising to her for having detained her, led the way to the gar- 
dens. He launched out into an eloquent panegyric on her dress, 
Tf^rhich he designated as ravishing, predicting its efiect on the assem- 



THE miser's daughter. 175 

Wage they were about to join. Mrs. Nettleship had, indeed, taken 
quite as much pains with lier toilette as her admirer; and it was no 
slight satisfaction to her to find her efibrts appreciated. Her gown 
was of blue and silver silk of the richest description, and inflated 
almost to the size of a balloon by an enormous hoop. She wore 
diamond ear-rings, and a diamond solitaire, while her neck was en- 
circled by a chain of large orient pearls. Her stomacher was spotted 
with plated silver, and thickly studded with Bristol stones. Her 
sleeves were short and wide, tied above the elbow with white satin 
bows, and edged with deep falls of lace. Her cap was of pink silk, 
and caul-shaped, and from behind it floated two strearaer-Hke crim- 
son ribands. Her ruddy complexion, which needed no aid of rouge, 
was relieved by abundance of patches, while her little fat fingers, 
rosy as those of Aurora, pept from out a pair of black mittens. A 
large fan, then as indispensable to a lady as a sword to a gentleman, 
completed her appointments. 

Marylebone Gardens, it is well known, lay on the eastern side of 
the upper end of the lane bearing the same name — the whole of the 
country beyond Harley Street, which was not more than a third of 
its present extent, being open fields. They were of considerable 
size, and were originally laid out and planted at the beginning of 
the last century, at which time the public were gratuitously admitted 
to them. In one part of the grounds there was an excellent bowl- 
ing green, which drew many lovers of that most agreeable recreation 
to it. By degrees, the gardens being very conveniently situated, 
rose in repute; and in 1737, their proprietor, Mr. Gough began to 
demand a shilling for admittance — this sum entitling the visitor to its 
value in refreshments. But still further improvements were effected. 
Orchestras, boxes, and a theatre for musical entertainments were 
erected within them. Besides the main walks, semicircular rows of 
trees were planted, and hedges contrived so as to form pleasing laby- 
rinths for those who preferred privacy. Bowers and alcoves were 
built in different places; lamps were fastened to the trees, and at 
night, on the occasion of a fete, every part of the garden was illu- 
minated with myriads of lamps of various colours. The company 
began to improve, and the price of admission was raised to five 
shillings. Fetes of every kind were held here; and the place con- 
tinued in vogue until nearly the end of the century with which its 
xise commenced. Malcolm mentions that a few trees, once forming 



176 THE miser's daughter. 

part of Marylebone Gardens, were standing at tlie nortli end of 
Harley Street in 1808. But we fear not even a stump of one of 
tliem is now left. 

Carriages, coaches, and chairs were setting down their occupants 
at the entrance to the gardens, as Mr. Cripps and his companion 
drew near. Never had Mrs. Nettleship seen a gayer throng — the 
dresses she thought magnificent. There was Lady Ancaster, whom 
Mr. Cripps pointed out to her, in a brocaded lutestring sack, with 
ruby-coloured ground and white tobine stripes trimmed with floss 
— the Countess of Pomfret, in a black satin sack flowered with red 
and white — Lady Almeria Vane, in a scarlet un watered tabby 
sack — Lady Ilchester, in a white tissue flowered sack. All these 
ladies wore hoops; but none of them, Mr. Cripps assured his com- 
panion, managed this equipment with half so much grace as herself. 

Throughout this stage of the business, Mr. Cripps had some diffi- 
culty in playing his part, and it required all his effrontery to enable 
him to go through with it. Having affirmed to his companion 
that he was an intimate acquaintance of all the ladies of rank he 
encountered, and in the habit of attending their routs and parties, 
he was under the necessity of sustaining the character, and kept 
constantly bowing and kissing his hand to them. In most cases 
he succeeded ; for the ladies he addressed, deceived by his showy 
attire, which seemed to mark him as somebody, returned his saluta- 
tions. Mrs. Nettleship was enchanted. To be attended by so 
fashionable a person, who knew all the beau monde, was supreme 
felicity. She would have given the world to be introduced to some 
of the fashionable ladies, and intimated as much to her companion ; 
but he was too shrewd to attend to the suggestion, contenting him- 
self with saying, with a very impassioned look, " I hope, my angel, 
that one of these days, I shall have the honour of introducing you 
to my fair friends under another name. 'Twould make me the 
happiest of men — 'pon rep !" 

" Ods bodlklns! Mr. Willars, how you do confuse me!" ex- 
claimed the lady, spreading her large fan before her face. 

By this time, they had gained the principal avenue leading to- 
wards the orchestra, and at each step he took, Mr. Cripps kissed 
his hand to some elegantly dressed person. 

"There's my friend Lord Effingham and his countess," he said 
— "glad to see you, my lord — that's the pretty Mrs. Rackham — a 



THE miser's DAUGHTER. 177 

bride, sweetheart, a bride "vnth. tender emphasis — " that's the rich 
Mrs. Draper — I daren't look at her, for she's determined to have 
me, whether I will or no, and I can't make up my mind to it, 
though she's promised to settle sixty thousand pounds upon me, 
and to die in six months." 

"La! Mr. Willars, you wouldn't sell yourself to such an ojus 
creature as that !" cried Mrs. Nettleship — " why, she's a perfect 
fright, and so dressed !" 

" Precisely what you describe her, 'pon rep !" repHed Mr. 
Cripps. " But do listen to the music. Isn't it inspiring?" 

And they paused for a moment to listen to the lively strains 
proceeding from the orchestra, which was placed at one end of a 
large building facing the principal walk. 

By this time, the company had almost entirely assembled. The 
main walk was completely thronged, and presented the appearance 
of the Mall at high tide, while all the boxes and alcoves were filled 
with persons discussing bowls of punch, plates of ham, chickens, 
salads, and other good things. The band in the orchestra was ex- 
cellent, and the lively airs and symphonies added to the excitement 
and spirit of the scene. Mr, Cripps created a great sensation. 
Many persons thought they had seen him before, but no one could 
tell who he was. Meanwhile, the object of this attention continued 
to dispense his bows and smiles, flourished his clouded cane, tapped 
his magnificent snufi'-box, and after astonishing all the beholders 
with his coxcombry, glided off with his companion into one of the 
side walks. 

He had scarcely disappeared, when Lady Brabazon and her party 
entered the main walk. Her ladyship led her little spaniel by its 
string, and was attended on one side by the beau, and on the other 
by Trussell. Behind them walked Clementina, who had contrived 
to allure Randulph from her mother, and to attach him to her^ 
while on the young man's left walked Sir Singleton Spinke. 

Everybody whom Mr. Villiers encountered told him of the pro- 
digious beau who had just been seen on the walk — Lord Effingham, 
Major Burrowes, Lord Dyneover, Sir John Fagg — all described 
him. 

" Who the devil is he ?" cried Villiers. 

" Haven''t the least idea," replied Sir John Fagg. " But T\\ 
speak to him, if I meet him again. He's your very double, 

N 



178 THE miser's daughter. 

Villiers. Fll swear lie has employed Desmartins to make him a 
suit precisely Kke your own." 

"Has he?" cried the beau, indignantly — "Then I'll never 
employ a rascally Frenchman again ! and what is more, I won't pay 
him his biU." 

TJie same thing was told him by twenty other persons, and the 
beau looked anxiously round for his personator, but was for some 
time unable to discern him. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Cripps had sought this secluded walk to give 
him an opportunity of making a declaration to the widow, and 
though he was not positively accepted, he was not decidedly refused, 
— the lady only asking time to consider over the proposal. The 
audacious valet was on his knees, and rapturously kissing her hand, 
vowing he would never rise till he received a favourable answer to 
his suit, when two persons were seen approaching, whom, to his 
infinite mortification and surprise, he recognised as Abel Beechcroft, 
and his uncle, Mr. Jukes. 

" We are interrupted, my charmer !" he cried, getting up, with 
a countenance of angry dismay — " Let us return to the public pro- 
menade. You won't refuse me ? I shall kill myself, 'pon rep, if 
you do !" 

" I'll think of it, Mr. Willars," said Mrs. Nettleship, twirling -her 
fan. " But it would be a dreadful thing if I was to break my 
engagement to Mr. Rathbone !" 

" Oh ! curse Mr. Rathbone ! I'll cut his throat !" cried Mr. 
Cripps, glancing anxiously down the walk. But unfortunately there 
was no outlet at the lower end, and he was compelled to turn and 
face the intruders. He looked also to the right and left, but on 
neither side was there an alcove into which he could retreat. 
Nothing was left for it but impudence, and luckily for him, this 
quaHty seldom deserted him at a pinch. Putting on his boldest 
manner, he strutted gaily, and with affected nonchalance, towards 
Abel and his imcle, who, as he advanced, stepped a little aside to 
look at him. 

" Why, as I live !" cried Abel, " that's Mr. Villiers's valet — ^your 
nephew. Jukes." 

" Lord save us ! so it is," cried Mr. Jukes, lifting up his hands 
in astonishment. "Why, Crackenthorpe, what are you doing 
here — and in your master's clothes ?" 



THE miser's daughter. 179 

" Truce to your jests, old fellow," said Mr. Cripps, waving him 
off, " and let me pass." 

"What! disown your uncle!" cried Mr. Jukes, angrily, " and 
in the presence of his worthy master ! The rascal would deny his 
own father. Pay me the ten crow^ns you borrowed yesterday." 

" La ! Mr. Willars, what's the meaning of all this ?" asked Mrs. 
Nettleship. 

" Ton my soul, my angel, I don't know, unless the old hunks 
has been drinking," replied Mr. Cripps. *' The 'rack punch has 
evidently got into his head, and made him mistake one person for 
another." 

" 'Rack punch !" cried Mr. Jukes, furiously. " I haven't tasted 
a drop ! You call him Mr. Willars, ma'am," he added, to Mrs. 
Nettleship — " He's deceiving you, ma'am. He's not Mr. Willars — 
he's Mr. Willars's gentleman — his valet." 

" A truce to this folly, you superannuated old dolt !" cried Mr. 
Cripps, raising his cane, " or I'll chastise you." 

" Chastise me !" exclaimed the butler, angrily. " Touch me, if 
you dare, rascal ! Crackenthorpe, Crackenthorpe — you'll certainly 
be hanged." 

"Let him alone. Jukes," interposed Abel. "He'll meet his 
master at the comer of the walk, and I should Hke to see how he'll 
carry it off." 

Taking advantage of the interference, Mr. Cripps passed on with 
his inamorata, who was as anxious to escape from the scene as him- 
self; while Abel and Mr. Jukes followed them at a short distance. 

It fell out as Abel had foreseen. As Mr. Cripps issued into the 
broad walk, right before him, and not many yards off, were his 
master and Lady Brabazon, together with the rest of the party. If 
the valet ever had need of assurance, it was now. But though 
ready to sink into the earth, he was true to himself, and exhibited 
no outward signs of discomposure. On the contrary, he drew forth 
his snuff-box, took a pinch, in his airiest manner, and said to Mrs, 
Nettleship — " There's Lady Brabazon — accounted one of the finest 
■women of the day, but, upon my soul, she's not to be compared 
with you." 

With this, he made a profound salutation to Lady Brabazon, 
who looked petrified with astonishment, and kissed his hand to 
Trussell, who was ready to die with laughing. As to the beau, he 

N 2 



180 THE miser's daughteb. 

grasped his cane in a manner tliat plainly betokened his intention 
of laying it across his valet's shoulders. But the latter, divining 
his intention, and seeing that nothing but a bold manoeuvre could 
now save him, strutted up to him, and said in a loud voice — " Ah! 
my dear fellow — how d'ye do? — glad to see you — plenty of com- 
pany" — adding in a lower tone, — " For Heaven's sake, sir, don't 
mar my fortune. I'm about to be married to that lady, sir — large 
fortune, sir — ;to-day will decide it — 'pon rep !" 

Mr. Villiers regarded him in astonishment, mixed with some 
little admiration ; and at length his good nature got the better of 
his anger. 

" "Well, get you gone instantly," he said; *' if I find you in the 
gardens in ten minutes from this time, you shall have tlie caning 
you merit." 

" Good day, sir," replied Mr. Cripps — " I'll not forget the 
favour." And, with a profound bow, he moved away with the 
widow. 

"And so you have let him off?" cried Lady Brabazon, in 
amazement. 

" Upon my soul, I couldn't help it," replied the beau. " I've a 
fellow-feehng for the rascal — and egad, all things considered, he 
has played his part so uncommonly well, that I hope he may be 
successful." 




^iy\. Cywk.shtJi'M^ 



M'^Cripps ''nrniinicn'np' his Masirr in Mary-lc bone Gardens, 



l.ONljyN HAKHY AO" Ul'lADF.NUW.l, GTHlvKT , lUIT. 



THE miser's daughter. 181 



CHAPTER III. 

A BIAN-OF-THE-WORLd's advice on a BIATTER of the heart — THE VISIT TO THE 

HAYMARKET THEATRE, AND THE SUPPER AFTERWARDS WITH KITTY CONWAY 

RANDULPH AGAIN AWKWARDLY CIRCUMSTANCED WITH HILDA. 

On the morning succeeding the visit to Marylebone Gardens, 
commemorated in the preceding chapter, as Trussell and Randulph 
sat together after breakfast, the latter communicated to his uncle 
all that had occurred at the miser's the day before, and besought 
him to give him a hope of obtaining Hilda's hand. 

" I wish I could do so, Randulph," replied Trussell, who had 
questioned him particularly as to the lady's deportment and man- 
ner during the interview; " but I don't see how it is possible. 
Were it an ordinary case, I should say. Go on — make the attempt. 
Difficulties,* especially in love matters, are always to be overcome 
by perseverance. But it is not so here. In the first place, you 
have forfeited the lady's esteem, and though that might be set to 
rights, if you had an opportunity for full explanation, yet, as affairs 
now stand, it is awkward. Then — what is far more important — 
her father and my brother are averse to the match ; and though it 
wouldn't signify displeasing one of them, it won't do to offend 
both." 

Randulph sighed deeply. 

" If, from an over-nice sense of honour, which, though I ap- 
plaud, I can scarcely understand," pursued Trussell, " you had not 
given your property to your father's creditors, you might have had 
Hilda for asking." 

" "Were the choice still left me, I would act as I have done," 
replied Randulph, emphatically. " I was bound to clear my 
father's memory." 

" Nay, I am far from meaning to upbraid you," replied Trussell. 
" I think your conduct singularly honourable and disinterested, 



182 THE miser's daughter. 

and not the less so because it lias been attended witli tbe present 
result. But in regard to this union, upon which you seem to have 
set your heart, and about which you have consulted me, I cannot 
seriously recommend you to indulge the thought of it for a mo- 
ment. The two old gentlemen, who have the reins in their hands, 
set their faces against it so entirely, that, even if the lady's consent 
could be obtained, it would be the height of folly to proceed with 
it. You would only wed to beggary ; and for Hilda's sake, as well 
as your own, that must never be." 

" You are right!" cried Randulph, rising, and taking a turn, 
round the room. " Is there no way of acquiring wealth expedi- 
tiously?" 

" None that I am aware of," replied TrusseU ; " unless you 
choose to have recourse to the gaming-table, or the highway. 
You may, if you please, turn Jacobite, and obtain a commission 
from King James the Third. Such things, I hear, are now daily 
given away; and if he should come to the throne, your fortune 
will be made." 

Randulph started ; for this chance remark brought to his mind 
Cord well Firebras's proposal, with which his uncle was wholly un- 
acquainted. A means of obtaining Hilda's hand through the in- 
fluence of this person presented itself to him. But he rejected the 
idea as soon as conceived. 

'^ Jesting apart, nephew," said TrusseU, who had noticed his 
confusion, but attributed it to a diflFerent cause. *' You must give 
up all idea of Hilda. She is a charming girl, no doubt; but she 
is not the only charming girl in the world ; and you must fall in 
love with some one else as quickly as you can. It seems impossi- 
ble at present, I make no doubt. But don't despair. You'll get 
over your disappointment in time. Why not begin with Lady 
Brabazon ? She has given you plenty of encouragement ; and is just 
the woman to initiate you into the ways of the world. It would 
be quite worth your while to devote yourself to her for a season ; 
and by this means you will gain a reputation for gallantry, which 
is very desirable for a young man." 

" I have no such ambition, uncle," replied Randulph. "Lady 
Brabazon is extremely fascinating, but my heart is otherwise en- 

ged." 

" Pshaw !" exclaimed TrusseU, " we don't live in the days of 



THE miser's daughtee. 183 

chivalry and eternal constancy. Men are no longer the preux 
chevaliers they used to be. Women like us all the better for a 
little infideHty. They fancy us better worth having when others 
are running after us. One success leads to another. Nourish, if 
you please, a secret passion for Hilda, but amuse yourself as you 
think proper, in the meantime. If it answers no other purpose, 
it will prevent you from doing something desperate. By-the-by, 
it just occurs to me that we are to meet your lady love at the 
drum to night Now let me advise you how to act." 

Before the council could be given, Mr. Jukes entered the room, 
and dehvering him a Httle perfumed billet, on a silver waiter, de- 
parted. 

"From Lady Brab herself, I declare I" cried Trussell, glanc- 
ing at the superscription, and breaking open the note. " Egad ! 
here's a disappointment. Old Scarve won't allow his daughter to 
attend her ladyship's drum to-night if we go there ; and so, she 
prays us to dine with her to-morrow instead." 

" And thus I shall miss my only chance of seeing Hilda, while 
she will be exposed to the assiduities of that daring impertinent, 
Beau Villiers !" cried Randulph. 

" Very true," said Trussell, gravely. ^ 

" I won't receive the back-word," said Randulph. " I'll go in 
spite of her ladyship." 

" Poh! poll! you mustn't think of such a thing," rejoined 
Trussell. " It would be an unheard of impropriety ; and you 
would only expose yourself to insult. It's devilish unlucky, but 
it can't be helped. I've pointed out to you the remedy for the 
evil : forget Hilda, and replace her image with that of Lady Bra- 
bazon. If the beau robs you of your mistress, you can soon be 
even with him. Ha! ha! And now, since the plans of the day 
are so entirely changed, suppose we go into the city, and see some 
of the sights there, and afterwards dine at a coffee-house. Who 
knows but we may meet with some adventure that may completely 
divert the current of your thoughts." 

Whatever Randulph might think of the probability of his 
uncle's notion being realised, he acquiesced in the suggestion, and 
not long after this, they sallied forth, and taking a boat at the 
Palace stairs, rowed to the Tower, near which they were landed. 
Conversant with every object of interest in the old fortress, Trus- 



184 THE miser's daughter. 

sell proved an excellent guide to his nephew, and they spent some 
hours in examining its various fortifications, and in talking over 
its historical recollections, as well as in visiting its armouries and 
its lions, and such matters as were then, and much more recently, 
exhibited to the public. From the Tower, they proceeded to the 
Royal Exchange, where they likeAvise spent some time. 

As the day had begun to draw in, Tnissell proposed an adjourn- 
ment to Kivat's coftee-house, where, he averred, they were sure of 
a good dinner and excellent wine. Randulph assented, and to 
Kivat's they repaired. Trussell's assertion was found to be well 
warranted ; the dinner was capital, and the claret so good that, in 
spite of his nephew's remonstrances, he called for a second bottle. 
Kandulph had already drunk more than he was accustomed to, but 
he could not resist the bumpers pressed upon him by his jovial 
uncle, who assured him that the best way of getting rid of care was 
to drown it in the glass. A third bottle was called for and disposed 
of ; and Trussell then ordered a coach, and privately instructed the 
driver to take them to the little theatre in the Haymarket. 

On arriving there, they were shown, by Trussell's desire, into a 
box near the stage, and as they entered it, the house was ringing 
with the applauses bestowed on a song which had just been executed 
by a female singer. The reiterated cries of encore were at length 
complied with by the fair object of them, who, advancing from the 
wings, whither she had retired, disclosed the figure and features of 
Kitty Conway. She repeated the song with infinite archness and 
spirit, and Randulph, like the rest of the house, was in raptures 
with her. He applauded vehemently, and as Kitty gracefully 
courtseyed in return for the plaudits, she recognised him, and 
during the rest of the performance, scarcely ever removed her eye 
from him. In spite of his efforts to avoid it, Kandulph could not 
be insensible to the witchery of her glance ; neither was he blind 
to the perfect symmetry of her exquisite 'little figure, displayed to 
the greatest advantage in a pretty peasant dress, or her airy move- 
ments, nor deaf to her joyous laugh that rung like silver upon his 
ears. He was, therefore, almost glad when the curtain fell, and hid 
her from his view. 

Trussell, who had noted with secret satisfaction the efiect pro- 
duced by the pretty actress upon his nephew, and who had, perhaps 
not undesignedly, placed him so near her, now launched into a 



THE miser's daughter. 185 

rapturous panegyric of her charms and talent, declaring both to be 
unapproachable; and while Randulph was assenting to all he heard, 
an orange woman entered the box, as was then the custom, and 
while affecting to offer her basket of fruit to the elder gentleman, 
slipped a note into the hands of the younger. She then withdrew, 
and Randulph, opening the billet, found, as he anticipated, that it 
came from Kitty Conway, and contained an invitation to him to sup 
with her after the play. 

"You will go, of course?" said Trussell, as his nephew showed 
him the note. 

Kandulph looked perplexed. 

" What ! afraid of a pretty Avoman !" laughed Trussell. " I had 
a better opinion of you. I'll take care of you. Let me see where 
she lives. Oh, close by — at the corner of the Haymarket, next to 
Cockspur-street. By-the-by, the note is not directed. She doesn't 
know your name. Ha ! ha !" 

" Well, I suppose I must go," said Randulph. 

"To be sure you must," laughed Trussell. " You'll forfeit all 
claim to be considered a youth of spirit if you don't." 

The entertainments of the evening were concluded by the " Mock 
Doctor," in which Kitty Conway did not appear; and this over, 
they quitted the house, and repaired to the abode of the pretty 
actress. A footman in rich livery admitted them, and ushered 
them into a small but exquisitely-furnished apartment, blazing with 
wax lights and mirrors, where they found Kitty sea'ted on a couch, 
conversing with an old gentleman, who, as he looked up at their 
entrance, proved to be Sir Singleton Spinke. An elderly female, 
probably the fair actress's mother, was likewise present. The old 
beau seemed a little disconcerted on their appearance, but he 
instantly recovered himself. As to Kitty Conway, she sprang from 
the couch, and running towards Randulph, stretched out both hands 
to him with unfeigned joy, crying — " Oh ! how very glad I am to 
see you ! how kind in you to come ! I had almost given you up. 
And now you must introduce yourself to me in due form; for 
though I wrote to you, you may have perceived I didn't know how 
to address my billet." 

" Permit me to have that honour, sweet Kitty," said Sir Single- 
ton, stepping forward, "for both are particular friends of mine. I 
was not aware they were coming, or I would have taken care to 



186 THE misee's daughter. 

apprise you of their names. This is Mr. Randulph Crew, newly 
arrived from Cheshire, and with all the freshness — in every sense — 
of the country about him. And this is his uncle, Mr, Trussell 
Beechcroft." 

"And his guai'dian also, I presume," laughed Kitty; "for it 
appears he won't let him stir without him." 

" I ought to apologise for this intrusion, Mrs. Conway," said 
Trussell, " and I can only excuse myself on the ground of my ex- 
cessive desire to make your acquaintance." 

" You are Mr. Crew's uncle, sir — that is enough for me," replied 
Eatty. " I am delighted to see you." 

Trussell bowed, and placed his hand upon his heart — a gesture 
peculiar to people who have very little heart to be so indicated. 

" You have got the start of us, Sir Singleton," he said. " When 
we had the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Conway at the Folly on the 
Thames, the other day, I fancied you were unknown to her." 

' " Our acquaintance is only of two days' date," said Kitty. " Sir 
Singleton was good enough to send me " 

" Hush ! hush ! sweet Kitty, I implore you," interrupted the old 
beau. 

" Nay, I haven't been enjojned to secresy," she rejoined. ^' He 
sent me a suit of diamonds worth five hundred pounds, entreating a 
moment's interview in return, which of course I could not refuse." 

" Of course not," laughed Trussell. " Do you hear that, Ran- 
dulph?" he whispered to his nephew. "Ah, you're a lucky dog! 
No diamonds necessary in your case, you see." 

At this moment, the servant entered the room, and announced 
supper. Kitty gave her arm to Randulph, and the old beau and 
Trussell contended for the elderly lady, who at length fell to the 
charge of the former. 

Meanwhile, the pretty actress led her most favoured guest to the 
adjoining chamber, the walls of which were adorned with several 
choice paintings, most of them relating to theatrical subjects. Over 
the fireplace hung a portrait of Kitty herself in one of her favourite 
characters, and Randulph commented upon its resemblance to her 
with a warmth that brought the colour to her cheek, and caused 
her heart to palpitate against his arm. A round table stood in the 
middle of the room, loaded with cold chickens, cold ham, cold 
tongue, lobsters, pates, jellies, and salads. There were several sorts 



THE miser's daughtee. 187 

of wine on the table; ratafia, rosa soils, and usquebaugli on the 
side-board ; and champagne in ice in the beaufet. As soon as the 
others made their appearance, Kitty dismissed the attendant. 

" We can wait upon ourselves just as well," she said, " and the 
presence of a servant is always a restraint." 

" I'm quite of your opinion," said Trussell. " Allow me to offer 
you a wing of a chicken." 

" Thankye," replied Kitty. " Pray take care of yourself. Have 
you ever seen me play Flora in the opera before, Mr. Crew?" 

" I'm almost ashamed to confess that this is the first time I've 
ever been in a theatre in London," replied Randulph. 

" I told you he was fresh from the country, Kitty," laughed the 
old beau — " very fresh 1" 

" I like him all the better for it," she replied. " How singular 
I should be the first actress you have seen." 

" Singularly delightful !" rejoined Randulph, gallantly. 

And TrusseU, who sat next him, nudged him in token of his 
entire approbation. 

" By-the-by, Sir Singleton," he said. " I haven't yet inquired 
how we chance to see you here to-night. I thought you were 
engaged to Lady Brab's drum ?" 

" So I was," replied the old beau. " In fact, I've been there for 
a couple of hours; but I prefer a supper with Kitty Conway to all 
the parties in the universe." 

"You flatter me," rejoined the fair object of the compliment; 
" such a pretty speech deserves a glass of champagne. Will you 
join me and Mr. Crew in one?" 

" With the greatest pleasure," repHed Sir Singleton. 

And springing up with an agility perfectly youthful, he took a 
bottle from the ice-pail, and poured its foaming contents into Kitty's 
glass. 

" A thousand thanks, Sir Singleton," she said. " I'm concerned 
to give you so much trouble." 

" Don't say a word," replied the old beau, bowing. " I'm en- 
chanted to be your slave." 

" I see no reason why we shouldn't follow their example, madam," 
said Trussell, taking the bottle from Randulph, and assisting the 
elderly lady. * 

"Nor I," she replied, returning his bow. 



188 THE miser's daughter. 

"Apropos of Lady Brab's Drum, Mr. Crew," said Sir Singleton, 
" old Scarve the miser, and his daughter, Hilda, were there." 

" I understood they were expected," said the young man, setting 
down his glass. 

" I hope the wine is not too much iced for you?" remarked 
Kitty, anxiously. 

" Not in the least," he replied. 

" It sometimes gives one a pain in the heart," said Kitty — " and 
I feared that such might be the case with you." 

" She seemed to be greatly admired," resumed Sir Singleton; 
" but for my part, I agree with Clementina Brabazon in thinking 
her beauty over-rated. One thing, perhaps, might be against her 
— she was decidedly out of spirits." 

Randulph finished his glass. 

•" Who are you speaking of ?" asked Kitty, who, in her anxiety 
about Randulph, had not caught the previous remark. 

" Hilda Scarve," replied Si'r Singleton. " She is considered 
very beautiful. But she won't bear a comparison with some one 
I could point out." 

*'I accept the compliment. Sir Singleton," rejoined Kitty, 
smiling. ** I have heard of this fair creature before. Give me 
some ratafia, Mr. Crew, and pledge me. I can play the hostess, 
you perceive." 

" To perfection — as you play every thing else," returned Ran- 
dulph. 

"Why, you have only seen me in one part, and can't therefore 
judge," she replied. " However, I accept the compliment, as I 
have just done Sir Singleton's." 

Trussell had felt some uneasiness about his nephew during the 
latter part of the conversation, but he now hoped the danger was 
past. He was mistaken. 

** I forgot to say, Mr. Crew," remarked Sir Singleton, with a 
little covert malice, " that Villiers paid the miser's daughter very 
marked attention, and devoted himself to her almost exclusively 
during the whole time I remained." 

*' Indeed !" exclaimed Randulph, turning pale. 

" And how did she receive his attentions?" interposed Trussell, 
adroitly. 

" Why, coldly enough, I must say," replied Sir Singleton. 



THE miser's daughter. 189 

" "Was her father with her? — did he sit near her?" asked Ran- 
dulph, breathlessly. 

"No; he was at cards, and thereby hangs a tale, which I will 
tell you anon. She was attended by Sir Norfolk Salusbury, who, 
I believe, is a relation of her's." 

" Sir Norfolk is her cousin on her mother's side," remarked 
Trussell. 

"He is a stiff, punctilious old fellow," laughed Sir Singleton. 
*' He didn't seem in the least to approve of Villiers' attentions to 
Hilda, and I shouldn't wonder if they fight about her to-morrow. 
But now for the story I promised you. Old Scarve, who, it 
seems, is a capital whist player — 

" He was always so reputed," observed Trussell. 

"And with reason, as you will find," rejoined Sir Singleton. 
*' Well, he sat down to cards, in the early part of the evening, 
with Sir Bulkeley Price, and in less than an hour won twelve 
thousand pounds of him." 

" Twelve thousand pounds. Sir Singleton!" exclaimed Trussell. 
" You amaze me." 

" Tt amazed every body else, too, I assure you," replied Sir 
Singleton. " Sir Bulkeley had had too much wine; and he went 
on losinor and doublino; his bets, until his losses amounted to the 
sum I've mentioned. I tried to stop him, but it was of no avail. 
You should have seen the old miser rise from the table after his 
success. I never beheld such fearful exultation. His eyes literally 
blazed, and he walked like a young man. Sir Bulkeley got up 
at the same time, with a very flushed face, and said, * You shall 
have your winnings to-morrow, Mr. Scarve.' To which the miser 
replied, with a bitter sneer, *The mortgage will do as well, Sir 
Bulkeley.' " 

" A home thrust! and just like him," said Trussell. "Well, 
I've lost some money in my time, but never any thing like this." 

" I wish I could have such luck as the miser," said Kitty; " I'd 
leave oif acting, and take to gaming. But you've been talking so 
hard, that you've forgotten to eat, gentlemen. For my own part 
I should be glad of some champagne." 

Her glass was instantly filled by Randulph, and Sir Singleton 
challenged the elderly lady. The conversation then became very 
lively. Kitty presently volunteered a song, which she executed so 



190 THE miser's daughter. 

charmingly, that it quite ravished her auditors. In fact, her 
sprighthness, beauty, and accomplishments, coupled with her win- 
ning manners and good-nature, made her almost irresistible — and 
so Randulph found. The champagne circulated freely, and its ef- 
fects began to be slightly manifest on the two elderly gentlemen. 
Again Kitty poured forth her clear and melodious voice in song, 
when the door opened, and a young man entered the room. It was 
Philip Frewin. He looked surprised and annoyed at seeing the 
party, and a flush of anger rose to his cheek as he recognised Ran- 
dulph. Kitty Conway carelessly motioned him to a chair, which 
he took almost mechanically. Sir Singleton and Trussell slightly 
acknowledged his presence, but Randulph sternly regarded him. 

" I believe, sir," he said, " you are the person I saw at Mr. 
Scarve's, and whom I previously met at the Folly on the Thames. 
May I ask the meaning of the masquerade attire you assumed 
yesterday ?" 

" You are under some mistake, sir," rejoined Philip, with great 
ejSrontery. '^ I know nothing of Mr. Scarve." 

" Not know him !" cried Randulph, in amazement. " I under- 
stood you were his nephew, Philip Frewin." 

" I am no relation to Mr. Scarve, and my name is not Philip 
Fruin," replied the other. 

Kitty Conway here burst into a loud laugh, which she continued 
in spite of Philip's angry looks. 

" Will you oblige me with your real name then?" demanded 
Randulph, after a pause. 

" No, sir, I will not," replied Philip. "What the devil is it to 
you what I am called? I am not accountable to you for my ac- 
tions. How comes this impertinent fellow here, Kitty?" he added, 
turning to her. 

*'He comes by my invitation," she rejoined; "and if you do 
not like his company, you can leave the house." 

" It is for him to leave, not me," replied PhiHp. "If he won't 
go quietly, I shall be under the necessity of turning him out." 

Kitty uttered a faint scream, and Randulph sprang to his feet, 
while the rest of the party regarded each other in dismay, as if in 
expectation of a scene. 

Under the influence of excessive passion, which supplied him 
with a courage foreign to his craven nature, Philip strode towards 



THE miser's daughter. 191 

Randulph, apparently with the intention of carrying his threat 
into execution; but before he could reach him, Kitty threw herself 
between them. Under her shelter, Philip became so violent in his 
manner and offensive in his language, that at last Randulph lost 
his patience, and snatching Sir Singleton's clouded cane from him, 
he pushed Kitty aside, and began to lay it with considerable 
energy upon Philip's shoulders. Roaring lustily, the latter made 
for the door, and Randulph pursued him, Kitty following closely 
after them, to see that no mischief ensued. 

In this way, they hurried along the lobby, where Philip got 
open the street-door, and darted out with such rapidity that he ran 
against a tall man who chanced to be passing at the time, and who 
instantly caught hold of him. Before his captor, walked two other 
persons, preceded by a link-boy, and the latter hearing the noise, 
turned round, and threw his light full upon the party. The 
persons in advance were the miser and his daughter, who were re- 
turning from Lady Brabazon's, and the tall man was no other than 
Jacob Post. 

At this moment, Randulph rushed forth; but on seeing the 
miser and his daughter, he halted in dismay, which was not dimi- 
nished as Kitty Conway came up and caught hold of his arm. It 
was an embarrassing situation certainly, and Randulph was so con- 
founded that he could not utter a word. 

Jacob, meanwhile, having discovered the prize he had caught, 
lost no time in announcing his good luck. 

*' Look here, sir !" he cried, triumphantly ; " look at your miserly 
nephew ! I have him fast enough. Look at the clothes he has on. 
Mayhap he'll deny himself now. Look at him, I say, sir ! and 
satisfy yourself that it's him, for he'll outswear me afterwards if 
you don't." 

" What ! Philip !" cried the miser, "is it really you?" 

" It is, sir," repHed Philip. "And if you will order your ser- 
vant to release me, I will explain how I came to be here, and in 
this dress. I have been put in peril of my life by Randulph Crew, 
who stands there with his mistress." 

" Release him, Jacob," said the miser. 

" I'd rather you'd let me take him to Saint James's Round- 
house," replied Jacob; " I'm sure it's the fittest place for liim." 



192 THE miser's daughter. 

" Do as I bid you, rascal !" cried Scarve, authoritatively, " Now 
then, what is the meaning of all this, Philip?" 

" Do not inquire further, father," cried Hilda, trembling vio- 
lently. " Come away, I beseech you." 

Seeing that Randulph was unable to speak, Eatty Conway ad- 
vanced towards the miser. 

" lean explain what has happened in a moment," she said. 

" Father!" said Hilda, in a determined tone, " if you will not 
accompany me, I will walk forward by myself." 

" I'm ready to go with you," said Jacob. 

"Well, well, I'm coming," repHed the miser — "some other 
time, nephew — some other time." 

As the miser and his daughter moved off in one direction, Philip, 
fearful of the consequences of remaining, ran off in the other. At 
this moment, Trussell and Sir Singleton appeared at the door. 

" Well, have you got rid of him?" cried the former. 

" Look where he runs," laughed IGtty. " Who do you think 
chanced to be passing at the very time we came forth?" 

" Perhaps the miser and his daughter," said Trussell. 

" A good guess," replied Kitty. 

"' The devil !" exclaimed Trussell — " and they saw you with my 
nephew ? Why, this is worse than the Folly on the Thames !" 

"Far worse!" groaned Randulph. "My hopes are now ut- 
terly destroyed !" 

"I don't understand you," said Kitty; "but come into the 
house." 

"No," replied Randulph, bitterly; "and I would I had never 
entered it." 

" For Heaven's sake, Randulph, consider what you are about," 
cried Trussell; — " this rudeness to a pretty woman, who has shown 
you so much kindness ! I blush for you." 

" I am no longer master of myself," cried Randulph. 

And murmuring some apology to Kitty, he bade her good night, 
and walked off with his uncle. 

" Well, here's a pretty conclusion to the supper," said Kitty to 
the old beau. "I don't know whether to laugh or cry; but 
perhaps I'd better laugh. Randulph Crew is an odd young man, 
but he's very handsome, and that makes up for a thousand singu- 
larities." 



THE miser's daughter. ] 93 

" He has very bad taste, Kitty," replied Sir Singleton, " for he's 
hlind to your attractions, and adores Hilda Scarve." 

" So it seems," she replied, in a tone of pique. " And now, 
good night, Sir Singleton." 

" Not just yet, sweet Kitty," he cried, following her. " I've a 
great deal to say to you. I shall make you another handsome pre- 
sent to-morrow." 

"Then keep what you have to say till then," she rejoined, 
slapping the door unceremoniously in his face. 



194 THE MISEE^S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER IV. 

BANDULPH'S CA££ER OF GAIETY — ABEL's REMARKS UPON IT TO MR. JUKES. 

Randulph's reflections on awaking the next morning were not 
of the most enviable kind ; and bitterly did he reproach himself for 
his imprudence. Fate seemed determined to place an insurmount- 
able bar between him and the object of his hopes, and he, at last, 
in some degree, consoled himself, as many others have done before 
him, by thinking that he was rather the victim of necessity than of 
his own misconduct. 

Throughout the early part of the day, he continued in a state of 
deep depression, from which Trussell in vain tried to rouse him. 
As to Abel, having ascertained from Mr. Jukes the cause of his 
despondency, he forbore to question him about it, and even feigned 
not to notice it. 

It required some little persuasion to induce him to dine with 
Lady Brabazon that day ; but once in the atmosphere of her lady- 
ship's wit and pleasantry, he soon revived. Divining, with true 
feminine tact, the cause of his dejection, she speedily dissipated it 
by her fine powers of raillery ; and to his own surprise, he passed a 
very agreeable evening, and quitted the house more than half in love 
with its fair mistress. 

Satisfied of the impression she had produced, Lady Brabazon 
did not fail to improve it. She included him in all her parties for 
a month to come, and took care to involve him in such a round of 
gaiety and fashionable dissipation, that he could not by any means 
extricate himself from it. The effect of this was soon manifest in 
his habits, in his attire, and in his manners ; and though the change 
was mightily approved of by Trussell, it was viewed in a very 
different light by his more sagacious and far-sighted uncle. 

" Well, Jukes," said the latter one day to his butler, " my first 
opinion of Randulph is fully borne out by his conduct." 



THE misee's daughter. 195 

" Why, he is rather gay, to be sure," replied Mr. Jukes. " But 
I don't give him up yet. Young men, as Mr. Trussell says, will 
be young men." 

*' But there''s no occasion for them to be young rakes," 'said Abel, 
sharply. " My nephew is a sad dissipated dog. Lady Brabazon 
seems to have got him completely into her toils." 

" Ah ! she's a dangerous woman !" said Mr. Jukes, lifting up 
his hands — " a dangerous woman !" 

*' And the pretty actress, Kitty Conway?" pursued Abel. "He 
sups with her occasionally, eh ?" 

" I fear he does, sir," replied Mr. Jukes. 

" Fear — you know he does, sirrah," cried Abel. " Why attempt 
to equivocate? What masquerade were they talking of at break- 
fast this morning?" 

"What, haven't you heard of it, sir ?" replied the butler. " It's 
a grand masquerade to be held at Ranelagh on Thursday. All 
the world is going there ; and, amongst others, my graceless ne- 
phew, Crackenthorpe Cripps." 

" What ! in his master's clothes, as before?" said Abel. 

" No, sir," repHed Mr. Jukes, " as harlequin." 

" Harlequin !" echoed Abel, " that will suit him exactly. And 
I hope the silly widow he is paying his addresses to wiU go as 
columbine." 

" Precisely what she means to do, sir," laughed Mr. Jukes. 

" Get me a domino before Thursday, Jukes ; I'll go to this mas- 
querade myself," said Abel. 

" Why, sir, you're becoming as great a rake as your nephew," 
returned Mr. Jukes, laughingly. "If I might be permitted, I 
should like to go with you to Ranelagh. I wish to have an eye 
on Crackenthorpe. Ah, sir ! our nephews are sad plagues to us — 
sad plagues !" 

" My nephew shall not plague me much longer," replied Abel. 
" I'll give him another month, and then " 

" You'll give him another after that," interrupted the butler. 

"No I won't," rejoined Abel; "I won't give him a day, nor an 
hour longer. I've spent nearly a hundred pounds upon him 
already — upon his dress— his amusements — his profligacies. No, 
I'll pack him off into the country. By-the-by, his mother has 
written to say she is coming to town. I've endeavoured to dis- 

o 2 



196 THE miser's daughter. 

suade her from the step, but she says she is uneasy about Ran- 
dulph." 

"Well, I hope she'll come," returned Mr. Jukes; " I'm sure 
she's wanted just now." 

" I've no wish to see her," said Abel, sternly. " There ha^ 
"been a coolness between us for years." 

" Then the sooner it is got rid of the better," rejoined the butler*. 
** Don't let the grave close over it. Her presence, I think, is very 
desirable. And on her son's account, as well as yours, I'm glad 
she's coming." 

"Don't calculate upon it," cried Abel, **for I don't think it 
likely. If I can hinder it, I will." 

" While we're on confidential matters, sir," said Mr. Jukes, 
" may I ask how Miss Scarve is getting on?" 

" Well enough, for aught I know," rejoined Abel, testily; 
" I've neither heard from her, nor seen her, since my visit to her 
father. And now I wish to be alone. Take care to get me a 
domino before Thursday." 



THE miser's daughter. 197 



CHAPTER V. 

BANDULPH RECEIVES A LETTEK FROM HIS MOTHER — ITS EFFECT UPON HIM — 
HIS GOOD RESOLUTIONS DEFEATED BY TRUSSELL. 

Randulph's mother had only written to him twice since his 
arrival in town, — for in those days ladies, especially country ladies, 
were neither so active nor so exacting in their correspondence, as 
&t present, — when one day, just as he was sallying forth on a plea- 
surable expedition with Trussell, a letter was delivered to him by 
Mr. Jukes, bearing her superscription. Glancing at it with some 
misgiving, he would have broken the seal, but Trussell, noticing 
his reluctance, and guessing the cause, advised him to put it in his 
pocket, and read it on his return at night. 

" Good advice," he said, laughingly, "is all the better for keep- 
ing, — its chief recommendation being that it is just as effectual a 
month afterwards as at the moment given." 

" If it had been a billet from Lady Brabazon, or Kitty Conway, 
he would have opened it without hesitation," remarked Abel, who 
stood by. 

" To be sure," replied Trussell, " and he would have done quite 
xif^ht, because such a note would require immediate attention, and 
as a man of breeding he could not leave it a moment unanswered." 

" And I am to infer, therefore, that a mother's letter is to be put 
aside," rejoined Abel. 

"Not exactly, sir," laughed Trussell; "but when one knows 
that it contains a lecture, one naturally feels indisposed to read it. 
That I suppose you can understand." 

"I understand no such thing," replied Abel, tartly; "but I 
perfectly understand how excessive addiction to pleasure injures 
the best principles, and chills the warmest affections. FiUal love 
and duty have Httle influence when dissipation has obtained the 
sway." 



198 THE miser's daughter. 

*' I acknowledge tlie justness of your rebuke, uncle," said Ran- 
dulph, " and will read the letter instantly." 

"On no account," rejoined Abel; " pursue your first impulse. 
It will ' keep,' as my brother says, tiU to-night, and you may pos- 
sibly be then in a better frame of mind for its perusal. When you 
have possessed yourself of its contents I shall be glad to be made 
acquainted with them." And turning away, he retreated to the 
library. 

It was late when Randulph returned, after a day spent in gaiety, 
as usual, and on retiring to his own room, his first business was to 
take out his mother's letter Opening it, he eagerly scanned its 
contents, which ran thus : — 

" My dear Son, — The accounts I have received of your mode 
of life have given me inexpressible uneasiness. A mother's hopes 
are perhaps seldom fulfilled, and my expectations, I now feel, were 
too sanguine ever to be realised. Still, I did not anticipate such 
complete disappointment as I have experienced. With your gene- 
rous nature and quick impulses, I should not have been surprised 
at your being led into slight indiscretions; but that you should 
have plunged so deeply into dissipation, and connected yourself 
with persons so very profligate, grieves me to the heart. Your 
conduct, I beheve is mainly attributable to bad advice, and there- 
fore, in some degree, to be excused. Your uncle Trussell is not 
without principle, and has a kindly disposition; but the enjoyment 
of the moment is all he cares for, and he is utterly reckless of con- 
sequences. I thought I had sufficiently guarded you against him, 
but I now see my error, and feel that I ought never to have intro- 
duced you to society so dangerous. My reliance was in your uncle 
Abel. I persuaded myself you would discern the good that lies 
beneath the surface of that excellent man, and anticipated much 
from your introduction to him. Not the least, therefore, of my 
affliction is the knowledge that you have forfeited his good opinion. 
Let me hope it is not too late regain it. 

" In your first letter you spoke of Hilda Scarve in terms of the 
highest admiration, I have been informed from another source 
that she is as highly-gifted as beautiful, and I confess it would have 
delighted me to see you united to her. I am aware there are 
obstacles in the way ; but they might, perhaps, have been removed* 



THE miser's DAUGHTER. 199 

Here again your misconduct, or, to give it its mildest term, your 
imprudence, has been prejudicial to you. 

" On another point — namely, your interview with the mysterious 
individual beneath the cloisters of Westminster Abbey, I do not 
deem it prudent to write. 

" In conclusion, my dear son, I beseech you to pause in your 
headlong career, to abandon the worthless society you have formed, 
and to place yourself under the guidance of your uncle Abel. He 
can save you. And that he may do so is the fervent prayer of 
" Your most aflFectionate mother, 

" Sophia Crew." 

Kandulph read this letter over and over again, and each time 
with fresh self-reproaches. He thought his mother viewed his in- 
discretions in too serious a light, but he could not disguise from 
himself that her fears were well grounded. What chiefly affected 
him, however, was the passage referring to Hilda, and its re-perusal 
caused him to pace his chamber with agitated steps. 

At last he became calmer, and sought his couch ; but he could 
not sleep, and in the morning arose feverish and unrefreshed. His 
uncles were at the breakfast- table before him; but though both 
noticed his dejected and haggard appearance, neither commented 
upon it. On the contrary, Trussell was livelier than usual, and 
rattled away about the masquerade to be given at Ranelagh on the 
following day, dilating upon the amusement to be expected at it. 
All at once, Raudulph broke silence. 

" I do not intend to go to the masquerade, uncle," he said. 

" Not go !" exclaimed Trussell, laying down a piece of broiled 
ham which he was conveying to his mouth. " Not go ! — why not, 
in the name of wonder?" 

Abel eyed his nephew narrowly. 

"I have been too much at such places of late," replied Ran- 
dulph. 

Trussell burst into a derisive laugh. 

" I see how it is," he said ; " you have received a dose of good 
counsel from your mother, and are labouring from its efiects." 

"1 trust I shall profit by the advice I have received," replied 
Randulph; "and as the first step towards it, I mean to abstain 
from the masquerade at Ranelagh." 



200 THE miser's daughter. 

Abel fastened his grey eyes upon him, as if he would read his 
soul, but he made no remark. 

"Well, well, do as you please, my dear boy," said Trussell — 
" do as you please. I shan't attempt to persuade you. But a mo- 
ment's reflection will convince you that your mother is not in a 
condition to judge of your conduct. She can only learn what you 
are doing by report; and report always exaggerates. Her alarm 
is quite natural. You are a deviHsh handsome fellow — very much 
liked by the women — very much courted by persons of quality. 
People in the country are terribly afraid of pretty women and great 
folks ; but you know that both are perfectly harmless. My only un- 
easiness about you," he added, with a dry cough, and a side glance 
at his brother, " is, that your means are rather inadequate to your 
expenses. But you may be richer one of these' days." 

" I see little prospect of it," muttered Abel. 

" I tliink there is every prospect of his making a good match, 
sir — ^but that is neither here nor there," replied Trussell. 

" I hope you don't allude to Beau VilHers's cast-off mistress, 
Lady Brabazon," said Abel. " I would rather he married Kitty 
Conway than that worthless woman. There is at least some 
honesty about the actress." 

" Do not be apprehensive on that score, uncle," rejoined Ran- 
dulph; " I am not likely to be so duped. My eyes are opened to 
my folly." 

" How long wiU they continue so ?" sneered Abel. " Satiety 
begets loathing, but with a fresh appetite you will begin anew." 

"I hope he will," said Trussell, "for I cannot, for the life of 
me, discover the harm he has committed." 

" It would surprise me if you did," observed Abel, contemp- 
tuously. 

The conversation here dropped, and the party continued their 
breakfast in silence. At its close, the elder uncle quitted the 
room. 

"You were somewhat rash in forming the resolution you have 
just announced, Randulph," observed Trussell, as soon as they were 
alone: " I didn't like to say so before my brother; but I felt quite 
sure of your going to the masquerade, notwithstanding your de- 
claration to the contrary." 



THE miser's daughter. 201 

" You are mistaken, sir," replied Randulpli, witK tlie air of a 
person wlio has come to an unalterable determination. 

"No, I am not," rejoined Trussell, smiling; "and wlien I tell 
you that Hilda Scarve will be there, I rather fancy you will 
acknowledge the correctness of my remark." 

" Ah ! that alters the case, indeed," exclaimed Randulph. " But 
are you sure of what you tell me?" 

*' As sure as we are now sitting together," replied Trussell. 
*' She is going" there under the escort of her relation, Sir Nor- 
folk Salusbury." 

"Then of course I must go," cried Randulph. "I wouldn't 
lose the chance of meeting her for the world." 

" But you forget — you have been too much at such places of 
late," jeered Trussell. 

" One more visit can make no difference," rejoined Randulph. 

" But there's no knowing what it may lead to," pursued Trus- 
sell. "Recollect your eyes are now open to your folly — ha ! ha !" 

" Laugh as much as you please, uncle," replied Randulph. " I 
do not go to see the masquerade — but to meet Hilda." 

" TV ell, I'm glad of your determination, on whatever plea you 
put it," rejoined Trussell, seriously. 

At this juncture, Abel re-appeared. 

" Well, Randulph," he said, regarding him — " still of the same 
mind? — No masquerade to-morrow, eh?" 

" I fear you will have little confidence in me in future, when I 
tell you I have decided upon going," replied Randulph, colouring 
with shame. 

" I expected as much," replied Abel, coldly. " I knew you 
would not be proof against your uncle's powers of persuasion." 

" Indeed, sir, I have not persuaded him," said Trussell. " Have 
I, Randulph?" 

" You have not," was the reply. 

"Then let me give you one piece of advice, Randulph," ob- 
served Abel. " Don't boast of your good resolutions until you 
have given them a trial." 



202 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE FAI& THOMASINE's VISIT TO HILDA — HER MYSTERIOUS COMMDNICATION — IN 
WHAT WAY, AND BY WHOM, THE ATTEMPT TO CARRY OFF HILDA WAS" PREVENTED 
— THE MISER BURIES HIS TREASURE IN THE CELLAR. 

During all this time, the miser continued to lead precisely the 
same life as before. Notwithstanding his application to Abel Beech- 
croft, Jacob Post had not quitted his master's service; for with all 
their bickerings and disagreements, the porter was strongly attached 
to him. A word, moreover, from Hilda, had turned the scale, and 
decided Jacob upon staying. Things therefore, went on in their 
usual way. Diggs had contrived, by producing deeds and other 
documents, which appeared regularly executed, to convince the 
miser that his nephew's account of his circumstances was cor- 
rect. But the project of the aUiance was dropped, or suffered to 
remain in abeyance, and Hilda endured no further annoyance 
respecting it. 

But it must not be imagined she was perfectly tranquil. On 
the contrary, she was haunted by the recollection of Randulph, 
who had made a much deeper impression on her heart than she 
had at first supposed ; and though she made the strongest efforts to 
banish his image from her thoughts, they were unsuccessful. The 
very jealousy she had experienced increased the flame ; and her 
casual encounter with him, as she was returning from Lady Bra- 
bazon's, tended to keep it alive. She saw nothing of him, and 
heard nothing of him, except that her father now and then told 
her, with a bitter sneer, that he had become excessively dissipated. 
But she now began to find excuses for him, and blamed herself for 
having acted harshly towards him on their last interview. Her 
solitary life, too, contributed to foster her passion. She had little 
to dwell on besides him, and his image being most frequently pre- 



THE miser's daughter. 203 

sented to her imagination, insensibly became linked with her af- 
fections. 

One morning, when her father was from home, and she was sit- 
ting in her own room, Jacob tapped at the door, and informed her 
that the mercer's daughter from over the way. Miss Thomasine 
Deacle, was below, and begged to speak with her. 

She instantly came down stairs, and found the young lady in 
question awaiting her, and very finely dressed, being attired in a 
red and yellow damask gown, with a red satin stomacher, crossed 
with ribands of the same colour, great bunches of ribands at her 
ruffles, and a pretty little fly-cap similarly bedizened. She was gaz- 
ing round the room with the greatest curiosity, but on seeing 
Hilda, rushed towards her, and wringing her hands, exclaimed, in 
tones of the deepest commiseration, " And is it in this miserable 
place that loveliness Hke yours is immured ! What a marble- 
hearted tyrant your father must be?" 

Hilda looked at a loss to comprehend the meaning of this 
address. \ 

" I beg pardon," pursued the fair Thomasine ; " but I am so 
horror-stricken by the sight of these naked walls, and this desolate 
apartment, that I may, perchance, have expressed myself too 
strongly. Oh! how can you exist here, Miss Scarve?" 

" I contrive to do so, strange as it may appear," replied Hilda, 
smiling. 

" This is a moment I have for months sighed for," cried the 
fair Thomasine, falling into a theatrical attitude. " I have longed 
to commune with you unrestrainedly — to form a strict friendship 
with you. You will soon understand me, as I understand you. Yes, 
Hilda Scarve and Thomasine Deacle, however disproportionate 
their rank, will be constant and attached friends. From^this mo- 
ment I devote myself to you. We have both many feelings in 
common. We both love, and have both been disappointed ; or 
rather, our affections have been betrayed." 

" I must beg you to cease this absurd strain. Miss Deacle, if the 
interview is to be continued," replied Hilda, somewhat haughtily. 
" I have neither loved, nor been disappointed." 

"Nay, fear me not," rejoined the fair Thomasine. " Your se- 
crets will be as secure in my bosom as in your own. I am a woman, 
and know of what a woman's heart is composed. I deeply sym- 



204 THE miser's daughter. 

pathize witli you. I know liow tenderly you love Randulph 
Crew, and how unworthy he has proved himself of your regard." 

" Really, Miss Deacle," cried Hilda, blushing, " I cannot suffer 
you to talk in this way." 

" I only do so to shew you that you may have entire confidence 
in me," replied the fair Thomasine. *•' Ah. ! Mr. Crew is very 
handsome, very handsome, indeed. I do not wonder at his in- 
spiring a strong passion." 

*' You are mistaken in supposing he has inspired me with one," 
rejoined Hilda, somewhat piqued. " I hope you do not come 
from him." 

" Oh, no," replied the fair Thomasine ; " but if I can do aught 
to forward the affair — if I can convey any message to him — com- 
mand me?" 

"It is time to put an end to this nonsense," said Hilda. "If 
you have nothing else to speak about to me, except Mr. Randulph 
Crew, I must wish you a good morning." 

" One object in my Qoming hither. Miss Scarve, I will frankly 
confess, was to make your acquaintance, and I trust, to form a 
lasting friendship with you," replied the fair Thomasine, somewhat 
discomposed. " But my chief motive," she added, assuming a 
mysterious look, and lowering her voice to those deep tones in 
which fearful intelligence is announced in a melo-drama, " was to 
inform you that an attempt will be made to carry you off to- 
night !" 

" Carry me off!" exclaimed Hilda, alarmed. 

"Ay, carry you off!" repeated the fair Thomasine. " Dreadful, 
isn't it ? But it is what all heroines, like ourselves, are subject to. 
I may not tell you who gave me the intelligence, but you may 
rely upon it. Most likely you have some suspicion of the hateful 
contriver of the base design. Our sex are seldom deceived in such 
matters. I was bound to secrecy, but I could not keep the matter 
from you. Whatever happens, I must not be implicated. Pro- 
mise me I shall not be so.'' 

" You shall not," replied Hilda. 

" And oh, Miss Scarve," pursued the fair Thomasine, " to appre- 
ciate my regard for you — to understand me thoroughly — you must 
know — though I tremble to mention it — that you are my rival — 
yes, my rival ! Your matchless charms have estranged the affections 



THE miser's daughtee. 205 

of my beloved and once-devoted Peter Pokerich. Still, I feel 
no resentment against you — but, on the contrary, I admire you 
beyond expression. A time may come when I may be useful to 
you ; and then forget not your humble, but faithful friend, Thoma- 
sine Deacle." 

" I will not — I will not," replied Hilda, who began to entertain 
some doubts as to her companion's sanity. " I am greatly obliged 
by your information, and will not fail to profit by it. Good 
morning." 

" Farewell !" exclaimed the fair Thomasine, pathetically. " I fear 
I am imperfectly understood." 

Hilda assured her to the contrary, and, summoning Jacob, he 
ushered her to the door. 

As soon as the fair Thomasine had departed, Hilda acquainted 
her aunt with the intelligence she had received. Mrs. Clinton was 
inclined to put little faith in it, but recommended that their relation. 
Sir Norfolk Salusbury, should be consulted on the subject. To 
this, however, Hilda objected, and Jacob Post was summoned to 
the conference. 

" Don't say a word about it to any one — not even to master," 
said the porter, on being appealed to; " leave the affair to me, and 
I'll warrant you. Master PhiHp Frewin — for I've no doubts it's 
him — sha'n't wish to renew the attempt. Go to bed just as usual, 
and think no more of the matter. You shall hear a^U about it next 
mornin'." 

"But had you not better have some assistance, Jacob?" said 
Hilda. " Such attempts are always made with sufficient force to 
ensure their execution." 

" I want no assistance, Miss," replied Jacob — " not I. Half a 
dozen of 'em may come if they choose — but they sha'n't go back a 
they came, I'll promise 'em." 

*^I think you may rely upon Jacob, niece," observed Mrs. 
Clinton. 

Hilda thought so too, and it was therefore resolved that nothing 
should be said to the miser on the subject, but that the porter should 
keep watch in his own way. 

Shortly, afterwards, Mr. Scarve came home. The day passeds 
off as usual, and Hilda and her aunt retired to rest early — a signal 
of intelligence passing between them and Jacob as they withdrew* 



206 THE miser's daughter. 

It so happened, on tKIs particular night, that the miser, who was 
busy with his papers and accounts, signified his intention of sitting 
up late, and ordered Jacob to place another farthing candle before 
him, to be lighted when the first was done. This arrangement not 
suiting Jacob at all, he declined obeying the order, hoping his 
master would go to bed; but he was mistaken. The miser con- 
tinued busily employed until his candle had burnt into the socket, 
when, finding Jacob had neglected to provide him with another, 
he went grumblingly to the cupboard for it. Hearing him stir, 
Jacob, who was on the alert, entered the room. 

" Do you know it's eleven o'clock, sir?" he said. " It's time to 
go to bed." 

"Go to bed yourself, you careless rascall" rejoined the miser, 
angrily. " I told you I was going to sit up, and ordered you to 
get me another candle. But you neglect every thing — every 
thing." 

" No, I don't," replied Jacob, gruflly. " You're growin' wasteful, 
and it's my duty to check you. You're hurtin' your eyes by 
sittin' up so late. Come, go to bed." 

"What the devil's the meaning of this, rascal?" cried the miser, 
sharply and suspiciously. " You've some object in view, and want 
to get me out of the way. I shall sit up late — perhaps all night." 

Seeing his master resolute, Jacob, after uttering a few inaudible 
words, withdrew. 

In another hour, he partly opened the door, and popped his head 
into the room. The miser was still hard at work. 

" Past twelve o'clock, and a cloudy momin' !" he cried, mimick- 
ing the hoarse tones of a watchman. 

" "What ! still up !" cried the miser. " Get to bed directly." 

*' No, I shan't," replied Jacob, pushing the door wide open, and 
striding into the room; "it's not safe to leave you up. Them 
accounts can just as well be settled to-morrow. Come," he added, 
marching to the table, and taking up the candle, " I'll see you to 
bed." 

" Set down the candle, rascal!" cried the miser, rising in a fury 
— " set it down instantly, or I'll be the death of you." 

Jacob reluctantly compUed, and looked hard at him, scratching 
his head as he did so. 

" I see you've something on your mind," cried the miser, fiercely. 



THE miser's daughter. 207 

" Confess at once that you intend to rob and murder me. Confess 
it, and I'll forgive you." 

" I've nothin' to confess," rejoined Jacob. " It's merely regard 
for your welfare as keeps me up. If you'd be advised by me, you'll 
go to bed — but if you won't you must take the consequences." 

" What consequences, sirrah ?" cried the miser, angrily. " Are 
you master here, or am I ?" 

" You are," replied Jacob — " more's the pity. If any thin' hap- 
pens, it's not my fault. I've warned you." 

" Stay, rascal!" vociferated the miser, who felt somewhat uneasy 
— "what do you mean? — what do you apprehend?" 

" I sha'n't tell you," replied Jacob, doggedly. " I can be as close 
as you. You'll know, if you'll stay up long enough." So saying, 
he disappeared. 

The miser was seriously alarmed. Jacob's mysterious conduct 
was wholly incomprehensible. He had never acted so before, and 
after debating with himself what it would be best to do, Mr. Scarve 
resolved to fetch his sword and remain on the watch. Accordingly, 
he crept up stairs, and possessed himself of the weapon, and as he 
passed the ladies' cliamber, on his return, he heard them stirring 
within it, while the voice of Mrs. CHnton, issuing from the keyhole, 
said, " Jacob, have they been here ?" 

"Not yet," replied the miser in a whisper, which he tried to 
make as Hke the porter's gruff voice as possible. 

Fully satisfied that he had discovered a plot, but fearful of being 
subjected to further interrogations, which might lead to his discovery, 
if he stayed longer, the miser hurried down stairs, muttering as he 
went — " Here's a pretty piece of work ! That rascal Jacob is at the 
bottom of it all. I'll discharge him to-morrow morning. But first, 
to find out what it means. How lucky I chanced to sit up ! It's 
quite providential." 

Resuming his seat at the table, he placed the sword before him, 
and went on with his accounts. The door was left partially ajar, 
so that, being very quick of hearing, he could detect the slightest 
sound. 

One o'clock, however, arrived, and the house remained undis- 
turbed. Another half hour passed by — still, no one came. His 
second candle had burned low, and he was calculating with himself 
whether he should light a third, or remain in the dark, when foot- 



208 THE miser's daughter. 

steps were distinctly heard on tlie stairs. He snatched up the 
sword and rushed to the door, where he encountered Jacob, with 
his crabstick in his hand. 

"Oh! I've caught you, rascal, have I?" he cried, seizing him, 
and placing the sword at his throat. 

" Leave go !" said Jacob, dashing him off — " Don't you hear 
'em ? They've come to carry off your daughter." And snatching 
the candle from him, darted up stairs. 

The miser's house consisted of two stories, exclusive of the attics. 
His own bed-room and that of his daughter lay on the second 
floor. The attics were wholly unoccupied, and filled with old 
lumber, which no one but himself would have harboured. The 
doors were kept constantly locked, and the windows boarded up. 
But it was evident that the parties who had got into the house had 
effected an entrance from the roof. Indeed, Jacob soon after found 
this to be the case. On reaching the landing, he perceived three 
masked figures descending the stairs. The foremost of them, a 
slightly built person, rather gaily attired, and provided with a 
lantern, turned to his companion, and said, " 'Pon rep ! we're dis- 
covered, and had better beat a retreat." 

The person behind him, however, who was a stout-built fellow, 
seemed to be of a different opinion. 

" No, curse it, no !" he cried, " we won't go back empty-handed. 
He is but one man, and we'll carry her off in spite of him. Lead 
us to Miss Scarve's chamber directly, sirrah !" he cried to Jacob, 
" or we'll cut your throat." 

" Oppose us not, my good fellow," said the first speaker; " we 
mean you no harm, 'pon rep ! Our business is with your young 
mistress. Conduct us to her chamber, and you shall have a crown 
for your trouble." 

" You shall have a cracked crown for yours !" cried Jacob, bring- 
ing down his crabstick with such force, that if it had hit its mark, 
it would have more than realised the threat. As it was, a quick 
spring saved the party against whom it was aimed. He let fall the 
lantern, and ran up the stairs. The person behind him, uttering a 
tremendous oath, drew his sword, and made a thrust at Jacob, who 
parried it with his crabstick, and in his turn dealt his assailant a 
blow on the arm that disabled him. Howhng with pain, and 
venting the most terrible imprecations, the fellow turned and fled, 



THE miser's daughtek. 209 

and the third person, seeing the fate that had attended his com- 
panions, followed their example. Darting up stairs, they passed 
through an open door in the attics, scrambled over a heap of lum- 
ber, and got through a small dormer window. 

It was fortunate for the fugitives that Jacob, who was close at 
their heels, got entangled in the lumber, or they might not have 
escaped so easily. When he extricated himself, they were gone, 
nor could he discover any trace of them. It appeared probable 
that they had passed over to the roof of the adjoining house, and 
dropped upon some leads, whence they had gained a passage which 
was concealed from view. Thinking it unnecessary to pursue them 
further, Jacob fastened the window, and descended to the lower 
part of the house, where he found the miser, together with Hilda 
and her aunt. 

" Well, have you secured them?" cried Mr. Scarve. " Hilda 
has told me what it all means." 

" No," replied Jacob, " but I have fairly routed them." 

" Who was the leader?" cried the miser — " Randulph Crew?" 

*' More likely your nephew," returned Jacob. *' But I can't 
swear to any one. There was three of 'era, and they was all 
masked." 

" I owe you a thousand thanks for my preservation, Jacob," 
said Hilda. 

" You may now rest in safety," replied Jacob. " I've fastened 
the window, and I warrant me they won't make a second attempt." 

Repeating her thanks, Hilda then retired with her aunt. 

" Have you no idea who it was?" said the miser. 

" Not the least," returned the other; " and I'm only sorry I 
couldn't identify Mr. Philip Frewin." 

The miser made no reply, and whatever his suspicions might 
be, he kept them to himself. The attempt, however, alarmed him 
on another account. If his house, which he had considered se- 
curely barricaded, could be so easily entered, other equally lawless 
characters, and whose aim might be plunder, could obtain admis- 
sion. He had large sums with him, for with the true avaricious 
spirit, he loved to see and to handle his gold, and not even the loss 
of interest could induce him to part with it. Resolving to hide 
his treasure where it could not be discovered, on the following 
night, when he concluded all were at rest, he crept stealthily down. 

P 



210 THE miser's daughter. 

stairs with two heavy money-bags on his back. With some effort, 
for the lock was very rusty, he opened the door of an old disused 
wine cellar. There was nothing in it but an empty barrel, which 
lay in one corner. 

Having looked anxiously round, to see that he was not watched, 
he laid down the bags, and crept up stairs for two more. These 
were heavier than the first, and he laid them down with as little 
noise as possible. He had to go back a third time, and returned 
equally laden. He then repaired to a small coal-hole adjoining, 
where was deposited a scanty supply of fuel — which, scanty as it 
was, he intended should last for many months to come — and pro- 
vided himself with a shovel and an old broom. A fourth ascent 
supplied him with a box, in which he placed the bags, and he then 
commenced operations upon the floor of 'the cellar. 

With great difficulty — for he worked with the utmost caution — 
he got out a few bricks, and then his task became easier. Having 
made a hole sufficiently deep to hold the box, he deposited it within 
it, and covering it over with earth, restored the bricks, as well as 
he could, to their places — jumping upon them, and pressing them 
down with his feet. Lastly, he swept all the loose earth together, 
and tossed it into the empty barrel. 

More than an hour was thus employed; and when all was over, 
he leaned against the wall in a complete state of exhaustion. 
While thus resting himself, his eye wandered to the door, which 
was slightly ajar, and he thought he perceived some one behind it. 
Instantly darting towards it, he threw it wide open, and beheld 
Jacob. 

" Villain !" he shrieked, raising his shovel — "I'll murder you !" 

" No you won't," replied Jacob, dauntlessly. 

" What have you seen, rascal?" cried the miser, trembling with 
fury. " Tell me what you've seen ! — speak !" 

"Put down the shovel, and then I will, but not otherivise" 
answered Jacob. " Well, then," he added, as the request was 
complied with, " I've seen you bury a box." 

"You have?" screamed the miser. "And you know what it 
contains?" 

" I can guess," repHed Jacob. " Some one always sees these 
things; and it is well for you, and those to come after you, that 
jou were seen by an honest man like me." 



f 



k 



■dt' ■ 

THE miser's daughter. 211 

"An honest man!" cried the miser, ironically. " Such a one 
would be asleep in his bed at this hour} and not prying into his 
master's affairs." 

"And what should his master be doing, eh?" retorted Jacob. 
" Shouldn't he be in bed, too, instead o' creepin' about his house 
as if he was doin' some guilty deed, and afraid o' being detected? 
Which is worse, him as buries money, or him as looks on while it's 
buried? I tell you what it is, sir — in my opinion, he who acts so 
deserves to be robbed. Nay, I'm not goin' to rob you. Don't be 
afraid ! But, I repeat, you deserve to be robbed. What was 
money made for? — not to be buried there. Spend it, and give 
yourself comfort. You haven't many years to live; and then you 
may be put where you've put your gold. But I preach to a deaf 
ear." 

While Jacob was speaking, the miser remained leaning on the 
shovel, as if considering what he should do. At length, he groaned 
out — " Well, you've baffled my design, Jacob. Dig up the chest." 

" No I won't," was the surly reply. 

"You won't?" 

" No," replied Jacob, " I'll not be art or part in anythin' of the 
sort. He as hides may find. Since you've buried the treasure, 
e'en let it rest. The secret's safe with me." 

" Will you swear it?" cried the miser, eagerly. 

" I will, if that'll content you," replied Jacob. 

" I'll trust you, then," rejoined Scarve. 

" Only because you can't help yourself," muttered Jacob. 

The miser took no notice of the remark, but, quitting the cellar, 
locked the door, and fastened the padlock outside. 

"You'll never enter this place without my leave, Jacob," he 
cried — " nor betray my secret?" 

" I've sworn it !" replied the porter, gruffly. And he turned 
off into his own room, while the miser went up stairs with a heavy 
heart. 

Some days after this occurrence. Sir Norfolk Salusbury called 
upon Hilda. The Welsh baronet was rather a favourite with the 
miser, for though they had few quahties in common, yet Sir Nor- 
folk's peculiar character suited him. He never asked a favour — 
never wanted to borrow money — never required any refreshment. 
All these circumstances recommended him to the miser's good 

p2 



212 " THE miser's daughter. 

opinion. With Hilda he was a still greater favourite. She liked 
his stately, old-fashioned manner; and, though she could have 
dispensed "with some of his formality, she preferred it to the fami- 
liarity of the few persons of quality whom she had encountered. 

On the present occasion, after much circumlocution. Sir Norfolk 
informed the miser that there was to he a masquerade — or, as he 
termed it, " a grand assemblage of personated characters in masks" 
— in a few days at Ranelagh, and he begged to be permitted to 
take his daughter to it. 

" It is a useless expense," muttered the miser. 

" I confess I should like to go very much," said Hilda. " I 
have never seen a masquerade ; and I am told those at Ranelagh 
are magnificent." 

" This will be unusually magnificent," replied Sir Norfolk; "and 
as you have expressed a wish on the subject, I will procure you a 
masquerading habit, and a ticket, if your father will allow you 
to go." 

" In that case I see no objection," said the miser, '* provided I 
am not obliged to accompany her. I abominate such fooleries." 

" I will gladly amdertake the curation of her," 'said Sir Norfolk. 

" And you are the only man I would trust her with, Sir Nor- 
folk," rejoined Scarve. "I know you will take as much care of 
her as I could take myself." 

Sir Norfolk acknowledged the compliment by a stately bow. 
And it was then arranged to Hilda's great satisfaction, that a court 
dressmaker should wait upon her on the following day, to prepare 
her a dress for the masquerade. All were pleased with the arrange- 
ment; and the miser was in high glee that he had obliged his 
daughter without putting himself to trouble or expense ; while Sir 
Norfolk was equally gratified in being able to afford pleasure to 
his fair cousin. 



THE miser's daughter. 213 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE PROGRESS OF MR. CRIPPS's LOVE-AFFAIR — MR. RATHBONE APPEARS ON THE 
SCENE — STRATAGEM OF THE VALET — MR. JUKES VISITS THE WIDOW. 

Mr. Cripps still continued unremitting in his attentions to Mrs. 
Nettleship, and had made such progress in her affections, that on 
Mr. Rathbone's return from the country — an event which occurred 
about ten days after the memorable visit to Marylebone Gardens — 
she told him she feared she could not fulfil her engagement with 
him, and besought him to allow her to break it off. But Mr. 
Rathbone declared he would do no such thing, and reminded her 
of a trifling penalty of three thousand pounds which was attached 
to the violation of the marriage contract on her part. He then 
upbraided her warmly with inconstancy ; recalled to her recollec- 
tion the professions of regard she had once expressed for him ; and 
concluded by vowing to be the death of his rival. Mrs. Nettlesliip 
bore his reproaches with the utmost composure ; but on hearing his 
final threat, she uttered a faint scream, and sank overcome by emo- 
tion into a chair. Mr. Rathbone offered no assistance ; but clapping 
his hat fiercely on his head, and flourishing his stick in a menacing 
manner, hurried out of the room. 

" Oh la!" exclaimed Mrs. Nettleship, getting up as soon as he 
was gone, " there will be a duel — a sanguinary duel — and I shall 
have caused it, wretched woman that I am !" 

But no duel ensued — perhaps to the widow's disappointment. 
On being made acquainted with the precise terms of the contract, 
of which he had hitherto been kept in ignorance, Mr. Cripps looked 
very grave, and advised her on no account to come to a decided 
rupture with Mr. Rathbone. 

" But the three thousand pounds can make no difference to you, 
Mr. Willars," said Mrs. Nettleship — " better pay it, and have done 
with him." 



214 THE miser's daughter. 

" On no account, my angel," replied her admirer. " We must 
manage to outwit him and obtain his consent." 

And strange to say, the cunning valet did contrive, not only not 
to quarrel with his rival, but even to make a friend of him. Fore- 
seeing that Mr. Rathbone would infallibly find out who he was, 
and expose him, he determined to be beforehand with him, and he 
therefore told the widow that he had concocted a scheme, by which 
he was certain of outwitting her affianced suitor ; but it was neces- 
sary to its success that he should assume the part of his own valet, 
whose name was Crackenthorpe Cripps. 

" I don't like the idea of your being taken for a walet at all, Mr. 
Willars," said Mrs. Nettleship — " and I can't see what purpose 
it '11 answer." 

"It is indispensable to my scheme, my angel," replied Mr. 
Cripps. *' You know these things are always so managed in the 
comedies, and they are the best models one can follow. On the 
stage, you constantly find masters putting on their servants' clothes, 
and vice versa. And only think, if we can trick Rathbone out of 
the three thousand," 

" Ah, that would be something, certainly," said Mrs. Nettleship. 
" I must have been a fool to enter into such an engagement.- But 
at that time I thought I loved him." 

"You must indeed have been wanting in your usual judgment, 
sweetheart," rephed Mr. Cripps; " but you hadn't seen me. The 
only course now left is to out-manoeuvre the insensible dolt. The 
idea of personating my valet was suggested to me by the address of 
the drunken old fellow we met in Marylebone Gardens." 

" I recollect," replied Mrs. Nettleship. " He called you his 
nephew — said your name was Cripps, and that you were Mr. 
Willars's walet. I remember it as well as if it had happened 
yesterday." 

" Disagreeable occurrences always dwell in one's remembrance 
longer than pleasant ones," rejoined the valet, forcing a laugh. 
**You must introduce me to Mr. Rathbone as Mr. Cripps. Leave 
him to find out the rest." 

The device worked exactly as its contriver desired and antici- 
pated. Mr. Rathbone was astounded when he learnt that his rival 
was a valet ; and he was so staggered by Mr. Cripps's dress, assurance, 
and deportment, that he was firmly convinced he was a gentleman 



m 



THE miser's daughter. 215 

in disguise. The inquiries he made only added to his perplexity. 
He ascertained that Beau Villiers had a valet named Cripps; but 
the description given of him did not tally with the appearance of 
Mrs. Nettleship's lover, and at last he became satisfied that the 
interloper was the master, and not the man. 

" I tell you what, Mrs. Nettleship," he said, one day, " this gay 
admirer of yours isn't what he pretends to be." 

"Indeed, Mr. Rathbone!" [exclaimed the widow, smiUng, 
"What is he, then?" 

" A great rake and coxcomb," replied the other, angrily. "He's 
his own master. No, I don't mean that exactly — he's himself dis- 
guised as his walet — that's it." 

" What do you mean, Mr. Rathbone?" simpered the widow. 
*' 1 declare I don't understand you." 

" Why, I mean that this walet — this Mr. Cripps, as you suppose 
him, is no walet at all," replied Rathbone. " He's Mr. Willars, 
the great beau." 

" Oh, you're entirely mistaken, Mr. Rathbone," said the widow, 
smiling. , 

*' I hope he means honourably by you, that's all," sneered Rath- 
bone. " Ah ! here he comes," he added, as Mr. Cripps entered the 
room. " Your most obedient, Mr. Willars." 

" My name is Cripps, sir, — Crackenthorpe Cripps, at your 
service," replied the valet, with a smirk of satisfaction. 

"Poh! poh! nonsense! — don't crack-jaw me," cried Rathbone; 
*' I know better. You can't impose on me, sir. I know a gentle- 
man from a walet when I see him." 

" Your opinion is too flattering, sir, to allow me to be angry at 
it," replied Mr. Cripps, bowing profoundly. 

" There ! — that bow alone would convict you," cried Rathbone, 
" who ever saw a walet make his honours in that style?" 

" Do me the favour to try my snush," said Mr. Cripps, taking 
out the beau's handsomest box, which he had borrowed for the 
occasion. 

'^Further proof !" exclaimed Rathbone; "look at that snuflf-box 
set with brilliants ! — those rings on his fingers ! Very like a walet, 
indeed." 

" You shall have it all your own way, sir," said Mr. Cripps, 



216 THE miser's daughter. 

again bowing; "but there's an old gentleman outside, who wiU 
tell you you are mistaken." 

" An accomplice, I'll be sworn," cried Rathbone. " But I 
should like to see him." And proceeding to the passage, he re- 
turned the next moment with Mr. Jukes while Mr. Cripps, seat- 
ing himself, winked significantly at the widow. On entering the 
room, the old butler glanced round it curiously. 

" Well, sir, you look like a servant, at all events," cried Mr. 
Rathbone. " Pray, who is the individual before us? — who is he?" 
'* I'm sorry to betray him, because he's my own kinsman," re- 
plied Mr. Jukes ; " but I cannot suffer him to impose on a respect- 
able lady." 

" Who do you say he is?" demanded Rathbone. 
" I repeat, I'm sorry to expose him," replied Mr. Jukes; "but 
the truth must be told. He's my nephew, Crackenthorpe Cripps, 
chief valet to Mr. Villiers." 

" There, sir, I told you my statement would be corroborated,"^ 
said Mr. Cripps, with a side-glance at the widow. 

"Why, does he own that his name is Cripps?" said the butler, 
in astonishment. 

" He would make us believe so," replied Rathbone ; " but we 
know, as yourself, you old deceiver, that it's Willars." 
The butler looked thoroughly mystified. 

" ^Pon rep ! this is vastly amusing," said Mr. Cripps, helping 
himself to a pinch of snufi) and clearing his point-laced cravat 
from the dust. 

" And so you, ma'am, are aware of the real name of this young 
man?" said Mr. Jukes, turning to the widow 

'' Perfectly aware of it," she replied, significantly. 
" And so am I," added Rathbone, coughing drily. " We're all 
aware of it — all." 

" Then I've nothing further to say," returned Mr. Jukes. 
" Whatever construction maybe put upon my visit, Crackenthorpe, 
I only came here to serve you." 

" No doubt, my good man, no doubt," repUed Rathbone. " But 
don't imagine you've deceived me." 

" So that I've convinced the lady, I'm perfectly satisfied," said 
Mr. Jukes, taking his leave. 

** Very well contrived, Mr. Willars — exceedingly well, sir," said 



THE miser's daughter, 217 

Ratlibone ; " but it won't do. I saw at once lie was one of your 
people." 

" You are a man of great discernment, truly," replied Mr. 
Cripps. " Pi'ay take a pinch of snusli before you go." 

"I'm afraid you spend your wages in snusli, sir," laugbed 
Ratbbone. And plunging liis fingers into the box, he quitted the 
room, chuckling to himself. 

*' Capitally done, 'pon rep !" cried Mr. Cripps. " The old fel- 
Jow couldn't have played his part better." 

*' And was he really engaged to do it?" said Mrs. Nettleship. 
" Well, I declare he quite took me in. But you see Mr. Ratlibone 
is too good a judge to be imposed upon- He knows the true 
gentleman when he sees him." 

" All is going exactly as I could wish it, my angel," replied Mr. 
Cripps. " Before a month has passed, I'll make him give up the 
contract." 

" Heigho !" exclaimed the widow, " I wish the month was 
over." 

Mr. Cripps had thus completely accomplished his purpose. His 
rival had made up his mind that he was Mr. Villiers ; and he was 
one of those obstinate persons who always persist in an error, even 
against the evidence of their senses. The valet took care to humour 
the idea. While persisting in giving his real name, and representing 
himself in his true character, Mr. Cripps demeaned himself in such 
sort as to leave no doubt in the mind of tlie sagacious tallow-chandler 
that his actual rank and position were widely different. Nothing, 
however, surprised the valet more than the kindly manner in which 
his rival behaved to him. So far was this carried, that he began 
to suspect some treachery might be intended against himself, and 
resolved to be on his guard. 

But whatever secret opinions the rivals might entertain of each 
other, ostensibly they were excellent friends, and constantly went 
to places of amusement together. When the masquerade at 
Ranelagh was announced, Mrs. Nettleship instantly signified her 
intention of attending it, and Mr. Cripps, emboldened by his former 
good luck, unhesitatingly undertook to escort her. Mr. Ratlibone, 
of course, was included in the party, and he not only begged to 
be permitted to pay for the tickets, but to give them a supper on 
the occasion. With apparent reluctance, Mr. Cripps assented to 



218 THE miser's daughtee. 

tlie proposal; and they then arranged the characters they should 
represent. The valet, being an excellent dancer, thought he should 
appear to advantage as harlequin ; and as Mrs. Nettleship, notwith- 
standing her bulk, still boasted considerable agiHty, she readily 
undertook to play columbine. The part of the hump-backed lover 
"Was offered to Mr. Rathbone, and accepted by him. 

There were yet two other persons whom the irresistible masque- 
rade threatened to draw into its vortex. These were the fair Tho- 
rn asine and Peter Pokerich. For more than two years the mercer s 
daughter had been dying to see a masquerade ; and the moment she 
heard of the grand entertainment in question, she attacked her 
father on the subject, and never allowed him to rest till he promised 
to let her go. Peter Pokerich required no solicitation to induce 
him to accompany her, being as eager as herself for the spectacle. 
Mr. Cripps had imparted to him his design, and it was arranged 
that they should all go together. Only one difficulty existed, — 
namely, that the fair Thomasine had selected the same character as 
the widow. But this objection was got over by Mr. Cripps, who 
declared he could do very well with two columbines. The little 
barber himself would have preferred playing harlequin, but as Mr. 
Cripps had appropriated the part, he was obliged to be content 
with that of clown. 



# 

THE MISER S DAUGHTER. 219 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE MASQUEBADE AT RAKELAGH, WITH THE VARIOUS INCIDENTS THAT OCCURRED 

AT IT. 

At length the day so much wished for by the principal person- 
ages in this history, and by many hundreds besides, arrived. It was 
the second Thursday in July, and a more joyous and auspicious day 
never ushered in a festival. This was the more fortunate, because 
the early part of the entertainment was to take place out of doors. 
The fete commenced at two o'clock; but long before that hour, the 
road to Chelsea was crowded with coaches, chariots, chairs, and 
vehicles of every description. The river, too, was thronged with 
boats, freighted with masquers, and presented a most lively appear- 
ance from the multitudes of spectators drawn forth by the fineness 
of the day, and the gaiety of the scene, which vied in splendour 
with a Venetian carnival. 

Having decided upon going by water, Mr. Cripps and his party 
left Billiter-square about one o'clock, and embarked in a tilt-boat, 
rowed by a couple of watermen, at Old Swan Stairs, near London 
Bridge. They were all, of course, in their masquerade attire, Mr. 
Cripps being arrayed in the parti-coloured garb of the hero of 
pantomine, — which differed only in some immaterial points, such 
as the looseness of the pantaloons at the ancle, and the amplitude 
of the shirt collar, from the garb of the modem harlequin. He 
was provided with a wand, and his face was concealed by a close 
black vizard. Mr. Rathbone had a large hump on his shoulders, 
like that of Punch (whom, by-the-by, his figure greatly resembled), 
a well-stuffed paunch, a large protuberance behind, shoes with im- 
mense roses in them, a tall sugar-loaf hat, and a mask, with a great 
hooked nose and chin. He carried, moreover, a stout knobbed 
stick. As to the lady, her goodly person was invested in a white 
satin habit, glistening with spangles, and flounced with garlands of 



220 THE miser's daughter. 

flowers. She liad sliort sleeves, with deep falls of lace to them, — 
satin shoes, braided with silver cord, — a pearl necklace round her 
throat, and a wreath of artificial roses upon her head. She declined 
hiding her features behind a mask, which Mr. Cripps declared was 
excessively kind and considerate. 

Their passage along the river was delightful, Mr. Cripps being 
so excited that he could not be content to remain under the tilt, 
but displayed himself in the fore part "of the boat, ogling all the 
prettiest damsels among the spectators, retorting the jests of their 
male companions, and, whenever an opportunity oiFered, dealing 
them a hearty thwack with his wand. Mrs. Nettleship did not 
altogether relish these proceedings, but Mr. Rathbone enjoyed them 
amazingly, and laid about him right and left, like his rival, with 
his knobbed stick. 

On landing at Chelsea, they met, according to appointment, the 
little barber and his companion. The fair Thomasine looked un- 
commonly pretty. She had on a gown of yellow and silver, span- 
gled like the widow's, and adorned with garlands of flowers, with 
a bodice of pink satin, crossed with ribands of the same colour. 
Round her throat she wore a chain of gold, from which depended 
an imitation diamond solitaire, and her rich auburn tresserwere 
covered with the prettiest Httle coquettish hat imaginable. Her 
dress was purposely made short, so as to display her small feet and 
ankles. From the same motive also as the widow, she declined 
wearing a mask. Mr. Cripps was quite captivated by her, and 
claiming the privilege of his character, took her from the barber, 
and ofiered her his unoccupied arm. 

Peter Pokerich wore a scull cap, covered with red and white 
worsted, arranged somewhat like a cock's-comb, a large ruff", a red 
calico doublet, white slashed calico drawers, with huge bunches of 
ribands at the knees, and pink silk hose. His face was painted in 
red and white streaks. Like the others, he was in tip-top spirits; 
and the whole party proceeded to Ranelagh, which was not far 
distant, laughing and jesting with each other merrily. 

Tliey found the road from town completely stopped up by a line 
of carriages, while the throng of spectators on foot rendered it diffi- 
cult to get on. The familiarities of the crowd were almost unsup- 
portable. Not a coach or a chair was suffered to pass without its 
occupant being inspected by the curious, who, in many cases, com- 



THE misek's daughter. 221 

pelled those tliey annoyed to let down tlie •windows, tliat tliej might 
have a better view of their dresses. 

By dint of elbowing and squeezing, assisted by the wand and 
knobbed stick, the party contrived to move slowly forward; and as 
they did so, they had ample opportunity of glancing at the occu- 
pants of the different vehicles. Mr. Cripps very soon distinguished 
his master s gilt chariot ; but he did not turn aside, as his mask and 
dress ensured him from detection. Mrs. Nettleship was struck by 
the magnificence of the equipage, and recalling the features of the 
beau, who was wrapped in a sky-blue domino, and wore a Spanish 
hat and feathers, but kept his mask in his hand, said, " Why that's 
the fine gentleman who spoke to you in Mary'bone Gardens. 
What's his name ?" 

" Odd enough ! the same as my own — Villiers," replied Mr. 
Cripps. " He's a first cousin of mine, and we're considered very 
much alike." 

By the side of Mr. Villiers sat Sir Singleton Spinke. The anti- 
quated beau was so metamorphosed, that Mr. Cripps scarcely recog- 
nised him ; nor would he, perhaps, have done so, if the charms of 
the fair Thomasine had not attracted the old coxcomb's attention, 
and caused him to thrust his head out of the window to look at 
her. Sir Singleton, as favouring his turn for gallantry, had chosen 
the part of Pierrot, and was habited in the peculiar vestment of 
white calico, with long, loose sleeves, as well as the broad-leaved, 
high-crowned hat proper to the character. 

Lady Brabazon's carriage immediately preceded that of the beau, 
and contained her ladyship, Clementina, Trussell, and Randulph. 
Trussell was dressed like a Turk, and wore a large turban, orna- 
mented with a crescent, and a fine, flowing, coal-black beard. 
Randulph did not appear in character, but was attired in a light 
blue velvet coat, laced with gold, the work of the French tailor, 
Desraartins, which displayed his elegant figure to the greatest 
advantage. He had not yet put on his mask. Clementina was 
robed in a pink silk domino, and wore a black velvet hat, looped 
with diamonds, and ornamented with a plume of white feathers, and 
really looked very beautiful. Lady Brabazon wore a rich silk 
dress, embossed with gold and silver, that suited her admirably. 

Next in advance of Lady Brabazon's carriage was that of Sir 
Bulkeley Price. The Welsh Baronet was in his ordinary attire. 



222 THE miser's daughter. 

but he was accompanied by a Chinese Mandarin, in a loose gown 
of light silk, girt at the middle with a silken belt, and having a 
conical cap, topped by a gilded ball, on his head. This person, 
notwithstanding the disguise of a long twisted beard, Mr. Cripps 
knew to be Cordwell Firebras. 

Passing several other carriages filled with various characters, 
they came to an old-fashioned chariot, driven by a coachman as 
ancient as itself in a faded livery, and drawn by two meagre- 
looking, superannuated horses. But, notwithstanding its unpro- 
mising appearance, the occupants of this carriage attracted especial 
attention from the beholders, and many and loud were the excla- 
mations of admiration uttered by them. 

" She is beautiful !" cried one. "Enchanting!" cried another. 
*' By far the prettiest person who has gone to the masquerade," 
cried a third. And so on in the same rapturous strain. 

Excited by these remarks, Mr. Cripps pressed forward to have 
a peep into the carriage, and found it occupied by Sir Norfolk 
Salusbury, and an exquisitely beautiful young female, attired with 
great simplicity in a dress of white satin, with wide short sleeves, 
as was then the mode, trimmed with deep falls of lace. A dia- 
mond necklace encircled her throat, and a few natural floavers 
constituted the sole ornaments of her dark abundant hair. It was 
Hilda Scarve, as Mr. Cripps was instantly aware, though he had 
scarcely time to look at her, for Sir Norfolk, out of all patience 
with the familiarity of the spectators, thrust him forcibly back, 
and ordered the coachman, in a peremptory tone, to drive on — an 
injunction with which the old domestic found some difficulty in 
complying. 

And now, before entering Ranelagh, it may be proper to offer 
a word as to its history. Alas ! for the changes and caprices of 
fashion ! This charming place of entertainment, the deHght of 
our grandfathers and grandmothers, the boast of the metropolis, 
the envy of foreigners, the renowned in song and story, the para- 
dise of hoops and wigs, is vanished, — numbered with the things 
that were ! — and, we fear, there is little hope of its revival. Rane- 
lagh, it is well known, derived its designation from a nobleman of 
the same name, by whom the house was erected, and the gardens, 
esteemed the most beautiful in the kingdom, originally laid out. 
Its situation adjoined the Royal Hospital at Chelsea; and the date 



THE miser's daughter. 223 

of its erection was 1690-1. Ranelagh House, on the death of the 
earl, in 1712, passed into the possession of his daughter. Lady 
Catherine Jones; but was let, about twenty years afterwards, to 
two eminent builders, who relet it to Lacy, afterwards patentee of 
Drury Lane Theatre, and commonly called Gentleman Lacy, by 
whom it was taken with the intention of giving concerts and 
breakfasts within it, on a scale far superior, in point of splendour 
and attraction, to any that had been hitherto attempted. In 1741, 
the premises were sold by Lacy to Messrs. Crispe and Meyonnet for 
40007., and the rotunda was erected in the same year by subscrip- 
tion. From this date, the true history of Ranelagh may be said 
to commence. It at once burst into fashion, and its entertain- 
ments being attended by persons of the first quality, crowds 
flocked in their train. Shortly after its opening, Mr. Crispe 
became the sole lessee ; and in spite of the brilliant success of the 
enterprise, shared the fate of most lessees of places of public 
amusement, being declared bankrupt in 1744. The property 
was then divided into thirty shares, and so continued until Rane- 
lagh was closed. The earhest entertainments of Ranelagh were 
morning concerts, consisting chiefly of oratorios, produced under 
the direction of Michael Festing, the leader of the band; but 
evening concerts were speedily introduced, the latter, it may be 
mentioned, to shew the difference of former fashionable hours from 
the present, commencing at half-past five, and concluding at nine. 
Thus it began, but towards its close, the gayest visitors to Rane- 
lagh went at midnight, just as the concerts were finishing, and re- 
mained there tiU three or four in the morning. In 1754, the fa- 
shionable world were drawn to Ranelagh by a series of amuse- 
ments called Comus's Court; and notwithstanding their somewhat 
questionable title, the revels were conducted with great propriety 
and decorum. A procession which was introduced was managed 
with great effect, and several mock Italian duets were sung with 
remarkable spirit. Almost to its close, Ranelagh retained its cha- 
racter of being the finest place of pubHc entertainment in Europe, 
and to the last the rotunda was the wonder and delight of every 
beholder. The coup d'oeil of the interior of this structure was ex- 
traordinarily striking, and impressed all who beheld it for the first 
time with surprise. It was circular in form, and exactly one hun- 
dred and fifty feet in diameter. Round the lower part of the 



224 THE miser's daughter. 

building ran a beautiful arcade, tlie intervals between eacli arch 
being filled up by alcoves. Over this was a gallery with a balus- 
trade, having entrances from the exterior, and forming a sort of 
upper boxes. Above the gallery was a range of round-headed 
windows, between each of which was a carved figure supporting 
the roof, and forming the terminus of the column beneath. At 
first, the orchestra was placed in the centre of the amphitheatre, 
but being found exceedingly inconvenient, as well as destructive 
of the symmetry of the building in that situation, it was removed 
to the side. It contained a stage capable of accommodating thirty 
or forty chorus-singers. The original site of the orchestra was oc- 
cupied by a large chimney, having four faces enclosed in a beauti- 
fully-proportioned hollow, hexagonal column, with arched open- 
ings at the sides, and a balustrade at the base. Richly moulded, 
and otherwise ornamented with appropriate designs, this enormous 
column had a charming efiect, and gave a peculiar character to the 
whole amphitheatre. A double range of large chandehers de- 
scended from the ceiling ; others were placed within the column 
above mentioned, and every alcove had its lamp. When all these 
chandeliers and lamps were lighted, the effect was wonderfully 
brilliant. The external diameter of the rotunda was one hundred 
and eighty-five feet. It was surrounded on the outside by an ar- 
cade similar to that within, above which ran a gallery, with a roof 
supported by pillars, and defended by a balustrade. The main en- 
trance was a handsome piece of architecture, with a wide, round 
arched gate in the centre, and a lesser entrance at either side. 
On the left of the rotunda stood the Earl of Ranelagh's old man- 
sion, a structure of some magnitude, but with little pretension to 
beauty, being built in the formal Dutch taste of the time of Wil- 
liam of Orange. On the right, opposite the mansion, was a mag- 
nificent conservatory, with great pots of aloes in front. In a line 
with the conservatory, and the side entrance of the rotunda, 
stretched out a long and beautiful canal, in the midst of which 
stood a Chinese fishing-temple, approached by a bridge. On 
either side of the canal were broad gravel walks, and alleys shaded 
by lines of trees, and separated by trimly-cHpped hedges. The 
gardens were exquisitely arranged with groves, bowers, statues, 
temples, wildernesses, and shady retreats. 

Though Lady Brabazon's carriage was within a hundred yards 



THE miser's daughter. 225 

of the entrance of Ranelagli when Mr. Cripps and his party 
passed it, owing to the crowd and confusion it was nearly a quar- 
ter of an hour in setting down. Before getting out, the whole 
party put on their masks ; and Lady Brabazon wrapped lierself in 
a yellow silk domino. Trussell took charge of Clementina, and 
her ladyship fell to Randulph's care. It was yet extremely early, 
but the crowd was prodigious, — many hundred persons being as- 
sembled in the area before the entrance to the rotunda. At least 
a thousand others were dispersed within the gardens, for the ro- 
tunda was not opened till the evening ; and it was afterwards 
computed that more than four thousand persons attended the 
masquerade. 

At the entrance. Lady Brabazon and her daughter were joined 
by Beau Villiers, Sir Bulkeley Price, and Firebras, Sir Singleton 
Spinke having disappeared. Randulph had already been more than 
once at Ranelagh, but it was only to attend the ordinary concerts, 
and never having seen a masquerade, he was extraordinarily struck 
with the spectacle presented to him. Most of the characters were 
grotesquely dressed, as was the taste of the time, for it was not a 
period when the niceties of costume were understood or regarded ; 
still, the general effect was admirable. A May-pole, surmounted 
by a crown, with long ribands dangling from it, was planted in 
front of the conservatory, and several dancers were chasing each 
other round it, while lively strains were played by a band of 
musicians beside them. Other and less melodious sounds were 
heard. Now a drummer would go by, beating a rub-a-dub enough 
to deafen every listener. Then came the vile scraping of a fiddle, 
or the shrill notes of a fife. The shouts, the laughter, the cries of 
all kinds bafiled description, and equally vain would it be to 
attempt any delineation of the motley assemblage. It consisted of 
persons of all countries, all periods, and all ranks, for the most part 
oddly enough jumbled together. A pope in his tiara would be 
conversing with a Jew; a grave lawyer in his gown and wig had a 
milk girl under his arm; a highland chief in liis full equipments 
escorted a nun ; a doge in his splendid habiHments was jesting with 
a common sailor with a thick stick under his arm. But frolic and 
fun everywhere prevailed: and to judge from the noise, everybody 
seemed to be merry. No one could escape from the tricks and jests 
of the buflfoons with whom the crowd abounded. The humour of 



226 THE misee's daughter. 

the last century was eminently practical ; cuff's and kicks were 
liberally dealt around, and returned in kind ; and whenever a 
sounding bloAv was heard, it elicited shouts of laughter like those 
that are heard at the feigned knocks in a pantomime. The clowns. 
Punches, Pierrots, doctors, and harlequins, of whom there were 
several, besides our friend Mr. Cripps, were the chief creators in 
this kind of merriment. 

While Randulph, greatly diverted by all he saw, was gazing 
around, a few words pronounced by a voice whose tones thrilled to 
> his heart caught his ear. He turned, and saw close behind him, 
attended by a tall personage, whose stiffness left no doubt as to its 
being Sir Norfolk Salusbury, a beautiful female mask, whose snowy 
skin, and dark streaming ringlets, would have told him, if his heart 
had not informed him of the fact that it was Hilda, but before he 
could summon resolution to address her, she had passed by ; and 
Lady Brabazon,"who had likewise heard the voice and recognised the 
speaker, dragged him in the opposite direction towards the May- 
pole. He looked eagerly backwards, but the fair mask was lost 
amid the throng, nor could he even discern the tall figure of Six 
Norfolk. 

A merry scene was before him, but he heeded it not.-- The 
chief dancers round the May-pole were Mr. Cripps and his party. 
To these were added, Sir Singleton Spinke, who had attached 
himself to the fair Thomasine, to the no small annoyance of Peter 
Pokerich, and a fat quack doctor and his attendant, the latter having 
a fool's-cap on his head. Round and round went the dancers, Mr. 
Cripps footing it with remarkable agihty, and Peter vainly emulat- 
ing his capers, when some confusion was created by Sir Singleton 
attempting to overtake the fair Thomasine, and possess himself of 
her hand. No more perfect pantaloon can be imagined than the old 
beau represented, and his gesticulations and grimaces called forth 
the laughter of all the spectators, which broke into shouts as, at the 
conclusion of the dance, Mr. Cripps gave him a soimding smack 
on liis lean shanks, with his wand, while the jealous barber lent 
him a box over the ear. But this did not quench his ardour, and 
a gesture from the coquettish columbine, who seemed determined 
not to lose him, drew him after her, as she tripped along the right 
hand alley near the canal with the rest of her gamesome party. 

Randulph would wilhngly have disengaged himself from Lady 



THE miser's daughter. 227 

Brabazon, but he could not do so without positive rudeness; and 
what made it worse was, that he was now left alone with her, for 
the rest of the party had disappeared, and he could not help fear- 
ing Beau Villiers might have discovered Hilda, and have gone in 
pursuit of her. 

" Come, Randulph," said her ladyship, rallying him ; " you seem 
to have lost your spirits at the very time they ought to be at the 
highest. Refreshments are given in the Chinese fishing temple. 
Let us go there, and try whether a glass of champagne will enliven 

you." _ . . . . • 

Randulph suffered himself to be led in the direction mentioned, 
and if he had been able to enjoy it, the scene offered to his gaze 
must have amused him, for it was extremely lively and diverting. 
The Chinese temple had been newly gilt and decorated, and its 
burnished pinnacles were reflected in the waters of the canal. It 
was filled with company, most of whom were partaking of refresh- 
ments, while an excellent band stationed in the midst of it played 
the liveliest airs, to which several parties on the banks of the canal 
were dancing. Amongst others were Mr. Cripps and his two 
columbines, who frolicked along the alley on the right, followed by 
the barber, the old beau, and Rathbone, attracting general atten- 
tion. Mr. Cripps was so agile, danced so well, and leaped so won- 
derfully, that it Avas generally supposed he was Mr. Yates, the 
celebrated harlequin of Drury Lane, while if the fair Thomasine 
had not been so pretty, she would have been taken for Mrs. Mann, 
the favourite columbine of the same house. As it was, she was 
allowed on all hands to be the best dancer in the garden ; and her 
glances were so bewitching, that many other persons fell in love 
with her besides Sir Singleton Spinke. One person, in especial, 
who displayed the most undisguised admiration of her, and who 
kept as near as he could, was a tall young man, with thin, sharp 
features, which Mr. Cripps, after puzzHng his brains to recollect 
them, at last called to mind as belonging to the companion of 
Kitty Conway, at the Folly on the Thames. This young man, 
who wore a long black silk gown, a velvet cap of the same colour, 
and a flowing black wig, and intended to represent an Italian doc- 
tor, it is, perhaps, almost needless to say, was Philip Frewin. 
Another admirer was a person habited as a pope, who kept con- 
stantly in their train, but whose robe and large mask precluded aU 

Q2 



230 THE miser's daughtee. 

*' I may, perhaps, remind you of it at some future time, that is 
all," rejoined Firebras. 

" Enough !" cried Randulph. " Take me to her at once." 
'^ Impossible !" exclaimed Firebras. " I must prepare Sir Nor- 
folk, and give Hilda a hint of my intention, lest she should pre* 
vent it, for I perceived just now that she discovered you. Rejoin 
your party, and avoid exciting the suspicions of Lady Brabazon 
and Beau Villiers, or they may mar all. I may not, perhaps, be 
able to accompHsh the object you desire till the evening, so curb 
your impatience." 

With this, he moved off, and mingled with the crowd, while 
Randulph joined Lady Brabazon. Her ladyship made many sar- 
castic remarks upon his display upon the water, and complimented 
him, ironically, upon his skill as a rower. Randulph was in no 
mood for such raillery, and might have made some angry retort, 
but at that moment, there was a great stir in the walk near the 
bridge, occasioned by the approach of the Prince and Princess of 
Wales, attended by a large retinue. The royal party entered the 
temple, and remained there more than half an hour conversing 
with those around them. Randulph had the honour of a presenta- 
tion to the prince, by Mr. Villiers; and while engaged in conver- 
sation with that illustrious personage, he perceived Cordwell Fire- 
bras among the by-standers; but he could not, without a breach of 
etiquette, withdraw to speak to him, and when the royal party 
quitted the temple, he was gone. He was about to search for him, 
when Beau Villiers, who had followed the Prince of Wales, hastily 
returned, and said, with an expression of malicious satisfaction 
that he had his Royal Highness's commands to him to join his 
train. Randulph had no alternative but compliance, and to his 
own chagrin, and his uncle Trussell's delight, he mingled with the 
royal attendants, and proceeded with them in their promenade 
through the gardens. 

In the course of this ramble, he perceived Firebras standing 
with Hilda and Sir Norfolk ; and though he was greatly annoyed 
not to be able to join them, it was some satisfaction to him to ob- 
serve that his present position seemed to operate to his advantage 
with the lady. The performances of Mr. Cripps's party diverted 
both the royal personages during their stroll, and they laughed 
heartily at a comic dance executed by them. 



THE miser's daughter. 231 

Some hours passed on in this way, and Randulph was still held 
in bondage. At length, the rotunda was opened. Of course, the 
royal party was ceremoniously ushered in, in the first place ; but 
immediately afterwards, crowds poured in, and the whole area of 
the amphitheatre, together with the boxes, and gallery above, were 
filled with company. What with the innumerable lights, and the 
extraordinary variety of dresses, the whole scene had a most bril- 
liant effect. There was an excellent band in the orchestra, and a 
concert was commenced, but little attention was paid to it by the 
assemblage, who continued promenading round and round the 
amphitheatre — laughing and talking loudly with each other. As 
soon as the concert was over, the loud blowing of a horn attracted 
general observation to a platform near the central column, on which 
the quack doctor and his attendant were stationed — the latter of 
whom began dispensing his medicines, and vaunting their efficacy, 
in a highly ludicrous manner. 

This and other entertainments consumed the time till ten o'clock; 
before which, however, a magnificent supper was served to the royal 
party in a private refreshment room. A bell was then rung, to 
announce that a grand display of fireworks was about to take place, 
and the company hurried to the outer galleries and to the gardens 
to witness the exhibition. Much confusion ensued, and amidst 
it, the fe,ir Thomasine, somehow or other, got separated from her 
party. 

The little barber was almost frantic. He rushed hither and 
thither among the crowd, calling for her by name, and exciting 
general ridicule. At last, in an agony of despair, he stationed him- 
self near the scaffold where the fireworks were placed ; and when 
the first signal-rocket ascended, he perceived her pretty face turned 
upwards at a little distance from him. She was standing near the 
trees with the old beau, whose transports at his enviable situation 
were somewhat disturbed by the descent of the heavy rocket-stick 
on his head. At this juncture, the little barber reached his truant 
mistress, and forcing her from Sir Singleton, placed her rounded 
arm under his own, and held it fast. 

" Oh dear, how glad I am to see you," said the naughty little 
Thomasine, for "fair" she does not deserve to be called; "weVe 
been looking for you everywhere" — (here she told a sad story). 
" That odious old beau has been trying to persuade me to run away 



232 THE miser's daughter. 

with liim. He offers to settle — I don't know what — upon me, and 
to make me Lady Splnke." 

" And why don't you accept his offer?" said the barber, in an 
ecstacy of jealous rage. 

" Because I'm engaged, and engagements with me are sacred 
things," replied the fair Thomasine, theatrically, yet tenderly. 
" But do look at that beautiful wheel !" 

The fireworks were really splendid. Flights of rockets soared 
into the skies ; magnificent wheels performed their mutations ; star- 
pieces poured forth their radiant glories ; maroon batteries resounded ; 
Chinese fountains filled the air with glittering showers; pots des 
aigrettes; pots des brins, and pots des saucissons, discharged their 
stars, serpents, and crackers; yew trees burnt with brilliant fire ; 
water rockets turned the canal to flame; fire balloons ascended; and 
a grand car with flaming wheels, drawn by sea-horses snorting fire, 
and containing a figure of Neptune, which traversed the whole 
length of the canal, and encircled the Chinese temple — the bridge 
being removed to make way for it — and finally exploded, scattering 
serpents and crackers in every direction, concluded the exhibition, 
amid the general plaudits of the assemblage. 

Darkness for a few minutes enveloped the crowd, during which 
a few cries were heard in timid female tones ; but the lamps were 
as soon as possible lighted, and the majority of the assemblage 
returned to the rotunda, where they repaired to the alcoves, and 
many a bowl of punch was emptied, many a bottle of champagne 
quaffed ; after which dancing was resumed with greater spirit than 
ever. 

Mr. Rathbone gave a capital supper to his party, in which the 
old beau contrived to get himself included. He contrived also to 
sit near the fair Thomasine, and pledged her so often and so deeply, 
that he fell beneath the table. Here he was left by the others, and 
a minuet being struck up, Mr. Cripps offered his hand to the widow, 
and led her forth to dance ; while Mr. Rathbone, greatly exhilarated 
by the punch he had drunk, stood by, laughing at them ready to 
split his sides; and the little barber took the opportunity of their 
being left alone together, to reprove the fair Thomasine for her 
improper conduct towards the old beau during supper. 

Liberated by the departure of the Prince of Wales, who quitted 
the gardens on the conclusion of the fireworks, Randulph imme- 



% 




Citrvs'i, G-nu/ICsWJc. 



RandulpiL and "Hilda dancing in ^ Rotunda at Ranelagli 



I 



LOHIXaC PARKY i-CP UlAWNnAl.T. STRl'.RT iSt?. 



THE miser's daughter. 233 

diately returned to tlie rotunda, in the hope of finding Hilda still 
there. He had scarcely entered it when he perceived Firebras 
at supper by himself in one of the alcoves, and instantly joined 
him. 

" She is still here," said Firebras, " and as soon as I have finished 
my supper I will take you to her. There would be no use in going 
now, for Sir Norfolk has only just ordered supper, and I can merely 
introduce you as a partner for a dance. Sit down, and take a glass 
of champagne." 

Randulph declined the latter offer, and was obliged to control 
his impatience until Firebras thought fit to rise. Crossing the 
amphitheatre, they proceeded to an alcove, in which Sir Norfolk 
and Hilda were seated, and Firebras, bowing to the old knight, 
said, " Sir Norfolk, permit me to have the honour of presenting the 
friend I mentioned some hours ago to your fair charge. Miss 
Scarve," he added, after a significant look at Hilda, *•' this gentle- 
man wishes to have the honour of dancing a minuet with you. I 
am sorry there is no time for a more ceremonious introduction 
to yourself. Sir Norfolk, but the musicians are striking up the 
dance." 

Upon this Hilda arose, and tendered her hand, with some trepi- 
dation, to Randulph, who, with a breast thrilling with joyful emo- 
tion, led her into the open space cleared for the dancers, and part 
of which was already occupied, as before related, by Mr. Cnpps and 
the widow. No time was allowed Randulph to hazard a word to 
his partner. Scarcely were they placed when the minuet com- 
menced. The grace with which they performed this charming, 
though formal dance, excited the admiration of all the beholders, 
and contrasted strongly with the exaggerated style in which it was 
executed by Mr. Cripps and Mrs. Nettleship. Indeed, a better 
foil — had such been desired — could not have been found than the 
two latter personages presented. 

Sir Norfolk planted himself on one side to view the dance, and 
there was unwonted elation in his countenance as he witnessed the 
graceful movements of his fair cousin and her partner. Trussell in 
his Turkish dress was among the spectators; and not far from him 
stood Cordwell Firebras. There were two other personages, also, 
who watched the dance, but who regarded it with any other senti- 



234 THE miser's daughtek. 

ments than those of satisfaction. These were Lady Brabazon and 
Beau Villiers. 

" So you see, Villiers, notwithstanding all your scheming, he 
has contrived to dance with her,^' said the former. 

" He has," repHed the beau, partly removing his mask, and dis- 
playing a countenance inflamed with passion — " but he has not 
exchanged a word with her, and I will take care he shall not 
exchange one." 

" You are desperately in love with this girl, ViUiers," said Lady 
Brabazon, angrily. "I thought it was her fortune merely you 
aimed at." 

" I have been foiled, and that has piqued me," rephed Villiers. 

^^ JLe Jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle" rejoined Lady Brabazon. 
" After the failure of your attempt to carry her off, I wonder you 
will persevere." 

" Hush !" exclaimed the beau. " Some one may overhear us. 
I would have carried her off to-night, if I had known she would 
have been here. Your ladyship ought to be obliged to me for the 
trouble I am taking. I shall remove your rival, and you will then 
have young Crew entirely to yourself. And now to put Sir Norfolk 
on his guard." 

With this, he passed on to the Welsh baronet, and addressed 
him. The latter bowed stiffly in return, and approached nearer 
the dancers; and while Hilda was courtes3ring to her partner at the 
close of the minuet, he took her hand and led her away. The 
young man would have followed them, but Cordwell Firebras came 
up and arrested him. 

" It won't do," he said; " Villiers has told the old baronet who 
you are. I must go after him instantly, and make some excuse for 
my share in the matter, or I shall have to cross swords with 
him to-morrow morning. I have done all I can for you. Good 
night." 

Soon after this, Randulph quitted the masquerade with Trussell. 
With some difficulty a boat was procured to convey them home. 
Finding his nephew in no mood for conversation, Trussell, who 
was rather tired, and moreover had drunk a good deal of punch 
and champagne, disposed himself to slumber, nor did he awake till 
they reached Lambeth stairs. 



THE misee's daughter. 235 

Another boat had just landed, and two persons in domino8 
marched before them in the very direction they were going. 

"Why, who the deuce have we here?" cried Trussell, running 
forward to overtake the party in advance. " Zounds ! brother, is 
it you ? Have you been at the masquerade ?" 

" I have," replied Abel; " and I have seen all that has occurred 
the?e.'' 



236 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER IX. 

JACOB BKINGS A PIECE OF INTELLIGENCE TO KANDXTLPH — TRtTSSELL AND RANDUtPH 

GO TO DRURY LANE. 

About a week after this, as Randulph was dressing himself one 
morning, Mr. Jukes entered his room, and informed him that the 
miser's servant, Jacob Post, wished to speak to him. 

" He is at the door," added the butler, mysteriously — " he seems 
very anxious to see you, so I brought him up stairs." 

" Quite right. Jukes," replied Randulph — " let him come in by 
all means." 

" I don't know that it is quite right, sir," replied Mr. Jukes, 
smiling. " I fear my master may be angry with me for admitting 
him ; but I didn't like to disobhge you." 

" Very kind of you indeed, Jukes," replied Randulph. " My 
uncle shall know nothing about the matter from me. But let Jacob 
come in." 

The good-natured butler then retired, and the next moment the 
porter entered the room, scratching his head, as was his wont when 
in any way embarrassed. 

" Well, Jacob," said Randulph, extending his hand to him, — 
" I'm glad to see you. Sit down." 

" No, I thank'ee, sir," repHed Jacob, " I'd rather stand. My 
business won't allow of sittin'." 

" Then begin upon it at once," rejoined Randulph. 

" Before I begin," said Jacob, making himself up for a speech, 
" I must premise that Pm come on my own accord, and at nobody 
else's request whatsomdever, least of all by desire of Miss Hilda — " 

" I'm perfectly satisfied of it, Jacob," interrupted Randulph — 
" perfectly." 

" Then you quite understand I'm come here without her know- 
ledge or previtty?" said Jacob. 



THE miser's daughter. 237 

" Quite so," replied Randulph — " I am quite sure she did not 
send you." 

" No, that she didn't," rejoined Jacob, " and mortal angry she'd 
be with me if she thought I had come. But I see you're impatient, 
and I'll keep you no longer in suspense. I'm come, then, to 
tell you, that my young missis is going to Wauxhall to-night." 

" A thousand thanks for the information, Jacob !" cried Randulph, 
taking a crown from his purse which lay on the table — "Drink my 
health." 

"I'd rather not take the money, — much obleeged to you all the 
same, sir," replied Jacob. " But as I was sayin', my young missis 
is goin' to Wauxhall with Sir Norfolk Salusbury, and they're to 
join Lady Drabbyson and Mr. Willars. Now I've no great opinion 
of those two fine folks. Indeed, I suspect they're contriving some 
wicked design against Miss Hilda. But it's no use warnin' my master, 
for he wilfully shuts his eyes to danger ; and as to Sir Norfolk, he's 
too much wrapped up in hisself, and too proud to listen to me. I 
therefore thought it better to come to you." 

" What do you suspect, Jacob ?" asked Randulph. 

" Why it's no matter what I suspect just now," replied the porter, 
— '*but I'm on a scent, and I'll find it out before night. Have you 
heard o' the attempt to carry off young missis ?" 

" No !" replied Randulph — " but you surely don't suspect Mr. 
Villiersofit?' 

" It mayn't be safe to speak out," replied Jacob, " especially as 
I can't bring proof. But I could almost undertake to swear that 
his walet, Mr. Cripps, was one of the parties engaged in it." 

" The rascal is capable of any thing !" cried Randulph. " Satisfy 
me that Mr. Villiers was the author of the atrocious attempt you 
have mentioned, and he shall pay for his villany with his life." 

*' Wait till to-night, sir," replied Jacob. " I may be able to 
satisfy you then. I'm on the look out." 

" I have ray own reasons for thinking some design is on foot," 
replied Randulph, " because Lady Brabazon has sent me and my 
uncle tickets for Drury Lane to-night, regretting she could not go 
there herself, but omitting to mention a word about Vauxhall." 

*' She wanted to get you out o' the way," returned Jacob. '^ It's 
a deep laid scheme. But I'll unravel it. Don't let any one — not 
even your uncle, Mr. Trussell, know where you're goin' to-night. 



238 THE miser's daughter. 

You can watch wliat's done, and act accordingly. I'll be there, 
and let you know what Pve learnt in the meantime." 

" I entirely approve of your advice," rejoined Randulph, "and 
win act in accordance with it. But how will you see me there?'' 

" Be under the orchyster at ten o'clock, and I'll find means o' 
comin' to you," repUed Jacob. " And now my time's up. You'll 
be cautious?" 

" Fear me not," replied Randulph. 

And Jacob took his departure. 

Acting upon the porter's suggestion, Randulph said nothing to 
his uncles of what had passed; nor did Mr. Jukes mention a word 
of Jacob's visit, so that neither of them had any idea of the cause 
of his abstraction, though both remarked it. He spent the greater 
part of the morning in his own room, in order to indulge his 
thoughts imrestrainedly, and only came down stairs to dinner when 
he was perfectly composed. Abel was graver than usual, but 
Trussell was in his usual flow of spirits, and talked of the perform- 
ances they were about to witness. 

" We are going to see the Beau's Stratagem," sir, he said to his 
brother, " and as Mr. Garrick is to play Archer, and Mr. Macklin, 
Scrub, we cannot fail of being well entertained." 

" Humph!" exclaimed Abel. 

" Then as to ladies,^' added Trussell, turning to Randulph, " we 
are to have the charming Mrs. Gibber, and the scarcely less charming 
Mrs. Woffington ; and the critics tell me that the new opera — the 
Temple of Dulness — is to be delightful." 

" No wonder critics say so," observed Abel, with a sneer, " the 
title alone would make it attractive to them.'' 

" Bravo!" exclaimed Trussell. " By-the-by," he added aside to 
Randulph, *'your friend IQtty Gonway sings at Vauxhall to- 
night." 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Randulph. 

" I'm surprised you don't go to hear her," said Abel, who had 
overheard the remark, looking so hard at him that he was covered 
with confusion. 

" He's otherwise engaged," interrupted TrusseU: " I only heard 
of it this morning by accident. We'll go to VauxhaU if you prefer 
it to Drury Lane, Randulph." 

" No, don't alter your arrangements!" cried Randulph, hastily. 



THE miser's daughter. 239 

, " Sir Singleton Spinke -will be there, I'll be sworn," laughed 
Trussell — " though he's got a new flame ; the daughter of a mercer 
named Deacle, who lives in the Little Sanctuary, just opposite — ^but 
never mind where she lives," he added, observing his brother frown 
— " she's a devilish pretty girl, and is called, on account of her 
beauty, the fair Thomasine. You saw her at the masquerade at 
Ranelagh the other night. She was one of the columbines who 
danced with Mr. Cripps." 

" 7 noticed her," observed Abel — " a silly coquette !" 

"I'll tell you a capital joke about Sir Singleton and this fair 
damsel," pursued Trussell, laughing. " You must know that he 
supped with her and her party the other night at Ranelagh, and got 
so drunk that he was left under the table in the alcove. While he 
was in this state, some one, most probably Mr. Cripps, cut off his 
long queue, and sent it the next morning in a packet to the fair 
Thomasine, accompanied by a tender epistle offering her his hand, 
and begging, as he could not send her a lock of his hair, to enclose 
instead — his pigtail !" 

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Mr. Jukes, who was in attendance. 
*' Just like one of Crackenthorpe's tricks, — just like him." 
. This story forced a smile even from Abel, and the rest of the 
dinner passed off agreeably enough. The cloth was removed, and 
the wine placed upon the table, but Randulph scarcely tasted it, 
and Trussell, after swallowing a few glasses, said it was time to 
start for the play. 

" Before you go, I have a word to say to you, Randulph," re- 
marked Abel, in a tone that alarmed the young man. " I have 
made no comments upon your dissipated course of life of late, be- 
cause I felt it would be thrown away ; but it must now be ended." 

" I am at a loss to know, sir, what particular part of my con- 
duct has displeased you," said Randulph. 

" I speak of your conduct generally, not particularly," rejoined 
Abel, severely. ^* But there will be one here to-morrow who has 
better title to admonish you than I have." 

" Your words would seem to refer to my mother, sir," said Ran- 
dulph, in great surprise. " Is she coming to town?" 

" She will be here to-morrow,'^ replied Abel. " But you are 
detaining your uncle Trussell — he is impatient. Go. It is your 
last night, make the most of it." 



240 THE miser's daughter. 

Trussell was as much surprised as Randulph at what had just 
passed, but he made no remark till they got out of the house. 

" Well, I shall be delighted to see my sister Crew," he said — 
** delighted to see her. But I wonder why the old gentleman 
made a secret of her coming. Don't be apprehensive of any lec- 
tures from her, Randulph. I'll set all right, depend upon it." 

" It is strange she shouldn't have written to me on the subject/' 
said Randulph. 

" Most likely my brother imposed secrecy upon her," repHed 
Trussell. " However, we must have a little talk together before 
her arrival. I must council you how to act at this juncture. 
She's an excellent creature, your mother. But it'll never do to 
be tied to the apron-string. Let us forget the matter now, and, 
adopting the old gentleman's advice, make the most of to-night." 

A boat conveyed them to Somerset Stairs, where they landed, 
and proceeded to Drury Lane Theatre. Randulph had resolved 
upon what course to pursue. The play was admirably performed ; 
but even the inimitable acting of Garrick and Macklin failed to 
interest him, so much was he pre-occupied. The comedy over, 
they adjourned to Tom's Coffee-house in Covent Garden, where 
abundance of company was assembled, plentifully besprinkled with 
blue and green ribands and stars. Trussell met a host of ac- 
quaintances, and framing a hasty excuse, Randulph left him with 
them, and hurrjong to SaUsbury Stairs, took a boat, and ordered 
the waterman to row to Vauxhall. 



THE misee's daughter. 241 



CHAPTER X. 

THE SUPPER AT VAUXHALL — BEAU VILLIERs' ATTEMPT TO CAKRY OFF HILDA 
DEFEATED BY EANDULPH. 

Celebrated througliout Europe, and once esteemed the most 
delightful place of recreation of the kind, Vauxhall Gardens have 
been in existence more than a century; and it rejoices us to ifind 
that they are not altogether closed. They were first opened with a 
ridotto al fresco, about the year 1730, and speedily rising to a high 
reputation, were enlarged, and laid out in the most superb manner. 
A magnificent orchestra, of Gothic form, ornamented with carvings 
and niches, and provided with a fine organ, was erected in the midst 
of the garden. There was likewise a rotunda, though not of equal 
dimensions with that of Ranelagh, being only seventy feet in 
diameter, with a dome-like roof, supported by four handsome Ionic 
columns, embellished with foliage at the base, while the shafts were 
wreathed with a Gothic balustrade, representing climbing figures. 
From the centre depended a magnificent chandelier. A part of 
the rotunda, used as a saloon, was decorated with columns, between 
which were paintings by Hayman. The entrance from the gardens 
was through a Gothic portal. Moreover, there were pavilions or 
alcoves, ornamented with paintings, from designs by Hogarth and 
Hayman, appropriate to the place ; each alcove having a table in it 
capable of accommodating six or eight persons, and leading in an 
extensive sweep to a magnificent piazza, five hundred feet in length, 
of Chinese architecture. This semi-circle led to a further sweep of 
pavilions. A noble gravel walk, nine hundred feet in length, bor- 
dered with lofty trees, and terminated by a broad lawn, in which 
there was a Gothic obelisk, faced the entrance. But the enchant- 
ment of the gardens commenced with the moment of their illumi- 
nation, when upwards of two thousand lamps, Hghted almost simul- 
taneously, glimmered through the green leaves of the trees, and 

K 



L 



242 THE miser's daughter. 

slied their radiance on the fairy scene around. This was the grand 
charm of Vauxhall. One of its minor attractions was a curious 
piece of machinery representing a miller's house, a water-wheel, and 
a cascade, which, at that period of the art, was thought quite 
marvellous. There were numberless walks and wildernesses in the 
grounds, and most of the vistas were adorned with statues. In one 
of thera, at a date a little posterior to this history, was a statue of 
Handel as Orpheus holding a lyre. 

It was nearly ten o'clock when Randulph reached the gardens. 
He proceeded along the grand walk, which was brilliantly illumi- 
nated, and filled with company, as far as the obelisk, but he could 
see nothing of Sir Norfolk or Hilda. He then turned into one of 
the side walks, and approached the orchestra, in front of which 
stood Kitty Conway, preparing to sing. She instantly detected 
Mm, and made a sHght movement of recognition. As he passed 
the range of alcoves beneath the orchestra, he perceived Jacob, 
who instantly came towards him. 

" I've found it all out," said the porter — " I knew I should. 
Mr. Willars is the contriver of the plot. He means to carry off 
Miss Hilda, and has engaged a coach for tliat purpose, which is 
stationed at the back o' the gardens. Luckily,, the coachman is a 
friend o' mine, and it's through him I've detected the scheme." 

" But where is your mistress?" cried Randulph. 

" There," replied Jacob, pointing to a party seated at supper 
beneath the grove of trees in front of the orchestra. 

"I see," replied Randulph. "By Heaven!" he cried, "Mr. 
Villiers is coming this way. Two persons stop him. As I live, 
one of them is his valet, and thfi other Captain Culpepper, a fellow 
whom my uncle Trussell told me was a sort of bravo, and would 
cut any man's throat for hire. Doubtless, they are planning the 
abduction." 

" You may take your oath of it," replied Jacob. " I'll manage 
to get near 'em unobserved. Come back to this place when they 
separate, and you shall know all." 

So sajdng, he slouched his hat over his eyes, and mingling with, 
the crowd, got within ear-shot of the beau, who, as has been inti- 
mated, was addressing Captain Culpepper and Mr. Cripps. 

Randulph, meanwhile, felt irresistibly drawn towards the table 
where Hilda was seated, and as he kept behind the trees, he was 



THE miser's daughtee. 243 

not noticed by the party, tliough he icas noticed by Kitty Conway, 
from the orchestra, who, guessing his intention, was so much 
agitated, that, for the first time in her professional career, she made 
some false notes m her singing. Hilda's seat was placed against a 
tree. On her right was Sir Norfolk Salusbury; and on the right 
of the baronet, Lady Brabazon ; next her ladyship was a vacant 
chair — no doubt just quitted by Beau Villiers; then came Lady 
Fazakerly; then Sir Bulkeley Price; and, lastly, Clementina Bra- 
bazon, who occupied the seat on the left of the miser's daughter. 
Partly screened by the tree against which Hilda was seated, Ran- 
dulph bent forward, and breathed her name in the gentlest accents. 
Hilda heard the whisper, and looking round, beheld the speaker. 

How much may be conveyed in a glance ! She read the intensity 
of his passion, and the depth of his devotion in his eyes; and for 
the first time, returned his gaze with a look of kindness, almost of 
tenderness; Randulph was transported; he could not resist the im- 
pulse that prompted him to advance and take her hand, which she 
unresisting yielded to him. 

All this was the work of a minute ; but the action had not been 
unobserved, either by Kitty Conway or Lady Brabazon. Both 
had felt a similar pang of jealousy, but revenge instantly occurred 
to the latter. While Randulph was in the act of raising Hilda's 
hand to his Hps, she touched Sir Norfolk's arm, and pointing in 
the direction of the lovers, whispered, " Look there!" 

Sir Norfolk arose, and in a stem and peremptory voice, said to 
the young man, " Set free that lady's hand, sir !" 

" Not unless she chooses to withdraw it," repHed Randulph. 
" I am wholly to blame for this. Sir Norfolk," said Hilda, with- 
drawing her hand, and blushing deeply. 

" You are pleased to say so. Miss Scarve," returned Sir Norfolk; 
" but the young man has been guilty of a great indecorum, and I 
shall call him to a strict account for it." 

" I shall be ready to ansyer the call, whenever you please. Sir 
Norfolk," rejoined Randulph. " But this is not the place for 
menaces. You will do well to look after your charge." 

" I shall take care to keep off impertinents.like you," replied Sir 
"Norfolk. 

*' Better guard her against other dangers which require more 
penetration than you care to practise," retorted Randulph. 

k2 



244 THE miser's daughter. 

" I have only one answer to make to such insolence," said Sir 
Norfolk, " and that shall be given to-morrow. You shall hear from 
me, Mr. Crew." 

" As soon as you please, Sir Norfolk," replied Eandulph. 

" For my sake, Mr. Crew," interposed Hilda, " let this quarrel 
go no further. I have been the innocent cause of it. Promise me 
it shall not." 

" I would willingly obey you in any thing, Miss Scarve," replied 
Eandulph; " but in this case it is not in my power. Farewell !" 

Fixing one passionate look upon her, he then bowed haughtily 
to Sir Norfolk, who returned his salutation in kind, and withdrew. 

As he walked away, he encountered Beau Villiers, who was 
returning from his conference. VilHers started on seeing him, but 
instantly recovered himself, and would have addressed him, but 
Eandulph turned abruptly away. 

*' What the devil has brought Eandulph Crew here ?" said 
Villiers to Sir Singleton, as he joined the party. " I thought he 
was at Drury Lane." 

" Devil knows !" cried the old beau. " But he has made a pretty 
scene." 

And he proceeded to relate what had occurred. Villiers laughed 
heartily at the recital. 

" I hope old Salusbury will cut his throat," he said, in an under 
tone. 

"Why, it would be desirable to get him out of the way, 
certainly," replied the old beau. " The women are all mad about 
him." 

" Especially Kitty Conway," observed Villiers. " Odds life ! this 
accounts for her having fainted in the orchestra. I wondered what 
could be the matter with her, but now I understand it. All is pre- 
pared," he added, in a deep whisper to Lady Brabazon. 

" Be careful how you act/' she replied, in a low tone. " You'll 
find Sir Norfolk dangerous, and Eandulph Crew is on the watch." 

" Fear nothing," he rejoined, " I've taken my measures securely. 
Make towards the dark walk, and contrive to lead] him and the 
others away." 

Lady Brabazon nodded. 

Soon after this she arose, and, without ceremony, took Sir Nor- 



THE miser's daughter. 245 

folk's arm, Tvliile Villiers very gallantly offered his to Hilda. The 

3st of the party paired off in like manner. 

Leading the way in the direction agreed npon, Lady Brabazon 
expressed a desire to view the scenic representation of the mill and 
water-fall before mentioned, which was exhibited in a hollow of the 
great walk ; and they proceeded towards it. Hilda was much dis- 
pleased by the assiduities of her companion, and she could not help 
remarking that he contrived, on various pretences, to linger behind 
the rest of the party, and though she repeatedly urged him to 
rejoin them, he always made some excuse for not doing so. At 
last, on pausing longer than usual, they quite lost sight of them, 
and were hurrying forward at Hilda's urgent request, when, as 
they passed one of the side vistas, Mr. Cripps, who was standing at 
the end of it, advanced towards his master. 

" Fortunately encountered, sir," said the valet, bowing; "Lady 
Brabazon sent me to look for you, to tell you that she and the party 
are gone down a walk on the left, to see a fine painting in the 
Chinese pavilion at the end of it. With your permission, I'll show 
you the way." 

" Oh, yes, let us go to them by all means," said Hilda, unsus- 
pectingly. 

" Lead on, then !" cried the beau, scarcely able to conceal his 
satisfaction at the success of the scheme. 

A few steps brought them to the end of a narrow walk, arched 
over by trees, the branches of which were so thickly interlaced, that 
the moonlight could not penetrate through them. Alarmed by its 
appearance, Hilda drew back. 

" How thoughtless of Sir Norfolk to leave me thus!" she ex- 
claimed. 

" Why, you are surely not afraid of accompanying me down this 
walk, Miss Scarve," laughed the beau. " My valet is with us, 
and shall protect you. The Chinese pavilion is not more than a 
hundred yards off; and the walk, though dark, is not solitary." 

Fancying she perceived some persons within it, Hilda suffered 
herself to be led on ; but she had not advanced many steps when all 
her uneasiness returned, and she bitterly regretted having assented. 
But it was too late. The beau's grasp had tightened upon her 
arm, and he drew her quickly forward, while Mr. Cripps proceeded 
at the same rapid pace. Once or twice, she thought she heard 



246 THE miser's daughter. 

footsteps behind her, and almost fancied she could distinguish a 
figure walking near them, but she did not dare to express her 
terrors. They had proceeded, so far as she could judge, about a 
hundred yards, when a sudden turn in the walk disclosed a low 
hedge; beyond was the open country, bathed in moonhght. 

Coming to a sudden halt, the beau said in a hurried, but impe- 
rative tone — " Miss Scarve, I love you to desperation, and am 
determined to make you mine. You are now in my power, and 
must accompany me.'' 

" Never !'' repHed Hilda, resolutely. " And I command you 
to release me." 

She would have screamed for help, if Yilliers, who grasped her 
more tightly, had not taken out his handkerchief, and, placing it 
over her mouth, prevented her cries. While this was passing, 
Captain Culpepper emerged from the trees, and hastened with Mr. 
Cripps towards him. 

" Bravo, sir I" cried the Captain. " All goes well this time. 
We'll have her in the coach in a twinkhng." 

" Not so fast, villains !" thundered Randulph, rushing forward. 
" I have allowed you to go thus far to see to what lengths your 
villany would carry you. But you shall pay dearly for it." 

As he spoke, he rushed to the beau, and snatching Hilda from 
him, dashed him backwards with such force that he fell upon the 
ground. Another person Hkewise came to the rescue. This was 
Jacob, who, brandishing his cudgel, hurried to the scene of action. 
On seeing him, the valet whipped out his blade, but it was beaten 
from his grasp, and he only avoided a terrible blow from the cudgel 
by a nimble leap aside. Without waiting for a second blow, he 
plunged into the wood, and made his escape. Captain Culpepper 
fared no better. Before he could draw his sword, he received 
a blow on the head, that stretched him senseless and bleeding on 
the ground. Hilda, meantime, had murmured her thanks to her 
deliverer, who felt, as he pressed her to his bosom, that the whole 
of his previous anxiety was more than repaid by the unutterable 
joy of the moment. 

" Hilda !" he cried, passionately, " I would risk a thousand lives 
for you. Forgive me if, at this moment, I dare to ask if I may 
hope?" 

She murmured a faint response in the aflS.rmative. 



THE miser's daughter. 247 



^Belight. 

^B " Alas !" exclaimed Hilda, "my avowal can give you little hap- 

(^■jmiess. I can never be yours." 

" There you speak truth !" cried Villiers, who by this time had 
regained his feet, and furiously approached them. "You never 
shall be his." 

" This is the leader of the gang !" cried Jacob, who having just 
disposed of Captain Culpepper, now rushed towards the beau, 
brandishing his cudgel in a formidable manner. " I'll soon settle 
him." 

"Leave him alone, Jacob!" cried Randulph, authoritatively; 
*' his punishment belongs to me." 

" You're wrong, sir," rejoined Jacob, " but I shan't disobey 
you. He doesn't deserve to be treated like a genTman." 

" Oblige me by stepping aside for a moment, Mr. Crew !" said 
the beau, with forced politeness. And as Randulph complied, he 
added — " I shall expect satisfaction for the injury you have done 
me. 

" I might well refuse it," replied Randulph; ''but I am too 
eager for vengeance myself to do so. You shall have the satisfac- 
tion you seek as soon as you please." 

" To-morrow morning, then, at the earliest hour — at five — in 
Tothill Fields," said Villiers. 

" I will be there," replied Randulph. 

And, quitting the beau, he rejoined Hilda, to wliom he offered 
his arm. They walked down the avenue together, Jacob follow- 
ing close beside them. Hilda allowed her hand to remain in his, 
while he poured the warmest protestations of attachment into her 
ear. She did not attempt to check him ; and perhaps it would be 
difficult to say which of the two felt the most regret when that 
brief dream of happiness was ended, as they emerged into the 
lighted vista. 

Almost immediately on entering the great walk, they met Sir 
Norfolk and Lady Brabazon and the rest of the party. Her lady- 
ship was at first greatly confused at seeing Randulph, but she in- 
stantly guessed what had happened, and tried to put a good face 
on the matter. Advancing to Hilda, she hastily inquired what 



248 THE miser's daughtee. 

had happened ; but the latter turned coldly from her, and taking 
the arm of Sir Norfolk Salusbury, desired to be led home. 

" Your ladyship is perfectly aware of the peril in which I have 
been placed," she said. " But I have been delivered from it by 
the courage and address of Mr. Crew." 

" Before you go. Miss Scarve," said Lady Brabazon, " I be- 
seech you to give me some explanation of what has happened." 

" It must suffice, then, to say, that Mr. Villiers has attempted 
to carry me off," repHed Hilda — " but his purpose has been de- 
feated." 

" What is this I hear!" cried Sir Norfolk. " Mr. VilUers 
guilty of so base an attempt ? I will go in search of him 
instantly !" 

" I have undertaken the punishment of Mr. ViUiers' ojffence, 
sir," said Randulph. 

" You have an account to settle with me, yourself, sir," rejoined 
Sir Norfolk, sternly. 

" I will settle it at five o'clock to-morrow morning, in Tothill 
Fields," replied Randulph, in a low tone, " after I have arranged 
with Mr. Villiers." 

" Be it so," replied Sir Norfolk. 

And he strode off with Hilda, followed by Jacob ; while Ran- 
dulph, without staying to exchange a word with Lady Brabazon, 
walked away in the opposite direction. 



THE miser's daughter. 249 



CHAPTER XI. 

KANDDLPH WORSTS BEAU VILLIERS IN A DUEL IN TOTHILL FIELDS; AND IS 
WORSTED HISISELF IN A SECOND DUEL BY SIR NORFOLK SALUSBURY 

On quitting Vauxhall, Randulph. made the best of his way 
home, agitated by a crowd of tumultuous thoughts. Abel had re- 
tired to rest more than an hour ago, but Trussell was not yet come 
home. Telling Mr. Jukes, therefore, that he must sec his younger 
uncle directly, he set off again without a moment's delay, and taking 
a boat at Lambeth stairs, rowed to the nearest point to Covent 
Garden. He then hurried to Tom's Coffee-house, where he found 
his uncle at supper in a box by himself, and proceeded to relate to 
him all that had occurred. 

" A pretty adventure !" exclaimed Trussell, at the close of the 
recital. " An abduction prevented, and a couple of duels ! I'm 
sorry I wasn't with you, that I might have taken one of the latter 
off your hands. It'll be a mortal conflict with the beau. I'm 
glad you've had lessons from Hewitt. He told me himself, not 
many days ago, that you were one of his best scholars, and had as 
strong a wrist, and as quick an eye as any man he knew." 

" I have no fear of the result in either case," replied Randulph. 

" I'm glad you're so confident," said Trussell; " but neither of 
your antagonists are to be despised. Take a glass of punch — tliey 
brew famously here — well, as you please. We must make arrange- 
ments instanter. Our best plan will be to go to Hewitt, and tell 
him to be in the field with swords and a surgeon at the appointed 
hour." 

Emptying the rummer of punch before him, he called to the 
drawer, paid him, and, taking his nephew's arm, they set forth. 
Mr. Hewitt lived in Leicester-street, Leicester-fields — now Leices- 
ter-square. He was in bed, but they soon knocked him up, and 
explaining their business, he entered upon it immediately. 



250 THE miser's daitghtee. 

" I will be sure to be on tbe ground at the time appointed, and 
will bring Mr. Molson, the surgeon, with me," said Hewitt. 
" He will take care of you in case of accident. But I don't appre- 
hend any such to you, because I know what you can do. You 
shall have my favourite German blade — here it is," he added, 
taking down a sword. " This is the strongest and lightest sword 
I ever handled, and equal to any Spanish tuck. Be sure you 
come coolly into the field. The best swordsman that ever fought 
will be worsted if he is in a passion. You'll need judgment as 
well as skill to-morrow, and take care you do not disorder it in any 
way. Mr. VilHers is a very skilful fencer, but he is Hkely enough 
to be in a passion. As to Sir Norfolk, you will find him calm as 
death. He is a far more dangerous adversary than the other." 

" Far more dangerous," echoed Trussell. 

" Sir Norfolk being so much taller than yourself," pursued the 
fencing-master, " the best way when you intend to make a thrust 
at him will be to come to half sword, you will then be within dis- 
tance. If you act on the defensive, engage only five inches, and 
keep him at that distance. You understand?" 

" Perfectly,"" replied Randulph. 

" The best thrust you can make at him will be seconde, or carte 
under the shell, or you may dart your sword as I have taught you. 
And now I recommend you to go to rest. Think no more of the 
duel, but sleep soundly, and come to the field as fresh as a lark." 

Randulph smiled at the fencing-master's advice, and having ar- 
ranged a meeting at the Horseferry, Westminster, opposite Lambeth 
stairs, at half-past four o'clock, he took his departure with his 
uncle. They reached home in about half an hour, and Mr. Jukes 
expressed great dehght at seeing them. It had been previously 
agreed, for fear of mistake, that Trussell should sit up all night, 
and call his nephew in sufficient time in the morning, and he there- 
fore ordered Mr. Jukes to bring him a bottle of brandy, and a 
large jug of cold water. The butler obeyed, and took the oppor- 
tunity of inquiring whether any thing was the matter, but received 
no direct answer. 

On retiring to his own room, Randulph threw himself into a 
chair, and turned over the events of the day. Amid a multitude of 
dark and disagreeable thoughts, there was one that was bright and 
cheering. He had seen Hilda — avowed his passion — and received 



THE miser's DATJGHTEK. 251 

an assurance that he was not indiiFerent to her. This thought 
buoyed him up, and made him regard with indifference the danger 
to which he was exposed. 

His most painful reflections were connected with his mother, and 
knowing the anguish she would experience if any thing should 
happen to him, he sat down and wrote a letter, full of filial affection 
and tenderness, to be delivered to her in case of his fall. This 
done, he threw himself on his couch, but his mind was too much 
disturbed to allow him to sleep. 

Long before it was Hght, he arose and dressed himself, and when 
Trussell entered the room, he was on his knees at the bedside, at 
prayer. On rising, he gave the letter he had written to the charge 
of his uncle, and they crept down stairs as softly as they could, for 
fear of disturbing any one in the house. They then proceeded to 
the dining-room, where Trussell swallowed a glass of brandy to 
keep the cold out of his stomach, and recommended his nephew to 
do the same to steady his hand, but the latter, doubting the efficacy 
of the prescription, declined it. Their hope of getting away proved 
fallacious, for as they entered the hall on their way to the outer 
door, they found Abel standing there, wrapped in his dressing- 
gown. 

"Randulph," he said, eyeing his nephew severely — "you are 
going to fight a duel. It is useless to deny it. I am sure you are." 

" I shall not attempt to deny it, sir," replied Randulph. " I 
am. 

" He is going to fight two duels, brother," said Trussell, embold- 
ened by the brandy he had just swallowed. 

" Two duels !" echoed Abel — " then he is doubly foolish — 
doubly culpable, liandulph, you are about to commit a very sin- 
ful, and very foolish action, and though you may be justified in 
what you do by the laws of honour, and the usages of society, you 
will not be justified before Heaven." 

" Keally, my dear sir," said Trussell, "you view this matter 
much too seriously." 

" Not a whit," replied Abel; " Randulph might stop if he would. 
But he would rather run the risk of offending his Maker than 
man." 

" Uncle," said Randulph, " I cannot now argue with you; but 
I have good reasons for what I am about to do." 



252 THE miser's daughter. 

" No reason can warrant bloodshed," said Abel, sternly. " Since 
you are deaf to my counsels, go. Yet think what a blow it will be 
to your mother, if she finds on her arrival that she has lost her 
son." 

" I have thought of that, uncie," replied Randulph; " and I have 
left a letter with my uncle Trussell. Perhaps, you will now permit 
me to commit its charge to you?" 

" Here it is, sir," said Trussell, handing him the letter. " Time 
presses. We must be gone. We hope to be back again with you 
at breakfast, and to make a hearty and merry meal. We are quite 
sorry to have disturbed you. Good morning, sir." 
" Abel threw a severe and disgusted look at him, and then turning 
to Randulph, pressed his hand affectionately, and said, " I hope I 
may see you at breakfast, and with no blood on your soul." 

And with these words, he walked away. 

" DeviHsh unlucky we should meet him !" said Trussell, forcing 
a laugh, as they quitted the house. " I suppose Jukes must have 
suspected something, and called him up, for I don't think he could 
have overheard us." 

Randulph made no reply, for Abel's parting speech had sunk 
deep into his breast, and they proceeded in silence towards the 
palace stairs. 

It was a fresh and beautiful morning, though the sun was scarcely 
risen, and a thin silvery mist hung like a veil over the smooth sur- 
face of the water. Two or three watermen were lying asleep in 
their tilts, and they roused one of them, who speedily rowed them 
to the opposite bank, near which they found Mr. Hewitt with two 
brace of swords under his arm, in addition to the one by his side, 
accompanied by a tall, stout man, with a red face, dressed in a well- 
powdered wig, and a suit of purple velvet, and carrying a gold- 
headed cane, who was introduced as Mr. Molson, the surgeon. 

" You look famously," said the fencing-master to Randulph. 
" Follow my instructions, and you're sure to come off victoriously." 

The party then walked along the Horseferry Road, which speedily 
brought them to Tothill Fields. They were the first on the ground, 
and Mr. Hewitt, after looking about for a short time, discovered a 
spot excellently adapted for the encounters. 

By this time, the sun having risen, the morning's early promise 
of beauty was fully confirmed. The spot selected for the combats 



THS miser's DAUGHTEE. 253 



^„.,......^...... 

^H massive body and tall towers above a range of mean habitations 
masking its base. Cawing jackdaws in clouds wheeled in the sunny- 
air above its pinnacles. A calmer or more beautiful scene could 
not be imagined. 

Randulph's reflections were interrupted by the approach of two 
persons from the left of the fields, who proved to be Sir Norfolk 
Salusbury and Cordwell Firebras. Sir Norfolk bowed stiffly to 
Randulph, and also to Trussell, and seeing that the beau was not 
arrived, said to the former, " As I am first in the field, I am entitled 
to the first bout." 

" I am sorry I cannot oblige you, Sir Norfolk," replied Randulph ;. 
" but I must give Mr. Villiers priority." 

" Well, as you please, sir," said the baronet, walking aside. 
Cordwell Firebras then advanced to Randulph. 
" I am here as Sir Norfolk's second," he said; " but I hope the 
matter may only serve as a little breathing for you both before 
breakfast. It is an idle quarrel. We must talk about Villiers's 
attempt anon. But here he is." 

As he spoke, two chairs were seen approaching from the lower 
end of the fields. When they came within a hundred yards of the 
party, they stopped, and from the first issued Mr. Villiers, and 
from the other Sir Bulkeley Price. Mr. Cripps walked by the side 
of his master's chair, bearing a water-bottle and a glass. The new- 
comers advanced slowly towards the party, and Mr. VilHers, having 
bowed with much haughtiness to Randulph, gracefully saluted the 
rest of the company. 

" Have we any thing to wait for, gentlemen?" he asked. 
" Nothing," replied Trussell; " we are all ready." 
" To business, then," rejoined the beau. 

At a motion from his master, Mr. Cripps advanced towards him, 
and receiving his clouded cane, proceeded to divest him of his coat, 
leaving him on a light striped silk waistcoat, with sleeves of the 
same material. Randulph, meantime, threw off" his upper garment, 
and rolled up the shirt sleeve on his right arm. Mr. Hewitt then 
stepped up to him, and gave him the German sword he had 
promised ; while Mr. Villiers received an exquisitely tempered blade 
from the valet. These preparations made, the seconds and by- 
standers fell back a few paces, Trussell, Firebras, and Hewitt stand- 



254 THE bhser's daughtee. 

ing on one side, and tlie two baronets on tlie otlier, while tlie sur- 
■ geon stood at a little distance in the rear with Mr. Cripps. 

Advancing towards each other, the combatants saluted, and in 
another moment their blades were crossed, and several rapid passes 
exchanged. The spectators watched the conflict with the greatest 
interest, for both parties appeared admirably matched, and the 
beau's superior skill was counterbalanced by Randulph's extra- 
ordinary vigour and quickness. Thrusts were made and parried on 
both sides, but not a single hit was given, until Randulph, finding 
his adversary engaged in tierce with a high point, made a firm 
thrust in carte over the arm, and passed his sword through the 
fleshy part of the other's shoulder. At this successful hit, the seconds 
rushed forward, but before they reached the spot, the beau's sword 
fell from his grasp. 

'^ It is nothing," said Villiers, surrendering himself to the surgeon, 
who Hkewise hurried towards him; "but I acknowledge myself 
defeated." 

While the beau's wound was bound up by the surgeon, and he 
was led to the chair by Mr. Cripps, Sir Norfolk Salusbury, who 
had been a watchful spectator of the conflict, stepped forward, and 
said to Randulph, " Whatever may be the issue of our encounter, 
Mr. Crew, I shall declare that in the combat which has just taken 
place, you have conducted yourself hke a man of honour and 
spirit." 

" I am glad to receive the acknowledgement from you. Sir Nor- 
folk," repHed Randulph, bowing. 

" Pray do not hurry yourself on my account," said the baronet, 
courteously. 

" I am quite ready for you," replied Randulph. " What I have 
gone through has only served to steady my nerves." 

With the assistance of Firebras, who had come over to him. Sir 
Norfolk then took off" his coat, waistcoat, and shirt, and in this state 
presented so extraordinary an appearance, that Randulph could 
scarcely repress a smile. The punctiHous old knight's first step was 
to deliver his sword to Mr. Hewitt, who, on measuring it with that 
of Randulph, found that it exceeded the latter in length by two 
inches. He therefore gave him one of his own swords, and Sir 
Norfolk beating an appeal with his right foot, bade his youthful 
opponent come on. 



vs 




W~^^^ 






m 


^/> 


^ .^m 


^ 


^ "^ 




8nu4C6A*'V(/t€_/ 



Tlie Duel m TothiJl fields 



iORDON; PARRY « C! :,KABENH/a.l. 



THE miser's daughtee. 255 

Having gone through their salutes with the greatest formality, 
they commenced the combat with the utmost caution. Sir Norfolk 
acted chiefly upon the defensive, and contented himself almost en- 
tirely with parrying the thrusts aimed at him. Randulph soon 
found that he had a formidable antagonist to deal with, and altering 
his plan, tried to compel him to attack him. He made several 
feints with great dexterity, and just touched his adversary's breast 
■with an inside thrust in carte, causing a slight effusion of blood. 

This had the effect of rousing the old baronet into exertion, and 
in his turn he became the assailant. He attacked Randulph with 
such force and fury, that he drove him back several paces. The 
young man returned to the charge, and pressed his adversary in his 
turn, so that he regained liis ground; but while making a pass in 
carte, his sword was turned near the wrist by a dexterous and sud- 
den lunge on the part of 'the baronet, whose point entered his side 
below the elbow, and inflicted a severe wound. 

Maddened by the pain, Randulph continued to fight desperately, 
but the seconds rushed between the combatants, and interposing 
their blades, declared that the strife must terminate, and that Sir 
Norfolk was the victor. The baronet immediately dropped his 
sword, and Randulph, whose strength had been fast failing, fell to 
the ground insensible. 



END OF THE SECOND BOOK, 



I 



THE MISEIl'S DAUGHTER. 

JSoofe tjE ®6ttlf. 



ABEL BEECHCROFT. 



ABEL JBEECHCROFT. 



CHAPTER I. 

WHAT BECAME OF EANDULPH AFTER THE DUEL — HOW HILDA KECEIVED THE 
INTELLIGENCE THAT BANDCLPH HAD BEEN WOUNDED IN THE DUEL; AND WHAT 
PASSED BETWEEN COKDWELL PIKEBRAS AND THE MISER. 

Assistance was promptly afforded Randulph, after liis fall, by 
the surgeon. Placed in Sir Bulkeley Price's chair, he was re- 
moved to the nearest tavern in the Horseferry Road, where his 
wound was dressed. Sir Norfolk Salusbury, who expressed great 
concern about him, followed him thither as soon as he had bound 
up his own wound, and put on his habiliments, and appeared 
greatly reHeved when the surgeon gave him his positive assurance 
that no danger whatever was to be apprehended. 

" Is that Sir Norfolk Salusbury?" asked Randulph, in a faint 
voice. 

"It is," replied the old baronet, stepping forward. 

" Our quarrel is now at an end, I trust?" said the young man, 
extending his hand, which the other grasped cordially. 

" In toto," replied Sir Norfolk; " and not merely is it at an 
end, but a friendship, I hope, has commenced between us from this 
date." 

" I shall hold it cheaply purchased on my part, if it proves so," 
replied Randulph, smiling gratefully. 

" My first business shall be to call on Hilda Scarve, to tell 
her how bravely you have combated in her defence," said Sir 
Norfolk. 

" You will for ever oblige me," replied the young man, trying 
to raise himself, but sinking back the next moment, exhausted by 
the effort. 

" I must interdict further conversation, gentlemen," interposed 
the surgeon; "the bleeding has re-commenced, and the pulse has 

s 2 



i 



260 THE miser's daughter. 

risen. If I am left alone with my patient for a few hours, I will 
answer for his doing well, but not otherwise." 

The room was then cleared, and Sir Norfolk invited the others 
to breakfast with him at his lodgings in Abingdon Street; and 
Trussell, finding that his attendance was not required, but that he 
was rather in the way than otherwise, accepted the invitation. 

Every thing belonging to Sir Norfolk was as formal as himself. 
He had an old servant, the stifiest and tallest of his class, who 
moved like an automaton worked by rusty springs. Moreover, he 
had a favourite old greyhound, who would allow no one to caress 
him but his master ; and a peacock, his especial favourite, which used 
to strut backwards and forwards with him for hours together in a 
little garden at the back of the house. InhospitaHty formed no 
part of the worthy old baronet's character, and a very plentiful re- 
past was set before his guests. Despising tea and coffee as effemi- 
nate and enervating beverages, he nevertheless offered them to his 
guests ; but they were decHned by all, and the light claret substi- 
tuted, greatly preferred. A few bottles of this pleasant drink 
served to wash down the broiled salmon, the slices of mutton-ham, 
the rump-steaks, the kidneys, and anchovy toasts, with which the 
board was spread. A cold sirloin of beef, and a veal and ham 
pasty, flanked by a tankard of stout Welsh ale, stood on the side- 
board, and to these Sir Bulkeley Price applied himself, and de- 
clared he had not made so good a breakfast since he arrived in 
town. 

" Your early rising has given you an appetite. Sir Bulkeley," 
said the elder baronet. 

"Perhaps so," replied the other, again applying to the tankard j 
*' but your ale is excellent — quite equal to my own. I wish I had 
sent some up from Flint." 

Aqua vitse in small glasses was then handed round, and partaken 
of by all except the host. After this, the party broke up, Trussell 
setting out to see how his nephew went on, and Sir Norfolk and 
Firebras proceeding to the Little Sanctuary to call on the miser. 

Not having seen his daughter over night, for he did not wait up 
for her, Mr. Scarve only became acquainted with the beau's attempt 
to carry her off, on the following morning. The relation of the 
matter exasperated him in the highest degree, and when Sir Nor- 
folk Salusbury and Firebras were ushered in by Jacob, they found 



THE miser's daughter. 261 

him in a state of great excitement. Without allowing the baronet 
time to utter a word, he rushed up to him, and, in a voice half 
choked by fury, exclaimed — " Have you killed him? — have you 
kiUed him?" 

" Do you allude to Mr. Randulph Crew, sir?" demanded Sir 
JVorfolk, calmly. 

" No, to the beau — to Villiers !" rejoined the miser. 

" I have not engaged with him," replied the old bachelor; " but 
he has met with due chastisement from Mr. Crew." 

" I am glad to hear it," rejoined the miser; " but I should have 
been better pleased if his villany had been punished by any other 
person. You, yourself, are in some measure to blame for this mis- 
adventure, Sir Norfolk." 

" I can make due allowance for your excited feehngs, Mr. 
Scarve," returned the baronet; "but — " 

" 'Sdeath, sir!" interrupted the miser; " why did you let Hilda 
out of your sight? Since you undertook the charge of her, it 
was your duty to keep strict watch over her." 

" I feel there is reason in what you say, Mr. Scarve," replied 
Sir Norfolk; " nevertheless — " 

"I want no explanation," cried the miser, fiercely; " it is suffi- 
cient for me that the thing has happened ; and look how it stands. 
My daughter is entrusted to your care — is all but carried off by a 
libertine, from under your very nose — and is rescued by the very 
person of all others I wished her to avoid, and against whom I 
cautioned you. Can any thing be imagined more vexatious?" 

" It is as vexatious to me as it can be to yourself, Mr. Scarve," 
replied Sir Norfolk, sternly, for his forbearance was fast waning; 
'* but I must beg of you to use more moderation in your tones and 
language. Recollect whom you are addressing." 

" I ought to have recollected your blind and stupid punctilious- 
ness, which so easily makes you the dupe of designers, before I 
committed my daughter to your charge," cried the miser, provoked 
by the other's haughtiness. 

" Whew !" exclaimed Firebras, with a slig^ht whistle. " There'll 
be another duel presently if he goes on at this rate." 

" Mr. Scarve, I wish you a good morning," said the old baronet, 
bowing stiffly " you shall hear from me ere long." 



262 THE miser's daughter. 

" Stay, Sir Norfolk !" cried Hilda, rushing up to him; "my 
father does not know what he says. For my sake, let it pass." 

" Ay, ay. Sir Norfolk, let it pass," whispered Firebras. " Mr, 
Scarve's intemperate conduct should move your pity rather than 
your anger." 

" I believe you are right, sir," replied the old baronet, in the 
same tone; " I will regard it as a mere infirmity of temper." 

" Sir Norfolk," said Hilda, speaking with forced calmness — 
" some menacing words passed between you and Randulph Crew, 
last night. You say he has risked his life on my account, and has 
punished my assailant. I trust that nothing has passed, or may 
pass, between you and him? Promise me this. Sir Norfolk." 

" Sir Norfolk may safely give that promise now," remarked 
Firebras. 

" How mean you, sir?" cried Hilda, becoming as pale as death. 
" Have you met him, Sir Norfolk ? — have you fought?" 

The old baronet averted his head. 

" I will answer for him," said Firebras — " they have met." 

" But nothing has happened ?" cried Hilda. " Randulph is 
safe, — is he not ?" 

" I did my best not to touch him," repHed the old baronet, reluc- 
tantly; "but he put me so hardly to it, that — that — " 

" Well !" cried Hilda, breathlessly. 

" After receiving a scratch myself, which a plaster has cured,'* 
pursued Sir Norfolk, " I slightly wounded him." 

" And this is the reward of liis devotion to me !" cried Hilda. 

" It is nothing — nothing whatever. Miss Scarve," rejoined Fire- 
bras ; " the surgeon says he will be out again in a week." 

" I am glad you hit him," said the miser; " it will teach him to 
meddle where he has no concern in future." 

'• /'I was grieved to do so," replied Sir Norfolk; " but he forced 
me to it. I never crossed swords with a braver young man. You 
have formed an erroneous opinion of him, Mr. Scarve." 

" I have formed no opinion of him at all," rejoined the miser. 

"You are sure he is not dangerously -vi^ounded, Sir Norfolk?" 
cried Hilda. 

" Quite sure," replied the old baronet. 

"Thank Heaven!" she exclaimed. And with a gasp for utter- 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 263 



ance, she fell into the arms of her aunt, who stood close beside her, 
and who bore her out of the room.' 

" It requires no conjurer to teU how affairs stand in that quarter, 
Mr. Scarve," observed Cordwell Firebras. 

"It is plain she loves the young man," said Sir Norfolk — " and 
for my own part I think him in every way worthy of her." 

" Worthy or not, he shall never have her," returned the miser, 
sullenly. 

"It is not for me to dictate to you, Mr. Scarve," rejoined Sir 
Norfolk; "nor would I presume to hint the course I think you 
ought to pursue; but being satisfied that your daughter's affec- 
tions are engaged to this young man, unless your objections to 
him are insuperable, I hope you will not interfere with their 
happiness." 

" My objections to him are insuperable, Sir Norfolk," rejoined 
the miser, coldly. 

"lam truly sorry to hear it," replied the old baronet. 

" Excuse me. Sir Norfolk," said Firebras, seeing that the other 
was about to take leave, " 1 have a few words to say to Mr- 
Scarve." 

Sir Norfolk then bowed, quitted the room, and was ushered to 
the door by Jacob. 

While this was passing, Cordwell Firebras drew a stool towards 
the chair which the miser had just taken. 

" I presume, Mr. Scarve, there are no eaves-droppers?" he said* 
glancing at the door. 

" I hope not," repUed the miser, who eyed him with great repug- 
nance; " but if you have any secret matters to discuss, you had 
better speak in a low tone." 

" Very well," resumed Firebras, compl3dng with the hint, " we 
must have a little talk together about this young man — this Ran- 
dulph Crew." 

" I guessed what was coming," groaned the miser. 

" You cannot now mistake your daughter's partiality for him," 
pursued Firebras; " and, on the other hand, I can teU you that he 
is devotedly attached to her." 

"Likely enough," replied the miser; "but I will never consent 
to his union with her." 



264 THE miser's daughtek. 

*' You must consent if 1 require you to do so," said Firebras, 
coldly. 

The miser moved uneasily in his chair. 

" You will not pretend to dispute my power to compel you to 
give her to him?" pursued Firebras. " I have but to produce a 
certain paper that you know of, and she is his." 

" Not so fast," rejoined the miser. " You hold this document in 
terrorem over me — ^but how if I resist it?" 

" You cannot resist it," replied Firebras — " you have bound 
yourself too strongly. Let me remind you of the packet delivered 
to you by Randulph Crew. Your daughter, too, will side with 
me. J have only to acquaint her with certain facts, and you well 
know what the consequences will be." 

"Well, take her," cried the miser — "take her, — but you will 
have her without a penny." 

" Scarcely so," rejoined Firebras. " Randulph shall have her, 
and shall also have the fortune you agreed to settle upon her." 

" I agreed to give her to the son of a man of fortune, and to 
make a settlement upon her correspondent with his property," said 
the miser; " but this young man has nothing." 

" I have something to say on that head," rejoined Firebras. 
" Randulph, you are aware, assigned his own life-interest in the 
entailed property to his father's creditors." 

" I know it — I know it," said the miser, hastily; " more fool he 
for doing so." 

" But do you know who those creditors are?" said Firebras. 

*' No," replied the miser; " do you?" 

" I do," repUed Firebras, smiling significantly; " and I know> 
moreover, how the property might be recovered from them." 

" Indeed!" exclaimed the miser, staring at him. 

" What should you say if Randulph were again to be put in 
possession of his estates, and three thousand a year?' pursued Fire- 
bras. " Would you then feel disposed to fulfil your engagement?" 

" It would make a material difierence, certainly," said the miser. 
** But you are merely saying this to try me." 

"No such thing," rejoined Firebras; "I am perfectly serious. 
Now mark me, Mr. Scarve. A few thousand pounds will settle 
the matter with these creditors, and Randulph's property will be 
unincumbered." 



THE miser's daughter. 265 

" And you will advance those few thousand pounds for him, of 
course ?" said the miser, drily. 

"No; you will/' returned Firebras. " It will be your interest 
to do so." 

" Hum !" exclaimed the other. 

"If he espouses your daughter, he must espouse the Jacobite 
cause also," pursued Firebras; "that we must both insist upon. 
His mother will be in town to-day, and we shall have her to 
back us." 

" You lay out your schemes very fairly," said the miser; " but I 
am persuaded they will fall to the ground. Prove to me that Ran- 
dulph can regain his property; and let me hear from his own lips 
an avowal that he will join our party, and I then may begin to 
think of giving my consent." 

" It shall be my business to do so," replied Firebras; " and now, 
good morning. Most likely I may call again in the evening." 

And putting on his hat, he took his departure without summon- 
ing Jacob. 



I 



k 



266 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER II. 

MRS. CREW — HER SOLICITUDE ABOUT HER SON ; AND HER CONVERSATION WITH 

ABEL. 

In the course of the afternoon, Randulph was transported to his 
uncle's house at Lambeth. He was feverish and restless, and kept 
constantly inquiring after his mother, declaring he was sure she 
had arrived, but was purposely kept out of his sight. An opiate 
having been administered, he presently began to experience its 
effects, and sank into a profound slumber, from which he did not 
awake till late in the following day. 

When he opened his eyes, he found the surgeon seated by his 
bedside, feehng his pulse. 

" You are wonderfully better, and wholly free from fever, sir," 
said Mr. Molson; " and if you can promise me to keep all emotion 
under control, I think I may yield to the entreaties of one who is 
most anxious to see you." 

"My mother!" exclaimed Randulph. "Ah! admit her by all 
means. Her presence will calm, rather than excite me." 

" I am not quite so sure of that," hesitated Molson ; " however, 
I will risk it." 

And quitting the room, he returned the next moment and intro- 
duced Mrs. Crew, who uttered a slight cry, and would have rushed 
forward, but he detained her, whispering, — " Remember your 
promise, madam. It was only on the understanding that you would 
maintain your composure that I allowed you to see him." 

Thus cautioned, Mrs. Crew softly approached the bed, and taking 
the hand which her son extended to her, pressed it to her lips. 
She said nothing, but her bosom heaved quickly, and Randulph 
felt the hot tears falling fast upon his hand. 

"Do not distress yourself, dearest mother," he said; " I am 



THE miser's daughter. 267 

*ta,lready so well that if tliis gentleman would allow me, I could 
get up." 

" Your son is doing exceedingly well, madam," said Mr. Molson, 
significantly; " and if we pay him due attention, lie may leave his 
bed in three or four days.'' 

■ Eoused by this remark, Mrs. Crew looked up, and fixed a glance 
fiiU of inexpressible tenderness and affection upon her son. Though 
lier countenance bore traces of much sorrow and anxiety, she was 
still a very handsome woman, and had a tall, fine figure; full as 
became her years, yet not so full as to interfere with the gracefulness 
of its proportions. She was two years younger than Trussell, being 
just forty-four, and might have been thought much younger, but 
for the care-worn expression above mentioned, which, while it added 
age to her features, lent interest to them at the same time. Her 
lineaments strikingly resembled those of her son, but were more 
dehcately formed, and her eyes were blue, large, and of the purest 
water. She was dressed in deep mourning, of simple material, and 
wore her own hair, originally of a bright and beautiful brown, but 
now mingled with grey. 

Charms such as Mrs. Crew possessed, must, it is scarcely neces- 
sary to say, have won her many admirers when they were at their 
best ; and some four-and-twenty years ago, she was sought on all 
hands, and had many brilhant alliances proposed to her ; but her 
heart was early engaged to liim to whom she was eventually 
united ; and she continued true to his memory, for though two of 
her old admirers found her out in her widowhood, and renewed 
the proposals made in the meridian of her attractions, and though 
both these ofiers were advantageous, while her own worldly cir- 
cumstances, as has been shown, were so much reduced as almost to 
justify a marriage of convenience, both were unhesitatingly re- 
jected. 

Mrs. Crew partook of the good qualities of both her brothers ; 
possessing the sound judgment and kindliness of Abel, without 
his asperity, and much of the good nature, without the worldH- 
ness of Trussell. Throughout the whole of her married life, her 
conduct had been exemplary. Devotedly attached to her hus- 
band, she strove, by the care which she paid to the manage- 
ment of the affairs entrusted to her, to make up in some degree, 
for his extravagance ; and though she was unable entirely to ac- 



268 THE miser's daughter. 

complisli her object, she did much to retard his progress towards 
ruin. Mr. Crew was one of those persons who, whatever their for- 
tune, will live beyond it. Warm-hearted, and hospitable, he kept 
open house, a dozen hunters, twice as many servants, a pack of 
hounds, and was not over particular in the choice of his associates. 
The consequence was that he speedily became embarrassed, and, 
instead of retrenching, raised money in the readiest way he could, 
and lived harder and more recklessly than ever. He was fond of 
horse-racing and cock-fighting, and though by no means a gam- 
bler, frequently lost more at play than a prudent gentleman would 
care to lose. • As Randulph grew up, he perceived the necessity of 
retrenchment, and, for nearly a year, decidedly changed his mode 
of Hfe. But he was not adapted by nature to follow up such a 
course with perseverance. Long before the year was over, he be- 
gan to find his plans of economy irksome, and at the end of it, 
launched into his old expenses. About this time, some designing 
persons got hold of him. Advances were made on most usurious 
terms, and he soon became inextricably involved. For the last 
two years of his life, he drank hard, discontinued most of the 
healthful exercises to which he had been accustomed, seldom 
hunted, and amused himself chiefly with bowling. This fatal 
course soon began to tell upon him. The infirmities of age came 
on before their time, and he died under fifty, with every appear- 
ance of an old man. On examination, his affairs were found 
frightfully embarrassed, and Randulph, who had just come of age, 
having stated his intentions to his father before his death, and ob- 
tained his mother's assent to the arrangement, assigned the whole of 
the entailed property to the creditors, retaining only for himself what 
would barely afford him the means of living. Mrs. Crew, it has 
been stated, had a small separate property of her own, settled upon 
her by her father at the time of her marriage ; but, between 
mother and son, they had not now in hundreds a year, what Mr. 
Crew had once had in thousands. 

Throughout all the trying circumstances above narrated, Mrs. 
Crew had conducted herself admirably. She never irritated her 
husband with reproaches, nor wearied him with advice, which her 
good sense told her would be unavaiUng ; but assisted him as far 
as was in her power, and cheered him in his distresses, taking care 
not to let her own afliiction be apparent. At no time did she ever 



THE miser's daughter. 26flf 

complain of him, even to her brothers. Indeed, she did not com- 
plain of ill-treatment, for Mr. Crew was sincerely attached to her, 
and but for his imprudence they might have been as happy a 
couple as ever lived. The sweetness and amiability of her dispo- 
sition was evinced on all occasions, but never so strongly as during 
the two last years of her husband's life, when his debilitated con- 
stitution, and pressing cares, impaired his naturally good temper, 
and rendered him fretful, and impatient of trifles. 

The tenderest attachment subsisted between Randulph, and his 
mother. Always treated with confidence, he had no reserve from 
her, but regarded her in the light both of a parent and friend. 

Mrs. Crew remained nearly an hour by her son's bedside, gazing 
at him, and answering the questions he put to her about her jour- 
ney and other matters, as briefly as possible ; for, in compliance 
with the surgeon's injunctions, she avoided any thing like contin- 
uous discourse. At length, discerning some slight symptoms of 
fatigue about him, she pressed his hand softly, and quitted the 
room. 

On going down stairs, she proceeded to the library, where she 
found her brothers. Trussell anxiously inquired how she had left 
the patient. 

"He is doing well, I beHeve," she rephed; " but oh! brother, 
what a meeting has this been ! I trust it is the last duel he will ever 
be engaged in." 

." I think he has come off famously," replied Trussell. " I called 
to inquire after Villiers last night, and I understand he is likely to 
be laid up for a fortnight at the least." 

" I am glad to hear it," observed Abel; " and I wish from my 
heart that Randulph's wound had been more severe." 

" Oh, brother ! why such a wish as that ?" exclaimed Mrs. 
Crew. 

" Because I would have his first duel his last, sister," said Abel. 
" I entirely disapprove of the practice of duelling, and think it 
utterly opposed to the religious principles we profess." 

" The duel is a necessity imposed upon society," said Trussell, 
" and, in my opinion, never can be dispensed with, unless a total 
revolution takes place in our manners and habits. It is the only 
check that holds certain characters in restraint, and though the 
practice may be carried too far, and swords be drawn on trifling 



270 THE miser's daughteb. 

occasions, a great good is accomplislied by the recognition and 
maintenance of a code of honour, to which all gentlemen must sub- 
scribe, and any infraction of which involves the loss of social 
position. Morahsts may preach as they please, but as long as society 
is constituted as it is at present — as long as such men as Vilhers 
exist — duelling must and will prevail." 

" There are other modes of avenging an injury besides violence," 
replied Abel; " and I trust society, in some more enlightened age, 
will fix such a brand upon the evil-doer, that it shall be in itself 
sufl&cient punishment for his offence. As we are now circumstanced, 
it may be impossible for a gentieman to avoid a quarrel; but he 
should never voluntarily seek it." 

" I am bound to say, in Randulph's justification," rejoined 
Trussell, " since you both view the matter in so grave a light, and 
I say it advisedly, that he has acted throughout this affair as becomes 
a gentleman and a man of honour. Such is the opinion of both 
his adversaries — and such is my own opinion. You have reason to 
be proud of him, Sophia." 

" I once thought so," she repHed, sadly. 

" And, beheve me, he has done nothing to forfeit your ^ood 
opinion," rejoined Trussell; " but much that should raise it." 

" I am not alone annoyed at the duels," said Abel, " but at the 
cause of them. It was my particular wish that Randulph should 
avoid Hilda Scarve — my expressed wish ; and now he has been so 
circumstanced with her, that any feeHng he might entertain towards 
her will be greatly strengthened. Trussell, you have laid up for 
your charge a great store of unhappiness. He will soon be cured 
of the wound he has received in this encounter, — ^but will his passion 
for Hilda be equally soon cured ?" 

" That is impossible to say," replied Trussell; " some men easily 
get over a disappointment in love." 

" And others, never !" rejoined Abel, bitterly. 

" I meant no allusion to you, sir," cried Trussell, reddening,— 
" none whatever." 

" Nor did I suspect you of doing so," returned Abel; " but if 
Randulph loves sincerely, he will feel the blow to his dying day." 

" And if he does love sincerely, brother, why — oh ! why — inter- 
fere between him and the object of his affections ?" said Mrs. 
Crew. 



THE miser's daughter. 271 

" I do not interfere with him — God forbid I should do so !'* 
rejoined Abel. " Let him marry Hilda, if he will. Let him ob- 
tain her father's consent, if he can." 

" But will you give your consent, brother T cried Mrs. Crew. 

" No !" replied Abel, emphatically, " I will not. I told him, 
when I first saw this girl, to avoid her on pain of my displeasure. 
He has disobeyed me, and must take the consequences. But 
what matters my consent ? I will have nothing to do with the 
affair. I wash my hands of it altogether. I have my own reasons, 
which suffice to myself, for objecting to the union; but I will not 
be placed in a painful and ungracious position, and be compelled 
to oppose it. I will have nothing to do with it — nothing what- 
ever." 

" Randulph wiU incur your displeasure if he marries Hilda, will 
he not?" asked Mrs. Crew. 

" Most assuredly," replied Abel; " I will never see him or her 
again. I will not be pressed to assign a reason for this determination ; 
nor will I say more than I have done. I wish him to be wholly 
uninfluenced by me. Neither will I have it said that I have inter- 
fered with his happiness." 

" And yet, believe me, it will be both said, and felt so, brother," 
rejoined Mrs. Crew. " Beware, lest you inflict a blow upon your 
nephew as severe as that you have endured yourself." 

Abel uttered a sharp cry and walked away, while Trussell looked 
at his sister to intimate she had gone too far. She instantly arose, 
and going up to Abel, took his hand, nor did he withdraw it from 
her. 

" Pardon me, brother," she said, " if I have spoken what 
is painful to you; but I am anxious to spare you further affliction. 
I know, though you have tried to case your heart in armour of 
proof, how tender it is — ^how readily wounded. I have wept for 
your unhappy lot, and would do all in my power to avert further 
distress from you. If, as I have reason to believe, Randulph is 
devotedly attached to Hilda Scarve, I am certain from what I know 
of his disposition, that a disappointment in obtaining her will bhght 
him for life, and I am sure it would only be increasing your own 
unliappiness, to feel that you had made him miserable." 

" But I do not make him miserable, sister !" cried Abel, sharply. 



272 THE miser's daughter. 

" He is a free agent, and can marry whom he pleases, ■without 
my consent." 

" I have told you he will never do so, brother," said Mrs. Crew. 
" His future happiness or misery rests with you." 

" Sophia, I will not endure this," said Abel, sternly; "and I 
request the subject may never be mentioned again. I have no 
desire to wound your feelings, but the truth must not be hidden 
from you. Since his arrival in town, Randulph has exliibited such 
a turn for gaiety and dissipation, that I think it would be very 
unwise in him to marry at all — at least, at present," 

" If he cannot marry advantageously," interposed Trussell, " I 
am clearly of Abel's opinion. His tastes and habits are rather 
expensive." 

" Expensive !" exclaimed Mrs. Crew. " They were most 
moderate." 

" Then he has a slight taste for play," pursued Trussell; " and 
is decidedly partial to society and amusement." 

" I'll hurry him back into the country as soon as he is able to 
move !" cried Mrs. Crew, greatly alarmed. 

" And you'll do wisely," said Abel. 

" I don't think he'll go," rejoined Trussell, laughing; "and if 
he does, ^he'U soon find his way back again. He's too fond of 
town to be long away from it." 

" Oh! how changed he must be!" exclaimed Mrs. Crew. 

" He owes it all to his uncle Trussell," rejoined Abel, sharply. 

" Then he owes me a great deal," replied Trussell; " and I hope 
he won't forget the debt. I think the plan of hurrying him into 
the country quite wrong. If you wish Hilda to make a deep im- 
pression upon him, that will be the surest way to accompHsh the 
object. In town, he has a thousand distractions. I cannot exactly 
say how he will stand with Lady Brabazon after this duel — but 
there's Kitty Conway, and he is sure to have plenty of new entan- 
glements." 

" Brother," cried Mrs. Crew — " you only furnish me with addi- 
tional reasons for desiring to take him away." 

" I am very sorry he ever came," said Abel; " it has disturbed 
the whole of my arrangements, and opened old wounds, which, 
though not closed, were yet not painful. Even Trussell has been 
unsettled by it." 



THE miser's daughter. 273 

*' Not in the least, sir," replied Trussell. " I have enjoyed his 
Tisit amazingly; and should belie myself confoundedly if I said 
otherwise. I wish I could prevail upon you to let him remain 
here a few months longer, and give him another hundred or so — 
and then " 

" Plunge him back again into poverty !" cried Abel, cutting him 
short. " What would be the use of such a course ? What good 
purpose would it answer ? He has apparently no wish to embark 
in any profession. And why should I furnish him with the means 
of continuing his career of dissipation ? No. I will do no such 
thing." 

" Will you see how he goes on for a month after his convales- 
cence ?" asked Trussell. " Surely, that is no great length of time 
to allow him." 

" I will promise nothing," replied Abel. " And now, brother, 
I shall be glad to be left alone for a short time with Sophia." 

" Willingly, sir," replied Trussell. And he quitted the room. 

Abel then took a chair, and motioned his sister to seat herself 
beside him. For a few moments he continued silent, as if summon- 
ing up resolution to address her; at length, he spoke. 

" You have alluded to past times, Sophia," he said, in faltering 
tones; " and have contrasted my position with that of your son, 
but you well know they are widely different. Nay, do not inter- 
rupt me — I know what you would say. Randulph has personal 
advantages which I never possessed, and which are sure to win 
him favour in the eyes of your sex. Besides, his nature does not 
resemble mine ; his feelings are not so acute and concentrated ; nor 
do I believe he could love so deeply. The love I entertained for 
Arabella CHnton was not the growth of a day — a month — a year — 
but the love of years. I had seen her opening beauties expand — 
had acquainted myself with her mind — ascertained her disposition, 
her temper — knew all her feelings, and persuaded myself she 
requited my love." 

" And she did requite it, brother," replied Mrs. Crew. " She 
did love you." 

" In mercy, do not tell me so !" cried Abel, becoming as pale as 
death. " I would rather think she hated me — deceived me ; — but 
loved me ! — that belief is only wanting to make me thoroughly 
wretched !" 

T 



274 THE miser's daughter. 

" Calm yourself, dear brother," said Mrs. Crew. " I would not 
increase your unhapplness for the world; but 1 am persuaded that 
the examination of this subject, which, from unhappy circum- 
stances, we have never hitherto been able [to discuss, will, in the 
end, relieve you of much anxiety." 

"I will try to bear it in that hope," repHed Abel; " but the 
barbed arrow is too firmly and too deeply planted to be removed. 
You will only lacerate me further in the attempt." 

"I will not be intimidated," rejoined Mrs. Crew. "I shall 
begin by telling you that it is your own fault that Arabella Clinton 
was not your wife. You have alluded to the deep passion you 
entertained for her, and your doubts of her aflfection for you. I 
do not say she loved you with equal passion, because you were not 
a person to inspire such ardour, neither was she one to feel it, for 
her nature was frigid. But she loved you well enough to have 
been your wife ; and what is more, she thoroughly respected you ; 
and therefore there can be no doubt that you might have been 
happy." 

" Go on !" groaned Abel. 

" You will forgive me, if I speak plainly," pursued Mrs. Crew, 
"fori must do so to show you where you erred. Rating yourself 
too humbly, you pursued, as I conceive, a most unwise and dan- 
gerous plan in order to test the sincerity of your mistress's attach- 
ment. Fearful she might accept you on the score of your wealth, 
you represented yourself as being in very moderate circumstances ; 
and, while full of tenderness and affection, adopted not unfrequently 
a harsh and forbidding manner towards her." 

" True, true !" cried Abel. 

" You were both the victims of error," continued Mrs, Crew. 
*' Deceived by your manner, she thought you had conceived a dis- 
like for her, and strove to wean herself from all regard for you; 
while her efforts made you believe you were indifferent to her. 
All, however, might have come right, but for the fatal mistake of 
deluding her as to your circumstances. With her, wealth was of 
little importance, and she would have married you as readily poor 
as rich; but with her father it was otherwise." 

" Her father was aware of my circumstances," said Abel, in a 
sombre tone. 

" He was so," repUed Mrs. Crew; "but it was his business to 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 275 

conceal them, for Arabella had a richer suitor, whom he preferred. 
Captivated by her beauty, Mr. Scarve proposed to her, and his suit 
was seconded by her father, who told her you were needy, sour- 
tempered, and indifferent to her. Doubly deceived, she hesitated. 
Instead of seeking an explanation, you avoided it, and retired to 
make way for your rival." 

" I did so because I thought him preferred," said Abel. 

" Several slight circumstances, I know, conspired to confirm you 
in your opinion," said Mrs. Crew; " but they were all devised by 
Mr. Clinton. A false construction was put upon your absence, 
and Arabella was induced to give her hand to Mr. Scarve." 

" Why was I not told all this at the time?" cried Abel. 

" Because I was not aware of it myself," replied Mrs. [Crew, 
" You may remember that this occurred during the period of my 
engagement to my poor husband, who was an old and intimate 
friend of Mr. Scarve's, and consequently, and not unnaturally, dis- 
liked by you. This produced a coolness between you. Besides, 
to be plain with you, I did not understand or estimate your character 
then as thoroughly as I do now. I thought you cold and repelling, 
and never gave you credit for the depth of feeling you have since 
exhibited. Neither had Mr. Scarve displayed himself in his true 
colours then. At that time he was passably good-looking, kept 
a tolerable establishment, and I really thought Arabella was better 
off than if she had married you. I was angry, too, that you had 
attempted to test her affections by misrepresenting your circum- 
stances, and thought you rightly served in losing her. Hence arose 
the misunderstanding between us, which separated us to the present 
period." 

" But how do you know Arabella's sentiments towards me were 
such as you describe ?" asked Abel. 

" I have it under her own hand," replied Mrs. Crew. " She 
wrote to me a full explanation of all the circumstances connected 
with this part of her life, stating how sincerely she had loved you, 
and how much she lamented that a mistake had separated her from 
you. From her letters, and from other information afforded me 
by my husband, I have been enabled to understand the whole case. 
You have been the victim of misunderstanding. But console 
yourself A thousandth part of the suffering you have undergone 
would atone for a more grievous error than you have committed. 

1 



276 THE miser's daughter. 

Console yourself, I say. You were beloved by Arabella Clinton, 
and to the last, she entertained the sincerest regard for you." 

" That is indeed a consolation to me," said Abel, melting into 
tears. " I am not ashamed to indulge this weakness in your 
presence, sister," he added, in a broken voice. 

" Those tears will do you good," she repHed, " and I pray you 
to indulge them freely. The past will not henceforth be so painful 
to contemplate; for, if I mistake not, your bitterest pang was the 
idea that you had never been loved." 

" It was !" gasped Abel. 

" And that has now been removed," rephed Mrs. Crew. " Here 
are Arabella''s letters," she added, giving him a small packet. 
" You will see from them how you have misunderstood her." 

Abel took the letters, glanced at the superscription with a 
shudder, and placed them in his breast. 

" I will read them," he said, " but not now." 

" Does Hilda Scarve resemble her mother?" asked Mrs. Crew, 
after a pause. 

" She is like her, but handsomer," replied Abel. " I have seen 
her upon two occasions lately, and she appears a very amiable 

girl." 

" Tlien what objection can there be to an union between her 
and Randulph?" asked Mrs. Crew. 

" I have said I will not be pressed on that head," rejoined Abel, 
sternly. *'7have an objection — a strong objection. What it is 
you shall know at another time." 

" Heaven grant that these two young people may not be equally 
victims of a mistake with you and Arabella !" sighed Mrs. Crew. 

At this moment, Mr. Jukes entered the room. 

" Mr. Scarve's servant, Jacob Post, has called to inquire after 
Mr. Randulph," he said ; " and understanding that you are here, 
madam, he craves permission to see you." 

" May he come in, brother ?" said Mrs. Crew. 

" Certainly," was the reply. 

And Jacob was ushered into the room. 

" I'm glad to hear Mr. Randulph is gettin' on so well, ma'am," 
he said, with an uncouth reverence to Mrs. Crew. " Lord lov'ee ! 
how like you are to him to be sure." 



THE miser's daughter. 277 

" I hope your young mistress has got over the fright she under- 
went at Vauxhall, Jacob ?" said Mrs. Crew. 

" Why, yes, pretty well, thank'ee ma'am," replied Jacob ; " she 
looks rayther palish, but whether from fright, or concern for Mr. 
Randulph, Pm sure I can't say." 

" You were present, Jacob, when my son rescued her from the 
libertine, Villiers — were you not?" asked Mrs. Crew. 

" I was ma'am," replied Jacob; " and I never saw a more sper- 
rited young gen'l'man i' my life. I should like to see him, and 
thank him for the pinkin' he has given that beau." 

" It cannot be at present, Jacob," repHed Mrs. Crew. " He is 
ordered to be kept perfectly quiet; and even I am not allowed to 
remain in his room." 

" There's no danger, ma'am, I hope ?" asked Jacob, with real 
concern. 

"None whatever, if he's not excited," returned Mrs. Crew. 

"I'm glad to hear it," said Jacob, brightening up ; "and Miss 
Hilda'll be glad to hear it too. She'd never ha' got over it, if any 
thing had happened to him on her account." 

" Is she then so much interested in him ?" asked Mrs. Crew. 

" Why, you see, ma'am," said Jacob, rather puzzled, and gazing 
from the questioner to Abel, who eyed him very curiously, " it's 
nat'rel she should be interested in a gen'l'man as has rendered her 
such important services as Mr. Randulph has done." 

" Quite natural," replied Mrs. Crew. " But I wish to ask you 
a plain question, Jacob : Is, or is not. Miss Hilda kindly affected 
toward my son ?" 

" Then I'll answer the question as plainly as it's asked, ma'am," 
replied Jacob — " she is." 

Mrs. Crew glanced at her brother, and Jacob took his cue from 
the glance. 

"I hope the two may come together, ma'am," he said; "I'm 
sure they're cut out for each other." 

" I can't help thinking so, from all I hear of Hilda," said Mrs. 
Crew. 

" It is idle to speculate upon what can never take place," said 
Abel, sternly. " Go and get something to eat, Jacob, and tell your 
young lady that Mr. Randulph will be quite himself in a few days 



278 THE MISEE^S DAUGHTEK. 

— that lie is going on as well as possible — that there is no sort of 
danger." 

" In other words, that there's no occasion to send to inquire after 
him again — eh, sir ?" said Jacob. 

" Exactly," replied Abel. " Good day, Jacob — good day." 

" I don't like him half so well as I did before," thought Jacob, 
as he left the room, and marched off to the butler's pantry, to Mr. 
Jukes, who placed bread and cold meat, together with a jug of 
stout ale, before him. 

" Here's Mr. Randulph's speedy recovery," cried Jacob. 

" I pledge you in that toast," said Mr. Jukes, filling himself a 
glass, and draining it. 

Soon after the porter's departure, Abel quitted his sister with the 
intention of going forth on business. 

While she was pondering on what had passed between them, 
the door was opened by Mr. Jukes, who told her that a gentleman 
had called to see her, and the next moment he ushered in Cord well 
Firebras. 



THE miser's daughter. 279 



CHAPTER III. 

DETAILING THE INTEEVIEW BETWEEN CORDWELI. FIREBBAS AND MRS. CKEW. 

Mrs. Crew, thougli a good deal surprised and startled, main- 
tained her composure suflSciently well not to attract the notice of 
the butler, who, having placed a chair for the visitor quitted the 
room. 

" I have called to inquire after your son, madam," commenced 
Firebras. " I was present at the affair yesterday, and can confirm 
what you have no doubt heard from your brother, that he con- 
ducted himself admirably throughout it." 

" My son, I am happy in being able to state, is rapidly recover- 
ing," replied Mrs. Crew; " and having satisfied you on this point, 
sir, I must entreat you to abridge your visit as much as possible. 
I would not on any account that my brother Abel should find you 
here." 

" There is no fear of that, madam," replied Firebras ; "I 
watched him go forth, before I ventured to make my call. But 
time is precious, and I will come to the object of my visit at once. 
I wrote to you to tell you how much captivated your son was with 
Mr. Scarve's fair daughter, Hilda. A sHght act of imprudence on 
his part for some time alienated the young lady's regard ; but he 
set himself right with her at Ranelagh, and at Vauxhall made 
rapid progress in her affections. I was present when the result of 
the duel was communicated to her yesterday, and if I had enter- 
tained any previous doubt as to the extent of Randulph's hold 
upon her heart, her conduct then would have removed it. She 
was taken fainting from the room." 

" Poor girl !" exclaimed Mrs. Crew — " I am sorry for her." 

"Why sorry?" rejoined Firebras; " Randulph wiU make her 
an excellent husband." 



ft 



280 THE miser's daughter. 

" But they will never be united," said Mrs. Crew, sighing 
deeply. 

" It will be his own fault if they are not," observed Firebras, 
drily. 

" How so?" cried Mrs. Crew; " both his uncle and her father 
are against the match." 

" That I well know," replied Firebras ; " but both may be 
brought to assent to it." 

" You are trifling with me," said the lady. 
" I thought you had known me better, Mrs. Crew, than to 
suppose me capable of trifling on a serious subject," rejoined 
Firebras, almost sternly. " I can make good my words. Of Mr. 
Scarve's consent, I am sure." 

" He must have altered his mind then, completely," said Mrs. 
Crew ; *' for I have been told he intended her for his nephew, and 
forbade Randulph his house.'' 

" He will consent, if I require it," said Firebras, signifi- 
cantly. 

" You amaze me !" exclaimed Mrs. Crew. " My brother, how- 
ever, has, within these few minutes, refused to give his consent 
and Randulph cannot marry without it." 

" Why cannot he?" replied Firebras, smiling. " It is not always 
necessary to ask an uncle's consent in these cases. Still, as Ran- 
dulph has considerable expectations from your brother, it would 
be better not to offend him. I do not despair of winning him 
over." 

" You will accomplish a miracle if you do so," said Mrs. Crew. 

"And I M?z7/ accomplish it, and more, provided Randulph joins 
our party," replied Firebras. 

" He refused your former overtures, did he not?" asked Mrs. *■ 
Crew. 

" He did," replied Firebras ; " but I should have succeeded ; 
with him, if it had not been for the interference of your brother 
Abel." 

" I am rejoiced to hear it," cried Mrs. Crew. 

" How !" exclaimed Firebras, " are you no longer faithful to ' 



our cause : 



9" 



" As faithful as ever," rephed Mrs Crew; " but I would rather 



THE miser's daughter. 281 



he joins us in any other way than on conviction." 

"Pshaw! it is not necessary to look at the matter so nicely," 
replied Firebras, contemptuously. " We must make proselytes the 
best way we can. Randulph will be very useful to us on the ap- 
proaching outbreak, and I am therefore anxious to secure him. 
He is precisely the person I want to attend upon the prince — 
and have him I will." 

" You are very peremptory, sir," said Mrs. Crew. 
" You accused me of trifling with you just now, madam," pur- 
sued Firebras, " but I will show you I am in earnest. Your son's 
whole destiny is in my hands ; and it depends altogether on me 
whether his future course is brilliant, successful, and happy, or the 
reverse. Not only can I wed him to the object of his affections — 
not only can I procure him a handsome dower from her father — 
not only can I secure the consent of his uncle, — but I can restore 
to him the estates which he has given up to his father's creditors, 
and place him in the position he is entitled to occupy. All this I 
can, and will do." 

"Provided he joins you?" said Mrs. Crew. 
" Of course," replied Firebras — " Of course." 
" Then I fear he will remain in his present condition," sighed 
Mrs. Crew. 

" Let us look at the other side of the case," pursued Firebras, 
sternly. " This is not a matter on which to be scrupulous, and I 
am determined to carry my point. If Randulph refuses to join 
me, he loses Hilda — loses her dower — loses his uncle's fortune — 
and his own. Without me Mr. Scarve will never give him his 
daughter; and without me he will never recover his property. 
Now, mark me, madam, for I know your son better than you do. 
He is a fine-spirited young man, and endowed with excellent 
qualities ; but he has essentially the habits and feelings of a gentle- 
man, and your brother Trussell has taken care to inoculate him with 
his own tastes and propensities. He will never be content with 
the quiet life he has hitherto led ; but, tormented by his love for 
Hilda, and the sense of what he has lost, will be driven to some 
desperate course." 

"He may yet marry her, though without her father's consent," 
said Mrs. Crew. 



282 THE miser's daughter. 

" And marry to beggary," rejoined Firebras, with a bitter 
laugh. " I do not wish to hold out threats — and what I say is said 
only to show my power. He never shall marry Hilda Scarve, nor 
shall he ever enjoy his own again, unless he joins the Jacobite 
cause. I can prevent both, and I will prevent them. His deci- 
sion must be made quickly, for he is wanted. Within a month 
from this time he must be mine, or all will be lost to him. As a 
prudent and affectionate mother — as a well-wisher to our cause — I 
look to you, madam, to use all your influence with him to produce 
this result." 

" I cannot — I cannot!" she rejoined. 

" Then you destroy him," said Firebras. 

" Oh, put it not thus," she rejoined. " You were an old friend 
of his father's, and received much kindness, and, unless I mistake, 
pecuniary assistance from him. Do not act thus cruelly towards 
the son of your old friend !" 

"Cruelly!" exclaimed Firebras, laughing derisively. "I offer 
him a fortune and the lady of liis love, and you call it cruelty — 
ha! ha!" 

" But at the price of his honour," said Mrs. Crew. 

" His honour ! bah !'' exclaimed Firebras, contemptuously. 
" What is to stain his honour in quitting the cause of a miserable 
usurper to join that of the rightful claimant of the throne? If 
you persist in such a notion, I shall begin to doubt the constancy 
of your own opinions." 

" I should be glad if Randulph would voluntarily embrace our 
cause," said Mrs. Crew; " but I would disown him if he were base 
enough to be houghtT 

" Well, I have placed both views of the case fairly before you,'* 
said Firebras, rising — " weigh over what I have said, and de- 
cide." 

And as he turned to depart, he encountered Abel Beechcroft, 
who had entered the room unobserved. 

" So !" he exclaimed, without losing his composure, " we have 
had a Ustener here, eh? You have heard what has passed between 
us, Mr. Beechcroft?" 

" Some part of it,^' repHed Abel; '^and I applaud my sister's 
conduct as much as I condemn yours. You have stated that you 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 283 



can compel me to give my consent to my nephew's marriage with 
Hilda Scarve. Be pleased to prove the assertion, sir." 

" You have me at a disadvantage, Mr. Beechcroft, because I 
have not had time to put my plan in operation," replied Fire- 
bras; " nevertheless, if I can prove to you that I can recover your 
nephew's property — and that I will only do so on the condition of 
your giving your unqualified consent to his union with the young 
lady in question, you will not refuse itT' 

" Coupled as it is with the other condition you have annexed to 
it, I should deem it my duty to do so," rejoined Abel. " But 
you must excuse me if I say that I distrust your power of getting 
back my nephew's property." 

" I shall not make the rejoinder which I should do to one of less 
pacific disposition than yourself, Mr. Beechcroft,'^ replied Fire- 
bras, sternly. "But you have doubted my word" unjustly. I can, 
if I choose, get back Randulph Crew's property." 

" Are you one of his father's creditors?" demanded Abel. 

" It matters not what I am," returned Firebras. " It must suf- 
fice that I can make good my assertion." 

" If you are not a creditor," rejoined Abel, " I can obtain the 
property for him as readily myself." 

" You are welcome to make the experiment," said Firebras, 
with a sHght laugh of defiance. " Mrs. Crew, I have the honour 
to wish you a good morning. Though my plans have been some- 
what precipitated by your worthy brother, I still am not without 
hopes that he will come into them ; and at all events, his presence 
at the interview will save you the necessity of explanation. Your 
son, I trust, will speedily be master of his property, the husband 
of Hilda, and " 

" A Jacobite," supplied Abel. 

" Precisely," said Firebras, laughing. " Good morning, Mr. 
Beechcroft." And turning from Abel, he left the room. 

" That is a daring and a dangerous man,'' said Abel to his 
sister. 

" A highly dangerous man," she replied; " and Randulph must 
be preserved from him." 

"He must," replied Abel. "I shall make it my immediate 
business to ascertain how far there is a probability of his being cor- 



284 



THE miser's daughter. 



rect in his statement about the property. It was fortunate that I 
chanced to come back. Jukes told me there was some one with 
you, and from his description of the person, I felt sure who it 
must be. Let us go into the garden, and talk the matter over 
further." 



THE miser's daughter. 285 



m 



I 



CHAPTER IV. 

TREATS OF THE MISER's ILLNESS; — AKD OF THE DISCOVEKY OF THE MTSTERIOUS 

PACKET BY HILDA. 

Hilda Scarve had soon a new cause of anxiety. Not only 
was she uneasy about Randulph, whose recovery was not quite so 
rapid as had been anticipated, but her father's state of heaUh began 
to occasion her considerable alarm. While walking out, he got 

.ught in the rain ; and on his return home, though drenched to 
the skin, refused to change his clothes. A low fever was the 
consequence ; and holding apothecary's stuff, as he termed physic, 
in abhorrence, he would take nothing to carry it off. Owing to 
this neglect, that which was a slight matter in the commencement, 
ended in becoming a serious illness. 

One day, in spite of his daughter's entreaties, he would go forth ; 
and, after being absent for a few hours, during which, as it appeared, 
he had walked to a considerable distance, he returned in such a 
state of exhaustion, that Hilda was quite terrified. All, however, 
she could prevail upon him to take was a small basin of weak water- 
gruel, but without even a teaspoonful of wine or brandy in it. 
Next morning he was considerably better, and Hilda thought the 
crisis past ; but she was mistaken, and so was her father ; for, fancy- 
ing that the exercise of the previous day had done him good, he 
went out again, walked further than before, got caught a second 
time in the rain, and fearfully increased the fever. 

On this occasion, he was persuaded to take off his wet clothes, 
and go to bed, and even to have a small fire lighted in his cham- 
ber, where none had ever before been lighted in his time. Watch- 
ing this operation with the utmost anxiety, he called to Jacob, 
who was laying the fire, not to waste the wood, though only three 
or four small chips were used ; next, blamed him for putting on 
too much coal; and, lastly, forbade him to light it. Jacob, how- 



286 THE miser's daughter. 

ver, ventured to disobey his orders, and having apphed a match to 
some bits of paper stuck in the bars, quitted the room. As soon 
as he was gone, the miser instantly sprang out of bed, and with- 
out much difficulty extinguished the only partially-kindled fire. 

Shortly afterwards, Hilda came into the room, and finding what 
had happened, besought him to let the fire be hghted, and at last 
wrung from him a most reluctant assent. But again another acci- 
dent occurred. More paper was lighted, the wood caught, and 
began to crackle in the bars. The chimney, however, smoked, and 
Jacob peeping up it to ascertain the cause, perceived that it was 
stopped by a wisp of straw. He immediately thrust up his arm, 
pulled down the obstacle, and in so doing, dislodged two heavy bags, 
which fell into the fire with a ratthng noise, proclaiming the nature 
of their contents. 

At this sound, the miser, who had been sinking into a slumber, 
instantly sprang up, and uttering a wild cry, ordered both his 
daughter and Jacob out of the room. They knew him too well to 
disobey, and as soon as they were gone, he got out of bed again, 
plucked the bags from the fire, which luckily had not burnt the 
sacking, and, locking them carefully up in a strong-box, placed the 
key under his pillow. 

But the idea of the discovery of his hoard haunted him, and, 
combined with the fever, prevented the possibility of slumber. He 
tried to recollect the difierent places where he had hidden money, 
and, unable to call them all to mind, grew almost distracted. Hilda 
begged to be allowed to sit up with him, but he would not allow 
her; neither would he permit Jacob to do so. Waiting till he 
thought all were asleep, he then rose, and wrapping himself in his 
dressing-gown, proceeded to examine several nooks and crannies 
in the room, in which he had placed small sums of money. 

All his hoards were safe, except one. He had put ten guineas 
in a glove about two months before, and fancied he had hidden it 
behind a shutter. But it was not there, and convinced that Jacob 
had discovered it, and purloined it, he was about to descend and 
tax him with the robbery, when he all at once recollected having 
placed the glove under a broken plank near the hearthstone. He 
immediately took up the board, and there, sure enough, was the 
lost treasure. 

Made easy by this discoveryj he restored the glove to its place, 



THE miser's daughter. 287 

and returned to bed. Still, he could not rest. An idea took pos- 
session of him, that the money he had buried in the cellar was 
gone, and unable to shake oiF the notion, he arose, and habiting 
himself as before, took the rushlight that burnt by his bedside, and 
■with trembling but cautious steps, went down stairs. 

Arrived at the cellar, he set down the rushlight, and cast an 
almost piteous look at the cask, beneath which he had buried his 
gold, as if seeking to know whether it was still there. At last he 
summoned up resolution for the task, and repairing to the coal-hole, 
possessed himself of the shovel, and commenced digging up the 
box. 

Anxiety supplied him with strength, and in less than half an 
hour, he had got out the box, opened it, and counted the money 
bags, which he found all right. He would have counted the gold 
within them as well, but neither his strength nor time would 
allow him to do so. 

While thus employed he formed a terrible representation of the 
effect that avarice may produce upon the mind. There he worked, 
burning with fever in a damp cellar, half naked, for he had taken 
off his dressing-gown to enable him to ply the spade with greater 
freedom ; — there he worked, as if hfe and death were in his efforts, 
and almost looked, such was his ghastly appearance, like a corpse 
digging its own grave. 

It was a fearful sight to see, and it was witnessed by one upon 
whom [it made a lasting and forcible impression. This was his 
daughter. Hearing him go down stairs, she had followed him, 
and saw what he was about, but did not dare to interrupt him, ap- 
prehensive of the consequences. At last, when he had got out 
the box, and examined its contents, she hoped all was over, and, 
proceeding to Jacob's room, roused him, and telling him what had 
happened, bade him watch his master, and then retired to her own 
chamber. 

Jacob obeyed, and having seen the former occurrence, was at no 
loss to comprehend what was now happening. He, accordingly, 
stationed himself at the door, and saw through the chink, for it 
was left ajar, that the miser was filling up the hole, and restoring 
the place to its former appearance. 

It was wonderful, and almost incredible, to see how that feeble 
old man, shaken by sickness, and tottering on the verge of the 



288 THE miser's daughter. 

grave, toiled — how he persevered — ^how he took the earth out of 
the cask — how he filled up the hole — ^how he restored the bricks 
to their places — how he trod them down with his naked feet. 
Jacob was amazed, and almost felt as if he' was in a dream. But 
he was suddenly roused to full consciousness as the miser, having 
finished his task, leaned upon his spade to rest himself, but being 
completely overcome, uttered a deep groan, and fell with his face 
upon the ground. 

Instantly rushing towards him, Jacob found him senseless, and at 
first thought him dead, but perceiving some symptoms of animation 
about him, he lifted him up in his arms as easily as if he had been 
a child, and carried him up stairs to bed. He then informed Hilda 
what had happened, and she hastened to apply such restoratives 
as she possessed, and which, ere long, to her infinite satisfaction, 
brought him back to consciousness. But he was not himself for 
some hours, and rambled incessantly about his treasure, which he 
imagined had been taken from him. Nature, however, at length 
asserted her sway, and he dropped asleep. During his slumbers, 
Jacob brought the chest up stairs with the money bags in it, and 
placed it at the foot of his bed. 

The miser did not wake till late in the following morning, and 
he was then very faint and light-headed. He swallowed a basin 
of strong broth, prepared for him by his daughter, with great 
greediness, for he was as much exhausted by want of food as from 
any other cause, and in the course of a few hours gained strength 
considerably. 

As he got better, his head cleared, and he began to recollect 
something of the events of the previous night. At first, he thought 
he must have dreamt of digging up his treasure ; but by degrees 
becoming satisfied that he had really done so, he grew exceedingly 
uneasy, and desired to know how he had been put to bed. Hilda 
then told him, and showed him where the chest was placed, assuring 
him all was safe. Still he was not wholly satisfied, and later in 
the day determined, in spite of all dissuasions to the contrary, to 
get up. 

Left to himself, he locked the door, and examined the bags, 
which were all tied in a pecuhar manner, and sealed, and their ap- 
pearance satisfied him that they had not been opened. He had not 
been long up, when he felt so dreadfully ill, that, for the first time 



THE miser's daughter. 289 

in his life, he began to think his end approaching. Falling back 
in his chair, he shook as with an ague, while cold perspiration burst 
from every pore. The fit, however, passed off, and he made an ef- 
fort to crawl to the door, and call Jacob. The latter instantly an- 
swered the summons, and looked so unmistakeably alarmed at his 
master's appearance, that the other could not but notice it. 

"You think me very ill, Jacob?" said the miser. "Don't be 
afraid of frightening me, — speak the truth, — I know you do." 

" Why, yes," rejoined Jacob ; " you don't look well, certainly. 
If I was you, and I'd any affairs to arrange, I'd settle 'em quickly, 
for fear of accident, — that's all." 

"I understand,^' replied the miser, with a ghastly grin; "but 
I'm not going to die just yet, Jacob, — not just yet, — don't think 
it." 

" I'm sure I hope not," replied Jacob; " for though we haven't 
agreed over and above well of late, I should be sorry to lose you." 

The miser turned away, and crept back to his chair, sinking into 
it exhausted by the effort he had made. 

" I want you to go to Gray's Inn, Jacob," he said, at length, " to 
tell Mr. Diggs to come to me.'* 

" What, to make your will?" rejoined Jacob. *' Well, I think 
you're right there. No harm in bein' on the safe side." 

" Never mind what I want him for," rejoined the miser; " do 
as I bid you.'' 

" I wish you'd let me bring some other Humey i'stead o' that 
smooth-faced, palaverin' Diggs," said Jacob. " A will's a serious 
affair, and I should be sorry you did an injustice that can't be 
repaired." 

" Don't argue with me, rascal, but begone !" cried the miser. 

" I don't like fetchin' Diggs," said Jacob. " Couldn't I make 
a will for you ? A few words would do it — ' I leave all my pro- 
perty and possessions, whatsoever and wheresomedever, to my law- 
fully-begotten daughter, Hilda Scarve.' That'll be quite enough, 
and far better than any will Mr. Diggs'll make for you. Besides, 
it'll cost you nothin'.'^ 

" This fellow will kill me !" groaned the miser. " Do go, 
Jacob !" he added, imploringly. 

" Well, I can't resist that," said Jacob; " but as you hope to be 
forgiven hereafter, don't act unjustly by your daughter." 

u 



290 THE miser's daughtee. 

"If you continue faithful to me to the last, I'll. leave you a 
handsome legacy, Jacob," said the miser; " a handsome legacy, — 
but not a farthing, if you disobey me." 

" I don't -want a legacy," replied Jacob. " I'd rather not have 
it. But don't you forget your wife's sister, poor Mrs. Clinton. 
You've used her hardly this many a year. Make it up to her now." 

*' I must look ill, indeed P groaned the miser, " since the rascal 
dares to talk to me thus. Will you go or not?" he asked. 

" Oh, yes, I'll go," said Jacob. " Shall I send your daughter 
to you?" 

And receiving a faint reply in the affirmative, he quitted the 
room. 

About an hour after this, he returned with Diggs, who was 
closeted with the miser for a long time. Jacob knew that some writ- 
ing must be going forward, for he was ordered to take pen and ink 
up stairs; and he would fain have played the spy, but he could not 
do so without being detected. At length, he was summoned by 
Diggs, who desired him to call a coach. He was not long in meet- 
ing with one ; and on informing the attorney that it was ready for 
him he was almost struck dumb with astonishment, by an order 
from the latter to take down the chest containing the money-bags, 
and place it in the vehicle. 

"Why, you don't mean to send that chest away?" he said to 
hismaster. 

" Yes, that chest — that identical chest, my good fellow," said 
the attorney. 

" But I must have the order from master's own lips, or I won't 
obey it," said Jacob, doggedly. 

" Will you be pleased, sir, to tell your servant what he is to 
do?" said Diggs, impatiently. 

" Take away the chest," replied the miser. 

"What this with the money in it, — this here?" asked Jacob, 
giving it a sounding knock. 

" Ay," rejoined the miser. 
, " Well, if I must, I must," said Jacob, shouldering the chest; 
" but it would have been safer i' the cellar than where it's a-goin* 
to." 

He had scarcely placed his burden in the coach, when Diggs 
followed him, and jumping into the vehicle, ordered him, with a 



J 



I 



THE MISER S DAUGHTER. 291 

txiumphant glance, to shut tlie door, and bid the coachman drive 
to his chambers. 

" Gray's Inn, coachee!" cried Jacob, as he compHed; "and 
may you break your fare's neck as you go,'^ he added, in a lower 
tone. 

His mind lightened, apparently, by what had taken place, Mr. 
Scarve remained perfectly quiet during the rest of the day, and 
retired early to rest ; but he passed another sleepless night, and was 
seized with a new panic about his money. The next day, finding 
himself unable to go down stairs, he ordered Jacob to bring up all 
his boxes, and to place them near him. His fever increasing, and 
assuming somewhat of the character of an ague, he consented to 
have a small fire kept up constantly in his bed-room, and set his 
chair close beside it. In addition to his dressing-gown, he wrapped 
an old blanket over his shoulders, and tried to keep his lower limbs 
warm by clotliing them in a couple of pair of worsted hose. His 
bed being totally destitute of hangings, he had a sheet hung up 
against the lower end of it to keep off the blaze of the fire, which 
he fancied disturbed him during the night. These slight comforts 
were all he permitted himself, and he remained as inflexible as 
ever on the score of medicine, and medical advice. 

" A doctor can do no good," he said to Jacob; who urged him 
to send for one: "if abstinence won't cure a man, no physic 
wiU." 

"Well, perhaps you're right, sir," said Jacob; "but 1 wish 
you'd think less o' your worldly affairs, and more o' your sperretual 
ones. Look at that pictur' over your chimley-piece, and see how 
Death is takin' away the covetous man's treasures before his very 
eyes. It might be intended as a wamin' to you." 

The picture alluded to by Jacob, was a copy of one of Holbein's 
designs of the Dance of Death, suspended over the chimney-piece, 
and with the scriptural motto underneath it — " Stulte, hac node 
repetunt animam tuam : et gucB parasti cvjus erunt f — did seem to 
have a fearful and solemn application to the present conjuncture. 
The miser shuddered as he looked at it, but he would not acknow- 
ledge the justice of the porter's remark. 

Of late, he had begim to entertain a dislike to Jacob, and would 
scarcely suffer him to come near him. Having seen him, when 
opening one of the boxes, take up an old stocking-foot in which a 

u2 



292 THE miser's daughter. 

few pieces of silver were tied, he took it into his head that he de- 
signed to rob him ; and his fears being magnified by his perturbed 
imagination, he soon persuaded himself that he also intended to 
murder him. To prevent any such design, he placed a loaded pis- 
tol on the chimney-piece near him, and hung a drawn sword on a 
peg, so as to be within reach in case of need. These weapons he 
carried with him to his bed-side at night. 

But he grew daily worse and worse, and his faculties became 
more and more enfeebled. He rambled about the house at nio-ht 
almost in a state of somnambulism, muttering strange things about 
his treasure, and frequently visiting the cellar where he had buried 
the chest, unconscious that it was gone. 

At such times, Jacob constantly followed, to prevent him from 
doing himself a mischief, but took care not to be seen. His groans 
and lamentations were pitiful to hear, for he had begun to fancy 
himself a ruined man, and not even the sight of his money could 
assure him to the contrary. 

It was vain to reason with him. The distressing idea was too 
strongly impressed upon his mind to be removed. 

His next whim was to have his boxes opened by Hilda, to whom 
he had entrusted his keys, and he insisted upon certain deeds and 
papers being read to him, the meaning of which he only very im- 
perfectly comprehended. 

One night, when seated by the fire-side wrapped in his blanket, 
and with his feet on a straw hassock, he desired his daughter to 
read him some more papers. The fire burnt as cheerily as it could 
in the starveling grate, and Hilda insisting upon having two candles 
to read by, there was more light than usual. Having got through 
several mortgages, leases, and bonds, to the innumerable clauses 
of which he listened in his usual apathetic manner, he suddenly 
turned round to her, and pointing to the strong-box which formerly 
stood under his table in the room down-stairs, signed to her to 
open it. 

Well aware that this box contained his most private papers, 
Hilda had hitherto avoided meddling with it, but thus enjoined, 
she no longer hesitated. Placing it on the table, therefore, she 
took the large bunch of keys, and, soon finding the right one, un- 
locked it. 

" Is there any thing in particular you wish me to read, dear 




The discovery of the rajsierious packet. 



lOMDQM; KARRT * CV iiiiAlliUfjlAliA. ^r^T.KT. 1847. 



THE ailSER'S DAUGHTER. 293 

father?" she said, taking out some papers tied together with red 
tape. " Here is a bond for two thousand pounds from George De- 
lahay ViUiers, Esquire; another from Lady Brabazon; and another 
from Sir Bulkeley Price. Shall I read any of them?' 

The miser shook his head. 

"Here are several bills," she continued, taking up a roll of 
smaller papers — " and another bundle of mortgages, will you hear 
any of them?" 

The miser shook his head. The movement was almost mecha- 
nical with him. 

" Then I will go on," pursued Hilda. " Ah ! what is tliis letter 
with the black seal ! Shall I read it?" 

The miser made no reply. He was gazing listlessly into the fire, 
and watching the wreaths of smoke ascend the chimney with 
childish delight. 

Hilda, therefore, opened the letter, and found a small memo- 
randum enclosed in it, which she placed upon the table. Trem- 
bHng with emotion, she then began to read aloud the following 
lines : — 

" Old and valued Friend, — If this should ever meet your 
eye, I shall have been a year in my grave, for in accordance with 
our agreement, it will not be delivered to you until the expiration 
of that time after my death. The agreement, I need not remind 
you, was so formed, that in case we should both die within the 
year, the contract entered into by us respecting the marriage of our 
children should be null and void." 

Here Hilda was startled by a sharp cry from her father, and 
looking up, she saw that he was staring wildly and inquiringly at 
her. 

" What are you reading?" he asked. 

" The letter deHvered to you by Randulph Crew," she repHed; 
— " the letter from his father." 

*' And what business have you to read it?" he cried. "Who 
gave you leave to do so?^' 

"Having gone so far, I shall go on," rejoined Hilda; and she 
resumed her reading: — "*I now call upon you to fulfil your 
share of the contract, and to give your daughter to my son. When 
we entered into the engagement, I was supposed to be the richer 
of the two; but I am now sadly reduced, and if my son fulfils his 



294 THE miser's daughter. 

■word, and gives up the estates to pay my creditors, lie will have 
little or nothing.' " 

" He has nothing — he has notliing !" cried the miser, '^ I -will 
never give my consent — never !" 

" * But under whatever circumstances he may he placed,' " said 
Hilda, continuing the letter, " ' whether he gives up the property 
or not, I call upon you to fulfil your part of the contract, as I 
would have fulfilled mine, whatever might have happened to you; 
and to make, as you have agreed to do, a settlement upon your 
daughter proportioned to your means.' ^' 

"I made no such agreement!" cried the miser; "it is false — 
false!" 

" ' I enclose a copy of the memorandum,' '^ pursued Hilda, still 
reading, " ' the original, as you know, is in the possession of Cord- 
well Firehras, He will see it executed. God so requite you, as 
you shall fulfil your agreement or neglect it ! — Randulph Crew.' 
And here is the memorandum," she added, taking up the smaller 
piece of paper, — " It is signed by Randulph Crew and John 
Scarve." 

"It is a forgery!" shrieked the miser. 

" The original is in the possession of Cordwell Firebras,'' said 
Hilda. " Father, you have dealt imjustly by Randulph Crew. 
You owe him a great reparation, and I trust you will make it." 

"I owe him nothing," replied the miser; " it is all a fabrication. 
Give me the papers, that I may burn them ! Give them to me 
directly !" 

And getting up, he staggered towards her, and snatched the 
letter and memorandum from her, with the intention of throwing 
them into the fire. But before he could do so, the door opened, 
and admitted Abel Beechcroft. 

"What do you want, sir?" cried the miser, regarding him 
fearfully, and letting the papers which he had crushed in his grasp 
drop upon the floor. 

"I have heard of your illness, Mr. Scarve,'' replied Abel; "and 
am come to say a few words to you that must be said while you 
are able to hear them." 

"But you disturb me," rejoined the miser — "you can have 
nothing to say to me." 

*' I have something to forgive,*" returned Abel. 



THE miser's daughter. 295 

" To forgive !" echoed Scarve, vacantly. "How have I injured 
you? All! now I recollect! I married Arabella Clinton, whom 
you would willingly have wedded. But she has been dead and 
gone these seventeen years, and more." 

"My father is not sufficiently himself to converse with you, 
Mr. Beechcroft," said Hilda; "but there is one thing I would 
mention " 

" Not a word about the letter, or the contract !" cried the miser, 
with sudden fury; '^not a word, or I will launch my curse against 
you — a father's curse — beware how you incur it !" 

" What is this?" cried Abel Beechcroft, in astonishment. 

"Nothing," cried the miser — "it is a matter between me and 
my daughter. Get you gone. You have no business here. I can 
die without your forgiveness." 

" Father !" exclaimed Hilda, " I have a duty to others as well 
as to you. Another opportunity may not occur. I must tell 
Mr. Beechcroft what I have discovered." 

The miser shook his hands at her in impotent fury, and attempted 
to pronounce the curse ; but his utterance failed him, and with a 
half-articulate cry, he fell senseless to the ground. 

Hilda's cries instantly brought Jacob to the room, and the miser 
was laid upon the bed, where restoratives were successfully em- 
ployed. Inexpressibly shocked and alarmed by what he had wit- 
nessed, Abel Beechcroft took his leave, and Hilda having picked 
up the letter and memorandum, and carefully straightened them, 
put them both into a place of security. 



296 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER V. 

Abel's conduct on learning the miser's illness— sik singleton spiSke 

PROPOSES to the fair THOMASINE — RANBULPH AGAIN DINES ■WITH LADY BRA- 
BAZON — HE RECEIVES A NOTE FROM KITT? CONWAY, AND IS ASSAULTED BY 
PHILIP FREWIN AND HIS MYRMIDONS ON HIS WAY TO SUP WITH HER, 

Accounts of Mr. Scarve's state of health had been conveyed 
to Mrs. Crew by Jacob, who unhesitatingly expressed his convic- 
tion that the attack would terminate fatally. 

"He may linger for some time," said Jacob; " but I'm certain 
he'll never be himself again." 

This intelligence produced a visible effect on Abel, and Mrs. 
Crew thought she could discover less asperity in his feeUngs 
towards his old enemy. He desired Jacob to inform him daily 
how his master went on, and to be sure and let him know instantly 
if any material change for the worse took place. 

" I suppose there is nothing I can do for him," he added — 
" nothing I can send him." 

*' Why, he won't take any physic if he knows it," said Jacob; 
" and as to wine or brandy, there isn't a drop in the house, and 
hasn't been these four or five days. And we can't send to buy any, 
for he only gives Miss Hilda the trifle he used to allow for house 
expenses, and she doesn't like to take any of his money, for fear 
of angerin' him, for he counts it every day, and would be sure to 
miss it." 

" Take a bottle of wine and another of brandy back with you, 
Jacob," said Abel. 

"Thankee, sir — thankee!" rejoined Jacob; "it may be the 
means o* savin' his life. I'll mix a spoonful with his gruel, and I 
dare say he'll never find it out." 

" Is there any thing else I can send him?" asked Abel. " My 



THE miser's daughter. 297 

housekeeper would make him broths or jellies. Wc have more 
convenience here than you can have." 

" And more means as well," replied Jacob ; " I won't say no, 
for we really arc hardly put to it to treat him as he should be 
treated. And only think of him, rolHn' in wealth, and yet denyin' 
himself the common comforts of existence — the necessaries, I may 
say, at a time like this. And then to be indebted to you for 'em, 
sir — you — of all people in the world." 

" Take care he never knows it, nor even suspects it," said Abel, 
hastily. 

"Never fear, sir," replied Jacob ; " he shall learn nothin' from 
me. But he'll never ask." 

" I suppose I cannot be of any assistance to your young lady, 
Jacob?" said Mrs. Crew. 

" I fear not, ma'am," repHed Jacob. " My poor young missis 
has a hard task to go through, but she must fulfil it. And brighter 
days, I hope, are in store for her." 

Abel then rang the bell, and gave instructions to Mr. Jukes, 
who, taking Jacob to his pantry, brought the wine and brandy 
his master had ordered, and filled a can with mutton brotk for 
him. 

** You shall have some nice chicken broth to-morrow," said the 
butler; "and in the meantime, this will be better than nothing." 

*' I should think so," replied Jacob. 

During the few minutes which it had taken the butler to go to 
the cellar, Jacob had foimd time to dig deep into a steak pie, and 
to empty a quart mug of ale; but he now started up, put the 
brandy into one capacious pocket, and the wine into the other, and 
taking up the can of broth, set off at his quickest pace to the 
Little Sanctuary. 

He came daily for a fresh supply of broth, which he said, and 
with perfect truth, was the main support of his master. Abel 
always saw him for a few minutes when he came, and listened with 
the greatest interest to his accounts of the miser's proceedings* 
Jacob told him of Diggs's visit, and of his suspicion that he had 
made his will; and concluded by mentioning the sum of money 
which the attorney had carried away. 

This account perplexed and troubled Abel exceedingly, and he 
muttered — " I must make some inquiries about Diggs, and try to 



298 THE miser's daughter. 

find out whai/lie does with the money. I hope this "wretched old 
man has not put the crowning act to his folly, and left his property 
away from his daughter." 

" God forbid !" exclaimed Jacob. "But there's no sayin' what 
he may do. I wish you would see him, sir." 

" I would see him if I thought it would do any good," replied 
Abel; " but I apprehend my interference would only be pro- 
ductive of harm. I must see him before all is over. We have an 
account to settle together." 

" Then you'd better not put it off too long," rephed Jacob. 

Abel, however, could not muster up resolution for the painful 
scene which he expected to encounter; until one evening — as he 
was sitting after dinner over his wine, with his sister, Randulph, 
and Trussell — Jacob, who had been there before in the morning, 
came to inform him that the miser had been so unwell all day, and 
so fanciful and light-headed, that if he wished to have any com- 
munication with him while he was in his right mind, he had better 
not postpone his visit. Abel then decided upon going at once, 
and accordingly proceeded with Jacob to the Little Sanctuary, 
where he had the short and painful interview with the miser, 
detailed in the preceding chapter. 

By this time Randulph was able to go abroad. One of his 
earliest visits was to Sir Norfolk Salusbury, who was delighted to 
see him, and shook him cordially by the hand, repeating what he 
had previously stated, that he thought he had conducted himself 
admirably in the affair of the duel. Sir Norfolk then began to talk 
of the miser's illness, and deplored the position of his daughter, 
adding that he had been several times to call upon him, but had 
always been denied admittance. While they were thus conversing. 
Sir Bulkeley Price was announced. Like Sir Norfolk, he appeared 
greatly pleased to see Randulph abroad again, and offered his 
congratulations. 

" Villiers was out before you, Mr. Crew," he said; " I had a 
visit from him yesterday; but he still wears his arm in a sHng, 
probably because he thinks it becoming. He came to entreat me 
to offer his apologies to Miss Scarve, and to express his compunc- 
tion for his conduct. He was incited to it, he declares, by the 
violence of his passion for her; but he is now entirely cured, and 
is heartily ashamed of his conduct." 



THE miser's daughter. t 299 

" He said as much to me," added Sir Norfolk. 

" He also expressed himself most handsomely ahout you, Mr. 
Crew," pursued Sir Bulkeley ; " and said he was extremely glad the 
duel had terminated in the way it did. I hope, therefore, you 
will be better friends than ever." 

" "We may be better friends, because we shall probably see less 
of each other," said Randulph, laughing. " However, it is plea- 
sant to have such flattering things said of one by an adversary." 

Shortly afterwards, the party left Abingdon Street, and pro- 
ceeded to the Mall in Saint James's Park, where they met Beau 
Villiers, Lady Brabazon, and Clementina, together with their 
constant attendant. Sir Singleton Spinke. Villiers, whose right 
arm was sustained by a scarf, immediately held forth his disengaged 
hand to Randulph, and passed so many encomiums upon his cou- 
rage and address, that the latter must have been made of stubborn 
material indeed, to be insensible to them. His generous nature 
was sensibly touched, and he began to think he had done the beau 
an injustice. Lady Brabazon, too, exerted her utmost witchery, 
and told him, with a captivating smile, " that if he consulted his 
good looks, he would fight a duel and get wounded once a month, 
as he now looked handsomer than ever." 

The interview ended in Randulph accepting an invitation to 
dine the next day with Lady Brabazon. Trussell was enchanted. 
Accident, and a combination of circumstances, had accomplished 
precisely what he desired. As to Randulph, he was annoyed with 
himself for having made the engagement ; but it was now too late 
to retract. He felt somewhat embarrassed as to how to communi- 
cate the matter to his mother; but Trussell relieved him of the 
difficulty, and, on their return home, gave a Hvely and diverting 
account of the meeting in the park, and said it had led to a recon- 
ciliation dinner, which was to take place at Lady Brabazon's on 
the following day. 

" I hope the dinner may not lead to another quarrel," said 
Abel. 

*' I hope so too," replied Mrs. Crew. " I wish you would dis- 
continue your intimacy with Lady Brabazon, Randulph, — I can- 
not endure her." 

" I do not intend to continue it to the same extent as before," 



300 THE misee's daughtee. 

said Randulph; " but it was impossible to refuse the present 
invitation." 

" Quite impossible !" echoed Trussell — " never was any thing so 
handsome as Villiers's apologies." 

" Pshaw !" exclaimed Abel; " they are as little to be trusted as 
himself 

" I don't think so in the present case," said Randulph. 

*' You may take my word for it, you are deceived," rejoined 
Abel. And here the conversation dropped. 

The next day, soon after five o'clock, Randulph and his uncle 
crossed from the Palace stairs to Westminster, and shaped their 
course towards the Little Sanctuary. Trussell wished to call for a 
new peruke which he had ordered from Peter Pokerich ; and while 
he stepped into the little barber's to try it on, Randulph proceeded 
to the other side of the street to make inquiries after the miser and 
his daughter. 

" He's as bad as he can be," said Jacob, who answered his 
knock, shaking his head; " and I'm afraid this constant watchin' 
will be too much for Miss Hilda. I want to have a word with 
you, but I can't stop just now, for I'm wanted. Where shall you 
be to-night?" 

" I'm going to dine with Lady Brabazon in Pall Mall," re- 
plied Randulph. " I shall leave about ten, and will call here 
on my way home." 

"No; PU step up to her ladyship's at ten," rejoined Jacob; 
*' and I'll wait till you come out. We may have somethin' to 
do together." 

With this, he closed the door, and Randulph walked across the 
street to Peter Pokerich's. At the same moment, a chair was seen 
advancing along the street, which stopped at Mr. Deacle's, and 
being opened, let forth Sir Singleton Spinke, very gaily dressed, 
who skipped into the mercer's shop. Having witnessed the old 
beau's entrance, Randulph turned into the barber's and told his 
imcle what had occurred. 

" Sir Singleton must be gone to pay court to the fair Thoma- 
sine," said Trussell, laughing. 

On hearing this remark, Peter, without saying a word, darted 
out of the shop, and hurried to the neighbouring house. Trussell 
was at first disposed to be angry, but on reflecting on the pro- 



THE miser's daughter. 301 

bable cause of the barber's sudden flight, lie burst into a loud 
laugli. 

" Let us go and see what happens," he said, arranging his 
wig. 

The little barber, meanwhile, had entered the mercer's shop. 
There was no one in attendance in front but an apprentice, who 
did not notice him. He accordingly stepped lightly and quickly 
towards the door of the inner room, which was left ajar, enabling 
him to hear what passed within, while the upper half being glazed, 
and partly covered by a green silk blind, showed him that the 
speakers were Sir Singleton and his mistress. The old beau was 
on his knees, while the fair Thomasine had abandoned her hand to 
him, though she averted her looks from him; owing to which cir- 
cumstance, she did not discover the jealous eyes of the barber glar- 
ing at her through the window. As to Peter, he tugged at his 
wig with jealous rage, and would have plucked handfuls of hair 
from it, if it would have yielded; but being stoutly made, it re- 
sisted his efforts bravely. 

" I will not rise till I have a favourable answer, adorable Tho- 
masine!" said Sir Singleton. "Will you be mine? — -^ill you fly 
with me?" 

" I cannot/' replied the fair Thomasine, turning round with such 
suddenness that the little barber had barely time to duck down to 
escape observation. " I cannot. I have already told you a hun- 
dred times, I am engaged to Peter Pokerich." 

"I will cut the little rascal's throat!" cried Sir Singleton, 
rising, and clapping his hand on his sword. " I will belabour him 
\nt\i his own pole." 

" No, don't !" said the fair Thomasine — " I should go distracted, 
like Opheha, if any harm were to happen to him. Poor Peter is 
so very fond of me — so very, very fond ! At one time, he was a 
little inconstant, to be sure — slightly dazzled by the charms of the 
miser's lovely daughter. But latterly, he has become quite de- 
voted." 

" He cannot love you a thousandth part as well as I love you," 
said the old beau — " it is not in his vulgar nature. Besides, I can 
make you Lady Spinke — can put you at the head of a splendid 
establishment — cover you with diamonds — introduce you to the 



302 THE miser's daughter. 

first society — take you every niglit to some fine lady's drum — to 
Ranelagh — to Vauxhall — to tlie playhouses." 

" It sounds delightful, indeed !'' said the fair Thomasine, whose 
eyes sparkled at the beau's enumeration of the pleasures he had in 
store for her. " But will you really make me Lady Spinke?" 

"I swear it!" cried the old beau. " Oh! you are mine! — say 
you are mine !" 

" No, you're too old for me !" said the fair Thomasine. " I don't 
think I could marry you." 

The unhappy barber, who had almost sunk into the floor, here 
revived again. 

" Too old !" exclaimed Sir Singleton. " Why I'm in the very 
prime of life. But granting that I am old, you'll the sooner be 
a widow. Lady Spinke, with a large jointure — think of that!" 

" A large jointure is very tempting, certainly," said the fair 
Tliomasine, musingly. 

" You can't hesitate, I'm sure, my charmer," cried the old beau, 
" between the brilliant life I hold out to you, and the wretched one 
you will be condemed to with your little barber. Give him up at 
once. Leave him to his wigs, his pomatum, his powder-puff, and 
his blocks, and let him marry some barmaid, or serving-woman, 
the only creatures fit for him." 

" Lady Singleton Spinke and Mrs. Peter Pokerich do sound 
very differently," said the fair Thomasine. '*I should mightily 
like to be called ' your ladyship.' " 

" So would most women, but it isn't every one who has the op- 
portunity," rejoined the old beau. 

" But then I must have a fine gilt coach?'' pursued the fair 
Thomasine. 

" It is yours," replied Sir Singleton. 

" And beautiful dresses?" she continued. 

" As many as you hke," he answered. " Til buy your father's 
whole stock of silks." 

" And magnificent diamonds?" 

" Equal to a Duchess's." 

" And I shall go to court?" 

« You shaU." 

" And to Ranelagh, Vauxhall, and the playhouses?" 

" As often as you please." 



THE miser's daughter. 303 

" Well, then, I almost — ^but oh dear ! it would be so •wrong — no, 
I can't consent. 'Twould break my Peter's heart." 

" Peter's heart "will soon be mended again," replied Sir Single- 
ton. " I'll have a coach and four at the corner of the street at five 
o'clock to-morrow morning; and then we'll drive a few miles out 
of town for an airing, and return to breakfast — and to the Fleet, 
where we'll be married." 

" Don't expect me, I never can make up ray mind to so fearful a 
step," said the fair Thomasine, pathetically, yet undecisively. 

" Well, I shall be there, at all events,^' said the old beau, press- 
ing her hand to his lips. " Farewell. At five." 

The little barber had heard enough. He darted off like a mad- 
man, and almost upset Trussell and Randulph, who, as well as him- 
self had overheard what passed. The next moment, the old beau 
issued forth, singing a French song, and twirling his cane gaily. 

" Ah !" he exclaimed, perceiving Trussell and Randulph, " what 
the deuce brings you here?" 

*' We came to look after the little barber, who ran away, leaving 
my wig only half dressed," replied Trussell. " He has just rushed 
out of this shop as if he had gone distracted." 

" The devil!" exclaimed Sir Singleton; " then he has overheard 
my plan. I must change it." 

And stepping back to the fair Thomasine, he whispered, " Peter 
Pokerich has been playing the spy upon us. He may interfere with 
our arrangements. To-night at twelve, instead of to-morrow morn- 
ing at five. Till then, ma belle, adieu!" and kissing his hand to 
her, he rejoined his friends. 

" You are both going to Lady Brab's, I suppose?" he said. 
*' Sorry I can't take you — we shall meet again in a few minutes." 

So saying, and strutting ofi" triumphantly, he entered his chair, 
and was conveyed to Lady Brabazon's, where Randulph and his 
imcle arrived a few minutes after him. 

The dinner passed off delightfully. It was a small party, con- 
sisting of Sir Bulkeley Price, Sir Norfolk Salusbury, and Lady 
Fazakerly. Every thing was done to please Randulph, and the efibrts 
were perfectly successful. The wine flowed freely after dinner — for 
it was a hard drinking age — and Randulph, who had been exceed- 
ingly temperate since the duel, began to feel the effect of it. As 
he was about to ascend to the drawing-room with the rest of the 



304 THE miser's daughter. 

gentlemen, a note was handed him by a servant, which he 
instantly opened. 

" "What says your billet, nephew?" inquired Trussell, who was 
standing by. 

"Oh! it's from Kitty Conway," said, Randulph. " She has 
found out, I know not how, that I am here, and wishes me to sup 
with her to-night for the last time. " 

"And you will go, won't you?" said Trussel. 

"Not I," replied Randulph, irresolutely. 

*' Oh, yes, you will," said Trussell; " and I'll accompany you on 
your last visit, as I did on the first." 

And they went up stairs laughingly to the drawing-room. 

Time passed by so fleetly in the fascinating society of Lady 
Brabazon, that Randulph was surprised, on glancing at his watch, 
to find it nearly eleven o'clock. 

" Jacob will be gone," he thought, "and will think I have for- 
gotten him." 

Hastily taking leave of Lady Brabazon, who chided him play- 
fully for running away so early, and engaged him to call upon her 
on the following morning, he went down stairs, accompanied by 
Trussell. They found Jacob at the door, and in no very bland 
humour at having been kept so long. 

" My time's more than up," said the latter, grufily, " and I was 
just goin' away. What I want to say is this, — I've received 
a hint that master"'s miserly nevy. Philip Frewin, is about to decamp 
with the money I gave Mr. Diggs t'other day. He's at the Crown 
Inn, Ox Yard, King Street. Suppose you pay him a visit." 

"I'll readily do so to-morrow, Jacob," said Randulph; "but to- 
night I'm engaged. Come along with me. My way lies in the 
same direction as yours, and I want to talk to you about your 
master and young mistress." 

Jacob complied, and accompaned Randulph to the comer of 
Hedge Lane, a narrow thoroughfare running into Cockspur Street, 
where he took his leave. Randulph and his uncle then tracked the 
lane above mentioned, until they came to Whitcomb Street, where 
Kitty Conway then resided, having removed from the Haymarket to 
an old house in the latter street, erected three years after the great 
Fire of London — namely 1669. Never having visited the pretty 
actress in her new abode, but having been told in the note that this 




CnuJtsluWx^^ 



Raibfl."a!^]i defendTDg lain self agalust Fhilip IVewiu and Ms myimidoEP 



THE miser's daughter. 305 

date, whicli was inscribed in large figures on a shield over the door, 
would guide him to it; Randulph was looking out for the house, 
when he observed three men at a little distance behind him, who 
seemed to be dogging him and his uncle. The foremost was a tall, 
thin man ; the second a stout,' square-set personage, attired in a 
shabby military garb ; and the third a great hulking fellow with an 
atrociously black muzzle, dressed in a blue jacket, short trousers, 
and woollen cap. 

Randulph could not help fancying he had seen these personages 
before, though he could not tell where, but he did not concern him- 
self much about them, until just as he had discovered Kitty Con- 
way's dwelling, and was about to knock at the door, he saw that 
they were quickening their pace towards him. On a nearer ap- 
proach, he was at no loss to detect Philip Frewin ; and in his com- 
panions. Captain Culpepper, and the fellow who had officiated as 
Jack-in-the- water at the Folly on the Thames. 

" Here is your man !" shouted Philip, pointing out Randulph to 
the others; "^upon him! don't leave an unbroken bone in his 
body." 

Randulph, however was prepared for the attack. Grasping the 
stout cane he held in his hand, he dealt PhiHp so severe a blow on 
the head with it that he stretched him on his back on the ground. 
At the same moment, Trussell received a blow from the cudgel of 
the athletic sailor, which sent him reeling against the door, to the 
posts of which he clung for support, while the ruffian turning to 
assault Randulph, encountered an unexpected adversary in the 
person of Jacob Post. 

" I thought what you were after, you scoundrels, when I saw you 
doggin' these gen'l'men," cried Jacob; " Pm glad I got up in time. 
Turn your cudgel this way, you black-muzzled hound ! Two can 
play at your game.'' 

While Jacob and his antagonist rapped away at each other as 
hard as they could, making the welkin ring with their blows, 
Randulph turned upon Culpepper, who attempted to draw his 
sword to assail him, and belaboured him so lustily with his cane, 
that the latter was soon fain to cry for quarter. 

The sound of the cudgels, and the vociferations of the comba- 
tants, had alarmed the watch, who sprang their rattles, and has- 



I 



306 



THE MISER S DAUGHTER. 



tened to the scene of strife, while Kitty Conway, hearing the noise, 
opened a window above, and seeing what was passing in the street, 
added her shrieks to the general clamour. 

Before, however, the watch could come up, Jacob had brought 
his athletic antagonist to the ground, and Culpepper had taken to 
his heels without being able to strike a single blow. 



THE misee's daughter. 307 



CHAPTER VI. 

BY "WHAT DEVICE PHILIP PKEVTIN GOT OFF; AND HOW BANDULPH AND TEUSSELL 
WEEE LOCKED UP IN THE WATCH-HOUSE. 

Seeing no chance of escape, Philip Frewin suddenly started to 
his feet, and running towards the watchman, plucked off his wig 
to show the extent of the injuries he had received, and charged the 
others with assaulting him. 

" My skull's fractured, I believe," he cried; *' and if you hadn't 
come up, I dare say I should have been killed outright. There," 
pointing to Randulph, " stands the rufSan who knocked me down." 

"You yourself commenced the assault, scoundrel," replied Ran- 
dulph, stepping forward; "and if you have been severely punished, 
you have only met with your desert." 

" The subterfuge shall not serve your turn, villain," rejoined 
Philip. " Secure him, watchman. I'll swear he meant to rob and 
murder me." 

" Tliis is a serious charge, sir," said the watchman to Randulph; 
*' and if the gen'l'man persists in it, I must take you in custody. 
I was in hopes, and so was you, Charley, wasn't you?" he added, 
appealing to the other watchman, who replied by a confirmatory 
grunt — " that it was only a bit of a fight between some gentlefolk 
about a girl, or some trifling matter of the sort, and that it might 
be set to rights by a bowl of punch among 'emselves, and a crown 
or so to us poor fellows. But this is another matter altogether." 

" What has been stated is utterly false," replied Randulph, " I 
was walking quietly along with my relative, who has sustained 
quite as much personal damage as any one in the fray, when this 
scoundrel, accompanied by two other ruffians, suddenly attacked 
me; and if it had not been for the assistance of that stout porter," 
pointing to Jacob Post, " I might not now be in a condition to 
give an explanation of the affair." 

X 2 



308 THE MISER-S DAUGHTER. 

"The young genTman speaks the truth, watchman," interposed 
Jacob; " if there's been any robbery and assault intended, it hasn't 
been on Ids part." 

"You won't listen to what the fellow says, watchman!" cried 
Philip; "he's one of the gang." 

" He has a jail-bird look, certainly," said the foremost, holdino- 
up his lantern to Jacob's face. " I declare I'm quite perplexed by 
these contradictory statements, Charley, I s'pose the best plan 
will be to take 'em all to the watchus?" 
" I reckon so, Sam," replied the other. 

" I shan't go!" cried Jacob, gruffly. " What'U become of my 
poor master, if I don't go home?" 

" You hear what he says, watchman?" cried Philip. '^ He wants 
to be off. Secure him." 

"Ay, ay, never fear!" cried the watchman, throwing himself 
on Jacob. " Spring the rattle, Charley." 

His comrade obeyed, and by this time a little crowd being col- 
lected, Jacob was secured, and Randulph surrounded and made 
prisoner. Trussell having partly recovered from the eiFects of.jhe 
blow, was likewise seized, and the black-muzzled Jack, who ap- 
peared much injured, was also lifted up, and supported between 
two men. 

After some further objurgation and discussion, the foremost 
watchman gave the word to move on, when the door of the house 
near them opened, and Kitty Conway rushed forth, and made 
her way through the crowd, to Randulph. 

" This is all a mistake !" she cried to the watchmen; " you are 
taking away the wrong persons. This gentleman, Mr. Randulph 
Crew, was coming to sup with me. I was expecting him, and 
hearing a noise in the street, opened my window, and witnessed 
the affray. 

" Well, and what did you see, madam — what did you see?" 
demanded Philip, fiercely. 

" I saw Randulph Crew knock you down," replied Kitty. 
"To be sure," replied Philip; "he did knock me down, and 
would have killed me if he could. This woman's evidence cor- 
roborates my statement, watchman." 

" But I heard from the shouts that you were the first assailant, 



THE miser's daughter. 309 

Philip," replied Kitty. "Besides, Captain Culpepper was with 
you, — though he was beaten off by Randulph." 

"Don't Philip me, ma'am!" cried the other; "I don't know 
you, and don't desire to know you — neither do I know any thing 
of Captain Culpepper. You want to get off your friend, that's 
evident, — but it won't do. He'll pass the night in the watch-house, 
instead of supping with you. Go on, watchman !" 

" You are worse even than I thought you, Philip !" cried Kitty, 
in tones of the strongest contempt. 

" I shouldn't mind being locked up in the watch-house," said 
Jacob ; " but what'll my young missis think of it? — what'll become 
of my poor master? If any thin' happens to him, I shall never 
forgive myself. I wish somebody would take a message from me 
to Miss Scarve in the Little Sanctuary, — it would make me more 
easy." 

" I will take it," said Kitty; " and will explain all." 

"You!" exclaimed Jacob. "No; that'll never do." But be- 
fore he could get out the latter part of the speech, Kitty had re- 
tired, and he was forced away by his captors. 

The party took the direction of Piccadilly, Philip Frewin walk- 
ing by the side of Sam, the foremost watchman, who kept fast hold 
of his arm, and the others following. As they drew near the top 
of the Haymarket, Philip said in a low tone to the watchman, — 
" You'll make more out of this job by letting me go, than by de- 
taining me." 

"Which way?" asked Sam, in the same tone. 

" Here are five guineas," replied Philip, slipping a purse into 
the other's hand; "contrive my escape, and that of the black- 
muzzled fellow in the sailor's dress." 

Sam held the money to the light, and saw that it was all right. 

" I'll manage it," he said. " So the charge you preferred 
against them t'others was all gammon, eh?" 

"To be sure," replied Philip; "but keep them safely under 
lock and key till to-morrow morning, and I'll double what I've just 
given you. You'll find me on this spot to-morrow night, at ten." 

" That'll do," rephed Sam. " And here we're at the top o' the 
Haymarket. Give me a push, and then make off as fast as you 
can. I'll take care of the rest. Your black-muzzled friend shall 
get his liberty by-and-by." 



310 THE miser's daughtee. 

Philip obeyed these instructions to the letter. Turning sud- 
denly upon the watchman, and thrusting him forcibly backwards, 
he set ojffas fast as his legs could carry him. Sam instantly started 
in pursuit, caUing loudly to his brethren to take care of the other 
prisoners; but he returned a few minutes afterwards, out of breath, 
and swearing that the fellow had managed to get off. 

Feigning to be in a very ill-humour, he returned a surly reply 
to Randulph's remarks on his carelessness, and hurried the pri- 
soners along until they reached Air-street, where the watchhouse 
was situated. The door was instantly opened by a constable, with 
whom Sam exchanged a few words in an undertone ; after which 
the prisoners were led down a narrow, dirty passage, and thrust 
into a filthy-looking hole, furnished only with a couple of benches, 
on which some half-dozen persons of very equivocal appearance 
were seated. Sam then, for the first time, appeared to notice the 
absence of the black-muzzled Jack, and inquiring where he was, 
was told that he had also contrived to escape. 

"Escaped! has he?" cried Sam, affecting to be in a great pas- 
sion. " Odds-my-life ! they slip out of one's fingers Hke eels. 
However, these three are safe enough, that's some comfort." 

*' If our accuser is gone," cried Randulph, looking round the 
chamber with inexpressible disgust, *' why are we detained?" 

"You're detained on a serious charge," replied Sam; " and I 
can't take upon me to let you go. But I'll fetch Mr. Foggo, the 
constable, and if he Hkes to liberate you, that'll be his concern." 

So saying, he went forth with his comrades, locking the door 
after him. 

"An agreeable situation, uncle," said Randulph to Trussell, 
who had seated himself on the extremity of one of the benches. 

" Agreeable indeed!" echoed Trussell, with a groan. " Oh, my 
poor head !" 

" Wliat *ud my dear young missis, or your good mother think 
of us, if they could see us in this place, and with this company?" 
whispered Jacob. " I'd rather have got a cracked crown myself 
than Mrs. Conway should call on Miss Hilda.'' 
" So would I," rejoined Randulph. 

" Come, come, no grumbhng," cried Trussell, rousing himself. 
" I'm the greatest sufferer after all. Every thing will be set right 
in the morning, and in the meantime, let's pass the night as com- 



THE MISEE'S daughter. 311 

fortably as we can. It's not the first time I've been in a watch- 
house. Depend upon it we shan't be liberated; but I'll engage to 
say we can get a better room than this." 

And so it turned out. In about ten minutes, Sam made his ap- 
pearance, with Mr. Foggo, who said he could not discharge the 
prisoners till they had been before a magistrate. 

" Can't you give us a little better accommodation, Mr. Foggo?" 
asked Trussell, slipping a guinea into his hand. 

The constable said nothing, but took them into a back room, 
furnished with a small deal table, and three or four rush-bottomed 
chairs, 

"This is a parlour after my poor master's own heart,'* said 
Jacob, looking at the bare walls and grated windows. 

"Any thing I can get for you, gen'l'men?" asked the constable, 
as he set a light on the table. 

" I suppose we must stay here all night, Mr. Foggo?" observed 
Trussell. " We're family men — and our ladies wiU be excessively 
distressed at our absence." 

"Sorry for it, sir, but you must stay," replied the constable. 
" If you desire it, I dare say I can so manage it that you shan't 
come before his worship. And in the meantime, though it's against 
rules, — but I don't mind obliging gentlemen, — if, I say, a bowl of 
punch would be agreeable " 

" A bowl of punch, by all means !" cried Trussell ; " here's 
money for it," he added, giving him another guinea. 

"I see you understand our ways, sir," said the constable, bow- 
ing. And he left the room. 

"Come, don't be downcast, my boy!" cried Trussell, clapping 
his nephew on the shoulder, " we shall have a jolly night of it 
after all. My head is getting better every minute. If Hilda and 
your mother do hear of your adventure, they'll only laugh at it. 
I've been locked up a dozen times or more in my younger days, 
and hope I shall be again. So cheer up, my boy. Your initiation 
into life would have been incomplete without this occurrence." 

Randulph could not help responding to his uncle's laugh, and 
Mr. Foggo shortly after appearing with a bowl of excellent punch, 
he began to think that the best way was to make himself com- 
fortable. Jacob, too, yielded to the genial influence of the liquor, 



312 THE miser's daughter. 

and ere long they were all laughing as merrily as if they had been 
at large. The bowl of punch discussed, Trussell disposed himself 
to slumber in his chair ; Jacob stretched himself at full length on 
the floor; and Randulph, having paced the chamber for some time, 
dropped asleep likewise. 



THE miser's daughter. 313 



CHAPTER VII. 

KITTY CONAVAT AND THE LITTLE BARBER PLAT A TEICK UPON THE FAIE THOMASINE 
— SIR SINGLETON SPINKE IS DELUDED INTO A MARRIAGE WITH THE PRETTY 
ACTRESS AT THE FLEET. 

Kitty Conway -was as good as her word. Scarcely had the 
watchmen departed with their prisoners than she set out for the 
Little Sanctuary. With a beating heart, and trembling hand, 
she knocked at the miser's door; but her summons remained unan- 
swered, and she was about to repeat it, when a little man crossed 
the street and addressed her. 

*' Mr. Scarve is very ill, ma'am," said the Httle man; — " dan- 
gerously ill." 

" So I've heard," replied Kitty. " I wish I could make them 
hear," she added, knocking again, and waiting vainly for an 
answer. 

" I fear you've come on a fruitless errand," said the little man, 
who still remained standing near her; " the porter is from home." 

" I know It — I know it," replied Kitty, hastily. " He has 
been taken to the watch-house. I want to see Miss Scarve, to tell 
her so." 

" What !" exclaimed the other, starting. " Jacob Post taken 
to the watch-house. This is an extraordinary event. Would," he 
added, with a groan, " that another person I could mention were 
taken there, too !" 

" And pray who may be the person implied by your amiable 
wish ?" asked Eatty. 

" Sir Singleton Spinke," replied the Httle man. " Do you know 
him, ma'am?" 

*' Perfectly well," replied Kitty. 

" Then you don't require to be told what a dreadful old rake he 
is," repUed the other; "nor will you wonder at my resentment 



314 THE miser's daughtee. 

against him, when I tell you he has attempted to run away with 
my betrothed," 

"Your betrothed!" exclaimed Kitty. "Pray what is her 
name ?" 

" She is generally denominated the fair Thoraasine," replied the 
other; " but perhaps I ought to call her Miss Deacle." 

"Ah! then I know who you are, my little friend," rejoined 
Kitty; "you are Peter Pokerich, the barber." 

"Right, madam," he replied, "I am that unfortunate indi- 
vidual." 

" And how does Sir Singleton mean to rob you of your 
mistress? — let me hear," asked Kitty. 

" He has made her an offer of marriage," replied Peter, " and 
she has accepted him — perfidious that she is ! I asked her to sup 
with me to-night, for the last time, that I might have an oppor- 
tunity of upbraiding her, and she has accepted the invitation. 
I'm waiting for her now, for she can't get out till the old people 
go to bed." 

As he spoke, the mercer's door opened, and a female figure 
issued from it. 

"There she is, I declare!" cried the little barber. "I'm so 
angry with her for her treachery, that I could almost kill her." 

" Don't think of such nonsense," replied Kitty. " If you want 
to revenge yourself, I'll teU you how to do it. Pretend to make 
love to me." 

" That's easily done," replied the barber. " Permit me to take 
your hand. I'll affect not to see the deceitful little hussy. Let 
me entreat you, madam," he added, putting on an impassioned air, 
" to come in with me. We can converse so much more pleasantly 
than in the street. Somebody may overhear us." 

" Somebody does overhear you, you little wretch!"- cried the 
fair Thomasine, stopping. " Good gracious ! if he isn't making 
love to the woman. I wonder who she can be." 

" She sees us," whispered Kitty; " the plan will do. I'll feign 
reluctance. — Oh no, I can't go in with you," she added, irre- 
solutely. 

" I beseech you, do," replied Peter. " I expected a visit from a 
neighbour, — Miss Thomasine Deacle, and I've prepared a little 
supper for her; but I won't wait.'* 



THE miser's daughter. 315 

" And so you want me to take her place ?" cried Kitty. " Very 
flattering indeed ! I dare say you'll try to persuade me next, that 
you prefer me to her." 

" So I do !" cried Peter; " I prefer you incomparably. You're 
a thousand times prettier than she is." 

" I shall burst with rage !" cried the fair Thomasine. " I could 
tear his disagreeable little eyes out." 

" "Well, since you're so pressing, I'll just go in for a moment," 
said Kitty; " but I won't sit down — and as to supper " 

" You'll just eat a mouthful ?" replied Peter. 

" Oh, I've no doubt she'll enjoy herself nicely !" said the fair 
Thomasine; " but I'll spoil their pastime — that I will !" 

" This way, madam !" cried Peter, handing the pretty actress to- 
wards his dwelling. 

"She's close behind us!" whispered Kitty; "contrive to let 
her get in without observation." 

Peter signified his assent in a whisper, and pretending to offer 
the most gallant attentions to the actress, left the door purposely 
open. Unconscious of the trick practised upon her, the fair Tho- 
masine slipped in after them, and hid herself behind a large wooden 
case, on which several wig-blocks were set. 

Having caught a gUmpse of what had occurred, Kitty squeezed 
Peter's hand to let him know how matters stood, and he imme- 
diately took the hint. 

" I declare I've left the door open," he said, locking it; " how 
excessively careless in me ! The fair Thomasine might get in, and 
surprise us." 

" She has been beforehand with you, sir," muttered the 
young lady^alluded to, looking up for an instant from behind the 
case. 

" And now, ma'am," said Peter, lighting a couple of candles, 
and placing them on the table, on which cold chickens and other 
viands were laid, "you'll take a little supper with me?" 

" Well, it looks so nice that it almost tempts me," said Kitty, 
seating herself. " I think I could manage the wing of a chicken." 

Having helped her as she required, Peter ran to a cupboard, and 
brought out a bottle of wine. 

" This is some delicious Constantia which I got for the fair 



316 THE miser's daughter. 

Thomasine," he said, pouring out a glass; "but I'm glad you'll 
drink it instead of her." 

" Here's to our absent friends," said Eattj, taking the glass. 

" I pledge you," rejoined the little barber; "though I should be 
sorry to change my present friend for any absent one." 

" Oh, the horrid, deceitful little monster !" cried the fair Tho- 
masine. " He was never half so gallant to me." 

*' By the bye, ma'am," said Peter, " your beauty has so fascinated 
me that I've omitted to ask your name ?" 

" It Is Kitty Conway," replied the lady. 

" What Mrs. Conway, the pretty actress of the Haymarket ?" 
cried Peter. 

" Tlie same," she replied. " And so, old Sir Singleton Spinke 
is about to take Miss Deacle off your hands, eh ?" 

" I believe so," replied Peter; " and I wish him joy of his bar- 
gain — ha ! ha ! and her of hers, too ! She won't know a day's 
happiness after she becomes Lady Spinke. Now, / should have 
made her a good husband — a really good husband — for I was de- 
votedly attached to her. But some people don't know what's good 
for them. However, I'm delighted things have turned out in this 
way — I've made a capital change. Here's to our better acquaint- 
ance," he added, filling the glasses again. 

" The amorous little wretch will get tipsy, and propose to her, I 
expect," said the fair Thomasine. 

" Sir Singleton Spinke, as I told you, is an old friend of mine," 
said Kitty Conway; "he paid me great attention, and, if I had 
chosen, I might have been Lady Spinke ; but I knew better — 
ha! ha!" 

" I hope your objection was to Sir Singleton, and not to the 
married state," said Peter. " You're not sworn to single blessed- 
ness, I trust ? 

" I have never given the matter serious consideration," replied 
the actress. 

" Then do so now," replied Peter, stepping forward and throwing 
himself at her feet; " oh ! be mine ! be mine, sweet Kitty ! I've no 
gilt coach to offer you, like Sir Singleton — ^no beautiful dresses, no 
magnificent diamonds. I can't take you to court in the morning, and 
to Ranelagh, Vauxhall, or some fine lady's drum in the evening. I've 
no temptations to hold out. But I can offer you sincere affection — a 



THE miser's daughter. 317 

comfortable home — and a young husband. Yes, a young husband ! 
I'm not a battered old beau, — but a smart, dapper, little fellow, of 
two-and-twenty, well worth any woman's notice. — If that don't 
sting her, I've done," he added, in a lower tone. 

" You certainly appear very amiable," said Kitty, with difficulty 
keeping her countenance, " and, though small, are reasonably good- 
looking." 

"Answer me," cried the little barber, passionately — " or let me 
snatch a reply from your honeyed lips." 

" I can stand this no longer," cried the fair Thomasine. And 
bursting from her concealment, she ran up to Peter, and boxed his 
ears soundly. 

" There ! take that — and that !" she cried — " that'll teach you 
to make love to other ladies before my eyes." 

" Halloa, madam ! what do you mean by this ?" cried Peter, 
rubbing his cheek. " How the deuce did you get into the room ? 
— through the key -hole ?" 

" No matter how I got in,'^ replied the fair Thomasine. " I've 
seen all that has passed, and heard all you've said. I'm astonished 
at you, Peter. How can you look me in the face after the shock- 
ing things you've said of me behind my back? But don't think I 
mind them, any more than the loss of your affection. I sha'n't 
bestow another thought upon you. As to you, madam *' 

" Well, madam !" exclaimed Kitty, calmly. 

" May you be happy with him — that's all I have to say," con- 
tinued the fair Thomasine, hysterically. " May you love him as 
much as I could have loved him; and may you never repent 
interfering with the happiness of another !" 

" Come, I like this. Miss Thomasine," said Peter. " It's very 
well for you to talk of interfering with the happiness of another; 
but didn't I see you listening to the addresses of that odious old 
beau — didn't I see him kiss your hand — didn't I hear you promise 
to run away with him — didn't I hear and see all this? Answer 
me that ?" 

" I will not deny that I was foolish enough to listen to Sir Sin- 
gleton's addresses," repHed the fair Thomasine, with dignity; "for 
the strongest of our sex is not proof against vanity. But I never 
assented to his proposal; or if I did so, it was only pretence." 



318 THE miser's daughter. 

" Oh, say tliat again, dearest Tommy — say it again?" cried 
Peter, delightedly. 

*^It was all pretence — I never meant to marry him!" repeated 
the fair Thomasine. 

'' You make me the happiest of barbers," cried Peter, catching 
her in his arms, and pressing her to his bosom. 

" Mercy on us ! what's this?" exclaimed the fair Thomasine, ex- 
tricating herself from his embrace, and assuming a cold demeanour. 
*' I thought you preferred this lady to me?" 

*' That was all a pretence, too," replied Peter. " The trick has 
succeeded to a miracle. We both of us knew you were behind 
that case." 

" Ah ! if I had only been aware of that !" cried the fair Tho- 
masine. 

*' It's very well you were not, in my opinion, Miss Deacle," said 
IQtty Conway. " I here restore you your lover, and assure you I 
never had a wish to rob you of him. And now, won't you sit down 
to supper with us?" 

Peter instantly set a chair for her, placed the wing of a chick:en 
on her plate, poured out a glass of Constantia, and the party were 
soon as merry as possible. During a pause in the conversation, 
they heard a watchman go past, and cry the hour. 

*' Three quarters past eleven," said the fair Thomasine; " the 
old beau promised to come for me at twelve." 

"I thought it was at six o'clock to-morrow morning?" said 
Peter. 

" No, twelve to-night," replied the fair Thomasine. *^ Finding 
you had overheard him, he altered the time. We were to be 
married at the Fleet." 

" It's a pity to disappoint him," observed Kitty, laughingly. 

*' How !" exclaimed Peter and the fair Tliomasine, simulta- 
neously. 

" He ought to have a wife, since he has made up his mind to 
commit the rash act of matrimony," rejoined Kitty. "A plan 
just occurs to me. PU take your place. Miss Deacle — that is, I'll 
disguise myself like you — conceal my features in a mask, and he'll 
never know the difference." 

"Capital!" exclaimed Peter; "that will be turning the tables 
upon him with a vengeance." 



THE MISEE'S daughter. 319 

"I'll lend you my columbine's dress," said the fair Tliomasine; 
" it will just fit you — and my mask. Come with me. You haven't 
a moment to spare." 

''The quicker the better," said Kitty; "for if I give myself 
time for reflection, I sha'n't do it." 

They then hurried away, and Peter having helped himself to 
another glass of Constantia, and put out the candles, followed them, 
and concealed liimself in an alley near the mercer's dwelling, where 
he could see, unobserved, all that passed. 

Punctually as the abbey clock struck twelve, the sound of wheels 
was heard — a carriage drew up at the corner, and the next mo- 
ment, the old beau was seen cautiously advancing on the opposite 
side of the street. Finding the coast clear, he advanced towards 
the mercer's door, and tapped against it. It was partially opened, 
and a low voice inquired from within — " Is it you?" 

" Yes, it's me, my angel," repHed the old beau; " Sir Singleton 
Spinke — ^your devoted admirer !" 

*' I'm quite ready," replied the speaker, stepping forth, and 
looking exactly like the fair Thomasine dressed for the masquerade 
at Ranelagh. 

" Why, you've got on your columbine's dress," said Sir Sin- 
gleton, approvingly. 

"It's the prettiest I have," replied the lady; "and I thought 
you would like me better in it than in any other." 

"You couldn't have made a better choice," replied the old 
beau; " in fact, you couldn't choose amiss. But why that envious 
mask?" 

" I put it on to hide my blushes," replied the other; " nor shall 
I remove is till we are united. But you must drive to the Fleet 
at once — I'll go nowhere else.^' 

" I don't desire you to do so, my angel," replied the old beau; 
" the parson is in attendance, and in less than half an hour we shall 
be man and wife." 

" Have you no scruple in taking me from poor Peter Pokerich?" 
said the lady. 

" None whatever," rephed the old beau. " I wish the little 
perruquier could be present at our marriage — it would complete 
his mortification." 

" Well, there's no saying what may happen," replied the other, 



320 THE miser's daughter. 

significantly; " but we've stood chattering here long enough, and 
may be observed." 

With this, she gave her hand to her admirer, who led her to 
the carriage, which was instantly afterwards heard to drive off. 
At the same moment, the barber issued from his hiding-place, 
while the mercer's door opened, and the fair Thomasine came 
forth. 

" Are they gone?" she asked. 

" Yes, they're off to the Fleet," replied Peter. " Kitty Conway 
gave me a hint to follow them, and see the marriage performed. 
Will you go?" 

" Willingly," replied the fair Thomasine. 

And hurrying off to the stairs near Westminster-bridge, they 
took a boat, and ordered the waterman to row as quickly as he 
could to Blackfriars-stairs, Luckily the tide was in their favour, 
so that the transit was quickly accomplished. 

Meanwhile, the carriage containing the old beau and the actress 
rolled rapidly along the Strand and Fleet-street, and drew up 
before a mean-looking house near the prison. A lamp threw a 
faint glimmer upon a sign over the door, displaying two hands 
joined together, with the words — " Marriages performed 
HERE," inscribed beneath it. Some chairmen and link-boys were 
standing at the door, but they were pushed aside by the old beau's 
footman. As Sir Singleton alighted, a short, stout, red-faced man, 
in a clerical garb, issued forth. This was Doctor Gay nam, the 
most noted of the Fleet parsons. He wore a rusty cassock and 
full-bottomed wig, filled with flour, instead of powder, which con- 
trasted strongly with his purple blotchy face, and nose studded 
with carbuncles. 

" This way — this way, my handsome gentleman and fair lady," 
said Doctor Gaynam, repeating his customary formula, and leading 
the pair down a passage in which there was a glass door, giving 
a view of two or three wedding parties, drinking and dancing. 
" We are ready for you," he added, opening a door, and ushering 
them into a small back room, where there were two other persons, 
who turned out to be the clerk and the register. The latter was 
seated at a desk, and had a large book, like a ledger, before him. 

" As you may not perhaps be aware of the practice here, sir," 
:Said Doctor Gaynam to Sir Singleton, " I will take the liberty to 



THE miser's daughter. 321 

inform you of it. Our rule is always to take the fees before- 
hand, to prevent misunderstanding — merely to prevent misunder- 
standing, sir." 

The old "beau immediately produced his purse, and gave five 
guineas to the clergyman, a couple to the register, and one to 
the clerk. This liberality produced a corresponding effect upon the 
parties. 

" I have the honour to see Sir Singleton Spinke, sir, I believe," 
said the register. " Is that the name you desire to be married by ?" 
he added, significantly. 

" Certainly," said the old beau ; " and the name of the lady 
is " 

** The name I wish to be married by is written down on this 
paper," said Kitty, in a low tone, delivering a leaf torn from her 
tablets, to the register. 

** Ah, the dear, sly rogue!" cried Sir Singleton, squeezing her 
hand. 

Doctor Gaynam then placed the parties on either side of him, 
and commenced reading the service. The register gave the lady 
away, and at the same time placed the slip of paper before the 
clergyman, who proceeding with the ceremony gave out the lady's 
name as Kitty — an appellation which somewhat astounded the old 
beau. He, however, repeated the words after the Doctor, and so 
did the lady, and in due time the marriage was completed. Just 
as the ring was placed on the bride's finger, two other persons entered 
the room; but as they kept near the door, and as Doctor Gaynam 
supposed them to be another couple waiting their turn to be united, 
no notice was taken of them. But when all was over, these two 
persons advanced, and proved to be no other than Peter Pokerich 
and the fair Thomasine. 

" Why, what in the name of wonder is this ?" cried the old 
beau, staring in astonishment. " The likeness is marvellous. Are 
there two fair Thomasines? But no, — it can't be. "Who the 
deuce have I married ?" 

" You shall see," replied the bride, unmasking. 

" Kitty Conway !" exclaimed Sir Singleton. 

" Yes, Kitty Conway is the name her ladyship was married by,'* 
said the register; " I've just entered it in the book." 

T 



322 THE miser's daughter. 

" We've come to offer you our best congratulation, Sir Single- 
ton,"" said Peter. 

*' And to wish you many years of happiness," added the fair 
Tliomasine. 

" Well, I'm nicely tricked indeed," cried the old beau. 
" Egad," he added, gazing at the bride, who really looked very 
beautiful, " I don't know but what I've the best of the bargain 
after all. Kitty is decidedly the smarter and prettier of the two, 
and if she has flirted a little, I don't mind it. Lady Singleton 
Spinke," he said, giving her his hand, " our carriage awaits us. 
I know nothing of these persons," pointing to Peter and the fair 
Thomasine. " Mr. Register, will you have the goodness to tell 
my servants to drive home — to Pall Mall?" 

Lady Spinke waved her hand kindly to the barber and his com- 
panion, who watched her enter the carriage, and drive off. 

" Upon my word, I begin to think I've thrown a good chance 
away," observed the fair Thomasine, with something like a sigh, 

" Oh! don't say so, my darling," cried Peter; " there's no secu- 
rity in a Fleet marriage. It may be set aside in a month." 

" Now, my handsome couple," cried Doctor Gaynam, who had 
followed them to the door, "don't you want the parson? — won't 
you step in and be married? The fees will be only twelve shillings 
to you — one shilling the clerk, and one the register." 

" What say you, sweetest," said Peter — " shall we be for ever 
united?" 

" For ever!" echoed the fair Thomasine. " Why, you've just 
said that a Fleet marriage can be set aside in a month. No, I 
thank you. If I'm married at all — especially to a barber — I'll 
be married properly. Take me back to the Little Sanctuary 
directly." 



THE miser's daughtee. 323 



CHAPTER Vni. 

OF THE VISIT OF PHILIP FEEWIN AND DIGGS TO THE MISER, AND WHAT THE! 
OBTAINED FROM HIM, 

Having made his escape from the watchmen, as before related, 
Philip Frewin ran on, without stopping, past Charing Cross and 
Whitehall, until he reached King-street, when he relaxed his pace. 
He then struck into Ox Yard, and entered the Crown Inn, witliin 
it, pushing past the waiter, who stared aghast at his blood-stained 
appearance — ^though broken pates were matters of common occur- 
rence in those days, as may be seen from Hogarth's prints — and 
made his way to a room where he found Diggs seated at a table, 
with glasses and a bowl of punch before him. The attorney had 
been asleep, but he roused himself on Philip's entrance. 

*' Wliy, you appear to have come off the worst in this en- 
counter?" he said, looking at him — '* I was afraid it would be so." 

" Ay, devil take it !" exclaimed Philip. " He's a more despe- 
rate fellow than I thought him. We should have done well 
enough but for Jacob Post." 

" Jacob Post!" repeated Diggs — "how came he there?" 

Philip told him what had occurred. 

" Well I thought it an ill-advised proceeding from the first," 
said Diggs, as the other concluded his recital. " I wish you hadn't 
chanced to hear he was going to sup with Kitty Conway. This 
would never have happened !" 

" Curse him 1" cried PhiHp, furiously. " He has robbed me of 
two mistresses and a fortune, and Pll be revenged on him — deeply 
revenged ! — I swear it !" 

" It is vexatious," replied Diggs, coolly, "and he has crossed 
your path somewhat unluckily. Still, as far as Kitty Conway is 
concerned, I think he did you a service in taking her oflf your 
hands. But, I repeat, Pm sorry you meddled with him to-night. 

y2 



324 THE miser's daughter. 

You've enough to do just now without thinking of revenge, and 
the greatest triumph you can have over him will be to get as much 
as possible from your uncle Scarve, and thereby reduce Hilda's 
fortune — for, take my word for it, she will marry him when the 
old man dies." 

" And his days are numbered?" observed Philip. 

"Undoubtedly," replied Diggs. " Ah, PhiHp ! if you had but 
played your cards well, what a fortune might be yours ! It would 
have repaired all your folly and extravagance." 

"Come, come, Diggs, no preaching,'' said Philip, angrily. 
" What is past is past." 

" But I will preach, as you call it," cried the attorney, some- 
what sharply; " because I am the chief sujBferer by your extrava- 
gance. You have been a profligate and a gambler; and are now 
little better than a sharper. I have lost some thousands by you, 
and I must and will be repaid !" 

" You shall be repaid, Diggs," replied PhiHp, in a deprecatory 
tone. 

" But how! — and when?" thundered the attorney — "how, and 
when, sir? — answer me that?" 

Philip was silent. 

" You can have the five thousand pounds you got from my 
uncle," he said, at length. 

" That is gone," rephed the attorney. 

" Gone!" cried PhiHp — " why, you offered to place the money 
in my hands yourself!" 

" I have found a better use for it," said Diggs; " and during 
your absence, it has been removed." 

PhiHp uttered a deep imprecation. 

"I'll tell you what I've done with it," said Diggs; "I've 
given it to a most important client of mine — an agent for the 
Jacobite party, to whose use it will be applied. Your uncle Scarve 
is a Jacobite, and I told him this money would be employed for 
that cause, and gave him a memorandum that if it prospered he 
should receive double the amount. Therefore, I am all right; and 
to be plain with you, I never meant you to have the money." 

" You are a consummate scoundrel, Diggs, and have tricked 
me most infamously," said PhiHp, angrily. 

" No such thing," repHed Diggs. 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 325 



'* I say you have," cried Philip. " I have wasted my property, 
it is true; but you have helped me to do so by your extortionate 
demands. You have raised money for me at such usurious interest, 
that you have beggared me while enriching yourself, for I know 
you've come in for your share of the spoil." 

" Ha! ha! ha!" cried Diggs, leaning back in his chair, and 
indulging in a loud fit of merriment. 

" I'll not be laughed at," cried Philip, striding up to him, and 
shaking his hand in his face ; " leave off — or I'll make you." 

" Sit down," said Diggs, calmly; "you'll gain nothing by pas- 
sion, but may by quietude." 

Accustomed to obey him, PhiHp sullenly complied. 

"Now listen to me," pursued the attorney; "for I've a good 
deal to tell you, and that will surprise you. You know that Ran- 
dulph Crew's father died greatly embarrassed, and that Randulph 
assigned his estates to the creditors." 

" Well, what of that?" asked Philip. 

" You shall hear, if you're quiet," cried Diggs, " but not other- 
wise. Mr. Crew's principal creditor was a person named Isaacs, a 
Jew, who had advanced him money at most usurious interest." 

"As you have done to me," observed PhiHp. " The man who 
gets into such hands is sure to be ruined." 

" Cunning as he was," pursued Diggs, without noticing the 
remark, "Isaacs got into difficulties, and assigned his securities to 
his chief creditor, Mr. Nettleship, a tallow-chandler in the city, 
who died about six months ago, and whose aifairs proving greatly 
embarrassed, the arrangement of them was committed to me by his 
surviving partner, Mr. Rathbone. On examining the claims on 
the Crew estates, I found they could not be legally substantiated, 
and therefore, instead of being worth sixty thousand pounds, as he 
imagined, the securities are not worth a twentieth part of that 
amount. These facts being made known to the agent of the Jaco- 
bite party, who is, as I have stated, a client of mine, he wished to 
get these papers into his hands, and Mr. Scarve's money has been 
appropriated to their purchase." 

" The devil it has!" exclaimed Philip; " and what use does the 
agent intend to make of them?" 

*' He means to give Randulph back his property, provided he 
joins the Jacobite cause," replied the attorney, " but on no other 



326 THE miser's daughter. 

condition. And in my opinion it will never be fulfilled. But 
what is more, your uncle Scarve is bound under a lieavy penalty 
to give liis daughter to Randulph Crew. But neither will this be 
accomplished, unless the young man turns Jacobite." 

" And what is all this to me?" cried Philip. " Or rather, what 
am I to gain by it?" 

" That depends upon yourself," replied Diggs. " It is plain 
you can never marry your cousin Hilda; and it is plain also that 
if Kandulph turns Jacobite he will marry her, and obtain her pro- 
perty and his own. You have, therefore, no hope but in persuad- 
ing your uncle to make you his heir." 

" And do you think that can be accomplished?" asked PhiHp,, 
eagerly. 

" I think il%iay be," replied the attorney; " and if attempted,, 
no time should be lost." 

* ' Wliy not make the experiment to-night ?" said Philip. " Jacob 
is out of the Way.^' 

" That is something, certainly," replied the attorney; " but the 
hour is late." 

" There is no telling what may happen to-morrow," said Philip. 
" We can but fail." 

After a little consideration, Diggs assented; and PhiHp retiring 
to an inner room, washed the sanguine stains from his face, mended 
his broken pate with a patch, and covered all with an old scratch 
wig. He then put on the tattered garb he was accustomed to wear 
on his visits to his uncle, and returning to Diggs, they quitted the 
inn by a private door, and proceeded to the Little Sanctuary. 

Knocking loudly, they were answered by Mrs. Clinton, who 
seemed greatly surprised, and by no means pleased, to see them. 
Diggs told her he had business with Mr. Scarve that could not be 
delayed, and, pushing past her, walked down the passage towards 
the parlour, followed by Philip, where they found Hilda. She had 
been seated at the table, reading that sacred volume which exercises 
the most soothing influence on the mind in seasons of trouble; but 
she arose on hearing their approach. Diggs repeated what he had 
stated to Mrs. CHnton, and asked permission to walk up-stairs to 
the miser's room. 

" Your business must be important if it cannot be postponed till 
to-morrow," said Hilda. 



THE miser's daughter. 327 

" It cannot be postponed, Miss Scarve," replied the attorney; 
" in your father's present state of health, delays might be dan- 
gerous, and the urgency of the case must plead my excuse." 

"Well, sir, if you are resolved to see him," replied Hilda, "you 
will find him in his own room. He is not gone to bed. You 
know your way.^' 

" I do," replied the attorney, going towards the stairs. 

" You need not expect Jacob Post home to-night, Hilda," ob- 
served Philip Frewin; " he has got shut up in the watch-house for 
assisting Randulph Crew in a street-disturbance. I saw them taken 
off myself." And chuckling at the alarm produced by this intelli- 
gence, he followed the attorney up-stairs. 

The miser was seated in his easy-chair, near the fire; his knees 
almost thrust into the scantily-suppHed grate ; and his skinny hands 
extended over the flame. A farthing candle was burning on the 
table. On hearing the door open, he cried, without looking round, 
in a querulous tone — 

" So you've come at last, Jacob, have you? Where have you 
been, rascal? You've kept me up very late, for I couldn't go to 
bed till you came home. I'll not leave you a farthing in my will, 
if you serve me such a trick again — not a farthing !" 

" It's not Jacob, sir," said the attorney, advancing — " It's me — 
Mr.J)iggs." 

" Diggs!" exclaimed the miser, looking round. " What brings 
you here at this time of night? — who have you got with you?" 

" Your nephew, sir, — ^Mr. Philip Frewin," replied the attorney. 
"I've come at rather an unseasonable hour, sir; but I thought it 
better not to delay my visit." 

" You think me in danger, Diggs — I know you do — and that's 
the reason of your coming," said the miser. " Every body fancies 
I'm going to die ; — even Abel Beechcroft paid me a visit t'other 
night to tell me so. But though I'm ill enough, God knows, it's 
not all over with me yet. I may come round, Diggs— may come 
round. But to your business P' 

" My business relates to your nephew, Mr. Scarve," said the 
attorney. " I know you are much too strong-minded to fear the 
approach of death, and though I trust my apprehensions may prove 
groundless, I hold it my duty to tell you that I consider your con- 
dition precarious. You may get better " 



328 THE miser's daughter. 

" But the probability is I shall not!" interrupted the miser, - 
with a ghastly grin ; " that's what you mean to say, sir. Go ^ 
on." 

" I wish to know your sentiments in reference to the proposed 
alliance between Mr. Frewin and your daughter," pursued the 
attorney. " If any thing should happen to you, is it your wish that 
she should marry him or Randulph Crew?" 

" She shall never marry the latter!" shrieked the miser; "I'll 
disinherit her rather." 

" Leave your property away from her, if she disobeys your 
injunctions and weds him — that will answer the purpose," said 

" I will — ^I will," rejoined the miser; " and what is more, I will 
leave it from her if she does not marry Philip Frewin." 

*' If such is your intention, the will had better be drawn up at 
once," said the attorney; " I will get writing materials, and pre- 
pare it." 

The miser assented, and turned his head thoughtfully towards 
the fire, while Diggs took up the candle, and went down stairs^for 
pen and ink. Though longing to address his uncle, PhiHp did not 
dare to do so, for fear of disturbing the present favourable position 
of things. The next moment Diggs returned, and sitting down at 
the table, commenced drawing up the will. The miser watched the 
progress of his rapid pen in silent curiosity, and Philip Frewin did 
his best to hide the intense interest he took in the proceedings. 
At length, the attorney completed his task, and having glanced it 
over, turned to the miser, and commenced reading it to him. The 
effect of the instrument, which was most strongly worded, was to 
place Hilda completely in the power of Philip Frewin. 

"It's just what I wished," said the miser, as Diggs finished; 
" I'll sign it." 

As he tottered to the table, and sat down in the seat relinquished 
for him by Diggs, who placed the will before him, and a pen in 
his trembling fingers, the door opened, and Hilda entered the room. 
Though greatly startled by her appearance at this critical juncture, 
the attorney commanded himself as well as he could, and said 
hastily to the miser, — " Sign it, sir, — sign it." 

But the latter would not be deprived of his triumph. He looked 



THE miser's daughtee. 329 

Up at liis daugliter, and said, " I'm about to put an effectual bar to 
your marriage with Randulph Crew." 

*'And do you forget your solemn contract with his father?" 
she rejoined. " Will you not fulfil that?" 

" That contract is little better than a moral obligation upon 
Mr. Scarve," said Diggs. " It is doubtful whether it is binding 
upon him, and it certainly cannot be enforced upon his represen- 
tatives." 

" Spoken like an honest man, sir, I must say," replied Hilda, 
contemptuously. "Father," she added, stepping forward, and lay- 
ing her hand upon the will, " I beseech you not to sign this paper. 
You are not sufficiently yourself to do so, and it is infamous in Mr. 
Diggs to practise on you thus. Keep it by you, and sign it if you 
will, when you have well considered it. But not now — not now." 

" You think me worse than I am, Hilda," said the miser, regard- 
ing her fixedly; "but I will undeceive you. It is true that at 
times my mind wanders, and ray memory fails me; but I am per- 
fectly myself at this moment. In proof of it, I will tell you what 
I am about to do. I am resolved you shall not marry Randulph 
Crew, and as I feel when I am gone that you may not respect my 
injunctions, I have taken care to place my property in such a state, 
that you forfeit it, if you do not obey them. There stands your 
husband, or my heir." 

" You say you are yourself, father," rejoined Hilda; " but I 
deny it. If you were in your right mind you could not act thus. 
You could not render me for ever miserable. You could not sepa- 
rate me from one to whom I am tenderly attached, and seek to 
unite me to one whom I abhor. And oh ! why this cruel injus- 
tice ! Why seek to benefit your nephew, whose character has al- 
ready been laid open to you by Mr. Beechcroft, at my expense? 
But do not blind yourself to the consequences of this wicked act. 
I will never wed PhiHp Frewin ; and if Randulph Crew ofiers me 
his hand I will accept him.'^ 

" Execute your will, sir," said Diggs, with a contemptuous 
smile; " and rest easy as to its fulfilment." 

" Mark me, Hilda," rejoined the miser, trembling with passion, 
** I have been years in collecting my fortune. I have saved it by 
the greatest frugality and self-denial. I love my money as well as 
my own flesh and blood — nay, better ; and I will not place it in the 



330 THE miser's daughter. 

power of this spendthrift — this Randulph Crew — to be squandered 
away. I will give it to one who will take proper care of it ; who 
will regard it as I have regarded it; who will watch its increase, 
and experience the same intense delight in its accumulation; and 
who will never part with it." 

" You are doing the very thing you seek to avoid, father," re- 
plied Hilda. " You are placing me in the power of a profligate 
and a spendthrift. You are throwing your money away; and if 
this will is ever executed, and the money gets into your nephew's 
hands, so far from being hoarded up, as you expect, it will be wasted 
in riot and extravagance." 

" She pleads solely for Randulph Crew," remarked Diggs, in 
a low tone to the miser. 

" I know it," repHed the latter, dipping the pen into the ink. 

" Father ! dear father !" cried Hilda; " do not turn a deaf ear to 
my last appeal. If you have any love for me, do not do this." 

" I have made up my mind," he answered, coldly. 

And he signed it with a firm hand. 

" God forgive you, father, as I do !" exclaimed Hilda, bursting 
into an agony of tears. 

" I had better take charge of the will, sir?" said Diggs, after he 
had attested the signature. 

The miser signified his assent, and the attorney, placing the 
paper carefully in his pocket, arose. 

" You may depend upon your injunctions being entirely fulfilled 
on my part, uncle," said Philip. " Good night, and when I call 
again, I shall hope to find you better. Good night, fair cousin." 

And saluting Hilda, who turned from him in disgust, he followed 
Diggs down stairs, and they made the best of their way out of the 
house, congratulating each other on the complete success of their 
infamous scheme. 



THE miser's daughtee. 331 



CHAPTER IX. 

ME. RATHBONE DrVtTLGES HIS PLAN TO MBS. NETTLESHIP ANT) PERSUADES HEE TO 
ACT IN CONCERT WITH HIM IN HIS DESIGN UPON THE VALET. 

Mr. Cripps's plan of inveigling Mr. Rathbone into consenting 
to his marriage with, the widow, threatened to be defeated by the 
precipitation of the lady herself, who now that she had made up 
her mind to it, declaimed strongly against the delay, and began to 
tax him with cooling in his ardour towards her. The valet pro- 
tested to the contrary; but all would not do, and he began to fear 
he should be compelled to sacrifice the three thousand pounds, 
which went very much against his incHnations. Lucidly, while 
he was in this dilemma, the duel occurred between his master and 
Randulph, and the wound which the latter had received, imme- 
diately furnished him with a pretext for absenting himself until he 
should have time to mature his plans. He felt too secure of his 
prize to be under any apprehension of being supplanted by Mr. 
Rathbone. 

Accordingly, he despatched Antoine, the French valet, who was 
in his confidence, and to whom he had promised a very handsome 
reward, in case of his success, to the widow with a message, stating 
that he had been wounded in a duel, and could not leave his 
room for some days, but as soon as he could get out he would 
pay her a visit. 

On receiving this distressing intelligence, Mrs. Nettleship ut- 
tered a scream, and fell back in her chair, and it required the com- 
bined assistance of Antoine and Mr. Rathbone, who chanced to 
be present, with abundance of rosa-solis, and ratafia, to bring her 
to herself 

"And where is the dear man wounded?" asked Mrs. Nettle- 
ship, faintly. 

"Dans le bras — in de arm, madame," replied Antoine. " Mais 



332 THE miser's daughter. 

pas dangereusement — not severely, madame. You shall see him 
again, et de bonne lieure — sur ma foi. My master sends his lofe 
to you, and bids me say his •wound is not so deep as that you have 
inflicted on him." 

" The dear soul !" exclaimed Mrs. Nettleship, pathetically. 

" The plot's out, now," said Mr. Rathbone, to the mdow; 
"this is his French walet. I told you that it was Mr. Willars 
all the time." 

*^ Certaifiemenf, monsieur,^^ said Antoine; ^^ c'est Monsieur Vil- 
liers qui est mon maitre.^^ 

" He says Mr. Willars is his master," observed Mr. Rathbone. 
" I understand French a little myself. I'll ask him a question or 
two. I say. Monsieur What's-your-name " 

*' Antoine," repHed the valet, bowing. 

"Well, then. Monsieur Ontwine, doyouknowa Mr. Cripps?" 

" Creepps, sare !" cried the valet, perplexed and rather alarmed. 

" Yes, Crackenthorpe Cripps," reiterated Mr. Rathbone. 

" Pardon, Monsieur, but may I inquire why you ask de ques- 
tion?" rejoined Antoine. 

" Because we've had a visit from a person of that name," replied 
Mr. Rathbone, winking at the widow. *' A person very like your 
master — very." 

" Mais, ma foi, monsieur! — vous ne mefiez pas? You don't 
suspect, sare?" 

"No, Monsieur Ontwine, I don't suspect, because I'm certain 
— your master has been deceiving us," rejoined Mr. Rathbone. 

"Deceiving you, sare!" exclaimed the valet; "impossible! 
Mr. VilHers is a man of too much honour. He would never 
deceive a lady. Sare, he will call you out, when he get well, if 
you say so. He will run you through de ventre — what you call 
it — de stomach." 

" For Heaven's sake, don't tell him, then. Monsieur Ontwine," 
cried Mr. Rathbone, alarmed. " I only meant to say that Mr. 
Willars has passed himself off as his own walet — as Mr. Cripps." 

** Quoif" exclaimed Antoine. " Mr. Villiers pass himself off 
as Creepps — is that it?" 

" Yes, that's it, Monsieur Ontwine," replied Mr. Rathbone; 
" but we smoked him directly — we couldn't mistake him for a 
walet— ha ! ha !" 



THE misee's daughtee. 333 

" Ah, vraiment non, monsieur P^ replied Antoine, joining in the 
laugh — " impossible !" 

" There could be no mistake in your case, Monsieur Ontwine," 
pursued Mr. Eathbone; " but -with Mr. Willars it's a different 
matter." 

" Very different, sare," replied Antoine, gravely ; and mutter- 
ing to himself — " bete! niaisT he added aloud, to Mrs. Nettle- 
ship, " Has madame any commands to honour me with for my 
master?" 

" Say how sorry I am for him,'' replied the widow. " I wish I 
might come and nurse him." 

" Mr. Villiers will be bien Jlatte, I'm sure," replied the valet — 
" but he could not tink of such a ting." 

" Nor any body else," replied Mr. Rathbone. "It would be 
highly improper. No, he'll soon be well, and will come and pay 
his respects to you himself.'' 

" My master's first visit will be rendered to you, madame," said 
the valet. And, with a profound bow, he took his leave. 

As soon as Antoine was gone, Mr. Rathbone drew a chair near 
Mrs. Nettleship. 

" My dear Mrs. N." he began, " Pm glad to find things in such 
a good train with your beau." 

" You're very obleeging to say so, Mr. R.," replied the widow, 
" and it's more than could be expected fron> you, considering the 
relations in which we once stood together." 

"Now, my dear Mrs. N.," pursued Rathbone, "I'm going to 
act as a friend to you. Don't deceive yourself. You fancy Mr. 
Willars in love with you, but I'll tell you the truth — he's only in 
love with your fortune." 

" You're his rival, Mr. R.," said the widow, turning up her 
nose. 

" No, I ain't, Mrs. N.," replied the other; " and if you want to 
see whether he loves you or your fortune best, tell him what I'm 
going to tell you. You must know," he added, in an altered tone 
. — " that in winding up your poor husband's affairs, I find, instead 
of his being the wealthy man he was supposed, that he died greatly 
in debt." 

" In debt !" screamed the widow, pushing back her chair. " In 
debt, Mr. B.!" 



334 THE miser's daughter. 

" In debt, my dear Mrs. N.," repeated Mr. Rathbone; " but 
don't faint, — there isn't time for it just now, — and there's nobody 
but me to see you. Your case stands thus : — You have nothing 
— nay, less than nothing — for all your husband's property will be 
seized. I've kept the secret safe enough to this moment, and I'll 
keep it till you're married, if I can. Now, perhaps, you begin to 
perceive my motive for giving you up so easily, and for encourag- 
ing the beau." 

" Too plainly," sighed the widow. " But what's to be done, 
for I begin to think with you, that if Mr. Willars finds this but, 
he may be off his bargain?" 

" He never shall find it out," replied Mr. Rathbone, "if you^ll 
promise to pay me the three thousand pounds to be forfeited by 
you in case of your breaking your marriage contract with me ; and 
I'll tell you how to do it. He believes you to be worth fifty thou- 
sand pounds — ha! ha! — and I've taken care to favour the notion 
— he ! he ! — ^you shall give him the whole of your propertv, and 
make him settle five thousand pounds of his own upon you. I'R 
be your trustee; and the money must be paid into my hands. 
Thus you'll get a young gay husband, and saddle him with your 
debts." 

" I can't do it," said the widow; " I tremble at the thought of 
such dreadful deception. Why, it's little better than swindling. 
I'll explain my situation to him, and throw myself upon his com- 
passion." 

" And lose him, as sure as my name's Tom Rathbone," replied 
the other. 

" Well, I place myself in your hands," said the widow; " it's 
a frightful position." 

*' We must lose no time in bringing the matter to an issue," 
rejoined Mr. Rathbone. " My attorney, Mr. Diggs, will prepare 
the settlement for you. Keep up your spirits — it'll be all right — 
ha! ha!" and he took his departure. 

Mrs. Nettleship took to her bed for a couple of days, at the end 
of which time she grew more composed, had another interview 
with Mr. Rathbone, requested him to show her her husband's 
books, and having satisfied herself that his statement was correct, 
promised to follow his instructions implicitly. 

At the end of a fortnight, Mr Cripps presented himself in 



THE miser's daughter. 335 

Billiter Square. He looked very pale, for he had been drinking 
freely the night before with the Duke of Doncaster's gentleman ; 
but this circumstance only lent him additional interest in the eyes 
of Mrs. Nettleship. As preconcerted, soon after his arrival, Mr. 
Rathbone entered the room. 

" Ah, Mr. Willars !" said the latter—" Glad to see you out 
agam. Hope you killed your man — ha! ha! — I've been thinking 
a good deal about you during your absence." 

" I hope you've made up your mind to release Mrs. Nettleship 
from her engagement to you, Mr. Rathbone?" replied Mr. Cripps. 

" Before I reply, I must ask Mrs. Nettleship one or two ques- 
tions," replied the other. "Is it your intention to marry Mr. 
"Willars, ma'am?" 

"La! Mr. R., what a question !" replied the widow. "How- 
ever, I'll answer it. It is." 

"And how do you mean to settle your property, madam? — on 
yourself I hope?" rejoined Mr. Rathbone. " I've no doubt Mr. 
Willars will make an excellent husband. But you are bound to 
take care of your own." 

" I sha'n't settle it at all," said Mrs. Nettleship — " if I give him 
myself, my fortune follows as a matter of course." 

"You are an angel," cried Mr. Cripps, rapturously; "and if 
you hadn't a farthing, instead of being as wealthy and beautiful as 
you are, you would be equally dear to me." 

" Are you quite sure?" cried Mrs. Nettleship. 

" Pon rep !" replied the valet, pressing his heart. 

" Well, then " cried the widow. 

" Mrs. N, is about to test your sincerity by representing her cir- 
cumstances as very different from what they are,^' interrupted Mr. 
Rathbone. " She told me she would do so. But I don't think it 
a fair joke; and I therefore put you on your guard against it." 

" It might have startled me a little," rephed Mr. Cripps, forcing 
a laugh ; ** but it would have made no difference in my sentiments 
or intentions. And now, Mr. Rathbone, since disinterestedness is 
the order of the day, you, I hope, will imitate the good example 
set you by Mrs. Nettleship, and excuse her the three thousand 
pounds. Pll now tell you frankly that my motive for pretending 
to be a valet was to trick you out of your consent. But finding- 1 
am deahng with a liberal, high-minded gentleman, I think it the 



336 THE miser's daughtee. 

best as well as the most straightforward course to ask you to remit 
the penalty. You cannot fairly claim it without forfeiting both the 
lady's and my good opinion ; and I'm sure you don't desire to for- 
feit either/' 

" I'll tell you what I'll do," replied Mr. Rathbone, putting on 
an air of candour equal to that of the valet ; " if you'll a^ree 
to settle five thousand pounds on Mrs. N., I will give up the 
contract." 

*' Settle five thousand pounds !" exclaimed Mr. Cripps, rather 
staggered. 

" No great sum to a man of fortune," rejoined Mr. Rathbone; 
*' she brings you twenty times the amount." 

" And herself," insinuated the widow. 

" I'U act as her trustee," pursued Mr. Rathbone — "it'll be a 
very pretty present to her." 

" I'm sure you won't hesitate, dearest," whispered the widow, 
" since Mr. Rathbone's so kind." 

"No — no, I can't hesitate," stammered Mr. Cripps; "but just 
now all my money's locked up, 'pon rep" 

"Don't let that be an obstacle," said Mr. Rathbone — "you 
shall give me a bond for the amount — that will do just as well." 

" Ah ! if you're satisfied with that, I'm quite content," returned 
Mr. Cripps, " I thought you required the money down, and that 
would rather have inconvenienced me." 

" Well, then, we had better settle the matter at once," said Mr. 
Rathbone — " I'll go and fetch my attorney, who shall prepare the 
bond and settlement, and then I'll deliver the contract to Mrs. 
Nettleship, after which there'll be no further obstacle to your 
union." 

So saying, he quitted the room, and the lovers were left alone, 
together. Neither of them felt very easy; and at last the widow 
proposed an adjournment to the dining-room, where refreshments 
were set out, and a few glasses of wine restored Mr. Cripps to his 
usual confidence and spirits. 

About two hours afterwards, Mr. Rathbone returned, bringing 
with him Mr. Diggs. Both the settlement and the bond were 
prepared. 

Not till that moment did it occur to Mr. Cripps that he was 
about to commit a forgery. He gazed at the deeds, as if uncertain 



THE miser's daughtee. 337 

what to do; then, hastily snatching up a pen, he signed them in 
his master's name, and in a signature so nearly resembling Mr. 
Villiers's, that it could scarcely be detected from it. This done Mr. 
Rathbone delivered a paper to Mrs. Nettleship, and took his de- 
parture with Diggs. 



338 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER X. 

HOW MR. CRIPPS'S MARRIAGE "WITH THE WIDOW WAS INTERRUPTED. 

One morning, about a week after tliis, Mr. Jukes, while busied 
in the butler's pantry, was surprised by a visit from his nephew, 
who strutted in very unceremoniously, and seated himself, according 
to custom, on the edge of the table. He was more finely dressed 
than usual, being equipped in one of his master's best suits. 

"Well, nunks, how are you, old fellow?" he said. "This is 
the last visit I shall pay you in this way." 

" Glad to hear it," rephed Mr. Jukes, drily. 

" Your wits were ever dull, nunks," replied Mr. Cripps; " and 
they are now more than usually obtuse. I mean that when I visit 
you next, it will be in a gilt coach, like my master's." 

" Body o' me !" exclaimed the butler — " what new folly is the 
lad dreaming of ?" 

" You shall hear presently, nunks," replied the valet; " but I'm 
quite exhausted with my walk. Give me a cup of ale, if you have 
no wine. Not bad tipple, 'pon rep !" he added, tossing off the 
glass poured out for him. " I'm going to be married, nunks." 

" What, to that foolish widow?" cried Mr. Jukes. 

" Pm about to marry Mrs. Nettleship," replied Mr. Cripps; 
" and I will thank you to speak more respectfully of one to whom 
you will soon be so nearly related. I'm to be married to her on 
Thursday next, and am come to invite you to the wedding. She 
has fifty thousand pounds, and it's all to be mine — no settlement — 
no tying up— no cursed trustees — fifty thousand pounds made over ! 
— what do you think of that, nunks, eh?'-* 

" I'm lost in astonishment," repHed Mr. Jukes; " but take care 
of it when you get it. Don't fool it away." 

** Leave me to manage my own concerns, nunks," rejoined the 



THE miser's daughtee. 339 

valet. " I'll take another glass of ale," lie added, helping him- 
self. 

'^Well, and where's the wedding to take place?" asked Mr. 
Jukes. 

" At my master's," replied Mr. Cripps. " There'll be a dinner, 
and a ball after it, and a supper after that. You'll come, of course; 
but you mustn't come as a servant. You must lay aside your 
livery, and put on one of Trussell Beechcroft's suits." 

" If I come at all, it'll be in my own clothes, depend upon it," 
replied Mr. Jukes. " But pray, does your master know what's 
going to take place in his house? — ^has he given you leave to have 
this dinner, and ball, and supper, eh?" 

"Pshaw! nunks, do you think I'd ask him?" rejoined Mr. 
Cripps, helping himself to a pinch of snuff. " He's going to New- 
market on Wednesday with Sir Bulkeley Price, and they don't 
return till Friday. And now, nunks," pursued Mr. Cripps, forti- 
fying himself with another pinch of snuff, " I want a Httle money 
from you. I must have all you can spare — I must, 'pon rep !" 
" I thought it would end in this," replied the butler. 
"'Sdeath! I ask no particular favour," rejoined Mr. Cripps — 
" I only want it till the day after the wedding, and that's but 
three days off. Come, down with a hundred, and you shall have 
a hundred to the back of it — ^you shall by this light !" 

" Ods bods! how the boy talks!" cried the butler. " I've no 
hundreds to lend, and if I had, I wouldn't lend them on usury." 

" Well, fifty I must have," said Mr. Cripps; " I can't do with 
less. Forty — ^you shake your head — thirty — twenty, — I'm obhged 
to come down like an auctioneer. You are devoid of all natural 
feeling, nunks; more stony-hearted than Brutus, to refuse your 
sister's son twenty pounds for three days, and perhaps prevent him 
from settling for Hfe." 

" Well," said Mr. Jukes, moved by this appeal, " I will lend 
you twenty guineas, nephew, but you must repay me. It's the 
savings of the last three years." 

" Repay you, faith and troth, I will, thou best of nunkies," 
replied Mr. Cripps, embracing him. " I'll repay you with enor- 
mous interest." 

" I don't want any interest," replied the butler; " I shall be 
well content with the principaL" 

z 2 



340 THE miser's daughter. 

And opening a drawer in the cupboard, he took out of it a small 
leather bag containing twenty guineas, which he counted, and gave 
to his nephew. 

" Twenty thousand thanks, nunks," said Mr. Cripps, pocketing 
the gold; " and rely upon being punctually repaid, By-the-by, if 
you're at all tired of your present place, and should like to serve 
me, I needn't say I shall be happy to engage you as butler, and to 
increase your wages. What do you get from old Abel?" 

" Never mind what I get, nephew," replied Mr. Jukes. " I've 
no idea of leaving him." 

" No offence, nunks/' rejoined the other. " 'Sdeath ! it's no 
degradation to a man to be his nephew's butler, I know two fathers 
who're their sons' shoe-blacks. But you'll not fail to come to the 
wedding. Twelve o'clock on Thursday. Be punctual. My 
butler's place shall be left open for a few days, in case you should 
change your mind about it." 

And he took his leave in high glee, while Mr. Jukes, as he shut 
the door after him, said dolefully to himself — 

" I'm afraid I've done wrong in lending the money. However, 
he's my sister's son." 

Having now got a larger sum in his pocket than he had ever 
had before, Mr. Cripps felt strongly tempted to try his luck at the 
gaming-table, but he resisted the temptation. 

" No, no," he thought, " it won't do to hazard this money. 
It's every thing to me just now. I shall have plenty to spare for 
play shortly." 

On his way home, Mr. Cripps called upon Peter Pokerich, and 
invited him and the fair Thomasine to the wedding, the one in the 
capacity of groomsman, and the other in that of bridesmaid. And 
the invitation was delightedly accepted by both. 

A great load was taken from the valet's mind on the following 
morning, as he helped his master into Sir Bulkeley Price's carriage, 
and saw him start, as he supposed, for Newmarket. 

Not a moment was to be lost. Every preparation that could be 
made without exciting suspicion, had been made beforehand — but 
now Mr. Cripps set to work in earnest. He went to the Cocoa 
Tree and ordered, in his master's name, a first-rate dinner, with 
abundance of the finest wines, to be sent in on the following day. 
He next engaged a band of musicians for the ball, and ordered 



THE miser's daughter. 341 

fruits, confectionary, and pastry for the supper. His fellow ser- 
vants, who were all, of course, in the secret, and to whom he had 
promised great things as soon as he should be put in possession of 
the widow's fortune, assisted him in his preparations for the fete. 
It was arranged that the ceremony should take place in the upper 
chamber, where Randulph first breakfasted with the beau, and the 
clergyman selected to perform it .was Doctor Gaynam. Tlius ' 
nothing seemed wanting on the valet's part to complete the matter ; 
and late on Wednesday evening he went to BilHter Square, to in- 
form Mrs. Nettleship that all was ready. After a brief visit, for 
he was somewhat fatigued, he took a tender adieu of her, saying, 
as he squeezed her hand at parting — 

*' We shall meet to-morrow, to part no more !" 
The next morning, betimes, Mr. Cripps placed himself under 
the hands of Antolne, who proceeded to array him in a magnificent 
suit, which had never been worn by his master, it having only 
been sent home the night before by Desmartins. It consisted of a 
coat of crimson-embossed velvet, richly-laced with gold, breeches 
of the same material, and a white satin waistcoat flowered with 
gold. To these were added pink silk hose rolled above the knee, 
superb diamond buckles, a point lace cravat, and his master's hand- 
somest RamilUes perriwig, which had been dressed by Peter Poke- 
rich. Nearly three hours were expended in thus attiring him ; and 
when all was completed, Antoine declared that his master had 
never looked half so well — a sentiment in which Mr. Cripps, as he 
complacently surveyed himself in the cheval-glass, entirely con- 
curred. 

A little before twelve, Peter Pokerich and the fair Thomasine 
arrived. The lady was dressed in wliite and silver, with a fly-cap 
with long lappets, and looked so excessively pretty, that Mr. Cripps 
could not help wishing she had been the bride instead of Mrs. 
Nettleship. 

While he was welcoming them, and passing some high-flown 
compliments on the fair Thomasine's charms, Mr. Jukes was shown 
into the room ; but as he was in his butler's dress, his nephew did 
not condescend to speak to him. 

Shortly after this, Antoine announced that the bride had arrived, 
and Mr. Cripps hurried down stairs to meet her. 

Mrs. Nettleship, who had bestowed more than ordinary pains 



342 THE miser's daughter. 

upon her person, wore a yellow satin sack, embroidered with little 
dots of gold. She had large pearl ear-rings, a garnet necklace, 
and a diamond solitaire. Her complexion, which was naturally 
rather high, had been corrected by white French powder, and was 
further set off with abundance of httle patches on her cheeks, neck, 
and shoulders. She carried a beautiful Iijdian fan, the handle of 
which was ornamented with precious stones. She had arrived in 
great state ; a gilt chariot, lined with pale blue satin, hired for her 
from a coach-maker, by Mr. E-athbone, having formed her convey- 
ance ; and she was attended by a couple of footmen out of place, 
likewise hired for the occasion, habited in superb liveries of sky- 
blue cloth trimmed with silver, with silver shoulder-knots, and 
point d'Espagne hats. Mr. Rathbone, who accompanied her, was 
dressed in a suit of purple velvet laced with gold. 

Almost bewildered by the grandeur she beheld around, the 
widow was led upstairs by Mr. Cripps; her wonder increased at 
every step she took. The two long-eared spaniels and the macaw 
enchanted her; but she actually screamed with delight on behold- 
ing the monkey, in his little scarlet coat and bag-Avig. 

Coffee, chocolate, and champagne, were then handed round by 
Antoine and the page; and while this was going on, the clergy- 
man and his assistant were announced. Dr. Gaynam had a much 
more respectable appearance than when he officiated at Sir Single- 
ton Spinke's marriage. He was dressed in his full canonicals, and 
wore a well-powdered full-bottomed wig, which Peter Pokerich 
would not have disdained. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Cripps had seated himself by the bride on one 
of the couches, and was talking very tenderly to her, when he 
perceived his uncle approach Mr. Rathbone, as if with the inten- 
tion of addressing him. He instantly arose, and taking the latter 
aside, whispered a few words to him, and then, having accom- 
pHshed his object, which was to prevent any communication be- 
tween him and Mr. Jukes, told the clergyman to proceed with the 
ceremony. 

Doctor Graynam was sipping a glass of usquebaugh, but he 
hastily gulped it down, and declared himself perfectly ready. He 
then took a prayer-book from the clerk, and stationed himself be- 
tween the windows, motioning the others to take their places be- 
fore him. 




G-nJutiATJC. 



IvF Cripps detected, 



THE miser's daughter. 343 

All was soon arranged. Peter Pokerich. and tlie fair Thomasine 
stood near the bride; Mr. Rathbone near tlie bridegroom ; Antoine 
behind him; while the group was completed by the two Africans, 
who had mounted a settee in the comer to obtain a full view of the 
ceremony. The page was on the floor keeping the dogs quiet, 
who were quarrelhng with the monkey, and biting its tail. 

Just as Dr. Gaynam had opened his book, and uttered a pre- 
liminary cough, a noise was heard at the door, and Mr. Cripps, 
turning to see what was the matter, beheld it open, and admit his 
master ! 

The valet's alarm was instantly communicated to the whole as- 
semblage. Antoine shrugged his shoulders, and lifted up his hands 
in affright. The two Africans exchanged glances of alarm, and 
all eyes were directed towards the beau, who, with angry looks, 
and grasping his clouded cane, marched towards the valet. He 
was followed by Lady Brabazon, Sir Bulkeley Price, and Trussell 
Beechcroft. Lady Brabazon was attended by her black page, 
leading her dog by a riband, and this arrival excited the anger 
of one of the spaniels, whose furious barking set the macaw 
screaming. 

Mr. Cripps presented a very chop-fallen appearance. All his 
assurance deserted him. His hands dropped to his side, and he 
scarcely dared to meet his master's angry gaze. 

" Rascal !" exclaimed Villiers, " I have at last fairly detected 
you. I'll teach you to put on my clothes — to assume my name — " 

" What!" screamed Mrs. Nettleship, dropping a bottle of salts, 
which she had placed to her nose — " isn't it really himself — isn't it 
Mr. WiUars?"- 

"No, madam," replied the beau — "I am Mr. Villiers; and this 
rascal is only my valet, Crackenthorpe Cripps."" 

" This looks like the real gentleman, I must say," cried Mr. 
Rathbone, who was thunderstruck with surprise. 

" Oh, the villain ! — the base deceiver ! — the impostor !" shrieked 
Mrs. Nettleship, clenching her hands, and regarding the valet as if 
she would annihilate him. " I'll tear his eyes out ! To deceive 
and expose me in this way — to — to — to — oh ! I shall never sur- 
vive it. Support me!" she added, falling into the arms of the 
fair Thomasine. 

" This is really too bad of you, sir," said Mr. Cripps, who 



344 THE miser's daughtee. 

began to recover himself a little. " You've deceived me. I thought 
you were at Newmarket." 

" I received information of your practices, rascal," replied the 
beau, " and resolving to see to what extent you carried them, I 
only went to a short distance from town, and then returned with 
Sir Bulkeley Price, with whom I have remained till now. And 
a pretty discovery I've made, i'faith ! My house filled with com- 
pany — my servants turned into your servants — a dinner, supper, 
confectionary, wine, fruit, musicians, and the devil knows what, 
ordered at my expense." 

"Well, they're not thrown away, sir," repHed Mr. Cripps. 
*' You can marry the lady yourself, if you think proper. Pve no 
doubt she'll consent to the exchange, and she has fifty thousand 
pounds." 

*' Oh, the impudence !" exclaimed Mrs. Nettleship, jumping up. 
" I'll not be taken in a second time. I'll be revenged on all the 
sex!" 

" You're not aware, Mr. Willars, of the extensive frauds this 
rascal has practised upon you," said Mr. Rathbone. " He has 
actually signed a bond for five thousand pounds in your name, 
which I have in my pocket.^' 

" The devil he has !" exclaimed Villiers. 

" But it is of no effect since the marriage has not taken place,'* 
said Mr. Cripps; " and if Mr. Villiers chooses to take the lady, he 
will of course pay you liimself." 

In spite of himself, the beau could not help laughing. 

" Bad as Mr. Cripps is, he is not worse than the other party,'* 
said Trussell, stepping forward; " while he was duping them, they 
tried to dupe him. I understand from Mr. Jukes, who has it on 
unquestionable authority, that Mrs. Nettleship, so far from being a 
wealthy widow, is greatly in debt, while her friend there, Mr. 
Rathbone, hoped to pocket the five thousand pounds secured by 
the bond he has mentioned." 

" Gadso ! then it seems Pve had an escape !" cried Mr. Cripps. 

"You have," repHed Trussell; "and your uncle would have 
told you all this before, if you had not kept him at a distance." 

" I won't stay here to be laughed at !" cried the widow, looking 
defiance at the jeering countenances around her. " Mr. Rathbone, 



THE miser's daughter. 345 

your arm. I'll make you marry me yourself, or pay the penalty 
of the contract," she added, in a whisper. 

" You'll not mistake a valet for a gentleman after this, Monsieur 
Rathbone," said Antoine — "ha! ha!" 

" You had better go away by the back stairs," said Trussell, 
stopping them; "for there are a couple of officers in the hall, 
waiting to arrest you !" 

"Curse on it! I sent them myself," said Mr. Rathbone, "to 
compel the rascal I supposed to be Mr. Willars to pay your debts." 

And hurrying out of the room, he acted upon Trussell's sug- 
gestion. 

'^ And now, rascal," said the beau to the valet, "you are no 
longer in my service — I discharge you. And you may thank your 
stars that I let you off so easily." 

" I was about to discharge you^ sir," rejoined the valet, imper- 
tinently. " I don't desire to live with a gentleman who takes his 
servants by surprise. He's as bad as a jealous husband." 

" Stay !" cried the beau — " you don't leave me in that way. 
Antoine, stand by him. Now, sir, take off that peruke — take it 
off carefully — now the sword." 

The orders were obeyed, and the wig and sword delivered to the 
French valet. 

" Now take off the coat." 

Mr. Cripps complied, with a sigh. 

" Now the waistcoat." 

The order was obeyed. 

" Now the cravat." 

And it was taken off. 

" Now the diamond buckles." 

*' Any thing else?" inquired Mr. Cripps, as he gave up the 
buckles. " Recollect there are ladies in the room, sir." 

"Yes; take yourself off," rejoined the beau. 

Even thus shorn of his splendour, Mr. Cripps maintained his 
customary assurance. He bowed profoundly and gracefully round, 
and quitted the room, amid the laughter of the company. 



346 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XI. 

" STtTLTE, HAC NOCTE EEPETUNT ANIMAM TUAM ; ET QJSSi PARASTI, CUJUS 
EKUNT." — LUC^, XII. 

" Where can Jacob be, I wonder?" said the miser, in a que- 
rulous tone, as he crept back to his chair by the fire, after the 
departure of Philip and Diggs -with their prize. " What keeps 
him out so late ?" 

" I don't think he'll come home at all to-night, father," replied 
Hilda. " But never mind him — go to bed." 

" Not come home !" echoed the miser, with a sharp cry; " if he 
doesn't, and that soon, too, he shall never enter my house again. 
How dares he go without leave? But perhaps you allowed him 
to do so. You begin to fancy yourself mistress here, because I 
can't look after you; but I'll teach you differently." 

" Indeed, father, you are quite mistaken," replied Hilda, meekly. 
"Jacob told me he wished to go out on business of his own, and I 
didn't like to refuse him — especially as he said he would soon be 
back." 

"And nicely he keeps his word," rejoined the miser; "why, 
he has already been absent more than two hours. But how do 
you know he won't be back to-night? Have you heard any thing 
about him?" 

Hilda hesitated. 

" You don't suspect he has carried off any thing?" continued 
the miser, getting up, and fixing a wildly- inquisitive glance upon 
her. " Has he robbed me, ha? Don't tell me a lie ! He has ! — 
I see he has !" 

" You are wrong, father — ^he has not," replied Hilda. " I will 
answer with my life for Jacob's honesty. My information is de- 
rived from Philip Frewin, who told me he has got locked up, from 



THE miser's daughter. 347 

some causGj in the watcli-liouse. I should disbelieve the statement 
but that it seems borne out by his absence." 

" I've no doubt of it," cried the miser — " none whatever. 
When he returns, he gets his dismissal." 

" And what will you do without him, father?" rejoined Hilda. 
** You will get no one so faithful — so honest." 

"Hum!" muttered the miser — "that is a consideration. You 
needn't stay with me any longer." 

" I don't like to leave you, dear father," said Hilda. " You are 
very much excited ; pray let me sit up with you." 

" No," replied the miser, peremptorily. " Give me my gruel, 
and then go to bed." 

In obedience to his injunctions, a small basin of gruel, and a 
slice of toasted bread, were presently placed before him. He 
swallowed a few mouthfuls, and then pushed the gruel aside. 

" I have no appetite," he said. " Take care of it. It will warm 
up again for my supper to-morrow night." 

" God grant you may be able to partake of it !" she answered, 
regarding him wistfully. " Father," she added, approaching him, 
and speaking in a supplicatory tone, " may I pray with you?" 
)|J^" Not to-night," rejoined the miser. " I am seldom incHned 
for devotion, and just now my mind is too much disturbed for it." 

" You make me very uneasy, dear father," cried Hilda, taking 
his hand. " Oh, do not — do not, I beseech you, postpone making 
up your account with your Maker ! You know not how soon you 
may|be called hence !" 

"No more of this," cried the miser, shaking her off. *'ltell 
you I am not so ill as you think me. Good night !" 

" One word more before I go, father," she said. " It is not too 
late to revoke your unjust will." 

" What I have done, I have done," he replied ; and turning 
away, he fixed his eyes on the fire. 

Oppressed with the gloomiest foreboding, she quitted the room. 

On gaining the lower room, she fell upon her aunt's bosom in an 
agony of distress. When she was sufficiently recovered to be able 
to explain to Mrs. Clinton what had occurred, the good old lady 
was almost as much afflicted as herself. 

" But that the hour is so untimely," she cried, " I would advise 



348 THE miser's daughter. 

you to go to Mr. Beeclicroft, and consult him. It would distract 
me if these villains should succeed in tlieir infamous scheme." 

"Providence, to whose care I resign myself, will thwart them, 
I am well assured!" rejoined Hilda. "I will go to Mr. Beech- 
croft the first thing to-morrow morning, and I am certain he will 
assist me if he can. And now let us retire to rest, for Jacob, it is 
clear, will not return." 

Left to himself, the miser remained for some time cowering over 
the fire, and drew closer and closer to it as it burnt lower, and dif- 
fused less warmth. At last, as it threatened to go out entirely, he 
scraped up all the cinders he could collect from the hearth, and 
throwing them upon it, kept it slightly alive. 

Suddenly, as if something had crossed him, he arose, and going 
to the table on which the writing materials were left, took up a 
pen ; but after gazing some time vacantly at the paper, he laid it 
down again, muttering, " Another time — another time !" 

He then took off part of his clothes, and got into bed; but sleep 
fled his eyelids, and dismal thoughts, which he vainly sought ta 
shake off, took possession of him. At length he sank into a sort 
of trance, during which a hideous night-mare, in the shape of a 
mountain of gold, laid its heavy hand upon him. Half stifled, he 
started bolt upright in bed, and gazed timorously round the imper- 
fectly-lighted chamber. It was a gusty night, and the noise of the 
casements creaking in the wind added to his fears. 

Unable to endure this state of nervous apprehension longer, he 
sprang out of bed, and, hastily wrapping himself in his dressing- 
gown, took down the pistol from the hook over the chimney, and 
proceeded to the closet where he fancied he heard some one trying 
to break in, and examined the window, but it appeared perfectly 
secure. 

No sooner, however, was one source of dread removed, than 
another was aroused. His hoards might be gone! Terrified by 
this idea, he flew to all his hiding-places, and placed their contents 
on the table. His dim eyes sparkled with unnatural brilliancy as 
he gloated over them. 

While telling over the pieces, and weighing them in his hand, a 
new recollection crossed him. Snatching up the candle, he hurried 
to a small cupboard at one side of the room, at the bottom of which 
lay a heap of old rags and rubbish, apparently put there out of the 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 349 



way. Hastily removing this dusty pile, some half-dozen leathern 
bags were exposed to view. 

" Here they are — here they are !" he exclaimed, with a cry of 
childish delight. " Oh, my darlings ! — my treasures ! — how glad 
I am to see you. You give me new life. Talk of physic — pshaw ! 
there is none like gold. The sight of it cures me in an instant. 
I feel well — quite well; no, not quite," he added, as a sudden gid- 
diness seized him, and he had to catch at the closet door for sup- 
port; " not quite well ; but better — much better. What a memory 
mine must be to forget these bags — each containing two hundred 
guineas — that's twelve hundred ! Twelve hundred guineas ! and I 
had forgotten them. I hope I have not forgotten any thing else. 
Let me see— oh, my head! — my head!" he continued, shaking 
it mournfully. " My memory's clean gone ! — clean gone ! But 
what shall I do with these bags? they're not safe here. Jacob may 
find them in cleaning the room. I'll hide them in the cellar with 
the other treasure." 

Utterly forgetful that the chest had been removed, he imme- 
diately set about executing his design. Listening at the door to 
hear that all was still, he took up two of the bags with the inten- 
tion of carrying them down stairs ; but finding them too heavy for 
him, he was obliged to content himself with one, and thus in trans- 
porting them all to the cellar, he had to perform six journeys. 

The last had nearly proved fatal, for, as he tottered down the 
cellar steps, he missed his footing, and rolled to the bottom. With 
some difficulty he got up again ; but heedless of the bruises he had 
received, he picked up his candle, which was extinguished in the 
fall, and returned to his bed-chamber to light it at the fire. This 
done, he procured the shovel, and repairing to the cellar commenced 
his task. 

In his present state of debility and exhaustion, it cost him infi- 
nite labour to get up the bricks, and he was frequently obliged to 
desist from the toil, and rest himself; but though he shook in every 
limb — though thick damps burst from every pore, he still perse- 
vered. 

Having got out the bricks, he carefully scraped ofi* the surface 
of the loose sandy soil. Surprised that the spade met with no re- 
sistance, his alarm was instantly excited, and he plunged it deeply 
into the ground. But no chest was there ! 



350 THE miser's daughter. 

For a few minutes lie stood transfixed with despair. It never oc- 
curred to him that he had himself removed his treasure, but he con- 
cluded he had been robbed of it. At length, his anguish found 
vent in a piercing cry, and he rushed towards the door with the 
intention of calling up Jacob ; but the recollection that forced itself 
upon him, that the porter was from home, checked him. 

Other imperfect ideas thronged upon his bewildered brain. A 
glimmering recollection of digging up the chest crossed him, but 
he fancied he must have taken out its contents and buried them 
deeper in the ground. Somewhat calmed by this idea, he com- 
menced digging anew with frightful ardour, and soon cleared out 
the soil to nearly the depth of three feet. But as he found nothing, 
his apprehensions returned with new force, and paralysed his efforts. 
Throwing aside the spade, he groped about in the sandy soil with 
his hands, in the hope of finding a few pieces of gold. A single 
piece would have satisfied him; but there was none — nothing but 
little pebbles mixed with the sand. His moans, while thus em- 
ployed, were truly piteous. 

At this juncture, his candle, which had long been expiring in the 
socket, went out, leaving him in total darkness. A mortal faint- 
ness seized him at the same time. He tried to get out of the hole, 
but fell back with the effort — ^his head striking against the bricks. 
He struggled to get up again, but in vain — his limbs refused their 
oflSce. He tried to cry out for help, but a hollow, rattling sound, 
alone issued from his throat. 

At length, by a convulsive effort, he did contrive to lift his 
head from the ground; but that was all he could do. His hands 
clutched ineffectually at the sandy soil; his frame was powerless; 
and a stifled groan broke from his lips. 

But this condition was too horrible for long endurance. The 
muscles of his neck relaxed*; his head fell heavily backwards ; and 
after a gasp or two, respiration ceased. 

Thus died this unhappy man, unattended, in a cellar, half en- 
tombed in the hole digged as a hiding-place for a portion of his 
wealth — wealth for which he had sacrificed all his comforts, all his 
feeHngs, all his affections, and for which alone of late he had 
seemed to Hve. Thus he perished — a fearful example of the effects 
of the heart-searing vice of which he was the slave and the victim. 



THE MISEK S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER XII. 

ABEL BEECHCROFT FINBS THE BODY OF THE MISER XS THE CELLAR — HIS REFLEC- 
TIONS UPON IT — Jacob's grief for his master. 

Unconscious of the awful catastrophe that had occurred, Hilda, 
•whose eyes had never closed since she sought her pillow, rose at an 
early hour, and set out for Abel Beechcroft's residence. 

Abel had not yet left his room, but she found Mr. Jukes astir, 
and in some alarm at the absence of Trussell and Randulph ; but 
she allayed his fears by telling him what she supposed had hap- 
pened to them. She was then shown into the library, and shortly 
afterwards Abel Beechcroft made his appearance. He was pre- 
pared for some disastrous tidings, and the moment he saw her, her 
looks confirmed his fears. After a kindly greeting, she proceeded 
to recount to him the infamous scheme practised upon her father 
by PhiHp and Diggs. 

" This is worse than even I anticipated," said Abel, as she 
closed her recital. " Your father is infatuated on the subject of 
his nephew, whose conduct, as well as that of his attorney, is scan- 
dalous. I will go with you at once. If not too late, and he is in 
his right mind, 1 think I can use such arguments with your father 
as will induce him to alter his iniquitous design." 

" I hope so," sighed Hilda; " but I have great misgivings." 

As they were quitting the room, they were stopped by Mrs. 
Crew. 

" You up at this hour, sister !" cried Abel,' somewhat discom- 
posed. 

" I was informed that Miss Scarve was here," replied Mrs. 
Crew, " and I therefore hurried down as fast as I could. As an 
old friend of her mother, I naturally felt anxious to see her." 
And she embraced Hilda affectionately. 

" I am sorry to abridge youx first meeting with the daughter of 



k 



352 THE miser's daughter. 

an old friend, Sophia," interposed Abel; " but when you are told 
that her father, who, you know, is in a very precarious condition, 
has been prevailed upon to make a will in his nephew's favour, 
you will see that not a moment must be lost in trying to induce 
him to revoke it." 

" I do — I do," replied Mrs. Crew. " But where is Randulph?" 
*' He did not come home last night," replied Abel, sarcastically. 
" Not come home !" echoed Mrs. Crew, turning pale. " What 
can have happened to him ?" 

" Nothing very particular," replied Abel, hastily. *' Trussell is 
absent likewise. You will see them both at breakfast, I dare say. 
But we are losing time. Good morning, sister."" 
I;, " Farewell, Hilda!" exclaimed Mrs. Crew, again embracing her. 
" I hope all will be accomplished that you desire. But if it should 
not be, it will serve only to increase our" — and she laid a slight 
emphasis on the pronoun — " interest in you. I already love you 
as if you were my own daughter." 

" And, beheve me, your attachment is fully requited, madam," 
replied Hilda. 

And she quitted the house with Abel Beechcroft, who displayed 
considerable impatience during her interview with his sister. 

On their arrival at the Little Sanctuary, they were admitted by 
Mrs. Clinton, for Jacob had not yet returned. After some little 
consideration, Abel went up alone to the miser's room, and knock- 
ing two or three times, and receiving no answer, opened the door. 

Approaching the bed, he found it empty, with the clothes turned 
down, as left by the miser; and casting a hurried glance into the 
closet, to satisfy himself that no person was there, he hastily ran 
down stairs to Hilda, to acquaint her with the alarming discovery 
he had made. 

She was greatly terrified; but after a moment's reflection, sug- 
gested that her father might possibly have gone down to the cellar, 
and related the circumstance which she herself had once witnessed 
there. Concurring in the opinion, Abel offered immediately to go 
in search of him ; and dissuading Hilda, who secretly shared his 
worst apprehensions, from accompanying him, took a candle, and 
descended to the cellar. 

As he entered the vault, he indistinctly perceived a ghastly 
object; and springing forward, held up the light, so as to reveal it 




0™J«^lu»K/6 



A>,-.| l<.„^,-. 



Toft discovci-ingthe Iwdy of tli.^-Mis'M- in ilic fpll.q 



LOiJDOir PARRX AC? UiAnKNBAU. STKEUT l647 



THE miser's daughter. 353 

more fully. His fancy had not deceived him. There, in a grave 
— evidently digged by his own hands — lay his old enemy — dead- 
dead! 

While Abel was wrapt in contemplation of this miserable spec- 
tacle, and surrendering himself to the thoughts which it inspired, 
heavy steps were heard behind him, and Jacob rushed into the 
cellar. 

" Where is he?" cried the porter, in accents of alarm. " Has 
any thing happened ? Ha! I see." 

And pushing past Abel Beechcroft, he precipitated himself into 
the hole with his master. " All's over -with him," he cried, in a 
voice of agony and self-reproach, and grasping the cold hand of 
the corpse. " This would never have happened if I had been at 
home. I'm in a manner his murderer." 

" Another hand than yours has been at work here, Jacob," said 
Abel; " and terrible as your poor master's fate has been, it may 
prove a salutary lesson to others. There he lies, who a few hours 
ago was the possessor of useless thousands, the value of which he 
knew not — nay, the very existence of which he knew not — for the 
few bags of gold beside him were the only palpable treasure he 
owned. There he lies, who tormented himself with a vainer quest 
than ever lured the blind searcher after the philosopher's stone. 
There he lies, the saddest and most degrading proof of the vanity 
of human desires, having died the death of a dog, with no heart 
to grieve for him, no eye to weep for him." 

" You're wrong in sayin' no one grieves for him, sir," rejoined 
Jacob, in a broken voice, " because I do. With all his faults, I 
loved him — nay, I think I loved him the better for his faults — and 
though I often talked of leavin' him, I never really meant to do 
so." 

" Your feelings do you credit, Jacob, and are consistent with the 
notion I had formed of you," said Abel. 

" I couldn't have said as much to him while he was alive," blub- 
K bered Jacob, — " not if he would have given me half his treasure 
K to utter it. But I am sorry now I didn't bear his humours better." 
^ "A natural regret, Jacob," said Abel. " The compunction we 
feel for unkindness exhibited by us to the dead should teach us 
consideration to the living. I could forgive your poor master all 
but the last act of his life." 

2 A 



354 THE miser's daughter. 

" Wliat was that?" asked Jacob, looking up. 

" The leaving his property away from his daughter," replied 
Abel. " Philip Frewin visited him late last night, with Diggs, 
and induced him to make a will in his favour." 

" Hell's curses on them both!" roared Jacob, in a furious tone, 
and springing out of the excavation. " And PhiKp came here ! 
That was the reason, then, why we were locked up in the watch'us. 
I thought there was somethin' in it. They did well to get me out 
of the way. If I had been at home, I'd have killed 'em outright, 
if I had been hanged for it, sooner than this should have happened. 
And do you mean to say, sir, that he has disinherited Miss Hilda 
entirely?" 

" Unless she marries Philip Frewin," replied Abel. 

" You've dried my eyes with a vengeance," cried Jacob. " I 

could almost find in my heart to spurn his avaricious old carcase. 

But it's not altogether his fault. The crime hes chiefly at the 

d oor of that scoundrel, Diggs. But such a will won't hold good, 

sir— will it?" 

" I hope not," sighed Abel. " But I must now go up stairs to 
your young mistress to acquaint her with her bereavement. It will 
be your care to remove the body." 

And with a slow footstep and saddened air he quitted the 
vault. 




THE miser's daughter. 365 



CHAPTER XIII. 

DIGGS AND PHILIP UNEXPECTEDLY AERIVE — THE MISEr's "WHX IS READ, AND 
PHn.IP DECLARES HIS INTENTION OF ACTING UPON IT— ABEL UNBOSOMS HLMSELF 
TO HILDA. 

Abel's looks as he approached Hilda convinced her of what 
had happened, and rendered the announcement of the melancholy 
tidings he had to communicate almost superfluous. 

" You have lost a father, my dear child !" he said, in a tone of 
the deepest commiseration ; " but you have a friend left who will 
endeavour to supply his place." 

Hilda could only thank him by her looks. 

" Under any circumstances, this would have been a heavy blow 
to you," pursued Abel, " but under the present it comes with addi- 
tional severity. Still, I am sure you have fortitude to support 
the trial ; and I trust, with the blessing of God, to restore you 
to your rights. Need I say my house is your home, and that of 
your worthy aunt, whenever you choose to remove to it." 

" I feel your kindness deeply, very deeply, sir," she rejoined, 
" but as long as circumstances will permit me, I will stay here." 

Just then a knock was heard at the door, and as no answer was 
returned by those within, it was opened, giving entrance to Philip 
Frewin and Diggs. They both appeared disconcerted on seeing 
Abel Beechcroft, but Diggs instantly recovered himself, and looking 
round, at once conjectured what had happened. 

"Miss Scarve," he said, '*we were passing by the house, and 
seeing the street door open — a very unusual occurrence here — en- 
tered without knocking. I hope and trust nothing is amiss." 

" Go into the cellar and satisfy ydurself," said Abel Beechcroft, 
sternly. 

2 A 2 



356 THE miser's daughter. 

" Good God, sir! you don't mean to insinuate that Mr. Scarve 
has died in the cellar !" cried the attorney. 

" Oons ! I hope not !*" exclaimed Philip, scarcely able to conceal 
his satisfaction. " How is my uncle, Hilda?" 

" My father is dead," she replied, in a freezing tone. 
" Dead !" repeated Philip. " Lord bless me ! how very sudden. 
Lucky we happened to turn in, Diggs. Can we do any thing for 
you, cousin.''" 

Hilda made no reply, but the attorney immediately interposed. 
" As your uncle's executor, and in a manner his heir, Mr. 
Frewin," he said, " it is your duty to seal up all his chests, cup- 
boards, bureaux, and drawers, without delay. I will assist you." 

" Hold!" exclaimed Abel, " I give you both notice that Miss 
Scarve considers that the will under which you propose to act has 
been fraudulently obtained ; and she will dispute it." 

*' Miss Scarve will act as her feeHngs dictate, or as she may be 
advised, sir," replied the attorney ; " but, in the meantime, it will 
but be right for Mr. Frewin to take proper precautions. Let us 
go to Mr. Scarve's chamber, sir." 

So saying, and disregarding the looks of disgust directed against 
them by Abel, they went up stairs. 

" Oh ! do not leave me till they are gone, Mr. Beechcroft,'^ said 
Hilda. 

" I will not," he replied, taking a seat beside her. 
Meanwhile, the attorney and his companion proceeded about 
their task with some semblance of feeling, but real indifference. 
Having glanced through the room up stairs, and swept all the poor 
miser's hoards, which were strewn about on the table, into a chest, 
which he locked, Diggs called Philip's attention to the position of 
the pen and paper, saying " I am almost certain he meant to write 
something — perhaps revoke his will — but it was too late — ha ! ha !" 
With a sly chuckle, he then proceeded to seal up all the boxes 
and cases. In this task he was assisted by Philip Frewin, and they 
had just concluded it, when heavy footsteps were heard on the stairs, 
and the next moment the door was thrown open, and Jacob entered 
the room, carrying in his arms the body of his master, which he de- 
posited on the bed. 

"And this was how he died!" said Philip, casting a shud- 
dering glance at the corpse. 



THE miser's daughter. 357 



I- 

^m " Ay ay, you calculated your chances nicely," rejoined Jacob. 
^B*' You'd cheat the devil, you would. But you haven't got the 
*' fortune yet." 

" Harkee, friend Jacob," said Philip, " I will thank you to speak 
more respectfully to me in future, or I will let you know who is 
master here." 

" You shall never be my master," replied Jacob; " and if I only 
get the word from my young missis, see if I don't turn you both 
out of the house, neck and heels." 

Philip would have made an 'angry retort, but Diggs checked 
him, whispering that " it would not do just now." 

*' You may get off from me," pursued Jacob; "but you won't 
get off from Mr. Randulph Crew for your conduct towards him 
last night." 

" I am ready to render Mr. Crew an account of my conduct 
whenever he may require it," replied Philip, haughtily. 

" If you will follow my advice, sir, now that your prospects are 
fully settled, you will leave off these brawls altogether," observed 
Diggs. " If Mr. Randulph Crew threatens you with an assault, give 
him in charge of a constable, and leave the rest to me." 

" I believe that will be the best plan," said Philip. 

"Much the best for a coward to pursue — faugh!" exclaimed 
Jacob, with a look of supreme contempt. 

Diggs and his companion then went down stairs to the cellar 
where the bags of gold were still left, and having examined them, 
locked the door, and put seals upon it. 

This done, they repaired to the parlour, and Diggs stepping up 
to Hilda, addressed her. 

" Chancing to have your father's last will in my pocket. Miss 
Scarve," he said, " I will read it to you, — as the sooner you are 
made acquainted with his injunctions the better. Mr. Beechcroft, 
I also request your attention to the document; and you too, Mrs. 
CHnton, that you may not afterwards plead ignorance of it." 

And without further preliminary he read the will. 

" It is sufficiently intelHgible, I must say," observed Abel, as he 
concluded ; " and I must also say, that I never listened to a more 
disgraceful document." 

" You are at liberty to make any comment upon it you think fit, 



358 THE miser's daughter. 

sir," said the attorney. " I am quite prepared for expressions of 
disappointment on your part." 

" Why on my part, sir?" rejoined Abel. 

*' Because Mr. Scarve's wise disposition of his property has pre- 
vented you from securing it for your nephew, sir," replied the 
attorney. 

A deep flush dyed Abel's pale cheek, and he fixed his kindling 
eye upon the attorney. 

" Up to this point you have succeeded in your villany, Mr. 
Diggs," he said, " but you may depend upon it your triumph will 
be brief. That instrument will never hold good, and the manner 
in which you have obtained it, with other of your recent acts, will 
drive you from the profession, if they do not also banish you from 
the country." 

" I laugh at your threats, sir," repHed the attorney. " My posi- 
tion is too firm to be shaken by any thing you can say or do. And 
you will find this will equally firm. Its motive is too apparent to 
admit of dispute. My late respected and lamented cHent wished 
to marry his daughter to his nephew, and fearing that she would 
disobey his injunctions, took care that she should not do so with- 
out forfeiting his property. Mr. Scarve had a perfect right to do 
this. If Miss Scarve thinks othermse, she can dispute the will. 
But she will find it as difficult to be set aside, as her father, while 
living, was to be turned from his purpose." 

" I shall act strictly up to the conditions of my uncle's will," 
said PhiHp Frewin; " and it will be a matter of deep regret to me 
if my fair cousin should refuse to accede to them. I will not urge 
her at this moment, but wiU call again in the course of the day for 
her answer." And with a superciHous bow, he took his departure 
with the attorney. 

For some time after they were gone, not a word was uttered by 
the group left in the parlour. Abel was buried in deep thought, 
and neither of the others appeared inclined to break the silence. 
At length, Abel roused himself, and turning to Mrs. Clinton, re- 
quested to be left alone a few minutes with Hilda : the good lady 
immediately withdrew. 

" It may be, Hilda," he said, in a voice of much emotion — 
" though God forbid it should be so — that the issue of this contest 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 359 



will be against us, and the will be declared valid. I cannot free 
myself from some misgivings." 

*' Nor I, sir," she replied; " and yet, to show you how strangely 
and inconsistently my father has acted, you will see from this" — 
and she drew forth a slip of paper from her bosom — " that he was 
under an obligation to the late Mr. Crew to give me to his son 
Randulph, with a certain dowry." 

Abel glanced over the document in surprise. 

*' Would I had seen this in his lifetime !" he said. 

" But for his violence you would have seen it, feir," she replied. 
*' I was about to show it you when you last saw him, and was 
only deterred by the state of excitement into which he was 
thrown." 

" How unfortunate !" exclaimed Abel. " But perhaps the do- 
cument may stiU be of use." 

And he arose and paced the room to and fro, in extreme agita- 
tion. At last he stopped before Hilda, regarding her fixedly. 

" Answer me sincerely," he said, " do you love Randulph?" 

" You need scarcely ask the question, sir," she rejoined, blush- 
ing. 

"The match seems ordained by Heaven," cried Abel; "it is 
useless to oppose it. Listen to me, Hilda. I loved your mother 
— deeply, passionately loved her. By my own fault, it seems — 
though I understood it not then — I lost her, and she became the 
bride of your father. From that time I was doomed to wretched- 
ness, and though my sufferings were hidden under the mask of in- 
difference, the vulture of despair was perpetually gnawing at my 
heart. During this dreadful period, when I hated all mankind, 
and him most of all who I conceived had robbed me of what I 
held dearest on earth, you were bom, and soon afterwards my sis- 
ter Mrs. Crew, gave birth to Randulph. It was whispered among 
our family that the two infants would suit each other, and that 
their union would reconcile old grievances. In the bitterness and 
anguish of my heart, I vowed that this should never happen, 
if I could prevent it; and for years I nourished the resolution, 
imtil it became rooted in my breast. Your mother died; and it 
might have been supposed that my sorrows and resentments would 
be buried in her grave; but it was not so. There are some loves, 
as there are some hatreds, that survive the tomb, and mine was one 



360 THE miser's daughter. 

of them. Whatever brought her image to my mind gave me acute 
suffering, and I prohibited all who knew me, on pain of my dis- 
pleasure, from alluding to her in any way. Thus little reached me 
of you or your father, till Randulph's arrival in town a few months 
since. To my surprise, I found he had seen you; and from the 
manner in which he spoke of you, I perceived that he was smitten 
by your charms." 

Hilda uttered a slight exclamation. 

"I will not disguise from you," pursued Abel, " that this dis- 
covery gave me inexpressible uneasiness, and I sought by every 
means in my power to prevent him from seeing you again. But 
fate had decreed it otherwise. Chance brought you together again 
and again, until the final adventure at Vauxhall seemed to link 
your affections together indissolubly." 

*' It did so," observed Hilda. 

" Notwithstanding all this, I could not bring myself to consent 
to your marriage," continued Abel; "nay, I determined to cast 
off Randulph for ever if he disobeyed me. My resolution was 
somewhat shaken by your father's illness, and I began to find ftiy 
dislike to the connexion abating. Can you understand these con- 
tradictory feelings, Hilda, for I loved you all the time ?" 

" I can, sir," she replied. 

" That which alone removed my objection," said Abel, sternly, 
was the sad spectacle I beheld in the cellar this morning. After the 
sight I there witnessed, I could not retain further animosity against 
the author of my misery. I can now review the past with calmness. 
I can now think of your mother without pain, and of your father 
without heart-burning ; I can now love you as their child, without 
other feelings obtruding upon me." 

And opening his arms, he folded Hilda in a strict embrace. 

"Bless you! bless you, my child!" he cried. "If Randulph 
proves worthy of you, he shall have you." 

Hilda averted her head, and there was silence between them for a 
brief space. 

" You wished to have some communication with my poor father 
before his death," she said, at length. " I hope it was not of im- 
portance?" . 

" Only to himself," replied Abel, with a deep sigh. " I wished 
to forgive him for prevailing upon me, under the garb of friendship, 



I 



THE miser's daughtee. 361 



to Introduce him to your mother and her family. I wished to for- 
give him for the arts he used to wean her affections from me; for 
his misrepresentation of my circumstances and character ; and for 
the prolonged anguish he occasioned me, and to which death would 
have been preferable. I wished to say thus much to him, — to hear 
from his own lips an avowal of his regret, — and to be at peace with 
him for ever !" 

" You are at peace with him now, sir, I trust," said Hilda. 

" As far as I, myself, am concerned, I am so,"" replied Abel ; " but 
for you — " 

" Oh do not think of me !" cried Hilda. " I forgive him from 
the bottom of my heart. He has been the dupe of others." 

" Say rather he has been the bond-slave of Mammon," replied 
Abel, sternly, "who has destroyed him, as he destroys all his 
worshippers. But I will not pain you by any harsh reflections. 
Be assured, nothing shall be neglected to repair the injury he has 
done you. And now, farewell, my dear child, since you decide 
upon remaining here. I will see you again in the latter part of 
the day; and, meantime, you stand in need of some repose." 

And folding her once more in his arms, he took his leave. 



362 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

PHnjP FEE WIN IS DANGEROUSLY "WOUNDED BY SANDULPH — HIS LAST VINDICTIVE 

EFFOBT. 

Randulph's feelings on awaking and finding himself in the 
■watch-house were at first humiliating and full of self-reproach. But 
by degrees these milder sentiments speedily gave way to anger against 
Philip Frewin, and so indignant did he become, on reflection, at 
the conduct of the latter, that he resolved that his first business, on 
obtaining his freedom, should be to seek him out and call him to a 
strict account. His wrath had by no means abated as Mr. Foggo 
entered the chamber, a little before eight o'clock, to call up him 
and his companions. 

" I hope you rested well, gen'l'men," said the constable, with a 
somewhat malicious grin. " Will you please to have breakfast?" 

"Not here, Mr. Foggo," replied Trussell, yawning. " I think 
^you said, last night — or else I dreamt it — that it wouldn't be 
necessary to go before a magistrate?" 

" I think it maybe managed, sir," said the constable, " provided 
—ahem!" 

" Provided we come down — eh, Mr. Foggo?" rejoined Trussell. 

" Exactly, sir," repHed the other. 

" Do not bribe him, uncle," cried Randulph, indignantly. 
"We have been most unjustifiably detained, and I wish to be 
taken before a magistrate, that I may have an opportunity of com- 
plaining of the shameful treatment we have experienced, as well as 
of preferring a charge against Philip Frewin." 

" Be advised by me, my dear boy, and make no further disturb- 
ance about the matter," replied Trussell. " You'll get no redress." 

" But, uncle—" 

" Between ourselves," inturrupted Trussell, " I would rather 



I 



THE miser's daughtee. 363 



tlie affair didn't come to tlie ears of ray brother Abel, wbicli, if 
we're publicly examined, will unquestionably be tbe case." 

" That's why I recommend you not to go before his worship," 
observed the cunning constable; " it may be disagreeable in its 
consequences," 

"To be sure it may," replied Trussell, slipping a guinea into 
his hand. " Let us out as fast as you can." 

" I shall not move," said Randulph. 

"Oh! it's quite optional," said Mr. Foggo, evidently discon- 
certed. 

" I shall go, at all events," said Trussell. 

" And so shall I," said Jacob. " I shall get back to my poor 
master as fast as I can. Lord knows what may have happened in 
my absence !" 

" Well, if you're both going, I must perforce accompany you," 
said Randulph; " but I protest against the step." 

Mr. Foggo attended them to the door of the watch-house, and 
made them a most polite bow as he let them out. Taking a hasty 
leave of the others, Jacob set off to the Little Sanctuary, where, it 
is needless to say, a painful surprise awaited him. 

As they walked along, Trussell proposed that they should break- 
fast at a coffee-house, and put their toilette a little in order before 
going home ; and Randulph, recollecting that Jacob had mentioned 
the Crown Inn, Ox Yard, as a place frequented by PhiKp Frewin, 
suggested that they should go there. Trussell being perfectly 
agreeable to the arrangement, they bent their steps in that direc- 
tion. 

On arriving at the Crown, and inquiring for Philip, they learnt 
that he had rooms in the house, but had been out the greater part 
of the night, and was absent at the time. He was, however, mo- 
mentarily expected, and the waiter promised to let them know 
when he returned. 

Trussell then ordered a good breakfast, to which, after making 
their toilettes, they both did ample justice. At the expiration of 
an hour, Randulph renewed his inquiries about Philip. Still he 
had not returned. 

" Well, if you like to wait here for him," said Trussell, " I will go 
home, and make some excuse for you, and will return and tell you 
what I have done." 



364 THE miser's daughter. 

The desire of avenging himself on Philip Frewin being now 
paramount in Randulph's breast, he readily assented to this plan, 
and Trussell departed. . Having feed the waiter, to insure the accom- 
plishment of his object, Randulph flung himself into a seat, and was 
musing over the events of the previous night, by way of keeping 
up his choler against Philip, when the door suddenly opened, and 
a man, stepping into the chamber, was about to withdraw, with an 
apology for his intrusion, when a cry from Randulph, who recog- 
nised him as Cordwell Firebras, checked him. 

*' What ! is it you, Randulph ?" cried Firebras, holding out 
his hand. " I came here to meet another person, but you are the 
man of all others I most wished to see. What the deuce are you 
doing here ?" 

*' I am waiting to see Philip Frewin," replied Randulph. " He 
served me a scurvy trick last night, and got me shut up in the 
watch-house, and 1 mean to chastise him.^' 

" I shan't hinder your laudable design," replied Firebras, laugh- 
ing. " But," he added, closing the door, " I was about to send to 
you on a matter of the utmost importance. I have a proposal to 
make to you that affects your nearest and dearest interests. Come 
to me at the Chequers Inn, Millbank, a little before midnight, and 
I will give you proof that I hold your fortune in my hands." 

** To be obtained on the same terms as heretofore ?' demanded 
Randulph. 

" Hear what I've got to propose, and then inquire the con- 
ditions," rejoined Firebras. 

" Well, I will come," replied Randulph. 

As he said this, the waiter entered the room, and made a sign to 
him that his man had arrived. 

Randulph's eyes sparkled, and without saying a word, he 
beckoned Firebras to follow him, and, directed by the waiter, pro- 
ceeded to Philip's room, which immediately adjoined his own. 

Philip was not alone. He was attended by Captain Culpepper, 
and was laughingly counting out a sum of money for him. But 
his glee died away on beholding Randulph's stern looks, and he 
would have beaten a retreat, if Firebras had not closed the door, 
and planted his bulky person before it. 

" What do you want here, sir?" he cried, in as fierce a tone as 



I 



THE miser's daughter. 365 



he could command, to Randulpli. *' This is my room — ^you have 
no business here. Ring the bell, Captain Culpepper." 

" If the captain stirs, I will cut his throat," cried Firebras. 

" If I treat you as a gentleman, scoundrel, it is more than you 
deserve," said Randulph, fiercely; " but I demand instant satisfac- 
tion for your conduct last night." 

" I can't fight to-day, Mr. Crew," said Philip. " Fm engaged 
on particular business, as this gentleman knows. To-morrow, at 
any hour you please." 

"This is a pitiful evasion, coward!" cried Randulph; "but it 
shall not avail you." 

And he struck him with the flat of his sword. 

"'Sblood! sir, hold your hand!" cried Captain Culpepper, 
whipping out his blade, and interposing. " Leave ofi" this game, or, 
by my troth, I'll slit your weazand for you." 

" No you won't, captain," said Cordwell Firebras, stepping for- 
ward. " Let them settle the matter themselves. If Mr. Frewin w 
a gentleman, he will give Mr. Crew satisfaction ; and if he is not^ 
you must agree with me, as a man of honour, that no punishment 
can be too degrading for him." 

" I must confess there is reason in what you say, sir," replied 
Culpepper. " Fight him, sir — fight him !" he whispered to Philip. 
" I'll help you if you require it." 

" Hold your hand, ruffian !" cried Philip, exasperated by the 
treatment he had experienced, " and look to yourself." 

And drawing his sword, he attacked Randulph with the utmost 
fury. It was evident, from his style of fencing, that Philip did not 
want skill; but his passion robbed him of judgment, and he fre- 
quently exposed himself to his antagonist, who fought with great 
coolness, evidently meaning to disarm him, or at most slightly wound 
him. 

Desirous, at length, of putting an end to the conflict, Randulph 
assailed his adversary more vigorously, and was driving him towards 
the wall, when footsteps were heard hurrying along the passage. 
Firebras turned to lock the door to prevent interruption, and while 
he was thus engaged, Culpepper made a thrust at Randulph, which, 
fortunately, the latter was able to avoid by a sudden spring 
backwards. 

Exasperated by this treachery, Randulph dexterously parried a 



366 THE miser's daughter. 

thrust in carte from Philip, and instantly returning the pass, his 
point plunged deeply into the other's breast. Philip staggered, and 
would have fallen, if Culpepper had not caught him. 

"Don't mind me," cried the woimded man, "attack him!— 
attack him ! I'll give you a thousand pounds if you kill him." 

" I can't do it now, sir," whispered Culpepper. " I fear you're 
seriously hurt." 

" Yes, it's all over," groaned Philip. " Curse him, the luck's 
always on his side." 

Meanwhile, Cordwell Firehras had rushed up to Randulph, who 
looked stupified at the result of the encounter. 

" Get off as fast as you can," he cried, " it won't do to be taken 
just now. The window in that closet is open, and you are young 
and active, and can easily reach the ground. Repair to the Chequers 
at once, and keep close all day. I'll be with you before midnight." 

Throwing one look of compassion at the wounded man, Randulph 
darted into the closet, and peeping out of the window, perceived 
that it looked upon the roof a shed. Dropping upon this building, 
he gained a narrow alley which led him into King-street. 

As soon as Randulph had made good his retreat, Firebras opened 
the door, and gave admittance to the landlord and some half-dozen 
attendants. 

A surgeon was instantly sent for, and Philip placed in a chair, 
while Cordwell Firebras assisted in bandaging up the wound. It 
bled internally, and Firebras's experience told him it was highly 
dangerous. 

"What do you think of my hurt?" asked Philip, whose aspect 
had already become ghastly and cadaverous. 

" I'll not deceive you," replied Firebras; "you're a dead man." 

" But my murderer will be hanged for it, won't he ?" cried 
Philip, with a mahgnant look. 

" You were fairly hit," replied Firebras. " If any body deserves 
hanging, it's Captain Culpepper. I saw the foul blow he aimed at 
Randulph." 

At this moment, Diggs entered the room, and was horror-stricken 
at beholding the condition of PhiHp Frewin. 

" Why ! what dreadful mischance is this ?" he cried, gazing at 
him, " I hope you are not seriously hurt?" 

" They tell me I am mortally wounded," replied Philip, with a 



I 



THE miser's daughtek. 367 



groan; "and I believe they're right. I have only been made my 
uncle's heir to mock me." 

" What ! is Mr. Scarve dead?" cried Firebras, in surprise. 

" He died last night," repHed the attorney, " and Mr. Frewin, 
as he has just told you, is his heir, provided Hilda refuses to marry 
him." 

" The devil!" exclaimed Firebras; " this has been a lucky blow 
for Randulph. I'm glad he was not aware of the fact, or the tiling 
might have looked Hke premeditation." 

" Get me a chair, Diggs, instantly !" cried Phihp, " and take 
me to the Little Sanctuary. I will see Hilda before I die, and if 
she refuses to marry me, I'll make my will at once. I have 
strength to sign it." 

" What madness is this?" cried Firebras. 

"It's no madness," repHed the other. " Get me a chair — quick 
—quick!" 

Thus exhorted, Diggs gave the necessary instructions, and shortly 
afterwards a chair was brought into the room by two porters, and 
the wounded man placed in it. Attended by Firebras, Diggs, 
Culpepper, and Mr. Molson, who chanced to be the nearest surgeon, 
and who had just arrived, — he was transported to the miser's dwell- 
ing. 

On arriving there, Cordwell Firebras hastily explained to Jacob, 
who answered the knock at the door, the object of their coming, 
and bade him urge his young mistress to see the wounded man. 
As soon as he had satisfied himself of the truth of the statement, 
which was so extraordinary that he could scarcely credit it, Jacob 
directed the chairmen to bring their burden along the passage into 
the parlour, and Phihp Frewin was got out and placed in the miser's 
old seat. 

The chairmen then withdrew, and Jacob ran up stairs to tell 
Hilda what had occurred, while Mr. Molson said to PhiHp-^ 

" If you have any instructions to give, sir, you must not lose 
time, for you have not many minutes to call your own." 

"Where is Hilda?" cried thewounded man. "Get pen, ink, 
and paper, Diggs — sit down — and write what I tell you. Is she 
come yet?" 

"Yes, she is here," repHed Firebras, as Hilda entered the room. 
"Miss Scarve," he added, stepping up to her, "your cousin has 



368 THE miser's daughtee. 

been desperately wounded in a duel with Randulpli Crew. He 
has not many minutes to live. Accede to what he proposes to you," 
he added, in a low tone. 

" Hilda," said Philip, in a faint voice, " I have sent for you to 
ask you, in the presence of these witnesses, whether you consent to 
marry me." 

" You are not in a state to ask the question," she replied, with a 
look of mingled commiseration and abhorrence. "Think of re- 
conciling yourself with Heaven." 

" Do you refuse?" cried PhiUp, trying to raise himself. 

" If you exert yourself in this way, you will only accelerate 
your end," said the surgeon. 

" I will have an answer," replied Philip — " yes or no ?" 

" Consent," whispered Firebras to Hilda. " It can matter no- 
thing." 

" I cannot bring my lips to utter the word," she replied, 

"I require an answer. Miss Scarve," said Diggs, "as it may 
affect Mr. Frewin's interest in the property, and your own." 

" Then I answer, no !" she repHed, firmly. 

Cordwell Firebras bit his lips. 

" Take down that answer, Diggs," said Philip. 

The attorney complied, and when done, requested Culpepper 
and the surgeon to witness it, which they did. 

" Now, Mr. Frewin, you are in possession of your uncle's pro- 
perty," said Diggs. 

" Then, write out a bequest of it all," said PhiUp, — " of all, mind 
— to— to— to — " 

" To whom, sir?" asked Diggs, writing with the greatest ra- 
pidity, for he saw that he had not a moment to spare. 

" To yourself," faintly replied the dying man. 

In a few seconds, without looking up, or exhibiting any sign of 
satisfaction, the attorney completed his task. 

" It is done — sign it, sir," he added, placing the paper before 
PhiUp, and giving him the pen, which the latter could scarcely 
grasp. 

It was a moment of breathless interest to all; and even Hilda 
bent forward. 

" Where is it?" groaned Philip, trying to fix his glazing eyes 
on the paper. 



THE misee's daughter. 36^ 

" Here, sir — here," said Diggg, putting his finger on the place 
■where the signature should be affixed. 

But it was too late. The pen fell from PhiHp's grasp, and fall- 
ing with his face on the table, he expired. 

'* Another moment, and I had been master of this property," 
cried Diggs, snatching up the unsigned paper. 

" You could not have kept it," said Cordwell Firebras. 

"Long enough to have answered my purpose," rejoined the 
attorney, putting on his hat, and quitting tbe house. He was fol- 
lowed in his retreat by Captain Culpepper. 

" You are now undisputed mistress of your inheritance, Hilda," 
said Cordwell Firebras. 

"Heaven be praised for it!" exclaimed Jacob. "I knew such 
wrongful acts would never prosper." 

" To me the event is most fortunate," said Hilda; " but I wish 
it could have been purchased at a less price than the life of my un- 
fortunate cousin." 

" I confess I cannot pity him," said Firebras. " But you must 
now think of yourself. You look very pale." 

" This last strange trick of fortune is almost too much for me,^' 
she rejoined. 

" I would recommend you to seek an asylum with some friend, 
while the last mournful duties to your father are performed," said 
Firebras. " Why not go to Mr. Beechcroft's? Randulph's mother 
is there." 

"I think I will follow your advice," replied Hilda; "for I 
cannot remain here after the shocking event that has just oc- 
curred." 

" Mrs. Clinton and I will take care of the house and property," 
said Jacob. " I'll go and fetch a coach directly, if you're going to 
Mr. Beechcroft's." 

And he set out on his errand, while Hilda went up stairs to her 
room, to make a few hasty preparations for her departure. 

This done, she entered the room in which her father's remains 
were laid, and kneeling beside the bed, prayed fervently. She 
then gazed for a few moments on his wan emaciated features, now 
rendered yet sharper by death, and pressing her lips upon them, 
quitted the room. CordweU Firebras led her in silence to the 
coach, in which Jacob put the few things she took with her. 

2 B 



370 THE miser's daughter. 

*' Where is Mr. Randulph?" asked the latter, as he was about 
to mount the box. 

" Do you know a summer-house on the banks of the river, near 
the mill, in MiUbank?" asked Firebras. 

"What, belongin' to the Chequers Inn?" rejoined Jacob. "I 
should know it, seein' as how I've passed many a pleasant hour in 
it/' 

"Well, be in a boat off it at midnight," rejoined Firebras, 
" and you'll hear something of Randulph." 

" I won't fail," replied Jacob, springing on the box, and ordering 
the coachman to drive to Lambeth, while Firebras returned to the 
house to give some directions to Mrs. CHnton. 



THE miser's daughter. 371 



CHAPTER XV. 

ME. CEIPPS'S ALTERED APPEARANCE — HE MTSTITIES THE FAIR THOMASINE ABOUT 
LADY SPINKE — THE SEIZURE OF THE JACOBITE CLUB CONTRIVED. 

On the same morning as the events previously related, while 
Peter Pokerich was powdering a barrister's wig, he was interrupted 
in his task by the sudden and rather distracted entrance of the fair 
Thomasine. 

" What's the matter Tommy, dear?" he inquired, unintention- 
ally puffing a great quantity of powder into her face. " Ten thou- 
sand pardons, but you quite startled me, and made me miss my 
aim." 

** You've nearly bhnded me, you careless thing," replied the 
fair Thomasine, rubbing her eyes ; " besides spoiHng my fly-cap, 
and filling my hair with your nasty powder. But have you heard 
the dreadful — ^the distressing news?" 

" No," replied Peter. " What is it?" 

'^ Mr. Scarve has been found dead in his cellar," replied the fair 
Thomasine, in a sepulchral tone, suited to the nature of her infor- 
mation ; *' where he had digged his own grave, and tried to bury 
himself, to save funeral expenses." 
I " Lord bless us ! you don't say so !" exclaimed Peter. 
I " Yes, I do,"" rejoined the fair Thomasine ; *' but turn your pow- 
der-puff the other way, or you'U miss your aim again. I shouldn't 
have been sorry for any thing that happened to him, — but what do 
you think? — he's disinherited his own daughter, and left all his 
property to his nephew." 

"Oh the horrid, unnatural old monster!" exclaimed Peter, 
capering about, and completely emptying the powder-puff in his 
tigitation. 

" Be quiet, do, and stand still!" said the fair Thomasine, taking 
hold of his collar, and keeping him down. " Poor Hilda's not to 

2 B 2 



372 THE miser's daughtee. 

have a farthing, unless she marries that odious cousin of her's ; and 
if I'm not greatly mistaken in her, she'll die sooner than consent." 

"Of course she will?" cried Peter, still plying the exhausted 
powder-puif. " Oh, she's a noble creature, and quite an example 
to her sex !" 

" So I think," replied the fair Thomasine; " and till she marries 
Randulph Crew, I don't marry you — that's positive? Oh, gemini! 
if there isn't Mr. Cripps ! How altered he is, to be sure." 

The latter exclamation was occasioned by the entrance of the 
ex-valet, who was indeed so much changed as scarcely to be recog- 
nisable. His coat was tlireadbare, out-at-elbows, and with the lace 
upon it tarnished; his waistcoat was in the same tattered condition; 
his nether garments were bepatched with cloths of various hues ; 
his hose were no longer silk, but cotton very much darned; and 
steel buckles replaced the diamond appendages to his shoes. His 
dishevelled peruke stood sadly in need of the aid of Peter Poke- 
rich ; his hat was an old cocked one, with one of the sides broken, 
and hanging loose; and a switch supplied the place of his clouded 
cane. He had no lace at his wrists or at his breast; indeed, it ^as 
rather questionable, from the manner in which he buttoned up his 
coat, whether he had a shirt at all. Fallen, however, as he was, 
Mr. Cripps was Mr. Cripps still. He wore his tattered apparel 
with as great an air as distinguished him when equipped in all his 
finery; flourished his switch as if it had been a magnificent baton; 
took snuff out of a pewter box, with as much grace as when he 
manipulated one set with brilliants; and brushed away the powder 
with a ragged handkerchief as airily as when he boasted a perfumed 
and embroidered mouchoir. 

" The fair Thomasine, as I live," he said, with a diving bow. 
" How charmingly you look, 'pon rep ! I've just been to Sir Sin- 
gleton Spinke's, to offer myself as his valet. But he has heard of 
my cussed adventure, and won't engage me." 

" Did you see Lady Spinke?" asked the fair Thomasine. 

" To be sure," replied Mr. Cripps, " and can report very favour- 
ably of her condition. Her old lord doats on her. She has large 
monkeys and little dogs, black pages and white china, gold and 
silver dresses, diamonds, rubies, garnets, pearls, emeralds — every 
thing, in short, that one of your sex can desire." 

"Except a young husband," interposed Peter. "I wish my 



THE misee's daughter. 373 

powder-puiF was full," he added, aside; "I'd empty it into his 
mischievous throat, and choke him.*" 

"Young husband! — fiddlestick!" cried Mr. Cripps. "Lady 
Spinke is a great deal too good a judge for that. She would 
rather be an old man's darling than a young man's warling, as the 
proverb hath it. And she's right, i'faith. She twists her old lord 
round her fingers as easily as a glove." 

" Just what I should like to do with my husband," cried the fair 
Tliomasine. 

" You shall twist me round your fingers as easily as you please, 
my angel," cried Peter, distractedly. " Plague take him ! what 
can have brought the fellow here?" 

" Her ladyship, I needn't say, has quitted the stage," pursued 
Mr. Cripps. " I heard them talking of going to Ranelagh to-night." 

"Ranelagh!" sighed the fair Thomasine. "How delightful! 
And I've never been there since the masquerade, and I begin to 
fear I shall never go there again!" 

" DeHghtful, indeed ! if it only lasts !" said Mr. Cripps, who had 
received a secret sign from the barber. 

"Lasts! what do you mean?" cried the fair Tliomasine. 

" Why, between ourselves," replied Mr. Cripps, with a laugh, 
" Sir Singleton has had eleven wives already — eleven Lady Spinkes, 
by this Hght ! The present lady is the twelfth. They were all mar- 
ried at the Fleet." 

"Oh, gemini! twelve wives!" exclaimed the fair Thomasine. 
" What a shocking old Turk!" 

" You would say so, if you knew the history of the former Lady 
Spinkes as well as I do," replied Mr. Cripps. " There were ac- 
tresses, singers, opera- dancers, mantua- makers, corset-makers, glove- 
makers, satin-shoemakers, embroiderers, and ladies of other voca- 
tions that I forget — but all young, and all very pretty — ha! ha! 
Why, they all came in a body to call upon him, the day after his 
marriage, and it took half-a-dozen constables to get them out of the 
house." 

" And if they had torn out his wicked old eyes they would have 
served him right !" cried the fair Thomasine. " I've no patience 
with such doings. Twelve wives? Why ifs as bad as a seraglio !" 

" Are you now satisfied that you're not one of them, my angel?" 
asked the little barber. 



374 THE miser's daughter. 

" That I am," she replied; " but I still adhere to my resolution 
of not marrying you till Hilda Scarve is imited to Randulph. 
Good morning, Mr. Cripps." 

The ex-valet made one of his best bows, and handed her to the 
door. 

" Cudslid ! you ought to thank me, Pokerich," he said, laughing; 
" the twelve wives did the business — put her out of conceit with 
the old knight, eh?" 

" You did it capitally," replied Peter; " and now what can I do 
for you in return?" 

" A good deal," repKed Mr. Cripps. " In the first place, you 
can dress my peruke, which, as you perceive, is cussedly out of 
order; in the second, you can perfume me; and in the third, you 
can lend me five guineas, for I haven't a rap to bless myself 
withal." 

"As to dressing your wig, that I'll do with pleasure," replied 
the barber ; " and I'll perfume you into the bargain. But I haven't 
five pounds to spare — I haven't, 'pon rep !" 

"Don't steal my adjurations, at all events," cried Mr. Cripps; 
" they're the only part of my former self I have left. Devil knows 
what will become of me. My master won't give me a character. 
I've lost the twenty guineas lent me by my uncle at the gaming- 
table, and I can't even borrow a pistol and a prad to help me to 
take a purse." 

A person entering the shop at this moment, Mr. Cripps walked 
aside, while the barber, offering his customer a chair, went into the 
back room in search of a full-bottomed black wig. On more nar- 
nowly examining the new comer, Mr. Cripps recognised the Jesuit 
priest. Father Verselyn, and it instantly occurred to him that he 
could turn the discovery to account. Accordingly, he stepped 
quickly up to him, and said, in a low tone — 

" Glad to see you, Father Verselyn — pray sit still, sir. How 
gets on the good cause, eh?" 

" You are mistaken in me, friend," replied the priest, uneasily. 

" I will soon prove the contrary, sir," rej oined Mr. Cripps, as- 
suming a different tone. " Unless you tell me where the club now 
meets, I'll make you my prisoner." 

The priest trembled -violently. 



THE miser's daughter, 375 

" Answer me directly," cried Mr. Cripps, '* or I call the barber 
to my assistance." 

" At the Chequers, in Millbank," replied the priest. 

" I'll have better assurance than your word," replied Mr. Cripps. 
" When is the next meeting?" 

" To-night," rephed the priest. 

" Now I teU you what, father," said Mr. Cripps, " I can get 
three hundred pounds for their capture. You shall share it with 
me. No buts. A Jesuit never hesitated to betray his friends when 
it answered his purpose. Choose between a good reward and a 
prison. But here comes the barber. Do you consent?'' 

The Jesuit nodded. 

Having settled his affairs with the barber, Father Verselyn 
quitted the shop, while Mr. Cripps, making a sign to Peter that 
he had business on hand, instantly followed him, and soon found 
that there was no indisposition on the priest's part to join in the 
scheme, provided he could do so with safety to himself. 

Discussing their project, they proceeded towards Millbank, and 
it was arranged, on the suggestion of Verselyn, that the landlord 
of the Chequers, who was no other than the former host of the 
Rose and Crown, should be included in their design, and receive a 
third of the reward. 



376 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE SUMMER-HOUSE AT THE CHEQUERS — THE OLD MILI^ — KANDULPH OVERHEARS 
THE PLOT — DISPERSION OF THE JACOBITE CLUB, AND FATE OF CORDWELL FtRE- 
BKAS. 

As Randulpli passed through the Little Sanctuary, on his way 
to Millbank, he paused for a moment before the dwelHng of the 
unfortunate miser. Ignorant of the catastrophe that had occurred 
there during the night, he could not help thinking that the house 
had a drearier look than usual; but attributing the notion to his 
^wn gloomy thoughts, he attached little importance to it, and 
passed on. 

On gaining Millbank, he speedily discovered the Chequers, and 
entering the house, recognised his old acquaintance, the former 
landlord of the Rose and Crown. The latter, however, did not 
recollect him, but eyed him rather suspiciously, till Randulph told 
him he came recommended by Mr. Cordwell Firebras. 

"Hush!" exclaimed the host. "He's only known as Captain 
Vizard here. My right name is Tom Wiles, but I'm now called 
Dick Chinnock. I fancy I've seen you before, sir." 

"I was introduced to the club when it met at your house in 
Gardiner's Street, Petty France," replied Randulph, "on the 
night when the members were pursued by the guard." 

" And an unlucky night it was !" exclaimed Chinnock. " We've 
never prospered since. I remember you now. I hope you won't 
bring the same ill-luck again. How soon will the captain be here, 
sir ?" 

" Not before midnight, I believe," replied Randulph, " and as 
I'm a good deal fatigued, I should like to go to bed for a few hours. 
I wish to be as private as possible." 

" I'll get a bed ready for you directly, sir," replied the host: 
" and in the meantime, perhaps you'll step this way." 



THE misek's daughter. 377 

And passing through a back door, he crossed a little garden, at 
the lower end of which stood a little square summer-house, with a 
pointed, tiled roof, surmounted by a vane. It overlooked the river, 
and on this side there was a platform, protected by a raiHng, with 
steps descending to the water's edge. On the left stood an old mill 
— a tall, picturesque, wooden structure. Between the summer- 
house and the mill flowed a small brook, which turned a large 
water-wheel, connected with the latter building. At the back of 
the mill, over a dense mass of habitations, could be distinguished 
the towers of Westminster Abbey. 

Having shown Randulph into the summer-house, the landlord 
promised to let him know as soon as his bed was ready, and left 
him. The Httle chamber was furnished with a small deal table, 
painted green, and a couple of chairs. Its internal decorations 
were much injured by damp and neglect. The gay paintings on 
the walls and ceiHngs were nearly effaced; the gilding had turned 
black; and the looking-glasses were so dim that they scarcely re- 
flected an object. As Randulph, after taking a momentary survey 
of the room, was about to seat himself, he noticed a ring in the 
floor, concealed by a bit of carpet, which he removed, and perceived 
that it covered a trap-door. Impelled by curiosity, he lifted the 
latter by means of the ring, and discovered a lower chamber, acces- 
sible by a ladder, placed against the stout pile supporting the floor. 
There appeared to be nothing in it ; and satisfied with the discovery 
he had made, Randulph closed the trap-door, and restored the car- 
pet to its original position. 

Drawing his chair to a little window on the left, he threw it open, 
and amused himself by examining the old mill. A small vessel 
was moored in front of it, apparently filled with sacks of corn and 
straw, which some of the crew were unloading. 

While watching these proceedings, Randulph cotdd not help sus- 
pecting (though he scarcely knew why,) that some underhand 
business was going forward. The sacks were teagled to the upper 
story of the mill, and one of them chancing to fall, proved by its 
sound that its contents were not what they seemed. The trusses of 
straw, too, seemed oddly shaped, and Randulph persuaded himself 
that muskets and other arms were concealed within them. 

If he had not felt quite certain that these proceedings had some 
connexion with the Jacobite cause, a circumstance that occurred 



378 THE miser's daughteb. 

almost immediately afterwards would have satisfied him of the fact. 
One of the crew in the little vessel observing him at the window 
of the summer-house, made various signs to him, which, though he 
could not precisely interpret, he understood to bear relation to the 
articles they were landing, as well as to their object. 

Soon after this, Mr. Chinnock presented himself, and apologis- 
ing for his delay, said — 

" The only bed-room I have is engaged by an invalid, but I've 
made you up a nice bed on a sofa, in a snug little closet, where no 
one will disturb you." 

Following the host into the house, Randulph was shown into a 
closet opening into a larger room, where, as had been stated, a sofa- 
bed was prepared. He threw himself upon it, without undressing, 
and presently fell asleep. How long he remained in this state he 
knew not, but he was awakened by the sound of muttered voices 
in the next apartment, and became an involuntary listener to their 
discourse. 

"They will all be here at midnight," said a voice, "and you 
may capture them without difficulty." 

"If we do, sir," replied another, "your reward is certain, 
though you are a Jesuit priest. I shall bring a strong party of 
men with me." 

"And I'll take care to admit them," said a third, whose voice 
Randulph recognised as that of the landlord, " provided you pro- 
mise me a third of the reward, and undertake that I shall not be 
implicated in the matter." 

" I give you my word, as an officer in his majesty's grenadier 
guards, that it shall be so," rejoined the previous speaker, " and 
that is better than the written engagement of any Jacobite." 

" The reward is three hundred pounds," said a sharp conceited 
voice. " That's one hundred to Mr. Chinnock, another hundred 
to Father Verselyn, and a third to me. Is that distinctly under- 
stood?" 

" Distinctly, Mr. Cripps," replied the officer, "provided I take 
them." 

"Yes, of course," said the landlord; "but you can't fail to do 
so, if you follow my instructions. I'll put them into your hands." 

" Can't you come down with something beforehand, captain?" 
asked Mr. Cripps. 



THE miser's daughter. 379 

"Not witli a crown," replied the officer. "I have abeady 
pledged my word that you shall receive the reward, and that must 
content you. It is as much as traitors can expect," he added, 
with a contemptuous laugh. 

*' You'll take care I am not injured?" said the Jesuit. 

" PU do my best," replied the officer; "but you must look to 
yourself. And now to arrange our plans. As soon as it gets dark, 
I'll place half-a-dozen of my grenadiers, under the care of Tom 
Pratt (Long Tom, as the men call him), in the summer-house near 
the river. They'U cut off their retreat, if any should be attempted 
by that way." 

" Long Tom and his men must hide themselves in the lower 
room of the summer-house, tiU Captain Vizard — I mean Cordwell 
Firebras — has made his search," said Chinnock. " He's sure 
to be here the first, and if he's seized too soon, you may lose the 
others." 

" I must have the whole pack, or you don't get the reward," 
said the officer. 

" There's a young man asleep in that closet, sent by the cap- 
tain," said the landlord — " I'm not quite sure that he's a Jacobite. 
What shall we do with him?" 

*' Detain him," replied the officer. " I hold you responsible for 
his safe custody." 

" But he's a stout, resolute fellow," said Chinnock, " and may 
get off, in spite of me." 

" I'll leave you a couple of my grenadiers," replied the officer; 
— " they'll remain in the bar, like chance customers. Call them, if 
you require assistance.'' 

After a little further conversation, which Randulph could not 
catch, they separated, and he began to reflect upon the new posture 
of affairs. He was now involved in a fresh difficulty, from which 
he did not see how he could escape. Though anxious to warn 
Cordwell Firebras and the other Jacobites of their danger, he felt 
it would be almost impracticable. Any attempt at flight from the 
house must be attended with great risk, after the precaution taken 
by the others to prevent it, and he finally resolved to let things 
take their course, and to be guided in his plan of action by circum- 
stances. 

Determined, however, to ascertain whether his movements were 



380 THE miser's daughter. 

watclied, he walked forth, and proceeded .towards the summer-house. 
Tlie host was instantly at his side, and he caught a gHmpse of 
Mr. Cripps in the doorway, and behind him the two grenadiers. 
Taking no sort of notice of these hostile preparations, he talked 
indifferently to the landlord, and presently returned with him to 
the house, and ordered some refreshment. 

Evening, at length, arrived, and as it grew dusk, Randulph gazed 
into the garden, and perceived the figures of the grenadiers, headed 
by Long Tom, steal off towards the summer-house. He also fancied 
he saw others station themselves at the side of the brook running 
between the inn garden and the mill yard, and he had no doubt the 
street door was guarded in a similar manner. The trap was thus 
completely set, and he trembled to think what might be the fate of 
those for whom, however he differed with them in political opinions, 
he still entertained a strong friendship. 

Slowly as the hours had hitherto passed, the interval between 
this time and that appointed for the arrival of Cordwell Firebras 
appeared yet more tedious. Twelve o'clock came — half-past — and 
yet none of the club had arrived: and Randulph began to hope 
that they had received some intimation of the plot against them. 
The same idea apparently occurred to the landlord, for he became 
very fidgetty, and kept coming constantly into Randulph's room, 
asking whether he knew what could be the cause of Captain 
Vizard's being so late. 

*' I'm afraid something must have happened to him and the other 
gentlemen," he said; "the Captain is punctuality itself — and so 
indeed ar^ they all. I wonder what can have occurred." 

" Perhaps they may have been betrayed," said Randulph. 

" I hope not!" cried the landlord; " if so, I should lose my 

best friends,'^ he added, correcting himself hastily. 

"Do you expect Sir Norfolk Salusbury to-night?" asked Ran- 
dulph. 

" I did, sir," replied the landlord; " but I don't know what to 
think now." 

" And Sir Bulkeley Price and Father Verselyn?" 

" Both, sir," was the reply. 

" Any others ?" inquired Randulph. 

" Several, I believe," returned the landlord. " A very full 
meeting of the club was expected. What can have kept them 



THE miser's daughter. 38 1 

away? All! as I live, that's the Captain's voice. All's right 
now." 

So saying, he rushed out, and presently afterwards returned, 
ushering in Cordwell Firebras. The latter looked greatly ex- 
hausted. 

"Give me a cup of wine, landlord," he said; *' I feel faint, 
I've had some hard work to do." 

The host instantly flew to a cupboard, and produced a flask and 
a large glass. Filling the latter, he presented it to Firebras, who 
emptied it at a draught. 

"You are late to-night. Captain," said the landlord; "I had 
almost given you up. Will the rest of the gentlemen be here?" 

" I expect so," replied Firebras. " I thought they would have 
heen here before me. Have you looked into the garden and the 
summer-house?" 

" I have," replied the landlord. 

" PU go there myself," said the other, taking a brace of pistols 
from his pocket. " Stay where you are," he added to Randulph, 
who was about to follow him. 

Accompanied by the host, who carried a lantern, Firebras crossed 
the garden; but though he glanced around, he perceived nothing, 
and marched direct to the summer-house. 

On approaching it, Chinnock ran forward, and pretending to try 
the door, drew out the key, crying, so as to be heard by those in- 
side — " Dear me ! it's locked — wait a minute, sir, and I'll fetch the 
key.'' 

Without pausing for a reply, he darted ofi" to the house. In 
a couple of minutes he returned, apologising to Firebras — whom 
he found impatiently pacing the platform in front of the summer- 
house, and gazing at the darkling tide flowing past him — for his 
delay ; and unlocked the door. 

The summer-house was empty; the grenadiers had taken the 
hint, and descended to the lower chamber. A glance satisfied 
Firebras that all was right, and he returned slowly to the house, 
the landlord stamping upon the floor as he quitted the building,»as 
a signal to the grenadiers that they might now come forth from 
their concealment. 

On reaching the house, Firebras dismissed the landlord, and 



382 THE misee's daughter. 

going up to Randulph, clapped him on the shoulder, and said — " I 
have rare news for you." 

" And I have news for you," replied the other. 

" Hear mine first !" cried Firebras. " What if I tell you I am 
come to offer you your estates and the hand of Hilda, if you join 
the Jacobite party?" 

'^ There would be no use in joining you now!" returned Ran- 
dulph. 

" You think I'm trifling with you !" cried Firebras, producing a 
packet; " but this will speak to the contrary. Here is the assign- 
ment of your estates to Isaac Isaacs. A receipt in full of all claims 
is attached to it. The deed is yours, provided you join us." 

" You amaze me !" cried Randulph, gazing at the packet ; " that 
is unquestionably the deed I executed." 

" Most certainly it is," replied Firebras. '* It is too long a story 
to teU you how I became possessed of it," he added, replacing it 
in his pocket, *' but I have other intelligence for you. Mr. Scarve 
is dead!" 

Randulph uttered an exclamation of surprise. 

" He died last night," pursued Firebras, " and left his property 
to Philip Frewiu, in case of Hilda's refusal to marry him.^' 

" But Philip may not Hve to claim the fulfilment of the condi- 
tion," cried Randulph. 

" PhiHp, also, is dead," replied Firebras. And smiling at Ran- 
dulph's astonishment, he added, "Now you see that all is in your 
grasp. Fate has given you the lady of your love. I offer you 
your fortune. Can you refuse to join us ?' 

" Mr. Firebras," said Randulph, composing himself, " this is 
not the time to put such a question to me." 

" Pardon me," cried Firebras, sternly, " I must have an answer 
now — at this moment — or you lose your estates and Hilda for ever. 
Do not suppose I threaten lightly. I can, and wiU, make good my 
words." 

" You mistake me altogether," rejoined Randulph. *' I mean 
to*say it would be useless to me to assent. You are betrayed !" 

" Betrayed !" exclaimed Firebras, in a voice of thunder, *'How ! 
by whom ? But this is a mere assertion made to turn me from my 
purpose." 



THE misee's daughter. 383 

" You will find it too true," replied Randulpli. " The house is 
environed on all sides by grenadiers." 

" I have just visited the summer-house," said Firebras, " There 
was no one there." 

"The men were concealed in the lower chamber," said Ran- 
dulph. 

"It may be so," cried Firebras, with terrible imprecation. 
*' But they shall not take me easily. My pistols ! ha ! they have 
been removed ! The landlord, then, is our betrayer." 

"He is," repHed Randulph. "Your only chance of escape is 
apparent unconsciousness of the design. You might, perhaps, make 
good your own retreat — but the others " 

" I will never desert them," said Firebras. " There is a boat 
at hand, for I ordered Jacob Post to be in waiting for you off the 
summer-house for another purpose, and I caught a ghmpse of him 
just now. Ha! here come our friends." And as he spoke, Sir 
Norfolk Salusbury, Sir Bulkeley Price, Father Verselyn, Mr. 
Travers, and four or five other gentlemen, entered the room. 

"Leave us, landlord," said Firebras ; "we will call you when 
we want you." 

And the order being obeyed, he bolted the door. 

"We are betrayed, gentlemen," said Firebras, in a low tone; 
" the house is surrounded by guards, and our retreat is cut oiF by 
the river.^* 

As the Words were uttered, the door was tried by some persons 
without, who, finding it fastened, proceeded to burst it open. 

" To the garden ! to the garden !" cried Firebras. 

And the party made for the window. Before, however, the 
whole of them could pass through it, the officer, and a party of 
grenadiers burst open the door, and endeavoured to seize them. 
Firebras and the others, with the exception of Randulph, drew 
their swords, and the next instant, an encounter took place. But 
as all was buried in darkness, httle mischief was done. 

In spite of the efibrts of the soldiers to prevent them, five or 
six of the Jacobites contrived to get across the ditch, and gaining 
the mill, took shelter within it. They were followed by a party of 
grenadiers, who fired a few shots at them. Whether the circum- 
stance was the result of accident or design is immaterial, but a few 
minutes afterwards the mill was found to be on fire. Flames burst 



384 THE miser's daughter. 

from the upper windows, throwing a fierce glare on the groups 
below, and brightly illumining the towers of Westminster Abbey. 

Repeated loud explosions were next heard, threatening each mo- 
ment to shake the mill to pieces; while some of the unfortunate 
Jacobites were seen springing from a side window upon the water- 
wheel and trying to descend by it. Two others, at the risk oi 
breaking their necks, dropped from a window facing the river, and 
endeavoured to gain the vessel moored beside it. The fugitives 
on the water-wheel were held in check by a party of grenadiers, 
who, having thrown a couple of planks over the little stream, were 
enabled to reach them. 

Meanwhile, favoured by the previous darkness, for all was now 
bright as day, Firebras, Salusbury, and the rest of the Jacobites, 
made good their retreat as far as the summer-house. Some of them 
even managed to force their way to the platform. Here a des- 
perate struggle took place, in which Sir Norfolk was severely 
wounded in the side by a bayonet. 

By this time, the fire had broken out in the mill, and its glare 
shewed Jacob at a Httle distance in a skiff. Notwithstanding the 
menaces of the soldiers, who pointed their guns at him, and threat- 
ened to fire if he approached nearer, Jacob pushed resolutely 
towards the summer-house. He was now close under the platform, 
and made signs to Randulph to descend, but the latter would not 
desert Sir Norfolk, who had been seized by a couple of grenadiers. 
He threw himself upon the old baronet's captors, and in the strug- 
gle that ensued, the railing gave way, and precipitating Sir Bulke- 
ley Price, the Jesuit, and the grenadiers, into the tide. Before the 
other soldiers had recovered from their surprise at this occurrence, 
Randulph had lowered Sir Norfolk into the skifi^ and sprung in 
after him. 

Jacob's efforts to push off were impeded by Sir Bulkeley Price, 
who clung to the stern of the skiff, earnestly imploring them to 
take him in. Father Verselyn caught hold of the steps, and ap- 
prehensive of some further disaster, crept along the side of the 
summer-house, and took refuge in a small sewer, in the slime of 
which it is supposed he perished, for he was never heard of more. 

Meanwhile, Cordwell Firebras — engaged hand to hand with the 
officer, who, having vainly summoned him to surrender, attacked 
him in person — had reached the platform. Seeing escape impos- 



THE miser's daughtee. 385 

sible, Firebras, wliile defending himself against tlie officer, called to 
Randulph, whom he descried below, and held out the packet to 
him. The latter ordered Jacob to keep the skiff steady, and to bring 
it as near the combatants as possible. 

While Jacob obeyed the injunction, a successful thrust from Fire- 
bras stretched his adversary upon the platform, but the next mo- 
ment he received his own death-wound from Long Tom, who 
stepped. forward, as his officer fell, and discharged his musket into 
his breast. 

With a dying effort, Firebras stretched his hand over the rail, 
and, consigning the packet to Randulph, fell backwards into the 
water. 

Possessed of the packet, Randulph turned to the aid of Sir Bul- 
keley Price, and pulling him into the sldff, Jacob instantly pushed 
off. Assisted by the stream, which ran very strong, they soon got 
under the sides of the vessel near the mill, and were sheltered from 
the fire of the soldiery. 

Meanwhile, the conflagration raged fast and furiously, and before 
the skiff containing the fugitives had got half way to Westminster 
Bridge, a tremendous explosion took place, scattering the blazing 
fragments of the old mill far and wide into the river. 



2 c 



386 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

IN WHICH THE "WEDDING-DAT IS FIXED. 

About three months after the events detailed in the preceding 
chapter, a family party were assembled in the dining-room of the 
house at Lamheth, consisting of Abel, Trussell, Mrs. Crew, and 
Hilda. The latter was dressed in deep mourning, and had a shade 
of melancholy on her countenance, which rather added to her 
beauty than detracted from it. She sat near Abel Beechcroft, who 
regarded her with parental affection, and whose features, having 
lost their somewhat cynical and saturnine cast, now expressed only 
benevolence and kindliness. Always placid and composed, Mrs. 
Crew looked more cheerful than before; and Trussell, who, indeed, 
was rarely out of humour, appeared in tip-top spirits. In short, a 
happier party never met together. Nor did their attendant, Mr. 
Jukes, appear a whit less contented. 

" Well, my dear niece," said Trussell, — " for so I shall make 
bold to call you, in anticipation of our intended relationship, — ^we 
shall certainly have Randulph back to-day." 

" This morning, do you think?" she rejoined. 

" Why, no, possibly not till evening," said Trussell. " Ah, 
•sir!" he added, to Abel, " how different our nephew's present jour- 
ney from Cheshire is from the last. Then he came with very little 
money in his pocket, and very little prospect of getting any — de- 
prived of his inheritance, and with no apparent prospect of its res- 
titution. Now he arrives a wealthy man, with a prospect of such 
happiness before him as a king might envy !" 

" It's a story to write in a book," said Mr. Jukes, rubbing his 
eyes. 

** I fear the two months during which Randulph has been absent, 
must have passed very slowly over your head, Hilda?" observed 



THE miser's daughter. 387 

Abel. " I may ask you the question now that we shall so soon 
have him with us again." 

" To say that I have not felt his absence, and wished for his re- 
turn, would not be to speak the truth, sir," she repHed; " but it 
would be equally untrue to say that I have not been happier 
durino- the period you mention than I ever was in my life. How, 
indeed, could it be otherwise, when I have experienced so much 
attention from you, from your brother, and from Mrs. Crew ?" 

" I'm sure there is nothing we wouldn't do to make you happy," 
said Mrs. Crew. 

"Nothing!" cried Mr. Jukes, emphatically — "nothing we 
wouldn't do." 

"I beg pardon, Mr. Jukes," said Hilda; "I ought to have in- 
cluded you in the list of my kind friends." 

" You make me proud to hear you say so," replied Mr. Jukes. 
" I told my master, long before things came to this, that nothing 
would make me so happy as to see you in this house, married to 
Mr. Randulph. And I told him also that we would have one of 
the upper rooms turned into a nursery, and that he should sit in an 
easy chair, nursing a little Randulph, or a little Abel, as the case 
may be, with a Miss Hilda, or a Miss Sophia playing beside him. 
Didn't I tell you that, sir?" 

" You did — you did," replied Abel, hastily. 

" Get me some usquebaugh, Mr. Jukes," said Trussell, who 
almost choked himself with laughing at the butler's speech, while 
Hilda was covered with blushes, and Mrs. Crew looked a Httle 
confused. 

The order was promptly obeyed, and Trussell, as he raised the 
glass to his lips, said, "May I live to see the realisation of Mr. 
Jukes's wish !" 

" I must drink that toast myself," said the butler, retiring to 
the sideboard. 

" By-the-bye, Hilda," said Trussell, laughing, " I haven't told 
you what has become of your disconsolate suitor, Beau Villiers, 
who wouldn't be content till you had refused him half a dozen 
times? Disappointed in his hope of obtaining you, or rather your 
fortune, he laid siege to Lady Spinke, and has eloped with her to 
Paris!" 

" A proper consummation to his folly," observed Abel. 



388 THE miser's daughter. 

" But the best is to come," pursued TrusselL " Sir Singleton's 
marriage, as you know, took place at the Fleet, and not having the 
fear of courts of law before his eyes, nor tliinking it necessary to 
get a divorce, the old beau is actually going to marry again. And 
this time his choice has fallen upon — whom do you think ? — Lady 
Brabazon !" 

" I'm glad that odious woman's got rid of, in any way," said 
Mrs. Crew. " I never could endure her." 

" By-the-bye, Mr. Jukes," said Trussell, laughing to himself at 
his sister's vivacity, " I never heard what became of your nephew, 
Mr. Cripps?" 

" I'm happy to say he's a reformed character, sir," replied the 
butler. " He was mixed up in some way or other, I don't know 
how, with that Jacobite disturbance, where Mr. Cordwell Firebras 
met his death, and received a very awkward wound, which put him 
in danger of his Hfe. Since then, he has become quite an altered 
person, and neither drinks, games, nor dresses, as he used to do. 
He's at present living with a very quiet family in Abingdon-street; 
and, as far as I can learn, is doing his duty." 

"I'm glad to hear it," said Abel; "and since that is the case, 
111 take care you shan't lose the twenty guineas you were foolish 
enough to lend him." 

Mr. Jukes made a suitable acknowledgment. 

The breakfast things were taken away, but the party were still 
chatting over the table, when the door suddenly opened, and Ran- 
dulph rushed into the room. He was in his travelling attire, and 
though somewhat embrowned, looked handsomer, Hilda thought, 
than she had ever seen him — except on the occasion of his first visit 
to her father's house. He was followed by Jacob Post, who had 
attended him in his journey, and who shook hands heartily with 
Mr. Jukes. 

Hilda, who had risen at Randulph's approach, was instantly 
locked in his embrace. The tears started to Abel's eyes as he re- 
garded the meeting of the young couple; Mrs. Crew gazed at 
them with fond dehght; but Trussell, who was not quite so much 
interested in lovers' meetings, availed himself of the opportunity 
of taking a pinch of snuff. 

" Well, you're looking vastly well, Randulph, I must say," ob- 



THE misee's daughtee. 389 

served Trussell, after his nephew's affectionate greetings had gone 
all round. " I don't think the country has disagreed with you." 

" It is the quiet life he has led there, brother, and the early hours 
he has kept, that have agreed with him," observed Abel. 

"You are right, uncle," replied Randulph, "and I am now 
quite convinced, from the experiment I have just made, that a 
quiet Hfe is more to my taste than a gay one." 

" I am glad to hear you say so !" cried Abel. 

Trussell made no remark, but he slightly shrugged his shoulders, 
and took an inordinate pinch of snuff. 

*' You don't believe me, I see, uncle," said Randulph, laughing. 
*' But I assure you it is the case. And I have no doubt I shall 
bring you to my opinion, when I get you down to Cheshire.'^ 

" When you do get me there, I've no doubt you will," replied 
Trussell, somewhat drily. " Town agrees with me perfectly. 
Every one to his taste." 

" And your tenants were glad to see you, Randulph, I am sure?'' 
said his mother, taking his hand. 

"They were, indeed," repUed Randulph; "and I never ex- 
perienced greater gratification than when they were collected in 
the old hall, and I told them I was once more their landlord. 
Tlieir shouts made the rafters ring again. They all wished to see 
their mistress that is to be," he continued, gazing tenderly at 
Hilda. 

" And I see not why their satisfaction should be delayed," re- 
plied Abel. " The considerations of decorum that apply to others 
do not apply to Hilda. So much of her life has been passed in 
self-sacrifice and trouble, that the sooner she is recompensed for it 
the better." 

" The best thing we can do is to leave the young couple alone 
together to fix the day," said Trussell. " Make it as early as you can, 
Randulph; and notwithstanding the objections I raised to the coun- 
try just now, I shall be happy to spend a month or two with you 
at Crew Hall, whenever you choose to invite me." 

" The house will always be your home, my dear uncle," said 
Randulph. " No one will be more welcome." 

Acting upon Trussell's hint, the others then withdrew. Though 
Randulph had a thousand things to say to Hilda, he could recollect 
none of them: but perhaps the expressions of rapturous devotion 



390 THE miser's daughtee. 

lie was able to utter were fully as agreeable to bis listener's ear as 
any otber kind of discourse he migbt have adopted. 

Thus more than half an hour passed away so swiftly, so de- 
lightfully, that the lovers did not know they had been alone many 
minutes, when they were interrupted by a discreet tap at the door. 

'' Come in," said Randulph. 

''Beg pardon,'' said Mr. Jukes, cautiously obejdngthe summons, 
" but Miss Thomasine Deacle is without, and wishes to speak to 
Miss Scarve.'^ 

*' With me !" exclaimed Hilda, in surprise. 

"I told her you were engaged with Mr. Randulph — particularly 
engaged," rep bed the butler; " but she said she didn't mind 
that. She wants to see you on a matter material to her happi- 
ness." 

" She is a strange creature," said Hilda, smiling at the recollec- 
tion of her former interview with her. " I dare say she wants to 
tell me something about Peter Pokerich." 

" Very hkely," said the butler, " for he is with her." 

" Well, let them come in," rephed Hilda. 

And the next moment, the fair Thomasine and the little barber 
were ushered into the room. 

" I trust you will excuse this intrusion, Miss Scarve," said the 
fair Thomasine, who was a Httle disposed to be in heroics: " but I 
have a favour to beg of you. You are aware of the admiration I 
have always entertained for you — of the devotion I have felt to- 
wards you " 

" I am quite sensible of both," interrupted Hilda, smiling; " but 
the favour?" 

" After aE, my heart fails me — I cannot ask it," said the fair 
Thomasine, turning away in confusion. 

"I'll tell you what it is," interposed Peter; "she declares she'll 
never have me, unless we're married on the same day as you and 
Mr.Randulph.^' 

" On the same day, and at the same church," said the fair Tho- 
masine, exhibiting a face like a blush rose. " The favour I wished 
to ask you, was your consent to tliis arrangement. Peter met Mr. 
Randulph and Jacob crossing Westminster Bridge on their return 
from Cheshire this morning, and we thought we had better lose no 
time in making the request.'^ 



THE miser's daughter. 391 

"My consent was scarcely required," said Hilda; "but as soon 
as the day is fixed, you shall know it." 

" I hope it will be soon !" cried Peter; " I'm tired of being put 
off so often." 

" It would ill become me to exhibit any impatience," said the 
fair Thomasine, casting down her eyes. 

"I sympathize with their situation, Hilda," said Randulph, 
taHng her hand. " Can we not give them an answer now. To- 
day is Thursday. Let it be Monday next." 

" Oh, yes, Monday, by all means?" cried Peter, jumping into 
the air, and clapping his hands. 

"I dare not urge Miss Scarve to greater expedition," said the 
fair Thomasine, still looking down ; *' but " 

" Your answer !" cried Peter, throwing himself on his knees be- 
fore Hilda. 

"Yes, your answer!" cried the fair Thomasine, kneeUng down 
beside Peter. 

"You cannot resist these entreaties, Hilda," said Randulph, 
smiUng. 

*' I cannot, indeed," she replied. " Be it as you propose." 

" Our marriage wiU take place on Monday," said Randulph: 
" and we shall be united at the parish church at Lambeth." 

" How charming !" cried Peter, rising, and assisting the fair 
Thomasine to her feet. " We can go there in a boat. Won't that 
be dehghtful?' 

" I shall never forget this obligation. Miss Scarve," said the fair 
Thomasine, taking Hilda's hand, and pressing it to her lips; "and 
may the day you have fixed be productive of happiness to both of 
us. We deserve to be rewarded for the troubles we have expe- 
rienced." 

And dropping a low curtesy to Randulph, she took her depar- 
ture with Peter, who skipped out of the room, scarcely able to con- 
tain himself for joy. 



392 THE miser's daughter. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

DETJlILING AN EVENT "WHICH MAY POSSIBLY HAVE BEEN ANTICIPATED FROM THE 
PKECEDING CHAPTEK. 

We sliall Imrry over the intervening period as rapidly as the 
lovers themselves would have hurried it over, and proceed at once 
to the wished-for day. 

A little before nine o'clock, on this eventful morning, Randulph, 
who had taken up his quarters with Sir Bulkeley Price, in Saint 
James's Square, entered the breakfast-room, arrayed in his bridal 
attire, which had been prepared for him by the skilful hands of 
Desmartins. He found Sir Bulkeley Price and Sir Norfolk Salusbury 
at the table — the latter having come up from Wales, whither he 
had retired to recruit himself after his wound, expressly to attend 
the ceremony. After receiving their congratulations, Randulph 
sat down with them, but as he could only swallow a cup of choco- 
late, he underwent much rallying on his want of appetite. 

Breakfast over, the party drove to Whitehall Stairs, where a six- 
oared barge was in readiness to convey them across the river. 
Jacob Post was appointed coxswain of this barge and he wore a 
waterman's coat of scarlet cloth, and velvet jockey-shaped cap of 
the same colour. The six rowers were attired in the same livery, 
and presented a very gay appearance. 

The morning was bright and beautiful, and everything seemed 
to Randulph to participate in his happiness. Each boat that passed 
them, seeing the purpose on which they were bent, cheered them 
cordially, and Jacob, who was greatly elated, returned their greet- 
ings lustily. 

As they passed through Westminster Bridge, and shaped their 
rapid course to Lambeth, they passed a boat containing a couple in 
bridal attire, and rowed by watermen with favours in their caps. 




CftoTYD 



GraJCsla'xJC^ 



The Marriag'e of Rsmdnlpli and Jiilda 



THE miser's daughter. 393 

These were Mr. Rathbone and Mrs. Nettlesliip, who, having made 
a composition with their creditors, had come to the conclusion that 
the best thing they could do would be to fulfil their original agree- 
ment, and having heard that Randulph and Hilda were to be 
united at Lambeth, they determined, Hke Peter Pokerich and the 
fair Thomasine, to be married at the same time, and at the same 
church. The boats cheered each other as they passed. 

Shortly after this, they came up with a four-oared cutter, in 
which was a still more gaily dressed bridal party, consisting of 
Mr. and Mrs. Deacle, the fair Thomasine, and Peter Pokerich. 
The sunny tresses, bright eyes, and dimpling cheeks of the bride, 
attracted Sir Bulkeley's admiration, and he called out to Peter that 
he ought to consider himself a very happy man; to which the 
little barber replied, " that he was the happiest man in the world — 
Mr. Crew excepted." 

Another cheering passed between the rowers; and Randulph's 
barge swept over the sparkling waters to the stairs near Lambeth 
Palace, where he and his companions disembarked. 

As Abel Beechcroft was extremely well known and highly res- 
pected in the neighbourhood, great preparations were made to lend 
eclat to his nephew's wedding. A band of music was stationed on 
a lighter moored near the stairs ; and the lighter itself was hung 
all over with flags and streamers. The band was plapng, the beUs 
ringing, and as Randulph leaped ashore, a loud shout from the 
crowd collected to see him land, welcomed him, while many flatter- 
ing comments, in no very low key, were made upon his handsome 
appearance by the female part of the assemblage. Jxl passing to- 
wards his uncle's residence, Randulph noticed with interest a troop 
of pretty little girls with wreaths round their heads, and baskets 
of flowers in their hands, standing in the path leading to the 
church. 

The party were admitted by Mr. Jukes, whose portly figure was 
well displayed in an expansive snowy waistcoat, a brown coat, spick 
and span new for the occasion, and a well-powdered bob-wig. 
The worthy butler gave Randulph a hearty welcome, and wished 
him many years of happiness, and having ushered him and the 
others into the parlour, returned to the hall to Jacob, to give him 
wedding favours for himself and the watermen, which the other 
hastened to distribute. 

2 D 



394 THE miser's daughter. 

The meeting between the young bride and bridegroom was full of 
agitated delight. Abel looked perfectly happy, but thoughtful, as 
did Mrs. Crew, whose emotion found relief in an occasional sigh — 
not the sigh of misgiving, but the relief of a joy-oppressed heart. 
Trussell was, as usual, in very high spirits. He shook Ilandulph 
heartily by the hand, wished him all sorts of happiness, and then 
cordially greeted the Welsh baronets. Besides Mrs. Clinton, there 
was another young lady present, the daughter of an old friend 
of Mrs. Crew's, a Miss Wilbraham, who acted as bridesmaid to 
Hilda. 

Soon afterwards, all being declared in readiness, the bride pre- 
pared to set forth under the care of Abel Beechcroft, who, before 
they quitted the house, in an earnest tone invoked a blessing on her 
head and on that of his nephew. And both felt that the blessing 
of so good a man would not be thrown away ! 

Cheered by the good wishes and smiling countenances of the 
groups through which they passed, and enlivened by the sunshine, 
the party entered the church. Peter Pokerich and the fair Thoma- 
sine, with Mr. Rathbone and Mrs. Nettleship, were already stand-- 
ing beside the altar. The young couple advanced, and took the 
central place, and the church was instantly crowded with specta- 
tors. 

The service was admirably performed by a venerable clergyman 
— an old and valued friend of Abel's, — and at its close, the con- 
course issued from the church, dividing into two lines so as to allow 
a passage for the wedding train. As soon as the happy couple 
were seen issuing hand in hand from the Gothic portal of the old 
church, a loud and joyous shout was raised by the assemblage, a 
couple of guns were fired on board the Hghtcr, and the church bells 
rang forth a joyous peal. 

It was a heart-cheering sight, and many a breast throbbed, — and 
many an eye grew moist at beholding it. And plenty of specta- 
tors there were. The whole of the area before the church was 
filled, and the windows and towers of the old archiepiscopal palace 
were studded with faces. The little flower-girls now stepped for- 
ward, and strewed their fragrant offerings in the path of the happy 
pair, who walked on amid the continued cheers of the bystanders. 

A little behind Randulph, on the right, walked Trussell, who, 
excited by the general enthusiasm, had placed his hat on his cane, 



THE miser's daughtee. 395 

and waved it to the crowd. Near him came Abel and Miss Wil- 
brahara, the former with a glowing smile on his countenance, such 
as Mr. Jukes himself never remembered to have witnessed. After 
them walked Sir Norfolk Salusbury and Mrs. Crew. 

Next in order came Mr. and Mrs. Pokerich, the latter of whom 
thought it decorous to turn aside her pretty face from the ardent 
gaze of her enamoured little lord. Lastly came Mr. and Mrs. 
Rathbone, whose appearance did not seem greatly to interest the 
spectators. Sir Bulkeley Price had posted himself on the left of 
the church-door, to watch the wedding train pass by, and to wait 
the coming forth of the clergyman. 

As Randulph advanced through the crowd, Jacob Post stepped- 
forward, and holding out his rough, honest hand to him, said in a 
voice, the sincerity of which could not be doubted, — 

" God bless you, sir, and your lovely bride, and may you know 
years of uninterrupted happiness !" 

" And take my blessing, too," said Mr. Jukes, likewise extend- 
ing his hand. " An old man's good wishes, though he be but a 
dependent, can do no harm." 

"I thank you both!" cried Randulph, in a voice of emotion; 
" and my wife thanks you too." 

"1 do — I do," she replied; "nor do I doubt the fulfilment of 
your wishes." 

And as she uttered these words, loud and deafening cheers rent 
the air, and another discharge of guns took place. 

In this way they proceeded to the house, where they were fol- 
lowed by the rest of the party, and presently afterwards by the 
clergyman and Sir Bulkeley. They then all sat down to an excel- 
lent repast. 

By desire of his hospitable master, Mr. Jukes invited the other 
couples and their friends to take refreshments at his house, which, 
as they delightedly availed themselves of the offer, were served to 
them in the summer-house overlooking the river ; where, while en- 
joying themselves, they did not forget to drink long life and hap- 
piness to Randulph and his bride. 

The honeymoon — all the rest of their life was a honeymoon — 
was passed by the happy couple, in good old-fashioned style, at 
Lambeth. They then proceeded to Cheshire, accompanied by 



396 THE miser's daughter. 

Trussell and Mrs. Crew, and were soon afterwards followed by 
Abel, who passed the winter with them. 

In due time, the prognostications of Mr. Jukes were fulfilled, 
and Abel displayed no objection to the endearments of two great- 
nieces, and a great-nephew. 

Appointed Eandulph's head-gamekeeper, Jacob Post passed the 
remainder of his days in the service of his new master. 

Of the two brothers Beechcroft, Abel was the first to pay the 
debt of nature, Trussell survived him two or three years, during 
which he was a great martyr to gout. He never, however, lost his 
temper, except when young Master Randulph accidentally trod on 
his toe, and then he would swear a round oath, to frighten him, 
and' try to hit at him with his stick, as testy old gentlemen are wont 
to do in plays. 

Randulph and Hilda almost touched the verge of the present 
century; and from the anecdotes of one of their descendants, 
in the third generation, the materials of the present Tale have 
been collected. 



THE END. 



C ■WHTriNG, BEADFORT HOUSE, STBAND. 



or 



o- 



-^ 



^ 



\^ 



^ 







^ '>:a'^ 



:^^' 







14 DAY USE K 

RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWID M ^ \ 



LOAN DEPT. 

This book is due on the last date stamped below, or 

on the date to which renewed. 

Renewed books are subject to immediate recalL 



tx 



SxJfi'boM tX 



OEC 1 1 '64-12 M 



-tO 



REC & LP 



jULl5'b5-iPM 



LD 2]A-40m-ll,'63 
(E16028l0)476B 



General Library 

University of California 

Berkeley 






i 









>. 



,>5(' 



■1 VJ 









?^'7>/'54^ 



,' ^, ■V'";;^'--'.''.'-'^-'t.- -^ ■ ■i'jiu ■.--;■■,•*'-•-■-' "-/■ r,--^ . ■■ ■ Tv/ '', >- A 'jfi" ■';^ :'-.'.■.'-■ ■ > .«.'.v,':;,.f .-/ ;j •:•.-■;■',. r-,'^- *%: '- ' *••! ^i' ■'■ ,■ ■ :,.•;'-; ',"-> 

fe r^?^:?;-^*;^^^',-.; J^:'^:^:'---.-:^- )'■'.'■ .; ,>--^, ..:^^- ::;■ V<?'^r<,-^>-'V;.^-' -',,:.'■■.■-*; -i: ^i.-V-'.'- ;.^:^ ■.^r•■^:''7il? 
^■^?;'^:^|>^>;>■■';- p^'.:'i' ,';'-"- i3^'-'':'i~;V "" ^'^ ''^:/^f^Cf^'-'*.V"i ■■"'■■',■:''' ;-"V-----';;"^ ■'.,• :?'vff7i: ;■./;^•'.vv'v^'.' 



^■A.•;■::;'.'^ 






u ;■,.-;-'> ■;, .'i.. 



t^iil-i^'-C--':'-^^ 'v:'v'v-'"v--i-':-'4'- ^'^■^^';G■■'■-^.>^^'^:- ■"'-•'^^'■•■''^'"" "^ '•'"■ ■ " '"^ '■•■•-- ''^V--':^ ^- *: ^'--■-; 






.v,V' ,i ;-,^- ,-\ ;, i' ' .•■ , 












|y-|i'"'^E:X':^'f'^- 






.'^?';r ■'/- • 



-*}. 
i" 







