





DUKE UNIVERSITY 


LIBRARY 




The Glenn Negley Collection 
of Utopian Literature 















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2010 with funding from 
Duke University Libraries 



http://www.archive.org/details/newrepublicorOOmall 



THE NEW REPUBLIC 



THE NEW REPUBLIC 

OR 

CULTURE, FAITH, AND PHILOSOPHY IN AN 
ENGLISH COUNTRY HOUSE 

BY 

W. H. M ALLOC K 

AUTHOR OF 'THE NEW PAUL AND VIRGINIA' ' IS LIFE WORTH LIVING ? ' 
'A ROMANCE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY' ETC. 




Tlavra yeXuis nal ndvra kovls k<x\ iravTO. rb fiT]8ei/, 
Tldvra yap e£ a\6ywv eVrl to. yiyvofava 

Greek Anthology 



A NEW IMPRESSION 



LONDON 
CHATTO & WINDUS 

1906 



AU«7V 



TO 

'VIOLET FANE' 

AUTHORESS OP 
'ANTHONY BA81NGTON* 'THE QUEEN OF THE FAIRIES ETC, 

Cbia $5ook is |nstribtt> 

BY HER SINCERE FRIEND 
THE AUTHOR 




THE NEW REPUBLIC. 



BOOK I. 

CHAPTER I. 

;OWARDS the close of last July, 
when the London season was fast 
dying of the dust, Otho Laurence 
had invited what the Morning 
Post called ' a select circle of friends,' to 
spend a quiet Sunday with him at his cool 
villa by the sea. 

This singular retreat was the work of 
a very singular man, Otho Laurence's uncle, 
who had squandered on it an immense 
fortune, and had designed it as far as possible 
to embody his own tastes and character. 
He was a member of a Tory family of some 
note, and had near relations in both Houses of 
Parliament ; but he w r as himself possessed of 
a deep though quiet antipathy to the two 
things generally most cherished by those of 



2 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

his time and order, the ideas of Christianity 
and Feudalism ; and he studiously kept 
himself clear of all public life. Pride of 
birth, indeed, he had in no small measure ; 
but it was the pride of a Roman of the 
Empire rather than of an Englishman ; a 
pride which, instead of connecting him with 
prince or people, made him shun the one as 
a Caesar, and forget the other as slaves. All 
his pleasures were those of a lettered 
voluptuary, who would, as he himself said, 
have been more in place under Augustus or 
the Antonines ; and modern existence, under 
most of its aspects, he affected to regard as 
barbarous. Next to a bishop, the thing he 
most disliked was a courtier ; next to a 
courtier, a fox-hunting country gentleman. 
But nothing in his life, perhaps, was so 
characteristic of him as his leaving of it. 
During his last hours he was soothed by a 
pretty and somewhat educated housemaid, 
whom he called Phyllis, and whom he made 
sit by his bedside, and read aloud to him Gib- 
bon's two chapters on Christianity. Phyllis 
had just come to the celebrated excerpt 
from Tertullian, in which that father con- 
templates the future torments of the unbe- 
lievers, when the parish clergyman, who had 
been sent for by Mr. Laurence's widowed 
sister-in-law, arrived to offer his services. 



BOOK L CHAPTER L 3 

* How shall I admire ' * — these were the words 
that, read in a low sweet tone, first greeted 
his ears when he was shown softly into the 
sick chamber — ' how shall I admire, how 
laugh, how rejoice, how exult, when I behold 
so many proud monarchs, so many fancied 
gods, groaning in the lowest abyss of dark- 
ness ; so many magistrates who persecuted 
the name of the Lord, liquefying in a fiercer 
fire than ever they kindled against the Chris- 
tians ! ' The clergyman was at first much 
reassured at hearing words so edifying ; but 
when he turned to old Mr. Laurence, he was 
dismayed to see on his pale face, no signs of 
awe, but only a faint smile, full of sarcastic 
humour. He therefore glanced at the book 
that was lying on the girl's lap, and dis- 
covered to his horror the work of the infidel 
historian. He was at first struck dumb ; 
but, soon recovering himself, began to say- 
something suitable at once to his own pro- 
fession and to the sick man's needs. Mr. 
Laurence answered him with the greatest 
courtesy, but with many thanks declined any 
assistance from him ; saying wistfully that he 
knew he had not long to live, and that his 
one wish was that he could open his veins in 



1 Vide Gibbon's Decline and Fall, chapter xv. 

B 2 



4 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

a bath, and so fade gently into death ; ' and 
then,' he added, 'my soul, if I have one, 
might perhaps be with Petronius, and with 
Seneca. And yet sleep would, I think, be 
better than even their company.' The poor 
clergyman bade a hasty adieu, and Phyllis 
resumed her reading. Mr. Laurence listened 
to every word : the smile returned to his 
lips that had for a moment left them, and 
was still upon them when, half-an-hour after- 
wards, he died, so quietly that Phyllis did 
not perceive it, but continued her read- 
ing for some time to ears that could hear 
nothing. 

All his property he left to his nephew 
Otho, including his splendid villa, which 
was indeed, as it was meant to be, a type of 
its builder. It was a house of pillars, porti- 
coes, and statues, designed ambitiously in 
what was meant to be a classical style; and 
though its splendours might not be all per- 
haps in the best taste, nor even of the most 
strictly Roman pattern, there was yet an air 
about its meretricious stateliness by which the 
days of the Empire were at once suggested 
to one, a magnificence that would at any rate 
have pleased Trimalcio, though it might have 
scandalised Horace. 

Otho Laurence inherited with his uncle's 



BOOK I. CHAPTER /. 5 

house something of the tastes and feelings of 
which it was the embodiment. But, though 
an epicure by training and by temper, he had 
been open to other influences as well. At 
one time of his life he had, as it is ex- 
pressed by some, experienced religion ; and 
not religion only, but thought and specula- 
tion also. Indeed, ever since he was twenty- 
four, he had been troubled by a painful sense 
that he ought to have some mission in life. 
The only difficulty was that he could find 
none that would suit him. He had consider- 
able natural powers, and was in many ways 
a remarkable man ; but, unhappily, one of 
those who are remarkable because they do 
not become famous, not because they do. 
He was one of those of whom it is said till 
they are thirty, that they will do something" ; 
till they are thirty-five, that they might do 
something if they chose ; and after that, that 
they might have done anything if they had 
chosen. Laurence was as yet only three 
years gone in the second stage, but such of 
his friends as were ambitious for him feared 
that three years more would find him landed 
in the third. He, too, was beginning to 
share this fear ; and, not being humble 
enough to despair of himself, was by this 
time taking to despair of his century. He 



6 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

was thus hardly a happy man ; but, like 
many unhappy men, he was capable of keen 
enjoyments. Chief amongst these was so- 
ciety in certain forms, especially a party in 
his own house, such as that which he had 
now assembled there. To this one in parti- 
cular he looked forward with more than usual 
pleasure, partly because of the peculiar 
elements which he had contrived to combine 
in it, but chiefly because amongst them was 
to be his friend Robert Leslie, who had 
been living abroad, and whom he had not 
seen for two years. 

Laurence's aunt, Lady Grace, helped to 
receive the guests, who by dinner-time on 
Saturday evening had all arrived. Robert 
Leslie was the last. The dressing-bell had 
just done ringing as he drove up to the 
door, and the others had already gone up- 
stairs ; but he found Laurence in the library, 
sitting with his head on his hand, and a 
pile of niemi-ca.rds on the desk before him. 
The two friends met with much warmth, and 
then examined each other's faces to see if 
either had changed. 

' You told me you had been ill,' said 
Laurence, having again looked at Leslie, 
1 and I am afraid you don't seem quite well 
yet' 



BOOK I. CHAPTER I. 7 

* You forget,' said Leslie, whose laugh 
was a little hollow, ' that I was on the sea six 
hours ago ; and, cs you know, I am a 
wretched sailor. But the worst of human 
maladies are the most transient also — love 
that is half despairing, and sea-sickness that 
is quite so.' 

' I congratulate you,' said Laurence, again 
examining his friend's face, ' on your true 
cynical manner. I often thought we might 
have masters in cynicism just as we have 
masters in singing. Perhaps I shall be able 
to learn the art from you.' 

' Oh ! ' said Leslie, ' the theory is simple 
enough. Find out, by a little suffering, what 
are the things you hold most sacred, and 
most firmly believe in, and, whenever an 
occasion offers, deny your faith. A cynic is 
a kind of inverted confessor, perpetually 
making enemies for the sake of what he 
knows to be false.' 

' Ah ! ' said Laurence, ' but I don't want 
theory. I know what is sacred just as well 
as you, and, when I am beast enough to be 
quite out of tune with it, I have the good 
sense to call it a phantom. But I don't 
do this with sufficient energy. It is skill in 
cynical practice I want — a lesson in the 
pungent manner — the bitter tone ' 



8 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' Then please not to take your lessons 
from me,' said Leslie. ' Imitation may be 
the sincerest flattery, but it is, of all, the most 
irritating : and a cynic, as you are good 
enough to call me, feels this especially. For 
a cynic is the one preacher, remember, that 
never wants to make converts. His aim is 
to outrage, not to convince : to create enemies, 
not to conquer them. The peculiar charm 
that his creed has for him, is his own pecu- 
liarity in holding it. He is an acid that can 
only fizz with an alkali, and he therefore hates 
in others what he most admires in himself. 
So if you hear me say a bitter thing, please 
be good enough to brim over immediately 
with the milk of human kindness. If I say 
anything disrespectful about friendship, please 
be good enough to look hurt ; and if I happen 
to say — what is the chief part of the cynic's 
stock-in-trade — that no woman was ever 
sincere or faithful, I trust you have some 
lady amongst your visitors who will look at 
me with mournful eyes, and say to me, "Ah, 
if you did but know ! " ' 

1 Well,' said Laurence, ' perhaps I have ; 
but, talking of what people are to say, I have 
something here about which I want you to 
help me. You see these cards ; they are all 
double. Now that second half is for some- 



BOOK I. CHAPTER 1. 9 

thing quite new, and of my own invention. 
The cook has written his part already, so you 
need not look so alarmed ; but he has only 
provided for the tongue as a tasting instru- 
ment ; I am going to provide for it as a talk- 
ing one. In fact, I am going to have a. menu 
for the conversation, and to this I shall make 
everyone strictly adhere. For it has always 
seemed absurd to me to be so careful about 
what we put into our mouths, and to leave 
chance to arrange what comes out of them ; 
to be so particular as to the order of what we 
eat, and to have no order at all in what we 
talk about. This is the case especially in 
parties like the present, where most of the 
people know each other only a little, and if 
left to themselves would never touch on the 
topics that would make them best acquainted, 
and best bring out their several personal 
flavours. That is what I like to see conversa- 
tion doing. I ought to have written these 
menus before ; but I have been busy all day, 
and, besides, I wanted you to help me. I 
was just beginning without you when you 
arrived, as I could wait no longer ; but I have 
put down nothing yet : indeed I could not fix 
upon the first topic that is to correspond with 
the soup — the first vernal breath of discussion 
that is to open the buds of the shy and 



io THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

strange souls. So come, now — what shall 
we begin with ? What we want is something 
that anyone can talk easily about, whether 
he knows anything of it or not — something, 
too, that may be treated in any way, either 
with laughter, feeling, or even a little touch 
of temper.' 

' Love,' suggested Leslie. 

* That is too strong to begin with,' said 
Laurence, ' and too real. Besides, introduced 
in that way, it would be, I think, rather com- 
mon and vulgar. No — the only thing that 
suggested itself to me was religion.' 

' Nothing could be better in some ways,' 
said Leslie ; ' but might not that, too, be 
rather strong meat for some ? I apprehend, 
like Bottom, that "the ladies might be afeared 
of the lion." I should suggest rather the 
question, "Are you High-church or Low- 
church ? " There is something in that 
which at once disarms reverence, and may 
also just titillate the interests, the temper, 
or the sense of humour. Quick,' he said, 
taking one of the cards, ' and let us begin to 
write.' 

1 Stop,' said Laurence ; ' not so fast, let 
me beg of you. Instead of religion, or any- 
thing connected with it, we will have, ' What 
is the Aim of Life ? ' Is not this the thing 



BOOK I. CHAPTER I. n 

of things to suit us ? About what do we 
know less or talk more ? There is a Sphinx 
in each of our souls that is always asking us 
this riddle ; and when we are lazy or disap- 
pointed, we all of us lounge up to her, and 
make languid guesses. So about this we 
shall all of us have plenty to say, and can say 
it in any way we like, flippant, serious, or 
sentimental. Think, too, how many avenues 
of thought and feeling it opens up ! Evidently 
the "Aim of Life" is the thing to begin 
with/ - " 

Leslie assented ; and before many minutes 
they had made the menu complete. 

The ' Aim of Life ' was to be followed by 
' Town and Country,' which was designed 
to introduce a discussion as to where the 
Aim of Life was to be best attained. After 
this, by an easy transition, came 'Society;' 
next by way of entries, ' Art and Literature,' 
1 Love and Money,' ' Riches and Civilisa- 
tion ; ' then ' The Present,' as something solid 
and satisfying ; and lastly, a light superfluity 
to dally with, brightly coloured and unsub- 
stantial, with the entremets came ' The 
Future.' 

' And who is here,' said Leslie, as they 
were ending their labours, ' to enjoy this feast 
of reason ?' 



12 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 I will tell you,' said Laurence. ' In the 
first place, there is Lady Ambrose, a woman 
of a very old but poor family, who has 
married a modern M.P. with more than a 
million of money. She is very particular 
about knowing the right people, and has 
lovely, large grey eyes. Then there is Miss 
Merton, a Roman Catholic young lady, the 
daughter of old Sir Ascot Merton, the horse- 
racino evangelical. I knew her well five 
years ago, but had not seen her since her 
conversion, till to-day. Then we have Dr. 
Jenkinson, the great Broad-church divine who 
thinks that Christianity is not dead, but 
changed by himself and his followers in the 
twinkling of an eye.' 

' I met Dr. Jenkinson,' said Leslie, 'just 
before I went abroad, at a great dinner given 
by Baron Isaacs, in honour of his horse hav- 
ing won the Derby. Well — and who else is 
there ? ' 

1 Two celebrated members of the Royal 
Society,' said Laurence ; ' no less persons 

than But, good gracious ! it is time we 

were up-stairs dressing. Come along directly, 
and I will explain the other people to you 
before dinner.' 



BOOK I. CHAPTER II. 13 




CHAPTER II. 



T was half-past eight, and the party 



were fast assembling in the twilight 
drawing-room. Leslie was loung- 
ing in one of the windows, by a 
large stand of flowers and broad-leaved plants, 
and was studying the company with consider- 
able interest. His first impression was of little 
more than of a number of men's dark coats 
and white shirt-fronts, tables, couches, and 
gilded chairs, and the pleasant many-coloured 
glimmerings of female apparel. But before 
long he had observed more minutely. There 
were men who he instinctively felt were 
celebrities, discoursing to groups of ladies ; 
there were ladies who he at once saw 
were attractive, being discoursed to by 
groups of men. He very soon detected 
Lady Ambrose, a fine handsome woman of 
perhaps thirty, with the large grey eyes of 
which Laurence had spoken, and a very 
clear complexion. Leslie was much prepos- 
sessed by her frank manner, and by her 



14 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

charming voice, as she was talking with some 
animation to a tall distinguished-looking 
young man, whose fine features, keen earnest 
glance, and thoughtful expression prepos- 
sessed him still more. Forming a third in 
this group, dropping in a word or two at 
intervals, he recognised the celebrated Dr. 
Jenkinson — still full of vigour, though his 
hair was silver — the sharp and restless 
sparkle of whose eyes, strangely joined with 
the most benevolent of smiles, Leslie remem- 
bered to have noticed at Baron Isaacs' 
festival. He had just identified Lady 
Ambrose and the Doctor, when Laurence 
came up to him in the window, and began to 
tell him who was who. 

1 Dr. Jenkinson is the only one I know/ 
said Leslie, ' and, naturally enough, he forgets 
me.' 

1 Well,' said Laurence, ' that man by 
himself, turning over the books on the table 
— the man with the black whiskers, spectacles, 
and bushy eyebrows — is Mr. Storks of the 
Royal Society, who is great on the physical 
basis of life and the imaginative basis of 
God. The man with long locks in the 
window, explaining a microscope in so eager 
a way to that dark-haired girl, is Professor 
Stockton — of the Royal Society also ; and 



BOOK L CHAPTER II 15 

member and president of many Societies 
more. The girl — child, rather, I ought to 
call her — that he is talking to, is Lady Violet 
Gresham — my second cousin. You see my 
aunt, the old lady with grey curls, on the 
ottoman near the fire-place ? Well — the 
supercilious-looking man, talking rather 
loudly and rather slowly to her about the 
dust in London, is Mr. Luke, the great critic 
and apostle of culture. That, too, is another 
critic close by him — the pale creature, with 
large moustache, looking out of the window 
at the sunset. He is Mr. Rose, the pre- 
Raphaelite. He always speaks in an under- 
tone, and his two topics are self-indulgence 
and art. The young man there with Lady 
Ambrose and Dr. Jenkinson, is Lord Allen. 
He is only two- or three-and-twenty ; still, 
had you been in England lately, you would 
often have heard his name. He has come 
early into an immense property, and he yet 
is conscious that he has duties in life. But/ 
said Laurence, sighing, ' he too feels, as I do, 
that he has fallen on evil days, in which 
there can be no peace for us — little but 
doubt and confusion, and what seems to 
me a losing battle against the spiritual dark- 
ness of this world. However — that red- 
headed youth thinks very differently. He 



1 6 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

is Mr. Saj.nders from Oxford, supposed to be 
very clever and advanced. Next him is 
Donald Gordon, who has deserted deer-stalk- 
ing and the Kirk, for literature and German 
metaphysics.' 

1 And who is that,' said Leslie, ' the young 
lady with those large and rather sad-looking 
eyes, and the delicate, proud mouth ?' 

1 Which ? ' said Laurence. 

' The one on the sofa,' said Leslie, ' who 
looks so like a Reynolds portrait — like a 
duchess of the last century — the lady in the 
pale blue dress, talking to that man with such 
a curiously attractive smile and the worn 
melancholy look ? ' 

1 That,' said Laurence, ' is Miss Merton. 
I am glad you admire her. And don't you 
know who it is she is talking to ? He is al- 
most the only man of these days for whom 
I feel a real reverence — almost the only one 
of our teachers who seems to me to speak 
with the least breath of inspiration. But he 
is too impressionable, perhaps — too much like 
me, in that way. And now, as the years 
come, it seems that hope is more and more 
leaving him, and things look darker to him 
than ever. That is Herbert.' 

1 Herbert!' exclaimed Leslie, 'so it is. I 
thought I recollected the face. I have heard 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IT. 17 

him lecture several times at the Royal Institu- 
tion ; and that singular voice of his, which 
would often hold all the theatre breathless, 
haunts me still, sometimes. There was some- 
thing strange and aerial in its exquisite modula- 
tions, that seemed as if it came from a discon- 
solate spirit, hovering over the waters of 
Babylon, and remembering Sion. I can't tell 
exactly why it was that — but, ah ! — my dear 
Laurence — who is this, that is coming into 
the room now — this lovely creature, with a 
dress like a red azalea ? What speaking 
eyes ! And what hair, too — deep dead black, 
with those white starry blossoms in it. I 
don't think I ever saw anyone move so 
gracefully ; and how proudly and piquantly 
she poises 

On her neck the small head buoyant, like a bell-flower 
on its bed ! ' 

' That,' said Laurence, when Leslie had 
done, ' is Mrs. Sinclair, who has published a 
volume of poems, and is a sort of fashionable 
London Sappho. But come, — we shall be 
going into dinner directly. You shall have 
Lady Ambrose on one side of you, and shall 
take in Miss Merton.' 



i8 THE NEW REPUBLIC, 




CHAPTER IIL 

•AURENCE, though he had fore- 
warned his guests of his menu 
before they left the drawing-room, 
yet felt a little anxious when they 
sat down to dinner ; for he found it not alto- 
gether easy to get the conversation started. 
Lady Ambrose, who was the first to speak, 
began somewhat off the point. 

1 What a charming change it is, Mr. 
Laurence,' she said, ' to look out on the sea 
when one is dressing, instead of across South 
Audley Street ! ' 

'Hush!' said Laurence softly, with a 
grave, reproving smile. 

1 Really,' said Lady Ambrose, • I beg your 
pardon. I thought Dr. Jenkinson had said 
grace.' 

' If he has,' said Laurence, ' it is very 
good of him, for I am afraid he was not 
asked. But what I mean is, that you must 
only talk of what is on the cards ; so be good 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. , 9 

enough to look at your menu, and devote 
your attention to the Aim of Life.' 

' Really, this is much too alarming/ said 
Lady Ambrose. ' How is one to talk at so 
short a notice on a subject one has never 
thought about before ? ' 

'Why, to do so,' said Laurence, 'is the 
very art of conversation ; for in that way, 
one's ideas spring up fresh like young roses 
that have all the dew on them, instead of 
having been kept drying for half a lifetime 
between the leaves of a book. So do set a 
good example, and begin, or else we shall 
never be started at all ; and my pet plan will 
turn out a fiasco.' 

There was, indeed, as Laurence said this, 
something very near complete silence all 
round the table. It was soon broken. 

'Are you High-church or Low-church?' 
was a question suddenly uttered in a quick 
eager girl's voice by Miss Prattle, a young 
lady of eighteen, to the astonishment of the 
whole company. It was addressed to Dr. 
Jenkinson who was sitting next her. 

Had a pin been run into the Doctor's leg, 

he could not have looked more astounded, 

or given a greater start. He eyed his fair 

questioner for some time in complete silence. 

' Can you tell me the difference ? ' he 



£* 



2o THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

said at last, in a voice of considerable good 
humour, yet with just a touch of sharpness 
in it. 

' I think,' said Miss Merton, who was 
sitting on the other side of him, ■ that my 
card is a little different. I have the " Aim 
of Life " on mine, and so I believe has 
everybody else.' 

1 Well,' said the Doctor, laughing, ' let us 
ask Miss Prattle what is her aim in life.' 

1 Thank Heaven,' said Laurence, ' Dr. 
Jenkinson has begun. I hope we shall all 
now follow.' 

Laurence's hope was not in vain. The 
conversation soon sprang up everywhere ; 
and the company, though in various humours, 
took most of them very kindly to the solemn 
topic that had been put before them. Mr. 
Luke, who was sitting by Mrs. Sinclair, was 
heard in a loudish voice saying that his own 
favourite Muse had always been Erato ; Mr. 
Eose had taken a crimson flower from a vase 
on the table, and, looking at it himself with 
a grave regard, was pointing out its infinite 
and passionate beauties to the lady next him ; 
and Mr. Stockton was explaining that the 
Alps looked grander, and the sky bluer than 
ever, to those who truly realised the atomic 
theory. No one, indeed, was silent except 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. i\ 

Mr. Herbert and Mr. Storks, the former of 
whom smiled rather sadly, whilst the latter 
looked about him with an inquisitorial frown. 
Laurence was delighted with the state of 
things, and surveyed the table with great 
satisfaction. Whilst his attention was thus 
engaged, Lady Ambrose turned to Leslie, 
and began asking him if he had been in town 
much this season. She was taken with his 
look, and wished to find out if he would 
really be a nice person to like. 

I Please,' interposed Laurence pleadingly, 
' do try and keep to the point — please, Lady 
Ambrose.' 

I I want to find out Mr. Leslie's aim 
in life by asking him where he has been,' she 
answered. 

1 1 have been in a great many places,' said 
Leslie, ' but not to pursue any end — only to 
try and forget that I had no end to pursue.' 

' This is a very sad state of things,' said 
Lady Ambrose ; ' I can always find some- 
thing to do, except when I am quite alone, or 
in the country when the house is empty. 
And even then I can make occupation. I 
draw, or read a book, or teach my little boy 
some lessons. But come — what do you think 
is the real aim of life ? — since that is what I 
must ask him, is it not, Mr. Laurence ? ' 



22 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' Don't ask me,' said Leslie ; * I told you 
I hadn't a notion ; and I don't suppose we 
any of us have.' 

1 That can't be true/ said Lady Ambrose, 
' for just listen how everyone is talking. I 
wish we could hear what they are saying. 
You might learn something then, perhaps, 
Mr. Leslie, since you are so very ignorant.' 

It happened that, as Lady Ambrose said 
this, the conversation suddenly flagged, and 
Laurence took advantage of the lull to ask if 
any satisfactory conclusions had been come 
to during the past five minutes, ' because we 
up here,' he said, ' are very much in the dark, 
and want to be enlightened.' 

'Yes,' said Mr. Storks gruffly, 'has any 
one found out what is the aim of life ? ' As 
he said this he looked about him defiantly, 
as though all the others were butterflies, that 
he could break, if he chose, upon his wheel. 
His eye at last lit upon Mr. Saunders, who, 
considering this a challenge to himself, im- 
mediately took up the gauntlet. The young 
man spoke with the utmost composure, and, 
as his voice was high and piercing, every- 
body could hear him. 

' The aim of life,' he said, adjusting his 
spectacles, ' is progress.' 

' What is progress ? ' interrupted Dr. 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 23 

Jenkinson coldly, without looking at Mr. 
Saunders, and as though any answer to his 
question was the last thing he expected. 

' Progress,' replied Mr. Saunders slowly, 
1 has been found, like poetry, somewhat hard 
to define.' 

'Very true,' said the Doctor drily, and 
looking straight before him. 

His accents were of so freezing a sharp- 
ness that he seemed to be stabbing Mr. 
Saunders with an icicle. Mr. Saunders, 
however, was apparently quite unwounded. 

1 But I,' he continued with the utmost 
complacency, ' have discovered a definition 
which will, I think, meet with general accept- 
ance. There is nothing original in it — it is 
merely an abstract of the meaning of all our 
great liberal thinkers — progress is such im- 
provement as can be verified by statistics, 
just as education is such knowledge as can 
be tested by examinations. That, I conceive, 
is a very adequate definition of the most 
advanced conception of progress, and to 
persuade people in general to accept this is at 
present one of the chief duties of all earnest 
men.' 

'Entirely true!' said Mr. Herbert, with 
ironical emphasis ; ' an entirely true definition 
of progress as our age prizes it.' 



24 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Mr. Saunders was delighted, and, im* 
agining he had made a disciple, he turned to 
Mr. Herbert and went on. 

' For just let us,' he said, ' compare a man 
with a gorilla, and see in what the man's 
superiority lies. It is evidently not in the 
man's ideas of God, and so forth — for in his 
presumable freedom from these the gorilla is 
the superior of the man — but in the hard and 
verifiable fact, that the man can build houses 
and cotton-mills, whereas the highest monkey 
can scarcely make the rudest approach to a 
hut.' 

1 But can you tell me,' said Mr. Herbert, 
' supposing men some day come to a state in 
which no more of this progress is possible, 
what will they do then ? ' 

' Mr. Mill, whom in almost all things I 
reverence as a supreme authority,' said Mr. 
Saunders, ' asked himself that very question. 
But the answer he gave himself was one of 
the few things in which I venture to dissent 
from him. For, when all the greater evils of 
life shall have been removed, he thinks the 
human race is to find its chief enjoyment in 
reading Wordsworth's poetry.' l 

•Indeed!' said Mr. Herbert; 'and did 

1 Vide J. S. Mill's Autobiography. 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 25 

Mill come to any conclusion so sane as 
that?' 

' I, on the contrary, believe,' Mr. Saun- 
ders went on, ' that as long as the human 
race lasts, it will still have some belief in 
God left in it, and that the eradication of 
this will afford an unending employment to 
all enlightened minds.' 

Leslie looked at Lady Ambrose, expecting 
to see her smile. On the contrary she was 
very grave, and said, ' I think this is shocking.' 

' Well,' said Laurence in a soothing tone 
to her, ' it is only the way of these young 
men in times of change like ours. Besides, 
he is very young — he has only just left 
Oxford ' 

' If these irreligious views are to be 
picked up at Oxford,' said Lady Ambrose, 
1 1 shall be obliged to send my little boy, 
when he grows up, to Cambridge. And as 
for what you say about " times of change " — 
I am not a conservative, as you know — indeed, 
I quite go in for reform, as my husband does : 
but I don't think religion ought to be dragged 
into the matter.' 

'Well,' said Laurence, 'let us listen to 
what Lord Allen is saying.' 

' He is sure,' said Lady Ambrose, ' not 
to say anything but what is nice.' 



26 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Allen was speaking in a low tone, but his 
voice was so clear that Lady Ambrose was 
quite able to hear him. 

1 To me it seems,' he was saying, blush- 
ing a little as he found suddenly how many 
people were listening to him, 'that the 
aim of life has nearly always been plain 
enough in a certain way — always, and for all 
men ' 

1 Indeed ? ' said Mr. Saunders, raising his 
eyebrows. 

'Yes,' said Allen, slightly turning towards 
him, and raising his voice somewhat. ' It 
has been, I think, as a single magnet, acting 
on all, though upon many by repulsion. It 
is quite indescribable in words. But there 
are two things by which you can tell a man's 
truth to it — a faith in God ; and a longing for 
a future life.' 

' Lord Allen,' exclaimed Mr. Herbert, 
and the sound of his voice made everyone at 
once a listener, ' that is very beautifully put ! 
And it is, indeed, quite true, as you say, that 
the real significance of life must be for ever 
indescribable in words. But, in the present 
day, I fear also that for most of us it is not 
even thinkable in thought The whole human 
race,' he went on in measured melancholy 
accents, ' is now wandering in an accursed 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 27 

wilderness, which not only shows us no hill- 
top whence the promised land may be seen, 
but which, to most of the wanderers, seems a 
promised land itself. And they have a God 
of their own too, who engages now to lead 
them out of it if they will only follow him : 
who, for visible token of his Godhead, leads 
them with a pillar of cloud by day, and a 
pillar of fire by night — the cloud being the 
black smoke of their factory chimneys, and 
the fire the red glare of their blast-furnaces. 
And so effectual are these modern divine 
guides, that if we were standing on the 
brink of Jordan itself, we should be utterly 
unable to catch, through the fire and the 
smoke, one single glimpse of the sunlit hills 
beyond.' 

Mr. Herbert said these last words almost 
fiercely ; and they were followed by a com- 
plete hush. It was almost directly broken by 
Mj:. ..Rose. 

' To me,' he said, raising his eyebrows 
wearily, and sending his words floating down 
the table in a languid monotone, ' Mr. 
Herbert's whole metaphor seems misleading. 
I rather look upon life as a chamber, which 
we decorate as we would decorate the 
chamber of the woman or the youth that we 
love, tinting the walls of it with symphonies 



28 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

of subdued colour, and filling it with works of 
fair form, and with flowers, and with strange 
scents, and with instruments of music. And 
this can be done now as well — better, rather 
— than at any former time : since we know 
that so many of the old aims were false, and 
so cease to be distracted by them. We have 
learned the weariness of creeds ; and know 
that for us the grave has no secrets. We 
have learned that the aim of life is life ; and 
what does successful life consist in ? Simply,' 
said Mr. Rose, speaking very slowly, and 
with a soft solemnity, ' in the consciousness of 
exquisite living — in the making our own each 
highest thrill of joy that the moment offers us 
■ — be it some touch of colour on the sea or on 
the mountains, the early dew in the crimson 
shadows of a rose, the shining of a woman's 
limbs in clear water, or ' 

Here unfortunately a sound of *'Sh' 
broke softly from several mouths. Mr. Rose 
was slightly disconcerted, and a pause that 
would have been a little awkward seemed 
imminent. Laurence, to prevent this, did the 
first thing that occurred to him, and hastily 
asked Dr. Jenkinson what his view of the 
matter was. 

The Doctor s answer came in his very 
sharpest voice. 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 29 

^ ' Do any of us know what life is ? ' he 
said. 'Hadn't we better find that out 
first?' 

' Life,' continued Mr. Rose, who had now 
recovered himself, 'is a series of moments 
and emotions.' 

'And a series of absurdities too, very 
often,' said Dr. Jenkinson. 

' Life is a solemn mystery,' said Mr. Storks, 
severely. 

'Life is a damned nuisance,' muttered 
Leslie to himself, but just loud enough to be 
heard by Lady Ambrose, who smiled at him 
with a sense of humour that won his heart 
at once. 

'Life is matter,' Mr. Storks went on, 
1 which, under certain conditions not yet fully 
understood, has become self-conscious.' 

' Lord Allen has just been saying that it 
is the preface to eternity,' said Mr. Saunders. 

• Only, unfortunately,' said Laurence, « it 
is a preface that we cannot skip, and the 
dedication is generally made to the wrong 
person.' 

' All our doubts on this matter,' said Mr. 
Saunders, 'are simply due to that dense 
pestiferous fog of crazed sentiment that still 
hides our view, but which the present genera- 
tion has sternly set its face to dispel and 



y> THE NEW REPUBLIC 

conquer. Science will drain the marshy 
grounds of the human mind, so that the 
deadly malaria of Christianity, which has 
already destroyed two civilisations, shall 
never be fatal to a third.' 

' I should rather have thought,' said Mrs. 
Sinclair, in her soft clear voice, and casting 
down her eyes thoughtfully, ' that passion and 
feeling were the real heart of the matter : 
and that religion of some sort was an in- 
gredient in all perfect passion. There are 
seeds of feeling in every soul, but these will 
never rise up into flowers without some 
culture — will they, Mr. Luke ? And this 
culture is, surely,' she said dreamily, ' the 
work of Love who is the gardener of the soul, 
and of Religion, the under-gardener, acting 
as Love bids it.' 

' Ah, yes ! ' said Mr. Luke, looking com- 
passionately about him. ' Culture ! Mrs. 
Sinclair is quite right ; for without culture 
we can never understand Christianity, and 
Christianity, whatever the vulgar may say of 
it, is the key to life, and is co-extensive with 
it.' 

Lady Ambrose was charmed with this 
sentiment. 

'Quite so, Mr. Luke, I quite agree with 
you,' she said, in her most cordial manner. 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 31 

* But I wish you would tell me a little more 
about Culture. I am always so much inter- 
ested in those things.' 

' Culture,' said Mr. Luke, ' is the union of 
two things — fastidious taste and liberal 
sympathy. These can only be gained by wide 
reading guided by sweet reason ; and when 
they are gained, Lady Ambrose, we are 
conscious, as it were, of a new sense, which at 
once enables us to discern the Eternal and the 
absolutely righteous, wherever we find it, 
whether in an epistle of St. Paul's or in a 
comedy of Menander's. It is true that cul- 
ture sets aside the larger part of the New 
Testament as grotesque, barbarous, and im- 
moral ; but what remains, purged of its 
apparent meaning, it discerns to be a 
treasure beyond all price. And in Christi- 
anity — such Christianity, I mean, as true 
taste can accept — culture sees the guide to 
the real significance of life, and the explana- 
tion,' Mr. Luke added with a sigh, ' of that 
melancholy which in our day is attendant 
upon all clear sight.' 

' But why,' said Allen, ' if you know so 
well what life's meaning is, need you feel 
this melancholy at all ? ' 

'Ah!' said Mr. Luke, 'it is from this 
very knowledge that the melancholy I speak 



32 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

of springs. We — the cultured — we indeed 
see. But the world at large does not. It will 
not listen to us. It thinks we are talking 
nonsense. Surely that is enough to sadden 
us. Then, too, our ears are perpetually be- 
ing pained and deafened by the din of the 
two opposing Philistinisms — science and ortho- 
doxy — both equally vulgar, and equally use- 
less. But the masses cannot see this. It is 
impossible to persuade some that science 
can teach them nothing worth knowing, and 
others that the dogmatic utterances of the 
gospels are either ignorant mistakes or 
oriental metaphors. Don't you find this, 
Jenkinson?' he added, addressing the 
Doctor across the table in a loud mournful 
voice. 

1 Laurence/ said the Doctor, apparently 
not hearing the question, ' haven't we talked 
of this quite long enough ? Town and 
Country — let us go on to that ; or else we 
shall be getting very much behind-hand.' 

These words of the Doctor's caused a 
rapid change in the conversation. And as it 
appeared impossible to agree as to what the 
aim of life was, most turned eagerly to the 
simpler question of where it might be best 
attained. At first there seemed to be 
a general sense on all sides that it was 



BOOK I. CHAPTER HI. 33 

a duty to prefer the country. There, the 
voices of Nature spoke to the soul more 
freely, the air was purer and fresher ; the 
things in life that were really valuable were 
more readily taken at their true worth ; 
foolish vanities and trivial cares were less 
likely to degrade the character ; one could 
have flowers ; one could listen to the music 
of birds and rivers ; a country house was 
more comfortable than a town one ; and few 
prospects were so charming as an English 
park. But the voice of Mr. Saunders was soon 
heard proclaiming that progress was almost 
entirely confined to towns, and that the modern 
liberal could find little scope for action in 
the country. ' If he does anything there,' 
Mr. Saunders said, ' he can only make his 
tenants more comfortable and contented ; 
and that is simply attaching them more to 
the existing order of things. Indeed, even 
now, as matters stand, the healthy rustic, 
with his fresh complexion and honest eye, 
is absolutely incapable of appreciating the 
tyranny of religion and society. But the 
true liberal is undeceived by his pleasing 
exterior, and sees a far nobler creature in 
the pale narrow-chested operative of the city, 
who at once responds to the faintest cry of 
insurgence.' 

D 



34 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Slight causes often produce large results ; 
and these utterances of Mr. Saunders turned 
the entire torrent of opinion into a different 
channel. Mr. Luke, who had a moment 
before been talking about 'liberal air,' and 
' sedged brooks,' and ' meadow grass,' now 
admitted that one's country neighbours were 
sure to be narrow-minded sectarians, and that 
it was better to live amongst cultured society, 
even under a London fog, than to look at all 
the splendour of provincial sunsets, in com- 
pany with a parson who could talk of nothing 
but his parishioners and justification by faith* 
Others, too, followed in the same direction ; 
and the verdict of the majority soon seemed 
to be that, except in a large country house, 
country life, though it might be very beauti- 
ful, was still very tiresome. But the voice of 
Mr. Saunders was again heard, during a 
pause, laying it down that no true liberal 
could ever care to live in the country now ; 
and Lady Ambrose, who highly disapproved 
of him and his views in general, saw here 
a fitting opportunity for contradicting him, 
asserting that, though she and her husband 
were both advanced liberals, yet the pleasant- 
est part of their year was that spent upon 
their moor in Scotland. ' And then, too,' she 
added, turning to Laurence, ' I am devoted 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 35 

to our place in Gloucestershire, and I would 
not miss for anything such things as my 
new dairy, and my cottages, with the old 
women in them.' 

' And yet,' said Laurence, smiling, ' Sir 
George would never go near the place if it 
were not for the shooting.' 

' Indeed he would,' said Lady Ambrose, a 
little indignantly. ' He likes the life so much, 
and is so fond of his gardens, and greenhouses, 
and 

But she was here interrupted by Mr. 
Herbert, who, mistaking the Sir George 
Ambrose mentioned for another Baronet of 
the same name — a gentleman of a very old 
but impoverished Catholic family — broke in as 
follows, somewhat to the consternation of 
Lady Ambrose, whose husband was a great 
cotton-spinner, of the most uncertain origin. 

1 Sir George,' he said, ' is, as I know well, an 
entirely honest gentleman of ancient lineage. 
He is indeed a perfectly beautiful type of 
what the English Squire properly ought to 
be. For he lives upon his own land, and 
amongst his own people ; and is a complete 
and lovely example to them of a life quite 
simple indeed, but in the highest sense loyal, 
noble, and orderly. But what is one amongst 
so many ? To most of his own order Sir 

D 2 



36 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

George Ambrose appears merely as a mad- 
man, because he sees that it is altogether a 
nobler thing for a man to be brave and 
chivalrous than it is to be fashionable ; and 
because he looks forward on his dying day to 
remembering the human souls that he has 
saved alive, rather than the pheasants that 
he has shot dead.' 

Now, the husband of Lady Ambrose being 
known to most present for his magnificent 
new country house, his immense preserves, 
and his yacht of four hundred tons that never 
went out of the Solent, there was naturally 
some wonder excited by Mr. Herbert's 
words, since the thought of any other Sir 
George never came for an instant into any- 
one's head. Lady Ambrose herself was in 
utter amazement. She could not tell what to 
make of it, and she was as near looking con- 
fused as she had ever been in her life. The 
awkwardness of the situation was felt by 
many : and to cover it a hum of conversation 
sprang up, with forced alacrity. But this did 
not make matters much better ; fop in a very 
short time Mr. Herbert's voice was again 
audible, uttering words of no measured 
denunciation against the great land-owners of 
England, 'who were once,' he said, ' in some 
true sense a Nobility, but are now the por- 



BOOK 1. CHAPTER III. 37 

tentousest Ignobility that the world ever set 
eyes upon.' Everyone felt that this was 
approaching dangerous ground : nor were 
they at all reassured when Mr. Herbert, who 
was, it appeared, quoting from a letter which 
he had received, he said, that morning from 
the greatest of modern thinkers, concluded 
amidst a complete silence with the following 
passage, • Yes, here they come, with coats of 
the newest fashion, with pedigrees of the 
newest forging, with their moors in Scotland, 
with their rivers in Norway, with their game 
preserves in England, with some thousands 
of human beings calling the7n masters, some- 
where — they probably forget where — and with 
the mind of a thinking man, or with the heart 
of a gentleman, nowhere. Here they come, our 
cotton-spinning plutocrats, bringing in luxury, 
and vulgarity, and damnation ! ' 

These last words came like a thunder- 
clap. Laurence hardly knew where to look. 
The result, however, was more satisfactory 
than could have been expected. There are 
some emotions, as we all know, that can be 
calmed best by tears. Lady Ambrose did 
not cry. She did something better — she 
laughed. 

1 What would poor Sir George say ? ' she 
whispered to Laurence. 'He is fishing in 



3 3 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Norway at this very moment. But do you 
really think,' she went on, being resolved 
not to shirk the subject, 'that Society is 
really as bad as Mr. Herbert says ? I was 
looking into the Comte de Grammont's 
Memoirs the other day, and I am sure 
nothing goes on in London now so bad as 
what he describes.' 

' Do you know, Lady Ambrose,' said 
Mr. Herbert, who concluded that he had 
given her much pleasure by his late re- 
marks, ' I think the state of London at the 
present day infinitely worse than anything 
Grammont or his biographer could have 
dreamt of.' 

' Quite so,' said Mr. Luke ; ' the bulk of 
men in our days are just as immoral as they 
were in Charles the Second's ; the only 
difference is that they are incomparably more 
stupid ; and that, instead of decking their 
immorality with the jewels of wit, they 
clumsily try to cover it with the tarpaulin of 
respectability. This has not made the 
immorality any the better ; it has only made 
respectability the most contemptible word in 
the English lanooia^e.' 

1 The fop of Charles's time,' said Leslie, 
* aimed at seeming a wit and a scholar. The 
fop of ours aims at being a fool and a dunce.' 



BOOK 1. CHAPTER III. 39 

* Yes,' said Mr. Herbert, ' society was 
diseased then, it is true, and marks of disease 
disfigured and scarred its features. Still, in 
spite of this, it had some sound life left in it. 
But now the entire organism is dissolving 
and falling asunder. All the parts are re- 
fusing to perform their functions. How, 
indeed, could this possibly be otherwise, 
when the head itself, the aristocracy, the 
part whose special office is to see and think, 
has now lost completely both its brains and 
eyes, and has nothing head-like left it ex- 
cept the mouth ; and that cannot so much as 
speak. It can only eat and yawn.' 

' Society, you see, Mr. Herbert,' said 
Lady Ambrose, who felt bound to say 
something, ' is so much larger now than it 
was.' 

' Oh,' said Laurence, shrugging his 
shoulders, * in that sense, I really think there 
is almost no society now.' 

1 1 don't see how there can be,' said Miss 
Merton, ' when what is called society is 
simply one great scramble after fashion. And 
fashion is such a delicate fruit, that it is sure 
to be spoilt if it is scrambled for.' 

' I am glad,' said Laurence, ' you don't 
abuse fashion as some people do. I look on 
it as the complexion of good society, and as 



40 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

the rouge of bad ; and when society gets 
sickly and loses its complexion, it takes to 
rouge — as it is doing now ; and the rouge 
eats into its whole system, and makes its 
health worse than ever.' 

1 You are the last person, Mr. Laurence,' 
said Lady Ambrose, ' you who go out so 
much, that I should have expected to hear 
talking against society like that.' 

1 Ah ! ' said Laurence, ' we cannot escape 
from our circumstances : I only wish we 
could. I go into the best society I can get, 
but I am not blind to the fact that it is very 
bad. Of course there are a number of the 
most delightful people in it : I am not deny- 
ing that for a moment. But not only is 
society not made up out of a few of its parts, 
but even the best parts suffer from the tone 
of the whole. And taking society as a whole, 
I honestly doubt if it was ever at any time 
so generally bad as it is now. I am not 
saying that it has forgotten its duties — 
that it cannot even conceive that it ever had 
any ; that is of course quite true : but Mr. 
Herbert has said that already. I am not 
complaining of its moral badness, but of its 
social badness — of its want of practical skill 
in life as a fine art — a want that it often feels 
itself, and yet has not the skill to remedy. 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 41 

Think for a moment how barbarous are its 
amusements ; how little culture there is in its 
general tone ; how incapable it is of any en- 
lightened interest ! ' 

' Really,' said Mr. Stockton, ' I think you 
are doing society a great injustice. It seems 
to me that enlightened interest is the very 
thing that is everywhere on the spread. The 
light of intellect is emerging from the labor- 
atory and the dissecting-room, where it had 
its birth, and is gilding, with its clear rays, 
the dinner-table, and even the ball-room. A 
freer, a truer, and a grander view of things, 
seems to me to be rapidly dawning on the 
world.' 

1 1 fear, my dear sir,' said Mr. Luke, ' that 
these pleasing opinions of yours will not bear 
testing.' 

' Do you mean,' said Mr. Stockton, ' that 
society as a rule is not infinitely better in- 
formed now than it was thirty years ago ? 
Has it not infinitely fewer prejudices and 
infinitely more knowledge ? ' 

'We should look to the effects of the 
knowledge, not to the knowledge itself,' said 
Mr. Luke. ' We cannot test the health of a 
society from looking over its examination 
papers in physical science.' 

' How would you test it ? ' said Mr. 
Stockton, with a slight curl of the lip. 



42 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 There are many tests/ said Mr. Luke. 
1 Here is one, amongst the very subjects that 
Mr. Laurence has ordered us to talk about — 
art and literature.' 

1 I accept the test,' said Mr. Stockton. 
1 What, then, can be nobler than much 
modern poetry ? There is some that I look 
upon as quite of the highest order.' 

' When I spoke of our literature,' said 
Mr. Luke loftily, c I was not thinking of 
poetry. We have no poetry now.' 

' Indeed ?' said Mr. Stockton ; ■ I imagined 
you had written some yourself.' 

' Ah ! ' exclaimed Mr. Luke, drawing a 
long sigh, ' I once knew what Goethe calls 
" the divine worth of tone and tears." But 
my own poems only prove the truth of what 
I say. They could only have been written 
in evil days. They were simply a wail of 
pain ; and now that I am grown braver, I keep 
silence. Poetry in some ages is an expression 
of the best strength ; in an age like ours it is 
the disguise of the worst weakness — or, when 
not that, it is simply a forced plant, an exotic. 
No, Mr. Stockton, I was not speaking of our 
poetry, but of the one kind of imaginative 
literature that is the natural growth of our 
own day, the novel. Now, the novel itself is 
a plant which, when it grows abundantly and 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 43 

alone, you may be sure is a sign of a poor 
soil. But don't trust to that only. Look at 
our novels themselves, and see what sort of 
life it is they image — the trivial interests, the 
contemptible incidents, the absurdity of the 
virtuous characters, the viciousness of the 
characters who are not absurd. Spain was in 
some ways worse in Cervantes' time than 
England is in ours ; but you may search all 
our novels for one character that has one 
tithe of Don Quixote's heroism, for one of 
our sane men that breathed in so healthy and 
pure an atmosphere as the inspired madman. 
And this is not from want of ability on the 
novelist's part. Some of them have powers 
enough and to spare ; but the best novels 
only reflect back most clearly the social 
anarchy, and the bad ones are unconscious 
parts of it.' 

' And as for our painting,' said Mr. 
Herbert, ' that reflects, even more clearly 
than our literature, our hideous and our hope- 
less degradation. The other day, when I 
walked through the Royal Academy, my 
mind was literally dazzled by the infernal 
glare of corruption and vulgarity that was 
flashed upon me from every side. There 
were, indeed, only two pictures in the whole 
collection that were not entirely abominable ; 



44 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

and these were, one of them three boulders in 
the island of Sark, the other a study of 
pebbles on the beach at Ilfracombe.' 

' I know little about the technicalities of 
art,' said Mr. Stockton, ' so I will not presume 
to dispute this point with you.' 

' Well,' said Leslie, ' here is another test 
quite as good as art and literature — love and 
money, and their relations in our days.' 

He would have continued speaking; but 
Mr. Herbert allowed him no time. 

1 The very things,' he said, ' I was about 
to touch upon — the very things the pictures 
the other day suggested to me. For, seeing 
how the work of the painter becomes 
essentially vile so soon as it becomes essen- 
tially venal, I was reminded of the like 
corruption of what is far more precious than 
the work of any painter — our own English 
girls, who are prepared for the modern 
marriage-market on precisely the same prin- 
ciples as our pictures for the Royal Academy. 
There is but one difference. The work of 
the modern painter is vile from its very be- 
ginning — in its conception and execution 
alike ; but our girls we receive, in the first 
instance, entirely fair and sacred from the 
hands of God himself, clothed upon with a 
lovelier vesture than any lilies of the field ' 



BOOK 1. CHAPTER III. 45 

1 Really,' whispered Lady Ambrose to 
Laurence, ' Providence has done so very 
little for us, as far as vesture goes.' 

' And we,' Mr. Herbei t went on, 

' with unspeakable profanity presume to 
dress and to decorate them, till the heavenly 
vesture is entirely hidden, thinking, like 
a modern Simon Magus, that the gifts of 
God are to be purchased for money, and 
not caring to perceive that, if they are 
to be purchased with the devil's money, 
we must first convert them into the devil's 
gifts.' 

' Yes,' said Mrs. Sinclair, with a faint 
smile, ' the day for love-matches is quite gone 
over now.' 

But her words were drowned by Mr. 
Saunders, who exclaimed at the top of his 
voice, and in a state of great excitement, 
' Electric telegraphs — railways — steam print- 
ing presses — let me beg of you to consider 
the very next subject set for us — riches and 
civilisation — and to judge of the present 
generation by the light of that' 

1 I have considered them,' said Mr. 
Herbert, ' for the last thirty years — and with 
inexpressible melancholy.' 

' I conceive,' said Mr. Saunders, ' that 
you are somewhat singular in your feelings.' 



46 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' I am,' replied Mr. Herbert ; 'and that in 
most of my opinions and feelings I am sin- 
gular, is a fact fraught for me with the most 
ominous significance. Yet, how could I — 
who think that health is more than wealth, 
and who hold it a more important thing to 
separate right from wrong than to identify 
men with monkeys — how could I hope to be 
anything but singular in a generation that 
deliberately, and with its eyes open, prefers a 
cotton-mill to a Titian ? ' 

' I hold it,' said Mr. Saunders, ' to be one 
of the great triumphs of our day, that it has 
so subordinated all the vaguer and more law- 
less sentiments to the solid guidance of sober 
economical considerations. And not only do 
I consider a cotton-mill, but I consider even 
a good sewer, to be a far nobler and a far 
holier thing — for holy in reality does but 
mean healthy — than the most admired 
Madonna ever painted.' 

1 A good sewer,' said Mr. Herbert, ' is, I 
admit, an entirely holy thing ; and would all 
our manufacturers and men of science bury 
themselves underground, and confine their 
attention to making sewers, I, for one, should 
have little complaint against them.' 

1 And are railways, telegraphs, gas-lamps 
— is the projected Channel tunnel, nothing in 



BOOK I. CHAPTER FIT. 47 

your eyes ? Is it nothing that all the condi- 
tions of life are ameliorated, that mind is 
daily pursuing farther its conquest over 
matter ? ' 

1 Have we much to thank you for/ said 
Mr. Herbert, ' that you have saved us from 
an hour of sea-sickness, if in return you give 
us a whole lifetime of heart-sickness ? Your 
mind, my good sir, that you boast of, is so 
occupied in subduing matter, that it is entirely 
forgetful of subduing itself — a matter, trust me, 
that is far more important. And as for your 
amelioration of the conditions of life — that is 
not civilisation which saves a man from the 
need of exercising any of his powers, but 
which obliges him to exert his noble powers ; 
not that which satisfies his lower feelings with 
the greatest ease, but which provides satisfac- 
tion for his higher feelings, no matter at what 
trouble.' 

• Other things being equal,' said Mr. 
Saunders, ' I apprehend that the generation 
that travels sixty miles an hour is at least 
five times as civilised as the generation that 
travels only twelve.' 

' But the other things are not equal,' said 
Mr. Herbert : ' and the other things, by which 
I suppose you mean all that is really sacred 
in the life of man, have been banished or 



48 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

buried by the very things which we boast of 
as our civilisation.' 

1 That is our own fault,' said Mr. Saun- 
ders, ' not the fault of civilisation.' 

f' Not so,' said Mr. Herbert. ' Bring up 
a boy to do nothing for himself — make every- 
thing easy for him — to use your own expres- 
sion, subdue matter for him — and that boy 
will never be able to subdue anything for 
himself. He will be weak in body, and a 
coward in soul ' 

' Precisely,' said Mr. Saunders. ' And 
that is really, if you look dispassionately at 
the matter, a consummation devoutly to be 
wished. For why do we need our bodies to 
be strong ? — To overcome obstacles. Why 
do we need to be brave ? — To attack enemies. 
But by and by, when all our work is done 
by machinery, and we have no longer any 
obstacles to overcome, or any hardships to 
endure, strength will become useless, and 
bravery dangerous. And my own hope is that 
both will have ere long vanished ; and that 
weakness and cowardice, qualities which we 
now so irrationally despise, will have vindicated 
their real value, by turning universal civilisa- 
tion into universal peace.' 

'Yes,' said Mr. Herbert, ' that is exactly 
what the modern world is longing for — a 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 49 

universal peace ; which never can nor will 
mean anything else than peace with the 
devil.' 

' Really,' said Lady Ambrose to Leslie, 
1 do you think we are in such a bad way as 
all this ? Dr. Jenkinson, I must ask you — 
you always know these things — do you think 
we are so very bad ? ' 

1 Yes — yes,' said the Doctor, turning 
towards her with a cheerful smile, ' there is a 
great deal that is very bad in our own days — 
very bad indeed. Many thoughtful people 
think that there is more that is bad in the 
present than there has ever been in the past. 
Many thoughtful people in all days have 
thought the same.' 

* Whenever wise men,' said Herbert, 
' have taken to thinking about their own 
times, it is quite true that they have always 
thought ill of them. But that is because the 
times must have gone wrong before the wise 
men take to the business of thinking about 
them at all. We are never conscious of our 
constitutions till they are out of order.' 

1 Ah ! yes,' said Mr. Luke ; ' how true 
that is, Herbert ! Philosophy may be a 
golden thing. But it is the gold of the 
autumn woods, that soon falls, and leaves the 
boughs of the nation naked.' 

£ 



5o THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 Yes,' said Leslie, ' leaving nothing but 
Bare mined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.' 

' Thank you, Mr. Leslie,' exclaimed Mr. 
Herbert across the table, ' thank you — an ex- 
quisitely apt quotation.' 

' Then you, Mr. Leslie,' said Lady Am- 
brose in a disappointed voice, 'you are one 
of these desponding people too, are you ? I 
never heard anything so dismal in my life.' 

' I certainly think,' said Leslie, ' that our 
age in some ways could not possibly be worse. 
Nobody knows what to believe, and most 
people believe nothing. Don't you find 
that ? ' 

1 Indeed I do not,' said Lady Ambrose, 
with some vigour, ' and I am very sorry for 
those who do. That Mr. Saunders,' she 
added, lowering her voice, ' is the first person 
I ever heard express such views. We were 
dining only the other day with the Bishop of 

, and I'll tell you what he said, Mr. 

Leslie. He said that the average number of 
churches built yearly during the last ten years 
was greater than it had ever been since the 
Reformation. That does not look as if re- 
ligion was on the decline, does it ? I know 
the Bishop spoke of a phase of infidelity that 
was passing over the nation : but that, he 



BOOK J. CHAPTER III. 51 

said, would soon have drifted by. Indeed, 
he told us that all the teachings of modern 
irreligious science were simply reproductions 
of — you must not laugh at me if I say the 
names wrong — Epicurus and Democritus — 
which had been long ago refuted. And that 
was no peculiar crotchet of his own mind ; for a 
very clever gentleman who was sitting next 
me said that that was the very thing which 
all the bishops agreed in saying — almost the 
only thing indeed in which they did agree.' 

' Ah ! ' said Leslie, ' materialism once 
came to the world like a small street 
boy throwing mud at it ; and the indignant 
world very soon drove it away. But it has 
now come back again, dirtier than ever, 
bringing a big brother with it, and Heaven 
knows when we shall get rid of it now.' 

' In every state of transition,' said Dr. 
Jenkinson to Miss Merton, ' there must 
always be much uneasiness. But I don't 
think,' he said, with a little pleased laugh, 
' that you will find these times really much 
worse than those that went before them. No 
— no. If we look at them soberly, they are 
really a great deal better. We have already 
got rid of a vast amount of superstition and 
ignorance, and are learning what Christianity 
really is. We are learning true reverence — 

E 2 



5 J THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

that is, not to dogmatise about subjects of 
which we cannot possibly know anything. 

'Just so, Jenkinson,' said Mr. Luke ; ' that 
is the very thing I am trying to teach the 
world myself. Personal immortality, for 
instance, which forms no part of the sweet 
secret of authentic Christianity ' 

1 Yes — yes,' said the Doctor hastily ; ' the 
Church had degraded the doctrine. It needed 
to be expressed anew.' 

' Of course,' said Miss Merton, 'I, as a 
Catholic ' 

' Dear ! dear ! ' exclaimed the Doctor, in 
some confusion, ' I beg your pardon. I had 
no notion you were a Roman Catholic' 

' I was going to say,' Miss Merton went 
on, 'that, though of course as a Catholic I 
am not without what I believe to be an infal- 
lible guide, I feel just as much as anyone 
the bad state in which things are now. It is 
so difficult to shape one's course in life. One 
has nowhere any work cut out for one. 
There is a want of — well — ' she said, 
smiling, ' of what perhaps, when religion has 
been analysed by science, will be called moral 
ozone in the air.' 

' Such a feeling is not unnatural,' said the 
Doctor; 'but you will find it vanish if you 
just resolve cheerfully to go on doing the 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 53 

duty next you — even if this be only to order 
dinner. And,' he said, turning to her rather 
abruptly, ' don't despond over the times : 
that only makes them worse. Besides, 
they are not really at all bad. There is no 
need for desponding at all.' 

1 But there is at least excuse,' said 
Laurence, ' when we see all the old faiths, the 
old ideas, under which the world has so long 
found shelter, fading 

Like the baseless fabric of a vision, 

rapidly and for ever away from us.' 

' I don't think so,' said the Doctor, as if 
that settled the question. 

' Christianity,' said Mr. Stockton, ' is only 
retiring to make way for something better. 
Religions are not quickened unless they 
perish. Look forward at the growing bright- 
ness of the future, not at the faded brightness 
of the past' 

' Why not look at the present ? ' said Dr. 
Jenkinson. • Depend upon it, it is not wise 
to be above one's times. There's plenty of 
religion now. The real power of Christianity 
is growing every day, even where you least 
expect it.' 

' In what part of Christianity,' said Leslie, 
' its real power lies, it would be unbecoming in 



54 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

me to profess that I know. But this I do 
know, that if you take four out of five of the 
> more thoughtful and instructed men of the day, 
you will find that not only have they no faith 
in a personal God or a personal immortality, 
but the very notions of such things seem 
to them absurdities.' 

'Yes,' said Mr. Herbert, 'it was once 
thought a characteristic of the lowest savages 
to be without a belief in a future life. It will 
soon be thought a characteristic of the lowest 
savages to be with one.' 

1 Really now — ' said Mr. Luke, in a voice 
whose tone seemed to beseech everyone to be 
sensible, ' personal immortality and a per- 
sonal Deity are no doctrines of Christianity. 
You, Jenkinson, I know agree with me.' 

There was nothing the Doctor so disliked 
as these appeals from Mr. Luke. He made 
in this case no response whatever. He 
turned instead to Miss Merton. 

1 You see,' he said to her in a very quiet 
but very judicial way, ' the age we live in is 
an age of change. And in all such ages 
there must be many things that, if we let them, 
will pain and puzzle us. But we mustn't let 
them. There have been many ages of change 
before our time, and there are sure to be 
many after it Our age is not peculiar.' 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 55 

Here he paused, as he had a way of 
doing at times between his sentences. This 
practice now, as it had often been before, was 
of a disservice to him ; for it gave a fatal 
facility for interruption when he could least 
have wished it. In this case Leslie entirely 
put him out, by attacking the very statement 
which the Doctor least of all had designed to 
bear question. 

' But in some ways,' said Leslie, ' this age 
is peculiar, surely. It is peculiar in the 
extraordinary rapidity of its changes. Chris- 
tianity took three hundred years to supplant 
polytheism ; atheism has hardly taken thirty 
to supplant Christianity.' 

Dr. Jenkinson did not deign to take the 
least notice of this. 

' I suppose,' said Miss Merton to Leslie, 
* that you think Catholicism quite a thing of 
the past ? ' 

1 I'm afraid,' said Leslie, ' that my opinion 
on that is of very small importance. But, 
however that may be, you must admit that in 
the views of the world at large there have 
been great changes ; and these, I say, have 
come on us with so astonishing a quickness that 
they have plunged us into a state of mental 
anarchy that has not been equalled since 
mental order has been known. There is no 
recognised rule of life anywhere. The old 



56 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

rules only satisfy those who are not capable 
of feeling the need of any rule at all. Every 
one who does right at all only does what is 
right in his own eyes. All society, it seems, 
is going to pieces.' 

' I,' said Mr. Rose, ' look upon social 
dissolution as the true condition of the most 
perfect life. For . the centre of life is the 
individual, and it is only through dissolution 
that the individual can re-emerge. All the 
warrings of endless doubts, all the question- 
ings of matter and of spirit, which I have 
myself known, I value only because, remem- 
bering the weariness of them, I take a 
profounder and more exquisite pleasure in 
the colour of a crocus, the pulsations of a 
chord of music, or a picture of Sandro 
Botticelli's.' 

Mr. Rose's words hardly produced all the 
effect he could have wished ; for the last part 
was almost drowned in the general rustle of 
the ladies rising. 

' Before we go, Mr. Laurence,' said Lady 
Ambrose, ' will you be good enough to tell 
me the history of these salt-cellars ? I 
wanted to have asked you at the beginning 
of dinner, but you made yourself so very 
appalling then, that I really did not ven- 
ture.' 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 57 

'Well,' said Laurence, 'no doubt they 
surprise you. They were a present made to 
me the other day by a friend of mine — an 
eminent man of science, and are models of a 
peculiar kind of retort he has invented, for 
burning human bodies, and turning them into 
gas.' 

* Good gracious ! ' said Lady Ambrose, 
'how horrible! I insist, Mr. Laurence, on 
your having another set to-morrow night- 
remember.' 

' There,' said Laurence, when the gentle- 
men had resettled themselves, and had 
begun their wine, « there is the new version 

of the skeleton at the banquet-board the 

two handfuls of white dust, to which we, the 
salt of the earth, shall one day crumble. Let 
us sacrifice all the bulls we have to Pluto 
illacrimabilis — let us sacrifice ourselves to 
one another, or to Heaven — to this favour 
must we come. Is not that so, Mr. Storks ? 

'Laurence,' said Dr. Jenkinson briskly, 
' the conversation hasn't kept pace with the 
dinner. We have got no farther than " The 
Present " yet. The ladies are going to talk 
of "The Future" by themselves. See- 
there they are out on the terrace.' 

Mr. Storks here drew his chair to the 
table, and cleared his throat. 



$8 THE NEW REPUBLIC 

1 It is easier,' he said, ' to talk about the 
present now we are alone — now they', he 
nodded his head in the direction of the 
party outside, 'are gone out to talk about 
the future in the moonlight. There are 
many things which even yet it does not do 
to say before women — at least, before all 
women.' 

1 My aunt,' said Laurence, ' is a great 
authority on woman's education and true 
position ; and she has written an essay to 
advance the female cause.' 

' Indeed ?' said Mr. Storks ; ' I was not 
aware of that I shall look forward with 
much pleasure to some conversation with her. 
But what I was going to say related to the 
present, which at dinner was on all sides so 
mercilessly run down. I was going to claim 
for the present age, in thought and specula- 
tion (and it is these that give their tone to 
its entire conduct of life), as its noble and 
peculiar feature, a universal, intrepid, dogged 
resolve to find out and face the complete 
truth of things, and to allow no prejudice, 
however dear to us, to obscure our vision. 
This is the only real morality : and not only 
is it full of blessing for the future, but it is 
giving us " manifold more in this present 
time" as well. The work of science, you 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 59 

see, is twofold ; it enlarges the horizon of 
the mind, and improves the conditions of the 
body. If you will pardon my saying so, Mr. 
Herbert, I think your antipathy to science 
must be due to your not having fully appreci- 
ated its true work and dignity.' 

' The work of science is, I know, two- 
fold,' said Mr. Herbert, 'speculative and 
practical.' 

1 Exactly so,' said Mr. Storks approv- 
ingly. 

' And all it can do for us in speculation,' 
said Mr. Herbert, ' is to teach us that we 
have no life hereafter : all it can do for us in 
practice, is to ruin our life here. It enervates 
us by providing us with base luxury ; it de- 
grades us by turning our attention to base 
knowledge.' 

1 No — no,' said Dr. Jenkinson, with one 
of his little laughs, ' not that. I don't think, 
Mr. Storks, that Mr. Herbert always quite 
means what he says. We mustn't take him 
at his word.' 

' My dear sir,' said Mr. Herbert, turning 
to the Doctor, ' you are a consecrated priest 
of the mystical Church of Christ' — Dr. Jen- 
kinson winced terribly at this — ' and let me 
ask you if you think it the work of Christ to 
bring into men's minds eternal corruption, 



60 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

instead of eternal life— or, rather, not corrup- 
tion, I should say, but putrefaction. For 
what is putrefaction but decomposition ? And 
at the touch of science all our noblest ideas 
decompose and putrefy, till our whole souls 
are strewn with dead hopes and dead religions, 
with corpses of all the thoughts we loved 

Quickening slowly into lower forms. 

You may call it analysis, but I call it death.' 

' I wish we could persuade you,' said Mr. 
Stockton, very temperately, ' to take a fairer 
view of things. Surely truth cannot in the 
long run be anything but life-giving.' 

' Let us take care of facts,' said Mr. Storks, 
' and fictions — I beg your pardon, religion — 
will take care of itself.' 

1 And religion,' said Mr. Stockton, ' will 
take care of itself very well. Of course we don't 
waste time now in thinking about personal 
immortality. We shall not live ; but the mind 
of man will ; and religion will live too, being 
part of the mind of man. Religion is, indeed, 
to the inner world what the sky is to the 
outer. It is the mind's canopy — the infinite 
mental azure in which the mysterious source 
of our being is at once revealed and hidden. 
Let us beware, then, of not considering re- 
ligion noble ; but let us beware still more of 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 61 

considering it true. We may fancy that we 
trace in the clouds shapes of real things ; and, 
as long as we know that this is only fancy, I 
know of no holier occupation for the human 
mind than such cloud-£azinor But let us 
always recollect that the cloud which to us 
may seem shaped like a son of man, may 
seem to another to be backed like a weasel, 
and to another to be very like a whale. What, 
then,' Mr. Stockton added, ' can be a nobler 
study than the great book of Nature, or, as 
we used to call it, the works of God ? ' 

1 Pray do not think,' said Mr. Herbert, 
* that I complain of this generation because it 
studies Nature. I complain of it because it 
does not study her. Yes,' he went on, as he 
saw Mr. Stockton start, ' you can analyse her 
in your test tubes, you can spy at her through 
your microscopes ; but can you see her with 
your own eyes, or receive her into your own 
souls ? You can tell us what she makes her 
wonders of, and how she makes them, and 
how long she takes about it. But you can- 
not tell us what these wonders are like when 
they are made. When God said, " Let there 
be light, and light was, and God saw that it 
was good," was he thinking, as he saw this, of 
the exact velocity it travelled at, and of the 
exact laws it travelled by, which you wise 



62 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

men are at such infinite pains to discover ; or 
was he thinking of something else, which you 
take no pains to discover at all — of how it 
clothed the wings of the morning with silver, 
and the feathers of the evening with gold ? 
Is water, think you, a nobler thing to the 
modern chemist, who can tell you exactly 
what gases it is made of, and nothing more ; 
or to Turner, who could not tell you at all 
what it is made of, but who did know and 
who could tell you what it is made — what it is 
made by the sunshine, and the cloud-shadow, 
and the storm-wind — who knew how it paused 
in the taintless mountain trout-pool, a living 
crystal over stones of flickering amber ; and 
how it broke itself turbid, with its choirs of 
turbulent thunder, when the rocks card it 
into foam, and where the tempest sifts it into 
spray ? When Pindar called water the best 
of things, was he thinking of it as the union 
of oxygen and hydrogen ' 

' He would have been much wiser if he 
had been,' interposed Dr. Jenkinson. ' Thales, 
to whose theory, as you know, Pindar was 

referring ' But the Doctor's words were 

utterly unavailing to check the torrent of Mr. 
Herbert's eloquence. They only turned it 
into a slightly different course. 

' Ah ! masters of modern science,' he went 



BOOK I. CHAPTER III. 63 

on, ' you can tell us what pure water is made 
of; but, thanks to your drains and your mills, 
you cannot tell us where to find it. You can, 
no doubt, explain to us all about sunsets ; but 
the smoke of your towns and your factories 
has made it impossible for us to see one. 
However, each generation is wise in its own 
wisdom ; and ours would sooner look at a 
foetus in a bottle, than at a statue of the 
god Apollo, from the hand of Phidias, and in 
the air of Athens.' 

During all this speech Mr. Storks had 
remained with his face buried in his hands, 
every now and then drawing in his breath 
through his teeth, as if he were in pain. 
When it was over he looked up with a scared 
expression, as if he hardly knew where he 
was, and seemed quite unable to utter a 
syllable. 

' Of course,' said Mr. Stockton, ' mere 
science, as science, does not deal with moral 
right and wrong.' 

'No,' said Mr. Saunders, 'for it has 
shown that right and wrong are terms of a 
bygone age, connoting altogether false ideas. 
Mere automata as science shows we are — 
clockwork machines, wound up by meat and 
drink ' 

' As for that,' broke in Mr. Storks, who 



64 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

had by this time recovered himself — and his 
weighty voice at once silenced Mr. Saunders, 
' I would advise our young friend not to be 
too confident. We may be automata, or we 
may not. Science has not yet decided. And 
upon my word,' he said, striking the table, 
' I don't myself care which we are. Supposing 
the Deity — if there be one — should offer to 
make me a machine, if I am not one, on con- 
dition that I should always go right, I, for one, 
would gladly close with the proposal.' 

' But you forget,' said Allen, ' that in the 
moral sense there would be no going right at 
all, if there were not also the possibility of 
going wrong. If your watch keeps good time 
you don't call it virtuous, nor if it keeps bad 
time do you call it sinful.' 

' Sin, Lord Allen,' said Mr. Storks, ' is 
a word that has helped to retard moral 
and social progress more than anything. 
Nothing is good or bad, but thinking makes 
it so ; and the superstitious and morbid way 
in which a number of entirely innocent things 
have been banned as sin, has caused more 
than half the tragedies of the world. Science 
will establish an entirely new basis of 
morality ; and the sunlight of rational appro- 
bation will shine on many a thing, hitherto 



BOOK 1. CHAPTER lit. 65 

overshadowed by the curse of a hypothetical 
God.' 

' Exactly so,' exclaimed Mr. Saunders 
eagerly. • Now, I'm not at all that sort of 
man myself,' he went on, 'so don't think it 
because I say this.' 

Everyone stared at Mr. Saunders in 
wonder as to what he could mean. 

' We think it, for instance,' he said, • a very 
sad thing when a girl is as we call it ruined. 
But it is we really that make all the sadness. 
She is ruined only because we think she is 
so. And I have little doubt that that higher 
philosophy of the future that Mr. Storks 
speaks of will go far, some day, towards solving 
the great question of women's sphere of action, 
by its recognition of prostitution as an honour- 
able and beneficent profession.' 

'Sir!' exclaimed Mr. Storks, striking the 
table, and glaring with indignation at Mr. 
Saunders, ' I could hardly have believed that 
such misplaced flippancy ' 

' Flippancy ! it is reasoned truth,' shrieked 
Mr. Saunders, upsetting his wine-glass. 

Luckily this brought about a pause. 
Laurence took advantage of it. 

' See,' he said, ' Dr. Jenkinson has left us, 
Will no one have any more wine ? — Then 
suppose we follow him.' 

v 



66 THE NEW REPUBLIC 




CHAPTER IV. 

[T was a calm, lovely evening. The 
moon was rising over the sea, and 
the sea was slowly silvering under 
it. A soft breeze breathed gently, 
full of the scents of flowers ; and in the low 
sky of the west there yet lingered a tender 
peach-colour. 

The ladies were sitting about on chairs, 
grouped together, but with several little 
groups within the group ; and amongst them 
all was Dr. Jenkinson, making himself par- 
ticularly agreeable to Mrs. Sinclair. When 
the gentlemen emerged there was a general 
stir, and Lady Ambrose, shutting up a 
volume of St.-Simon's Memoirs, said, 'Well, 
Mr. Laurence, we have been talking most 
industriously about the future.' 

Laurence was standing with Mr. Luke on 
the step of the dining-room window, and both 
were looking out gravely on the tranquil 
scene. 

1 Do you remember/ said Laurence, ' that 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 67 

it was here, three years ago, that you com- 
posed the lines that stand last in your pub- 
lished volumes ? ' 

1 1 remember,' said Mr. Luke dreamily. 
' What an evening that was ! ' 

' I wish you would repeat them,' said 
Laurence. 

1 What is the good ? ' said Mr. Luke ; ' why 
rouse again the voices that haunt 

About the mouldered lodges of the past ? ' 

' Mr. Luke,' said Lady Ambrose appeal- 
ingly, ' I do so wish you would.' 

' Is Mr. Luke going to recite poetry ? ' said 
Mrs. Sinclair, coming languidly up to them. 
' How delicious !' She was looking lovely in 
the dim light, with a diamond star shining in 
her dark hair ; and for a mortal bard there 
was positively no resisting her appeal. 

Mr. Luke, with a silent composure, 
pressed his hands for a moment against his 
forehead ; he gave one hem ; and then in a 
clear melodious voice began as follows : — 

1 Softly the evening descends, 
Violet and soft. The sea 
Adds to the silence, below 
Pleasant and cool on the beach 
breaking; yes, and a breeze 
Calm as the twilight itself 
Furtively sighs through the dusk, 

F2 



6* THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Listlessly lifting my hair, 
Fanning my thought-wearied brow. 

Thus I stand in the gloom 
Watching tlie moon- track begin 
Quivering to die like a dream 
Over the far sea-line 
To the unknown region beyond. 

1 'So for ages hath man 
Gazed on the ocean of time 
From the shores of his birth, and, turning 
His eyes from the quays, the thronged 
Marts, the noise and the din 
To the far horizon, hath dreamed 
Of a timeless country beyond. 

Vainly : for how should he pass, 
Being on foot, o'er the wet 
Ways of the unplumbed waves f 
How, without ship, should he past 
Over the shipless sea 
To the timeless country beyond i 

' Ah, but once — once long ago, 
Came there a ship white-sailed 
From the country beyond, with bright 
Oarsmen, and men that sang; 
Came to Humanity s coasts, 
Called to the men on the shore, 
joyously touched at the port. 

Then did time-weary man 
Climb the bulwarks, the deck 
Eagerly crowding. Anon 
With jubilant voices raised, 
And singing, " When Israel came 
Out of Egypt" and w fiat so else 



BOOK 1. CHAPTER IK 09 

In the psahn is written, they passed 

Out of the ken of the land, 

Over the far sea-line, 

To the unknown region beyond. 

' Where are they now, then — they 
That were borne out of sight by the ship — 
Our brothers, of times gone by f 
Why have they left us here 
Solemn, defected, alone, 
Gathered in groups on the shore t 
Why ? For we, too, have gazed 
Oer the waste of waters, arid watched 
For a sail as keenly as they. 
Ah, wretched men that we are I 
On our haggard faces and brows 
Aching, a wild breeze faivns 
Full of the scents of the sea, 
Redolent of regions beyond. 
Why, then, tarries the ship ? 
When will her white sail rise 
Like a star on the sea-line 1 When t 

1 When 1 — And the answer comes 
From the sailless face of the sea, 
"Ah, vain watchers, what boots 
The calm of the evening? 
Have ye not watched through the day 
Turbulent waves, the expanse 
Endless, shaken with storm, 
And ask ye where is the ship t 
Deeper than plummet can dive 
She is bedded deep in the ooze, 
And over her tall mast floats 
The purple plain of the calm." 



■7o THE NEW REPUBLIC, 

1 Yes — and never a ship 
Since this is sunken, will come 
Ever again o'er the waves — 
Nay, not even the craft ivith the fierce 
Steersman, him of the marsh 
Livid, with wheels of flame 
Circling his eyes, to smite 
The lingering soul with his oar, 
— Not that even. But we 
Drop where we stand one by one 
On the shingles and sands of time % 
And cover in taciturn gloom, 
With only perhaps some tear, 
Each for his brother the hushed 
Heart and the limitless dreams 
With a little gift of sand.' 

Thank you, Mr. Luke, so much,' said 
Lady Ambrose. ' How charming ! I am 
always so fond of poems about the sea.' 

' Ah,' said Mr. Luke, turning to Mrs. 
Sinclair, 'these are emotions scarcely worth 
describing.' 

' Certainly not,' muttered Mr. Storks, half 
aloud as he moved off to discover Lady 
Grace. 

Mr. Luke stood apart, and surveyed the 
party with a look of pensive pity. On Mr. 
Storks, however, whose last remark he had 
overheard, his eyes rested with an expression 
somewhat more contemptuous. The bright- 
ening moonlight fell softly on the group 



BOOK L CHAPTER IV. 71 

before him, giving it a particularly picturesque 
effect, as it touched the many colours and 
folds of the ladies' dresses, and struck here 
and there a furtive flash from a gem on wrist 
or throat. The tranquil hour seemed to 
have a tranquillising effect on nearly every- 
one ; and the conversation reached Mr. 
Luke's ears as a low murmur, broken only by 
the deep sound of Mr. Storks's voice, and the 
occasional high notes of Mr. Saunders, who 
seemed to Mr. Luke, in his present frame of 
mind, to be like a shrill cock crowing to the 
world before the sunrise of universal philis- 
tinism. 

Laurence meanwhile had caught Miss 
Merton's eyes looking at him with a grave 
regard ; and this had brought him instantly 
to her side, when Mr. Luke had ended his 
recital. 

' We didn't spare the times we live in, 
to-night, did we ? ' he said slowly to her in a 
low voice. ' Well, well — I wonder what it is 
all coming to — we and our times together ! 
We are certainly a curious medley here, all 
of us. I suppose no age but ours could have 
produced one like it — at least, let us hope so, 
for the credit of the ages in general.' 

1 I must say,' said Miss Merton, smiling, 
1 that you seem to take to the age very kindly, 



7* THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

and to be very happy amongst your friends. 
But you did not tell us very much of what 
you thought yourself.' 

' I don't often say what I think,' said 
Laurence, ' because I don't often know what I 
think ;but I know a great many things that I 
don't think; and I confess I take a pleasure in 
saying these, and in hearing others say them ; 
so the society that I choose as a rule re- 
presents not the things I think I approve, 
but the things I am sure I repudiate.' 

1 1 confess,' said Miss Merton, ' I don't 
quite understand that.' 

1 Shall I tell you,' said Laurence, ' why I 
live so much in society — amongst my friends, 
as you call them ? Simply because I feel, in 
my life, as a child does in a dark room ; and 
I must have some one to talk to, or else I 
think I should go mad. What one says is 
little matter, so long as one makes a noise 
of some sort, and forgets the ghosts that in 
one's heart one is shuddering at' 

Miss Merton was silent for a moment, and 
looked up into the sky in which the stars 
were now one by one appearing. 

1 I suppose,' she said presently, ' you think 
it is a very poor affair — life's whole business. 
And yet I don't see why you should.' 

* Not see why I should ? repeated 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 73 

Laurence. ' Ah, that shows how little you, 
from your position, can sympathise with ours. 
I am not surprised at it. Of course, it is out 
of the question that you should. You, happy 
in some sustaining faith, can see a meaning in 
all life, and all life's affections. You can endure 
— you can even welcome its sorrows. The 
clouds of ennui themselves for you have 
silver linings. For your religion is a kind 
of philosopher's stone, turning whatever it 
touches into something precious. But we — 
we can only remember that for us, too, things 
had a meaning once ; but they have it no 
longer. Life stares at us now, all blank and 
expressionless, like the eyes of a lost friend, 
who is not dead, but who has turned an idiot. 
Perhaps you never read Clough's Poems, 
did you ? Scarcely a day passes in which I 
do not echo to myself his words : — 

Ah well-a-day, for we are souls bereaved ! 

Of all the creatures under heaven's wide cope, 
We are most hopeless who had once most hope, 

And most belierless who had once believed.' 

'And do you think,' said Miss Merton in 
a low tone, ' that belief in these days brings no 
painful perplexities too ? Do you think that 
we can look out on the state of the world 
now, and think about its future, without 
anxiety ? But really,' she went on, raising her 



74 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

voice, ' if I, like you, thought that Christianity 
was not true, I should not waste my time in 
lamenting over it. I should rather be glad 
that I had got free from a gigantic and awful 
imposition.' 

' What ! ' exclaimed Laurence, ' should we 
rejoice at our old guide dropping dead 
amongst the mountains, even though he had 
lost his way ; if so we are left hopeless, and 
without any guide at all ? ' 

'You have your consciences,' said Miss 
Merton, with some decision in her voice ; 
' you surely don't mean to say that you have 
lost them ? ' 

' As for our consciences,' said Leslie, who 
was standing close by, ' we revere them so 
much that we fancy they possess some power. 
But conscience, in most souls, is like an Eng- 
lish Sovereign — it reigns, but it does not 
govern. Its function is merely to give a formal 
assent to the Bills passed by the passions ; and 
it knows, if it opposes what those are really 
bent upon, that ten to one it will be obliged to 
abdicate.' 

1 Let us hope that the constitutions of 
most souls are more stable than that,' said 
Miss Merton. ' As far as morality goes, I 
expect you have quite enough to guide you ; 
and if you think religion false* I don't see why 



BOOK L CHAPTER IV. 75 

its loss should trouble you. And life itself, 
remember, has plenty of pleasures. It is full 
of things worth living for.' 

1 Is it ? ' exclaimed Leslie with sudden 
emphasis, and he looked into Miss Merton's 
face with an expression half absent and half 
wondering. ' Is there anything in life that 
you really think is, for its own sake, worth 
living for ? To me it seems that we are 
haunted with the power of imagining that 
there might be, and are pursued with the 
knowledge that there never is. Look at that 
lovely water before us, with its floods of moon- 
light — how it ripples, how it sparkles away 
into the distance ! What happiness sights like 
these suggest to one ! How happy they 
might make us — might, but they never do ! 
They only madden us with a vague pain, that 
is like the sense of something lost for ever.' 

'Still,' said Miss Merton, 'life is not all 
moonlight. Surely friendship and affection 
are worth having?' 

1 Let me beg you, Miss Merton,' said Leslie, 
replying to her tone rather than to her words, 
■ not to think that I am always pining and 
bemoaning myself. Fortunately the deeper 
part of one's nature will often go to sleep, and 
then the surface can enjoy itself. We can 
even laugh with our lips at the very things 



?6 the new republic. 

that our hearts in silence are breaking for. 
But as for happiness, that is always like pro- 
phecy, it is only fulfilled in the future ; or else 
it is a miracle — it only exists in the past. 
The actual things we wish for we may very 
likely get, but they always come too late or 
too soon. When the boy is in love, he tries 
to feel like a man ; when the man is in love, 
he tries to feel like a boy ; and both in vain.' 

' Ah,' exclaimed Laurence, ' I think very 
differently from that. I know,' he said, turn- 
ing to Miss Merton, 'that friendship and af- 
fection are things worth having; and if only 
pain and anxiety would leave me, I could 
enjoy the taste of happiness.' 

* Could you ? ' said Leslie. ' When I look 
at what we are and what the world is, I can 
fancy no more melancholy spectacle than a 
happy man ; though I admit,' he added as he 
moved slowly away, ' that there is none more 
amusing than a man who tries to be melan- 
choly.' 

' Leslie is oddly changed,' said Laurence, 
'since I saw him last. / am distressed with 
life because I cannot find out its worth. He is 
indignant at it, it seems, because he thinks he 
has found out its worthlessness. And yet — 
I envy him his temperament. He never lets 
any melancholy subdue him. He can always 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 77 

laugh it down in a moment ; and he will 
trample bravely on any of his sentiments if 
he is on the road to anything he is proud of 
aiming at.' 

Laurence was silent for a moment, and 
then said abruptly : — 

' I dare say you think me very morbid ; but 
perhaps you can hardly realise the intense rest- 
less misery that a man endures when he can 
find nothing to do which he really feels worth 
doing. Could I only find some one thing — 
one great cause to labour for — one great idea 
— I could devote my whole self to it, and be 
happy : for labour, after all, is the only thing 
that never palls on a man. But such a cause, 
such an idea — I can find it nowhere. Politics 
have turned into a petty, weary game ; reli- 
gion is dead. Our new prophets only offer us 
Humanity, in place of the God of which they 
have deprived us. And Humanity makes a 
very poor Deity, since it is every day disgrac- 
ing itself, and is never of the same mind from 
one week's end to another. And so here I am 
utterly alone — friendless, and with nothing to 
help me ; feeling that, were it not for the 
petty contemptible interests I manufacture 
for myself from day to day, life would be 
quite unbearable.' 

1 And yet,' said Miss Merton, ' you have 



78 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

much to make you happy — much that you 
would be sorry to lose.' 

' I have a certain position,' said Laurence, 
1 and a certain amount of wealth, and I would 
not willingly lose anything of either of these; 
but that is not because, in my heart, I value 
them ; but because, if I lost them, I might in 
my heart cease to despise them.' 

' Surely,' said Miss Merton, ■ there is a 
better way of looking at the matter. You 
came into the world with all your lower am- 
bitions satisfied for you. The ground there- 
fore is quite clear for the higher ambitions. 
That is why I think an aristocracy, as a rule, 
must always be the best governors of men, 
for their ambitions, as a rule, are the only 
genuine ones. Think, too, what an advantage 
mere wealth is. The highest labour will never 
produce money, but generally requires it.' 

' That is just the difficulty,' said Laurence, 
• What shall I labour for ? I am almost 
maddened sometimes, as I sit all the day idle, 
and seem to hear the hateful wasted moments 
slipping away from me. And I cotdd do 
something, I am sure. I feel I have powers.' 

' I think,' said Miss Merton, ■ that all I 
should say to you is, find something to do. 
The power to find or make an object is, I 
think, a great part of genius. However,' she 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 79 

said, with some sympathy in her voice, ' if 
you are in difficulties, I am sure I wish I 
could help you.' 

' Well,' said Laurence in a subdued voice, 
* I'm sure I beg your pardon for my egoism. 
I never talked so long about myself in my 
whole life before ; and I promise never to do 
so again.' 

Leslie meanwhile had moved away 
towards Mrs. Sinclair, who, looking par- 
ticularly fascinating, was still commanding 
the attentions of Dr. Jenkinson. The Doctor 
was standing by her, all deferent gallantry, 
and, to Leslie's surprise, was saying something 
to her about Sappho. 

' And now,' said Mrs. Sinclair, with a 
little appealing dainty smile, ' I want to ask 
you something about the Greek Anthology 
too. I can't read much Greek myself: 
but a gentleman who used to be rather 
kind to me, translated me a good deal of 
Greek poetry, once upon a time — when my 
husband,' she said, with a little shrug of 
the shoulders, ' used to go to sleep after his 
dinner.' 

Dr. Jenkinson here glanced suspiciously 
at Mrs. Sinclair. 

1 Now, what I want you to tell me,' she 
said, 'is something about some little — ahem 



80 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

■ — little love songs, I think they were — ipomK- 
something or other — I really can't pronounce 
the name.' 

The Doctor started. 

' And, Dr. Jenkinson, please,' Mrs. Sinclair 
went on in a voice of plaintive innocence, 
' not to think me a terrible blue-stocking, 
because I ask you these questions ; for I 
really hardly know any Greek myself — except 
perhaps a verse or two of the New Testa- 
ment ; and that's not very good Greek, I 
believe, is it ? But the gentleman who 
translated so much to me, when he came to 
these little poems I speak of, was continually, 
though he was a very good scholar, quite 
unable to translate them. Now, why should 
that have been, I want to know ? Are Greek 
love-poems very hard ? ' 

' Well,' said the Doctor, stammering, yet 
re-assured by Mrs. Sinclair's manner, 'they 
were probably — your friend perhaps — well — 
they were a little obscure perhaps — much 
Greek is — or ' 

' Corrupt ? ' suggested Mrs. Sinclair 
naively. 

The word was a simple one : but it 
sufficed to work a miracle on Dr. Jenkinson. 
For the first time in his life to a lady who 
united the two charms of beauty and fashion, 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 81 

to both of which he was eminently susceptible, 
Dr. Jenkinson was rude. He turned abruptly 
away, and staring hard at the moon, not at 
Mrs. Sinclair, said simply, ' I don't know,' 
with the most chilling intonation of which 
those words are capable. He then moved a 
pace away, and sat down on a chair close to 
Miss Merton. 

Mrs. Sinclair turned to Leslie, with a 
flash in her eyes of soft suppressed laughter. 

' How lovely the evening is !' murmured 
Leslie, responding to the smile. 

1 Yes,' said Mrs. Sinclair, looking out 
dreamily over the sea, ' it almost realises 
one's idea of perfect beauty.' 

' Really, Mrs. Sinclair,' said Leslie, ' you 
are certainly most Hellenic. First you talk 
of Sappho, now of Ideas of Beauty. Are 
you a Platonist ? ' 

' Mr. Leslie, of course I am,' said Mrs. 
Sinclair, somewhat misapprehending his 
meaning. ' I never heard such an imperti- 
nent question. Platonism, however, is a very 
rare philosophy in these days, I'm afraid.' 

1 Ah, and so you too think we are all of 
us very bad, do you ? ' said Leslie. ' It may 
be so, of course ; and yet men at least often 
generalise very hastily and very wrongly, I 
am sure. How often, for instance, do we 

G 



82 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

say that all wives nowadays are inconstant, 
simply because such are the only ones we 
remember, not because they are the only 
ones we know.' 

This speech was quite in Mrs. Sinclair's 
own manner, and she looked at Leslie with a 
smile of appreciation half humorous and 
half sentimental. 

' Ah,' she began to say, in a voice that 
had just a touch of sadness in it, ' if we could 
but all of us love only when we ought, and 
where we ought — ' But here she paused. 
Her voice died away, and she leaned her 
head upon her hand in silence. 

Leslie was going to have spoken ; but he 
was suddenly arrested by the sound of Dr. 
Jenkinson, close beside him, talking to Miss 
Merton in a tone of unusual earnestness. 

1 I don't wonder,' he was saying, ' that 
you should feel in perplexity sometimes ; 
whichever way we look at things there will 
be perplexities. But there is such a thing 
as goodness ; and goodness in the end must 
triumph, and so in this large faith let us 
rest.' 

'And,' said Donald Gordon in his soft 
deferential voice, which always sounded as if 
he was saying something deeply devotional, 
'don't you think it is a higher thing to be 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 83 

good for good's own sake than for God's ? 
and, whatever men may believe about having 
another life, and a beautiful heaven, with gold 
streets, and with jewelled fortifications, don't 
you think that morality really is after all its 
own reward ? ' 

' But what of those poor people,' said 
Miss Merton, ' who cannot be moral — whom 
circumstances have kept from being ever 
anything but brutalised ? I dare say,' she 
said, turning to the Doctor, quite forgetting 
his sacred character, ' that I shall hardly be 
able to make you understand such a notion 
as that of living for God's glory. But still, if 
there be not a God for whose glory we can 
live, and who in his turn will not leave us all 
to ourselves, what then ? Think of all those 
who, in spite of hard surroundings, have just 
had strength enough to struggle to be good, 
but to struggle only — whose whole moral 
being has been left writhing in the road of 
life, like an animal that a cart-wheel has gone 
over, just lifting its eyes up with a piteous 
appeal at us who will not help it ' 

Miss Merton looked at Dr. Jenkinson and 

paused. The moon shone tenderly on his 

silver hair, and his keen eyes had something 

very like moisture in them. 

* Yes/ he said ; ' these are great, great 
ca 



84 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

difficulties. But there is another life in store 
for us — another life, and a God. And don't 
think that the world is growing to disbelieve 
in these. Remember how many intelligent 
laymen count themselves members of the 
Church of England, simply because they 
believe in these two doctrines.' 

' It has always been inexplicable to me,' 
said Mr. Storks, who had been attracted by 
the sound of the Doctor's voice, ' whence this 
longing for a future life could have arisen. 
I suppose there are few things the very 
possibility of which science so conclusively 
disproves.' 

'And yet,' said Laurence, who had been 
speaking for a moment to Mrs. Sinclair, ' I 
can't help thinking at certain times that there 
may be a whole world of things undreamed 
of by our scientific philosophy. Such a feeling 
is touched by the sight of an " Ora pro anima 
mea," or a " Resurgam," on a quiet tombstone, 
or the sign of the cross made by a mother in 
hope and in sorrow on the forehead of her 
dead child.' 

Miss Merton looked at Laurence with 
some wonder in her large expressive eyes, 
Mr. Storks snorted, and Dr. Jenkinson 
blinked. 

1 See,' said Donald Gordon, 'the moonlight 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. g s 

grows brighter and brighter every moment 
It is almost bewildering in its dazzling pale- 
ness.' 

1 And there,' said Laurence, ' do you catch 
it ? — that is the light-ship on the horizon, like 
a large low star.' 

Laurence seated himself on the balus- 
trade, and, leaning on his elbow, looked up 
into the clear hollow skies. 

'World upon world,' he exclaimed at last, 
'and each one crowded, very likely, with 
beings like ourselves, wondering what this 
whole great universe is ! ' 

• And the vast majority of them believing 
in a wise and just God,' said Leslie, • for I 
see no reason why ours should be the stupid- 
est world in all creation.' 

' Yes,' said Laurence, ' and in each world 
a small select band, that has pierced through 
such a husk of lies, and has discovered the 
all-golden truth, that the universe is aimless, 
and that for good and evil the end is all 
one.' 

Dr. Jenkinson had a sensible horror of 
the stars : and as soon as they were men- 
tioned, he turned round in his chair, givino- 
his back to the group, Miss Merton included ; 
whilst Mr. Storks walked away, not without 
dignity. 



85 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' Mrs. Sinclair is going to sing in a 
moment,' said Laurence ; ' some one is gone 
to fetch her guitar.' 

'Hush!' exclaimed Miss Merton, 'do 
just listen to this.' 

' Good gracious ! ' said Laurence in a 
whisper, 'Mr. Storks is at my aunt at 
last.' 

Mr. Storks had been watching ever since 
dinner for an opportunity of discussing with 
Lady Grace the true position of woman, as 
settled by modern science. He was pecu- 
liarly full of this subject just now, having 
received only that morning a letter from a 
celebrated American physician, who stated 
very strongly as his opinion, that the strain 
of what is called the higher education was 
most prejudicial to the functions of maternity, 
and that the rights of woman might very 
probably be fatal to the existence of man. 
As soon as he got hold of Lady Grace, he 
led up to this point with startling rapidity ; 
having been perfectly charmed at starting to 
find that she fully agreed with him that the 
prejudices of the present day were doing 
more harm to woman's true interests than 
anything else. 

' It is a pleasure,' said Mr. Storks, ' to dis- 
cuss these matters with a person so thoroughly 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 87 

enlightened as yourself. You will of course 
see from what Dr. Boston says how en- 
tirely suicidal is the scheme of turning woman 
into a female man. Nature has marked out 
her mission for her plainly enough ; and so 
our old friend Milton was right in his mean- 
ing after all, when he says that man is made 
for God, and woman for God through him, 
though of course the expression is anti- 
quated.' 

' Surely,' said Lady Grace with anima- 
tion, ' not only the expression is antiquated, 
but the meaning also is contrary to all true 
fairness and enlightment.' 

' I confess, I don't see that,' said Mr. 
Storks with a look of smiling deference. 

' What ! ' cried Lady Grace, ' is it not con- 
trary to reason — let me put it to your own 
candour — for a man who knows that his 
wife, ages hence, will be a seraph singing be- 
fore the throne of God, to consider her only 
made for God through him — to consider her, 
indeed, as a thing made simply for her hus- 
band's use ? ' 

This answer of Lady Grace's took Mr. 
Storks quite aback. He knew not how to 
comport himself. His jaw fell — he stared — 
he said nothing. He felt as though he had 
been assassinated. But luckily at this very 



88 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

moment, liquid and clear, and exquisitely 
modulated, were heard the sounds of Mrs. 
Sinclair's voice, singing the following 
song — 

Darling, can you endure the liquid weather, 
The jasmine-scented twilights, oh my dear 1 

Or do you still remember how together 

We read the sad sweet Idyll ' Guinevere,' 
Love, in one last year's twilight 1 

Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo scrisse. 1 

Ah, the flowers smelt sweet, and all unheeding 

Did I read to you that tender tale, 
Oh my love, until my voice, in reading 

How those lovers greeted ' passion-pale^ 
Trembled in the soft twilight. 
Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo scrisse. 

Then our eyes met, and then all was over — 
All the world receded cold and far ; 

And your lips were on my lips, my lover ; 
And above us shook a silver star, 

Through depths of melting twilight. 

Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo scrisse. 

Darling, no July will ever find us 

On this earth, together, more. Our fates 
Were but a moment cheated. Then, behind us 

Shrilled his voice for whom Ca'ina 2 waits, 
Shattering our one sweet twilight. 
Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo scrisse. 

1 Dante, Inferno, v. 137. 9 Ibid. v. 107. 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 89 

I shall know no more of summer weather, 
Nought will be for me of glad or fair - , 

Till I join my darling, and together 
We go for ever on the accursed air} 
There in the dawnless twilight. 

Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo scrisse. 

1 What a lovely voice ! ' said Laurence to 
Miss Merton. ' I wonder how she will sound 
singing before the throne.' 

' She will be obliged to take lessons in a 
rather different style,' said Miss Merton, 
unable to suppress a smile ; and then she 
suddenly checked herself, and looked grave. 
' Mrs. Sinclair has always interested me,' she 
said. ' I often come across her in London, 
but I hardly know her.' 

' Mr. Laurence,' said Mrs. Sinclair, ' you 
must now make Mr. Leslie sing, for I discover 
that he can play the guitar too.' 

Leslie was of course pressed, and with 
some reluctance consented. 

' I suppose,' he said, ' we are all of us 
more or less moon-struck to-night, so I had 
best sing the silliest thing I know ; and as I 
don't think anything can be sillier than a song 
I once wrote myself, I will sing that' 

He touched a few chords carelessly, and 
yet with the manner of a practised player ; 

1 Dante, Inferno, v. 31. 



90 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

paused for a moment, and then again striking 
the instrument began to sing. He was 
watched at first with merely a languid 
curiosity; and Miss Prattle whispered to 
Lady Ambrose that his attitude was very 
affected ; but curiosity and criticism were both 
lost in surprise at the first sound of his rich 
and flexible voice, and still more so at the 
real passion which he breathed into the 
following words, rude and artless as they 
were : — 

Oh, her cheek, her cheek was pale, 

Her voice was hardly musical; 
But your proud grey eyes greiv tender. 

Child, when mine they met, 
With a piteous self-surrender, 
Margaret. 

Child, what have I done to thee t 
Child, what hast thou done to me t 

How you froze me with your tone 
That last day we met ! 

Your sad eyes then were cold as stone, 
Margaret. 

Oh, it all now seems to me 

A far-off weary mystery / 
Vet — and yet, her last sad frown 

Awes me still, and yet — 
In vain I laugh your memory down, 
Margaret. 

Leslie received loud thanks from many 



BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 91 

voices, especially from Lady Ambrose. 
Some, however, were almost silent from 
surprise at the feeling, which he seemed quite 
unconsciously to have betrayed. Mrs. Sinclair 
held out her hand to him, when no one was 
looking, and said quietly, ' Thank you so 
much, I can't tell you how I like your song.' 

'Well,' said Laurence, as the party moved 
indoors into the lighted drawing-room, 'we 
have been all of us very sentimental to-night, 
and if we can't get better now, I hope we 
shall sleep it off, and wake up well and sane 
to-morrow morning-. ' 

This being Saturday night, there sprang up 
some vague mention of church. The nearest 
church however was some miles distant, and 
a rumour arose amongst the guests that Dr. 
Jenkinson would perform the service and 
preach a sermon in the private chapel. 



92 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 




BOOK II. 

CHAPTER I. 

N the following morning Lady 
Ambrose awoke somewhat out 
of spirits. Last night, whilst her 
maid was brushing her hair, she had 
pondered deeply over much that she had heard 
during the evening ; and her thoughts having 
been once started in such a direction, the 
conviction quickly dawned upon her that the 
world was indeed becoming very bad, and that 
society was on the point of dissolution. This 
was quite a new view of things to her, and it 
had all the charm of novelty. Still, however, 
she would probably have found by the morn- 
ing that she had successfully slept it off, if the 
post had not failed to bring her an invitation 

to the Duchess of 's garden-party at 

— House, which she was expecting with 

some anxiety. As it was, therefore, her 
spirits failed to recover themselves, and 
w r hilst she was being dressed her thoughts 
wandered wistfully away to the promised 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I 93 

morning service in the chapel. At breakfast, 
however, another blow awaited her. How 
a private chapel had come to be mentioned 
last evening was not clear. Certainly there 
was no such appendage to Laurence's villa, 
and the susceptibilities of Lady Ambrose 
received a severe shock, as she learnt that the 
ministrations of Dr. Jenkinson, the comfort of 
which she was looking forward to, were to 
take place in the theatre which adjoined the 
house. She bore up, however, like a brave 
woman, and resolving that nothing, on her part 
at least, should be wanting, she appeared 
shortly before eleven o'clock, in full Sunday 
costume, with her bonnet, and her books of 
devotion. 

Mrs. Sinclair looked at her in dismay. 
' I had thought,' she said plaintively to 
Laurence, ' that, as this was only a morning 
performance, I need not make a toilette. 
And as for a prayer-book, why, dear Mr. 
Laurence, I have not had one since I was 
confirmed.' 

'Not when you were married?' said 
Leslie. 

' Perhaps,' said Mrs. Sinclair pensively, 
' but I have forgotten all about that now.' 

At this moment the gong sounded, and 
the whole party, Lady Ambrose and her 



94 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

bonnet amongst them, adjourned to the place 
of worship, which was connected with the 
house by a long corridor. 

When the party entered they found them- 
selves in a complete miniature theatre, with 
the gas, as there were no windows, fully 
burning. 1 1 had been arranged beforehand that 
the guests should occupy the boxes, the gallery 
being appropriated to the servants, whilst 
the stalls were to remain completely empty. 
The congregation entered with great decorum 
and gradually settled themselves in their 
places with a subdued whispering. Lady 
Ambrose buried her face in her hands for a 
few moments, and several of the younger 
ladies followed her example. Everyone 
then looked about them silently, in suspense 
and expectation. The scene that met their 
eyes was certainly not devotional. The 
whole little semicircle glittered with heavy 
gilding and with hangings of crimson satin, 
and against these the stucco limbs of a 
number of gods and goddesses gleamed pale 
and prominent. The gallery rested on the 
heads of nine scantily-draped Muses, who, 
had they been two less in number, might have 
passed for the seven deadly sins ; round the 
frieze in high relief reeled a long procession 
of Fauns and Bacchanals ; and half the harem 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 95 

of Olympus sprawled and floated on the azure 
ceiling. Nor was this all. The curtain was 
down, and, brilliantly illuminated as it was, 
displayed before the eyes of the congregation 
Faust on the Brocken, with a long plume, 
dancing with the young witch, who could 
boast of no costume at all. The scene was 
so strange that everyone forgot to whisper or 
even to smile. There was a complete silence, 
and the eyes of all were soon fixed upon the 
curtain in wonder and expectation. 

Presently a sound was heard. A door 
opened, and Dr. Jenkinson, in his ordinary 
dress, entered the stalls. He looked delibe- 
rately round him for a moment, as though he 
were taking stock of those present ; then, 
selecting the central stall as a kind of prie- 
dien, he knelt down facing his congrega- 
tion, and after a moment's pause began to 
read the service in a simple, earnest voice. 
Lady Ambrose, however, though she knew 
her prayer-book as well as most women, couli 
not for the life of her find the place. The 
reason was not far to seek. The Doctor was 
opening the proceedings with the following 
passage from the Koran, which he had once 
designed to use in Westminster Abbey as 
the text of a missionary sermon. 

' Be constant in prayer,' he began, in a 



96 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

voice tremulous with emotion, ' and give alms : 
and what good ye have sent before for your 
souls, ye shall find it with God. Surely God 
seeth that which ye do. They say, Verily 
none shall see Paradise except they be Jews 
or Christians. This is their wish. Say ye, 
Produce your proof of this if ye speak truth. 
Nay, but he who resigneth himself to God, 
and doeth that which is right, he shall have 
his reward with his Lord ; there shall come 
no fear on them, neither shall they be 
grieved.' * 

Dr. Jenkinson then went on to the Con- 
fession, the Absolution, and a number of 
other selections from the English morning 
service, omitting, however, the creed, and 
concluded the whole with a short prayer of 
St. Francis Xavier's. 

But it was discovered that his voice, un- 
less he made an effort, was unhappily only 
partly audible from the position which he 
occupied ; and Laurence, as soon as the 
Liturgy was over, went softly up to him to ap- 
prise him of the fact. Dr. Jenkinson was very 
grateful for being thus told in time. It was 
fortunate, he said, that the prayers only had 
been missed ; the question was, where should 
he go for the sermon. Laurence in a diffi- 

1 Koran, chap. ii. Sale's Translation, 



BOOK II CHAPTER 1. 97 

dent manner proposed the stage ; but the 
Doctor accepted the proposal with great 
alacrity, and Laurence went immediately out 
with him to conduct him to his new pulpit. 
In a few moments the curtain was observed to 
twitch and tremble ; two or three abortive pulls 
were evidently being made ; and at last Faust 
and the young witch rapidly rolled up, and 
discovered first the feet and legs, and then 
the entire person of Doctor Jenkinson, stand- 
ing in the middle of a gorge in the Indian 
Caucasus — the remains of a presentation of 
Prometheus Bound which had taken place last 
February. 

The Doctor was not a man to be abashed 
by incongruities. He looked about him for 
a moment : he slightly raised his eyebrows, 
and then, without the least discomposure, and 
in a clear incisive voice, began : — 

' In the tenth verse of the hundred and 
eleventh Psalm, it is said, " The fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom." ' The fear 
of the Lord,' he again repeated, more slowly, 
and with more emphasis, surveying the 
theatre as he spoke, ' is the beginning of 
wisdom.' 

He then made a long pause, looking down 
at his feet, as if, although he held his sermon- 
book in his hand, he were considering how to 

H 



9S THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

begin. As he stood there silent, the footlights 
shining brightly on his silver hair, Lady 
Ambrose had full time to verify the text in 
her prayer-book. At last the Doctor sud- 
denly raised his head, and with a gentle 
smile of benignity playing on his lips, shook 
open his manuscript, and thus proceeded : — 

' The mam difficulty that occupied the early 
Greek Philosophers, as soon as pldlosophy in 
its prober sense can be said to have begun, was 
the great dualism that seemed to riin through 
all things. Matter and mind, the presence of 
imperfection, and the idea of perfection, or the 
luiity and plurality of being, were amongst the 
various forms in which the two contradictory 
elements of things were presented to them, 
as demanding reconcilement or expla?iation. 
This manner of viewing things comes to a 
head, so to speak, amo?tgst the ancients, in the 
system of Plato. With him the sensible and 
the intelligible worlds stand separated by a 
great gulf the one containing all good, the 
other of itself only evil, until we recognise its 
relation to the good, and see that it is only a 
shadow and a type of it. The world of real 
existence is something outside, and virtually 
unconnected with, this world of mere phe- 
nomena ; and the Platonic prayer is that we 
should be taken out of the world, rather tlian % 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 99 

as Christ says, with a fuller wisdom, that we 
should be delivered from the evil. 

1 Plato had, however, by thus dwelling on 
this antagonism in things, paved the way for 
a reconciliation — some say he even himself began 
it. At any rate, it was through him that it 
was nearly, if not quite, accomplished by his 
disciple Aristotle. A ristotle first systematiscd 
the great principle of evolution, and trans- 
formed what had appeared tofor?ner thinkers 
as the dualism of mind and matter into a single 
scale of ascending existences. Tims what 
Plato had conceived of as two worlds, were now 
presented as opposite poles of the same. The 
TrpcoTTj v\y), the world (i without form and void" 
receiving form, at length culminated in the 
soul of man ; and in the soul of man sensation 
at length culminated in pure thought! A 
slight cough here escaped from Mrs. Sinclair. 
1 You will perhaps think, the Doctor went on, 
' that a sermon is not the place in which to 
discuss such differences of secular opinion ; or 
you will perhaps think that such differences 
are of no very great moment, But if you look 
under the surface, and at the inner meaning of 
them, you will find that they bear upon ques- 
tions which are, or ought to be, of the very 
highest moment to each of us — questions in- 
deed', the Doctor added, suddenly lowering his 

H 2 



ioo THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

manuscript for a moment, and looking sharply 
found at his audience, ' which we all of us here 
have very lately — very lately indeed — either 
discussed ourselves, or heard discussed by others* 
This produced an immediate sensation, es- 
pecially amongst the feminine part of the 
listeners, to whom the discourse thus far had 
seemed strange, rather than significant. ' The 
question? the Doctor continued, ' is one of the 
relations of the spiritual to the natural ; and 
the opposition between the views of these two 
ancient philosophers is by no means obsolete in 
our own century. There is even now far too 
prevalent a tendency to look upon the spiritual 
as something transcending and completely 
separate from the natter al ; and there is in the 
minds of many well-meaning and earnest 
persons a sort of alarm felt at any attempt to 
bring the two into connectioti. This feeling 
is experienced not by Christians only, but by a 
la7'ge number of their opponents. There is, for 
instance, no doctrine more often selected for 
attack by those who oppose Christianity upon 
moral grotmds, than that of which my text is 
oji expression, I mean the doctrine of a morality 
enforced by rewards and punishments. Such 
viorality, we hear it continually tcrged by men 
who set themselves up as advanced thinkers, is 
no morality at all No action can be good, 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. IO i 

they tell us, that does not spring from the love 
of good. Virtue is no longer virtue if it 
springs froin fear. The very essence of it is 
to spring from freedom. Now, these argu- 
ments, though specious at the first blush of the 
thing, are really, if we look them honestly in 
the face, to the utmost shallow and unphiloso- 
phical. They are really but so many denials 
of the great doctrine of evolution — so many at- 
tempts to set iip again that absolute antagonism 
between good and evil which it has been the aim 
of all the higher thinkers, and of Christ him- 
self, to do away with. If, then, these moderti 
critics of Christianity come to us with stuh 
objections, let tcs not try to disguise the truth 
that the morality of our religio?i is based on 
fear. Let us rather boldly avow this, and try 
to point out to them that it is they, and not the 
Psalmist, that are out of harmony with modern 
thought. For what is it that the sacred Scrip- 
ture says ? " The fear of the Lord is the 
beginning of wisdom" The beginning, you 
will please to observe — the beginning only. It 
is 7iot perfect wisdom, it is not perfect virtue ; 
but it is the beginning of both of these. It is, 
if I may be allowed the expression, the moral 
protoplasm — it is that out of which they are 
both evolved. It is, as Aristotle would call it, 
their potentiality. The actuality is different 



102 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

from the potentiality ; for" perfect /oce," as St. 
yohn says, " caste t A on t fear." Putting toge- 
ther, then, the ideas of these two good men, St. 
fohn and Aristotle, we may say that the love 
of God — that is, true wisdom — is tlie actuality 
of the fear of Him. 

' This account of the origin of the true 
wisdom may not, indeed, be applicable to each 
individual case. Some persons' — the Doctor's 
voice here grew very soft, and seemed as 
though it would almost break with feeling — 
' some perso7is may have been so fortunate as 
to have received the truest wisdom into their 
hearts by education, ahnost with their mother s 
milk. But there are those not so fortunate, 
zuho may have needed the discipline of a godly 
fear to lead them upwards from a " wallowing 
in the sensual sty" towards the higher life. 
And just as this is trtie of many of us indivi- 
dually, so it is still more deeply t7 r ue of the 
human race as a whole. All study of history, 
and of social science, and of philosophy, is teach- 
ing this to us every day with increasing clear- 
ness. The human race, as soon as it became 
human, feared God before it loved Him. Its 
fear, as tlie Scripture puts it, was the beginning 
of its wisdom ; or as modern thought has put 
it, in slightly different words, the love of 
justice sprang out of the fear of suffering in- 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 103 

justice. Thus the end is different from the 
beginning, and yet springs out of it. Ethics, 
as it has been well said, are the finest fruits 
of humanity, but they are not its roots. Our 
reverence for truth, all our sacred family ties, 
and the purest and most exalted forms of matri- 
monial attachment, have each their respective 
origins in selfimterest, self -preservation, and 
animal appetite. 

1 There is, I admit, in this truth something 
that may at first sight repel us, and perhaps 
even prompt some of us to deny indignantly 
that it is a truth at all. But this is really a 
cozvardly and unzvorthy feeling, fatal to any 
true comprehension of God's dealings with 
man, and arising from a quite mistaken con- 
ception of our ozvn dignity, and our own con- 
nection with God. It is some such mistaken 
conception as this that sets so many of us 
against the discoveries of modern science as to 
the origin of our own species, and, zuhat is Jar 
worse, prompts us to oppose such discoveries 
with dishonest objectio7is. How is it possible, 
some of us ask, that man with his sublime con- 
ceptions of duty and of God, and his fine ap- 
paratus of 1'eason, and so forth, should be pro- 
duced by any process of evolution from a beastly 
and irrational ape f But to ask such questions 
as these is really to call in question the power 



ici THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

of God, and so to do Him dishonour. It is 
true that we cannot trace out, as yet, all the 
steps of this wonderful evolution ; but let tis 
not be found, like doubting Thomas, resolved 
not to believe until we have actually seen. And 
yet, if our faith does indeed require strengthen- 
ing, we have only to look a little more attentively 
at the commonest facts before us. For is it not y 
let me ask you — to take, for instance, a mans 
sublime faculty of reasoning and logical com- 
prehension — -far more wonder ftd that a reason- 
ing man should have the same parents as a 
woman, than that they both shotdd have the 
same parents as a monkey ? Science and re- 
ligion both alike teach us that with God all 
tilings are possible. 

' I just touch in passing tipon this doctrine 
that we popularly call Darwinism, because it 
is the most familiar example to us of the doc- 
trine of evolution. But the point which I am 
wishing to emphasize is not the outward evolu- 
tion of man, but the inward, of which, however % 
the fo inner is an image and a likeness. This 
theory of moral evolution, I wish to point out 
to you,, is alike the Christian and the scientific 
theory ; and I thus wish you to see that the 
very points in which science seems most opposed 
to Christianity are really those in which it 
most fundamentally agrees with it. I will 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 105 

therefore just ask you to notice how foolish and 
short-sighted those persons are who think that 
a great result is lessened if it can be proved to 
have had small beginnings. Is a state less 
truly a state because we know that it has sprung 
out of the germ of the family ? Surely not. 
Neither is man less truly man if he have sprung 
from an ape ; nor is love less truly love if it 
has sprung from fear. 

And so now, since we have see7i how science 
and Christianity are at one as to the rise of the 
moral sentiments, I will pass on to a wider 
point, the character and the history of Christi- 
anity itself both of which have been misunder- 
stood and misinterpreted for at least eighteen 
hundred years ; and when I have pointed out 
how this great subject is being now explained 
by the methods of modern science, I will pass 
on to an issue that is wider yet. 

* The world has hitherto failed to under- 
stand Christianity, because it studied it upon 
a false method — a method based upon that old 
dualistic theory of things of which I have 
already spoken. Just as Plato looked upon 
mind as entirely distinct from matter, so used 
Christians to look upon things sacred as en- 
tirely distinct from things secular. But now 
this middle wall of partition is being broken 
down by science, and by scientific criticism, and 



lo6 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

by a wider view of things in general. The 
primary way in which all this has affected 
Christianity, is by the new spirit in which it 
has led us to study the Bible. We used to 
look upon the Bible as a book standing apart 
by itself, and to be interpreted by a peculiar 
canon of criticism. But we Juive now learnt 
that it is to be studied just like all other books ; 
and we are now for the first time coming to 
understand what, in its true grandeur, a real 
revelation is. We are learning, in fact, that 
just as no single sci'ipture "is of any private 
interpretation ; " still less is the entire body of 
the Scriptures. They, too, must be interpreted 
by their context. We must inquire into their 
origin ; we must ask diligently under what 
circumstances they were written and edited, 
and for what ends. Nor must we ever again 
fall into such quaint and simple mistakes as 
did commentators like Origen, or Augustine, 
or Tertullian, or even Paid himself, whose dis- 
coveries of Messianic prophecies in writings 
like the Psalms for instance, are really much 
the same as would be a discovery on our part in 
Mr. Tennyson" s line on the death of the Duke of 
Wellington, " The last gi'eat Englishman is 
low," a prophecy of the late Chancellor of the 
Exchequer. But to understand the meaning 
of any text, we nmst try to see what, from 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 107 

his position and education, the writer cotild 
have meant by it ; not what this or that Father, 
living long afterwards, fancied that he meant. 
Our motto in religion, as in science, should be, 
" Vere scire est per causas scire." 

' If 'we study Christianity reverently and 
careftlly upon these principles, we shall see 
that it was not a thing that sprang up, as we 
used to fancy, without any human antecedents, 
but that its roots reach back with many ramifi- 
cations into the weste?m and orieiital thought 
of precedi?ig centuries. We shall see how it 
absorbed into itself all that was highest in 
Hebraistic Theism and in Hellenic thought — 
something too, let us admit, of the failings of 
both. I cannot here enter into any of the 
details of this, what may be truly termed pre- 
Christian Christianity. I can only briefly 
point out its existence, and its dottble origin, 
commenting on these by the following few lines 
from a great German writer. " The yearning 
after a higher revelation" he tells us, " was the 
universal characteristic of the last centuries 
of the ancient zvorld. This was in the first 
place but a consciousness of the decline of the 
classical nations and their culture, and the 
presentiment of the approach of a new era ; 
and it called into life not only Christianity, 
but also, and before it, Pagan and Jewish 



108 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Alexandrianism, and other related develop- 
ments." 

1 This, then, is the great point to be borne 
in mind — viz. that God had been prepari?ig the 
way for the coming of Christ long before he 
sent " Elias, which ivas for to be." Neither 
jfohn Baptist, no, nor One greater than John, 
was left by God (as the children of Israel were 
left by PharaoJi) to gather straw himself to 
make bricks. The materials were all prepared 
ready to their hands by their Heavejily Father. 
And so, let us be especially and prayerfully on 
our guard against considering Christianity as 
having come into the world at once, ready-made, 
so to speak, by our Saviour, as a body of theo- 
logical doctrines. Any honest study of history 
will show us that the Apostles received no such 
system ; that our Lord Himself never made 
any claim to the various characters with which 
subsequent thought invested Him ; and that to 
attribute such claims to Him would be an an- 
achro7iism, of which He would Himself have 
scarcely tmderstood the meaning. If we only 
clear our eyes of any false theological glamottr, 
a very slight study of the i?ispired writers will 
at once show us this. We shall see how un- 
certain and shifting at first everything was. 
We shall see what a variety of conflicting 
opinions the early Clmrch entertained even 



BOOR II. CHAPTER I. 109 

ut>on the most fundamental subjects — suck, for 
instance, as the identity of the God of the Old 
Testament with the God of the New, which 
was denied by a large number of the early 
Christians : we shall see how widely divergent 
were the systems of yeivish and Pauline 
Christianity, and how discrepant and ten- 
tative are the accounts given by St. Paul and 
by the author of the Fourth Gospel of the 
mystical nature of Christ, whom they tried to 
identify with different mysterious potencies 
supposed by the f ewish-A lexandrian philoso- 
phers to be coexistent with God. And if we 
pursue the history of the Church a little farther, 
we sliall find many more things to startle us. 
We shall find, for instance, the most renowned 
apologist of early Catholic times, a materialist, 
holding the materiality not of the soul of man 
only, but of God also. " Nihil enim " — these 
are this father s words — " si non corpus. Omne 
quod est, co?'pus est.' Thus we see,' said the 
Doctor cheerfully, looking round him with a 
smile of benignant triumph, and blinking with 
his eyes, ' that difference of opinion about the 
dogmas of j'eligion is nothing new. It existed 
in the fewish Church; tlie phenomenon was 
only prolonged by Christianity. Later 
fudaism and pi'imitive Christianity were both 
made tip of a variety of systems, all honestly 



no THE NEW REPUBLIC 

and boldly thought out, differing widely from 
each other, and called by the honourable appella- 
tion of heresies : and of these, let me remind 
you, it is the glory of the Church of England 
to be composed likewise. 

' Nor is this all,' he went on in a softer 
and more appealing tone ; ' not only are 
all these things so confused and doubtful ; 
but we now see that, in the face of rece?it criti- 
cism, we cannot even be quite sure about any of 
the details of the divine life of our Lord. But 
in all this ' — the Doctor's voice here became 
still more aerial, and he fixed his eyes upon 
the painted ceiling of the theatre, as though 
he were gazing on some glorious vision — ' in 
all this thei r e is nothing to discompose us. We 
can be quite sure that He lived, and that He 
went about doing good, and that in him we have, 
in the highest sense, everlasting life. 

'Let us then no longer fght against the 
conclusions of science and of witicism, but 
ratlier see in them the hand of God driving us, 
even against otir will, away from beliefs and 
teachings that are not really those of His so?i. 
If we do not do this — if we persist in identify- 
big the false Christianity with the true — the 
false, when it is at last plucked rudely away 
from us, as it must be, will carry away a part 
of the trtie with it. And as long as we are in 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. m 

this state of mind, we are never for a moment 
safe. We can never open a philological review, 
or hear of a scientific experiment, without 
trembling. Witness the discussions now en- 
gaging so much public attention on the sub- 
ject of animal automatism, and the marvellous 
results which experiments on living subjects 
have of late days revealed to us ; a frog with 
half a brain having desfroyed more theology 
than all the doctors of the Church with their 
whole brains can ever build up again. Thus 
does God choose the " weak things of this world 
to coyifound the wise!' Seeing, then, that this 
is the state of the case, we should stwely learn 
henceforth not to identify Christianity with 
anything that science can assail, or even ques- 
tion. Let us say rather that nothing is or can 
be essential to the religion of Christ which, 
when once stated, can be denied withotit 
absurdity. If we can only attain to this con- 
ception, we shall see truly that this ottr faith is 
indeed one " that no man taketh away from us! 
'If we be thus once " stab lis hed in the 
faith," all human history, and the history of 
Christianity especially, will asstime for us a 
new sacredness and a new significance. We 
shall recognise gladly its long struggles of 
growth, and its struggles for existe?ice, and see 
how in all these were at work the great prin- 



IU THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

ciplcs of evolution. We sliall see how Christian 
perfection emerged gradually out of imper- 
fection — nay, that it was only through imper- 
fection that this perfection was possible. For 
although, as we now know, all the various 
theological systems that have sprung up about 
Christianity, and have been so long current, 
are not Christianity, are most of them, ind:cd, 
not even sense — yet it was through these that 
true C liristianity made its way, and extended 
itself in a corrupt and ignorant world. For 
the world has been given froin age to age just 
so much of the truth as it has been able to bear, 
and it is only, let us remember, from receiving 
it tempered in this wise proportion, that it has 
been able to receive it at all. But these times 
of the world's pi'obation are now passing away. 
It is nozv at length ceasing to be under " tutors 
and governors ;" it is learning to " put away 
childish things." It is coming to a sense that 
it is now fitted to receive Christ's truth pure, 
and without any admixture or wrappage of 
falsehood. A nd so, as it looks back over all the 
various opinions once so fiercely agitated about 
religion, it recognises in all of them a common 
element of good, and it sees that all theologians 
and all sects have really agreed with one 
another, and been meaning the same thing, 
even when they least suspected or wished it* 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 113 

Nor is it, as modern study is showing us, 
varieties of Christianity only that this deeper 
unity underlies, btit all other religions also. 
It has been well observed by a great Roman 
Catholic writer now living, that whenever any 
great saintliness of life is to be observed 
amongst infidels and heretics, it is always 
found to be due to the presence of certain beliefs 
and rules which belong to the Catholics. And 
i?i like manner, we may say too, that whenever 
any great saintliness of life is to be observed 
amongst Catholics, it is due to the presence of 
certain beliefs and rules that belong to the 
infidels and the heretics — and indeed to all 
good men, no matter what their religion is. 

1 Such are~4he views that all the most en- 
lightened men of otir own day are coming to* 
But the process is gi'adual ; and meanwhile let 
us not rebuke our weaker brethren, if for the 
present "they follow not after us ;" let us 
rather bear with them^ and make all allowa7ice 
for them ; for we mttst remember, as I have 
said before, that those evils to which they still 
cling, but from which we, under God's mercy, 
are trying to free ourselves, have done good 
service in their time; and that even siich 
doctrines as those of eternal punish?nent, or of 
sacerdotal absolution, or the subtleties of sacra- 
mental syste?ns, or the mystical paradoxes of 

I 



H4 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

the Athanasian Cr.ed, have assisted in the 
evolution of the good — have been, in so?ne sense r 
"schoolmasters to bring men to God!' And 
even if we do occasionally come across some 
i)icident in the history of our religion — some 
doctri?ie or body of doctrines, which seems, 
humanly speaking, to subserve no good end at 
all — such as our own Thirty-nine A?'ticles — 
let us not suffer such to try our faith, but let 
•us trust in God, believi?ig that in His secret 
councils He has foimd some fitting use even for 
these; because we k?iow how many things there 
are, in every branch of inquiry, that we cannot 
explain, and yet we know that nothing happens 
but by those immutable and ete7-nal laws which 
our Heavenly Father has Himself ordained, 
and of which He is Himself the highest 
synthesis. 

* And now! said the Doctor, with a fresh 
briskness in his voice, ' / shall pass on to that 
wider point to which I have already alluded, 
which is indeed that which I wish chiefly to 
impress upon you, and to which all that I have 
Jiitherto said has been preparatory. We have 
come to see how genuine Christianity has been 
enabled to grow and extend itself only through 
an admixture of what we now recognise as evil. 
And seeing this, we shall be led on to a con- 
clusion that is much wider. It has been said 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 115 

that it is the part of the devil to see in good the 
gez'ms of evil. Is it not also the part of the 
devil not to recognise in evil the germs of good t 
May we not indeed say with St. Augusti?ie, 
that absolute evil is impossible, because, if we 
look at it rightly, it is always rising up into 
good? And so, may we not recognise in 
all things the presence and the providence of 
God? 

1 Perhaps this view may at first sight seem 
difficult. Some of us may fi?zd that we have a, 
certain amount of pride to swallow before we 
can cheerfully acquiesce in it. It is not an 
uncommon thing to find persons who secretly 
flatter their vanity by cherishing a gloomy view 
of the world and of mankind. But if we can 
only get free from these littlenesses, and attain 
to that view which I have indicated, it will en- 
large and ameliorate our ozvn philosophy of 
things, and bring life and trust to us, in the 
place of dottbt and despondency. Evil will 
then appear to us simply as undeveloped good 
— as something which we may acquiesce in 
without complaining — as something that has 
assisted in the development of whatever is 
good in the present, and which will itself one 
day become good in the futzcre. Indeed it is 
not too much to say that all things, in a certain 

sense, existed first in the for?n of evil. It was 
1 2 



uS THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

not till after the Spirit of God had worked on 
the primeval matter that God pi'onounced the 
world to be " very good!' 

' A nd so, if we consider the subject thus, 
we shall learn to put a stop to all those fretful 
waitings over the badness of our own times of 
which we hear so much — waitings over the un- 
belief of our neighbours, the corruption of 
society, the misery of the poor, the luxury of 
ttie rich, or the decline of commercial morality. 
T/ie present is an age of change, and is there- 
fore at every turn presenting to us some new 
feature. But if these come to us in the 
apparent guise of evils, let us not uselessly 
bemoan them ; but let us believe that they are, 
even if we cannot see that it is so, but the 
beginnings, the embryos of new good. Indeed, 
by the eye of faith, even in the present day, 
may be discerned the beautiftil spectacle of good 
actually shining through evil. May we not, 
for instance, discern the well-being of the rich 
through the misery of the poor ? and again, 
the honest iiidtistry of the poor through the 
idleness of the rich ? 

' If then, these things be so, surely we may 
look on unmoved at the great changes and com- 
?notions tJiat are going on around us, and the 
new forms that society, and thought, and 
fvh'fics are assuming, even although for the 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 117 

moment they may appear threatening. And 
if in this gi'eat storm our Master have fallen 
asleep, and no longer speak atidibly to us, let 
us not be of little faith and fear f til, and try to 
awaken Him with our foolish clamours ; but 
let us trust all to Him, and follow His ex- 
ample. For really, if we do hit trust in God, 
there is no ground for fear, but " all things 
zvo?'k together for good to him that believeth." 
And, however the matter may strike us at first 
sight, the times we live in are really the times 
that are best fitted for us ; and we shall see, if 
we will but think soberly, that we could not, as 
a whole, alter anything in tJmn for the better. 
I do not mean that we have not each of us his 
own work marked out for him to do ; but all 
this work is strictly in relation to tilings as 
tliey are. God has given to zis the general 
conditions under which we are to serve Him, 
and these are the best and indeed the only con- 
ditions for us. Doubtless, if we each do the 
duty that lies before us, these conditions will be 
slowly and insensibly changed by us; but zve 
shall ourselves change also, as well as the con- 
ditions ; what I mean is, that supposing by a 
sudden act of will we could do what we pleased 
with the conditions of the age, we, being as we 
are, should not be really able to make the age 
better. We should not be really able to make 



H8 THE AEW REPUBLIC. 

it different. Any Utopia we might imagine 
would, if it were a thinkable one, be only our 
own age in a masquerading dress. For we 
cannot escape from our age, or add, except in a 
very small degree, anything that is really new 
to it. Nor need we wish to do so. Our age 
is for us the best age possible. We are its 
children, and it is our only true parent. But 
though zve cannot alter our time at a stroke, so 
to speak, no, not even in imagination, we can 
all of us help to do so little by little, if we do 
cheerfully the duties tJiat are set 'before us. 
And if we do this, which is what Christ bids 
us to do, then is Christ made manifest in us, 
and lives in the hearts of every one of us ; and 
in a far higher sense than any mere physical 
one, He is risen from the dead. And if Hebe 
not so risen in and for us, then are we indeed, 
as the Apostle says, " of all men most miser- 
able" 

1 Let us therefore, with a large hope for 
the future, and a cheerful contentment with 
the present, be willing to leave the world hi the 
hands of God, knowing that He has given us 
what conditions and what circtimstances are 
best for us. Let us see all things in God, and 
let us become in Him, as Plato says, "spectators 
of all time, and of all existence." And thus, 
in spite of the diffictilties presented to us by 



BOOK II. CHAPTER I. 119 

" all tlie evil that is done under the sun" we 
shall perceive that all things will, nay mtcst, 
come right in God's own time ; and the 
apparent dualism of good and evil at last 
become a glorious tinity of good. But let us 
remember also that u the Kingdom of God 
cotneth not with observation ; " and I would 
conclude my sermon with certain memorable 
zuords spoken by Christ Himself, though un- 
fortunately not to be found in the Gospels, but 
preserved to us by Clement of Alexandria. 
" The Lord" Clement tells tis, " being asked 
token His kingdom should come, said, When 
two shall be one, and that which is without as 
that which is within, and the male with tfie 
female — neither male nor female!' 

* And now ' (at the sound of this 

word the whole congregation rose automatic- 
ally to their feet), ' I will ask you,' the Doctor 
went on after a pause, ' to conclude this morn- 
ing's service by doing what I trust I have 
shown that all here may sincerely and honestly 
do. I mean, I will ask you to recite after me 
the Apostles' Creed.' 

This appeal took the whole congregation 
quite aback. But there was no time for won- 
der. Dr. Jenkinson at once began ; nor was 
his voice the only sound in the theatre. Lady 
Ambrose, pleased, after all that she had heard 



120 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

the night previous, to make public profession 
of her faith, especially in a place where it could 
not be called in question, followed the Doctor 
audibly and promptly ; Miss Prattle followed 
Lady Ambrose ; Lady Violet Gresham, who 
was busy with one of her sleeve-links, followed 
Miss Prattle ; Lady Grace, from quite another 
part of the house, followed Dr. Jenkinson on 
her own account ; Mr. Stockton repeated the 
first clause in a loud voice, and then relapsed 
into marked silence ; Mr. Luke only opened 
his lips to sigh out audibly in the middle a 
disconsolate ' Heigh ho!' Mr. Storks blew his 
nose with singular vigour through the whole 
proceeding ; Mrs. Sinclair, just towards the 
end, tapped Leslie's arm gently with her fan, 
and said to him in a whisper, ' Do you reall) 
believe all this ? ' 

When all was over, when the Doctor had 
solemnly pronounced the last ' Amen,' he 
looked about him nervously for a moment, as 
if the question of how to retire becomingly 
suddenly dawned upon him. Luckily he 
perceived almost directly a servant standing 
in readiness by the curtain. The Doctor 
frowned slightly at the man ; made a slightly 
impatient gesture at him ; and Faust and 
the young witch again covered the preacher 
from the eyes of his congregation. 



BOOK II CHAPTER II. 121 




CHAPTER II. 

>HE blinds were half-down at 
luncheon in the dining-room, to 
keep out the brilliant summer sun. 
The guests dropped in by ones and 
twos, somewhat tired and exhausted by the 
divine service of the morning ; and the sight of 
the table was not a little refreshing to them, as 
it shone whitely in the soft gloom, with its 
flowers and ferns, and its day-lit glimmer of 
glass and silver. Soon, however, a piece of 
news was circulated that was even more re- 
freshing than the luncheon. Dr. Jenkinson, 
owing to his late exertions, and the gas-light, 
and the draughts upon the stage, was suffer- 
ing from a headache, which inclined him to 
keep his room ; and accordingly an unhoped- 
for prospect of freely discussing the sermon 
dawned brightly upon the whole party. 

Mr. Stockton, who had been much struck 
with the strictly prosaic style of Dr. Jenkin- 
son's discourse, and who had been secretly 
contrasting this with the more impassioned 



122 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

character of his own mind, was the first to 
begin. 

1 The sermon was perhaps ingenious,' he 
said, turning to Lady Ambrose, 'but I'm afraid 
our friend's forte is certainly not poetry.' 

1 Surely,' said Donald Gordon with ex- 
treme solemnity of manner and only a slight 
twinkle in his eye, ' his forte is something far 
better, Poetry can only make us happy for 
a little while. Such doctrines as we have 
heard this morning ought to make us happy 
always.' 

As for Lady Ambrose, to whom both 
these remarks were addressed, she was in 
doubt what altogether to think of the matter. 
More than half her heart inclined her to look 
upon Dr. Jenkinson as a valuable ally ; but 
there was yet, all the while, a fatal something 
that whispered to her a vague distrust of him. 
She was therefore waiting anxiously to hear 
what would be said by others, before taking 
any side herself; her mind all the while being 
busy with the profoundest questions. This 
suspense of judgment produced a certain 
gravity and depression in her, which was 
visible on her face, and which seemed to com- 
municate itself to nearly everyone at her end 
of the table. For Lady Ambrose was a 
communicative woman. Her spirits, good or 



BOOK II CHAPTER II. 123 

bad, were generally caught by those near her. 
As for Mr. Herbert, however, no one else 
seemed needed to depress him. Low, slow, 
and melancholy, his accents at once caught 
the ear of Lady Ambrose. 

1 1 have heard to-day,' he said to Mrs. 
Sinclair, who was sitting next him, 'an 
entirely new and in every way memorable 
doctrine, which I never heard before from the 
mouth of man, woman, or child ; nor can I 
tell by what steps any human being could 
have, arrived at it. I have heard that the 
world — the world as it is — could not be better 
than it is ; that there is no real sorrow in it — 
no real evil — no real sin.' 

' Poor Dr. Jenkinson ! ' said Mrs. Sinclair, 
also in a melancholy voice ; ' I suppose he 
has never loved.' 

1 Ah,' exclaimed Mr. Stockton, — his voice 
was melancholy as well — ' the whole teach- 
ings of that school have always seemed to me 
nothing more than a few fragments of science 
imperfectly understood, obscured by a few 
fragments of Christianity imperfectly re- 
membered.' 

' You forget,' said Leslie, 'that Dr. Jenkin- 
son's Christianity is really a new firm trading 
under an old name, and trying to purchase 
the goodwill of the former establishment' 



124 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Lady Ambrose, who had not liked Leslie 
so much on further acquaintance as she had 
at first expected she should, was very indig- 
nant at him for so flippant a speech as this — 
she felt sure it was flippant, though she did 
not quite understand its meaning — but once 
again Mr. Herbert's grave accents arrested 
her. 

' It is simply,' he was saying to Mrs. 
Sinclair, evidently alluding to the same subject 
— • it is simply our modern atheism trying 
to hide its own nakedness, for the benefit of 
the more prudish part of the public, in the 
cast grave-clothes of a Christ who, whether 
he be risen or no, is very certainly, as the 
angel said, not here.' 

4 All discussion of such matters seems to 
me but a diseased activity,' said Mr. Rose, 
raising languidly a white deprecating hand. 

Mr. Storks too, though for different 
reasons, was apparently of the same opinion. 

1 In his main points,' he said with a severe 
dogmatism that seemed designed to end all 
further controversy, 'and putting aside his 
quasi-religious manner of expressing it — 
which considering his position may be par- 
doned — I conceive Dr. Jenkinson to have 
been entirely right.' 

Hitherto Lady Ambrose's views had been 



BOOK II. CHAPTER 12. 125 

wavering to and fro, in a sad uncertainty. 
But now her mind at once cleared. Her 
worst suspicions of the Doctor were con- 
firmed by this fatal commendation. The 
gloom on her face deepened, and she had a 
look almost of distress about her as she 
turned to Laurence. 

1 You look tired,' he said to her. 

'No,' said Lady Ambrose wearily: 'at 
least, perhaps I am a little. Do you know, I 
always think one feels rather dull if one 
doesn't get the letters one expects.' 

' Perhaps you don't know,' said Laurence, 
' that the letters you got this morning were 
only those of last night's post. Our Sunday 
letters we are obliged to send for, and they 
don't generally come till later on in the 
day.' 

' Really ! ' exclaimed Lady Ambrose, with 
surprise, as a smile slowly spread over her 
face, and her frank eyes lit up again. ' The 
Duchess couldn't have forgotten it,' she said 
to herself half-consciously. Strangely enough, 
a new warmth, it seemed, had dawned upon 
her, and her ice-bound gloom began to thaw 
— to thaw only, however, not to evaporate* 
It did not go ; it only became voluble. 

' Do you know, Mr. Laurence,' she began, 
* I have been thinking over and over again 



126 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

about many of the things that were said last 
night ; and I really am afraid that the world 
is getting very bad. It is very sad to think 
so ; but, with all this infidelity and wicked- 
ness of which we hear so much, I'm afraid it 
is true. For my own part, you know, there 
is nothinsf I dislike so much as to hear the 
Bible profanely spoken about ; though, of 
course, I know one is tempted sometimes 
to make jokes out of it oneself. And then,' 
Lady Ambrose added — her ideas did not 
always follow one another in the strictest 
order — ' hardly a week passes without some 
new scandal. I had a letter only this morn- 
ing, telling me all the particulars about Colonel 
Eardly and poor Lady Arthur. And that 
man, you know — just fancy it ! — it will not 
be very long before we shall be obliged to 
receive him again. However,' said Lady 
Ambrose, with a slightly more cheerful 
accent, ' that sort of thing, I believe, is con- 
fined to us. The middle classes are all right 
— at least, one always hears so.' 

At this moment Lord Allen's voice was 
heard. 

' But now,' Lady Ambrose went on to 
Laurence, very slightly moving her head in 
the direction of Lord Allen, and speaking in 
a low tone, ' how different he is 1 ' 



BOOK II. CHAPTER II. 127 

Lady Ambrose had the greatest admira- 
tion for Lord Allen, though her acquaintance 
with him had hitherto been of the slightest ; 
and Laurence, not knowing how to respond 
to all her late remarks, was glad that her 
attention was thus called elsewhere. 

' Don't you think,' Allen was saying, half 
addressing himself to Mr. Herbert, half to 
Mr. Luke, ' that though at the present 
moment things as they are may be worse 
than they have ever been before, there 
are yet ideas amongst us of things as they 
might be, that are in advance of what has 
ever been before ? I know quite well how 
society is falling to pieces, and how all our 
notions of duty are becoming confused or 
lost. I know too how utterly without any 
religion we are' — (Lady Ambrose started) — 
4 at least, any religion that one man can ex- 
press to another, and that can enable men to 
act in concert. But still, I can't help feeling 
that, in spite of all this, a higher class of con- 
ceptions both of religion and morality, and 
social relations also, is forming itself in the 
minds of thinking men.' 

1 Perfectly true, Lord Allen,' said Mr. 
Luke, ' perfectly true ! It is indeed the very 
essence of the cultured classes to be beyond 
their time — to have, indeed, every requisite 



128 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

for making everything better, except the prac- 
tical power. As you say, what man's life 
ought to be — what true morality is — what is 
true sense, and what is true nonsense — these 
are matters never at any time distinguished 
so truly as by some of us in the latter half of 
the nineteenth century. Only, unfortunately,' 
said Mr. Luke, sighing slowly, and looking 
round the table, ' the dense ignorance of the 
world at large hampers and hinders such men 
as these, so that all that their teaching and 
their insight can do, is only to suggest a 
Utopia in the future, instead of leading to 
any reality in the present.' 

' All my happiness is in a kind of Utopia,' 
sighed Mrs. Sinclair. 

' Yes — yes,' said Mr. Luke wearily ; ' so 
in these days must be the happiness of all of 
us — except that of the world at large.' 

Mr. Storks was here heard clearing his 
throat. With an ominous pugilistic smile he 
turned towards Mr. Luke. 

' Are you quite sure,' he said, ' that the 
reason why your friends do nothing practical 
is not because they will build Utopias ? I, 
as I have already said, entirely hold with Dr. 
Jenkinson that the world is as good as it can 
be — has, indeed, been always as good as it 
could have been — has, that is, been always 



BOOK II. CHAPTER II. 129 

persistently progressing by one constant 
course of evolution. I don't myself profess 
to be a student of history ; but, as far as I at 
all understand its teachings, the one thing it 
most clearly shows to us is, that what strikes 
a superficial observer as simply the decadence 
of old orders of things, is really, under the 
surface, the birth of the new. Indeed,' said 
Mr. Storks, shrugging his shoulders, ' of course 
it must be so. We are all part of Nature ; 
and, little as we think it, we are all working 
together by invincible and inviolable laws. 
Nature will have her own way ; and those 
who have studied her carefully know that her 
way is always the best. Even supposing we 
could transplant ourselves into some different, 
some more advanced state of society, my dear 
sir, do you think we should be any happier 
there ? As much happier, I suppose, as you 
or I should be if we were translated into the 
heaven our nurses used to tell us of, where 
nothing was done but to sing Tate and Brady's 
psalms with the angels to all eternity. The 
air of our own age is the only air fit for us 
In any other we should languish.' 

1 I languish in this,' said Mr. Luke, looking 
up to the ceiling. 

Scarcely were the words out of his moufch 
than Mr. Saunders exclaimed, in his most ex- 

K 



130 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

cited and shrillest voice, ' I deny it — I entirely 
deny it ! ' 

Mr. Luke was thunderstruck. Even Mr. 
Storks was taken aback by the audacity of the 
contradiction; and as for the rest of the com- 
pany, they could not conceive where on earth 
Mr. Saunders had left his manners. Mr. 
Storks, however, was still more astonished, 
and still less pleased, when he discovered, as 
Mr. Saunders proceeded, what was the real 
meaning of his speech. 

1 1 entirely deny,' Mr. Saunders went on, 
' that the ways of Nature are the best ways. 
The belief that they are so is of all faiths the 
one that most obviously contradicts experi- 
ence. Did I accept this, I could accept any- 
thing — Transubstantiation even. I should 
literally feel that I had no right to condemn 
any doctrine because it was groundless, gra- 
tuitous, and absurd. This faith in the good- 
ness of Nature — why, that it is a faith, is not 
that enough to condemn it ? What but faith, 
let me ask, has enslaved and stunted the world 
hitherto ? And this particular faith, I would 
remind you, which you flatter yourself will 
oppose religion, has been in most cases its 
child, and is always ready to be its parent. 
I on the contrary maintain that, far frum being 
the best, Nature is the most odious of things 



BOOK II. CHAPTER II. f f 

-that the whole universe is constructed 
on the most hateful principles; in fact, that 
out of the primordial atoms only one thin* has 
developed iteelf fa which the good M * 
the evil ; and that is the one thing that is 
usually opposed to Nature-man, and the 
reason of man.' 

Mr Storks turned sharply round, and, with 
an awful look m his eyes of contemptuous 
mdignation, stared Mr. Saunders into silence 
He held him fixed in this way for a few 
moments, and then said to him in a voice of 

mustard. Then again turning to Mr. Luke 
You see, he proceeded, 'what I take to be 
civilisation— indeed, the whole duty of man- 
is the gradual self-adaptation of the human 
organism to its environment-an adaptation 
which must take place, and any attempts to 
hinder which are simply neither more nor Jess 
than disease. Progress, which it is our high- 
est life to further, is a thing that will continue 
despite the opposition of individuals Its 
tendencies are beyond the control of indivi- 
duals, and are to be sought in the spirit of the 
age at large,-not-if you will forgive me the 
word-m the crotchets of this or that thinker. 
And it seems to me to be the hopeful and 
distinguishing feature of the present day, that 



I3» THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

men are learning generally to recognise this 
truth — that they are learning not to cry out 
against progress, but to investigate its grand 
and inevitable laws, and submit themselves 
willingly to them. And the tendency of our 
own day is, I am proud to say, a tendency 
towards firm, solid, verifiable knowledge, and, 
as a result of this, towards the acquisition of 
a firm and solid happiness also.' 

'To me,' said Mr. Herbert, 'it seems 
rather that the only hope for the present age 
lies in the possibility of some individual 
wiser than the rest getting the necessary 
power, and in the most arbitrary way possible 
putting a stop to this progress — utterly 
stamping out and obliterating every general 
tendency peculiar to our own time. Mr. 
Storks will perhaps think me very foolish. 
Perhaps I am. I freely own that I could 
more easily tell a good action, if I saw it, than 
a good piece of protoplasm, and that I think 
the understanding of a holy moral law, by 
which an individual may live, of infinitely 
more importance than the discovery of all the 
laws of progress in the world. But let Mr. 
Storks despise me, and not be angry with 
me ' 

1 My dear sir/ interposed Mr. Storks, 



BOOK II. CHAPTER II. 1-3 

with a gruff courtesy, ' why should I do either 
the one or the other ? ' 

'Because,' said Mr. Herbert, slightly 
waving his hand, and speaking with great 
emphasis, 'had I only the power, I would 
myself put a forcible stop to all this evolution. 
I would make a clean sweep of all the im- 
provements that the present day so much 
vaunts. I would collect an army of strong, 
serviceable, honest workmen, and send them 
to blow up Manchester, and Birmingham, 
and Liverpool, and Leeds, and Wolverhamp- 
ton ' 

' And all the artisans in them ? ' asked Mr. 
Storks. 

' Well,' said Mr. Herbert, smiling, ' I 
would, perhaps, give the artisans notice of 
this gunpowder plot of mine. And yet their 
existence has always presented a painful 
difficulty to me. For if there is no other 
life, I think they have a very bad time of it 
here ; and if there is another life, I think that 
they will all certainly be damned. But it is 
not only Manchester and Birmingham that I 
would blow up. I would blow up also every 
anatomical museum in the land, save such as 
were absolutely necessary for the use of pro- 
fessional doctors, that the foul sights in them 
should not taint men's imaginations, and give 



134 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

them an appetite for beastly knowledge. I 
would destroy every railway, and nearly every 
steam-engine ; and I would do a number of 
other things of a like sort, by way of prepar- 
ing the ground for a better state of society. 
Indeed, so far am I from believing that an 
entirely different and better state of society is 
unthinkable, that I believe it to be not im- 
practicable ; and I am at the present moment 
collecting money, from such as will here and 
there confide in me, for the purpose of pur- 
chasing land, and of founding a community 
upon what seem to me to be true and 
healthful principles — a Utopia, in fact — in 
which I trust may be once again realised 
upon earth those two things to which we are 
now such strangers — order and justice.' 

' I once began a book about justice,' said 
Laurence, ' on the model of Plato's Re- 
public' 

' What is Plato's Republic ? ' said Lady 
Ambrose. ' Tell me.' 

'It is a book,' said Laurence, 'which 
describes the meeting of a party of friends, 
who fell discussing high topics just as we 
are doing, and, amongst others, What is 
justice ? ' 

1 What !' exclaimed Lady Ambrose. ' Did 
not they know that ? ' 



BOOK II. CHAPTER II. 135 

' You forget,' said Laurence, ' that this was 
very long ago.' 

' To be sure,' said Lady Ambrose ; ' and 
they were of course all heathens. Well — 
and what conclusions did they come to as to 
the nature of justice ?' 

' At first,' said Laurence, ' though Socrates 
himself was amongst them, they were all com- 
pletely at a loss how to define it. But at last 
they hit upon the notion of constructing an 
ideal perfect state, in which of course justice 
would be lurking somewhere. Now there 
are in life, Plato says, four great virtues — 
wisdom, courage, temperance, and justice ; 
and no sooner has the ideal state been con- 
structed, than it appears that three of these 
virtues are specially illustrated and embodied, 
each in a particular class of citizens. Thus, 
wisdom is specially embodied in the theore- 
tical politicians and religious speculators of 
the day ; courage is embodied in the practical 
men who maintain and execute the regula- 
tions and orders of the philosophers ; and 
temperance is embodied in the commercial 
and industrial classes, who loyally submit them- 
selves to their betters, and refrain from 
meddling in matters that are too high for 
them. And now, where is justice? In what 
class is that embodied specially ? ' 



136 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' In the judges and the magistrates and 
the policemen,' said Lady Ambrose. 

' No,' said Laurence ; ' it is peculiar to no 
class. It resides in all. It is that virtue 
which enables the others to exist and to con- 
tinue.' 

' But surely,' said Lady Ambrose, ' all 
that is not what we mean by justice now ?' 

1 Certainly not,' said Laurence ; ' and my 
book was designed to investigate what justice 
is, as it exists now. I, like Plato, constructed 
a state, making it, however, a real rather than 
an ideal picture. But when I had done this, 
I could find no earnest thinking class to re- 
present wisdom ; no class of practical poli- 
ticians that would carry out even the little 
wisdom they knew, and so represent courage ; 
and certainly no commercial or industrial class 
that would refrain for a single day from 
meddling in matters that were too hicfh for 
them, and so represent temperance. So I 
analysed life in a somewhat different way. I 
divided it into happiness, misery, and justice. 
I then at once discovered that the rich repre- 
sented all the happiness of which we are now 
capable, and the poor all the misery ; and that 
justice was that which set this state of things 
going and enabled it to continue.' 

' Ah, Laurence, ' exclaimed Mr. Herbert, 



BOOK II. CHAPTER II. 137 

clapping his hands gently in sad applause, ' I 
like that. I wish you had worked out this 
idea more fully.' 

1 Suppose,' exclaimed Leslie, ' that we try 
this afternoon to construct a Utopia ourselves. 
Let us embody our notions of life as it ought 
to be in a new Republic' 

1 Well/ said Lady Ambrose, ' I am not a 
Conservative ; I don't object. I'm sure at 
any rate that there is much we could all of us 
alter, if we only had our own way.' 

1 Much,' said Lady Grace, with severe 
briskness. 

' Much,' said Miss Merton, with a soft, 
half-serious smile. 

' Much,' said Lord Allen, catching eagerly 
at the idea. 

' Well, then,' said Laurence, ' let us all do 
our best to give those airy somethings, our 
aspirations, a local habitation and a name.' 

The majority of the company took very 
kindly to the proposal. Lady Grace was 
especially pleased, as it seemed to provide at 
once a whole afternoon's occupation for the 
party ; and it was arranged accordingly that 
as soon as luncheon was over they should 
adjourn for castle-building to a shady spot in 
the garden. 



ij3 THE NEW REPUBLIC 




CHAPTER III. 

GUIDED by Lady Grace, the guests 
gradually converged after luncheon 
towards the appointed spot, strag- 
gling thither by various ways, and 
in desultory groups; passing down broad 
flights of steps flanked by gods and goddesses, 
and along straight terraces set with vases and 
Irish yews ; while busts of orators, poets, and 
philosophers, with Latin inscriptions, glim- 
mered to right and left of them in groves of 
laurels ; and scaly Tritons, dappled with 
green lichens, spouted up water in the middle 
of gleaming basins. Everything was to- 
day looking at its loveliest. There was an 
unusual freshness in the warm summer air. 
Beyond the green shrubs the sea shone bright 
and blue ; and through the shrubs the sea- 
breeze moved and whispered. 

Laurence strolled slowly on behind with 
Miss Merton, choosing a path which none of 
the others had taken. 

' How delicious this is ! ' said Miss Merton, 



BOOK II. CHAPTER III. 139 

lifting her hat to enjoy the breeze upon her 
forehead. ' Nobody could be in bad spirits 
in a place like this. There is something so 
fresh and living everywhere, and even when 
we lose sight of the sea we still hear it.' 

' Yes,' said Laurence. ' I believe these 
gardens are like Keats's island. There is 
no recess in them 

Not haunted by the murmurous sound of waves.' 

* And how perfectly everything is kept ! 
What gardeners you must have ! ' said Miss 
Merton, as they turned up a narrow winding 
walk, thickly set on either side with carefully- 
trimmed laurels. 

The whole place was, indeed, as Miss 
Merton said, kept perfectly. Not a weed 
was on the grey gravel ; not a single twig 
called for pruning. Every vase they passed 
was full of the most delicious flowers. Over- 
head the branches of limes and of acacia- 
trees murmured gaily. Everything seemed 
to be free from care, and to be laughing", 
light of heart, in the bright weather. 

' I am taking you this way,' said Laurence, 
1 because I want to show you what I think 
may perhaps interest you.' 

As he spoke these words, a sudden bend 
in the walk brought them face to face with 



HO THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

something that gave Miss Merton a sudden 
sensation of surprise. It was a small classical 
portico built in a style of the most severe 
simplicity, through which by an iron gate one 
passed into an open space beyond. What 
surprised Miss Merton on seeing this was the 
singular sense of desolation and dreariness 
that seemed all at once to come over her. 
The iron gates before her were a mass of rust ; 
the portico, which had once been white, was 
weather-stained into a dismal grey ; the stone, 
too, it was built of was scaling off in almost 
every place, and the fragments lay unheeded 
as they had fallen upon the ground. Here, 
amongst everything that spoke of the utmost 
care, was one object that spoke of entire 
forgetfulness and neglect. They approached 
in silence, and Miss Merton looked in through 
the bars of the rusty gate. The scene that 
met her eyes was one of greater desolation 
still. It was a circular plot of ground, fenced 
round by a low stone wall that was sur- 
mounted by spiked railings. It looked as 
though it might have been once a flower 
garden, but it was now a wilderness. Outside 
its boundary rose the rare and beautiful trees 
of the happy tended shrubberies. Inside were 
nettles, brambles, and long weedy grass. 
Nothing else was visible in this melancholy 



BOOK II. CHAPTER III. 141 

enclosure but three cypresses, apparently of 
various ages, the two smaller planted near 
together, the third, and by far the largest, 
standing apart by itself. 

Miss Merton was quite at a loss what to 
make of the strange spot ; and, as Laurence 
was feeling in his pocket for the key, she 
asked him if it had anything to do with 
breeding pheasants. 

' Do you see what is written abcve the 
gate ? ' said Laurence, as he pointed to a dim 
inscription whose letters still retained a 
glimmer of fading gold ; ' can you read it ? 

Neque harum, quas colis, arborum 
Te, prseter invisam cupressum, 
Ulla brevem dominum sequetur 

" Of all these trees which you love so, the 
hated cypress only shall follow its master, 
and be faithful to him in his narrow house." 
But come — let us go inside, if you are not 
afraid of the long grass.' 

They passed through the gate, which 
gave a low wail upon its hinges, and Miss 
Merton followed Laurence, knee-deep in 
grass and nettles, to the smallest of the three 
cypress-trees. There Laurence paused. At 
the foot of the tree Miss Merton saw a flat 
slab of marble, with something written upon 



142 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

it ; and for the first time she felt certain that 
she must be in a place of graves. 

1 This,' said Laurence, pointing to the 
little cypress, ' was planted only five years 
ago, ten days before the poor old man died 
who now sleeps under it. This is my uncle's 
grave. Do you see the inscription ? 

Omnis moriar, nullaque pars mei 
Vitabit Libitinam. 

" I shall wholly die, and there is no part of 
me that will escape the Venus of death." 
That, and that alone, he chose to have 
written over him.' 

Laurence spoke with some feeling, but 
Miss Merton was so much surprised that she 
hardly knew what response to make. 

' And does nobody take any care of this 
place ? ' at last she said. 

' No,' said Laurence. ' By his own last 
orders, nobody. But come — you must look 
at this too.' And he motioned her towards 
the neighbouring cypress. 

At the foot of this, almost hidden by the 
long grass, Miss Merton saw something that 
surprised her still more strangely. It was the 
statue of a woman half reclining in a languid 
attitude on a block of hewn marble. The 
figure was full and beautiful, and the features 



BOOK II. CHAPTER III. 143 

of the face were singularly fine ; but there 
was something in the general effect that 
struck one at the first moment as not pleasing. 
What slight drapery there was, was disposed 
meretriciously over the rounded limbs ; on 
the arms were heavy bracelets ; one of the 
hands held a half-inverted wine-cup, and the 
other was laid negligently on a heap of coins. 
But what jarred most upon the feelings was 
the face, with its perfect features. For a 
cold sneer was fixed upon the full mouth and 
the fine nostrils ; and the eyes, with a leer of 
petulant sensuality, seemed to be fixed for 
ever upon the flat neighbouring gravestone. 

1 This cypress,' said Laurence, ' is much 
older than the other. It was planted twenty 
years ago ; and twenty years ago the original 
of that statue was laid beneath it. She was one 
of those many nameless ladies — for, as you 
know, he completely exiled himself from society 
all the latter part of his life — who from time 
to time shared his fortunes at the house here. 
She was, too, by far the loveliest. She was at 
the same time the hardest, the most selfish, 
the most mercenary as well. And he knew it 
too. In spite of the distraction he found in her 
companionship, he was never for a moment 
deceived about her. At last, having made 
a fortune out of him, she was thinking of 



144 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

leaving him. But one day, suddenly, she 
caught a chill and died. She died here, 
and here she was buried. That statue, as 
you may imagine, is his design not hers. 
The attitude, the drapery, the wine-cup 
held in one hand, and the money in the 
other, are according to his express direc- 
tion ; and by his direction, too, that face, with 
its lovely features, leers and sneers at him for 
ever, as he rests in his neglected grave. 
See, too, there is the epitaph which he chose 
for her : — 

Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti j 
Tempus abire tibi est. 

u You have wantoned enough with me — you 
have eaten enough of my substance — you have 
drunk enough of my champagne ; 'tis high 
time for you to go." And now,' said Laurence, 
1 let us come to the third tree, and you shall 
see what is overshadowed by it.' 

They passed across the enclosure to the 
largest of the three cypresses, and at the foot 
of that Miss Merton discovered a third grave- 
stone, also with a poetical inscription. ' That,' 
said Laurence, ' you can read without help of 
mine.' 

Miss Merton looked ; and the lines were 
not new to her : — 



BOOK II. CHAPTER III. I45 

A slumber did my spirit seal, 

I knew no mortal fears. 
She seemed a thing that could not feel 

The touch of earthly years. 

She knows no motion now, nor force, 

She neither feels nor sees, 
Rolled round in earth's diurnal course 

With rocks, and stones, and trees. 

1 Here,' said Laurence, ' is the oldest grave 
of all. Its date is that of the tree that stands 
beside it, and that was planted forty years ago. 
Under that stone lies the only woman ex- 
cept myself, almost the only thing — that the 
old man ever really loved. This was in his 
young days. He was only thirty when she- 
died ; and her death was the great turning- 
point of his life. She lived with him for two 
years, in a little cottage that stood on the very 
spot where he afterwards built the villa. She 
has no name, you see, on the grave-stone, and I 
had best not give her any. She was some 
one's wife, but not his. That is her story. I 
have her miniature somewhere, which one day 
I should like to show you. It is a lovely dark 
face, with liquid, spiritual eyes, and under it 
are written two lines of Byron's, which might 
have been composed for her : 

She walks in beauty like the night 
Of cloudless climes and starry skies. 
L 



i 4 6 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Well, there she lies now ; and the old man's 
youth lies buried with her. It was her death 
tnat made him a philosopher. He built this 
great place here, and laid out these gardens 
half to kill his grief for her, and half to keep 
alive her memory ; and here, as you see, he 
buried her. She gave up all that was best in 
her for the love of him. He gave up all that 
was best in him for the loss of her.' 

1 And is this place left quite uncared for ? ' 
said Miss Merton, looking around her. 

'It is left,' said Laurence, ' as he wished 
it should be. It was one of his most 
special orders that, when he was dead and 
buried, no further care of any kind should 
be spent on it. The grass and weeds were 
to be left to grow wild in it, the rails to rust, 
the portico to decay and crumble. " Do 
you think," he said to me, " that I know so 
little of life as to flatter myself that any 
single creature will regret me when I am 
gone, or even waste a thought upon me ? I 
do not chose, as Christians do, to rest for ever 
under a lie ; for their tombs are lying monu- 
ments that they are remembered ; mine shall 
be a true one that I am forgotten. Yes," he 
said, " it makes me laugh to think of myself — 
me, who have built this house and planted 
these gardens which others will enjoy — rotting 



BOOK II. CHAPTER III. H7 

in the midst of it all, under thorns and bram- 
bles, in a little dismal wilderness. And then 
perhaps, Otho," he would say to me, " some of 
your friends who will walk about these gardens 
in a year or two— Christians, no doubt, with 
the devil knows what of fine sentiments about 
faith and immortality — will look in through 
the bars of the gate, and be shocked at that 
honest wilderness, that unconcealed neglect, 
which is the only real portion of those that 
have been." But during his last illness he 
softened just a little, and admitted that I, he 
did believe, cared for him, and might, when he 
was dead, every now and then think of him. 
" And so," he said, " if you like to do it, come 
every now and then, and scrape the moss 
from my inscription, and from the two others. 
But that is all I will have you do— that, and 
nothing more. That will express all that it 
is possible that you should feel for me." I 
promised him to do no more than that, and 
that I do. Poor old man!' Laurence went 
on meditatively, as they passed out of the 
gates, and were again in the bright trim gar- 
den. « He thought that he belonged to times 
before his own ; but I think that in reality 
he belonged to times after them. If he was 
Roman at all, as he always fancied himself, he 
was Roman only in that sombre ennui that 



i,» 



14? THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

through all his later years oppressed him ; and 
which seems to me to be now settling down 
upon the world — an ennui that always kept 
him seeking for pleasures, and that turned the 
pleasures into ashes as soon as he possessed 
them. His pleasures were high and low; but 
the higher made him despise the lower ; and 
the lower he sought simply that he might drown 
the higher. Two things only during his last 
years never palled upon him : one was, saying 
a sharp thing neatly ; the other, detecting 
some new weakness in human nature. In this 
he seemed really to revel. On the littlenesses 
and the pretences of men, especially when 
they turned out failures, he seemed to look 
with a passionate contemptuous fondness, 
like a wicked prince on a peasant-girl. See 
— here was his summer study — this stone 
pavilion. Let us go in for a moment, and I 
will show it to you.' 

They were in front of a small quasi-classi- 
cal building of white marble, embowered be- 
hind in arbutus and in myrtles, and command- 
ing from its large windows a full view of the 
sea. Laurence unlocked the door, and he and 
Miss Merton entered. 

Inside there was a faint musty smell, and 
a general sense that the place had been long 
disused. The walls were completely lined 



BOOK II. CHAPTER III. 149 

with books in splendid bindings, whose gilded 
backs glimmered temptingly through the 
network of the bookcase doors. In the centre 
stood a table, covered with a cloth of faded 
crimson velvet ; nothing on it but a tarnished 
ormolu inkstand, in the shape of a Roman 
temple, across the columns of which spiders 
had woven dusty webs. Placed stiffly before 
the table stood a gilded arm-chair, with 
cushions of crimson damask, and under it a 
foot-stool to match, which had been worn 
quite bare by the old philosopher's feet. 

' Here,' said Laurence, ' he would sit day 
after day amongst his books, drawing, or 
reading, or writing, or looking out at his 
flowers or at the sea. Look ! these two folios, 
bound in red morocco, are a collection of his 
verses, letters, essays and so on, that he had 
had privately printed. They are not all, I'm 
afraid, quite fit to read. But this first volume 
is all right. I should like to take it out and 
show it to you by-and-by. But come — I 
have nothing more to exhibit now. We had 
better join the others. They will not be far off,' 
he said, as they left the pavilion ; ' indeed, I 
think I can hear them talking/ 

In another moment they had passed 
through an arch of evergreens, and found 
themselves on the spot where nearly all the 



I $o THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

rest of the party had already assembled, dis- 
posed in an easy group upon the grass. The 
place was an amphitheatre of velvet turf, set 
round with laurels and all kinds of shrubs; 
in the arena of which — if one may so speak — 
a little fountain splashed cool and restless in 
a porphyry basin. Overhead the blue sum- 
mer sky was screened by the whispering 
shade of tall trees ; and above the dark laurel- 
leaves the fresh sea was seen in the distance, 
an azure haze full of sparklings. The whole 
scene, as Miss Merton and Laurence, with 
his gorgeous folio under his arm, came upon 
it, was curiously picturesque. The various 
dresses made against the green turf a soft 
medley of colours. The ladies were in white 
and black and pale yellow, green and crimson 
and dove-colour. All the men, except Mr. 
Luke, were in shooting coats ; and Mr. 
Saunders, who wore knickerbockers, had even 
pink stockings. And here, as the lights and 
shades flickered over them, and the gentle air 
breathed upon them, they seemed altogether 
like a party from which an imaginative on- 
looker might have expected a new Decameron. 
Already, under Lady Grace's vigorous 
guidance, a certain amount of talk had begun 
apropos of the new Republic ; all the ladies, 
with the exception of Mrs. Sinclair, having 



BOOK II. CHAPTER III. 15! 

fallen to discussing the true position of women, 
or rather of woman, and their opinions on this 
point being- a little various. But besides this, 
the post had arrived ; and that too had 
created some excitement. Lady Ambrose in 
particular had become delightfully radiant, on 
receiving a large envelope that was stiff as 
she handled it ; and which she saw contained, 
as she just peeped into it, a card, on the top of 
which was printed, ' To have the honour to 
meet — .' She had, too, just extracted from 
Lord Allen a promise to come and stay with 
her, next autumn, in the country ; and her 
measure of good spirits was quite full. 

1 Now, Mr. Laurence,' she exclaimed, 
dangling her hat in her hand, ' do come and 
put a stop to this. You see what a woman's 
parliament would be if we ever have one, 
which my husband says is not at all im- 
possible. Here is one of us who thinks that 
everything will go well if women can only 
learn to paint flowers on white dessert plates, 
and get fifteen shillings apiece for them.' 

1 And I,' said Lady Grace, smiling good- 
naturedly, ' was just saying that they all 
ought to be taught logic' 

1 Perfectly true,' exclaimed Mr. Saunders, 
putting up his spectacles to see who had spoken. 

'And Miss Merton,' said Lady Ambrose 



15* THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

4 thinks that we should all be taught to walk 
the hospitals, or be sick-nurses.' 

' I should not so much mind that,' said 
Mrs. Sinclair, ' in war time, if one had anyone 
fighting in whose life one really took an 
interest. I once thought, Mr. Leslie, that 
that might be my mission, perhaps.' 

1 But,' said Lady Ambrose, ' how are we 
to build a castle in the air together, if we are 
all at cross purposes like this ? ' 

There did indeed seem little prospect of 
their getting to work at all ; until Leslie ex- 
claimed at last that he thought he had found 
a way. 

1 See,' said Mrs. Sinclair, ' I told you a 
little while ago you would be wanted to talk 
cleverly. And now, Mr. Leslie, don't you 
think you would be more comfortable if you 
sat a little farther off ? or Lady Grace, of 
whom I am already afraid, will begin to think 
we're flirting.' 

1 Well,' said Leslie, ' in spite of all our 
differences, I think I see a way in which we 
shall all be able to set to work together. We 
want to imagine a state that shall be as nearly 
perfect as we can make it. Well and good. 
Now, we shall all admit, I suppose, that in a 
perfect state all the parts will be perfect, and 
each part will imply and involve all the 



BOOK IT. CHAPTER III. 153 

others. Given one bone, we shall be able to 
construct the entire animal. Let us then 
take one part, and imagine that first. Let us 
take the highest class in our state, and see 
what we think that ought to be, looking on it 
in the first place not as a corporate body of 
superiors, but as an assembly of equals. Let 
us, I mean, to put it in other words, begin 
with seeing what we really wish society to be 
— what we really think that the highest and 
most refined life consists in, that is possible 
for the most favoured classes ; and then let 
us see afterwards what is implied in this.' 

Leslie's proposal was welcomed eagerly 
by everyone. 

1 Well,' said Lady Ambrose, ' and so we 
are each of us to say, are we, what we think 
is the essence of good society ? Come then, 
who knows ? ' 

'Art,' murmured Mr. Rose. 

' Reason,' said Mr. Saunders. 

' Unworldliness, based on knowledge of 
the world,' said Miss Merton. 

' Wait a moment,' said Laurence, ' we are 
going too fast. This is not what Mr. Leslie 
means.' 

' No, no,' said Mr. Saunders. ' Let us 
get rid of what is evil before we introduce 
what is good. I should begin by getting rid 



154 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

of every belief that is not based upon reason, 
and every sentiment whose existence cannot 
be accounted for.' 

' Here we are/ said Lady Ambrose, 'all 
over the place. Now if I might be allowed 
to say what I thought was the essence of 
good society, I should say that a great part of 
it, at least, was the absence of dull and vulgar 
people.' 

' Excellent ! ' exclaimed Mr. Luke, ' and a 
capital exclusion with which to begin our new 
Republic' 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I. i 5S 




BOOK III 
CHAPTER I. 

[ES/ said Mr. Luke still more 
solemnly, ' if we only follow this 
out — this idea of the exclusion 
from our society of all vulgar and 
extraneous elements, we shall find we have done 
a great deal more than we may at first think. 
We shall have at once a free, and liberal, and 
untainted social and intellectual atmosphere, in 
which our thoughts, and feelings, and refine- 
ments, and ways of living, may develop them- 
selves to the utmost, unimpeded. Lady 
Ambrose has certainly begun with hitting the 
right nail on the head.' 

Could Lady Ambrose have been told, 
when she left London the afternoon before, 
that in another twenty-four hours she would 
be taking the lead in the construction of a 
Utopia, or ideal statte of society, suggested 
by the writings of a Greek philosopher, she 
would have been utterly at a loss to know 



156 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

what the prophecy meant ; and had she 
known what it meant, she would certainly not 
have believed it. Indeed, as it was, she could 
hardly imagine that Mr. Luke was serious, 
and that he was not laughing at her ; so she 
said quickly and in a tone of self-defence, 

1 Of course I know that there must be 
something more than the mere exclusion of 
vulgar people, Mr. Luke. We must have 
religion, and all that, and ' 

' Ah I' exclaimed Mr. Luke, interrupting 
her with a grand wave of the hand ; ' my dear 
Lady Ambrose, let us leave all that till by- 
and-by. Let us be content to begin with 
simpler matters first.' 

' Let us begin with the flowers of life/ 
said Leslie, ■ and when we have chosen these, 
let us trace them back to their roots.' 

' I quite think,' said Miss Merton, 'that in 
a really good society — one that was perfectly 
good even in the superficial sense of the 
word — we should find, if we only had eyes 
enough, religion lurking somewhere, and 
everything else we want.' 

' And so that's your view, my dear, is it ?' 
said Lady Ambrose. ' Oh, then, I suppose 
since you, a Roman Catholic, think so, I may 
also.' 

1 Surely, too,' said Miss Merton, ' we must 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I. 157 

all know that nothing can be so bad, either 
for the pushers or the pushed, as the struggle 
of people to get into what they think is good 
society, not in the least because they care to 
be there, but merely because they care to be 
known to be there.' 

Lady Ambrose, who perhaps felt uncon- 
sciously some small pricks of conscience here, 
again looked doubtful, and said, ' Still, if we 
really want to make a perfect state, this does 
not seem a very serious thing to begin with.' 

' Listen,' exclaimed Laurence ; ' let me 
read you something I have here — something 
of my uncle's, which I have just thought 
of It is a short adaptation of Aristotle's 
Ethics! 

Lady Ambrose started. Hearing two 
words, the one as long as Aristotle, and the 
other as unfamiliar as Ethics, she began to 
think that she had made the conversation 
serious with a vengeance. Indeed, the whole 
party, as well as herself, showed some signs 
of surprise. 

' It is very short,' said Laurence, ' and I will 
only read a page or two. It is called "A system 
of Ethics, adapted from Aristotle, for the use 
of the English Nation." It was suggested to 
him — ' (and this bewildered Lady Ambrose 
still more, though at the same time it gave 



158 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

hei • some gleam of hope) , ' by a very rich vulgar 
family, who bought a place near here, and 
who much annoyed and amazed him by the 
great court they paid to him. This is the 
first chapter ; it treats of " The Summum 
Bonum, or The Moral End of Action? 
Listen — 

' Ethics being the art and science of hu??ian 
action, as directed towards the chief good of 
life — that highest and final end, to which, if 
we think a little, we shall see all other ends are 
subordinate ; it is evident that our first task 
must be, as our master Aristotle well says, to 
form a clear conceptio7i of zvhat this end, the 
chief good, is. 

Now on this point Aristotle would seem 
to err. For he, folloiving the commoft 
op ; 7iion of men, affirms the chief good to be 
happiness, holding the only question to be,Jn 
tv hat does true happiness lie? And if he 
had been philosophising for savages, he would 
indeed have been in the right. But because 
savages a?id men in a state of nahire have all 
9ne end of action, which is Jiappiness, it by ?io 
means follows that the same is true of civilised 
nations, and that these may not have ends that 
are far higher. It is indeed evident that they 
have. And not this only, but that of such 
ends there is a very great variety. To describe 



BOOK III. CHAPTER L 159 

and number these with anything like absolute 
acctcracy is neither reqtdred nor admitted by 
the nature of the subject. But we shall be 
sufficiently near the truth if we say that tliere 
is a separate a?id characteristic chief good for 
each civilised nation — (quot gentes tot summa 
bona) — a?id that it is by this in each case that 
the natio7ial character is determined. A 
glance at the continent of Europe will at once 
illustrate this, and suggest examples to us of 
these national chief goods. We shall see the 
Germans, for instance, following what is 
called Thought to its inmost recesses, the French 
what is called Life. We shall find accordingly 
that the chief good of the former natio?i, 
which is perhaps the highest of all, is the 
krwwledge of the unknowable; whilst that of 
the latter, which is next to it in dignity, is the 
practice of the unmentionable. And so oji 
with all the other nations ; each will be found 
to have its separate chief good ; and none of 
these to have the least connection with happiness. 
For us, however, who are English, and 
writing for English readers, it will be enough 
to concern ourselves simply with the chief 
good of the English. 

1 We shall discover this, in the same zvay 
as we did that of the Fre?ich and Germans, in 
an examination of our own special national 



160 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

characteristic. First, however, we must be 
clear what this characteristic is ; a?id here it 
will be well to take our neighbours opinions of 
us as well as our own. If we inquire then in 
what light we present ourselves to the other 
EiM'opean nations, we shall find that just as 
the Germans are known mainly as a profound 
nation, and the French as a prurient nation, so 
are we, in like manner, nozv known as a vulgar 
nation. And as this view of us exactly tallies 
with otcr own, it appears evident that the 
special national characteristic of the English 
is vulgarity, and that the chief good of the 
English is the final end that is aimed at by 
the English vulgar classes. 

' This zve affirm to be social distinction, to 
their admiration and pursuit of which is due 
that cardinal moral quality which they call 
worldliness in themselves, and snobbishness in 
their friends and enemies. And if any object 
that to a great part of the nation social dis- 
tinction in its true sense is a thing unknown, 
and that to another part it is a thing that 
comes without being struggled for, and so in 
neither case can be the end of moral action, 
we shall ansiver them that to object this, is 
much the same as to argue that a peach-tree 
does not bear peaches because none are to be 
seen groiving o?it of the roots ; or that there is 



BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 161 

no meaning in the Athanasian Creed because 
none is attached to it by the only people who use 
it ; or that there is no meaning in the dogma of 
the Popes infallibility because its only possible 
meaning is repitdiated by all those who defend 
it. For 7io thing will be found unless we seek 
it in its right place. And for the ethics of a 
nation we mtist look only in that part of the 
nation which is their proper sphere ; and that 
part is, as we have already shown, the vulgar 
part. And should any still imagine that if 
we thus limit the scope of our observation, we 
shall not be able to treat the subject exhaustively , 
we shall remind him that the vulgar classes, 
though not yet co-extensive with the nation, are 
still rapidly becoming so, vtilgarity ascending 
and descending with equal certainty ; since on 
the one hand it ruins all society into which it 
contrives to enter ; whilst it thrives itself, on 
the other hand, on all society that contrives to 
enter into it. To it therefore our ivhole study 
may be confined. Nor lastly (for it is well to 
anticipate every possible objection), is there any 
need that even thtis we should study those 
classes that naturally possess social distinction, 
that we may so learn in what its real essence 
consists ; since, if we do but observe facts, we 
shall see that ignorance of the whole inner 
nature of good society is the chief characteristic 

M 



162 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

of those who with most single-heartedness 
direct their lives towards getting into it. It 
will be enough then, without a7iy further ex- 
planation, to lay it dozvn that social distinction 
is the chief good, and the end of all moral 
action ; nor can the Aristotelians say that this 
is in reality a mediate end, and sought for 
only because it leads to happiness ; since so Jar 
are men from seeking social distinction for the 
sake of happiness, that they are perpetually 
renouncing happiness for the sake of social 
distinction! 

1 Capital, Mr. Laurence !' exclaimed Lady 
Ambrose, breaking into a low silvery laugh, 
as soon as Laurence had ended. ' And how 
true that is about those people who really ruin 
the society into which they contrive to push 
themselves ! ' 

Lord Allen, who caught Miss Merton's 
eye at this moment, gave a very faint smile. 

' So you see,' said Laurence, ' that you 
were quite right, Lady Ambrose, by in- 
stinctively beginning with exclusion.' 

1 Still/ said Allen, ' I'm afraid that all this 
is rather selfish. These people who want to 
to be so smart, are, I dare say, not much the 
worse because of it. Indeed, myself, I rather 
like a good snob now and then.' 

* Well,' said Laurence, ' let me read a few 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I. 163 

more paragraphs, and you will see. • Such 
being the endj he goes on, * of all moral 
action, virtue or morality is that state of 
mind which desires this end ; and virtuous or 
moral acts are those which help its on towards 
it, provided only that they are do?ie zvith 
purpose. For acts done not with purpose, but 
by chance, are not to be held moral. Nozv the 
nature of purpose is well explained by Aristotle, 
when he says that its object is all such volun- 
tary action as is the result of deliberation. 
And what then is the object of deliberation f 
Let us consider that : for men, it is evident, do 
not deliberate about all matters alike ; since in 
addition to their continually not deliberating in 
coses when they ought, there are many matters 
about which deliberation is out of the question. 
Thus uo one deliberates about what is in its 
nature immutable, as how to alter vulgarity of 
a peoples member of Parliament ; nor about 
necessary things, as how to alleviate the misery 
of the starving poor ; nor about things of 
chance, as how to prevent the dissemination of 
cholera ; nor, again, about remote things which 
do not concern us, as, to use a former instance, 
how to alleviate the misery of the starving 
poor; nor does anyone deliberate about i?u- 
possible things, as how to check the poisonous 
adulteration of food ; nor about things that are 

M 2 



,64 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

past and lost, as how to do anything for the 
glory of England; nor, lastly, do we delibei'ate 
abont things we do not care about, as how to 
get that lost glory back again. Deliberation, 
then, only takes place abont such matters as 
our ozvn agency can effect, and which we wish 
it should effect. Virtue, therefore, being thus 
based on deliberation, is manifestly not one of 
those things that come to us by nature whether 
we will or no ; but it is acquired by habit. 
The genus of moral virtue is a habit. But 
what special sort of habit f and how does it 
differ from all other habits f Let us consider 
this. 

1 We must remember, first, that it is the 
office of every virtue to perfect that of which it 
is the virtue. Thus it is the virtue of a 
modem London house to be as badly built as 
possible and not be seen to be so; it is the 
virtue of an insured ship not to appear unsea- 
worthy before she does so to the crew as she is 
foundering; and it is the virtue of butchers 
meat, groceries and so forth, not to appear un- 
fit for human consumption. In the same way 
moral virtue, or the virtue of a man, is that 
which makes him appear to be one thing to the 
world, whilst in reality he is another. Such 
being the case, it is plain that in trying to be 
virtuous, we may, as in most other things, do 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I 165 

too much, or too little ; and what is right will 
be a mean lying between these two extremes. 
Now of means there are two kinds, the absolute 
and the relative, either of which we can find 
in anything that is continuous ; the former, as 
when we take the bisecting point in a straight 
line, which is for all men one and the same ; 
the latter, as when we take the mean point or 
thing with reference to ourselves, in which case 
it will differ with our different requirements. 
Thus, if three be too small a number, and 
seventy-five too great, simply as an arithmetical 
problem, we take thirty-nine to be the mean, 
which exceeds three by as much as it is exceeded 
by seventy -five ; but with reference to ourselves 
we cannot so decide. For thirty-nine articles of 
religion may be too few for the present A re It- 
bishop of Westminster, and three may be too 
many for the Dean. Or again betiueen 100I. 
and 20/., the mean with regard to the matter 
itself would be 60/., but tvith regard to our- 
selves, not so. For 60/. would be too little to 
offer to a cook, and too much to offer to a 
curate. So in like manner that equality which 
constitutes moral virtue is not the absolute, but 
the relative mean. Moral virtue, then, we 
shall define to be a certain state, or habit of 
purpose, conforming in action to the relative 
mean, and adjusted to that mean as the worldly 



1 65 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

or snobbish man would adjust it. At this 
point we shall pause a moment to make a very 
slight change in the accepted terminology of the 
subject. We have hitherto spoken of the virtue 
of the vulgar classes as being a mean. We 
consider, however, that ottr language will be 
less ambiguous, if we take ajiother form of the 
same word, and agree to call it a meanness. 
Moral virtue, then, is a meanness lying between 
two vices, its extremes ; the one vice being that 
of excess, tJie other that of defect. Thus it is 
possible for a habit of mind to be so unrestrained 
and vehement, that the acts it produces at once 
betray their motives and obtrude the7n 011 the 
observer ; it is possible for it, also, on the other 
hand, to be so weak and ?cerveless as never to 
produce any acts at all. For instance, the 
habit of thought in a clergyman may be so 
strong and unrestrained as to lead him to speak 
his whole conclusions out, and so get deprived of 
his living ; or on the other hand it may be so 
weak and undeveloped, that he comes to no con- 
elusions at all, and so dies in a curacy ; the 
meanness between these two extremes being 
what is called vagueness, or the absence of any 
defined opinions, which is a gi r eat merit, and 
leads, in the Established Church, to high pre- 
ferment. So also with habits of action, the 
general name given to the true meanness is 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I. 167 

ivorldliness, whereof the excess is snobbishness, 
and the defect independence : worldliness 
being in its esseiice the former of these, and in 
its aspect the latter. Whence it follows that 
we may yet further generally define the moral 
meanness, as that which is inwardly one ex- 
treme, and which is outwardly the other! 

1 Now,' said Laurence, ' though I don't 
suppose the writer of this really cared two 
straws whether the majority of people were 
mean and vulgar or no, there is a great deal 
of truth in what he says : and I think in our 
ideally good society one of the first things we 
want is that it shall be unmixed and genuine ; 
I mean, all its members must be of it, as well 
as in it. They must give it its prestige. We 
must have none that merely get their pres- 
tige from it.' 

' Well,' said Allen, 'no doubt this exclusion 
is better, if it could be only managed.' 

1 Don't let us think yet,' said Laurence, 
' about how to manage it. Let us see what we 
want first, and see what it costs afterwards.' 

' I certainly believe,' said Miss Merton, 
* that what I consider the extremely bad 
manners of a great many very fine ladies 
would all go, if a stop were put to this 
jostling and scrambling that goes on about 
them, as Mr. Laurence proposes.' 



r68 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 See,' said Laurence, ' here is one good 
fruit of exclusion at once — the redemption of 
our manners ; and a most important fruit too, 
I think ; for I hope we all start with the un- 
derstanding that our society, ideally good as 
it is, is above none of those outward graces 
and refinements of behaviour and ways of 
living that give us such pleasure now, when 
we find them.' 

1 And manner too, Mr. Laurence,' broke 

in Lady Ambrose, ' as well as manners 

Think what a charm there is in a really 
charming manner.' 

' There is indeed,' exclaimed Mr. Stockton. 

1 The dear Duchess of for instance — 

why, there's a fascination even in the way in 
which she says good morning.' 

' Ah yes,' said Lady Ambrose. ' Now, 
there's what I call a really perfect manner 
for you.' 

1 Very well,' said Laurence, ' and whatever 
is a really perfect manner, in our ideal society 
we must all have it.' 

' I must confess,' said Allen, ' that I get 
very sick sometimes of our conventional 
society manners ; and I often long to have 
a good genuine savage to talk to.' 

1 That,' said Laurence, ' is because of all 
the social shams that we have just agreed to 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I. 169 

get rid of. And to call the manner of society- 
conventional, conveys no greater blame 
than if you were to call language con- 
ventional. For manner is but a second 
language, of which the best society speaks the 
purest dialect — the Attic, in fact. And as 
with language, so with manner, the more 
uniformity there is in it in some ways, the 
nicer shades of individuality shall we be able 
to express by it in others.' 

'Well,' said Allen, shortly, 'perhaps it is 
so. You are very likely right.' 

1 And in manner,' said Laurence, ' I in- 
clude tone too — that special and indescribable 
way of looking at things, and speaking of 
things, which characterises good society, and 
distinguishes it from the rest of the world so 
completely, and yet by marks so subtle that 
they would utterly escape the notice of those 
who don't know their meaning — that little 
extra stroke of polishing that brings to light 
such countless new delicate veins in the 
marble of life — the little extra stroke of the 
brush that puts a new refinement, and self- 
possession, into the face. As Browning says 
of a very different subject — 

Oh, the little more, and how much it is, 
And the little less, and what worlds away. 



170 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

And this is something quite independent of 
any special ability or special quality on the 
part of the individual people themselves ; 
though of course the more gifted and culti- 
vated they are, the greater will its charm 
be.' 

'Yes,' said Miss Merton thoughtfully, 
and half to herself, ' I think all that is quite 
true.' 

' Of course,' said Laurence, ' I know that 
tone alone can only make society good in a 
very narrow sense of the word. I merely 
mean that no amount of other qualities can 
make it really good, without tone.' 

1 1 don't in the least object,' said Allen, 
1 to the marble being polished ; but what I 
want first to be sure of is, that it is worth 
polishing.' 

1 Quite so,' said Laurence. ' What we 
must now consider is, what are all those 
special qualities and accomplishments, which 
will make a really perfect society the best 
among the best — such things as wit, know- 
ledge, experience, humour, and so on — the 
veins, in fact, in the marble, that can be 
brought out by the polish.' 

' Ah, yes, my dear Laurence,' began Mr. 
Luke, ' this is the great thing that we shall 
have to decide about ; and it is this very 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I 171 

thing that I am always telling the world 
is 

But he was interrupted by the advent 
of Mr. Herbert, who, with the exception of 
Mr. Storks and Dr. Jenkinson, was the only 
member of the party not already there. Mr. 
Herbert's whole aspect surprised everyone. 
At luncheon, as all remembered, he had been 
melancholy and desponding ; but his face 
now wore a bright smile, and there was 
something that was almost gaiety in his 
elastic step. No one, however, ventured 
to ask him the reason of this pleasing 
change ; but as he held an open newspaper 
in his hand, which he had apparently just 
received, it occurred to most that he must 
have seen in it ' something to his advan- 
tage.' 

' Well,' he exclaimed to Laurence, in a 
manner quite in keeping with his look, ' and 
tell me now how are you getting on with your 
new Republic ? You ought to make a very 
beautiful thing out of it — all of you together, 
with so many charming ladies.' 

1 Do you think so ? ' said Laurence, in 
great surprise at this cheerful view of things. 

1 Yes,' answered Mr. Herbert, slowly and 
with decision. ■ Ladies I always think, so 
long as they are good and honest, have 



172 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

beautiful imaginations. And now, let me 
ask you how you have set to work.' 

Laurence explained to him that they had 
begun, on Leslie's suggestion, with consider- 
ing what society, or the life of the highest 
classes, would be at its best ; and that they 
were going to see afterwards what was 
implied in this. 

' Indeed ! ' said Mr. Herbert medita- 
tively. ' Now, that is a really beautiful way 
of going about the business. And how far, 
let me ask you, have you got with your 
picture of these highest classes ? I trust 
at all events that you have made a good 
beginning.' 

' A beginning,' said Laurence, ' is all that 
we have made. We have agreed that our 
society is to have the utmost polish, ease, 
and grace of manner, and the completest 
savoir -vivre. It is, in fact, to be a sort of 
exemplar of human life at its highest con- 
ceivable completeness.' 

1 Excuse me,' said Mr. Herbert, 'but the 
ways of polite life, and the manners of fine 
ladies and gentlemen, are beautiful only as 
the expression of a beautiful spirit I They 
are altogether hateful as the ornament or the 
covering of a vile one.' 

4 Yes, Herbert, yes,' exclaimed Mr. Luke, 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I. 173 

with a long sigh. ' And I was just going to 
say this, when you joined us — that to make 
society really good — even really brilliant and 
entertaining — one thing is wanted, and that is 
true and genuine culture. Then let us have 
the polish by all means ; but let it be a 
diamond we polish, and not a pebble. Our 
society must be one that does not merely 
dance, and hunt, and shoot. It must think, 
and reason, and read. It must be familiar — 
the whole of it must be familiar — with the 
great thoughts of the world, the great facts of 
the world, and the great books of the world. 
You want all this, if you would be perfectly 
brilliant in your salons, as well as really pro- 
found in your studies.' 

This was assented to by nearly all. Lady 
Ambrose however looked a little uncomfort- 
able, and not quite satisfied about some- 
thing. 

■ Don't you think/ she said at last, ' that if 
everyone is to have so much culture, society 
will tend to become — well — just a little ' 

1 Well, Lady Ambrose ? ' said Laurence. 

' Well, just a little bit blue. It will be all 
too bookish, if you understand what I mean. 
Don't you know when anyone comes to see 
you in London, and will talk of nothing but 
books, one always fancies it is because he isn't 



174 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

— it's very uncharitable to say so, but still it's 
true — because he isn't very much in society, 
and doesn't know many people to talk about ?' 

' I always think it such a blessing,' said 
Lord Allen, ' to find anyone who will talk 
about books, and will not be perpetually bor- 
ing one with vulgar gossip and scandal.' 

1 Oh, so do I,' said Lady Ambrose eagerly, 
1 but that was not what I meant exactly. Mr. 
Laurence knows what I mean; I'm sure he 
does. No one can delight in a book more than 
I ; but still — ' she said, pausing to think how 
much of what she considered culture was to be 
found in those London drawing-rooms where 
she felt her own life completest, ' still — 
somehow — ' she said with a faint smile, ' it is 
possible to be too literary, isn't it, as well as 
too anything else ? ' 

' Perfectly true, Lady Ambrose,' said Mr. 
Luke — Lady Ambrose was delighted — ' peo- 
ple continually are too literary — to my cost I 
know it ; and that is because the world at large 
— what is called the reading world even more 
than the non-reading world — are hopelessly at 
sea as to what books are, and what they really 
do for us. In other words, if you will forgive 
my harping as I do upon a single expression, 
they lack culture.' 

' Why, I thought culture was books and 



BOOK III. CHAPTER I. 175 

literariness, and all that,' Lady Ambrose 
murmured half aloud, with a look of be- 
wilderment. Mr. Herbert however suddenly 
came to her rescue. 

' Now, all this,' he said, ' is most interesting ; 
but I feel myself, something as I imagine Lady 
Ambrose does, that I should like to know 
a little more clearly what culture is, and what 
you mean by it, when you call it the essence 
of good society.' 

'Yes,' said Lady Ambrose, 'this is just 
what I like. Come, Mr. Luke, suppose you 
were to tell us.' 

'Suppose,' said Mr. Luke with an august 
wave of his hand, ' instead of that we ask Mr. 
Laurence to tell us. No one can do so better 
than he. I, Lady Ambrose, have perhaps 
grown something too much of a specialist to 
be able to put these things in a sufficiently 
popular way.' 

' Ah,' said Mr. Herbert, ' this is really nice. 
I shall like to listen to this. But you must 
allow me to be merely a listener, and not ask 
me for instruction. I assure you I am here 
altogether to be instructed.' 

Laurence, with some diffidence, assented 
to what was asked of him ; and there was a 
general rustling on all sides of the party settling 
themselves down more luxuriously on the 



176 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

grass. Every influence of the summer afternoon 
conspired to make all take kindly to the topic 
— the living airy whisper of the leaves over- 
head, the wandering - scents of the flowers 
that the breeze just made perceptible, the 
musical splash of the fountain in its quiet 
restlessness, the luxury of the mossy turf as 
soft as sleep or rose-leaves, and a far faint 
murmur of church-bells that now and then 
invaded the ear gently, like a vague appealing 
dream. Mr. Saunders even was caressed by 
his flattered senses into peacefulness ; the 
high and dry light of the intellect ceased to 
scintillate in his eyes ; the spirit of progress 
condescended to take a temporary doze. 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 177 




CHAPTER II. 

ND now, Mr. Laurence/ said Lady 
Ambrose, 'begin at the begin- 
ning, please, and don't do as Lord 
Kennington did at the Eton and 
Harrow match the other day — go talking to 
me about "overs," and "long-stops," and 
things like that, before I was even quite sure 
of the difference between " out " and " in." ' 

' Of course,' Laurence began, smiling 
with a little prefatory shyness, ' we can all 
understand the difference between a coarse 
common rustic palate, like that of the burly 
farmer, for instance, who just enjoys food in 
a brute way when he is hungry, and drink so 
long as it is spirituous at all times ; and the 
palate of the true epicure, that is sensitive to 
taste as the nicest ear is to music, and can 
discriminate perfectly all the subtle semitones 
and chords of flavour. Well, transfer this 
image from the mouth to the mind, and 
there's the whole thing in a nutshell. There 
is culture and no culture. A person is really 

N 



t?8 THE NEW REPUBLIC 

cultivated when he can taste not only the 
broad flavours of life — gulping its joys and 
sorrows down, either with a vulgar grimace 
of disgust, or an equally vulgar hearty vo- 
racity ; but when with a delicate self-posses- 
sion he appreciates all the subtler taste of 
things, when he discriminates between joy 
and joy, between sorrow and sorrow, between 
love and love, between career and career ; 
discerning in all incidents and emotions their 
beauty, their pathos, their absurdity, or their 
tragedy, as the case may be.' 

' You mean, then,' said Miss Merton, 
' that a man of the highest culture is a sort of 
emotional bon vivant ? ' 

4 That surely is hardly a fair way — ' began 
Laurence. 

1 Excuse me, my dear Laurence,' broke 
in Mr Luke, in his most magnificent of 
manners, ' it is perfectly fair — it is admirably 
fair. Emotional bon vivant ! ' he exclaimed. 
' I thank Miss Merton for teaching me that 
word! for it may remind us all,' Mr. Luke 
continued, drawing out his words slowly, as 
if he liked the taste of them, ' how near our 
view of the matter is to that of a certain 
Galilean peasant — of whom Miss Merton has 
perhaps heard — who described the highest 
culture by just the same metaphor, as a 



BOOK III CHAPTER II. i 79 

hunger and a thirst after righteousness. Our 
notion of it differs only from his, from the 
Zeitgeist having made it somewhat wider.' 

Miss Merton, in her inmost soul, did any- 
thing but return Mr. Luke's compliment, and 
consider his comment on her words as either 
admirably or perfectly fair. However, she 
held her peace. The thoughts of Lady 
Ambrose had been flowing in a slightly dif- 
ferent direction. 

' But what I want to ask,' she said, ' is 
this. I want to know why it is that whenever 
one hears it said, " Oh, So-and-so is a very 
cultivated person," one always expects to find 
him — well, almost half professional as it were, 
or at least able to talk of nothing but music, 
or painting, or books ? I mean, a man who's 
merely a cultivated person doesn't seem ever 
to be quite a man of the world, or to be much 
good in society, except when one wants him 
to talk on his own subjects — I hate people 
myself who have subjects — and then, ten to 
one, he doesn't know when to leave off. Now, 
Mr. Laurence, I see you want to interrupt 
me ; but do let me say my say. A right 
amount of culture is of course delightful, and 
personally, I don't much care for people who 
haven't got it. But too much of it — I'm sure, 
Mr. Laurence, you must agree with me at 

N 2 



i So THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

heart — is a mistake. And that, you know, is 
all I mean about it ; nothing more than 
that.' 

1 Ah,' said Laurence, smiling, ' I think I 
see what it is. You will look on culture as 
some special kind of accomplishment or taste, 
like music ; and you think that in some special 
way it is bound up with books ; and books 
you look upon as something special also, 
beginning and ending with themselves ; and, 
unless I am much mistaken, you think that 
the more books a man has read, the more 
cultivated you may safely call him.' 

' Not all books,' said Lady Ambrose in 
an injured tone. ' Of course I don't mean 
trashy novels, and of course I don't mean 
blue-books, or books of history.' 

' But what I want first of all to impress 
on you,' said Laurence, ' is that whatever its 
relation to books may be, culture is by no 
means a bookish thing, or a thing that ought 
to be less in place at Hurlingham than at 
the South Kensington Museum. Nor is it 
in any sense a hobby, or a special taste, to 
be gratified at the expense of anything else. 
Instead of that, it is the education of all our 
tastes, of all our powers of enjoying life ; and, 
so far from its being a thing for recluses, and 
a substitute for society, it is only when natu- 



BOOK III. CHAPTER 11. ill 

ralised in the best society that it can at all do 
itself justice in expressing itself outwardly, or 
even exist in any completeness inwardly.' 

Lady Ambrose smiled, and looked more 
interested, and began to give Laurence her 
most intelligent attention. 

' Still,' Laurence went on, ' culture and 
books have a good deal to do with one 
another ; and since they are so bound up to- 
gether in your mind, let us try to see at once 
what the relation really is. Let us begin, 
then, with that part of culture which in this 
sense is most bound up with books — most 
bound up because it cannot be got without 
them ; the part of culture, I mean, that comes 
from the knowledge of the past — from a know- 
ledge of history, in short, or parts of history.' 

Lady Ambrose here took Laurence fairly 
aback by the way in which she repeated the 
word ' History ! ' 

' Well, judging from the results I have 
seen,' she said, with an amount of decision in 
her voice that was positively startling, ' I can- 
not say, Mr. Laurence, that I agree with you. 
And I think that on this subject I have a 
right to speak.' 

* What on earth can the woman be mean- 
ing ? ' said Mr. Luke to himself. 

' It is not a fortnight ago,' Lady Ambrose 



iSz THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

went on, ' that I sat at dinner by somebody 
— I won't tell you his name — who had not 
only read heaven knows how much history, 
but had written, I believe, even more than he 
had read. And what do you think this good 
man did during all the early part of dinner ? 
Why, he did nothing but fume, and fret, and 
bluster, so that everyone was made uncom- 
fortable, simply because somebody said that 
King Harold was not quite so excellent a 
character as the late Prince Consort ; and I 
heard him muttering, " What monstrous in- 
justice ! What monstrous ignorance ! " to 
himself for nearly half an hour. I don't think 
I ever saw such a — I was going to say,' said 
Lady Ambrose, laughing softly, ' such a beast 
— but I won't ; I'll say a bear instead. At 
last, however — I don't know how it came 
about — he said to me, in a very solemn voice, 
" What a terrible defeat that was which we 
had at Bouvines ! " I answered timidly — not 
thinking we were at war with anyone — that I 
had seen nothing about it in the papers. 
"H'm!" he said, giving a sort of a grunt 
that made me feel dreadfully ignorant, 
" why, I had an Excursus on it myself in the 
' Archaeological Gazette,' only last week." 
And, do you know, it turned out that the 
Battle of Bouvines was fought in the 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 183 

thirteenth century, and had, as far as I could 
make out, something to do with Magna 
Charta. Now, Mr. Laurence, if that's the 
sort of culture one gets from studying 
history, I'm glad I've forgotten even the 
names of the twelve Caesars, and the dates 
of the kings of England. Besides,' Lady 
Ambrose added, ' it makes one think what 
a serious thing it is to lose a battle, if 
people are to be made so cross about it six 
hundred years afterwards.' 

' I quite agree with you,' said Laurence, 
' that if that's the sort of culture one gets 
from history, we had better never open a 
history book again. But history, Lady 
Ambrose, has very little to do with the 
Battle of Bouvines, and nothing with the 
character of Harold.' 

* Then what has it got to do with ? ' 
asked Lady Ambrose incredulously. ' It 
certainly has to do with kings, and wars, and 
facts, and dates, hasn't it ? ' 

'What people call facts,' said Laurence, 
'are only the dry bones of history. It is 
quite true that most professed historians have 
hitherto, instead of painting the face of the 
past, simply made discrepant notes about 
the shape of its skull : everything that could 
give the shape of the skull the least signifi- 



1 34 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

cance they left unthought of, or dismissed it 
in an occasional chapter. But really the 
least important of all the world's events are 
those that you can localise exactly, and put 
an exact date to ; those which alone most 
historians see.' 

* But,' interposed Miss Merton, ' don't 
you call such things as the events in Caesar's 
life, for instance, or Hildebrand's, history?' 

' Looked on simply as events,' said 
Laurence, ' I call them biography, or I call 
them illustrations of history ; but I do not 
call them history. History, in its true senst*, 
is a travelling in the past ; the best of 
histories would be but the carriage or the 
steamboat you travelled by ; your histories of 
dates and battles are at best but the Brad- 
shaws and the railway-maps. Our past must 
be an extension of the present, or it is no 
real past. Now I expect, Lady Ambrose, 
that, in its true sense, you know a good deal 
more history than you are aware of. I saw 
you reading Saint-Simon yesterday evening, 
and you alluded to Grammont's Memoirs at 
dinner.' 

1 Oh, of course,' said Lady Ambrose, 
1 books like that ! But, then, they really give 
you such a notion of the times, and quite 
take you back to them.' 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 185 

4 Nothing is history that does not,' said 
Laurence. 

' Really,' exclaimed Lady Ambrose, 
brightening. ' " II y a plus de vingt ans que 
je dis de la prose, sans que j'en susse rien." 
And so it seems that I have known history 
without suspecting it, just as M. Jourdain 
talked prose.' 

1 Pardon me,' cried Mr. Saunders, ' if I 
interrupt you for a moment ; but, Mr. 
Laurence, though I admit that there is a 
great deal of truth in what you say, you 
have not even alluded to the great function 
of history, nor have you even hinted at the 
great use of facts. However, perhaps I had 
better reserve what I have to say on this, as 
well as on certain other matters, till by-and- 

by-' 

' Very well,' said Laurence, ' if history, 
then, is a travelling in the past — what else it 
is, as Mr. Saunders says, we can talk of after- 
wards — don't you see what it does for us, Lady 
Ambrose, in the way of culture — does for us, 
not as students, but as men and women of 
the world ? Just think for a moment what 
our own age would seem to us if all the past, 
beyond the memories of our grandfathers, 
was a blank to us ; and then think how 
infinitely our minds are enlarged, how a 



1 86 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

freer air, as it were, seems to blow through 
them, even from that vague knowledge of the 
past afloat in the world, which we pick up 
here and there as we go along. Even that 
has an effect upon us. It prevents us being, 
as we else should be, merely temporal people, 
who are just as narrow-minded and dull as 
those merely local people — the natives of a 
neighbourhood — who wear gorgeous ribands 
at flower-shows in the country. Don't you 
remember last year, when I was staying with 
you, how you pointed some of them out to 
me, and how amused you were at their ways 
and their finery ? ' 

Lady Ambrose smiled and nodded. 

'Go on, Mr. Laurence — I can understand 
all this,' she said. ' But I want to hear a 
little more.' 

'Well,' said Laurence, 'your own know- 
ledge of the history of France and England 
during the last two hundred years — you 
know well enough how that has made you, 
in a certain sense, more a woman of the 
world. What would you be, for instance, if 
you never knew that there had been a 
French Revolution, or an English Revolution 
— a Cromwell, or a Louis Quatorze, or a Mira- 
beau ? But your knowledge of history does 
not end here. You know something, at any 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II 187 

rate, of the feudal times. You know what a 
castle was like, what a knight was like, what a 
monk' was like. You know something, too, 
of Roman and Greek history ; and, come — 
to go no farther — you know the Bible.' 

1 1 hope,' said Lady Ambrose, in a voice 
of reproving solemnity, ' that one would not 
call that history.' 

' Certainly not,' said Mr. Saunders, with 
a small suppressed chuckle. 

1 At all events,' proceeded Laurence, 
ignoring these interruptions, ' you know 
something of Rome, and Greece, and 
Palestine, and Egypt ; and each of these 
names is really a little aerial chariot which 
carries your imagination back as you pro- 
nounce it into some remote age, when life 
was different from what it is now. So is the 
mind widened by even a little vague history. 
Or, just repeat to yourself such words as 
France and Italy, and think for a moment of 
the effect of them. They are not mere names 
— mere geographical expressions ; but they 
are spells which evoke, whether you will or no, 
hosts of subtle associations, rising up like spirits 
out of the past centuries, and hovering in the 
air round you with their unbidden influence, 
and mixing with all your notions of Europe 
as it is now. Or, would you feel the matter 



1 88 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

more strongly yet, think, when you are 
travelling, what but for history would Venice 
be, or Athens, or Jerusalem ? If it were 
not for history, be it never so vaguely 
understood, would you find the same 
indescribable fascination in Rome ? ' 

1 I never was at Rome,' said Lady 
Ambrose. ' We're going there next winter 
with the Kenningtons.' 

This piece of intelligence brought 
Laurence to a stop. Mr. Rose, however, 
whose imagination had been fired by all 
this talk about history, suddenly broke 
forth. 

1 And also,' he exclaimed, ' is it not by 
history alone that we can in our day learn 
anything of the more subtle and gorgeous 
dyes that life is capable of taking — how fair a 
thing it may be, how rich in harmonious 
freedom, and beauty of form, and love, and 
passionate friendship ? Why, but for history, 
what should we be now but a flock of list- 
less barbarians, bveipdroiv dXCyKioi fxop^alcri 
<f>vp6vTes elKrj TT&vTa ? Would not all life's 
choicer and subtler pleasures be lost to us, if 
Athens did not still live to redeem us from 
the bondage of the middle age, and if the 
Italian Renaissance — that strange child of 
Aphrodite and Tannhauser, did not still live 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 1S9 

to stimulate us out of the torpor of the 
present age ? What, but for history, should 
we know,' cried Mr. Rose, ' of the x^/h? of 
Greece, of the lust of Rome, of the strange 
secrets of the Borgias ? Consider, too, the 
bowers of quiet, full of sweet dreams, that 
history will always keep for us — how it 
surrounds the house of the present with the 
boundless gardens of the past — gardens rich in 
woods, and waters, and flowers, and outlooks 
on illimitable seas. Think of the immortal 
dramas which history sets before us ; of the 
keener and profounder passions which it 
shows in action, of the exquisite groups and 
figures it reveals to us, of nobler mould than 
ours — Harmodius and Aristogeiton, Achilles 
and Patroclus, David and Jonathan, our 
English Edward and the fair Piers Gaveston, 
a/*a t a)KVjiopo<; /ecu d'C£vpb<5 trepl Travraiv, or, 
above all, those two by the agnus castus and 
the plane-tree where Ilyssus flowed,' — Mr, 
Rose's voice gradually subsided, — ' and where 
the Attic grasshoppers chirped in shrill 
summer choir.' 

1 At any rate, Lady Ambrose,' Laurence 
resumed briskly, ' you now see something of 
the way in which history gives us culture ; 
and you see, too, — this is the chief point I 
want to impress upon you, — that in history, 



190 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

and many other things as well, books are 
only the telescopes through which we see 
distant facts ; and we no more become book- 
ish by such a use of books than you became 
optical when you looked through your 
telescope in Gloucestershire, and saw Captain 
Audley, at the bottom of the park, proposing 
to your under-keeper's daughter.' 

1 I really do believe,' said Lady Ambrose, 
1 that that man is a little off his head. How- 
ever,' she went on laughing, ' I give up about 
the bookishness, Mr. Laurence, and I dare 
say one really is the better for knowing 
something about history ; but still, I can't 
help thinking that the chief thing to know 
about is, after all, the life about one, and that 
knowledge, just like charity, should begin at 
home.' 

' There,' said Laurence, ' we quite agree ; 
and that, if I managed to express myself 
clearly, was the very thing that I set out with 
saying. It is with the life about us that all our 
concern lies ; and culture's double end is simply 
this — to make us appreciate that life, and to 
make that life worth appreciating. We only 
study the past to adorn our present, or to make 
our view of it clearer. And now, since we have 
at any rate suggested how this is done, let us 
put the past, and the distant too — everything, 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 191 

in fact, to which books are only the telescopes 
— out of our minds altogether, and merely 
consider the real heart of the matter — culture 
and the present. I tried to explain just now 
that we meant by a man of culture one on 
whom none of the finer flavours of life are 
lost — who can appreciate, sympathise with, 
criticise, all the scenes, situations, sayings, or 
actions around him — a sad or happy love- 
affair, a charm of manner and conversation, 
a beautiful sunset, or a social absurdity. I 
declare,' said Laurence, ' I could tell better 
whether a man was really cultivated, from the 
way in which he talked gossip, or told a story, 
than from the way in which he discussed a 
poem or a picture.' 

'Certainly,' said Leslie. 'I don't call a 
woman cultivated who bothers me at dinner 
first with discussing this book and then that 
— whose one perpetual question is, " Have 
you read So-and-so ? " But I call a woman 
cultivated who responds and who knows what 
I mean as we pass naturally from subject 
to subject — who by a flash or a softness in 
her eyes, by a slight gesture of the hand, 
by a sigh, by a flush in the cheek, makes 
me feel as I talk of some lovely scene that 
she too could love it — as I speak of love or 
sorrow, makes me feel that she herself has 



192 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

known them ; as I speak of ambition, ox ennui, 
or hope, or remorse, or loss of character, 
makes me feel that all these are not mere 
names to her, but things.' 

1 Do you call me cultivated, Mr. Leslie ? ' 
whispered Mrs. Sinclair, in a soft paren- 
thesis. 

' I mean,' said Leslie, finishing, • I like to 
hear each key I touch make, not a dead thud, 
as on a piece of wood, but strike a musical 
string - .' 

' Good,' murmured Mr. Rose ; ' that is 
good! Yes,' he continued, 'the aim of culture, 
if Mr. Leslie will lend me his nice metaphor, 
is indeed to make the soul a musical instru- 
ment, which may yield music either to itself 
or to others, at any appulse from without ; 
and the more elaborate a man's culture is, the 
richer and more composite can this music be. 
The minds of some men are like a simple 
pastoral reed. Only single melodies, and 
these unaccompanied, can be played upon 
them — glad or sad ; whilst the minds of 
others, who look at things from countless 
points of view, and realise, as Shakespeare 
did, their composite nature — their minds 
become, as Shakespeare's was, like a great 
orchestra. Or sometimes,' said Mr. Rose 
dreamily, as if his talk was lapsing into a 



BOOK HI. CHAPTER II, m 

soliloquy, 'when he is a mere passive ob- 
server of things, letting impressions from 
without move him as they will, I would 
compare the man of culture to an ^olian 
harp, which the winds at will play through— 
a beautiful face, a rainbow, a ruined temple, 
a death-bed, or a line of poetry, wandering in 
like a breath of air amongst the chords of 
his soul, touching note after note into soft 
music, and at last gently dying away into 
silence.' 

'Well, now,' said Laurence, in a very 
matte.--of-fact tone, for he saw that Mr. Rose's 
dreamy manner always tended to confuse 
Lady Ambrose, ' since we are now clear that 
the aim of culture is to make us better com- 
pany as men and women of the world, let us 
consider a little farther how culture is at- 
tained. We have just spoken of histories 
and other books, which merely bring us face 
to face with facts that would else be out of 
our reach. We now come to two other things 
—the facts of the life about us, the farts 
which experience teaches us, and to which all 
other facts are secondary; and, farther, to 
the way in which all this knowledge— the 
knowledge of the living present especially— is 
(for we have really not talked of this at all 
yet) turned into culture. Mere acquaintance 



o 



194 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

with facts will not do it ; mere experience of 
facts will not do it. A woman, for instance, 
may have had all kinds of experience — 
society, sorrow, love, travel, remorse, distrac- 
tion — and yet she may not be cultivated. She 
may have gone through everything only half 
consciously. She may never have recognised 
what her life has been. What is needed to 
teach her — to turn this raw material into 
culture ? Here, Lady Ambrose, we come 
to our friends the books again — not, however, 
to such books as histories, but to books of art, 
to poetry, and books akin to poetry. The 
former do but enlarge our own common ex- 
perience. The latter are an experience in 
themselves, and an experience that interprets 
all former experiences. The mind, if I may 
borrow an illustration from photography, is a 
sensitised plate, always ready to receive the 
images made by experience on it. Poetry is 
the developing solution, which first makes 
these images visible. Or, to put it in 
another way, if some books are the telescopes 
with which we look at distant facts, poetry — 
I use the word in its widest sense — is a magic 
mirror which shows us the facts about us 
reflected in it as no telescope or microscope 
could show them to us. Let a person of ex- 
perience look into this, and experience then 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 195 

becomes culture. For in that magic mirror 
we see our life surrounded with issues view- 
less to the common eye. We see it com- 
passed about with chariots of fire and with 
horses of fire. Then we know the real 
aspect of our joys and sorrows. We see the 
lineaments, we look into the eyes of thoughts, 
and desires, and associations, which had been 
before unseen and scarcely suspected pre- 
sences — dim swarms clustering around our 
every action. Then how all kinds of objects 
and of feelings begin to cling together in our 
minds ! A single sense or a single memory 
is touched, and a thrill runs through count- 
less others. The smell of autumn woods, the 
colour of dying fern, may turn by a subtle 
transubstantiation into pleasures and faces 
that will never come again — a red sunset and 
a windy sea-shore into a last farewell, and the 
regret of a lifetime.' 

Laurence had chosen these illustrations of 
his quite at random ; but he was fortunate in 
the last in a way which he never dreamt of. 
Lady Ambrose, in her early and unwise days, 
had actually had a love-affair. She had been 
engaged to a handsome young Guardsman, 
with only eleven hundred a year, and no 
prospects but debts ; and though she had 
successfully exchanged him for Sir George 

O 2 



196 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

and his million of money, she still sometimes 
recalled him, and the wild September evening 
when she had seen her last of him upon 
Worthing pier. 

' Ah,' she exclaimed, with some emotion 
in her voice, ' I know exactly what you mean 
now. Why, there have been poems at one time 
or another of one's life, that one could really 
hardly bear to hear repeated. Now, there's 
that of Byron's, " When we two parted." I 
don't even know if it is right to think it a 
good poem — but still, do you know, there 
was a time when, just because it was con- 
nected with something — it almost made me 
cry if anyone repeated or sang it — one of my 
brothers, I know, who had a beautiful voice, 

was always ' Lady Ambrose here grew 

conscious that she was showing more feeling 
than she thought at all becoming. She 
blushed, she stammered a little, and then, 
making a rush at another topic, ' But what is 
Mr. Rose.' she exclaimed, ' saying about the 
Clock-tower and the Thames Embankment V 

' I was merely thinking,' said Mr. Rose, 
who had been murmuring to himself at in- 
tervals for some time, ' of a delicious walk I 
took last week, by the river side, between 
Charing Cross and Westminster. The great 
clock struck the chimes of midnight ; a cool 



BOOK III. CHAPTER If. 197 

wind blew ; and there went streaming on the 
wide wild waters with long vistas of reflected 
lights wavering and quivering in them ; and 
I roamed about for hours, hoping I might see 
some unfortunate cast herself from the 
Bridge of Sighs. It was a night I thought 
well in harmony with despair. Fancy,' ex- 
claimed Mr. Rose, ' the infinity of emotions 
which the sad sudden splash in the dark river 
would awaken in one's mind — and all due to 
that one poem of Hood's ! ' 

1 Yes,' said Laurence, not having listened 
to Mr. Rose, who spoke, indeed, somewhat 
low, ' Yes,' he said, continuing the same train 
of thought he had left off with, and looking 
first at Lady Ambrose and then at Miss 
Merton, ' is it not poetry that does all this 
for the world ? I use poetry in its widest 
sense, and include in it all imaginative litera- 
ture, and other art as well. Is it not the 
poet that gives our existence all its deepest 
colours, or enables us to give them to it our- 
selves ? Is it not — if I may quote a transla- 
tion of Goethe that I made myself — 

Is't not the harmony that from his bosom springs, 
A fid back into itself the ivhole world brings ? 
When Nature round her spindle, cold and strong, 
Winds on and on the endless threads of things ; 
When all existences, a tuneless throng, 
Make discord as with jangling strings, 



193 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Whose life-breath bids the flux of blind creation 

Move to a rhythmic music of his own ? 

Who calls each single thing to the common consecration, 

When rapturously it trembles into tone ? 

Who sets our wild moods and the storms in tune 1 

Our sad moods, and the still eve's crimson glow 1 

Who showers down all the loveliest flowers of June, 

Where she, the heart's beloved, will go ? 

Who, of a few green leaves in silly twine, 

Makes toil's immortal guerdon, art's reward, 

Raises the mortal, draws down the divine f 

The power of man incarnate in the bard. 1 

And so,' Laurence went on, ' if it is to the 
bard that we owe all these fine things, we 
need surely not fear that we shall be thought 
bookish if we say that a society cannot be 
really good that does not as a body draw a 
large amount of its nourishment from the 
bard's work. Of course in one sense poetry 
exists unwritten ; but in the general run of 
people this will never properly awake itself, 
make itself available, but at the spell of 
written poetry. Nay, this is true even of the 
poet himself. Why else does he externalise 
his feelings — give them a body ? As I say, 
however, the general catholic use of poetry 
is not to make us admire the poetry of poems 
but discern the poetry of life. I myself,' 
Laurence went on, ' am devoted to literature 

1 Vide Faust, Prologue for the Theatre 



BOOK III, CHAPTER II. , 99 

as literature, to poetry as poetry. I value it 
not only because it makes me appreciate the 
originals of the things it deals with, but for 
itself. I often like the description of a 
sunset better than I like a sunset ; I don't 
care two straws about Liberty, but my mind 
is often set all aglow by a good ode to her. 
I delight in, I can talk over, I can brood 
over, the form of a stanza, the music of a line, 
the turn of a phrase, the flavour of an 
epithet. Few things give me such pleasure 
for the moment as an apt quotation from 
Horace or Shakespeare. But this, I admit, 
is a hobby — a private hobby — this distinct 
literary taste, just as a taste for blue china is, 
and must certainly not be confused with cul- 
ture in its deeper and wider sense.' 

' Ah,' said Mr. Rose earnestly, 'don't des- 
pise this merely literary culture, as you call 
it, or the pleasure it is to have at command a 
beautiful quotation. As I have been lying 
on the bank here, this afternoon, and looking 
up into the trees, and watching the blue sky, 
glancing between the leaves of them— as I 
have been listening to the hum of the insects, 
or looking out with half-shut eyes towards 
the sea across the green rustling shrubs, and 
the red rose-blossoms, fragments of poetry 
have been murmuring in my memory like a 



200 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

swarm of bees, and have been carrying my 
fancy hither and thither in all manner of 
swift luxurious ways. The " spreading 
favour," for instance, of these trees that we 
sit under, brought just now into my mind 
those magical words of Virgil's — 

O qui me gelidis in vallibus Haemi 
Sistat, et ingenti ramorum protegat umbnt ! 

What a picture there ! What a thrill it sent 
all through me, like a rush of enchanted 
wind ! In another moment the verse that 
goes just before, also came to me — 

Virginibus bacchata Lacaenis 
Taygeta 

and into the delicious scene now around me 
— this beautiful modern garden — mixed in- 
stantly visions of Greek mountains, and 
ragged summits, and choirs of Laconian 
maidens maddened with a divine enthusiasm, 
and with fair white vesture wildly floating. 
Again, another line from the same poem, 
from the same passage, touched my memory, 
and changed, in a moment, the whole com- 
plexion of my feelings — 

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. 

Think of that ! The spirit is whirled 
away in a moment of time, and set amongst 
quite new images, quite other sources of 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 201 

excitement. But again, in an instant, 
the splash of the fountain caught my ear, 
and awoke, I scarcely know how, the 
memory of some lines in one of Petrarch's 

Epistles — 

Soporifero clausam qui murmure vallem 
Implet inexhausto descendens alveus amne — 

and my imagination, on the wings of the 
verses, was borne away floating towards 
Vaucluse. Think, then, within the space of 
five minutes how many thoughts and sensa- 
tions, composite and crowded, can, by the 
agency of mere literature, enrich the mind, 
and make life intenser.' 

' And I — ' said Laurence, smiling, — ' do 
you see that far-away sail out on the horizon 
line ? — well, I caught myself murmuring 
over a scrap of Milton, only two minutes 
ago— 

As when afar at sea a fleet descried 
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial gales 
Close sailing from Bengala. 

Why, I could go on capping verses with you 
the whole afternoon, if we had nothing else 
to do. But besides this, a knowledge of 
books as books has got another use. How 
it enriches conversation, by enabling us to 
talk by hints and allusions, and to convey so 
many more meanings than our actual words 



202 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

express. I came across an exquisite instance 
of this the other day, in a book of anecdotes 
about the poet Rogers, which shows how a 
familiarity with the scenes even of Greek 
poetry may give a brilliance to fashionable 
talk in the nineteenth century. One evening 
at Miss Lydia White's — she was a Tory, 
and well known then in society — a guest who 
was a Whig, said a propos of the depressed 
state of his own party at the time, " There is 
nothing left for us but to sacrifice a Tory 
virgin." " Yes," said Miss Lydia White, " I 
believe there's nothing- the Whip-s wouldn't 
do to raise the wind!' But yet, after all, this 
is not the important thing, and I hope Lady 
Ambrose will forgive us for having talked so 
long about it.' 

'And so one must read a great deal, after 
all, to be really cultivated,' said Lady Ambrose, 
in a disappointed tone. ' You've made culture 
seem so nice, that I feel positively quite 
ashamed to think how seldom now I look at 
a line of poetry, except, of course, when any- 
thing new comes out, that everybody must 
read.' 

* I don't think you need be afraid on that 
score,' said Leslie. ' If society is to be cul- 
tivated, it must, no doubt, read a good deal, 
as a body. But all its members need not 



BOOK III CHAPTER II. 203 

With women especially, nothing startles me 
more than when I find sometimes how very- 
far, if they have had any serious experience 
of the world and life, a very little poetry will 

go-' 

' I expect,' said Miss Merton, ' that we 
are naturally more introspective than men, 
and so, in what concerns ourselves, a very 
little will make us cultivated ; although we 
don't certainly get so easily as men that 
indifferent way of looking on life as a 
whole, which I suppose is what you call the 
dramatic spirit, and which people praise so 
in Shakespeare. But as to what Mr. Leslie 
says, I have so often myself noticed the same 
thing in girls — especially at times when they 
are passing into womanhood, without having 
made much of a success of youth. I re- 
member one poor friend of mine, whose 
frhole life seemed to become clear to her 
through just one line of Tennyson's — 

My life has crept so long on a broken wing. 

I suppose it was a sort of magic mirror to 
her as Mr. Laurence was saying just now.' 

1 I,' said Leslie, 'once knew some one at 
Baden, who spent half her time at the tables, 
as much the observed of all observers as 
Worth and her own strange beauty could 



204 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

make her — she liked being stared at — and 
who was certainly not a woman who gave 
much of her time to reading. She was very 
wretched with her husband, and her name 
was far from being above the reach of gossip. 
Talking one day to her in a hardish flippant 
sort of way — a tone of talk which she 
affected to like — I alluded by some chance 
to Francesca di Rimini in Dante ; and I 
shall never forget the tone in which she 
exclaimed, " Poor Francesca ! " — its passion 
and its pathos. I was surprised that she 
had even looked into Dante : but she had ; 
and that one passage had lit up her whole 
life for her — that one picture of the two 
lovers "going for ever on the accursed air." ' 

' How nice of you, Mr. Leslie,' said Mrs. 
Sinclair, ■ to remember my poor verses! ' 

1 Let us consider, too,' said Laurence, ■ that 
poetry does not only enable us to appreci- 
ate what we have already experienced, but it 
puts us in the way of getting new experi- 
ences. This was Wordsworth's special 
claim for poetry, that it widened our sympa- 
thies — widened them in some new direction 
— that it was ever giving us, in fact, not new 
quotations, but new culture.' 

1 Ah, here,' said Leslie, ' is a thing that 
continually occurs to me. Just consider for 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 205 

a moment the wonderful social effect of even 
so partial a thing as the culture that Words- 
worth himself gave us. Consider the effect 
of it on a common worldly woman — let her 
be girl or matron — who without it would be 
nothing but a half mechanical creature, living, 
as far as her interests went, a wretched hand- 
to-mouth existence of thin distraction, or 
eager anxious scheming - for herself or her 
daughters. Cultivate her, I say, just in this 
one direction — give her but this one fragment 
of culture, a love of Nature— and all the 
mean landscape of her mind will be lit up 
with a sudden beauty, as the beam of ideal 
sunshine breaks across it, with its " light that 
never was on sea or land." I don't say that 
such a woman will become better for this, but 
she will become more interesting. In a girl, 
however pretty, what is there to interest a 
man if he reads nothing in her face from 
night to night but that she is getting daily 
more worn and jaded in the search for a rich 
husband ? Or even, to go a step higher, 
in the unthinking, uncultivated flirt, so 
common in every class of society — what is 
there in her that a man will not soon discover 
to be insipid and wearying ? ' 

' Surely,' remonstrated Mrs. Sinclair plain- 



206 THE NEW REPUBLIC, 

tively, ' that rather depends on what she is 
like. I must stand up for my sex.' 

1 But give her,' Leslie went on, ' one 
genuine, one disinterested taste, and all is 
changed. If I had an audience about me of 
young ladies, whom it was not too late to 
advise — srirls entering on the world, deter- 
mined to run the worldly course, and to 
satisfy all the expectations of the most 
excellent and lowest-minded of chaperons, I 
would say this to them : — I have no doubt 
you are all ignorant ; of course you are all 
vain. That to make a brilliant match is your 
great object, you all avow. A certain sort of 
flirting, of which the less said the better, is 
your most disinterested taste. I know all 
this (I should say), and I can't help it ; nor do 
I ask you to alter one of these points for the 
better. But this I do ask you to do. Try 
to add something else to them. Try to win 
for yourselves one taste of a truer and deeper 
sort. Study Wordsworth, and some parts of 
Shelley ; open out your sympathies, by their 
aid, in just one direction. Learn to love the 
sea, and the woods, and the wild flowers, with 
all their infinite changes of scent, and colour, 
and sound — the purple moor, the brown 
mountain stream, the rolling mists, the wild 
smell of the heather. Let these things grow 



BOOK III. CHAPTER II. 207 

to " haunt you like a passion," learn in this 

way the art of 

desiring 
More in this world than any understand. 

You'll perhaps find it a little dull at first ; but 
go on, and don't be disheartened ; and then 
— by-and-by — by-and-by, go and look in the 
looking-glass, and study your own face. 
Hasn't some new look, child, come into your 
eyes, and given them an expression — a some- 
thing that they wanted before ? Smile. 
Hasn't your smile some strange meaning in it 
that it never used to have ? You are a little 
more melancholy, perhaps. But no matter. 
The melancholy is worth its cost. You are 
now a mystery. Men can't see through you 
at a glance as they did ; and so, as Sterne 
says, " you have their curiosity on your side,'' 
and that alone — even that will have increased 
your value tenfold in our Babylonian 
marriage-market.' 

1 Well, Mr. Leslie,' said Lady Ambrose 
with severe gravity, ' if that's the way you'd 
talk to young ladies, I should be very careful 
you never spoke to any that I had anything 
to do with.' 

' Many people, I know,' Leslie went on, 
passing by the rebuke, ' think that books and 
culture are a kind of substitute for life, and 



2o3 THE NEW REPUBLIC 

that the real masters in the art of living have 
no need for this poor pis-aller. They only 
drive four-in-hand, or shoot, or dance, or 
run away with their friends' wives. But no 
mistake can be greater. Culture is not a 
substitute for life, but the key to it. It is 
really to the men of culture, to the men 
who have read and who have thought, that 
all exercise, all distractions, mental or bodily, 
moral or immoral, yield their finer keener 
pleasures. They are the men that husbands 
dread for their wives, and that fascinating 
people find fascinating.' 

Lady Ambrose much disapproved of the 
tone of this speech ; but none the less, in a 
certain mysterious way, did it insidiously 
increase her appreciation of the alue of 
culture ; and she felt that with Laurence at 
any rate she most thoroughly agreed, when 
he said by way of summing up, 

' And so now I think we see what culture 
is, and the reason why it is essential to good 
society. We see that much as it depends on 
books, life is really the great thing it has to do 
with. It is the passions, the interests, the 
relations, the absurdities of life that it fits us 
to see into, to taste, to discriminate. And I 
think we see, too, that not only is culture 
essential to good society, but g )od society 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IT. 209 

also is essential to culture, and that there was 
therefore very good reason for the exclusive- 
ness we began with. For in the first place 
I expect it requires certain natural advantages 
of position to look at and overlook life in 
that sympathetic and yet self-possessed way, 
which alone can give us a complete view of 
it. And in the next place, the more we dis- 
cern in life, the more social polish shall we 
want to do justice to our discernment ; and 
not polish only, but those far subtler things, 
tone and balance as well. I think it was the 
late Lord Lytton who remarked in one of 
his books, what an offensive thing gaiety was 
sure to be in any woman except one of the 
most perfect breeding. So too with humour 
— the greater sense of humour a well-bred 
man has, the more delightful he is ; the 
greater sense of humour a vulgar man has, 
the more intolerable he is.' 

The measure of Lady Ambrose's assent 
was now almost complete. It remained, 
however, for Mrs. Sinclair to give the finish- 
ing touch. 

4 1 remember,' she said softly and regret- 
fully, ' a friend of mine — he was killed 
afterwards, poor man, in a duel near Dresden 
— who once, when he was down for some 
weeks in the country fishing, fell desperately 

p 



210 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

in love with a certain rector's daughter, 
who sang, and painted, and read German, and 
had a beautiful figure as well. The mother 
at once saw what was in the wind, and asked 
him directly to come and lunch at the 
rectory. And there three things happened. 
First, the mother began telling him what very 
superior society there was in the neighbouring 
local town ; " In fact, its tone," she said, " is 
almost like that of a cathedral town." Then 
the lovely daughter asked him if he was 
partial to boiled chicken ; and then, a little 
later on — it was this that quite finished him, 
for the two first shocks he said he might have 
got over — in answer to some little common 
joke or other that he made, she told him, 
with a sort of arch smile — what do you 
think ? why, that he was saucy! 

1 I confess,' said Miss Merton, laughing, 
'that it would take a very great deal of charm 
of some sort to make one get over that. At 
any rate, it's a comfort to think that the 
young ladies in our new Republic won't call 
their admirers " saucy." ' 

' Well,' said Laurence, ' and so we have 
£Ot thus far — we have made our ideal 
society as highly bred, as highly educated, 
as polished, as sparkling, as graceful, as 

\ 

\ 



BOOK TIT. CHAPTER IT. an 

easy, as dignified, as we can possibly imagine/ 
it. And now, what next ? ' 

There was a moment's pause. 

1 What I should want in a Utopia,' Allen 
broke in abruptly, ' would be something 
definite for the people to do, each in his own 
walk of life. What I should want would be 
some honest, definite, straightforward, re- 
ligious belief that we might all live by, and 
that would connect what we did and went 
through here with something more important 
elsewhere. Without this, to start with,' he 
said, half sadly and half coldly, ' all life seems 
to me a mockery.' 

' And are you quite sure,' said Laurence, 
with a slight sigh, 'that it is not a mockery ?' 

Mr. Luke here saw an opening for which 
he had long been waiting. 



r» 



3i i THE NEW REPUBLIC, 




CHAPTER III. 

»Y dear Laurence,' Mr. Luke began, 
1 of course human life is a 
mockery, if you leave out the one 
thing in it that is of real impor- 
tance. And it is because you have done this, 
that Lord Allen thinks that culture is so little 
worth caring for, though I doubt, by the 
way, if he expressed quite accurately what 
I conclude him to have meant.' ' However,' 
said Mr. Luke, clearing his throat, and 
looking round at the general company, ' what 
was said about culture just now was perfectly 
right — perfectly right, and really capitally 
illustrated — as far as it went. The only fault 
was that, as I say, the most important point 
in the matter was entirely left out. It is 
quite true that culture is, as Mr. Laurence 
observed so happily, the sensitising of the 
mental palate — the making it a good taster. 
But a taster of what ? Not only of social 
absurdities, or love affairs, or beautiful 
scenery, but of morality, of righteousness, 
of Christianity. The really profound work 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III 213 

of culture is to make us judges of these 
—judges able to tell in an instant real 
righteousness and real Christianity from 
pseudo-righteousness and pseudo-Christianity, 
so that we may swallow the true like the 
healing water of life, and reject the false like 
a sample of bad claret — that we may have, 
in fact, just the same horror of any doctrine 
or dogma that is contrary to sweet reason 
(such, for instance,' he said confidentially to 
Lady Grace, ' as that of eternal punishment) 
that we have for young ladies who call their 
friends "saucy," or for young ladies' mothers 
who look on a bishop's palace as a focus 
of the most polite society. So I think, if 
you only all recognise this, that culture 
includes — in fact, essentially is — the discern- 
ment of true righteousness, of true morality, 
you need none of you fear that to a really 
cultivated society life will be in any danger 
of becoming a mockery.' 

' I was sorry,' said Miss Merton in a low 
tone to Laurence, ' to hear you say that just 
now, because I know you don't mean it.' 

Laurence, who had been sitting a little 
above her on the bank, moved quietly down, 
and placed himself at her side. 

' You make me feel ashamed of myself,' 
he said to her, ' when you speak like this.' 



XH THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

There was something in his manner 
which a little embarrassed Miss Merton. 
She looked down, and said nothing for a 
moment ; and then, not having quite com- 
mand of her voice, she answered him in a 
tone rather louder than she intended. 

'Well,' she said, 'and don't you think 
that some definite faith or other is needed by 
the world ? ' 

1 Yes, / think so ; / think so. I entirely 
agree with Miss Merton,' exclaimed some- 
body. But it was not Laurence. To the 
surprise of everyone, it was Mr. Saunders. 
All eyes were turned on him. 

'Will you allow me,' he said, looking 
round him with a nervous eagerness, as 
though doubtful if he should gain a hearing, 
' will you allow me to make a few observa- 
tions here — it will only take a moment — to 
remind you of just a few things which I think 
ought not to be lost sight of? Well,' Mr. 
Saunders went on, as he seemed to have 
secured the ear of the house, ' in the first 
place as to history, just one word. The main 
use of history, which Mr. Laurence forgot 
altogether to mention, is of course, as Comte 
has so well established, to teach us his philo- 
sophy of it — to show us, in other words, how 
entirely non compos mentis the world was till 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. 215 

our time, and that it is only in the present 
century that it has acquired the power of 
passing a reasonable judgment. And next, 
as to facts ; mere facts, as facts, I think quite 
as useless as Mr. Laurence does, except for 
one reason. And that reason is the way in 
which from every side they confute, give the 
lie to, annihilate, the pretensions of revealed 
religion, and of the myths which it calls its 
history. This, however, by the way. It was 
not the chief thing that I wanted to say to 
you. Now, you all,' Mr. Saunders went on, 
holding up his forefinger and addressing the 
company, ' propose to form a picture of what 
the world ought to be — what I suppose you 
hope it will be; and you say, and very 
rightly, that the great secret is that it should 
appreciate properly the pleasures of human 
life. But, please mark this, you have quite 
ignored the most important thing of all — the 
vast change that all these pleasures are 
undergoing, that the whole aspect of life is 
undergoing, beneath the touch of modern 
thought and modern philosophy ; nay — and 
this indeed is the special point I want to lay 
stress upon — Mr. Luke just now even used 
those obsolete and misleading words, righte- 
ousness and morality, soiled by so many 
unworthy associations. By the way,' he 



ii6 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

exclaimed, stopping suddenly and looking 
round him, ' I suppose I may speak the truth 
freely, as I know well enough that all to 
whom my vaticinations would be unwelcome 
are sure to mistake me for a Cassandra.' 

1 Mistake him for a what ? ' said Lady 
Ambrose, in a loud undertone. 

1 She was a beautiful young unfortunate,' 
whispered Mrs. Sinclair confidentially, ' who 
was betrayed by the god Apollo.' 

Mr. Saunders was conscious he had 
raised a smile. He considered it a full 
licence to proceed. 

' Well,' he said, ' as Miss Merton re- 
marked a moment ago, some definite faith is 
needed by the world ; and, as I now delibe- 
rately declare, some definite faith it will have 
— some one definite faith that will tolerate 
no dissent from it ; and it will have this be- 
fore fifty years are over.' 

Everyone stared at Mr. Saunders, every- 
one except Mr. Luke, who simply smiled at 
the sky, and said, with an air of suppressed 
pleasantry, ' I had imagined that our young 
friend's motto vtzs freedom! 

Mr. Saunders was nettled at this beyond 
description. With a vindictive quickness he 
fixed his eyes upon Mr. Luke. 

4 Sight is free,' he said, uttering his words 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. 217 

very slowly, as if each one were a dagger in 
itself, and could give Mr. Luke a separate 
smart ; ' sight is free,' he said, ' and yet the 
sight of all healthy men, I conceive, is in 
agreement. It differs, I admit, when our 
eyes are dim with tears of hysterical feel- 
ing ; or when we are drunk ; or when we 
are fighting — in this last case, Mr. Luke, I 
am told we are often visited with illumina- 
tions of a truly celestial radiance — but it is 
surely not such exceptional vision as this 
that you praise as free. And it is just the 
same,' said Mr. Saunders triumphantly, 'with 
the mind. The minds of men will never 
have been so free as on that not-distant day 
when they shall all agree. And what will 
that agreement result in ? Why, in the utter 
banishment, the utter destruction — I know 
no word strong enough to express my mean- 
ing — of all mystery and of all mysticism, 
and consequently of that supposed inscrut- 
able difference between ri^ht and wrono- 
which has been made, in the hands of the 
priests, one of the most hideous engines of 
terror that were ever employed to degrade and 
crush mankind. Right and wrong, indeed ! 
Righteousness and morality ! There is 
something insidious in their very sound. 
No — "useful," "healthful," "serviceable," 



2i8 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

" pleasant " — these will be the words of the 
future. Emancipated man will know no 
wrong, save unhealthiness and unpleasant- 
ness. That most treacherous handmaid of 
priestcraft, poetry, which, professing to 
heighten the lights of life, did, in reality, 
only deepen its shadows, will delude him no 
longer — she will be gone — gone for ever. 
Science, the liberator of humanity, will have 
cast its light upon her ; and the lying vision 
will vanish. But why do I talk of poetry ? 
Is not that, and every other evil — reverence, 
faith, mysticism, humility, and all the unclean 
company — comprised in this one word, 
Religion ? Well, let religion — the ancien 
regime of the world — retire, as it has done, 
to its Versailles, and fence itself round for 
a little with its mercenary soldiers ! The 
Paris of the world is, at any rate, left free — 
and there the Revolution of Humanity is 
begun. Science leads it, and in another 
fifty years there will not be another religion 
left. Surely most here must know this,' 
continued Mr. Saunders, 'although they may 
perhaps forget it sometimes. But the fact 
is notorious, and I really think ' 

'Sir!' 

Where did that sudden, solemn exclama- 
tion come from — that single syllable at which 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. 2i<j 

the music of Mr. Saunders's voice, 'like a 
fountain's sickening pulse,' retired in a 
moment. Who had spoken ? The sound 
surprised everybody. It was Mr. Stockton 
■ — Mr. Stockton, with a face all aglow with 
feeling, beneath his picturesque wide-awake 
hat, and holding in his hand a white pocket- 
handkerchief bordered with pale blue. 

1 Perhaps,' he continued, looking slowly 
round him, 'I, as a man of science, who 
have been a patient apprentice at my work 
for six-and-twenty years, may be allowed to 
give some opinion on this matter. Destroy 
religion ! Destroy poetry ! ' he exclaimed, 
in his rich, bell-like voice, that was now 
resonant with an indignant melancholy. 
1 Will science destroy either of these 
precious and exquisite heritages of the 
human race ? Will it extinguish one pro- 
found, one ennobling, one devout feeling ? 
Will it blight that rich culture on which the 
present age so justly prides itself? I have 
followed science for six-and-twenty years, 
I speak therefore from experience ; and I 
boldly answer " No." How indeed should 
it ? I know, I deplore, and I trust also 
forgive, the common notion that it does. 
But how can that notion have arisen ? 
That is what puzzles me. Is not science 



220 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

essentially religious, essentially poetical — nay, 
does it not deepen quite boundlessly the 
religion and poetry already existing in the 
world, and fuse the two together, as they 
were never fused before ? Does it narrow 
our notions of life's wonder and dignity to 
peer into the abyss of being, and learn 
something of the marvellous laws of things — • 
to discover the same mysterious Something 
in a snow-flake, in the scent of a rose, in the 
" topmost star of unascended heaven," and 
in some prayer or aspiration in the soul of 
man ? True it is that this wondrous All is 
Matter, and that all matter is atoms in its 
last analysis. No idle metaphysics have 
clouded my brain, so I have been able to see 
these things clearly ' 

1 Yes, yes, yes,' cried Mr. Saunders, 
recovering himself, his voice tremulous with 
excitement, ' I know all that. I know that in 
their last analysis a pig and a martyr, a prayer 
and a beef-steak, are just the same — atoms 
and atomic movement. We, the younger 
generation of thinkers, accept all the premisses 
you give us without a moment's question. 
AVe only reason boldly and honestly on them, 
and I defy you to prove — Mr. Stockton, sir, 
if you will only listen to me ' 

But there was little chance of that. 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. 221 

Interrupted only for a moment, and whilst 
Mr. Saunders was yet speaking, Mr. Stock- 
ton's eloquence swept on. 

' Consider ourselves,' he said, ' consider 
the race of men, and note the truly celestial 
light that science throws on that. We have 
ascended,' said Mr. Stockton; 'noble thought ! 
We have not descended. We are rising 
towards heaven, we have not fallen from it. 
Yes — we, with attributes so like an angel's, 
with understanding so like a God's — to this 
height we have already risen. Who knows 
what future may not be in store for us ? 
And then, on the other hand, when the awe- 
struck eye gazes, guided by science, through 
the " dark backward and abysm of time," and 
sees that all that is has unfolded itself, un- 
moved and unbidden, (astounding thought !) 
from a brainless, senseless, lifeless gas — the 
cosmic vapour, as we call it — and that it may, 
for aught we know, one day return to it — I 
say, when we realise, when we truly make 
our own, this stupendous truth, must not 
our feelings,' said Mr. Stockton, letting his 
eyes rest on Miss Merton's with an appealing 
melancholy — ' our feelings at such moments 
be religious ? Are they not Religion ?' 

* But,' said Miss Merton, ' there is nothing 



222 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

religious in a gas. I don't see how anything 
religious can come out of it.' 

' Perfectly right ! ' chuckled Mr. Saunders, 
faintly clapping his hands. ' Nothing can 
come out of the sack but what's in it. Miss 
Merton's perfectly right.' 

• Ah, Miss Merton,' Mr. Stockton con- 
tinued, ' don't be frightened by the mere 
sound of the word matter. For who knows 
what matter is ' — (' Then, why talk about 
it?' shrilled Mr. Saunders, unheeded) — 'that 
great Alpha and Omega of the Universe ? ' 
Mr. Stockton went on. ' And don't wrong 
me by thinking that I " palter with you in a 
double sense," and that I am not using the 
word religion in its truest, its profoundest 
signification. Do you think, Miss Merton, 
for instance, that I cannot feel with you, 
when, stirred to your inmost soul by some 
strain of Mozart or Beethoven, you kneel 
before your sacrificial altar, whilst the 
acolyte exalts the Host, and murmur with 
bowed head your litany to your beautiful 
Virgin ? I say advisedly, Miss Merton, 
that I, as a man of science, can appreciate, 
and to a great extent share, your adoring — 
your adorable frame of mind.' 

Mr. Stockton paused. His acquaintance 
with Catholic ritual, and the fact of thus find- 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. 223 

ing herself elected, without any merit of her 
own, as the special object of so great a man's 
eloquence, produced in Miss Merton an un- 
fortunate sense of absurdity, and in another 
moment she was conscious of nothing but a 
most inappropriate desire to laugh. She 
compromised with her facial muscles, how- 
ever, and only gave a smile, which she trusted 
would pass muster as one of grave enquiry. 
Mr. Stockton thought that it was so, and 
went on ; but, unknown to himself, he felt all 
the while that it was not so, and his enthusi- 
asm, he could not tell why, became somewhat 
more polemical. 

1 Does science, then,' he proceeded, ' rob 
us of one iota of religious feeling, or de- 
grade our notions of life's measureless 
solemnity ? Nay, it is rather the flippant 
conceptions of theology that would do that, 
by connecting everything with an eternal 
Personality — a personality so degraded as to 
have some connection with ourselves. The 
prayer of the theologian, " cabined, cribbed, 
confined " in spoken words, is directed to a 
Being that Science can make no room for, 
and would not want, if she could. The 
prayer of the man of science, for the most 
part of the silent sort, is directed whither ? 
demands what ? He is silent if you ask 



224 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

him, for his answer would be beyond the 
reach of words. Even to hint at its nature 
he would feel were a profanity.' 

1 Do you know, Mr. Stockton,' said Miss 
Merton, this time with a polite meekness, 
' all this rather bewilders me.' 

1 And so it does me,' said Mr. Stockton, 
much pleased with Miss Merton's manner ; 
'and this august bewilderment, which gives 
fulness and tone to our existence, but which 
we can neither analyse nor comprehend — to 
me comes in one shape, to you in another, and 
is — religion. In the name, then, of all genuine 
science, and of all serious scientific men, let 
man keep, I say,' said Mr. Stockton, looking 
round him, ' this precious and ennobling 
heritage — let him keep it and shape it ever 
anew, to meet his ever-changing and deepen- 
ing needs. In my dream of the future I see 
religions not diminished, but multiplied, 
growing more and more richly diverse, as 
they sink deeper into individual souls. 
Surely, science, then, is not come to destroy 
the past, but to fulfil it — and I confess I can 
myself see no better way of discovering what 
we desire in the future than by the charming 
analysis Mr. Laurence has been giving us of 
what we most admire in the present.' 

1 See,' said Donald Gordon softly, ' here 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. *>5 

is science on the one side offering us all re- 
ligions, and on the other none.' 

' Heigho ! ' sighed Mr. Luke, very loud ; 
* let us agree about conduct first, and quarrel 
about theology afterwards.' 

' Precisely,' resumed Mr. Stockton, to 
Mr. Luke's extreme annoyance — Mr. Luke 
himself having still much to say, and consi- 
dering that Mr. Stockton did but darken 
counsel by interrupting him — ' Mr. Luke is 
perfectly right' (' I should like to know how 
you know that,' thought Mr. Luke.) ' Let us 
agree about conduct — morality, by-the-by, is 
the plainer word — that is the great thing. 
Let us agree about the noble and the beauti- 
ful. Let us agree heroically to -follow truth 
— ay, truth ; let us follow that, I say, picking 
our way step by step, and not look where we 
are going. Let us follow — what can I add 
to this ? — the incomparable life of the great 
Founder of Christianity. Yes, Miss Merton, 
entertaining the views that I do, I say the 
incomparable life. Such is the message of 
science to the world ; such is the instinct of 
culture when enriched and quickened by 
science.' 

This was literally taking the bread out of 
Mr. Luke's mouth. Not only was it repeat- 
ing what he had said before, but it was anti- 

Q 



226 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

cipating, in a formless undisciplined way, the 
very thing that he was going to say again. 
And the man who had robbed him thus was 
a mere Philistine — a mere man of science, 
who was without even a smattering of Greek 
or Hebrew, and who thought sensori-motor 
nerves and spontaneous generation more im- 
portant subjects than Marcion's Gospel or 
the Psalms of David. For once in his life 
Mr. Luke was for tire moment completely 
silenced. Laurence however somewhat 
soothed him, by replying to him, not to Mr. 
Stockton, 

1 Yes, I believe I was wrong after all ; 
and that true culture will really prevent us 
from looking on life as a mere mockery.' 

Mr. Luke was going to have answered ; 
but, worse even than Mr. Stockton's, Mr. 
Saunders's hated accents now got the start 
of him. 

' One word more,' Mr. Saunders ex- 
claimed, ' one plain word if you will allow 
me. All this talk about Religion, Poetry, 
Morality, implies this — or it implies nothing 
— the recognition of some elements of inscrut- 
able mystery in our lives and conduct ; and 
to every mystery, to all mystery, science is 
the sworn, the deadly foe. What she is 
daily more and more branding into man's con- 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. 227 

sciousness is, that nothing is inscrutable that 
can practically concern man. Use, pleasure, 
self-preservation — on these everything de- 
pends ; on these rocks of ages are all rules of 
conduct founded : and now that we have dug 
down to these foundations, what an entirely 
changed fabric of life shall we build upon 
them. Right and wrong, I again say, are 
entirely misleading terms ; and the supersti- 
tion that sees an unfathomable gulf yawning 
between them is the great bar to all healthful 
progress.' 

' And I say, on the contrary/ said 
Laurence, replying very suavely to Mr. 
Saunders's vehemence, ' that it is on the 
recognition of this mysterious and unfathom- 
able gulf that the whole of the higher plea- 
sures of life depend — and the higher vicious 
pleasures as much as, if not more than, the 
virtuous.' 

Lady Ambrose started at this. 

1 / am not vicious,' said Mr. Saunders 
snappishly. ' When I call pleasure the one 
criterion of action, I am thinking of very 
different pleasures from what you think I 
mean.' 

' What is Mr. Saunders's notion of the 
most passionate pleasure ?' said Mrs. Sinclair 
bewitchingly. 

Qa 



228 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

* I agree with my great forerunner Hobbes/ 
said Mr. Saunders, 'that the strongest of all 
pleasures are those arising from the gratifica- 
tion of curiosity ; and he is the real ethical 
philosopher who subordinates all other appe- 
tites to this, like Bacon, who lost his life 
through pursuing a scientific experiment, or' 
— he said pausing to think of another ex- 
ample — 

' Like Bluebeard's wives ? ' enquired Mrs. 
Sinclair naively. ' I'm afraid I never give 
my husband his highest pleasure ; for I never 
let him,' she added in a regretful whisper, 
' open my letters, although I read all his. 
But, Mr. Saunders,' she said, ■ if you are so 
fond of curiosity, you must have some 
mystery to excite it.' 

1 Yes,' said Mr. Saunders, ' but mystery is 
a fox for us to hunt and shoot ; not a God to 
hunt and shoot us.' 

' Fancy,' exclaimed Lady Ambrose in 
horror, ' shooting a fox ! what sacrilege ! ' 

This remark, so entirely spontaneous, and 
so entirely unexpected, produced a general 
laugh, in which all joined but Mr. Saunders 
himself, and Mr. Herbert. 

' Well,' said Laurence at length, when the 
chorus had subsided, ' may I read a certain 
letter of my uncle's to myself, which is 



BOOK III. CHAPTER III. 229 

printed in this very book I have here ? It 
was running in my mind just now, and is 
about the very matter we were speaking of — 
the connection of religions, of Christian 
morality, with all the higher pleasures of life.' 

' Very good,' said Mr. Saunders. ' Read 
what you please. I can only say that I have 
at this moment in my portmanteau an 
analysis I have made of all the Christian 
moral sentiments, in which I trace every one 
of them to such disgusting or paltry origins 
as shall at once rob them of all their pestilent 
prestige. I begin with the main root, the 
great first parent of all these evils, the con- 
ception of God, which I show may have 
arisen in seventy-three different ways, each 
one more commonplace than the other. By- 
and-by, if you will not fear to confront the 
document, I will show it to you.' 

Mr. Luke meanwhile had seen his way to 
bringing Mr. Stockton's true ignorance home 
to him, and had been regretting to him, in 
tones of insidious confidence, that hardly 
enough stress had been laid just now on the 
necessity of really wide reading — ' an inti- 
macy,' said Mr. Luke, ' with the great litera- 
tures of the world — a knowledge and com- 
parison of the best things that have been said 
and thought, in all the various ages, on the 



230 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

great questions of life, without which,' he 
added, ' as you and I know, that discrimina- 
tion between right and wrong that we were 
speaking of just now, can never be anything 
more than a make-believe.' Nor did Mr. 
Luke seem at all aware, as he was thus pro- 
ceeding, that Laurence had found his place, 
and had already begun to read, as follows : 

1 As I grow old, my dear Otho, I am 
coming to think over many things that I have 
hitherto thought too little about, and, amongst 
others, the great mystery of Christia7iity! 

At this point, however, Laurence and Mr. 
Luke were both interrupted by an entirely 
unforeseen event. 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV, *n 




CHAPTER IV. 

[AURENCE had just got to the end 
of the first sentence, and Mr. Luke 
at the same time was just reminding 
Mr. Stockton with some unction 
how impossible it was for us to value properly 
that curious mixture of trumpery and elevation, 
the 'Apocalypse' of John, unless we compared 
it with a very kindred work, the ' Pastor ' of 
Hermas, when a servant startled Laurence 
by announcing in his ear the arrival of the 
vicar of the parish. 

Everyone in dismay looked ; and there, 
standing a pace away in the background, the 
stranger was. He was an old man, very 
tall and spare, with an ascetic aspect, but 
with a carriage dignified though slightly 
stooping, and with severe, piercing eyes. 
The sudden embarrassment, however, which 
his apparition seemed to cause the party was 
relieved somewhat by Laurence's taking him 
aside as if for some private conversation, and 
also by another arrival of a far more genial 



J3* THE NEW REPUBLIC 

nature — that of servants with tea, piles of 
strawberries, iced coffee, and champagne cup. 
Mr. Rose at once bought himself golden 
opinions of Lady Grace by helping her page, 
a pretty boy with light curling hair, to arrange 
some tumblers on the grass. Mr. Stockton 
felt his spirits suddenly rise, and began 
asking Lady Violet what she thought of their 
new Republic as far as they had got with 
it. 

' I don't know,' she answered petulantly. 
' As far as I can see, you want everyone to 
read a great many books and to have only 
one opinion. For my part, I hate people 
who do the one, and a society that does the 
other.' 

' What a charming girl Lady Violet is ! ' 
said Mr. Stockton to Lady Grace, as he 
stood by the tea table. ' Such penetration ! 
such vivacity ! such originality ! ' 

1 What beautiful sermons he does preach, 
to be sure ! ' murmured Lady Ambrose. 

1 Who ? Who ? ' enquired several voices. 

'Why, Dr. Seydon,' said Lady Ambrose. 
* Don't you know him ? Have you never 
heard him in London — the gentleman with 
Mr. Laurence ? See, he is coming back again 
to have some tea.' 

It was indeed but too true. Mr. Luke's 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 233 

face in especial grew very blank. Mr. 
Saunders clenched his fist — a small one. 

Dr. Seydon's face, on the contrary, wore 
what for it was a really gracious smile. He 
was mindful of how upon his arrival he had 
overheard the words ' Apocalypse ' and 
1 mystery of Christianity.' 

As Laurence introduced him into the 
circle Lady Ambrose at once claimed ac- 
quaintance with him, and made room for him 
at her side. 

« I am sorry,' he said, looking round him 
with a singularly dignified, almost con- 
descending courteousness, ' to disturb in this 
way your Sunday's reading. But I can but 
stay a few moments. I shall not interrupt 
you long.' 

1 We have been talking a good deal,' said 
Laurence, ■ about the signs of the times.' 

1 And,' said Lady Ambrose eagerly, feel- 
ing herself near a friend, 'about all this 
wicked infidelity and irreligion that is so much 
about in the world now.' 

'Ah, yes,' said Dr. Seydon slowly, and 
with a sudden frown, 'it is true, unhappily, 
that there is, or has been, much of that in our 
century. But what remains is confined, I 
imagine (and that is sad enough, God knows) 
to the half educated artisans in our large 



»34 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

towns, whom the Church in former years, 
alas ! relaxed her hold on. For I fear I 
cannot deny that we, in this matter, are not 
wholly guiltless. The Church, we may 
depend upon it, has much to answer for.' 

1 Perfectly true, my dear sir ! perfectly 
true,' exclaimed Mr. Luke, who could never 
resist assenting to this sentiment. 

Dr. Seydon darted a quick glance at Mr. 
Luke, as if he were anything but pleased at 
finding himself so readily agreed with. 

1 But,' he went on, ' matters are fast as- 
suming a more satisfactory appearance ; and 
the great advance made in true education, 
and the liberal spirit that this brings with it, 
cannot fail to lead to that great change in 
our position that we so much desiderate.' 

1 Quite so,' said Mr. Luke. ' The true 
reading of ecclesiastical history ' 

1 Ah ! ' exclaimed Dr. Seydon, holding up 
his forefinger, ' exactly so. You have hit 
upon the right thing there.' (' Good gracious ! ' 
thought Mr. Luke, astounded at this patron- 
ising compliment, ' I should think I had.') 
' Could we but get both the parties,' Dr. 
Seydon went on, addressing Mr. Luke across 
Lady Ambrose, 'to understand fairly the 
history of the important era, the matter 
would, I think, be as good as settled. You 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 235 

see/ he said, turning to Lady Ambrose, ' if 
the Easterns will merely face steadily the 
pregnant fact that Michael Cerularius, in his 
first letter to Leo IX., in 1053, took abso- 
lutely no exception to any one point in 
Western doctrine, but simply to certain se- 
condary points of discipline, they will see that 
the gulf that separates us is very slight when 
viewed by the clearer light of modern 
thought. I think,' he added, 'that I saw 
Lady Ambrose's name amongst the sub- 
scribers to the Eastern Church Union Asso- 
ciation.' 

' Oh yes,' said Lady Ambrose, ' certainly. ' 
I do so wish that some union could be 
brought about. For the Greek Church, you 
know, certainly have the Apostolical Suc- 
cession ; and then, if we were only joined with! 
them, the Roman Catholics could never deny! 
our orders— not,' she added, with a most! 
cordial smile to Dr. Seydon, 'that I don't 
myself believe implicitly in them, as it is.' 

A rapid frown gathered itself on Dr. 
Seydon's brow. 

1 The denial of them,' he said severely, 
' hurts the Romanists far more than it does 
us. As to the Greeks, what I was going to 
say was this. Let them just cast their eyes 
back so far as the tenth century, and they 



*36 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

will see — and pray mark this, all of you,' he 
said, holding up his forefinger, and shaking it 
several times, ' for this is very important — I 
say the Greeks will see, unless they are de- 
termined to close their eyes, that at the time 
of the great rupture with the West, they did 
actually acknowledge the entire soundness of 
our confession of faith ; the main point they 
objected to, and which they thought fit 
ground then for separation, being that the 
Western Church did not sing Alleluiah in 
Lent, and that it used in the Lord's Supper 
unleavened bread, which, Nicetas Pectoratus 
contended in an elaborate treatise, was dead 
bread, and could not therefore be either 
supersubstantial or consubstantial to us. It 
has been the fault of the Easterns, in fact, to be 
ever over-subtle, and to fall into those excesses 
of human wisdom which are foolishness with 
God. Isaac the Armenian, for instance, 
wrote a book to prove his countrymen in 
heresy for twenty-nine different reasons, of 
which the two most important are these — 
that they did not blow on baptised persons, 
and that they made their consecrated oils of 
rapeseed and not of olives. But two causes 
seem to me to be now working together, 
under God, to put the Easterns into a more 
becoming spirit, and to make them more 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 237 

heartily willing to join us. These are — I 
have mentioned them in the third volume 
of my "History of the Filioque Clause" — 
first, that the genuine Greek blood is be- 
coming daily more adulterated, and the Greek 
intellect losing therefore its old subtlety ; and 
secondly, that the political disturbance that 
now seems imminent in the East, will distract 
them from abusing such subtlety as they 
still possess. We shall therefore meet on 
the broad ground of our fundamental agree- 
ments ; and once let the moral influence of 
the two churches, the Greek and English, be 
mutually augmented by an open union, in 
another five years, I imagine, we shall have 
heard the last of infidelity, in England at 
least, or indeed of Romanism either.' 

* Now, that's the sort of man,' said Lady 
Ambrose, as soon as Dr. Seydon had 
departed, ■ that I should like to have for my 
clergyman in our new Republic' 

1 Seydon ! ' exclaimed Mr. Luke, ' so that 
is he, is it ? I thought I remembered that 
face of his. Of course — I remember now, 
seeing that his college had given this living 
to him.' 

' It was he,' said Laurence to Miss 
Merton, 'who, some years ago, prevented 
Dr. Jenkinson being made a bishop, which 



«38 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

he said, though it might be a compliment 
to learning, would be a grievous insult to 
God.' 

'And so, Lady Ambrose,' said Mr. 
Stockton, ' you would like Dr. Seydon for a 
clergyman ! Well, in our ideal society you 
would be able to have any clergyman you 
chose — any religion you chose — any which 
most satisfied your own conscience.' 

1 Oh, very well,' said Lady Ambrose, ' if 
it would not interfere with one's religion in 
any way, I think all this culture and en- 
lightenment most delightful.' 

! It will bind us to nothing,' said Mr. 
Stockton, ■ except to a recognition of noble- 
ness, of morality, of poetry. What Mr. 
Laurence has offered to read to us is an 
account of how all of these are bound up in 
religion in my sense of the word.' 

' Come, Mr. Laurence,' said Lady Am- 
brose, 'please go on. It is wonderful,' she 
added in a solemn whisper, ' how even bad 
men, like old Mr. Laurence, know at heart 
how it is really best to be good, and to 
believe in true religion.' 

1 As I grow old, my dear Otho,' Laurence 
again began to read, '/ am coming to think 
over many things that I have hitherto thought 
too little about, and, amongst others, tlie great 



BOOK III. CHAPTER TV. 239 

mystery of Christianity. I am coming to 
see tliat, from a too superficial way of looki?ig 
at it, I have done this religion a gross in- 
justice, and have blindly failed to recognise 
how much of all t/iat we hold most precious 
in life is dependent on its severe and u?ibend- 
ing systems of theology and morals. It will 
perhaps strike yoti that it is rather late in 
the day for me to pay my tribute to these, 
now that the world at large is theoretically 
denying the former of them, and is practically 
forgetting the latter. But it is this very fact 
that induces me to speak out — the growing 
licence and the growing scepticism of modem 
society. I wish to raise my voice against the 
present state of things, and to warn the world 
that if it goes on much longer as it is going 
on now, it will soon have irrefnediably rtii?ied 
all the finer and more piquant flavours of life, 
and that soon there will be actually nothing 
left to give rational zest to this poor pitiful 
existence of ours. 

* You know what an admirer I have 
always been, in many ways, of the ancients, 
and how, in many ways, I think modern 
civilisation barbarous as compared with theirs. 
J have not changed this opinion. I have only 
tome lately to understand what it means. 
The charm of ancient life lies mainly in its 



24o THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

form. In essence, the life open to us is, as I 
fully see now, infinitely superior. And to 
what is this superiority due? Simply to 
Christianity. It came with Christianity, and 
it will also go with it. 

i I am not mad, Otho. Listen to me a 
little longer, my boy, and you will see my 
meaning. 

* To begin, then — -just consider the one 
matter of humour. Compare the ancient humour- 
ists with the modern. Think for a moment 
of Lncian, of Aristophanes, of Plautus, of 
Petro7iius, of Horace ; then think of Eras- 
mus, Swift, Cervantes, Voltaire, Sterne. 
Does not the mere memory of the two sets of 
names bring home to you what a gtdf in this 
matter there is between the ancient world and 
the modern t Is not the modern humour an 
altogether different thing from the ancient — 
broader and deeper beyond co?nparison or 
measurement ? The humour of the ancients 
could raise a laugh ; true — that is just what 
it could raise, and a laugh could express all 
the fee li Jigs raised by it. Think of the in- 
tolerable vulgarity of Homers gods, who 
" laughed consumedly " at Vulcan, as he waited 
on them, — why f because he was lame. The 
sense of humour on Olympus was about equal 
to what it would be now in a cou?itry lawyer's 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 241 

parlour. Think of Horace, who saw in a, 
dull pun on tivo proper names, a joke so ex- 
cellent that he wrote a whole satire in honour 
of it. It is true that Juvenal shoived a 
somewhat finer sense, when he said that whe?i 
Fortune was pleased to be facetious, she made a 
nouveau riche ; Petronius, perhaps, was even 
in advance of Juvenal. But ancient humour 
at its best was a shallow thing. It meant 
little. It was like the bright sparkle on 
a brawling stream, hardly ankle- deep. But 
our moder7i humour is like the silent snake- like 
lights in a still water, that go coiling down 
into depths unfathomable, as it lures our 
thoughts onwards to the contemplation of 
endless issues. The twinkle in the eyes of a 
Sterne or a Cervantes seems to hint to us of 
Eleusinian mysteries with a triumphant 
solemn treachery ; and wakes our souls, as 
we catch it, into a sudden thrill of delicious, 
furtive insight. Such humour as this may 
excite laughter ; but no laughter can ease our 
feelings fully — they also demand tears ; and 
even tears are not enough for us. Of such 
humour as this the ancients had hardly a 
notion; it differs from t heirs as the man 
differs from the baby, and seems almost like a 
?iew sense, peculiar to the modern world. 

1 Now, to what is this development of 

R 



24* THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

humour due — this new and exquisite source 
of pleasure ? Simply, as you must see, if you 
look into the matter, to that much maligned 
thing, Christianity, and that marvellous 
system of moral laws and restraints which, 
although accredited through imposture, elabo- 
rated by barbarism, and received by credulity, 
has entirely changed the whole complexion of 
life. Think how it has done this. It has 
slowly permeated and penetrated all mans 
inner existence. It has given him new un- 
earthly aims ; it lias given him new un- 
earthly standards by which to measure 
every action. It has cunningly associated 
everything with the most awful or the most 
glittering conceptions with which the imagi- 
nation can scare or intoxicate itself — with 
Hell, Heaven, Judgment, and so forth : and 
thus tfiere is scarcely a si?igle choice or refusal 
that has been left indifferent, and not more or 
less nearly connected with the most stupendous 
issues. The infinitely beautiful, the infinitely 
terrible, the infinitely hateful meet us every- 
where. Everything is enchanted, and seems 
to be w/iat it is not. The enchantment quite 
deludes the vulgar ; it a little deludes tlie 
wise ; but the wise are for ever in various 
ways secretly undoing the spell, and getting 
glimpses of things as they really are. What 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 243 

a delight these glimpses are to those that get 
them / Here lies the sense of humour—in the 
detection of truth through revered and reig7i- 
ing falsehood. Think of the colloquies of 
Erasmus, and his Laus Stultitice— there is an 
instance for you. Think of Don Quixote- 
there zs another. All its humour is due to 
Christian dreams of honour, duty and 
chivalry. Who, again, would have cared for 
Swift's showing us that man was hateful, if 
Christ had not bewitched us i?ito thinking that 
man was loveable f Gulliver owes its point to 
the Gospels. Ster?ie sees everything- " big with 
infinite jestr But why f Because Christi- 
anity has made everything big also with in- 
finite solemnity. A possible moral meaning 
is secreted over the whole surface of life like 
the scented oil in the cells on the surface of 
an orange skin, The humourist catches the 
Perfume of these volatile oils, as they are 
crushed out and wasted by our every action 

' Think, too, by the way, of the kindred 
subject of wit. I was reading a play of Con 
greve's yesterday : and this made me reflect 
how nearly all the brightest wit of the modem 
world consists in showing us this one thing— 
that fidelity in marriage is ridiculous; "that 
is, m showing us what, but for Christianity 
no one would ever have doubted. Such wit 



244 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

is, as it were, the forbidden kiss we give to 
common sense, from which an angry religion 
has been bent on separating us. 

* Think, too, of that flozver of Christian 
civilisation, the innuendo. That is simply the 
adi'oit saying under difficulties of what, but 
for Christianity, everyone would have taken 
for granted. 

1 Here, then, you see, are the wit, tlie 
innuendo, the hzimour of the world, all owing 
their existence, or, at any rate, tJieir flavour, 
to Christianity. And what would life, what 
ivould conversation be without these f But it 
is not these only that we owe to the same 
source. A 11 otir finer pleasures are indebted 
for their chief taste to it likewise. Love in 
itself for instance, is, as everyone knows who 
has felt it, the coarsest and most foolish of all 
our feelings. Leave it free to do what it 
pleases, and we sooii cease to care what it does. 
But Christianity, with a miraculotis inge- 
nuity, has confined and cramped it into so gro- 
tesque and painful a posture, and set such 
vigilant guardians to keep it there, that any 
retiirn to its natural freedom is a rapture, an 
adventure, a?id a triumph, which none but the 
wisest and most skilful can compass with 
grace or safety, and which wise men, therefore, 
think worth compassing. It is indeed t/te 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 245 

same with all the natural and true pleasures 
of life — poor tasteless things not worth living 
for, in themselves; but they have been so 
hidden away from us, and have come to be 
in such bad odour with the world, that only 
the wisest — for wisdom is but the detection of 
falsehood — see that they may be taken, and have 
the courage to take them ; and the wisdom 
they are conscious of in doing this, forms a 
delicioits sauce piquante — (of which humour, 
wit, and so on, are some of the flavours) — to 
these same poor pleasures, that can give us a 
real zest for them. 

* Such a life of wisdom is, of course, only 
for the few. The wise mtist always be few, as 
the rich must. The poor must make fine food 
for the rich to eat. The fools must make fine 
follies for the wise to detect. We cannot all 
be happy in a rational way. It is at least 
best that some of us should be. But what I 
want to point out to you, my boy, is, that if 
society goes on as it is going on now, nobody 
will be able soon to be rationally happy at all. 
It is true that I do not now live much in 
the world; but I have sufficient means of see- 
ing the course it is taking. I, like Hamlet, 
have heard of its "paintings," how it "jigs 
and ambles and lisps, and nick-names Gods 
creatures" I know how fast all Christian 



246 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

moral sentiment is silently dying out of it. 
Indeed, so rapid do I imagine to be the way in 
which it is losing all proper feeling, that I 
should not be surprised were society in 
another five years, if I am not dead by 
that time, to receive me back again. Now, 
as long as Christianity was firmly fixed 
as a faith, we might amuse ourselves 
by offending against its morals as much as 
we liked ; for our acts were in no danger of 
losing their forbidden character. There 
would ahvays be a persecution, under which 
pleasure might thrive. But now, since faith 
is dead, we have only the moral senti??tents 
left to us ; and if we once get rid of these by a 
too reckless violation of them, the whole work 
of Christianity, which I have been trying to 
explain to you, will be undone. Wit and 
hmnour, love and poetry, will all alike have 
left us. Life will have lost its seasonings 
and its satues : and served up to us au naturel 
it will only naicseate us. Man, indeed, will 
then be only separated from the animals by 
his capacity for ennui. 

' / had once hoped tJiat the middle classes 
s—that vast and useless body, who have neither 
the skill that produces tlieir wealth, nor the 
taste that can enjoy it — might have proved 
tliemselves at least of S07ne use, by preserving 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 247 

the traditions of a sound, respectable morality ; 
that they might have kept alive the nation's 
power of being shocked and scandalised at wit, 
or grace, or freedom. But no ; they too are 
changed. With awkward halting gait they 
are waddling in the footsteps of ttieir betters, 
and they will soon have made vice as vulgar 
as they long ago made virtue. 

1 To me, of course, all this matters little. 
Such flavours as life has, have lasted me thus 
far ; nor will the world's growing blank?iess 
affect me. I shall never look into a woma?i's 
eyes again. One of my own is blind now, 
and the other is so dim that I doubt if the 
best-paid beauty could contrive to look into it 
with more than an ironical tenderness. All 
this matters nothing to me. But you, my boy 
— what will be left for you, when I am take?i 
away from the evil that is to come ? Your 
prospect does not seem to me a cheerful one. 
But alas ! I can offer no remedy. I can o?ily 
beguile my time by warning y 021. At any rate, 
it is always good to think a little about the 
roots of things : so I trust you will be in 
some way profited by these patruae verbera 
linguae.' 

When Laurence closed the book there 
was a silence of some moments, as if no one 
knew exactly how to take what had just been 



248 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

read. But at last Donald Gordon exclaimed, 
in his devoutest of soft whispers : ' Is Saul 
also among the prophets ? ' The words acted 
like a spell ; the ice was broken, and Mr. 
Herbert, who hitherto had hardly uttered a 
syllable the whole afternoon, now broke out 
suddenly in his most emphatic accents. 

1 Thank you, my dear Laurence,' he ex- 
claimed ; ' thank you much, indeed. There 
is something in what you have just read us 
that seems to me quite precious and peculiar. 
Nor do I find any such honesty in any creed 
sung by priests in churches, as I do in this 
sardonic confession of that great truth, which 
the present age as a whole is resolutely bent 
upon forgetting — that the grand knowledge 
for a man to know is the essential and eternal 
difference between right and wrong, between 
base and noble ; that there is a right and a 
noble to be striven for, not for the sake of its 
consequences, but in spite of them ; and that 
it is this fact alone which, under countless 
forms, is the one thing affirmed in all human 
art and implied in all serviceable learning. 
Your Cervantes smiles it to you ; your Swift 
curses it to you ; your Bernard of Morlaix 
hymns it to you ; your saddened Shakespeare 
tells it to you in every way. Strange indeed 
is it, and mournful, that we see a time when 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 249 

the one truth that we live and die by not 
only needs to be pointed out to us, but as- 
serted passionately in the teeth of those whom 
we have elected as our wisest teachers.' Mr. 
Saunders at once took this to be a special 
allusion to himself, and his face involuntarily 
began to array itself in a smile of triumph. 
' However,' Mr. Herbert went on benignantly, 
1 you have truly gone the right way to work 
in constructing an ideal society, if you make 
it recognise this before all things, and see how 
witness is borne to it by every pleasure and 
every interest of life.' 

1 Ah, yes,' exclaimed Mr. Stockton, \ it is 
just this noble discrimination between right 
and wrong, Mr. Herbert, that modern en- 
lightenment will so preeminently encourage 
and foster. Morality is quite indispensable to 
any dream of the future. And as to religion 
. — the motto of the future is freedom — holy, 
awful, individual freedom. We shall each be 
free to choose or evolve the religion most 
profoundly suited to us.' 

' Well,' said Lady Ambrose, ' as long as I 
may keep my own religion, I shall be quite 
satisfied ; and about other people, I really 
don't think I'm bigoted — not as long, you 
know, as they belong to some church. But 
religion is the thing I want. OL_cpurse we 



250 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

must have morality. Mustn't we ? ' she 
added, with a half-puzzled expression, turning 
to Lady Grace. 

1 Must ! ' sighed Mrs. Sinclair. ' It's very 
easy to say must.' 

' Of course we must,' said Lady Grace 
cheerfully. ' My dear,' she went on, with a 
little kindly laugh towards Mr. Saunders, ' he 
doesn't really doubt it.' 

Mr. Saunders sprang to his feet as if an 
adder had stung- him. 

1 What ! ' he exclaimed, standing in the 
centre of the group, and looking round him, 
4 and do I not really doubt that the degrading 
practice of prayer, the fetish-worship of celi- 
bacy, of mortification, and so forth — do I not 
doubt that the foul faith in a future life, the 
grotesque conceptions of the theological vir- 
tues, and that preposterous idol of the market- 
place, the sanctity of marriage, — do you think 
I do not really doubt that we must retain 
these ? Do you think, on the contrary, I do 
not know that they are already doomed ? 
However,' here Mr. Saunders paused sud- 
denly and again sat down on the grass, ' there 
is no need for me at this moment to destroy 
any cherished illusions ; though I shall be 
happy to show my analysis of them that I 
spoke about just now to anyone who is not 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 251 

afraid to inspect it. I hear much said about 
tolerance, as a characteristic of your society. 
All I ask is, that you have the courage to 
extend your tolerance to me. Your new 
Republic may be full of illusions then. 
The great labour of destroying them will be 
positively delicious to me.' 

' Well,' said Mr. Stockton, with a mixture 
of deference and patronage, ' and what does 
Miss Merton think ? ' 

' Oh,' said Miss Merton with a slow 
smile, ' I am all in favour of toleration. I 
think that what I consider truth is quite good 
enough to stand on its own merits, if unpre- 
judiced eyes can only be got to see them. 
And I honestly do think, that with really 
high-breeding, and with what we apparently 
mean by culture, we should have at least one 
part of the world as good as we could wish 
it. But yet — ' she added, hesitating a little, 
1 we have surely settled only half the question 
yet. We have said a good deal about this 
wide and discerning taste that is to guide us. 
We have not said much yet about the parti- 
cular things — the occupations, the duties, the 
pleasures, that it will lead us to choose. 

' No,' began Mr. Rose, ' I should like 
myself very much to say something as to 
that — as to the new pleasures that modern 
culture has made possible for us.' 



aS2 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' Suppose — ' said Lady Ambrose with one 
of her most beaming smiles, as she pushed her 
hat away over the back of her head, ' suppose 
we talk of this by-and-by — at dinner, or in 
the evening. Let us just enjoy a little now. 
The air now is so truly delicious. It seems 
quite like a sin, doesn't it, to think of going in 
to dinner by-and-by.' 

A happy thought struck Lady Grace. 

' Suppose we have dinner out of doors, 
Otho,' she said, ' in the pavilion with the 
roses round it that you used to call the 
summer dining-room.' 

This proposal was received with what 
was little short of rapture. ' That really 
would be too delightful ! ' exclaimed Lady 
Ambrose. ' And what place could sound 
more perfect for us to finish our new 
Republic in ! ' It was arranged accordingly. 

1 And now,' exclaimed Lady Ambrose to 
Laurence confidentially, as the conversation 
ceased to be general, ' I want you to let me 
have a look at that book of your uncle's. I 
have often heard it spoken about. Lord 
Heartpool had a copy, which he showed my 
poor father in Paris. Come, Mr. Laurence, 
you need not hold it back. I'm sure there's 
nothing in it that would do me any harm.' 

• Well — no,' said Laurence ; ' in this 
volume I don't think there is.' 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. 253 

* Because what you read just now,' said 
Lady Ambrose, ' was all really in favour of 
goodness, though it is true I didn't quite like 
the tone of some of it' 

' What,' interposed Mr. Rose, 'is there an- 
other volume ? I should much like to see that.' 

1 I declare, Mr. Laurence,' said Lady 
Ambrose, who had now got the book in her 
hand, ' here's something really quite pretty — 
at least, I've only got as far as the first verse 
yet. It's a little poem called " To the Wife 
of an old Schoolfelloiv!' ' 

1 Read it out to us — do,' said Laurence, 
with a soft smile. ' It will illustrate very 
well the letter we had just now.' 

' Do you know, I really think I might 
manage this,' she said, 'although I'm not in 
the least by way of being a reader out. 
Listen, then, and please don't laugh at me,' 

Let others seek for wisdom's way 

In mode?'n science, modern wit, — 
/ turn to love, for all that these, 

These two can teach, is taught by it. 

Yes, all. In that first hour we met 

And sfniled and spoke so soft and long, loiv. 
Did wisdom dawn ; and I began 

To disbelieve in right and wrong, love. 

Then, as love's gospel clearer grew, 
And I each day your doorstep trod, love^ 

I learned that love was all in all, 
And rose to disbelieve in God, love. 



254 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Yes, wisdom's book ! you taught me this, 
And ere I half had read you through, lovs, 

I learned a deeper wisdom yet — 
/ learned to disbelieve in you, love. 

So now, fair teacher, I am wise, 

And free : 'tis truth that makes us free, love. 

But you — you're pale ! grow wise as I, 
And learn to disbelieve in me, love. 

As Lady Ambrose had read on, her 
voice had grown more and more disap- 
proving - , and several times she had shown 
symptoms of being on the point of stopping. 

1 I've no doubt it's all very witty,' she 
said, putting down the book, which was 
eagerly caught up by Mr. Rose, ' but — but 
that sort of thing, you know,' she exclaimed 
at last, ' I think is rather better in the 
smoking-room. However, I saw something 
next to those verses, that I think would suit 
Miss Merton. It seemed to be a sort of 
address to the Virgin Mary.' 

Miss Merton looked a little embarrassed ; 
Laurence looked astonished. 

' Let me read it,' exclaimed Mr. Rose, 
rapidly turning over the pages. ' This must 
be what Lady Ambrose means, I think : — 

My own, my one desire, 
Virgin most fair.' 

'Yes.' said Lady Ambrose, 'that's it.' 



BOOK III. CHAPTER IV. ^55 

1 Oh,' said Laurence, ' that is not my 
uncle's ; it is mine. It is the earliest copy 
of verses I ever wrote. I was seventeen 
then, and by an odd freak my uncle printed 
them in the end of his own collection.' 

Miss Merton's embarrassment in a great 
measure disappeared. She looked interested; 
and Mr. Rose, in slow, suave tones went on 
to read : — 

Mine own, my one desire, 

Virgin most fair 
Of ail the virgin choir f 
Hail, most pare, most perfect, loveliest one t 

Lo, in my hand I bear, 
Wo-jenfor the circling of thy long gold hair, 
Culled leaves and flowers, from places which the sun 

The spring long shines upon, 
Where never shepherd hath driven flock to graze, 

Nor any grass is mown ; 
But there sound through all the sunny sweet warm days, 

Mid the green holy place, 

The wild bee's wings alone. 

Yea, and with jealous care 
The maiden Reverence tends the fair things there, 
And walereth all of them with sprinkling showers 
Of pearled grey dew from a clear running river. 
Whoso is chaste of spirit uttei-ly, 
May gather there the leaves and fruits and flowers — 

The unchaste, never. 
But thou, goddess, and dearest love of mine — 

(' I don't at all approve of this,' murmured 
Lady Ambrose^) 



*& THE NEW REPUBLIC 

Tirke, and about thine hair 

This anartem entwine — 

Take, and for my sake wear, 
Who am more to thee than other mortals are, 

Whose is the holy lot 
As friend with friend to walk and talk with thee. 
Hearing thy sweet mouth's music in mine ear, 

But thee beholding not. l 

1 Ah, they are sweet verses,' said Mr. 
Rose ; ' a little too ascetic, perhaps, to be 
quite Greek. They are from Euripides, I 
see — the address to Artemis of Hippolytus.' 

' Yes,' said Laurence ; ' I don't think I 
ever wrote any original poetry.' 

' It's exactly like Mr. Laurence — that bit/ 
whispered Mrs. Sinclair. 

' And now,' said Mr. Rose, ' as I suppose 
we shall ere long be all going to dress for 
dinner, I will go, Mr. Laurence, if you will 
let me, and examine that other volume you 
spoke of, of your uncle's Miscellanies.' 

Mr. Rose moved slowly away ; and as he 
did so, there came the sound of the distant 
dressing-bell, which warned the whole party 
that it was time to be following his example. 

1 Eur. Hipp. v. 69— 8 J. 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 257 




BOOK IV. 

CHAPTER I. 

>0 proposal could have been happier 
than Lady Grace's, of the garden 
banquet in the pavilion. It seemed 
to the guests, when they were all 
assembled there, that the lovely summer's day 
was going to close with a scene from fairy- 
land. The table itself, with its flowers, and 
flowing fruit, and its many-coloured Venetian 
glass, shone and gleamed and sparkled, 
in the evening light, that was turning out- 
side to a cool mellow amber ; and above, from 
the roof, in which the dusk was already 
darkness, hung china lamps, in the shape of 
green and purple grape-clusters, looking like 
luminous fruits stolen from Aladdin's garden. 
The pavilion, open on all sides, was supported 
on marble pillars, that were almost hidden in 
red and white roses. Behind, the eye rested 
on great tree-trunks, and glades of rich 
foliage ; and before, it would pass over turf 

s 



258 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

and flowers, till it reached the sea beyond, on 
which, in another hour, the faint silver of the 
moonlight would begin to tremble. 

There was something in the whole scene 
that was at once calming and exhilarating ; 
and nearly all present seemed to feel in some 
measure this double effect of it. Dr. Jenkin- 
son had been quite restored by an afternoon's 
nap ; and his face was now all a-twinkle with 
a fresh benignity, that had however, like an 
early spring morning, just a faint suspicion of 
frost in it. Mr. Storks even was less severe 
than usual ; and as he raised his champagne 
to his lips, he would at times look very nearly 
conversational. 

1 My dear Laurence,' exclaimed Mr. 
Herbert, 'it really almost seems as if your 
visions of the afternoon had come true, and 
that we actually were in your new Republic 
already. I can only say that, if it is at all 
like this, it will be an entirely charming place 
— too charming, perhaps. But now, re- 
member this — you have but half got through 
the business to which you first addressed 
yourselves — that of forming a picture of a 
perfect aristocracy — an aristocracy in the 
true and genuine sense of the word. You are 
all to have culture, or taste. Very good, you 
have talked a great deal about that, and you 



BOOK TV CHAPTER I. 259 

have seen what you mean by it ; and you 
have recognised, above all, that it includes 
a discrimination between right and wrong. 
But now, you with all this taste and culture — 
you gifted men and women of the nineteenth 
century, — what sort of things does your taste 
teach you to reach out towards ? In what 
actions and aims, in what affections and 
emotions, would you place your happiness ? 
That is what I want to hear — the practical 
manifestations of this culture.' 

'Ah,' said Mr. Rose, 'I have at this 
moment a series of essays in the press, which 
would go far towards answering these ques- 
tions of yours. They do, indeed, deal with 
just this- — the effect of the choicer culture of 
this century on the soul of man — the ways in 
which it endows him with new perceptions — 
how it has made him, in fact, a being 
altogether more highly organised. All I 
regret is, that these choicer souls, these x a P l ~ 
eyres, are as yet like flowers that have not 
found a climate in which they can thrive pro- 
perly. That mental climate will doubtless 
come with time. What we have been trying 
to do this afternoon is, I imagine, nothing 
more than to anticipate it in imagination.' 

' Well,' said Mr. Herbert, with a little the 
tone of an inquisitor, ' that is just what I 

s a 



26o THE NEW REPUBLIC. 



have been -asking. What will this climate be 
like, and what will these flowers be like in 
this climate ? How would your culture alter 
and better the present, if its powers were 
equal to its wishes ? ' 

Mr. Rose's soft lulling tone harmonised 
well with the scene and hour, and the whole 
party seemed willing to listen to him ; or 
at any rate no one felt any prompting to 
interrupt him. 

' I can show you an example, Mr. Her- 
bert,' he said, ' of culture demanding a finer 
climate, in — if you will excuse my seeming 
egoism — in myself. For instance, (to take 
the widest matter I can fix upon — the general 
outward surroundings of our lives), often, 
when I walk about London, and see how 
hideous its whole external aspect is, and what 
a dissonant population throng it, a chill 
feeling of despair comes over me. Consider 
how the human eye delights in form and 
colour, and the ear in tempered and har- 
monious sounds ; and then think for a 
moment of a London street ! Think of the 
shapeless houses, the forest of ghastly 
chimney-pots, of the hell of distracting noises 
made by the carts, the cabs, the carriages — 
think of the bustling, commonplace, careworn 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 261 

crowds that jostle you — think of an omnibus 
— think of a four-wheeler ' 

' I often ride in an omnibus,' said Lord 
Allen, with a slight smile to Miss Merton. 

' It is true,' replied Mr. Rose, only over- 
hearing the tone in which these words were 
said, ' that one may ever and again catch 
some touch of sunlight that will for a moment 
make the meanest object beautiful with its 
furtive alchemy. But that is Nature's work, 
not man's ; and we must never confound the 
accidental beauty that Nature will bestow on 
man's work, even at its worst, with the 
rational and designed beauty of man's work 
at its best. It is this rational human beauty 
that I say our modern city life is so com- 
pletely wanting in; nay, the look of out-of- 
door London seems literally to stifle the very 
power of imagining such beauty possible. 
Indeed, as I wander along our streets, push- 
ing my way among the throngs of faces — faces 
puckered with misdirected thought, or ex- 
pressionless with none — barbarous faces set 
towards Parliament, or Church, or scientific 
lecture-rooms, or Government offices, or 
counting-houses — I say, as I push my way 
amongst all the sights and sounds of the 
streets of our great city, only one thing ever 



262 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

catches my eye, that breaks in upon my 
mood, and warns me I need not despair.' 

1 And what is that ? ' asked Allen, with 
some curiosity. 

4 The shops,' Mr. Rose answered, ' of 
certain of our upholsterers and dealers in 
works of art. Their windows, as I look into 
them, act like a sudden charm on me — like a 
splash of cold water dashed on my forehead 
when I am fainting. For I seem there to 
have got a glimpse of the real heart of things ; 
and as my eyes rest on the perfect pattern 
(many of which are really quite delicious ; 
indeed, when I go to ugly houses, I often 
take a scrap of some artistic cretonne with me 
in my pocket as a kind of aesthetic smelling 
salts), I say, when I look in at their windows, 
and my eyes rest on the perfect pattern of 
some new fabric for a chair or for a window- 
curtain, or on some new design for a wall- 
paper, or on some old china vase, I become 
at once sharply conscious, Mr. Herbert, that, 
despite the ungenial mental climate of the 
present age, strange yearnings for, and know- 
ledge of, true beauty, are beginning to show 
themselves like flowers above the weedy soil ; 
and I remember, amidst the roar and clatter 
of our streets, and the mad noises of our own 
times, that there is amongst us a growing 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 163 

number who have deliberately turned their 
backs on all these things, and have thrown 
their whole souls and sympathies into the 
happier art-ages of the past. They have 
gone back,' said Mr. Rose, raising his voice a 
little, 'to Athens and to Italy, to the Italy of 
Leo and to the Athens of Pericles. To such 
men the clamour, the interests, the struggles 
of our own times, become as meaningless as 
they really are. To them the boyhood of 
Bathyllus is of more moment than the man- 
hood of Napoleon. Borgia is a more familiar 
name than Bismarck. I know, indeed — and 
I really do not blame them — several dis- 
tinguished artists who, resolving to make 
their whole lives consistently perfect, will, on 
principle, never admit a newspaper into their 
houses that is of later date than the times of 
Addison ; and I have good trust that the 
number of such men is on the increase — men 
I mean,' said Mr. Rose, toying tenderly with 
an exquisite wine-glass of Salviati's, ' who 
with a steady and set purpose follow art for 
the sake of art, beauty for the sake of beauty, 
love for the sake of love, life for the sake of 
life.' 

Mr. Rose's slow gentle voice, which was 
apt at certain times to become peculiarly 
irritating, sounded now like the evening air 



264 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

grown articulate, and had secured him 
hitherto a tranquil hearing, as if by a kind of 
spell. This however seemed here in sudden 
danger of snapping. 

1 What, Mr. Rose ! ' exclaimed Lady 
Ambrose, ' do you mean to say, then, that the 
number of people is on the increase who 
won't read the newspapers ? ' 

' Why, the men must be absolute idiots ! ' 
said Lady Grace, shaking her grey curls, and 
putting on her spectacles to look at Mr. 
Rose. 

Mr. Rose however was imperturbable. 

' Of course,' he said, ' you may have 
newspapers if you will : I myself always 
have them ; though in general they are too 
full of public events to be of much interest. 
I was merely speaking just now of the spirit 
of the movement. And of that we must all 
of us here have some knowledge. We must 
all of us have friends whose houses more or 
less embody it. And even if we had not, we 
could not help seeing signs of it — signs of 
how true and earnest it is, in the enormous 
sums that are now given for really good 
objects.' 

' That,' said Lady Grace, with some tart- 
ness, ' is true enough, thank God ! ' 

1 But I can't see/ said Lady Ambrose, 



BOOK IV, CHAPTER /. 265 

whose name often figured in the Times, in 

the subscription-lists of advertised charities 

1 1 can't see, Mr. Rose, any reason in that 
why we should not read the newspapers.' 

'The other day, for instance,' said Mr. 
Rose reflectively, ' I heard of eight Chelsea 
shepherdesses, picked up by a dealer, I really 
forget where — in some common cottage, if I 
recollect aright, covered with dirt, giving no 
pleasure to anyone— and these were all sold 
in a single day, and not one of them fetched 
less than two hundred and twenty pounds.' 

'/ can't help thinking they must have 
come from Cremorne,' said Mrs. Sinclair 
softly. 

•But why,' said Mr. Rose, 'should I 
speak of particular instances ? We must all 
of us have friends whose houses are full of 
priceless treasures such as these — the whole 
atmosphere of whose rooms really seems im- 
pregnated with art— seems in fact, Mr. 
Herbert, such an atmosphere as we should 
dream of for our new Republic' 

'TV be sure,' exclaimed Lady Ambrose, 
feeling that she had at last got upon solid 
ground. ' By the way, Mr. Rose,' she said, 
with her most gracious of smiles, ' I suppose 
you have hardly seen Lady Julia Hayman's 
new house in Belgrave Square ? I'm sure 



a66 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

that would delight you. I should like to 
take you there some day, and show it to you.' 

4 I have seen it/ said Mr. Rose, with 
languid condescension. ' It was very pretty, 
I thought — some of it really quite nice.' 

This and the slight rudeness of manner it 
was said with, raised Mr. Rose greatly in 
Lady Ambrose's estimation, and she began to 
think with respect of his late utterances. 

1 Well, Mr. Herbert,' Mr. Rose went on, 
1 what I want to say is this. We have here 
in the present age, as it is, fragments of the 
right thine. We have a number of isolated 
right interiors ; we have a few, very few right 
exteriors. But in our ideal state, our entire 
city — our London — the metropolis of our 
society, would be as a whole as perfect as 
these fragments. Taste would not there be 
merely an indoor thing. It would be written 
visibly for all to look upon, in our streets, our 
squares, our gardens. Could we only mould 
England to our wishes, the thing to do, I am 
persuaded, would be to remove London to 
some kindlier site, that it might there be 
altogether born anew. I myself would have 
it taken to the south-west, and to the sea- 
coast, where the waves are blue, and where 
the air is calm and fine, and there — ' 

'Ah me!' sighed Mr. Luke with a lofty 
sadness, ' caelum non animam mutant* 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER /. 267 

1 Pardon me,' said Mr. Rose, ■ few para- 
doxes — and most paradoxes are false — are, I 
think, so false as that. This much at least of 
sea-like man's mind has, that scarcely any- 
thing so distinctly gives a tone to it as the 
colour of the skies he lives under. And I 
was going to say,' he went on, looking out 
dreamily towards the evening waves, ' that as 
the imagination is a quick workman, I can at 
this moment see our metropolis already trans- 
planted and rebuilt. I seem to see it now as 
it were from a distance, with its palaces, its 
museums, its churches, its convents, its gar- 
dens, its picture-galleries — a cluster of domed 
and pillared marble, sparkling on a gray 
headland. It is Rome, it is Athens, it is 
Florence, arisen and come to life again, in 
these modern days. The aloe-tree of beauty 
again blossoms there, under the azure stain- 
less sky.' 

4 Do you know, Mr. Rose,' said Lady 
Ambrose in her most cordial manner, ' all 
this is very beautiful ; and certainly no one 
can think London as it is more ugly than I 
do. That's natural in me, isn't it, being a 
denizen of poor prosaic South Audley Street 
as I am ? But don't you think that your 
notion is — it's very beautiful, I quite feel that 
— but don't you think it is perhaps a little too 



268 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

dream-like — too unreal, if you know what I 
mean ? ' 

' Such a city,' said Mr. Rose earnestly, ' is 
indeed a dream, but it is a dream which we 
might make a reality, would circumstances 
only permit of it. We have many amongst 
us who know what is beautiful, and who 
passionately desire it ; and would others only 
be led by these, it is quite conceivable that 
we might some day have a capital, the entire 
aspect of which should be the visible embo- 
diment of our finest and most varied culture, 
our most sensitive taste, and our deepest 
aesthetic measure of things. This is what this 
capital of our new Republic must be, this 
dwelling-place of our ideal society. We shall 
have houses, galleries, streets, theatres, such 
as Giulio Romano or Giorgio Vasari, or 
Giulio Campi would have rejoiced to look at ; 
we shall have metal-work worthy oi the hand 
of Ghiberti and the praise of Michel Angelo ; 
we shall rival Domenico Beccafumi with our 
pavements. As you wander through our 
thoroughfares and our gardens, your feelings 
will not be jarred by the presence of human 
vulgarity, or the desolating noise of traffic ; 
nor in every spare space will your eyes be 
caught by abominable advertisements of ex- 
cursion trains to Brighton, or of Horniman's 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 269 

cheap tea. They will rest instead, here on 
an exquisite fountain, here on a statue, here 
on a bust of Zeus or Hermes or Aphrodite, 
glimmering in a laurelled nook ; or on a 
Mater Dolorosa looking down on you from 
her holy shrine ; or on the carved marble 
gate-posts of our palace gardens, or on their 
wrought iron or wrought bronze gates ; or 
perhaps on such triumphal arches as that 
which Antonio San Gallo constructed in 
honour of Charles V., and of which you must 
all remember the description given by Vasari. 
Such a city,' said Mr. Rose, ' would be the 
externalisation of the human spirit in the 
highest state of development that we can 
conceive for it. We should there see ex- 
pressed openly all our appreciations of all 
the beauty that we can detect in the world's 
whole history. The wind of the spirit that 
breathed there would blow to us from all 
the places of the past, and be charged with 
infinite odours. Every frieze on our walls, 
every clustered capital of a marble column, 
would be a garland or nosegay of associations. 
Indeed, our whole city, as compared with the 
London that is now, would be itself a nosegay 
as compared with a faggot ; and as related to 
the life that I would see lived in it, it would be 
like a shell murmuring with all the world's 






270 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

memories, and held to the ear of the two 
twins, Life and Love.' 

Mr. Rose had got so dreamy by this time 
that he felt himself the necessity of turning a 
little more matter-of-fact again. 

1 You will see what I mean, plainly 
enough,' he said, ' if you will just think of our 
architecture, and consider how that naturally 
will be ' 

' Yes,' said Mr. Luke, ' I should be glad 
to hear about our architecture.' 

4 — How that naturally will be,' Mr. Rose 
went on, ' of no style in particular.' 

' The deuce it won't ! ' exclaimed Mr. 
Luke. 

1 No,' continued Mr. Rose, unmoved ; '. no 
style in particular, but a renaissance of all 
styles. It will matter nothing to us whether 
they be pagan or Catholic, classical or 
mediaeval. We shall be quite without pre- 
judice or bigotry. To the eye of true taste, 
an Aquinas in his cell before a crucifix, or a 
Narcissus gazing at himself in a still fountain, 
are — in their own ways, you know — equally 
beautiful.' 

'Well, really,' said Miss Merton, 'I can 
not fancy St. Thomas being a very taking 
object to people who don't believe in him 
either as a saint or a philosopher. I always 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER T. 271 

think that, except from a Christian point of 
view, a saint can be hardly better described 
than by Newman's lines, as — 

A bundle of bones, whose breath 
Infects the world before his death.' ' 

' I remember the lines well,' said Mr. 
Rose calmly, 'and the writer you mention 
puts them in the mouth of a yelping devil. 
But devils, as far as I know, are not generally 
—except, perhaps, Milton's— conspicuous for 
taste : indeed, if we may trust Goethe, the 
very touch of a flower is torture to them.' 

' Dante's biggest devil,' cried Mr. Saun- 
ders, to everyone's amazement, 'chewed 
Judas Iscariot like a quid of tobacco, to all 
eternity. He, at any rate, knew what he 
liked.' 

Mr. Rose started, and visited Mr. Saun- 
ders with a rapid frown. He then proceeded, 
turning again to Miss Merton as if nothing 
had happened. 

'Let me rather/ he said, 'read a nice 
sonnet to you, which I had sent to me this 
morning, and which was in my mind just now. 
These lines '—Mr. Rose here produced a 
paper from his pocket—' were written by a 
boy of eighteen— a youth of extraordinary 

1 Vide J. H. Newman's Dream of Gerontius. 



272 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

promise, I think, whose education I may my- 
self claim to have had some share in direct- 
ing. Listen,' he said, laying the verses before 
him, on a clean plate. 

Three visions in the watches of one night 

Made sweet my sleep — almost too sweet to tell. 

One was Narcissus by a woods ide well, 

And on the moss his limbs and feet were white; 

And one, Queen Venus, blown for my delight 

Across the blue sea in a rosy shell ; 

And one, a lean Aquinas in his cell, 

Kneeling, his pen in hand, with aching sight 

Strained towards a carven Christ ; and of these three 

I knei.v not which was fairest. First 1 turned 

Towards that soft boy, who laughed and fled from me; 

Towards Venus then; and she smiled once, and she 

Fled also. Then with teeming heart /yearned, 

O Angel of the Schools, towards Christ with thee/ 

Yes,' murmured Mr. Rose to himself, folding 
up the paper ; ' they are dear lines. Now, 
there,' he said, ■ we have a true and tender 
expression of the really Catholic spirit of 
modern sestheticism, which holds nothing 
common or unclean. It is in this spirit, I say, 
that the architects of our state will set to 
work. And thus for our houses, for our 
picture-galleries, for our churches — I trust we 
shall have many churches — they will select 

and combine ' 

1 Do you seriously mean,' broke in Allen, 
a little impatiently, ' that it is a thing to wish 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 273 

for and to look forward to, that we should 
abandon all attempts at original architecture, 
and content ourselves with simply sponging 
on the past ? ' 

4 I do,' replied Mr. Rose suavely ; ' and 
for this reason, if for no other, that the world 
can now successfully do nothing else. Nor, 
indeed, is it to be expected or even wished 
that it should.' 

' You say we have no good architecture 
now ! ' exclaimed Lady Ambrose ; ' but, Mr. 
Rose, have you forgotten our modern 
churches ? Don't you think them beautiful ? 
Perhaps you never go to All Saints' ? ' 

'I every now and then,' said Mr. Rose, 
4 when I am in the weary mood for it, attend 
the services of our English Ritualists, and I 
admire their churches very much indeed. In 
some places the whole thing is really managed 
with surprising skill. The dim religious twi- 
light, fragrant with the smoke of incense ; the 
tangled roofs that the music seems to cling 
to ; the tapers, the high altar, and the strange 
intonation of the priests, all produce a curious 
old-world effect, and seem to unite one with 
things that have been long dead. Indeed, it 
all seems to me far more a part of the past 
than the services of the Catholics.' 

Lady Ambrose did not express her appro- 

T 



274 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

bation of the last part of this sentiment, out 
of regard for Miss Merton ; but she gave 
a smile and a nod of pleased intelligence to 
Mr. Rose. 

'Yes,' Mr. Rose went on, 'there is a 
regretful insincerity about it all, that is very 
nice, and that at once appeals to me, " Gleich 
einer alien halbverklungen Sage" The priests 
are only half in earnest ; the congregations, 
even ' 

1 Then I am quite sure,' interrupted Lady 
Ambrose with vigour, ' that you can never 
have heard Mr. Cope preach.' 

' I don't know,' said Mr. Rose languidly. 
' I never enquired, nor have I ever heard 
anyone so much as mention, the names of 
any of them. Now all that, Lady Ambrose, 
were life really in the state it should be, you 
would be able to keep.' 

' Do you seriously, and in sober earnest, 
mean,' Allen again broke in, 'that you think 
it a good thing that all our art and architec- 
ture should be borrowed and insincere, and 
that our very religion should be nothing but 
a dilettante memory ? ' 

1 The opinion,' said Mr. Rose, ' which by 
the way you slightly misrepresent, is not 
mine only, but that of all those of our own 
day who are really devoting themselves to 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 175 

art for its own sake. I will try to explain the 
reason of this. In the world's life, just as in 
the life of a man, there are certain periods of 
eager and all-absorbing action, and these are 
followed by periods of memory and reflection. 
We then look back upon our past, and 
become for the first time conscious of what 
we are, and of what we have done. We 
then see the dignity of toil, and the grand 
results of it, the beauty and the strength of 
faith, and the fervent power of patriotism ; 
which, whilst we laboured, and believed, and 
loved, we were quite blind to. Upon such a 
reflective period has the world now entered. 
It has acted and believed already ; its task 
now is to learn to value action and belief — to 
feel and to be thrilled at the beauty of them. 
And the chief means by which it can learn 
this is art — the art of a renaissance. For by 
the power of such art, all that was beautiful, 
strong, heroic, or tender in the past — all the 
actions, passions, faiths, aspirations of the 
world, that lie so many fathom deep in the 
years — float upwards to the tranquil surface 
of the present, and make our lives like what 
seems to me one of the loveliest things in 
nature, the iridescent film on the face of a 
stagnant water. Yes ; the past is not dead 
unless we choose that it shall be so. Chris- 
t 2 



276 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

tianity itself is not dead. There is " nothing 
of it that doth fade," but turns " into some- 
thing rich and strange," for us to give a new 
tone to our lives with. And, believe me,' 
Mr. Rose went on, gathering earnestness, 
' that the happiness possible in such conscious 
periods is the only true happiness. Indeed, 
the active periods of the world were not 
really happy at all. We only fancy them to 
have been so by a pathetic fallacy. Is the 
hero happy during his heroism ? No, but 
after it, when he sees what his heroism was, 
and reads the glory of it in the eyes of youth 
or maiden.' 

' All this is very poor stuff — very poor 
stuff,' murmured Dr. Jenkinson, whose face 
had become gradually the very picture of 
crossness. 

' Do you mean, Mr. Rose/ said Miss 
Merton, with a half humorous, half incre- 
dulous smile, ' that we never value religion 
till we have come to think it nonsense ? ' 

1 Not nonsense — no,' exclaimed Mr. Rose 
in gentle horror ; ' I only mean that it never 
lights our lives so beautifully as when it is 
leaving them like the evening sun. It is in 
such periods of the world's life that art 
springs into being in its greatest splendour. 
Your Raphael, Miss Merton, who painted 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 277 

you your " dear Madonnas," was a luminous 
cloud in the sunset sky of the Renaissance, 
— a cloud that took its fire from a faith that 
was sunk or sinking.' 

1 I'm afraid that the faith is not quite 
sunk yet,' said Miss Merton, with a slight 
sudden flush in her cheeks, and with just the 
faintest touch of suppressed anger. 

Mr. Saunders, Mr. Stockton, Mr. Storks, 
and Mr. Luke all raised their eyebrows. 

1 No/ said Mr. Rose, ' such cyclic sunsets 
are happily apt to linger.' 

1 Mr. Rose,' exclaimed Lady Ambrose, 
with her most gracious of smiles, ' of course 
everyone who has ears must know that all 
this is very beautiful, but I am positively so 
stupid that I haven't been quite able to follow 
it all.' 

' I will try to make my meaning clearer,' 
he said, in a brisker tone. ' I often figure to 
myself an unconscious period and a conscious 
one, as two women — one an untamed 
creature with embrowned limbs native to the 
air and the sea ; the other marble- white and 
swan-soft, couched delicately on cushions 
before a mirror, and watching her own supple 
reflection gleaming in the depths of it. On 
the one is the sunshine and the sea-spray. 
The wind of Heaven and her unbound hair 



278 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

are playmates. The light of the sky is in her 
eyes ; on her lips is a free laughter. We 
look at her, and we know that she is happy. 
We know it, mark me ; but she knows it not. 
Turn, however, to the other, and all is 
changed. Outwardly, there is no gladness 
there. Her dark, gleaming eyes open depth 
within depth upon us, like the circles of a 
new Inferno. There is a clear, shadowy 
pallor on her cheek. Only her lips are 
scarlet. There is a sadness — a languor, even 
in the grave tendrils of her heavy hair, and 
in each changing curve of her bosom as she 
breathes or sighs.' 

' What a very odd man Mr. Rose is ! ' 
said Lady Ambrose in a loud whisper. ' He 
always seems to talk of everybody as if they 
had no clothes on. And does he mean by 
this that we ought to be always in the 
dumps ? ' 

1 Yes,' Mr. Rose was meanwhile proceed- 
ing, his voice again growing visionary, ' there 
is no eagerness, no action there ; and yet all 
eagerness, all action is known to her as the 
writing on an open scroll ; only, as she reads, 
even in the reading of it, action turns into 
emotion, and eagerness into a sighing memory. 
Yet such a woman really may stand symbo- 
lically for us as the patroness and the lady of 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER T. 279 

all gladness, who makes us glad in the only- 
way now left us. And not only in the only 
way, but in the best way — the way of ways. 
Her secret is self-consciousness. She knows 
that she is fair ; she knows, too, that she is 
sad ; but she sees that sadness is lovely, and 
so sadness turns to joy. Such a woman may 
be taken as a symbol, not of our archi- 
tecture only, but of all the aesthetic sur- 
roundings with which we shall shelter and 
express our life. Such a woman do I see 
whenever I enter a ritualistic church ' 

'I know,' said Mrs. Sinclair, 'that very 
peculiar people do go to such places ; but, 
Mr. Rose,' she said with a look of appealing 
enquiry, ' I thought they were generally 
rather over-dressed than otherwise ? ' 

• The imagination,' said Mr. Rose, open- 
ing his eyes in grave wonder at Mrs. Sinclair, 
4 may give her what garb it chooses. Our 
whole city, then — the city of our new Re- 
public — will be in keeping with this spirit. It 
will be the architectural and decorative em- 
bodiment of the most educated longings of 
our own times after order and loveliness and 
delight, whether of the senses or the ima- 
gination. It will be, as it were, a resurrec- 
tion of the past, in response to the longing 
and the passionate regret of the present It 



*8o THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

will be such a resurrection as took place in 
Italy during its greatest epoch, only with this 
difference ' 

1 You seem to have forgotten trade and 
business altogether,' said Dr. Jenkinson. ' I 
think, however rich you intend to be, you 
will find that they are necessary.' 

1 Yes, Mr. Rose, you're not going to 
deprive us of all our shops, I hope ? ' said 
Lady Ambrose. 

1 Because, you know,' said Mrs. Sinclair, 
with a soft maliciousness, ' we can't go with- 
out dresses altogether, Mr. Rose. And if I 
were there,' she continued plaintively, ' I 
should want a bookseller to publish the 
scraps of verse — poetry, as I am pleased to 
call it — that I am always writing.' 

' Pooh ! ' said Mr. Rose, a little annoyed, 
* we shall have all that somewhere, of course ; 
but it will be out of the way, in a sort of 
Piraeus, where the necessary kclttij\oi ' 

1 A sort of what ? ' said Lady Ambrose. 

1 Mr. Rose merely means,' said Donald 
Gordon, ' that there must be good folding- 
doors between the offices and the house of 
life ; and that the servants are not to be seen 
walking about in the pleasure-grounds.' 

1 Yes,' said Mr. Rose, ' exactly so.' 

•Well, then,' said Lady Ambrose, 'I 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 281 

quite agree with you, Mr. Rose; and if 
wishing were only having, I've not the least 
doubt that we should all of us be going back 
to Mr. Rose's city to-morrow, instead of to 
London, with its carts, and cabs, and smoke, 
and all its thousand-and-one drawbacks. I'm 
sure,' she said, turning to Miss Merton, ' you 
would, my dear, with all your taste.' 

1 It certainly,' said Miss Merton, smiling, 
* all sounds very beautiful. All I am afraid 
of is that we should not be quite worthy of it.' 
'Nay,' said Mr. Rose, 'but the very 
point is that we shall be worthy of it, and 
that it will be worthy of us. I said, if you 
recollect, just now, that the world's ideal of 
the future must resemble in many ways its 
memory of the Italian Renaissance. But 
don't let that mislead you. It may resemble 
that, but it will be something far in advance 
of it. During the last three hundred years 
— in fact, during the last sixty or seventy 
years, the soul of man has developed 
strangely in its sentiments and its powers of 
feeling; in its powers, in fact, of enjoying 
life. As I said, I have a work in the press, 
devoted entirely to a description of this 
growth. I have some of the proof sheets 
with me ; and if you will let me I should like 
to read you one or two passages.' 



282 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' I don't think much can be made out of 
that,' said Dr. Jenkinson, with a vindictive 
sweetness. ' Human sentiment dresses itself 
in different fashions, as human ladies do ; but 
I think beneath the surface it is much the 
same. I mean,' he added, suddenly recollect- 
ing that he might thus seem to be rooting up 
the wheat of his own opinions along with the 
tares of Mr. Rose's, ■ I mean that I don't 
think in seventy years, or even in three 
hundred, you will be able to show that 
human nature has very much changed. I 
don't think so.' 

Unfortunately, however, the Doctor found 
that, instead of putting down Mr. Rose by 
this, he had only raised up Mr. Luke. 

1 Ah, Jenkinson, I think you are wrong 
, there,' said Mr. Luke. ' As long as we re- 
cognise that this growth is at present con- 
fined to a very small minority, the fact of 
such growth is the most important, the most 
significant of all facts. Indeed, our friend Mr. 
Rose is quite right thus far, in the stress he 
lays on our appreciation of the past, that we 
have certainly in these modern times acquired 
a new sense, by which alone the past can be 
appreciated truly, the sense which, if I may 
invent a phrase for it, I should call that of 
Historical Perspective; so that now really 



BOOK Tl. CHAPTER I. 283 

for the first time the landscape of history is 
beginning to have some intelligible charm for 
us. And this, you know, is not all. Our 
whole views of things — (you, Jenkinson, must 
know this as well as I do) — the Zeitgeist 
breathes upon them, and they do not die ; 
but they are changed — they are enlightened.' 

The Doctor was too much annoyed to 
make any audible answer to this ; but he 
murmured with some emphasis to himself, 
' That's not what Mr. Rose was saying ; 
that's not what I was contradicting.' 

1 You take, Luke, a rather more rose- 
coloured view of things than you did last 
night/ said Mr. Storks. 

'No,' said Mr. Luke, with a sigh, 'far 
from it. I am not denying (pray, Jenkinson, 
remember this) that the majority of us are at 
present either Barbarians or Philistines ; and 
the ugliness of these is more glaring now 
than at any former time. But that any of us 
are able to see them thus distinctly in their 
true colours, itself shows that there must be 
a deal of light somewhere. Even to make 
darkness visible some light is needed. We 
should always recollect that. We are only 
discontented with ourselves when we are 
struggling to be better than ourselves.' 

1 And in many ways,' said Laurence, ' I 



aS4 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

think the struggle has been successful, 
Take, for instance, the pleasure we get now 
from the aspects of external nature, and the 
way in which these seem to mix themselves 
with our lives. This certainly is something 
distinctly modern. And nearly all our other 
feelings, it seems to me, have changed just 
like this one, and have become more sensi- 
tive, and more highly organised. If we may 
judge by its expression in literature, love 
has, certainly ; and that I suppose is the 
most important and comprehensive feeling 
in life.' 

1 Does Mr. Laurence only suppose that ?' 
sighed Mrs. Sinclair, casting down her eyes. 

' Well,' said Dr. Jenkinson, ' our feelings 
about these two things — about love and ex- 
ternal nature — perhaps have changed some- 
what. Yes, I think they have. I think you 
might make an interesting magazine article 
out of that — but hardly more.' 

' I rather,' said Laurence apologetically, 
'agree with Mr. Luke and Mr. Rose, that 
all our feelings have developed just as these 
two have. And I think this is partly owing 
to the fusion in our minds of our sacred and 
secular ideas — which indeed you were speak- 
ing of this morning in your sermon. Thus, 
to find some rational purpose in life was once 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 285 

merely enjoined as a supernatural duty. In our 
times it has taken our common nature upon 
it, and become a natural longing — though, 
I fear,' he added softly, ' a fruitless one.' 

1 Yes,' suddenly exclaimed Lady Grace, 
who had been listening intently to her 
nephew's words ; ' and if you are speaking 
of modern progress, Otho, you should not 
leave out the diffusion of those grand ideas 
of justice, and right, and freedom, and 
humanity which are at work in the great 
heart of the nation. We are growing culti- 
vated in Mr. Luke's noble sense of the word, 
and our whole hearts revolt against the way in 
which women have hitherto been treated, and 
against the cruelties which dogma asserts the 
good God can practise, and the cruelties on 
the poor animals which wicked men do prac- 
tise. And war too,' Lady Grace went on, a 
glow mounting into her soft faded cheek, 
' think how fast we are outgrowing that ! 
England at any rate will never watch the 
outbreak of another war, with all its inevi- 
table cruelties, without giving at least one 
sob that shall make all Europe pause and 
listen. Indeed, we must not forget how the 
entire substance of religion is ceasing to be 
a mass of dogmas, and is becoming em- 
bodied instead in practice and in action.' 



286 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 Quite true, Lady Grace,' said Mr. Luke. 
Lady Grace was just about to have given a 
sign for rising ; but Mr. Luke's assent de- 
tained her. ' As to war,' he went on, ' there 
may, of course, be different opinions. Ques- 
tions of policy may arise ' (' As if any 

policy,' murmured Lady Grace, ' could justify 
us in such a thing ! ') ' but religion — yes, 
that, as I have been trying to teach the 
world, is the great and important point on 
which culture is beginning to cast its light — 
and with just the effect which you describe. 
It is true that culture is at present but a 
little leaven hid in a barrel of meal ; but still 
it is doing its work slowly ; and in the 
matter of religion — indeed, in all matters, for 

religion rightly understood embraces all ' 

(' I do like to hear Mr. Luke talk sometimes,' 
murmured Lady Grace), ' its effect is just 
this — to show us that religion in any civilised, 
any reasonable, any sweet sense, can never 
be found except embodied in action ; that it 
is, in fact, nothing but right action, pointed — 
winged, as it were — by right emotion, by a 
glow, an aspiration — an aspiration towards 

God ' (Lady Grace sighed with feeling) 

— ' not of course,' Mr. Luke went on confi- 
dentially, ' that petulant Pedant of the 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER L 287 

theologians — that irritable angry Father, with 
the very uncertain temper — but towards ' 

' An infinite, inscrutable, loving Being,' 
began Lady Grace, with a slight moisture in 
her eyes. 

' Quite so,' said Mr. Luke, not waiting to 
listen, 'towards that great Law — that great 
verifiable tendency of things — that great 
stream whose flowing such of us as are able 
are now so anxiously trying to accelerate. 
There is no vain speculation about creation, 
and first causes, and consciousness here, 
which are matters we can never verify, and 
which matter nothing to us ' 

' But,' stammered Lady Grace aghast, 
' Mr. Luke, do you mean to say that — but it 
surely must matter something whether God 
can hear our prayers, and will help us, and 
whether we owe Him any duty, and whether 
He is conscious of what we do, and will 
judge us — it must matter ' 

Mr. Luke leaned forwards towards Lady 
Grace, and spoke to her in a confidential 
whisper. 

1 Not two straws — not that,' he said with 
a smile, and a very slight fillip of his finger 
and thumb. 

Lady Grace was thunderstruck. 

* But,' again she stammered softly and 



a88 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

eagerly, ' unless you say there is no per- 
sonal ' 

Mr. Luke hated the word personal ; it was 
so much mixed up in his mind with theology, 
that he even winced if he had to speak of 
personal talk. 

1 My dear Lady Grace,' he said, in a tone of 
surprised remonstrance, ' you are talking like 
a Bishop.' 

' Well, certainly,' said Lady Grace, rising, 
and struggling, she hardly knew how, into a 
smile, ' nolo episcopari. You see I do know 
a little Latin, Mr. Luke.' 

* Yes,' said Mr. Luke with a bow, as he 
pushed back a chair for her, ' and a bit that 
has more wisdom in it than all other ecclesi- 
astical Latin put together.' 

' We're going to leave you gentlemen to 
smoke your cigarettes,' said Lady Grace. 
' We think of going down on the beach for a 
little, and looking at the sea, which is getting 
silvery ; and by-and-by, I dare say you will 
not expel us if we come back for a little tea 
and coffee.' 

' Damn it ! ' 

Scarcely had the last trailing skirt swept 
glimmering out of the pavilion into the 
mellow slowly-brightening moonlight, than 
the gentlemen were astounded by this sudden 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 289 

and terrible exclamation. It was soon found 
to have issued from Mr. Saunders, who had 
hardly spoken more than a few sentences 
during the whole of dinner. 

4 What can be the matter ? ' was enquired 
by several voices. 

1 My fool of a servant,' said Mr. Saunders 
sullenly, 'has, I find, in packing, wrapped up 
a small sponge of mine in my disproof of 
God's existence.' 

1 H'f,' shuddered Mr. Rose, shrinking 
from Mr. Saunders's somewhat piercing tones, 
and resting his forehead on his hand, ' my 
head aches sadly. I think I will go down to 
the sea, and join the ladies.' 

' I,' said Mr. Saunders, ' if you will ex- 
cuse me, must go and see in what state the 
document is, as I left it drying, hung on the 
handle of my jug.' 

No sooner had Mr. Saunders and Mr. 
Rose departed than Dr. Jenkinson began to 
recover his equanimity somewhat. Seeing 
this, Mr. Storks, who had himself during 
dinner been first soothed and then ruffled 
into silence, found suddenly the strings of 
his tongue loosed. 

1 Now, those are the sort of young fellows,' 
he said, looking after the retreating form of 
Mr. Saunders, ' that really do a good deal to 

u 



2*> THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

bring all solid knowledge into contempt in 
the minds of the half-educated. There's a 
certain hall in London, not far from the top 
of Regent Street, where I'm told he gives 
Sunday lectures.' 

1 Yes,' said Dr. Jenkinson, sipping his 
claret, ' it's all very bad taste — very bad taste.' 

'And the worst of it is,' said Mr. Storks, 
1 that these young men really get hold of a 
fact or two, and then push them on to their 
own coarse and insane conclusions — which 
have, I admit, to the vulgar eye, the look of 
being obvious.' 

' Yes,' said Dr. Jenkinson, with a seraphic 
sweetness, ' we should always suspect every- 
thing that seems very obvious. Glaring in- 
consistencies and glaring consistencies are 
both sure to vanish if you look closely into 
them.' 

1 Now, all that about God, for instance,' 
Mr. Storks went on, ' is utterly uncalled for ; 
and, as young Saunders puts it, is utterly mis- 
leading.' 

'Yes,' said Dr. Jenkinson, 'it #// depends 
upon the way you say it' 

' I hardly think,' said Mr. Stockton with 
a sublime weariness, ' that we need waste 
much thought upon his way. It is a very 
common one — that of the puppy that barks 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. 291 

at the heels of the master whose meat it 
steals.' 

' May 1/ said Mr. Herbert gently, after 
a moment's pause, ' ask this, for I am a little 
puzzled here. Do I understand that Mr. 
Saunders's arguments may be held, on the 
face of the thing, to disprove the existence of 
God?' 

Mr. Storks and Mr. Stockton both stared 
gravely on Mr. Herbert ; and said nothing. 
Dr. Jenkinson stared at him too ; but the 
Doctor's eye lit up into a little sharp twinkle 
of benign content and amusement, and he 
said — 

1 No, Mr. Herbert, I don't think Mr. 
Saunders can disprove that, nor anyone else 
either. For the world has at present no 
adequate definition of God ; and I think we 
should be able to define a thing before we 
can satisfactorily disprove it. I think so. I 
have no doubt Mr. Saunders can disprove the 
existence of God, as he would define Him. 
All atheists can do that.' 

' Ah,' murmured Mr. Stockton, ' nobly 
said!' 

1 But that's not the way,' the Doctor went 

on, ' to set to work — this kind of rude denial. 

We must be loyal to nature. We must do 

nothing per saltum. We must be patient. 

u 2 



2Q2 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

We mustn't leap at Utopias, either religious 
or irreligious. Let us be content with the 
knowledge that all dogmas will expand in 
proportion as we feel they need expansion ; 
for all mere forms are transitory, and even the 

personality of ' 

Fatal word! It was like a match to a 
cannon. 

I Ah, Jenkinson,' exclaimed Mr. Luke, and 
Dr. Jenkinson stopped instantly, ' we see what 
you mean ; and capital sense it is too. But 
you do yourself as much as anyone else a 
great injustice, in not seeing that the age is 
composed of two parts, and that the cultured 
minority is infinitely in advance of the Phil- 
istine majority — which alone is, properly 
speaking, the present ; the minority being 
really the soul of the future waiting for its 
body, which at present can exist only as a 
Utopia. It is the wants of this soul that we 
have been talking over this afternoon. When 
the ladies come back to us, there are several 
things that I should like to say; and then 
you will see what we mean, Jenkinson — and 
that even poor Rose has really some right 
on his side.' 

At the mention of Mr. Rose's name the 
Doctor's face again curdled into frost. 

I I don't think so.' That was all he said. 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 293 




CHAPTER II. 

rE could really, Mr. Luke, almost 
fancy that we heard the Sirens 
singing, just now,' said Mrs. 
Sinclair, when the ladies of the 
party had returned from their ramble on the 
shore, with Mr. Rose amongst them, like 
Apollo leading the Muses. 

The coloured lamps were now glowing 
brightly, with their green and purple clusters ; 
the table was glittering under them, a wilder- 
ness of enchanted sparklings ; and outside the 
moonlight was bathing everything, the roof 
and pillars of the pavilion, the myrtles, and 
the multitudes of crowding roses, which 
trembled just a little in the air that they 
themselves scented. 

'Yes,' Mrs. Sinclair said, whilst there were 
some arrangements going on amongst the 
others with shawls and opera-cloaks, ' I never 
saw anything like the sea to-night. Far off 
the spray amongst the rocks looked like mer- 
maids playing; and at our feet it seemed 



794 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

as if the little pale waves were whispering 
and sighing messages to us. I don't think I 
should like to tell quite all I thought they 
said to me. And listen,' she cried with a faint 
sigh, ' is not that the nightingale ? It is — I 
am certain it is ! — 

The same that oft-times hath 
Charmed magic casements opening on the foam 
Of perilous seas in faery lands forlorn. ' 

What a night it is, to be sure ! We all felt 
down on the beach as if we were literally- 
breathing in Romance — or — well, I don't 
know what the right word is.' 

■ And 1/ said Mr. Rose, ' have been ex- 
plaining to them, that, had they lived in any 
other age, they would have felt nothing of all 
this ; that they feel it, by virtue of senses that 
have only been acquired in ours.' 

' Yes,' said Mr. Luke, clearing his throat ; 
1 that's quite true, and I want now to try and 
explain clearly how and why it is true. I 
was particularly anxious,' he said in a whisper 
to Laurence as he drew his chair forward, ' to 
speak of this when your Roman Catholic 
friend was here ; as she seems a very in- 
telligent young lady, and is, I have no doubt, 
fully alive to some of the grotesquenesses of 
what she considers to be her creed.' 

1 Keats, Ode to the Nightingale. 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 395 

Mr. Luke resettled himself. On one side 
of him was Miss Merton, in a pale blue opera 
cloak, bordered with white fur, and embroi- 
dered with gold, something in her large eyes 
of a subdued sadness ; and on the other side 
was Mrs. Sinclair, all in white, who looked 
like a wood-anemone against a background 
of dark foliage. 

' Now,' Mr. Luke continued, raising his 
voice a little, but speaking with a more 
mellow persuasiveness than usual, ' we all of 
us feel, in a general way — I think I may say 
that we nearly all of us feel — that the cul- 
tured minority of the present age is endowed 
with feelings, sentiments, and powers of in- 
sight, not only in advance of its common 
contemporaries, but in advance of all preced- 
ing times. We understand natural beauty, 
and natural affections, and above all moral 
beauty, in a new way, all our own. Now, to 
what is the advance due ? It is all due to cul- 
ture in its highest connection — its connection 
with religion. We feel stronger emotions 
about natural scenery, for just the same reason 
that we feel stronger emotions about righte 
ousness. And the reason is, that our emo- 
tions, in either case, no longer tempt us to 
draw grotesque inferences from themselves. 
There's the whole heart of the matter. We 



296 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

rest gratefully content with the objects that 
excite our love ; we don't pass away beyond 
them, and forget them. You had an excel- 
lent instance of the old treatment I condemn in 
those verses of Euripides which Mr. Laurence 
has translated with so much tenderness. 
There, you see, you have nature — flowers, 
meadows, and so forth ; and more important 
still, you have a high conception of virtue. 
But yet in that poem you have no real feel- 
ing for either the flowers or the virtue. The 
feeling only grazes these, so to speak, and 
glances off to a shadowy deity beyond, who 
was no more true, no more verifiable, than 
any of the rest of her kind, male or female, 
singular or triple. And now,' Mr. Luke 
went on, turning to Miss Merton, 'here is 
another illustration of the whole thing — of 
the advance made by culture in our entire 
mental state, of which I particularly wanted 
to talk to you (for in one point at least we 
agree, even professedly — the doctrine of de- 
velopment), and this is an illustration of it that 
you in a special way will appreciate. You, 
of course,' said Mr. Luke, 'know something 
more or less about St. Augustine, I suppose.' 
As it was with her reading that Father's 
account of his conversion that Miss Merton 
in a peculiar way associated her own, she 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 2y7 

looked at Mr. Luke with increased interest, 
feeling at the same time that she had cer- 
tainly as much knowledge on the subject as 
he so generously gave her credit for. 

1 Well,' Mr. Luke went on, ' Augustine 
was on the whole, you know, the most cul- 
tured of all the Fathers, and, considering the 
early date at which he lived, had in some 
ways a real insight into Christianity ; so we 
may safely consider him as the most favour- 
able specimen of the results of the old system. 
Let us take then the purest and most elevat- 
ing of all the pleasures of life, and enquire, 
through him, how it is treated and looked 
upon by theological Christianity. The eyes, 
says Augustine, love fair and various forms, 
and shining and lovely colours ; and all day 
long they are before me, and solicit my con- 
templation. " For " (and this exquisite sen- 
tence I remember in his very words) " the 
Light, that queen of colours, bathing all that 
we can look upon, from morning till evening, 
let me go where I will, will still keep gliding 
by me in unnumbered guises, and soothes me 
whilst I am busy at other things, and am 
thinking nothing of her.'" 1 

Miss Merton was pleased at the apprecia- 

1 Vide Aug. Con/. 1. ix. c. 34. 



398 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

tive tone in which Mr. Luke quoted. Mr. 
Luke noticed this, and he was pleased also. 

' And now,' he continued, ' what return 
does our gentleman make to the light for 
its beautiful and constant service to him ? 
Does he thank it ? does he praise it ? does 
he seek it ? No — ' Mr. Luke here gave a 
little laugh — ' not a bit of it ! He prays to 
his God that he may be delivered from its 
insidious snares ; he envies the blindness of 
Tobit, and describes himself as " earnestly 
groaning " under the temptations of these 
eyes of his flesh. That is all ! There,' said 
Mr. Luke, with a confident appeal to Miss 
Merton, whose expression was now slightly 
altering, ' we have in a most pointed form 
the barbarising results of the old theological 
religion. And now, put side by side with 
this, the following expression of the religion 
of sweet reason, such as culture reveals it to 
us. It deals with exactly the same sense, 
and the same pleasures : — 

What soul was his, when, from the naked top 

Of some bold headland, he beheld the sun 

Rise up, and bathe the world in light ! He looked — 

Ocean and earth, the solid frame of earth 

And ocean's liquid mass beneath him lay 

In gladness and deep joy. The clouds were touched 

And in their silent faces could be read 

Unutterable love. Sound needed none, 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 



299 



Nor any voice of joy ; his spirit drank 

The spectacle : sensation, soul, and form, 

All melted into him ; they swallowed up 

His animal being ; in them did he live, 

And by them did he live ; they were his life. 

In such access of mind, in such high hour 

Of visitation from the living God, 

Thought was not ; in enjoyment it expired ; 

No thanks he breathed, he proffered no request 1 

A sudden sigh here escaped from some 
one. Mr. Luke looked round. 

1 Ah/ exclaimed Mr. Stockton, ' what a 
description of prayer ! What a noble, what 
a magnificent description ! ' 

The fashion of Mr. Luke's countenance 
changed. He stopped short, he would not 
proceed a word farther. His whole quota- 
tion had been ruined, he felt, by this odious 
interruption. 

' I never supposed,' said Miss Merton, 
who thought Mr. Luke pausing that she 
might give in her acquiescence, ' I never sup- 
posed St. Augustine's views quite final upon 
all matters. I dare say there are some 
things that even I could have taught him.' 

She smiled as she said this ; but there 
was a little embarrassment in her tone which 
was perceived by Laurence, and which 
brought him at once to her rescue. 

1 Vide Wordsworth, Excursion, Book i. 



*x> THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

4 1/ he said, ' think the contrast Mr. Luke 
has drawn even stronger than he has made 
it. I by no means think that Augustine 
was afraid of the pleasures of light and 
sight as they were enjoyed by Wordsworth ; 
for I can hardly fancy that he could have had 
the least conception of them. They seem to 
me a new and peculiar heritage, which we 
may all more or less have part in ; but which 
by former ages were undreamt of, not re- 
jected. I often myself look back on a certain 
early walk I took one spring morning in these 
gardens — amongst the very trees and flower- 
beds we are now looking out upon. The fresh 
softness that was in the air, and all the wan- 
dering scents, like dreams or prophecies of 
summers gone or coming, and the wet light 
glistening on the dewy leaves, seemed to go 
at once to the soul — to " melt into me," as 
into Wordsworth's herdsman. Once I sur- 
prised myself stooping under a dripping 
bough, to look upwards at a yellow flower, 
and watch it lonely against a background of 
blue sky ; and once I started to find myself 
quite lost in staring at a red rock, gleaming 
amongst shrubs and ivy, which a plant of 
periwinkle spangled with a constellation of 
purple stars. The colour, the shape, the smell 
of every leaf and flower — each seemed to 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 301 

touch me like a note of music ; and the 
bloom of morning mist was over everything.' 

'Ah,' said Mrs. Sinclair, her dark eyes 
gleaming in the moonlight, ' how those spring 
mornings sometimes make one sick with 
longing ! ' 

1 Yes,' said Laurence, ' with longing — 
with a vague longing ; not always, I am 
afraid, with thanksgiving or with praise. But 
I think the feeling in all its moods is the same 
in some ways. It is a mixing together of 
outward and inward things — our whole inward 
lives passing out of us into Nature ; Nature 
melting into us, and growing part of our in- 
ward lives, so that all our hopes and fears 
and memories become embodied things, 
touching us in scents of flowers, in the breath 
of the air, in the sparkle of water, or mixing, 
like Hamadryads, their beings with the trees. 
Now, could I have described such feelings as 
these — my own state of mind during my 
morning walk — to Saint Augustine, he would 
not have understood me. He would have 
thought me raving. And my case is not 
peculiar. These feelings are no private things 
of my own. They belong to our whole age. 
And of this,' Laurence went on, ' you may 
see a very curious proof in a part of our 
modern literature, which as literature is least 



3©2 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

successful. I mean, a certain class of novels : 
not the works of the greater novelists, still 
less the works of the professional novel- 
manufacturers ; not these, but a sort of pro- 
duction almost peculiar to our own time — the 
novels of amateurs, who write perhaps but a 
single book during their whole lives ; and 
that one, with the simple aim of pouring out 
their own feelings for themselves to contem- 
plate, or of explaining to themselves or others 
their own histories.' 

1 And so,' said Mr. Storks, ' you would 
gauge the refinement of the age by its silliest 
novels ? ' 

' I think we too often forget,' said 
Laurence, ' that a very silly book may be 
evidently the work of a very clever person ; 
and may show its author possessed of every 
gift, except that of literature. And in many 
of the poor novels I am speaking of, the 
utter failure of the expression often only calls 
our attention more strongly to the depth, the 
delicacy, and the refinement of what the 
writer has struggled to express. I was read- 
ing a girl's novel in the train the other day, 
called Love in a Life. Its long spasms of 
ungrammatical verbiage, its utter want of 
knowledge of the world, would have turned 
the dullest reviewer, in spite of himself, into a 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 303 

caustic wit. But there was a something all 
through it, that its authoress was trying — try- 
ing to utter, that reminded me of Ariel try 
ing to escape from his tree. What, Lady 
Ambrose ! Have you written a novel ? 
No ? Then why are you looking so mysteri- 
ous, and so full of meaning ? ' 

1 Go on, Mr. Laurence,' said Lady Am- 
brose. ' I'll show you by-and-by.' 

1 Well,' said Laurence, ' take any one of 
these novels, and you will find the writer 
looking on Nature in just that peculiar 
modern way that we have been talking of. 
I don't say you will always find the senti- 
ment in the books, but the books will show 
you that you would find it in the writers. 
And this feeling about Nature is but an 
example of others. Take, as I said, the 
modern conception of love, and study that 
too, in these foolish novels. You will find 
half the folly comes from an attempt to 
express much, not from success in expressing 
little.' 

A pause followed this. It was broken at 
last by Allen. 

' I quite agree with Mr. Laurence,' he 
said diffidently. ■ I have not much right to 
judge, I dare say. I am not a great reader ; 
and I can only speak from books. But still 



3 o + THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

I know a little of the love poetry of this and 
of other times ; and the poetry of this has 
always seemed to me far — far the highest 
It has seemed to me to give the passion so 
much more meaning, and such a much 
greater influence over all life. And this, I 
suppose, must be because men, as the world 
goes on, are really learning to love in a 
higher way than perhaps they themselves 
are often conscious of 

1 1 think some philosopher,' murmured 
Mrs. Sinclair to Leslie, ' says we feel that we 
are greater than we know. It must be a 
great comfort sometimes to know that we 
are greater than we feel.' 

1 Is it not Novalis,' went on Allen, 'who 
says that if all the human race were a single 
pair of lovers, the difference between mysti- 
cism and non-mysticism would cease ? 
Would that have been understood even a 
hundred years ago ? But as to poets, I was 
thinking of two English poets of our own 
day especially. Shakespeare may of course 
have exhibited the working of love more 
powerfully than they ; yet I am sure he could 
never have conceived its meaning and 
its nature so deeply. No heroine of his 
could have understood Mrs. Browning's 
Sonnets from the Portuguese ; nor any hero of 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 30? 

his her husband's love lyrics. What seems 
to me the thing so peculiarly modern, is this 
notion of love as something which, once 
truly attained, would, as Browning says, 

make Time break, 
Letting us pent-up creatures through 
Into Eternity, our due. ' ' 

1 Ah ! ' murmured Mrs. Sinclair, ' but sup- 
pose there is no eternity ! I think we had 
better take what we can, and be thankful. 
Listen — listen again! "The nightingales, 
the nightingales! " There, Lord Allen, there 
is a bit of your Mrs. Browning for you.' 

'What, Lord Allen!' said Lady Am- 
brose, 'and is Mr. Robert Browning a 
better poet than Shakespeare ? I always 
thought Shakespeare was quite our best.' 

' It is not a question,' said Laurence, as 
Allen did not speak, ' of different poets, but 
of different ages. I have often wondered 
myself how far Faust would have appealed to 
the author of Hamlet, and whether all the 
spiritual action of the drama, in so far as it 
relates to the heroine, might not be lost upon 
him. What a difference between Margaret 
and Ophelia — not between themselves, but 
between the parts they play ! Shakespeare 

1 Vide Mr. R, Browning's Dis aliter visum. 
X 



306 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

himself might have understood Margaret's 
influence. I doubt it. But even if he had, 
that would prove little. Shakespeare's was 

The prophetic soul 
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come ; l 

and the "wide world" of his time would it- 
self have understood nothing of it. But what 
strikes me still more than the growth of par- 
ticular feelings, is the infusion and the inter- 
penetration of all. Look at Shakespeare's 
Sonnets. He loved the objects they were 
addressed to ; he loved flowers and Nature. 
But these two sets of things were connected 
only in his mind, they were not fused. Take, 
however, that most typical of all modern 
poems — the celebrated love-song in Maud % 
and think of that : — 

The slender acacia would not shake 

One long milk-bloom on the tree ; 
The white lake-blossom fell into the lake, 

And the pimpernel dozed on the lea ; 
But the rose was awake all night for your sake, 

Knowing your promise to me ; 
The lilies and roses were all awake, 

They sighed for the dawn and thee. 

What a passion is here ! We almost hear the 
lover's pulses as they painfully beat quicker. 
Our breath catches with his ; and we 

1 Vide Shakespeare, Sonnet cvii. 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 307 

long and long- with his longing. And yet 
hardly a word about his feelings is said 
directly. The secret is echoed back to us 
from the scene and from the summer night. 
It is the milk-bloom of the acacia, the musk 
of the roses, the stir of the morning breeze, 
that tells it all to us as if they were living 
things, and as if a human passion had passed 
into them for a soul. Now, would the world 
have understood this in any other times but 
ours? I don't think even Shakespeare's 
Jessica would, nor Dante's Beatrice, nor 
Petrarch's Laura, nor Horace's Lydia, nor 
Plato's Diotima, nor Homer's Helen.' 

'Listen!' exclaimed Mr. Rose eagerly, 

as soon as Laurence stopped ; * will you let 

me read one passage out of my work which 

bears upon this very point— in fact, sums up 

exactly what you have been saying? It 

occurs,' said Mr. Rose, who was sitting ready 

under one of the lamps with some printer's 

proofs before him, ' in my Essay on Capacity. 

"But chief '"—this is the passage I mean— 

" But chief amongst the new things which the 

heart of man has come to the understanding of 

is the passion of love, in its distinctly modern 

form. The goddess of this love is no longer 

the Aphrodite of the Greeks, or the Mary of 

the Christians. She is a mysterious hybrid 



io8 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

being, in whose veins is the blood of both of 
them. She is Mary in her desire of the 
Creator ; she is Aphrodite in her desire of the 
creature ; and in her desire of the creation, she 
is also Artentis." (' Oh, this will never do — 
this will never do !' muttered Dr. Jenkinson to 
himself, tapping with his feet on the ground.) 
' " Into the strange passion" ' Mr. Rose 
went on, '" of which hers is the tutelage, there 
have melted the sounds of woods and of 
waters, and the shapes and the hues of moun- 
tains, and the savour of airs and winds, and 
the odours of all flowers. All the joys, indeed, 
of the senses have fallen into it, like streams 
into one sea. And with the joys of the spirit 
it has been likewise. But whereas the senses 
have contributed their joys mainly, the spirit 
has contributed its sorrows and pains as well. 
Throughotit this love, despite its fulness of life, 
there yet runs also a co?istant taint of death, 
of which it needs cleansing — grotesque troubles 
and misgivings of conscience, and cloistral 
meditations, andfa?itastic repentances. For this 
very reaso7i, however, is it the more wholly ex- 
pressive to us of the mans imier develop?nent. 
It shows us how all his desires, senses, and 
powers of feeling have been growing together, 
and coalescing into a single organism, capable 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 309 

of quite new sets of pleasures, and respond- 
ing to far filter movements from without." ' 

' H'm,' said Mr. Luke slowly, in a tone of 
meditative commendation, 'there's a great 
deal of truth in that — a very great deal — if 
the fellow,' he added to himself, ' would only 
put it a little better.' 

1 Are you quite sure,' said Dr. Jenkinson, 
looking round him in an agony of suppressed 
irritation, ' that anyone at all feels all these 
things, beyond the very few people who talk 
about them ? ' 

'Yes,' said Mr. Rose, smiling with a 
honeyed gravity, and wholly unconscious of 
the Doctor's animus, ' all feel thus who have 
any part or lot in the world s development.' 

' You,' said the Doctor, turning sharply 
away from Mr. Rose, 'think so, Laurence, 
don't you, because you find some of the same 
sort of phrases in novels ? I don't think you'll 
find very much thought in those novels — not 
very much. They are effeminate foolish 
books.' 

' Yes,' said Allen with an assenting voice 
that much pleased the Doctor, ' a great deal 
of this increased depth and refinement of 
feeling, I know, is very good— all of it, I 
dare say, may be. But still, if left to itself, it 
must tend — indeed, I have often seen it tend 



310 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

— to make men effeminate, as Dr. Jenkinson 
says, and unfit for work. Now, I dare say 
Mr. Luke will call me a barbarian, but I am 
going to venture to say that, in spite of all 
that is said against it, that barbarous thing 
sport — shooting, deer-stalking, hunting — is of 
great value, especially to people who are not 
barbarians, as a kind of mental tonic. It 
makes them active and spirited — it must do 
so : it gives them presence of mind, and a 
readiness to exert themselves ; and though 
sport may in one sense be a self-indulgence, 
it is a self-indulgence that is constantly 
teaching all sorts of self-denial.' 

' My dear Lord Allen,' said Mr. Luke, 
1 1 most entirely agree with you. It does 
seem, I admit, at first sight, a somewhat 
singular thing, that the result of the latest 
civilisation should be to give men leisure to 
return to the occupations of their earliest 
barbarism — and those too deprived of their 
one justification — necessity. But still these 
barbarous sports must, as you say, if not 
pursued too exclusively, give a valuable 
moral tone to minds whose refinement might 
else become weakness. Only the worst of the 
matter, as it actually stands, is this — that the 
majority of people who do follow sport, are 
the very people who have no refinement that 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 311 

needs strengthening, but merely an idle aim- 
less strength that needs refining. And you 
must remember, Lord Allen, that the man 
who is gluttonous of aimless bodily action is 
no better than the man who is an epicure in 
aimless mental emotion.' 

* And so,' said Donald Gordon, with 
devout solemnity, 'this is what we must 
remedy in our new Republic. Our gentle- 
men there must have both sides of their 
nature developed equally ; and they must be 
at once so intellectual and so manly, as to be 
content that partridges and foxes shall die 
exclusively for them, without their living ex- 
clusively for partridges and foxes.' 

1 Exactly so,' said Mr. Luke drily. 

1 Some one observed this afternoon/ said 
Allen, turning a little stiffly to Donald Gordon, 
' how one could see the expression of a girl's 
face changed by the influence of a little 
genuine mental culture. I have noticed the 
same thing in men's faces, under the influence 
of a little genuine bodily culture. And 
I think myself that the moors of your 
country, or a river in Norway, or a good 
cruise in a yacht, may go — well, at least half 
as far towards making a complete man, as 
the study of books, and art, and poetry, in 
an arm-chair, or in a picture-gallery.' 



312 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 I think that is so true,' said Miss 
Merton softly to him in a whisper, for Dr. 
Jenkinson had begun to speak. 

' But,' the Doctor was saying, ' you must 
want something besides looking at pretty 
scenery, and falling in love, and shooting. I 
think you want something besides that to 
make life complete. You will want to exer- 
cise your intellect — your reason.' 

' Yes/ said Allen, ' and I defend all this 
voluntary physical exercise and excitement, 
because I think it makes the mind even more 
healthy than it does the body.' 

1 Yes,' said Dr. Jenkinson with a smile, ' I 
think that's right.' 

' You, gentlemen,' interposed Lady Grace, 
1 seem to be taking very good care of your- 
selves ; but are we women to shoot and 
take all this exercise also ? ' 

1 That,' said Mr. Luke with a courtly 
smile, 'we defer to your superior wisdom. 
There are, however, two helps to education, 
akin to exercise, in which both sexes will 
share, and which in a perfect state of society 
would be most important in their results. I 
mean travelling, and the halving of our lives 
between town and country. The completeness, 
the many-sidedness of such culture as there is 
amongst us, is in a great measure due to 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 313 

these ; but it is only slowly that we are 
learning to use them properly. Of course, 
Jenkinson, you understand all this — no man 
can do so better. It is simply the music and 
gymnastic of the Greeks. It is simply true 
education, which is but another name for 
culture. And in the cultivated man, thought, 
and taste, and feeling, and spirit are really 
all one, and fused together. Could we but 
look forward to a time when all or even the 
greater part of those one meets would unite 
these priceless gifts, there might then indeed 
be some satisfaction and some hope in 
life.' 

' And don't you want goodness ? ' said 
Dr. Jenkinson, all his sharpness returning ; 
1 do you want no sense of duty, and right, and 
wrong ? ' 

1 Yes,' said Laurence, • but we have in- 
cluded that already. We have found that 
that is pre-supposed in every educated 
pleasure. It is that that gives even our 
lightest conversation its best sparkle, and 
beads its surface over with its bright, crisp 
foam of half-conscious irony. The moral 
ideal is a note, as it were, which we are 
always hearing, and with which our daily talk 
makes continual harmonies, because it is never 
pitched in unison with it. Thus we talk 



3t4 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

of killing time, and so on, as being the 
great end of our lives ; of money or position 
being the only thing to marry for ; and of 
marriage ties as if they were always a 
weariness, or a grotesque torture.' 

1 And thus/ said Leslie, ' we say a man 
has had, par excellence, a success, when he 
has, for his own selfish pleasure, done a 
woman the greatest injury possible.' 

' And thus,' said Donald Gordon softly, 
1 when he does not tell all the world he 
has done so, we say he is a perfect gentle- 
man.' 

' And do you want no religion ? ' said 
Dr. Jenkinson, paying no attention to all 
this, but again turning to Mr. Luke. 

1 My dear Jenkinson,' said Mr. Luke, 
1 you and I agree upon these matters so well, 
that I think you must be trying to misunder- 
stand us. Can religion and morals be 
separated ? and are not they both included in 
what we mean by culture ? Is it not in virtue 
of culture — of that nice and complex discri- 
mination — that we can tell at once when we 
come across a genuine logion of Jesus 
amongst the sayings vulgarly supposed to be 
most distinctive of Him ? Think, for in- 
stance,' Mr. Luke continued, 'what a beauti- 
ful and profound harmony is at once made 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 315 

amongst our heartstrings, if culture have 
really tuned them, by such a story as that of 
the woman taken in adultery, or by the 
parable of the Prodigal Son, or by such simple 
pregnant sayings as, " v-n-dyoy /ecu epxojxat 77/065 
vjxas," and then turn for a moment to the 
theological accounts of the Trinity ! Why,' 
exclaimed Mr. Luke with a sudden jauntiness, 
' to sit on the key-board of an organ would 
make music compared to the discord, the 
jangling, the string-breaking that Church 
Catechisms, and Athanasian Creeds, and 
Episcopal speculations on the personality of 
the Creator, make on the musical instrument 
of the cultured mind. Ah,' Mr. Luke con- 
tinued, 'could the Founder of Christianity 
only have found men of more culture as His 
immediate disciples and reporters — could He 
only have secured a biographer as simply 

honest as poor Boswell was Well, well, but 

it's no use speculating about what might have 
been. Religion has had bad times hitherto, 
but now at last we — some of us, at least — are 
seeing the way to make them better ; you 
yourself, Jenkinson, amongst the number. 
And all this is due to that very thing which 
we say is the essence of the best human life — 
culture ; culture which is neither religion, nor 
morality, nor taste, nor intellect, nor know- 



3 i 6 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

ledge, nor wide reading, but the single result 
of all — and this,' Mr. Luke added, ' showing 
itself to the full — doing itself complete justice, 
through — as our friends have already said — 
what we call polish and high-breeding, and 
refinement of manner, and of manners.' 

1 Surely you,' said Mr. Stockton, turning 
to Dr. Jenkinson with the most mollifying 
deference, 'must agree with us that the present 
century has seen the soul of man widening 
out, with all its marvellous powers, and dis- 
playing new riches of beauty like an unfolding 
flower. But whilst we value — and none can 
value more than I — our higher flights of 
imagination, our finer forms of love, and poetry, 
and worship, I am not blind to the great 
agent that is at the bottom of all this change. 
I mean the emancipated human intellect, 
with all its manifold apparatus of discovery 
and conquest — that great liberator of life, and 
thought, and religion.' 

1 There is some truth in that,' said Dr. 
Jenkinson, not ungraciously, ' but I think you 
are all putting it in a wrong way. And, Luke,' 
he added with a little more causticity, ' to 
understand Christianity, you must know 
something of other religions too. You 
must study the great religions of the East, 
and compare them with those of the West. 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 317 

No religion can be understood by its own 
light only.' 

' In our ideal city,' said Mr. Rose, ' as I , 
saw it in my brief Apocalypse, you will find a 
home and a temple for every creed, and for 
every form of worship.' 

' What ! ' exclaimed Lady Ambrose, ' does 
Dr. Jenkinson want us to introduce Juggernaut 
and his car into England ? ' 

1 May I ask you one question,' broke in 
Mr. Herbert suddenly, ' a question which at 
times, I confess, seems to me not without 
importance ! Will this religion of yours, as 
you told us in the afternoon it was based on 
the discrimination between good and evil, 
also involve a discrimination between life and 
death ? Will it, I mean, point to any other 
life beyond this, or will it not ? Is whatever 
evil and sorrow we patiently suffer, a thing 
which, if it do not bring its reward to us here, 
will never bring us any reward at all ? And 
shall we call the death of the noble sufferer 
blessed for no other reason than that he 
rests from his labours and his works do 
not follow him ? ' 

1 Dear me ! dear me ! ' said Dr. Jenkinson 
petulantly to himself. ' These sort of 
questions ought never to be asked in that 



3i 8 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

hard abrupt way. You can't answer then: 
— you can't answer them.' 

Mr. Stockton, however, found no diffi- 
culty with his answer. 

' As to that/ he said, ' each man would 
think as he pleased, and his thoughts would 
shape themselves to meet the deepest needs 
of his life. In the state of society we long 
for, the belief in a future life would be open 
to all to accept or to reject. The only thing 
to guard against would be any definite public 
opinion on the matter, one way or the other ; 
for in any definite public opinion, remember, 
there is the germ of all dogmatism and of all 
persecution. Public opinion, in society as it 
ought to be, would be a frictionless fluid, if 
I may borrow a metaphor from science, in 
which no adventitious obstacle from prejudice 
or otherwise would impede the progress of 
any view that its own merits set in motion.' 

Mr. Luke was certainly an unfortunate 
man. Mr. Stockton had again, in part at 
least, expressed the exact thing which in 
other words he was going to have said him- 
self. Mr. Luke, however did not flinch. 
He boldly took the bull by the horns. 

1 True,' he said ; ' that metaphor is inge- 
nious, and explains exactly what we want to 
explain. That is one of the great conditions 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 319 

of a truly cultivated society, what Mr. Stock- 
ton calls a frictionless public opinion — a 
public opinion which shall let every system, 
every creed, every philosophy of life, stand 
or fall on its own practical verifiable merits ; 
and this we shall get, too, if we can only 
banish two things, prejudice and ignorance, 
of which last,' Mr. Luke added, looking 
studiously away from Mr. Stockton, ' by far 
the deadliest form is the fetish-worship of 
useless knowledge.' 

'Well,' said Miss Merton, 'I suppose 
that this is all that any of us would ask, who 
really and truly believe in what we profess 
to believe.' 

' Of course it is,' said Mr. Luke, ' every- 
thing — everything.' 

1 And I'm quite sure,' said Lady Grace, 
1 that in a society where the tone is so nobly 
liberal, and where all have such a true and 
burning admiration of the morally beautiful, 
it will be quite impossible that woman's life 
shall not be seen to be what it really is — 
a thing as capable as men's of high aims, and 
independent purposes, and not, as it were, 
entirely sunk in theirs. I, Mr. Luke, in face 
of such a public opinion as you speak of, 
should have little fear for our cause. I think, 
under God, it would prosper there.' 



320 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 Of course it would,' said Mr. Luke. ' If 
culture enables us to detect beauty and to prize 
it, what should it enable us to prize more 
than womanhood, with all its exquisite capa- 
bilities developed to their utmost ? Life has 
no greater ornament than cultured woman- 
hood.' 

' Except cultured manhood,' said Lady 
Grace, unconsciously giving Mr. Luke a 
slight wound by her generous and unex- 
pected return of his royal compliment. ' Ah,' 
she sighed to herself with a look at Mr. Luke, 
1 and he does not believe in God — or thinks 
he does not ! I suppose it must needs be 
that offences come ; but I wish they did not 
come by such good men. However — I 
trust that it is all really for the best. And 
then — there is no such thing as eternal punish- 
ment. One may be thankful to feel sure of 
that.' 

' I am afraid you will think me very 
troublesome,' said Mr. Herbert, who had 
been talking to Laurence in a low tone for 
the last few minutes, ' but there is one ques- 
tion more I should like to ask you. I want to 
know if you, who see the many delicate beau- 
ties of life, and the countless positions it 
may be viewed from, — I want to know if you 
will teach the lower, the commoner classes, 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 321 

who look up to you as models, to quote 
poetry, and to be enquiring and sceptical 
also?' 

1 1 hope not, indeed,' broke in Lady 
Ambrose with vigour ; ' and as to our being 
their models, Mr. Herbert, I'm sure you can't 
mean that. It seems to me one of the very 
worst things in these times that they will 
take us for their models. However, I think 
it is really a good deal our fault, and that it 
comes very much from our giving our maids 
so many of our old clothes to wear. That 
sort of thing puts notions into their heads. 
Now, here at any rate is one reform, that is 
implied in our Republic ; — I don't like that 
word Republic, by the way — we must put a 
stop to all this imitation of ourselves. Isn't 
that so, Mr. Laurence ? ' 

' Thank you, Lady Ambrose,' said Mr. 
Herbert, rising, ' thank you. I think it alto- 
gether a wise — nay, more than wise, an essen- 
tial thing, to keep these wide speculations 
from spreading beyond the only circles that 
they are really fitted for. I have to go in- 
doors now, as I have a few matters to arrange 
to-night ; but I am much obliged to you all for 
what you have taught me about culture, and 
enlightenment, and society, as it ought to be.' 

1 The difficulty is/ said Lady Ambrose, 
y 



322 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

as Mr. Herbert was walking away, 'how to 
keep all this thought, and so forth, to our- 
selves. One thing I'm quite certain of, that 
we really do a great deal of harm without 
thinking of it, by the way in which we speak 
our minds out before servants, and that sort 
of people, without in the least considering 
what may come of it. Now, what do 
you think of this, as a plan for making 
our ideal state a really good and contented 
place ? — the upper classes should speak a 
different language from the lower classes. 
Of course we should be able to speak theirs, 
'but they would not be able to speak ours. 
And then, you see, they would never hear us 
talk, or read our books, or get hold of our 
ideas ; which, after all, is what does all the 
mischief. And yet,' said Lady Ambrose 
with a sigh, ' that's not the great difficulty. 
The great difficulty would be about daugh- 
ters and younger sons, and how to give 
them all enough to keep them going in the 
world. However, this we can talk of in a 
minute. But — ' here Lady Ambrose put her 
hand in her pocket, and a sound was heard 
as of rustling paper. 

' I really do believe,' said Laurence, ' that 
Lady Ambrose has written a novel, although 
she denies it ; and there she is going to read 



HOOK IV. CHAPTER IT. 333 

a bit of it now, as a specimen of her own 
culture.' 

'No,' said Lady Ambrose, 'really and 
truly. And if I had written a novel, Mr. 
Laurence, I should not have the cruelty to 
inflict it upon you. No ; but what I have 
here,' she said at last, producing a manuscript, 
4 though it is not mine, is next door to a 
novel, and in some respects better than one. 
It is a sort of memoir of herself, written by 
a certain lady I know. I am betraying no 
confidence in showing it to you ; as she her- 
self has lent it to a good many friends, and 
as long as her name is not mentioned, she is 
by way of wishing to have it circulated. She 
has, in fact, consulted me about having it 
printed. Now I want you, Mr. Laurence, to 
look through some of it, and tell me if the 
writer is not really a person of culture. Per- 
haps you would not mind reading out a little 
of it' 

' Am I to read it a through ? ' asked 
Laurence, as he took the seat which Mr. 
Rose gave up to him at the table. 

' No, no,' said Lady Ambrose. ' Just 
pick out the best bits — a page here, and a 
page there.' 

' Well,' said Laurence, ' I will, at any rate, 
start with the beginning. Now, are all of us 

Y 2 



324 THE NEW REPUBLIC, 

ready to be let into the secrets of a young 
lady's soul ? — 

1 " One of ten feels a longing — who has not 
felt it ? — in the hurry and trouble of life to 
pause for a little while and look back upon 
the past, which we too too often forget, and see 
what it is we have grown from. We long to 
see how it has fared with ourselves — our own 
selves — our chai'acters! 

' I think you may skip the beginning,' 
said Lady Ambrose, ■ it's a little dull. Turn 
over a page or two.' 

1 " How strangely do they come back to me, 
those distant irrevocable days ! " Will that 
do ? ' asked Laurence. 

1 Yes,' said Lady Ambrose, ' I think so — 
go on there.' 

' " those distant irrevocable days, when 

the world was all new to me, and each experi- 
ence was fresh and delightful, and I knew 
nothing of what self-reproach could mean. 
Ah, ?ne ! how times have changed since then ! 
I sometimes fancy that I am hardly worthy 
now to look back upon my own past. I was 
gifted naturally with a curious warmth and 
si7icerity of nattire, that must have been very 
beautiful. But my peculiar gift, my own own 
gift, was a power of sympathy with others, by 
which quite naturally I used to throw myself 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 325 

into their places, understand tJieir difficulties, 
and excite myself with their interests. When 
I was yet quite a child, that, I know, is what 
men felt in me — / never cared for boys — 07ie 
mail especially. It was then that life began 
for me, and what it all meant broke on me like 
a revelation. I, in my simplicity, never 
dreamt of his being more than a friend — / am 
not sure even that he was my dearest friend. 
I certainly never tried to charm him. But 
I did charm him, nevertheless, quite uncon- 
sciously. And he loved me passionately, de- 
votedly, child as I was. Ah, God! when will 

another ever feel the same for me f And I 

1 O, my lost, my rejected friend ! come back to 
me' sometimes I still cry in my solitude ; 
'poor, and obscurely connected as you are, 
come back to me ! ' I shall never forget— poor 
little me ! — the solemn shock of the moment, 
how my heart stood still, how all the blood 
came rushing into my cheek, when all of a 
sudden, as it seemed to me, and without any 
warning, he asked me to be his wife. Every- 
thing seemed to grow dizzy before me. It 
seemed to me as if the day of jttdgment had 
come. [Alas / will there ever be a day of 
judgment at all? is what I now ask.) I don't 
know what I said. I only remember distinctly 
my throwing myself into my mothers arms, 



326 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

and crying like a child — and I was one — as if 
my very heart would break. '/ am only a 
child ! ' that is what I said. ' Oh, mother, I 
am such a child ! ' The pathos of the scene 
often comes back to vie even now — a shadowy 
timid memory, wondering if I shall give it 
harbour. I remember, too, how I said my 
prayers that night, and how I asked 
God 

■ I think you needn't read that,' said Lady 
Ambrose, ' go on a page or two further.' 

' " / spent much of my time sketching." 
Shall I go on there ? ' said Laurence. ' " / 
had always a curiously appreciative eye for 
natural beauty!' Will that do ? Or shall I 
o-o on here — I think this is better — at the next 
paragraph ? — " Oh the great waste of love in 
this our world!' ' 

' Yes, go on there,' said Mrs. Sinclair and 
several others. 

1 " Oh the great waste of love in this our 
world ! How many a true heart would have 
%ive?i itself to me, could I only honestly and 
unreservedly have opened out to it all the 
depths of mine, and received it! A?id why 
iid I never do so ? It may be that I have 
known none who could really understand 
xne — none that I could really love. But does 
t/iat excuse me, not for not loving them, but 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 32? 

for making as though I did love them, and so 
ruining their lives and searing my own? 
sending them in the end to their brandy-bottles, 
and their gaming-hells, and their wild Cre- 
momes, and myself—to the mental state in 
which I am now ! 

1 " Have I then lost it for ever— lost all hope 
of love ? and must I quietly take Up with my 
unappreciated loneliness f If it is so, if indeed, 
it is so, surely I have brought it on myself 

Was there not one — not my earliest lover but 

another, who with a devotion I understood far 
more fully, laid himself at my feet, and offered 
me all his mans devotion, and his mans sym- 
pathy ! Why, why in my madness did I send 
him from me, penniless as he was — but what 
of that?— driving him to death, and leavi?ig 
myself to desolation ? How does the image of 
his pale still face upturned towards the Indian 
star-light, with eyes which no star-light could 
ever touch any more, rise before me— his hand 
on his breast, and clasping with its last grasp 
a locket with my picture in it ! Yes, I see 
him there, though I did not see him. I know 
how he must have looked, with his heart bullet- 
pierced— noble, beautiful in death. Unworthy 
as I was of you, my true-hearted one, too late, 
too late, did I learn my own unworthiness. I 
was sitting in the window of our house at 



328 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

Ventnor, when the letter came that told me. 
It was evening ; and I had been looking out 
through the summer twilight at the sea and at 
the sunset. As I read the letter, it dropped 
fro?n my hand. I gave a gasp. I repressed a 
shrill cry. I felt a choking sensation in my 
throat; but I was very proud, and I even re- 
pressed a sob. I only, with entire calmness, 
turned my head towai'ds the sea, and sighed a 
sigh deep-drawn as if my soul we7'e in it. 
My cheek was pale, my eyes were wild and 
wistful— full of a solemn new earnestness. 
What the exact thoughts were that were busy 
in me, I camwt tell. All I am conscious of 
was this, that far, far off were the great 
crimson spaces of evening sky and a trail of 
rippled splendotir on the sea. One great violet 
cloud fringed with a border of living fire, 
t/iat seemed to be eating into it, hung just above 
the place where the sun had gone dozvn ; and 
over this, in a pale liquid solittide of hushed 
colour, was the evening star, trembling like a 
tear-drop. I was always sensitive to colour ; 
and somehow or other this stcnset relieved me 
— went right to my heart with a quiet sense of 
healing. That eveni7ig was, I think, one of 
the great points in my life. I seemed ever 
after to see my own character more clearly — 
how deep zvere my own capacities for feeli?ig, 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 329 

and also how strangely Nature could enter in 
and comfort me, when all human sympathy 
would have seemed intrusive. That night, 
when I went upstairs, I hardly knew myself. 
There was a wild look in my eyes — an inex- 
pressible moumfulness and an inexpressible 
longing. Two or three long tendrils of hair 
had got loose, and hung over my forehead with 
a kind of wild languor. ' What is there that 
men can see in me to attract the?n ? ' I had 
often said to myself I think then a some- 
thing of what it was began to dawn upon me. 
1 And he — he, the true, the gallant, the devoted, he 
has lost all this I I gasped, turning away from 
the glass ; and, throwing myself on my knees by 
the bed, the sob I had so long suppressed broke 

forth, and I tried to pray " h'm — and so 

on, and so on, and so on ' 

* You needn't read all those bits about 
the prayers,' said Lady Ambrose. ' I don't 
think it is quite reverent' 

1 Well,' said Laurence, ' here's a new 
stage of her life. Let us go on here. " And 
now, from the bleak desolation of my present 
existence, I peer wistfully ozct on all sides, and 
see if any will bring the love to me that I so 
much crave for." ' 

1 Poor thing ! ' said Mrs. Sinclair, with a 
little sigh. 



33© THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

* I'm afraid,' said Lady Ambrose, 'I must 
mention, by the way, that the lady is married, 
and remarkably well married too.' 

' " Here in the old house with its quiet 
gables" Laurence went on reading, " / sit in 
my own room, a7id watch the sunset dying 
away over the yellowing autumn zvoods, itself 
the colour of a belated autumn leaf I watch 
it alone — -yes, thank heaven, alone. I manage 
to steal for an hotcr or two away from those 
people of whom the house is full. Who is 
there amongst them that can understand me ? 
whose spirit meets mine on equal terms ? I 
latigh with them, I talk with them, I jest with 
them, and they think they know me. But ah ! 
the weariness, the far-offness of it all " ' 

* It is entirely her own fault,' said Lady 
Ambrose, ' that she has these people here. Her 
husband is devoted to the country and the 
turnips for their own sake, and would never 
see a soul but a few of the neighbouring 
squires and parsons, if she did not make him. 
In London, you know, she is nearly always 
by herself. At least,' Lady Ambrose added, 
1 he's very rarely with her.' 

1 A little further on,' said Laurence, ' it 
seems that all the visitors have gone ; and 
she has been to pay a visit to the parson's 
■wife,' 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 331 

1 You may be sure she was quite by her- 
self if she did that/ said Lady Ambrose. 

' Here,' Laurence continued, ' is a descrip- 
tion of the visit. " What sweet eyes the little 
thing had ! What a look of trustfulness in 
her face ! A good and pure, and therefore a 
happy woman, if ever there was one. What 
a trust in those eyes of hers ! What an 
innocence ! What a sweet coyitent ! There is 
no purple shadow of care tmder her eyes — 
{people say I darken mine artificially . Alas! 
heaven knows there is little need for me to do 
t/tat !) There is no secret trouble discernible 
in her lips — no languor in her air ! What 
does she know of life, with its trot^^^s, its 
distractions, its sins ? Ah ! were I but like 
Iter — /, world-worn and world-weary, sickened 
with pomps, and vanities, and soiled affections, 
and hollow homage — were I but worthy that 
she should talk to me ! ' Dont talk to me,' I 
felt inclined to say. * You wouldn't if you 
knew — if you could know! Oh, how far better 
are you than I ! You little dream when I 
show myself demurely in my seat in the village 
church, bowing at the Glorias, or kneeling 
with my face hid in my hands, you little 
imagine what a woman you see there. 
You little dream what strange thoughts un- 
bidden mix themselves up for me with th$ 



333 THE NEW REPUBLIC 

hymn-music; what wild regrets, what bitter 
reveries, what strange scenes and figures, fill 
my mind as I kneel before the Commtmion- 
table. Why could I not have been content 
like you with a quiet lot, a toiling honest Jms- 
band like you ? Is there not something holy, 
even in his dull sermons, if you only look on 
them in the lovely light of duty ? Why does 
my heart vibrate with the troubled wailing 
music of ma?iy sorrows, many longings, of 
which you do not even dream the existence f 
Oh ! what afar higher, far nobler woman are 
you than I, in every way ! " ' 

'And now,' said Lady Ambrose, seeing 
that Laurence had shut the book, ' I want to 
know if all this is a specimen of culture, and 
if you would call the writer a cultivated per- 
son ; because she is really one of the most 
delightful people I know to talk to ; and if 
this is what you call culture — though I think, 
in her case, it's a little bit affected, you know 
— but then she never lets you see all this 
when you talk to her — I do quite from the 
bottom of my heart give up about culture 
being priggish, and bookish, and all that ; 
and since, as you say, it really must include 
religion, I don't see what we could wish for 
more, to make life — humanly speaking — per- 
fect Of course we shall do good sometimes 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 333 

■ — I mean, not forget the poor — there's some- 
thing so wretchedly heartless in that, I think. 

And then, too, politics ' 

' Yes,' repeated Allen, ' politics ' 



' Of course,' said Lady Ambrose, ' it is 
necessary that some of us should look after 
politics, because if we did not somebody else 
would. But still — (are you a Liberal, Lord 
Allen ?) — but still, within a limit, I think 
the less we meddle the better.' 

' Much, Lady Ambrose,' said Mr. Rose, 
who had been somewhat put out by this di- 
gression, ' much is, no doubt, to be got over 
in your friend's style ; nor do I think the 
culture displayed in her memoirs, even apart 
from that ' 

' Oh, but you mustn't judge her only by 
her writings,' said Lady Ambrose. ' When 
you meet her, she is not a bit like them.' 

* Amateurs in writing rarely are,' said 
Laurence. ' Their writings are simply the 
foot-notes of their lives, where they tell you 
what they heve not skill enough to bring into 
the text.' 

' She draws beautifully,' Lady Ambrose 
went on, ■ and is really the brightest of crea- 
tures — so witty, and with such a sense of the 
ridiculous ! And really, to hear her tell a 
bit of scandal — not that I at all approve 



334 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

of scandal myself — I always think it's so 
uncharitable ' 

' Ah,' said Donald Gordon gently, ' I have 
the very highest opinion of scandal. It is 
founded on the most sacred of things — that 
is, Truth, and it is built up by the most 
beautiful of things — that is, Imagination.' 

' Well, Mr. Gordon,' said Lady Ambrose, 
smiling, ' we won't talk about that now. But 
as for what you say about style, Mr. Rose, it 
is rather jerky, and so forth, I admit. How- 
ever, that's the way with us women. Indeed, 
I often think that if women had invented 
language, it would have consisted mainly of 
interjections, and that its only stop would 
have been a note of exclamation.' 

Mr. Rose was much annoyed at these 
interruptions. 

1 I wanted to say,' he went on, as soon as 
Lady Ambrose had ceased, ' that I think 
your friend's memoirs more instructive from 
their very shortcomings, as showing how the 
human mind — even if not exceptionally gifted 
— has come to be an organism of increased 
delicacy and capacity, except when stunted by 
the necessity of work, or of occupation that is 
other than voluntary, and chosen for any ob- 
ject beyond itself. You have here, you see, that 
same modern sense of the blending together 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 335 

of the outer and inner worlds ; there is the 
same delicate discrimination between the 
aesthetic aspects of the different stages of life, 
and the nice gradation of moral colours : 
there is the same fine self-consciousness, and 
consequent endeavour to give tone and 
quality to her memories as they pass by her, 
in exquisite and complex ways.' 

1 Yes,' exclaimed Leslie suddenly, who 
had spoken but little all the evening, ' here, I 
think, is the crowning work of culture. It 
teaches each of us to look back upon his own 
life, with all its wants, its relations, and its 
possibilities, all its wasted hours and its affec- 
tions trifled away or degraded — it teaches us 
to look back upon all this with quite a new 
kind of discrimination. The beauty of youth, 
with all its buoyancy and innocence, wakes in 
us of the modern world a more wistful and 
solemn regret ; we are more keenly alive to 
the pathos of failure ; to the sadness of the 
cold shadows that will often darken the whole 
inward landscape, and the ravage made by 
the storms that will sometimes break over it ; 
and to the gleams of sunshine fitfully re- 
appearing, often only touching its distant 
wolds. And the charm of this is,' Leslie 
went on, with a short laugh, ' that however 
disastrous our lives may have been, what- 



336 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

ever shipwreck we may have made of 
ourselves or others, let us only look back on 
this with the eyes of culture, whilst "es 
wiederholt die Klage des Lebens labyrinthisch 
irren Lauf" and the whole retrospect becomes 
a delightful picture, the more impressive and 
suggestive from its landslips, its broken 
roads, and its waste places. I really think 
one is repaid for having made oneself quite 
lonely, and deserted, and friendless, by the 
pleasure one gets from contemplating one's 
own situation.' 

' I cannot bear that man,' whispered Lady 
Ambrose to Miss Merton. ' Didn't you 
notice the nasty way in which all that was 
said ? But — good gracious, Mr. Laurence, 
what is that bell ringing for in the house ? 
Is that for us to leave off talking ? We have 
not half done yet.' 

Laurence smiled, and looked a little shy, 
and murmured that he did not think it was 
so late. ' I don't know whether you'll mind,' 
he said at last, ' but our Rector is going to 
give us a little evening service. He proposed 
it this afternoon in the garden, and I could 
not well refuse.' 

' Mind it ! ' exclaimed Lady Ambrose. ' I 
should think not.' 

* Service ! ' said Dr. Jenkinson briskly ; 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 337 

' yes, come and let us go to that. I think,' he 
said, looking round him, [ that you will find 
the religion we have is the best for us at 
present. I think so. And Christianity,' he 
added, turning to Mr. Stockton, I really em- 
braces all religions, even any honest denial 
of itself.' 

There was now a general movement 
towards the house. 

1 I'm afraid,' said Mrs. Sinclair to Leslie, 
4 that you're not of a very happy disposition. 
You don't look happy, somehow. And yet 
I think you might be, if you only tried. I 
suppose you're not out of spirits like Mr. 
Laurence, because you don't believe in the 
Trinity, are you ? Just look at the sea now. 
Isn't that beautiful ? Don't you care for that ? 
But I, you know,' she added with a sigh, 
* disagree with Mr. Luke. / want the notion 
of a personal deity, to make me enjoy nature. 
I want my thought to pass away to him. But 
I don't mean a vague deity ; but some one 
whom I have myself made a deity, and who, 
therefore, I can be quite sure exists — do you 
see ? ' 

1 My dear,' said Lady Ambrose again to 
Miss Merton, ' I really cannot bear Mr. 
Leslie. I feel quite sure he's a bad man. And 
the way he sneers and laughs at things does 

Z 



338 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

go so against me. I wouldn't have that man 
inside my house, do you know, for anything. 
T know you don't think so ; but then you 
Roman Catholics believe so much, you can 
afford to be liberal. Not that I myself am at 
all bigoted ; indeed, the one thing I think we 
want is toleration and charity. And do you 
know, my dear,' Lady Ambrose added as 
they were entering the house, ' I have a set 
of eight cousins, all unmarried ; and when I 
look at those girls' faces, I do confess, my 
dear, that I positively wish your religion was 
true ; for then they could all go into convents. 
One doesn't like those half-and-half Protes- 
tant things, you know.' 

j ust at this moment, emerging from the 
house, pale and disappointed, appeared the 
figure of Mr. Saunders. 

' It is thrown away,' he exclaimed ; ' my 
disproof of God's existence. The under- 
housemaid did it ! I am pleased to discover, 
however, that she previously read through a 
part ; so it has not perished, I trust, without 
emancipating one spirit. What ! are you all 
going indoors ? ' 

1 Yes,' said Mr. Storks, laying his arm on 
Mr. Saunders's shoulder; 'and you had 
better come too. Young man,' he said in a 
voice of commanding kindness, ' you should 



BOOK IV. CHAPTER II. 3J9 

never in this virulent way deny God's ex- 
istence. What rational man believes in it ? ' 
' I was looking before dinner,' said Mr. 
Rose, who with Laurence was bringing up the 
rear, ' at the books in your uncle's pavilion 
in the garden ; and I saw there, in a closed 
case, a copy of the ■ Cultes secrets des Dames 
Romaines.' 

'Well ?' said Laurence a little stiffly, ' It 
has been locked up for years.' 

' I conceived as much,' said Mr. Rose 
gently. ' As you do not seem to set much 
store by the work, I will give you thirty 
pounds for it' 



34o THE NEW REPUBLIC. 




BOOK V. 

CHAPTER I. 

gJ^PNCE more the theatre was brightly 
lighted ; and once more the con- 
gregation was assembled in the tier 
of boxes. There was not so much 
excitement as there had been in the morning ; 
indeed, the reserved decorum that reigned 
might have been said to partake almost of the 
nature of apathy. When, however, Dr. Seydon 
entered, none could deny that he did indeed 
look a reverend man ; and the very aspect of 
the place seemed to grow devotional at his 
presence. Lady Ambrose perceived with a full 
heart that he was duly habited in a surplice ; 
and her bosom warmed with a sense of safety 
and of comfort as he took his place and 
solemnly produced his prayer-book. Nor was 
Lady Ambrose alone in this sudden stir of 
feeling. There was another of the wor- 
shippers who was moved even more strongly, 
though in a slightly different way. Many 
starts had been given on the stage in that 



BOOK V. CHAPTER I. 341 

theatre ; but none of these, it may be safely 
said, ever equalled one now given in the 
boxes, as Dr. Jenkinson, who had been kneel- 
ing with his face hid in his hands, raised 
his eyes, and saw for the first time who it 
was confronting him — no obscure rural 
clergyman, as he had anticipated, but that 
illiberal apologist of superstition, whose offi- 
cious bigotry had robbed the Upper House 
of its most enlightened spiritual peer. Dr. 
Jenkinson, however, with the heroism of a 
true martyr, suffered bravely for his faith in 
the comprehensiveness of Christianity. His 
face assumed, in another moment, an expres- 
sion of cherubic suavity ; in his gentlest and 
devoutest tones he was soon taking his part in 
the whole service, and that too with such an ex- 
quisite clearness of articulation, that, amongst 
the confused murmurs of the rest, the entire 
evening office sounded like a duet between 
him and Dr. Seydon. It is true that there 
was something in the ring of this one audible 
voice that gave the latter a sense of some- 
thing being wrong somewhere ; but luckily, 
being a little shortsighted, he could not re- 
cognise the owner of it ; and Dr. Jenkinson, 
feeling no manner of call to endure the ser- 
mon, retired furtively as soon as the prayers 
were over. 



342 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

4 Weren't they read beautifully ! ' said 
Lady Ambrose to Lady Grace in a whisper. 
' Oh, how glad I shall be to hear him preach 
once again ! ' she added, as Dr. Seydon, having 
risen from his knees, retired, his hands 
clasped before him, through the side door. 
Lady Ambrose, however, was entirely alone 
in this gladness. Most of the others dreaded 
the sermon that was imminent, and some 
even meditated following Dr. Jenkinson. But 
events were too quick for them. Hardly, it 
seemed, had Dr. Seydon left the stalls, than 
the curtain drew rapidly up, and displayed 
again the gorge in the Indian Caucasus, only 
with a preacher in it very different from the 
one who had stood there in the morning. 
The whole congregation gave a sudden gasp 
of surprise. It was not Dr. Seydon that 
they saw. It was Mr. Herbert. 

With a gracious gravity he advanced to- 
wards the footlights ; and made a slight bow to 
the house — a bow of deprecation and apology. 

' A little while ago, in the garden,' he said, 
4 I confessed to our kind host, Mr. Laurence, 
that there were a few things that I should like 
quietly to say to you ; and Mr. Laurence has 
become sponsor for you all, and has promised, 
in your names, that you would suffer me to 
say them here. It is true,' Mr. Herbert 



BOOK V. CHAPTER L ^ 

went on, with a smile and a wave of his hand, 
' that when I look round me at this glittering 
semicircle, I begin to hd not a little shy of 
you, and to repent of my own temerity. 
You, however, have given me to-day so much 
good food for reflection, that I feel bound, in 
the commonest honesty, to make what poor 
return I can. So remember, that if I weary 
you, you have really brought it upon your- 
selves. 

' Well—to begin, then. You think me— 
you need not deny it, for I know you think 
me- a somewhat crotchety and melancholy 
individual, averse to modern knowledge and 
to modern progress, and seeing, as a rule 
everything very yellow indeed, with his 
jaundiced eyes. But I think myself that I am 
not by any means so obstinate and so wrong- 
headed as I am quite aware that I appear To 
you; nay, my own opinion is that I err, 
rather, in not being quite obstinate enough.' 
It is true that I have persistently pointed out 
that England is at present given over wholly 
to ignoble pursuits, and is ruining herself with 
deadly industries. But I have never said 
hitherto, so far as I know, that we might not 
rally, and that a brighter future might not be 
in store for us. Nay, I hailed a piece of news 
to-day with the most unfeigned delight, which 



344 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

seemed an omen to me that such a brighter 
future actually was in store for us. In a paper 
that reached me this afternoon there was a 
letter on the prospects of the English iron 
trade ; and I read in that letter that nineteen 
foundries in Middlesborough have been closed 
within the last three months, and the Moloch 
fires in their blast-furnaces extinguished ; that 
ten more foundries in the same place are 
scarcely able to continue work, and must 
very shortly be closed likewise ; and that the 
dense smoke-cloud that so long has darkened 
that whole country is beginning to clear away, 
and will open ere long upon astonished 
human eyes, that have never yet beheld it, 
the liquid melted blue of the deep wells of 
the sky. It is quite true that this indication 
of a reviving prosperity for our country 
suggests more than it proves. But at any rate 
it put me this afternoon, when I joined your 
party, into quite a right and hopeful mood 
for appreciating your conceptions of a better 
order of things. It is in fact simply to ex- 
plain my appreciation that I am, in this most 
unconscionable way, now detaining you. 

' Let me say in the first place, then, how 
profoundly right I consider the manner in 
which you set to work. For it is one of the 
most vital of all truths, that in a perfect state 



BOOK V. CHAPTER I. 345 

all the parts will be perfect ; and that if the 
highest classes be as good as they can be, so 
also will be all the other classes. And I 
want to tell you, in the next place, how 
entirely fair and lovely did all the elements 
seem to be, out of which you composed for 
your higher classes their ideal existence. 
For you gave them every outward grace that 
could adorn life, and every inward taste and 
emotion that could enrich it, and every 
species of intellectual activity that could 
stimulate it. Your society was indeed to be 
truly the crhne de la crane : it was to be 
made beautiful, and profound, and brilliant, 
by lovers, and theologians, and wits, and men 
of science, and poets, and philosophers, and 
humourists — all men and women of the 
world, and fit to live in society, as well as to 
educate it. This would indeed be, as was 
said at dinner, Rome and Athens and 
Florence, at their best, and let me add Paris 
also, united and reanimated, and enriched by 
the possession of yet wider knowledge, and 
the possibilities of freer speculation. That 
truly is a dazzling picture. But even that is 
not all. There was your city itself too, of 
which a lovely glimpse was given us, with its 
groves, its gardens, its palaces, and its ex- 
quisite reproductions of the world's noblest 






346 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

architectures ; and all this under our softest 
English skies, and by our bluest English 
seas. Ah,' exclaimed Mr. Herbert, smiling, 
and clasping his hands gently, ' how I should 
like to live in a city like that ! I can literally 
see it now with my mind's eye, whilst I am 
talking. I see its private houses with their 
wonders of wrought marble ; I see its 
theatres, its museums, its chapels and 
churches of all denominations, its scientific 
lecture rooms, and its convents. For what 
strikes me more forcibly than anything is 
that all forms of faith and philosophy seem 
to find here an impartial home, and to unite in 
animating one harmonious social life. In fact, 
so vividly do I see this scene which your 
words have called up before me, that I want 
very much, if you will let me, to add one 
small feature to it, myself. It is a very 
humble detail, this of mine. In the eyes of 
the men of science, who lead modern 
thought, it is simply a sanitary matter. It 
relates to the way in which you shall 
dispose of your dead. Now in this, at least, 
you will be surprised to hear I quite keep 
pace with the times, being a sincere advocate 
for cremation ; and what I should want to do 
in your city, would be to supply it with an 
establishment, hidden underground, where the 



BOOK V. CHAPTER I. 347 

bodies of the dead should be turned into gas,/ 
in properly devised retorts ; the gas from 
each body being received in a small separate 
gasometer. Above these gasworks, and 
amongst your fair towers and spires, and 
your superb institutions, and art-galleries, I 
would build a circular domed temple of 
umbred marble, blind and blank upon the 
face of it, without carved work, and without 
window ; only there should be written above 
the portal, not as in Dante's vision, 

Per me si va nelP etcrno dolore, 
Per me si va tra la perduta gente — 

but one verse out of our English translation 
of the Bible, for women and little children to 
read ; and another verse out of a Latin poet, 
which is, I believe, an equivalent for the 
original of that translation, for men and 
scholars to read. The first should be, 
" Though after my skin worms destroy this 
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God." And 
the other : 

Quaeris quo jaceas post obitum loco ? 
Quo non nata jacent. 

And within, around the dark walls, should 
be a number of separate shrines, like — 
to use the simile that Dante would have 
chosen — the stalls in a great stable ; and 



348 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

to each shrine there should be a separate 
gas-jet. And when the life of any was over, 
after the fire had done its work upon the 
dead body, that man or woman who felt 
most bitterly the loss of the one that had 
been, should repair to this temple, to an ap- 
pointed shrine, and there, in silence kneeling 
before it, should light the gas-jet ; and thus 
evoking for the last time that which was once 
so loved and loving, pass, with what thoughts 
might be, a brief vigil before it, till its flicker 
grew slowly faint upon the watcher's face, 
and at length it went out and ended utterly 
and for ever. And above, over these 
sanctuaries of bereavement and final leave- 
taking, there should hang from the domed 
roof one rude iron lamp, always burning — 
casting a pale flare upwards upon the dark- 
ness. This would be the common lamp of 
the poor, for whose sake, dying, no one felt 
bereavement, or whom no one at any rate 
could find time to say good-bye to ; but 
who thus united together, apart by them- 
selves, would do all that would be at all 
seemly in them — would remind you mutely 
and unobtrusively by their joint light, that 
one thing at least they shared with you, 
namely death. It is not of the poor, how- 
ever, that I am mainly thinking now. It is 



BOOK V. CHAPTER L 349 

of your higher classes, who have leisure 
to feel sorrow and all its holy influences. 
And these, I say, would find in this simple 
funeral service one that would meet all their 
diverse needs, and be in tune with all their 
diverse feelings. It would suit all. For to 
some it would symbolise an absolute disbelief 
in any life beyond ; and to all the rest it 
would symbolise a bewildered doubt about 
any life beyond. For in one or other of 
these states of mind everyone would be. 

' Do you deny it ? ' exclaimed Mr. 
Herbert, raising his voice suddenly, and 
looking round the theatre with a passionate 
anger, at which the whole audience were 
literally electrified. ' Do you deny it ? ' he 
exclaimed. ' I tell you that it is so. I tell 
you too that that is your own case, and that 
in your Utopia you have aggravated the 
evil, and have not remedied it. You are all 
deniers or doubters, I tell you, every one of 
you. The deniers, I know, will not contradict 
me ; so at present I need not speak to them. 
It is to you — the majority, you who will con- 
tradict me ; you who are so busy with your 
various affirmations, with your prayers, your 
churches, your philosophies, your revivals of 
old Christianities, or your new improvements 
on them ; with your love of justice, and 



I 



350 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

humanity, and toleration ; it is to you that 1 
speak. It is to you that I say that, however 
enlightened and however sure you may be 
about all other matters, you are darkened and 
uncertain as to this — whether there really is 
any God at all who can hear all the prayers 
you utter to Him, or whether there really is 
any other life at all, where the aspirations 
you are so proud of will be realised, and 
where the wrongs you are so pitiful over will 
be righted. There is not one amongst you 
who, watching a dead friend, flickering for the 
last time before you in the form of a gas- 
flame, and seeing how a little while and this 
flame was with you, and again a little while 
and it was not with you, would be at all sure 
whether this was really because, as your 
hearts would suggest to you, it went to the 
F"ather, or because, as your men of science 
would assert to you, it went simply — out. 

1 Listen to me for a moment, and I can 
prove that this is so, to you. You are rich, 
and you have leisure to think of things in 
what light you will, and your life is to a great 
extent made easy for you by the labour of 
others. I do not complain of that. There 
can be no civilisation without order, and 
there can be no order without subordination. 
Outward goods must be apportioned un- 



/ 



BOOK V. CHAPTER I. v>\ 

equally, or there would be no outward goods 
to apportion. But you who have the larger 
share of these are bound to do something for 
those who have the less. I say you are 
bound to do so ; or else sooner or later that 
larger share will be taken away from you. 
Well, and what is it you propose to do ? I 
know your answer — I have heard it a thou- 
sand times. You will educate them — you 
will teach them. And truly, if you know how 
to do that properly, you will have done all 
you need do. But,' exclaimed Mr. Herbert, 
his voice again rising, and quivering with ex- 
citement, ' that is just what you do not know. 
I am not casting my words at random. Out 
of your own mouths will I judge you. There 
never was a time when you talked so much 
as now about teaching the people, and yet do 
not you yourselves confess that you cannot 
agree together as to what to teach them ? 
You can agree about teaching them — I know 
this too well — countless things that you think 
will throw light upon life ; but life itself you 
leave a blank darkness upon which no light 
can be thrown. You say nothing of what is 
good in it, and of what is evil. Does success 
in it lie in the enjoyment of bodily pleasures, 
or in the doing of spiritual duty ? Is there 
anything in it that is right for its own sake, 






352 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

or are all things right only because of their 
consequences ? And seeing that, if we 
struggle for virtue, our struggles can never be 
quite successful here, is there any other place 
where they may have, I do not say their 
reward, but their consummation ? To these 
questions only two answers can be given, and 
one must be entirely true, and the other en- 
tirely false. But you — you dare not give 
either; you are too enlightened. It is true 
that you can afford to be liberal about these 
matters ; you can afford to consider truth and 
falsehood equally tolerable. But for the poor 
man surely it is not so. It must make some 
difference to him what you teach him, whether 
your teaching is to open his eyes to his God 
and to his duty, and so place his noblest 
happiness in his own hands, or whether it is to 
open his eyes to those verified Utilitarian prin- 
ciples from which he will learn that his own 
life and labour are only not utterly contempti- 
ble, because they conduce to a material well- 
being in which he himself can have no share. 
If, with entire belief yourselves, you are pre- 
pared to give him the former teaching, why 
then it is well and good both for him and you. 
But if not, beware of teaching him at all. 
You will but be removing a cataract from his 
mind's eye that he may sfare aghast and 



BOOK V. CHAPTER /. 353 

piteous at his own poverty and nakedness, or 
that he may gaze with a wild beast's hunger 
at your own truly noble prosperity which he 
can never taste, save in the wild beast's way. 

' But enough of the poor ; enough of this 
division of happiness. Let me ask you to 
consider now what sort of happiness there is 
to divide — I say divide, meaning that you 
will get the whole of it. And as I have said 
before, this happiness is very fair in seeming. 
Knowledge, and culture, and freedom, and 
toleration — you have told us what fine things 
all these can do for you. And I admit it 
myself too ; I feel it myself too. Lovely, 
indeed, to look upon are the faiths, the philo- 
sophies, the enthusiasms of the world — the 
ancient products of the ages — as the sun« 
shine of the modern intellect falls on them. 
See, they look clearer, and brighter, and more 
transparent — see, they form themselves into 
more exquisite and lucid shapes, more aerial 
structures. But why ? Do not deceive your- 
selves ; it is for a terrible reason. It is be- 
cause, like a fabric of snow, they are one and 
all dissolving. 

' Listen, and I will show you that this is so. 
Aristotle says that what is truly a man's Self 
is the thinking part of him. This sooner or 
later all the other parts obey — sooner or later, 

A A 



354 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

willingly or unwillingly ; and if this Self be 
base, the whole man will be base ; if the Self 
be noble, the whole man will be noble. And 
as it is with the individual man, so it is 
with the ages and the generations. They obey 
their several Selves, whatever these Selves 
may be. The world once had a Self whose 
chief spokesman was a Jewish peasant called 
Jesus ; and sooner or later the world followed 
him. Later on, it had a Self whose chief 
spokesmen were Dominies or Luthers or 
Loyolas ; and in like manner the world 
followed them. Later still, it had got another 
Self, and the chief spokesmen of this were 
Voltaires and Rousseaus. And in each case 
the world was convinced at heart, consciously 
or unconsciously, that the vital truths of life 
were to be sought for only where these Selves 
sought for them. With Jesus and with 
Luther it sought them in duty and in a 
turning to the true God ; with Voltaire and 
Rousseau, in justice, and in a turning from the 
false God. And now, where do you seek them ? 
Where does the Self of your age seek them — 
your Self, that thinking part of you before 
which you all either quail or worship? Does it 
seek them either in justice, or loving-kindness, 
or in the vision of the most high God ! No — ■ 
but in the rotting bodies of dead men, or in 



BOOK V. CHAPTER L 355 

the writhing bodies of live cats. And in 
your perplexity, and your amazed despair, 
ever and again you cry to it, What shall 
we do to be saved ? Show us the Father ! 
Show us the high and holy One that inhabiteth 
Eternity ! And what does your Self answer 
you ? It answers you with a laugh, " There 
is no high and holy One at all. How say ye 
then to me, Show us the Father ? For the 
Earth saith, He is not with me ; and the depth 
saith, He is not with me ; and our filthy phials 
of decaying animal matter say, He is not with 
us. Argal, ye poor foolish seekers, He is no- 
where." You may try to escape from your 
own Self, but you cannot ; you may try to 
forget its answer, but you cannot. Loudly 
you may affirm with your lips ; but the im- 
portunate denial is ever at your heart. Patrice 
quis exsul se quo que fugit f 

1 What do you do then in this perplexity 
— this halting between two opinions ? Why, 
you do this. You try to persuade yourselves 
that neither opinion is of much moment — that 
the question cannot be decided absolutely — 
that it should not be decided absolutely — in 
fact, that it is one of your chief glories that 
you leave it undecided. But I tell you, in 
that case, that though you say you are rich, 
and increased with goods, and have need of 

A A 2 



356 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

nothing ; you are, in reality, wretched, and 
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. I 
am not casting my words at random. Again 
out of your own mouths will I judge you. 
All your culture, you say, is based ultimately 
upon this — a discrimination between right 
and wrong. True, profoundly true. But will 
you be able to say what is right and what is 
wrong any longer, if you don't know for 
whom anything is right and for whom any- 
thing is wrong — whether it is for men with 
immortal souls, or only with mortal bodies — 
who are only a little lower than the angels, or 
only a little better than the pigs ? Whilst 
you can still contrive to doubt upon this mat- 
ter, whilst the fabric of the old faith is still 
dissolving only, life still for you, the enlight- 
ened few, may preserve what happiness it has 
now. But when the old fabric is all dissolved, 
what then ? When all divinity shall have 
gone from love and heroism, and only utility 
and pleasure shall be left, what then ? Then 
you will have to content yourselves with com- 
plete denial ; or build up again the faith that 
you have just pulled down — you will have 
to be born again, and to seek for a new Self. 
1 But suppose we accept denial, you will 
say, what then ? Many deniers have lived 
noble lives, though they have looked neither 



BOOK V. CHAPTER I. 357 

for a God nor for a heaven. Think of Greece, 
you will say to me, and that will answer you. 
No — but that is not so, and that will not an- 
swer me. The Greeks never, in your sense, 
denied God ; they never, in your sense, 
denied eternal life — never, because they 
never knew them. They felt God only ; they 
felt him unconsciously ; and in denying the 
God they knew, they were really affirming 
the God they felt. But you — do not you 
deceive yourselves. Do not think you can 
ever again be as the Greeks. The world's 
progress has a twofold motion. History 
moves onwards round some undiscovered 
centre, as well as round what you consider 
its discovered axis ; and though it seems to 
repeat itself, it never can repeat itself. The 
Atheism of the modern world is not the 
Atheism of the ancient : the long black night 
of the winter is not the swift clear night of the 
vanished summer. The Greek philosopher 
could not darken his life, for he knew not from 
what mysterious source the light fell upon it. 
The modern philosopher does know, and he 
knows that it is called God, and thus know- 
ing the source of light he can at once 
quench it. 

' What will be left you then if this light be 
quenched ? Will art, will painting, will poetry 



358 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

be any comfort to you ? You have said that 
these were magic mirrors which reflected back 
your life for you. Well — will they be any 
better than the glass mirrors in your 
drawing-rooms, if they have nothing but 
the same listless orgy to reflect ? For 
that is all that will be at last in store for you ; 
nay, that is the best thing that possibly can be 
in store for you ; the only alternative being not 
a listless orgy for the few, but an undreamed- 
of anarchy for all. I do not fear that, how- 
ever. Some will be always strong, and some 
will be always weak; and though, if there 
is no God, no divine and fatherly source of 
order, there will be, trust me, no aristocracies, 
there will still be tyrannies. There will still 
be rich and poor ; and that will then mean 
happy and miserable ; and the poor will be — 
as I sometimes think they are already — but 
a mass of groaning machinery, without even 
the semblance of rationality ; and the rich, 
with only the semblance of it, but a set of 
gaudy, dancing marionettes, which it is the 
machinery's one work to keep in motion. 

' What, then, shall you do to be saved ? 
Rend your hearts, I say, and do not mend 
your garments. Seek God earnestly, and 
peradventure you still may find Him — and I 
— even I may find Him also. For I — who 



BOOK V. CHAPTER I. 359 

am I that speak to you ? Am I a believer ? 
No, I am a doubter too. Once I could 
pray every morning, and go forth to my day's 
labour stayed and comforted. But now I can 
pray no longer. You have taken my God away 
from me, and I know not where you have 
laid Him. My only consolation in my misery 
is that at least I am inconsolable for His loss. 
Yes,' cried Mr. Herbert, his voice rising into 
a kind of threatening wail, ' though you have 
made me miserable, I am not yet content 
with my misery. And though I too have 
said in my heart that there is no God, and 
that there is no more profit in wisdom than 
in folly, yet there is one folly that I will not 
give tongue to. I will not say Peace, peace, 
when there is no peace. I will not say we 
are still Christians, when we can sip our 
wine smilingly after dinner, and talk about 
some day defining the Father ; and I will 
only pray that if such a Father be, He may 
have mercy alike upon those that hate Him, 
because they will not see Him ; and on those 
who love and long for Him, although they no 
longer can see Him.' 

Mr. Herbert's voice ceased. The cur- 
tain fell. The whirlwind was over ; the fire 
was over ; and after the fire, from one of the 
side boxes came a still small voice. 



360 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

' Very poor taste — very poor taste.' 
It was perceived that Dr. Jenkinson, 
having discovered almost immediately who 
was really to be the preacher, had stolen back 
silently into the theatre. 



BOOK V. CHAPTER II. 361 




CHAPTER II. 

k HE following morning Miss Merton 
had risen early, and was saunter- 
ing slowly before breakfast up and 
down the broad terrace in front of 
the house. She inhaled the fresh delightful air; 
she looked out over the breezy sea ; she scanned 
the splendid villa, now shining in the sunlight, 
with its marble porticoes, and its long rows 
of windows ; and she thought over yesterday 
with all its conversations and incidents. In 
especial, she thought of Laurence. She 
thought of him as he was now, and as he had 
been in former times, when they had known 
each other so well ; and as she thought of 
him, she sighed. 

' And he might do so much,' she said to 
herself, ' and yet he is so weak and so irreso- 
lute ; wasting his time in Paris and in London, 
reading poetry and buying pictures, and talk- 
ing philosophy he doesn't believe in with his 
dilettante friends. And this place — this 
lovely place — how often does he come here ? 



362 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

What does he do for his tenants and depend- 
ants — for all who ought to look for help to 
him ? I have no patience with a man who 
keeps moaning about religion as he does, and 
yet won't act up to the light which he must 
have.' 

Whilst she was thus meditating, the 
subject of her meditations appeared upon the 
terrace. 

1 You are out early,' he said. ' I have 
been just seeing Herbert off. He has had to 
go before everybody else, for he is en route 
for Italy.' 

1 You look very tired,' said Miss Merton 
sympathetically. 

* Oh, it is nothing,' said Laurence, turning 
the subject. ' Did you notice Leslie last 
evening in the garden, and how odd his 
manner was ? Do you remember, too, the 
pretty song he sang the night before, and 
how surprised we all were at it ? Well, I 
had a letter yesterday, from a friend both 
of his and mine, which explains it. The 
heroine of the song was not an ideal young 
lady, though whether one can call her real 
any longer is more than I can say. She is 
dead. I don't know all the story ; but my 
friend just gave me the outline, and enclosed 
a note for Leslie, to tell the news to him 



BOOK if. CHAPTER IT. 363 

himself. He never fancies he feels anything; 
but what he won't admit to himself, his 
manner, I am sure admitted to me, and I 
dare say to you too.' 

'Yes,' said Miss Merton thoughtfully, ' I 
felt sure it must be something of that kind, 
But you,' she said, turning to Laurence, 
' how utterly tired and worn-out you look. 

' To say the truth,' Laurence answered, 
' I slept very little last night. I was thinking 
of our culture and our enlightenment. I was 
thinking of — God knows what ; and why 
should I tell you ? I'm sorry,' he said, 'that 
we're all breaking up to-day. I wish we 
could have kept the party together for a little 
longer. I don't know what I shall do. I 
can't stop here ; I shan't go to London — I 
hate London. I had almost resolved, an 
hour ago, to go off to Italy with Herbert/ 

1 By way of finding some duty to do ? ' 
asked Miss Merton quietly. 

1 I have no duties,' said Laurence. ' Didn't 
Herbert very truly tell us so last night ? 
But in Italy I should at least forget that I 
ever might have had any. And I should be 
then, at any rate, with a congenial friend. 
Herbert and I, you see, are two fools. We 
both of us want to pray, and we neither of us 
can.' 



364 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

There was a long pause. At last Miss 
Merton said with some embarrassment, stoop- 
ing as she did so to smell a red geranium ■ 

' I'm sure I wish I could be of any use to 
you ; but really I don't quite see how I can.' 

There was another pause. At last 
Laurence said in a very low tone : 

1 I cannot pray, because I do not believe 
in God. Will you pray for me ? ' 

Miss Merton turned and looked at 
him with a soft, serious smile. 

' I did last night, if you wish very much 
to know,' she said, and her cheek grew slowly 
tinted with an unconscious blush. 

1 Did you ? ' exclaimed Laurence with a 
sudden eagerness. ■ Then, if you cared 
enough for me to do that, will you care 
enough for me to do something far better than 
praying for me ? Will you — ' he said, 
pausing and looking at her ; ' will you — 
But at that instant the gong for breakfast 
sounded, and the sentence died unfinished. 
Both he and she were perhaps a little grate- 
ful for this interruption. It relieved a sudden 
sense of shyness that had become painful, and 
to all intents and purposes their looks had 
already said all that need be said. It might, 
both felt, be securely left to find its way into 
words at a more convenient season. In an- 



BOOK V. CHAPTER II 3^5 

other moment they were in the midst of that 
most matter-of fact bustle that precedes in 
country-houses the settling down to breakfast 
of a large party. 

'Well, Mr. Laurence,' exclaimed Lady 
Ambrose, * all pleasant things come to an 
end at last. But this visit to you has really 
been positively delightful. And now, you 
must be careful not to forget me — that we are 
expecting you in September in Gloucester- 
shire, to take part in our piivate theatricals. 
By-the-by,' she added, sinking her voice to 
a fit solemnity, ' I think I told you, didn't I, 

how ill the poor Duchess of had been 

last week, though she's better now, I am 
happy to hear this morning. Ham — tongue 
— pigeon- pie — omelette,' she went on, as she 
sat down at the table ; ' why, amongst all this 
host of good things, I don't know really what 
to choose. Well, suppose, Mr. Laurence, 
you were to bring me just the little — least bit 
of omelette. My dear,' she whispered to 
Miss Merton, who was on one side of her, 
'what a dreadful blowing-up Mr. Herbert 
gave us last night, didn't he ? Now that, 
you know, I think is all very well in a 
sermon, but in a lecture, where the things are 
supposed to be taken more or less literally, 
I think it is a little out of place.' 



366 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 Did you say just now,' said Leslie, who 
found himself on the other side of Lady 

Ambrose, ' that the Duchess of was 

ill?' 

1 Oh, it was just something I was telling 
Mr. Laurence,' said Lady Ambrose coldly. 
' She's much better now, thank you. Do you 
know her ? ' 

' She's my aunt,' said Leslie. 

Lady Ambrose turned round and looked 
Leslie full in the face. As she looked, a 
smile began to dimple her cheek, and light 
up her sweet grey eyes. 

1 You don't say so ! ' she exclaimed at 
last. ' Why, of course you are. How stupid 
of me not to have found that out before. To 
be sure — you are the redoubtable Eton boy, 
who made such a dreadful commotion at 
Daleham by wanting to run away with the 
nursery governess. And to think that I have 
only discovered you at this last moment, when 
we are all of us going to say good-bye ! ' 

1 Your carriage is at the door, my Lady,' 
said a servant. 

* Already !' said Lady Ambrose. 'How 
time flies ! Dr. Jenkinson, you and I are 
going to the train together, I believe. And 
now, Mr. Leslie,' she went on, ' Mr. Laurence 



BOOK V. CHAPTER II. 367 

is coming to us, in September, for some pri- 
vate theatricals. I don't know if you do 
anything in that way yourself. But perhaps 
if you are in England, and have no better 
engagements, you will come with him. At 
any rate, if you won't, please to remember I 
shall think it very ill-natured of you.' 

1 Thank you,' said Leslie, smiling, ' I am 
not ill-natured.' 

' I'm quite ready, Lady Ambrose, if you 
are,' said Dr. Jenkinson briskly ; ' and now, 
Laurence,' he said, as he was standing in the 
portico, whilst Lady Ambrose was getting 
into the carriage, 'good-bye ; I've had a most 
pleasant visit. But as to your Utopia, your 
ideal of the future — ' he added confidentially, 
' it has been said, foolishly enough, that God 
was the Brocken-phantom of self, projected 
on the mists of the non-ego. Well — your 
Utopia was the Brocken-phantom of the 
present, projected on the mists of the imprac- 
ticable. It was simply the present with its 
homelier details left out Good bye — good- 
bye.' 

' Then in that case,' said Laurence, as 
he bade adieu to the Doctor, ' it is a comfort 
to know from you that the Present, as it is, is 
the highest state of things conceivable.' 



363 THE NEW REPUBLIC. 

1 Good-bye.' said Lady Ambrose, with a 
smile in her beautiful frank eyes. • Good-bye, 
Mr. Leslie, and mind that you don't forget 
September.' 



THE INTX 



PRINTED BV 

SfOTTIjWOODE AND CO. LTD., NEW-STREET SQUAR« 

LONDON 



CHATTO & WINDUS'S 

Popular Two Shilling Novels 

BY THE BEST AUTHORS. 
Bound in Picture Cloth, flat backs. 



BY EDWIN LESTER ARNOLD. 
The Constable of St. Nicholas. 

BY SIR WALTER BESANT. 
St. Katherine's by the Tower. 
The Rebel Queen. 

BY HAROLD BINDLOSS. 
Ainslie's Ju-ju. 

BY McD. BODKIN, K.C. 
Dora Myrl, the Lady Detective. 

BY DICK DONOVAN. 
The Mystery of Jamaica Terrace. 
The Man- Hunter. 
Tales of Terror. 
Vincent Trill, Detective. 
Dark Deeds. 
Wanted ! 
The Man from Manchester. 

BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN. 
A Crimson Crime. 

BY PAUL GAULOT. 
The Red Shirts. 
BY MAJOR ARTHUR GRIFFITHS. 
No. 99 ; and Blue Blood. 
BY OWEN HALL. 
The Track of a Storm. 
BY BRET HARTE. 
The Luck of Roaring Camp ; 
and Sensation Novels Con- 
densed. 
In a Hollow of the Hills. 
A Sappho of Green Springs. 
Colonel Starbottle's Client 
A Protegee of Jack Hamlin's. 
Sally Dows. 

BY HEADON HILL 
Zambra, the Detective. 

BY FERGUS HUME. 
The Lady from Nowhere. 

Bound in 

BY MRS. ALEXANDER. 
Maid, Wife, or Widow ? 
Valerie's Fate. 
Blind Fate. 
A Life Interest 
Mona's Choice. 
By Woman's Wit 



BY EDMUND MITCHELL. 
Plotters of Paris. 
The Temple of Death. 
Towards the Eternal Snows. 

BY BERTRAM MITFORD. 
The Luck of Gerard Ridgeley. 
The King's Assegai. 

BY J. E. MUDDOCK. 
Maid Marian and Robin Hood. 

BY D. CHRISTIE MURRAY. 
His Own Ghost 

BY OUIDA. 
Syrlin. 
The Waters of Edera. 

BY JAMES PAYN. 
A Modern Dick Whittington. 

BY DORA RUSSELL. 
A Country Sweetheart. 
The Drift of Fate. 

BY G. R. SIMS. 
In London's Heart. 
Rogues and Vagabonds. 

BY FRANK STOCKTON. 
The Young Master of Hyson 
Hall. 

BY SUNDOWNER. 
The Tale of the Serpent. 
BY SARAH TYTLER. 
Citoyenne Jacqueline. 

BY ALLEN UPWARD. 
The Queen against Owen. 

BY FLORENCE WARDEN. 
Joan, the Curate. 

BY BYRON WEBBER. 
Sport and Spangles. 

BY JOHN STRANGE WINTER. 
Cavalry Life ; and Regimental 
Legends. 

BY LOUIS ZANGWILL. 
A Nineteenth Century Miracle. 

Picture Boards. 

BY GRANT ALLEN. 
Strange Stories. 
Philistia. 
Babylon. 

The Beckoning Hand. 
In All Shades. 
For Maimie's Sake. 



London; CHATTO &• WIND US, m St. Martin's Lane, VV.C. 



TWO-SHILLING POPULAR NOVELS. 



BY GRANT ALLEN— continued. 
The Devil's Die. 
This Mortal Coil. 
The Tents of Shem. 
The Great Taboo. 
Dumaresq's Daughter. 
The Duchess of Powysland. 
Blood Royal. 
Ivan Greet's Masterpiece. 
The Scallywag. 
At Market Value. 
Under Sealed Orders. 

BY EDWIN LESTER ARNOLD. 
Phra the Phoenician. 

BY FRANK BARRETT. 
A Recoiling Vengeance. 
For Love and Honour. 
John Ford ; and His Helpmate. 
Honest Davie. 
A Prodigal's Progress. 
Folly Morrison. 
Lieutenant Barnabas. 
Found Guilty. 
Fettered for Life. 
Between Life and Death. 
The Sin of Olga Zassoulich. 
Little Lady Linton. 
The Woman of the Iron Bracelets. 
The Harding Scandal. 
A Missing Witness. 

BY BESANT & RICE. 
Ready-Money Mortiboy. 
With Harp and Crown. 
This Son of Vulcan. 
My Little Girl. 
The Case of Mr. Lucraft 
The Golden Butterfly. 
By Celia's Arbour. 
The Monks of Thelema. 
Twas in Trafalgar's Bay. 
The Seamy Side. 
The Ten Years' Tenant. 
The Chaplain of the Fleet. 

BY WALTER BESANT. 
All Sorts and Conditions of Men 
The Captains' Room. 
All in a Garden Fair. 
Dorothy Forster. 
Uncle Jack. 
Children of Glbeon. 
The World went very well then. 
Herr Paulus. 



BY WALTER BESANT —continued. 
For Faith and Freedom. 
To Call her Mine. 
The Bell of St Paul's. 
The Holy Rose. 
Armorel of Lyonesse. 
St. Katherine's by the Tower. 
The Ivory Gate. 
Verbena Camellia Stephanotia. 
The Rebel Queen. 
Beyond the Dreams of Avarice. 
The Revolt of Man. 
In Deacon's Orders. 
The Master Craftsman. 
The City of Refuge. 

BY AMBROSE BIERCE. 
In the Midst of Life. 

BY FREDERICK BOYLE. 
Camp Notes. 
Savage Life. 
Chronicles of No-Man's Land. 

BY ROBERT BUCHANAN. 
The Shadow of the Sword. 
A Child of Nature. 
God and the Man. 
Annan Water. 
The New Abelard. 
The Martyrdom of Madeline. 
Love Me for Ever. 
Matt : a Story of a Caravan. 
Foxglove Manor. 
The Master of the Mine. 
The Heir of Linne. 
Woman and the Man. 
Rachel Dene. 
Lady Kilpatrick. 

BY BUCHANAN AND MURRAY. 
The Charlatan. 

BY HALL CAINE. 
The Shadow of a Crime. 
A Son of Hagar. 
The Deemster. 

BY COMMANDER CAMERON. 
The Cruise of the « Black Prince,* 

BY AUSTIN CLARE. 
For the Love of a Lass. 

BY MRS. ARCHER CLIVE. 
Paul Ferroll. 
Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife. 



London: CHATTO 6* WIXDUS, mSt. Martins Lane, W.C. 



TWO-SHILLING POPULAR NOVELS. 



BY MAC LA REN COBBAN. 
The Cure of Souls. 
The Red Sultan. 

BY W ILK IE COLLINS. 
Armadale. 
After Dark. 
No Name. 
A Rogue's Life. 
Antomna. 
Basil. 

Hide and Seek. 
The Dead Secret. 
Queen of Hearts. 
My Miscellanies. 
The Woman in White. 
The Moonstone. 
Man and Wife. 
Poor Miss Finch. 
Miss or Mrs. ? 
The New Magdalen. 
The Frozen Deep. 
The Law and the Lady. 
The Two Destinies. 
The Haunted Hotel. 
The Fallen Leaves. 
Jezebel's Daughter. 
The Black Robe. 
Heart and Science. 
1 1 say No.' 
The Evil Genius. 
Little Novels. 
The Legacy of Cain. 
Blind Love. 

MORTIMER d FRANCES COLLINS. 

Sweet Anne Page. 

Transmigration. 

From Midnight to Midnight. 

A Fight with Fortune. 

Sweet and Twenty. 

Frances. 

The Village Comedy. 

You Play Me False. 

Blacksmith and Scholar. 

BY M. J. COLQUHOUN. 
Every Inch a Soldier. 

BY C. EGBERT CRADDOCK. 
Prophet of the Smoky M ountains 

BY MATT CRIM. 
Adventures of a Fair Rebel. 



BY B. M. CROKER. 
Pretty Miss Neville. 
Proper Pride. 
A Bird of Passage. 
Diana Barrington. 
•To Let' 

A Family Likeness. 
VillageTales & J ungleTragedies. 
Two Masters. 
Mr. Jervis. 

The Real Lady Hilda. 
Married or Single ? 
Interference. 
A Third Person. 

BY ALPHONSE DAUDET. 
The Evangelist. 

BY JAMES DE MILLE. 
A Strange Manuscript found in 
a Copper Cylinder. 

BY DICK DONOVAN. 
The Man-hunter. 
Caught at Last 1 
Tracked and Taken. 
Who Poisoned Hetty Duncan ? 
The Man from Manchester. 
A Detective's Triumphs. 
In the Grip of the Law. 
Wanted 1 

From Information Received. 
Tracked to Doom. 
Link by Link. 
Suspicion Aroused. 
Riddles Read. 

The Mystery of Jamaica Terrace. 
Chronicles of Michael Danevitch. 

BY MRS. ANNIE EDWARD ES. 
A Point of Honour. 
Archie LovelL 

BY EDWARD EGGLESTON. 
Roxy. 

BY G. MANVILLE FENN. 
The New Mistress. 
Witness to the Deed. 
The Tiger Lily. 
The White Virgin. 

BY PERCY FITZGERALD. 
Bella Donna. 
Polly. 

The Second Mrs. Tillotson. 
Seventy-five Brooke Street. 



London: CHATTO &* WJADUS, m Si. Martin's Lane, W.C. 



TWO-SHILLING POPULAR NOVELS. 



PERCY FITZGERALD— continued. 
Never Forgotten. 
The Lady of Brantome. 
Fatal Zero. 

BY PERCY FITZGERALD and Others. 
Strange Secrets. 

BY R. E. FRANCILLON. 
Olympia. 
One by One. 
Queen Cophetua. 
A Real Queen. 
King or Knave. 
Romances of the Law. 
Ropes of Sand. 
A Dog and his Shadow. 

BY HAROLD FREDERIC. 
Seth's Brother's Wife. 
The Lawton Girl. 

Prefaced by Sir H. BARTLE FRERE 
Pandurang Had 

BY CHARLES GIBBON. 
Robin Gray. 
For Lack of Gold. 
What will the World Say? 
In Honour Bound. 
In Love and War. 
For the King. 
Queen of the Meadow. 
In Pastures Green. 
The Flower of the Forest. 
A Heart's Problem. 
The Braes of Yarrow. 
The Golden Shaft 
Of High Degree. 
The Dead Heart. 
By Mead and Stream. 
Heart's Delight. 
Fancy Free. 
Loving a Dream. 
A Hard Knot 
Blood-Money. 

BY WILLIAM GILBERT. 
James Duke, Costermonger. 

BY ERNEST GLANVILLE. 
The Lost Heiress. 
The Fossicker. 
A Fair Colonist. 



BY REV. S. BARING GOULD. 
Eve. 
Red Spider. 

BY ANDREW HALLIDAY. 
Every- Day Papers. 

BY THOMAS HARDY. 
Under the Greenwood Tree. 

BY BRET HARTE. 
An Heiress of Red Dog. 
The Luck of Roaring Camp. 
Californian Stories. 
Gabriel Conroy. 
Flip. 
Maruja. 

A Phyllis of the Sierras. 
A Waif of the Plains. 
A Ward of the Golden Gate. 

BY JULIAN HAWTHORNE. 
Garth. 

Ellice Quentin. 
Dust. 

Fortune's Fool. 
Beatrix Randolph. 
Miss Cadogria. 
Love — or a Name. 
David Poindexter's Disappear* 

ance. 
The Spectre of the Camera. 

BY SIR ARTHUR HELPS. 
Ivan de Biron. 

BY G. A. HENTY. 
Rujub, the Juggler. 

BY HEADON HILL 
Zambra, the Detective. 

BY JOHN HILL. 
Treason-Felony. 

BY MRS. CASHEL HOEY. 
The Lover's Creed. 

BY MRS. HUNG ERF ORD. 
In Durance Vile. 
A Maiden all Forlorn. 
A Mental Struggle. 
Marvel. 

A Modern Circe. 
Lady Verner's Flight. 
The Red-House Mystery. 
The Three Graces. 
An Unsatisfactory Lover. 



London: CHATTO 6* WIND US, m St. Martin's Lane, W.C. 



TWO-SHILLING POPULAR NOVELS. 



5 



BY MRS. HUNGERFORD— continued. 

Lady Patty. 

Nora Creina. 

April's Lady. 

P.eter's Wife. 

The Professor's Experiment. 

BY MRS. ALFRED HUNT. 
The Leaden Casket 
Self-C ondemned. 
That Other Person. 

BY MARK KERSHAW. 
Colonial Facts and Fictions. 

BY R. ASHE KING. 
A Drawn Game. 
* The Wearing of the Green.' 
Passion's Slave. 
Bell Barry. 

BY EDMOND LEPELLETIER. 
Madame Sans-Gene. 

BY JOHN LEYS. 
The Lindsays. 

BY E. LYNN LINTON. 
Patricia Kemball. 
The Atonementof Learn Dundas. 
The World Well Lost 
Under which Lord ? 
With a Silken Thread. 
The Rebel of the Family. 
4 My Love !' 
lone. 

Paston Carew. 
Sowing the Wind. 
The One too Many. 
Dulcie Everton. 

BY HENRY W. LUCY. 
Gideon Fleyce. 

by justin McCarthy. 

Dear Lady Disdain. 

The Waterdale Neighbours. 

My Enemy's Daughter. 

A Fair Saxon. 

Linley Rochford. 

Miss Misanthrope. 

Donna Quixote. 

The Comet of a Season. 

Maid of Athens. 



justin McCarthy— continued. 

Camiola : a Girl with a Fortune. 
The Dictator. 
Red Diamonds. 
The Riddle Ring. 

BY HUGH MacCOLL 
Mr. Stranger's Sealed Packet 

BY GEORGE MACDONALD. 
Heather and Snow. 

BY MRS. MACDONELL. 
Quaker Cousins. 

BY W. H. MALLOCK. 
The New Republic 

BY J. MASTERMAN. 
Half a Dozen Daughters. 

BY BRANDER MATTHEWS. 
A Secret of the Sea. 

BY L T. MEADE. 
A Soldier of Fortune. 

BY LEONARD MERRICK. 
The Man who was Good. 

BY MRS. MOLESWORTH. 
Hathercourt Rectory. 

BY J. E. MUDDOCK. 
Stories Weird and Wonderful. 
The Dead Man's Secret 
From the Bosom of the Deep. 

BY D. CHRISTIE MURRAY. 
A Life's Atonement 
Joseph's Coat 
Val Strange. 
A Model Father. 
Coals of Fire. 
Hearts. 

By the Gate of the Sea. 
The Way of the World. 
A Bit of Human Nature. 
First Person Singular. 
Cynic Fortune. 
Old Blazer's Hero. 



London: CHATTO & WINDUS, in St. Martin's Lane, W.C. 



TWO-SHILLING POPULAR NOVELS. 



CHRISTIE MURRAY— continued. 
Bob Martin's Little Girl. 
Time's Revenues. 
A Wasted Crime. 
In Direst Peril. 
Mount Despair. 
A Capful o' Nails. 

BY MURRAY AND HERMAN. 
One Traveller Returns. 
Paul Jones's Alias. 
The Bishops' Bible. 

BY HUME NISBET. 
1 Bail Up !' 
Dr. Bernard St Vincent 

BY W. E. NORRIS. 
Saint Ann's. 
Billy Bellew. 

BY GEORGES OH NET. 
Doctor Rameau. 
A Last Love. 
A Weird Gift 

BY MRS. OLIPHANT. 
Whiteladies. 
The Primrose Path. 
The Greatest Heiress in England. 

BY OUIDA. 
Held in Bondage. 
Strathmore. 
Chandos. 

Under Two Flags. 
Idalia. 

Cecil Castlemaine's Gage. 
Tricotrin. 
Puck. 

Folle Farine. 
A Dog of Flanders. 
Pascarel. 
Signa. 

In a Winter City. 
Ariadne. 
Moths. 
Friendship. 
Pipistrello. 
Bimbi. 

In Maremma. 
Wanda. 
Frescoes. 

Princess Napraxine. 
Two Little Wooden Shoes. 
A Village Commune. 



BY OUIDA— continued. 
Othmar. 
Guilderoy. 
Ruffino. 
Syrlin. 

Santa Barbara. 
Two Offenders. 
Wisdom, Wit, and Pathos. 

BY MARGARET AGNES PAUL 
Gentle and Simple. 

BY JAMES PAYN. 
Lost Sir Massingberd. 
A Perfect Treasure. 
Bentinck's Tutor. 
Murphy's Master. 
A County Family. 
At Her Mercy. 
A Woman's Vengeance. 
Cecil's Tryst 
The Clyffards of Clyffe. 
The Family Scapegrace. 
The Foster Brothers. 
The Best of Husbands. 
Found Dead. 
Walter's Word. 
Halves. 

Fallen Fortunes. 
What He Cost Her. 
Humorous Stories. 
Gwendoline's Harvest 
Like Father, Like Son. 
A Marine Residence. 
Married Beneath Him. 
Mirk Abbey. 
Not Wooed, but Won. 
Two Hundred Pounds Reward. 
Less Black than We're Painted, 
By Proxy. 
High Spirits. 
Under One Roof. 
Carlyon's Year. 
A Confidential Agent 
Some Private Views. 
A Grape from a Thorn. 
From Fxile. 
Kit : A Memory. 
For Cash Only. 
The Canon's Ward. 
The Talk of the Town. 
Holiday Tasks. 
Glow-worm Tales. 
The Mystery of Mirbridge. 



London; CHATTO 6* W1NDUS, hi St. Martins Lane, W.C 



TWO-SHILLING POPULAR NOVELS. 



BY JAMES PAY N— continued. 
The Burnt Million. 
The Word and the Will. 
A Prince of the Blood. 
Sunny Stories. 
A Trying Patient. 

BY MRS. CAMPBELL PRAED. 
The Romance of a Station. 
The Soul of Countess Adrian. 
Outlaw and Lawmaker. 
Christina Chard. 
Mrs. Tregaskiss. 

BY RICHARD PRYCE. 
Miss Maxwell's Affections. 

BY CHARLES READE. 

It is Never Too Late to Mend. 

Hard Cash. 

Peg Woffington. 

Christie Johnstone. 

Griffith Gaunt. 

Put Yourself in His Place. 

The Double Marriage. 

Love Me Little, Love Me Lone. 

Foul Play. 

The Cloister and the Hearth. 

The Course of True Love. 

The Autobiography of a Thief. 

A Terrible Temptation. 

The Wandering Heir. 

A Simpleton. 

A Woman-Hater. 

Singleheart and Doubleface. 

Good Stories of Man and other 

Animals. 
The Jilt. 

A Perilous Secret 
Readiana. 

BY MRS. J. H. RIDDELL 
Her Mother's Darling. 
The Uninhabited House. 
Weird Stories. 
Fairy Water. 

Prince of Wales's Garden Party. 
The Mystery in Palace Gardens. 
Idle Tales. 



BY F. W. ROBINSON. 
Women are Strange. 
The Hands of Justice. 
The Woman in the Dark. 

BY DORA RUSSELL. 
A Country Sweetheart. 

BY W. CLARK RUSSELL. 
Round the Galley Fire. 
On the Fo'k'sle Head. 
In the Middle Watch. 
A Voyage to the Cape. 
A Book for the Hammock. 
The Mystery of the ' Ocean Star.' 
The Romance of Jenny Harlowe 
An Ocean Tragedy. 
My Shipmate Louise. 
Alone on a Wide Wide Sea. 
The Phantom Death. 
The Good Ship 'Mohock.' 
Is He the Man? 
Heart of Oak. 
The Convict Ship. 
The Tale of the Ten. 
The Last Entry. 

BY ALAN ST. AUBYN. 
A Fellow of Trinity. 
The Junior Dean. 
The Master of St. Benedict's. 
To His Own Master. 
Orchard Damerel. 
In the Face of the World. 
The Tremlett Diamonds. 

BY GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA 
Gaslight and Daylight. 

BY GEORGE R. SIMS. 
The Ring o' Bells. 
Mary Jane's Memoirs. 
Mary Jane Married. 
Tales of To-day. 
Dramas of Life. 
Tinkletop's Crime. 
Zeph : a Circus Story. 
My Two Wives. 
Memoirs of a Landlady. 
Scenes from the Show. 
The Ten Commandments. 
Dagonet Abroad. 
Rogues and Vagabonds. 



London: CHATTO &- W1NDUS, m St. Martins Lane, IV.C. 



8 



TWO-SHILLING POPULAR NOVELS. 



BY T. W. SPEIGHT. 
The Mysteries of Heron Dyke. 
The Golden Hoop. 
By Devious Ways. 
Hoodwinked. 
Back to Life. 

The Loudwater Tragedy. 
Burgo's Romance. 
Quittance in Full. 
A Husband from the Sea. 
BY R. A. STERNDALE. 
The Afghan Knife. 

BY R. LOUIS STEVENSON. 
New Arabian Nights. 

BY WALTER THORNBURY. 
Tales for the Marines. 

BY ANTHONY TROLLOPE. 
The Way We Live Now. 
Mr. Scarborough's Family. 
The Golden Lion of Granpere. 
The American Senator. 
Frau Frohmann. 
Marion Fay. 
Kept in the Dark. 
The Land-Leaguers. 

BY FRANCES E. TROLLOPE. 
Anne Furness. 
Mabel's Progress. 
Like Ships upon the Sea. 

BY T. ADOLPHUS TROLLOPE. 
Diamond Cut Diamond. 

BY MARK TWAIN. 
Tom Sawyer. 



BY MARK TWAIN— continued. 
The Stolen White Elephant. 
A Pleasure Trip on the Continent 
The Gilded Age. 
Huckleberry Finn. 
Life on the Mississippi. 
Mark Twain's Sketches. 
The £ i, 000,000 Bank-note. 

BY SARAH TYTLER. 
Noblesse Oblige. 
The Huguenot Family. 
What She Came Through. 
Beauty and the Beast. 
The Bride's Pass. 
Saint Mungo's City. 
D s ippeared. 
Lady Bell. 
Buried Diamonds. 
The Blackhall Ghosts. 

BY C. C. FRASER-TYTLER. 
Mistress Judith. 

BY ALLEN UPWARD. 
The Queen against Owen. 

BY ARTEMUS WARD. 
Artemus Ward Complete. 

BY WILLIAM WESTALL. 
Trust-Money. 

BY MRS. F. H. WILLIAMSON. 
A Child Widow. 

BY J. S. WINTER. 
Cavalry Life. 
Regimental Legends. 

BY H. F. WOOD. 
Passenger from Scotland Yard. 
Englishman of the Rue Cain. 



POPULAR SHILLING BOOKS. 



BY HAYDEN CARRUTH. 
The Adventures of Jones. 

by justin h. McCarthy. 

Our Sensation Novel. 

Doom. 

Dolly. 

Lily Lass. 

BY HENRY NEWBOLT. 
Taken from the Enemy. 

BY BARRY PAIN. 
Eliza's Husband. 



BY GEORGE R. SIMS. 
The Dagonet Reciter. 
Dagonet Ditties. 
Dagonet Dramas of the Day. 
How the Poor Live. 
The Case of George Candlemas. 
Young Mrs. Caudle. 
The Life we Live. 
Li Ting of London. 

BY ROBERT SURTEES. 
Handley Cross. With 65 Illus- 
trations by John Leech. 
BY ALFRED SUTRO. 
The Foolish Virgins. 



Leiden: CHATTO &• W1NDUS, in St. Martins Lane, W.C. 



ALPHABETICAL CATALOGUE OF BOOKS 

IN 

FICTION AND GENERAL LITERATURE 

FUBLISHED BY 

CHATTO & WlNDUS 
in St. Martin's Lane, Charing Cross 

Telephone No. 
3524 Central 



Telegrams 
Bookstore, London 



London, W.C. 



ADAMS (W. DAVENPORT), 
Books by. 
A Dictionary of the Drama: A 
Guide to the Plays, Playwrights, Players, 
and Playhouses of the United Kingdom 
and America, from the Earliest Times to 
the Present. Vol. I. (A to G). Demy 8vo, 
cloth, ioj. td. net. — Vol. II., completing 
the Work, is in preparation. 
Quips and Quiddities. Selected by 
W. D. Adams. Post Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 



ALEXANDER (Mrs.), NoveJsby. 

Crown Svo. cloth, 3.5. 6d. each ; post Svo, 

picture boards. 2s. each. 
Valerie's Fate. I Mona's Choice. 
A Life Interest. | Woman's Wit. 



AGONY COLUMN (The) of 'The 

Times, ' from 1800 to 1870. Edited by 
Alice Clay. Post Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 



ALDEN (W. L.). — Dre witt's 

Dream. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 



ALLEN (GRANT), Books by. 

Moorland Idylls. Crown Svo, cloth, 65 
Post-Prandial Philosophy. Crown 
Svo, art linen, 31. 6d. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3.5. 6d. each ; post Svo, 

illustrated boards, 2.5. each. 
Babylon. With 12 Illustrations. 
Strange Stories. 
The Beckoning Hand. 
For Mairais's Sake. 
Philistia. I In all Shades. 
The Devil's Die. 
This Mortal Coil. 
The Tents of Snem. 
The Great Taboo. 
Dumaresq's Daughter. 
Under Sealed Orders. 
The Duchess of Fowysland. 
Blood Royal. 

Ivan Greet's Masterpiece. 
The Scallywag. With 24 Illustrations 
At Market Vaiue. 



POPULAB 



Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. td. each. 
The Cost of her Pride. 
A Golden Autumn. 
Barbara, Lady's Maid & Peeress. 
Mrs. Crichton's Creditor. 
A Missiog Hero. 
A Fight with Fate. 
'Xhe Step-mother. 

Blind Fate. Post Svo, picture boards. 2s. 



APPLETON (G. W.), Novels by. 
Rash Conclusions. Cr. Svo, cl., 3.5. td. 
The Lady in Sables. Cr. 8vo, cl., ts 



The Tents of Shem. 

Edition, medium Svo, td. 
Babylon. Cheap Edition - , 
cloth, is. net. 



post Svo, 



ANDERSON (MARY).— Othello's 

Occupation. Crown Svo, cloth, 3.1. td. 



ANTROBUS (C. L.), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. each. 
Quality Corner. | Wildersmoor. 
The Wine of Finvarra. 



ARNOLD (E. L.), Stories by. 

The Wonderful Adventures of 
Phra the Phoenician. Crown 8vo, 
1 loth, with 12 Illustrations by H. M. 
Paget, 3s. td.; pest 8vo, illustrated 
boards, 2s. 

I he Constable of St. Nicholas. 
With a Frontispiece. Crown 8vo, cloth, 
3s. td. ; picture cloth, flat back, 2s. 



ARTEMUS WARD'S Works. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, with Portrait, 3.5. td. ; 
post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. 



ART (The) of AMUSING: A 

Collection of Graceful Arts, Games, 
Tricks, Puzzles, and Charades. By 

Frank Bellew. With 300 Illustrations. 
Crown Svo cloth, 4s. 6d. 



A5HT0N (JOHN), Books by. 
English Caricature and Satire on 

Napoleon the First. With 115 

Illustrations. Crown Svo, cloth, 7.5. td. 
Social Life in the Reign of Queen 

Anne. With 85 Illustrations. Crown 

8vo, cloth, 3s. td. 



Crown Svo. cloth, ts. each. 

Social England under the Re- 
gency. With 90 Illustrations. 

Florizel's Folly: The Story of George 
IV. and Mrs. Fitzherbert. With 13 
Illustrations. 



[207] 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



AUTHORS for ths POCKET- 

i6mo, cloth, as netca.; leather, 3.$. net ea 
The Pocket R. L. S. 
The Pocket Thackeray. 
The Pocket Charles Dickens. 
The Pocket Richard Jefferies. 
The Pocket George Mac Donald. 
The Pocket Emerson. 
The Pocket Thomas Hardy. 
The Pocket George Eliot. 
The Pocket Charles Kingsloy. 
The Flower of the Mind. 



BACTERIA, Yeast Fungi, and 

Allied Species, A Synopsis of. Bv 
W. Li. Grove, B.A. With 87 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 

BARDSLEY (Rev. C. W.).— 

English Surnames : Their Sources 

and Significations. Cr. 8vo, cloth, ys 61. 



BARING-GOULD (S.), Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. bd. each ; post 8vo, 
illustrated boards, 25. each ; POPULAR 
Editions, medium Svo, 6d. each. 
Red Spider. I Eve. 



BARR (AMELIA E.).— Love will 

Venture in. Cr, 8»o, cl„ 2« bd. net 

15ARR (ROBERT), Stories by. 

Crown Svo, cloth. 3s. 6 /. each. 
In a Steamer Chair. With 2 Illusts. 
From Whose Bourne, &c With 47 

Illustrations by Hal HURST and others. 
K^venge! With 12 Illustrations by 

Lancelot Speed and others. 
A Woman Intervenes. 
A Prince of Good Fellows. With 

15 I. lustra'.!- as by E ]. SULLIVAM. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
The Speculations of John Steele. 
The Unchanging East. 



BARRETT (FRANK), Novels by. 

,0, illust. bds.. 2s. ea.. cl., 21. 6d. ea. 
The Sin of Olga Zassoulich. 
Folly Morrison. 
Little Lady Linton. 
Honest Davie. I Found Guilty. 
John Ford; and His Helpmate. 
A Recoiling Yengeance. 
Lieut. Barnabas. 
For Love and Hon our. 
Cr. Svoi cloth, 3^. bd. each; post Svo, illust. 

boards, as. each ; cloth limp, 2*. bd. each. 
Between Life and Death. 
Fettered for Life. 
A Missing Witness. With 8 Illus. 

trations by W. H. MARGETSON. 
The Woman of the Iron Bracelets. 
The Harding Scandal. 
A Prodigal's Progress. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3*. bd. each. 
Under a Strange Mask. With 19 

Illu-trations by E. F. BREW IN ALL, 
Was She Jus tified? 

Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
Lady Judas. 

The Error of Her Wa ys. 
Fettered for Life. Popular Edition. 

medium 8vo, 6d. 



BARRETT (FRANK), Novels by 

— continued. 
The Obliging Husband. With 

Frontispiece in Colours. Crown 8vo, 
cloth, 2s. 6i. net. 

BATIiTTheTin DLseases Tof the 

Skin. By J. L. Milton. Post8vo, ss. : 
cloth, 1 .. (1 ;. 

BEACONSFIELD, LORD. ByT. 

P. O'Connor, M.P. Crown Svo. cloth, s.?. 



BECHSTEIN(LUDWIG),andthe 

Brothers GRIMM.— As Pretty as 
Seven, and other Stories With 98 
Illustrations by RlCHTER. oquare 8vo, 

cloth, 6s. bd. ; cilt edces. 7?. (>.'. 

BEDE (CUTHBERT).— Mr. Ver- 

dant dreen. With 05 Illustrations. 
Post svo. i «. net, 

BENNETT fARNOLDyTNovels 

by. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
Leonora. I A Great Man. 
Teresa of Watllng Street. With 8 

Illustrations by Frank Cillei r. 
Tales of the Five Towns. 
Sacred and Profane Love. 

Hugo. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3;. (>.!■ e 
Anna of the Five Towns. 
The Gates of Wrath. 
The Grand Babylon Hotel. Crown 
. cloth. 3?. td. ; Popular Edition, 

m ulitim Svo, 6d. 
The Chost. Crown 8vo, cl., 2s. 6d. net. 

BENNETT »W. C.).— Songs for 

Sailors. Po^t Svo. cl oth, 2s. 

BEWICK (THOMAS) and Mis 

Pupils. By Austin Dobson. With 95 
Illustrations. Square Svo, cloth 

B1ERCE (AMBROSE).— In the 

Midst of Life. Crown 8vo, cloth, 35. td. ; 
post Svo. illustrated boards, 2?. 

B I L L NYE'S Comic History or 

the United States. With 146 1 lusts, 
by F. OPPER. Crown 8vo, cloth, ij. fitf 



BINDLOSS (HAROLD), Novels by. 

Crown Svo. cloth, 6?. each. 
The Concession-Hunters. 
The Mistress of Bonaventure. 
Daventry's Daug hter. 
A Sower of Wheat. Cr. 8vo, cl., 3?. bd. 
Ainslie's Ju-Ju. Crown Svo, cloth, 

3s. 6d. ; picture cloth, flat back. 2s. 

BLlJNDElX'S Worthies, 1604- 

1904. By M. L. Banks, MA With 10 
lllustrats. Demy 8vo, cloth. js. 6d. net. 



BOCCACCIO.— The Decameron. 

With a Portrait. Pott Svo, cloth, gilt 
top, 2s. net : leather, g ilt edges, is . net. 

BO D raTvT]Mc7DTrr^CT)rBooks by . 
Dora Myrl, the Lady Detective. 

Cr. Svo, cl., 3s. 6d. : picture cl., flat back, 2s, 
Crown Svo, cloth, js. bd. each. 
Shillelagh and Shamrock. 
Patsey the Omadaun. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.G 



BESANT and RICE, Novels by. 

Cr. 8vo, cloth, 3$. ou. each : post 8vo, 
iilust. bds. 2s. each ; cL limp, 2s. du. each, 

Ready-Money Mortiuoy. 

The Golden Butterfly. 

My Little Girl. 

With Harp and Crown. 

This Son of Yulcan. 

The Monks of Thelema. 

By Celia's Arbour. 

The Chaplain of the r'lcet. 

The Seamy Side. 

The Case of Mr. Lucra. c. 

'Twas in Trafalgar's Biy. 

The Ten Years' Tenant. 



BESANT Oir WALTER), 

Novels by. Crown 8vb, cloth, 3,. 6d. 
each ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, zs. 
each ; cloth limn, zs. (>d. each. 

All Sorts and Conditions of Men. 
Wiith i2 Illustrations by FRED. BARNARD 

d'he Captains' Room, Stc. 

All in a Garden Fair. With 6 Illus- 
trations bv Harry Furniss. 

Dorothy Forster. With Frontispiece. 

Uncle Jack, and other Stories. 

Children of Gibeon. 

The World Went Very wt ell Then. 
With 12 Illustrations by A. Forestier. 

Herr Paulus. 

The Bell of St. Paul's. 

For Faith and Freedom. With 

lllusts. bv A. FORESTIER and V. WADDY 

To Call Her Mine, Sbc. With 9 IUus- 

trations by A. FORESTIER. 
The Holy Rose, &c. With Frontispiece. 
Armorel of Lyonesse. With 12 Illus- 

'.raionsby F. BARNARD. 
St. (Catherine's by the Tower. 

With 12 Illustrations by C. GREEN. 
Yerbena Camellia Stephanotls. 
The Ivory Gate. 
The Rebel Queen. 
Beyond the Dreams of Avarice. 

With 12 Illustrations by W. 11. HYDE. 
In Deacon's Orders, &c. With Frontis. 
The Revolt of Man. 
The Master Craftsman. 
The City of R efuge. 

Crown 8vo. cloth is. 6U. exh. 

A Fountain Sealed. 

The Changeling. 

The Fourth Generation. 

Ihe Orange Girl. With 8 Illustrations 
by F. Pegram. 

The Alabaster Box. 

'JChe Lady of Lynn. With 12 Illustra- 
tions by G. Demain-Hammonh. 

No Other Way. With 12 Illustrations 
by C. P. Wak d. 

Crown 8vo, picture cloth, flat back, 2s. each. 

St. Katherine's by the Tower. 

The Rebel Queen. 

Large Type, Fine :Paper Editions, pott 
8vo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net each ; leather, 
gilt edges, 3s. net each. 

All Sorts and Conditions of Men. 

London. 

Sir Richard Whittington. 

Gaspard do Coligny. 



BESANT (Sir WALTER), 

Novels by — continued. 
Popular Editions, medium 8vo, 6,/. each. 
All Sorts and Conditions of Men. 
The Golden Butterfly. 
Ready-Money Mortiboy. 
The Chaplain of the F.eet. 
The Monks of Thelema. 
The Orange Girl. 
For Faith and Freedom. 
Children of Gibeon. 
Dorothy Forster. 

Demy 8vo, cloth, 7.$. 6,/. each. 
London. With 125 Illustrations. 
Westminster. With Etching by F. S. 

Walker, and 130 Illustrations, 
douth London. With Etching by F. S. 

Walker, and 118 Illustrations. 
r-ast London. With Etching bv F. S. 

Walker, and 56 Illustrations I 

Mat, I.. Raven Hill, and f. Pennell. 
Jerusalem. By Walter Besant nil 

E. II I'ai MER. With Map and 12 lllusts. 

Crown 8v0, buckram. 6c each. 
A a We Are and .As We May Be. 
Essays and Hisroriettes. 
The Eulogy of Richard Jefferies. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3$, 6,/. each. 
Fifty Years Ago. With m lllusts. 
Caspard de Coligny. With a Portrait. 
Sir Richard Whittington. 
The Charm, and other Drawing-room 

Plays. With 50 Illustrations by CHRIS 

Hammond, &c. 

Art of Fiction. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, is.net. 



BLAKE (WILLIAM), The Poet- 
ical Works of. Edited by E. J. ELLl 

In 2 Vols., each with Photogravure 

Frontispiece, small demy 8vo, buckram, 

12s. net ; half-leather, 15.V. net. 
The Real Blake : A Portrait Biography 

by E. J. Ellis. With 13 Illustrations 

Demy 8v0. buckram, 125. net. 
William' Blake : A Critical Study by 

A. C. Swinburne, With a Portrait. 

Crown 8vo, buckram, 6s. net. 
William Blake: Etchings from lis 

Works (8 Steel Plates and 2 Lithographs) 

by W. 1). Scott. Colombier folio, Iialf- 

cloth, j2s. 61/. net. 



BOURGET (PAUL).— A Living 

Lie. Translated by John De Vii.lier. ■.. 
Crown 8vo, cloth, 35. 6rf. 

BOYD.— A Versailles Christmas^ 

tide. By Mary Stuart Boyd. With 
S3 lllusts. by A. S. Boyd. Fc.ip. rto, 1 

BOYLE ( F.y, Works by. lost 

8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
Chronicles of No-Man's Land. 
Camp Notes. | Savage Lifa. 



BRAND (JOHN).— Observations 

on Popular Antiquities. With the 
Additions of Sir HfiNRY Ellis. Crown 
8vo, clotli, 3s. 61I, 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



SREWER'S (Rev. Dr.) Diction 

aries. Crown Svo, cloib, 3$. 6d. each. 
TheReader'sHandbook of Famous 

Names in Fiction. Allusions, 

References, Proverbs, Plots, 

Stories, and Poarus. 
A Dictionary of Miracles: Imitative, 

Realistic, and Dogmatic. 

BREWSTER (Sir DAVID), 

Works by. Post 8vo, cloth, 4*. 64. each. 
More Worlds than One: Creed ol 

1 osopher, Hope of Christian. Plates 
The Martyrs of Science: Galileo, 

Tycho Bkahe, and Kepler. 
Letters on Natural Magic. With 

numerous Illustrations. 



E3RAYSHAW(J. DODSWORTH). 

—Slum Silhouettes : Stonesoi London 
Life. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



L5RIGHT (FLORENCE).— A Girl 

Capitalist. Crown Svo cloth. 6.?. 

3RILLAT-SAVARIN. — Gastro- 

nomy as a Fine Art. Translated by 

R. E. Axdkrsox. Post 8vo, half ol., k. 

iRYDEN (H. A.).— An Exiled 

Scot. With Frontispiece by J. S. 
Cromptox, R.I. Crown Svo, cloth, 3*. 6d. 

3RYDGES (HAROLD)T— U ncle 

Sam at Home. With 91 Illusfs. Post 

Rvo il'nst. boarrts ■>?. : c'oth 1'itin 2s. 6// 



3UCriAiNAiN (KUi5EKlJ, Foems 
and Novels by. 

The Complete Poetical Works ot 
Robert Buchanan. 2 Vols., crown 
8vo, buckram, with Purliait Frontispiece 
to each volume, 12s. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. i>d. each ; post Svo, 
illustrated boards, 2s. each. 

The Shadow of the Sword. 

A Child of Mature. 

Cod and the Man. With n Illustra- 
tions by F. Barnard. 

Lady Kilpatrick. 

The Martyrdom of Madeline. 

Love Me for Ever. 

Annan Water. | Foxglove Manor. 

The New Abelard. | Rachel Dane. 

Matt: A Story of a Car: 

The Master of the Mine. 

The Heir of Linne. 

Woman and the Man. 

Crown Svo. c.'oth, 3s. 6*i. each. 

Red and Whita Heather. 

Androme da. 

Popular Editions, medium Svo. 6J. each. 

The Shadow of the Sword. 

God and the M-.n. 

Foxglove Manor 

The CharlatanTl;v Kl.:-.ertE(:chan-a\\ 
and Henry Murray. Crown 8vo, cloth, 
with Frontispiece by T. H. ROBINSON, 
3.S. 6.2. ; post Svo, illustrated boards 2s. 



BURNS (ROBERT).— The Cot- 
ter's Saturday Night. With Illustra- 
tions by A. S. hoYD. reap. 4(0, cl., 6s. net. 



BURTON (ROBERT). — The 

Anatomy ol Melancholy. Demy Svo, 
cloth, 7s. bd. 



CAMERON (Comma nderV. 
LOVETT). — The Cruise of the 
' Black Prince ' Privateer. Cr. Svo, 
cloth, with 2 Illustrations by P. MACNAB, 
3.?. 6d. ; post Svo, picture boards. 2*. 



CAMPBELL (A. GODRIC). — 

Fleur- de- Camp: a Daughter of 
France. Crown Svo. cioth. Us. 

CALnIE (HALL),~Novels byT~ 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. td. each ; post Svo, 
illustrated boards, 2s. each ; cloth limp, 
2s. fid. each. 

The Shadow of a Crime. 

A Son of Hagar. | The Deemster. 

Also LIBRARY Emtioxs of the three novels, 
crown Svo, cloth. 6s. each ; Cheap Popu- 
1 ah Editions, medium Svo.port rait cover. 
6,/. each ; and the Fine Paper Edition 
of The Deemster, pott Svo, cloth, 
tilt top, 2s.net [leather, gilt fdges 3t.net. 

CAPTAIN COTGNET; Soldier 

of the Empire. Edited by Lored.w 
- archeY', and Translated by Sirs. CAREY. 
With 100 Iilusts. Cr. Svo. cloth. v.fW. 

CA RLYLE tTHOMAS)^-On the 

Choice of Books. Post Svo. cloth, is. 6a. 



CARkUTH (HAYDEN). — The 

Adventures of Jones. With 17 Illus- 
trations. Fcap. Svo, picture co\er, ij. ; 
cloth, is. 6d. 



JURGESS(GELETT) and WILL 

IRWIN. — The Picaroons: A San 
Francisco Night's Entertainment. | 

Crown Svo, clo.h, 3s. td. 



CHAMBERS (ROBERT W.), 

Stories of Paris Life by. 
The King in Yellow. Crown Svo, 

cloth, 3s. bd. ; fcap. 8vo, cloth limp. 2s 6d. 
In the Quar ter. Fcap 8vo. cloth, 2s. bd . 

CHAPMAN'S (GEORGE) Work*. 

Vol. I., Plays Complete, including the 
Doubtful Ones. — Vol. II., Poems and 
Minor Translations, with Essay by A. C. 
Swinburne— Vol. III., Translations of 
the Iliad and Odyssey. Three Vols., 
crown 8vo. cloth, 35. 6d. each. 

CHESSTThe Laws and Practice 

of. With an Analysis of the Openings. 
I.y Howard Staunton. Edited by 
Ri B. Wormai.D. Crown Svo. cloth, 3s. 

The Minor Tactics cf Chess: A 
Treatise on the Deployment of the 
Forces in obedience to Strategic Principle. 
By F. K. Young and E. C. Howell. 
Fcap Svo, cloth. 2s. 6d. 

The Hastings Chess Tournament. 
The Authorised Account ot the 230 Games 
plaved Aug.-Sept., 1S95. With Annota- 
tions by PlLLSBURY, LASKER, TARRASCII, 

Steixitz, Sciiiffers, Teicumann, Bar- 
deleben Blackburxe, Ginsberg, 
Tin'sley, Mason, and Albin ,• Biographi- 
cal Sketches, and 22 Portraits. Edited by 
11, F. Cheshire. Crown Svo, cloth, 5*. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



CHAUCER for Children: A Gol 

den Key. By Mrs. H. R. Havveis. With 
8 Coloured Piates and 30 Woodcuts. 
Crown 4to. cloth. 3.?. td. 
Chaucer for Schools. With the Story 
of hs Times and his W.-rk. Bv Mrs. 
H. R. Haweis. Demy 8vo, cloth.' 2s. td. 



CL1VE (Mrs. ARCHER), Novels 

by. Post 8vo, cloth. 3s. td. each j illus- 
trated boards, 2s. each. 

Paul Ferroll. 

Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife. 

CLARE (AUSTIN), stories by. 
For the Love of a Lass. Post 8vo, 

illustrated boards, 2s. 
By the Rise of the River. Crown 
8vo, cloth, 35 td. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, ts. each. 
The Tideway. 
Ra ndal of Randalholme. 

CLODD (EDYVARDl— IVlyThs 

and Dreams. Crown 8vo, cloth, j.t. f)rf. 



COLOUR BOOKS— continued. 
Cairo, Jerusalem, and Damascus. 

By D. S. JtfARGOLIOUTH, Litt.D. Witil 
numerous Illustrations in il.ree Colours 
by W. S. Tyruhitt, R.B.A., and 
Reginald Barratt, A.R.W.S. Fcap. 
4to, doth, 20^ net. l^eft. 

The Rhine. By H. J. Mackj 

With numerous Illustrations in Three 

Colours by Effie Jardixe. Fcap. 4to, 

cloth, 20s. net. {Oct, 

*s* Prospectuses of these Books, with ie at 3 

alsn in regard to SPECIAL COPIES on pine 

rag paper, may be had. 



COBBAN (J. MACLAREN), 

Novels by. 

The Cure of Souls. Post 8vo, illus- 
trated boards, is. 

The Red Sultan. Crown 8vo, cloth, 
3.?. td. ; post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2c. 

The Burden of Isabel. Crown Svo, 
cloth, 35. 6./. 



COLLINS (J. CHURTON, M.A.), 
Books by. Cr. 8vo, cloth. 3*. td. each 
Illustrations of Tennyson. 
Jonathan Swift. 



COLLINS (MORTIMER and 
FRANCES", Novels by Cr.Svo, cl. 
?s. td. eachijpost 8vo, Mini td. hd<., is. each. 

From Midnight to Midnight. 

You Play me Falsa. 

Blacksmith and Scholar. 

'i he Village Com edy . 

Post Svo, illusirated boards, 2s. each. 

Transmigration. 

A Fight with Fortune. 

Sweet Anne Page. 

Sweet an d Twenty. | Frances 

CoLMAN^S (OEORGT3TrIuiiK>r^ 

ous Works: 'Broad Grins,' 'My 
Nightgown and Slippers,' &c. With 
Life and Frontis. Crown 8vo, cl., 3$. td. 

CO LO U K = BOO KS7~ 
Switzerland and its People. K* 

Clarence Rooi:. With 56 Illustrations 
in Three Colours by EFFIE J ARDINE, and 
24 in Two Tints. Fcap. 40, cl. 20s. net. 

Venice. By Beryl de Seuxcourt and 
AiaySturge-Henderson. With 30 Illus- 
trations in Three Colours by REGINALD 
Barratt, A.R.W.S. Fcap. 4to, .loth,. 
io.r. td. net. \_March 

The Colour of London. By Rev 
W. J. LOF'lIE, K.SA. With Introduction 
by M. H. Spielmann, F.S.A., and Illus- 
trations in Three Colours and Sepia 
by Yoshio Marking-, who also supplies 
a descriptive chapter. Fcap. 4to, cloth, 
20j. net. \3lay. 



COLLINS (WILKIE.), Novels by. 

Cr. Svo, cl., «. td. each ; post8vo, picture 
boards, 2.;. each ; cl. limn. 25. td . each. 

Antonina. | Easil | KideandSeeK 

The Woman in White. 

The Moonstone. | Man and Wife. 

The Dead Secret. I After Dark. 

The Oaeen of H ear's. 

Ho Hainit! My Miscellanies. 

Armadale. | ±-cor Miss Finch. 

Miss or Mrs ? I The Black Robe. 

The New Magdalen. 

Frozen Deep. | A Rogue's Life. 

The Law and the Laay. 

The Two Destinies. 

The Haunted Hotel. 

The Fallen Leaves. 

Jezebel's Daughter. 

Heart and Science. | 'I Say K».' 

The jsvil Genius, i Little Novels. 

The Lega cy of Cain. I B lind Love. 

Popular Editions, medium 8vo, td. each. 

The Y/oman in Y/hite. 

Moonstone. | Tfie Near Magdalen. 

The Dead Secret I No Name. 

Ma.11 and Wife Armadale. 

ihe Woman in White. Large Type, 
Fink Papeh Edition. Pott 8vo, cioth, 
Silt top. 2s. net : leather. .11 It edges, 3,? net. 

The Frozen Deep. Large Type EDrr. 
Fcap. Svo cl. u. net ; leather , is. td, m t. 

COLQUHOUN (M. J.).— Every 

Inch a Soldier. Crown Svo, cloth, 
J,s td.: post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 



COLT-BREAKING, Hints on. By 

W. M. Hutchison. Cr. 8vo, cl.. 3.9 td. 



:OMPTON (HERBERT), by. 
The Inimitable Mrs. Massing- 

baiil. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. td. 
Crown S, o, cloth, os. each. 
The Wilful Way. 
The Queen can do no Wrong. 
To Defeat the Fnds of Justice. 



COOPER 

Hamilton. 



(E. H.).— Geoffory 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. td 



CORNISH (J. F.).— Sour Grapes. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 6t. 



CORNWAL L.— Popular 
Romances of the West of England : 
The Drolls, Traditions, a. id Superstitions 
of Old Cornwall. Collected bv ROBERT 
HUNT, F.R.S. With two Pla'es by 
George Cruikshaxk. Ci. 8vo, cl. 7s. td. 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



COVENT GARDEN THEATRE, 

The Annals of, from 1732 to 1897. By 
HENRY SAXE WINDHAM. With 45 Illus- 
trations. Two Vols., demy Svo, cl, 21s. net 



CRADuOCK (C. EGBERT), by. 

The Prophet of the Great Smoky 
Mountains. Crown Svo, cloth, 35. fid.: 
post Sv >, illustrated boards. 2s. 

His Vanished Star. Cr8vo,cl. 3s. 6d 



CRESSWELL (HENRY). —A 

Lady of Misrule. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s. 



CRIM (MATT). -Adventures of 

a Fair Rebel. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6rf. 
v ., illustrated boards, 2s. 



CROCKETT (S. R.) and others.— 

Tales of our Coast. By S. R. 
Crockett, Gilbert Parker, Harold 
Frederic, ' Q.,' and W. Clark Russell 
With 13 Illustrations by FRANK BRANG- 
WYN. Crown Svo. cloth. -?s. fid. 



CROKER (Mrs. B. M.), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 35. 6,1. each ; 

p.st Svo, hlustrated boards, 2s. each; 

cloth limp, 2s. dl. each. 
Pretty Miss Neville. 
A Bird of Passage. | Mr. Jervis. 
Diana Barrington. 
Two Masters. I Interference. 
A Family Likeness. 
A Third Person. | Proper Pride. 
Village Tales & Jungle Tragedies 
The Real Lady Hilaa. 

Married or Single? 

Crown Svo, cloth 3.?. bd. each. 
In the Kingdom of Kerry: 
Miss Ealmaine's Past. 
Jasen. I Beyond the Pale. 

Terence. With 6 ll!u-u. byS. Paget. 
The Cat's-paw. With 12 Illustrations 

by Fred Peuram. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. bd. each ; post 8vo, 

cloth limp. 2s. 6d. each. 
Infatuati on. I S o^o One Else 
'To Let.' Post Kvo, 1 laure boards, 2*. 

cloth liinp, 2 



CUMMING (C. F. GORDON), 

Works by. Demy Svo, cloth, 6s. ea ch. 
In the Hebrides. With 24 Illustrations. 
In the Himalayas and on the 

Indian Plains. With 42 Illustrations 
Two Happy Years in Ceylon. 

With 28 Illustrations. 
Via Cornwall to Egypt . Frontis . 

CUSSANS (JOHN E.).— A Hand- 
book of Heraldry ; including instruc- 
tions for Tracing Pedigrees, Deciphering 
Ancient MSS., &c. With 40S Woodcuts 
and 2 Coltd. Plates. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 



Popular Editions, medium 8vo,6J. each. 
Diana Barrington. 
Pretty Miss Neville. 
A Bir.i of Passage. 
Beyond the Pale. 

A Family Likeness. 

The Spanish Necklace. With 8 

Illustrations by F. Pegr»M. Crown Svo, 

cloth. 2c fid net 



CYCLING, HUMOURS OF. By 

Jerome K Jerome, H. G.Wells, Barky 
Pain. C. Rook, Pett Ridge, J. F.Sulli- 
van. &c. With Illusts. Cr.Svo.cL.is. net. 



DAUDET (ALPHONSE). — The 

Evangelist ; or, Port Salvation. 

Translated by C. H. MELTZER. Cr. 8vo, 
cloth, 3s6rf. ; post 8vo, illustrated bds.,2s. 

DAVENANT (FRANCIS).— Hints 

for Parents on the Choice of a 
Profession for their Sons when 
Starting in Life. Crown Svo, is. fid. 

DAVlTXSONlHlJGH COLEMAN). 

—Mr. Sadler's Daughters. Crown 
8vo. cloth, 3s. fid, 

DAVIES (Dr. N. E. YORKE-), 

Worksby. Cr. Svo. is. ea.; cl. u. 6d.ea. 
One Thousand Medical Maxims 

and Surgical Hints. 
Nursery Hints: A Mother's Guide. 
Foods for the Fat : Dietetic Cure ol 

Corpulency, Gout, and excessive Leanness. 
Aids to Long Life. Crown 8vo, 2s. ; 

cloth, 2S. f>d. 



DAVIES' (Sir JOHN) Complete 

Poetical Works. Edited with Notes, 
by Rev. A. B. Grosart, D.D. Two Vols., 
crown 8>o, cloth, 3s. fid. each. 



CRUIKSHANK'S CuMlC AL= 

MANACK. Complete in Two SERIES. 

The First, from 1S35 to 1843 : the 
Second, f 1 om 1844 to 1853. A Gathering 
of the Best Humour of THACKERAY, 
Hood, Albert Smith, &c. With nu- 
merous Steel Engravings and Woodcuts 
by Cuf KSHANK, LANDEILS, &c. Two 
Vols . crown Svo, cloth, 7.?. (id each. 
The Life of George CruikshanK. 
Bj BLANCHARD JeRROLD. With 84 Illus- 
trations and a Bibliography. Crown Svo, 
cloth, 3 j. 6^. 



DEAKIN (DOROTHEA), Stories 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each. 
The Poet and the Pierrot. 
The Princ es s & th e Kitchen-maid . 

DEFOE (DANIEL). — Robinson 

Crusoe. With 37 Illusts. by GEORGE 

CRUIKSHANK. LARGE TYPE, FINE PAPER 

Edition. Pott 8vo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net ; 
leather, gilt edges, 3s. net. 



DE GUERIN (MAURICE), The 

Journal of. With a Memoir by Sainte- 
BEUVE. Fcap. Svo, half-cloth, 2s. 6d. 

DE MAISTRE (XAV1 E Ri^A 

Journey Round my Room. Transl. 
Henry ATTWEll. Post Svo, cloth. 2s. 61, 

DFjMlTXFjf JAMES).— AStrange 

Manuscript found in a Copper 
Cylinder. Crown Svo, cloth, with 19 
Illustrations by Gilbert Gaul, 3s. 6d. ; 
post Svo. illustrated boards. 2s. 



DEVONSHIRE SCENERY, The 

History of. By Arthur W. Clayden, 
MA. With Illus. Demy Svo, c'.ios 6d. net. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



DEWAR (T. R.). — A Ramble 

Round the Globe. With 220 Illustra- 
tions. Crown Svo, cloth, js. 6d. 



DE W1NDT (HARRY).— Through 
the Gold-Fields of Alaska to 
Bering Straits. With Map and 33 

Illustrations. Demy 8vo, cloth, 6s. 

DICKENS (CHARLES)TTheT7ife 

of, as Revealed in his Writings. By 

Percy Fitzgerald, F.S.A. With 2 Por- 
traits and 2 Facsimile Letters. 2 vols., 
demy 8vo, cloth, 21.?. net. 
The Speeches of Charles Dickens. 
Edited and Annotated by R. H. SHEP- 
HERD. With a Portrait. Pott 8vo, cloth, 
2s. net ; leather, 3.?. net. 
The Pocket Charles Dickens : bcin 14 
Favourite Passages chosen by Alfrku 
H. Hyatt. i6mo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net ; 
leather, gilt top, 3s. net. 



DICTIONARIES. 

The Reader's Handbook of 
Famous Names in Fiction, 
Allusions, References, Pro- 
verbs, Plots, S. oi'ies.anii Poems 
By Kev. E. C. Brewer, LL.D. Crown 
8vo, cloth. 35. td. 

A Dictionary of Miracles, 
Imitative, Realistic, and Dogrhauc. By 
Rev. E. C. Brewer, LL.D. Ciown 8vJ, 
cloth, 3s. 6d. 

Familiar Allusions. Dy William A. 
and Charles G. Wheeler. Demy 8vo, 
cloth, 7s. 6d. net. 

Familiar Short Sayings of Great 
Men. With Historical and Explanatory 
Notes by Samuel A. Bent, A.M. Crown 
8vo, cloth. 7s. 6if. 

The Slang Dictionary: Etymological, 
Historical, and Anecdotal. Crown Svo, 
cloth, 6s. fid. 

Words, Facts, and Phrases: A 
Dictionary of Curious, Quaint, and Out 
of-the-Way Matters By Eliezer 
EDWARDS. Crown 8vo. cloth, 3w M 



D1LKE (Sir CHARLK5, M.P.). 

— The British Empire. Crown 8vo 

buckram, 3s. 6d. 



DOBSON (AUSTIN), Works by. 
Thomas Bewick and his Pupils. 

With 95 Illusts. So. Svo. cloth, 3s. td. 
Crown Svo. buckram, 6s. each. 
Four Frenchwomen. With Four 

Portraits. 
Eighteenth Century Vignettes. 

In Three Series, each 6s. ; also Fine- 

I'Aper Editions of the Three Series 

pott Svo, cloth, 2s. net each ; leather, 

3$. net each. 
A Paladin of Philanthropy, and 

other Papers. With 2 Illustrations. 
Side-walk Studies. With 5 Illusts. 



DOBSON (W. T.).- Poetical ln= 
genuities and Eccentricities. Post 
8vo. cloth. 2s. <>d. 



DOWLINQ (RICHARD). — Old 

Corcoran's Money. Cr. 8vo, c!., 3s. bd. 



DOYLE (A. CONAN).— The Firm 

of Girdle.stone. Crown fivoc'n h 3.?. fW. 



DONOVAN (DICK), Detective 

Stories by. Post Svo, illustiated 
boards, 2s. each ; cloth Imp. 2s. 6 i each. 

Riddles Read. | Link by Link. 

Caught at Last. 

Suspicion Aroused. 

Tracked anil Taken. 

Who Poisoned Hetty Duncan? 

In the Grip of the Law. 

From Information Received. 

Tracked to Doom. 

Crown Svo, clotn 3*. bd. c:;ch. 

Tyler Tatlock, Private Detactiva. 

Deacon E rodie ; or. Beh ind the Mask. 

Crown Svo, cl., 3s. 6d. eacli ; picture cl., 

flat back, 2s. each ; post 8vo, illustrated 

boards, 2s. each ; cloth limp, 2«. f 'd.cjch. 
The Man from Manchester. 
The Myst ery of Jamaic a Terrace. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 3s.' rf.each: post Svo, illus- 
trated boards, ?s. each; cloth limp,2s. bd. each 
A Detective's Triumphs. 
Chronicles o f Mi chael Danevitch. 
The Records of Vincent Trill. 

Cr. Svo cl , 3s. (>d. ; picture cl., rial bk., 2s. 
The Man-Hunter. Post 8vo, illustrated 

boards, 2s. ; cloth limp, 2s. (id. ; picture 

cloth, flat back, 2s. 
Tales of Terror. Crown Svo, cloth, 

3s 6d. ; picture cloth, flat back, 2s. 
Dark Deeds. Crown Svo, cloth limp, 

2s. bd. ; picture cloth, flat bac ; ;, 2s. 
Wanted! Crown Svo, picture cloth, flat 

back, 2s.; post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. ; 

cloth limp, 2s. bd. 

DRAMATISTS, THrTOL D. 

Edited by Col. Cunningham. Cr. Svo, 
cloth, with Portra ts, 3s. bd. per Vol. 

Ben Jonson's Works. With Notes, 
Critical and Explanatory, and a Bio- 
graphical Memo*.r by WILLIAM GlKFORD. 
Three Vols. 

Chapman's Works. Three Vols. Vol. 
I. contains the Plays complete ; Vol. II., 
Poems and Minor Translations, with an 
Essay by A. C. Swinburne; Vol. Ill , 
Translations of the Iliad and Odyssey. 

Marlowe's Works. One Vol. 

Massinger's Plays. From Gifkord's 
_ Text. One Vol. 

DUNCAN (SARA JEAiNiNEITfc, 

Books by. Cr. 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d. each. 
A Social Departure. With in 

Illustrations by F. H. Townsexd. 
An American Girl in London. 

With So Illustrations by F. H T IWNSKND. 

The Simple Adventures of a 
Manisa hib. Wuh 37 Il lustrations. 
Crown Svo, clot 11, 3^. ou. each. 
A Daughter of To-Day. 
"Vernon's Aunt. With 47 Illustrations. 

DUTT(ROMESrTC.).— England 

and India: Progress during One 
Huntred Years. Crown Svo. cloth, 2s. 



DYSON (EDWARD). — In the 

Roaring Fifties. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. 



CHATTO & W1NDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



EARLY ENGLISH POETS. 

Kwicd by Rev. A. B. GlfoSAKT, D.D 
Crown 8vo, cloth, 35. b,i. per Volume. 

Fletcher's (Gilesi Poems. One Vol. 

Davies' (fair John) Complete 
Poetical Works. Two Vols. 



(Mrs. 



ANNIE), 

8vo, 



EDWARDES 

Novels by. 
A Point of Honour. Post 

illustrated boards, 2s. 
Archie LoveH. Crown Svo, cloth 
?,.'. bit. ; po^t 8vo, illustrated boards, zs. 
^AJPlastes 1 Saint. Cr. Svo, cloili, 3.9. 6d. 

EDWARDS (ELI EZER). Words, 

Facts, and Phrases: A Dictionary of 
Curious, Quai:, t, and Out-ol-the-Way 
Matters. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3?. 6d. 

EGERTON (UeV. 17~~C^ 

Sussex Folk and Sussex Ways. 

With Introduction by Rev. Dr. H. Wace, 
and Four Iliusts. Crown Svo, cloth, 5s. 

EGO LESTON (EDWAR D).— 

Roxy. Post Svo, illustrated boards, 2.?. 

ENGLISHMAN (An) in Paris! 

Recollections of Louis Philippe and the 
Empire, Crow n Svo, cloth. 3$, 01. 



ENGLISH MAN'S HOUSE, The: 

A Practical Guide for Selectingor Bulletin 
a Home. By C. J. Richardson. With 
Coloured Frontispiece and 534 Illustra 
tions. Crown Svo. cloth, 3.?. (>,f. 



EYES, Our: How to Preserve 
Them. By John Browning. Crown 
8vo, cloth, is. 



FAMILIAR ALLUSIONS: Mis- 

cellaneous Information, including Celc 
brated Statues, Paintings, Palaces, 
Country Seats, Ruins, Churches, Shins. 
Streets, Clubs, Natural Curiosities, &c. 
By W. A. and C. 0. Wheeler. Dem 
8,0. cloth, ys. td. net. 

FAMILIAR SHORT SAYINCjo 

of Great Men. By S. A. Bent, A.M 
Crown Svo, cloth, 7s. til 



FARADAY (MICHAEL), Wo* w* 

by. Post Svo, cloth, 4*. td. each. 

The Chemical History of a 
Candle: Lectures delivered before a 
Juvenile Audience. Edited by WILLIAM 
Ckookes, F.C S. With numerous Iliusts. 

On the Various Forces of Nature, 
and their Relations to each 
other. Edited bv William Ckookes 
F.CS. With Illustrations. 



FARRER (J. ANSON).— War: 

Three Essays. Crown Svo, doth, is. fid. 



FICTION, a Catalogue of, with 

Descriptions and Reviews of nearly 
Twelve Hundred Novels, will be 
sent free by Chatto & WlNDl'S upon 
application. 

F IN-BEC— The Cupboard 

Papers. The Art of Living and Dining. 
Post Svo, cloth, 2s. td. 



FENN (G. MANVILLE). Novels 

by. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. (id. each ; 

post Svo, illustrated boaids, 21. each. 
The New Mistress. 
Witness to the Deed. 
The Tiger Lily. 
The White Virgin. 

Crown Svo cloth, 35. bd earn, 
A Woman Worth Winning. 
Cursed by a Fortune 
The Case of Ailsa Cray. 
Commodore Junk. 
Black Blood. | Sn Jeopardy. 
Double Cunning. 
A Fluttered Davecoto. 
King of the Castl«. 
The Master of the Ceremonies. 
The Story of Antony Grace. 
The Man with a Shadow. 
One Maid's Mischief. 
This Man's Wife. 
The Bag or Diamonds, and Three 

Bits or Paste. 
Running Amok. 

Crown Svo. cloth, bs. each. 
Black Shadows. 
The Cankerworm. 
So Like a Woman. 

A Crimson Crime. Crown 8vo, cloth, 

35. 1 </. : picture cloth, flat back. 2?. 



FIREWORK MAKING, TheCom- 

p'ete Art of; or, The Pyrotechnist's 
Treasury. By t'HOMAS Kentish With 
267 Illustrations Cr. Svo. cloth, tx. td 



FITZGERALD (PERCY), by. 

JLittle Essays : Passages from the 

Letters of CHARLES LAMB. Post Svo, 

clolh, 2s. td. 
Fatal Zero. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3$. td. ; 

post 8vo, illustrated boards, z$. 

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, K. each. 
Bella Donna. | Polly. 
The Lady of Brantome. 
Never Forgotten. 
The Second Mrs. Tillotson. 
Seventy- five Brooke S treet. 

The Life of Charles Eickens as 
Revealed in his Writings. Wild 

Portraits and Facsimiles. 2 vols, demy 
Svo, cloth, 21s. net. 
The Life of Laurence Sterne. 

With a Portrait. Crown Svo, cioth, t\s-. 



FLAMMARION (CAA1ILLE), 

Works by. 

Popular Astronomy. Translated by 
J. Ellard Gore, F.K.a.S. With Three 
Plates and 2SS Illustrations. Medium 
Svo, cloth, 10s. td. 

Thunder and Lightning. Trans- 
lated by WALTER MOSTYN. With Illus- 
trations. Crown Svo, cloth, bs. net. 



FLETCHER'S (GILES, B.D.) 

Complete Poems : Christ's Victorie in 

Heaven, Victorie on Earth, Triumph over 
Dea^h ; with Minor Poems. Notes by 
Rev. A. B. Grosart. Cr. Svo, cl. $3. td. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



FORBES (Hon. Mrs. WALTER). GIBBON (CHARLES), Novels 



-Duml 



.7! R 



-loth. 3 1 6/ 



FRANCILLON (R. E.), Novels 

by. Ciown 8vo, clolh, 3s. 67. each ; post 
Svo, illustrated boards, 25. ea< li. 
One by One I A Keal Queen. 
A Dog and his Shadow/. 
Ropes of S and. \V th Il lustrations. 

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
2-aeen Cophetua. | Olympia. 

Romances of the Law, 
King or Knave ? 



Jack Doyle's Daughter. Crown Svo, 
cloth, 35 M. 



FREDERIC (HAROLD), Novels 

by. Post Sv 1, ciotii. 3s. td. eaUi ; 

illustrated board's, 2* each. 
Peth's Brother's Wife. 
T he L awton Girl. 

FRY'S (HERBERT;) Roval 

Guide to the London Chariiies, 
Edited by John Lane. Publiskec 
Annual ly. Crown 8vo, cloth, is. td. 

GARDENING BOOKS. PostSvo 

li. e;ich ; cloth, is. 64. each. 

A Year's Work in Garden and 
Greenhouse. Bv George Glenny, 

Household Horticulture. Bv Tom 
and |ane JEKROLD. Illustrated. 

The CarcJen that Paid the Rent. 
By Toil Jkkrold. 

Our Kitchen Garden. Bv Ton 

JERKOI D. Post 8vo. cloth, r.f net. 



GAULOT (PAUL), Books by. 

The Red Shirts: A Tale of 'The 
Terror.' Iranslated by JOH\* 1)E VlL- 
LliCRS. Crown Svo, cloth, with Frontis- 
pid e by Stanley Wood, 3s. td. ; picture 
cloth, flat back, 2s. 

Crowa 8\o, cloth, 6s. each. 

Love and Lovers of the Past. 
Translated by C. Laroche, M.A. 

A Conspiracy under the Terror. 
Translated by C. LAROCHE, M.A. With 
Illustrations and Facsimiles. 



GERARD (DOROTHEA).— A 

Queen of Curds and Cream. Crown 
Kvo cloth. 3s. f>d. 



GERMAN POPULAR STORIES. 

Collected bv the Brothers Grimm and 
Translated by Edga < TAM-OR. With 
lnti eduction by John Ruskin, and 22 
Steel Plates after George Cruikshank. 
Square Svo. cloth giU edges. 7s. 6d. 



GIBNEY (SOMERYILLE). 

Sentenced! Crow Svo cloth if n 



GIBBON (CHARLES;, i\o*eis 

by. Crown Svo, cloh, 3,?. td. each ; 

post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
Robin Gray. 
The Golden Shaft. 
The Flower of the Forest. 
The Braes of Yarrow. 
Of High Degree. 
Queen of the Meadow. 



by — con tin it cd. 

Post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
The Dead Heart. 
For Lack of Gold. 
What Will the Y/crld Say? 
For the King. | A Hard Knot. 
In Pastures Green. 
In Love and War. 
A Heart's Problem. 
By Mead and Stream. 
Fancy Free. | Loving a Dream. 
In Honour Bound. 
Heart's Delight. | Blood-Money. 



GiBSON (L. S.), Novels 
Crown 8vo, clolh, 6s. t- ch. 
The Freemasons. Burnt Spices. 



GILBERT (WILLIAM).-James 

Duke, Costermonger. Post 8vo, illus- 
trated boards, 2s. 

G I L B ERT'S (W. S.) Origina I 

Plays. In 3 Series, post Svo, 2s. bd each. 

The First Series contains : The Wicked 

W. ;i id — Pygmalion and Galatea — 

Charity— The Princess— The Palace if 
Truth— Trial by Jurv — lolanthe. 
The Second Series" contains: Broken 
Mearts — Engaged — Sweethearts — 
Gretchen — Dan 1 Druce— Tom Cobb 

— H.M.S. 'Pinafore' — The Sorcerer— 
The Pirates of Penzance. 

The Third Series contai&s: Comedy and 

Tragedy — Foggerty's Fairy — Rosen- 

crantz and Guildenstein — Patience— 

, Piincess Ida — The Mikado- Ruddigore 

— Ihj Yeomen of the Guard— The Gou- 
rioiurs— The Mountebanks— Utopia. 

Eight Original Comic Operas 
wntten by W. s>. GlLUEkT. Two Series, 
demy svo, cloth, 2S. td. each. 

The First Series contains : The Sorcerer 
—H.M.S. 'Pinafore'— The Pirates rf 
Penzince — lolanthe — Patience — Prin- 
cess Ida— The Mikado — Tri:d by Jurv. 

The Second Series contains : The Gon- 
doliers—The Grand Duke— The Yeomen 
of the Guard— IBs Excellency— Utopia, 
Limited— Ruddigore — The Mountebanks 

— Ha«te to the Weddmg. 

The Gilbert and Sullivan Birth- 
day Book: Quotations for Every Dav 
in the Year. Compiled by A. VNAISOX. 
Royal t6mo, clo:h, 2s. 6d. 



GISSING (ALGERNON , Novels 

by. Crown Svo, cloth, g It top. 6s. each, 

A Secret of the North Sea. 
Knitters in the Sun, 
The Wealth of Mallerstang. 
An Angel's Portion. 
Baiiol Garth. 



The Dreams cf Simon Usher. 

Crown Svo, clolh, 2s. td. net. 

gTeNNY (GEORGE).— A Year's 

Work in Garden and Greenhouse : 

Practical Advice as to Flower, Fruit, a; d 
Frame Garden. Post Svo, is. ; cl„ is. td. 



CHATTO & VVINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



GODWIN (WILLIAM). — Lives 

of the Necromancers. Post 8vo. cl.. 23 



QLANVILLE (ERNEST), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each ; 
post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
The Lost Heiress. With 2 Illustra 

by HUMfc NlSBET. 
The Fossicker: A Romance of Mash. 

onaland. Two tllusts. bv HOME NlSBBT. 
A Fair Colonist . With Frontispiece. 
The Golden Rock. With Frontispiece 

bv Stanley Wood. Cr. Svo, cloth. 3s. 6d. 
Tales from the Veld. With 1^ 

Illustrations. Ci own .Svo, cloth, 3*. 6d. 
Max Thornton. With 8 Illustration? 

by J. S. Cr.»mptox, R.I. Large crown 

8vo cloth, ;.' it edg es, ?s. 

GOLDEN "TREASURY of 

Thought, The : A Dictionary of Quo- 
tations from the Best Authors. By 
Tu EO r>r< RF. Taylor. Cr. Svo. ci.. 3'- f > '■ 

GOODMAN (E. J.)— The Fate of 

Herb ert Wayne. Cr. 8vo. cl„ 3*. r-d . 

GORDON SAMUEL). — The 

Ferry of Fate: a Tale of Russian 
Jewry* C rown 8vo, cloth.- fa. 

G0RE1j7~ELLTRD, F.R.A.S.). 

—The Stellar Heavens: an Introduo- 

t o the Study of the Stars and 
Nebulx. Crown Svo, cloth, 2s. net. 
Studies in Astronomy. With 8 
Illustrations. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. 



GRACE (ALFRED A.).— Tales 

of a Dyinjt Race. C-. Svo, cL 3: I ti 

GREEKS AND ROMANS, The 

Life of the, described from Antique 
Monuments. By ERNST Guhl and W. 
KONKR. Edited bv Dr. F. HUEFFER 
With 545 Illusls. Demy 8vo, cU -> fid 

GRE EN (ANNA KATHARINE), 

Novels by. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. eacl 
The Millionaire Baby. 
The Amethyst Box. 
The Woman in the Alcove. 



HAIR, The: Its Treatment in 

Health, Weakness, and Disease. 

Translated from the German of Dr. J. 
Pincl's. Crown 8vo, is. ; cloth, is. 6d. 



HAKE (Dr. T. GORDON), Poems 

by. Crown Svo, cloth, bs. each. 
New Symbols. 
Legends of the Morrow. 
The Serpent Play. 

Maiden Ecstasy. Small 4to, cloth, 8s. 
HALL (Mrs. S. C.).— Sketches 

of Irish Character. With Illustra- 
tions on Sleel and Wood by CRUlK- 
shank. Maclise, Gilbert, and Harvey. 
Demy 8vo, cloth, ys. 6d. 



HALL (OWEN), Novels by. 
The Track of a Storm. Crown 8vo, 

picture cloth, flat back, 2s. 
Jetsam. Ciown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 

Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s. each. 
Eureka. I Hernando. 

HARTE'S ~ (BRET) Collected 

Works. LIBRARY EDITION, in Ten 
Volumes, crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
Vol. 1. Complete Poetical and 
Dramatic Works. With Port. 
II The Luck of Roaring Camp- 
Bohemian Papers— American- 
Legends. 

III. Talis of the Argonauts- 

Eastern' Sketches. 

IV. Gabriel Conroy. 

V. Stories — Condensed Novels. 
I, VI. Tales of the Pacific Slope, 
VII. Tai.esofthePacificSlope— II. 
With Portrait by John Pettie. 
„ VIII. Tales of Pine and Cypress. 
„ IX. Buckeye and Chapparkl. 
X. Tales of Trail and Town 



GREENWOOD (JAMES).— The 

Prisoner in the Dock. Crown Svo 
cloth, 

GREY (Sir GEORGE).— The 
Romance of a Proconsul. By James 

MILNE. Crown Svo. buckram, fij. 



GRIFFITH (CECIL;.— Connthia 

.Marazion. Crown Bvo, cloth. 

G R I F F ITHSlMajor A. ) .— N0T99, 

and Blue Blood. Ciown Svo clo'h. 2 ;. 

G U NTE R~(AT~C LAV E R I N G . A 

Florida Enchantment. Crown Svo 
cloth. y.M. 

GUTTENBERG (VIOLET), 

Novels by. Crown Svo. cloth, 6s. each. 
Neither Jew nor Greek. 
The Power of the Palmist. 



GYP. — CLOCLO. Translated by 
XoR\ M. Statham. Cr. 8vo, cl., 3s. 6d. 



Bret Harte's Choice Works in Prose 
and Verse. With Portra.t and 40 Illus- 
trations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3«. Od. 

Bret Harte's Poetical 'Works, in- 
cluding Some Later Verses. Crown 
Svo, buckram, 4s. 6d. 

In a Hollow of the Hills. Crown 
8vo, picture cloth, flat back, 2s. 

Condensed Novels. (Two Series m 
One Volume.) Pott Svo, cloth, gilt top 
2s. net : leather, gilt edges, 3s. net. 



Crown Svo. cloth, 6s. each. 
On the Old Trail. 
Under the Redwoods. 
From Sandhill to Pine. 
Stories in Light and Shadow. 
Mr. Jack Hamlin's Mediation. 
Trent's Trust. 

Crown Svo, cloth. 3s. 6d. each : post Svo. 

illustrated boards, 2j. each. 
Gabriel Conroy. 

A Waif of the Plains. With 60 Illus- 
trations bv Stanley L. Wood. 
A Ward of the Golden Gate. With 
59 Illustrations by Stanley L, Wood. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



HARTE'S (BRET) Works— cont. 

Crown Svo, cloth, $s. 6d each. 
Maruja. 

Susy. With 2 Illusts. by J. A. Christie. 
Tiie Bell-Ringer of Angel's, &c 

With 39 Illusts. by Dudley Hardy, &c. 
Clarence : A Story or the American War 

With 8 Illustrations by A. JULE GOODMAN. 
Barker's Luck, &c. With 39 Illustra- 
tions by A. Fokestier, Paul Hardy, &c. 
Devil's Ford, &c. With Frontispiece. 
The Crusade of the ' Excelsior.' 

With Frontis.byJ. Bernard Partridge 
Three Partners; or, The Bi£ 

Strike on Heavy Tree Hill. 

With 8 Illustrations by J. Gfl.ICH. 
Tales of Trail and Town. With 

Frontispiece by G. P. Jacomb HOOD. 
Condensed Novels. New Series. 



Crown 8vo, cloth, $s. 6d. each ; picture cloth, 
flat back, 2s. each. 
A Sappho of Green Springs. 
Colonel Starbottle's Client. 
A Protegee of Jack Hamlin's. 

With numerous Illustrations. 
Sally Dov/s, Xc. With 47 Illustrations 
by W. D. Almond and others. 

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
The Luck of Roaring Camp, and 
Sensation Novels Condensed. 
(Also in picture cloth at same ptice.,) 
An Heiress of Red Dog. 
The Luck of Roaring Camp. 
Californian Stories. 



Post Svo, illus. bds., 2s. each ; cloth, 25. 6d. each. 
Flip. I A Phyllis of the Sierras. 

h ATllTday (ANlTREWV 1 

Every=day Papers. Post Svo, illus- 
trated boards, 2s. 

HAMILTON (COSMO), stories 

by. 
The Glamour of the Impossible; 
and Through a Keyhole. Crown 
8vo, cloth, $s. 6d. 
Nature's Vagabond, &c. Crown Svo, 
cloth, 6s. 



HANDWRITING, The Philo= 

sophy of. With over 100 Facsimiles. 
By Don Felix de Salamanca. Posi 
8vo, half-cloth, 2s. 6d. 



HANKY-PANKY: White Magic. 
Sleight of Hand, &c. Edited by \V. 
H. Cremer. With 200 Illustrations, 
Crown Svo, cloth, 45. 6d. 



HARDY (IZA DUFFUS), Novels 

by. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
The Lesser Evil. 
Man, "Woman, and Fate. 
A Butterfly. 



HARDY (THOMAS). — Under 

the Greenwood Tree. Post 8vo, cloth 
3s. 6d. ; illustrated boards, 2s. ; cloth 
limp, 2s. 6d. Also the FINE PAPER 
Edition, pott Svo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net ; 
leather, gilt edges, 3s. net ; and the CHEAP 
Edition, medium 8vo,6rf. 



HARKINS (E. F.).— The Schem- 

ers. Crown Svo. cloth 6s 

HAWEIS(Mrs. H. R.), Booksby^ 

The Art of Beauty. With Coloured 

Frontis. and 91 Illu-ts. Sq. 8vo, cloth, 6s. 

The Art of Decoration. With 

Coloured Frontispiece and 74 Illustra- 
tions. Square Svo, cloth, 6s. 

The Art of Dress. With 32 Illustra- 
tions. Post Svo, is. ; cloth, is. 6d. 

Chaucer for Schools. With Frontis- 
piece. Demy Svo, clolh, 2s. 6d. 

Chaucer for Children. With 8 
Coloured Plates and 30 Woodcuts. 
Crown 4to, cloth, $s. 6 '. 



HAWEIS (Rev. H. R.).— Ameri- 
can Humorists: Washington 
Irving, Oliver Wendell Holmes, 
James Russell Lowell, Artemus 
Ward, Mark Twain, and Bret IIarie. 
Crown S vo, cloth, 6s. 

H A WTHORNE (J U LlX N^ 

Novels by. Crown 8vo cloth, 3s. 6d. 

each; post Svo. illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
Garth. | Ellice Ouentin. 
Fortune's Fool. | Dust. Four Illusts. 
Beatrix Randolph With Four Illusts. 
D. Poindexter's Disappearance. 
The Spectre of the Camera. 
Love— or a Name. 

Miss Cadogna. Post 8vo, illustrated 

boards, 2s. 
S ebastia n Strome. Cr. Svo, ci., tf. 6d. 

HEALY (CHRIS), Books ~by. 

Crown Svo. cloth. 6s. each. 
Confessions of a Journalist. 
H»irs of Reuben. 
Mara. 

The Endless Heritage. Crown 8vo, 
cloth, 3s. 6d. 

HECKETHORN (C. W.), Books 

by. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
London Souvenirs. 
London Memories: Social, His- 

torical, and Topographical. 



HELPS (Sir ARTHUR), Books 

by. Post Svo. cloth, 2s. 6d. each. 
Animals and their Masters. 
Social Pressure. 

Ivan de Biron. Crown 8vo, cloth 
3?. 6d. ; post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 



HENDERSON (ISAAC).— Agatha 

Page. Crown Svo, clolh, 3?. 6d. 



HENTY (G. A.), Novels by. 

Rujub, the Juggler. Demy Svo, cloth, 
-with 8 Illustrations by S. L. Wood. $s. ; 
post Svo cloth, 3s. 6d. ; illust. boards, 2s. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 3$. 6d. each. 

The Queen's Cup. 

Dorothy's Double. 

Colonel Thorndyke's Secret. 



HERMAN (HENRY). -A Leading 

Lady. Post 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6.1. 



12 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



HILL (HEADON).— Zambra the 

Detective. Crown Bvo, cloth, 3*. Cut.; 
picture cloth, flat back, 2s. ; post Svo, 
illustrated boards, 2*. 



HILL 1JOHN1, Works by. 

Treason-Felony. Post 8vo, illustrated 

boards, 2 s. 
The Common Ancestor. Crown 

8vo, cloth. 3s. 6d. 



H1NKS0N (II. A.), Novels by. 

Cr^wn Svo, cloth, 6s. e;ich. 
Fan Fit zgerald. I Silk and Steel. 
HOEY (Mrs. CASHED.— The 

Lover's Creed. Crown, Svo, cloth, 
3s. 61, : post .Svo, illustrated boards 2s.. j 

HOF FMA NN (P RO FESSOR) I 

King Koko. A Magic Story. With 25 1 
Illustrations. Crown Svo cloth, Tj. net. 

H L!lMY~Where~to~go for a. 

By E. 1'. Sholl, Sir II. Maxwell, John 
Watson, Jane Barlow, Mary Lovett 
Cameron, Justin H. McCarthy, Paul 
Lance. I. w. Craham, J. H. Salter, 
Phcebe Allen, s. J. Beckett, l. Rivers 
Vine, and C. F. Gordon CUMMING. 
Crown Svo, 1 ' 

HOLM ES OLIVE R WENDELL), 

Books by. 
The Autocrat of the Breakfnst- 

TablG. Illustrated by J. GORDON 

Thomson. Post Svo, c'otb limp, as. 6d. 
Also the Fine Paper Edition, r>ott8vo, 
cloth, giltlop,2s. net.; leather, gilt edi;es, 
35. net. Another Edition. post Svo cloth,2£. 
The Autocrat of the Breakfast- 
Table and The Professor at the 
Breakfast-Table, in one vol., post 
Svo. half-cloth, 2s. 

HOOD'S (THOMAS) Choice 

Woiks in Prose and Verse. With 
Life of the Author, Portrait, and 20c 
Illustrations, Crown Svo, cloth, 3c bd. 

iiOOK T S (.THEODORE) Choice 

Humorous Works; including his Ludi- 
crous Adventures Pons Mots. Puns. 
Hoaxes. With Life and Frontispiece. 

Crown Svo cloth. 31. 6d. 



HUGO (VICTOR).— The Outlaw 

of Iceland. Translated by Sir Gildekt 
Campbell. Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 

HU ME (FERGUS), Novels by. 
The Lady From Nowhere. Crown 

Svo. cloth, 3s. 6d. 
The Millionaire Mystery. Crown 

8vo. cloth, 3«. bd. 
The Wheeling Light. Crown Svo, 
cloth, g It lop, bs. 

Novels 

6d. each ; 
each ; 



HUNGERFORD (Mrs.), 

by. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 
post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 
cloth limp, 2? 6,1. each. 

The Frcfessor's Experiment. 

Nora Creina. 

Lady Verner's Flight. 

Lady Patty. I Peter's Wife. 

The Red-House Mystary. 

An Unsatisfactory Lover. 

April's Lady. 

A Maiden All Forlorn. 

The Three Graces. 

A Mental Struggle. 

Marvel. \ A Modern Circs. 

In Durance Vile. 

Crown Svo, cloth. 3s. d/. each. 
An Anxious Moment. 
A Point of Conscience. 
The Coming of Chloe. | Lovlce. 

HUNT'5 (LEIGH) Essays: A 
Tale for a Chimney Corner, &c. 

Ed. bv R. Oi.likr. Post Svo. half-cl 2s. 



HOPKINS (TIGHEi, Novels by. 
For Freedom, down Svo, cloth, 60. 

Crown Svo, clcth. 3.?. 6d. each. 
'Twixt Love and Duty. 
The Incomplete Adventurer. 
The Nugents of Carriconna. 
Nell Haifenden. With 8 Illustrations 

HORNE (R. h E NG 1ST 

With Portrait 



Orion. 

Crow a Svo, cloth, 7.?. 



HORNIMAN (ROY\ Novels by. 
Bellamy the Magnificent. Crown 

Svo, c oth, 6s. 
Israel Rank; Crown Svo, cl., 2.;. 6 !. net. 

HOKNUNG (E. W.) t Novel s~by 
The Shadow of theRope. Crown 

8vo, cloth . 3.C. 6,1. 

Crown Svo, cloth, ns. each. 
Stingaree. | A Thief in the Night. 



HUNT (Mrs. ALFRED), Novels 

by. Crown Svo. cloth, 3s. bd. each ; post 
Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 

Trte Leaden Casket. 

S^lf-Condemned. 

That Other Person. 

Mrs. Juliet. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



HUTCHINSON (W. M.) —Hints 

on Colt- Breaking. With 25 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3.5. 6d. 



INDOOR PAUPERS. Bv One ok 

Them. Crown Svo, is. ; cloth, is. 6d. 

i~NM AN (HERBER T)"and 

HARTLEY ASPDEN.-The Tear of 
Kalec. Crown Svo, cloth, gilt top, 6s. 



INNKEEPER'S HANDBOOK 

(The) and Licensed Victualler's 
Manual. By J. TREVOK-Davies. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 2.?. 



IRISH WIT AND HUMOUR, 

Songs of. Edited by A. Perceval 
Graves. Post fcvo, cloth, 2s. bd. 



JAMES (C. T. C.).— A Romance of 

the Queen's Hounds. Post 8\o, 

cloth hllip, If. bil. 



JAMESON (WILLIAM).— My 

Dead Self. Post 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6rf, 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



13 



JAPP (Dr. A. H.).— Dramatic 

Pictures. Crown 8vo. cloth. 5^. 



JEFFERIES (RICHARD), by. 

The Open Air. Post 8vo, clotu, 2j. 6d. 
Large Type, Fine Paper Edition, pott 
Svo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net ; leather, gilt 
edges, 3s. net. 

Nature near London. Crown Svo, 
buckram, 6s. : post Svo, cl., 2s. 6d. ■ LARGE 
Type, Fine Paper Edition, pott Svo, cl., 
gilt top, 2j, net ; leather, gi!t edges, 35.net. 

The Life of the Fields. Post Svo, 
cloth, 2.?. 6d. ; Large Type, Fine Paper 
Edition, pott Svo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net ; 
leather, gilt edges, 35. net. 

The Pocket Richard JefTerie3 : 
being Passages chosen from the Nature 
Writings of JEFFERIES by Alfred H. 
Hyatt. i6mo, cloth, giit top, 25. net.; 
leather, gilt top, 3? net. 

The Eulogy of Richard Jefferies. 

Bv Sir WALTER BESANr. Cr. Svo, cl., 6s. 



JENNINGS (H. J.).— Curiosities 

of Criticism. Post Svo, cloth, 2s. bU. 

JEROME (JEROME k\)^Stage- 

land. With 64 Illustrations by J. Ber- 
nard Partridge. Fcap 4to, is. 



JERROLD (DOUGLAS). — The 

Barber's Chair ; and The Hedgehog 
Letters. Post Svo, ha'f-cloth, 2*. 



JERROLD (TOM), Works by. 

Posi Svo, is. each ; cloth, ts. 6d. each. 
The Garden that Paid the Rent. 
Househol d Horticu lture. 

Our Kitchen Garden: The Plants We 
Grow, and How We Cook Them. >ost 
cloth, is. net. 



JESSE (EDWARD). — See ties 
and Occupations of a Country Life. 

Post Svo, cloth, 2S. 



JOHNSTON (R.).— The Peril of 

an Empire. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. 

JONES (WILLIAM, F.S.A~), 

Books by. Cr. Svo, cloth, 35. 6d. each. 

Finger-Ring Lore: Historical, Legend- 
ary, and Anecdotal. With numerous 
Illustrations. 

Crowns and Coronations. With 91 
Illustrations. 



JONSON'S (BEN) Works. With 

Notes and Biographical Memoir h\ 
William Gifford. Edited by Colonel 
Cunningham. Three Vols., crown Svo 
cloth, is. 6d. each. 



JOSEPHUS, The Complete 

Works of. Translated by William 
WHISTON. Containing ' The Antiquities 
of the Jews,' and ' The Wars of the Jews.' 
With 52 Illustrations and Maps. Two 
Vols., demy 8vo, half-cloth, 12s. 6d. 



KEATING (JOSEPH).— Maurice. 

Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 



KEMPT (ROBERT).— Pencil and 

Palette : Chapters on Art and 
Artists. Post Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 



KERSHAW (MARK).— Colonial 

Facts and Fictions: Humorous 
Sketches. Post Svo, illustrated boards, 
2s. ; cloth, 2j. 6d. 



KING (R. ASHE), Novels by. 

Post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 
'The Wearing of the Green.' 
Passion's Slave. I Bell Barry. 
A Drawn Game. Crown 8vo, cloth, 

3t. '),/. ; post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 



KIPLING PRIMER (A), lnclucl- 

ing Biographical and Critical Chapters, 
an Index to Mr. Kip'ing's principal 
Writings, and Bibliographies. By F. L. 
Knowles. With Two Portraits. Crown 
Svo. cloth, 3.9. 6d. 



KNIGHT (WILLIAM and 

EDWARDS— The Patient's Vade 
Mecum : How to Get Alost Benefit 

from Medical Advice. Crown Svo, 
cloth, n.6rf . 

LAMB'S~(CHARLES) Complete 

Works in Prose and Verse, including 
' Pnctrv for Children ' and 'Prince Dorus.' 
Edited' by R. H. SHEPHERD. With 2 
Portraits and Facsimile of the ' Essay on 
Roast Pig-' Crown Svo (both Series , 
cloth, 3s. id. 

The Essays of Elia (both Series V Post 
svo, halt-cloth, zj.— Also the Fine Paper 
Edition, pott Svo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net ; 
leather, gilt edges, 3s. net. 

Little Essays : Sketches and Characters 
by Charles Lamb, selected from his 
Letters by PERCY FITZGERALD. Post 
Svo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 

The Dramatic Essays of Charles 
Lamb. With Introduction and Notes 
by Brander Matthews, and Steel-plate 
Poi-frait. Fcap. Svo. half-cloth. 2.?. 6d. 



LAMBERT (GEORGE). — The 

President of Boravia. Crown 8vo, 

cloth . 35. 6d. 

LANDORt WALTER SAVAGE^ 

— Citation and Examination <>t 
William Shakespeare, &c, before 

Sir Thomas Lucy, touching Deer-stea ing, 
loth September, 15S2 ; and A Confer 
ence of Master Edmund 
Spenser with the Eailof Essex, touch- 
ing the slate of Ireland, 1595. Fcap. 8vo, 
half-Roxburghe, 2s. 6d. 

LANE~TEDWARD WILLI AML 

— The Thousand and One Nig-hts, 

commonly called in England The 
Arabian Nights' Entertain- 
ments. Translated from the Atabic 
and illustrated by many hundred Engrav- 
ings from Designs by Harvey. Edited by 
E."s. Poole. With Preface by Stanley 
Lane-Poole. 3 Vols., 8vo, cl., 225. 6d. 



LARWOOD (JACOB), Books by. 
Anecdotes of the Clergy. PostSvo, 

half-cloth, 2s. 
Theatrical Anecdotes. Post 8vo, 

cloth. 2s. 6d. 
Kumour of the Law. Pest Svo, cl., 2s. 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



M 



LEHMANN (R. C). — Harry 

Fludyer at Cambridge, and Conver- 
sational Hints for Young: Shooters. 

Crown Svo, is. : cloth, is. td. 



LEIGH (HENRY S.).— Carols of 

Cockayne. Crown Svo. buckram, 5.. 



LELAND (C. G.).— A Manual of 

Amending and Repairing:. With Dia- 
grams. Crown Svo, cloth. 5^. 

L E PELLET! ER (EDMOND). - 

Madame Sans-Gene. Translated In 
John dk Villiers. Post Svo. cloth. 
31. td. ; illustrated boards, 2s. ; POPULAR 
Edition, medium Svo, td. 



LESPINASSE, JULIE DE. H3 

the Marquis de S£gur. Authorised 
English Version, with a Portrait. Dem) 
Svo, cloth, is. td. net. 



LEYS (JOHN K.), Novels by. 

The Lindsays. Post Svo. illust. bds.,2<: 
A Sore Temptation. Cr. Svo, cl.. 6s 

LILBURN (ADAM).— A Tragedy 

in Marble. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. td. 

LINDSAY7rLARRY)7NoveIs by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3c. td. each. 
Rhoda R oberts. I The Jacobite. 

Crown Svo. cloth. 6s. each. 
Judah Pyecroft, Puritan. 
The Story of Leah. 



LINTON (E. LYNN). Works by. 
An Octave of Friends. Crown Svo, 
cloth, $s. td. 

Crown Svo, cloth. 3;. td. each ; post Svo, illus- 
trated boards, 2.!. each. 
Patricia Kemball. | lone. 
The Atonement of Learn Dundas. 
The "World Well Lost. 12 Illusts. 
The One Too Many. 
Under which Lord ? With 12 Il'usts 
' My Love.' I Sowing the Wind. 
Paston Carew. I Dulcie Evsrton, 
"With a Silken Thread. 
The Rebel of the Family. 

Post Svo. cloth, 2s. td. each. 
Witch Stories. 
Ourselves: Essays on Women, 

Sowing the "Wind. Cheap Edition, 
post Svo. cloth, it net. 

Patricia Kemball. Popular Edi- 
tion, medium 8vo. td. 



LUCY (HENRY W.).— Gideon 

Fleyce. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. td ; post 
Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 



MACAULAY (LORD).— The His- 
tory of England. Large Type. Fine 
Pafer Edition, in 5 vols, pott 8vo, 
cloth, gilt top, 2s. net per vol. ; leather, 
gilt edges, 3?. net per vol. 



MACCOLL (HUGH).— Mr. 

Stranger's Sealed Packet. Post 
8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. 



MCCARTHY (JUSTIN), Booksby. 
The Reign of Queen Anne. Two 

Vols, demy Svo, cloth, 12s. each. 
A History of the Four Georges 
and of William the Fourth. 

Four Vols., demv Svo, cloth, 12s. each. 

A History of Our Own Times 
from the Accession of Queen Victoria to 
the General Election of 1880. Lif.rary 
Edition. Four Vols., demv Svo, cloth, 
125. each.— Also the POPULAR EDITION, 
in Four Vols., crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
—And the Jubilee. Edition, with an 
Appendix of Events to the end of i836, 
in 2 Vols., demv 8vo, cloth, 7.5. td. each. 

A History of Our Own Times, 
Vol. V., from 1SS0 to the Diamond Jubilee. 
Demv Svo, cloth, 12.?.; crown Svo, cloth, 6*. 

A History of Our Own Times, 
Vols. VI. ancl VII.. from 1897 to Accession 
of Edward VII. 2 Vols., demv Svo, cl., 24s. 

A Short History of Our Own 
Times. Cr. 8vo, cl., ts.— Also a Popu- 
lar Edition, post 8 vo. cloth limp, 2s. td. : 
and the Cheap Edition, medium 8vo, td. 

Reminiscences. With a Portrait. Two 
Vols., demv Svo. cloth. 2*s. 

The Story' of an Irishman. Demy 
Svo, cloth, 12s. 



Large Type, Fine Paper Edition 5. 
Pott Svo, cloth, gilt top, zs. net per vol, : 
leather, gilt edges, 3s. net per vol. 
The Reign of Queen Anne, in 1 Vol. 
A History of the Four Georges 

and of William IV., in 2 vols. 
A History of Our Own Times from 
Accession of Q.Victoria to 1897, in 3 Vols . 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. td. each ; post Svo, pict. 
boards. 2s. each ; cloth limp, 2.?. firf.each. 
The Waterdale Neighbours 
My Enemy's Daughter. 
A Fair Saxon. ■ Linley Rochford. 
Dear Lady Disdain. | The Dictator. 
Miss Misanthrope. With 12 Rusts. 
Donna Quixote. With 12 Illustrations. 
The Comet of a Season. 
Maid of Athens. With 12 Illustrations. 
Camiola. 
Red Diamon ds. I T he Riddle Ring. 

Crown Svo. cloth, 3.?. td. each. 
The Thre e Disgraces . | Mononia. 

'The Right Honourable.' By Justin- 
McCarthy and Mrs. Campbell Praed. 
Crown 8vo. cloth, ts. 



MCCARTHY (J. H.), Works by. 

The French Revolution. (Consti- 
tuent Assembly, 1789-91.) Four Vols., 
demv Svo. cloth, 125. each. 

An Outline of the History of 
Ireland. Crown Svo, Is. : cloth, is. td. 

Ireland Since the Union— 1798- 
1886. Crown 8vo. doth. 6s. 

Hafiz in London. Svo, gold cloth, 35. td 
Our Sensation Novel. Crown Svo 

is. ; cloth, is. td. 
Doom: An Atlantic Episode. Crown 8vo, u. 
Dolly : A Sketch. Crown Svo, is. 
Lily Lass. Crown 8vo, I*. ; cloth, is. td. 
A London Legend. Cr. 8vo, cloth, 3s. td. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



IS 



MACDONALD (Dr. GEORGE), 

Books by. 
Works of Fancy and Imagination 

Ten Vols., i6mo, cloth, gilt, in case, 21s. ; 
or separately, Grolier cloth, 2s. 6d. each. 
Also a New Issue in i6mo, cloth, gilt 
top, 2s. net per Vol. ; leather, gilt top, 3s, 
net per Vol. 
Vol. I. Within and Without— The 

Hidden Life. 
„ II. The Disciple — The Gospel 
Women— Book of Sonnets- 
Organ Songs. 
„ III. Violin Songs— Songs of the 
Days and Nights— A Book 
of Dreams— Roadside Poems 
—Poems for Children. 
„ IV. Parables— Ballads — Scotch 
„ V. & VI. Phantastes. [Songs. 
„ VII. The Portent. 
„ VIII. The Light Princess — The 

Giant's Heart— Shadows. 
„ IX. Cross Purposes— Golden Key 
Carasoyn— LittleDaylight. 
„ X. The Cruel Painter— The Wow 
o'Rivvln — The Casti.e— The 
Broken Swords— The Gray 
Wolf— Uncle Cornelius. 

Poetical Works of George Mac- 
Donald. 2 Vols., cr.Svo, buctcram, 12s. 

A Threefold Cord. Post 8vo, cloth, $s. 

Heather and Snow. Crown 8vo, cloth. 
3S. 64. ; post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 

Lil: til. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 

The Pocket George MacDonald: 

Passages Chosen by A. H. Hyatt. i6mo, 
cloth gilt, 2s. net ; leather gi t, 3?. net. 



MACDONELL (AGNES).— 

Quaker Cousins. Post Svo, boards, 2s. 



MACGREGOR (ROBERT).— 

Pastimes and Players: Notes on 
Popular Games. Post 8vo. cloth, 2.5. 6d. 



MACMICHAEL (J. A.).— The 

Story of Charing Cross and its 
Immediate Neighbourhood. With 
3 lllu sls. Pu ny ; vo, cloth, :s. fd. net. ; 

MACQU01D~(M7s7)^Wo7ksn^ 

illustrated by T. R. MACQUOID. Square 
8vo, cloth, 6s. each. 

In the Ardennes. With 50 Illustration?. 

Pictures and Legends from Nor- 
mandy and Brittany. 34 Illusts. 

Through Normandy. With 02 Illusts. 

Ab out Yo rkshire. With 67 Illusts. 

MAGICIAN'S Own Book, The": 

Performances with Eggs, Hats, &c. 
With 200 Illusts. Cr. Svo. cloth. 41. 6d. 



MACHRAY (ROBERT), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s. each. 
A Blow over the Heart. 
The Mystery of Lincoln's Inn. 
The Private Detective. 



Her Honour. Cr. 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. net 



MACKAY (Dr. CHAS.). -Inter- 
ludesand Undertones. Cr.8vo,cIoth,6s. 



MACKAY (WILLIAM). —A 

Mender of Nets. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6 s. 

MACKENNA (S. J.) and J. A. 

O'SHEA.— Brave Men in Action: 

Stories of the British Flag. With 8 Illus- 
trations by Stanley L. Wood. Small 
demy 8vo, cloth, gilt edges. gj. 



MACKENZIE 

Drexel Dream. 



(W. A.).— The 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 



MACLISE Portrait Gallery (The) 

of Illustrious Literary Characters : 
1 85 Portraits by Daniel Maclise ; 
with Memoirs by WILLIAM BATES, B.A. 
Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6tl. 



MAGIC LANTERN, The, and its 

Management. By T. C. Hep worth. 
With 10 Illusts. Cr. Svo, is. ; cloth. ls.6d. 



MAGNA CHARTA: A Facsimile of 
the Original, 3 ft. by 2 ft., with Arms and 
Seals emblazoned in Gold and Colours, 5.:. 



A1ALLOCK (W. H.), Works by. 
The New Republic. Post 8vo, cloth, 

3s. 6d ; illustrated boards, 2s. 
The New Paul and Ylrginia. Post 

8vo, cloth, 2s. 6U. 

Poems. Small 4to, parchment, 8s. 

Is Lite W orth Living? Cr. 8vo. c)„ 6s. 

MALLOrY (Sir TliOMAS).— 

Mort d' Arthur, Selections from, edited 
by B. M. Ranking. Post 8vo, cloth, 2s. 



MARGUERITTE (PAUL and 

VICTOR \ Novels by. 
The Disaster. Translated by F. Lees. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 
The Commune. Translated by F. Lees 

and R. B. Douglas. Crown hvo, cloth, 6s. 



MARIE DE MEDICI and the 

Court of France in the Xy Century. 

Tianslated from the French of Louis 
Batiffol. With a Portrait. Demy Svo, 
cioth, 7.9. 6d. net 



MARLOWE'S Works, including 

his Translations. Edited with Notes by 
Col. Cunningham. Cr. Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



MARSH (RICHARD).— A 

Spoiler of Men. Cr. 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



MASSINGER'S Plays. From the 

Text of William GlFFORD. Edited by 
Col. Cunningham. Cr. Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



MASTERMAN (J.).— Half -a 

dozen Daughters. Post 8vo, bds„ 2 



MATTHEWS (BRANDER).— A 

Secret of the Sea. Post Svo, illus- 
trated boards, as. ; cloth, 2s. 6d. 



MAX O'RELL, Books by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each. 
Her Royal Highness Woman. 
Between Ourselves*. 
Rambles in Womanland. 



MEAKIN (BUDGETT).-Lifein 

Morocco. With 24 Illustrations. Demy 
Svo, cloth, 12s. 6d, net. 



i6 



CHATTO & W1NDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



MEADE (L. T.), Novels by. 
A Soldier of Fortune. Crown 8vo. 
cloth, 3s. 6d. ; post Svo. iliust. boards, 2s. 
Crown Svo, cloth, js. (td, each. 
The Yoice of the Charmer. 
In an Iron Crip. I The Siren. 
Dr. Rumsey's Patient. 
On the Brink of a Chasm. 
The Way of a Woman. 
A Son oi Ishmael. 
An Adventuress. | Rosebury. 
The Blue Diamond. 
A Stumble by the Y/ay. 
This Troublesome Y/crld. 



MEDICI SERIES (The) of Re- 
productions from the Old Masters. 
Full Prospectuses upon application. 



MERIVALE (HERMAN).— Bar, 

Stage, and Platform: Memories. 
With Portrait. Crown Svo. cin'h, fit. 



MERRICK (HOPE). — VVnen a 

Girl's Engaged. Cr. 8vo cloth, 3s.6d. 

MERRICK (LEON.), Novels by. 

The Man who was Good, down 

8vo, c!., 3s. '' . iliust. bils., 2 . 

Crown each. 

Cynthia. | This Stage of Fools. 



MEYNELL (A L 1 C El— The 

Flower of the Mind : a Choice 
among the Best Poems. In i6mu, 
c oth, as. 11 t ; leather, 3c. net. 



MILLER (Mrs. F. FENW1CK). 
— Physiology for the Young : The 
Home of L ife. [llnsts.Post Svo 

MINTO (WM.).-Was She tiood 

or Bad? Crown Svo. cloth, is. (><i. 



MONCRIEFF (W. D. SCOTT-).— 

The Abdication: A Drama. With 7 
Etchings. Imperial 4(0, buckiain, 215. 



MITCHELL (EDM.), Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth. 3s. 6,1. each. 
The Lone Star Rush. With S lllusts 

Only a Nigger. 

Crown Svo, picture cloth, Hat backs, is. each. 
Plotters of Paris. 
The Temple of Death. 
Towards th e Eter nal Snows. 
Belforts of Culben. cr. 8vo, eta 
MlTFORD (BERTRAM), Novels 

by. Crown Svo. cloth. %s. 6a. each. 
Renshaw Fanning's Quest. 
Triumph of Hilary Blachland. 
Havilan d's Chum. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each ; picture c'.oth, 
flat back, is. each. 
The Luck of Gerard Ridgeley. 
The Kin g's A sses fai. With o lllusts 
The Gun-Runnei'. Cr. Svo, el.. 3s. 6d., 

Cheap Edition, medium Svo., fvi. 
HarleyGreenoak's Charge. Crown 

Svo, cloth. 6s. 



MOLESWORTH (Mrs.).- 

Hathercourt Rectory. Crown Svo 
cloth. 3i. 6d. ; post Svo. iliust. hoards 2s-. 



MOORE (THOMAS), Works by. 
The Epicurean; and Alciphron. 

Post Svo, half-cloth. 2.5. 
Prose and Yerse: including Suppressed 
Passages from the Memoirs of Lord 
Byron. Edited by R. H. Shephkrd. 
With Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth. 7 . (v* 



MOLIERE: A Biography. By 

H. C. Ciiatfield-Tayi.or. Wilh 10 
lllusts, by Job. Royal Svo, cl., 10$. 6a. net. 



MURRAY (D. CHRISTIE), 

Novels by. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. a/. 

each ; post S> o, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
A Life's Atonement. 
Joseph's Coat. With 12 Illustrations. 
Coals Of Fire. With 3 Illustrations. 
Val Strarjge. I A Y/asted Crime. 
A Capful o' Nails. I Hearts. 
The "Way of the World. 
Mount Despair. | A Model Father. 
Old Blazer's Hero. 
By the Gate of the Sea. 
A Eit of Human Nature. 
First Person Singular. 
Bob Martin's Little Girl. 
Time's Revenges. 
Cynic Fo rtune. I In D irest Peril. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. bd. each. 
This Little World. 
A Race for Millions. 
The Church of Humanity. 
Tales in Prose and Verse. 
Despair's Last Journey. 
V.C. : A Chronicle of Castle Barfield. 

Verona's Father. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s. 
His Own ChOSt. Crown Svo, cloth, 

35. tid. : picture cloth, flat back, 2s. 
Joseph's Coat. Popular Edition, 

medium Svo. bd. 
Bob Martin's Little Girl. Cheap 

Edi tion, post 8vo, cloth, re net. 

MURRAY (D. CHRISTIE) and 

HENRY MERMAN. Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3$. hd. each ; post Svo, 

illustrated boards, is. each. 
One Traveller Returns. 
The Bishops' Bible. 
Paul Jones's Alias. With Illustrations 

bv A. Forestikr and G. Nicoi. KT. 

MURRAY (HENRY), Novels by. 

Post Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. each. 
A Game of Bluff. 
A Song of Sixpence. 

MUDDOCK (J. E.), Stories by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth. 35. 6d. each. 
Basile the Jester. 
Young Lochinvar. 

The Golden Idol. 

Post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
The Dead Man's Secret. 
From the Bosom of the Deep. 
Stories Weird "and Wonderful. 

Post 8vo, iliust. boards, is. ; cloth, is. W. 
Maid Marian and Robin Hood. 

With 12 Illustrations by STARLEY L. 

WOOD. Crown Svo. clcth, 34. 6rf. ; picture 

cloth fiat back. is. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



«7 



MORRIS (Rev. W. MEREDITH, 

B.A.). — British Violin -Makers, 
Classical and Modern. With numerou- 
Portraits, Illustrations, and Facsimiles 01 
Labels. De.-ny 8vo, cloth, raj. 6d. ne f . 

MORROW (W. C.).— Bohemian 

Paris of To- Day. With 106 Illusts.by 
EdouardCucuel. Small demy 8vo,cl.,6.s. 



MY FIRST BOOK. By Walter 
Besaxt. James Payn, W. Clark Rus- 
sell, Grant Allen, Hall Caine. 
George R. Sims, Rudyard Kipling, 
A. Conan Doyle, M. E. Pk addon 
F. W. Robinson. H. Rider Haggard 
R. M. Ballantyne, I. Zangwill 

MORLEY ROBERTS.D. CHRISTIE MURRAY 

Marie Corelli, J. K. Jurome, John 
Si range Winter, Bret Hai.tr, ' Q., 
Robert Buchanan, and R. L. Stevun- 
kon. With Prefatory Story by Jerome 
K. Jerome, and 185 Illustrations. Demy 
8vo, art linen. .«. 6rf. 



NEWBOLT (HENRY). — Taken 

from the Enemy. Fen. Sv", pic, cov. is. 



NISBET (HUME), Books by. 

'Bail Up I' Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. : 

post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. ; 

Popular Edition, medium Svo, 6d. 
Dr. Bernard St. Vincent. Post 8vo, 

illustrated boards, 2s. 
Lessons in Art. With 21 Illustrations. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6rf. 



NORDAU (MAX).— Morganatic: 

A Romance. Translated by Elizabeth 
Lee. Crown 8vo. cloth, gilt top 6s. 



NORRIS (W. E.)f Novels by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each ; post 8vo, 

illustrated boards, 25. each. 
Saint Ann' s. 1 B illy Bvjllaw. 
Miss Went worth's Idea. Crown Svo, 

cloth. 3.t. 6d. 



OHNET (GEORGES), Novels by. 

Doctor Rameau. PostSvo, illustrated 

boards, 2s. 
A Weird Gift. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. : 

post 8vo, illustrated board-, is. 
A Last L ove. Post 8vo. Illust. bds., 2s 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3.?. 6d. each. 
Love's Depths. 
Tne Money-maker. 
The Wom an of M ystery. 

The Path of Glory. Translated by 
F. Rothyvell. Crown 8vo. cloth, 65. 



OSBOURNE (LLOYD). — The 

Motorsnaniacs. Cruvvn 8vo, c.ot-.i 
decorated, jr. 6d. 



OSHAUGHNESSY (ARTHUR), 

Poems by. 
Music & Moonlight. Pep. 8vo, el., 7.?. 6,.'. 
Laysof France. Cr„ 8vo. cloth. in« • ■' 



OLIPHANT (Mrs.), Novels by. 

Post 8vo. illustrated boards, 2,5 each. 
The Primrose Path. 
The Great est H eiress in England. 
Whiteladies. Ciown8vo, cloth, with 12 

Illustrations, 35. 6rf. ; pjst 8vo, bds., 2s. 
The Sorceress. Crown 8vo. cloth, 3s 6d. 



ORROCK (James), Painter, Con 

noisseur, Collector. By Byron 
Webber. With nearly 100 Photogravures 
and many Half-tone Drawings. Two 
Vols., small folio, buckram, loguineas net. 



0U1DA, Novels by. Crown Svo, 
cloth. 3$. 6d. each ; post 8vo, illustrated 
boaids, 2s. each. 

Tricotrin, A Dog of Flanders. 

BufSno. Cecil Castlemaine's 

Gchmar. Gage. 

Frescoes. Princess Napraxine. 

Wanda. Held in Bondage. 

Ariadne. Under Two Flags. 

Pascarel. Foile- Farine. 

Chandos. Two V/oodcn Shoes. 

Moths. A Yillage Commune. 

Puck. In a Winter Ciiy. 

Jdalia. Santa Barbara. 

Bimti. In Maremma. 

Signa. Strathmore. 

Friendship. Pipisuelio. 

Guilderoy. Two Offenders. 
Crown 8vo, cloth, 3$. i-.d. each. 

A Rainy June. I TheMassarenes. 

Popular Edum.vs, medium 8vo. 6J. eacii. 

Under Two Flags. Moths. 

Held in Bondage. Puck. 

Strathmore. Tricotrin. 

The Massarenes. Chandos. 

Friendship. Ariadne. 

Two Little Wooden Shoes. 

Syrlin. Crown Svo, cloth, 3J. 6^.; pot 
8vo, picture cloth, flat back, 2,.; illus- 
trated boards, 2s. 

Two Little Wooden Shoes. Large 
Type Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, is. net ; 
leather, is. 6d. net. 

The 'Waters of Edera. Crown Svo, 
cloth, 3$. 6d. ; picture cloth, fl.it back, 2s. 

Santa Barbara. Cheap Edition, post 
8vo. cloth, is. net. 

Wisdom, Wit, and Pathos, selected 
from the Works of OUIDA by F. SYDNt-Y 
Morris. Post 8vo. cloth. 5s — Cheap 
EDITION, illustrated boirris. 2s. 



PAIN (BARRY).— Eliza's Hus- 

band. Fcap.. Svo, ijt. : cloth, is. 6d. 

PALMER (W- T.),. Books by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, with Front's., 6s. each. 
Lake Country Rambles. 
In Lak elan d Dc IIb and Fells. 

PANDURANG H A R I ; or, 

Memoirs of a Hindoo. With Preface 
.by Sir Bartle Frere. Post Svo, illus- 
trated boards, 2s. 



PARADISE (The) or Garden of 

the Holy Fathers. Translated 1 fioui 
the Syriac, with an Introduction, by 
E. A. Wallis Budge, Lilt.D. With 2 

Frontispieces. 2 vols, large crown 'i-.o, 
15.? ne t 

PARI SSALON, The Illustrated 

Catalogue of the. With aboiir^oo illus- 
trations. Published annually, Dy8vp, 3.<- 



i8 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



PASCAL'S Provincial Letters. 

Willi Introduction and Notes by T. 
M'Crie. D.D. Post 8vo. half-cloth, 2.?. 



PASTON LETTERS (The), 1422- 

1509. Edited, with Introduction and 
Notes, by James Gairdner. Six Vols., 
demy 8vo, linen, gilt top, £"3 15s. the set. 



PAUL (MARGARET A).— Gentle 

and Simple. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. ; 
post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 



PAYN (JAMES), Novels by. 

Crown Svo. cloth, 3*. bd. each ; post Svo, 
illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
Lost Sir Massingberd. 
The Clyffards of Clyffe. 
A County Family. 
Less Black than We're Painted. 
By Proxy. 1 For Cash Only. 

High bpirits. | Sunny Stories. 
A Confidential Agent. 
A Grape from a Thorn. 12 Illusts. 
The Family Scapegrace. 
Holiday Tasks. 

The Talk of the Town. 12 Illusts. 
The Mystery of Mirbridge. 
The Word and the Will. 
The Burnt Million. 
A Trying Patient. 

Post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
Humorous Stories. | From Exile. 
Ihe Foster Brothers. 
Married Beneath Him. 
Bentinck's Tutor. 
Walter's Woi-d. Fallen Fortunes. 
A Perfect Treasure. 
Like Father, Like Son. 
A Woman's Vengeance. 
Carlyon's Year. | Cecil's Tryst. 
Murphy's Master. | At Her Mercy. 
Some Private Views. 
Found Dead. | Mirk Abbey. 

Gwendoline's Harvest. 
A Marine Residence. 
The Canon's Ward. 
Not Wooed, But Won. 
Two Hundred Pounds Reward. 
The Best of Husbands. 
Halves. ! What He Cost Her. 
Kit : A Memory. Under One Roof. 
Clow-Worm Tales. 
A Prince of the Blood. 

A Modern Dick Whittington. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, with Portrait of Author, 

3s. 6<i.: picture cloth, Hat back, 2s. 
The Burnt Million. Cheap Edition 

post Svo, cloth, is. net. 
Notes from the ' News.' Crown Svo, 

cloth. «. (kL 

J opular Editions, medium Svo, 6d. each. 
Lost Sir Massingberd. 
Walter's Word. 



PAYNE (WILL). — Jerry the 

Dreamer. Crown Svo. plorh. %s. M. 



PENNELL- ELMH1RST (Cap= 
tain B.).— The Best of the Fun. 
With 8 Coloured Illustrations and 4S 
others. Medium S\ i, cl< ith, 6*. oet. 



PENNELL (H. CHOLMONDE- 

LEY), Works by. Post 8vo, ci., 2 r. 6rf. ea. 
Puck on Pegasus. With Illtstrations, 
Pegasus Re-Saddled. With n Full- 
page Illustrations by G. Du Maur ER. 
The Muses of Mayfair: Ve.-; de 
Societe. Selected by H. C. Peni*EL'.. 



PENNY (F. E.), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 6.5. each. 
The Sanyasi. | Dilys. 
Caste andCreed. The Tea-Planter. 



PERRIN (ALICE), Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
The Waters of Destruction. 

Red Rec ords. 

Free Solitude. Cr. Svo, cL, as. 6d. net. 
East Of Suez. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



PETER PAN KEEPSAKE (The). 

The Story retold lor Childieu by DANIEL 
O'Connor. With numerous Illustrations. 
Crown 4to, is. net. 



PHELPS (E. S.). — Jack the 

Fisherman. Illustrated by C. W. 
Reed. Crown Svo, cloth, is. 6a'. 



PHIL MAYS Sketch-Book : 

Cartoons. Crown folio, cloth. 2s. 6d. 



54 



PHIPSON (Dr. T. L.), Books by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, $s. each. 
Famous Violinists and Violins. 
The Confessions of a Violinist. 
Voice and Violin. 

PILKINGTON (L. L.).— Mallen- 

der's /Mistake. Crow n Svo, cloth, 6.?. 



PLANCHE (J. R.), Works by. 
The Pursuivant of Arms. With 

6 1'iates and 209 Illustrations. Crown 

8vo, cloth, 7s. M. 
Songs and Poems. Edited by Mrs. 

Mackarness. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 



PLUTARCH'S Lives of Illus- 
trious Men. With Life of Plutarch 
by J. and W. Langhorne, and Por- 
traits. Two Vols., 8vo, half-cloth, 10s. 6</. 



POE'S (EDGAR ALLAN) Choice 
Works : Poems, Stories, Essays. 

With an Introduction by CHARLES 
Baudelair e. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 

POLLOCK(W. H.).— The Charm, 

and Other Drawing-Room Plays. 
By Sir Walter Besa.vt and Walter 
H. Pollock. With 50 Illustrations. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 3?. 6d. 



PROCTOR (RICHARD A.), 

Works by. Crown 8vo,cloth, 3s. 6d. each. 
Easy Star Lessons. With Star Maps 

for every N'i^ht in the Year. 
Flowers of the Sky. With 55 Illusts. 
Familiar Science Studies. 
Mysteries of Time and Space. 
The Universe o f Suns. 
Saturn and its System. With 13 

Steel Plates. Demy 8vo, cloth. 6s. 
Wages and Wants of Science 

Workers. Crown8vo, is, ^J. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



19 



PRAED (Mrs. CAMPBELL), 

Novels by. Post 8vo, illus. boards, 2s. ea. 
The Romance of a Station. 
The Soul of Countess Adrian. 



Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. (id. each : post Svo 

illustrated boards, 2s. each. 
Outlaw and Lawmaker. 
Christina Chard. 
Mrs. Tregaskiss. With 8 Illustrations. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each. 
Nulma. I Madame Izan. 
' As a Watch in the Night.' 

Christina Chard. Cheap Edition, 

post Svo. cloth, is. net. 
The Lost Earl of Elian. Crown 

8vo, cloth, (is. 



PRICE (E. C). — Valentina. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



PRYCE (RICHARD). —Miss 

Maxwell's Affections. Crown Svo, 
cl., 3.?. fd. : post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s. 



RAMBOSSON (J.). — Popular 

Astronomy. Translated by C. B. 
Pitman. With 10 Coloured Plates and 
63 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo, c'oth, 3.?. 6a. 



READE'S (CHARLES) Novels. 

Collected Librar v Edition, in Seventeen 
Volumes, crown Svo, cloth, 35. 6i each. 

Peg Woffington j and Christie 
Johnstone. 

Hard Cash. 

The Cloister and the Hearth. 
With a Preface by Sir Walter Besant. 

' It is Never Too Late to Mend.' 

The Course of True Love Never 
Did Run Smooth ; and Single- 
heart and Doubleface. 

The Autobiography of a Thief: 
Jack of all Trades ; A Hero and 
a Martyr; The "Wandering Heir. 

Love Me Little, Love Me Long. 

The Double Marriage. 

Griffith Gaunt. 

Foul Play. 

Put Yourself in His Place. 

A Terrible Temptation. 

A Simpleton. 

A Woman-Hater. 

The Jilt: and Good Stories of Man 
and other Animals. 

A Perilous Secret. 

Readiana; and Bible Characters. 

In Twenty-one Volumes, post 8vo, illustrated 
boards, 2s. each. 
Peg Woffington. | A Simpleton. 
Christie Johnstone. 
' It is Never Too Late to Mend.' 
The Course of True Love Never 

Did Run Smooth. 
Autobiography of a Thief; Jack 

of all Trades; James Lambert. 
Love Me Little, Love Me Long. 
The Double Marriage. 
The Cloister and the Hearth. 
A Terrible Temptation. 



READE'S (CHARLES) Novels— 

co7itiniied. 
Hard Cash. | Readiana. 
Foul Play. | Griffith Gaunt. 
Put Yourself in His Place. 
The Wandering Heir. 
A "Woman-Hater. 
Singleheart and Doubleface. 
Good Stories of Man, &c. 
The Jilt ; and other Stones. 
A Perilous Secret. 



Large Type, Fine Paper Editions. 
Pott 8vo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net each ; leather, 
gilt edges, 3s. net each. 
The Cloister and the Hearth. With 

32 Illustrations by M. B. HEWERD1KE. 
' It is Neve r Too L ate to Mend." 
Popular Editions, medium Svo, 6d. each. 
The Cloister and the Hearth. 
' It is Never Too Late to Mend.' 
Foul Play. | Hard Cash. 
Peg Woffington; and Christie 

Johnstone. 
Griffith Gaunt. 
Put Yourself in His Place. 
A Terrible Temptation. 
The Double Marriage- 
Love Me Little, Love Me Long. 

Fcap. Svo, half-Roxburghe, 2s. 6d. each. 
Christie Johnstone. With Frontis. 
Peg Woffi ngton. 

The Wandering Heir. Large Type 

Edition, fcap.8vo, cloth, is. net : leather, 

is. f<d. net. 
The Cloister and the Hearth. 

Edition de Luxe, with 16 Photogravure 

and 84 half-tone Illustrations by Matt 

B. Hewerdine. Small 4to, cloth, 6s net. 
Bible Characters. Fcap 8vo, i.r. 
Selections from the Works of 

Charles Reade. Edited by Wis. A. 

Ireland. Post 8vo, cloth, 2s. hi. 



RICHARDSON (FRANK), Nov- 

els by. Crown Svo, cloth. 3s. fid. each. 
The Man who Lost his Past. With 

50 Illustrations bv Tom BROWNE, R.I. 
The Bay s water Miracl e. 

Crown Svo. cloth. 6s. each. 
The King's Counsel. 
Semi-Society. 
There and Back. 



RIDDELL (Mrs.), Novels by. 
A Rich Man's Daughter. Crown 

Svo, cloth. 3.?. 6d. 
Weird Stories. Crown 8vo, cloth, 

3s. 6d. ; post 8vo, picture boards, 2$. 

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s.each. 
The Uninhabited House. 
Prince of Wales's Garden Party. 
The Mystery in Palace Gardens. 
Fairy Water. | Idle Tales. 
Her Mother's Darling. 



RIMMER (ALFRED).- Rambles 

Round Eton and Harrow. With >2 
Illustrations. Square Svo, cloth, 3s. bd. 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



20 

RIVES (AMELIE), Stories by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. od. each. 
Barbara Dering. 
Meriel: A Lov e Story. 

ROBINSON (F. W.). Novels by. 
Women are Strange. Post 8vo, 

illustrated boards, 2s. 
The Hands of Justice. Crown 8vo, 

cloth, •*?. bd. ; post Kvo, ilhist. bds., 2.?. 
The Woman in the Dark. Crown 

Svo. cloth, 35 M. : post 8vo. Ulust. bds 



POLFE (FR.), Novels by. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
Hadrian the Seventh. 
Don Tarquinio. 



ROWLEY (Hon. HUGH). Post 

8vo, cloth, 2s. 6,1. each. 

Puniana: or, Thoughts Wise and Other- 
wise : a Collection of the Best Kiddles, 
Conundrums, Jokes, Sells, &c, with 
numerous Illustrations. 

More Puniana. Wit h numerous Plus's. 

RUNCIMAN (J AS.), Stones by^ 
Schools and Scholars. Post 8vo, 

cloth, 7s. 6d. 
Skippers and Shellbacks. Crown 
S\o, cloth, 35. 6d. 



ROLL OF BATTLE ABBEY, 

THE: A List of Principal Warriors who 
came from Normandy with William the 
Conqueror. »o66. Tn Gold and Colon's. *s. 



ROMANOFFS, THta CUKSti OF 
THfi: A Study of the Reigns of 
Paul I. and Alexander I. of Russia. 

By A. S. RAProPORT, MA, With Por- 
traits. Demy Svo. c'o'li T 6t. net. 

R0SEN(jAR1Ein(a.;.— A ton d- 

book of Architectural Styles. Trans- 
lated by W. Collett-Sandars. With 
630 Illustrations. Cr. 8vn, cloth, 7? 6,/ 

RO£S (ALBERT).— A Sugar 

Princess. Cro wn 8vo. cloth, v. M. 

ROWS ELL InARY C.).- 
Monsicur de Paris. Crown 8vo, 
cloth. 2j. 6,1 net. 



RUSSELL (DORA), Novels by. 
A Country Sweetheart. Crown 8vo, 

picture cloth, flat back, 2s. 
The Drift of Fate. Crown 8vo, cloth, 

3s. fid. : picture cloth, flat back. 2<. 



RUSSELL (Rev. JOHN) and his 

Out-of-door Life. By E. W. L. 
DAVIES. With Illustrations coloured by 
hand. Royal 8vo, cloth, 16s. net. 



RUSSELL (HERBERT). -True 

Blue. Crown Svo, cloth, 3;. 6d . 



RUSSELL (VV. CLARKi, Novels 

by. Crown 8vn. cloth, 6«. eich. 

Overdue. 1 Wr ong Side Out. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 34. 6d. each ; post 8vo, 
i lus'ruted hoards. 2.V. each : cloth, 2s. 6d. each. 

Round the Galley Fire. 

In the Middle Watch. 

On the Fo'k'sle Head. 

A Voyage to the Cape. 

A Book for the Hammock. 

The Mystery of the ' Ocean Star.' 

The Rome nee of Jenny Harlowe. 

The Tale of the Ten. 

An Ocean Tragedy. 

Mv Shipmate Louise. 

Alone on a Wide Wide Sea, 

The Good Ship ' Mohock.' 

The Phantom Death. 

Is He the Man? | Heart of Oak. 

The Convict Ship. 

The Last Entry. 

Crown Rvo, cl >th, 3*. firf. each. 
A Tale of Two Tunnels. 
The Death Ship. 

The Ship: Her Story. With 50 Tllustra 
tions by H. C. Seppings Wright. 
Small 4to. cloth. 6c. 

The ' Pretty Polly.' With 12. Illustra- 
tions by G. E. Robertson 1 . Large 
crown Kvo, cloth, gilt edges, 5s. 

The Convict Ship. Popular Edition, 
medium Svo, 6U. 



SAINT AUBYN (ALAN), Novels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each ; post 
Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. each. 

A Fellow of Trinity. With a Note 
bv Oliver Wendell Holmes. 

The Junior Dean. 

Orchard Damerel. 

The Master of St. Benedict's. 

In the Face of the World. 

To His Own Master. 

The Tremlett Diamonds. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3$. 6d. each. 
The Wooing of May. 
Fortune's Gate. 
A Tragic Honeymoon. 
Gallantry Bower. 
A Proctors Wooing. 
Bonnie Maggie Lauder. 
Mrs. Dunbar's Secret. 
Mary Unwin. With s Illusbations. 

SAINT - JOHN (BAYLE). — A 

Levantine Family. Cr. 8vo, cl.. ?.<. (yi. 

SALA (G. A.).— Gaslight and 

Daylight. Post Svo. illustrated boards. 2<. 

SALMON (A. LX— Literary 

Rambus in the West of England. 

Wi;h ,1 FrO '"ispiece. Cr. 8vo. cl.. lis, n e . 

SCOTLAND YARD, Pasted Present 
By Ex-Chief-Inspector Cavanagh. P-st 
8vo illustrated boards. 2s. : cloth, 2s. Ni. 



SECRET OUT, The: Tricks with 

Cards. &c. 300 Illusts. Cr. Svo. cl., 4* • 6./. 

SEROE ANT (ADELINE), Novels 

by. Crown Svo, cloth. 3*. 6d. each. 
Under False Pretences. 
Dr. Endlcott's Experiment. 

The Missing Elizabeth. Crown Svo, 

cloth, bs. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



21 



ST. MARTINS LIBRARY (The). 

In pocket size, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net per 
Vol. ; leather, gilt edges, 3s. net per Vol. 
By Sir Walter Besant. 
All Sorts and Conditions of Men. 
Sir Richard Whittington. 
Caspard de Coligny. | London. 

Bv Hall Caine. 
The Deemster. 

Bv WlLKIE COLLINS. 

The "Woman in White. 

L5y D 'NiEL Defoe. 
Robinson Crusoe. With 37 Illus 
trations by G. Cruikshank. 

By Charles Dickexs. 
Speeches.' With P.>rlrait. 

by Austin Dobson. 
Eighteenth Century Vignettes. 
three Series, each Illustrated. 
Bv Thomas Hardv. 
Under the Greenwood Tree. 

Bv Pret Harte. 
Condensed Novels. 

By Oliver Wendell Holmes. 
The Autocrat of the Breakfast- 
Table. Blustrated by J. G Thomson 
Bv Richard Jefferies. 
The Life of the Fields. 
The Open Air. 
Nature near London. 

By Charles Lamb. 
The Essays of Elia. 

By Lof d Macaulay. 
History of England, in 5 Volumes. 

Bv Justin McCarthy. 
The Re'gn of Queen Anne, in 1 Vol. 
A History of the Four Georges 

and of Wiliiam IY., in 2 Vols. 

A History of Our Own Times from 

Acctssionot Q. Victoria to 1897, in3VoIs. 

Bv George MacDonaid. 

Worksof Fancyand Imagination, 

in 10 Vols. (For Lisl, see p. 15.; 

By Charles Readf.. 

The Cloister and the Hearth. With 

->.i l>lu<sti,Htii>ns bv M. H. Hewekdine. 
•It is Never Too Late to Mend.' 

By Rr-BERT I. LIS STEVENSON. 

Memories and Portraits. 

Virginibus Puerisque. 

Men and Books. 

New Arabian Nights. 

Across tli3 Plains. 1 Merry Men. 

Tne Pcems of R. L. Stevenson. 

By H. .A. Taine 
History oi English Literature, in 
4V0U With 32 P01 traits. 
By Mark Twain— Sketches. 
' By Walton and cotton. 
The Complete Angler. 



SENIOR (WM.).-By Stream 

and Sea. Post 8vo cloth, 2s. 6d. 

SEYMOUR (CYRIL), Novels by. 

C ruvn Svo. cloth, 6s. each. 
The Mag-c of To-Morrow. 
Comet Chaos. 



SHAKESPEARE the Boy : Home 

and School Life, Games and Spoils, 
Manners. Customs, and Folk lore of the 
Time. By W. J. Rolee. With 42 Illus- 
trations. Crown Svo. cloth. 3?. 6d. 



SHARP (WILLIAM).— Child.en 

of To-morrow. Crown Svo. cloth, 3s. td. 



SHELLEY'S Complete WORKS 

in Veraeand Prose. Edited by R. 

Herne Shepherd. Five Vo s., crown 
8vo. cloth, 35. 6d. each. 
Poetical 'Works, in Three Vols. : 

Vol. I. Margaret Nicholson ; Shel'ey's 
Con espondence with Stockdaie ; Wandering 
Jew: Queen Mab ; Alastor ; R'-salind aiKi 
Helen ; Prometheus Unbound ; Adonais 

Vol. II. Laon and Cythna : The Cenci ; 
Ju ian and Maddalo ; SwelHoot the Tyrant : 
The Witch of Atlas ; Epipsychidion ; Hella-. 

Vol. III. Posthumous Poems ; The 
Masque of Anarchy ; and oilier Pieces. 
Prose Works, in Two Vols. : 

Vol. I. Zastrozz ; St. Irvyne; Dublin ind 
Ma low Pamphlets ; Refutation of Deism ; 
Letters to Leiyh Hunt ; Minor Writings. 

Vol. II. Essays: Le'.ters from Abroad; 
Translations and Fragments: a Biography. 

SHERARD (R. H.).— Rogues. 

Crown Svo, cloth, Is, 6J. 



SHERIDAN'5 (RICHARD 
BR1NSLEY) Complete Works. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 35. M. 

The Rivals, The School for Scan- 
dal, &c. Post 8vo, haif-cloih, 2j. 

Sheridan's Comedies: The Rivals 
and The School for Scandal. 
Edited by Brandek Matthews. Willi 
Illustrations. Dcmv Svo, buckram. 12-. fid. 



SMIEL (M. P.), Novels by. 

The Purple Cloud. Cr. 8ro.oJoth, 34.6,/. 
Unto the Third Generation. Cr. 8\o 

ciolh, 6s. 

SIG NBOARDS: Their Hisioiy, in- 

eluding Famous Taverns and Remarkable 
Characters. By JACOB Larwood and J. 
C. Hotten. With 95 Illustrations. Crown 
Svo c'oth ^v. 6d. 



SINCLAIR (UPTON). — Prince 

Hasten. Crown Svo, clolh, 34-. 6J. 



SISTER DORA. By M. Lo.nsi.ale. 

IJemy Svo, qd. : cloth. 6d 



SKETCH LEY (ARTHUR).— A 

Match in the Dark. Post Svo, illus- 
trated boards. 2s. 



SLANG DICTIONARY ( The): His- 

torical and Anecdotal. Cr. Svo. el., 6s. bd. 



SA1ITH (J. MOYR), Books by. 

The Prince of Argolis. With 130 
Illustrations. Post 8vo. cloth, $s.6d. 

The W ooing of the Water Witch. 
With Uhistrat. ons. Rust Svo, cloih, bs. 



C1IATT0 & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



22 

SIMS (GEORGE R.), Books by. 
For Life— and After. Cr. 8vo, cL, 6s. 

Pi,st 8vo, illustrated boards, 2s. each ; cloth 
limp, 25. 6d. eacli. 
The Ring o* Bells. 
Tinkletop's Crime. | zeph. 
Dramas of Life. With 6o Illustrations. 
My Two "Wives. I Tales of To-day. 
Memoirs of a Landlady. 
Scenes from the Show. 
The Ten Commandments. 

Crown Svo, picture cover, is. each ; cloth, 
15 6d. each. 
The Dagonet Reciter and Reader. 
The Case of George Candlemas. 
Dagonet Ditties. Life We Live. 
Young Mrs. Caudle. 
Li Ting of London. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each ; post Svo, 
picture boards, 25. each ; cloth, 2s. 6d. each. 
Mary Jane's Memoirs. 
Mary Jane Married. 
Dagonet Abroad. 
Rogues and Vagabonds. 

Crown Svo, cloth, ?.?. ftd. each. 
Once upon a Christmas Time. 
With 8 Illustrations by CHAS. GREEN, K.l. 
In London's Heart. 
A Blind Marriage. 
"Without the Limelight. 
The Small-part Lady. 
Biographs of Babylon. 
Among My Autographs. 7oFacsims. 

Picture cloth, flat back, 25. each. 
Rogues and Vagabonds. 
In London s Heart. 

How the Poor Live; and Horrible 

London. Crown 8vo, leatherette, is. 
Dagonet Dramas. Crown 8vo. is. 
Mary Jane's Memoirs. Popular 

EDITION, medium 8vo, bd. 
His "Wife's Revenge. Crown 8vo., 

cloth, 2<. ftd- net. _^ 



SPEIGHT (T. W.) t Novels by. 

Post Svo, illustrated boards. 2s. each. 
The Mysteries of Heron Dyke; 
By Devious Ways. 
Hoodwinked; & Sandycroft Mys- 
tery. I The Golden Hoop. 
Back to Life. [ Quittance in Full. 
The Loudwater Tragedy. 
Burg'o's Romance. 
A Husband from the Sea. 



SNAZELLEPARILLA. Decanted 
by G. S. Edwards. With 66 Illustrations. 
Crown Svo. cloth, 3.?. (xL 

SOCIETY IN LONDON. Crown 

8vo. is. : cloth, is. 6d. 



SOMERSET (Lord HENRY).- 

Sones of Adieu. 4to. lap, vellum, 6?. 



SPENSER for Children. ByM.H 

TOWRY. With Coloured Illustrations by 
W. J. Morgan. Crown 4to. clolh. 3t. 6d. 



SPETTIGUE (H. 
Heritage of Eve. 



H.). — The 

Cr. Svo, cloth, 6s. 



Crown Svo, cloth. -\s 6rf. each 
Her Ladyship. ! The Grey Monk: 
The Master of Trenance. 
The Secret of Wyvern Towers. 
Doom of Siva. I As it was Written 
The "Web of Fate. 
Experiences of Mr. Verachoyle. 

Stepping Blindfold: Cr.8vo, cloth, 6s. 
"Wife or No Wife.Post 8vo,cloth, is. 6di 

STARRY HEAVENS Poet i c a 1 

Birthday Book, l'ott Svo. cloth, 2s. 6d. 



STEDMAN (E. C.).— Victorian 

Poets. Crown Svo, clo'.h, os. 



STEPHENS (RICCARDO).— The 

Crucifo rm Mark. Gr. ffvo, cl.. 3* . 6 I. 

STEPHENS (R. NEILSON).— 

Philip Winwocd. Cr. 8vo c).. ?,s. 6d. 



SPRIGGE (S. SQUIRE). —An 

Industrious Chevalier. Cr. 8vo, 6$ 



STAFFORD (JOHN), Novels by 

Doris and I. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 
Carlton Priors. Crown Svo. cloth, 6s. 



STEPNIAK (S.).— At the Dawn 

of a New Reign : a Study of Modern 
Russia. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. 



STERN DALE (R. ARMITAGEl. 

—The Afghan Knife. Post 8vo, cloth, 
3.?. 6rt. : illustrated boards, 2s. 

STERNE (LAURENCE), The 

Life of. By Percy Fitzgerald. With 
a Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 



STOCKTON (FRANK R.).-The 

Young Master of Hyson Mall. With 
36 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 
3.5. 6d. ; picture cloth, flat back, 2j. 



STODDARD (C. W.), Books by. 

Po t Svo, cloth, gilt top, 6s. net each. 
South- Sea Idyls: Summer Cruising. | 
The Island of Tranquil Delights. 



STRANGE SECRETS. Told by 
Percy Fitzgekald, Conan Doyle,] 
F.Marryat. &c. Post 8vo. illust. bds., 2s.\ 



STRUTT (JOSEPH). —The 

Sports and Pastimes of the People 
of England. With 140 Illustrations.' 
Crown svo. cloth. 3.9. "6/i.- 



STANLEY (WINIFRED). — A 

Flash of the Will. Cr.8vo, cloth, 6s. 



SUMER AND AKKAD, A 

History of. By Leonard W. King, 
M.A. With Maps and numerous Illusts^ 
Roval 8vo, cloth, i6s. net. \_ShorilyA 



SUNDOWNER, Stories by. 

Told by the Taffrail. Cr. 8vo, 3s. 6rf. 
The Tale of the Serpent. Crowo 
Svo, cloth, Hat back, 2s. 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



STEVENSON (R. LOUIS), 

Works by. Cr. 8vo, buckram, 6s. each. 

Travels with a Donkey. With a 
Frontispiece by WALTER CRANE. 

An Inland Voyage. With a Frontis- 
piece by Walter Ckane. 

Familiar Studies of Men & Books. 

The Silverado Squatters. 

The Merry Men. 

Underwoods : Poems. 

Memories and Portraits. 

Yirginibus Puerisque. 

Ballads. | Prince Otto. 

Across the Plains. 

Weir of Hermiston. 

In the South Seas. 

Essays of Travel. 

Tales and Fantasies. 

Essays in the Art of 'Writing. 

Songs of Travel. Cr. 8 vo, buckram $s. 
New Arabian Nights. Crown Svo, 

buckram, 6s. ; post 8vo, illust. boards, 2s.; 

Popular Edition, medium 8vo, 6d. 

Post 8vo, half -cloth, is. net each ; leather, 

2s. net each. 
Prayers Written at Yailima. 
A Christmas Sermon. 



The Suicide Club; and The Rajah's 
Diamond. (From New Arabian 
Nigh is.) With 8 Illustrations by W. J. 
HenneSSY. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 

The Stevenson Reader. Edited by 
Lloyd Osbourne. Post 8vo, cloth, 
2s. 6d. ; buckram, gilt top. 3s. 6d. 

The Pocket R.L.S.: Favourite Pas- 
sages. i 6mo cl„ 2s. ne t ; leather, 3s. net. 
Large Type, Fine Paper Editions. 
Pott 8vo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. net each ; 
leather, gilt edges, 3s. net each. 

Virginibus Puerisque. 

Familiar Studies of Men & Books. 

New Arabian Nights. 

Memories and Portraits. 

Across the Plains. 

The Merry Men. 

The Poems of R. L. Stevenson. 

R. L. Stevenson : A Study. By H. B. 
Baildon. With 2 Portraits. Crown 
8vo, buckram, 6s. 

Recollections of R. I#. Stevenson 
in the Pacific. By Arthur John- 
stone. With Portrait and Facsimile 
Letter. Crown Svo, buckram, 6s. net. 



STRAUS (RALPH).— The Man 

Apart. Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. 



SURTEE5 (ROBERT). - 

Handley Cross; or, Mr. Jorrocks's 
Hunt. With 79 Illusts. by John Leech. 
Post 8vp, picture cover, is. : cloth. 2s. 

S "UTR 0~~( AL F R ED )7^TlTe 

Foolish Virgins; Fcp. 8vo, u.:cl.. is.fv/ 



SWEET (ALEX. E.) and J. 

ARMOY KNOX. -On a Mexican 
Mustang Through Texas, Irom the 

Gulf to the Rio Grande. With 265 Illus- 
trations. Demy Svc, cloth, 3s. 6d. 



23 



SWIFT'S (Dean) Choice Works, 

in Prose and Verse. With Memoir, Por- 
trait, and Facsimiles. Cr. Svo, cl., 3?. 6rf. 

Gulliver's Travels, and A Tale of 

a Tub. Post Svo, half-cloth, 2s. 
Jonathan Swift : A Studv. Bv J. 
Churton Collins. Cr. Svo, cl., 3s. 6d. 



SWINBURNE'S (ALGERNON 

CHARLES) Works. 
Selections from Mr. Swinburne's 

Works. Fcap.8vo, 6s. 
Atalanta in Calydon. Crown 8vo,6t. 
Cliastelard: A Tragedy. Crown 8\ 0,7s. 
Poems and Ballads. First Series. 

Crown Svo, os. 
Poems and Ballads. Second Serifs. 

Crown Svo. os. 
Poems and Ballads. Third Series. 

Crown Svo, 7s. 
Songs before Sunrise. Crown 8vo- 

ics. 6d. 
Fothwell: ATragedv. Crown Svo, 125.6,;. 
Songs Of Two Nations. Crown Svo, 6s. 
George Chapman. (In Vol. II. 01" G. 

CHAPMAN'S Works.) Crown Svo, 3s. 6d. 
Essays and Studies. Crown 8vo, 12s. 
Erechtheus: A 1'ragedv. Oown8vo 6s. 
A Note on Charlotte Bronte. Crown 

Svo, 6;. 

A Study of Shakespeare. Crown 

Svo, Ss. 
Songs of the Springtides. Crown 

Svo. 6s. 
Studies in Song. Crown Svo, 7s. 
Mary Stuart: A Tragedy. Crown Svo, 85. 
Tristram of Lyonesse. Crown 8vo,gs. 
A Century of Roundels. Small .tto, 8s. 
A Midsummer Holiday. Cr. 8vo, 7s. 
Marino Faliero: A Tragedy. Crown 

8vo. 6s 
A Study of Victor Hugo. Cr. 8vo, 6s, 
Miscellanies. Crown 8vo, 12s. 
Apocrine : A Tragedy. Crown Svo, 6s. 
A Study of Ben Jonson. Cr. Svo. 7?. 
The Sisters: A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, Os. 
Astrophel, &c. Crown Svo, 7s. 
Studies in Prose and Poetry. 

Crown Svo, as;. 
The Tale of Balen. Crown Svo. 7; 
Rosamund, Queen of the Lorn. 

bards: ATragedv. Crown Svo, 6s. 
A Channel Passage. Crown Svo, 7s. 
Love's Cross -Currents: A Years 

Letters. Crown Svo, 6s. net. 
'William Blake, erown Svo, 6s. net. 



Mr. Swinburne's Collected Poems. 

In 6 Vols., crown Svo, 36s. net the set. 

Mr. Swinburne's Collected Tra- 
gedies. In5Vols., cr.Svo, 30s.net the set. 



TAINE'S History of English 

Literature. Trans, by Henry Van Laun. 
Four Vols., demy Svo, cl., 30s. — POPULAR 
Edition, Two Vols., crown Svo, cl., 15s. : 
Fi.n'e Paper Edition, in Four Vols., with 
32 Portraits, pott Svo, cloth, gilt top, 2s. 
net per vol. ; leather, gilt edges, 3s. net 
per vol. 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



24 

TALES FOR THE HOMES. 

B\ TWESTY-SlX Wf LL-KNOWNAUTHORS. 

Kdited by Rev. |. March ant. Pub). shed 
for the benefit of the BaRXAKDO ME- 
MOKIAL FUND. With 3 Portraits. Crown 
fn-n. cl .tli. 5s net 



TROLLOPE (FRANCES EJ, 

Novels by. Crown Sv... cloth, jj, 6-/. 

each; post 8vo, ill u dated boards, 2s. each. 
Like Ships upon the Sea. 
Mabel's Progress. I Anne Furness. 



TAYLOR (TOM). — Historical 
Dramas: 'Jeanne DarC 'TwixtAxe 
and Crown' 'The Fool's Revenge. 
•Arkwright's Wife,' 'Anne Boleyn,' 
•Plot and Passion.' Crown 8vo, is. each. 

TEMPLE (SIR^FC HARD).— A 

Bird's-eye View of Picturesque 
India. With 32 Musts. Cr. 8vo cl., 6s. 



THACKERAYANA : Notes and 

Anecdotes. With numerous Sketches by 
THACKKRAV. down 8vo. c\o h, 3s. <>d. 

Thackeray (The Pocket). Arranged 
by A. H. Hyatt. In i6mo, cloth, gilt 
top. 2c net : leather, gilt top. 3.?. net. 

TrToMAS (ANNIE), Novels by. 
The Siren's Web. Cr. 8vo. cl., 3s. td. 
Comrades True. Crown 8vo, cloth, us. 



THOMAS (BERTHA), Novels by. 
In a Cath edral City. Cr . Svo, cl., 3 i. o ..', 

Crown 8vt>, c oth,6s. each. 
The House on the Scar. 
The Son of the Hou=e, 



I liuMi>OiVi>SEAbONS,andThe 
Castle cf Indolence. With 48 Illus 
trations. Post 8vo, ha f-cloth. ?s. 

THOREAU rliislUfe .and Aims. 

By A. H. Pace. With a Portra t. Pus 
8vo, buckram, 3*. M, 



Trt ORN BURY (WALT), Books by 

The Life and Correspondence oi 

J. K. W. Turner. Uhh 8 Coloured 

llltisl'-.au 1 2 Woodcuts Cr. Svo.cl., Js.6V 

Tales for the Marines. Post 8vo 
ill str-t d b«iaids 2\- 



liMBS (JOHN), Works by. 

Crown Bvo, cloth. 3.?. 6J. each. 
Clubs and Club Life in London. 

With 41 I Mil- tr. lions. 

English Eccentrics and Eccen- 
tricities. With 48 Illustrations 

TOM PK1NS (HERBE RT W. X 

lYlarsh-Country Rambles. With 
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s. 



T RE ETON (ERNEST A.).- 

lastigntor. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6< 



The 



TROLLOPE (ANTHONY), Novels 

by. Crown Svo, c'oth. js. Cd. each; pobt 
8\o. illustrated boards, 2s. each. 

The Way Y/e Live Now. 

Frau Frohmann. | Marion Fay. 

Mr. Scarborough's Family. 

The Land- Leag uers. 

Post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s..each. 

Kept in the Dark. 

The American Senator. 

The C olden Lion of Granpere. 



TROLLOPE (T. A.).— Oiamond 

Cn\ Diamon d. Pos- Svo, i'l ii' - 1 ' Is , 2,. 

TURENNE (RAYMOND).— The 

Last of the Mammoths, Crown Bvo, 
cloth, 2s (1 .'. net. 

TWA I N S "(MARK) Books7 
Author's Edition de Luxe of the 
Works of Mark Twairs, in 23 
Volumes (limited to 600 Numbered 
Copies), price 12s. M. net per Volume. 
(Can be subscribed for only m Sets.) 

UNIFORM LlisKAKY EulTION. Crown 

Svo, cloth, 3s. dd. each. 
Mark Twain's Library of Humour. 

With 197 Illustrations liv E.W. KemklkJ 
Roughing It : and The Innocents 

at Kome. With 200 Illus. rations by 

K. A. KRASER. 

The American Claimant. With 8t 
Illustrations by HAL 11 ' 'kst and others. 

* The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. 

With 111 Illustrations. 
Torn Sawyer Abroad. With 26 

Illustrations by Dan Bkakd, 
Tom Sawyer. Detective, With Port. 
Pudd'rihead Y/iison VMth Portrait 

and Six Iin strati. .us by LOCK Loeb. 
-A Tramp Abroad. Wi h 314 lllus's. 
»ihe Innocents Abroad: or, NVw 

Pilgrim's Progress. With 234 Mil ts. 
*The Gilded Age. By Mark Twain 

and I . D. WAkNER. With 212 1 lusts. 

'- The Prince and the Pauper. 

wiih 190 Must ations. 

* T. ife on the Mississippi. 3m Musts. 
* r ine Adventures of Huckleberry 

Finn. 174 Illus!.,. bv !*-. W. KkmRMQ 
"A Yankee at the Court of King 
Arthur. 22©rllhists. by Dan Braru. 

* The Stolen White Elej'hant. 
*The £1,000,000 Bank-Note. 

A Double-barrelled Detective 
S»ory. With 7 Illustrations. 

The Choice Y/orks of Mark Twain. 
With Life, Portrait, and Illusti ations. 

» # * The Books marked * may be ha I also in 
post Svo, picture cloth, at 2s. cac'i. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. each. 
Personal Recollections of Joan of 

Arc. With 12 Musts, by K. V. Du Mono. ; 
More Tramps Abroad. 
The Man that Corrupted Hadley- 

burg. Uith Frontispitc e. 

Mark Twain's Sketches. Potl 8v», 
cloth, gilt top, 2S. net ; leather, gilt edges. 
3.v. net; pictuie boards, 2s. 



TWELLS (JULIA H.).— Et tu, 

Seiarel Crown Svo cloth. 65 



TYTLER (C. C. FRASER-).— 

A\istress Judith. Crown Svo, cloth, 
3s. (>d.; post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. I 






Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



2^ 



TYTLER (SARAH), Novels by. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6<l. each ; post Svo. 

illustrated hoards, 2s. each. 
Buried Diamonds. 
The JSlackhali Ghosts. 
What She Came Through. 

Post 8vo, illustra'cd boards, »c. each 
Saint AT un go's City. | Lady Boll, 
The Huguenot Family. 
Disappeared. | Nouiesse Oblige. 
Leauty and the Beast. 



Crown Svo, c'oth, $s. 6.1. each. 
The Macdonaid Lass. 
The Witch. Wife. 
Rachel Langton, I Sapphira 
Mrs. Carmichael's Goddesses. 
A Honeymoon's Eciiube. 
A Young Dragon. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. each. 
Three Men of Mark. 
In Clarissa's Day. 
Sir David's Visitors. 
The Poet and His Guardian Angel 

Citoyenne Jacqueline. Crown Svo, 

picture c oth, Bat hack, 2s. 
The Bride's Pass. Post Svo, illus- 
trated boards, 2s.; CHEAP EDITION, 
cloth, if. net. 

U PWARD (ALLEN), Novels' by. 
The Queen against Owen. Crown 

Svo, cloth, 3?. td. ; picture cloth, fiat back. 
is. ; post Svo, picture boards, 2?. 
The Phantom Torpedo-Boats. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. 

VAN DAM (ALBERT D.).-A 

Court Tragedy. With 6 Illustrations 
by J. D. Davis. Crown Svo, cloth, 3.9. (sd. 



VASARL— Stories of the Italian 
Artists from Vayari. Arranged by 
E. L. SEELEY. Lartje crown 8vo, buck 
ram, with 8 Four-Colour P'ates and 24 
in Two Tints, 7s. 61. net; Edition de 
Luxe, demy Svo, bound in parchment, 
with additional Coloured Plates, 155. 
net. A Prospectus may be had. 



VASHTI and ESTHER. By 

' lielle ' of The World. Cr. Svo cl.. 35 6,? 



VIZETELLY (ERNEST A.), 

Books by. Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each. 
The Scorpion. 
The Lover's Progress. 
With Zola in England. 4 Ports. 

A Path of Thorns. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 

The Wild Marquis: Life and Adven- 
tures of Armand Guerry de Maubreuil. 
Crown Svo, cloth, 6s. 



WALLACE (LEW.;.— Ben-Hur: 

A Tale of the Christ. Crown Svo, 
cloth. 3s. 6d- 



WALLER (S. E.).-Sebastiani's 

Secret. With 9 Illusts. Cr. Svo, cl., 6s. 



WALTON ancf , COTTON'S 

Complete Angler. Pott Svo, cloth, 
gilt, 2s. net ; leather, gilt edges, 3.5. net 

WALT WHITMAN," Poems by; 

Edited, with Introduction, by W. M. Kos- 
SETTI. With Port. Cr. Svo, buckram. 6s. 



WARDEN (FLORENCE), by. 
Joan, the Curate. Crown 8vo, cloth, 

->.s. fid. ; picture cloh, Hat back. 2s. 
A Fight to a Finish. Cr. svo, cl.. 35. 6d. 

Crown Svo, cloth, hi. each. 
The Heart of a Girl. \Vuh8 Illusts. 
V/hat Ought She to Do? 
Tom Daw»oii. 

The Youngest Miss Brawn. 
Love and Lordship. 
Ttte Old House at the Corner. 



WARA1AN (CY).--The Express 

Messenger. Crown Svo, cloth, 3 . (id. 

WARRANT to Execute CharlesT 

A Facsimile, with the 59 Signatures and 
Seals. 2.t. 
Warrant to Execute Mary Queen 
of Scots. Iiiclu ling Ouciii KiiiuoVl.i s 
Signature and the Grca.Seal. 2-.. 



WASSERMANN (L1LLIAS).— 

_ T he Daifodils Crown < vn, cl .ith. ■ <. hi. 

W EATH E R7T^VtoTo7etelKhe, 

with the Pocket Spectroscope. Hy 
F. W. Cory. VV.tn 10 Illustration*. 

Crown Svo. cloth is. 61. 

WEBBER (BYRON).— SporTand 

Spangles. Crown Svo, cloth. 2.?. 



WERNER (A.). — Ciiapenaa's 

White Man. Crown Svo. eloth, is. 6,1. 



WESTALL (WILL.), Novels by. 

Trust-Money. Crown Svo, cloth, 3*. <~d.; 
post Svo, illustrated boards, 2s. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, (is. eac\ 
As a Man Sows. ! The Old Bank. 
Dr. Wynne's Revenge. 
The Sacred Crescents. 
A Very Queer business. 

Crown Svo, cloth, 35. fid. each. 
A Woman Tempted Him. 
For Honour and Life. 
Her Two Millions. 
Two Pinches or Snuff. 
With the Red Eagle. 
A Red Bridal. | Nigel Fortescne. 
Ben Clough. | Birch Dene. 
The Old Factory. 
Sons of Belial. | Strange Crimes. 
Her Ladyship's Secret. 
The Phantom City. 
Ralph Norbreck's Trust. 
A Queer Race. 1 Red Ryvington. 
Roy of Roy's Court. 
As Luck would have it. 



With the Red Eagle. Popular 

Edition, me<!ium Svo, vd. 



26 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



WE ST BURY (ATHA). — The 

Shadow of Hilton Fernbrook. Crown 
8vo. cloth, 35. bd. 

WHEELWRIGHT (E. G.).-A 

Slow Awakening. Crown 8vo cloth, 6s. 

WH ISHAW (FRED.), N ovels 

by. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. bd. each. 
A Forbidden Name. 
Many "Ways of Love. With 8 lliusts. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, bs. each. 
Mazeppa. 

Near the Tsar, near Death. 
A Splendid Impostor. 



WILDE (LADY).— The Ancient 

Legends, Charms, and Superstitions 
of Ireland. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. i>d. 



WHITE (GILBERT). — Natural 

History of Selborne, Post 8vo, cloth, 2.?. 



WILLIAMS (W. MATTIEU), by. 
Science in Short Chapters. Crown 

8vo, cloth, 7s. bd. 
The Chemistry of Cookery. Crown 

Svo. cloth, 6s. 
A Simple Treatise on Heat. With 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. bd. 



WILLIAMSON (Mrs. F. H.).— A 
Child Widow. Post 8vo, illust. bds., 2s. 

WILLS (C. J.), Novels by. 

An Easy-going Fellow. Crown 8vo, 

cloth. 3.?. <■(/. 
Kis Dead Past. Crown Svo, cloth, bs. 



WILSON (Dr. ANDREW), by. 

Chapters on Evolution. With 259 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7*. 6d. 
Ueisure-Time Studies. With Iilustra 

tions. Crown Svo, cloth. <i. v . 

Studies in Life and Sense. With 36 
Illustrations. Crown Svo, cloth. 35. bd. 

Common Accidents, and how to 
Treat Them. Cr. 8vo, u. ; cloth, is. bd 

Glimpses of Nature. Withes Iilustra 
tions. Crown Svo, cloth, is. bd. 



WOOD (H. F.), Detective Stories 

by. Post Svo. illustrated boards 2.?. each. 
Passenger from Scotland Yard. 
The Englishman of the Rue C ain. 

WOOLLEY (CELIA PARKER).— 

Rachel Armstrong. Post Svo, 2s. bd. 



WRAGGE (CLEMENT L.).— 
The Romance of the South Seas. 

With S4 Illustrations. Crown Svo, cloth, 
7.?. bd. net. 

WRIGHT (THOMAS), by. 
Caricature History of the Georges; 

or. Annals of the House of Hanover. 
With Frontispiece and over 300 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. bd. 
History of Caricature and of the 
Grotesque in Art, Literature, 
Sculpture, and Painting. Illus- 
trated by F. W. Fairholt. Crown Svo. 
cloth, 7.?. bd. j 

ZANGWILL (LOUIS).— A Nine- 
teenth Century Miracle. Crown Svo, 
cloth. 35. bd. : picture cloth, flat back, 2%. 



WINTER (JOHN STRANGE), 

bv. 
Regimental Legends. Post 8vo, 

Must rated boaids, ?.s. ; cloth, 2s. 6^. 
Cavalry Life; and Regimental 

Legends. Ciown 8vo, cloth, 3s. bd. ; 

picture cloth, flat back, 2s. 



ZOLA (EMILE), Novels by. 

Uniform Edition. Translated or Edited, 
with Introductions, by Ernest A. Vize- 
TELLY. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. each. 

His Masterpiece. I The Joy of Life. 

Germinal. 

The Honour of the Army. 

Abbe Mouret's Transgression. 

The Fortune of the Rougons. 

The Conquest of Plassans. 

The Dram-Shop. 

The Fat and the Thin. | Money. 



His Excellency. 

The Downfall. 

Lourdes. 

Rome. 

Paris. 



The Dream. 
Doctor Pascal. 
Fruitrulness. 
Work. 
Truth. 



Popular Editions, medium 8vo, bd. each. 
The Dram-Shop. I Paris. | Money. 
Lourdes. | Rome. | The Downfall. 



"With Zola in England. By Ernest 

A. Vizei elly. With 4 Portraits. Crown 
8vo, cloth, 35. bd. 



THE PICCADILLY NOVELS. 

LIBRARY Editions, many Illustrated, crown Svo, cloth, 3s. bd. each. 



By Mrs. ALEXANDER. 



Valerie's Tate. 
A Life Interest. 
Mona's Choice. 
Ky Woman's Wit. 
The Cost of Her Pride. 



Barbara. 

A Tight with Fate. 
A Golden Autumn. 
Mrs. Crichton's Creditor. 
The Step-mother. 



A Missing Hero. 
By M. ANDERSON. 

Othello's Occupation. 

By G. W APPLETON. 

Rash Conclusions. 



Philis.ia- I Babylon. 
Strange Stories. 
For Maimie's Sake. 
In all Shades. 
The Beckoning Hand. 
The Devil's Die. 
This Mortal Coil. 
The Tents of Shem. 



By GRANT ALLEN. 



The Great Taboo. 
Dumaresq's Daughter. 
Duchess of Powysland, 
Blood Royal. 
Ivan Greets Masterpiece. 
The Scallywag. 
At Market Value. 
Under Sealed Orders. 



ARTEMUS WARD'S WORKS, Complete 

By EDWIN L. ARNOLD 

Phra the Phoenician. | Constable of St. N'ichola 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



27 



The Piccadilly (3/6) Novels — continued. 

By Rev. S. BARING-GOULD 

Red Spicier. | Eve. 

By ROBERT BARR. 

In a Steamer Chair I A Woman Intervenes. 

From Whose Bourne. | Revenue ! 

A Prince of Good Fellows. 
By FHANK BARRETT. 



A Prodigal's Progress. 
Woman of Iron Bracelets. 
Fctiered for Life. 
Eetween Life and Death. 
By 'BELLE.'- 



The Harding Scanda 
Under a Strange Mask. 
A Missing Witness. 
Was She Justified Z 
Vashti and Esther. 
By ARNOLD BENNETT. 
The Gates of Wrath. 1 The Grand Babylon Hotel. 

Anna of the Five Towns. 
By Sir W. BESANT and J. RICE. 
Ready-Money Mortiboy. | Bv Telia's Arbc 



My Little G rl. 
With Harp and Crown. 
This Son of Vulcan. 
The Golden Butterfly. 
The Monks of Thelema 



Chaplain of the Fleet. 
The Seamy Side. 
The Case of Mr Lucraft. 
In Trafalgar's Bay. 
The Ten Years' Tenant. 
By Sir WALTER BESANT. 
All Sorts and Conditions. | Verbena Camellia Stepha 
"" e Ivory Gate. Lnotis. 



By MORT. and FRANCES COLLINS. 

Blacksmith a*d Scholar. I You Play Me False. 
The Village Comedy. I Midnight to Midnight 

By M. J. COLOUHOUN.— Every Inch a Soldie 

By HERBERT COMPTON, 
The Inimitable Mrs. Massingham. 

By E. H. COOPER. -Geoflbry Hamilton. 

By Y. C. COTES Two Girls on a Barge. 

By C. EGBERT CRADDOCK. 
The Prophet of the Great Smoky Mountains. 
His Vanished Star. 



By S. R. CROCKETT and others. 

Tales of Our Coast. 



The Captains' Room. 
All in a Garden Fair. 
Dorothy Forster. 
Uncle Jack. | Holy Rose 
World Went Well Then. 
Children of Gibeon. 
Herr P ulus. 
For Faith and Freedom. 
To Call Her Mine. 
The Revolt of Nian. 
The Bell of St. Paul's. 
Armorel of Lyonesse. 
S. Katherine's by Towei 



The Rebel Queen 
Dreams of Avarice. 
In Deacon's Orders. 
The Master Craftsman. 
The Ci y of Refuge. 
A Fountain Sealed. 
The Changeling. 
The Fourth Generation. 
The Charm. 

Alabaster Box. 
The Orange Girl. 
" he Lady of Lynn, 
rso utner Way. 
By AMBROSE! BIERCE.-In Midst of Life. 
By HAROLD BINDLOSS. 
Ainshe's Ju-J u. | A Sower of Wheat. 

By M. McD. BODKIN, K.C. 

Dora Myrl. | Shillelagh and Shamrock 

Patsey the Omadaun. 

By PAUL BOURGET.-A Living Lie. 

By J. D. BRAYSHAW.-Slum Silhouettes. 

By H. A. BRYDEN.— An Exiled Scot. 

By ROBERT BUCHANAN. 



Diana Barring ton. 

Proper Pride. 

A Family Lik«ness. 

Pretty Miss Neville. 

A Bird of Passage. 

Mr Jervis. 

Village Tales. 

Some One Else. | Jason 

Infatuation. 



By B. M. CROKER. 



Real Lady Hilda. 
Married ..r Single? 
Two Masters. 
In the Kingdom of Kerry. 
Interfetence. 
A Third Person. 
B-ycnd the Pale. 
Miss Balmaine's Past. 

I The Cat's-paw 



Shadow of the Sword. 
A Child of Nature. 
God and the Man. 
Martyrdom of Madeline. 
Love Me for Ever. 
Annan Water. 
Foxglove Manor. 
The Charlatan 



The 



New Abet 
Matt. I Rachel Dene 

Master of the Mine. 
The Heir of Linne. 
Woman and the Man. 
Red and White Heather. 
Lady Kilpatrick. 
Andromeda. 

GELETT BURGESS and WILL IRWIN. 

The Picaroons. 

By HALL CAINE. 

Shadow of a Crime. | Son of Hagar. | Deemster. 

By R. W, CHAMBERS.— The King in Yellow. 

By AUSTIN CLARE.- By Rise of River. 

By Mrs. ARCHER CLIYE. 

Paul Ferroll. j Whv Paul Ferroll Killed his Wite. 

By MACLAREN COBBAN. 
The Red Sultan. | The Burden of Isabel 

By Y. LOYETT CAMERON. 
The Cruise of the " Black Prince." 

By WILKIE COLLINS. 



By ALPHONSE DAUDET. 

The Evangelist ; or, Port Salvation. 
By H. C. DAYIDSON.-Mr. Sadler's Daughters. 

By DOROTHEA DEAKIN. 
The Poet and the Pierrot. 
The Princess and the Kitchen-maid, 

By JAMES DE MILLE. 
A Strange Manuscript Found in a Copper Cylinder. 

By HARRY DE WiNDT. 
True Tales of Tiavel and Adventure. 

By DICK DONOYAN. 



Man rom Mancheste: 
Records of Vincent Trill. 
Myst, of famaica Terrace 
Deacon Brodie. 



Tales of Terror. 
Chro.of Michael Danevir/Ti 
Tyler Tatlock. Detective. 
A Detective's Triumphs 



RICHARD DOY/LING.-Old Corcorans Money. 
CONAN DOYLE. -The Firm of Girdlestone. 

By S. JEANNETTE DUNCAN. 
A Daughter of To-day I Vernon's Aunt. 
By ANNIE EDWARDES. 
Archie Lovell. | A Plaster Saint. 

By G. S. EDWARDS.— Snazelleparilla. 
By G. MANYILXE FENN. 



Cursed by 
The Case of Ailsa Gray 
Commodore Junk. 
The New Mistress. 
Witness to the Deed. 
The Tiger Lily. 
The Wiiite Virgin. 
Black Blood. 
Double Cunning. 
The Bag of Diamonds 
Runn 



A Fluttered Dovecote. 
King of the Castle. 
Master of the Ceremonies. 
The Man with a Shadow. 
One Maid's Mischief. 
Story of Antony Grace. 
This Man's Wife. 
In Jeopardy. 
Woman Worth Winning. 
A Crimson Crime. 



Armadale. I After Dark. 
No Name. Antonina 
Basil. I Hide and Seek. 
The Dead Secret. 
Queen of Hearts. 
My Miscellanies 
The Woman in White. 
The Law and the Lady. 
The Haunted Hotel. 
The Moonstone. 
Man and Wife. 
Poor Miss Finch. 
Miss or Mrs. 



The New Magdalen. 
The Frozen Deep. 
The Two Destinies. 
' I Say No.' 
Little Novel*. 
The Fallen Leaves. 
Jezebel's Daughter. 
The Black Robe. 
Heart and Science. 
The Evil Genius. 
The Legacy of Cain 
A Rogue's Life. 
Blind Love. 



Ey PERCY FITZGERALD.-Fatal Zero. 

By Hon. Mrs. W. FORBES.-Dumb. 

By R. E. FRANC1LLON. 

OnebyOne. | A Real Queen. I A Dog and his Shadow. 
Ropes of Sand. | Jack Doyle s Daughter 

By HAROLD FREDERIC. 
Seth's Brother's Wife. I The Lawton Girl. 

By PAUL GAULOT.— The Red Shirts. 

By DOROTHEA GERARD. 

A i^ueen of Curds and Cream 

By CHARLES GIBBON. 

Robin Gray. | The Braes of Yarrow. 

Of High Degree, Queen of the Meadow. 

The Golden Shaft. I The Flower of the Forest 

By E. GLANYILLE. 
The Lost Heiress. I The Golden Rock. 

Fair Colonist I Fossicker. | Tales from the Veld. 

By E. J. GOODMAN. 
The Fate of Herbert Wayne. 

By ALFRED A. GRACE. 
Tales of a Dying Race. 

By CECIL GRIFFITH Corinthia Mnrazion 

By A. CLAYERING GUHTER. 
A Florida Enchantment. 



28 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



1 he Piccadilly (3/6) Novels— continued. 
By GYP.-Cloclo. 
By OWEN HALL. 
The Track of a Storm | Jetsam. 

By COSMO HAMILTON. 
Clamour of the Impossible , and Through a Keyhole. 

By THOMAS HARDY. 
L'mler the Greenwood Tree. 

By BBET HARTE. 

1 A Prot. gee of Jack 
Clarence. [Hamlin's. 

Barker's Luck. 
Devil's Kord. 
Crusade of ' Excelsior.' 
Three Partners. 
Gabriel Conroy. 
New Condensed Novels. 



Manila, 
A v\ aif of the Pla : ns. 
Ward of Golden Gate. 
Sappho of Green Springs. 
: 01. Starbottle s Client. 
Susy. I S.illy Dow?. 

Pell-Ringer of Angel's. 
1 aies of Trail and Town. 



By JULIAN HAWTHORNE. 

Garth. | Dust. Beatn ~ 

fcllice Quentin. David 

Sebastian Strome. appearance. 

Fortune's Fool. Spectre of Camera, 

l-ove— or a Name 
By CHRIS HEALY.-The Endless Heritage. 
By Sir A. HELPS.-Ivan de Biron. 
By I. HENDERSON. -Agatha Page. 
By G. A. HENTY. 
Dorothy's Double. | The Queen's Cup. 

Rujub, the tuggler. I Colonel Thorndyke's Secret 

By HEADON HILL Zanitra the Detective. 

By JOHN HILL.— Tne Common Ancestor. 
By Mrs. CASH EL HOE Y.- TIim Lover s Greed 

By TIGHE HOPKINS. 

Twixt Love and Duty. I Incomplete Adventurer. 

Nugentsof Carriconna. | Nell Haffenden. 

By E. Y/. HORNUNG. 

1 lie Shadow of the Rope. 

By YICTOR HUGO.— The Outlaw of Iceland 

By FERGUS HUME. 
Lady from Nowhere. | The Millionaire Mystery. 

HUNGERFORD. 

Professor's Experiment. 



A Point ol Conscence. 
A Maiden all Forlorn 
The Coming of Chloe. 
Nora Creina. 
An Anxious Moment. 
April's Lady. 
Peter's Wife. 
Lovice. 



By Mrs. 

Marvel. 

I nsatisfactory Lover. 

In Durance Vile. 

A Modem Circe. 

Lady Patt>. 

A Mental Struggle. 

Lady Verncr's Flight. 

The Red-House Mystery 

The Three Graces. 

By Mrs. ALFRED HUNT. 
The Leaden Casket. I Self-Condemned. 

That Other Person. | Mrs. Juliet. 

By R. ASHE KING.-A Drawn Game. 
ByGEORGELAM BERT.-President of Boravia 

By EDMOKD LEPELLETIER. 
Madame Sans-Gene. 
By ADAM LI LBURN.-A Tragedy in Marble 

By HARRY LINDSAY. 
Rhoda Roberts. I The Jacobite. 

By E. LYNN LINTON. 
Patricia Kemball. I Atonement Learn Dundas 

Under which Lord? The One Too Many. 

My Love!' | lone. ] Dulcie Fverton. 



Pasti n Carew. 
lowing the Wind 
With a Silken Thr< 



Tr.e Rebel of the Fami 
An Octave of Fri.-nds. 
The World Well Lost. 



By HENRY W. LUCY.-Gideon Fieyce. 
B/ JUSTIN MCCARTHY. 



A Fair Saxon 
Linley Rochford. 
Dear Lady Disdain. 
Camioia. | Mononia. 
Waterdale Neighbours. 
My Enemy's Daughter. 
Miss Misanthrope. 

jusiin h. McCarthy 



Donna Ouixote. 

Maid of Athens. 

The Comet of a Season. 

The Dictator. 

Red Diamonds. 

The Riddle Ring. 

The Three Disgraces. 

A London Legend. 



By GEORGE MACDONALD 

Heather and Snow. 

By W. H. MALLOCK.— The New Republic. 

By P. A V. MARGUERITTE.-The Disaster 

By RICHARD MARSH. -A Spoiler of Men. 



By L. T. MEADE. 

A Soldier of Fortune. I On Brink of a Chasm. 

Ill an Iron Grip. The Siren. 

Dr Rumsey's Patient. The Way of a Woman. 

The Voice of the Charmer. A Son ol Ishmael 
An Adventuress. I The Blue Diamond. 

This Troublesome World. | Rosebury. 
A Stumble by the Way. 
By HOPE MERRICK. 
When a Girl's Engaged. 
By LEONARD MERRICK. 
This Stage of Fools. | Cynthia. 

The Man who was Good 
By EDMUND MITCHELL. 
The Lone Star Ku-h. I Only a Nig.er. 

By BERTRAM MITFORD. 
The Gun-Runner. I Th« King's Assegai. 

L. .kol Gerard Ridgeley. | Kenshaw Fanning's Ques 
The Triumph of Hilary Blachland. | Haviland s Chun 

Mrs. MOLESWORTH.— Hathercourt Rector) 
By J. E. MUDDOCK. 

Maid Marian and Robin I Basilethe Jester. 
Hood. I Golden Idol. 

Young Lochinvar 
By D. CHRISTIE MURRAY. 



A Life's Atonement 

Joseph's Coat. 

Coals of Foe. 

Old Bl izer's Hero. 

V..1 Strange. | Hearts. 

A Mo .el Father. 

By the Gate of the Sea. 

A Bit of Human Nature 

First Person Singular. 

Cynic Fortune. 

The Way of the W^rld. 

V.C. 



Bob Martin s Little Girl. 

Time's Revenges. 

A Wasted Crime. 

In Direst Peril. 

Mount Desnair. 

A Capful o' Nails. 

Tales in Prose »nd Vers' 

A Race for Millions. 

This Li.tle World. 
j His Own Ghost. 
I Church of Humanity 
I Despair's Last Jo:rney 



By MURRAY and HERMAN. 

The Bishops' Biole I Paul Jones's Alias. 

One Traveller Returns. 
By HUME N1SBET.— • Bail Up I 
By W. E. NORRIS. 
Saint Ann's. I Billv Bellew. 

Miss Wentworth's Idea. 
By G. OHNET.-A Weird Gift. 
Love's Depths. | The Woman of Mystery 

The Money-maker. 
By Mrs. OLIPHANT. 
Whiteladies. I The Sorceress. 

By OUIDA. 



Held in Bondage. 
Strathmore. | Chandos. 
Under Two Flags. 
Cecil Castiem line's Gage. 
Tncotrin | Puck. 
Folle-Farine 
A Dog of Flande s. 
Pascarel. I Signa. 
Princess Napraxine. 
Two Wooden Shoes 
In a Winder City. 
The Massarenes. 



Friendship I Idalia. 
Moths. Ruffino. 

Pipis*rello. | Ariadne 
A Village Commune. 
Bimbi. I Wanda. 

Frescoes. | Othmar 
In Maremma. 
Syrlin. I Guilderoy 

Santa Barbara. 
Two Offenders. 
The Waters of Edsra, 
i A Rainy June. 



By MARCARET A. PAUL. 

Gentle and Simple 

By JAMES PAYN. 



High Spirits. I Bv Proxy 
The Talk of the Town. 
Holiday Tasks. 
For Cash Only. 
The Burnt Million. 
The Word and the WilL 
Sunny Stories. 
A Trying Patient. 
Modern Dick Whittingtt 



Lost Sir Massingberd. 
The ClyfTaidsofClyffe. 
The Family Scapegrace. 
ACounty Family. [Painted 
Less Black than We're 
A Confidential Agent. 
A Grape troin a Thorn. 
In Pen! and Privation. 
Mystery of Mirbridge. 

By WILL PAYNE.— Jerry the Dreamer 

By Mrs. CAMPBELL PRAED. 

Outlaw and Lawmaker. I Mrs. Tregaskss. 

Christina Chard. | Nulma. | Madame Iza 

' As a Watch in the Night.' 

By E. C. PRICE.-Valentina. 

By RICHARD PRYCE. 

Miss Maxwell's Affections. 

By Mrs. J. H. RIDDELL. 
Weird Stories. | A Rich Man's Daughte 



Ill ST. MART 1N^5_LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



The Piccadilly (3/6) Novels— continued. 



29 



„, By CHARLES REACE, 

A . Wo 7'ngton ; and Griffith Gaunt 
Christie Johnstone, 
hard Cash. 

Cloister and the Hearth. 
Never Too Late to Mend 
i lie Course of True 

Love ; and Singleheart 

and Doubleface. 
Autobiography of a 

Thief; jack of all 

Trades ; A Hero and 

a Martyr ; and The 

Wandering Heir. 



Love Little, Love Long. I 
The Double Marriage. 
Foul Play. 

Put Yourself in His Place 
A Terrible Temptation." 
A Simpleton. 
A Woman-Hater. 
The Jilt. & other StO'ies 
& Good Stories of Man. 
A Perilous Secret. 
Readiana ; and Biole 
Characters 



Man Who Lost His Past. | The Bayswater Mys-en 
r» v „ B y AMELIE KIYES. 
Barbara Dermg. | Meriel. 

rhe Hands 01 justice. | Woman in the Hark: 

By ALBERT ROS8.-A Ssgar Princess 

-By J. RUNCIMAN.-Skippers and SheUb-c'ks 

By W. CLARK RUSSELL 

■n°,Z d M- M*? 3 w y F ! ,e ' I M » Shipmate Lou.-. 
•n the Mi, ri e Wat< h. Alone on Wide Wide Sea 

)n he Fo k'sle Head. The Phantom Dea 

A Voyage to the Cape. Is He the M 

jtnok for the hammock 



By R. L. STEYENSON.-The Suicide Club. 
By FRANK STOCKTON. 

T he \ oun ? Master ol Hyson Kail 
By SUNDOWNER.- Told by the Taflrail 
jOnaMexi^M^ ETaadK « OX - 

By ANNIE THOMAS.-The Siren's Web. 
By BERTHA THOMAS. 
In a Cathedral Cry. 
1 :l Q .?y FRANCES E. TF.CLLOPE. 
Like Ships Upon Sea. | Anne 1 urness 
Mabel's Progress. 
By ANTHONY TROLLOPE. 
The Way we Live No*. I Marion Fav 
i-rau Frohmann. Starh<,™,,r- n-- n 
■ | OLarr.crou^h s I-am: y. 
The Land-Lea? 



.Che 



: ce Works. 
I Library of Humour. 

The Innocents Abroad. 
[Roughing It; and The 

Innocents at Home. 
| A Tra.np Ahioad. 
I The American Claimant. 

Adventures Fom Sawyer 
I Tom Sawyer Abroad. 

' m Saw\er, Detect! 



By MARK TV/A IN. 



P :fld'nliead Wilson. 
The Gilded Age. 

Prii.ce anil the Pauper. 
Life on the Mississippi. 

Huckleberry l-'iun 

A Yankee at Court. 
Stolen White Elephant. 
£5.000,000 Bank-note 

ADouMe-barreiltd Detec- 
tive Story. 



'lystery of ' Ocean Star! 
( enny Harlowe. 
j.n Ocean Tragedy. 
!• Tale of Two Tunnels 



Good Ship • Mohock. 
The Convict Ship 
Heart of Oak. 
The Tale of the Ten. 
The Last Entry. 



The Death Ship. 
By DORA RUSSELL.-Drift of Fate 
By HERBERT RUSSELL.-True Blue 
s By BAYLE ST. JOHN.-A Levantine Pan 
r F, 1i B , y ADE ^NB SERGEANT. 
r.lindicotts Experiment | Under False Pretence 
By WILLIAM SHARP. 
Children of To-morrow 
By M. P. SHIEL.-The Purple Cloud 
By GEORGE R. SIMS. 



|£pu<si Abroad, 
-ice uponChristmasTime 
ithout the Limelight 
ogues and Vagabonds, 
fraphs of Baby 



In London's Heart. 
Mary Jane's Memoirs 
Mary Jane Married. 
The Small-part Lady. 
A Blind Marriage 



C. C. PRASE R-TYTLER.-f,.is;ress Judith 
,„.,-, By SARAH TYTLER. 

Tr'eMtd ,,ft,1 r'r' S - U-chei Langton. 

VOt^l U' e" a " « aSS -, • I A "™>ey-noon\ Eclipse. 

u itch \\ ,te. ] Sapphira. I A Young Dragon 

ALLEN UPWARD.-The Queen against Owen 

By ALBERT D. YANDAM.-A Court Tragedy 

By E. A. YIZETELLY. 

The Scorpion. ; The Lovers Progress 

By LEW. WALLACE. -lien Hur 
.u Ey FLORENCE Y/ARJJEN. 
Joan, the curate. | A Fight to a Finish 

Ey CY Y/ARMAN.-Express Messenger 
By A. WERNER.-Chapenga's White Man. 
By WILLIAM WE3TALL. 
lor Honour and Li e i Ked Ryvin *t. .' 

A Woman Tempted Him. I Ralph N 



By UPTON SINCLAIR.-p,i„ce Hagen 

1y J. MOYR 3MITH.-The Prince of Argolis 

By T. W. SPEIGHT. 

p^^enancej^^ly^r"- 

The Doom of Siva. * 

By ALAN ST. AUBYN 

Fellow of Trinity. , The Tromlett Diamonds. 



k's Trust 
» iiist-ni.niey. 
Sons of Belial. 
Roy of Roy's Court 
With the Red Eagle. 



e Junior Dean, 
ister of St. Benedict's 
his Own Master, 
tlantay Bower. 
Face of the World. 
:hard Daxnerel 



The Wooing of Ma, 
A Tragic Honeymoon. 
A Proctor s Wooing 
Fortune's Gate. 
Bonnie Maggie Lauder 
Mary Unwin. 
Mrs. Dunbar's Secret. 
By JOHN STAFFORD.-Dorisandl 
By R. STEPHENS.-The Cruciform Ma-k 
/If 1 """ STBPHB »S--l™ip Winwood. 
r- R. A. STERNDALE.-The Afghan Knife 



M 

Two Pinches of Snuff. 
Vigel Fortescue. 
^iich Dene | Ben Clough 
l'lie Pnamoui City. A Red arid... 

ti Q mm - aCe ' Strange Crimes. 

The Old factory Her Ladyship s Secret 

As Luck would have i' 
By ATHA WESTBORY. 
J he Shadow of Hilton Fernbroot 

A FnrbMH B ? FnED WHISHAW. 

A Forbidden Name I Manv w ■„ - „<■ r 

Bv C J wir T <a i ? ay . s "■ Love 

*»y i,. j. WILLS.— An hasy-g..in<. Fellow 

By JOHN STRANGE WINTER. ' 

Cavalry Life i and Regimental I emends. 

By LOUIS ZANGWILL. 

A Nireteenth Centurv Miracle 

By EMILE ZOt A. 



I The Honour of the Army. 
1- I The Dream. 
Abbe Mouret's Trans- 
gression. | Money. 
The Con ,uest or Plassans 
Dram-Shop. | Downfall. 
:e!lency 



His Masterpiece. 
The Pat and the Thin. 
Dr. Pasc?l. | Joy of Life 
f-ortun-ot the Kougons. 
Lcurdes. | Fruitiuiness 
R me Work. 

I Paris. | Truth. 



CHEAP EDITIONS OF~POPU^Ar7^ovwT 

Post 8vo. illustrated boards, "eaTh 



_ run nvc 

By Mrs. ALEXANDER. 

iS 'c . I A Ufe Interest. 

•nesl-ate. I Mono's Choice.' 

By Woman's Wit 
By E. LESTER ARNOLD. 

Fhra the Phoenician. 



Philisfa. 



Strange Stories. 
For Maunie's Sake, 
in all Shades. 
|The Beckoning Hand, 
The Devils Die. 

KTEMUS WARD'S WORKS. Complete. ItSSStJST 



By GRANT ALLEN. 

Babylon. | Dumaresq's Daughter 
Duchess of Puwsylanci 
Blood Royal. 

Ivar.Grtets Masterpiece. 

I he Scallywag. 
This Mortal Coil. 
At Market Value. 
Uii«. Sealed Orders, 



3° 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS, 



Two-Shilling Novels — continued. 

By Rev. S. BARING-COULD. 

Red Spider. | Eve. 

By FRANK BARRE1T. 



Fettered for Life. 
Little Lady Linton. 
Between Life and Death. 
Sin ofOlga Zassoulich. 
Folly Morrison. 
Lieut. Barnabas* 
Honest Davie. 



A Prodigal's Progress. 

p'ound ooil y. 

A Recoiling Vengeance 

For Love and Honour. 

John Ford, &c. 

Woman of Iron Bracelets 

The Hording Scandal. 



I By M. J. COLQUHOUN.-Every Inch a Soldii 

By C. EGBERT CRADDOCK. 

The Prophet of the Great Smoky Mountains. 

By H. N. CRELLIN. -Tales of the Caliph. 

MATT CRIM.— The Adventures of a Fair Rete 

By B. M. CROKER. 

Village Tales and Ju"l 



A Missing Witness. 
By Sir W. BESANT and J. RICE. 



Ready-Money tooruboy. 
My Little Girl. 
With Harp and Crown. 
This Son of Vulcan. 
The Golden Bui tartly. 
The Monks of Theleina. 



By Celia' 

Chaplain of the Fleet. 
The Seamy Side. 
The Ca-euf Mr. Lucraft. 
In Trafalgar s Bay. 
The Ten Years' Tenant. 



By Sir WALTER BESANT 



All Sorts and Conditions. 
The Captains' Room. 
All in a Garden Fair. 
Dorothy Forster. 
Uncle lack. [Then. 

The World Went Very Weil 
Children of Gibeon. 
Herr Paulus. 
For Faith and Freedom. 
ToCal Her Mine. 
The Master Craiuman. 



e Bell ol =>t. Paul's. 
The Huly Rose. 
Armorel of Lyonesse. 
St. Katherine'sby Tower. 
Verbena Camellia Stepha- 
The Ivory Gate. [notis. 
The Rebel 'Jueen. 
Beyond Dreams Avarice. 
The Revolt of Man. 
In Deacon's Orders. 
The City of Refuge. 



AMBROSE BIERCE.— In tie Midst of Life. 

By FREDERICK BOYLE. 

Camp Notes. I Chronicles of No-man's 

Savage Life. | Land. 

By BRET HARTE. 



Californinn Stories. 
Gabriel Conroy. 
Luck of Roaring Camp. 
An Heiress of Red Dog. 



'lip. | Marnia 

A Phyllis ofthe Sierra: 
A Waif of Che Plains. 
Ward of Golden Gate. 



By ROBERT BUCHANAN. 



Shadow of the Sword. 
A Child of Nature. 
God and the Man. 
Love Me for Ever. 
Foxglove Manor. 
The Master ofthe Mine. 
Annan Water. 



Matt. 



The Martyrdom of Ma- 
deline. 
The New Abelard. 
The Heir of Linne. 
Woman and the Mi 
Rachel Dene. | 
Lady Kilpatrick. 

BUCHANAN and MURRAY.-The Charlatan. 
By HALL CAINE. 

A Son of Hagar. | Vhe Deemster 

The Shadow of a Crime. 



By HAYDEN CARRUTH. 

The Adventures of Jones. 
By AUSTIN CLARE.-For the Lovs of a Lass. 

By Mrs. ARCHER CLIYE. 
Paul Ferroll. | Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife. 

By MACLAREN COBBAN. 
The Cure 01 Souls. | The Red Sultan. 

-The Bar S 



By C. ALLSTON COLLINS 

By MORT. and FRANCES COLLINS. 

Sweet Anne Page. < Sweet and Twenty. 

Transmigration ! The Village Comedy. 

From Midnight to Mid- | You Play Me False 

night. Blacksmith and Schola 

A Fight witn Fortune. I Frances. 

By WILKIE COLLINS. 
Armadale. | A'ter Dark, The Woman in White. 
No Name I Antonma. t The Moonstone. 
Basil. | Hide and Seel 
The Dead Secret. 



;ter 



Queen ol Hearts. 
Miss or Mrs.': 
The New Magdalen. 
The Frozen l.eep. 
The Law and the Lady. 
The Two Destinies. 
The Haunted Hotel, 
A Rogue s Liie. 
My Miscellanies. 



Man and W 
Poor Mbs F nch. 
The Fallen Le ives 
Jezebel's Daughter 
The Black Rooe. 
Heart and Science. 
' I say No ! ' 
The Evil Genius. 
Little Novels. 
Legacy of Cain. 
blind Love. 



Pretty Mi's Nevilie. 
D.ana Barritiqtou. 
A Bird of Passage. 
Proper Pride | • To Let 
A Family Likeness. 
A Third Person. 



Tragedies. | Mr. Je 

Two Masters. 
The Real Lady Hilda. 
Married or Single! 
I Interference. 



By ALPHONSE DAUDET. 

The Evangelist ; or, Port Salvation. 

By JAMES DE MILLE A Strange Manuscri 

By DICK DONOYAN. 



The Man-H 
Tracked and Taken. 
Cant; ht at Last! 
Who Poisoned Hetty 
Duncan? | Wanted! 
Man irom Manchester. 
A Detective s Triumphs. 
Mystery Jamaica Terrace. 



hael Danevitch. 
In the Grip ol tut I .a 
From Information 

ceived. 
Tracked to Doom 
Link by Link. 
Suspicion Aroused. 
Riddles Read. 



By Mrs. ANNIE EDWARDES. 

A Point of Honour. | Archie Loicll. 

By EDWARD EGGLESTON.-Roxy. 
By G. MANYILLE FENN. 

The New Mistress. I The Tiger Lily. 

Witness to the Deed. | The White Virgin. 

By PERCY FITZGERALD. 

Rella Donna. | Fatal Zero. I Seventy - five Ero<i 

Never Forgotten. | Polly. Street 

Second Mrs. Tillotson. [ The Lady of Brantoux 

By PERCY FITZGERALD and o'.hers 

Strange Secret-,. 

By R. E. FRANC1LLON. 
Olympia. | King or Knave? 

line by One. I Romances of the Law. 

A Keal Queen. Ropes of Sand. 

(Jueen Cophetua. | A Dog and his Shadoi 

By HAROLD FREDERIC. 
Seth's Brother's Wife. | The Lawton Girl. 

Prefaced by Sir BARTLE FRERE. 

Pandurang Hari. 
By CHARLES GIBBON. 

Robin Gray In Honour Bound. 

Fancy Free. Flower of the Forest. 

For Lack of Gold. The Braes of Yarrow, 

what will the World Say ? The Golden Shalt. 
In Love olid War. Of High Degree. 

F.>r t>e King By Mead and Stream. 

In Pastures Green. Loving a Dream. 

( )ueen ol ihe Meadow. A Hard Knot. 

A Heart's Problem. Heart's Delight. 

The Dead Heart. Blood Money. 

By WILLIAM GILBERT.-Jaines Duke 
By ERNEST GLANYILLE. 
The Lost Heiress. | The Fossicker. 

A Fair Colonist. 
ANDREW HALLIDAY.-Every-day Pape 

By THOMAS HARDY. 
I'nder the Greenwood Tree. 

By JULIAN HAWTHORNE 
Ellice Quentin. | Garth. Love— or a Name 
Fortune's Fool. David Poindexter s 

Miss Cadogna. | Dust. appearance. [Cam 

Beatrix Randolph. The Spectre of 

Ey Sir ARTHUR HELPS.— Ivan de Bin 
By G. A. HEHTY.— Rujub the Jm-gler. 
By HEADON HILL.-Zambra the Detecti 
By JOHN HILL.— Treason-Felony. 
By Mrs. HUNGERFORD. 
A Maiden all Forlorn. | Lady Verners Flight, 
n Durance Vile. The Red-House Myst 

Marvel. | Peter's Wife. The Three Graces. 
A Mental Struggle. Unsatisfactory Lover. 

A Modem Circe. Lady Patty. I NoraCr. 

April's Lady. ■ Processor s 1 . 



Ill ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C. 



3i 



Two-Shilling Novels— co?iti?iued. 
By Mrs. CASHEL HOEY.- The Lover's Creed. 
Mrs. GEORGE HOOPER.— The House of Raby. 
By Mrs. ALFRED HUNT. 

That Other Person. | The Leaden Casket. 

Self-Condemned. 



By R. ASHE KING. 

A Drawn Game. [Green.' I Passion's Slave. 
' The Wearing of the | Beli Barry. 



By JOHN LEYS.-The Lindsays. 
By E. LYNN LINTON. 



Patricia Kemball. 
The World Well Lost 
Under which Lord? 
Paston Carew. 
' My Love ! ' | lone. 
With a Silken Thread, 



The Atonement of Learn 

Dundas. 
Rebel of the Family. 
Sowing the Wind. 
The One Too Many. 
Dulcie Everton. 



By HENRY W. LUCY.-Gideon Fleyce, 
By JUSTIN MCCARTHY. 

Dear Lady Disdain. 



Waterdale Neighbours. 
My Enemy's Daughter. 
A Fair Saxon. | Camiola. 
Linley Rochford. 
Miss Misanthrope. 



Donna Quixote. 

Maid of Athens. 

The Comet of a Season. 

The Dictator. 

Red Diamonds. 

The Riddle Ring. 



By HUGH MACCOLL. 

Mr. Stranger's Sealed Packet. 

GEORGE MACDONALD.— Heather and Snow. 

By AGNES MACDONELL.-Quaker Cousins. 

By W. H. MALLOCK.— The New Republic. 

By BRANDER MATTHEWS. 

A Secret of the Sea. 

By L. T. MEADE A Soldier of Fortune. 

By LEONARD MERRICK. 

The Man who was Good. 

By Mrs. MOLESWOHT3. 

Hathercourt Rectory. 

By J. E. MUDDOCK. 

Dead Man's Secret. | From Bosom of the Deep. 

Stories Weird and Wonderful. 

By D. CHRISTIE MURRAY. 



A Bit of Human Nature. 
First Person Singular. 
Bob Martin's Little Girl. 
Time's Revenges. 
A Wasted Crime, 
In Direst Peril. 
Mount Despair. 
A Capful o' Nails. 



A Model Father. 

Joseph's Coat. 

Coals of Fire. 

Val Strange. 1 Hearts. 

Old Blazer's Hero. 

The Way of the World. 

Cynic Fortune. 

A Life's Atonement. 

By the Gate of the Sea 

By MURRAY and HERMAN. 

One Traveller Returns. I Th» Bishops' Bible. 

Paul Jones's Aiias. 

By HUME NISBET. 

Bail Up !' I Dr. Bernard St. Vincent. 

By W. E. NORRIS. 

Saint Ann's. | Billy Bellew. 

By GEORGES OHNET. 

Dr. Rameau. | A Weird Gift. 

A Last Love. 

By Mrs. OLIPHANT. 

Whiteladies. I The Greatest Heiress in 

The Primrose Path. I England. 



By OUIDA. 



Held in Bondage. 
Strathmore. I Chandos. 
Idalia. I Tricotrin. 

Under Two Flags. 
Cecil Castlemaine's Gage. 
Puck. I PascareL 

Folle-Farine. 
A Dog of Flanders. 
Signa. { Ariadne. 

Princess Napraxine. 
In a Winter City. 
Friendship. 



Two Little Wooden Shoes 
Moths. I Bimbi. 

Pipistrello 

A Village Commune. 
Wanda. I Othmar. 

Frescoes. | Guilderoy. 
In Maremma. 
Ruffino. | Syrlin. 
Santa Barbara. 
Two Offenders. 
Ouida's Wisdom, Wit, 
and Pathos 



By MARGARET AGNES PAUL. 

Gentle and Simple. 

By JAMES PAYN. 



Bentinck's Tutor. 

Murphy's Master. 

A County Family. 

At Her Mercy. | Kit. 

Cecil's Tryst. | Halves. 

The ClyffardsofClvffe. 

The Foster Brothers. 

Found Dead. 

The Best of Husbands. 

Walters Word. 

Fallen Fortunes. 

Humorous Stories. 

£200 Reward. 

A Marine Residence. 

MirkAbbey | HighSpirits 

Under One Root. 

Carlyon's Year. 

For Cash Only. 

The Canons Ward. 

The Talk of the Town. 

Holiday Tasks, 



A Perfect Treasure. 
What He Cost Her. 
A Confidential Agent. 
Glow-worm Tales. 
The Burnt Million. 
Sunny Stories. 
Lost Sir Massingberd. 
A Woman's Vengeance. 
The Family Scapegrace. 
Gwendoline's Harvest. 
Like Father, Like Son. 
Married Beneath Him. 
Not Wooed, but Won. 
Less Black than We're 

Painted. | By Proxy. 
Some Private Views. 
A Grape from a Thorn. 
The Mystery of Mir- 

bridge. | From Exile. 
The Word and the Will. 
A Prince of the Blood. 



A Trying Patient. 

By Mrs. CAMPBELL PRAED. 

The Romance of a Station I Christina Chard. 
Outlaw and Lawmaker. | Mrs. Tregaskiss 
The Soul of Countess Adrian. 



By CHARLES READE. 



It is Never Too Late to 

Mend. | The Jilt. 
Christie Johnstone. 
The Double Marriage. 
Put Yourself in His Place. 
Love L'ttle, Love Long. 
Cloister and the Hearth. 
Course of True Love. 
Autobiography of a Thief. 
A Terrible Temptation. 



Foul Play. | Hard Cash. 

The Wandering Heir. 

Singlelieart, Doubleface. 

Good Stor es of Man, &c. 

Peg Woffington. 

Griffith Gaunt. 

A Perilous Secret. 

A Simpleton. 

Readiana. 

A Woman-Hater. 



By Mrs J H. RIDDELL. 



The Uniubabited House. 
The Mystery in Palace 

Gardens. 
Idle Tales. 



Weird Stories. 
Fairy Water. 
Her Mother's Darling. 
The Prince of Wales s 
Garden Party. 

By F. W. ROBINSON. 

Women are Strange. | The Woman in the Dark. 

The Hands of Justice. 

By W. CLARK RUSSELL 



Round the Galley Fire, 
On the Fo'k'sle Head. 
In the Middle Watch 
A Voyage to the Cape. 
Book for the Hammock. 
The Mystery of the 

'Ocean Star.' 
Romance Jennv Harlowe. 
An Ocean Tragedy. 



Shipmate Louise. 
Alone on Wide Wide Sea. 
Good Ship 'Mohock.' 
The Phantom Death. 
Is He the Man? 
Heart of Oak. 
The Convict Ship. 
The Tale of the Ten. 
The Last Entry. 



By GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA. 

Gaslight and Daylight. 

By GEORGE R. SIMS. 



The Ring o' Bells. 
Mary lane's Memoirs 
Mary Jane Married. 
Tales of To-day. 
Dramas of Li e. 
Tinkietop's Crime. 



Zeph. I My Two Wives. 
Memo'rs of a Landlady. 
Scenes from the Show 
Ten Commandments. 
Dagonet Abroad. 
Rogues and Vagabonds. 



ARTHUR SKETCHLEY.— A Match in the Dark. 

By R. A. STERNDALE.-The Afghan Knife. 

By 



The Mysterie 

Dyke. 
The Golden Hoop. 
Hoodwinked. 
By Devious Ways. 



:. W. SPEIGHT. 

Heron I Back to Life. 

1 The Loudwater Tragedy, 

I Burgo's Romance. 

I Quittance in Full 

I A Husband from the Sea. 



CHATTO & WINDUS, PUBLISHERS. 



Two-Shilling Novels— continued- 

By ALAN ST. AUBYN. 
A fellow 01 Trinity. I Orcliard Dain.rel. 

The Junior Dean. In tlie Face of tne World. 

Master of St Hen* diet's. | The Tremlclt Diamonds. 
To His Own Ma-tcr. 
By R. LOUIS STEVENSON. 
New Arabian Ni^hu. 

By ROBERT SURTEES.-HanrTey Cross. 



By ANTHONY TEOLLOPE. 
Trui Kroliiuann. The Land-Leaguers. 

Marion Fay, The American Senator. 

Kept in the Dark. Scarborough's Fan ily. 

Tiie Way We Live Now. i, olden Lion of Granpere. 



Like S 



By F. ELEANOR TROLLOPS. 
iii the Sea. \ Anne Kamess. 
Mabel's Progress. 



By HARK TWAIN. 

A Tramp Abr ad j Huckleberry Finn. 

Prince and the Pauper. Tom Sawyer. 
Yankee at Court Stolen White Elephant. 

Pleasure Trip on Conti-I Life on the Mississippi. 
The Gilded Age. [nert. \ £1,000,000 Bank-Nole. 

Sketches. 

By C. C.FRASER-TYTLER.-MistressJudith. 

By SARAH TYTLER. 



rSri<!e'sP'-ss. | Lady Bell 
Buried Diamonds. 
Sr. Mungo's City. 
Noblesse Oblige. 



The Huguenot Family. 
The Blackball Ghosts. 
What She Came Through. 
Beauty and the Beast. 



Disappeared. 

Dy ALLEN UPWARD.-Oueen against Owen. 

By Y/M. WEST ALL.— Trust-Money. 

By Mrs. WILLI AMSON.-A Chill u id 1 

By JOHN STRANGE WINTER. 

Regimental Legends 

By H. F. WOOD. 
The Passenger from Scot- I The Englishman of the 
land Yard. I Rue Cain. 

By MARG. WYNMAN.-My Flirtations. 



NEW SERIES OF TWO-SHILLING NOVELS. 



Hound in picture cloth, Hat backs 
By EDWIN LESTER ARNOLD 

The Constable of St. Nil hoi. 1,. 



Ey Sir WALTER BESANT. 
St. [Catherine's by Tower. | Tne tvobel Queen. 

By H. BINDLOSS.-Amshes Ju-ju. 

By McD. BODKIN. K.C. 
Dura Myrl, the Lady Detective. 



Man from Mane!; 
Wanted I 

I lark I '.•.■.Is 
Tales of Tu 



By DICK DONOVAN. 



1 he Man-Hunter. 

The Mystery of Jamaica 

Terrace. 
Vincent Trill, Detective. 



3y C. M. FENN.— A Crimson Crime. 
Ey PAUL CAULOT.-The v,.,l Shirts. 
By Major ARTHUR CRIFFUHB. 

No. 9) : and Blue Blood. 
By OWEN HULL.- Track oi a Storm. 

By BRET HARTE. 

I nek Roaring Camp, Arc. I CoL Starbottle's Client. 
In a Hoiiow 01 the Hill . Protegee ol Jack Ha,..hn': 
Sappho 01 Green Springs. | Sal.y Dows. 

By HEADON KILL.-Zambra, the Detective. 



By EDMUND MITCHELL. '—■* 
Plotters of Paris. | The Temple of Death 

Towards the Eternal Snows. 

By BERTRAM MITFORD. 

The Luck ol Gerard Ridgeley. | The Kings Assegai. 

By J. E. MUDDOCK. 

Maid Marian and Robin Hood. 

By CHRISTIE MURRAY.-HisUwn Ghost. 

By OUTDA. 

Svrlin. I The Water-: of Edera. 

Ey JAS. PAYN.— Mortem Dick Whittington. 

By DORA RUSSELL. 

A Country Sweetheart | The Dri't of Fate. 

By GEORGE R. SIMS. 

In London's Heart. I Rogues and Vagabonds 

By FRANK STOCKTON. 

The Youne Master of Hys.m HalL 

By SUNDOWNER.— Tale of the Serpent. 

By SARAH TYTLER.— Citoyenne Jacqueline. 

ALLEN 1'PWARD Oueen against Owen. 

Bv F. WARDEN. Joan, the Curate 

BVRON WEBBER. Sport and Spangle?. ' 

By JOHN STRANGE WINTER. 

Cavalry I ife ; and Regimental Legends. 

By LOUIS ZANGWILL. 

A Nincteenth-Centrny Miracle. 



SIXPENNY COPYRIGHT NOVELS. 



By GRANT ALLEN.-Ti.e Tents of Shem. 

By FnANK BARHSTT, - I etiere.t for Life. 

By ARNOLD BENNETT. 

The Grand Babylon llot-I 
Ey W ALTERBi-SANT. 
Children ol Glbeon All Sorts am! Conditionsof 

F01 Faith and Freedom. Men. 

Dorothy Tester. I The Orange Girl. 

By 8ESANT and RACE. 
The Golden butterfly. I Ready-Mo ey Mortiboy 

The Monks ol fhrleipa The Chaplain of the rluet 

By P.C3ERT BUCHANAN. 
The shadow ot the Sword | God and tne Man. 
Foxglove Mai or. 
By S. BAitiMi-uOULD. 
Red Spider. | E\e 

By HALL CAIHE. 
A Son of Hagar | The Deemster. 

The Shadow ol a Cr;me 
By WILKIE COLLINS. 
Amadale. I No Name. I Man and Wife. 
The Moonstone. The De..d Secret 

Tne Woman in White. | The New Magdalen. 

By B. M. CROKER. 

Diana Parringtou I Pietty Miss Neville. 

A Bird of Passage. | Beyond the Pale. 

A Fam lv Lifceuess. 

Ey THOMAS HARDY. 

I uder the Greenwood 1 ree. 

By E. LEPELLETlEi*.- Madame SansGene. 

By E.LYnll LINTON.- Patricia KerobaU. 



By BERTRAM MITFORD.-The Gun-Runner. 

By D. CHRISTIE MURRAY.-Josephs Coat. 

By HUME NISBET. Kail Up 

By OUIDA. 

Pu^k. I Moths I Strathmore. | Tricotria. 

Held in Bondage. | Under Two Flags. | Chan'Jos. 

The MaS-arenes. | Friendship. | Ariadne. 

Two Little Wooden Shoes. 

By JAMES PAYN. 

Walter's Word. | Lost sir Massingberd. 

By CHARLES READE. 



Griffith Gaunt. 

Foul Play. | Hard Cash. 

p. g Woffington ; and 

Christie Johnstone. 
A'lerrible temptation. 



Put Yourself in His Place. 
The Cloister ana the 

Hearth. 
Never Too Late to Mend. 
The Double Marriage 



Love Me Little, Love Me Long. 

By W. CLARK RUSSELL.-The Convict Ship. 

3y GEORGE R. SIMS.— Mary Jane's Memoirs. 

By ROBERT LOUIS STEYENSOol. 

New Arabian Nights 

By WILLIAM WEST/ALL. 

With the Red £agle. 

By EMILE ZOLA. 

The Downfall | The Dram-Shop. I Money 
Lourdes. Rome. 1 Paris. 

By JUSTIN MCCARTHY. 

A Short History of Our Own Times. 



rjNWIN Brothers, Ltd., Printers, 27, Pilgrim Street, Ludgate Hill, London, EC. 



AP 

c 



Date Due 



. 



1 



r ~ 



' 



-jEF 



2*^^ 










hi 



823*69 M255 ■.. 35270 



" 



