The Nature of Poetry
Author: Dobell, Sydney.
Publication info: xviii, [1], 339 p., [1]. London: Smith, Elder, & Co, 1876.

The Nature of Poetry
[Page ]
LECTURE ON THE ‘NATURE OF POETRY’. Delivered in the Queen Street Hall, Edinburgh, April 8, 1857. The temper in which we perceive a fact to be accounted for is very different from that in which we construct a theory to explain it.
Looking at this Book, for instance, I may assert with some confidence that I see such and such a shape and colour; but I should speak in a different tone if I had to treat of the cause of colour or to answer the old vexed questions of form and substance. So I may have the greatest certainly that such and such works of a great Poet are Poems; but those of you who have the deepest intimacy with those works, and have gone nearest to the hidden qualities which make them what they are, will understand most thoroughly in how different a mood I shall enter this evening upon an enquiry as to the Nature of Poetry.
I would meet on the threshold of the subject some
[Page 4]
objections that may arise in the course of what I have to say. Those of you who are already well exercised in such enquiries may perhaps complain that I have not compressed into my space as much detail as it might have held, and that throughout I have not dealt so much with the metaphysics of the question as was due to my audience.
I would answer to the first objection that as this is not an essay but a lecture, some repetitions may occasionally be necessary to keep up an easy continuity of Thought; and to the second that I have intentionally avoided what is commonly called metaphysics because as I have to-night, as far as regards the mind, to do more with phenomena than essences—with the quomodo than the cur sit —I wish to keep my subject as clear as possible from all unnecessary controversies.
As Poetry is a product of mental functions I have to deal with those functions; but I am concerned rather with the science of their activity, on which we can all agree, than with the philosophy of it, on which each of us should probably differ. I have therefore carefully abstained from the use of such words as—implying more than is needful for my purpose—raise unnecessary questions in the hearer, questions of the highest interest in themselves, but not vital to what we are about to consider.
[Page 5]
Lastly, and most emphatically, I would ask of you all that if in some portions of my remarks I appear to claim more for the character of the Poet than Biography will justify, you will be good enough to suspend your judgements till you arrive at that part of my theory in which I endeavour to reconcile the Poet in the exercise of his vocation with the same Man—often as we know a very erring miserable man—under the ordinary circumstances of Life. With this brief preface I proceed at once to examine the Nature of Poetry.
In one of the books attributed to Aristotle we are told that artist should follow Zeuxis. You may remember that this great artist having promised to paint the Greeks an Helen, demanded to study from all the most beautiful women in Greece; and choosing from each the beauty wherein she excelled, combined their charms into a total perfection more beautiful than any. This consummate whole would be thenceforth the standard of female form; as a woman was more or less beautiful she would more or less resemble this incarnate Beauty, and for every portion of a female figure there would be one infallible criterion. If it could congruously make part of this perfect whole, it must be held perfect; and if it would be incongruous with that faultless shape, it must be considered in the same degree failing of perfection.
[Page 6]
This gives us a tolerable notion of the judgment by ideals—so called of course not because the standard cannot really exist, but because this real perfection if truly built up of separately perfect parts may be supposed to agree as a whole with what Plato has called the idea — or that immaterial model in the Divine Mind after which each of God's works is created.
It is only by this judgment from ideals that we can, in anything, judge at once largely and accurately. In every reality there are, because it is imperfect, things which are not accounted for by its own individual instance, things inadequate and superadequate, questions without answers, and answers without questions. It is only in the Ideal Model that Perfection justifies itself, and the insoluble problems of each imperfect copy of it uncoil and join in beautiful and harmonious solution. It is only by attaining a just idea of the perfect Man that we can understand the World-old conflict concerning such questions as ‘what is Truth,’ ‘what is Goodness,’ ‘what is Beauty.’ It is only by associating such ideal men into the ideal of human society that one can graduate all the opposing theories of morality and politics, and see all their wrongs and contradictions conterminating in a central Right and Truth.
Nay, it is only by recognising this unattained ideal , and
[Page 7]
the distance from it of our highest real , that we understand the ethical office of Religion and demonstrate the moral necessity of Revelation itself. My answer, therefore, to our question of to-night ‘what is Poetry?’ is this: Poetry is whatever can congruously form part of a Poem: Perfect Poetry is whatever can congruously form part of a Perfect Poem. Our real business is therefore to enquire ‘What is a Perfect Poem?’
Now since, for obvious reasons, we cannot literally imitate Zeuxis and combine the perfect portions of imperfect Poems into something from which we might deduce the laws of a perfect whole, we must carry the enquiry a step further back. I shall do so by laying down a postulate which I shall ask you to take awhile for granted, and I shall then, in the first part of this lecture, work out an hypothesis from this premiss: and in the second part of the lecture I shall adduce examples of existing poetry, and proceed to justify my hypothesis by showing that it explains the phenomena and is not inconsistent with established truths. In reply then to the question what is a Perfect Poem I answer a perfect Poem is the perfect expression of a Perfect Human Mind . Not only an expression, but a perfect expression, of not only a Mind, but a human Mind, and not only a human Mind, but a perfect human Mind. To show, by careful generalizations from
[Page 8]
the facts of History and Biography, the true character of a perfect human Mind, would in itself be a task not for one lecture but a series of lectures; and I shall therefore content myself to-night with an authority which, while higher than any human induction, is, as I need not tell such an audience as this—the very short-hand and brief of all Philosophies, and assume that ‘in the Image of God made He man.’ To discover the characteristic features of the Image we must therefore enquire the Attributes of the Original.
Now the manifestations by which the Supreme is best known to us are those of to Know, to Love, and to Make. And since a human mind can have no notion of the creation of Something out of Nothing, to Make, so far as we are concerned, must be understood as to Order. Order being that collocation of things which to the Divine Mind seems fit: and which we humanly express when we say that Order is a certain position of things with regard to each other regulated by the nature of the things: which state of position we call relation because each of the posited things refers the mind to the other.
An ideal Man, therefore, must by virtue of his Image-ship be a Knower, a Lover, and a Maker. But since he is Image and not Original, created and not Creator, he must be something besides.
[Page 9]
There must be that in him which expresses the relation of the thing made to the Maker.
Now that which in the less recognizes the greater, in the vassal acknowledges the Suzerain, the Saxons termed Worthschipe , from Worth , the residence of a Manorial Lord. Hence (and I must beg you to bear in mind the wide interpretation of the words) our verb ‘to Worship.’ The Ideal Man must, then, be a Worshipper.
The primary attributes of a perfect human Mind are, therefore, to Know, to Love, to Worship and to Order.
‘To Know,’ implies things that can be known. Existing in midst of those things, the ideal mind is roused to activity by them with the following results.
The things which it knows are true. The things which it loves are Beautiful. The things which it worships are sublime. The things which it ‘makes’ are ordered: order being that position of things regarding each other with which an ideal mind is pleased.
The ideal mind identifies Beauty and Sublimity as the magnetic needle identifies the North. The North is not the North because the needle points to it: but meanwhile it is sufficient for us to know that we can depend upon the needle.
The ideal mind receives Truth as a perfect eye
[Page 10]
receives form and colour. What relation form and colour bear to the Absolute we cannot tell: it is sufficient that they are Truths to Beings organized as we are.
The ideal mind weaves order as a loom weaves a fabric. There is a higher reason why the fabric is what it is than the mechanism of the loom; yet that lower reason is sufficient for practical purposes—and would perhaps be more useful than the higher if—as in the case of Man explaining Man—one loom had to account for the products of the other. And here let us again notice the importance of dealing with ideals when we arrive at the large simplicities of Nature. There can be no doubt that Love is the test of the Beautiful; but if I had said the Beautiful is what a human being loves, a thousand facts would rise to contradict me. But though many minds love what is not beautiful, we all must notice that in proportion as a mind is high in the scale of humanity the objects of its Love are certain to graduate towards Beauty.
There can be no doubt that Worship is the test of the Sublime, though some nations bow down before the horrible and the ugly. But these fetish-worshippers are known to be, in every sense, the lowest form of humanity; and in those nations where the human Nature is in other respects more highly developed we find the objects of reverence more and more sublime.
[Page 11]
There can be no doubt that to make, in the sense of to order, is a power common to the human mind, though the result of its feebler exercise be too often but a complicated confusion—‘non bene junctarum discordia semina rerum.’ But as we rise to stronger characters we find them reducing those ‘discordia semina’ to a partial order or a forced consistency, resulting in systems each complete in itself, even though perhaps mutually irreconcilable. And as we still rise to yet higher minds we find a more and more general harmony and cosmos of thought, because both a clearer perception of separate things as they are and a correcter power of distributing them according to relations.
Thus ascending through the various grades of the real, and perceiving how at every step certain Laws have a wider and directer efficacy, we learn that to understand the full and true operation of those Laws (whose impeded and uncertain results in this our imperfect state perplex and puzzle us) we must rise still higher in the same direction, and look to that perfect type of the Ideal in which alone their action is general, simple, congruous, and infallible. Arriving there we find Love consecrated to the Beautiful, Worship intuitively loyal to the Sublime, Knowledge accepting only the True, and Order spontaneously co-ordinating the Related.
[Page 12]
Here let no one found an objection on the ground of that Christian Charity which we owe to all Men, for on closer examination he will perceive that the true exercise of that universal Love depends on the very principle I have laid down. He who detects those elements of Beauty which exist beneath the ugliness of every sinner is exercising one of the most ennobling privileges of Christianity: but he who loves the faults even of his dearest friend is destroying, by that amiable vice, one of the Divinest safeguards of his own virtue. And let no man take exception to what I have said of Worship from any fear that it infringes on the first Commandment. In the first place I beg such an objector to notice that large significance of the term which I have pointed out when mentioning its derivations; and in the second place it would be easy to show, by applying certain Laws which I shall presently have to indicate, that those material things which we call sublime are but the visible expressions of the Invisible, and that when by the impulse of his reverence the Poet instinctively recognizes the Sublimities of this Universe, he is really but repeating in his own appointed fashion the great saying ‘All Worship be to God alone.’
A perfect mind, then, possesses, in due proportion, every human quality, and is especially characterized by
[Page 13]
the power to love, to worship, to know, and to order. And a perfect Poem is the perfect expression of such a mind.
To express is to carry out. To express a mind is to carry out that mind into some equivalent. And here I must beg you to observe carefully the sense in which I shall have to use this term ‘equivalent,’ because, as will be shown by-and-bye, the peculiar meaning attached to it is important to the whole theory. By an ‘equivalent’ I mean that product of an active mind, which being presented to the same mind when passive, would restore the former state of activity. I say not which being presented to another mind, but ‘which being presented to the same mind.’ For instance, the full verbal expression of a feeling of mine would be such words as if I heard them in a tranquil mind would excite that feeling into the same state of activity.
There is no essential difference in the forms of Poetic expression, but they may be conveniently divided, for our present purpose, into simple and compound.
Simple, as when the state of mind in the Expressor is directly succeeded by some external act, as of speech. As if, feeling Love, I should say, ‘I love.’ Compound, as when the mental activity is directly succeeded by such facts of the imagination as are its equivalents , which
[Page 14]
facts it has to express by such other equivalents as being equivalent to them are thus indirectly equivalent to itself. As if I should express the feeling of Love not by saying ‘I love,’ but by calling up in the imagination some beautiful object which is the equivalent of Love—that is, which would rouse my Love into activity—and finding for that object some equivalent in words—that is, such words as when the object has disappeared from my inward sight would make it reappear.
A compound or indirect expression is therefore a succession of direct expressions, and is, of course, more or less compound according to the number in the series between the original mental activity and the final external act, as of speech, for instance, which is its ultimate outcome. For example, in the illustration I have just given of the indirect expression of Love, the feeling finds its equivalent in the image of something beautiful, and this image finds its equivalent in words. This is the simplest form of compound. But, as we shall see by-and-bye, it may happen that there are no verbal equivalents for that ‘something beautiful’ which is the equivalent of the feeling, and that the ‘something’ must itself be expressed by another and equivalent beautiful image for which there happen to be adequate words. This, which I hope to illustrate presently, is the next form of compound.
[Page 15]
In either case the verbal signs, the words, are the indirect expression of Love; and the compound act will be perfect in proportion to the perfection of each of the simple acts whereof it is composed. It will be seen at a glance that no full utterance of a total human mind is likely to be wholly simple or wholly compound; but as the one or the other predominates, the character of the total expression will be direct or indirect.
In a perfect Poem, therefore, the perfect mind may be said either to utter itself directly in a truthful and orderly expression of Love and Worship , or indirectly in a loving and worshipful expression of ordered Truth . The first may be called Lyrical, the second Epical Poetry; though, as the peculiar forms of each became occasionally adopted for the other, the popular use of these names has lost sight of the original and essential distinctions. I do not mention the Drama among the great separate forms of Poetry, because the Drama is merely an Epic produced under compulsory external conditions that interfere with the natural laws of epical production. Much that I should wish to say on this most interesting of hybrids I am compelled by time and space to omit from the present enquiry.
The two great forms of Poetic expression, then,—the Epical and Lyrical—are governed by the same laws, and
[Page 16]
we will proceed therefore to investigate the one which, more or less, contains the other, and to enquire into the conditions of a Perfect Epic. We have seen that it is a perfect expression of a perfect human mind,—that is, something which being brought into contact with a perfect mind would rouse into action its characteristic and other qualities in due proportion; and that it is an indirect expression—that is, such an equivalent as is not a simple utterance.
We have first, therefore, to find an equivalent not in words but in things for a mind possessing many faculties, of which what are popularly called the feelings are represented by to love and to worship, and the other functions by to know and to order. The problem is not to find an equivalent for either of these functions separately, but to produce a total that shall answer to them all. The faculty to know might perhaps find its equivalent in a chaos of Truths: the faculty to order in an arrangement of them: but to love and to worship exact that those Truths shall be either beautiful or sublime.
But we seek something more than even an orderly arrangement of things true, beautiful, and sublime: for the mind that has to find an equivalent is stated in the premiss to be not only a mind but a human mind. To those conditions, therefore, that are imposed by the
[Page 17]
faculties in which it is the Image of God we must add the conditions by which it is specially marked and limited as Man . And, since it is looking for an equivalent to itself among things other than itself, one primary condition of expression by such an equivalent must be the laws by which the human mind perceives—or the laws of what, to avoid metaphysical disquisitions, I will call the inward eye . And this familiar term is no mere figure of speech, for the body is so much the Poem and homologue of the soul that the laws of the inward eye may be illustrated by those of the outward. The outer eye has to do with the universe of external things; the inner eye has to do with that inner universe of facts which memory has stored and perception supplies, and with such new combinations of these as may take place under the direction of the other functions of the mind.
Now the great law of outward sight is that we perceive but one thing at a time. A combination of things is perceived by rapid discursions of the eye from the object which it principally regards to the surrounding objects, which become accessories to the object of principal attention and are united with it by an act of optical memory. The mental vision obeys the same law. The Truth on which the inward eye is chiefly fixed becomes a solar centre and other truths are apprehended by rapid
[Page 18]
excursions from this central point—to which they become, therefore, accessories; each accessory (in proportion to the attention paid to it) itself the centre of still subordinate excursions. And as the bodily eye in perceiving a cluster of objects will do so more felicitously and perfectly if the object on which it chiefly rests be one of such size and position as to be a favourable centre for excursion, and of such general character as shall not conflict with the impressions of the others, so the mental eye for the perfect exercise of its powers needs that its principal Truths shall be central and generic, and by the—as it were mechanical—conditions of its functions requires for its happiest exercise to move under the direction of order.
Let us notice, for instance, the mode of the outer eye in dealing with facts which the Divine order has already regulated—an organized being. It strikes upon the most important portion, and by rapid unconscious excursions to the subordinate parts brings them into optical relation with the central fact: and in these unconscious excursions, however rapid, the same law prevails, and the members are perceived as wholes with regard to their parts by the same process whereby the total being is perceived as a whole with regard to its members. And it is because in an organized being the Divine order has
[Page 19]
arranged the facts of which it is composed that the eye can more rapidly get a true perception of such a being than of a chaotic mass of the same number of constituents. So with the eye of the mind. It fixes on some fact among the multitude of inner existences—some natural centre of many relations—and relates all referable facts to it by rapid unconscious excursions. In the same manner these subordinate facts are themselves made centres for their own appropriate relations, and the process extends downwards as far as perception goes. The mind is naturally disposed, therefore, to perceive a whole— something made up by the reference of many things to some one principal thing—and the perception will be felicitous and perfect (that is, the mind will use its natural functions with ease and advantage) in proportion as that great Whole and all its constituents are ordered.
I might have reached the same conclusions by a scrupulous analysis of our notion of ‘ order ;’ but as it would demand a closer consequence of thought than the present method, I shall content myself this evening with this argument—and it seems to me a sufficient argument —from analogy.
The hypothesis that a perfect Poem is the expression of a perfect Human Mind conducts us therefore to these primary laws for the construction of an Epic: that it
[Page 20]
must be an ordinated thing: that as to this arrangement it must be that of one subject with that subject's congruous accessories: and that such subject and accessories must be of a nature to satisfy Love (and its modifications) Worship and Knowledge; must be generically True and specifically Beautiful and Sublime. And that the foregoing laws apply not only to the principal subject and its accessories, but to every part of which that whole is made up; i.e. that the Great Poem is an organized aggregation of small Poems; with this difference, that whereas the sine quâ non of the principal Truth in the Poem is its sublimity or beauty the sine quâ non of the principal Truth in the passage is its relationship, near or remote, to the central truth of the Greater Whole.
To which central truth it is related either directly, as in the cardinal portions, or as in the subordinate members —by virtue of its relationship to some other Truth still more nearly related than itself.
But we have said that a Perfect Epic is the perfect expression of a perfect human mind: and though we have now reached some notion of the equivalent of such a mind, we have not reached that of its expression because an expression is a given species of equivalent—an equivalent and something more. To express is, as we
[Page 21]
saw, to carry out . An expression therefore is an equivalent that can exist out of the mind. We have gone so far on our journey outward as to realize for the active faculties of the mind an equivalent in the facts of the imagination; let us take the last stage which crosses the boundaries of the inner and outer worlds and examine the vehicle in which this final carrying out is to take place. The mind may be ‘carried out’ more or less perfectly by bodily movement, by the inflexion and combination of inarticulate sounds, by the design of visible shapes and by the utterance of words. Hence we have Action, Music, Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, and Poetry. Of these methods our subject confines us to the last. It will be perceived that practically that ‘last’ contains all the others, since the Poet by means of words can evoke those others in the imagination of his hearer and really therefore express himself by all the arts at once: but we are now to consider the physical and external means by which he obtains possession of these and all other modes of expression, and must examine the conditions of Poetic human Speech . Those conditions must be, of course, the laws which govern the medium through which sound is produced, the organs by which we produce it, and the mind to which things are to be conveyed by means of it. As to the first, we know that
[Page 22]
sound is the result of undulations of air, and that to the shape of those undulations it is necessary there should be no collision between them. We find therefore succession to be a first condition of verbal sounds, we know that the same condition is that of the organs of utterance, and, as we have already noticed that law of the mind by which it perceives perfectly but one thing at a time, we know that succession is also the condition of perfect mental reception. But succession is the general condition of all verbal utterance, and we are now enquiring concerning a specific form of it—Poetic utterance—and shall expect therefore to discover some specific form of that general condition which shall produce perfect, as distinct from imperfect, utterance. It would be easy to show, and I will by-and-bye proceed to show, that the necessary conditions of such perfect utterance could be deduced from those higher data of the mind from which we have drawn the principles of the Poem to be uttered: but because I wish to demonstrate the thorough humanity of Poetry—that it not only answers to our Divinest faculties but is actually in tune with our material flesh and blood, we will again, if you please, turn to the laws of that body by which the mind receives and conveys sensation. I need only refer you to the science of acoustics to recall the well-known fact that the difference between a mere noise—or an imperfect and indistinct
[Page 23]
auditory sensation—and musical sounds—or a perfect and distinct sensation—depends on the degree to which the vibrations of air obey the laws of oscillation and interference; those laws that result in undulation and provide that in a perfect sound the vibrations must recur after regular intervals of time. Whether in one of the original vibrations that make up the note,—where the interval may be but the 24,000th part of a second—or in the notes themselves,—between which the intervals are so much longer—the law is the same that the succession must have definite relations to a certain beaten time. (I need only refer you to the science of Harmony for illustrations of this familiar position.)
Now a succession of such a kind is a rhythmic succession. And since such a succession is the most perfect manner of propagating sound through air, and receiving it from air, it must also be the most perfect manner of communicating it to air. And since our organs are all constituted with special aptitude for their peculiar tasks, a rhythmic succession must be what it is best for the mouth to produce and the ear to receive.
Nay I think we might go further: for remembering those beautiful experiments by which Chladni 1 Savart,
[Page 24]
and Wheatstone have shown to what a wonderful extent vibrations are propagated through matter, and when once set in motion are repeated by sympathetic and other action in innumerable reflexes, each bearing computable relations to the original impulse; remembering, too, that the laws of oscillation and interference are so wide as to extend from Chladni's grains of sand to Sun, Moon, and stars, and remembering that the two great sources of bodily sensation—sound and light—are already shown to be results of undulations that obey these laws, we shall be prepared, I think, to expect in the human body a general submission to principles to which it shows itself amenable in the external organs of hearing and seeing.
And turning to that body what do we find to confirm that expectation?
One of the most notable and well-known facts regarding that body is that its vitality depends upon the motion of an organ, the heart, whose motion is, in health, peculiar for its most accurate proportions. The interval of time between every healthy heart-throb is precisely equal to that of the throb itself. Physiology has already shown that other recognisable organic motions of the body—for instance, the action of the lungs—bear definite
[Page 25]
relations to this motion of the heart: and in all modesty I would suggest to the great Physiologists here present whether there be not reason to infer that every portion of the incessant vital action of the system is keeping measured dance to that great beater of time ? If so it follows that any thoroughly congruous and felicitous outcome of functions so proportional in their action must be itself proportional, and that in so far as anything which those functions are called on to take up and convey is proportional it will be easily and harmoniously accepted. Perfect utterance, therefore, whether as a thing to be performed or as a thing to be received by those functions, must occur in a succession bearing proportional relations to a time marked by a series of equal intervals, that is, to the time beaten by a healthy heart.
Now rhythm, or musical time, is, as we all know, a succession of this nature, and we arrive therefore at the second condition of poetic utterance, that it shall be a rhythmic succession . And thus from the lower data— those of the body—we have reached the same condition for the physical utterance which from the higher data— of the mind—we have before deduced as one of the primary conditions of the ideal Poem to be uttered— Proportion . And by applying to this proportioned succession of utterance those same conditions concerning
[Page 26]
Truth, Beauty, Sublimity, and Relationship, which ordinate the character and proportions of the Poem , we complete our definition of the perfect Epic as the expression of a perfect human mind by means of one beautiful or sublime truth, and other essentially related truths, arranged according to their essential relationship, in a proportioned succession of words true and congruous, and therefore sublime or beautiful . A perfect Poem would be therefore a miniature of the Creation not in its matter but its principles; the Kosmos not of God but Man; the humanization of abstract Truth; the soul, as it were, become concrete; the word of Man made flesh and dwelling amongst us; and being the expression of the highest state to which the whole human mind can attain on Earth it would be limited to no era or nation but would be accepted and understood in its fullness whenever, at however vast an interval of history, another human mind anywhere attained the same elevation, and less and less partially and obscurely as each of us in the development of our best qualities rose nearer to the hopeless pinnacle of that supreme immaculate height.
Having ascertained the principles of a Perfect Poem we may safely lay down of Poems that they are right in so far as they consist with this type and wrong in so far as they recede from it: and of poetry that it is excellent
[Page 27]
in so far as it could form part of such perfect Poem and imperfect in so far as it is incongruous therewith.
Before proceeding to a closer investigation of some of the separate parts of which Poetry—perfect or imperfect —is composed, two questions naturally present themselves which it will be well to answer here where they arise. The one is ‘if a perfect Poem be the outcome of a perfect mind what chance is there of our ever having such a Poem?’
The other ‘how is it that men who have written unquestionable poetry have been as men so very far from perfection?’
The answer to these questions brings us, I believe, to the secret of all great Poems and of some of the most perplexing problems of Poetry. There are among men an order of minds gifted with the power of—I am of course using the word with no reference to its Scriptural meaning—transfiguration.
We are familiar with an inferior form of the gift in the bodily transformation of which some men are capable, so as to assume, as it were, the features and gait of another: and we see a subordinate manifestation of the gift itself in the case of the great Actor, and a diseased and involuntary exhibition of its phenomena in the hallucinations of the Lunatic.
[Page 28]
The higher forms of this gift enable the possessor to re-construct (so to speak) his whole character into that of some other mind.
In such persons the process is instinctive, and as the Actor cannot tell you by what laws he reproduces the face and manner of his hero, neither can he who has in the highest form the gift whereof we speak explain the process of its action.
A single look often suffices to give the actor his bodily cue: a word, a thought, a feeling may be sufficient for the mental transformation of the Poet. In this transformation the proportionate activity of his various qualities is so much altered that the proportion of the inherent qualities themselves seems, for the time being, changed: attributes that were large and notable become insignificant, and those that were in comparative abeyance during ordinary life arise into signal and masterful exercise. The possession of this gift does not make a man a Poet, but I think no imperfect Man can be a great Poet without possessing it. When possessed by one otherwise fitted to be a Poet it has two principal modes of manifestation. The one—and primary—is that at any beautiful or sublime influence it transfigures the mind towards Perfection—approaching the perfect state in proportion to its own power in the given mind and the
[Page 29]
nature of the mental materials on which it has to work: —in this state the Poem is designed. The second is that in representing the human characters of the Poem it transfigures the mind into those characters for the time being—and by a succession of such states the characterization of the Poem is executed. The amount of completeness in this second transfiguration makes one difference between the Epic and the Drama.
The Epic being like some Dramatic story told by a great Tragedian wherein his successive but partial impersonations of the different characters meet in the permanent unity of himself, the one narrator; and the Drama the action of the same story enacted by him encostume , without the narrative, and with no central figure of himself in which the various dissimilar personifications might unite and cohere. A Poet has therefore a world—the world of imagined facts—of infinite possible variety, and an inexhaustible stock of men and women in the transmutable substance of his own character: and by the peculiarity of his nature the environments of this imaginary world affect him as actual circumstances affect ordinary men, and he lives, for a time, in these men and women as naturally as in his own personality. Out of this world and from these men and women he has to select and construct his Poem. The primary character
[Page 30]
of the individual Poet and the degree to which he possesses the transfiguring power will determine the character of the Poem and regulate its approach to perfection. Where Love predominates the Lyric will be its expression in modes of predominating Beauty, and in the Epic the main subject will be Beautiful: where Worship the Lyric will be reverent and sublime and the Epic will take a subject of awe or terror: and in proportion to the sense of truth and relation the materials of the Poem will be more or less just and the ordination of it more or less perfect. In the highest type of Poet the Lyric will be the expression of combined Love and Reverence, and the subject chosen for the Epic will be at once Beautiful and Sublime.
Having thus come down from the heights of that perfect Ideal which we are not likely to see realized, to those regions of the possible which human poets may hope to climb, and to the topmost ledges of which they have now and then ascended, let us look, in the light of the general principles I have been endeavouring to set forth, more minutely at some of the peculiarities of all poetic expression. We have seen that as a Poem is the expression of a Poet's mind, every portion of a Poem, from the Epic to the single passage, is the result of the same principles, almost as we see in the
[Page 31]
beautiful science of crystallography that the whole crystal is but a larger atom. Let us take one of the poetic atoms for analysis. We shall be met at the onset by the question ‘how if the whole Poem be but an equivalent to the Poet's mind, can the single passage be an equivalent to the same characteristics?’
This is readily explained by an inward glance at the manner of our mental activities.
Take for instance our whole power to love.
We shall find the total Love of which we are capable to be like the Ocean, which though it be one water yet by meeting and incalculably crossing forces—invariable sway of the rolling globe, variable beat of all manner of winds, Sun-stroke, and Moon-stroke, actions, reactions, and interactions, multiplied past mortal skill, of waves, tides, shores, promontories, reefs, and rivers,—is roused into innumerable apparitions of the same substance, each having the form of separation without the power thereof, each diverse as to its momentary manifestation but indifferent as to its permanent nature, and holding, for its own space and season, the same shapeless, motionless, colourless, general element in a special moving, figured, coloured individuality. Now these billows, ripples, flakes and drops of a great general feeling or other attribute have, when they can be expressed at all, each for
[Page 32]
itself correlatives in the external world, and by the serial expression of this temporary personœ the great flood finds, as it were, its narrow way by the straits of successional utterance. And thus, though no single fact of the imagination may be able, in the words of our great Poet, to ‘take up the whole of Love and utter it,’ the Poet, through his ordinating power, creates by the ordered assemblage of forms individually beautiful, an organized whole of Beauty sufficient for the Whole of Love, and corresponding in its parts to the vibrations of its successional activity. What is true in the case of Love, has analogous truth in the activity of the other mental powers.
Let us therefore out of that organized imaginative Whole which the Poet has produced take any one of the complete facts of Imagination whereof it is made up, and examine its constituents. Under the simplest conditions of expression, the expressed fact must consist of itself and the words that express it. As we have seen that it must itself be either beautiful or sublime, it corresponds to the Poet's love or worship. Proceeding outwards from the mind, you have therefore, first the fact, the equivalent of a feeling, and then the words, the equivalent of the fact.
And as the truth of the fact is the equivalent of the faculty to know, and the relationship of the fact to the
[Page 33]
feeling and the words to the fact, the equivalent of that sense of relation which is the characteristic of the power to order, you have in the single expressed fact what you had in the great combination of such facts, the Poem, an equivalent for to feel, to know, and to order.
This is an instance of the simplest kind: proceed to one more difficult. Suppose the fact of the imagination is one that has no equivalent in words, or that from familiarity, popular misuse, or double meanings, its original verbal signs are no longer poetic equivalents. Suppose you have to express such a fact. You must find for that fact an equivalent in some other fact that has an equivalent in words. An equivalent is, as we have seen, something which being presented to the quiet mind will produce there the thing of which it is the equivalent. You require therefore a fact that shall produce in the mind another fact; you require something more, a fact that shall produce a beautiful or sublime fact; and yet something more, a fact that shall produce such a fact in a mind whose primary characteristics are a sense of truth and a sense of relation. Your equivalent, therefore, must truly and essentially correspond to the beautiful or sublime fact for which it stands. That it does so makes it not only an equivalent for that fact but for your sense of truth and relationship. And as that first fact was an
[Page 34]
equivalent to certain feelings, this second fact not only stands for the first, but stands also for your characteristics of feeling, knowing and ordering. Now a fact that thus stands for another is its metaphor. We have arrived therefore at this law of all metaphor—that every true metaphor is not only a metaphor of the thing for which it stands but of the Poet who placed it.
Time does not allow me to multiply instances and to carry out the principle into still more minute detail, but I think, if at leisure you examine any variety of examples, you will find that this is the law of all poetic equivalents and that it explains those erroneous figures of speech which are so often mistaken for Poetry. What are critically called concetti, or conceits, and those misperceptions of Nature which arise from what an eminent writer has lately denominated ‘the pathetic fallacy,’ and those substitutions of horrors for terrors and the carnal for the human which we call melodrama, are the equivalents of minds in whom, either constitutionally, or for the time being, there is something wrong in the kind or the balance of the powers to love, to worship, to know and to order.
Having formed our poetic passage in the imagination— having found for our feelings metaphors in facts and for our unspeakable facts metaphors in facts that have corresponding words, the remainder of the act of expression
[Page 35]
would not need examination if words were arbitrary signs. But, as we all know, (however much philologers may differ about the precise primitive roots and their values,) there can be no doubt that in the first origin of language all words were metaphors—that is had an essential relationship to the facts for which they stood. And since every word of our modern languages is the result of some modification, combination, and recombination of those primitives, something of the essential relationship must still exist. But since those modifications and combinations have often taken place under the control of very artificial conditions, and since in the lapse of ages the various conditioning forces have crossed and recrossed into a complexity not often to be unravelled, the consciousness of original relation is so far lost that the words of a modern language are neither algebraic signs nor metaphorical equivalents, but range between these extremes and frequently approach either. In such a language (since he must not create a new one) the Poet has to express himself. In it he must find an equivalent for his imagined facts. We have seen the laws of poetic equivalents. An arbitrary sign does not fulfil those laws. The Poet requires his equivalent to be not a sign but a metaphor, and the whole action of his mind on language is therefore to elevate it from the sign towards the metaphor.
[Page 36]
The first result of this action is to instinctively select from the mass of verbal signs those words that retain most of their old essential relation to the thing signified. The next is to impart to them what shall, as far as may be, restore what is lost of that relation: to make them essentially akin to the facts they represent. Now one of the proofs that two apparently different things agree is the identity of their effects. If I strike you, successively, with a rod of iron, of silver, and of gold, it will seem at first sight indeed that one effect is produced by very different causes: but on closer enquiry we shall see that the pain produced was neither because the producing rod was iron, silver, or gold, but because it was hard, and that the iron, silver, and gold produced the same pain because they agreed in being hard . Identical effects are therefore evidence of relationship in the causes, and when such effects occur in such a mind as we are investigating identical effects are the evidence of essential relationship. The Poet therefore adds to his selected words something which by having the same effect as the fact for which they stand shows itself to be essentially related to that fact. That ‘something’ is rhythm.
Words rhythmically combined affect the feelings of the poetic hearer or utterer in the same way as the fact they represent: and thus by a reflex action the fact is reproduced
[Page 37]
in the imagination. By instinctive selection and rhythmic combination the verbal utterance is thus elevated from a sign to or towards a metaphor, and becomes, like other metaphors, not only a metaphor of the proximate poetic fact but of the characteristics of the Poet.
We saw a little while ago that the law of the whole Epic, that it is one subject with its congruous accessories, must apply to every passage of which the Epic is made up. We have now seen by an analysis of one such passage that the other law of the whole Epic, that it should be a metaphor of the Poet's characteristics, is not only fulfilled in every passage, but in every cardinal portion of a passage: in every complete act of expression and in the sub-acts of which it is composed. Carrying out the homology of the whole and the parts, let us now, reasoning from the less to the greater, by one more examination of the passage explain a difficulty in the Epic. Select a complete expression and pull it to pieces. I will take a well-known saying of Shakspeare because it not only illustrates what I am going to say, but also happens to be exemplary of a truth I have just now been bringing before you. Othello, bending over Desdemona and prefiguring what he is going to do, says not, ‘when I have killed thee,’ but ‘when I have plucked thy rose.’
Here you have an instance in which the fact of the
[Page 38]
imagination had no equivalent in words, and had to be expressed by another fact for which such an equivalent existed. That somewhat by which the living differed from the dead,—that wonder of vital form and colour, that visible presence of thought and passion, that fragrant atmosphere of sweet influences, that spiritual mystery of an incarnate soul by which she was not a corpse but Desdemona , had not—and will never have—a name or phrase among men. But in the language of God there was a fact essentially akin to it for which we had a human sign; the Poet instinctively turned to that equivalent, and the ineffable became effable in a Rose. But I quote this sentence ‘when I have plucked thy rose’ that having perceived its surpassing beauty as a whole you may take it in pieces and so, to use its own metaphor, ‘pluck the rose’ of it. For that somewhat by which the whole sentence lives, and the parts live while forming a whole, is like the living Desdemona, something not to be defined. ‘When I have plucked thy rose,’ separate those words altogether from the general idea and restrict them to their several utterly independent meanings. You will find that they have all expired a something with which they before were warm, and that some of them, ‘when’ and ‘have’ for instance, are almost without any life or significance at all. Look out ‘when’ and the auxiliary verb
[Page 39]
‘to have’ in the Dictionary and see how empty and effete they are. Now reunite the sentence, and behold the same ‘when’ and the same ‘have’ full, and brimming over, with the life, colour, and beauty of the whole.
Now this circulation of vitality and beauty from the whole into its parts which you have seen in the single sentence, takes place also in the total Epic and explains how some members of a great Poem—as it were the prepositions and conjunctions of that mighty syntax—which taken separately do not seem to express either the Love or Worship of the Poet are, nevertheless, by their essential union with wholes of which they are perceived by his peculiar gifts to be necessary parts, and of whose essence they are therefore partakers, as truly the fulfilment of the great primary Poetic Law as the most dazzling centres of the Beautiful or the Sublime.
We have now in endeavouring to find the principles of Perfect Poetry investigated a perfect Poem in its origin, its wholes, and its parts. We have enquired into the Principles of the producing Mind, into the Principles of the total thing produced, and all the members which compose it, and we have discovered the human means by which its production becomes possible to imperfect humanity. We have found a Poem to be from first to last, in things and in words, the manifold metaphor of a
[Page 40]
human mind , and to approach perfection within and without, in spirit and in matter, in design and execution, in the ratio wherein the mind of whose activity it is the equivalent is at the time of its production perfect.
To elaborate these general truths into all their completeness would require a whole season of Lectures, but I would remind you, in passing, that whereas we have been compelled to confine ourselves this evening to a mere sketch of the main characteristics of the Poet and of his work, the perfect Poem should really be the equivalent of his whole nature, the expression of every quality by which he is truly, though ideally, human.
I have explained at the commencement of these remarks why in proposing a standard of Poetry I chose the ideal and perfect Poet and Poem as they might exist instead of the real and imperfect Poet and Poem as they are actually known to us. But it may be asked why, instead of going into the principles of such Ideals, have I not contented myself with bringing before you such selected passages from existing poems as may be held faultless, or with giving a brief sketch of such Poems as I supposed to be most nearly perfect? To this I answer that inasmuch as the value of a just notion of Poetry is not only that we may be able to identify it when seen in full flowered Perfection, but that as Critics we may be able to
[Page 41]
estimate it rightly when—as in the majority of instances— we catch it in manifestations not wholly mature, the knowledge of Principles is even of more importance than that of their supreme results. For as in morals so in Poetry it is not he who mechanically copies the actions , but he who vitally—in the best mode possible to his given stage of development—applies the principles of the Perfect Character that really most resembles it in nature.
There is a poetical as well as a moral hypocrisy: and it is possible for the literary as well as the moral Pharisee to make void the living Law through dead tradition. You remember some Sir Galahad or Sir Tristram of old who passed in armour his years of heroic gentleness and sought, sword in hand, the sangreal of Purity and Truth. Some Knight without fear and without reproach, who met his enemy as a brother, and nursed him with a Lover's chivalrous devotion, and who falling himself after a thousand triumphs had such words as these said over his noble corse:
‘Thou wert the courteousest Knight that ever bore shield; thou wert the truest friend that ever bestrode horse; thou wert the truest Lover that ever loved woman; thou wert the kindest man that ever struck with sword; thou wert the goodliest person that ever came among press of Knights; thou wert the meekest man and the
[Page 42]
gentlest that ever ate in hall with ladies; and thou wert the sternest Knight to thy mortal foe that ever laid lance in rest.’
You can also perhaps remember (he was to be found, occasionally, a year or two back), some nineteenth century advocate of philosophical pacification, who loves God with £. s. d. and his customer as himself, who answers with a perverted text the cry of the weak and the oppressed, and refutes the Patriot's heart with irrefragable arithmetic; who is so jealous of his country's blood that he would keep it for her blushes; and—holding Life more precious than all that is beautiful to live for—would fill his pockets in the name of Christian amity with that worst bribe of Tyrants, the prosperity of dishonour. There can be no doubt which of these two is the least warlike; but I ask you which is really nearer to the Gospel of Love and Peace?
It was necessary, therefore, in order to estimate imperfect Poets and Poetry, that we should investigate the principles even more than the practice of the Perfect. Having dealt in what is past with the ideal, I purpose in the short remainder of this lecture to glance briefly at the real. I have developed the premiss with which we started, that ‘a perfect Poem is the perfect expression of a perfect human mind,’ into an hypothesis as to perfect
[Page 43]
Poetry and perfect Poets; I will now, if you please, proceed to illustrate the principal propositions of that hypothesis by the acknowledged facts of Poetry and Poets as they exist. As that hypothesis was, I think, a sober and legitimate deduction, I shall by demonstrating its conclusions, arrive at something like a proof of the premiss. My first proposition was, in effect, that a perfect Poet is a man possessing in the highest degree these gifts—to love, and its accompaniment the sense of Beauty, to worship, and its accompaniment the sense of the Sublime, to order, and its accompaniment the sense of Relation, and to know, or that ability of perceiving Truth without which the other gifts would have no proper objects of exercise. Now let us see what, by universal consent, have been the characteristics of imperfect Poets who have actually existed, and see how far they go towards our theory of the perfect. But you may meet me by the objection that common consent is valueless with regard to qualities that are supposed to be beyond the judgment of the majority of mankind. The objection, if valid, is valid also, more or less, with regard to all the highest and rarest objects of human thought. But I would suggest in the present case a mode of arriving at truth which, while neither wholly popular nor wholly private, combines the advantages of
[Page 44]
both without the evils of either, and unites that guarantee of general humanity which is only contained in common consent with those advantages of special aptitude, which by the fact of its speciality, must always in all cases, be the privilege of the few.
The process is based on the general facts, admitted on all sides, that however different in amount and intensity our different mental powers may be in different individuals, they are possessed in some degree by the whole of Mankind: and that, as resulting from this community, there are some things on which the whole race are agreed.
The process in its most familiar form is this,—and in the less familiar form in which it can be publicly used, it is essentially the same. Taking one of these common consents—as that grass is green, or sunshine beautiful, consider who among your friends seems most—and most continually—impressed with this fact on which all agree. Ask that person whom, of all he knows, he considers a greater judge of green, or of beauty, than himself. Apply to that third for his superior in the same line, and so persevere till from the base of a common consent you rise to the pinnacle of a consummate individual knowledge.
This is the true intellectual democracy, wherein the many are made not the judge , but the means of discovering the judge.
[Page 45]
It does not follow that it is also the true political democracy, because, for one reason among others— æsthetics seeks the perennial and absolute best , and politics has to do with the relative and the temporary.
Now applying this method to the enquiry in hand, and leaving, of course, the sacred Writers out of the question, whom should we discover by this graduated ascent to be the ultimate supreme appeal in all questions of the Beautiful? Undoubtedly, in every land where Poetry has existed, some Poet.
Of the Sublime? Some Poet.
Of Truth—in that sense whereof we have been speaking—from the time when the Greek said ἀΕίδω — I see intensely—for ‘I sing,’ to the day that Wordsworth saw and sang the Celandine and the Daisy? Some Poet.
Of order—that harmony and melody which in their best known manifestation of Music have taken their very name from the Muse ,—that proportion which has made ‘to lisp in numbers’ a proverb for Poetry, that ordinated Wholeness which gave title alike to the Greek ροιητής , and the Scottish Makar , and which has lent us the phrase of Epic Unity as our highest expression of a multiform One ? Some Poet.
And what process do we need for arriving at the testimony to that worship by which, in every land, the
[Page 46]
Poets have filled earth, air, and sky, with mythologies; peopled at once Asgard, Hades, and Olympus, crowded on the heights of Bifrost the sons of Muspel and the einheriar of Odin, drawn round the violet-crowned city its thirty thousand gods—gods that this day and while the world lasts, hold for awful Pallas the siege with time and Ruin—or
                                         Dum Capitolium
Scandet cum tacitâ virgine Pontifex,
have seated Jove on the eternity of his consecrated hill? And we need no formal evidence of that universal Poet's Love , high as Heaven, deep even as Hell, wide not only as Creation, but as the difference between Created and Creator:—that Love which, whether singing least or greatest, first or last, matter or spirit, temporal or eternal— the dewdrop or the ocean, the flower or the star, the glint of a glowworm or the splendour of Noon, the choir of Angles or the minstrelsy of Birds, the beauty of the loftiest Queen of Sheba, or the eyes of the poorest outcast that ever trembled with a penitent tear, the coloured glory of the summer world, or the incandent Wonder of the Great White Throne, the robe of morning, buckled with the Sun, or those other skirts ‘dark with excess of light’—so sang that Prophets have been content to set their message to such music, and that
[Page 47]
wherever since Men were upon Earth, love to God or love to man has been bursting a human bosom, the dumb humanity that must speak or die, has snatched some Poet's harp and saved itself in Poetry.
I could have wished to exemplify these qualities to which the consent of Mankind testifies, by reading from the works of ancients and moderns, some of those many specimens of the Sublime and Beautiful on which we are agreed.
But time compels me to hasten on.
Before illustrating the proposition that a perfect Poem is the perfect expression of such a mind as we have been examining, let me draw your attention for a moment to the other truths regarding expression itself; and first that a perfect expression is that product of an active and perfect mind, which, being brought into contact with the same mind in a passive state, would restore the state of which it is the expression.
At first sight I know you would be inclined to say ‘that product of an active mind which being brought into contact with another mind, would produce that state whereof it is the expression:’ but a little examination will show us that as soon as the expressor leaves the test of his own consciousness he loses the ground of all certitude, and not only subjects himself to a gamut of criteria
[Page 48]
wide as the space between a European and a Bosjesman, and among Europeans between a Newton and a gamin, but has no power even to ascertain in any precise manner whether he answers those criteria or not. And a little further consideration will show us that the value of that ideal and perfect standard we have taken depends on its being the common measure of every part of that to which we apply it: and we shall perceive that the characteristic homogeneity of a perfect Poem, and of perfect Poetry, is the result of its conformity—intrinsic and extrinsic—to this single standard.
These facts afford a solution to the long vexed problem of the difference between Rhetoric and Poetry. That difference has puzzled the majority of investigators, because they have sought it not in cause but in effect ,— in the thing produced and not in the mode of production. The things produced sometimes, in given selected instances, do not differ: the invariable difference is in the mode of production. Poetry is, as we have seen, the expression of a mind according to its own laws. Rhetoric is the expression of a mind according to the laws of its Hearer.
Poetry is the human embodiment of Truth in that form which is essentially truest to the Truth embodied.
Rhetoric, even in the best sense, is the embodiment
[Page 49]
of it in that form which is most affecting to certain Beholders. The Rhetor addresses his audience; and is estimated by his power over them at a given time and place.
The Poet addresses no audience, and is known by his power, in every age and land while mankind exists, over minds that approach the type of his own representative Humanity.
It may happen regarding the works of the Rhetor and the Poet, that at certain points their orbits intersect, but watch them awhile, and as surely as in obedience to inexorable causes, two stars meet, pass, and depart on opposite paths, you shall see that they deviate into wide and wider separation—ay, and perhaps that, like those stars, the fact of their momentary conjunction was an evidence of the contrariety of the forces by which they moved.
A perfect poetic expression then is, that which being brought into contact with the passive mind of the expressor, will restore the state of which it is the expression —and this I have called an equivalent. That things may be the equivalents of feelings is proved by examples which will occur spontaneously to the minds of all of us. Merely glancing at those innumerable instances which might be drawn from the plastic arts, from Religious and
[Page 50]
other ceremonies, from devotional and monumental architecture, and all the other visible representatives of the passions, let me draw your notice a moment to a well known illustration in modern sculpture—Thorwaldsen's famous marble of ‘Night.’ You remember the great Mother flying in her sleep, with vast wings and drooping head; bearing two sleeping babes, like two poppy buds, in her breast, and followed by an owl. The four are Night ; not either one but the total four. There is no phenomenal likeness to Night in the group, and if you try to separate them the resemblance is, if possible, less. For Night is motionless,—but the Woman is evidently moving: nevertheless, her bent head and the gravitating lines in the Babes, so visibly heavy with slumber, neutralize the sense of motion and make it seem a less effort to move than to stand still . Again Night is silent, yet those giant pinions of hers cannot surely flap without a rush of noise; but the owl behind them, ‘the muffled bird of noiseless flight,’ whose large wings will pass your ear as silent as a butterfly, takes out, as it were, the sound from the whole sculpture, and reduces it to a total of Truth.
But how ‘a total of Truth,’ for Night is black and they are whitest marble: Night is shapeless and they are all exquisite shapes: Night is mainly negative and they are positive throughout.
[Page 51]
A total Truth nevertheless, because, phenomenally different as the things may be, you feel when looking on the Sculpture as you feel when looking upon Night. The Sculpture is the equivalent of your feeling, your feeling —on the principle I explained in treating of rhythm— creates by reflex action, the fact of Night in the imagination; Night and the Sculpture are metaphors of each other by being common metaphors of a single state of mind. Did time permit I might illustrate the equivalence of things to feelings in another department of Art by reading an exquisite song of Tennyson's which you all remember—‘Break, break, break, on thy cold grey stones, oh sea!’: a song which is, as a whole, the mere metaphor of a mental attitude that every one can understand, that no one could scientifically define, but that is more or less reproduced in the reader by the images which the Poets sets afloat in the imagination.
My proposition that the great law of Poetic equivalents is this, that every Poetic metaphor is not only a metaphor of the thing metaphorized but of the Poet, in other words, that every metaphor must be essentially, and not merely accidentally, related to the thing for which it stands, and that every perfect Poetic Metaphor must also be either beautiful or sublime, you may readily illustrate by a comparison between the art and the symbolism of
[Page 52]
various times and peoples. The Christ of mediæval Religious Art was the metaphor , and the well-known fish-symbol—chosen, you know, because the word ἰχθύς was supposed to contain the initial letters of His titles— was not the metaphor of the Saviour because one had essential and the other only accidental relations to Him.
The Ceres of Greek art was , and the many-breasted goddess of Hindoo symbolism was not , the poetic metaphor of fruitful Nature, because the first was true and beautiful, the second only similar and ugly.
The Snowdrop, because it fulfils all the poetic laws, is a metaphor of maidenhood; but a ring on the first finger is only the sign of it, because it arises out of other than essential relations. In the same way compare as equivalents of Love the Venus of Melos or of Medici, with some Indian Image of Kam Deo or with the symbolism of a Valentine. Or compare the ancient hieroglyphic writing, in which the sign pictured the thing signified, with the later hieroglyph in which the sign stood not for the thing but for the first sound in the name of the thing, or with the alphabet of modern times, in which almost the last trace of metaphor is lost.
Finally, compare the sublime metaphor of Scripture, ‘God is Light,’ with those effigies of the Deity which shock us in some mediæval paintings, and with those
[Page 53]
mathematical definitions within which the ancient Scholasticism sought to shut up Him Whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain.
In these true metaphors, and in all other cases of true poetic metaphor, we shall find a recognition of something more than a phenomenal similarity; we shall find the type and antitype, like two lines that meet somewhere but not here, slanting towards some common truth far back in the profounds of causation,—some truth in its unity unseen and for ever invisible, but, in the relationship of its remote diverging issues, felt , as the blind needle feels the pole, by the total perception of a consummate human mind. Recognizing thus the deep mystery that is in every true metaphor we raise it from the rank of ornament to a solemn significance, and understand the wisdom of the saying of Aristotle— ‘the greatest thing is to employ metaphors well for this alone cannot be acquired from another but is an indication of an excellent Genius.’ And perceiving moreover that the law of the metaphor is really that of all poetic expression, and that the Poem is therefore a metaphor of the human soul, we recognize in Poetry that reconciliation of Spirit and Matter, of the inward and the outward, which no effort of voluntary reason can achieve, but which is accomplished, as all our necessities that
[Page 54]
transcend the powers of reason are accomplished, by an instrument specially created for that end.
Viewing the Poet as that instrument, that great and curious Divine Machine, strong as the forces of Nature, but more sensitive than any Æolian string that ever trembled to an imperceptible wind, one is reminded of the old Ptolemæan story of the Gygonian rock which could not be removed from its place by any human power, but could be stirred, therein, by the stalk of an Asphodel. And when perplexed for the secondary causes by which the instrument performs its God-appointed Work one turns involuntarily to other mysteries of Providence and recalls such natural marvels as Professor Wilson showed us, not long since, in his lecture upon colours, when rays so apparently different as the chemical and the luminous—rays that even to the delicate nerves of the eye gave nothing but symptoms of diversity —were discovered by a still finer test to be essentially the same, and that which had passed through ordinary substances as darkness in one specially-adapted medium became light.
In treating of that last stage of poetic expression by which things have their equivalents in words , I proposed to you that the necessary effect of what we had recognised as the Poet's characteristics would be the elevation of
[Page 55]
even the words of poetic speech towards the rank of metaphor , by securing an essential likeness between the sign and the thing signified: and that one of the great means of this elevation was rhythm . That certain quantities and accents in connected words—certain modes of verbal motion , involving a certain direct action of the organs of speech and hearing, and a sympathetic action in the rest of the system—bodily and mental—in other terms that certain rhythms and measures are metaphors of ideas and feelings I will illustrate by a few well-known examples, which I have taken chiefly from Authors not English in order that you may the more readily forget—as I must request you to forget—altogether the sense of the individual words and attend only to the effect of the rhythmic combination.
The first is the famous line from Homer in which the heavy stone that has been rolled to the hill-top rebounds to the bottom
Αὖτις sbeacgr;ρΕιτα ρέδονδΕ κυλίνδΕτο λâας ἀναιδής.
Any one who has sat on a hill and pushed a stone over the precipitous brow will recognize in the marvellous measure of this line the whole history of the descent. Αὖτις —it rolls lazily over the brow,— ἔρΕιτα —stung by the first jag of rock it leaps from the earth;—rebounding from
[Page 56]
a midway ledge— ρέδονδΕ —it has sprung like a planet into mid-air:—now touching the first slopes of the plain see how—round and hardly visible—it whirls like a wheel in χυλίνδΕτο —; and thrown back, like a cannon shot from yonder strong wall in the flat, finishes at last in λâας ἀτΕιδής.
Take the contrary fact in Milton's description of the toilsome upheaval of the great Mass from the hill-foot to the top.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Toiled on with difficulty and labour he.
I would refer you at your leisure to the celebrated bowshot in Homer, the fall of the bull, and the labour of the Cyclops in Virgil, the flight of Alcyone in Ovid and the dancing measures of the Greek Tragedians.
Ἔκλαγξαν δ' ἂρ ὀϊστοὶ ἐρ' ὤμων χωομένοιο
ΔΕινὴ δὲ κλαγγὴ γένΕτ' ἀργυρέοιο βιοîο.
Sternitur exanimisque tremens procumbit humi bos.
Illi inter sese magna vi brachia tollunt.
Percutiensque levem modo natis aëra pennis,
Stringebat summas ales miserabilis undas. Met. b. xi. 733–34.
I quote the Schoolboy's favourite line of the galloping Horse in Virgil,
Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum.
because it has a modern parallel in the marvellous rhythm
[Page 57]
of our own Laureate in which the light cavalry still gallop to glory at Balaclava.
Half a league, half a league, half a league onward.
The fall of Lucifer in Dante's Purgatorio is a noble example
                                         Giù dal cielo
Folgoreggiando scendere, da un lato.
And the fall of a body in the Inferno in which the heavy helpless clamp with which a corpse falls flattened on a floor tells its story in utter independence of the literal sense.
E caddi, come corpo morto cade.
And as an example of an opposite kind I will beg you to read, what I wish time permitted me to quote, and to surrender yourselves, irrespective of the sense, to the bacchanalian rhythm of Francesco Redi's ‘Bacco in Toscana.’
Among other means of elevating the verbal sign to the rank of metaphor the choice of words in which there is a relation of sound and sense is frequent in the Poetry of every language. That this choice is governed by the same laws that rule all other metaphors—that the resemblance must be one not of mere sensuous similarity but of essential relation—I would illustrate by referring you to
[Page 58]
the suggestions of the cries of animals and birds in Beethoven's pastoral symphony, and in Meyerbeer's Prelude to the Prophet, and to imitations of the same things by birdcalls and other mimetic machinery; and by contrasting Milton's trumpet line—
Sonorous metal blowing martial sound,
with Swift's
Tantara, tantara, while all the boy's holloa,
or by opposing Virgil's cooing line of turtle doves,
Nec tamen interea raucæ, tua cura, palumbes—
or verses in Shelley's Skylark and Coleridge's Nightingale to the more phenomenally accurate, but less essentially true, representation of the thrush and blackbird in the clever jeux d'esprit of William Allingham.
My propositions as to the unity of subject in a perfect Poem, and as to the (to use a physiological term) homotypy of every natural member of that Poem, are the necessary results of what I have taken to be the conditions of human perception. Those conditions are not inconsistent, I think, with either of our foremost systems of philosophy, are supported by that congruity of mind and body which science and Philosophy alike demonstrate, and have the unconscious testimony of the idiom
[Page 59]
of all ages and languages. I think, therefore, I need not here enter into proof of that congruity, and may assume the conditions as already proved. As both my propositions are the logical inferences from these conditions, and as the first of them merely accounts for facts on which we are all agreed (for the unity of the epical subject has been the axiom of all criticism), I will leave you to test them at your leisure, by any number of examples—especially as they apply to all human expression, and only in a peculiar manner to Poetry as it should be the most perfect form of that expression.
The proposition which contains the modus operandi by which the imperfect Poet rises on the one hand towards the ideally perfect mind and descends on the other to the varieties of common human character, is also not of a nature to need detailed demonstration here. Though very important in itself the facts for which it accounts are at once too numerous and too well-known for quotation.
The means by which Poets of no wide external experience, and few opportunities, therefore, of taking the moral portraits, line by line, of men as they are, can fill their scenes with every type and variety of Mankind, astonish the traveller, the soldier, the statesman, the physician, by pictures as accurate as their own
[Page 60]
eyesight, and startle the highest King or the lowest Beggar, the sturdiest Manhood, or the tenderest Woman, with the very inmost revelations of themselves, is a problem which each of us must often have tried to solve. The hypothesis that the Poet has the power to become , for the time, King or Beggar, Man or Woman, and, when thus transformed, to feel imagined scenes as the rest of us feel actual circumstances, accounts, I think, for the phenomena to be explained, and is not inconsistent with other established truths. From the boys who erred on one side when they cried after Dante, ‘lo the man who was in Hell,’ to the passer-by who erred as far on the other when he fancied he saw the Poet of the Lakes in that William Wordsworth who was chaffering for a penny with the carrier at his door, all Poetical Biography has been one long perplexing contrast of the Man and the Artist, and all Poems have been, more or less, untrue to that poor mortal whose name men saw upon the title page.
We have at length done with the Poet's mind, and the nature and laws of its expression.
I now, in conclusion, briefly proceed to the proposition that a Poem is the characteristic expression of such a mind, and that Poetry is that which can congruously form part of such a Poem. As it would take many
[Page 61]
lectures to array before you the great Poems of the World, and so illustrate my case, I will take a method more manageable, and I think sufficiently convincing, and let you see with your own eyes the dry bones of fact become the living Apollo of Poetry.
Taking an acknowledged Poetic subject, the Coliseum at Rome, I will read to you first the simple statistics of its shape, size, et cetera. I will then read a description of the same object by a poetic but not a Poet's mind, in which the bare statistical skeleton is clothed upon with some beauty, sublimity, and relation ; and finally I will read Byron's memorable lines, in which feelings, facts, and relationships have arranged themselves in rhythmical equivalents at once, in idea and in word, true, beautiful, and sublime.
Here are the statistics.
‘This Ampitheatre is in form an ellipse. Its superficial area is nearly six acres: its major axis 620 feet, its minor axis 513: the present height of its outer wall 157. Of this circuit scarcely a half presents its original height, and throughout a great portion of it the travertine arcades are demolished, and the rough wall inside, partially erect, is overgrown with grass and shrubs and covered by a modern support. The centre is occupied by the oval arena 287 feet long by 180 wide.
[Page 62]
‘Round the arena, and resting on a huge mass of arches rising on arches, the sloping seats for the spectators (of which the building could contain 87,000) ascend towards the summit of the external wall.’
Here the same thing with a sense of something more than the physical facts. (From Joseph Forsyth ‘On Antiquities, Arts and Letters in Italy.’)
‘As it now stands, the Coliseum is a striking image of Rome itself: decayed—vacant—serious—yet grand,— half grey and half green—erect on one side and fallen on the other, with consecrated ground in its bosom—inhabited by a beadsman; visited by every caste; for moralists, antiquaries, architects, devotees, all meet here to meditate, to examine, to draw, to measure, and to pray. “In contemplating antiquities,” says Livy, “the mind itself becomes antique.” It contracts from such objects a venerable rust, which I prefer to the polish and the point of those wits who have lately profaned this august ruin with ridicule.’
Here the Poetry of the whole.
‘The stars are forth, the moon above the tops
Of the snow-shining mountains. Beautiful!
I linger yet with Nature, for the night
Hath been to me a more familiar face
Than that of man; and in her starry shade
Of dim and solitary loveliness,
I learn'd the language of another world.
[Page 63]
I do remember me, that in my youth,
When I was wandering—upon such a night
I stood within the Coliseum's wall,
Midst the chief relics of almighty Rome.
The trees which grew along the broken arches
Waved dark in the blue midnight, and the stars
Shone through the rents of ruin; from afar
The watch-dog bay'd beyond the Tiber; and
More near from out the Cæsar's palace came
The owl's long cry, and, interruptedly,
Of distant sentinels the fitful song
Began and died upon the gentle wind.
Some cypresses beyond the time-worn breach
Appear'd to skirt the horizon, yet they stood
Within a bowshot. Where the Cæsars dwelt,
And dwell the tuneless birds of night, amidst
A grove which springs through levell'd battlements,
And twines its roots with the imperial hearths,
Ivy usurps the laurel's place of growth:—
But the gladiator's bloody Circus stands,
A noble wreck in ruinous perfection!
While Cæsar's chambers and the Augustan halls,
Grovel on earth in indistinct decay.
And thou didst shine, thou rolling moon, upon
All this, and cast a wide and tender light,
Which soften'd down the hoar austerity
Of rugged desolation, and fill'd up,
As 'twere anew, the gaps of centuries;
Leaving that beautiful which still was so,
And making that which was not, till the place
Became religion, and the heart ran o'er
With silent worship of the great of old!
The dead, but sceptered sovereigns, who still rule
Our spirits from their urns.’— Manfred.
I would recommend you to try a similar experiment with the death of King Arthur in the glorious old legend and
[Page 64]
Tennyson's wonderful idealization of it in the ‘Morte d'Arthur.’ 2
Having thus in the course of this Lecture descended from a general primary hypothesis to its detailed inferences and, afterwards, from an observation of facts, ascended through those details to the origin of the hypothesis —having endeavoured to show that it is consistent with itself, that it explains the phenomena to be accounted for, and is not incogruous with established truths,—I will close by pointing out in very few words, two particulars wherein, as it seems to me, this hypothesis is singularly fortunate. The first is that while, so far as I know, wholly contained by no previous theory, it admits, explains and unites into itself the best theories of the best Authorities, ancient and modern: the other is that by recognising Poetry as—in the manner I have endeavoured to describe—the true carrying out and efflorescence of a human soul, according to its own laws , this theory assigns to Poetry its due position among the Works of that Creator Who, by what we call secondary causes and effects, evolves the graduated succession of relations, and by the harmony of each with each insures the unison of each with all—suns with far solar centres, worlds with suns, inhabitants with worlds, trees with the
[Page 65]
soil, leaves and blossoms with the tree, Man with his place, Man's works with man, and all things with Himself —and shows the perfect human Poem to be a word in the eternal utterance of the One Almighty Poet—a congruous passage in that Poem of the Universe which is the ordered expression of His Wisdom and His Love.
NOTES
1 [1] The reader may perhaps remember, among the discoveries relating to phonics made by Chladni or Chladenius, the curious result of one of his experiments on plates of glass or metal—that a sonorous plate, fixed horizontally, having its upper surface regularly strewed with sand, on being struck at the edge with a violin bow, not only gave a peculiar sound, but also exhibited a corresponding arrangement of the sand.—Ed.
2 [1] See also Layamon's version as approaching in some of its details to Tennyson's—J. N.
$$$
