r 



THE OTHER HOUSE 




THE OTHER HOUSE 



By the Same Author, 6s. each. 

The Spoils of Poynton 

The National Observer. " One of the finest 
works of the imagination, if not actually the 
finest, that has come from the press for several 
years. A work of brilliant fancy, of delicate 
humour, of gentle satire, of tragedy and comedy 
in appropriate admixture. A polished and thril- 
ling story of the lives of men and women who, 
one and all, are absolutely real." 

Terminations 

Pall Mall Gazette. "These four stories are so 
clever, that one can only raise one's hands in 
admiration." 

Embarrassments 

The Times. " Mr. James's stories are a con- 
tinued protest against superficial workmanship 
and slovenly style. He is an enthusiast who has 
devoted himself to keeping alive the sacred fire 
of genuine literature ; and he has his reward in a 
circle of constant admirers, whose sympathy 
encourages him to persevere." 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 



OTHER HOUSE 



By HENRY JAMES 



L c 



ONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 

MDCCCXCVII 



First Edition, 2 vols., October 1896 



All rights reserved 



BOOK FIRST 



I 



MRS. BEEVER of Eastmead, and of "Beever and 
Bream/' was a close, though not a cruel observer of 
what went on, as she always said, at the other 
house. A great deal more went on there, naturally, 
than in the great clean, square solitude in which 
she had practically lived since the death of Mr. 
Beever, who had predeceased by three years his 
friend and partner, the late Paul Bream of Bounds, 
leaving to his only son, the little godson of that 
trusted associate, the substantial share of the busi- 
ness in which his wonderful widow she knew and 
rejoiced that she was wonderful now had a 
distinct voice. Paul Beever, in the bloom of 
eighteen, had just achieved a scramble from Win- 
chester to Oxford : it was his mother's design that 
he should go into as many things as possible before 
coming into the Bank. The Bank, the pride of 
Wilverley, the high clear arch of which the two 
houses were the solid piers, was worth an expensive 
education. It was, in the talk of town and county, 
" hundreds of years " old, and as incalculably 
"good" as a subject of so much infallible arithmetic 
could very well be. That it enjoyed the services of 
Mrs. Beever herself was at present enough for her* 



4 THE OTHER HOUSE 

and an ample contentment to Paul, who inclined so 
little to the sedentary that she foresaw she should 
some day be as anxious at putting him into figures 
as she had in his childhood been easy about putting 
him into breeches. Half the ground moreover was 
held by young Anthony Bream, the actual master of 
Bounds, the son and successor of her husband's 
colleague. 

She was a woman indeed of many purposes ; 
another of which was that on leaving Oxford the 
boy should travel and inform himself: she belonged 
to the age that regarded a foreign tour not as a hasty 
dip, but as a deliberate plunge. Still another had 
for its main feature that on his final return he should 
marry the nicest girl she knew : that too would be 
a deliberate plunge, a plunge that would besprinkle 
his mother. It would do with the question what 
it was Mrs. Beever's inveterate household practice 
to do with all loose and unarranged objects it 
would get it out of the way. There would 
have been difficulty in saying whether it was a 
feeling for peace or for war, but her constant habit 
was to lay the ground bare for complications that 
as yet at least had never taken place. Her life was 
like a room prepared for a dance : the furniture was 
all against the walls. About the young lady in 
question she was perfectly definite ; the nicest girl 
she knew was Jean Martle, whom she had just sent 
for at Brighton to come and perform in that 
character. The performance was to be for the 
benefit of Paul, whose midsummer return was at 



THE OTHER HOUSE 5 

hand and in whom the imagination oi alternatives 
was to be discouraged from the first. It was on the 
whole a comfort to Mrs. Beever that he had little 
imagination of anything. 

Jean Martle, condemned to Brighton by a father 
who was Mrs. Beever's second cousin and whom 
the doctors, the great men in London, kept there, 
as this lady opined, because he was too precious 
wholly to lose and too boring often to see Jean 
Martle would probably some day have money and 
would possibly some day have sense : even as 
regards a favoured candidate this marked the extent 
of Mrs. Beever's somewhat dry expectations. They 
were addressed in a subordinate degree to the girl's 
" playing," which was depended on to become 
brilliant, and to her hair, which was viewed in the 
light of a hope that it would with the lapse of years 
grow darker. Wilverley, in truth, would never 
know if she played ill ; but it had an old-fashioned 
prejudice against loud shades in the natural cover- 
ing of the head. One of the things his cousin had 
been invited for was that Paul should get used to 
her eccentric colour a colour of which, on a certain 
bright Sunday of July, Mrs. Beever noted afresh, 
with some alarm, the exaggerated pitch. Her 
young friend had arrived two days before and now 
during the elastic interval from church to luncheon 
had been despatched to Bounds with a message 
and some preliminary warnings. Jean knew that 
she should find there a house in some confusion, a 
new-born little girl, the first, a young mother not 



6 THE OTHER HOUSE 

yet " up," and an odd visitor, somewhat older than 
herself, in the person of Miss Armiger, a school- 
friend of Mrs. Bream, who had made her appearance 
a month before that of the child and had stayed on, 
as Mrs. Beever with some emphasis put it, " right 
through everything." 

This picture of the situation had filled, after the 
first hour or two, much of the time of the two ladies, 
but it had originally included for Jean no particular 
portrait of the head of the family an omission in 
some degree repaired, however, by the chance of 
Mrs. Beever's having on the Saturday morning 
taken her for a moment into the Bank. They had 
had errands in the town, and Mrs. Beever had 
wished to speak to Mr. Bream, a brilliant, joking 
gentleman, who, instantly succumbing to their 
invasion and turning out a confidential clerk, had 
received them in his beautiful private room. " Shall 
I like him ? " Jean, with the sense of a widening 
circle, had, before this, adventurously asked. " Oh, 
yes, if you notice him ! " Mrs. Beever had replied in 
obedience to an odd private prompting to mark him 
as insignificant. Later on, at the Bank, the girl 
noticed him enough to feel rather afraid of him : 
that was always with her the foremost result of 
being noticed herself. If Mrs. Beever passed him 
over, this was in part to be accounted for by all that 
at Eastmead was usually taken for granted. The 
queen-mother, as Anthony Bream kept up the jest 
of calling her, would not have found it easy to paint 
off-hand a picture of the allied sovereign whom she 



THE OTHER HOUSE 7 

was apt to regard as a somewhat restless vassal. 
Though he was a dozen years older than the happy 
young prince on whose behalf she exercised her 
regency, she had known him from his boyhood, and 
his strong points and his weak were alike an old 
story to her. 

His house was new he had on his marriage, at a 
vast expense, made it quite violently so. His wife 
and his child were new; new also in a marked 
degree was the young woman who had lately taken 
up her abode with him and who had the air of 
intending to remain till she should lose that quality. 
But Tony himself this had always been his name 
to her was intensely familiar. Never doubting 
that he was a subject she had mastered, Mrs. 
Beever had no impulse to clear up her view by 
distributing her impressions. These impressions 
were as neatly pigeon-holed as her correspondence 
and her accounts neatly, at least, save in so far as 
they were besprinkled with the dust of time. One 
of them might have been freely rendered into a hint 
that her young partner was a possible source of 
danger to her own sex. Not to her personally, of 
course ; for herself, somehow, Mrs. Beever was not 
of her own sex. If she had been a woman she 
never thought of herself so loosely she would, in 
spite of her age, have doubtless been conscious of 
peril. She now recognised none in life except that 
of Paul's marrying wrong, against which she had 
taken early measures. It would have been a 
misfortune therefore to feel a flaw in a security 



8 THE OTHER HOUSE 

otherwise so fine. Was not perhaps the fact that 
she had a vague sense of exposure for Jean Martle a 
further motive for her not expatiating to that young 
lady on Anthony Bream ? If any such sense 
operated, I hasten to add, it operated without Jean's 
having mentioned that at the Bank he had struck 
her as formidable. 

Let me not fail equally to declare that Mrs. 
Beever's general suspicion of him, as our sad want 
of signs for shades and degrees condemns me to call 
it, rested on nothing in the nature of evidence. If 
she had ever really uttered it she might have been 
brought up rather short on the question of grounds. 
There were certainly, at any rate, no grounds in 
Tony's having, before church, sent a word over to 
her on the subject of their coming to luncheon. 
" Dear Julia, this morning, is really grand," he had 
written. "We've just managed to move to her 
downstairs room, where they've put up a lovely bed 
and where the sight of all her things cheers and 
amuses her, to say nothing of the wide immediate 
outlook at her garden and her own corner of the 
terrace. In short the waves are going down and 
we're beginning to have our meals ' regular.' 
Luncheon may be rather late, but do bring over 
your charming little friend. How she lighted up 
yesterday my musty den ! There will be another 
little friend, by the way not of mine, but of Rose 
Armiger's, the young man to whom, as I think you 
know, she's engaged to be married. He's just back 
from China and comes down till to-morrow. Our 



THE OTHER HOUSE 9 

Sunday trains are such a bore that, having wired 
him to take the other line, I'm sending to meet him 
at Plumbury." Mrs. Beever had no need to reflect 
on these few lines to be comfortably conscious that 
they summarised the nature of her neighbour 
down to the " dashed sociability," as she had heard 
the poor fellow, in sharp reactions, himself call it, 
that had made him scribble them and that always 
made him talk too much for a man in what, more 
than he, she held to be a " position." He was 
there in his premature bustle over his wife's slow 
recovery ; he was there in his boyish impatience to 
improvise a feast ; he was there in the simplicity 
with which he exposed himself to the depredations, 
to the possible avalanche, of Miss Armiger's belong- 
ings. He was there moreover in his free-handed 
way of sending six miles for a young man from 
China, and he was most of all there in his allusion 
to the probable lateness of luncheon. Many things 
in these days were new at the other house, but 
nothing was so new as the hours of meals. Mrs. 
Beever had of old repeatedly dined there on the 
stroke of six. It will be seen that, as I began with 
declaring, she kept her finger on the pulse of 
Bounds. 



II 



WHEN Jean Martle, arriving with her message, was 
ushered into the hall, it struck her at first as empty, 
and during the moment that she supposed herself in 
sole possession she perceived it to be showy and 
indeed rather splendid. Bright, large and high, 
richly decorated and freely used, full of " corners " 
and communications, it evidently played equally the 
part of a place of reunion and of a place of transit. 
It contained so many large pictures that if they 
hadn't looked somehow so recent it might have 
passed for a museum. The shaded summer was in 
it now, and the odour of many flowers, as well as 
the tick from the chimney-piece of a huge French 
clock which Jean recognised as modern. The 
colour of the air, the frank floridity, amused and 
charmed her. It was not till the servant had left 
her that she became aware she was not alone a 
discovery that soon gave her an embarrassed 
minute. At the other end of the place appeared 
a young woman in a posture that, with interposing 
objects, had made her escape notice, a young woman 
bent low over a table at which she seemed to have 
been writing. Her chair was pushed back, her face 
buried in her extended and supported arms, her 



THE OTHER HOUSE n 

whole person relaxed and abandoned. She had 
heard neither the swing of the muffled door nor any 
footfall on the deep carpet, and her attitude denoted 
a state of mind that made the messenger from 
Eastmead hesitate between quickly retreating on 
tiptoe or still more quickly letting her know that she 
was observed. Before Jean could decide her com- 
panion looked up, then rapidly and confusedly rose. 
She could only be Miss Armiger, and she had been 
such a figure of woe that it was a surprise not to 
see her in tears. She was by no means in tears ; 
but she was for an instant extremely blank, an 
instant during which Jean remembered, rather to 
wonder at it, Mrs. Beever's having said of her that 
one really didn't know whether she was awfully 
plain or strikingly handsome. Jean felt that one 
quite did know : she was awfully plain. It may 
immediately be mentioned that about the charm of 
the apparition offered meanwhile to her own eyes 
Rose Armiger had not a particle of doubt : a slim, 
fair girl who struck her as a light sketch for some- 
thing larger, a cluster of happy hints with nothing 
yet quite " put in " but the splendour of the hair 
and the grace of the clothes clothes that were not 
as the clothes of Wilverley. The reflection of these 
things came back to Jean from a pair of eyes as to 
which she judged that the extreme lightness of their 
grey was what made them so strange as to be 
ugly a reflection that spread into a sudden smile 
from a wide, full-lipped mouth, whose regular office, 
obviously, was to produce the second impression. 



12 THE OTHER HOUSE 

In a flash of small square white teeth this second 
impression was produced and the ambiguity that 
Mrs. Beever had spoken of lighted up an ambiguity 
worth all the dull prettiness in the world. Yes, 
one quite did know: Miss Armiger was strikingly 
handsome. It thus took her but a few seconds to 
repudiate every connection with the sombre image 
Jean had just encountered. 

" Excuse my jumping out at you/' she said. " I 
heard a sound I was expecting a friend." Jean 
thought her attitude an odd one for the purpose, but 
hinted a fear of being in that case in the way ; on 
which the young lady protested that she was de- 
lighted to see her, that she had already heard of 
her, that she guessed who she was. " And I dare- 
say you've already heard of me." 

Jean shyly confessed to this, and getting away 
from the subject as quickly as possible, produced on 
the spot her formal credentials. 

" Mrs. Beever sent me over to ask if it's really 
quite right we should come to luncheon. We came 
out of church before the sermon, because of some 
people who were to go home with us. They're with 
Mrs. Beever now, but she told me to come straight 
across the garden the short way." 

Miss Armiger continued to smile. " No way ever 
seems short enough for Mrs. Beever ! " 

There was an intention in this, as Jean faintly 
felt, that was lost upon her; but while she was 
wondering her companion went on : 

" Did Mrs. Beever direct you to inquire of me ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 13 

Jean hesitated. " Ot any one, I think, who would 
be here to tell me in case Mrs. Bream shouldn't be 
quite so well." 

" She isn't quite so well." 

The younger girl's face showed the flicker of a 
fear of losing her entertainment; on perceiving 
which the elder pursued : 

" But we shan't romp or racket shall we ? We 
shall be very quiet." 

" Very, very quiet," Jean eagerly echoed. 

Her new friend's smile became a laugh, which 
was followed by the abrupt question : "Do you 
mean to be long with Mrs. Beever ? " 

"Till her son comes home. You know he's at 
Oxford, and his term soon ends." 

"And yours ends with it you depart as he 
arrives ? " 

" Mrs. Beever tells me I positively shan't," said 
Jean. 

" Then you positively won't. Everything is done 
here exactly as Mrs. Beever tells us. Don't you 
like her son ? " Rose Armiger asked. 

" I don't know yet ; it's exactly what she wants 
me to find out." 

" Then you'll have to be very clear." 

" But if I find out I don't ? " Jean risked. 

" I shall be very sorry for you ! " 

" I think then it will be the only thing in this 
love of an old place that I shan't have liked." 

Rose Armiger for a moment rested her eyes on 
her visitor, who was more and more conscious that 



I 4 THE OTHER HOUSE 

she was strange and yet not, as Jean had always 
supposed strange people to be, disagreeable. " Do 
you like me ? " she unexpectedly inquired. 

" How can I tell at the end of three minutes ? " 
" / can tell at the end of one ! You must try 
to like me you must be very kind to me," Miss 
Armiger declared. Then she added : " Do you 
like Mr. Bream ? " 

Jean considered ; she felt that she must rise to 
the occasion. " Oh, immensely 1 " At this her 
interlocutress laughed again, and it made her con- 
tinue with more reserve : " Of course I only saw 
him for five minutes yesterday at the Bank." 

" Oh, we know how long you saw him ! " Miss 
Armiger exclaimed. " He has told us all about 
your visit." 

Jean was slightly awe-stricken : this picture seemed 
to include so many people. "Whom has he told ?" 

Her companion had the air of being amused at 
everything she said; but for Jean it was an air, 
none the less, with a kind of foreign charm in it. 
" Why, the very first person was of course his poor 
little wife." 

" But I'm not to see her, am I ? " Jean rather 
eagerly asked, puzzled by the manner of the allu- 
sion and but half suspecting it to be a part of her 
informant's general ease. 

" You're not to see her, but even if you were she 
wouldn't hurt you for it," this young lady replied. 
" She understands his friendly way and likes above 
all his beautiful frankness." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 15 

Jean's bewilderment began to look as if she too 
now, as she remembered, understood and liked 
these things. It might have been in confirmation of 
what was in her mind that she presently said : " He 
told me I might see the wonderful baby. He told 
me he would show it to me himself." 

"I'm sure he'll be delighted to do that. He's 
awfully proud of the wonderful baby." 

" I suppose it's very lovely," Jean remarked with 
growing confidence. 

11 Lovely! Do you think babies are ever lovely ? " 

Taken aback by this challenge, Jean reflected a 
little ; she found, however, nothing better to say 
than, rather timidly: "I like dear little children, 
don't you ? " 

Miss Armiger in turn considered, " Not a bit ! " 
she then replied. " It would be very sweet and 
attractive of me to say I adore them ; but I never 
pretend to feelings I can't keep up, don't you 
know ? If you'd like, all the same, to see Effie," 
she obligingly added, " I'll so far sacrifice myself as 
to get her for you." 

Jean smiled as if this pleasantry were contagious. 
" You won't sacrifice her ? " 

Rose Armiger stared. " I won't destroy her." 

" Then do get her." 

" Not yet, not yet ! " cried another voice that of 
Mrs. Beever, who had just been introduced and 
who, having heard the last words of the two girls, 
came, accompanied by the servant, down the hall. 
"The baby's of no importance. We've come over 



16 THE OTHER HOUSE 

for the mother. Is it true that Julia has had a bad 
turn ? " she asked of Rose Armiger. 

Miss Armiger had a peculiar way of looking at a 
person before speaking, and she now, with this 
detachment, delayed so long to answer Mrs. Beever 
that Jean also rested her eyes, as if for a reason, on 
the good lady from Eastmead. She greatly admired 
her, but in that instant, the first of seeing her at 
Bounds, she perceived once for all how the differ- 
ence of the setting made another thing of the gem. 
Short and solid, with rounded corners and full 
supports, her hair very black and very flat, her eyes 
very small for the amount of expression they 
could show, Mrs. Beever was so " early Victorian " 
as to be almost prehistoric was constructed to 
move amid massive mahogany and sit upon banks 
of Berlin-wool. She was like an odd volume, 
" sensibly " bound, of some old magazine. Jean 
knew that the great social event of her younger 
years had been her going to a fancy-ball in the 
character of an Andalusian, an incident of which 
she still carried a memento in the shape of a 
hideous fan. Jean was so constituted that she also 
knew, more dimly but at the end of five minutes, 
that the elegance at Mr. Bream's was slightly 
provincial. It made none the less a medium in 
which Mrs. Beever looked superlatively local. That 
indeed in turn caused Jean to think the old place 
still more of a " love." 

" I believe our poor friend feels rather down," 
Miss Armiger finally brought out. "But I don't 



THE OTHER HOUSE 17 

imagine it's of the least consequence," she im- 
mediately added. 

The contrary of this was, however, in some 
degree foreshadowed in a speech directed to Jean 
by the footman who had admitted her. He re- 
ported Mr. Bream as having been in his wife's room 
for nearly an hour, and Dr. Ramage as having 
arrived some time before and not yet come out. 
Mrs. Beever decreed, upon this news, that they 
must drop their idea of lunching and that Jean must 
go straight back to the friends who had been left 
at the other house. It was these friends who, on 
the way from church, had mentioned their having 
got wind of the rumour the quick circulation of 
which testified to the compactness of Wilverley 
that there had been a sudden change in Mrs. 
Bream since the hour at which her husband's note 
was written. Mrs. Beever dismissed her companion 
to Eastmead with a message for her visitors. Jean 
was to entertain them there in her stead and to 
understand that she might return to luncheon only 
in case of being sent for. At the door the girl 
paused and exclaimed rather wistfully to Rose 
Armiger : " Well, then, give her my love I " 



II 



"YouR young friend," Rose commented, "is as 
affectionate as she's pretty: sending her love to 
people she has never seen ! " 

" She only meant the little girl. I think it's rather 
nice of her," said Mrs. Beever. "My interest in 
these anxieties is always confined to the mamma. 
I thought we were going so straight." 

" I dare say we are," Miss Armiger replied. 
" But Nurse told me an hour ago that I'm not to see 
her at all this morning. It will be the first morning 
for several days." 

Mrs. Beever was silent a little. " You've enjoyed 
a privilege altogether denied to me." 

"Ah, you must remember," said Rose, "that I'm 
Julia's oldest friend. That's always the way she 
treats me." 

Mrs. Beever assented. "Familiarly, of course. 
Well, you're not mine ; but that's the way I treat 
you too," she went on. " You must wait with me 
here for more news, and be as still as a mouse." 

" Dear Mrs. Beever," the girl protested, " I never 
made a noise in all my life ! " 

"You will some day you're so clever," Mrs. 
Beever said. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 19 

"I'm clever enough to be quiet." Then Rose 
added, less gaily: "I'm the one thing of her own 
that dear Julia has ever had." 

Mrs. Beever raised her eyebrows. "Don't you 
count her husband ? " 

" I count Tony immensely ; but in another way." 

Again Mrs. Beever considered: she might have 
been wondering in what way even so expert a young 
person as this could count Anthony Bream except 
as a treasure to his wife. But what she presently 
articulated was : " Do you call him ' Tony ' to 
himself?" 

Miss Armiger met her question this time promptly. 
" He has asked me to and to do it even to Julia. 
Don't be afraid ! " she exclaimed ; " I know my place 
and I shan't go too far. Of course he's everything 
to her now," she continued, " and the child is already 
almost as much ; but what I mean is that if he counts 
for a great deal more, I, at least, go back a good deal 
further. Though I'm three years older we were 
brought together as girls by one of the strongest of 
all ties the tie of a common aversion." 

" Oh, I know your common aversion ! " Mrs. 
Beever spoke with her air of general competence. 

" Perhaps then you know that her detestable 
stepmother was, very little to my credit, my aunt. 
If her father, that is, was Mrs. Grantham's second 
husband, my uncle, my mother's brother, had been 
the first. Julia lost her mother; I lost both my 
mother and my father. Then Mrs. Grantham took 
me : she had shortly before made her second marriage. 



20 THE OTHER HOUSE 

She put me at the horrid school at Weymouth at 
which she had already put her step-daughter." 

"You ought to be obliged to her," Mrs. Beever 
suggested, " for having made you acquainted." 

" We are we've never ceased to be. It was as 
if she had made us sisters, with the delightful 
position for me of the elder, the protecting one. 
But it's the only good turn she has ever done 
us." 

Mrs. Beever weighed this statement with her 
alternative, her business manner. " Is she really 
then such a monster ? " 

Rose Armiger had a melancholy headshake. 
" Don't ask me about her I dislike her too much, 
perhaps, to be strictly fair. For me, however, I 
daresay, it didn't matter so much that she was 
narrow and hard: I wasn't an easy victim I 
could take care of myself, I could fight. But Julia 
bowed her head and suffered. Never was a mar- 
riage more of a rescue." 

Mrs. Beever took this in with unsuspended 
criticism. "And yet Mrs. Grantham travelled all 
the way down from town the other day simply to 
make her a visit of a couple of hours." 

"That wasn't a kindness," the girl returned; 
"it was an injury, and I believe certainly Julia 
believes that it was a calculated one. Mrs. 
Grantham knew perfectly the effect she would 
have, and she triumphantly had it. She came, she 
said, at the particular crisis, to 'make peace.' 
Why couldn't she let the poor dear alone? She 



THE OTHER HOUSE 21 

only stirred up the wretched past and reopened old 
wounds." 

For answer to this Mrs. Beever remarked with 
some irrelevancy : " She abused you a good deal, 
I think." 

Her companion smiled frankly. " Shockingly, 
I believe ; but that's of no importance to me. She 
doesn't touch me or reach me now." 

" Your description of her," said Mrs. Beever, " is 
a description of a monstrous bad woman. And yet 
she appears to have got two honourable men to give 
her the last proof of confidence." 

" My poor uncle utterly withdrew his confidence 
when he saw her as she was. She killed him he 
died of his horror of her. As for Julia's father, he's 
honourable if you like, but he's a muff. He's afraid 
of his wife." 

" And her ' taking ' you, as you say, who were no 
real relation to her her looking after you and put- 
ting you at school : wasn't that," Mrs. Beever pro- 
pounded, " a kindness ? " 

" She took me to torment me or at least to make 
me feel her hand. She has an absolute necessity 
to do that it was what brought her down here the 
other day." 

"You make out a wonderful case," said Mrs. 
Beever, "and if ever I'm put on my trial for a 
crime say for muddling the affairs of the Bank 
I hope I shall be defended by some one with 
your gift and your manner. I don't wonder," 
she blandly pursued, "that your friends, even the 



22 THE OTHER HOUSE 

blameless ones, like this dear pair, cling to you 
as they do." 

" If you mean you don't wonder I stay on here 
so long," said Rose good-humouredly, " I'm greatly 
obliged to you for your sympathy. Julia's the one 
thing I have of my own." 

" You make light of our husbands and lovers ! " 
laughed Mrs. Beever. " Haven't I had the pleasure 
of hearing of a gentleman to whom you're soon to 
be married ? " 

Rose Armiger opened her eyes there was perhaps 
a slight affectation in it. She looked, at any rate, 
as if she had to make a certain effort to meet the 
allusion. " Dennis Vidal ? " she then asked. 

" Lord, are there more than one ? " Mrs. Beever 
cried ; after which, as the girl, who had coloured a 
little, hesitated in a way that almost suggested 
alternatives, she added: " Isn't it a definite engage- 
ment?" 

Rose Armiger looked round at the clock. " Mr. 
Vidal will be here this morning. Ask him how he 
considers it." 

One of the doors of the hall at this moment 
opened, and Mrs. Beever exclaimed with some 
eagerness : " Here he is, perhaps ! " Her eagerness 
was characteristic ; it was part of a comprehensive 
vision in which the pieces had already fallen into 
sharp adjustment to each other. The young lady 
she had been talking with had in these few minutes, 
for some reason, struck her more forcibly than ever 
before as a possible object of interest to a youth of 



THE OTHER HOUSE 23 

a candour greater even than any it was incumbent 
on a respectable mother to cultivate. Miss Armiger 
had just given her a glimpse of the way she could 
handle honest gentlemen as "muffs." She was 
decidedly too unusual to be left out of account. If 
there was the least danger of Paul's falling in love 
with her it ought somehow to be arranged that her 
marriage should encounter no difficulty. 

The person now appearing, however, proved to be 
only Doctor Ramage, who, having a substantial wife 
of his own, was peculiarly unfitted to promise relief 
to Mrs. Beever's anxiety. He was a little man who 
moved, with a warning air, on tiptoe, as if he were 
playing some drawing-room game of surprises, and 
who had a face so candid and circular that it sug- 
gested a large white pill. Mrs. Beever had once 
said with regard to sending for him : " It isn't to 
take his medicine, it's to take him. I take him twice 
a week in a cup of tea." It was his tone that did 
her good. He had in his hand a sheet of note-paper, 
one side of which was covered with writing and with 
which he immediately addressed himself to Miss 
Armiger. It was a prescription to be made up, and 
he begged her to see that it was carried on the spot 
to the chemist's, mentioning that on leaving Mrs. 
Bream's room he had gone straight to the library to 
think it out. Rose, who appeared to recognise at a 
glance its nature, replied that as she was fidgety 
and wanted a walk she would perform the errand 
herself. Her bonnet and jacket were there; she 
had put them on to go to church, and then, on 



24 THE OTHER HOUSE 

second thoughts, seeing Mr. Bream give it up, had 
taken them off. 

"Excellent for you to go yourself," said the 
Doctor. He had an instruction to add, to which, 
lucid and prompt, already equipped, she gave full 
attention. As she took the paper from him he 
subjoined: "You're a very nice, sharp, obliging 
person." 

" She knows what she's about ! " said Mrs. Beever 
with much expression. " But what in the world is 
Julia about ? " 

" I'll tell you when / know, my dear lady." 

" Is there really anything wrong ? " 

" I'm waiting to find out." 

Miss Armiger, before leaving them, was waiting 
too. She had been checked on the way to the door 
by Mrs. Beever's question, and she stood there with 
her intensely clear eyes on Doctor Ramage's face. 

Mrs. Beever continued to study it as earnestly. 
" Then you're not going yet ? " 

" By no means, though I've another pressing call. 
I must have that thing from you first," he said to 
Rose. 

She went to the door, but there again she paused. 
" Is Mr. Bream still with her ? " 

" Very much with her that's why I'm here. She 
made a particular request to be left for five minutes 
alone with him." 

" So Nurse isn't there either ? " Rose asked. 

" Nurse has embraced the occasion to pop down 
for her lunch. Mrs. Bream has taken it into her 



THE OTHER HOUSE 2$ 

head that she has something very important to 
say." 

Mrs. Beever firmly seated herself. " And pray 
what may that be ? " 

" She turned me out of the room precisely so that 
I shouldn't learn." 

" I think / know what it is," their companion, at 
the door, put in. 

" Then what is it ? " Mrs. Beever demanded. 

" Oh, I wouldn't tell you for the world ! " And 
with this Rose Armiger departed. 



IV 

LEFT alone with the lady of Eastmead, Doctor 
Ramage studied his watch a little absently. " Our 
young friend's exceedingly nervous." 

Mrs. Beever glanced in the direction in which 
Rose had disappeared. " Do you allude to that 
girl ? " 

" I allude to dear Mrs. Tony." 

"It's equally true of Miss Armiger ; she's as 
worried as a pea on a pan. Julia, as far as that 
goes," Mrs. Beever continued, " can never have 
been a person to hold herself together." 

" Precisely she requires to be held. Well, 
happily she has Tony to hold her." 

" Then he's not himself in one of his states ? " 

Doctor Ramage hesitated. " I don't quite make 
him out. He seems to have fifty things at once 
in his head." 

Mrs. Beever looked at the Doctor hard. " When 
does he ever not have ? But I had a note from him 
only this morning in the highest spirits." 

Doctor Ramage's little eyes told nothing but what 
he wanted. " Well, whatever happens to him, he'll 
always have them ! " 

Mrs. Beever at this jumped up. "Robert 



THE OTHER HOUSE 27 

Ramage," she earnestly demanded, " what is to 
happen to that boy ? " 

Before he had time to reply there rang out a 
sudden sound which had, oddly, much of the effect 
of an answer and which caused them both to start. 
It was the near vibration, from Mrs. Bream's room, 
of one of the smart, loud electric bells which were 
for Mrs. Beever the very accent of the newness of 
Bounds. They waited an instant ; then the Doctor 
said quietly : " It's for Nurse ! " 

" It's not for you ? " The bell sounded again as 
she spoke. 

" It's for Nurse," Doctor Ramage repeated, 
moving nevertheless to the door he had come in 
by. He paused again to listen, and the door, the 
next moment thrown open, gave passage to a tall, 
good-looking young man, dressed as if, with much 
freshness, for church, and wearing a large orchid 
in his buttonhole. " You rang for Nurse ? " the 
Doctor immediately said. 

The young man stood looking from one of his 
friends to the other. "She's there it's all right. 

But ah, my dear people ! " And he passed his 

hand, with the vivid gesture of brushing away an 
image, over a face of which the essential radiance 
was visible even through perturbation. 

" How's Julia now ? " Mrs. Beever asked. 

" Much relieved, she tells me, at having spoken." 

11 Spoken of what, Tony ? " 

" Of everything she can think of that's incon- 
ceivable that's damnable." 



28 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" If I hadn't known that she wanted to do exactly 
that," said the Doctor, " I wouldn't have given her 
the opportunity." 

Mrs. Beever's eyes sounded her colleague of the 
Bank. " You're upset, my poor boy you're in one 
of your greatest states. Something painful to you 
has taken place." 

Tony Bream paid no attention to this remark ; all 
his attention was for his other visitor, who stood 
with one hand on the door of the hall and an 
open watch, on which he still placidly gazed, in 
the other. "Ramage," the young man suddenly 
broke out, " are you keeping something back ? 
Isn't she safe ? " 

The good Doctor's small, neat face seemed to 
grow more genially globular. "The dear lady is 
convinced,, you mean, that her very last hour is at 
hand?" 

" So much so," Tony replied, " that if she got 
you and Nurse away, if she made me kneel down 
by her bed and take her two hands in mine, what 
do you suppose it was to say to me ? " 

Doctor Ramage beamed. " Why, of course, that 
she's going to perish in her flower. I've been 
through it so often ! " he said to Mrs. Beever. 

" Before, but not after," that lady lucidly rejoined. 
" She has had her chance of perishing, but now it's 
too late." 

" Doctor," said Tony Bream, " is my wife going 
to die ? " 

His friend hesitated a moment. " When a lady's 



THE OTHER HOUSE 29 

only symptom of that tendency is the charming 
volubility with which she dilates upon it, that's 
very well as far as it goes. But it's not quite 
enough." 

" She says she knows it," Tony returned. " But 
you surely know more than she, don't you ? " 

" I know everything that can be known. I know 
that when, in certain conditions, pretty young 
mothers have acquitted themselves of that inevi- 
table declaration, they turn over and go comfortably 
to sleep." 

" That's exactly," said Tony, " what Nurse must 
make her do." 

"It's exactly what she's doing." Doctor Ramage 
had no sooner spoken than Mrs. Bream's bell 
sounded for the third time. " Excuse me ! " he im- 
perturbably added. " Nurse calls me." 

"And doesn't she call me ? " cried Tony. 

" Not in the least." The Doctor raised his hand 
with instant authority. " Stay where you are ! " 
With this he went off to his patient. 

If Mrs. Beever often produced, with promptitude, 
her theory that the young banker was subject to 
" states," this habit, of which he was admirably 
tolerant, was erected on the sense of something in 
him of which even a passing observer might have 
caught a glimpse. A woman of still more wit than 
Mrs. Beever, whom he had met on the threshold of 
life, once explained some accident to him by the 
words : " The reason is, you know, that you're so 
exaggerated." This had not been a manner of 



3 o THE OTHER HOUSE 

saying that he was inclined to overshoot the truth ; 
it had been an attempt to express a certain quality 
of passive excess which was the note of the whole 
man and which, for an attentive eye, began with 
his neckties and ended with his intonations. To 
look at him was immediately to see that he was a 
collection of gifts, which presented themselves as 
such precisely by having in each case slightly over- 
flowed the measure. He could do things this was 
all he knew about them ; and he was ready-made, 
as it were he had not had to put himself together. 
His dress was just too fine, his colour just too high, 
his moustache just too long, his voice just too loud, 
his smile just too gay. His movement, his manner, 
his tone were respectively just too free, too easy and 
too familiar; his being a very handsome, happy, 
clever, active, ambitiously local young man was in 
short just too obvious. But the result of it all was 
a presence that was in itself a close contact, the air 
of immediate, unconscious, unstinted life, and of his 
doing what he liked and liking to please. One of 
his " states," for Mrs. Beever, was the state of his 
being a boy again, and the sign of it was his talking 
nonsense. It was not an example of that tendency, 
but she noted almost as if it were that almost 
as soon as the Doctor had left them he asked 
if she had not brought over to him that awfully 
pretty girl. 

" She has been here, but I sent her home again." 
Then his visitor added: "Does she strike you as 
awfully pretty ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 31 

"As pretty as a pretty song! I took a tre- 
mendous notion to her." 

" She's only a child for mercy's sake don't show 
your notion too much ! " Mrs. Beever ejaculated. 

Tony Bream gave his bright stare ; after which, 
with his still brighter alacrity, " I see what you 
mean : of course I won't ! " he declared. Then, as 
if candidly and conscientiously wondering : " Is it 
showing it too much to hope she'll come back to 
luncheon ? " 

" Decidedly if Julia's so down." 

" That's only too much for Julia not for her" 
Tony said with his flurried smile. "But Julia 
knows about her, hopes she's coming and wants 
everything to be natural and pleasant." He passed 
his hand over his eyes again, and as if at the 
same time recognising that his tone required 
explanation, "It's just because Julia's so down, 
don't you see?" he subjoined. "A fellow can't 
stand it." 

Mrs. Beever spoke after a pause during which 
her companion roamed rather jerkily about. " It's a 
mere accidental fluctuation. You may trust Ramage 
to know." 

"Yes, thank God, I may trust Ramage to 
know!" He had the accent of a man constitu- 
tionally accessible to suggestion, and could turn 
the next instant to a quarter more cheering. " Do 
you happen to have an idea of what has become of 
Rose?" 

Again Mrs. Beever, making a fresh observation, 



32 THE OTHER HOUSE 

waited a little before answering. "Do you now 
call her ' Rose'?" 

" Dear, yes talking with Julia. And with her," 
he went on as if he couldn't quite remember 
"do I too? Yes," he recollected, "I think I 
must." 

"What one must one must," said Mrs. Beever 
dryly. " ' Rose,' then, has gone over to the 
chemist's for the Doctor." 

"How jolly of her!" Tony exclaimed. "She's 
a tremendous comfort." 

Mrs. Beever committed herself to no opinion on 
this point, but it was doubtless on account of the 
continuity of the question that she presently asked : 
" Who's this person who's coming to-day to marry 
her?" 

" A very good fellow, I believe and ' rising ' : 
a clerk in some Eastern house." 

" And why hasn't he come sooner ? " 

" Because he has been at Hong Kong, or some 
such place, trying hard to pick up an income. 
" He's ' poor but pushing,' she says. They've no 
means but her own two hundred." 

" Two hundred a year ? That's quite enough for 
them ! " Mrs. Beever opined. 

"Then you had better tell him so!" laughed 
Tony. 

" I hope you'll back me up ! " she returned ; after 
which, before he had time to speak, she broke out 
with irrelevance : " How is it she knows what Julia 
wanted to say to you ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 33 

Tony, surprised, looked vague. "Just now? 
Does she know ? I haven't the least idea." Rose 
appeared at this moment behind the glass doors of 
the vestibule, and he added : " Here she is." 

" Then you can ask her." 

"Easily," said Tony. But when the girl came 
in he greeted her only with a lively word of thanks 
for the service she had just rendered ; so that the 
lady of Eastmead, after waiting a minute, took the 
line of assuming with a certain visible rigour that 
he might have a reason for making his inquiry 
without an auditor. Taking temporary leave of 
him, she mentioned the visitors at home whom she 
must not forget. "Then you won't come back?" 
he asked. 

"Yes, in an hour or two." 

" And bring Miss What's-her-name ? " 

As Mrs. Beever failed to respond to this, Rose 
Armiger added her voice. "Yes do bring Miss 
What's-her-name." Mrs. Beever, without assent- 
ing, reached the door, which Tony had opened for 
her. Here she paused long enough to be over- 
taken by the rest of their companion's appeal. " I 
delight so in her clothes." 

" I delight so in her hair ! " Tony laughed. 

Mrs. Beever looked from one of them to the 
other. 

" Don't you think you've delight enough with 
what your situation here already offers ? " She 
departed with the private determination to return 
unaccompanied. 

c 



V 



THREE minutes later Tony Bream put his question 
to his other visitor. "Is it true that you know 
what Julia a while ago had the room cleared in 
order to say to me ? " 

Rose hesitated. "Mrs. Beever repeated to you 
that I told her so? Yes, then; I probably do 
know." She waited again a little. "The poor 
darling announced to you her conviction that she's 
dying." Then at the face with which he greeted 
her exactitude : " I haven't needed to be a monster 
of cunning to guess ! " she exclaimed. 

He had perceptibly paled: it made a difference, 
a kind of importance for that absurdity that it 
was already in other ears. "She has said the 
same to you ? " 

Rose gave a pitying smile. " She has done me 
that honour." 

" Do you mean to-day ? " 

" To-day and once before." 

Tony looked simple in his wonder. "Yester- 
day?" 

Rose hesitated again. "No; before your child 
was born. Soon after I came." 

" She had made up her mind then from the first ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 35 

"Yes," said Rose, with the serenity of superior 
sense; "she had laid out for herself that pleasant 
little prospect. She called it a presentiment, a 
fixed idea." 

Tony took this in with a frown. "And you 
never spoke of it ? " 

"To you? Why in the world should I when 
she herself didn't? I took it perfectly for what 
it was an inevitable but unimportant result of 
the nervous depression produced by her step- 
mother's visit." 

Tony had fidgeted away with his hands in the 
pockets of his trousers. " Damn her stepmother's 
visit ! " 

" That's exactly what I did ! " Rose laughed. 

" Damn her stepmother too ! " the young man 
angrily pursued. 

" Hush ! " said the girl soothingly : " we mustn't 
curse our relations before the Doctor ! " Doctor 
Ramage had come back from his patient, and she 
mentioned to him that the medicine for which she 
had gone out would immediately be delivered. 

"Many thanks," he replied: "I'll pick it up 
myself. I must run out to another case." Then 
with a friendly hand to Tony and a nod at the 
room he had quitted : "Things are quiet." 

Tony, gratefully grasping his hand, detained him 
by it. " And what was that loud ring that called 
you?" 

"A stupid flurry of Nurse. I was ashamed of 
her." 



3 6 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" Then why did you stay so long ? " 
" To have it out with your wife. She wants you 
again." 

Tony eagerly dropped his hand. "Then I 

go!" " 

The Doctor raised his liberated member. "In 
a quarter of an hour not before. I'm most 
reluctant, but I allow her five minutes." 

" It may make her easier afterwards," Rose 
observed. 

"That's precisely the ground of my giving in. 
Take care, you know; Nurse will time you," 
the Doctor said to Tony. 

" So many thanks. And you'll come back ? " 

"The moment I'm free." 

When he had gone Tony stood there sombre. 
" She wants to say it again that's what she 
wants." 

" Well," Rose answered, " the more she says it 
the less it's true. It's not she who decides it." 

"No," Tony brooded; "it's not she. But it's 
not you and I either," he soon went on. 

" It's not even the Doctor," Rose remarked with 
her conscious irony. 

Her companion rested his troubled eyes on her. 
"And yet he's as worried as if it were." She 
protested against this imputation with a word to 
which he paid no heed. " If anything should 
happen" and his eyes seemed to go as far as 
his thought " what on earth do you suppose would 
become of me ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 37 

The girl looked down, very grave. "Men have 
borne such things." 

"Very badly the real ones." He seemed to 
lose himself in the effort to embrace the worst, 
to think it out. " What should I do ? where 
should I turn ? " 

She was silent a little. "You ask me too 
much ! " she helplessly sighed. 

" Don't say that," replied Tony, " at a moment 
when I know so little if I mayn't have to ask 
you still more ! " This exclamation made her 
meet his eyes with a turn of her own that might 
have struck him had he not been following another 
train. "To you I can say it, Rose she's inex- 
pressibly dear to me." 

She showed him a face intensely receptive. " It's 
for your affection for her that I've really given you 
mine." Then she shook her head seemed to 
shake out, like the overflow of a cup, her generous 
gaiety. " But be easy. We shan't have loved her 
so much only to lose her." 

" I'll be hanged if we shall ! " Tony responded. 
"And such talk's a vile false note in the midst 
of a joy like yours." 

" Like mine ? " Rose exhibited some vague- 
ness. 

Her companion was already accessible to the 
amusement of it. " I hope that's not the way 
you mean to look at Mr. Vidal ! " 

"Ah, Mr. Vidal !" she ambiguously murmured. 

" Shan't you then be glad to see him ? " 



3 8 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"Intensely glad. But how shall I say it?" 
She thought a moment and then went on as if 
she found the answer to her question in Tony's 
exceptional intelligence and their comfortable in- 
timacy. "There's gladness and gladness. It isn't 
love's young dream ; it's rather an old and rather 
a sad story. We've worried and waited we've 
been acquainted with grief. We've come together 
a weary way." 

" I know you've had a horrid grind. But isn't 
this the end of it ? " 

Rose hesitated. "That's just what he's to 
settle." 

" Happily, I see ! Just look at him." 

The glass doors, as Tony spoke, had been 
thrown open by the butler. The young man 
from China was there a short, meagre young 
man, with a smooth face and a dark blue double- 
breasted jacket. " Mr. Vidal ! " the butler an- 
nounced, withdrawing again, while the visitor, 
whose entrance had been rapid, suddenly and 
shyly faltered at the sight of his host. His pause, 
however, lasted but just long enough to enable 
Rose to bridge it over with the frankest maidenly 
grace ; and Tony's quick sense of being out of 
place at this reunion was not a bar to the im- 
pression of her charming, instant action, her soft 
" Dennis, Dennis ! " her light, fluttered arms, her 
tenderly bent head and the short, bright stillness 
of her clasp of her lover. Tony shone down at 
them with the pleasure of having helped them, 



THE OTHER HOUSE 39 

and the warmth of it was in his immediate grasp 
of the traveller's hand. He cut short his em- 
barrassed thanks he was too delighted ; and leav- 
ing him with the remark that he would presently 
come back to show him his room, he went off again 
to poor Julia. 



VI 



DENNIS VIDAL, when the door had closed on his 
host, drew again to his breast the girl to whom he 
was plighted and pressed her there with silent joy. 
She softly submitted, then still more softly dis- 
engaged herself, though in his flushed firmness he 
but partly released her. The light of admiration 
was in his hard young face a visible tribute to 
what she showed again his disaccustomed eyes. 
Holding her yet, he covered her with a smile that 
produced two strong but relenting lines on either 
side of his dry, thin lips. " My own dearest," he 
murmured, " you're still more so than one remem- 
bered!" 

She opened her clear eyes wider. "Still more 
what?" 

" Still more of a fright ! " And he kissed her again. 

" It's you that are wonderful, Dennis," she said ; 
"you look so absurdly young." 

He felt with his lean, fine brown hand his spare, 
clean brown chin. "If I looked as old as I feel, 
dear girl, they'd have my portrait in the illustrated 
papers." 

He had now drawn her down upon the nearest 
sofa, and while he sat sideways, grasping the wrist 



THE OTHER HOUSE 41 

of which he remained in possession after she had 
liberated her fingers, she leaned back and took him 
in with a deep air of her own. " And yet it's not 
that you're exactly childish or so extraordinarily 
fresh," she went on as if to puzzle out, for her 
satisfaction, her impression of him. 

" ' Fresh,' my dear girl ! " He gave a little happy 
jeer; then he raised her wrist to his mouth and 
held it there as long as she would let him, looking 
at her hard. " Thats the freshest thing I've ever 
been conscious of ! " he exclaimed as she drew away 
her hand and folded her arms. 

"You're worn, but you're not wasted," she 
brought out in her kind but considering way. 
" You're awfully well, you know." 

" Yes, I'm awfully well, I know " he spoke with 
just the faintest ring of impatience. Then he 
added : " Your voice, all the while, has been in my 
ears. But there's something you put into it that 
they out there, stupid things ! couldn't. Don't 
'size me up' so," he continued smiling; "you 
make me nervous about what I may seem to come 
to!" 

They had both shown shyness, but Rose's was 
already gone. She kept her inclined position and 
her folded arms ; supported by the back of the sofa, 
her head preserved, toward the side on which he 
sat, its charming contemplative turn. " I'm only 
thinking," she said, " that you look young just as a 
steel instrument of the best quality, no matter how 
much it's handled, often looks new." 



42 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" Ah, if you mean I'm kept bright by use ! " 

the young man laughed. 

"You're polished by life." 

" ' Polished ' is delightful of you ! " 

" I'm not sure you've come back handsomer than 
you went," said Rose, " and I don't know if you've 
come back richer." 

"Then let me immediately tell you I have!" 
Dennis broke in. 

She received the announcement, for a minute, in 
silence : a good deal more passed between this pair 
than they uttered. " What I was going to say," 
she then quietly resumed, "is that I'm awfully 
pleased with myself when I -see that at any rate 
you're what shall I call you ? a made man." 

Dennis frowned a little through his happiness. 
"With 'yourself? Aren't you a little pleased 
with me ? " 

She hesitated. "With myself first, because I 
was sure of you first." 

" Do you mean before I was of you ? I'm 
somehow not sure of you yet!" the young man 
declared. 

Rose coloured slightly ; but she gaily laughed. 
" Then I'm ahead of you in everything ! " 

Leaning toward her with all his intensified need 
of her and holding by his extended arm the top 
of the sofa-back, he worried with his other hand 
a piece of her dress, which he had begun to finger 
for want of something more responsive. "You're 
as far beyond me still as all the distance I've come." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 43 

He had dropped his eyes upon the crumple he 
made in her frock, and her own during that 
moment, from her superior height, descended upon 
him with a kind of unseen appeal. When he 
looked up again it was gone. "What do you mean 
by a ' made ' man ? " he asked. 

" Oh, not the usual thing, but the real thing. A 
man one needn't worry about." 

" Thank you ! The man not worried about is the 
man who muffs it." 

" That's a horrid, selfish speech," said Rose 
Armiger. "You don't deserve I should tell you 
what a success I now feel that you'll be." 

" Well, darling," Dennis answered, " that matters 
the less as I know exactly the occasion on which 
I shall fully feel it for myself." 

Rose manifested no further sense of this occasion 
than to go straight on with her idea. She placed 
her arm with frank friendship on his shoulder.. It 
drew him closer, and he recovered his grasp of her 
free hand. With his want of stature and presence, 
his upward look at her, his small, smooth head, his 
seasoned sallowness and simple eyes, he might at 
this instant have struck a spectator as a figure 
actually younger and slighter than the ample, 
accomplished girl whose gesture protected and even 
a little patronised him. But in her vision of him 
she none the less clearly found full warrant for 
saying, instead of something he expected, something 
she wished and had her reasons for wishing, even if 
they represented but the gain of a minute's time. 



44 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" You're not splendid, my dear old Dennis you're 
not dazzling, nor dangerous, nor even exactly dis- 
tinguished. But you've a quiet little something that 
the tiresome time has made perfect, and that just 
here where you've come to me at last makes me 
immensely proud of you ! " 

She had with this so far again surrendered her- 
self that he could show her in the ways he pre- 
ferred how such a declaration touched him. The 
place in which he had come to her at last was of 
a nature to cause him to look about at it, just as to 
begin to inquire was to learn from her that he had 
dropped upon a crisis. He had seen Mrs. Bream, 
under Rose's wing, in her maiden days ; but in his 
eagerness to jump at a meeting with the only 
woman really important to him he had perhaps 
intruded more than he supposed. Though he ex- 
pressed again the liveliest sense of the kindness of 
these good people, he was unable to conceal his 
disappointment at finding their inmate agitated also 
by something quite distinct from the joy of his 
arrival. "Do you really think the poor lady will 
spoil our fun ? " he rather resentfully put it to 
her. 

" It will depend on what our fun may demand of 
her," said Rose. " If you ask me if she's in danger, 
I think not quite that : in such a case I must cer- 
tainly have put you off. I dare say to-day will 
show the contrary. But she's so much to me you 
know how much that I'm uneasy, quickly upset; 
and if I seem to you flustered and not myself and 



THE OTHER HOUSE 45 

not with you, I beg you to attribute it simply to the 
situation in the house." 

About this situation they had each more to say, 
and about many matters besides, for they faced 
each other over the deep waters of the accumulated 
and the undiscussed. They could keep no order 
and for five minutes more they rather helplessly 
played with the flood. Dennis was rueful at first, 
for what he seemed to have lighted upon was but 
half his opportunity; then he had an inspiration 
which made him say to his companion that they 
should both, after all, be able to make terms with 
any awkwardness by simply meeting it with a con- 
sciousness that their happiness had already taken 
form. 

" Our happiness ? " Rose was all interest. 

" Why, the end of our delays." 

She smiled with every allowance. "Do you 
mean we're to go out and be married this minute ? " 

" Well almost ; as soon as I've read you a 
letter." He produced, with the words, his pocket- 
book. 

She watched him an instant turn over its con- 
tents. "What letter?" 

" The best one I ever got. What have I done 
with it ? " On his feet before her, he continued his 
search. 

" From your people ? " 

" From my people. It met me in town, and it 
makes everything possible." 

She waited while he fumbled in his pockets; 



6 THE OTHER HOUSE 

with her hands clasped in her lap she sat looking 
up at him. "Then it's certainly a thing for me 
to hear." 

" But what the dickens have I done with it ? " 
Staring at her, embarrassed, he clapped his hands, 
on coat and waistcoat, to other receptacles ; at the 
end of a moment of which he had become aware of 
the proximity of the noiseless butler, upright in the 
high detachment of the superior servant who has 
embraced the conception of unpacking. 

" Might I ask you for your keys, sir ? " 

Dennis Vidal had a light he smote his forehead. 
" Stupid it's in my portmanteau ! " 

" Then go and get it ! " said Rose, who perceived 
as she spoke, by the door that faced her, that Tony 
Bream was rejoining them. She got up, and Tony, 
agitated, as she could see, but with complete com- 
mand of his manners, immediately and sociably said 
to Dennis that he was ready to guide him upstairs. 
Rose, at this, interposed. " Do let Walker take him 
I want to speak to you." 

Tony smiled at the young man. "Will you 
excuse me then?" Dennis protested against the 
trouble he was giving, and Walker led him away. 
Rose meanwhile waited not only till they were out 
of sight and of earshot, but till the return of Tony, 
who, his hand on Vidal's shoulder, had gone with 
them as far as the door. 

" Has he brought you good news ? " said the 
master of Bounds. 

"Very good. He's very well ; he's all right." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 47 

Tony's flushed face gave to the laugh with which 
he greeted this almost the effect of that of a man 
who had been drinking. " Do you mean he's quite 
faithful?" 

Rose always met a bold joke. " As faithful as I ! 
But your news is the thing." 

" Mine? " He closed his eyes a moment, but stood 
there scratching his head as if to carry off with a 
touch of comedy his betrayal of emotion. 

" Has Julia repeated her declaration ? " 

Tony looked at her in silence. " She has done 
something more extraordinary than that," he replied 
at last. 

"What has she done?" 

Tony glanced round him, then dropped into a 
chair. He covered his face with his hands. "I 
must get over it a little before I tell you ! " 



VII 

SHE waited compassionately for his nervousness to 
pass, dropping again, during the pause, upon the sofa 
she had just occupied with her visitor. At last as, 
while she watched him, his silence continued, she 
put him a question. " Does she at any rate still 
maintain that she shan't get well ? " 

Tony removed his hands from his face. " With 
the utmost assurance or rather with the utmost 
serenity. But she treats that . now as a mere 
detail." 

Rose wondered. "You mean she's really con- 
vinced that she's sinking ? " 

" So she says." 

" But is she, good heavens ? Such a thing isn't 
a matter of opinion : it's a fact or it's not a fact." 

" It's not a fact," said Tony Bream. " How can 
it be when one has only to see that her strength 
hasn't failed ? She of course says it has, but she 
has a remarkable deal of it to show. What's the 
vehemence with which she expresses herself but a 
sign of increasing life ? It's excitement, of course 
partly ; but it's also striking energy." 

" Excitement ? " Rose repeated. " I thought you 
ust said she was * serene.' " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 49 

Tony hesitated, but he was perfectly clear. 
" She's calm about what she calls leaving me, bless 
her heart ; she seems to have accepted that prospect 
with the strangest resignation. What she's uneasy, 
what she's in fact still more strangely tormented and 
exalted about, is another matter." 

" I see the thing you just mentioned." 

" She takes an interest," Tony went on, " she asks 
questions, she sends messages, she speaks out with 
all her voice. She's delighted to know that Mr. 
Vidal has at last come to you, and she told me to tell 
you so from her, and to tell him so to tell you both, 
in fact, how she rejoices that what you've so long 
waited for is now so close at hand." 

Rose took this in with lowered eyes. " How dear 
of her ! " she murmured. 

"She asked me particularly about Mr. Vidal," 
Tony continued " how he looks, how he strikes me, 
how you met. She gave me indeed a private message 
for him." 

Rose faintly smiled. " A private one ? " 

" Oh, only to spare your modesty : a word to the 
effect that she answers for you." 

" In what way ? " Rose asked. 

" Why, as the charmingest, cleverest, handsomest, 
in every way most wonderful wife that ever any man 
will have had." 

" She is wound up ! " Rose laughed. Then she 
said : " And all the while what does Nurse think ? 
I don't mean," she added with the same slight 
irony, " of whether I shall do for Dennis." 

D 



5 o THE OTHER HOUSE 

"Of Julia's condition? She wants Ramage to 
come back." 

Rose thought a moment. " She's rather a goose, 
I think she loses her head." 

" So I've taken the liberty of telling her." Tony 
sat forward, his eyes on the floor, his elbows on his 
knees and his hands nervously rubbing each other. 
Presently he rose with a jerk. "What do you 
suppose she wants me to do ? " 

Rose tried to suppose. " Nurse wants you ? " 

"No that ridiculous girl." Nodding back at 
his wife's room, he came and stood before the 
sofa. 

Half reclining again, Rose turned it over, raising 
her eyes to him. " Do you really mean something 
ridiculous ? " 

" Under the circumstances grotesque." 

"Well," Rose suggested, smiling, "she wants 
you to allow her to name her successor." 

" Just the contrary ! " Tony seated himself where 
Dennis Vidal had sat. " She wants me to promise 
her she shall have no successor." 

His companion looked at him hard; with her 
surprise at something in his tone she had just visibly 
coloured. " I see." She was at a momentary loss. 
" Do you call that grotesque ? " 

Tony, for an instant, was evidently struck by 
her surprise; then seeing the reason of it and 
blushing too a little, " Not the idea, my dear Rose 
God forbid ! " he exclaimed. " What I'm speaking 
of is the mistake of giving that amount of colour 



THE OTHER HOUSE 51 

to her insistence meeting her as if one accepted 
the situation as she represents it and were really 
taking leave of her. 

Rose appeared to understand and even to be 
impressed. "You think that will make her 
worse ? " 

" Why, arranging everything as if she's going to 
die ! " Tony sprang up afresh ; his trouble was 
obvious and he fell into the restless pacing that 
had been his resource all the morning. 

His interlocutress watched his agitation. 
" Mayn't it be that if you do just that she'll, on 
the contrary, immediately find herself better ? " 

Tony wandered, again scratching his head. 
" From the spirit of contradiction ? I'll do anything 
in life that will make her happy, or just simply 
make her quiet : I'll treat her demand as intensely 
reasonable even, if it isn't better to treat it as an ado 
about nothing. But it stuck in my crop to lend 
myself, that way, to a death-bed solemnity. Heaven 
deliver us ! " Half irritated and half anxious, suffer- 
ing from his tenderness a twofold effect, he dropped 
into another seat with his hands in his pockets and 
his long legs thrust out. 

" Does she wish it very solemn ? " Rose asked. 

" She's in dead earnest, poor darling. She wants 
a promise on my sacred honour a vow of the most 
portentous kind." 

Rose was silent a little. " You didn't give it ? " 

" I turned it off I refused to take any such 
discussion seriously. I said : ' My own darling, 



52 THE OTHER HOUSE 

how can I meet you on so hateful a basis ? Wait 
till you are dying ! '" He lost himself an instant ; 
then he was again on his feet. " How in the world 

can she dream I'm capable ? " He hadn't 

patience even to finish his phrase. 

Rose, however, finished it. " Of taking a second 
wife ? Ah, that's another affair ! " she sadly 
exclaimed. "We've nothing to do with that," 
she added. " Ol course you understand poor Julia's 
feeling." 

" Her feeling ? " Tony once more stood in front 
of her. 'i ' 

" Why, what's at the bottom of her dread of your 
marrying again." 

" Assuredly I do ! Mrs. Grantham naturally 
she's at the bottom. She has filled Julia with the 
vision of my perhaps giving our child a step- 
mother." 

" Precisely," Rose said, " and if you had known, 
as I knew it, Julians girlhood, you would do justice 
to the force of that horror. It possesses her whole 
being she would prefer that the child should 
die." 

Tony Bream, musing, shook his head with 
dark decision. "Well, I would prefer that they 
neither of them should ! " 

"The simplest thing, then, is to give her your 
word." 

" My < word ' isn't enough," Tony said : " she 
wants mystic rites and spells ! The simplest thing, 
moreover, was exactly what I desired to do. My 



THE OTHER HOUSE 53 

objection to the performance she demands was that 
this was just what it seemed to me not to be." 

" Try it," said Rose, smiling. 

" To bring her round ? " 

" Before the Doctor returns. When he comes, 
you know, he won't let you go back to her." 

"Then I'll go now," said Tony, already at the 
door. 

Rose had risen from the sofa. " Be very brief 
but be very strong." 

" I'll swear by all the gods that or any other 
nonsense." Rose stood there opposite to him with 
a fine, rich urgency which operated as a detention. 
"I see you're right," he declared. "You always 
are, and I'm always indebted to you." Then as he 
opened the door : " Is there anything else ? " 

"Anything else?" 

" I mean that you advise." 

She thought a moment. " Nothing but that 
for you to seem to enter thoroughly into her idea, 
to show her you understand it as she understands 
it herself." 

Tony looked vague. "As she does ? " 

" Why, for the lifetime of your daughter." As 
he appeared still not fully to apprehend, she 
risked : " If you should lose Effie the reason would 
fail." 

Tony, at this, jerked back his head with a flush. 
"My dear Rose, you don't imagine that it's as a 
needed vow " 

" That you would give it ? " she broke in. " Cer- 



4 THE OTHER HOUSE 

tainly I don't, any more than I suppose the degree 
of your fidelity to be the ground on which we're 
talking. But the thing is to convince Julia, and 
I said that only because she'll be more convinced 
if you strike her as really looking at what you 
subscribe to." 

Tony gave his nervous laugh. " Don't you know 
I always 'put down my name' especially to 
4 appeals ' in the most reckless way ? " Then 
abruptly, in a different tone, as if with a pas- 
sionate need to make it plain, " I shall never, never, 
never," he protested, " so much as look at another 
woman ! " 

The girl approved with an eager gesture. 
41 You've got it, my dear Tony. Say it to her that 
way ! " But he had already gone, and, turning, she 
found herself face to face with her lover, who had 
come back as she spoke. 



VIII 

WITH his letter in his hand Dennis Vidal stood and 
smiled at her. " What in the world has your dear 
Tony ' got/ and what is he to say ? " 

" To say ? Something to his wife, who appears 
to have lashed herself into an extraordinary 
state." 

The young man's face fell. "What sort of a 
state?" 

" A strange discouragement about herself. She's 
depressed and frightened she thinks she's sinking." 

Dennis looked grave. " Poor little lady what a 
bore for us ! I remember her perfectly." 

" She of course remembers you," Rose said. " She 
takes the friendliest interest in your being here." 

" That's most kind of her in her condition." 

" Oh, her condition," Rose returned, " isn't quite 
so bad as she thinks." 

"I see." Dennis hesitated. "And that's what 
Mr. Bream's to tell her." 

" That's a part of it." Rose glanced at the docu- 
ment he had brought to her ; it was in its enve- 
lope, and he tapped it a little impatiently on his 
left finger-tips. What she said, however, had no 
reference to it. " She's haunted with a morbid 



56 THE OTHER HOUSE 

alarm on the subject, of all things, of his marry- 
ing again." 

" If she should die ? She wants him not to ? " 
Dennis asked. 

"She wants him not to." Rose paused a 
moment. " She wants to have been the only one." 

He reflected, slightly embarrassed with this peep 
into a situation that but remotely concerned him. 
"Well, I suppose that's the way women often 
feel." 

" I daresay it is." The girl's gravity gave the 
gleam of a smile. " I daresay it's the way / 
should." 

Dennis Vidal, at this, simply seized her and 
kissed her. " You needn't be afraid you'll be the 
only one ! " 

His embrace had been the work of a few seconds, 
and she had made no movement to escape from it ; 
but she looked at him as if to convey that the 
extreme high spirits it betrayed were perhaps just a 
trifle mistimed. "That's what I recommended 
him," she dropped, " to say to Julia." 

" Why, I should hope so ! " Presently, as if a 
little struck, Dennis continued: "Doesn't he want 
to?" 

"Absolutely. They're all in all to each other. 
But he's naturally much upset and bewildered." 

" And he came to you for advice ? " 

" Oh, he comes to me," Rose said, " as he might 
come to talk of her with the mother that, poor dar- 
ling, it's her misfortune never to have known," 



THE OTHER HOUSE 57 

The young man's vivacity again played up. 
" He treats you, you mean, as his mother-in- 
law ? " 

" Very much. But I'm thoroughly nice to him. 
People can do anything to me who are nice to 
Julia." 

Dennis was silent a moment ; he had slipped 
his letter out of its cover. " Well, I hope they're 
grateful to you for such devotion." 

"Grateful to me, Dennis? They quite adore 
me." Then as if to remind him of something it 
was important he should feel : " Don't you see what 
it is for a poor girl to have such an anchorage 
as this such honourable countenance, such a place 
to fall back upon ? " 

Thus challenged, her visitor, with a moment's 
thought, did frank justice to her question. " I'm 
certainly glad you've such jolly friends one sees 
they're charming people. It has been a great 
comfort to me lately to know you were with them." 
He looked round him, conscientiously, at the bright 
and beautiful hall. " It is a good berth, my dear, and 
it must be a pleasure to live with such fine things. 
They've given me a room up there that's full of them 
an awfully nice room." He glanced at a picture 
or two he took in the scene. " Do they roll in 
wealth ? " , 

" They 're like all bankers, I imagine," said Rose. 
" Don't bankers always roll ? " 

"Yes, they seem literally to wallow. What a 
pity we ain't bankers, eh ? " 



58 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" Ah, with my friends here their money's the least 
part of them," the girl answered. " The great thing's 
their personal goodness." 

Dennis had stopped before a large photograph, a 
great picture in a massive frame, supported, on a 
table, by a small gilded easel. "To say nothing 
of their personal beauty ! He's tremendously good- 
looking." 

Rose glanced with an indulgent sigh at a 
representation of Tony Bream in all his splen- 
dour, in a fine white waistcoat and a high white 
hat, with a stick and gloves and a cigar, his 
orchid, his stature and his smile. " Ah, poor Julia's 
taste ! " 

" Yes," Dennis exclaimed, " one can see how he 
must have fetched her ! " 

" I mean the style of the thing," said Rose. 

" It isn't good, eh ? Well, you know." Then 
turning away from the picture, the young man 
added : " They'll be after that fellow ! " 

Rose faltered. " The people she fears ? " 

"The women-folk, bless 'em if he should lose 
her." 

" I daresay," said Rose. " But he'll be proof." 

" Has he told you so ? " Dennis smiled. 

She met his smile with a kind of conscious bravado 
in her own. " In so many words. But he assures 
me he'll calm her down." 

Dennis was silent a little : he had now unfolded 
his letter and run his eyes over it. " What a funny 
subject for him to be talking about ! " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 59 

" With me, do you mean ? " 

" Yes, and with his wife." 

"My dear man," Rose exclaimed, "you can 
imagine he didn't begin it ! " 

"Did you?" her companion asked. 

She hesitated again, and then, " Yes idiot ! " 
she replied with a quiet humour that produced, on 
his part, another demonstration of tenderness. 
This attempt she arrested, raising her hand, as she 
appeared to have heard a sound, with a quick 
injunction to listen. 

" What's the matter ? " 

" She bent her ear. " Wasn't there a cry from 
Julia's room ? " 

" I heard nothing." 

Rose was relieved. " Then it's only my nervous- 
ness." 

Dennis Vidal held up his letter. "Is your 
nervousness too great to prevent your giving a 
moment's attention to this ? " 

" Ah, your letter ! " Rose's eyes rested on it as 
if she had become conscious of it for the first time. 

" It very intimately concerns our future," said her 
visitor. " I went up for it so that you should do 
me the favour to read it." 

She held out her hand promptly and frankly. 
" Then give it to me let me keep it a little." 

"Certainly; but kindly remember that I've still 
to answer it I mean referring to points. I've 
waited to see you because it's from the ' governor ' 
himself practically saying what he'll do for me." 



6o THE OTHER HOUSE 

Rose held the letter ; her large light eyes widened 
with her wonder and her sympathy. "Is it some- 
thing very good ? " 

Dennis prescribed, with an emphatic but amused 
nod at the paper, a direction to her curiosity. 
" Read and you'll see ! " 

She dropped her eyes, but after a moment, while 
her left hand patted her heart, she raised them with 
an odd, strained expression. " I mean is it really 
good enough ? " 

" That's exactly what I want you to tell me ! " 
Dennis laughed out. A certain surprise at her 
manner was in his face. 

While she noted it she heard a sound again, a 
sound this time explained by the opening of the 
door of the vestibule. Doctor Ramage had come 
back; Rose put down her letter. " I'll tell you as 
soon as I have spoken to the Doctor." 



IX 



THE Doctor, eagerly, spoke to her first. " Our 
friend has not come back ? " 

"Mine has," said Rose with grace. "Let me 
introduce Mr. Vidal." Doctor Ramage beamed a 
greeting, and our young lady, with her discreet 
gaiety, went on to Dennis : " He too thinks all the 
world of me." 

" Oh, she's a wonder she knows what to do ! 
But you'll see that for yourself," said the Doctor. 

" I'm afraid you won't approve of me," Dennis 
replied with solicitude. " You'll think me rather in 
your patient's way." 

Doctor Ramage laughed. " No indeed I'm sure 
Miss Armiger will keep you out of it." Then look- 
ing at his watch, " Bream's not with her still ? " he 
inquired of Rose. 

" He came away, but he returned to her." 

" He shouldn't have done that." 

" It was by my advice, and I'm sure you'll find 
it's all right," Rose returned. " But you'll send him 
back to us." 

" On the spot." The Doctor picked his way out. 

" He's not at all easy," Dennis pronounced when 
he had gone. 



62 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Rose demurred. " How do you know that ? " 

" By looking at him. I'm not such a fool," her 
visitor added with some emphasis, "as you strike 
me as wishing to make of me." 

Rose candidly stared. " As I strike you as wish- 
ing ? " For a moment this young couple looked 

at each other hard, and they both changed colour. 
" My dear Dennis, what do you mean ? " 

He evidently felt that he had been almost violently 
abrupt ; but it would have been equally evident 
to a spectator that he was a man of cool courage. 
"I mean, Rose, that I don't quite know what's 
the matter with you. It's as if, unexpectedly, on my 
eager arrival, I find something or other between us." 

She appeared immensely relieved. " Why, my 
dear child, of course you do ! Poor Julia's between 
us much between us." She faltered again; then 
she broke out with emotion : " I may as well confess 
it frankly I'm miserably anxious. Good heavens," 
she added with impatience, " don't you see it for 
yourself ? " 

" I certainly see that you're agitated and absent 
as you warned me so promptly you would be. 
But remember you've quite denied to me the 
gravity of Mrs. Bream's condition." 

Rose's impatience overflowed into a gesture. 
" I've been doing that to deceive my own self ! " 

"I understand," said Dennis kindly. "Still," 
he went on, considering, "it's either one thing or 
the other. The poor lady's either dying, you 
know, or she ain't ! n 



THE OTHER HOUSE 63 

His friend looked at him with a reproach too 
fine to be uttered. "My dear Dennis you're 
rough!" 

He showed a face as conscientious as it was 
blank. "I'm crude possibly coarse ? Perhaps I 
am without intention." 

" Think what these people are to me," said Rose. 

He was silent a little. " Is it anything so very 
extraordinary? Oh, I know," he went on, as if 
he feared she might again accuse him of a want 
of feeling ; "I appreciate them perfectly I do 
them full justice. Enjoying their hospitality here, 
I'm conscious of all their merits." The letter 
she had put down was still on the table, and he 
took it up and fingered it a moment. " All I mean 
is that I don't want you quite to sink the fact that 
I'm something to you too." 

She met this appeal with instant indulgence. 
" Be a little patient with me," she gently said. 
Before he could make a rejoinder she pursued : 
"You yourself are impressed with the Doctor's 
being anxious. I've been trying not to think 
so, but I daresay you're right. There I've 
another worry." 

" The greater your worry, then, the more press- 
ing our business." Dennis spoke with cordial 
decision, while Rose, moving away from him, 
reached the door by which the Doctor had gone 
out. She stood there as if listening, and he con- 
tinued: "It's me, you know, that you've now to 
'fall back 'upon." 



64 THE OTHER HOUSE 

She had already raised a hand with her clear 
"Hush!" and she kept her eyes on her com- 
panion while she tried to catch a sound. "The 
Doctor said he would send him out of the room. 
But he doesn't." 

" All the better for your reading this." Dennis 
held out the letter to her. 

She quitted her place. " If he's allowed to stay, 
there must be something wrong." 

" I'm very sorry for them ; but don't you call 
that a statement ? " 

"Ah, your letter?" Her attention came back 
to it, and, taking it from him, she dropped again 
npon the sofa with it. " Voyons, voyons this great 
affair!" she had the air of trying to talk herself 
nto calmness. 

Dennis stood a moment before her. " It puts 
us on a footing that really seems to me sound." 

She had turned over the leaf to take the measure 
of the document ; there were three, large, close, 
neat pages. " He's a trifle long-winded, the 
t governor ' ! " 

" The longer the better," Dennis laughed, " when 
it's all in that key! Read it, my dear, quietly and 
carefully; take it in it's really simple enough." 
He spoke soothingly and tenderly, turning off to 
give her time and not oppress her. He moved 
slowly about the hall, whistling very faintly and 
looking again at the pictures, and when he had 
left her she followed him a minute with her eyes. 
Then she transferred them to the door at which 



THE OTHER HOUSE 65 

she had just listened; instead of reading she 
watched as if for a movement of it. If there had 
been any one at that moment to see her face, such 
an observer would have found it strangely, tragic- 
ally convulsed : she had the appearance of holding 
in with extraordinary force some passionate sob or 
cry, some smothered impulse of anguish. This 
appearance vanished miraculously as Dennis turned 
at the end of the room, and what he saw, while 
the great showy clock ticked in the scented still- 
ness, was only his friend's study of what he had put 
before her. She studied it long, she studied it in 
silence a silence so unbroken by inquiry or com- 
ment that, though he clearly wished not to seem 
to hurry her, he drew nearer again at last and 
stood as if waiting for some sign. 

" Don't you call that really meeting a fellow ? " 
"I must read it again," Rose replied without 
looking up. She turned afresh to the beginning, 
and he strolled away once more. She went 
through to the end; after which she said with 
tranquillity, folding the letter : " Yes ; it shows 
what they think of you." She put it down where 
she had put it before, getting up as he came back 
to her. "It's good not only for what he says, but 
for the way he says it." 

" It's a jolly bit more than I expected." Dennis 
picked the letter up and, restoring it to its en- 
velope, slipped it almost lovingly into a breast- 
pocket. "It does show, I think, that they don't 
want to lose me." 



66 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"They're not such fools!" Rose had in her 
turn moved off, but now she faced him, so intensely 
pale that he was visibly startled ; all the more that 
it marked still more her white grimace. " My dear 
boy, it's a splendid future." 

" I'm glad it strikes you so ! " he laughed. 

"It's a great joy you're all right. As I said 
a while ago, you're a made man." 

"Then by the same token, of course, you're 
a made woman ! " 

"I'm very, very happy about you," she brightly 
conceded. " The great thing is that there's more 
to come." 

" Rather there's more to come ! " said Dennis. 
He stood meeting her singular smile. " I'm only 
waiting for it." 

" I mean there's a lot behind a general attitude. 
Read between the lines ! " 

" Don't you suppose I have, miss ? I didn't 
venture, myself, to say that to you." 

" Do I have so to be prompted and coached ? " 
asked Rose. " I don't believe you even see all 
I mean. There are hints and tacit promises 
glimpses of what may happen if you'll give them 
time." 

"Oh, I'll give them time!" Dennis declared. 
"But he's really awfully cautious. You're sharp 
to have made out so much." 

" Naturally I'm sharp." Then, after an instant, 
"Let me have the letter again," the girl said, 
holding out her hand. Dennis promptly drew it 



THE OTHER HOUSE 67 

forth, and she took it and went over it in silence 
once more. He turned away as he had done 
before, to give her a chance; he hummed slowly, 
to himself, about the room, and once more, at the 
end of some minutes, it appeared to strike him 
that she prolonged her perusal. But when he 
approached her again she was ready with her 
clear contentment. She folded the letter and 
handed it back to him. "Oh, you'll do!" she 
proclaimed. 

" You're really quite satisfied ? " 

She hesitated a moment. " For the present 
perfectly." Her eyes were on the precious 
document as he fingered it, and something in 
his way of doing so made her break into incon- 
gruous gaiety. He had opened it delicately and 
been caught again by a passage. "You handle 
it as if it were a thousand-pound note ! " 

He looked up at her quickly. " It's much more 
than that. Capitalise his figure." 

" < Capitalise ' it ? " 

" Find the invested sum." 

Rose thought a moment. "Oh, I'll do every- 
thing for you but cipher ! But it's millions." Then 
as he returned the letter to his pocket she added : 
"You should have that thing mounted in double 
glass with a little handle like a hand-screen." 

"There's certainly nothing too good for the 
charter of our liberties for that's what it really 
is," Dennis said. " But you can face the music ? " 
he went on. 



68 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" The music ? " Rose was momentarily blank. 

He looked at her hard again. "You have, my 
dear, the most extraordinary vacancies. The figure 
we're talking of the poor, dear little figure. The 
five-hundred-and-forty," he a trifle sharply ex- 
plained. " That's about what it makes." 

" Why, it seems to me a lovely little figure," said 
the girl. " To the ' likes ' of me, how can that be 
anything but a duck of an income ? Then," she 
exclaimed, " think also of what's to come ! " 

"Yes but I'm not speaking of anything you 
may bring." 

Rose wavered, judicious, as if trying to be as 
attentive as he desired. " I see without that. 
But I wasn't speaking of that either," she added. 

" Oh, you may count it I only mean I don't 
touch it. And the going out you take that too ? " 
Dennis asked. 

Rose looked brave. "Why it's only for two 
years." 

He flushed suddenly, as with a flood of reassur- 
ance, putting his arms round her as round the 
fulfilment of his dream. " Ah, my own old girl ! " 

She let him clasp her again, but when she disen- 
gaged herself they were somehow nearer to the 
door that led away to Julia Bream. She stood 
there as she had stood before, while he still held 
one of her hands ; then she brought forth some- 
thing that betrayed an extraordinary disconnection 
from all that had just preceded. " I can't make 
out why he doesn't send him back ! " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 69 

Dennis Vidal dropped her hand ; both his own 
went into his pockets, and he gave a kick to the 
turned-up corner of a rug. " Mr. Bream the 
Doctor ? Oh, they know what they're about ! " 

" The doctor doesn't at all want him to be there. 
Something has happened," Rose declared as she 
left the door. 

Her companion said nothing for a moment. 
" Do you mean the poor lady's gone ? " he at last 
demanded. 

" Gone ? " Rose echoed. 

" Do you mean Mrs. Bream is dead ?" 

His question rang out so that Rose threw herself 
back in horror. " Dennis God forbid ! " 

11 God forbid too, I say. But one doesn't know 
what you mean you're too difficult to follow. 
One thing, at any rate, you clearly have in your 
head that we must take it as possibly on the 
cards. That's enough to make it remarkably to 
the point to remind you of the great change that 
would take place in your situation if she should 
die." 

" What else in the world but that change am I 
thinking of ? " Rose asked. 

" You're not thinking of it perhaps so much in the 
connection I refer to. If Mrs. Bream goes, your 
' anchorage,' as you call it, goes." 

" I see what you mean." She spoke with the 
softest assent ; the tears had sprung into her eyes 
and she looked away to hide them. 

" One may have the highest possible opinion of 



70 THE OTHER HOUSE 

her husband and yet not quite see you staying on 
here in the same manner with him.' 1 

Rose was silent, with a certain dignity. "Not 
quite/' she presently said with the same gentleness. 

"The way therefore to provide against every- 
thing is as I remarked to you a while ago to 
settle with me this minute the day, the nearest one 
possible, for our union to become a reality." 

She slowly brought back her troubled eyes. 
" The day to marry you ? " 

" The day to marry me of course ! " He gave a 
short, uneasy laugh. " What else ? " 

She waited again, and there was a fear deep in her 
face. " I must settle it this minute ? " 

Dennis stared. " Why, my dear child, when in 
the world if not now ? " 

"You can't give me a little more time?" she 
asked. 

" More time ? " His gathered stupefaction broke 
out. " More time after giving you years ? " 

"Ah, but just at the last, here this news, this 
rush is sudden." 

" Sudden ! " Dennis repeated. "Haven't you 
known I was coming, and haven't you known for 
what?" 

She looked at him now with an effort of resolu- 
tion in which he could see her white face harden ; 
as if by a play of some inner mechanism some- 
thing dreadful had taken place in it. Then she 
said with a painful quaver that no attempt to be 
natural could keep down : " Let me remind you 



THE OTHER HOUSE 71 

Dennis, that your coming was not at my request. 
You've come yes; but you've come because you 
would. You've come in spite of me." 

He gasped, and with the mere touch of her tone 
his own eyes filled. " You haven't wanted me ? " 

" I'm delighted to see you." 

" Then in God's name what do you mean ? 
Where are we, and what are you springing on me?" 

" I'm only asking you again, as I've asked you 
already, to be patient with me to let me, at such 
a critical hour, turn round. I'm only asking you to 
bear with me I'm only asking you to wait." 

" To wait for what ? " He snatched the words out 
of her mouth. " It's because I -have waited that I'm 
here. What I want of you is three simple words 
that you can utter in three simple seconds." He 
looked about him, in his helpless dismay, as if to 
call the absent to witness. " And you look at me 
like a stone. You open up an abyss. You give me 
nothing, nothing." He paused, as it were, for a 
contradiction, but she made none ; she had lowered 
her eyes and, supported against a table, stood there 
rigid and passive. Dennis sank into a chair with 
his vain hands upon his knees. " What do you 
mean by my coming in spite of you ? You never 
asked me not to you've treated me well till now. 
It was my idea yes ; but you perfectly accepted 
it." He gave her time to assent to this or to deny 
it, but she took none, and he continued: "Don't 
you understand the one feeling that has possessed 
me and sustained me ? Don't you understand that 



72 THE OTHER HOUSE 

I've thought of nothing else every hour of my way ? 
I arrived here with a longing for you that words 
can't utter; and now I see though I couldn't 
immediately be sure that I found you from the 
first constrained and unnatural." 

Rose, as he went on, had raised her eyes again ; 
they seemed to follow his words in sombre sub- 
mission. " Yes, you must have found me strange 
enough." 

"And don't again say it's your being anxious 

! " Dennis sprang up warningly. " It's your 

being anxious that just makes my right." 

His companion shook her head slowly and am- 
biguously. " I am glad you've come." 

" To have the pleasure of not receiving me ? " 

" I have received you," Rose replied. " Every 
word I've spoken to you and every satisfaction I've 
expressed is true, is deep. I do admire you, I do 
respect you, I'm proud to have been your friend. 
Haven't I assured you of my pure joy in your pro- 
motion and your prospects ? " 

"What do you call assuring me? You utterly 
misled me for some strange moments ; you mysti- 
fied me; I think I may say you trifled with me. 
The only assurance I'm open to is that of your 
putting your hand in mine as my wife. In God's 
name," the yoiing man panted, " what has happened 
to you and what has changed you ? " 

" I'll tell you to-morrow," said Rose. 

" Tell me what I insist on ? " 

She cast about her, " Tell you things I can't now." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 73 

He sounded her with visible despair. " You're 
not sincere you're not straight. You've nothing 
to tell me, and you're afraid. You're only gaining 
time, and you've only been doing so from the first. 
I don't know what it's for you're beyond me ; but 
if it's to back out I'll be hanged if I give you a 
moment." 

Her wan face, at this, showed a faint flush ; it 
seemed to him five years older than when he came 
in. " You take, with your cruel accusations, a 
strange way to keep me ! " the girl exclaimed. " But 
I won't talk to you in bitterness," she pursued in 
a different tone. " That will drop if we do allow 
it a day or two." Then on a sharp motion of his 
impatience she added : " Whether you allow it or 
not, you know, I must take the time I need." 

He was angry now, as if she were not only 
proved evasion, but almost proved insolence ; and 
his anger deepened at her return to this appeal that 
offered him no meaning. " No, no, you must 
choose," he said with passion, " and if you're really 
honest you will. I'm here for you with all my soul, 
but I'm here for you now or never." 

" Dennis ! " she weakly murmured. 

" You do back out?" 

She put out her hand. " Good-bye." 

He looked at her as over a flood ; then he thrust 
his hand behind him and glanced about for his hat. 
He moved blindly, like a man picking himself up 
from a violent fall flung indeed suddenly from a 
smooth, swift vehicle. "Good-bye." 



HE quickly remembered that he had not brought in 
his hat, and also, the next instant, that even to clap 
it on wouldn't under the circumstances qualify him 
for immediate departure from Bounds. Just as it 
came over him that the obligation he had incurred 
must keep him at least for the day, he found himself 
in the presence of his host, who, while his back was 
turned, had precipitately reappeared and whose vision 
of the place had resulted in an instant question. 

" Mrs. Beever has not come back ? Julia wants 
her Julia must see her ! " 

Dennis was separated by the width of the hall 
from the girl with whom he had just enjoyed such 
an opportunity of reunion, but there was for the 
moment no indication that Tony Bream, engrossed 
with a graver accident, found a betrayal in the space 
between them. He had, however, for Dennis the 
prompt effect of a reminder to take care : it was a 
consequence of the very nature of the man that to 
look at him was to recognise the value of appearances 
and that he couldn't have dropped upon any scene, 
however disordered, without, by the simple fact, re- 
establishing a superficial harmony. His new friend 
met him with a movement that might have been that 



THE OTHER HOUSE 75 

of stepping in front of some object to hide it, while 
Rose, on her side, sounding out like a touched bell, 
was already alert with her response. "Ah," said 
Dennis, to himself, " it's for them she cares ! " 

"She has not come back, but if there's a hurry " 

Rose was all there. 

" There is a hurry. Some one must go for her." 

Dennis had a point to make that he must make on 
the spot. He spoke before Rose's rejoinder. " With 
your increasing anxieties, Mr. Bream, I'm quite 
ashamed to be quartered on you. Hadn't I really 
better be at the inn ? " 

" At the inn to go from here ? My dear fellow, 
are you mad ? " Tony sociably scoffed ; he wouldn't 
hear of it. " Don't be afraid ; we've plenty of use for 
you if only to keep this young woman quiet." 

" He can be of use this instant." Rose looked at 
her suitor as if there were not the shadow of a cloud 
between them. " The servants are getting luncheon. 
Will you go over for Mrs. Beever ? " 

"Ah," Tony demurred, laughing, "we mustn't 
make him fetch and carry ! " 

Dennis showed a momentary blankness and then, 
in his private discomposure, jumped at the idea of 
escaping from the house and into the air. "Do 
employ me," he pleaded. "I want to stretch my 
legs I'll do anything." 

"Since you're so kind, then, and it's so near," 
Tony replied. " Mrs. Beever's our best friend, and 
always the friend of our friends, and she's only across 
the river." 



76 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"Just six minutes," said Rose, " by the short way. 
Bring her back with you." 

" The short way," Tony pressingly explained, " is 
through my garden and out of it by the gate on the 
river." 

"At the river you turn to the right the little 
foot-bridge is her bridge," Rose went on. 

" You pass the gatehouse empty and closed at 
the other side of it, and there you are," said 
Tony. 

" In her garden it's lovely. Tell her it's for Mrs. 
Bream and it's important," Rose added. 

" My wife's calling aloud for her ! " Tony laid his 
hand, with his flushed laugh, on the young man's 
shoulder. 

Dennis had listened earnestly, looking at his com- 
panions in turn. " It doesn't matter if she doesn't 
know in the least who I am ? " 

"She knows perfectly don't be shy!" Rose 
familiarly exclaimed. 

Tony gave him a great pat on the back which sent 
him off. " She has even something particular to 
say to you ! She takes a great interest in his rela- 
tions with you," he continued to Rose as the door 
closed behind their visitor. Then meeting in her 
face a certain impatience of any supersession of the 
question of Julia's state, he added, to justify his 
allusion, a word accompanied by the same excited 
laugh that had already broken from him. "Mrs. 
Beever deprecates the idea of any further delay in 
your marriage and thinks you've got quite enough 



THE OTHER HOUSE 77 

to ' set up ' on. She pronounces your means remark- 
ably adequate." 

" What does she know about our means ? " Rose 
coldly asked. 

" No more, doubtless, than I ! But that needn't 
prevent her. It's the wish that's father to the 
thought. That's the result of her general goodwill 
to you." 

" She has no goodwill of any sort to me. She 
doesn't like me." Rose spoke with marked dryness, 
in which moreover a certain surprise at the direction 
of her friend's humour was visible. Tony was now 
completely out of his groove ; they indeed both were, 
though Rose was for the moment more successful 
in concealing her emotion. Still vibrating with the 
immense effort of the morning and particularly of 
the last hour, she could yet hold herself hard and 
observe what was taking place in her companion. 
He had been through something that had made his 
nerves violently active, so that his measure of security, 
of reality almost, was merged in the mere sense of 
the unusual. It was precisely this evidence of what 
he had been through that helped the girl's curiosity 
to preserve a waiting attitude the firm surface she 
had triumphantly presented to each of the persons 
whom, from an early hour, she had had to encounter. 
But Tony had now the air of not intending to reward 
her patience by a fresh communication ; it was as if 
some new delicacy had operated and he had struck 
himself as too explicit. He had looked astonished 
at her judgment of the lady of Eastmead. 



78 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" My dear Rose," he said, " I think you're greatly 
mistaken. Mrs. Beever much appreciates you." 

She was silent at first, showing him a face worn 
with the ingenuity of all that in her interview with 
Dennis Vidal she had had to keep out of it and put 
into it. " My dear Tony," she then blandly replied, 
" I've never known any one like you for not having 
two grains of observation. I've known people with 
only a little; but a little's a poor affair. You've 
absolutely none at all, and that, for your character, 
is the right thing : it's magnificent and perfect." 

Tony greeted this with real hilarity. " I like a 
good square one between the eyes ! " 

" You can't like it as much as I like you for being 
just as you are. Observation's a second-rate thing ; 
it's only a precaution 'the refuge of the small and 
the timid. It protects our own ridicules and props 
up our defences. You may have ridicules I don't 
say so ; but you've no suspicions and no fears and 
no doubts; you're natural and generous and 
easy " 

" And beautifully, exquisitely stupid ! " Tony 
broke in. " ' Natural ' thank you ! Oh, the 
horrible people who are natural ! What you mean 
only you're too charming to say it is that I'm so 
utterly taken up with my own interests and feelings 
that I pipe about them like a canary in a cage. Not 
to have the things you mention, and above all not to 
have imagination, is simply not to have tact, than 
which nothing is more unforgivable and more loath- 
some. What lovelier proof of my selfishness could 



THE OTHER HOUSE 79 

I be face to face with than the fact which I imme- 
diately afterwards blushed for that, coming in to 
you here a while ago, in the midst of something so 
important to you, I hadn't the manners to ask you 
so much as a question about it ? " 

" Do you mean about Mr. Vidal after he had 
gone to his room ? You did ask me a question," 
Rose said; "but you had a subject much more 
interesting to speak of." She waited an instant 
before adding : " You spoke of something I haven't 
ceased to think of." This gave Tony a chance for 
reference to his discharge of the injunction she had 
then laid upon him; as a reminder of which Rose 
further observed : " There's plenty of time for Mr. 
Vidal." 

" I hope indeed he's going to stay. I like his 
looks immensely," Tony responded. " I like his 
type ; it matches so with what you've told me of 
him. It's the real thing I wish we had him here." 
Rose, at this, gave a small, confused cry, and her 
host went on : " Upon my honour I do I know a 
man when I see him. He's just the sort of fellow I 
personally should have liked to be." 

" You mean you're not the real thing ? " Rose 
asked. 

It was a question of a kind that Tony's good- 
nature, shining out almost splendidly even through 
trouble, could always meet with princely extrava- 
gance. " Not a bit ! I'm bolstered up with all sorts 
of little appearances and accidents. Your friend 
there has his feet on the rock." This picture of her 



8o THE OTHER HOUSE 

friend's position moved Rose to another vague sound 
the effect of which, in turn, was to make Ton}' 
look at her more sharply. But he appeared not to 
impute to her any doubt of his assertion, and after 
an instant he reverted, with a jump, to a matter that 
he evidently wished not to drop. " You must really, 
you know, do justice to Mrs. Beever. When she 
dislikes one it's not a question of shades or degrees. 
She's not an underhand enemy she very soon lets 
one know it." 

" You mean by something she says or does ? " 

Tony considered a moment. " I mean she gives 
you her reasons she's eminently direct. And I'm 
sure she has never lifted a finger against you." 

" Perhaps not. But she will," said Rose. "You 
yourself just gave me the proof." 

Tony wondered. " What proof ? " 

"Why, in telling Dennis that she had told you 
she has something special to say to him." 

Tony recalled it it had already passed out of his 
mind. " What she has to say is only what I myself 
have already said for the rest of us that she hopes 
with all her heart things are now smooth for his 
marriage." 

" Well, what could be more horrid than that ? " 

" More horrid ? " Tony stared. 

" What has she to do with his marriage ? Her 
interference is in execrable taste." 

The girl's tone was startling, and her companion's 
surprise augmented, showing itself in his lighted 
eyes and deepened colour. " My dear Rose, isn't 



THE OTHER HOUSE 81 

that sort of thing, in a little circle like ours, a 
permitted joke a friendly compliment ? We're all 
so with you." 

She had turned away from him. She went on, as 
if she had not heard him, with a sudden tremor in 
her voice the tremor of a deep upheaval : " Why 
does she give opinions that nobody wants or asks 
her for ? What does she know of our relations or 
of what difficulties and mysteries she touches ? 
Why can't she leave us alone at least for the first 
hour?" 

Embarrassment was in Tony's gasp the unex- 
pected had sprung up before him. He could only 
stammer after her as she moved away : " Bless my 
soul, my dear child you don't mean to say there 
are difficulties ? Of course it's no one's business 
but one hoped you were in quiet waters." Across 
her interval, as he spoke, she suddenly faced round, 
and his view of her, with this, made him smite his 
forehead in his penitent, expressive way. " What a 
brute I am not to have seen you're not quite happy, 

and not to have noticed that he ! " Tony caught 

himself up ; the face offered him was the convulsed 
face that had not been offered Dennis Vidal. Rose 
literally glared at him ; she stood there with her two 
hands on her heaving breast and something in all 
her aspect that was like the first shock of a great 
accident. What he saw, without understanding it, 
was the final snap of her tremendous tension, the 
end of her wonderful false calm. He misunderstood 
it in fact, as he saw it give way before him : he 

F 



82 THE OTHER HOUSE 

sprang at the idea that the poor girl had received a 
blow a blow which her self-control up to within a 
moment only presented as more touchingly borne. 
Vidal's absence was there as a part of it : the situa- 
tion flashed into vividness. " His eagerness to leave 
you surprised me," he exclaimed, "and yours to 
make him go ! " Tony thought again, and before he 
spoke his thought her eyes seemed to glitter it back. 
" He has not brought you bad news he has not 
failed of what we hoped ? " He went to her with 
compassion and tenderness : " You don't mean to 
say, my poor girl, that he doesn't meet you as you 
supposed he would ? " Rose dropped, as he came, 
into a chair; she had burst into passionate tears. 
She threw herself upon a small table, burying her 
head in her arms, while Tony, all wonder and pity, 
stood above her and felt helpless as she sobbed. 
She seemed to have sunk under her wrong and to 
quiver with her pain. Her host, with his own re- 
current pang, could scarcely bear it : he felt a sharp 
need of making some one pay. " You don't mean 
to say Mr. Vidal doesn't keep faith ? " 

"Oh, God! oh, God! oh, God!" Rose Armiger 
wailed. 



XI 



TONY turned away from her with a movement which 
was a confession of incompetence ; a sense more- 
over of the awkwardness of being so close to a grief 
for which he had no direct remedy. He could only 
assure her, in his confusion, of his deep regret that 
she had had a distress. The extremity of her 
collapse, however, was brief, a gust of passion after 
which she instantly showed the effort to recover. 
" Don't mind me," she said through her tears ; " I 
shall pull myself together ; I shall be all right in a 
moment." He wondered whether he oughtn't to 
leave her; and yet to leave her was scarcely 
courteous. She was quickly erect again, with her 
characteristic thought for others flowering out through 
her pain. " Only don't let Julia know that's all I 
ask of you. One's little bothers are one's little 
bothers they're all in the day's work. Just give 
me three minutes, and I shan't show a trace." She 
straightened herself and even smiled, patting her 
eyes with her crumpled handkerchief, while Tony 
marvelled at her courage and good humour. 

" Of one thing you must be sure, Rose," he 
expressively answered, "that whatever happens 
to you, now or at any time, you've friends here 



84 THE OTHER HOUSE 

and a home here that are yours for weal and 
woe." 

" Ah, don't say that," she cried ; " I can scarcely 
bear it ! Disappointments one can meet ; but how 
in the world is one adequately to meet generosity ? 
Of one thing you, on your side, must be sure : that 
no trouble in life shall ever make me a bore. It was 
because I was so awfully afraid to be one that I've 
been keeping myself in and that has led, in this 
ridiculous way, to my making a fool of myself at the 
last. I knew a hitch was coming I knew at least 
something was ; but I hoped it would come and go 
without this!" She had stopped before a mirror, 
still dealing, like an actress in the wing, with her 
appearance, her make-up. She dabbed at her cheeks 
and pressed her companion to leave her to herself. 
" Don't pity me, don't mind me ; and, above all, 
don't ask any questions." 

" Ah," said Tony in friendly remonstrance, " your 
bravery makes it too hard to help you ! " 

" Don't try to help me don't even want to. And 
don't tell any tales. Hush ! " she went on in a 
different tone. " Here's Mrs. Beever ! " 

The lady of Eastmead was preceded by the butler, 
who, having formally announced her, announced 
luncheon as invidiously as if it had only been waiting 
for her. The servants at each house had ways of 
reminding her they were not the servants at the 
other. 

" Luncheon's all very well," said Tony, " but who 
io the world's to eat it ? Before you do," he 



THE OTHER HOUSE 85 

continued, to Mrs. Beever, "there's something I 
must ask of you." 

"And something I must ask too," Rose added, 
while the butler retired like a conscientious Minister 
retiring from untenable office. She addressed her- 
self to their neighbour with a face void, to Tony's 
astonishment, of every vestige of disorder. " Didn't 
Mr. Vidal come back with you ? " 

Mrs. Beever looked incorruptible. " Indeed he 
did ! " she sturdily replied. " Mr. Vidal is in the 
garden of this house." 

" Then I'll call him to luncheon." And Rose 
floated away, leaving her companions confronted in 
a silence that ended as Tony was lost in the wonder 
of her presence of mind only when Mrs. Beever 
had assured herself that she was out of earshot. 

" She has broken it off! " this lady then responsibly 
proclaimed. 

Her colleague demurred. " She ? How do you 
know ? " 

" I know because he has told me so." 

" Already in these few minutes ? " 

Mrs. Beever hung fire. "Of course I asked him 
first. I met him at the bridge I saw he had had a 
shock." 

"It's Rose who has had the shock!" Tony 
returned. " It's he who has thrown her over." 

Mrs. Beever stared. " That's her story ? " 

Tony reflected. " Practically yes." 

Again his visitor hesitated, but only for an instant. 
" Then one of them lies." 



86 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Tony laughed out at her lucidity. " It isn't Rose 
Armiger ! " 

" It isn't Dennis Vidal, my dear ; I believe in him," 
said Mrs. Beever. 

Her companion's amusement grew. " Your opera- 
tions are rapid." 

" Remarkably. I've asked him to come to me." 

Tony raised his eyebrows. " To come to you ? " 

"Till he can get a train to-morrow. He can't 
stay on here." 

Tony looked at it. " I see what you mean." 

" That's a blessing you don't always ! I like 
him he's my sort. And something seems to tell 
me I'm his!" 

" I won't gracefully insult you by saying you're 
every one's," Tony observed. Then, after an instant, 
" Is he very much cut up ? " he inquired. 

" He's utterly staggered. He doesn't understand." 

Tony thought again. " No more do I. But you'll 
console him," he added. 

" I'll feed him first," said his neighbour. " I'll 
take him back with me to luncheon." 

" Isn't that scarcely civil ? " 

" Civil to you ? " Mrs. Beever interposed. " That's 
exactly what he asked me. I told him I would 
arrange it with you." 

" And you're ' arranging ' it, I see. But how can 
you take him if Rose is bringing him in ? " 

Mrs. Beever was silent a while. " She isn't. She 
hasn't gone to him. That was for me" 

Tony looked at her in wonder. " Your operations 



THE OTHER HOUSE 87 

are rapid/' he repeated. " But I found her under 
the unmistakable effect of a blow." 

" I found her exactly as usual." 

" Well, that also was for you," said Tony. " Her 
disappointment's a secret." 

" Then I'm much obliged to you for mentioning it." 

u I did so to defend her against your bad account 
of her. But the whole thing's obscure," the young 
man added with sudden weariness. " I give it up ! " 

" / don't I shall straighten it out." Mrs. Beever 
spoke with high decision. "But I must see your 
wife first." 

" Rather ! she's waiting all this while." He had 
already opened the door. 

As she reached it she stopped again. "Shall I 
find the Doctor with her ? " 

" Yes, by her request." 

"Then how is she?" 

" Maddening ! " Tony exclaimed ; after which, as 
his visitor echoed the word, he went on : " I mean in 
her dreadful obsession, to which poor Ramage has 
had to give way and which is the direct reason of 
her calling you." 

Mrs. Beever's little eyes seemed to see more than 
he told her, to have indeed the vision of something 
formidable. " What dreadful obsession ? " 

"She'll tell you herself." He turned away to 
leave her to go, and she disappeared ; but the next 
moment he heard her again on the threshold. 

" Only a word to say that that child may turn 
up." 



88 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" What child ? " He had already forgotten. 

" Oh, if you don't remember ! " Mrs. Beever, 

with feminine inconsequence, almost took it ill. 

Tony recovered the agreeable image. "Oh, your 
niece ? Certainly I remember her hair." 

"She's not my niece, and her hair's hideous. 
But if she does come, send her straight home ! " 

" Very good," said Tony. This time his visitor 
vanished. 



XII 



HE moved a minute about the hall ; then he dropped 
upon a sofa with a sense of exhaustion and a 
sudden need of rest; he stretched himself, closing 
his eyes, glad to be alone, glad above all to make 
sure that he could lie still. He wished to show 
himself he was not nervous ; he took up a position 
with the purpose not to budge till Mrs. Beever 
should come back. His house was in an odd con- 
dition, with luncheon pompously served and no one 
able to go to it. Poor Julia was in a predicament, 
poor Rose in another, and poor Mr. Vidal, fasting 
in the garden, in a greater one than either. Tony 
sighed as he thought of this dispersal, but he 
stiffened himself resolutely on his couch. He 
wouldn't go in alone, and he couldn't even enjoy 
Mrs. Beever. It next occurred to him that he could 
still less enjoy her little friend, the child he had 
promised to turn away ; on which he gave a sigh 
that represented partly privation and partly resig- 
nation partly also a depressed perception of the 
fact that he had never in all his own healthy life 
been less eager for a meal. Meanwhile, however, 
the attempt to stop pacing the floor was a success : 
he felt as if in closing his eyes he destroyed the 



go THE OTHER HOUSE 

vision that had scared him. He was cooler, he was 
easier, and he liked the smell of flowers in the dusk. 
What was droll, when he gave himself up to it, was 
the sharp sense of lassitude ; it had dropped on him 
out of the blue and it showed him how a sudden 
alarm such as, after all, he had had could drain a 
fellow in an hour of half his vitality. He wondered 
whether, if he might be undisturbed a little, the 
result of this surrender wouldn't be to make him 
delightfully lose consciousness. 

He never knew afterwards whether it was in 
the midst of his hope or on the inner edge of a doze 
just achieved that he became aware of a footfall 
betraying an uncertain advance. He raised his lids 
to it and saw before him the pretty girl from the 
other house, whom, for a moment before he moved, 
he lay there looking at. He immediately recognised 
that what had roused him was the fact that, noise- 
lessly and for a few seconds, her eyes had rested on 
his face. She uttered a blushing "Oh!" which 
deplored this effect of her propinquity and which 
brought Tony straight to his feet. "Ah, good 
morning ! How d'ye do ? " Everything came back 
to him but her name. " Excuse my attitude I 
didn't hear you come in." 

" When I saw you asleep I'm afraid I kept the 
footman from speaking." Jean Martle was much 
embarrassed, but it contributed in the happiest way 
to her animation. " I came in because he told me 
that Cousin Kate's here." 

"Oh yes, she's here she thought you might 



THE OTHER HOUSE 91 

arrive. Do sit down," Tony added with his prompt 
instinct of what, in his own house, was due from a 
man of some confidence to a girl of none at all. It 
operated before he could check it, and Jean was as 
passive to it as if he had tossed her a command ; but 
as soon as she was seated, to obey him, in a high- 
backed, wide-armed Venetian chair which made a 
gilded cage for her flutter, and he had again placed 
himself not in the same position on the sofa 
opposite, he recalled the request just preferred by 
Mrs. Beever. He was to send her straight home ; 
yes, it was to be invited instantly to retrace her 
steps that she sat there panting and pink. 

Meanwhile she was very upright and very serious ; 
she seemed very anxious to explain. " I thought it 
better to come, since she wasn't there. I had gone 
off to walk home with the Marshes I was gone 
rather long; and when I came back she had left 
the house the servants told me she must be here." 

Tony could only meet with the note of hospitality 
so logical a plea. " Oh, it's all right Mrs. Beever's 
with Mrs. Bream." It was apparently all wrong 
he must tell her she couldn't stay ; but there was a 
prior complication in his memory of having invited 
her to luncheon. " I wrote to your cousin I hoped 
you'd come. Unfortunately she's not staying her- 
self." 

" Ah, then, /mustn't ! " Jean spoke with lucidity, 
but without quitting her chair. 

Tony hesitated. " She'll be a little while yet 
my wife has something to say to her." 



92 THE OTHER HOUSE 

The girl had fixed her eyes on the floor; she 
might have been reading there the fact that for the 
first time in her life she was regularly calling on a 
gentleman. Since this was the singular case she 
must at least call properly. Her manner revealed 
an earnest effort to that end, an effort visible even 
in the fear of a liberty if she should refer too 
familiarly to Mrs. Bream. She cast about her with 
intensity for something that would show sympathy 
without freedom, and, as a result, presently produced : 
" I came an hour ago, and I saw Miss Armiger. 
She told me she would bring down the baby." 

"But she didn't?" 

" No, Cousin Kate thought it wouldn't do." 

Tony was happily struck. " It will do it shall 
do. Should you like to see her ? " 

" I thought I should like it very much. It's very 
kind of you." 

Tony jumped up. " I'll show her to you myself." 
He went over to ring a bell ; then, as he came back, 
he added : " I delight in showing her. I think she's 
the wonder of the world." 

" That's what babies always seem to me," said 
Jean. " It's so absorbing to watch them." 

These remarks were exchanged with great gravity, 
with stiffish pauses, while Tony hung about till his 
ring should be answered. 

" Absorbing ? " he repeated. " Isn't it, preposter- 
ously ? Wait till you've watched Effie ! " 
v His visitor preserved for a while a silence which 
might have indicated that, with this injunction, her 



THE OTHER HOUSE 93 

waiting had begun ; but at last she said with the 
same simplicity : " I've a sort of original reason for 
my interest in her." 

" Do you mean the illness of her poor mother ? " 
He saw that she meant nothing so patronising, 
though her countenance fell with the reminder of 
this misfortune : she heard with awe that the 
unconscious child was menaced. " That's a very 
good reason," he declared, to relieve her. " But so 
much the better if you've got another too. I hope 
you'll never want for one to be kind to her." 

She looked more assured. " I'm just the person 
always to be." 

" Just the person ? " Tony felt that he must 

draw her out. She was now arrested, however, by 
the arrival of the footman, to whom he immediately 
turned. " Please ask Gorham to be as good as to 
bring down the child." 

" Perhaps Gorham will think it won't do," Jean 
suggested as the servant went off. 

" Oh, she's as proud of her as I am ! But if she 
doesn't approve I'll take you upstairs. That'll be 
because, as you say you're just the person. I 
haven't the least doubt of it but you were going to 
tell me why." 

Jean treated it as if it were almost a secret. 
"Because she was born on my day." 

" Your birthday ? " 

"My birthday the twenty-fourth." 

" Oh I see ; that's charming that's delightful ! " 
The circumstance had not quite all the subtlety she 



94 THE OTHER HOUSE 

had beguiled him into looking for, but her amusing 
belief in it, which halved the date like a succulent 
pear, mingled oddly, to make him quickly feel that 
it had enough, with his growing sense that Mrs. 
Beever's judgment of her hair was a libel. " It's a 
most extraordinary coincidence it makes a most 
interesting tie. Do, therefore, I beg you, whenever 
you keep you anniversary, keep also a little hers." 

" That's just what I was thinking," said Jean. 
Then she added, still shy, yet suddenly almost 
radiant : " I shall always send her something ! " 

" She shall do the same to you ! " This idea had 
a charm even for Tony, who determined on the 
spot, quite sincerely, that he "would, for the first 
years at least, make it his own charge. " You're 
her very first friend," he smiled. 

" Am I ? " Jean thought it wonderful news. 
" Before she has even seen me ! " 

" Oh, those are the first. You're ' handed down,'" 
said Tony, humouring her. 

She evidently deprecated, however, any abate- 
ment of her rarity. "Why, I haven't seen her 
mother, either." 

"No, you haven't seen her mother. But you 
shall. And you have seen her father." 

" Yes, I have seen her father." Looking at him 
as if to make sure of it, Jean gave this assertion the 
assent of a gaze so unrestricted that, feeling herself 
after an instant caught, as it were, in it, she turned 
abruptly away. 

It came back to Tony at the same moment with 



THE OTHER HOUSE 95 

a sort of coarseness that he was to have sent her 
home; yet now, somehow, as if half through the 
familiarity it had taken but these minutes to 
establish, and half through a perception of her 
extreme juvenility, his reluctance to tell her so had 
dropped. "Do you know I'm under a sort of 
dreadful vow to Mrs. Beever ? " Then as she 
faced him again, wondering : " She told me that if 
you should turn up I was to pack you off." 

Jean stared with a fresh alarm. " Ah, I shouldn't 
have stayed ! " 

" You didn't know it, and I couldn't show you the 
door." 

" Then I must go now." 

" Not a bit. I wouldn't have mentioned it to 
consent to that. I mention it for just the other 
reason to keep you here as long as possible. I'll 
make it right with Cousin Kate," Tony continued. 
" I'm not afraid of her ! " he laughed. " You pro- 
duce an effect on me for which I'm particularly 
grateful." She was acutely sensitive ; for a few 
seconds she looked as if she thought he might be 
amusing himself at her expense. " I mean you 
soothe me at a moment when I really want it," he 
said with a gentleness from which it gave him 
pleasure to see in her face an immediate impression. 
" I'm worried, I'm depressed, I've been threshing 
about in my anxiety. You keep me cool you're 
just the right thing." He nodded at her in clear 
kindness. " Stay with me stay with me ! " 

Jean had not taken the flight of expressing a 



96 THE OTHER HOUSE 

concern for his domestic situation, but in the pity 
that flooded her eyes at this appeal there was an 
instant surrender to nature. It was the sweetness 
of her youth that had calmed him, but in the res- 
ponse his words had evoked she already, on the 
spot, looked older. " Ah, if I could help you ! " she 
timidly murmured. 

" Sit down again ; sit down ! " He turned away. 
" Here's the wonder of the world ! " he exclaimed 
the next instant, seeing Gorham appear with her 
charge. His interest in the apparition almost 
simultaneously dropped, for Mrs. Beever was at the 
opposite door. She had come back, and Ramage 
was with her : they stopped short together, and he 
did the same on catching the direction, as he 
supposed, of his sharp neighbour's eyes. She had 
an air of singular intensity ; it was peculiarly 
embodied in a look which, as she drew herself up, 
she shot straight past him and under the reprobation 
of which he glanced round to see Jean Martle turn 
pale. What he saw, however, was not Jean Martle 
at all, but that very different person Rose Armiger, 
who, by an odd chance and with Dennis Vidal at 
her side, presented herself at this very juncture at 
the door of the vestibule. It was at Rose Mrs. 
Beever stared stared with a significance doubtless 
produced by this young lady's falsification of her 
denial that Mr. Vidal had been actively pursued. 
She took no notice of Jean, who, while the rest of 
them stood about, testified to her prompt compliance 
with any word of Tony's by being the only member 



THE OTHER HOUSE 97 

of the company in a chair. The sight of Mrs. 
Beever's face appeared to have deprived her of the 
force to rise. Tony observed these things in a flash, 
and also how far the gaze of the Gorgon was from 
petrifying Rose Armiger, who, with a bright recovery 
of zeal by which he himself was wonderstruck, 
launched without delay a conscientious reminder of 
luncheon. It was on the table it was spoiling it , 
was spoilt! Tony felt that he must gallantly 
support her. " Let us at last go in then," he said 
to Mrs. Beever. "Let us go in then," he repeated 
to Jean and to Dennis Vidal. " Doctor, you'll come 
too?" 

He broke Jean's spell at a touch ; she was on her 
feet ; but the Doctor raised, as if for general applica- 
tion, a deterrent, authoritative hand. " If you please, 
Bream no banquet." He looked at Jean, at Rose, 
at Vidal, at Gorham. " I take the house in hand. 
We immediately subside." 

Tony sprang to him. " Julia's worse ? " 

No she's the same." 

" Then I may go to her ? " 

"Absolutely not." Doctor Ramage grasped his 
arm, linked his own in it and held him. " If you're 
not a good boy I lock you up in your room. We 
immediately subside," he said again, addressing the 
others ; "we go our respective ways and we keep 
very still. The fact is I require a hushed house. 
But before the hush descends Mrs. Beever has 
something to say to you." 

She |was on the other side of Tony, who felt, 



98 THE OTHER HOUSE 

between them there, like their prisoner. She 
looked at her little audience, which consisted of 
Jean and Rose, of Mr. Vidal and the matronly 
Gorham. Gorham carried in her ample arms a 
large white sacrifice, a muslin-muffled offering 
which seemed to lead up to a ceremony. " I have 
something to say to you because Doctor Ramage 
allows it, and because we are both under pledges to 
Mrs. Bream. It's a very peculiar announcement for 
me to have on my hands, but I've just passed her 
my promise, in the very strictest manner, to make 
it, before leaving the house, to every one it may 
concern, and to repeat it in certain other quarters.' 1 
She paused again, and Tony, from his closeness to 
her, could feel the tremor of her solid presence. 
She disliked the awkwardness and the coercion, 
and he was sorry for her, because by this time he 
well knew what was coming. He had guessed his 
wife's extraordinary precaution, which would have 
been almost grotesque if it hadn't been so infinitely 
touching. It seemed to him that he gave the 
measure of his indulgence for it in overlooking the 
wound to his delicacy conveyed in the publicity she 
imposed. He could condone this in a tender sigh, 
because it meant that in consequence of it she'd now 
pull round. " She wishes it as generally known as 
possible," Mrs. Beever brought out, "that Mr. 
Bream, to gratify her at a crisis which I trust she 
exaggerates, has assured her on his sacred honour 
that in the event of her death he will not again 
marry." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 99 

" In the lifetime of her daughter, that is," Doctor 
Ramage hastened to add. 

" In the lifetime of her daughter," Mrs. Beever as 
clearly echoed. 

" In the lifetime of her daughter ! " Tony himself 
took up with an extravagance intended to offer the 
relief of a humorous treatment, if need be, to the 
bewildered young people whose embarrassed stare 
was a prompt criticism of Julia's discretion. It 
might have been in the spirit of a protest still more 
vehement that, at this instant, a small shrill pipe 
rose from the animated parcel with which Gorham, 
participating in the general awkwardness, had 
possibly taken a liberty. The comical little sound 
created a happy diversion ; Tony sprang straight to 
the child. "So it is, my own," he cried, "a 
scandal to be talking of ' lifetimes ! ' " He caught 
her from the affrighted nurse he put his face down 
to hers with passion. Her wail ceased and he held 
her close to him ; for a minute, in silence, as if 
something deep went out from him, he laid his 
cheek to her little cheek, burying his head under 
her veil. When he gave her up again, turning 
round, the hall was empty of every one save the 
Doctor, who signalled peremptorily to Gorham to 
withdraw. Tony remained there meeting his eyes, 
in which, after an instant, the young man saw some- 
thing that led him to exclaim : " How dreadfully ill 
she must be, Ramage, to have conceived a stroke in 
such taste ! w 

His companion drew him down to the sofa, 



ioo THE OTHER HOUSE 

patting, soothing, supporting him. "You must 
bear it my dear boy you must bear everything." 
Doctor Ramage faltered. "Your wife's exceed- 
ingly ill." 



END OF BOOK FIRST 



BOOK SECOND 



XIII 

IT continued to be for the lady of Eastmead, as the 
years went on, a sustaining reflection that if in the 
matter of upholstery she yielded somewhat stiffly to 
the other house, so the other house was put out of 
all countenance by the mere breath of her garden. 
Tony could beat her indoors at every point, but 
when she took her stand on her lawn she could defy- 
not only Bounds but Wilverley. Her stand, and 
still more her seat, in the summer days, was frequent 
there, as we easily gather from the fortified position 
in which we next encounter her. From May to 
October she was out, as she said, at grass, drawing 
from it most of the time a comfortable sense that on 
such ground as this her young friend's love of new- 
ness broke down. He might make his dinner-service 
as new as he liked ; she triumphed precisely in the fact 
that her trees and her shrubs were old. He could 
hang nothing on his walls like her creepers and 
clusters ; there was no velvet in his carpets like the 
velvet of her turf. She had everything, or almost 
everything she had space and time and the river. 
No one at Wilverley had the river as she had it ; 
people might say of course there was little of it to 
have, but of whatever there was she was in intimate 



104 THE OTHER HOUSE 

possession. It skirted her grounds and improved 
her property and amused her guests; she always 
held that her free access made up for being, as 
people said, on the wrong side of it. If she had not 
been on the wrong side she would not have had the 
little stone foot-bridge which was her special pride 
and the very making of her picture, and which she 
had heard compared she had an off-hand way of 
bringing it in to a similar feature, at Cambridge, 
of one of the celebrated " backs." The other side 
was the side of the other house, the side for the view 
the view as to which she entertained the merely 
qualified respect excited in us, after the first creative 
flush, by mysteries of our own making. Mrs. Beever 
herself formed the view and the other house was 
welcome to it, especially to those parts of it enjoyed 
through the rare gaps in an interposing leafy lane. 
Tony had a gate which he called his river-gate, but 
you didn't so much as suspect the stream till you 
got well out of it. He had on his further quarter a 
closer contact with the town ; but this was just what 
on both quarters she had with the country. Her 
approach to the town was by the " long way " and 
the big bridge, and by going on, as she liked to do, 
past the Doctor's square red house. She hated 
stopping there, hated it as much as she liked his 
stopping at Eastmead : in the former case she 
seemed to consult him and in the latter to advise, 
which was the exercise of her wisdom that she 
decidedly preferred. Such degrees and dimensions, 
I hasten to add, had to do altogether with short 



THE OTHER HOUSE 105 

relations and small things ; but it was just the good 
lady's reduced scale that held her little world 
together. So true is it that from strong compres- 
sion the elements of drama spring and that there 
are conditions in which they seem to invite not so 
much the opera-glass as the microscope. 

Never, perhaps, at any rate, had Mrs. Beever been 
more conscious of her advantages, or at least more 
surrounded with her conveniences, than on a 
beautiful afternoon of June on which we are again 
concerned with her. These blessings were partly 
embodied in the paraphernalia of tea, which had 
cropped up, with promptness and profusion, in a 
sheltered corner of the lawn and in the midst of 
which, waiting for custom, she might have been in 
charge of a refreshment-stall at a fair. Everything 
at the other house struck her as later and later, and 
she only regretted that, as the protest of her own 
tradition, she couldn't move in the opposite direction 
without also moving from the hour. She waited for 
it now, at any rate, in the presence of a large red 
rug and a large white tablecloth, as well as of sundry 
basket-chairs and of a hammock that swayed in the 
soft west wind ; and she had meanwhile been 
occupied with a collection of parcels and paste- 
board boxes that were heaped together on a bench. 
Of one of these parcels, enveloped in several layers 
of tissue-paper, she had just possessed herself, and, 
seated near her tea-table, was on the point of 
uncovering it. She became aware, at this instant, 
of being approached from behind ; on which, looking 



lo6 THE OTHER HOUSE 

over her shoulder and seeing Doctor Ramage, she 
straightway stayed her hands. These friends, in a 
long acquaintance, had dropped by the way so many 
preliminaries that absence, in their intercourse, was 
a mere parenthesis and conversation in general 
scarce began with a capital. But on this occasion 
the Doctor was floated to a seat not, as usual, on the 
bosom of the immediately previous. 

" Guess whom I've just overtaken on your door- 
step. The young man you befriended four years 
ago Mr. Vidal, Miss Armiger's flame ! " 

Mrs. Beever fell back in her surprise ; it was rare 
for Mrs. Beever to fall back. " He has turned up 
again ? " Her eyes had already asked more than her 

friend could tell. " For what in the world ? " 

" For the pleasure of seeing you. He has 
evidently retained a very grateful sense of what you 
did for him." 

" I did nothing, my dear man I had to let it 
alone." 

" Tony's condition of course I remember again 
required you. But you gave him a shelter," said the 
Doctor, " that wretched day and that night, and he 
felt (it was evidently much to him) that, in his 
rupture with his young woman, you had the right 
instinct of the matter and were somehow on his side." 
" I put him up for a few hours I saved him, in 
time, the embarrassment of finding himself in a 
house of death. But he took himself off the next 
morning early bidding me good-bye only in a quiet 
little note." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 107 

" A quiet little note which I remember you after- 
wards showed me and which was a model of 
discretion and good taste. It seems to me," the 
Doctor went on, "that he doesn't violate those 
virtues in considering that you've given him the right 
to reappear." 

" At the very time, and the only time, in so long a 
period that his young woman, as you call her, 
happens also to be again in the field ! " 

" That's a coincidence," the Doctor replied, " far too 
singular for Mr. Vidal to have had any forecast of it." 

" You didn't then tell him ? " 

" I told him nothing save that you were probably 
just where I find you, and that, as Manning is busy 
with her tea-things, I would come straight out for 
him and announce that he's there." 

Mrs. Beever's sense of complications evidently 
grew as she thought. " By ' there ' do you mean on 
the doorstep ? " 

" Far from it. In the safest place in the world 
at least when you're not in it." 

" In my own room ? " Mrs. Beever asked. 

" In that austere monument to Domestic Method 
which you're sometimes pleased to call your boudoir. 
I took upon myself to show him into it and to close 
the door on him there. I reflected that you'd 
perhaps like to see him before any one else." 

Mrs. Beever looked at her visitor with apprecia- 
tion. " You dear, sharp thing ! " 

" Unless, indeed," the Doctor added, " they have, 
in so many years, already met." 



108 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" She told me only yesterday they haven't." 

" I see. However, as I believe you consider that 
she never speaks the truth, that doesn't particularly 
count." 

" I hold, on the contrary, that a lie counts double," 
Mrs. Beever replied with decision. 

Doctor Ramage laughed. " Then why have you 
never in your life told one ? I haven't even yet 
quite made out," he pursued, " why especially with 
Miss Jean here you asked Miss Armiger down." 

" I asked her for Tony." 

" Because he suggested it ? Yes, I know that." 

" I mean it," said Mrs. Beever, " in a sense I think 
you don't know." She looked at him a moment; 
but either her profundity or his caution were too 
great, and he waited for her to commit herself 
further. That was a thing she could always do 
rapidly without doing it recklessly. " I asked her 
exactly on account of Jean." 

The Doctor meditated, but this seemed to deepen 
her depth. "I give it up. You've mostly struck 
me as so afraid of every other girl Paul looks at." 

Mrs. Beever's face was grave. " Yes, I've 
always been; but Pm not so afraid of them as of 
those at whom Tony looks." 

Her interlocutor started. "He's looking at 
Jean ? " 

Mrs. Beever was silent a little. " Not for the first 
time!" 

Her visitor also hesitated. " And do you think, 
Miss Armiger ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 109 

Mrs. Beever took him up. " Miss Armiger's better 
for him since he must have somebody ! " 

" You consider she'd marry him ? " 

" She's insanely in love with him." 

The Doctor tilted up his chin ; he uttered an 
expressive " Euh ! She is indeed, poor thing ! " he 
said. " Since you frankly mention it, I as frankly 
agree with you, that I've never seen anything like it. 
And there's monstrous little I've not seen. But if 
Tony isn't crazy too ? " 

" It's a kind of craze that's catching. He must 
think of that sort of thing." 

" I don't know what you mean by * thinking ! ' 
Do you imply that the dear man, on what we 
know ? " The Doctor couldn't phrase it. 

His friend had greater courage. " Would break 
his vow and marry again ? " She turned it over, 
but at last she brought out : " Never in the world." 

"Then how does the chance of his thinking of 
Rose help her?" 

" I don't say it helps her. I simply say it helps 
poor me." 

Doctor Ramage was still mystified. " But if they 
can't marry ? " 

" I don't care whether they marry or not ! " 

She faced him with the bravery of this, and he 
broke into a happy laugh. " I don't know whether 
most to admire your imagination or your morality." 

" I protect my girl," she serenely declared. 

Doctor Ramage made his choice. "Oh, your 
morality ! " 



no THE OTHER HOUSE 

" In doing so," she went on, " I also protect my 
boy. That's the highest morality I know. I'll see 
Mr. Vidal out here/' she added. 

" So as to get rid of him easier ? " 

" My getting rid of him will depend on what he 
wants. He must take, after all/' Mrs. Beever con- 
tinued, " his chance of meeting any embarrassment. 
If. he plumps in without feeling his way " 

" It's his own affair I see," the Doctor said. 
What he saw was that his friend's diplomacy had 
suffered a slight disturbance. Mr. Vidal was a new 
element in her reckoning; for if, of old, she had 
liked and pitied him, he had since dropped out of 
her problem. Her companion, who timed his 
pleasures to the minute, indulged in one of his 
frequent glances at his watch. " I'll put it then to 
the young man more gracefully than you do that 
you'll receive him in this place." 

" I shall be much obliged to you." 

"But before I go," Doctor Ramage inquired, 
" where are all our friends ? " 

" I haven't the least idea. The only ones I count 
on are Effie and Jean." 

The Doctor made a motion of remembrance. " To 
be sure it's their birthday : that fellow put it out 
of my head. The child's to come over to you to tea, 
and just what I stopped for " 

" Was to see if I had got your doll ? " Mrs. 
Beever interrupted him by holding up the muffled 
parcel in |her lap. She pulled away the papers. 
" Allow me to introduce the young lady." 



THE OTHER HOUSE in 

The young lady was sumptuous and ample ; he 
took her in his hands with reverence. "She's 
splendid she's positively human ! I feel like a 
Turkish pasha investing in a beautiful Circassian. 
I feel too," the Doctor went on, " how right I was 
to depend, in the absence of Mrs. Ramage, on 
your infallible taste." Then restoring the effigy: 
" Kindly mention how much I owe you." 

"Pay at the shop," said Mrs. Beever. "They 
1 trusted ' me." 

" With the same sense of security that I had ! " 
The Doctor got up. "Please then present the 
object and accompany it with my love and a kiss." 

"You can't come back to give them yourself? " 

"What do I ever give ' myself/ dear lady, but 
medicine ? " 

"Very good," said Mrs. Beever; "the presenta- 
tion shall be formal. But I ought to warn you that 
your beautiful Circassian will have been no less than 
the fourth." She glanced at the parcels on the bench. 
" I mean the fourth doll the child's to receive to-day." 

The Doctor followed the direction of her eyes. 
" It's a regular slave-market a perfect harem ! " 

"We've each of us given her one. Each, that is, 
except Rose." 

" And what has Rose given her ? " 

" Nothing at all." 

The Doctor thought a moment. "Doesn't she 
like her ? " 

"She seems to wish it to be marked that she 
has nothing to do with her." 



ii2 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Again Doctor Ramage reflected. " I see that's 
very clever." 

Mrs. Beever, from her chair, looked up at him. 
" What do you mean by ' clever ' ? " 

"I'll tell you some other time." He still stood 
before the bench. "There are no gifts for poor 
Jean?" 

" Oh, Jean has had most of hers." 

"But nothing from me" The Doctor had but 
just thought of her; he turned sadly away. "I'm 
quite ashamed ! " 

"You needn't be," said Mrs. Beever. "She has 
also had nothing from Tony." 

He seemed struck. " Indeed ? On Miss Armi- 
ger's system ? " His friend remained silent, and he 
went on : " That of wishing it to be marked that he 
has nothing to do with her ? " 

Mrs. Beever, for a minute, continued not to 
reply; but at last she exclaimed: "He doesn't 
calculate ! " 

"That's bad for a banker!" Doctor Ramage 
laughed. " What then has she had from Paul ? " 

"Nothing either as yet. That's to come this 
evening." 

"And what's it to be?" 

Mrs. Beever hesitated. " I haven't an idea." 

"Ah, you can fib!" joked her visitor, taking 
leave. 



HE crossed on his way to the house a tall parlour- 
maid who had just quitted it with a tray which 
a moment later she deposited on the table near 
her mistress. Tony Bream was accustomed to say 
that since Frederick the Great's grenadiers there 
had never been anything like the queen-mother's 
parlourmaids, who indeed on field-days might, in 
stature, uniform and precision of exercise, have 
affronted comparison with that formidable phalanx. 
They were at once more athletic and more reserved 
than Tony liked to see their sex, and he was always 
sure that the extreme length of their frocks was deter- 
mined by that of their feet. The young woman, at 
any rate, who now presented herself, a young woman 
with a large nose and a straight back, stiff cap- 
streamers, stiffer petticoats and stiffest manners, 
was plainly the corporal of her squad. There was 
a murmur and a twitter all around her; but she 
rustled about the tea-table to a tune that quenched 
the voice of summer. It left undisturbed, however, 
for awhile, Mrs. Beever's meditations; that lady 
was thoughtfully occupied in wrapping up Doctor 
Ramage's doll. "Do you know, Manning, what 
has become of Miss Armiger?" she at last inquired. 



H4 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"She went, ma'am, near an hour ago, to the 
pastrycook's." 

" To the pastrycook's ? " 

"She had heard you wonder, ma'am, she told 
me, that the young ladies' birthday-cake hadn't 
yet arrived." 

" And she thought she'd see about it ? Uncom- 
monly good of her ! " Mrs. Beever exclaimed. 

"Yes, ma'am, uncommonly good." 

" Has it arrived, then, now ? " 

" Not yet, ma'am." 

" And Miss Armiger hasn't returned ? " 

" I think not, ma'am." 

Mrs. Beever considered again. "Perhaps she's 
waiting to bring it." 

Manning indulged in a proportionate pause. 
" Perhaps, ma'am in a fly. And when it comes, 
ma'am, shall I fetch it out ? " 

"In a fly too? I'm afraid," said Mrs. Beever, 
" that with such an incubation it will really require 
one." After a moment she added : "I'll go in and 
look at it first." And then, as her attendant was 
about to rustle away, she further detained her. 
" Mr. Bream hasn't been over ? " 

" Not yet, ma'am." 

-Mrs. Beever consulted her watch. "Then he's 
still at the Bank." 

" He must be indeed, ma'am." 
Tony's colleague appeared for a little to ponder 
this prompt concurrence ; after which she Said : 
" You haven't seen Miss Jean ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE ii$ 

Manning bethought herself. "I believe, ma'am, 
Miss Jean is dressing." 

"Oh, in honour " But Mrs. Beever's idea 

dropped before she finished her sentence. 

Manning ventured to take it up. " In honour 
of her birthday, ma'am." 

" I see of course. And do you happen to have 
heard if that's what also detains Miss Effie that 
she's dressing in honour of hers ? " 

Manning hesitated. " I heard, ma'am, this 
morning that Miss Effie had a slight cold." 

Her mistress looked surprised. " But not such 
as to keep her at home ? " 

"They were taking extra care of her, ma'am 
so that she might be all right for coming." 

Mrs. Beever was not pleased. " Extra care ? 
Then why didn't they send for the Doctor ? " 

Again Manning hesitated. "They sent for Miss 
Jean, ma'am." 

" To come and look after her ? " 

"They often do, ma'am, you know. This morn- 
ing I took in the message." 

" And Miss Jean obeyed it ? " 

" She was there an hour, ma'am." 

Mrs. Beever administered a more than approving 
pat to the final envelope of her doll. "She said 
nothing about it." 

Again Manning concurred. "Nothing, ma'am." 
The word sounded six feet high, like the figure she 
presented. She waited a moment and then as if 
to close with as sharp a snap the last open door to* 



116 THE OTHER HOUSE 

the desirable, " Mr. Paul, ma'am," she observed, " if 
you were wanting to know, is out in his boat on the 
river." 

Mrs. Beever pitched her parcel back to the bench. 
" Mr. Paul is never anywhere else ! " 

" Never, ma'am," said Manning inexorably. She 
turned the next instant to challenge the stranger 
who had come down from the house. " A gentleman, 
ma'am," she announced; and, retiring while Mrs. 
Beever rose to meet the visitor, drew, with the noise 
of a lawn-mower, a starched tail along the grass. 

Dennis Vidal, with his hat off, showed his hostess 
a head over which not a year seemed to have 
passed. He had still his young, sharp, meagre 
look, and it came to her that the other time as 
well he had been dressed in double-breasted blue 
of a cut that made him sailorly. It was only on 
a longer view that she saw his special signs to be 
each a trifle intensified. He was browner, leaner, 
harder, finer ; he even struck her as more wanting 
in height. These facts, however, didn't prevent 
another fact from striking her still more : what 
was most distinct in his face was that he was 
really glad to take her by the hand. That had 
an instant effect on her : she could glow with 
pleasure, modest matron as she was, at such an 
intimation of her having, so many years before, in 
a few hours, made on a clever young man she 
liked an impression that could thus abide with 
him. In the quick light of it she like'd him afresh ; 
it was as if their friendship put down on the spot 



THE OTHER HOUSE 117 

a firm foot that was the result of a single stride 
across the chasm of time. In this indeed, to her 
clear sense, there was even something more to 
pity him for : it was such a dreary little picture 
of his interval, such an implication of what it had 
lacked, that there had been so much room in it 
for an ugly old woman at Wilverley. She motioned 
him to sit down with her, but she immediately re- 
marked that before she asked him a question she 
had an important fact to make known. She had 
delayed too long, while he waited there, to let him 
understand that Rose Armiger was at Eastmead. 
She instantly saw at this that he had come 
in complete ignorance. The range of alarm in 
his face was narrow, but he coloured, looking 
grave ; and after a brief debate with himself 
he inquired as to Miss Armiger's actual where- 
abouts. 

" She has gone out, but she may reappear at any 
moment," said Mrs. Beever. 

" And if she does, will she come out here ? " 

" I've an impression she'll change her dress first. 
That may take her a little time." 

" Then I'm free to sit with you ten minutes ? " 

" As long as you like, dear Mr. Vidal. It's for 
you to choose whether you'll avoid her." 

" I dislike dodging I dislike hiding," Dennis 
returned ; " but I daresay that if I had known 
where she was I wouldn't have come." 

" I feel hatefully rude but you took a leap in the 
dark. The absurd part of it," Mrs. Beever went on f 



Ii8 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" is that you've stumbled on her very first visit 
to me." 

The young man showed a surprise which gave 
her the measure of his need of illumination. " For 
these four years ? " 

" For these four years. It's the only time she has 
been at Eastmead." 

Dennis hesitated. " And how often has she been 
at the other house ? " 

Mrs. Beever smiled. "Not even once." Then 
as her smile broadened to a small, dry laugh, " I 
can quite say that for her ! " she declared. 

Dennis looked at her hard. "To your certain 
knowledge ? " 

"To my certain and absolute knowledge." This 
mutual candour continued, and presently she said : 
" But you where do you come from ? " 

"From far away I've been out of England. 
After my visit here I went back to my post." 

" And now you've returned with your fortune ? " 
He gave her a smile from which the friendliness 
took 'something of the bitter quality. "Call it my 
T^zsfortune ! " There was nothing in this to deprive 
Mrs. Beever of the pleasant play of a professional 
sense that he had probably gathered such an inde- 
pendence as would have made him welcome at the 
Bank. On the other hand she caught the note of a 
tired grimness in the way he added : " I've come 
back with that. It sticks to me ! " 

For a minute she spared him. "You want her 
as much as ever ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 119 

His eyes confessed to a full and indeed to a 
sore acceptance of that expression of the degree. 
" I want her as much as ever. It's my constitu- 
tional obstinacy ! " 

" Which her treatment of you has done nothing 
to break down ? " 

" To break down ? It has done everything in life 
to build it up." 

" In spite of the particular circumstance ? " 

At this point even Mrs. Beever's directness failed. 

That of her visitor, however, was equal to the 
occasion. " The particular circumstance of her 
chucking me because of the sudden glimpse given 
her, by Mrs. Bream's danger, of the possibility of a 
far better match ? " He gave a laugh drier than her 
own had just been, the ring of an irony from which 
long, hard thought had pressed all the savour. 
" That ' particular circumstance/ dear madam, is 
every bit that's the matter with me ! " 

" You regard it with extraordinary coolness, but 
I presumed to allude to it " 

" Because," Dennis broke in with lucidity, " I 
myself made no bones of doing so on the only 
other occasion on which we've met ? " 

" The fact that we both equally saw, that we both 
equally judged," said Mrs. Beever, "was on that 
occasion really the only thing that had time to pass 
between us. It's a tie, but it's a slender one, and 
I'm all the more flattered that it should have had 
any force to make you care to see me again." 

" It never ceased to be my purpose to see you, 



120 THE OTHER HOUSE 

if you would permit it, on the first opportunity. My 
opportunity," the young man continued, " has been 
precipitated by an accident. I returned to England 
only last week, and was obliged two days ago to 
come on business to Southampton. There I found 
I should have to go, on the same matter, to Mar- 
rington. It then appeared that to get to Harrington 
I must change at Plumbury " 

" And Plumbury," said Mrs. Beever, " reminded 
you that you changed there, that it was from there 
you drove, on that horrible Sunday." 

" It brought my opportunity home to me. With- 
out wiring you or writing you, without sounding the 
ground or doing anything I ought to have done, I 
simply embraced it. I reached this place an hour 
ago and went to the inn." 

She looked at him wofully. " Poor dear young 
man ! " 

He turned it off. " I do very well. Remember 
the places I've come from." 

" I don't care in the least where you've come 
from ! If Rose weren't here I could put you up so 
beautifully." 

" Well, now that I know it," said Dennis after a 
moment, " I think I'm glad she's here. It's a fact 
the more to reckon with." 

" You mean to see her then ? " 

He sat with his eyes fixed, weighing it well. " You 
must tell me two or three things first. Then I'll 
choose I'll decide." 

She waited for him to mention his requirements, 



THE OTHER HOUSE 121 

turning to her teapot, which had been drawing, so 
that she could meanwhile hand him a cup. But for 
some minutes, taking it and stirring it, he only 
gazed and mused, as if his curiosities were so 
numerous that he scarcely knew which to pick out. 
Mrs. Beever at last, with a woman's sense for this, 
met him exactly at the right point. " I must tell 
you frankly that if four years ago she was a girl 
most people admired " 

He caught straight on. " She's still more won- 
derful now ? " 

Mrs. Beever distinguished. " I don't know about 
' wonderful,' but she wears really well. She carries 
the years almost as you do, and her head better 
than any young woman I've ever seen. Life is 
somehow becoming to her. Every one's immensely 
struck with her. She only needs to get what she 
wants. She has in short a charm that I recognise." 

Her visitor stared at her words as if they had 
been a framed picture; the reflected colour of it 
made a light in his face. " And you speak as one 
who, I remember, doesn't like her." 

The lady of Eastmead faltered, but there was 
help in her characteristic courage. " No I don't 
like her." 

" I see," Dennis considered. " May I ask then 
why you invited her ? " 

" For the most definite reason in the world. Mr. 
Bream asked me to." 

Dennis gave his hard smile. " Do you do every- 
thing Mr. Bream asks ? " 



122 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" He asks so little ! " 

" Yes," Dennis allowed " if that's a specimen ! 
Does he like her still ? " he inquired. 

"Just as much as ever." 

The young man was silent a few seconds. " Do 
you mean he's in love with her ? " 

" He never was in any degree." 

Dennis looked doubtful. " Are you very sure ? " 

" Well," said his hostess, " I'm sure of the pre- 
sent. That's quite enough. He's not in love with 
her now I have the proof." 

"The proof?" 

Mrs. Beever waited a moment. " His request in 
itself. If he were in love with her he never would 
have made it." 

There was a momentary appearance on her com- 
panion's part of thinking this rather too fine ; but he 
presently said : " You mean because he's completely 
held by his death-bed vow to his wife ? " 

"Completely held." 

" There's no likelihood of his breaking it ? " 

" Not the slightest." 

Dennis Vidal exhaled a low, long breath which 
evidently represented a certain sort of relief. 
" You're very positive ; but I've a great respect for 
your judgment." He thought an instant, then 
he pursued abruptly : " Why did he wish her 
nvited?" 

" For reasons that, as he expressed them to me, 
struck me as natural enough. For the sake of old 
acquaintance for the sake of his wife's memory." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 123 

"He doesn't consider, then, that Mrs. Bream's 
obsession, as you term it, had been in any degree an 
apprehension of Rose ? " 

" Why should he ? " Mrs. Beever asked. " Rose, 
for poor Julia, was on the point of becoming your 
wife." 

" Ah ! for all that was to prevent ! " Dennis rue- 
fully exclaimed. 

" It was to prevent little enough, but Julia never 
knew how little. Tony asked me a month ago if I 
thought he might without awkwardness propose to 
Miss Armiger a visit to the other house. I said 
' No, silly boy ! ' and he dropped the question ; but 
a week later he came back to it. He confided to 
me that he was ashamed for so long to have done 
so little for her ; and she had behaved in a difficult 
situation with such discretion and delicacy that to 
have ' shunted ' her, as he said, so completely was a 
kind of outrage to Julia's affection for her and a 
slur upon hers for his wife. I said to him that 
if it would help him a bit I would address her a 
suggestion that she should honour me with her 
company. He jumped at that, and I wrote. She 
jumped, and here she is." 

Poor Dennis, at this, gave a spring, as if the young 
lady had come into sight. Mrs. Beever reassured 
him, but he was on his feet and he stood before 
her. " This then is their first meeting ? " 

" Dear, no ! they've met in London. He often 
goes up." 

"How often?" 



124 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" Oh, irregularly. Sometimes twice a month." 

" And he sees her every time ? " 

Mrs. Beever considered. " Every time ? I should 
think hardly." 

" Then every other ? " 

" I haven't the least idea." 

Dennis looked round the garden. " You say 
you're convinced that, in the face of his promise, 
he has no particular interest in her. You mean, 
however, of course, but to the extent of marriage." 

"I mean," said Mrs. Beever, "to the extent of 
anything at all." She also rose ; she brought out her 
whole story. " He's in love with another person." 

" Ah," Dennis murmured, " that's none of my 
business ! " He nevertheless closed his eyes an 
instant with the cool balm of it. " But it makes a 
lot of difference." 

She laid a kind hand on his arm. " Such a lot, I 
hope, then, that you'll join our little party ? " He 
looked about him again, irresolute, and his eyes fell 
on the packages gathered hard by, of which the 
nature was betrayed by a glimpse of flaxen curls 
and waxen legs. She immediately enlightened him. 
" Preparations for a birthday visit from the little 
girl at the other house. She's coming over to 
receive them." 

Again he dropped upon a seat ; she stood there 
and he looked up at her. "At last we've got to 
business ! It's she I've come to ask about." 

" And what do you wish to ask ? " 

" How she goes on I mean in health." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 125 

" Not very well, I believe, just to-day ! " Mrs. 
Beever laughed. 

"Just to-day?" 

" She's reported to have a slight cold. But don't 
be alarmed. In general she's splendid." 

He hesitated. "Then you call it a good little 
life ? " 

" I call it a beautiful one ! " 

" I mean she won't pop off ? " 

" I can't guarantee that," said Mrs. Beever. 
" But till she does " 

" Till she does ? " he asked, as she paused. 

She paused a moment longer. "Well, it's a 
comfort to see her. You'll do that for yourself." 

" I shall do that for myself," Dennis repeated. 
After a moment he went on : " To be utterly frank, 
it was to do it I came." 

" And not to see me ? Thank you ! But I quite 
understand," said Mrs. Beever ; " you looked to me 
to introduce you. Sit still where you are, and I 
will." 

" There's one thing more I must ask you. You 
see ; you know ; you can tell me." He complied 
but a minute with her injunction ; again, nervously, 
he was on his feet. " Is Miss Armiger in love with 
Mr. Bream ? " 

His hostess turned away. " That's the one 
question I can't answer." Then she faced him 
again. "You must find out for yourself." 

He stood looking at her. " How shall I find 
out ? " 



126 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" By watching her." 

" Oh, I didn't come to do that ! " Dennis, on his 
side, turned away; he was visibly dissatisfied. But 
he checked himself; before him rose a young man in 
boating flannels, who appeared^ to have come up 
from the river, who had advanced noiselessly across 
the lawn and whom Mrs. Beever introduced with- 
out ceremony as her " boy." Her boy blinked at 
Dennis, to whose identity he received no clue ; and 
her visitor decided on a course.. " May I think over 
what you've said to me and come back ? " 

" I shall be very happy to see you again. But, in 
this poor place, what will you do ? " 

Dennis glanced at the river; then he appealed 
to the young man. "Will you lend me your 
boat ? " 

" It's mine," said Mrs. Beever, with decision. 
" You're welcome to it." 

"I'll take a little turn." Raising his hat, Dennis 
went rapidly down to the stream. 

Paul Beever looked after him. " Hadn't I better 

show him ? " he asked of his mother. 

"You had better sit right down there." She 
pointed with sharpness to the chair Dennis had 
quitted, and her son submissively took possession 
of it. 



XV 



PAUL BEEVER was tall and fat, and his eyes, like his 
mother's, were very small ; but more even than to his 
mother nature had offered him a compensation for 
this defect in the extension of the rest of the face. 
He had large, bare, beardless cheeks and a wide, 
clean, candid mouth, which the length of the smooth 
upper lip caused to look as exposed as a bald head. 
He had a deep fold of flesh round his uncovered 
young neck, and his white flannels showed his legs 
to be all the way down of the same thickness. He 
promised to become massive early in life and even 
to attain a remarkable girth. His great tastes were 
for cigarettes and silence ; but he was, in spite of 
his proportions, neither gross nor lazy. If he was 
indifferent to his figure he was equally so to his 
food, and he played cricket with his young towns^ 
men and danced hard with their wives and sisters, 
Wilverley liked him and Tony Bream thought well 
of him : it was only his mother who had not yet 
made up her mind. He had done a good deal at 
Oxford in not doing any harm, and he had subse- 
quently rolled round the globe in the very groove 
with which she had belted it. But it was exactly 
in satisfying that he a little disappointed her : she 



128 THE OTHER HOUSE 

had provided so against dangers that she found it a 
trifle dull to be so completely safe. It had become 
with her a question not of how clever he was, but 
of how stupid. Tony had expressed the view that 
he was distinctly deep, but that might only have 
been, in Tony's florid way, to show that he himself 
was so. She would not have found it convenient to 
have to give the boy an account of Mr. Vidal ; but 
now that, detached from her purposes and respect- 
ful of her privacies, he sat there without making 
an inquiry, she was disconcerted enough slightly to 
miss the opportunity to snub him. On this occa- 
sion, however, she could steady herself with the 
possibility that her hour would still come. He 
began to eat a bun his row justified that; and 
meanwhile she helped him to his tea. As she 
handed him the cup she challenged him with some 
sharpness. " Pray, when are you going to give it ? " 

He slowly masticated while he looked at her. 
" When do you think I had better ? " 

" Before dinner distinctly. One doesn't know 
what may happen." 

" Do you think anything at all will ? " he placidly 
asked. 

His mother waited before answering. " Nothing, 
certainly, unless you take some trouble for it." 
His perception of what she meant by this was 
clearly wanting, so that after a moment she con- 
tinued : " You don't seem to grasp that I've done 
for you all I can do, and that the rest now depends 
on yourself." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 129 

"Oh yes, mother, I grasp it," he said without 
irritation. He took another bite of his bun and 
then added : " Miss Armiger has made me quite 
do that." 

" Miss Armiger ? " Mrs. Beever stared ; she even 
felt that her opportunity was at hand. " What in 
the world has she to do with the matter ? " 

" Why I've talked to her a lot about it." 

"You mean she has talked to you a lot, I suppose. 
It's immensely like her." 

" It's like my dear mamma that's whom it's like," 
said Paul. " She takes just the same view as yourself. 
I mean the view that I've a great opening and that 
I must make a great effort." 

"And don't you see that for yourself? Do you 
require a pair of women to tell you ? " Mrs. Beever 
asked. 

Paul, looking grave and impartial, turned her 
question over while he stirred the tea. "No, not 
exactly. But Miss Armiger puts everything so 
well." 

"She puts some things doubtless beautifully. 
Still, I should like you to be conscious of some 
better reason for making yourself acceptable to 
Jean than that another young woman, however 
brilliant, recommends it." 

The young man continued to ruminate, and it 
occurred to his mother, as it had occurred before, 
that his imperturbability was perhaps a strength. 
" I am," he said at last. " She seems to make clear 
to me what I feel." 

i 



130 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Mrs. Beever wondered. "You mean of course 
Jean does." 

" Dear no Miss Armiger ! " 

The lady of Eastmead laughed out in her 
impatience. "I'm delighted to hear you feel any- 
thing. You haven't often seemed to me to feel." 

" I feel that Jean's very charming." 

She laughed again at the way he made it sound. 
" Is that the tone in which you think of telling her 
so?" 

"I think she'll take it from me in any tone," 
Paul replied. " She has always been most kind to 
me ; we're very good friends, and she knows what I 
want." 

" It's more than / do, my dear ! That's exactly 
what you said to me six months ago -when she liked 
you so much that she asked you to let her alone." 

"She asked me to give her six months for a 
definite answer, and she likes me the more for 
having consented to do that/' said Paul. "The 
time I've waited has improved our relations." 

" Well, then, they now must have reached per- 
fection. You'll get her definite answer, therefore, 
this very afternoon." 

" When I present the ornament ? " 

"When you present the ornament. YouVe got 
it safe, I hope ? " 

Paul hesitated ; he took another bun. " I imagine 
it's all right." 

"Do you only 'imagine' with a thing of that 
value ? What have you done with it ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 131 

Again the young man faltered. " I've given it to 
Miss Armiger. She was afraid I'd lose it." 

"And you were not afraid she would?" his 
mother cried. 

" Not a bit. She's to give it back to me on this 
spot. She wants me too much to succeed." 

Mrs. Beever was silent a little. "And how much 
do you want her to ? " 

Paul looked blank. " In what ? " 

" In making a fool of you." Mrs. Beever 
gathered herselt. "Are you in love with Rose 
Armiger, Paul ? " 

He judiciously weighed the question. "Not in 
the least. I talk with her of nobody and nothing 
but Jean." 

" And do you talk with Jean of nobody and 
nothing but Rose ? " 

Paul appeared to make an effort to remember. 
" I scarcely talk with her at all. We're such old 
friends that there's almost nothing to say." 

" There's this to say, my dear that you take too 
much for granted ! " 

" That's just what Miss Armiger tells me. Give 
me, please, some more tea." His mother took his 
cup, but she look at him hard and searchingly. He 
bore it without meeting her eyes, only turning his 
own pensively to the different dainties on the table. 
" If I do take a great deal for granted," he went on, 
" you must remember that you brought me up to it." 

Mrs. Beever found only after an instant a reply ; 
then, however, she uttered it with an air of 



132 THE OTHER HOUSE 

triumph. " I may have brought you up but I 
didn't bring up Jean ! " 

" Well, it's not of her I'm speaking," the young 
man good-humouredly rejoined; "though I might 
remind you that she has been here again and again, 
and month after month, and has always been taught 
so far as you could teach her to regard me as 
her inevitable fate. Have you any real doubt," he 
went on, " of her recognising in a satisfactory way 
that the time has come ? " 

Mrs. Beever transferred her scrutin}' to the 
interior of her teapot. " No ! " she said after a 
moment. 

" Then what's the matter ? " 

" The matter is that I'm nervous, and that your 
stolidity makes me so. I want you to behave to me 
as if you cared and I want you still more to behave 
so to her." Paul made, in his seat, a movement in 
which his companion caught, as she supposed, the 
betrayal of a sense of oppression; and at this her 
own worst fear broke out. "Oh, don't tell me you 
dorit care for if you do I don't know what I shall 
do to you ! " He looked at her with an air he some- 
times had, which always aggravated her impatience, 
an air of amused surprise, quickened to curiosity, 
that there should be in the world organisms capable 
of generating heat. She had thanked God, through 
life, that she was cold-blooded, but now it seemed 
to face her as a Nemesis that she was a volcano 
compared with her son. This transferred to him 
the advantage she had so long monopolised, that of 



THE OTHER HOUSE 133 

always seeing, in any relation or discussion, the 
other party become the spectacle, while, sitting back 
in her stall, she remained the spectator and even 
the critic. She hated to perform to Paul as she had 
made others perform to herself; but she determined 
on the instant that, since she was condemned to do 
so, she would do it to some purpose. She would 
have to leap through a hoop, but she would land on 
her charger's back. The next moment Paul was 
watching her while she shook her little flags at him. 
" There's one thing, my dear, that I can give you 
my word of honour for the fact that if the influence 
that congeals, that paralyses you, happens by any 
chance to be a dream of what may be open to you 
in any other quarter, the sooner you utterly dismiss 
that dream the better it will be not only for your 
happiness, but for your dignity. If you entertain 
with no matter how bad a conscience a vain fancy 
that you've the smallest real chance of making the 
smallest real impression on anybody else, all I can 
say is that you prepare for yourself very nearly as 
much discomfort as you prepare disgust for your 
mother." She paused a moment ; she felt, before 
her son's mild gape, like a trapezist in pink tights. 
" How much susceptibility, I should like to know, 
has Miss Armiger at her command for your great 
charms ? " 

Paul showed her a certain respect ; he didn't clap 
her that is he didn't smile. He felt something, 
however, which was indicated, as it always was, by 
the way his eyes grew smaller : they contracted at 



134 THE OTHER HOUSE 

times, in his big, fair face, to mere little conscious 
points. These points he now directed to the region 
of the house. "Well, mother," he quietly replied, 
"if you would like to know it, hadn't you better ask 
her directly ? " Rose Armiger had come into view ; 
Mrs. Beever, turning, saw her approach, bare- 
headed, in a fresh white dress, under a showy red 
parasol. Paul, as she drew near, left his seat and 
strolled to the hammock, into which he immediately 
dropped. Extended there, while the great net 
bulged and its attachments cracked with his weight, 
he spoke with the same plain patience. " She has 
come to give me up the ornament." 



XVI 

" THE great cake has at last arrived, dear lady ! " 
Rose gaily announced to Mrs. Beever, who waited, 
before acknowledging the news, long enough to 
suggest to her son that she was perhaps about to 
act on his advice. 

"I'm much obliged to you for having gone to see 
about it " was, however, what, after a moment, Miss 
Armiger's hostess instructed herself to reply. 

"It was an irresistible service. I shouldn't 
have got over on such a day as this," said Rose, 
" the least little disappointment to dear little Jean." 

" To say nothing, of course, of dear little Effie," 
Mrs. Beever promptly rejoined. 

" It comes to the same thing the occasion so 
mixes them up. They're interlaced on the cake 
with their initials and their candles. There are 
plenty of candles for each," Rose laughed, "for 
their years have been added together. It makes a 
very pretty number !" 

" It must also make a very big cake," said Mrs. 
Beever. 

" Colossal." 

" Too big to be brought out ? " 

The girl considered. "Not so big, you know," 



136 THE OTHER HOUSE 

she archly replied, "as if the candles had to be 
yours and mine ! " Then holding up the " orna- 
ment " to Paul, she said : " I surrender you my 
trust. Catch ! " she added with decision, making a 
movement to toss him a small case in red morocco, 
which, the next moment, in its flight through the 
air, without altering his attitude, he intercepted with 
one hand. 

Mrs. Beever's excited mistrust dropped at the 
mere audacity of this : there was something per- 
ceptibly superior in the girl who could meet hall 
way, so cleverly, a suspicion she was quite con- 
scious of and much desired to dissipate. The lady 
of Eastmead looked at her hard, reading her desire 
in the look she gave back. " Trust me, trust me," 
her eyes seemed to plead ; " don't at all events 
think me capable of any self-seeking that's stupid or 
poor. I may be dangerous to myself, but I'm not 
so to others ; least of all am I so to you." She had 
a presence that was, in its way, like Tony Bream's : 
it made, simply and directly, a difference in any 
personal question exposed to it. Under its action, 
at all events, Mrs. Beever found herself suddenly 
feeling that she could after all trust Rose if she 
could only trust Paul. She glanced at that young 
man as he lay in the hammock, and saw that in 
spite of the familiarity of his posture which indeed 
might have been assumed with a misleading purpose 
his diminished pupils, fixed upon their visitor, 
still had the expression imparted to them by her 
own last address. She hesitated; but while she 



THE OTHER HOUSE 137 

did so Rose came straight up to her and kissed her. 
It was the very first time, and Mrs. Beever blushed 
as if one of her secrets had been surprised. Rose 
explained her impulse only with a smile ; but the 
smile said vividly : " I'll polish him off ! " 

This brought a response to his mother's lips. 
" I'll go and inspect the cake ! " 

Mrs. Beever took her way to the house, and as 
soon as her back was turned her son got out of the 
hammock. An observer of the scene would not 
have failed to divine that, with some profundity of 
calculation, he had taken refuge there as a mute 
protest against any frustration of his interview with 
Rose. This young lady herself laughed out as she 
saw him rise, and her laugh would have been, for 
the same observer, a tribute to the natural art that 
was mingled with his obvious simplicity. Paul 
himself recognised its bearing and, as he came and 
stood at the tea-table, acknowledged her criticism by 
saying quietly : " I was afraid dear mamma would 
take me away." 

" On the contrary ; she has formally surrendered 
you." 

" Then you must let me perform her office and 
help you to some tea." 

He spoke with a rigid courtesy that was not 
without its grace, and in the rich shade of her 
umbrella, which she twirled repeatedly on her 

oulder, she looked down with detachment at the 
table. " I'll do it for myself, thank you ; and I 
should like you to return to your hammock." 



I 3 8 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" I left it on purpose," the young man said. 
"Flat on my back, that way, I'm at a sort of 
disadvantage in talking with you." 

"That's precisely why I made the request. I 
wish you to be flat on your back and to have 
nothing whatever to reply." Paul immediately re- 
traced his steps, but before again extending himself 
he asked her, with the same grave consideration, 
where in this case she would be seated. " I sha'n't 
be seated at all," she answered ; " I'll walk about 
and stand over you and bully you." He tumbled 
into his net, sitting up rather more than before ; and, 
coming close to it, she put out her hand. " Let me 
see that object again." He had in his lap the little 
box he had received from her, and at this he passed 
it back. She opened it, pressing on the spring, and, 
inclining her head to one side, considered afresh the 
mounted jewel that nestled in the white velvet. 
Then, closing the case with a loud snap, she 
restored it to him. " Yes, it's very good ; it's a 
wonderful stone, and she knows. But that alone, 
my dear, won't do it." She leaned, facing him, 
against the tense ropes of the hammock, and he 
looked up at her. " You take too much for granted." 

For a moment Paul answered nothing, but at last 
he brought out : " That's just what I said to my 
mother you had already said when she said just 
the same." 

Rose stared an instant ; then she smiled again. 
" It's complicated, but I follow you ! She has been 
waking you up." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 139 

"She knows/' said her companion, "that you 
advise me in the same sense as herself." 

" She believes it at last her leaving us together 
was a sign of that. I have at heart perfectly to 
justify her confidence, for hitherto she has been so 
blind to her own interest as to suppose that, in 
these three weeks, you had been so tiresome as to 
fall in love with me." 

" I particularly told her I haven't at all." 

Paul's tone had at moments of highest gravity 
the gift of moving almost any interlocutor to mirth. 
" I hope you'll be more convincing than that if you 
ever particularly tell any one you have at all ! " the 
girl exclaimed. She gave a slight push to the 
hammock, turning away, and he swung there gently 
a minute. 

" You mustn't ask too much of me, you know," 
he finally said, watching her as she went to the 
table and poured out a cup of tea. 

She drank a little and then, putting down the cup, 
came back to him. " I should be asking too much 
of you only if you were asking too much of her. 
You're so far from that, and your position's so 
perfect. It's too beautiful, you know, what you 
offer." 

" I know what I offer and I know what I don't," 
Paul returned ; " and the person we speak of knows 
exactly as well. All the elements are before her, 
and if my position's so fine it's there for her to see 
it quite as well as for you. I agree that I'm a 
decent sort, and that, as things are going, my 



140 THE OTHER HOUSE 

business, my prospects, my guarantees of one kind 
and another, are substantial. But just these things, 
for years, have been made familiar to her, and 
nothing, without a risk of greatly boring her, can 
very well be added to the account. You and my 
mother say I take too much for granted ; but I take 
only that." This was a long speech for our young 
man, and his want of accent, his passionless pauses, 
made it seem a trifle longer. It had a visible effect 
on Rose Armiger, whom he held there with widen- 
ing eyes as he talked. There was an intensity in 
her face, a bright sweetness that, when he stopped, 
seemed to give itself out to him as if to encourage 
him to go on. But he went on only to the extent 
of adding ; " All I mean is that if I'm good enough 
for her she has only to take me." 

"You're good enough for the best girl in the 
world," Rose said with the tremor of sincerity. 
" You're honest and kind ; you're generous and 
wise." She looked at him with a sort of intelligent 
pleasure, that of a mind fine enough to be touched 
by an exhibition of beauty even the most occult. 
"You're so sound you're so safe that it makes 
any relation with you a real luxury and a thing to 
be grateful for." She shed on him her sociable 
approval, treating him as a happy product, speaking 
of him as of another person. " I shall always be 
glad and proud that you've been, if only for an 
hour, my friend ! " 

Paul's response to this demonstration consisted in 
getting slowly and heavily to his feet. "Do you 



THE OTHER HOUSE 141 

think I like what you do to me?" he abruptly 
demanded. 

It was a sudden new note, but it found her quite 
ready. " I don't care whether you like it or not ! 
It's my duty, and it's yours it's the right thing." 

He stood there in his tall awkwardness ; he 
spoke as if he had not heard her. " It's too 
strange to have to take it from you." 

" Everything's strange and the truest things are 
the strangest. Besides, it isn't so extraordinary as 
that comes to. It isn't as if you had an objection to 
her ; it isn't as if she weren't beautiful and good 
really cultivated and altogether charming. It isn't 
as if, since I first saw her here, she hadn't developed 
in the most admirable way, and also hadn't, by her 
father's death, come into three thousand a year and 
into an opportunity for looking, with the red gold of 
her hair, in the deepest, daintiest, freshest mourning, 
lovelier far, my dear boy, than, with all respect, any 
girl who can ever have strayed before, or ever will 
again, into any Wilverley bank. It isn't as if, 
granting you do care for me, there were the smallest 
chance, should you try to make too much of it, of my 
ever doing anything but listen to you with a pained 
' Oh, dear ! ' pat you affectionately on the back and 
push you promptly out of the room." Paul Beever, 
when she thus encountered him, quitted his place, 
moving slowly outside the wide cluster of chairs, 
while Rose, within it, turned as he turned, pressing 
him with deeper earnestness. He stopped behind 
one of the chairs, holding its high back and now 



142 THE OTHER HOUSE 

meeting her eyes. " If you do care for me," she 
went on with her warm voice, " there's a magnificent 
way you can show it. You can show it by putting 
into your appeal to Miss Martle something that she 
can't resist." 

" And what may she not be able to resist ? " Paul 
inquired, keeping his voice steady, but shaking his 
chair a little. 

" Why, you if you'll only be a bit personal, a bit 
passionate, have some appearance of really desiring 
her, some that your happiness really depends on 
her." Paul looked as if he were taking a lesson, and 
she gave it with growing assurance. "Show her 
some tenderness, some eloquence, try some touch of 
the sort that goes home. Speak to her, for God's 
sake, the words that women like. We all like them, 
and we all feel them, and you can do nothing good 
without them. Keep well in sight that what you 
must absolutely do is please her." 

Paul seemed to fix his little eyes on this remote 
aim. " Please her and please you." 

" It sounds odd, yes, lumping us together. But 
that doesn't matter," said Rose. "The effect of 
your success will be that you'll unspeakably help 
and comfort me. It's difficult to talk about it my 
grounds are so deep, deep down." She hesitated, 
casting about her, asking herself how far she might 
go. Then she decided, growing a little pale with 
the effort. " I've an idea that has become a passion 
with me. There's a right I must see done there's 
a wrong I must make impossible. There's a loyalty 



THE OTHER HOUSE 143 

I must cherish there's a memory I must protect. 
That's all I can say." She stood there in her vivid 
meaning like the priestess of a threatened altar. " If 
that girl becomes your wife-^why then I'm at last 
at rest I " 

" You get, by my achievement, what you want I 
see. And, please, what do / get ? " Paul presently 
asked. 

" You ? " The blood rushed back to her face with 
the shock of this question. "Why, you get Jean 
Martle ! " He turned away without a word, and at 
the same moment, in the distance, she saw the person 
whose name she had just uttered descend the great 
square steps. She hereupon slipped through the 
circle of chairs and rapidly met her companion, who 
stopped short as she approached. Rose looked him 
straight in the eyes. " If you give me the peace I 
pray for, I'll do anything for you in life ! " She left 
him staring and passed down to the river, where, on 
the little bridge, Tony Bream was in sight, waving 
his hat to her as he came from the other house, 



XVII 

ROSE ARMIGER, in a few moments, was joined by 
Tony, and they came up the lawn together to where 
Jean Martle stood talking with Paul. Here, at the 
approach of the master of Bounds, this young lady 
anxiously inquired if Effie had not been well enough 
to accompany him. She had expected to find her 
there; then, failing that, had taken for granted he 
would bring her. 

" I've left the question, my dear Jean, in her nurse's 
hands," Tony said. " She had been bedizened from 
top to toe, and then, on some slight appearance of 
being less well, had been despoiled, denuded and 
disappointed. She's a poor little lamb of sacrifice. 
They were at her again, when I came away, with the 
ribbons and garlands; but there was apparently 
much more to come, and I couldn't answer for it that 
a single sneeze wouldn't again lay everything low. 
It's in the bosom of the gods. I couldn't wait." 

" You were too impatient to be with dear, de- 
lightful us" Rose suggested. 

Tony, with a successful air of very light comedy, 
smiled and inclined himself. " I was too impatient 
to be with you, Miss Armiger." The lapse of four 
years still presented him in such familiar mourning 



THE OTHER HOUSE 145 

as might consort with a country nook on a summer 
afternoon ; but it also allowed undiminished relief to 
a manner of addressing women which was clearly 
instinctive and habitual and which, at the same time, 
by good fortune, had the grace of flattery without 
phrases and of irony without impertinence. He was 
a little older, but he was not heavier ; he was a little 
worn, but he was not worn dull. His presence was, 
anywhere and at any time, as much as ever the clock 
at the moment it strikes. Paul Beever's little eyes, 
after he appeared, rested on Rose with an expression 
which might have been that of a man counting the 
waves produced on a sheet of water by the plunge 
of a large object. For any like ripple on the fine 
surface of the younger girl he appeared to have no 
attention. 

"I'm glad that remark's not addressed to me" 
Jean said gaily; "for I'm afraid I must im- 
mediately withdraw from you the light of my 
society." 

" On whom then do you mean to bestow it ? " 

" On your daughter, this moment. I must go and 
judge for myself of her condition." 

Tony looked at her more seriously. " If you're at 
all really troubled about her I'll go back with you. 
You're too beautifully kind ; they told me of your 
having been with her this morning." 

" Ah, you were with her this morning ? " Rose 
asked of Jean in a manner to which there was a clear 
effort to impart the intonation of the casual, but which 
had in it something that made the person addressed 



146 THE OTHER HOUSE 

turn to her with a dim surprise. Jean stood there 
in her black dress and her fair beauty ; but her 
wonder was not of a sort to cloud the extraordinary 
radiance of her youth. " For ever so long. Don't 
you know I've made her my peculiar and exclusive 
charge?" 

" Under the pretext," Tony went on, to Rose, " of 
saving her from perdition. I'm supposed to be in 
danger of spoiling her, but Jean treats her quite as 
spoiled ; which is much the greater injury of the two." 

"Don't go back, at any rate, please," Rose said to 
him with soft persuasion. " I never see you, you 
know, and I want just now particularly to speak to 
you." Tony instantly expressed submission, and 
Rose, checking Jean, who, at this, in silence, turned 
to take her way to the bridge, reminded Paul Beever 
that she had just heard from him of his having, on 
his side, some special purpose of an interview with 
Miss Martle. 

At this Paul grew very red. " Oh yes, I should 
rather like to speak to you, please," he said to Jean. 

She had paused half way down the little slope ; 
she looked at him frankly and kindly. "Do you 
mean immediately ? " 

" As soon as you've time." 

" I shall have time as soon as I've been to Effie," 
Jean replied. " I want to bring her over. There 
are four dolls waiting for her." 

" My dear child," Rose familiarly exclaimed, " at 
home there are about forty ! Don't you give her 
one every day or two ? " she went on to Tony. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 147 

Her question didn't reach him ; he was too much 
interested in Paul's arrangement with Jean, on 
whom his eyes were fixed. " Go, then to be the 
sooner restored to us. And do bring the kid ! " He 
spoke with jollity. 

" I'm going in to change perhaps I shall presently 
find you here," Paul put in. 

" You'll certainly find me, dear Paul. I shall be 
quick ! " the girl called back. And she lightly went 
her way while Paul walked off to the house and the 
two others, standing together, watched her a minute. 
In spite of her black dress, of which the thin, 
voluminous tissue fluttered in the summer breeze, 
she seemed to shine in the afternoon light. They 
saw her reach the bridge, where, in the middle, she 
turned and tossed back at them a wave of her hand- 
kerchief ; after which she dipped to the other side 
and disappeared. 

" Mayn't I give you some tea ? " Rose said to her 
companion. She nodded at the bright display of 
Mrs. Beever's hospitality ; Tony gratefully accepted 
her offer and they strolled on side by side. "-Why 
have you ceased to call me 'Rose'?" she then 
suddenly demanded. 

Tony started so that he practically stopped ; on 
which she promptly halted. "Have I, my dear 

woman? I didn't know " He looked at her 

and, looking at her, after a moment flagrantly 
coloured : he had the air of a man who sees some- 
thing that operates as a warning. What Tony 
Bream saw was a circumstance of which he had 



148 THE OTHER HOUSE 

already had glimpses ; but for some reason or other 
it was now written with a largeness that made it 
resemble a printed poster on a wall. It might have 
been, from the way he took it in, a big yellow 
advertisement to the publicity of whose message 
no artifice of type was wanting. This message was 
simply Rose Armiger's whole face, exquisite and 
tragic in its appeal, stamped with a sensibility that 
was almost abject, a tenderness that was more than 
eager. The appeal was there for an instant with 
rare intensity, and what Tony felt in response to it 
he felt without fatuity or vanity. He could meet it 
only with a compassion as unreserved as itself. He 
looked confused, but he looked kind, and his com- 
panion's eyes lighted as with the sense of something 
that at last even in pure pity had come out to her. 
It was as if she let him know that since she had 
been at Eastmead nothing whatever had come 
out. 

"When I was at Bounds four years ago," she 
said, " you called me Rose and you called our friend 
there " she made a movement in the direction Jean 
had taken " nothing at all. Now you call her by 
name and you call me nothing at all." 

Tony obligingly turned it over. " Don't I call 
you Miss Armiger ? " 

" Is that anything at all ? " Rose effectively asked. 
"You're conscious of some great difference." 

Tony hesitated; he walked on. "Between you 
and Jean ? " 

"Oh, the difference between me and Jean goes 



THE OTHER HOUSE 149 

without saying. What I mean is the difference 
between my having been at Wilverley then and my 
being here now." 

They reached the tea-table, and Tony, dropping 
into a chair, removed his hat. " What have I called 
you when we've met in London ? " 

She stood before him closing her parasol. " Don't 
you even know ? You've called me nothing." She 
proceeded to pour out tea for him, busying herself 
delicately with Mrs. Beever's wonderful arrangements 
for keeping things hot. " Have you by any chance 
been conscious of what I've called you ? " she said. 

Tony let himself, in his place, be served. " Doesn't 
every one in the wide world call me the inevitable 
' Tony ' ? The name's dreadful for a banker ; it 
should have been a bar for me to that career. It's 
fatal to dignity. But then of course I haven't any 
dignity." 

" I think you haven't much," Rose replied. "But 
I've never seen any one get on so well without it ; 
and, after all, you've just enough to make Miss 
Martle recognise it." 

Tony wondered. " By calling me ' Mr. Bream ' ? 
Oh, for her I'm a greybeard and I address her as 
I addressed her as a child. Of course I admit," he 
added with an intention vaguely pacific, "that she 
has entirely ceased to be that." 

" She's wonderful," said Rose, handing him some- 
thing buttered and perversely cold. 

He assented even to the point of submissively 
helping himself. "She's a charming creature." 



i$b THE OTHER HOUSE 

" I mean she's wonderful about your little girl." 

"Devoted, isn't she ? That dates from long ago. 
She has a special sentiment about her." 

Rose was silent a moment. " It's a little life to 
preserve and protect/' she then said. " Of course ! " 

"Why, to that degree that she seems scarcely to 
think the child safe even with its infatuated 
daddy!" 

Still on her feet beyond the table near which he 
sat, she had put up her parasol again, and she 
looked across at him from under it. Their eyes 
met, and he again felt himself in the presence of 
what, in them, shortly before, had been so deep, so 
exquisite. It represented something that no lapse 
could long quench something that gave out the 
measureless white ray of a light steadily revolving. 
She could sometimes turn it away, but it was always 
somewhere; and now it covered him with a great 
cold lustre that made everything for the moment 
look hard and ugly made him also feel the chill of 
a complication for which he had not allowed. He 
had had plenty of complications in life, but he had 
likewise had ways of dealing with them that were in 
general clever, easy, masterly indeed often really 
pleasant. He got up nervously: there would be 
nothing pleasant in any way of dealing with this 
one. 



XVIII 

CONSCIOUS of the importance of not letting his 
nervousness show, he had no sooner pointlessly 
risen than he took possession of another chair. He 
dropped the question of Effie's security, remembering 
there was a prior one as to which he had still to 
justify himself. He brought it back with an air of 
indulgence which scarcely disguised, however, its 
present air of irrelevance. " I'll gladly call you, my 
dear Rose, anything you like, but you mustn't think 
I've been capricious or disloyal. I addressed you 
of old at the last in the way in which it seemed 
most natural to address so close a friend of my wife's. 
But I somehow think of 3'ou here now rather as a 
friend of my own." 

" And that makes me so much more distant ? " 
Rose asked, twirling her parasol. 

Tony, whose plea had been quite extemporised, felt 
a slight confusion, which his laugh but inadequately 
covered. " I seem to have uttered a betise but I 
haven't. I only mean that a different title belongs, 
somehow, to a different character." 

" I don't admit my character to be different," 
Rose said ; " save perhaps in the sense of its having 
become a little intensified. If I was here before as 



152 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Julia's friend, I'm here still more as Julia's friend 
now." 

Tony meditated, with all his candour; then he 
gave a highly cordial, even if a slightly illogical 
assent. " Of course you are from your own point 
of view." He evidently only wanted to meet her as 
far on the way to a quiet life as he could manage. 
" Dear little Julia ! " he exclaimed in a manner which, 
as soon as he had spoken, he felt to be such a fresh 
piece of pointlessness that, to carry it off, he got up 
again. 

"Dear little Julia!" Rose echoed, speaking out 
loud and clear, but with an expression which, unlike 
Tony's, would have left on the mind of an ignorant 
auditor no doubt of its conveying a reference to the 
unforgotten dead. 

Tony strolled towards the hammock. " May I 
smoke a cigarette ? " She approved with a gesture 
that was almost impatient, and while he lighted he 
pursued with genial gaiety : " I'm not going to 
allow you to pretend that you doubt of my having 
dreamed for years of the pleasure of seeing you here 
again, or of the diabolical ingenuity that I exercised 
to enable your visit to take place in the way most 
convenient to both of us. You used to say the 
queen-mother disliked you. You see to-day how 
much ! " 

" She has ended by finding me useful," said Rose. 
"That brings me exactly to what I told you just 
now I wanted to say to you." 

Tony had gathered the loose net of the hammock 



THE OTHER HOUSE 153 

into a single strand, and, while he smoked, had 
lowered himself upon it, sideways, in a posture 
which made him sit as in a swing. He looked sur- 
prised and even slightly disconcerted, like a man 
asked to pay twice. " Oh, it isn't then what you 
did say ?" 

" About your use of my name ? No, it isn't that 
it's something quite different." Rose waited ; she 
stood before him as she had stood before her previous 
interlocutor. " It's to let you know the interest I 
take in Paul Beever. I take the very greatest." 

" You do ? " said Tony approvingly. " Well, you 
might go in for something worse ! " 

He spoke with a cheerfulness that covered all 
the ground ; but she repeated the words as if 
challenging their sense. " I might ' go in ' ? " 

Her accent struck a light from them, put in an 
idea that had not been Tony's own. Thus pre- 
sented, the idea seemed happy, and, in his incon- 
trollable restlessness, his face more vividly bright- 
ening, he rose to it with a zeal that brought him for 
a third time to his feet. He smiled ever so kindly 
and, before he could measure his words or his 
manner, broke out : " If you only really would, 
you know, my dear Rose ! " 

In a quicker flash he became aware that, as if 
he had dealt her a blow in the face, her eyes had 
filled with tears. It made the taste of his joke too 
bad. "Are you gracefully suggesting that I shall 
carry Mr. Beever off?" she demanded. 

" Not from me, my dear never ! " Tony blushed 



154 THE OTHER HOUSE 

and felt how much there was to rectify in some of 
his impulses. " I think a lot of him and I want to 
keep my hand on him. But I speak of him frankly, 
always, as a prize, and I want something awfully 
good to happen to him. If you like him," he 
hastened laughingly to add, "of course it does 
happen I see ! " 

He attenuated his meaning, but he had already 
exposed it, and he could perceive that Rose, with 
a kind of tragic perversity, was determined to get 
the full benefit, whatever it might be, of her 
impression or her grievance. She quickly did her 
best to look collected. " You think he's safe then, 
and solid, and not so stupid as he strikes one at 
first ? " 

" Stupid ? not a bit. He's a statue in the block 
he's a sort of slumbering giant. The right sort 
of tact will call him to life, the right sort of hand 
will work him out of the stone." 

"And it escaped you just now, in a moment of 
unusual expansion, that the right sort are mine ? " 

Tony puffed away at his cigarette, smiling at her 
resolutely through its light smoke. "You do in- 
justice to my attitude about you. There isn't an 
.hour of the day that I don't indulge in some tribute 
or other to your great ability." 

Again there came into the girl's face her strange 
alternative look the look of being made by her 
passion so acquainted with pain that even in the 
midst of it she could flower into charity. Sadly 
and gently she shook her head. " Poor Tony ! " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 155 

Then she added in quite a different tone: "What 
do you think of the difference of our ages ? " 

" Yours and Paul's ? It isn't worth speaking of! " 

" That's sweet of you considering that he's only 
twenty-two. However, I'm not yet thirty," she 
went on ; " and, of course, to gain time, one 
might press the thing hard." She hesitated again ; 
after which she continued : " It's awfully vulgar, 
this way, to put the dots on the i's, but as it was 
you, and not I, who began it, I may ask if you 
really believe that if one should make a bit of an 

effort ? " And she invitingly paused, to leave 

him to complete a question as to which it was 
natural she should feel a delicacy. 

Tony's face, for an initiated observer, would have 
shown that he was by this time watching for a 
trap ; but it would also have shown that, after a 
moment's further reflection, he didn't particularly 
care if the trap should catch him. " If you take 
such an interest in Paul," he replied with no 
visible abatement of his preference for the stand- 
point of pleasantry, " you can calculate better than 
I the natural results of drawing him out. But what 
I can assure you is that nothing would give me 
greater pleasure than to see you so happily ' estab- 
lished,' as they say so honourably married, so affec- 
tionately surrounded and so thoroughly protected." 

" And all alongside of you here ? " cried Rose. 

Tony faltered, but he went on. " It's precisely 
your being ' alongside' of one that would enable 
one to see you." 



i$6 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" It would enable one to see you it would have 
that particular merit," said Rose. " But my interest 
in Mr. Beever hasn't at all been of a kind to prompt 
me to turn the possibility over for myself. You 
can readily imagine how far I should have been 
in that case from speaking of it to you. The 
defect of your charming picture/' she presently 
added, "is that an important figure is absent 
from it." 

" An important figure ? " 

"Jean Martle." 

Tony looked at the tip of his cigarette. "You 
mean because there was at one time so much 
planning and plotting over the idea that she should 
make a match with Paul ? " 

" At one time, my dear Tony ? " Rose exclaimed. 
" There's exactly as much as ever, and I'm already 
in these mere three weeks in the very thick of 
it ! Did you think the question had been quite 
dropped ? " she inquired. 

Tony faced her serenely enough in part because 
he felt the extreme importance of so doing. " I 
simply haven't heard much about it. Mrs. Beever 
used to talk about it. But she hasn't talked of late." 

"She talked, my good man, no more than half 
an hour ago ! " Rose replied. 

Tony winced; but he stood bravely up; his 
cigarettes were an extreme resource. " Really ? 
And what did she say to you ? " 

"She said nothing to me but she said every- 
thing to her son. She said to him, I mean, that 



THE OTHER HOUSE 157 

she'll never forgive him if she doesn't hear from 
him an hour or two hence that he has at last 
successfully availed himself, with Miss Martle, of 
this auspicious day, as well as of the fact that 
he's giving her, in honour of it, something remark- 
ably beautiful." 

Tony listened with marked attention, but without 
meeting his companion's eyes. He had again seated 
himself in the hammock, with his feet on the ground 
and his head thrown back ; and he smoked freely, 
holding it with either hand. "What is he giving 
her ? " he asked after a moment 

Rose turned away; she mechanically did some- 
thing at the table. "Shouldn't you think she'd 
show it to you ? " she threw over her shoulder. 

While this shoulder, sensibly cold for the instant, 
was presented, he watched her. " I daresay if she 
accepts it." 

The girl faced him again. "And won't she 
accept it ? " 

" Only I should say if she accepts htm." 

" And won't she do that ? " 

Tony made a " ring " with his cigarette. " The 
thing will be for him to get her to." 

"That's exactly," said Rose, "what I want you 
to do." 

" Me ? " He now stared at her. " How can I ? " 

" I won't undertake to tell you how I'll leave 
that to your ingenuity. Wouldn't it be a matter 
just an easy extension of existing relations ? You 
saw just now that he appealed to her for his chance 



158 THE OTHER HOUSE 

and that she consented to give it to him. What 
I wanted you to hear from me is that I feel how 
much interested you'll be in learning that this 
chance is of the highest importance for him 
and that I know with how good a conscience 
you'll throw your weight into the scale of his 
success." 

" My weight with the young lady ? Don't you 
rather exaggerate my weight ? " Tony asked. 

"That question can only be answered by your 
trying it. It's a situation in which not to take an 
interest is well, not your duty, you know," said 
Rose. 

Tony gave a smile which he felt to be a little pale ; 
but there was still good-humour in the tone in which 
he protestingly and portentously murmured: "Oh, 
my < duty' !" 

"Surely; if you see no objection to poor Mrs. 
Beever's at last gathering the fruit of the tree she 
long ago so fondly and so carefully planted. Of 
course if you should frankly tell me you see one 

that I don't know !" She looked ingenuous 

and hard. " Do you, by chance, see one ? " 

"None at all. I've never known a tree of 
Mrs. Beever's of which the fruit hasn't been 
sweet." 

" Well, in the present case sweet or bitter ! it's 
ready to fall. This is the hour the years have 
pointed to. You think highly of Paul " 

Tony Bream took her up. " And I think highly 
of Jean, and therefore I must see them through ? I 



THE OTHER HOUSE 159 

catch your meaning. But have you in a matter 
composed, after all, of ticklish elements thought of 
the danger of one's meddling ? " 

" A great deal." A troubled vision of this danger 
dawned even now in Rose's face. " But I've thought 
still more of one's possible prudence one's occa- 
sional tact." Tony, for a moment, made no reply ; 
he quitted the hammock and began to stroll about. 
Her anxious eyes followed him, and presently she 
brought out : " Have you really been supposing that 
they've given it up ? " 

Tony remained silent; but at last he stopped 
short, and there was an effect of returning from an 
absence in the way he abruptly demanded : " That 
who have given up what ? " 

" That Mrs. Beever and Paul have given up what 
we're talking about the idea of his union with 
Jean." 

Tony hesitated. " I haven't been supposing any- 
thing at all ! " Rose recognised the words for the 
first he had ever uttered to her that expressed even 
a shade of irritation, and she was unable to conceal 
that she felt, on the spot, how memorable this fact 
was to make them. Tony's immediate glance at her 
showed equally that he had instantly become aware 
of their so affecting her. He did, however, nothing 
to modify the impression : he only stood a moment 
looking across the river; after which he observed 
quietly : " Here she is on the bridge." 

He had walked nearer to the stream, and Rose 
had moved back to the tea-table, from which the view 



160 THE OTHER HOUSE 

of the bridge was obstructed. " Has she brought 
the child ? " she asked. 

" I don't make out she may have her by the 
hand." He approached again, and as he came he 
said : " Your idea is really that I should speak to 
her now ? " 

" Before she sees Paul ? " Rose met his eyes ; 
there was a quick anguish of uncertainty in all her 
person. " I leave that to you since you cast a 
doubt on the safety of your doing so. I leave it," 
said Rose, "to your judgment I leave it to your 
honour." 

" To my honour ? " Tony wondered with a showy 
jerk of his head what the deuce his honour had to 
do with it. 

She went on without heeding him. " My idea is 
only that, whether you speak to her or not, she shall 
accept him. Gracious heavens, she must!" Rose 
broke out with passion. 

" You take an immense interest in it ! " Tony 
laughed. 

"Take the same, then, yourself, and the thing 
will come off." They stood a minute looking at 
each other, and more passed between them than had 
ever passed before. The result of it was that Rose 
had a drop from her strenuous height to sudden and 
beautiful gentleness. " Tony Bream, I trust you." 

She had uttered the word in a way that had the 
power to make him flush. He answered peaceably, 
however, laughing again : " I hope so, my dear Rose !" 
Then in a moment he added : " I will speak." He 



THE OTHER HOUSE 161 

glanced again at the circuitous path from the bridge, 
but Jean had not yet emerged from the shrubbery 
by which it was screened. " If she brings Effie 
will you take her ? " 

With her ominous face the girl considered. " I'm 
afraid I can't do that." 

Tony gave a gesture of impatience. " Good God, 
how you stand off from the poor little thing ! " 

Jean at this moment came into sight without the 
child. " I shall never take her from her ! " And 
Rose Armiger turned away. 



XIX 

TONY went toward his messenger, who, as she saw 
Rose apparently leaving the garden, pressingly 
called out : " Would you. Miss Armiger, very kindly 
go over for Effie ? She wasn't even yet ready," she 
explained as she came back up the slope with her 
friend, "and I was afraid to wait after promising 
Paul to meet him." 

" He's not here, you see," said Tony ; " it's he 
who, most ungallantly, makes you wait. Never 
mind ; you'll wait with me." He looked at Rose as 
they overtook her. "Will you go and bring the 
child, as our friend here asks, or is such an act as 
that also, and still more, inconsistent with your 
mysterious principles ? " 

" You must kindly excuse me," Rose said directly 
to Jean. " I've a letter to write in the house. Now 
or never I must catch the post." 

" Don't let us keep you, then," Tony returned, 
" I'll go over myself as soon as Paul comes 
back." 

" I'll send him straight out." And Rose Armiger 
retired in good order. 

Tony followed her with his eyes; then he ex- 
claimed : " It's, upon my soul, as if she couldn't 



THE OTHER HOUSE 163 

trust herself ! " His remark, which he checked, 

dropped into a snap of his fingers while Jean Martle 
wondered. 

" To do what ? " she asked. 

Tony hesitated. "To do nothing! The child's 
all right ? " 

" Perfectly right. It's only that the great Gorham 
has decreed that she's to have her usual little supper 
before she comes, and that, with her ribbons and 
frills all covered with an enormous bib, Effie had 
just settled down to that extremely solemn 
function." 

Tony in his turn wondered. "Why shouldn't 
she have her supper here ? " 

" Ah, you must ask the great Gorham ! " 

" And didn't you ask her ? " 

" I did better I divined her," said Jean. "She 
doesn't trust our kitchen." 

Tony laughed. " Does she apprehend poison ? " 

"She apprehends what she calls ' sugar and 
spice.' " 

" ' And all that's nice ? ' Well, there's too much 
that's nice here, certainly! Leave the poor child 
then, like the little princess you all make of her, to 
her cook and her ' taster,' to the full rigour of her 
royalty, and stroll with me here till Paul comes out 
to you." He looked at his watch and about at the 
broad garden where the shadows of the trees were 
still and the long afternoon had grown rich. " This is 
remarkably peaceful, and there's plenty of time." 
Jean concurred with a murmur as soft as the stir of 



164 THE OTHER HOUSE 

the breeze, a " Plenty, plenty," as serene as if, to 
oblige Tony Bream, so charming a day would be 
sure to pause in its passage. They went a few steps, 
but he stopped again with a question. "Do you 
know what Paul wants of you ? " 

Jean looked a moment at the grass by her feet. 
" I think I do." Then raising her eyes without shy- 
ness, but with unqualified gravity, " Do you know, 
Mr. Bream ? " she asked. 

" Yes I've just now heard." 

" From Miss Armiger ? " 

" From Miss Armiger. She appears to have had 
it from Paul himself." 

The girl gave out her mild surprise. " Why has 
he told her?" 

Tony hesitated. " Because she's such a good 
person to tell things to." 

" Is it her immediately telling them again that 
makes her so ? " Jean inquired with a faint smile. 

Faint as this smile was, Tony met it as if he had 
been struck by it, and as if indeed, in the midst of 
an acquaintance which four years had now conse- 
crated, he had not quite got used to being struck. 
That acquaintance had practically begun, on an un- 
forgettable day, with his opening his eyes to it 
from an effort which had been already then the effort 
to forget his suddenly taking her in as he lay on 
the sofa in his hall. From the way he sometimes 
looked at her it might have been judged that he had 
even now not taken her in completely that the act 
of slow, charmed apprehension had yet to melt into 



THE OTHER HOUSE 165 

accepted knowledge. It had in truth been made 
continuous by the continuous expansion of its object. 
If the sense of lying there on the sofa still sometimes 
came back to Tony, it was because he was interested 
in not interrupting by a rash motion the process 
taking place in the figure before him, the capricious 
rotation by which the woman peeped out of the child 
and the child peeped out of the woman. There was 
no point at which it had begun and none at which 
it would end, and it was a thing to gaze at with an 
attention refreshingly baffled. The frightened child 
had become a tall, slim nymph on a cloud, and yet 
there had been no moment of anything so gross as 
catching her in the act of change. If there had been 
he would have met it with some punctual change of 
his own ; whereas it was his luxurious idea unob- 
scured till now that in the midst of the difference 
so delightfully ambiguous he was free just not to 
change, free to remain as he was and go on liking 
her on trivial grounds. It had seemed to him that 
there was no one he had ever liked whom he could 
like quite so comfortably : a man of his age had had 
what he rather loosely called the " usual " flashes of 
fondness. There had been no worrying question of 
the light this particular flash might kindle ; he had 
never had to ask himself what his appreciation of 
Jean Martle might lead to. It would lead to exactly 
nothing that had been settled all round in advance. 
This was a happy, lively provision that kept every- 
thing down, made sociability a cool, public, out-of- 
door affair, without a secret or a mystery confined 



166 THE OTHER HOUSE 

it, as one might say, to the breezy, sunny forecourt 
of the temple of friendship, forbidding it any dream 
of access to the obscure and comparatively stuffy 
interior. Tony had acutely remarked to himself that 
a thing could be led to only when there was a practi- 
cable road. As present to him to-day as on that 
other day was the little hour ot violence so 
strange and sad and sweet which in his life had 
effectually suppressed any thoroughfare, making 
this expanse so pathless that, had he not been 
looking for a philosophic rather than a satiric 
term, he might almost have compared it to a 
desert. - He answered his companion's inquiry 
about Rose's responsibility as an informant after 
he had satisfied himself that if she smiled exactly 
as she did it was only another illustration of a 
perfect instinct. That instinct, which at any time 
turned all talk with her away from flatness, told 
her that the right attitude for her now was the 
middle course between anxiety and resignation. 
" If Miss Armiger hadn't spoken," he said, " I 
shouldn't have known. And of course I'm in- 
terested in knowing." 

" But why is she interested in your doing so ? " 
Jean asked. 

Tony walked on again. " She has several reasons. 
One of them is that she greatly likes Paul and that, 
greatly liking him, she wishes the highest happiness 
conceivable for him. It occurred to her that as I 
greatly like a certain young lady I might not 
unnaturally desire for that young lady a correspond- 



THE OTHER HOUSE 167 

ing chance, and that with a hint," laughed Tony, 
" that she really is about to have it, I might perhaps 
see my way to putting in a word for the dear boy in 
advance." 

The girl strolled beside him, looking quietly before 
her. " How does she know," she demanded, 
" whom you ' greatly like ' ? " 

The question pulled him up a little, but he resisted 
the impulse, constantly strong in him, to stop again 
and stand face to face with her. He continued to 
laugh and after an instant he replied : " Why, I 
suppose I must have told her." 

" And how many persons will she have told ? " 
" I don't care how many," Tony said, " and I 
don't think you need care either. Every one but she 
from lots of observation knows we're good friends, 
and it's because that's such a pleasant old story with 
us all that I feel as if I might frankly say to you 
what I have on my mind." 

" About what Paul may have to say ? " 
" The first moment you let him." 
Tony was going on when she broke in : " How 
long have you had it on your mind ? " 

He found himself, at her challenge, just a trifle 
embarrassed. " How long ? " 

"As it's only since Miss Armiger has told you 
that you've known there's anything in the air." 

This inquiry gave Tony such pause that he met it 
first with a laugh and then with a counter-appeal. 
"You make me feel dreadfully dense! Do you 
mind my asking how long you yourself have known 



168 THE OTHER HOUSE 

that what may be in the air is on the point of 
alighting ? " 

" Why, since Paul spoke to me." 
" Just now before you went to Bounds ? " Tony 
wondered. " You were immediately sure that that's 
what he wants ? " 

" What else can he want ? He doesn't want so 
much," Jean added, "that there would have been 
many alternatives." 

" I don't know what you call ' much ' ! " Again 
Tony wondered. " And it produces no more effect 

upon you " 

" Than I'm showing to you now ? " the girl 
asked. " Do you think me dreadfully stolid ? " 

" No, because I know that, in general, what you 
show isn't at all the full measure of what you feel. 
You're a great little mystery. Still," Tony blandly 
continued, "you strike me as calm as quite sub- 
lime for a young lady whose fate's about to be 
sealed. Unless, of course, you've regarded it," he 
added, " as sealed from far away back." 

They had strolled, in the direction they had 
followed, as far as they could go, and they neces- 
sarily stopped for a turn. Without taking up his 
last words Jean stood there and looked obscurely 
happy, as it seemed to him, at his recognition of her 
having appeared as quiet as she wished. " You 
haven't answered my question," she simply said. 
"You haven't told me how long you've had it on 
your mind that you must say to me whatever it is 
you wish to say." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 169 

" Why is it important I should answer it ? " 
"Only because you seemed positively to imply 
that the time of your carrying your idea about had 
been of the shortest. In the case of advice, if to 

advise is what you wish " 

" It is what I wish," Tony interrupted ; " strangely 
as it may strike you that, in regard to such a matter 
as we refer to, one should be eager for such a 
responsibility. The question of time doesn't signify 
what signifies is one's sincerity. I had an 
impression, I confess, that the prospect I a good 
while ago supposed you have accepted had what 
shall I call it ? rather faded away. But at the 
same time I hoped" and Tony invited his com- 
panion to resume their walk " that it would 
charmingly come up again." 

Jean moved beside him and spoke with a colourless 
kindness which suggested no desire to challenge or 
cross-question, but a thoughtful interest in anything, 
in the connection in which they were talking, that he 
would be so good as to tell her and an earnest 
desire to be clear about it. Perhaps there was 
also in her manner just the visible tinge of a 
confidence that he would tell her the absolute truth. 
" I see. You hoped it would charmingly come up 
again." 

" So that on learning that it is charmingly coming 
up, don't you see ? " Tony laughed, " I'm so agree- 
ably agitated that I spill over on the spot. I want, 
without delay, to be definite to you about the really 
immense opinion I have of dear Paul. It can't do 



i;o THE OTHER HOUSE 

any harm, and it may do a little good, to mention 
that it has always seemed to me that we've only got 
to give him time. I mean, of course, don't you 
know," he added, " for him quite to distinguish him- 
self." 

Jean was silent a little, as if she were thoroughly 
taking this home. "Distinguish himself in what 
way ? " she asked with all her tranquillity. 

"Well in every way," Tony handsomely replied. 
" He's full of stuff there's a great deal of him : too 
much to come out all at once. Of course you know 
him you've known him half your life ; but I see 
him in a strong and special light, a light in which 
he has scarcely been shown to you and which 
puts him to a real test. He has ability ; he has 
ideas ; he has absolute honesty ; and he has more- 
over a good stiff back of his own. He's a fellow of 
head ; he's a fellow of heart. In short he's a man 
of gold." 

" He's a man of gold," Jean repeated with punctual 
acceptance, yet as if it mattered much more that 
Tony should think so than that she should. " It 
would be odd," she went on, "to be talking with 
you on a subject so personal to myself if it 
were not that I've felt Paul's attitude for so long 
past to be rather publicly taken for granted. 
He has felt it so, too, I think, poor boy,, and 
for good or for ill there has been in our situa- 
tion very little mystery and perhaps not much 
modesty." 

"Why should there be, of the false kind, when 



THE OTHER HOUSE 17! 

even the true has nothing to do with the matter ? 
You and Paul are great people : he's the heir- 
apparent and you're the most eligible princess in 
the Almanach de Gotha. You can't be there and be 
hiding behind the window-curtain : you must step 
out on the balcony to be seen of the populace. Your 
most private affairs are affairs of state. At the 
smallest hint like the one I just mentioned even an 
old dunderhead like me catches on he sees the 
strong reasons for Paul's attitude. However, it's 
not of that so much that I wanted to say a word. 
I thought perhaps you'd just let me touch on your 
own." Tony hesitated ; he felt vaguely disconcerted 
by the special quality of stillness that, though she 
moved beside him, her attention, her expectation 
put forth. It came over him that for the purpose of 
his plea she was almost too prepared, and this made 
him speculate. He stopped short again and, uneasily, 
" May I light one more cigarette?" he asked. She 
assented with a flicker in her dim smile, and while 
he lighted he was increasingly conscious that she 
waited. He met the deep gentleness of her eyes 
and reflected afresh that if she was always beautiful 
she was beautiful at different times from different 
sources. What was the source of the impression 
she made on him at this moment if not a kind 
of refinement of patience, in which she seemed 
actually to hold her breath ? " In fact," he said 
as he threw away his match, " I have touched on it 
I mean on the great hope we all have that you do see 
your way to meeting your friend as he deserves." 



172 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" You ' all ' have it ? " Jean softly asked. 

Tony hesitated again. " I'm sure I'm quite right 
in speaking for Wilverley at large. It takes the 
greatest interest in Paul, and I needn't at this time 
of day remind you of the interest it takes in yourself. 
But, I repeat, what I meant more particularly to utter 
was my own special confidence in your decision. 
Now that I'm fully enlightened it comes home to me 
that, as regards such a possibility as your taking 
your place here as a near neighbour and a permanent 
friend " and Tony fixedly smiled " why, I can 
only feel the liveliest suspense. I want to make 
thoroughly sure of you ! " 

Jean took this in as she had taken the rest ; after 
which she simply said : " Then I think I ought to 
tell you that I shall not meet Paul in the way that 
what you're so good as to say seems to point to." 

Tony had made many speeches, both in public 
and in private, and he had naturally been exposed 
to replies of the incisive no less than of the massive 
order. But no check of the current had ever made 
him throw back his head quite so far as this 
brief and placid announcement. " You'll not meet 
him ?" 

" I shall never marry him." 

He undisguisedly gasped. " In spite of all the 
reasons ? " 

" Of course I've thought the reasons over - 
often and often. But there are reasons on the 
other side too. I shall never marry him," she 
repeated. 



XX 



IT was singular that though half an hour before he 
had not felt the want of the assurance he had just 
asked of her, yet now that he saw it definitely with- 
held it took an importance as instantly as a mirror 
takes a reflection. This importance was so great that 
he found himself suddenly scared by what he heard. 
He thought an instant with intensity. " In spite of 
knowing that you'll disappoint " he paused a little 
" the universal hope ? " 

" I know whom I shall disappoint ; but I must 
bear that. I shall disappoint Cousin Kate." 

" Horribly," said Tony. 

" Horribly." 

"And poor Paul to within an inch of his life." 

" No, not poor Paul, Mr. Bream ; not poor Paul 
in the least," Jean said. She spoke without a hint 
of defiance or the faintest ring of bravado, as if for 
mere veracity and lucidity, since an opportunity quite 
unsought had been forced upon her. " I know about 
poor Paul. It's all right about poor Paul," she 
declared, smiling. 

She spoke and she looked at him with a sincerity 
so distilled, as he felt, from something deep within 
her that to pretend to gainsay her would be in the 



174 THE OTHER HOUSE 

worst taste. He turned about, not very brilliantly, 
as he was aware, to some other resource. " You'll 
immensely disappoint your own people." 

"Yes, my mother and my grandmother they 
both would like it. But they've never had any 
promise from me." 

Tony was silent awhile. "And Mrs. Beever 
hasn't she had ? " 

"A promise? Never. I've known how much 
she has wanted it. But that's all." 

"Ah, that's a great deal," said Tony. "If, 
knowing how much she has wanted it, you've come 
back again and again, hasn't that been tantamount 
to giving it ? " 

Jean considered. " I shall never come back again." 
"Ah, my dear child, what a way to treat us !" 
her friend broke out. 

She took no notice of this; she only went 
on : " Months ago the last time I was here an 
assurance, of a kind, was asked of me. But even 
then I held off." 

" And you've gone on with that intention ? " 
He had grown so serious now that he cross- 
questioned her, but she met him with a promptitude 
that was touching in its indulgence. " I've gone on 
without an intention. I've only waited to see, to 
feel, to judge. The great thing seemed to me to 
be sure I wasn't unfair to Paul. I haven't been 
I'm not unfair. He'll never say I've been I'm sure 
he won't. I should have liked to be able to become 
his wife. But I can't." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 175 

" You've nevertheless excited hopes," said Tony. 
" Don't you think you ought to consider that a little 
more ? " His uneasiness, his sense of the unex- 
pected, as sharp as a physical pang, increased so 
that he began to lose sight of the importance of 
concealing it ; and he went on even while something 
came into her eyes that showed he had not concealed 
it. " If you haven't meant not to do it, you've, so 
far as that goes, meant the opposite. Therefore 
something has made you change." 

Jean hesitated. " Everything has made me 
change." 

" Well," said Tony, with a smile so strained that 
he felt it almost pitiful, " we've spoken of the dis- 
appointment to others, but I suppose there's no use 
in my attempting to say anything of the disappoint- 
ment to me. That's not the thing that, in such a 
case, can have much effect on you." 

Again Jean hesitated : he saw how pale she had 
grown. "Do I understand you tell me that you 
really desire my marriage ? " 

If the revelation of how he desired it had not 
already come to him the deep mystery of her beauty 
at this crisis might have brought it on the spot a 
spectacle in which he so lost himself for the minute 
that he found no words to answer till she spoke 
again. " Do I understand that you literally ask me 
for it ? " 

" I ask you for it I ask you for it," said Tony 
Bream. 

They stood looking at each other like a pair who, 



176 THE OTHER HOUSE 

walking on a frozen lake, suddenly have in their 
ears the great crack of the ice. " And what are your 
reasons ? " 

" I'll tell you my reasons when you tell me yours 
for having changed." 

" I've not changed," said Jean. 

It was as if their eyes were indissolubly engaged. 
That was the way he had been looking a while 
before into another woman's, but he could think at 
this moment of the exquisite difference of Jean's. 
He shook his head with all the sadness and all 
the tenderness he felt he might permit himself to 
show just this once and never again. "You've 
changed you've changed." 

Then she gave up. " Wouldn't you much rather 
I should never come back ? " 

" Far rather. But you will come back," said 
Tony. 

She looked away from him at last turned her 
eyes over the place in which she had known none 
but emotions permitted and avowed, and again 
seemed to yield to the formidable truth. " So you 
think I had better come back so different ? " 

His tenderness broke out into a smile. "As 
different as possible. As different as that will be just 
all the difference," he added. 

She appeared, with her averted face, to consider 
intently how much " all " might in such a case prac- 
tically amount to. But " Here he comes " was what 
she presently replied. 

Paul Beever was in sight, so freshly dressed that 



THE OTHER HOUSE 177 

even at a distance his estimate of the requirements 
of the occasion was visible from his necktie to his 
boots. Adorned as it unmistakably had never been, 
his great featureless person moved solemnly over 
the lawn. 

" Take him then take him ! " said Tony Bream. 

Jean, intensely serious but with agitation held at 
bay, gave him one more look, a look so infinitely 
pacific that as, at Paul's nearer approach, he turned 
away from her, he had the sense of going off with a 
sign of her acceptance of his solution. The light in 
her face was the light of the compassion that had 
come out to him, and what was that compassion but 
the gage of a relief, of a promise ? It made him 
walk down to the river with a step quickened to 
exhilaration ; all the more that as the girl's eyes 
followed him he couldn't see in them the tragic 
intelligence he had kindled, her perception from 
the very rhythm of the easy gait she had watched 
so often that he really thought such a virtual 
confession to her would be none too lavishly repaid 
by the effort for which he had appealed. 

Paul Beever had in his hand his little morocco 
case, but his glance also rested, till it disappeared, 
on Tony's straight and swinging back. " I've 
driven him away," he said. 

" It was time," Jean replied. " Efifie, who wasn't 
ready for me, must really come at last." Then 
without the least pretence of unconsciousness she 
looked straight at the small object Paul carried. 

Observing her attention to it he also dropped his 



i?8 THE OTHER HOUSE 

eyes on it, while his hands turned it round and 
round in apparent uncertainty as to whether he had 
better present it to her open or shut. " I hope you 
won't be as indifferent as Effie seems to be to the 
pretty trifle with which I've thought I should like to 
commemorate your birthday." He decided to open 
the case and with its lifted lid he held it out to her. 
" It will give me great pleasure if you'll kindly accept 
this little ornament." 

Jean took it from him she seemed to study it a 
moment. "Oh Paul, oh Paul!" her protest was 
as sparing as a caress with the back of the 
hand. 

"I thought you might care for the stone," he 
said. 

" It's a rare and perfect one it's magnificent." 

" Well, Miss Armiger told me you would know." 
There was a hint of relaxed suspense in Paul's tone. 

Still holding the case open his companion looked 
at him a moment. " Did she kindly select it ? " 

He stammered, colouring a little. "No ; mother 
and I did* We went up to London for it ; we had 
the mounting designed and worked out. They took 
two months. But I showed it to Miss Armiger and 
she said you'd spot any defect." 

" Do you mean," the girl asked, smiling, " that if 
you had not had her word for that you would have 
tried me with something inferior ? " 

Paul continued very grave. " You know well 
enough what I mean." 

Without again noticing the contents of the case she 



THE OTHER HOUSE 179 

softly closed it and kept it in her hand. "Yes, 
Paul, I know well enough what you mean." She 
looked round her; then, as if her old familiarity 
with him were refreshed, and sweetened : " Come 
and sit down with me." She led the way to a 
garden bench that stood at a distance from Mrs. 
Beever's tea-table, an old green wooden bench that 
was a perennial feature of the spot. " If Miss 
Armiger knows that I'm a judge," she pursued as they 
went, " it's, I think, because she knows everything 
except one, which I know better than she." She 
seated herself, glancing up and putting out her free 
hand to him with an air of comradeship and trust. 
Paul let it take his own, which he held there a 
minute. " I know you" She drew him down, and 
he dropped her hand ; whereupon it returned to his 
little box, which, with the aid of the other, it tightly 
and nervously clasped. " I can't take your present. 
It's impossible," she said. 

He sat leaning forward with his big red fists on 
his knees. " Not for your birthday ? " 

" It's too splendid for that it's too precious. 
And how can I take it for that when it isn't for that 
you offer it ? How can I take so much, Paul, when 
I give you so little ? It represents so much more 
than itself a thousand more things than I've any 
right to let you think I can accept. I can't pretend 
not to know I must meet you half way. I want to 
do that so much to keep our relations happy, happy 
always, without a break or a cloud. They will be 
they'll be beautiful. We've only to be frank. They 



i8o THE OTHER HOUSE 

are now : I feel it in the kind way you listen to me. 
If you hadn't asked to speak to me I should have 
asked it myself. Six months ago I promised I would 
tell you, and I've known the time was come." 

"The time is come, but don't tell me till you've 
given me a chance," said Paul. He had listened 
without looking at her, his little eyes pricking with 
their intensity the remotest object they could reach. 
" I want so to please you to make you take a 
favourable view. There isn't a condition you may 
make, you know, of any sort whatever, that I won't 
grant you in advance. And if there's any induce- 
ment you can name that I've the least capacity to 
offer, please regard it as offered with all my heart. 
You know everything you understand ; but just let 
me repeat that all I am, all I have, all I can ever be 
or do " 

She laid her hand on his arm as if to help, not to 
stop him. " Paul, Paul you're beautiful ! " She 
brushed him with the feather of her tact, but he 
reddened and continued to avert his big face, as if 
he were aware that the moment of such an assertion 
was scarcely the moment to venture to show it. 
" You're such a gentleman ! " Jean went on this 
time with a tremor in her voice that made him 
turn. 

" That's the sort of fine thing I wanted to say to 
you" he said. And he was so accustomed, in any 
talk, to see his interlocutor suddenly laugh that his 
look of benevolence covered even her air of being 
amused by these words. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 181 

She smiled at him ; she patted his arm. " You've 
said to me far more than that comes to. I want 
you oh, I want you so to be successful and happy ! " 
And her laugh, with an ambiguous sob, suddenly 
changed into a burst of tears. 

She recovered herself, but she had brought tears 
into his own eyes. " Oh, that's of no consequence ! 
I'm to understand that you'll never, never ? " 

" Never, never." 

Paul drew a long, low breath. "Do you know 
that every one has thought you probably would ? " 

"Certainly, I've known it, and that's why I'm 
glad of our talk. It ought to have come sooner. 
You thought I probably would, I think " 

" Oh, yes ! " Paul artlessly broke in. 

Jean laughed again while she wiped her eyes. 
"That's why I call you beautiful. You had my 
possible expectation to meet." 

" Oh, yes ! " he said again. 

" And you were to meet it like a gentleman. I 
might have but no matter. You risked your life- 
you've been magnificent." Jean got up. "And 
now, to make it perfect, you must take this back." 

She put the morocco case into his submissive 
hand, and he sat staring at it and mechanically turn- 
ing it round. Unconsciously, musingly he threw it 
a little way into the air and caught it again. Then 
he also got up. "They'll be tremendously down 
on us." 

" On ' us ' ? On me, of course but why on 
you?" 



1 8a THE OTHER HOUSE 

" For not having moved you." 

"You've moved me immensely. Before me 
let no one say a word about you ! " 

" It's of no consequence/' Paul repeated. 

" Nothing is, if we go on as we are. We're 
better friends than ever. And we're happy ! " Jean 
announced in her triumph. 

He looked at her with deep wistfulness, with 
patient envy. " You are ! " Then his eyes took 
the direction to which her attention at that moment 
passed : they showed him Tony Bream coming up 
the slope with his little girl in his hand. Jean went 
down instantly to welcome the child, and Paul turned 
away with a grave face, giving at the same time 
another impulsive toss to the case containing the 
token she had declined. 



XXI 

HE directed his face to the house, however, only to 
find himself in the presence of his mother, who had 
come back to her tea-table and whom he saw veri- 
tably glare at the small object in his hands. From this 
object her scrutiny jumped to his own countenance, 
which, to his great discomfort, was not conscious of 
very successfully baffling it. He knew therefore a 
momentary relief when her observation attached 
itself to Jean Martle, whom Tony, planted on the 
lawn, was also undisguisedly watching and who was 
already introducing Effie to the treasure laid up in 
the shade of the tea-table. The girl had caught up 
the child on her strong young arm, where she sat 
robust and radiant, befrilled and besashed, hugging 
the biggest of the dolls ; and in this position erect, 
active, laughing, her rosy burden, almost on her 
shoulder, mingling its brightness with that of her 
crown of hair, and her other hand grasping, for 
Effie's further delight, in the form of another puppet 
from the pile, a still rosier imitation of it antici- 
pated quickly the challenge, which, as Paul saw, 
Mrs. Beever was on the point of addressing 
her. 

" Our wonderful cake's not coming out?" 



184 , THE OTHER HOUSE 

" It's too big to transport," said Mrs. Beever : " it's 
blazing away in the dining-room." 

Jean Martle turned to Tony. " I may carry her 
in to see it ? " 

Tony assented. "Only please remember she's 
not to partake." 

Jean smiled at him. " I'll eat her share ! " And 
she passed swiftly over the lawn while the three 
pair of eyes followed her. 

" She looks," said Tony, " like the goddess Diana 
playing with a baby-nymph." 

Mrs. Beever's attention came back to her son. 
" That's the sort of remark one would expect to hear 
from you ! You're not going with her ? " 

Paul showed vacant and vast. " I'm going in." 

" To the dining-room ? " 

He wavered. " To speak to Miss Armiger." 

His mother's gaze, sharpened and scared, had 
reverted to his morocco case. " To ask her to keep 
that again ? " 

At this Paul met her with spirit. " She may keep 
it for ever ! " Giving another toss to his missile, 
while his companions stared at each other, he took 
the same direction as Jean. 

Mrs. Beever, disconcerted and flushed, broke out 
on the spot to Tony. " Heaven help us all she 
has refused him ! " 

Tony's face reflected her alarm. " Pray, how do 
you know ? " 

"By his having his present to her left on his 



THE OTHER HOUSE 185 

hands a jewel a girl would jump at ! I came back 
to hear it was settled " 

" And you haven't heard it's not ! " 

" What I haven't heard I've seen. That it's ' not ' 
sticks out of them ! If she won't accept the gift," 
Mrs. Beever cried, "how can she accept the 
giver ? " 

Tony's appearance, for some seconds, was an echo 
of her question. "Why, she just promised me she 
would ! " 

This only deepened his neighbour's surprise. 
" Promised you ?" 

Tony hesitated. " I mean she left me to infer 
that I had determined her. She was so good 
as to listen most appreciatively to what I had to 
say." 

"And, pray, what had you to say?" Mrs. Beever 
asked with austerity. 

In the presence of a rigour so immediate he found 
himself so embarrassed that he considered. " Well 
everything. I took the liberty of urging Paul's 
claim." 

Mrs. Beever stared. " Very good of you ! What 
did you think you had to do with it ? " 

" Why, whatever my great desire that she should 
accept him gave me." 

" Your great desire that she should accept him ? 
This is the first I've heard of it." 

Once more Tony pondered. " Did I never speak 
of it to you ? " 



i86 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" Never that I can remember. From when does 
it date ? " Mrs. Beever demanded. 

" From the moment I really understood how much 
Paul had to hope." 

" How ' much ' ? " the lady of Eastmead derisively 
repeated. " It wasn't so much that you need have 
been at such pains to make it less ! " 

Tony's comprehension of his friend's discomfiture 
was written in the smile of determined good humour 
with which he met the asperity of her successive 
inquiries; but his own uneasiness, which was not 
the best thing in the world for his temper, showed 
through this superficial glitter. He looked suddenly 
as blank as a man can look who looks annoyed. 
" How in the world could I have supposed I was 
making it less ? " 

Mrs. Beever faltered in her turn. " To answer 
that question I should need to have been present at 
your appeal." 

Tony's eyes put forth a fire. " It seems to me 
that your answer, as it is, will do very well for a 
charge of disloyalty. Do you imply that I didn't act 
in good faith ? " 

"Not even in my sore disappointment. But I 
imply that you made a gross mistake." 

Tony lifted his shoulders ; with his hands in his 
pockets he had begun to fidget about the lawn- 
bringing back to her as he did so the worried figure 
that, in the same attitude, the day of poor Julia's 
death, she had seen pace the hall at the other house. 
" But what the deuce then was I to do ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 187 

" You were to let her alone." 

11 Ah, but I should have had to begin that earlier ! " 
he exclaimed with ingenuous promptitude. 

Mrs. Beever gave a laugh of despair. "Years 
and years earlier ! " 

" I mean," returned Tony with a blush, " that from 
the first of her being here I made a point of giving 
her the impression of all the good I thought of Paul." 

His hostess continued sarcastic. " If it was a 
question of making points and giving impressions, 
perhaps then you should have begun later still ! " 
She gathered herself a moment ; then she brought 
out: "You should have let her alone, Tony Bream, 
because you're madly in love with her ! " 

Tony dropped into the nearest chair ; he sat 
there looking up at the queen-mother. "Your 
proof of that's my plea for your son ? " 

She took full in the face his air of pity for her 
lapse. " Your plea was .not for my son your plea 
was for your own danger." 

" My own ' danger ' ? " Tony leaped to his feet 
again in illustration of his security. " Need I 
inform 3^ou at this time of day that I've such 
a thing as a conscience ? " 

"Far from it, my dear man. Exactly what I 
complain of is that you've quite too much of one." 
And she gave him, before turning away, what might 
have been her last look and her last word. " Your 
conscience is as big as your passion, and if both 
had been smaller you might perhaps have held your 
tongue ! " 



i88 THE OTHER HOUSE 

She moved off in a manner that added emphasis 
to her words, and Tony watched her with his hands 
still in his pockets and his long legs a little apart. 
He could turn it over that she accused him, after 
all, only of having been a particularly injurious 
jool. " I was under the same impression as you," 
he said " the impression that Paul was safe." 

This arrested and brought her sharply round. 
"And were you under the impression that Jean 
was ? " 

" On my honour as far as I'm concerned ! " 
" It's of course of you we're talking," Mrs. 
Beever replied. " If you weren't her motive are 
you able to suggest who was ? " 

" Her motive for refusing Paul ? " Tony looked 
at the sky for an inspiration. " I'm afraid I'm too 
surprised and distressed to have a theory." 

" Have you one by chance as to why, if you 
thought them both so safe, you interfered ? " 

" ' Interfered ' is a hard word," said Tony. " I 
felt a wish to testify to my great sympathy with 
Paul from the moment I heard what I didn't at all 
know that this was the occasion on which he was, 
in more senses than one, to present his case." 

" May I go so far as to ask," said Mrs. Beever, 
"if your sudden revelation proceeded from Paul 
himself?" 

No not from Paul himself." 

"And scarcely from Jean, I suppose ?" 

" Not in the remotest degree from Jean." 

" Thank you," she replied ; " you've told me." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 189 

She had taken her place in a chair and fixed her 
eyes on the ground. " I've something to tell you 
myself, though it may not interest you so much." 
Then raising her eyes : " Dennis Vidal is here." 

Tony almost jumped. " In the house ? " 

" On the river paddling about." After which, 
as his blankness grew, " He turned up an hour 
ago," she explained. 

" And no one has seen him ? " 

"The Doctor and Paul. But Paul didn't know " 

" And didn't ask ? " Tony panted. 

" What does Paul ever ask ? He's too stupid ! 
Besides, with all my affairs, he sees my people come 
and go. Mr. Vidal vanished when he heard that 
Miss Armiger's here." 

Tony went from surprise to mystification. " Not 
to come back ? " 

" On the contrary, I hope, as he took my boat." 

" But he wishes not to see her ? " 

" He's thinking it over." 

Tony wondered. "What, then, did he corne 
for?" 

Mrs. Beever hung fire. " He came to see Effie." 

" Effie ? " 

"To judge if you're likely to lose her." 

Tony threw back his head. " How the devil does 
that concern him ? " 

Again Mrs. Beever faltered ; then, as she rose, 
" Hadn't I better leave you to think it out ? " she 
demanded. 

Tony, in spite of his bewildered face, thought it 



190 THE OTHER HOUSE 

out with such effect that in a moment he exclaimed : 
" Then he still wants that girl ? " 

" Very much indeed. " That's why he's afraid " 

Tony took her up. " That Effie may die ? " 
" It's a hideous thing to be talking about," said 
Mrs. Beever. "But you've perhaps not forgotten 

who were present ! " 

" I've not forgotten who were present ! I'm 
greatly honoured by Mr. Vidal's solicitude;" Tony 
continued; "but I beg you to tell him from me 
that I think I can take care of my child." 

" You must take more care than ever," Mrs. 
Beever pointedly observed. " But don't mention him 
to her!" she as sharply added. Rose Armiger's 
white dress and red parasol had reappeared on the 
steps of the house. 



XXII 

AT the sight of the two persons in the garden Rose 
came straight down to them ; and Mrs. Beever, 
sombre and sharp, still seeking relief in the oppor- 
tunity for satire, remarked to her companion in a 
manner at once ominous and indifferent that her 
guest was evidently in eager pursuit of him. Tony 
replied with gaiety that he awaited her with fortitude, 
and Rose, reaching them, let him know that as she 
had something more to say to him she was glad he 
had not, as she feared, quitted the garden. Mrs. 
Beever hereupon signified her own intention of 
taking this course : she would leave their visitor, as 
she said, to Rose to deal with. 

Rose smiled with her best grace. " That's as I 
leave Paul to you. I've just been with him." 

Mrs. Beever testified not only to interest, but to 
approval. " In the library ? " 

" In the drawing-room." Rose the next moment 
conscientiously showed by a further remark her 
appreciation of the attitude that, on the part of her 
hostess, she had succeeded in 'producing. "Miss 
Martle's in the library." 

" And Effie ? " Mrs. Beever asked. 

" Effie, of course, is where Miss Martle is." 



I 9 2 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Tony, during this brief colloquy, had lounged 
away as restlessly as if, instead of beaming on 
the lady of Eastmead, Rose were watching the 
master of the other house. He promptly turned 
round. "I say, dear lady, you know be kind to 
her!" 

"To Effie?" Mrs. Beever demanded. 

" To poor Jean." 

Mrs, Beever, after an instant's reflection, took a 
humorous view of his request. " I don't know why 
you call her ' poor ' ! She has declined an excellent 
settlement, but she's not in misery yet." Then she 
said to Rose : " I'll take Paul first." 

Rose had put down her parasol, pricking the 
point of it, as if with a certain shyness, into the 
close, firm lawn. " If you like, when you take Miss 

Martle " She paused in deep contemplation of 

Tony. 

" When I take Miss Martle ? " There was a new 
encouragement in Mrs. Beever's voice. 

The apparent effect of this benignity was to make 
Miss Armiger's eyes widen strangely at their com- 
panion. "Why, I'll come back and take the 
child." 

Mrs. Beever met this offer with an alertness not 
hitherto markedly characteristic of her intercourse 
with Rose. " I'll send her out to you." Then by 
way of an obeisance to Tony, directing the words 
well at him : " It won't indeed be a scene for that 
poor lamb ! " She marched off with her duty 
emblazoned on her square satin back. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 193 

Tony, struck by the massive characters in which 
it was written there, broke into an indulgent laugh, 
but even in his mirth he traced the satisfaction she 
took in letting him see that she measured with some 
complacency the embarrassment Rose might cause 
him. " Does she propose to tear Miss Martle limb 
from limb ? " he playfully inquired. 

" Do you ask that," said Rose, " partly because 
you're apprehensive that it's what I propose to do to 
you?" 

" By no means, my dear Rose, after your just 
giving me so marked a sign of the pacific as your 
coming round " 

"On the question," Rose broke in, "of one's 
relation to that little image and echo of her adored 
mother ? That isn't peace, my dear Tony. You 
give me just the occasion to let you formally know 
that it's war." 

Tony gave another laugh. " War ? " 

" Not on you I pity you too much." 

" Then on whom ? " 

Rose hesitated. "On any one, on every one, 
who may be likely to find that small child small as 
she is ! inconvenient. Oh, I know," she went on, 
" you'll say I come late in the day for this and you'll 
remind me of how very short a time ago it was that 
I declined a request of yours to occupy myself with 
her at all. Only half an hour has elapsed, but what 
has happened in it has made all the difference." 

She spoke without discernible excitement, and 
Tony had already become aware that the face she 



194 THE OTHER HOUSE 

actually showed him was not a thing to make him 
estimate directly the effect wrought in her by the 
incongruous result of the influence he had put forth 
under pressure of her ardour. He needed no great 
imagination to conceive that this consequence might, 
on the poor girl's part, well be mainly lodged in 
such depths of her nature as not to find an easy or 
an immediate way to the surface. That he had her 
to reckon with he was reminded as soon as he caught 
across the lawn the sheen of her white dress ; but 
what he most felt was a lively, unreasoning hope 
that for the hour at least, and until he should have 
time to turn round and see what his own situation 
exactly contained for him, her mere incontestable 
cleverness would achieve a revolution during which 
he might take breath. This was not a hope that in 
any way met his difficulties it was a hope that only 
avoided them ; but he had lately had a vision of 
something in which it was still obscure to him whether 
the bitter or the sweet prevailed, and he was ready 
to make almost any terms to be allowed to surrender 
himself to these first quick throbs of response to 
what was at any rate an impression of perfect beauty. 
He was in bliss with a great chill and in despair 
with a great lift, and confused and assured and 
alarmed divided between the joy and the pain of 
knowing that what Jean Martle had done she had 
done for Tony Bream, and done full in the face of 
all he couldn't do to repay her. That Tony Bream 
might never marry was a simple enough affair, but 
that this rare creature mightn't suddenly figured to 



THE OTHER HOUSE 195 

him as formidable and exquisite. Therefore he found 
his nerves rather indebted to Rose for her being 
if that was the explanation too proud to be vulgarly 
vindictive. She knew his secret, as even after seeing 
it so freely handled by Mrs. Beever he still rather 
artlessly called the motive of his vain appeal ; knew 
it better than before, since she could now read it in 
the intenser light of the knowledge of it betrayed by 
another. If on this advantage he had no reason to 
look to her for generosity, it was at least a comfort 
that he might look to her for good manners. Poor 
Tony had the full consciousness of needing to think 
out a line, but it weighed somewhat against that 
oppression to feel that Rose also would have it. He 
was only a little troubled by the idea that, ardent 
and subtle, she would probably think faster than he. 
He turned over a moment the revelation of these 
qualities conveyed in her announcement of a change, 
as he might call it, of policy. 

" What you say is charming," he good-naturedly 
replied, " so far as it represents an accession to the 
ranks of my daughter's friends. You will never 
without touching me remind me how nearly a sister 
you were to her mother ; and I would rather express 
the pleasure I take in that than the bewilderment I feel 
at your allusion to any class of persons whose interest 
in her may not be sincere. The more friends she 
has, the better I welcome you all. The only thing 
I ask of you," he went on, smiling, " is not to quarrel 
about her among yourselves." 

Rose, as she listened, looked almost religiously 



ig6 THE OTHER HOUSE 

calm, but as she answered there was a profane 
quaver in her voice that told him with what an effort 
she achieved that sacrifice to form for which he was 
so pusillanimously grateful. " It's very good of you 
to make the best of me ; and it's also very clever of 
you, let me add, my dear Tony and add with all 
deference to your goodness to succeed in implying 
that any other course is open to you. You may 
welcome me as a friend of the child or not. I'm 
present for her, at any rate, and present as I've 
never been before." 

Tony's gratitude, suddenly contracting, left a little 
edge for irritation. " You're present, assuredly, my 
dear Rose, and your presence is to us all an 
advantage of which, happily, we never become uncon- 
scious for an hour. But do I understand that the 
firm position among us that you allude to is one to 
which you see your way to attaching any possibility 
of permanence ? " 

She waited as if scrupulously to detach from its 
stem the flower of irony that had sprouted in this 
speech, and while she inhaled it she gave her visible 
attention only to the little hole in the lawn that she 
continued to prick with the point of her parasol. 
" If that's a graceful way of asking me," she returned 
at last, " whether the end of my visit here isn't near 
at hand, perhaps the best satisfaction I can give you 
is to say that I shall probably stay on at least as 
long as Miss Martle. What I meant, however, just 
now," she pursued, " by saying that I'm more on the 
spot than heretofore, is simply that while I do stay 



THE OTHER HOUSE 197 

I stay to be vigilant. That's what I hurried out to 
let you definitely know, in case you should be 
going home without our meeting again. I told 
you before I went into the house that I trusted 
you I needn't recall to you for what. Mr. Beever 
after a while came in and told me that Miss Martle 
had refused him. Then I felt that, after what 
had passed between us, it was only fair to say 
to you " 

" That you've ceased to trust me ? " Tony inter- 
jected. 

" By no means. I don't give and take back." 
And though his companion's handsome head, with 
its fixed, pale face, rose high, it became appreciably 
handsomer and reached considerably higher, while 
she wore once more the air of looking at his mistake 
through the enlarging blur of tears. " As I believe 
you did, in honour, what you could for Mr. Beever, 
I trust you perfectly still." 

Tony smiled as if he apologised, but as if also he 
couldn't but wonder. " Then it's only fair to say to 
me ?" 

" That I don't trust Miss Martle." 

" Oh, my dear woman ! " Tony precipitately 
laughed. 

But Rose went on with all deliberation and dis- 
tinctness. " That's what has made the difference 
that's what has brought me, as you say, round to a 
sense of my possible use, or rather of my clear 
obligation. Half an hour ago I knew how much you 
loved her. Now I know how much she loves you." 



igS THE OTHER HOUSE 

Tony's laugh suddenly dropped ; he showed the 
face of a man for whom a joke has sharply turned 
grave. " And what is it that, in possession of this 
admirable knowledge, you see ? " 

Rose faltered ; but she had not come so far simply 
to make a botch of it. " Why, that it's the obvious 
interest of the person we speak of not to have too 
stupid a patience with any obstacle to her marrying 
you." 

This speech had a quiet lucidity of which the odd 
action was for an instant to make him lose breath 
so violently that, in his quick gasp, he felt sick. In 
the indignity of the sensation he struck out. " Pray, 
why is it the person's obvious interest any more than 
it's yours ? " 

" Seeing that I love you quite as much as she 
does ? Because you don't love me quite so much 
as you love her. That's exactly ' why,' dear Tony 
Bream ! " said Rose Armiger. 

She turned away from him sadly and nobly, as if 
she had done with him and with the subject, and he 
stood where she had left him, gazing at the foolish 
greenness at his feet and slowly passing his hand 
over his head. In a few seconds, however, he heard 
her utter a strange, short cry, and, looking round, 
saw her face to face across the interval of sloping 
lawn with a gentleman whom he had been suffi- 
ciently prepared to recognise on the spot as Dennis 
Vidal. 



XXIII 

HE had, in this preparation, the full advantage of 
Rose, who, quite thrown for the moment off her 
balance, was vividly unable to give any account of 
the apparition which should be profitable to herself. 
The violence of her surprise made her catch the back 
of the nearest chair, on which she covertly rested, 
directing at her old suitor from this position the 
widest eyes the master of Bounds had ever seen her 
unwittingly open. To perceive this, however, was 
to be almost simultaneously struck, and even to be 
not a little charmed, with the clever quickness of her 
recovery that of a person constitutionally averse to 
making unmeasured displays. Rose was capable of 
astonishment, as she was capable of other kinds of 
emotion ; but she was as little capable of giving way 
to it as she was of giving way to other kinds ; so that 
both of her companions immediately saw her moved 
by the sense that a perturbing incident could at the 
worst do her no such evil turn as she might suffer 
by taking it in the wrong way. Tony became aware, 
in addition, that the fact communicated to him by 
Mrs. Beever gave him an advantage even over the 
poor fellow whose face, as he stood there, showed 
the traces of an insufficient forecast of two things : 



200 THE OTHER HOUSE 

one of them the influence on all his pulses of the 
sight again, after such an interval, and in the high 
insolence of life and strength, of the woman he had 
lost and still loved ; the other the instant effect on 
his imagination of his finding her intimately engaged 
with the man who had been, however without fault, 
the occasion of her perversity. Vidal's marked 
alertness had momentarily failed him ; he paused in 
his advance long enough to give Tony, after noting 
and regretting his agitation, time to feel that Rose 
was already as colourlessly bland as a sensitive 
woman could wish to be. 

All this made the silence, however brief and it 
was much briefer than my account of it vibrate to 
such a tune as to prompt Tony to speak as soon as 
possible in the interest of harmony. What directly 
concerned him was that he had last seen Vidal as 
his own duly appreciative guest, and he offered him 
a hand freely charged with reminders of that quality. 
He was refreshed and even a little surprised to 
observe that the young man took it, after all, with- 
out stiffness ; but the strangest thing in the world 
was that as he cordially brought him up the bank he 
had a mystic glimpse of the fact that Rose Armiger, 
with her heart in her throat, was waiting for some 
sign as to whether she might, for the benefit of her 
intercourse with himself, safely take the ground of 
having expected what had happened having perhaps 
even brought it about. She naturally took counsel 
of her fears, and Tony, suddenly more elated 
than he could have given a reason for being, was 



THE OTHER HOUSE 201 

ready to concur in any attempt she might make 
to save her appearance of knowing no reproach. 
Yet, foreseeing the awkwardness that might arise 
from her committing herself too rashly, he made 
haste to say to Dennis that he would have been 
startled if he had not been forewarned : Mrs. 
Beever had mentioned to him the visit she had just 
received. 

" Ah, she told you ? " Dennis asked. 
" Me only as a great sign of confidence," Tony 
laughed. 

Rose, at this, could be amazed with superiority. 
" What ? you've already been here ? " 

" An hour ago," said Dennis. " I asked Mrs. 
Beever not to tell you." 

That was a chance for positive criticism. " She 
obeyed your request to the letter. But why in the 
world such portentous secrecy ? " Rose spoke as if 
there was no shade of a reason for his feeling shy, 
and now gave him an excellent example of the right 
tone. She had emulated Tony's own gesture of 
welcome, and he said to himself that no young 
woman could have stretched a more elastic arm 
across a desert of four cold years. 

" I can explain to you better," Dennis replied, 
" why I emerged than why I vanished." 

" You emerged, I suppose, because you wanted to 
see me." Rose spoke to one of her admirers, but 
she looked, she even laughed, at the other, showing 
him by this time an aspect completely and inscru- 
tably renewed. " You knew I was here ? " 



202 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"At Wilverley ?" Dennis hesitated. "I took it 
for granted." 

"I'm afraid it was really for Miss Armiger you 
came," Tony remarked in the spirit of pleasantry. 
It seemed to him that the spirit of pleasantry would 
help them on. 

It had its result it proved contagious. " I would 
still say so before her even if it weren't!" 
Dennis returned. 

Rose took up the joke. " Fortunately it's true 
so it saves you a fib." 

" It saves me a fib ! " Dennis said. 

In this way the trick was successfully played 
they found their feet ; with the added amusement for 
Tony of hearing the necessary falsehood uttered 
neither by himself nor by Rose, but by a man whose 
veracity, from the first, on that earlier day, of 
looking at him, he had felt to be almost incompatible 
with the flow of conversation. It was more and 
more distinct while the minutes elapsed that the 
secondary effect of her old friend's reappearance 
was to make Rose shine with a more convenient 
light ; and she met her embarrassment, every way, 
with so happy an art that Tony was moved to 
deplore afresh the complication that estranged him 
from a woman of such gifts. It made up indeed a 
little for this that he was also never so possessed of 
his own as when there was something to carry off 
or to put, as the phrase was, through. His light 
hand, his slightly florid facility were the things that 
in managing, in presiding, had rendered him so widely 



THE OTHER HOUSE 203 

popular ; and wasn't he, precisely, a little presiding, 
wasn't he a good deal managing just now ? Vidal 
would be a blessed diversion especially if he should 
be pressed into the service as one : Tony was content 
for the moment to see this with eagerness rather 
than to see it whole. His eagerness was quite 
justified by the circumstance that the young man 
from China did somehow or other the reasons would 
appear after the fact represent relief, relief not 
made vain by the reflection that it was perhaps only 
temporary. Rose herself, thank heaven, was, with 
all her exaltation, only temporary. He could already 
condone the officiousness of a gentleman too inter- 
ested in Effie's equilibrium: the 'grounds of that 
indiscretion gleamed agreeably through it as soon as 
he had seen the visitor's fingers draw together over 
the hand held out by Rose. It was matter to 
whistle over, to bustle over, that, as had been 
certified by Mrs. Beever, the passion betrayed by 
that clasp had survived its shipwreck, and there 
wasn't a rope's end Tony could throw, or a stray 
stick he could hold out, for which he didn't immedi- 
ately cast about him. He saw indeed from this 
moment his whole comfort in the idea of an 
organised rescue and of making the struggling 
swimmer know, as a preliminary, how little any one 
at the other house was interested in preventing him 
to land. 

Dennis had, for that matter, not been two minutes 
in touch with him before he really began to see this 
happy perception descend. It was, in a manner, to 



204 THE OTHER HOUSE 

haul him ashore to invite him to dine and sleep 
which Tony lost as little time as possible in doing ; 
expressing the hope that he had not gone to the inn 
and that even if he had he would consent to the quick 
transfer of his effects to Bounds. Dennis showed 
that he had still some wonder for such an overture, 
but before he could respond to it the words were 
taken out of his mouth by Rose, whose recovery 
from her upset was complete from the moment she 
could seize a pretext for the extravagance of tran- 
quillity. 

"Why should you take him away from us and 
why should he consent to be taken ? Won't Mrs. 
Beever," Rose asked of Dennis " since you're not 
snatching the fearful joy of a clandestine visit to her 
expect you, if you stay anywhere, to give her the 
preference ? " 

" Allow me to remind you, and to remind Mr. 
Vidal," Tony returned, " that when he was here 
before he gave her the preference. Mrs. Beever 
made no scruple of removing him bodily from under 
my roof. I forfeited I was obliged to the pleasure 
of a visit to him. But that leaves me with my loss 
to make up and my revenge to take I repay Mrs. 
Beever in kind." To find Rose disputing with him 
the possession of their friend filled him with imme- 
diate cheer. " Don't you recognise," he went on to 
him, " the propriety of what I propose ? I take you 
and deal with Mrs. Beever, as she took you and 
dealt with me. Besides, your things have not even 
been brought here as they had of old been brought 



THE OTHER HOUSE 205 

to Bounds. I promise to share you with these ladies 
and not to grudge you the time you may wish to 
spend with Miss Armiger. I understand but too 
well the number of hours I shall find you putting in. 
You shall pay me a long visit and come over here as 
often as you like, and your presence at Bounds may 
even possibly have the consequence of making 
them honour me there a little oftener with their 
own." 

Dennis looked from one of his companions to the 
other ; he struck Tony as slightly mystified, but not 
beyond the point at which curiosity was agreeable. 
" I think I had better go to Mr. Bream," he after a 
moment sturdily said to Rose. " There's a matter 
on which I wish to talk with you, but I don't see that 
that need prevent." 

" It's for you to determine. There's a matter on 
which I find myself, to you also, particularly glad of 
the opportunity of saying a word." 

Tony glanced promptly at his watch and at Rose, 
"Your opportunity's before you say your word 
now. I've a little job in the town," he explained to 
Dennis ; " I must attend to it quickly and I can easily 
stop at the hotel and give directions for the removal 
of your traps. All you will have to do then will be 
to take the short way, which you know over the 
bridge there and through my garden to my door. 
We shall dine at an easy eight." 

Dennis Vidal assented to this arrangement without 
qualification and indeed almost without expression : 
there evidently lingered in him an operative sense 



206 THE OTHER HOUSE 

that there were compensations Mr. Bream might be 
allowed the luxurious consciousness of owing him. 
Rose, however, showed she still had a communica- 
tion to make to Tony, who had begun to move in the 
quarter leading straight from Eastmead to the town, 
so that he would have to pass near the house on 
going out. She introduced it with a question about 
his movements. "You'll stop, then, on your way 
and tell Mrs. Beever ? " 

" Of my having appropriated our friend ? Not 
this moment," said Tony " I've to meet a man on 
business, and I shall only just have time. I shall if 
possible come back here, but meanwhile perhaps 
you'll kindly explain. Come straight over and take 
possession," he added, to Vidal ; " make yourself at 
home don't wait for me to return to you." He 
offered him a hand-shake again, and then, with his 
native impulse to accommodate and to harmonise 
making a friendly light in his face, he offered one to 
Rose herself. She accepted it so frankly that she 
even for a minute kept his hand a response that 
he approved with a smile so encouraging that it 
scarcely needed even the confirmation of speech. 
They stood there while Dennis Vidal turned away as 
if they might have matters between them, and Tony 
yielded to the impulse to prove to Rose that though 
there were things he kept from her he kept nothing 
that was not absolutely necessary. " There's some- 
thing else I've got to do I've got to stop at the 
Doctor's." 

Rose raised her eyebrows. "To consult him ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 207 

" To ask him to come over." 

" I hope you're not ill." 

" Never better in my life. I want him to see 
Effie." 

"She's not ill surely?" 

" She's not right with the fright Gorham had 
this morning. So I'm not satisfied." 

"Let him then by all means see her," Rose 
said. 

Their talk had, through the action of Vidal's 
presence, dropped from its chilly height to the 
warmest domestic level, and what now stuck out of 
Tony was the desire she should understand that on 
such ground as that he was always glad to meet her. 
Dennis Vidal faced about again in time to be called, 
as it were, if only by the tone of his host's voice, to 
witness this. "A bientot. Let me hear from you 
and from him that in my absence you've been 
extremely kind to our friend here." 

Rose, with a small but vivid fever-spot in her 
cheek, lookec} from one of the men to the other, 
while her kindled eyes showed a gathered purpose 
that had the prompt and perceptible effect of exciting 
suspense. " I don't mind letting you know, Mr. 
Bream, in advance exactly how kind I shall be. It 
would be affectation on my part to pretend to be 
unaware of your already knowing something of what 
has passed between this gentleman and me. He 
suffered, at my hands, in this place, four years ago, 
a disappointment a disappointment into the rights 
and wrongs, into the good reasons of which I won't 



208 THE OTHER HOUSE 

attempt to go further than just to say that an inevi- 
table publicity then attached to it." She spoke with 
slow and deliberate clearness, still looking from Tony 
to Dennis and back again ; after which her strange 
intensity fixed itself on her old suitor. " People 
saw, Mr, Vidal," she went on, "the blight that 
descended on our long relations, and people believed 
and I was at the time indifferent to their believing 
that it had occurred by my act. I'm not indifferent 
now that is to any appearance of having been 
wanting in consideration for such a man as you. 
I've often wished I might make you some reparation 
some open atonement. I'm sorry for the distress 
that I'm afraid I caused you, and here, before the 
principal witness of the indignity you so magnani- 
mously met, I very sincerely express my regret and 
very humbly beg your forgiveness." Dennis Vidal, 
staring at her, had turned dead white as she kept it 
up, and the elevation, as it were, of her abasement 
had brought tears into Tony's eyes. She saw them 
there as she looked at him once more, and she 
measured the effect she produced upon him. She 
visibly and excusably enjoyed it and after a moment's 
pause she handsomely and pathetically completed it. 
" That, Mr. Bream for your injunction of kindness 
is the kindness I'm capable of showing." 

Tony turned instantly to their companion, who 
now stood staring hard at the ground. " I change, 
then, my appeal I make it, with confidence, to you. 
Let me hear, Mr. Vidal, when we meet again, that 
you've not been capable of less ! " Dennis, deeply 



THE OTHER HOUSE 209 

moved, it was plain, but self-conscious and stiff, gave 
no sign of having heard him ; and Rose, on her side, 
walked a little away like an actress who has launched 
her great stroke. Tony, between them, hesitated; 
then he laughed in a manner that showed he felt 
safe. "Oh, you're both all right!" he declared; 
and with another glance at his watch he bounded off 
to his business. He drew, as he went, a long 
breath filled his lungs with the sense that he should 
after all have a margin. She would take Dennis 
back. 



XXIV 

" WHY did you do that ? " Dennis asked as soon as 
he was alone with Rose. 

She had sunk into a seat at a distance from him, 
all spent with her great response to her sudden 
opportunity for justice. His challenge brought her 
flight to earth ; and after waiting a moment she 
answered him with a question that betrayed her 
sense of coming down. " Do you really care, after 
all this time, what I do or don't do ? " 

His rejoinder to this was in turn only another 
demand. " What business is it of his that you may 
have done this or that to me ? What has passed 
between us is still between us : nobody else has 
anything to do with it." 

Rose smiled at him as if to thank him for being 
again a trifle sharp with her. " He wants me, as 
he said, to be kind to you." 

You mean he wants you to do that sort of 
thing ? " His sharpness brought him step by step 
across the lawn and nearer to her. " Do you care 
so very much what he wants ? " 

Again she hesitated; then, with her pleased, 
patient smile, she tapped the empty place on the 
bench. " Come and sit down beside me, and I'll 



THE OTHER HOUSE 211 

tell you how much I care." He obeyed her, but not 
precipitately, approaching her with a deliberation 
which still held her off a little, made her objective 
to his inspection or his mistrust. He had said to 
Mrs. Beever that he had not come to watch her, but 
we are at liberty to wonder what Mrs. Beever might 
have called the attitude in which, before seating 
himself, he stopped before her with a silent stare. 
She met him at any rate with a face that told him 
there was no scrutiny she was now enough in the 
wrong to fear, a face that was all the promise of 
confession and submission and sacrifice. She 
tapped again upon her bench, and at this he sat down. 
Then she went on : " When did you come back ? " 

" To England ? The other day I don't remem- 
ber which of them. I think you ought to answer 
my question," Dennis said, " before asking any more 
of your own." 

"No, no," she replied, promptly but gently; 
" there's an inquiry it seems to me I've a right to 
make of you before I admit yours to make any at 
all." She looked at him as if to give him time either 
to assent or to object ; but he only sat rather stiffly 
back and let her see how fine and firm the added 
years had hammered him. "What are you really 
here for ? Has it anything to do with me ? " 

Dennis remained profoundly grave. " I didn't 
know you were here I had no reason to," he at 
last replied. 

" Then you simply desired the pleasure of renew- 
ing your acquaintance with Mrs. Beever ? " 



212 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" I came to ask her about you." 

" How beautiful of you ! " and Rose's tone, un- 
tinged with irony, rang out as clear as the impulse 
it praised. " Fancy your caring ! " she added ; after 
which she continued : " As I understand you, then, 
you've had your chance, you've talked with her ? " 

"A very short time. I put her a question or 
two." 

" I won't ask you what they were," said Rose, 
" I'll only say that, since I happen to be here, it 
may be a comfort to you not to have to content 
yourself with information at second-hand. Ask me 
what you like. I'll tell you everything." 

Her companion considered. " You might then 
begin by telling me what I've already asked." 

She took him up before he could go on. " Oh, why 
I attached an importance to his hearing what I just 
now said ? Yes, yes ; you shall have it." She 
turned it over as if with the sole thought of giving 
it to him with the utmost lucidity; then she was 
visibly struck with the help she should derive from 
knowing just one thing more. " But first are you 
at all jealous of him ? " 

Dennis Vidal broke into a laugh which might 
have been a tribute to her rare audacity, yet which 
somehow, at the same time, made him seem only 
more serious. " That's a thing for you to find out 
for yourself!" 

" I see I see." She looked at him with musing, 
indulgent eyes. " It would be too wonderful. Yet 
otherwise, after all, why should you care ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 213 

" I don't mind telling you frankly," said Dennis, 
while, with two fingers softly playing upon her 
lower lip, she sat estimating the possibility she had 
named " I don't mind telling you frankly that I 
asked Mrs. Beever if you were still in love with 
him." 

She clasped her hands so eagerly that she almost 
clapped them. " Then you do care ? " 

He was looking beyond her now at something 
at the other end of the garden ; and he made no 
other reply than to say : " She didn't give you 
away." 

" It was very good of her ; but I would tell you 
myself, you know, perfectly, if I were." 

"You didn't tell me perfectly four years ago," 
Dennis returned. 

Rose hesitated a minute ; but this didn't prevent 
her speaking with an effect of great promptitude. 
"Oh, four years ago I was the biggest fool in 
England ! " 

Dennis, at this, met her eyes again. " Then 
what I asked Mrs. Beever " 

" Isn't true ? " Rose caught him up. " It's an 
exquisite position," she said, " for a woman to be 
questioned as you question me, and to have to 
answer as I answer you. But it's your revenge, 
and you've already seen that to your revenge I 
minister with a certain amount of resolution." She 
let him look at her a minute; at last she said 
without flinching : " I'm not in love with Anthony 
Bream." 



214 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Dennis shook his head sadly. " What does that 
do for my revenge ? " 

Rose had another quick flush. "It shows you 
what I consent to discuss with you," she rather 
proudly replied. 

He turned his eyes back to the quarter to 
which he had directed them before. " You do 
consent ? " 

" Can you ask after what I've done ? " 

" Well, then, he no longer cares ? " 

" For me ? " said Rose. " He never cared." 

"Never?" 

"Never." 

" Upon your honour ? " 

" Upon my honour." 

"But you had an idea ?" Dennis bravely 

pursued. 

Rose as dauntlessly met him. " I had an idea." 

" And you've had to give it up ? " 

" I've had to give it up." 

Dennis was silent ; he slowly got upon his feet. 
" Well, that does something." 

"For your revenge?" She sounded a bitter 
laugh. " I should think it might ! What it does 
is magnificent ! " 

He stood looking over her head till at last he 
exclaimed : " So, apparently, is the child ! " 

" She has come ? " Rose sprang up to find that 
Effie had been borne toward them, across the grass, 
in the arms of the muscular Manning, who, having 
stooped to set her down and given her a vigorous 



THE OTHER HOUSE 215 

impulsion from behind, recovered the military 
stature and posture. 

" You're to take her, miss, please from Mrs. 
Beever. And you're to keep her." 

Rose had already greeted the little visitor. 
" Please assure Mrs. Beever that I will. She's 
with Miss Martle?" 

"She is indeed, miss." 

Manning always spoke without emotion, and the 
effect of it on this occasion was to give her the air 
of speaking without pity. 

Rose, however, didn't mind that. " She may 
trust me," she said, while Manning saluted and 
retired. Then she stood before her old suitor with 
Effie blooming on her shoulder. 

He frankly wondered and admired. " She's 
magnificent she's magnificent ! " he repeated. 

" She's magnificent ! " Rose ardently echoed. 
" Aren't you, my very own ? " she demanded of the 
child, with a sudden passion of tenderness. 

"What did he mean about her wanting the 
Doctor ? She'll see us all through every blessed 
one of us ! " Dennis gave himself up to his serious 
interest, an odd, voracious manner of taking her in 
from top to toe. 

" You look at her like an ogre ! " Rose laughed, 
moving away from him with her burden and press- 
ing to her lips as she went a little plump pink arm. 
She pretended to munch it; she covered it with 
kisses ; she gave way to the joy of her renounced 
abstention. " See us all through ? I hope so ! 



2i6 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Why shouldn't you, darling, why shouldn't you? 
You've got a real friend, you have, you duck ; and 
she sees you know what you've got by the won- 
derful way you look at her ! " This was to attribute 
to the little girl's solemn stare a vividness of mean- 
ing which moved Dennis to hilarity ; Rose's pro- 
fession of confidence made her immediately turn 
her round face over her friend's shoulder to the 
gentleman who was strolling behind and whose public 
criticism, as well as his public mirth, appeared to 
arouse in her only a soft sense of superiority. 
Rose sat down again where she had sat before, 
keeping Effie in her lap and smoothing out her fine 
feathers. Then their companion, after a little more - 
detached contemplation, also took his former 
place. 

"She makes me remember!" he presently ob- 
served. 

" That extraordinary scene poor Julia's mes- 
sage ? You can fancy whether / forget it ! " 

Dennis was silent a little ; after which he said 
quietly : " You've more to keep it in mind." 

" I can assure you I've plenty ! " Rose replied. 

"And the young lady who was also present 
isn't she the Miss Martle ? " 

" Whom I spoke of to that woman ? She's the 
Miss Martle. What about her ? " Rose asked with 
her cheek against the child's. 

" Does she also remember ? " 

" Like you and me ? I haven't the least idea." 

Once more Dennis paused ; his pauses were filled 



THE OTHER HOUSE 217 

with his friendly gaze at their small companion. 
" She's here again like you ? " 

"And like you?" Rose smiled. "No, not like 
either of us. She's always here." 

" And it's from her you're to keep a certain little 
person ? " 

" It's from her." Rose spoke with rich brevity. 

Dennis hesitated. "Would you trust the little 
person to another little person ? " 

" To you to hold ? " Rose looked amused. 
" Without a pang ! " The child, at this, profoundly 
meditative and imperturbably " good," submitted 
serenely to the transfer and to the prompt, long 
kiss which, as he gathered her to him, Dennis, in 
his turn, imprinted on her arm. " I'll stay with 
you ! " she declared with expression ; on which he 
renewed, with finer relish, the freedom she per- 
mitted, assuring her that this settled the question 
and that he was her appointed champion. Rose 
watched the scene between them, which was charm- 
ing ; then she brought out abruptly : " What I said 
to Mr. Bream just now I didn't say for Mr. 
Bream." 

Dennis had the little girl close to him ; his arms 
were softly round her and, like Rose's just before, 
his cheek, as he tenderly bent his head, was pressed 
against her cheek. His eyes were on their com- 
panion. "You said it for Mr. Vidal? He liked 
it, all the same, better than I," he replied in a 
moment. 

" Of course he liked it ! But it doesn't matter 



2i8 THE OTHER HOUSE 

what he likes," Rose added. " As for you I don't 
know that your ' liking ' it was what I wanted." 

"What then did you want ? " 

" That you should see me utterly abased and all 
the more utterly that it was in the cruel presence of 
another." 

Dennis had raised his head and sunk back into 
the angle of the bench, separated from her by such 
space as it yielded. His face, presented to her over 
Effie's curls, was a combat of mystifications. " Why 
in the world should that give me pleasure ? " 

"Why in the world shouldn't it?" Rose asked. 
"What's your revenge but pleasure?" 

She had got up again in her dire restlessness; 
she glowed there in the perversity of her sacrifice. 
If he hadn't come to Wilverley to watch her, his 
wonder-stricken air much wronged him. He shook 
his head again with his tired patience. " Oh, damn 
pleasure ! " he exclaimed. 

" It's nothing to you ? " Rose cried. " Then if it 
isn't, perhaps you pity me ? " She shone at him as 
if with the glimpse of a new hope. 

He took it in, but he only, after a moment, echoed, 
ambiguously, her word. " Pity you ? " 

" I think you would, Dennis, if you under- 
stood." 

He looked at her hard ; he hesitated. At last he 
returned quietly, but relentingly: "Well, Rose, I 
dorit understand." 

"Then I must go through it all I must empty 
the cup. Yes, I must tell you." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 219 

She paused so long, however, beautiful, candid 
and tragic, looking in the face her necessity, but 
gathering herself for her effort, that, after waiting a 
while, he spoke. " Tell me what ? " 

" That I'm simply at your feet. That I'm yours 
to do what you will with to take or to cast away. 
Perhaps you'll care a little for your triumph," she 
said, " when you see in it the grand opportunity I 
give you. It's your turn to refuse now you can 
treat me exactly as you were treated ! " 

A deep, motionless silence followed, between 
them, this speech, which left them confronted as if 
it had rather widened than bridged their separation. 
Before Dennis found his answer to it the sharp 
tension snapped in a clear, glad exclamation. The 
child threw out her arms and her voice : " Auntie 
Jean, Auntie Jean ! " 



XXV 

THE others had been so absorbed that they had not 
seen Jean Martle approach, and she, on her side, 
was close to them before appearing to perceive a 
stranger in the gentleman who held Effie in his lap 
and whom she had the air of having assumed, at a 
greater distance, to be Anthony Bream. Effie's 
reach towards her friend was so effective that, with 
Vidal's obligation to rise, it enabled her to slip from 
his hands and rush to avail herself of the embrace 
offered her, in spite of a momentary arrest, by Jean. 
Rose, however, at the sight of this movement, was 
quicker than Jean to catch her; she seized her 
almost with violence, and, holding her as she had 
held her before, dropped again upon the bench and 
presented her as a yielding captive. This act of 
appropriation was confirmed by the flash of a fine 
glance a single gleam, but direct which, how- 
ever, producing in Jean's fair face no retort, had 
only the effect of making her look, in gracious 
recognition, at Dennis. He had evidently, for the 
moment, nothing but an odd want of words to 
meet her with ; but this, precisely, gave her 
such a sense of having disturbed a scene of 
intimacy that, to be doubly courteous, she said : 



THE OTHER HOUSE 221 

" Perhaps you remember me. We were here 
together " 

" Four years ago perfectly," Rose broke in, 
speaking for him with an amenity that might have 
been intended as a quick corrective of any impres- 
sion conveyed by her grab of the child. "Mr. 
Vidal and I were just talking of you. He has 
come back, for the first time since then, to pay us a 
little visit." 

"Then he has things to say to you that I've 
rudely interrupted. Please excuse me I'm off 
again," Jean went on to Dennis. " I only came for 
the little girl." She turned back to Rose. " I'm 
afraid it's time I should take her home." 

Rose sat there like a queen-regent with a baby 
sovereign on her knee. " Must I give her up to 
you ? " 

" I'm responsible for her, you know, to Gorham," 
Jean returned. 

Rose gravely kissed her little ward, who, now 
that she was apparently to be offered the entertain- 
ment of a debate in which she was so closely 
concerned, was clearly prepared to contribute to it 
the calmness of impartial beauty at a joust. She 
was just old enough to be interested, but she was 
just young enough to be judicial; the lap of her 
present friend had the compass of a small child- 
world, and she perched there in her loveliness as if 
she had been Helen on the walls of Troy. " It's 
not to Gorman I'm responsible," Rose presently 
answered. 



222 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Jean took it good-humouredly. " Are you to Mr. 
Bream?" 

" I'll tell you presently to whom." And Rose 
looked intelligently at Dennis Vidal. 

Smiled at in alternation by two clever young 
women, he had yet not sufficiently to achieve a 
jocose manner shaken off his sense of the strange 
climax of his conversation with the elder of them. 
He turned away awkwardly, as he had done four 
years before, for the hat it was one of the privileges 
of such a colloquy to make him put down in an odd 
place. " I'll go over to Bounds," he said to Rose. 
And then to Jean, to take leave of her : " I'm stay- 
ing at the other house." 

"Really? Mr. Bream didn't tell me. But I 
must never drive you away. You've more to say to 
Miss Armiger than I have. I've only come to get 
Effie," Jean repeated. 

Dennis at this, brushing off his recovered hat, 
gave way to his thin laugh. " That apparently may 
take you some time ! " 

Rose generously helped him off. " I've more to 
say to Miss Martle than I've now to say to you. I 
think that what I've already said to you is quite 
enough. 

" Thanks, thanks quite enough. I'll just go 
over." 

" You won't go first to Mrs. Beever ? " 

" Not yet I'll come in this evening. Thanks, 
thanks ! " Dennis repeated with a sudden dramatic 
gaiety that was presumably intended to preserve 



THE OTHER HOUSE 223 

appearances to acknowledge Rose's aid and, in a 
spirit of reciprocity, cover any exposure she might 
herself have incurred. Raising his hat, he passed 
down the slope and disappeared, leaving our young 
ladies face to face. 

Their situation might still have been embarrassing 
had Rose not taken immediate measures to give it a 
lift. " You must let me have the pleasure of 
making you the first person to hear of a matter that 
closely concerns me." She hung fire, watching her 
companion ; then she brought out : " I'm engaged to 
be married to Mr. Vidal." 

" Engaged ? " Jean almost bounded forward, 
holding up her relief like a torch. 

Rose greeted with laughter this natural note. 
"He arrived half an hour ago, for a supreme appeal 
and it has not, you see, taken long. I've just had 
the honour of accepting him." 

Jean's movement had brought her so close to the 
bench that, though slightly disconcerted by its 
action on her friend, she could only, in consistency, 
seat herself. " That's very charming I congratu- 
late you." 

" It's charming of you to be so glad," Rose 
returned. " However, you've the news in all its 
freshness." 

" I appreciate that too," said Jean. " But fancy 
my dropping on a conversation of such impor- 
tance ! " 

" Fortunately you didn't cut it short. We had 
settled the question. He had got his answer." 



224 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" If I had known it I would have congratulated 
Mr. Vidal," Jean pursued. 

" You would have frightened him out of his wits 
he's so dreadfully shy," Rose laughed. 

"Yes I could see he was dreadfully shy. But 
the great thing," Jean candidly observed, " is that 
he was not too dreadfully shy to come back to you." 

Rose continued to be moved to mirth. "Oh, I 
don't mean with me ! He's as bold with me as I 
am for instance with you." Jean had not touched 
the child, but Rose smoothed our her ribbons as if 
to redress some previous freedom. "You'll think 
that says everything. I can easily imagine how you 
judge my frankness," she added. " But of course 
I'm grossly immodest I always was." 

Jean wistfully watched her light hands play here 
and there over Effie's adornments. " I think you're 
a person of great courage if you'll let me also be 
frank. There's nothing in the world I admire so 
much for I don't consider that I've, myself, a great 
deal. I daresay, however, that I should let you 
know just as soon if I were engaged." 

"Which, unfortunately, is exactly what you're 
not!" Rose, having finished her titivation of the 
child, sank comfortably back on the bench. "Do 
you object to my speaking to you of that ? " she 
asked. 

Jean hesitated ; she had only after letting them 
escape become conscious of the reach of her words, 
the inadvertence of which showed how few waves of 
emotion her scene with Paul Beever had left to 



THE OTHER HOUSE 225 

subside. She coloured as she replied : " I don't 
know how much you know." 

" I know everything," said Rose. " Mr. Beever 
has already told me." 

Jean's flush, at this, deepened. "Mr. Beever 
already doesn't care ! " 

" That's fortunate for you, my dear ! Will you 
Jet me tell you," Rose continued, " how much /do ? " 
Jean again hesitated, looking, however, through 
her embarrassment, very straight and sweet. "I 
don't quite see that it's a thing you should tell me 
or that I'm really obliged to hear. It's very good 

of you to take an interest " 

"But however good it may be, it's none of my 
business : is that what you mean ? " Rose broke 
in. " Such an answer is doubtless natural enough. 
My having hoped you would accept Paul Beever, 
and above all my having rather publicly expressed 
that hope, is an apparent stretch of discretion that 
you're perfectly free to take up. But you must 
allow me to say that the stretch is more apparent 
than real. There's, discretion and discretion and 
it's all a matter of motive. Perhaps you can guess 
mine for having found a reassurance in the idea 
of your definitely bestowing your hand. It's a 
very small and a very pretty hand, but its possible 
action is out of proportion to its size and even to 
its beauty. It was not a question of meddling in 
your affairs your affairs were only one side of the 
matter. My interest was wholly in the effect of 
your marriage on the affairs of others. Let me 

p 



226 THE OTHER HOUSE 

say, moreover," Rose went smoothly and inexorably 
on, while Jean, listening intently, drew shorter 
breaths and looked away, as if in growing pain, 
from the wonderful white, mobile mask that 
supplied half the meaning of this speech " let 
me say, morever, that it strikes me you hardly 
treat me with fairness in forbidding me an allusion 
that has after all so much in common with the fact, 
in my own situation, as to which you've no scruple 
in showing me your exuberant joy. You clap your 
hands over my being if you'll forgive the vulgarity 
of my calling things by their names got out of the 
way ; yet I must suffer in silence to see you rather 
more in it than ever." 

Jean turned again upon her companion a face 
bewildered and alarmed : unguardedly stepping into 
water that she had believed shallow, she found 
herself caught up in a current of fast-moving 
depths a cold, full tide that set straight out to 
sea. " Where am I ? " her scared silence seemed 
for the moment to ask. Her quick intelligence 
indeed, came to her aid, and she spoke in a voice 
out of which she showed that she tried to keep 
her heart-beats. "You call things, certainly, by 
names that are extraordinary; but I, at any rate, 
follow you far enough to be able to remind 
you that what I just said about your engage- 
ment was provoked by your introducing the 
subject." 

Rose was silent a. moment, but without prejudice, 
clearly, to her firm possession of the ground she 



THE OTHER HOUSE 227 

stood on a power to be effectively cool in exact 
proportion as her interlocutress was troubled. " I 
introduced the subject for two reasons. One of 
them was that your eager descent upon us at that 
particular moment seemed to present you in the 
light of an inquirer whom it would be really rude 
not to gratify. The other was just to see if you 
would succeed in restraining your glee." 

" Then your story isn't true ? " Jean asked with 
a promptitude that betrayed the limits of her cir- 
cumspection. 

"There you are again!" Rose laughed. "Do 
you know your apprehensions are barely decent ? 
I haven't, however, laid a trap with a bait that's 
all make-believe. It's perfectly true that Mr. Vidal 
has again pressed me hard it's not true that I've 
yet given him an answer completely final. But as 
I mean to at the earliest moment, you can say so 
to whomever you like." 

"I can surely leave the saying so to you!" Jean 
returned. " But I shall be sorry to appear to have 
treated you with a want of confidence that may 
give you a complaint to make on the score of my 
manners as to which you set me too high an 
example by the rare perfection of your own. Let 
me simply let you know, then, to cover every 
possibility of that sort, that I intend, under no 
circumstances ever ever to marry. So far as 
that knowledge may satisfy you, you're welcome 
to the satisfaction. Perhaps in consideration of 
it," Jean wound up, with an effect that must have 



228 THE OTHER HOUSE 

struck her own ear as the greatest she had ever 
produced "perhaps in consideration of it you'll 
kindly do what I ask you." 

The poor girl was destined to see her effect 
reduced to her mere personal sense of it. Rose 
made no movement save to lay her hands on Effie's 
shoulders, while that young lady looked up at the 
friend of other occasions in round-eyed detachment, 
following the talk enough for curiosity, but not 
enough either for comprehension or for agitation. 
"You take my surrender for granted, I suppose, 
because you've worked so long to produce the 
impression, which no one, for your good fortune, 
has gainsaid, that she's safe only in your hands. 
But / gainsay it at last, for her safety becomes a 
very different thing from the moment you give 
such a glimpse of your open field as you must 
excuse my still continuing to hold that you do 
give. My 'knowledge' to use your term that 
you'll never marry has exactly as much and as 
little weight as your word for it. I leave it to your 
conscience to estimate that wonderful amount. You 
say too much both more than I ask you and more 
than I can oblige you by prescribing to myself to 
take seriously. You do thereby injustice to what 
must be always on the cards for you the possible 
failure of the great impediment. I'm disinterested 
in the matter I shall marry, as I've had the honour 
to inform you, without having to think at all of 
impediments or failures. That's the difference 
between us, and it seems to me that it alters 



THE OTHER HOUSE 229 

everything. I had a delicacy but now I've nothing 
in the world but a fear." 

Jean had got up before these remarks had gone 
far, but even though she fell back a few steps her 
dismay was a force that condemned her to take 
them in. "God forbid I should understand you," 
she panted ; "I only make out that you say and 
mean horrible things and that you're doing your 
best to seek a quarrel with me from which you 
shall derive some advantage that, I'm happy to feel, 
is beyond my conception." Both the women were 
now as pale as death, and Rose was brought to her 
feet by the pure passion of this retort. The manner 
of it was such as to leave Jean nothing but to walk 
away, which she instantly proceeded to do. At the 
end of ten paces, however, she turned to look at 
their companion, who stood beside Rose, held by 
the hand, and whom, as if from a certain considera- 
tion for infant innocence and a certain instinct of 
fair play, she had not attempted to put on her side 
by a single direct appeal from intimate eyes. This 
appeal she now risked, and the way the little girl's 
face mutely met it suddenly precipitated her to 
blind supplication. She became weak she broke 
down. " I beseech you to let me have her." 

Rose Armiger's countenance made no secret of 
her appreciation of this collapse. " I'll let you have 
her on one condition," she presently replied. 

" What condition ? " 

"That you deny to me on the spot that you've 
but one feeling in your soul. Oh, don't look vacant 



230 THE OTHER HOUSE 

and dazed/' Rose derisively pursued; "don't look 
as if you didn't know what feeling I mean ! 
Renounce it repudiate it, and I'll never touch 
her again ! " 

Jean gazed in sombre stupefaction. " I know 
what feeling you mean," she said at last, "and 
I'm incapable of meeting your condition. I ' deny,' 
I ' renounce,' I ' repudiate ' as little as I hope, as I 
dream, or as I feel that I'm likely ever again even 

to utter ! " Then she brought out in her baffled 

sadness, but with so little vulgarity of pride that 
she sounded, rather, a note of compassion for a 
perversity so deep : " It's because of that that I 
want her ! " 

" Because you adore him and she's his ? " 

Jean faltered, but she was launched. "Because 
I adore him and she's his." 

" / want her for another reason," Rose declared. 
" I adored her poor mother and she's hers. That's 
my ground, that's my love, that's my faith." She 
caught Effie up again ; she held her in two strong 
arms and dealt her a kiss that was a long consecra- 
tion. " It's as your dear dead mother's, my own 
my sweet, that if it's time I shall carry you to 
bed ! " She passed swiftly down the slope with 
her burden and took the turn which led her out of 
sight. Jean stood watching her till she disappeared 
and then waited till she had emerged for the usual 
minute on the rise in the middle of the bridge. 
She saw her stop again there, she saw her again, 
as if in the triumph a great open-air insolence 



THE OTHER HOUSE 231 

of possession, press her face to the little girl's. 
Then they dipped together to the further end and 
were lost, and Jean, after taking a few vague steps 
on the lawn, paused, as if sick with the aftertaste 
of her encounter, and turned to the nearest seat. 
It was close to Mrs. Beever's blighted tea-table, 
and when she had sunk into the chair she threw 
her arms upon this support and wearily dropped 
her head. 



XXVI 

AT the end of some minutes, with the sense of being 
approached, she looked up and saw Paul Beever. 
Returning to the garden, he had stopped short at 
sight of her, and his arrival made her spring to her 
feet with the fear of having, in the belief that she 
was unobserved, shown him something she had 
never shown. But as he bent upon her his kind, 
ugly face there came into her own the comfort of a 
general admission, the drop of all attempt at a 
superfine surface : they stood together without 
saying a word, and there passed between them 
something sad and clear, something that was in its 
essence a recognition of the great, pleasant oddity 
of their being drawn closer by their rupture. They 
knew everything about each other now and, young 
and clean and good as they were, could meet not 
only without attenuations, but with a positive 
friendliness that was for each, from the other, a 
moral help. Paul had no need of speech to show 
Jean how he thanked her for understanding why he 
had not besieged her with a pressure more heroic, 
and she, on her side, could enter with the tread of 
a nurse in a sick-room into the spirit of that accom- 
modation. They both, moreover, had been closeted 



THE OTHER HOUSE 233 

with his mother an experience on which they 
could, with some dumb humour, compare notes. 
The girl, finally, had now, to this dear boy she 
didn't love, something more to give than she had 
ever given ; and after a little she could see the 
dawn of suspicion of it in the eyes with which he 
searched her grave face. 

" I knew Miss Armiger had come back here, and 
I thought I should find her," he presently ex- 
plained. 

" She was here a few minutes ago she has just 
left me," Jean said. 

" To go in again ? " Paul appeared to wonder he 
had not met her on his way out. 

" To go over to Bounds." 

He continued to wonder. " With Mr. Bream ? " 

" No with his little girl." 

Paul's surprise increased. "She has taken her up ? " 

Jean hesitated ; she uneasily laughed. " Up up 
up : away up in her arms ! " 

Her companion was more literal. "A young 
woman of Effie's age must be a weight ! " 

" I know what weight I've carried her. Miss 
Armiger did it precisely to prevent that." 

" To prevent your carrying her ? " 

" To prevent my touching or, if possible, looking 
at her. She snatched her up and fled with her to 
get her away from me." 

"Why should she wish to do that?" Paul 
inquired. 

" I think you had better ask her directly." Then 



234 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Jean added : " As you say, she has taken her up. 
She's her occupation, from this time." 

" Why, suddenly, from this time ? " 

" Because of what has happened." 

" Between you and me ? " 

" Yes that's one of her reasons." 

" One of them ? " laughed Paul. " She has so 
many ? " 

"She tells me she has two." 

"Two? She speaks of it?" 

Jean saw, visibly, that she mystified him ; but she 
as visibly tried to let him see that this was partly 
because she spared him. " She speaks of it with 
perfect frankness." 

" Then what's her second reason ? " 

" That if I'm not engaged " Jean hung fire, but 
she brought it out " at least she herself is." 

" She herself ? instead of you ? " 

Paul's blandness was so utter that his com- 
panion's sense of the comic was this time, and in 
spite of the cruelty involved in a correction, really 
touched. "To you? No, not to you, my dear 
Paul. To a gentleman I found with her here. To 
that Mr. Vidal," said Jean. 

Paul gasped. " You found that Mr. Vidal with her ? " 
He looked bewilderedly about. " Where then is he ? " 

"He went over to Bounds." 

" And she went with him ? " 

" No, she went after." 

Still Paul stood staring. "Where the dickens 
did he drop from ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 235 

" I haven't the least idea." 

The young man had a sudden light. " Why, I 
saw him with mamma ! He was here when I came 
off the river he borrowed the boat." 

" But you didn't know it was he ? " 

" I never dreamed and mamma never told me." 

Jean thought a moment. " She was afraid. You 
see I'm not." 

Paul Beever more pitifully wondered ; he re- 
peated again the word she had left ringing in his 
ears. "She's < engaged'?" 

" So she informed me." 

His little eyes rested on her with a stupefaction 
so candid as almost to amount to a challenge ; then 
they moved away, far away, and he stood lost in 
what he felt. She came, tenderly, nearer to him, 
and they turned back to her : on which he saw they 
were filled with the tears that another failure she 
knew of had no power to draw to them. " It's 
awfully odd ! " he said. 

" I've had to hurt you," she replied. " I'm very 
sorry for you." 

" Oh, don't mind it 1 " Paul smiled. 

" These are things for you to hear of straight." 

" From her ? Ah, I don't want to do that ! You 
see, of course, I shan't say anything." And he covered, 
for an instant, working it clumsily, one of his little 
eyes with the base of one of his big thumbs. 

Jean held out her hand to him. " Do you love 
her?" 

He took it, embarrassed, without meeting her 



236 THE OTHER HOUSE 

look ; then, suddenly, something of importance 
seemed to occur to him and he replied with simple 
alertness : " I never mentioned it ! " 

Dimly, but ever so kindly, Jean smiled. " Because 
you hadn't had your talk with me ? " She kept hold 
of his hand. "Dear Paul, I must say it again 
you're beautiful ! " 

He stared, not as yet taking this approval home; 
then with the same prompt veracity, " But she 
knows it, you know, all the same ! " he exclaimed. 

Jean laughed as she released him ; but it kept no 
gravity out of the tone in which she presently 
repeated : " I'm sorry for you." 

" Oh, it's all right ! May I light a cigarette ? " he 
asked. 

" As many as you like. But I must leave you." 

He had struck a match, and at this he paused. 
" Because I'm smoking ? " 

" Dear, no. Because I must go over to see 
Effie." Facing wistfully to her little friend's 
quarter, Jean thought aloud. " I always bid her 
' Good-night.' I don't see why on her birthday, of 
all evenings I should omit it." 

"Well, then, bid her ' Good-night ' for me too." 
She was halfway down the slope ; Paul went in the 
same direction, puffing his cigarette hard. Then, 
stopping short, " Tony puts him up ? " he abruptly 
asked. 

" Mr. Vidal ? So it appears." 

He gazed a little, blowing his smoke, at this 
appearance. " And she has gone over to see him ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 237 

" That may be a part of her errand." 

He hesitated again. " They can't have lost much 
time ! " 

" Very little indeed." 

Jean went on again ; but again he checked her 
with a question. "What has he, what has the 

matter you speak of, to do with her cutting in ? " 

He paused as if in the presence of things painfully 
obscure. 

" To the interest others take in the child ? Ah," 
said Jean, " if you feel as you do" she hesitated 
"don't ask me. Ask her 1" 

She went her way, and, standing there in thought, 
he waited for her to come, after an interval, into 
sight on the curve of the bridge. Then as the 
minutes elapsed without her doing so, he lounged, 
heavy and blank, up again to where he had found 
her. Manning, while his back was turned, had 
arrived with one of her aids to carry off the tea- 
things ; and from a distance, planted on the lawn, 
he bent on these evolutions an attention unnaturally 
fixed. The women marched and countermarched, 
dismantling the table; he broodingly and vacantly 
watched them ; then, as he lighted a fresh cigarette, 
he saw his mother come out of the house to give 
an eye to their work. She reached the spot and 
dropped a command or two ; after which, joining him, 
she took in that her little company had dispersed. 

" What has become of every one ? " 

Paul's replies were slow ; but he gave her one 
now that was distinct. " After the talk on which I 



238 THE OTHER HOUSE 

lately left you I should think you would know 
pretty well what had become of me" 

She gave him a keen look ; her face softened. 
" What on earth's the matter with you ? " 

He placidly smoked. " I've had my head 
punched." 

" Nonsense for all you mind me ! " She scanned 
him again. " Are you ill, Paul ? " 

" I'm all right," he answered philosophically. 

" Then kiss your old mammy." Solemnly, silently 
he obeyed her ; but after he had done so she still 
held him before her eyes. She gave him a sharp 
pat. " You're worth them all 1 " 

Paul made no acknowledgment of this tribute 
save to remark after an instant rather awkwardly : 
" I don't know where Tony is." 

"I can do without Tony," said his mother. 
" But where's Tony's child ? " 

" Miss Armiger has taken her home." 

" The clever thing!" Mrs. Beever fairly applauded 
the feat. " She was here when you came out ? " 

" No, but Jean told me." 

" Jean was here ? " 

" Yes ; but she went over." 

" Over to Bounds after what has happened ? " 
Mrs. Beever looked at first incredulous; then she 
looked stern again. " What in the name of good- 
ness possesses her ? " 

" The wish to bid Effie good-night." 

Mrs. Beever was silent a moment. " I wish to 
heaven she'd leave Effie alone ! " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 239 

" Aren't there different ways of looking at that ? " 
Paul indulgently asked. 

" Plenty, no doubt and only one decent one." 
The grossness of the girl's error seemed to loom 
larger. " I'm ashamed of her ! " she declared. 

11 Well, I'm not ! " Paul quietly returned. 

" Oh, you of course you excuse her ! " In the 
agitation that he had produced Mrs. Beever bounced 
across an interval that brought her into view of an 
object from which, as she stopped short at the sight 
of it, her emotion drew fresh sustenance. " Why, 
there's the boat ! " 

" Mr. Vidal has brought it back," said Paul. 

She faced round in surprise. " You've seen 
him?" 

" No, but Jean told me." 

The lady of Eastmead stared. "She has seen 
him ? Then where on earth is he ? " 

" He's staying at Bounds," said Paul. 

His mother's wonderment deepened. " He has 
got there already ? " 

Paul smoked a little : then he explained. " It's 
not very soon for Mr. Vidal he puts things 
through. He's already engaged to her." 

Mystified, at sea, Mrs. Beever dropped upon a 
bench. " Engaged to Jean ? " 

" Engaged to Miss Armiger." 

She tossed her head with impatience. "What 
news is that ? He was engaged to her five years 
ago!" 

" Well, then he is still. They've patched it up." 



240 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Mrs. Beever was on her feet. "She has seen 
him?" 

Tony Bream at this moment came rapidly down 
the lawn and had the effect of staying Paul's 
answer. The young man gave a jerk to the stump 
of his cigarette and turned away with marked 
nervousness. 



XXVII 

THE lady of Eastmead fronted her neighbour with a 
certain grimness. " She has seen him they've 
patched it up." 

Breathless with curiosity, Tony yet made but a 
bite of her news. " It's on again it's all right ? " 

" It's whatever you like to call it. I only know 
what Paul tells me." 

Paul, at this, stopped in his slow retreat, wheeling 
about. " I only know what I had just now from 
Jean." 

Tony's expression, in the presence of his young 
friend's, dropped almost comically into the con- 
siderate. "Oh, but I daresay it's so, old man. I 
was there when they met," he explained to Mrs. 
Beever, " and I saw for myself pretty well how it 
would go." 

" I confess I didn't," she replied. Then she added : 
"It must have gone with a jump ! " 

" With a jump, precisely and the jump was 
hers ! " laughed Tony. " All's well that ends well ! " 
He was heated he wiped his excited brow, and 
Mrs. Beever looked at him as if it struck her that 
she had helped him to more emotion than she wished 
him. " She's a most extraordinary girl," he went on 

9 



242 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" and the effort she made there, all unprepared for 
it" he nodded at the very spot of the exploit 
" was magnificent in its way, one of the finest things 
I've ever seen." His appreciation of the results of 
this effort seemed almost feverish, and his elation 
deepened so that he turned, rather blindly, to poor 
Paul. " Upon my honour she's cleverer, she has 
more domestic resources, as one may say, than I 
don't care whom ! " 

" Oh, we all know how clever she is ! " Mrs. Beever 
impatiently grunted. 

Tony's enthusiasm, none the less, overflowed ; he 
was nervous for joy. " I thought I did myself, but 
she had a lot more to show me ! " He addressed 
himself again to Paul. " She told you with her 
coolness ? " 

Paul was occupied with another cigarette ; he 
emitted no sound, and his mother, with a glance at 
him, spoke for him. " Didn't you hear him say it 
was Jean who told him ? " 

" Oh, Jean ! "Tony looked graver. " She told 
Jean ? " But his gaiety, at this image, quickly came 
back. " That was charming of her ! " 

Mrs. Beever remained cold. " Why on earth was 
it charming?" 

Tony, though he reddened, was pulled up but an 
instant his spirits carried him on. " Oh, because 
there hasn't been much between them, and it was 
a pretty mark of confidence." He glanced at his 
watch. " They're in the house ? " 

" Not in mine in yours." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 243 

Tony looked surprised. " Rose and Vidal ? " 

Paul spoke at last. " Jean also went over went 
after them." 

Tony thought a moment. " ( After them ' Jean ? 
How long ago ? " 

" About a quarter of an hour," said Paul. 

Tony continued to wonder. "Aren't you mis- 
taken ? They're not there now." 

"How do you know," asked Mrs. Beever, "if 
you've not been home ? " 

" I have been home I was there five minutes ago." 

" Then how did you get here ? " 

" By the long way ? I took a fly. I went back 
to get a paper I had stupidly forgotten and that I 
needed for a fellow with whom I had to talk. Our 
talk was a bore for the want of it, so I drove over 
there and got it, and, as he had his train to catch, I 
then overtook him at the station. I ran it close, but 
I saw him off; and here I am." Tony shook his 
head. " There's no one at Bounds." 

Mrs. Beever looked at Paul. " Then where's 
Effie?" 

" Effie's not here ? " Tony asked. 

" Miss Armiger took her home," said Paul. 

" You saw them go ? " 

" No, but Jean told me." 

" Then where's Miss Armiger ? " Tony continued. 
" And where's Jean herself? " 

" Where's Effie herself that's the question," said 
Mrs. Beever. 

"No," Tony laughed, "the question's Where's 



344 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Vidal ? He's the fellow I want to catch. I asked him 
to stay with me, and he said he'd go over, and it was 
my finding just now he hadn't come over that made 
me drive on here from the station to pick him up." 

Mrs. Beever gave ear to this statement, but she 
gave nothing else. " Mr. Vidal can take care of 
himself; but if Effie's not at home, where is she?" 
She pressed her son. " Are you sure of what Jean 
said to you ? " 

Paul bethought himself. " Perfectly, mamma. 
She said Miss Armiger carried off the little 
girl." 

Tony appeared struck with this. " That's exactly 
what Rose told me she meant to do. Then they're 
simply in the garden they simply hadn't come 
in." 

" They've been in gardens enough ! " Mrs. Beever 
declared. " I should like to know the child's simply 
in bed." 

" So should I," said Tony with an irritation that 
was just perceptible ; " but I none the less deprecate 
the time-honoured custom of a flurry I may say 
indeed of a panic whenever she's for a moment out 
of sight." He spoke almost as if Mrs. Beever were 
trying to spoil for him by the note of anxiety the 
pleasantness of the news about Rose. The next 
moment, however, he questioned Paul with an evident 
return of the sense that toward a young man to whom 
such a hope was lost it was a time for special tact. 
" You, at any rate, dear boy, saw Jean go ? " 

" Oh, yes I saw Jean go." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 245 

" And you understood from her that Rose and 
Effie went with Vidal ? " 

Paul consulted his memory. " I think Mr. Vidal 
went first." 

Tony thought a moment. " Thanks so much, old 
chap." Then with an exaggerated gaiety that might 
have struck his companions had it not been the sign 
of so much of his conversation : " They're all a jolly 
party in the garden together. I'll go over." 

Mrs. Beever had been watching the bridge. " Here 
comes Rose she'll tell us." 

Tony looked, but their friend had already dropped 
on the hither side, and he turned to Paul. " You 
wouldn't object a to dining ? " 

" To meet Mr. Vidal ? " Mrs. Beever interposed. 
11 Poor Paul," she laughed, " you're between two 
fires ! You and your guest," she said to her 
neighbour, " had better dine here." 

" Both fires at once ? " Tony smiled at her son. 
" Should you like that better ? " 

Paul, where he stood, was lost in the act of 
watching for Rose. He shook his head absently. 
" I don't care a rap ! " Then he turned away again, 
and his mother, addressing Tony, dropped her voice. 

" He won't show." 

" Do you mean his feelings ? " 

" I mean for either of us." 

Tony observed him a moment. " Poor lad, I'll 
bring him round ! " After which, " Do you mind if I 
speak to her of it ? " he abruptly inquired. 

11 To Rose of this news ? " Mrs. Beever looked 



246 THE OTHER HOUSE 

at him hard, and it led her to reply with severity : 
" Tony Bream, I don't know what to make of you ! " 
She was apparently on the point of making some- 
thing rather bad, but she now saw Rose at the bottom 
of the slope and straightway hailed her. " You took 
Effie home ? " 

Rose came quickly up. " Not I ! She isn't 
here ? " 

" She's gone," said Mrs. Beever. " Where is 
she ? " 

" I'm afraid I don't know. I gave her up." Paul 
had wheeled round at her first negation ; Tony had 
not moved. Bright and handsome, but a little out 
of breath, she looked from one of her friends to the 
other. " You're sure she's not here ? " Her sur- 
prise was fine. 

Mrs. Beever's, however, had greater freedom. "How 
can she be, when Jean says you took her away ? " 

Rose Armiger stared ; she threw back her head. 
" ' Jean says ? ' " She looked round her. " Where 
zs'Jean'?" 

" She's nowhere about she's not in the house." 
Mrs. Beever challenged the two men, echoing the 
question as if it were indeed pertinent. " Where is 
the girl ? " 

" She has gone to Bounds," said Tony. " She's 
not in* my garden ? " 

" She wasn't five minutes ago I've just come out 
of it." 

" Then what took you there?" asked Mrs. Beever. 

" Mr. Vidal." Rose smiled at Tony : " You know 



THE OTHER HOUSE 247 

what ! " She turned again to Mrs. Beever, looking 
her full in the face. " I've seen him. I went over 
with him." 

"Leaving Effie with Jean precisely," said Tony, 
in his arranging way. 

"She came out she begged so hard," Rose 
explained to Mrs. Beever. " So I gave in." 

"And yet Jean says the contrary?" this lady 
demanded in stupefaction of her son. 

Rose turned, incredulous, to Paul. " She said to 
you anything so false ? " 

" My dear boy, you simply didn't understand ! " 
Tony laughed. " Give me a cigarette." 

Paul's eyes, contracted to the pin-points we have 
already seen them become in his moments of emotion, 
had been attached, while he smoked still harder, 
to Rose's face. He turned very red and, before 
answering her, held out his cigarette-case. " That 
was what I remember she said that you had gone 
with Effie to Bounds." 

Rose stood wonderstruck. " When she had 
taken her from me herself ? " 

Mrs. Beever referred her to Paul. " But she 
wasn't with Jean when he saw her ! " 

Rose appealed to him. "You saw Miss Martle 
alone?" 

" Oh yes, quite alone." Paul now was crimson 
and without visible sight. 

" My dear boy," cried Tony, impatient, " you 
simply don't remember." 

"Yes, Tony. I remember," 



248 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Rose had turned grave she gave Paul a sombre 
stare. " Then what on earth had she done with 
her?" 

" What she had done was evident : she had taken 
her home ! " Tony declared with an air of incipient 
disgust. They made a silly mystery of nothing. 

Rose gave him a quick, strained smile. " But if 
the child's not there ? " 

"You just told us yourself she isn't!" Mrs. 
Beever reminded him. 

He hunched his shoulders as if there might be 
many explanations. " Then she's somewhere else. 
She's wherever Jean took her." 

" But if Jean was here without her ? " 

" Then Jean, my dear lady, had come back." 

" Come back to lie ? " asked Mrs. Beever. 

Tony coloured at this, but he controlled himself. 
" Dearest Mrs. Beever, Jean doesn't lie." 

" Then somebody does ! " Mrs. Beever roundly 
brought out. 

" It's not you, Mr. Paul, I know ! " Rose declared, 
discomposed but still smiling. "Was it you who 
saw her go over ? " 

" Yes ; she left me here." 

" How long ago ? " 

Paul looked as if fifty persons had been watching 
him. " Oh, not long ! " 

Rose addressed herself to the trio. " Then why 
on earth haven't I met her ? She must explain her 
astounding statement ! " 

" You'll see that she'll explain it easily," said Tony. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 249 

" Ah, but, meanwhile, where's your daughter, 
don't you know?" Rose demanded with resent- 
ment. 

" I'm just going over to see." 

" Then please go ! " she replied with a nervous 
laugh. She presented to the others, as a criticism 
of his inaction, a white, uneasy face. 

" I want first," said Tony, " to express to you my 
real joy. Please believe in it." 

She thought she seemed to come back from a 
distance. " Oh, you know?" Then to Paul: 
" She told you ? It's a detail," she added impa- 
tiently. " The question " she thought again " is 
the poor child." Once more she appealed to Paul. 
" Will you go and see ? " 

" Yes, go, boy." Tony patted his back. 

" Go this moment," his mother put in. 

He none the less lingered long enough to offer 
Rose his blind face. " I want also to express " 

She took him up with a wonderful laugh. " Your 
real joy, dear Mr. Paul ? " 

" Please believe in that too." And Paul, at an 
unwonted pace, took his way. 

" I believe in everything I believe in every one," 

Rose went on. "But I don't believe " She 

hesitated, then checked herself. " No matter. Can 
you forgive me ? " she asked of Mrs. Beever. 

" For giving up the child ? " The lady of East- 
mead looked at her hard. " No ! " she said curtly, 
and, turning straight away, went and dropped into 
a seat from which she watched the retreating figures 



250 THE OTHER HOUSE 

of her two parlourmaids, who carried off between 
them a basket containing the paraphernalia of tea. 
Rose, with a queer expression, but with her straight 
back to the painful past, quietly transferred her plea 
to Tony. " It was his coming it made the 
difference. It upset me." 

" Upset you ? You were splendid I " 
The light of what had happened was in her face 
as she considered him. " You are ! " she replied. 
Then she added : " But he's finer than either of 
us!" 

" I told you four years ago what he is. He's all 
right." 

" Yes," said Rose" he's all right. And / am 
now," she went on. "You've been good to me." 
She put out her hand. " Good-bye." 
" Good-bye ? You're going ? " 
" He takes me away." 

" But not to-night ! " Tony's native kindness, 
expressed in his inflection, felt that it could now risk 
almost all the forms he essentially liked. 
_" From the depth of Rose's eyes peeped a dis- 
tracted, ironic sense of this. But she said with all 
quietude : " To-morrow early. I may not see you." 
" Don't be absurd ! " laughed Tony. 
" Ah, well if you will 1 " She stood a moment 
looking down ; then raising her eyes, " Don't hold 
my hand so long," she abruptly said. " Mrs. Beever, 
who has dismissed the servants, is watching us." 

Tony had the appearance of having felt as if he 
had let it go; but at this, after a glance at the 



THE OTHER HOUSE 251 

person indicated, staring and smiling with a clear 
face, he retained his grasp of it. "How in the 
world, with your back turned, can you see 
that ? " 

" It's with my back turned that I see most. She's 
looking at us hard." 

" I don't care a hang ! " said Tony gaily. 

" Oh, I don't say it for myself! " But Rose with- 
drew her hand. 

Tony put both his own into his pockets. " I hope 
you'll let me say to you very simply that I believe 
you'll be very happy." 

" I shall be as happy as a woman can be who has 
abandoned her post." 

" Oh, your post 1 " Tony made a joke of that 
now. But he instantly added : " Your post will be 
to honour us with your company at Bounds again ; 
which, as a married woman, you see, you'll be per- 
fectly able to do." 

She smiled at him. " How you arrange things ! " 
Then with a musing headshake : " We leave Eng- 
land." 

" How you arrange them ! " Tony exclaimed. 
" He goes back to China ? " 

" Very soon he's doing so well." 

Tony hesitated. " I hope he has made money." 

"A great deal. I should look better shouldn't 
I ? if he hadn't. But I show you enough how little 
I care how I look. I blow hot and cold ; I'm all 
there then I'm off. No matter," she repeated. In 
a moment she added : "I accept your hopes for 



252 THE OTHER HOUSE 

my happiness. It will do, no doubt, soon as I 

learn ! " Her voice dropped for impatience ; 

she turned to the quarter of the approach from the 
other house. 

" That Effie's all right ? " Tony saw their mes- 
senger already in the shrubbery. " Here comes 
Paul to tell us." 

Mrs. Beever rejoined them as he spoke. " It 
wasn't Paul on the bridge. It was the Doctor 
without his hat." 

" Without his hat ? " Rose murmured. 

" He has it in his hand," Tony cheerfully asserted 
as their good friend emerged from cover. 

But he hadn't it in his hand, and at sight of them 
on the top of the slope he stopped short, stopped 
long enough to give Rose time to call eagerly : " Is 
Effie there?" 

It was long enough also to give them all time to 
see, across the space, that his hair was disordered 
and his look at them strange ; but they had no 
sooner done so than he made a violent gesture a 
motion to check the downward rush that he evidently 
felt his aspect would provoke. It was so imperative 
that, coming up, he was with them before they had 
moved, showing them splashed, wet clothes and a 
little hard white face that Wilverley had never seen. 
"There has been an accident." Neither had Wilverley, 
gathered into three pair of ears, heard that voice. 

The first effect of these things was to hold it an 
instant while Tony cried : " She's hurt ? " 

" She's killed ? " cried Mrs. Beever. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 253 

"Stay where you are!" was the Doctor's stern 
response. Tony had given a bound, but, caught by 
the arm, found himself jerked, flaming red, face to 
face with Rose, who had been caught as tightly by 
the wrist. The Doctor closed his eyes for a second 
with this effort of restraint, but in the force he had 
put into it, which was not all of the hands, his captives 
submissively quivered. " You're not to go ! " he 
declared quite as if it were for their own good. 

" She's dead ? " Tony panted. 

" Who's with her who was ? " cried Rose. 

" Paul's with her by the water." 

" By the water ? " Rose shrieked. 

"My child's drowned?" Tony's cry was strange. 

The Doctor had been looking from one of them to 
the other; then he looked at Mrs. Beever, who, 
instantly, admirably, with a strength quickly acknow- 
ledged by the mute motion of his expressive little 
chin toward her, had stilled herself into the appeal 
of a blanched, breathless wait. " May / go ? " 
sovereignly came from her. 

" Go. There's no one else," he said as she bounced 
down the bank. 

" No one else ? Then where's that girl ? "Rose's 
question was fierce. She gave, as fiercely, to free 
herself, a great wrench of her arm, but the Doctor 
held her as if still to spare her what he himself had 
too dreadfully seen. He looked at Tony, who said 
with quick quietness 

" Ramage, have I lost my child ? " 

"You'll see be brave. Not yet I've told Paul. 



254 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Be quiet ! " the Doctor repeated ; then his hand 
dropped on feeling that the movement he had meant 
to check in his friend was the vibration of a man 
stricken to weakness and sickened on the spot. 
Tony's face had turned black ; he was rooted to the 
ground ; he stared at Rose, to whom the Doctor said : 
" Who, Miss Armiger, was with her ? " 

All her lividness wondered. " When was it ? " 

" God knows ! She was there against the 
bridge." 

" Against the bridge where I passed just now ? 
/ saw nothing ! " Rose jerked, while Tony dumbly 
closed his eyes. 

"I came over because she wasn't at the house, 
and from the bank there she was. I reached her 
with the boat, with a push. She might have been 
half an hour " 

" It was half an hour ago she took her ! " Rose 
broke in. " She's not there ? " 

The Doctor looked at her hard. " Of whom do 
you speak ? " 

"Why, of Miss Martle whose hands are never 
off her." Rose's mask was the mask of Medusa. 
" What has become of Miss Martle ? " 

Dr. Ramage turned with the question to Tony, 
whose eyes, open now, were half out of his head. 
" What has become of her ? " 

" She's not there ? " Tony articulated. 

" There's no one there." 

" Not Dennis ? " sprang bewilderedly from Rose. 

The Doctor stared. "Mr. Vidal ? No, thank 



THE OTHER HOUSE 255 

God only Paul." Then pressing Tony : " Miss 
Martle was with her ? " 

Tony's eyes rolled over all space. " No not 
Miss Martle." 

" But somebody was ! " Rose clamoured. " She 
wasn't alone ! " 

Tony fixed her an instant. " Not Miss Martle," 
he repeated. 

" But who then ? And where is she now ? " 

" It's positive she's not here ? " the Doctor asked 
of Rose. 

" Positive Mrs. Beever knew. Where is she ? " 
Rose rang out. 

" Where in the name ? " passed, as with the 

dawn of a deeper horror, from their companion to 
Tony. 

Tony's eyes sounded Rose's, and hers blazed back. 
His silence was an anguish, his face a convulsion. 
" It isn't half an hour," -he at last brought out. 

" Since it happened ? " The Doctor blinked at his 
sudden knowledge. " Then when ? " 

Tony looked at him straight. "When I was 
there." 

"And when was that?" 

"After I called for you." 

" To leave word for me to go ? " The Doctor set 
his face. " But you were not going home then." 

" I did go I had a reason. You know it," Tony 
said to Rose. 

" When you went for your paper ? " She thought. 
" But Effie wasn't there then." 



256 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"Why not? She was there, but Miss Martle 
wasn't with her." 

"Then, in God's name, who was?" cried the 
Doctor. 

" / was," said Tony. 

Rose gave the inarticulate cry of a person who 
has been holding her breath, and the Doctor an 
equally loud, but more stupefied " You ? " 

Tony fixed upon Rose a gaze that seemed to 
count her respirations. " I was with her," he re- 
peated ; " and I was with her alone. And what was 
done / did." He paused while they both gasped : 
then he looked at the Doctor. " Now you know." 
They continued to gasp ; his confession was a 
blinding glare, in the shock of which the Doctor 
staggered back from Rose and she fell away with a 
liberated spring. "God forgive me!" howled Tony 
he broke now into a storm of sobs. He dropped 
upon a bench with his wretched face in his hands, 
while Rose, with a passionate wail, threw herself, 
appalled, on the grass, and their companion, in a 
colder dismay, looked from one prostrate figure to 
the other. 



END OF BOOK SECOND 



BOOK THIRD 



XXVIII 

THE greatest of the parlourmaids came from the hall 
into the drawing-room at Eastmead the high, 
square temple of mahogany and tapestry in which, 
the last few years, Mrs. Beever had spent much 
time in rejoicing that she had never set up new 
gods. She had left it, from the first, as it was 
full of the old things that, on succeeding to her 
husband's mother, she had been obliged, as a young 
woman of that period, to accept as dolefully different 
from the things thought beautiful by other young 
women whose views of drawing-rooms, all about 
her, had also been intensified by marriage. She 
had not unassistedly discovered the beauty of her 
heritage, and she had not from any such subtle 
suspicion kept her hands off it. She had never in 
her life taken any course with regard to any object 
for reasons that had so little to do with her duty. 
Everything in her house stood, at ^n angle of its 
own, on the solid rock of the discipline it had cost 
her. She had therefore lived with mere dry wist- 
fulness through the age of rosewood, and had been 
rewarded by finding that, like those who sit still in 
runaway vehicles, she was the only person not 
thrown out. Her mahogany had never moved, but 



260 THE OTHER HOUSE 

the way people talked about it had, and the people 
who talked were now eager to sit down with her on 
everything that both she and they had anciently 
thought plainest and poorest. It was Jean, above 
all, who had opened her eyes opened them in 
particular to the great wine-dark doors, polished and 
silver-hinged, with which the lady of Eastmead, 
arriving at the depressed formula that they were 
"gloomy," had for thirty years, prudently on the 
whole, as she considered, shut out the question of 
taste. One of these doors Manning now softly 
closed, standing, however, with her hand on the 
knob and looking across, as if, in the stillness, to 
listen at another which exactly balanced with it on 
the opposite side of the room. The light of the long 
day had not wholly faded, but what remained of it 
was the glow of the western sky, which showed 
through the wide, high window that was still open 
to the garden. The sensible hush in which Man- 
ning waited was broken after a moment by a 
movement, ever so gentle, of the other door. 
Mrs. Beever put her head out of the next 
room ; then, seeing her servant, closed the door 
with precautions and came forward. Her face, 
hard but overcharged, had pressingly asked a 
question. 

" Yes, ma'am Mr. Vidal. I showed him, as you 
told me, into the library." 

Mrs. Beever thought. " It may be wanted. I'll 
see him here." But she checked the woman's 
retreat. " Mr. Beever's in his room ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 261 

" No, ma'am he went out." 

" But a minute ago ? " 

" Longer, ma'am. After he carried in " 

Mrs. Beever stayed the phrase on Manning's lips 
and quickly supplied her own. " The dear little girl 
yes. He went to Mr. Bream ? " 

" No, ma'am the other way." 

Mrs. Beever thought afresh. " But Miss Armiger's 
in?" 

" Oh, yes in her room." 

" She went straight ? " 

Manning, on her side, reflected. "Yes, ma'am. 
She always goes straight." 

"Not always," said Mrs. Beever. "But she's 
quiet there ? " 

"Very quiet." 

"Then call Mr. Vidal." While Manning obeyed 
she turned to the window and stared at the gather- 
ing dusk. Then the door that had been left open 
closed again, and she faced about to Dennis Vidal. 

" Something dreadful has happened ? " he instantly 
asked. 

" Something dreadful has happened. You've 
come from Bounds ? " 

" As fast as I could run. I saw Doctor Ramage 
there." 

" And what did he tell you ? " 

"That I must come straight here." 

" Nothing else ? " 

"That you would tell me," Dennis said. " I saw 
the shock in his face." 



262 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" But you didn't ask ? " 

" Nothing. Here I am," 

" Here you are, thank God ! " Mrs. Beever gave 
a muffled moan. 

She was going on, but, eagerly, he went before 
her. " Can I help you ? " 

" Yes if there is help. You can do so first by 
not asking me a question till I have put those I wish 
to yourself." 

" Put them put them ! " he said impatiently. 

At his peremptory note she quivered, showing 
him she was in the state in which every sound 
startles. She locked her lips and closed her eyes an 
instant ; she held herself together with an effort. 
" I'm in great trouble, and I venture to believe that 
if you came back to me to-day it was because " 

He took her up shorter than before. " Because I 
thought of you as a friend ? For God's sake, think 
of me as one ! " 

She pressed to her lips while she looked at him 
the small tight knot into which her nerves had 
crumpled her pocket-handkerchief. She had no 
tears only a visible terror. " I've never appealed 
to one," she replied, " as I shall appeal to you now. 
Effie Bream is dead." Then as instant horror was 
in his eyes : " She was found in the water." 

" The water ? " Dennis gasped. 

" Under the bridge at the other side. She had 
been caught, she was held, in the slow current by 
some obstruction, and by the pier. Don't ask me 
how when I arrived, by the mercy of heaven, she 



THE OTHER HOUSE 263 

had been brought to the bank. But she was gone." 
With a movement of the head toward the room she 
had quitted, " We carried her back here," she went 
on. Vidal's face, which was terrible in the intensity 
of its sudden vision, struck her apparently as for 
the instant an echo, wild but interrogative, of what 
she had last said ; so she explained quickly : "To 
think to get more time." He turned straight away 
from her ; he went, as she had done, to the window 
and, with his back presented, stood looking out in 
the mere rigour of dismay. 

vShe was silent long enough to show a respect for 
the particular consternation that her manner of 
watching him betrayed her impression of having 
stirred ; then she went on : " How long were you at 
Bounds with Rose ? " 

Dennis turned round without meeting her eyes or, 
at first, understanding her question. " At Bounds ? " 

" When, on your joining her, she went over with 
you." 

He thought a moment. " She didn't go over with 
me. I went alone after the child came out." 

" You were there when Manning brought her ? " 
Mrs. Beever wondered. " Manning didn't tell 
me that." 

" I found Rose on the lawn with Mr. Bream 
when I brought back your boat. He left us 
together after inviting me to Bounds and then 
the little girl arrived. Rose let me hold her, and 
I was with them till Miss Martle appeared. Then 
I rather uncivilly went off." 



264 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"You went without Rose?" Mrs. Beever asked. 

"Yes I left her with the little girl and Miss 
Martle." The marked effect of this statement made 
him add : " Was it your impression I didn't ? " 

His companion, before answering him, dropped 
into a seat and stared up at him ; after which she 
articulated: "I'll tell you later. You left them," 
she demanded, " in the garden with the child ? " 

" In the garden with the child." 

" Then you hadn't taken her ? " 

Dennis had for some seconds a failure either of 
memory or of courage ; but whichever it was he 
completely overcame it. " By no means. She was 
in Rose's arms." 

Mrs. Beever, at this image, lowered her eyes to 
the floor; after which, raising them again, she 
continued : "You went to Bounds ? " 

" No I turned off short. I was going, but if I 
had a great deal to think of," Dennis pursued, "after 
I had learned from you she was here, the quantity 
wasn't of course diminished by our personal en- 
counter." He hesitated. " I had seen her with him." 

" Well ? " said Mrs. Beever as he paused again. 

" I asked you if she was in love with him." 

" And 1 bade you find out for yourself." 

" I've found out," Dennis said. 

" Well ? " Mrs. Beever repeated. 

It was evidently, even in this tighter tension, 
something of an ease to all his soreness to tell 
her. " I've never seen anything like it and there's 
not much I've not seen." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 265 

" That's exactly what the Doctor says ! " 

Dennis stared, but after a moment, "And does 
the Doctor say Mr. Bream cares ? " he somewhat 
artlessly inquired. 

" Not a farthing." 

" Not a farthing. I'm bound to say I could see 
it for myself," he declared, "that he has behaved 
very well." Mrs. Beever, at this, turning in torment 
on her seat, gave a smothered wail which pulled 
him up so that he went on in surprise : " Don't 
you think that ? " 

"I'll tell you later," she answered. "In the 
presence of this misery I don't judge him. 

"No more do I. But what I was going to say 
was that, all the same, the way he has with a 
woman, the way he had with her there, and his 
damned good looks and his great happiness " 

" His great happiness ? God help him ! " Mrs. 
Beever broke out, springing up again in her emotion. 
She stood before him with pleading hands. " Where 
were you then ? " 

"After I left the garden? I was upset, I was 
dissatisfied I didn't go over. I lighted a cigar; 
I passed out of the gate by your little closed pavilion 
and kept on by the river." 

"By the river?" Mrs. Beever was blank. 
" Then why didn't you see ? " 

"What happened to the child? Because if it 
happened near the bridge I had left the bridge 
behind." 

" But you were in sight " 



266 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" For five minutes," Dennis said. " I was in sight 
perhaps even for ten. I strolled there, I turned 
things over, I watched the stream and, finally 
just at the sharp bend I sat a little on the stile 
beyond that smart new boat-house." 

"It's a horrid thing." Mrs. Beever considered. 
" But you see the bridge from the boat-house." 

Dennis hesitated. "Yes it's a good way, but 
you've a glimpse." 

" Which showed you nothing at all ? " 

" Nothing at all ? " his echo of the question was 
interrogative, and it carried him uneasily to the 
window, where he again, for a little, stared out. 
The pink of the sky had faded and dusk had begun 
in the room. At last he faced about. "No I 
saw something. But I'll not tell you what it was, 
please, till I've myself asked you a thing or two." 

Mrs. Beever was silent at this : they stood face 
to face in the twilight. Then she slowly exhaled 
a throb of her anguish. "I think you'll be a 
help." 

"How much of one," he bitterly demanded, 
"shall I be to myself?" But he continued before 
she could meet the question : " I went back to the 
bridge, and as I approached it Miss Martle came 
down to it from your garden." 

Mrs. Beever grabbed his arm. "Without the 
child?" He was silent so long that she repeated 
it : " Without the child ? " 

He finally spoke. " Without the child." 

She looked at him as she showed that she felt 



THE OTHER HOUSE 267 

she had never looked at any man. "On your 
sacred honour ? " 

"On my sacred honour." 

She closed her eyes as she had closed them at the 
beginning of their talk, and the same defeated spasm 
passed over her face. " You are a help," she said. 

" Well," Dennis replied straightforwardly, " if it's 
being one to let you know that she was with me 
from that moment " 

Breathless she caught him up. "With you? 
till when ? " 

"Till just now, when we again separated at the 
gate-house : I to go over to Bounds, as I had 
promised Mr. Bream, and Miss Martle " 

Again she snatched the words from him. "To 
come straight in ? Oh, glory be to God 1 " 

Dennis showed some bewilderment. "She did 
come ? " 

" Mercy, yes to meet this horror. She's with 
Effie." She returned to it, to have it again. " She 
was with you ? " 

" A quarter of an hour perhaps more." At this 
Mrs. Beever dropped upon her sofa again and gave 
herself to the tears that had not sooner come. She 
sobbed softly, controlling them, and Dennis watched 
her with hard, haggard pity ; after which he said : 
" As soon as I saw her I spoke to her I felt that 
I wanted her." 

"You wanted her?" in the clearer medium 
through which Mrs. Beever now could look up 
there were still obscurities. 



268 THE OTHER HOUSE 

He hesitated. " For what she might say to me. 
I told you, when we spoke of Rose after my arrival, 
that I had not come to watch her. But while I was 
with them " he jerked his head at the garden 
"something remarkable took place." 

Mrs. Beever rose again. " I know what took 
place." 

He seemed struck. " You know it ? " 

" She told Jean." 

Dennis stared. " I think not." 

"Jean didn't speak of it to you?" 

" Not a word." 

"She spoke of it to Paul," said Mrs. Beever. 
Then, to be more specific: "Something highly re- 
markable. I mean your engagement." 

Dennis was mute ; but at last, in the gathered 
gloom, his voice was stranger than his silence. 
" My engagement ? " 

"Didn't you, on the spot, induce her to renew 
it?" 

Again, for some time, he was dumb. " Has she 
said so ? " he then asked. 

" To every one." 

Once more he waited. " I should like to see 
her." 

" Here she is." 

The door from the hall had opened as he spoke : 
Rose Armiger stood there. She addressed him 
straight and as if she had not seen Mrs. Beever. 
" I knew you'd be here I must see you." 

Mrs. Beever passed quickly to the side of the 



THE OTHER HOUSE 269 

room at which she had entered, where her fifty 
years of order abruptly came out to Dennis. " Will 
you have lights ? " 

It was Rose who replied. " No lights, thanks." 
But she stayed her hostess. " May I see her ? " 

Mrs. Beever fixed a look through the dusk. 
" No ! " And she slipped soundlessly away. 



XXIX 

ROSE had come for a purpose, Vidal saw, to which 
she would make but a bound, and she seemed in 
fact to take the spring as she instantly broke out : 
" For what did you come back to me ? for what 
did you come back ? " She approached him quickly, 
but he made, more quickly, a move that gained him 
space and that might well have been the result of 
two sharp impressions : one of these the sense that 
in a single hour she had so altered as to be ugly, 
without a trace of the charm that had haunted him ; 
and the other the sense that, thus ravaged and dis- 
figured, wrecked in the gust that had come and 
gone, she required of him something that she had 
never required. A monstrous reality flared up in 
their relation, the perception of which was a shock 
that he was conscious for the moment of betraying 
that he feared, finding no words to answer her and 
showing her, across the room, while she repeated 
her question, a face blanched by the change in her 
own. " For what did you come back to me ? for 
what did you come back ? " 

He gaped at her ; then as if there were help for 
him in the simple fact that on his own side he could 
immediately recall, he stammered out : " To you 



THE OTHER HOUSE 271 

to you ? I hadn't the slightest notion you were 
here ! " 

" Didn't you come to see where I was ? Didn't 
you come absolutely and publicly for me ? " He 
jerked round again to the window with the vague, 
wild gesture of a man in horrible pain, and she went 
on without vehemence, but with clear, deep inten- 
sity : " It was exactly when you found I was here 
that you did come back. You had a perfect chance, 
on learning it, not to show ; but you didn't take the 
chance, you quickly put it aside. You reflected, 
you decided, you insisted we should meet." Her 
voice, as if in harmony with the power of her plea, 
dropped to a vibration more muffled, a soft but 
inexorable pressure. "I hadn't called you, I 
hadn't troubled you, I left you as perfectly alone as 
I've been alone. It was your own passion and your 
own act you've dropped upon me, you've over- 
whelmed me. You've overwhelmed me, I say, 
because I speak from the depths of my surrender. 
But you didn't do it, I imagine, to be cruel, and if 
you didn't do it to be cruel you did it to take what it 
would give you." Gradually, as she talked, he faced 
round again ; she stood there supported by the high 
back of a chair, either side of which she held tight. 
" You know what I am, if any man has known, and 
it's to the thing I am whatever that is you've 
come back at last from so far. It's the thing I 
am whatever that is I now count on you to 
stand by." 
"Whatever that is?" Dennis mournfully mar- 



272 THE OTHER HOUSE 

veiled. " I feel, on the contrary, that I've never, 
never known ! " 

4 'Well, it's before anything a woman who has 
such a need as no woman has ever had." Then she 
eagerly added : " Why on earth did you descend on 
me if you hadn't need of me ? " 

Dennis took for an instant, quite as if she were 
not there, several turns in the wide place ; moving 
in the dumb distress of a man confronted with the 
greatest danger of his life and obliged, while pre- 
cious minutes lapse, to snatch at a way of safety. 
His whole air was an instinctive retreat from being 
carried by assault, and he had the effect both of 
keeping far from her and of revolving blindly round 
her. At last, in his hesitation, he pulled up before 
her. " What makes, all of a sudden, the tremendous 
need you speak of? Didn't you remind me but an 
hour ago of how remarkably low, at our last meeting, 
it had dropped ? " 

Rose's eyes, in the dimness, widened with their 
wonder. " You can speak to me in harshness of what 
I did an hour ago ? You can taunt me with an act 
of penance that might have moved you that did 
move you ? Does it mean," she continued, " that 
you've none the less embraced the alternative that 
seems to you most worthy of your courage ? Did 
I only stoop, in my deep contrition, to make it 
easier for you to knock me down ? I gave you 
your chance to refuse me, and what you've come back 
for then will have been only, most handsomely, to 
take it. In that case you did injustice there to the 



THE OTHER HOUSE 273 

question of your revenge. What fault have you to 
find with anything so splendid ? " 

Dennis had listened with his eyes averted, and he 
met her own again as if he had not heard, only 
bringing out his previous words with a harder 
iteration : " What makes your tremendous need ? 
what makes your tremendous need ? " he spoke as 
if that tone were the way of safety. " I don't in the 
least see why it should have taken such a jump. 
You must do justice, even after your act of this 
afternoon a demonstration far greater than any I 
dreamed of asking of you you must do justice to 
my absolute necessity for seeing everything clear. 
I didn't there in the garden see anything clear at 
all I was only startled and wonder-struck and 
puzzled. Certainly I was touched, as you say I 
was so touched that I particularly suffered. But I 
couldn't pretend I was satisfied or gratified, or even 
that I was particularly convinced. You often failed 
of old, I know, to give me what I really wanted 
from you, and yet it never prevented the success of 
your effect on what shall I call it ? " He stopped 
short. " On God knows what baser, obscurer part 
of me ! I'm not such a brute as to say," he quickly 
went on, "that that effect was not produced this 
afternoon " 

" You confine yourself to saying," Rose inter- 
rupted, " that it's not produced in our actual situa- 
tion." 

He stared through the thicker dusk ; after which, 
" I don't understand you ! " he dropped. " I do 

s 



274 THE OTHER HOUSE 

say," he declared, " that, whatever your success to- 
day may be admitted to consist of, I didn't at least 
then make the admission. I didn't at that moment 
understand you any more than I do now ; and I 
don't think I said anything to lead you to suppose 
I did. I showed you simply that I was bewildered, 
and I couldn't have shown it more than by the 
abrupt way I left you. I don't recognise that I'm 
committed to anything that deprives me of the right 
of asking you for a little more light." 

" Do you recognise by chance," Rose returned, 
" the horrible blow ?" 

" That has fallen on all this wretched place ? 
I'm unutterably shocked by it. But where does it 
come into our relations ? " 

Rose smiled in exquisite pity, which had the air, 
however, of being more especially for herself. 
" You say you were painfully affected ; but you 
really invite me to go further still. Haven't I put 
the dots on all the horrid i's and dragged myself 
through the dust of enough confessions ? " 

Dennis slowly and grimly shook his head ; he 
doggedly clung to his only refuge. " I don't under- 
stand you- I don't understand you." 

Rose, at this, surmounted her scruples. " It would 
be inexpressibly horrible to me to appear to be free 
to profit by Mr. Bream's misfortune." 

Dennis thought a moment. " To appear, you 
mean, to have an interest in the fact that the death 
of his daughter leaves him at liberty to invite you 
to become his wife ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 275 

" You express it to admiration." 

He discernibly wondered. " But why should 
you be in danger of that torment to your delicacy 
if Mr. Bream has the best of reasons for doing 
nothing to contribute to it ? " 

"The best of Mr. Bream's reasons," Rose re- 
joined, " won't be nearly so good as the worst of 
mine." 

" That of your making a match with some one 
else ? I see," her companion said. " That's the 
precaution I'm to have the privilege of putting in 
your power." 

She gave the strangest of smiles ; the whites of 
her excited eyes shimmered in the gloom. " Your 
loyalty makes my position perfect." 

Dennis hesitated. " And what does it make my 
own ? " 

" Exactly the one you came to take. You have 
taken it by your startling presence ; you're up to 
your eyes in it, and there's nothing that will become 
you so as to wear it bravely and gallantly. If you 
don't like it," Rose added, "you should have thought 
of that before ! " 

"You like it so much on your side," Dennis 
retorted, "that you appear to have engaged in 
measures to create it even before the argument for 
it had acquired the force that you give such a fine 
account of." 

" Do you mean by giving it out as an accomplished 
fact ? It was never too soon to give it out ; the right 
moment was the moment you were there. Your 



276 THE OTHER HOUSE 

arrival changed everything ; it gave me on the spot 
my advantage ; it precipitated my grasp of it." 

Vidal's expression was like a thing battered dead, 
and his voice was a sound that matched it. " You 
call your grasp your announcement ? " 

She threw back her head. " My announcement 
has reached you ? Then you know I've cut off your 
retreat." Again he turned away from her ; he flung 
himself on the sofa on which, shortly before, Mrs. 
Beever had sunk down to sob, and, as if with the 
need to hold on to something, buried his face in one 
of the hard, square cushions. She came a little 
nearer to him ; she went on with her low lucidity : 
" So you can't abandon me you can't. You came 
to me through doubts you spoke to me through 
fears. You're mine ! " 

She left him to turn this over ; she moved off and 
approached the door at which Mrs. Beever had gone 
out, standing there in strained attention till, in the 
silence, Dennis at last raised his head. " What is it 
you look to me to do ? " he asked. 

She came away from the door. " Simply to see 
me through." 

He was on his feet again. " Through what, in the 
name of horror ? " . 

"Through everything. If I count on you, it's to 
support me. If I say things, it's for you to say 
them." 

" Even when they're black lies ? " Dennis brought 
out. 

Her answer was immediate. " What need should I 



THE OTHER HOUSE 277 

have of you if they were white ones ? " He was 
unable to tell her, only meeting her mettle with 
his stupor, and she continued, with the lightest 
hint of reproach in her quiet pain : " I thank you 
for giving that graceful name to my weak boast 
that you admire me." 

He had a sense of comparative idiotcy. " Do you 
expect me on that admiration to marry you ? " 

" Bless your innocent heart, no ! for what do you 
take me? I expect you simply to make people 
believe that you mean to." 

11 And how long will they believe it if I don't ? " 

" Oh, if it should come to that," said Rose, "you 
can easily make them believe that you have ! " She 
took a step so rapid that it was almost a spring ; she 
had him now and, with her hands on his shoulders, 
she held him fast. " So you see, after all, dearest, 
how little I ask ! " 

He submitted, with no movement but to close his 
eyes before the new-born dread of her caress. Yet 
he took the caress when it came the dire confes- 
sion of her hard embrace, the long entreaty of her 
stony kiss. He might still have been a creature 
trapped in steel ; after she had let him go he still 
stood at a loss how to turn. There was something, 
however, that he presently opened his eyes to try. 
" That you went over with me that's what you wish 
me to say ? " 

" Over to Bounds ? Is that what / said ? I can't 
think." But she thought all the same. " Thank you 
for fixing it. If it's that, stick to it ! " 



278 THE OTHER HOUSE 

"And to our having left the child with Miss 
Martle?" 

This brought her up a moment. " Don't ask me 
simply meet the case as it comes. I give you," 
she added in a marvellous manner, "a perfectly free 
hand ! " 

" You're very liberal," said Dennis, " but I think 
you simplify too much." 

" I can hardly do that if to simplify is to leave it 
to your honour. It's the beauty of my position that 
yodre believed." 

" That, then, gives me a certain confidence in 
telling you that Miss Martle was the whole time 
with me." 

Rose stared. " Of what time do you speak ? " 

" The time after you had gone over to Bounds with 
Effie." 

Rose thought again. " Where was she with you ? " 

" By the river, on this side." 

" On this side ? You didn't go to Bounds ? " 

" Not when I left you for the purpose. I obeyed 
an impulse that made me do just the opposite. You 
see," said Dennis, "that there's a flaw in my 
honour ! You had filled my cup too full I couldn't 
carry it straight. I kept by the stream I took a 
walk." 

Rose gave a low, vague sound. " But Miss Martle 
and I were there together." 

"You were together till you separated. On my 
return to the bridge I met her." 

Rose hesitated. " Where was she going ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 279 

" Over to Bounds but I prevented her." 

" You mean she joined you ? " 

" In the kindest manner for another turn. I took 
her the same way again." 

Once more Rose thought. " But if she was 
going over, why in the world should she have let 
you ? " 

Dennis considered. " I think she pitied me." 

" Because she spoke to you of me ? " 

" No ; because she didn't. But I spoke to her of 
you," said Dennis. 

" And what did you say ? " 

He hung fire a moment. "That a short time 
before I saw you cross to Bounds." 

Rose slowly sat down. " You saw me ? " 

"On the bridge, distinctly. With the child in 
your arms." 

" Where were you then ? " 

" Far up the stream beyond your observation." 

She looked at him fixedly, her hands locked 
together between her knees. "You were watch- 
ing me ? " Portentous and ghostly, in the darker 
room, had become their confronted estrange- 
ment. 

Dennis waited as if he had a choice of answers ; 
but at last he simply said : " I saw no more." 

His companion as slowly rose again and moved 
to the window, beyond which the garden had now 
grown vague. She stood before it a while ; then, 
without coming away, turned her back to it, so that 
he saw her handsome head, with the face obscure, 



280 THE OTHER HOUSE 

against the evening sky. " Shall I tell you who did 
it ? " she asked. 

Dennis Vidal faltered. " If you feel that you're 
prepared." 

" I've been preparing. I see it's best." Again, 
however, she was silent. 

This lasted so long that Dennis finally spoke. 
"Who did it?" 

" Tony Bream to marry Jean." 

A loud sound leaped from him, which was thrown 
back by the sudden opening of the door and a 
consequent gush of light. Manning marched in with 
a high lamp, and Doctor Ramage stood on the 
threshold. 



XXX 

THE Doctor remained at the door while the maid put 
down her lamp, and he checked her as she pro- 
ceeded to the blinds and the other duties of the 
moment. 

" Leave the windows, please; it's warm. That 
will do thanks." He closed the door on her extin- 
guished presence and he held it a little, mutely, 
with observing eyes, in that of Dennis and Rose. 

" Do you want me?" the latter promptly asked, in 
the tone, as he liked, of readiness either to meet 
him or to withdraw. She seemed to imply that at 
such an hour there was no knowing what any one 
might want. Dennis's eyes were on her as well 
as the Doctor's, and if the lamp now lighted her 
consciousness of looking horrible she could at 
least support herself with the sight of the crude 
embarrassment of others. 

The Doctor, resorting to his inveterate practice 
when confronted with a question, consulted his 
watch. " I came in for Mr. Vidal, but I shall be 
glad of a word with you after I've seen him. I 
must ask you, therefore" and he nodded at the 
third door of the room "kindly to pass into the 
library." 



282 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Rose, without haste or delay, reached the point he 
indicated. " You wish me to wait there ? " 

" If you'll be so good." 

" While you talk with him ? " 

" While I talk with ' him.' " 

Her eyes held Vidal's a minute. "I'll wait." 
And she passed out. 

The Doctor immediately attacked him. " I must 
appeal to you for a fraction of your time. I've seen 
Mrs. Beever." 

Dennis hesitated. " I've done the same." 

" It's because she has told me of your talk that I 
mention it. She sends you a message." 

" A message ? " Dennis looked as if it were open to 
him to question indirectness. "Where then is she ? " 

" With that distracted girl." 

" Miss Martle ?" Dennis hesitated. "Miss Martle 
so greatly feels the shock ? " 

"' Feels' it, my -dear sir?" the Doctor cried. 
" She has been made so pitifully ill by it that there's 
no saying just what turn her condition may take, 
and she now calls for so much of my attention as 
to force me to plead, with you, that excuse for 
my brevity. Mrs. Beever," he rapidly pursued, 
"requests you to regard this hurried inquiry as 
the sequel to what you were so good as to say 
to her." 

Dennis thought a moment ; his face had changed 
as if by the action of Rose's disappearance and the 
instinctive revival, in a different relation, of the 
long, stiff habit of business, the art of treating 



THE OTHER HOUSE 283 

affairs and meeting men. This was the art of not 
being surprised, and, with his emotion now con- 
trolled, he was discernibly on his guard. " I'm 
afraid," he replied, " that what I said to Mrs. Beever 
was a very small matter." 

" She doesn't think it at all a small matter to have 
said you'd help her. You can do so in the cruel 
demands our catastrophe makes of her by con- 
sidering that I represent her. It's in her name, 
therefore, that I ask you if you're engaged to be 
married to Miss Armiger." 

Dennis had an irrepressible start; but it might 
have been quite as much at the freedom of the 
question as at the difficulty of the answer. " Please 
say to her that I am" He spoke with a clearness 
that proved the steel surface he had in a few minutes 
forged for his despair. 

The Doctor took the thing as he gave it, only 
drawing from his pocket a key, which he held 
straight up. " Then I feel it to be only right to say 
to you that this locks " and he indicated the quarter 
to which Rose had retired " the other door." 

Dennis, with a diffident hand out, looked at him 
hard ; but the good man showed with effect that he 
was professionally used to that. " You mean she's 
a prisoner ? " 

" On Mr. Vidal's honour." 

" But whose prisoner ? " 

" Mrs. Beever's." 

Dennis took the key, which passed into his 
pocket. " Don't you forget," he then asked with 



284 THE OTHER HOUSE 

inscrutable gravity, " that we're here, all round, on a 
level " 

"With the garden? "the Doctor broke in. "I 
forget nothing. We've a friend on the terrace." 

"A friend?" 

" Mr. Beever. A friend of Miss Armiger's," he 
promptly added. 

Still showing nothing in his face, Dennis perhaps 
showed something in the way that, with his eyes 
bent on the carpet and his hands interclenched behind 
him, he slowly walked across the room. At the end 
of it he turned round. " If I have this key, who has 
the other ? " 

" The other ? " 

" The key that confines Mr. Bream." 

The Doctor winced, but he stood his ground. " I 
have it." Then he said as if with a due recognition of 
the weight of the circumstance : " She has told you ? " 

Dennis turned it over. " Mrs. Beever ? " 

11 Miss Armiger." There was a faint sharpness in 
the Doctor's tone. 

It had something evidently to do with the tone in 
which Dennis replied. " She has told me. But if 
you've left him " 

" I've not left him. I've brought him over." 

Dennis showed himself at a loss. " To see me ? " 

The Doctor raised a solemn, reassuring hand ; 
then, after an instant, " To see his child," he colour- 
lessly said. 

" He desires that ? " Dennis asked with an accent 
that emulated this detachment. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 285 

" He desires that." Dennis turned away, and in 
the pause that followed the air seemed charged with 
a consciousness of all that between them was repre- 
sented by the unspoken. It lasted indeed long 
enough to give to an auditor, had there been one, a 
sense of the dominant unspeakable. It was as if 
each were waiting to have something from the other 
first, and it was eventually clear that Dennis, who 
had not looked at his watch, was prepared to wait 
longest. The Doctor had moreover to recognise 
that he himself had sought the interview. He impa- 
tiently summed up his sense of their common attitude. 
" I do full justice to the difficulty created for you 
by your engagement. That's why it was important 
to have it from your own lips." His companion 
said nothing, and he went on : " Mrs. Beever, all 
the same, feels that it mustn't prevent us from putting 
you another question, or rather from reminding you 
that there's one that you led her just now to expect 
that you'll answer." The Doctor paused again, but 
he perceived he must go all the way. " From the 
bank of the river you saw something that bears 
upon this " he hesitated ; then daintily selected his 
words "remarkable performance. We appeal to 
your sense of propriety to tell us what you saw." 

Dennis considered. " My sense of propriety is 
strong ; but so just now is my sense of some 
other things. My word to Mrs. Beever was con- 
tingent. There are points /want made clear." 

" I'm here," said the Doctor, " to do what I can to 
satisfy you. Only be go good as to remember that 



286 THE OTHER HOUSE 

time is everything." He added, to drive this home, 
in his neat, brisk way : " Some action has to be 
taken." 

" You mean a declaration made ? " 

" Under penalty," the Doctor assented, " of con- 
sequences sufficiently tremendous. There has been 
an accident of a gravity " 

Dennis, with averted eyes, took him up. "That 
can't be explained away ? " 

The Doctor looked at his watch ; then, still 
holding it, he quickly looked up at Dennis. "You 
wish her presented as dying of a natural cause ? " 

Vidal's haggard face turned red, but he instantly 
recovered himself. " Why do you ask, if you've a 
supreme duty ? " 

" I haven't one worse luck. I've fifty." 

Dennis fixed his eyes on the watch. " Does that 
mean you can keep the thing quiet ? " 

The Doctor put his talisman away. "Before I 
say I must know what you'll do for me." 

Dennis stared at the lamp. " Hasn't it gone 
too far ? " 

" I know how far : not so far, by a peculiar 
mercy, as it might have gone. There has been 
an extraordinary coincidence of chances a miracle 
of conditions. Everything appears to serve." He 
hesitated; then with great gravity: "We'll call it 
a providence and have done with it." 

Dennis turned this over. "Do you allude to 
the absence of witnesses ? " 

"At the moment the child was found. Only the 



THE OTHER HOUSE 287 

blessed three of us. And she had been there " 

Stupefaction left him counting. 

Dennis jerked out a sick protest. " Don't tell me 

how long! What do / want ?" What he 

wanted proved, the next moment, to be more 
knowledge. " How do you meet the servants ? " 

" Here ? By giving a big name to her complaint. 
None of them have seen her. She was carried in 
with a success ! " The Doctor threw up trium- 
phant little hands. 

" But the people at the other house ? " 

" They know nothing but that over here she has 
had an attack which it will be one of the fifty duties 
of mine I mentioned to you to make sufficiently 
remarkable. She was out of sorts this morning 
this afternoon I was summoned. That call of 
Tony's at my house is the providence ! " 

But still Dennis questioned. " Hadn't she some 
fond nurse some devoted dragon ? " 

" The great Gorham ? Yes : she didn't want her 
to come; she was cruelly overborne. Well," the 
Doctor lucidly pursued, " I must face the great 
Gorham. I'm already keeping her at bay doctors, 
you see, are so luckily despots ! They're blessedly 
bullies. She'll be tough but it's all tough 1 " 

Dennis, pressing his hand to his head, began 
wearily to pace again : it was far too tough for 
him. But he suddenly dropped upon the sofa, all 
but audibly moaning, falling back in the despair 
that broke through his false pluck. His interlocutor 
watched his pain as if he had something to hope 



288 THE OTHER HOUSE 

from it ; then abruptly the young man began : " I 

don't in the least conceive how " He stopped 

short : even this he couldn't bring out. 

" How was it done ? Small blame to you ! It 
was done in one minute with the aid of a boat 
and the temptation (we'll call it !) of solitude. 
The boat's an old one of Tony's own pad- 
locked, but with a long chain. To see the place,'' 
said the Doctor after an instant, " is to see the 
deed." 

Dennis threw back his head; he covered his 
distorted face with his two hands. " Why in thun- 
der should I see it ? " 

The Doctor had moved towards him ; at this he 
seated himself beside him and, going on with quiet 
clearness, applied a controlling, soothing grasp to 
his knee. "The child was taken into the boat and 
it was tilted : that was enough the trick was 
played." Dennis remained motionless and dumb, 
and his companion completed the picture. "She 
was immersed she was held under water she was 
made sure of. Oh, I grant you it took a hand 
and it took a spirit ! But they were there. Then 
she was left. A pull of the chain brought back the 
boat ; and the author of the crime walked away." 

Dennis slowly shifted his position, dropped his 
head, dropped his hands, sat staring lividly at the 
floor. " But how could she be caught?" 

The Doctor hesitated, as if in the presence of an 
ambiguity. " The poor little girl ? You'd see if 
you saw the place." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 289 

" I passed it to come back here," Dennis said. 
" But I didn't look, for I didn't know." 

The Doctor patted his knee. "If you had known 
you would have looked still less. She rose; she 
drifted some yards; then she was washed against 
the base of the bridge, and one of the openings of 
her little dress hooked itself to an old loose clamp. 
There she was kept." 

"And no one came by ? " 

"No one came till, by the mercy of God, / 
came ! " 

Dennis took it in as if with a long, dry gulp, and 
the two men sat for a minute looking at each other, 
At last the younger one got up. " And yet the risk 
of anything but a straight course is hideous." 

The Doctor kept his place. " Everything's hideous. 
I appreciate greatly," he added, "the gallantry of 
your reminding me of my danger. Don't think I 
don't know exactly what it is. But I have to think 
of the danger of others. I can measure mine ; I 
can't measure theirs." 

"I can return your compliment," Dennis replied. 
" ' Theirs,' as you call it, seems to me such a fine 
thing for you to care for." 

The Doctor, with his plump hands folded on his 
stomach, gave a small stony smile. " My dear man, 
I care for my friends ! " 

Dennis stood before him; he was visibly mys- 
tified. "There's a person whom it's very good 
of you to take this occasion of calling by that 
name ! " 



2$o THE OTHER HOUSE 

Doctor Ramage stared ; with his vision of his 
interlocutor's mistake all his tight curves grew 
tense. Then, as he sprang to his feet, he seemed 
to crack in a grim little laugh. " The person you 
allude to is, I confess, not, my dear sir " 

"One of the persons," said Dennis, "whom you 
wish to protect ? It certainly would have surprised 
me to hear it ! But you spoke of your ' friends.' 
Who then is your second one ? " 

The Doctor looked astonished at the question. 
"Why, sweet Jean Martle." 

Dennis equally wondered. " I should have sup- 
posed her the first ! Who then is the other ? " 

The Doctor lifted his shoulders. "Who but 
poor Tony Bream ? " 

Dennis thought a moment. " What's his danger? " 

The Doctor grew more amazed. "The danger 
we've been talking of ! " 

" Have we been talking of that? " 

" You ask me, when you told me you knew ? " 

Dennis, hesitating, recalled. " Knew that he's 
accused ? " 

His companion fairly sprang at him. "Accused 
by her too ? " 

Dennis fell back at his onset. " Is he by anybody 
else?" 

The Doctor, turning crimson, had grabbed his 
arm ; he blazed up at him. " You don't know it 
all ? " 

Dennis faltered. " Is there any more ? " 

" Tony cries on the housetops that he did it ! " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 291 

Dennis, blank and bewildered, sank once more on 
his sofa. "He cries ?" 

" To cover Jean." 

Dennis took it in. " But if she is covered ? " 

"Then to shield Miss Armiger." 

Poor Dennis gazed aghast. " Who meanwhile 
denounces him ? " He was on his feet again ; again 
he moved to the open window and stood there while 
the Doctor in silence waited. Presently he turned 
round. " May I see him ? " 

The Doctor, as if he had expected this, was 
already at the door. " God bless you ! " And he 
flashed out. 

Dennis, left alone, remained rigid in the middle 
of the room, immersed apparently in a stupor of 
emotion ; then, as if shaken out of it by a return 
of conscious suffering, he passed in a couple of 
strides to the door of the library. Here, however, 
with his hand on the knob, he yielded to another 
impulse, which kept him irresolute, listening, drawing 
his breath in pain. Suddenly he turned away Tony 
Bream had come in. 



XXXI 

"IF in this miserable hour I've asked you for a 
moment of your time," Dennis immediately said, " I 
beg you to believe it's only to let you know that 

anything in this world I can do for you " Tony 

raised a hand that mutely discouraged as well as 
thanked him, but he completely delivered himself: 
" I'm ready, whatever it is, to do on the spot." 

With his handsome face smitten, his red eyes 
contracted, his thick hair disordered and his black 
garments awry, Tony had the handled, hustled look 
of a man just dragged through some riot or some 
rescue and only released to take breath. Like Rose, 
for Dennis, he was deeply disfigured, but with a 
change more passive and tragic. His bloodshot 
eyes fixed his interlocutor's. " I'm afraid there's 
nothing any one can do for me. My disaster's over- 
whelming ; but I must meet it myself." 

There was courtesy in his voice ; but there was 
something hard and dry in the way he stood there, 
something so opposed to his usual fine overflow that 
for a minute Dennis could only show by pitying 
silence the full sense of his wretchedness. He was 
in the presence of a passionate perversity an atti- 
tude in which the whole man had already petrified. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 293 

"Will it perhaps help you to think of something," 
he presently said, " if I tell you that your disaster 
is almost as much mine as yours, and that what's of 
aid to one of us may perhaps therefore be of aid to 
the other ? " 

"It's very good of you," Tony replied, "to be 
willing to take upon you the smallest corner of so 
big a burden. Don't do that don't do that, Mr. 
Vidal," he repeated, with a heavy head-shake. 
" Don't come near such a thing ; don't touch it ; 
don't know it ! " He straightened himself as if with 
a long, suppressed shudder ; and then with a sharper 
and more sombre vehemence, " Stand from under 
it ! " he exclaimed. Dennis, in deeper compassion, 
looked at him with an intensity that might have 
suggested submission, and Tony followed up what 
he apparently took for an advantage. " You came 
here for an hour, for your own reasons, for your 
relief : you came in all kindness and trust. You've 
encountered an unutterable horror, and you've only 
one thing to do." 

" Be so good as to name it/' said Dennis. 
" Turn your back on it for ever go your way this 
minute. I've come to you simply to say that." 

" Leave you, in other words ? " 

" By the very first train that will take you." 
Dennis appeared to turn this over ; then he spoke 
with a face that showed what he thought of it. " It 
has been my unfortunate fate in coming to this place 
so wrapped, as one might suppose, in comfort and 
peace to intrude a second time on obscure, unhappy 



294 THE OTHER HOUSE 

things, on suffering and danger and death. I should 
have been glad, God knows, not to renew the adven- 
ture, but one's destiny kicks one before it, and I 
seem myself not the least part of the misery I speak 
of. You must accept that as my excuse for not 
taking your advice. I must stay at least till you 
understand me." On this he waited a moment ; 
after which, abruptly, impatiently, " For God's 
sake, Mr. Bream, believe in me and meet me ! " he 
broke out. 

" Meet you ? " 

" Make use of the hand I hold out to you ! " 
Tony had remained just within the closed door, as 
if to guard against its moving from the other side. 
At this, with a faint flush in his dead vacancy, he 
came a few steps further. But there was something 
still locked in his conscious, altered eyes, and coldly 
absent from the tone in which he said: "You've 
come, I think, from China ? " 

" I've come, Mr. Bream, from China." 
" And it's open to you to go back ? " 
Dennis frowned. " I can do as I wish." 
" And yet you're not off like a shot ? " 
" My movements and my inclinations are my own 
affair. You won't accept my aid ? " 

Tony gave his sombre stare. " You ask me, as 
you call it, to meet you. I beg you to excuse 
me if on my side I first inquire on what definite 

ground ? " 

Dennis took him straight up. " On the definite 
ground on which Doctor Ramage is good enough to 



THE OTHER HOUSE 295 

do so. I'm afraid there's no better ground than 
my honour." 

Tony's stare was long and deep ; then he put out 
his hand, and while Dennis held it, " I understand 
you," he said. " Good-bye." 

Dennis kept hold of him. " Good-bye ? " 

Tony had a supreme hesitation. " She's safe." 

Dennis had a shorter one. " Do you speak of 
Miss Martle ? " 

" Not of Miss Martle." 

" Then I can. She's safe." 

" Thank you," said Tony. He drew away his hand. 

" As for the person you do speak of, if you say 
it " and Dennis paused. 

" She's safe," Tony repeated. 

" That's all I ask of you. The Doctor will do the 
rest." 

"I know what the Doctor will do." Tony was 
silent a moment. " What will you do ? " 

Dennis waited, but at last he spoke. " Every- 
thing but marry her." 

A flare of admiration rose and fell in Tony's eyes. 
" You're beyond me ! " 

" I don't in the least know where I am, save that 
I'm in a black, bloody nightmare and that it's not I, 
it's not she, it's not you, it's not any one. I shall 
wake up at last, I suppose, but meanwhile " 

" There's plenty more to come ? Oh, as much as 
you like ! " Tony excitedly declared. 

" For me, but not for you. For you the worst's 
over," his companion boldly observed. 



296 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" Over ? with all my life made hideous ? " 

There wasacertain sturdiness in Vidal's momentary 

silence. " You think so now ! " Then he added 

more gently : " I grant you it's hideous enough." 

Tony stood there in the agony of the actual ; the 
tears welled into his hot eyes. " She murdered 
she tortured my child. And she did it to incriminate 
Jean." 

He brought it all back to Dennis, who exclaimed 
with simple solemnity : " The dear little girl the 
sweet, kind little girl ! " With a sudden impulse 
that, in the midst of this tenderness, seemed almost 
savage, he laid on Tony's shoulder a hard, consci- 
entious hand. " She forced her in. She held her 
down. She left her." 

The men turned paler as they looked at each 
other. " I'm infamous I'm infamous," said Tony. 

There was a long pause that was like a strange 
assent from Dennis, who at last, however, brought 
out in a different tone : " It was her passion." 

" It was her passion." 

11 She loves you ! " Dennis went on with a 

drop, before the red real, of all vain terms. 

" She loves me ! " Tony's face reflected the mere 
monstrous fact. " It has made what it has made 
her awful act and my silence. My silence is a part 
of the crime and the cruelty I shall live to be a 
horror to myself. But I see it, none the less, as I 
see it, and I shall keep the word I gave her in the 
first madness of my fear. It came to me there 
it is." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 297 

" I know what came to you," Dennis said. 

Tony wondered. " Then you've seen her ? " 

Dennis hesitated. " I know it from the Doctor." 

" I see " Tony thought a moment. " She, 

I imagine " 

"Will keep it to herself? Leave that to me!" 
Dennis put out his hand again. " Good-bye." 

" You take her away ? " 

" To-night." 

Tony kept his hand. " Will her flight help 
Ramage ? " 

" Everything falls in. Three hours ago I came 
for her." 

" So it will seem pre-arranged ? " 

" For the event she announced to you. Our happy 
union ! " said Dennis Vidal. 

He reached the door to the hall, where Tony 
checked him. " There's nothing, then, I shall do for 
you?" 

" It's done. We've helped each other." 

What was deepest in Tony stirred again. " I mean 
when your trouble has passed." 

" It will never pass. Think of that when you're 
happy yourself." 

Tony's grey face stared. " How shall I ever 

The door, as he spoke, opened from the room to 
which Mrs. Beever had returned, and Jean Martle 
appeared to them. Dennis retreated. " Ask her ! " 
he said from the threshold. 



XXXII 

RUSHING to Tony, she wailed under her breath : " I 
must speak to you I must speak to you ! But 
how can you ever look at me ? how can you ever 
forgive me ? " In an instant he had met her ; in a 
flash the gulf was bridged : his arms had opened 
wide to her and she had thrown herself into them. 
They had only to be face to face to let themselves 
go ; he making no answer but to press her close 
against him, she pouring out her tears upon him 
as if the contact quickened the source. He held 
her and she yielded with a passion no bliss could 
have given; they stood locked together in their 
misery with no sound and no motion but her sobs. 
Breast to breast and cheek to cheek, they felt simply 
that they had ceased to be apart. This long embrace 
was the extinction of all limits and questions 
swept away in a flood which tossed them over the 
years and in which nothing remained erect but the 
sense and the need of each other. These things had 
now the beauty of all the tenderness that they had 
never spoken and that, for some time, even as they 
clung there, was too strange and too deep for speech. 
But what was extraordinary was that as Jean dis- 
engaged herself there was neither wonder nor fear 



THE OTHER HOUSE 299 

between them ; nothing but a recognition in which 
everything swam and, on the girl's part, the still 
higher tide of the remorse that harried her and that, 
to see him, had made her break away from the 
others. " They tell me I'm ill, I'm insane," she went 
on " they want to shut me up, to give me things 
they tell me to lie down, to try to sleep. But it's all 
to me, so dreadfully, as if it were / who had done it, 
that when they admitted to me that you were here I 
felt that if I didn't see you it would make me as crazy 
as they say. It's to have seen her go to have seen 
her go : that's what I can't bear it's too horrible ! " 
She continued to sob ; she stood there before him 
swayed to and fro in her grief. She stirred up his 
own, and that added to her pain ; for a minute, in 
their separate sorrow, they moved asunder like 
creatures too stricken to communicate. But they 
were quickly face to face again, more intimate, with 
more understood, though with the air, on either side 
and in the very freedom of their action, of a clear 
vision of the effect of their precipitated union the 
instinct of not again touching it with unconsecrated 
hands. Tony had no idle words, no easy consola- 
tion ; she only made him see more vividly what had 
happened, and they hung over it together while she 
accused and reviled herself. "I let her go I let her 
go ; that's what's so terrible, so hideous. I might 
have got her have kept her ; I might have screamed, 
I might have rushed for help. But how could I 
know or dream ? How could the worst of my 
fears ? " She broke off, she shuddered and 



300 THE OTHER HOUSE 

dropped; she sat and sobbed while he came and 
went. "I see her little face as she left me she 
looked at me as if she knew. She wondered and 
dreaded : she knew she knew ! It was the last 
little look I was to have from her, and I didn't even 
answer it with a kiss. She sat there where I could 
seize her, but I never raised a hand. I was close, I 
was there she must have called for me in her terror ! 
I didn't listen I didn't come I only gave her up to 
be murdered ! And now I shall be punished for 
ever : I shall see her in those arms in those arms ! " 
Jean flung herself down and hid her face; her 
smothered wild lament filled the room. 

Tony stopped before her, seeing everything she 
brought up, but only the more helpless in his pity. 
" It was the only little minute in all the years that 
you had been forced to fail her. She was always 
more yours than mine." 

Jean could only look out through her storm-beaten 
window. " It was just because she was yours that 
she was mine. It was because she was yours from 

the first hour that I ! " She broke down again ,* 

she tried to hold herself; she got up. " What could 
I do, you see ? To you I couldn't be kind." She 
was as exposed in her young, pure woe as a bride 
might have been in her joy. 

Tony looked as if he were retracing the saddest 
story on earth. " I don't see how you could have 
been kinder." 

She wondered with her blinded eyes. " That 
wasn't what thought I was it couldrit be, ever, 



THE OTHER HOUSE 301 

ever. Didn't I try not to think of you ? But the 
child was a beautiful part of you the child I could 
take and keep. I could take her altogether, without 
thinking or remembering. It was the only thing I 
could do for you, and you let me, always, and she 
did. So I thought it would go on, for wasn't it 
happiness enough ? But all the horrible things 
I didn't know them till to-day I There they were 
so near to us ; and there they closed over her, and 
oh ! " She turned away in a fresh wild spasm, 
inarticulate and distracted. 

They wandered in silence, as if it made them more 
companions ; but at last Tony said : " She was a 
little radiant, perfect thing. Even if she had not 
been mine you would have loved her." Then he 
went on, as if feeling his way through his thickest 
darkness : " If she had not been mine she wouldn't 
be lying there as I've seen her. Yet I'm glad she 
was mine ! " he said. 

" She lies there because I loved her and because 
I so insanely showed it. That's why it's I who 
killed her ! " broke passionately from Jean. 

He answered nothing till he quietly and gently 
answered : " It was / who killed her." 

She roamed to and fro, slowly controlling herself, 
taking this at first as a mere torment like her own. 
" We seem beautifully eager for the guilt 1 " 

" It doesn't matter what any one else seems. I 
must tell you all now. I've taken the act on myself." 

She had stopped short, bewildered. " How have 
you taken it ? " 



302 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" To meet whatever may come." 

She turned as white as ashes. " You mean you've 
accused yourself? " 

"Any one may accuse me. Whom is it more 
natural to accuse ? What had she to gain ? My 
own motive is flagrant. There it is," said Tony. 

Jean withered beneath this new stroke. " You'll 
say you did it ? " 

" I'll say I did it." 

Her face grew old with terror. " You'll lie ? 
You'll perjure yourself? " 

" I'll say I did it for you." 

She suddenly turned crimson. "Then what do 
you think I'll say?" 

Tony coldly considered. " Whatever you say will 
tell against me." 

" Against you ? " 

" If the crime was committed for you." 

" ' For ' me ? " she echoed again. 

" To enable us to marry." 

" Marry ? we ? " Jean looked at it in blighted 
horror. 

" It won't be of any consequence that we shan't, 
that we can't : it will only stand out clear that we 
can" His sombre ingenuity halted, but he achieved 
his demonstration. " So I shall save whom I wish 
to save." 

Jean gave a fiercer wail. "You wish to save 
her ? " 

" I don't wish to hand her over. You can't con- 
ceive it ? " 



THE OTHER HOUSE 303 

" I ? " The girl looked about her for a negation 
not too vile. " I wish to hunt her to death ! I wish 
to burn her alive ! " All her emotion had changed 
to stupefaction ; the flame in her eyes had dried them. 
" You mean she's not to suffer ? " 

" You want her to suffer all ? " 

She was ablaze with the light of justice. " How 
can anything be enough ? I could tear her limb from 
limb. That's what she tried to do to me ! " 

Tony lucidly concurred. " Yes what she tried 
to do to you." 

But she had already flashed round. "And yet 
you condone the atrocity ? " 

Tony thought a moment. " Her doom will be to 
live." 

" But how will such a fiend be suffered to live 
when she went to it before my eyes ? " Jean stared 
at the mountain of evidence; then eagerly: "And 
Mr. Vidal her very lover, who'll swear what he 
knows what he saw ! " 

Tony stubbornly shook his head. " Oh, Mr. Vidal ! " 

"To make me," Jean cried, "seem the mon- 
ster !" 

Tony looked at her so strangely that she stopped. 
" She made it for the moment possible " 

She caught him up. " To suspect me ? " 

" I was mad and you're weren't there." With a 
muffled moan she sank down again ; she covered 
her face with her hands. " I tell you all I tell 
you all," he said. " He knows nothing he saw 
nothing he'll swear nothing. He's taking her away.'' 



304 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Jean started as if he had struck her. " She's 
here ? " 

Tony wondered. " You didn't know it ? " 

" She came back ? " the girl panted. 

" You thought she had fled ? " 

Jean hung there like a poised hawk. " Where is 
she ? " 

Tony gave her, with a grave gesture, a long, 
absolute look before which, gradually, her passion 
fell. " She has gone. Let her go." 

She was silent a little. " But others : how will 
they ? " 

" There are no others." After a moment he 
added : " She would have died for me." 

The girl's pale wrath gave a flare. "So you want 
to die for her?" 

" I shan't die. But I shall remember." Then, as 
she watched him, " I must tell you all," he said 
once more. " I knew it I always knew it. And I 
made her come." 

"You were kind to her as you're always 
kind." 

" No ; I was more than that. And I should have 
been less." His face showed a rift in the blackness. 
" I remember." 

She followed him in pain and at a distance. 
" You mean you liked it ? " 

"I liked it while I was safe. Then I grew 
afraid." 

"Afraid of what?" 

"Afraid of everything. You don't know but 



THE OTHER HOUSE 305 

we're abysses. At least Fm one ! " he groaned. 
He seemed to sound this depth. " There are other 
things. They go back far." 

" Don't tell me all," said Jean. She had evidently 
enough to turn over. " What will become of her ? " 
she asked. 

" God knows. She goes forth." 

" And Mr. Vidal with her ? " 

" Mr. Vidal with her." 

Jean gazed at the tragic picture. " Because he 
still loves her ? " 

" Yes," said Tony Bream. 

"Then what will he do?" 

" Put the globe between them. Think of her 
torture," Tony added. 

Jean looked as if she tried. " Do you mean 
that?" 

He meant another matter. " To have only made 
us free." 

Jean protested with all her woe. "It's her triumph 
that our freedom is horrible ! " 

Tony hesitated ; then his eyes distinguished in 
the outer dusk Paul Beever, who had appeared at 
the long window which in the mild air stood open 
to the terrace. " It's horrible," he gravely replied. 

Jean had not seen Paul ; she only heard Tony's 
answer. It touched again the the source of tears ; 
she broke again into stifled sobs. So, blindly, 
slowly, while the two men watched her, she passed 
from the room by the door at which she had 
entered. 



XXXIII 

" YOU'RE looking for me ? " Tony quickly asked. 

Paul, blinking in the lamplight, showed the dismal 
desert of his face. " I saw you through the open 
window, and I thought I would let you know " 

" That some one wants me ? " Tony was all 
ready. 

" She hasn't asked for you ; but I think that if 
you could do it " 

" I can do anything," said Tony. " But of whom 
do you speak ? " 

" Of one of your servants poor Mrs. Gorham." 

" Effie's nurse ? she has come over ? " 

"She's in the garden," Paul explained. "I've 
been floundering about I came upon her." 

Tony wondered. " But what's she doing ? " 

" Crying very hard without a sound." 

" And without coming in ? " 

" Out of discretion." 

Tony thought a moment. " You mean because 
Jean and the Doctor ? " 

" Have taken complete charge. She bows to 
that, but she sits there on a bench " 

" Weeping and wailing?" Tony asked. " Dear 
thing, I'll speak to her." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 307 

He was about to leave the room in the summary 
manner permitted by the long widow when Paul 
checked him with a quiet reminder. " Hadn't you 
better have your hat ? " 

Tony looked about him he had not brought it in. 
" Why ? if it's a warm night ? " 

Paul approached him, laying on him as if to stay 
him a heavy but friendly hand. "You never go 
out without it don't be too unusual." 

" I see what you mean I'll get it." And he 
made for the door to the hall. 

But Paul had not done with him. " It's much 
better you should see her it's unnatural you 
shouldn't. But do you mind my just thinking for 
you the least bit asking you for instance what it's 
your idea to say to her ? " 

Tony had the air of accepting this solicitude ; 
but he met the inquiry with characteristic candour. 
" I think I've no idea but to talk with her of Effie." 

Paul visibly wondered. " As dangerously ill ? 
That's all she knows." 

Tony considered an instant. "Yes, then as 
dangerously ill. Whatever she's prepared for." 

" But what are you prepared for ? You're not 
afraid ? " Paul hesitated. 

"Afraid of what?" 

" Of suspicions importunities ; her making some 
noise." 

Tony slowly shook his head. " I don't think," 
he said very gravely, " that I'm afraid of poor 
Gorham." 



308 THE OTHER HOUSE 

Paul looked as if he felt that his warning half 
failed. "Every one else is. She's tremendously 
devoted." 

" Yes that's what I mean." 
Paul sounded him a moment. " You mean to 
you?" 

The irony was so indulgent and all irony on 
this young man's part was so rare that Tony was 
to be excused for not perceiving it. " She'll do 
anything. We're the best of friends." 
" Then get your hat," said Paul. 
" It's much the best thing. Thank you for telling 
me." Even in a tragic hour there was so much in 
Tony of the ingenuous that, with his habit of good- 
nature and his hand on the door, he lingered for the 
comfort of his friend. " She'll be a resource a fund 
of memory. She'll know what I mean I shall 
want some one. So we can always talk." 
" Oh, you 1 re safe ! " Paul went on. 
It had now all come to Tony. " I see my way 
with her." 

" So do I ! " said Paul. 

Tony fairly brightened through his gloom. " I'll 
keep her on ! " And he took his course by the front. 
Left alone Paul closed the door on him, holding it 
a minute and lost evidently in reflections of which 
he was the subject. He exhaled a long sigh that 
was burdened with many things ; then as he moved 
away his eyes attached themselves as if in sympathy 
with a vague impulse to the door of the library. 
He stood a moment irresolute ; after which, deeply 



THE OTHER HOUSE 309 

restless, he went to take up the hat that, on coming 
in, he had laid on one of the tables. He was in the 
act of doing this when the door of the library opened 
and Rose Armiger stood before him. She had 
since their last meeting changed her dress and, 
arrayed for a journey, wore a bonnet and a long, 
dark mantle. For some time after she appeared 
no word came from either ; but at last she said : 
"Can you endure for a minute the sight of 
me?" 

" I was hesitating I thought of going to you," 
Paul replied. " I knew you were there." 

At this she came into the room. " I knew you 
were here. You passed the window." 

"I've passed and repassed this hour." 

" I've known that too, but this time I heard you 
stop. I've no light there," she went on, "but the 
window, on this side, is open. I could tell that you 
had come in." 

Paul hesitated. " You ran a danger of not finding 
me alone." 

" I took my chance of course I knew. I've been 
in dread, but in spite of it I've seen nobody. I've 
been up to my room and come down. The coast was 
clear." 

" You've not then seen Mr. Vidal ? " 

"Oh yes him. But he's nobody." Then as if 
conscious of the strange sound of this : " Nobody, I 
mean, to fear." 

Paul was silent a moment. " What in the world 
is it you fear ? " 



3io THE OTHER HOUSE 

"In the sense of the awful things you know? 
Here on the spot nothing. About those things I'm 
quite quiet. There may be plenty to come ; but 
what I'm afraid of now is my safety. There's some- 
thing in that ! " She broke down ; there was 

more in it than she could say. 

" Are you so sure of your safety ? " 

" You see how sure. It's in your face," said Rose. 
" And your face for what it says is terrible." 

Whatever it said remained there as Paul looked 
at her. " Is it as terrible as yours ? " he asked. 

" Oh, mine mine must be hideous ; unutterably 
hideous forever ! Yours is beautiful. Everything, 
every one here is beautiful." 

" I don't understand you," said Paul. 

" How should you ? It isn't to ask you to do that 
that I've come to you." 

He waited in his woful wonder. " For what 
have you come ? " 

" You can endure it, then, the sight of me ? " 

11 Haven't I told you that I thought of going to 
you?" 

"Yes but you didn't go," said Rose. "You 
came and went like a sentinel, and if it was to watch 
me " 

Paul interrupted her. " It wasn't to watch you." 

" Then what was it for ? " 

" It was to keep myself quiet," said Paul. 

" But you're anything but quiet." 

"Yes," he dismally allowed; "I'm anything but 
quiet." 



THE OTHER HOUSE 311 

" There's something then that may help you : it's 
one of two things for which I've come to you. And 
there's no one but you to care. You may care a very 
little ; it may give you a grain of comfort. Let your 
comfort be that I've failed." 

Paul, after a long look at her, turned away with 
a vague, dumb gesture, and it was a part of his 
sore trouble that, in his wasted strength, he had 
no outlet for emotion, no channel even for pain. 
She took in for a moment his clumsy, massive 
misery. "No you loathe my presence," she 
said. 

He stood awhile in silence with his back to her, as 
if within him some violence were struggling up ; 
then with an effort, almost with a gasp, he turned 
round, his open watch in his hand. "I saw Mr. 
Vidal," was all he produced. 

"And he told you too he would come back for 
me?" 

" He said there was something he had to do, but 
that he would meanwhile get ready. He would 
return immediately with a carriage." 

" That's why I've waited," Rose replied. " I'm 
ready enough. But he won't come." 

"He'll come," said Paul. "But it's more than 
time." 

She drearily shook her head. "Not after getting 
off not back to the horror and the shame. He 
thought so ; no doubt he has tried. But it's beyond 
him." 

" Then what are you waiting for ? " 



312 THE OTHER HOUSE 

She hesitated. " Nothing now. Thank you." 
She looked about her. " How shall I go?" 

Paul went to the window ; for a moment he 
listened. " I thought I heard wheels." 

She gave ear; but once more she shook her 
head. "There are no wheels, but I can go that 
way." 

He turned back again, heavy and uncertain ; he 
stood wavering and wondering in her path. " What 
will become of you ? " he asked. 

" How do I know and what do I care ? " 

" What will become of you ? what will become 
of you?" he went on as if he had not heard 
her. 

" You pity me too much," she answered after an 
instant. " I've failed, but I did what I could. It 
was all that I saw it was all that was left me. It 
took hold of me, it possessed me : it was the last 
gleam of a chance." 

Paul flushed like a sick man under a new wave of 
weakness. " Of a chance for what ? " 

"To make him take her. You'll say my calcu- 
lation was grotesque my stupidity as ignoble as my 
crime. All I can answer is that I might none the 
less have succeeded. People have- in worse con- 
ditions. But I don't defend myself I'm face to face 
with my mistake. I'm face to face with it forever 
and that's how I wish you to see me. Look at me 
well!" 

" I would have done anything for you ! " Paul as if 
all talk with her were vain, wailed under his breath. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 313 

She considered this ; her dreadful face was lighted 
by the response it kindled. " Would you do any- 
thing now ? " He answered nothing ; he seemed 
lost in the vision of what was carrying her through. 
" I saw it as I saw it," she continued : " there it was 
and there it is. There it is there it is," she repeated 
in a tone sharp, for a flash, with all the excitement 
she contrived to keep under. " It has nothing to do 
now with any part or any other possibility even of 
what may be worst in me. It's a storm that's past, 
it's a debt that's paid. I may literally be better." At 
the expression this brought out in him she inter- 
rupted herself. "You don't understand a word I 
utter ! " 

He was following her as she showed she could 
see only in the light of his own emotion ; not in 
that of any feeling that she herself could present. 
" Why didn't you speak to me why didn't you tell 
me what you were thinking? There was nothing 
you couldn't have told me, nothing that wouldn't 
have brought me nearer. If I had known your 
abasement " 

" What would you have done ? " Rose demanded. 

" I would have saved you." 

11 What would you have done ? " she pressed. 

" Everything." 

She was silent while he went to the window. 
" Yes, I've lost you I've lost you," she said at last. 
"And you were the thing I might have had. He 
told me that, and I knew it." 

" ' He ' told you ? " Paul had faced round. 



314 THE OTHER HOUSE 

" He tried to put me off on you. That was what 
finished me. Of course they'll marry," she abruptly 
continued. 

" Oh yes, they'll marry." 

" But not soon, do you suppose ? " 

" Not soon. But sooner than they think." 

Rose looked surprised. "Do you already know 
what they think ? " 

" Yes that it will never be." 

"Never?" 

"Coming about so horribly. But some day it 
will be." 

" It will be," said Rose. "And I shall have done 
it for him. That's more," she said, "than even you 
would have done for me." 

Strange tears had found their way between Paul's 
closed lids. "You're too horrible," he breathed; 
"you're too horrible." 

" Oh, I talk only to you : it's all for you. Remem- 
ber, please, that I shall never speak again. You 
see," she went on, " that he daren't come." 

Paul looked afresh at his watch. "I'll go with 
you." 

Rose hesitated. " How far ? " 

" I'll go with you," he simply repeated. 

She looked at him hard ; in her eyes too there 
were tears. "My safety my safety!" she mur- 
mured as if awestruck. 

Paul went round for his hat, which on his 
entrance he had put down. " I'll go with you," 
he said once more. 



THE OTHER HOUSE 315 

Still, however, she hesitated. " Won't he need 
you ? " 

" Tony? for what?" 

" For help." 

It took Paul a moment to understand. " He 
wants none." 

" You mean he has nothing to fear ? " 

" From any suspicion ? Nothing." 

"That's his advantage," said Rose. " People like 
him too much." 

"People like him too much," Paul replied. 
Then he exclaimed : " Mr. Vidal ! " to which, as 
she looked, Rose responded with a low, deep moan. 

Dennis had appeared at the window; he gave 
signal in a short, sharp gesture and remained 
standing in the dusk of the terrace. Paul put 
down his hat; he turned away to leave his com- 
panion free. She approached him while Dennis 
waited ; she lingered desperately, she wavered, as 
if with a last word to speak. As he only stood 
rigid, however, she faltered, choking her impulse 
and giving her word the form of a look. The look 
held her a moment, held her so long that Dennis 
spoke sternly from the darkness : " Come ! " At 
this, for a space as great, she fixed her eyes on 
him; then while the two men stood motionless 
she decided and reached the window. He put out 
a hand and seized her, and they passed quickly 
into the night. Paul, left alone, again sounded a 
long sigh ; this time it was the deep breath of a 
man who has seen a great danger averted. It had 



316 THE OTHER HOUSE 

scarcely died away before Tony Bream returned. 
He came in from the hall as eagerly as he had 
gone out, and, finding Paul, gave him his news : 
" Well I took her home." 

Paul required a minute to carry his thoughts back 
to Gorham. " Oh, she went quietly ? " 

" Like a bleating lamb. She's too glad to stay on." 

Paul turned this over; but as if his confidence 
now had solid ground he asked no question. " Ah, 
you're all right ! " he simply said. 

Tony reached the door through which Jean had 
left the room ; he paused there in surprise at this 
incongruous expression. Yet there was something 
absent in the way he echoed " All right ? " 

"I mean you have such a pull. You'll meet 
nothing but sympathy. 

Tony looked indifferent and uncertain ; but his 
optimism finally assented. " I daresay I shall get 
on. People perhaps won't challenge me." 

" They like you too much." 

Tony, with his hand on the door, appeared struck 
with this; but it embittered again the taste of his 
tragedy. He remembered with all his vividness to 
what tune he had been "liked," and he wearily 
bowed his head. " Oh, too much, Paul ! " he sighed 
as he went out. 

THE END 



Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co. 
London & Edinburgh 



ILLUMINATION 

BY HAROLD FREDERIC 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. 'When Mr. Harold Frederic's In the Valley appeared, 
we reviewed it favourably as a perfect specimen of an American historical 
novel. His present novel, Illumination, is of merit even more considerable. 
. . . The knowledge of character revealed reminds us of George Eliot's 
Scenes of Clerical Life? 

The Spectator. ' There is something more than the mere touch of the 
vanished hand that wrote The Scarlet Letter in Illumination, which is the 
best novel Mr. Harold Frederic has produced, and, indeed, places him very 
near if not quite at the head of the newest school of American fiction. . . . 
Illumination is undoubtedly one of the novels of the year.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette.' Mr. Frederic's picture of the ideas and habits 
of this backwoods Methodist community is a revelation.' 

The Morning Post. ' Unmistakably a clever work, epigrammatic and 
original.' 

The St. James's Gazette. ' A novel of singular force and skill, which 
every one should read.' 

The Westminster Gazette. 'With this work Mr. Frederic may be said 
to make a successful bid for a place in the first rank of living novelists. It is 
a book of such strange interest and power, of such exquisite and original 
humour, that we shall be surprised indeed if its merit is not generally 
recognised.' 

The Daily Telegraph. 'A remarkable novel, as original in conception 
as it is powerful in execution. A novel well worth reading, both for the 
absorbing interest of its central theme and for the excellence of the sub- 
ordinate characters.' 

The Saturday Review. c Mr. Frederic at his best. The drama unfolds 
itself with rare delicacy and self-restraint. . . . Michael is a beautiful char- 
acter, vividly and exquisitely painted. The Soulsbys, whose peculiar pro- 
fession as "debt-raisers" is unknown here, are creations who alone would 
make the book repay perusal.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'Mr. Harold Frederic is winning his way by 
sure steps to the foremost ranks of writers of fiction. Each book he gives us 
is an advance upon the one before it. ... His story is chiselled in detail, 
but the details gradually merge into a finished work ; and when we close the 
last page we have a new set of men and women for our acquaintances, a new 
set of provocative ideas, and almost a Meissonier in literature to add to our 
shelves. . . . Mr. Frederic's new novel is the work of a man born to write 
fiction ; of a keen observer, a genuine humorist, a thinker always original 
and sometimes even profound ; and of a man who has thoroughly learned 
the use of his own pen. 

The Manchester Guardian. 'A remarkable book, and likely to be the 
novel of the year. It is a long time since a book of such genuine importance 
has appeared. It will not only afford novel-readers food for discussion during 
the coming season, but it will eventually fill a recognised place in English 
fiction.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 

A 



WITHOUT SIN 

BY MARTIN J. PRITCHARD 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The World. 'The ingenious manner in which the story is sustained to 
the end, the undoubted fascination of the writing, and the convincing charm 
of the principal characters are what make this novel so intensely interesting.' 

The Literary World. 'We would advise our readers strongly not to 
neglect Mr. Pritchard's remarkable story, whatever else they are obliged to 
let go pass unread. . . . We are loth to reveal any more of Mr. Pritchard's 
most tender and most impressive story. The book teems with ability, and 
there are parts which rise superior to this rather mild word. It will be 
strange indeed if Mr. Martin Pritchard does not come into great repute.' 

The Academy. 'One is hardly likely to go far wrong in predicting that 
Without Sin will attract abundant notice, on account not only of the daring 
conception which forms its basis, but of the skilful way in which a delicate 
subject is handled. . . . There is something indescribably pathetic in the 
situation here produced and its sequel.' 

The Daily News. 'In this extraordinary book there are many tender 
passages that would adorn many a story of a more " normal " character.' 

The Review of Reviews. ' An extremely clever book. . . . The story 
is very delicately handled, and abounds in situations of thrilling interest. A 
unique and daring book. ' 

The Sun. ' Beyond all question one of the remarkable novels of the year. 
Mr. Pritchard is to be congratulated on the delicacy and refinement which 
he brings to bear on the treatment of a theme that is bold to the verge of 
audacity. I repeat that it is a remarkable book remarkable for its liquid 
and musical English ; for its penetrating studies in character ; above all, for 
its fastidious treatment of a most delicate theme. ' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'Martin Pritchard's knowledge of the Ghetto 
life is excellent, and excellently rendered. The young Jewish girl who is 
overtaken by a grave situation is realised to the best powers of the author. 
. . . Granting the position, its treatment is unexceptionable. The critical 
reader will dwell upon the pictures of Jewish life. These reveal in their 
author a perception and an insight which augur well for his future efforts. 
In any case, and from any point of view, the book is worth perusal and 
consideration.' 



To-day. 'The idea of the story is so daring, so improbable, and yet so 
.turally told, that one pardons the improbability for the sake of the interest 
hich it arouses.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE MAN OF STRAW 

BY EDWIN PUGH 

In One Volume ', price 6s. 

The Daily Mail. ' So finely imagined and so richly built up with natural 
incident and truthful detail, that no one who cares for a fine novel, finely 
written, can afford to let it pass. Mr. Pugh's study of John Coldershaw is, 
in its strength, a graduated truth of detail, masterly almost beyond possibility 
of overpraise. Possibly it is the London setting which lends the story a 
touch of the style of Dickens. Certain it is that London humanity has never 
been so well portrayed since Dickens ceased to portray it.' 

Black and White. ' Certain to be widely read and to be discussed, since 
it is notable for matter and manner alike. Abounds in magnificent situations. 
The realism is ever touched with imagination, and it is often powerful and 
never dull.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' Places its author in the front rank of the new 
realism. Nothing that Mr. Pugh describes is a mere fancy picture every 
stroke of his pen brings conviction with it. He writes with the instinct of 
an artist, and selects his incidents with marvellous skill.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'Marks a great advance upon A Street in 
Suburbia. Mr Pugh's observation is as close and keen as ever, but it has 
widened. In fine, The Man of Straw is a notable novel.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'A very powerful story. Most readers, when 
they have once begun it, will not be able to lay it down until they have 
finished it. The opening chapters have a savour of Dickens ; the climax is 
almost Zolaesque. 'The Man of Straw,' in his heartless, callous viciousness, 
stands head and shoulders above the mealy-mouthed conventional hero of the 
average novel.' 

The British Weekly. ' The ablest novel we have read for some time. 
Mr. Pugh is a very conscientious and thorough worker, and a man of great 
talent. He revives one side of the genius of Dickens.' 

The Literary World. 'A powerfully-written story, confirming our im- 
pression of Mr. Pugh's ability. He knows the life and the people he deals 
with, and his work shows a thorough conscientious and painstaking care, 
alike in its conception and handling.' 

Bookselling. ' A work so full of promise as to leave little doubt as to 
Mr. Pugh's future.' 

The Scotsman. ' A story of singular power and absorbing interest. The 
author proves himself a keen, sympathetic student of life in the poorer parts 
of the Metropolis. It is impossible to convey anything like an adequate 
conception of the sustained animation and the dramatic vigour of the book, 
or of the fertile imagination of the writer. It is full of scenes of pathps, of 
humour, or of those possessing a fine blending of both qualities.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



ON THE FACE OF THE WATERS 

BY FLORA ANNIE STEEL 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Spectator. * We have read Mrs. Steel's book with ever-increasing 
surprise and admiration surprise at her insight into people with whom 
she can scarcely have been intimate, admiration for the genius which has 
enabled her to realise that wonderful welter of the East and West, which 
Delhi must have presented just before the Mutiny. There is many an officer 
who would give his sword to write military history as Mrs. Steel has written 
the history of the rising, the siege, and the storm. It is the most wonderful 
picture. We know that none who lived through the Mutiny will lay the book 
down without a gasp of admiration, and believe that the same emotion will be 
felt by thousands to whom the scenes depicted are but lurid phantasmagoria.' 

A.T.Q.C. in ' The Speaker.' ' It certainly is a remarkable book. The 
native intrigues are brilliantly handled. Alice Gissing may claim to stand 
beside the really great women of fiction. The whole book has the high 
seriousness which, until quite recently, few people dreamed of as possible in 
an Anglo-Indian novel.' 

The Saturday Review. 'Many novelists and spinners of tales have 
made use of the Indian Mutiny, but Mrs. Steel leaves them all a long way 
behind. On the Face of the Waters is the best novel of the Great Mutiny, 
and we are not likely to see its rival in our time.' 

The St. James's Gazette. ' A fine novel about an epoch in our history 
which Englishmen can never cease to weep over and to glory in.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'Mrs. Steel has beaten Mr. Kipling on his 
own ground, India. She has written a fine novel, whose scene is laid in the 
world Mr. Kipling was the first to make real to us. There is no need to tell 
a story which all men and women who love their country and her honour 
should read for themselves before the month is out. Books like this are so 
rare that it is difficult to welcome them too warmly. ' 

The Westminster Gazette. 'Beside Mrs. Steel's book, all other stories 
dealing with the Mutiny seem thin and melodramatic. It is altogether a 
remarkable book.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'A picture, glowing with colour, of the most 
momentous and dramatic events in all our Empire's later history. We have 
read many stories having for their setting the lurid background of the Indian 
Mutiny, but none that for fidelity to fact, for vivacity of imagination, for 
masterly breadth of treatment, comes within half a dozen places of this. On 
the Face of the Waters is a record of fact as well as a work of fiction, but 
fiction and fact are so skilfully interwoven that one realises the fact all the 
more vividly because of the intense interest one is compelled to take in the 
fiction. The real triumph of the book is in the description of native life, 
and in the dramatic power with which are rendered the native thought and 
passion and emotion. Mrs. Steel gets fairly inside the Indian skin, and looks 
out upon the life of that troublous fiery time through Indian eyes. Any 
novelist who writes of India and Indian life now must necessarily challenge 
comparison with Mr. Rudyard Kipling. Mrs. Steel has so challenged com- 
parison, and need not fear as to the result.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C, 



THE POTTER'S THUMB 

BY FLORA ANNIE STEEL 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Globe. 'This is a brilliant story a story that fascinates, tingling 
with life, steeped in sympathy with all that is best and saddest.' 

The Manchester Guardian. ' The impression left upon one after reading 
The Potter's Thumb is that a new literary artist, of very great and unusual 
gifts, has arisen. ... In short, Mrs. Steel must be congratulated upon having 
achieved a very genuine and amply deserved success.' 

The Glasgow Herald. 'A clever story which, in many respects, brings 
India very near to its readers. The novel is certainly one interesting alike to 
the Anglo-Indian and to those untravelled travellers who make their only 
voyages in novelists' romantic company.' 

The Scotsman. ' It is a capital story, full of variety and movement, which 
brings with great vividness before the reader one of the phases of Anglo- 
Indian life. Mrs. Steel writes forcibly and sympathetically, and much of the 
charm of the picture which she draws lies in the force with which she brings 
out the contrast between the Asiatic and European world. The Potter's 
Thttntb is very good reading, with its mingling of the tragedy and comedy of 
life. Its evil woman par excellence . . . is a finished study.' 

.. [ FROM THE FIVE RIVERS 

BY FLORA ANNIE STEEL 
In One Volume^ price 6.?. 

The Times. ' Time was when these sketches of native Punjabi society 
would have been considered a curiosity in literature. They are sufficiently 
remarkable, even in these days, when interest in the "dumb millions "of 
India is thoroughly alive, and writers, great and small, vie in ministering to it. 
They are the more notable as being the work of a woman. Mrs. Steel has 
evidently been brought into close contact with the domestic life of all classes, 
Hindu and Mahomedan, in city and village, and has steeped herself in their 
customs and superstitions. . . . Mrs. Steel's book is of exceptional merit and 
freshness.' 

The Athenaeum. ' They possess this great merit, that they reflect the 
habits, modes of life, and ideas of the middle and lower classes of the popula- 
tion of Northern India better than do systematic and more pretentious works.' 

The Globe. ' She puts before us the natives of our Empire in the East as 
they live and move and speak, with their pitiful superstitions, their strange 
fancies, their melancholy ignorance of what poses with us for knowledge and 
civilisation, their doubt of the new ways, the new laws, the new people. 
" Shah Sujah's Mouse," the gem of the collection a touching tale of un- 
reasoning fidelity towards an English " Sinny Baba" is a tiny bit of perfect 
writing.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE DANCER IN YELLOW 

BvW. E. NORRIS 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

Lady's Pictorial. 'This is a capital novel. The story is very human, 
very well told, and rather pathetic.' 

The Daily News. 'The story is developed with great ingenuity and 
skill, and there is nothing unreal or sentimental in the pathos of the closing 
scenes. This book is one of the best that he has given us of late.' 

The Academy. 'The whole book teems with cultivated irony and humour.' 

The Spectator. 'Daisy herself is a masterpiece certainly one of the 
finest of Mr. Norris's very fine portraits.' 

The Manchester Guardian. ' From first to last it is easy, pleasant read- 
ing ; full, as usual, of shrewd knowledge of men and things.' 

The Guardian. 'A very clever and finished study of a dancer at one of 
the London theatres. We found the book very pleasant and refreshing, and 
laid it down with the wish that there were more like it. ' 

The Scotsman. 'A pleasing story. The dancer is attractive in her 
natural simplicity.' 

The Times. 'An admirable specimen of Mr. Norris's drawing-room 
style. . . . The work is dashed off with a firm touch, and carefully finished. 
. . . Mr. Norris shows his special talent at its best in analysing and delineat- 
ing the feelings and passions of the people chiefly concerned. ' 

The Athenaeum. 'We are well content to read Mr. Norris's smooth 
fictions as long as he is pleased to send them forth so well finished and per- 
fect. . . . This story is a most agreeable specimen of his art. Mr. Norris is 
eminently restful, and none of his books have surpassed The Dancer in 
Yellow in this his peculiar quality.' 

The World. ' The Dancer in Yellow takes us by surprise. The story is 
both tragic and pathetic. . . . We do not think he has written any more 
clever and skilful story than this one, and particular admiration is due to the 
byways and episodes of the narrative. ' 

The National Observer. ' The Dancer in Yellow is readable ; it is 
interesting ; the hero is skilfully drawn ; he is very human. The skill in the 
portrayal of the ways and manners of the men and women of to-day, that has 
long distinguished him, is not wanting. The pictures of contemporary Eng- 
land are true and vivid.' 

The Speaker. 'Like all Mr. Norris's stories, it is a tale of society in 
other words, of the actual life of the present day and it gives us many of 
those clever sketches of country houses and their owners, and clubs and their 
frequenters. . . . There is a strong element of tragedy in the tale ; all lovers 
of his work will find a great deal to their taste in The Dancer in Yellow.'' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



A VICTIM OF GOOD LUCK 

BY W. E. NORRIS 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The World. ' Here is Mr. Norris in his best form again, giving us an 
impossible story with such imperturbable composure, such quiet humour, 
easy polish, and irresistible persuasiveness, that he makes us read A Victim 
of Good Luck right through with eager interest and unflagging amusement, 
without being aware, until we regretfully reach the end, that it is just a 
farcical comedy in two delightful volumes.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It has not a dull page from first to last. Any 
one with normal health and taste can read a book like this with real pleasure.' 

The Spectator. ' Mr. Norris displays to the full his general command of 
narrative expedients which are at once happily invented and yet quite natural 
which seem to belong to their place in the book, just as a keystone belongs 
to its place in the arch. . . . The brightest and cleverest book which Mr. 
Norris has given us since he wrote The Rogue? 

The Saturday Review. 'Novels which are neither dull, unwholesome, 
morbid, nor disagreeable, are so rare in these days, that A Victim of Good 
Luck . . . ought to find a place in a book-box filled for the most part with 
light literature. . . . We think it will increase the reputation of an already 
very popular author.' 



THE COUNTESS RADNA 

BY W. E. NORRIS 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. ' He is a remarkably even writer. And this novel is almost 
as good a medium as any other for studying the delicacy and dexterity of his 
workmanship. ' 

The Morning Post.' The fidelity of his portraiture is remarkable, and 
it has rarely appeared to so much advantage as in this brilliant novel.' 

The Daily News. ' The Countess Radna contains many of the qualities 
that make a story by this writer welcome to the critic. It is caustic in style, 
the character drawing is clear, the talk natural ; the pages are strewn with 
good things worth quoting.' 

The Speaker. 'In style, skill in construction, and general "go," it is 
worth a dozen ordinary novels.' 

Black and White. 'The novel, like all Mr. Norris's work, is an exces- 
sively clever piece of work, and the author never for a moment allows his 
grasp of his plot and his characters to slacken.' 

The Westminster Gazette.' Mr. Norris writes throughout with much 
liveliness and force, saying now and then something that is worth remember- 
ing. And he sketches his minor characters with a firm touch.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



FLAMES 

BY ROBERT HICHENS 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Daily Chronicle.' A cunning blend of the romantic and the real, the 
work of a man who can observe, who can think, who can imagine, and who 
can write. It is not Mr. Hichens's occultism that marks off Flames from the 
ordinary run of romances. That distinction is to be found rather in its real- 
istic side, on the one hand its frescoes and vignettes of London and, on 
the other, in its wonderfully touching and we at least like to believe essen- 
tially true study of the capacity for goodness and even purity lurking in the 
heart of a draggled outcast of the streets. One chapter in the book, entitled 
"The Dance of the Hours," and depicting the outer scene as well as the 
inner significance of an evening at a well-known " Theatre of Varieties " 
in Leicester Square, strikes us as a little masterpiece of close analysis and 
vigorous description. And the little thumb-nail sketches of the London 
streets have the grim force of a Callot. But the real virtue of the book con- 
sists of its tender, sympathetic, almost reverential picture of Cuckoo Bright. 
Not that there is any attempt at idealising her ; she is shown in all her tawdry, 
slangy, noisy vulgarity, as she is. But in despite of all this, the woman is 
essentially a heroine, and lovable. If it contained nothing more than what 
we do not hesitate to call this beautiful story and it does contain more 
Flames would be a noteworthy book. ' 

The World. 'An exceedingly clever and daring work . . . a novel so 
weirdly fascinating and engrossing that the reader easily forgives its length. 
Its unflagging interest and strength, no less than its striking originality, both 
of design and treatment, will certainly rank it among the most notable novels 
of the season. ' 

The Daily Telegraph. 'It carries on the attention of the reader from 
the first chapter to the last. It is full of exciting incidents, very modern, and 
excessively up-to-date.' 

The National Observer and British Review. ' Such are the literary 
gifts which Mr. Hichens possesses, that he makes his story interesting from 
beginning to end. To these gifts we are anxious to pay a merited tribute. 
First amongst them we may mention his singular skill in style the instinctive 
accuracy of his sentences, their bracing rhythm, and the charm of their 
occasional music. To this must be added a genuine sense of poetry, which 
shows itself in his descriptions of various aspects of nature, and not infrequently 
in his descriptions of moral situations likewise. He has, further, an extra- 
ordinarily keen faculty of observation, in respect of social life, under its 
meaner and more sordid aspects. The house, for instance, where Marr died, 
the lodgings and the landlady of the heroine, are described with a force and 
a vividness, with a poignant and semi-humorous precision, which recalls the 
art of Balzac more than that of any other writer. The furniture, the wall- 
paper, the smells that haunt the passages, all these details are brought home 
to our senses, and leave on the mind an impression not unlike that produced 
by the boarding-house in Ptre Goriot.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



AN IMAGINATIVE MAN 

BY ROBERT HICHENS 

AUTHOR OF 'THE GREEN CARNATION' 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Guardian. 'There is no possible doubt as to the cleverness of the 
book. The scenes are exceeding powerful.' 

The Graphic. 'The story embodies a study of remarkable subtlety and 
power, and the style is not only vivid and picturesque, but in those passages 
of mixed emotion and reflection, which strike what is, perhaps, the charac- 
teristic note of late nineteenth century prose literature, is touched with some- 
thing of poetic charm.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It treats an original idea with no little skill, and 
it is written with a distinction which gives M. Hichens a conspicuous place 
amongst the younger story-tellers who are really studious of English diction. 
... It is marked out with an imaginative resource which has a welcome note 
of literature.' 

The Scotsman. 'It is no doubt a remarkable book. If it has almost 
none of the humour of its predecessor {The Green Carnation), it is written 
with the same brilliancy of style, and the same skill is shown in the drawing 
of accessories. Mr. Hichens's three characters never fail to be interesting. 
They are presented with very considerable power, while the background of 
Egyptian life and scenery is drawn with a sure hand. ' 



THE FOLLY OF EUSTACE 

BY ROBERT HICHENS 

In One Volume, price 6s. 



The Daily Telegraph. 'There is both imaginative power and a sense of 
style in all that Mr. Hichens writes, coupled with a distinct vein of humour.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'Admirably written, and in the vein that Mr. 
Hichens has made peculiarly his own.' 

The World. * The author of An Imaginative Man took a high place 
among imaginative writers by that remarkable work, and The Folly of 
Eustace fully sustains his well -merited repute as a teller of tales. The little 
story is as fantastic and also as reasonable as could be desired, with the 
occasional dash of strong sentiment, the sudden turning on of the lights of 
sound knowledge of life and things that we find in the author when he is most 
fanciful. The others are weird enough and strong enough in human interest 
to make a name for their writer had his name needed making.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C f 

A 3 



ANDRIA 

BY PERCY WHITE 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. c In the small area of Andria may be found more clever- 
ness than in a score of common novels.' 

The National Observer. The book is literally loaded with clever 
sayings.' 

The Daily Telegraph.' Cannot fail to secure the sincerest admiration 
as a collection of lifelike and convincing character-sketches, in every one of 
which the touch of a master-hand is conspicuously and continuously manifest. 
. . . Sparkles with brilliant metaphor and trenchant epigram.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' One of the most brilliantly executed portraits in 
modern fiction, the portrait of Louis Olway, philosopher and pessimist. . . . 
The irony of it all is delicious. ' 

The Daily Graphic. 'Andria is a worthy successor to Mr. Bailey - 
Martin and that caustic study Corruption.'' 

The Globe. ' Andria will have attractions for many.' 

The New York World.' Mr. White has distinctly added to his record.' 

The British Weekly. 'The people and situations are only too real.' 

The Birmingham Gazette. 'There is a noble sort of pathos in the life 
and death of Andria's husband, and a strong, breezy, and healthful air about 
Andria herself.' 

The Court Journal. ' The story is interesting to those who want a story ; 
it affords the " social problem " solutionists all the elements of a study in love 
and matrimony.' 

The Manchester Courier. ' No one will spend a dull hour in the time 
he gives to Mr. White's latest novel.' 

The Bradford Observer. ' Mr. Percy White will lose nothing in reputa- 
tion. . . . Andria shows the same intensity of purpose and vigour of 
writing.' 

The Glasgow Herald. 'Andria is a good novel ; it touches many phases 
of life; its author writes as a gentleman, and his tone is refreshingly wholesome.' 

The Sheffield Daily Telegraph. 'An artistic, clever, and well-finished 
novel, Andria should rank as Mr. White's best book.' 

The Standard. 'A clever novel, subtle and discriminating in its character- 
drawing, and full of excellent things. ... It shows, too, a greater capacity 
for kindliness and sympathy, and a wider view of humanity than its pre- 
decessors. ' 

The Daily News. ' It goes without saying that a book from the pen of Mr. 
Percy White abounds in cleverness. ... In some respects the story interests 
us more than its predecessors. It is, we think, more human. ... It is all 
very well done, with certainty of touch and convincing restraint of manner. ' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



CORRUPTION 

BY PERCY WHITE 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Speaker. 'In his first book, Mr.Bailey-Martin, Mr. White gave 
us a remarkable picture of the sordidness of life in a suburban household. 
In the present volume he rises to a higher social level, and treats of rising 
members of Parliament, of political leaders, and even of Prime Ministers. 
. . . The sketches of types are both forcible and true.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' None can travel over his brightly-written 
pages without being gladdened by the little flashes of epigram which light up 
the scene for us, or stirred by the shrewdness and worldly wisdom which he 
has put into the mouths of his characters. One of the charms of the book 
lies in the conviction that its author knows the world, and is full of a broad, 
full knowledge, and therefore sympathy with the foibles, passions, and sins 
with which it abounds. ... It is a sermon preached on the old ^Eschylian 
text, that the evil-doer must always suffer. The book is a drama of biting 
intensity, a tragedy of inflexible purpose and relentless result.' 

The Daily Telegraph.' Corruption more than fulfils the brilliant pro- 
mises of Mr. Bailey -Martin. ... As its title indicates, it deals with the 
political and social cankers of the day, which it lays bare with a fearless and 
unerring touch.' 

MR. BAILEY-MARTIN 

BY PERCY WHITE 

With a Photogravure Portrait of the Author 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. ' Mr. White has written an audacious book.' 

The Athenaeum. ' Mr. White, with the aid of the necessary qualities 
dry humour and delicate irony succeeds nearly all the time. . . . The char- 
acter is one exceedingly difficult to portray. . . . Mr. White has resisted the 
temptation to force and exaggerate the note, and this is probably the secret of 
his success.' 

The Speaker. 'There is cleverness enough in Mr. Bailey -Martin to 
furnish forth a dozen novels. ... It shows not only a remarkable knowledge 
of contemporary life, but a keen insight into character, and a considerable 
degree of literary power. ' 

The Daily Telegraph. 'The book teems with smart sayings and graphic 
characterisations, and cannot fail to make a mark among the cleverest novels 
of the year.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'The book must be pronounced a well-nigh un- 
qualified triumph.' 

The National Observer. Admirably clever, and deserving to be read by 
those who are bored with the average novel.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE SPOILS OF POYNTON 

BY HENRY JAMES 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The National Observer. ' One of the finest works of the imagination, ii 
not actually the finest, that has come from the press for several years. A 
work of brilliant fancy, of delicate humour, of gentle satire, of tragedy and 
comedy in appropriate admixture. A polished and enthralling story of the 
lives of men and women, who, one and all, are absolutely real. We con- 
gratulate Mr. James without reserve upon the power, the delicacy, and the 
charm of a book of no common fascination.' 

The World. * Mr. Henry James at his very best.' 

The Bookseller. 'Shows all Mr. James's wonted subtleness of observa- 
tion and analysis, fine humour, and originality of thought.' 

The Court Journal. 'Mr. James is philosophical, aesthetic, refined, 
daintily humorous, delicately cynical by turns. There is scarcely a page 
which has not some good thing in it. He give us Cosway-like portraits of 
men and women, delicately cynical sketches of character, relieved by flashes 
of keen humour.' 

The Standard. 'Immensely clever.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' Women ought to be grateful to Mr. James for 
delineating a woman as supremely honourable as any knight of chivalry. A 
book in every way worthy of its author, and, at the same time, extremely 
characteristic. It goes without saying that Mr. James has drawn the chief 
figures of his story with his usual precision of outline and felicity of touch. 
But in this book, it is not only the characters that rivet one's attention, for, 
by some cunning artifice, certain mere chattels, a few objets (Tart, are invested 
with an interest and an importance of their own.' 

The Daily News. ' Mr. James's art is that of the miniaturist. In this 
book we have much of the delicate whimsicalities of expression, of the amaz- 
ing cleverness in verbal parryings ; we never cease to admire the workman- 
ship. ' 

The Morning Post.' A strikingly clever book.' 

The Daily Mail. 'This comedy is positively delightful. An exquisite 
story, rich in detail, well-flavoured with humour, and excellent in workman- 
ship.' 

The St. James's Gazette. 'A notable novel, written with perfect com- 
mand of the situation, original a piece of exquisitely polished literature. ' 

The Westminster Gazette. ' The best novel that Mr. James has given 
us for several years. The writing is pointed, subtle, exquisite, and abound- 
ing in delicate shades of meaning. The book is admirable throughout, and 
it will be a serious reflection on novel readers if its unflagging interest does 
not win it a wide circle of readers. ' 

The Manchester Guardian. ' Delightful reading. The old felicity of 
phrase and epithet, the quick, subtle flashes of insight, the fastidious liking 
for the best in character and art, are as marked as ever, and give one an 
intellectual pleasure for which one cannot be too grateful. ' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



EMBARRASSMENTS 

BY HENRY JAMES 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. * Mr. James's stories are a continued protest against super- 
ficial workmanship and slovenly style. He is an enthusiast who has devoted 
himself to keeping alive the sacred fire of genuine literature ; and he has his 
reward in a circle of constant admirers.' 

The Daily News. ' Mr. Henry James is the Meissonier of literary art. 
In his new volume, we find all the exquisiteness, the precision of touch, that 
are his characteristic qualities. It is a curiously fascinating volume.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. * His style is well-nigh perfect, and there are 
phrases which reveal in admirable combination the skill of the practised crafts- 
man, and the inspiration of the born writer. ' 

The National Observer. 'The delicate art of Mr. Henry James has 
rarely been seen to more advantage than in these stories. ' 

The St. James's Gazette. * All four stories are delightful for admirable 
workmanship, for nicety and precision of presentation, and The Way it Came 
is beyond question a masterpiece.' 

The Literary World. * Admirers of Mr. Henry James will be glad to 
have this collection of polished stories. There is a fine finish about all his 
work : no signs of hurry or carelessness disfigure the most insignificant para- 
graph. Embarrassments is as good as anything he has written. As the work 
of a sincere and brilliantly clever writer it is welcome. ' 

TERMINATIONS 

BY HENRY JAMES 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. ' All the stories are told by a man whose heart and soul are 
in his profession of literature.' 

The Morning Post. 'The discriminating will not fail to recognise in the 
tales composing this volume workmanship of a very high order and a wealth 
of imaginative fancy that is, in a measure, a revelation. ' 

The Athenaeum. ' The appearance of Terminations will in no way shake 
the general belief in Mr. Henry James's accomplished touch and command of 
material. On the contrary, it confirms conclusions long since foregone, and 
will increase the respect of his readers. . . . With such passages of trenchant 
wit and sparkling observation, surely in his best manner, Mr. James ought to 
be as satisfied as his readers cannot fail to be.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'What strikes one, in fact, in every corner of 
Mr. James's work is his inordinate cleverness. These four tales are so clever, 
that one can only raise one's hands -in admiration. The insight, the sympathy 
with character, the extraordinary observation, and the neat and dexterous 
phrasing these qualities are everywhere visible.' 

The Scotsman. ' All the stories are peculiar and full of a rare interest.' 
LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



M C LEOD OF THE CAMERONS 

BY M. HAMILTON 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. 'The author of A Self -Deny ing Ordinance and Across 
an Ulster Zfo^has not belied their promise in M* Lead of the Camerons' 

The Spectator. ' The author's method of handling her theme is void of 
offence, and she certainly succeeds in enlisting the sympathies of her readers 
for her courageous heroine. The denouement is quite refreshingly wholesome.' 

The Speaker. ' We have read many novels of life at Malta, but none so 
vivid and accurate in local colour as M'Leod of the Camerons. A well-told 
and powerful story . . . acute analysis of character ; it offers a standard of 
perfection to which the majority of writers of fiction cannot attain.' 

The Literary World. 'A decidedly good story. It has some very 
original features, is well told, and is entertaining enough to hold the reader 
in close attention. ' 

The National Observer. 'Miss Hamilton shows wonderful powers of 
observation. She also has a fine dramatic gift, used to advantage in the 
more stirring scenes. The book is true to life, and it is also true to art.' 

The Daily Telegraph.' A well told story. A lifelike picture of garrison 
existence in Malta, as well as a number of vigorous and convincing character- 
sketches, outlined with considerable force, and filled in with great delicacy of 
finish. From beginning to end, the story is alive with human interest.' 

The Standard. ' There is not only more promise but more achievements 
in M'Leod of the Camerons than in any novel by a comparatively new writer 
that we have read for a long time. It is well constructed, well thought out, 
and the characters are set before the reader in a manner that makes it evident 
the writer knows all about them. Her style is straightforward and admirably 
adapted to the telling of a story.' 

The Daily News. ' The quality of this author's work is the great clear- 
ness of the presentation, character, and setting. The motive of the story is 
original, and the treatment throughout is skilful and strong.' 

The Manchester Guardian. ' Striking and exceedingly readable. Miss 
Hamilton is to be congratulated upon a very fresh, exciting, and yet natural 
piece of work.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'A clever and very well written story.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' Miss Hamilton has a real power of compelling 
pity, and not a little sense of humour. Altogether this novel is very readable 
and talented, and far above the average novel.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C, 



A SELF-DENYING ORDINANCE 

BY M. HAMILTON 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. 'The characters are exceptionally distinct, the move- 
ment is brisk, and the dialogue is natural and convincing.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'Joanna Con way is on distinctly new lines, and 
it has given us pleasure to follow her spicy, attractive personality through 
all the phases of her carefully, finely-depicted evolution.' 

The National Observer. 'A remarkably lifelike picture of English 
society. The author is a keen observer. The writing is above the average.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'An excellent novel. Joanna Con way is one of 
the most attractive figures in recent fiction. It is no small tribute to the 
author's skill that this simple country girl, without beauty or accomplishments, 
is from first to last so winning a personality. The book is full of excellent 
observation.' 

Black and White.' Some pleasant hours may be passed in following the 
fortunes of Joanna, the charming heroine of M. Hamilton's A Self-Denying 
Ordinance. The book is well written, and hofds the attention from start to 
finish. The characters are true to life.' 

The Methodist Times. 'The story retains its interest throughout. It 
contains some vividly-drawn delineations of character. ' 

Woman. 'Contains the finest, surest, subtlest character drawing that 
England has had from a new writer for years and years past' 

Public Opinion. 'A well written and fascinating novel. It is a clever 
sketch of life in its different phases. . . . " Every personage strikes one as 
being richly endowed with individuality. 1 " 

The Manchester Courier. ' A decided success. There are such women 
as Joanna Conway in the world, though, unfortunately, not so many as are 
required ; but there are few writers of the present day who can do justice to 
such a character, so poetical, and yet so practical. . . . There is humour in 
the book : the scene is chiefly in Ireland, and who can truly write of Ireland 
without humour ? but the greatest charm is in the wonderful tenderness, in 
the womanly chivalry which renders so true the title of a self-denying 
ordinance.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE EBB-TIDE 

BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON 

AND 

LLOYD OSBOURNE 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Times. 'This is a novel of sensation. But the episodes and 
incidents, although thrilling enough, are consistently subordinated to sensa- 
tionalism of character. . . . There is just enough of the coral reef and the 
palm groves, of cerulean sky and pellucid water, to indicate rather than to 
present the local colouring. Yet when he dashes in a sketch it is done to 
perfection. . . . We see the scene vividly unrolled before us.' 

The Daily Telegraph. 'The story is full of strong scenes, depicted 
with a somewhat lavish use of violet pigments, such as, perhaps, the stirring 
situations demand. Here and there, however, are purple patches, in which 
Mr. Stevenson shows all his cunning literary art the description of the 
coral island, for instance. . . . Some intensely graphic and dramatic pages 
delineate the struggle which causes, and a final scene . . . concludes this 
strange fragment from the wild life of the South Sea.' 

The St. James's Gazette. 'The book takes your imagination and 
attention captive from the first chapter nay, from the first paragraph and it 
does not set them free till the last word has been read.' 

The Standard. 'Mr. Stevenson gives such vitality to his characters, 
and so clear an outlook upon the strange quarter of the world to which he 
takes us, that when we reach the end of the story, we come back to civilisa- 
tion with a start of surprise, and a moment's difficulty in realising that we 
have not been actually away from it.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'We are^swept along without a pause on the 
current of the animated and vigorous narrative. Each incident and adven- 
ture is told with that incomparable keenness of vision which is Mr. Stevenson's 
greatest charm as a story-teller.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'It is brilliantly invented, and it is not less 
brilliantly told. There is not a dull sentence in the whole run of it. And 
the style is fresh, alert, full of surprises in fact, is very good latter-day 
Stevenson indeed.' 

The World. ' It is amazingly clever, full of that extraordinary know- 
ledge of human nature which makes certain creations of Mr. Stevenson's pen 
far more real to us than persons we have met in the flesh. Grisly the book 
undoubtedly is, with a strength and a vigour of description hardly to be 
matched in the language. . . . But it is just because the book is so extra- 
ordinarily good that it ought to be better, ought to be more of a serious whole 
than a mere brilliant display of fireworks, though each firework display has 
more genius in it than is to be found in ninety-nine out of every hundred 
books supposed to contain that rare quality.' 

The Morning Post. 'Boldly conceived, probing some of the darkest 
depths of the human soul, the tale has a vigour and breadth of touch which 
have been surpassed in none of Mr. Stevenson's previous works. . . . We 
do not, of course, know how much Mr. Osbourne has contributed to the tale, 
but there is no chapter of which any author need be unwilling to acknow- 
ledge, or which is wanting in vivid interest.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE NAULAHKA 

A Tale of West and East 

BY RUDYARD KIPLING AND WOLCOTT BALESTIER 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. * There is no one but Mr. Kipling who can make his 
readers taste and smell, as well as see and hear, the East ; and in this book 
(if we except the description of Tarvin's adventures in the deserted city of 
Gunvaur, which is perhaps less clear-cut than usual) he has surely surpassed 
himself. In his faculty for getting inside the Eastern mind and showing its 
queer workings, Mr. Kipling stands alone.' 

The Academy. ' The Naulahka contains passages of great merit. 
There are descriptions scattered through its pages which no one but Mr. 
Kipling could have written. . . . Whoever reads this novel will find much of 
it hard to forget . . . and the story of the exodus from the hospital will rank 
among the best passages in modern fiction.' 

The Times. 'A happy idea, well adapted to utilise the respective ex- 
perience of the joint authors. ... An excellent story. . . . The dramatic 
train of incident, the climax of which is certainly the interview between 
Sitabhai and Tarvin, the alternate crudeness and ferocity of the girl-queen, the 
susceptibility of the full-blooded American, hardly kept in subjection by his 
alertness and keen eye to business, the anxious eunuch waiting in the distance 
with the horses, and fretting as the stars grow paler and paler, the cough of 
the tiger slinking home at the dawn after a fruitless night's hunt the whole 
forms a scene not easily effaced from the memory.' 

The Glasgow Herald. 'An entrancing story beyond doubt. . . . The 
design is admirable to bring into violent contrast and opposition the widely 
differing forces of the Old World and the New and while, of course, it 
could have been done without the use of Americanese, yet that gives a 
wonderful freshness and realism to the stoiy. The design is a bold one, and' 
it has been boldly carried out. . . . The interest is not only sustained 
throughout, it is at times breathless. . . . The Maharajah, the rival queens, 
the pomp and peril of Rhatore, are clearly Mr. Kipling's own, and some of 
the Indian chapters are in his best style.' 

The Speaker. ' In the presentation of Rhatore there is something of the 
old Kiplingesque glamour ; it is to the pages of Mr. Kipling that one must 
go for the strange people and incidents of the royal household at Rhatore. 
... It is enough to say that the plotting of that most beautiful and most 
wicked gipsy, Sitabhai, is interesting ; that Sitabhai is well created ; and that 
the chapter which describes her secret meeting with Tarvin is probably the 
finest and the most impressive in the book.' 

The Bookman. ' The real interest of the book is in the life behind the 
curtains of the Maharajah's palace. The child Kunwar, his mother, the 
forsaken Zulu queen, the gipsy with her wicked arts, are pictures of Indian 
life, which even Mr. Kipling has not surpassed.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE MANXMAN 

BY HALL CAINE 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Times. 'With the exception of The Scapegoat, this is unquestion- 
ably the finest and most dramatic of Mr. Hall Caine's novels. . . . The 
Manxman goes very straight to the roots of human passion and emotion. It 
is a remarkable book, throbbing with human interest.' 

The Guardian. 'A story of exceptional power and thorough originality. 
The greater portion of it is like a Greek tragic drama, in the intensity of its 
interest, and the depth of its overshadowing gloom. . . . But this tragedy is 
merely a telling background for a series of brilliant sketches of men and 
manners, of old-world customs, and forgotten ways of speech which still 
linger in the Isle of Man.' 

The Standard. 'A singularly powerful and picturesque piece of work, 
extraordinarily dramatic. . . . Taken altogether, The Manxman cannot fail 
to enhance Mr. Hall Caine's reputation. It is a most powerful book.' 

The Morning Post. 'If possible, Mr. Hall Caine's work, The Manx- 
man, is more marked by passion, power, and brilliant local colouring than its 
predecessors. ... It has a grandeur as well as strength, and the picturesque 
features and customs of a delightful country are vividly painted. ' 

The World. ' Over and above the absorbing interest of the story, which 
never flags, the book is full of strength, of vivid character sketches, and 
powerful word-painting, all told with a force and knowledge of local colour.' 

The Queen. ' The Manxman is undoubtedly one of the most remarkable 
books of the century. It will be read and re-read, and take its place in the 
literary inheritance of the English-speaking nations.' 

The St. James's Gazette. ' The Manxman is a contribution to litera- 
ture, and the most fastidious critic would give in exchange for it a wilderness 
of that deciduous trash which our publishers call fiction. ... It is not possible 
to part from The Manxman with anything but a warm tribute of approval.' 
EDMUND GOSSE. 

The Christian World. * There is a great fascination in being present, 
as it were, at the birth of a classic ; and a classic undoubtedly The Manxman 
is. ... He who reads The Manxman feels that he is reading a book which 
will be read and re-read by very many thousands with human tears and 
human laughter.' 

Mr. T. P. O'Connor in 'The Sun.' 'This is a very fine and great 
story one of the finest and greatest of our time. . . . Mr. Hall Caine reaches 
heights which are attained only by the greatest masters of fiction. ... I 
think of the great French writer, Stendhal, at the same moment as the great 
English writer. ... In short, you feel what Mr. Howells said of Tolstoi, 
"This is not like life ; it is life." ... He belongs to that small minority of 
the Great Elect of Literature.' 

The Scotsman. ' It is not too much to say that it is the most powerful 
story that has been written in the present generation. . . . The love of Pete, 
his simple-mindedness, his sufferings when he has lost Kate, are painted with 
a master-hand. . . . It is a work of genius.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C 



THE BONDMAN 

BY HALL CAINE 

With a Photogravure Portrait of the Author. 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

Mr. Gladstone. ' The Bondman is a work of which I recognise the 
freshness, vigour, and sustained interest, no less than its integrity of aim.' 

The Times. ' It is impossible to deny originality and rude power to this 
saga, impossible not to admire its forceful directness, and the colossal 
grandeur of its leading characters.' 

The Academy. ' The language of The Bondman is full of nervous, 
graphic, and poetical English ; its interest never flags, and its situations and 
descriptions are magnificent. It is a splendid novel.' 

The Speaker. ' This is the best book that Mr. Hall Caine has yet 
written, and it reaches a level to which fiction very rarely attains. . . . We 
are, in fact, so loth to let such good work be degraded by the title of 
"novel" that we are almost tempted to consider its claim to rank as a prose 
epic. 

The Scotsman. ' Mr. Hall Caine has in this work placed himself 
beyond the front rank of the novelists of the day. He has produced a story 
which, for the ingenuity of its plot, for its literary excellence, for its delinea- 
tions of human passions, and for its intensely powerful dramatic scenes, is 
distinctly ahead of all the fictional literature of our time, and fit to rank with 
the most powerful fictional writing of the past century.' 

THE SCAPEGOAT 

BY HALL CAINE 
.In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. ' In our judgment it excels in dramatic force all the Author's 
previous efforts. For grace and touching pathos Naomi is a character which 
any romancist in the world might be proud to have created, and the tale of 
her parents' despair and hopes, and of her own development, confers upon 
The Scapegoat a distinction which is matchless of its kind. ' 

The Guardian. ' Mr. Hall Caine is undoubtedly master of a style which 
is peculiarly his own. He is in a way a Rembrandt among novelists.' 

The Athenaeum. ' It is a delightful story to read.' 

The Academy. 'Israel ben Oliel is the third of a series of the most 
profoundly conceived characters in modern fiction.' 

The Saturday Review. ' This is the best novel which Mr. Caine has 
yet produced.' 

The Scotsman. * The new story will rank with Mr. Hall Game's previous 
productions. Nay, it will in some respects rank above them. It will take 
its place by the side of the Hebrew histories in the Apocrypha. It is nobly 
and manfully written. It stirs the blood and kindles the imagination.' 

Truth. 'Mr. Hall Caine has been winning his way slowly, but surely, 
and securely I think also, to fame. You must by all means read his 
absorbing Moorish romance, The Scapegoat.'' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



LIFE THE ACCUSER 

BY THE AUTHOR OF 'A SUPERFLUOUS WOMAN' 
In One Volume^ Price 6s. 

The National Observer. 'The book has thought, it has wit, it has 
humour, delicate pathos, piquant originality, and dramatic strength. Miss 
Brooke owes much to George Eliot and much to George Meredith, but from 
both she has learned not copied. A story strongly imagined and told with 
strength, but also with extreme delicacy. There is no weak place in the book, 
no flight into fine writing, no tumble into melodrama, Many of the scenes 
are memorable. A piece of drama which would have done no discredit to 
George Eliot or George Meredith. No matter how small the part, it is played 
perfectly ; no matter how unimportant the character, its delineation is exact, 
convincing. Life the Accuser deserves to rank as a classic. We urge readers 
to read it, and then to ask themselves whether it is a book they are ever likely 
to forget. ' 

The Saturday Review.' It is hardly necessary to say of a novel by the 
author of A Superfluous Woman, that it abounds in cleverness. Life the 
Accuser has power, pith, and originality, and well deserves reading. 

The Daily Chronicle. ' Miss Brooke has given us a story in which our 
interest grows and grows, becomes absorbing, and is fast held until the last 
word upon the last page is read. Miss Brooke has wrought conscientiously 
and well ; her style has real distinction, her thought is upon a high level, her 
characterisation strong, clear, and vivid. All the men and women are por- 
trayed with much more than ordinary skill and effectiveness, but Rosalie 
Treleyon and Constantia Dayntree are masterpieces of portraiture. In fine, 
Life the Accuser is beyond all doubt a work of time and care and marked 
literary ability. The author's own observations upon men and things, inter- 
spersed among the pages, are as evidently the reflection of a clever brain 
trained to thinking keenly and justly, as the story itself is evidently the work 
of an artist.' 

The New Age. 'A book which should win its author a front-rank place 
among the novelists of to-day by its literary excellence, the conscientious 
thoroughness of its workmanship, and the perfection of its artistry. ' 

The Daily Graphic. ' Clever studies of character, and passages of undeni- 
ably good writing. ' 

The Literary World. 'Once the author gets deep ... we are held 
captive by the vividness of the recital.' 

The Court Journal. ' Of the cleverness of Miss Brooke's novel there can 
be no question. There is much admirable dialogue, much clever psychology, 
much dramatic feeling and literary daring. The story is admirably told. ' 

The Pall Mall Gazette.' Interesting throughout.' 

The Academy. ' In the conception of the story, in the grasp of the 
characters and the situations, there is undoubted power and notable promise.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



A SUPERFLUOUS WOMAN 

In One Volume, Price 6s. 

The Spectator. ' There are certain passages which quite arrest attention 
in the vividness of their imaginative power, and which, despite the expanses 
of vague indeterminate work by which they are surrounded, suggest a sus- 
picion that the author may show herself possessed, not merely of talent, but 
even of a spark of genius. ' 

The Daily News. ' The anonymous writer has descriptive powers of no 
mean order. The landscape passages are instinct with colour and atmosphere. 
There are some charming pastoral scenes, but the character-drawing through- 
out is not convincing.' 

The Daily Graphic. ' Only a clever woman could have written the story of 
Jessamine ; only a woman could fail to see how brilliantly inconclusive it is.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' No one who bestows attentive perusal upon her 
pages will be disposed to question the power of the anonymous authoress. 
The pages betray a capacity for the analysis of human feelings and emotions 
rarely to be met with. A Superfluous Woman is not a novel to be lightly 
read and then laid aside ; it will repay a second perusal.' 

The Westminster Gazette. ' There is much strong, and some pathetic, 
writing in A Superfluous Woman. Apart from its structural defects it shows 
power and imagination in no small degree. The chief success of the book is 
unquestionably Colin. This is a book far out of the common rut, and has a 
power of interesting even when it displeases.' 

The National Observer. 'The book is not another production of the 
deadly Serious Female. It is best where it is nearest passionate life. There are 
singular qualities force, cleverness, insight in the last scene between Jessa- 
mine and Colin, and in that of her lonely death. Altogether the book is 
uncommonly well worth reading.' 

The Standard. ' A love-story that is a very remarkable piece of writing 
told with real power and beauty. The writer is full of undisciplined power 
and undigested thought ; but she has poetry, and passion, and courage, and, 
unless we are mistaken, has a future before her.' 

The St James's Gazette. 'A bold work. We are very much afraid 
that "the young person " will not be allowed to read it. If so, we sincerely 
hope that she will do so without permission ; for, though it may not be the 
best novel of the season, it is amongst those best worth reading.' 

The Gentlewoman. 'A story of very conspicuous ability, full of a virile 
grasp on the problems of life, and a keen sense of the dramatic value of 
contrasts, which should carry the author to a fame he seems disposed to 
avoid. ' 

The Queen.' One is fascinated, and devours the whole at a sitting.' 
LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE HEAVENLY TWINS 

BY SARAH GRAND 

/// One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. 'It is so full of interest, and the characters are so 
eccentrically humorous yet true, that one feels inclined to pardon all its 
faults, and give oneself up to unreserved enjoyment of it. ... The twins 
Angelica and Diavolo, young barbarians, utterly devoid of all respect, con- 
ventionality, or decency, are among the most delightful and amusing children 
in fiction.' 

The Academy. * The adventures of Diavolo and Angelica the 
" heavenly twins " are delightfully funny. No more original children were 
ever put into a book. Their audacity, unmanageableness, and genius for 
mischief in none of which qualities, as they are here shown, is there any 
taint of vice are refreshing ; and it is impossible not to follow, with very 
keen interest, the progress of these youngsters. ' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' Everybody ought to read it, for it is an inex- 
haustible source of refreshing and highly stimulating entertainment.' 

The World. ' There is much powerful and some beautiful writing in this 
strange book.' 

The Westminster Gazette. 'Sarah Grand . . . has put enough obser- 
vation, humour, and thought into this book to furnish forth half-a-dozen 
ordinary novels.' 

Punch. ' The Twins themselves are a creation : the epithet " Heavenly " 
for these two mischievous little fiends is admirable.' 

The Queen. ' There is a touch of real genius in The Heavenly Twins' 

The Guardian. 'Exceptionally brilliant in dialogue, and dealing with 
modern society life, this book has a purpose to draw out and emancipate 
women. ' 

The Lady. 'Apart from its more serious interest, the book should take 
high rank on its literary merits alone. Its pages are brimful of good things, 
and more than one passage, notably the episode of "The Boy and the 
Tenor," is a poem complete in itself, and worthy of separate publication.' 

The Manchester Examiner. 'As surely as Tess of the d? Urbervilles 
swept all before it last year, so surely has Sarah Grand's Heavenly Twins 
provoked the greatest attention and comment this season. It is a most 
daringly original work. . . . Sarah Grand is a notable Woman's Righter, 
but her book is the one asked for at Mudie's, suburban, and seaside libraries, 
and discussed at every hotel table in the kingdom. The episode of the 
" Tenor and the Boy " is of rare beauty, and is singularly delicate and at the 
same time un-English in treatment.' 

The New York Critic. 'It is written in an epigrammatic style, and, 
besides its cleverness, has the great charm of freshness, enthusiasm, and 
poetic feeling.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



IDEALA 

A STUDY FROM LIFE 
BY SARAH GRAND 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Morning Post 'Sarah Grand's Ideala. ... A clever book in 
itself, is especially interesting when read in the light of her later works. 
Standing alone, it is remarkable as the outcome of an earnest mind seeking 
in good faith the solution of a difficult and ever present problem. . . . Ideala 
is original and somewhat daring. . . . The story is in many ways delightful 
ind thought-suggesting.' 

The Liverpool Mercury. 'The book is a wonderful one an evangel 
for the fair sex, and at once an inspiration and a comforting companion, to 
which thoughtful womanhood will recur again and again.' 

The Glasgow Herald. ' Ideala has attained the honour of a fifth 
edition. . . . The stir created by The Heavenly Twins, the more recent 
work by the same authoress, Madame Sarah Grand, would justify this step. 
Ideala can, however, stand on its own merits.' 

The Yorkshire Post 'As a psychological study the book cannot fail to 
be of interest to many readers.' 

The Birmingham Gazette. 'Madame Sarah Grand thoroughly deserves 
her success. Ideala, the heroine, is a splendid conception, and her opinions 
are noble. . . . The book is not one to be forgotten. ' 

OUR MANIFOLD NATURE 

BY SARAH GRAND 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Spectator. 'Insight into, and general sympathy with widely 
differing phases of humanity, coupled with power to reproduce what is seen, 
with vivid distinct strokes, that rivet the attention, are qualifications for 
work of the kind contained in Our Manifold Nature which Sarah Grand 
evidently possesses in a high degree. . . . All these studies, male and female 
alike, are marked by humour, pathos, fidelity to life, and power to recognise 
in human nature the frequent recurrence of some apparently incongruous 
and remote trait, which, when at last it becomes visible, helps to a com- 
prehension of what might otherwise be inexplicable. ' 

The Speaker. 'In Our Manifold Nature Sarah Grand is seen at her 
best. How good that is can only be known by those who read for them- 
selves this admirable little volume. In freshness of conception and originality 
of treatment these stories are delightful, full of force and piquancy, whilst 
the studies of character are carried out with equal firmness and delicacy.' 

The Guardian. ' Our Manifold Nature is a clever book. Sarah Grand 
has the power of touching common things, which, if it fails to make them 
" rise to touch the spheres," renders them exceedingly interesting.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C 



THE MASTER 

BY I. ZANGWILL 

With a Photogravure Portrait of the Author 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Morning Post. * The merits of the book are great. Its range of obser- 
vation is wide ; its sketches of character are frequently admirably drawn. . . . 
It is extremely refreshing, after a surfeit of recent fiction of the prevalent type, 
to welcome a really clever work by a writer who is certainly not hampered 
by conventional prejudice. ' 

The Queen. 'It is impossible to deny the greatness of a book like The 
Master, a veritable human document, in which the characters do exactly as 
they would in life. ... I venture to say that Matt himself is one of the most 
striking and original characters in our fiction, and I have not the least doubt 
that The Master will always be reckoned one of our classics. ' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It is a powerful and masterly piece of work. . . . 
Quite the best novel of the year.' 

The Literary World. ' In The Master > Mr. Zangwill has eclipsed all his 
previous work. This strong and striking story of patience and passion, of 
sorrow and success, of art, ambition, and vain gauds, is genuinely powerful 
in its tragedy, and picturesque in its completeness. . . . The work, thoroughly 
wholesome in tone, is of sterling merit, and strikes a truly tragic chord, which 
leaves a deep impression upon the mind.' 

The Jewish World. ' For a novel to be a work that shall live, and not 
merely please the passing taste of a section of the public, it must palpitate with 
the truth of human experience and human feeling. . . . Such a novel is The 
Master, Mr. ZangwilPs latest, and assuredly one of his best works. Interest 
in the story is sustained from beginning to end. From the first page to the 
last we get a series of vivid pictures that make us feel, as well as understand, 
not only the personality and environment of his characters, but the motives 
that compel, like fate, their words and actions.' 

The Leeds Mercury. ' The Master is impassioned and powerful, and, in 
our judgment, is vastly superior to Children of the Ghetto. From the first page to 
the last the book is quick with life, and not less quick surprises. . . . The 
impression which the book leaves is deep and distinct, and the power, from 
start to finish, of such a delineation of life is unmistakable.' 

The Liverpool Mercury. ' The accomplished author of Children of the 
Ghetto has given us in The Master a book written with marvellous skill, and 
characterised by vivid imaginative power. It is not a volume to be taken up and 
despatched in a leisure evening, but one to be studied and enjoyed in many 
an hour of quiet, or to be read aloud in the family circle, when the toils of 
the day have given place to retirement and peace. ' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



CHILDREN OF THE GHETTO 

A Study of a Peculiar People 
BY I. ZANGWILL 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Times. ' From whatever point of view we regard it, it is a remark- 
able book.' 

The Athenaeum. 'The chief interest of the book lies in the wonderful 
description of the Whitechapel Jews. The vividness and force with which 
Mr. Zangwill brings before us the strange and uncouth characters with which 
he has peopled his book are truly admirable. . . . Admirers of Mr. Zangwill's 
fecund wit will not fail to find flashes of it in these pages. ' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' Altogether we are not aware of any such minute, 
graphic, and seemingly faithful picture of the Israel of nineteenth century 
London. . . . The book has taken hold of us.' 

The Spectator. 'Esther Ansell, Raphael Leon, Mrs. Henry Goldsmith, 
Reb Shemuel, and the rest, are living creations. 

The Speaker. 'A strong and remarkable book.' 

The National Observer. 'To ignore this book is not to know the East 
End Jew.' 

The Guardian. 'A novel such as only our own day could produce. A 
masterly study of a complicated psychological problem in which every factor 
is handled with such astonishing dexterity and intelligence that again and 
again we are tempted to think a really good book has come into our hands.' 

The Graphic. 'Absolutely fascinating. Teaches how closely akin are 
laughter and tears.' 

Black and White. 'A moving panorama of Jewish life, full of truth, full 
of sympathy, vivid in the setting forth, and occasionally most brilliant. Such 
a book as this has the germs of a dozen novels. A book to read, to keep, to 
ponder over, to remember.' 

W. Archer in ' The World.'' The most powerful and fascinating book 
I have read for many a long day.' 

Land and Water. 'The most wonderful multi-coloured and brilliant 
description. Dickens has never drawn characters of more abiding indi- 
viduality. An exceeding beautiful chapter is the honeymoon of the Hyams. 
Charles Kingsley in one of his books makes for something of the same sort. 
But his idea is not half so tender and faithful, nor his handling anything like 
so delicate and natural.' 

Andrew Lang in 'Longman's Magazine.' 'Almost every kind of 

reader will find Children of the Ghetto interesting.' 

T. P. O'Connor in 'The Weekly Sun.' 'Apart altogether from its 
great artistic merits, from its clear portraits, its subtle and skilful analysis of 
character, its pathos and its humour, this book has, in my mind, an immense 
interest as a record of a generation that has passed and of struggles that are 
yet going on.' 

The Manchester Guardian. 'The best Jewish novel ever written.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM IIEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE KING OF SCHNORRERS 

Grotesques and Fantasies 
BY I. ZANGWILL 

With over Ninety Illustrations by PHIL MAY and Others. 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. ' Several of Mr. Zangwill's contemporary Ghetto char- 
acters have already become almost classical; but in The King of Schnorrers 
he goes back to the Jewish community of the eighteenth century for the 
hero of his principal story ; and he is indeed a stupendous hero . . . anyhow, 
he is well named the king of beggars. The illustrations, by Phil May, add 
greatly to the attraction of the book. ' 

The Saturday Review. 'Mr. Zangwill has created a new figure in 
fiction, and a new type of humour. The entire series of adventures is a 
triumphant progress. . . . Humour of a rich and active character pervades 
the delightful history of Manasses. Mr. Zangwill's book is altogether very 
good reading. It is also very cleverly illustrated by Phil May and other 
artists.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It is a beautiful story. The King of Schnorrers 
is that great rarity an entirely new thing, that is as good as it is new. ' 

The World. ' The exuberant and even occasionally overpowering humour 
of Mr. Zangwill . is at his highest mark in his new volume, The King of 
Schnorrers. ' 



THE PREMIER AND THE PAINTER 

BY I. ZANGWILL AND LOUIS COWEN 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Graphic. ' It might be worth the while of some industrious and 
capable person with plenty of leisure to reproduce in a volume of reasonable 
size the epigrams and other good things witty and serious which The Premier 
and the Painter contains. There are plenty of them, and many are worth 
noting and remembering.' 

The St. James's Gazette. 'The satire hits all round with much impar 
tiality ; while one striking situation succeeds another till the reader is alto- 
gether dazzled. The story is full of life and "go" and brightness, and will 
well repay perusal.' 

The Morning Post. 'The story is described as a "fantastic romance," 
and, indeed, fantasy reigns supreme from the first to the last of its pages. It 
relates the history of our time with humour and well-aimed sarcasm. All the 
most prominent characters of the day, whether political or otherwise, come in 
for notice. The identity of the leading politicians is but thinly veiled, while 
many celebrities appear in propria persona. Both the "Premier" and 
"Painter" now and again find themselves in the most critical situations. 
Certainly this is not a story that he who runs may read, but it is cleverly 
original, and often lightened by bright flashes of wit.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE WORLD AND A MAN 

BY 'ZZ' 
In One Volume, Price 6s. 

The Daily Chronicle. ' This is an extremely clever novel. A Drama in 
Dutch was clever, but this book is worth a dozen of it. In all modern fiction 
there is no character more thoroughly realised than the Man with whom the 
World dealt so disastrously. Z Z has analysed his hero according to the 
best method of a literary artist. The story . . . fascinates from the sheer 
power of its telling. Z Z's literary method is the literary method of Mr. 
George Gissing, of Mr. George Moore, of Emile Zola. Although there are 
so many details, one can see plainly enough that each has been carefully 
selected for reproduction. In this respect his work is superior to that of most 
modern realists, and to that of one, perhaps of two, of the writers we have 
just mentioned. He is absolutely faithful to life. He gives just so much as 
will produce a strong, vivid, memorable impression. The World and a Man 
is a serious contribution to literature.' 

The Globe. ' Sincere and thoughtful, and so much above the average, 
that all who read for profit should hasten to judge it for themselves.' 

The Observer. ' A strongly written story which will please those readers 
who care for the more serious kind of fiction. A clever and readable work, 
which may be recommended to all who look for something more than mere 
" flowers, froth, and flummery " in the fiction which they peruse.' 



A DRAMA IN DUTCH 

BY 'Z Z' 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Speaker. ' A novel of such remarkable merit, and written with such 
easy mastery of style. From first to last this striking and powerful story 
maintains a high level of excellence, betokening no 'prentice hand. It is a 
story teeming with humour and pathos, instinct with the irony of human fate, 
and quick to apprehend the subtle twists and inconsistencies of human 
character. Above all, it is deliciously original . . . and told with great spirit, 
humour, and dramatic vigour. A vivid picture of a side of life upon which 
little light has been cast by our novelists since Dickens laid down his pen.' 

The Westminster Gazette. 'Vivid in portraiture, vivacious in manner. 
. . . The combination of close observation and grim sardonic humour gives 
the book a decided charm. . . . The pathetic figure of Peter is drawn with a 
tenderness which indefinitely enlarges our impression of the author's dramatic 
possibilities.' 

The Aberdeen Daily Free Press. ' In the publication of this and 
kindred works, Mr. Heinemann is doing much to maintain the freshness and 
vigour of our English fiction. . . . He has seldom provided a pleasanter and 
yet more bracing work than the Drama now before us. ... As a mere story 
it will carry delight to even the most unthinking.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



A COURT INTRIGUE 

BY BASIL THOMSON 
In One Volume, Price 6s. 

The Daily Chronicle. 'The description of the Court is broad farce. 
There is a topsyturvydom about everything that is almost Gilbertian. Lovers 
of mystery are hardly to be satisfied without a little gore, and it is to these 
that we commend A Court Intrigue.' 

The Daily Telegraph. * The hero is a personage worthy to have figured 
in Alphonse Daudet's Les Rois en Exile. Told with great power and striking 
impressiveness.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette.' The romance is sprightly and entertaining. 
Mr. Thomson must have the credit for an audacious and happy piece of 
invention.' 

The Guardian* ' Admirably told. The reader's curiosity is kept awake 
the whole time. . . . The idea is both original and ingenious. ' 

The Academy. 'Mr. Thomson has three first-rate qualities : wit, inven- 
tion, and an admirable manner. No cleverer book will appear this side of 
Christmas. A book at once enthralling and original. ' 

The Morning Post. 'The balance is always evenly held between 
pleasant comedy and farce in Mr. Thomson's decidedly clever work. His 
conceit is carried out with vivacity and considerable lightness of touch, to 
which is added just enough pathos.' 



CHUN-TI-KUNG 

BY CLAUDE REES 
In One Volume, Price 6s. 

The World. ' Apart from its love interest, the novel is decidedly enter- 
taining, as the author is not only a keen student of Chinese character, but has 
written powerfully, and as one having authority, on the intricacies of official 
and social life and habits in the Flowery Land.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' A novel of exceptional merit ; probably the most 
elaborate and painstaking study of celestial life and character that has ever yet 
appeared in the English language, or, for that matter, in any European tongue. ' 

The Literary World. 'A wonderfully intimate and presumably accurate 
account of the life and doings of a middle-class young Chinaman. The first 
part is delightfully humorous and original . . . with much of the peculiar 
charm which carries the reader into such a wonderful atmosphere of things 
Asiatic. ' 

' The St. James's Budget. ' A striking bit of work. While it is so lightly 
and amusingly written that it would attract readers seeking only entertain- 
ment, it speaks with knowledge of matters that claim the interest of the serious 
thinker. The book is an artistic and well-rounded whole, and is a valuable 
contribution to the literature that gives one part of the world some idea of the 
life the other part is living.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE LAST SENTENCE 

BY MAXWELL GRAY 

AUTHOR OF 'THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND,' ETC. 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Standard. ' The Last Sentence is a remarkable story; it abounds 
with dramatic situations, the interest never for a moment flags, and the 
characters are well drawn and consistent.' 

The Saturday Review. 'There is a great deal as well as a great variety 
of incident in the story, and more than twenty years are apportioned to it ; but 
it never seems overcrowded, nor has it the appearance of several stories rolled 
into one. The Last Sentence is a remarkable novel, and the more so because 
its strong situations are produced without recourse to the grosser forms of 
immorality.' 

The Daily Telegraph. 'One of the most powerful and adroitly worked- 
out plots embodied in any modern work of fiction runs through The Last 
Sentence. . . . This terrible tale of retribution is told with well-sustained 
force and picturesqueness, and abounds in light as well as shade.' 

The Morning Post. ' Maxwell Gray has the advantage of manner that is 
both cultured and picturesque, and while avoiding even the appearance of the 
melodramatic, makes coming events cast a shadow before them so as to excite 
and entertain expectation. ... It required the imagination of an artist to 
select the kind of Nemesis which finally overtakes this successful evil-doer, 
and which affords an affecting climax to a rather fascinating tale. ' 

The Glasgow Herald. ' This is a very strong story. ... It contains 
much rich colouring, some striking situations, and plenty of thoroughly living 
characters. The interest is of a varied kind, and, though the hero is an 
aristocrat, the pictures of human life are by no means confined to the upper 
circles. ' 

The Leeds Mercury. ' It shows a command of the resources of the 
novelist's art which is by no means common, and it has other qualities which 
lift it far above the average level of the circulating library. It is written with 
a literary grace and a moral insight which are seldom at fault, and from first 
to last it is pervaded with deep human interest.' 

The Queen. 'Maxwell Gray has a certain charm and delicacy of style. 
She has mastered the subtleties of a particular type of weak character until 
she may be almost called its prophet.' 

The Lady's Pictorial. 'The book is a clever and powerful one. . . . 
Cynthia Marlowe will live in our memories as a sweet and noble woman ; one 
of whom it is a pleasure to think of beside some of the "emancipated" 
heroines so common in the fiction of the day. ' 

The Manchester Courier. ' The author of The Silence of Dean Maitland 
gives to the reading world another sound and magnificent work. ... In 
both these works Maxwell Gray has taken " Nemesis " as his grand motif. In 
each work there sits behind the hero thata/ra cura which poisons the whole- 
some draught of human joy. In each is present the corroding blight that 
comes of evil done and not discovered.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE YEARS THAT THE LOCUST 
HATH EATEN 

BY ANNIE E. HOLDSWORTH 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Literary World. * The novel is marked by great strength, which 
is always under subjection to the author's gift of restraint, so that we are made 
to feel the intensity all the more. Pathos and humour (in the true sense) go 
together through these chapters ; and for such qualities as earnestness, insight, 
moral courage, and thoughtfulness, The Years that the Locust hath Eaten 
stands out prominently among noteworthy books of the time. ' 

The Daily News. 'Bears out to the full the promise given by Joanna 
Traill, Spinster. The author has a genuine sense of humour, and an eye for 
character, and if she bids us weep at the tragedy of life and death, she makes 
us smile by her pleasant handling of human foible and eccentricities.' 

The Standard. 'A worthy successor to Joanna Traill, Spinster. It is 
quite as powerful. It has insight and sympathy and pathos, humour, and 
some shrewd understanding of human nature scattered up and down its pages. 
Moreover, there is beauty in the story and idealism. . . . Told with a humour, 
a grace, a simplicity, that ought to give the story a long reign. . . . The 
charm of the book is undeniable ; it is one that only a clever woman, full of 
the best instincts of her sex, could have written.' 

The Review of Reviews. * It has all the charm and simplicity of treat- 
ment which gave its predecessor (Joanna Traill, Spinster) its vogue.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' The book should not be missed by a fastidious 
novel-reader.' 

The Court Journal. ' The moral of the book is excellent ; the style 
strong and bold.' 

The Scotsman. 'The story is well told, and a vein of humour serves to 
bring the pathos into higher relief.' 

The Manchester Guardian. 'It is sincere and conscientious, and it 
shows appreciation of the value of reticence.' 

The Manchester Courier. 'The book is full of delicate touches of 
characterisation, and is written with considerable sense of style. ' 

The Glasgow Herald. ' Worked out with great skill and success. . . . 
The story is powerfully told .' 

The Liverpool Mercury. 'The story is told with sympathy and pathos, 
and the concluding chapters are touching in the extreme.' 

The Birmingham Gazette. 'A sad story beautifully written, containing 
pure thoughts and abundant food for reflection upon the misery which exists 
in the world at the present day. The tale is particularly * pathetic, but it is 
true in character. It will be read with interest.' 

The Leeds Mercury. 'Full of powerful situations.' 
LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



IN HASTE AND AT LEISURE 

BY E. LYNN LINTON 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Speaker. 'Mrs. Lynn Linton commands the respect of her readers 
and critics. Her new story, In Haste and at Leisure^ is as powerful a piece 
of writing as any that we owe to her pen.' 

The St. James's Budget. 'A thorough mistress of English, Mrs. Lynn 
Linton uses the weapons of knowledge and ridicule, of sarcasm and logic, with 
powerful effect; the shallow pretences of the "New Woman" are ruthlessly 
torn aside.' 

The Literary World. ' Whatever its exaggerations may be, /;; Haste and 
at Leisiire remains a notable achievement. It has given us pleasure, and we 
can recommend it with confidence.' 

The Court Journal. ' The book is a long but brilliant homily and series 
of object-lessons against the folly and immorality of the modern craze of the 
most advanced women, who rail against men, marriage, and maternity. The 
book is immensely powerful, and intensely interesting.' 

The Daily Graphic. 'It is an interesting story, while it is the most 
tremendous all-round cannonade to which the fair emancipated have been 
subjected.' 

The World. * It is clever, and well written.' 

The Graphic. ' It is thoroughly interesting, and it is full of passages that 
almost irresistibly tempt quotation.' 

The St. James's Gazette.' It is a novel that ought to be, and will be, 
widely read and enjoyed.' 

The Globe. ' It is impossible not to recognise and acknowledge its great 
literary merit. ' 

The Glasgow Herald. '/ Haste and at Leisure is a striking and even 
brilliant novel. ' 

The Manchester Courier. 'In this cruelly scientific analyses of the 
"New Woman," Mrs. Lynn Linton writes with all the bitterness of Dean 
Swift. The book is one of remarkable power. ' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE ISLAND OF DOCTOR MOREAU 

BY H. G. WELLS 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Spectator. 'There is nothing in Swift's grim conceptions of animal- 
ised men and rationalised animals more powerfully conceived than Mr. Wells' 
description of the deformed and malformed creatures of Doctor Moreau. . . . 
Doctor Moreau is a figure to make an impression on the imagination, and his 
tragic death has a kind of poetic justice which satisfies the mind of the reader. 
Although we do not recommend The Island of Doctor Moreau to readers of 
sensitive nerves, as it might well haunt them too powerfully, we believe that 
Mr. Wells has almost rivalled Swift in the power of his very gruesome, but 
very salutary as well as impressive, conception.' 

The Saturday Review.' Finely imagined, and the story of the hero, 
suddenly brought into an island peopled with nightmare creatures, is vivid 
and exciting to the last degree.' 

The Literary World. ' To say it is a work of genius is to do it inadequate 
justice. Free from the least suspicion of outraging Mrs. Grundy.' 

The National Observer. ' Since The Island of Doctor Moreau contains 
no word of love, we are unable to recommend it either to the sentimental girl 
in the suburbs, or, since it is perfectly decent, to the unwholesome person who 
brought into fashion the dying fiction once called New. But any one who can 
appreciate power, daring, and originality, cannot do better than send for 
Doctor Moreau' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'Fascinating to any one who loves the deft 
manipulation of an ingenious idea. . . . The reader may sup his full of strange 
and gruesome spectacles in these pages. He may or may not object to it, but 
he will read if he has once begun, will read and wonder. ' 

The St. James's Gazette.' There can be no question that Mr. Wells has 
written a singularly vivid and stimulating story. The idea is original and 
boldly fantastic. The description of the strange Beast Folk is powerful, and 
even convincing. The reader follows with a growing interest the fate of the 
stranger who is cast by accident upon this island of pain and terror. There 
are thrilling episodes and adventurous moments, and, above all, that happy 
knack of the tale-teller which makes you want to go on till you have got to 
the end of the story. The book is well written, with occasional passages that 
show a rare felicity in the use and handling of language. There is none of the 
younger romancers more gifted.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



