The Old and Modern Dramatists
Author: Lewes, George Henry.
Publication info: The Leader ; Toronto [Toronto]. 01 Jan 1850: iv, 960 p.

The Old and Modern Dramatists [in, The Leader ... No. 19. Saturday, August 3, 1850 ...]
[Page ]
THE OLD AND MODERN DRAMATISTS. Apropos of Marston's Malcontent , which was revived at the Olympic last Monday, and there mercilessly murdered by the most incompetent company in London, we wish to say a word respecting our much-praised Old English Dramatists.
Light the fagots! clear your throats for execration! ransack your memory for epithets like stones to cast at our heretical heads! we are about to utter heresy of so black a dye that it will take the breath from some of you! It is nothing less than a conviction that the greatest injury yet sustained by the English drama was the revival of admiration for the Old English Dramatists. They were forgotten—justly so—
“Denn alles das entsteht
Ist werth dass es zu ende geht,”
(“Nothing parishes but it deserves to perish,”— Geothe) forgotten in spite of their marvellous passages and lines of beauty, until Charles Lamb and his friends, struck with the brilliancy of the jewels cast upon these dunghills, cried out with all the quick delight of discoverers, “Here is a new world!” The old English dramatists were exhumed from the dust of oblivious ages, and were studied by our poets as models. Now we venture to say that more detestable models were never held up before a student's reverence; their very excellences being fatal lures. This is not the occasion for a survey of their characteristics, or a display of their peculiar infelicity as dramatists; but whoever has more than a secondhand acquaintance with Kyd, Peele, Marlowe, Webster, Dekker, Ford, Marston, Chapman, Heywood, Middleton, Shirley, Cyril Tourneur, and the rest, will probably agree with us that their plays are as poor in construction (artistic as well as theatric) as they are resplendent in imagery and weighty lines—that their characters are sketched rather than developed —that their situations for the most part are violent, horrible, and clumsily prepared, and that, besides being wearisome in reading, they are essentially unfit for the modern stage. If this be so— or but partially so—it follows that they cannot be good models for our living dramatists. The drama should be a reflex of our life, idealized, of course, but issuing out of the atmosphere we breathe. It was so when these writers lived: it was so in the reigns of Charles and Anne; it was so in the last century, when the British tar and British merchant were the claptraps of the stage. These last century tragedies and comedies are wearisome enough, 'tis true, and any escape from them might, to our young poets, have seemed an issue into a freer, healthier world. But the escape into the Old Drama was a brilliant fallacy: it was the Young Englandism of Art: disgusted with the Present, yet without faith in the Future, it flew into the Past. Unhappily all our poets could learn in that Old Drama was precisely that of which (if they were poets) they stood in least need, viz., poetry; finding that there they learned to think that poetry was enough to make a drama! Whereas, if they had never known this Old Drama, they must perforce have created a new form, and instead of the thousand-and-one imitations of the old dramatists, which the last twenty years have produced, we might have had some sterling plays. Who are the successful dramatists of our day? Precisely those who do not imitate the Elizabethan form! Perhaps Knowles may be cited as an exception; but his imitation really consists in quaintness of diction, not in the nature of his plots and arrangement of his subject He succeeds by his strong domestic element. To appeal to the public taste, to move the general heart of men, you must quit the study, and try to image forth some reflex of the world that all men know, speaking their language, uttering their thoughts, espousing their idealisms. Racine has been blamed by short-sighted critics for making his Greeks speak and think like Frenchmen: he did so because he was a poet , not an antiquary! Had he pictured Greeks (and how easy for one so learned to have done so!) he would have committed the mistake of our modern dramatists, viz., sacrificed the present to the past. We foresee an objection drawn from the continued success of Shakspeare and Racine; and we will answer it. Not because of their form—of what is temporal and peculiar to their epochs in them— do these masters hold us in their spell, but in spite of it. If they were born into this century they would not adopt the tone of two centuries past, but do now what they did then—reflect their age. This remark will also anticipate any question as to whether we wish drawing-room and cottage life to be the only sphere for a modern dramatist. We do not wish it. There is no need of abjuring the picturesque adjuncts of dress, scene, and distant time. Poetry moves more freely in a world of beauty and magnificence. But we do wish that the dramatist should not be an archæologist, that he should not strive to revive defunct forms, but produce a nineteenth century drama: something that will appeal to a wider audience than that of a few critics and black letter students. What has prevented our poets from attempting this? A preconceived notion of the excellence of the old English dramatists!
The Keans are to open a theatre confessedly with the intention of bringing out new plays. It is the only chance left for a theatre; but it will require some courage to persevere, and not be frightened at the first non-success. But, if our voice can pierce through ancient prejudices, we would earnestly counsel all aspiring dramatists to forget, if possible, that Shakspeare had contemporaries, to shun the old writers as they would the plague; and we would whisper softly in the managerial ear, Beware of works which in critical compliment are said to be “worthy of a place beside productions of the Elizabethan age”! Verbum sat.
$$$
