Theory of Greek Tragedy
Author: De Quincey, Thomas.
Publication info: The Collected Writings Of Thomas De Quincey . viii, 455 p. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1890.

Theory of Greek Tragedy [in, The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey; New and Enlarged Edition; By David Masson ... Vol. x. Literary Theory And Criticism]
[Page 342]
THEORY OF GREEK TRAGEDY 1 The Greek Tragedy is a dark problem. We cannot say that the Greek Drama as a whole is such in any more comprehensive sense; for the Comedy of Greece depends essentially upon the same principles as our own. Comedy, as the reflex of social life, will shift in correspondence to the shifting movements of civilisation. Inevitably, as human intercourse in cities grows more refined, Comedy will grow more subtle; it will build itself on distinctions of character less grossly defined, and on features of manners more delicate and impalpable. But the fundus , the ultimate resource, the well-head, of the comic, must for ever be sought in one and the same field,—viz. the ludicrous of incident, or the ludicrous of situation, or the ludicrous which arises in a mixed way between the character and the situation. The age of Aristophanes, for example, answered in some respects to our own earliest dramatic era, viz. from 1588 to 1635,—an age not (as Dr. Johnson assumes it to have been in his elaborate Preface to Shakspere) rude or gross; on the contrary, far more intense with intellectual instincts and agencies than his own, which was an age of collapse. But in the England of Shakspere, as in the Athens of Aristophanes, the surface of society in cities still rocked, or at least undulated, with the ground-swell surviving from periods of intestine tumult and insecurity. The times were still martial and restless;
[Page 343]
men still wore swords in pacific assemblies; the intellect of the age was a fermenting intellect; it was a revolutionary intellect. And Comedy itself, coloured by the moving pageantries of life, was more sinewy, more audacious in its movements; spoke with something more of an impassioned tone; and was hung with draperies more rich, more voluminous, more picturesque. On the other hand, the age of the Athenian Menander, or the English Congreve, though still an unsettled age, was far less insecure in its condition of police, and far less showy in its exterior aspect. In England, it is true that a picturesque costume still prevailed: the whole people were still draped 2 professionally; each man's dress proclaimed his calling; and so far it might be said “Natio comœda est.” 3 But the characteristic and dividing spirit had fled, whilst the forms survived; and those middle men had universally arisen whose equivocal relations to different employments broke down the strength of contrast between them. Comedy, therefore, was thrown more exclusively upon the interior man,—upon the nuances of his nature, or upon the finer spirit of his manners. It was now the acknowledged duty of Comedy to fathom the coynesses of human nature, and to arrest the fleeting phenomena of human demeanour.
But Tragedy stood upon another footing. Whilst the comic muse in every age acknowledges a relationship which is more than sisterly—in fact, little short of absolute identity —the tragic muses of Greece and England stand so far aloof as hardly to recognise each other under any common designation. Few people have ever studied the Grecian Drama; and hence may be explained the possibility that so little should have been said by critics upon its characteristic differences, and nothing at all upon the philosophic ground of these differences. Hence may be explained the fact that,
[Page 344]
whilst Greek Tragedy has always been a problem in criticism, it is still a problem of which no man has attempted the solution. This problem it is our intention briefly to investigate.
I. There are cases occasionally occurring in the English Drama and the Spanish where a play is exhibited within a play. To go no further, every person remembers the remarkable instance of this in Hamlet. Sometimes the same thing takes place in painting. We see a chamber, suppose, exhibited by the artist, on the walls of which (as a customary piece of furniture) hangs a picture. And, as this picture again might represent a room furnished with pictures, in the mere logical possibility of the case we might imagine this descent into a life below a life going on ad infinitum . Practically, however, the process is soon stopped. A retrocession of this nature is difficult to manage. The original picture is a mimic, an unreal, life. But this unreal life is itself a real life with respect to the secondary picture; which again must be supposed realized with relation to the tertiary picture, if such a thing were attempted. Consequently, at every step of the introvolution (to neologise a little in a case justifying a neologism), something must be done to differentiate the gradations, and to express the subordinations of life; because each term in the descending series, being first of all a mode of non-reality to the spectator, is next to assume the functions of a real life in its relations to the next lower or interior term of the series.
What the painter does in order to produce this peculiar modification of appearances, so that an object shall affect us first of all as an idealized or unreal thing, and next as itself a sort of relation to some secondary object still more intensely unreal, we shall not attempt to describe; for in some technical points we should, perhaps, fail to satisfy the reader, and without technical explanations we could not satisfy the question. But, as to the poet, all the depths of philosophy,— at least of any known and recognised philosophy,—would less avail to explain speculatively the principles which in such a case should guide him than Shakspere has explained by his practice. The problem before him was one of his own suggesting; the difficulty was of his own making. It
[Page 345]
was so to differentiate a drama that it might stand within a drama precisely as a painter places a picture within a picture, and therefore that the secondary or inner drama should be non-realized upon a scale that would throw, by comparison, a reflex colouring of reality upon the principal drama. This was the problem, this was the thing to be accomplished; and the secret, the law, of the process by which he accomplishes this is to swell, tumefy, stiffen, not the diction only, but the tenor of the thought,—in fact, to stilt it, and to give it a prominence and an ambition beyond the scale which he adopted for his ordinary life. It is, of course, therefore, in rhyme—an artifice which Shakspere employs with great effect on other similar occasions (that is, occasions when he wished to solemnize or in any way differentiate the life); it is condensed and massed as respects the flowing of the thoughts; it is rough and horrent with figures in strong relief, like the embossed gold of an ancient vase; and the movement of the scene is contracted into short gyrations —so unlike the free sweep and expansion of his general developments.
Now, the Grecian Tragedy stands in the very same circumstances, and rises from the same original basis. If, therefore, the reader can obtain a glimpse of the life within a life which the painter sometimes exhibits to the eye, and which the Hamlet of Shakspere exhibits to the mind— then he may apprehend the original phasis under which we contemplate the Greek Tragedy.
II. But to press further into the centre of things. Perhaps the very first element in the situation of the Grecian Tragedy, which operated by degrees to evoke all the rest, was the original elevation of the scale by which all was to be measured, in consequence of two accidents: 1st, the sanctity of the ceremonies in which Tragedy arose; 2d, the vast size of the ancient theatres.
The first point we need not dwell on. Everybody is aware that Tragedy in Greece grew by gradual expansions out of an idolatrous rite—out of sacrificial pomp: though we do not find anybody who has noticed the consequent overruling effect which this had upon the quality of that Tragedy,—how, in fact, from this early cradle of Tragedy
[Page 346]
arose a sanctity which compelled all things to modulate into the same religious key. But next, the theatres—why were they so vast in ancient cities: in Athens, in Syracuse, in Capua, in Rome? Purely from democratic influences. Every citizen was entitled to a place at the public scenical representations. In Athens, for example, the state paid for him. He was present, by possibility and by legal fiction, at every performance: therefore room must be prepared for him. And, allowing for the privileged foreigners (the domiciled aliens called μΕτοικοι , we are not surprised to hear that the Athenian theatre was adapted to an audience of thirty thousand persons. It is not enough to say that naturally — we have a right to say that inevitably —out of this prodigious compass, exactly ten times over the compass of the large Drury Lane burned down a generation ago, 4 arose certain immediate results that moulded the Greek Tragedy in all its functions, purposes, and phenomena. The person must be aggrandized, the countenance must be idealized. For upon any stage corresponding in its scale to the colossal dimensions of such a house the unassisted human figure would have been lost; the unexaggerated human features would have been seen as in a remote perspective, and, besides, have had their expression lost; the unreverberated human voice would have been undistinguishable from the surrounding murmurs of the audience. Hence the cothurnus to raise the actor; hence the voluminous robes to hide the disproportion thus resulting to the figure; hence the mask larger than life, painted to represent the noble Grecian contour of countenance; hence the mechanism by which it was made to swell the intonations of the voice like the brazen tubes of an organ.
Here, then, you have a Tragedy, by its very origin, in mere virtue of the accidents out of which it arose, standing upon the inspiration of religious feeling; pointing, like the spires of our English parish churches, up to heaven by mere necessity of its earliest purpose, from which it could not alter or swerve per saltum ; so that an influence once there was always there. Even from that cause, therefore, you have a Tragedy ultra-human and Titanic. But, next, from
[Page 347]
political causes falling in with that early religious cause, you have a Tragedy forced into a more absolute and unalterable departure from a human standard. That figure so noble, that voice so profound, and, by the very construction of the theatres as well as of the masks, receiving such solemn reverberations, proclaim a being elevated above the ordinary human scale. And then comes the countenance always adjusted to the same unvarying tone of sentiment, viz. the presiding sentiment of the situation, which of itself would go far to recover the key-note of Greek Tragedy. These things being given, we begin to perceive a life removed by a great gulf from the ordinary human life even of kings and heroes: we descry a life within a life.
III. Here, therefore, is the first great landing-place, the first station, from which we can contemplate the Greek Tragedy with advantage. It is, by comparison with the life of Shakspere, what the inner life of the mimetic play in Hamlet is to the outer life of the Hamlet itself. It is a life below a life. That is—it is a life treated upon a scale so sensibly different from the proper life of the spectator as to impress him profoundly with the feeling of its idealization. Shakspere's tragic life is our own life exalted and selected: the Greek tragic life presupposed another life, the spectator's, thrown into relief before it. The tragedy was projected upon the eye from a vast profundity in the rear; and between this life and the spectator, however near its phantasmagoria might advance to him, was still an immeasurable gulf of shadows.
Hence, coming nearer still to the determinate nature and circumscription of the Greek Tragedy, it was not in any sense a development—1, of human character, or, 2, of human passion. Either of these objects, attributed to tragedy, at once inoculates it with a life essentially on the common human standard. But that neither was so much as dreamed of in the Grecian Tragedy is evident from the mere mechanism and ordinary conduct of those dramas which survive,— those especially which seem entitled to be viewed as fair models of the common standard. About 1000 to 1500 lines, of which one-fifth must be deducted for the business of the chorus, may be taken as an average extent of a Greek tragic
[Page 348]
drama. Five acts, of one hundred and sixty lines each, allow no sweep at all for the systole and diastole, the contraction and expansion, the knot and the dénouement , of a tragic interest, according to our modern meaning. The ebb and flow, the inspiration and expiration, cannot find room to play in such a narrow scene. Were the interest made to turn at all upon the evolution of character, or of passion modified by character, and both growing upon the reader through various aspects of dialogue, of soliloquy, and of multiplied action—it would seem a storm in a wash-hand basin. A passion which advanced and precipitated itself through such rapid harlequin changes would at best impress us with the feeling proper to a hasty melodrama, or perhaps serious pantomime. It would read like the imperfect outline of a play, or, still worse, would seem framed to move through such changes as might raise an excuse for the dancing and the lyric music. But the very external phenomena, the apparatus and scenic decorations, of the Greek Tragedy all point to other functions. Shakspere—that is, English Tragedy—postulates the intense life of flesh and blood, of animal sensibility, of man and woman—breathing, waking, stirring, palpitating with the pulses of hope and fear. In Greek Tragedy, the very masks show the utter impossibility of these tempests or conflicts. Struggle there is none, internal or external: not like Hamlet's with his own constitutional inertia and his gloomy irresolution of conscience; not like Macbeth's with his better feeling as a man, with his hospitality as a host. Medea, the most tragic figure in the Greek scene, passes through no flux and reflux of passion, through no convulsions of jealousy on the one hand, or maternal love on the other. She is tossed to and fro by no hurricanes of wrath, wrenched by no pangs of anticipation. All this is supposed to have passed out of the spectator's presence. The dire conflict no more exhibits itself scenically and “ coram populo ” than the murder of her two innocent children. Were it possible that it should, how could the mask be justified? The apparatus of the stage would lose all decorum, and Grecian taste, or sense of the appropriate, which much outran the strength of Grecian creative power, would have been exposed to perpetual shocks.
[Page 349]
IV. The truth is now becoming palpable: certain great situations —not passion in states of growth, of movement, of self-conflict—but fixed, unmoving situations , were selected; these held on through the entire course of one or more acts. A lyric movement of the chorus, which closed the act, and gave notice that it was closed, sometimes changed this situation; but throughout the act it continued unchanged, like a statuesque attitude. The story of the tragedy was pretty nearly involved and told by implication in the tableaux vivants which presided through the several acts. The very slight dialogue which goes on seems meant rather as an additional exposition of the interest—a commentary on the attitude originally assumed—than as any exhibition of passions growing and kindling under the eye of the spectator. The mask, with its monotonous expression, is not out of harmony with the scene; for the passion is essentially fixed throughout, not mantling and undulating with the breath of change, but frozen into marble life.
And all this is both explicable in itself, and peremptorily determined, by the sort of idealized life—life in a state of remotion, unrealized, and translated into a neutral world of high cloudy antiquity—which the Tragedy of Athens demanded for its atmosphere.
Had the Greeks, in fact, framed to themselves the idea of a tumultuous passion—passion expressing itself by the agitations of fluctuating will—as any fit, or even possible, subject for scenic treatment, in that case they must have resorted to real life, the more real the better. Or, again, had real life offered to their conceptions a just field for scenic exhibition, in that case they must have been thrown upon conflicts of tempestuous passion, the more tempestuous the better. But, being, by the early religious character of Tragedy, and by the colossal proportions of their theatres, imperiously driven to a life more awful and still—upon life as it existed in elder days, amongst men so far removed that they had become invested with a patriarchal, or even an antediluvian, mistiness of antiquity, and often into the rank of demigods—they felt it possible to present this mode of being in states of suffering , for suffering is enduring and indefinite, but never in states of conflict , for conflict is by its
[Page 350]
nature fugitive and evanescent. The Tragedy of Greece is always held up as a thing long past—the Tragedy of England as a thing now passing. We are invited by Sophocles or Euripides, as by some great necromancer, to see long-buried forms standing in solemn groups upon the stage —phantoms from Thebes or from Cyclopian cities. But Shakspere is a Cornelius Agrippa, who shows us, in his magic glass, creatures yet breathing, and actually mixing in the great game of life upon some distant field, inaccessible to us without a magician's aid.
The Greek drama, therefore, by its very necessities proposing to itself only a few grand attitudes or situations, and brief dialogues as the means of illuminating those situations, with scarcely anything of action “actually occurring on the stage,” from these purposes derives its other peculiarities: in the elementary necessities lay the fundus of the rest.
V. The notion, for example, that murder, or violent death, was banished from the Greek stage on the Parisian conceit of the shock which such bloody incidents would give to the taste is perfectly erroneous. Not because it was sanguinary, but because it was action, had the Greeks an objection to such violences. No action of any kind proceeds legitimately on that stage. The persons of the drama are always in a reposing state, “so long as they are before the audience.” And the very meaning of an act is that in the intervals, the suspension of the acts, any possible time may elapse and any possible action may go on.
VI. Hence, also, a most erroneous theory has arisen about Fate as brooding over the Greek tragic scene. This was a favourite notion of the two Schlegels. But it is evident that many Greek tragedies, both amongst those which survive, and amongst those the titles and subjects of which are recorded, did not, and could not, present any opening at all for this dark agency. Consequently it was not essential. And, even where it did intervene, the Schlegels seem to have misunderstood its purpose. A prophetic colouring, a colouring of ancient destiny, connected with a character or an event, has the effect of exalting and ennobling. But whatever tends towards this result inevitably translates the persons and their situation from that condition of ordinary
[Page 351]
breathing life which it was the constant effort of the Greek Tragedy to escape; and therefore it was that the Greek poet preferred the gloomy idea of Fate,—not because it was essential, but because it was elevating. It is for this reason, and apparently for this reason only, that Cassandra is connected by Æschylus with Agamemnon. The Sphinx, indeed, was connected with the horrid tale of Œdipus in every version of the tale; but Cassandra was brought upon the stage out of no certain historic tradition, or proper relation to Agamemnon, but to confer the solemn and mysterious hoar of a dark prophetic woe upon the dreadful catastrophe. Fate was therefore used, not for its own direct moral value as a force upon the will, but for its derivative power of ennobling and darkening.
VII. Hence, too, that habit amongst the tragic poets of travelling back to regions of forgotten fable and dark legendary mythus. Antiquity availed powerfully for their purposes, because of necessity it abstracted all petty details of individuality and local notoriety,—all that would have composed a character . It acted as twilight acts (which removes day's “mutable distinctions”), and reduced the historic person to that sublime state of monotonous gloom which suited the views of a poet who wanted only the situation , but would have repelled a poet who sought also for the complex features of a character. It is true that such remote and fabulous periods are visited at times, though not haunted, by the modern dramatist. Events are sought, even upon the French stage, from Gothic or from Moorish times. But in that case the poet endeavours to improve and strengthen any traits of character that tradition may have preserved, or by a direct effort of power to create them altogether where history presents a blank neutrality— whereas the Greek poet used simply that faint outline of character, in its gross distinctions of good and bad, which the situation itself implied. For example, the Creon of Thebes is pretty uniformly exhibited as tyrannical and cruel. But that was the mere result of his position as a rival originally for the throne, and still more as the executive minister of the popular vengeance against Polynices for having brought a tide of war against his mother-land: in
[Page 352]
that representative character Creon is compelled to acts of cruelty against Antigone in her sublime exercise of natural piety, both sisterly and filial; and this cruelty to her and to the miserable wreck, her father, making the very wrath of heaven an argument for further persecution, terminates in leaving him an object of hatred to the spectator. But, after all, his conduct seems to have been purely official and ministerial. Nor, if the reader think otherwise, will he find any further emanation from Creon's individual will or heart than the mere blank expression of tyranny in a public cause,—nothing, in short, of that complexity and interweaving of qualities, that interaction of moral and intellectual powers, which we moderns understand by a character. In short, all the rude outlines of character on the Greek stage were, in the first place, mere inheritances from tradition, and generally mere determinations from the situation; and in no instance did the qualities of a man's will, heart, or constitutional temperament, manifest themselves by and through a collision or strife amongst each other,—which is our test of a dramatic character. And therefore it was that elder, or even fabulous, ages were used as the true natural field of the tragic poet: partly because antiquity ennobled; partly also because, by abstracting the individualities of a character, it left the historic figure in that neutral state which was most entirely passive to the moulding and determining power of the situation.
Two objections we foresee—1. That even Æschylus, the sublimest of the Greek tragedians, did not always go back to a high antiquity. He himself had fought in the Persian War; and yet he brings both Xerxes and his father Darius (by means of his apparition) upon the stage; though the very Marathon of the father was but ten years earlier than the Thermopylæ and Salamis of the son. But in this instance the scene is not properly Grecian: it is referred by the mind to Susa, the capital of Persia, far eastward even to Babylon, and four months' march from Hellas. Remoteness of space in that case countervailed the proximity in point of time; —though it may be doubted whether, without the benefit of the supernatural, it would even in that case have satisfied the Grecian taste. And it certainly would not had the
[Page 353]
whole reference of the piece not been so intensely Athenian. For, when we talk of Grecian Tragedy, we must remember that, after all, the Pagan Tragedy was in any proper sense exclusively Athenian; and the tendency of the Grecian taste, in its general Grecian character, was in various instances modified or absolutely controlled by that special feature of its existence.
2. It will be urged, as indicating this craving after antiquity to be no peculiar or distinguishing feature of the Greek stage, that we moderns also turn away sometimes with dislike from a modern subject. Thus, if it had no other fault, the Charles I . of Banks is coldly received by English readers. Doubtless; but not because it is too modern. 5 The objection to it is that a parliamentary war is too intensely political,—and political, moreover, in a way which doubly defeated its otherwise tragic power: first, because questions too notorious and too domineering of law and civil polity were then at issue, --the very same which came to a final hearing and settlement in 1688-9. Our very form of government at this day is the result of the struggle then going on,—a fact which eclipses and dwarfs any separate or private interest of an individual prince, though otherwise and by his personal character, in the very highest degree, an object of tragic sympathy. Secondly, because the political interest afloat at that era (1649) was too complex and intricate: it wanted the simplicity of a poetic interest. That is the objection to Charles I . as a tragedy,—not because modern, but because too domineeringly political,—and because the casuistic features of the situation were too many and too intricate.
VIII. Thus far, therefore, we now comprehend the purposes and true locus to the human imagination of the Grecian Tragedy: that it was a most imposing scenic exhibition of a few grand situations,—grand from their very simplicity and from the consequences which awaited their dénouement , and seeking support to this grandeur from constantly fixing its eye upon elder ages lost in shades of antiquity, or, if departing from that ideal now and then, doing so with a view to
[Page 354]
patriotic objects, and seeking an occasional dispensation from the rigour of art in the popular indulgence to whatever touched the glory of Athens. Let the reader take along with him two other circumstances, and he will then complete the idea of this stately Drama: first, the character of the Dialogue ; secondly, the functions of the Chorus .
IX. From one hundred and fifty to one hundred and eighty lines of hexameter Iambic verse compose the dialogue of each act. 6 This space is sufficient for the purpose of unfolding the situation to the spectator, but as a means of unfolding a character would have been by much too limited. For such a purpose, again, as this last, numerous scenes, dialogues, or soliloquies, must have been requisite; whereas generally, upon the Greek stage, a single scene, one dialogue between two interlocutors, occupies the entire act. The object of this dialogue was, of course, to bring forward the prominent points of the situation, and to improve its interest as regarded—1, its grandeur, 2, its statuesque arrangement to the eye, or, 3, the burden of tragic consequences which it announced. With such purposes, so distinct from any which are pursued upon the modern stage, arose a corresponding
[Page 355]
distinction of the dialogue. Had the dialogue ministered to any purpose so progressive and so active as that of developing a character, with new incidents and changes of the speakers coming forward at every moment as occasions for evoking the peculiarities of that character—in such a case, the more it had resembled the movement, the fluctuations, the hurry of actual life and of real colloquial intercourse, the more it would have aided the views of the poet. But the purpose of the Greek dialogue was not progressive; essentially it was retrospective. For example, the Heracleidœ opens with as fine and impressive a group as ever sculptor chiselled—a group of young children, princely daughters of a great hero, whose acts resound through all mythology: viz. of Hercules, of a Grecian cleanser and deliverer from monsters, once irresistible to quell the oppressor, but now dead, and himself the subject of outrage in the persons of his children. These youthful ladies, helpless from their sex, with their grandmother Alcmene, now aged and infirm, have arranged themselves as a marble group on the steps ascending to the altars of a local deity. They have but one guide, one champion— a brother-in-arms of the deceased Hercules, and his reverential friend,—but this brave man also suffering, through years and martial toils, under the penalties of decaying strength. Such is the situation, such the inauguration of this solemn tragedy. The dialogue which follows between Iolaus, the faithful guardian of the ladies, and the local ruler of the land, takes up this inaugural picture, so pompous from blazing altars and cloudy incense, so religious from the known meaning of the conventional attitudes, so beautiful from the loveliness of the youthful suppliants rising tier above tier according to their ages and the graduation of the altar steps, so moving in its picture of human calamity by the contrasting figure of the two grey-haired supporters, so complete and orbicular in its delineation of human frailty by the surmounting circumstances of its crest, the altar, the priestess, the temple, the serene Grecian sky. This impressive picture, having of itself appealed to every one of thirty thousand hearts, having already challenged universal attention, is now explained and unfolded through the entire first act. Iolaus, the noble old warrior, who had clung the closer to the fluttering dovecot
[Page 356]
of his buried friend from the unmerited persecution which had assaulted them, comments to the stranger prince upon the spectacle before him—a spectacle significant to Grecian eyes, intelligible at once to everybody, but still rare and witnessed in practice by nobody. The prince, Demophoon, is a ruler of Athens: the scene is placed in the Attic territory, but not in Athens,—about fifteen miles, in fact, from that city, and not far from the dread field of future Marathon. To the prince Iolaus explains the lost condition of his young flock. The ruler of Argos had driven them out of every asylum in the Peloponnesus. From city to city he had followed them at the heels with his cruel heralds of persecution. They were a party of unhappy fugitives (most of them proclaiming their innocence by their very age and helplessness) that had run the circle of Greek hospitality,—everywhere had been hunted out like wild beasts, or like those common nuisances from which their illustrious father had liberated the earth, till the long circuit of their unhappy wanderings had brought them at last to Athens, in which city they had a final confidence, as knowing not only the justice of that state, but that she only would not be moved from her purposes by fear of the aggressor. No finer opening can be imagined. The statuesque beauty of the group, and the unparalleled persecution which the first act exposes (a sort of misery and an absolute hostility of the human race to which our experience suggests no corresponding case, except that of a leper in the middle ages, or of a Pariah, or of a man under a papal interdict) fix the attention of the spectators beyond any other situation in Grecian Tragedy. And the compliment to Athens, not verbal but involved in the very situation, gave a depth of interest to this drama for the very tutelary region of the Drama which ought to stamp it with a sort of prerogative as in some respects the ideal tragedy or model of the Greek theatre.
Now, this one dialogue, as filling one act of a particular drama, is quite sufficient to explain the view we take of the Greek tragic dialogue. It is altogether retrospective . It takes for its theme the visible group arranged on the stage before the spectators from the first. Looking back to this, the two interlocutors (supposed to come forward upon the stage) contrive
[Page 357]
between them, one by pertinent questions, the other by judicious management of his replies, to bring out those circumstances in the past fortunes and immediate circumstances of this interesting family, which may put the audience in possession of all which it is important for them to know. The reader sees the dark legendary character which invests the whole tale; and in the following acts this darkness is made more emphatic from the fact that incidents are used of which contradictory versions existed,—some poets adopting one version, some another: so cloudy and uncertain were the facts. All this apocryphal gloom aids that sanctity and awe which belong to another and a higher mode of life,—to that slumbering life of sculpture, as opposed to painting, which we have called a life within a life. Grecian taste would inevitably require that the dialogue should be adjusted to this starting-point and standard. Accordingly, in the first place, the dialogue is always (and in a degree perhaps unperceived by the translators up to this time) severe, massy, simple, yet solemnized intentionally by the use of a select vocabulary, corresponding (in point of archaism and remoteness from ordinary use) to our own scriptural vocabulary! Secondly, the metre is of a kind not yet examined with suitable care. There were two objects aimed at in the Greek Iambic of the Tragic Drama; and in some measure these objects were in collision with each other, unless most artfully managed. One was to exhibit a purified imitation of real human conversation. The other was to impress upon this colloquial form, thus far by its very nature recalling ordinary human life, a character of solemnity and religious consecration. Partly this was effected by acts of omission and commission: by banishing certain words or forms of words; by recalling others of high antiquity (particular tenses, for instance, were never used by the tragic poets,—not even by Euripides, the most Wordsworthian 7 of the Athenian poets in the circumstance of having a peculiar theory of poetic
[Page 358]
diction, which lowered its tone of separation, and took it down from the cothurnus): other verbal forms, again, were used nowhere but upon the stage. partly, therefore, this consecration of the tragic style was effected by the antique cast, and the exclusive cast, of its phraseology. But partly also it was effected by the metre. From whatever cause it may arise—chiefly, perhaps, from differences in the genius of the two languages—certain it is that the Latin Iambics of Seneca, &c. (in the tragedies ascribed to him), cannot be so read by an English mouth as to produce anything like the sonorous rhythmus and the grand intonation of the Greek Iambics. This is a curious fact, and as yet, we believe, unnoticed. But, over and above this original adaptation of the Greek language to the Iambic metre, we have no doubt whatever that the recitation of verse on the Attic stage was of an artificial and semi-musical character. It was undoubtedly much more sustained , and intonated with a slow and measured stateliness, 8 which, whilst harmonizing it with the other circumstances of solemnity in Greek Tragedy, would bring it nearer to music. Beyond a doubt, it had the effect (and
[Page 359]
might have the effect even now, managed by a good reader) of the recitative in the Italian Opera: as, indeed, in other points, the Italian Opera is a much nearer representative of the Greek Tragedy than the direct Modern Tragedy professing that title.
X. As to the Chorus. Little needs to be said upon this element of the Athenian tragedy. Everybody knows how solemn, and therefore how solemnizing, must have been the richest and most lyrical music, the most passionate of the ancient poetry, the most dithyrambic of tragic and religious raptures, supported to the eye by the most hieroglyphic and therefore mysterious of dances. For the dances of the chorus —the strophe and the antistrophe—were symbolic, and therefore full of mysterious meanings; and not the less impressive because these meanings and these symbols had lost their significancy to the mob; since the very cause of that loss lay in the antiquity of their origin. One great error which remains to be removed is the notion that the chorus either did support, or was meant to support, the office of a moral teacher. The chorus simply stood on the level of a sympathizing spectator, detached from the business and the crash of the catastrophe; and its office was to guide or to interpret the sympathies of the audience. Here, perhaps, was a great error of Milton's, which will be found in two 9 separate places. At present, it is sufficient to say that the mysterious solemnity conferred by the chorus presupposes, and is in perfect harmony with, our theory of a life within a life: a life sequestrated into some far-off slumbering state, having the severe tranquillity of Hades; a life symbolized by the marble life of sculpture; but utterly out of all symmetry and proportion to the realities of that human life which we moderns take up as the basis of our Tragic Drama.
NOTES
1 [1] Appeared first in Blackwood for February 1840 (which number of Blackwood contained also the first portion of the paper on the Essenes): reprinted by De Quincey in 1858 in vol. ix of his Collective Edition of his Writings.—M.
2 [1] “The whole people were still draped professionally”:—For example, even in Queen Anne's reign, or so late as that of George I, physicians never appeared without the insignia of their calling; clergymen would have incurred the worst suspicions had they gone into the streets without a gown and bands. Ladies, again, universally wore masks, as the sole substitute known to our ancestors for the modern parasol,— a fact perhaps not generally known.
3 [2] A saying of Juvenal about the Greeks.—M.
4 [1] Drury Lane Theatre was burnt down on Friday, 24th February 1809.—M.
5 [1] The reference seems to be to one or other of the tragedies of John Banks, a London dramatic author of the latter part of the seventeenth century, the earliest dated 1677 and the latest 1696.—M.
6 [1] The five acts which old tradition prescribed as binding upon the Greek tragic drama cannot always be marked off by the interruptions of the chorus. In the Heracleidœ of Euripides they can. But it is evident that these acts existed for the sake of the chorus, by way of allowing sufficient openings (both as to number and length) for the choral dances; and the necessity must have grown out of the time allowed for a dramatic representation, and originally, therefore, out of the mere accidental convenience prescribed by the social usages of Athens. The rule, therefore, was at any rate an arbitrary rule. Purely conventional it would have been, and local, had it even grown out of any Attic superstition (as we have sometimes thought it might) as to the number of the choral dances. But most probably it rested upon a sort of convention which of all is the least entitled to respect or translation to foreign soils, viz. the mere local arrangement of meals and sleeping hours in Athens; which, having prescribed a limited space to the whole performance, afterwards left this space to be distributed between the recitation and the more popular parts addressed to eye and ear as the mob of Athens should insist. Horace, in saying roundly as a sort of brutum fulmen, “Neu quinto brevior neu sit productior actu Fabula,” delivers this capricious rule in the capricious manner which becomes it. The stet pro ratione voluntas comes forward equally in the substance of the precept and in the style of its delivery.
7 [1] Valckenaer [1715–1785], in his immortal series of comments on the Phœnissœ of Euripides, notices the peculiar spirit and tendency of the innovations introduced into the tragic diction by this youngest of the great Athenian dramatists. These innovations ran in the very same direction as those of Wordsworth in our own times. To say this, however, without further explanation, considering how profoundly the views of Wordsworth in this matter have been misunderstood, would simply be to mislead the English reader equally as to Euripides. Yet, as we should be sorry to discuss so great a theme indirectly and in a corner, it may be enough for the present to remark that Euripides did not mean to tax his great predecessors Æschylus and Sophocles with any error of taste in the cast of their diction. Having their purposes, they chose wisely. But he felt that the Athenian tragedy had two functions—1, to impress awe and religious terror, 2, to impress pity. This last he adopted as his own peculiar function, and with it a corresponding diction—less grand (it is true) and stately, but counterbalancing this loss by a far greater power of pure (sometimes, we may say, of holy) household pathos. Such also was the change wrought by Wordsworth.
8 [1] Any man who has at all studied the Greek Iambics must well remember those forms of the metre which are used in a cadence at the close of a resounding passage, meant to express a full pause, and the prodigious difference from such as were meant for weaker lines, or less impressive metrical effects. These cadences, with their full body of rhythmus, are never reproduced in the Latin imitations of the Iambic hexameter: nor does it seem within the compass of Latin Iambic metre to reach such effects: though otherwise, and especially in the Dactylic hexameter, the Latin Language is more powerful than the Greek.
9 [1] Viz. in the brief Introduction to the Samson Agonistes, and in a remarkable passage (taxed not unreasonably with bigotry by Wordsworth) of the Paradise Regained. [The reference is to Milton's preface to his Samson entitled “Of that Sort of Dramatic Poem called Tragedy,” and to Par. Reg., iv, 338–352.—M.]
$$$
