The Progress of Romance ... (1785)
Author: Reeve, Clara.
Publication info: The Progress Of Romance, Through Times, Countries, and Manners ... In a Course Of Evening Conversations . 2 v. Colchester: Printed for the Author by W. Keymer .., 1785.

The Progress of Romance, through Times, Countries, and Manners ... in a Course of Evening Conversations. By C. R ... in Two Volumes ...
[Page iii]
[Volume I] PREFACE.
It hath bene through all ages ever seene,
That with the praise of armes and chevalrie
The prize of beautie still hath ioyned beene,
And that for reasons speciall privitee,
For either doth on other much relie:
For he me seemes most fit the faire to serve,
That can her best defend from villenie,
And she most fit his service doth deserve,
That fairest is, and from her faith will never swerve. Spenser's Faery Queene, Book 4. Canto 5. Stanza 1.
Romances may not improperly be called the polite literature of early ages, and they have been the favourite amusements of later times. In rude and barbarous ages, they resided in the breath of oral tradition, in civilized nations they were of course committed to writing: and in still more polished periods, they have varied their forms, and have appeared either in prose or verse, according to the genius of the writers, or the taste of the times.
[Page iv]
In the following pages, I have endeavoured to trace the progress of this species of composition, through all its successive stages and variations, to point out its most striking effects and influence upon the manners, and to assist according to my best judgment, the reader's choice, amidst the almost infinite variety it affords, in a selection of such as are most worthy of a place in the libraries of readers of every class, who seek either for information or entertainment.
How far I have succeeded in this attempt, must now be left to the decision of that tribunal which I have ever approached with the most respectful diffidence; and whose indulgence, I am perhaps in the present instance concerned more than ever to implore.
While many eminent writers have (if I may be permitted the allusion) skimmed over the surface of this subject, it
[Page v]
seemed to me that none of them had sounded the depths of it.—Of metrical Romances they have treated largely, but with respect to those in prose, their informations have been scanty and imperfect.
When they approach that period of obscurity, which began with the spreading of Christianity over the western world, they drop entirely the latter and equally essential branch of the subject; nor do they resume it, till the sixteenth Century, when Calprenede , the Scuderies, D'Ursé , and other French writers, revived the taste for prose Romances, by their productions.
To fill up this chasm in the history of Romance, to rectify the mistakes that have been made by indiscriminate praise or blame, to methodise and arrange the works themselves, and to ascertain as many of the Authors, and the dates of
[Page vi]
them as I could get information of, to mark the distinguishing characters of the Romance and the Novel, to point out the boundaries of both: and lastly to present to the reader's eye a selection of the best writings of both kinds.
These objects would I thought, have a fair claim to the attention of the public; and if executed with fidelity and judgment, would I hoped merit its approbation and encouragement.
While I was collecting materials for this work, I held many conversations with some ingenious friends upon the various subjects, which it offered to be investigated and explained. This circumstance naturally suggested to me the Idea of the dialogue form; in which opposite sentiments would admit of a more full and accurate examination, arguments and objections might be more clearly stated and discussed, than in a
[Page vii]
regular series of Essays, or even letters, not to mention, that the variety and contrast which naturally arise out of the Dialogue, might enliven a work of rather dry deduction, and render it more entertaining to the reader, and not the less useful or instructive.—In this Idea I was confirmed by the great success of some late writers in this way, particularly of Madame de Genlis , in her excellent work called the Theatre of Education.
It was not till I had compleated my design, that I read either Dr. Beattie's Dissertation on Fable and Romance , or Mr. Warton's History of English Poetry . —To the perusal of these books, I was most strongly recommended by two friends, to whom I had shewn my own work, and to whose judgment I owe all possible respect and deference.—I obeyed their injunctions, and have additional
[Page viii]
obligations to them for the entertainment afforded me by these excellent writers.—I soon found that they neither interfered with my plan, nor had anticipated my subject, yet I own I was well pleased, that neither of these books had fallen in my way before I had finished my own work; as otherwise it might have been supposed that I had borrowed my lights from them, where ever there happened to be a concurrence of opinion, or of representation.
Dr. Beattie has walked over the ground, aud marked out its boundaries, but he has paid little attention to its various produce, whether of flowers, herbs, or weeds; except a very few works of capital merit, (some of which he confesses he had not read through) he consigns all the rest to oblivion. Thus Genius thinks it enough to strike out the outline, and leaves to industry and
[Page ix]
inferior talents, the minuter parts, and more laborious task of detail and arrangement.
From Mr. Warton's History of English Poetry , I might indeed have derived considerable advantages, had I met with it sooner. I was happy however to find, that in many instances, my opinions were confirmed, and my arguments strengthened by this learned and judicious writer.
It had long been a received opinion, that Romances were communicated to the Western world by the Crusades.— Mr. Warton allows that they were introduced at a much earlier period, viz. by the Saracens; who came from Africa, and settled in Spain, about the beginning of the eighth Century.—From Spain he imagines, they found an easy passage into France and Italy.—He further examines the Hypotheses of Dr. Percy and Mr.
[Page x]
Mallet ; who derive these fictions from the ancient songs of the Gothic Bards and Scalds: this Idea he allows to be well founded, so far at least as it does not exclude his own System.— These fictions (he says) had taken deep root in Europe, and prepared the way for the Arabian fables which were introduced in the ninth Century, by which they were in a great measure superseded.
That Chivalry, which was the substance of Romance, existed among the Goths he allows, but adds, that under the Feudal establishment, it received new strength and vigour: and was invested with the formalities of a regular institution. —Which Dr. Percy likewise acknowledges in his remarks on Chivalry; the passage is quoted in the body of this work.—Mr. Warton next proceeds to the Minstrels, Troubadours, and early poets of this country, which is his proper
[Page xi]
subject; it was entirely beside his plan to enter further into the subject of prose Romances.
It is remarkable, that among the many learned and ingenious writers who have treated this subject, few have taken proper notice of the Greek Romances, which may justly be deemed the parents of all the rest. The learned men of our own country, have in general affected a contempt for this kind of writing, and looked upon Romances, as proper furniture only for a lady's Library. —Not so the French and Italian writers, on the contrary they have not only deemed them worthy their own attention; but have laboured to make them deserving of ours.
I mean not however to include all the learned of our country under this observation. —The names of Hurd, Beattie, Warton, Percy , and Mallet , are an honourable
[Page xii]
exception, a subject that has been thought worthy of any portion of their time and attention, cannot be undeserving the notice and protection of the public. It is with sincere pleasure I add a name that will not disgrace the list, a writer of my own sex, Mrs. Dobson the elegant writer of the History of the Troubadours and the Memoirs of Ancient Chivalry.
In answer to some objections, made by a learned writer, whose friendship does me honour, to my account of the antiquity of Romance-writing; I was led to ask him, why the fictions of the Ægyptians and Arabians, of the Greeks and Romans, were not entitled to the appellations of Romances, as well as those of the middle ages, to which it was generally appropriated?—I was answered by another question.—What did I know of the Romances of those countries?
[Page xiii]
—Had I ever seen an Ægyptian Romance? I replied, yes, and I would shortly give him a proof of it. I accordingly compiled and methodised the History of Charoba Queen of Ægypt .— My friend was surprised and puzzled, and answered me to this effect.
“I return your Ægyptian story with thanks; whence you took it, or how far it is your own I know not.”— As I think this piece a great literary curiosity, I shall give it to the public, at the end of this work.—That I may not appear to claim a right to the invention of this story, I shall inform my readers from whence it is taken.—It is extracted from a book called— The History of Ancient Ægypt, according to the Traditions of the Arabians.—Written in Arabic, by the Reverend Doctor Murtadi, the Son of Gapiphus, the Son of Chatem, the Son of Molsem the Macdesian.—Translated into
[Page xiv]
French by M. Vattier, Arabic Professor to Louis 14th King of France.
This translator in his Preface speaks of this story in high terms. “Were there nothing in this story (says he) worthy of our notice but the Fable of Gebirus and Charoba, with the Adventure of the Shepherd, and the Sea-nymph, I should not repent of my trouble in this Translation.— I little thought to find in an Arabian writer, a story so nearly resembling the fables of the Greek and Latin poets.—While I was writing, it frequently reminded me of the 4th book of the Odyssey, and of several parts of Ovid's Metamorphoses.
This story is mentioned in the ingenious Mrs. Rowe's History of Joseph , a poem not so much known and valued as it deserves to be.—I trust that my readers will not be displeased with a quotation from it.
[Page xv]
    When Totis by his death, the fole command
Of Misraim left to fair Charoba's hand;
The rich Gebirus from Chaldea came
With foreign pomp to seek the royal dame.
Chemis adorn'd his train, whose beauteous face
Allur'd a goddess of the watery race;
On Nilus' banks the young Chaldean stood,
When lo Marina rising from the flood!
Her chariot set with pearl, the wave divides,
Softly along the silver stream she glides,
Her robes with sparkling gems transparent shine,
Her brighter Eyes express a light divine;
Not from her humid bed the blooming day
Has e'er ascended with a brighter ray.
She leaves her Chrystal vaults and coral groves
And o'er the grassy meads with Chemis roves.
At parting gave him a celestial spell
Which every good procures, and ills expel
My mother from this pair derives her line
And this she left me, as a gift divine,
By all her Ancestors preserv'd with Care;
One drop of this shall banish all despair. Mrs. Rowe's Hist. of Joseph , Book 6th.
This curious story will sufficiently answer my purpose, if it only furnishes an additional proof that Romances are of universal growth, and not confined
[Page xvi]
to any particular period or countries. They were the delight of barbarous ages, and they have always kept their ground amongst the multiplied amusements of more refined and cultivated periods, containing like every other branch of human literature, both good and evil things. They are not to be put into the hands of young persons without distinction and reserve, but under proper restrictions and regulations they will afford much useful instruction, as well as rational and elegant amusement. In this view therefore they are equally entitled to our attention and respect, as any other works of Genius and literature.
[Page 1]
EVENING I. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Euph. Hortensius , I am proud of a visit from you, tho' I am ignorant of the motive to which I am indebted for it.
Hort. What Madam, do you think you can give a challenge, and go off with impunity? —I am come hither to demand an explanation of your behaviour last Thursday evening at Sophronia's house; and I have brought her with me to be a witness to our dispute—of the defeat of one of us,—or perhaps of our compromise, and reconciliation.
Soph. Or that Euphrasia shall make a convert to her own opinion.
[Page 2]
Euph. I am obliged to the occasion that brings you both to spend an hour with me.— Pray be seated my friends, and let me understand your meaning.—Surely I was not so presumptuous as to challenge Hortensius?
Hort. I will not suffer you either by raillery or compliment to evade my purpose.— In the course of our late conversation, you threw out several hints that struck me as either new , or uncommon , in respect to the works of the ancient and modern writers;— but what surprised me most of all, you seemed to degrade Epic poetry, and to place it on an equality with the old Romance. I wish you to explain your sentiments on this head, for I cannot account for your defence of a kind of writings that are generally exploded. I little expected to hear Euphrasia ridicule the works of the great Ancients.—(You smile) —Yes Madam, raillery was the only weapon you deigned to use, in opposition to my arguments. —Yet you told me you had better reasons in reserve, but you did not choose then to enter upon the subject, as it would engross too much of our time and attention.
[Page 3]
Euph. Your memory Sir, is very retentive, and there is no warding off your attack; perhaps I only seemed to degrade your favourites, and exalt the others, because I opposed opinions long received, and but little examined; while in reality I only meant to place each in their proper rank, both as to merit and utility.
Hort. To convince me of that, you must give me a full explanation of your opinions in respect to both, and also of the foundation of them.
Soph. I have promised in your behalf that you shall give Hortensius full satisfaction, and my honour is engaged for it—I know this is a subject you are not unprepared to speak upon.
Euph. Methinks you demand no trifling satisfaction for my Challenge, as it pleases you to call it. However I shall not refuse to comply with your request, if you can have patience to listen, while I investigate a subject of greater extent than perhaps you may suppose; and which though I am not quite unprepared for, I am afraid to begin.
[Page 4]
Soph. My dear friend, it is your patience and not ours that will be tried. I am very desirous to hear this subject discussed, and to be informed by the conversation of two such opponents. I expect from Euphrasia's reading and observation much advantage to myself.
Hort. My expectations Madam, do not fall short of yours.
Euph. No compliments my good friends! my reading and observations are very much at your service, I wish they may afford you information or entertainment. I will confess to you that I have considered this subject deeply, and that I have written some remarks upon it.—I have made many extracts from different Authors, and collected materials of various kinds; always intending to methodize them one time or other.—I will bring my papers before you; communicate my remarks, propose my opinions; and either be confirmed in them by your approbation, or be silenced by your better arguments on the contrary side;—perhaps I may be enabled to
[Page 5]
strike out new lights upon the subject, when my imagination is corrected by the judgment of Hortensius.
Hort. No compliments I repeat. I wish I may be able to stand my ground. I find you are making great preparations against me, you are coming upon me armed with your papers and extracts.—Artillery and fire-arms against the small sword, the tongue.
Euph. A most warlike allusion! and the comparison holds good; for if I should come to a close engagement, the small sword will destroy what may escape the artillery.
Hort. Fairly replied.—The attack is begun, I have questioned you closely, it is your part to maintain your own opinions. You have said that Romances are neither so contemptible, nor so dangerous a kind of reading, as they are generally represented— you have compared them to Epic poems.
Euph. Let me first entreat you my good friends to divest yourselves of common prejudices: —excuse the expression.— Mankind in general are more biassed by names than
[Page 6]
things; and what is yet stranger, they are biassed by names to which they have not affixed an absolute and determinate meaning. —For instance—pray what do you understand by the word Romance?
Hort. By Romance I understand a wild, extravagant, fabulous Story.
Euph. Sophronia , favour me with an explanation of this word? It is not merely a question of idle curiosity.
Soph. I understand it to mean all those kind of stories that are built upon fiction, and have no foundation in truth.
Euph. You will please to reflect, that under this general denomination of Romance, a vast genus of composition is included, works of various kinds, merits, and tendencies. It is running some hazard, to praise or to decry in general terms, without being perfectly acquainted with the whole extent of the subject under consideration.
Hort. What is it necessary to read all the trash contained in this Genus, as it pleases you to call it, in order to speak of any part of it?
[Page 7]
Euph. By no means, I will explain this point presently.—No writings are more different than the ancient Romance and modern Novel , yet they are frequently confounded together, and mistaken for each other. There are likewise great distinctions to be made between the old Greek Romances, those of the middle ages, and those of the fifteenth and sixteenth Centuries. Books of all these kinds have been enthusiastically read and admired; of late years they have been as absurdly censured and condemned. If read indiscriminately they are at best unprofitable, frequently productive of absurdities in manners and sentiments, sometimes hurtful to good morals; and yet from this Genus there may be selected books that are truly respectable, works of genius, taste, and utility, capable of improving the morals and manners of mankind.
Soph. I am entirely of your opinion, and give my testimony to this truth.
Euph. It seems to me that this Genus of composition has never been properly distinguished
[Page 8]
or ascertained; that it wants to be methodized, to be separated, classed, und regulated; and that a work of this kind would be both entertaining and useful.
Soph. Doubtless it would, and you give us hopes of seeing this accomplished.
Hort. I perceive that you are laying a deep foundation, but what kind of building you will raise upon it, I am impatient to hear.
Euph. If you will honour me with your attention, and sometimes give me your asistance, we will at leisure hours pursue this subject together. Let me bespeak your favour, by assuring you that I mean to do something more than merely to investigate names :— we will afterwards proceed to consider the beauties and defects of these writings, of the uses and abuses, and of their effects upon the manners of the times in which they were written. I propose to trace Romance to its Origin, to follow its progress through the different periods to its declension, to shew how the modern Novel sprung up out of its ruins, to examine and compare the merits of both, and to remark upon the effects of them.
[Page 9]
Hort. Upon my word you do well to lay a deep foundation, the superstructure will require it: if it be well executed it will do you honour, and without a compliment, I think you equal to this undertaking.
Euph. You may be mistaken, and yet I may be entitled to your allowance,—the design may be good though the execution should fall short. I always mean more than I can express;—my materials increase upon me, insomuch that I fear I may be encumbered by the number and variety of them. I shall depend upon your assistance, and since you have opened my mouth upon the subject, you are bound in honour to correct my redundancies, and to supply my deficiencies.
Hort. What to furnish you with weapons for my defeat?
Euph. Not so, but to assist me in the course of my progress through the land of Romance. I purpose to remark upon the most eminent works of the kind, and to pay the tribute of praise to works of Genius and morality.
[Page 10]
Hort. I respect both the motive and the end too much to discourage you, and you may depend upon every assistance in my power.
Euph. Let then the present conversation serve as an introduction to our progress, the next time we meet we will pursue the subject more closely.
Hort. Let it be at my house next Thursday ladies!
Soph. Agreed, and let the Thursday in every week be set apart for this purpose, till the progress is finished.
Euph. With all my heart.—I will readily attend you in turn.
Hort. I am much obliged to you, for your readiness to gratify my curiosity, and shall expect next Thursday with some impatience. —adieu Madam.
Euph. I shall depend upon you for encouragement when deserved,—correction where I am mistaken, and allowance where wanted. —adieu my friends.
[Page 11]
EVENING II. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Hort. Ladies , I rejoice to see you at my house on this occasion. Let us lay aside form and ceremony, and proceed to the business of our meeting.— I expect a pitch'd battle; for I see Euphrasia has brought her artillery and is placing them to advantage.
Euph. You know your advantages, and that a woman is your opponent.
Hort. Whether you mean me a compliment or reproof, is not clear.—But I will not reply to it, lest it should hinder business. —It lies upon you Madam to proceed with your investigation.
[Page 12]
Soph. You are to explain to us the word Romance, of which it seems we have no certain Idea.
Euph. Since our last meeting I have not been idle.—I have consulted all the Dictionary writers upon the subject, and I do not find that any of them are clear and certain in their definition of it.
Ainsworth and Littleton speak in the following terms:— Narratio ficta,—fabulosa heroicorum facinorum historia.—Scriptum eroticum —splendida fabula.
Boyer calls a Romance too concisely— un fable—une conte—un mensonge.
Old Dyche and Bailey —a fiction, or feigned Story.
Dr. Johnson —a military fable of the middle ages :—A tale of wild adventures of war and love.
With all respect to the Doctor's judgment, —I must affirm that this definition can only be proper to the Romances of the middle ages, but cannot extend to the whole Genus.
[Page 13]
Hort. A proper distinction—but what use will you make of it?
Euph. The Origin of Romance is of much higher date, as I hope to convince you,— but first let us speak of the name.
Hort. How then would you define it?
Euph. By fixing a clear and certain meaning to it, not as of my own invention or judgment; but borrowing the idea of the Latinists, I would call it simply an Heroic fable ,—a fabulous Story of such actions as are commonly ascribed to heroes, or men of extraordinary courage and abilities.—Or if you would allow of it, I would say an Epic in prose.
Hort. I cannot allow of the last appellation, but to the first I make no objection. An Epic is a very superior composition.
Euph. We will speak of that hereafter. I do not despair of bringing you over to my definition; but let us first trace the Origin of our subject. Romances or Heroic fables are of very ancient, and I might say universal Origin. We find traces of them in all times,
[Page 14]
and in all countries: they have always been the favourite entertainment of the most savage, as well as the most civilized people. In the earliest accounts of all nations, we find they had traditional stories of their most eminent persons, that is of their Heroes , to which they listened in raptures, and found themselves excited to perform great actions, by hearing them recited;—they had their warsongs —and they had also their prose narratives.
Hort. This is indeed a truth that cannot be denied, I did not expect so ancient, nor so well authenticated an Origin, as you have given them.
Soph. I knew that Euphrasia would never advance, what she could not defend,— proceed Madam.
Euph. As a country became civilized, their narrations were methodized, and moderated to probability.—From the prose recitals sprung History,—from the war-songs Romance and Epic poetry.
Hort. History—Romance—and Epics all in a breath!
[Page 15]
Euph. Let us first distinguish History from the others.—When a nation became acquainted with letters, they could record facts, and this is the Æra of true History. Before that time a story, that at first was founded on facts, by length of time and passing through many hands, lost many real circumstances, and acquired many fictitious ones. The heathen Mythology is an unanswerable proof of this truth;—what at first was the History of mortal men, and their actions, was at length ascribed to deities; and the veil of Allegory concealed and altered facts, till they could no longer be traced, and at last were lost in fable and obscurity. These Stories, though no longer believed by wise men as truths, yet continued to please as agreeable fictions; and in more enlightened times, men of Genius and fancy, perceiving the pleasure they gave and how willingly they were received, imitated those antient fables, and in process of time composed others of different kinds, following the track of their talents, and the temper of the times in which they lived.
[Page 16]
Hort. All this I allow.—But will you involve History in this obscurity?
Euph. By no means.—Let us now leave History to her own strength and evidence, as the noblest and most useful of all studies; and let us proceed to Romance, and the Epic poem.
Hort. Romance and Epic again!—do you affirm that they are the same?
Euph. I do affirm it, and will endeavour to maintain it. They spring from the same root,—they describe the same actions and circumstances,—they produce the same effects, and they are continually mistaken for each other.
Hort. Your pardon Madam,—I must mention one material difference.—The Epic poem is always derived from some Historical fact, though perhaps remote and obscure.
Euph. Remote and obscure indeed.— So perhaps are some of the stories in Ovid's Metamorphoses ,—but I will bring a fairer comparison.—In the French Romances of the sixteenth Century, they had their foundation
[Page 17]
in real History; but the superstructure was pure fiction. I will not shelter myself under their authority, I will not speak of them as respectable works.—Let us compromise.— If you will permit me to go on in my own way, perhaps I may answer your objections when you least expect it, and I shall call upon you to make them, in due time.
Hort. I will hear you with attention and impartiality: but I wish you to come to the point directly.
Soph. The dispute waxes warm.—My dear Euphrasia , I expect you to answer all the scruples of Hortensius.
Euph. Well then, I will come to the point you wish to bring me.—Mankind willingly adopt the prejudices of their ancestors, they embrace them with affection, they quit them with reluctance. One of them is to decry Romance, and venerate Epic Poetry. I believe Hortensius has as few prejudices as any man living; but I must think this to be a strong one, and as such I shall treat it, and endeavour to cure him of it.
[Page 18]
Hort. I hope I am open to conviction, and ready to acknowledge truth, whether it makes for or against me.—Proceed Madam.
Euph. The Romances of all countries are derived from the bards. All countries have had their bards of early times, and their prose Romances afterwards.—Left my opinion should not be sufficient, I shall refer you to Dr. Percy's Essay on the old Metrical Romances , in which he has treated this subject, in so clear and judicious a manner, that nothing I can say is worthy to come after it.—You shall take it home with you, and it will prepare you for our next conversation. You will there find that Romances have been written both in prose and verse, and that according to the different circumstances of the Author's genius and situation, they became Epics or Romances.
Hort. I will certainly read it, but I will not promise to receive it implicitly.—I cannot with any patience see Homer and Virgil degraded into writers of Romances.
[Page 19]
Euph. I would not willingly degrade those great Poets: but I beg leave to distinguish them.---
Homer is universally acknowledged as the Prince of Epic poetry. If we may believe Dr. Blackwell , there was a wonderful concurrence of circumstances, that elevated him to this high station; circumstances unlikely, perhaps impossible, to happen again to any other Poet, or at least as improbable, as to find another Poet equally capable of using the same advantages:—but with all this eclat that surrounds him, Homer was the parent of Romance; where ever his works have been known, they have been imitated by the Poets and Romance writers.—I look upon Virgil as the most successful of his Imitators.
Hort. This is what I call degrading both these divine men, which I did not expect from you, whom I reckoned among their admirers.
Euph. I am so still, as much as possible, on this side Idolatry.—I venerate Homer as much as one unlearned in his own language can do. From Pope's admired translation I can discern
[Page 20]
the strong paintings of his bold imagination, his knowledge and judgment in marking his characters; and above all things, the consideration that the world owes to him, in a great measure, the knowledge of the History and Manners of the times in which he wrote, and of some ages before him; on these and many other accounts, Homer must always claim our respect and even veneration.— But after all this can you forbear smiling at the extravagant sallies of his imagination, can you approve his violent machinery, in which he degrades his deities below his heroes, and makes deities of men. In a word, if you will not smile with me, I know many of his admirers that will; in spite of the labours of his commentators, who strive with all their strength, to allegorize away his absurdities.
Hort. Upon my word Madam, you have made a bold attack, I am not prepared to answer you of a sudden, but I shall do it hereafter.
Euph. In the mean time I am preparing to anticipate your answer, and to obviate your
[Page 21]
objections.—It is astonishing that men of sense, and of learning, should so strongly imbibe prejudices, and be so loth to part with them.—That they should despise and ridicule Romances, as the most contemptible of all kinds of writing, and yet expatiate in raptures, on the beauties of the fables of the old classic Poets,—on stories far more wild and extravagant, and infinitely more incredible.
Hort. It is because we pay due respect to works of true Genius, and disdain the comparison of such weak and paltry imitations, as those you have undertaken to support.
Euph. I am no stranger to the charms of Poetry, I have even felt a degree of its enthusiasm, yet I cannot sacrifice the convictions of truth at its shrine. I am of opinion that many of the fine old Historical ballads, are equally entitled to the name of Epic poems.
There are examples enough extant, of Romance in verse, and Epics in prose. I shall produce some of them in the course of our progress:—but at present I shall only mention the Provencals , or Troubadours ,—and I refer you to Mrs. Dobson's account of them.
[Page 22]
Hort. You would engage me in a new course of reading, but I had rather you would give me your own arguments.
Euph. I am afraid they should not be sufficient, but I will try a shorter way with you. You think the divine Homer degraded by my comparisons, yet I will shew you a striking resemblance of him, in a work of much lower estimation:—Did you never read a book called the Arabian Nights Entertainments?
Hort. You cannot be in earnest in this comparison?
Euph. Indeed I am.—If you will take the trouble to read the Story of Sindbad the Sailor, in the first volume, you will think that either the genius of Homer was transfused into the writer, or else that he was well acquainted with his works; for he certainly resembles Homer in many particulars.—In the boldness of his imagination,—in the variety of his characters,—and in the marvellous adventures he relates.—In the history of Sindbad , we have most of those that Ulysses meets with
[Page 23]
in the Odyssey: insomuch that you must be convinced the likeness could not be accidental.
Soph. I can confirm your assertion by my testimony,—I have often been surprized at it.—But Hortensius must read the story in order to be convinced of the resemblance.
Euph. Above all other points, the Arabian writer most resembles Homer in his Machinery: with this difference however, that he is by far the most modest in the use of it.— Homer takes the liberty of sending his deities perpetually on the most trifling errands,— it is true the Magicians of the Arabian perform very marvellous things, by the assistance of the good and evil Genii: but then they are all subordinate to the seal of the Sultan Solomon the son of David ,—it is likewise worthy of observation; that throughout the whole work, the Supreme Being is never mentioned without the deepest marks of homage and veneration.
Give me leave to mention one more circumstance relating to this work.—That all
[Page 24]
doubts of its Origin and Authenticity are removed, by the testimony of several writers well acquainted with the original language: particularly by Lady M. W. Montague , and by Mr. Jones ; both of whom bear testimony to the fidelity of the English translation.
Hort. All that you have said, will only prove that this Arabian writer imitated Homer as many others have done.
Euph. If I am not mistaken, it will prove something more;—namely, that there is frequently a striking resemblance between works of high and low estimation, which prejudice only, hinders us from discerning, and which when seen, we do not care to acknowledge: for the defects of a favourite Author, are like those of a favourite friend; or perhaps still more like our own.
Soph. A palpable hit Hortensius! — confess it?
Hort. I confess that Euphrasia has thrown out many things that have surprized, if they have not convinced me, and that I am very desirous she should proceed.
[Page 25]
Soph. You will then read the Story of Sindbad the Sailor, at our request.
Hort. I will,—but I will not promise to allow the comparison.
Euph. Not before you are convinced that it is just.
Hort. In what class will you place your Arabian writer?
Euph. In one of which he is the Original —Eastern Tales:—of which I shall say more in due time and place. In the mean time, I beg leave to lay down two points as certain; upon which I shall establish my system.
First, That Epic Poetry is the parent of Romance.
Secondly, That there is a certain degree of respect due to all the works of Genius, by whatever name distinguished.—Grant me these two postulata, and I shall proceed regularly.
Hort. I find you will take them for granted. —But I put in a caveat, in objection to your dogmas.
[Page 26]
Euph. I will call upon you to make them, at a proper time.
Hort. Then I will not interrupt you unseasonably: but perhaps I may sometimes ask for explanation.
Euph. I will most willingly hear and answer you, and I beg your assistance as we go forward.
Soph. It appears to me that Euphrasia has advanced nothing that she has not proved, and I expect as she proceeds that she will explain herself still further.
Euph. You do me honour,—and I hope justice likewise.
Hort. Well Euphrasia ,—I will follow you as closely as I can.
Euph. Having traced Romance to its Origin, I shall proceed with the progress of it: but this shall be the subject of our next conversation, it is now time to put an end to this.
Soph. Let us then adjourn to next Thursday, at my house.
Hort. I will not fail to meet you there.
[Page 27]
Soph. What would your neighbour Ergasius say, if he should hear that you met weekly two women, to talk of Romances?
Hort. He would certainly indulge his splenetic humour at my expence.
Euph. If you are afraid of him, it will be best to give over our meetings, for I am meditating to tell the subject of them to all the world.
Hort. That is indeed enough to alarm one. I find I must take care of what I say before you.
Euph. Take courage my friend.—I promise you never to make our conversation public, without your consent and approbation.
Hort. On these conditions, I am satisfied, I dare say you will do nothing rashly, nor without due consideration.
Euph. I am honoured by your friendship and confidence.—Adieu 'till next Thursday.
Soph. I shall reckon the hours 'till our next meeting.—Adieu!
[Page 28]
EVENING III. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Hort. Well met, my fair friends.— You see I am come, although I hazard the censure of Ergastus. —I protest Euphrasia has carried all her points triumphantly. —I shall be afraid to attack her in future.
Euph. You allow then, I had some foundation for my assertions.
Hort. I do;—and you have staggered my opinions in some points that I thought immoveably fixed and certain:—but much is yet wanting to make me a perfect convert to yours.
[Page 29]
Euph. I shall not entirely rely upon my own strength to effect your conversion, but occasionally call in assistance from abler hands.
Soph. The porch is methinks big enough for the building.—Proceed.
Euph. My dear friend, the building is of greater extent than you imagine, but I will without further prefacing, plunge into the subject. I have traced Romance to an early Origin, and I have mentioned Homer as perhaps the first who gave it a regular model or form: I say perhaps , because there might be others before him: for doubtless there were Stories transmitted from age to age, before they were committed to writing.
I have seen some Ægyptian stories, of the fabulous kind, that do not fall very short of those in the Mythology of the Greeks and Romans. The Greeks were always fond of these stories.
It is said that one Dearchus , a disciple of Aristotle , wrote Romances; and he has been called the first writer of them.
[Page 30]
Antonius Diogenes was the author of a work of this kind, called the Errors and Amours of Dinias and Dercyllis.
The Amours of Rhodanis and Simonides , are mentioned as very ancient.
The Romance of Leucippé and Clitophon , written by Achilles Tatius , a Greek, he was afterwards a Bishop, and his works are still extant.
The Ephesian History by Xenophon , might be reckoned in this class; also the four books of incredible things, written by Damasius. — Under the same class may be ranked the fables of Parthonius Nicenus ,—of Athenagoras,— Theodorus Prodromus,—Eustathius ,—and Longus , —and many others doubtless, whose names are lost.
Hort. From whence, and to what purpose have you conjured up such a list of uncouth names—to frighten us?
Euph. Only to shew you that the Ancients had their Romances, as well as later times,— of these works many are lost, and perhaps you would not be much pleased with those that remain.
[Page 31]
Hort. I am a stranger to them all, except the Ephesian History of Xenophon.
Euph. I will be more particular in the next I shall mention.—One of the most ancient and famous prose Romances is, The Æthiopic History of Heliodorus , Bishop of Tricca in Thessalia, in the fourth century. It is related, that a Synod considering the danger that might happen to youth, from reading a Romance (though there is nothing in it, in the least degree offensive to morals or modesty,) authorized by the dignity of its author; proposed to him either to burn his book, or resign his Bishopric, and that he chose the latter. There are many testimonies of the merits of this book, both from ancient, and modern writers; but there needs no other evidence, than the circumstance of its having been successively translated into all the known languages.
Hort. Has it ever been translated into English.
Euph. Yes certainly, I cannot say how early; I do not know of any translation before
[Page 32]
that of 1687. About the year 1720, there was a new and pompous Edition, published under the second Title of Theagenes and Chariclea , which I have seen likewise, but I have some reason to believe it was never a popular book here.
Hort. Pray give us your opinion of it?
Euph. It is indisputably a work of Genius, and as such will always be respectable; and moreover, it is one of those Romances that are immediately derived from Homer. —The manners of it are evidently imitative of him, and I desire you to respect it on this account.
Hort. Suppose I were disposed to read it, where is it to be found?
Euph. In my own library, at your service. There are doubtless many more of the same kind that are now sunk into oblivion: but this may serve as specimen of the Ancient Romance.
Soph. You are got so far beyond my depth, that I have little to say; but I flatter myself you will come within my reach in due time. I thought myself well read in Romance, but
[Page 33]
I know nothing of any work you have yet mentioned.
Euph. I shall soon come to your list, but not just at present.—I shall speak first of the Romances of the middle ages; but before I begin I shall read you some extracts from Dr. Percy , which will be of great service in our progress through the Regions of Romance.
“That our old Romances of Chivalry may be derived in a lineal descent from the ancient Historical songs of the Gothic bards and scalds will be shown:—and indeed appears the more evident as many of these songs are still preserved in the North, which exhibit all the seeds of Chivalry before it became a solemn institution.
“Chivalry, as a distinct military order, conferred in the way of investiture, and accompanied with the solemnity of an oath, and other ceremonies, was of later date, and sprung out of the feudal constitution. —But the ideas of Chivalry prevailed long before in all the Gothic nation,
[Page 34]
and may be discovered as in embrio, in the customs, manners, and opinions, of every branch of that people.—That fondness of going in quest of adventures, that spirit of challenging to single combat, and that respectful complaisance to the fair sex, (so different from the manners of the Greeks and Romans), are all of Gothic origin, and may be traced up to the earliest times among all the Northern nations. These existed long before the feudal ages, though they were called forth and strengthened in a peculiar manner under that constitution, and at length arrived at their full maturity in the time of the Crusades, so replete with Romantic adventures.”---This extract will I hope answer all your doubts and scruples Hortensius.
Hort. I confess it confirms your assertions, and answers your intentions.
Euph. I will tell you my intention,—it is not to take the honour of making you a convert to myself, but to abler hands.
[Page 35]
Hort. Then you must think me prejudiced indeed.—No Madam, I will owe my conviction to nobody, if not to you.
Soph. That is handsomely said, and I dare say will be made good.—I beg you my dear friend to proceed.
Euph. It is a general received opinion, that the first Romances of Chivalry were written in France.—I think it very doubtful.— I suppose them to have been current in Spain long before: for the Moors were conversant in them, and many of the old Spanish Romances were of Moorish derivation; as appears from the stories themselves.
Soph. I have heard that the name is derived from the French, and it seems to me that the Provencals called their works Romaunts.
Euph. That is very true.—Dr. Percy will confirm this truth also.—“The Latin tongue, ceased to be spoken in France about the ninth Century, and was succeeded by a mixture of the language of the Franks and bad Latin, which was called the Romaunce tongue. As the songs of Chivalry, became the most
[Page 36]
popular compositions in that language, they were emphatically called Romans, Romants, or Romanic, and though this name was at first given to either prose, or poetry, it came by degrees to be appropriated to prose only, and is now in general so used.”
Hort. I have long waited to hear the Etymology of this world, and I expected a different derivation of it.
Euph. Will you favour us with your own sentiments on this head?
Hort. I always thought it was derived from the Romans, but in what manner I was ignorant. I conjectured that it arose from an imitation of their manners.
Euph. I have been desirous to inform myself in this particular, and I give you the best account I can meet with.—I have read somewhere, that the inhabitants of Normandy, were formerly called Romandii, or Romandui, which seems to me the more proper Etymology. —The French or Franks language came at length to be called the Romaunt tongue, as often as the proper name.
[Page 37]
Soph. I am of the same opinion, and am told that Romances may be traced in France as high as the eleventh Century.
Euph. Unless I am mistaken they may be traced much higher.—I must read you some more extracts before I give you a list of them.
Hort. Your extracts lay heavy upon me. Pray give us your own sentiments and your own observations?
Euph. You will have much more reason to complain when I lay them aside; which I shall do shortly, and turn into another road. I shall make no farther mention of the metrical Romances, than is necessary to carry us forward to the prose ones.---When they were become popular in France, Spain, Italy, and some part of Germany, Britain was not unacquainted with them; as witness— another extract from Dr. Percy —“The stories of King Arthur and his round table, may reasonably be supposed to be the growth of this Island. The stories of Guy of Warwick, and Bevis of Southampton, and others of the same kind, were probably
[Page 38]
the invention of the English minstrels.— The Welch have some very old Romances on the subject of King Arthur, but as these are in prose, they are not (probably) the first pieces composed on this subject.”
Hort. I am extremely glad, for the honour of Britain , that she had early a knowledge of this polite literature.
Euph. When you thought you were jesting, you uttered a serious truth, this was indeed the polite literature of those early ages.
These old Historical songs, inspired the enthusiasm of glory, however they may now be ridiculed.—It is recorded, that at the famous battle of Hastings, the Normans animated their courage, by singing the old Romance, or song of Rollo. —Dr. Percy says, it was the song of Roland ; but the former seems most likely, because Rollo was their ancient chief, and their Prince traced his descent from him. —It is indisputable that these songs, had a strong effect upon the hearers;—but I shall have occasion to enlarge upon this subject hereafter. I have said more than I intended
[Page 39]
on this head, in order to convince Hortensius of the intimate connexion between the Epic poetry, and the old Romance.—Pray observe, that I am now speaking of the OLD Romance, and not of the imitations of it that sprung up many ages afterwards. They are frequently confounded together, and from thence have arisen the erroneous opinions that have been formed of them. I am now speaking of the old Romances of Religion and Chivalry, in which there was a strange mixture of Paganism and Christianity; which was farther promoted by two Monkish writers of those times; one of which under the fictitious name of Turpinus Archbishop of Rheims, wrote a kind of History of Charlemagne , and his twelve peers or Paladins, who drove the Saracens out of France;—the other our Geoffery of Monmouth. From the first of these Ariosto composed, or rather compiled his Orlando Furioso , and Tasso took the hint of his Jerusalem. — Dr. Percy says on this head—“Should the public encourage the revival of the ancient songs of Chivalry, they would frequently
[Page 40]
see the rich ore of an Ariosto or Tasso , though buried under the rubbish and dross of those barbarous times.”
Hort. I confess that you have open'd to me a new vein of learning, which I never before thought worth the trouble of enquiring after.
Euph. The confession is ingenuous.—I still refer you to Dr. Percy , though I shall read no more extracts from him.
I presume you are by this time convinced, that the Romance and Epic poem are nearly related.—Dr. Percy has given us a list of the remains of the metrical Romances;—at our next meeting I will give you mine of prose ones. For this time I take my leave of you. I shall expect you at my house next Thursday.
Hort. & Sophron. We will not fail you.
[Page 41]
EVENING IV. Sophronia, Hortensius, Euphrasia. Hort. I am impatient to hear the further progress of Romance. We have passed through one department, which has afforded me both information and entertainment, and I expect still more from the succeeding part.
Euph. I am obliged to your candour and attention, and shall endeavour to merit your indulgence, and the patience with which you have listened to the dryest part of our progress; I hope we shall find more entertainment as we go forward.
I shall now give you my list of the most eminent Romances of the middle ages , with
[Page 42]
as many of the dates of the publication, as I have been able to procure.
I do not pretend to give a regular list of them, but only to note some of the most celebrated ones, and to mark the distinction between the Old Romance , those of the middle ages, and those of the last division nearest our own times; when the passion for these kind of writings was revived in France, in the seventeenth Century. Our own country has produced many, and as early as any in Europe, the Spaniards excepted, who received them from the Moors and Arabians, long before they were known in France or England.— I am now speaking of the Romances of Chivalry properly so called.
Geoffery of Monmouth's History gave birth to most of those Romances, which are founded on English stories.
The Romance of Hornechild or King Horne , is one of the oldest, and is of the metrical kind.—I know not the date.
Sir Lancelot du Lake.
Sir Guy of Warwick.
[Page 43]
The History of King Arthur and his Knights of the round table.
Sir Bevys of Hampton— Bevis of Southampton.
Sir Degorye —Sir Tristram —Sir Percevat
All these are extant in metre, and many of them in Prose.
Guy Earl of Warwick, Prose, 1292
Richard Cæur de Lyon , — 1247
Historia Alexandria Regis , — 1245
Destruction of Troy , — 1380
There is good reason to believe that Romances were written in Normandy, long before the time of the Troubadours in Provence.
You will observe that many of the French Romances are founded upon English stories, —for instance,
Le Mort d' Authure , — 1158
Tristan Chevalier de la table Ronde , 1150
Le Brut d'Augleterre , — 1155
Richard Cæur de Lyon , — 1360
Sir Beuves de Hamton ,
Hort. It seems to me that you frequently mention Histories of real persons, among the heroes of Romance.
[Page 44]
Euph. You are right,—the early Romances were often taken from prose Histories; most of those last mentioned were, and it is worthy your observation, that they have been translated and transcribed from prose to verse, and vice versa : so that the same stories have appeared, and are still extant in both forms.— I will mention a few more French Romances, before I take notice of those of Spain.
Histoire de Quatre fils d' Aymon , 1156
Le Roman de Rois , — 1160
Sir Eglamour d' Artois.
Histoire d' Ippomedon.
Tristan Prince de Lyonnois , 1445
Loves, &c. of the Greek Princes , 1360
Le Chevalier de la Cigne , — 1435
Roman de Rou.
Histoire de Sangraal.
Le Romaunt de la Rose , — 1409
Hort. I have heard something of the last mentioned, but all the others are strangers to to me.
Euph We will speak further of it hereafter, —at present we will take notice of some of
[Page 45]
the most celebrated of the Spanish Romances.
Amadis de Gaul in 24 parts written in the thirteenth Century,
From this famous Romance sprung many imitations. Such as Amadis of Greece,— Palmerin d'Oliva,—Palmerin of England,— Belianis of Greece,—and many others, for which I refer you to Don Quixote's library, as we are not likely to meet with them any where else.—I shall only observe that when the art of printing became established in England, most of the old Romances were re-published that had slept many years.—For instance, Recuyel d'Histoire de Troy , by Caxton , 1470,— Mort Arthure by the same,— and many others that I need not mention a second time. There were also some modern Greek Romances,—as Chæreas & Callirhoe ,— and Chariton ,—in the 14th Century.
Hort. Upon my word, and a formidable collection! are any of them now extant?
Euph. I believe all, but most of them certainly are.—I will read you an article or two, from a Bookseller's Catalogue, 1777.
[Page 46]
Tristan Chevalier de la table Ronde— belle exemp.—avec figures & vignettes—eleg. rel. — 1548.—Price 1l. IIS. 6d.
Le Romaunt de la Rose, ou tout l'Art d' Amore et enclose:—Mss.—ecrire sur velin, en letters Gothique, avec la Capitals illumine, en de plus belle preservation.—sur le dernier fuillé est cette remarque. “Johan Anquetin, Bailis, a present Count de Harcourt, fait devise et ecrire cette Romaunt de la Rose, par Johan Selles, Clerc.”—Accomplis en l'Ann de Incarnation , 1409—Price 1l. IIS. 6d.
Hort. Very curious indeed,—and the price shews its estimation.
Euph. Another Edition of the same work printed    —   —   1541
Another, at Amsterdam,   1735
Soph. I have heard much of the Romance of the Rose, and I wish to know more particulars of it.
Hort. Euphrasia smiles, I fancy she could give us some.
Euph. I believe I can but it will interrupt our progress; when I have finished my list, I will tell you all that I know of it.
[Page 47]
Soph. You cannot oblige us more.
Euph. I find myself obliged to mention many of these works, which were of early invention; according to the date of their translation ; —as, Romaunt de la Chevalieres de Gloire,—Paris , 1612.—The Castell of Love, a Spanish Romance.—Translated into English by John Bourchier (Lord Berners ); who also translated many other Romances from the French, Spanish, and Italian, particularly, The History of the noble and valyant Knight, Sir Arthur of Lytell Britain, (Armorica).— The famous exploits of Sir Hugh of Bourdeaux. —This nobleman died in the year 1532.
Soph. A proof that Romances were early known here:—but you seem to have finished your list.
Euph. I understand you, and will now fulfil my promise.—The Romance of the Rose, is, properly speaking, a course of Love-philosophy, —it was begun by William de Lorris , who undertook it to please a Lady with whom he was enamour'd,—he died in 1260, leaving it unfinished.—Forty years after; one John de
[Page 48]
Meun , who was also called le Clopinell , wrote a continuation of it; he was a Dominican, and a Doctor of Divinity.
Soph. He was not like the Greek Bishop, ordered to burn his work?
Euph. Times and manners were changed; Priests wrote Romances, and Princes read them.—This John de Meun dedicated another Romance of his, to King Philip le Bel , in which he mentions his former work, as a recommendation of his new one.
“I John de Meun , who formerly upon jealousy, putting Belacoil into prison, taught how to take the Castell, and gather the Rose, &c.”—Many of the French writers extol this Romance very highly, and prefer it to all the works of the Italian Poets; but it is customary with them, to depreciate the writers of other countries, and to magnify their own. As another proof of the affinity of metrical and prose Romances, this famous one was translated into Prose, in the year 1480, by Johan de Moulinet , who is said to have enriched it with many Allegories of his
[Page 49]
own invention. It afterwards underwent several further alterations, from the different hands it passed through; but still the ground work was the same, and it still preserved its estimation.
Hort. Pray was it ever translated into English?
Euph. It was begun by Chaucer , but left unfinished at his death. I can give you a specimen of this work, if you wish to hear it.
Soph. By all means:—Let us hear it?
Extract from CHAUCER.
    Menne saine that in swevenings 1 ,
There nis but fables and lesings,
But menne may know, some swevens sent,
And afterwards been appaurent;
This I shall draw unto warraunt.
    Within my twenty year of age
When that love taketh his courage
Of youngé folke, I wente soone
To bedde as I was wonte to doone;
And fast I slepte, and in sleeping
Me mette with such a swevening,
That liked me wondrous wele,
And in this sweven is never a dele,
[Page 50]
That it nis afterwards befal,
Like as this dreme will tell us all.
    Now this dreme will I rhime aright
To make your herts both gay and light,
For Love he praieth, and also
Commaundeth me that it be so.
    Now if there be any aske of me
Whether it be he or she,
How this book that I read you here
Shall hight? that I will now declare.
It is THE ROMAUNT OF THE ROSE,
In which all the art of Love I close.
    The matter fair is of to make,
God graunt me in greé that she it take
For whom that in begonnen is,
And that is she that hath I wis
Such mokell prise, and thereto she
So worthy is beloved to be,
That she well ought of prise and right,
Be 'cleped Rose of every wight.
Euph. I reckon that by this time, I have tired you sufficiently.
Soph. Not me I am sure, you have satisfied my curiosity.
Hort. Nor me.—I find this account both curious and entertaining, and we are obliged for the communication.
[Page 51]
Euph. I hope by this time Hortensius is convinced, that Romances, have been written, both in prose and verse; and further that a Romance, is nothing but an Epic in prose.
Hort. I give up the point,—but I reserve the liberty of making the proper distinction between the classic Poets, and Romance writers.
Euph. We will speak further on that head hereafter,—at present, I have still a more arduous undertaking to support, namely, that these writings were by no means so contemptible, as they have been represented by later writers:—by those who never saw them, nor knew any particulars of them; but have condemned them indiscriminately, through blind prejudice; or what is worse, total ignorance of them.
Hort. I take shame to myself, and shall remain silent on this head.
Euph. In early times, in the dawning of literature, these subjects exercised the pens of the ingenious—they were the favourite studies of the young nobility and gentry of those
[Page 52]
times, and their manners were, in a great measure formed upon the models of those adventurers, whose exploits they continually heard recited. The effects they produced were indeed of so mixed a nature, that it is difficult to separate the good from the bad. Religion and virtue, were so blended with fanaticism and absurdity, that the lustre of the former principles, concealed the blemishes of the latter.—At this distance of time we need not be afraid to give our judgment of them, neither ought we to be ashamed to do justice to works of Genius, by whatever name they are called.
Hort. Certainly.—I shall pay them due respect for your sake.
Euph. Not so, Hortensius , I will not accept such respect for them.—You shall pay it for the sake of those illustrious men, who imbibed their enthusiasm, and carried it into practice.
These were the books that caused such a spirit of Chivalry in the youth of much later times, particularly in Spain; such as raised
[Page 53]
up a Cervantes to attack them; and you will find a curious list of them, in the sixth chapter of the first book of Don Quixote , in the conversation between the Priest and the Barber; in which the Author condemns most of them to the flames.
Hort. Is it possible to respect that incomparable work, and yet respect the books it condemns and ridicules?
Euph. Yes it is; though it may seem at first view a paradox.—This infatuation was so general, that the brightest geniuses, and the wisest men were not exempt from it. —Our Poetry owes more to it, than you imagine; it was calculated to elevate and warm a poetic imagination, of this I shall bring proofs. Chaucer , and all our old writers, abound with it,— Spencer owes perhaps his immortality to it, it is the Gothic imagery, that gives the principal graces to his work, and without them we should soon grow tired of his Allegories, —but we have a yet stronger instance in our divine Milton , whose mind was so deeply impressed by them, and his imagination so
[Page 54]
warmed, that he frequently recurs to them, of which I shall only give you a few specimens.---
Fairer than feigned of old, or fabled since
Of Fairy damsels met in forest wide
By knights of Logres, or of Lyones,
Lancelot , or Pelleas , or Pellenore. Par. Reg. b. z.
And again in the following book.---
When Agrican with all his northern powers
Besieged Albracca, as Romances tell ,
The city of Galliphrone;—from thence to win
The fairest of her sex Angelica
His daughter; sought by many prowest knights,
Both Paynim , and the peers of Charlemagne.
There are continual allusions of this kind, sprinkled through all his works; but these may serve as prooss of what I have advanced.
Hort. You find means to authenticate what ever you advance.
Soph. Give me leave to furnish you with another passage, from memory, it is in the Penseroso.---
Or call up him that left half told
The story of Cambuscan bold,
Of Camball , and of Algarsife ,
And who who had Canacé to wife,
[Page 55]
That own'd the virtuous ring and glass;—
And of the wondrous horse of brass
On which the Tartar king did ride:—
And if ought else great bards beside
In sage and solemn tunes have sung
Of turneys and of trophies hung,
Of forests and enchantments drear
Where more is meant than meets the ear.
Euph. I am much obliged to you, this passage helps to illustrate our subject.—I will only just observe that the story of Canacé is finished by Spencer in the Fairy Queen, Book 4th, where he begins the story with a fine Apostrophe to Chaucer's memory.
Hort. There is a kind of enthusiasm, that is inspired by these Poets, which seizes the head, and engages the heart, in their favour. —I have heard it observed that Spencer has made more poets than any other writer of our country.
Soph. I know one instance of it myself, in a lady, who never before dreamed of writing Poetry, she was not young at the time when she first met with Spencer ; and reading some of the finest Cantos in it, the impression was
[Page 56]
so strong, that she could not sleep all the night after, and before the morning, she composed a very pretty piece of Poetry in honour of Spencer. —and from that time forward, she continued to write whenever a subject fell in her way, and all her writings are above mediocrity.
Euph. I can confirm this truth, and that she wrote verses when she was turned of seventy years of age.
Hort. My dear Ladies, you are enough to frighten one, I shall be afraid to take up one of these books, lest it should work such a miracle upon me.:—but are we not wandering from our subject?
Soph. I beg your pardon, it is I that have led you astray.
Euph. Not so far as Hortensius seems to think, for Spencer's poem may be called of the Romance kind.—He will allow that there must have been something engaging and fascinating in those books that captivated the hearts of men, who were in other respects of sound minds and regular conduct:—for ought
[Page 57]
we to think that all who read and admired those books were fools or madmen?
Hort. According to your account, we must reckon all the most accomplished men of those times in the number if we do.
Euph. In the days of Gothic ignorance, these Romances might perhaps, be read by many young persons as true Histories, and might therefore more easily affect their manners. —As in the Heathen Mythology, the example of a mortal exalted into a demi-god, was an incitement to the imitation of actions so gloriously rewarded;—so the examples of the Heroes of Romance and Epic poetry, might have excited the youth of those times, to copy exploits universally rewarded by praise and admiration.
Hort. It is neither incredible, nor improbable that they might do so; and you have well explained the Paradox, I took notice of.
Euph. This infatuation spread through France, Italy, Germany, and England; but more remarkably in Spain, where the young nobility were so deeply infected by it, that it
[Page 58]
called forth the pen of a Cervantes ; who by ridiculing Romance and Knight Errantry in his Don Quixote , in some degree checked this frenzy: but the effect of his ridicule was not so universal as is generally believed.
Hort. Are you going to maintain another Paradox?
Euph. Not at all—I am only speaking a well known truth, and I shall only appeal to Dr. Percy. —“The Satire of Cervantes , or, rather the inorease of knowledge and literature, drove these books off the stage.”
Hort. Now you are coming upon us, with your extracts again.
Euph. Not so.—I shall endeavour for once to stand my ground alone.—The passion for these books was in some degree checked; but it was not eradicated.—There is good reason to believe, that even Cervantes himself, was not cured of it.
Hort. Nay, if you animadvert upon Cervantes , I know not what to say:—but I shall expect proofs of this assertion.
Euph. I shall produce them presently.—
[Page 59]
Besides his Galatea ; (of which he speaks with pleasure, and rescues it from the condemned books in Don Quixote's library, and after he had written his Novels upon a new plan,) he composed a serious Romance, called Persiles and Sigismonda , which remains extant, as a proof against him. It is said that he preferred this to all his other works:—he compares it with the Æthiopics of Heliodorus , being written in the same style and manner. What shall we say of the man, who had produced Don Quixote , and could afterwards write a book of the same kind as those he satyrized? May we not conclude that he still loved them in his heart?
Hort. Permit me to offer a reason on his behalf,—a reason that makes me sigh over the fate of Genius.— Cervantes! the gallant soldier!—the delightful companion!— the charming writer!—the pride and boast of his country!— Cervantes wanted bread.—he wrote this celebrated work in a prison, and knowing the taste and humour of his countrymen, composed such a book, as was most likely to please them, and procure relief to his miseries.
[Page 60]
Euph. Your apology is generous and liberal, and you have given us, probably, the true reason.—I join with you, in admiring and deploring the fate of that incomparable man, and in him, of neglected Genius.—I am now going, as you will think, to maintain another Paradox; to affirm that the passion for the Old Romance , still exists in some countries: —particularly, in Spain and Italy.
Hort. How will you bring proofs of this point?
Euph. By appealing to the veracity of our friend Horatio , whom you knew a man to be believed. Horatio resided twenty years in Italy, and was a close observer of the manners of the place where he resided.—He told me that in the city of Naples, (and many other places) there are a set of people who earn their bread by reciting old stories, that they are surrounded by a set of auditors who give them small money.—They put one in mind of the old bards, except that they recite sometimes in prose, as well as in verse,— they recite in a kind of tone between speaking
[Page 61]
and singing, something like the Opera recitative,—they are frequently sent for to attend the sick, whom they lull to sleep by their chantings,—sometimes they recite from their invention, but oftener from their memory,— sometimes stanzas of Ariosto and Tasso ;— sometimes from the old Romances;—at others the legendary stories of the saints of the Romish church, but they are much followed, and most people are pleased with their recitals, and they are very popular.
Soph. I have heard that there are still itinerant bards in Italy and Spain.
Euph. You are not misinformed. Horatio has heard two of them contend in alternate verse, and with all the warmth and enthusiasm of the ancient Poets.—Neither the spirit of Poetry or Romance, is totally extinct, in many parts of Italy and Spain.
Hort. Whenever I think to catch you tripping, you glide away from me, and in your place I find another person, whom I am to contend with.
Euph, I only fortify my opinions, by others more respectable.
[Page 62]
Hort. You fight flying like a Parthian, but I will confess freely that you have given me a much higher opinion of these old Romances, and of those who read them. But what then are those of which I had formed so contemptible an opinion?
Euph. Ah Hortensius! —have I not caught you tripping?—Have you suffered yourself to form a contemptible opinion of books you never knew, nor enquired after?
Hort. If I have taken up an opinion upon trust, it was from the character that has been given me of those books, by persons of acknowledged abilities and judgment.
Euph. Then do not part with it till you see good reason for it, perhaps you friends may have given you a true representation: there are many paltry Romances, and but few capital ones.—But I shall come nearer to you at our next meeting, when I am to speak of yet a third class, which I shall call modern Romances , and indeed they are so comparatively; I mean those of the sixteenth and seventeenth Centuries; we will now take our leave of the OLD Romances.
[Page 63]
Hort. Thus far you have gone forward successfully, and I am much obliged for your communications.
Euph. And I to you for your patience, which I shall put to further trial.
Soph. Pray banish that Idea, lest it should lead you to suppress or abridge any thing.— Next Thursday we meet at my house.
Hort. I shall attend you with increased satisfaction.
Euph. Good night to my kind and partial friends.
[Page 64]
EVENING V. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Euph. We are now to proceed to the modern Romances, which have been so often mistaken for the old ones.— after these had been exploded in a great measure, the taste for them was revived in France, by Calprenede,—D'Ursé ,—the Scudery 's, and many others; who wrote new Romances upon a different plan: which in some kinds of refinement were superior to the old ones, but in the greater merits fell very short of them. They were written with more regularity, and brought nearer to probability; but on the other hand by taking for their foundation some obscure parts of true history, and building
[Page 65]
fictitious stories upon them, truth and fiction were so blended together, that a common reader could not distinguish them, young people especially imbibed such absurd ideas of historical facts and persons, as were very difficult to be rectified.—Why does Sophronia smile at my remark?
Soph. Because it reminds me of a circumstance, that confirms the truth of your observation. —A sister of mine was upon a visit in the country.—She slept with a lady who was a visitor at the same house.—The room was hung with fine old Tapestry, representing the history of Alexander the Great.—The stranger lady asked the story, and my sister pointed out the tent of Darius as the capital piece.— Pray said the stranger, which of those ladies is Cassandra? —my sister was surprized and at a loss for an answer.—I don't know said she, that any person of that name is there.—Oh, said the lady, I mean Statira ; she is sometimes called by that name, and sometimes by the other.—My sister was confounded to discover how ignorant she was of Statira 's history, and
[Page 66]
said no more.—At her return home she told me of this incident, I was at no loss to understand it.—I told her that Statira many Centuries after her death, had been revived by a certain French writer, and made the subject of a long Romance, under the name of Cassandra.
Euph. Your story illustrates my observation, and proves the impropriety of putting these books into the hands of young people, though in other respects they are a very harmless kind of reading.
Soph. I have heard that these books produced a particular kind of affectation in speaking and writing, which is still called the Romantic.
Euph. That is very probable,—but as fashion has too great a share in regulating the language of the times, that could not last very long.
Soph. I beg your pardon.—Fashion did not then change so often as now.
Euph . I believe there has always been nearly the same proportion of fashionable folly in civilized countries; the only difference
[Page 67]
is, that within the present Century it has made a much quicker rotation. To trace the causes of this would lead us too far from our present subject.—When people talk in an affected manner, and still more when they utter improbabilities, it may without impropriety be called Romantic, at any time.
Hort. You, ladies, may settle this point at any other time.—I beg you, Madam, to proceed to your modern Romances.
Euph. The ancient and modern Romance, had each their peculiar ton , their affectation , their absurdities :—at the same time it must be confessed by those who despise them, that the enthusiasm they inspired was that of virtue and honour.
Soph. That is indisputable.—I have read many of these you are now speaking of, and I can bear my testimony that they inculcated no principles contrary to any of the moral or social virtues.
Euph. You say true.—If it taught young women to deport themselves too much like Queens and Princesses, it taught them at the
[Page 68]
same time that virtue only could give lustre to every rank and degree.—It taught the young men to look upon themselves as the champions and protectors of the weaker sex;— to treat the object of their passion with the utmost respect;—to avoid all improper familiarities, and, in short, to expect from her the reward of their virtues.
Hort. Upon my word, ladies, you have said more in behalf of these books, than you have against them; and with every appearance of reason.
Euph. I am glad you think so, and begin to hope we shall agree in opinion still better, as we advance farther.
Such as I have described them, are the French Romances.—The Astrea of D'Ursé,— Cyrus and Clelia by Mesdemoiselles Scudery, —Cassandra and Cleopatra by Calprenede,— Ariane,—Almahide,—Polexander,—Ibrahim, —Francion ,—and many others of the same kind.—These were the books that pleased our grandmothers, whose patience in wading thro' such tremendous volumes, may raise our surprize:
[Page 69]
for to us they appear dull,—heavy,— and uninteresting.
Soph. You remind me of what my good Aunts have often told me, that they, my Mother, and a select party of relations and friends, used to meet once a week at each others houses, to hear these stories;—one used to read, while the rest ply'd their needles.
Hort. Such an assembly would excite a smile in the ladies of this enlightened age, who know how to employ their time so much better.
Soph. Spare your reflections Hortensius .— I presume to think these meetings were quite as innocent, though perhaps in some respects not so improving , as the Coteries , and Card-assemblies of our days.
Euph. I am entirely of your opinion, my friend; and I believe Hortensius meant a reflection upon the present age, rather than the past.
Hort. I presume not to decide a point of so much consequence.—The Ladies of the present age, have the advantages of a more
[Page 70]
liberal education, whether they make a better use of them, depends on themselves.
Euph. I believe they have not the patience of their ancestors, in reading such tedious stories, and that most of them would submit to any penance to avoid it. These books are now become the lumber of a bookseller's shop, and are frequently seen to wrap a pound of sugar from the grocer's. I have dip'd into them, in order to qualify myself to speak of their merits and defects; and I declare that nothing but a prison, and no other companion, could induce me to read one of them through.
Hort. Are not these the books that I have heard despised so much?
Euph. I believe they are:—yet among loads of trash, we may select some works of Genius, that deserve to be celebrated, and transmitted to posterity.
       ---“that which we call a Rose,
By any other name would smell as sweet.” Shakesp.
I ask your permission to read another short extract from Dr. Percy?
[Page 71]
Hort. Your humble servant Madam,— pray read what you please.”
Euph. “The first prose Romances that appeared in our language were printed by Caxton , (at least that I have been able to discover,) and these were translations from the French:—Whereas Romances had long been current in metre, and read in Chaucer 's time.”
Hort. They shall be prose or verse, for any opposition from me.
Euph. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth 's reign these books began to be much read, and towards the end of it, Romances were written in our language.—One of the earliest and most famous that I know of, is Euphues , or the Anatomy of Wit, by John Lilly , who attempted to reform and purify the English language, by purging it of obsolete and uncouth expressions. Mr. Blount who published Lilly 's plays, speaks of this work in his Preface. “Our nation is oblige to Lilly for a new kind of English which he taught it,—all our ladies were his
[Page 72]
scholars; and that beauty at Court that could not parléz Euphuisme ;—that could not converse in his language,—was as little regarded as she who now speaks not French.”
Other writers speak very differently of this work. One calls it an affected Jargon, in which the perpetual use of metaphors, allusions and allegories, pass for wit, and stiff bombast for fine language; that the court of Elizabeth was miserably infected by it, which helped to let in the vile pedantry that was predominant in the following reign. This diversity of opinions induced me to purchase the book, which by good fortune, I met with soon after.
Hort. You will then give us your own opinion of it?
Euph. I esteem it as a great curiosity.—The language exceeded my expectation, but there is a certain quaintness and peculiarity, that would not be borne with at this time; yet we should always consider it as written in the dawning of our language, and as a step to the improvement of it, which soon after shone out
[Page 73]
with great lustre under Shakespear, Fletcher , and Johnson.
Hort. I should like to see this book.
Euph. I am afraid you are not a sufficient adept in Romance, to have any relish for it. —It is printed in the black letter—“The first part is called Euphues or the Anatomy of Wit.—Very pleasant for all Gentlemen to reade, and most necessary to remember; wherein is contained the delights that Wit followeth in his Youth, by the pleasantness of Love, and the happinesse he reapeth in age, by the perfectnesse of Wisdom. —Printed 1620.
“The second Part is entitled Euphues and his England, containing his Voyage and Adventures.—Printed in 1623, and Dedicated to Edward Vere , Earl of Oxenford, Great Chamberlain of England.”
Soph. I shall not be satisfied with this account. —I must read it.
Euph. Whenever you please.—The next work of this kind I shall mention is, Parthenissa , a Romance, by Roger Boyle , Earl of
[Page 74]
Orrery,—in three Volume folio, Printed 1664.
Hort. Mercy on us!—three Volumes in Folio!
Euph. Yea, and here follows a remark upon it, by Mr. Walpole , from his Royal and noble Authors.---
“The Earl's Biographer says, that this performance has not been much read, because it never was compleated; as if three Volumes in Folio wou'd not content the most heroic appetite that ever existed.”
Hort. Truly I am of his opinion. I suppose it was the fashion both to write, and to read these voluminous works, at that time.
Euph. I believe it was.—That eternal scribler the Duchess of Newcastle wrote many stories of the same kind, which were published in 1665, in one volume folio, called— Nature's Pictures drawn by Fancy to the Life.
Hort. Thank heaven, it is not the fashion to read such long works now!
Euph. You may always throw aside your book, when you are tired. The wits of these days have more squeamish appetites, and the
[Page 75]
writers of both times studied the taste of their readers.
Let us return to our subject.—The next work of merit I shall mention, is Sir Philip Sidney 's Arcadia, which has been highly celebrated, by his contemporaries; and indeed by many later writers. This Romance is of a mixed kind, partaking of the heroic manners of the old Romance, and the simplicity of pastoral life.
Hort. This book has been excepted from the general censure passed upon others of the same class. The Author was reckoned one of the first characters of his age,—or rather the Phœnix of it.
Euph. After what you have said, I shall not attempt the character of this celebrated work:—but I will read you an extract from Mr. Walpole 's catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors.---
“No man seems to me so astonishing an object of temporary admiration as Sir Philip Sidney . The learned of Europe dedicated their works to him, the republic of Poland thought him worthy to be in nomination
[Page 76]
for their crown.—All the Muses of England wept for his death.—When we at this distance enquire what prodigious merits excited such admiration,—what do do we find?—Great valour.—But it was an age of heroes. In full of all other talents, we have a tedious, lamentable, pedantic, Pastoral romance, which the patience of a young virgin in love, cannot now wade through: and some absurd attempts to fetter English verse in Roman chains; a proof that this applauded author understood little of the genius of his own language. —The few of his letters extant are poor matters.—By far the best presumption of his abilities as a writer, is a pamphlet, which is an answer to Leicester 's Commonwealth. —It defends his uncle with great spirit:—he died with the rashness of a volunteer, after having lived to write with the sang froid , and prolixity of Mademoiselle de Scuderi.
Hort. I think the character of Sir Philip Sidney , too much degraded here.
[Page 77]
Euph. In justice to the writer, I must give you the note that follows.---
“I have been blamed (says Mr. Walpole ,) for not mentioning Sir Philip 's defence of poetry, which some think his best work,— all that my criticisms pretended to say, was, that I could not conceive how a man who in some respects had written dully and weakly, and who at best was far inferior to our best Authors, had obtained such immense reputation.—Let his merits, and his same be weighed together, and then let it be determined whether the world has overvalued, or I have undervalued the character of Sir Philip Sidney .”
Hort. Truly I think he has undervalued it. His credit as a writer, out of the question; there will remain qualities enough, to justify the respect paid to Sir Philip , by his contemporaries.
Euph. You will recollect that his merits as a writer , was the point that fell under Mr. Walpole 's consideration, and also that it is a man who is the author of this critique.
[Page 78]
Hort. I understand you:—but has a woman nothing to say in defence of a work that has always been a favourite with her sex?
Euph. Our sex are certainly obliged to Sir Philip , who paid us great deference upon all occasions. The Arcadia is addressed to his accomplished sister the Countess of Pembroke, and is commonly called, Pembroke's Arcadia.
Hort. Still you are silent as to the merits of it.
Euph. Since you will oblige me to speak out, I think it equal, but not superior to any of the Romances of the same period. The prose part of it, is much superior to the poetry; as will appear by comparing it with that of his contemporaries. Spenser 's Shepherd's Calender is still intelligible, and pleasant: but Sidney 's Pastorals, are dull and unintellible, and are generally skipped over by those who still read and admire the Arcadia.
Soph. I confess that is exactly the case with me, who still have the courage to declare I think it a very fine Romance.
[Page 79]
Euph. So do many others, and I do not see any reason why people should be ashamed to avow their taste.—I have a few words more to add on this subject.—Sir Philip Sidney died in 1586. The date of my edition of the Arcadia is 1627:—but I should suppose there must have been an earlier one.—In 1725, it underwent a kind of Translation by Mrs. Stanley , by which it was thought to lose more beauties than it gained.—It is now time for us to leave his works to their repose, upon the shelves of the learned, and the curious in old writings.
Soph. I shall come and awaken the Arcadia, in order to refresh my memory. I lov'd this book in my youth, and shall not forsake it now.
Euph. My friend, what you say is one of the strongest objections to books of this class. If read and liked early in life, they are apt to give a romantic turn to the reader's mind, unless she has as much discretion as Sophronid.
Soph. I do not deserve the compliment,— I had really the turn of mind you mention, till a little knowledge of the world, and my
[Page 80]
experience in it, corrected the absurd ideas I had conceived.
Euph. You are very ingenuous, and your confession confirms my opinion.—The next work I shall introduce to you, is Barclay 's Argenis , which you already know to be a favorite of mine.—It is doing it an injury to treat it as a mere Romance; for the story is only a vehicle to convey to us, the genius and knowledge of the Author. A writer of the last Century thus speaks of it.---
“The philosophy and politics of Barclay's Argenis , have made it worthy of the perusal of the greatest statesmen and scholars.”
The name of Romance, even in our days, had prejudiced many people against it— you among the rest Hortensius.
Hort. I confess it. I thought you had employed your time to little purpose in reviving an old Romance; but on reading it, I was convinced that it was a work of real merit, and deserved a better reception.
Euph. There are some Critics among us, that ought to have informed themselves better,
[Page 81]
before they presumed to impose their opinions upon the public, which they have misinformed, and put it out of their power to rectify the erroneous opinions they have occasioned.
Hort. The Reviewers I presume.—I remember there was something said, that I thought ill-natured, but I do not recollect the particulars.
Euph. I have in my hand an extract from the Critical Review of January 1772,--- “Notwithstanding the pains taken in an Advertisement to put off this Phœnix, for an Original work, we will venture to pronounce it a translation of the Argenis of Barclay ,—That a Lady may have given us a translation of that composition is not impossible; but we rather imagine that an old translation has been modernised.— The Argenis has been highly commended by several learned and ingenious men, but we own ourselves to have no relish for the Romances of the last Century, we are sufficiently satisfied with those of the present.”— What think you of this sentence?
[Page 82]
Hort. Arbitrary and decisive; with an air of neglect and contempt, that is calculated to prejudice the public against it:—but pray had this mandate any effect upon the sale of your publication?
Euph. Too much so, on the public in general:— but I have a circle of friends who cannot be biassed by these self elected censors of books.—If these doughty Critics, had read the Preface only , they would have been satisfied, that neither the Editor , nor the Publisher , ever intended to put off this Phœnix for an original work ; though by its being advertised with some other original publications, it gave a pretence to those who look no farther than advertisements , to put so unfair a construction on it.
Hort. Very unfair dealing indeed.
Euph. These sagacious inquisitors ventured to pronounce it the Argenis of Barclay ,— amazing penetration, and equal discretion!— had they afforded so much of their precious time, as was necessary to read the Preface only, they would have known that the Editor
[Page 83]
was so far from desiring to disguise or conceal the truth, that she took pleasure and pride in acknowledging it and, in short they would have met with a full confutation of every point they advanced against her.
Soph. Their sentence was both cruel and unjust, but I hope it recoiled upon themselves.
Hort. It seems to me that they looked no farther than the Title-page, and gave their sentence, by guessing at the contents of the book.
Euph. I have every reason to believe so:— but peace be to them and their labours, which if they were not well paid for, they would soon discontinue.—It is not in their power to add to, or take away from the reputation of Barclay 's Argenis , whatever it may have gained or lost by any of its translators or commentators.
Hort. But how did you come off from the rest of the Inquisitors?
Euph. The Monthly Reviewers were more liberal and candid,—they read the Preface , nay they commended it, and paid due respect
[Page 84]
to the Original writer: but they objected to the politics, as local and temporary; and to the principles of government, as absolute and arbitrary.—They took no notice that the high monarchical principles of Barclay were moderated by the Editor. I could also have wished them to have cast an eye upon the Poetry, which is no inconsiderable part of the work, nor, as I hope, the worst executed. I confess I was mortified to find they did not; for though I expected they would find something to correct, I hoped they would likewise find something to commend.—But I have said too much upon this subject, and shall conclude with observing, it was the best book I ever gave the public, and the worst received.
Hort. It is indisputably a work of great merit;—but pray allow me to ask a question, —how came you to alter the Original title, and call it the Phœnix?
Euph. It was against my own judgment and remonstrance.—The Publisher advised, and even insisted upon a new Title , and I the rather
[Page 85]
gave way to his demand, because there was another Translation offer'd to the press, and intended to be published at the same time; and I thought my friends would know mine by this distinction:—this was the private reason hinted at in the Preface, which was ridiculed by the Reviewers.
Soph. I have heard that your Translation is considerably abridged.
Euph. It is so,—I wish it had been abridged as much more, and that I had only told the plain narrative, and omitted all the fine Essays, (the most valuable part of the work,) and the poetry also; it had saved me much time and labour, and would have pleased more readers.
Hort. But not such readers, as you wish to please.
Euph. Those are the best readers for an Author that buy the most books, but enough of this. I must observe that J. Barclay was of Scotish parentage, but born and educated in France, and that he was an accomplished gentleman. Those who desire to know more of him, must read his works;—which are, The Argenis ,
[Page 86]
and Euphormio , a satyrical work. You are now I trust convinced of the affinity of Prose, and metrical Romances.
Chaucer's Canterbury tales would tell equally well in verse or prose. His Knight's tale is a complete Epic, and in Dryden's opinion very little inferior to the Iliad or the Æneis.— “The story (says he) is more pleasing, the manners as perfect, the diction as poetical, the learning as deep and various, and the conduct as artful.” Permit me to remark that Dryden's elegant, rich, and harmonious numbers, have preserved this, and many other of Chaucer's works, from sinking into oblivion, and he has given the old Bard a share of his own immortality.
Spenser's Faery Queen , is confessedly a Romance versified.
Fenelon's Telemachus , is an Epic in prose. —The Telemachus is a work above all praise, and demands our notice here, as being a story of the Heroic kind.
Ramsey's Cyrus is an excellent work, but it has more of the cast of History than of Romance.
[Page 87]
I mention both these charming books rather out of time, because they are of a different species, from the modern stories or Novels.
Hort. And of more value than a million of them, though you have spoken so very briefly of them.
Euph. To praise them is to hold a candle to the Sun.
I shall now draw towards a conclusion of Romances properly so called.—I shall read you an extract, which is the conclusion of the conversation of the Canon and the Curate in the fourth book of Don Quixote ; in the course of which, all the absurdities of Romances have been exposed and criticised.— “The subject of a Romance (says the Canon) affords an ample field for a good Genius to display itself.—He may weave a web of such various and beautiful texture, that the perfection of it may attain to the ultimate end of all writing, which is to delight and instruct mankind; because this unconfined way of writing, gives an Author room to shew his skill, in the Epic
[Page 88]
or the Lyric way, in Tragedy or Comedy; with all the parts included in the sweet and charming sciences of Poetry and Oratory:” —for the Epic may be written in prose , as well as verse ,
Hort. You end, as you always do, with a clincher to your argument.
Euph. Let us then adjourn to next Thursday.
Soph. We have sufficiently fatigued you for this time, and we can never repay our obligations to you.
[Page 89]
EVENING VI. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Hort. Well met my fair friends,— I would not forego our weekly Coterie , for any route or assembly whatever.
Euph. You do us honour, and we will strive to deserve it.
Soph. The honour is all your own,—I disclaim any share of it.
Euph. I except it then as the reward of my labours; which I shall continue with the same, or increased assiduity.
Hortensius I now desire to hear your objections, to any part of what I have advanced in our past conversations?
Hort. Yes,—my objections to what has been said by men of first-rate Genius, learning,
[Page 90]
and judgment. You have contrived so as to transfer your attack from yourself to those, whom I dare not contradict.
Euph. If I have done it unfairly, I shall be ready to submit.
Hort. No, I dare not say so, nor do I mean to oppose you;—on the contrary, you have convinced me of some errors, and cured me of some prejudices. I confess I have not been conversant enough in this Genus of composition, as you have properly called it, to be a competent judge of the merit or defects of most of the works in it.—I come to you for further information, in pursuing the subject before us. You promised to proceed to your remarks on their effects upon the manners of their times respectively.
Soph. Will you permit me first to ask a question?
Euph. As many as you please, Madam.
Soph. I have been desired to mention a certain book to you, and to ask if you have read it, and whether it would not be of service in your present enquiry?—It is called,
[Page 91]
“Traité de l'Origine de Romans, par Mons. Huet .”
Euph. I have it my own library.
Soph. And what is your opinion of it?
Euph. I will give it you in the words of Shakespeare .---
“His remarks are two grains of wheat in two bushels of chaff, you shall search for them a whole day, and when you have found them they are not worth your labour.”
Soph. Shall I tell the gentleman who desired me to offer it to you, of this sentence of yours, or Shakespeare's?
Euph. Not so, I will put my answer into the mouth of a great Critic, whose sentence will be as respectable, as it is decisive.---
The supplement to the Translator's preface to Jarvis's Don Quixote , is said to be written by Bishop Warburton , and would be no discredit to any writer. I shall read you the passage I referr'd to.---
“Mons. Huet Bishop of Avranches , who wrote a formal treatise upon the Origin of
[Page 92]
Romances, has said little or nothing of them, in that superficial work.— Having brought down the account of Romances to the later Greeks, and enter'd upon those of the western writers, which have now the name of Romances almost appropriated to them, he puts the change upon his readers, and instead of giving us an account of these books of Chivalry, he contents himself with a long account of the poems of the Provencal writers, which are called likewise Romances:—and so, under the equivoque of a common term, drops his proper subject, and entertains us with another, that had no relation to it more than in the name.”
Hort. She comes upon us with her extracts again, and she uses them so as to make them irresistable.
Soph. Will you give me a copy of this extract, to shew my friend.
Euph. With all my heart. I hoped to have found many helps from this treatise, but was disappointed. I expected an account of the
[Page 93]
Milesian Tales, which are often mentioned by those who treat on this subject, and I made a brief extract, of what fills many pages in Mons. Huet's book.
He says that the Ionians were the most corrupt and dissolute of all the Asiatic Greeks,— that they fell under the dominion of Cyrus , when he conquered Asia Minor,—that the Persians imbibed their manners, and became the most voluptuous people in the world. But, in them and a taste for elegant pleasures, the Milesians surpassed them all. They were the first that introduced Romance writing among the Persians, which obtained the highest reputation in those times.—That the Milesian Fables are full of licentious stories and amorous adventures, which gave offence to those of the graver sort.—He thinks it probable that Romances were innocent till they fell into their hands, and that before that time they only recounted memorable and singular adventures. He says that their works are devoured by time, and yet, afterwards, advances several conjectures concerning them. If they
[Page 94]
were such as he describes, they are best buried in oblivion. It is the opinion of many learned men, that the works of Lucian , and likewise of Apuleius , are derived from these Milesian sables.
Mons. Huet runs over the names of many fabulous and some real Authors, but as they are only names, they are of no great consequence.
Hort. Does he say nothing of the compositions of later times?
Euph. Oh yes!—he extols the French Romances of his own times, as the most perfect of all works of this kind; and says they deserve the same compliment that Horace paid to the Iliad of Homer ,—that they teach Morality more effectually, than the precepts of the most able Philosophers.
Hort. Are not these the works we have just been criticising?
Euph. The very same. I will only give a specimen of his Style,—“Mons. D'Ursé was the first who retrieved Romances from barbarity, and reduced them to rules in his
[Page 95]
incomparable Astrea . The most ingenious and polite work which has appeared in this kind, which eclipsed the glory which Greece, Italy, and Spain had acquired.”
Hort. Well said Bishop!—you loved Romances as well as Heliodorus.
Euph. He goes on yet farther, and speaks with admiration and astonishment of those of Mademoiselle de Scudery .—“That the art of writing Romances (says he) might be able to defend itself against scrupulous censures, not only by the commendations of the Patriarch Photius , but by the great examples of those who have applied themselves to it, and might justify itself by hers.”
Soph. I am astonished at what I have heard!
Euph. Oh pray listen to one more period, which is in the true French style of Hyperbole! —“That that which had been improved by Philosophers, as Athenagoras and Apuleius ; —by a Roman Prætor, as Sisenna ;—by a Consul, as Petronius ;—by an Emperor, as Clodius Albinus ;—by a Priest, as Theodorus Prodromus ;—by Bishops, as Heliodorus
[Page 96]
and Achilles Tatius ;—by a Pope, as Pius Secundus ;—by a Saint, as John Damascenus ; —might have the honour to be attended to, by a wise and virtuous maid.”
Soph. Hyperbole indeed!—I hope after this, Hortensius will read the Romances of Mesdemoiselles Scudery.
Hort. I hope you will excuse me,— unless you enjoin it as a penance for the trouble I have given our ingenious friend.
Soph. I am in hopes, that this trouble may turn to good account, and that our friend may reap the fruits of her labours, in more than one respect,—and for this reason, I excuse your penance.
Euph. We will speak of that hereafter.— With your permission we will now proceed to some remarks on the effects of Romance upon the manners of their respective times.
Hort. Pray do so,—we are come fairly to this point.
Euph. The extravagances and absurdities of Romances, have been pointed out by many writers, but few have attempted to shew
[Page 97]
the good effects they have produced.— Will you accept the Bishop of Avranches as an advocate for them?
Hort. Not unless he shews us in what respect mankind are benefited by them.
Euph. Perhaps you expect too much, it is not easy to demonstrate the effects of writings of so mixed a nature. People must read something, they cannot always be engaged by dry disquisitions, the mind requires some amusement.—Story-telling is of ancient and reverend origin as I hope we have proved.— That these stories should have a moral tendency will be generally allowed,—that they go frequently much higher, and when composed by people of cultivated genius and virtuous principles, they speak to all the noblest feelings of the human heart, and excite to such actions as they describe, of which I shall give some remarkable instances. Give me leave to introduce to you a set of men all of whom read, and some of them wrote Romances: —men who, as all the world allows, had no small portion of Romance in their
[Page 98]
composition, and were excited by a strong and enthusiastic thirst of glory, to actions honourable to themselves, and advantageous to their country. Such were the heroes of Queen Elizabeth's court; and I might reckon the Queen herself as an Heroine, worthy to command such men.
Hort. You have well chosen this circle, for the illustration of the subject. The Prince who can select, and employ such men, deserves the glory he derives from them; and while he uses their abilities, does himself the greatest honour.
Euph. Your observation is just; and there is no better Criterion of a Prince's abilities and principles, than the circle of men he draws round him.—Such was Elizabeth , and such were her servants.—Sir Philip Sydney ,— Sir John Norris ,—the Earl of Essex ,— Lord Willoughby ,—Lord Herbert of Cherbury ,— Sir John Perrot ,—Sir Francis Drake ,— Sir Walter Raleigh ,—Admiral Howard ,— Lord Montjoy ,—Sir Francis Vere ,—and many others.
[Page 99]
Hort. What a constellation of Heroes!— it make ones blood grow warm at the bare mention of them.—When shall we see again such men.
Euph . I will not answer your question, but by telling you a Story.
The French army used to sing the song of Rolando or Orlando ; to excite their courage before a battle.—King John of France, (the same who died in England in 1364,) said one day, to those who had been singing this famous song,—“It is a long time since there has been any Rolando's among the French.” —an old Captain made him the following answer,—“Sire, we shall see again the Rolando's , when we have another Cherlemagne .”
Hort. A word to the wise!—But did any of these Heroes write Romances?
Euph. You have lately heard of Sir Philip Sydney's works.—Did you never read the life of Lord Herbert , written by himself?
Hort. I have,—he is indeed a Hero worthy of Romance.
[Page 100]
Euph. He certainly was a copy of these models, and rather approaching to the character of Don Quixote ; but his noble spirit, and fine qualities, concealed or excused his knight-errantry. Certainly these men were animated by great and generous principles, to expose their lives continually to obtain what they thought infinitely more valuable,— an honourable name and memory. I have a curious book, of the lives and actions of Q. Elizabeth's worthies, who were all men of this stamp. I will give you an anecdote from thence, as a specimen of the spirit of those times.
“The Lord Montjoy (above mentioned,) was of a bold and daring spirit. When very young, he went abroad as a volunteer without the Queen's permission, for which he was severely checked by her and forbidden to do so again;—notwithstanding this, he stole away a second time, and went with Sir John Norris into Brittany and made a campaign there,—at his return the Queen reproved him sharply before the whole
[Page 101]
court, in the following words.—Serve me so again, and I will lay you fast enough!— you will never leave, till you are knock'd on the head, like that rash and inconsiderate fellow Sydney .—It is time enough for you to go abroad when I send you, till then stay at home, read your books, and study the art of war, against you are called to the practice of it.”
There is something in this aspiring spirit that affects one,—we cannot help admiring and lamenting this enthusiasm of glory.
    Oh fatal love of fame!—Oh glorious heat!---
Only destructive to the brave and great !— Addison.
Hort. I admire with you, this avarice of same and glory,—it warms one's heart, with a degree of their enthusiasm!—but surely Madam, you do not assert that Romances inspired these men to perform all these great actions?
Euph. They certainly had a great share in them, you find yourself warmed at the bare mention of them; and doubtless they were excited by the great names they had heard and read of.
[Page 102]
The effects of Romance, and true History are not very different. When the imagination is raised, men do not stand to enquire whether the motive be true or false.— The love of glory has always a certain enthusiasm in it, which excites men to great and generous actions, and whatever stimulates this passion, must have the credit of the actions it performs. On the contrary, whenever this spirit, and this enthusiasm, become the objects of contempt and ridicule, mankind will set up for themselves an idol of a very different kind.—They will then devote themselves to mean or mercenary pursuits which debase and corrupt the mind.—The thirst of immoderate wealth or pleasure, will engross their attentions and desires; or else they will sink into a state of supine indolence, and become entirely negligent of what they owe to themselves, to their connexions, or to their country.— There must be a stimulus to excite men to action, and such as is the motive, such will the action be.
Hort . I confess that your reasoning is just, and I sigh over the comparison.—The ambition
[Page 103]
of our age, and country, is indeed of a very different kind.
Euph My favorite Romance-writer, John Barclay , describes it as if he had lived in later times.—“The youth of our country, says he, instead of desiring to signalize themselves abroad, contract an avaritious desire of enriching themselves at home, by the spoils of their own country.”
Hort. The painting is strong, and the picture but too like.
Euph. Compare the times past with the present; and see on which side the balance will turn; in favour of public spirit, or private virtue. Let us suppose the character of Don Quixote realized, with all its virtues and absurdities. I would ask, whether such a man is not more respectable, and more amiable, than a human being, wholly immersed in low, groveling, effeminate, or mercenary pursuits, without one grain of private virtue, or public spirit; whose only thoughts, wishes, and desires, are absorbed in a worthless self?
Hort. But is there no medium between these two extremes?
[Page 104]
Euph. Doubtless there is,—but mankind are apt to run into extremes. We ridicule the enthusiasm of honour and glory, and run headlong into the gulph of folly and dissipation, —we throw aside forms and ceremonies, and fink into carelessness and negligence; —we despise decorum and preciseness, and plunge into licentiousness.
Hort. Who then shall draw the line?— who shall assign the bounds to fashion, and bring it within the barriers of reason and morality. Oh honour, venerable and prostituted name! —who shall ascertain thee, and establish thy dominion?—who shall put it out of the power of knaves and fools, to usurp thy name, and wear thy trophies?—when shalt thou be restored to universal reverence?
Euph. That will be, when it is seen, as upon the reverse of a Roman medal, with virtue for its inseparable companion, with the old motto,— Honos et Virtus.
Soph. Bravo my friends!—It seems to me that you both have imbibed a good portion of the Enthusiasm you have described, and I have not heard you with insensibility.
[Page 105]
Euph. You do well to recall us to the subject of our conversation. Romances have for many ages past been read and admired, lately it has been the fashion to decry and ridicule them; but to an unprejudiced person, this will prove nothing but the variations of times, manners, and opinions.—Writers of all denominations,—Princes and Priests,— Bishops and Heroes,—have their day, and then are out of date.—Sometimes indeed a work of intrinsic merit will revive, and renew its claim to immortality: but this happiness falls to the lot of few, in comparison of those who roll down the stream of time, and fall into the gulph of oblivion.
Upon the whole, I think, we may conclude, that Romances in general are neither the sublime compositions which their enthusisiastic admirers have represented them; or so contemptible and pernicious as some prejudiced men have described them.—If upon a fair and impartial review of them, it appears, that they inculcated the greater principles of virtue and honour; though (in the
[Page 106]
times of Gothic ignorance) they might be productive of many absurdities, and some real evils; yet they were by no means so dangerous, as many writings of later times, of which I shall have occasion to speak hereafter.
I have the courage to maintain that the most eminent works of this class are entitled to our notice and respect; and that even the most heavy and prolix of them, are, at least, as innocent and inoffensive, as any of the rest of the genuine offspring of dulness.
Hort. I entirely agree with you. I ask pardon for the injuries I have done them, and promise you that I never again will disturb their repose.
Soph. I cannot forbear smiling at his Palinode ; it may be taken whatever way you please to understand it.
Euph. Then I shall certainly take it the best way.
Hort. I wish you to take it in the way that does you most honour: for I am sincerely obliged to you for the entertainment and information you have given me; and as soon
[Page 107]
as your leisure will permit, I beg you to meet at my house and continue your progress.
Euph. I shall wait on you, as soon as I have collected materials, and I beg you to give me your assistance in future.
Soph. I sincerely with it may be in my power to help you.—Adieu!
[Page 108]
EVENING VII. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Hort. We have now, I presume, done with the Romances, and are expecting your investigation of Novels.
Euph. It is now that I begin to be sensible in how arduous an undertaking I have engaged, and to fear I shall leave it unfinished.
Hort. Have no fears, Madam; we shall not suffer you to leave off presently. We expect the completion of the plan you have given us.
Soph. If I judge rightly, the conclusion is yet a great way off.
Euph. This is one of the circumstances that frighten me. If I skim over the subject lightly it will be doing nothing; and if I am too minute I may grow dull and tedious, and tire my hearers.
[Page 109]
Hort. You must aim at the medium you recommended to us.
Euph. What Goddess, or what Muse must I invoke to guide me through these vast, unexplored regions of fancy?—regions inhabited by wisdom and folly,—by wit and stupidity,— by religion and profaneness,— by morality and licentiousness.—How shall I separate and distinguish the various and opposite qualities of these strange concomitants? —point out some as the objects of admiration and respect, and others of abhorrence and contempt?
Hort. The subject warms you already, and when that is the case, you will never be heard coldly.—Go on and prosper.
Euph. In this fairy land are many Castles of various Architecture.—Some are built in the air, and have no foundation at all,— others are composed of such heavy materials, that their own weight sinks them into the earth, where they lie buried under their own ruins, and leave not a trace behind,—a third sort are built upon a real and solid foundation,
[Page 110]
and remain impregnable against all the attacks of Criticism, and perhaps even of time itself.
Soph. So so!—we are indeed got into Fairy-land; it is here that I expect to meet with many of my acquaintance, and I shall challenge them whenever I do.
Euph. I hope that you will assist my labours.—I will drop the metaphor, and tell you that I mean to take notice only of the most eminent works of this kind:—to pass over others slightly and leave the worst in the depths of Oblivion.
The word Novel in all languages signifies something new. It was first used to distinguish these works from Romance, though they have lately been confounded together and are frequently mistaken for each other.
Soph. But how will you draw the line of distinction, so as to separate them effectually, and prevent future mistakes?
Euph. I will attempt this distinction, and I presume if it is properly done it will be followed,— If not, you are but where you were
[Page 111]
before. The Romance is an heroic fable, which treats of fabulous persons and things.— The Novel is a picture of real life and manners, and of the times in which it is written. The Romance in lofty and elevated language, describes what never happened nor is likely to happen.—The Novel gives a familiar relation of such things, as pass every day before our eyes, such as may happen to our friend, or to ourselves; and the perfection of it, is to represent every scene, in so easy and natural a manner, and to make them appear so probable, as to deceive us into a persuasion (at least while we are reading) that all is real, until we are affected by the joys or distresses, of the persons in the story, as if they were our own.
Hort. You have well distinguished, and it is necessary to make this distinction.—I clearly perceive the difference between the Romance and Novel, and am surprized they should be confounded together.
Euph. I have sometimes thought it has been done insidiously, by those who endeavour
[Page 112]
to render all writings of both kinds contemptible.
Soph. I have generally observed that men of learning have spoken of them with the greatest disdain, especially collegians.
Euph. Take care what you say my friend, they are a set of men who are not to be offended with impunity. Yet they deal in Romances, though of a different kind.— Some have taken up an opinion upon trust in others whose judgment they prefer to their own.— Others having seen a few of the worst or dullest among them, have judged of all the rest by them;—just as some men affect to despise our sex, because they have only conversed with the worst part of it.
Hort. Your sex knows how to retort upon ours, and to punish us for our offences against you.—Proceed however.
Euph. The Italians were the first that excelled in Novel-writing.—I cannot ascertain the date of any of their earliest Novels. Cynthio Giraldi , and the Decameron of Boccace
[Page 113]
are some of the first; and served as a model to many that were written afterwards.
Hort. One Original work of Genius, always produces a swarm of imitations.
Euph. Cervantes published his exemplary Novels in the year 1619.—They are twelve in number, and their titles are as follows:— The little Gipsey—The liberal Lover— The Force of Blood—Ricconete and Cotadillo— The Spanish English Lady—The Glass Doctor— The jealous Estramaduran—The illustrious Chambermaid—The two Ladies—The Lady Cornelia—The deceitful Marriage —I mention these by name, because (though they are well known) they have been introduced into other works and ascribed to other Authors. Cervantes boàsts in his Preface, that he was the first that ever wrote Novels in the Spanish language, which is a proof that he intended them as a different species, from all his other works.
Hort. I make no doubt that the seed once sown, produced as plentiful a drop there, as it did in the rest of Europe.
[Page 114]
Euph. No, I think not.—It went on fair and softly in Spain, but in France it multiplied to infinity, as it has since done in England.— The first Novels in France were those of Scarron , who probably took the hint from Cervantes .—His Novels were soon buried and forgotten, his best work is called le Roman Comique , which I imagine he intended as a kind of Burlesque on the heroic Romance, for otherwise, it is more properly a Novel, than his other pieces.—It is very badly translated into English, by the Title of the Comical Romance , whereas it ought to be the Theatrical Romance , being the Adventures of a company of strolling players;—under all its disadvantages; it is still natural, lively, and entertaining,
Soph. I have read an early Novel translated from the French, which was much admired in in its day, called Zayde.
Euph. I thank you for reminding me of it.—It was written by M. Segrais , and the Treatise on the Origin of Romance by M. Huet : was prefixed to it—in it the good Bishop pays
[Page 115]
as many compliments to M. Segrais , as he does to M. D'Urfe and Madamois. Scudery.
Soph. But give us your opinion of Zayde?
Euph. It is superior to Scarron 's Novels, but I think, not equal to those of Cervantes ; which have all strong marks of his Genius and spirit.
Soph. Allow me to remind you of the Princess of Cleves , the Captives, Ines de Castro , and I shall recollect others of the same date.
Euph. You oblige me.—All the last are within the limits of mediocrity, but the Princess of Cleves is of worse tendency, for it influences young minds in favour of a certain fatality in love matters, which encourages them to plead errors of the imagination, for faults of the heart, which if indulged will undermine both their virtue and peace.
Soph. You have not mentioned le Sage?
Euph. Le Sage is indeed a writer of note, he is the Author of the Devil upon Two Sticks , (as the Diable Boitu is absurdly translated,) of the Bachelor of Salamanca , and of Gil Blas , which is a Novel of first rate merit,
[Page 116]
Hort. There I agree with you.— Voltaire who never praises without good reason, speaks of it and its Author in these terms.—“ Son Gil Blas est demeuré, parcequ'ily a du naturel. ”
—It is written in such a manner as to please all times and all people.—He speaks also of Novels written by Count Antony Hamilton , which were as lively as Scarron 's, without their Buffoonery.—Are you acquainted with his writings?
Euph. I have read his Memoirs of the Count de Grammont , which are written with the vivacity of a wit, and the ease of a fine gentleman; they are somewhat exceptionable on the score of morals, and yet as little as can be expected from the Memoirs of a licentious court, that of Charles the Second; and the life of a man of pleasure like the Count de Grammont . I do not reckon this among the Novels, because it has truth for its foundation, though indeed highly embellished.— Of his Novels I know nothing, tho' I have made a strict enquiry after them, and I conjecture that they never were popular.
[Page 117]
Soph. I remember a book called La Belle Assemblé , that was very much read formerly, and I think it was well spoken of.
Euph. It was written some time after the books we have named, and it is a very unexceptionable and entertaining work of its kind, It carries marks of imitation of Boccace's Decameron , and some of the stories are too far out of the limits of probability. Let us next consider some of the early Novels of our own country.
We had early translations of the best Novels of all other Countries, but for a long time produced very few of our own. One of the earliest I know of is the Cyprian Academy , by Robert Baron in the reign of Charles the First.—Among our early Novel-writers we must reckon Mrs. Behn .—There are strong marks of Genius in all this lady's works, but unhappily, there are some parts of them, very improper to be read by, or recommended to virtuous minds, and especially to youth.— She wrote in an age, and to a court of licentious manners, and perhaps we ought to ascribe to
[Page 118]
these causes the loose turn of her stories.— Let us do justice to her merits, and cast the veil of compassion over her faults.—She died in the year 1689, and lies buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey.—The inscription will shew how high the stood in estimation at that time.
Hort. Are you not partial to the sex of this Genius?—when you excuse in her, what you would not to a man?
Euph. Perhaps I may, and you must excuse me if I am so, especially as this lady had many fine and amiable qualities, besides her genius for writing.
Soph. Pray let her rest in peace,—you were speaking of the inscription on her monument, I do not remember it.
Euph. It is as follows:
Mrs. APHRA BEHN, 1689.
Here lies a proof that wit can never be
Defence enough against mortality.
Let me add that Mrs. Behn will not be forgotten, so long as the Tragedy of Oroonoko is acted, it was from her story of that illustrious
[Page 119]
African, that Mr. Southern wrote that play, and the most affecting parts of it are taken almost literally from her.
Hort. Peace be to her manes! —I shall not disturb her, or her works.
Euph. I shall not recommend them to your perusal, Hortensius.
The next female writer of this class is Mrs. Manley , whose works are still more exceptionable than Mrs. Behn's , and as much inferior to them in point of merit.—She hoarded up all the public and private scandal within her reach, and poured it forth, in a work too well known in the last age, though almost forgotten in the present; a work that partakes of the style of the Romance, and the Novel. I forbear the name, and further observations on it, as Mrs. Manley 's works are sinking gradually into oblivion. I am sorry to say they were once in fashion, which obliges me to mention them, otherwise I had rather be spared the pain of disgracing an Author of my own sex.
[Page 120]
Soph. It must be confessed that these books of the last age, were of worse tendency than any of those of the present.
Euph. My dear friend, there were bad books at all times, for those who fought for them.—Let us pass them over in silence.
Hort. No not yet.—Let me help your memory to one more Lady-Author of the same class.—Mrs. Heywood .—She has the fame claim upon you as those you have last mentioned.
Euph. I had intended to have mentioned Mrs. Heywood though in a different way, but I find you will not suffer any part of her character to escape you.
Hort. Why should She be spared any more than the others?
Euph. Because she repented of her faults, and employed the latter part of her life in expiating the offences of the former.—There is reason to believe that the examples of the two ladies we have spoken of, seduced Mrs. Heywood into the same track; she certainly wrote some amorous novels in her youth, and
[Page 121]
also two books of the same kind as Mrs. Manley 's capital work, all of which I hope are forgotten.
Hort. I fear they will not be so fortunate, they will be known to posterity by the infamous immortality, conferred upon them by Pope in his Dunciad.
Euph. Mr. Pope was severe in his castigations, but let us be just to merit of every kind. Mrs. Heywood had the singular good fortune to recover a lost reputation, and the yet greater honour to atone for her errors.— She devoted the remainder of her life and labours to the service of virtue. Mrs. Heywood was one of the most voluminous female writers that ever England produced, none of her latter works are destitute of merit, though they do not rise to the highest pitch of excellence.— Betsey Thoughtless is reckoned her best Novel; but those works by which she is most likely to be known to posterity, are the Female Spectator , and the Invisible Spy .— this lady died so lately as the year 1758.
[Page 122]
Soph. I have heard it often said that Mr. Pope was too severe in his treatment of this lady, it was supposed that she had given some private offence, which he resented publicly as was too much his way.
Hort. That is very likely, for he was not of a forgiving disposition.—If I have been too severe also, you ladies must forgive me in behalf of your sex.
Euph. Truth is sometimes severe.— Mrs. Heywood 's wit and ingenuity were never denied. I would be the last to vindicate her faults, but the first to celebrate her return to virtue, and her atonement for them.
Soph. May her first writings be forgotten, and the last survive to do her honour!
Euph. Let us proceed to other writers.— As I purpose in future to take notice only of such Novels as are originals, or else of extraordinary merit, I must beg your allowance for all trifling slips of memory, for errors in chronology, and all other mistakes of equal consequence.— I must also have leave to mention English and Foreign books indifferently, just
[Page 123]
as they happen to rise to my memory, and observation.
Hort. It is but just that you should have these, and every other allowance you can require, we have already laid a heavy tax upon you.
Euph. You see I have many helps from my notes, and I hope to receive further assistance from you both.—I will proceed with my progress. The life of Cleveland , natural son of Oliver Cromwell , is one of the old Novels , if I may be allowed the expression, I do not certainly know the Author, nor yet the date of the first edition.—When a Novel came out but seldom, it was eagerly received and generally read, this was at the time called a work of uncommon merit, but it will not bear a comparison with those that have been written since. There is originality and regularity in it. The incidents are too much of the marvellous kind, but some of the scenes are very pathetic, and there is business enough to keep the reader's attention constantly awake,
[Page 124]
and above all other merit, it has a moral tendency.
Hort. I have heard this book ascribed to Daniel de Foe , who as I think was also the Author of Robinson Crusoe.
Euph. His title to the last mentioned is not quite clear.—It is said that he was trusted with a manuscript of Alexander Selkirk 's, who met with an adventure of the same kind as Crusoe 's, and that he stole his materials from thence, and then returned the manuscript to the Author—When Selkirk 's book was published, it was taken but little notice of; it had more truth, but less Romance, and beside, the curiosity of the public was gratified, and they looked on Crusoe as the Original, and Selkirk as the copy only.
Hort. That was hard indeed, but I fear not unprecedented; you will give us your opinion of the book, exclusive of this circumstance.
Euph. Robinson Crusoe was published in the year 1720.— Gaudentio di Lucca in 1725, I shall speak of these two books together,
[Page 125]
because there is a strong resemblance between them, the same marks of Originality appear in both.—They both give account of unknown or rather of Ideal countries, but in so natural and probable a manner, that they carry the reader with them wherever they please, in the midst of the most extraordinary occurrences. Gaudentio di Lucca is written by the pen of a master, it is imputed to Bishop Berkely , and is not unworthy of that truly venerable man.—There is a greatness of design, and a depth of penetration into the causes of the health and prosperity of a state, and of the moral evils that first weaken and undermine, and finally cause the ruin of it. The vast consequence of the good or bad education of youth, on which depends the health, vigour, and happiness of a nation.— These circumstances gives this book a manifest superiority to the other, in many other respects they are both equally entitled to our plaudit.— But what gives a still higher value to these two books, they are evidently written to promote the cause of religion and virtue, and may safely
[Page 126]
be put into the hands of youth.—Such books cannot be too strongly recommended, as under the disguise of fiction, warm the heart with the love of virtue, and by that means, excite the reader to the practice of it.
Hort. A warm plaudit you have given them,—I remember to have read Robinson Crussoe when very young, but I have forgot it, and ever since I have looked upon it as a book for children only but I will read it again upon your recommendation, and judge of its merits.
Euph. That is the certain consequence of putting these books too soon into the hands of children.—I will be bold to say a youth who reads them at a proper age, will never forget them.—Let me also beg you will read Gaudentio di Lucca.
Hort. I will certainly read them both at my best leisure.
Soph. But let me beg you to get the old Edition of Crusoe , for this is one of the books, which Fanaticism has laid her paw upon, and altered it to her own tenets, and she has added some of her own reveries at the end of it,
[Page 127]
called Vision of the Angelical World .— If Hortensius should once dip into that part of it, it would entirely discredit our recommendation.
Euph. You say true, I will get him the old Edition, which is the best.
Hort. Pray do you call these Books Romances or Novels?
Euph. They partake of the nature of both, but I consider them as of a different species from either, as works singular and Original.— I shall have occasion to place some later works under this class. But it is time for us to adjourn till next Thursday.
Hort. I shall not fail to meet you.
Soph. At my house.—No other engagement shall prevent it.
Hort. Agreed,—none could give me equal pleasure.
Euph. You are always my kind and indulgent friends, and your approbation is the crown of my labours.
[Page 128]
EVENING VIII. Hortensius, Euphrasia, Sophronia. Soph. My good friends I rejoice to see you.—We are now coming to a period within my memory and observation, and I shall ask Euphrasia a few questions.
Euph , As many as you please. —I expect your assistance.
Soph. Pray give us your opinion of the modern French Novels?
Euph. I will in a few words,—That the best are the most excellent , and the worst the most execrable of all others; and most of those I have read, fall under one or the other of these denominations.
Soph. You will give us your remarks upon the best of them.
[Page 129]
Euph. Are there any that you have particularly in view?
Soph. I was thinking of those of Mons. Marivaux —the Paysan Parvenue , and Marianne.
Euph. The works of Marivaux are of capital merit, they are pictures of real life and manners, and they have the advantages of highly polished language and sentiments; the Paysan Parvenue is somewhat exceptionable, his French morality is not suitable to an old English palate, but his Marianne has no such abatements, “she needs no soil, but shines by her own light.”—It has indeed been translated into English more than once, but never so as to do justice to the Original.
The first was published in 1742 it was a very poor literal translation, but yet it was read by every body with avidity; soon after another attempt was made by a still worse hand, this is called Indiana or the virtuous Orphan , in this piece of patchwork, many of the fine reflexions, the most, valuable part of the work are omitted, the Story, left unfinished by the
[Page 130]
death of M. Marivaux , is finished by the same bungler, and in the most absurd manner. It puts me in mind of what was said to a certain translator of Virgil.
Read the commandments friend,—translate no further,
For it is written, thou shalt do no murther.
Soph. Is the Paysan Parvenue translated into English?
Euph. It is, but not much better than Marianne , nor is it so well known, it is frequent- confounded with the Paysanne Parvenue of the Chevalier Mouby , which without half its merits is much more popular.—This last work has been twice translated, the first bears the title of the fortunate Country Maid , the second is called the Virtuous Villager , or the Virgin's Victory , both are well known to the readers of Circulating Libraries.
Hort. Did not M. Crebillon write something of this kind?
Euph. Les Egarément de Cæaeur et d'Esprit , which was never popular in England, though it was in France.—Some pious person, fearing it might poison the minds of youth (it is really exceptionable,) wrote a book of meditations
[Page 131]
with the same title, and this was the book that Yorick's fille de Chambre was purchasing in the bookseller's shop.
Hort. All this is Greek to me—My intelligence came by reading Mr. Gray 's letters to his friends, in one of which he wishes to read eternally new Romances of Marivaux and Crebillon.
Euph. You find that Mr. Gray did not despise these books.
Hort. So it seems.—But he did not know how to call them.
Euph. That was because he never had read the true Romances , but confounded all fictions under that name; but I understand your meaning, and your raillery also.
Hort. I want to catch you tripping, but you always elude my traps.—Proceed, I will not interrupt you again impertinently.
Soph. Pray was not Marianne finished by Madame Riccoboni?
Euph. No—but I wish it had.—She wrote one of the books or divisions, to shew that she could write like M. Marivaux , and then gave it over.
[Page 132]
Soph. Don't you think Madame Riccoboni a writer of great merit?
Euph. Capital.—Her Novels are first rates, and she wrote several pieces for the Stage with success.—I think Jenny Salisbury below the rest of her novels, because in it she attempted to paint English manners, without being sufficiently acquainted with them, and she has made strange work with English names and families.—Her letters of Madame de Sancerre —and Valiere are excellent,—and all her other works are in the first rank of Novels.
Soph. I have seen a collection of Novels published by Dr. Croxall , are they of any estimation?
Euph. They are an early selection of Novels, translated from the Italian, Spanish and French writers, of which we have made mention, none of them deserve farther particularizing.
Mrs. St. Aubin 's works are in the rank of mediocrity likewise.
M. Prevot was the Author of the Marquis de Bretagne , the Chevalier de Grieux , and
[Page 133]
some other pieces which belongs to the same class.
Hort. You have not yet made mention of the most eminent writers of our country, Richardson and Fielding.
Euph. I hope you did not think it possible for me to forget them. Mr. Richardson published his works, at a considerable distance of time from each other.— Pamela was the first, it met with a very warm reception, as it well deserved to do.—I remember my mother and aunts being shut up in the parlour reading Pamela , and I took it very hard that I was excluded.—I have since seen it put into the hands of children, so much are their understandings riper than mine, or so much are our methods of Education improved since that time.
Soph. It is a general mistake in regard to the youth of our time, they are put too forward in all respects. Let us return to Pamela , I can remember the time when this book was the fashion, the person that had not read Pamela , was disqualified for conversation, of which it was the principal subject for a long time.—You will
[Page 134]
give us your opinion of this, and the other works of Mr. Richardson?
Euph. To praise the works of Mr. Richardson is to hold a candle to the Sun, their merits are well understood in other countries besides our own; they have been translated into French, Italian , and German , and they are read in English frequently, by the people of the first tank in all the politest countries in Europe.
A Lady of quality in France, sent an Epigram to one of Mr. Richardson 's family soon after his death, which I will give you here.
    Richardson tu nés plus!
Le cœur humain en vous regret
Son plus profound Observateur,
Son plus eloquent interpret,
Son plus parfait Legislateur.
I was desired to give a literal translation of it. Hort. You will favour us with it I hope? Euph. It is as follows:—
    Richardson is now no more!
Then may the human heart deplore
Its most profound investigator,
Its patron, friend, and regulator,
And its most perfect Legislator.
[Page 135]
Hort. Very close indeed to the Original.
Soph. But your remarks on Richardson 's works?
Euph. I will hazard a few remarks on them, which perhaps I may be allowed, because no person whatever has read them over with more pleasure and delight than myself.
It seems to me that Pamela is the Chef d' Œuvre of Mr. Richardson .—The Originality, the beautiful simplicity of the manners and language of the charming maid, are interesting past expression; and find a short way to the heart, which it engages by its best and noblest feelings.—There needs no other proof of a bad and corrupted heart, than its being insensible to the distresses, and incapable to the rewards of virtue.—I should want no other criterion of a good or bad heart, than the manner in which a young person was affected, by reading Pamela.
Euph. Your plaudit is a warm one.— But Richardson is a writer all your own; your sex are more obliged to him and Addison , than to all other men-authors.
[Page 136]
Euph. I deny that.—We have many other redoubtable champions as I shall bring proof enough,—and no man is degraded by defending us, for the female cause is the cause of virtue.
Hort. I mean not to degrade your champions or their cause.—But let us hear your critique on Mr. Richardson 's other works?
Euph. It was yourself who digressed from the subject. I have but little more to say of them; that all are of capital merit is indisputable; but it seems to me that Pamela has the most originality.— Grandison the greatest regularity and equality.— Glarissa the highest graces, and most defects.
Mr. Richardson was besides the first who wrote Novels in the Epistolary style, and he was truly an Original writer.
Hort. Have I your leave to make a few observations?
Euph. Certainly,—or to what purpose do we meet?
Hort. I allow the merit of this writer, and I respect his principles,—but I have some objections
[Page 137]
to the manner of his executing his designs.—1st. His insupportable prolixity.— 2dly. From his works have sprung up a swarm of paltry Novels in the letter-writing way to the great exercise of our patience.—And 3dly, they have taught many young girls to wiredraw their language, and to spin away long letters out of nothing.
Euph. You have given me materials for a longer discussion than the nature of our conversation will admit of, I will answer them as briefly as possible.—To the first objection,— Every man is to speak and write his own English, some take a larger compass than others, but if the language is good, and the end answers the reader's time and attention, we have no right to complain.—If you have a mind to see an Epitomé of Richardson 's works, there is such a publication, wherein the narrative is preserved; but you must no longer expect the graces of Richardson , nor his pathetic addresses to the heart, they are all evaporated and only the dry Story remains.—Perhaps this abridgement is the best reply to your objection.
[Page 138]
—To the second, No Author is answerable for faults of his imitators, and you have before observed that every Original writer is followed by a swarm of them, but you will not surely for that reason depreciate the Original writer.—To the third,—Let the young girls bear the faults of the letters they write, let them copy Richardson , as often as they please, and it will be owing to the defects of their understandings, or judgments, if they do not improve by him. We could not say as much of the reading Ladies of the last age.
Soph. No truly, for their studies were the French and Spanish Romances, and the writings of Mrs. Behn , Mrs. Manly , and Mrs. Heywood.
Hort. There is great weight in your observations, and yet I cannot but observe that you do not deny the force of my objections; you only extenuate them,—but I will not urge you to any farther reply at this time.— I agree with you that no Author is answerable for those effects, which his works are not intended to produce.
[Page 139]
Soph. Let me beg you to forbear any further digressions, and suffer Euphrasia to proceed in her progress without interruption.
Hort. I stand corrected Madam.—I beg you to proceed.
Euph. The next Author upon the lift, and whom Hortensius feared I should forget , is Henry Fielding , Esq. whose works are universally known and admired.—As I consider wit only as a secondary merit, I must beg leave to observe, that his writings are as much inferior to Richardson 's in morals and exemplary characters, as they are superior in wit and learning.—Young men of warm passions and not strict principles, are always desirous to shelter themselves under the sanction of mixed characters, wherein virtue is allowed to be predominant.—In this light the character of Tom Jones is capable of doing much mischief; and for this reason a translation of this book was prohibited in France.—On the contrary no harm can possibly arise from the imitation of a perfect character, though the attempt should fall short of the original.
[Page 140]
Soph. This is an indisputable truth,— there are many objectionable scenes in Fielding 's works, which I think Hortensius will not defend.
Hort. My objections were in character, and your's are so likewise; as you have defended Richardson , so I will defend Fielding .—I allow there is some foundation for your remarks, nevertheless in all Fielding 's works, virtue has always the superiority she ought to have, and challenges the honours that are justly due to her, the general tenor of them is in her favour, and it were happy for us, if our language had no greater cause of complaint in her behalf.
Euph. There we will agree with you.— Have you any further observations to make upon Fielding 's writings?
Hort. Since you refer this part of your task to me, I will offer a few more remarks.— Fielding's Amelia is in much lower estimation than his Joseph Andrews , or Tom Jones ; which have both received the stamp of public applause.— He likewise wrote several dramatic
[Page 141]
pieces of various merits, but these and his other works have no place in our present retrospect.—Lest you should think me too partial to the merits of this writer, I will give you the sentence of an historian upon him.
“The Genius of Cervantes (says Dr. Smollet ) was transfused into the Novels of Field ing, who painted the characters, and ridiculed the follies of life, with equal strength, humour and propriety.”
Euph. We are willing to join with you in paying the tribute due to Fielding 's Genius, humour, and knowledge of mankind, but he certainly painted human nature as it is , rathan as it ought to be.
Soph. These two last writers have detained your attention too long, I fear that you will cut us short for it on some future occasion. I grudge every digression that retards our progress.
Euph. The two last mentioned are of the first eminence, and had a claim to more than common notice; but though we sometimes take a compass, our work does not stand still
[Page 142]
in the mean time, we will now proceed on our inquiry.—
Miss Sarah Fielding 's works are not unworthy next to be mentioned after her brother's, if they do not equal them in wit and learning, they excell in some other material merits, that are more beneficial to their readers.— They well deserve the protection of your sex Hortensius , and the plaudit of ours. The distinguishing marks of her best characters are simplicity of manners and benevolence of heart.
Hort. You must bring me acquainted with this lady's works, pray what are their titles?
Euph. The History of David Simple— The Countess of Delwyn—Ophelia—Letters by the principal Characters in David Simple— The Lives of Cleopatra and Octavia —and lastly, A translation of Xenophon's Socrates , which is reckoned her capital work.
Soph. Pray did she not also write a book, called, The Governess, or little Female Academy , for the use of Schools?
[Page 143]
Euph. I beg her pardon for omitting it. and I thank you for reminding me of it, for it does honour to the head and heart of the Author.—Miss Fielding was one of those truly estimable writers, whose fame smells sweet, and will do so to late posterity, one who never wrote “A Line that dying she would wish to blot.”
Soph. What a pleasure to pay the tribute due to such a character!
Euph. How much happier, if one could stimulate others to imitate it!
Hort. You are ready enough to pay due respect to writers of your own sex, but you are rather severe upon some of ours.
Euph. I hope not,—I wish to be impartial. But I will not begin an altercation with you at this time, left it should interrupt our business, hereafter I will demand your objections, and endeavour to answer them all.
Hort. I desire you will proceed in your own way.
Euph. It is time for us to adjourn.
[Page 144]
Soph. I am impatient to proceed in our progress, I foresee we are not near the conclusion, and though I wish to get forward, I am in no haste for the end.
Hort. Nor, I, believe me.—We meet at my house next Thursday.
Euph. I begin to find this undertaking grow heavy upon me, I foresee many and great difficulties in my way, and am in doubt whether I shall get to the end of my journey as I first intended, or stop short by the way.
Hort. Don't think of it, we shall not suffer you to stop short.—Take a week's repose, and you will return to your task with renewed strength and alacrity; and consider whether you cannot make more use of us, to lighten the burthen to you.
Euph. I thank you, and will consider of it, I will explain myself further at our next meeting.—I wish you a good night!
Soph. I shall think the time long till our next meeting. Adieu!
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
[Page ]
[Volume II] EVENING IX. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Euph. At our last meeting, I mentioned some difficulties I apprehended in my progress, as I should come nearer to the present times, and I must now confess, upon reflexion they increase.
Hort. Communicate them to your friends, and depend upon our best assistance, to obviate, or at least to abate them.
Soph. I sincerely wish it may be in my power to lighten the task to you.
Euph. We have hitherto travelled through these enchanted regions of fiction with tolerable ease and safety.—But as we advance further, new dangers awaits us every step we set.—We may tread upon serpents that may
[Page 4]
rise and sting us; or we may rouse a hornet's nest that may stun us with its noise, or wound us with its deadly weapons.
Soph. Take us with you however, that we may know how to defend you.—Explain to us those dangers which perhaps are only ideal.
Euph. Alas, you will acknowledge the reality of them presently!—The reputation of dead Authors is ascertained, and we may speak of their, works with freedom and safety; but it is not so with living ones, we shall say too much or too little, either for them, or ourselves.—As we advance, they multiply upon us, till they become a formidable army.
Soph. Let us meet them with the Olive in our hands, and promise to crown with laurels, those who best deserve to wear them.
Euph. And who will think they do not deserve them?
Hort. Take courage Euphrasia! with truth and candour on your side, you will make friends, who will be able and willing to defend you.
[Page 5]
Euph. With truth and candour on each side, that is yourself and Sophronia , I will endeavour to go forward warily and circumspectly. —First then, I shall only speak of the most capital works of the kind, therefore I shall have a demand for praise more than censure. —Secondly, I shall speak briefly to their merits, and only enlarge upon those most celebrated. —And Thirdly, I shall fortify my own opinions, by the judgment of others of superior authority.
Hort. Since you have divided your heads so methodically, give me leave to add another. —Fourthly, we will ( én dernier resort ) consult those infallible judges the Reviewers , as good Catholics do the Pope, and let them decide, where we desire to be excused.
Euph. I thank you for that thought,— it will lighten my labour, and relieve my apprehensions, —we will appeal occasionally to the most candid and impartial of them, viz. — The Monthly Reviewers.
Soph. No more disqualifying, Euphrasia.— Hortensius , no more sub-division,—let me beg
[Page 6]
you to proceed, and not to abbreviate as you threaten us.
Hort. Come on then.—Let us view and Review your list Euphrasia.
Euph. The Female Quixote was published in the year 1752.—In this ingenious work the passion for the French Romances of the last Century, and the effect of them upon the manners is finely exposed and ridiculed.— The Author of it is since well known as one of the distinguished female writers this age has produced among us—Mrs. Lennox.
Soph. That circumstance is so well known, that I shall not be thought to detract from her merit, if I venture to remark, that the Satire of the Female Quixote seems in great measure to have lost its aim, because at the time it first appeared, the taste for those Romances was extinct, and the books exploded.
Euph. Your remarks is just,—this book came thirty or forty years too late.—But Mrs. Lennox 's character is established upon works of a superior kind, which are above our retrospect, though we can only speak here of her Novels.—She
[Page 7]
wrote two others, one called Henrietta , and the other Sophia —both of indisputable merit.
Hort. You are in the right Ladies.— Romances at this time were quite out of fashion, and the press groaned under the weight of Novels, which sprung up like Mushrooms every year.
Euph. They did but now begin to increase upon us, but ten years more multiplied them tenfold. Every work of merit produced a swarm of imitators, till they became a public evil, and the institution of Circulating libraries, conveyed them in the cheapest manner to every bodies hand.
Hort. I rejoice that you do not defend Circulating libraries,—if yon had, I would have sought against them with more success, than I have met with hitherto, when I have been your opponent.
Euph. I am entirely of your opinion, they are one source of the vices and follies of our present times; and we shall have occasion to say more of them when we come to draw inferences
[Page 8]
from the effects of novel-reading upon the manners.
Hort They have been well ridiculed in Mr. Colman 's farce called Polly Honeycombe.
Euph. In some respects, but the Satire would have been much stronger and the moral more commendable, if he had not exhibited the parents as objects of Ridicule; which spoils the effect, and puts it upon a footing with too many other Dramatic pieces upon the same plan.
Soph. I am delighted with your remark, and have often been offended with this dramatic error: it is so general that most of the plays seem calculated to teach our youth, that they are wiser than their parents, and that they may safely deceive and ridicule them.
Hort. You say true, there is hardly a play where one does not meet with these absolute children and undutiful parents, and the poets always take care to punish the latter, and reward and former
Euph. This likewise is one of the evils of our times; but we will not enlarge upon it here, as it is foreign to our present subject.
[Page 9]
Soph. I beg your pardon!—undutiful parents and arbitrary children are as frequently found in Novels as upon the Stage, and the remark is equally proper upon both kinds of writing.
Euph. I cannot deny it.—But I shall neither applaud, nor recommend any that have a tendency to weaken the respect due to parents; for upon that depends in a great measure, the education of youth, their introduction into life, and indeed all the social and domestic virtues.
Hort. It was I that led you into this useful observation:—I do not repent it, nor will I reckon the time as lost.
Euph. Let us however return into our proper track.—You will allow me to speak of the works of the same Author together, though published at considerable intervals of time, to relieve my memory, and because you may have them all in view at one time.
Hort. Certainly,—we can make no objection
[Page 10]
Euph. Whenever you recollect any books of this kind that are worthy of our notice, and that are not mentioned in my notes, you will oblige me by reminding me of them.
Hort. I will then put you in mind that Dr. Smollet was a novel writer.
Euph. Dr. Smollet 's Novels abound with wit, and humour, which some Critics think is carried beyond the limits of probability; all his characters are over charged, and he has exhibited some scenes that are not proper for all readers; but upon the whole, his works are of a moral tendency,—their titles are, Roderick Random—Peregrine Pickle—Sir Lancelot Greaves—Ferdinand Count Fathom—Adventures of an Atom .—Many years after these he gave the public another, in no respect inferior, and in some superior to them all, called Humphrey Clinker.
Hort. Honest Humphrey is an acquaintance of mine, and he is really a pleasant fellow.— But as you say many of the characters are outrée.
[Page 11]
Euph. Then you do condescend to read Novels sometimes, especialiy when they are written by men?
Hort. Spare your raillery,—it was Romances that I made war against, and you have taught me to make the proper distinction.
Euph. I never meant to animadvert upon such books as were capable of affording you rational entertainment, it is only the Cynical censurers of them that I reflect upon.—I will mention another novel writer of your sex, with a Dr. prefixed to his name likewise.— Dr. Shebbeare 's Novels have spirit, humour, and morality, but their merits have great abatements, on the score of party virulence, and private spleen.—His first Novel was called the Marriage-act , which gave offence to those who had a hand in composing that famous Act , which makes an unfortunate Æra in our manners. Whether he was prosecuted, or what other motive obliged him to alter the Title I never could learn, but the second Edition is called Matrimony —the other Novel is Lydia—or filial Piety.
[Page 12]
Hort. It seems you dislike that famous Act , as much as Shebbeare?
Euph. I only read its motives, by its consequences, it is from this Æra, that we have seen the manners of the women of our country reflect disgrace upon it.—Trials of a certain kind, and Divorces in consequence, were very rare before that Period, and alas too common ever since!—I reason from facts, and they are stubborn things.
Hort. I am afraid there is too much truth in your remark,—our manners are indeed on the decline, and there needs no Act of Parliament to discourage marriage.
Euph. You are leading me away from my subject again.—I will look over my notes, and gather up the clue to our further progress.— I find the Card mentioned as a work of merit, it is an imitation of the different styles of our most eminent Novel-writers, it has wit, humour, and sentiment.—If I am rightly informed, it's the work of a Clergyman whose name was since much vilified; but as there is
[Page 13]
no name prefixed to the book, I have no business to declare it.
Pompey the Little —a book much read and admired, the Author likewise chose to remain unknown. It is a work of more than common merit.
Peter Wilkins —a work of Originality and Morality, I shall speak of it under a separate class.
Soph. I see you are determined to keep up to your last regulation, and you abridge with a vengeance.
Euph. I shall do so for the most part, but I will next mention a book, that will oblige me to enlarge, and perhaps I may exercise your patience.—I am going to speak of Rosseau 's new Eloisa.
Hort. Aye, truly that will afford an ample subject for Criticism, let us hear what you can say upon it Euphrasia :
Euph. It is dangerous to criticise a work that has been so much, and so justly admired. —It is a book that speaks to the heart, and engages that in its behalf, and when reflexion
[Page 14]
comes aferwards, and reason takes up the reins, we discover that it is dangerous and improper for those for whose use it is chiefly intended, for young persons.
Hort. I expect a more particular examination of it, and a proof of your assertion.
Euph. It shall then be in the words of another, as usual Hortensius.
Voltaire 's Prophecy is at once the most just and severe Satire upon it.—I have an extract of just so much of it as is requisite to my present purpose, and in his opinion I give my own, expressed to the utmost advantage.
Hort. I must bear with this extract, as I have with many others, but, I reserve the liberty of replying to it.
Euph. That is but just, listen to Voltaire .—“The Author of this book like those Empiricks who make wounds on purpose to shew the virtues of their Balsams, poisons our souls for the glory of curing them. And this poison will act violently on the understanding and on the heart, and the antidote will act on the understanding only,
[Page 15]
and the poison will triumph in the heart.— And he will boast of having opened a gulph, and he will think he saves himself from blame by crying out.—Woe be to the young girls that fall into it!—and he will say, I have warned you against it in my preface, and young girls never read prefaces.—And he will say by way of excuse for writing a book that inspires vice, that he lives in an age wherein it is impossible to be virtuous.— And to justify himself, he will slander the whole world, and threaten with his contempt all those who do not approve his book.—And every body shall wonder, how with a soul so pure and virtuous, he could compose a book that is so much the reverse,—and many who believed in him shall believe in him no more.”
Hort. Poor John James Rousseau! surely thy brother Voltaire is too severe upon thee, not considering his own flights and vagaries!
Euph. Will you undertake to defend him?
Hort. I will do like you, when your favourites are attacked, I will extenuate his faults.—
[Page 16]
I will consider Rousseau as a Philosopher and a virtuous man; he is neither a libertine nor an encourager of loose morals, and upon your own principles, he is not answerable for the bad effects of his works.
Euph. A man cannot compose an amorous Novel without intending it.
Hort. Perhaps his design may be misunderstood and misconstrued.
Rousseau saw that the women on the Continent, while maidens, paid due respect to their honour and character, but as soon as they were married they entertained all the world, and encouraged gallants; of the two evils he thought a single person's indulging a criminal passion, of less pernicious consequence to society, than a married woman who commits adultery:—upon this principle he wrote this book.—He puts the character of a woman who encourages lovers after marriage, in opposition to one who having committed the greatest fault before marriage, repents, and recovers her principles.—He inforces the sanctity of the marriage vow, he sets the
[Page 17]
breach of it in a light to shock every considerate mind, he shews that where it is broken, nothing but hatred and disgust succeeds; the confidence a man should place in his wife, the tenderness he should feel for his offspring, is destroyed, and nothing remains but infamy and misery.
If Rousseau intended by this work to give a check to this shameful intercourse of the sexes, so frequently practiced on the Continent, under the specious name of gallantry, he is to be commended; and if it produced effects he did not foresee, he ought to be excused.
Euph. I am sure Rousseau is much obliged to your sensible and polite apology for his Eloise . But after all the objections remain. It is a dangerous book to put into the hands of youth, it awakens and nourishes those passions, which it is the exercise of Reason, and of Religion also, to regulate, and to keep within their true limits. On this account I have often wished that the two first Volumes of Eloise , could be abridged and altered, so as to render
[Page 18]
them consistent with the unexceptionable morals of the two last.—I thought it might be possible to give a different turn to the story, and to make the two Lovers, stop short of the act , that made it criminal in either party to marry another, for were they not actually wedded in the sight of heaven? and could Elaise with any pretensions to virtue, or to delicacy, give herself to another man?
If this insuperable objection was removed; then might the Lovers renew their friendship with honour and dignity on both sides, then might the husband in full confidence in his wife's principles, invite her friend, and even leave them together without appearing so justly-ridiculous in his conduct as he now does to impartial judges.
Hort. I like your plan, and advise you to make this alteration yourself.
Euph. You must excuse me Sir,—I have not yet the presumption to attempt it, or to think myself able to do justice to Rousseau in such an alteration.—It must remain as it is, it has done all the mischief in its power to
[Page 19]
the youth of this generation; and the worst part of it is, that those who write only for depraved and corrupted minds, dare appeal to Rousseau as a precedent.
Hort. In that light I see the bad effects of it manifestly, and I believe that Rousseau himself would be concerned for them;—but what will you say of his Emilius?
Euph. Nearly the same as of the other,— it may do some good, but I am afraid much more harm. The discussion of its merits and defects would lead me too far from the present subject, especially as it does not properly belong to this class of writing.— Rousseau is a whimsical and chimerical writer, with great beauties and great blemishes, and I am convinced he did not really intend to hurt the principles or morals of mankind.
Hort. You do him barely justice; but can you say so much of Voltaire who so cruelly scourges him?
Euph. No truly.—He never misses an opportunity of shewing his wit, and his malignity, likewise, against Revelation; and in doing
[Page 20]
injury to Religion, he injures the rights and the happiness of society.
Soph. It is pleasant to see these Freethinkers and free speakers, throwing dirt at each other:—to see the Author of Candide taking exceptions at the character of Wolmar.
Hort. Your remark is good, and reminds me of a vulgar proverb, “When knaves quarrel, honest men recover their own.”— Thus a Christian may know what confidence to place in the enemies of his religion.— But pray give us your opinion of Candide?
Euph Not I indeed, let the men do it.— Pray Hortensius look for what the Reviewers say of it.
Hort. Here I have it,— Monthly Review , 1761—“ Candide, or, All for the best .— An absurd improbable tale, written with an apparent view to depreciate not only human nature, but the wisdom and goodness of the Supreme Being; and ridicule his providence under that generally received and worthily adopted principle—All for the best.”—Gramercy Messrs. the Reviewers,
[Page 21]
I subscribe to your sentence with all my heart.
Euph. Hortensius you have led me to speak of Voltaire 's works, which I would rather have avoided: his wit is indisputable, but wit is only a secondary merit; and when it is abused and made an instrument to do mischief, it becomes detestable.
Hort. It was impossible to avoid speaking of him as a writer of eminence in your walk, —and will you say nothing more of his Novels?
Euph. Nothing.—I do not wish to recommend them, they will always be found by those, who think it worth their while to seek them.
Soph. Let us leave them to their admirers. —It is time for you to pursue your journey, and to mention other writers.
Euph. Or rather, it is time to separate for this evening, the next time we meet, we must make quicker dispatch, or this progress of ours, will be too long before it comes to an end.
Hort. I believe you will be tired the first of the party.
Euph. If I do not tire my hearers I shall be satisfied.—A good night to you.
[Page 22]
EVENING X. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Euph. You are truly welcome my friends.—I receive you in my library, because we shall want to have recourse to our books.
Hort. Make me your Librarian, or employ me in some way as your assistant.
Euph. I make use of your permission, pray take down the Monthly Review for the year 1761—and look for Sidney Biddulph.
Soph. This looks like doing business;— but pray do not transfer your task to the Reviewers.
Euph. Never fear, there will still remain employment enough for me.
Hort. I have it here.—“ In the work before us, the Author seems to have designed
[Page 23]
to draw tears from the reader by distressing innocenee and virtue as much as possible.— Now though we are not ignorant that this may be a true picture of human life in some instances; yet we are of opinion that such representations are by no means calculated to encourage or promote virtue.”
Euph. Stop there if you please, I do not want the whole Article. I have in my notes an extract from the Critical Review , which will be a proper contrast to the other.
“ The design of this work is to prove that neither prudence, foresight, nor even the best disposition the human heart is capable of, are of themselves sufficient to defend us from the inevitable evils to which human nature is liable.—Whether this inference is favourable to the encouragement of virtue, we could not stop to enquire: we were so interested in the distress of Sidney Biddulph , and so absorbed in the events of her life, that in short, every arrow of Criticism was unpointed.—Instead of thinking
[Page 24]
these evils were allotted to her, we perceive that they arose from a want of knowledge of the world, from too easy credulity, and from unsuspecting innocence. —We can only wish that few of our readers may want her example to inspire and direct them.”—You have heard the evidence on both sides and now I ask your opinion Sophronia?
Soph. I had rather you had given your own, but as you desire it I will.—This book is a great favorite of mine, the Story is admirably told, and the language is so easy and natural, that every thing seems real in it, and we sorrow as for a well known and beloved friend; in my opinion it well deserves the encomium the Critical Reviewers have given it.
Hort. It is worthy of observation, that laying aside the dictatorial style of Censors, they speak of it, as if it was a true history.—“ Instead of thinking these evils were allotted to her, we perceive that they arose from want of knowledge of the world, &c.”— I cannot help smiling at it.
[Page 25]
Euph. Your observation is deep as well as pleasant , perhaps there is not a better Criterion of the merit of a book, than our losing sight of the Author.
Hort. You have really converted my remark into solid value, and I readily agree to your criterion.
Soph. And so do I.—But I am mistaken if Euphrasia had not a further meaning in applying to me for my opinion of this book.— I am fond of melancholy stories, and she prefers those that end happily, she meant to oblige me to declare my sentiments, and afterwards give her own; and then ask you to decide upon them.
Euph. I find you know my meaning by my gaping.—I do really think that books of a gloomy tendency do much harm in this country, and especially to young minds;— they should be shewn the truth through the medium of chearfulness, and led to expect encouragement in the practice of the social duties, and rewards for virtuous actions.
[Page 26]
—If they should be unfortunate, they will see the reverse of the medal soon enough.
Hort. But will not the expectations of nothing but peace and happiness, disqualify them to sustain the reverse?
Euph. I should think not.—The mind that is always ruminating upon the evils of life, will be apt to cast every object into shade.
Soph. Authors of the first eminence have written upon both principles, and if your doctrine was to be followed, we should have no Tragedies, and no pathetic stories.— What says Hortensius?
Hort. There is much to be said on both sides; I do not presume to decide upon the subject.—But for myself, I subscribe to Euphrasia 's opinion, that virtue stands in need of every encouragement, considering the many trials we must encounter in her constant warfare.—That youth should be led to expect the rewards of virtue in the present life, without losing sight of a better expectation hereafter: and this will be a powerful antidote against the unavoidable evils of life.—
[Page 27]
Virtue should always be represented in the most beautiful and amiable light, capable of attracting the hearts of her votaries, and of rewarding every sacrifice they can make to her:—but in truth there are too many moralists (and I might add divines,) who represent her in so austere and disgusting a manner, as to discourage and frighten her pupils away from her presence.
Soph. Give me leave to mention one more book of this kind, which has been universally read and applauded.— Rasselas Prince of Abyssinia.
Euph. I have not forgotten Rasselas , I assure you, but I intended to place him in a different class.—However as he is upon the table, let us hear what the Reviewers say of him?
Hort. “ This book (say they) was generally read and approved, the invention and language are worthy of the Author, (Dr. Johnson ) nevertheless it leaves the mind gloomy and dissatisfied.—The inferences that happiness is always in prospect and
[Page 28]
never attainable, is so discouraging a truth, if it be one , that it ought rather to be concealed, or at least softened to us.— Instead of directing our pursuits, it tends to keep us in a state of total inaction, whereas we want to be excited to activity, and made to expect our happiness in doing our duty, rather than to encourage us to remain in a state of inactivity and indolence.”
Soph. It is clearly against me, and I must give up the point, rather than detain you any longer on the subject.
Euph. No so my friend,—every one has a right to choose his books, and to judge for himself in these matters; there have been many eminent Poets and Painters who have chosen melancholy subjects, and they meet with as many admirers, as the more chearful ones, perhaps both may be useful to different dispositions, some minds want to be encouraged and comforted; others to be humbled and softened, by a retrospect of the evils to which human nature is liable.
[Page 29]
Hort. A very fair and generous compromise. You may resume the contest at some future time, when it does not interfere with the subject before you.
Euph. I take up my clue again.—The year following two books of the same kind were published, both of them were in some degree copies of Rasselas , but neither of them equal to it, though both had their respective merit and admirers.— Almoran and Hamet by Dr. Hawkesworth , and Soliman and Almena by Dr. Langhorne , they both end happily Sophronia , and yet I prefer Rasselas to either of them.
Soph. I receive it as proof of your impartiality.
Hort. Do you know that you have pass'd by a book more read and talked of than most of those we have reviewed.
Euph. Likely enough, we have not been quite regular in our progress, but pray who is the great personage omitted?
Hort. No less a man than Tristram Shandy , Gent.
[Page 30]
Euph. I must beg of you to decide upon its merits, for it is not a woman's book.
Hort. Indeed I will not allow of your excuse.— You have spoken freely enough of many other writers, and if you are a competent judge of them, why not of Sterne?
Euph. You urge me closely,—in verity I have never read this book half through, and yet I have read enough to be ashamed of. Fashion which countenances every folly, induced me to begin it;—but what what can I say of it with safety?—That it is a Farrago of wit and humour, sense and nonsense, incoherency and extravagance.—The Author had the good fortune to make himself and his writings the ton of the day , and not to go out of fashion during his life.—What value posterity will set upon them I presume not to give my opinion of, it is time that must decide upon them, and it will certainly do them justice.
Hort. You are very reserved in your judgment of Tristram , but what have you to say against his Sentimental Journey?
[Page 31]
Euph. It is indisputably a work of merit.— Where Sterne attempts the Pathos, he is irresistable; the Reviewers have well observed, that though he affected humour and foolery, yet he was greatest in the pathetic style.— His Maria and le Fevre , and his Monk , are charming pictures, and will survive, when all his other writings are forgot.
Hort. Then I am friends with you again, which I could not be, if you had passed over his merits, as slightly as his absurdities.
Euph. Sterne , like all other Original writers has been followed by a swarm of imitators, not one of which deserve mention among works of eminence in this class of writing.
Hort. Aye, let them sleep in peace. It would ill become you who have passed over the Novels of Voltaire , to mention this crop of mushrooms.
Euph. I am deaf of that ear Hortensius , and you know the cause of it—Let us take leave of Tristram , and return to my list.— The name I read is— Longsword Earl of Salisbury an Historical Romance.
[Page 32]
Hort. How is that, a Romance in the 18th Century?
Euph. Yes, a Romance in reality and not a Novel.—A story like those of the middle ages, composed of Chivalry, Love, and Religion.— Pray turn to the Review , where I think you will find a high character of it.
Hort. A high character indeed!—“ In this agreeable Romance, the truth of History is artfully interwoven with entertaining fictions, and interesting episodes.—It seems to be formed on an intimate acquaintance with the Romances of the 15th and 16th Centuries, which however extravagant and beyond nature, were always favourable to the cause of virtue, and are so far preferable to the more natural productions of later times.—There is a certain pomp of diction, a richness, and at the same time a simplicity of expression, which seldom fails to captivate the reader, and particularly impresses young minds, naturally warmed and attracted by the splendor of the heroic virtues, and moved by the finest affections
[Page 33]
of the human heart.—In short, however the good old Romances may be now laughed out of doors, certain it is, that no species of writing could amuse with less injury to the morals, and virtuous manners of the Reader.”—Why the Reviewers speak your own sentiments!—I never suspected that you were in league with them.
Euph. When they speak the language of truth, candor and impartiality, I am always ready to adopt their sentiments.—This work is distinguished in my list, among Novels uncommon and Original.
Soph. It seems to me that you have passed over several works of first rate merit.— Longsword was published in 1766.
Euph. I thank you heartily for reminding me, I have skipped over a whole page in my list, and my notes upon it.
I find that Mrs. Sheridan was the Author of Sidney Bidulph , and also a very pretty Eastern Tale called Nourjahad.
Mrs. Brooke 's works hold a very high rank in the Novel Species.—She first translated
[Page 34]
Lady Catesby's Letters , and afterwards gave us two Novels of her own very much superior to it, Lady Julia Mandeville , and Emily Montague .—She also translated the Marquis dé St. Forlaix . Her stories are interesting and pathetic, her language highly polished and elegant.
Soph. Indeed Mrs. Brooke 's Novels deserve all that you can say of them.—Pray did not Millenium Hall come out about this time?
Euph. It was in the year 1762.— Mrs. Brooke 's works were published at different times, Emily Montague , in 1763.
Soph. Have you nothing more to say of Millenium Hall than the date of it?
Euph. It is a very good little book, and you ought to have made its Eulogium.
Soph. I had rather hear my favourite's praises from another mouth than my own.
Euph. Then I will pay it the homage it justly claims. It is calculated to inspire the heart with true benevolence and the love of virtue, it is a very entertaining as well as moral
[Page 35]
work, and very proper to be put into the hands of young persons.
Soph. I am glad you think it worthy of a place in your class of eminence, for I am fond of it to a degree.
Hort. Now Ladies you have the whole business to yourselves, I have not read any of the last mentioned books but Emily Montague , which indeed deserves your plaudit.
Euph. The letters of Theodosius and Constantia are both moral and entertaining, and they are also instructive, and deserve a place in every good young woman's closet,— they came out 1763.
Hort. I would fain be of some use, pray are Marmontel's works, worthy of a place upon your shelf?
Euph. I could be offended at that question, and more at the manner of it, and yet I will not spare what deserves correction, Marmontel is as you well know, a charming writer, but his Moral Tales , have some things in them that are offensive to good Morals .—His Bellisarius is worthy of a place in every Monarch's
[Page 36]
Library.—And his Incas to be enshrined in every benevolent heart.
Hort. I really beg your pardon.—I ought not to have seemed to doubt that you would do justice to Marmontel? —I did not really doubt it.
Euph. I accept your Palinode.—I do not with to make a Parade of sentiment, like some writers, who have brought even the word itself into disgrace. You know that upon principle I refused to admit works of prophaneness and immorality into my Catalogue of eminent Novels, though admired for their wit, or for the name of the Authors; I should be concerned to have occasion to repeat any more what I have said on this subject.
Hort. I am sorry to have given you occasion for what you have now said.—Forget it, and proceed with your progress.
Euph. The next work of merit and morality that I shall speak of, is the Marquis de Roselle , by Madame Elie de Beaumont . I have a partiality for this book, I never read one of the kind that afforded me greater
[Page 37]
pleasure; in it the noblest lessons of virtue and good conduct are conveyed to the reader's mind, through the vehicle of entertainment; it may be recommended to young persons, to guard them against the deceptions of the world, and to enable them to distinguish between real and intrinsic merit, and the tinsel accomplishments of the circle of dissipation. —This translation was published in 1764.
Soph. It is indeed, a charming book, and I think there are more writings of Madame de Beaumont worth your notice.
Euph. You will please to observe , that there are two Ladies of that name, with only a small distinction between them— Madame Elie de Beaumont is the Author of the Marquis de Roselle .—Madame le Prince de Beaumont has written many books for the use of Schools Le Magazin des Enfans and others for youth in a series.—She has also written Novels for grown Gentlemen and Ladies , but none of first rate Merit.
Soph. Is there not a book of her's called the new Clarissa?
[Page 38]
Euph. There is, but it is out of the bounds of nature and probability; there is also a book of the same title, which was published in Ireland, which I think superior to the French one, but neither of them are capital.— Madame le Prince Beaumont 's writings are strongly tinctured with bigotry and enthusiasm, but the always means to support the cause of virtue.—If I am not misinformed she presides over a seminary of Education, or in plain English, she keeps a school.
Soph. An employment of great utility and importance, and when faithfully discharged, claims our respect, and an honourable mention.
Euph. Certainly, and deserves more respect than is generally paid to it—The year 1766 was very prolific in the Novel way, and indeed, they seem to have over-run the press, till they became a drug in the terms of trade .— The Reviewers complain bitterly of the fatigue of reading them, it became necessary to have an Annual Supply for the Circulating Library, in consequence the manufacturers of
[Page 39]
Novels were constantly at work for them, and were very poorly paid for their labours.— Among the trash the press groaned under, some works of merit appeared which discredited the trifling ones, and helped to drive them off the Stage.
Sir George Ellison , a picture of a truly benevolent man.
Sir Charles Beaufort , strong painting of shocking characters, which are made triumphant over Innocence and Virtue
John Buncle, Esq .—a whimsical and outré story, intermixed with sprinklings of wit and Learning, and a Genius truly original.
The Vicar of Wakefield , by Dr. Goldsmith , a work of great merit and great faults, but must ever afford both pleasure and benefit to a good heart.
Soph. These last mentioned are abridged in good earnest.
Euph. I find it necessary, and shall continue to do so except in particular cases.
The fair American —or Emmera , a work of merit and morality, 1767.
[Page 40]
Letters of Madame de Sancerre , by Madame Riccobini , which is saying enough.
History of Ernestina ,—a very pretty story by the same Lady.
Lucy Watson , a melancholy tale well told as a warning to youth.
Hort. You drive away at a great rate, and I wish not to check your course, I shall come up to you, when you come to the inferences.
Euph. The Life and Adventures of Common Sense , is a work of Genius, wit, humour and morality, and will afford an agreeable entertainment to every reader of taste and judgment.
Arthur O'Bradley has more humour, than wit or sentiment, but is above the common Novels of this date—1769.
The Persian Tales of Inatulla are worth reading, but I shall class them with other Tales and Fables of the same kind.
Soph. You will do right to make them a separate class.
Euph. At this period when a constant supply of Novels was expected by the Readers of
[Page 41]
the Circulating Library, some persons whose excellent principles led them to see and lament the decline of virtuous manners, and the passion for desultory reading; endeavoured to stem the torrent by making entertaining stories their vehicle to convey to the young and flexible heart, wholsome truths, that it refused to receive under the form of moral precepts and instructions, thus they tempered the utilé with the dulcé , and under the disguise of Novels, gave examples of virtue rewarded, and vice punished; and if the young mind unawares to itself, was warmed with thé love of virtue, or shocked at the punishment of the wicked; this was all the reward they wished or expected from their Labours.
Of this kind are the following works:
Callistus , or the Man of Fashion , by Mr. Mulso.
The Exemplary Mother , by Mrs. Cooper.
The Placid Man , by Mr. Jenner.
The Fool of Quality , by Mr. Brooke.
This last I must enlarge upon.—Mr. Brooke was a man of Genius, taste and sensibility,
[Page 42]
but unhappily these fine talents were over- shadowed by a veil of Enthusiasm, that casts a shade upon every object.
I will not trust myself to give a character to works of so mixed a kind. Let us see what the Reviewers say of it. Hortensius , be so kind to turn to the Index for The Fool of Quality.
Hort. I obey you Madam.—“While with pleasure we contemplate the amiable and worthy characters drawn by this able writer, it is with real concern that we see them debased by the ascetic reveries of Madame Guyon, William Law , and the rest of the repturous tribe.—What can we say more of a performance, which is at once enriched by Genius, enlivened by fancy, bewildered with enthusiasm, and overrun with the visionary jargon of fanaticism?
“We shall only add our hearty with that the ingenious writer, would give us an abridgement of this work, cleared from the fanctimonious rubbish by which its beauties are so much obscured;—and then, we are
[Page 43]
persuaded, it would be perused with pleasure by readers of every rank and age; but while it remains in its present motley state, we apprehend it will be a favourite with only Behmenites, Hernhutters, Methodists, Hutchinsonians ,—and some Roman Catholics.
Euph. Very just.—the same character will serve for Juliet Grenville , Mr. Brooke 's other Novel in which fanaticism is predominant. I shall offer a conjecture of my own, that Mr. Brooke would never have condescended to write Novels, but to make them his vehicles to convey his tenets to the minds of such readers, as were not likely to receive them in any other form.
Soph. What a pity, that such genius and such taste should be used only to promote a blind and illiberal zeal to make proselytes! and to limit the mercies of God to one particular sect of Christians.
Hort. It is the characteristic of the sects enumerated in the Review .—The growth of fanaticism is an alarming consideration; it
[Page 44]
is creeping into every sect among us, nay even into the established national Church.
Euph. Between Deism on one hand, and fanaticism on the other, people of rational piety, and moderation, are in no very good situation, for they are anathemiz'd by the zealots of both parties.—Let us leave them to him who knows best how to separate the grain from the chaff , and return to our subject.
Letters from an English Lady at Paris , in which are contained the Memoirs of Mrs. Williams .—1769.
This is a work of real merit, I have here an extract from the Review .—‘The whole of this work forms a most interesting, exemplary tale, abounding with affecting incidents, sensible observations, and moral reflections:—and some of the letters are enlivened with a vein of pleasantry, which will afford an agreeable relief to such readers as are not fond of distressful events, and melancholy scenes.’
Anecdotes of a Convent , by the same Author, and merits the same rank and plaudit.
[Page 45]
Soph. It is indeed a most agreeable book, and the Reviewers have done it justice.—I think you have not yet mentioned Mrs. Griffith 's Novels.
Euph. Mrs. Griffith 's Novels are moral and sentimental, though they do not rise to the first class of excellence, they may fairly be ranked in the second, they are very unexceptionable and entertaining books.— Their Titles are:— The Delicate Distress.—The Gordian Knot (by Mr. G.)— Lady Barton— Lady Juliana Harley —Mr. and Mrs. G. are well known as the Authors of the ingenious Letters of Henry and Frances , and some other pieces of merit.
Hort. I have seen a book called, Letters from Altamont in Town to his Friends in the Country , which in my opinion has great merit.
Euph. Indisputably.—It was written by Mr. Jenner , Author of the Placid Man , of whom I shall have occasion to say more, when we come to our moral inferences.
The History of Charles Wentworth, Esq ; is a work of Genius and Originality, but it is not proper for all readers, it is strongly tinctured with Deism, and is evidently written in
[Page 46]
favour of that uncomfortable System, and like Rousseau , he appeals to savages in confirmation of his tenets;it is therefore an improper book for youth.
The Man of Feeling —and the Man of the World , are by the same Author, Mr. Mackenzie . —both are moral, natural, and pathetic, aud worthy of our plaudit; if there is any defect, it is that some of the scenes are shocking representations of human nature, and bear too hard upon the readers humanity and sensibility.
Soph. Pray what is your opinion of Miss Minifie 's Novels?
Euph. They are in the class of mediocrity, if I were to mention such, it would make our task too long and tedious, I must therefore pass over these, and hundreds beside that are very innocent and moral books.
Soph. I saw a book upon your shelf called, The Portrait of Life, in a Series of Novels.
Euph. It is only a compilation from different Authors, a common and easy method of book-making in these days: there are a
[Page 47]
great number of these publications, and it is surprizing they should answer to the trade.— The pleasing Instructor—The entertaining Novelist —Old Heads upon young Shoulders , &c. — ad infinitum .—These compilations are shameful impositions upon the public, and ought to be discouraged by every citizen of the Republic of Letters; the most effectual method would be to enter every book that is worthy of publication at Stationers Hall.
Hort. Is it not equally injurious to Authors, to publish extracts of books in Magazines and other periodical publications?
Euph. Certainly.—And unless I am mistaken, the method I propose would put an end to these pilfering practices, for they deserve to be called so.
Soph. I have seen a Novel called Constantia, or the distressed Friend , which I think is above the common place Novels of the circulating library.
Euph. You have given it the place it deserves, below excellence and above contempt.
[Page 48]
Louisa a sentimental Novel , may be ranked a step higher, but not on the first form.—It is of the melancholy kind.—There are a great number of Novels of the same class, and we might fill a volume with a list of them: but we are now come to a resting place,—I have brought my work down to a later period than I at first intended; it is time to draw towards a conclusion.
Hort. I hope you are not serious?— Your plan is by no means compleated.
Euph. I am very sensible that it is not, but this part of it is.—For what remains to be said I have more reason to fear it will be too much, than too little.—I shall endeavour to draw it into a small a compass as possible, with your assistance.—For this time we must adjourn.
Hort. I shall have many questions to ask, and perhaps some objections to make; I think also there are many books omitted.
Euph. At our next meeting I will hear and answer all your demands, if I do not, (as I have already done,) anticipate your objections.
[Page 49]
—I shall bring with me a list of Novels Original and uncommon.—I shall speak of Tales and Fables out of the reach of nature, though not of Criticism: and having dispatched these, we will gather up the clue of our progress, and proceed to inferences.
Soph. I rejoice to hear that you are not come to a final conclusion. I hope to see you at my house next Thursday.
Hort. I will not fail you.—I perceive that Euphrasia has yet much to say.—Perhaps I may be of some service, in protracting the conclusion you apprehend.
Euph. Don't frighten me Hortensius .—I with rather to contract than extend my plan, as I shall shew you at our next meeting.
Hort. I take my leave for this Evening Ladies.
[Page 50]
EVENING XI. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Hort. Ever since our last meeting I have been reflecting upon several things you said at that time; and I beg leave to make some remarks.
Euph. I will hear them most willingly, and endeavour to profit by them.
Hort. You excepted against compilations very justly, and you advised a method to prevent them. You wished to prevent long extracts of books being inserted in periodical publications:—did you mean that this prohibition should extend to the Reviewers?
Euph. By no means.—As the Censors of literature they ought to have an exclusive right to give extracts of every publication
[Page 51]
that deserves their recommendation: but I could with this sovereign power were restrained within certain bounds.
Hort. In what respect?—You must depend upon their judgement and candour.
Euph. Certainly;—and you may appeal from their Sentence to the public at large.— I wish they could confine and limit their extracts to the compass of one Monthly Review ; for it is not fair to skim off the cream of an Author's dairy, and leave only the dregs behind: or in other words, to gratify the reader's curiosity, and prevent his purchasing the book; and thus intercepting the reward of the Author's labours, which I believe happens frequently.
Hort. What you now say is very just, you would leave them perfectly free and unrestrained in their judgement, and only limit their extracts.
Euph. That is my wish in favour of all writers; whose property in their own works is already too much abridged by an arbitrary
[Page 52]
decision of power, over literature and her off- spring.
Soph. These remarks lead us from the prosecution of our subject.
Hort. Not entirely.—I must ask another question:—why should you finish your progress and retrospect here?—I see no reason why it should not be continued down to the present year.
Euph. I gave you my reasons at our Ninth meeting, and as we come nearer to the present time, they grow stronger.—I have brought my progress down to the close of the year 1770, which is just ten years lower than I at first intended.—It would be an invidious task to speak of the writers of the present day; let us leave them to the Reviewers, it is their province.—If they do not all justice the Authors may think they deserve, let them appeal to the public , and to time , and trust to their impartiality, for their sentence will be just, and irreversible.
Hort. You will not then suffer your late publications to be mentioned, though they belong to your proper subject?
[Page 53]
Euph. No certainly.—If they deserve to be remembered, I have no doubt they will survive me: and if not, let them be forgotten. —You will now give me leave to read you my list of Novels and Stories Original and uncommon. I have already enlarged upon some of them.
Tale of a Tub.
by Swift.
Gulliver's Travels.
Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress.
Patrick's Pilgrim.
Don Quixote , by Cervantes.
Modern Don Quixote , by Marivaux.
Robinson Crusoe , by Defoe.
Gaudentio di Lucca , by Bishop Berkeley.
Peter Wilkins.
Voyage to the Moon.
Chrysal—or Adventures of a Guinea.
Reverie—or flight to the Paradise of Fools.
Arsaces, Prince of Betlis.
These three last by the same Author, and all of the satyrical kind.
Life of John Buncle, Esq.
John Buncle, jun. Esq.
[Page 54]
Tristram Shandy, Gent.
Life and Adventures of Common Sense.
Citizen of the World.
Pilgrim of China.
The Spiritual Quixote, an Antidote to Methodism.
The Castle of Otranto —printed at Strawberry -Hill .—I have spoken largely of this work in a former publication of mine.
These are all of great merit in their kind, and of moral tendency.
Soph. You abridge now indeed, as you threatened to do.
Euph. It is time that I should bring my progress to a period, I have enlarged upon the most eminent works of the kind, and have given a general character of those last mentioned.
I shall next introduce another species of the same Genus of writing, which will make some variety in our progress.—I will lead you into enchanted palaces,—delicious gardens,— and endless labyrinths.—We will put ourselves under the protection of the good genii,
[Page 55]
and they will conduct us out of them by an invisible gate, where we shall find ourselves much forwarder, and have in view the place where we shall finish our journey.
Soph. I am pleased with the excursion of your fancy, I hope you will permit us to stop sometimes, and take a view of the curiosities of the places we pass through.
Euph. You must not tarry a long while any where, and there are very few of these places that will bear a close inspection.
Hort. I shall follow you as Æneas did the Sybil , with the same confidence, that you will guide me through in safety.
Euph. The allusion is not amiss.—Oh that you could realize the golden bough!
Hort. I am afraid the tree does not grow in this country.
Euph. Yes it does, but is guarded by Hesperian dragons, and there are a thousand dangers and vexations in the way of those who adventure for the prize.—But this is trifling away time.
[Page 56]
Hort. Let us then advance, and may you obtain the golden prize!
Euph. Here is my list and a few notes upon it.
Tales and Fables ancient and modern.
You have doubtless read the fables of Æsop, Pilpay , and Locman —and imitations of them without end.—There is an opinion lately gone forth, that fables are improper for children. I shall not now investigate this subject, but it does not appear to me that those ages that were instructed by Fable and Allegory, were less virtuous than the present times are; and this Criterion will apply to many other kinds of writing besides that before us.
Hort. This is taking a short way of deciding an important question.
Euph. If it be a certain one, the shorter the better; if not it shall give place to a better.— Will you be the person to give it?
Hort. Not in this place,—it would interfere with our present business,—we will postpone the subject for the present, and beg of you to proceed with your allegorical fables.
[Page 57]
Euph. I do not presume to assert that they are absolutely the best, or the only method of instruction, but that they do not deserve to be despised or exploded.
Who spoke in Parables I need not say;—
But sure he knew it was a pleasant way,
Sound sense by plain examples to convey. Dryden.
There are many works of this kind, that are excellent and instructive, both in prose and verse.—I will mention briefly, Gay's Fables,— Cotton's Visions,—Moore's Fables for the Female Sex, &c. —But it requires a skilful hand to select books of this kind for youth, because there are many professedly written for this purpose that are very improper; and if books for youth are ill chosen they will do more harm than good. Mr. Dodsley's Collection of Fables ancient and modern , is the best that I know.
Hort. I agree with you in this point, and indeed in most others; and when I seem to oppose you, it is only to give you a fillup , and to make you exert yourself.—Nevertheless, I intend to have another contest with you before
[Page 58]
I quit the field.—In the mean time I beg you to proceed.
Euph. Let us then take a brief survey of Eastern Tales , a class of no small extent. I have spoken largely of the Arabian Nights Entertainment as a work of Originality and Authenticity, and let me add of amusement. The great demand for this book, raised a swarm of imitations, most of which are of the French manufactory, as the Persian Tales —Turkish Tales—Tartarian Tales—Chinese Tales—Peruvian Tales—Mogul Tales—&c.
The stories of this kind are all wild and extravagant to the highest degree; they are indeed so far out of the bounds of Nature and probability, that it is difficult to judge of them by rules drawn from these sources.— It cannot be denied that some of them are amusing, and catch hold of the readers attention.
Soph. They do more than catch the attention, for they retain it.—There is a kind of fascination in them,—when once we begin a volume, we cannot lay it aside, but drive
[Page 59]
through to the end of it, and yet upon reflexion we despise and reject them.
Hort. They are certainly dangerous books for youth,—they create and encourage the wildest excursions of imagination, which it is, or ought to be, the care of parents and preceptors to restrain, and to give them a just and true representation of human nature, and of the duties and practice of common life.
Euph. You speak as if it was the general study of parents and teachers in our days to educate our youth to wisdom and virtue.— Is it not their ambition to make them knowing rather than wise, and fashionable rather than virtuous?—thus they are hackney'd in the ways of the world, and though ignorant of every thing that is really good and estimable, they are old before their days are half spent.
Soph. The books that are put into the hands of youth, do in a great measure direct their pursuits and determine their characters; it is therefore of the first consequence that they should be well chosen.—After the character
[Page 60]
is formed, books of entertainment may be recommended, and read with safety, and sometimes with advantage.
Hort. You do not mean to recommend any of the books last named?
Euph. I do not; and yet it will be well if young people read nothing worse.—The Eastern Tales have raised a vast number of imitations, and many readers are extremely fond of them.—Madame D'Anois was a famous composer of Fairy Tales ,—she likewise wrote a Romance called Hyppolitus Earl of Douglas , which had then, and even now has its admirers, though it is as wild and improbable as the Fairy Tales , or Eastern Fables .— The Count de Gabalis may be reckoned among these excursions of a raised imagination.
I shall read you a list of some more modern works of the same kind.
Rasselas, Prince of Abissinia —Dr. Johnson.
Almoran and Hamet—Hawkesworth.
Soliman and Almena—Longhorne
Nourjahad —Mrs. Sheridan.
Mirza and Fatima, an Indian Tale.
[Page 61]
Tales of the Genii.
The Persian Tales of Inatulla.
Miscellany of Eastern Learning.
Chinese Anecdotes.
Lessings Fables.
Abassai, an Eastern Story.
Loves of Othniel and Achsah .—I do not pretend to give an opinion whether this strange book be ancient or modern, but there is reason to think it was written by a Jew.
The Triumph of Reason over Fancy —a fanciful story.
The Visiers,—or enchanted Lahyrinth — of the same kind.
There are many other books of this class, but these are all within my knowlege that are worthy of mention.
There would be no end of reciting the names of these Tales.
Hort. There is something very pleasing in Eastern Stories well told. There was a passion at all times for story-telling in all the countries beyond the Levant.—I remember an incident in a book of travels that is a proof of the continuance of this custom.
[Page 62]
The traveller had engaged himself to make a journey into Upper Egypt, without the knowledge and consent of his friends, in search of antiquities, and to carry on a traffic privately for precious stones.—The dangerous circumstances attending this negociation, and the other hazards he run of perishing in a barbarous country, affected his mind and disturbed his rest; he confessed to his friend and patron, that he suffered much from his inward agitations. His patron rallied him upon his want of resolution, and asked him if he had not yet learned the Turkish method of calming his mind?—The traveller thought he meant the use of opium or some drug of that kind, but he soon after called for a young man his servant, and ordered him to take up a book and read where he left off the night before, —the youth did as he was directed, and read a very pleasant story, to which the traveller was attentive, and found his mind relieved and comforted.—When the lad had done reading, his master raised many questions,
[Page 63]
and made remarks upon the story, and then spoke to his guest as follows:—“You see my friend, that we are not such Barbarians as many of the Franks believe us,—your people are extremely vain and conceited of their own customs, and yet provoked to see others tenacious of theirs; they laugh at our Turkish stories, and at this method of soothing our cares; yet I conceive that it is as natural and as innocent as gaming, or drinking great quantities of wine, which are your common diversions.”—The traveller could not help admitting the truth of what he said, and observed, that it was strange that writers of Travels should censure the Turks and Moors for their passion for hearing Tales and Stories, when at the same time if this inclination did not prevail among Christians, their books could not be read at all.”
Euph. We are much obliged for your Story, which illustrates our subject,—I will produce another of the same kind. M. de Guys in his Sentimental Journey through Greece , takes notice of the same passion for tales and
[Page 64]
stories.—When a party of women met together they frequently entertained each other with telling a story in turn, which amusement is called Paramythia .—He describes some young girls at their needle-work, one of them says, “Come, let us have a party at the Paramythia , these pretty amusements will lighten our work.—I will tell you the fine Persian story my father taught me.”
Soph. In short the passion for tales and stories is common to all times, and all countries, and varies only according to the customs and manners of different people; and those who most affect to despise them under one form, will receive and admire them in another.
Euph. Nothing is more true, it is the selection of them, that makes them an innocent or a pernicious amusement.
I have now done with Eastern Tales and Stories.
Hort. May I then ask a question or two?
Euph. As many as you please.—We are now at a proper resting place.
[Page 65]
Hort. What is your opinion of Ossian's works, and the Erse poetry?
Euph. You could not have asked me a more difficult question. I read Dr. Johnson's sentiments on this head, and was satisfied with his decision: but I have since read Mr. M c Nichol's Remarks upon Johnson's Tour , and that overset all that the Doctor had said. There is something imperious and dogmatical in his manner of criticizing, and in the present case he seems to have wanted both judgment and candour.—On the other hand, M c Nichol shews too much of bitterness and acrimony, and of the same national pride as he condemns in Johnson , but he appeals to facts and to living persons of character and veracity, and such evidence is not easily set aside.
Hort. I wish you would leave Dr. Johnson and Mr. M c Nichol to settle their disputes between themselves, and give us your own opinion.
Euph. I ought first to shew you the grounds of my opinion, and to do that I must relate another curious circumstance.
[Page 66]
A friend of mine wrote to a young gentleman who was in the Highlands, observing the remains of Antiquity there, and making enquiry into the authenticity of Ossian 's works. My friend sent the traveller a fragment of his own composing, in imitation of Ossian 's manner—He shewed it to several persons in the Highlands, and asked what they thought of it?—they told him it was one of Ossian 's fragments, and they remembered it perfectly well.—This proof of disingenuity in support of the national claim to Ossian 's credit, renders very doubtful every account we receive from the natives of his country.
Hort. This is indeed a curious circumstance.—but I want to have your opinion upon this complicated evidence.
Euph. You oblige me to go farther into many subjects than I intended, and you must bear whatever blame I shall incur. I believe that Mr. Macpherson collected together all the traditional stories of the Highlands, that he put them into his own loom, and wove them into a regular piece.
[Page 67]
His works bear strong marks of genius and Originality, they are bold and figurative, and some of them are highly pleasing. It is certainly a very respectable collection.— The ingenious and unfortunate Chatterton 's compositions I think to be of the same kind.— The ground-work his Manuscripts, the building his own.
Hort. In what class of writing would you place Ossian ,—pray tell us?—In the Romance or Novel?—or will you give him a place among your Epic Poets?
Euph. It is difficult to assign a place to the writings of Ossian.—Fingal is undoubtedly an Epic, but not a Poem.—I cannot give that name to what is neither prose nor verse, —this sort of writing, corrupts and spoils our language, and destroys the barrier, which nature has placed, to distinguish between poetry and prose.—I think if you have no objection I would reckon Ossian among the Romances.
Hort. With all my heart, I give him up to your sentence.—But I do not feel myself satisfied with your treatment of the great Epic
[Page 68]
Poets Homer and Virgil , whose works you have as I think degraded, by base comparisons.— Those who are placed at the top of Parnassus.
Euph. And think you there are no other Epic poets but Homer and Virgil?
Hort. None worthy to be placed in the first rank of excellence.
Euph. I suppose there may have been many, but some are lost by time and accident. I have mentioned the Knight's Tale in Chaucer , the ' Squire 's Tale is of the same kind.— Many of the metrical Romances ought to be ranked as Epic poems.—And will you deny the title of Epic poets to Ariosto? —To Tasso? — To Guarini? —To Camoens? —To Milton?
Hort. I do not.—But I look upon them as only successful imitators of the great Ancients.
Euph. You put me in mind of a prejudice I received in my youth, from reading the verses placed before the first editions of Milton.
[Page 69]
Three poets in three distant ages born,
Greece, Italy, and England did adorn,
The first in loftiness of thought surpass'd,—
The next in Majesty,—in both the last.—
The force of nature, could no farther go,
To make a third she join'd the former two.
I understood this compliment literally, and believed there never were but three Epic poets, and that it was impossible there could ever be a fourth.
Hort. And you think I have a prejudice of the same kind?—According to your account, Epic poets are as plentiful as mushrooms.
Euph. Not so neither—they are rare, but not so scarce as is generally believed.— Pope had laid a plan for an Epic Poem that might have equalled him to your great Ancients.
Hort. I hope you reckon Sir Richard Blackmore in your list of Epic poets?
Euph. It is not a man's believing himself a poet, that will oblige the world to receive him as such:—many other writers have been under the same mistake as Blackmore .—If we leave it to time to decide the point, it will appear
[Page 70]
which is the real, and which the pretended Genius.
Hort. But will you make no amends for your heretical opinions of Homer and Virgil?
Euph. I have no amends to make.—I have placed them at the head of their class, and paid them every mark of respect and veneration.
Hort. Then we have only traced the circle, and returned to the same place we set out from.
Soph. And there let us rest, and leave time also to decide upon it. I have waited some time to mention some books that Euphrasia has either pass'd by, or reserved for her last class:—I mean the German Stories,— or what will you call them, of Gesner, Klopstock , and other writers, or paraphrasers of the Scripture stories?
Euph. I cannot say I am an admirer of them.—I have already spoken against all those stories where truth and fiction are blended together.—If this is exceptionable in profane History, it is certainly much more so in regard
[Page 71]
to Scripture.—The translations of these books help to spoil our language, which has suffered much by such innovations, and much more from paltry imitations of them. I wish they were all laid on an heap, and burnt together.
Hort. I knew a worthy divine of our church, who expressed the same wish, respecting all the commentaries on the Scriptures, and said that men would be the better Christians for it.
Euph. I do not presume to give an opinion upon so important a subject, but I do think there are too many books upon most others. It is perhaps providential that some should be forgotten, to make room for others, or else literally the world would not contain them.
Soph. I have seen a book called the History of Joseph , of the kind I mentioned. It was attributed to Mrs. Rowe , of whose writings you have made no mention.
Euph. Mrs. Rowe 's writings are very respectable.— They breathe a true spirit of piety, tinctured with a degree of Enthusiasm, above the reach of ordinary Christians.
[Page 72]
Her Letters moral and entertaining , are very proper for youth.
She wrote a poem, called Joseph , which is not unworthy of a place upon the shelf with other modern Epic poems.—One of the admirers of the German books above named, has paraphrased Mrs. Rowe's Joseph , and extended it to a thick Octavo volume; and put it into the same kind of language, which is neither prose nor verse. It grieves me to see this trash circulate while the poem is forgot.
The German books of this kind are:
The Death of Abel , by M. Gesner.
The Messiah , by M. Klopstock.
Noah ,
I shall not mention the English imitations, but leave them quietly to their repose.
I have now done with this neutral class of writing, and with all the rest of the Genus. What remains is to consider the effects of Novel reading upon the manners, and to draw some inferences, with an humble view to public utility.—But this must be the subject of a future conversation, for it grows late.
[Page 73]
Soph. You have brought us, as you threatened, within view of our journey's end.
Euph. If I have omitted any works of eminence, I shall be glad to be reminded of it before I conclude. It is very probable that I may.
Hort. If you have it is very excusable in so numerous a class of writers. I think you have done justice to every body, but the Ancient Poets.
Euph. Who shall decide this point for us both?—Will you give consent that I should appeal to the Public to decide upon it?
Hort. In what manner will you ask the public opinion?
Euph. Be it known to you, that I have written down all our conversations as soon as I left you, and got into my own closet.— But I will keep my word, and not publish the work without your consent.
Hort. It is a point of some consequence.— I will consider of it, and tell you the result at our next meeting.
[Page 74]
Soph. I shall wait for your decision, before I give my own;—in the interval I shall beg permission to read Euphrasia 's manuscript.
Euph. With all my heart. You have both a right to see it, consider it well, and decide its fate.—For this time I take my leave.
Hort. It is time that you should have some respite.—Pray let us know when you are at leisure to finish this subject.
Euph. I will send you word when I am prepared to receive you.
Hort. Ladies, a good evening to you both!
[Page 75]
EVENING XII. Hortensius, Sophronia, Euphrasia. Hort. Ladies well met!—this clear frosty day has tempted you to walk.
Euph. Sophronia tempted me abroad, out of regard for my health.
Soph. I did indeed, for sedentary amusements, have hurt both her health and spirits. There is no way of enduring the cold but by bidding it defiance,—exercise renews our health and spirits.
Hort. I rejoice to find you pursuing this salutary maxim,—no people are born too tender to endure their own climate,—it is indulgence and luxury that effeminates us, and then we complain of our country, and fly to
[Page 76]
others to recover what we have lost by our own fault.
Soph. Britain was always esteem'd a mild and temperate country till within the last century.
Hort. You say true, and the present race are not very like the descendants of the Britons that were found here by Julius Cæsar.
Euph. The Britons are not more altered in this, than in all other respects—their manners,—their customs,—their amusements.
Hort. Their amusements will bring us to our old subject,—suppose you both go home with me, and pursue it there?
Euph. No—It is you that must go with me, my notes and extracts are in my own library, and I shall want them frequently.
Hort. I am ready to attend you at this time, but the next visit must be to me.
Euph. We shall then have concluded our progress, and I shall ask your advice in regard to a future undertaking.
Hort. At your pleasure,—but do not shorten your walk.
[Page 77]
Soph. She is glad of a pretence to finish it I assure you.
Euph. I will not reply to the charge.— Hortensius you shall say all that you can against Novels,—I will reply to your censures, and Sophronia shall be Moderator between us.
Hort. I shall not spare them, notwithstanding the ill success I have had whenever I have been your opponent.
Euph. Nor shall I contradict you, unless when your censure is too general and indiscriminate, on works of Genius, taste, and morality.
Soph. It is no easy task to separate and select them, for they are found altogether, good, bad, and indifferent, in the Chaos of a circulating Library.
Euph. A Circulating Library is indeed a great evil,—young people are allowed to subscribe to them, and to read indiscriminately all they contain; and thus both food and poison are conveyed to the young mind together.
Hort. I should suppose that if books of the worst kind were excluded; still there would be
[Page 78]
enough to lay a foundation of idleness and folly.—A person used to this kind of reading will be disgusted with every thing serious or solid, as a weakened and depraved stomach rejects plain and wholsome food.
Soph. There is truth and justice in your observation,—but how to prevent it?
Hort. There are yet more and greater evils behind.—The seeds of vice and folly are sown in the heart,—the passions are awakened,—false expectations are raised.—A young woman is taught to expects adventures and intrigues,—she expects to be addressed in the style of these books, with the language of flattery and adulation.—If a plain man addresses her in rational terms and pays her the greatest of compliments,—that of desiring to spend his life with her,—that is not sufficient, her vanity is disappointed, she expects to meet a Hero in Romance.
Euph. No Hortensius ,—not a Hero in Romance, but a fine Gentleman in a Novel:— you will not make the distinction.
[Page 79]
Hort. I ask your pardon, I agreed to the distinction and therefore ought to observe it.
Euph. I would not have interrupted you on this punctilio; but let us walk into the house, and pursue the subject in the Library.
Hort. Now you are armed with your extracts, you think yourself invulnerable.
Euph. I will not attempt to contradict you, unless I have good reason for it.—I beg you to proceed with your remarks.
Hort. From this kind of reading, young people fancy themselves capable of judging of men and manners, and that they are knowing, while involved in the profoundest ignorance. They believe themselves wiser than their parents and guardians, whom they treat with contempt and ridicule:—Thus armed with ignorance, conceit, and folly, they plunge into the world and its dissipations, and who can wonder if they become its victims?—For such as the foundation is, such will be the superstructure.
Euph. All this is undoubtedly true, but at the same time would you exclude all works of
[Page 80]
fiction from the young reader?—In this case you would deprive him of the pleasure and improvement he might receive from works of genius, taste and morality.
Hort. Yes, I would serve them as the Priest did Don Quixote 's library, burn the good ones for being found in bad company.
Euph. That is being very severe, especially if you consider how far your execution would extend.—If you would prohibit reading all works of fiction, what will become of your favourites the great Ancients, as well as the most ingenious and enlightened modern writers?
Soph. Surely this is carrying the prohibition too far, and though it may sound well in Theory, it would be utterly impracticable.
Hort. I do not deny that.—There are many things to be wished, that are not to be hoped. I see no way to cure this vice of the times, but by extirpating the cause of it.
Euph. Pray Hortensius , is all this severity in behalf of our sex or your own?
Hort. Of both.—Yet yours are most concerned in my remonstrance for they read more
[Page 81]
of these books than ours, and consequently are most hurt by them.
Euph. You will then become a Knight errant, to combat with the windmills, which your imagination represents as Giants; while in the mean time you leave a side unguarded.
Hort. And you have found it out.—Pray tell me without metaphors, your meaning in plain English?
Euph. It seems to me that you are unreasonably severe upon these books, which you suppose to be appropriated to our sex, (which however is not the case):—not considering how many books of worse tendency, are put into the hands of the youth of your own, without scruple.
Hort. Indeed!—how will you bring proofs of that assertion?
Euph. I will not go far for them. I will fetch them from the School books, that generally make a part of the education of young men.—They are taught the History—the Mythology—the morals—of the great Ancients, whom you and all learned men revere:—But
[Page 82]
with these, they learn also—their Idolatry—their follies—their vices—and every thing that is shocking to virtuous manners.— Lucretius teaches them that fear first made Gods—that men grew out of the earth like trees, and that the indulgence of the passions and appetites, is the truest wisdom.— Juvenal and Persius describe such scenes, as I may venture to affirm that Romance and Novel-writers of any credit; would blush at:—and Virgil —the modest and delicate Virgil , informs them of many things, they had better be ignorant of.—As a woman I cannot give this argument its full weight.—But a hint is sufficient,—and I presume you will not deny the truth of my assertion.
Hort. I am astonished—admonished—and convinced!—I cannot deny the truth of what you have advanced, I confess that a reformation is indeed wanting in the made of Education of the youth of our sex.
Soph. Of both sexes you may say.—We will not condemn yours and justify our own.—You are convinced, and Euphrasia will use her victory generously I am certain.
[Page 83]
Euph. You judge rightly.—I do not presume to condemn indiscriminately, the books used in the education of youth; but surely they might be better selected, and some omitted, without any disadvantage.—I fear there is little prospect of such a general reformation as Hortensius generously wishes for. If any method can be found to alleviate these evils, it must be lenient—gradual—and practicable.—Let us then try to find out some expedient, with respect to those kind of books, which are our proper subject.
As this kind of reading is so common, and so much in every body's power, it is the more incumbent on parents and guardians to give young people a good taste for reading, and above all to lay the foundation of good principles from their very infancy; to make them read what is really good, and by forming their taste teach them to despise paltry books of every kind.—When they come to maturity of reason, they will scorn to run over a circulating Library, but will naturally aspire to read the best books of all kinds.
[Page 84]
Soph. In most cases it would supersede the evil we complain of: but for the middling and lower ranks of people, I apprehend this would not hinder either children or servants from reading Novels.
Euph. The best way to do this is to find them constant employment. In every rank and situation, people may superintend the education of their children, and “ train them tip in the way they should go .” There is no duty enjoined but what is practicable.—I am afraid the negligence of parents, is too often the cause of a wrong bias in their children,— or else their false indulgence, which is equally prejudicial to them.
With all these precautions in view, I would select such books as were proper to be put into the hands of youth; and with the same circumspection I would carry them to the Theatres, to satisfy the curiosity of youth, and prevent their taking these amusements clandestinely, for how in an age like this, cou'd I flatter myself I cou'd prevent them?
[Page 85]
Soph. This is indeed the medium between the two extremes, and I think Hortensius can make no objection to it.
Hort. I can only say that were I a father, I would suffer no such books to come into my house.
Euph. Then your children would borrow them of their young friends,—indeed Hortensius your prohibition would be to no purpose.
Hort. Then I thank God I am not in a situation to want to use it!
Euph. You do not consider that there are some works of this kind to which you have given your plaudit, and others, which I have shewn you were written as an antidote to the bad effects of them, tho' under the disguise and name of Novels.
Hort. Well, that is true, and I will allow that when the principles are fixed, and the character formed, they may be read with safety; but that there are very few of them proper for youth to read: and as there are upon a moderate calculation ten of the wrong sort to one of the right, it is ten to one that a child meets with the former.
[Page 86]
Soph. You are now more candid and reasonable, and we will agree with you. But Euphrasia is looking over her extracts, she has more to say to you.
Euph. I have said that there are a kind of books, which tho' published under the title of Novels, are designed as an antidote to the bad effects of them. I have some Extracts from these, which I hope you will think worthy of your attention.
But first I shall give you an Extract from A Comparative View of the State and Faculties of Man, with those of the Animal World , by Dr. Gregory , a work generally read and admired.
“ Notwithstanding the absurdities of the old Romance, it seems calculated to produce more favorable effects on the morals of mankind than our modern Novels. If the former did not represent men as they really are, it represented them better. Its heroes were patterns of courage, truth, generosity, humanity, and the most exalted virtues,—its heroines were distinguished
[Page 87]
for modesty, delicacy, and the utmost dignity of manners. The latter represent mankind too much what they really are, and paint such scenes of pleasure and vice as are unworthy to see the light, and thus in a manner hackney youth in the ways of wickedness before they are well entered into the world; they expose the fair sex in the most wanton and shameless manner to the eyes of the whole world, by stripping them of that modest reserve, which is the foundation of grace and dignity, the veil with which nature intended to protect them from too familiar an eye, in order to be at once the greatest incitement to love, and the greatest security to virtue.”
Another passage from the same Author.—
“The pleasure we receive from History, arises in a great measure from the same source with that we receive from Romance, it is not a bare recital of facts that gives us pleasure, they must be facts that give some agitation to the mind, by their being important, interesting, or surprising; but
[Page 88]
these events do not frequently recur in History, it is not surprising, but it is sometimes difficult to keep our attention awake.”
Hort. Unless I am greatly mistaken, this Extract favours my argument more than yours.
Euph. I give it up to you, so make your most of it, if it speaks truth and reason, I will give my assent it, though perhaps I may not agree to the inferences you may draw from it.
Soph. It favours Euphrasia's argument in favour of the old Romances, and speaks of the Novels in contrast with them.
Euph. My next Extract is from the Placid Man , against exhibiting vicious or shocking Characters to public view.
“ Tho' a good character may not have the designed effect with regard to improving the mind of the reader, a bad one will always act strongly the contrary way. The goodness of the one is easily forgotten, but the viciousness of the other cleaves to
[Page 89]
the mind of the young reader, and has its effect according to the disposition of him who receives it; if that is good, the picture of vice may carry a degree of disgust with it, which may prevent its doing him—much harm; but if it happens to be more inclined to evil, (which without being uncandid, we may, I fear, suppose more than an equal chance,) vicious images will strengthen that propensity, and however careful the Author may have been in rendering strict poetical justice, by making punishment the certain effect of criminal indulgence, the ideas of the indulgence will remain upon the mind, after those of the punishment are effaced. I am convinced that the introducing profligate characters either into Novels, or upon the Stage by way of exposing them to shame and ridicule, is a very dangerous experiment, especially for young minds; for as Swift's Directions to Servants is said to have made more bad servants than ever it corrected, by teaching them tricks, which
[Page 90]
without his wit they wou'd never have found out; so a series of crimes and follies, may give an insight into vice, which the good moral drawn from them may not prevent being put in practice.”
Hort. I entirely approve this Author's remarks, and believe that the shocking stories exhibited to view in the public papers (frequently false or misrepresented,) have a bad effect upon young minds;—they familiarize their eyes to scenes of vice and folly, and sometimes to crimes of which they would be ignorant , and which are the disgrace of human nature.
Soph. I have often thought so, but how is it possible to prevent it?
Hort. The first step is to point it out, for what remains, it must be left to different times and manners, which we may hope will arise in due time; when poverty and distress, shall have made a general reformation both necessary and practicable:—at present our great men are fully employed, in disputing over the spoils of their unhappy and impoverished
[Page 91]
country. An Englishman cannot behold it without a sigh, nor speak of it but with indignation.
Oh England, model to thy inward greatness!
Like little body with a mighty heart;
What might'st thou do, that wou'd thee honour do
Were all thy children kind and natural?
Shakespeare.
Euph. Alas there is but too much foundation for your remarks!—But let us hope the best, and be prepared for the worst.—Let me recal you to the subject, by observing that it was an extract from a Novel that led you into these deep reflections.—Confess Hortensius that a Novel may be a moral production?
Hort. It would be folly to deny it. But how few are such in comparison of those we have unanimously condemned?
Euph. Perhaps there are more of the better sort than you are acquainted with;—I have had the honour to introduce many to your notice and I may yet increase the number.—I should apologize for my next Extract from a Novel of later date than my limited year 1770—but the Extract itself shall be my apology.
[Page 92]
Extract from the Trial or the History of Charles Horton, Esq.
“If you wish in a Novel to inculcate some moral truth, to hide a jewel under so thin a veil that its brilliancy may be easily discerned, there should always be a reference to the manners and the time in which it is written; there should be the greatest probability, carried thro' the whole allegory, that your reason may not be shocked, while your imagination is pleased. If Novels were properly regulated with this design always in view, they might become really useful to society. A moral lesson otherwise dry and tedious in itself, might be communicated in a pleasing dress: as a pill has its desired effect, tho' wrapped in a gold or silver leaf. The more inviting lessons of instruction are made, certainly the better; for who are they that read Novels?—Not men of learning, for they despise them,” ( read affect to despise them ,)—not men of business, for they have other employments,—not the rich and great, for
[Page 93]
they have other amusements.—The midling rank of people then are the chief if not the only readers,”—( certainly not the only, for they are the resource of idle people of all ranks and degrees among us )—but particularly the young, the volatile, the hearts most susceptible of all kinds of impressions.—To these the chastest images should be presented, for these the purest pictures painted and selected.—Vice should be represented as it really is, attended with that trouble and confusion that should deter the wandering feet of innocence and credulity from treading in her paths; and where it is necessary to give a loose to invention, the greatest care should be taken, not to pass the line of decency. Novels written with this respect might be made subservient to the best and noblest purposes. Were I a despotic prince, I would sooner hang a man that wrote a work of direct, or indirect tendency to corrupt the morals of youth, than one who committed arobbery on the high road. We degenerate,
[Page 94]
we descend into the depravities of our nature too soon, and too easily; we want no enticements of this, or any other kind.”
Soph. This Extract makes its own apology.—It is in your favour.
Euph. I have selected such passages as speak the language of truth, candour, and impartiality, without considering whether they favoured my own opinions or not.—I find one more Extract, but thro' inadvertency I have omitted the name of the book from whence it is taken.”
“The effects of Romance, and true History upon young minds is not very different. The great and important duty of a writer is, to point out the difference between Virtue and Vice, to shew one rewarded, and the other punished; for young people pay more regard to present good, than to future recompense,—it is by degrees that they understand, and admit with reluctance, these wholsome and necessary truths. It is of the utmost consequence that these distinctions should be
[Page 95]
enforced in the strongest manner, that they may be excited to copy good, and avoid evil actions. The dullest book that ever was written with a moral view, is preferable to the most witty and elegant where these distinctions are overthrown. How dangerous and destructive is it then to suffer young people to read books where Vice is palliated and extenuated, and even recommended under other names,—where fornication is called gallantry—dissipation pleasure—prodigality generosity—and selfishness a due regard to one's own interest.—What punishment do such men deserve, who write with a design to gratify the vanities, the follies, the passions, the vices of youth, and furnish them with excuses for the most atrocious actions?—The poor pilferer who steals to supply his natural wants is hanged, and these pernicious members of society, are rewarded for poisoning the morals of the rising generation.—How weak, how ineffectual are human laws to answer their intended purposes; and bad
[Page 96]
at the world is, it would be much worse, if it were not for the interposition of a superior law, in cases which no human one can reach.”
Hort. This last Extract is clearly in my favour, but I respect too much your candour and impartiality to make an unfair use of it.
Euph. I thank you for this concession.—We are not very different in opinion,—I would exclude books of bad tendency from the hands of youth, as strongly as yourself, but I would separate the grain from the chaff.
Soph. It is now that I may enter upon my office of Moderator.— Hortensius would prohibit the reading all Novels in order to exclude the bad ones.— Euphrasia would make a separation in favour of works of Genius, taste, and morality; she would recommend such methods of preventing the mischiefs arising from novel reading, as are moderate prudent, and above all practicable .—
The objections to bad books of this species, are equally applicable to all other kinds of writing,—indecent novels, indecent plays,
[Page 97]
essays, memoirs, dialogues are equally to be exploded: but it does not follow that all these kinds of writing are to be extirpated, because some are bad.—By the same kind of reasoning we might plead for the prohibition of all kinds of writing; for excellent and unexceptionable works of every species, may be contrasted with vicious and immoral ones. All these objections amount to no more than that bad books are bad things;—but shall we therefore prohibit reading?
Hort. You have spoken to some purpose.—I know that mine is an Utopian scheme; and I acknowledge that Euphrasia 's is practicable, if parents and guardians would give due attention to it.
Euph. Then we are agreed at last,—Selection is to be strongly recommended, and good books to be carefully chosen by all that are concerned in the education of youth.—In order to make this work of ours of some public utility, I would recommend some that may properly be given to children even from their infancy, and as they grow up towards
[Page 98]
maturity:—that is to say, if my friends think it worthy to be offered to the public.
Hort. Why, if you will do it in your own name I have no objection,—but I should not choose that mine should appear in print.
Euph. I will so disguise it that you shall not know yourself, and Sophronia likewise shall appear in Masquerade.
Soph. I leave it entirely to you to dispose of me, in whatever way you think most proper for your service.
Hort. I am thinking, that from your part in our past conversations, any person who did not know you well, would conclude that your principal, if not only study, had been Romances and Novels.
Euph. I am under no concern on that account, it is not of any consequence how much or how little one knows, but the use one makes of the knowledge one has acquired.—If like the industrious bee I have cull'd from various flowers my share of Honey, and stored it in the common Hive, I shall have performed the duties of a good citizen of the Republic of letters, and I shall not have lived in vain.
[Page 99]
Hort. You are entitled to this approbation from your intention,—and further—
Euph. No further I beseech you. If you pay me any compliments, I shall be obliged to expunge them from my copy.—If my work deserves public approbation, I trust it will meet with it.
Soph. I am concerned that you should have limited yourself to a year, for I have wished you to speak of some books of later date.
Euph. As Novels I cannot, but only as books deserving public honours, on the score of public utility.—As such I have a desire to mention the works of the Countess of Genlis .— The Theatre of Education . for young people, an excellent work.—And her other Publications, Theodore and Adelaide , and the Tales of the Castle , are a school for Parents, Guardians, and Preceptors.—I had rather be the Author of such books as these, than be reckoned the first wit of the Age.
Soph. You have done them justice, but there are some Novels of merit within the last ten years.
[Page 100]
Euph. The public will do them justice, and time will shew, whether they owed their success to intrisic merit, or to the caprice of fashion. I will not be drawn in to say any thing more of them.
Hort. We will not urge you any further,—you have fully executed the plan you laid down, and we leave the conclusion to you.
Euph. Here then I conclude, and thank you for your assistance, and the patience with which you have attended me in my progress. As soon as I have made out my list of books, I will return your visit Hortensius , and desire your opinion upon it.
Hort. I shall hope for that pleasure soon.—I now take my leave wishing you the best reward of your labours, Fame and Profit!
Soph. I join heartily in the same wish.
Euph. Every kind of happiness attend you my good friends!—For what remains, I shall (without asking the aid of puffing, or the influence of the tide of fashion,) leave the decision to an impartial and discerning public.
NOTES
1 Dreams.
$$$
