The Poetry of Pope
Author: De Quincey, Thomas.
Publication info: The Collected Writings Of Thomas De Quincey . vi, 474 p. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1890.

The Poetry of Pope [in, The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey. New and Enlarged Edition By David Masson ... Vol. XI Literary Theory and Criticism]
[Page ]
THE POETRY OF POPE 1 Every great classic in our native language should from time to time be reviewed anew; and especially if he belongs in any considerable extent to that section of the literature which connects itself with manners, and if his reputation originally, or his style of composition, is likely to have been much influenced by the transient fashions of his own age. The withdrawal, for instance, from a dramatic poet, or a satirist, of any false lustre which he has owed to his momentary connexion with what we may call the personalities of a fleeting generation, or of any undue shelter to his errors which may have gathered round them from political bias, or from intellectual infirmities amongst his partisans, will sometimes seriously modify, after a century or so, the fairest original appreciation of a fine writer. A window composed of Claude Lorraine glasses spreads over the landscape outside a disturbing effect, which not the most practised eye can evade. The eidola theatri affect us all. No man escapes the contagion from his contemporary bystanders. And the reader may see further on that, had Pope been merely a
[Page 52]
satiric poet, he must in these times have laid down much of the splendour which surrounds him in our traditional estimate of his merit. Such a renunciation would be a forfeit—not always to errors in himself, but sometimes to errors in that stage of English society which forced the ablest writer into a collusion with its own meretricious tastes. The antithetical prose “characters,” as they were technically termed, which circulated amongst the aristocracy in the early part of the last century, the style of the dialogue in such comedy as was then popular, and much of the occasional poetry in that age, expose an immoderate craving for glittering effects from contrasts too harsh to be natural, too sudden to be durable, and too fantastic to be harmonious. To meet this vicious taste,—from which (as from any diffusive taste) it is vain to look for perfect immunity in any writer lying immediately under its beams,—Pope sacrificed, in one mode of composition, the simplicities of nature and sincerity; and, had he practised no other mode, we repeat that now he must have descended from his pedestal. To some extent he is degraded even as it is; for the reader cannot avoid whispering to himself—What quality of thinking must that be which allies itself so naturally (as will be shown) with distortions of fact or of philosophic truth? But, had his whole writings been of that same cast, he must have been degraded altogether, and a star would have fallen from our English galaxy of poets.
We mention this particular case as a reason generally for renewing by intervals the examination of great writers, and liberating the verdict of their contemporaries from the casual disturbances to which every age is liable in its judgments and in its tastes. As books multiply to an unmanageable excess, selection becomes more and more a necessity for readers, and the power of selection more and more a desperate problem for the busy part of readers. The possibility of selecting wisely is becoming continually more hopeless as the necessity for selection is becoming continually more pressing. Exactly as the growing weight of books overlays and stifles the power of comparison, pari passu is the call for comparison the more clamorous; and thus arises a duty correspondingly more urgent of searching and revising until everything
[Page 53]
spurious has been weeded out from amongst the Flora of our highest literature, and until the waste of time for those who have so little at their command is reduced to a minimum . For, where the good cannot be read in its twentieth part, the more requisite it is that no part of the bad should steal an hour of the available time; and it is not to be endured that people without a minute to spare should be obliged first of all to read a book before they can ascertain whether in fact it is worth reading. The public cannot read by proxy as regards the good which it is to appropriate, but it can as regards the poison which it is to escape. And thus, as literature expands, becoming continually more of a household necessity, the duty resting upon critics (who are the vicarious readers for the public) becomes continually more urgent—of reviewing all works that may be supposed to have benefited too much or too indiscriminately by the superstition of a name. The prægustatores should have tasted of every cup, and reported its quality, before the public call for it; and, above all, they should have done this in all cases of the higher literature,—that is, of literature properly so called.
What is it that we mean by literature ? Popularly, and amongst the thoughtless, it is held to include everything that is printed in a book. Little logic is required to disturb that definition. The most thoughtless person is easily made aware that in the idea of literature one essential element is some relation to a general and common interest of man,—so that what applies only to a local, or professional, or merely personal interest, even though presenting itself in the shape of a book, will not belong to Literature. So far the definition is easily narrowed; and it is as easily expanded. For not only is much that takes a station in books not literature; but inversely, much that really is literature never reaches a station in books. The weekly sermons of Christendom, that vast pulpit literature which acts so extensively upon the popular mind—to warn, to uphold, to renew, to comfort, to alarm—does not attain the sanctuary of libraries in the ten-thousandth part of its extent. The Drama again,—as, for instance, the finest of Shakspere's plays in England, and all leading Athenian plays in the noontide of the Attic stage,—
[Page 54]
operated as a literature on the public mind, and were (according to the strictest letter of that term) published through the audiences that witnessed 2 their representation some time before they were published as things to be read; and they were published in this scenical mode of publication with much more effect than they could have had as books during ages of costly copying or of costly printing.
Books, therefore, do not suggest an idea coextensive and interchangeable with the idea of Literature; since much literature, scenic, forensic, or didactic (as from lecturers and public orators), may never come into books, and much that does come into books may connect itself with no literary interest. 3 But a far more important correction, applicable to the common vague idea of literature, is to be sought not so much in a better definition of literature as in a sharper distinction of the two functions which it fulfils. In that great social organ which, collectively, we call literature, there may be distinguished two separate offices that may blend and often do so, but capable, severally, of a severe insulation, and naturally fitted for reciprocal repulsion. There is, first, the literature of knowledge ; and, secondly, the literature of power . The function of the first is—to teach ; the function of the second is—to move : the first is a rudder; the second, an oar or a sail. The first speaks to the mere discursive understanding; the second speaks ultimately, it may happen, to the higher understanding or reason, but always through affections of pleasure and sympathy. Remotely, it may travel towards an object seated in what Lord Bacon calls
[Page 55]
dry light 4 ; but, proximately, it does and must operate,—else it ceases to be a literature of power ,—on and through that humid light which clothes itself in the mists and glittering iris of human passions, desires, and genial emotions. Men have so little reflected on the higher functions of literature as to find it a paradox if one should describe it as a mean or subordinate purpose of books to give information. But this is a paradox only in the sense which makes it honourable to be paradoxical. Whenever we talk in ordinary language of seeking information or gaining knowledge, we understand the words as connected with something of absolute novelty. But it is the grandeur of all truth which can occupy a very high place in human interests that it is never absolutely novel to the meanest of minds: it exists eternally by way of germ or latent principle in the lowest as in the highest, needing to be developed, but never to be planted. To be capable of transplantation is the immediate criterion of a truth that ranges on a lower scale. Besides which, there is a rarer thing than truth,—namely, power , or deep sympathy with truth. What is the effect, for instance, upon society, of children? By the pity, by the tenderness, and by the peculiar modes of admiration, which connect themselves with the helplessness, with the innocence, and with the simplicity of children, not only are the primal affections strengthened and continually renewed, but the qualities which are dearest in the sight of heaven,— the frailty, for instance, which appeals to forbearance, the innocence which symbolises the heavenly, and the simplicity which is most alien from the worldly,—are kept up in perpetual remembrance, and their ideals are continually refreshed. A purpose of the same nature is answered by the higher literature, viz. the literature of power. What do you learn from “Paradise Lost”? Nothing at all. What do you learn from a cookery-book? Something new, something that you did not know before, in every paragraph. But would you therefore put the wretched cookery-book on a
[Page 56]
higher level of estimation than the divine poem? What you owe to Milton is not any knowledge, of which a million separate items are still but a million of advancing steps on the same earthly level; what you own is power ,—that is, exercise and expansion to your own latent capacity of sympathy with the infinite, where every pulse and each separate influx is a step upwards, a step ascending as upon a Jacob's ladder from earth to mysterious altitudes above the earth. All the steps of knowledge, from first to last, carry you further on the same plane, but could never raise you one foot above your ancient level of earth: whereas the very first step in power is a flight—is an ascending movement into another element where earth is forgotten.
Were it not that human sensibilities are ventilated and continually called out into exercise by the great phenomena of infancy, or of real life as it moves through chance and change, or of literature as it recombines these elements in the mimicries of poetry, romance, &c., it is certain that, like any animal power of muscular energy falling into disuse, all such sensibilities would gradually droop and dwindle. It is in relation to these great moral capacities of man that the literature of power, as contradistinguished from that of knowledge, lives and has its field of action. It is concerned with what is highest in man; for the Scriptures themselves never condescended to deal by suggestion or co-operation with the mere discursive understanding: when speaking of man in his intellectual capacity, the Scriptures speak not of the understanding, but of “ the understanding heart ,”—making the heart, i.e. the great intuitive (or non-discursive) organ, to be the interchangeable formula for man in his highest state of capacity for the infinite. Tragedy, romance, fairy tale, or epopee, all alike restore to man's mind the ideals of justice, of hope, of truth, of mercy, of retribution, which else (left to the support of daily life in its realities) would languish for want of sufficient illustration. What is meant, for instance, by poetic justice ?—It does not mean a justice that differs by its object from the ordinary justice of human jurisprudence; for then it must be confessedly a very bad kind of justice; but it means a justice that differs from common forensic justice by the degree in which it attains its object, a justice
[Page 57]
that is more omnipotent over its own ends, as dealing—not with the refractory elements of earthly life, but with the elements of its own creation, and with materials flexible to its own purest preconceptions. It is certain that, were it not for the Literature of Power, these ideals would often remain amongst us as mere arid notional forms; whereas, by the creative forces of man put forth in literature, they gain a vernal life of restoration, and germinate into vital activities. The commonest novel, by moving in alliance with human fears and hopes, with human instincts of wrong and right, sustains and quickens those affections. Calling them into action, it rescues them from torpor. And hence the preeminency over all authors that merely teach of the meanest that moves , or that teaches, if at all, indirectly by moving. The very highest work that has ever existed in the Literature of Knowledge is but a provisional work: a book upon trial and sufferance, and quamdiu bene se gesserit . Let its teaching be even partially revised, let it be but expanded,—nay, even let its teaching be but placed in a better order,—and instantly it is superseded. Whereas the feeblest works in the Literature of Power, surviving at all, survive as finished and unalterable amongst men. For instance, the Principia of Sir Isaac Newton was a book militant on earth from the first. In all stages of its progress it would have to fight for its existence: 1st, as regards absolute truth; 2dly, when that combat was over, as regards its form or mode of presenting the truth. And as soon as a La Place, or anybody else, builds higher upon the foundations laid by this book, effectually he throws it out of the sunshine into decay and darkness; by weapons won from this book he superannuates and destroys this book, so that soon the name of Newton remains as a mere nominis umbra , but his book, as a living power, has transmigrated into other forms. Now, on the contrary, the Iliad, the Prometheus of Æschylus, the Othello or King Lear, the Hamlet or Macbeth, and the Paradise Lost, are not militant, but triumphant for ever as long as the languages exist in which they speak or can be taught to speak. They never can transmigrate into new incarnations. To reproduce these in new forms, or variations, even if in some things they should be improved, would be to plagiarise. A good steam-engine
[Page 58]
is properly superseded by a better. But one lovely pastoral valley is not superseded by another, nor a statue of Praxiteles by a statue of Michael Angelo. These things are separated not by imparity, but by disparity. They are not thought of as unequal under the same standard, but as different in kind , and, if otherwise equal, as equal under a different standard. Human works of immortal beauty and works of nature in one respect stand on the same footing: they never absolutely repeat each other, never approach so near as not to differ; and they differ not as better and worse, or simply by more and less: they differ by undecipherable and incommunicable differences, that cannot be caught by mimicries, that cannot be reflected in the mirror of copies, that cannot become ponderable in the scales of vulgar comparison.
Applying these principles to Pope as a representative of fine literature in general, we would wish to remark the claim which he has, or which any equal writer has, to the attention and jealous winnowing of those critics in particular who watch over public morals. Clergymen, and all organs of public criticism put in motion by clergymen, are more especially concerned in the just appreciation of such writers, if the two canons are remembered which we have endeavoured to illustrate, viz. that all works in this class, as opposed to those in the literature of knowledge, 1st, work by far deeper agencies, and, 2dly, are more permanent; in the strictest sense they are κτηματα ἐς ἀΕι : and what evil they do, or what good they do, is commensurate with the national language, sometimes long after the nation has departed. At this hour, five hundred years since their creation, the tales of Chaucer, 5 never equalled on this earth for their tenderness, and for life of picturesqueness, are read familiarly by many in the charming language of their natal day, and by others in the modernisations of Dryden, of Pope, and Wordsworth. At this hour, one thousand eight hundred years since their creation, the Pagan tales of Ovid, never equalled on this earth for the gaiety of their movement and the
[Page 59]
capricious graces of their narrative, are read by all Christendom. This man's people and their monuments are dust; but he is alive: he has survived them, as he told us that he had it in his commission to do, by a thousand years; “and shall a thousand more.”
All the literature of knowledge builds only ground-nests, that are swept away by floods, or confounded by the plough; but the literature of power builds nests in aërial altitudes of temples sacred from violation, or of forests inaccessible to fraud. This is a great prerogative of the power literature; and it is a greater which lies in the mode of its influence. The knowledge literature, like the fashion of this world, passeth away. An Encyclopædia is its abstract; and, in this respect, it may be taken for its speaking symbol—that before one generation has passed an Encyclopædia is superannuated; for it speaks through the dead memory and unimpassioned understanding, which have not the repose of higher faculties, but are continually enlarging and varying their phylacteries. But all literature properly so called— literature κατ᾿ ἐξοχην ,—for the very same reason that it is so much more durable than the literature of knowledge, is (and by the very same proportion it is) more intense and electrically searching in its impressions. The directions in which the tragedy of this planet has trained our human feelings to play, and the combinations into which the poetry of this planet has thrown our human passions of love and hatred, of admiration and contempt, exercise a power for bad or good over human life that cannot be contemplated, when stretching through many generations, without a sentiment allied to awe. 6 And of this let every one be assured—that
[Page 60]
he owes to the impassioned books which he has read many a thousand more of emotions than he can consciously trace back to them. Dim by their origination, these emotions yet arise in him, and mould him through life, like forgotten incidents of his childhood.
In making a revaluation of Pope as regards some of his principal works, we should have been glad to examine more closely than we shall be able to do some popular errors affecting his whole intellectual position, and especially these two: first , That he belonged to what is idly called the French School of our literature; secondly , That he was specially distinguished from preceding poets by correctness.
The first error has infected the whole criticism of Europe. The Schlegels, with all their false airs of subtlety, fall into this error in discussing every literature of Christendom. But, if by a mere accident of life any poet had first turned his thoughts into a particular channel on the suggestion of some French book, that would not justify our classing what belongs to universal nature, and what inevitably arises at a certain stage of social progress, under the category of a French creation. Somebody must have been first in point of time upon every field; but this casual precedency establishes no title whatever to authority, or plea of original dominion, over fields that lie within the inevitable line of march upon which nations are moving. Had it happened that the first European writer on the higher geometry was a Græco-Sicilian, that would not have made it rational to call geometry the Græco-Sicilian Science. In every nation first comes the higher form of passion, next the lower. This is the mere order of nature in governing the movements of human intellect as connected with social evolution—this is, therefore, the universal order —that in the earliest stages of literature men deal with the great elementary grandeurs of passion, of conscience, of the will in self-conflict; they deal with the capital struggle of the human race in raising empires or in overthrowing them, in vindicating their religion (as by crusades), or with the more mysterious struggles amongst spiritual races allied to our own that have been dimly revealed to us. We then have an Iliad, a Jerusalem Delivered, a Paradise Lost. These great subjects exhausted, or exhausted in their more inviting
[Page 61]
manifestations, inevitably by the mere endless motion of society, there succeeds a lower key of passion. Expanding social intercourse in towns, multiplied and crowded more and more, banishes those gloomier and grander phases of human history from literature. The understanding is quickened; the lower faculties of the mind,—fancy, and the habit of minute distinction,—are applied to the contemplation of society and manners. Passion begins to wheel in lower flights, and to combine itself with interests that in part are addressed to the insulated understanding—observing, refining, reflecting. This may be called the minor key of literature, in opposition to the major as cultivated by Shakspere, Spenser, Milton. But this key arises spontaneously in every people, and by a necessity as sure as any that moulds the progress of civilisation. Milton and Spenser were not of any Italian school. Their Italian studies were the result and not the cause of the determination given to their minds by nature working in conjunction with their social period. It is equally childish to say of Dryden and Pope that they belonged to any French school. That thing which they did the would have done though France had been at the back of China. The school to which they belonged was a school developed at a certain stage of progress in all nations alike by the human heart as modified by the human understanding: it is a school depending on the peculiar direction given to the sensibilities by the reflecting faculty and by the new phases of society. Even as a fact (though a change as to the fact could not make any change at all in the philosophy of the case), it is not true that either Dryden or Pope was even slightly influenced by French literature. Both of them had a very imperfect acquaintance with the French language. Dryden openly ridiculed French literature; and Pope, except for some purposes connected with his Homeric translations, read as little of it as convenience would allow. But, had this been otherwise, the philosophy of the case stands good: that after the primary formations of the fermenting intellect come everywhere,—in Thebes or Athens, France or England,— the secondary; that after the creating passion comes the reflecting and recombining passion; that after the solemnities and cloistral grandeurs of life, solitary and self-conflicting,
[Page 62]
comes the recoil of a self-observing and self-dissecting stage, derived from life social and gregarious. After the Iliad, but doubtless many generations after, comes a Batrachomyomachia: after the gorgeous masque of our forefathers came always the anti-masque, that threw off echoes as from some devil's laughter in mockery of the hollow and transitory pomps that went before.
It is an error equally gross, and an error in which Pope himself participated, that his plume of distinction from preceding poets consisted in correctness . Correctness in what? Think of the admirable qualifications for settling the scale of such critical distinctions which that man must have had who turned out upon this vast world the single oracular word “correctness,” to shift for itself and explain its own meaning to all generations. Did he mean logical correctness in maturing and connecting thoughts? But, of all poets that have practised reasoning in verse, Pope is the most inconsequential in the deduction of his thoughts, and the most severely distressed in any effort to effect or to explain the dependency of their parts. There are not ten consecutive lines in Pope unaffected by this infirmity. All his thinking proceeded by insulated and discontinuous jets; and the only resource for him , or chance of even seeming correctness, lay in the liberty of stringing his aphoristic thoughts like pearls, having no relation to each other but that of contiguity. To set them like diamonds was for Pope to risk distraction; to systematise was ruin. On the other hand, if this elliptical word correctness ,—for elliptical it must be until its subject of control is assigned,—is to be understood with such a complimentary qualification as would restrict it to Pope's use of language , that construction is even more untenable than the other—more conspicuously untenable: for many are they who have erred by illogical thinking, or by distracted evolution of thoughts; but rare is the man amongst classical writers in any language who has disfigured his meaning more remarkably than Pope by imperfect expressions. We do not speak of plebeian phrases, of exotic phrases, of slang, from which Pope was not free, though more free than many of his contemporaries. From vulgarism indeed he was shielded, though imperfectly, by the aristocratic society he
[Page 63]
kept: they being right, he was right: and he erred only in the cases where they misled him: for even the refinement of that age was oftentimes coarse and vulgar. His grammar, indeed, is often vicious; preterites and participles he constantly confounds, and registers this class of blunders for ever by the cast-iron index of rhymes that never can mend. But worse than this mode of viciousness is his syntax, which is so bad as to darken his meaning at times, and at other times to defeat it. But these were errors cleaving to his times; and it would be unfair to exact from Pope a better quality of diction than belonged to his contemporaries. Still it is indisputable that a better model of diction and of grammar prevailed a century before Pope. In Spenser, in Shakspere, in the Bible of King James's reign, and in Milton, there are very few grammatical errors. 7 But Pope's defect in language
[Page 64]
was almost peculiar to himself. It lay in an inability, nursed doubtless by indolence, to carry out and perfect the expression of the thought he wishes to communicate. The language does not realise the idea: it simply suggests or hints it. Thus, to give a single illustration:—
“Know, God and Nature only are the same:
In man the judgment shoots at flying game.” 8
The first line one would naturally construe into this: that God and Nature were in harmony, whilst all other objects were scattered into incoherency by difference and disunion. Not at all; it means nothing of the kind; but that God and Nature only are exempted from the infirmities of change. They only continue uniform and self-consistent. This might mislead many readers; but the second line must do so: for who would not understand the syntax to be that the judgment, as it exists in man, shoots at flying game? But, in fact, the meaning is that the judgment, in aiming its calculations at man, aims at an object that is still on the wing, and never for a moment stationary. We give this as a specimen of a fault in diction, the very worst amongst all that are possible. To write bad grammar or colloquial slang does not necessarily obscure the sense; but a fault like this is a treachery, and hides the true meaning under the cloud of a conundrum: nay worse; for even a conundrum has fixed conditions for determining its solution, but this sort of mutilated expression is left to the solutions of conjecture.
There are endless varieties of this fault in Pope, by
[Page 65]
which he sought relief for himself from half-an-hour's labour, at the price of utter darkness to the reader.
One editor distinguishes amongst the epistles that which Pope addressed to Lord Oxford some years after that minister's fall, as about the most “ correct , musical, dignified, and affecting” that the poet has left. 9 Now, even as a specimen of vernacular English, it is conspicuously bad: the shocking gallicism, for instance, of “ attend ” for “wait his leisure,” in the line “For him thou oft hast bid the world attend,” would alone degrade the verses. 10 To bid the world attend— is to bid the world listen attentively, or look attentively; whereas what Pope means is that Lord Oxford bade the world wait in his ante-chamber until he had leisure from his important conferences with a poet to throw a glance upon affairs so trivial as those of the British nation. This use of the word attend is a shocking violation of the English idiom; and even the slightest would be an unpardonable blemish in a poem of only forty lines, which ought to be finished as exquisitely as a cameo. It is a still worse disfiguration of the very same class,—viz. a silent confession of defeat, in a regular wrestling match with the difficulties of a metrical expression,—that the poem terminates thus—
“Nor fears to tell that Mortimer is he.”
Why should he fear? Really there is no very desperate courage required for telling the most horrible of secrets about Mortimer. Had Mortimer even been so wicked as to set the Thames on fire, safely it might have been published by Mortimer's bosom friend to all magistrates, sheriffs, and constables; for not a man of them would have guessed in
[Page 66]
what hiding-place to look for Mortimer, or who Mortimer might be. True it is that a secondary earldom, conferred by Queen Anne upon Harley, Lord Oxford, was that of Mortimer; but it lurked unknown to the public ear; it was a coronet that lay hid under the beams of Oxford —a title so long familiar to English ears, from descending through six-and-twenty generations of de Veres. Quite as reasonable it would be, in a birthday ode to the Prince of Wales, if he were addressed as my Lord of Chester, or Baron of Renfrew, or your Grace of Cornwall. To express a thing in cipher may do for a conspirator; but a poet's correctness is shown in his intelligibility.
Amongst the early poems of Pope the “ Eloisa to Abelard ” has a special interest of a double order:—First, it has a personal interest as the poem of Pope, because indicating the original destination of Pope's intellect, and the strength of his native vocation to a class of poetry in deeper keys of passion than any which he systematically cultivated. For itself also, and abstracting from its connexion with Pope's natural destination, this poem has a second interest, an intrinsic interest, that will always make it dear to impassioned minds. The self-conflict—the flux and reflux of the poor agitated heart—the spectacle of Eloisa now bending penitentially before the shadowy austerities of a monastic future, now raving upon the remembrances of the guilty past—one moment reconciled by the very anguish of her soul to the grandeurs of religion and of prostrate adoration, the next moment revolting to perilous retrospects of her treacherous happiness—the recognition, by shining gleams through the very storm and darkness evoked by her earthly sensibilities, of a sensibility deeper far in its ground, and that trembled towards holier objects—the lyrical tumult of the changes, the hope, the tears, the rapture, the penitence, the despair— place the reader in tumultuous sympathy with the poor distracted nun. Exquisitely imagined, among the passages towards the end, is the introduction of a voice speaking to Eloisa from the grave of some sister nun that, in long-forgotten years, once had struggled and suffered like herself,—
“Once (like herself) that trembled, wept, and prayed,
Love's victim then, though now a sainted maid.”
[Page 67]
Exquisite is the passage in which she prefigures a visit yet to come from Abelard to herself—no more in the character of a lover, but as a priest, ministering by spiritual consolations to her dying hours, pointing her thoughts to heaven, presenting the Cross to her through the mists of death, and fighting for her as a spiritual ally against the torments of flesh. That anticipation was not gratified. Abelard died long before her; and the hour never arrived for him of which with such tenderness she says—
“It will be then no crime to gaze on me.”
But another anticipation has been fulfilled in a degree that she could hardly have contemplated; the anticipation, namely—
“That ages hence, when all her woes were o'er,
And that rebellious heart should beat no more,”
wandering feet should be attracted from afar
“To Paraclete's white walls and silver springs”
as the common resting-place and everlasting marriage-bed of Abelard and Eloisa; that the eyes of many who had been touched by their story, by the memory of their extraordinary accomplishments in an age of darkness, and by the calamitous issue of their attachment, should seek, first and last, for the grave in which the lovers trusted to meet again in peace; and should seek it with interest so absorbing that even amidst the ascent of hosannahs from the choir, amidst the grandeurs of high mass, the raising of the host, and “the pomp of dreadful sacrifice,” sometimes these wandering eyes should steal aside to the solemn abiding-place of Abelard and his Eloisa, offering so pathetic a contrast, by its peaceful silence, to the agitations of their lives; and that there, amidst thoughts which by right were all due and dedicated
                                         “to heaven,
One human tear should drop and be forgiven.”
We may properly close this subject of Abelard and Eloisa by citing, in English, the solemn Latin inscription placed in the last century, six hundred years after their departure from earth, over their common remains. They were buried
[Page 68]
in the same grave. Abelard dying first by a few weeks more than twenty-one years, his tomb was opened again to admit the coffin of Eloisa; and the tradition at Quincy, the parish near Nogent-sur-Seine in which the monastery of the Paraclete is situated, was that at the moment of interment Abelard opened his arms to receive the impassioned creature that once had loved him so frantically, and whom he had loved with a remorse so memorable. The epitaph is singularly solemn in its brief simplicity, considering that it came from Paris, and from academic wits: “Here, under the same marble slab, lie the founder of this monastery, Peter Abelard, and its earliest Abbess, Heloisa—once united in studies, in love, in their unhappy nuptial engagements, and in penitential sorrow; but now (our hope is) reunited for ever in bliss.”
The Satires of Pope, and,—what under another name are satires, viz. his Moral Epistles ,—offer a second variety of evidence to his voluptuous indolence. They offend against philosophic truth more heavily than the Essay on Man; but not in the same way. The Essay on Man sins chiefly by want of central principle, and by want therefore of all coherency amongst the separate thoughts. But, taken as separate thoughts, viewed in the light of fragments and brilliant aphorisms, the majority of the passages have a mode of truth; not of truth central and coherent, but of truth angular and splintered. The Satires, on the other hand, were of false origin. They arose in a sense of talent for caustic effects, unsupported by any satiric heart. Pope had neither the malice (except in the most fugitive form) which thirsts for leaving wounds, nor, on the other hand, the deep moral indignation which burns in men whom Providence has from time to time armed with scourges for cleansing the sanctuaries of truth or justice. He was contented enough with society as he found it: bad it might be, but it was good enough for him : and it was the merest selfdelusion if at any moment the instinct of glorying in his satiric mision (the magnificabo apostolatum meum ) persuaded him that in his case it might be said— Facit indignatio versum . The indignation of Juvenal was not always very noble in its origin, or pure in its purpose: it was sometimes
[Page 69]
mean in its quality, false in its direction, extravagant in its expression: but it was tremendous in the roll of its thunders, and as withering as the scowl of a Mephistopheles. Pope, having no such internal principle of wrath boiling in his breast, being really (if one must speak the truth) in the most pacific and charitable frame of mind towards all scoundrels whatever except such as might take it into their heads to injure a particular Twickenham grotto, was unavoidably a hypocrite of the first magnitude when he affected (or sometimes really conceited himself) to be in a dreadful passion with offenders as a body. It provokes fits of laughter, in a man who knows Pope's real nature, to watch him in the process of brewing the storm that spontaneously will not come; whistling, like a mariner, for a wind to fill his satiric sails; and pumping up into his face hideous grimaces in order to appear convulsed with histrionic rage. Pope should have been counselled never to write satire, except on those evenings when he was suffering horribly from indigestion. By this means the indignation would have been ready-made. The rancour against all mankind would have been sincere; and there would have needed to be no extra expense in getting up the steam. As it is, the short puffs of anger, the uneasy snorts of fury in Pope's satires, give one painfully the feeling of a locomotive-engine with unsound lungs. Passion of any kind may become in some degree ludicrous, when disproportioned to its exciting occasions. But it is never entirely ludicrous until it is self-betrayed as counterfeit. Sudden collapses of the manufactured wrath, sudden oblivion of the criminal, announce Pope's as always counterfeit.
Meantime insincerity is contagious. One falsehood draws on another. And, having begun by taking a station of moral censorship which was in the uttermost degree a self-delusion, Pope went on to other self-delusions in reading history the most familiar, or in reporting facts the most notorious. Warburton had more to do with Pope's satires as an original suggester, 11 and not merely as a commentator, than with any other section of his works. Pope and he
[Page 70]
hunted in couples over this field: and those who know the absolute craziness of Warburton's mind, the perfect frenzy and lymphaticus error which possessed him for leaving all high-roads of truth and simplicity, in order to trespass over hedge and ditch after coveys of shy paradoxes, cannot be surprised that Pope's good sense should often have quitted him under such guidance.—There is, amongst the earliest poems of Wordsworth, one which has interested many readers by its mixed strain of humour and tenderness. It describes two thieves who act in concert with each other. One is a very aged man, and the other is his great-grandson of three years old:
“There are ninety good years of fair and foul weather
Between them, and both go a-stealing together.”
What reconciles the reader to this social iniquity is the imperfect accountability of the parties,—the one being far advanced in dotage, and the other an infant. And thus
“Into what sin soever the couple may fall,
This child but half-knows it, and that not at all.” 12
Nobody besides suffers from their propensities: since the child's mother makes good in excess all their depredations; and nobody is duped for an instant by their gross attempts at fraud; no anger or displeasure attends their continual buccaneering expeditions; on the contrary,
“Wherever they carry their plots and their wiles,
Every face in the village is dimpled with smiles.”
There was not the same disparity of years between Pope and Warburton as between old Daniel and his descendant
[Page 71]
in the third generation: Warburton was but ten years younger. And there was also this difference, that in the case of the two thieves neither was official ringleader: on the contrary, they took it turn about; great-grandpapa was ringleader to-day, and the little great-grandson to-morrow:
“Each in his turn was both leader and led”:
whereas, in the connexion of the two literary accomplices, the Doctor was latterly always the instigator to any outrage on good sense, and Pope, from mere habit of deference to the Doctor's theology and theological wig, as well as from gratitude for the Doctor's pugnacity in his defence (since Warburton really was as good as a bull-dog in protecting Pope's advance or retreat), followed with docility the leading of his reverend friend into any excess of folly. It is true that oftentimes in earlier days Pope had run into scrapes from his own heedlessness, and the Doctor had not the merit of suggesting the escapade , but only of defending it; which he always does (as sailors express it) “with a will”: for he never shows his teeth so much, or growls so ferociously, as when he suspects the case to be desperate. But in the Satires, although the original absurdity comes forward in the text of Pope, and the Warburtonian note in defence is apparently no more than an afterthought of the good Doctor in his usual style of threatening to cudgel anybody who disputes his friend's assertion, yet sometimes the thought expressed and adorned by the poet had been prompted by the divine. This only can account for the savage crotchets, paradoxes, and conceits which disfigure Pope's later edition of his Satires.
Truth, even of the most appreciable order, truth of history, goes to wreck continually under the perversities of Pope's satire applied to celebrated men; and, as to the higher truth of philosophy, it was still less likely to survive amongst the struggles for striking effects and startling contrasts. But worse by far are Pope's satiric sketches of women, as carrying the same outrages on good sense to a far greater excess; and, as these expose more brightly the false principles on which he worked, and have really been the chief ground of tainting Pope's memory with the reputation
[Page 72]
of a woman-hater (which he was not ), they are worthy of separate notice.
It is painful to follow a man of genius through a succession of inanities descending into absolute nonsense, and of vulgar fictions sometimes terminating in brutalities. These are harsh words, but not harsh enough by half as applied to Pope's gallery of female portraits. What is the key to his failure? It is simply that, throughout this whole satiric section, not one word is spoken in sincerity of heart, or with any vestige of self-belief. The case was one of those, so often witnessed, where either the indiscretion of friends, or some impulse of erring vanity in the writer, had put him upon undertaking a task in which he had too little natural interest to have either thought upon it with originality, or observed upon it with fidelity. Sometimes the mere coercion of system drives a man into such a folly. He treats a subject which branches into A, B, and C. Having discussed A and B, upon which he really had something to offer, he thinks it necessary to integrate his work by going forward to C, on which he knows nothing at all, and,—what is even worse,—for which, in his heart, he cares nothing at all. Fatal is all falsehood. Nothing is so sure to betray a man into the abject degradation of self-exposure as pretending to a knowledge which he has not, or to an enthusiasm which is counterfeit. By whatever mistake Pope found himself pledged to write upon the characters of women, it was singularly unfortunate that he had begun by denying to women any characters at all,—
“Matter too soft a lasting mark to bear,
And best distinguished by black, brown, or fair.”
Well for him if he had stuck to that liberal doctrine: “Least said, soonest mended.” And much he could not easily have said upon a subject that he had pronounced all but a nonentity. In Van Troil's work, or in Horrebow's, upon Iceland, there is a well-known chapter regularly booked in the index— concerning the Snakes of Iceland . This is the title, the running rubric; and the body of the chapter consists of these words—“There are no snakes in Iceland.” That chapter is soon studied, and furnishes very little opening
[Page 73]
for footnotes or supplements. Some people have thought that Mr. Van T. might, with advantage, have amputated this unsnaky chapter on snakes; but, at least, nobody can accuse him of forgetting his own extermination of snakes from Iceland, and proceeding immediately to describe such horrible snakes as eye had never beheld amongst the afflictions of the island. Snakes there are none, he had protested; and, true to his word, the faithful man never wanders into any description of Icelandic snakes. Not so our satiric poet. He, with Mahometan liberality, had denied characters ( i.e. souls) to women. “Most women,” he says, “have no character at all” 13 ; yet, for all that, finding himself pledged to treat this very subject of female characters, he introduces us to a museum of monsters in that department, such as few fancies could create, and no logic can rationally explain. What was he to do? He had entered upon a theme, he had pledged himself to a chase, on which, as the result has shown, he had not one solitary thought—good, bad, or indifferent. Total bankruptcy was impending. Yet he was aware of a deep interest connected with this section of his satires; and, to meet this interest, he invented what was pungent when he found nothing to record which was true.
It is a consequence of this desperate resource—this plunge into absolute fiction—that the true objection to Pope's satiric sketches of the other sex ought not to arise amongst women, as the people that suffered by his malice,
[Page 74]
but amongst readers generally, as the people that suffered by his fraud. He has promised one thing, and done another. He has promised a chapter in the zoology of nature, and he gives us a chapter in the fabulous zoology of the Heralds' College. A tigress is not much within ordinary experience; still there is such a creature; and, in default of a better choice,—that is, of a choice settling on a more familiar object,—we are content to accept a good description of a tigress. We are reconciled; but we are not reconciled to a description, however spirited, of a basilisk. A viper might do; but not, if you please, a dragoness or a harpy. The describer knows, as well as any of us the spectators know, that he is romancing; the incredulus odi overmasters us all; and we cannot submit to be detained by a picture which, according to the shifting humour of the poet, angry or laughing, is a lie where it is not a jest, is an affront to the truth of nature where it is not confessedly an extravagance of drollery. In a playful fiction we can submit with pleasure to the most enormous exaggerations; but then they must be offered as such. These of Pope's are not so offered, but as serious portraits; and in that character they affect us as odious and malignant libels. The malignity was not real,—as indeed nothing was real,—but a condiment for hiding insipidity. Let us examine two or three of them, equally with a view to the possibility of the object described and to the merits of the description.
“How soft is Silia! fearful to offend;
The frail one's advocate, the weak one's friend.
To her Calista proved her conduct nice;
And good Simplicius asks of her advice.”
Here we have the general outline of Silia's character; not particularly striking, but intelligible. She has a suavity of disposition that accommodates itself to all infirmities. And the worst thing one apprehends in her is—falseness: people with such honeyed breath for present frailties are apt to exhale their rancour upon them when a little out of hearing. But really now this is no foible of Silia's. One likes her very well, and would be glad of her company to tea. For the dramatic reader knows who Calista is; and, if Silia has
[Page 75]
indulgence for her , she must be a thoroughly tolerant creature. Where is her fault, then? You shall hear—
“Sudden she storms! she raves!—You tip the wink;
But spare your censure; Silia does not drink.
All eyes may see from what the change arose:
All eyes may see—[see what?]—a pimple on her nose.”
Silia, the dulcet, is suddenly transformed into Silia the fury. But why? The guest replies to that question by winking at his fellow-guest; which most atrocious of vulgarities in act is expressed by the most odiously vulgar of phrases—he tips the wink—meaning to tip an insinuation that Silia is intoxicated. Not so, says the poet—drinking is no fault of hers —everybody may see [why not the winker then?] that what upsets her temper is a pimple on the nose. Let us understand you, Mr. Pope. A pimple!—what! do you mean to say that pimples jump up on ladies’ faces at the unfurling of a fan? If they really did so in the 12th of George II, and a lady, not having a pimple on leaving her dressing-room, might grow one whilst taking tea, then we think that a saint might be excused for storming a little. But how is it that the wretch who winks does not see the pimple, the causa teterrima of the sudden wrath, and Silia, who has no looking-glass at her girdle, does ? And then who is it that Silia “storms” at—the company, or the pimple? If at the company, we cannot defend her; but, if at the pimple—oh, by all means—storm and welcome—she can't say anything worse than it deserves. Wrong or right, however, what moral does Silia illustrate more profound than this—that a particular lady, otherwise very amiable, falls into a passion upon suddenly finding her face disfigured? But then one remembers the song—“ My face is my fortune, sir, she said, sir, she said ”—it is a part of every woman's fortune, so long as she is young. Now to find one's fortune dilapidating by changes so rapid as this—pimples rising as suddenly as April clouds—is far too trying a calamity that a little fret-fulness should merit either reproach or sneer. Dr. Johnson's opinion was that the man who cared little for dinner could not be reasonably supposed to care much for anything. More truly it may be said that the woman who is reckless
[Page 76]
about her face must be an unsafe person to trust with a secret. But, seriously, what moral, what philosophic thought, can be exemplified by a case so insipid, and so imperfectly explained as this?
Next comes the case of Narcissa:—
“ ‘Odious! in woollen ? 14 'Twould a saint provoke,’
Were the last words that poor Narcissa spoke.
‘No, let a charming chintz and Brussels lace
Wrap my cold limbs and shade my lifeless face;
One would not sure be frightful when one's dead:
And, Betty, give this cheek a little red.’ ”
Well, what's the matter now? What's amiss with Narcissa that a satirist must be called in to hold an inquest upon the corpse, and take Betty's evidence against her mistress? Upon hearing any such question, Pope would have started up in the character (very unusual with him ) of religious censor, and demanded whether one approved of a woman's fixing her last dying thought upon the attractions of a person so soon to dwell with darkness and worms? Was that right —to provide for coquetting in her coffin? Why, no, not strictly right: its impropriety cannot be denied; but what strikes one even more is the suspicion that it may be a lie. Be this as it may, there are two insurmountable objections to the case of Narcissa, even supposing it not fictitious: viz. first, that so far as it offends at all, it offends the religious sense, and not any sense of which satire takes charge; secondly, that, without reference to the special functions of satire, any form of poetry whatever, or any mode of moral censure, concerns itself not at all with total anomalies. If the anecdote of Narcissa were other than a fiction, then it was a case too peculiar and idiosyncratic to furnish a poetic illustration: neither moral philosophy nor poetry condescends to the monstrous or the abnormal; both one and the other deal with the catholic and the representative.
There is another Narcissa amongst Pope's tulip-beds of ladies, who is even more open to criticism—because offering not so much an anomaly in one single trait of her character
[Page 77]
as an utter anarchy in all. Flavia and Philomede again present the same multitude of features with the same absence of all central principle for locking them into unity. They must have been distracting to themselves; and they are distracting to us a century later. Philomede , by the way, represents the second Duchess of Marlborough, 15 daughter of the great Duke. And these names lead us naturally to Sarah, the original, and (one may call her) the historical Duchess, who is libelled under the name of Atossa . This character amongst all Pope's satiric sketches has been celebrated the most, with the single exception of his Atticus . But the Atticus rested upon a different basis: it was true; and it was noble. Addison really had the infirmities of envious jealousy, of simulated friendship, and of treacherous collusion with his friend's enemies, which Pope imputed to him under the happy parisyllabic name of Atticus; and the mode of imputation, the tone of expostulation—indignant as regarded Pope's own injuries, but yet full of respect for Addison, and even of sorrowful tenderness: all this, in combination with the interest attached to a feud between two men so illustrious, has sustained the Atticus as a classic remembrance in satiric literature. But the Atossa is a mere chaos of incompatibilities, thrown together as into some witch's cauldron. The witch, however, had sometimes an unaffected malignity, a sincerity of venom in her wrath, which acted chemically as a solvent for combining the heterogeneous ingredients in her kettle; whereas the want of truth and earnestness in Pope leaves the incongruities in his kettle of description to their natural incoherent operation on the reader. We have a great love for the great Duchess of Marlborough, though too young by a hundred years 16 or
[Page 78]
so to have been that true and faithful friend which, as contemporaries, we might have been.
What we love Sarah for is partly that she has been ill-used by all subsequent authors, one copying from another a fury against her which even in the first of these authors was not real. And a second thing which we love is her very violence, qualified as it was. Sulphureous vapours of wrath rose up in columns from the crater of her tempestuous nature against him that deeply offended her; but she neglected petty wrongs. Wait, however; let the volcanic lava have time to cool; and all returned to absolute repose. It has been said that she did not write her own book. We are of a different opinion. The mutilations of the book were from other and inferior hands; but the main texture of the narrative and of the comments was, and must have been, from herself, since there could have been no adequate motive for altering them, and nobody else could have had the same motive for uttering them. 17 It is singular that in the case of the Duchess, as well as that of the Lady M. W. Montagu, the same two men without concert were the original aggressors amongst the gens de plume : viz. Pope, and subsequently, next in the succession to him , Horace Walpole. Pope suffered more from his own libellous assault upon Atossa , through a calumny against himself rebounding from it, than Atossa could have done from the point-blank shot of fifty such batteries. The calumny circulated was that he had been bribed by the Duchess with a thousand pounds to suppress the character—which pocketing of a bribe of itself was bad enough; but, as the consummation of baseness, it was added, that after all, in spite of the bribe, he caused it to be published.
[Page 79]
This calumny we believe to have been utterly without foundation. It is repelled by Pope's character, incapable of any act so vile, and by his position, needing no bribes. But what we wish to add is that the calumny is equally repelled by Sarah's character, incapable of any propitiation so abject. Pope wanted no thousand pounds; but neither did Sarah want his clemency. He would have rejected the £1000 cheque with scorn; but she would have scorned to offer it. Pope cared little for Sarah; but Sarah cared nothing at all for Pope.
What is offensive, and truly so, to every generous reader, may be expressed in two items: first, not pretending to have been himself injured by the Duchess, Pope was in this instance meanly adopting some third person's malice,—which sort of intrusion into other people's quarrels is a sycophantic act, even where it may not have rested upon a sycophantic motive; secondly, that even as a second-hand malice it is not sincere. More shocking than the malice is the self-imposture of the malice: in the very act of puffing out his cheeks, like Æolus, with ebullient fury, and conceiting himself to be in a passion perfectly diabolic, Pope is really unmoved, or angry only by favour of dyspepsy; and at a word of kind flattery from Sarah (whom he was quite the man to love), though not at the clink of her thousand guineas, he would have fallen at her feet, and kissed her beautiful hand with rapture. To enter a house of hatred as a junior partner, and to take the stock of malice at a valuation—(we copy from advertisements) — that is an ignoble act. But then how much worse in the midst of all this unprovoked wrath,—real as regards the persecution which it meditates, but false as the flatteries of a slave in relation to its pretended grounds,—for the spectator to find its malice counterfeit, and the fury only a plagiarism from some personated fury in an opera!
There is no truth in Pope's satiric sketches of women— not even colourable truth; but, if there were, how frivolous, how hollow, to erect into solemn monumental protestations against the whole female sex what, if examined, turn out to be pure casual eccentricities, or else personal idiosyncrasies, or else foibles shockingly caricatured, but, above all, to be such foibles as could not have connected themselves with sincere feelings of indignation in any rational mind.
[Page 80]
The length and breadth (almost we might say the depth ) of the shallowness which characterises Pope's philosophy cannot be better reflected than from the four well-known lines—
“For modes of faith let graceless zealots fight;
His can't be wrong whose life is in the right:
For forms of government let fools contest;
Whate'er is best administered is best.”
In the first couplet what Pope says is that a life which is irreproachable on a human scale of appreciation neutralises and practically cancels all possible errors of creed, opinion, or theory. But this schism between the moral life of man and his moral faith, which takes for granted that either may possibly be true whilst the other is entirely false, can wear a moment's plausibility only by understanding life in so limited a sense as the sum of a man's external actions appreciable by man. He whose life is in the right cannot, says Pope, in any sense calling for blame, have a wrong faith; that is, if his life were right, his creed might be disregarded. But the answer is—that his life, according to any adequate idea of life in a moral creature, cannot be in the right unless in so far as it bends to the influences of a true faith. How feeble a conception must that man have of the infinity which lurks in a human spirit who can persuade himself that its total capacities of life are exhaustible by the few gross acts incident to social relations or open to human valuation! An act which may be necessarily limited and without opening for variety may involve a large variety of motives; motives again, meaning grounds of action that are distinctly recognised for such, may (numerically speaking) amount to nothing at all when compared with the absolutely infinite influxes of feeling or combinations of feeling that vary the thoughts of man; and the true internal acts of moral man are his thoughts, his yearnings, his aspirations, his sympathies or repulsions of heart. This is the life of man as it is appreciable by heavenly eyes. The scale of an alphabet —how narrow is that! Four or six and twenty letters, and all is finished. Syllables range through a wider compass. Words are yet more than syllables. But what are words to thoughts? Every word has a thought corresponding to it,
[Page 81]
so that not by so much as one solitary counter can the words outrun the thoughts. But every thought has not a word corresponding to it: so that the thoughts may outrun the words by many a thousand counters. In a developed nature they do so. But what are the thoughts when set against the modifications of thoughts by feelings, hidden even from him that feels them, or against the inter-combinations of such modifications with others—complex with complex, decomplex with decomplex? These can be unravelled by no human eye. This is the infinite music that God only can read upon the vast harp of the human heart. Some have fancied that musical combinations might in time be exhausted. A new Mozart might be impossible. All that he could do might already have been done. Music laughs at that , as the sea laughs at palsy, as the morning laughs at old age and wrinkles. But a harp, though a world in itself, is but a narrow world in comparison with the world of a human heart.
Now these thoughts, tinctured subtly with the perfume and colouring of human affections, make up the sum of what merits κατ ἐξοχην the name of life ; and these in a vast proportion depend for their possibilities of truth upon the degree of approach which the thinker makes to the appropriation of a pure faith. A man is thinking all day long, and putting thoughts into words: he is acting comparatively seldom. But are any man's thoughts brought into conformity with the openings to truth that a faith like the Christian's faith suggests? Far from it. Probably there never was one thought, from the foundation of the earth, that has passed through the mind of man which did not offer some blemish, some sorrowful shadow of pollution, when it came up for review before a heavenly tribunal,—that is, supposing it a thought entangled at all with human interests or human passions. But it is the key in which the thoughts move that determines the stage of moral advancement. So long as we are human, many among the numerous and evanescent elements that enter (half-observed or not observed at all) into our thoughts cannot but be tainted. But the governing, the predominant element it is which gives the character and tendency to the thought; and this must become such, must become a governing element, through the quality of the ideas
[Page 82]
deposited in the heart by the quality of the religious faith. One pointed illustration of this suggests itself from another poem of Pope's, in which he reiterates his shallow doctrine. In his Universal Prayer he informs us that it can matter little whether we pray to Jehovah or to Jove, so long as in either case we pray to the First Cause. To contemplate God under that purely ontological relation to the world would have little more operative value for what is most important in man than if he prayed to Gravitation. And it would have been more honest in Pope to say, as virtually he has said in the couplet under examination, that it can matter little whether man prays at all to any being. It deepens the scandal of this sentiment, coming from a poet professing Christianity, that a clergyman (holding preferment in the English Church),—viz. Dr. Joseph Warton,—justifies Pope for this Pagan opinion, upon the ground that an ancient philosopher had uttered the same opinion long before. What sort of philosopher? A Christian? No: but a Pagan. What then is the value of the justification? To a Pagan it could be no blame that he should avow a reasonable Pagan doctrine. In Irish phrase, it was “true for him .” Amongst gods that were all utterly alienated from any scheme of moral government, all equally remote from the executive powers for sustaining such a government, so long as there was a practical anarchy and rivalship amongst themselves, there could be no sufficient reason for addressing vows to one rather than to another. The whole pantheon collectively could do nothing for moral influences; a fortiori , no separate individual amongst them. Pope indirectly confesses this elsewhere by his own impassioned expression of Christian feelings, though implicitly denying it here by his mere understanding. For he reverberates elsewhere, by deep echoes, that power in Christianity which even in a legendary tale he durst not on mere principles of good sense and taste have ascribed to Paganism. For instance, how could a God, having no rebellion to complain of in man, pretend to any occasion of large forgiveness of man, or of framing means for reconciling this forgiveness with his own attribute of perfect holiness? What room, therefore, for ideals of mercy, tenderness, long-suffering, under any Pagan religion—under any
[Page 83]
worship of Jove? How again from gods disfigured by fleshly voluptuousness in every mode could any countenance be derived to an awful ideal of purity? Accordingly we find that even among the Romans (the most advanced, as regards moral principle, of all heathen nations) neither the deep fountain of benignity, nor that of purity, was unsealed in man's heart. So much of either was sanctioned as could fall within the purposes of the magistrate; but beyond that level neither fountain could have been permitted to throw up its column of water, nor could, in fact, have had any impulse to sustain it in ascending,—and not merely because it would have been repressed by ridicule as a deliration of the human mind, but also because it would have been frowned upon gravely by the very principle of the Roman polity, as wandering away from civic objects. Even for so much of these great restorative ventilations as Rome enjoyed, she was indebted not to her religion, but to elder forces acting in spite of her religion, viz. the original law written upon the human heart. Now, on the other hand, Christianity has left a separate system of ideals amongst men, which (as regards their development) are continually growing in authority. Waters, after whatever course of wandering, rise to the level of their original springs. Christianity lying so far above all other fountains of religious influence, no wonder that its irrigations rise to altitudes otherwise unknown, and from which the distribution to every level of society becomes comparatively easy. Those men are reached oftentimes—choosing or not choosing—by the healing streams who have not sought them nor even recognised them. Infidels of the most determined class talk in Christian lands the morals of Christianity, and exact that morality with their hearts, constantly mistaking it for a morality co-extensive with man; and why? Simply from having been moulded unawares by its universal pressure through infancy, childhood, manhood, in the nursery, in the school, in the market-place. Pope himself, not by system or by affectation an infidel, nor in any coherent sense a doubter, but a careless and indolent assenter to such doctrines of Christianity as his own Church prominently put forward, or as social respectability seemed to enjoin,—Pope, therefore, so far a very lukewarm Christian,
[Page 84]
was yet unconsciously to himself searched profoundly by the Christian types of purity. This we may read in his
“Hark! they whisper; Angels say,
Sister Spirit, come away!”
Or, again, as some persons read the great lessons of spiritual ethics more pathetically in those that have transgressed them than in those that have been faithful to the end—read them in the Magdalen that fades away in penitential tears rather than in the virgin martyr triumphant on the scaffold—we may see in his own Eloisa, and in her fighting with the dread powers let loose upon her tempestuous soul, how profoundly Pope also had drunk from the streams of Christian sentiment through which a new fountain of truth had ripened a new vegetation upon earth. What was it that Eloisa fought with? What power afflicted her trembling nature, that any Pagan religions could have evoked? The human love “the nympholepsy of the fond despair,” might have existed in a Vestal Virgin of ancient Rome; but in the Vestal what counter-influence could have come into conflict with the passion of love through any operation whatever of religion? None of any ennobling character that could reach the Vestal's own heart. The way in which religion connected itself with the case was through a traditional superstition —not built upon any fine spiritual sense of female chastity as dear to heaven, but upon a gross fear of alienating a tutelary goddess by offering an imperfect sacrifice. This sacrifice, the sacrifice of the natural household 18 charities in a few injured women on the altar of the goddess, was selfish in all its stages—selfish in the dark deity that could be pleased by the sufferings of a human being simply as sufferings, and not at all under any fiction that they were voluntary ebullitions of religious devotion—selfish in the senate and people who demanded these sufferings as a ransom paid through sighs and tears for their ambition—selfish in the Vestal herself, as sustained altogether by fear of a punishment
[Page 85]
too terrific to face, sustained therefore by the meanest principle in her nature. But in Eloisa how grand is the collision between deep religious aspirations and the persecuting phantoms of her undying human passion! The Vestal feared to be walled up alive—abandoned to the pangs of hunger, to the trepidations of darkness, to the echoes of her own lingering groans, to the torments perhaps of frenzy rekindling at intervals the decaying agonies of flesh. Was that what Eloisa feared? Punishment she had none to apprehend: the crime was past, and remembered only by the criminals; there was none to accuse but herself; there was none to judge but God. Wherefore should Eloisa fear? Wherefore and with what should she fight? She fought by turns against herself and against God, against her human nature and against her spiritual yearnings. How grand were the mysteries of her faith, how gracious and forgiving its condescensions! How deep had been her human love, how imperishable its remembrance on earth! “What is it,” the Roman Vestal would have said, “that this Christian lady is afraid of? What is the phantom that she seems to see?” Vestal! it is not fear, but grief. She sees an immeasurable heaven that seems to touch her eyes,—so near is she to its love. Suddenly, an Abelard—the glory of his race—appears, that seems to touch her lips. The heavens recede and diminish to a starry point twinkling in an unfathomable abyss; they are all but lost for her . Fire it is in Eloisa that searches fire: the holy that fights with the earthly; fire that cleanses with fire that consumes: like cavalry the two fires wheel and counterwheel, advancing and retreating, charging and countercharging, through and through each other. Eloisa trembles, but she trembles as a guilty creature before a tribunal unveiled within the secrecy of her own nature: there was no such trembling in the heathen worlds, for there was no such secret tribunal. Eloisa fights with a shadowy enemy: there was no such fighting for Roman Vestals, because not all the temples of our earth (which is the crowned Vesta), no, nor all the glory of her altars, nor all the pomp of her cruelties, could cite from the depths of a human spirit any such fearful shadow as Christian faith evokes from an afflicted conscience.
[Page 86]
Pope, therefore, wheresoever his heart speaks loudly, shows how deep had been his early impressions from Christianity. That is shown in his intimacy with Crashaw, in his Eloisa, in his Messiah, in his adaptation to Christian purposes of the Dying Adrian, &c. 19 It is remarkable, also, that Pope betrays, in all places where he has occasion to argue about Christianity, how much grander and more faithful to that great theme were the subconscious perceptions of his heart than the explicit commentaries of his understanding. He, like so many others, was unable to read or interpret the testimonies of his own heart,—an unfathomed deep over which diviner agencies brood than are legible to the intellect. The cipher written on his heaven-visited heart was deeper than his understanding could interpret.
If the question were asked, What ought to have been the best among Pope's poems? most people would answer, the Essay on Man . If the question were asked, What is the worst? all people of judgment would say, the Essay on Man . Whilst yet in its rudiments, this poem claimed the first place by the promise of its subject; when finished, by the utter failure of its execution, it fell into the last. The case possesses a triple interest: first, as illustrating the character of Pope modified by his situation; secondly, as illustrating the true nature of that “didactic” poetry to which this particular poem is usually referred; thirdly, as illustrating the anomalous condition to which a poem so grand in its ambition has been reduced by the double disturbance of its proper movement,—one disturbance through the position of Pope, another through his total misconception of didactic poetry.
First, as regards Pope's position. It may seem odd—but it is not so—that a man's social position should overrule his intellect. The scriptural denunciation of riches, as a snare
[Page 87]
to any man that is striving to rise above worldly views, applies not at all less to the intellect, and to any man seeking to ascend by some aërial arch of flight above ordinary intellectual efforts. Riches are fatal to those continuities of energy without which there is no success of that magnitude. Pope had £800 a year. That seems not so much. No, certainly not, supposing a wife and six children; but by accident Pope had no wife and no children. He was luxuriously at his ease; and this accident of his position in life fell in with a constitutional infirmity that predisposed him to indolence. Even his religious faith, by shutting him out from those public employments which else his great friends would have been too happy to obtain for him, aided his idleness, or sometimes invested it with a false character of conscientious self-denial. He cherished his religion too certainly as a plea for idleness. The result of all this was that in his habits of thinking and of study (if study we can call a style of reading so desultory as his ) Pope became a pure dilettante . In his intellectual eclecticism he was a mere epicure, toying with the delicacies and varieties of literature; revelling in the first bloom of moral speculations, but sated immediately; fastidiously retreating from all that threatened labour, or that exacted continuous attention; fathoming, throughout all his vagrancies amongst books, no foundation; filling up no chasms; and, with all his fertility of thought, expanding no germs of new life.
This career of luxurious indolence was the result of early luck which made it possible, and of bodily constitution which made it tempting. And, when we remember his youthful introduction to the highest circles in the metropolis, where he never lost his footing, we cannot wonder that, without any sufficient motive for resistance, he should have sunk passively under his constitutional propensities, and should have fluttered amongst the flower-beds of literature or philosophy far more in the character of a libertine butterfly for casual enjoyment than of a hard-working bee pursuing a premeditated purpose.
Such a character, strengthened by such a situation, would at any rate have disqualified Pope for composing a work severely philosophic, or where philosophy did more than
[Page 88]
throw a coloured light of pensiveness upon some sentimental subject. If it were necessary that the philosophy should enter substantially into the very texture of the poem, furnishing its interest and prescribing its movement, in that case Pope's combining and theorising faculty would have shrunk as from the labour of building a pyramid. And woe to him where it did not , as really happened in the case of the Essay on Man. For his faculty of execution was under an absolute necessity of shrinking in horror from the enormous details of such an enterprise, to which so rashly he had pledged himself. He was sure to find himself, as find himself he did, landed in the most dreadful embarrassment upon reviewing his own work,—a work which, when finished, was not even begun; whose arches wanted their key-stones; whose parts had no coherency; and whose pillars, in the very moment of being thrown open to public view, were already crumbling into ruins. This utter prostration of Pope in a work so ambitious as an Essay on Man—a prostration predetermined from the first by the personal circumstances which we have noticed—was rendered still more irresistible, in the second place, by the general misconception in which Pope shared as to the very meaning of “didactic” poetry. Upon which point we pause to make an exposition of our own views.
What is didactic poetry? What does “didactic” mean when applied as a distinguishing epithet to such an idea as a poem? The predicate destroys the subject: it is a case of what logicians call contradictio in adjecto —the unsaying by means of an attribute the very thing which is the subject of that attribute you have just affirmed. No poetry can have the function of teaching. It is impossible that a variety of species should contradict the very purpose which contradistinguishes its genus . The several species differ partially, but not by the whole idea which differentiates their class. Poetry, or any one of the fine arts (all of which alike speak through the genial nature of man and his excited sensibilities), can teach only as nature teaches, as forests teach, as the sea teaches, as infancy teaches,—viz. by deep impulse, by hieroglyphic suggestion. Their teaching is not direct or explicit, but lurking, implicit, masked in deep
[Page 89]
incarnations. To teach formally and professedly is to abandon the very differential character and principle of poetry. If poetry could condescend to teach anything, it would be truths moral or religious. But even these it can utter only through symbols and actions. The great moral, for instance, the last result, of the Paradise Lost is once formally announced,— viz. to justify the ways of God to man ; but it teaches itself only by diffusing its lesson through the entire poem in the total succession of events and purposes: and even this succession teaches it only when the whole is gathered into unity by a reflex act of meditation, just as the pulsation of the physical heart can exist only when all the parts in an animal system are locked into one organisation.
To address the insulated understanding is to lay aside the Prospero's robe of poetry. The objection, therefore, to didactic poetry, as vulgarly understood, would be fatal even if there were none but this logical objection derived from its definition. To be in self-contradiction is, for any idea whatever, sufficiently to destroy itself. But it betrays a more obvious and practical contradiction when a little searched. If the true purpose of a man's writing a didactic poem were to teach, by what suggestion of idiocy should he choose to begin by putting on fetters? wherefore should the simple man volunteer to handcuff and manacle himself, were it only by the encumbrances of metre, and perhaps of rhyme? But these he will find the very least of his encumbrances. A far greater exists in the sheer necessity of omitting in any poem a vast variety of details, and even capital sections of the subject, unless they will bend to purposes of ornament. Now this collision between two purposes,—the purpose of use in mere teaching, and the purpose of poetic delight,— shows, by the uniformity of its solution, which of the two is the true purpose, and which the merely ostensible purpose. Had the true purpose been instruction, the moment that this was found incompatible with a poetic treatment, as soon as it was seen that the sound education of the reader-pupil could not make way without loitering to gather poetic flowers, the stern cry of “duty” would oblige the poet to remember that he had dedicated himself to a didactic
[Page 90]
mission, and that he differed from other poets, as a monk from other men, by his vows of self-surrender to harsh ascetic functions. But, on the contrary, in the very teeth of this rule, wherever such a collision does really take place, and one or other of the supposed objects must give way, it is always the vulgar object of teaching (the pedagogue's object) which goes to the rear, whilst the higher object of poetic emotion moves on triumphantly. In reality not one didactic poet has ever yet attempted to use any parts or processes of the particular art which he made his theme, unless in so far as they seemed susceptible of poetic treatment, and only because they seemed so. Look at the poem of Cyder by Philips, of the Fleece by Dyer, 20 or (which is a still weightier example) at the Georgics of Virgil,—does any of these poets show the least anxiety for the correctness of your principles, or the delicacy of your manipulations, in the worshipful arts they affect to teach? No; but they pursue these arts through every stage that offers any attractions of beauty. And, in the very teeth of all anxiety for teaching, if there existed traditionally any very absurd way of doing a thing which happened to be eminently picturesque, and if, opposed to this, there were some improved mode that had recommended itself to poetic hatred by being dirty and ugly, the poet (if a good one) would pretend never to have heard of this disagreeable improvement. Or, if obliged, by some rival poet, not absolutely to ignore it, he would allow that such a thing could be done, but hint that it was hateful to the Muses or Graces, and very likely to breed a pestilence.
This subordination of the properly didactic function to the poetic,—which leaves the old essential distinction of poetry (viz. its sympathy with the genial motions of man's heart) to override all accidents of special variation, and shows that the essence of poetry never can be set aside by its casual modifications, —will be compromised by some loose thinkers, under the idea that in didactic poetry the element of instruction is, in fact, one element, though subordinate and secondary. Not at all. What we are denying is that the element of instruction enters at all into didactic poetry. The subject of
[Page 91]
the Georgics, for instance, is Rural Economy as practised by Italian farmers; but Virgil not only omits altogether innumerable points of instruction insisted on as articles of religious necessity by Varro, Cato, Columella, &c., but, even as to those instructions which he does communicate, he is careless whether they are made technically intelligible or not. He takes very little pains to keep you from capital mistakes in practising his instructions; but he takes good care that you shall not miss any strong impression for the eye or the heart to which the rural process, or rural scene, may naturally lead. He pretends to give you a lecture on farming, in order to have an excuse for carrying you all round the beautiful farm. He pretends to show you a good plan for a farm-house, as the readiest means of veiling his impertinence in showing you the farmer's wife and her rosy children. It is an excellent plea for getting a peep at the bonny milkmaids to propose an inspection of a model dairy. You pass through the poultry-yard, under whatever pretence, in reality to see the peacock and his harem. And so, on to the very end, the pretended instruction is but in secret the connecting tie which holds together the laughing flowers going off from it to the right and to the left; whilst, if ever at intervals this prosy thread of pure didactics is brought forward more obtrusively, it is so by way of foil, to make more effective upon the eye the prodigality of the floral magnificence.
We affirm, therefore, that the didactic poet is so far from seeking even a secondary or remote object in the particular points of information which he may happen to communicate, that much rather he would prefer the having communicated none at all. We will explain ourselves by means of a little illustration from Pope, which will at the same time furnish us with a miniature type of what we ourselves mean by a didactic poem, both in reference to what it is and to what it is not . In the Rape of the Lock there is a game at cards played, and played with a brilliancy of effect and felicity of selection, applied to the circumstances, which make it a sort of gem within a gem. 21 This game was not in the first edition
[Page 92]
of the poem, but was an afterthought of Pope's, laboured therefore with more than usual care. We regret that ombre , the game described, is no longer played, so that the entire skill with which the mimic battle is fought cannot be so fully appreciated as in Pope's days. The strategics have partly perished; which really Pope ought not to complain of, since he suffers only as Hannibal, Marius, Sertorius, suffered before him. Enough, however, survives of what will tell its own story. For what is it, let us ask, that a poet has to do in such a case, supposing that he were disposed to weave a didactic poem out of a pack of cards, as Vida has out of the chess-board? 22 In describing any particular game he does not seek to teach you that game—he postulates it as already known to you; but he relies upon separate resources. 1st, He will revive in the reader's eye, for picturesque effect, the well-known personal distinctions of the several kings, knaves, &c., their appearances and their powers. 2dly, He will choose some game in which he may display a happy selection applied to the chances and turns of fortune, to the manœuvres, to the situations of doubt, of brightening expectation, of sudden danger, of critical deliverance, or of final defeat. The interest of a war will be rehearsed: lis est de paupere regno —that is true; but the depth of the agitation on such occasions, whether at chess, at draughts, or at cards, is not measured of necessity by the grandeur of the stake; he selects, in short, whatever fascinates the eye or agitates the heart by mimicry of life; but, so far from teaching , he presupposes the reader already taught , in order that he may go along with the movement of the descriptions.
Now, in treating a subject so vast as that which Pope chose for his Essay, viz. MAN , this eclecticism ceases to be possible. Every part depends upon every other part: in such a nexus of truths, to insulate is to annihilate. Severed from each other, the parts lose their support, their coherence, their very meaning; you have no liberty to reject or choose.
[Page 93]
Besides, in treating the ordinary themes proper for what is called didactic poetry—say, for instance, that it were the art of rearing silkworms or bees, or suppose it to be horticulture, landscape-gardening, hunting, or hawking—rarely does there occur anything polemic; or, if a slight controversy does arise, it is easily hushed asleep—it is stated in a line, it is answered in a couplet. But in the themes of Lucretius and Pope everything is polemic—you move only through dispute, you prosper only by argument and never-ending controversy. There is not positively one capital proposition or doctrine about Man, about his origin, his nature, his relations to God, or his prospects, but must be fought for with energy, watched at every turn with vigilance, and followed into endless mazes, not under the choice of the writer, but under the inexorable dictation of the argument.
Such a poem, so unwieldy, whilst at the same time so austere in its philosophy, together with the innumerable polemic parts essential to its good faith and even to its evolution, would be absolutely unmanageable from excess and from disproportion, since often a secondary demur would occupy far more space than a principal section. Here lay the impracticable dilemma for Pope's Essay on Man. To satisfy the demands of the subject was to defeat the objects of poetry. To evade the demands in the way that Pope has done is to offer us a ruin for a palace. The very same dilemma existed for Lucretius, and with the very same result. The De Rerum Naturâ (which might, agreeably to its theme, have been entitled De Omnibus Rebus ), and the Essay on Man (which might equally have borne the Lucretian title De Rerum Naturâ ), are both, and from the same cause, fragments that could not have been completed. Both are accumulations of diamond-dust without principles of coherency. In a succession of pictures, such as usually form the materials of didactic poems, the slightest thread of interdependency is sufficient. But, in works essentially and everywhere argumentative and polemic, to omit the connecting links, as often as they are insusceptible of poetic effect, is to break up the unity of the parts, and to undermine the foundations, in what expressly offers itself as a systematic and architectural whole. Pope's poem has suffered even
[Page 94]
more than that of Lucretius from this want of cohesion. It is indeed the realisation of anarchy; and one amusing test of this may be found in the fact that different commentators have deduced from it the very opposite doctrines. In some instances this apparent antinomy is doubtful, and dependent on the ambiguities or obscurities of the expression. But in others it is fairly deducible; and the cause lies in the elliptical structure of the work: the ellipsis, or (as sometimes it may be called) the chasm, may be filled up in two different modes essentially hostile; and he that supplies the hiatus in effect determines the bias of the poem this way or that—to a religious or to a sceptical result. In this edition the commentary of Warburton has been retained; which ought certainly to have been dismissed. The essay is, in effect, a Hebrew word with the vowel-points omitted; and Warburton supplies one set of vowels, whilst Crousaz sometimes with equal right supplies a contradictory set.
As a whole, the edition before us is certainly the most agreeable of all that we possess. The fidelity of Mr. Roscoe to the interest of Pope's reputation contrasts pleasingly with the harshness at times of Bowles, and the reckless neutrality of Warton. In the editor of a great classic we view it as a virtue, wearing the grace of loyalty, that he should refuse to expose frailties or defects in a spirit of exultation. Mr. Roscoe's own notes are written with a peculiar good sense, temperance, and kind feeling. The only objection to them, —which applies, however, still more to the notes of the former editors,—is the want of compactness. They are not written under that austere instinct of compression and verbal parsimony, as the ideal merit in an annotator, which ought to govern all such ministerial labours in our days. Books are becoming too much the oppression of the intellect, and cannot endure any longer the accumulation of undigested commentaries, or that species of diffusion in editors which roots itself in laziness: the efforts of condensation and selection are painful; and they are luxuriously evaded by reprinting indiscriminately whole masses of notes—though often in substance reiterating each other. But the interests of readers clamorously call for the amendment of this system.
[Page 95]
The principle of selection must now be applied even to the text of great authors. It is no longer advisable to reprint the whole of either Dryden or Pope. Not that we would wish to see their works mutilated. Let such as are selected be printed in the fullest integrity of the text. But some have lost their interest 23 ; others, by the elevation of public morals since the days of those great wits, are felt to be now utterly unfit for general reading. Equally for the reader's sake and the poet's, the time has arrived when they may be advantageously retrenched; for they are painfully at war with those feelings of entire and honourable esteem with which all lovers of exquisite intellectual brilliancy must wish to surround the name and memory of Pope.
NOTES
1 [1] Appeared as the opening article in the North British Review for August 1848 (see ante, Vol. IV, pp. 14–15), in the form of a review of “The Works of Alexander Pope, Esquire. By W. Roscoe, Esq. A new edition. In eight vols. London, 1847”: reprinted by De Quincey in 1858 in vol. ix of his Collective Edition of his Writings. It was there entitled simply “Alexander Pope”; but, as that title has been already used for the biography of Pope which De Quincey contributed to the Encyclopædia Britannica, and which, though not reprinted by himself, has appeared in a previous volume of the present edition, the title “The Poetry of Pope” has been substituted, as more convenient and distinctive.—M.
2 [1] Charles I., for example, when Prince of Wales, and many others in his father's court, gained their known familiarity with Shakspere not through the original quartos, so slenderly diffused, nor through the first folio of 1623, but through the court representations of his chief dramas at Whitehall.
3 [2] What are called The Blue Books,—by which title are understood the folio Reports issued every session of Parliament by committees of the two Houses, and stitched into blue covers,—though often sneered at by the ignorant as so much waste paper, will be acknowledged gratefully by those who have used them diligently as the main wellheads of all accurate information as to the Great Britain of this day. As an immense depository of faithful (and not superannuated) statistics, they are indispensable to the honest student. But no man would therefore class the Blue Books as literature.
4 [1] “Heraclitus saith well in one of his enigmas, Dry light is ever the best. And certain it is that the light that a man receiveth by counsel from another is drier and purer than that which cometh from his own understanding and judgment; which is ever infused and drenched in his affections and customs.”—Bacon's Essay on Friendship.—M.
5 [1] The Canterbury Tales were not made public until 1380 or there-abouts; but the composition must have cost thirty or more years; not to mention that the work had probably been finished for some years before it was divulged.
6 [1] The reason why the broad distinctions between the two literatures of power and knowledge so little fix the attention lies in the fact that a vast proportion of books,—history, biography, travels, miscellaneous essays, &c.,—lying in a middle zone, confound these distinctions by interblending them. All that we call “amusement” or “entertainment” is a diluted form of the power belonging to passion, and also a mixed form; and, where threads of direct instruction intermingle in the texture with these threads of power, this absorption of the duality into one representative nuance neutralises the separate perception of either. Fused into a terium quid, or neutral state, they disappear to the popular eye as the repelling forces which, in fact, they are.
7 [1] And this purity of diction shows itself in many points arguing great vigilance of attention, and also great anxiety for using the language powerfully, as the most venerable of traditions, when treating the most venerable of subjects. For instance, the Bible never condescends to the mean colloquial preterites of chid for did chide, or writ for did write, but always uses the full dress word, chode and wrote. Pope might have been happier had he read his Bible more; but assuredly he would have improved his English. A question naturally arises how it was that the elder writers—Shakspere in particular (who had seen so little of higher society when he wrote his youthful poems of Lucrece and Adonis)—should have maintained so much purer a grammar? Dr. Johnson indeed, but most falsely, says that Shakspere's grammar is licentious. “The style of Shakspere” (these are the exact words of the Doctor in his preface) “was in itself ungrammatical, perplexed, and obscure.” An audacious misrepresentation! In the Doctor himself, a legislator for the language, we undertake to show not only more numerically of trespasses against grammar, but (which is worse still) more unscholarlike trespasses. Shakspere is singularly correct in grammar. One reason, we believe, was this:—From the Restoration of Charles II decayed the ceremonious exteriors of society. Stiffness and reserve melted away before the familiarity and impudence of French manners. Social meetings grew far more numerous as towns expanded; social pleasure far more began now to depend upon conversation; and conversation, growing less formal, quickened its pace. Hence came the call for rapid abbreviations: the 'tis and 'twas, the can't and don't, of the two post-Miltonic generations arose under this impulse; and the general impression has ever since subsisted amongst English writers—that language, instead of being an exquisitely beautiful vehicle for the thoughts, a robe that never can be adorned with too much care or piety, is in fact a dirty high-road which all people detest whilst all are forced to use it, and to the keeping of which in repair no rational man ever contributes a trifle that is not forced from him by some severity of Quarter-Sessions. The great corrupter of English was the conversational instinct for rapidity. A more honourable source of corruption lay in the growth of new ideas, and the continual influx of foreign words to meet them. Spanish words arose, like reformado, privado, desperado, and French ones past counting. But, as these retained their foreign forms of structure, they reacted to vitiate the language still more by introducing a piebald aspect of books, which it seemed a matter of necessity to tolerate for the interests of wider thinking. The perfection of this horror was never attained except amongst the Germans.
8 [1] Pope's Moral Essays, Epistle I., lines 95–96.—M.
9 [1] Printed in Pope's Works as “Epistle to Robert, Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer.” This was the title by which Robert Harley, the Tory statesman of Queen Anne's reign, and the friend and patron of many of the literary men of that time, was promoted to the peerage in 1711. He was afterwards Lord High Treasurer of Great Britain, but was dismissed from office in 1714. On the accession of George I. in that year he was sent to the Tower on political charges. He remained there for two years, was tried and acquitted, and spent the rest of his life in retirement. He died in 1724.—M.
10 [2] “For him thou oft hast bid the world attend, Fond to forget the statesman in the friend.”—M.
11 [1] It was after his connexion with Warburton that Pope introduced several of his living portraits into the Satires.
12 [1] The poem quoted from is one of those printed among Wordsworth's “Poems referring to the period of Old Age,” and bears the title The Two Thieves: or the Last Stage of Avarice. De Quincey, quoting from memory, does not quote quite correctly. In the original the first-quoted couplet runs thus— “There are ninety good seasons of fair and foul weather Between them, and both go a-pilfering together”; and the other thus— “And yet, into whatever sin they may fall, This child but half knows it, and that not at all.”—M.
13 [1] By what might seem a strange oversight, but which, in fact, is a very natural oversight to one who was not uttering one word in which he seriously believed, Pope, in a prose note on verse 207, roundly asserts that “the particular characters of women are more various than those of men.” It is no evasion of this insufferable contradiction that he couples with the greater variety of characters in women a greater uniformity in what he presumes to be their ruling passion. Even as to this ruling passion he cannot agree with himself for ten minutes; generally, he says, it is the love of pleasure; but sometimes (as at verse 208), forgetting this monotony, he ascribes to women a dualism of passions—love of pleasure, and love of power—which dualism of itself must be a source of self-conflict, and therefore of inexhaustible variety in character: “Those only fixed, they first or last obey— The love of pleasure and the love of sway.”
14 [1] This refers to the Act of Parliament, then recent, for burying corpses in woollen; which greatly disturbed the fashionable costume in coffins comme il faut.
15 [1] The sons of the Duke having died in early youth, the title and estates were so settled as to descend through this daughter, who married the Earl of Sunderland. In consequence of this arrangement, Spencer, the name of Lord Sunderland, displaced, until lately, the great name of Churchill; and the Earl became that second Duke of Marlborough about whom Smollett tells us in his History of England (Reign of George II) so remarkable and to this hour so mysterious a story.
16 [2] The Duchess died in the same year as Pope, viz. just in time by a few months to miss the Rebellion of 1745 and the second Pretender; spectacles which for little reasons (vindictive or otherwise) both of them would have enjoyed until the spring of 1746, when their hour of hope passed away for ever. [Sarah Jennings, Duchess of Marlborough, 1660–1744.—M.]
17 [1] The book referred to seems to be “An Account of the Conduct of the Dowager Duchess of Marlborough from her first coming to Court to the year 1710,” privately printed in 1742. Bibliographical authorities ascribe it to Nathaniel Hooke, author ofRoman History. In 1788 there appeared in Edinburgh, under the editorship of Lord Hailes, a small volume entitled “The Opinions of Sarah, Duchess Dowager of Marlborough, published from her original MSS.”—M.
18 [1] The Vestals not only renounced marriage, at least for those years in which marriage could be a natural blessing, but also left their fathers’ houses at an age the most trying to the human heart as regards the pangs of separation.
19 [1] The meaning is that Pope's Christianity is shown by his intimacy with the writings of the Anglo-Catholic poet Richard Crashaw (died 1650), and by the nature of some of his own poems,—such as his Eloisa to Abelard, his Messiah: a Sacred Eclogue, and his verses entitled The Dying Christian to his Soul. These last were avowedly a Christian adaptation of some celebrated Latin lines of the Emperor Hadrian.—M.
20 [1] Cyder, by John Philips (1676–1708), was published in 1708; The Fleece, by John Dyer (1700–1758), in 1757.—M.
21 [1] The passage occupies lines 25–100 of the Third Canto of The Rape of the Lock.—M.
22 [1] Marco Girolamo Vida, of Cremona (1490–1566), author of a Latin poem on the Game of Chess, and of other Latin poems; of one of which, The Christiad, Milton says, in his juvenile poem on The Passion,— “Loud o'er the rest Cremona's trump doth sound.”—M.
23 [1] We do not include the Dunciad in this list. On the contrary, the arguments by which it has been generally undervalued, as though antiquated by lapse of time and by the fading of names, are all unsound. We ourselves hold it to be the greatest of Pope's efforts. But for that very reason we retire from the examination of it, which we had designed, as being wholly disproportioned to the narrow limits remaining to us.
$$$
