The Poets and Poetry of Scotland
Author: Stevenson, Robert Louis.
Publication info: The Academy : A Weekly Review of Literature, Science and Art; London (Oct. 9, 1869 ^b 11 Jan. 1902): xi, 622 p.

The Poets and Poetry of Scotland [in, The Academy. A Weekly Review of Literature, Science and Art. January—June. Volume IX]
[Page 138]
The Poets and Poetry of Scotland, from the Earliest to the Present Time; comprising characteristic Selections from the Works of the more noteworthy Scottish Poets; with Biographical and Critical Notices . By James Grant Wilson. Vol. I.; 1219 to 1776. (London: Blackie & Co., 1876.) It is somewhat too much the fashion to pat Scotch literature on the back. Inhabitants of South Britain are pleased to commend verses, which, short of a miraculous gift of tongues, it is morally impossible they should comprehend. It may interest these persons to learn that Burns wrote a most difficult and crude patois (or sub- patois , if they prefer); that there are not so very many people alive in Scotland who could read his works without a furtive reference to the margin; and consequently, that an Englishman need not be ashamed to confess he can make nothing out of the vernacular poems except a raucous gibberish—which, it is the honest belief of the present reviewer, is about the measure of his achievement. It is partly to this that we must attribute the exaggerated favour of “The Cotter's Saturday Night,” by no means one of his best poems, but one of the most easily understood; partly to this, and partly to the Scotch predilection for religious literature.
But even the least intelligent condescension of the South Briton is better than the hysterical praise with which Mr. Grant Wilson bedaubs his native literature—praise which reads all the more hysterical that it is quite gravely written, without adjectives, without points of admiration, in the most convinced and matter-of-fact tone conceivable. Scotch literature, he tells us, contains “a body of poetry and song than which there is none superior in the literature of any land, ancient or modern.” Barbour's Bruce , “in clearness and simplicity must rank before either Chaucer or Gower; and in elevation of sentiment Pinkerton does not hesitate to prefer it to both Dante and Petrarch.” Dunbar's Dance of the Sevin Deidly Sins “is equal in its way to anything in Spenser,” and his Justis betuix the Tailzour and Sowtar “as droll as anything in Scarron or Rabelais.” Mr. Wilson thinks that Burns spoke “with somewhat too much extravagance” when he called the Gentle Shepherd “the most glorious poem ever written;” but he seems quite to agree with Allan Cunningham in thinking “Willie was a wanton wag” the most original of lyrics. And this barbarous galimaufry or hotch-potch of indiscriminate laudation does not come fairly to the boil, until we hear that Falconer's “Shipwreck” placed its author “in the front rank of Scottish poets.” What? alongside of Barbour who surpassed Dante, Chaucer, and Petrarch, cheek by jowl with Dunbar who was the equal of Spenser and Rabelais, and arm in arm with the unique Hamilton of Gilbertfield, for whom it had been reserved, since the foundation of the world, to write the most original lyric on record! Was there ever such an irreverent hurly-burly of names, such a profane morris-dance of great men and little poetasters? Whaur's Wully Shakespeare noo? let us exclaim, and write it in the richest vernacular possible for English consonants.
[Page 139]
And not only (to make an end of fault-finding), not only has Mr. Wilson made himself a mouthpiece for all that the perfervid genius of the Scots has ever found to say in praise of itself, but he has been somewhat hasty and inexact in his historical enquiries. Certainly, in 1414, the English King Henry IV. did not take James I. along with him on his second expedition to France. If there were no other reason, Henry IV. had then been some time dead. And certainly Mr. Wilson ought not to have printed Lapraik's “When I upon thy bosom lean.” They are shocking bad verses, whatever Burns may have thought. And besides, good or bad, they are not Lapraik's. They are a bungling plagiarism from an English piece in the Weekly Magazine ; and the really lamentable manner in which they have suffered in the stealing is the last article in the charge against.
                                         “ the old kind chiel
About Muirkirk. ”
We have him convicted on two counts; not being able to write verse himself, and not knowing what was good in other people's verses. Again, the fable of the “Eagle and Robin Redbreast” should certainly have appeared in the collection, but as certainly, I apprehend, should not have appeared under the name of Alexander Scot. “Ar. Scot” was the signature with which Allan Ramsay chose to send abroad his forgeries; it contains, it will be seen, his initials and a declaration of his nationality which is characteristic of the race. The fable in question, which is here attributed to the “Scottish Anacreon,” and the “Vision” which has been rightly enough placed among the selections from Ramsay, both appeared for the first time in the Evergreen under the same signature of Ar. Scot. And, unless Mr. Grant Wilson has some other light unknown to me upon the matter, I cannot understand upon what principle he has separated them. Either they are both by Scot, or both by Ramsay. There is no third way. And, as a matter of fact, I believe they are both Ramsay's.
But Mr. Grant Wilson is not without qualifications for the task he has set himself to do. Of course, all anthologies make bad blood. Of course, one is far more sorry for the good things left out, than pleased that so many have been put in. I am inconsolable for Drummond's sonnet, beginning “In vain I haunt the cold and silver springs.” Where is “Auld Lang Syne?” What strange blindness fell upon Mr. Wilson when he began to make his selections out of Scott? Scott, of all men, is the man to gain in a properly made anthology. And here he has not gained; here he has lost cruelly. The death of Marmion has been printed, the admirable battle-scene immediately preceding is left out. And of all those inspired fragments of song he scattered here and there about the pages of the novels, we have no more than the barest representation. On the whole, however, the selection is well done. There might have been a little less of what is Scotch in no real sense, and the same principle which led Mr. Wilson to include Susanna Blamyre might have led him, not without advantage, to leave some others out. She was English by birth, but wrote in the Scotch spirit; these others were born Scots, but aped the English manner just well enough to fall between two stools. And, indeed, they will not long detain the reader—they are so dead and so dead-heavy —and he will pass on to what is genuinely national in the collection, to the specimens of that merry, coarse, and somewhat prosaic poetry which began with James I. and is yet scarcely cold.
“Christ's Kirk on the Green” is a direct descendant of the Canterbury Tales, and its best successors are all more or less in the same vein. A clear stream of narration, a plentiful scarcity of serious images and similes, a sort of dry slyness, a gross, unflinching realism in humorous disquisition or description—these are notes common to almost all that is good in Scotch poetry. Even when an author seeks to move pity, it is not by strong language that he sets about the task, but by dramatic truth. In the simplest words, he makes his characters say what they might have said and do what they might have done. He relies entirely on the inherent pathos of the situation. He does not seek to heighten or idealise. He is no Shakspere, only a sort of provincial Boccaccio at the most.
All this is fairly well illustrated in the volume under review. Here also the reader will find that gem of a poem, Alexander Hume's “Day Estivall.” In speaking of such work, one must beware of the Grant-Wilson school of oratory. Let an earnest recommendation here suffice.
A point of curiosity is the rest of Burns's ode about Washington, some lines of which appear already in his Correspondence. It is a very poor performance, but interesting as another testimony to the profound sympathy of Burns for all democratic movements. Why does Mr. Wilson tell us no more about the history of the piece; and why (since we are at fault-finding one more) does he not give us explicit notice when a piece is original and when it is a translation from Gaelic.
Robert Louis Stevenson.
$$$
