Essays
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: The Round Table: a Collection Of Essays On Literature, Men, and Manners, By William Hazlitt . 2 v. Edinburgh: Printed for Archibald Constable and Co. and Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, 1817.


 The Round Table: a Collection of Essays on Literature, Men and Manners, by William Hazlitt
[Page ]
[Volume I] Introduction. It has often struck me, in common with other luxurious persons who are fond of reading at breakfast, and who are well-tempered enough, particularly on such occasions, to put up with a little agreeable advice, that there has now been a sufficient distance of time since the publication of our good old periodical works, and a sufficient change in matters worthy of social observation, to warrant the appearance of a similar set of papers.
Upon this design, with the assistance of a few companions, and with all sorts of determinations to be equally instructive and delightful, I am accordingly now entering; and must give the reader to understand, in their name as well as my own, that,
[Page 2]
wishing to be regarded as his companions also, we act as becomes all honest persons under such circumstances, and profess to be no other than what we are:—in other words, we assume no fictitious characters, or what an acquaintance of ours, in his becoming disdain of the original French, would call names of war.
A hundred years back, when the mode of living was different from what it is now, and taverns and coffee-houses made the persons of the wits familiar to every body, assumptions of this kind may have been necessary. Captain Steele, for instance, the gay fellow about town, might not always have been listened to with becoming attention, or even gravity, especially if he had been a little too inarticulate over-night;—he therefore put on the wrinkles and privileges' of Isaac Bickerstaff, the old gentleman. Sir Richard might be a little better, but not perhaps during an election, or after the failure of a fish-pool; and so he retreated into the ancient and impregnable composition of Nestor Ironside.
I do not mean to say that we have none of the foibles of our illustrious predecessors. It would be odd, indeed, (to speak candidly, and with that humility which becomes frail beings like men,) if our numerous and very eminent virtues had no
[Page 3]
drawback;—but more on this subject presently. All that I say is, that we have not the same occasion for disguise; and, therefore, as we prefer at all times a plain, straight-forward behaviour, and, in fact, choose to be as original as we can in our productions, we have avoided the trouble of adding assumed characters to our real ones; and shall talk, just as we think, walk, and take dinner, in our own proper persons. It is true, the want of old age, or of a few patriarchal eccentricities to exercise people's patronage on, and induce their self-love to bear with us, may be a deficiency in our pretensions with some; but we must plainly confess, with whatever mortification, that we are still at a flourishing time of life; and that the trouble and experience, which have passed over our heads, have left our teeth, hair, and eyes, pretty nearly as good as they found them. One of us, (which, by the way, must recommend us to all the married people, and admirers of Agesilaus,) was even caught the other day acting the great horse with a boy on his shoulders; and another (which will do as much for us among the bachelors, and give Lord's Ground in particular a lively sense of our turn of thinking) was not a vast while ago counted the second best cricketer in his native town.
[Page 4]
On the other hand, as we wish to avoid the solitary and dictatorial manner of the latter Essayists, and, at the same time, are bound to shew our readers, that we have something to make up for the want of flapped waistcoats and an instructive decay of the faculties, we hereby inform them, that we are, literally speaking, a small party of friends, who meet once a week at a Round Table to discuss the merits of a leg of mutton, and of the subjects upon which we are to write. This we do without any sort of formality, letting the stream of conversation wander through any ground it pleases, and sometimes retiring into our own respective cogitations, though it must be confessed, very rarely,—for we have a lively, worn-visaged fellow among us, who has a trick, when in company, of leaping, as it were, on the top of his troubles, and keeping our spirits in motion with all sorts of pleasant interludes. After dinner, if the weather requires it, we draw round the fire, with a biscuit or two, and the remainder of a philosophic bottle of wine; or, as we are all passionately fond of music, one of us touches an instrument, in a manner that would make a professor die with laughter to see him using his thumb where he should put his finger, or his finger where he should use his thumb; but nevertheless in such a way as
[Page 5]
to ravish the rest of us, who know still less than he does. At an Italian air we even think him superior to Tramezzani, though we generally give vent to our feelings on this point in a whisper. We suspect, however, that he overheard us one evening, as he immediately attempted some extraordinary graces, which, with all our partiality, we own were abominable.
The reader will see, by this account, that we do not mean to be over austere on the score of domestic enjoyments. Then for our accomplishments as writers, one of us is deep in mathematics and the learned languages, another in metaphysics, and a third in poetry; and, as for experience, and a proper sympathy with the infirmities of our species, the former of which is absolutely necessary for those who set up to be instructors, and the latter quite as much so to give it a becoming tone, and render it lastingly useful,—we shall not break in upon a greater principle by imitating the reckless candour of Rousseau, and make a parade of what other weaknesses we may have,—but for sickness, for ordinary worldly trouble, and in one or two respects, for troubles not very ordinary, few persons, perhaps, at our time of life, can make a handsomer shew of infirmities. Of some we shall only say, that they have been common to most
[Page 6]
men, as well as ourselves, who were not born to estates of their own: but these and others have enabled us to buy, what money might have still kept us poor in,—some good real knowledge, and at bottom of all our egotism, some warm-wishing unaffected humility. Even at school, where there is nothing much to get sick or melancholy with, if indulgent parents are out of the way, we were initiated into experience a little earlier than most people; the tribulations we have fallen into before and after this time are almost innumerable; and we may add, as a specimen of our experience after the fashion of Ulysses, that we have all of us, at separate periods from one another, been in France. I must confess, however, for my own part, that I was not of an age to make much use of my travels, having gone thither in my childhood to get rid of one sickness, and only staid long enough to survive another. It was just before the decrees that altered religious as well as political matters in that country, and almost all that I remember is a good old woman, our landlady, who used to weep bitterly over me, because I should die a heretic, and be buried in unconsecrated ground. I have made an exception ever since, out of the whole French nation, in favour of the people at Calais; and was delighted, though not surprised, to hear the other
[Page 7]
day from one of our Round Table, that the women there were all pretty and prepossessing, and still looked as if they could be kind to young heretics.
Of this accomplished and experienced party of ours, circumstances have made me the president; but I wish it to be distinctly understood, that I do not on that account claim any pre-eminence but a nominal one. We shall all choose our own subjects, only open to the suggestions and comments of each other. Correspondents, therefore, (and I must here mention that all persons not actually admitted to the said Table, must write to us in the form of a letter,) may address, as they please, either to the President of the Round Table; or to the President and his fellows in general, as, “Mr President, —Gentlemen of the Round Table;” or to any one of my friends in particular, according to his signature, as, “To the Member of the Round Table, T. or W.” This perhaps will be determined by the nature of the communication; but I was the more anxious to say something on the point, inasmuch as my situation often reminds me of other great men who have sat at the head of tables, round or square, such as Charlemagne with his peers, who were persons of greater prowess than himself; or King Arthur, who, in spite of his renown,
[Page 8]
was nothing, after all, to some of his knights, Launcelot or Tristan, for instance; or, to give a more familiar example, Robin Hood and his fellows, every one of whom, before he could be admitted into the company, must have beaten the captain.
I must not, however, before I conclude, pass over King Arthur so slightly, as our Round Table, to a certain degree, is inevitably associated in our minds with his. The name, indeed, was given to us by one of that sex, who have always been the chief ornaments and promoters of chivalrous institutions; and for my part, when I am sitting at the head of it, with my knights on each side, I can hardly help fancying that I am putting a triumphant finish to the old prophecy, and feeling in me, under an unexpected but more useful character, the revived spirit of that great British Monarch, who was to return again to light from his subterraneous exile, and repair the Round Table in all its glory:—
“He is a King ycrownid in Fairie
With scepter and sword, and with his regally
Shall resort as lord and sovereigne
Out of Fairie, and reigne in Britaine,
And repaire againe the old Round Table,
Among Princes King incomparable.” Lydgate.
[Page 9]
To this idea, and the long train of romantic associations and inspired works connected with it, we shall sometimes resort in our poetical moments, just as we shall keep the more familiar idea of the dining table before us in our ordinary ones. Nor will it always, indeed, be absent from our minds during our philosophical and most abstruse speculations; for what have the most chivalrous persons been from the earliest ages, but so many moral reformers, who encountered error and corruption with various weapons, who brought down brute force, however gigantic, who carried light into darkness, and liberty among the imprisoned, and dissipated, with some charm or other about them, the illusions of pleasure? H. T.
[Page 9]
THE SUBJECT CONTINUED. As the reader has been given to understand, that the subjects which my friends and myself mean to discuss will form part of our conversation at Table, and that the conversation will nevertheless be as casual and unrestrained as it usually is among social parties, he may easily conclude that they will
[Page 10]
be of a very various description. We shall confine ourselves, indeed, to no kinds in particular; and taking advantage sometimes of the character of table-talk, even the same article may contain a variety of subjects, and start off from one point to another with as unshackled and extemporaneous an enjoyment as one of Montaigne's. This, however, will be but seldom; for we are habitually fond of arrangement, and do not like to see even the dishes out of their proper positions. But, at the same time, though we shall generally confine ourselves to one subject in our Essays, and sometimes be altogether facetious, and sometimes exclusively profound, we shall always think ourselves at liberty to be both, if we please,—always at liberty to set out merrily in a first paragraph, or to be pleasant in a parenthesis. These things, while they refresh the writer, serve to give a fillip to the reader's attention; and act upon him as the handing round of a snuff-box may do in the middle of conversation.
Besides, there is a beauty of contrast in this variety; and as we mean to be very powerful writers, as well as every thing else that is desirable, power is never seen to so much advantage as when it goes about a thing carelessly. You like to see a light horseman, who seems as if he could abolish
[Page 11]
you with a passing cut, and not a great heavy fellow, who looks as if he should tumble down in case of missing you, or a little red staring busybody, who would be obliged to wield his sword two-handed, and kill himself first with exertion. When Bonaparte set out on his Russian expedition, they say that he got into his carriage, twirling his glove about, and singing
“Marlbrouk to the wars is going:”
Perhaps we shall be quite as gay and buoyant when setting out on the loftiest speculations,—barring, of course, all comparisons with him on the score of success, though even we cannot answer for what a north-east wind or a fall of snow may do to us. I have myself, before now, had a whole host of fine ideas blown away by the one; and have been compelled to retreat from the other, mind and body, with my knees almost into the fire.
In short, to put an end to this preface exemplificatory, the most trifling matters may sometimes be not only the commencement, but the causes, of the gravest discussions. The fall of an apple from a tree suggested the doctrine of gravitation; and the same apple, for aught we know, served up in a dumpling, may have assisted the philosopher
[Page 12]
in his notions of heat; for who has not witnessed similar causes and effects at a dinner table? I confess, a piece of mutton has supplied me with arguments, as well as chops, for a week; I have seen a hare or a cod's-head giving hints to a friend for his next Essay; and have known the most solemn reflections rise, with a pair of claws, out of a pigeon-pie.
There are two or three heads, however, under which all our subjects may be classed; and these it will be proper to mention, not so much for the necessity of any such classification, as for an indication of the particular views and feelings with which we may handle them. The first is Manners, or the surface of society,—the second Morals, metaphysically considered, or its inmost causes of action,—the third Taste, or its right feeling upon things both external and internal, which lies, as it were, between both.
With regard to the first, we are aware, and must advise the reader, that we do not possess so much food for observation as the authors of the earlier periodical works; and this is the case, not merely because we have not been in the habit of living so much as they did out in society, but because manners are of a more level surface than they were in their times, and people's characters
[Page 13]
have, in a manner, been polished out. In fact, this is owing in great measure to the very writers in question. The extension of a general knowledge and good breeding were their direct objects; they succeeded; and there is not a domestic party now-a-days, in high life or in middle, but in its freedom from grossness and its tincture of literature, is indebted to Steele and his associates. The good was great and universal, and should alone render those men immortal, even without all the other claims of their wit and character.
Every general advantage, however, of this kind, has a tendency to overdo itself. A certain degree of knowledge and politeness being within every body's power, sufficient to enable them to pass smoothly with each other, every thing further is at last neglected; character first gives way to polish; polish by little and little carries away solidity; and all the community, who are to be acted upon in this way, are at length in danger of resembling so much worn-out coin, which has not only lost the features upon it, and grown blank by attrition, but begins to be weighed and found wanting even for the common purposes of society.
As far, then, as our observations on Manners go, it will be our endeavour to counteract this extreme.
[Page 14]
Our mode of proceeding will be best explained by itself; but we shall endeavour to set men, not upon disliking smoothness, but avoiding insipidity,—not upon starting into roughness, but overcoming a flimsy sameness,—and this, too, not by pretending to characters which they have not, but by letting their own be seen as far as they possess them, and once more having faces to know them by.
Taste, as was inevitable, has sympathized completely with this superficial state of manners. In proportion as men were all to resemble each other, and to have faces and manners in common, their self-love was not to be disturbed by any thing in the shape of individuality. A writer might be natural, but he was to be natural only as far as their sense of nature would go, and this was not a great way. Besides, even when he was natural, he hardly dared to be so in language as well as idea;— there gradually came up a kind of dress, in which a man's mind, as well as body, was to clothe itself; and the French, whose wretched sophisticated taste had been first introduced by political circumstances, saw it increasing every day under the characteristic title of polite criticism, till they condescended to acknowledge that we were behaving ourselves well,—that Mr Pope was a truly
[Page 15]
harmonious poet, and that Mr Addison's Cato made amends for the barbarism of Shakspeare. The praises, indeed, bestowed by the French in these and similar instances, went in one respect to a fortunate extreme, and tended to rouse a kind of national contradiction, which has perhaps not been without its effect in keeping a better spirit alive: but it must not be concealed, that both Shakspeare and Milton have owed a great part of their reputation of late years to causes which, though of a distinct nature, have been unconnected with a direct poetical taste. I allude to the art of acting with regard to the former, and to certain doctrines of religion with respect to the latter, both of which have no more to do with the fine spirit of either poet, than a jack-o'-lantern or a jugged hare. Milton still remains unknown to the better classes, in comparison with succeeding writers; and Chaucer and Spenser, the two other great poets of England, who have had no such recommendations to the pursuits or prejudices of society, are scarcely known at all, especially with any thing like an apprehension of their essential qualities. Chaucer is considered as a rude sort of poet, who wrote a vast while ago, and is no longer intelligible; and Spenser, a prosing one, not quite so old, who wrote nothing but allegories. They
[Page 16]
startle to hear, that the latter has very little need of the glossary, and is dipt in poetic luxury; and that the former, besides being intelligible with a little attention, is in some respects a kindred spirit with Shakspeare for gravity as well as for mirth, and full of the most exquisite feeling of all kinds, especially the pathetic. It is curious, indeed, to see the length to which the levelling spirit in manners, and the coxcombical sort of exclusiveness it produces, have carried people in their habitual ideas of writers not of their generation. Nothing is young and in full vigour but themselves. Shakspeare may enjoy a lucky perpetuity of lustihead by means of school-compilations and stage-players; and Milton, in their imaginations, is a respectable middle-aged gentleman, something like the clergyman who preaches on Sundays; but Spenser is exceedingly quaint and rusty; and Chaucer is nothing but old Chaucer or honest Geoffrey, which is about as pleasant, though not intended to be so, as the lover's address to the sun in the Gentle Shepherd :—
“And if ye're wearied, honest light ,
Sleep, gin ye like, a week that night.”
You will even find them talking, with an air of patronage, of having found something good now and
[Page 17]
then in these old writers ,—meaning the great masters above mentioned, and the working heads that crowded the time of Shakspeare. They evidently present them to their minds as so many old gentlemen and grandfathers, half-doating; and, for aught I know, would think of Apollo himself in the same way, if it were not for Tooke's Pantheon, or an occasional plaster cast. As if perpetual youth, instead of age, was not the inheritance of immortal genius! As if a great poet could ever grow old, as long as Nature herself was young!
But I must restrain myself on this subject, or I shall exceed my limits. The reader will see that we are prepared to say a great deal of “these old poets;” and we are so,—not because they are old, but because they are beautiful and ever fresh. We shall also do as much for some of the old prose-writers; and endeavour, by means of both, and of the universal principles which inspired them, to wean the general taste, as far as we can, from the lingering influence of the French school back again to that of the English, or, in other words, from the poetry of modes and fashions to that of fancy, and feeling, and all-surviving Nature. We have had enough, in all conscience, of men who talk away, and write smoothly, and everlastingly copy each other;—let us, in the name of variety, if of
[Page 18]
nothing else, have a little of men, who held it necessary to think and speak for themselves,—men who went to the fountain-head of inspiration, where the stream wept and sparkled away at its pleasure, and not where it was cut out into artificial channels, and sent smoothing up, pert and monotonous, through a set of mechanical pipes and eternally repeated images.
On the subject of Morals, which is one that requires the nicest developement, and will be treated by us with proportionate care and sincerity, we shall content ourselves with saying at present, that if we differ on this point also from the opinions of our predecessors and others, it is only where we think them hurtful to the real interests of charity and self-knowledge, and where they have made a compromise, to no real purpose, with existing prejudices. Here, as well as in Manners, we shall endeavour to pierce below the surface of things, but only to fetch out what we conceive to be a more valuable substance, and fitter for the kindlier purposes of intercourse. We may disturb the complacency of some exquisitely self-satisfied persons, and startle into a God-bless-me or so, (which we should be sorry to do over their tea-cups,) a number of worthy people, who lament that every body does not resemble
[Page 19]
them: but the world have too long, even when most professing to be charitable, been taught to value themselves at the expence of others; and perhaps in our old zeal for the many instead of the few, we shall endeavour to reverse this kind of beginning at home, and exhort them to think somewhat better of others, even at a little expence to themselves.
In short, to recommend an independent simplicity in Manners, a love of nature in Taste, and truth, generosity, and self-knowledge in Morals, will be the object, dining or fasting, with blade in hand or with pen, of the Knights of the Round Table. H. T.
[Page 124]
No. XVI. ON CHAUCER. We have great pleasure in giving the Correspondent before us a hearing at our Round Table . He is fond of Chaucer and the Arabian Nights ; and this is as instant a bond of fellowship with us, as talking of dishes with a voluptuary, or of sunshine with a stray Italian, or dolls with a little girl, or of the little girl with her mother, or horses with a buck or a little boy, or those plagues of servants with a housewife, or Horace with a schoolboy, or the playhouse with a collegian, or bankrupts with a tradesman, or high breeding with a
[Page 125]
city beau, or the east wind with an invalid, or snuff with a spare talker, or any thing with a chatterbox, or of pleasant fellows, with a pleasant fellow, or of somebody's defects, with those, of course, who have none. Besides, from the nature of our establishment, we have a more than ordinary sympathy with King Cambuscan and his festal board; we become doubly conscious of our state and dignity, as our Correspondent approaches us with the subject; and feel as if we were mutually acting the commencement of the story over again,—we, as the king with his men about him, and he, as the strange knight coming up the hall;—only our visitor retains nothing of that personage but his courtesy; and we, instead of sitting down, diademed and o'er canopied, to a course of swans, are obliged to be content with plain heads of hair and a shoulder of mutton.—What further we have to say, we shall keep till he has done speaking.
To the President and Companions of the Round Table.
“Or call up him, that left half-told
The story of Cambuscan bold.
Of Camball, and of Algarsife,
And who had Canace to wife,
[Page 126]
That own'd the virtuous ring and glass,
And of the wondrous horse of brass,
On which the Tartar King did ride.” Il Penseroso.
Gentlemen ,—As every inquiry that either the antiquary or the critic has made has been made in vain, we come to the melancholy conclusion, that the tale of Chaucer's accomplished Squire was left half told. Mr. Tyrwhit, to whom the lovers of our ancient Bard are under the greatest obligation, tells us that he has never been able to discover the probable origin of the tale—though he adds, “I should be very hardly brought to believe that the whole, or even any considerable part of it, was of Chaucer's invention.”
We are not told by that enlightened critic the grounds of this opinion; but we may reasonably infer that he considered it to be of the class of Arabian fictions; and that it was highly probable it had reached our Poet in some translation, and was adopted by him as matter highly congenial to his splendid fancy, and awaiting only the consecrating powers of his verse. Spenser, who, with Milton, had cast his eye upon this tale with peculiar regret, undertook to give a supplement; but of the deficient parts took that which had the weaker interest. The combat in the lists for
[Page 127]
Canace perhaps better suited the design of his Faery Queen. It would not be an unprofitable speculation, to consider how far the wild adventures of the horse of brass were within the grasp of his rich but moral imagination. However, our present inquiry is what supplement may be offered; for it would be too bold to presume that we have settled the very incidents, which would have completed this delightful fiction.
Our readers will excuse us for recalling to their minds the actual state of Chaucer's story. The King of Tartary, with his wife, his daughter, and his two sons, are sitting amid the nobles of their court, solemnly holding his anniversary. The board was served so abundantly, that the Poet disclaims the task of recounting what “would occupy a somers day.” However, while the Minstrels are playing their most animated compositions, and the third course had been removed, suddenly, by the hall door, a Knight entered upon a steed of brass. He bore in his hand a mirror of glass, on his thumb a ring of gold, and a naked sword was hanging by his side. He rode at once up to the highe bord , and an awful silence was the immediate and natural effect of so extraordinary a visitor. The Knight, it seems, is sent by the King of Araby and Inde to salute Cambuscan on this
[Page 128]
solemn occasion. The horse and the sword are presents to his Majesty. The mirror and the ring are offered to his lovely daughter. By the one, every danger menacing the state is instantly discerned —treachery is unfolded either in love or politics; by the other, the language of birds is bestowed upon the wearer, to understand what they say, and to make the suitable replies. The sword of our Knight heals as readily as it wounds, and has certainly been disused by monarchs ever since the days of Cambuscan.
Canace soon puts the virtues of her ring to proof, and, with its lovely disclosures, ends the adventure. The Poet then promises, first to recount the warlike achievements of Cambuscan. He will after speke of Algarsife , who won Theodora for his wife, and of the perils from which he was relieved by the horse of brass; and finally, of Camball fighting in the lists with the Brethren for Canace. Of the horse of brass he tells us nothing, but that, after having quietly endured the gaze, and the philosophy too, of the vulgar, it was displayed by the Knight fully to his Majesty, when he no doubt was graciously pleased to express his full admiration; and then says Chaucer—
“The hors vanisht, I n'ot in what manere,
Out of hir ( their ) sight, ye get no more of me.”
[Page 129]
Let it be recollected, that Algarsife won the Princess Theodora for his wife, and that the horse is peculiarly destined to relieve him in his perils.
Our readers see that we consider the tale as an Arabian fiction, and we think that we find adventures in the Mille et une Nuits , that admirably answer the promise of the Poet, if, indeed, they were not the very inventions which Chaucer designed to adopt. We allude to the story of the Enchanted Horse . Let us briefly analyze this fanciful production.
The King of Persia, surrounded by his nobles at Schiraz, is celebrating an important anniversary. An Indian, with an enchanted horse, governed by a pin, (like Chaucer's,) suddenly enters the palace. The king's son is rashly tempted to make a trial of him. Not having been so attentive as he should have been, and, like many aspiring princes, only knowing how to get into motion, he mounts, and, with more than the speed of an arrow, is instantly hurried from the sight of his anxious parent. His ascent is terrific—mountains become indistinct from his height—he loses every thing terrestrial at last, and is endangered by too close a pressure against the marble floor of heaven. He keeps his seat, however, and, at all events, does not drop his courage in the flight. The first and most natural
[Page 130]
thought is, that, to descend, the pin must be turned in a mode opposite to that which enabled him to rise. To his infinite dismay, this effort produces no alteration in his course. At length he discovers a second pin in the enchanted courser, and, upon moving it, he descends at night on the terrace of the Princess of Babylon's summer palace. Why should we display their mutual surprise? The beauty of the princess was a wonder that a horse full of enchantments could never hope to equal, and beauty exerts its usual power even amidst the feats of magic. He is, however, now anxious to relieve a father's anxiety, and prevails upon the princess to accompany him to Persia. She, captivated with his person, and it may be also, that, in some degree, she was
“Witch'd with noble horsemanship,”
consents to accompany him in a flight, which is to terminate in their union. They arrive upon the horse, in perfect safety, at a pleasure-house, not far from the capital of Persia. The prince sets out to visit his royal father, and also to announce the unlooked-for partner of his journey. No objections whatever were raised to receiving her at court. The Indian, who, upon the apprehended loss of the prince, had been thrown into prison, is set at
[Page 131]
liberty. But causeless imprisonment does not always leave the mind full of gratitude for the end of it, and, with the avenging subtlety of his black character, he hurries instantly to the Princess of Babylon, where she awaits the return of her lover; tells her that he is sent by both king and prince to convey her on the steed, and, as soon as they are mounted, hovers over Schiraz, to announce to his enemy the exquisite consummation of his revenge. With his reluctant companion, the Indian at length arrives at the kingdom of Cashmir. Nothing can be more meritorious in the mind of the king than to punish the robber of a legitimate sovereign; he accordingly puts the Indian to death. But, notwithstanding his indignation at the spoiler, he has no objection to the spoil, and therefore speedily determines to wed the princess himself. She avoids the union by feigning madness. The royal physicians, it may be supposed, are all put in requisition, but they, greatly to the credit of their skill, leave the patient as they found her. Luckily the Prince of Persia, disguised as a Dervise, arrives with the only medicine that could effect her cure. She is soon, as may be supposed, in condition to bear another flight, and then, by a stratagem, regaining the horse of brass, they sublimely ascend together,
[Page 132]
before the astonished Court of Cashmir, and return once more to Schiraz, and to happiness. Such are the grand features of this beautiful tale.
Surely it would not be very difficult to adapt this most lovely fiction to Chaucer's “Cambuscan bold.” The attempt at Chaucer's style and versification might confound the best of us, but there could be no objection to new model and translate the whole into either the rhymed couplet of Dryden, with his vigour and freedom, or perhaps it might grace, and be graced by, the swelling stanza of Spenser. B.
We sympathize heartily with our Correspondent's wishes to have Chaucer's story completed; but how or by whom it should be done, it is not perhaps so easy to desire. We have an infinite regard for Spenser; but, in despite of our love for Italian romance, all stanzas, particularly those that are remarkable as such, appear to us to be as unfit for the ease and freedom of narrative poetry, as a horse which should have a trick of stopping at every twenty yards, whether you wanted him to get on or not. The couplet, we think, would be the best; nor would it be any drawback on its merits, if the reader were occasionally
[Page 133]
reminded of Dryden, for the best parts of Dryden's versification are some of the best music of which English rhythm is capable; or, in other words, are imitated from the best part of the versification of Chaucer himself,—an assertion that may make some persons smile, who always think of the Father of English Poetry as a mere clown compared with his children, but which we may be able to prove to their satisfaction in some future papers. The writer, however, who undertook to finish a story of Chaucer, should come to his task, not only with as much rhythmical vigour as Dryden, but with twenty times his nature and sentiment, and with at least a great portion of the abstract poetical luxury of Spenser, whose attempt, nevertheless, of this very task, is one of the least happy passages of his poem. A writer like our Correspondent, who is able to relish Chaucer, must demand that which delighted him in Chaucer, —that is to say, idiom and simplicity of style, and real unsophisticated, strait-forward nature in the manners, sentiment, and description; but how difficult to get hold of these, when the style of our poetry has been little else, for these hundred and fifty years, but a kind of classical cant, and some of those, who have latterly undertaken to improve it, have substituted another sort of cant, a business
[Page 134]
of yeas and haths , for simplicity? A continuer of Chaucer must write as Chaucer wrote, in the best kind of his own every-day language;— like Chaucer, he must dare to speak and think as nature tells him, and not as the French tell him, or his books:—but to do all this, he must be a true poet as well as his original. He must be born of the same breed, or how shall he take to the same atmosphere? He must have a like grace and vigour of wing, or how shall he sport about at will,—how shall he descend, and gambol, and sparkle, and soar? Spenser himself, in continuing Chaucer's story, thinks it necessary to make an ardent apology for so doing, and thus addresses the shade of his great predecessor:—
“Then pardon, O most sacred, happie spirit,
That I thy labours lost may thus revive,
And steale from thee the meede of thy due merit,
That none durst ever whilest thou wast alive,
And, being dead, in vaine yet many strive:
Ne dare I like; but, through infusion sweete
Of thine owne spirit which doth in me survive,
I follow here the footing of thy feete,
That with thy meaning so I may the rather meete.” Faerie Queene , Book IV. Canto 2.
The plain fact is, that none but true poets can continue, as none but such can translate, each
[Page 135]
other; and this is the reason why there have ever been, and are ever likely to be, so few good translations; for a true poet will generally feel the ambition of originality as well as his fellows, and endeavour to make work for the translators himself.
But there are two reasons why we should scarcely wish to see Chaucer's story finished by the very best modern hand. The one is, because it would take away a certain venerable grace and interest, which accompanies the very idea of a noble fragment, and which seems, in the same way, to have struck the Italian sculptor, who refused to supply the limb of an ancient statue;—the other, because modern versions, strictly so called, of an old poet, tend to divert attention from the illustrious original, and to foster an additional ignorance of him, in consequence of what are supposed to be the rudeness of his style, and obscurities of his language.—But we shall say more of these matters in two or three future numbers, which we propose to write on the subject of Chaucer's genius, and on the proper way of reading and enjoying him, accompanied with specimens, and a comment.
In the mean time, we cannot close the present article in a better manner, than by giving a sample or two of the story, which has called forth the
[Page 136]
analysis of our Correspondent. And here we shall anticipate an observation on what appears to us to be the best method of modernizing the Father of English Poetry, if modernized he need be at all; and even then we would always have the original kept by the side. It should be, we think, after the mode of the Italian rifacimento , altering only just as much as is necessary for comfortable intelligibility, and preserving all the rest, that which appears quaint as well as that which is more modern,—in short, as much of the author,—his nature,—his own mode of speaking and describing, as possible. By thus preserving his best parts, we should keep the model of Nature, his own model, before us, and make modern things bend to her,—not her, as is the custom of our self-love, bend to every thing which happens to be modern.
The commencements of Chaucer's stories have always to us a certain morning freshness in them, —in some measure, perhaps, from his fondness for adorning them with descriptions of that time of day, or of the spring. There is a sparkling passage of this sort in the story of Cambuscan, and those who know how to read the author with the proper attention to the vowels after the manner still used in France, will see in it the beauty of his versification as well as description:—
[Page 137]
“Phœbus the sonne ful jolif was and clere,
For he was nigh his exaltation
In Marte's face, and in his mansion
In Aries, the colerike hot signe:
Ful lusty was the wether and benigne:
For which the foules again the sonne shene,
What for the seson and the yonge grene,
Ful loude songen hir affections:
Hem semed hem han getten hem protections
Again the swerd of winter kene and cold.”
Which, if it were to be re-written in the way mentioned above, would surely want little more than a change of the spelling:—
“Phœbus the sun full jolly was and clear;
For he was nigh his exaltation
In Mars's face, and in his mansion
In Aries, the cholerick hot sign:—
Full lusty was the weather and benign,
For which the birds, against the sunny sheen,
What for the season and the crisp young green,
Full out in the fine air sang their affections;
It seemed to them that they had got protections
Against the sword of winter, keen and cold.”
The following is the description of the Knight's entrance:—
“And so befell, that after the thridde cours,
While that this king sit thus in his nobley,
Herking his minstralles her thinges play
[Page 138]
Beforne him at his bord deliciously,
In at the halle dore al sodenly
Ther came a knight upon a stede of brass,
And in his hond a brod mirrour of glas;
Upon his thombe he had of gold a ring,
And by his side a naked sword hanging;
And up he rideth to the highe borde.
In all the halle ne was ther spoke a word
For mervaille of this knight;—him to behold
Ful besily they waiten, yong and old.”
This scarcely wants any thing for the most indolent modern reader, but a little change of the same kind:—
“And so befell, that after the third course,
While that this king sat thus in his nobley,
Hearing his minstrels their productions play
Before him at his board deliciously,
In at the great hall door all suddenly
There came a knight upon a steed of brass,
And in his hand a broad mirror of glass;
Upon his thumb he had of gold a ring,
And by his side a naked sword hanging;
And up he rideth to the royal board.—
In all the hall there was not spoke a word
For marvel of this knight:—him to behold
Full busily they wait, both young and old.”
What truth and simplicity in this picture! Every thing tells precisely as it should do:—the King's state is before you, but the most prominent image
[Page 139]
is the Knight, and the wonder he creates. You seem to feel the silence of the hall, and to hear the dotting of the horse's brazen feet up the pavement.
After explaining his message as the reader has heard, he goes out and alights from his steed, which, shining as the “sun bright,”
“Stood in the court as still as any stone.”
The talking and guessing of the common people who crowd about it are then excellently detailed, and may be compared with the same sort of picture in Spenser, where he describes the people coming about the dragon slain by the Red-cross Knight. At night time, the Court find themselves “gaping,” and go to bed: but Canace cannot help dreaming about her ring, and gets up earlier than usual to go and make trial of it in the garden. She
—“slept her firste slepe, and than awoke:
For welle a joy she in hire herte toke
Both of hire quainte ring, and of hire mirroure,
That twenty time she chaunged her colour:
And in hire slepe, right for the impression
Of hire mirrour, she had a vision.”
We conclude with one of his usual morning touches. Canace, in leaving her bed, calls up her
[Page 140]
women and her old nurse, who does not exactly understand what her mistress can be stirring so early for; but they all seem ready enough to wait upon her, and up she gets,
“As rody and bright as the yonge Sonne,
That in the Ram is foure degrees yronne;
No higher was he, when she redy was;
And forth she walketh esily a pace,
Arrayed after the lusty seson sote
Lightly for to playe, and walken on fote,
Nought but with five or sixe of hire meinie;
And in a trenche forth in the park goth she.
The vapour, which that fro the erthe glode,
Maketh the Sonne to seme rody and brode.”
This wants as little modernizing as the former: —up rises Canace,
“As ruddy and as bright as the young Sun
That in the Ram but four degrees has run;
No higher was he, when she ready was;
And forth she walketh easily a pace,
Dress'd, with the lovely time of year to suit,
Lightly to play and walk about on foot,
With only five or six in company;
And in a trench forth in the park goes she.
The vapour, that up glided from the ground,
Made the sun seem ruddy, and broad, and round.”
In this manner, perhaps, it might be warrantable to touch Chaucer's language, but still with
[Page 141]
himself by the side to see it done reverently, and to correct the passages which an inferior hand might leave faulty. It is possible, that something of a vapour, at least to common eyes, might be thus removed from his glorious face; but to venture any further, we are afraid, would be to attempt to improve the sun itself, or to go and recolour the grass it looks upon. L. H.
[Page 172]
No. XX. ON THE POETICAL CHARACTER. A STRONG sensation, as the phrase is, has been excited among our readers, by the article on Methodism of our Friend W. H.; and we feel ourselves inclined to say something to it, not indeed in contradiction, for we heartily agree with almost every particle of it, nor in emulation, for we know where our powers lie; but in addition to what he has thrown out on one or two incidental points. The reader must merely consider us as pursuing the subject at the Round Table , after a sufficient pause of admiration at our Friend's
[Page 173]
chivalrous eloquence, broken only by the cracking of walnuts, and a grateful replenishing of his glass.
As to the Methodists, however, we do not pretend to argue with them. We only wonder how they can argue with others, seeing that they set out with renouncing reason itself. We do not object, neither, we are sure, does W. H., to David's proceedings being looked upon with an eye of charity, any more than we do to Charles the Second's or to Louis the Fourteenth's, whatever may be our objection to those who make certain differences where there are none. Methodism, in one respect, comes to the same end as Philosophy, in divesting merit of its self-love, and demerit of its hopelessness; but then it cuts up a great deal of good taste and virtue by the way; and after denying merit in practice, makes a still more ridiculous one consist in opinion. There is no arguing with people of these perceptions. A real Methodist (for all are not Methodists who call themselves so, any more than all persons think, who think that they do) has more need of a physician than a logician; he should take the road to the doctor's instead of the chapel; and before any one, who is falling into the same way, and has not yet been persuaded out of the reason that Providence
[Page 174]
gave him to see with, undertakes to look after the state of his soul, which he is to enjoy in the next world, let him be able to say that he has properly attended to the state of his body, which was given him to enjoy in the present. If he has, he will very soon convince himself that he has saved both together; if not, the best road for him is a good horse-road. It is an excellent piece of advice, “read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest;” but all the “inwardly digesting” in the world, of one sort, will not do without the other. Before the patient has ridden or walked two hours for a hundred days successively, we will be bound that he not only finds himself in infinitely better spirits, but every thing with a better aspect about him, and others, as well as the Methodists, in a much better way than he imagined. He will not flatter himself that he is comfortable, by reckoning himself as one of the preposterously small minority to be saved; but feel that he is so, by seeing that the infinite majority are upon the whole happier than otherwise, and quite as acceptable to a good Being as he. He will discover that actions are as much better than opinions, as exercise is than the want of it. He will no longer prefer the “light,” as it is called, to the common daylight of health and reason; nor blind himself in order to see better,
[Page 175]
like an infant who shuts his eyes to look through a pair of spectacles. The Methodists talk of the “vile world” and the “vile body,” and boast of being able to view the next world better, in proportion as they see every thing discoloured in this; but they carry the same discolourment every where in spite of themselves; their optics resemble the burnt glasses, which enable us to look at the sun, but convert it into a blood-red fire. This is jaundice, and not religion. We do not honour the Maker by dispraising what he has made. The “vile world” and the “vile body” are very valuable and beautiful things to people in health; and health only, or what you remember of it, is the fit judge of the beautiful, because its perceptions only are in their natural state; its mouth, as the doctors say, is not out of taste. So to finish this long digression into which we have run unawares in behalf of the Methodists indirect, we once more disclaim all intention of arguing with the Methodists direct, unless they take up the question physically. It is with their livers they must discuss the matter, and not with their lungs; and, indeed, it is a mere pretence in them to affect that they ever talk otherwise. They are a kind of diseased ventriloquists, and speak from the diaphragm. Whenever we see the title of a methodistical
[Page 176]
pamphlet, we always make an erratum as we go along, and read it, “How to discern things with the help of the jaundice,—By an Eye-Witness,”— or “Hints towards keeping a bad state of health when you get it,—By a Sufferer.”
It was concerning the poets and others of their cast, whether in art or even philosophy, whether Raphael or Plato, that we intended to take up the conversation,—a race of men, among whom very few Methodists have been found; and for this reason, in addition to their natural powers of thinking,—that in their youth and health they have had too strong a sense of the beauties of things about them, for almost any adversity to tear away. They retain a certain healthiness of mind, as other people do of body, by a constant activity with nature,—a perpetual mental living, as it were, out of doors. Or rather they have more natural resources than other persons; they are richer when they begin the world. It is on this point, if any, that we differ with our Friend W. H. He attributes original poverty of spirit to poets, artists, &c. and we would substitute the word occasional or incidental . Poetry, in fact, with a reserve always as to first causes, or to the question why such a man is a poet and others are not, seems to be the result of an organization delicate,
[Page 177]
but not diseased, whatever disease may be induced afterwards. A young poet has perhaps the most pleasurable tendencies of any human being, and the greatest number of them;—at home or abroad, in the city or the country, in society or alone, he has an instinct to fasten on and fetch out the whole wealth of enjoyment; and as long as he is in health, this habit is of necessity the result of a love of pleasure, instead of a sense of pain, or of the want of resources. The smallest and most insignificant thing can administer to his pleasure by means of association; and it is from the same cause that he is enabled to render tenfold his sense of the beautiful, in what people admire in general,—that he has the brightest sense of the sunshine, and is the warmest lover of woman,— that he sees the splendour of an Arabian tale along the wealthy shops of a capital,—peoples every green field with all its pleasures at once,—and accompanies the movements of a beautiful figure with a host of graces and delights. It was in this feeling that Akenside, himself a young poet at the time, invoked his animal as well as intellectual spirits in the Pleasures of Imagination :—
“Be present, all ye Genii, who conduct
The wandering footsteps of the youthful bard
New to your springs and shades,—who touch his ear
[Page 178]
With finer sounds,—who heighten to his eye
The bloom of nature, and before him turn
The gayest, happiest attitude of things.”
On the other hand, it is evident that this exquisite tendency to pleasure is liable, from the delicacy of its nature, to degenerate into as exquisite a tendency to pain; and poets may exhibit the poverty in question more than other men, not because they have been always poor, but because, like other spendthrifts of great wealth, the change from riches to poverty is the greater.
Let a poet do his utmost to keep his health,—to hinder his nerves from being overwrought, and to preserve his blood in its proper flow, and we will answer for it, that his life runs sprightly to the last. But what are his temptations? To say nothing, for instance, of other sensualities, he has as strong a relish of repose as of action; the nature of modern education, and of modern customs in general, tends to throw him into sedentary enjoyment; and the single fact of his giving way to this propensity,—of his hanging over books, and cultivating his mental activity at the expence of his bodily,—may weaken his organs of digestion, and alter his sensations at once from pleasure to pain. This is a very unromantic circumstance, but it is a very true one. It is all very well to talk
[Page 179]
of grief and misfortunes; we are not unexperienced in either; nor do we mean to say that we do not sympathize with those whom they afflict, let the cause be what it may. If self-caused, so much indeed the more to be pitied. But grief, though certainly not always to be done away by endeavouring to strengthen the body, may generally be more modified by it than is imagined. The mind is a very delicate thing, but the body was given us to keep it in. We must not wonder that we get weather-beaten, if we do not take care of our wainscots. In a “sea of troubles,” a great deal surely depends on the boat. Such, however, after all, is the natural tendency of poets to pleasure, that they retain more of it, we are persuaded, in the midst of pain, than any persons of the same delicate organization, who are not poets. In fact, their very ability to resort to fancy for the supply of enjoyment is a proof of it. Epicurus said, that it was a relief to him, in the severest torments of the stone, to call to mind the pleasures he had enjoyed; and such is the philosophical power of poetry, with the additional excitement of its being able to embody its recollections in verse, and to procure fame by them. We are aware but of six poets on record, whose nerves appear to have embittered their existence,—
[Page 180]
Tasso, Salvator Rosa, Racine, Cowper, Collins, and Alfieri. The two latter had been rakes; the nerves of the third seem, from his very infancy, to have hung together by threads; and the second apparently resembled him, for he absolutely died of nervousness at losing the countenance of Louis the Fourteenth. The cause of Tasso's hypochondria is involved in mystery; and we believe, after all, that he got rid of it, as temperate people are apt to do, towards the latter part of their lives. If Parnell is to increase the list, it should be added, that his final bad spirits have been attributed to the loss of his wife, and that, to try and better them, he resorted to the bottle. We speak, of course, with reverence of the frailties of such beings, as well as of their other infirmities. Tasso was perhaps a little proud and assuming; but Parnell, Cowper, and Racine, were all most amiable men; and so must Collins have been, if we are to judge from the fondness exhibited for him by Dr Johnson. The most complete specimen of destitution of spirits, from first to last, and the only one we ever remember to have read of, is afforded by that accomplished genius, Salvator Rosa, who united, and with a certain degree of excellence too, poetry, painting, and music. He said of himself, if we rightly remember a passage we met
[Page 181]
with somewhere, that nature seemed to have formed him purely to make an experiment how far human suffering could go. But certainly he wanted boldness in no respect.
Should Chatterton's name be mentioned, who promised to be a great poet, it is to be remembered, that no youth ever set out in the world with higher spirits, as may be seen from his letters to his mother and sister; but he too was a spendthrift of them; and the contrast of pain seems to have overset him by its suddenness as well as violence. The late excellent Henry Kirke White, who promised to be a poet also, was a martyr to study.
“The spoiler swept that soaring lyre away,
Which else had sounded an immortal lay.
Oh what a noble heart was here undone,
When Science' self destroyed her favourite son.” Byron.
So says of him a noble poet, who is fulfilling the promise of his youth, and who has known enough of the pleasures and pains of his nature, to think, we dare say, with us.
But the poets above mentioned are nothing in point of number to the poets in general,—taking, of course, only the true ones, among which Parnell himself perhaps is scarcely to be admitted.
[Page 182]
Of the great mass, there is no reason to believe, but that if they had more pain, they had also more pleasure, than the rest of their fellow-creatures; and that pleasure, on the whole, was predominant. It has been supposed by some, that by “poverty of spirit,” our Friend W. H. meant want of spirit, in the common sense of the term, as referring to courage; but he means, of course, what we have already said, and not a deficiency which would be incompatible with enthusiasm, as well as especially contradicted by the poets of his own country, whom nobody understands or enjoys more. There may be a deficiency of animal courage, where there is the very greatest courage arising from reflection; and the latter, no doubt, belongs more to a delicate organization than the former.
But to proceed with a glance at the principal poets. Little or nothing is known of the personal habits of the Grecian poets; but Homer has been handed down by tradition, probably from his delight in expatiating on good cheer, (which, however, would tell as much the other way,) as having been what is now called a jolly fellow;—Anacreon, in spite of his drinking, is understood to have been merry to the last;—the Greek wine was probably not very potent, nor drunk by him immoderately,
[Page 183]
or he must have taken as much exercise as a fox-hunter, for he lived to an old age. The Greek tragedians, generally speaking, were men who led active lives in the world, and in professions which could not have put up with poverty of spirit.
The two poets who have done more harm, perhaps, to the reputation of their professions for spirit than all their brethren put together, are Virgil and Horace, both of them flatterers of Augustus, and the one an absolute runaway; but if the former is said to have been of a nervous temperament, the latter, whatever may have been his asthma, or his occasional fits of indigestion, was surely gifted with a very agreeable run of sensations,— so agreeable, that who has not pardoned him (the rogue!) for all his transgressions? He is the very Gil Blas of poets, with talents and sentiment to boot.
To come to modern Italy, we have already spoken of Tasso and Alfieri, and hardly know what to say on the score of the great Dante, who appears to have been a grave personage from his youth, though there is a delightful sonnet of his extant, in which he talks of going on a boat-party with some friends, in a style that is very amiable and companionable. But Petrarch's youth, as he
[Page 184]
himself tells us, was full of life and spirits; and so far from not having a relish for ordinary things, he was one of the greatest bucks at Avignon, and rallies himself and a friend of his on the exceeding care they used to take not to rumple their cloaks or splash their stockings. Ariosto, Pulci, Berni, 1 Bembo, Casa, Fortiguerri, Marino, all appear to have set out in similar health and spirits, and not to have lost them, generally speaking, afterwards, though most of them exhibited symptoms of delicate organization, and there is great reason to believe, had led very free lives. Guidi's temper is said to have been so diseased, that, as he was taking a copy of a new poem of his to court, in order to present it to the Pope, he died in the coach, of a fit of passion, on discovering some errors of the press. Filicaia, by his poems, appears to have been an habitual invalid and devotee; Redi describes himself as of a dry and chilly complexion; and Frugoni has written several little poems on his hypochondria, intermixed
[Page 185]
with warm praises of his physicians for defeating its attacks, which they appear never to have failed to do. A friend, who pronounced his panegyric, represents him as dying old and robust. Sannazarius died at an advanced age also, though his life had been far from fortunate; and so did Metastasio, a hypochondriac professed, who talks very pleasantly to his friend Farinelli about headache, tension of the nerves, and “other gentilities;” and says, he finds it, after all, “a cursed business, this same trade of heroism.” Tansillo's Tears of Saint Peter , written in his advanced years, was a mere piece of methodistical compromise, after the manner of David, for his previous rakery and his licentious poem of the Vintager . Among the French poets, we have already mentioned Racine. We do not remember any thing of the private life of Corneille. Moliere, we believe, was a nervous man, and so was Boileau; La Fontaine, when he died, was found to have a hair shirt next his skin,—a piece of penance for his Tales ; but the greater part of his life appears to have passed in a kind of contented infantine dream, half unconscious of the wit and fine things it uttered; and Chaulieu, La Fare, and above all Voltaire, what perfection of the animal as well as intellectual vivacity of their countrymen!
[Page 186]
Voltaire's cheerfulness is the last talent, perhaps, which his adversaries will forgive him.
To come home to England. It is not one of the least curious instances of the native spirit of this country, that three out of its four greatest poets,—Chaucer, Spenser, and Milton,—have been men of busy action in the political world,— that two out of the three were unequivocally on the side of freedom, and helped to procure us our present enjoyments,—and that the greater part of the rest, Gray, Collins, Pope, Thomson, Akenside, Andrew Marvell, &c. had a like feeling for independence. It is the same with the majority of the poets now living. There is no reason to believe that these celebrated men were not upon the whole very comfortable with themselves, and enjoyed what they have made so many others enjoy. Pope had evidently a quick relish of existence, in spite of his bodily infirmities. Gray and Collins were not so lively, but then it was after the season of youth. Thomson was of a cheerful temperament, so was Garth, so was Prior, Fenton, Congreve, so were Beaumont and Fletcher, so was Andrew Marvell, and so was Chaucer, till he got into prison in his old age. There is no doubt that Milton's infirmities arose from over-application, as well as political trouble;
[Page 187]
yet, in the midst of his blindness and all the rest, “with darkness and with dangers compassed round,” he expressly tells us that he had not abated “a jot of heart or hope.” That fine fellow, Sir Philip Sydney, (whose biographers, by the way, have not told half, we suspect, of what might be discovered by an inquiring and unprejudiced writer,) is said to have been of a temperament inclined to melancholy, but not in his first youth; it was after all but a gentle one,— a twilight, in which he saw things softly, if not brilliantly.—Cowley's was of the same description, —a tendency to “the pensive pleasures.” As to Shakspeare, who baffles one's speculations of every sort, it seems impossible, on the one hand, that he could have had such a complete feeling of the prostration of spirits,—of the wearisome sameness of a sickly eyesight,—as he has manifested in Hamlet and other characters, if he had not felt it in his own person; but then, on the other, what must have been his merriment and his volatility, if we are to judge from Falstaff, Benedick , and others of the laughing order? He must have been Democritus and Heraclitus in one person,—an anomaly not unaccountable on the very ground of melancholy itself; but this, after all, is a secondary question. His original
[Page 188]
spirits, according to the account given us of his early life, appear to have been sprightly and sanguine, to a degree of defiance.
The same remarks will apply to the painters and musicians. They do not appear to have been originally deficient in any sort of spirit, whatever want some of them may have induced upon themselves. Mozart is said to have suffered under an exhausted sensibility in the latter part of his life; but we believe he had a strong sense of other pleasures besides those of his art; and music, in its direct vibrations upon the nerves, always seemed likely to us, as far as we could guess, to be a more trying thing to a composer who enjoyed it, and who was not of a very stout organization, than poetry itself. It is absolute dram-drinking at the ear. Yet Haydn, from the little we have heard of him, appears to have been a very staid personage; and Handel, with all his sublimities, and even his delicacies and tricksome graces, was a gross kind of jovial fellow, and announced by a plethoric person (to use the Gibbonian style) the ample use he made of his knife and fork.
A certain amorousness, and perception of beauty, appear to be the distinguishing features of Mozart's composition; and in this respect, as well as in others, perhaps, he had some resemblance to Raphael,
[Page 189]
who seemed born for no other purpose but to feel what was amiable and beautiful, and to touch out anew, as it were, the sweetest note of our sphere. His very awfulness is lovely, like that of the cherub in Milton. Raphael received from nature such a sense of the pleasurable, that, if the general belief is well founded with respect to the occasion of his death, he fell a martyr to it in the 37th year of his age. Michael Angelo was of an austerer cast; but we do not know that his temper was melancholy. Rubens was a very high-toned spirit, and had a kind of princeliness and splendour in his style of living, that resembled the taste of his pictures.
The summary then of what we have been saying is this,—that poets, in our opinion, and those that partake of this character, have originally a wealth instead of poverty of spirit;—that they are very liable, however, from the temptations into which it leads them, to fall into such poverty;— but that, even then, they are more likely than most persons to retain a portion of their first resources, and feel some of that pleasure which they were made to communicate to the world. We say, moreover, that health is the great secret of wealth in this instance; and that a poet or painter, as well as any body else, who falls into lowness of
[Page 190]
spirit, should do his best to help himself out of it, —on horseback if he wants a lift more than ordinary, —with his feet, if he does not,—but with some mode of bodily effort at any rate. And now, having ended our long fit of talking, we feel in us an exceeding tendency to the pleasure of a glass of wine, (a reasonable one, of course,) and shall drink it, with this toast, to all our brother authors, present and to come,—
May good digestion wait on appetite,
And health on both. L. H.
[Page 190]
No. XXI. ON DEATH AND BURIAL. The Christian mythology personifies Death by an animated skeleton;—the Pagan did it by the figure of a pale but beautiful female, or with a reconcilement still more agreeable, by that of a butterfly escaped from its chrysalis. This was death, and the life that followed it, at once,— the soul freed from the body, and fluttering in the fresh air of Heaven.
The cultivation of pleasant associations is, next
[Page 191]
to health, the great secret of enjoyment; and, accordingly, as we lessen our cares and increase our pleasures, we may imagine ourselves affording a grateful spectacle to the Author of happiness. Error and misery, taken in their proportion, are the exceptions in his system. The world is most unquestionably happier upon the whole than otherwise; or light, and air, and the face of nature, would be different from what they are, and mankind no longer be buoyed up in perpetual hope and action. By cultivating agreeable thoughts, then, we tend, like bodies in philosophy, to the greater mass of sensations, rather than the less.
What we can enjoy, let us enjoy like creatures made for that very purpose: what we cannot, let us, in the same character, do our best to deprive of its bitterness. Nothing can be more idle than the voluntary gloom with which people think to please Heaven in certain matters, and which they confound with serious acknowledgment, or with what they call a due sense of its dispensations. It is nothing but the cultivation of the principle of fear, instead of confidence, with whatever name they may disguise it. It is carrying frightened faces to court, instead of glad and grateful ones; and is above all measure ridiculous, because the real cause of it, and, by the way, of a
[Page 192]
thousand other feelings which religious courtiers mistake for religion, cannot be concealed from the Being it is intended to honour. There is a dignity certainly in suffering, where we cannot chuse but suffer;—if we must take physic, let us do it like men;—but what would be his dignity, who, when he had the choice in his power, should make the physic bitterer than it is, or even refuse to render it more palatable, purely to look grave over it, and do honour to the physician?
The idea of our dissolution is one of those which we most abuse in this manner, principally, no doubt, because it is abhorrent from the strong principle of vitality implanted in us, and the habits that have grown up with it. But what then? So much the more should we divest it of all the unpleasant associations which it need not excite, and add to it all the pleasant ones which it will allow.
But what is the course we pursue? We remember having a strong impression, years ago, of the absurdity of our mode of treating a death-bed, and of the great desirableness of having it considered as nothing but a sick one,—one to be smoothed and comforted, even by cordial helps, if necessary. We remember also how some persons, who, nevertheless, did too much justice to the very
[Page 193]
freest of our speculations to consider them as profane, were startled by this opinion, till we found it expressed in almost so many words, by no less an authority than Lord Bacon. We got at our notion through a very different process, we dare say,—he through the depth of his knowledge, and we from the very buoyancy of our youth;—but we are not disposed to think it the less wise on that account. “The serious,” of course, are bound to be shocked at so cheering a proposition; but of them we have already spoken. The great objection would be, that such a system would deprive the evil-disposed of one terror in prospect, and that this principle of determent is already found too feeble to afford any diminution. The fact is, the whole principle is worth little or nothing, except the penalty to be inflicted is pretty certain, and appeals also to the less sentimental part of our nature. It is good habits,—a well educated conscience,—a little early knowledge,—the cultivation of generous motives,— must supply people with preventives of bad conduct; their sense of things is too immediate and lively to attend, in the long run, to any thing else. We will be bound to say, generally speaking, that the prospective terrors of a death-bed never influenced any others than nervous consciences, too weak, and inhabiting organizations
[Page 194]
too delicate, to afford to be very bad ones. But, in the mean time, they may be very alarming to such consciences in prospect, and very painful to the best and most temperate of mankind in actual sufferance; and why should this be, but, as we have said before, to keep bitter that which we could sweeten, and to persist in a mistaken want of relief, under a notion of its being a due sense of our condition? We know well enough what a due sense of our condition is in other cases of infirmity; and what is a death-bed but the very acme of infirmity,—the sickness, bodily and mental, that of all others has most need of relief?
If the death-bed happens to be an easy one, the case is altered; and no doubt it is oftener so than people imagine;—but how much pains are often taken to render it difficult?—First, the chamber, in which the dying person lies, is made as gloomy as possible with curtains, and vials, and nurses, and terrible whispers, and perhaps the continual application of handkerchiefs to weeping eyes;— then, whether he wishes it or not, or is fit to receive it or not, he is to have the whole truth told him by some busy-body, who never was so anxious perhaps in the cause of veracity before;— and lastly, some partings, and family assemblings, and confusion of the head with matters of faith,
[Page 195]
and trembling prayers that tend to force upon dying weakness the very doubts they undertake to dissipate. Well may the soldier take advantage of such death-beds as these, to boast of the end that awaits him in the field.
But having lost our friend, we must still continue to add to our own misery at the circumstance. We must heap about the recollection of our loss all the most gloomy and distasteful circumstances we can contrive, and thus, perhaps, absolutely incline ourselves to think as little of him as possible. We wrap the body in ghastly habiliments, put it in as tasteless a piece of furniture as we can invent, dress ourselves in the gloomiest of colours, awake the barbarous monotony of the church-bell, (to frighten every sick person in the neighbourhood,) call about us a set of officious mechanics, of all sorts, who are counting their shillings, as it were, by the tears that we shed, and watching with jealousy every candle's end of their “perquisites,”—and proceed to consign our friend or relation to the dust, under a ceremony that takes particular pains to impress that consummation on our minds.—Lastly, come tasteless tombstones and ridiculous epitaphs, with perhaps a skull and cross-bones at top; and the tombstones are crowded together, generally in the middle of towns, always
[Page 196]
near the places of worship, unless the church-yard is overstocked. Scarcely ever is there a tree on the spot;—in some remote villages alone are the graves ever decorated with flowers. All is stony, earthy, and dreary. It seems as if, after having rendered every thing before death as painful as possible, we endeavoured to subside into a sullen indifference, which contradicted itself by its own efforts.
The Greeks managed these things better. It is curious that we, who boast so much of our knowledge of the immortality of the soul, and of the glad hopes of an after-life, should take such pains to make the image of death melancholy; while, on the other hand, Gentiles whom we treat with so much contempt for their ignorance on those heads, should do the reverse, and associate it with emblems that ought to belong rather to us. But the truth is, that we know very little what we are talking about, when we speak, in the gross, of the ancients, and of their ideas of Deity and humanity. The very finest and most amiable part of our notions on those subjects comes orginally from their philosophers;—all the rest, the gloom, the bad passions, the favouritism, are the work of other hands, who have borrowed the better materials as they proceeded, and then pretended an original right in them. Even the absurd
[Page 197]
parts of the Greek Mythology are less painfully absurd than those of any other; because, generally speaking, they are on the cheerful side instead of the gloomy. We would rather have a Deity, who fell in love with the beautiful creatures of his own making, than one, who would consign nine hundred out of a thousand to destruction, for not believing ill of him.
But not to digress from the main subject. The Ancients did not render the idea of death so harshly distinct, as we do, from that of life. They did not extinguish all light and cheerfulness in their minds, and in things about them, as it were, on the instant; neither did they keep before one's eyes, with hypochondriacal pertinacity, the idea of death's heads and skeletons, which, as representations of humanity, are something more absurd than the brick which the pedant carried about as the specimen of his house. They selected pleasant spots for sepulture, and outside the town; they adorned their graves with arches and pillars,—with myrtles, lilies, and roses; they kept up the social and useful idea of their great men by entombing them near the highway, so that every traveller paid his homage as he went; and latterly, they reduced the dead body to ashes,— a clean and inoffensive substance,—gathered into
[Page 198]
a tasteful urn, and often accompanied it with other vessels of exquisite construction, on which were painted the most cheerful actions of the person departed, even to those of his every-day life,— the prize in the games, the toilet, the recollections of his marriages and friendships,—the figures of beautiful females,—every thing, in short, which seemed to keep up the idea of a vital principle, and to say, “the creature, who so did and so enjoyed itself, cannot be all gone.” The image of the vital principle and of an after-life was, in fact, often and distinctly repeated on these vessels by a variety of emblems, animal and vegetable, particularly those mentioned in the beginning of this article, the image of Psyche or the soul by means of the butterfly,—an association which, in process of time, as other associations gathered about it, gave rise to the most exquisite allegory in the world, the story of Cupid and Psyche.
Now, we do not mean to say, that every body who thinks as we do upon this subject, should or can depart at once from existing customs, especially the chief ones. These things must either go gradually or by some convulsive movement in society, as others have gone; and mere eccentricity is no help to their departure. What we cannot undo, let us only do as decently as possible; but
[Page 199]
we might render the dying a great deal more comfortable, by just daring a little to consider their comforts and not our puerility; we might allow their rooms also to be more light and cheerful; we might take pains to bring pleasanter associations about them altogether; and when they were gone, we might cultivate our own a little better; our tombstones might at least be in better taste; we might take more care of our graves; we might preserve our sick neighbours from the sound of the death-bell; a single piece of ribbon or crape would surely be enough to guard us against the unweeting inquiries of friends, while, in the rest of our clothes, we might adopt, by means of a ring or a watch-ribbon, some cheerful instead of gloomy recollection of the person we had lost,—a favourite colour, for instance, or device,—and thus contrive to balance a grief which we must feel, and which, indeed, in its proper associations, it would not be desirable to avoid. Rousseau died gazing on the setting sun, and was buried under green trees. Petrarch, who seemed born to complete and render glorious the idea of an author from first to last, was found dead in his study with his head placidly resting on a book. What is there in deaths like these to make us look back with
[Page 200]
anguish, or to plunge into all sorts of gloominess and bad taste?
We know not whether it has ever struck any of our readers, but we seem to consider the relics of ancient taste, which we possess, as things of mere ornament, and forget that their uses may be in some measure preserved, so as to complete the idea of their beauty, and give them, as it were, a soul again. We place their urns and vases, for instance, about our apartments, but never think of putting any thing in them; yet when they are not absolutely too fragile, we might often do so,— fruit, flowers,—toilet utensils,—a hundred things, with a fine opportunity (to boot) of shewing our taste in inscriptions. The Chinese, in the Citizen of the World , when he was shewn the two large vases from his own country, was naturally amused to hear that they only served to fill up the room, and held no supply of tea in them as they did at home. A lady, a friend of ours, who shews in her countenance her origin from a country of taste, and who acts up to the promise of her countenance, is the only person, but one, whom we ever knew to turn antique ornament to account in this respect. She buried a favourite bird in a vase on her mantle-piece; and there the little rogue lies, with more kind and tasteful associations
[Page 201]
about him, than the greatest dust in Christendom. The other instance is that of two urns of marble, which have been turned as much as possible to the original purposes of such vessels, by becoming the depository of locks of hair. A lock of hair is an actual relic of the dead, as much so, in its proportion, as ashes, and more lively and recalling than even those. It is the part of us that preserves vitality longest; it is a clean and elegant substance: and it is especially connected with ideas of tenderness, in the cheek or the eyes about which it may have strayed, and the handling we may have given it on the living head. The thoughts connected with such relics time gradually releases from grief itself, and softens into nothing but tender enjoyment; and we know that in the instance alluded to, the possessor of those two little urns would no more consent to miss them from his study, than he would any other cheerful association that he could procure. It is a feeling, which he would not forego for a great deal, that the venerable and lovely dust to which they belonged lies in a village church-yard, and has left the most unfading part of it inclosed in graceful vessels. L. H.
[Page 213]
No. XXIV. ON THE NIGHT-MARE. I do not hesitate to declare to the reader, even in this free-thinking age, that I am no small adept in the uses of the Occult Philosophy, as I
[Page 214]
shall thoroughly make manifest.—Be it known then, that I am sometimes favoured with the visits of a nocturnal spirit, from whom I receive the most excellent lessons of wisdom. His appearance is not highly prepossessing, and the weight of his manner of teaching, joined to the season he chuses for that purpose, has in it something not a little tremendous; but the end of his instruction is the enjoyment of virtue, and as he is conscious of the alarming nature of his aspect, he takes leave of the initiated the moment they reduce his theory to practice. It is true, there are a number of foolish persons living in and about this metropolis, who, instead of being grateful for his friendly
[Page 215]
offices, have affected to disdain them, in the hope of tiring him out, and thus getting rid of his disagreeable presence; but they could not have taken a worse method, for his benevolence is as unwearied as his lessons and appearances are formidable, and these unphilosophic scorners are only punished every night of their lives in consequence. If any curious person wishes to see him, the ceremony of summoning him to appear is very simple, though it varies according to the aspirant's immediate state of blood. With some, nothing more is required than the mastication of a few unripe plums or a cucumber, just before midnight: others must take a certain portion of that part of a calf, which is used for what are vulgarly called veal-cutlets: others, again, find the necessary charm in an omelet or an olio. For my part, I am so well acquainted with the different ceremonies, that, without any preparation, I have only to lie in a particular posture, and the spirit is sure to make its appearance. The figures under which it presents itself are various, but it generally takes its position upon the breast in a shape altogether indescribable, and is accompanied with circumstances of alarm and obscurity, not a little resembling those which the philosophers underwent on their initiation into the Eleusinian and other mysteries.
[Page 216]
The first sensations you experience are those of a great oppression and inability to move; these you endeavour to resist, but after an instant resign yourself to their control, or rather flatter yourself you will do so, for the sensation becomes so painful, that in a moment you struggle into another effort, and if in this effort you happen to move yourself and cry out, the spirit is sure to be gone, for it detests a noise as heartily as a monk of La Trappe, a traveller in the Alps, or a thief. Could an intemperate person in this situation be but philosopher enough to give himself up to the spirit's influence for a few minutes, he would see his visitant to great advantage, and gather as much knowledge at once as would serve him instead of a thousand short visits, and make him a good liver for months to come.
It was by this method some time ago, that I not only obtained a full view of the spirit, but gradually gathering strength from sufferance, as those who are initiated into any great wisdom must, contrived to enter into conversation with it. The substance of our dialogue I hereby present to the reader, for it is a mistaken notion of the pretenders to the Cabala, that, to reveal the secrets on these occasions, is to do harm, and incur the displeasure of our spiritual acquaintances. All the harm, as I
[Page 217]
have said before, is in not understanding the secrets properly, and explaining them for the benefit of mankind; and on this head I have an objection to make to that ancient and industrious order of Illuminati the Freemasons, who, though they hold with my familiar that eating suppers is one of the high roads to experimental wisdom, differ with him in confining their knowledge to such persons as can purchase it.
I had returned at a late hour from the representation of a new comedy, and after eating a sleepy and not very great supper, reclined myself on the sopha in a half sitting posture, and took up a little Horace to see if I could keep my eyes open with a writer so full of contrast to what I had been hearing. I happened to pitch upon that Ode, At O Deorum quisquis, &c. , describing an ancient witchesmeeting, and fell into an obscure kind of reverie upon the identity of popular superstition in different ages and nations. The comic dramatist, however, had been too much for me; the weather, which had been warm, but was inclining to grow cloudy, conspired with my heaviness, and the only sounds to be heard, were the ticking of a small clock in the room, and the fitful sighs of the wind as it rose without,
The moaning herald of a weeping sky.
[Page 218]
By degrees my eyes closed, my hand with the book dropped one way, and my head dropped back the other upon a corner of the sopha.
When you are in a state the least adapted to bodily perception, it is well known that you are in the precise state for spiritual. I had not been settled, I suppose, for more than a quarter of an hour, when the lid of a veal-pye, which I had lately attacked, began swelling up and down with an extraordinary convulsion, and I plainly perceived a little figure rising from beneath it, which grew larger and larger as it ascended, and then advanced with great solemnity towards me over the dishes. This phenomenon, which I thought I had seen often before, but could not distinctly remember how or where, was about two feet high, six inches of which, at least, went to the composition of its head. Between its jaws and shoulders there was no separation whatever, so that its face, which was very broad and pale, came immediately on its bosom, where it quivered without ceasing in a very alarming manner, being, it seems, of a paralytic sensibility like blanc-mange. The fearfulness of this aspect was increased by two staring and intent eyes, a nose turned up, but large, and a pair of thick lips turned despondingly down at the corners. Its hair, which stuck about its ears like
[Page 219]
the quills of a porcupine, was partly concealed by a bolster rolled into a turban, and decorated with duck's feathers. The body was dressed in a kind of armour, of a substance resembling what is called crackling, and girded with a belt curiously studded with Spanish olives, in the middle of which, instead of pistols, were stuck two small bottles containing a fiery liquor. On its shoulders were wings shaped like the bat's, but much larger; its legs terminated in large feet of lead; and in its hands, which were of the same metal, and enormously disproportioned, it bore a Turkish bowstring.
At sight of this formidable apparition, I felt an indescribable and oppressive sensation, which by no means decreased, as it came nearer and nearer, staring and shaking its face at me, and making as many ineffable grimaces as Munden in a farce. It was in vain, however, I attempted to move; I felt, all the time, like a leaden statue, or like Gulliver pinned to the ground by the Lilliputians; and was wondering how my sufferings would terminate, when the phantom, by a spring off the table, pitched himself with all his weight upon my breast, and I thought began fixing his terrible bowstring. At this, as I could make no opposition, I determined at least to cry out as lustily as possible, and was beginning to make the effort, when the spirit motioned
[Page 220]
me to be quiet, and, retreating a little from my throat, said, in a low suffocating tone of voice, “Wilt thou never be philosopher enough to leave off sacrificing unto calf's flesh?”
“In the name of the Great Solomon's ring,” I ejaculated, “what art thou?”
“My name,” replied the being, a little angrily, “which thou wast unwittingly going to call out, is Mnpvtglnau-auw-auww, and I am Prince of the Night-mares.”
“Ah, my Lord,” returned I, “you will pardon my want of recollection, but I had never seen you in your full dress before, and your presence is not very composing to the spirits. Doubtless this is the habit in which you appeared with the other genii at the levee of the mighty Solomon.”
“A fig for the mighty Solomon!” said the spirit, good humouredly; “this is the cant of the Cabalists, who pretend to know so much about us. I assure you, Solomon trembled much more at me than I did at him. I found it necessary, notwithstanding all his wisdom, to be continually giving him advice; and many were the quarrels I had on his account with Peor, the Dæmon of Sensuality, and a female devil named Ashtoreth.”
“The world,” said I, “my Prince, do not give you credit for so much benevolence.”
[Page 221]
“No,” replied he, “the world are never just to their best advisers. My figure, it is true, is not the most prepossessing, and my manner of teaching is less so; but I am nevertheless a benevolent spirit, and would do good to the most ungrateful of your fellow-creatures. This very night, between the hours of ten and one, I have been giving lessons to no less than twelve priests, and twenty-one citizens. The studious I attend somewhat later, and the people of fashion towards morning.—But as you seem inclined at last to make a proper use of my instructions, I will recount you some of my adventures, if you please, that you may relate them to your countrymen, and teach them to appreciate the trouble I have with them.”
“You are really obliging,” said I, “and I should be all attention, would you do me the favour to sit a little more lightly, for each of your fingers appears heavier than a porter's load, and, to say the truth, the very sight of that bowstring almost throttles me.” L. H.
[Page 222]
THE SUBJECT CONTINUED. At these words the spectre gave a smile, which I can compare to nothing but the effect of vinegar on a death's-head. However, he rose up, though very slowly, and I once more breathed with transport, like a person dropping into his chair after a long journey. He then seated himself with much dignity on the pillow at the other end of the sopha, and thus resumed the discourse:—“I have been among mankind, ever since the existence of cooks and bad consciences, and my office is two-fold, to give advice to the well-disposed, and to inflict punishment on the ill. The spirits over which I preside are of that class called by the ancients Incubi, but it was falsely supposed that we were fond of your handsome girls, as the Rosicrucians maintain, for it is our business to suppress, not encourage the passions, as you may guess by my appearance.”
“Pardon me,” interrupted I, “but the poets and painters represent your Highness as riding about on horseback; some of them even make
[Page 223]
you the horse itself, and it is thus that we have been taught to account for the term Night-mare.”
Here the phantom gave another smile, which made me feel sympathetically about the mouth as though one of my teeth was being drawn. “A pretty jest,” said he: “as if a spiritual being had need of a horse to carry him! The general name of my species in this country is of Saxon origin: the Saxons, uniting as they did the two natures of Britons and Germans, eat and drank with a vengeance; of course they knew me very well, and being continually visited by me in all my magnificence, called me, by way of eminence, the Night Mara , or Spirit of Night. As to the poets and painters, I do not know enough of them to be well acquainted with their misrepresentations of me, though all of those gentlemen who could afford it have been pretty intimate with me. The moralizing Epicurean, whom you have in your hand there, I knew very well. Very good things he wrote, to be sure, about temperance and lettuces; but he eat quite as good at Mecænas's table. You may see the delicate state of his faculties by the noise he makes about a little garlick. Anacreon was so fond of drinking and raking that he had little leisure to eat,—and I did not see him much till latterly, but then my visits were pretty constant
[Page 224]
and close. His wine killed him at last, and this is the event which his successors have so neatly shadowed forth as the effect of a grape-stone. As rakes rather than eaters, I knew also Politian, Boccace, and other Italians, whose hot complexion made them suffer for every excess. A great eater suffers the pains of a rake, and a rake, if he does not half starve himself, suffers the pains of a great eater. The French poets have lived too lightly to be much troubled with my attendance, and I cannot say I know much of your English ones. There was Congreve, indeed, who dined every day with a duchess, and had the gout: I visited him often enough, and once wreaked on him a pretty set of tortures under the figure of one Jeremy Collier. My Lord Rochester, who might have displayed so true a fancy of his own without my assistance, had scarcely a single idea with which I did not supply him, for five years together, during which time, you know, he confessed himself to have been in a state of intoxication. But I am sorry to say, that I have had no small trouble with some of your poetical moralists, as well as men of pleasure. Something, I confess, must be allowed to Pope, whose constitution hardly allowed him an hour's enjoyment; but an invalid so fond of good things might have spared the citizens and clergy a little.
[Page 225]
It must be owned also, that the good temper he really possessed did much honour to his philosophy; but it would have been greater, could he have denied himself that silver saucepan. It seduced him into a hundred miseries. One night, in particular, I remember, after he had made a very sharp attack on Addison and a dish of lampreys, he was terribly used by my spirits, who appeared to him in the shapes of so many flying pamphlets:— he awoke in great horror, crying out with a ghastly smile, like a man who pretends to go easily through a laborious wager, ‘These things are my diversion.’ With regard to Dr Johnson, about whose masticating faculties so much has been said, people do not consider his great bulk and love of exercise. He may have eaten twice as much as any one of his companions; but then he was twice as large, and wanted twice as much enjoyment. I assure you, all the tea he drank did not hurt him a jot. Consider the size of the cups in those days, and of the great man who emptied them, and it was nothing but an April shower on Plinlimmon. It is true, he compelled my attendance somewhat too often, but no oftener than men of less size and much less right. The worst night he passed was after he received his pension: he thought he was Osborne the bookseller, and that he was knocked
[Page 226]
down with the second volume of his folio dictionary. —As to your painters, I have known still less of them, though I am acquainted with one now living, who has so long tried to be horrible, that he has at last spoiled his genius, and become entirely so. I once sat to this gentleman at midnight for my portrait, and the likeness is allowed by all of us to be excellent.”
“Well,” interrupted I, “but it is not at all like you in your present aspect.”
“No,” replied the phantom, “it is my poetical look. I have all sorts of looks and shapes, civic, political, and poetical. Last night, for instance, I appeared to a city baronet, and sat upon his chest in the shape of a bale of goods. I then went to a Minister's, who had been at a dinner with his brethren to consult what they should do six months hence against a pressing emergency; and after I had horrified him with all sorts of fancies about taxes, and Whigs, and Reformers, want of place, want of words, political convulsions, Austria, and Bonaparte, I finished my night's work with a still greater personage, upon whom I took my seat in the likeness of a huge and indescribable compound, made up of tight clothes, turtle, and quart bottles, with a double-faced wig-block for the head, and a jacket laced with bills and billets-doux, and hung
[Page 227]
with needles and thread for epaulets. It is by particular favour,” continued he, “that I appear to you as I really am; but as you have not seen many of my shapes, I will, if you please, give you a sample of some of my best.”
“Oh, by no means,” said I, somewhat hastily, “I can imagine quite enough from your descriptions. The philosophers certainly ill-used you when they represented you as a seducer.”
“The false philosophers did,” replied the spectre; “the real philosophers knew me better. It was at my instance that Pythagoras forbade the eating of beans; Plato owed some of his schemes to my hints, though I confess not his best; and I also knew Socrates very well from my intimacy with Alcibiades, but the familiar that attended him was of a much higher order than myself, and rendered my services unnecessary. However, my veneration for that illustrious man was so great, that, on the night when he died, I revenged him finely on his two principal enemies. People talk of the flourishing state of vice, and the happiness which guilty people sometimes enjoy in contrast with the virtuous; but they know nothing of what they talk. You should have seen Alexander in bed after one of his triumphant feasts, or Domitian or Heliogabalus after a common supper, and you
[Page 228]
would have seen who was the true monarch, the master of millions, or the master of himself. The Prince retired perhaps amidst lights, garlands, and perfumes, with the pomp of music, and through a host of bowing heads: every thing he saw and touched reminded him of empire; his bed was of the costliest furniture, and he reposed by the side of beauty. Reposed, did I say? As well might you stretch a man on a gilded rack, and fan him into forgetfulness. No sooner had he obtained a little slumber, but myself and other spirits revenged the crimes of the day; in a few minutes the convulsive snatches of his hands and features announce the rising agitation; his face blackens and swells; his clenched hands grasp the drapery about him; he tries to turn but cannot, for a hundred horrors, the least of which is the fear of death, crowd on him and wither his faculties, till at last, by an effort of despair, he wakes with a fearful outcry, and springs from the bed, pale, trembling, and aghast, afraid of the very assistance he would call, and terrified at the consciousness of himself. Such are the men, before whom millions of you rational creatures consent to tremble.”
“You talk like an orator,” said I; “but every ambitious prince, I suppose, has not horrors like
[Page 229]
these, for every one is neither so luxurious as Alexander, nor so indolent and profligate as a Domitian or Heliogabalus. Conquerors, I should think, are generally too full of business to have leisure for consciences and night-mares.”
“Why, a great deal may be done,” answered the spirit, “against horrors of any kind by mere dint of industry. But too much business, especially of a nature that keeps passion on the stretch, will sometimes perform the office of indolence and luxury, and turn revengefully upon the mind. To this were owing, in great measure, the epilepsies of Cæsar and Mohammed. In the same way, I revenged the world on Dionysius of Syracuse, Henry VIII., Charles IX., on monks, nabobs, inquisitors, women of pleasure, and other tormentors of mankind. With the faces of most of the Roman Emperors I am as familiar as an antiquary, particularly from Tiberius down to Caligula; and again from Constantine downwards. But if I punished the degenerate Romans, I nevertheless punished their enemies too. They were not aware, when scourged by Attila, what nights their tormentor passed. Luckily for justice, he brought from Germany not only fire and sword, but a true German appetite. I know not a single conqueror of modern times,
[Page 230]
who equalled him in horror of dreaming, unless it was a little, spare, aguey, peevish, supper-eating fellow, whom you call Frederick the Great. Those exquisite ragouts, the enjoyment of which added new relish to the sarcasms he dealt about him with a royalty so unanswerable, sufficiently revenged the sufferers for their submission. Nevertheless, he dealt by his dishes as some men do by their mistresses; he loved them the more they tormented him. Poor Trenck, with his bread and water in the dungeon of Magdeburg, enjoyed a repose fifty times more serene than the royal philosopher in his palace of Sans Souci, or Without Care. Even on the approach of death, this great conqueror—this warrior full of courage and sage speculation—could not resist the customary pepper and sauce piquant, though he knew he should inevitably see me at night, armed with all his sins, and turning his bed into a nest of monsters.”
“Heaven be praised,” cried I, “that he had a taste so retributive! The people under arbitrary governments must needs have a respect for the dishes at court. I now perceive, more than ever, the little insight we have into the uses of things. Formerly one might have imagined that eating and drinking had no use but the vulgar one of
[Page 231]
sustaining life; but it is manifest that they save the law a great deal of trouble, and the writers of cookery books can be considered in no other light than as expounders of a criminal code. Really, I shall hereafter approach a dish of turtle with becoming awe, and already begin to look upon a ragout as something very equitable and inflexible.”
“You do justice,” observed the spirit, “to those eminent dishes, and in the only proper way. People who sit down to a feast with their joyous darting of eyes and rubbing of hands, would have very different sensations, did they know what they were about to attack. You must know, that the souls of tormented animals survive after death, and become instruments of punishment for mankind. Most of these are under my jurisdiction, and form great part of the monstrous shapes that haunt the slumbers of the intemperate. Fish crimped alive, lobsters boiled alive, and pigs whipped to death, become the most active and formidable spirits, and if the object of their vengeance take too many precautions to drown his senses when asleep, there is the subtle and fell Gout waiting to torment his advanced years, a spirit partaking of the double nature of the Night-mare and Salamander, and more terrible than any one
[Page 232]
of us, inasmuch as he makes his attacks by day as well as by night.”
“I shudder to think,” interrupted I, “even of the monstrous combinations which have disturbed my own rest, and formed so horrible a contrast to the gaiety of a social supper.”
“Oh, as for that matter,” said the phantom, in a careless tone, “you know nothing of the horrors of a glutton, or an epicure, or a nefarious debauchee. Suffocation with bolsters, heaping of rocks upon the chest, buryings alive, and strugglings to breathe without a mouth, are among their common-place sufferings. The dying glutton in La Fontaine never was so reasonable, as when he desired to have the remainder of his fish. He was afraid that if he did not immediately go off, he might have a nap before he died, which would have been a thousand times worse than death. Had Apicius, Ciacco the Florentine, Dartineuf, or Quin, been able and inclined to paint what they had seen, Callot would have been a mere Cipriani to them. I could produce you a jolly fellow, a corpulent nobleman, from the next hotel, the very counterpart of the glutton in Rubens's Fall of the Damned , who could bring together a more hideous combination of fancies than are to be found in Milton's Hell. He is not without
[Page 233]
information, and a disposition naturally good, but a long series of bad habits have made him what they call a man of pleasure, that is to say, he takes all sorts of pains to get a little enjoyment which shall produce him a world of misery. One of his passions, which he will not resist, is for a particular dish, pungent, savoury, and multifarious, which sends him almost every night into Tartarus. At this minute, the spectres of the supper-table are busy with him, and Dante himself could not have worked up a greater horror for the punishment of vice than the one he is undergoing. He fancies that though he is himself , he is nevertheless four different beings at once, of the most odious and contradictory natures,—that his own indescribable feelings are fighting bodily and maliciously with each other,—and that there is no chance left him either for escape, forgetfulness, or cessation.”
“Gracious powers!” cried I; “what, all this punishment for a dish?”
“You do not recollect,” answered the spirit, “what an abuse such excesses are of the divine gift of reason, and how they distort the best tendencies of human nature. The whole end of existence is perverted by not taking proper care of the body. This man will rise to-morrow morning, pallid, nervous, and sullen; his feelings must be
[Page 234]
reinforced with a dram to bear the ensuing afternoon; and I foresee, that the ill-temper arising from his debauch, will lead him into a very serious piece of injustice against his neighbour. To the same cause may be traced fifty of the common disquietudes of life, its caprices, and irritabilities. To-night a poor fellow is fretful because his supper was not rich enough, but to-morrow night he will be in torture because it was too rich. An hysterical lady shall flatter herself she is very sentimentally miserable, when most likely her fine feelings are to be deduced, not from sentiment, but a surfeit. Your Edinburgh wits thought they had laid down a very droll impossibility when they talked of cutting a man's throat with a pound of pickled salmon, whereas much less dishes have performed as wonderful exploits. I have known a hard egg to fill a household with dismay for days together; a cucumber has disinherited an only son; and a whole province has incurred the royal anger of its master at the instigation of a set of woodcocks.”
“It is a thousand pities,” said I, “that history, instead of habituating us to love ‘the pomp and circumstance’ of bad passions, cannot trace the actions of men to their real sources.”
“Well, well,” said the spirit, “now that you are
[Page 235]
getting grave on the subject, I think I may bid you adieu. Your nation has produced excellent philosophers, who were not the less wise for knowing little of me. Pray tell your countrymen that they are neither philosophic nor politic in feasting as they do on all occasions, joyful, sorrowful, or indifferent: that good sense, good temper, and the good of their country, are distinct things from indigestion; and that, when they think to shew their patriotic devotion by carving and gormandizing, they are no wiser than the bacchanals of old, who took serpents between their teeth, and tortured themselves with knives.”
So saying, the spectre rose, and stretching out his right hand, with a look which I believe he intended to be friendly, advanced towards me; he then took my hand in his own, and perceiving signs of alarm in my countenance, burst into a fit of laughter, which was the very quintessence of discord, and baffles all description, being a compound of the gabblings of geese, grunting of hogs, quacking of ducks, squabbling of turkies, and winding up of smoke-jacks. When the fit was pretty well over, he gave me a squeeze of the hand, which made me jump up with a spring of the knees, and gradually enveloping himself in a kind of steam, vanished with a noise like the
[Page 236]
crash of crockery ware. I looked about me; I found that my right hand, which held the Horace, had got bent under me, and gone to sleep, and that, in my sudden start, I had kicked half the dishes from the supper-table. L. H.
[Volume II]
[Page 122]
No. XXXIX. A DAY BY THE FIRE. I am one of those that delight in a fireside, and can enjoy it without even the help of a cat or a tea-kettle. To cats, indeed, I have an aversion, as animals that only affect a sociality, without caring a jot for any thing but their own luxury; and my tea-kettle,—I frankly confess,—has long been displaced, or rather dismissed, by a bronze-coloured
[Page 123]
and graceful urn; though, between ourselves, I am not sure that I have gained any thing by the exchange. Cowper, it is true, talks of the “bubbling and loud-hissing urn,” which
“Throws up a steamy column,”
but there was something so primitive and unaffected,—so warm-hearted and unpresuming, in the tea-kettle,—its song was so much more cheerful and continued,—and it kept the water so hot and comfortable as long as you wanted it,—that I sometimes feel as if I had sent off a good, plain, faithful old friend, who had but one wish to serve me, for a superficial, smooth-faced upstart of a fellow, who, after a little promising and vapouring, grows cold and contemptuous, and thinks himself bound to do nothing but stand on a rug and have his person admired by the circle. To this admiration, in fact, I have been obliged to resort, in order to make myself think well of my bargain, if possible; and, accordingly, I say to myself every now and then during the tea,— “A pretty look with it—that urn;” or, “It's wonderful what a taste the Greeks had;” or, “The eye might have a great many enjoyments, if people would but look after forms and shapes.” In the meanwhile, the urn leaves off its “bubbling and hissing,”—but then
[Page 124]
there is such an air with it! My tea is made of cold water,—but then the Greeks were such a nation!
If there is any one thing that can reconcile me to the loss of my kettle, more than another, it is that my fire has been left to itself; it has full room to breathe and to blaze, and I can poke it as I please. What recollections does that idea excite!—Poke it as I please!—Think, benevolent Reader,—think of the pride and pleasure of having in your hand that awful, but, at the same time, artless weapon, a poker,—of putting it into the proper bar,—gently levering up the coals,—and seeing the instant and bustling flame above! To what can I compare that moment? That sudden, empyreal enthusiasm? That fiery expression of vivification? That ardent acknowledgment, as it were, of the care and kindliness of the operator? —Let me consider a moment:—it is very odd;— I was always reckoned a lively hand at a simile; —but language and combination absolutely fail me here. If it is like any thing, it must be something beyond every thing in beauty and life. Oh —I have it now:—think, Reader,—if you are one of those who can muster up sufficient sprightliness to engage in a game of forfeits,—on Twelfth night, for instance,—think of a blooming girl, who is condemned to “open her mouth and shut her eyes,
[Page 125]
and see what heaven,” in the shape of a mischievous young fellow, “will send her.” Her mouth is opened accordingly, the fire of her eyes is dead, her face assumes a doleful air;—up walks the aforesaid heaven or mischievous young fellow, (young Ouranos,—Hesiod would have called him,) and, instead of a piece of paper, a thimble, or a cinder, claps into her mouth a peg of orange or a long slice of citron;—then her eyes above instantly light up again,—the smiles wreathe about,—the sparklings burst forth, and all is warmth, brilliancy, and delight.—I am aware that this simile is not perfect; but if it would do for an epic poem, as I think it might, after Virgil's whipping-tops and Homer's jackasses and black-puddings, the reader, perhaps, will not quarrel with it.
But to describe my feelings in an orderly manner, I must request the reader to go with me through a day's enjoyments by the fireside. It is part of my business to look about for helps to reflection; and, for this reason, among many others, I indulge myself in keeping a good fire from morning till night. I have also a reflective turn for an easy chair, and a very thinking attachment to comfort in general. But of this, as I proceed. —Imprimis, then,—the morning is clear and cold, —time, half-past seven,—scene, a breakfast-room.
[Page 126]
Some persons, by the bye, prefer a thick and rainy morning, with a sobbing wind, and the clatter of pattens along the streets; but, I confess, for my own part, that being a sedentary person, and too apt to sin against the duties of exercise, I have somewhat too sensitive a consciousness of bad weather, and feel a heavy sky go over me like a feather-bed, or rather like a huge brush which rubs all my nap the wrong way. I am growing better in this respect, and by the help of a stout walk at noon, and getting, as it were, fairly into a favourite poet and a warm fire of an evening, begin to manage a cloud or an east wind tolerably well;—but still, for perfection's sake on the present occasion, I must insist upon my clear morning, and will add to it, if the reader pleases, a little hoar-frost upon the windows, a bird or two coming after the crumbs, and the light smoke from the neighbouring chimneys brightening up into the early sunshine. Even the dustman's bell is not unpleasant from its association; and there is something absolutely musical in the clash of the milkpails suddenly unyoked, and the ineffable, ad libitum note that follows.
The waking epicure rises with an elastic anticipation; enjoys the freshening cold-water which endears what is to come; and even goes placidly
[Page 127]
through the villanous scraping process which we soften down into the level and lawny appellation of shaving. He then hurries down stairs, rubbing his hands, and sawing the sharp air through his teeth; and as he enters the breakfast-room, sees his old companion glowing through the bars,—the life of the apartment,—and wanting only his friendly hand to be lightened a little, and enabled to shoot up into dancing brilliancy. (I find I am getting into a quantity of epithets here; and must rein in my enthusiasm.)—What need I say? The poker is applied, and would be so whether required or not, for it is impossible to resist the sudden ardour inspired by that sight:—the use of the poker, on first seeing one's fire, is as natural as shaking hands with a friend. At that movement, a hundred little sparkles fly up from the coal-dust that falls within, while, from the masses themselves, a roaring flame mounts aloft with a deep and fitful sound as of a shaken carpet:—epithets again;—I must recur to poetry at once:—
2 Then shine the bars, the cakes in smoke aspire,
A sudden glory bursts from all the fire.
The conscious wight, rejoicing in the heat,
Rubs the blithe knees, and toasts th' alternate feet.
[Page 128]
The utility, as well as beauty, of the fire during breakfast, need not be pointed out to the most unphlogistic observer. A person would rather be shivering at any time of the day than at that of his first rising:—the transition would be too unnatural:—he is not prepared for it,—as Barnardine says, when he objects to being hanged. If you eat plain bread and butter with your tea, it is fit that your moderation should be rewarded with a good blaze; and if you indulge in hot rolls or toast, you will hardly keep them to their warmth without it, particularly if you read; and then,—if you take in a newspaper,—what a delightful change from the wet, raw, dabbing fold of paper, when you first touch it, to the dry, crackling, crisp superficies, which, with a skilful spat of the finger-nails at its upper end, stands at once in your hand, and looks as if it said “Come read me.” Nor is it the look of the newspaper only which the fire must render complete:—it is the interest of the ladies who may happen to form part of your family,—of your wife in particular, if you have one,—to avoid the niggling and pinching aspect of cold; it takes away the harmony of her features, and the graces of her behaviour; while, on the other
[Page 129]
hand, there is scarcely a more interesting sight in the world than that of a neat, delicate, good-humoured female, presiding at your breakfast-table, with hands tapering out of her long sleeves, eyes with a touch of Sir Peter Lely in them, and a face set in a little oval frame of muslin tied under the chin, and retaining a certain tinge of the pillow without its cloudiness. This is, indeed, the finishing grace of a fireside, though it is impossible to have it at all times, and perhaps not always politic,—especially for the studious.
From breakfast to dinner, the quantity and quality of enjoyment depend very much on the nature of one's concerns; and occupation of any kind, if we pursue it properly, will hinder us from paying a critical attention to the fireside. It is sufficient, if our employments do not take us away from it, or at least from the genial warmth of a room which it adorns;—unless, indeed, we are enabled to have recourse to exercise; and in that case, I am not so unjust as to deny that walking or riding has its merits, and that the general glow they diffuse throughout the frame has something in it extremely pleasurable and encouraging;—nay, I must not scruple to confess, that, without some preparation of this kind, the enjoyment of
[Page 130]
the fireside, humanly speaking, is not absolutely perfect; as I have latterly been convinced by a variety of incontestible arguments in the shape of headaches, rheumatisms, mote-haunted eyes, and other logical appeals to one's feelings which are in great use with physicians.—Supposing, therefore, the morning to be passed, and the due portion of exercise to have been taken, the Firesider fixes rather an early hour for dinner, particularly in the winter-time; for he has not only been early at breakfast, but there are two luxurious intervals to enjoy between dinner and the time of candles,—one that supposes a party round the fire with their wine and fruit,—the other, the hour of twilight, of which it has been reasonably doubted whether it is not the most luxurious point of time which a fireside can present:—but opinions will naturally be divided on this as on all other subjects, and every degree of pleasure depends upon so many contingencies, and upon such a variety of associations, induced by habit and opinion, that I should be as unwilling as I am unable to decide on the matter. This, however, is certain, that no true Firesider can dislike an hour so composing to his thoughts, and so cherishing to his whole faculties; and it is equally certain, that he will be little inclined to protract the dinner beyond what he can
[Page 131]
help, or if ever a fireside becomes unpleasant, it is during that gross and pernicious prolongation of eating and drinking, to which this latter age has given itself up, and which threatens to make the rising generation regard a meal of repletion as the ultimatum of enjoyment.
The inconvenience to which I allude is owing to the way in which we sit at dinner, for the persons who have their backs to the fire are liable to be scorched, while, at the same time, they render the persons opposite them liable to be frozen; so that the fire becomes uncomfortable to the former, and tantalizing to the latter; and thus three evils are produced, of a most absurd and scandalous nature;—in the first place, the fireside loses a degree of its character, and awakens feelings the very reverse of what it should; secondly, the position of the back towards it is a neglect and affront, which it becomes it to resent; and finally, its beauties, its proffered kindness, and its sprightly social effect, are at once cut off from the company by the interposition of those invidious and idle surfaces, called screens. This abuse is the more ridiculous, inasmuch as the remedy is so easy; for we have nothing to do but to use semicircular dining-tables, with the base unoccupied towards the fireplace, and the whole annoyance vanishes at once;
[Page 132]
the master or mistress might preside in the middle, as was the custom with the Romans, and thus propriety would be observed, while every body had the sight and benefit of the fire;—not to mention, that, by this fashion, the table might be brought nearer to it,—that the servants would have better access to the dishes,—and that screens, if at all necessary, might be turned to better purpose as a general enclosure instead of a separation.
But I hasten from dinner, according to notice; and cannot but observe, that if you have a small set of visitors, who enter into your feelings on this head, there is no movement so pleasant as a general one from the table to the fireside, each person taking his glass with him, and a small, slimlegged table being introduced into the circle for the purpose of holding the wine, and perhaps a poet or two, a glee-book, or a lute. If this practice should become general among those who know how to enjoy luxuries in such temperance as not to destroy conversation, it would soon gain for us another social advantage, by putting an end to the barbarous custom of sending away the ladies after dinner,—a gross violation of those chivalrous graces of life, for which modern times are so highly indebted to the persons whom they are pleased to term Gothic. And here I might digress,
[Page 133]
with no great impropriety, to shew the snug notions that were entertained by the knights and damsels of old in all particulars relating to domestic enjoyment, especially in the article of mixed company;—but I must not quit the fireside, and will only observe, that, as the ladies formed its chief ornament, so they constituted its most familiar delight.
“The minstralcie, the service at the feste,
The grete yeftes to the most and leste,
The riche array of Theseus' paleis,
Ne who sate first, ne last upon the deis,
What ladies fairest ben, or best dancing,
Or which of hem can carole best or sing,
Ne who most felingly speketh of love;
What haukis sitten on the perch above,
What houndis liggen on the flour adonn,—
Of all this now make I no mencioun.” Chaucer.
[Page 133]
No. XL. THE SUBJECT CONTINUED. The word snug , however, reminds me, that, amidst all the languages, ancient and modern, it belongs
[Page 134]
exclusively to our own; and that nothing but a want of ideas suggested by that soul-wrapping epithet, could have induced certain frigid connoisseurs to tax our climate with want of genius, —supposing forsooth, that because we have not the sunshine of the Southern countries, we have no other warmth for our veins, and that, because our skies are not hot enough to keep us in doors, we have no excursiveness of wit and range of imagination. It seems to me that a great deal of good argument in refutation of these calumnies has been wasted upon Monsieur du Bos and the Herrn Winckelman,—the one a narrow-minded pedantic Frenchman, to whom the freedom of our genius was incomprehensible,—the other an Italianized German, who being suddenly transported into the sunshine, began frisking about with unwieldy vivacity, and concluded that nobody could be great or bewitching out of the pale of his advantages. Milton, it is true, in his Paradise Lost, expresses an injudicious apprehension lest
                                         “An age too late, or cold
Climate, or years, damp his intended wing;”
but the very complaint which foreign critics bring against him as well as Shakspeare, is, that his wing was not damped enough,—that it was too daring
[Page 135]
and unsubdued; and he not only avenges himself nobly of his fears by a flight beyond all Italian poetry, but shews, like the rest of his countrymen, that he could turn the coldness of his climate into a new species of inspiration, as I shall presently make manifest. Not to mention, however, that the Greeks and Romans, Homer in particular, saw a great deal worse weather than these critics would have us imagine, the question is, would the Poets themselves have thought as they did? Would Tyrtæus, the singer of patriotism, have complained of being an Englishman? Would Virgil, who delighted in husbandry, and whose first wish was to be a philosopher, have complained of living in our pastures, and being the countryman of Newton? Would Homer, the observer of character, the panegyrist of freedom, the painter of storms, of landscapes, and of domestic tenderness, —aye, and the lover of snug houseroom and a good dinner,—would he have complained of our humours, of our liberty, of our shifting skies, of our ever-green fields, our conjugal happiness, our firesides, and our hospitality? I only wish the reader and I had him at this party of ours after dinner, with a lyre on his knee, and a goblet, as he says, to drink as he pleased,—
—“Piein, hote thumos anogoi.” Odyss. lib. viii. v. 70.
[Page 136]
I am much mistaken if our blazing fire and our freedom of speech would not give him a warmer inspiration than ever he felt in the person of Demodocus, even though placed on a lofty seat, and regaled with slices of brawn from a prince's table. The ancients, in fact, were by no means deficient in enthusiasm at sight of a good fire; and it is to be presumed, that if they had enjoyed such firesides as ours, they would have acknowledged the advantages which our genius presents in winter, and almost been ready to conclude with old Cleveland, that the Sun himself was nothing but
“Heaven's coalery;—
A coal-pit rampant, or a mine on flame.”
The ancient hearth was generally in the middle of the room, the ceiling of which let out the smoke; it was supplied with charcoal or faggots; and consisted, sometimes of a brazier or chafing-dish, (the focus of the Romans,) sometimes of a mere elevation or altar, (the Εςια or Εσχαρα of the Greeks.) We may easily imagine the smoke and annoyance which this custom must have occasioned,—not to mention the bad complexions which are caught by hanging over a fuming pan, as the faces of the Spanish ladies bear melancholy witness. The stoves, however, in use with the countrymen of
[Page 137]
Mons. du Bos and Winckelman are, if possible, still worse, having a dull, suffocating effect, with nothing to recompense the eye. The abhorrence of them which Ariosto expresses in one of his satires, when, justifying his refusal to accompany Cardinal d'Este into Germany, he reckons up the miseries of its winter-time, may have led M. Winckelman to conclude that all the Northern resources against cold were equally intolerable to an Italian genius; but Count Alfieri, a poet, at least as warmly inclined as Ariosto, delighted in England; and the great Romancer himself, in another of his satires, makes a commodious fireplace the climax of his wishes with regard to lodging. In short, what did Horace say, or rather what did he not say, of the raptures of in-door sociality,— Horace, who knew how to enjoy sunshine in all its luxury, and who nevertheless appears to have snatched a finer inspiration from absolute frost and snow? I need not quote all those beautiful little invitations he sent to his acquaintances, telling one of them that a neat room and a sparkling fire were waiting for him, describing to another the smoke springing out of the roof in curling volumes, and even congratulating his friends in general on the opportunity of enjoyment afforded them by a stormy day; but to take leave at once of these
[Page 138]
frigid connoisseurs, hear with what rapture he describes one of those friendly parties, in which he passed his winter evenings, and which only wanted the finish of our better morality and our patent fireplaces, to resemble the one I am now fancying.
“Vides ut aliâ stet nive candi dum
Soracte; nec jam sustineant onus
    Silvæ laborantes; geluque
       Flumina constiterint acuto?
Dissolve frigus, ligna super foco
Largè reponens; atque benigniùs
    Deprome quadrimum Sabinâ,
       O Thaliarche, merum diotâ.
Permitte Divis cætera. ...
Donec virenti canities abest
Morosa, nunc et campus, et areæ,
    Lenesque sub noctem susurri
       Compositâ repetantur horâ:
Nunc et latentis proditor intimo
Gratus puellæ risus ab angulo,
    Piguusque dereptum lacerto
       Aut digito male pertinaci.” Lib. I. Od. 9.
“Behold yon mountain's hoary height
    Made higher with new mounts of snow;
Again behold the winter's weight
    Oppress the lab'ring woods below,
[Page 139]
And streams with icy fetters bound
Benumb'd and crampt to solid ground.
With well-heap'd logs dissolve the cold,
    And feed the genial hearth with fires,
Produce the wine that makes us bold,
    And sprightly wit and mirth inspires.
For what hereafter shall betide,
Jove, if 'tis worth his care, provide.
·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·
Th' appointed hour of promis'd bliss,
    The pleasing whisper in the dark,
The half unwilling, willing kiss,
    The laugh that guides thee to the mark,
When the kind nymph would coyness feign,
And hides but to be found again,
These, these are joys the Gods for youth ordain.” Dryden.
The Roman poet, however, though he occasionally boasts of his temperance, is too apt to lose sight of the intellectual part of his entertainment, or at least to make the sensual part predominate over the intellectual. Now, I reckon the nicety of social enjoyment to consist in the reverse; and after partaking with Homer of his plentiful boiled and roast, and with Horace of his flower-crowned wine parties, the poetical reader must come at last to us Barbarians of the North for the perfection of fireside festivity—that is to say, for the
[Page 140]
union of practical philosophy with absolute merriment, —for light meals and unintoxicating glasses, —for refection that administers to enjoyment, instead of repletions that at once constitute and contradict it. I am speaking, of course, not of our common-place eaters and drinkers, but of our classical arbiters of pleasure, as contrasted with those of other countries: these, it is observable, have all delighted in Horace, and copied him as far as their tastes were congenial; but without relaxing a jot of their real comfort, how pleasingly does their native philosophy temper and adorn the freedom of their conviviality,—feeding the fire, as it were, with an equable fuel that hinders it alike from scorching and from going out, and, instead of the artificial enthusiasm of a heated body, enabling them to enjoy the healthful and unclouded predominance of a sparkling intelligence! It is curious, indeed, to see how distinct from all excess are their freest and heartiest notions of relaxation. Thus, our old poet Drayton, reminding his favourite companion of a fireside meeting, expressly unites freedom with moderation:—
“My dearly loved friend, how oft have we
In winter evenings, meaning to be free,
To some well-chosen place us'd to retire,
And there with moderate meat, and wine, and fire,
[Page 141]
Have pass'd the hours contentedly in chat,
Now talk'd of this, and then discours'd of that,—
Spoke our own verses 'twixt ourselves,—if not
Other men's lines, which we by chance had got.” Epistle to Henry Reynolds, Esq. Of Poets and Poesy.
And Milton, in his Sonnet to Cyriack Skinner, one of the turns of which is plainly imitated from Horace, particularly qualifies a strong invitation to merriment by anticipating what Horace would always drive from your reflections,—the feelings of the day after:—
“Cyriack, whose Grandsire, on the royal bench
    Of British Themis, with no mean applause
    Pronounc'd, and in his volumes taught, our laws,
Which others at their bar so often wrench;
To-day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench
    In mirth, that, after, no repenting draws.
    Let Euclid rest, and Archimedes pause,
And what the Swede intends, and what the French.
To measure life learn thou betimes, and know
    Tow'rd solid good what leads the nearest way:
       For other things mild Heav'n a time ordains,
And disapproves that care, though wise in shew,
    That with superfluous burden loads the day,
       And when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains.”
But the execution of this sonnet is not to be compared in gracefulness and a finished sociality with the one addressed to his friend Lawrence, which, as
[Page 142]
it presents us with the acme of elegant repast, may conclude the hour which I have just been describing, and conduct us complacently to our twilight.
“Lawrence, of virtuous father virtuous son,
    Now that the fields are dank, and ways are mire,
    Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
Help waste a sullen day,—what may be won
From the hard season gaining? Time will run
    On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
    The frozen earth, and clothe in fresh attire
The lily and rose, that neither sow'd nor spun.
What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
    Of Attic taste, with wine, whence we may rise
To hear the lute well-touch'd, and artful voice
    Warble immortal notes and Tuscan air?
    He who of these delights can judge, and spare
       To interpose them oft, is not unwise.”
But twilight comes; and the lover of the fireside, for the perfection of the moment, is now alone. He was reading a minute or two ago, and for some time was unconscious of the increasing dusk, till, on looking up, he perceived the objects out of doors deepening into massy outline, while the sides of his fireplace began to reflect the light of the flames, and the shadow of himself and his chair fidgeted with huge obscurity on the wall.
[Page 143]
Still wishing to read, he pushed himself nearer and nearer to the window, and continued fixed on his book, till he happened to take another glance out of doors, and on returning to it, could make out nothing. He therefore lays it aside, and restoring his chair to the fireplace, seats himself right before it in a reclining posture, his feet apart upon the fender, his eyes bent down towards the grate, his arms on the chair's elbows, one hand hanging down, and the palm of the other turned up and presented to the fire,—not to keep it from him, for there is no glare or scorch about it,—but to intercept and have a more kindly feel of its genial warmth. It is thus that the greatest and wisest of mankind have sat and meditated; a homely truism perhaps, but such a one as we are apt enough to forget. We talk of going to Athens or Rome to see the precise objects which the Greeks and Romans beheld, and forget that the Moon, which may be looking upon us at the moment, is the same identical planet that enchanted Homer and Virgil, and that has been contemplated and admired by all the great men and geniuses that have existed; by Socrates and Plato in Athens, by the Antonines in Rome, by the Alfreds, the Hospitals, the Miltons, Newtons, and Shakspeares. In like manner, we are anxious to discover how
[Page 144]
these great men and poets appeared in common, what habits they loved, in what way they talked and meditated, nay, in what postures they delighted to sit, and whether they indulged in the same tricks and little comforts that we do. Look at Nature and their works, and we shall see that they did, and that when we act naturally and think earnestly, we are reflecting their commonest habits to the life. Thus we have seen Horace talking of his blazing hearth and snug accommodations like the jolliest of our acquaintances; and thus we may safely imagine, that Milton was in some such attitude as I have described, when he sketched that enchanting little picture, which beats all the cabinet portraits that have been produced:—
“Or if the air will not permit,
Some still removed place will fit,
Where glowing embers through the room
Teach light to counterfeit a gloom,
Far from all resort of mirth,
Save the cricket on the hearth,
Or the bellman's drowsy charm
To bless the doors from nightly harm.”
—But to attend to our fireside. The evening is beginning to gather in. The window, which presents a large face of watery grey, intersected by strong lines, is imperceptibly becoming darker;
[Page 145]
and as that becomes darker, the fire assumes a more glowing presence. The contemplatist keeps his easy posture, absorbed in his fancies; and every thing around him is still and serene. The stillness would even ferment in his ear, and whisper, as it were, of what the air contained: but a minute coil, just sufficient to hinder that busier silence, clicks in the baking coal, while every now and then the light ashes shed themselves below, or a stronger, but still a gentle flame flutters up with a gleam over the chimney. At length, the darker objects in the room become mingled; the gleam of the fire streaks with a restless light the edges of the furniture, and reflects itself in the blackening window; while his feet take a gentle move on the fender, and then settle again, and his face comes out of the general darkness, earnest even in indolence, and pale in the very ruddiness of what it looks upon.—This is the only time perhaps at which sheer idleness is salutary and refreshing. How observed with the smallest effort is every trick and aspect of the fire! A coal falling in,—a fluttering fume,—a miniature mockery of a flash of lightning,—nothing escapes the eye and the imagination. Sometimes a little flame appears at the corner of the grate like a quivering spangle; sometimes it swells out at top into a restless
[Page 146]
and brief lambency; anon it is seen only by a light beneath the grate, or it curls around one of the bars like a tongue, or darts out with a spiral thinness and a sulphureous and continued puffing as from a reed. The glowing coals meantime exhibit the shifting forms of hills, and vales, and gulfs,—of fiery Alps, whose heat is uninhabitable even by spirit, or of black precipices, from which swart fairies seem about to spring away on sable wings;—then heat and fire are forgotten, and walled towns appear; and figures of unknown animals, and far-distant countries scarcely to be reached by human journey;—then coaches, and camels, and barking dogs as large as either, and forms that combine every shape and suggest every fancy;—till at last, the ragged coals tumbling together, reduce the vision to chaos, and the huge profile of a gaunt and grinning face seems to make a jest of all that has passed.—During these creations of the eye, the thought roves about into a hundred abstractions, some of them suggested by the fire,—some of them suggested by that suggestion, —some of them arising from the general sensation of comfort and composure, contrasted with whatever the world affords of evil, or dignified by high wrought meditation on whatsoever gives hope to benevolence and inspiration to wisdom. The
[Page 147]
philosopher at such moments plans his Utopian schemes, and dreams of happy certainties which he cannot prove:—the lover, happier and more certain, fancies his mistress with him, unobserved and confiding, his arm round her waist, her head upon his shoulder, and earth and heaven contained in that sweet possession:—the poet, thoughtful as the one, and ardent as the other, springs off at once above the world, treads every turn of the harmonious spheres, darts up with gleaming wings through the sunshine of a thousand systems, and stops not till he has found a perfect Paradise, whose fields are of young roses, and whose air is music,—whose waters are the liquid diamond,— whose light is as radiance through crystal,—whose dwellings are laurel bowers,—whose language is poetry,—whose inhabitants are congenial souls, —and to enter the very verge of whose atmosphere strikes beauty on the face, and felicity on the heart.—Alas, that flights so lofty should ever be connected with earth by threads as slender as they are long, and that the least twitch of the most common-place hand should be able to snatch down the viewless wanderer to existing comforts!—The entrance of a single candle dissipates at once the twilight and the sunshine, and the ambitious dreamer is summoned to his tea!
[Page 148]
No. XLI. THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.
“Now stir the fire, and close the shutters fast,
Let fall the curtains, wheel the sofa round,
And while the bubbling and loud hissing urn
Throws up a steamy column, and the cups,
That cheer, but not inebriate, wait on each,
So let us welcome peaceful evening in.”
Never was snug hour more feelingly commenced!—Cowper was not a great poet; his range was neither wide nor lofty; but such as it was, he had it completely to himself; he is the poet of quiet life and familiar observation.—The fire, we see, is now stirred, and becomes very different from the one we have just left; it puts on its liveliest aspect in order to welcome those to whom the tea-table is a point of meeting, and it is the business of the Firesider to cherish this aspect for the remainder of the evening. How light and easy the coals look! How ardent is the roominess within the bars! How airily do the volumes of smoke course each other up the chimney, like so many fantastic and indefinite spirits, while the eye in vain endeavours to accompany any one of them!
[Page 149]
The flames are not so fierce as in the morning, but still they are active and powerful; and if they do not roar up the chimney, they make a constant and playful noise, that is extremely to the purpose. Here they come out at top with a leafy swirl; there they dart up spirally and at once,— there they form a lambent assemblage that shifts about on its own ground, and is continually losing and regaining its vanishing members. I confess I take particular delight in seeing a good blaze at top; and my impatience to produce it will sometimes lead me into great rashness in the article of poking,—that is to say, I use the poker at the top instead of the middle of the fire, and go probing it about in search of a flame. A lady of my acquaintance,—“near and dear,” as they say in Parliament,—will tell me of this fault twenty times in a day, and every time so good-humouredly, that it is mere want of generosity in me not to amend it; but somehow or other I do not. The consequence is, that, after a momentary ebullition of blaze, the fire becomes dark and sleepy, and is in danger of going out. It is like a boy at school in the hands of a bad master, who, thinking him dull, and being impatient to render him brilliant, beats him about the head and ears, till he produces the very evil he would prevent. But, on
[Page 150]
the present occasion, I forbear to use the poker:—there is no need of it:—every thing is comfortable; every thing snug and sufficient. How equable is the warmth around us! How cherishing this rug to one's feet! How complacent the cup at one's lip! What a fine broad light is diffused from the fire over the circle, gleaming in the urn and the polished mahogany, bringing out the white garments of the ladies, and giving a poetic warmth to their face and hair! I need not mention all the good things that are said at tea,—still less the gallant. Good-humour never has an audience more disposed to think it wit, nor gallantry an hour of service more blameless and elegant. Ever since tea has been known, its clear and gentle powers of inspiration have been acknowledged, from Waller paying his court at the circle of Catharine of Braganza, to Dr Johnson receiving homage at the parties of Mrs Thrale. The former, in his lines, upon hearing it “commended by her Majesty,” ranks it at once above myrtle and laurel, and her Majésty, of course, agreed with him:—
“Venus her myrtle, Phœbus has his bays;
Tea both excels, which she vouchsafes to praise.
The best of queens , and best of herbs, we owe
To that bold nation, which the way did show
[Page 151]
To the fair region, where the sun does rise,
Whose rich productions we so justly prize.
The Muse's friend, Tea, does our fancy aid,
Repress those vapours which the head invade,
And keeps that palace of the soul serene,
Fit, on her birth-day, to salute the Queen.”
The eulogies pronounced on his favourite beverage by Dr Johnson, are too well known to be repeated here; and the commendatory inscription of the Emperor Kien Long,—to an European taste at least,—is somewhat too dull, unless his Majesty's tea-pot has been shamefully translated. For my own part, though I have the highest respect, as I have already shewn, for this genial drink, which is warm to the cold, and cooling to the warm, I confess, as Montaigne would have said, that I prefer coffee,—particularly in my political capacity:—
“Coffee, that makes the Politician wise
To see through all things with his half-shut eyes.”
There is something in it, I think, more lively, and, at the same time, more substantial. Besides, I never see it but it reminds me of the Turks and their Arabian tales,—an association infinitely preferable to any Chinese ideas; and, like the king who put his head into the tub, I am transported
[Page 152]
into distant lands the moment I dip into the coffee-cup,—at one minute ranging the valleys with Sinbad, at another encountering the fairies on the wing by moonlight, at a third exploring the haunts of the cursed Maugraby, or wrapt into the silence of that delicious solitude from which Prince Agib was carried by the fatal horse. Then if I wish to poeticise upon it at home, there is Belinda with her sylphs, drinking it in such state as nothing but poetry can supply:—
“For lo! the board with cups and spoons is crown'd,
The berries crackle, and the mill turns round:
On shining altars of japan they raise
The silver lamp; the fiery spirits blaze;
From silver spouts the grateful liquors glide,
And China's earth receives the smoking tide:
At once they gratify the scent and taste,
And frequent cups prolong the rich repast.
Straight hover round the fair her airy band;
Some, as she sipp'd, the fuming liquor fann'd;
Some o'er her lap their careful plumes display'd,
Trembling, and conscious of the rich brocade.”
It must be acknowledged, however, that the general association of ideas is at present in favour of tea, which, on that account, has the advantage of suggesting no confinement to particular ranks or modes of life. Let there be but a fireside, and any body, of any denomination, may be fancied
[Page 153]
enjoying the luxury of a cup of tea, from the duchess in the evening drawing-room, who makes in the instrument of displaying her white hand, to the washerwoman at her early tub, who having had nothing to signify since five, sits down to it with her shining arms and corrugated fingers at six. If there is any one station of life in which it is enjoyed to most advantage, it is that of mediocrity,—that in which all comfort is reckoned to be best appreciated, because, while there is taste to enjoy, there is necessity to earn the enjoyment; and I cannot conclude the hour before us with a better climax of snugness than is presented in the following pleasing little verses. The author, I believe, is unknown, and may not have been much of a poet in matters of fiction; but who will deny his taste for matters of reality, or say that he has not handled his subject to perfection?
“The hearth was clean, the fire was clear,
    The kettle on for tea,
Palemon in his elbow-chair,
    As blest as man could be.
Clarinda, who his heart possess'd,
    And was his new-made bride,
With head reclin'd upon his breast
    Sat toying by his side.
[Page 154]
Stretch'd at his feet, in happy state,
    A fav'rite dog was laid,
By whom a little sportive cat
    In wanton humour play'd.
Clarinda's hand he gently prest;
    She stole an amorous kiss,
And blushing modestly confess'd
    The fulness of her bliss.
Palemon, with a heart elate,
    Pray'd to Almighty Jove,
That it might ever be his fate,
    Just so to live and love.
Be this eternity, he cried,
    And let no more be given:
Continue thus my lov'd fireside,
    I ask no other heav'n.”
The Happy Fireside.—Elegant Extracts.
There are so many modes of spending the remainder of the evening between tea-time and bedtime, (for I protest against all suppers that are not light enough to be taken on the knee,) that a general description would avail me nothing, and I cannot be expected to enter into such a variety of particulars. Suffice it to say, that where the fire is duly appreciated, and the circle good-humoured, none of them can be unpleasant, whether the party be large or small, young or old,
[Page 155]
talkative or contemplative. If there is music, a good fire will be particularly grateful to the performers, who are often seated at the farther end of the room; for, it is really shameful, that a lady who is charming us all with her voice, or firing us, at the harp or piano, with the lightning of her fingers, should at the very moment be trembling with cold. As to cards, which were invented for the solace of a mad prince, and which are only tolerable, in my opinion, when we can be as mad as he was, that is to say, at a round game,—I cannot by any means patronize them, as a conscientious Firesider: for, not to mention all the other objections, the card-table is as awkward, in a fireside point of view, as the dinner-table, and is not to be compared with it in sociality. If it be necessary to pay so ill a compliment to the company, as to have recourse to some amusement of the kind, there is chess or draughts, which may be played upon a tablet by the fire; but nothing is like discourse, freely uttering the fancy as it comes, and varied, perhaps, with a little music, or with the perusal of some favourite passages, which excite the comments of the circle. It is then, if tastes happen to be accordant, and the social voice is frank as well as refined, that the “sweet music of speech” is heard in its best harmony, differing
[Page 156]
only for apter sweetness, and mingling but for happier participation, while the mutual sense smilingly bends in with every rising measure,
“And female stop smoothens the charm o'er all.”
This is the finished evening; this the quickener at once and the calmer of tired thought; this the spot, where our better spirits await to exalt and enliven us, when the daily and vulgar ones have discharged their duty!
“Questo è il Paradiso,
Più dolce, che fra l' acque, e fra l' arene
In ciel son le Sirene.” Tasso . Rime Amorose.
“Here, here is found
A sweeter Paradise of sound,
Than where the Sirens take their summer stands
Among the breathing waters and glib sands.”
Bright fires and joyous faces,—and it is no easy thing for philosophy to say good night. But health must be enjoyed, or nothing will be enjoyed; and the charm should be broken at a reasonable hour. Far be it, however, from a rational Firesider not to make exceptions to the rule, when friends have been long asunder, or when some domestic celebration
[Page 157]
has called them together, or even when hours peculiarly congenial render it difficult to part. At all events, the departure must be a voluntary matter; and here I cannot help exclaiming against the gross and villanous trick which some people have, when they wish to get rid of their company, of letting their fires go down, and the snuffs of their candles run to seed:—it is paltry and palpable, and argues bad policy as well as breeding; for such of their friends as have a different feeling of things, may chance to be disgusted with them altogether, while the careless or unpolite may chuse to revenge themselves on the appeal, and face it out gravely till the morning. If a common visitor be inconsiderate enough, on an ordinary occasion, to sit beyond all reasonable hour, it must be reckoned as a fatality,—as an ignorance of men and things, against which you cannot possibly provide,—as a sort of visitation, which must be borne with patience, and which is not likely to occur often, if you know whom you invite, and those who are invited know you.—But with an occasional excess of the fireside, what social virtue shall quarrel? A single friend, perhaps, loiters behind the rest;—you are alone in the house;—you have just got upon a subject, delightful to you both; the fire is of a candent brightness; the wind howls out of
[Page 158]
doors; the rain beats; the cold is piercing! Sit down.---This is a time when the most melancholy temperament may defy the clouds and storms, and even extract from them a pleasure that will take no substance by daylight. The ghost of his happiness sits by him, and puts on the likeness of former hours;—and if such a man can be made comfortable by the moment, what enjoyment may it not furnish to an unclouded spirit? If the excess belong not to vice, temperance does not forbid it when it only grows out of occasion. The great Poet, whom I have quoted so often for the fireside, and who will enjoy it with us to the last, was like the rest of our great poets, an ardent recommender of temperance in all its branches; but though he practised what he preached, he could take his night out of the hands of sleep as well as the most entrenching of us. To pass over, as foreign to our subject in point of place, his noble wish that he might “ oft outwatch the bear,” with what a wrapped-up recollection of snugness, in the elegy on his friend Diodati, does he describe the fireside enjoyment of a winter's night?
“Pectora cui credam? Quis me lenire docebit
Mordaces curas? Quis longam fallere noctem
Dulcibus alloquiis, grato cum sibilat igni
[Page 159]
Molle pyrum, et nucibus strepitat focus, et malus Auster
Miscet cuncta foris, et desuper intonat ulmo?”
“In whom shall I confide? Whose counsel find
A balmy med'cine for my troubled mind?
Or whose discourse, with innocent delight,
Shall fill me now, and cheat the wintry night,
When hisses on my hearth the pulpy pear,
And black'ning chesnuts start and crackle there,
While storms abroad the dreary meadows whelm,
And the wind thunders through the neighb'ring elm?”
Cowper's Translation.
Even when left alone, there is sometimes a charm in watching out the decaying fire,—in getting closer and closer to it with tilted chair and knees against the bars, and letting the whole multitude of fancies, that work in the night silence, come whispering about the yielding faculties. The world around is silent; and for a moment the very cares of day seem to have gone with it to sleep, leaving you to snatch a waking sense of disenthralment, and to commune with a thousand airy visitants that come to play with innocent thoughts. Then for imagination's sake, not for superstition's, are recalled the stories of the Secret World and the midnight pranks of Fairyism. The fancy roams out of doors after rustics led astray by the jack-o-lantern,
[Page 160]
or minute laughings heard upon the wind, or the night-spirit on his horse that comes flouncing through the air on his way to a surfeited citizen, or the tiny morris-dance that springs up in the watery glimpses of the moon;—or keeping at home, it finds a spirit in every room peeping at it as it opens the door, while a cry is heard from up stairs announcing the azure marks inflicted by
“The nips of fairies upon maids' white hips,”
or hearing a snoring from below, it tiptoes down into the kitchen, and beholds where
—“Lies him down the lubber fiend,
And stretch'd out all the chimney's length,
Basks at the fire his hairy strength.”
Presently the whole band of fairies, ancient and modern,—the dæmons, sylphs, gnomes, sprites, elves, peries, genii, and, above all, the fairies of the fireside, the salamanders, lob-lie-by-the-fires, lars, lemures, and larvæ, come flitting between the fancy's eye and the dying coals, some with their weapons and lights, others with grave steadfastness on book or dish, others of the softer kind with their arch looks and their conscious pretence of attitude, while a minute music tinkles in the ear, and Oberon gives his gentle order:—
[Page 161]
“Through this house in glimmering light
    By the dead and drowsy fire,
Every elf and fairy sprite
    Hop as light as bird from briar;
And this ditty, after me,
Sing, and dance it trippingly.”
Anon, the whole is vanished, and the dreamer, turning his eye down aside, almost looks for a laughing sprite, gazing at him from a tiny chair, and mimicking his face and attitude.—Idle fancies these, and incomprehensible to minds clogged with every-day earthliness,—but not useless, either as an exercise of the invention, or even as adding consciousness to the range and destiny of the soul. They will occupy us too, and steal us away from ourselves, when other recollections fail us or grow painful,—when friends are found selfish, or better friends can but commiserate, or when the world has nothing in it to compare with what we have missed out of it. They may even lead us to higher and more solemn meditations, till we work up our way beyond the clinging and heavy atmosphere of this earthly sojourn, and look abroad upon the light that knows neither blemish nor bound, while our ears are saluted at that egress by the harmony of the skies, and our eyes behold the lost and congenial spirits that we have loved, hastening
[Page 162]
to welcome us with their sparkling eyes and their curls that are ripe with sunshine.
But earth recals us again;—the last flame is out;—the fading embers tinkle with a gaping dreariness; and the chill reminds us where we should be.—Another gaze on the hearth that has so cheered us, and the last lingering action is to wind up the watch for the next day.—Upon how many anxieties shall the finger of that brief chronicler strike,—and upon how many comforts too!—To-morrow our fire shall be trimmed anew; and so, gentle reader, good night:—may the weariness I have caused you make sleep the pleasanter!
“Let no lamenting cryes, nor dolefull tears,
Be heard all night within, nor yet without;
Ne let false whispers, breeding hidden fears,
Break gentle sleep with misconceived doubt.
Let no deluding dreams, nor dreadful sights,
Make sudden, sad affrights,
Ne let hobgoblins, names whose sence we see not,
Fray us with things that be not;
But let still silence true night-watches keep,
That sacred Peace may in assurance reigne,
And timely Sleep, since it is time to sleep,
May pour his limbs forth on your pleasant plaine.”
                                         Spenser's Epithalumion. L. H.
[Page ]
No. XLIV. ON WASHERWOMEN. Writers , we think, might oftener indulge themselves in direct picture-making, that is to say, in detached sketches of men and things, which should be to manners , what those of Theophrastus are to character.
Painters do not always think it necessary to paint epics, or to fill a room with a series of pictures on one subject. They deal sometimes in single figures and groups; and often exhibit a profounder feeling in these little concentrations of their art, than in subjects of a more numerous description. Their gusto , perhaps, is less likely to be lost on that very account. They are no longer Sultans in a seraglio, but lovers with a favourite mistress, retired and absorbed. A Madonna of Corregio's, the Bath of Michael Angelo, the Standard of Leonardo da Vinci, Titian's Mistress, and other single subjects or groups of the great masters, are acknowledged to be among their greatest performances, some of them their greatest of all.
It is the same with music. Overtures, which
[Page 178]
are supposed to make allusion to the whole progress of the story they precede, are not always the best productions of the master; still less are chorusses, and quintetts, and other pieces involving a multiplicity of actors. The overture to Mozart's Magic Flute (Zauberflute) is worthy of the title of the piece; it is truly enchanting; but what are so intense, in their way, as the duet of the two lovers, Ah Perdona ,—or the laughing trio in Cosi Fan Tutte ,—or that passionate serenade in Don Giovanni, Dëh vieni alla finistra , which breathes the very soul of refined sensuality! The gallant is before you, with his mandolin and his cap and feather, taking place of the nightingale for that amorous hour; and you feel that the sounds must inevitably draw his mistress to the window. Their intenseness even renders them pathetic; and his heart seems in earnest, because his senses are.
We do not mean to say, that, in proportion as the work is large and the subject numerous, the merit may not be the greater if all is good. Raphael's Sacrament is a greater work than his Adam and Eve; but his Transfiguration would still have been the finest picture in the world, had the second group in the foreground been away; nay, the latter is supposed, and, we think, with justice,
[Page 179]
to injure its effect. We only say that there are times, when the numerousness may scatter the individual gusto;—that the greatest possible feeling may be proved without it;—and, above all, returning to our more immediate subject, that writers, like painters, may sometimes have leisure for excellent detached pieces, when they want it for larger productions. Here, then, is an opportunity for them. Let them, in their intervals of history, or, if they want time for it, give us portraits of humanity. People lament that Sappho did not write more: but, at any rate, her two odes are worth twenty epics like Tryphiodorus.
But, in portraits of this kind, writing will also have a great advantage; and may avoid what seems to be an inevitable stumbling-block in paintings of a similar description. Between the matter-of-fact works of the Dutch artists, and the subtle compositions of Hogarth, there seems to be a medium reserved only for the pen. The writer only can tell you all he means,—can let you into his whole mind and intention. The moral insinuations of the painter are, on the one hand, apt to be lost for want of distinctness, or tempted, on the other, by their visible nature, to put on too gross a shape. If he leaves his meanings to be imagined, he may unfortunately speak to unimaginate
[Page 180]
spectators, and generally does; if he wishes to explain himself so as not to be mistaken, he will paint a set of comments upon his own incidents and characters, rather than let them tell for themselves. Hogarth himself, for instance, who never does any thing without a sentiment or a moral, is too apt to perk them both in your face, and to be over-redundant in his combinations. His persons, in many instances, seem too much taken away from their proper indifference to effect, and to be made too much of conscious agents and joint contributors. He “o'er-informs his tenements.” His very goods and chattels are didactic. He makes a capital remark of a cow's horn, and brings up a piece of cannon in aid of a satire on vanity. 3 It is the writer only who, without hurting the most delicate propriety of the representation, can leave no doubt of all his intentions,—who can insinuate his object in two or three words, to the dullest conception, and, in conversing with the most foreign minds, take away all the awkwardness of interpretation. What painting gains in universality to the eye, it loses by an
[Page 181]
infinite proportion in power of suggestion to the understanding.
There is something of the sort of sketches we are recommending in Sterne: but Sterne had a general connected object before him, of which the parts apparently detached were still connecting links: and while he also is apt to overdo his subject like Hogarth, is infinitely less various and powerful. The greatest master of detached portrait is Steele: but his pictures too form a sort of link in a chain. Perhaps the completest specimen of what we mean in the English language is Shenstone's School-Mistress , by far his best production, and a most natural, quiet, and touching old dame.—But what? Are we leaving out Chaucer? Alas, we thought to be doing something a little original, and find it all existing already, and in unrivalled perfection, in his portraits of the Canterbury Pilgrims! We can only dilate, and vary upon his principle.
But we are making a very important preface to what may turn out a very trifling subject; and must request the reader not to be startled at the homely specimen we are about to give him, after all this gravity of recommendation. Not that we would apologise for homeliness, as homeliness. The beauty of this unlimited power of suggestion
[Page 182]
in writing is, that you may take up the driest and most common-place of all possible subjects, and strike a light out of it to warm your intellect and your heart by. The fastidious habits of polished life generally incline us to reject, as incapable of interesting us, whatever does not present itself in a graceful shape of its own, and a ready-made suit of ornaments. But some of the plainest weeds become beautiful under the microscope. It is the benevolent provision of nature, that in proportion as you feel the necessity of extracting interest from common things, you are enabled to do so;—and the very least that this familiarity with homeliness will do for us is to render our artificial delicacy less liable to annoyance, and to teach us how to grasp the nettles till they obey us.
The reader sees that we are Wordsworthians enough not to confine our tastes to the received elegancies of society; and, in one respect, we go farther than Mr Wordsworth, for, though as fond, perhaps, of the country as he, we can manage to please ourselves in the very thick of cities, and even find there as much reason to do justice to Providence, as he does in the haunts of sportsmen, and anglers, and all-devouring insects.
To think, for instance, of that laborious and inelegant class of the community,— Washerwomen,
[Page 183]
and of all the hot, disagreeable, dabbing, smoaking, splashing, kitcheny, cold-dining, anti-company-receiving associations, to which they give rise.—What can be more annoying to any tasteful lady or gentlemen, at their first waking in the morning, than when that dreadful thump at the door comes, announcing the tub-tumbling viragoes, with their brawny arms and brawling voices? We must confess, for our own parts, that our taste, in the abstract, is not for washerwomen; we prefer Dryads and Naiads, and the figures that resemble them;—
“Fair forms, that glance amid the green of woods,
Or from the waters give their sidelong shapes
Half swelling.”
Yet, we have lain awake sometimes in a street in town, after this first confounded rap, and pleased ourselves with reflecting how equally the pains and enjoyments of this world are dealt out, and what a pleasure there is in the mere contemplation of any set of one's fellow-creatures and their humours, when our knowledge has acquired humility enough to look at them steadily.
The reader knows the knock which we mean. It comes like a lump of lead, and instantly wakes the maid, whose business it is to get up, though
[Page 184]
she pretends not to hear it. Another knock is inevitable, and it comes, and then another; but still Betty does not stir, or stirs only to put herself in a still snugger posture, knowing very well that they must knock again. “How, 'drat that Betty,” says one of the washerwomen; “she hears as well as we do, but the deuce a bit will she move till we give her another;” and at the word another, down goes the knocker again. “It's very odd,” says the master of the house, mumbling from under the bed-clothes, “that Betty does not get up to let the people in; I've heard that knocker three times.”—“Oh,” returns the mistress, “she's as lazy as she's high,”—and off goes the chamber-bell;—by which time Molly, who begins to lose her sympathy with her fellow-servant in impatience of what is going on, gives her one or two conclusive digs in the side; when the other gets up, and rubbing her eyes and mumbling, and hastening and shrugging herself down stairs, opens the door with—“Lard, Mrs Watson, I hope you haven't been standing here long?”—“Standing here long! Mrs Betty! Oh don't tell me; people might stand starving their legs off, before you'd put a finger out of bed.”—“Oh don't say so, Mrs Watson; I'm sure I always rises at the first knock; and there—you'll find every thing comfortable below,
[Page 185]
with a nice hock of ham, which I made John leave for you.” At this the washerwomen leave their mumbling, and shuffle down stairs, hoping to see Mrs Betty early at breakfast. Here, after warming themselves at the copper, taking a mutual pinch of snuff, and getting things ready for the wash, they take a snack at the promised hock; for people of this profession have always their appetite at hand, and every interval of labour is invariably cheered by the prospect of having something at the end of it. “Well,” says Mrs Watson, finishing the last cut, “some people thinks themselves mighty generous for leaving one what little they can't eat; but, howsomever, it's better than nothing.”—“Ah,” says Mrs Jones, who is a minor genius, “one must take what one can get now-a-days; but Squire Hervey's for my money.”— “Squire Hervey!” rejoins Mrs Watson, “what's that the great what's-his-name as lives yonder?”— “Aye,” returns Mrs Jones, “him as has a niece and nevvy, as they say eats him out of house and land;”—and here commences the history of all the last week of the whole neighbourhood round, which continues amidst the dipping of splashing fists, the rumbling of suds, and the creaking of wringings out, till an hour or two are elapsed; and then for another snack and a pinch of snuff, till
[Page 186]
the resumption of another hour's labour or so brings round the time for first breakfast. Then, having had nothing to signify since five, they sit down at half-past six in the wash-house, to take their own meal before the servants meet at the general one. This is the chief moment of enjoyment. They have just laboured enough to make the tea and bread and butter welcome, are at an interesting point of the conversation, (for there they contrive to leave off on purpose,) and so down they sit, fatigued and happy, with their red elbows and white corrugated fingers, to a tub turned upside down, and a dish of good christian souchong, fit for a body to drink.
We could dwell a good deal upon this point of time, but we have already, we fear, ran out our limits; and shall only admonish the fastidious reader, who thinks he has all the taste and means of enjoyment to himself, how he looks with scorn upon two persons, who are perhaps at this moment the happiest couple of human beings in the street,— who have discharged their duty, have earned their enjoyment, and have health and spirits to relish it to the full. A washerwoman's cup of tea may vie with the first drawn cork at a bon-vivant's table, and the complacent opening of her snuff-box with that of the most triumphant politician over a
[Page 187]
scheme of partition. We say nothing of the continuation of their labours, of the scandal they resume, or the complaints they pour forth, when they first set off again in the indolence of a satisfied appetite, at the quantity of work which the mistress of the house, above all other mistresses, is sure to heap upon them. Scandal and complaint, in these instances, do not hurt the complacency of our reflections; they are in their proper sphere; and are nothing but a part, as it were, of the day's work, and are so much vent to the animal spirits. Even the unpleasant day which the work causes up stairs in some houses, —the visitors which it excludes, and the leg of mutton which it hinders from roasting, are only so much enjoyment kept back and contracted, in order to be made keener the rest of the week. Beauty itself is indebted to it, and draws from that steaming out-house and splashing tub the well-fitting robe that gives out its figure, and the snowy cap that contrasts its curls and its complexion. In short, whenever we hear a washerwoman at her foaming work, or see her plodding towards us with her jolly warm face, her mob cap, her black stockings, clattering patterns, and tub at arm's length resting on her hip-joint, we look upon her as a living lesson to us to make the most both of
[Page 188]
time and comfort, and as a sort of allegorical union of pain and pleasure, a little too much, perhaps, in the style of Rubens. L. H.
[Page 199]
No. XLVI. ON COMMON-PLACE CRITICS.
“Nor can I think what thoughts they can conceive.”
We have already given some account of common-place people; we shall in this number attempt a description of another class of the community, who may be called (by way of distinction) common-place critics. The former are a set of people who have no opinions of their own, and do not pretend to have any; the latter are a set of people who have no opinions of their own, but who affect to have one upon every subject you can mention. The former are a very honest, good sort of people, who are contented to pass for what they are; the latter are a very pragmatical, troublesome sort of people, who would pass for what they are not, and try to put off their common-place
[Page 200]
notions in all companies and on all subjects, as something of their own. They are of both species, the grave and the gay; and it is hard to say which is the most tiresome.
A common-place critic has something to say upon every occasion, and he always tells you either what is not true, or what you knew before, or what is not worth knowing. He is a person who thinks by proxy, and talks by rote. He differs with you, not because he thinks you are in the wrong, but because he thinks somebody else will think so. Nay, it would be well if he stopped here; but he will undertake to misrepresnet you by anticipation, lest others should misunderstand you, and will set you right, not only in opinions which you have, but in those which you may be supposed to have. Thus, if you say that Bottom the weaver is a character that has not had justice done to it, he shakes his head, is afraid you will be thought extravagant, and wonders you should think the Midsummer Night's Dream the finest of all Shakspeare's plays. He judges of matters of taste and reasoning as he does of dress and fashion, by the prevailing tone of good company; and you would as soon persuade him to give up any sentiment that is current there, as to wear the hind part of his coat before. By the best company,
[Page 201]
of which he is perpetually talking, he means persons who live on their own estates, and other people's ideas. By the opinion of the world, to which he pays and expects you to pay great deference, he means that of a little circle of his own, where he hears and is heard. Again, good sense is a phrase constantly in his mouth, by which he does not mean his own sense or that of any body else, but the opinions of a number of persons who have agreed to take their opinions on trust from others. If any one observes that there is something better than common sense, viz. uncommon sense, he thinks this a bad joke. If you object to the opinions of the majority, as often arising from ignorance or prejudice, he appeals from them to the sensible and well-informed; and if you say that there may be other persons as sensible and well informed as himself and his friends, he smiles at your presumption. If you attempt to prove any thing to him, it is in vain, for he is not thinking of what you say, but of what will be thought of it. The stronger your reasons, the more incorrigible he thinks you; and looks upon any attempt to expose his gratuitous assumptions as the wandering of a disordered imagination. His notions are like plaster figures cast in a mould, as brittle as they are hollow; but they will break
[Page 202]
before you can make them give way. In fact, he is the representative of a large part of the community, the shallow, the vain, and indolent, of those who have time to talk, and are not bound to think: and he considers any deviation from the select forms of common-place, or the accredited language of conventional impertinence, as compromising the authority under which he acts in his diplomatic capacity. It is wonderful how this class of people agree with one another; how they herd together in all their opinions; what a tact they have for folly; what an instinct for absurdity; what a sympathy in sentiment; how they find one another out by infallible signs, like Free-masons! The secret of this unanimity and strict accord is, that not any one of them ever admits any opinion that can cost the least effort of mind in arriving at, or of courage in declaring it. Folly is as consistent with itself as wisdom: there is a certain level of thought and sentiment, which the weakest minds, as well as the strongest, find out as best adapted to them; and you as regularly come to the same conclusions, by looking no farther than the surface, as if you dug to the centre of the earth! You know beforehand what a critic of this class will say on almost every subject the first time he sees you, the next time, the
[Page 203]
time after that, and so on to the end of the chapter. The following list of his opinions may be reied on:—It is pretty certain that before you have been in the room with him ten minutes, he will give you to understand that Shakspeare was a great but irregular genius. Again, he thinks it a question whether any one of his plays, if brought out now for the first time, would succeed. He thinks that Macbeth would be the most likely, from the music which has been since introduced into it. He has some doubts as to the superiority of the French school over us in tragedy, and observes, that Hume and Adam Smith were both of that opinion. He thinks Milton's pedantry a great blemish in his writings, and that Paradise Lost has many prosaic passages in it. He conceives that genius does not always imply taste, and that wit and judgment are very different faculties. He considers Dr Johnson as a great critic and moralist, and that his Dictionary was a work of prodigious erudition and vast industry; but that some of the anecdotes of him in Boswell are trifling. He conceives that Mr Locke was a very original and profound thinker. He thinks Gibbon's style vigorous but florid. He wonders that the author of Junius was never found out. He thinks Pope's translation of the Iliad an improvement
[Page 204]
on the simplicity of the original, which was necessary to fit it to the taste of modern readers. He thinks there is a great deal of grossness in the old comedies; and that there has been a great improvement in the morals of the higher classes since the reign of Charles II. He thinks the reign of Queen Anne the golden period of our literature; but that, upon the whole, we have no English writer equal to Voltaire. He speaks of Boccacio as a very licentious writer, and thinks the wit in Rabelais quite extravagant, though he never read either of them. He cannot get through Spenser's Fairy Queen , and pronounces all allegorical poetry tedious. He prefers Smollett to Fielding, and discovers more knowledge of the world in Gil Blas than in Don Quixote . Richardson he thinks very minute and tedious. He thinks the French Revolution has done a great deal of harm to the cause of liberty; and blames Buonaparte for being so ambitious. He reads the Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews , and thinks as they do. He is shy of having an opinion on a new actor or a new singer; for the public do not always agree with the newspapers. He thinks that the moderns have great advantages over the ancients in many respects. He thinks Jeremy Bentham a greater man than Aristotle. He
[Page 205]
can see no reason why artists of the present day should not paint as well as Raphael or Titian. For instance, he thinks there is something very elegant and classical in Mr Westall's drawings. He has no doubt that Sir Joshua Reynolds's Lectures were written by Burke. He considers Horne Tooke's account of the conjuction That very ingenious, and holds that no writer can be called elegant who uses the present for the subjunctive mood, who says, If it is for If it be . He thinks Hogarth a great master of low, comic humour; and Cobbett a coarse, vulgar writer. He often talks of men of liberal education, and men without education, as if that made much difference. He judges of people by their pretensions; and pays attention to their opinions according to their dress and rank in life. If he meets with a fool, he does not find him out; and if he meets with any one wiser than himself, he does not know what to make of him. He thinks that manners are of great consequence to the common intercourse of life. He thinks it difficult to prove the existence of any such thing as original genius, or to fix a general standard of taste. He does not think it possible to define what wit is. In religion, his opinions are liberal. He considers all enthusiasm as a degree of madness, particularly to be guarded
[Page 206]
against by young minds; and believes that truth lies in the middle, between the extremes of right and wrong. He thinks that the object of poetry is to please; and that astronomy is a very pleasing and useful study. He thinks all this, and a great deal more, that amounts to nothing. We wonder we have remembered one half of it.
“For true no-meaning puzzles more than wit.”
Though he has an aversion to all new ideas, he likes all new plans and matters-of-fact; the new Schools for All, the Penitentiary, the new Bedlam, the new Steam-Boats, the Gas-Lights, the new Patent Blacking; every thing of that sort, but the Bible Society. The Society for the Suppression of Vice he thinks a great nuisance, as every honest man must.
In a word, a common-place critic is the pedant of polite conversation. He refers to the opinion of Lord M. or Lady G. with the same air of significance that the learned pedant does to the authority of Cicero or Virgil; retails the wisdom of the day, as the anecdote-monger does the wit; and carries about with him the sentiments of people of a certain respectability in life, as the dancing-master does their air, or their valets their clothes. Z.
NOTES
1 By the way, Berni's entertaining description of himself and his friend in the last canto of the Orlando Innamorato, seems to have been the origin, both of the general idea of Thomson's Castle of Indolence, and of the personal introductions of one's self in poetry, as exemplified in that delightful little work.
2 Parody upon part of the well-known description of night, with which Pope has swelled out the passage in Homer, and the faults of which have long been appreciated by general readers.
3 See the cannon going off in the turbulent portrait of a General-Officer: and the cow's head coming just over that of the citizen who is walking with his wife.
$$$
