The person charging this material is responsible for 
Its return to the library from which it was withdrawn 
on or before the Latest Date stamped below. 

Ia^";r„nl" h"' ^"^ ""^^'""'"9 Of books are reasons for discipli- 
nary action and may result in dismissal from the University 
To renew call Telephone Center, 333-8400 ""'^^rsity. 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 



SEP 2 9 



99^ 



L161— O-IOQfi 



THE SILENCE 



OF 



DEAN MAITLAND 



THE SILENCE 



OP 



DEAN MAITLAIsTD 

A NOVEL 

BY 

MAXWELL GRAY 
,;5)emt alle 6c^ulb racl;t fid) auf ©rben " 



J 

IN THREE VOLUMES 

VOL. L 



LOJSTDOK 
KEGAN PAUL, TEENCH & CO., 1, PATEKNOSTER SQUARE 

1886 



(The rights of translation and oj reproduction are reserved.) 









PART I. 



*' Not poppy, nor mandragora, 
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, 
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep 
Which thou ow'dst yesterday." 



VOL. J. 



THE SILENCE 

OF 

DEAN" MAITLAND. 

CHAPTER I. 

The grey afternoon was wearing on to its 
chill close ; the dark cope of immovable dun 
cloud overhead seemed to contract and grow 
closer to the silent world beneath it ; and the 
steep, chalky hill, leading from the ancient 
village, with its hoary castle and church, up 
over the bleak^ barren down, was a weary 
thing to climb. 

The solitary traveller along that quiet 
road moved her limbs more slowly, and 
felt her breath coming more quickly and 
shortly, as she mounted higher and higher. 



4 THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 

and the grey Norman tower lessened and 
gradually sank out of sight behind her. But 
she toiled bravely on between the high 
tangled hedges, draped with great curtains 
of traveller's joy, now a mass of the silvery 
seed-feathers which the country children call 
" old man's beard," and variegated with the 
deep-purple leaves of dogwood, the crimson 
of briony and roseberry, the gleaming black 
of privet, and the gold and orange reds of ivy 
hangings ; and, though her pace slackened to 
a mere crawl, she did not pause till she reached 
the brow of the hill, where the hedges ceased, 
and the broad white high-road wound over 
the open down. 

Here, where the enclosed land ended, was 
a five-barred gate in the wild hedgerow, and 
here the weary pedestrian, depositing the 
numerous parcels she carried on the ground 
at her feet, rested, her arms supported on the 
topmost bar, and her face and the upper 
portion of her tall figure traced clearly 
against the grey gloomy sky. Some linnets 
fluttered out of the hedge beside her, one or 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 5 

two silent larks sprang np from the turf of 
the downland sloping away from the gate, 
and some rooks sailed cawing overhead. All 
else was still with the weird, dreamy stillness 
that hangs over the earth on a day of chill 
east-wind haze. 

There is a brooding expectancy about such 
a day that works strongly on the imagination, 
and suggests the dark possibilities of irre- 
sistible Fate. There is an austere poetry in 
tlie purply grey, breathless earth and the 
dark, unchanging sky, and a mute pathos in 
the quiet hush of weary Nature, thus folding 
her hands for rest, which has an unutterable 
charm for some temperaments, and touches 
far deeper chords than those vibrated by the 
brilliance and joyous tumult of life and song 
in the pleasant June-time. There is some- 
thing of the infinite in the very monotony of 
the colouring ; the breathless quiet, the vague- 
ness of outline, and dimness of the all-enfolding 
mist are full of mystery, and invest the most 
commonplace objects with romance. 

The sense of infinity was deepened in this 



b THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

case by the vast sweep of the horizon which 
bounded our pedestrian's gaze. The grey 
fallows and wan stubble-fields sloped swiftly 
away from the gate to a bottom of verdant 
pastures dotted with trees and homesteads ; 
beyond them were more dim fields, and then 
a wide belt of forest, principally of firs. To 
the right, the valley, in which nestled the 
now unseen tower of Chalkburne, widened 
out, bounded by gentle hills, till the stream 
indicating its direction became a river, on 
the banks of which stood the mist-veiled 
town of Oldport, the tall tower of whose 
church rose light, white, and graceful against 
the iron-grey sky, emulating in the glory of 
its maiden youth — for it had seen but two 
lustres — the hoary grandeur of its Norman 
parent at Chalkburne. Beyond the town, 
the river rolled on, barge-laden, to the sea, 
the faint blue line of which was blurred by 
a maze of masts where the estuary formed a 
harbour. 

To the left of the tired gazer stretched 
a wide champaign, rich in woodland, and 



THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 7 

bounded in the far distance by two chalky 
summits, at whose steep bases surged the 
unseen sea, quiet to-day on the surface, but 
sullen with the heavy roar of the ground- 
swell beneath. Here and there, in the breaks 
of wood and forest on the horizon, Alma's 
accustomed eyes saw some faint grey touches 
which in bright summer were tiny bays of 
sapphire sea. 

Alma Lee herself made a bright point of 
interest in the afternoon greyness, as she 
leant wearily, and not ungracefully, on the 
gate, her face and figure outlined clearly 
against the dark sky. Her dress was a 
bright blue, and her scarlet plaid shawl, 
fastened tightly about her shoulders, revealed 
and suggested, as only a shawl can, a full, 
supple form, indicative of youth and health. 
Her dark, thick hair was crowned by a small 
velvet hat, adorned with a bright bird's 
wing ; and her dark eyes and well-formed 
features, reposeful and indifferent as they were 
at the moment, suggested latent vehemence 
and passion. Her hands and feet were large, 



8 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

the former bare, and wrapped in the gay 
shawl for warmth. 

Alma was not thinking of the mystery and 
infinite possibility suggested by the grey 
landscape before her; still less was she dream- 
ing of the tragic shades Fate was casting 
even now upon her commonplace path. Un- 
suspecting and innocent she stood, lost in 
idle thought, deaf to the steps of approaching 
doom, and knowing nothing of the lives that 
were to be so tragically entangled in the 
mazes of her own. Could she but have had 
one glimpse of the swift-coming future, with 
what horror would the simple country girl 
have started back and struggled against the 
first suspicion of disaster ! 

The silence was presently broken by four 
mellow, slowly falling strokes from the grey 
belfry of Chalkburne ; then all was still 
again, and Alma began to pick up her 
parcels. Suddenly she heard the sound of 
hoofs and wheels, and, dropping her packages, 
turned once more to the gate, and appeared a 
very statue of contemplation by the time a 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 9 

dog-cart, drawn by a high-stepping chesnnt, 
and driven by a spick-and-span groom, fair- 
haired and well featured, drew up beside her, 
and the groom sprang lightly to the ground. 

" Come, Alma," he said, approaching the 
pensive figure, which appeared unconscious 
of him, " you won't say no now ? You look 
dog-tired." 

'' I shall say exactly what I please, Mr. 
Judkins/' she replied. 

" Then say yes, and jump up. Chesnut 
is going like a bird, and will have you at 
Swaynestone in no time. Do say yes, do ee 
now." 

'' Thank you, I intend to walk." 

^^ Just think what a way it is to walk to 
Swaynestone, and you so tired." 

" I am not tired." 

" Then, why are you leaning on that there 
gate ? " 

" I am admiring the view, since you are so 
very inquisitive." 

" Oh Lord ! the view ! There's a deal 
more view to be seen from the seat of this 



10 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

here cart, and it's pleasant flying along like a 
bird. Come now, Alma, let me help you up." 

" Mr. Judkins, will you have the kindness 
to drive on ? I said in Oldport that I intended 
to walk. It's very hard a person mayn't do 
as she pleases without all this worry," replied 
Alma, impatiently. 

" Wilful woman mun have her way," 
murmured the young fellow, ruefully. " Well, 
let me carry them parcels home, at least." 

" I intend to carry them myself, thank 
you. Good afternoon ; " and Alma turned 
her back upon the mortified youth, and 
appeared lost in the charms of landscape. 

" Well, darn it ! if you won't come, you 
won't ; that's flat ! " the young man exclaimed 
angrily. ^' This is your nasty pride, Miss 
Alma ; but, mind you, pride goes before a 
fall," he added, springing to his perch, and 
sending the high-stepper flying along the 
level down-road like the wind, with many 
expressions of anger and disappointment, and 
sundry backward glances at Alma, who gazed 
with unruffled steadiness on the fields. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 11 

" I wonder," slie mused, " why a person 
always hates a person who makes love to 
them ? I liked Charlie Judkins well enough 
before he took on with this love-nonsense." 

And she did not know that by declining 
that brief drive she had refused the one 
chance of escaping all the subsequent tragedy, 
and that her fate was even now approaching 
in the growing gloom. 

But what is this fairy music ascending from 
the direction of Chalkburne, and growing 
clearer and louder every moment ? Sweet, 
melodious, drowsily cheery, ring out five 
tiny merry peals of bells, each peal accurately 
matched with the other, and consisting of ^ve 
tones. The music comes tumbling down in 
sweet confusion, peal upon peal, chime break- 
ing into chime, in a sort of mirthful strife of 
melody, through all which a certain irregular 
rhythm is preserved, which keeps the blending 
harmonies from degenerating into dissonance. 
With a sweep and a clash and a mingling of 
sleepy rapture, the elfin music filled all the 
quiet hazy air around Alma, and inspired her 



12 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

with vague pleasure as she turned her head 
listening in the direction of the dulcet sounds, 
and discerned their origin in the nodding 
head of a large silk-coated cart-horse looming 
through the haze. 

He was a handsome, powerful fellow, step- 
ping firmly up the hill with the happy con- 
sciousness of doing good service which seems 
to animate all willing, well-behaved horses, 
and emerging into full view at the head of 
four gallant comrades, each nodding and step- 
ping as cheerily as himself, with a ponderous 
waggon behind them. Each horse wore his 
mane in love-locks, combed over his eyes, 
the hair on the massive neck being tied here 
and there with bows of bright woollen ribbon. 
Each tail was carefully plaited at its spring 
from the powerful haunches for a few inches ; 
then it was tied with another bright knot, 
beneath which the remainder of the tail swept 
in untrammelled abundance almost down to 
the pasterns, the latter hidden by long 
fringes coming to the ground. The ponderous 
harness shone brightly on the broad, shining 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 13 

brown bodies, and, as each horse carried a 
leading-rein, thickly studded with brass 
bosses and fastened to the girth, and there 
was much polished brass about headstall, 
saddle, and collar, they presented a very 
glittering appearance. 

But the crowning pride of every horse, and 
the source of all the music which was then 
witching the wintry air, was the lofty erection 
springing on two branching wires from every 
collar, and towering far above the pricked ears 
of the proud steeds. These wires bore a long 
narrow canopy placed at right angles to the 
horse's length, and concealing beneath a deep 
fringe of bright scarlet worsted the little peal 
of nicely graduated bells. Balls of the same 
bright worsted studded the roof of the little 
canopy, and finished the gay trappings of 
the sturdy rustics, who bore these accumulated 
honours with a sort of meek rapture. 

The waggon these stout fellows drew needed 
all their bone and sinew to bring it up and 
down the steep, hilly roads. Its hind-wheels 
were as high as Alma's head ; their massive 



14 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

felloes, shod with double tires, were a foot 
broad ; the naves were like moderate-sized 
casks. High over the great hind wheels arched 
the waggon's ledge in a grand sweep, descend- 
ing with a boat-like curve to the smaller front 
wheels, whence it rose again, ending high 
over the wheeler's haunches, like the prow of 
some old ship over the sea. A massive thing 
of solid timber it was, with blue wheels and 
red body, slightly toned by weather. On 
the front, in red letters on a yellow ground, 
was painted, " Eichard Long, Malbourne, 
1860." 

Two human beings, who interrupted the 
fairy music with strange gutturals and wild 
ejaculations to the steeds, mingled with 
sharp whip-cracks, accompanied this imposing 
equipage. One was a tall, straight-limbed 
man in fustian jacket and trousers, a coat 
slung hussar-wise from his left shoulder, and 
a cap worn slightly to one side, with a pink 
chrysanthemum stuck in it. His sunburnt 
face was almost the hue of his yellow-brown 
curls and short beard ; his eyes were blue ; 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 15 

and his strong, laboured gait resembled that 
of his horses. The other was a beardless lad, 
his satellite, similarly arrayed, minus the 
flower. Sparks flew from the road when the 
iron hoofs and heavy iron boots struck an 
occasional flint. When the great waggon 
was fairly landed on the brow of the hill, the 
horses were brought to by means of sundry 
strange sounds and violent gestures on the 
part of the men, and, with creaking and 
groaning and halloing, the great land-ship 
came to anchor, the elfin chimes dropped into 
silence, interrupted by little bursts of melody 
at every movement of the horses, and the lad 
seized a great wooden mallet and thrust 
beneath the hind wheel. The carter leant 
placidly against the ponderous shaft with his 
face to Alma, and struck a match to kindle 
his replenished pipe. 

" Coldish," he observed, glancing with 
surly indifference towards her. 

" It is cold," returned Alma, drawing her 
shawl cosily round her graceful shoulders ; 
while the wheeler, stimulated into curiosity 



16 THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 

by his master's voice, turned round to look at 
Alma, and shook out a little peal of bells, 
which roused the emulation of his four 
brothers, who each shook out a little chime 
on his own account ; while the waggoner 
glanced slowly round the vast horizon, and, 
after some contemplation, said in a low, 
bucolic drawl — 

" Gwine to hrain, I 'lows." 

" It looks like it," replied Alma. " How is 
your wife, Wilham ? " 

The waggoner again interrogated the 
horizon for inspiration, and, after some 
thought, answered with a jerk, " Neuce the 
same." 

" I hope she will soon be about again," said 
Alma ; and the leader emphasized her words 
by shaking a little music from his canopy, 
and thus stimulated his brothers to do like- 
wise. " You come home lighter than you set 
out," she added, looking at the nearly empty 
waggon, which she had seen pass in the 
morning filled with straw. 

William turned slowly round and gazed 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 17 

inquiringly at the waggon, as if struck by a 
new idea, for some moments ; then he said, 
" Ay." After this he looked thoughtfully 
at Alma and her parcels for some moments, 
until his soul again found expression in the 
words, " Like a lift ? " the vague meaning 
of which was elucidated by the pointing of 
his whip towards the waggon. 

Alma assented, and with the waggoner's 
assistance soon found herself, with all her 
merchandise, comfortably installed in the 
great waggon, which was empty save for a 
few household and farming necessaries from 
Oldport. Before mounting — a feat, by the 
way, not unworthy of a gymnast — she stroked 
the wheel horse's thick silken coat admir- 
ingly. 

" You do take care of your horses at 
Malbourne, William," she said. " I heard 
father say this morning he never saw a better- 
groomed and handsomer team than yours." 

WilHam went on silently arranging Alma's 
seat, and stowing her parcels for her ; but a 
smile dawned at the corners of his moutli, 

VOL. I. c 



18 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

and gradually spread itself over the whole of 
his face, and his pleasure at length found a 
vent, when he reached the ground, in a sound- 
ing thwack of his broad hand on the wheeler's 
massive flank — a thwack that set the bells 
a-tremble on the horse's neck, and sent a 
sympathetic shiver of music through all the 
emulous brotherhood. 

" Ay," he observed, with a broad smile of 
admiration along the line of softly swaying 
tails and gently moving heads, with their 
nostrils steaming in the cold air ; " he med 
well say that." 

" Ay," echoed Jem, the satellite, removing 
the sledge mallet from the wheel and striding 
to the front, with a reflection of his chief's 
pleasure in his ruddy face as he glanced 
affectionately at the team, " that he med." 

It was not Alma's admiration which 
evoked such satisfaction — she was but a 
woman, and naturally could not tell a good 
horse from a donkey ; but her father, Ben 
Lee, Sir Lionel Swaynestone's coachman, a 
man who had breathed the air of stables 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 19, 

from his cradle, and who drove the splendid 
silk-coated, silver-harnessed steeds in the 
Swaynestone carriages, his opinion was 
something. With a joyous crack of the 
whip, and a strange sound from the recesses 
of his throat, William bid his team " Gee-up ! " 

The mighty hoofs took hold of the road, 
the great wheels slowly turned, a shower of 
confused harmony fell in dropping sweetness 
from the bells, and with creaking and 
groaning, and nodding heads, and rhythmic 
blending of paces and music, the waggon 
lumbered ponderously along the level chalk 
road which led, unenclosed by hedge or fence, 
over the open down. 

To ride in a waggon with ease, and at the 
same time enjoy the surrounding landscape 
without a constant exercise of gymnastic skill 
in balancing and counter-balancing the body 
in response to the heavy swaying and 
jerking of the unwieldy machine, is difficult ; 
to sit on the ledge is to be an acrobat ; to lie 
on the floor is to see nothing but sky, besides 
having one's members violently wrenched 



20 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

one from the other. Alma, however, was 
very comfortably placed on a pile of sacks, 
which served as an arm-chair, deadened the 
jerking power of the motion, and left her 
head and shoulders above the ledge, so that 
she could well see the grey surrounding 
landscape in the deepening haze. 

She leant back with a feeling of agreeable 
languor, wrapped her hands in her shawl, 
and gazed dreamily on the down rising steeply 
to the left, and forming, where chalk had 
been quarried in one place, a miniature pre- 
cipice, crested with overhanging copse, rich 
in spring with fairy treasures of violets in 
white sheets over the moss, clusters of 
primroses and oxlips among the hazel stumps, 
blue lakes of hyacinth, and waving forests of 
anemone ; and she gazed on the sloping fields, 
farmsteads, and bounding forest to the right, 
lulled by the steady music of the bells, 
among which she heard from time to time 
William's satisfied growl of " Ay, he med 
well say that," and the occasional song of 
Jem, as he trudged along by the leader — 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 21 

" For to ploTigli, and to sow, and to reap, and to mow, 
Is the work of the farmer's bu-oy-oy." 

Happy and harmless she looked in her 
rustic chariot, as they rolled slowly along in 
the gathering gloom, now over a heathy 
stretch nearly at the summit of the down, 
past a lonely, steep-roofed, red-tiled hostelry, 
with a forge cheerily glowing by its side, 
whence the anvil-music rose and blended 
pleasantly with that of the bell-team, and 
over which hung a sign-board bearing the 
blacksmith's arms, the hammer, with the 
couplet inscribed beneath, " By hammer and 
hand, All arts do stand." 

Downhill now, with the heavy drag cast 
beneath the wheel by mighty efforts on the 
part of Jem ; then again on the level road, 
w^ith the chalk down always rising to the left, 
and falling away to the right ; past farm- 
houses, where the cattle stood grouped in the 
yard and the ducks quacked for their evening 
meal ; then once more down a hill, steep and 
difficult, down to the level of a willow-shaded 
stream by a copse, outside which daffodils 



22 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

rioted all over the sloping lea descending to 
the brookside in spring ; and then again up 
and up, with straining and panting and creak- 
ing, with iron feet pointed into and gripping 
the steep chalk road, with louder pealing of 
the fairy chimes, whose rhythm grows irre- 
gular and fitful, with strange shouts and 
gestures from the men, with " Whup ! " and 
" Whoa ! " and '' Hither ! " with many pauses, 
when the great heads droop, the music stops, 
and the mallet is brought into requisition. 

Happy and harmless indeed was Alma, the 
lashes drooping over her rose-leaf cheeks, her 
fancies roving unfettered. She was hoping 
to get home betimes, for she had something 
nice for father's tea among her parcels, and 
she was thinking of the penny periodical 
folded up in her basket, and wondering how 
the heroine was getting on in the story which 
broke off abruptly at such an interesting 
moment in the last number. Was the peasant 
girl, in whom Alma detected a striking like 
ness to herself, really going to marry the poor 
young viscount who was so deplorably in 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 23 

love with her ? She could not help furnish- 
ing the viscount with the form and features 
of Mr. Ingram Swaynestone, Sir Lionel's 
eldest son, though the latter was fair, while 
the viscount happened to be dark. 

Now they are at the summit of the steep 
hill, and pause to breathe and replenish 
pipes. On one side is dense coppice ; on the 
other, Swaynestone Park slopes down in 
woodland, glade, and park-like meadow to the 
sea-bounded horizon. Then on again, up hill 
and down dale, past cottage and farmstead, 
with the park always sloping away to the 
sea on the right. Lights glow cheerily now 
from distant cottage windows, and they can 
even catch glimpses of lights from the fa9ade 
of Swaynestone House between the trees occa- 
sionally, while the merry music peals on in 
its drowsy rhythm, and little showers of 
sparks rise at the contact of iron-shod wheel 
and foot with the flinty road. 

They have just passed the entrance-gates of 
Swaynestone — lonely gates, unfurnished with 
a lodge — and the waggon stops with inter- 



24 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

rupted music at some smaller gates on the 
other side of the road, where the upland still 
rises, not in bare down, but in rich meadow, to 
a hanging wood, out of which peeps dimly in 
the dusk a small white structure, built with a 
colonnade supporting an architrave, to imitate 
a G-reek temple — Alma's home. 

" Ay ! he med well say that," repeated the 
waggoner, still digesting the pleasure of 
Ben Lee's compliment, and slapping the 
wheel-horse's vast flank, so that the fairy 
chime began again, and the smack resounded 
like an accompaniment to its music. It was 
fairly dark in the road ; the misty dusk of 
evening was overshadowed by the thick belt 
of chestnut, lime, and beech bounding the 
park by the roadside ; and the large horn 
lantern was handed to Alma to aid her in 
gathering her parcels together, and its light 
fell upon her bright dark eyes, and rosy, 
dimpled cheeks, making her appear more 
than ever as if her gaudy dress was but a 
disguise assumed for a frolic. Her almond- 
shaped, rather melancholy eyes sparkled as 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 25 

she looked in tlie young carter's stolid face, 
and thanked him heartily. 

" I have had such a nice ride," she added 
pleasantly, and the horses one by one 
dropped a bell-note or two to emphasize her 
words. 

" You must gie I a toll for this yere ride," 
returned William, with a look of undisguised, 
but not rude admiration. 

Alma flushed, and drew back. " How 
much do you want ? " she asked, taking out 
her purse, and pretending not to understand. 

" You put that there in your pocket," he 
replied, offended, " and gie I a kiss." 

" Indeed, I shall do nothing of the kind," 
retorted Alma. " Let me get down. I'll 
never ride with you again, if I walk till I 
drop — that I won't." 

But the waggoner insisted on his toll, and 
vowed that she should not descend till it was 
paid ; and poor Alma protested and stormed 
vainly, whilst Jem leaned up against a horse 
and laughed, and adjured her to make haste. 
Alma burst into tears, wrung her hands, and 



26 THE SILENCE OF DEAK MAITLAND. 

wished that she had not been so obdurate to 
poor Charlie Judkins. He would not have 
been so rude, she knew. Nor, indeed, would 
"William have been so persistent had she not 
offended him by her unlucky offer of money, 
and roused the dogged obstinacy of his class. 
She darted to the other side of the waggon, 
but in vain ; William was too quick, and she 
was just on the point of raising her voice, 
in the hope that her father might be near, 
when a light, firm step was heard issuing 
from the park gates, and a clear and singu- 
larly musical voice broke into the dispute 
with a tone of authority. 

'' For shame, William Grove ! " it said. 
" How can you be so cowardly ? Let the 
girl go directly. Why, it is Alma Lee, 
surely ! " 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 27 



CHAPTER II. 

The speaker emerged into the little circle of 
light cast by the lantern — a slight, well-built, 
youthful figure of middle height yet com- 
manding presence, clad in dark grey, with 
a round, black straw hat and a neat white 
necktie, the frequent costume of a country 
curate in those days, when the clerical garb 
had not reached so high a stage of evolution 
as at present. His beardless face made him 
look still younger than he really was ; his 
features were refined and clearly cut; his hair 
very dark ; and his eyes, the most striking 
feature of his face, were of that rare, dazzling 
light blue which can only be compared to 
a cloudless, noon sky in June, when the pale, 
intense blue seems penetrated to overflowing 
with floods of vivid light. 



28 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" I waren't doing no harm," returned the 
waggoner, with a kind of surly respect ; " I 
gied she a ride, and she med so well gie I 
a kiss." 

" And you a married man ! " cried the 
indignant young deacon ; " for shame ! " 

" There ain't no harm in a kiss," growled 
William, with a sheepish, discomfited look, 
while he stood aside and suffered the new- 
comer to help Alma in her descent. 

" There is great harm in insulting a 
respectable young woman, and taking ad- 
vantage of her weakness. As for a kiss, it 
is not a seemly thing between young people 
who have no claim on each other, though 
there may be no positive harm in it. You 
ought to know better, William." 

" There ain't no harm for the likes of we," 
persisted the waggoner. ^' 'Tain't as though 
Alma was a lady ; she's only a poor man's 
daughter." 

" And a poor man's daughter has as much 
right to men's respect as a duchess," cried 
the young fellow, with animation. "I wonder 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 29 

you can say sacli a thing, Grove. And 
you a poor man yourself, with a httle 
daughter of your own ! How would you 
like her to be kissed against her will ? " 

William muttered to the effect that " Any- 
body med kiss she" — which was true enough, 
as she had seen but three summers yet — and 
went on twining his whip with a cowed, 
injured look, while Alma gazed in awed 
admiration at her handsome young champion, 
whose kindling eyes seemed to send forth 
floods of pale-blue light in the gloom. 

" There is something so unmanly in at- 
tacking a girl's self-respect," continued the 
eager champion. " I did not think you 
capable of it, William. A stout fellow like 
you, a man I always liked. Go home to 
your wife, and think better of it. I will see 
you across the meadow myself. Alma, though 
it is hard that a girl cannot be abroad alone 
at this hour." 

So saying, the young Bayard possessed 
himself of sundry of Alma's parcels, and 
with a pleasant " Good night, Jem," turned 



30 THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 

his back on the waggon and opened the gate, 
through which Alma passed quickly, followed 
by her protector, while the cumbrous waggon 
went on its way to the rhythmic jangle of 
the sweetly clashing bells, and William 
trudged stolidly on with his accustomed whip- 
crackings and guttural exclamations, mur- 
muring from time to time with a mortified 
air, " There ain't no harm in a kiss ! " And, 
indeed, he meant no harm, though he took 
care not to relate the incident to his wife ; it 
was only his rough tribute to Alma's unac- 
customed beauty, and signified no more than 
a gracefully turned allusion in higher circles. 
" And Mr. Cyril must go a-spiling of she," 
he added, " as though she didn't look too 
high already. But pride goes before a fall, 
as I'ye heerd 'un zay." Ominous repetition 
of Judkins's words ! 

Alma, in the mean time, murmured her 
thanks to her chivalrous protector, and 
stepped up the dewy meadow with a beating 
breast and a flushing cheek, her ears tingling 
with the words, " A poor man's daughter has 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 31 

as much right to respect as a duchess," her 
heart swelling at the memory of the courtesy 
with which Maitland handed her down from 
the waggon and carried half her parcels ; she 
knew that a veritable duchess would not 
have been treated with more honour. All 
her life she had known Cyril Maitland. She 
had sported with him over that very lea, 
where the tall yellow cowslips nodded in 
spring, and where they had pelted each other 
with sweet, heavy cow^slip-balls ; she had 
kissed and cuffed him many a time, though 
he was always " Master Cyril " to the coach- 
man's child ; and, as they grew up, had been 
inclined to discuss him with a half-respectful, 
half-familiar disparagement, such as well- 
known objects receive. Never till that fatal 
evening had his grace of mind and person 
and the singular charm of his manner keenly 
touched her. But when he stood there in 
the lantern's dim rays, looking so handsome 
and so animated by the impulsive chivalry 
with which he defended her, and she heard 
the musical tones and refined accents of the 



32 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

voice pleading her cause and the cause of 
her sex and her class, a new spirit came to 
her — a spirit of sweetness and of terror, 
which set all her nerves quivering, and 
opened a new world of wonder and beauty 
to her entranced gaze. As holy as a young 
archangel, and as beautiful, he seemed to the 
simple girl's dazzled thoughts, and she felt" 
that no harm could ever C(jme to her in that 
charmed presence, no pain ever touch her. 

All unconscious of the tumult of half- 
conscious emotion awakening beside him, 
Cyril Maitland walked on, chatting with 
pleasant ease on all sorts of homely topics, 
in no wise surprised at his companion's falter- 
ing, incoherent replies, which he attributed 
to the embarrassment from which he had just 
delivered her. The dulcet clashing of the bells 
grew fainter, and then rose on a sudden gust 
of wind just as they reached the door of the 
strangely built white house, before the square 
windows of which rose a small colonnade of 
white pillars. Alma opened the door, and a 
ruddy glow rushed out upon her, while 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 33 

within a clieerful little home-scene presented 
itself. A small table, covered with a clean 
white cloth, touched with rose by the firelight, 
and spread with tea-things, was drawn up 
before the glowing hearth, and a warm aroma 
of tea and toast greeted the tired, hungry 
gh^l. Before the fire sat a strong, middle- 
aged man in an undress livery, consisting 
partly of a sleeved waistcoat, busily engaged 
in making toast; while a neatly dressed woman 
moved about the warm parlour, adding a few 
touches to the table. 

" Just in time, Alma," called out the man, 
without turning his head. 

" And a pretty time, too," added the 
woman, who was Alma's stepmother. " Why 
hadn't you a come along with Charlie Judkins 
this hour agone ? Gadding about till it's 

dark night Oh, Mr. Cyril, I beg your 

pardon, sir ! " and she dropped a curtsey, 
while her husband turned, and rose. 

" May I come in ? " asked Cyril, pausing, 
hat in hand, and smiling his genial smile. 
" Your tea is very tempting, Mrs. Lee." 

VOL. I. D 



34 THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 

'' Come in and welcome, Master Cyril," 
said tlie coactiman, as Cyril, with the air of 
an accustomed guest, placed his hat on a 
side-table adorned with the family Bible, 
workboxes, and tea-trays, and took the chair 
Mrs. Lee handed him. 

" Why, I've not had tea with you for an 
age," continued Cyril, stroking a large tabby 
cat, which sprang purring upon his knee 
the moment he was seated ; " and I don't 
deserve any now, since I come straight from 
the drawing-room at Swaynestone, where the 
rites of the teapot were being celebrated. 
But the ladies there have no idea of tea- 
making, and I only had two cups, and was 
tantalized with a vague sketch of a piece of 
bread and butter." 

^^Well, you always were a rare one for 
tea. Master Cyril," returned his hostess. 
" If I had but known you were coming, I'd 
'a made some of them hot cakes. But there's 
jam in plenty, some blackberry as Alma made 
this fall." 

" Alma came by Long's waggon," he ex- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 35 

plained, when she had withdrawn to lay 
aside her hat and shawl ; *' and as I chanced 
to he at the gate when she got down, I saw 
her across the meadow." 

" Thank 'ee kindly, Master Cyril. I don't 
like her to be out alone at nights," said Ben 
Lee, " though, to be sure, there's only our 
own people about on the estate." 

Before Alma's mind there arose a vision of 
the Swaynestone drawing-room as she had 
seen it once at tea-time when she was sum- 
moned to speak to the young ladies about 
some needlework she was doing for them. 
She saw in imagination the long range of 
windows with their rich curtains ; the mirrors 
and couches ; the cabinets filled with rare and 
costly hric-a-hrac ; the statuettes and pictures ; 
the painted ceiling of the long, lofty room ; 
the beautiful chimneypiece of sculptured 
Parian marble ; the rich glow from the hearth 
throwing all kinds of warm reflections upon 
the splendid apartment, and principally upon 
the little table, laden with silver and price- 
less china, by the fire ; and the charming 



36 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

group of ladies in their stylish dress and 
patrician beauty, half seen in the fire-lit 
dusk. It was a world of splendour to 
Alma's unaccustomed eyes — a place in which 
an ordinary mortal could in no wise sit down 
with any comfort, without, indeed, a some- 
thing almost amounting to sacrilege ; a world 
in which the perfume of hot-house flowers 
took away the bated breath, and in which no 
footfall dared echo, where voices were low 
and musical, and manners full of courteous 
ease ; a world inhabited by beings untouched 
by common cares, with other thoughts, and 
softer, more beautifully adorned lives ; a world 
which Alma entered with a burdensome sense 
of being out of place, in which she only 
spoke when spoken to, and where she heard 
herself discussed as if she were a thing 
without hearing. 

" What ! is this Lee's daughter ? " Lady 
Swaynestone had asked, putting up her gold- 
rimmed glasses, and taking a quiet survey of 
Alma and her blushes. 

" Surely you remember little Alma Lee, 



THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 37 

mother," Ethel Swaynestone replied. " She 
has shot up, you see, like the rest of us." 

" Ah, to be sure ! How the time goes, 
Ethel ! How is your mother, Alma ? And 
she is embroidering Maude's handkerchiefs ? 
A very nice employment for a young woman. 
But I don't like her gown ; it is far too 
smart for a coachman's daughter." 

" Nonsense, mother dear. Why shouldn't 
she be smart, if she likes ? But if you want 
really to look nice. Alma, you must not wear 
violet and pale blue together," said the fair- 
haired Maude, with a sweet look of interest 
in Alma's appearance that won her heart, 
wounded as it was by " her ladyship's " want 
of consideration. 

Very glad was Alma to retire from that 
august presence — almost as glad as she had 
been to enter it. And Mr. Cyril had walked 
straight from the splendid apartment, from 
the light of Miss Ethel and Miss Maude's 
eyes, and the sound of their sweet, cultured 
voices, with a disparaging remark upon their 
tea, and chosen Alma's own humble everyday 



38 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

dwelling and homely meal in the narrow 
rcom in preference. This filled her with a 
strange, indefinable emotion, half pleasure 
and half pain. Some instinct told her that 
he was the same welcomed, admired guest 
there as here ; that he spoke with the same 
easy charm to Lady Swaynestone and her 
daughters and the high-born visitors he 
chanced to meet there as to her parents and 
herself. And could her imagination have 
borne her into Cyril's future, she would have 
seen him, as he subsequently was, a welcomed 
frequent guest at royal tables, wdiere his 
beautiful voice and perfect manner cast the 
same glamour over the palace atmosphere as 
over that of the coachman's little dwelling. 

Quickly as Alma returned to the parlour, 
she yet found time to arrange her rich hair 
and add a necklace of amber beads, thus 
imparting a kind of gipsy splendour to her 
dark face, and other little trifles to her dress ; 
and very handsome she looked in the fire- 
light — for the one candle but emphasized the 
gloom — with that new sparkle in her eyes 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 39 

and flusli on lier cheek. It was Cyril who 
recommended her to toast the sausages she 
had brought from Oldport instead of frying 
them ; he and Lilian had often cooked them 
so in the schoolroom at home, he said, when 
Mrs. Lee demurred at trusting to his culinary 
skill. It was Cyril also who suggested the 
agreeable addition of cold potatoes warmed 
up. 

'' Well, Master Cyril, I never thought to 
see you teach my wife cooking," laughed 
Ben, paying a practical compliment to his 
skill. " Hand Master Cyril some tea, Alma ; 
and do yon taste the sausages, my girl. 
Why, where's your appetite after tramping 
all the way into Oldport, and nothing but a 
bit of bread and cheese since breakfast ? 
You shan't walk there and back again any 
more ; that and the shopping is too much. 
And so you came along part of the way in 
Long's waggon, when you might have been 
tooled along by the best horse in our stables, 
and Judkins fit to cry about it. Now, don't 
you call that silly, Mr. Cyril ? " 



40 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

"Every one to his taste, Ben. I prefer 
the dog-cart." 

" And it ain't every day a girl like Alma 
gets a chance of riding behind such a horse 
or beside such a young man," added Mrs. 
Lee, severely. *' But there's people as never 
knows where their bread's buttered." 

*' There are people," said Alma, with a 
toss of her graceful head, " as know what 
they've a mind to do, and do it." 

" And there's headstrong girls as lives to 
repent," retorted the stepmother. 

" Ay, you was always a wilful one, 
Alma," said her father ; " but if you don't 
look out you'll be a old maid, and you won't 
like that. And a smarter fellow than Charlie 
Judkins never crossed a horse. No drink 
with Charlie — goes to church regular, and 
has a matter of fifty pound in the bank, and 
jDuts by every week. And Sir Lionel ready 
to find him a cottage and raise his wages 
when he marries." 

" Well, let him marry, then," returned 
Alma, airily; "/don't want to prevent him. 



THE SILEXCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 41 

I dare say Mr. Cyril would be kind enough 
to perform the ceremony, if he wished it." 

" I should have the greatest pleasure, 
Alma, particularly if he chose a certain 
friend of mine. For, as your father says, 
Charlie is a really good fellow, as warm- 
hearted a man as I know, and deserves a 
good wife." 

" There are plenty of good wives to be 
had," returned Alma ; " no doubt Mr. 
Judkins will soon find one, especially as 
he has so many friends to put in a word 
for him." 

''Ay, and he might have the pick of girls 
in Malbourne, and five miles round," added 
Mrs. Lee. 

" And Charlie won't stand Alma's hoity- 
toity airs much longer," chimed in her father. 
" He was terrible angry this afternoon, and 
talked about stuck-up faggots, he did. And 
you rising twenty-two, and refused Mr. 
Ingram's own man. I don't know what 'd 
be good enough for ye. Alma, I don't, with- 
out 'twas Mr. Ingram hisself. Ain't she a 
wilful one, Mr. Cyril ? " 



42 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" We mustn't be hard upon her, Ben. 
She has a right to refuse a man if she doesn't 
care for him. But any girl might think 
twice b.efore refusing CharHe Judkins," said 
Cyril, in his gentle, gracious way. " I was 
to tell you, Mrs. Lee," he added, "that we 
are running short of eggs at the Rectory, and 
ask if your fowls were laying enough to 
spare ? " 

" Ourn have mostly give over laying, but 
Mrs. Maitland shall have a dozen so soon as 
Alma can get over to-morrow. Why, you 
don't bide at the Rectory now, sir ? " 

" No. I have rooms in my own parish at 
Shotover," he replied ; " but I am always 
running in and out at home. It is only a 
mile and a half, you know ; and Shotover is 
such a tiny parish, it leaves us very idle." 

" That's well for your book-learning, Mr. 
Cyril. I reckon you have to know a good 
deal more before you can be priested next 
Trinity. When are ye coming over to 
Malbourne to preach to we ? " 

" Oh, not for a long while, Ben. I feel as 



THE SILEKCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 43 

if I could never have the assurance to preach 
to all you grave and reverend seigniors. I 
don't even preach at Shotover, if I can help 
it," he repHed, with an air of ingenuous 
modesty that became him well. 

" You mun get over that, sir," continued 
Ben ; " you mun think of Timothy. He 
was to let no man despise his youth, you 
mind." 

"" Certainly, Ben. But I have only been 
ordained three months, and I may w^ell hold 
my tongue till I have learned a little wisdom. 
Ah, Ben, you can't imagine what a dreadful 
ordeal it is to preach one's first sermon ! I 
feel cold water running down my back wdien 
I think of it. They say my face was whiter 
than my surplice, and my voice sounded so 
loud and strange in my ears I thought it 
must frighten people, instead of which they 
could scarcelv hear me." 

" Lauk-a-mercy, Mr. Cyril, you'll soon get 
over that," said Mrs. Lee, in a tone of con- 
solation. " That's just how I felt the first 
time I acted parlourmaid, Jane being took 



44 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

ill, and a party to dinner, and I housemaid. 
You mid 'a seen the glasses knock up agen 
the decanter when I filled them, the jellies 
all a-tremble with the palpitations — not to 
mention the first time I walked into Mal- 
bourne Church with Lee, and made sure I 
should a dropped every step I took up the 
aisle, and all them hoys staring, and your pa 
beginning ' the wicked man.' But law ! I 
thinks nothing of it now." 

" You may still hear my teeth chatter in 
Shotover Church, nevertheless, Mrs. Lee," 
replied Cyril, softly stroking the cat, which 
still nestled purring on his knee, and casting 
an amused glance on Mrs. Lee and on Alma, 
whose face expressed the most sympathetic 
interest. '' But, as you say, I shall get over 
it in time. And, indeed, if the congre- 
gation consisted of Alma, and Lilian, and 
Mr. Ingram Swaynestone, and his sisters, 
I shouldn't mind preaching at Malbourne. 
Fellow- sinners of my own age are not 
so appalling." 

" Ay, with a head like yourn, you med be 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 45 

a bishop some day," observed Lee, thougbt- 
fully. " Whaf s this yere thing they made 
ye at college ? somat to do with quarrelling ? " 

" A wrangler." 

" Ah ! You may depend upon it, it's a fine 
thing to be a wrangler. Mr. Ingram, now, 
they only made he a rustic ; but he was at 
t'other place — Oxford, they calls it." 

''He was rusticated," said Cyril, gravely. 
" That is not so advantageous as being made 
a wrangler." 

" You see, I was right, after all, motber," 
Alma interposed ; '' and you always would 
have it that Mr. Cyril was a mangier. As 
if they had mangles at Cambridge ! " 

" You'd better be less forward with your 
tongue, and get on with your vittles, miss. 
Why, bless the girl, she's eat nothing, and 
if that ain't the third time she've put sugar 
into the milk-jug by mistake ! Why, father, 
whatever's come to her ? " 

Alma blushed prettily, but her confusion 
almost amounted to distress ; and Cyril, with 
his ready tact, again drew attention from her. 



46 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

*' You must not imagine," lie said, " that I 
have to pass my time in strife and dissension 
because I am a wrangler. Quite the contrary. 
Thank you for the tea, Mrs. Lee. Grood 
night, Ben ; " and, placing the cat very 
gently on the warm hearth, and shaking hands 
with his hosts, Cyril rose, took his hat, and 
followed Alma out into the darkness. 

She bore the candle, and by its light guided 
him to the little wicket at the end of the 
garden, where, with a curtsey, she bid him 
good night. 

" Good night, Alma," he returned carelessly, 
and stepped briskly down the dark meadow, 
the grass of which was crisped now by frost ; 
while Alma remained at the wicket, that he 
might have the benefit of the candle's feeble 
ray. 

When he was half-way across, he suddenly 
stopped and turned. 

" Oh, Alma ! " he cried, retracing his steps, 
when she looked up with startled inquiry in 
his face, " I quite forgot the very thing I 
came for." Here he paused, overcome with 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 47 

surprise at the vivid, tense expression of 
Alma's bright face, and a ray of illumination 
shot over the something he had observed in 
the house, the absent manner and the lack of 
appetite, and accounted for her disparagement 
of the enamoured Judkins. By these signs 
he knew that Alma was in love with some 
other swain. " I quite forgot Miss Lilian's 
message to you. My sister is getting up a 
Bible-class for young women, and she wishes 
you to join. She is to hold it in her room 
at the Rectory after evensong on Sunday 
afternoons. Will you come ? " 

" Oh, I don't know, Mr. Cyril ! You see, 
I should be dark home these winter nights," 
returned Alma, hesitating and blushing, and 
looking up at Cyril and down on the frosted 
grass and up again. 

" Well, you can talk it over with Miss 
Lilian when you bring the eggs. I think we 
might get over the difiiculty of getting home 
in the dark. If that was all, I might see 
you home myself" 

" Oh, Mr. Cyril ! " 



48 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

There was a quiver and flash and illumina- 
tion in the words and look of the simple, 
unconscious girl which shot like electric 
flame through her interlocutor's frame, and 
made him speechless. The blue radiance from 
his eyes mingled for a moment with the dark 
fire of Alma's, and a strange, unaccustomed 
tremor, that was not all pain, set his pulses 
beating as they were not used to beat, and 
stirred all the currents of his blood. 

" Good night, Alma," he said shortly, and 
in a voice so unlike his own that the girl 
stood petrified in pained amazement ; and he 
turned, and sped swiftly over the crisp grass 
to the gate, glad to be out of the influence 
of the solitary candle's dim light. 

He let the gate fall-to with a clash which 
made it vibrate backwards and forwards for 
some minutes before it found rest, and strode 
rapidly over the dark highway beneath the 
trees. 

" What have I done ? " he muttered, with a 
beating heart. " Oh, my God ! I meant no 
harm. What have I done ? " 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 49 

Yet the warm, delicious glow still lingered, 
paining him, in his breast, and he strode on. 
with his head bent down, humbled and 
wretched. His soul was yet spotless as the 
untrodden snow ; all his hopes and tastes 
were innocent ; the fierce flame of temptation 
had never yet cast its scorching glare upon 
him, hitherto he had deemed himself in- 
vulnerable. In his trouble, he put his hand 
instinctively in his pockets, where nestled as 
usual the rubbed covers of his " Visitations 
and Prayers for the Sick," and other devo- 
tional books, and was comforted. He lifted 
his head, and felt in his breast-pocket for a 
letter, the pressure of which, though he could 
not read it beneath that dark dome of solid 
night, fully restored the serenity to his face. 
It began, " Dearest Cyril," and ended, " Ever 
affectionately yours, Marion Everard ; " it 
alluded to the pains of separation, and the 
hopes expressed by Cyril of a possible 
marriage in a year's time. 

They had been engaged a whole year, 
and the necessity of waiting another year 

VOL. I. E 



50 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

before marriage was tlie tragedy of their 
young lives. A year seemed an eternity 
to them, and the life they passed apart 
from each other no life. A vision of 
Marion's gentle face brightened the curtain 
of thick darkness spread before Cyril. He 
recalled her tones and looks with a rush of 
sweet affection — all the tender looks she had 
ever given him, and they were many ; but 
he could not recall any one look that re- 
sembled the glance of fervid, unquenchable 
passion which flashed from Alma's tell-tale 
eyes in that fatal moment at the gate. Such 
a look he had beheld in no woman's eyes ; 
such a look, he feared, in the narrowness of 
his serene purity, could light no good 
woman's eyes. 

He was wrong. The flame which burnt 
in poor, innocent Alma's breast, and which 
her guileless nature so rashly and uncon- 
sciously betrayed, descended like a celestial 
glory upon her life with a purifying and 
strengthening power, which could have lifted 
her to unimagined summits of heroism. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 51 

There are people whose lives are never 
touched by passion, and who, when they 
come in contact with it, recognize only its 
strength, which they dread, and condemn its 
mysteries as baleful. Such was Cyril in 
these white young days of his before any 
shadow fell upon his sunny, safe path. Such 
was not Cyril in after-days, when the agony 
of the penitent and the evildoer found a 
responsive echo in his heart, and made him 
pitiful and lenient in judging character and 
discriminating motives. But to-night, in 
spite of the momentary glow for which he 
so despised himself, he drew the robe of the 
Pharisee about his upright soul, and cast a 
stone of condemnation upon the sufferer as he 
passed her swiftly by. 

A Iraa remained statue-like, with her solitary 
light painting a feeble halo on the all-encom- 
passing gloom, until Cyril's steps had ceased 
to echo along the lonely highway, and her 
mother called to her to bring back the candle 
and shut the door. 

As soon as she had obeyed, she found a 



52 THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 

pretext for going to lier room, and there, 
sitting down on the edge of the bed in the 
dark, she burst into tears. 

" I am tired, and William Grove frightened 
me," she said to herself; and a few minutes 
later she was at needlework in the parlour, 
singing like any wild bird. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 53 



CHAPTER IIL 

A WARM glimmer of ruddy light on the thick 
darkness told Cyril of the approach of the 
wheelwright's house and shop, and, passing 
this and descending the hill, he became aware 
of the rich crimson which marked the lower 
windows of the Sun Inn, and found himself 
at the end of the wheelwright's yard, at the 
meeting of four roads. Opposite the Sun, 
and coloured by its light, a sign-post reared 
itself at the corner, oblique, and appearing to 
gesticulate madly with its outspread arms. 
This corner turned, all the village sparkled 
out in a little constellation of cottage case- 
ments before his gaze ; and there, beyond the 
brook, which murmured faintly in the stillness, 
the Rectory windows shone out among masses 
of foliage, or rather of branches, behind which 



54 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

the grey cliiircli spire lifted itself unseen in the 
mirk. As soon as Cyril's foot was within 
the gate, a sudden illumination from the hall 
door, which simultaneously opened, poured 
itself upon the drive, and showed him the 
outline of a woman's young and graceful 
figure in the porch. 

" Did you hear me coming, Lilian ? " asked 
he, entering the house. " Your hearing must 
indeed be acute." 

" Did we hear him, Mark Antony ? " echoed 
Lilian, addressing a magnificent black cat, 
with white breast and paws, which had been 
sitting upon the step at her feet, and gazing 
with grave expectancy down the drive till 
Cyril reached the door, when he rose, and 
respectfully greeted him with elevated tail 
and gentle mews, interspersed with purring. 
" You know that puss and I have an extra 
sense, which tells us when you are coming," 
she replied lightly, as she passed her arm 
through his, and led him through the little 
hall into the drawing-room, on the threshold 
of which a terrier and a pug sprang out to 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 55 

greet the new-comer with short barks of joy 
and sudden bounds and various wild expres- 
sions of delight — an indiscreet behaviour, 
quietly rebuked by two swift but dignified 
strokes of Mark Antony's white velvet paw, 
which sent the heedless animals, with dismal 
yelps and mortified tails, to a respectful 
distance. 

A lady lay on a sofa near the fire, and a 
boy and a girl of some eight and nine years 
rolled on the hearthrug with some toys. 
These children, with Cyril and Lilian, who 
were twins, constituted the sole remainder of 
Mrs. Maitland's once too numerous family. 
What with bearing and rearing them all, and 
the sorrow of losing so many, her strength was 
now exhausted, and the prime of her life was 
passed chiefly on that sofa, among its warm 
rugs. Cyril bent to kiss her, and a look of 
pride and joy lighted her pale, refined face as 
she gazed upon him. 

The children sprang upon Cyril, and he, 
having caressed them, took a seat by Lilian, 
who was at the writing-table, from which she 
had risen on his approach. 



56 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" Will it do ? " he asked, gazing upon some 
manuscript before her. 

" I think so," she replied. " I have drawn 
a line through the most ornate passages. But 
you must really try and adapt yourself to 
your congregation, Cyril. This goes com- 
pletely over their heads. Be less elaborate, 
and speak from your heart, simply and 
honestly." 

"The discipline which turns out wranglers," 
observed Cyril, with a dry little smile, " does 
not train popular rustic preachers." 

" Cyril's sermons again ? " asked Mrs. Mait- 
land. " Lilian should compose them entirely, 
I think. And yet I am wrong, for I doubt if 
either of you could do anything without the 
other." 

The twins smiled, knowing this to be 
perfectly true. They were alike, and yet 
different. Lilian's features were fuller than 
Cyril's ; her eyes softer and of a grey colour, 
but they met the gazer with an even more 
powerful electric thrill than Cyril's light blue 
orbs ; her hair was many shades lighter than 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 57 

her brother's ; and while Cyril could not 
appear in any assembly without exciting 
interest and drawing all eyes to himself, 
Lilian had a peculiar manner of pervading 
places without attracting the slightest obser- 
vation. Gradually one became aware of an in- 
fluence, and only after a long time discovered 
the personage from whom it emanated. 

No one ever praised Lilian's beauty, though 
she possessed all the elements of loveliness. 
She shared Cyril's musical voice, but lacked its 
more powerful and penetrating tones. Cyril 
had beautifully shaped hands, but Lilian's 
were like two fair spirits, and formed the 
only striking part of her personality ; they 
were the first thing the stranger observed in 
her, and, once observed, they were never for 
a moment forgotten. The twins had shared 
everything from their babyhood. The same 
tutor demanded equal tasks of brother and 
sister ; and when Cambridge separated them, 
Lilian still followed the course of her brother's 
studies, and would doubtless have been a high 
wrangler, had she been submitted to the same 



58 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

tests as he. The peculiar bond between them 
was respected and acknowledged even by 
Mark Antony, who was, as his mistress fre- 
quently observed, a cat of considerable force 
of character. Besides Lilian, Cyril was the 
only human being Mark Antony ever followed 
or fawned upon, and it was supposed that his 
very strong affections were entirely bestowed 
upon the twins. 

To strangers this cat was haughtily in- 
different; and, if a visitor took such a 
liberty as to stroke his ebon fur, would 
rise and walk away with offended majesty. 
To the family he observed a distant but 
eminently courteous demeanour ; to the 
servants he was condescending ; to the 
children polite, but never familiar, their re- 
spectful caresses being received with dignified 
resignation, and never suffered to go beyond 
a certain point ; his bearing to the dogs was 
that of a despot. He was a great warrior, 
and suffered no other cat to intrude so much 
as a paw on the Rectory grounds ; hence 
his name. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 59 

He never left Lilian while slie was in 
the house, and at certain seasons exacted 
games of play from her, scorning to play 
with any one else, save occasionally when he 
unbent so far as to entangle himself wildly in 
Winnie's curls, to the great consternation of 
the dogs. But Cyril might do anything with 
him, and could never do wrong. In this, 
Mark Antony differed from his mistress, since 
Cyril was the only person with whom she 
ever quarrelled, the two having had many 
a pitched battle in their childhood, though 
they always stood up for each other to 
such an extent that, if one was punished by 
the deprivation of pudding, the other was 
permitted to go on half rations with the 
delinquent, and to give one an orange meant 
to give each half a one. 

'' Did you tell him that the Everards were 
here this afternoon ? " Mrs. Maitland added, 
the personal pronoun being considered suffi- 
cient indication to Lilian of her brother, 
while " her " in addressing Cyril was known 
to mean Lilian. 



60 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

"Were they, indeed? and I away, of 
course," grumbled Cyril. 

"You may guess Marion's message," laughed 
Lilian, in a low aside, at which Cyril looked 
pleased. 

" Well, mother, and the news ? " he added. 

" Henry's long silence is satisfactorily ex- 
plained." 

" Satisfactorily ? Oh, mother ! and he has 
been at death's door ! " interrupted Lilian. 

" 111 ? Everard ? I knew there must be 
something very serious," ejaculated Cyril. 
''But he is better?" 

" He is convalescent, dear. He is a noble, 
unselfish fellow, as I always knew when he 
was but a tiny boy ! He would not let his 
friends be written to until he was completely 
out of danger. There was a child dangerously 
ill of scarlet fever in some dreadful court in 
Seven Dials. He was too ill to be moved, and 
had a bad, drunken mother, and Henry watched 
him for several nights, relieving guard with 
a day nurse. By the time the child was out 
of danger Henry was raving " 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 61 

" Then, why," interrupted Cyril, with 
agitation, " were we not told ? " 

" He had foreseen his delirium, and for- 
bidden any communication till he died or 
recovered. He knew full well that nothing 
would have kept Marion from him, had she 
known " 

"" He was right ! " broke in Cyril, in a low, 
fervid tone. " Thank Heaven that he thought 
of that ! "- 

" Henry always thinks of everything that 
may affect the welfare of his friends," added 
Lilian, whose face v/ore a look of quiet 
enthusiasm, and whose dark grey eyes were 
shining with repressed tears. 

" And now ? " added Cyril, with energy. 
" They will not let Marion go to him now, 
I hope. The convalescent stage is the most 
infectious." 

" They will not meet until Henry is per- 
fectly free from infection. You may trust 
Henry for that, Cyril." 

" He has been very ill," said Lilian ; " they 
feared he would be both blind and deaf. It 



62 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

will be months before he can recover, though 
the infectious stage is already nearly past." 

" Poor old Everard ! that will be a terrible 
trial for him, with his ambition. Time is so 
precious to a man who is beginning his 
career." 

" I suspect he has been working too hard," 
said Mrs. Maitland, " and the enforced rest 
to his brain may benefit him more than they 
think. Admiral Everard is ordered to the 
Mediterranean with the squadron in a few 
weeks' time, and, a winter abroad being 
necessary for Henry, he is to go in the 
Cressy to Malta, from whence he will after- 
wards go to other places — Egypt and the 
Holy Land among them — and Marion is to 
be his companion." 

"Marion? What ! Marion spend the winter 
abroad ? Impossible ! She shall not go." 

" You are not married yet, Cyril," said 
Lilian, laughing. 

" My dear boy, why should Marion not 
go ? " asked his mother, in surprise. '' She 
is delighted at the prospect. It is perhaps 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 63 

the only cliance she will have of going 
abroad for any length of time. Once married, 
a girl cannot see much of the world, as the 
admiral says, and a country curate's wife is 
especially bound to home." 

" And do you suppose, mother, that I shall 
always be a country curate ? " asked Cyril, 
with fire. " No, indeed. My wife will have 
as many opportunities of seeing the world 
as any one, I trust. But she cannot, she 
must not leave me all this winter. I simply 
cannot spare her." 

" And Henry — can he spare her ? " asked 
Lilian. 

"She is not engaged to Henry. Let 
Henry get a wife of his own." 

'' My dear Cyril, how absurdly you talk ! " 
said Mrs. Maitland. " You forget that Henry 
is an invalid, and will need his sister's care. 
And you forget, too, that Marion is looking 
forward with the greatest delight to this un- 
expected trip." 

" The only lady on board — on board a 
man-of-war ! " 



64 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" And awful fun, too," interposed the boy 
on the rug. '^ I only wish I was ill, and the 
admiral would take me." 

" Well, Lennie, you would be a more 
appropriate passenger, certainly. The ad- 
miral had better take us all, I think. Snip, 
the terrier, and Snap, the pug, with Mark 
Antony to catch the mice and keep us in 
order." 

" But Marion is not going in the Cressy,'' 
interposed Lilian. " There was some idea of 
her going at first. It seems, however, that 
ladies are not supposed to sail with their 
relations." 

" I was beginning to wonder whether the 
admiral purposed carrying a regular Noah's 
ark about with him," grumbled Cyril. " And 
pray, how does Marion get to Malta, unless 
in the Cressy ? By balloon ? or does she 
charter a vessel of her own ? " 

^'She goes with the Wilmots, overland by 
Marseilles. Captain Wilmot is joining his 
regiment at Malta. They stop at Paris and 
other places, taking it leisurely, and that will 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 65 

be delightful to Marion, who has travelled 
so little." 

" It seems, then, after all, that Henry will 
have to do without Marion till he reaches 
Malta," said Cyril. 

" But he will have his father, and, of 
course, a proper attendant on board. At 
Malta he will be thrown on his own resources, 
and will need a companion. They will take 
care of each other," Mrs. Maitland replied 
cheerfully. " They think of coming home 
by way of Sicily." 

" I shall go to Woodlands to-morrow, and 
remonstrate with the admiral, if he is there. 
I shall take the pony-chaise, unless you want 
it, Lilian." 

" Nonsense, Cyll. You may go to the 
Woodlands and take the pony, but you will 
not remonstrate with the admiral, or make 
yourself in any way obnoxious," said Lilian. 
" When you come to reflect, you will see 
what a charming arrangement it is for every- 
body. The admiral is the more delighted, as 
he thinks this voyage will make Henry so 

VOL. I. F 



66 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

desperately in love with the navy that he 
will become a naval surgeon." 

" Hang the admiral ! " observed Cyril, in 
his softest, most plaintive voice, while a droll 
little smile curved his lips. "Why doesn't 
somebody pity me ? Isn't it hard lines, Mark 
Antony ? " 

Mark Antony responded by a tiny mew. 
He was sitting on the writing-table between 
his twin favourites, the picture of feline bliss ; 
his tail curled round his dainty white paws, 
his snowy breast tinted by the ruddy fire- 
light, his eyes lazily closing and unclosing, 
while he made rhythmic accompaniment to 
their voices in deep, long-drawn purrs, and 
expressed a benevolent and condescending 
interest in the conversation by occasional 
winks and movements in the direction of 
brother or sister, as each spoke. He had 
inspected and thoroughly sniffed Cyril's 
sermon with an air of approving criticism. ' 

" Mark Antony was most condescending to 
Marion this afternoon," said Lilian ; " he not 
only purred affably when she stroked him, 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 67 

but even allowed her to kiss him on the 
breast." 

Whereupon Cyril bestowed a salute on the 
same spot, commending the cat's sagacity in 
thus recognizing Marion as one of the family. 
Mark Antony drew himself up with gratified 
pride, and returned his friend's caress by 
lifting his velvet paw, placing his head on 
one side with an arch, roguish expression 
in his sparkling eyes and bristled white 
whiskers, and chucking Cyril under the chin 
with the daintiest grace, to the envy and 
delight of the children, who worshipped this 
household divinity at a distance ; the jealous 
disgust of the dogs, who were sleeping with 
one eye open, after the manner of their tribe, 
and growled faintly ; and the admiration of 
the whole family, who knew that this delicate 
caress was never accorded save to the twins. 

" No one seems to have thought of me in 
this matter," observed Cyril, stroking the 
delighted animal. " I shall certainly stand 
up for my rights. This notion of sacrificing 
Marion, and sending her half the world over 



68 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

in charge of an invalid brother, is too detest- 
able. Her sisters should interfere ; they 
stand in the place of a mother to her." 

" Married sisters have little influence on 
home affairs, fortunately for Marion's freedom 
in the choice of a husband," Mrs. Maitland 
said, laughing. 

"Well, it grows late," said Cyril, rising. 
" By the way, I did your errands at Lee's. 
The eggs and the pupil are to arrive to- 
morrow morning." 

" I am so glad you remembered," replied 
Lilian ; " I have the greatest desire to gain 
some influence over Alma Lee. Do you 
know, Cyril, she is a girl of no common 
character. No one in the least suspects 
what that girl is capable of." 

" What, Lill, have you unearthed another 
genius ? " asked Cyril, carelessly. 

" Oh no ; no genius. But the next time 
you see her, observe the way in which her 
eye flashes, and the mobility of her features. 
Poor Alma ! she is so liable to fall into temp- 
tation, with her beauty and ignorance, and 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 69 

passionate, undisciplined nature. There are 
fine elements in her, deep feeling, strong 
imagination, and capability of self-sacrifice. 
How she tended that poor little step-sister of 
hers ! Lucy was fearfully afflicted. Her own 
mother shrank from her at times ; but Alma, 
never. Yet she is very wayward, and so 
spoilt. Her nature is powerful for evil and 
good. Nothing but strong principle can keep 
such a nature straight." 

Cyril listened, looking thoughtfully towards 
the fire, with his hand shading his eyes from 
its light. 

" My sister is a profound student of human 
nature, mother," he observed lightly. " She 
is right in saying that Miss Alma has a will 
of her own. Let us hope you will succeed in 
putting a curb on this unbridled nature, 
Lilian: You are quite right in your analysis 
of it. But I am not sure that a Bible-class is 
the panacea you imagine. To move Alma 
Lee, I think you must appeal to her affec- 
tions." 

" She is frightfully vain, poor girl ! " inter- 



70 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

posed Mrs. Maitland. " If you could induce 
her to dress more quietly, Lilian ! " 

" I am not so much afraid of her vanity, 
mother. As Cyril says, her affections must 
be got at, and I want to make my Bible-class 
a means to that end." 

" Just listen to the parish priest ! " laughed 
Cyril ; " she talks like a book. She is worth 
ten curates to my father. The time I have 
wasted, as usual ; it is past seven ! Good 
night, Lennie. Have you earned the half- 
crown yet ? No ? Lazy fellow. You will 
never be able to own a menagerie as you 
wish, unless you work harder. You may still 
get the half-crown if you bring me a fable of 
La Fontaine's, in decent Latin, remember. 
Winnie has fully earned hers, and here it is, 
brand-new. Good night, mother. Father 
will be home at eight, he bid me tell you. 
Good night, Lilian." And, having been duly 
taken leave of by the dogs, Cyril left the 
drawing-room, accompanied to the door by 
Lilian and Mark Antony, the latter flourish- 
ing his tail aloft with due ceremony, and 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 71 

remaining seated on tlie step at Lilian's feet, 
watching till the young man's form was 
swallowed up in the wintry gloom. 

'* Cyril appears anxious to be married," 
Mrs. Maitland observed, on Lilian's return to 
the drawing-room. "It is a very strong 
attachment, and well placed, fortunately for the 
dear boy. His anxiety about Marion actually 
made him forget Henry's peril, and the 
heroism which brought it upon him. Love 
is stronger than friendship." 

" Cyril is very impulsive," replied Lilian, 
*' and, like all impulsive people, is in a 
desperate hurry about everything. An early 
marriage is the thing to give balance to such 
a temperament." 

" Dear child," remonstrated her mother, 
" I do not think he needs balance. I may be 
a foolish old woman," she added, smiling, 
" but I can see no fault in Cyril. Neither 
can your father. I wish he had wider scope 
for his fine talents. To cramp a young fellow 
of his splendid powers and attainments in 
that narrow country parish seems such a 



72 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

deplorable waste of good material. I see, too, 
that the bondage chafes him." 

Lilian made no reply, but looked thought- 
fully at the fire, soothing some inward per- 
turbation by stroking and restroking Mark 
Antony, who sat purring with an expression 
of imbecile rapture on her knee. 

Cyril meanwhile made his way through 
the foggy darkness of the country roads to 
his rooms in the tiny village where lay his 
cure, vexed and cogitating upon every possible 
means of keeping Marion in England. 

His dinner was ready — a simple chop, but 
cooked and served in the daintiest perfection, 
and accompanied by a bottle of claret of a 
delicate vintage. Some late flowers and a 
dish of autumn fruit garnished his table, all 
the appointments of which were elegant and 
refined. Nothing in the simple little lattice- 
windowed room could offend the most 
fastidious taste, though it was rather bare, 
and its easiest chair would have been full of 
penance to some people's limbs. Two proof 
line-engravings, after Eaphael, were its sole 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 73 

adornments, unless we include a great many 
books, most of which were well bound, and 
a harmonium. His solitary meal ended, 
Cyril's landlady brought him some coffee, 
made as English coffee rarely is, and served 
in a lovely cup of Sevres, the gift of Marion 
Everard, and acquainted him with the fact 
that an old woman had sent three times that 
day, requesting him to come and read to her, 
as she was taken worse. 

"I'll go directly," replied Cyril. "Poor old 
soul ! I'm so sorry I was out when she sent ; " 
and he started from his seat to get his hat. 
Then it struck him that he had better drink 
the coffee while it was hot, and he sat down 
again, and fell into a reverie, experiencing 
the delicious physical languor which comes 
after much air and exercise and the satisfac- 
tion of a temperate appetite, and which is so 
favourable to a certain kind of mental occu- 
pation. He looked wistfully at a volume of 
St. Augustine, which lay ready to his hand, 
and then at his watch. "It is too late for 
Martha Hale to-night," he reflected; "and, 



74 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

after all, what good can I do lier ? Her life 
has been a combination of a martyr's and a 
saint's ; she has the Bible at her fingers' ends, 
and caught me tripping in a quotation twice 
the other day. Her spiritual knowledge is 
such as I can only dimly guess at. I can tell 
her nothing that she does not know five times 
as well as I. Her daughter reads to her by 
the hour. She has no sins to confess, no 
doubts to calm. And it would be a sin to 
disturb her at this time of night." And he 
finished the coffee, and was soon lost in St. 
Augustine's " City of God," which he closed 
at about the time when Martha Hale's radiant 
soul took flight from its worn and suffer- 
ing tenement. Then he slept as youth sleeps, 
Marion's sweet face flitting through his 
dreams, and her voice making melody to an 
accompaniment of sweetly clashing peals of 
the bell-music from Long's waggon team. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 75 



CHAPTER lY. 

Rather more than a year after Alma Lee's 
evening ride in the waggon, a railway 
carriage containing two travellers was speed- 
ing southwards through the wintry air, with 
din and rattle and smoke, in the wake of the 
red-eyed engine, which panted, groaned, and 
throbbed as with the agony of some vexed 
demon. 

The travellers were men in the heyday 
of youth, and their comfortable rugs, and 
the array of books and papers with which 
they were surrounded in the well-padded 
carriage, marked them as among those 
fortunate sons of earth who are absolved 
from the labour of carefully considering 
sixpences and shillings before converting 
them into things of convenience or pleasure. 



76 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

An odour as of a recently evanished cigar of 
fine flavour further emphasized their emanci- 
pation from the slavery of petty economies, 
though a practised observer would never for 
a moment have classed them in the ranks of 
those gilded youth v^ho are exempted from 
the curse of labour and at liberty to squander 
the rich prime of their strength on pleasures 
and follies as they will. No ; they were 
evidently two young men of the cultured 
middle class, bred in comfort, if not luxury, 
but with their own standing yet to make — a 
truly happy position for youth of average 
thews and sinews. 

They sat in opposite corners, with their 
legs stretched out beneath their warm rugs, 
one looking backwards at the swiftly receding 
perspective of trees and fields, villages and 
farmsteads, flashing and fading on the sight ; 
the other facing forwards to the yet unseen, 
but seeing it not, since he was fast asleep. 
Fast asleep, unconscious and peaceful as any 
babe on its mother's breast, he was speeding 
on without fear to a fate which in his wildest 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 77 

dreams he could never have pictured, and 
which, could it have been shadowed forth 
ever so dimlj to him, he would have dismissed 
with laughing scorn as utterly improbable — 
nay, impossible. Yet the train rushed on 
with pant and puff and clatter, bearing him 
nearer and nearer to the hidden terror with 
every quiet breath he drew in his secure 
slumbers, while pleasant fancies of the present 
and warm hopes of the future wove them- 
selves into fantastic images in his light 
dreams. His was a well-built, manly form, 
and his sleeping face, with all its placid calm, 
was full of latent energy and bright intellect ; 
a strong, serene face, with firm lips and chin, 
the face of a man who could do and endure 
much ; a face expressive of healthy vigour of 
both mind and body, though it bore traces of 
fatigue, which the soft touches of sleep were 
every moment erasing. 

His wakeful companion was a clergyman, a 
man whose mobile and finely cut features, 
and eyes full of intense blue light, were 
expressive of something akin to genius ; a man 



78 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

whose delicately organized nature could be 
touched, the observer would imagine, only to 
the finest issues. 

A world of thought and care sat on the 
young priest's brow, and the look which 
he bent on the fast-receding fields was so 
profoundly sad, that it would seem as if 
happiness could never again smile on him. 
None of the layman's calm strength and 
wholesome serenity was his ; such power as 
his face expressed would come in lightning 
flashes of brief but keen intensity. All nerve, 
fire, imagination, and feeling, was this young 
spirit apparently ; capable of descending to the 
lowest depths of suffering or rising to the 
very airiest summits of enthusiasm. It was 
an eminently beautiful and spiritual young 
face, and one which never failed to awaken 
interest, if not love. He looked very worn 
and fatigued ; but no merciful wing of 
sleep came to fan the trouble from his brow, 
while his companion slept so serenely and 
dreamed so pleasantly. 

In one hand he held a little book with 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 79 

red edges ; but, instead of consulting its pages, 
his eyes were bent fixedly on the flying 
wintry landscape, which, nevertheless, they 
saw not, their gaze of intense abstraction 
being turned inwards upon some unspeakable 
sorrow. His face was in the shadow, while 
some rays of wintry sunlight fell upon the 
sleeper's face, touched the brown moustache 
with tints of gold, and finally dazzled the 
closed eyes to wakefulness. They were very 
pleasant eyes when opened — honest, hazel 
eyes, looking directly and kindly upon the 
world, and suggesting the sunshine of whole- 
some mirth in their depths ; shrewd eyes, 
for they had seen many varieties of human 
beings in the course of six and twenty years, 
and were not easily deceived. 

" Upon my word," observed the owner of 
the eyes, " I think I must have forgotten 
myself for a moment, Cyril." 

At the first sound of his voice all the 
sadness vanished from the young priest's 
face ; the mournfully brooding eyes left the 
landscape, and flashed a gay brilliance upon 



80 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

the face in the sunshine ; the finely moulded 
lips lost their drooping curve in a smile ; the 
dejected attitude became one of alert repose ; 
the whole man was changed. 

" You may have forgotten yourself, old 
fellow, but it was impossible for any one else 
to forget you with that dulcet harmony of 
yours resounding through the brain," he 
replied. 

" Come, now, that's a libel ; I never snore," 
returned the other, with a hearty yawn that 
brought the tears into his eyes ; " and if I did, 
you might forgive me, since you were not 
preaching." 

u There are some sermons of mine just over 
your head, Everard ; who knows but some 
lulling influence may have emanated from 
them ? " 

'' ' He jests at scars that never felt a 
wound.' You scoundrel, you know very well 
that the sleep of the just is murdered the 
moment you begin thumping the pulpit- 
cushion," said Everard, with a banter which 
veiled an honest enthusiasm for his friend's 
gifts. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 81 

" I suppose I ought to say something neat 
with regard to the elegance with which 
you take off people's legs and tie up their 
arteries. But, you see, my ignorance is so 
total " 

" Exactly. Genius in our profession is 
known only to the initiated, while in yours 
it is impossible to hide its light under a 
bushel. Lucky fellows, you parsons. Not 
the minutest spark of worth in you escapes 
observation." 

" You have hit on the weak point in our 
profession, Henry," said Cyril, dropping his 
air of banter. " Seriously, it is a very awful 
thing to be placed as we are in the full light 
of public observation, all our weaknesses, 
failings, and errors heightened by its glare, 
and doing — oh, the smallest of them ! — such 
worlds and worlds of harm." 

" Stuff, Maitland ! That is where you 
parsons err. You think too much of your 
example and influence. You don't suppose, 
man, that we think you superior to human 
weaknesses ? Not a bit of it ; we should 

VOL. I. G 



82 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

loathe you, if we did. For goodness sake, 
Cyril, don't take up with these superfine 
priestly notions. By the way, why didn't 
you go to sleep ? You look as if you wanted 
it badly enough. Have you got some infernal 
machine secreted under your waistcoat, to 
wake you with a timely dig in case you 
succumb to nature's weakness, according to 
the rule of St. What's-his-name ? " 

" My dear fellow," returned the other, with 
a pained look, " you mean no harm, but you 

handle certain subjects with a levity " 

" Come now, Cyril, we are not treading on 
holy ground. Your conscience and feelings 
are in a state of hyper-sesthesia ; you have 
been working too hard. I didn't mean that 
parsons were not expected to practise what 
they preach a little more precisely than other 
men, or that any grave lapse on their part is 
not worse in them than in others. But I 
object to this morbid self-consciousness and 
conscience-searching. Surely a clergyman 
who is honest in his faith ought to be able to 
lead a Christian's life with sufficient ease to 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 83 

prevent him from torturing himself about the 
effect of his peccadilloes, which are all taken 
for granted, on his flock." 

" There are no peccadilloes for us," returned 
Cyril, with a deep sigh. " But now, Henry, 
let me speak out my anxiety about you as a 
friend merely, not as a priest. Many things 
you have said lately have grieved me 
deeply " 

" Oh, I know ! Because I don't believe in 
the devil, I am in a parlous state. You 
priests have a great tenderness for that absurd 
old devil of yours. Beg his pardon ; I will 
speak more respectfully of him in future. 
Drive on." 

" Your profession," pursued Maitland, with 
a look of shocked forbearance, " is a noble 
one ; nay, in some respects it is more noble 
than the priesthood itself, though lacking the 
special stamp of sanctity which that bears. It 
is more noble because it involves so much more 
self-sacrifice. But it is one beset with special 
and awful dangers. Your minds are so con- 
stantly set upon the material, that it is no 



84 THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 

wonder if you are tempted to lose sight of the 
spiritual." 

" That I admit," returned Everard. 
" You risk your souls that you may heal 
our bodies, and the Italian proverb, ' Where 
there are three doctors there are two atheists,' 
is daily verified." 

" Granted. But I am not one of the 
atheists, happily for me." 

" Not yet ; but I tremble for you, Henry. 
That light tone grows upon you. And you 
reason every day more and more from the 
point of view of the man of science. You 
learn more and more to distrust everything 
that cannot be proved by the evidence of the 

senses " 

" Of reason." 

^' It amounts to the same thing. Will you 
promise to pray against this, Henry ? " asked 
Cyril, with intense supplication. 

"My friend," returned the other, with a 
slight shake of his body, like that a dog gives 
in issuing from the water, " you accused me 
just now of treating sacred things with levity. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 85 

Now your words jar upon my sense of rever- 
ence, which is strangely different in a priest 
and a layman. You are accustomed, you see. 
to handle religious topics freely. I am not. 
And as I have no words to express them in, 
I would rather leave them alone." 

Cyril heaved a profound sigh, and was 
silent for some seconds, while Everard kindled 
a second cigar. 

''You think I have taken a liberty, Harry?" 
he asked, after a while. 

" Not in the least. Feeling as you do, you 
would have been wrong to be silent. You 
have but done your duty, old friend. Cheer 
up. Oh, do keep a fellow company in a 
cigar ! It is holiday-time." 

Cyril's sensitive face brightened. It was 
evident that he was extremely anxious about 
the effect his words would have on his friend's 
estimation of him. But he resolutely declined 
the cigar — a self-denial which fretted his 
friend as being quite a new feature in his 
character. 

"You are very much changed, Maitland, 



86 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLANB. 

during the past year/' he said, looking keenly 
at him. 

" I am indeed," he replied, with a heavy 
sigh ; and he turned the subject by pointing 
out the towers of a grey cathedral in the 
distance. " It is always a pleasant friend to 
meet on one's way home," he said ; and the 
two joined in admiring the massive pile, till 
their passage through a chalk cutting hid it 
from their sight for a time, and then the 
train slackened, the shouts of porters were 
heard, the cathedral appeared once more, and 
they glided under the roofs of the smoky 
station, amid a confused din of bell-ringing, 
door-banging, hurrying steps and wheels, and 
all the turmoil attending a brief pause on a 
main line. 

'' Belminster always had a great fascination 
for me," observed the doctor, looking across 
the sea of smoke-wreathed roofs to the vast 
towers of the cathedral. " Surely that serenely 
majestic person in gaiters is the bishop him- 
self. The expression ' Church dignitary ' is 
so fit. Who ever heard of a medical dignitary, 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 87 

or a legal dignitary ? Good gracious me, 
Maitland, what an awful thing it must be to 
be a bishop's son ! Fancy asking that urbane 
and dignified cleric to pass the wine ! I 
should faint if called upon to feel a spiritual 
lordship's pulse. 

Cyril smiled as the unconscious bishop 
made a stately and solitary progress past their 
carriage, recognizing the young clergyman 
as he passed. 

"He is very kind and fatherly," he observed, 
as the train moved on. " I wish I were still 
in his diocese. Yes, I have a great regard 
for Belminster. I was ordained there." 

" May you walk in the gaiters of that good 
old gentleman, Cyril, some score of years 
hence, and make the splendid old arches of 
the minster ring with jouv eloquence ! I shall 
settle near you — as parish doctor, mind — 
though I invent heaven knows how many 
diseases, as I hope to do, and Europe rings 
with my discoveries. No fashionable physician 
business for me." 

*'A bishop," observed the young priest. 



88 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

thoughtfully, "has an immense scope for 
action." 

" Here is a man," said Everard, appealing 
to the windows and sides of the carriage, 
" who is too honest to say, ' Nolo episcopari.' 
Let us make much of this man ! Let us — 
hem ! — marry him to our sister." 

'' This day two months," added Maitland, 
" the wedding will take place." 

" By the way, the young minx suggested 
that I should read Tennyson's ' St. Simeon 
Stylites ' at the next Penny Readings. The 
suggestion is, I suppose, intended for a pro- 
found joke. Rather a weak poem. Lunacy 
requires the master-mind of a Shakespeare to 
handle it without repulsiveness." 

"I am not sure that it was lunacy," said 
Cyril. 

" Not lunacy to stand on a pillar for thirty 
years ? My good fellow, when I consider the 
doings of the Stylites and the recluses of the 
Theba'id, I sometimes wonder if there was 
any sanity in the world in those days." 

" There was, at least, method in their mad- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 89 

ness, Everard. Consider the power their 
austerities gained them over the minds of 
ordinary men." 

" Of course ; many an authentic maniac has 
been honoured with almost divine honours in 
certain stages of society. The lust of power 
is a curious thing. For my part, I would 
rather be a nonentity than stand on a pillar 
to gain influence." 

" But consider what they wanted influence 
for. To bring souls to God." 

" So they persuaded themselves, no doubt. 
Of all things I loathe asceticism. Not so 
much for the spiritual ambition and pride 
that attend it, as because it is in reality 
only the other side of profligacy, or, in 
other words, an ascetic is a rake turned 
monk." 

" Can a rake do better than turn monk ? " 

" In my judgment, he can. He can repent, 
turn away from his wickedness, and lead a 
rational human life." 

" Nay. He has made himself unworthy of 
those common human enjoyments in which 



90 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

innocent men may indulge. Nothing but a 
life of penance can atone " 

" Nothing can atone," interrupted Everard. 
" I am a Protestant, Cyril — a rabid Pro- 
testant, as you observed the other day. None 
of your popish penances for me. What's the 
matter ? " 

^' Nothing," replied Cyril, whose features 
quivered with pain, as he pressed his hand 
to his side. " At least, only a ' stitch ' I am 
subject to. Myself, I long for more austerity 
in the Christian life of to-day. A few 
eremites of the Thebai'd type on Salisbury 
Plain " 

" I tell you what, Cyril : you must learn to 
moderate your transports in that parish of 
yours, or you will soon be in a hospital or a 
lunatic asylum. Subject to a stitch at four 
and twenty ! It won't do. The devil fly away 
with your eremites ! There are legends of 
some of those same Thebaid lunatics, who, 
after passing years and years in every species 
of austerity, suddenly burst their unnatural 
trammels in one unguarded moment, fled to 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 91 

the city, and plunged into a very vortex of 
iniquity. Extremes meet, and Nature is a 
stern avenger." 

The spasm again flitted across Cyril's face, 
unnoticed by his friend, for Cyril turned to 
the window as he pressed his side. Beneath 
his clothes he wore a little golden cross, 
studded with tiny spikes, which, on pressure, 
pierced the flesh. 

" The exception rather proves the rule," 
he said, smiling, as he turned his face again 
towards his friend. " The ascetics have in 
all ages of the world been the salt of the 
earth. A mere protest against sensuality is 
something. And people need the discipline 
of pain." 

" If I were to invent a purgatory, Cyril, it 
would be one of happiness. Joy is the true 
educator and refiner, not pain. Nothing 
exists, or can exist, without joy, which is 
both the originator and sustainer of life in 
the organic world, and therefore, by analogy, 
in the spiritual. You and I are here to-day 
as the result of long ages of physical and 



92 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

moral well-being enjoyed through an infinite 
chain of ancestors. Without continued phy- 
sical, mental, and moral enjoyment through- 
out our own individual lives, you and I 
would never have attained to our present 
physical, mental, and moral stature — such as 
it is. Good heavens, Cyril ! think of the 
stunted, stifled natures we have been seeing 
daily in those dens of East-End vice and 
misery, and contrast them with the men who 
were our companions at Cambridge ! " 

" I grant a certain necessary basis of 
physical well-being," rejoined Cyril, wearily ; 
" but I trust the day will dawn when you 
too will rejoice in the discipline of sorrow. 
It may even now be knocking at your doors ; 
for you are too happy, Harry, for a sinful 
man " 

" I am most perfectly happy, and trust to 
remain so, my gruesome prophet," said 
Everard, with a cheery laugh. " I have 
youth, health, a clear conscience, a profession 
I love, and good prospects in it, and — 
and " Here a curious smile, and some- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 93 

thing distantly resembling a blush, irradiated 
the doctor's face. " In short, I should be an 
ungrateful miscreant if I were not perfectly 
happy. Though, to be sure," he added, " I 
am not going to be married to one of the 
dearest girls on earth this day two months. 
Why, what is this? Oldport already, as I 
am a living man ! " He was on his feet in a 
moment, eagerly scanning the faces on the 
platform, while Cyril collected the various 
impedimenta. " She is not there," he mut- 
tered, in a tone of disappointment, as he 
appropriated his own share of the plunder. 

" Oh no ! " returned Cyril, in a composed 
manner ; " she had no intention of coming:. 
Lilian would come alone ; the phaeton only 
holds three, and Marion, of course, would not 
drive in alone." 

Everard smiled at the different significance 
of the word " she " in his own and his friend's 
vocabulary : to the latter it meant Marion ; 
to himself, Lilian. 

" Perhaps she is here, after all," he con- 
tinued, " waiting outside with the pony." 



94 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

'' Go and see," said Cyril ; " time and 
patience, meanwhile, may result in the pro- 
duction of a porter, which event I will abide." 

Everard eagerly strode along the little 
platform, thronged with labourers and market- 
women bearing baskets of the singularly 
aggressive nature affected by market-women — 
baskets constructed apparently for the express 
purpose of damaging passengers' ribs, and 
finding out their tenderest spots. He threaded 
his way eagerly through these perils, occa- 
sionally removing a stolid and motionless 
human obstacle by the simple process of 
23lacing his hands on its shoulders and 
wheeling it aside, till he issued on the top 
of the hill outside the station. The river 
flowed peacefully by its wharves at the foot 
of the hill ; the little town rose on its banks, 
and clustered lovingly round the base of the 
tall white tower, whose weathercock burned 
golden in the clear wintry sky ; and the grey 
downs laid their arms protectingly round this, 
their child. 

But Everard did not look at this scene ; he 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 95 

scanned only the lines of flys and omnibuses, 
each manned by a gesticulating, whip-waving 
driver, in search of the well-known pony from 
Malbourne, with the face he loved behind 
it. But there was no i3ony and no Lilian, 
and he returned disconsolate to Cyril, who, 
in the mean time, had succeeded in gaining 
the attention of one of the two distracted 
porters. 

" Perhaps," observed Cyril, tranquilly, " I 
forgot to write. Who knows ? Well, we 
must have a fly." 

" By the sword of my grandfather," cried 
Ev^erard, "I will not go in one of those 
confounded flys. Let us walk. The weather 
is made for it. A country walk will drive 
ascetic megrims out of your brain." 
" And the portmanteaus ? " 
'' Left till called for. We can carry our 
own bags. Now, look here," he added, as 
Cyril demurred, " I am not going to mortify 
my flesh by riding in a cushioned fly behind 
two horses, with my luggage carried for me. 
I shall walk across country, bag on shoulder ; 



96 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

and if that is too comfortable for your 
reverence, you can get some dried peas at the 
first grocer s we come to." 

Cyril laughed and consented. Everard 
gave the man silver to buy peas to put in his 
boots, to his great mystification, and the two 
young men set off down the hill, deafened by 
the importunities of flymen, and crossed the 
bridge over the dark, sluggish river, and 
admired the artistic pyramids of casks on the 
brewers' wharves, and rejoiced at hearing the 
familiar Hampshire drawl in the streets ; for 
it was market-day, and many a rustic lounged, 
stolid, with open mouth, before the gay shop- 
windows decked for Christmas. 

Presently a more musical sound made their 
ears tingle with pleasant home-thoughts — the 
sweet, melodious confusion of waggon-bells, 
clashing rhythmically along the street, and 
they soon recognized Long's fine team of 
horses, each proudly shaking the music from 
his crest, and responding to the guttural 
commands of William Grove, who strode 
along with an expressionless face and a sprig 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 97 

of mistletoe in his cap, cracking his whip, a'nd 
accompanied by his satellite Jem, who bore 
holly in his hat. A faint gleam, distantly 
resembling a smile, spread over William's 
face at the greeting of the two young men, 
and he even went so far as to issue the 
strange monosyllable which brought his team 
to a standstill at their request, while the 
more youthful and impassioned Jem expanded 
into a distinct grin, and replied that his 
health was " middling." 

" Well, and how are all the Malbourne 
folk ? and are any of our people in Oldport 
to-day. Grove ? " 

" I ain't zeed none as I knows on," he 
replied, after profound consideration. 

" Any of the Malbourne folk * gone up the 
steps ' to-day ? " asked Everard, looking in 
the direction of the town hall, which was 
closed, with its clock glittering in the sun- 
shine. 

" Ah ! 'tain't often we goos up steps," re- 
turned William, who knew well that the 
steps referred to were those conducting the 

YOL. I. H 



98 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

malefactor before the magistrates at the town 
hall, and which were numerous and un- 
pleasant to climb with a burdened conscience. 
'•' We never knows, though/' he added, in an 
unusual burst of moralizing, " who med be 
the next." 

" I hope it won't be you, William," returned 
Everard ; " if it is, it won't be for robbing 
those fine horses of their corn. Why, they 
look as fit as filberts," he added, patting the 
leader. 

" It wun't be you neither, doctor," growled 
William, affectionately ; " for all they zes as 
how you done for Jem Martin, a-cutting of 
him open and a-zewing of him up so many 
times, and pretty nigh pisened Mam Lee." 

" Do they say that ? " laughed Everard. 
"And this is fame, as Mr. Crummies observed, 
Cyril. Well, look here, William! you take 
these bags of ours, if you think the waggon 
can stand it, and fetch our portmanteaus from 
the station. Jem can run up the hill for 
them." 

" Our luggage, William," explained Cyril, 



THE SILENCE OF "DEAN MAITLAND. 99 

"if it won't put you out of your way. We 
are going home on foot, and didn't know how 
on earth to get our things out till we met 
you." 

After deep cogitation, and some assistance 
from the quicker intelligence of Jem, the 
nature of the service he was required to 
render at last dawned upon William Grove's 
intellect, which was apparently situated at a 
long distance from the material world, and 
he consented with gruff heartiness, and, 
waking all the five little peals of music with 
one motion of his whip, started off in the 
direction of the station. 

" A happy New Year to you ! " the two 
friends cried together at parting. 

"And beware of going up the steps," 
added Everard. " Upon my word, Cyril, I 
should like to explore the recesses of that 
fellow's moral consciousness. He is ap- 
parently up to the level of the most advanced 
thinkers of the day. He evidently looks 
upon crime as a misfortune dependent upon 
quite extrinsic circumstances." 



100 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" They all do," returned Cyril. " It is the 
part of Christianity to convince the world of 
sin." 

" Who shall say how far a man's will 
consents to his acts ? " added Everard, 
musingly. " I hope some day to be able to 
give myself to the study of mental disease, 
and more accurately trace the connection 
between that and crime." 

" Let us forget both this one day," said 
Cyril, whose spirits had undergone a wonder- 
ful change in the last half-hour, and were 
now gay even to boyishness. 

Everard fell readily into his humour, and, 
chatting and laughing, the friends soon 
passed the streets of the little town and its 
miniature suburbs, and gained the pretty 
village of Chalkburne, the Norman tower of 
which showed in the sunlight fresh and 
unworn by its eight centuries of storm, and 
greeted the travellers with the music of its 
chiming hour as they walked through the 
linden-girdled churchyard, rejoicing in their 
youth and the live wintry air. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 101 

Cyril had the gift of conversation, which 
Everard somewhat lacked, and the talk was 
brilliant and sparkled with his ready wit 
and quick repartee, in which the doctor 
was continually worsted, greatly to his own 
good-humoured content. His love for Cyril 
and his admiration for his gifts were bound- 
less. The two friends had passed all their 
school-time together, Everard riding daily to 
Malbourne to study with Cyril's tutor, Mr. 
Maitland's curate ; and in those young days 
the hero-worship began, the elder boy, whose 
mental powers were slower, if more solid, 
admiring, protecting, and helping the bright- 
eyed, clever child who shared his studies and 
so often distanced him. They met again at 
Cambridge, where the senior was only one 
year ahead of his two-years junior, and there 
Everard found fresh cause to admire his 
brilliant and successful friend, who gathered 
friends and admirers innumerable about him, 
and won laurels, both literary and social. 

And now family ties promised to unite 
them more closely, and Everard was glad — 



102 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

far more glad than Maitland, whose affection 
for his friend, though warm, had not the 
slightest element of hero-worship, but was, 
on the contrary, flavoured with a good spice 
of condescension. With all his imagination 
and quick sympathy, Cyril did not see that 
Henry possessed those solid and patient 
mental gifts which readily master the facts 
of physical science, and, above all, had the 
peculiar faculty which may be called scientific 
imagination, — that he was, in short, one of 
those chosen few who make new epochs in 
the history of scientific research. Cyril 
looked upon his enthusiasm for his profession 
as praiseworthy, but inexplicable. It seemed 
to him that Henry crawled upon the earth, 
while he soared in the vast of heaven's blue. 
Such was the bond which united the two 
hard-working young men who walked along 
the chalky road that bracing afternoon at the 
end of December, to pass a week's well-earned 
holiday under the friendly roof of Malbourne 
Rectory. 



THE SILENCE OF DEx^N MAITLAND. 103 



CHAPTER Y. 

The afternoon sun was shining peacefully 
upon the thatched roofs of Malbourne, on the 
dark grey spire of its tree-girdled church, 
and on the south-west front of Malbourne 
Rectory. At one of the sun-lighted windows 
sat Lilian Maitland, busily writing, her face 
directed to the prospect without, which she 
occasionally looked upon in her thoughtful 
pauses. 

The lawn sloped quickly from the windows 
to a road which was concealed by trees, 
and beyond which rose the park-like grounds 
of Northover House in such a manner as 
to appear but a continuation of the Rectory 
grounds. Somewhere down in the hollow 
by the road there danced and murmured 
the bright little stream which gave its name 



104 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

to Malboiirne, and which Lilian knew was 
sparkling gaily now in the sunshine, as it 
washed the drooping hart's-tongue waving 
from its mossy bank. Beyond the cluster 
of village roofs on the right spread a 
range of flat, windy fields to the unseen 
sea. Behind the Eectory, and on the left 
of Lilian's window, rose the bleak chalk 
downs, strong barriers against the wild salt 
winds which swept over those regions, summer 
and winter, from the sea. 

Mark Antony, the cat, sat demurely on 
the table by the blotting-book, thoughtfully 
scanning the sunny landscape, and pretend- 
ing not to see the pert little robin on the 
lawn, while he occasionally appealed to 
Lilian's sympathies by rubbing his velvet 
head against her cheek, or giving her a 
dainty little bite, which he had copied from 
his human friends, under the impression 
that it was a kiss. In a low chair, between 
the table and the fire, sat a very pretty, 
slender girl, toying with a piece of fancy 
work, but really intent upon trying to win 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 105 

a glance or responsive purr from Mark 
Antony, who regarded all her efforts with 
haughty indifference, and continued to evolve 
his philosophy of the visible universe un- 
moved. 

" He is so tantalizing ! " she cried, throw- 
ing away her work with a pretty pettish 
gesture. " If he would only once show some 
deference to me, I should not care. Puss, 
puss, I say ! Come to me at once, sir ! " 

" He thoroughly understands the secret of 
his own supremacy, Marion," replied Lilian, 
coming to the end of her writing, and softly 
stroking the animal's snow-white breast. 
" He knows as well as you do that you would 
think nothing of his caresses if he lavished 
them unasked." 

" Selfish, hateful animal ! " 

" He is not selfish," replied Lilian ; " he is 
a profound student of human nature. He 
has discovered that the deepest joy a human 
being can taste is to love disinterestedly. 
He therefore offers mankind this enjoyment 
by permitting them to adore him at a 



106 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

distance. Dogs afford a far lower enjoyment 
— that of being loved." 

^' Dogs are right," said Marion, her brown 
eyes softening in a wistful gaze ; " the 
happiest thing is to be loved. I should die 
if people didn't love me. I almost hated 
Cyril when I thought, in that dreadful time 
last spring, that he didn't care for me." 

"It is delicious to be loved," rejoined 
Lilian, '* but to love is best. How happy 
Henry is in his affection for you ! You are 
the dearest thing in the world to him, and 
yet I think you care little comparatively for 
him ; you even prefer your brother Leslie, 
who is always too busy with sport and 
gaieties to write to you." 

" Well, it is different," replied Marion. 
" Henry is so full of learning that he seems 
older than Leslie, who is the darling of his 
regiment and so full of life. And then, 
Henry is not engaged. I am sure he has 
never cared for any girl, and will die an old 
bachelor. Of course, he cares much more for 
me than I can for him. And he is so devoted 
to Cyril." 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 107 

*^ I think," said Lilian, pressing her cheek 
against her pet's glossy fur, " that neither of 
you know the real worth of Henry." 

" Oh, he is the best old fellow in the world, 
but not clever and handsome like Cyril, and 
without the dash of Leslie. By the way, I 
suppose those bad boys will be here to- 
night." 

"• No doubt they will turn up some time, 
unless something serious detains them, in 
which case they will telegraph. Cyll has 
promised to preach to-morrow. Are you 
quite sure, Marion, that he did not mention 
his train ? He always likes me to meet him 
at Oldport." 

" He said he would write later to name the 
train. I suppose he forgot." 

" He does forget now, Marion, as he never 
used to. He is killing himself in that 
dreadful parish. Oh, I shall be so thankful 
wdien you are married ! There will be a 
perfect holiday, to begin with, and then you 
will keep him within reasonable bounds." 

Marion laughed. " He will have to take 



108 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

care of me as well as the parish," she said. 
" But what is this ? " 

" This " proved to be merely Eliza, the 
parlour-maid, who entered with her usual 
unmoved countenance. 

" It is only Stevens, Miss Lilian," she said. 
" And could you please step down to the 
forge at once ? " 

" The forge ! " exclaimed Marion, with 
wide eyes of astonishment. 

" What is the matter there, Eliza ? " asked 
Lilian, tranquilly. 

'' Only Hotspur, Mr. Ingram's horse, miss. 
They've been trying this hour to get him 
shod. Straun says he wouldn't touch him 
for a hundred pounds." 

" But what has the parish clerk to do with 
shoeing horses ? " exclaimed the bewildered 
Marion. 

" Or the parson's daughter ? " added 
Lilian, laughing. " Why, nothing is done 
in the village without Stevens, Marion. He 
and G-randfer together are the oracles of 
Malbourne. No, you shall not come with 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 109 

me ; you would be frightened to death. Gro 
and see if mother wants anything. She will 
be waking now." 

" Oh, I say, Lilian ! " cried a little voice, as 
Lennie burst in, rosy and excited, " do come 
along. Such larks ! Hotspur has kicked a 
cart to atoms, and now he is letting fly in all 
directions, and is killing Judkins, and there's 
Stevens stamping at the back door, and the 
whole village with its hair on end." 

" Hyberbole is Lennie's favourite figure," 
commented Lilian, going out into the hall, 
and taking her hat and jacket. " Run on, 
Lennie, and say I am just coming. Matter ? 
Oh, my dearest Marion, nothing ! Only that 
Ingram Swaynestone spoils his horses' 
tempers, and then is surprised that his 
servants can't manage them." 

In another minute Lilian had passed with 
quick, light step and erect carriage down the 
drive, and along the village high-road, 
bordered with its little gardens, in which 
one or two belated autumn flowers still made 
a brave show against the wintry rigour. She 



110 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

went quickly, but without hurry, and found 
time on the way to give some directions about 
the church to the clerk, a lean, rugged figure, 
stooping slightly beneath the fardel of some 
fifty winters, and crowned with a shock of 
grizzled red hair, who walked and talked 
excitedly at her side. 

Soon she saw the forge, from the black 
heart of which streamed a ruddy glow, look- 
ing lurid in contrast with the sunshine, and 
round which was grouped a dense little 
crowd of women and children, with a few 
men. Straun, the smith, a burly, grimy, 
bare-armed figure in a leathern apron, stood 
in an attitude of defiant despair, one strong 
hand grasping his great hammer, which he 
had flung on the anvil, and calling silently 
on Heaven to witness that he was ready 
to shoe Christian horses, however rampant, but 
not demons, hippogriffs, or any such uncanny 
monsters. Near him, looking rather pale, 
but resolute, as became one superior to the 
weaker emotions, an old, bent, withered man, 
with shrewd grey eyes and pursed-up mouth, 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. Ill 

stood leaning forward on a stout oaken stick, 
and shook his head as one who despaired of 
finding virtue in these degenerate days in 
either man or beast. 

" And I zays, as I zed afore," he repeated, 
emphasizing his words with the stick, which 
he dug into the ground with all the force of 
his two withered hands, " zend for Miss 
Lihan — zend for she ! " 

" Lard love 'ee, Grranfer," observed a stout 
fellow in a smock-frock, who stood inside the 
forge in attendance on a couple of massive, 
glossy-coated cart-horses, who were cosily 
munching some hay dropped before them, and 
contemplating the proceedings lazily with 
their great soft winking eyes, " where 's the 
use of a gal ? " — a proposition received by 
Granfer and the assembled village with silent 
scorn. 

The centre of the excited little crowd, 
which occasionally burst asunder and flew 
outwards with a wild mingling of women's 
and children's shrieks — for the men skurried 
off with a silent celerity that was all the more 



112 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

effectual — was a beautiful chesnut horse, 
not standing, according to the comfortable 
and decent wont of horses, on four firmly 
planted feet, but outraging people's belief in 
the stability of natural laws by rearing him- 
self wildly and insecurely on his two hind 
legs, and dangling from his mouth in mid- 
air a miserable white-faced biped in sleeved 
waistcoat and gaiters, whose cap had fallen 
off, and whose damp hair streamed as wildly 
as Hotspur's own waving mane and quiver- 
ing tail. Tired of this folly, with his ears 
laid back, his nostrils wide and red, and his 
eyes showing nothing but the whites. Hot- 
spur would suddenly drop his victim to his 
native earth, and, plunging forwards on his 
other end, as if intent on turning a summer- 
set, would throw his hind hoofs up towards 
the sky in a manner most alarming to those 
who enjoyed a near view of the proceedings ; 
and then, wearying of this, he would dance 
round on all four legs at once in a manner 
utterly bewildering to contemplate. 

" Why, Hotspur," cried Lilian, in her clear, 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 113 

mellow voice, as she stepped quickly through 
the crowd just as Hotspur dropped the un- 
fortunate groom to the ground, and prepared 
to turn himself the other way up, ^' what is 
this, old fellow ? " and she caught the rein 
from the groom's hand, pushing the latter 
gently away, and laid her slender, strong 
white hand firmly upon the quivering neck 
of the maddened, plunging horse. " Fie, 
Hotspur, fie ! " 

No one had observed Lilian's approach, and 
when she appeared, as if dropped from the 
skies in the groom's place, a sudden quiet 
pervaded every human face and limb, the 
crowd fell back, and all looked on, save the 
sceptic with the cart-horses, with an air of 
tranquil expectancy ; while Lilian, without a 
trace of anxiety or agitation, talked in 
caressing, reproving tones to the ill-conducted 
steed, whose limbs had quivered into some 
approach to quiet at the first touch of the 
slender, spirit-like hand on his neck. 

But even Lihan's magic touch could not 
expel the demon of passion at once from the 

VOL. I. I 



114 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

maddened creature. He still reared and 
j^lunged and danced, in a manner that led 
the spectators to give him plenty of room 
for his evolutions ; but he became gradually 
quieter, until he stood as Providence intended 
horses to stand, on all four feet at once, and 
only betrayed the internal workings of his 
outraged feelings by the quivering of his 
limbs and body, the workings of his ears and 
eyes, and the redness of his wide nostrils, 
while Lilian's musical voice never ceased its 
low monologue of soothing and reproach, and 
her hand never left stroking and patting his 
shining neck and shoulders. At Hotspur's 
first backward rear, indeed, her hand left him 
perforce, and she only avoided being hoisted 
in mid-air like the luckless groom, by giving 
him ^ long rein and stepping quickly back 
out of the way of his formidable fore-feet. 

This was an ugly moment, and a woman 
in the crowd uttered an exclamation of dis- 
may and turned pale at the sight of the 
girl beneath the rearing horse, though no 
one else betrayed the least emotion, not even 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 115 

the sceptic in the smock-frock, whose mouth 
was too widely opened in astonishment to 
leave room for his features to express any 
other feeling ; but Hotspur, finding that 
Lilian did not balk him of his dance on his 
hind legs, soon desisted from that uncomfort- 
able performance, and yielded, as his betters 
frequently did, gradually to the soothing 
charm of her voice and touch, until he became, 
figuratively speaking, clothed and in his 
right mind. She found fault with Hotspur's 
bit, and pointed out the undue tightness of 
his girths to Judkins, whose cheeks had now 
resumed their native ruddy hue ; and when 
these defects were remedied, she led the horse 
a little way along the road and back again, 
and fed him with sugar and other dainties, 
till Hotspur's heart waxed so glad within him 
that he consented to stand like a lamb, while 
Straun, not without some misgiving in his 
bluff face, and a muttered reference to his 
wife and his seven children, fitted his new 
shoes on to his restive feet with what speed 
and dexterity he could muster. 



116 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

"And I zed/' observed Granfer, again 
striking his oaken staff emphatically on the 
ground, and looking round on the assembled 
village as if for applause, " zed I, ' Zend for 
Miss Lilian — zend for she ' ! " 

The crowd, in the mean time, had been 
augmented by the arrival of two other 
spectators, who were unobserved in the 
absorbing interest evoked by Hotspur and 
his conqueror. One was a tall, finely built 
man, somewhat past middle life, on a good, 
well-bred bay horse, which he rode and 
handled with perfect horsemanship. He 
stopped, in the first instance, to avoid riding 
over the village population ; and in the 
second, to witness the curious little drama 
enacted in the wintry sunshine. He was soon 
joined by a grey-haired clergyman, of vener- 
able aspect and refined features, who looked 
on with quiet interest. 

" Upon my word, Maitland," said the 
equestrian, addressing the latter, " this is a 
new revelation of your daughter's powers. 
I was already aware that she soothed the 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAKD. 117 

troubles and quieted tlie consciences of the 
whole village, but I did not know that she 
undertook the blacksmith's labours as well." 

" My daughter," replied Mr. Maitland, 
tranquilly, "has received a very singular 
gift from the Almighty. She can subdue 
any animal, tame or w^ild, by some mysterious 
virtue of touch, voice, or glance — perhaps of 
all three. Not a very lofty gift, perhaps. Sir 
Lionel, but one which is often very useful in 
a homely way." 

" But surely, Maitland, you cannot approve 
of Lilian's rendering such dangerous services 
as these. Are you not afraid for her ? " 

" No ; I have every confidence in her 
powers. And I do not like to make her 
nervous by suggesting danger. Perhaps one 
secret of her influence is her absolute fearless- 
ness. "Watch the expression of her eye. 
No ; I like my child to render whatever 
service she is capable of to her fellow- 
creatures. Parents often err, I think, by in- 
terfering unnecessarily with their children's 
actions. Well, Lilian, and what was the 



118 THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 

matter ? " he asked, as the crowd, perceiving 
them, fell back respectfully, with curtsies and 
cap-touchings. Judkins, receiving his four- 
footed charge from Lilian's hand, prepared to 
mount and ride away, not without warning 
from Lilian, and strict injunctions to eschew 
whipping and other irritations, and to quiet 
Hotspur's nerves by a good canter on the 
turf. 

" Only a horse with a spoilt temper, father," 
she replied. " How do you do. Sir Lionel ? 
Tell Mr. Swaynestone that I mean to scold 
him roundly about Hotspur. He is far too 
hot himself to be able to indulge in chesnnt 
horses. And, indeed, I am not sure that he 
ought to have any horse at all." 

'' All this," said Sir Lionel, who had dis- 
mounted and taken off his hat with graceful, 
old-fashioned courtesy, " I will faithfully do, 
though surely one word from yourself would 
have more effect than volumes I could say. 
Do your spells work only on the lower 
creation, Lilian ? " 

"I suppose so," returned Lilian, turning 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 119 

homewards in the reddening sunbeams, accom- 
panied by the two gentlemen and the horse, 
which latter she patted to his great satisfac- 
tion. "- My spells consist chiefly of sympathy 
and affection, and these are perfect with 
innocent animals and children, but only 
partial with sinful men." 

" Ben Lee will never forgive you for in- 
ducing me to drive without bearing-reins," said 
Sir Lionel. '' I wish you could have seen 
the sight, Maitland. Lee ignominiously de- 
throned, your daughter and myself on the 
box, Lilian handling the ribbons, and driving 
me up and down before the house without 
bearing-reins. Lee never drives out now 
without preparing for his last moment, poor 
fellow. I hope you will not help poachers, 
Lilian. I hear you can surround yourself 
with fifty pheasants at any moment in our 
w^oods." 

" If I were to hurt anything, I think my 
power would be gone ; and even if I did not 
love a thing I should have no power, for I 
have no influence on reptiles." 



120 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" And does Cyril, who is so like you, share 
your power ? " 

" As a child he did," interposed Mr. 
Maitland. " You remember the bull that 
killed Lee's father, Sir Lionel ? Imagine my 
feelings on seeing the twins, then about six 
years old, stroking him, and trying to reach 
by jumping up to his terrific horns ! Still, 
Cyril has an unusual influence over animals, 
though it becomes fainter. He has more 
power with human beings than his sister." 

"Yet Lilian stopped that fellow who was 
beating his wife to death." 

" And the whole village looking on and 
not lifting a finger — the cowards ! " Lilian 
flashed out. " He fell down in sheer fright 
when I rushed at him. Come in, Sir Lionel, 
and have some tea," she added, as they 
reached the gates. 

But Sir Lionel refused the tea, having still 
some distance to ride before dark. 

" I am in Lady Swaynestone's service 
to-night," he said, *' and she bid me ask you 
to come and counsel her about some dis- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 121 

tribution of coals or what not, when you have 
a spare moment. I wish you could also 
exorcise the demon of extravagance from that 
boy Ingram." 

" She nearly scolds the poor fellow to 
death as it is," said Mr. Maitland. '* We are 
expecting Henry Everard to-night." 

" So I hear. A promising fellow, Sir 
Andrew Smithson tells me. He was both 
clever and kind in his treatment of Lee's 
wife last spring. As a lad, I thought him 
rather dull. However, we all pin our faith 
on Dr. Everard now at Swaynestone." 

And bidding them farewell. Sir Lionel 
sprang like any youth to his saddle, and rode 
away at a canter, looking like a very prince, 
as his tall and gracefully erect figure dis- 
appeared among the trees in the dusk. 

The group at the forge, meantime, rightly 
judged that so much heat, toil, and anxiety 
required the alleviation of moisture, and 
Straun, casting his hammer aside, proclaimed 
his intention of adjourning for solace to 
the Sun, which stood at the corner by the 



122 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

cross-roads, a few paces further down tlie 
road. 

" Come on, Stevens," lie said, " and toss 
me who'll treat Grranfer." 

The guardian of the cart-horses thought it 
a pity not to follow so good an example ; so 
also did Hale, the wheelwright, who lived at 
the opposite corner ; and Wax, who chanced 
to be the schoolmaster, and Baines, the tailor, 
whose monotonous indoor occupation, though 
varied with pig-jobbing and gardening, re- 
quired frequent solace of this nature. Hale's 
brother Tom, a soldier resting from war's 
alarms in his native village in a very 
undress uniform, consisting of no belt, a 
tunic unbuttoned all the way down and 
displaying a large expanse of striped shirt, 
trousers tucked up round the ankles, a short 
pipe, and a muffin-cap perilously askew, con- 
sidered it a breach of manners unbecoming a 
soldier and a gentleman to permit these 
worthy men to drink without his assistance ; 
and similar feelings animated his brother 
Jim, a sailor, bearing the legend, " H.M.S. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 123 

Bellerophon,'' on his cap. So the brave 
fellows, accommodating their pace to that of 
Granfer, which was more dignified than 
swift, turned in as one man beneath the low 
doorway of the Sun, and grouped themselves 
about the cosy, sanded bar, where the fire- 
light was beginning to look cheerily ruddy 
in the fading afternoon. 

" And I zaid," added Granfer, striking the 
sanded floor dogmatically with his stick, 
" ' Zend for Miss Lilian — zend fur she.' " 

" Ay, Granfer," growled the smith, " it's all 
very well for Miss Lilian. She ain't got a wife 
and seven children, and her bread to git." 

" I zes, zes I," interposed the sceptic in the 
smock-frock, who had taken a pull at his 
tankard, and was removing the foam from 
his lips by the simple application of the back 
of his hand, " ' Where's the use of a gal ? ' 
I've a zin it, and I believes it. I shouldn't 
a believed it if I hadn't a zin it."- 

" You never believes nothink," observed 
Jim. " Ah ! if you'd a sin what I've a sin 
aboord the Bellyruffian " 



124 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

"Or if he'd a sin they there snake- 
charmers in India, what he won't believe in," 
added the soldier. 

" Ah ! " broke in the clerk, " you put Miss 
Lilian aboord tlie Bellyruffian^ or take her 
out to Injy and let her charm snakes, and 
I'll war'nt she'll do it. That ar buoy Dick, 
whatever she done to he, nobody knows. 
A bad 'un he wer, wouldn't do nothing he 
hadn't a mind to. You med bate 'un till 
you couldn't stand. Wax have broke sticks 
about his back, and covered 'un with weals, 
but catch he gwine to school if he'd a mind 
to miche. I ses to Miss Lilian, I ses, ' I've 
a bate that ar buoy black and blue/ I ses, 
' and I've a kep 'un without vittles this two 
days, and he wun't do nothun he an't a 
mind to.' And she ups and ses, ' Stevens,' 
she ses, ' I should like to bate you,' she ses ; 
' I should like to bate you green and yaller,' 
she ses. ' Lard love 'ee, Miss Lilian, what- 
ever would ye bate I for ? ' I ses, ses I. 
' Because you are a fool, Stevens,' she ses, 
' and you are ruining that buoy, and turning 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 125 

him into a animal,' slie ses. And she took 
'un up Rectory, and kep' 'un there a day, and 
sent 'un home as good as gold. And she 
made me promise I wouldn't bate 'un no more 
for two good weeks, and I ain't bate 'un 
zince, and he'll do what he's told now 
without the stick. ' I should like to bate 
you green and yaller, Stevens,' she ses. And 
she'd a done it, she would, green and yaller 
— ah ! that she would, mates." 

" I don't deny," said Baines, the tailor, 
whose profession rendered him morbid, revolu- 
tionary, and inclined to distrust the utility 
of existing institutions, " but what Miss 
Lilian may have her uses." 

" Ah, Baines," interrupted the soldier, 
" you ain't such a fool as you looks, after all." 

Before the stupefied Baines, who was 
accustomed to have his remarks received 
with reverence, could reply to this insult, 
public feeling was suddenly outraged by the 
following observation from the smock-frocked 
sceptic, the want of wisdom in whom was 
accounted for by his having only recently 



126 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

come to Malbourne from a village at least 
ten miles off that centre of intelligence. 

" But what shall us do when Miss Lilian 
gets married ? " 

" Married ! " shouted the clerk. " And 
who ses she's a-gwine to marry ? " 

" She med marry ; then agen she medn't," 
replied this foolish person, unabashed by the 
dark glances bent upon him. 

" Miss Lilian," observed Granfer, who had 
been indulgently listening while he despatched 
his beer, and thus affording weaker wits the 
opportunity of exercising themselves during 
his forbearance, "ain't agwine to marry 
nobody ; " and, thrusting his staff forwards 
and resting his two hands upon it, Granfer 
looked round the assembly with austere 
menace in his shrewd grey eyes. 

Nobody dared reply to this, and silence 
prevailed, broken only by the sound of good 
liquor disappearing down men's throats, and 
a weak, half-audible murmur from the smock- 
frock about girls being girls, whether gentle 
or simple. 



THE SILENCE OP DEAN M AIT LAND. 127 

" I zes to my missus, vive year agone last 
Middlemas, zes I," continued Granfer, who 
chanced to be the grandsire of the indignant 
clerk, " ' Miss Lilian ain't one o' your 
marrying zart ; ' " and again Granfer looked 
round the assembly as if challenging them 
to deny the undeniable, and was met by an 
assenting murmur of '' All's ! " 

"Miss Lilian," pursued Granfer, with an 
air of inspiration, " is turned vour and 
twenty. Your and twenty year old come 
last May is they twins. Well I minds the 
night they was barned. The last time as 
ever I druv a 'oss. A vrosty night 'twas, 
and nipped all the archards miles round, and 
there warn't no vruit that year. Ah ! 
Yarmer Long he'd a lost dree and dirty 
yowes lambing-time that year. Well I minds 
it. I druv pony-chaise into Oldport, and 
vetched out t' doctor. And I zes to my missus, 
I zes, when I come home, ' Master's got twins ! ' 
Ay, that's what I zed, zure enough. And 
my missus she zes, zes she, ' Lard love 'ee, 
Granfer,' she zes, * you don't zay zo ! ' she 



128 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

zes ; " and again Granfer paused and looked 
round to perceive the effect of his eloquence. 

" Ay," said the landlord, feeling that 
courtesy now obliged him to entertain the 
intellects as well as the bodies of his guests, 
" twins is zummat when it comes to that. 
Twins is bad enough for poor volk, but when 
it comes to ladies and they, Lard 'a massey ! " 

" Ah ! " murmured Granfer, shaking his 
head with profound wisdom, and at the same 
time regretfully contemplating the vacuum 
in his beer-pot, '' them twins done for Mrs. 
Maitland. She ain't ben the zame 'ooman 
zince, never zimmed to perk up agen arter 
that. Yine children they was, too, as ever 
you'd wish to zee, and brought up on Yarmer 
Long's Alderney cow, kep' special vor 'um, 
as I used to vetch the milk marnin' and 
evenin'. I did, zure enough." 

Here Tom, the soldier, who, in virtue of 
his red coat, was bound to be susceptible to 
feminine charms, opined that Miss Lilian was 
still " a smartish-looking gal ; " and Jim, the 
sailor, added that he didn't see why she 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 129 

shouldn't pick up some smart lad yet, for 
his heart was warm, and he could not bear to 
consign an unoffending girl to the chills of 
single blessedness. There was Lieutenant 
Everard, of the Bellerophon, a frequent visitor 
at the Rectory, for example — as smart an 
officer as Jim had ever seen, he added. 

" Ah, goo on wi' ye ! " cried Grranfer, 
greatly refreshed by the polite replenishment 
of his pot at Tom's expense. '' Miss Lilian's 
as pretty a maid as Tom'll zee in a day's 
march. But she wun't marry nobody. Yur 
why ? zes I. Cause she wun't ha'e the common 
zart, and the upper crust they wun't ha'e 
she." 

" Watever's come over Judkins now ? " 
asked Hale, the wheelwright, musingly. 
" He'd had a drop too much 's afternoon, and 
he was a latherin' into Hotspur like mad 
coming down shoot.* He hadn't ought to 
treat a boss like that." 

" A man med well drink," said the tailor, 
" afore trusting hisself to a animal like that 

* A short steep hill on the highway. 
VOL I. K 



130 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

there. Steady as Charlie Judkins was, poor 
chap ! What these ^ere rich men 'a got to 
answer for ! " 

" I never zeen a 'oss rampageouser," replied 
the smith ; " but I never zeen a 'oss Miss 
Lilian couldn't quiet, or a ass either." 

" Your missus 'ull be sending for her one 
day, then," said Jim ; and the whole assembly 
broke into a loud guffaw, after which 
Granfer very impressively related the history 
of the hunted fox, which appeared one day 
with his paws on the window-sill of Lilian's 
sitting-room, followed by the pack in full 
cry, and the whole field at no great distance. 
He told how Lilian quickly opened the 
window, Reynard leapt in, and she as quickly 
shut it ; and how the huntsman, on finding 
the hounds at check round the Rectory 
window, looked in, and was greatly shocked 
to see poor Reynard's pointed nose and 
glittering eyes peering out from among the 
skirts of a young lady sitting quietly at 
work, and tranquilly surveying the baffled 
hounds baying outside> 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN Mx^ITLAND. 131 

Lilian refused to deliver up her fugitive, 
holding parley with the master of the hounds 
through the closed and latched window, until 
the latter had withdrawn his pack ; and it 
was not until the premises had been cleared 
a good half-hour of every vestige of hound, 
horse, and man, that she unbolted door or 
window, and suffered her weary, panting 
prisoner to depart, which he did with evident 
regret and thankfulness for hospitality— a 
hospitality poorly requited by him, since he 
managed to snatch a chick from the poultry- 
yard in effecting his escape. 

But no one seemed to think there was any- 
thing unusual in Lilian's power over living 
creatures ; it was simply what one expected 
of Miss Lilian, just as one expected church 
bells to ring and cocks to crow. Nor had 
any one thanked her for assisting so effectively 
at the shoeing of Hotspur. 

Then followed a long history of animals 
healed by Lilian, and in particular of a dog 
of Ingram Swaynestone's, which the latter 
was going to shoot, when she begged its life, 



132 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

and nursed it into health. Also of the 
racers Ingram had at a trainer's, and the 
money he lost by them ; of the ' oaks and 
beeches at Swaynestone, which had to expiate 
these losses ; and of the young fellow's pro- 
bable descent to beggary through the paths 
of pleasure. 

" He's a vine young veller/' observed 
Granfer, at the close of his second pot ; " a 
wild 'un zurely. His vather was a wild 'un, 
too ; 'tis the blood and the high veeding. So 
was his grandfather. I minds things as Sir 
Lionel did would make 'ee all stare. Men is 
just the zame as 'osses — veed 'em up, and they 
vlings. The well-bred 'uns is vive times 
skittisher than t'others. Wuld Sir Lionel, he 
was the wildest of all — druv his stags into 
Oldport vou.r-in-hand, he did, and killed dree 
or vour volks in the streets. Ah ! times isn't 
what they was," sighed Granfer, regretfully 
draining his pot. 

By this time it was dark night. The Sun 
windows threw a warm glow over the road ; 
the stars sparkled keenly above the thatched 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 133 

roof of the little hostel ; and the smell of 
wood-smoke, mingled with the appetizing 
odour of fried pork, red herrings, and onion 
soup, rising all over the village, warned the 
topers that the hour of supper was ap- 
proaching, and they would have dispersed, 
however unwillingly, but for the chimes of 
waggon-bells along the road, which beguiled 
them into waiting while William Grrove 
deposited his parcels at the Sun, took the one 
glass offered by the host, and recounted the 
news from Oldport. 



134 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 



CHAPTER YI. 

On looking back in after-life to that brisk 
winter's walk, both Everard and Maitland 
held it as one of their sunniest memories. 
Every step seemed to put a fresh lustre in 
Cyril's eyes, and add to the wine-like sparkle 
of his conversation. In proportion as his 
spirits fell at one time, they rose at another 
by virtue of his sensitive, emotional tempera- 
ment ; while Henry's steady, sunny cheerful- 
ness went on deepening more slowly, but 
perhaps more surely, and at last bubbled 
over. Presently they passed a woman toiling 
np a hill with a baby and a basket, of both 
which burdens Everard relieved her, to her 
unbounded surprise, coolly handing the basket 
to Cyril, and himself bearing the baby, which 
he tossed till it crowed with ecstasy. Having 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 135 

left tliese trifles at a roadside cottage, with a 
shilling to requite the woman for the loan 
of her infant, they reached Swaynestone 
Park, and met Ben Lee, who was crossing 
the road on his way from his cottage to the 
stables. 

Everard greeted him with a cordiality 
to which Lee replied gruffly, and with an 
evident intention of hurrying on. 

"Oh, come, Lee," said Everard, '• you are 
not so busy as all that ! How are they all up 
at the Temple ? Alma's roses in full bloom, 
I hope ? And my patient, Mrs. Lee, has she 
quite got over the accident ? I shall be 
looking in very soon." 

" You may save yourself the trouble. Dr. 
Everard," returned Lee, in a surly manner ; 
''thank 'ee kindly all the same. But I want 
no more gentlefolk up at my house. I've 
had enough of they. Grood afternoon, Mr. 
Cyril; glad to see you home, sir;" and, 
touching his hat, he passed quickly on, 
leaving Everard in a state of stupefaction in 
the middle of the road. 



136 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

"What the deuce is the matter with 
Lee ? " he exclaimed. " Surely he can't be 
drunk, Cyril ! " 

All the light had faded from Cyril's 
radiant face. The moment he caught sight 
of the coachman, he made the old movement 
of pressing his hand to his side in a spasm of 
pain, and he seemed almost as impatient of 
delay as Lee himself. 

" I never heard of his drinking," he replied 
evasively. " Perhaps things have gone 
wrong with him. Look here, Henry ! let us 
cut the high-road, and get hom.e across 
country ; we shall save half a mile, and find 
the ladies at tea.'^ 

" What sense can you get out of a fellow 
in love ? " returned Everard, leading the way 
over the stile. " For him mankind dwindles 
down to a slim puss of a girl, with dimples 
and a pair of brown eyes. Go on, man ! 
' Gather ye rosebuds while ye may ; ' " and, 
lilting out the gay old ballad with all the 
strength of his honest lungs, Everard resumed 
his light-hearted manner, and did not observe 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 137 

that Cyril's gaiety had become forced and 
spasmodic. 

A ruddy glow above the wooded crests of 
Northover was all that remained of day when 
they entered the Rectory grounds by the 
churchyard path, and found Lilian, with the 
cat gravely coiled at her feet at the hall door, 
darkly outlined against the faint, crimson 
light of the hall stove. 

" Your instinct is infallible, Lilian," said 
Cyril, embracing her ; " for you were not 
even sure that I was coming to-night. Dear 
Lilian, it is nice to see you again ! " 

"I am glad not to be wholly eclipsed by 
the new star," she replied, laughing, yet 
scanning his face with some anxiety, while 
she continued to hold his hand. Then she 
turned to Henry, over whose spirits an un- 
accountable damp had descended, and offered 
him her hand ; while Cyril stooped to stroke 
Mark Antony, who was triumphantly rubbing 
himself round and round his legs with loud 
purrs and exultant tail. ^' I ana so glad you 
have brought him, Henry," she said ; adding. 



138 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. ^ 

in a lower voice, "He is looking horribly 
ill." 

By this time Mr. Maitland, the children, 
the dogs, and all the servants were in the 
hall, greeting Cyril with such enthusiasm 
that Henry remained for some moments un- 
noticed by Lilian's side. 

" You all seem extremely glad to see Cyril^' 
he observed to her, with rueful emphasis. 

" Dear Henry, I know we are horribly rude 
to our guests when we have Cyril to spoil," 
she replied, laying her hand gently on his 
arm. 

He took the hand in his and pressed it 
warmly to his side, and felt that the rainbow 
radiance had suddenly returned to his uni- 
verse. But the bright moment was very 
brief, for it was now his turn to be welcomed, 
and by the time he was free to go into the 
drawing-room, Lilian was not to be seen." 

" But where is Marion ? " asked Cyril, 
looking round the drawing-room, after he 
had duly saluted his mother, who was, as 
usual, on her couch. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 139 

" I think you will find her in my room," 
replied Lilian, as indifferently as if she had 
not specially arranged for the lovers to meet 
there. " We dine punctually at half-past 
seven. No, Henry, you foolish fellow, you 
are to stay here," she added, as Cyril left 
the room, and Henry attempted to follow 
him. 

" A brother, I suppose, is of no account in 
these daj^s," grumbled Everard, seating him- 
self by Mrs. Maitland's couch with a con- 
tented air, nevertheless. " All this courtship 
is sickening to me, Mrs. Maitland. As for 
that hopeful son of yours, not one word of 
sense have I got out of him this day, or do 
I expect to get for the next two months. 
Thank goodness, it must come to an end 
then, and they will settle down to a life's 
squabbling like sane people." 

" Ah, young people ! young people ! " said 
Mr. Maitland, looking very happy about it. 
"We must not be hard upon them, Henry. 
We all go mad once — Lennie will turn that 
back into Latin for you, eh ? — But we con- 



140 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

sider Cyril and Marion a very sensible young 
couple, don't we, Nellie ? " 

" I think," replied Mrs. Maitland, laughing, 
" that we consider everything that Cyril does 
sensible. When his biography is written, it 
will be said that his family did, to a certain 
extent, appreciate him." 

Whereupon the conversation turned upon 
Cyril and his doings and his prospects, and 
their anxiety about him, and suddenly the 
thought struck chill to Everard's marrow — 
What would happen, in case of Cyril's failure, 
death, or other misadventure, to the innocent 
family circle of which he was the central 
hope ? 

The curtains were drawn snugly against 
the frosty cold without. Eliza, all smiles 
and fresh cap-ribbons, brought a lamp and 
tea ; and Everard wondered if heaven could 
possibly be an improvement on the present. 
No one ever made or poured out tea like 
Lilian, he thought ; no tea ever had so divine 
an effect on the nervous system as hers. For 
weeks he had dreamed of sitting thus by the 



THE SILEXCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 141 

drawing-room fire, his whole being pervaded 
by the dehcious fact of her presence, and 
now he found the reality sweeter than the 
dream. 

Not for weeks only, but for years after- 
wards, did the memory of that fireside scene 
shine warmly on the darkness of his life. 
The lamplight was so soft that the fire, on 
which Lennie had thrown some fir-cones, 
disputed for mastery with it, and added to 
the cheery radiance of the pretty drawing- 
room. On one side of the fire, Mrs. Maitland, 
still beautiful, though faded, and exquisitely 
dressed, lay on her couch amidst becomingly 
arranged furs and shawls ; Henry sat by her 
on a low seat, and rendered her various 
little filial attentions ; Mr. Maitland sat facing 
the fire, with its light playing on his silvery 
hair and clean-cut features, the prototype 
of Cyril's. 

On the other side of the hearth sat Lilian, 
with the tea-table at her side ; Winnie was 
on a stool at her feet, her head pressed to 
her sister's knee, on which reposed, in care- 



142 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

less majesty, Mark Antony, gracefully toying 
with the golden curls tossed in pretty negli- 
gence within reach of his paws. The warm 
rug before the fire was occupied by the terrier 
and the pug, the children's tea-cups, and the 
recumbent full-length of Lennie, who sprang 
to his feet from time to time to pass people's 
cups. 

Lilian spoke little. She and Henry did 
not address each other once; but his eye 
never lost the picture on the opposite side 
of the fire, which reminded him of Raphael's 
Virgin of the Cardellino. It was not that 
Lilian's intelligent face in the least resembled 
that harmless, faultlessly featured Madonna's, 
though her deep grey eyes were bent down 
much in the same way on the child-face and 
sportive animal on her knee as the Virgin's 
in the picture. It was the look of divine, 
innocent, ineffable content that she wore. 
And yet Everard did not appear to be looking 
at this charming picture, though Lilian knew 
that he saw it, and was equally conscious of 
the picture he made, his broad shoulders and 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 143 

athletic limbs affording a fine contrast to her 
mother's fragile, faded grace. 

" And what are your plans, Henry ? " asked 
Mr. Maitland at last, when Cyril's affairs had 
been discussed over and over again. 

" I think of buying a good practice near 
Southampton, and settling down as a country 
doctor," he replied. " I have enough property 
to make me fairly independent, and shall be 
able to carry on my scientific pursuits with- 
out fear of starvation." 

" And the next step, I suppose, will be to 
take a wife ? " 

'' The very next step," replied Everard, 
looking thoughtfully into the glowing heart 
of the fire. 

Lilian bent her head a little, and caught 
away a curl at which Mark Antony was 
snatching. " If no one is going to have any 
more tea, pussie shall have the rest of the 
cream," she said. 

Cyril, in the mean time, quickly found his 
way to the well-known room called Lilian's, 
where Marion was sitting, in the dusk, alone. 



144 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

but acutely conscious of the liglit, swift steps 
along the corridor which bore her expected 
lover to her side. They met in silence, each 
young heart being too full for speech ; and it 
was not until Cyril had released Marion from 
his embrace, and placed her in a chair by the 
fireside, that he said, kneeling on the rug 
near her, 

" Am I indeed quite forgiven, Marion ? '' 

"You foolish fellow! How many times 
have I written that word ? " she replied, 
laughing. 

" Written, yes ; but I want to hear it from 
your own lips — I want to be quite sure," he 
continued, with unabated earnestness, the 
blue fire of his eyes bent upon her soft 
brown gaze, while he held both her hands 
pressed against his breast. 

" Dear Cyril, you make too much of what 
is better forgotten," she said. "We quarrelled 
long ago and made it up long ago, though 
we have not met since." 

^' Forgotten ? Oh, Marion, do you think 
I can ever forget? And though you for- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 145 

give me, do you think I can ever forgive 
myself ? " 

" Certainly. Don't lovers always quarrel ; 
and are they not better friends afterwards? 
And don't you mean to forgive poor me ? 
I have forgiven us both ; though, indeed, 
those few months were very dreadful." 

" Dreadful ! They were more than dread- 
ful to me. Oh, Marion, if you knew, if you 
only dreamed, how unworthy I am, you who 
are so white, so stainless ! You can never 
guess. Sometimes I wonder that I ever dare 
hope to call you mine, so black am I in 
comparison with you." 

" Cyril, this is lover's talk — exaggeration. 
It makes me feel ashamed," she replied, soft 
blushes stealing over her gentle face in the 
firelight ; "it makes me remember that I 
am but a weak, foolish girl, and greatly need 
the guidance of a strong, good man like 
you." 

" Good ! God help me ! " he exclaimed, 
turning his face from the modest glance that 
seemed to scorch his very soul. " Marion, 

VOL. I. L 



146 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

I am not good ; there is no weaker man than 
I on God's earth, and without you I think I 
should be utterly lost. Do you know — no, 
you never can know — what it is to be able to 
love a good woman ; to feel the vile n ess die 
out of one at the very thought of her ; to be 
strengthened and purified by the very atmo- 
sphere she breathes ; — to feel at the thought 
of losing her — Marion, dear Marion, I think 
sometimes if you knew the darkness that was 
upon my soul during those wretched months 
when we were parted, I fear — oh, I fear 
that you would cast me off with loathing 
and scorn " 

Marion smiled a gentle smile, only dimly 
seeing the passionate agony in Cyril's 
shadowed face. " I know that I could never 
scorn you,'' she interrupted, with tender 
emphasis. 

Cyril bent his head over her hands in 
silence for a few seconds ; and then, looking 
up again, said, in a more collected manner, 
" Marion, will you take me, worthless as I 
am, and bear with me and cleave to me 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 147 

through good and evil report, and help me, 
in spite of the past, to be a better man ? " 

" Dear," she replied gently, " I have taken 
you for better and for worse. I don't expect 
you to be faultless, though I do admire and 
honour you above all men. I should be 
sorry if you were faultless, because, you 
know, I am not faultless myself; I am not 
like Lilian, even. We shall help each other 
to be wiser and better, I hope." 

Cyril had averted his face from the inno- 
cent, loving gaze he could not endure, but 
he turned once more and looked into Marion's 
charming face, which was radiant in a sudden 
burst of firelight, while his own remained in 
darker shadow than ever. " Promise once 
more," he said, in low, impassioned tones, 
" that you will never leave me." 

Marion suffered herself to glide into the 
embrace before her, and repeated the promise, 
half laughing to herself at the foolish import- 
ance assigned to trifles by lovers, and half 
believing in the intensity of the oft-repeated 
assurances, and was very happy until a 



148 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND: 

discreet clatter of silver and cliina was heard 
outside, followed by a knock at the door, and, 
after an interval, the entrance of Eliza, who 
was edified to find Marion at one end of the 
room, adjusting some china on a bracket, and 
Cyril at the other, gazing out of the window 
with great interest at the frosty stars. 

When the candles were lighted, the cur- 
tains drawn, and the tea poured out, all 
traces of his passionate agitation had left 
Cyril's beautiful, severely cut features, and 
he sat by Marion's side, tea-cup in hand, quiet 
and content, the very picture of the ideal 
curate of commonplace just dropped in to tea. 

Marion now saw him clearly, and was 
distressed at his wan and worn appearance, 
and also at a certain look he never had before 
the fatal winter she passed in the Mediter- 
ranean with her brother. Since then she 
had met him face to face but once, on the 
day when he came to ask forgiveness and 
renew the engagement, and then, naturally, 
he did not look like his old self. Was it 
only toil which had robbed Cyril of the bloom 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 149 

of his you til ? she wondered ; and she sighed. 
" It was time yoii had a hohdaj, I think," 
she said softly. " You must not be such an 
ascetic any more ; you do not belong to a 
celibate priesthood, remember." 

" This is not exactly the cell of an an- 
chorite," replied Cyril, with the smile which 
won so many hearts, as he rested his head 
comfortably on the back of his low chair, 
nnd gazed upon Marion's slender grace. 
'' Mayn't I have another lump of sugar, 
Marion ? Lilian and I have expended much 
thought on the decoration of this room." 

" And taste," said Marion, looking round 
upon the pictures and bric-a-brac and various 
evidences of cultured taste, though it is not 
to be supposed that the two lovers were there 
to discuss nothing but the decoration of 
Lilian's room. 

Cyril had spoken hotly of his dislike to 
Marion's Mediterranean tour ; and Marion's 
pride had been touched till she reminded him 
that she was entirely her own mistress, and 
might probably continue so to the end of the 



150 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

chapter. Then ensued a quarrel, only half 
serious on either side, a quarrel that a word 
or a look would have righted in a moment. 
But, unfortunately, Marion had to join her 
friends, the Wilmots, sooner than she antici- 
pated, and thus hurried off before she could 
say good-bye to Cyril and make things 
straight with one little smile. 

The game of quarrelling, when carried on 
between two young, ardent lovers, is a very 
pretty diversion, but cannot possibly be 
played at a distance, as these two found to 
their cost. Deprived of the fairy artillery 
of glances, sighs, voices, and gestures, and 
confined to the heavy ordnance of letters, 
they could not bring things to a happy 
conclusion. Letters were first hot, then cold, 
then rare, then non-existent, until one day 
Cyril wrote, after long silence, to ask Marion 
how long she meant to play with his affec- 
tions. Marion replied that if Cyril con- 
sidered their engagement as a mere pastime, 
the sooner it was broken off the better. 
Cyril wrote back to release her from an 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 151 

engagement wliich he said he perceived had 
become distasteful to her. 

This was in March. At Whitsuntide, 
Everard spent some time at Malbourne, 
whence Cyril went to Belminster for ordi- 
nation at Trinity. He thought Cyril un- 
happy, and after the ordination he asked 
him, subsequently to some conversation 
with Lilian on the subject, if he still cared 
for Marion, to which Cyril replied in the 
affirmative. Then Henry told him that 
Marion was pining and showing tendencies 
to consumption. She was the kind of woman, 
he said, whose health is perfect in happiness, 
but who breaks down the moment that elixir 
of life is denied. He thought that she loved 
Cyril still. 

Thus emboldened, Cyril owned himself in 
the wrong, and sued for a return to favour. 
He could, however, only afford one brief 
interview with Marion, since he had with 
some difficulty freed himself from the curacy 
at Shotover, which had given him a title to 
deacon's orders, and got himself placed on a 



152 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAXD. 

mission staff in the East of London, where 
he led a semi-monastic life in a house with 
his fellow-curates, and enjoyed to the full the 
hard labour for which he had clamoured so 
eagerly while at Shotover. 

The situation was eminently unfavourable to 
courtship, while it seemed to render marriage 
absolutely impracticable. Cyril, however, 
found a means of reconciling duty with in- 
clination, and easily convinced his rector that 
his labours would be equally valuable if he 
had a home of his own within easy reach of 
the scene of his toils, and thus they were to 
be married in the spring. The narrow means 
which so frequently darken the horizon of 
curates' love-dreams had no place in this 
romance, since both Cyril and Marion had 
wherewithal to keep the wolf from the door. 

But they are together at last, and the dark 
days which divided them are to be forgotten. 

" When I hear the word ' misery,' I think 
of last spring," said Marion, laughing. 

Cyril's face clouded, and he turned away 
and gazed at the fire. '' Never think of it ! " 



THE SILEXCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 153 

he exclaimed, suddenly turning a bright, 
animated gaze upon Marion. " I shall drive 
it from your memory, dear, by every act and 
thought of my life." 

Dinner, the hour so fondly welcomed by 
mortals in general, came all too soon for 
ihese ; and, indeed, it was not till the others 
had taken their places at the table that 
Marion made her appearance, flushed and 
charming, and met her brother for the first 
time since his arrival in the house. 

" This is an improvement," he said, holding 
her at arm's length to look at her, '' on the 
mealy-faced girl I saw three months ago. 
Pray, miss, where do you get your rouge ? " 

" Manufactured on the estate, Henry," 
replied Mr. Maitland. " Native Malbourne 
rouge. Let us hope Cyril may acquire some 
of it." 

" It comes off easily," said Everard, gravely, 
while Cyril became absorbed in Mark Antony, 
who sat on a stool at Lilian's side at the 
head of the table, with his chin on a level 
with the cloth, and who was so enchanted 



154 THE SILENCE OF DEAX MAITLAXD. 

to find himself with a twin on each side of 
him, that his deep mellifluous purrs threatened 
to drown the conversation. 

" You will be glad to hear that Granfer is 
still alive and well, and wiser than ever, 
Henry," said Mrs. Maitland, who was sitting 
on his right, having, as usual, resigned the 
head of the table to Lilian. 

'• I congratulate Malbourne, Mrs. Maitland. 
It could never go on without Grranfer's 
advice. And the discontented Baines has 
not yet blown you all up ? And friend 
Wax still wields the ferule in defiance of 
Lilian ? " 

" But not in church," said Lilian. 

'' Because Lilian steals the cane if he 
brings it," added Marion. 

" And is anybody engaged, or born, or 
dead ? " continued Everard, gaily. " By the 
way, what has happened to Ben Lee ? It 
struck me that he had been drinking this 
afternoon. And our friend Alma, how is 
she ? " 

There was a dead silence for a second or 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 155 

two, and Everard's eager gaze of inquiry 
met no response from the eyes bent resolutely 
on the plates. 

" Let me send you some more beef, Henry," 
said Mr. Maitland, looking up from his joint 
with sudden briskness. " Come, where is 
your boasted appetite ? Yes, bring Dr. 
Everard's plate, Eliza." 

" But Alma ? Oh, I hope there is nothing 
wrong with her ? " continued Everard, look- 
ing round with a dismayed gaze, while Mrs. 
Maitland laid her hand warningly on his 
sleeve. " Oh, Lilian, Alma is not dead ? " 

" Worse," replied Lilian, in a low voice — 
"• far worse." 

There were tears, he saw, trembling upon 
her eyelashes ; and if ever tears resembled 
pearls, then, he thought, did those precious 
drops, and if ever mortal woman was dear, 
then was Lilian. He saw it all now on the 
instant, and he remembered how much Lilian 
had done for Alma, and how at Whitsuntide 
she had spoken of her and cared about her 
absence from the Sacrament, and so dismayed 



156 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

was he by this catastrophe that, having none 
of the ready resources and fine tact which, 
ensure social success, he simply, like the 
honest, clumsy fellow he was, dropped his 
knife and fork, and gazed horror-struck 
before him. Fortunately, at that moment 
Lennie, who was stretched on the hearthrug, 
intent upon " Ivanhoe," bethought himself of 
an important event, and took advantage of 
the silence to proclaim it. 

" I say, Henry," he exclaimed, " what do 
you think ? I'm going into trousers to- 
morrow." 

" Why, it was all over Oldport," said Cyril. 
" Bills in every window. * Oh yes ! oh. yes ! 
oh yes ! Know all by these presents that 
Lennie Maitland goes into trousers to- 
morrow.' " 

" Oh, won't I smack you by-and-by ! " 
observed Lennie, tranquilly returning to the 
gests of Brian de Bois-Guilbert. 

" I think, Cyril, you scarcely appreciate 
the honour your brother intends you," said 
Mr. Maitland. " He dons these virile gar- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 157 

ments for the purpose of liearing your sermon. 
He evidently holds trousers to be conducive 
to a pious frame of mind, or at least to a cer- 
tain mental receptivity ; eh, Lennie, lad ? " 

" The unfortunate tailor's life has been a 
burden to him in the fear that the suit would 
not be ready in time,'' said Mrs. Maitland. 

" In time to hear Oywil pweach," added 
Marion, laughing. 

" How many times have they been tried 
on, Lennie ? '' asked Lilian. 

" Never you mind their rubbish," said 
Everard ; "■ ask Miss Mawion how often she 
calls me Henwy ? " 

" And Cywil will line the pockets with 
silver for you," added Cyril, who was looking 
very happy, having, as Eliza observed with 
satisfaction, his hand locked in Marion's under 
the tablecloth. 

No sooner had the ladies withdrawn, than 
Everard burst out, " And who is the 
scoundrel ? " 

" Softly, softly, Henry ! beware of rash 
judgments," returned Mr. Maitland, whose 



158 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

face took a grieved look. " Nothing is known, 
which is hateful to me because of the great 
wave of scandal and the dreadful scorching 
of tongues which arises about the matter. 
Lee, I know not why, assumes that it is a 
gentleman ; and public opinion, and, I fear I 
must add, his reputation, point to Ingram 
Swaynestone. Sir Lionel has spoken to him, 
but he absolutely denies it ; and, indeed " 

"In short," broke in Cyril, who was ex- 
tremely busy with some walnuts on his plate, 
" the less said about these miserable scandals 
the better." 

" True, quite true," said his father, with a 
heavy sigh. 

"- But Alma ! the little girl we used to 
play with at the Temple, with Lilian, and 
often Ingram, and the girl Swaynestones ! " 
cried Henry. " I cannot believe any wrong 
of her. She has been wronged — of that I am 
sure." 

" Truly, I had never dreamed of such 
trouble for Alma, poor child ! " said Mr. Mait- 
land. " Elsewhere in the parish, of course, 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 159 

one dreads such things, knowing their temp- 
tations. It is a heavy grief for me, Henry, 
as you may imagine." 

" And for Lihan," added Everard. " Yes, 
I know how you love your spiritual children, 
sir, and can imagine your distress. And poor 
Lee, he was so proud of her. He is sullen, I 
see ; a sure sign of grief. Oh, I hope he is 
not unkind to her ! " 

'' The stepmother is hard, and has a sharp 
tongue ! She forgets what poor Alma did 
for her child. Altogether, it is a sad, sad 
history. The Temple, I suppose, holds more 
unhappiness than any house in the county." 

" Oh, really, my dear father," exclaimed 
Cyril, who seemed pained beyond endurance, 
" you must not take it so to heart ! She is 
not the first " 

" By Jove, Maitland ! " interrupted Everard, 
^' you are the last man from whom I should 
expect an echo of Mephistopheles. He never 
said anything more diabolical than that — ' Sie 
ist die Erste nicht.' " 

Cyril coloured so hotly that he exhibited 



160 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MATTLAND. 

the plieiiomenon of a black blush, while Mr. 
Maitland hastened to say that Cyril was 
in a different position from Faust, who had 
wrought the wrong. " And then," he added, 
" Cyril is doubtless weary of sin and sorrow, 
of which, in his parish, he must have far more 
than we in our simple rustic home have any 
idea of, busy as Satan undoubtedly is every- 
where." 

" Quite so," returned Cyril, wearily. " My 
words sounded unfortunately, Everard ; but, 
as my father suggests, when one has break- 
fasted and lunched for weeks upon peccant 
parishioner, one does not enjoy the same 
dish at dinner." 

Everard's rejoinder was prevented by the 
intrusion of a sunny head at the door, and 
the clear voice of Winnie was heard crying, 
' Do make haste ! Me and Lennie want to 
Know what is in that basket, and Lilian won't 
let us." Whereupon Cyril sprang up and 
chased the delighted child through the hall 
and into the drawing-room, where she took 
refuge, screaming, in Lilian's dress. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 161 

The basket whicli so stimulated the 
children's curiosity was well known to 
contain the young men's Christmas gifts to 
the ftiraily, and was forthwith uncovered 
amid a scene of joyous turbulence, and had 
its contents distributed. 

The task of collecting the parcels in the 
basket and conveying them to the drawing- 
room had been performed by Eliza with thrills 
of delicious agony, for it was almost beyond 
human nature not to take at least one peep 
at a packet containing the very ribbon she 
longed for, and at another revealing glimpses 
of a perfect love of a shawl, which proved 
to be destined for cook. However, she ap- 
peared with a perfectly demure countenance 
when fetched by Lennie, with the other 
maids, to receive her presents. By that time 
Mr. Maitland had become lost to all earthly 
cares, in an arm-chair, with an old battered 
volume Everard had picked up at a book- 
stall in Paris for him ; Winnie was wonderino- 
if some fairy had informed Henry that a fisli- 
ing-rod of her very own had been her soul's 

VOL. I. M 



162 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

unattainable star for months ; and Lennie 
was dancing round the room with an illus- 
trated " Don Quixote " clasped in his arms. 

It was pleasant to see Cyril making his 
gifts. Each was offered with a suitable word, 
tender or droll, according to the recipient, 
and with a grace that an emperor might have 
envied, though a carping observer would 
have detected that the gifts themselves had 
been purchased as nearly as possible at the 
same shop. As for Everard, he made his 
offerings with a sneaking air, and seemed 
glad to get them off his hands. He threw 
the " Don Quixote " at Lennie, with " Here, 
you scamp ! " and placed the invalid reading- 
stand by Mrs. Maitland, with an awkward, 
" I don't know if this thing will be any good 
to you." 

" Why, Henry, who told you that father's 
life has been a burden to him for months for 
want of that old edition ? " asked Lilian. 

''' He is a wizard ; he should be burnt," 
laughed Cyril, reflecting inwardly that while 
his gifts cost money, Everard's cost time 



THE SILENCE OP DEAN MAITLAND. 163 

and thought and infinite trouble in hunting 
out. 

" But ain't Lilian to have anything ? " in- 
quired the ingenuous Lennie ; for Lilian and 
Cyril never gave each other presents — they 
had things so much in common, and Everard 
appeared to have forgotten her. 

Lilian appealed, as usual, to Mark Antony 
for sympathy, and Everard grew very hot, 
while Cyril absorbed himself in fitting the 
bracelet he had given to Marion upon her 
slender arm. Then Lilian looked up. 

'' It was horrid of you to forget me, Henry," 
she said. 

" I didn't forget you," stammered Everard ; 
" but the thing was so trifling I hadn't the 

courage • It's only a photograph of the 

picture which inspired Browning's ^ Guardian 
Angel.' Here it is, if you think it worth 
having. You said you would give anything 
to see Gruercino's picture at Fano." 

" Oh, Henry, how very kind and thoughtful 
of you ! " exclaimed Lilian, her face trans- 
figured with pleasure. " But I thought there 
was no photograph ? " 



16i TKE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" Well, no ; but young Stobart was doing 
Italy in the autumn, and I got him to go to 
Fano with his camera. It wasn't far out of 
his way," he replied, in a tone of apology. 

Lennie's solicitude being relieved, he and 
the others were absorbed each after his own 
fashion ; no one observed these two. Lilian 
looked up at Henry, who had thrown himself 
into a low chair by her side, so that their 
faces were on a level. Her eyes were dewy 
and bright ; they gazed straight into his for a 
minute, and then fell. " You had it done for 
me," she murmured. 

It was the crowning moment of Everard's 
happy night. He bent over the spirit-like 
hand resting on the cat; and unseen pressed 
his lips to it. He knew that Lilian loved 
him, and knew that he loved her. He said 
nothing more ; it was enough bliss for one 
day. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 165 



CHAPTER YII. 

Before going to rest that night, Mr. Mait- 
land led Everard to his study, and there 
subjected him to a searching cross-examina- 
tion on the subject of Cyril's care-worn and 
unhealthy appearance, which Everard referred 
to his overzeal in his labours, and the exces- 
sive austerities which he practised. 

"It would be all very well for him to 
mortify his flesh if he had too much of it to 
balance his spirit," Everard observed ; " but, 
as a matter of fact, he has too little." 

" Cyril is sensitive," his father replied ; 
" his nerves are too tensely strung, like those 
of all extremely refined and poetic natures. 
"We thought, Lilian and I, that it was the 
estrangement from Marion which was preying 
on him. It was that which caused him to 



166 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

leave Sliotover, and plunge into this terrific 
London work — that and, of course, higher 
motives." 

" Cyril, though healthy, is delicate, '^ replied 
Everard. " He ought never to fast ; he cannot 
bear it, especially when working. His brain 
will give way under such discipHne. Observe 
him to-morrow when he preaches. There is 
too much nervous excitement.'' 

The next morning Cyril did not appear till 
the end of breakfast, and then took nothing 
but a cup of coffee. 

*' Eeally, Cyril, I did think Sunday at least 
was a feast-day ! " cried Everard, pausing in 
his own manful assault on a well-piled plate 
of beef. 

" But Cyril is to celebrate to-day ; he must 
fast,'' Lilian explained ; and then Everard 
observed that Mr. Maitland's breakfast con- 
sisted of nothing, and groaned within himself, 
and asked his friends if they considered it 
decorous for clergymen to faint in the midst 
of public worship. 

" "When a man has to work, he should feed 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 1G7 

himself into proper condition," he said to un- 
heeding ears. 

After breakfast, the Maitland family re- 
paired in a body to the Sunday school, and 
Everard went out to smoke a pipe alone, and, 
the frost being keen, he wore an overcoat, 
finding one of his own in the hall. He had 
some difficulty in putting it on, and could not 
by. any means induce it to meet across the 
chest. This gave him great satisfaction. 
" It cannot be that my Sunday-go-to-meeting 
clothes take up so much room," he mused. 
'' No ; I am increasing in girth round the 
chest. Who could imagine that one night's 
happiness and country air would produce such 
an effect ? A new scientific fact." 

It was pleasant on the lawn in the frosty 
Sunday stillness. The sunbeams danced on 
the evergreens and smiled on the Shotover 
parklands ; a robin sang its cheerfully 
pathetic song ; and a flock of rooks uttered 
their breezy caws in the pale blue above his 
head. Everard smoked with profound en- 
joyment ; he thought of last night's enchant- 



168 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

ment, and the promise lie had just extracted 
from Lilian to sit with him in the Eectory 
pew instead of with the school -children. His 
hands were thrust for warmth into his coat- 
pockets, and in one of them he felt the square 
outline of a letter, which he drew out, won- 
dering — since his habits were neat and 
methodical, as became a student of natural 
science — how he came to leave a letter there. 
The letter, however, had no envelope and 
no address. He opened it, and found, in the 
half-formed, clear writing of an unlearned 
person, probably some patiejit in humble life, 
the following : — 

" No, I will never, never marry you. 
What good could that do me, now you do not 
love me no more — me that loved you better 
than Heaven and her own poor soul ? Would 
I like to see you miserable, and spoil your 
prospex ? To marry the likes of me would 
ruin you, and how could that make me 
happy ? Marry her ; it is better for you. I 
have done wrong for love of you, and God 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 169 



will punish me. But you are sorry, and will 
be forgiven. Farewell for ever. 

" Your broken-hearted 

The gracious light of the wintry morning 
seemed to fade out of the pale pure sky ; 
there was no more delight in the robin's 
song ; the bright crystals of the hoar-frost 
sparkled in vain for Everard. " Why, why 
are there such things ? " he murmured. 
'' Why was Cyril's echo of Mephistopheles 
so much more poignant in its cynicism 
because of its truth ? " 

The weak suffering, the strong going scot- 
free ; Alcestis plunging, love-radiant, into the 
darkness of Hades, while Admetus rejoices in 
the light of heaven ; women trusting, and 
men deceiving — what a world ! All the con- 
fused misery of the painful insoluble riddle of 
earth seemed to awake and trouble the clear 
happiness of Everard's soul at the story told 
in the poor little scrap of paper, the more 
pathetic for its bad spelling and artless 



170 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

grammar. And liow came sucli an epistle 
in liis pocket ? Doubtless some friend had 
borrowed bis coat; some beedless rackety 
medical student, perchance, and flavoured it 
with tobacco and correspondence. " Sie ist 
die Erste nicht," the rooks seemed to say in 
their pleasant, fresh morning caws. 

But now the bells came chiming slowly on 
the clear air, those dear, drowsy three strokes 
which awoke in his heart so many echoes of 
home and boyhood and sweet innocent life 
beneath the beloved roof where Lilian dwelt ; 
bells calling people to come and pray, to 
think of God and heaven, and forsake all the 
sin and sorrow of the troubled earth — calling 
people to hear how even such black things as 
the letter told of might be made white again 
like snow ; to hear the kind fatherly counsels 
of such as Mr. Maitland or Cyril. And his 
heart swelled when he thought that Cyril 
had devoted his stainless youth, his bright 
promise, and his splendid gifts to a calling 
which, however vainly, tried to stem the tide 
of all this mad, sad evil, and lift men out of 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 171 

the mire of earth's misery. How beautiful 
to have Cyril's faith, and the power of thus 
consecrating himself! How poor in com- 
parison his own career, devoted merely to 
the healing of men's bodies, to the satisfac- 
tion of noble desire for knowledge, and the 
widening the horizon of men's thoughts ! 

Like all thinkers, and especially those 
whose thoughts dwell much on the study of 
natural facts, Everard had many doubts, and 
often feared that the Christianity so dear to 
him through instinct, training, and associa- 
tion, might be, after all, but a fairy dream. 
But the atmosphere of Malbourne, and more 
especially the influence of Mr. Maitland's 
genuine and practical piety, together with 
Cyril's bright enthusiasm, quenched these 
doubts as nothing else could ; and now the 
village bells fell like balm on his troubled 
soul, and he responded with cheery good 
temper to Lennie, who came bounding over 
the lawn in the proud consciousness of 
trousers, crying, " Come along, Henry, and 
look at Lilian's donkey." 



172 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

He thrust the paper in his pocket, and, 
taking the little fellow's hand, trotted off 
with him towards Winnie, who was ap- 
proaching them at headlong pace, with 
curls streaming in the wind, and soon seized 
his other hand, and led him to the meadow, 
where he beheld one of the sorriest beasts he 
had ever set eyes on, cropping the frosty 
grass, and winking lazily in the sun. 

"What can Lilian do with such a creature ?'' 
he asked. 

" Oh, she makes it happy, like all her 
things," replied Lennie. " Won't you stare 
when you see her three-legged cat, and the 
fox with the broken leg she has in the stable ! " 

'' She likes hurt things," commented Winnie, 
while Lennie related how Lilian met this 
donkey one day in the road leading over the 
downs. It was harnessed to a cart laden 
with vegetables, and had fallen between the 
shafts, where its owner, a brutal, bad fellow, 
well known in Malbourne, was furiously be- 
labouring it. 

" Didn't he stare when Lilian caught him 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 173 

by the collar and pulled him off the donkey ! " 
said Lennie. " Then he fell all of a tremble, 
and Lilian told him he would be sent to 
prison or fined. And he said he was too 
poor to buy another donkey, and couldn't 
help this one growing old and weak. So 
Lilian gave him ten shillings for it." 

" Dear Lilian ! " Everard said to himself, as 
he looked at the wretched beast, with its stiff 
limbs and body scarred by old sores and 
stripes. " Which do you love best, Winnie, 
Lilian or Cyril ? " 

" Cyril," replied both children, unhesi- 
tatingly, but could give no reason for their 
preference, until Lennie, after long cogitation, 
said, " He does make a fellow laugh so." 

Everard smiled, and thought of Words- 
worth's boy with his weathercock. The day 
was warmer now, and bidding Lennie run 
indoors with his great coat, he set off to 
church with the children. 

It was a matter of time for a person of 
any consideration to get through Malbourne 
Churchyard, for there, grouped upon either 



174 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

side the porch, lounged a little crowd of 
Malbourne worthies, solemnly passing the 
churchgoers in review, and headed, of course, 
by G-ranfer in a clean white smock-frock, 
and with his hale old many-coloured visage 
and veined hands looking purplish in the 
frosty air. Tom Hale was there, making a 
bright centre to the cool-toned picture in his 
red tunic and spotless, well-brushed clothes ; 
while Jim, with open breast and sailor garb, 
lent a bit of picturesque that not even the 
Sunday coats of Baines's manufacture could 
quite subdue. 

Lennie held up his head, and felt that his 
trousers were making a deep impression ; 
while Everard stopped and wished a good 
morning to them all, smock-frocks, Sunday 
coats, and uniforms, and received a little 
dignified patronage from Granfer, who had 
always regarded him with some disparage- 
ment, as being neither a Swaynestone nor a 
Maitland, but a mere appendage to the latter 
family, a circumstance which helped to render 
Granfer the deho:ht of Everard's life. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 175 

The present moment did not find Granfer 
conversational, his mental powers being- 
concentrated on observing the animated 
scene before him. There v^as Farmer Long, 
with his wife and daughters in their warm 
scarlets and purples, to scrutinize as they 
strolled along the road and over the church- 
yard path ; then the more distant farmers, 
who drove up to the lych-gate in old-fashioned 
gigs, and, having dropped their families, 
hastened to the Sun to put up the strong, 
coarse-limbed horses ; then came the Garretts 
from Northover, new people, whom Mal- 
bourne regarded, with a mixture of scorn 
and envy, as mere mushroom pretenders. 
They came on foot, their own gates being 
but a stone's-throw from the church, a hand- 
some family of sons and daughters, coeval 
with the Maitlands. To them Granfer's 
salutation was almost infinitesimal in its 
elaborate graduation. Then, blending with 
the drowsy chime of the three bells, arose the 
clatter of hoofs and the roll of wheels, and 
the Swaynestone laudau, with its splendid 



176 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

high-stepping horses, swept easily up to the 
gate, the silver-mounted harness, the silken 
coats of the steeds, the panels, and the re- 
volving wheel-spokes flashing in the sun. 
G-ranfer did not know it, but perhaps he 
dimly felt that the splendour of this appari- 
tion somehow enlarged and beautified the 
dim, narrow horizon of his life. 

Ben Lee's very livery, not to speak of his 
skilful and effective driving, contributed 
vaguely to Granfer's importance ; as also did 
the courteous elegance and finely built form 
of Sir Lionel, and the manner in which, the 
footman having retired at a look, he handed 
out Lady Swaynestone and his daughter 
Ethel, in their velvets and furs. But Granfer 
was distressed to see that Ben Lee no longer 
drove up with his former dash, and turned 
his shining steeds in the direction of the Sun 
with no more consequence than if he had 
been driving a mere brewer's dray. " Ah, 
Ben ain't the man he was ! " he muttered, 
after having helped Sir Lionel and his 
family with the sunshine of his approbation 
into church. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 177 

Then came the tripping, whispering pro- 
cession of school-children, led by the rector, 
followed by Wax, who was involved in the 
double misery of new Sunday broadcloth and 
the absence of his cane, without which emblem 
of authority he was ever a lost man ; and last 
of all came Cyril, who found time for a word 
and a smile for each of the group, and left 
them all exhilarated by his passing presence 
as if by a draught of wine. Then the bells 
ceased, the loungers entered the church, and 
Granfer himself, the sunshine warming his 
wintry white hair, walked slowly with the 
aid of his stout oak staff up the centre aisle 
to his allotted place. 

He was already seated, and Cyril's musical 
voice had given a deeper pathos to the 
sentence, " Hide thy face from my sins," 
when Ingram Swaynestone and his sister 
Maude entered, rosy and fresh from their long 
brisk walk in the frosty morning. Ingram 
Swaynestone was tall and fair and strongly 
built, the typical young Englishman, who 
belongs to no class and only one country, 

VOL. I. 



178 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

physically perfect, good-tempered, and well- 
spoken, with a perfect digestion and a 
nervous system nndistraiight by intellectual 
burdens and riddles of the painful earth. 
His appearance with his pretty, fair-haired 
sister caused a tiny stir, almost imperceptible, 
like a summer breath through ripe corn, 
amongst the fairer portion of the congrega- 
tion, with whom he was extremely popular, 
not only on account of his good looks and 
known appreciation of feminine charms, but 
also because of a faint delicious aroma of 
wickedness that hung about his name. 

The devotions of several undoubtedly pious 
young maidens were more than once inter- 
rupted for the purpose of looking to see if he 
Avas looking, which he certainly was at every- 
one of them in turn, when opportunity per- 
mitted ; while Cyril's beautiful voice rang 
through the church, and Everard and Lilian, 
who had always loved and admired the simple 
majesty of the Liturgy, felt that they had 
never before known its real beauty. 

When he read of the Massacre of the 



TPIE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 179 

Innocents, one or two women cried. The 
tone in which he read that Rachel was 
weeping for her children and would not be 
comforted, poignantly reminded them that 
they could never be comforted for their lost 
little ones buried outside in the sunny 
churchyard. Henry, and Lilian, and Marion, 
and the children all gazed up with admiring 
affection at the beautiful young priest stand- 
ins: white-robed outside the chancel at the 
eagle lectern, Henry thinking that the music 
of Cyril's voice alone surpassed any chanted 
cathedral service. 

Often in after-years did Henry and Lilian 
think of that sweet Sunday morning with 
refreshment : the solemn beauty of the old 
church, with its heavy Norman arches ; the 
sunshine stealing in, mellow and soft, through 
the south windows and tingeing the snowy 
frock of Grranfer, who sat just below the 
chancel, and leant forward on his staff in an 
attitude of rapt attention ; the innocent looks 
of the choir-boys, amongst whom was Dicky 
Stevens, fourth in descent from Granfer, and 



180 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

whom Lilian had delivered from the tyranny 
of the rod ; and Mr. Maitland's reverend 
aspect, as he bent his silvered head and 
listened to Cyril's pure voice. 

But the moment which lingered in his 
heart's memory till his dying day was 
that in which he knelt with Marion and 
Lilian and the villagers at the altar, and 
received the holy symbols from Cyril's own 
consecrated hands. He never forgot Cyril's 
pale, saint-like features and white-stoled 
form, the crimson from a martyr's robe in the 
south chancel window staining in a long bar 
the priest's breast and hands and the very 
chalice he held. 

" I was so glad," Lilian said, when they 
were walking home together, Marion having 
stopped to speak to some one, "to see you 
there, Henry, because Cyril is often troubled 
about your daring speculations." 
, " Your father never fails to still my doubts, 
Lilian," he replied. " There is that in his 
plain, unpretending sermons, which carries 
conviction straight into one's heart. Ser- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 181 

mons, as a rule, simply bore me ; but Mr. 

Maitland's Well, you know, he always 

was my beau ideal of a parish priest." 

Lilian's face kindled. " You are the only 
person who really appreciates my father," 
she replied. " Even Cyril does not quite 
know what gifts he has buried in this tiny 
rustic place, and willingly and consciously 
buried." 

" I honour his intellect, but still more his 
heart, which speaks not only in his studiously 
plain sermons, but even more in his life. 
Cyril could take no better model." 

" True ; yet we all think Cyril destined to 
something higher," replied Lilian. 

" By the way, Henry," said Cyril at 
luncheon, '' I took your overcoat by mistake 
this morning. I hope it didn't put you out 
much ; my things are all too small for you." 

" That fellow is always appropriating my 
property, and I am too big to retaliate," 
growled Everard, who had forgotten all 
about the tight overcoat of the morning. 

'' Oh, I say, Cywil," broke in Lennie, 



182 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

^' wasn't Ingwam Swaynestone in a wage 
with you for not pweaching this morning ! 
He came to church on purpose, and he does 
hate going to church in the winter, he says, 
because the cold nips the girls' noses and 
makes them look so ugly." 

" He doesn't mean that nonsense, Lennie," 
said Mr. Maitland, laughing gently. " He 
pays his rector a fine compliment, to say the 
least of it," he added. 

Cyril, who was by no means making up 
for his morning fast, looked as if he thought 
Ingram was more likely to be interested in 
the colour of girls' noses than the quality of 
any sermons. Then he learnt how Ingram 
had called with offers of guns and horses to 
Everard and himself, and had been at play 
with Winnie, who was now in dire disgrace 
and condemned to go without pudding, in 
consequence of having made Ingram's nose 
bleed. 

" Oh, really, mother ! " he exclaimed, 
stroking the bright curls brushing his arms, 
" isn't that rather hard ? Winnie did not 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 183 

mean it ; it miglit have been her nose. Do 
jou think Ingram will go without pudding, 
Win ? Let her off, mother. I never saw a 
little girl behave better in church." 

Whereupon Winnie was respited, after 
many comments from her elders on her rough 
ways and romping habits and constant 
breakages, which, it appeared, were a source 
of perennial disgrace to the little girl. 

Cyril had very tender ways with children, 
and was almost as sorry for hurt things as 
Lilian. That very afternoon a child stumbled 
and fell on the way to church, and Everard 
saw him slip aside in his long cassock, and 
pick up the howling, dust-covered urchin 
with some merry, tender observation, wipe 
away the tears and blood with his own 
spotless handkerchief before Wax had time 
to bring out a denunciation on the brat's 
heedlessness, and comfort him finally with 
pence, though the parson's bell had rung, 
and Mrs. Wax had come to the end of her 
voluntary on the harmonium, and begun 
over again in despair. 



18i THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

The morning congregation had received 
some additions, to wit, those lazy Sabbatarians 
who kept their day of rest so literally as to 
get up too late to go to church in the 
morning, those mothers too fatigued by 
performing the family toilettes to perform 
their own, and those who cooked the Sunday 
dinners and minded the babies, the majority 
of which latter accompanied their parents to 
afternoon service. It was pleasant, too, to 
observe that Ingram Swaynestone's piety had 
conquered his pain at the eclipse of feminine 
beauty, and that he helped to swell the little 
crowd. 

When Cyril ascended the pulpit, he looked 
round the dim church with an anxious, 
searching gaze, and Lilian observed that his 
eye rested with apprehension on the Lees' 
pew, and he appeared relieved when he saw 
Mrs. Lee standing there alone. Then he 
glanced in the direction of the Swaynestone 
servants' pew, where Ben Lee sat, glum and 
downcast, and Judkins, with a haggard look, 
held his hymn-book before his face. They 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 185 

were singing " Hark, the herald angels," 
Job Stubbs and Dickie Stevens bringing out 
the treble with a will, and the basses bearing 
their parts manfully. 

Cyril distinguished all the voices — those of 
Lilian and Everard, Marion and the children, 
Sir Lionel and his daughters, the Rectory 
maids, the smock-frocks, Tom and Jim Hale, 
Baines, the tailor, who was only an occasional 
church-goer, and loved to air his bass occa- 
sionally in orthodox ears — he heard even 
Granfer's own tremulous quaver, which had 
been a tenor of local celebrity, and a crowd 
of young memories rushed over him. He 
clutched the edge of the pulpit, regardless of 
the holly-wreath which encircled it, and 
pricked his fingers, and, when the last notes 
of " Herald angels " died away in the final 
quaver of an old woman half a bar behind, 
was silent for a few moments. 

At last he recovered himself, and gave out 
his text — '' Keep innocency, and take heed to 
the thing that is right, for that shall bring a 
man peace at the last." 



186 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

He felt them all gazing up at him — Lennie 
and Winnie, with their innocent eyes and 
mouths wide open to hear " Cywil pweach ; " 
his mother, who seldom ventured to church ; 
Farmer Long and his family ; the well-known 
villagers ; Granfer, with his head on one 
side, like an old bird, the better to hear him ; 
Ben Lee — yes, Ben Lee was looking ; his 
father in the chancel was looking also. 

Cyril turned pale ; Marion caught her 
breath, but was soon quieted by the clear, 
pure notes of the young preacher's voice. 
He could not but pause, he said, before that 
congregation, and question himself deeply 
and sternly before he presumed to address 
them. They had seen him grow up among 
them. Many were his elders, had held him 
in their arms, chidden the faults of his boy- 
hood, taught him, cared for him ; many had 
been his playmates and companions, known 
his weaknesses, shared, perchance, in his 
escapades. How should he speak to them ? 

Everard disapproved of these personal re- 
marks ; and yet, when he heard the silver 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 187 

tones of Cyril's voice, his easy flowing 
sentences, and tlie delicacy of his allusions, 
he could not hut he charmed. The fact was, 
as he reflected, that Cyril could do what no 
other man might, and still charm. His very 
faults and weaknesses were, in a manner, 
endearing. 

He felt it, nevertheless, a great privilege, 
he continued, to be placed there, and he 
asked of their patience to hear him, for the 
sake of his office. Then, referring to his 
manuscript, he briefly touched upon the story 
of the martyred innocents and its lessons ; 
and not till then did the profound snore 
of William Grove and other accustomed 
sleepers arise. Every creature had kept 
awake during the unaccustomed prologue, 
and, indeed, many of the habitual sleepers 
were still awake, considering it only fair to 
Mr. Cyril. Then the preacher spoke of the 
beauty of innocence, and his manner, hitherto 
so quiet, changed, and became more and more 
impassioned, till some of the sleepers woke 
and gazed about them with dazed wonder, 



188 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

as the tones of that clarion voice besought 
them all to keep innocency, that pearl beyond 
all price, that one costly treasure without 
which there was no light in the summer 
sun, nor any joy in youth and spring-time. 
Then he painted the tortures of a guilty 
conscience, the agony beyond all agonies, 
with such power and passion, and such a 
richness of poetic diction and picturesque 
imagery, that many a man trembled, some 
women sobbed, and poor Ben Lee uttered a 
stifled groan. 

Everard grew uncomfortable. He began 
to fear some unseemly hysteric excitement 
in the little congregation, and was distressed 
to find Marion and Mrs. Maitland crying 
without reserve. Lilian's eyes were moist, 
but she did not cry ; she was pale with a 
reflection of Cyril's white passion. Mr. 
Maitland covered his face with his surplice. 
He too was uneasy, and more affected than 
he liked to acknowledge to himself; yet he 
hoped that Alma's betrayer might be present 
and have his heart touched. The dusk was 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 189 

falling fast in the dim, deep-sliadowed build- 
ing ; two or three sparks of light glowed 
among the white robes of the choir, and up 
among the dark arches Cyril's face showed 
haggard and agonized in the little isle of 
light made by the two pale tapers on each 
side of him in the darkness. 

Long did the little congregation remember 
that scene : the hush of attention, broken 
only by an occasional sob from some woman — 
for most of the sleepers were awake now, 
and dimly conscious of the unaccustomed 
passion breaking the drowsy air around 
them — the great growing shadows in the 
fast-darkening church ; the mass of awe- 
struck faces pale in the grey gloom ; the 
rosy gleams of the scattered tapers on the 
choristers' surplices ; and up above them, from 
the heart of the mysterious darkness, the 
one beautiful, impassioned face in the lonely 
radiance, and the mighty musical voice peal- 
ing forth the unutterable anguish of sin ; and 
the light which subsequent events threw 
upon it only rendered it the more impressive. 



190 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" It is true, indeed," said the preacher, 
suddenly easing the intolerable tension of his 
passion, and speaking in calmer tones, " that 
what a holy writer has called ' the princely 
heart of innocence,' may be regained after 
long anguish of penitence and prayer, but 
the consequences of sin roll on in ever-grow- 
ing echoes, terrible with the thunder of 
everlasting doom ; the contrite heart is utterly 
broken, and the life for ever saddened and 
marred. Innocence once lost, my brethren, 
the old careless joy of youth never returns. 
thou, whosoever thou be, man, woman, 
or even child ; thou who hast once stained 
thy soul with deadly sin, ' not poppy, nor 
mandragora, nor all the drowsy syrups of the 
world, shall ever medicine thee to that sweet 
sleep which thou ow'dst yesterday.' 

*' Yet despair not, beloved brethren," he 
added, with flute-like softness, for his voice 
had again risen in agonized intensity ; " there 
is forgiveness and healing for all. But oh ! 
keep innocency, keep innocency ; guard and 
treasure that inestimable, irrecoverable pos- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MATTLAND. 191 

session, that pure perennial source of joyous 
days and peaceful nights, and take heed, take 
watchful heed, of the thing that is right. Keep 
innocency, little children, sitting here in the 
holy church this evening, beneath the eyes 
of those who love and guard you — you whose 
souls are yet fresh with the dew of baptism, 
keep, oh, keep your innocency ! Keep it, 
youths and children, who wear the chorister's 
white robe ! Keep innocency, young men 
and maidens, full of heart and hope ; keep 
this one pearl, I pray you, for there is no 
joy without it ! And you, men and women 
of mature years, strong to labour and bowed 
with cares and toils innumerable — you who, 
in the hurry of life's hot noon, have scarce 
time to think of heaven, with its white robes 
and peace, yet see that you keep innocency 
through all ! And you, standing amid the 
long golden lights of life's evening, aged 
men and women who wear the honoured 
crown of white hairs, watch still, and see that 
you guard your priceless treasure even to 
the last. Keep innocency, I conjure you. 



192 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

for that shall bring a man peace at the last ! 
Peace, peace," he repeated, with a yearning 
intensity that culminated in a deep, hard 
sob, " peace ! " 

He paused, and there was dense silence for 
some seconds, and Everard saw that the blue 
brilliance of his eyes was blurred with tears ; 
while Sir Lionel and Ingram experienced a 
sense of profound relief in the hope that the 
too-exciting sermon was at an end. The 
congregation rose joyously to their feet, 
eased of a strain that was becoming intoler- 
able. 

When Cyril had left the pulpit, his father 
pronounced the benediction on the kneeling 
crowd in his calm, sweet tones, so restful 
after the storm and passion of the young 
preacher's richly compassed voice. But the 
blessing did not reach Cyril's distracted soul. 
Taking advantage of the shadows when he 
reached liis place in the chancel, he glided 
swiftly behind the pillars, like some hurt 
spirit fleeing from the benison that would 
heal it, till he reached the vestry, where he 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 193 

threw liimself in a chair behind a screen, and 
covered his face. When Mr. Maitland in due 
time followed the choir thither, he did not at 
first observe the silent, ghostly figure in the 
shadow ; and then becoming aware of him, 
he left him to himself till the choristers were 
gone, thinking that he was praying. But on 
approaching nearer, he was startled to hear 
strong sobs issue from the veiled figure. 

" My dear boy," he remonstrated, " this 
will never do. Too much excitement is un- 
wholesome both for priest and people. Come, 
master yourself, dear lad. You are unwell ; 
this fasting is not wise. Henry was right." 

" Oh, father," sobbed Cyril, " it is not the 
fasting! Oh, shut the door, and let us be 
alone, and let me tell you all — all ! " 

" Come, come," said the gentle old man ; 
" calm yourself, and tell me whatever you 
lilvC later. At present we are both worn out, 
and need change of thought. You have a 
great gift, dear fellow, and I trust your 
words have struck home to at least one 
conscience " 

VOL. I. 



194 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" They have — oh, they have, indeed ! " 
repeated Cyril, with increasing agitation ; 

" and that miserable conscience Oh, 

father, father ! how can I tell you ? " 

''Hush! hush! This is hysteria, as 
Everard predicted. Say no more ; I insist 
upon your silence. Eemember where we 
are! Drink this water. Stay! I will call 
Henry ; " and Mr. Maitland went quickly into 
the church, where Everard was yet lingering 
with Lilian, who always had various errands 
connected with the parish to transact in the 
porch, and beckoned him to the vestry. 

Cyril did not resist his father's will any 
more, but sank back with a moan, half of 
anguish, half of relief, and listened meekly to 
the rough kindliness of Everard and the 
£:entle remonstrances of his father. 

" This is a pretty scene, Mr. Maitland," 
observed Everard, on entering the vestry. 
■ " 111 ? Of course he is ill, after exciting 
himself on an empty stomach ! The end of 
such goings-on as these, my friend, is Bedlam. 
Take this brandy, and then go quietly home 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 195 

and get a good sleep, and let us have no more 
of this nonsense, for goodness sake." 

So Cyril did as they bid him, and held his 
peace. Had he but acted on his heart's 
impulse, and spoken out then as he wished, 
he would have produced sorrow and dismay 
indeed, but the long, lingering tragedy which 
was to involve so many lives would have 
been for ever averted. 

Once, perhaps, in each crisis of our lives, 
our guardian angel stands before us with his 
hands full of golden opportunity, which, if 
we grasp, it is well with us ; but woe to us 
if we turn our backs sullenly on our gentle 
visitor, and scorn his celestial gift ! Never 
again is the gracious treasure offered, and the 
favourable moment returns no more. 



lOG THE SILEN'CE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 



CHAPTER YIII. 

** Ay, you med all mark my words ! " said 
Granfer, looking solemnly round from under 
the shadow of his bushy grey eyebrows. 
" I've a zaid it, and I'll zay it agen — ay, that 
I 'ool, let they go agen it as may ! You med 
all mark my words, I zay. Queen Yictoree'll 
make he a bishop avore she's done wi' 'un." 

" Ay," chorused the listening group, who 
were standing around the village oracle in 
the churchyard, looking phantom-like in the 
pale blending of sunset and moonrise ; and 
then there was a thoughtful pause, during 
which Granfer's shrewd grey eyes scrutinized 
each face with an air of challenge. 

" Ter'ble vine praiching zure-ly," observed 
Hale, the wheelwright. 

" Yine ! you med well zay that," rejoined 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 197 

Granfer, sternly. " I tell 'ee all, there never 
was praiching that vine in all Malbourne 
lands avore ! Ay, I've a zaid it, and I'll zay 
it agen ! " 

'• Made me sweat, 'ee did," observed Straun, 
the blacksmith, whose Sunday appearance 
was a caricature on his burly working-day 
2)resentment ; for broadcloth of Baines's rough 
fashioning now hid the magnificent muscular 
arms and bare neck ; a tall hat, too small in 
the head, replaced the careless, smoke-browned 
cap of every day ; and the washing and 
shaving to which his face had been subjected 
gave it an almost unnatural pallor. 

" Ye nied well sweat, Jarge Straun, when 
you thinks on yer zins," reflected Granfer, 
piously. 

" 'Twas ter'ble vine ; but darned if I 
knows what 'twas all about ! " said William 
Grove, scratching his curly head with some 
perplexity. 

" Ah ! Mr. Cyril, he have a dale too much 
larning for the likes o' you, Willum," re- 
turned Granfer, graciously condescending to 



198 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

William's weaker intellect ; " let he alone 
for that. Why, Lard love 'ee, Willum, / 
couldn't make out more'n a quarter on't 
mezelf; that I couldn't, I tell 'ee ! A vast 
o' larning in that lad's head." 

" Ay, and soine on it was poetry ; I yerd 
the jingle of it," said sailor Jim. 

" Master, now," continued Granfer, settling 
himself more comfortably against a tombstone, 
and leaning forward on his stick — " Lard 'a 
massey, any vool med unnerstand he ! He 
spakes in his discoorses jest as though he 
was a zitting in front of vire atop of a 
cricket, and a zaying, ' Well, Granfer, and 
how be the taaties a-coming up ? ' or, ' Granfer, 
think o' yer zins avore you blames other 
volk.' Ay, that's how he spakes, bless 'un ! 
He don't know no better, he don't. Can't 
spake no grander than the Lard have give 
'un grace to." 

"Master's a good man," said Straun, 
defiantly. " He've a done his duty by we 
this thirty year." 

" Ay, he's well enough, master is," con- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 199 

tinued G-ranfer, in a tolerant manner ; "I 
never had no vault to vind wi' he, bless 'un ! 
A vine vamily he've had, too ! He've a done 
so well as he could ; but a never was no 
praicber to spake on, I tell 'ee." 

" Ter'ble pretty what Mr. Cyril said about 
preaching to them as knowed him a boy," 
said Tom Hale. " Them esskypades, now," 
he added fondly, as he caressed his moustache 
and struck one of his martial attitudes. 

'* What's a esskypade, Granfer ? " inquired 
a smock-frock. 

"A esskypade," returned Granfer, slowly 
and thoughtfully — " a esskypade, zo to zay, 
is, in a way o' spaking, what you med call a 
zet-to — a zart of a scrimmage like ; " and he 
fixed his glittering eye fiercely, yet half 
doubtfully, on Tom Hale's face, as much as 
to challenge him to deny it. 

" Just so," responded Tom. '' I said to 
meself, I said, ' Mr. Cyril is thinking of the 
set-to we had together in father's yard that 
Saturday afternoon ; that's what he means 
by his esskypades.' " 



200 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

' " Ay, and you licked him well," added Jim, 
eagerly ; " that was summat like a fight, Tom." 
. " Master Cyril had to be carried home, and 
kep' his bed for a week ; and Tom, he couldn't 
see out of his eyes next day," commented 
the elder Hale, with pride in his brother's 
prowess. 

" Ay, you dreshed 'un, zure enough, Tom," 
commented Granfer, graciously. 

*'He took a deal of licking, and hit out 
like a man," said the modest warrior, who 
loved Cyril with the profound affection in- 
spired only by a vanquished foe. 

Tom had fought sterner battles since. He 
had been through the Indian Mutiny cam- 
paign, and known the grim realities of 
Lucknow ; but his heart still glowed, as he 
saw before him, in his mind's eye, the 
prostrate form of Cyril on the grass among 
the timber of the wheelwright's yard — poor, 
vanquished Cyril, slighter, though older, than 
himself, with his little shirt torn and blood- 
stained — and heard the applause of his com- 
rades gathered to watch the fray. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 201 

" Well, I minds n, a little lad, chivying 
Granfer's wuld sow round meadow," struck 
in Stevens, who had now completed all his 
duties in the church and locked the door, 
the great key of which he carried in his 
hand. 

" A vine, peart buoy as ever I zee," re- 
flected Granfer, " and wanted zo much stick 
as any on 'em. I've a smacked 'un mezelf," 
added Granfer, with great dignity and im- 
portance ; '' ay, and I smacked 'un well, I 
did ! " repeated Granfer, with relish. 

" You was allays a good 'un to smack, 
Granfer," observed his grandson, the clerk, 
with tender reminiscences of Granfer *s opera- 
tion on his own person. 

" Whatever I done, I went through wi' 't," 
returned the old man, complacently digesting 
this tribute to his prowess. " Ay, I've a 
smacked 'un mezelf, and I smacked 'un w ell, 
I did," he repeated, with ever-growing im- 
portance. 

" Come along home ! " said Stevens, who 
was waiting to lock the lych-gate. " You 



202 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

bain't old enough to bide in churchyard for 
good, Granfer." 

" Ah ! I bain't a-gwine underground this 
ten year yet," returned Granfer, shaking his 
head, and slowly rising from his tombstone 
in the blue moonlight, his breath showing 
smokelike on the keen air, and his wrinkled 
hands numbed doubly by age and the winter 
night. " I baint a-gwine yet," he muttered 
to himself; while the group broke up in slow, 
rustic fashion, and they all trudged off, Tom 
leading the way, erect and martial, airily 
swinging his little cane, and stepping with a 
firm, even stride ; Jim rolling along with a 
wide, swaying gait, as if there were an 
earthquake, and the churchyard ground were 
heaving and surging around him ; the rustics 
tramping heavily after, with a stolid, forceful 
step, as if the ground beneath them were a 
stubborn enemy, to be mastered only by con- 
tinued blows ; and soon the grey church 
stood silent and deserted in the frostv moon- 
light, till the clock in the belfry pealed out 
five mellow strokes above the quiet, unheeding 
dead. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 203 

At that hour Ben Lee was on the point of 
leaving his stables and going home to tea. 
Judkins and he were kindling their pipes at 
the harness-room fire, each with a face of 
sullen gloom. 

'^ It wasn't so much what he said," observed 
Judkins ; " 'twas how he said it made them 
all cry. He seemed kind of heart-broken 
about it, as though somebody belonging to 
him, some friend like, had done wrong." 

" Do you think he was thinking of my 
poor girl ? " asked Ben, quickly ; and Judkins 
nodded assent. 

" He always had a kind heart, had Mr. 
Cyril, and he thought a deal of Alma," con- 
tinued Lee ; " lent her good books and that." 

"There was one in the church as wasn't 
upset, and looked as quiet as a whetstone all 
through — that damned doctor ! " said the 
young man, fiercely. 

" Dr. Everard ? You don't think, 
Charles ? " 

" Haven't T seen him walking in the wood 
with her ? " he interrupted, with impreca- 



204 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

tions. " Why did he come sneaking into 
your house, doctoring your wife last spring, 
day after day without fail, and always some- 
think to say to Alma afterwards in another 
room ? Answer me that, Ben Lee ! " 

The man was half stunned. " I'd break 
every bone in his cursed body," he burst out, 
purple with passion, " if I thought that ! 
And the good he done my wife, too, and I 
that blind ! " 

" Blind you were, Ben Lee, and blind was 
everybody else. But I watched. I've seen 
them shake hands at the gate, and she giving 
of him flowers, damn him ! I've seen them 
in the wood there, standing together, and he 
showing of her things through that glass of 
his that makes things bigger than they ought 
to be. Wait till I catch him, Ben, that's all ! 
And he sitting through that sermon, and 
everybody crying, and even Mr. Ingram 
blowing his nose ; he sitting as scornful and 
cold as any devil. There's no conscience in 
the likes of him ! " 

" Charles," cried Ben, suddenly clutching 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 205 

the yoimg man's arm with a grip that 
brought the blood to his face, " I'll kill 
him ! " 

Ben was purple, and quivering from head 
to foot, and Judkins's passionate anger sank 
within him at the sight. 

" Hush, Ben, hush ! " he said ; " don't you 
do nothing rash. Killing's murder, Ben. 
And that will do her no good. No, no ; I'll 
thrash him, and you shall thrash him, and he 
shall be brought to book, sure enough ; that's 
only justice." 

Poor Ben dashed away his pipe, covered 
his face with his coat -cuff, and broke out 
ciying. 

" Lord ha' mercy ! " cried the young groom, 
crying himself. ''You do take on, Ben. 
Come, come, cheer up, man. Better days'll 
come, and you may see her married and 
happy yet. Come on home, Ben, come." 

And he drew him out into the solemn quiet 
of the winter moonlight, and took him across 
the park and the meadow, and wished him 
good night at the door of his sorrowful home. 



206 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" And mind you, Ben, don't you be hard on 
lier," he said at parting. 

" If Ben comes across him," he muttered to 
himself, as he strolled moodily up and down 
the high-road, whence he could see the 
Temple white in the moonlight, with its one 
window faintly aglow, ^' he'll do for him. 
Ben's hot, and he'll do for him, as sure as 
eggs is eggs." Then he vowed to himself 
that he would wreak his own revenge first, 
and, if possible, save Ben from yielding 
to his passionate nature. " I'll track him 
down like a hound ! " he muttered, striking 
fiercely at the frosted hedgerow with the 
light whip he carried. 

Everard, in the mean time, was serenely 
happy in the drawing-room at Malbourne, 
unconscious that he had an enemy in the 
world, much less that men were scheming 
against his honour and his life. Nay, he did 
not even dream that he had so much as a 
detractor ; he loved his fellows, and was at 
peace with mankind. 

The family were gathered in the drawing- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 207 

room in pleasant Sunday idleness, save Mr. 
Maitland, who was visiting a sick parishioner. 
Cyril and Marion were side by side on a 
remote sofa, dreamily happy in each other's 
presence ; Henry had mounted his microscope 
within reach of Mrs. Maitland, and was dis- 
playing its wonders in calm happiness for 
her and Lilian. Mark Antony, after careful 
and minute inspection of every detail of the 
strange apparatus, had decided that it was 
harmless, though frivolous, and expressed this 
decision by deep contented purrs and an 
adjournment to Cyril's knee, where he saw a 
prospect of long continuation and peace ; and 
Lennie and Winnie occupied the hearthrug, 
and divided their attention between the dogs 
and the microscope. 

When Lilian bent over the tube, with 
the strong light of the lamp touching her 
animated face, and her dress rustling agaiust 
him, Henry thought he had never been so 
happy in his life. Now and again some 
little unexpected incident, some glance or 
tone, revealed to him the delicious truth 



208 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

that they loved each other. No one else 
suspected that any change had come over 
the fraternal relations of a lifetime ; they 
possessed this young happiness as a secret, 
sacred treasure, and feared the moment when 
it must be revealed to the world. Everard 
was loth to part even with the sweet anguish 
of doubt which crossed his heaven from time 
to time ; it was so delightful to watch and 
question every word and glance and gesture 
of Lilian's, and play upon them a perpetual 
daisy game — " She loves me, she loves me 
not, she loves me." Some deep instinct told 
him that never in all his life would he again 
taste such happiness as this blessed dawn of love 
yielded him. As for Lilian, her manner took 
a little shyness occasionally in the strange fear 
which is the shadow of unspeakable joy. 

Soon the domestic quiet was broken, but 
not troubled, by the irruption of Stanley and 
Lyster Grarrett, the two sons of Northover, 
who liked to lounge away a Sunday evening 
at the Eectory, and there was much discussion 
of the entertainment to be given the next 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 209 

night to the villagers ; and then the Garrett 
girls were brought across the park to assist 
in the little parliament, and kept to share 
the informal supper which was a Sunday 
feature at Malbourne. 

During supper a note arrived from Swayne- 
stone, bidding Everard come to luncheon next 
day to meet the great Professor Hamlyn, 
who had seen some paper of Everard's in a 
scientific journal, and expressed a wish to see 
the writer. This was a great pleasure to 
Everard, and a little responsive light in 
Lilian's face told him that she realized what 
making this man's acquaintance meant to 
him. 

"The luncheon was a great success," 
Everard observed, on his return to the Rectory 
in the afternoon next day. " The great man 
was most gracious ; he did me the honour of 
contradicting me nine times. Sir Lionel, in 
his gentle way, was a little horrified at his 
lion's roar, but saw that I was specially 
honoured in being selected for the royal 
beast's refection." 

VOL. I. p 



210 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

He went on to tell how the great writer, 
who lived in the neighbourhood, and was 
entertaining the professor, had been present, 
and had been less overbearing in manner 
and milder in language than usual. His hair 
had, however, evidently not been brushed. 
He was questioning Sir Lionel about Cyril's 
sermon, in which he was interested, since 
he had a slight acquaintance with the 
Maitlands, and had already detected CyriFs 
bright parts. He heard of the sermon 
through his brother, who had been taking a 
country stroll the previous afternoon, and had 
sauntered unnoticed into the church, just at 
the beginning of the sermon, and returned 
home with the intelligence that a young 
genius had arisen in the neighbourhood, with 
a voice, manner, and power unequalled in his 
experience. 

Ingram Swaynestone, who had accompanied 
Everard back to Malbourne, wondered that 
Cyril should stare abstractedly at the fire 
during this recital, as if it had no interest 
for him, and made some remark to him ex- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 211 

pressive of his own personal appreciation of 
the sermon. 

" My good fellow," returned Cyril, facing 
about, and speaking in his eas}^ genial 
fashion, " do you suppose that I don't know 
that I have the ' gift of the gab,' as Everard 
calls it ? I don't know that one need be proud 
of it, any more than of having one's nose 
placed in the middle of one's face, instead of 
all askew, as befalls some people ; and yet 
the devil is quite active enough in per- 
suading me to be vain of it without my 
friends' assistance." 

" It strikes me, Cyril," broke in Everard, 
" that you and the devil are on very confi- 
dential terms. I should have thought an 
innocent young parson like you the very last 
person the arch-enemy would select to hob- 
and-nob with." 

"As if the Premier were to hold confidential 
chats with the late Nana Sahib," added In- 
gram, laughing. 

Cyril flushed hotly, and then said, with a 
quietly dignified air, of which he was master 



212 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

when lie wished to rebuke gently, " You are 
light-hearted, Henry ; your spirits run away 
with you." 

Upon which Everard could not resist re- 
torting, with unabashed gravity, " I trust 
that yours will not run away with you, Cyril, 
since they are of such a questionable com- 
plexion." 

" Come, you idle people," broke in Lilian ; 
" it is time to go to the schoolroom. Are 
you going to be a waiter, Ingram ? There is 
no compulsion, remember. Henry and the 
two Garretts are enlisted. Keppel Everard 
is our Ganymede; Marion and I are Hebes. 
In plain English, we serve the tea, and Keppel 
the beer." 

" Since all the posts are filled, I will engage 
myself as general slavey," said the good- 
tempered Ingram, rising and following Lilian 
to the schoolroom, where a substantial meal 
was spread, and Mr. Maitland, with his curate, 
Mr. Marvyn, was already receiving his 
humble guests, who, unlike the guests of 
more fashionable entertainments, liked to 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 213 

arrive before instead of after the appointed 
hour, and in this case came long before all 
the candles were lighted, so that they de- 
pended chiefly on firelight for illumination. 

Soon, however, the tables were full, men, 
women, and children sitting before a 
bounteous supply of roast beef and potatoes, 
while the air became oppressive with the 
scent of crushed evergreens an'd steaming 
food. Mr. Maitland and his curate had one 
table ; Cyril and the Eev. George Everard 
presided at another ; and the children's special 
board rejoiced in Lennie and Winnie as host 
and hostess. 

Profound gravity prevailed, broken only 
by an occasional feminine titter or childish 
laugh, though it was evident, from the ex- 
pression of Granfer's face when he came to 
the end of his first plate of beef, that he 
contemplated making a remark^ probably of a 
jocular nature. All the mirth of the feast 
seemed to be concentrated in the faces of the 
Hebes and Ganymedes, who flew about the 
room with the greatest enjoyment, and took 



214 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

care that neither plate nor cup was empty. 
The two most assiduous waiters w^ere Ingram 
Swaynestone and Everard, both of whom 
appeared to have the gift of ubiquity, and 
carved with a recklessness and rapidity that 
astonished all beholders. It was not until 
the pudding was finished, and grace had been 
sung by the choir, that some symptoms of 
mirth and enjoyment began to break out 
among the rustic revellers, and Mr. Maitland 
laughed with his usual heartiness at Granfer's 
annual joke, a fine antique one, with the 
mellowness of fifty years upon it. 

It was pleasant, while the tables were being 
cleared, and the people were grouped about 
the room, to see Cyril move among his old 
friends, saying to each exactly the right 
thing, in the manner exactly fitted to charm 
each ; going up to Tom Hale, and laying 
his hand affectionately on his stalwart, red- 
coated shoulder, and calling the pleased flush 
into his face by the manner in which he 
alluded to old times, especially the immortal 
battle. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 215 

" I should be sorry to figlit you now, 
Tom," he added ; "or Jim either. It is well 
that my calling makes me a man of peace, 
while yours make you men of war." 

" Yes, Mr. Cyril, it is all very well to be 
strong," replied Tom ; " but what's that to a 
head-piece like yours ? " 

" They would rather have a smile from 
Cyril than a whole dinner from the rest of 
us," Everard observed to Lilian, as he paused 
a moment in his toilsome occupation of re- 
arranging the room. " Just look at George," 
he added, pointing to his reverend brother, 
who was standing disconsolate and dejected 
in the ^[uietest corner he could find ; " he is 
afraid that people are enjoying themselves. 
He would give his head to be allowed to 
improve the occasion." 

" He implored my father to substitute 
hymns and clerical addresses for our frivolous 
little entertainment," replied Lilian. " He 
asked him how he would answer for having 
let slip such a precious opportunity of preach- 
ing the Gospel." 



216 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" Such a gospel- — 

" ' The dismal news I tell, 

How our friends are all embarking 
For the fiery port of hell.' 

Poor old G-eorge! What a dreary phantas- 
magoria life must seem to him ! " 

" Happily, he doesn't really believe his 
creed. He asked Granfer just now if he knew 
that he was standing on the brink of the 
grave. Granfer replied, ' Ay, I've ben a- 
standing there this ninety year and more, and 
I hain't, zo to zay, tired on't yet.' " 

Everard went up to his brother, and 
accosted him. " I hope " there is nothing 
wrong, George," he said ; " you look as if 
something had disagreed with you." 

" Thank you, Henry," he replied, " my 
health is, under Providence, excellent ; but I 
grieve for the souls of these poor creatures. 
I have ascertained for a fact that Maitland 
has caused beer and tobacco to be placed in a 
class-room for the men. Why, oh, why will 
he not lead them to the only true source of 
comfort ? " 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 217 

The diners were now joined by otlier guests 
of a higher grade: Farmer Long and his 
family ; other farmers ; a fresh contingent of 
Garretts ; and last, though not by any means 
least, Sir Lionel Swaynestone and his two 
pretty daughters. 

Thereupon the choir, assisted by amateurs, 
struck up, " My love is like a red, red rose," 
and the concert began. Wax executed a solo 
on the clarionet of such fearful difficulty 
that Everard trembled lest he should break 
a blood-vessel; and everybody, including 
Mrs. AYax, who coursed frantically after his 
rapid runs and 'flourishes on the piano, 
breathed an inward thanksgiving when he 
had finished. A piano duet between Miss 
Swaynestone and Miss Garrett followed, and 
was not the less tumultuously applauded 
because the superior swiftness of Miss 
Garrett's fiugers landed her at^ the finish 
two bars ahead of Mi^s Swaynestone, who 
played on to the end with unruffled compo- 
sure. Nobody had taken the slightest notice 
of any of these performances, save Wax's, 



218 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

which alarmed the nervous ; but now a 
change took place. Cyril led Lilian on to 
the platform, and Marion's piano prelude 
was drowned by the sound of heavy feet 
plunging in from the smoking-room, and 
everybody listened attentively for what was 
a really delicate entertainment for the ear — 
a vocal duet between the twins. Even Sir 
Lionel left his stately calm to encore the 
simple melody, while Granfer did serious 
damage to the school floor with his stick. It 
was not that the brother and sister sang: with 
unusual skill, or that their voices were re- 
markably good, taken apart ; the charm lay 
in the peculiar sweetness of tone resulting 
from the exact blending of the two. 

Ingram Swaynestone grumbled in a good- 
tempered way at having to read after this 
performance, and though he read a bit of 
Dickens with great spirit and humour, Everard 
observed that the audience only listened and 
applauded as a matter of duty. Ethel Swayne- 
stone was an accomplished singer, but her 
voice failed to please the rustic ear ; /while the 



THE SILEXCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 219 

choir glees and other amateur music were 
received as a matter of course. But when 
Cyril once more stood on the platform, and 
began in his rich, pure voice, " There was a 
sound of revelry by night," Everard was 
startled at the sudden hush of attention that 
fell on the audience, and surprised at the 
richness of harmony in the well-kuown 
stanzas. When Cyril repeated the line, " But 
hush ! hark ! a deep sound strikes like a rising 
knell ! " the rustics started and looked over 
their shoulders in dismay, and one susceptible 
matron uttered a faint shriek. '' Did ye not 
hear it ? " continued the reciter, in such thrill- 
ing tones that Mrs. Stevens, meeting the 
light of Cyril's blue eyes, took the question 
personally, and replied wildly in the nega- 
tive, to the general consternation. Having 
brought this to a conclusion in such a manner 
that his unlettered audience actually saw the 
ball-room scene, " the cheeks all pale," the 
'' tremblings of distress," and actually heard 
the sounds of approaching doom break in 
upon the brilliant revelry, and witnessed the 



220 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

hurried departure of the troops to the terrible 
field destined to be fertilized with " red rain," 
Cyril paused, to let the tumultuous encores 
subside ; and, at last, when silence ensued, 
began with a plaintive sweetness, chat was in 
strong contrast to the dramatic force and fire 
of the " Eve of Waterloo "— 

'"I remember, I remember, 
The house where I was born. 
The little window where the sun 
Came peeping in at morn. 
He never came a wink too soon, 
Or brought too long a day ; 
But now ' " 

Here Cyril paused, with a deep sigh. 

" ' I often wish the night 
Had borne my breath away.' " 

To Everard's intense surprise, he not only 
saw tears all round him, but found a sensation 
of intense sorrow and longing for the past 
stealing over himself, while the pathos of 
Cyril's voice seemed to break his heart. He 
saw, as they all saw, Malbourne Rectory, and 
Cyril, a boy once more — gentle, happy, and 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 221 

full of sweet, innocent fancies ; and when the 
latter went on, in his quiet voice, so full of 
melodious heart-break — 

" ' And where my brother set 
Tiie laburniTin on his birthday : 
That tree is living yet,' " 

something rushed up into Everard's throat 
and half choked him. He knew that Cyril 
was thinking of a rose-tree he had planted 
on a far-off birthday. 

" ' But now 'tis little joy,' " 

said Cyril, with a voice full of tears — 

" ' To know I'm farther oif from heaven 
Than when I was a boy.' " 

There was no applause to this ; complete 
and tearful silence reigned when he finished 
and stepped quietly down among his friends, 
where Sir Lionel gently rebuked him for 
playing so cruelly on their feelings, and 
added; " As I said to Ingram yesterday, 
such a voice and manner would sway the 
House ; " and every one was relieved when 
the choir struck up, " All among the Barley." 



222 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

Lilian was among the few who did not 
give way to tears during the recital of Hood's 
patlietic little poem, though Everard, who 
hovered near her all the evening, observed 
that her large, soft grey eyes were dewy 
wet, as was their wont when she was moved, 
and her face reflected all the changes on her 
brother's. It was not easy to get very close 
to Lilian, because she was fenced in, as it 
were, by a little ring of children, who clung 
to her skirts, and laid their cheeks against her 
beautiful, slender hands, and were perfectly 
happy with the privilege of touching her. 

'' I do not think," she said, while returning 
to the Rectory through the frosty moonlight 
with Everard, " that Cyril is farther off from 
heaven than when he was a boy. Lideed, it 
seems to me that one must grow nearer to it 
with every day of life, unless one deliberately 
turns from it." 

" You are speaking from your own experi- 
ence," replied Henry. " Men are different. 
To go through early manhood is to be drawn 
over a morass of temptation, into which, with 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 223 

the best intentions, most men sink occa- 
sionally." 

"Not men like Cyril, Henry. He is so 
slightly weighted with flesh that he would 
skim dry- footed over the most quaking quag- 
mire. I know every thought in Cyril's 
heart." 

Everard was half inclined to endorse this 
opinion of Cyril. He recognized in his 
friend's character a certain feminine element, 
that ewig weibliche which Goethe pronounces 
the saving ingredient in human nature. The 
protecting tenderness with which he loved 
the bright, gentle boy, two years his junior 
and less robust than himself, still lived in his 
deep affection for the pious and intellectual 
young priest. Cyril's feelings were sacred to 
him as a woman's ; he feared to sully their 
delicate bloom by harsh allusions to the bare 
facts of life. He was one of the twins, both 
of whom were objects of his lifelong tender- 
ness. And Cyril had his moods, like a woman 
— a peculiarity not without fascination for 
Everard's more thoroughly masculine mind. 



224 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

A soft mood was on Cyril that night. He 
knocked at Everard's door after every one 
had retired for the night, and drew a chair to 
his side by the fire, before which the doctor 
was smoking, and, investing hiraself in one 
of Everard's coats, lighted a pipe of his own. 

" The coolness with which the fellow takes 
my coats ! " growled Everard. 

'^ It is no matter if your coats smell of 
tobacco," replied Cyril, tranquilly ; " I smoke 
so seldom that I have no smoking-coats. To- 
night I am restless." 

" Why so pale and wan, fond lover ? " 
langhed Everard. " Because Marion is gone 
back to Woodlands for two days, I suppose." 

" You may laugh, Henry, but I feel more 
than lost without her. I am helpless, 
separated from the best influence of my life." 

" You are a slave to your feelings ; learn 
to master them." 

"It is true," replied Cyril. ^' You are the 
best and wisest friend ever man had. I never 
regretted doing anything you advised. I 
shall always be grateful to you for making 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 225 

me read up for mathematical honours. I 
needed that discipline to steady me. I have 
never valued you as you deserve ; only now 
and again it flashes upon me that what I take 
for granted is of superior worth. How selfish 
I was about letting Marion join you in the 
Mediterranean ! You little dream how I 
suffered for that. Well, without you, Marion 
and I would have been parted for ever." 

" Without Lilian." • 

" You and Lilian together. How selfish 
and weak I was ! and the harm that came 
from it ! " 

" Oh, come ! It's all right now ; a for- 
gotten story. 

" There are things that can never be for- 
gotten," sighed Cyril, with the pathetic 
intonation that had broken people's hearts in 
the evening. " To give way to a sin, only 
one sin, is like letting a little water through a 
d^^ke. A child may begin it, but once begun, 
the terrible consequences sweep endlessly on, 
a very flood of iniquity. I suppose there is 
nothing which has the power of multiplying 

VOL. I. Q 



226 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

itself like sin. One hideous consequence 
begets a hundred more hideous," continued 
Cyril, staring moodily at the fire, while his 
pipe lay extinct and neglected by his side. 

" I see no pulpit, your reverence," said 
Everard, who was puffing away with quiet 
enjoyment. 

Cyril turned with one of his sudden changes, 
and flashed a mirthful glance of his strange 
blue eyes on his friend, and, replenishing his 
pipe from the tobacco which Keppel had 
brought for Everard on his return from his 
last voyage, broke into a strain of gay affec- 
tionate chat, full of a thousand reminiscences 
of the school-days they passed together under 
Mr. Marvyn's care in the quiet village. 

" What a fellow you were ! " exclaimed 
Cyril, with enthusiasm, after recalling a 
certain story of a Sevres vase ; and, though 
Everard only grunted, he looked at the 
graceful, animated figure before him with an 
affectionate adoration that made him feel it 
would be a pleasure to die for such a man. 
" I was afraid when I smashed the vase," 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 227 

continued Cyril, " and but for you should 
have hidden it. I never shall forget seeing 
you walk up to Lady Swaynestone and tell 
her that we had run up against the vase and 
broken it. I felt such a sneak ; I had done 
it, and you took the blame on yourself, and 
got the punishment. She said no word, but 
delivered you such a box on the ear as made 
mine tingle, and sent you staggering across 
the room. Then her anger found words, and 
you bore it all." 

" I never knew a ruder or more ill-bred 
woman," said Everard. 

" I suppose you got over the box on the 
ear in an hour or two," continued Cyril ; 
'•' but I did not. I was miserable for days, 
hating myself, and yet too frightened to tell 
the truth." 

Everard here produced a yawn of cavernous 
intensity, and dropped his pipe in sheer 
drowsiness ; but Maitland seemed more alert 
than ever, and rose in his restlessness and 
looked out of the window on the dark vault 
of shimmering stars. 



228 THE SILEN'CE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" The night wanes," he said ; " one day 
more, and the weary old year will be done — 
only one day." 

" Ungrateful fellow ! " said Everard, stretch- 
ing himself till he seemed gigantic ; " such 
a good old year. I shall be sorry to say 
good-bye to him, for my part." 

Cyril dropped the curtain and turned to 
the fire, his features all alight. " Let us look 
forward," he said, " to the rosy future. 
Welcome to sixty-three, Harry ; it is full of 
promise for us both ! Good night, dear lad, 
and Grod bless you ! " 

And, with a warm hand-clasp, he took his 
leave, but turned again, lingering, irresolute ; 
and then, with another warm hand-clasp and 
blessing, left his drowsy friend to his slumbers, 
ju'fet as the church clock was striking three. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 229 



CHAPTER IX. 

The last day of tlie year dawned briglit and 
cloudless, a very prince and pearl of winter 
days, and Everard's heart bounded within him 
as he looked out on the ruddy morning, and 
felt it a joy merely to live. 

" I shall long remember sixty-two," he 
thought ; "it has been a good year, and to- 
day will crown and complete the whole. To- 
day I will make sure of my fate." 

The wine of life never before had the 
sparkle and effervescence of that morning ; it 
was almost too much for a sober mind. Had 
Everard been superstitious, or even introspec- 
tive, he would have presaged disaster at hand. 
Instead of which, he rejoiced in his youth, 
and felt as if his body were turned to air, as 



230 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MATTLAND. 

he sprang down the staircase and into the 
sunny breakfast-room. 

Mr. Maitland was late that morning, and 
Cyril read the simple household prayers. 
Everard loved this sweet custom of family 
prayer, remiss as he' often was in assisting 
personally at it ; it seemed so fit and har- 
monious for that holy incense to ascend from 
the altar of the innocent country home, and 
to-day it acquired a sort of pathos from the 
youth and grace of the reader. The scene 
lived long in his mind, irradiated by a sweet 
light of peace and holiness : the kneeling 
children and Lilian, the sunshine touching 
their hair ; the bowed heads of the maids ; the 
dignified bearing of the reader ; the music 
of his voice — a voice soft now, and soothing 
as the murmur of the brook beneath the 
trees, with none of the tragic tones they 
knew so well. Just as Cyril was about to 
pronounce the closing benediction, Mr. Malt- 
land, thinking the prayers done, entered, and, 
seeing how they were employed, dropped on 
his knees in time to receive the lad's blessing. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 231 

The siglit of that grey head, bent thus before 
the young priest's benison, touched Everard 
profoundly, and he felt humbled to think of 
his own world-stained soul by the side of 
these spotless creatures — priests and women 
and children. 

" Lead us not into temptation," said Cyril's 
pure, rich voice, chorused by the innocent 
trebles and Everard's own faltering bass. 

What temptation could possibly befall those 
guileless beings that day ? What harsh dis- 
sonance could ever mar the music of those 
tuneful lives ? he wondered. And he was 
glad that his own faltering petition had gone 
up to Heaven with those of hearts so pure, 
though even he could scarcely fall into 
temptation in that sweet spot, he thought. 

Cyril announced his intention of walking 
into Oldport that bright morning, and Lilian, 
of course, was to go part of the way with 
him. Everard had been asked to shoot over 
some of the Swaynestone covers, and rather 
surprised Cyril, who knew that his friend 
liked sport, by saying that he had declined 



232 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

the shooting-party, and wanted to join the 
pedestrians. 

" You had far better shoot, Henry," he 
said ; *' a mere walk is a stupid thing for 
}ou. You have had no amusement whatever 
since you have been here." 

" To-morrow we plunge into a vortex of 
dissipation," said Everard. " Will you give 
me the first dance, Lilian ? By the way, I 
suppose his reverence has given up these 
frivolities." 

" Oh, I shall dance at Woodlands to- 
morrow," replied Cyril. "Just two square 
dances with Marion, and then, I suppose, 
farewell to such delights." 

" I cannot say that I like to see a clergy- 
man dancing," observed his father, " though 
I danced myself till I was forty, and should 
enjoy a turn with the young people even now." 

" Then, let us have a quiet carpet-dance 
while the boys are here," said Lilian; "just the 
Swaynestones and Garretts and Marion, and 
father shall dance with each of us in turn." 

" Oh yes!" cried Everard; and Cyril chimed 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 233 

in with great animation, " Just one more 
fling for me ; " and Mr. Maitland went off 
laughing, and saying he had nothing to do 
with it — they must ask their mother, and 
Lennie and Winnie jumped for joy, and an- 
nounced that they should not go to bed 
before their elders, and the little fete was 
regarded as a pleasant certainty. 

Cyril kept them waiting some minutes 
after the appointed time for starting. He had 
important letters to write, he said ; and when 
at last he appeared, his face was full of care 
and perplexity. In the mean time, Lilian and 
Everard were very happy on the sunny lawn 
together, visiting the invalid donkey and 
other animals, and wandering about their old 
playground, past the spot where the twins 
used to play at Robinson Crusoe, and where 
Everard helped them build a hut, and re- 
calling a thousand pleasant memories of their 
childish labours and sports. There was hoar- 
frost on the delicate branches of the leafless 
trees, and the sunshine was broken into a 
thousand jewel-like radiances by the little 



234 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

sharp facets of the ice-crystals. There was an 
unwonted sparkle also in Lilian's eyes, and 
a deeper glow on her cheeks than usual. The 
air was like wine. 

• The blacksmith was clinking merrily at his 
glowing forge as they passed along the road, 
and his blithe music carried far in the still 
air. Granfer was sunning himself outside, 
according to custom, ready for a chat with 
anybody, and commanding from his position 
a view of all the approaches to the village. 
Hale, the wheelwright, was there, getting 
some ironwork done, and turned with Granfer 
to look after the trio. 

" -Ay," observed the latter, shaking his 
head wisely, " a viner pair than they twins 
o' ourn you never see, John Hale, so well 
matched they be as Sir Lionel's bays." 

" A pretty pair," replied the wheelwright ; 
" but give me the doctor. There's muscle 
and build ! " 

" Ay," echoed Straun, between the rhythmic 
hammer-strokes ; "a man like he's a credit 
to his vittles." 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 235 

The young doctor's appearance certainly 
justified tliis observation, and his walk and 
bearing fully set off the robust manliness of 
his athletic frame, which was further en- 
hanced by contrast with Cyril's slender grace. 
The friends were of similar height, but 
Henry's shoulders were higher, and made 
him look taller ; his chest and back were far 
broader than Cyril's, and his well-balanced 
limbs were hard with muscle. The suit of 
grey which he wore gave him breadth, and 
displayed his form more fully than did Cyril's 
black broadcloth of severe clerical cut, which 
had, moreover, the well-known effect of 
lessening the outlines of the figure. The 
delicate glow which the sparkling air had 
called into Cyril's worn cheek was very 
different from the firm hue of health in 
Henry's honest face ; and the fearless, frank 
gaze of his bright brown eyes, and the light 
brown moustache, looking golden in the sun- 
shine, gave him an older look than Cyril's 
clean-shaven features wore. 

Hale observed to Granfer that whoever 



236 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

attacked the doctor on a dark night would 
find him an ugly customer, which Grranfer 
admitted, adding that Cyril's strength all went 
to brain-power, in which he was supreme. 
Lilian also observed Henry's athletic appear- 
ance in contrast with her brother's slight 
build, and then she remembered how the 
friends but the day before had been playing 
with the children in the hall, and the fragile- 
looking Cyril had given his muscular friend 
a blow so clean and straight and well-planted 
that the doctor had gone down like a ninepin 
before it, to the great amusement of the 
children and satisfaction of Everard. 

Farmer Long was driving into Oldport in 
his gig, and there beside him sat Mr. Marvyn, 
charmed to see his three pupils together. 
" I shall not see you again, Henry," he said 
regretfully, " unless you stay over Sunday. 
I only came back for the entertainment 
yesterday. I have a parson's week to finish. 
Cyril I shall see again." And so they parted 
with regret, since Everard was greatly 
attached to his old tutor, who had encouraged 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 237 

and developed his taste for natural science, 
and upheld him in his choice of a profession. 
" And I wanted to tell old Marvyn about my 
germ theory," Everard said, as the gig dis- 
appeared. 

" You will be able to tell the whole world 
soon," replied Lilian, to whom the theory 
had been confided and explained that very 
morning. 

" Not yet," said Everard ; " it takes years 
of patient study and experiment to verify a 
scientific theory." 

" Old Hal always was a patient fellow," 
Cyril observed. " Do you remember the rows 
about his dissections in his bedroom, Lill ? " 

Lilian replied that she remembered the 
odours, and they all laughed over the old 
schoolroom jokes and catastrophes, and were 
very happy as they climbed the hillside by 
a field-path, leaving the road below them. 
Afterwards Everard remembered the rare and 
affectionate expression, " Old Hal." And now 
in the bright sunshine he was pleased to see 
Cyril so like his old self, careless, cordial. 



238 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

and light-hearted, all the asceticism and sad- 
ness put away ; ambition, toil, and care com- 
pletely forgotten. He knew that Cyril loved 
Marion truly, and would be happy with her, 
and yet it struck him that morning that his 
strong, half-instinctive affection for his twin 
sister touched a yet deeper chord in his 
nature. Now that Marion was away, there 
was a greater ease about the twins ; each 
seemed to develop the other's thoughts in 
some mysterious manner. They laughed to 
each other, and walked hand-in-hand like 
children, seeing everything through each 
other's eyes — the still, sunny winter fields 
and brown woods stretching away to the sea, 
the flocks of weird white sea-gulls, the occa- 
sional rabbit or pheasant starting up before 
them, the larks, silent now, fluttering over 
the grassy furrows^ the bright berries in 
copse and hedgerow, the sheep peacefully 
munching the mangolds a solitary shepherd 
was cutting for them in a lonely field. They 
called each other Cyll and Lill, abbreviations 
none else ever used ; they contradicted each 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 239 

other as they never dreamed of contradicting 
anybody else. 

Everard walked along, sometimes by their 
side, sometimes behind them, as the nature 
of the path obliged, and listened to them 
and loved them. The twins were never so 
delicious to him as when tog:ether in his 
familiar presence, of which they seemed to 
make no account. So long as those two 
could meet together thus, an immortal child- 
hood would be theirs, he thought ; age could 
never rob the beautiful bond between them 
of its bloom. Presently they quarrelled. 
Lilian sat on a felled tree in the woods 
through which they were passing ; Cyril 
leant up against a tree ; and Everard looked 
on with amusement, and loved them all the 
more in their childishness. 

" Oh, you babes in the wood ! " he cried 
at last ; whereupon Cyril flashed upon him 
one of his droll glances, and laughed. 

" Come, Lill," he said, " I forgive you this 
time." 

Absolute harmony and utter unconscious- 



240 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

ness of past anger was established between 
tbem on the instant, and Everard was 
amused to hear them plunge straightway 
into a grave discussion upon the limits of 
free-will. 

They were now high on the crest of the 
hill, and could see the lovely stretches of 
down sweeping away to the unseen sea on 
one side, while on the other the Swaynestone 
lands sloped down with wood and park and 
farmstead till they merged in the horizon, 
which was broken here and there by tiny 
blue bays of inland sea on the north. 

There was no sound ; all the song-birds, 
even the robin, were hushed by the frost, and 
the whole landscape lay silent before them, 
folded in the awful purity of winter sunshine. 
The shadows in the hills and woods were blue, 
and distant objects looked immensely far in 
the violet haze of the winter morning. Here 
they paused, deep in their argument, and 
looked down over the tranquil woods and 
saw the white front of Swaynestone House 
gleaming in the sun. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 241 

Down in a low-lying fallow field there 
were some black specks motionless in the 
furrows ; suddenly they rose in a black cloud 
of wings, and there were a hundred silver 
flashes against the belt of coppice bordering 
the field. Higher still the cloud rose, and 
swift gleams of black and silver flashed in 
rhythmic sequence against the pure blue of 
the sky, and the weird wail of the plover 
was heard faintly, as the flock floated in a 
dazzle of white bodies and black wings over 
the coppice till they reached another field, 
into the furrows of which they dropped 
motionless. While Everard and Lilian were 
watching the plovers, they did not observe 
that Oyril plunged into the wood behind 
them and put his hand into the hollow of a 
tree. 

"" I was looking for a squirrel's nest," he 
said, strolling back again. ''Listen; I will 
imitate a chaffinch." 

It was a trick they used to practice when 
parted from each other in the woods, and 
they looked down over the roof of the 



VOL. I. 



242 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

Temple, which lay among the trees below 
them, and thought of their old rambles for 
nuts and blackberries, when little Alma 
would often join them and tell them where 
to find heavy-laden boughs and brambles. 
Suddenly from among the trees rose the call 
of another chaffinch, exactly corresponding to 
Cyril's. 

" Some children at play," said Cyril, care- 
lessly ; " Lennie and Winnie, perhaps. They 
were going to Swaynestone to slide. I must 
get on, Everard ; I have a lot to do in 
Oldport." 

" ' Jog on, jog on, tlie footpath way. 
And merrily hent the stile-a : 
A merry heart goes all the day. 
Your sad tires in a mile-a,' " 

Everard sang out in his deep voice, as the 

trio continued their walk at a mended pace. 

After another mile through hanging woods 

of beech and sycamore, they descended a hill 

and climbed another crested with coppice, 

through which they passed, brushing the 

heavy hoar-frost from the dead leaves and 

twigs as they went, and pausing for Lilian 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 243 

to sliow them tlie haunt of a little wren in 
a bank. The tiny bird, attracted by some 
crumbs sprinkled on her muff, came cautiously 
out, climbed up her arm, pecked its dainty 
meal, and suffered itself to be raised on the 
muff to the level of her face, in which it 
gazed confidingly, even venturing to peck at 
a little stray fluff of a curl which stole over 
her neck. Everard and Maitland stood apart 
and watched this pleasant comedy. 

" You had the same power over animals as 
Lilian," Everard observed to Cyril. " What 
is its secret, I wonder ? " 

" There are three moral factors," replied 
Cyril : " perfect self-control, that warm and 
intelligent affection which we call sympathy, 
and innocence. Lilian is the most guileless 
human being on the face of this earth. There 
must also be some physical attraction, I sus- 
pect — some mesmeric or electric power, of 
which we know little." 

" But surely you possess the three moral 
factors ; how is it you have lost your power ? 
Lilian was saying only last night that the 



244 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

good draw nearer heaven with increasing 
years, and you, whose life has been not 
merely stainless, but austere " 

" Henry," interrupted Cyril, in his most 
pathetic voice, " I am a man ! " 

Lilian had replaced her tiny friend at its 
house-door, and now joined the young men, 
who went on their way, Everard struck and 
startled by the heart-broken accent Cyril laid 
on the word man, and wondering if the 
morbid tone he had of late detected in the 
young priest's mind did not almost verge on 
insanity. 

At the end of the coppice through which 
they were passing was a stile standing on 
a steep bank, which led by rough steps down 
into the high-road, and here they parted, the 
twins once more falling into discord, each 
offering Henry as a companion to the other, 
and declining to selfishly appropriate him, 
until he laughingly suggested that he was 
no mere chattel, but a being endowed with 
will ; also that his will decided to take the 
homeward path with Lilian — a decision which 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 245 

evidently satisfied Cyril, who sprang down 
the steep bank, and turned, on reaching the 
road, to the stile — over which the other two 
leaned — with a laughing face, and lifted his 
hat in his own graceful manner. They gazed 
after the light, well-carried figure for a 
moment or two, little imagining how all the 
light died out of the bright young face when 
it turned from them, what a weight of trouble 
lined the clear brow and drew down the 
corners of the delicate mouth, and added ten 
years, at least, to his apparent age, and then 
they began to retrace their steps through the 
wood. 

" It is like old times," Lilian observed. 
" Cyril and I are growing old and wise, 
Henry ; we are seldom like that now. We 
seem to grow apart, which we must expect." 

" ' The old order changeth, giving place to 
new,' "quoted Everard. "The new may be 
better, but one does not like to part with 
the old," he added falteringly, after a pause. 

" The old — was good," replied Lilian, 
rather absently ; and the perfect self-command 



246 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

of which her brother had spoken suddenly 
deserted her, with the consciousness that the 
story of her life and love was approaching a 
crisis, and the two walked on in silence. 

Everard's bright spirits seemed to have 
flown onwards in the wake of Cyril, his heart 
sank down like a thing of lead, and a dread- 
ful vision of all his sins and shortcomings, 
his weaknesses and failings, rose ghastly and 
oppressive before him. Henry Everard ap- 
peared to him as the merest rag of a man — 
the most complete failure that ever issued 
from the workshops of nature and education. 
He stole a glance at Lilian, walking with her 
light step and airy carriage by his side ; a 
sweet picture of sinless womanhood, her 
cheek flushed with purest rose by exercise, 
her eyes cast down contrary to their wont, 
her hair touched into golden tints by the 
sunlight, and the outline of her form traced 
clearly against a background of frosted hazel 
boughs, and his spirit died within him. 
AVhat had he to offer her ? How could he 
ever dare? And yet Lilian turned 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 247 

under the stress of his ardent gaze, and met 
his eyes for one swift moment ; then her looks 
resumed their commerce with the mossy, 
frost- veined path, and a rich rush of crimson 
flooded her face. 

^' LiHan," began Henry, breathlessly, " we 
have been great friends all our lives." 

^' Yes," replied Lilian, regaining her natural 
mental poise ; " Cyril and I always appro- 
priate each other's goods." 

'^ Supposing Cyril out of the question." he 
added hastily, " would you not care for — 
value my friendship ? In short, am I not 
your own personal friend ? Don't you care 
a little for me for my own sake, Lilian ? " 

" Indeed I do, dear Henry," she replied, 
a little tremulously. " There is no friend for 
whom I — whom I value more highly. That 
is — yes, we are real friends." 

" You were always dear to me, very dear — 
as dear as Marion herself," continued Henry ; 
"but you have become the dearest of all 
since I scarcely know when — the very dearest 
human being on earth. Oh, Lilian, the truth 



248 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

is that I love you with all my heart ! I have 
loved you long ; I cannot tell when I began." 
" That is not the important question," 
returned Lilian, with a little smile dawning 
about her lips and eyes. "The question is, 
how long do you mean to go on ? " 

The same quaint, half-humorous, half- 
pathetic expression which so often lighted 
Cyril's pale blue eyes now gleamed from 
Lilian's gray orbs, moistened with the sweet 
dew which so frequently enhanced their lustre, 
and even in that passionate moment Henry 
observed this, and thought how closely his 
love and his friendship were bound together, 
and realized that Cyril was dearer than ever 
lo him now that Lilian was his. 

The answer to Lilian's playful earnest was 
the old immemorial assertion of lovers, re- 
peated with endless delightful iteration, long 
drawn out w^th Heaven knows how much 
unnecessary sweetness. The old unvarying 
song the birds sing every spring, with a fresh 
charm that never cloys, though the white- 
headed man heard it in his childhood, and in 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 249 

the days when he too swelled the many- voiced 
marriage hymn which ascends perpetually 
from the youth and strength of earth ; the 
old eternal song which is yet the freshest 
sound that ever falls on the ear of youth, and 
fills it with a sweet bewildered surprise ;* the 
theme which changed Eden from a prison to 
a home ; — this delicious melody was sung over 
again in the wintry woods that day, when all 
the birds were hushed by the frost, and the 
earth lay still in its winter trance. 

The singing of this pleasant duet took a 
long time, and the low midwinter sun passed 
its meridian and travelled some distance on 
its westward way, while they strolled slowly 
on with many pauses, slowly enough to chill 
blood not warmed by the current of vital 
flame which young Love sends through the 
veins, until they reached the spot above the 
Temple, where they watched the plovers' 
flight in the morning. They paused there. 

At that moment a delicate music floated up 
from the valley, the well-known, cheery 
chiming of the waggon-bells. Nearer and 



250 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

nearer the golden harmony swelled, stronger 
and stronger the fairy peals waxed, as the 
team approached on its way along the high- 
road to Oldport, till the soft chimes came 
tumbling in the full power of their sweet 
turbulence upon the clear, still air. 

" Those are our wedding-bells," said 
Everard, as they passed on and let the 
melodious clashing die away behind them in 
the distance. ^' It is a good omen," 



THE SILEKCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 251 



CHAPTER X. 

The irony of fate will often have it so that 
when life gains its culminating point of 
happiness, it is but one degree from the 
darkest hour of overthrow ; just as the blossom 
has reached its sweetest bloom, the blighting 
frost comes, and all is over. When Everard 
and Lilian exchanged the promise whose 
sweetness was to live through so many dark 
and lonely years, they little dreamed that any 
peril was near them in the silent wood. They 
saw no crouching figure trembling behind 
the hazel bushes ; they did not guess that 
any eye, save those of the wild creatures of 
the wood, witnessed their betrothal ; and 
they went on their way rejoicing, making 
plans for the happy future they were to 
spend side by side. 



252 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

When Ben Lee went home to dinner that 
day, the young groom, Judkins, accompanied 
him, as he often did now, finding a strange 
solace to his own grief in that of the troubled 
father, and pleased that the old man turned 
to him for consolation. He usually left Lee 
at the door, but on this occasion Mrs. Lee 
came out and beckoned him in. 

" She's gone to meet him," she said ex- 
citedly. "• She made believe to go and gather 
a bit of brushwood in the garden, and she's 
off up the hill to the wood. He must have 
passed an hour ago, and there was the 
whistle of a chaffinch for signal. I heard her 
whistle back, the deceitful faggot, though 
she thought I was safe out of the way, and 
she's been watching for an opportunity ever 
since. Straight up the hill she went, Lee, 
not twenty minutes gone." 

While Mrs. Lee was speaking, the two men 
had followed her through the house, and now 
stood in the back garden, whence they could 
see the whole slope of the hill, with its 
woody crest traced clear against the blue 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 253 

midday sky. Beneath this crest the trees 
had been cleared in a straight, broad strip 
about the breadth of the little garden. 

" Look here, Ben ! " cried Judkins, seizing 
the arm of Lee, who was striding rapidly 
through the garden, and was about to ascend 
the treeless slope ; " don't you do nothing 
rash, now." 

Lee's face was purple, and he shook the 
younger man off with a muttered oath, when 
the latter once more caught him by the arm, 
and pointed upwards, with a cry. 

" I knew it ; I always knew it. The damned 
scoundrel ! " 

Just within the shadow of the wood, which 
partly screened them, were two figures, the 
inner and less seen, that of a woman in dark 
winter clothing ; the outer, that of a man in 
a suit of grey. The light hazel twigs im- 
pinged but slightly on the latter figure, so 
that its outline was distinctly seen, and the 
face itself was even visible sideways for a 
moment. The female figure, on the contrary, 
with the face hidden in the other's arm, and 



254 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAliTD. 

its dark outlines less striking by their colour, 
could only be guessed at. The vision lasted 
but a moment ; the figures moved on over 
the woodland path. The hazels were denser 
there, and the path turned into the wood, so 
that the pair were gradually hidden, and soon 
completely vanished from sight. 

" I'm witness, mind," Judkins muttered, 
while Lee groaned aloud. '• You and me saw 
him go through the village this morning in 
those grey clothes and that hat." 

So saying, the young man turned and 
went rapidly back, avoiding the garden, and 
plunging into the shadow of the trees which 
bordered it on either side, while Lee toiled 
up the hill. He had not gone far before 
Alma appeared at the spot where the hazels 
grew thin, and issued from the wood. She 
started slightly when she saw her father, but 
soon regained her composure, and advanced 
towards him. 

" What were you doing in the wood ? " he 
asked harshly. 

" I only went up for a little fresh air this 
fine day," she replied gently. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 255 

" Went up to hear the birds sing, perhaps," 
lie continued, with savage sarcasm. 

" There are no birds singing now," said 
Alma, sadly. " Even the robin is silent in 
the frost." 

" Ay, and the chaffinch. Who were you 
speaking to a minute ago ? " 

" Nobody," she replied, looking surprised. 

" That's a damned lie. Alma ! " 

" I have spoken to no human being but 
you and mother this week past," said Alma, 
in a tone of weary apathy. 

They had reached the garden now, and 
Alma went in, scarcely hearing the impreca- 
tion that burst from her maddened father's 
lips. 

Lee remained behind her ; then re-ascended 
the hill and picked up a little scrap of paper 
he had seen Alma tear in halves and drop 
when she thought herself unobserved. He 
pieced it together, and read, written in a 
disguised, backward-slanting hand, " At dusk 
to-night. The old spot. Important." 

" Oh, Alma ! " he cried ; " my pretty 



256 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

Alma ! my only child ! " Then he turned 
back, his brow darkening as he went, till 
the momentary tenderness was quite effaced, 
and he muttered fiercely beneath his breath, 
" I'll kill him ! I'll kill him ! " 

It was late when the unconscious lovers 
reached home. The bell was ringing for 
luncheon, and Mark Antony wa& sitting on 
the doorstep, looking very cross at his 
mistress's delay ; for he was a cat of regular 
habits, and particularly disliked waiting for 
meals. He received Lilian rather distantly, 
accepted Henry's caress with haughty dis- 
dain, and then boxed Snip's ears for barking 
inopportunely. 

" Oh, I say, Henry ! " cried Lennie, who 
was bounding into the dining-room with 
fresh-brushed hair and clean collar, " ain't 
you in a mess ? " 

Henry had slipped on a damp bank by a 
stream, in trying to gather some ivy coloured 
crimson and gold for Lilian, and a great 
brown-and-green stain showed strikingly on 
the knee of his grey suit. In two bounds 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 257 

he was in his room, and in three seconds 
out of the stained suit and into another, 
consisting of a black coat and lower garments 
of the same tone of grey as those discarded. 
The grey suit was folded neatly and placed 
on a chair ; and he appeared at the table in 
less than five minutes in that perfect neatness 
and cleanliness which so especially distinguish 
the English gentleman. 

No one observed his change of dress, though 
everybody had noticed the morning's grey suit. 
It was rather light in colour for the season, 
according to the fashion of that day, and had 
commended itself to Everard from the sense 
of cleanliness that light colours always 
afforded him. Lilian, indeed, observed that 
the grey coat was replaced by a black one, 
and, in speculating afterwards on the subject, 
she came to the conclusion that the black 
had probably been assumed for indoor wear, 
as being cooler than the thick frieze. 

Marion appeared at luncheon, having 
dropped in on her way to Oldport, where 
she had errands in connection with the New 

VOL. I. S 



258 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

Year's ball at Woodlands. She made a 
charming little face of disappointment at the 
non-appearance of Cyril ; but the disappoint- 
ment by no means spoilt her appetite, and 
she kept them all alive by her sprightly 
conversation and playful, endearing ways. 
She petted Mr. Maitland in a most enchant- 
ing manner ; teased the children and the 
cat ; was impertinent to Lilian when gently 
rebuked for these misdemeanours ; snubbed 
her brother, according to her usual custom ; 
and was very tender in the little cares she 
lavished on Mrs. Maitland. Her vivacity, 
and the bright, warm-coloured style of her 
beauty, and the aerial lightness of her form 
made a good foil to Lilian's repose and gentle 
dignity, the quieter tones of her colouring, 
and the more majestic development of her 
figure. 

Everard regarded his sister as a charming 
wayward child, loved her little rebellious 
ways, and put up contentedly with all her 
naughtiness. He was six years her senior, 
and had been the youngest of the family till 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 259 

her birth, which cost their mother her life ; 
and then the orphan baby became the object 
of his tenderest care, and he soothed away 
his own sorrowful sense of orphanhood by 
hovering over the tiny sister's slumbers, and 
amusing her waking moments by all kinds 
of childish devices. It was partly for the 
baby's sake that he was never sent to school ; 
partly also in obedience to the request of his 
dead mother, who judged, from her experience 
of the elder boys, that the benefits of public 
schools were overbalanced by their contamina- 
tions and temptations. All his life he had 
been Marion's devoted slave, and, like other 
despots, she received his devotion with a 
satisfaction not unmingled with contempt. 

" What on earth is Cyril doing in Oldport 
all day ? " Marion asked. " What business 
can he possibly have ? " 

" Upon my word, I cannot imagine," 
replied Mr. Maitland, who had not considered 
the subject before. 

And Marion's question set Everard think- 
ing. Cyril was not likely to make many 



260 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

purchases in the little country town ; his 
affairs were in the hands of London lawyers ; 
he could not want money ; he had no friends 
there; in short, it was very odd that he 
should spend the day in a little market town 
on business that could not be postponed, and 
so miss the partly expected' visit of Marion. 

Marion, however, carried Mr. Maitland off 
with her after luncheon, on his remembering 
that he had certain commissions to execute, 
and Lilian drove to Swaynestone to pay her 
long-promised call on Lady Swaynestone, 
and advise her about her charities according 
to her request. She had a thousand things 
to do, and was much troubled that she could 
not visit a certain Widow Dove, who lived 
in a lonely cottage on the down, that after- 
noon, and carry her a little present of money. 
So Henry, finding that he could not be 
allowed to accompany Lilian to Lady Swayne- 
stone'sj since the ladies wished to discuss 
business, offered to be Lilian's almoner, 
and was eagerly accepted. 

He saw Lilian and the children off in the 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 261 

pony-carriage, and tlien betook himself to 
writing some letters in the room called 
Lilian's ; and, having done this, he re- 
membered that Lilian had lamented having 
no time to frame and hang the photograph 
of Gruercino's picture, and did this for her, 
the frame having been already furnished by 
the village carpenter. 

In the mean time, at about three o'clock, 
Cyril appeared in the drawing-room, where 
Mrs. Maitland was lying on her couch. He 
had finished his business, got some luncheon 
at Oldport, and been picked up just out of 
the town by Farmer Long, who drove him 
home in his gig, he said. Then, after ten 
minutes' chat with his mother, he went to his 
room, teUing her that he wished to get a 
sermon ready for the next Sunday, when he 
was to be at work again, and requesting that 
he might not be disturbed till dinner. 

All this Mrs. Maitland told Everard, when 
he looked into the drawing-room a few 
minutes later. 

" I begged him to put off his sermon- 



262 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

writing till another day," she said, " for he 
looked woefully haggard and weary ; but I 
could not persuade him. He says he feels so 
burdened until he has got his Sunday's 
sermons off his mind. Just like his father. 
He always does his sermons on Monday, if 
he can, and feels a free man for the rest of 
the week." 

" It is rather odd," Everard observed, 
'' that Cyril should spend so much time in 
writing his sermons ; for he is supposed to 
be an extempore preacher." 

" Last Sunday's sermon was certainly 
extempore," his mother replied ; " he had 
some manuscript, but scarcely referred to it 
more than once. I wonder if I am a very 
foolish old woman, Henry, for thinking that 
Cyril has a really singular gift in preaching ? 
His voice appears to me to be something 
quite out of the common. And I have heard 
John Bright's oratory, and Gladstone's, and 
D'Israeli's, the best preachers in our own 
Church, and those brilliant Roman Catholics 
who attracted such crowds to Notre Dame." 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 263 

" I think, Mrs. Maitland," replied Everard, 
who was rather distraught in his manner, 
since he was nerving himself to introduce the 
topic of his engagement, " that Cyril will be 
reckoned the greatest preacher in the Church 
of England." 

Then some people called, and Everard 
made his escape as soon as he decently could, 
and at about a quarter to four he started on 
his walk to Widow Dove's with a light heart. 
His road was, as far as the wood above the 
Temple, the same as that he had pursued so 
happily with Lilian an hour or two before, 
and it filled him with unspeakable rapture to 
recall the delightful incidents in his morning 
walk as he went, so that he was dreamy and 
unobservant, and scarcely spoke to the people 
he met on his solitary ramble, a thing very 
unusual with him. 

The sun was declining redly and with 
great pomp of cloud scenery in the west — a 
glorious ending, he thought, of the happiest 
of happy years ; and that was the only clue 
he had to the time of his starting, when 



264 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

referring in memory to this fatal walk, since 
he omitted, in his dreamy abstraction, to look 
at his watch, though he was naturally so 
precise in his habits, and had such a keen 
sense of the passage of time. 

When he reached Widow Dove's lonely 
dwelling, he found it cold and dark, the 
door shut, and no smoke issuing from the 
chimney ; the widow and her daughter were 
evidently gone away for a day or two. He 
felt a sort of eerie shiver at the darkness and 
gloom of the solitary homestead, though he 
little dreamt that his fate or the fate of 
those he loved could be influenced by a 
circumstance so trifling as the emptiness of a 
secluded cottage. 

Then he turned his face homewards in 
the gathering dusk, choosing another way 
from that by which he came, by that strange 
fatality which pursues doomed men, and 
strode gaily and swiftly along over the open 
down, every dimple and hollow of which 
were familiar to him from boyhood. Some 
stars were out now, sparkling keenly in the 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 265 

clear, frosty sky, in which the moon had not 
yet risen. Over hedge and ditch, and through 
copses, and round plantations Everard sped 
blithely, until he approached the high-road 
leading to Malbourne. Here his pace slack- 
ened, and he listened carefully for the sound 
of Long's waggon-bells, which he thought 
would carry far in the frosty stillness. 

But there was no repetition of the fairy 
peals which rang so blithely in the morning, 
and he got as far as the wheelwright's 
corner without having heard them. Grove, 
the waggoner, was to bring him a parcel 
from Oldport, a little parcel that he feared 
might be forgotten if he did not intercept it. 
Here he met Grranfer, toiling slowly along 
on his way to spend the evening at Hale's, 
whose wife was one of his numerous de- 
scendants. Had Granfer heard the team go 
by ? he asked. 

" No, I ain't a yeard 'em since this 
marning, zo to zay ; not as I knows on, 
Dr. Everard," Granfer replied, with his usual 
circumlocution. " I 'lows I yeared 'em's 



266 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

marning, zure enougli. They was a-gwine 
into Oldport, as I hreckons, as you med zay 
zumwheres about noon or thereabouts. No, 
I 'lows I ain't a-yeared nor a bell zince that 
there ; not as I knows on, I ain't." 

After some further conversation, Everard 
strolled slowly on in the direction of Long's 
farm, full of anxiety about his precious packet, 
which he knew would fade. Near Long's he 
heard that the team had returned some time 
before, and his packet had been sent to the 
Eectory. 

Striking across the fields, he returned in 
the deepening night, without going through 
the village, and, meeting with a little delay 
in consequence of an old gap having been 
recently stopped in a fence — a good stiff 
bullfinch — he gained the Rectory at about 
six o'clock, thus missing, to his disgust^ the 
charmed hour of tea. There, when he entered, 
was the precious little box on the hall table, 
and he caught it up, and was going to un- 
fasten it in his room, when Winnie waylaid 
him at the foot of the stairs, eager for a romp, 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 267 

which romp resulted in Winnie, while being- 
tossed high in air, throwing back her head 
and striking him a tremendous blow in the 
eye with it, so that he set her hastily down 
with an exclamation of pain, and put his hand 
to his face. 

" You've done it now, Winnie ; blinded 
me," he said. 

" Oh, Henry, I am so sorry ! " sobbed 
Winnie. " And they won't let me go to 
Long's tea-party to-morrow ; it was only on 
Sunday I made Ingram Swaynestone's nose 
bleed." 

" Never mind, darling/' said Everard, kiss- 
ing and soothing her ; " it was not your fault 
at all." 

Then he promised to let no one know 
of his black eye, and to do his best to cure 
it ; to which intent he procured raw meat 
from the kitchen, and went to his room, 
taking Winnie with him to help him unpack 
the parcel, which contained some choice 
white flowers. These he bid the child take 
to her sister at once, while he shut himself 



268 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

up, and tried to subdue the rising inflamma- 
tion in the bruised eye to the best of his 
ability. 

He was anxious to avoid such an ornament 
as a black eye on his own account, as well 
as the child's, since a black eye does not 
improve a man's appearance at a ball, nor 
is it in keeping with popular ideas of a newly 
accepted lover. So he doctored himself till 
it was time to get ready for dinner, and then, 
seeing the grey suit lie on the chair as he 
had placed it in the morning, he sponged the 
green stain away from it. Scarcely had he 
done this when he saw other stains, some still 
wet, and, procuring some fresh water, sponged 
these also. The water was red when he 
finished. 

" Blood," he thought, being well used to 
such stains. ''Did I cut myself anywhere, I 
wonder ? " 

He did not, however, waste much thought 
on this trivial incident, but sponged the 
garments clean in his tidy way, and left the 
crimsoned water in the basin, where it subse- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 269 

quently gave Martha, the housemaid, what 
she described as a turn. Then he made his 
appearance in the drawing-room, carefully 
avoiding the lights, and gave rather a lame 
account of himself since his return from the 
fruitless errand to Widow Dove's. He was 
rewarded for his labour on Lilian's behalf, by 
the sweetest smile in the world, and was 
enchanted to observe at dinner that Lilian 
wore one of the white roses from his bouquet 
in her dress. 

Cyril did not appear at dinner; he sent 
word that one of his bad headaches had come 
on, and begged that he might be undisturbed 
for the night. 

" Poor dear Cyril ! " said Lilian ; " it is so 
hard for a man to have headaches. His are 
like mine ; nothing but quiet heals them." 

" Their very headaches are twins," Mr. 
Maitland observed. " Why, Henry," he 
added, " what have you done to your eye ? 
You appear to have been in the wars, man." 

Winnie, who was standing by the fire, 
here threw an imploring glance at Henry, 



270 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

and completely scattered what few talents he 
had ever possessed for dissimulation. 

" I — I — I knocked my head against some- 
thing in the dark," he stammered ; '' I — it 
was purely accidental." 

" What a nasty blow ! " said Lilian, ob- 
serving it ; " you will have a black eye. What 
a pity ! Ah, sir ! perhaps that accounts for 
your rudeness to me this evening." 

"My rudeness, Lilian? What can you 
mean ? " asked Henry. 

" Yes, your incivility to me, and also to 
Mark Antony, who was actually doing you 
the honour of running to meet you — the 
haughty Mark himself Think of that ! " 

" I can only apologize to both with the 
deepest humility," he replied, stroking the 
petted animal, who was dining with his usual 
urbane condescension at Lilian's side ; " but 
indeed I am quite innocent, having seen 
neither you nor puss since you started for 
Swaynestone." 

Then Lilian told how at tea-time, on pass- 
ing from the back regions towards the 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 271 

drawing-room, accompanied by her usual 
body-guard, Mark Antony, she had seen Henry 
run across the back hall towards the staircase ; 
had called to him about Widow Dove's com- 
mission ; while the cat, with a mew of delight, 
had bounded after him. He had rushed on, 
however, in the dusk, a grey, ghost-like figure, 
and flitted up the stairs to his room, followed 
by Mark, whom he expelled ignominiously, 
shutting the door after him. 

" You must be under some delusion," 
replied Henry, utterly confounded. " I saw 
no cat when I came in." 

" It was growing very dark," Lilian said, 
*' and Martha was late in lighting the hall- 
lamp to-night, for which, indeed, I afterwards 
rebuked her." 

" The lamps were lighted " Henry 

began, and then stopped at the sight of 
Winnie, who was gesticulating in an agonized 
manner behind her mother's chair. " This 
sounds extremely ghost-like," he added ; " I 
hope it bodes me no misfortune. It must 
have been my wraith, Lilian." 



272 TEE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" It sounds rather eerie, certainly," inter- 
posed Mr. Maitland. '' Lilian dear, I hope 
you are not going to take to seeing people's 
wraiths. It gives me the most fearful jumps 
to think of" 

" I am creeping from head to foot," added 
Mrs. Maitland, laughing ; " and on the last 
night of the year, too. Dr. Everard, what 
prescriptions have you for young ladies who 
take to ghost-seeing ? " 

"I am going to ask you for another cutlet, 
sir. My appetite will convince you that I, at 
least, am no illusion, but a substantial reality," 
said Henry, instead of replying. 

" There never was any deception about 
you, Harry lad," returned Mr. Maitland, 
cordially ; " you were always real." 

The evening which ensued ought to have 
been very happy, but somehow it was not. 
A vague uneasiness was in the air ; Cyril's 
absence created a void in the family party, 
and the children, who were permitted to stay 
up for the New Year, grew tired, and conse- 
quently tiresome. Mr. Maitland, when he 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 273 

recovered from his after-dinner nap, which 
was unusually long, read them one of Dickens's 
Christmas tales, and although it was pleasant 
to Henry to sit by Lilian and watch her 
beautiful white hands at their busy task of 
embroidering some silken flowers, he was not 
sorry when, the servants having been as- 
sembled in the drawing-room, a pleasant 
clinking of glasses was heard, and, the usual 
ceremonies of toasting and hand-shaking gone 
through, the bells began drowsily chiming the 
Old Year out from the belfry hard by. 

They all went into the hall then, Mr. 
Maitland opened the door wide to let the New 
Year in, and Lilian and Henry, hand-in-hand, 
gazed trustfully out into the starry sky to 
meet it, their hearts full of the sweetest hopes. 

When Henry went to his room soon after, 
he could not refrain from opening Cyril's 
door, which adjoined his own, and just looking 
in, thinking he might be asleep. He pushed 
the door very softly, and introduced his head. 
Only a faint light was burning from one 
candle, and by this dim ray he saw Cyril 

VOL. I. T 



274 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

kneeling half-dressed before a picture of the 
Crucifixion. His face was hidden in his 
hands, and he was sobbing in a low, sup- 
pressed way. 

Henry shut the door softly, and stealthily 
withdrew, vexed at his own intrusion. 
" That is not the way to cure the head- 
ache," he mused, half awed at the manner 
in which the young priest received the New 
Year. Yet who could venture to say that 
watching and fasting and tearful contrition 
were not eminently fitting, in one set apart 
for holy functions, at such a season ? "I 
wonder," Everard continued to speculate, 
" what infinitesimal peccadilloes the poor 
lad is mourning with all that expenditure of 
nervous energy ? " Then he thought of his 
own weaknesses and shortcomings, and felt 
pitchy black in contrast with a soul so white. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 275 



CHAPTER XI. 

The wheelwright's house stood just on the 
crest of the steep little hill which carries the 
pilgrim down into the village of Malbourne 
with a rapid acceleration of pace, and which 
ends where the four roads meet. The Sun 
Inn stands at one corner, facing the incoming 
pilgrim cheerfully on its left ; and opposite 
this tidy hostelry stands a sign-post ap- 
parently waving four gaunt arms distractedly, 
and seeming to bid the wayfarer pause 
beneath the thatched roof of the little inn, 
whether his journey's end lie onwards over 
the high-road, or oblige him to turn aside 
through the village by church and Rectory. 

On the traveller's right, facing him, is a 
cottage, and facing that is the wheelwright's 
yard, full of timber and waggons half built or 



276 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

broken. The wlieelwriglit's dwelling, stand- 
ing above the grassy yard, commands a fine 
view of the village nestled under the down 
and the sweeping parklands of Northover on 
one side, and on the other looks over an un- 
dulating landscape to the sea. It is a cheery 
little house, pleasantly shaded by a couple of 
shapely lindens in front, and close to the 
high-road, upon which its front windows and 
deep-timbered porch give. 

On New Year's Eve the wheelwright's 
windows were all lighted up, and there was 
even a lantern at the little front wicket, 
which gazed out like a friendly eye, as if to 
bid people enter and make merry within, and 
threw a yellow fan- shaped radiance on the 
steep road without. The porch door was 
open, and disclosed a passage lighted by a 
candle in a tin sconce adorned with holly. 
On one side, an open door revealed the chill 
dignities of the best parlour, which not even 
a blazing fire and abundance of holly-berries 
could quite warm. 

On a haircloth sofa in this state apartment 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 277 

sat Mrs. Hale, of Malbourne Mill, and Mrs. 
Wax, the schoolmaster's wife, both exceed- 
ingly upright, and both holding a handker- 
chief of Gargantuan dimensions over the 
hands they crossed in their laps. Opposite, 
in a horsehair arm-chair, sat an elderly lady 
in a plum-coloured silk gown, gold chain, 
and a splendid cap, also very upright, and 
also holding a Gargantuan handkerchief. 
This was Mrs. Cave, the wife of a small 
farmer in the neighbourhood. 

Each lady's face wore a resigned expression, 
mingled with the calm exultation natural to 
people who know themselves to be the most 
aristocratic persons in a social gathering. 
Each realized that Wiirde hat JBiirde, and felt 
herself equal to the occasion ; each paused, 
before making or replying to an observation, 
to consider the most genteel subjects of 
conversation and the most genteel language 
in which to clothe them. 

" Remorkably fine weather for the time of 
year, ladies," observed Mrs. Hale, soothing 
her soul by the pleasant rustle her shot-silk 



278 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

gown made when she smoothed it, and 
regretting that her gold chain was not so 
new-fashioned as Mrs. Cave's ; while, on the 
other hand, she experienced a delicious 
comfort in meditating on the superiority of 
iier brooch, which was a large flat pebble in 
a gold frame. 

" Indeed, mem, it is most seasonable, 
though trying for delicate chestes," returned 
Mrs. Cave, with her finest company smile, 
after which a pause of three minutes ensued. 

" Some say the frost is on the breek," con- 
tinued Mrs. Hale, wondering if it would be 
genteel to ask Mrs. Cave how much her cap 
cost. She had an agonized suspicion that it 
would not. 

After five minutes, Mrs. Wax, whose com- 
parative youth and lower rank occasioned 
her some diffidence, took up her parable in 
the following genteel manner : — " Her lady- 
ship was observing this marning " 

But what her ladyship was observing was 
never revealed to man, since at that moment, 
"Widow Hale, the host's mother, came burst- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 279 

ing' in, stout, healthy, and red-faced, her cap 
slightly awry, and called out in her hearty, 
wholesome voice — 

" Well, now, my dears, and how are you 
getting on ? I'm that harled up with so 
many about, I ain't had a minute to ast after 
ye all. Mary Ann, my dear, give me a kiss 
do, and a hearty welcome to you all, and a 
kiss all round, and do make yourselves at 
home. Now, is the tea to your liking ? 
This best teapot aia't much at drawing. I 
ain't much of a one for best things myself; 
well enough for looking at, and just to say 
you've got them, but give me work-a-day 
things for comfort. There ain't above half 
the company come yet, and Mary Ann upset 
about the pies for supper. Do just as y(Hi 
would at home, and you will please me. If 
there ain't dear old Grranfer coming in, bless 
his heart ! Come in, Granfer, and kindly 
welcome." 

And so saying, the kind soul bustled out, 
and relieved Granfer of his hat, while her 
daughter-in-law, the actual hostess, came to 



280 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

do the honours of the best parlour, bringing 
in three more female guests of distinction, 
who were much awed by the appalling 
gentility of the three already assembled, and 
a little inclined to regret their own social 
importance. 

Granfer and the widow, in the mean time, 
entered the great kitchen, a long, low, white- 
washed room, with heavy beams across the 
ceiling, a stone floor, and a wide hearth with 
a wood fire burning between dogs upon it. 
The ceiling and walls wore their everyday 
decoration of hams, guns, a spit, various 
cooking utensils, a tiny bookshelf, and a 
large dresser, well garnished with crockery 
and pewters, together with their festal 
Christmas adorning of holly, fir, and mistle- 
toe, and a round dozen of tin sconces bearing 
tallow candles. There was an oaken settle 
on one side the chimney corner, into the 
cosiest nook of which Granfer deposited his 
bent form with a sigh of content, and gazed 
round upon the assembled guests with 
benevolence. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 281 

On a long table on trestles at one end of 
the room was spread a solid meal, consisting 
of a huge ham, own brother to those depend- 
ing in rich brown abundance from the ceiling ; 
a south-country, skim-milk cheese, finely 
marbled with greenish blue veins, and re- 
sembling Stilton in reduced circumstances ; a 
great yellow and brown mass of roast beef; a 
huge pie ; several big brown blocks of plum- 
cake ; and some vast loaves of white home- 
baked bread and pats of fresh butter. The 
forks were of steel, and black-handled like the 
knives ; and the spoons, of which there was a 
dearth, were pewter. A deficiency of tea- 
cups suggested to Corporal Tom Hale the 
agreeable expedient of sharing one between 
a lady and a gentleman, which was hailed 
with applause by his naval brother, and 
immediately acted upon. 

For those guests who looked upon tea as 
an enervating beverage, there was ample 
provision in the shape of various brown and 
yellow jugs filled with ale from the cask Tom 
and Jim had procured for the occasion ; and 



282 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

it was generally iinderstood that liquor of a 
still more comforting nature was held in 
reserve to stimulate conviviality at a later 
hour. The blacksmith, Straun, the clerk, 
Stevens, with their wives and families, were 
there ; also Baines, the discontented tailor, 
and the husbands of the best-parlour ladies. 

The wheelwright's wife, a comely woman 
of thirty, and his sister, a blooming damsel 
some ten years younger, ran to and fro with 
flushed faces among the guests, while the 
widow made herself ubiquitous. 

The uniforms of Tom and Jim, with those 
of three or four artillerymen from the neigh- 
bouring forts, and the red coats of a couple 
of linesmen, together with the bright ribbons 
of the women, lent colour and variety to the 
monotony of black coats and smock-frocks, 
and upon the whole the wheelwright's 
kitchen presented as cheery and animated a 
sight as one would wish to see on a New 
Year's Eve. Nor was a town element want- 
ing in the rustic gathering ; for just as tea 
was in full swing, and little Dickie Stevens — ■ 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 283 

whose tea lay in the future, after the serving 
of his elders — was supplying the place of a 
band by playing hymn-tunes on his con- 
certina, a taxed-cart drove up, and deposited 
two chilled mortals from Oldport, Mr. and 
Mrs. Wells, greengrocers, and related, by 
some inextricable family complications known 
only in that remote south-country district, 
more or less to nearly all the company. 

Tea being finished, pipes were produced, 
also ale, and there was wild work in a dimly 
lighted quarter of the kitchen, where the 
Hale brothers had cunningly arranged un- 
expected mistletoe, and whence smothered 
shrieks of laughter and sounds as of ears 
being vigorously boxed issued every now and 
then. 

The odd part about the mistletoe business 
was the extreme gullibility of the ladies, 
who were by far too guileless to profit by 
the experience of others in that dangerous 
region, and suffered themselves to be decoyed 
thither on the flimsiest pretexts, and betrayed 
the utmost surprise and indignation at the 



284 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

kissing which invariably ensued. As for 
Tom and Jim, they went to work with a 
business-like determination to kiss every girl 
in the room, and several respectable matrons 
into the bargain. It was about this time 
that the artillery sergeant and the wheel- 
wright's pretty sister Patty vanished, and 
were subsequently discovered at the front 
door, enjoying the soft December breeze and 
studying astronomy, a study which produced 
the happiest subsequent results, and set the 
Malbourne bells chiming in the spring of the 
coming year. 

So large and successful a party had not 
been held in Malbourne for many a year, the 
predominance of the military element greatly 
contributing to its success ; for the sons of 
Mars excelled not only in the art of pleasing 
the fairer sex, which has in all ages been 
considered their special function, but possessed 
many other accomplishments of social value. 
A very pretty bit of fencing was exhibited 
between a red and a blue coat, and Corporal 
Tom snuffed candles with a pistol, amid 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 285 

shrieks of terrified delight from the women. 
One soldier sang a comic, another a senti- 
mental, song ; and when little Dick Stevens 
was perched on a table, and warbled out, 
*' Rosalie, the Prairie Flower," and ''Wait for 
the Waggon," to the accompaniment of Wax's 
clarionet and Baines's violin, the kitchen 
ceiling trembled and threatened to drop its 
quivering hams and hollies at the powerful 
chorus furnished by these stalwart warriors, 
and the gentility of the best parlour was 
finally melted by it to such a deliquescence 
as to mingle freely with the vulgar currents 
circulating in the kitchen. 

Indeed, village talent was quite in the shade 
during the first part of the evening, and the 
discreet Corporal Tom observed such deprecia- 
tion on the faces of the village genuises that 
he resolved to put off asking for the recitation 
with which he knew a certain warrior to be 
primed until a later hour, and created a 
diversion by proposing a game of Turn the 
Trencher, which absorbed the children and 
younger people at one end of the room, and 



286 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

left the circle of elders round the chimney 
free to converse or visit the best parlour, 
where fruit and sherry wine were laid out, as 
they pleased. 

" I seen young Mr. Maitland in Oldport 
to-day," observed the town greengrocer's 
lady, one of the fireside circle, by way of 
furnishing the town news to her rustic 
friends. 

" Now, did you, Mrs. Wells ? " returned 
her host. " Ah ! so you zeen he ? " 

" Yes, Mr. Hale ; I seen him go into the 
bank opposite, and stay there — oh ! I should 
think a good hour," continued Mrs. Wells, 
adjusting her cap-ribbons with a complacent 
sense of their splendour. " He's grown more 
personable than ever ; but he do look ill, 
poor young gentleman, to be sure — that 
white and thin ! " 

" That's living in Lunnun," said Hale ; 
** Lunnun takes it out of a man. I never 
held with going to Lunnun myself. Never 
knowed any good come of it." 

" Ah, you don't know every think, Jacob 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 287 

Hale ! " said Granfer, benevolently. " 'Tain't, 
zo to zay, nateral to a man as gives hisself 
entirely to wheels. You doos your best, but 
more zense can't come out of ye than the 
Almighty have a put in. Na-a. You don't 
know everythink, Jacob Hale, I zays." 

The profundity of this remark produced a 
deep impression, particularly upon the wheel- 
wright, who appeared to think he had re- 
ceived a great compliment from Grranfer, and 
rekindled his pipe at the burning gorse on 
the hearth with a beatified air. 

" Zeems as though zummat had been 
a-taking of it out of Mr. Cyril," observed the 
blacksmith, thoughtfully. 

" 'Tain't, zo to zay, Lunnon, Jarge Straun," 
replied Grranfer, solemnly. '' No, Jarge 
Straun ; 'tain't Lunnon, as you med zay. 
I zes to Bill Stevens 's marning, I zays, 
' Bill,' I zays, zays I, ' brains is the matter wi' 
Mr. Cyril,' I zays, ' that's what's the matter 
wi' he ; '" and Grranfer's keen grey eyes took 
a survey of all the listening, stolid faces, and 
he experienced a keen sense of enjoyment, as 



288 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

he leant forwards, his hands crossed on his 
staff, and felt that he was getting into regular 
conversational swing. " Ay, that's what I 
zed, zure enough," he added. 

" Brains ! " repeated Straun, thoughtfully. 
'' I never yeared of nobody dying of brains, 
as I knows on." 

" You ain't a yeered every think, Jarge 
Straun," returned Granfer, severely. " Ay, 
you med mark my words, it all hruns to 
brains wi' Mr. Cyril ; there ain't, as you med 
zay, nothing left to hrun to vlesh and vat, 
whatever he med put inzide of hisself. 
Mankind is like the vlower o' the vield : 
where it all hruns to vlower, there ain't, zo 
to zay, zo much leaf as you med swear by ; 
then, agen, I tell 'ee, where it all runs to 
leaf, you can't expect no vlower to speak on. 
Look at broccoli ! " 

Here Granfer, being fairly launched, struck 
out from personal to general observations, 
and thence, at the prompting of his grandson, 
to the hoary regions of history. 

" Ay, I minds Boney, to be zure — well I 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 2S9 

minds be ; " and he related tlie oft-told tale 
of the frequent scares the inhabitants of those 
coasts received, sometimes by authentic 
rumours of Bonaparte's appearance at sea, 
sometimes by the accidental or mistaken 
kindling of the beacons on every prominent 
headland and on the downs, where a watch 
was kept day and night for the appearance 
of the dreaded foe. 

He told how the wealthy farmers sent their 
silver and other valuables, sometimes in- 
cluding even their women and children 
under the latter head, inland for safety — 
most of them, apparently, having first con- 
sulted Granfer on the subject — in conse- 
quence of Bonaparte's rumoured descents on 
that fated coast ; also of the rousing of the 
volunteers at the dead of night on one of 
these occasions — of their march to the sea- 
shore, and their all getting lost on the way, 
and arriving next morning on a scene of 
profound peace. Then came the great 
smuggler story, and the tragic history of the 
loss of the ship Halifax, the crew and 

VOL. I. U 



290 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

passengers of which lay burled in the wind- 
swept churchyard near the fatal shore which 
wrecked them. Five young women were 
among those washed ashore and subsequently 
buried, and their appearance, as G-ranfer saw 
them, lying pale and beautiful side by side 
awaiting burial, was the climax of this story ; 
after delivering it he usually paused and 
looked round for some moments with working 
lips to enjoy the silence of the interested 
listeners. 

Having thus got his audience, which con- 
sisted mainly of village seniors, well in hand, 
Grranfer began, to the accompaniment of the 
young people's continuous laughter, somewhat 
softened by distance, to play upon their love 
of the marvellous and the horrible, and pro- 
duced some delightful creeps by his eerie 
tales ; and finally landed himself in his re- 
nowned narrative of his midnight adventure 
upon Down End, a bleak, storm-stricken 
eminence, where the last man gibbeted in 
these parts, a truculent villain, with a most 
romantic history, then swung in chains. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 291 

Granfer had been belated on a moonless, 
cloudy night, had wandered far in the cutting- 
wind, and had begun to guess that he had at 
last done with the downs, and reached the well- 
known Down End — an unpleasant spot for a 
midnight stroll, since, besides the unwelcome 
presence of the murderer on his gibbet, an 
extensive chalk quarry there supplied an 
array of little precipices high enough to cost 
any one slipping over the edge his life. 

Granfer had arrived at a vague mass loom- 
ing through the darkness, a dim something, 
which he conjectured to be the sign-post, an 
erection which shared the same eminence 
with the gibbet at many yards distance from 
it, and was about to strike a light with the 
flint and steel in his pocket to a weird 
accompaniment of shrieks and moans and 
unholy riot of clankings and hissings, which 
might be only the voices of the midnight 
storm, but, on the other hand, might he what 
Granfer wisely left to his hearers' imagina- 
tions, when " all on a zuddent there comes a 
girt bang on the shoulders of me, vlint and 



292 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

steel vlies out of my hands, and down I goos, 
vlat as a vlounder on my vaace, wi' zummat 
atop o' me," the old man was saying, his 
wrinkled face and keen eyes lighted by the 
blazing gorse fire and his own imagination, 
while Straun and Hale, and the other worthies, 
with open mouths, staring eyes, and dropped 
pipes, and the women, with various contor- 
tions of visage and extensive clasping of 
shivering hands, gazed with tense, strained 
attention upon the withered, eager counte- 
nance, when the door burst open, and William 
Grove, supported by Corporal Tom, staggered 
into the kitchen, white-faced and trembling, 
and fell into a chair placed for him in the 
centre of the room, clapping his hands con- 
vulsively upon his knees, and exclaiming at 
intervals, " Lard ! Lard 'a massey ! " 
and the sudden apparition, coming thus upon 
strained nerves and excited imaginations, 
produced a most alarming effect. 

The women screamed and clung to one 
another ; the men uttered ejaculations ; the 
game of Turn the Trencher broke up in dis- 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MATTLAND 293 

may, and the players came clustering round the 
distracted Grrove ; while the services of the 
military were called into requisition to soothe 
the terrors and agitations of the prettiest girls, 
the gallant sergeant finding it necessary to 
place his arm round the blooming form of 
Miss Patty Hale for the distressed damsel's 
support. 

" Lard 'a massey ! Willum Grove," ex- 
claimed Granfer at last, with impatience, " if 
you ain't got nothink better to zay than Lard 
'a massey, you med zo well bide quiet, I tell 
'ee. Lard love 'ee, Willum, you never had 
no zense to speak on, but you be clane dunch 
now. Ay, Willum be clane dunch^'' he added ; 
while the astute Tom, who said that William 
had come flying in at the porch door (where 
the gallant corporal had been helping pretty 
Miss Cave to admire the moon), and could be 
prevailed upon to make no other observation 
than that so scornfully censured by Granfer, 
assisted the waggoner's faculties by a timely 
draught of ale. After disposing of this, and 
drying his mouth with the back of his hand, 



294 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

William recovered slightly and found his 
tongue. 

'' Lard 'a massey on us all ! " he cried ; 
" they bin an' done for poor Ben Lee." 

" Done for him ! " cried a chorus of voices 
in various tones of horror and dismay. 

" Done var en, zure enough ! " repeated 
William, rocking himself backward and for- 
ward, in a strange contrast to his usual 
stolidity. ^' We bin an' vound the body ! " 

It was even so. Ben Lee left his home at 
dinner-time, and had not returned. At tea- 
time, Mrs. Lee was returning in the dusk 
from an errand to Malbourne, and met a 
hurrying figure clad in grey, as she came 
through the fields beneath the wood, which 
was on the crest of the hill above the Temple. 
She found only Alma in the house, and after 
waiting with more discontent than disquiet, 
she concluded that work had delayed her 
husband, and finally took her tea and seated 
herself at her needlework by the fire. 

At half-past seven Sir Lionel and Lady 
Swaynestone, with their daughter, were 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 295 

dressed for a dinner-party and awaiting the 
arrival of the carriage, which had been 
ordered at that hour. But no carriage 
appeared, and a message to the stables 
elicited the news that the coachman had not 
been there since the afternoon, when Ingram 
Swaynestone chanced to have seen him near 
his home. A messenger to the Temple re- 
turned with the tidings that he had not 
been home ; and then Judkins asked for an 
audience with Sir Lionel, which resulted in 
a search-party being sent forth to find the 
missing man, whose habits were regular and 
punctual. 

William Grove, who chanced to be on some 
errand to Swaynestone for his master before 
going to the wheelwright's party, assisted 
in the search, and was with Judkins when 
Lee was discovered quite dead in the wood 
above his home. There were no signs of 
any struggle on the hard frozen path, from 
whence his body had evidently been dragged 
into the fern and brush, whither it was traced 
by the marks on the rime-covered moss and 



296 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

the disorder of the ferns and brambles. A 
slight wound on the face, which had bled, 
but could not have killed him, was the only 
sign of violence at first seen. 

The lights were not extinguished at Swayne- 
stone House till nearly dawn. Sir Lionel, 
who was a magistrate, set to work at once 
to investigate the fatal affair, the police were 
immediately informed, and every member 
of the Swaynestone household was closely 
questioned, as well as Mrs. Lee. Poor 
Alma could not be subjected to much inter- 
rogation, and was not in a position to throw 
any light upon the tragedy. Death was not 
the only visitor at the Temple ; a new life, 
scarcely less tragic than the death, began 
there on that fatal night, and the New Year 
rose upon sorrow and dismay in hall and 
cottage. 

It took long to extract what he knew of 
the affair from William Grove, but this was 
at length accomplished, amid varied comment 
and ejaculation. Granfer said no further 
word until the whole truth had been elicited, 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 297 

and tlien upon the first favourable pause lie 
looked round with an air of great solemnity, 
and took up his parable thus : " You med 
all mark my words. Zomebody'll hae to 
swing for this yere. Ay, I've said it, and 
I'll zay it agen : zomebody'll hae to swing." 



298 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Next to the divine sweetness of youthful 
love, nothing so completely charms and en- 
thrals us as the rapid development of new 
ideas and the swift inrush of fresh knowledge 
in the spring-time of life. How the world 
widens to the eager student, what vast and 
endless horizons open out to his gaze, as he 
acquires fresh knowledge ! What a sense of 
power his thoughts give him as they draw 
together from the vagueness of scattered 
speculations, and take definite shape before 
him ! Love unlocks the gate of a yet undis- 
covered world of emotion, which has its 
higher and lower circles, its purgatory and 
paradise, and its endless possibilities beyond ; 
knowledge and ripening thought rend the 
obscuring veils from the illimitable universe. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 299 

The enthusiastic delight of fresh discovery 
is in both cases the very elixir of life ; nay, 
it is life itself. 

On the last day of the year, Everard dis- 
covered the new world of love ; and on New 
Year's morning, under the stimulus of a 
fresh happiness, a theory, after which he had 
long been groping with many a vague sur- 
mise and hazardous hypothesis, interrupted 
by hopeless gaps in evidence, suddenly re- 
vealed itself complete and flawless before him. 
It came like an electric shock, with such a 
happy flash of inspiration that he was obliged 
to pause in his dressing to take in the results 
of the unconscious cerebration which his 
studies and speculations had set up, while 
tears of joy rushed to his eyes. Clear and 
distinct as it was to his own mind, he knew 
that years of patient labour and minute 
scientific investigation must pass before he 
could present it to other minds, but he knew 
also that, once verified, it would make an 
epoch in the study of physiology. 

Such a superabundance of happiness as 



300 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MATTLAND. 

Everard's might well excite the malignity of 
envious gods, and would have prompted an 
ancient Greek to throw away some precious 
thing in all haste. But being a Christian 
Englishman, Everard did not follow the 
example of Poly crates ; nay, had he been a 
G-reek of old days, he would never have 
imputed envy or malignity to the strong im- 
mortals. Strength was to him a guarantee 
of goodness, because his own strength made 
him noble and kind ; it made him also pitiful 
to the malice and spite of weak things. 

Full of this new rapture, his eyes hazy 
with abstraction, as the eyes of dreamers are 
hazy with dreams, Everard went forth to 
meet the New Year's new joy like one borne 
upon clouds, and reached the breakfast-room 
just at the end of prayers. Mr. Maitland 
according to custom, was dismissing the 
maids with a kind good morning and New 
Year's wish, when Eliza, whose face was 
stained with tears, paused with a spasmodic, 
" Oh, please, sir ! " 

" You are discomposed, Eliza," said Mr. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 301 

Maitland, gently, while he looked round and 
observed similar perturbation on the faces of 
the other maids. '' Nothing wrong, I hope ? " 

" Poor Ben Lee ! " sobbed Eliza, resorting 
to her handkerchief. 

" He was found dead, sir," added Martha, 
the housemaid, her grief, which was sincere, 
tempered by a certain delight in the tragically 
impressive. 

" It was Stevens brought the news," added 
the cook, who was also not impervious to 
the pleasure of communicating disastrous 
intelligence. 

" Found dead ! My good girls ! In 
Heaven's name, where ? when ? Oh, surely 
not ! Where is Stevens ? " cried Mr. Mait- 
land, as much agitated as the heart of woman 
could desire. '' Oh, those poor Lees ! What 
trouble ! what trouble ! " 

" It was last night, sir," continued Eliza, 
much refreshed by her master's perturbation, 
and by the copious tears with which she had 
accompanied the broken narrative. " Sir 
Lionel had lanterns sent out for him." 



302 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" He did not die in his bed, then ? " the 
deep voice of Everard. broke in. 

" He was hid away in the wood," replied 
Martha ; " and they do say " 

" I must go to the Temple at once," inter- 
rupted Mr. Maitland, starting off to get his 
hat, with an injunction to the women not to 
talk over the tragedy, which he might as 
well have addressed to the wind. 

Lilian with great difficulty succeeded in 
keeping him back until she had made him 
drink some coffee and take a little food, when 
he started off at railroad speed, bidding her 
tell the clerk there would be no service that 
morning. Then Henry and Lilian and the 
two children sat down to a melancholy break- 
fast, and the discussion of the tragedy, of 
which they gathered from the servants as 
much as William Grove had communicated 
on the previous night, together with a fine 
growth of conjecture and exaggeration. 

" Poor Alma ! " sighed Lilian, when her 
father was gone. " Oh, Henry ! what do you 
think of it ? " 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 303 

" I am afraid it looks rather dark," returned 
Henrj, not observing the entrance of Eliza 
with a hot dish. " Lee's behaviour, when 
last I saw him, was most unaccountable. His 
trouble evidently preyed on his mind, poor 
fellow." 

" Oh, Henry ! what do you mean ? 
Not " 

" An unhinged mind quickly turns to 
suicide," replied Henry, suddenly checking 
himself as he became aware of the wide gaze 
of Winnie's eyes immediately opposite him. 

Five minutes after, the whole of Malbourne 
knew that Dr. Everard had received the 
intelligence with little surprise, and at once 
ascribed it to suicide. 

Cyril had started for Woodlands before 
breakfast, leaving a charming note of New 
Year's wishes for everybody, and saying that 
it was incumbent on him to go to Woodlands 
at once, to apologize for his incivility in not 
meeting Marion on the previous day. 

" What a devoted lover ! " Mr. Maitland 
had observed, on hearing the note read. 



304 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

*' Well, man has but one spring-time, though 
the birds renew their youth every year." 

" I think, papa," said Winnie, in one of 
those sudden visitations of acuteness which 
befall little girls occasionally, " that Cyril is 
not so devoted to loving as to being loved." 

And Lilian knew that the child had hit on 
her brother's weak point. 

After breakfast, Everard accompanied 
Lilian and the children on a visit to the 
invalid donkey and other dumb dependents. 
It was pleasant to see Lilian in the poultry- 
yard. When she entered the yard she gave 
a little coo, and a flock of pigeons, preening 
themselves aloft on gable and roof in the sun- 
shine, came fluttering down, a rustling cloud 
of white wings, and settled upon her till she 
seemed a parody on Lot's wife, a pillar of 
birds instead of salt, while the more adven- 
turous fowls sprang up and pecked the grain 
from her basket and her hands, till she 
scattered pigeons, fowls, and all, with a light 
" Hish ! " and wave of her arms. 

Everard, the children, and the two dogs 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 305 

stood apart to watch this little scene, Everard 
smoking tranquilly, and delighting in the 
picture of Lilian involved in her cloud of 
dove-like wings. During this progress he 
told her eagerly of the theory which had been 
born in his brain that morning, and they both 
discussed it, Lilian being sufficiently grounded 
in science to comprehend something of the 
importance of the subject, and having, more- 
over, the receptive intellect which readily 
admits half-grasped notions. 

"We shall have to work hard for this," 
Everard said, knowing that Lilian would 
willingly take her share of the toil. 

"It will be well worth hard work," she 
replied joyously ; " but I have other work 
now, so I must go in. No ; I have not told 
mother," she added, in reply to a whispered 
question from Henry ; "I would rather it 
came from you." 

" And I have had no opportunity as yet." 
he said. "So I have to skate with these 
scamps, have I ? Yery well ; but join us as 
soon as you can, Lilian." 

VOL. I. X 



306 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

"And mind you bring some cake," added 
Lennie, who was notlaing if not practical; 
and the children, hanging one on each of 
Everard's hands, danced joyously off into 
Northover Park, where they were to skate 
on a piece of water a quarter of a mile off. 

Just as they entered the gate by the lodge, 
Lyster Garrett was leaving it. He looked at 
Henry with some surprise, and received his 
greeting very stiffly. 

" Oh, do come and skate, Lyster ! " cried 
Lennie ; " then you can help me, and Winnie 
can have Henry to herself." 

" I am going to Swaynestone," Garrett 
said. " This is a sad business of Lee's. Foul 
play, I fear ; " and he looked searchingly at 
Everard. 

"Foul play?" returned Everard. "Non- 
sense ! Why, I suppose poor Lee never had 
an enemy in his life." 

" He had one," said Garrett, with marked 
emphasis. "I should strongly recommend 
that person to make himself scarce." 

" Lee was not a man to make enemies, poor 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 307 

fellow," replied Everard. " It will all come 
out at the inquest, no doubt. Mr. Maitland 
is gone to the Temple to comfort the poor 
widow." 

And they passed on, Everard wondering 
what on earth was the matter with young 
Garrett, who was studying for the Bar, and 
was rather inclined to look upon human 
existence as raw material to be worked up in 
courts of justice. 

" The world doesn't look much older than 
it did yesterday, Henry," observed Winnie, 
thoughtfully ; " yet it's sixty-three, and 
yesterday it was only sixty-two." 

Henry did not reply, but looked reflectively 
at the frozen landscape and clouded sky, 
whence the sun had been shining half an 
hour before. There was a vague misgiving 
within him ; Garrett's hints flung a shroud of 
dark conjecture over the Lee tragedy, which 
he had forgotten for the moment. The world 
did look older to him, and it seemed a whole 
year since yesterday. But the pond was soon 
reached, and the children's skates and his own 



308 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

had to be fitted on at the expense of freezing 
fingers and stagnant blood, which a few turns 
in the biting air set right again. Then the 
Garrett ladies appeared, and there was quite 
a little party on the ice, and the children 
having by this time learnt to go alone, Henry 
indulged himself in some artistic skating, and 
the world grew young again, aud he did not 
observe that Miss Garrett and her sister 
declined all his offers of assistance, and avoided 
him as much as the small extent of the little 
lake would permit. 

" I am not sure that I shall marry Ingram 
Swaynestone, after all," Winnie observed to 
Lilian, when she arrived with the promised 
cake in an hour's time. " I think pw'aps I 
shall have Henwy when I gwow up." 

" There was nobody in the world like 
Ingram yesterday," Lilian laughed ; "so I 
suppose your skating instructions have been 
more successful than his, Henry." 

" This is rather a dismal New Year s 
morning," Lilian said to Henry, who was 
busily engaged in fitting on her skates. 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 309 

"Those poor Lees haunt me, and the servants 
say there are such dreadful surmises about 
Ben's death. I wish Cyril were here. I 
wonder what he is doing ? " 

Cyril at that moment was in the library at 
Woodlands, comfortably seated in a deep arm- 
chair by a blazing fire. The laity of the male 
kind were shooting ; Marion, and her sister, 
Mrs. Whiteford, were busily employed with 
the other ladies in decorations and arrange- 
ments for the impending ball. Cyril had 
taken refuge in the library with a book that 
he was utterly unable to read, and was sorry 
to find that George Everard had followed his 
example. 

The Rev. George had assumed that atti- 
tude on the hearthrug which means con- 
versation, and the disposition of his coat-tails 
was such as forebodes a long discourse, as 
Cyril observed with inward groans. Cyril's 
face was strained and haggard ; his mind was 
in the tense, over-wrought condition which 
craves solitude and repose ; and he racked his 
brains for some pretext to escape from his 



310 THE SILEKCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

brother-clergyman, who had the advantage of 
being his senior by many years, and whose 
theology was of a kind to fill Cyril with 
despair, since George belonged to the straitest 
sect of the Evangelicals. 

Mr. Everard began by commenting upon his 
young brother's worn appearance, and accusing 
him of fasting. 

"I fasted," replied Cyril, '* because I was 
too unwell to eat. And if I received the New 
Year with watching and prayer, you will 
surely allow that I might have done worse." 

" Truly. I could wish many to follow your 
example, Maitland ; but not to the injury of 
this fleshly tabernacle, as I fear you have 
done. Such misdirected zeal amounts to 
excess, and that will-worship against which 
we are cautioned. You played a very poor 
part at breakfast, I observed." 

Cyril smiled, for he had observed, on his 
part, George Everard's vigorous onslaught 
upon his father's well-spread breakfast-table, 
and he replied that his lack of appetite was 
due to his own folly in taking a long walk 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 311 

fasting after a day of headache. " Indeed, 
I am thoroughly knocked up," he added 
wearily. 

" My dear young friend," continued George, 
solemnly, " I have become deeply interested 
in you. I perceive that you are a very 
precious vessel." 

In spite of his weariness, and the strange 
hunted look that made him appear to start 
at every sound, as if expecting evil tidings, 
Cyril's face kindled and gained an added 
charm at these words. Appreciation was 
the very breath of life to him, and he felt 
that he had hitherto thought too slightingly 
of Greorge, who perhaps, after all, could not 
help being evangelical, and consequently 
rather slangy in his religious conversation. 
He made a graceful allusion to their impend- 
ing relationship, thanked George for his good 
opinion, and expressed a hope that they 
might know more of each other before long. 

" I have wrestled in prayer for you," con- 
tinued the elder priest. " I shall continue to 
wrestle, that you may come to know the 



312 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

truth, and that you may have strength to 
resist the seductions of the Scarlet Woman. 
I observe great powers in you — singular 
powers ; powers that may effect much in the 
vineyard, if you only devote them to your 
Master's service ; powers which, unsanctified, 
will lead you into great temptations." 

" I am in for it," thought Cyril, who dis- 
liked listening to other people's sermons as 
much as doctors object to taking their own 
prescriptions ; " he is wound up for at least 
six heads." But his face wore the most 
winning expression of interest and the defer- 
ence due to one so much older in the ministry 
than himself, while he replied modestly that 
he was aware that some talents had been 
vouchsafed him, and did not intend to hide 
them in a napkin, but that he thought per- 
haps his dear brother rated him too highly 
in the kindness of his heart. 

At which Everard smiled paternally, and 
proceeded to speak of Cyril's gifts — his agree- 
able manner and power of winning hearts, 
his eloquence, his intellectual polish, and his 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 313 

musical and flexible voice, and pointed out 
to him the peculiar power these would give 
him in his ministerial capacity. 

" Not that these mere carnal gifts are 
anything in themselves," he continued ; " they 
are but nets to catch men. The nets are not 
necessary, but it pleases the Lord to work by 
means, and those to whom much is given will 
have much to answer for. In short, you have 
very singular opportunities of doing good 
work in the vineyard. I am thankful that 
you have been moved to enter the ministry. 
You might have had a more brilliant career 
in a worldly calling. But what you have 
undertaken is worth any sacrifice. And no 
man, having once put his hand to the plough, 
may dare to look back." 

George Everard was not destitute of the 
human weakness that leads us to believe in 
the value of our own good advice, but he 
would have been rather startled if he could 
have known the powerful effect his words 
had upon his susceptible and impulsive 
listener's mind. 



314 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" I have put my hand to the plough," said 
Cyril, taking away the hands in which he 
had buried his haggard face during this 
exordium, and speaking in those deep, strong 
chest-notes which so stirred the fibre of his 
listeners' hearts ; "I will never turn back. 
I call you to witness, George Everard, in the 
face of high Heaven, that I will never turn 
back, and that I will make any and every 
sacrifice for the sake of this my high calling 
and vocation." 

Cyril rose from his seat as he spoke, and 
raised one hand with an impressive gesture. 
All the languor and dejection vanished from 
his face and form ; a dazzle of pale blue fire 
came from his eyes ; his every feature kindled; 
his whole being expressed an intensity of 
feeling that almost frightened Everard, who 
felt something like a child playing with 
matches and suddenly kindling a wood-pile. 
He could only ejaculate faintly, " My dear 
young friend ! " while Cyril paced the room 
with firm strides and loftily erect head, a 
thing of grace and spirit-like beauty, and at 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 315 

last paused in front of George with snch a 
glance of fire as seemed to pierce through 
and through the soul of the elder man, and 
offered him his hand, saying, " Do you bear 
me witness ? " 

" I do indeed," faltered the other, over- 
come by the sight of an emotion beyond his 
conception, accustomed though he was to a 
purely sentimental form of rehgion ; and he 
pressed Cyril's fevered hand in his own cool 
one, uttering some words of prayer and 
blessing, thinking that possibly one of the 
sudden conversions he so constantly preached 
about, and so rarely discovered any traces of 
in actual life, had taken place. 

" Your words," said Cyril, quietly, after a 
time, " were like a spark to a train of gun- 
powder. They came at a moment of internal 
wrestling, and helped me to a decision." 

George Everard replied that he was blest 
in being the unworthy instrument of speak- 
ing a word in season, and proceeded to ad- 
monish his convert at length ; while Cyril, 
with all the fire quenched in his look and 



316 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

bearing, sat drooping and haggard beneath 
the cold, unimpassioned gaze of his counsellor, 
busied with his own thoughts, and occa- 
sionally smiling a little inward smile as the 
well-worn phrases and various allusions to 
the Scarlet Woman fell on his wearied ear. 

"In conclusion, dear Cyril," George said 
at length, " I must bid you beware of 
women." 

Cyril started and flushed, but Everard 
smiled and continued — 

" Do not mistake me. You have hitherto 
had no temptation from that source ; the 
monastic discipline of your life at St. Chad's, 
however mistaken, has at least that ad- 
vantage. But, my dear brother, you will 
find the weaker vessels a stumbling-block 
and a constant thorn in the flesh of the 
Christian pastor. Our sisters have a fatal 
habit of mixing personal with religious feel- 
ing." 

Here he sighed deeply, and Cyril suddenly 
remembered a legend to the effect that the 
Rev. George, in his curate days, possessed 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 317 

a large cupboard full of unworn slippers 
worked by the faithful sisters of his flock. 
" Thinking that they love the manna fur- 
nished them by the faithful shepherd, they 
too often, and perhaps unconsciously, cherish 
a tenderness for the shepherd himself, and 
this leads to much that does not conduce to 
edifying. Such feelings are indeed harmless ; 
but, though all things are lawful unto me, 
all things are not expedient, especially," he 
added, with unguarded confidence, " when 

one's wife is inclined to be jeal Well, 

you know, a young pastor should be prepared. 
And let no man be too sure of himself. 
Our poor sisters constantly want spiritual 
advice ; let them seek it of an aged pastor. 
I would counsel you, whose manners and 
appearance are so strikingly calculated to 
impress weaker vessels with admiration, to 
confine your personal ministrations to men 
and elder sisters. You will be run after as 
a popular preacher, and women will be a 
snare to you, as tending to bring discredit 
on your calling, and giving occasion to the 



318 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

enemy to blaspheme. The Christian pastor 
must not only abstain from all evil, but from 
all appearance of evil — nay, the remotest sus- 
picion of it. Our light has to shine strongly 
before men." 

"I feel that most keenly," replied Cyril, 
roused to interest. " I feel that the lightest 
imputation upon us is absolutely fatal to our 
influence ; that v^^e are bound to a far stricter 
life than others. By the v^ay, Everard, a 
very difficult case of conscience was submitted 
to our rector some years ago. There v^as a 
man doing good work in a parish consisting 
mainly of cultured and wealthy people, a 
man who had great personal influence. That 
man in early youth had done a wrong, 
which he bitterly repented, to atone for 
which he would have given years of his life 
— perhaps even life itself. A girl " — Cyril 
paused, and a thick, sobbing sigh caught his 
breath and impeded his utterance — " a girl 
had been, alas ! led astray. She died by her 
own hand. Years after, when the penitent 
was in the height of his usefulness, a man 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 319 

who had loved this girl found him out, and 
attempted to avenge the unhappy girl's death 
by killing him. He attacked him in a lonely 
spot, on a ledge of narrow cliff." Cyril 
paused again, and moistened his parched lips, 
passing his handkerchief over his damp, chill 
forehead at the same time. " There was a 
struggle for life — no violence on the priest's 
part ; only the instinctive struggle for self- 
preservation — and the would-be assassin was 
hurled over the cliff to his death." Cyril 
paused once more, and caught his breath 
chokingly. '' No suspicion was aroused ; the 
verdict was accidental death. The clergy- 
man gave no evidence. He went on his 
usual way, and no one ever guessed that his 
hand — the hand which gave the sacred 
elements ! — had sent a fellow-creature to his 
grave. The question which concerned our 
rector was, whether the unintentional homicide 
ought to have volunteered his evidence, and 
confessed his involuntary share in the poor 
creature's death. You see/' continued Cyril, 
suddenly lifting his face to his listener, " he 



320 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

must have brouglit up the old scandal if 
he had done so, and that, coupled with the 
mystery about the death, would have utterly 
ruined his career as a Christian pastor." 

" True," replied George, thoughtfully 
studying the intricacies of the Turkey carpet. 
" How did your rector obtain possession of 
these facts ? " 

" The poor fellow confided in him — came to 
him for advice in his trouble." 

" And what was the advice ? " 

" It was never given. Agitation of mind 
brought on severe illness, which proved fatal. 
The rector found it difficult to arrive at any 
decision. What do you think ? " 

" Truly, my dear young friend, the case is 
perplexing. Had the question been referred 
to me, I should certainly have made it a 
matter of earnest prayer. As a mere abstract 
question, I feel inclined to favour the erring 
pastor's course of action. A revelation of 
the truth would doubtless have given great 
occasion to the enemy to blaspheme." 

Cyril heaved a sigh of relief. " Yery 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MATTLAND. 321 

true," he replied, sinking back into tlie 
depths of his easy-chair, whence he quickly 
started in nervous tremor as the door suddenly 
opened, and glanced apprehensively round, 
to see nothing more terrible than the bright 
face and light figure of Marion. 

" Oh ! here you are, you bad boys, looking 
as grave as two owls," she said, in her light, 
delicate treble. " Gleorge, your wife wants 
you in the drawing-room at once." 

The obedient husband rose immediately, 
but paused lingeringly at the door. ^' We 
will discuss the matter further," he said. 
" Cyril and I have been having the most 
interesting conversation, Marion. I have 
passed a refreshing morning with him. We 
have more in common than I supposed." 

And with an indulgent tap of his young 
sister's cheek, George vanished, and left the 
lovers alone, Marion charmed to find such 
harmony established between the two eccle- 
siastics, who bid fair at one time to differ as 
only those of the same creed under slightly 
varying aspects can differ. 

YOL. I. T 



322 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

" Isn't it provoking, Cyril ? " she cried. 
" Here is a telegram from Leslie, to say he 
cannot spare time to come to-night, and 
his regiment does not embark till the third. 
If any one wants to wish him good-bye, 
they can run over to Portsmouth to-morrow. 
I dare say, indeed ! The other officers are 
coming ; but we shall be short of men, I fear." 

" Is that all ? " returned Cyril , with a 
sigh of relief; for he had turned pale and 
shuddered at the sight of the telegram. 
" Well, dearest, let us run over with your 
father and Keppel to-morrow, and wish them 
all good-bye at once. I rather envy the 
admiral going on the Mediterranean station 
at this murky season." 

"You poor boy! " exclaimed Marion, placing 
her hand upon his burning brow ; " you look 
as if you needed some kind of a change. I 
am afraid your head is still aching." 

" It is maddening," returned Cyril, detain- 
ing the caressing hand. " To tell the truth, 
I am very unwell. I ought not to have 
walked this morning." 



THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 323 

" Indeed you ought not. I saw that you 
were quite lame from fatigue." 

" And who is to blame for my walk ? " 
returned Cyril, with forced gaiety ; " who 
but Miss Everard ? I suppose I caught cold 
in Long's gig yesterday afternoon. I had no 
overcoat, meaning to walk. I feel as if I 
had been beaten all over." 

" Poor dear ! " said Marion, tenderly. 
" And you actually have a little bruise here 
over the temple," she added, touching the 
place, which was tender even to her velvet 
touch. 

" Oh, that's nothing ! " Cyril replied 
hastily ; but he rose and approached a small 
mirror, into which he gazed apprehensively. 
" Ah yes, I dressed in a hurry, and hit 
myself Avith a hair-brush. And this," lie 
added, pointing to a strip of plaster on his 
chin, " I did in shaving." 

" What can we do for you ? " asked Marion. 
" I was going to ask you to carry some 
plants from the conservatory, but you must 
not." 



324 THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND. 

*' Come and sit by me, dear," Cyril replied, 
in his gracefully autocratic manner; "there 
is no anodyne like your presence." 

So the lovers remained hand-in-hand by 
the library fire a good hour, Marion's bright 
eyes and caressing tones worshipping Cyril, 
who appreciated nothing so much as incense. 

George Everard, in the mean time, was 
telling his wife what unexpected graces he 
had discovered .in his future brother-in-law. 
" A very precious soul," he said. " He only 
needs Christian influence." 

Mrs. , Everard knew well that, according 
to the usage of her husband's tribe, the word 
Christian was not applicable to either of the 
Maitlands. •% 



END OP VOL. I. 



PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES, 



