LIBRARY 

Brigham Young University 




!0> 

IN 

= ^t 
= G> 
"W 
= CM 
I CM 



ico 



w 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2013 



http://archive.org/details/snakespassOOstok 






THE SNAKE'S PASS. 



Quarto, cloth, gilt edges, price 6s. 
BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 

UNDER THE SUNSET. 

£ome ©pinions of tf)e $rn$s. 

" . . . . This particularly is a book which all clever and imagi- 
native children should read. . . . The stories all point a grand 
moral, are deeply pathetic, and of absorbing interest." — The World. 

". . . . A charming book " — Punch. 

"... . This collection of delicate and forcible allegories." — Daily 
Telegraph. 

"... . The style of the book is characterized throughout by re- 
markable purity and grace." — The Daily News. 

" .... A really beautiful book, which may be enjoyed, not only 
by children, but by their elders."— Morning Post. 

" . . . . The tales are in the best style of imaginative narrative, 
with charming little touches of nature and reference to every-day 
things." — The Spectator. 

". . . . The book is pervaded by a dreamy beauty of style, 
which cannot fail to be fascinating."— 7^£ Echo. 

". . . . A mystical, supernatural tale, told as it should be told, 
hovering airily and luminously in a medium half imaginative, half 
ethical " — Liverpool Daily Post. 

". . . . It ought to be in the book-case of every pastor, Chri-tian, 
teacher, and scholar in in the kingdom "—Elgin Conrant. 

"... . The tales one and all captivate the young intellect by the 

charm of innocence and freshness they possess "—Dublin 

Freeman' s J onrnal. 

". . . . We have rarely met a more delightful or more thoroughly 

wholesome book to place in the hands of children "~~Cork 

Constitution. 

". . . . The thoughts of the book are high and pure,_ and the 

scenery of it is finely coloured and attractive "—New York 

Tribune. 

"A charming book, full of ingenious, refined, and poetical fancy."— 
The Australasian. 



The Snake's Pass 



BY 

BRAM STOKER, M.A. 




LONDON : 

SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE & RIVLNGTON, Ltd. 

£t. JUunstan's p?ousr, 

FETTEK LANE, FLEET STREET. 
1891. 

All rights reserved. 



CHISWICK PRESS :-C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT, 
CHANCERY LANE. 



E 1 
b?vJgh;_ 

r 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Chapter I. A Sudden Storm l 

II. The Lost Crown of Gold ...... 15 

III. The Gombeen Man 36 

IV. The Secrets of the Bog ....... 58 

V. On Knocknacar 83 

VI. Confidences 106 

VII. Vanished 126 

VIII. A Visit to Joyce 147 

IX. My New Property . 160 

X. In the Cliff Fields ........ 176 

XL Un Mauvais Quart d'Heure 195 

XII. Bog-Fishing and Schooling 213 

XIII. Murdock's Wooing 235 

XIV. A Trip to Paris 254 

XV. A Midnight Treasure Hunt 278 

XVI. A Grim Warning 297 

XVII. The Catastrophe. . 320 

XVIII. The Fulfilment 344 



The Snake's Pass. 



CHAPTER I. 

A SUDDEN STORM. 

Between two great mountains of grey and green, as 
the rock cropped out between the tufts of emerald 
verdure, the valley, almost as narrow as a gorge, ran 
due west towards the sea. There was just room for the 
roadway, half cut in the rock, beside the narrow strip 
of dark lake of seemingly unfathomable depth that lay 
far below between perpendicular walls of frowning rock. 
As the valley opened, the land dipped steeply, and the 
lake became a foam-fringed torrent, widening out into 
pools and miniature lakes as it reached the lower 
ground. In the wide terrace-like steps of the shelving 
mountain there were occasional glimpses of civilization 
emerging from the almost primal desolation which im- 
mediately surrounded us — clumps of trees, cottages, and 
the irregular outlines of stone-walled fields, with black 
stacks of turf for winter firing piled here and there. 
Far beyond was the sea — the great Atlantic — with a 



Z THE SNAKE S PASS. 

wildly irregular coast-line studded with a myriad of 
clustering rocky islands. A sea of deep dark blue, with 
the distant horizon tinged with a line of faint white 
light, and here and there, where its margin was visible 
through the breaks in the rocky coast, fringed with a 
line of foam as the waves broke on the rocks or 
swept in great rollers over the level expanse of sands. 

The sky was a revelation to me, and seemed to almost 
obliterate memories of beautiful skies, although I had 
just come from the south and had felt the intoxication 
of the Italian night, where in the deep blue sky the 
nightingale's note seems to hang as though its sound 
and the colour were but different expressions of one 
common feeling. 

The whole west was a gorgeous mass of violet and 
sulphur and gold — great masses of storm-cloud piling up 
and up till the very heavens seemed weighted with a 
burden too great to bear. Clouds of violet, whose centres 
were almost black and whose outer edges were tinged with 
living gold; great streaks and piled up clouds of palest 
yellow deepening into saffron and flame- colour which 
seemed to catch the coming sunset and to throw its 
radiance back to the eastern sky. 

The view was the most beautiful that I had ever seen, 
and, accustomed as I had been only to the quiet pastoral 
beauty of a grass country, with occasional visits to my 
Great Aunt's well- wooded estate in the South of England, 
it was no wonder that it arrested my attention and 
absorbed my imagination. Even my brief half-a-year's 



A SUDDEN STORM. 3 

travel in Europe, now just concluded, had shown me 
nothing of the same kind. 

Earth, sea and air all evidenced the triumph of nature, 
and told of her wild majesty and beauty. The air was 
still — ominously still. So still was all, that through the 
silence, that seemed to hedge us in with a sense of oppres- 
sion, came the booming of the distant sea, as the great 
Atlantic swell broke in surf on the rocks or stormed the 
hollow caverns of the shore. 

Even Andy, the driver, was for the nonce awed into 
comparative silence. Hitherto, for nearly forty miles of 
a drive, he had been giving me his experiences — pro- 
pounding his views — airing his opinions ; in fact he had 
been making me acquainted with his store of knowledge 
touching the whole district and its people — including 
their names, histories, romances, hopes and fears — all that 
goes to make up the life and interest of a country-side. 

No barber — taking this tradesman to illustrate the 
popular idea of loquacity in excelsis — is more consistently 
talkative than an Irish car-driver to whom has been 
granted the gift of speech. There is absolutely no limit to 
his capability, for every change of surrounding affords a 
new theme and brings on the tapis a host of matters 
requiring to be set forth. 

I was rather glad of Andy's ' brilliant flash of silence ' 
just at present, for not only did I wish to drink in and 
absorb the grand and novel beauty of the scene that opened 
out before me, but I wanted to understand as fully as I 
could some deep thought which it awoke within me. It 



4 THE SNAKE S PASS. 

may have been merely the grandeur and beauty of the 
scene — or perhaps it was the thunder which filled the air 
that July evening — but I felt exalted in a strange way, 
and impressed at the same time with a new sense of the 
reality of things. It almost seemed as if through that 
opening valley, with the mighty Atlantic beyond and the 
piling up of the storm-clouds overhead, I passed into a 
n 3w and more real life. 

Somehow I had of late seemed to myself to be waking 
up. My foreign tour had been gradually dissipating 
my old sleepy ideas, or perhaps overcoming the negative 
forces that had hitherto dominated my life; and now 
this glorious burst of wild natural beauty — the majesty 
of nature at its fullest — seemed to have completed my 
awakening, and I felt as though I looked for the first 
time with open eyes on the beauty and reality of the 
world. 

Hitherto my life had been but an inert one, and I was 
younger in many ways and more deficient in knowledge of 
the world in all ways than other young men of my own 
age. I had stepped but lately from boyhood, with all 
boyhood's surroundings, into manhood, and as yet I was 
hardly at ease in my new position. 

For the first time in my life I had had a holiday — a 
real holiday, as one can take it who can choose his own 
way of amusing himself. 

I had been brought up in an exceedingly quiet way 
with an old clergyman and his wife in the west of 
England, and except my fellow pupils, of whom there 



A SUDDEN STORM. . 5 

was never at any time more than one other, I had 
had little companionship. Altogether I knew very few 
people. I was the ward of a Great Aunt, who was 
wealthy and eccentric and of a sternly uncompromising 
disposition. When my father and mother were lost at 
sea, leaving me, an only child, quite unprovided for, 
she undertook to pay for my schooling and to start me 
in a profession if I should show sufficient aptitude for 
any. My father had been pretty well cut off by his 
family on account of his marriage with what they con- 
sidered his inferior, and times had been, I was always 
told, pretty hard for them both. I was only a very 
small boy when they were lost in a fog when crossing 
the Channel; and the blank that their loss caused me 
made me, I dare say, seem even a duller boy than I was. 
As I did not get into much trouble and did not exhibit 
any special restlessness of disposition, my Great Aunt 
took it, I suppose, for granted that I was very well off 
where I was ; and when, through growing years, the 
fiction of my being a schoolboy could be no longer 
supported, the old clergyman was called " guardian " 
instead of " tutor," and I passed with him the years that 
young men of the better class usually spend in College 
life. The nominal change of position made little diffe- 
rence to me, except that I was taught to ride and shoot, 
and was generally given the rudiments of an education 
which was to fit me for being a country gentleman. I 
dare say that my tutor had some secret understanding 
with my Great Aunt, but he never gave me any hint 



6 the snake's pass. 

whatever of her feelings towards me. A part of my 
holidays each year was spent in her place, a beautiful 
country seat. Here I was always treated by the old 
lady with rigid severity but with the best of good 
manners, and by the servants with affection as well as 
respect. There were a host of cousins, both male and 
female, who came to the house; but I can honestly say 
that by not one of them was I ever treated with cor- 
diality. It may have been my fault, or the misfortune 
of my shyness ; but I never met one of them without 
being made to feel that I was an " outsider." 

I can understand now the cause of this treatment as 
arising from their suspicions when I remember that the 
old lady, who had been so severe with me all my life, 
sent for me when she lay on her deathbed, and, taking 
my hand in hers and holding it tight, said, between her 
gasps : — 

" Arthur, I hope I have not done wrong, but I have 
reared you so that the world may for you have good as 
well as bad — happiness as well as unhappiness ; that 
you may find many pleasures where you thought there 
were but few. Your youth, I know, my dear boy, has 
not been a happy one ; but it was because I, who loved 
your dear father as if he had been my own son — and 
from whom I unhappily allowed myself to be estranged 
until it was too late — wanted you to have a good and 
happy manhood." 

She did not say any more, but closed her eyes and still 
held my hand. I feared to take it away lest I should 



A SUDDEN STORM. 7 

disturb her ; but presently the clasp seemed to relax, and 
I found that she was dead. 

I had never seen a dead person, much less anyone die, 
and the event made a great impression on me. But youth 
is elastic, and the old lady had never been much in my 
heart. 

When the will was read, it was found that I had been 
left heir to all her property, and that I would be called 
upon to take a place among the magnates of the county. 
I could not fall at once into the position and, as I was of 
a shy nature, resolved to spend at least a few months in 
travel. This I did, and when I had returned, after a 
six months' tour, I accepted the cordial invitation of 
some friends, made on my travels, to pay them a visit 
at their place in the County of Clare. 

As my time was my own, and as I had a week or two 
to spare, I had determined to improve my knowledge 
of Irish affairs by making a detour through some of 
the counties in the west on my way to Clare. 

By this time I was just beginning to realize that life 
has many pleasures. Each day a new world of interest 
seemed to open before me. The experiment of my 
Great Aunt might yet be crowned with success. 

And now the consciousness of the change in myself 
had come home to me — come with the unexpected sud- 
denness of the first streak of the dawn through the 
morning mists. The moment was to be to me a notable 
one ; and as I wished to remember it to the full, I tried 
to take in all the scene where such a revelation first 



8 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

dawned upon me. I had fixed in my mind, as the 
central point for my memory to rest on, a promontory 
right under the direct line of the sun, when I was 
interrupted by a remark made, not to me but seemingly 
to the universe in general : — 

" Musha ! but it's comin' quick." 

"What is coming?" I asked. 

" The shtorm ! Don't ye see the way thim clouds is 
dhriftin' ? Faix ! but it's fine times the ducks '11 be 
afther havin' before many minutes is past." 

I did not heed his words much, for my thoughts were 
intent on the scene. We were rapidly descending the 
valley, and, as we got lower, the promontory seemed to 
take bolder shape, and was beginning to stand out as 
a round-topped hill of somewhat noble proportions. 

" Tell me, Andy," I said, " what do they call the hill 
beyond ? " 

" The hill beyant there is it ? Well, now, they call 
the place Shleenanaher." 

" Then that is Shleenanaher mountain ? " 

" Begor it's not. The mountain is called Knockcallte- 
crore. It's Irish." 

" And what does it mean ? " 

" Faix, I believe it's a short name for the Hill iv the 
Lost Goolden Crown." 

" And what is Shleenanaher, Andy ? " 

" Throth, it's a bit iv a gap in the rocks beyant that 
they call Shleenanaher." 

" And what does that mean? It is Irish, I suppose ? " 



A SUDDEN STORM. 9 

" Thrue for ye ! Irish it is, an' it manes ' The Shnake's 
Pass.' " 

" Indeed ! And can you tell me why it is so called ? " 

" Begor, there's a power iv raysons guv for callin' it 
that. Wait till we get Jerry Scanlan or Bat Moynahan, 
beyant in Carnaclif ! Sure they knows every laygend 
and shtory in the bar'ny, an'll tell them all, av ye like. 
Whew ! Musha ! here it comes." 

Surely enough it did come. The storm seemed to 
sweep through the valley in a single instant — the still- 
ness changed to a roar, the air became dark with the 
clouds of drifting rain. It was like the bursting of a 
waterspout in volume, and came so quickly that I was 
drenched to the skin before I could throw my mackin- 
tosh round me. The mare seemed frightened at first, 
but Andy held her in with a steady hand and with 
comforting words, and after the first rush of the tempest 
she went on as calmly and steadily as hitherto, only 
shrinking a little at the lightning and the thunder. 

The grandeur of that storm was something to re- 
member. The lightning came in brilliant sheets that 
seemed to cleave the sky, and threw weird lights amongst 
the hills, now strange with black sweeping shadows. The 
thunder broke with startling violence right over our heads, 
and flapped and buffeted from hillside to hillside, rolling 
and reverberating away into the distance, its farther 
voices being lost in the crash of each succeeding peal. 

On we went, through the driving storm, faster and 
faster ; but the storm abated not a jot. Andy was too 



10 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

much occupied with his work to speak, and as for me it 
took all my time to keep on the rocking and swaying car, 
and to hold my hat and mackintosh so as to shield myself, 
as well as I could, from the pelting storm. Andy seemed 
to be above all considerations of personal comfort. He 
turned up his coat collar, that was all ; and soon he was 
as shiny as my own waterproof rug. Indeed, altogether, 
he seemed quite as well off as I was, or even better, for 
we were both as wet as we could be, and whilst I was 
painfully endeavouring to keep off the rain he was 
free from all responsibility and anxiety of endeavour 
whatever. 

At length, as we entered on a long straight stretch of 
level road, he turned to me and said : — 

" Yer 'an'r it's no kind iv use dhrivin' like this all the 
way to Carnaclif. This shtorm '11 go on for hours. I 
know thim well up in these mountains, wid' a nor'-aist 
wind blowin'. Wouldn't it be betther for us to get 
shelther for a bit ? " 

" Of course it would," said I. " Try it at once ! 
Where can you go ? " 

"There's a place nigh at hand, yer 'an'r, the Widdy 
Kelligan's sheebeen, at the cross-roads of Glenna- 
shaughlin. It's quite contagious. Gee-up ! ye ould corn- 
crake ! hurry up to Widdy Kelligan's." 

It seemed almost as if the mare understood him and 
shared his wishes, for she started with increased speed 
down a laneway that opened out a little on our left. In 
a few minutes we reached the cross-roads, and also 



A SUDDEN STORM. 11 

the sheebeen of Widow Kelligan, a low whitewashed 
thatched house, in a deep hollow between high banks 
in the south-western corner of the cross. Andy 
jumped down and hurried to the door. 

" Here's a sthrange gintleman, Widdy. Take care iv 
him," he called out, as I entered. 

Before I had succeeded in closing the door behind me 
he was unharnessing the mare, preparatory to placing 
her in the lean-to stable, built behind the house against 
the high bank. 

Already the storm seemed to have sent quite an assem- 
blage to Mrs. Kelligan's hospitable shelter. A great fire 
of turf roared up the chimney, and round it stood, and sat, 
and lay a steaming mass of nearly a dozen people, men 
and women. The room was a large one, and the inglenook 
so roomy that nearly all those present found a place in it. 
The roof was black, rafters and thatch alike ; quite a 
number of cocks and hens found shelter in the rafters at 
the end of the room. Over the fire was a large pot, sus- 
pended on a wire, and there was a savoury and inexpres- 
sibly appetizing smell of marked volume throughout the 
room of roasted herrings and whisky punch. 

As I came in all rose up, and I found myself placed in 
a warm seat close to the fire, whilst various salutations of 
welcome buzzed all around me. The warmth was most 
grateful, and I was trying to convey my thanks for the 
shelter and the welcome, and feeling very awkward over 
it, when, with a " GJ-od save all here ! " Andy entered the 
room through the back door. 



12 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

He was evidently a popular favourite, for there was a 
perfect rain of hearty expressions to him. He, too, was 
placed close to the fire, and a steaming jorum of punch 
placed in his hands — a similar one to that which had 
been already placed in my own. Andy lost no time in 
sampling that punch. Neither did I ; and I can honestly 
say that if he enjoyed his more than I did mine he must 
have had a very happy few minutes. He lost no time 
in making himself and all the rest comfortable. 

" Hurroo ! " said he. "Musha ! but we're just in time. 
Mother, is the herrins done ? Up with the creel, and turn 
out the pitaties ; they're done, or me senses desaves me. 
Yer 'an'r, we're in the hoight iv good luck ! Herrins, it 
is, and it might have been only pitaties an' point." 

"What is that?" I asked. 

" Oh, that is whin there is only wan herrin' amongst a 
crowd — too little to give aich a taste, and so they put it in 
the middle and point the pitaties at it to give them a 
flaviour." 

All lent a hand with the preparation of supper. A 
great potato basket, which would hold some two hundred- 
weight, was turned bottom up — the pot was taken off the 
fire, and the contents turned out on it in a great steaming 
mass of potatoes. A handful of coarse salt was taken 
from a box and put on one side of the basket, and another 
on the other side. The herrings were cut in pieces, and 
a piece given to each. — The dinner was served. 

There were no plates, no knives, forks or spoons — no 
ceremony — no precedence — nor was there any heartburn- 



A SUDDEN STORM. 13 

ing, jealousy or greed. A happier meal I never took a 
part in — nor did I ever enjoy food more. Such as it was 
it was perfect. The potatoes were fine and cooked to per- 
fection ; we took them in our fingers, peeled them how 
we could, dipped them in the salt — and ate till we were 
satisfied. 

During the meal several more strangers dropped in and 
all reported the storm as showing no signs of abating. 
Indeed, little such assurance was wanting, for the fierce 
lash of the rain and the howling of the storm as it beat on 
the face of the house, told the tale well enough for the 
meanest comprehension. 

When dinner was over and the basket removed, we 
drew around the fire again — pipes were lit — a great 
steaming jug of punch made its appearance, and con- 
versation became general. Of course, as a stranger, I 
came in for a good share of attention. 

Andy helped to make things interesting for me, and his 
statement, made by my request, that I hoped to be allowed 
to provide the punch for the evening, even increased his 
popularity, whilst it established mine. After calling 
attention to several matters which evoked local stories 
and jokes and anecdotes, he remarked : — 

" His 'an'r was axin' me just afore the shtorm kem on as 
to why the Shleenanaher was called so. I tould him that 
none could tell him like Jerry Scanlan or Bat Moynahan, 
an' here is the both of them, sure enough. Now, boys, 
won't ye oblige the sthrange gintleman an tell him what 
vez know iv the shtories anent the hill ? " 



14 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

" Wid all the plisure in life," said Jerry Scanlan, a tall 
man of middle age, with a long, thin, clean shaven face, a 
humorous eye, and a shirt collar whose points in front 
came up almost to his eyes, whilst the back part dis- 
appeared into the depths of his frieze coat collar behind. 

" Begor yer 'an'r I'll tell ye all I iver heerd. Sure 
there's a laygend, and there's a shtory — musha ! but 
there's a wheen o' both laygends and shtories — but there's 
wan laygend beyant all — Here ! Mother Kelligan, fill up 
me glass, fur sorra one o' me is a good dhry shpaker — 
Tell me, now, sor, do they allow punch to the Mimbers 
iv Parlymint whin they're spakin' ? " I shook my head. 

"Musha! thin, but its meself they'll nWer git as a 
mimber till they alther that law. Thank ye, Mrs. Kelligan, 
this is just my shtyle. But now for the laygend that they 
tell of Shleenanaher : — " 



15 



CHAPTER IT. 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 



"Well, in the ould ancient times, before St. Patrick 
banished the shnakes from out iv Ireland, the hill bey ant 
was a mighty important place intirely. For more betoken, 
none other lived in it than the King iv the Shnakes him- 
self. In thim times there was up at the top iv the hill a 
wee bit iv a lake wid threes and sedges and the like 
growin' round it ; and 'twas there that the King iv the 
Shnakes made his nist — or whativer it is that shnakes calls 
their home. Glory be to God ! but none us of knows any- 
thin' of them at all, at all, since Saint Patrick tuk them 
in hand." 

Here an old man in the chimney corner struck in: — 
" Thrue for ye, Acushla ; sure the bit lake is there 
still, though more belike its dhry now it is, and the 
threes is all gone." 

" Well," went on Jerry, not ill-pleased with this corro-- 
boration of his story, "the King iv the Shnakes was 
mighty important intirely. He was more nor tin times as 
big as any shnake as any man's eyes had iver saw ; an' he 
had a goolden crown on to the top of his head, wid a big 



16 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

jool in it that tuk the colour iv the light, whether that 
same was from the sun or the moon ; an' all the shnakes 
had to take it in turns to bring food, and lave it for him 
in the cool iv the evenin', whin he would come out and ate 
it up and go back to his own place. An' they do say that 
whiniver two shnakes had a quarr'll they had to come to 
the King, an' he decided betune them ; an' he tould aich 
iv them where he was to live, and what he was to do. An' 
wanst in ivery year there had to be brought to him a live 
baby ; and they do say that he would wait until the moon 
was at the full, an' thin would be heerd one wild wail that 
made every sowl widin miles shuddher, an' thin there 
would be black silence, and clouds would come over the 
moon, and for three days it would never be seen agin." 

" Oh, Glory be to God ! " murmured one of the women, 
" but it was a terrible thing ! " and she rocked herself 
to and fro, moaning, all the motherhood in her awake. 

" But did none of the min do nothin' r " said a 
powerful-looking young fellow in the orange and green 
jersey of the Gaelic Athletic Club, with his eyes flash- 
ing ; and he clenched his teeth. 

" Musha ! how could they ? Sure, no man ever seen 
the King iv the Shnakes!" 

" Thin how did they know about him ? " he queried 
doubtfully. 

" Sure, wasn't one of their childher tuk away iv'ry 
year ? But, anyhow, it's all over now ! an' so it was 
that none iv the min iver wint. They do say that one 
woman what lost her child, run up to the top of the 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 17 

hill; but what she seen, none could tell, for, whin 
they found her she was a ravin' lunatic, wid white 
hair an eyes like a corpse — an' the mornin' afther 
they found her dead in her bed wid a black mark 
round her neck as if she had been choked, an' the 
mark was in the shape iv a shnake. Well ! there was 
much sorra and much fear, and whin St. Pathrick tuk 
the shnakes in hand the bonfires was lit all over the 
counthry. Never was such a flittin' seen as whin the 
shnakes came from all parts wrigglin' and crawlin' an 
shkwirmin'." 

Here the narrator dramatically threw himself into an 
attitude, and with the skill of a true improvisatore, sug- 
gested in every pose and with every limb and in every 
motion the serpentine movements. 

" They all came away to the West, and seemed to come 
to this wan mountain. From the North and the South 
and the East they came be millions an' thousands an' 
hundhreds — for whin St. Patrick ordhered them out he 
only tould them to go, but he did'nt name the place — an 
there was he up on top of Brandon mountain wid his 
vistments on to him an' his crozier in his hand, and 
the shnakes movein' below him, all goin up North, an', 
sez he to himself: — 

" ' I must see about this.' An' he got down from aff 
iv the mountain, and he folly' d the shnakes, and he 
see them move along to the hill beyant that they call 
Knockcalltecrore. An' be this time they wor all come 
from all over Ireland, and they wor all round the 
c 



18 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

mountain — exceptin' on the say side — an' they all had 
their heads pointed up the hill, and their tails pointed 
to the Saint, so that they didn't see him, an' they all 
gave wan great hiss, an' then another, an' another, like 
wan, two, three ! An' at the third hiss the King of 
the Shnakes rose up out of the wee fen at the top of 
the hill, wid his gold crown gleamin' — an' more betoken 
it was harvest time, an' the moon was up, an' the sun 
was settin', so the big jool in the crown had the light 
of both the sun an' the moon, an' it shone so bright 
that right away in Lensther the people thought the whole 
counthry was afire. But whin the Saint seen him, his 
whole forrum seemed to swell out an' get bigger an' 
bigger, an' he lifted his crozier, an' he pointed West, an' 
sez he, in a voice like a shtorm, ' To the say all ye 
shnakes ! At wanst ! to the say ! ' 

"An' in the instant, wid wan movement, an' wid a 
hiss that made the air seem full iv watherfalls the whole 
iv the shnakes that was round the hill wriggled away 
into the say as if the fire was at their tails. There was 
so many iv them that they filled up the say out beyant 
to Cusheen Island, and them that was behind, had to 
shlide over their bodies. An' the say piled up till it 
sent a wave mountains high rollin' away across the 
Atlantic till it sthruck upon the shore iv America — 
though more betoken it wasn't America thin, for it 
wasn't discovered till long afther. An' there was so 
many shnakes that they do say that all the white sand 
that dhrifts up on the coast from the Blaskets to 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 19 

Achill Head is made from their bones." Here Andy 
cut in: — 

"But, Jerry, you haven't tould us if the King iv the 
Shnakes wint too." 

" Musha ! but it's in a hurry ye are. How can I 
tell ye the whole laygend at wanst; an', moreover, 
when me mouth is that dhry I can hardly spake at 
all — an' me punch is all dhrunk " 

He turned his glass face down on the table, with an air 
of comic resignation. Mrs. Kelligan took the hint and 
refilled his glass whilst he went on : — 

" Well ! whin the shnakes tuk to say-bathin' an' forgot 
to come in to dhry themselves, the ould King iv thim 
sunk down agin into the lake, an' Saint Pathrick rowls 
his eyes, an' sez he to himself : — 

" ' Musha ! is it dhramin' I am, or what ? or is it 
laughin' at me he is ? Does he mane to defy me ? ' 
An' seein' that no notice was tuk iv him at all, he lifts 
his crozier, and calls out : — 

" ' Hi ! Here ! You ! Come here ! I want ye ! ' — As he 
spoke, Jerry went through all the pantomime of the 
occasion, exemplifying by every movement the speech 
of both the Saint and the Snake. 

" Well ! thin the King iv the Shnakes puts up his 
head, out iv the lake, an' sez he : — 

"'Who calls?' 

" ' I do,' says Saint Pathrick, an' he was so much 
mulvathered at the Shnake presumin' to sthay, afther 
he tould thim all to go, that for a while he didn't 
think it quare that he could sphake at all. 



20 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

" ' Well, what do ye want wid me ? ' sez the Shnake. 
" ' I want to know why you didn't lave Irish soil wid 
all th' other Shnakes,' sez the Saint. 

" ' Ye tould the Shnakes to go,' sez the King, ■ an' I 
am their King, so I am; and your wurrds didn't apply 
to me ! ' an' with that he dhrops like a flash of lightnin' 
into the lake agin. 

" Well ! St. Patrick was so tuk back wid his impidence 
that he had to think for a minit, an' then he calls 
again : — 

" ' Hi ! here ! you ! ' 

" ' What do you want now ? ' sez the King iv the 
Shnakes, again poppin' up his head. 

" ' I want to know why you didn't obey me ordhers ? ' 
sez the Saint. An' the King luked at him an' laughed ; 
and he looked mighty evil, I can tell ye— for be this time 
the sun was down and the moon up, and the jool in his 
crown threw out a pale cold light that would make you 
shuddher to see. 'An',' says he, as slow an' as hard as 
an attorney (saving your prisence) when he has a bad 
case : — 

"'I didn't obey,' sez he, 'because I thraverse the 
jurisdiction.' 

" ' How do ye mane ? ' asks St. Pathrick. 
" ' Because,' sez he, ' this is my own houldin',* sez he, 
1 be perscriptive right,' sez he. • I'm the whole gover- 
mint here, and I put a nexeat on meself not to lave 
widout me own permission,' and he ducks down agin 
into the pond. 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 21 

"Well, fhe Saint began to get mighty angry, an' he 
raises his crozier, and he calls him agin : — 

" ' Hi ! here ! yon ! ' and the Shnake pops up. 

"'Well! Saint, what do you want now? Amn't I 
to be quit iv ye at all ? ' 

" ' Are ye goin', or are ye not ? ' sez the Saint. 

"'I'm king here; an' I'm not goin'.' 

" ' Thin,' says the Saint, ' I depose ye ! ' 

" ' You can't,' sez the Shnake, * whilst I have me 
crown.' 

" ' Then I'll take it from ye,' sez St. Pathrick. 

" ' Catch me first ! ' sez the Shnake ; an' wid that 
he pops undher the wather, what began to bubble up 
and boil. Well thin ! the good Saint stood bewildhered, 
for as he was lukin' the wather began to disappear out 
of the wee lake — and then the ground iv the hill began 
to be shaken as if the big Shnake was rushin' round 
and round it down deep down undher the ground. 

" So the Saint stood on the edge of the empty lake an' 
held up his crozier, and called on the Shnake to come 
forth. And when he hiked down, lo ! an' behold ye ! 
there lay the King iv the Shnakes coiled round the 
bottom iv the lake — though how he had got there the 
Saint could niver tell, for he hadn't been there when 
he began to summons him. Then the Shnake raised 
his head, and, lo ! and behold ye ! there was no crown 
on to it. 

" ' Where is your crown ? ' sez the Saint. 

"'It's hid,' sez the Shnake, leerin' at him. 



22 THE shake's pass. 

" ' Where is it liid ? ' 

" ' It's hid in the mountain ! Buried where you nor 
the likes iv you can't touch it in a thousand years ! ' 
an' he leered agin. 

" ' Tell me where it may be found ? ' sez the Saint 
starnly. An' thin the Shnake leers at him again wid 
an eviller smile than before ; an' sez he : — 

" ' Did ye see the wather what was in the lake ? ' 

" ' I did,' sez Saint Pathrick. 

" ' Thin, when ye find that wather ye may find me 
jool'd crown, too,' sez he ; an' before the Saint could 
say a word, he wint on: — 

" ' An' till ye git me crown I'm king here still, though 
ye banish me. An' mayhap, I'll come in some forrum 
what ye don't suspect, for I must watch me crown. An' 
now I go away — iv me own accorrd.' An' widout one 
word more, good or bad, he shlid right away into the 
say, dhrivin' through the rock an' makin' the clift that 
they call the Shleenanaher — an' that's Irish for the 
Shnake's Pass — until this day." 

" An' now, sir, if Mrs. Kelligan hasn't dhrunk up 
the whole bar'l, I'd like a dhrop iv punch, for talkin' is 
dhry wurrk," and he buried his head in the steaming 
jorum, which the hostess had already prepared. 

The company then began to discuss the legend. Said 
one of the women : — 

" I wondher what forrum he tuk when he kem back ! " 
Jerry answered : — 

" Sure, they do say that the shiftin' bog wor the forrum 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 23 

he tuk. The mountain wid the lake on top used to be the 
fertilest shpot in the whole counthry ; but iver since the 
bog began to shift this was niver the same." 

Here a hard-faced man named McGlown, who had 
been silent, struck in with a question : — 

" But who knows when the bog did begin to shift ? " 

" Musha ! Sorra one of me knows ; but it was whin 
th' ould Shnake druv the wather iv the lake into the 
hill!" — There was a twinkle in the eyes of the story- 
teller, which made one doubt his own belief in his 
story. 

" Well, for ma own part," said McGlown, ** A don't 
believe a sengle word of it." 

" An' for why not ? " said one of the women. " Isn't 
the mountain called ' Knockcalltecrore,' or ' The Hill of 
the Lost Crown iv Gold,' till this day ? " Said another : — 

" Musha ! how could Misther McGlown believe any- 
thin', an' him a Protestan'." 

"A'll tell ye that A much prefer the facs," said 
McGlown. ** Ef hestory es till be believed, A much 
prefer the story told till me by yon old man. Damn 
me! but A believe he's old enough till remember the 
theng itself." 

He pointed as he spoke to old Moynahan, who, 
shrivelled up and white-haired, crouched in a corner 
of the ingle-nook, holding close to the fire his wrinkled 
shaky hands. 

"What is the story that Mr. Moynahan has, may I 
ask ? " said I. " Pray oblige, me, won't you ? I am 



24 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

anxious to hear all I can of the mountain, for it has 
taken my fancy strangely." 

The old man took the glass of punch, which Mrs. 
Kelligan handed him as the necessary condition ante- 
cedent to a story, and began : — 

" Oh, sorra one of me knows anythin' except what I've 
heerd from me father. But I oft heerd him say that he 
was tould, that it was said, that in the Frinch invasion 
that didn't come off undher Gineral Humbert, whin the 
attimpt was over an' all hope was gone, the English 
sodgers made sure of great prize-money whin they 
should git hould of the 'threasure chist. For it was 
known that there was much money goin' an' that they 
had brought a lot more than iver they wanted for pay 
and expinses in ordher to help to bribe some of the 
people that was houldin' off to be bought by wan side 
or the other — if they couldn't manage to git bought be 
both. But sure enough they wor all sould, bad cess 
to thim ! and the divil a bit of money could they lay 
their hands on at all." 

Here the old man took a pull at his jug of punch, 
with so transparent a wish to be further interrogated 
that a smile flashed round the company. One of the 
old crones remarked, in an audible sotto voce : — 

" Musha ! But Bat is the cute story-teller intirely. 
Ye have to dhrag it out iv him ! Go on, Bat ! Go on ! 
Tell us what become iv the money." 

" Oh, what become iv the money ? So ye would like 
to hear! Well, I'll tell ye. — Just one more fill of the 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 25 

jug, Mrs. Kelligan, as the gintleman wishes to know 
all about it. — Well! they did say that the officer what 
had charge of the money got well away with some five 
or six others. The chist was a heavy wan — an iron 
chist bang full up iv goold ! Oh, my ! but it was fine ! 
A big chist — that high, an' as long as the table, an' 
full up to the led wid goolden money an' paper money, 
an' divil a piece of white money in it at all ! All 
goold, every pound note iv it." 

He paused, and glanced anxiously at Mrs. Kelligan, 
who was engaged in the new brew. 

" Not too much wather if ye love me, Katty. You know 
me wakeness ! — Well, they do say that it tuk hard work 
to lift the chist into the boat ; an' thin they put in a gun 
carriage to carry it on, an' tuk out two horses, an' whin 
the shmoke was all round an' the darkness of night was 
on they got on shore, an' made away down South from 
where the landin' was made at Killala. But, anyhow, 
they say that none of them was ever heerd of agin. But 
they was thraced through Ardnaree an' Lough Conn, an' 
through Castlebar Lake an' Lough Carra, an' through 
Lough Mask an' Lough Corrib. But they niver kem 
out through Galway, for the river was watched for thim 
day an' night be the sodgers ; and how they got along 
God knows ! for 'twas said they suffered quare hardships. 
They tuk the chist an' the gun carriage an' the horses in 
the boat, an' whin they couldn't go no further they 
dhragged the boat over the land to the next lake, an' so 
on. Sure one dhry sayson, when the wathers iv Corrib 



26 THE snake's pass. 

was down feet lower nor they was iver known afore, a 
boat was found up at the Bealanabrack end that had lay 
there for years ; but the niin nor the horses nor the 
treasure was never heerd of from that day to this — so 
they say," he added, in a mysterious way, and he 
renewed his attention to the punch, as if his - tale was 
ended. 

" But, man alive ! " said McGlown, " that's only a 
part. Go on, man dear! an' fenesh the punch after." 

" Oh, oh ! Yes, of course, you want to know the end. 
Well ! no wan knows the end. But they used to say that 
whin the min lift the boat they wint due west, till one 
night they sthruck the mountain beyant ; an' that there 
they buried the chist an' killed the horses, or rode away 
on them. But anyhow, they wor niver seen again ; an' as 
sure as you're alive, the money is there in the hill ! For 
luk at the name iv it ! Why did any wan iver call it 
1 Knockcalltore ' — an' that's Irish for ' the Hill of the 
Lost Gold ' — if the money isn't there ? " 

" Thrue for ye ! " murmured an old woman with a 
cutty pipe. " For why, indeed ? There's some people 
what won't believe nothin' altho' it's undher their 
eyes ! " and she puffed away in silent rebuke to the 
spirit of scepticism — which, by the way, had not been 
manifested by any person present. 

There was a long pause, broken only by one of the old 
women, who occasionally gave a sort of half-grunt, half- 
sigh, as though unconsciously to fill up the hiatus in 
the talk. She was a ' keener ' by profession, and was 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 27 

evidently well fitted to, and well drilled in, her work. 
Presently old Moynahan broke the silence : — 

" Well ! it's a mighty quare thing anyhow that the hill 
beyant has been singled out for laygends and sthories and 
gossip iv all kinds consarnin' shnakes an' the like. An' 
I'm not so sure, naythur, that some iv thim isn't there 
shtill — for mind ye ! it's a mighty curious thin' that the 
bog beyant keeps shiftin' till this day. And I'm not so 
sure, naythur, that the shnakes has all left the hill yit ! " 

There was a chorus of " Thrue for ye ! " 

"Aye, an' it's a black shnake too!" said one. 

" An' wid side-whishkers ! " said another. 

" Begorra ! we want Saint Pathrick to luk in here 
agin ! " said a third. 

I whispered to Andy the driver : — 

" Who is it they mean P " 

"Whisht!" he answered, but without moving his 
lips ; " but don't let on I tould ye ! Sure an' it's Black 
Murdock they mane." 

" Who or what is Murdock ? " I queried. 

" Sure an' he is the Gombeen Man." 

" What is that ? What is a gombeen man ? " 

" Whisper me now ! " said Andy ; " ax some iv the 
others. They'll larn it ye more betther nor I can." 

" What is a gombeen man ? " I asked to the company 
generally. 

" A gombeen man is it ? Well ! I'll tell ye," said an 
old, shrewd-looking man at the other side of the hearth. 
" He's a man that linds you a few shillin's or a few pounds 



28 THE snake's pass. 

whin ye want it bad, and then niver laves ye till he has 
tuk all ye've got — yer land an' yer shanty an' yer holdin' 
an' yer money an' yer craps; an' he would take the 
blood out of yer body if he could sell it or use it 
anyhow ! " 

" Oh, I see, a sort of usurer." 

"Ushurer ? aye that's it ; but a ushurer lives in the city 
an' has laws to hould him in. But the gombeen has 
nayther law nor the fear iv law. He's like wan that 
the Scriptures says ' grinds the faces iv the poor.' . 
Begor! it's him that'd do little for God's sake if the 
divil was dead ! " 

" Then I suppose this man Murdock is a man of 
means — a rich man in his way?" 

" Rich is it ? Sure an' it's him as has plinty. He 
could lave this place if he chose an' settle in Galway 
— aye or in Dublin itself if he liked betther, and lind 
money to big min — landlords an' the like — instead iv 
playin' wid poor min here an' swallyin' them up, wan 
be wan. — But he can't go ! He can't go ! " This he 
said with a vengeful light in his eyes ; I turned to 
Andy for explanation. 

"Can't go! How does he mean? What does he 
mean?" 

" Whisht ! Don't ax me. Ax Dan, there. He doesn't 
owe him any money ! " 

" Which is Dan ? " 

"The ould man there be the settle what has just 
spoke, Dan Moriarty. He's a warrum man, wid money 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 29 

in bank an' what owns his houldin' ; an' he's not afeerd 
to have his say about Murdock." 

"Can any of you tell me why Murdock can't leave 
the Hill ? " I spoke out. 

"Begor' I can," said Dan, quickly. "He can't lave 
it because the Hill houlds him ! " 

" What on earth do you mean ? How can the Hill 
hold him ? " 

" It can hould tight enough ! There may be ray sons 
that a man gives — sometimes wan thing, an' sometimes 
another; but the Hill houlds — an' houlds tight all the 
same ! " 

Here the door was opened suddenly, and the fire blazed 
up with the rush of wind that entered. All stood up 
suddenly, for the new comer was a priest. He was a 
sturdy man of middle age, with a cheerful countenance. 
Sturdy as he was, however, it took him all his strength to 
shut the door, but he succeeded before any of the men 
could get near enough to help him. Then he turned and 
saluted all the company: — 

" God save all here." 

All present tried to do him some service. One took his 
wet great coat, another his dripping hat, and a third 
pressed him into the warmest seat in the chimney corner, 
where, in a very few seconds, Mrs. Kelligan handed him a 
steaming glass of punch, saying, "Dhrink that up, yer 
Biv'rence. 'Twill help to kape ye from catchin' cowld." 

"Thank ye, kindly," he answered, as he took it. 
When he had half emptied the glass, he said: — 



30 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

"What was it I heard as I came in about the Hill 
holding some one ? " Dan answered : — 

" 'Twas me, yer Eiverence, I said that the Hill had 
hould of Black Murdock, and could hould him tight." 

"Pooh! pooh! man; don't talk such nonsense. The fact 
is, sir," said he, turning to me after throwing a searching 
glance round the company, " the people here have all sorts 
of stories about that unlucky Hill — why, God knows; and 
this man Murdock, that they call Black Murdock, is a 
money-lender as well as a farmer, and none of them like 
him, for he is a hard man and has done some cruel things 
among them. When they say the Hill holds him, they 
mean that he doesn't like to leave it because he hopes to 
find a treasure that is said to be buried in it. I'm not 
sure but that the blame is to be thrown on the different 
names given to the Hill. That most commonly given is 
Knockcalltecrore, which is a corruption of the Irish phrase 
Knock-na-callte-croin-6ir, meaning, ' The Hill of the Lost 
Golden Crown ; ' but it has been sometimes called Knock - 
calltore — short for the Irish words Knock-na-callte-6ir, or 
' The Hill of the Lost Gold.' It is said that in some old 
past time it was called Knocknanaher, or ' The Hill of the 
Snake;' and, indeed, there's one place on it' they call 
Shleenanaher, meaning the * Snake's Pass.' I dare say, 
now, that they have been giving you the legends and 
stories and all the rubbish of that kind. I suppose you 
1 know, sir, that in most places the local fancy has run 
riot at some period and has left a good crop of absur- 
dities and impossibilities behind it?" 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 31 

I acquiesced warmly, for I felt touched by the good 
priest's desire to explain matters, and to hold his own 
people blameless for crude ideas which he did not share. 
He went on : — 

" It is a queer thing that men must be always putting 
abstract ideas into concrete shape. No doubt there have 
been some strange matters regarding this mountain that 
they've been talking about — the Shifting Bog, for instance ; 
and as the people could not account for it in any way that 
they can understand, they knocked up a legend about it. 
Indeed, to be just to them, the legend is a very old one, 
and is mentioned in a manuscript of the twelfth century. 
But somehow it was lost sight of till about a hundred 
years ago, when the loss of the treasure-chest from the 
French invasion at Killala set all the imaginations of the 
people at work, from Donegal to Cork, and they fixed the 
Hill of the Lost Gold as the spot where the money was to 
be found. There is not a word of fact in the story from 
beginning to end, and" — here he gave a somewhat stern 
glance round the room — " I'm a little ashamed to hear so 
much chat and nonsense given to a strange gentleman 
like as if it was so much gospel. However, you mustn't be 
too hard in your thoughts on the poor people here, sir, for 
they're good people — none better in all Ireland — in all 
the world for that — but they talk too free to do themselves 
justice." 

All those presert were silent for awhile. Old Moy- 
nahan was the first to speak. 

" Well, Father Pether, I don't say nothin' about Saint 



32 THE snake's pass. 

Patlirick an' the shnakes, meself, because I don't know 
nothin' about them ; but I know that me own father tould 
me that he seen the Frinchmin wid his own eyes crossin' 
the sthrame below, an' facin' up the mountain. The moon 
was risin' in the west, an' the hill threw a big shadda. 
There was two min an' two horses, an' they had a big box 
on a gun carriage. Me father seen them cross the sthrame. 
The load was so heavy that the wheels sunk in the clay, 
an' the min had to pull at them to git them up again. 
An' didn't he see the marks iv the wheels in the ground 
the very nixt day ? " 

"Bartholomew Moynahan, are you telling the truth?" 
interrupted the priest, speaking sternly. 

" Throth an I am, Father Pether ; divil a word iv a 
lie in all I've said." 

"Then how is it you've never told a word of this 
before? " 

"But I have tould it, Father Pether. There's more 
nor wan here now what has heered me tell it; but 
they wor tould as a saycret ! " 

" Thrue for ye ! " came the chorus of almost every 
person in the room. The unanimity was somewhat 
comic and caused amongst them a shamefaced silence, 
which lasted quite several seconds. The pause was not 
wasted, for by this time Mrs. Kelligan had brewed 
another jug of punch, and glasses were replenished. 
This interested the little crowd and they entered afresh 
into the subject. As for myself, however, I felt 
strangely uncomfortable. I could not quite account 
for it in any reasonable way. 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 33 

I suppose there must be an instinct in men as well 
as in the lower orders of animal creation — I felt as 
though there were a strange presence near me. 

I quietly looked round. Close to where I sat, on the 
sheltered side of the house, was a little window built 
in the deep recess of the wall, and, further, almost 
obliterated by the shadow of the priest as he sat close 
to the fire. Pressed against the empty lattice, where 
the glass had once been, I saw the face of a man — a 
dark, forbidding face it seemed in the slight glimpse I 
caught of it. The profile was towards me, for he was 
evidently listening intently, and he did not see me. 
Old Moynahan went on with his story : — 

"Me father hid behind a whin bush, an' lay as close 
as a hare in his forrum. The min seemed suspicious of 
bein' seen and they looked carefully all round for the 
sign of any wan. Thin they started up the side of the 
hill; an' a cloud came over the moon so that for a bit 
me father could see no thin'. But prisintly he seen the 
two min up on the side of the hill at the south, near 
Joyce's mearin'. Thin they disappeared agin, an' 
prisintly he seen the horses an' the gun carriage an' 
all up in the same place, an' the moonlight sthruck 
thim as they wint out iv the shadda; and men an' 
horses an' gun carriage an' chist an' all wint round to 
the back iv the hill at the west an' disappeared. Me 
father waited a minute or two to make sure, an' thin 
he run round as hard as he could an' hid behind the 
projectin' rock at the enthrance iv the Shleenanaher, 

D 



34 THE snake's pass. 

an' there f oreninst him ! right up the hill side he seen 
two min carryin' the chist, an' it nigh weighed thim 
down. But the horses an' the gun carriage was no- 
where to be seen. Well ! me father was stealin' out 
to folly thim, when he loosened a sthone an' it clattered 
down through the rocks at the Shnake's Pass wid a 
noise like a dhrum, an' the two min sot down the chist 
an' they turned ; an' whin they seen me father one of 
them runs at him, and he turned an' run. An' thin 
another black cloud "crossed the moon ; but me father 
knew ivery foot of the mountain side, and he run on 
through the dark. He heerd the footsteps behind him 
for a bit, but they seemed to get fainter an' fainter ; 
but he niver stopped runnin' till he got to his own 
cabin. — An' that was the last he iver see iv the men or 
the horses or the chist. Maybe they wint into the air 
or the say, or the mountain ; but anyhow they vanished, 
and from that day to this no sight or sound or word 
iv them was ever known ! " 

There was a universal, ' Oh ! ' of relief as he concluded, 
whilst he drained his glass. 

I looked round again at the little window — but the 
dark face was gone. 

Then there arose a perfect bable of sounds. All 
commented on the story, some in Irish, some in 
English, and some in a speech, English indeed, but so 
purely and locally idiomatic that I could only guess at 
what was intended to be conveyed. The comment 
generally took the form that two men were to be 



THE LOST CROWN OF GOLD. 35 

envied, one of them, the gombeen man, Murdock, who 
owned a portion of the western side of the hill, the 
other one, Joyce, who owned another section of the 
same aspect. 

In the midst of the buzz of conversation the clatter- 
ing of hoofs was heard. There was a shout, and the 
door opened again and admitted a stalwart stranger of 
some fifty years of age, with a strong, determined face, 
with kindly eyes, well dressed but wringing wet, and 
haggard, and seemingly disturbed in mind. One arm 
hung useless by his side. 

" Here's one of them !" said Father Peter. 



CHAPTEE III. 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 



" God save all here," said the man as lie entered. 

Room was made for him at the fire. He no sooner 
came near it and tasted the heat than a cloud of 
steam arose from him. 

" Man ! but ye're wet," said Mrs. Kelligan. " One'd 
think ye'd been in the lake bey ant ! " 

" So I have," he answered, " worse luck ! I rid all 
the way from Gal way this blessed day to be ■ here in 
time, but the mare slipped coming down Curragh Hill 
and threw me over the bank into the lake. I wor in 
the wather nigh three hours before I could get out, 
for I was foreninst the Curragh Eock an' only got a 
foothold in a chink, an' had to hold on wid me one 
arm for I fear the other is broke." 

" Dear ! dear ! dear ! " interrupted the woman. " Sthrip 
yer coat off, acushla, an' let us see if we can do any- 
thin'." 

He shook his head, as he answered: — 

" Not now, there's not a minute to spare. I must get 
up the Hill at once. I should have been there be sis 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 37 

o'clock. But I mayn't be too late yit. The mare has 
broke down entirely. Can any one here lend me a 
horse ? " 

There was no answer till Andy spoke: — 

" Me mare is in the shtable, but this gintleman has 
me an' her for the day, an* I have to lave him at 
Carnaclif to-night." 

Here I struck in: — 

" Never mind me, Andy ! If you can help this 
gentleman, do so: I'm better off here than driving 
through the storm. He wouldn't want to go on, with 
a broken arm, if he hadn't good reason!" 

The man looked at me with grateful eagerness: — 

"Thank yer honour, kindly. It's a rale gintleman 
ye are! An' I hope ye'll never be sorry for helpin' 
a poor fellow in sore throuble." 

" What's wrong, Phelim ? " asked the priest. " Is 
there anything troubling you that any one here can 
get rid of ? " 

" No thin', Father Pether, thank ye kindly. The 
throuble is me own intirely, an' no wan here could 
help me. But I must see Murdock to-night." 

There was a general sigh of commiseration; all un- 
derstood the situation. 

" Musha ! " said old Dan Moriarty, sotto voce. " An' 
is that the way of it ! An' is he too in the clutches 
iv that wolf ? Him that we all thought was so warrum. 
Glory be to God ! but it's a quare wurrld it is ; an' 
it's few there is in it that is what they seems. Me 



38 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

poor frind ! is there any way I can help ye ? I have a 
bit iv money by me that yer welkim to the lend iv av 
ye want it." 

The other shook his head gratefully: — 

" Thank ye kindly, Dan, but I have the money all 
right ; it's only the time I'm in trouble about ! " 

" Only the time ! me poor chap ! It's be time that 
the divil helps Black Murdock an* the likes iv him, the 
most iv all ! God be good to ye if he has got his 
clutch on yer back, an' has time on his side, for ye' 11 
want it ! " 

"Well! anyhow, I must be goin' now. Thank ye 
kindly, neighbours all. When a man's in throuble, 
sure the goodwill of his frinds is the greatest comfort 
he can have." 

" All but one, remember that ! all but one ! " said the 
priest. 

"Thank ye kindly, Father, I shan't forget. Thank 
ye Andy: an' you, too, young sir, I'm much beholden 
to ye. I hope, some day, I may have it to do a good 
turn for ye in return. Thank ye kindly again, and 
good night." He shook my hand warmly, and was 
going to the door, when old Dan said : — 

" An' as for that black-jawed ruffian, Murdock — " He 
paused, for the door suddenly opened, and a harsh voice 
said : — 

"Murtagh Murdock is here to answer for himself !" — 
It was my man at the window. 

There was a sort of paralyzed silence in the room, 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 39 

through which came the whisper of one of the old 
women : — 

" Musha ! talk iv the divil ! " 

Joyce's face grew very white ; one hand instinctively 
grasped his riding switch, the other hung uselessly by 
his side. Murdock spoke : — 

" I kem here expectin' to meet Phelim Joyce. I 
thought I'd save him the throuble of comin' wid the 
money." Joyce said in a husky voice : — 

" What do ye mane ? I have the money right enough 
here. I'm sorry I'm a bit late, but I had a bad accident 
— bruk me arrum, an' was nigh dhrownded in the Curragh 
Lake. But I was goin' up to ye at once, bad as I am, to 
pay ye yer money, Murdock." The Gombeen Man inter- 
rupted him: — 

" But it isn't to me ye'd have to come, me good man. 
Sure, it's the sheriff, himself, that was waitin' for ye', an' 
whin ye didn't come " — here Joyce winced ; the speaker 
smiled — " he done his work." 

" What wurrk, acushla ? " asked one of the women. 
Murdock answered slowly: — 

" He sould the lease iv the f arrum known as the 
Shleenanaher in open sale, in accordance wid the ter- 
rums of his notice, duly posted, and wid warnin' given 
to the houldher iv the lease." 

There was a long pause. Joyce was the first to 
speak : — 

"Ye' re jokin', Murdock. For God's sake say ye're 
jokin' ! Ye tould me yerself that I might have time to 



40 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

git the money. An' ye tould me that the pnttin' me farrnm 
up for sale was only a matther iv forrum to let me pay 
ye back in me own way. Nay ! more, ye asked me not to 
te tell any iv the neighbours, for fear some iv them might 
want to buy some iv me land. An' it's niver so, that 
whin ye got me aff to G-alway to rise the money, ye went 
on wid the sale, behind me back — wid not a soul by to 
spake for me or mine — an' sould up all I have ! No ! 
Murtagh Murdock, ye' re a hard man I know, but ye 
wouldn't do that ! Ye wouldn't do that ! " 

Murdock made no direct reply to him, but said seem- 
ingly to the company generally: — 

" I ixpected to see Phelim Joyce at the sale to-day, 
but as I had some business in which he was consarned, 
I kem here where I knew there'd be neighbours — an' 
sure so there is." 

He took out his pocket-book and wrote names, 
" Father Pether Eyan, Daniel Moriarty, Bartholomew 
Moynahan, Andhrew McGlown, Mrs. Katty Kelligan — 
that's enough ! I want ye all to see what I done. 
There's nothin' undherhand about me! Phelim Joyce, 
I give ye formial notice that yer land was sould an' 
bought be me, for ye broke yer word to repay me the 
money lint ye before the time fixed. Here's the 
Sheriff's assignmint, an' I tell ye before all these 
witnesses that I'll proceed with ejectment on title at 
wanst." 

All in the room were as still as statues. Joyce was 
fearfully still and pale, but when Murdock spoke the 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 41 

word "ejectment" lie seemed to wake in a moment to 
frenzied life. The blood flushed up in his face and 
he seemed about to do something rash; but with a 
great effort he controlled himself and said: — 

"Mr. Murdock, ye won't be too hard. I got the 
money to-day — it's here — but I had an accident that 
delayed me. I was thrown into the Curragh Lake and 
nigh drownded an' me arrum is bruk. Don't be so 
close as an hour or two — ye'll never be sorry for it. 
I'll pay ye all, and more, and thank ye into the 
bargain all me life; ye'll take back the paper, won't 
ye, for me childhren's sake — for Norah's sake ? " 

He faltered ; the other answered with an evil smile : — 

" Phelim Joyce, I've waited years for this moment — 
don't ye know me betther nor to think I would go 
back on meself whin I have shtarted on a road? I 
wouldn't take yer money, not if ivery pound note was 
spread into an acre and cut. up in tin-pound notes. I 
want yer land — I have waited for it, an' I mane to 
have it! — "Now don't beg me any more, for I won't go 
back — an' tho' its many a grudge I owe ye, I square 
them all before the neighbours be refusin' yer prayer. 
The land is mine, bought be open sale ; an' all the 
judges an' coorts in Ireland can't take it from me! 
An' what do ye say to that now, Phelim Joyce ? " 

The tortured man had been clutching the ash sapling 
which he had used as a riding whip, and from the nervous 
twitching of his fingers I knew that something was 
coming. And it came ; for, without a word, he struck 



42 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

the evil face before him — struck as quick as a flash 
of lightning — such a blow that the blood seemed to 
leap out round the stick, and a vivid welt rose in an 
instant. With a wild, savage cry the Gombeen Man 
jumped at him; but there were others in the room as 
quick, and before another blow could be struck on 
either side both men were grasped by strong hands 
and held back. 

Murdock's rage was tragic. He yelled, like a wild 
beast, to be let get at his opponent. He cursed and 
blasphemed so outrageously that all were silent, and 
only the stern voice of the priest was heard : — 

" Be silent Murtagh Murdock ! Aren't you afraid 
that the God overhead will strike you dead ? With 
such a storm as is raging as a sign of His power, 
you are a foolish man to tempt Him." 

The man stopped suddenly, and a stern dogged sullen- 
ness took the place of his passion. The priest went 
on: — 

"As for you, Phelim Joyce, you ought to be ashamed 
of yourself; ye're not one of my people, but I speak 
as your own clergyman would if he were here. Only 
this day has the Lord seen fit to spare you from a 
terrible death; and yet you dare to go back of His 
mercy with your angry passion. You had cause for 
anger — or temptation to it, I know — but you must 
learn to kiss the chastening rod, not spurn it. The 
Lord knows what He is doing for you as for others, 
and it may be that you will look back on this day in 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 43 

gratitude for His doing, and in shame for your own 
anger. Men, hold off your hands — let those two men 
go; they'll quarrel no more — before me at any rate, I 
hope." 

The men drew back. Joyce held his head down, and 
a more despairing figure or a sadder one I never saw. 
He turned slowly away, and leaning against the wall 
put his face between his hands and sobbed. Murdock 
scowled, and the scowl gave place to an evil smile 
as looking all around he said : — 

" Well, now that me work is done, I must be 
gettin' home." 

"An' get some wan to iron that mark out iv yer 
face," said Dan. Murdock turned again and glared 
around him savagely as he hissed out: — 

" There'll be iron for some one before I'm done. 
Mark me well ! I've never gone back or wakened 
yit whin I promised to have me own turn. There's 
thim here what'll rue this day yit! If I am the 
shnake on the hill — thin beware the shnake. An' for 
him what shtruck me, he'll be in bitther sorra for it 
yit — him an' his ! " He turned his back and went to 
the door. 

" Stop ! " said the priest. " Murtagh Murdock, I 
have a word to say to you — a solemn word of warning. 
Ye have to-day acted the part of Ahab towards Naboth 
the Jezreelite ; beware of his fate ! You have coveted 
your neighbour's goods — you have used your power 
without mercy; you have made the law an engine of 



44 THE snake's pass. 

oppression. Mark me ! It was said of old that what 
measure men meted should be meted out to them 
again. God is very just. 'Be not deceived, God is 
not mocked. For what things a man shall sow, those 
also shall he reap.' Ye have sowed the wind this day — 
beware lest you reap the whirlwind ! Even as God 
visited his sin upon Ahab the Samarian, and as He 
has visited similar sins on others in His own way — so 
shall He visit yours on you. You are worse than the 
land-grabber — worse than the man who only covets. 
Saintough is a virtue compared with your act! Re- 
member the story of Naboth's vineyard, and the 
dreadful end of it. Don't answer me ! Go and repent 
if you can, and leave sorrow and misery to be com- 
forted by others — unless you wish to undo your wrong 
yourself. If you don't — then remember the curse that 
may come upon you yet ! " 

Without a word Murdoch opened the door and went 
out, and a little later we heard the clattering of his 
horse's feet on the rocky road to Shleenanaher. 

When it was apparent to all that he was really 
gone a torrent of commiseration, sympathy and pity 
broke over Joyce. The Irish nature is essentially 
emotional, and a more genuine and stronger feeling I 
never saw.. Not a few had tears in their eyes, and 
one and all were manifestly deeply touched. The least 
moved was, to all appearance, poor Joyce himself. He 
seemed to have pulled himself together, and his sterling 
manhood and courage and pride stood by him. He 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 45 

seemed, however, to yield to the kindly wishes of his 
friends ; and when we suggested that his hurt should 
be looked to, he acquiesced: — 

" Yes, if you will. Betther not go home to poor 
Norah and distress her with it. Poor child ! she'll 
have enough to bear without that." 

His coat was taken off, and between us we managed 
to bandage the wound. The priest, who had some 
surgical knowledge, came to the conclusion that there 
was only a simple fracture. He splinted and ban- 
daged the arm, and we all agreed that it would be 
better for Joyce to wait until the storm was over 
before starting for home. Andy said he could take 
him on the car, as he knew the road well, and that, 
as it was partly on the road to Carnaclif, we should 
only have to make a short detour and would pass the 
house of the doctor, by whom the arm could be properly 
attended to. 

So we sat around the fire again, whilst, without, the 
storm howled and the fierce gusts which swept the 
valley seemed at times as if they would break in the 
door, lift off the roof, or in some way annihilate the 
time-worn cabin which gave us shelter. 

There could, of course, be only one subject of conver- 
sation now, and old Dan simply interpreted the public 
wish, when he said : — 

" Tell us, Phelim, sure we're all friends here ! how 
Black Murdock got ye in his clutches? Sure any wan 
of us would get you out of thim if he could." 



46 THE snake's pass. 

There was a general acquiescence. Joyce yielded 
himself, and said: — 

" Let me thank ye, neighbours all, for yer kindness 
to me and mine this sorraful night. Well ! I'll say no 
more about that ; but I'll tell ye how it was that 
Murdock got me into his power. Ye know that boy of 
mine, Eugene ? " 

" Oh ! and he's the fine lad, God bless him ! an' the 
good lad too ! " — this from the women. 

" Well ! ye know too that he got on so well whin I 
sint him to school that Dr. Walsh recommended me 
to make an ingineer of him. He said he had such 
promise that it was a pity not to see him get the 
right start in life, and he gave me, himself, a letther to 
Sir G-eorge Henshaw, the great ingineer. I wint and 
seen him, and he said he would take the boy. He 
tould me that there was a big fee to be paid, but I 
was not to throuble about that — at any rate, that he 
himself didn't want any fee, and he would ask his 
partner if he would give up his share too. But the 
latther was hard up for money. He said he couldn't 
give up all fee, but that he would take half the fee, 
provided it was paid down in dhry money. Well ! the 
regular fee to the firm was five hundhred pounds, and 
as Sir George had giv up half an' only half th' other 
half was to be paid, that was possible. I hadn't got 
more'n a few pounds by me — for what wid dhrainin' 
and plantin' and fencin' and the payin' the boy's 
schoolin', and the girl's at the Nuns' in Galway, it had 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 47 

put me to the pin iv me collar to find the money up 
to now. But I didn't like to let the boy lose his chance 
in life for want of an effort, an' I put me pride in me 
pocket an' kem an' asked Murdock for the money. He 
was very smooth an' nice wid me — I know why now — 
an' promised he would give it at wanst if I would give 
him security on me land. Sure he joked an' laughed wid 
me, an' was that cheerful that I didn't a misthrust him. 
He tould me it was only forrums I was signin' that'd 
never be used " Here Dan Moriarty interrupted him : — 

" What did ye sign, Phelim ? " 

" There wor two papers. Wan was a writin' iv some 
kind, that in considheration iv the money lent an' his own 
land — which I was to take over if the money wasn't paid 
at the time appointed — he was to get me lease from me : 
an' the other was a power of attorney to Enther Judgment 
for the amount if the money wasn't paid at the right 
time. I thought I was all safe as I could repay him in 
the time named, an' if the worst kem to the worst I might 
borry the money from some wan else — for the lease is 
worth the sum tin times over — an' repay him. Well! 
what's the use of lookin' back, anyhow ! I signed the 
papers — that was a year ago, an' one week. An' a week 
ago the time was up ! " He gulped down a sob, and 
went on: — 

" Well ! ye all know the year gone has been a terrible 
bad wan, an' as for me it was all I could do to hould on — 
to make up the money was impossible. Thrue the lad 
cost me next to nothin', for he arned his keep be exthra 



48 the snake's pass. 

work, an' the girl, Norah, kem home from school and 
laboured wid me, an' we saved every penny we could. 
But it was all no use! — we couldn't get the money 
together anyhow. Thin we had the misfortin wid the 
cattle that ye all know of ; an' three horses, that I 
sould in Dublin, up an' died before the time I guaranteed 
them free from sickness." Here Andy struck in: — 

" Thrue for ye ! Sure there was some dhreadful dis- 
ordher in Dublin among the horse cattle, intirely; an' 
even Misther Docther Perfesshirial Ferguson himself 
couldn't git undher it ! " Joyce went on : — 

" An' as the time grew nigh I began to fear, but Mur- 
dock came down to see me whin I was alone, an' tould 
me not to throuble about the money an' not to mind about 
the sheriff, for he had to give him notice. ' An',' says he, 
' I wouldn't, if I was you, tell Norah anythin' about it, for 
it might frighten the girl — for weemin is apt to take to 
heart things like that that's only small things to min 
like us.' An' so, God forgive me, I believed him ; an' I 
niver tould me child anything about it — even whin I got 
the notice from the sheriff. An' whin the Notice tellin' of 
the sale was posted up on me land, I tuk it down meself 
so that the poor child wouldn't be frightened — God help 
me ! " He broke down for a bit, but then went on : — 

" But somehow I wasn't asy in me mind, an' whin the 
time iv the sale dhrew nigh I couldn't keep it to meself 
any longer, an' I tould Norah. That w^as only yister- 
day, and look at me to-day ! Norah agreed wid me 
that we shouldn't trust the Gombeen, an' she sent me 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 49 

off to the Galway Bank to borry the money. She said 
I was an honest man an' farmed me own land, and that 
the bank might lind the money on it. An' sure enough 
whin I wint there this mornin' be appointment, wid the 
Coadjuthor himself to inthroduce me, though he didn't 
know why I wanted the money — that was Norah's 
idea, and the Mother Superior settled it for her — the 
manager, who is a nice gintleman, tould me at wanst that 
I might have the money on me own note iv hand. I 
only gave him a formal writin', an' I took away the 
money. Here it is in me pocket in good notes ; they're 
wet wid the lake, but I'm thankful to say all safe. But 
it's too late, God help me ! " Here he broke down for 
a minute, but recovered himself with an effort : — 

"Anyhow the bank that thrusted me musn't be 
wronged. Back the money goes to Galway as soon 
as iver I can get it there. If I am a ruined man I 
need'nt be a dishonest wan ! But poor Norah ! God help 
her ! it will break her poor heart." 

There was a spell of silence only broken by sympa- 
thetic moans. The first to speak was the priest. 

" Phelim Joyce, I told you a while ago, in the 
midst of your passion, that God knows what He is 
doin', and works in His own way. You're an honest 
man, Phelim, and God knows it, and, mark me, He 
won't let you nor yours suffer. ■ I have been young,' 
said the Psalmist, 'and now am old; and I have not 
seen the just forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread.' 
Think of that, Phelim ! — may it comfort you and 



50 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

poor Norah. God bless her! but she's the good girl. 
You have much to be thankful for, with a daughter 
like her to comfort you at home and take the place 
of her poor mother, who was the best of women; and 
with such a boy as Eugene, winnin' name and credit, and 
perhaps fame to come, even in England itself. Thank 
God for His many mercies, Phelim, and trust Him." 

There was a dead slience in the room. The stern 
man rose, and coming over took the priest's hand. 

" God bless ye, Father ! " he said, " it's the true 
comforter ye are." 

The scene was a most touching one ; I shall never 
forget it. The worst of the poor man's trouble seemed 
now past. He had faced the darkest hour ; he had told 
his trouble, and was now prepared to make the best of 
everything — for the time at least — for I could not 
reconcile to my mind the idea that that proud, stern 
man, would not take the blow to heart for many a long 
day, that it might even embitter his life. 

Old Dan tried comfort in a practical way by thinking 
of what was to be done. Said he : — 

"Iv course, Phelim, it's a mighty throuble to give up 
yer own foine land an' take Murdock's bleak shpot in- 
stead, but I daresay ye will be able to work it well 
enough. Tell me, have ye signed away all the land, or 
only the lower farm? I mane, is the Cliff Fields yours 
or his ? " 

Here was a gleam of comfort evidently to the poor man. 
His face lightened as he replied : — 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 51 

" Only the lower farm, thank God ! Indeed, I couldn't 
part wid the Cliff Fields, for they don't belong to me — 
they are Norah's, that her poor mother left her — they 
wor settled on her, whin we married, be her father, and 
whin he died we got them. But, indeed, I fear they're 
but small use be themselves ; shure there's no wather in 
them at all, savin' what runs off me ould land ; an' if we 
have to carry wather all the way down the hill from — 
from me new land" — this was said with a smile, which 
was a sturdy effort at cheerfulness — " it will be but poor 
work to raise anythin' there — ayther shtock or craps. 
No doubt but Murdock will take away the sthrame iv 
wather that runs there now. He'll want to get the cliff 
lands, too, I suppose." 

I ventured to ask a question : — 

" How do your lands lie compared with Mr. Mur- 
dock' s ? " 

There was bitterness in his tone as he answered, in true 
Irish fashion : 

" Do you mane me ould land, or me new ? " 

"The lands that were — that ought still to be yours,'* 
I answered. 

He was pleased at the reply, and his face softened as 
he replied : — 

" Well, the way of it is this. We two owns the West 
side of the hill between us. Murdock's land — I'm spakin' 
iv them as they are, till he gets possession iv mine — lies at 
the top iv the hill ; mine lies below. My land is the best 
bit on the mountain, while the G-ombeen's is poor soil, with 
only a few good patches here and there. Moreover, there 



52 THE snake's pass. 

is another thing. There is a bog which is high up the 
hill, mostly on his houldin', but my land is free from 
bog, except one end of the big bog, an' a stretch of 
dry turf, the best in the counthry, an' wid' enough turf 
to last for a hundhred years, it's that deep." 

Old Dan joined in : — 

" Thrue enough ! that bog of the Gombeen's isn't much 
use anyhow. It's rank and rotten wid wather. Whin 
it made up its> mind to sthay, it might have done 
betther ! " 

" The bog ? Made up its mind to stay ! What on 
earth do you mean ? " I asked. I was fairly puzzled. 

" Didn't ye hear talk already," said Dan, " of the 
shiftin' bog on the mountain ? " 

"I did." 

" Well, that's it ! It moved an' moved an' moved 
longer than any wan can remimber. Me grandfather 
wanst tould me that whin he was a gossoon it wasn't 
nigh so big as it was when he tould me. It hasn't 
shifted in my time, and I make bould to say that it 
has made up its mind to settle down where it is. Ye 
must only make the best of it, Phelim. I daresay ye 
will turn it to some account." 

"I'll try what I can do, anyhow. I don't mane to 
fould me arms an' sit down op-pawsit me property an' 
ate it ! " was the brave answer. 

For myself, the whole idea was most interesting. I had 
never before even heard of a shifting bog, and I deter- 
mined to visit it before I left this part of the country. 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 53 

By this time the storm was beginning to abate. The 
rain had ceased, and Andy said we might proceed on our 
journey. So after a while we were on our way ; the 
wounded man and I sitting on one side of the car, and 
Andy on the other. The whole company came out to wish 
us God-speed, and with such comfort as good counsel and 
good wishes could give we ventured into the inky darkness 
of the night. 

Andy was certainly a born car-driver. Not even the 
darkness, the comparative strangeness of the road, or 
the amount of whisky-punch which he had on board could 
disturb his driving in the least ; he went steadily on. 
The car rocked and swayed and bumped, for the road was 
a bye one, and in but poor condition — but Andy and the 
mare went on alike unmoved. Once or twice only, in 
a journey of some three miles of winding bye-lanes, 
crossed and crossed again by lanes or water-courses, 
did he ask the way. I could not tell which was road- 
way and which water-way, for they were all water-courses 
at present, and the darkness was profound. Still, both 
Andy and Joyce seemed to have a sense lacking in myself, 
for now and again they spoke of things which I could not 
see at all. As, for instance, when Andy asked: — 

"Do we go up or down where the road branches 
beyant ? " Or again : " I disremimber, but is that Micky 
Dolan's ould apple three, or didn't he cut it down ? an' is 
it Tim's foment us on the lift ? " 

Presently we turned to the right, and drove up a short 
avenue towards a house. I knew it to be a house by the 



54 THE snake's pass. 

light in the windows, for shape it had none. Andy 
jumped down and knocked, and after a short colloquy, 
Joyce got down and went into the Doctor's house. I was 
asked to go too, but thought it better not to, as it would 
only have disturbed the Doctor in his work ; and so Andy 
and I possessed our souls in patience until Joyce came 
out again, with his arm in a proper splint. And then we 
resumed our journey through the inky darkness. 

However, after a while either there came more light into 
the sky, or my eyes became accustomed to the darkness, 
for I thought that now and again I beheld " men as trees 
walking." 

Presently something dark and massive seemed outlined 
in the sky before us — a blackness projected on a darkness 
— and, said Andy, turning to me: — 

" That's Knockcalltecrore ; we're nigh the foot iv it 
now, and pretty shortly we'll be at the enthrance iv the 
boreen, where Misther Joyce'll git aff." 

We plodded on for a while, and the hill before us 
seemed to overshadow whatever glimmer of light there 
was, for the darkness grew more profound than ever ; 
then Andy turned to my companion: — 

" Sure, isn't that Miss Norah I see sittin' on the 
sthyle beyant ? " I looked eagerly in the direction in 
which he evidently pointed, but for the life of me I 
could see nothing. 

" No ! I hope not," said the father, hastily. " She's 
never come out in the shtorm. Yes ! It is her, she sees 
us." 



THE GOMBEEN MAX. 55 

Just then there came a sweet sound down the lane : — 

" Is that you, father ? " 

"Yes! my child; but I hope you've not been out 
in the shtorni." 

" Only a bit, father ; I was anxious about you. Is 
it all right, father; did you get what you wanted?" 
She had jumped off the stile and had drawn nearer 
to us, and she evidently saw me, and went on in a 
changed and shyer voice : — 

" Oh ! I beg your pardon, I did not see you had a 
stranger with you." 

This was all bewildering to me ; I could hear it all — 
and a sweeter voice I never heard — but yet I felt 
like a blind man, for not a thing could I see, whilst 
each of the three others was seemingly as much 
at ease as in the daylight. 

" This gentleman has been very kind to me, Norah. 
He has given me a seat on his car, and indeed he's 
come out of his way to lave me here." 

" I am sure we're all grateful to you, sir ; but, 
father, where is your horse? Why are you on a car 
at all? Father, I hope you haven't met with any 
accident — I have been so fearful for you all the day." 
This was spoken in a fainter voice; had my eyes been 
of service, I was sure I would have seen her grow 
pale. 

"Yes, my darlin', I got a fall on the Curragh Hill, 
but I'm all right. Norah dear ! Quick, quick ! catch 
her, she's faintin' ! — my God ! I can't stir ! " 



56 THE snake's pass. 

I jumped off the car in the direction of the voice, but 
my arms sought the empty air. However, I heard 
Andy's voice beside me : — 

" All right ! I have her. Hould up, Miss Norah ; 
yer dada's all right, don't ye see him there, sittin' on 
me car. All right, sir, she's a brave girrul ! she hasn't 
fainted." 

" I am all right," she murmured, faintly ; " but, 
father, I hope you are not hurt ? " 

" Only a little, my darlin', just enough for ye to 
nurse me a while; I daresay a few days will make me 
all right again. Thank ye, Andy; steady now, till I 
get down ; I'm feelin' a wee bit stiff." Andy evidently 
helped him to the ground. 

" Good night, Andy, and good night you too, sir, and 
thank you kindly for your goodness to me all this 
night. I hope I'll see you again." He took my 
hand in his uninjured one, and shook it warmly. 

" Good night," I said, and " good-bye : I am sure I 
hope we shall meet again." 

Another hand took mine as he relinquished it — a 
warm, strong one — and a sweet voice said, shyly : — 

" Good night, sir, and thank you for your kindness 
to father." 

I faltered " Good night," as I raised my hat ; the 
aggravation of the darkness at such a moment was more 
than I could equably bear. We heard them pass up the 
boreen, and I climbed on the car again. 

The night seemed darker than ever as we turned our 



THE GOMBEEN MAN. 57 

steps towards Carnaclif, and the journey was the 
dreariest one I had ever taken. I had only one thought 
which gave me any pleasure, but that was a pretty 
constant one through the long miles of damp, sodden 
road — the warm hand and the sweet voice coming 
out of the darkness, and all in the shadow of that 
mysterious mountain, which seemed to have become a 
part of my life. The words of the old story-teller came 
back to me again and again: — 

" The Hill can hould tight enough ! A man has 
raysons — sometimes wan thing and sometimes another — 
but the Hill houlds him all the same ! " 

And a vague wonder grew upon me as to whether it 
could ever hold me, and how ! 



58 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE SECRETS OP THE BOG. 

Some six weeks elapsed before my visits to Irish friends 
were completed, and I was about to return home. I 
bad had everywhere a hearty welcome ; the best of sport 
of all kinds, and an appetite beyond all praise — and one 
pretty well required to tackle with any show of success 
the excellent food and wine put before me. The west 
of Ireland not only produces good viands in plenty and 
of the highest excellence, but there is remaining a keen 
recollection, accompanied by tangible results, of the 
days when open house and its hospitable accompani- 
ments made wine merchants prosperous — at the expense 
of their customers. 

In the midst of all my pleasure, however, I could 
not shake from my mind — nor, indeed, did I want to — 
the interest which Shleenanaher and its surroundings 
had created in me. Nor did the experience of that 
strange night, with the sweet voice coming through 
the darkness in the shadow of the hill, become 
dim with the passing of the time. When I look 
back and try to analyse myself and my feelings 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 59 

with the aid of the knowledge and experience of 
life received since then, I think that I must have 
been in love. I do not know if philosophers have 
ever undertaken to say whether it is possible for a 
human being to be in love in the abstract — whether 
the something which the heart has a tendency to send 
forth needs a concrete objective point ! It may be so ; 
the swarm of bees goes from the parent hive with 
only the impulse of going — its settling is a matter 
of chance. At any rate I may say that no philo- 
sopher, logician, metaphysician, psychologist, or other 
thinker, of whatsoever shade of opinion, ever held that 
a man could be in love with a voice. 

True that the unknown has a charm — omne ignotum 
pro magnifico. If my heart did not love, at least it 
had a tendency to worship. Here I am on solid 
ground ; for which of us but can understand the feelings 
of those men of old in Athens, who devoted their altars 
" To The Unknown God ? " I leave the philosophers to 
say how far apart, or how near, are love and worship ; 
which is first in historical sequence, which is greatest 
or most sacred! Being human, I cannot see any grace 
or beauty in worship without love. 

However, be the cause what it might, I made up my 
mind to return home via Carnaclif. To go from Clare 
to Dublin by way of Galway and Mayo is to challenge 
opinion as to one's motive. I did not challenge opinion, 
I distinctly avoided doing so, and I am inclined to 
think that there was more of Norah than of Shlee- 



60 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

nanaher in the cause of my reticence. I could bear 
to be " chaffed " about a superstitious feeling respecting 
a mountain, or I could endure the same process \ re- 
garding a girl of whom I had no high ideal, no sweet 
illusive memory. 

I would never complete the argument, even to myself 
— then; later on, the cause or subject of it varied.! 

It was not without a certain conflict of feelings that 
I approached Carnaclif, even though on this occasion I 
approached it from the South, whereas on my former 
visit I had come from the North. I felt that the 
time went miserably slowly, and yet nothing would 
have induced me to admit so much. I almost regretted 
that I had come, even whilst I was harrowed with 
thoughts that I might not be able to arrive at all at 
Knockcalltecrore. At times I felt as though the whole 
thing had been a dream; and again as though the 
romantic nimbus with which imagination had sur- 
rounded and hallowed all things must pass away and 
show that my unknown beings and my facts of delicate 
fantasy were but stern and vulgar realities. 

The people at the little hotel made me welcome 
with the usual effusive hospitable intention of the 
West. Indeed, I was somewhat nettled at how well 
they remembered me, as for instance when the buxom 
landlady said : — 

"I'm glad to be able to tell ye, sir, that yer car- 
man, Andy Sullivan, is here now. He kem with a 
commercial from Westport to Eoundwood, an' is on 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 61 

his way back, an' hopin' for a return job. I think 
ye'll be able to make a bargain with him if ye 
wish." 

I made to this kindly speech a hasty and, I felt, an 
ill-conditioned reply, to the effect that I was going to 
stay in the neighbourhood for only a few days and 
would not require the car. I then went to my room, 
and locked my door muttering a malediction on offi- 
cious people. I stayed there for some time, until I 
thought that probably Andy had gone on his way, and 
then ventured out. 

I little knew Andy, however. When I came to the 
hall, the first person that I saw was the cheerful 
driver, who came forward to welcome me: — 

" Musha ! but it's glad I am to see yer 'an'r. An' 
it'll be the proud man I'll be to bhring ye back to 
Westport wid me." 

" I'm sorry Andy," I began, " that I shall not want 
you, as I am going to stay in this neighbourhood for 
a few days." 

" Sthay is it ? Begor ! but it's more gladerer 
shtill I am. Sure the mare wants a rist, an' it'll 
shute her an' me all to nothin' ; an' thin whilst 
ye're here I can be dhrivin' yer 'an'r out to Shlee- 
nanaher. It isn't far enough to intherfere wid her 
rist." 

I answered in, I thought, a dignified way — I cer- 
tainly intended to be dignified : — 

M I did not say, Sullivan, that I purposed going out 



62 THE snake's pass. 

to Shleenanaher or any other place in the neighbour- 
hood." 

" Shure no, yer 'an'r, but I remimber ye said ye'd like 
to see the Shiftin' Bog; an' thin Misther Joyce and 
Miss Norah is in throuble, and ye might be a comfort 
to thim." 

"Mr. Joyce ! Miss Norah ! who are they?" I felt that 
I was getting red and that the tone of my voice was 
most unnatural. 

Andy's sole answer was as comical a look as I ever 
saw, the central object in which was a wink which 
there was no mistaking. I could not face it, and had 
to say : 

" Oh yes, I remember now ! was not that the man 
we took on the car to a dark mountain ? " 

" Yes, surr — him and his daughther ! " 

" His daughter ! I do not remember her. Surely we 
only took him on the car." Again I felt angry, and 
with the anger an inward determination not to have 
Andy or anyone else prying around me when I should 
choose to visit even such an uncompromising pheno- 
menon as a shifting bog. Andy, like all humourists, 
understood human nature, and summed up the situation 
conclusively in his reply — inconsequential though it 
was : — 

" Shure yer 'an'r can thrust me; its blind or deaf 
an' dumb I am, an' them as knows me knows I'm not 
the man to go back on a young gintleman goin' to 
luk at a bog. Sure doesn't all young min do that 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 63 

same ? I've been there meself times out iv mind ! 
There's nothin' in the wurrld foreninst it ! Lukin' at 
bogs is the most intherestin' thin' I knows." 

There was no arguing with Andy; and as he knew 
the place and the people, I, then and there, concluded 
an engagement with him. He was to stay in Carnaclif 
whilst I wanted him, and then drive me over to West- 
port. 

As I was now fairly launched on the enterprise, I 
thought it better to lose no time, but arranged to visit 
the bog early the next morning. 

As I was lighting my cigar after dinner that evening 
Mrs. Keating, my hostess, came in to ask me a favour. 
She said that there was staying in the house a gentle- 
man who went over every day to Knockcalltecrore, and 
as she understood that I was going there in the 
morning, she made bold to ask if I would mind 
giving a seat on my car to him as he had turned his 
ancle that day and feared he would not be able to 
walk. Under the circumstances I could only say "yes," 
as it would have been a churlish thing to refuse. 
Accordingly I gave permission with seeming cheerful- 
ness, but when I was alone my true feelings found 
vent in muttered grumbling : — " I ought to travel in 
an ambulance instead of a car." " I seem never to 
be able to get near this Shleenanaher without an 
invalid." " Once ought to be enough ! but it has be- 
come the regulation thing now." " I wish to goodness 
Andy would hold his infernal tongue — I'd as lief have 



64 THE SNAKE S PASS. 

a detective after me all the time." "It's all very well 
to be a good Samaritan as a luxury — but as a profession 
it becomes monotonous." " Confound Andy ! I wish I'd 
never seen him at all." 

This last thought brought me up standing, and set 
me face to face with my baseless ill-humour. If I had 
never seen Andy I should never have heard at all of 
Shleenanaher. I should not have known the legend — 
I should not have heard Norah's voice. 

" And so," said I to myself, " this ideal fantasy — this 
embodiment of a woman's voice, has a concrete name 
already. Aye! a concrete name, and a sweet one too." 

And so I took another step on my way to the bog, 
and lost my ill-humour at the Fame time. When my 
cigar was half through and my feelings were propor- 
tionately soothed, I strolled into the bar and asked Mrs. 
Keating as to my companion of the morrow. She told 
me that he was a young engineer named Sutherland. 

" What Sutherland ? " I asked. Adding that I had 
been at school with a Dick Sutherland, who had, I 
believed, gone into the Irish College of Science. 

" Perhaps it's the same gentleman, sir. This is Mr. 
Eichard Sutherland, and I've heerd him say that he 
was at Stephen's Green." 

"The same man!" said I, "this is jolly! "Tell me, 
Mrs. Keating, what brings him here?" 

" He's doin' some work on Knockcalltecrore for Mr. 
Murdock, some quare thing or another. They do tell 
me, sir, that it's a most mystayrious thing, wid poles 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 65 

an' lines an' magnets an' all kinds of divilments. They 
say that Mr. Murdock is goin' from off of his head 
ever since he had the law of poor Phelim Joyce. My! 
but he's the decent man, that same Mr. Joyce, an* 
the Gombeen has been hard upon him." 

" What was the law suit ? " I asked. 

" All about a sellin' his land on an agreement. Mr. 
Joyce borryed some money, an' promised if it wasn't 
paid back at a certain time that he would swop lands. 
Poor Joyce met wid an accident comin' home with the 
money from Gal way an' was late, an' when he got home 
found that the Gombeen had got the sheriff to sell 
up his land on to him. Mr. Joyce thried it in the 
Coorts, but now Murdock has got a decree on to him 
an' the poor man '11 to give up his fat lands an' take 
the Gombeen's poor ones instead." 

"That's bad! when has he to give up?" 

" Well, I disrem ember meself exactly, but Mr. Suther- 
land will be able to tell ye all about it as ye drive 
over in the mornin." 

" Where is he now ? I should like to see him ; it 
may be my old schoolfellow." 

"Troth, it's in his bed he is; for he rises mighty 
arly, I can tell ye." 

After a stroll through the town (so-called) to finish 
my cigar I went to bed also, for we started early. 
In the morning, when I came down to my breakfast 
I found Mr. Sutherland finishing his. It was my old 
schoolfellow ; but from being a slight, pale boy, he had 



66 THE snake's pass. 

grown into a burly, hale, stalwart man, with keen 
eyes and a flowing brown beard. The only pallor 
noticeable was the whiteness of his brow, which was 
ample and lofty as of old. 

We greeted each other cordially, and I felt as if 
old times had come again, for Dick and I had been 
great friends at school. When we were on our way 
I renewed my inquiries about Shleenanaher and its 
inhabitants. I began by asking Sutherland as to what 
brought him there. He answered: — 

" I was just about to ask you the same question. 
' What brings you here ? ' " 

I felt a difficulty in answering as freely as I could 
have wished, for I knew that Andy's alert ears were 
close to us, so I said: — 

"I have been paying some visits along the West 
Coast, and I thought I would take the opportunity on 
my way home of investigating a very curious pheno- 
menon of whose existence I became casually acquainted 
on my way here — a shifting bog." 

Andy here must strike in : — 

" Shure the masther is mighty fond iv bogs, intirely. 
I don't know there's anything in the wurruld what 
intherests him so much." 

Here he winked at me in a manner that said as 
plainly as if spoken in so many words, " All right, yer 
'an'r, I'll back ye up ! " 

Sutherland laughed as he answered: — 

" Well, you're in the right place here, Art ; the difficulty 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 67 

they have. in this part of the world is to find a place that 
is not bog. However, about the shifting bog on Knock- 
calltecrore, I can, perhaps, help you as much as any one. 
As you know, geology has been one of my favourite 
studies, and lately I have taken to investigate in my 
spare time the phenomena of this very subject. The 
bog at Shleenanaher is most interesting. As yet, how- 
ever, my investigation can only be partial, but very soon 
I shall have the opportunity which I require." 

" How is that ? " I asked. 

"The difficulty arises," he answered, "from a local feud 
between two men, one of them my employer, Murdock, 
and his neighbour, Joyce." 

" Yes," I interrupted, " I know something of it. I 
was present when the sheriff's assignment was shown 
to Joyce, and saw the quarrel. But how does it affect 
you and your study ? " 

"This way; the bog is partly on Murdock' s land and 
partly on Joyce's, and until I can investigate the whole 
extent I cannot come to a definite conclusion. The feud 
is so bitter at present that neither man will allow the 
other to set foot over his boundary — or the foot of any 
one to whom the other is friendly. However, to-morrow 
the exchange of lands is to be effected, and then I shall be 
able to continue my investigation. I have already gone 
nearly all over Murdock' s present ground, and after to- 
morrow I shall be able to go over his new ground — up 
to now forbidden to me." 

"How does Joyce take his defeat?" 



68 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

"Badly, poor fellow, I am told; indeed, from what I 
see of him, I am sure of it. They tell me that up to lately 
he was a bright, happy fellow, but now he is a stern, hard- 
faced, scowling man ; essentially a man with a grievance, 
which makes him take a jaundiced view of everything 
else. The only one who is not afraid to speak to him is 
his daughter, and they are inseparable. It certainly is 
cruelly hard on him. His farm is almost an ideal one for 
this part of the world; it has good soil, water, shelter, 
trees, everything that makes a farm pretty and com- 
fortable, as well as being good for farming purposes ; and 
he has to change it for a piece of land as irregular in 
shape as the other is compact; without shelter, and 
partly taken up with this very bog and the utter waste 
and chaos which, when it shifted in former times, it left 
behind." 

" And how does the other, Murdock, act ? " 

" Shamefully ; I feel so angry with him at times that I 
could strike him. There is not a thing he can say or do, 
or leave unsaid or undone, that is not aggravating and in- 
sulting to his neighbour. Only that he had the precaution 
to bind me to an agreement for a given time I'm blessed 
if I would work for him, or with him at all — interesting 
as the work is in itself, and valuable as is the opportunity 
it gives me of studying that strange phenomenon, the 
shifting bog." 

"What is your work with him?" I asked: "mining 
or draining, or what ? " 

He seemed embarrassed at my question. He ' 'hum'd 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 69 

and 'ha'd ' — then with a smile he said quite 
frankly : — 

" The fact is that I am not at liberty to say. The 
worthy Gombeen Man put a special clause in our agree- 
ment that I was not during the time of my engagement to 
mention to any one the object of my work. He wanted 
the clause to run that I was never to mention it ; but 
I kicked at that, and only signed in the modified 
form." 

I thought to myself "more mysteries at Shleenanaher ! " 
Dick went on : — 

" However, I have no doubt that you will very soon 
gather the object for yourself. You are yourself some- 
thing of a scientist, if I remember ? " 

" Not me ! " I answered. My Great Aunt took care 
of that when she sent me to our old tutor. Or, indeed, 
to do the old boy justice, he tried to teach me some- 
thing of the kind; but I found out it wasn't my vogue. 
Anyhow, I haven't done anything lately." 

" How do you mean ? " 

" I haven't got over being idle yet. It's not a year 
since I came into my fortune. Perhaps — indeed I hope — 
that I may settle down to work again." 

" I'm sure I hope so, too, old fellow," he answered 
gravely. "When a man has once tasted the pleasure 
of real work, especially work that taxes the mind and the 
imagination, the world seems only a poor place with- 
out it." 

" Like the wurrld widout girruls for me, or widout 



70 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

bog for his 'an'r ! " said Andy, grinning as lie turned 
round on his seat. 

Dick Sutherland, I was glad to see, did not suspect 
the joke. He took Andy's remark quite seriously, and 
said to me: — 

" My dear fellow, it is delightful to find you so 
interested in my own topic." 

I could not allow him to think me a savant. In the 
first place he would very soon find me out, and would 
then suspect my motives ever after. And again, I had 
to accept Andy's statement, or let it appear that I had 
some other reason or motive — or what would seem even 
more suspicious still, none at all ; so I answered : — 

" My dear Dick, my zeal regarding bog is new ; it is 
at present in its incipient stage in so far as erudition 
is concerned. The fact is, that although I would like 
to learn a lot about it, I am at the present moment 
profoundly ignorant on the subject." 

"Like the rest of mankind!" said Dick. "You will 
hardly believe that although the subject is one of vital 
interest to thousands of persons in our own country — one 
in which national prosperity is mixed up to a large extent 
— one which touches deeply the happiness and material 
prosperity of a large section of Irish people, and so helps 
to mould their political action, there are hardly any 
works on the subject in existence." 

" Surely you are mistaken," I answered. 

" No ! unfortunately, I am not. There is a Danish 
book, but it is geographically local ; and some informa- 



THE SECRETS OF TIIE BOG. 71 

tion can be derived from the Blue Book containing the 
report of the International Commission on turf- cutting, 
but the special authorities are scant indeed. Some day, 
when you want occupation, just you try to find in any 
library, in any city of the world, any works of a scientific 
character devoted to the subject. Nay more! try to find 
a fair share of chapters in scientific books devoted to it. 
You can imagine how devoid of knowledge we are, when 
I tell you that even the last edition of the ' Enclyco- 
psedia Britannica ' does not contain the heading ' bog.' " 

" You amaze me ! " was all I could say. 

Then as we bumped and jolted over the rough bye- 
road Dick Sutherland gave me a rapid but masterly 
survey of the condition of knowledge on the subject of 
bogs, with special application to Irish bogs, beginning 
with such records as those of Giraldus Cambrensis — of 
Dr. Boate — of Edmund Spenser — from the time of the 
first invasion when the state of the land was such that, 
as is recorded, when a spade was driven into the ground 
a pool of water gathered forthwith. He told me of the 
extent and nature of the bog-lands — of the means taken 
to reclaim them, and of his hopes of some heroic 
measures being ultimately taken by Government to 
reclaim the vast Bog of Allen which remains as a great, 
evidence of official ineptitude. 

" It will be something," he said, " to redeem the 
character for indifference to such matters so long es- 
tablished, as when Mr. King wrote two hundred years 
ago, ' We live in an Island almost infamous for 



72 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

bogs, and yet, I do not remember, that any one has 
attempted much concerning them. ' " We were close 
to Knockcalltecrore when he finished his impromptu 
lecture thus : — 

" In fine, we cure bog by both a surgical and a medical 
process. We drain it so that its mechanical action as 
a sponge may be stopped, and we put in lime to kill 
the vital principle of its growth. Without the other, 
neither process is sufficient; but together, scientific and 
executive man asserts his dominance." 

" Hear ! hear ! " said Andy. " Musha, but Docther 
Wilde himself, Rest his sowl! couldn't have put it 
aisier to grip. It's a purfessionaler the young gintleman 
is intirely ! " 

We shortly arrived at the south side of the western 
slope of the hill, and as Andy took care to inform me, 
at the end of the boreen leading to the two farms, and 
close to the head of the Snake's Pass. 

Accordingly, I let Sutherland start on his way to 
Murdock's, whilst I myself strolled away to the left, 
where Andy had pointed out to me, rising over the 
slope of the intervening spur of the hill, the top of one 
of the rocks which formed the Snake's Pass. After a few 
minutes of climbling up a steep slope, and down a 
steeper one, I arrived at the place itself. 

From the first moment that my eyes lit on it, it 
seemed to me to be a very remarkable spot, and quite 
worthy of being taken as the scene of strange stories, for 
it certainly had something ' uncanny ' about it. 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 73 

I stood in a deep valley, or rather bowl, with behind 
me a remarkably steep slope of green sward, whilst on 
either hand the sides of the hollow rose steeply — that 
on the left, down which I had climbed, being by far the 
steeper and rockier of the two. In front was the Pass 
itself. 

It was a gorge or cleft through a great wall of rock, 
which rose on the seaside of the promontory formed 
by the hill. This natural wall, except at the actual 
Pass itself, rose some fifty or sixty feet over the summit 
of the slope on either side of the little valley ; but right 
and left of the Pass rose two great masses of rock, 
like the pillars of a giant gateway. Between these lay 
the narrow gorge, with its walls of rock rising sheer 
some two hundred feet. It was about three hundred 
feet long, and widened slightly outward, being shaped 
something funnel- wise, and on the inner side was about 
a hundred feet wide. The floor did not go so far as 
the flanking rocks, but, at about two-thirds of its 
length, there was a perpendicular descent, like a groove 
cut in the rock, running sheer down to the sea, some 
three hundred feet below, and as far under it as we 
could see. From the northern of the flanking rocks 
which formed the Pass the rocky wall ran northwards, 
completely sheltering the lower lands from the west, 
and running into a towering rock that rose on the 
extreme north, and which stood up in jagged peaks 
something like " The Needles " off the coast of the Isle 
of Wight. 



74 THE snake's pass. 

There was no doubt that poor Joyce's farm, thus 
sheltered, was an exceptionally favoured spot, and I could 
well understand how loth he must be to leave it. 

Murdock's land, even under the enchantment of its 
distance, seemed very different, and was just as bleak 
as Sutherland had told me. Its south-western end 
ran down towards the Snake's Pass. I mounted the 
wall of rock on the north of the Pass to look down, 
and was surprised to find that down below me was 
the end of a large plateau of some acres in extent which 
ran up northward, and was sheltered north and west by 
a somewhat similar formation of rock to that which pro- 
tected Joyce's land. This, then, was evidently the place 
called the " Cliff Fields " of which mention had been 
made at Widow Kelligan's. 

The view from where I stood was one of ravishing 
beauty. Westward in the deep sea, under grey clouds 
of endless variety, rose a myriad of clustering islets, 
some of them covered with grass and heather, where 
cattle and sheep grazed ; others were mere rocks 
rising boldly from the depths of the sea, and sur- 
rounded by a myriad of screaming wild-fowl. As the 
birds dipped and swept and wheeled in endless circles, 
their white breasts and grey wings varying in infinite 
phase of motion — and as the long Atlantic swell, tempered 
by its rude shocks on the outer fringe of islets, broke 
in fleecy foam and sent living streams through the 
crevices of the rocks and sheets of white water over 
the boulders where the sea rack rose and fell, I thought 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 75 

that the earth could give nothing more lovely or more 
grand. 

Andy's voice beside me grated on me unpleasantly : — 

" Musha ! but it's the fine sight it is entirely ; it only 
wants wan thing." 

" What does it want ? " I asked, rather shortly. 

" Begor, a bit of bog to put your arrum around while 
ye' re lukin' at it," and he grinned at me knowingly. 

He was incorrigible. I jumped down from the rock 
and scrambled into the boreen. My friend Sutherland 
had gone on his way to Murdock's, so calling to Andy 
to wait till I returned, I followed him. 

I hurried up the boreen and caught up with him, 
for his progress was slow along the rough laneway. In 
reality I felt that it would be far less awkward having 
him with me ; but I pretended that my only care was for 
his sprained ankle. Some emotions make hypocrites of 
us all ! 

With Dick on my arm limping along we passed up the 
boreen, leaving Joyce's house on our left. I looked out 
anxiously in case I should see Joyce — or his daughter ; 
but there was no sign of anyone about. In a few minutes 
Dick, pausing for a moment, pointed out to me the 
shifting bog. 

" You see," he said, "those two poles? the line between 
them marks the mearing of the two lands. We have 
worked along the bog down from there." He pointed 
as he spoke to some considerable distance up the hill to 
the north where the bog began to be dangerous, and 



76 THE snake's pass. 

where it curved around the base of a grassy mound, or 
shoulder of the mountain. 

" Is it a dangerous bog ? " I queried. 

" Eather ! It is just as bad a bit of soft bog as ever I 
saw. I wouldn't like to see anyone or anything that I 
cared for try to cross it ! " 

"Why not?" 

" Because at any moment they might sink through it ; 
and then, good-bye — no human strength or skill could 
ever save them." 

"Is it a quagmire, then ? or like a quicksand ? " 

" Like either, or both. Nay ! it is more treacherous 
than either. You may call it, if 'you are poetically in- 
clined, a 'carpet of death ! ' What you see is simply a film 
or skin of vegetation of a very low kind, mixed with the 
mould of decayed vegetable fibre and grit and rubbish 
of all kinds which have somehow got mixed into it, 
floating on a sea of ooze and slime — of something half 
liquid half solid, and of an unknown depth. It will bear 
up a certain weight, for there is a degree of cohesion in 
it ; but it is not all of equal cohesive power, and if one 
were to step on the wrong spot — " He was silent. 

" What then ? " 

" Only a matter of specific gravity ! A body sud- 
denly immersed would, when the air of the lungs had 
escaped and the rigor mortis had set in, probably sink a 
considerable distance ; then it would rise after nine 
days, when decomposition began to generate gases, and 
make an effort to reach the top. Not succeeding in 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 77 

this, it would ultimately waste away, and the bones would 
become incorporated with the existing vegetation some- 
where about the roots, or would lie among the slime at 
the bottom." 

"Well," said I, "for real cold-blooded horror, commend 
me to your men of science." 

This passage brought us to the door of Murdock's 
house — a plain, strongly-built cottage, standing on a 
knoll of rock that cropped up from the plateau round 
it. It was surrounded with a garden hedged in by a belt 
of pollard ash and stunted alders. 

Murdock had evidently been peering surreptitiously 
through the window of his sitting-room, for as we passed 
in by the gate he came out to the porch. His salutation 
was not an encouraging one : — 

"You're somethin' late this mornin', Mr. Sutherland. 
I hope ye didn't throuble to delay in ordher to bring up 
this sthrange gintleman. Ye know how particular I am 
about any wan knowin' aught of me affairs." 

Dick flushed up to the roots of his hair, and, much to 
my surprise, burst out quite in a passionate way: — 

" Look you here, Mr. Murdock, I'm not going to take 
any cheek from you, so don't you give any. Of course I 
don't expect a fellow of your stamp to understand a gentle- 
man's feelings — damn it ! how can you have a gentleman's 
understanding when you haven't even a man's ? You 
ought to know right well that what I said I would do, I 
shall do. I despise you and your miserable secrets and 
your miserable trickery too much to take to myself any- 



78 THE snake's pass. 

thing in which they have a part ; but when I bring with 
me a friend, but for whom I shouldn't have been here at 
all — for I couldn't have walked — I expect that neither 
he nor I shall be insulted. For two pins I'd not set 
foot on your dirty ground again ! " 

Here Murdock interrupted him : — 

" Aisy now ! ye' re undher agreement to me ; an* I 
hould ye to it." 

" So you can, you miserable scoundrel, because you 
know I shall keep my word ; but remember that I expect 
proper treatment ; and remember, too, that if I want an 
assistant I am to have one." 

Again Murdock interrupted — but this time much more 
soothingly : 

" Aisy ! Aisy ! haven't I done every livin' thing ye 
wanted — and helped ye meself every time ? Sure arn't 
I yer assistant ? " 

"Yes, because you — you wanted to get something, and 
couldn't do without me. And mind this ! you can't do 
without me yet. But be so good as to remember that I 
choose my own assistant ; and I shall not choose you 
unless I like. You can keep me here, and pay me for 
staying as we agreed; but don't you think that I could 
fool you if I would P " 

" Ye wouldn't do that, I know— an' me thrusted ye ! " 

" You trusted me ! you miserable wretch — yes ! you 
trusted me by a deed, signed, sealed, and delivered. I 
don't owe you anything for that." 

"Mr. Sutherland, sir! ye're too sharp wid me. Yer 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 79 

frind is very welkim. Do what you like — go where you 
choose — bring whom you will — only get on wid the worrk 
and kape it saycret." 

" Aye ! " sneered Dick, " you are ready to climb down 
because you want something done, and you know that this 
is the last day for work on this side of the hill. Well, let 
me tell you this — for you'll do anything for greed — that 
you and I together, doing all we can, shall not be able 
to cover all the ground. I haven't said a word to my 
friend — and I don't know how he will take any request 
from you after your impudence ; but he is my friend, and 
a clever man, and if you ask him nicely, perhaps he 
will be good enough to stay and lend us a hand." 

The man made me a low bow and asked me in suitable 
terms if I would kindly stop part of the day and help in 
the work. Needless to say I acquiesced. Murdock eyed 
me keenly, as though to make up his mind whether or no 
I recollected him — he evidently remembered me — but I 
affected ignorance, and he seemed satisfied. I was glad 
to notice that the blow of Joyce's riding switch still 
remained across his face as a livid scar. He went away 
to get the appliances ready for work, in obedience to a 
direction from Sutherland. 

" One has to cut that hound's corns rather roughly,'* 
said the latter, with a nice confusion of metaphors, as 
soon as Murdock had disappeared. 

Dick then told me that his work was to make magnetic 
experiments to ascertain, if possible, if there was any iron 
hidden in the ground. 



80 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

" The idea," he said, " is Murdoch's own, and I have 
neither lot nor part in it. My work is simply to carry 
out his ideas, with what mechanical skill I can command, 
and to invent or arrange such appliances as he may 
want. Where his theories are hopelessly wrong, I point 
this out to him, but he goes on or stops just as he chooses. 
You can imagine that a fellow of his low character is 
too suspicious to ever take a hint from any one ! We 
have been working for three weeks past, and have been 
all over the solid ground, and are just finishing the 
bog." 

" How did you first come across him ? " I asked. 

"Very nearly a month ago he called on me in Dublin, 
having been sent by old Gascoigne, of the College of 
Science. He wanted me to search for iron on his pro- 
perty. I asked if it was regarding opening mines? he 
said, ' no, just to see if there should be any old iron 
lying about.' As he offered me excellent terms for my 
time, I thought he must have some good — or rather I 
should say some strong motive. I know now, though 
he has never told me, that he is trying for the money 
that is said to have been lost and buried here by the 
French after Humbert's expedition to Killala." 

" How do you work ? " I asked. 

"The simplest thing in the world; just carry about 
a strong magnet — only we have to do it systematically." 

" And have you found anything as yet ? " 

" Only old scraps — horseshoes, nails, buckles, buttons ; 
our most important find was the tire of a wheel. The 



THE SECRETS OF THE BOG. 81 

old Gombeen thought he had it that time ! " and 
Dick laughed. 

" How did you manage the bog ? " 

" That is the only difficult part ; we have poles on 
opposite sides of the bog with lines between them. 
The magnet is fixed, suspended from a free wheel, and I 
let it down to the centre from each side in turn. If 
there were any attraction I should feel it by the thread 
attached to the magnet which I hold in my hand." 

"It is something like fishing ? " 

" Exactly." 

Murdoch now returned and told us that he was ready, 
so we all went to work. I kept with Sutherland at the 
far side of the bog, Murdoch remaining on the near side. 
We planted or rather placed a short stake in the solid 
ground, as close as we could get it to the bog, and 
steadied it with a guy from the top ; the latter I held, 
whilst Murdoch, on the other side, fulfilled a similar 
function. A thin wire connected the two stakes ; on this 
Sutherland now fixed the wheel, from which the magnet 
depended. On each side we deflected the stake until 
the magnet almost touched the surface of the bog. After 
a few minutes' practice I got accustomed to the work, 
and acquired sufficient dexterity to be able to allow the 
magnet to run freely. Inch by inch we went over the 
surface of the bog, moving slightly to the south-west 
each time we shifted, following the edges of the bog. 
Every little while Dick had to change sides, so as to 
cover the whole extent of the bog, and when he came 



82 . THE snake's pass. 

round again had to go back to where he had last stopped 
on the same side. 

All this made the process very tedious, and the day- 
was drawing to a close when we neared the posts set up 
to mark the bounds of the two lands. Several times 
during the day Joyce had come up from his cottage and 
inspected our work, standing at his own side of the 
post. He looked at me closely, but did not seem to re- 
cognize me. I nodded to him once, but he did not 
seem to see my salutation, and I did not repeat it. 

All day long I never heard the sweet voice; and as 
we returned to Carnaclif after a blank day — blank in 
every sense of the word — the air seemed chiller and the 
sunset less beautiful than before. The last words I 
heard on the mountain were from Murdock : — 

" Nothin' to-morrow, Mr. Sutherland ! I've a flittin' 
to make, but I pay the day all the same; I hould ye 
to your conthract. An' remember, surr, we're in no 
hurry wid the wurrk now, so ye' 11 not need help any 
more." 

Andy made no remark till we were well away from the 
hill, and then said, dryly : — 

" I'm afeerd yer 'an'r has had but a poor day ; ye luk 
as if ye hadn't seen a bit iv bog at all, at all. Gee 
up, ye ould Corncrake ! the gintlemin does be hurryin' 
home fur their tay, an' fur more wurrk wid bogs to- 
morra ! " 



83 



CHAPTER V. 

ON KNOCKNACAE, 

When Sutherland and I had finished dinner that evening 
we took up the subject of bogs where we had left it in 
the morning. This was rather a movement of my own 
making, for I felt an awkwardness about touching on 
the special subject of the domestic relations of the in- 
habitants of Knockcalltecrore. After several interesting 
remarks, Dick said : — 

" There is one thing that I wish to investigate 
thoroughly, the correlation of bog and special geo- 
logical formations." 

" For instance ? " said I, 

"Well, specially with regard to limestone. Just at 
this part of the country I find it almost impossible to 
pursue the investigation any more than Van Troil could 
have pursued snake studies in Iceland." 

" Is there no limestone at all in this part of the 
country ? " I queried. 

" Oh yes, in lots of places, but as yet I have not been 
able to find any about here. I say ' as yet ' on purpose, 
because it seems to me that there must be some on 
Knockcalltecrore." 



84 the snake's pass. 

Needless to say the conversation here became to me 
much more interesting ; Dick went on : — 

" The main feature of the geological formation of all 
this part of the country is the vast amount of slate and 
granite, either in isolated patches or lying side by side. 
And as there are instances of limestone found in quaint 
ways, I am not without hopes that we may yet find the 
same phenomenon." 

"Where do you find the instances of these limestone 
formations ? " I queried, for I felt that as he was bound 
to come back to, or towards Shleenanaher, I could ease 
my own mind by pretending to divert his from it. 

" Well, as one instance, I can give you the Corrib 
River — the stream that drains Lough Corrib into G-alway 
Bay ; in fact, the river on which the town of Galway is 
built. At one place one side of the stream all is granite, 
and the other is all limestone ; I believe the river runs 
over the union of the two formations. Now, if there 
should happen to be a similar formation, even in the least 
degree, at Knockcalltecrore, it will be a great thing. 

" Why will it be a great thing ? " I asked. 

" Because there is no lime near the place at all ; 
because with limestone on the spot a hundred things 
could be done that, as things are at present, would not 
repay the effort. With limestone we could reclaim the 
bogs cheaply all over the neighbourhood — in fact a lime- 
kiln there would be worth a small fortune. We could 
build walls in the right places ; I can see how a lovely 
little harbour could be made there at a small expense. 



ON KNOCKNACAR. 85 

And then beyond all else would be the certainty — which 
is at present in my mind only a hope or a dream — 
that we could fathom the secret of the shifting bog, 
and perhaps abolish or reclaim it." 

" This is exceedingly interesting," said I, as I drew 
my chair closer. And I only spoke the exact truth, for 
at that moment I had no other thought in my mind. 
" Do you mind telling me more, Dick ? I suppose 
you are not like Lamb's Scotchman that will not broach 
a half -formed idea ! " 

"Not the least in the world. It will be a real 
pleasure to have such a good listener. To begin at 
the beginning, I was much struck with that old cavity 
on the top of the hill. It is one of the oddest things 
I have ever seen or heard of. If it were in any other 
place or amongst any other geological formation I 
would think its origin must have been volcanic. But 
here such a thing is quite impossible. It was evidently 
once a lake." 

" So goes the legend. I suppose you have heard 
it?" 

" Yes ! and it rather confirms my theory. Legends 
have always a base in fact; and whatever cause gave 
rise to the myth of St. Patrick and the King of the 
Snakes, the fact remains that the legend is correct in 
at least one particular — that at some distant time there 
was a lake or pond on the spot." 

" Are you certain ? " 

"A very cursory glance satisfied me of that. I could' 



86 THE SNAKE S PASS. 

not go into the matter thoroughly, for that old wolf of 
mine was so manifestly impatient that I should get to 
his wild-goose chase for the lost treasure-chest, that 
the time and opportunity were wanting. However, I 
saw quite enough to convince me." 

" Well, how do you account for the change ? What 
is your theory regarding the existence of limestone ? " 

" Simply this, that a lake or reservoir on the top of 
a mountain means the existence of a spring or springs. 
Now springs in granite or hard slate do not wear away 
the substance of the rock in the same way as they do 
when they come through limestone. And moreover, 
the natures of the two rocks are quite different. There 
are fissures and cavities in the limestone which are 
wanting, or which are at any rate not so common or 
perpetually recurrent in the other rock. Now if it 
should be, as I surmise, that the reservoir was ever fed 
by a spring passing through a streak or bed of lime- 
stone, we shall probably find that in the progress of 
time the rock became worn and that the spring found 
a way in some other direction — either some natural 
passage through a gap or fissure already formed, or by 
a channel made for itself." 

" And then ? " 

" And then the process is easily understandable. The 
spring naturally sent its waters where there was the 
least resistance, and they found their way out on some 
level lower than the top of the hill. You perhaps 
noticed the peculiar formation of the hill, specially on 



OX KNOCKS AC AR. 87 

its west side — great sloping tables of rock suddenly 
ended by a wall of a different stratum — a sort of 
serrated edge all the way down the inclined plane ; you 
could not miss seeing it, for it cuts the view like the 
teeth of a saw! Now if the water, instead of rising to 
the top and then trickling down the old channel, 
which is still noticeable, had once found a vent on one 
of those shelving planes it would gradually fill up the 
whole cavity formed by the two planes, unless in the 
meantime it found some natural escape. As we know, 
the mountain is covered in a number of places with a 
growth or formation of bog, and this water, once ac- 
cumulating under the bog, would not only saturate it, 
but would raise it — being of less specific gravity than 
itself — till it actually floated. Given such a state of 
things as this, it would only require sufficient time for 
the bog to become soft and less cohesive than when it 
was more dry and compact, and you have a dangerous 
bog, something like the Carpet of Death that we spoke 
of this morning." 

" So far I can quite understand." said I. " But if 
this be so, how can the bog shift as this one has un- 
doubtedly done? It seems, so far, to be hedged with 
walls of rock. Surely these cannot move." 

Sutherland smiled. " I see you do apprehend ! Now 
we are at the second stage. Did you notice as we 
went across the hill side that there were distinct beds 
or banks of clay? " 

" Certainly ! do they come in ? " 



88 THE SNAKE S PASS. 

" Of course ! If my theory is correct, the shifting is 
due to them." 

" Explain ! " 

" So far as I can. But here I am only on surmise, 
or theory pure and simple. I may be all wrong, or I 
may be right — I shall know more before I am done with 
Shleenanaher. My theory is that the shifting is due 
to the change in the beds of clay, as for instance by 
rains washing them by degrees to lower levels— this is 
notably the case in that high clay bank just opposite 
the Snake's Pass. The rocks are fixed, and so the clay 
becomes massed in banks between them, perhaps aided 
in the first instance by trees falling across the chasm 
or opening. But then the perpetually accumulating 
water from the spring has to find a way of escape ; and 
as it cannot cut through the rock it rises to the earth 
bed, till it either tops the bed of clay which confines it 
or finds a gap or fissure through which it can escape. 
In either case it makes a perpetually deepening channel 
for itself, for the soft clay yields little by little to the 
stream passing over it, and so the surface of the outer 
level falls, and the water escapes, to perhaps find new 
reservoirs ready made to receive it, and a similar pro- 
cess as before takes place." 

" Then the bog extends and the extended part takes 
the place of the old bog which gradually drains." 

" Just so ! but such would of course depend on the 
level; there might be two or more reservoirs, each with 
a deep bottom of its own and united only near the 



ON KNOCKNACAR. 89 

surface ; or if the bank or bed of clay lay on the surface 
of one shelving rock, the water would naturally drain 
to the lowest point and the upper land would be shallow 
in proportion." 

" But," I ventured to remark, " if this be so, one 
of two things must happen ; either the water would 
wear away the clay so quickly, that the accumulation 
would not be dangerous, or else the process would be 
a very gradual one, and would not be attended with 
such results as we are told of. There would be a 
change in the position of the bog, but there would not 
be the upheaval and complete displacement and chaos 
that I have heard of, for instance, with regard to this 
very bog of Knockcalltecrore. „ 

" Your ' if ' is a great peacemaker ! If what I have 
supposed were all, then the result would be as you have 
said ; but there are lots of other supposes ; as yet we 
have only considered one method of change. Suppose, 
for instance, that the water found a natural means of 
escape — as, for instance, where this very bog sends a 
stream over the rocks into the Cliff Fields — it would not 
attack the clay bed at all, unless under some unusual 
pressure. Then suppose that when such pressure had 
come the water did not rise and top the clay bed, but 
that it found a small fissure part of the way down. 
Suppose there were several such reservoirs as I have 
mentioned — and from the formation of the ground I 
think it very likely, for in several places jutting rocks 
from either side come close together, and suggest a sort 



90 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

of gap or canon in the rock formation, easily forming 
it into a reservoir. Then if the barrier between the two 
upper ones were to be weakened, and a sudden weight 
of water were to be thrown on the lower wall ; suppose 
such wall were to partially collapse, and bring down, say, 
a clay bank, which would make a temporary barrier 
loftier than any yet existing, but only temporary ; sup- 
pose that the quick accumulation of waters behind this 
barrier lifted the whole mass of water and slime and bog 
to its utmost height. Then, when, such obstruction had 
been reached, the whole lower barrier, weakened by infil- 
tration and attacked with sudden and new force, would 
give way at once, and the stream, kept down from above 
by the floating bog, would force its way along the bed 
rock and lift the whole spongy mass resting on it. Then 
with this new extent of bog suddenly saturated and 
weakened — demoralized as it were — and devoid of re- 
sisting power, the whole floating mass of the upper bog 
might descend on it, mingle with it, become incor- 
porated with its semi-fluid substance, and form a new 
and dangerous quagmire incapable of sustaining solid 
weight, but leaving behind on the higher level only the 
refuse and sediment of its former existence — all the 
rubble and grit too heavy to float, and which would 
gradually settle down on the upper bed rock." 

" Eeally, Dick, you put it most graphically. What a 
terrible thing it would be to live on the line of such 
a change." 

" Terrible, indeed ! At such a moment a house in the 



ON KNOCKNACAR. 91 

track of the movement — unless it were built on the rock — 
would go down like a ship in a storm. Go down solid 
and in a moment, without warning and without hope ! " 

" Then with such a neighbour as a shifting bog, the 
only safe place for a house would be on a rock." — 
Before my eyes, as I spoke, rose the vision of Murdock's 
house, resting on its knoll of rock, and I was glad 
for one reason that there, at least, would be safety for 
Joyce — and his daughter. 

" Exactly ! Now Murdock's house is as safe as a 
church. I must look at his new house when I go up 
to-morrow." 

As I really did not care about Murdock's future, I 
asked no further questions ; so we sat in silence and 
smoked in the gathering twilight. 

There was a knock at the door. I called " Come in." 
The door opened slowly, and through a narrow opening 
Andy's shock head presented itself. 

" Come in, Andy ! " said Dick. " Come here and try if 
you can manage a glass of punch ! " 

11 Begor ! " was Andy's sole expression of acquiescence. 
The punch was brewed and handed to him. 

" Is that as good as Widow Kelligan's ? " I asked 
him. Andy grinned : — 

" All punch is good, yer 'an'rs. Here's both yer good 
healths, an' here's ' The Girls ' an' " — turning to me, 
" ' the Bog.' " He winked, threw up his hand — and 
put down the empty glass. " Glory be to God " was his 
grace after — drink. 



92 THE snake's pass. 

" Well, Andy ! what is it ? " said Dick. 

" I've heerd," said he, " that yer 'an'rs isn't goin' in the 
mornin' to Shleenanaher, and I thought that yez couldn't 
do betther nor dhrive over to Knocknacar to-morra an' 
spind the day there." 

"And why Knocknacar?" said I. 

Andy twirled his cap between his hands in a sheepish 
way. I felt that he was acting a part, but could not 
see any want of reality. With a little hesitation he 
said : — 

"I've gother from what yer 'an'rs wor savin' on the car 
this mornin', that yez is both intherested in bogs — an' 
there's the beautifulest bit iv bog in all the counthry 
there beyant. An', moreover, it's a lovely shpot intirely. 
If you gintlemin have nothin' betther to do, ye'd dhrive 
over there — if ye'd take me advice." 

"What kind of bog is it, Andy?" said Dick. "Is 
there anythin' peculiar about it. Does it shift?" 

Andy grinned a most unaccountable grin: — 

" Begor, it does, surr!" he answered quickly. "Sure 
all bogs does shift ! " And he grinned again. 

" Andy," said Dick, laughing, " you have some joke in 
your mind. What is it ? " 

" Oh, sorra wan, surr — ask the masther there." 

As it did not need a surgical operation to get the joke 
intended into the head of a man — of whatever nation- 
ality — who understood Andy's allusion, and as I did not 
want to explain it, I replied : — 

" Oh, don't ask me, Andy ; I'm no authority on the 



ON KNOCKNACAR. 93 

subject," and I looked rather angrily at him, when Diet 
was not looking. 

Andy hastened to pnt matters right — he evidently did 
not want to lose his day's hire on the morrow : — 

" Yer 'an'rs ! ye may take me wnrrd for it — there's 
a bog beyant at Knocknacar which'll intherest yez 
intirely — I remimber it meself a lot higher up the 
mountain whin I was a spalpeen — an' it's been crawlin' 
down iver since. It's a mighty quare shpot intirely ! " 

This settled the matter, and we arranged forthwith to 
start early on the following morning for Knocknacar, 
Andy, before he left, having a nightcap — out of a 
tumbler. 

We were astir fairly early in the morning, and having 
finished a breakfast sufficiently substantial to tide us 
over till dinner time, we started on our journey. The 
mare was in good condition for work, the road was 
level and the prospect fine, and altogether we enjoyed 
our drive immensely. As we looked back we could see 
Knockcalltecrore rising on the edge of the coast away to 
our right, and seemingly surrounded by a network of 
foam-girt islands, for a breeze was blowing freshly from 
the south-west. 

At the foot of the mountain — or rather, hill — there was 
a small, clean-looking sheebeen. Here Andy stopped and 
put up the mare ; then he brought us up a narrow lane 
bounded by thick hedges of wild briar to where we could 
see the bog which was the object of our visit. Dick's foot 
was still painful, so I had to give him an arm, as on yes- 



94 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

terday. We crossed over two fields, from which the stones 
had been collected and placed in heaps. The land was 
evidently very rocky, for here and there — more especially 
in the lower part — the grey rock cropped up in places. 
At the top of the farthest field, Andy pointed out an 
isolated rock rising sharply from the grass. 

" Look there, yer 'an'rs ; whin I remimber first, that 
rock was as far aff from the bog as we are now from the 
boreen — an' luk at it now ! why, the bog is close to it, so 
it is." He then turned and looked at a small heap of 
stones. "Murther! but there is a quare thing. Why 
that heap, not a year ago, was as high as the top iv that 
rock. Begor, it's bein' buried, it is ! " 

Dick looked quite excited as he turned to me and 
said : — 

" Why, Art, old fellow ! here is the very thing we 
were talking about. This bog is an instance of 
the gradual changing of the locality of a bog by the 
filtration of its water through the clay beds resting on 
the bed-rock. I wonder if the people here will let 
me make some investigations! Andy, who owns this 
land?" 

" Oh, I can tell yer 'an'r that well enough ; it's Misther 
Moriarty from Knockaltecrore. Him, surr," turning to 
me, " that ye seen at Widda Kelligan's that night in the 
shtorm." 

"Does he farm it himself?" 

" No, surr — me father rints it. The ould mare was riz 
on this very shpot." 



OX KNOCKNACAR. 95 

" Do you think your father will let me make some 
investigations here, if I get Mr. Moriarty's permission 
also ? " 

" Throth, an' he will, surr — wid all the plisure in life — 
iv coorse," he added, with native shrewdness, " if there's 
no harrum done to his land — or, if there's harrum done, 
it's ped for." 

" All right, Andy," said I ; " I'll be answerable for that 
part of it." 

We went straight away with Andy to see the elder 
Sullivan. We found him in his cabin at the foot of the 
hill — a hale old man of nearly eighty, with all his senses 
untouched, and he was all that could be agreeable. I told 
him who I was, and that I could afford to reimburse him 
if any damage should be done. Dick explained to him 
that, so far from doing harm, what he would do would 
probably prevent the spreading of the bog, and would in 
such case much enhance the value of his holding, and in 
addition give him the use of a spring on his land. Accord- 
ingly we went back to make further investigations. Dick 
had out his note-book in an instant, and took accurate 
note of everything ; he measured and probed the earth, 
tapped the rocks with the little geological hammer which 
he always carried, and finally set himself down to make 
an accurate map of the locality, I acting as his assistant 
in the measurements. Andy left us for a while, but 
presently appeared, hot and flushed. As he approached, 
Dick observed: — 

"Andy has been drinking the health of all his relatives. 



96 the snake's pass. 

We must keep him employed here, or we may get a spill 
going home." 

The object of his solicitude came and sat on a rock 
beside us, and looked on. Presently he came over, and 
said to Dick : — 

" Yer 'an'r, can I help ye in yer wurrk ? Sure, if ye 
only want wan hand to help ye, mayhap mine id do. 
An' thin his 'an'r here might hop up to the top iv the 
mountain ; there's a mighty purty view there intirely, 
an' he could enjoy it, though ye can't get up wid yer 
lame fut." 

" Good idea!" said Dick. "You go up on top, Art. This 
is very dull work, and Andy can hold the tape for me as 
well as you or anyone else. You can tell me all about it 
when you come down." 

" Do, yer 'an'r. Tell him all ye see!" said Andy, as I 
prepared to ascend. " If ye go up soft be the shady parts, 
mayhap ye'd shtrike another bit of bog be the way." 

I had grown so suspicious of Andy's double entente, 
that I looked at him keenly, to see if there was any fresh 
joke on ; but his face was immovably grave, and he was 
seemingly intent on the steel tape which he was holding. 

I proceeded up the mountain. It was a very pleasant 
one to climb, or rather to ascend, for it was nearly all 
covered with grass. Here and there, on the lower half, were 
clumps of stunted trees, all warped eastwards by the pre- 
vailing westerly wind — alders, mountain-ash, and thorn. 
Higher up these disappeared, but there was still a plea- 
sant sprinkling of hedgerows. As the verdure grew on the 



OX KNOCKS ACAR. 97 

south side higher than on the north or west, I followed it 
and di*ew near the top. As I got closer, I heard some one 
singing. '* By Jove," said I to myself, " the women of this 
country have sweet voices ! " — indeed, this was by no means 
the first time I had noticed the fact. I listened, and as I 
drew nearer to the top of the hill, I took care not to make 
any noise which might disturb the singer. It was an odd 
sensation to stand in the shadow of the hill-top, on that 
September day, and listen to Ave Maria sung by the un- 
known voice of an unseen singer. I made a feeble joke all 
to myself: — 

" My experience of the girls of the "West is that of 
vox et praiterea nihil." 

There was an infinity of pathos in the voice — some 
sweet, sad yearning, as though the earthly spirit was 
singing with an unearthly voice — and the idea came on 
me with a sense of conviction that some deep unhappiness 
underlay that appeal to the Mother of Sorrows. I 
listened, and somehow felt guilty. It almost seemed 
that I was profaning some shrine of womanhood, and I 
took myself to task severely in something of the following 
strain : — 

11 That poor girl has come to this hill top for solitude. 
She thinks she is alone with Nature and Nature's 
God, and pours forth her soul freely ; and you, wretched, 
tainted man, break in on the sanctity of her solitude — 
of her prayer. For shame ! for shame ! " 

Then — men are all hypocrites ! — I stole guiltily forward 
to gain a peep at the singer who thus communed with 



98 THE snake's pass. 

Nature and Nature's God, and the sanctity of whose 
solitude and prayer I was violating. 

A tuft of heath grew just at the top ; behind this I 
crouched, and parting its luxuriance looked through. 

For my pains I only saw a back, and that back 
presented in the most ungainly way of which graceful 
woman is capable. She was seated on the ground, 
not even raised upon a stone. Her knees were raised 
to the level of her shoulders, and her outstretched arms 
confined her legs below the knees — she was, in fact, in 
much the same attitude as boys are at games of cock- 
fighting. And yet there was something very touching 
in the attitude — something of self-oblivion so complete 
that I felt a renewed feeling of guiltiness as an intruder. 
— Whether her reasons be aesthetic, moral, educational, 
or disciplinary, no self-respecting woman ever sits in such 
a manner when a man is by. 

The song died away, and then there was a gulp and 
a low suppressed moan. Her head drooped between her 
knees, her shoulders shook, and I could see that she was 
weeping. I wished to get away, but for a few moments 
I was afraid to stir lest she should hear me. The soli- 
tude, now that the vibration of her song had died out of 
the air, seemed oppressive. In those few seconds a new 
mood seemed to come over her. She suddenly abandoned 
her dejected position, and, with the grace and agility of a 
young fawn, leaped to her feet. I could see that she was 
tall and exquisitely built, on the slim side — what the 
French call svelte. With a grace and pathos which were 



ON KNOCKXACAR. 99 

beyond expression she stretched forth her arms towards 
the sea, as to something that she loved, and then, letting 
them fall by her side, remained in a kind of waking 
dream. 

I slipped away, and when I was well out of sight, 
ran down the hill about a hundred yards, and then 
commenced the re-ascent, making a fair proportion of 
noise as I came — now striking at the weeds with my 
heavy stick, now whistling, and again humming a popular 
air. 

When I gained the top of the hill I started as though 
surprised at seeing any one, much less a girl, in such a 
place. I think I acted the part well — again I say that 
at times the hypocrite in us can be depended upon ! She 
was looking straight towards me, and certainly, so far 
as I could tell, took me in good faith. I doffed my 
hat and made some kind of stammering salutation as 
one would to a stranger — the stammering not being, of 
course, in the routine of such occasions, but incidental 
to the special circumstances. She made me a graceful 
curtsey, and a blush overspread her cheeks. I was afraid 
to look too hard at her, especially at first, lest I should 
frighten her away, but I stole a glance towards her at 
every moment when I could. 

How lovely she was ! I had heard that along the 
West coast of Ireland there are traces of Spanish blood 
and Spanish beauty; and here was a living evidence of 
the truth of the hearsay. Not even at sunset in 
the parades of Madrid or Seville, could one see more 



100 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

perfect beauty of the Spanish type — beauty perhaps 
all the more perfect for being tempered with northern 
calm. As I said, she was tall and beautifully propor- 
tioned. Her neck was long and slender, gracefully set in 
her rounded shoulders, and supporting a beautiful head 
borne with the free grace of the lily on its stem. There is 
nothing in woman more capable of complete beauty than 
the head, and, crowned as this head was with a rich mass 
of hair as black and as glossy as the raven's wing, it was 
a thing to remember. She wore no bonnet, but a grey 
homespun shawl was thrown loosely over her shoulders ; 
her hair was coiled in one rich mass at the top and 
back of her head, and fastened with an old-fashioned 
tortoiseshell comb. Her face was a delicate oval, showing 
what Kossetti calls " the pure wide curve from ear to 
chin." Luxuriant black eyebrows were arched over large 
black-blue eyes swept by curling lashes of extraordinary 
length, and showed off the beauty of a rounded, ample 
forehead — somewhat sunburnt, be it said. The nose was 
straight and wide between the eyes, with delicate sensitive 
nostrils ; the chin wide and firm, and the mouth full and 
not small, with lips of scarlet, forming a perfect Cupid's 
bow, and just sufficiently open to show two rows of small 
teeth, regular and white as pearls. Her dress was that 
of a well-to-do peasant — a sort of body or jacket of 
printed chintz over a dress or petticoat of homespun of 
the shade of crimson given by a madder dye. The 
dress was short, and showed trim ankles in grey home- 
spun with pretty feet in thick country- made wide- toed 



ON KXOCKNACAR. 101 

shoes. Her hands were shapely, with long fingers, and 
were very sunburnt and manifestly used to work. 

As she stood there, with the western breeze playing 
with her dress and tossing about the stray ends of her 
raven tresses, I thought that I had never in my life seen 
anything so lovely. And yet she was only a peasant girl, 
manifestly and unmistakably, and had no pretence of 
being anything else. 

She was evidently as shy as I was, and for a little while 
we were both silent. As is usual, the woman was the first 
to recover her self-possession, and whilst I was torturing 
my brain in vain for proper words to commence a conver- 
sation, she remarked : — 

" What a lovely view there is from here. I suppose, sir, 
you have never been on the top of this hill before ?" 

" Never," said I, feeling that I was equivocating if not 
lying. " I had no idea that there was anything so lovely 
here." I meant this to have a double meaning, although 
I was afraid to make it apparent to her. " Do you often 
come up here ?" I continued. 

" Not very often. It is quite a long time since I was 
here last ; but the view seems fairer and dearer to me 
every time I come." As she spoke the words, my memory 
leaped back to that eloquent gesture as she raised her 
arms. 

I thought I might as well improve the occasion and lay 
the foundation for another meeting without giving offence 
or fright, so I said : — 

"This hill is quite a discovery; and as I am likely to 



102 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

be here in this neighbourhood for some time, I dare say I 
shall often find myself enjoying this lovely view." 

She made no reply or comment whatever to this state- 
ment. I looked over the scene, and it was certainly a 
fit setting for so lovely a figure ; but it was the general 
beauty of the scene, and not, as had hitherto been the 
case, one part of it only that struck my fancy. Away 
on the edge of the coast-line rose Knockcalltecrore ; 
but it somehow looked lower than before, and less im- 
portant. The comparative insignificance was of course 
due to the fact that I was regarding it from a superior 
altitude, but it seemed to me that it was because it did 
not now seem to interest me so much. That sweet voice 
through the darkness seemed very far away now — here 
was a voice as sweet, and in such a habitation ! The 
invisible charm with which Shleenanaher had latterly 
seemed to hold me — or the spell which it had laid upon 
me, seemed to pass away, and I found myself smiling 
that I should ever have entertained such an absurd idea 

Youth is not naturally stand off, and before many 
minutes the two visitors to the hill-top had laid aside 
reserve and were chatting freely. I had many questions to 
ask of local matters, for I wanted to find out what I could 
of my fair companion without seeming to be too inqui- 
sitive ; but she seemed to fight shy of all such topics, and 
when we parted my ignorance of her name and surround- 
ings remained as profound as it had been at first. She, 
however, wanted to know all about London. She knew it 
only by hearsay; for some of the questions which she 



ON KNOCKNACAR. 108 

asked me were amazingly simple — manifestly she had 
something of the true peasant belief that London is the 
only home of luxury, power, and learning. She was so 
frank, however, and made her queries with such a gentle 
modesty, that something within my heart seemed to grow, 
and grow; and the conviction was borne upon me that I 
stood before my fate. Sir Geraint's ejaculation rose to 
my lips : — 

" Here, by God's rood, is the one maid for me !" 

One thing gave me much delight. The sadness seemed 
to have passed quite away — for the time at all events. Her 
eyes, which had at the first been glassy with recent tears, 
were now lit with keenest interest, and she seemed to 
have entirely forgotten the cause of her sorrow. 

" Good ! " thought I to myself complacently. " At least 
I have helped to brighten her life, though it be but 
for one hour." 

Even whilst I was thinking she rose up suddenly — we 
had been sitting on a boulder — " Goodness ! how the time 
passes!" she said; "I must run home at once." 

" Let me see you home," I said eagerly. Her great eyes 
opened, and she said with a grave simplicity that took me 
" way down " to use American slang : — 

" Why ? " 

" Just to see that you get home safely," I stammered. 
She laughed merrily : — 

" No fear for me. I'm safer on this mountain than any- 



104 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

where in the world — almost," she added, and the grave, 
sad look stole again over her face. 

" Well, but I would like to," I urged. Again she an- 
swered with grave, sweet seriousness: — 

" Oh, no, sir : that would not do. What would folk 
say to see me walking with a gentleman like you?" The 
answer was conclusive. I shrugged my shoulders because 
I was a man, and had a man's petulance under disappoint- 
ment ; and then I took off my hat and bowed — not 
ironically, but cheerfully, so as to set her at ease — for I 
had the good fortune to have been bred a gentleman. 
My reward came when she held out her hand frankly and 
said : — 

" Good-bye, sir," gave a little graceful curtsey, and 
tripped away over the edge of the hill. 

I stood bareheaded looking at her until she disappeared. 
Then I went to the edge of the little plateau and looked 
over the distant prospect of land and sea, with a heart 
so full that the tears rushed to my eyes. There are 
those who hold that any good emotion is an act of 
prayer! If this be so, then on that wild mountain -top 
as fervent a prayer as the heart of man is capable of 
went up to the Giver of all good things ! 

When I reached the foot of the mountain I found Dick 
and Andy waiting for me at the sheebeen. As I came 
close Dick called out: — 

" What a time you were, old chap. I thought you had 
taken root on the hill-top ! What on earth kept 
you?" 



ON KNOCKS ACAR. 105 

" The view from the top is lovely beyond compare," I 
said, as an evasive reply. 

" Is what ye see there more lovelier nor what ye see 
at Shleenanaher ? " said Andy with seeming gravity. 

" Far more so ! " I replied instantly and with decision. 

" I tould yer 'an'r there was somethin' worth lukin' 
at," said he. " An' may I ask if yer 'an'r seen any bog 
on the mountain ? " 

I looked at him with a smile. I seemed to rather 
like his chaff now. " Begor I did, yer 'an'r," I answered, 
mimicking his accent. 

We had proceeded on our way for a long distance, 
Andy apparently quite occupied with his driving — Dick 
studying his note-book, and I quite content with my 
thoughts — when Andy said, apropos of nothing and 
looking at nobody: — 

" I seen a young girrul comin' down the hill beyant, a 
wee while before yer 'an'r. I hope she didn't disturb 
any iv yez ? " 

The question passed unnoticed, for Dick apparently did 
not hear and I did not feel called upon to answer it. 

I could not have truthfully replied with a simple 
negative or positive. 



106 



CHAPTEE VI. 

CONFIDENCES. 

The next day Sutherland would have to resume his 
work with Murdock — but on his newly- acquired land. I 
could think of his visit to Knockcalltecrore without a 
twinge of jealousy ; and for my own part I contemplated 
a walk in a different direction. Dick was full of his ex- 
periment regarding the bog at Knocknacar, and could 
talk of nothing else — a disposition of things which suited 
me all to nothing, for I had only to acquiesce in all he 
said, and let my own thoughts have free and pleasant 
range. 

"I have everything cut and dry in my head, and I'll 
have it all on paper before I sleep to-night," said the 
enthusiast. " Unfortunately, I am tied for a while longer 
to the amiable Mr. Murdock ; but since you're good 
enough, old fellow, to offer to stay to look after the 
cutting, I can see my way to getting along. We can't 
begin until the day after to-morrow, for I can't by 
any possibility get old Moriarty's permission before 
that. But then we'll start in earnest. You must get 
some men up there and set them to work at once. 



CONFIDENCES. 107 

By to-morrow evening I'll have an exact map ready 
for you to work by, and all you will have to do will 
be to see that the men are kept up to the mark, look 
at the work now and then and take a note of results. 
I expect it will take quite a week or two to make the 
preliminary drainage, for we must have a decided fall for 
the water. We can't depend on less than twenty or 
thirty feet, and I should not be surprised if we want 
twice as much. I suppose I shan't see you till to-morrow 
night ; for I'm going up to my room now, and shall work 
late, and I must be off early in the morning. As you're 
going to have a walk I suppose I may take Andy, for 
my foot is not right yet ? " 

"By all means," I replied, and we bade each other 
good night. 

When I went to my own room I locked the door and 
looked out of the open window at the fair prospect 
bathed in soft moonlight. For a long time I stood there. 
What my thoughts were I need tell no young man or 
young woman, for without shame I admitted to myself 
that I was over head and ears in love. If any young 
person of either sex requires any further enlightenment, 
well ! then, all I can say is that their education in life 
has been shamefully neglected, or their opportunities 
have been scant; or, worse still, some very grave omisssion 
has been made in their equipment for the understanding 
of life. — If any one, not young, wants such enlightenment 
I simply say — ' sir or madam, either you are a fool or 
your memory is gone ! ' 



108 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

One thing I will say, that I never felt so much at 
one with my kind ; and before going to bed I sat down 
and wrote a letter of instructions to my agent, directing 
him to make accurate personal inquiries all over the estate, 
and at the forthcoming rent-day make such remissions of 
rent as would relieve any trouble or aid in any plan of 
improvements such as his kinder nature could guess at 
or suggest. 

I need not say that for a long time I did not sleep, and 
although my thoughts were full of such hope and happi- 
ness that the darkness seemed ever changing into sun- 
shine, there were, at times, such harrowing thoughts of 
difficulties to come, in the shape of previous attachments 
— of my being late in my endeavours to win her as my 
wife — of my never been able to find her again — that, now 
and again, I had to jump from my bed and pace the 
floor. Towards daylight I slept, and went through a 
series of dreams of alternating joy and pain. At first 
hope held full sway, and my sweet experience of the 
day became renewed and multiplied. Again I climbed 
the hill and saw her and heard her voice — again the 
tearful look faded from her eyes — again I held her hand 
in mine and bade good-bye, and a thousand happy 
fancies filled me with exquisite joy. Then doubts began 
to come. I saw her once more on the hill-top — but she 
was looking out for some other than myself, and a 
shadow of disappointment passed over her sweet face 
when she recognized me. Again, I saw myself kneeling 
at her feet and imploring her love, while only cold, 



CONFIDENCES. 109 

hard looks were my lot ; or I found myself climb- 
ing the hill, but never able to reach the top — or on 
reaching it finding it empty. Then I would find myself 
hurrying through all sorts of difficult places — high, bleak 
mountains, and lonely wind-swept strands — dark paths 
through gloomy forests, and over sun-smitten plains, 
looking for her whom I had lost, and in vain trying to 
call her — for I could not remember her name. This last 
nightmare was quite a possibility, for I had never heard 
it. 

I awoke many times from such dreams in an agony of 
fear; but after a time both pleasure and pain seemed 
to have had their share of my sleep, and I slept the 
dreamless sleep that Plato eulogizes in the "Apologia 
Socratis." 

I was awakened to a sense that my hour of rising had 
not yet come by a knocking at my door. I opened it, and 
on the landing without saw Andy standing, cap in hand. 

" Hullo, Andy ! " I said. " What on earth do you 
want ? " 

" Ter 'an'r '11 parden me, but I'm jist off wid Misther 
Sutherland ; an' as I undherstand ye was goin' for a walk, 
I made bould t' ask yer 'an'r if ye'll give a missage to me 
father?" 

"Certainly, Andy! With pleasure." 

" Maybe ye'd tell him that I'd like the white mare tuk 
off the grash an' gave some hard 'atin' for a few days, as 
I'll want her brung into Wistport before long." 

"Ail right, Andy! Is that all?" 



110 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

" That's all, yer 'an'r." Then he added, with a sly 
look at me : — 

" May be ye' 11 keep yer eye out for a nice bit o' bog as 
ye go along." 

"Get on, Andy," said I. "Shut up! you ould corn- 
crake." I felt I could afford to chaff with him as we 
were alone. 

He grinned, and went away. But he had hardly gone 
a few steps when he returned and said, with an air of 
extreme seriousness: — 

" As I'm goin' to Knockcalltecrore, is there any missage 
I kin take for ye to Miss Norah ? " 

" Oh, go on ! " said I. " What message should 
I have to send, when I never saw the girl in my 
life ? " 

For reply he winked at me with a wink big enough to 
cover a perch of land, and, looking back over his 
shoulder so that I could see his grin to the last, he 
went along the corridor — and I went back to bed. 

It did not strike me till a long time afterwards — 
when I was quite close to Knocknacar — how odd it 
was that Andy had asked me to give the message to 
his father. I had not told him I was even coming in 
the direction — I had not told anyone — indeed, I had 
rather tried to mislead when I spoke of taking a walk 
that day, by saying some commonplace about 'the ad- 
visability of breaking new ground ' and so forth. Andy 
had evidently taken it for granted; and it annoyed me 
somewhat that he could find me so transparent. How- 



CONFIDENCES. Ill 

ever, I gave the message to the old man, to which he 
promised to attend, and had a drink of milk, which is 
the hospitality of the west of Ireland farmhouse. Then, 
in the most nonchalant way I could, I began to saunter 
up the hill. 

I loitered awhile here and there on the way up. I 
diverted my steps now and then as if to make inquiry 
into some interesting object. I tapped rocks and turned 
stones over, to the discomfiture of various swollen pale- 
coloured worms and nests of creeping things. With the 
end of my stick I dug up plants, and made here and 
there unmeaning holes in the ground as though I were 
actuated by some direct purpose known to myself and not 
understood of others. In fact I acted as a hypocrite 
in many harmless and unmeaning ways, and rendered 
myself generally obnoxious to the fauna and flora of 
Knocknacar. 

As I approached the hill-top my heart beat loudly 
and fast, and a general supineness took possession of my 
limbs, and a dimness came over my sight and senses. I 
had experienced something of the same feeling at other 
times in my life — as, for instance, just before my first 
fight when a school boy, and when I stood up to make 
my maiden speech at the village debating society. Such 
feelings — or lack of feelings — however, do not kill; and 
it is the privilege and strength of advancing years to 
know this fact. 

I proceeded up the hill. I did not whistle this 
time, or hum, or make any noise — matters were far too 



112 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

serious with me for any such levity. I reached the top 
— and found myself alone ! A sense of blank dis- 
appointment came over me — which was only relieved 
when, on looking at my watch, I found that it was as 
yet still early in the forenoon. It was three o'clock 
yesterday when I had met — when I had made the 
ascent. 

As I had evidently to while away a considerable time, 
I determined to make an accurate investigation of the hill 
of Knocknacar — much, very much fuller than I had 
made as yet. As my unknown had descended the hill 
by the east, and would probably make the ascent — if 
she ascended at all — by the same side ; and as it was my 
object not to alarm her, I determined to confine my 
investigations to the west side. Accordingly I descended 
about half way down the slope, and then commenced my 
prying into the secrets of Nature under a sense of the 
just execration of me and my efforts on the part of the 
whole of the animate and inanimate occupants of the 
mountain side. 

Hours to me had never seemed of the same inexhaus- 
tible proportions as the hours thus spent. At first I was 
strong with a dogged patience ; but this in time gave way 
to an impatient eagerness, that merged into a despairing 
irritability. More than once I felt an almost irresistible 
inclination to rush to the top of the hill and shout, or 
conceived an equally foolish idea to make a call at every 
house, cottage and cabin, in the neighbourhood. In this 
latter desire my impatience was somewhat held in check 



CONFIDENCES. 113 

by a sense of the ludicrous ; for as I thought of the detail 
of the doing it, I seemed to see myself when trying to 
reduce my abstract longing to a concrete effort, meeting 
only jeers and laughter from both men and women — in 
my seemingly asinine effort to make inquiries regarding 
a person whose name even I did not know, and for what 
purpose I could assign no sensible reason. 

I verily believe I must have counted the leaves of grass 
on portions of that mountain. Unfortunately, hunger 
or thirst did not assail me, for they would have afforded 
some diversion to my thoughts. I sturdily stuck to my 
resolution not to ascend to the top until after three 
o'clock, and I gave myself much kudos for the stern 
manner in which I adhered to my resolve. 

My satisfaction at so bravely adhering to my resolu- 
tion, in spite of so much mental torment and temptation, 
may be imagined when, at the expiration of the appointed 
time, on ascending to the hill-top, I saw my beautiful 
friend sitting on the edge of the plateau and heard her 
first remark after our mutual salutations : — 

" I have been here nearly two hours, and am just 
going home ! I have been wondering and wondering 
what on earth you were working at all over the hill- 
side ! May I ask, are you a botanist ? " 

u No ! " 

" Or a geologist ? " 

" No ! " 

" Or a naturalist ? " 

u No J II 



114 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

There she stopped; this simple interrogation as to the 
pursuits of a stranger evidently struck her as unniaidenly, 
for she blushed and turned away. 

I did not know what to to say ; but youth has its own 
wisdom — which is sincerity — and I blurted out : — 

" In reality I was doing nothing ; I was only trying to 
pass the time." 

There was a query in the glance of the glorious blue- 
black eyes and in the lifting of the ebon lashes ; and I 
went on, conscious as I proceeded that the ground before 
me was marked "Dangerous" : — 

" The fact is, I did not want to come up here till after 
three, and the time seemed precious long, I can tell 
you." 

" Indeed , But you have missed the best part of the 
view. Between one and two o'clock, when the sun strikes 
in between the islands — Cusheen there to the right, and 
Mishear — the view is the finest of the whole day." 

" Oh, yes," I answered, " I know now what I have 
missed." 

Perhaps my voice betrayed me. I certainly felt full of 
bitter regret ; but there was no possibility of mistaking 
the smile which rose to her eyes and faded into the blush 
that followed the reception of the thought. 

There are some things which a woman cannot misunder- 
stand or fail to understand ; and surely my regret and 
its cause were within the category. 

It thrilled through me, with a sweet intoxication, to 
realize that she was not displeased. Man is predatory 



CONFIDENCES. 115 

even in his affections, and there is some conscious power 
to him which follows the conviction that the danger of 
him — which is his intention — is recognized. 

However, I thought it best to be prudent, and to rest 
on success — for a while, at least. I therefore commenced 
to talk of London, whose wonders were but fresh to 
myself, and was rewarded by the bright smile that 
had now become incorporated with my dreams by day and 
by night. 

And so we talked — talked in simple companionship ; 
and the time fled by on golden wings. No word of love 
was spoken or even hinted at, but with joy and gratitude 
unspeakable I began to realize that we were en rapport. 
And more than this, I realized that the beautiful peasant 
girl had great gifts — a heart of gold, a sweet, pure 
nature, and a rare intelligence. I gathered that she had 
had some education, though not an extensive one, and 
that she had followed up at home such subjects as she 
had learned in school. But this was all I gathered. I 
was still as ignorant as ever of her name, and all else 
beside, as when I had first heard her sweet voice on the 
hill-top. 

Perhaps I might have learned more, had there been 
time; but the limit of my knowledge had been fixed. 
The time had fled so quickly, because so happily, that 
neither of us had taken account of it ; and suddenly, 
as a long red ray struck over the hill-top from the 
sun now preparing for his plunge into the western 
wave, she jumped to heir feet with a startled cry: — 



116 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

" The sunset ! What am I thinking of ! Good-night ! 
good-night! No, you must not come — it would never 
do ! Good night ! " And before I could say a word, she 
was speeding down the eastern slope of the mountain. 

The revulsion from such a dream of happiness made 
me for the moment ungrateful; and I felt that it was 
with an angry sneer on my lip that I muttered as I 
looked at her retreating form : — 

" Why are the happy hours so short — whilst misery and 
anxiety spread out endlessly ? " 

But as the red light of the sunset smote my face, 
a better and a holier feeling came to me; and there 
on the top of the hill I knelt and prayed, with the 
directness and fervour that are the spiritual gifts of 
youth, that every blessing might light on her — the 
arriere pensee being — her, my wife. Slowly I went down 
the mountain after the sun had set ; and when I got 
to the foot, I stood bareheaded for a long time, looking 
at the summit which had given me so much happi- 
ness. 

Do not sneer or make light of such moments, ye whose 
lives are grey. Would to God that the grey-haired and 
grey-souled watchers of life, could feel such moments 
once again ! 

I walked home with rare briskness, but did not 
feel tired at all by it — I seemed to tread on air. As I 
drew near the hotel, I had some vague idea of hurrying 
at once to my own room, and avoiding dinner altogether 
as something too gross and carnal for my present exalted 



CONFIDENCES. 117 

condition; but a moment's reflection was sufficient to 
reject any such folly. I therefore achieved the other 
extreme, and made Mrs. Keating' s kindly face beam 
by the vehemence with which I demanded food. I 
found that Diet had not yet returned — a fact which did 
not displease me, as it insured me a temporary exemp- 
tion from Andy's ill-timed banter, which I did not feel 
in a humour to enjoy at present. 

I was just sitting down to my dinner when Dick 
arrived. He too had a keen appetite ; and it was not 
until we had finished our fish, and were well into our 
roast duck, that conversation began. Once he was started, 
Dick was full of matters to tell me. He had seen Mo- 
riarty — that was what had kept him so late — and had 
got his permission to investigate and experiment on the 
bog. He had thought out the whole method of work 
to be pursued, and had, during Murdock's dinner-time, 
made to scale a rough diagram for me to work by. We 
had our cigars lit before he had exhausted himself on 
this subject. He had asked me a few casual questions 
about my walk, and, so as not to arouse any suspicions, 
I had answered him vaguely that I had had a lovely 
day, had enjoyed myself immensely, and had seen some 
very pretty things — all of which was literally and exactly 
true. I had then asked him as to how he had got on 
with his operations in connection with the bog. It 
amused me to think how small and secondary a place 
Shleenanaher, and all belonging to it, now had in my 
thoughts. He told me that they had covered a large 



118 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

portion of the new section of the bog — that there was 
very little left to do now, in so far as the bog was 
concerned ; and he descanted on the richness and the 
fine position of Mnrdock's new farm. 

"It makes me angry," said he, "to think that that 
hnman-shaped wolf should get hold of such a lovely 
spot, and oust such a good fellow as the man whom 
he has robbed — yes ! it is robbery, and nothing short 
of it. I feel something like a criminal myself for work- 
ing for such a wretch at all." 

"Never mind, old chap," said I; "you can't help it. 
Whatever he may have done wrong, you have had 
neither act nor part in it. It will all come right in 
time ! " In my present state of mind I could not imagine 
that there was, or could be, anything in the world that 
would not come all right in time. 

We strolled into the street, and met Andy, who imme- 
diately hurried up to me : — 

" G-ood evenin', yer 'an'r ! An' did ye give me instruc- 
tions to me father ? " 

"I did, Andy; and he asked me to tell you that all 
shall be done exactly as you wish." 

"Thank yer 'an'r." He turned away, and my heart 
rejoiced, for I thought I would be free from his badinage ; 
but he turned and came back, and asked with a servility 
which I felt to be hypocritical and assumed : — 

"Any luck, yer 'an'r, wid bogs to-day?" I know I 
got red as I answered him: — 
. " Oh, I don't know ! Yes ! a little — not much." 



CONFIDENCES. 119 

" Shure an' I'm glad to hear it, suit ! but I might have 
known be the luk iv ye and be yer shtep. Faix ! it's 
aisy known whin a man has been lucky wid bogs !" The 
latter sentence was spoken in a pronounced " aside." 

Dick laughed, for although he was not in the secret he 
could see that there was some fun intended. I did not 
like his laugh, and said hotly: — 

" I don't understand you, Andy ! " 

' * Is it under shtand me ye don't do ? Well, surr, if I've 
said anythin' that I shouldn't, I ax yer pardon. Bogs 
isn't to be lightly shpoke iv at all, at all ! " then, after 
a pause: — "Poor Miss Norah!" 

"What do you mean?" said I. 

" Shure yer 'an'r, I was only pityin' the poor crathur. 
Poor thing, but this'll be a bitther blow to her intirely ! " 
The villain was so manifestly acting a part, and he 
grinned at me in such a provoking way, that I got quite 
annoyed. 

"Andy, what do you mean? out with it!" I said hotly. 

" Mane, yer 'an'r? Sure nawthin'. All I mane is, poor 
Miss Norah ! Musha, but it'll be the sore thrial to her. 
Bad cess to Knocknacar anyhow!" 

" This is infernal impertinence ! Here " I was 

stopped by Dick's hand on my breast: — 

"Easy, easy, old chap! What is this all about? Don't 
get angry, old man. Andy is only joking, whatever it is. 
I'm not in the secret myself, and so can give no opinion ; 
but there is a joke somewhere. Don't let it go beyond 
a joke." 



120 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

" All right, Dick," said I, having had time to recover my 
temper. " The fact is that Andy has started some chaff 
on me about bogs — meaning girls thereby — every time he 
mentions the word to me ; and now he seems to accuse me 
in some way about a girl that came to meet her father 
that night I left him home at Knockcalltecrore. You 
know, Joyce, that Murdock has ousted from his farm. 
Now, look here, Andy ! You're a very good fellow, and 
don't mean any harm ; but I entirely object to the way 
you're going on. I don't mind a button about a joke. I 
hope I'm not such an ass as to be thin-skinned about a 
trifle, but it is another matter when you mention a young 
lady's name alongside mine. You don't think of the harm 
you may do. People are very talkative, and generally get 
a story the wrong end up. If you mention this girl — 
whatever her name is " 

"Poor Miss Norah!" struck in Andy, and then osten- 
tatiously corrected himself — "I big yer 'an'r's pardon, 
Miss Norah, I mane." 

" This Miss Norah along with me," I went on, " and 
especially in that objectionable form, people may begin 
to think she is wronged in some way, and you may do 
her an evil that you couldn't undo in all your lifetime. 
As for me, I never even saw the girl. I heard her speak 
in the dark for about half a minute, but I never set eyes 
on her in my life. Now, let this be the last of all this 
nonsense ! Don't worry me any more ; but run in and 
tell Mrs. Keating to give you a skinful of punch, and 
to chalk it up to me." 



CONFIDENCES. 121 

Andy grinned, ducked his head, and made his exit 
into the house as though propelled or drawn by some 
unseen agency. When I remarked this to Dick he re- 
plied, " Some spirit draws him, I dare say." 

Dick had not said a word beyond advising me not 
to lose my temper. He did not appear to take any notice 
of my lecture to Andy, and puffed unconcernedly at his 
cigar till the driver had disappeared. He then took 
me by the arm and said : — 

"Let us stroll a bit up the road." Arm in arm we 
passed out of the town and into the silence of the 
common. The moon was rising, and there was a soft, 
tender light over everything. Presently, without looking 
at me, Dick said : — 

" Art, I don't want to be inquistive or to press for 
any confidences, but you and I are too old friends not to 
be interested in what concerns each other. What did 
Andy mean? Is there any girl in question?" 

I was glad to have a friend to whom to open my 
mind, and without further thought I answered: — 

" There is, Dick ! " 

Dick grasped my arm and looked keenly into my face, 
and then said : 

" Art ! Answer me one question — answer me truly, old 
fellow, by all you hold dear — answer me on your honour!" 

"I shall, Dick! What is it?" 

" Is it Norah Joyce ? " I had felt some vague alarm 
from the seriousness of his manner, but his question put 
me at ease again, and, with a high heart, I answered : — 



122 THE snake's pass. 

"No! Dick. It is not." We strolled on, and after a 
pause, that seemed a little oppressive to me, he spoke 
again : — 

" Andy mentioned a poor * Miss Norah ' — don't get 
riled, old man — and you both agreed that a certain 
young lady was the only one alluded to. Are you sure 
there is no mistake? Is not your young lady called 
Norah?" This was a difficult question to answer, and 
made me feel rather awkward. Being awkward, I got 
a little hot : — 

" Andy's an infernal fool. What I said to him — you 
heard me " 

" Yes ! I heard you." 

" was literally and exactly true. I never set eyes 

on Nor ah Joyce in my life. The girl I mean, the one 
you mean also, was one I saw by chance yesterday — and 
to-day — on the top of Knocknacar." 

"Who is she?" — there was a more joyous sound in 
Dick's voice. 

"Eh! eh!" I stammered. "The fact is, Dick, I 
don't know." 

" What is her name ? " 

" I don't know." 

" You don't know her name ? " 

"No." 

" Where does she come from ? " 

" I don't know. I don't know anything about her, 
except this, Dick, that I love her with all my heart and 
soul ! " I could not help it — I could not account for it 



CONFIDENCES. 123 

— but the tears rushed to my eyes, and I had to 
keep my head turned away from Dick lest he should ( 
notice me. He said nothing, and when I had surrep- 
titiously wiped away what I thought were unmanly 
tears of emotion, I looked round at him. He, too, 
had his head turned away and, and if my eyes did not 
deceive me, he too had some unmanly signs of emotion. 

" Dick ! " said I. He turned on the instant. We looked 
in one another's faces, and the story was all told. We 
grasped hands warmly. 

"We're both in the same boat, old boy," said he. 

"Who is it, Dick?" 

" Norah Joyce ! " I gave a low whistle. 

" But," he went on, " you are well ahead of me. I 
have never even exchanged a word with her yet. I have 
only seen her a couple of times; but the whole world 
is nothing to me beside her. There! I've nothing to 
tell. Veni, Vidi, Victus sum! — I came, I saw, I was 
conquered. She has beauty enough, and if I'm not an 
idiot, worth enough to conquer a nation! — Now, tell me 
all about yours." 

" There's nothing to tell, Dick ; as yet I have only 
exchanged a few words. I shall hope to know more 
soon." We walked along in silence, turning our steps 
back to the hotel. 

" I must hurry and finish up my plans to-night so 
as to be ready for you to-morrow. You won't look on 
it as a labour to go to Knocknacar, old chap ! " said he, 
slapping me on the back. 



124 THE snake's pass. 

" Nor you to go to Shleenanaher," said I, as we shook 
hands and parted for the night. 

It was quite two hours after this when I began to 
undress for bed. I suppose the whole truth, however 
foolish, must be told, but those two hours were mainly 
spent in trying to compose some suitable verses to my 
unknown. I had consumed a vast amount of paper — 
consumed literally, for what lover was ever yet content 
to trust his unsuccessful poetic efforts to the waste 
basket? — and my grate was thickly strewn with filmy 
ashes. Hitherto the Muse had persistently and suc- 
cessfully evaded me. She did not even grant me a 
feather from her wing, and my ' woeful ballad made to 
my mistress' eyebrow ' was amongst the things that 
were not. There was a gentle tap at the door. I opened 
it, and saw Dick with his coat off. He came in. 

" I thought I would look in, Art, as I saw the light 
under your door, and knew that you had not gone to 
bed. I only wanted to tell you this. You don't know 
what a relief it is to me to be able to speak of it to 
any living soul — how maddening it is to me to work 
for that scoundrel Murdoch. You can understand now 
why I flared up at him so suddenly ere yesterday. I 
have a strong conviction on me that his service is 
devil's service as far as my happiness is concerned — 
and that I shall pay some terrible penalty for it." 

"Nonsense, old fellow," said I, "Norah only wants to 
see you to know what a fine fellow you are. You won't 



CONFIDENCES. 125 

miud my saying it, but you are the class of man that any 
woman would be proud of ! " 

" Ah ! old chap," he answered sadly, " I'm afraid it 
will never get that far. There isn't, so to speak, a 
fair start for me. She has seen me already — worse 
luck ! — has seen me doing work which must seem to 
her to aid in ruining her father. I could not mistake 
the scornful glance she has thrown on me each time we 
have met. However, die sara sara ! It's no use fretting 
beforehand. Good night ! " 



126 



CHAPTER VII. 

VANISHED. 

We were all astir shortly after daylight on Monday 
morning. Dick's foot was well enough for his walk to 
Knockcalltecrore, and Andy came with me to Knock- 
nacar, as had been arranged, for I wanted his help in 
engaging labourers and beginning the work. We got 
to the shebeen about nine o'clock, and Andy having 
put up the mare went out to get labourers. As I was 
morally certain that at that hour in the morning there 
would be no chance of seeing my unknown on the hill- 
top, I went at once to the bog, taking my map with 
me and studying the ground where we were to com- 
mence operations. 

Andy joined me in about half-an-hour with five men — 
all he had been able to get in the time. They were 
fine strapping young fellows and seemed interested in 
the work, so I thought the contingent would be strong 
enough. By this time I had the ground marked out 
according to the plan, and so without more ado we com- 
menced work. 

We had attacked the hill some two hundred feet 



VANISHED. 127 

lower down than the bog, where the land suddenly 
rose steeply from a wide sloping extent of wilderness 
of invincible barrenness. It was over this spot that 
Sutherland hoped ultimately to send the waters of the 
bog. We began at the foot and made a trench some 
four feet wide at the bottom, and with sloping walls, so 
that when we got in so far the drain would be twenty 
feet deep, the external aperture would measure about 
twice as much. 

The soil was heavy and full of moderate- sized boul- 
ders, but was not unworkable, and amongst us we came 
to the conclusion that a week of solid work would, bar 
accidents and our coming across unforeseen difficulties, 
at any rate break the back of the job. The men 
worked in sections — one marking out the trench by 
cutting the surface to some foot-and-a-half deep, and 
the others following in succession. Andy sat on a stone 
hard by, filled his pipe, and endeavoured in his own 
cheery way to relieve the monotony of the labour of the 
others. After about an hour he grew tired and went 
away — perhaps it was that he became interested in a 
country car, loaded with persons, that came down the 
road and stopped a few minutes at the sheebeen on its 
way to join the main road to Carnaclif. 

Things went steadily on for some time. The men 
worked well, and I possessed my soul in such patience 
as I could, and studied the map and the ground most 
carefully. When dinner-time came the men went off 
each to his own home, and as soon as the place was 



128 THE snake's pass. 

free from them I hurried to the top of the mountain. 
The prospect was the same as yesterday. There 
was the same stretch of wild moor and rugged coast, 
of clustering islands and foam-girt rocks — of blue sky 
laden with such masses of luminous clouds as are only 
found in Ireland. But all was to me dreary and deso- 
late, for the place was empty and she was not there. I 
sat down to wait with what patience I could. It was 
dreary work at best ; but at any rate there was hope — 
and its more immediate kinsman, expectation — and I 
waited. Somehow the view seemed to tranquillize me 
in some degree. It may have been that there was some 
unconscious working of the mind which told me in some 
imperfect way that in a region quite within my range of 
vision, nothing could long remain hidden or unknown. 
Perhaps it was the stilly silence of the place. There 
was hardly a sound — the country people were all within 
doors at dinner, and even the sounds of their toil were 
lacking. From the west came a very faint breeze, just 
enough to bring the far-off, eternal roar of the surf. 
There was scarcely a sign of life. The cattle far below 
were sheltering under trees, or in the shadows of hedges, 
or standing still knee-deep in the pools of the shallow 
streams. The only moving thing which I could see was 
the car which had left so long before, and was now far 
off, and was each moment becoming smaller and smaller 
as it went into the distance. 

So I sat for quite an hour with my heart half sick 
with longing, but she never came. Then I thought I 



VANISHED. 129 

heard a step coming up the path at the far side. My 
heart beat strangely. I sat silent, and did not pretend 
to hear. She was walking more slowly than usual, and 
with a firmer tread. She was coming. I heard the steps 
on the plateau, and a voice came : — 

"Och! an' isn't it a purty view, yer 'an'r?" I leaped 
to my feet with a feeling that was positively murderous. 
The revulsion was too great, and I broke into a burst 
of semi-hysterical laughter. There stood Andy — with 
ragged red head and sun- scorched face — in his garb of 
eternal patches, bleached and discoloured by sun and 
rain into a veritable coat of many colours — gazing at 
the view with a rapt expression, and yet with one eye 
half- closed in a fixed but unmistakable wink, as though 
taking the whole majesty of nature into his confidence. 

When he heard my burst of laughter he turned to 
me quizzically: — 

" Musha ! but it's the merry gentleman yer 'an'r is this 
day. Shure the view here is the laughablest thing I ever 
see ! " and he affected to laugh, but in such a soulless, 
unspontaneous way that it became a real burlesque. I 
waited for him to go on. I was naturally very vexed, 
but I was afraid to say anything lest I might cause him 
to interfere in this affair — the last thing on earth that I 
wished for. 

He did go on ; no one ever found Andy abashed or 
ill at ease : — 

" Begor ! but yer 'an'r lepped like a deer when ye heerd 
me shpake. Did ye think I was goin' to shoot ye? 

E 



130 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

Faix! an' I thought that ye wor about to jump from 
an iv the mountain into the say, like a shtag." 

" Why, what do you know about stags, Andy? There 
are none in this part of the country, are there?" I 
thought I would drag a new subject across his path. 
The ruse of the red herring drawn across the scent 
succeeded ! 

" Phwhat do I know iv shtags? Faix, I know this, that 
there does be plinty in me Lard's demesne bey ant at 
Wistport. Sure wan iv thim got out last autumn an' 
nigh ruined me garden. He kem in at night an' ate 
up all me cabbages an' all the vigi tables I'd got. I 
frightened him away a lot iv times, but he kem back 
all the same. At last I could shtand him no longer, and 
I wint meself an' complained to the Lard. He tould 
me he was very sorry fur the damage he done, 'an',-' sez 
he, ' Andy, I think he's a bankrup,' sez he, ' an' we 
must take his body.' ' How is that, Me Lard ? ' sez I. 
Sez he, 'I give him to ye, Andy. Do what, ye like wid 
him ! ' An' wid that I wint home an' I med a thrap iv 
a clothes line wid a loop in it, an' I put it betune two 
threes ; and shure enough in the night I got him." 

"And what did you do with him, Andy?" said I. 

" Faith, surr, I shkinned him and ate him ! " He said 
this just in the same tone in which he would speak of 
the most ordinary occurrence, leaving the impression on 
one's mind that the skinning and eating were matters 
done at the moment and quite offhand. 

I fondly hoped that Andy's mind was now in quite 



VANISHED. 131 

another state from his usual mental condition ; but I 
hardly knew the man yet. He had the true humorist's 
persistence, and before I was ready with another intellec- 
tual herring he was off on the original track. 

" I thrust I didn't dishturb yer 'an'r. I know some 
gintlemin likes to luk at views and say nothin'. I'm 
tould that a young gintleman like yer 'an'r might be 
up on top iv a mountain like this, an' he'd luk at the 
view so hard day afther day that he wouldn't even shpake 
to a purty girrul — if there was wan forninst him all the 
time ! " 

" Then they lied to you, Andy ! " I said this quite 
decisively. 

" Faix, yer 'an'r, an' it's glad I am to hear that same, 
for I wouldn't like to think that a young gintleman 
was afraid of a girrul, however purty she might be." 

" But, tell me, Andy," I said, " what idiot could have 
started such an idea ? And even if it was told to you, 
how could you be such a fool as to believe it ? " 

"Me belave it! Surr, I did't belave a wurrd iv it — 
not until I met yer 'an'r." His face was quite grave, 
and I was not sorry to find him in a sober mood, for I 
wanted to have a serious chat with him. It struck me 
that he, having relatives at Knocknacar, might be able 
to give me some information about my unknown. 

"Until you met me, Andy! Surely I never gave you 
any ground for holding such a ridiculous idea?" 

" Begor, yer 'an'r, but ye did. But p'raps I had 
betther not say any more — yer 'an'r mightn't like it." 



132 the shake's pass. 

This both surprised and nettled me, and I was deter- 
mined now to have it out, so I said, " You quite surprise 
me, Andy. What have I ever done ? Do not be afraid ! 
Out with it," for he kept looking at me in a timorous 
kind of way. 

"Well, then, yer 'an'r, about poor Miss Norah?" 

This was a surprise, but I wanted to know more. 

"Well, Andy, what about her?" 

" Shure, an' didn't you refuse to shpake iv her intirely 
an' sot on me fur only mintionin' her — an' she wan 
iv the purtiest girruls in the place." 

"My dear Andy," said I, "I thought I had explained 
to you, last night, all about that. I don't suppose 
you quite understand; but it might do a girl in her 
position harm to be spoken about with a — a man like 
me." 

"Wid a man like you — an' for why? Isn't she as 
good a girrul as iver broke bread ? " 

"Oh, it's not that, Andy; people might think harm." 

" Think harrum ! — phwhat harrum — an' who'd think 
it?" 

" Oh, you don't understand — a man in your position 
can hardly know." 

" But, yer 'an'r, I don't git comprehindin' ! What 
harrum could there be, an' who'd think it ? The people 
here is all somethin' iv me own position — workin' people 
— an' whin they knows a girrul is a good, dacent girrul, 
why should they think harrum because a nice young 
gintleman goes out iv his way to shpake to her? — 



VANISHED. 133 

Doesn't lie slipake to the quality like himself, an' no 
wan thinks any harrum iv ayther iv them ? " 

Andy's simple, honest argument made me feel ashamed 
of the finer sophistries belonging to the more artificial 
existence of those of my own station. 

" Sure, yer 'an'r, there isn't a bhoy in Connaught that 
wouldn't like to be shpoke of wid Miss Norah. She's 
that good, that even the nuns in Galway, where she 
was at school, loves her and thrates her like wan iv 
themselves, for all she's a Protestan'." 

" My dear Andy," said I, " don't you think you're 
a little hard on me? You're putting me in the dock, 
and trying me for a series of offences that I never even 
thought of committing with regard to her or any one 
else. Miss Norah may be an angel in petticoats, and 
I'm quite prepared to take it for granted that she is 
so — your word on the subject is quite enough for me. 
But just please to remember that I never set eyes on 
her in my life. The only time I was ever in her pre- 
sence was when you were by yourself, and it was so 
dark that I could not see her, to help her when 
she fainted. Why, in the name of common sense, you 
should keep holding her up to me, I do not under- 
stand." 

" But yer 'an'r said that it might do her harrum 
even to mintion her wid you." 

" Oh, well, Andy, I give it up — it's no use trying to 
explain. Either you won't understand, or I am unable 
to express myself properly." 



134 the snake's pass. 

" Surr, there can be only one harram to a girrul from 
a gintleman," he laid his hand on my arm, and said 
this impressively — whatever else he may have ever said 
in jest, he was in grim earnest now — "an' that's whin 
he's a villain. Ye wouldn't do the black thrick, and 
desave a girrul that thrusted ye ? " 

" No, Andy, no ! God forbid ! I would rather go 
to the highest rock on some island there beyond, 
where the surf is loudest, and throw myself into the 
sea, than do such a thing. No ! Andy, there are lots 
of men that hold such matters lightly, but I don't 
think I'm one of them. Whatever sins I have, or may 
ever have upon my soul, I hope such a one as that 
will never be there." 

All the comment Andy made was, " I thought so ! " 
Then the habitual quizzical look stole over his face again, 
and he said: — 

"There does be some that does fear Braches iv Pro- 
mise. Mind ye, a man has to be mighty careful on the 
subject, for some weemin is that 'cute, there's no bein' 
up to them." 

Andy's sudden change to this new theme was a little 
embarrassing, since the idea leading to it — or rather 
preceding it — had been one purely personal to myself; 
but he was off, and I thought it better that he should 
go on. 

" Indeed ! " said I. 

" Yes, surr. Oh, my ! but they're 'cute. The first 
thing that a girrul does when a man looks twice at 



VANISHED. 135 

her, is t' ask him to write her a letther, an' thin she 
has him — tight." 

" How so, Andy ? " 

" Well, ye see, surr, when you're writin' a letther to 
a girrul, ye can't begin widout a 'My dear' or a 'My 
darlin' ' — an' thin she has the grip iv the law onto ye I 
An' ye do be badgered be the councillors, an' ye do be 
frowned at be the judge, an' ye do be laughed at be the 
people, an' ye do have to pay yer money — an' there ye 
are ! " 

" I say, Andy," said I, " I think you must have been 
in trouble yourself in that way — you seem to have it 
all off pat!" 

" Oh, throth, not me, yer 'an'r. Glory be to G-od ! 
but I niver was a defindant in me life — an' more be- 
token, I don't want to be — but I was wance a witness 
in a case iv the kind." 

" And what did you witness ? " 

"Faix, I was called to prove that I seen the gintle- 
man's arrum around the girrul' s waist. The councillors 
made a deal out iv that — just as if it warn't only manners 
to hould up a girrul on a car ! " 

"What was the case, Andy? Tell me all about it." 

I did not mind his waiting, as it gave me an excuse 
for staying on the top of the hill. I knew I could easily 
get rid of him when she came — if she came — by sending 
him on a message. 

" Well, this was a young woman what had an action 
agin Shquire Murphy iv Ballynashoughlin himself — 



136 THE snake's pass. 

a woman as was no more nor a mere simple gover- 
ness ! " 

It would be impossible to convey the depth of social 
unimportance conveyed by his tone and manner ; and 
coming from a man of " shreds and patches," it was 
more than comic. Andy had his good suit of frieze 
and homespun; but whilst he was on mountain duty, 
he spared these and appeared almost in the guise of a 
scarecrow. 

" Well ! what happened ? " 

" Faix, whin she tould her shtory the shquire's coun- 
cillor luked up at the jury, an' he whispered a wurrd 
to the shquire and his 'an'r wrote out a shlip iv paper 
an' handed it to him, an' the councillor ups an' says 
he : ' Me Lard and Gintlemin iv the Jury, me client 
is prepared to have the honour iv the lady's hand if 
she will so, for let bygones be bygones.' An' sure 
enough they was married on the Sunday next four 
weeks ; an' there she is now dhrivin' him about the 
counthry in her pony- shay, an' all the quality comin' to 
tay in the garden, an' she as affable as iver to all the 
farmers round. Aye, an' be the hokey, the shquire himself 
sez that it was a good day for him whin he sot eyes on 
her first, an' that he don't know why he was such a dam 
fool as iver to thry to say ' no ' to her, or to wish it." 

" Quite a tale with a moral, Andy ! Bravo ! Mrs. 
Murphy." 

"A morial is it? Now may I make bould to ask 
yer 'an'r what morial ye take out iv it? 



VANISHED. 137 

" The moral, Andy, that I see is, When you see the 
right woman go for her for all you're worth, and thank 
God for giving you the chance." Andy jumped up and 
gave me a great slap on the back. 

" Hurro ! more power to yer elbow ! but it's a bhoy 
afther me own h'arrt y' are. I big yer pardon, surr, 
for the liberty ; but it's mighty glad I am." 

"Granted, Andy; I like a man to be hearty, and you 
certainly are. But why are you so glad about me ? " 

"Because I like yer 'an'r. Shure in all me life I 
niver see so much iv a young gintleman as I've done 
iv yer 'an'r. Surr, I'm an ould man compared wid 
ye — I'm the beginnin' iv wan, at any rate, an' I'd 
like to give ye a wurrd iv advice — git marrid while 
ye can ! I tell ye this, surr, it's not whin the hair is 
beginnin' to git thin on to the top iv yer head that a 
nice young girrul 'ill love ye for yerself. It's the 
people that goes all their lives makin' money and 
lukin' after. all kinds iv things that's iv no kind iv 
use to thim, that makes the mishtake. Suppose ye do 
git marrid when ye're ould and bald, an' yer legs is 
shaky, an' ye want to be let sit close to the fire in the 
warrum corner, an' ye've lashins iv money that ye 
don't know what to do wid ! Do you think that it's 
thin that yer wives does be dhramin' iv ye all the time 
and worshippin' the ground ye thrid? Not a bit iv it! 
They do be wantin' — aye and thryin' too — to help God 
away wid ye ! " 

" Andy," said I, " you preach, on a practical text, a 



138 THE snake's pass. 

sermon that any and every young man ought to hear ! " 
I thought I saw an opening here for gaining some in* 
formation and jumped in. 

" By Jove ! you set me off wishing to marry ! Tell 
me, is there any pretty girl in this neighbourhood that 
would suit a young man like me ? " 

"Oho ! begor, there's girruls enough to shute any 
man." 

" Aye, Andy — but pretty girls ! " 

"Well surr, that depinds. Now what might be yer 
'anr's idea iv a purty girrul ? " 

"My dear Andy, there are so many different kinds 
of prettiness that it is hard to say." 

"Faix, an' I'll tell ye if there's a girrul to shute in 
the counthry, for bedad I think I've seen thim all. 
But you must let me know what would shute ye 
best?" 

" How can I well tell that, Andy, when I don't know 
myself? Show me the girl, and I'll very soon tell you." 

" Unless I was to ax yer 'an'r questions ! " this was 
said very slily. 

" Go on, Andy ! there is nothing like the Socratic 
method." 

" Very well thin ! I'll ax two kinds iv things, an' yer 
'an'r will tell me which ye'd like like the best ! " 

" All right, go on." 

" Long or short ? " 

" Tall ; not short, certainly." 

" Fat or lane ? " 



VANISHED. 139 

" Fie ! fie ! Andy, for shame ; you talk as if they were 
cattle or pigs." 

'* Begor, there's only wan kind iv fat an' lane that I 
knows of ; but av ye like I'll call it thick or thin ; which 
is it?" 

" Not too fat, but certainly not skinny." Andy held 
uj) his hands in mock horror : — 

" Yer 'an'r shpakes as if ye was talkin' iv powlthry." 

" I mean Andy," said I with a certain sense of 
shame, " she is not to be either too fat or too lean, 
as you put it." 

" Ye mane ' shtreaky ' ! " 

" Streaky ! " said I, " what do you mean ? " He 
answered promptly : — 

" Shtreaky, — thick an' thin — like belly bacon." I said 
nothing. I felt certain it would be useless and out of 
place. He went on: — 

" Nixt, fair or dark ? " 

"Dark, by all means." 

"Dark be it, surr. What kind iv eyes might she 
have ? " 

" Ah ! eyes like darkness on the bosom of the azure 
deep!" 

" Musha ! but that's a quare kind iv eye fur a girrul 
to have intirely! Is she to be all dark, surr, or only 
the hair of her?" 

" I don't mean a nigger, Andy ! " I thought I 
would be even with him for once in a way. He laughed 
heartily. 



140 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

"Oh ! my but that's a good wan. Be the hokey, a 
girrul can be dark enough fur any man widout bein' 
a nagur. Glory be to God, but I niver seen a faymale 
naygur meself, but I suppose there's such things ; God's 
very good to all his craythurs ! But, barrin' naygurs, 
must she be all dark ? " 

" Well not of necessity, but I certainly prefer what 
we call a brunette." 

"A bru-net. What's that now; I've heerd a wheen 
o' quare things in me time, but I niver heerd a woman 
called that before." 

I tried to explain the term; he seemed to understand, 
but his only comment was: — 

" Well, God is very good," and then went on with 
his queries. 

"How might she be dressed?" he looked very sly as 
he asked the question. 

" Simply ! The dress is not particular — that can 
easily be altered. For myself, just at present, I should 
like her in the dress they all wear here, some pretty 
kind of body and a red petticoat." 

" Thrue for ye!" said Andy. Then he went ©ver the 
list ticking off the items on his fingers as he went 
along : — 

"A long, dark girrul, like belly bakin, but not a 
naygur, some kind iv a net, an' wid a rid petticoat, 
an* a quare kind iv an eye ! Is that the kind iv a 
girrul that yer 'an'r wants to set yer eyes on?" 

" Well," said I, " item by item, as you explaim them, 



VANISHED. 141 

Andy, the description is correct; but I must say, that 
never in my life did I know a man to so knock the 
bottom out of romance as you have done in summing- 
up the lady's charms." 

11 Her charrums, is it ? Be the powers ! I only tuk 
what yer 'an'r tould me. An' so that's the girrul that 
id shute yer ? " 

" Yes ! Andy. I think she would." I waited in 
expectation, but he said nothing. So I jogged his 
memory : — 

" Well ! " He looked at me in a most peculiar 
manner, and said slowly and impressively : — 

" Thin I can sahtisfy yer 'an'r. There's no such girrul 
in all Knocknacar!" I smiled a smile of triumph: — 

" You're wrong for once, Andy. I saw such a girl 
only yesterday, here on the top of this mountain, just 
where we're sitting now." 

Andy jumped up as if he had been sitting on an ant- 
hill, and had suddenly been made aware of it. He 
looked all round in a frightened way, but I could 
see that he was only acting, and said : — 

" Glory be to God ! but maybe it's the fairies, it was, 
or the pixies ! Shure they do say that there's lots an' 
lots an' lashins iv them on this hill. Don't ye have 
nothin' to say to thim, surr ! There's only sorra follys 
thim. Take an ould man's advice, an' don't come up 
here any more. The shpot is dangerous to ye. If ye 
want to see a fine girrul go to Shleenanaher, an' have 
a good luk at Miss Norah in the daylight." 



142 THE snake's pass. 

" Oh, bother Miss Norah ! " said I. " Get along 
with you — do ! I think you've got Miss Norah on the 
brain ; or perhaps you're in love with her yourself.'* 
Andy murmured sotto voce, but manifestly for me to 
hear : — 

" Begor, I am, like the rist iv the bhoys — av course \ " 

Here I looked at my watch, and found it was 
three o'clock, so thought it was time to get rid of him. 

" Here," said I " run down to the men at the cutting 
and tell them that I'm coming down presently to measure 
up their work, as Mr. Sutherland will want to know how 
they've got on." 

Andy moved off. Before going, however, he had 
something to say, as usual : — 

"Tell me, Misther Art" — this new name startled me, 
Andy had evidently taken me into his public family — 
" do ye think Misther Dick " — this was another surprise — 
"has an eye on Miss Norah? " There was a real shock 
this time. 

"I see him lukin' at her wance or twice as if he'd 
like to ate her; but, bedad, it's no use if he has, for 
she wouldn't luk at him. No wondher ! an' him helpin* 
to be takin' her father's houldin' away from him." 

I could not answer Andy's question as to poor old 
Dick's feelings, for such was his secret, and not mine ; but 
I determined not to let there be any misapprehension 
regarding his having a hand in Murdock's dirty work, 
so I spoke hotly : — 

" You tell anyone that dares to say that Dick 



VANISHED. 143 

Sutherland has any act or part, good or bad — large or 
small — in that dirty ruffian's dishonourable conduct, 
that he is either a knave or a fool — at any rate he is 
a liar ! Dick is simply a man of science engaged by 
Murdock, as any other man of science might be, to look 
after some operations in regard to his bog." 

Andy's comment was made sotto voce, so I thought it 
better not to notice it. 

" Musha ! but the bogs iv all kinds is gettin' mixed 
up quarely. Here's another iv them. Misther Dick is 
engaged to luk afther the bogs. An' so he does, but 
his eyes goes wandherin' among thim. There does be 
bogs iv all kinds now all over these parts. It's quare 
times we're in, or I'm gettin' ould ! " 

With this Parthian shaft Andy took himself down the 
hill, and presently I saw the good effects of his presence 
in stimulating the workmen to more ardent endeavours, 
for they all leaned on their spades whilst he told them 
a long story, which ended in a tumult of laughter. 

I might have enjoyed the man's fun, but I was in 
no laughiDg humour. I had got anxious long ago because 
she had not visited the hill-top. I looked all round, 
but could see no sign of her anywhere. I waited and 
waited, and the time truly went on leaden wings. The 
afternoon sun smote the hill-top with its glare, more 
oppressive always than even the noontide heat. 

I lingered on and lingered still, and hope died within 
me. 

When six o'clock had come I felt that there was no 



144 THE snake's pass. 

niore chance for me that day; so I went sadly down the 
hill, and, after a glance for Dick's sake at the cutting, 
sought the sheebeen where Andy had the horse ready 
harnessed in the car. I assumed as cheerful an aspect 
as I could, and nattered myself that I carried off the 
occasion very well. It was not at all nattering, however, 
to my histrionic powers to hear Andy, as we were driving 
off, whisper in answer to a remark deploring how sad 1 
looked, made by the old lady who kept the sheebeen : — 

" Whisht ! Don't appear to notice him, or yell dhrive 
him mad. Me opinion is that he's been wandherin' on 
the mountain too long, an' tamperin' wid the rings on 
the grass — you know — an' that he has seen the fairies!" 
Then he said aloud and ostentatiously : — 

" Gee up ! ye ould corncrake — ye ought to be fresh 
enough — ye've niver left the fut iv the hill all the day," 
— then turning to me, ''An' sure, surr, it's goin' to the 
top that takes it out iv wan — ayther a horse or a 
man." 

I made no answer, and in silence we drove to Car- 
naclif, where I found Dick impatiently waiting dinner 
for me. 

I was glad to find that he was full of queries 
concerning the cutting, for it saved me from the con- 
sideration of subjects more difficult to answer satis- 
factorily. Fortunately I was able to give a good 
account of the time spent, for the work done had far 
exceeded my expectations. I thought that Dick was 
in much better spirits than he had been ; but it was 



VANISHED. 145 

not until the subject of the bog at Knocknacar was 
completely exhausted that I got any clue on the sub- 
ject. I then ashed Dick if he had had a good time 
at Shleenanaher ? 

11 Yes ! " he answered. " Thank G-od ! the work is 
nearly done. We went over the whole place to-day 
and there was only one indication of iron. This was 
in the bog just beside an elbow where Joyce's land — his 
present land — touches ours ; no ! I mean on Murdock's, 
the scoundrel ! " He was quite angry with himself for 
using the word " ours " even accidentally. 

11 And has anything come of it ? " I asked him. 

" Nothing ! Now that he knows it is there, he 
would not let me go near it on any account. I'm in 
hopes he'll quarrel with me soon in order to get rid 
of me, so that he may try by himself to fish it — what- 
ever it may be — out of the bog. If he does quarrel 
with me ! Well ! I only hope he will ; I have been 
longing for weeks past to get a chance at him. 
Then she'll believe, perhaps " He stopped. 

"You saw her to-day, Dick!" 

" How did you know that ? " 

" Because you look so happy, old man ! " 

"Yes! I did see her; but only for a moment. She 
drove up in the middle of the day, and I saw her go 
up to the new house. But she didn't even see me," and 
his face fell. Presently he asked : — 

" You didn't see your girl ? " 

" No, Dick, I did not ! But how did you know ? " 



146 THE snake's pass. 

" I saw it in your face when you came in ! " 

We sat and smoked in silence. The interruption 
came in the shape of Andy : — 

"I suppose, Masther Art, the same agin to-morra — 
unless ye'd like me to bring ye wid Masther Dick to 
see Shleenanaher — ye know the shpot, surr — where Miss 
Norah is ! " 

He grinned, and as we said nothing, made his exit. 



147 



CHAPTER VIII. 

A VISIT TO JOYCE. 

With renewed hope I set out in the morning for 
Knocknacar. 

It is one of the many privileges of youth that a few 
hours' sleep will change the darkest aspect of the entire 
universe to one of the rosiest tint. Since the previous 
evening, sleeping and waking, my mind had been fram- 
ing reasons and excuses for the absence of ... . ! — it was 
a perpetual grief to me that I did not even know her 
name. The journey to the mountain seemed longer than 
usual ; but, even at the time, this seemed to me only 
natural under the circumstances. 

Andy was to-day seemingly saturated or overwhelmed 
with a superstitious gravity. Without laying any 
personal basis for his remarks, but accepting as a stand- 
point his own remark of the previous evening concerning 
my having seen a fairy, he proceeded to develop his 
fears on the subject. I will do him the justice to say 
that his knowledge of folklore was immense, and that 
nothing but a gigantic memory for detail, cultivated to 
the full, or else an equally stupendous imaginitaon 



14'8 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

working on the facts that momentarily came before his 
view, conld have enabled him to keep up such a flow of 
narrative and legend. The general result to me was, 
that if I had been inclined to believe such matters 
I would have remained under the impression that, 
although the whole seaboard, with adjacent mountains, 
from Westport to G-alway, was in a state of plethora 
as regards uncanny existences, Knocknacar, as a habitat 
for such, easily bore off the palm. Indeed, that re- 
markable mountain must have been a solid mass of 
gnomes, fairies, pixies, leprachauns, and all genii, species 
and varieties of the same. No Chicago grain-elevator in 
the early days of a wheat corner could have been more 
solidly packed. It would seem that so many inhabitants 
had been allured by fairies, and consequently had mys- 
teriously disappeared, that this method of minimisation 
of the census must have formed a distinct drain on the 
local population, which, by the way, did not seem to be 
excessive. 

I reserved to myself the right of interrogating Andy 
on this subject later in the day, if, unhappily, there 
should be any opportunity. Now that we had drawn near 
the hill, my fears began to return. 

Whilst Andy stabled the mare I went to the cutting 
and found the men already at work. During the night 
there had evidently been a considerable drainage from 
the cutting, not from the bog but entirely local. This 
was now Friday morning, and I thought that if equal 
progress were made in the two days, it would be quite 



A VISIT TO JOYCE. 149 

necessary that Dick should see the working on Sunday, 
and advise before proceeding further. 

As I knew that gossip and the requirements of his 
horse would keep Andy away for a little while, I 
determined to take advantage of his absence to run up 
to the top of the hill, just to make sure that no one 
was there. It did not take long to get up, but when I 
arrived there was no reward, except in the shape of 
a very magnificent view. The weather was evidently 
changing, for great clouds seemed to gather from the 
west and south, and far away over the distant rim of 
the horizon the sky was as dark as night. Still the 
clouds were not hurrying as before a storm, and the 
gloom did not seem to have come shoreward as yet ; it 
was rather a presage of prolonged bad weather than bad 
itself. I did not remain long, as I wished to escape 
Andy's scrutiny. Indeed, as I descended the hill I began 
to think that Andy had become like the " Old Man of the 
Sea," and that my own experience seemed likely to rival 
that of Sinbad. 

When I arrived at the cutting I found Andy already 
seated, enjoying his pipe. When he saw me he looked 
up with a grin, and said audibly: — 

" The Good People don't seem to be workin' so 'arly 
in the mornin' ! Here he is safe an' sound amongst us." 

That was a very long day. Whenever I thought I 
could do so, without attracting too much attention, I 
strolled to the top of the hill, but only to suffer a new 
disappointment. 



150 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

At dinner-time I went up and sat all the time. I 
was bitterly disappointed, and also began to be seriously 
alarmed. I seemed to have lost my unknown. 

When the men got back to their work, and I saw Andy 
beginning to climb the hill in an artless, purposeless 
manner, I thought I would kill two birds with one stone, 
and, whilst avoiding my incubus, make some inquiries. 
As I could easily see from the top of the hill, there were 
only a few houses all told in the little hamlet ; and 
including those most isolated, there were not twenty in 
all. Of these I had been in the sheebeen and in old 
Sullivan's, so that a stroll of an hour or two, properly 
organized, would cover the whole ground; and so I set 
out on my task to try and get some sight or report of my 
unknown. I knew I could always get an opportunity of 
opening conversation by asking for a light for my cigar. 

It was a profitless task. Two hours after I had started 
I returned to the top of the hill as ignorant as I had 
gone, and the richer only by some dozen or more drinks 
of milk, for I found that the acceptance of some form of 
hospitality was an easy opening to general conversation. 
The top was still empty, but I had not been there a 
quarter of an hour when I was joined by Andy. His 
first remark was evidently calculated to set me at 
ease : — 

"Begor, yer 'an'r comes to the top iv this hill nigh 
as often as I do meself." 

I felt that my answer was inconsequential as well 
as ill-tempered: — 



A VISIT TO JOYCE. 151 

" Well, why on earth, Andy, do you come so often ? 
Surely there is no need to come, unless you like it." 

" Faix! I came this time lest yer 'an'r might feel lonely. 
I niver see a man yit be himself on top iv a hill that 
he didn't want a companion — iv some kind or another." 

" Andy," I remarked, as I thought, rather cuttingly, 
"you judge life and men too much by your own 
experience. There are people and emotions which are 
quite out of your scope — far too high, or perhaps too low, 
for your psychic or intellectual grasp." 

Andy was quite unabashed. He looked at me ad- 
miringly. 

" It's a pity yer 'an'r isn't a mimber iv Parlyment. 
Shure, wid a flow iv language like that, ye could do 
anythin' ! " 

As satire was no use I thought I would draw him 
out on the subject of the fairies and pixies. 

" I suppose you were looking for more fairies ; the 
supply you had this morning was hardly enough to suit 
you, was it ? " 

"Begor, it's meself is not the only wan that does be 
lukin' for the fairies ! " and he grinned. 

"Well, I must say, Andy, you seem to have a good 
supply on hand. Indeed, it seems to me that if there 
were any more fairies to be located on this hill it would 
have to be enlarged, for it's pretty solid with them al- 
ready, so far as I can gather." 

"Augh! there's room for wan more! I'm tould there's 
wan missin' since ere yistherday." 



152 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

It was no good trying to beat Andy at this game, so 
I gave it up and sat silent. After a while he asked 
me : — 

"Will I be dhrivin' yer 'an'r over to Knockcallte- 
crore ? " 

" Why do yon ask me ? " 

•'I'm thinking it's glad yer 'an'r will be to see Miss 
Norah." 

" Upon my sonl, Andy, yon are too bad. A joke is 
a joke, but there are limits to it ; and I don't let any 
man joke with me when I prefer not. If yon want to 
talk of your Miss Norah, go and talk to Mr. Sutherland 
about her. He's there every day and can make use of 
your aid! Why on earth do you single me out as your 
father confessor ? You're unfair to the girl, after all, 
for if I ever do see her I'm prepared to hate her." 

" Ah ! yer 'an'r would' nt be that hard ! What har- 
rum has the poor crathur done that ye'd hate her — a 
thing no mortial man iver done yit ? " 

" Oh, go on ! don't bother me any more ; I think it's 
about time we were getting home. You go down to the 
sheebeen and rattle up that old corncrake of yours ; I'll 
come down presently and see how the work goes 
on." 

He went off, but came back as usual ; I could have 
thrown something at him. 

" Take me advice, surr — pay a visit to Shleenanaher, 
an' see Miss Norah ! " and he hurried down the hill. 

His going did me no good; no one came, and after a 



A VISIT TO JOYCE. 153 

lingering glance around, and noting the gathering of the 
rain clouds, I descended the hill. 

When I got up on the car I was not at all in a 
talkative humour, and said but little to the group sur- 
rounding me. I heard Andy account for it to them : — 

" Whisht ! don't notice his 'an'r's silence ! It's stupid 
wid shmokin' he is. He lit no less nor siventeen cigars 
this blissed day. Ax the neighbours av ye doubt me. 
Gee up ! " 

The evening was spent with Dick as the last had 
been. I knew that he had seen his girl ; he knew that 
I had not seen mine, but neither had anything to tell. 
Before parting he told me that he expected to shortly 
finish his work at Knockcalltecrore, and asked me if I 
would come over. 

"Do come," he said, when I expressed a doubt. " Do 
come, I may want a witness," so I promised to go. 

Andy had on his best suit, and a clean wash, when 
he met us smiling in the early morning, " Look at him," 
I said, "wouldn't you know he was going to meet his 
best girl ? " 

" Begor," he answered, " mayhap we'll all do that 
same ! " 

It was only ten o'clock when we arrived at Knockcall- 
tecrore, and went up the boreen to Murdock's new farm. 
The Gombeen Man was standing at the gate with his 
watch in his hand. When we came up, he said : — 

" I feared you would be late. It's just conthract time 
now. Hadn't ye betther say good-bye to your frind an' 



154 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

git to work?" He was so transparently inclined to be 
rude, and possibly to pick a quarrel, that I whispered a 
warning to Dick. To my great satisfaction he whispered 
back : — 

" I see he wants to quarrel ; nothing in the world will 
make me lose temper to-day." Then he took out his 
pocket-book, searched for and found a folded paper ; 
opening this he read : " ' and the said Eichard Suther- 
land shall be at liberty to make use of such assistant as 
he may choose or appoint whensoever he may wish during 
the said engagement at his own expense.' You see, 
Mr. Murdock, I am quite within the four walls of the 
agreement, and exercise my right. I now tell you for- 
mally tbat Mr. Arthur Severn has kindly undertaken to 
assist me for to-day." Murdock glared at him for a 
minute, and then opened the gate and said: — 

"Come in, gintlemin." We entered. 

"Now, Mr. Murdoch!" said Dick, briskly, "what do 
you wish done to-day ? Shall we make further exami- 
nation of the bog where the iron indication is, or shall 
we finish the survey of the rest of the land ? " 

" Finish the rough survey ! " 

The operation was much less complicated than when 
we had examined the bog. We simply "quartered" the 
land, as the Constabulary say when they make search for 
hidden arms ; and taking it bit by bit, passed the 
magnet over its surface. We had the usual finds of 
nails, horseshoes, and scrap iron, but no result of im- 
portance. The last place we examined was the house. 



A VISIT TO JOYCE. 155 

It was a much better built and more roomy structure 
than the one he had left. It was not, however, like the 
other, built on a rock, but in a sheltered hollow. Dick 
pointed out this to me, and remarked: — 

" I don't know but that Joyce is better off, all told, 
in the exchange. I wouldn't care myself to live in a 
house built in a place like this, and directly in the track 
of the bog." 

" Not even," said I, "if Norah was living in it 
too?" 

" Ah, that's another thing ! With Norah I'd take my 
chance and live in the bog itself, if I could get no other 
place." 

When this happened, our day's work was nearly done, 
and very soon we took our leave for the evening, Murdock 
saying, as I thought rather offensively : — 

" Now, you, sir, be sure to be here in time on Monday 
morning." 

"All right!" said Dick, nonchalantly; and we passed 
out. In the boreen, he said to me : — 

"Let us stroll up this way, Art," and we walked 
up the hill towards Joyce's house, Murdock coming 
down to his gate and looking at us. When we came 
to Joyce's gate, we stopped. There was no sign of Norah; 
but Joyce himself stood at his door. I was opening 
the gate when he came forward. 

" Good evening, Mr. Joyce," said I. " How is your 
arm? I hope quite well by this time. Perhaps you 
don't remember me — I had the pleasure of giving you 



156 THE snake's pass. 

a seat up here in my car, from Mrs. Kelligan's, the 
night of the storm." 

" I remember well," he said ; " and I was thankful 
to you, for I was in trouble that night — it's all done 
now." And he looked round the land with a sneer, 
and then he looked yearningly towards his old farm. 

" Let me introduce my friend, Mr. Sutherland," said I. 

" I ask yer pardon, sir. An' I don't wish to be rude 
— but I don't want to know him. He's no frind to 
me and mine ! " 

Dick's honest, manly face grew red with shame. I 
thought he was going to say something angrily, so cut 
in as quickly as I could: — 

" You are sadly mistaken, Mr. Joyce ; Dick Suther- 
land is too good a gentleman to do wrong to you or 
any man. How can you think such a thing ? " 

" A man what consorts wid me enemy can be no frind 
of mine ! " 

" But he doesn't consort with him ; he hates him. 
He was simply engaged to make certain investigations 
for him as a scientific man. Why, I don't suppose 
you yourself hate Murdock more than Dick does." 

" Thin I ax yer pardon, sir," said Joyce. " I like to 
wrong no man, an' I'm glad to be set right." 

Things were going admirably, and we were all begin- 
ning to feel at ease, when we saw Andy approach. I 
groaned in spirit — Andy was gradually taking shape to 
me as an evil genius. He approached, and making his 
best bow, said : — 



A VISIT TO JOYCE. 157 

"Fine evenin', Misther Joyce. I hope yer arrum is 
betther — an' how is Miss Norah ? " 

"Thank ye kindly, Andy; both me arm and the girl's 
well." 

" Is she widin ? " 

" No ! she wint this mornin' to stay over Monday in 
the convent. Poor girl! she's broken-hearted, lavin' her 
home and gettin' settled here. I med the changin' as 
light for her as I could — but weemin takes things to 
heart more nor min does, an' that's bad enough, God 
knows ! " 

" Thrue for ye," said Andy. " This gintleman here, 
Masther Art,- says he hasn't seen her since the night 
she met us below in the dark." 

" I hope," said Joyce, " you'll look in and see us, if 
you're in these parts, sir, whin she comes back. I know 
she thought a dale of your kindness to me that night." 

" I'll be here for some days, and I'll certainly come, 
if I may." 

" And I hope I may come, too, Mr. Joyce," said Dick, 
" now that you know me." 

" Ye' 11 be welkim, sir." 

We all shook hands, coming away ; but as we turned 
to go home, at the gate we had a surprise. There, 
in the boreen, stood Murdock — livid with fury. He 
attacked Dick with a tirade of the utmost virulence. 
He called him every name he could lay his tongue to — 
traitor, liar, thief, and indeed exhausted the whole termi- 
nology of abuse, and accused him of stealing his secrets 



158 THE snake's pass. 

and of betraying his trust. Dick bore the ordeal splen- 
didly; he never turned a hair, but calmly went on smok- 
ing his cigar. When Murdock had somewhat exhausted 
himself and stopped, he said calmly: — 

" My good fellow, now that your ill-manners are ex- 
hausted, perhaps you will tell me what it is all about ? " 

Whereupon Murdock opened again the vials of his 
wrath. This time he dragged us all into it — I had 
been brought in as a spy, to help in betraying him, 
and Joyce had suborned him to the act of treachery. 
For myself I fired up at once, and would have struck 
him, only that Dick laid his hand on me, and in a 
whisper cautioned me to desist. 

" Easy, old man — easy ! Don't spoil a good position. 
What does it matter what a man like that can say? 
Give him rope enough ! we'll have our turn in time, 
don't fear ! " 

I held back, but unfortunately Joyce pressed for- 
wards. He had his say pretty plainly. 

" What do ye mane, ye ill-tongued scoundhrel, comin' 
here to make a quarrel? Why don't ye shtay on the 
land you have robbed from me, and lave us alone ? 
I am not like these gintlemen here, that can afford to 
hould their tongues and despise ye — I'm a man like 
yerself, though I hope I'm not the wolf that ye are 
— fattenin' on the blood of the poor ! How dare you 
say I suborned any one — me that never told a lie, or 
done a dirty thing in me life ? I tell you, Murtagh 
Murdock, I put my mark upon ye once — I see it now 



A VISIT TO JOYCE. 159 

conrin' up white through the red of yer passion ! Don't 
provoke me further, or I'll put another mark on ye that 
ye' 11 carry to yer grave ! " 

No one said a word more. Murdock moved off and 
entered his own house ; Dick and I said " good night " 
to Joyce again, and went down the boreen. 



160 



CHAPTER IX. 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 



The following week was a time to me of absolute bitter- 
ness. I went each day to Knocknacar, where the cutting 
was proceeding at a rapid rate. I haunted the hill-top, 
but without the slightest result. Dick had walked over 
with me on Sunday, and had been rejoiced at the pro- 
gress made ; he said that if all went well we could about 
Friday next actually cut into the bog. Already there 
was a distinct infiltration through the cutting, and we 
discussed the best means to achieve the last few feet 
of the work so as not in any way to endanger the safety 
of the men working. 

All this time Dick was in good spirits. His meeting 
with Norah's father had taken a great and harrowing 
weight off his mind, and to him all things were now pos- 
sible in the future. He tried his best to console me 
for my disappointment. He was full of hope — indeed 
he refused to see anything but a delay, and I could 
see that in his secret heart he was not altogether sorry 
that my love affair had received a temporary check. 
This belief was emphasized by the tendency of certain of 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 161 

his remarks to the effect that marriages between persons 
of unequal social status were inadvisable — he, dear old 
fellow, seemingly in his transparent honesty unaware 
that he was laying himself out with all his power to 
violate his own principles. 

But all the time I was simply heartbroken. To say 
that I was consumed with a burning anxiety would be to 
to understate the matter ; I was simply in a fever. I 
could neither eat nor sleep satisfactorily, and — sleeping 
or waking — my brain was in a whirl of doubts, conjec- 
tures, fears and hopes. The most difficult part to bear 
was my utter inability to do anything. I could not pro- 
claim my love or my loss on the hill-top; I did not 
know where to make inquiries, and I had no idea who 
to inquire for. I did not even like to tell Dick the full 
extent of my woes. 

Love has a modesty of its own, whose lines are boldly 
drawn, and whose rules are stern. 

On more than one occasion I left the hotel secretly — 
after having ostensibly retired for the night — and wended 
my way to Knocknacar. As I passed through the sleep- 
ing country I heard the dogs bark in the cottages as I 
went by, but little other sound I ever heard except the 
booming of the distant sea. On more than one of these 
occasions I was drenched with rain — for the weather had 
now become thoroughly unsettled. But I heeded it 
not; indeed the physical discomfort — when I felt it — 
was in some measure an anodyne to the torture of my 
restless soul. 

M 



162 the snake's pass. 

I always managed to get back before daylight, so as 
to avoid any questioning. After three or four days, how- 
ever, the "boots" of the hotel began evidently to notice 
the state of my clothes and boots, and ventured to speak 
to me. He cautioned me against going out too much 
alone at night, as there were two dangers — one from 
the moonlighters who now and again raided the district, 
and who, being composed of the scum of the country- 
side — "corner-boys" and loafers of all kinds — would be 
only too glad to find an unexpected victim to rob ; and 
the other, lest in wandering about I should get into 
trouble with the police under suspicion of being one of 
these very ruffians. 

The latter difficulty seemed to me to be even more 
obnoxious than the former; and to avoid any suspicion 
I thought it best to make my night wanderings known to 
all. Accordingly, I asked Mrs. Keating to have some 
milk and bread and butter left in my room each night, 
as I would probably require something after my late 
walk. When she expressed surprise as to my movements, 
I told her that I was making a study of the beauty of the 
country by night, and was much interested in moonlight 
effects. This last was an unhappy setting forth of my 
desires, for it went round in a whisper amongst the ser- 
vants and others outside the hotel, until at last it reached 
the ears of an astute Ulster-born policeman, from whom 
I was much surprised to receive a visit one morning. I 
asked him to what the honour was due. His answer 
spoke for itself : — 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 163 

" From information received A come to talk till ye 
regardin' the interest ye, profess to take in moon- 
lichtin'." 

" What on earth do you mean ? " I asked. 

"A hear ye're a stranger in these parts — an' as ye 
might take away a wrong impression weth ye — A thenk 
it ma duty to tell ye that the people round here are 
nothin' more nor less than leears — an' that ye mustn't 
believe a sengle word they say." 

"Beally," said I, "I am quite in the dark. Do try 
and explain. Tell me what it is all about." 

" Why, A lam that ye're always out at nicht ail 
over the country, and that ye've openly told people 
here that ye're interested in moon-lichtin'." 

"My dear sir, some one is quite mad! I never said 
such a thing — indeed, I don't know anything about 
moon-lighting." 

" Then why do ye go out at nicht ? " 

" Simply to see the country at night — to look at the 
views — to enjoy effects of moonlight." 

" There ye are, ye see — ye enjoy the moonlicht effect." 

" Good lord ! I mean the view — the purely aesthetic 
effect — the chiaroscuro — the pretty pictures ! " 

"Oh, aye ! A see now — A ken weel ! Then A needn't 
trouble ye further. But let ma tell ye that it's a 
dangerous practice to walk out be nicht. There's many 
a man in these parts watched and laid for. Why in 
Knockcalltecrore there's one man that's in danger all 
the time. An' as for ye — why ye'd better be careful 



164 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

that yer nicht wanderins doesn't bring ye ento trouble," 
and he went away. 

At last I got so miserable about my own love affair 
that I thought I might do a good turn to Dick; and 
so I determined to try to buy from Murdock his 
holding on Knockcalltecrore, and then to give it to 
my friend, as I felt that the possession of the place, 
with power to re-exchange with Joyce, would in no way 
militate against his interests with Norah. 

"With this object in view I went out one afternoon to 
Knockcalltecrore, when I knew that Dick had arranged 
to visit the cutting at Knocknacar. I did not tell any- 
one where I was going, and took good care that Andy 
went with Dick. I had acquired a dread of that astute 
gentleman's inferences. 

It was well in the afternoon when I got to Knock- 
calltecrore. Murdock was out at the edge of the bog 
making some investigations on his own account with 
the aid of the magnets. He flew into a great rage when 
he saw me, and roundly accused me of coming to spy 
upon him. I disclaimed any such meanness, and told 
him that he should be ashamed of such a suspicion. It 
was not my cue to quarrel with him, so I restrained 
myself as well as I could, and quietly told him that I 
had come on a matter of business. 

He was anxious to get me away from the bog, and 
took me into the house ; here I broached my subject 
to him, for I knew he was too astute a man for my 
going round the question to be of any use. 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 165 

At first my offer was a confirmation of his suspicion 
of me as a spy; and, indeed, he did not burke this 
aspect of the question in expressing his opinion. 

" Oh, aye ! " he sneered. " Isn't it likely I'm goin' to 
give up me land to ye, so that ye may hand it over to 
Mr. Sutherland — an' him havin' saycrets from me all 
the time — maybe knowin' where what I want to find 
is hid. Didn't I know it's a thraitor he is, an' ye a 
shpy." 

" Dick Sutherland is no traitor and I am no spy. I 
wouldn't hear such words from anyone else; but, unfor- 
tunately, I know already that your ideas regarding us 
both are so hopelessly wrong that it's no use trying to 
alter them. I simply came here to make you an offer 
to buy this piece of land. The place is a pretty one, and 
I, or some friend of mine, may like some day to put 
up a house here. Of course if you don't want to sell 
there's an end to the matter; but do try to keep a 
decent tongue in your head — if you can." 

My speech had evidently some effect on him, for he 
said : — 

" I didn't mane any offinse — an' as for sellin', I'd sell 
anything in tbe wurrld av I got me price fur it ! " 

" Well ! why not enter on this matter ? You're a man 
of the world, and so am I. I want to buy ; I have 
money and can afford to give a good price, as it is a 
fancy with me. What objection have you to sell ? " 

" Ye know well enough I'll not sell — not yit, at all 
evints. I wouldn't part wid a perch iv this land fur 



166 THE snake's pass. 

all ye cud offer — not till I'm done wid me sareh. I 
mane to get what I'm lukin' fur — if it's there ! " 

" I quite understand ! Well ! I am prepared to meet 
you in the matter. I am willing to purchase the land — 
it to be given over to me at whatever time you may 
choose to name. Would a year suit you to make your 
investigations ? " 

He thought for a moment— then took out an old 
letter, and on the back of it made some calculations. 
Then he said : — 

" I suppose ye'd pay the money down at wanst ? " 

" Certainly," said I, " the very day I get possession." 
I had intended paying the money down, and waiting for 
possession as a sort of inducement to him to close 
with me ; but there was so much greed in his manner 
that I saw I would do better by holding off payment 
until I got possession. My judgment was correct, for 
his answer surprised me : — 

" A month '11 do what I wanted ; or, to be certain, 
say five weeks from to-day. But the money would have 
to be payed to the minit." 

" Certainly ! " said I. " Suit yourself as to time, and 
let me know the terms, so that I can see if we agree. 
I suppose you will want to see your attorney, so name 
any day to suit you." 

" I'm me own attorney ! Do ye think I'd thrust any 
iv them wid me affairs? Whin I have a law suit I'll have 
thim, but not before. If ye want to know me price I'll 
tell it to ye now." 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 167 

" Go on," said I, concealing my delight as well as I 
could. 

He accordingly named a sum which, to me, accus- 
tomed only as I had hitherto been to the price of land 
in a good English county, seemed very small indeed. 

" He evidently thought he was driving a hard bargain, 
for he said with a cunning look : — 

" I suppose ye'll want to see lawyers and the like. 
So you may ; but only to see that ye get ye bargin 
hard and fast. I'll not discuss the terrums wid anyone 
else ; an' if y' accept, ye must sign me a writin' now, that 
ye buy me land right here, an' that ye'll pay the money 
widin a month before ye take possession on the day 
we fix." 

" All right," said I. " That will suit me quite well. 
Make out your paper in duplicate, and we will both sign. 
Of course, you must put in a clause guaranteeing title, 
and allowing the deed to be made with the approval of 
my solicitor, not as to value, but as to form and 
completeness. 

" That's fair ! " he said, and sat down to draw up his 
papers. He was evidently a bit of a lawyer — a gombeen 
man must be — and he knew the practical matters of law 
affecting things in which he was himself interested. His 
Memorandum of Agreement was, so far as I could judge, 
quite complete and as concise as possible. He designated 
the land sold, and named the price which was to be paid 
into the account in his name in the Galway Bank before 
twelve o'clock noon on the 27th September, or which 



168 THE snake's pass. 

might be paid in at an earlier date, with the deduction of 
two per cent, per annum as discount — in which case the 
receipt was to be given in full and an undertaking to 
give possession at the appointed time, namely Wednesday, 
27 Oct., at 12 noon. 

We both signed the memorandum, he having sent 
the old woman who came up from the village to cook 
for him for the old schoolmaster to witness the signa- 
tures. I arranged that when I should have seen my 
solicitor and have had the deed proper drafted, I would 
see him again. I then came away, and got back at the 
hotel a little while before Dick arrived. 

Dick was in great spirits ; his experiment with the 
bog had been quite successful. The cutting had advanced 
so far that the clay wall hemming in the bog was actually 
weakened, and with a mining cartridge, prepared for the 
purpose, he had blown up the last bit of bank re- 
maining. The bog had straightway begun to pour into 
the opening, not merely from the top, but simultaneously 
to the whole depth of the cutting. 

"The experience of that first half -hour of the rush," 
went on Dick, " was simply invaluable. ' I do wish you 
had been there, old fellow. It was in itself a lesson on 
bogs and their reclamation." 

It just suited my purpose that he should do all the 
talking at present, so I asked him to explain all that 
happened. He went on : — 

" The moment the cartridge exploded the whole of the 
small clay bank remaining was knocked to bits and was 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 169 

carried away by tlie first rush. There had evidently been 
a considerable accumulation of water just behind the 
bank ; and at the first rush this swept through the cutting 
and washed it clean. Then the bog at the top, and the 
water in the middle, and the ooze below all struggled for 
the opening. I could see that the soft part of the bog 
actually floated. Naturally the water got away first. 
The bog proper, which was floating, jammed in the 
opening, and the ooze began to drain out below it. Of 
course, this was only the first rush ; it will be running 
for days before things begin to settle ; and then we shall 
be able to make some openings in the bog and see if 
my theories are tenable, in so far as the solidifica- 
tion is concerned. I am only disappointed in one 
thing." 

" What is that ? " 

" That it will not enlighten us much regarding the bog 
at Shleenanaher, for I cannot find any indication here 
of a shelf of rock such as I imagine to be at the basis of 
the shifting bog. If I had had time I would like to have 
made a cutting into some of the waste where the bog had 
originally been. I daresay that Joyce would let me try 
now if I asked him." 

I had my own fun out of my answer : — 

" Oh ! I'm sure he will ; but even if he won't let you 
now, he may be inclined to in a month or two when 
things have settled down a bit." 

His answer startled me. 

" Do you know, Art, I fear it's quite on the cards 



170 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

that in a month or two there may be some settling 
down up there that may be serious for some one." 

" How do you mean ? " 

" Simply this — that I am not at all satisfied about 
Murdock's house. There is every indication of it being 
right in the track of the bog in case it should shift 
again ; and I would not be surprised if that hollow where 
it stands was right over the deepest part of the natural 
reservoir, where the rock slopes into the ascending stra- 
tum. This wet weather looks bad ; and already the bog 
has risen somewhat. If the rain lasts I wouldn't like 
to live in that house after five or six weeks." 

A thought struck me : — 

" Did you tell this to Murdock ? " 

" Certainly ! the moment the conviction was in my 
mind." 

"When was that now? just for curiosity!" 

" Last night, before I came away." A light began 
to dawn on me, as to Murdock's readiness to sell the 
land. I did not want to have to explain anything, so I 
did not mention the subject of my purchase, but simply 
asked Dick : — 

"And what did our upright friend say?" 

"He said, in his own sweet manner, that it would 
last as long as he wanted it, and that after that it 
might go to hell — and me too, he added, with a thought- 
fulness that was all his own." 

When I went to my room that night I thought over 
the matter. For good or ill I had bought the property, 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 171 

and there was no going back now; indeed I did not 
wish to go back, for I thought that it would be a 
fine opportunity for Dick to investigate the subject. If 
we could succeed in draining the bog and reclaiming it, 
it would be a valuable addition to the property. 

That night I arranged to go over on the following 
day to Galway, my private purpose being to consult 
a solicitor; and I wrote to my bankers in London, direct- 
ing that an amount something over the sum required to 
effect my purchase should be lodged forthwith to an 
account to be opened for me at the Galway Bank. 

Next day I drove to Galway, and there, after a little 
inquiry, found a solicitor, Mr. Caicy, of whom every 
one spoke well. I consulted him regarding the purchase. 
He arranged to do all that was requisite, and to have 
the deed of purchase drawn. I told him that I wished 
the matter kept a profound secret. He agreed to meet 
my wishes in this respect, even to the extent that when 
he should come to Carnaclif to make the final com- 
pletion with Murdock, he would not pretend to know 
me. We parted on the best of terms, after I had dined 
with him, and had consumed my share of a couple of 
bottles of as fine old port as is to be had in all the 
world. 

Next day I returned to Carnaclif in the evening and 
met Dick. 

Everything had gone right during the two days. Dick 
was in great spirits ; he had seen his Norah during 
the day, and had exchanged salutations with her. Then 



172 the snake's pass. 

he had gone to Knocknacar, and had seen a great 
change in the bog, which was already settling down 
into a more solid form. I simply told him I had been 
to Gal way to do some banking and other business. It 
was some consolation to me in the midst of my own 
unhappiness to know that I was furthering the happiness 
of my friend 

On the third day from this Mr. Caicy was to be over 
with the deed, and the following day the sale was to be 
completed, I having arranged with the bank to transfer on 
that day the purchase money for the sale to the account 
of Mr. Murdock. The two first days I spent mainly 
on Knocknacar, going over each day ostensibly to look 
at the progress made in draining the bog, but in reality 
in the vain hope of seeing my unknown. Each time I 
went, my feet turned naturally to the hill-top ; but on 
each visit I felt only a renewal of my sorrow and dis- 
appointment. I walked on each occasion to and from 
the hill, and on the second day — which was Sunday — 
went in the morning and sat on the top many hours, 
in the hope that some time during the day, it being a 
holiday, she might be able to find her way there once 
again ! 

When I got to the top, the chapel bells were ring- 
ing in all the parishes below me to the west, and very 
sweetly and peacefully the sounds came through the 
bright crisp September air. And in some degree the 
sound brought peace to my soul, for there is so large 
a power in even the aspirations and the efforts of men 



MY NEW PROPERTY 173 

towards good, that it radiates to immeasurable distance. 
The wave theory that rules our knowledge of the dis- 
tribution of light and sound, may well be taken to 
typify, if it does not not control the light of divine 
love, and the beating in unison of human hearts. 

I think that during these days I must have looked, 
as well as felt, miserable ; for even Andy did not make 
any effort to either irritate or draw me. On the Sunday 
evening, when I was on the strand behind the hotel, 
he lounged along, in his own mysterious fashion, and 
after looking at me keenly for a few moments, came 
up close, and said to me in a grave, pitying half- 
whisper : — 

"Don't be afther breakin' yer harrt, yer 'an'r. Divil 
mend the fairy girrul. Sure isn't she vanished intirely ? 
Mark me now ! there's no sahtisf action at all, at all, in 
them fairy girruls. Faix ! but I would'nt like to see a 
fine young gintleman like yer 'an'r, become like Yeoha, 
the Sigher, as they called him in the ould times." 

"And who might that gentleman be, Andy?" I asked, 
with what appearance of cheerful interest I could muster 
up. 

" Begor ! it's a prince he was that married onto 
a fairy girrul, what wint an' was tuk off be a fairy 
man what lived in the same mountain as she done 
herself. Sure thim fairy girruls has mostly a fairy man 
iv their own somewheres, that they love betther nor 
they does mortials. Jist you take me advice, Master Art, 
fur ye might do worser ! Go an take a luk at Miss 



174 THE snake's pass. 

Norah, an ye'll soon forgit the fairies. There's a rale 
girral av ye like ! " 

I was too sad to make any angry reply, and before 
I could think of any other kind, Andy lounged away 
whistling softly — for he had, like many of his class, a 
very sweet whistle — the air of Savoumeen Deelish. 

The following day Mr. Caicy turned up at the hote 
according to his promise. He openly told Mrs. Keating, 
of whom he had often before been a customer, that he 
had business with Mr. Murdock. He was, as usual with 
him, affable to all, "passing the time of day" with the 
various inhabitants of all degrees, and, as if a stranger, 
entering into conversation with me as we sat at lunch in 
the coffee-room. When we were alone he whispered to 
me that all was ready ; that he had made an examina- 
tion of the title, for which Murdock had sent him all 
the necessary papers, and that the deed was complete 
and ready to be signed. He told me he was going over 
that day to Knockcalltecrore, and would arrange that 
he would be there the next day, and that he would take 
care to have some one to witness the signatures. 

On the following morning, when Dick went off with 
Andy to Knocknacar, and Mr. Caicy drove over to 
Knockcalltecrore, where I also shortly took my way on 
another car. 

We met at Murdock' s house. The deed was duly com- 
pleted, and Mr. Caicy handed over to Murdock the letter 
from the bank that the lodgment had been made. 

The land was now mine ; and I was to have possession 



MY NEW PROPERTY. 175 

on the 27th of October. Mr. Caicy took the deed with 
him ; and with it took also instructions to draw ont a 
deed making the property over to Eichard Sutherland. 
He went straight away to Galway ; whilst I, in listless 
despair, wandered out on the hill- side to look at the 



176 



CHAPTEE X. 

IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 

I went along the mountain- side until I came to the 
great ridge of rocks which, as Dick had explained to me, 
protected the lower end of Murdock's farm from the 
westerly wind. I climbed to the top to get a view, and 
then found that the ridge was continuous, running as 
far as the Snake's Pass where I had first mounted it. 
Here, however, I was not as then above the sea, for I 
was opposite what they had called the Cliff Fields, and 
a very strange and beautiful sight it was. 

Some hundred and fifty feet below me was a plateau 
of seven or eight acres in extent, and some two hundred 
and fifty feet above the sea. It was sheltered on the 
north by a high wall of rock like that I stood on, ser- 
rated in the same way, as the strata ran in similar 
layers. In the centre there rose a great rock with a 
flat top some quarter of an acre in extent. The whole 
plateau, save this one bare rock, was a mass of verdure. 
It was watered by a small stream which fell through 
a deep narrow cleft in the rocks, where the bog 
drained itself from Murdock's present land. The 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 177 

after-grass was deep, and there were many clumps 
of trees and shrubs — none of them of considerable 
height except a few great stone-pines which towered 
aloft and dared the fury of the western breeze. But 
not all the beauty of the scene could hold my eyes — for 
seated on the rocky table in the centre, just as I had 
seen her on the hill-top at Knocknacar, sat a girl to 
all intents the ditto of my unknown. 

My heart gave a great bound, and in the tumult of 
hope that awoke within my breast the whole world 
seemed filled with sunshine. For an instant I almost 
lost my senses ; my knees shook, and my eyes grew dim. 
Then came a horrible suspense and doubt. It was im- 
possible to believe that I should see my unknown here 
when I least expected to see her. And then came the 
man's desire of action. 

I do not know how I began. To this day I cannot 
make out whether I took a bee-line for that isolated table 
of rock, and from where I was, slid or crawled down the 
face of the rock, or whether I made a detour to the 
same end. All I can recollect is that I found my- 
self scrambling over some large boulders, and then 
passing through the deep heavy grass at the foot of 
the rock. 

Here I halted to collect my thoughts — a moment 
sufficed. I was too much in earnest to need any de- 
liberation, and there was no choice of ways. I only 
waited to be sure that I would not create any alarm 
by unnecessary violence. 



178 THE snake's pass. 

Then I ascended the rock. I did not make more 
noise than I could help ; but I did not try to come 
silently. She had evidently heard steps, for she spoke 
without turning round : — 

" Am I wanted ? " Then, as I was passing across the 
plateau, my step seemed to arouse her attention ; for 
at a bound she leaped to her feet, and turned with a 
glad look that went through the shadow on my soul, 
as the sunshine strikes through the mist. 

"Arthur!" She almost rushed to meet me; but stopped 
suddenly — for an instant grew pale — and then a red flush 
crimsoned her face and neck. She put up her hands 
before her face, and I could see the tears drop through 
her fingers. 

As for myself, I was half-dazed. When I saw that 
it was indeed my unknown, a wild joy leaped to my 
heart ; and then came the revulsion from my long pent- 
up sorrow and anxiety ; and as I faltered out — " At last ! 
at last ! " — the tears sprang unbidden to my eyes. There 
is, indeed, a dry-eyed grief, but its corresponding joy is 
as often smit with sudden tears. 

In an instant I was by her side, and had her hand in 
mine. It was only for a moment, for she withdrew it 
with a low cry of maidenly fear — but in that moment 
of gentle, mutual pressure, a whole world had passed, 
and we knew that we loved. 

We were silent for a time, and then we sat together 
on a boulder — she edging away from me shyly. 

What matters it of what we talked? There was not 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 1/9 

much to say — nothing that was new — the old, old story 
that has been told since the days when Adam, waking, 
found that a new joy had entered into his life. For those 
whose feet have wandered in Eden, there is no need 
to speak; for those who are yet to tread the hallowed 
ground, there is no need either — for in the fulness of 
time their knowledge will come. 

It was not till we had sat some time that we ex- 
changed any sweet words— they were sweet, although 
to any one but ourselves they would have seemed the 
most absurd and soulless commonplaces. 

We spoke, and that was all. It is of the nature of 
love that it can from airy nothings win its own celestial 
food ! 

Presently I said — and I pledge my word that this 
was the first speech that either of us had made, beyond 
the weather and the view, and such lighter topics : — 

" Won't you tell me your name ? I have so longed 
to know it, all these weary days." 

" Norah — Norah Joyce ! I thought you knew." 

This was said with a shy lifting of the eyelashes, 
which were as suddenly and as shyly dropped again. 

" Norah ! " As I spoke the word — and my whole 
soul was in its speaking — the happy blush overspread 
her face again. " Norah ! What a sweet name ! Norah ! 
No, I did not know it ; if I had known it, when I 
missed you from the hill-top at Knocknacar, I should 
have sought you here." 

Somehow her next remark seemed to chill me : — 



180 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

" I thought yon remembered me, from that night when 
father came home with yon ? " 

There seemed some disappointment that I had so for- 
gotten. 

" That night," I said, " I did not see yon at all. It 
was so dark, that I felt like a blind man — I only heard 
your voice." 

"I thought you remembered my voice." 

The disappointment was still manifest. Fool that I 
was ! — that voice, once heard, should have sunk into my 
memory for ever. 

11 1 thought your voice was familiar when I heard you 
on the hill- top ; but when I saw you, I loved you from 
that moment — and then every other woman's voice in 
the world went, for me, out of existence ! " She half 
arose, but sat down again, and the happy blush once 
more mantled her cheek — I felt that my peace was 
made. "My name is Arthur." Here a thought struck 
me — struck me for the first time, and sent through me 
a thrill of unutterable delight. The moment she had 
seen me she had mentioned my name — all unconsciously, 
it is true — but she had mentioned it. I feared, however, 
to alarm her by attracting her attention to it as yet, and 
went on: — "Arthur Severn — but I think yon know it." 

" Yes ; I heard it mentioned up at Knocknacar." 

" Who by ? " 

"Andy the driver. He spoke to my aunt and me 
when we were driving down, the day after we — after 
we met on the hill-top the last time." 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 181 

Andy ! And so my jocose friend knew all along ! Well, 
wait ! I must be even with him ! 

" Your aunt ? " 

" Yes ; my aunt Kate. Father sent me up to her, 
for he knew it would distress me to see all our things 
moved from our dear old home — all my mother's things. 
And father would have been distressed to see me grieved, 
and I to see him. It was kind of him ; he is always so 
good to me." 

" He is a good man, Norah — I know that ; I only hope 
he won't hate me." 

"Why?" — This was said very faintly. 

" For wanting to carry off his daughter. Don't go, 
Norah. For God's sake, don't go ! I shall not say any- 
thing you do not wish ; but if you only knew the agony 
I have been in since I saw you last — when I thought I 
had lost you — you would pity me — indeed you would! 
Norah, I love you ! No ! you must listen to me — you 
must ! I want you to be my wife — I shall love and 
honour you all my life ! Don't refuse me, dear ; don't 
draw back — for I love you ! — I love you ! " 

There, it was all out. The pent-up waters find their 
own course. 

For a minute, at least, Norah sat still. Then she 
turned to me very gravely, and there were tears in her 
eyes : — 

"Oh, why did you speak like that, sir? — why did 
you speak like that ? Let me go ! — let me go ! You 
must not try to detain me ! " — I stood back, for we had 



182 THE snake's pass. 

both risen — " I am conscious of your good intention — 
of the honour you do me — but I must have time to 
think. Good-bye ! " 

She held out her hand. I pressed it gently — I dared 
not do more — true love is very timid at times ! — She 
bowed to me, and moved off. 

A sudden flood of despair rushed over me — the pain 
of the days when I thought I had lost her could not 
be soon forgotten, and I feared that I might lose her 
again. 

"Stay, Norah! — stay one moment!" She stopped and 
turned round. "I may see you again, may I not? Do 
not be cruel ! — may I not see you again ? " 

A sweet smile lit up the perplexed sadness of her 
face : — 

"You may meet me here to-morrow evening, if you 
will," and she was gone. 

To-morrow evening ! Then there was hope ; and with 
gladdened heart I watched her pass across the pasture 
and ascend a path over the rocks. Her movements 
were incarnate grace ; her beauty and her sweet pre- 
sence filled the earth and air. When she passed from 
my sight, the sunlight seemed to pale and the warm 
air to grow chill. 

For a long while I sat on that table-rock, and my 
thoughts were of heavenly sweetness — all, save one 
which was of earth — one brooding fear that all might 
not be well — some danger I did not understand. 

And then I too arose, and took my way across the 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 183 

plateau, and climbed the rock, and walked down the 
boreen on my way for Carnaclif. 

And then, and for the first time, did a thought 
strike me — one which for a moment made my blood 
run cold — Dick! 

Aye — Dick ! What about him ? It came to me with a 
shudder, that my happiness — if it should be my happi- 
ness — must be based on the pain of my friend. Here, 
then, there was perhaps a clue to Norah's strange 
gravity ! Could Dick have made a proposal to her ? 
He admitted having spoken to her — why should he, too, 
not have been impulsive? Why should it not be that 
he, being the first to declare himself, had got a favour- 
able answer, and that now Norah was not free to 
choose ? 

How I cursed the delay in finding her — how I cursed 
and found fault with everyone and everything ! Andy 
especially came in for my ill-will. He, at any rate, 
knew that my unknown of the hill-top at Knocknacar 
was none other than Norah ! 

And yet, stay ! who but Andy persisted in turning 
my thoughts to Norah, and more than once suggested 
my paying a visit to Shleenanaher to see her? No ! 
Andy must be acquitted at all points : common justice 
demanded that. Who, then, was I to blame? Not 
Andy — not Dick, who was too noble and too loyal a 
friend to give any cause for such a thought. Had he 
not asked me at the first if the woman of my fancy 
was not . this very woman ; and had he not confessed 



184 THE snake's pass. 

his own love only when I answered him that it was not ? 
No ! Dick must be acquitted from blame ! 

Acquitted from blame ! Was that justice ? At pre- 
sent he was in the position of a wronged man, and it 
was I who had wronged him — in ignorance certainly, but 
still the wrong was mine. And now what could I do? 
Should I tell Dick ? I shrank from such a thing ; and 
as yet there was little to tell. Not till to-morrow even- 
ing should I know my fate ; and might not that fate be 
such that it would be wiser not to tell Dick of it? 
Norah had asked for time to consider my offer. If it 
should be that she had already promised Dick, and yet 
should have taken time to consider another offer, would 
it be fair to tell Dick of such hesitation, even though 
the result was a loyal adherance to her promise to him ? 
Would such be fair either to him or to her ? No ! he 
must not be told — as yet, at all events. 

How, then, should I avoid telling him, in case the 
subject should crop up in the course of conversation ? I 
had not told him of any of my late visits to Knockcall- 
tecrore, although, God knows! they were taken not in 
my own interest, but entirely in his ; and now an ex- 
planation seemed impossible. 

Thus revolving the situation in my mind as I walked 
along, I came to the conclusion that the wisest thing I 
could do was to walk to some other place and stay there 
for the night. Thus I might avoid questioning altoge- 
ther. On the morrow I could return to Carnaclif, and 
go over to Shleenanaher at such a time that I might 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 185 

cross Dick on the way, so that I might see Norah and 
get her answer without anyone knowing of my visit. 
Having so made up my mind, I turned my steps towards 
Eoundwood, and when I arrived there in the evening 
sent a wire to Dick : — 

"Walked here, very tired; sleep here to-night; pro- 
bably return to-morrow." 

The long walk did me good, for it made me thoroughly 
tired, and that night, despite my anxiety of mind, I 
slept well — I went to sleep with Norah's name on my 
lips. 

The next day I arrived at Carnaclif about mid-day. I 
found that Dick had taken Andy to Knockcalltecrore. 
I waited until it was time to leave, and then started off. 
About half a mile from the foot of the boreen I went 
and sat in a clump of trees, where I could not be 
seen, but from which I could watch the road ; and pre- 
sently saw Dick passing along on Andy's car. When 
they had quite gone out of sight, I went on my way to 
the Cliff Fields. 

I went with mingled feelings. There was hope, there 
was joy at the remembrance of yesterday, there was ex- 
pectation that I would see her again — even though the 
result might be unhappiness, there was doubt, and there 
was a horrible, haunting dread. My knees shook, and I 
felt weak as I climbed the rocks. I passed across the 
field and sat on the table-rock. 

Presently she came to join me. With a queenly bear- 
ing she passed over the ground, seeming to glide rather 



186 THE snake's pass. 

than to walk. She was very pale, but as she drew near 
I could see in her eyes a sweet calm. 

I went forward to meet her, and in silence we shook 
hands. She motioned to the boulder, and we sat down. 
She was less shy than yesterday, and seemed in many 
subtle ways to be, though not less girlish, more of a 
woman. 

When we sat down I laid my hand on hers and said 
— and I felt that my voice was hoarse: — 

" Well ! " 

She looked at me tenderly, and said in a sweet, grave 
voice : — 

"My father has a claim on me that I must not 
overlook. He is all alone ; he has lost my mother, and my 
brother is away, and is going into a different sphere of 
life from us. He has lost his land that he prized and 
valued, and that has been ours for a long, long time ; 
and now that he is sad and lonely, and feels that he is 
growing old, how could I leave him ? He that has 
always been so good and kind to me all my life ! " Here 
the sweet eyes filled with tears. I had not taken away 
my hand, and she had not removed hers ; this negative 
of action gave me hope and courage. 

" Norah ! answer me one thing. Is there any other 
man between your heart and me ? " 

" Oh no ! no ! " Her speech was impulsive ; she 
stopped as suddenly as she began. A great weight 
seemed lifted from my heart ; and yet there came a 
qualm of pity for my friend. Poor Dick ! poor Dick ! 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 187 

Again we were silent for a minute. I was gathering 
courage for another question. 

" Norah ! " — I stopped ; she looked at me. 

" Norah ! if your father had other objects in life, which 
would leave you free, what would be your answer to me?" 

"Oh, do not ask me ! Do not ask me ! " Her tone 
was imploring ; but there are times when manhood must 
assert itself, even though the heart be torn with pity for 
woman's weakness. I went on : — 

" I must, Nor ah ! I must ! I am in torture till you 
tell me. Be pitiful to me ! Be merciful to me ! Tell 
me, do you love me ? You know I love you, Norah. Oh 
God ! how I love you ! The world has but one being in 
it for me; and you are that one! With every fibre of 
my being — with all my heart and soul, I love you! 
Won't you tell me, then, if you love me ? " 

A flush as rosy as dawn came over her face, and 
timidly she asked me, " Must I answer ? Must I ? " 

" You must, Norah ! " 

"Then, I do love you! God help us both ! but I love 
you ! I love you ! " and tearing away her hand from 
mine, she put both hands before her face and burst into 
a passionate flood of tears. 

There could be but one ending to such a scene. In 
an instant she was in my arms. Her will and mine 
went down before the sudden flood of passion that burst 
upon us both. She hid her face upon my breast, but I 
raised it tenderly, and our lips met in one long, loving, 
passionate kiss. 



188 THE snake's pass. 

We sat on the boulder, hand in hand, and whispering 
confessed to each other, in the triumph of our love, all 
those little secrets of the growth of our affection that 
lovers hold dear. That final separation, which had been 
spoken of but a while ago, was kept out of sight by 
mutual consent; the dead would claim its dead soon 
enough. Love lives in the present and in the sunshine 
finds its joy. 

Well, the men of old knew the human heart, when 
they fixed upon the butterfly as the symbol of the soul ; 
for the rainbow is but sunshine through a cloud, and 
love, like the butterfly, takes the colours of the rainbow 
on its aery wings! 

Long we sat in that beauteous spot. High above us 
towered the everlasting rocks ; the green of nature's 
planting lay beneath our feet ; and far off the reflec- 
tion of the sunset lightened the dimness of the soft 
twilight over the wrinkled sea. 

We said little, as we sat hand in hand; but the 
silence was a poem, and the sound of the sea, and the 
beating of our hearts were hymns of praise to nature 
and to nature's God. 

We spoke no more of the future; for now that we 
knew that we were each beloved, the future had but 
little terror for us. We were content ! 

When we had taken our last kiss, and parted beneath 
the shadow of the rock, I watched her depart through 
the gloaming to her own home; and then I too took my 
way. At the foot of the Boreen I met Murdock, who 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 189 

looked at me in a strange manner, and merely growled 
some reply to my salutation. 

I felt that I could never meet Dick to-night. 
Indeed, I wished to see no human being, and so I sat 
for long on the crags above the sounding sea ; and 
then wandered down to the distant beach. To and 
fro I went all the night long, but ever in sight of the 
hill, and ever and anon coming near to watch the 
cottage where Norah slept. 

In the early morning, I took my way to Eoundwood, 
and going to bed, slept until late in the day. 

When I woke, I began to think of how I could break 
my news to Dick. I felt that the sooner it was done 
the better. At first I had a vague idea of writing to 
him from where I was, and explaining all to him ; but 
this, I concluded, would not do — it seemed too cowardly a 
way to deal with so true and loyal a friend — I would go 
now and await his arrival at Carnaclif, and tell him all, 
at the earliest moment when I could find an opportunity. 

I drove to Carnaclif, and waited his coming im- 
patiently, for I intended, if it were not too late, to 
afterwards drive over to Shleenanaher, and see Norah — 
or at least the house she was in. 

Dick arrived a little earlier than usual, and I could 
see from the window that he was grave and troubled. 
When he got down from the car, he asked if I were 
in, and being answered in the affirmative, ordered dinner 
to be put on the table as soon as possible, and went 
up to his room. 



190 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

I did not come down until the waiter came to tell 
me that dinner was ready. Dick had evidently waited 
also, and followed me down. When he came into the 
room, he said heartily : — 

" Hallo ! Art, old fellow, welcome back, I thought yon 
were lost," and shook hands with me warmly. 

Neither of us seemed to have much appetite, but we 
pretended to eat, and sent away platesfull of food, cut 
up into the smallest proportions. When the apology 
for dinner was over, Dick offered me a cigar, lit his 
own, and said : — 

" Come out for a stroll on the sand, Art ; I want to 
have a chat with you." I could feel that he was 
making a great effort to appear hearty, but there was 
a hollowness about his voice, which was not usual. 
As we went through the hall, Mrs. Keating handed me 
my letters, which had just arrived. 

We walked out on the wide stretch of fine hard sand, 
which lies westwards from Carnaclif when the tide is 
out, and were a considerable distance from the town 
before a word was spoken. Dick turned to me, and 
said : — 

"Art! what does it all mean?" 

I hesitated for a moment, for I hardly knew where 
to begin — the question, so comprehensive and so sudden, 
took me aback. Dick went on: — 

"Art! two things I have always believed; and I won't 
give them up without a struggle. One is that there 
are very few things that, no matter how strange or 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 191 

wrong they look, won't bear explanation of some kind ; 
and the other is that an honourable man does not 
grow crooked in a moment. Is there anything, Art, that 
you would like to tell me?" 

" There is, Dick ! I have a lot to tell ; but won't you 
tell me what you wish me to speak about ? " I was just 
going to tell him all, but it suddenly occurred to me 
that it would be wise to know something of what was 
amiss with him first. 

" Then I shall ask you a few questions ! Did you 
not tell me that the girl you were in love with was 
not Norah Joyce ? " 

" I did ; but I was wrong. I did not know it at 
the time — I only found it out, Dick, since I saw you 
last ! " 

" Since you saw me last ! Did you not then know 
that I loved Norah Joyce, and that I was only waiting 
a chance to ask her to marry me ? " 

"I did!" I had nothing to add here; it came 
back to me that I had spoken and acted all along 
without a thought of my friend. 

" Have you not of late payed many visits to Shlee- 
nanaher ; and have you not kept such visits quite 
dark from me ? " 

"I have, Dick." 

" Did you keep me ignorant on purpose ? " 

" I did ! But those visits were made entirely on your 
account." — I stopped, for a look of wonder and disgust 
spread over my companion's face. 



192 the snake's pass. 

" On niy account ! on my account ! And was it, 
Arthur Severn, on my account that you asked, as I 
presume you did, Norah Joyce to marry you — I 
take it for granted that your conduct was honourable, 
to her at any rate — the woman whom I had told you I 
loved, and that I wished to marry, and that you 
assured me that you did not love, your heart being 
fixed on another woman? I hate to speak so, Art! 
but I have had black thoughts, and am not quite my- 
self — was this all on my account ? " It was a terrible 
question to answer, and I paused ; Dick went on : — 

" Was it on my account that you, a rich man, pur- 
chased the home that she loved ; whilst I, a poor one, 
had to stand by and see her father despoiled day by 
day, and, because of my poverty, had to go on with a 
hateful engagement, which placed me in a false posi- 
tion in her eyes?" 

Here I saw daylight. I could answer this scathing 
question : — 

" It was, Dick — entirely on your account ! " He drew 
away from me, and stood still, facing me in the twi- 
light as he spoke : — 

" I should like you to explain, Mr. Severn — for your 
own sake — a statement like that." 

Then I told him, with simple earnestness, all the truth. 
How I had hoped to further his love, since my own 
seemed so hopeless — how I had bought the land intend- 
ing to make it over to him, so that his hands might 
be strong to woo the woman he loved — how this and 



IN THE CLIFF FIELDS. 193 

nothing else had taken me to Shleenanaher ; and that 
whilst there I had learned that my own unknown love 
and Norah were one and the same — of my proposal to 
her ; and here I told him humbly how in the tumult 
of my own passion I had forgotten his — whereat he 
shrugged his shoulders — and of my long anxiety till her 
answer was given. I told him that I had stayed away 
the first night at Roundwood, lest I should be betrayed 
into any speech which would lack in loyalty to him as 
well as to her. And then I told him of her decision not 
to leave her father — touching but lightly on the con- 
fession of her love, lest I should give him needless pain ; 
I did not dare to avoid it lest I should mislead him 
to his further harm. When I had finished he said 
softly : — 

" Art, I have been in much doubt ! " 

I thought a moment, and then remembered that I had 
in my pocket the letters which had been handed to 
me at the hotel, and that amongst them there was one 
from Mr. Caicy at Galway. This letter I took out and 
handed to Dick. 

" There is a letter unopened. Open it and it may tell 
you something. I know my word will suffice you ; but 
this is in justice to us both." 

Dick took the letter and broke the seal. He read the 
letter from Caicy, and then holding up the deed so that 
the dying light of the west should fall on it, read it. The 
deed was not very long. When he finished it he stood 
for a moment with his hands down by his sides ; then 
o 



194 THE snake's pass. 

he came over to me, and laying his hands, one of which 
grasped the deed, on my shoulders, said : — 

" Thank God, Art, there need be no bitterness be- 
tween me and thee— all is as yon say, but oh ! old 
fellow!" — and here he laid his head on my shoulder 
and sobbed — " my heart is broken ! All the light has 
gone out of my life ! " 

His despair was only for a moment. Eecovering him- 
self as quickly as he had been overcome, he said : — 

"Never mind, old fellow, only one of us must suffer; 
and, thank God ! my secret is with you alone— n® one 
else in the wide world even suspects. She must never 
know ! Now tell me all about it ; don't fear that it 
will hurt me. It will be something to know that you 
are both happy. By the way, this had better be torn up ; 
there is no need for it now ! " Having torn the paper 
across, he put his arm over my shoulder as he used to 
do when we were boys ; and so we passed into the 
gathering darkness. 

Thank God for loyal and royal manhood ! Thank 
God for the heart of a friend that can suffer and re- 
main true ! And thanks, above all, that the lessons of 
tolerance and forgiveness, taught of old by the Son of 
God, are now and then remembered by the sons of men. 



195 



CHAPTEE XI. 

UN MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE. 

When we were strolling "back to the hotel Dick said to 
me: — 

" Cheer up, old fellow ! You need'nt be the least bit 
downhearted. Go soon and see Joyce. He will not 
stand in the girl's way, you may be sure. He is a good 
fellow, and loves Norah dearly — who could help it ! " 
He stopped for a moment here, and choked a great 
sob, but went on bravely : — 

" It is only like her to be willing to sacrifice her own 
happiness ; but she must not be let do that. Settle the 
matter soon! Go to-morrow to see Joyce. I shall go 
up to Knocknacar instead of working with Murdock; it 
will leave the coast clear for you." Then we went into 
the hotel; and I felt as if a great weight had been 
removed. 

When I was undressing I heard a knock. " Come in," 
I called, and Dick entered. Dear old fellow ! I could 
see that he had been wrestling with himself, and had 
won. His eyes were red, but there was a noble manli- 
ness about him which was beyond description. 



196 the snake's pass. 

" Art," said he, " I wanted to tell you something, 
and I thought it ought to be told now. I would' nt like 
the night to close on any wrong impression between 
you and me. I hope you feel that my suspicion about 
fair* play and the rest of it is all gone." 

"I do ! old fellow ! quite." 

" Well, you are not to get thinking of me as in any 
way wronged in the matter, either by accident or design. 
I have been going over the whole matter to try and get 
the heart of the mystery ; and I think it only fair to say 
that no wrong could be done to me. I never spoke a 
single word to Norah in my life. Nor did she to me. 
Indeed, I have seen her but seldom, though the first 
time was enough to finish me. Thank G-od ! we have 
found out the true state of affairs before it was too late. 
It might have been worse, old lad ! it might have been 
worse ! I don't think there's any record— even in the 
novels — of a man's life being wrecked over a girl he 
did'nt know. We don't get hit to death at sight, 
old boy ! It's only skin deep this time, and though skin 
deep hurts the most, it doesn't kill ! I thought I would 
tell you what I had worked out, for I knew we were such 
old friends that it would worry you and mar your happi- 
ness to think I was wretched. I hope— and I honestly 
expect — that by to-morrow I shall be all right, and able 
to enjoy the sight of both your happiness — as, please 
God! I hope such is to be." 

We wrung each other's hands ; and I believe that 
from that moment we were closer friends than ever. 



UN MAUVAIS QUART D'HEUKl^. 197 

As he was going out Dick turned to me, and 
said : — 

"It is odd about the legend, isn't it ! The Snake 
is in the Hill still, if I am not mistaken. He told me 
all about your visits and the sale of the land to you, in 
order to make mischief. But his time is coming; St. 
Patrick will lift that crozier of his before long ! " 

" But the Hill holds us all ! " said I ; and as I spoke 
there was an ominous feeling over me. " We're not 
through yet; but it will be all right now." 

The last thing I saw was a smile on his face as he 
closed the door. 

The next morning Dick started for Knocknacar. It 
had been arranged the night before that he should go on 
Andy's car, as I preferred walking to Shleenanaher. I 
had more than one reason for so doing, but that which 
I kept in the foreground of my own mind — and which 
I almost persuaded myself was the chief — if not the only 
reason — was that I did not wish to be troubled with 
Andy's curiosity and impertinent badinage. My real 
and secret reason, however, was that I wished to be 
alone so that I might collect my thoughts, and acquire 
courage for what the French call un mauvais quart 
d'heure. 

In all classes of life, and under all conditions, this is 
an ordeal eminently to. be dreaded by young men. No 
amount of reason is of the least avail to them — there is 
some horrible, lurking, unknown possibility which may 
defeat all their hopes, and may, in addition, add the 



198 the snake's pass. 

flaming aggravation of making them appear ridiculous ! 
I summed up my own merits, and, not being a fool, found 
considerable ground for hope. I was young, not bad 
looking — Norah loved me ; I had no great bogey of 
a past secret or misdeed to make me feel sufficiently 
guilty to fear a just punishment falling upon me ; 
and, considering all things, I was in a social position and 
of wealth beyond the dreams of a peasant — howsoever 
ambitious for his daughter he might be. 

And yet I walked along those miles of road that 
day with my heart perpetually sinking into my boots, 
and harassed with a vague dread which made me feel 
at times an almost irresistible inclination to run away. 
I can only compare my feelings, when I drew in sight of 
the hill-top, with those which animate the mind of a 
young child when coming in sight of the sea in order 
to be dipped for the first time. 

There is, however, in man some wholesome fear of 
running away, which at times either takes the place of 
resolution, or else initiates the mechanical action of 
guiding his feet in the right direction — of prompting his 
speech and regulating his movement. Otherwise no young 
man, or very few at least, would ever face the ordeal 
of asking the consent of the parents of his inamorata. 
Such a fear stood to me now ; and with a seeming bold- 
ness I approached Joyce's house. When I came to the 
gate I saw him in the field not far off, and went up 
to speak to him. 

Even at that moment, when the dread of my soul 



UN MAUVAIS QUART D'lIEURE. 199 

was greatest, I could not but recall an interview which 
I had had with Andy that morning, and which was not 
of my seeking, but of his. 

After breakfast I had been in my room, making 
myself as smart as I could, for of course I hoped to 
see Norah — when I heard a knock at the door, timid 
but hurried. When I called to " come in," Andy's 
head appeared ; and then his whole body was by 
some mysterious wriggle conveyed through the partial 
opening of the door. When within, he closed it, 
and, putting a finger to his lip, said in a mysterious 
whisper : — 

" Masther Art ! " 

" Well Andy ! what is it ? " 

" Whisper me now ! Shure I don't want to see yer 
'an'r so onasy in yer mind." 

I guessed what was coming, so interrupted him, for 
I was determined to get even with him. 

" Now, Andy ! if you have any nonsense about your 
1 Miss Norah,' I don't want to hear it." 

" Whisht ! surr ; let me shpake. I mustn't kape 
Misther Dick waitin'. Now take me advice ! an' take a 
luk out to Shleenanaher. Ye may see some wan there 
what ye don't ixpect ! " — this was said with a sly mys- 
teriousness, impossible to describe. 

" No ! no ! Andy," said I, looking as sad as I could, 
"I can see no one there that I don't expect." 

" They do say, surr, that the fairies does take quare 
shapes; and your fairy girrul may have gone to 



200 THE snake's pass. 

Shleenanaher. Fairies may want to take the wather 
like mortials." 

" Take the water, Andy ! what do ye mean ? " 

" What do I mane ! why what the quality does call 
say-bathin'. An' maybe, the fairy girrul has gone 
too ! " 

" Ah ! no, Andy," said I, in as melancholy a way as I 
could, "my fairy girl is gone. I shall never see her 
again ! " 

Andy looked at me very keenly; and then a twinkle 
came in his eye and he said, slapping his thigh : — 

" Begor ! but I believe yer 'an'r is cured ! Ye used 
to be that melancholy that bedad it's meself what was 
gettin' sarious about ye ; an' now it's only narvous ye 
are ! Well ! if the fairy is gone, why not see Miss 
Norah ? Sure wan sight iv her 'd cure all the fairy 
spells what iver was cast. Go now, yer 'an'r, an' see 
her this day ! " 

I said with decision, "No, Andy, I will not go to- 
day to see Miss Norah. I have something else to do ! " 

"Oh, very well!" said he with simulated despondency. 
" If yer 'an'r won't, of course ye won't ! but ye' re wrong. 
At any rate, if ye're in the direction iv Shleenanaher, 
will ye go an' see th' ould man ? Musha ! but I'm 
thinkin' it's glad he'd be to see yer 'an'r." 

Despite all I could do, I felt blushing up to the 
roots of my hair. Andy looked at me quizzically; and 
said oracularly, and with sudden seriousness : — 

" Begor ! if yer fairy girrul is turned into a fairy com- 



UN" MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE. 201 

plately, an' lias flew away from ye, maybe ould Joyce 
too 'd become a leprachaun ! Hould him tight whin 
ye catch him ! Eemimber, wid leprachauns, if ye wance 
let thim go ye may niver git thim agin. But if ye 
hould thim tight, they must do whatsumiver ye wish ! 
So they do say — but maybe I'm wrong — I'm itherfarin' 
wid a gintleman as was bit be a fairy, and knows more 
nor mortials does about thim ! There's the masther 
callin'. Good bye, surr, an' good luck ! " and with a 
grin at me over his shoulder, Andy hurried away. I 
muttered to myself: — 

"If anyone is a fairy, my bold Andy, I think I can 
name him. You seem to know everything ! " 

This scene came back to me with renewed freshness. 
I could not but feel that Andy was giving me some 
advice. He evidently knew more than he pretended ; 
indeed, he must have known all along of the identity 
of my unknown of Knocknacar with Norah. He now 
also evidently knew of my knowledge on the subject ; 
and he either knew or guessed that I was off to see 
Joyce on the subject of his daughter. 

In my present state of embarrassment, his advice was 
a distinct light. He knew the people, and Joyce espe- 
cially ; he also saw some danger to my hopes, and 
showed me a way to gain my object. I knew already 
that Joyce was a proud man, and I could quite con- 
ceive that he was an obstinate one; and I knew from 
general experience of life that there is no obstacle so 
difficult to surmount as the pride of an obstinate man. 



202 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

With all the fervour of my heart I prayed that, on this 
occasion, his pride might not in any way be touched, or 
arrayed against me. 

When I saw him I went straight towards him, and 
held out my hand. He seemed a little surprised, but 
took it. Like Bob Acres, I felt my courage oozing out 
of the tips of my fingers, but with the remnant of it 
threw myself into the battle : — 

" Mr. Joyce, I have come to speak to you on a very 
serious subject." 

" A sarious subject ! Is it concarnin' me ? " 

" It is." 

" Go on ! More throuble, I suppose ? " 

" I hope not, most sincerely. Mr. Joyce, I want to 
have your permission to marry your daughter ! " If I 
had suddenly turned into a bird and flown away, I 
do not think I could have astonished him more. For 
a second or two he was speechless, and then said, in 
an unconscious sort of way: — 

" Want to marry me daughter ! " 

"Yes, Mr. Joyce! I love her very dearly! She is a 
pearl amongst women; and if you will give your per- 
mission, I shall be the happiest man on earth. I can 
quite satisfy you as to my means. I am well to do ; 
indeed, as men go, I am a rich man." 

" Aye ! sir, I don't doubt. I'm contint that you are 
what you say. But you never saw me daughter — except 
that dark night when you took me home." 

" Oh yes, I have seen her several times, and spoken 



UN MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE. 203 

with her; but, indeed, I only wanted to see her once 
to love her ! " 

" Ye have seen her— and she never tould me ! Come 
wid me ! " He beckoned me to come with him, and 
strode at a rapid pace to his cottage, opened the door, 
and motioned me to go in. I entered the room — which 
was both kitchen and living room — to which he pointed. 
He followed. 

As I entered, Norah, who was sewing, saw me and 
stood up. A rosy blush ran over her face ; then she grew 
as white as snow as she saw the stern face of her father 
close behind me. I stepped forward, and took her hand ; 
when I let it go, her arm fell by her side. 

" Daughter ! " — Joyce spoke very sternly, but not un- 
kindly. " Do you know this gentleman ? " 

" Yes, father ! " 

" He tells me that you and he have met several times. 
Is it thrue ? " 

"Yes, father; but — " 

" Ye never tould me ! How was that ? " 

" It was by accident we met." 

" Always be accident ? " Here I spoke : — 

" Always by accident — on her part." He inter- 
rupted me : — 

" Yer pardon, young gentleman ! I wish me 
daughter to answer me ! Shpeak, Norah ! " 

"Always, father! — except once, and then I came to 
give a message — yes ! it was a message, although from 
myself." 



204 THE snake's pass 

" What missage ? " 

" Oli father ! don't make me speak ! We are not 
alone ! Let me tell yon, alone ! I am only a girl — and 
it is hard to speak." 

His voice had a tear in it, for all its sternness, as he 
answered : — 

"It is on a subject that this gentleman has spoke 
to me about — as mayhap he has spoke to you." 

" Oh father ! " — she took his hand, which he did not 
withdraw, and, bending over, kissed it and hugged it 
to her breast. " Oh father ! what have I done that 
you should seem to mistrust me ? You have always 
trusted me; trust me now, and don't make me speak 
till we are alone ! " 

I could not be silent any longer. My blood began to 
boil, that she I loved should be so distressed — what- 
soever the cause, and at the hands of whomsoever, 
even her father. 

" Mr. Joyce, you must let me speak ! You would 
speak yourself to save pain to a woman you loved." 
He turned to tell me to be silent, but suddenly stopped ; 
I went on : — " Norah," he winced as I spoke her name, 
" is entirely blameless. I met her quite by chance at 
the top of Knocknacar when I went to see the view. I 
did not know who she was — I had not the faintest 
suspicion ; but from that moment I loved her. I went 
next day, and waited all day in the chance of seeing her ; 
I did see her, but again came away in ignorance even of 
her name. I sought her again, day after day, day after 



UN MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE. 205 

day, but could get no word of her; for I did not know 
who she was, or where she came from. Then, by chance, 
and after many weary days, again I saw her in the 
Cliff Fields below, three days ago. I could no longer be 
silent, but told her that I loved her, and asked her to 
be my wife. She asked a while to think, and left me, 
promising to give me an answer on the next evening. 
I came again ; and I got my answer." Here Norah, who 
was sobbing, with her face turned away, looked round, 
and said: — 

" Hush ! hush ! You must not let father know. All 
the harm will be done ! " Her father answered in a 
low voice : — 

"All that could be done is done already, daughter. 
Ye never tould me ! " 

" Sir ! Norah is worthy of all esteem. Her answer to 
me was that she could not leave her father, who was all 
alone in the world ! " Norah turned away again, but her 
father's arm went round her shoulder. " She told me 
I must think no more of her; but, sir, you and I, 
who are men, must not let a woman, who is dear to us 
both make such a sacrifice." Joyce's face was some- 
what bitter as he answered me: — 

"Ye think pretty well of yerself, young sir, whin 
ye consider it a sacrifice for me daughter to shtay wid 
the father, who loves her, and who she loves. There 
was never a shadda on her life till ye came ! '* This 
was hard to hear, but harder to answer, and I stam- 
mered as I replied : — 



206 THE snake's pass. 

" I hope I am man enough to do what is best for 
her, even if it were to break my heart. But she 
must marry some time ; it is the lot of the young 
and beautiful ! " Joyce paused a while, and his look 
grew very tender as he made answer softly: — 

" Aye ! thrue ! thrue ! the young birds lave the nist in 
due sayson — that's only natural." This seemed sufficient 
concession for the present; but Andy's warning rose 
before me, and I spoke : — 

" Mr. Joyce, God knows ! I don't want to add one drop 
of bitterness to either of your lives ! only tell me that I 
may have hope, and I am content to wait and to try 
to win your esteem and Norah's love." 

The father drew his daughter closer to him, and with 
his other hand stroked her hair, and said, whilst his 
eyes filled with tears : — 

" Ye didn't wait for me esteem to win her love ! " 
Norah threw herself into his arms and hid her face 
on his breast. He went on : — 

" We can't undo what is done. If Norah loves ye — 
and it seems to me that she does — do I shpeak thrue, 
daughter ? " The girl raised her face bravely, and 
looked in her father's eyes : — 

" Yes! father." A thrill of wild delight rushed through 
me. As she dropped her head again, I could see that 
her neck had 

" The colour of the budding rose's crest." 

" Well ! well ! " Joyce went on, " Ye are both 



UN MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE. 207 

young yit. God knows what may happen in a year! 
Lave the girl free a bit to choose. She has not met 
many gentlemen in her time ; and she may desave 
herself. Me darlin' ! whativer is for your good shall be 
done, plase God! " 

" And am I to have her in time ? " The instant I 
had spoken I felt that I had made a mistake ; the 
man's face grew hard as he turned to me: — 

" I think for me daughter, sir, not for you ! As it is, 
her happiness seems to be mixed up with yours — lucky 
for ye. I suppose ye must meet now and thin; but 
ye must both promise me that ye' 11 not meet widout me 
lave, or, at laste, me knowin' it. We 're not gentle- 
folk, sir, and we don't undherstand their ways. If ye 
were of Norah's and me own kind, I mightn't have to 
say the same ; but ye' re not." 

Things were now so definite that I determined to 
make one more effort to fix a time when my happiness 
might be certain, so I asked: — 

"Then if all be well, and you agree — as please God 
you shall when you know me better — when may I claim 
her ? " 

When he was face to face with a definite answer 
Joyce again grew stern. He looked down at his daughter 
and then up at me, and said, stroking her hair : — 

" Whin the threasure of Knockcalltecrore is found, thin 
ye may claim her if ye will, an' I '11 freely let her 
go ! " As he spoke, there came before my mind the 
strong idea that we were all in the power of the Hill — 



208 THE snake's pass. 

that it held us ; however, as lightly as I could I 
spoke : — 

" Then I would claim her now ! " 

"What do ye mane?" — this was said half anxiously, 
half fiercely. 

" The treasure of Knockcalltecrore is here ; you hold 
her in your arms ! " He bent over her : — 

" Aye ! the threasure sure enough — the threasure ye 
would rob me of!" Then he turned to me, and said 
sternly, but not unkindly : — 

" Go, now! I can't bear more at prisent; and even me 
daughter may wish to be for a while alone wid me ! " 
I bowed my head and turned to leave the room; but as 
I was going out, he called me back : — 

" Shtay ! Afther all, the young is only young. Ye seem 
to have done but little harm — if any." He held out his 
hand; I grasped it closely, and from that instant it 
seemed that our hearts warmed to each other. Then 
I felt bolder, and stepping to Norah took her hand — 
she made no resistance — and pressed it to my lips, and 
went out silently. I had hardly left the door when 
Joyce came after me. 

" Come agin in an hour," he said, and went in and 
shut the door. 

Then I wandered to the rocks and climbed down 
the rugged path into the Cliff Fields. I strode 
through the tall grass and the weeds, rank with the 
continuous rain, and gained the table rock. I climbed 
it, and sat where I first had met my love, after 



UN MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE. 209 

I had lost her; and, bending, I kissed the ground 
where her feet had rested. And then I prayed as fer- 
vent a prayer as the heart of a lover can yield, for 
every blessing on the future of my beloved ; and made 
high resolves that whatsoever might befall, I would so 
devote myself that, if a man's efforts could accomplish 
it, her feet should never fall on thorny places. 

I sat there in a tumult of happiness. The air was 
full of hope, and love, and light; and I felt that in all 
the wild glory and fulness of nature the one unworthy 
object was myself. 

"When the hour was nearly up I went back to the 
cottage ; the door was open, but I knocked on it with 
my hand. A tender voice called to me to come in, and 
I entered. 

Norah was standing up in the centre of the room. Her 
face was radiant, although her sweet eyes were bright 
with recent tears ; and I could see that in the hour 
which I had passed on the rock, the hearts of the father 
and the child had freely spoken. The old love between 
them had taken a newer and fuller and more conscious 
life — based, as God has willed it with the hearts of 
men, on the parent's sacrifice of self for the happiness 
of the child. 

Without a word I took her in my arms. She came 
without bashfulness and without fear ; only love and 
trust spoke in every look, and every moment. The cup 
of our happiness was full to the brim ; and it seemed 
as though God saw, and, as of old with His completed 
p 



210 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

plan of the world, was satisfied that all was 



We sat, hand in hand, and told again and again 
the simple truths that lovers tell; and we built bright 
mansions of future hope. There was no shadow on 
us, except the shadow that slowly wrapped the earth 
in the wake of the sinking sun. The long, level rays 
of sunset spread through the diamond panes of the 
lattice, grew across the floor, and rose on the opposite 
wall ; but we did not heed them until we heard Joyce's 
voice behind us : — 

" I have been thinkin' all the day, and I have come 
to believe that it is a happy day for us all, sir. I say, 
though she is my daughter, that the man that won her 
heart should be a proud man, for it is a heart of 
gold. I must give her to ye. I was sorry at the 
first, but I do it freely now. Ye must guard and 
kape, and hould her as the apple of your eye. If ye 
should ever fail or falter, remimber that ye took a 
great thrust in takin' her from me that loved her 
much, and in whose heart she had a place — not merely 
for her own sake, but for the sake of the dead that 
loved her." He faltered a moment, but then coming 
over, put his hand in mine, and while he held it there, 
Norah put her arm around his neck, and laying her 
sweet head on his broad, manly breast, said softly: — 

"Father, you are very good, and I am very, very 
happy ! " Then she took my hand and her father's 
together, and said to me ; — 



UN MAUVAIS QUART D'HEURE. 211 

" Kemeniber, he is to be as your father, too; and 
that you owe him all the love and honour that I do ! " 

" Amen," I said, solemnly ; and we three wrung 
each others' hands. 

Before I went away, I said to Joyce : — 

11 You told me I might claim her when the treasure 
of the Hill was found. Well! give me a month, and 
perhaps, if I don't have the one you mean, I may have 
another." I wanted to keep, for the present, the secret 
of my purchase of the old farm, so as to make a happy 
surprise when I should have actual possession. 

" What do ye mane ? " he said. 

"I shall tell you when the month is up," I answered; 
" or if the treasure is found sooner — but you must trust 
me till then." 

Joyce's face looked happy as he strolled out, evidently 
leaving me a chance of saying good-bye alone to No rah; 
she saw it too, and followed him. 

" Don't go father ! " she said. At the door she turned 
her sweet face to me, and with a shy look at her father, 
kissed me, and blushed rosy red. 

" That's right, me girl," said Joyce, " honest love is 
without shame ! Ye need never fear to kiss your lover 
before me." 

Again we stayed talking for a little while. I wanted 
to say good-bye again; but this last time I had to 
give the kiss myself. As I looked back from the gate, 
I saw father and daughter standing close together ; he 
had his arm round her shoulder, and the dear head 



212 THE snake's pass. 

that I loved lay close on his breast, as they both waved 
me farewell. 

I went back to Carnaclif, feeling as though I walked 
on air ; and my thoughts were in the heaven that lay 
behind my footsteps as I went — though before me on 
the path of life. 



213 



CHAPTER XII. 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 



When I got near home, I met Dick, who had strolled 
out to meet me. He was looking much happier than 
when I had left him in the morning. I really believe 
that now that the shock of his own disappointment 
had passed, he was all the happier that my affair had 
progressed satisfactorily. I told him all that had 
passed, and he agreed with the advice given by Joyce, 
that for a little while, nothing should be said about the 
matter. We walked together to the hotel, I hurrying 
the pace somewhat, for it had begun to dawn upon 
me that I had eaten but little in the last twenty-four 
hours. It was prosaic, but true ; I was exceedingly 
hungry. Joy seldom interferes with the appetite ; it> 
is sorrow or anxiety which puts it in deadly peril. 

When we got to the hotel, we found Andy waiting 
outside the door. He immediately addressed me : — 

" 'Och musha ! but it's the sad man I am this day ! 
Here's Masther Art giv over intirely to the fairies. An' 
its leprachaun catchin', he has been onto this blissed 
day. Luk at him ! isn't it full iv sorra he is. Give 



214 THE snake's pass. 

up the fairies, Masther Art! — Do thry an make him, 
Misther Dick! — an' take to fallin' head over ears in love 
wid some nice young girrul. Sure, Miss Norah herself, 
bad as she is, 'd be betther nor none at all, though 
she doesn't come up to Masther Art's rulin' ! " 

This latter remark was made to Dick, who imme- 
diately asked him: — 

"What is that, Andy?" 

" Begor ! yer 'an'r, Masther Art has a quare kind iv 
a girrul in his eye intirely, wan he used to be lukin' 
for on the top iv Knocknacar — the fairy girrul yer 
'an'r," he added to me in an explanatory manner. 

" I suppose, yer 'an'r," turning to me, " ye haven't 
saw her this day?" 

"I saw nobody to answer your description, Andy; and 
I fear I wouldn't know a fairy girl if I saw one," said 
I, as I passed into the house followed by Dick, whilst 
Andy, laughing loudly, went round to the back of the 
house, where the bar was. 

That was, for me at any rate, a very happy evening. 
Dick and I sat up late and smoked, and went over the 
ground that we had passed, and the ground that we were, 
please God, to pass in time. I felt grateful to the dear 
old fellow, and spoke much of his undertakings both at 
Knocknacar and at Knokcalltecrore. He told me that 
he was watching carefully the experiment at the former 
place as a guide to the latter. After some explanations, 
he said : — 

" There is one thing there which rather disturbs me. 



BOG-FISHIXG AND SCHOOLING. 215 

Even with the unusual amount of rain which we have 
had lately, the flow or drain of water from the bog is 
not constant ; it does not follow the rains as I expected. 
There seems to be some process of silting, or choking, 
or damming up the walls of what I imagine to be the 
different sections or reservoirs of the bog. I cannot 
make it out, and it disturbs me; for if the same pro- 
cess goes on at Knockcalltecrore, there might be any 
kind of unforeseen disaster in case of the shifting of the 
bog. I am not at all easy about the way Murdock is 
going on there. Ever since we found the indication of 
iron in the bog itself, he has taken every occasion when 
I am not there to dig away at one of the clay banks 
that jut into it. I have warned him that he is doing a 
very dangerous thing, but he will not listen. To-morrow, 
when I go up, I shall speak to him seriously. He went 
into G-alway with a cart the night before last, and was 
to return by to-morrow morning. Perhaps he has some 
game on. I must see what it is." 

Before we parted for the night we had arranged to 
go together in the morning to Knockcalltecrore, for of 
course I had made up my mind that each day should 
see me there. 

In the morning, early, we drove over. We left Andy, 
as usual, in the boreen at the foot of the hill, and 
walked up together. I ,left Dick at Murdock' s gate, 
and then hurried as fast as my legs could carry me to 
Joyce's. 

Norah must have had wonderful ears. She heard 



216 THE snake's pass. 

my footsteps in the lane, and when I arrived at the 
gate she was there to meet me. She said, "Good 
morning," shyly, as we shook hands. For an instant 
she evidently feared that I was going to kiss her, there 
in the open where someone might see ; but almost as 
quickly she realized that she was safe so far, and we 
went up to the cottage together. Then came my reward; 
for, when the door was closed, she put her arms round 
my neck as I took her in my arms, and our lips met 
in a sweet, long kiss. Our happiness was complete. 
Anyone who has met the girl he loved the day after 
his engagement to her, can explain why or how — if any 
explanation be required. 

Joyce was away in the fields. We sat hand in hand, 
and talked for a good while ; but I took no note of 
time. 

Suddenly Norah looked up. " Hush ! " she said. 
" There is a step in the boreen ; it is your friend, Mr. 
Sutherland." We sat just a little further apart and 
let go hands. Then the gate clicked, and even I heard 
Dick's steps as he quickly approached. He knocked at 
the door ; we both called out " Come in " simultaneously, 
and then looked at each other and blushed. The door 
opened and Dick entered. He was very pale, but in a 
couple of seconds his pallor passed away. He greeted 
Norah cordially, and she sweetly bade him welcome ; 
then he turned to me: — 

" I am very sorry to disturb you, old fellow, but would 
you mind coming down to Murdock's for a bit? There 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 217 

is some work which I wish you to give me a hand 
with." 

I started up aud took my hat, whispered good-bye 
to Norah, and went with him. She did not come to 
the door ; but from the gate I looked back and saw her 
sweet face peeping through the diamond pane of the 
lattice. 

" What is it, Dick ? " I asked, as we went down the 
lane. 

" A new start to-day. Murdock evidently thinks we 
have got on the track of something. He went into 
Galway for a big grapnel; and now we are making an 
effort to lift it — whatever 'it' is — out of the bog." 

" By Jove ! " said I, " things are getting close." 

"Yes," said Dick. "And I am inclined to think he 
is right. There is most probably a considerable mass 
of iron in the bog. We have located the spot, and are 
only waiting for you, so as to be strong enough to make 
a cast." 

When we got to the edge of the bog we found Murdock 
standing beside a temporary jetty, arranged out of a 
long plank, with one end pinned to the ground and 
the centre supported on a large stone, placed on the 
very edge of the solid ground, where a rock cropped 
up. Beside him was a very large grappling-iron, some 
four feet wide, attached to a coil of strong rope. When 
we came up, he saluted me in a half surly manner, 
and we set to work, Dick saying, as we began : — 

" Mr. Severn, Mr. Murdock has asked us to help in 



218 THE snake's pass. 

raising something from the bog. He prefers to trust 
us, whom he knows to be gentlemen, than to let his 
secret be shared in with anyone else." 

Dick got out on the end of the plank, holding the 
grapnel and a coil of the rope in his hand, whilst the 
end of the coil was held by Murdock. 

I could see from the appearance of the bog that some- 
one had been lately working at it, for it was all broken 
about as though to make a hole in it, and a long pole 
that lay beside where I stood was covered with wet and 
slime. 

Dick poised the grapnel carefully, and then threw it 
out. It sank into the bog, slowly at first, but then more 
quickly ; an amount of rope ran out which astonished 
me, for I knew that the bog must be at least so deep. 

Suddenly the run of the rope ceased, and we knew 
that the grapnel had gone as far as it could. Murdock 
and I then held the rope, and Dick took the pole and 
poked and beat a passage for it through the bog up to 
the rock where we stood. Then he, too, joined us, and 
we all began to pull. 

For a few feet we pulled in the slack of the rope. 
Then there was a little more resistance for some three 
or four feet, and we knew that the grapnel was dragging 
on the bottom. Suddenly there was a check, and 
Murdock gave a suppressed shout: — 

" We have got it ! I feel it ! Pull away for your 
lives ! " 

We kept a steady pull on the rope. At first there 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 219 

was simply a dead weight, and in my own mind I was 
convinced that we had caught a piece of projecting 
rock. Murdock would have got unlimited assistance 
and torn out of the bog whatever it was that we had 
got hold of, even if he had to tear up the rocks by the 
roots ; but Dick kept his head, and directed a long 
steady pull. 

There was a sudden yielding, and then again resist- 
ance. We continued to pull, and then the rope began 
to come, but very slowly, and there was a heavy weight 
attached to it. Even Dick was excited now. Murdock 
shut his teeth, and scowled like a demon; it would 
have gone hard with anyone who came then between 
him and his prize. As for myself, I was in a tumult. 
In addition to the natural excitement of the time, there 
rose to my memory Joyce's words : — " When the trea- 
sure is found you may claim her if you will;" — and, 
although the need for such an occasion passed away 
with his more free consent, the effect that they had at 
the time produced on me remained in my mind. 

Here, then, was the treasure at last; its hiding for 
a century in the bog had come to an end. 

We pulled and pulled. Heavens! how we tugged 
at that rope. Foot after foot it came up through 
our hands, wet and slimy, and almost impossible to 
hold. Now and again it slipped from each of us in 
turns a few inches, and a muttered " steady ! steady ! " 
was all the sound heard. It took all three of us to 
hold the weight, and so no one could be spared to 



220 THE snake's pass. 

make an effort to further aid us by any mechanical 
appliance. The rope lay beside us in seemingly an 
endless coil. I began to wonder if it would ever end. 
Our breath began to come quickly, our hands were 
cramped. There came a new and more obstinate re- 
sistance. I could not account for it. Dick cried 
out : — 

" It is under the roots of the bog ; we must now 
take it up straight. Can you two hold on for a 
moment ? and I shall get on the plank." "We nodded, 
breath was too precious for unnecessary speech. 

Dick slacked out after we had got our feet planted 
for a steady resistance. He then took a handful of 
earth, and went out on the plank a little beyond the 
centre and caught the rope. When he held it firmly with 
his clay-covered hands, he said : — 

" Come now, Art. Murdock, you stay and pull." I 
ran to him, and, taking my hands full of earth, caught 
the rope also. 

The next few minutes saw a terrible struggle. Our 
faces were almost black with the rush of blood in 
stooping and lifting so long and so hard, our hands 
and backs ached to torture, and we were almost in 
despair, when we saw the bog move just under us. 
This gave us new courage and new strength, and with 
redoubled effort we pulled at the rope. 

Then up through the bog came a large mass. We could 
not see what it was, for the slime and the bog covered 
it solidly; but with a final effort we lifted it. Each 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 221 

instant it grew less weighty as the resistance of the 
bog was overcome, and the foul slimy surface fell back 
into its place and became tranquil. When we lifted 
and pulled the mass on the rock bank, Murdock 
rushed forward in a frenzied manner, and shouted 
to us: — 

" Kape back ! Hands off ! It's mine, I say, all mine ! 
Don't dar even to touch it, or I'll do ye a harrum ! 
Here, clear off ! this is my land ! Go ! " and he 
turned on us with the energy of a madman and the 
look of a murderer. 

I was so overcome with my physical exertions that 
I had not a word to say, but simply in utter weari- 
ness threw myself upon the ground ; but Dick, with 
what voice he could command, said : — 

" You're a nice grateful fellow to men who have 
helped you ! Keep your find to yourself, man alive ; 
we don't want to share. You must know that as well 
as I do, unless your luck has driven you mad. Handle 
the thing yourself, by all means. Faugh ! how filthy 
it is ! " and he too sat down beside me. 

It certainly was most filthy. It was a shapeless 
irregular mass, but made solid with rust and ooze and 
the bog surface through which it had been dragged. 
The slime ran from it in a stream ; but its filth had 
no deterring power for Murdock, who threw himself 
down beside it and actually kissed the nauseous mass 
as he murmured : — 

" At last ! at last ! me threasure ! All me own ! " 



222 THE shake's pass. 

Dick stood up with a look of disgust on his handsome 
face : — 

" Come away, Art ; it's too terrible to see a man 
degraded to this pitch. Leave the wretch alone with 
his god ! " Murdock turned to us, and said with savage 
glee : — 

" No ! shtay ! Sthay an' see me threasure ! It'll make 
ye happy to think of afther ! An' ye can tell Phelim 
Joyce what I found in me own land — the land what I 
tuk from him." We stayed. 

Murdock took his spade and began to remove the 
filth and rubbish from the mass. And in a very few 
moments his discovery proclaimed itself. 

There lay before us a rusty iron gun-carriage ! This 
was what we had dragged with so much effort from the 
bottom of the bog; and beside it Murdock sat down 
with a scowl of black disappointment. 

" Come away ! " said Dick. " Poor devil, I pity him ! 
It. is hard to find even a god of that kind worthless!" 
And so we turned and left Murdock sitting beside the 
gun-carriage and the slime, with a look of baffled greed 
which I hope never to see on any face again. 

We went to a brook at the foot of the hill, Andy 
being by this time in the sheebeen about half a mile 
off. There we cleansed ourselves as well as we could 
from the hideous slime and filth of the bog, and then 
walked to the top of the hill to let the breeze freshen 
us up a bit if possible. After we had been there for 
a while, Dick said: — 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 223 

" Now, Art, you had better run back to the cottage. Miss 
Joyce will be wondering what has become of you all this 
time, and may be frightened." It was so strange to 
hear her — Norah, my Norah — called " Miss Joyce," that 
I could not help smiling — and blushing whilst I smiled. 
Dick noticed and guessed the cause. He laid his hand 
on my shoulder, and said: — 

"You will hear it often, old lad. I am the only one 
of all your friends privileged to hear of her by the name 
you knew her by at first. She goes now into your class 
and amongst your own circle ; and, by George ! she will 
grace it too — it or any circle — and they will naturally 
give to her folk the same measure of courtesy that they 
mete to each other. She is Miss Joyce — until she shall 
be Mrs. Arthur Severn!" 

What a delicious thrill the very thought sent through 
me ! 

I went up to the cottage, and on entering found Norah 
still alone. She knew that I was under promise not to 
tell anything of Murdock's proceedings, but noticing that 
I was not so tidy as before — for my cleansing at the 
brook- side was a very imperfect one — went quietly and 
got a basin with hot water, soap, and a towel, and clothes 
brush, and said I must come and be made very tidy. 

That toilet was to me a sweet experience, and is a 
sweet remembrance now. It was so wifely in its purpose 
and its method, that I went through it in a languorous 
manner — like one in a delicious dream. When, with a 
blush, she brought me her own brush and comb and began 



224 THE snake's pass. 

to smooth my hair, I was as happy as it is given to a 
man to be. There is a peculiar sensitiveness in their hair 
to some men, and to have it touched by hands that 
they love is a delicious sensation. When my toilet was 
complete Norah took me by the hand and made me sit 
down beside her. After a pause, she said to me with a 
gathering blush : — 

" I want to ask you something." 

" And I want to ask you something," said I. " Norah, 
dear ! there is one thing I want much to ask you." 

She seemed to suspect or guess what I was driving at, 
for she said: — 

"You must let me ask mine first." 

" No, no ! " I replied. " You must answer me ; and 
then, you know, you will have the right to ask what 
you like." 

" But I do not want any right." 

" Then it will be all the more pleasure to me to 
give a favour — if there can be any such from me to 
you." 

Masculine persistence triumphed — men are always 
more selfish than women — and I asked my question : — 

"Norah, darling — tell me when will you be mine — 
my very own? When shall we be married?" 

Tho love-light was sweet in her eyes as she answered 
me with a blush that made perfect the smile on her 
lips: — 

"Nay! You should have let me ask my question 
first." 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 225 

"Why so, dearest?" 

"Because, dear, I am thinking of the future. You 
know, Arthur, that I love you, and that whatever you 
wish, I would and shall gladly do; but you must think 
for me too. I am only a peasant girl — " 

"Peasant!" I laughed. " Norah, you are the best 
lady I have ever seen! Why, you are like a queen — 
what a queen ought to be ! " 

" I am proud and happy, Arthur, that you think so ; 
but still I am only a peasant ! Look at me — at my dress. 
Yes ! I know you like it, and I shall always prize it 
because it found favour in your eyes ! " She smiled 
happily, but went on: — 

"Dear, I am speaking very truly. My life and 
surroundings are not yours. You are lifting me to a 
higher grade in life, Arthur, and I want to be worthy 
of it and of you. I do not want any of your family or 
your friends to pity you and say, 'Poor fellow, he has 
made a sad mistake. Look at her manners — she is not 
of us.' 'I could not bear to hear or to know that such 
-vas said — that anyone should have to pity the man 
I love, and to have that pity because of me. Arthur, it 
would break my heart ! " 

As she spoke the tears welled up in the deep dark 
eyes and rolled unchecked down her cheeks. I caught 
her to my breast with the sudden instinct of protection, 
and cried out : — 

"Norah! no one on earth could say such a thing of 
you — you who would lift a man, not lower him. You 
Q 



226 THE sxake's pass. 

could not be ungraceful if you tried ; and as for my 
family and friends, if there is one who will not hold out 
both hands to you and love you, he or she is no kin or 
friend of mine." 

" But, Arthur, they might be right ! I have learned 
enough to know that there is so much more to learn 
— that the great world you live in is so different from 
our quiet, narrow life here. Indeed, I do not mean 
to be nervous as to the future, or to make any difficul- 
ties ; but, dear, I should like to be able to do all that 
is right and necessary as your wife. Eemember, that 
when I leave here I shall not have one of my own kin 
or friends to tell me anything — from whom I could ask 
advice. They do not themselves even know what I might 
want — not one of them all ! Your world and mine, 
dear, are so different — as yet." 

" But, Norah, shall I not be always by your side to 
ask ? " — I felt very superior and very strong as well 
as very loving as I spoke. 

" Yes, yes ; but oh ! Arthur — can you not understand — 
I love you so that I would like to be, even in the eyes 
of others, all that you could wish. But, dear, you must 
understand and help me here. I cannot reason with 
you. Even now I feel my lack of knowledge, and it 
makes me fearful. Even now" — her voice died away 
in a sob, and she hid her beautiful eyes with her 
hand. 

" My darling ! my darling ! " I said to her passion- 
atelv — all the true lover in me awake — " Tell me what 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 227 

it is that you wish, so that I may try to judge with all 
my heart." 

" Arthur ! I want you to let me go to school — to a 
good school for a while — a year or two before we are 
married. Oh ! I should work so hard ! I should' try so 
earnestly to improve — for I should feel that every hour 
of honest work brought me higher and nearer to your 
level ! " 

My heart was more touched than even my passion 
gave me words to tell — and I tried, and tried hard, to tell 
her what I felt — and in my secret heart a remorseful 
thought went up : " What have I done in my life to be 
worthy of so much love ! " 

Then, as we sat hand in hand, we discussed how it 
was to be done — for that it was to be done we were both 
agreed. I had told her that we should so arrange it 
that she should go for awhile to Paris, and then to 
Dresden, and finish up with an English school. That 
she could learn languages, and that amongst them 
would be Italian ; but that she would not go to Italy 
until we went together — on our honeymoon. She bent 
her head and listened in silent happiness ; and when 
I spoke of our journey together to Italy, and how we 
would revel in old-world beauty — in the softness and 
light and colour of that magic land— the delicate porce- 
lain of her shell-like ear became tinged with pink, and 
I bent over and kissed it. And then she turned and 
threw herself on my breast, and hid her face. 

As I looked I saw the pink spread downward and 



228 the snake's pass. 

grow deeper and deeper, till her neck and all became 
flushed with crimson. And then she put me aside, rose 
uj), and with big brave eyes looked me full in the face 
through all her deep embarrassment, and said to me : — 

" Arthur, of course I don't know much of the great 
world, but I suppose it is not usual for a man to pay 
for the schooling of a lady before she is his wife — what- 
ever might be arranged between them afterwards. You 
know that my dear father has no money for such a 
purpose as we have spoken of, and so if you think it 
is wiser, and would be less hardly spoken of in youT 
family, I would marry you before I went — if — if you 
wished it. But we would wait till after I came from 
school to — to — to go to Italy," and whilst the flush 
deepened almost to a painful degree, she put her hands 
before her face and turned away. 

Such a noble sacrifice of her own feelings and her 
own wishes — and although I felt it in my heart of 
hearts I am sure none but a woman could fully under- 
stand it — put me upon my mettle, and it was with truth 
I spoke : — 

" Norah, if anything could have added to my love 
and esteem for you, your attitude to me in this matter 
has done it. My darling, I shall try hard all my life to 
be worthy of you, and that you may never, through any 
act of mine, decline for a moment from the standard 
you have fixed. God knows I could have no greater 
pride or joy than that this very moment I should 
call you my wife. My dear ! my dear ! I shall count 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 229 

the very hours until that happy time shall come. But 
all shall be as you wish. You will go to the schools we 
spoke of, and your father shall pay for them. He will 
not refuse, I know, and what is needed he shall have. 
If there be any way that he would prefer — that suits 
your wishes — it shall be done. More than this ! if he 
thinks it right, we can be married before you go, and 
you can keep your own name until my time comes to 
claim you." 

" No ! no ! Arthur. When once I shall bear your 
name I shall be too proud of it to be willing to have any 
other. But I want, when I do bear it, to bear it worthily 
— I want to come to you as I think your wife should 
come." 

"My dear, dear Norah — my wife to be — all shall be 
as you wish." 

Here we heard the footsteps of Joyce approaching. 

" I had better tell him," she said. 

When he came in she had his dinner ready. He 
greeted me warmly. 

" Won't ye stay ? " he said. " Don't go unless ye wish 
to!" 

" I think, sir, Nor ah wants to have a chat with you 
when you have had your dinner." 

Norah smiled a kiss at me as I went out. At the 
door I turned and said to to her: — 

" I shall be in the Cliff Field in case I am wanted." 

I went there straightway, and sat on the table rock 
in the centre of the fields, and thought and thought. 



230 THE snake's pass. 

In all my thought there was no cloud. Each day — 
each hour seemed to reveal new beauties in the girl I 
loved, and I felt as if all the world were full of sun- 
shine, and all the future of hope; and I built new 
resolves to be worthy of the good fortune which had come 
upon me. 

It was not long before Norah came to me, and said 
that she had told her father, and that he wished 
to speak with me. She said that he quite agreed 
about the school, and that there would be no difficulty 
made by him on account of any false pride about my 
helping in the task. We had but one sweet minute 
together on the rock, and one kiss; and then, hand in 
hand, we hurried back to the cottage, and found Joyce 
waiting for us, smoking his pipe. 

Norah took me inside, and, after kissing her father, 
came shyly and kissed me also, and went out. Joyce 
began : — 

" Me daughter has been tellin' me about the plan of 
her goin' to school, an' her an' me's agreed that it's the 
right thing to do. Of coorse, we're not of your class, 
an' if ye wish for her it is only right an' fair that she 
should be brought up to the level of the people that 
she's goin' into. It's not in me own power to do all 
this for her, an' although I did'nt give her the schoolin' 
that the quality has, I've done already more nor min 
like me mostly does. Norah knows more nor any girl 
about here — an' as ye're to have the benefit of yer 
wife's schoolin', I don't see no rayson why ye should'nt 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 231 

help in it. Mind ye this — if I conld see me way to 
do it nieself, I'd work me arms off before I'd let you 
or any one else come between her an' me in such a 
thing. But it'd be only a poor kind of pride that'd 
hurt the poor child's feelins, an' mar her future — an' 
so it'll be as ye both wish. Ye must find out the 
schools an' write me about them when ye go back to 
London." I jumped up and shook his hand. 

" Mr. Joyce, I am more delighted than I can tell 
you ; and I promise, on my honour, that you shall 
never in your life regret what you have done." 

" I'm sure of that — Mr. — Mr. — " 

"Call me Arthur ! " 

" Well ! I must do it some day — Arthur — an' as to 
the matther that Norah told me ye shpoke of — that, if 
I'd wish it, ye'd be married first. Well ! me own 
mind an' Norah's is the same — I'd rather that she 
come to you as a lady at wance — though God knows ! 
it's a lady she is in all ways I iver see one in me life 
— barrin' the clothes ! " 

" That's true, Mr. Joyce ! there is no better lady in all 
the land." 

" Well, that's all settled. Ye'll let me know in 
good time about the schools, won't ye ? an' now I 
must get back to me work," and he passed out of the 
house, and went up the hillside. 

Then Norah came back, and with joy I told her 
that all had been settled ; and somehow, we seemed to 
have taken another step up the ascent that leads 



232 THE snake's pass. 

from earth to heaven — and that all feet may tread, 
which are winged with hope. 

Presently Norah sent me away for a while, saying 
that she had some work to do, as she expected both 
Dick and myself to come back to tea with them; and 
I went off to look for Dick.' 

I found him with Murdock. The latter had got over 
his disappointment, and had evidently made up his 
mind to trust to Dick's superior knowledge and intelli- 
gence. He was feverishly anxious to continue his 
search, and when I came up we held a long discussion 
as to the next measure to be taken. The afternoon 
faded away in this manner before Murdock summed 
up the matter thus: — 

" The chist was carried on the gun-carriage, and 
where wan is th' other is not far off. The min 
couldn't have carried the chist far, from what ould 
Moynahan sez. His father saw the min carryin' the 
chist only a wee bit." Dick said: — 

" There is one thing, Murdock, that I must warn you 
about. You have been digging in the clay bank by 
the edge of the bog. I told you before how dangerous 
this is; now, more than ever, I see the danger of it. 
It was only to-day that we got an idea of the depth 
of the bog, and it rather frightens me to think that 
with all this rain falling you should be tampering 
with what is more important to you than even the 
foundations of your house. The bog has risen far 
too much already, and you have only to dig perhaps 



BOG-FISHING AND SCHOOLING. 233 

one spadeful too much in the right place and you'll 
have a torrent that will sweep away all you have. I 
have told you that I don't like the locality of your 
house down in the hollow. If the bog ever moves 
again, God help you ! You seem also to have been 
tampering with the stream that runs into the Cliff: 
Fields. It is all very well for you to try to injure poor 
Joyce more than you have done — and that's quite 
enough, God knows ! — but here you are actually im- 
perilling your own safety. That stream is the safety 
valve of the bog, and if you continue to dam up that 
cleft in the rock you will have a terrible disaster. 
Mind now ! I warn you seriously against what you 
are doing. And besides, you do not even know for 
certain that the treasure is here. Why, it may be 
anywhere on the mountain, from the brook below the 
boreen to the Cliff Fields; is the off chance worth the 
risk you run ? " Murdock started when he mentioned 
the Cliff Fields, and then said suddenly: — 

" If ye' re afraid ye can go. I'm not." 

" Man alive ! " said Dick, " why not be afraid if you 
see cause for fear ? I don't suppose I'm a coward any 
more than you are, but I can see a danger, and a very 
distinct one, from what you are doing. Your house is 
directly in the track in which the bog has shifted at 
any time this hundred years ; and if there should be 
another movement, I would not like to be in the 
house when the time comes." 

" All right ! " he returned doggedly, " I'll take me 



234 THE snake's pass. 

chance; and I'll find the threasure, too, before many 
days is over ! " 

" Well ; but be reasonable also, or you may find your 
death ! " 

" Well, if I do that's me own luk out. Ye may 
find yer death first ! " 

" Of course I may, but I see it my duty to warn 
you. The weather these last few weeks back has been 
unusually wet. The bog is rising as it is. As a matter 
of fact, it is nearly a foot higher now than it was when 
I came here first ; and yet you are doing what must 
help to rise it higher still, and are weakening its walls 
at the same time." He scowled at me as he sullenly 
answered : — 

" Well, all I say is I'll do as I like wid me own. I 
wouldn't give up me chance iv findin' the threasure 
now— no, not for God himself!" 

" Hush ! man ; hush ! " said Dick sternly, as we turned 
away. " Do not tempt Him, but be warned in time ! " 

" Let Him look out for Himself, an' I'll look out for 
meself," he answered with a sneer. " I'll find the 
threasure — an' if need be in spite iv God an' iv the 
Divil too ! " 



235 



CHAPTER XIII. 

mtjedock's wooing. 

I think it was a real pleasure to Dick to get Norah's 
message that he was expected to tea that evening. 
Like the rest of his sex, he was not quite free from 
vanity; for when I told him, his first act was to look 
down at himself ruefully, and his first words were: — 

" But I say, old lad ! look at the mess I'm in ; and 
these clothes are not much, anyhow." 

" Never mind, Dick, you are as good as I am." 

" Oh, well ! " he laughed, " if you'll do, I suppose I 
needn't mind. We're both pretty untidy. No, begad," 
he added, looking me all over, " you're not out of the 
perpendicular with regard to cleanliness, anyhow. I 
say, Art ! who's been tidying you up ? Oh ! I see ! 
Forgive me, old lad ; and quite natural, too ! Miss 
Joyce should see you blush, Art! Why, you are as 
rosy as a girl ! " 

''Call her 'Norah,' Dick! it is more natural, and I 
am sure she will like it better. She is to look on you 
as a brother, you know ! " 

" All right, Art," he answered heartily, " but you 



236 THE snake's pass. 

must manage it for me, for I think I should be alarmed 
to do so unless I got a lead; but it will come easy- 
enough after the first go off. Kemember, we both always 
thought of her as ' Norah ! '" 

We went down towards the brook and met with 
Andy, who had the car all ready for us. 

" Begor yer 'an'rs," said he, " I thought yez was lost 
intirely, or that the fairies had carried yez off; both iv 
yez this time." — This with a sly look at me, followed 
by a portentous wink to Dick. "An' I'm thinkin' it's 
about time fur somethin' to ate. Begor! but me stum- 
mick is cryin' out that me throat is cut ! " 

" You're quite right, Andy, as to the fact," said Dick, 
" but you are a little antecedent." 

"An' now what's that, surr? Begor! I niver was 
called that name afore. Shure, an' I always thry to be 
dacent — divvle a man but can tell ye that! Antidacent 
indeed! Well now! what nixt?" 

" It means, Andy, that we are going to be carried off 
by the fairies, and to have some supper with them too ; 
and that you are to take this half-crown, and go over 
to Mother Kelligan's, and get her to try to dissipate that 
unnatural suspicion of capital offence wreaked on your 
thoraic region. Here, catch ! and see how soon you 
can be off ! " 

" Hurroo ! Begor, yer 'an'r, it's the lamed gintleman 
y' are! Musha! but ye ought to be a councillor in- 
tirely ! Gee-up ! ye ould corncrake ! " and Andy was 
off at full speed. 



murdock's wooing. 237 

When we had got rid of him, Dick and I went down 
to the brook, and made ourselves look as tidy as we 
could. At least Dick did ; for, as to myself, I purposely 
disarranged my hair — unknown to Dick — in the hope 
that Norah would take me in hand again, and that I 
might once more experience the delicious sensation of a 
toilet aided by her sweet fingers. 

Young men's ideas, however, are very crude; no one 
who knew either the Sex or the World would have fallen 
into such an absurd hope. When I came in with Dick, 
Norah — in spite of some marked hints, privately and 
secretly given to her — did not make either the slightest 
remark on my appearance, or the faintest suggestion as 
to improving it. 

She had not been idle in the afternoon. The room, 
which was always tidy, was as prettily arranged as the 
materials would allow. There were some flowers, and 
flag-leaves, and grasses tastefully placed about ; and on 
the table, in a tumbler, was a bunch of scarlet poppies. 
The tablecloth, although of coarse material, was as white 
as snow, and the plates and cups, of common white and 
blue, were all that was required. 

When Joyce came in from his bedroom, where he had 
been tidying himself, he looked so manly and handsome 
in his dark frieze coat with horn buttons, his wide un- 
starched shirt-collar, striped waistcoat, and cord breeches, 
with grey stockings, that I felt quite proud of him. 
There was a natural grace and dignity about him which 
suited him so well, that I had no wish to see him other 



238 THE snake's pass. 

than a peasant. He became the station, and there was 
no pretence. He made a rough kind of apology to 
us both : — 

" I fear ye' 11 find things a bit rough, compared with 
what you're accustomed to, but I know ye'll not mind. 
We have hardly got settled down here yit ; and me 
sisther, who always lives with us, is away with me other 
sisther that is sick, so Norah has to fare by herself; 
but gentlemen both — you, Mr. Sutherland ; and you, 
Arthur — you're welcome! 

We sat down to table, and Norah insisted on doing 
all the attendance herself. I wanted to help her, and, 
when she was taking up a plate of cakes from the hearth, 
stooped beside her and said : — 

" May not I help, Norah ? Do let me ! " 

" No — no, dear," she whispered. " Don't ask me now 
— I'm a little strange yet — another time. You'll be 
very good, won't you, and help me not to feel awk- 
ward ? " 

Needless to say I sat at table for the rest of the 
meal, and feasted my eyes on my darling, whilst in 
common with the others I enjoyed the good things 
placed before us. But when she saw that I looked too 
long and too lovingly, she gave me such an imploring 
glance from her eloquent eyes, that for the remainder 
of the time I restrained both the ardour of my glance 
and its quantity within modest bounds. 

Oh ! but she was fair and sweet to look upon ! Her 
dark hair was plainly combed back, and coiled modestly 



murdock's wooing. 239 

round her lovely head. She had on her red petticoat 
and chintz body, that she knew I admired so much ; and 
on her breast she wore a great scarlet poppy, whose 
splendid colour suited well her dark and noble beauty. 
At the earliest opportunity, when tea was over, I whis- 
pered to her: — 

" My darling, how well the poppy suits you. How 
beautiful you are. You are like the Goddess of Sleep!" 
She put her finger to her lips with a happy smile, as 
though to forbid me to pay compliments — before others. 
I suppose the woman has never yet been born — and 
never shall be — who would not like to hear her praises 
from the man she loves. 

I had eaten potato-cakes before, but never such as 
Norah had made for us ; possibly they seemed so good 
to me because I knew that her hands had made them. 
The honey, too, was the nicest I had tasted — for it was 
made by Norah's bees. The butter was perfect — for it 
was the work of her hands ! 

I do not think that a happier party ever assembled 
round a tea-table. Joyce was now quite reconciled to 
the loss of his daughter, and was beaming all over; 
and Dick's loyal nature had its own reward, for he 
too was happy in the happiness of those he loved — or 
else I was, and am, the most obtuse fool, and he the 
most consummate actor, that has been. As for Norah 
and myself, I know we were happy — as happy as it 
is given to mortals to be. 

When tea was over, and Norah fetched her father's 



240 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

pipe and lighted it for him, she said to me with a 
sweet blush, as she called me by my name for the 
first time before a stranger: — 

"I suppose, Arthur, you and Mr. Sutherland would 
like your own cigars best; but if you care for a pipe 
there are some new ones here," and she pointed them 
out. We lit our cigars, and sat round the fire; for 
in this damp weather the nights were getting a little 
chilly. Joyce sat on one side of the fire and Dick on 
the other. I sat next to Dick, and Norah took her 
place between her father and me, sitting on a little 
stool beside her father and leaning, her head against 
his knees, whilst she took the hand that was fondly 
laid over her shoulder and held it in her own. Pre- 
sently, as the grey autumn twilight died away, and as 
the light from the turf fire rose and fell, throwing 
protecting shadows, her other hand stole towards my 
own — which was waiting to receive it ; and we sat 
silent for a spell, Norah and I in an ecstasy of quiet 
happiness. 

By-and-by we heard a click at the latch of the gate, 
and firm, heavy footsteps coming up the path. Norah 
jumped up, and peeped out of the window. 

" Who is it, daughter ? " said Joyce. 

" Oh father ! it is Murdock ! What can he want ? " 

There was a knock at the door. Joyce rose up, 
motioning to us to sit still, laid aside his pipe, and 
went to the door and opened it. Every word that 
was spoken was perfectly plain to us all. 



murdock's wooing. 241 

" Good evenin', Phelim Joyce ! " 

" Good evenin' ! You want me ? " 

" I do." Murdock's voice was fixed and firm, as of 
one who has made up his mind. 

" What is it ? " 

" May I come in ? I want to shpake to ye par- 
ticular." 

" No, Murtagh Murdock ! Whin a man comes undher 
me roof by me own consint, I'm not free wid him to 
spake me mind the same as whin he's outside. Ye 
haven't thrated me well, Murdock. Ye've been hard 
wid me ; and there's much that I can't forgive ! " 

" Well ! if I did, ye gev me what no other man has 
ever gave me yit widout repintin' it sore. Ye sthruck 
me a blow before all the people, an' I didn't strike ye 
back." 

" I did, Murtagh ; an' I'm sorry for it. That blow 
has been hangin' on me conscience iver since. I would 
take it back if I could ; God knows that is thrue. 
Much as ye wronged me, I don't want such a thing 
as that to remimber when me eyes is closin'. Murtagh 
Murdock, I take it back, an' gladly. Will ye let me ? " 

" I will — on wan condition." 

''What is it?" 

"That's what I've kem here to shpake about; but 
I'd like to go in." 

" No ! ye can't do that — not yit, at any rate, till I 
know what ye want. Ye must remimber, Murtagh, 
that I've but small ray son to thrust ye ! " 



242 THE snake's pass. 

" Well, Phelim, I'll tell ye ; tho' it's mortial hard to 
name it shtandin' widout the door like a thramp ! I'm 
a warrum man ; I've a power iv money put by, an' it 
brings me in much." 

" I know ! I know ! " said the other bitterly. " Grod 
help me! but I know too well how it was gother up." 

" Well ! niver mind that now ; we all know that. 
Anyhow, it is gother up. An' them as finds most fault 
wid the manes, mayhap 'd be the first to get hould iv it 
av they could. Well, anyhow, I'm warrum enough to 
ask any girrul in these parts to share it wid me. 
There's many min and weemin between this and 
Gal way, that'd like to talk over the fortin iv their 
daughter wid Murtagh Murdock — for all he's a gom- 
been man." 

As he spoke, the clasp of Norah's hand and mine 
grew closer. I could feel in her clasp both a clinging, as 
for protection, and a restraining power on myself. 
Murdock went on : — 

" But there's none of thim girls what I've set me 
harrt on — except wan ! " He paused. Joyce said 
quietly : — 

"An' who, now, might that be?" 

" Yer own daughther, Norah Joyce ! " Norah's hand 
restrained me as I was instinctively rising. 

" Go on ! " said Joyce, and I could notice that 
there was a suppressed passion in his voice : — 

"Well, I've set me harrt on her; and I'm willin' to 
settle a fortin on her, on wan condition." 



murdock's wooing. 243 

" And wliat, now, might that be ? " — the tone was 
of veiled sarcasm. 

" She'll have all the money that I settle on her to 
dale wid as she likes — that is, the intherest iv it — as 
long as she lives ; an' I'm to have the Cliff Fields 
that is her's, as me own to do what I like wid, an' 
that them an' all in them belongs to me." Joyce 
paused a moment before answering : — 

" Is that all ye have to say ? " Murdock seemed 
nonplussed, but after a slight pause he answered:— 

"Yis!" 

"An' ye want me answer?" 

" Iv coorse ! " 

"Thin, Murtagh Murdock, I'd like to ask ye for why 
me daughter would marry you or the like of you? Is 
it because that yer beauty 'd take a young girl's 
fancy — you that's known as the likest thing to a divil in 
these parts ! Or is it because of yer kind nature ? You 
that tried to ruin her own father, and that drove both 
her and him out of the home she was born in, and 
where her poor mother died! Is it because yer cha- 
racther is respicted in the counthry wheriver yer name 
is known ? " Here Murdock interrupted him : — 

" I tould ye it's a warrum man I am " — he spoke 
decisively, as if his words were final — " an' I can, an' will, 
settle a fortin on her." Joyce answered slowly and with 
infinite scorn : — 

" Thank ye, Mr. Murtagh Murdock, but me daughter 
is not for sale ! " 



244 ' THE snake's psss. 

There was a long pause. Then Murdock spoke again, 
and both suppressed hate and anger were in his 
voice : — 

" Ye had betther have a care wid me. I've crushed ye 
wance, an' I'll crush ye agin! Ye can shpake scornful 
yerself, bat mayhap the girrul would give a different 
answer." 

" Then, ye had betther hear her answer from herself. 
Norah ! Come here, daughter ! Come here ! " 

Norah rose, making an imperative sign to me to keep 
my seat, and with the bearing of an empress passed 
across to the door and stood beside her father. She 
took no notice whatever of her wooer. 

" What is it, father ? " 

"Now, Murdock, spake away! Say what ye have to 
say ; an' take yer answer from her own lips." Murdock 
spoke with manifest embarrassment : — 

"I've been tellin' yer father that I'd like ye for me 
wife ! " 

"I've heard all you said ! " 

" An' yer answer ? " 

" My father has answered for me ! " 

"But I want me answer from yer own lips. My! but 
it's the handsome girrul ye are this night ! " 

" My answer is ' No ! ' " and she turned to come 
back. 

" Shtay ! " Murdock' s voice was nasty, so nasty that 
instinctively I stood up. No person should speak like 
that to the woman I loved. Norah stopped. "I sup- 



murdock's wooing. 245 

pose ye won't luk at ine because ye have a young slipark 
on yer hands. I'm no fool ! an' I know why ye've been 
down in the Fields. I seen yez both more nor wance ; 
an' I'm makin' me offer knowin' what I know. I don't 
want to be too hard on ye, an' I'll say nothin' if ye 
dont dhrive me to. But remimber ye're in me power ; 
an' ye've got to plase me in wan way or another. I 
knew what I was doin' whin I watched ye wid yer 
young shpark! Ye didn't want yer father to see him 
nigh the house! Ye'd betther be careful, the both of 
ye. If ye don't intind to marry me, well, ye won't ; 
but mind how ye thrate me or shpake to me, here or 
where there's others by ; or be th' Almighty ! I'll send 
the ugly whisper round the counthry about ye " 

Flesh and blood could not stand this. In an instant 
I was out in the porch, and ready to fly at his throat ;^ 
but Norah put her arm between us. 

"Mr. Severn!" she said in a voice which there was no 
gainsaying, " my father is here. It is for him to pro- 
tect me here, if any protection is required from a thing 
like that ! " The scorn of her voice made even Murdock 
wince, and seemed to cool both Joyce and myself, and 
also Dick, who now stood beside us. 

Murdock looked from one to another of us for a 
moment in amazement, and then with a savage scowl, as 
though he were looking who and where to strike with 
venom, he fixed on Norah — God forgive him ! 

" An' so ye have him at home already, have ye ! An' 
yer father prisent too, an' a witness. It's the sharp 



246 THE snake's pass. 

girrul ye are, Norah Joyce, but I suppose this wan is 
not the first ! " I restrained myself simply because 
Norah's hand was laid on my mouth ; Murdock went 
on : — 

" An' so ye thought I wanted ye for yerself ! Oh no ! 
It's no bankrup's daughther for me; but I may as well 
tell ye why I wanted ye. It was because I've had in 
me hands, wan time or another, ivery inch iv this moun- 
tain, bit be bit, all except the Cliff Fields ; and thim I 
wanted for purposes iv me own — thim as knows why, 
has swore not to tell" — this with a scowl at Dick and 
me — " But I'll have thim yit ; an' have thim too widout 
thinkin' that me wife likes sthrollin' there wid sthrange 
min ! " 

Here I could restrain myself no longer; and to my 
joy on the instant — and since then whenever I have 
thought of it — Norah withdrew her hand as if to set me 
free. I stepped forward, and with one blow fair in the 
lips knocked the foul-mouthed ruffian head over heels. 
He rose in an instant, his face covered with blood, and 
rushed at me. This time I stepped out, and with an 
old football trick, taking him on the breast-bone with 
my open hand, again tumbled him over. He arose livid 
— but this time his passion was cold — and standing some 
yards off, said, whilst he wiped the blood from his 
face : — 

"Wait! Ye'll be sorry yit ye shtruck that blow! 
Aye ! ye'll both be sorry — sad an' sorry — an' for shame 
that ye don't reckon on ! Wait ! " — I spoke out : — 



murdock's wooing. 247 

" Wait ! yes, I shall wait, but only till the time conies 
to punish you. And let me warn you to be careful how 
you speak of this lady ! I have shown you already how I 
can deal with you personally ; next time — if there be a 
next time " Here Murdock interrupted sotto voce — 

" There '11 be a next time ; don't fear ! Be G-od but 
there will ! " I went on : — 

" I shall not dirty my hands with you but I shall 
have you in gaol for slander." 

"Gaol me, is it?" he sneered. "We'll see. An' so 
ye think ye' re going to marry a lady, whin ye make an 
honest woman iv Norah Joyce, do ye ? Luk at her ! 
an' it's a lady ye're goin' to make iv her, is it? An' 
thim hands iv hers, wid the marks iv the milkin' an' 
the shpade on to them. My! but they'll luk well 
among the quality ! won't they ? " I was going to 
strike him again, but Norah laid her hand on my arm ; 
so smothering my anger as well as I could, I said : — 

" Don't dare to speak ill of people whose shoes you 
are not worthy to black ; and be quick about your 
finishing your work at Shleenanaher, for you've got to 
go when the time is up. I won't have the place 
polluted by your presence a day longer than I can 
help." 

Norah looked wonderingly at me and at him, for he 
had given a manifest start. I went on : — 

" And as for these hands " — I took rTorah's hands in 
mine — " perhaps the time may come when you will pray 
for the help of their honest strength — pray with all the 



248 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

energy of your dastard soul! But whether this may be 
or not, take you care how you cross her path or mine 
again, or you shall rue it to the last hour of your life. 
Come, Norah, it is not fit that you should contaminate 
your eyes or your ears with the presence of this wretch !" 
and I led her in. As we went I heard Joyce say : — 

"An' listen to me! Niver you dare to put one foot 
across me mearin' again; or I'll take the law into me 
own hands ! " 

Then Dick spoke : — 

" An' hark ye, Mr. Murdock ! remember that you have 
to deal with me also in any evil that you attempt ! " 
Murdock turned on him savagely : — 

" As for you, I dismiss ye from me imploymint. Ye'll 
niver set foot on me land agin ! Away wid ye ! " 

" Hurrah ! " shouted Dick. " Mr. Joyce, you're my 
witness that he has discharged me, and I am free." Then 
he stepped down from the porch, and said to Murdock, 
in as exasperating a way as he could : — 

"And, dear Mr. Murdock, wouldn't it be a pleasure 
to you to have it out with me here, now? Just a 
simple round or two — to see which is the best man ? 
I am sure it would do you good — and me too ! I can 
see you are simply spoiling for a fight. I promise you 
that there will be no legal consequences if you beat 
me, and if I beat you I shall take my chance. Do 
let me persuade you ! Just one round ; " and he be- 
gan to take off his coat. Joyce, however, stopped him, 
king gravely : — 



murdock's wooing. 249 

" No ! Mr. Sutherland, not here ! and let me warn ye, 
for ye're a younger man nor me, agin such anger. I 
sthruck that man wance, an' it's sorry I am for that 
same ! No ! not that I'm afeered of him " — answering 
the query in Dick's face — " but because, for a full- 
grown man to sthrike in anger is a sarious thing. 
Arthur there sthruck not for himself, but for an affront 
to his wife that's promised, an' he's not to be blamed." 
Norah here took my arm and held it tight ; " but I 
say, wid that one blow that I've sthruck since I was 
a lad on me mind, ■ Never sthrike a blow in anger all 
yer life long, unless it be to purtect one ye love ! ' " 
Dick turned to him, and said heartily: — 

" You're quite right, Mr. Joyce, and I'm afraid I acted 
like a cad. Here ! you clear off ! Your very presence 
seems to infect better men than yourself, and brings 
them something nearer to your level. Mr. Joyce, forgive 
me ! I promise I'll take your good lesson to heart." 

They both came into the room ; and Norah and I 
looking out of the window — my arm being around her — 
saw Murdock pass down the path and out at the gate. 
We all took our places once again around the fire. 
When we sat down Norah instinctively put her hands 
behind her, as if to hide them — that ruffian's words 
had stung her a little ; and as I looked, without, how- 
ever, pretending to take any notice, I ground my 
teeth. But with Norah such an ignoble thought could 
be but a passing one ; with a quick blush she laid her 
hand open on my knee, so that, as the fire-light fell 



250 THE snake's pass. 

on it, it was shown in all its sterling beauty. I 
thought the opportunity was a fair one, and I lifted 
it to my lips and said : — 

" Norah ! I think I may say a word before your father 
and my friend. This hand — this beautiful hand," and 
I kissed it again, "is dearer to me a thousand times, 
because it can do, and has done, honest work ; and 
I only hope that in all my life I may be worthy of 
it." I was about to kiss it yet again, but Norah drew 
it gently away. Then she shifted her stool a little, and 
came closer to me. Her father saw the movement, and 
said simply : — 

" Go to him, daughter. He is worth it ! — he sthruck a 
good blow for ye this night." And so we changed places, 
and she leaned her head against my knee ; her other 
hand — the one not held in mine — rested on her father's 
knee. 

There we sat and smoked and talked for an hour or 
more. Then Dick looked at me and I at him, and we 
rose. Norah looked at me lovingly as we got our hats. 
Her father saw the look, and said : — 

" Come, daughter ! if you're not tired, suppose we 
see them down the boreen." 

A bright smile and a blush came in her face ; she 
threw a shawl over her head, and we went all together. 
She held her father's arm and mine ; but by-and-by 
the lane narrowed, and her father went in front with 
Dick, and we two followed. 

Was it to be wondered at, if we did lag a little behind 



murdock's wooing. 251 

them? — and if we spoke in whispers? — or, if now and 
again, when the lane curved and kindly bushes pro- 
jecting threw dark shadows, our lips met? 

When we came to the open space before the gate, 
we found Andy. He pretended to see only Dick and 
Joyce, and saluted them : — 

" Begor ! but it's the fine night, it is, Misther Dick, 
though more betoken the rain is comin' on agin soon. 
A fine night, Misther Joyce! and how's Miss Norah? — 
God bless her! Musha! but it's sorry I am that she 
didn't walk down wid ye this fine night ! An' poor 
Masther Art — I suppose the fairies has got him agin?" 
Here he pretended to just catch sight of me. " Yer 
'an'r, but it's the sorraful man I was — shure, an' I thought 
ye was tuk aff be the fairies — or, mayhap, it was houldin' 
a leprachaun that ye wor. An' my ! but there's Miss 
Norah, too, comin' to take care iv her father ! God bless 
ye, Miss Norah, Acushla ! — but it's glad I am to see 
ye ! " 

" And I'm always glad to see you, Andy," she said, 
and shook hands with him. 

Andy took her aside, and said, in a staccato whisper 
intended for us all : — 

" Musha ! Miss Norah, dear, may I ax ye some- 
thin'?" 

" Indeed you may, Andy. What is it ? " 

"Well, now, it's throubled in me mind I am about 
Masther Art — that young gintleman beyant ye, talkin' 
t' yer father!" the hypocritical villain pointed me out, 



252 THE snake's pass. 

as though she did not know me. I conld see in the 
moonlight the happy smile on her face as she turned 
towards me. 

" Yes, I see him ! " she answered. 

"Well, Miss Norah, the fairies got him on the top 
iv Knocknacar, and ivir since he's been wandherin' round 
lukin' fur wan iv thim. I thried to timpt him away be 
tellin' him iv nice girruls iv these parts — real girruls, not 
fairies. But he's that obstinate he wouldn't luk at wan 
iv thim — no, nor listen to me, ayther." 

" Indeed ! " she said, her eyes dancing with fun. 

" An', Miss Norah, dear, what kind iv a girrul d'ye 
think he wanted to find ? " 

" I don't know, Andy — what kind ? M 

"Oh, begor ! but it's meself can tell ye ! Shure, it's 
a long, yalla, dark girrul, shtreaky — like — like he knows 
what — not quite a faymale nagur, wid a rid petticoat, 
an' a quare kind iv an eye ! " 

"Oh, Andy ! " was all she said, as she turned to me 
smiling. 

" Get along, you villain ! " said I, and I shook my 
fist at him in fun; and then I took Norah aside, and 
told her what the "quare kind iv an eye" was that I 
had sought — and found. 

Then we two said "Good-night" in peace, whilst the 
others in front went through the gate. We took — 
afterwards — a formal and perfectly decorous farewell, 
only shaking hands all round, before Dick and I mounted 
the car. Andy started off at a gallop, and his " Git 



murdock's wooing. 253 

up, ye ould corncrake!" was lost in our shouts of ^.Good- 
bye ! " as we waved our hats. Looking back, we saw 
Norah's hands waving as she stood with her father's 
arm around her, and her head laid back against his 
shoulder, whilst the yellow moonlight bathed them from 
head to foot in a sea of celestial light. 

And then we sped on through the moonlight and the 
darkness alike, for the clouds of the coming rain rolled 
thick and fast across the sky. 

But for me the air was all aglow with rosy light, and 
the car was a chariot flying swiftly to the dawn ! 



254 



CHAPTEE XIV. 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 



The next day was Sunaay ; and after church I came over 
early to Knockcalltecrore, and had a long talk with Norah 
about her school project. We decided that the sooner 
she began the better — she because, as she at first 
alleged, every month of delay made school a less suitable 
place for her — I because, as I took care not only to 
allege but to reiterate, as the period had to be put in, 
the sooner it was begun the sooner it would end, and so 
the sooner would my happiness come. 

Norah was very sweet, and shyly told me that if such 
was my decided opinion, she must say that she too had 
something of the same view. 

"I do not want you to be pained, dear, by any delay," 
she said, " made by your having been so good to me ; 
and I love you too well to want myself to wait longer 
than is necessary," — an admission that was an intoxicat- 
ing pleasure to me. 

We agreed, that our engagement was, if not to be kept a 
secret, at least not to be spoken of unnecessarily. Her 
father was to tell her immediate relatives, so that there 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 255 

would not be any gossip at her absence, and I was to tell 
one or two of my own connexions — for I had no imme- 
diate relatives — and perhaps one or two friends who were 
rather more closely connected with me than those of my 
own blood. I asked to be allowed to tell also my solici- 
tor, who was an old friend of my father's, and who had 
always had more than merely professional relations with 
me. I had reasons of my own for telling him of the pur- 
posed change in my life, for I had important matters to 
execute through him, so as to protect Norah's future in 
case my own death should occur before the marriage was 
to take place. But of this, of course, I did not tell 
her. 

We had a happy morning together, and when Joyce 
came in we told him of the conclusion we had arrived 
at. He fully acquiesced ; and then, when he and I were 
alone, I asked him if he would prefer to make the arrange- 
ments about the schools himself or by some solicitor he 
would name, or that should all be done by my solicitor ? 
He told me that my London solicitor would probably 
know what to do better than anyone in his own part of 
the world ; and we agreed that I was to arrange it with 
him. 

Accordingly I settled with Norah that the next day 
but one I should leave for London, and that when I had 
put everything on a satisfactory footing I should return 
to Carnaclif, and so be for a little longer able to see 
my darling. Then I went back to the hotel to write 
my letters in time for post. 



256 THE snake's pass. 

That afternoon I wrote to my solicitor, Mr. Chapman, 
and asked him to have inquiries made, without the least 
delay, as to what was the best school in Paris to which 
to send a young lady, almost grown up, but whose edu- 
cation had been neglected. I added that I should be 
myself in London within two days of my letter, and would 
hope to have the information. 

That evening I had a long talk on affairs with Dick, 
and opened to him a project I had formed regarding 
Knockcalltecrore. This was that I should try to buy 
the whole of the mountain, right away from where the 
sandy peninsula united it to the mainland — for evi- 
dently it had ages ago been an isolated sea-girt rock- 
bound island. Dick knew that already we held a large 
part of it — Norah the Cliff Fields, Joyce the upper land 
on the sea side, and myself the part that I had already 
bought from Murdock. He quite fell in with the idea, 
and as we talked it over he grew more and more 
enthusiastic. 

"Why, my dear fellow," he said, as he stood up and 
walked about the room, "it will make the most lovely 
residence in the world, and will be a fine investment for 
you. Holding long leases, you will easily be able to 
buy the freehold, and then every penny spent will 
return many fold. Let us once be able to find the 
springs that feed the bog, and get them in hand, and 
we can make the place a paradise. The springs are evi- 
dently high up on the hill, so that we can not only get 
water for irrigating and ornamental purposes, but we 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 257 

can get power also ! Why, you can have electric light, 
and everything else yon like, at the smallest cost. And 
if it be, as I suspect, that there is a streak of limestone 
in the hill, the place might be a positive mine of wealth 
as well ! We have not lime within fifty miles, and if once 
we can quarry the stone here we can do anything. We 
can build a harbour on the south side, which would be 
the loveliest place to keep a yacht in that ever was known 
— quite big enough for anything in these parts — as safe 
as Portsmouth, and of fathomless depth. 

" Easy, old man ! " I cried, for the idea made me ex- 
cited too. 

" But I assure you Art, I am within the truth ! " 

"I know it, Dick — and now I want to come to busi- 
ness ! " 

" Eh ! how do you mean ? " he said, looking puzzled. 

Then I told him of the school project, and that I 
was going to London after another day to arrange it. 
He was delighted, and quite approved. 

" It is the wisest thing I ever heard of ! " was his com- 
ment. "But how do you mean about business?" he 
asked. 

" Dick, this has all to be done ; and it needs some 
one to do it. I am not a scientist nor an engineer, and 
this project wants the aid of both, or of one man who 
is the two. Will you do it for me — and for Norah?" 

He seemed staggered for a moment, but said heartily : 

" That I will — but it will take some time ! " 

" We can do it within two years," I answered, " and 



258 the sxake's pass. 

that is the time that Norah will be away. It will help 
to pass it ! " and I sighed. 

"A long time, indeed, but oh, what a time, Art! Just 
fancy what you are waiting for; there need be no un- 
happy moment, please God, in all those months." 

Then I made him a proposition, to which he, saying 
that my offer was too good, at first demurred. I rea- 
soned with him, and told him that the amount was 
little to me, as, thanks to my Great Aunt, I had more 
than I ever could use ; and that I wanted to make 
Norah's country home a paradise on earth — so far as love 
and work and the means at command could do it ; 
that it would take up all Dick's time, and keep him for 
the whole period from pursuing his studies ; and that he 
would have to be manager as well as engineer, and would 
have to buy the land for me. I told him also my 
secret hope that in time he would take all my affairs in 
hand and manage everything for me. 

" Buying the land will, I fancy, be easy enough," he 
said. " Two of the farms are in the market now, and 
all round here land is literally going abegging. However, 
I shall take the matter in hand at once, and write you 
to London, in case there should be anything before 
you get back." And thus we settled that night that 
I was, if possible, to buy the whole mountain. I wrote 
by the next post to Mr. Caicy, telling him that I had 
a project of purchase in hand, and that Mr. Sutherland 
would do everything for me during my absence, and 
that whatever he wished was to be done. I asked him 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 259 

to come over and see Dick before the week was 
out. 

The next day I spoke to Joyce, and asked him if he 
would care to sell me the lease of the land he now held. 
He seemed rejoiced at the chance of being able to get 
away. 

" I will go gladly, though, sure enough, I'll be sad 
for a while to lave the shpot where I was born, and 
where I've lived all me life. But whin Norah is gone — 
an' sure she'll never be back, for I'm thinkin' that after 
her school ye'll want to get married at once — " 

" That we shall ! " I interrupted. 

"An' right enough too! But widout her the place 
will be that lonesome that I don't think I could abear 
it! Me sister '11 go over to Knocknacar to live wid me 
married sister there, that'll be only too happy to have 
her with her ; and I'll go over to Glasgow where Eugene 
is at work. The boy wants me to come, and whin I wrote 
and tould him of Norah's engagement, he wrote at once 
askin' me to lave the Hill and come to him. He says 
that before the year is out he hopes to be able to keep 
himself — an' me, too, if we should want it — an' he wrote 
such a nice letter to Norah — but the girl will like to 
tell ye about that herself! I can't sell ye the Cliff 
Fields meself, for they belong to Norah ; but if ye like 
to ask her I'm sure she'll make no objection." 

" I should be glad to have them," I said, " but all 
shall be her's in two years ! " 

And then and there we arranged for the sale of the 



260 the snake's pass. 

property. I made Joyce the offer ; lie accepted at once, 
but said it was more than it was worth. 

" No," said I, "I shall take the chance ! I intend 
to make improvements." 

Norah did not make any objection to her father selling 
the Cliff Fields. She told me that as I wanted to have 
them, I might, of course ; but she hoped I would never 
sell the spot, as it was very dear to her. I assured her 
that in this as in all other matters I would do as she 

wished, and we sealed the assurance with . Never 

mind ! we sealed it ! 

I spent the afternoon there, for it was to be my last 
afternoon with Norah until I came back from Paris. 
We went down for a while to the Cliff Fields and sat 
on the table rock and talked over all our plans. I told 
her I had a scheme regarding Knockcalltecrore, but that 
I did not wish to tell her about it as it was to be a 
surprise. It needed a pretty hard struggle to be able 
to keep her in the dark even to this extent — there is 
nothing more sweet to young lovers than to share a 
secret. She knew that my wishes were all for her, and 
was content. 

When we got back to the cottage I said good-bye. 
This naturally took some time — a first good-bye always 
does ! — aod went home to get my traps packed ready 
for an early start in the morning — more especially as I 
wished, when in Galway, to give Mr. Caicy instructions 
as to transferring the two properties — Norah's and her 
father's. 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 261 

When Dick came home, he and I had a long talk on 
affairs; and I saw that he thoroughly understood all 
about the purchase of the whole mountain. Then we 
said good-night, and I retired. 

I did not sleep very well. I think I was too happy, 
and out of the completeness of my happiness there 
seemed to grow a fear — some dim haunting dread of a 
change — something which would reverse the existing 
order of things. And so in dreams the Drowsy God 
played at ball with me; now throwing me to a dizzy 
height of joy, and then, as I fell swiftly through dark- 
ness, arresting my flight into the nether gloom with some 
new sweet hope. It seemed to me that I was awake all 
the night — and yet I knew I must have slept for I had 
distinct recollections of dreams in which all the persons 
and circumstances lately present to my mind were 
strangely jumbled together. The jumble was kaleido- 
scopic; there was an endless succession of its phases, 
but the pieces all remained the same. There were 
moments when all seemed aglow with rosy light, and 
hard on them, others horrid with the gloom of despair or 
fear ; but in all, the dominating idea was the mountain 
standing against the sunset, always as the embodiment 
of the ruling emotion of the scene — and always Norah's 
beautiful eyes shone upon me. I seemed to live over 
again in isolated moments all the past weeks ; but in such 
a way that the legends and myths and stories of Knock - 
calltecrore which I had heard were embodied in each 
moment. Thus, Murdock had always a part in the 



262 THE snake's pass. 

gloomy scenes, and got inextricably mixed up with the 
King of the Snakes. They freely exchanged personalities, 
and at one time I could see the Gombeen Man defying 
St. Patrick, whilst at another the Serpent seemed to be 
struggling with Joyce, and, after twisting round the 
mountain, being only beaten off by a mighty blow from 
Koran's father, rushing to the sea through the Shlee- 
nanaher. 

Towards morning, as I suppose the needs of the waking 
day became more present to my mind in the gradual 
process of awakening, the bent of my thoughts began 
to be more practical ; the Saint and His Majesty of the 
Serpents began to disappear, and the two dim cuirassiers 
who, with the money chest, had through the earlier hours 
of the night been passing far athwart my dreams — appear- 
ing and disappearing equally mysteriously — took a more 
prominent, or, perhaps, a more real part. Then I seemed 
to see Murdock working in a grave, whose sides were ever 
crumbling in as he frantically sought the treasure chest, 
whilst the gun-carriage, rank with the slime of the bog, 
was high above him on the brink of the grave, projected 
blackly against the yellow moon. Every time this scene 
in its myriad variations came round, it changed to one 
where the sides of the grave began to tumble in, and 
Murdock in terror tried to scream out, but could make 
no sound, nor could he make any effort to approach 
Norah, whose strong hands were stretched out to aid 
him. 

With such a preparation for waking is it any wonder 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 263 

that I suddenly started broad awake with a strong sense 
of something forgotten, and found that it was four 
o'clock, and time to get ready for my journey. I did not 
lose any time, and after a hot cup of tea, which the 
cheery Mrs. Keating had herself prepared for me, was on 
my way under Andy's care to Eecess, where we were 
to meet the " long car " to G-alway. 

Andy was, for a wonder, silent, and as I myself felt in 
a most active frame of mind, this rather gave me an 
opportunity for some amusement. I waited for a while 
to see if he would suggest any topic in his usual style ; 
but as there was no sign of a change, I began : — 

" You are very silent to-day, Andy. You are sad ! 
What is it ? " 

" I'm thinkin' ! " 

"So I thought, Andy. But who are you thinking 
of?" 

" Faix, I'm thinkin* iv poor Miss Norah there wid 
ne'er a bhoy on the flure at all, at all ; an' iv the fairy 
girrul at Knocknacar — the poor craythur waitin' for some 
kind iv a leprachaun to come back to her. They do say, 
yer 'an'r, that the fairies is mighty fond iv thim 
leprachauns intirely. Musha ! but it's a quare thing 
that weemen of all natures thinks a power more iv min- 
kind what is hard to be caught nor iv thim that folly s 
thim an' is had aisy ! " 

" Indeed ! Andy." I felt he was getting on dangerous 
ground, and thought it would be as well to keep him to 
generalities if I could. 



264 the snake's pass. 

" Shure they do tell me so ; that the girruls, whether 
fairies or weernen, is more fond iv lukin' out fur 
leprachauns, or min if that's their kind, than the clargy 
is iv killin' the divil — an' they've bin at him fur thousands 
iv years, an' him not turned a hair." 

"Well! Andy, isn't it only natural, too? If we look 
at the girls and make love to them, why shouldn't they 
have a turn too, poor things, and make love to us ? 
Now you would like to have a wife, I know ; only that 
you're too much afraid of any woman." 

" Thrue for ye ! But shure an' how could I go dhrivin' 
about the counthry av I had a wife iv me own in wan 
place ? It's meself that's welkim everywhere, jist because 
any wan iv the weemen might fear I'd turn the laugh 
on her whin I got her home; but a car-dhriver can no 
more shpake soft to only wan girrul nor he can dhrive 
his car in his own shanty." 

"Well! but Andy, what would you do if you were to 
get married ? " 

" Faix, surr, an' the woman must settle that whin she 
comes. But, begor! it's not for a poor man like me — 
nor for the likes iv me — that the fairies does be keepin' 
their eyes out. I tell yer 'an'r that poor min isn't 
iv much account anyhow ! Shure poverty is the worst iv 
crimes ; an' there's no hidin' it like th' others. Patches 
is saw a mighty far way off ; and shure enough they're 
more frightfuller nor even the polis ! " 

"By G-eorge ! Andy," said I, "I'm afraid you're a 
cynic." 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 265 

"A cynic, sir; an', faix, what sin am I up to now?" 

" You say poverty is a crime." 

" Begor ! but it's worse ! Most crimes is forgave 
afther a bit ; an' the law is done wid ye whin ye're 
atin' yer skilly. But there's some people — aye ! an' 
lashins iv thim too — what 'd rather see ye in a good shute 
iv coffin than in a bad shute iv clothes ! " 

"Why, Andy, you're quite a philosopher!" 

" Bedad, that's quare ; but whisper me now, surr, what 
kind iv a thing's that ? " 

" Well ! it's a very wise man — one who loves 
wisdom." 

" Begor! yer 'an'r, lovin' girruls is more in my shtyle ; 
but I thought maybe it was some new kind iv a 
Protestan'." 

"Why a Protestant?" 

" Sorra wan iv me knows ! I thought maybe they 
can believe even less nor the ould wans." 

Andy's method of theological argument was quite too 
difficult for me, so I was silent ; but my companion was 
not. He, however, evidently felt that theological disqui- 
sition was no more his forte than my own, for he instantly 
changed to another topic : — 

" I'll be goin' back to Knockcalltecrore to-morra, yer 
'an'r. I've been tould to call fur Mr. Caicy, th' attorney — 
savin' yer prisence — to take him back to Carnaclif. Is 
there any missage ye'd like to send to any wan ? " He 
looked at me so slyly that his meaning was quite 
obvious. 



266 the snake's pass. 

" Thanks, Andy, but I think not ; unless you tell 
Mr. Dick that we have had a pleasant journey this 
morning." 

" Nothin' but that ?— to nobody ? " 

" Who to, for instance, Andy ? " 

"There's Miss Norah, now! Shure girruls is always 
fond iv gettin' missages, an' most iv all from people 
what they're not fond iv ! " 

" Meaning me ? " 

" Oh, yis ! oh, yis ! if there's wan more nor another 
what she hates the sight iv, it's yer 'an'r! Shure didn't 
1 notice it in her eye ere yistherday night, beyant at the 
boreen gate ? Faix ! but it's a nice eye Miss Norah has ! 
Now, yer 'an'r, wouldn't an eye like that be betther for a 
young gintleman to luk into, than the quare eye iv yer 
fairy girrul — the wan that ye wor lukin' for, an' didn't 
find ! " 

The sly way in which Andy looked at me as he said 
this was quite indescribable. I have seen sly humour in 
the looks of children where the transparent simplicity of 
their purpose was a foil to their manifest intention to 
pretend to deceive. I have seen the arch glances of 
pretty young women when their eyes contradicted with 
resistless force the apparent meaning of their words ; but 
I have never seen any slyness which could rival that of 
Andy. However, when he had spoken as above, he 
seemed to have spent the last bolt in his armoury ; 
and for the remainder of the drive to Recess he did not 
touch again on the topic, or on a kindred one. 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 26'7 

When I was in the hotel porch waiting the arrival of 
the long car, Andy came up to me : — 

" What day will I be in Galway for yer 'an'r ? " 
" How do you mean, Andy ? I didn't tell you I was 
coming back." 

Andy laughed a merry, ringing laugh : — 
" Begor ! yer 'an'r, d'ye think there's only wan way iv 
tellin' things ? Musha ! but spache 'd be a mighty pre- 
cious kind iv a thing if that was the way ! " 

"But, Andy, is not speech the way to make known 
what you wish other people to know ? " 

"Ah, go to God! I'd like to know if ye take it for 
granted whin ye ask a girrul a question an' she says ' no,' 
that she manes it — or that she intends ayther that ye 
should think she manes it. Faix ! it 'd be a harrd wurrld 
to live in, if that was so; an' there 'd be mighty few 
widdys in it ayther ! " 
" Why widows, Andy ? " 

" Shure, isn't wives the shtuff that widdys is made iv !" 
" Oh ! I see. I'm learning, Andy — I'm getting on ! " 
"Yis! yer 'an'r. Ye haven't got on the long cap now ; 
but I'm afeerd it's only a leather medal ye'd get as yit. 
Niver mind! surr. Here's the long car comin' ; an' whin 
ye tellygraph to Misther Dick to smd me over to Galway 
fur to bring ye back, I'll luk up Miss Norah an' ax her 
to condescind to give ye some lessons in the differ 
betwixt ' yes ' an' ' no ' as shpoke by girruls. I'm tould 
now, it's a mighty intherestin' kind iv a shtudy for a 
young gintleman ! " 



268 THE snake's pass. 

There was no answering this Parthian shaft. 

" Good-bye ! Andy," I said, as I left a sovereign in 
his hand. 

"Good luck! yer 'an'r; though what's the use iv wishin' 
luck to a man, whin the fairies is wid him!" 

The last thing I saw was Andy waving his ragged hat 
as we passed the curve of the road round the lake before 
Recess was hidden from our view. 

When I got to Galway I found Mr. Caicy waiting for 
me. He was most hearty in his welcome ; and told me 
that as there was nearly an hour to wait before the 
starting of the Dublin express, he had luncheon on the 
table, and that we could discuss our business over it. We 
accordingly adjourned to his house, and after explaining 
to him what I wanted done with regard to the purchase 
of the property at Knockcalltecrore, I told him that 
Dick knew all the details, and would talk them over with 
him when he saw him on the next evening. 

I began my eastward journey with my inner man 
in a most comfortable condition. Indeed, I concluded 
that there was no preparation for a journey like a 
bottle of ' Sneyd's 47 ' between two. I got to Dublin 
in time for the night mail, and on the following morn- 
ing walked into Mr. Chapman's office at half -past ten 
o'clock. 

He had all the necessary information for me ; 
indeed, his zeal and his kindness were such that then 
and there I opened my heart to him, and was right 
glad that I had done so when I felt the hearty grasp 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 269 

of his hand as he wished me joy and and all good 
fortune. He was, of course, on the side of prudence. 
He was my own lawyer and my father's friend ; and it 
was right and fitting that he should be. But it was 
quite evident that in the background of his musty life 
there was some old romance — musty old attorneys 
always have romances — so at least say the books. He 
entered heartily into my plan; and suggested that, if I 
chose, he would come with me to see the school and the 
schoolmistress in Paris. 

" It will be better, I am sure," he said, " to have 
an old man like myself with you, and who can in our 
negotiations speak for her father. Indeed, my dear boy, 
from being so old a friend of your father's, and having 
no children of my own, I have almost come to look 
on you as my son, so it will not be much of an effort 
to regard Miss Norah as my daughter. The school- 
mistress will, in the long run, be better satisfied with 
my standing in loco parentis than with your's." It 
was a great relief to me to find my way thus 
smoothed, for I had half expected some objection or 
remonstrance on his part. His kind offer was, of 
course, accepted ; and the next morning found us in 
Paris. 

We went to see the school and the schoolmistress. 
All was arranged as we wished. Mr. Chapman did 
not forget that Norah wished to have all the extra 
branches of study, or that I wished to add all that 
could give a charm to her life. The schoolmistress 



270 THE snake's pass. 

opened her eyes at the total of Koran's requirements, 
which Mr. Chapman summed up as " all extras " — the 
same including the use of a saddle-horse, and visits to 
the opera and such performances as should be approved 
of, under the special care and with the special accom- 
paniment of Madame herself. 

I could see that for the coming year Norah's lines would 
lie in pleasant places in so far as Madame Lepecheaux 
could accomplish it. The date of her coming was to 
be fixed by letter, and as soon as possible. 

Mr. Chapman had suggested that it might be well 
to arrange with Madame Lepecheaux that Norah 
should be able to get what clothes she might require^ 
and such matters as are wanted by young ladies of 
the position which she was entering. The genial French 
woman quite entered into the idea, but insisted that 
the representative of Norah's father should come with 
her to the various magasins and himself make arrange- 
ments. He could not refuse ; and as I was not for- 
bidden by the unsuspecting lady, I came too. 

These matters took up some time, and it was not 
until the fifth day after I had left Connemara that we 
were able to start on our return journey. We left at 
night, and after our arrival in the early morning went, 
as soon as we had breakfasted, to Mr. Chapman's office 
to get our letters. 

I found two. The first I took to the window to 
read, where I was hidden behind a curtain, and where 
I might kiss it without being seen ; for, although the 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 271 

writing was strange to me — for I had never seen her 
handwriting — I knew that it was from Norah. 

Do any of us who arrive at middle life ever attempt 
to remember our feelings on receiving the first letter 
from the woman or the man of our love ? Can there come 
across the long expanse of commonplace life, strewn as 
it is with lost beliefs and shattered hopes, any echo 
— any after-glow — of that time, any dim recollection 
of the thrill of pride and joy that flashed through us 
at such a moment? Can we rouse ourselves from the 
creeping lethargy of the contented acceptance of things, 
and feel the generous life-blood flowing through us 
once again ? 

I held Koran's letter in my hand, and it seemed as 
though with but one more step, I should hold my 
darling herself in my arms. I opened her letter most 
carefully ; anything that her hands had touched was 
sacred to me. And then her message — the message of 
her heart to mine — sent direct and without intermediary, 
reached me : — 

" My dear Arthur, — 

" I hope you had a good journey, and that 
you enjoyed your trip to Paris. Father and I are 
both well ; and we have had excellent news of Eugene, 
who has been promoted to more important work. We 
have seen Mr. Sutherland every day. He says that 
everything is going just as you wish it. Mr. Mur- 
dock has taken old Bat Moynahan to live with him 



272 THE snake's pass. 

since you went ; they are always together, and Moy- 
nahan seems to be always drunk. Father thinks that 
Mr. Murdock has some purpose on foot, and that it 
cannot be a good one. We shall all be glad to see 
you soon again. I am afraid this letter must seem 
very odd to you; but you know I am not accustomed 
to writing letters. You must believe one thing — that 
whatever I say to you, I feel and believe with all my 
heart. I got your letters, and I cannot tell you what 
pleasure they gave me, or how I treasure them. 
Father sends his love and duty. What could I send 
that words could carry ? I may not try yet. Perhaps I 
shall be more able to do what I wish, when I know more. 

" Noeah." 

The letter disappointed me ! Was any young man 
ever yet satisfied with written words, when his medium 
had hitherto been rosy lips, with the added commen- 
tary of loving eyes ? And yet when I look back on 
that letter from a peasant girl, without high education 
or knowledge of the world, and who had possibly never 
written a letter before except to her father or brother, 
or a girl friend, and but few even of these — when I 
read in every word its simplicity and truth, and recog- 
nise the arriere pensee of that simple phrase, " what- 
ever I say to you I feel and think with all my 
heart," I find it hard to think that any other letter 
that she or anyone else could have written, could have 
been more suitable, or could have meant more. 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 273 

When I had read Norah's letter over a few times, 
and feared that Mr. Chapman would take humorous 
notice of my absorbtion, I turned to the other letter, 
which I knew was from Dick. I brought this from 
the window to the table, beside which I sat to read it, 
Mr. Chapman being still deep in his own neglected corre- 
spondence. 

I need not give his letter in detail. It was long and 
exhaustive, and told me accurately of every step taken 
and everything accomplished since I had seen him. 
Mr. Caicy had made his appearance, as arranged, and 
the two had talked over and settled affairs. Mr. Caicy 
had lost no time, and fortune had so favoured him that 
he found that nearly all the tenants on the east side 
of the hill wished to emigrate, and so were anxious to 
realize on their holdings. The estate from which they 
held was in bankruptcy ; and as a sale was then being 
effected, Mr. Caicy had purchased the estate, and then 
made arrangements for all who wished to purchase to 
do so on easy terms from me. The nett result was, that 
when certain formalities should be complied with, and 
certain moneys paid, I should own the whole of Knockcall- 
tecrore and the land immediately adjoining it, together 
with certain other parcels of land in the neighbourhood. 
There were other matters of interest also inhis letter. He 
told me that Murdock, in order to spite and injure 
Joyce, had completed the damming up of the stream 
which ran from his land into the Cliff Fields by 
blocking with great stones the narrow chine in the 



274 THE snake's pass. 

rocks through which it fell ; that this, coupled with 
the continuous rains had made the bog rise enor- 
mously, and that he feared much there would be some 
disaster. His fear was increased by what had taken 
place at Knocknacar. Even here the cuttings had shown 
some direful effects of the rain ; the openings, made 
with so much trouble, had become choked, and as a 
consequence the bog had risen again, and had even 
spread downwards on its original course. Alarmed by 
these things, Dick had again warned Murdock of the 
danger in which he stood from the position of his 
house ; and further, from tampering with the solid 
bounds of the bog itself. Murdock had not taken his 
warnings in good part — not any better than usual — and 
the interview had, as usual, ended in a row. Murdock 
had made the quarrel the occasion of ventilating his 
grievance against me for buying the whole mountain, 
for by this time it had leaked out that I was the pur- 
chaser. His language, Dick said, was awful. He cursed 
me and all belonging to me. He cursed Joyce and 
Norah, and Dick himself, and swore to be revenged 
on us all, and told Dick that he would balk me of find- 
ing the treasure — even if I were to buy up all Ireland, 
and if he had to peril his soul to forestall me. Dick 
ended his description of his proceedings characteris- 
tically: — ''In fact, he grew so violent, and said such in- 
sulting things of you and others, that I had to give 
him a good sound thrashing." 

" Others " — that meant Norah, of course — good 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 275 

old Dick! It was just as well for Mr.. Murdock's 
physical comfort, and for the peace of the neighbour- 
hood, that I did not meet him then and there ; for, under 
these favouring conditions, there would have been a con- 
tinuance of his experiences under the hands of Dick 
Sutherland. 

Then Dick went on to tell me at greater length what 
Norah had conveyed in her letter — that, since I had left, 
Murdock had taken Bat Moynahan to live with him, and 
kept him continually drunk ; that the two of them were 
evidently trying to locate the whereabouts of the trea- 
sure; and that, whenever they thought they were not 
watched, they trespassed on Joyce's land, to get near a 
certain part of the bog. 

"I mean to watch them the first dark night," wrote 
Dick, at the close of his letter ; " for I cannot help 
thinking that there is some devilment on foot. I don't 
suppose you care much for the treasure — you've 
got a bigger treasure from Knockcalltecrore than ever 
was hidden in it by men — but, all the same, it is yours 
after Murdock's time is up; and, as the guardian of 
your interest, I feel that I have a right to do whatever 
may be necessary to protect you. I have seen, at times, 
Murdock give such a look at Moynahan out of the corners 
of his eyes — when he thought no one was looking — that, 
upon my soul, I am afraid he means — if he gets the chance 
— to murder the old man, after he has pumped him 
of all he knows. I don't want to accuse a man of such 
an intention, without being able to prove it, and of course 



2ft> THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

have said nothing to a soul ; but I shall be really more 
comfortable in my mind when the man has gone away." 

By the time I had finished the letter, Mr. Chapman 
had run through his correspondence — vacation business 
was not much in his way — and we discussed affairs. 

The settlement of matters connected with my estate, 
and the purchase of Knockcalltecrore, together with the 
making of certain purchases — including a ring for Norah 
— kept me a few days in London ; but at length all was 
complete, and I started on my trip to the West of 
Ireland. Before leaving, I wrote to Norah that I would 
be at Knockcalltecrore on the morning of the 20th Octo- 
ber ; and also to Dick, asking him to see that Andy 
was sent to meet me at Galway on the morning of the 
19th — for I preferred rather to have the drive in soli- 
tude, than to be subjected to the interruptions of chance 
fellow-passengers. 

At Dublin Mr. Caicy met me, as agreed ; and toge- 
ther we went to various courts, chambers, offices, and 
banks — completing the purchase with all the endless 
official formalities and eccentricities habitual to a country 
whose administration has traditionally adopted and 
adapted every possible development of all belonging to 
red-tape. 

At last, however, all was completed; and very early 
the next morning Mr. Caicy took his seat in the G-alway 
express, in a carriage with the owner of Knockcallte- 
crore, to whom he had been formally appointed Irish 
law agent. 



A TRIP TO PARIS. 277 

The journey was not a long one, and it was only twelve 
o'clock when we steamed into G-alway. As we drew up 
at the platform, I saw Dick, who had come over to meet 
me. He was, I thought, looking a little pale and anxious ; 
but as he did not say anything containing the slightest 
hint of any cause for such a thing, I concluded that he 
wished to wait until we were alone. This, however, was 
not to be for a little while ; for Mr. Caicy had telegraphed 
to order lunch at his house, and thither we had to repair. 
We walked over ; although Andy, who was in waiting 
outside the station, grinning from ear to ear, offered to 
" rowl our 'an 'rs over in half a jiffey." 

Lunch over, and our bodies the richer for some of Mr. 
Caicy' s excellent port, we prepared to start. Dick took 
occasion to whisper to me : — 

" Some time on the road propose to walk for a bit, 
and send on the car. I want a talk with you alone, 
without making a mystery ! " 

" All right, Dick. Is it a serious matter ? " 

" Very serious ! n 



278 



CHAPTEE XV. 

A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 

When, some miles on our road, we came to a long 
stretch of moorland, I told Andy to stop till we got 
off. This being done, I told him to go on and wait 
for us at the next house, as we wished to have a walk. 

" The nixt house ? " queried Andy, " the very nixt 
house ? Must it be that same ? " 

" No, Andy ! " I answered, " the next after that will 
do equally well, or the third if it is not too far off. 
Why do you want to change ? " 

" Well, yer 'an'r, to tell ye the thruth there's a girrul 
at the house bey ant what thinks it's a long time on the 
road I am widout doin' anythin' about settlin' down, 
an' that its time I asked her fortin, anyhow. Musha ! 
but it's afeerd I am to shtop there, fur maybe she'd 
take advantage iv me whin she got me all alone, an' 
me havin' to wait there till yez come. An' me so 
softhearted, that maybe I'd say too much or too little." 

" Why too much or too little ? " 

" Faix ! if I said too much I might be settled down 
before the month, was out ; an' if I said too little I 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 279 

might have a girrul lukin' black at me iv'ry time I 
dhruv by. The house beyant it is a public, an' shure I 
know I'm safe there anyhow — if me dhrouth'll only hould 
out!" 

I took the hint, and Andy spun my shilling in the 
air as he drove off. Dick and I walked together, and 
when he was out of earshot I said : — 

" Now, old fellow, we are alone ! What is it ? " 

"It's about Murdock." 

" Not more than you told me in your letter, I hope. I 
owe you a good turn for that thrashing you gave him ! " 

" Oh, that was nothing ; it was a labour of love ! 
What I want to speak of is a much more serious affair." 

" Nothing to touch Norah, I hope ? " I said anxiously. 

" This individual thing is not, thank God ! but every- 
thing which that ruffian can do to worry her or any of 
us will be done. We'll have to watch him closely." 

" What is this new thing ? " 

"It; is about old Moynahan. I am in serious doubt 
and anxiety as to what I should do. At present I have 
only suspicion to go on, and not the faintest shadow of 
proof, and I really want help and advice." 

"Tell me all about it." 

" I shall ! exactly as I remember it ; and when I have 
told you, you may be able to draw some conclusion 
which can help us." 

" Go on ! but remember I am, as yet, in ignorance of 
what it is all about. You must not take any know- 
ledge on my part for granted." 



280 THE snake's pass. 

"I'll bear it in mind. Well ! you remember what I 
said in my letter, that I had a suspicion of Murdock, 
and intended watching him ? " I nodded. " Two nights 
after I had written that, the evening was dark and wet — 
just the weather I would have chosen myself had I had 
any mysterious purpose on hand. As soon as it got 
dark I put on my black waterproof and fishing boots 
and a sou'wester, and then felt armed for any crouching 
or lying down that might be required. I waited out- 
side Murdock' s house in the laneway, where I could see 
from the shadows on the window that both men were 
in the house. I told you that old Bat Moynahan had 
taken up his residence entirely with the Gombeen 
Man " 

" And that he was always drunk ! " 

" Exactly ! I see you understand the situation. Pre- 
sently I heard a stumble on the stone outside the porch, 
and peeping in through the hedge I saw Murdock hold- 
ing up old Moynahan. Then he shut the door and 
they came down the path. The wind was by this time 
blowing pretty strongly, and made a loud noise in the 
hedgerows, and bore in the roar of the surf. Neither 
of the men could hear me, for I took care as I followed 
them to keep on the leeward side, and always with 
something between us. Murdock did not seem to have the 
slightest suspicion that any one was even on the hill side 
let alone listening, and he did not even lower his tone 
as he spoke. Moynahan was too drunk to either know 
or care how loud he spoke, and indeed both had to 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 281 

speak pretty loud in order to be heard through the 
sound of the growing storm. The rain fell in torrents, 
and the men passed down the boreen stumbling and 
slipping. I followed on the other side of the hedge, 
and I can tell you I felt grateful to the original 
Mackintosh, or Golosh, or whatever was the name of 
the Johnny who invented waterproof. When they had 
reached the foot of the hill, they went on the road which 
curves round by the south-east, and I managed to 
scramble through the fir wood without losing sight of 
them. When they came to the bridge over the stream, 
where it runs out on the north side of the Peninsula, 
they turned up on the far bank. I slipped over the bridge 
behind them, and got on the far side of the fringe of 
alders. Here they stopped and sheltered for a while, 
and as I was but a few feet from them I heard every 
word which passed. Murdock began by saying to 
Moynahan : — 

" ' Now, keep yer wits about ye, if ye can. Ye' 11 
get lashins iv dhrink whin we get back, but remimber 
ye promised to go over the ground where yer father 
showed ye that the Frinchmin wint wid the gun car- 
riage an' the horses. Where was it now that he tuk 
ye ? ' Moynahan evidently made an effort to think and 



" ' It was just about this shpot wheer he seen thim 
first. They crast over the sthrame — there wor no bridge 
thin nigher nor Galway — an' wint up the side iv the hill 
sthraight up.' 



282 the shake's pass. 

" ' Now, couldn't ye folia the way yer father showed 
ye? Jist think. It's all dark, and there's nothin' that 
ye know to confuse ye — no threes what has growed up 
since thin. Thry an' remimber, an' ye' 11 have lashins 
iv dhrink this night, an' half the goold whin we 
find it." 

" ' I can go ! I can show the shpot ! Come on. 5 He 
made a sudden bolt down into the river, which was 
running unusually high. The current almost swept him 
away ; but Murdock was beside him in a moment, cry- 
ing out : — 

" ' G-o an ! the wather isn't deep ! don't be afeerd ! 
I'm wid ye.' When I heard this I ran round and across 
the bridge, and was waiting behind the hedge on the 
road when they came up again. The two men went up 
the hill straight for perhaps a hundred yards, I still 
close to them ; then Moynahan stopped : — 

" ' Here's about the shpot me father tould me that 
he seen the min whin the moon shone out. Thin they 
went an 2 beyant,' and he pointed to the south. The 
struggle through the stream had evidently sobered him 
somewhat, for he spoke much more clearly. 

" ' Come on thin,' cried Murdock, and they moved off. 

" ' Here's wheer they wint to, thin,' said Moynahan, 
as he stopped on the south side of the hill — as I knew 
it to be from the louder sound of the surf which was 
borne in by the western gale. ' Here they wor, jist 
about here, an' me father wint away to hide from thim 
beside the big shtone at the Shleenanaher so that they 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 283 

wouldn't see him/ Then he paused, and went on in quite 
a different voice : — 

"There, now I've tould ye enough for wan night. 
Come home ! for it's chilled to the harrt I am, an' 
shtarved wid the cowld. Come home ! I'll tell no more 
this night.' The next sound I heard was the popping of 
a cork, and then the voice of Murdock in a cheery 
tone : — 

" ' Here, take a sup of this, ould man. It's chilled we 
both are, an' cramped wid cowld. Take a good dhraw, 
ye must want it if ye're as bad as I am ! ' The gurgle 
that followed showed that he had obeyed orders ; this 
was confirmed within an incredibly short time by his 
voice as he spoke again. 

" ' Me father hid there beyant. Come on ! ' We all, 
each in his own way, moved down to the Shleenanaher, 
and stood there. Moynahan spoke first. 

" '' From here, he seen them jist over the ridge iv the 
hill. I can go there now ; come on ! * He hurried up 
the slope, Murdock holding on to him. I followed, 
now crouching low, for there was but little shelter here. 
Moynahan stopped and said: — 

" ' It was just here ! ' 

" ' How do ye know ? ' asked Murdock doubtfully. 

" ' How do I know ! Hasn't me father been over the 
shpot wid me a score iv times ; aye, an' a hundhred times 
afore that be himself. It was here, I tell ye, that he 
seen the min wid the gun carriage for the last time. 
Do ye want to arguey it ? ' 



284 THE snake's pass. 

" * Not me ! ' said Murdock, and as he spoke T saw 
him stoop — for as I was at the time lying on the ground 
I could see his outline against the dark sky. He was 
looking away from me, and as I looked too I could see 
him start as he whispered to himself : — 

" ' Be God ! but it's thrue ! there's the gun carriage ! ' 
There it was ! Art, true enough before my eyes, not ten 
feet away on the edge of the bog ! Moynahan went on : — 

" ' Me father tould me that the mountain was different 
at that time ; the bog only kem down about as low as 
this. Musha! but its the quare lot it has shifted since 
thin ! ' There was a pause, broken by Murdock, who 
spoke in a hoarse, hard voice : — 

" ' An' where did he see them nixt ? ' Moynahan 
seemed to be getting drunker and drunker, as was 
manifest in his later speech; his dose of whiskey had 
no doubt been a good one. 

11 ' He seen them next to the north beyant — higher up 
towards Murdock' s house.' 

"* Towards Murdock's house! Ye mane Joyce's?' 

" * No, I mane Black Murdock's ; the wan he had be- 
fore he robbed Joyce. But begor ! he done himself ! It's 
on Joyce's ground the money is ! He's a nagur, any- 
how — Black Murdock the Gombeen — bloody end to him ! ' 
and he relapsed into silence. I could hear Murdock grind 
his teeth ; then after a pause he spoke as the bottle 
popped again. 

" ' Have a sup ; it'll kape out the cowld.' Moynahan 
took the bottle. 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 285 

" ' Here's death and damnation to Black Gombeen ! ■ 
and the gurgling was heard again. 

" ' Come ! now, show me the shpot where yer father 
last saw the min ! ' Murdock spoke authoritatively, and 
the other responded mechanically, and ran rather than 
walked along the side of the hill. Suddenly he stopped. 

" ' Here's the shpot ! ' he said, and incontinently tumbled 
down. 

" ' Git up ! Wake up ! ' shouted Murdock in his ear. 
But the whiskey had done its work ; the man slept, 
breathing heavily and stentoriously, heedless of the storm 
and the drenching rain. Murdock gathered a few stones 
and placed them together — I could hear the sound as 
they touched each other. Then he, too, took a pull at 
the bottle, and sat down beside Moynahan. I moved 
off a little, and when I came to a whin bush got behind 
it for a little shelter, and raising myself looked round. 
We were quite close to the edge of the bog, about half 
way between Joyce's house and Murdock' s, and well in 
on Joyce's land. I was not satisfied as to what Murdock 
would do, so I waited. 

" Fully an hour went by without any stir, and then I 
heard Murdock trying to awaken old Moynahan. I got 
down on the ground again and crawled over close to 
them. I heard Murdock shake the old man, and 
shout in his ear ; presently the latter awoke, and the 
Gombeen Man gave him another dose of whiskey. This 
seemed to revive him a little as well as to complete his 
awakening. 



286 THE snake's pass. 

" ' Musha ! but it's cowld I am ! ' he shivered. 

" ' Begor it is — git up and come home ! ' said Murdock, 
and he dragged the old man to his feet. 

" ' Hould me up, Murtagh,' said the latter, ' I'm that 
cowld I can't shtand, an' me legs is like shtones — I can't 
feel them at all, at all ! ' 

"'All right!' said the other, 'walk on a little bit 
— sthraight — as ye're goin' now — I'll just shtop to cork 
the bottle.' 

" From my position I could see their movements, and as 
I am a living man, Art ! I saw Murdock turn him with 
his face to the bog, and send him to walk straight to 
his death ! " 

" Good Grod ! Dick — are you quite certain ? " 

" I haven't the smallest doubt on my mind. I wish 
I could have, for it's a terrible thing to remember ! 
That attempt to murder in the dark and the storm, 
comes between me and sleep ! Moreover, Murdoch's 
action the instant after showed only too clearly what 
he intended. He turned quickly away, and I could 
hear him mutter as he moved past me on his way 
down the hill : — 

" ' He'll not throuble me now — curse him ! an' his share 
won't be required,' and then he laughed a low horrible 
laugh, slow and harsh, and as though to himself ; and I 
heard him say : — 

" ' An' whin I do get the chist, Miss Norah, ye'll be the 
nixt !'" 

My blood began to boil as I heard of the villain's 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 287 

threat : — " Where is lie Dick ? He must deal with me 
for that." 

" Steady, Art! steady!" and Dick laid his hand on me. 

" Go on ! " I said. 

" I couldn't go after him, for I had to watch Moynahan, 
whom I followed close, and I caught hold of as soon as 
I thought Murdock was too far to see me. I was only 
just in time, for as I touched him he staggered, lurched 
forward, and was actually beginning to sink in the bog 
It was at one of those spots where the rock runs sheer 
down into the morass. It took all my strength to pull 
him out, and when I did get him on the rock he sank 
down again into his drunken sleep. I thought the 
wisest thing I could do was to go to Joyce's for help ; and 
as, thanks to my experiments with the magnets all those 
weeks, I knew the ground fairly well, I was able to 
find my way — although the task was a slow and difficult 
one. 

When I got near I saw a light at the window. My 
rubber boots, I suppose, and the plash of the falling 
rain dulled my footsteps, for as I drew near I could 
see that a man was looking in at the window, but he did 
not hear me. I crept up behind the hedge and watched 
him. He went to the door and knocked — evidently net 
for the first time ; then the door was opened, and I 
could see Joyce's figure against the light that came from 
the kitchen. 

" ' Who's there ? What is it ? * he asked. Then 
I heard Murdock' s voice : — 



288 THE snake's pass. 

" ' I'm lookin' for poor ould Moynahan. He was out 
on the hill in the evenin', but he hasn't kem home, 
an' I'm anxious about him, for he had a sup in him, 
an' I fear he may have fallen into the bog. I've been 
out lukin' for him, but I can't find him. I thought he 
might have kem in here.' 

" ' No, he has not been here. Are you sure he was on 
the hill ? ' 

" ' Well, I thought so — but what ought I to do ? I'd 
be thankful if ye'd advise me. Be the way, what o'clock 
might it be now ? ' 

" Norah, who had joined her father, ran in and looked 
at the clock. 

" ' It is just ten minutes past twelve,' she said. 

" ' I don't know what's" to be done,' said Joyce. 
' Could he have got to the shebeen ? ' 

" ' That's a good idea ! I suppose I'd betther go there 
an' luk afther him. Ye see, I'm anxious about him, for 
he's been livin' wid me, an' if any thin' happened to him, 
people might say I done it! ' 

" ' That's a queer thing for him to say ! ' said Norah 
to her father. 

"Murdock turned on her at once. 

" ' Quare thing — no more quare than the things they'll 
be say in' about you before long.' 

" ' What do you mean ? ' said Joyce, coming out. 

"'Oh, nawthin', nawthin' ! I must look for Moyna- 
han.' And without a word he turned and ran. Joyce 
and Norah went into the house. When Murdock had 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT 289 

quite gone I knocked at the door, and Joyce came out 
like a thunderbolt. 

" ' I've got ye now ye ruffian ' — he shouted — ' what 
did ye mean to say to me daughter ? ' but by this time I 
stood in the light, and he recognized me. 

" ' Hush ! ' I said, ' let me in quietly ' — and when I 
passed in we shut the door. Then I told them that I 
had been out on the mountain, and had found Moynahan. 
I told them both that they must not ask me any questions, 
or let on to a soul that I had told them anything — that 
much might depend on it — for I thought, Art, old chap, 
that they had better not be mixed up in it, however the 
matter might end. So we all three went out with a 
lantern, and I brought them to where the old man was 
asleep. We lifted him, and between us carried him 
to the house ; Joyce and I undressed him and put him 
in bed, between warm blankets. Then I came away 
and went over to Mrs. Kelligan's, where I slept in a 
chair before the fire. 

" The next morning when I went up to Joyce's I 
found that Moynahan was all right — that he hadn't 
even got a cold, but that he remembered nothing what- 
ever about his walking into the bog. He had even 
expressed his wonder at seeing the state his clothes 
were in. When I went into the village I found that 
Murdock had been everywhere and had told every- 
one of his fears about Moynahan. I said nothing of 
his being safe, but tried quietly to arrange matters so 
that I might be present when Murdock should set his 



290 THE snake's pass. 

eyes for the first time on the man he had tried to murder. 
I left him with a number of others in the shebeen, and 
went back to bring Moynahan, but found, when I got to 
Joyce's that he had already gone back to Murdock's 
house. Joyce had told him, as we had arranged, that 
when Murdock had come asking for him he had been 
alarmed, and had gone out to look for him ; had found 
him asleep on the hill- side, and had brought him home 
with him. As I found that my scheme of facing Murdock 
with his victim was frustrated, I took advantage of 
Murdock's absence to remove the stones which he had 
placed to mark the spot where the treasure was last seen. 
I found them in the form of a cross, and moving them, 
replaced them at a spot some distance lower down the 
line of the bog. I marked the place, however, with a 
mark of my own — four stones put widely apart at the 
points of a letter Y — the centre marking the spot where 
the cross had been. Murdock returned to his house 
not long after, and within a short time ran down 
to tell that Moynahan had found his way home, and 
was all safe. They told me that he was then white 
and scared-looking." Here Dick paused : — 

" Now, my difficulty is this. I know he tried to 
murder the man, but I am not in a position to prove 
it. No man could expect his word to be taken in such 
a matter and under such circumstances. And yet I am 
morally certain that he intends to murder him still. 
What should I do ? To take any preventive steps 
would involve making the charge which I cannot prove. 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 291 

As yet neither of the men has the slightest suspicion 
that I am concerned in the matter in any way — or that 
I even know of it. Now may I not be most useful by 
keeping a watch and biding my time ? " 

I thought a moment, but there seemed to be only one 
answer : — 

" You are quite right, Dick ! We can do nothing just 
at present. We must keep a sharp look out, and get 
some tangible evidence of his intention — something that 
we can support — and then we can take steps against him. 
As to the matter of his threat to harm Norah, I shall 
certainly try to bring that out in a way we can prove, 
and then he shall have the hottest corner he ever thought 
of in his life." 

" Quite right that he should have it, Art ; but we must 
think of her too. It would not do to have her name 
mixed up with any gossip. She will be going away 
very shortly, I suppose, and then his power to hurt her 
will be nil. In the mean time everything must be done 
to guard her." 

"I shall get a dog — a good savage one — this very 
day ; that ruffian must not be able to even get near the 
house again " Dick interrupted me: — 

"Oh, I quite forgot to tell you about that. The very 
day after that night I got a dog and sent it up. It is 
the great mastiff that Meldon, the dispensary doctor, had 
— the one that you admired so much. I specially asked 
Norah to keep it for you, and train it to be always with 
her. She promised that she would always feed him 



292 THE snake's pass. 

herself and take him about with her. I am quite sure 
she understood that he was to be her protector." 

" Thank you, Dick," I said, and I am sure he knew I 
was grateful. 

By this time we had come near the house, outside 
which the car stood. Andy was inside, and evidently did 
not expect our coming so soon, for he sat with a mea- 
sure of stout half emptied before him on the table, and 
on each of his knees sat a lady — one evidently the mother 
of the other. As we appeared in the doorway he started 
up. 

" Be the powdhers, there's the masther ! Grit up, 
acushla !" — this to the younger woman, for the elder had 
already jumped up. Then to me : — 

"Won't ye sit down, yer 'an'r — there's only the wan 
chair, so ye see the shifts we're dhruv to, whin there's 
three iv us. I couldn't put Mrs. Dempsey from off iv 
her own shtool, an' she wouldn't sit on me knee alone 
— the dacent woman ! — so we had to take the girrul on 
too. They all sit that way in these parts ! " The latter 
statement was made with brazen openness and shameless 
effrontery. I shook my finger at him : — 

" Take care, Andy. You'll get into trouble one of these 
days ! " 

"Into throuble ! for a girrul sittin' on me knee ! Begor! 
the Govermint'll have to get up more coorts and more 
polis if they want to shtop that ould custom. An' 
more betoken, they'll have to purvide more shtools, too. 
Mrs. Dempsey, whin I come round agin, mind ye kape 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 293 

a govermint shtool for me ! Here's the masther wouldn't 
let any girrul sit on any wan's knee. Begor! not 
even the quality nor the fairies ! All right, yer 'an'r, 
the mare's quite ready. Good-bye, Mrs. Dempsey. Don't 
forgit the shtool — an' wan too for Biddy! Gee up, ye 
ould corncrake ! " and so we resumed our journey. 

As we went along Dick gave me all details regarding 
the property which he and Mr. Caicy had bought for me. 
Although I had signed deeds and papers without num- 
ber, and was owner in the present or in future of the 
whole hill, I had not the least idea of either the size or 
disposition of the estate. Dick had been all over it, and 
was able to supply me with every detail. As he went on 
he grew quite enthusiastic — everything seemed to be even 
more favourable than he had at first supposed. There 
was plenty of clay^; and he Suspected that in two or three 
places there was pottery clay, such as is found chiefly in 
Cornwall. There was any amount of water ; and when we 
should be able to control the whole hill and regulate 
matters as we wished, the supply would enable us to do 
anything in the way of either irrigation or ornamental 
development. The only thing we lacked, he said, was 
limestone, and he had a suspicion that limestone was to 
be found somewhere on the hill. 

" I cannot but think," said he, " that there must be a 
streak of limestone somewhere. I cannot otherwise ac- 
count for the subsidence of the lake on the top of the 
hill. I almost begin to think that that formation of 
rock to which the Snake's Pass is due runs right through 



294 THE snake's pass. 

the hill, and that we shall find that the whole top of 
it has similar granite cliffs, with the hollow between 
them possibly filled in with some rock of one of the later 
formations. However, when we get possession I shall 
make accurate search. I tell you, Art, it will well 
repay the trouble if we can find it. A limestone quarry 
here would be pretty well as valuable as a gold mine. 
Nearly all these promontories on the western coast of 
Ireland are of slate or granite, and here we have not 
got lime within thirty miles. With a quarry on the 
spot, we can not only build cheap and reclaim our own 
bog, but we can supply five hundred square miles of 
country with the rudiments of prosperity, and at a 
nominal price compared with what they pay now ! " 

Then he went on to tell me of the various arrange- 
ments effected — how those who wished to emigrate were 
about to do so, and how others who wished to stay were 
to have better farms given them on what we called " the 
mainland " ; and how he had devised a plan for building 
houses for them — good solid stone houses, with proper 
offices and farmyards. He concluded what seemed to 
me like a somewhat modified day-dream : — 

"And if we can find the limestone — well! the im- 
provements can all be done without costing you a 
penny; and you can have around you the most pros- 
perous set of people to be found in the country." 

In such talk as this the journey wore on till the even- 
ing came upon us. The day had been a fine one — one of 
those rare sunny days in a wet autumn. As we went I 



A MIDNIGHT TREASURE HUNT. 295 

could see everywhere the signs of the continuous rains. 
The fields were sloppy and sodden, and the bottoms 
were flooded; the bogs were teeming with water; the 
roads were washed clean — not only the mud but even the 
sand having been swept away, and the road metal was 
everywhere exposed. Often, as we went along, Dick took 
occasion to illustrate his views as to the danger of the 
shifting of the bog at Knockalltecrore by the evidence 
around us of the destructive power of the continuous 
rain. 

When we came to the mountain gap where we got our 
first and only view of Knockalltecrore from the G-alway 
road, Andy reined in the mare, and turned to me, pointing 
with his whip: — 

"There beyant, yer 'an'r, is Knockalltecrore — the hill 
where the threasure is. They do say that a young 
English gintleman has bought up the hill, an' manes 
to git the threasure for himself. Begor ! perhaps he has 
found it already. Here ! Gee up ! ye ould corncrake ! 
What the divil are ye kapin' the quality waitin' for?" 
and we sped down the road. 

The sight of the hill filled me with glad emotion, and 
I do not think that it is to be wondered at. And yet 
my gladness was followed by an unutterable gloom — a 
gloom that fell over me the instant after my eyes took in 
the well-known hill struck by the falling sunset from the 
west. It seemed to me that all had been so happy and 
so bright and so easy for me, that there must be in store 
some terrible shock or loss to make the balance even, and, 



296 THE snake's pass. 

to reduce my satisfaction with life to the level above 
which man's happiness may not pass. 

There was a curse on the hill! I felt it and realized 
it at that moment for the first time. I suppose I must 
have shown something of my brooding fear in my face, 
for Dick, looking round at me after a period of silence, 
said suddenly : — 

" Cheer up Art, old chap ! Surely you, at any rate, 
have no cause to be down on your luck ! Of all men that 
live, I should think you ought to be about the very 
happiest ! " 

" That's it, old fellow," I answered. " I fear that 
there must be something terrible coming. I shall never 
be quite happy till Norah and all of us are quite away 
from the Hill." 

" What on earth do you mean ? Why, you have just 
bought the whole place ! " 

" It may seem foolish, Dick ; but the words come back 
to me and keep ringing in my ears — ' The Mountain 
holds — and it holds tight.' " Dick laughed : — 

" Well, Art, it is not my fault, or Mr. Caicy's, if you 
don't hold it tight. It is yours now, every acre of it ; 
and, if I don't mistake, you are going to make it in time 
— and not a long time either — into the fairest bower to 
which the best fellow ever brought the fairest lady ! 
There now, Art, isn't that a pretty speech?" 

Dick's words made me feel ashamed of myself, and 
I made an effort to pull myself together, which lasted 
until Dick and I said good-night. 



297 



CHAPTEK XVI 



A GRIM WARNING. 



I cannot say the night was a happy one. There were 
moments when I seemed to lose myself and my own 
anxieties in thoughts of Norah and the future, and such 
moments were sweet to look back on — then as they are 
now ; but I slept only fitfully and dreamt frightfully. 

It was natural enough that my dreams should centre 
around Knockcalltecrore ; but there was no good reason 
why they should all be miserable or terrible. The 
Hill seemed to be ever under some uncomfortable or un- 
natural condition. When my dreams began, it was 
bathed in a flood of yellow moonlight, and at its summit 
was the giant Snake, the jewel of whose crown threw 
out an unholy glare of yellow light, and whose face and 
form kept perpetually changing to those of Murtagh 
Murdock. 

I can now, with comparatively an easy effort, look back 
on it all, and disentangle or give a reason for all the 
phases of my thought. The snake " wid side whiskers " 
was distinctly suggested the first night I heard the legend 
at Mrs. Kelligan's ; the light from the jewel was a part 



298 THE snake's pass. 

of the legend itself ; and so on with every fact and inci- 
dent. Presently, as I dreamt, the whole Mountain seemed 
to writhe and shake as though the great Snake was circling 
round it, deep under the earth ; and again this movement 
changed into the shifting of the bog. Then through dark 
shadows that lay athwart the hill I could see the French 
soldiers, with their treasure-chest, pass along in dusky, 
mysterious silence, and vanish in the hill side. I saw 
Murdock track them ; and, when they were gone, he and 
old Moynahan — who suddenly and mysteriously appeared 
beside him — struggled on the edge of the bog, and, with 
a shuddering wail, the latter threw up his arms and sank 
slowly into the depths of the morass. Again Norah 
and I were wandering together, when suddenly Mur- 
dock' s evil face, borne on a huge serpent body, writhed 
up beside us ; and in an instant Norah was whirled from 
my side and swept into the bog, I being powerless to 
save her or even help her. 

The last of all my dreams was as follows : — Norah 
and I were sitting on the table rock in the Cliff Fields ; 
all was happy and smiling around us. The sun shone 
and the birds sang, and as we sat hand in hand, the 
beating of our hearts seemed a song also. Suddenly 
there was a terrible sound — half a roar, as of an 
avalanche, and half a fluttering sound, as of many great 
wings. We clung together in terror, waiting for the 
portent which was at hand. And then over the cliff 
poured the whole mass of the bog, foul- smelling, foetid, 
terrible, and of endless might. Just as it was about 



A GRIM WARNING. 299 

to touch us, and as I clasped Norah to me, so that we 
might die together, and whilst her despairing cry was 
in my ear, the whole mighty mass turned into loath- 
some, writhing snakes, sweeping into the sea! 

I awoke with a scream which brought nearly every one 
in the hotel into my bedroom. Dick was first, and found 
me standing on the floor, white and drunk with terror. 

" What is it, old fellow ? — oh ! I see, only a nightmare ! 
Come on ! he's all right ; it's only a dream ! " and almost 
before I had realized that the waking world and not the 
world of shadows was around me, the room was cleared 
and I was alone. I lit a candle and put on some clothes ; 
as it was of no use trying to sleep again after such an 
experience, I got a book and resolutely set to reading. 
The effort was successful, as such efforts always are, and 
I quite forgot the cause of my disturbance in what I 
read. Then the matter itself grew less interesting .... 

There was a tap at my door. I started awake — it 
was broad daylight, and the book lay with crumpled 
leaves beside me on the floor. It was a message to tell 
me that Mr. Sutherland was waiting breakfast for me. I 
called out that I would be down in a few minutes, which 
promise I carried out as nearly as was commensurate with 
the requirements of the tub and the toilet. I found Dick 
awaiting me; he looked at me keenly as I came in, 
and then said heartily: — 

"I see your nightmare has not left any ill-effects. I 
say! old chap, it must have been a whopper — a regular 
Derby winner among nightmares — worse than Andy's old 



300 THE snake's pass. 

corncrake. You yelled fit to wake the dead. I would 
have thought the contrast "between an ordinary night 
and the day you are going to have would have been 
sufficient to satisfy anyone without such an addition to 
its blackness." Then he sung out in his rich voice t — 

" Och, Jewel, kape dhramin' that same till ye die, 
For bright mornin' will give dirty night the black lie." 

We sat down to breakfast, and I am bound to say, from 
the trencher experience of that meal, that there is nothing 
so fine as an appetiser for breakfast, as a good preliminary 
nightmare. 

We drove off to Knockcalltecrore. When we got to 
the foot of the hill we stopped as usual. Andy gave me 
a look which spoke a lot, but he did not say a single 
word — for which forbearance I owed him a good turn. 
Dick said: — 

" I want to go round to the other side of the hill, 
and shall cross over the top. I shall look you up, if 
I may, at Joyce's about two o'clock." 

"All right," I said; "we shall expect you," and I 
started up the hill. 

When I got to the gate, and opened it, there was a 
loud, deep barking, which, however, was instantly stilled. 
I knew that Norah had tied up the mastiff, and I went 
to the door. I had no need to knock; for as I came 
near, it opened, and in another instant Norah was in 
my arms. She whispered in my ear when I had kissed 
her : — 



A GRIM WARNING. 301 

"I would like to have come out to meet you, but I 
thought you would rather meet me here ! " Then, as we 
went into the sitting-room, hand-in-hand, she whispered 
again : — 

" Aunt has gone to buy groceries, so we are all alone. 
You must tell me all about everything." 

We sat down close together, still hand-in-hand, and 
I told her all that we had done since I had left. When 
I had finished the Paris part of the story, she put up 
her hands before her face, and I could see the tears drop 
through her fingers. 

" Norah ! . Nbrah ! Don't cry, my darling ! What is 
it?" 

u Oh, Arthur, I can't help it ! It is so wonderful — 
more than all I ever longed or wished for ! " Then she 
took her hands away, and put them in mine, and looked 
me bravely in the face, with her eyes half -laughing and 
half-crying, and her cheeks wet, and said: — 

"Arthur, you are the Fairy Prince ! There is nothing 
that I can wish for that you have not done — even my 
dresses are ready by your sweet thou ghtfuln ess. It needs 
an effort, dear, to let you do all this — but I see it is quite 
right — I must be dressed like one who is to be your wife. 
I shall think I am pleasing you afresh, every time I put 
one of them on ; but I must pay for them myself. You 
know I am quite rich now. I have all the money you 
paid for the Cliff Fields; father says it ought to go in 
such things as will fit me for my new position, and will 
not hear of taking any of it." 



302 THE snake's pass. 

" He is quite right, Norah, my darling — and you are 
quite right, too — all shall be just as you wish. Now 
tell me all about everything since I went away." 

" May I bring in Turco ? he is so quiet with me ; and 
he must learn to know you and love you, or he wouldn't 
be any friend of mine." She looked at me lovingly, and 
went and brought in the mastiff, by whom I was forth- 
with received into friendship. 

That was indeed a happy day ! We had a family 
consultation about the school ; the time of beginning 
was arranged, and there was perfect accord amongst us. 
As Dick and I drove back through the darkness, I 
could not but feel that, even if evil were looming ahead 
of us, at least some of us had experienced what it is to 
be happy. 

It had been decided that after a week's time — on the 
28th October — Norah was to leave for school. Her 
father was to bring her as far as London, and Mr. Chap- 
man was to take her over to Paris. This was Joyce's 
own wish ; he said : — 

" 'Twill be betther for ye, darlin', to go widout me. 
Ye' 11 have quite enough to do for a bit, to keep even 
wid the girls that have been reared in betther ways 
nor you, widout me there to make little iv ye." 

" But, father," she remonstrated, " I don't want to 
appear any different from what I am ! And I am too 
fond of you, and too proud of you, not to want to appear 
as your daughter." 

Her father stroked her hair gently as he answered : — 



A GRIM WARNING. 303 

" Norah ! my darlin', it isn't that. Ye've always been 
the good and dutiful daughter to me ; an' in all your pretty 
life there's not wan thing I wish undone or unsaid. But 
I'm older than you, daughter, an' I know more iv the 
world ; an' what I say, is best for ye— now, and in yer 
future. I'm goin' to live wid Eugene ; an' afther a while 
I suppose I, too, '11 be somethin' different from what I 
am. An' thin, whin I've lived awhile in a city, and got 
somethin' of city ways, I'll come an' see ye, maybe. Ye 
must remimber, that it's not only of you we've to think, 
but of th' other girls in the school. I don't want to have 
any of them turnin' up their noses at ye — that's not 
the way to get the best out iv school, me dear ; for I sup- 
pose school is like everywhere else in the world — the 
higher ye're able to hould yer head, the more others '11 
look up to ye ! " 

His words were so obviously true, that not one of 
us had a word to say, and the matter was acquiesced in 
nem. con. I myself got leave to accompany the party as 
far as London — but not beyond. It was further arranged 
that Joyce should take his daughter to Galway, to get 
some clothes for her — just enough to take her to Paris 
— and that when in Paris she should have a full outfit 
under the direction of Madame Lepechaux. They were 
to leave on Friday, so as to have the Saturday in Galway ; 
and as Norah wanted to say good-bye on the Sunday 
to old schoolfellows and friends in the convent, they 
would return on Monday, the 25th October. Accord- 
ingly, on the morning after next, Joyce took a letter 



304 the snake's pass. 

for me to Mr. Caicy, who was to pay to him whatever 
portion of the purchase-money of his land he should 
require, and whom I asked to give all possible assistance 
in whatever matters either he or Norah might desire. 
I would have dearly liked to have gone myself with them, 
but the purpose and the occasion were such that I could 
not think of offering to go. On the day fixed they left 
on the long car from Carnaclif. They started in torrents 
of rain, but were as well wrapped up as the resources 
of Dick and myself would allow. 

When they had gone, Dick and I drove over to Knock - 
calltecrore. Dick wished to have an interview with Mur- 
dock, regarding his giving up possession of the land on 
the 27th, as arranged. 

We left Andy as usual at the foot of the hill, and went 
up to Murdock's house. The door was locked ; and al- 
though we knocked several times, we could get no answer. 
We came away, therefore, and went up the hill, as 
Dick wished me to see where, according to old Moynahan, 
was the last place at which the Frenchmen had been seen. 
As we went on and turned the brow of the mound, which 
lay straight up — for the bog-land lay in a curve round 
its southern side — we saw before us two figures at the 
edge of the bog. They were those of Murdock and old 
Moynahan. When we saw who they were, Dick whis- 
pered to me : — 

" They are at the place to which I changed the mark, 
but are still on Joyce's land." 

They were working just as Dick and I had worked 



A GRIM WARNING. 305 

with Murdock, when we had recovered the gun-carriage, 
and were so intent on the work at which they toiled 
with feverish eagerness, that they did not see us coming ; 
and it was only when we stood close beside them that 
they were conscious of our presence. Murdock turned 
at once with a scowl and a sort of snarl. When he saw 
who it was, he became positively livid with passion, and 
at once began to bombard us with the foulest vitupera- 
tion. Dick pressed my arm, as a hint to keep quiet and 
leave the talking to him, and I did nothing ; but he 
opposed the Gombeen Man's passion with an unruffled 
calm. Indeed, he seemed tome to want even to exasperate 
Murdock to the last degree. When the latter paused 
for a second for breath, he quietly said: — 

" Keep your hair on, Murdock ! and just tell me quietly 
why you are trespassing ; and why, and what, you are 
trying to steal from this property?" 

Murdock made no answer, so Dick went on : — 

" Let me tell you that I act for the owner of this land, 
who bought it as it is, and I shall hold you responsible for 
your conduct. I don't want to have a row needlessly, 
so if you go away quietly, and promise to not either 
trespass here again, or try to steal anything, I shall not 
take any steps. If not, I shall do as the occasion 
demands." 

Murdock answered him with the most manifestly 
intentional insolence : — 

"You! ye tell me to go away! I don't ricognize ye 
at all. This land belongs to me frind, Mr. Joyce, an' 
x 



306 the snake's pass. 

I shall come on it whin I like, and do as I like. Whin 
me frind tells me not to come here, I shall shtay away. 
Till then I shall do as I like ! " 

Said Dick : — 

" You think that will do to bluff me because you know 
Joyce is away for the day, and that, in the meantime, you 
can do what you want, and perhaps get out of the bog 
some property that does not belong to you. I shall not 
argue with you any more ; but I warn you that you will 
have to answer for your conduct." 

Murdock and Moynahan continued their pulling at 
the rope. We waited till the haul was over, and saw that 
the spoil on this occasion was a part of the root of a tree. 
Then, when both men were sitting exhausted beside it, 
Dick took out his notebook, and began to make notes of 
everything. Presently he turned to Murdock, and said : — 

" Have you been fishing, Mr. Murdock ? What a 
strange booty you have brought up ! It is really most 
kind of you to be aiding to secure the winter firing for 
Mr. Joyce and my friend. Is there anything but bog- 
wood to be found here ? " 

Murdock' s reply was a curse and a savage scowl; but 
old Moynahan joined in the conversation : — 

"Now, I tould ye, Murtagh, that we war too low 
down ! " 

" Shut up ! " shouted the other, and the old man shrank 
back as if he had been struck. Dick looked down, and 
seemed to be struck by the cross of loose stones at his 
feet, and said: — 



A GRIM WARNING. 307 

" Dear me ! that is very strange — a cross of stones* 
It would almost seem as if it were made here to mark 
something ; but yet " — here he lifted one of the stones 
— "it cannot have been long here; the grass is fresh under 
the stones." Murdock said nothing, but clenched his 
hands and ground his teeth. Presently, however, he 
sent Moynahan back to his house to get some whiskey. 
When the latter was out of earshot, Murdock turned 
to us, and said : — 

" An' so ye think to baffle me ! do ye ? Well ! I'll 
have that money out — if I have to wade in yer blood. 
I will, by the livin' God ! " and he burst into a string 
of profanities that made us shudder. 

He was in such deadly earnest that I felt a pity for 
him, and said impulsively : — 

" Look here ! if you want to get it out, you can have 
a little more time if you like, if only you will conduct 
yourself properly. I don't want to be bothered looking 
for it. Now, if you'll only behave decently, and be some- 
thing like a civilized being, I'll give you another month 
if you want it ! " 

Again he burst out at me with still more awful 
profanities. He didn't want any of my time! He'd 
take what time he liked! God Himself — and he par- 
ticularized the persons of the Trinity — couldn't balk 
him, and he'd do what he liked ; and if I crossed 
his path it would be the worse for me ! And, as for 
others, that he would send the hard word round the 
country about me and my leman! — I couldn't be always 



308 THE snake's pass. 

knocking the ruffian down, so I turned away and 
called to Dick: — 

" Coming ! " said Dick, and he walked up to Murdock 
and knocked him down. Then, as the latter lay dazed on 
the grass, he followed me. 

" Keally," he said, apologetically, " the man wants it. 
It will do him good ! " 

Then we went back to Carnaclif. 

These three days were very dreary ones for me : we 
spent most of the time walking over Knockcalltecrore 
and making plans for the future. But, without Norah, 
the place seemed very dreary ! 

We did not go over on the Monday, as we knew that 
Joyce and Norah would not get home until late 
in the evening, and would be tired. Early, however, 
on the day after — Tuesday — we drove over. Joyce 
was out, and Dick left me at the foot of the 
boreen, so when I got to the house I found Norah 
alone. 

The dear girl showed me her new dresses with much 
pride; and presently going to her room put on one of 
them, and came back to let me see how she looked. 
Her face was covered with blushes. Needless to say 
that I admired the new dress, as did her father, who 
just then came in. 

When she went away to take off the dress Joyce 
beckoned me outside. When we got away from the 
house he turned to me ; his face was very grave, and 
he seemed even more frightened than angry. 



A GRIM WARNING. 309 

" There's somethin' I was tould while I was away, that 
I think ye* ought to know." 

" Go on, Mr. Joyce ! " 

" Somebody has been sayin' hard things about Norah!" 

" About Norah ! Surely there is nobody mad enough 
or bad enough to speak evil of her." 

" There's wan ! " He turned as he spoke, and looked 
instinctively in the direction of Murdock's house. 

" Oh, Murdock ! as he threatened — what did he 
say ? " 

" Well, I don't know. I could only get it that some- 
body was sayin' somethin', an' that it would be well to 
have things so that no wan could say anythin' that we 
couldn't prove. It was a frind tould me — and that's all 
he would tell! Mayhap he didn't know any more himself; 
but I knew him to be a frind ! " 

" And it was a friendly act, Mr. Joyce. I have no 
doubt that Murdock has been sending round wicked lies 
about us all ! But thank God ! in a few days we will 
be all moving, and it doesn't matter much what he can 
do." 

" No ! it won't matter much in wan way, but he's not 
goin', all the same, to throw dirt on me child. If he 
goes on I'll folly him up ! " 

" He won't go on, Mr. Joyce. Before long, he'll be 
out of the neighbourhood altogether. To tell you the 
truth, I have bought the whole of his land, and I get 
possession of it to-morrow ; and then I'll never let him 
set foot here again. When once he is out of this, 



310 THE SNAKE'S PASS. 

he will have too much other wickedness on hand to 
have time to meddle with us ! " 

" That's thrue enough ! Well ! we'll wait an' see what 
happens — but we'll be mighty careful all the same." 

"Quite right," I said, "we cannot be too careful in 
such a matter ! " Then we went back to the house, and 
met Norah coming into the room in her red petticoat, 
which she knew I liked. She whispered to me ! oh so 
sweetly : — 

" I thought, dear, you would like me to be the old 
Norah, to-day. It is our last day together in the old 
way." Then hand-in-hand we went down to the Cliff 
Fields, and sat on the table-rock for the last time, and 
feasted our eyes on the glorious prospect, whilst we told 
each other our bright dreams of the future. 

In the autumn twilight we came back to the house ; 
Dick had, *in the meantime, come in, and we both 
stayed for tea. I saw that Dick had something to tell 
me, but he waited until we were going home before he 
spoke. 

It was a sad parting with Norah that night ; for it was 
the last day together before she went off to school. 
For myself, I felt that whatever might be in the future 
— and I hoped for much — it was the last time that I 
might sit by the firelight with the old Norah. She, too, 
was sad, and when she told me the cause of her sadness, 
I found that it was the same as my own. 

" But oh ! Arthur, my darling, I shall try — I shall try 
to be worthy of my great good fortune — and of you!" 



A GRIM WARNING. 311 

she said, as she put her arms round my neck, and leaning 
her head on my bosom, began to cry. 

" Hush ! Norah. Hush, my darling ! " I said, "you 
must not say such things to me. You, who are worthy 
of all the good gifts of life. Oh, my dear! my dear ! 
I am only fearful that you may be snatched away from 
me by some terrible misfortune — I shall not be happy till 
you are safely away from the shadow of this fateful 
mountain and are beginning your new life." 

" Only one more day ! " she said. " To-morrow we must 
settle up everything — and I have much to do for father 
— poor father ! how good he is to me. Please G-od ! 
Arthur, we shall be able some day to repay him for all his 
goodness to me ! " How inexpressibly sweet it was to 
me to hear her say " we " shall be able, as she nestled 
up close to me. 

Ah ! that night ! Ah ! that night ! — the end of the 
day when, for the last time, I sat on the table-rock 
with the old Norah that I loved so well. It almost 
seemed as if Fate, who loves the keen contrasts of glare 
and gloom, had made on purpose that day so bright, 
and of such flawless happiness ! 

As we went back to Carnaclif Dick told me what had 
been exercising his mind all the afternoon. When he 
had got to the bog he found that it had risen so much 
that he thought it well to seek the cause. He had gone 
at once to the place where Murdock had dammed up the 
stream that ran over into the Cliff Fields, and had found 
that the natural position of the ground had so far aided 



312 THE snake's pass. 

his efforts that the great stones thrown into the chine 
had become solidified with the rubbish by the new weight 
of the risen bog into a compact mass, and unless some 
heroic measure, such as blowing up the dam, should be 
taken, the bog would continue to rise until it should 
flow over the lowest part of the solid banks containing it. 

" As sure as we are here, Art," he said, " that man 
will do himself to death. I am convinced that if the 
present state of things goes on, with the bog at its present 
height, and with this terrible rainfall, there will be 
another shifting of the bog — and then, God help him, 
and perhaps others too ! I told him of the danger, 
and explained it to him — but he only laughed at me and 
called me a fool and a traitor — that I was doing it to 
prevent him getting his treasure — his treasure, for- 
sooth ! — and then he went again into those terrible 
blasphemies — so I came away ; but he is a lost man, 
and I don't see how we can stop him." I said 
earnestly : — 

" Dick, there's no danger to them — the Joyces — is 
there ? " 

" No ! " be answered, " not the slightest — their house 
is on the rock, high over the spot, and quite away from 
any possible danger." 

Then we relapsed into silence, as we each tried to think 
out a solution. 

That night it rained more heavily than ever. The 
downfall was almost tropical— as it can be on the West 
Coast— and the rain on the iron roof of the stable behind 



A GRIM WARNING. 313 

the hotel sounded like thunder ; it was the last thing in 
my ears before I went to sleep. 

That night again I kept dreaming — dreaming in the 
same nightmare fashion as before. But although the 
working of my imagination centred round Knockcallte- 
crore and all it contained, and although I suffered dismal 
tortures from the hideous dreams of ruin and disaster 
which afflicted me, I did not on this occasion arouse the 
household. In the morning when we met, Dick looked 
at my pale face and said : — 

"Dreaming again, Art! Well, please God, it's all 
nearly over now. One more day, and Norah will be 
away from Knockcalltecrore." 

The thought gave me much relief. The next morn- 
ing — on Thursday, 28th of October — we should be 
on our way to Galway en route for London, whilst Dick 
would receive on my behalf possession of the property 
which I had purchased from Murdock. Indeed his 
tenure ended at noon this very day ; but we thought it 
wiser to postpone taking possession until after Norah 
had left. Although Norah's departure meant a long 
absence from the woman I loved, I could not regret 
it, for it was after all but a long road to the end I 
wished for. The two years would soon be over. And 
then ! — and then life would begin in real earnest, and 
along its paths of sorrow as of joy Norah and I should 
walk with equal steps. 

Alas ! for dreaming ! The dreams of the daylight 
are often more delusive than even those born of the 



314 the snake's pass. 

glamour of moonlight or starlight, or of the pitchy dark- 
ness of the night ! 

It had been arranged that we were not on this day 
to go over to Knockcalltecrore, as JSTorah and her father 
wanted the day together. Miss Joyce, Norah's aunt, who 
usually had lived with them, was coming back to look 
after the house. So after breakfast Dick and I smoked 
and lounged about, and went over some business matters, 
and we arranged many things to be done during my 
absence. The rain still continued to pour down in a per- 
fect deluge — the roadway outside the hotel was running 
like a river, and the wind swept the rain-clouds so 
that the drops struck like hail. Every now and again, 
as the gusts gathered in force, the rain seemed to drive 
past like a sheet of water; and looking out of the 
window, we could see dripping men and women trying 
to make headway against the storm. Dick said to me : — 

" If this rain holds on much longer it will be a bad 
job for Murdock. There is every fear that if the bog 
should break under the flooding he will suffer at once. 
What an obstinate fool he is — he won't take any 
warning! I almost feel like a criminal in letting him 
go to his death — ruffian though he is ; and yet what 
can one do? We are all powerless if anything should 
happen." After this we were silent. I spoke the 
next : — 

" Tell me, Dick, is there any earthly possibility of any 
harm coming to Joyce's house in case the bog should 
shift again? Is it quite certain that they are all safe?" 



A GRIM WARNING?. 315 

" Quite certain, old fellow. You may set your mind 
at rest on that score. In so far as the bog is concerned, 
she and her father are in no danger. The only way 
they could run any risk of danger would be by their 
going to Murdock's house, or by being by chance lower 
down on the hill, and I do not think that such a 
thing is likely to happen." 

This set my mind more at ease, and while Dick sat 
down to write some letters I continued to look at the 
rain. 

By-and-by I went down to the tap-room, where there 
were always a lot of peasants, whose quaint speech 
amused and interested me. When I came in one of 
them, whom I recognized as one of our navvies at Knock- 
nacar, was telling something, for the others all stood 
round him. Andy was the first to see me, and said as 
I entered: — 

"Ye'll have to go over it all agin, Mike. Here's his 
'an'r, that is just death on to bogs — an' the like," he 
added, looking at me slyly. 

"What is it?" I asked. 

"Oh, not much, yer 'an'r, except that the bog up at 
Knocknacar has run away intirely. Whin the wather 
rose in it, the big cuttin' we med tuk it all out, like 
butthermilk out iv a jug. Begor ! there never was seen 
such a flittin' since the wurrld begun. An' more betoken, 
the quare part iv it is that it hasn't left the bit iv a 
hole behind it at all, but it's all mud an' wather at the 
prisint minit." 



316 THE snake's pass. 

I knew this would interest Dick exceedingly, so I went 
for him. When he heard it he got quite excited, and 
insisted that we should go off to Knocknacar at once. 
Accordingly Andy was summoned, the mare was har- 
nessed, and with what protection we could get in the way 
of wraps, we went off to Knocknacar through the rain 
storm. 

As we went along we got some idea of the damage 
done — and being done — by the wonderful rainfall. Not 
only the road was like a river, and the mountain streams 
were roaring torrents, but in places the road was flooded 
to such a dangerous depth that we dared not have 
attempted the passage only that, through our repeated 
journeys, we all knew the road so well. 

However, we got at last to Knocknacar, and there 
found that the statement we heard was quite true. The 
bog had been flooded to such a degree that it had burst 
out through the cutting which we had made, and had 
poured in a great stream over all the sloping moorland on 
which we had opened it. The brown bog and black mud 
lying all over the stony space looked like one of the lava 
streams which mark the northern side of Vesuvius. Dick 
went most carefully all over the ground wherever we 
could venture, and took a number of notes. Indeed, 
the day was beginning to draw in, when, dripping and 
chilled, we prepared for our return journey through the 
rain. Andy had not been wasting his time in the shee- 
been, and was in one of his most jocular humours ; and 
when we too were fortified with steaming hot punch we* 



A GRIM WARNING. 317 

were able to listen to his fun without wanting to kill 
him. 

On the journey back, Dick — when Andy allowed him 
speech — explained to me the various phenomena which we 
had noticed. When we got back to the hotel it was night. 
Had the weather been fine we might have expected a 
couple more hours of twilight ; but with the mass of 
driving clouds overhead, and the steady downpour of rain, 
and the fierce rush of the wind, there was left to us not 
the slightest suggestion of day. 

We went to bed early, for I had to rise by daylight 
for our journey on the morrow. After lying awake for 
some time listening to the roar of the storm and the 
dash of the rain, and wondering if it were to go on for 
ever, I sank into a troubled sleep. 

It seemed to me that all the nightmares which had 
individually afflicted me during the last week returned 
to assail me collectively on the present occasion. I was 
a sort of Mazeppa in the world of dreams. Again and 
again the fatal hill and all its mystic and terrible asso- 
ciations haunted me! — Again the snakes writhed around 
and took terrible forms ! Again she I loved was in peril ! 
Again Murdock seemed to arise in new forms of terror 
and wickedness! Again the lost treasure was sought 
under terrible conditions; and once again I seemed to 
sit on the table-rock with Norah, and to see the whole 
mountain rush down on us in a dread avalanche, and 
turn to myriad snakes as it came! And again Norah 
seemed to call to me, " Help ! help ! Arthur ! Save 



318 THE snake's pass. 

me ! Save me I " And again, as was most natural, 
I found myself awake on the floor of my room — though 
this time I did not scream — wet and quivering with 
some nameless terror, and with Norah's despairing cry 
in my ears. 

But even in the first instant of my awakening I had 
taken a resolution which forthwith I proceeded to carry 
into effect. These terrible dreams — whencesoever they 
came — must not have come in vain ! The grim warning 
must not be despised ! Norah was in danger, and I 
must go to her at all hazards ! 

I threw on my clothes and went and woke Dick. When 
I told him my intention he jumped up at once and began 
to dress, whilst I ran downstairs and found Andy, and 
set him to get out the car at once. 

"Is it goin' out agin in the shtorm ye are ? Begor ! 
ye'd not go widout some rayson, an' I'm not the bhoy to 
be behind whin ye want me. I'll be ready, yer 'an'r, in 
two skips iv a dead salmon!" and Andy proceeded to 
make, or rather complete, his toilet, and hurried out to 
the stable to get the car ready. In the mean time Dick 
had got two lanterns and a flask, and showed them to 
me. 

" We may as well have them with us. We do not 
know what we may want in this storm." 

It was now past one o'clock, and the night was 
pitchy dark. The rain still fell, and high overhead we 
could hear the ceaseless rushing of the wind. It was a 
lucky thing that both Andy and the mare knew the road 



A GRIM WARNING. 319 

thoroughly, for otherwise we never could have got on 
that night. As it was, we had to go much more slowly 
than we had ever gone before. 

I was in a perfect fever. Every second's delay seemed 
to me like an hour. I feared — nay more, I had a deep 
conviction — that some dreadful thing was happening, and 
I had over me a terrible dread that we should arrive too 
late. 



320 



CHAPTEE XVII. 



THE CATASTROPHE. 



As we drew cioser to the mountain, and recognized our 
whereabouts by the various landmarks, my dread seemed 
to grow. The night was now well on, and there were 
signs of the storm abating ; occasionally the wind would 
fall off a little, and the rain beat with less dreadful 
violence. In such moments some kind of light would be 
seen in the sky — or, to speak more correctly, the darkness 
would be less complete — and then the new squall which 
followed would seem by contrast with the calm to smite 
us with renewed violence. In one of these lulls we saw 
for an instant the mountain rise before us, its bold out- 
line being shown darkly against a sky less black. But 
the vision was swept away an instant after by a squall 
and a cloud of blinding rain, leaving only a dreadful 
memory of some field for grim disaster. Then we went 
on our way even more hopelessly ; for earth and sky, 
which in that brief instant we had been able to dis- 
tinguish, were now hidden under one unutterable pall of 
gloom. 

On we went slowly. There was now in the air a 



THE CATASTROPHE. 321 

thunderous feeling, and we expected each moment to be 
startled by the lightning's flash or the roar of Heaven's 
artillery. Masses of mist or sea fog now began to 
be borne landward by the passing squalls. In the time 
that elapsed between that one momentary glimpse of 
Knockcalltecrore and our arrival at the foot of the boreen 
a whole lifetime seemed to me to have elapsed, and 
in my thoughts and harrowing anxieties I recalled — as 
drowning men are said to do before death — every moment, 
every experience since I had first come within sight of 
the western sea. The blackness of my fears seemed 
only a carrying inward of the surrounding darkness, 
which was made more pronounced by the flickering of 
our lanterns, and more dread by the sounds of the 
tempest with which it was laden. 

When we stopped in the boreen, Dick and I hurried 
up the hill, whilst Andy, with whom we left one of the 
lanterns, drew the horse under the comparative shelter 
of the wind-swept alders, which lined the entrance to the 
lane. He wanted a short rest before proceeding to 
Mrs. Kelligan's, where he was to stop the remainder 
of the night, so as to be able to come for us in 
the morning. 

As we came near Murdock's cottage Dick pressed my 
arm. 

" Look ! " he called to me, putting his mouth to my 
ear so that I could hear him, for the storm swept the 
hill fiercely here, and a special current of wind came 
whirling up through the Shleenanaher. " Look ! " he is 



322 THE snake's pass. 

up even at this hour. There must be some villainy 
afloat ! " 

When we got up a little farther he called to me again 
in the same way. 

" The nearest point of the bog is here ; let us look at 
it." We diverged to the left, and in a few minutes were 
down at the edge of the bog. 

It seemed to us to be different from what it had been. 
It was raised considerably above its normal height, and 
seemed quivering all over in a very strange way. Dick 
said to me very gravely: — 

" We are just in time. There's something going to 
happen here." 

" Let us hurry to Joyce's," I said, " and see if all is safe 
there." 

"We should warn them first at Murdoch's," he said. 
" There may not be a moment to lose." We hurried 
back to the boreen and ran on to Murdock's, opened the 
gate, and ran up the path. We knocked at the door, 
but there was no answer. We knocked more loudly still, 
but there came no reply. 

" We had better make certain," said Dick, and I could 
hear him more easily now, for we were in the shelter of 
the porch. We opened the door, which was only on the 
latch, and went in. In the kitchen a candle was burn- 
ing, and the fire on the hearth was blazing, so that it 
could not have been long since the inmates had left. 
Dick wrote a line of warning in his pocket-book, tore 
out the leaf, and placed it on the table where it could 



THE CATASTROPHE. 323 

not fail to be seen by anyone entering the room. "We 
then hurried out, and up the lane to Joyce's. 

As we drew near we were surprised to find a light in 
Joyce's window also. I got to the windward side of 
Dick, and shouted to him : — 

" A light here also ! there must be something strange 
going on." We hurried as fast as we could up to the 
house. As we drew close the door was opened, and 
through a momentary lull we heard the voice of Miss 
Joyce, Norah's aunt: — 

" Is that you, Norah ? " 

" No ! " I answered. 

" Oh ! is it you, Mr. Arthur ? Thank God ye've 
come ! I'm in such terror about Phelim an' Norah. 
They're both out in the shtorm, an' I'm nigh disthracted 
about them." 

By this time we were in the house, and could hear 
each other speak, although not too well even here, for 
again the whole force of the gale struck the front of the 
house, and the noise was great. 

" Where is Norah ? Is she not here ? " 

"Oh no ! God help us ! Wirrastru ! wirrastru ! " The 
poor woman was in such a state of agitation and abject 
terror that it was with some difficulty we could learn 
from her enough to understand what had occurred. The 
suspense of trying to get her to speak intelligibly was 
agonizing, for now every moment was precious ; but we 
could not do anything or make any effort whatever until 
we had learned all that had occurred. At last, how- 



324 THE snake's pass. 

ever, it was conveyed to us that early in the evening 
Joyce had gone out to look after the cattle, and had not 
since returned. Late at night old Moynahan had come to 
the door half drunk, and had hiccoughed a message that 
Joyce had met with an accident and was then in Mur- 
dock's house. He wanted Norah to go to him there, but 
Norah only was to go and no one else. She had at 
once suspected that it was some trap of Murdock's for 
some evil purpose, but still she thought it better to go, 
and accordingly called to Hector, the mastiff, to come with 
her, she remarking to her aunt " I am safe with him, at 
any rate." But Hector did not come. He had been rest- 
less, and groaning for an hour before, and now on looking 
for him they had found him dead. This helped to con- 
firm Norah' s suspicions, and the two poor women were 
in an agony of doubt as to what they should do. Whilst 
they were discussing the matter Moynahan had returned — 
this time even drunker than before — and repeated his 
message, but with evident reluctance. Norah had accord- 
ingly set to work to cross-examine him, and after a while 
he admitted that Joyce was not in Murdock's house at 
all — that he had been sent with the message and told 
when he had delivered it to go away to mother Kelligan's 
and not to ever tell anything whatever of the night's 
proceedings — no matter what might happen or what 
might be said. When he had admitted this much he 
had been so overcome with fright at what he had done 
that he began to cry and moan, and say that Murdock 
would kill him for telling on him. Norah had told him, 



THE CATASTROPHE. 325 

he could remain in the cottage where he was, if he would 
tell her where her father was, so that she could go to 
look for him ; but that he had sworn most solemnly that 
he did not know, but that Murdock knew, for he told 
him that there would be no chance of seeing him at his 
own house for hours yet that night. This had determined 
Norah that she would go out herself, although the storm 
was raging wildly, to look for her father. Moynahan, 
however, would not stay in the cottage, as he said he would 
be afraid to, unless Joyce himself were there to protect 
him ; for if there were no one but women in the house 
Murdock would come and murder him and throw his 
body into the bog, as he had often threatened. So 
Moynahan had gone out into the night by himself, and 
Norah had shortly after gone out also, and from that 
moment she — Miss Joyce — had not set eyes on her, and 
feared that some harm had happened. 

This the poor soul told us in such an agony of dread 
and grief that it was pitiful to hear her, and we could not 
but forgive the terrible delay. I was myself in deadly 
fear, for every kind of harrowing possibility rose before 
me as the tale was told. It was quite evident that 
Murdock was bent on some desperate scheme of evil ; 
he either intended to murder Norah or to compromise 
her in some terrible way. I was almost afraid to think 
of the subject. It was plain to me that by this 
means he hoped, not only to gratify his revenge, but 
to get some lever to use against us, one and all, so as 
to secure his efforts in searching for the treasure. In 



326 THE snake's pass. 

my rage against the cowardly hound, I almost lost sight 
of the need of thankfulness for one great peril avoided. 

However, there was no time at present for further 
thought — action, prompt and decisive, was vitally neces- 
sary. Joyce was absent — we had no clue to where he 
could be. Norah was alone on the mountain, and with 
the possibility of Murdock assailing her, for he, too, was 
abroad — as we knew from the fact of his being away 
from his house. 

We lost not a moment, but went out again into the 
storm. We did not, however, take the lantern with us, 
as we found by experience that its occasional light was 
in the long run an evil, as we could not by its light see 
any distance, and the grey of the coming dawn was be- 
ginning to show through the abating storm, with a* faint 
indication that before long we should have some light. 

We went down the hill westward until we came near 
the bog, for we had determined to make a circuit of it 
as our first piece of exploration, since we thought that 
here lay the most imminent danger. Then we sejmrated, 
Dick following the line of the bog downward whilst I 
went north, intending to cross at the top and proceed 
down the farther side. We had agreed on a signal, if such 
could be heard through the storm, choosing the Australian 
" coo-ee," which is the best sound to travel known. 

I hurried along as fast as I dared, for I was 
occasionally in utter darkness. Although the morning 
was coming with promise of light, the sea- wind swept 
inland masses of swiftly -driving mist, which, whilst they 



THE CATASTROPHE. 327 

encompassed me, made movement not only difficult and 
dangerous, but at times almost impossible. The electric 
feeling in the air bad become intensified, and each moment 
I expected the thunderstorm to burst. 

Every little while I called, " Norah ! Norah ! " in the 
vain hope that, whilst returning from her search for her 
father, she might come within the sound of my voice. 
But no answering sound came back to me, except the 
fierce roar of the storm laden with the wild dash of the 
breakers hurled against the cliffs and the rocks below. 

Even then, so stangely does the mind work, the 
words of the old song, "The Pilgrim of Love," came 
mechanically to my memory, as though I had called 
"Orinthia" instead of "Norah:" — 

" Till with ' Orinthia ' all the rocks resound." 

On, on I went, following the line of the bog, till I had 
reached the northern point, where the ground rose and 
began to become solid. I found the bog here so swollen 
with rain that I had to make a long detour so as to 
get round to the western side. High up on the hill 
there was, T knew, a rough shelter for the cattle ; 
and as it struck me that Joyce might have gone here 
to look after his stock, and that Norah had gone 
hither to search for him, I ran up to it. The cattle 
were there, huddled together in a solid mass behind 
the sheltering wall of sods and stones. I cried out as 
loudly as I could from the windward side, so that my 
voice would carry : — 



328 THE snake's pass. 

" Norah ! Norah ! Joyce ! Joyce ! Are you there ? Is 
anyone there ? " 

There was a stir amongst the cattle and one or two low 
"moos" as they heard the human voice, but no sound 
from either of those I sought ; so I ran down again 
to the further side of the bog. I knew now that neither 
Norah nor her father could be on this point of the hill, or 
they would have heard my voice ; and as the storm came 
from the west, I made a zigzag line going east to west as 
I followed down the bog so that I might have a chance of 
being heard — should there be anyone to hear. When I got 
near to the entrance to the Cliff Fields I shouted as 
loudly as I could, " Norah ! Norah ! " but the wind took 
my voice away as it would sweep thistles down, and it was 
as though I made the effort but no voice came, and I felt 
awfully alone in the midst of a thick pall of mist. 

On, on I went, following the line of the bog. Lower 
down there was some shelter from the storm, for the great 
ridge of rocks here rose between me and the sea, and 
I felt that my voice could be heard further off. I was 
sick at heart and chilled with despair, till I felt as if the 
chill of my soul had extended even to my blood ; but on I 
went with set purpose, the true doggedness of despair. 

As I went I thought I heard a cry through the mist — 
Norah's voice ! It was but an instant, and I could not be 
sure whether my ears indeed heard, or if the anguish of 
my heart had created the phantom of a voice to deceive 
me. However, be it what it might, it awoke me like a 
clarion; my heart leaped and the blood surged in my 



THE CATASTROPHE. 329 

brain till I almost became dizzy. I listened to try if I 
could distinguish from what direction the voice had come. 

I waited in agony. Each second seemed a century, and 
my heart beat like a trip-hammer. Then again I heard 
the sound — faint, but still clear enough to hear. I 
shouted with all my power, but once again the roar of 
the wind overpowered me ; however, I ran on towards 
the voice. 

There was a sudden lull in the wind — a blaze of 
lightning lit up the whole scene, and, some fifty yards 
before me, I saw two figures struggling at the edge of 
the rocks. In that welcome glance, infinitesimal though 
it was, I recognized the red -petticoat which, in that place 
and at that time, could be none other than No rah' s. I 
shouted as I leapt forward ; but just then the thunder 
broke overhead, and in the mighty and prolonged roll 
every other sound faded into nothingness, as though the 
thunderclap had come on a primeval stillness. As I 
drew near to where I had seen the figures, the thunder 
rolled away, and through its vanishing sound I heard 
distinctly Norah's voice : — 

"Help! Help! Arthur! Father! Help! Help!" 
Even in that wild moment my heart leaped, that of all 
names, she called on mine the first. — Whatever men may 
say, Love and Jealousy are near kinsmen ! 

I shouted in return, as I ran, but the wind took my 
voice away — and then I heard her voice again, but fainter 
than before : — 

" Help ! Arthur — Father ! Is there no one to help me 



330 THE snake's pass. 

now ! " And then the lightning flashed again, and in the 
long jagged flash we saw each other, and I heard her glad 
cry before the thunderclap drowned all else. I had seen 
that her assailant was Murdoch, and I rushed at him, 
but he had seen me too, and before I could lay hands 
on him he had let her go, and with a mighty oath which 
the roll of the thunder drowned, he struck her to the 
earth and ran. 

I raised my poor darling, and, carrying her a little 
distance, placed her on the edge of the ridge of rocks 
beside us, for by the light in the sky, which grew 
paler each second, I saw that a stream of water rising 
from the bog, was flowing towards us. She was un- 
conscious — so I ran to the stream and dipped my hat 
full of water to bring to revive her. Then I remembered 
the signal of finding her, and putting my hands to my 
lips I sounded the " Coo-ee," once, twice. As I stood I 
could see Murdock running to his house, for every 
instant it seemed to grow lighter, and the mist to dis- 
perse. The thunder had swept away the rain-clouds, and 
let in the light of the coming dawn. 

But even as I stood there — and I had not delayed an 
unnecessary second — the ground under me seemed to be 
giving way. There was a strange shudder or shiver 
below me, and my feet began to sink. With a wild 
CY j — f or I felt that the fatal moment had come — that 
the bog was moving, and had caught me in its toils, I 
threw myself forward towards the rock. My cry seemed 
to arouse Norah like the call of a trumpet. She leaped 



THE CATASTROPHE. 331 

to her feet, and in an instant seemed to realize my 
danger, and rnslied towards me. When I saw her coming 
I shouted to her : — 

" Keep back ! keep back." But she did not pause an 
instant, and the only words she said were : — 

" I am coming, Arthur ! I am coming ! " 

Half way between us there was a flat-topped piece of 
rock, which raised its head out of the surrounding bog. 
As she struggled towards it, her feet began to sink, and 
a new terror for her was added to my own. But she 
did not falter a moment, and, as her lighter weight was 
in her favour, with a great effort she gained it. In the 
meantime I struggled forward. There was between me 
and the rock a clump of furze bushes ; on these I threw 
myself, and for a second or two they supported me. 
Then even these began to sink with me, for faster and 
faster, with each succeeding second, the earth seemed 
to liquify and melt away. 

Up to now I had never realized the fear, or even the 
possibility, of death to myself — hitherto all my fears had 
been for Norah. But now came to me the bitter pang 
which must be for each of the children of men on whom 
Death has laid his icy hand. That this dread moment 
had come there was no doubt ; nothing short of a 
miracle could save me ! 

No language could describe the awful sensation of 
that melting away of the solid earth — the most dreadful 
nightmare would be almost a pleasant memory compared 
with it. 



332 THE snake's pass. 

I was now only a few feet from the rock whose very 
touch meant safety to me — bnt it was just beyond my 
reach ! I was sinking to my doom ! — I could see the 
horror in Norah's eyes, as she gained the rock and 
struggled to her feet. 

But even Koran's love could not help me — I was 
beyond the reach of her arms, and she no more than I 
could keep a foothold on the liquifying earth. Oh ! that 
she had a rope and I might be saved ! Alas ! she had none 
— even the shawl that might have aided me had fallen off 
in her struggle with Murdock. 

But Norah had, with her woman's quick instinct, seen 
a way to help me. In an instant she had had torn off 
her red petticoat of heavy homespun cloth and thrown 
one end to me. I clutched and caught it with a despair- 
ing grasp — for by this time only my head and hands 
remained above the surface. 

" Now, O God ! for strength ! " was the earnest prayer 
of her heart ; and my thought was : — 

" Now, for the strong hands that that other had des- 



Norah threw herself backward with her feet against a 
projecting piece of the rock, and I felt that if we could 
both hold out long enough I was saved. 

Little by little I gained ! I drew closer and closer to 
the rock ! Closer ! closer still ! till with one hand I 
grasped the rock itself, and hung on, breathless, in blind 
desperation. I was only just able to support myself, for 
there was a strange dragging power in the viscous mass 



THE CATASTROPHE. 333 

that held me, and greatly taxed my strength, already 
exhausted in the terrible struggle for life. The bog was 
beginning to move! But Norah bent forward, kneeling 
on the rock, and grasped my coat collar in her strong 
hands. Love and despair lent her additional strength, 
and with one last great effort she pulled me upward — and 
in an instant more I lay on the rock safe and in her arms. 

During this time, short as it was, the morning had 
advanced, and the cold grey mysterious light disclosed 
the whole slope before us dim in the shadow of the hill. 
Opposite to us, across the bog, we saw Joyce and Dick 
watching us, and between the gusts of wind we faintly 
heard their shouts. 

To our right, far down the hill, the Shleenanaher stood 
out boldly, its warder rocks struck by the grey light 
falling over the hill-top. Nearer to us, and something 
in the same direction, Murdock's house rose a black mass 
in the centre of the hollow. 

But as we looked around us, thankful for our safety, 
we grasped each other more closely, and a low cry of 
fear emphasized Norah's shudder — for a terrible thing 
began to happen. 

The whole surface of the bog, as far as we could see 
it in the dim light, became wrinkled, and then began to 
move in little eddies, such as one sees in a swollen river. 
It seemed to rise and rise till it grew almost level with 
where we were, and instinctively we rose to our feet 
and stood there awestruck, Norah clinging to me, and 
with our arms round each other. 



334 THE snake's pass. 

The shuddering surface of the bog began to extend 
on every side to even the solid ground which curbed it, 
and with relief we saw that Dick and Joyce stood high 
up on a rock. All things on its surface seemed to 
melt away and disappear, as though swallowed up. 
This silent change or demoralization spread down in 
the direction of Murdoch's house — but when it got to 
the edge of the hollow in which the house stood, it 
seemed to move as swiftly forward as water leaps down 
a cataract. 

Instinctively we both shouted a warning to Mur- 
doch — he, too, villain though he was, had a life to 
lose. He had evidently felt some kind of shock or 
change, for he came rushing out of the house full of 
terror. For an instant he seemed paralyzed with fright 
as he saw what was happening. And it was little 
wonder ! for in that instant the whole house began to 
sink into the earth — to sink as a ship founders in a 
stormy sea, but without the violence and turmoil that 
marks such a catastrophe. There was something more 
terrible — more deadly in that silent, causeless destruc- 
tion than in the devastation of the earthquake or the 
hurricane. 

The wind had now dropped away ; the morning light 
struck full over the hill, and we could see clearly. The 
sound of the waves dashing on the rocks below, and 
the booming of the distant breakers filled the air — but 
through it came another sound, the like of which I had 
never heard, and the like of which I hope, in God's pro- 



THE CATASTROPHE. 335 

vidence, I shall never hear again — a long, low gurgle, 
with something of a sucking sound ; something terrible 
— resistless— and with a sort of hiss in it, as of seething 
waters striving to be free. 

Then the convulsion of the bog grew greater ; it almost 
seemed as if some monstrous living thing was deep under 
the surface and writhing to escape. 

By this time Murdock's house had sunk almost level 
with the bog. He had climbed on the thatched roof, 
and stood there looking towards us, and stretching forth 
his hands as though in supplication for help. For a 
while the superior size and buoyancy of the roof sus- 
tained it, but then it too began slowly to sink. Mur- 
dock knelt, and clasped his hands in a frenzy of 
prayer. 

And then came a mighty roar and a gathering rush. 
The side of the hill below us seemed to burst. Mur- 
dock threw up his arms — we heard his wild cry as 
the roof of the house, and he with it, was in an instant 
sucked below the surface of the heaving mass. 

Then came the end of the terrible convulsion. With 
a rushing sound, and the noise of a thousand waters 
falling, the whole bog swept, in waves of gathering size, 
and with a hideous writhing, down the mountain- side to 
the entrance of the Shleenanaher — struck the portals 
with a sound like thunder, and piled up to a vast height. 
And then the millions of tons of slime and ooze, and bog 
and earth, and broken rock swept through the Pass into 
the sea. 



336 THE snake's pass. 

Norah and I knelt down, hand-in-hand, and with full 
hearts thanked God for having saved us from so terrible 
a doom. 

The waves of the torrent rushing by us at first came 
almost level with us; but the stream diminished so 
quickly, that in an incredibly short time we found our- 
selves perched on the top of a high jutting rock, stand- 
ing sharply up from the sloping sides of a deep ravine, 
where but a few minutes before the bog had been. 
Carefully we climbed down, and sought a more secure 
place on the base of the ridge of rocks behind us. The 
deep ravine lay below us, down whose sides began to 
rattle ominously, here and there, masses of earth and 
stones deprived of their support below where the torrent 
had scoured their base. 

Lighter and lighter grew the sky over the mountain, 
till at last one red ray shot up like a crack in the vault 
of heaven, and a great light seemed to smite the rocks 
that glistened in their coat of wet. Across the ravine 
we saw Joyce and Dick beginning to descend, so as to 
come over to us. This aroused us, and we shouted to 
them to keep back, and waved our arms to them in 
signal ; for we feared that some landslip or some new 
outpouring of the bog might sweep them away, or that 
the bottom of the ravine might be still only treacherous 
slime. They saw our gesticulations, if they did not hear 
our voices, and held back. Then we pointed up the ravine, 
and signalled them that we would move up the edge of 
the rocks. This we proceeded to do, and they followed 



THE CATASTROPHE. 337 

on the other side, watching us intently. Our progress 
was slow, for the rocks were steep and difficult, and we 
had to keep eternally climbing up and descending the 
serrated edges, where the strata lapped over each other ; 
and besides we were chilled and numbed with cold. 

At last, however, we passed the corner where was the 
path down to the Cliff Fields, and turned eastwards up 
the hill. Then in a little while we got well above the 
ravine, which here grew shallower, and could walk on 
more level ground. Here we saw that the ravine ended 
in a deep cleft, whence issued a stream of water. And 
then we saw hurrying up over the top of the cleft Joyce 
and Dick. 

Up to now, Norah and I had hardly spoken a word. Our 
hearts were too full for speech ; and, indeed, we under- 
stood each other, and could interpret our thoughts by a 
subtler language than that formulated by man. 

In another minute Norah was clasped in her father's 
arms. He held her close, and kissed her, and cried 
over her ; whilst Dick wrung my hand hard. Then 
Joyce left his daughter, and came and flung his arms 
round me, and thanked God that I had escaped; whilst 
Norah went up to Dick, and put her arms round him, 
and kissed him as a sister might. 

We all went back together as fast as we could; and 
the sun that rose that morning rose on no happier group 
— despite the terror and the trouble of the night. Norah 
walked between her father and me, holding us both 
tightly, and Dick walked on my other side with his arm 



338 THE SNAKE S PASS. 

in mine. As we came within sight of the house, we met 
Miss Joyce — her face grey with anxiety. She rushed 
towards us, and flung her arms round Norah, and the 
two women rocked each other in their arms ; and then 
we all kissed her — even Dick, to her surprise. His kiss 
was the last, and it seemed to pull her together ; for she 
perked up, and put her cap straight — a thing which she 
had not done for the rest of us. Then she walked be- 
side us, holding her brother's hand. 

We all talked at once and told the story over and 
over again of the deadly peril I had been in, and how 
Norah had saved my life ; and here the brave girl's 
fortitude gave way. She seemed to realize all at once 
the terror and the danger of the long night, and sud- 
denly her lips grew white, and she would have sunk 
down to the ground only that I had seen her faint 
coming and had caught her and held her tight. Her 
dear head fell over on my shoulder, but her hands never 
lost their grasp of my arm. 

We carried her down toward the house as quickly as 
we could ; but before we had got to the door she had re- 
covered from her swoon, and her first look when her 
eyes opened was for me, and the first word she said 
was — 

" Arthur ! Is he safe " 

And then I laid her in the old arm-chair by the 
hearth-place, and took her cold hands in mine, and kissed 
them and cried over them — which I hoped vainly that 
no one saw. 



THE CATASTROPHE. 339 

Then Miss Joyce, like a true housekeeper, stirred her- 
self, and the flames roared up the chimney, and the 
slumbering kettle on the chain over the fire woke and 
sang again ; and it seemed like magic, for all at once we 
were all sipping hot whiskey punch, and beginning to 
feel the good effects of it. 

Then Miss Joyce hurried away Norah to change her 
clothes, and Dick and I went with Joyce, and we all 
rigged ourselves out with whatever came to hand; and 
then we came back to the kitchen and laughed at each 
other's appearance. We found Miss Joyce already 
making preparations for breakfast, and succeeding pretty 
well, too. 

And then Norah joined us, but she was not the least 
grotesque; she seemed as though she had just stepped 
out of a band-box — she seemed so trim and neat, with 
her grey jacket and her Sunday red petticoat. Her 
black hair was coiled in one glorious roll round her noble 
head, and there was but one thing which I did not like, 
and which sent a pang through my heart — a blue - and 
swollen bruise on her ivory forehead where Murdock had 
struck her that dastard blow ! She saw my look and 
her eyes fell, and when I went to her and kissed the 
wound and whispered to her how it pained me, she 
looked up at me and whispered so that none of the 
others could hear : — 

" Hush ! hush ! Poor soul, he has paid a terrible 
penalty ; let us forget as we forgive!" And then I took 
her hands in mine and stooped to kiss them, whilst the 



340 THE shake's pass. 

others all smiled happily as they looked on; but she 
tried to draw them away, and a bright blush dyed her 
cheeks as she murmured to me : — 

" No ! no, Arthur ! Arthur dear, not now ! I only 
did what anyone would do for you ! " and the tears 
rushed to her eyes. 

" I must ! Norah," said I, " I must ! for I owe these 
brave hands my life ! " and I kissed them and she 
made no more resistance. Her father's voice and words 
sounded very true as he said: — 

"Nay, daughter, it is right that he should kiss those 
hands this blessed mornin', for they took a true man 
out of the darkness of the grave ! " 

And then my noble old Dick came over too, and he 
raised those dear hands reverently to his lips, and said 
very softly: — 

" For he is dear to us all ! " 

By this time Miss Joyce had breakfast well under 
weigh, and one and all we thought that it was time we 
should let the brightness of the day and the lightness 
of our hearts have a turn ; and Joyce said heartily : — 

" Come now ! Come now ! Let us sit down to break- 
fast ; but first let us give thanks to Almighty God that 
has been so good to us, and let us forgive that poor 
wretch that met such a horrible death. Eest to his soul ! " 

We were all silent for a little bit, for the great glad- 
ness of our hearts, that came through the terrible re- 
membrance thus brought home to us, was too deep for 
words. Norah and I sat hand in hand, and between us 



THE CATASTROPHE. 341 

was but one heart, and one soul, and one thought — and 
all were filled with gratitude. 

When once we had begun breakfast in earnest a minia- 
ture babel broke out. We had each something to tell 
and much to hear ; and for the latter reason we tacitly 
arranged, after the first outbreak, that each should speak 
in turn. 

Miss Joyce told us of the terrible anxiety she had 
been in ever since she had seen us depart, and how 
every sound, great or small — even the gusts of wind 
that howled down the chimney and made the casements 
rattle — had made her heart jump into her mouth, and 
brought her out to the door to see if we or any of us 
were coming. Then Dick told us how, on proceeding 
down the eastern side of the bog, he had diverged so 
as to look in at Mur dock's house to see if he were there, 
but had found only old Moynahan lying on the floor 
in a state of speechless drunkenness, and so wet that 
the water running from his clothes had formed a pool 
of water on the floor. He had evidently only lately 
returned from wandering on the hill- side. Then as he 
was about to go on his way he had heard, as he thought, 
a noise lower down the hill, and on going towards it 
had met Joyce carrying a sheep which had its leg broken, 
and which he told him had been blown off a steep rock 
on the south side of the hill. Then they two had kept 
together after Dick had told him of our search for 
Norah, until we had seen them in the coming grey of 
the dawn. 



342 THE snake's pass. 

Next Joyce took up the running, and told us how he 
had been working on the top of the mountain when he 
saw the signs of the storm coming so fast that he 
thought it would be well to look after the sheep and 
cattle, and see them in some kind of shelter before the 
morning. He had driven all the cattle which were up 
high on the hill into the shelter where I had found them, 
and then had gone down the southern shoulder of the 
hill, placing all the sheep and cattle in places of shelter 
as well as he could, until he had come across the 
wounded one, which he took on his shoulders to bring 
it home, but which had since been carried away in the 
bursting of the bog. He finished by reminding me 
jocularly that I owed him something for his night's 
work, for the stock was now all mine. 

" No ! " said I, " not for another day. My purchase of 
your ground and stock was only to take effect from after 
noon of the 28th, and we are now only at the early 
morning of that day ; but at any rate I must thank you 
for the others," for I had a number of sheep and cattle 
which Dick had taken over from the other farmers 
whose land I had bought. 

Then I told over again all that had happened to me. I 
had to touch on the blow which Norah had received, 
but I did so as lightly as I could ; and when I said " Grod 
forgive him ! " they all added softly, " Amen ! " 

Then Dick put in a word about poor old Moynahan : — 

" Poor old fellow, he is gone also. He was a drunkard, 
but he wasn't all bad. Perhaps he saved Norah last 



THE CATASTROPHE. 343 

night from a terrible danger. His life mayhap may leaven 
the whole lump of filth and wickedness that went through 
the Shleenanaher into the sea last night ! " 

We all said " Amen " again, and I have no doubt that 
we all meant it with all our hearts. 

Then I told again of Norah's brave struggle and how, 
by her courage and her strength, she took me out of 
the very jaws of a terrible death. She put one hand 
before her eyes — for I held the other close in mine — and 
through her fingers dropped her welling tears. 

"We sat silent for a while, and we felt that it was only 
right and fitting when Joyce came round to her and laid 
his hand on her head and stroked her hair as he said : — 

" Ye have done well, daughter — ye have done well ! " 



344 



CHAPTEE XVIII. 

THE FULFILMENT. 

When breakfast was finished, Dick proposed that we 
should go now and look in the full daylight at the effect 
of the shifting of the bog. I suggested to Norah that 
perhaps she had better not come as the sight might 
harrow her feelings, and, besides, that she would want 
some rest and sleep after her long night of terror and 
effort. She point blank refused to stay behind, and 
accordingly we all set out, having now had our clothes 
dried and changed, leaving only Miss Joyce to take care 
of the house. 

The morning was beautiful and fresh after the storm. 
The deluge of rain had washed everything so clean that 
already the ground was beginning to dry, and as the 
morning sun shone hotly there was in the air that 
murmurous hum that follows rain when the air is still. 
And the air was now still — the storm seemed to have 
spent itself, and away to the West there was no sign of 
its track, except that the great Atlantic rollers were 
heavier and the surf on the rocks rose higher than 
usual. 



THE FULFILMENT. 345 

We toon our way first down the hill, and then west- 
ward to the Shleenanaher, for we intended, under Dick's 
advice, to follow, if possible, up to its source the ravine 
made by the bog. When we got to the entrance of the 
Pass we were struck with the vast height to which the 
bog had risen when its mass first struck the portals. A 
hundred feet overhead there was the great brown mark, 
and on the sides of the Pass the same mark was visible, 
declining quickly as it got seaward and the Pass widened, 
showing the track of its passage to the sea. 

We climbed the rocks and looked over. Norah clung 
close to me, and my arm went round her and held her 
tight as we peered over and saw where the great waves of 
the Atlantic struck the rocks three hundred feet below us, 
and were for a quarter of a mile away still tinged with 
the brown slime of the bog. 

We then crossed over the ravine, for the rocky bottom 
was here laid bare, and so we had no reason to fear water- 
holes or pitfalls. A small stream still ran down the 
ravine and, shallowing out over the shelf of rock, spread 
all across the bottom of the Pass, and fell into the sea — 
something like a miniature of the Staubach Pall, as the 
water whitened in the falling. 

We then passed up on the west side of the ravine, and 
saw that the stream which ran down the centre was 
perpetual — a live stream, and not merely the drainage of 
the ground where the bog had saturated the earth. As 
we passed up the hill we saw where the side of the 
slope had been torn bodily away, and the great chasm 



346 THE snake's pass. 

where once the house had been which Murdock took from 
Joyce, and so met his doom. Here there was a great 
pool of water — and indeed all throughout the ravine were 
places where the stream broadened into deep pools, and 
again into shallow pools where it ran over the solid bed 
of rock. As we passed up, Dick hazarded an expla- 
nation or a theory : — 

" Do you know it seems to me that this ravine or 
valley was once before just as it is now. The stream ran 
down it and out at the Shleenanaher just as it does now. 
Then by some landslips, or a series of them, or by a 
falling tree, the passage became blocked, and the hollow 
became a lake, and its edges grew rank with boggy 
growth; and then, from one cause and another — the 
falling in of the sides, or the rush of rain storms carrying 
down the detritus of the mountain, and perpetually wash- 
ing down particles of clay from the higher levels — the 
lake became choked up ; and then the lighter matter 
floated to the top, and by time and vegetable growth 
became combined. And so the whole mass grew co- 
hesive and floated on the water and slime below. This 
may have occurred more than once. Nay, moreover, 
sections of the bog may have become segregated or 
separated by some similarity of condition affecting its 
parts, or by some formation of the ground, as by the 
valley narrowing in parts between walls of rock so that 
the passage could be easily choked. And so, solid earth 
formed to be again softened and demoralized by the 
later mingling with the less solid mass above it. It is 



THE FULFILMENT. 347 

possible, if not probable, that more than once, in the 
countless ages that have passed, this ravine has been as 
we see it — and again as it was but a few hours ago ! " 

No one had anything to urge against this theory, and 
we all proceeded on our way. 

When we came to the place where Norah had rescued 
me, we examined the spot most carefully, and again 
went over the scene and the exploit. It was almost 
impossible to realize that this great rock, towering 
straight up from the bottom of the ravine, had, at the 
fatal hour, seemed only like a tussock rising from the 
bog. When I had climbed to the top I took my knife 
and cut a cross on the rock, where my brave girl's 
feet had rested, to mark the spot. 

Then we went on again. Higher up the hill we came 
to a place, where, on each side a rocky promontory, 
with straight deep walls, jutted into the ravine, making 
a sort of narrow gateway or gorge in the valley. Dick 
pointed it out: — 

" See ! here is one of the very things I spoke of, 
that made the bog into sections or chambers, or tanks, 
or whatever we should call them. More than that, here is 
an instance of the very thing I hinted at before — that the 
peculiar formation of the Snake's Pass runs right through 
the hill ! If this be so ! — but we shall see later on." 

On the other side was, we agreed, the place where 
old Moynahan had said the Frenchmen had last been 
seen. Dick and I were both curious about the matter, 
and we agreed to cross the ravine and make certain, 



348 THE snake's pass. 

for, if it were the spot, Dick's mark of the stones in 
the Y shape would be a proof. Joyce and Norah both 
refused to let us go alone, so we all went up a little 
further, where the sides of the rock sloped on each 
side, and where we could pass safely, as the bed was 
rock and quite smooth with the stream flowing over it 
in a thin sheet. 

When we got to the bottom, Joyce, who was looking 
round, said suddenly : — 

" What is that like a square block behind the high 
rock on the other side ? " He went over to it, and an 
instant after, gave a great cry and turned and beckoned 
to us. We all ran over — and there before us, in a 
crescent- shaped nook, at the base of the lofty rock, lay 
a wooden chest. The top was intact, but one of the 
lower corners was broken, as though with a fall ; and 
from the broken aperture had fallen out a number of 
coins, which we soon found to be of gold. 

On the top of the chest we could make out the letters 
R. F. in some metal, discoloured and corroded with 
a century of slime, and on its ends were great metal 
handles — to each of which something white was at- 
tached. We stooped to look at them, and then Norah, 
with a low cry, turned to me, and laid her head on 
my breast, as though to shut out some horrid sight. 
Then we investigated the mass that lay there. 

At each end of the chest lay a skeleton — the flesh- 
less fingers grasping the metal handle. We recog- 
nized the whole story at a glance, and our hats came off. 



THE FULFILMENT. 349 

" Poor fellows ! " said Dick, " they did their duty 
nobly. They guarded their treasure to the last." Then 
he went on. " See ! they evidently stepped into the 
bog, straight off the rock, and were borne down at 
once, holding tight to the handles of the chest they 
carried — or stay" — and he stooped lower and caught 
hold of something : — 

" See how the bog can preserve ! this leather strap 
attached to the handles of the chest each had round 
his shoulder, and so, willy nilly, they were dragged to 
their doom. Never mind! they were brave fellows all 
the same, and faithful ones — they never let go the 
handles — look ! their dead hands clasp them still. France 
should be proud of such sons ! It would make a noble 
coat of arms, this treasure chest sent by freemen to aid 
others — and with two such supporters ! "j 

We looked at the chest and the skeletons for a while, 
and then Dick said: — 

"Joyce, this is on your land — for it is yours till to- 
morrow — and you may as well keep it — possession is 
nine points of the law — and if we take the gold out, 
the government can only try to claim it. But if they 
take it, we may ask in vain ! " Joyce answered : — 

"Take it I will, an' gladly; but not for meself. The 
money was sent for Ireland's good — to help them that 
wanted help, an' plase God ! I'll see it does'nt go asthray 
now ! " 

Dick's argument was a sensible one, and straightway 
we wrenched the top off the chest, and began to remove 



350 THE snake's pass. 

tlie gold; but we never stirred the chest or took away 
those skeleton hands from the handles which they 
grasped. 

It took ns all, carrying a good load each, to "bring 
the money to Joyce's cottage. We locked it in a great 
oak chest, and warned Miss Joyce not to say a word 
about it. I told Miss Joyce that if Andy came for me 
he was to be sent on to us, explaining that we were going 
back to the top of the new ravine. 

We followed it up further, till we reached a point 
much higher up on the hill, and at last came to the 
cleft in the rock whence the stream issued. The floor 
here was rocky, and it being so, we did not hesitate to 
descend, and even to enter the chine. As we did so, 
Dick turned to me : — 

" Well ! it seems to me that the mountain is giving 
up its secrets to-day. We have found the Frenchmen's 
treasure, and now we may expect, I suppose, to find 
the lost crown ! By George ! though, it is strange ! 
they said the Snake became the Shifting Bog, and that 
it went out, by the Shleenanaher ! — as we saw the bog 
did." 

When we got well into the chine, we began to look 
about us curiously. There was something odd — some- 
thing which we did not expect. Dick was the most 
prying, and certainly the most excited of us all. He 
touched some of the rock, and then almost shouted : — 

" Hurrah ! this a day of discoveries. — Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! " 



THE FULFILMENT. 351 

" Now, Dick, what is it ? " I asked — myself in a 
tumult, for his enthusiasm, although we did not know 
the cause, excited as all. 

"Why! man, don't you see! this is what we have 
wanted all along," 

"What is? Speak out, man dear! We are all in 
ignorance ! " Dick laid his hand impressively on the 
rock : — 

"Limestone! There is a streak of it here, right 
through the mountain — and, moreover, look! look! — 
this is not all nature's work — these rocks have been 
cut in places by the hands of men ! " We all got very 
excited, and hurried up the chine ; but the rocks now 
joined over our heads, and all was dark beyond, and 
the chine became a cave. 

" Has anyone a match — we must have a light of 
some kind here," said Joyce. 

" There is the lantern in the house. I shall run for 
it. Don't stir until I get back," I cried ; and I ran 
out and climbed the side of the ravine, and got to 
Joyce's house as soon as I could. My haste and im- 
petuosity frightened Miss Joyce, who called in terror: — 

"Is there anything wrong — not an accident I hope?" 

" No ! no ! we only want to examine a rock, and 
the place is dark. Give us the lantern quick, and 
some matches." 

" Aisy ! aisy, alanna ! " she said. " The rock won't 
run away ! " 

I took the lantern and matches and ran back. When 



352 the snake's pass. 

we had lit the lantern, Norah suggested that we should 
be very careful, as there might be foul air about. Dick 
laughed at the idea. 

"No foul air here, Norah; it was full of water a 
few hours ago," and taking the lantern, he went into 
the narrow opening. We all followed, Norah clinging 
tightly to me. The cave widened as we entered, and 
we stood in a moderate sized cavern, partly natural 
and partly hollowed out by rough tools. Here and 
there, were inscriptions in strange character, formed 
by straight vertical lines something like the old tele- 
graph signs, but placed differently. 

" Ogham ! — one of the oldest and least known of 
writings," said Dick, when the light fell on them as 
he raised the lantern. 

At the far end of the cave was a sort of slab or 
bracket, formed of a part of the rock carven out. Norah 
went towards it, and called us to her with a loud cry. 
We all rushed over, and Dick threw the light of the 
lantern on her; and then exclamations of wonder burst 
from us also. 

In her hand she held an ancient crown of strange form. 
It was composed of three pieces of flat gold joined all 
along one edge, like angle iron, and twisted delicately. 
The gold was wider and the curves bolder in the centre, 
from which they were fined away to the ends and then 
curved into a sort of hook. In the centre was set a great 
stone, that shone with the yellow light of a topaz, but 
with a fire all its own ! 



THE FULFILMENT. 358 

Dick was the first to regain his composure and, as 
usual, to speak : — 

" The Lost Crown of Gold ! — the crown that gave the 
hill its name, and was the genesis of the story of St. 
Patrick and the King of the Snakes! Moreover, see, 
there is a scientific basis for the legend. Before this 
stream cut its way out through the limestone, and made 
this cavern, the waters were forced upwards to the lake 
at the top of the hill, and so kept it supplied ; but when 
its channel was cut here — or a way opened for it by some 
convulsion of nature, or the rending asunder of these 
rocks — the lake fell away." 

He stopped, and I went on: — 

" And sq, ladies and gentlemen, the legend is true, 
that the Lost Crown would be discovered when the water 
of the lake was found again." 

" Begor ! that's thrue, anyhow ! " said the voice of 
Andy in the entrance. " Well, yer 'an'r, iv all the 
sthrange things what iver happened, this is the most 
sthrangest ! Fairies isn't in it this time, at all, *at 
all ! " 

I told Andy something of what had happened, in- 
cluding the terrible deaths of Murdock and Moynahan, 
and sent him off to tell the head constable of police, 
and any one else he might see. I told him also of the 
two skeletons found beside the chest. 

Andy was off like a rocket. Such news as he had 
to tell would not come twice in a man's lifetime, and 
would make him famous through all the country-side. 

A A 



354 THE snake's pass. 

When he was gone, we decided that we had seen all 
that was worth while, and agreed to go back to the 
house, where we might be on hand to answer all queries 
regarding the terrible occurrences of the night. When 
we got outside the cave, and had ascended the ravine, 
I noticed that the crown in Koran's hands had now 
none of the yellow glare of the jewel, and feared the 
latter had been lost. I said to her : — 

" Nor ah, dear ! have you dropped the jewel from the 
crown ? " 

She held it up, startled, to see ; and then we all won- 
dered again — for the jewel was still there, but it had lost 
its yellow colour, and shone with a white light, some- 
thing like the lustre of a pearl seen in the midst of the 
flash of diamonds. It looked like some kind of uncut 
crystal, but none of us had ever seen anything like it. 

We had hardly got back to the house when the result 
of Andy's mission began to be manifested. Every soul 
in the country-side seemed to come pouring in to see the 
strange sights at Knockcalltecrore. There was a perfect 
babel of sounds ; and every possible and impossible story, 
and theory, and conjecture was ventilated at the top of 
the voice of every one, male and female. 

The head constable was one of the first to arrive. 
He came into the cottage, and we gave him all the re- 
quired details of Murdock's and Moynahan's death, 
which he duly wrote down, and then went off with Dick 
to go over the ground. 

Presently there was a sudden silence amongst the 



THE FULFILMENT. 355 

crowd outside, the general body of which seemed to con- 
tinue as great as ever from the number of new arrivals 
— despite the fact that a large number of those present 
had followed Dick and the head constable in their inves- 
tigation of the scene of the catastrophe. The silence 
was as odd as noise would have been under ordinary 
circustances, so I went to the door to see what it meant. 
In the porch I met Father Eyan, who had just come 
from the scene of the disaster. He shook me warmly 
by the hand, and said loudly, so that all those around 
might 'hear : — 

"Mr. Severn, I'm real glad and thankful to see ye 
this day. Praise be to God, that watched over ye last 
night, and strengthened the arms of that brave girl to 
hold ye up." Here Norah came to join us ; and he 
took her warmly by both hands, whilst the people 
cheered : — 

" My ! but we're all proud of ye ! Eemember that 
God has given a great mercy through your hands 
— and ye both must thank Him all the days of 
your life! And those poor men that met their death 
so horribly — poor Moynahan, in his drunken slumber ! 
Men! it's a warning to ye all! Whenever ye may be 
tempted to take a glass too much, let the fate of that 
poor soul rise up before ye and forbid ye to go too far. 
As for that unhappy Murdock, may God forgive him 
and look lightly on his sins ! I told him what he 
should expect — that the fate of Ahab and Jezebel would 
be his. For as Ahab coveted the vineyard of his neigh- 



356 THE snake's pass. 

bour Naboth, and as Jezebel wrought evil to aid him 
to his desire, so this man hath coveted his neighbour's 
goods and wrought evil to ruin him. And now behold 
his fate, even as the fate of Ahab and Jezebel! He 
went without warning and without rites — and no man 
knows where his body lies. The fishes of the sea 
have preyed on him, even as the dogs on Jezebel." 
Here Joyce joined us, and he turned to him: — 

" And do you, Michael Joyce, take to heart the lesson 
of God's goodness ! Ye thought when yer land and 
yer house was taken that a great wrong was done ye, 
and that God had deserted ye ; and yet so inscrutable 
are His ways that these very things were the salvation 
of ye and all belonging to ye. For in his stead you 
and yours would have been swept in that awful 
avalanche into the sea ! " 

And now the head constable returned with Dick, and 
the priest went out. I took the former aside and asked 
him if there would be any need for Norah to remain, 
as there were other witnesses to all that had occurred. 
He told me that there was not the slightest need. Then 
he went away after telling the people that we all had 
had a long spell of trouble and labour, and would want 
to be quiet and have some rest. And so, with a good 
feeling and kindness of heart which I have never seen 
lacking in this people, they melted away ; and we all came 
within the house, and shut the door, and sat round the 
fire to discuss what should be done. Then and there we 
decided that the very next day Norah should start with 



THE FULFILMENT. 357 

her father, for the change of scene would do her good, 
and take her mind off the terrible experiences of last 
night. 

So that day we rested. The next morning Andy was 
to drive Joyce and Korah and myself off to Galway, en 
route for London and Paris. 

In the afternoon Norah and I strolled out together 
for one last look at the beautiful scene from our table- 
rock in the Cliff Fields. Close as we had been hitherto, 
there was now a new bond between us ; and when we 
were out of sight of prying eyes — on the spot where we 
had first told our loves, I told her of my idea of the new 
bond. She hung down her head, but drew closer to 
me as I told her how much more I valued my life 
since she had saved it for me — and how I should 
in all the two years that were to come try hard that 
every hour should be such as she would like me to have 



" Norah, dear ! " I said, " the bar you place on our 
seeing each other in all that long time will be hard to 
bear, but I shall know that I am enduring for your sake." 
She turned to me, and with earnest eyes looked lovingly 
into mine as she said : — 

4< Arthur ! dear Arthur, God knows I love you ! I 
love you so well that I want to come to you, if I can, in 
such a way that I may never do you discredit ; and I 
am sure that when the two years are over — and, indeed, 
they will not go lightly for me — you will not be sorry 
that you have made the sacrifice for me. Dear ! I shall 



358 the snake's pass. 

ask you when we meet on our wedding morning if you 
are satisfied." 

When it was time to go home we rose up, and — it 
might have been that the evening was chilly — a cold 
feeling came over me, as though I still stood in the 
shadow of the fateful hill. And there in the Cliff Fields 
I kissed Norah Joyce for the last time ! 

The two years sped quickly enough, although my not 
being able to see Norah at all was a great trial to me. 
Often and often I felt tempted almost beyond endur- 
ance to go quietly and hang round where she was so 
that I might get even a passing glimpse of her ; but I 
felt that such would not be loyal to my dear girl. It 
was hard not to be able to tell her, even now and 
again, how I loved her, but it had been expressly 
arranged — and wisely enough too — that I should only 
write in such a manner as would pass, if necessary, the 
censorship of the schoolmistress. " I must be," said 
Norah to me, " exactly as the other girls are — and, 
of course, I must be subject to the same rules." And 
so it was that my letters had to be of a tempered 
warmth, which caused me now and again considerable 
pain. 

My dear girl wrote to me regularly, and although 
there was not any of what her schoolmistress would call 
" love" in her letters, she always kept me posted in all her 
doings ; and with every letter it was borne in on me that 
her heart and feelings were unchanged. 



THE FULFILMENT. 359 

I had certain duties to attend to with regard to my 
English property, and this kept me fairly occupied. 

Each few months I ran over to the Knockcalltecrore, 
which Dick was transforming into a fairyland. The 
discovery of the limestone had, as he had conjectured, 
created possibilities in the way of building and of water- 
works of which at first we had not dreamed. The new 
house rose on the table-rock in the Cliff Fields. A 
beautiful house it was, of red sandstone with red tiled 
roof and quaint gables, and jutting windows and balus- 
trades of carven stone. The whole Cliff Fields were laid 
out as exquisite gardens, and the murmur of water was 
everywhere. None of this I ever told Norah in my 
letters, as it was to be a surprise to her. 

On the spot where she had rescued me we had reared 

a great stone — a monolith whereon a simple legend told 

the story of a woman's strength and bravery. Eound 

its base were sculptured the history of the mountain 

from its legend of the King of Snakes down to the lost 

treasure and the rescue of myself. This was all carried 

out under Dick's eye. The legend on the stone was : — 

Norah Joyce 

a Brave Woman 

on this spot 

by her Courage and Devotion 

saved a man's life. 

At the end of the first year Norah went to another 
school at Dresden for six months ; and then, by her 
own request to Mr. Chapman, was transferred to an 



360 THE snake's pass. 

English school at Brighton, one justly celebrated amongst 
Englishwomen. 

These last six months were very, very long to me ; for 
as the time drew near when I might claim my darling 
the suspense grew very great, and I began to have 
harrowing fears lest her love might not have survived 
the long separation and the altered circumstances. 

I heard regularly from Joyce. He had gone to live 
with his son Eugene, who was getting along well, and 
was already beginning to make a name for himself as an 
engineer. By his advice his father had taken a sub- section 
of the great Ship Canal, then in progress of construction, 
and with the son's knowledge and his own shrewdness 
and energy was beginning to realize what to him was a 
fortune. So that the purchase-money of Shleenanaher, 
which formed his capital, was used to a good purpose. 

At last the long period of waiting came to an end. 
A month before Norah's school was finished, Joyce went 
to Brighton to see her, having come to visit me before- 
hand. His purpose and mine was to arrange all about 
the wedding, which we wanted to be exactly as she 
wished. She asked her father to let it be as quiet as 
possible, with absolutely no fuss — no publicity, and in 
some quiet place where no one knew us. 

" Tell Arthur," she said, " that I should like it to be 
somewhere near the sea, and where we can get easily 
on the Continent." 

I fixed on Hythe, which I had been in the habit of 
visiting occasionally, as the place where we were to be 



THE FULFILMENT. 361 

married. Here, high over the sea level, rises the grand 
old church where the bones of so many brave old Norse- 
men rest after a thousand years. The place was so near 
to Folkestone that after the wedding and an informal 
breakfast we could drive over to catch the mid- day 
boat. I lived the requisite time in Hythe, and complied 
with all the formalities. 

I did not see my darling until we met in the church- 
porch, and then I gazed on her with unstinted admiration. 
Oh ! what a peerless beauty she was ! Every natural 
grace and quality seemed developed to the full. Every 
single grace of womanhood was there — every subtle mani- 
festation of high breeding — every stamp of the highest 
culture. There was no one in the porch — for those with 
' me delicately remained in the church when they saw me 
go out to meet my bride — and I met her with a joy 
unspeakable. Joyce went in and left her with me a 
moment — they had evidently arranged to do so — but 
when we were quite alone she said to me with a very 
serious look : — 

" Mr. Severn, before we go into the church answer me 
one question — answer me truthfully, I implore you ! " A 
great fear came upon me that at the last I was to 
suffer the loss of her I loved— that at the moment when 
the cup of happiness was at my lips it was to be 
dashed aside — and it was with a hoarse voice and a 
beating heart I answered : — 

" I shall speak truly, Norah ! What is it ? " She said 
very demurely : — 



362 THE SNAKE'S pass. 

" Mr. Severn ! are you satisfied with me?" I looked 
up and caught the happy smile in her eyes, and for 
answer took her in my arms to kiss her : but she said : — 

"Not yet, Arthur! not yet! What would they say? 
And besides, it would be unlucky." So I released her, 
and she took my arm, and as we came up the aisle 
together I whispered to her: — 

" Yes, my darling ! Yes ! yes ! a thousand times. 
The time has been long, long; but the days were well 
spent J " She looked at me with a glad, happy look 
as she murmured in my ear: — 

" We shall see Italy soon, dear, together. I am so 
happy ! " and she pinched my arm. 

That was a very happy wedding, and as informal as 
it was happy. As Norah had no bridesmaid, Dick, who 
was to have been my best man, was not going to act; 
but when Norah knew this she insisted on it, and said 
sweetly : — 

" I should not feel I was married properly unless Dick 
took his place. And as to my having no bridesmaid, all 
I can say is, if we had half so good a girl friend, she 
would be here, of course ! " 

This settled the matter, and Dick with his usual grace 
and energy carried out the best man's chief duty of 
taking care of his principal's hat. 

There were only our immediate circle present, Joyce 
and Eugene, Miss Joyce — who had come all the way 
from Knocknacar, Mr. Chapman, and Mr. Caicy — who had 
also come over from Galway specially. There was one 



THE FULFILMENT. 3G3 

other old friend also present, but I did not know it until 
I came out of the vestry, after signing the register, with 
my wife on my arm. 

There, standing modestly in the background, and with 
a smile as manifest as a ten acre field, was none other 
than Andy — Andy so well dressed and smart that there 
was really nothing to distinguish him from any other 
man in Hythe. Norah saw him first, and said heartily : — 

"Why, there is Andy! How are you, Andy?" and 
held out her hand. Andy took it in his great fist, and 
stooped and kissed it as if it had been a saint's hand 
and not a woman's : — 

" God bless and keep ye, Miss Norah darlin' — an' the 
Virgin and the saints watch over ye both." Then he 
shook hands with me. 

" Thank you, Andy !" we said both together, and then I 
beckoned Dick and whispered to him. 

We went back to breakfast in my rooms, and sat down 
as happy a party as could be — the only one not quite 
comfortable at first being Andy. He and Dick both came 
in quite hot and flushed. Dick pointed to him: — 

" He's an obstinate, truculent villain, is Andy. Why, I 
had to almost fight him to make him come in. Now, 
Andy, no running away — it is Miss Norah's will!" and 
Andy subsided bashfully into a seat. It was fully several 
minutes before he either smiled or winked. We had a 
couple of hours to pass before it became time to leave 
for Folkestone; and when breakfast was over, one and 
then another said a few kindly words. Dick opened the 



364 the snake's pass. 

ball by speaking most beautifully of our own worthiness, 
and of how honestly and honourably each had won the 
other, and of the long life and happiness that lay, he 
hoped and believed, before us. Then Joyce spoke a few 
manly words of his love for his daughter and his pride 
in her. The tears were in his eyes when he said how 
his one regret in life was that her dear mother had to 
look down from Heaven her approval on this day, instead 
of sharing it amongst us as the best of mothers and 
the best of women. Then Norah turned to him and 
laid her head on his breast and cried a little — not un- 
happily, but happily, as a bride should cry at leaving 
those she loves for one she loves better still. 

Of course both the lawyers spoke, and Eugene said a 
few words bashfully. I was about to reply to them all, 
when Andy got up and crystallized the situation in a few 
words : — 

" Miss Norah an' yer 'an'r, I'd like, if I might make 
so bould, to say a wurrd fur all the men and weemen in 
Ireland that ayther iv yez iver kem across. I often heerd 
iv fairies, an' Masther Art knows well how he hunted 
wan from the top iv Knocknacar to the top iv Knock - 
calltecrore, and I won't say a wurrd about the kind iv a 
fairy he wanted to find — not even in her quare kind 
iv an eye — bekase I might be overlooked, as the masther 
was ; and more betoken, since I kem here Masther Dick 
has tould me that I'm to be yer 'an'r's Irish coachman. 
Hurroo! an' I might get evicted from that same houldin' 
fur me impidence in tellin' tales iv the Masther before 



THE FULFILMENT. 36*5 

he was married ; but I'll promise yez both that there'll be 
no man from the Giant's Causeway to Cape Clear what'll 
thry, an' thry hardher, to make yer feet walk an' yer 
wheels rowl in aisy ways than meself . I'm takin' a liberty, 
I know, be sayin' so much, but plase God ! ye' 11 walk 
yer. ways wid honour an' wid peace, believin' in aich 
other an' in God — an' may He bless ye both, an' yer 
childher, and yer childher's childher to folly ye. An' 
if iver ayther iv yez wants to shtep into glory over a 
man's body, I hope ye' 11 not look past poor ould Andy 
Sullivan ! " 

Andy's speech was quaint, but it was truly meant, for 
his heart was full of quick sympathy, and the honest 
fellow's eyes were full of tears as he concluded. 

Then Miss Joyce's health was neatly proposed by Mr. 
Chapman and responded to in such a way by Mr. Caicy 
that Norah whispered me that she would not be sur- 
prised if Aunt took up her residence in Galway before 
long. 

And now the hour was come to say good-bye to all 
friends. We entered our carriage and rolled away, leav- 
ing behind us waving hands, loving eyes, and hearts that 
beat most truly. 

And the great world lay before us with all the possi- 
bilities of happiness that men and women may win for 
themselves. There was never a cloud to shadow our sun- 
lit way; and we felt that we were one. 




CHISWICK PRESS:— C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT, 
CHANCERY LANE. 



