The Slave 



IRew 6s. IRovels 



Mammon & Co. 

By E. F. BENSON 

The Market Place 

By HAROLD FREDERIC 

Jaspar Tristram 
By A. W. CLARKE 

The Awkward Age 

By HENRY JAMES 

Hearts Importunate 

By EVELYN DICKINSON 

The Virgins of the Rocks 
By GABRIBLE D'ANNUNZIO 

The Confounding of Camelia 
By ANNK D. SEDGWICK 

Via Lucis 

By KANSANDRA VIVARIA 

The Maternity of Harriott Wicken 
By Mrs. HENRY DUDENEY 

LONDON : WM. HEINEMANN 
"21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 






The Slave 



A Romance 




By 

Robert Hichens 

Author of "Flames," "The Green Carnation," etc. 




London 

William Heinemann 
1899 




: 

v x & 

' : ^// 



All rights, including translation, reserved 



This Edition enjoys copyright in all countries 
signatory to the Berne Treaty, and is 
not to be imported into the United States 
of A merica. 



The Slave 



CHAPTER I 

ON a morning in May two men were strolling in the new sunshine 
of London along Piccadilly. One was elderly and brown, with a 
skin resembling parchment, keen and piercing eyes, a wizened 
figure that had been always small and that now began to shrink, 
and hair and beard flecked with white. The other was a tall and 
straight boy of about twenty-three, with fine features, large blue 
eyes, and very thick and smooth hair, dark brown in colour and 
growing low 011 his forehead. The boy was very well dressed in 
the height of the fashion, and had something of the conventional, 
and yet elaborate aspect of the true dandy. The elderly man, on 
the other hand, had a baggy appearance. His suit had come from 
a good tailor, but it had apparently suffered an irretrievable collapse 
on first perceiving its wearer, and, unable to recover, it now hung 
about his figure dejectedly, and gave itself to the breeze or to the 
dust in a manner so abandoned as almost to suggest impropriety. 
It were impossible to find in all London two men whose aspects 
more plainly hinted that they were unsuitable companions. If 
their mere modes of dress showed a strong difference between 
them, this was emphasised by the expressions, wary and unwaver- 
ing, of their eyes, by their strangely dissimilar gaits, even by their 
hands and by the manner in which they held their walking-canes. 
The elderly man grasped his firmly with thin and crooked fingers, 
and struck it sharply upon the pavement as he shuffled onwards. 
The young man held his lightly, almost frivolously, in the way of 
a hundred other young men who passed them by, going to clubs or 
to the Park. Many of these young men nodded to him gaily. 
Some glanced at his companion, but no one seemed to know him. 

" I realise to-day for the first time how long I have been away," 
said the elderly man, whose name was Sir Reuben Allabruth. 
" Piccadilly contains a world of strangers. Even you you, Aubrey," 

A* 



2 THE SLAVE 

he hesitated obviously before uttering the last word, "are a stranger. 
You were a schoolboy when I started on my travels. Now you're 
what a girl calls a pretty boy a young man with a straight nose 
and an air. Your mother's prouder of you now than she was even 
when you were at Eton, but I " 

He paused and sighed, and his sigh was ugly. 

" You liked me better as a schoolboy ? " said the young man in 
a conventional voice. 

Sir Reuben glanced at him sideways. 

*' I knew you better/' he answered. " I've been away too long. 
Even my few real friends seem like strangers." 

" Except mother, surely ? " said the young man. 

" Ah ! But your mother's unique, Aubrey," Sir Reuben an- 
swered, with a flash of feeling that had in it a touch of the 
grotesque. 

" Of course. I know that," Aubrey said, with the slight impa- 
tience of one compelled to receive a truism. 

He took off his hat to a dowager in purple, who made havoc of 
the beauty of the gentle morning in a barouche with bright yellow 
wheels. She smiled at him with the elephantine indulgence of a 
stout woman for a slim youth. 

"That surely that isn't Lady Helen Marchmont ? " said Sir 
Reuben, looking after her. 

" Yes. You knew her, didn't you ? " 

"She dined with me whenever I asked her. But that was 
eight years ago. She didn't recognise me. I suppose I have 
altered more than she has." 

" Well, you know you're much whiter than you were," said 
Aubrey calmly, in the cool and unemotional voice of youth. 

" Of course. Any other change ? " 

" You look a bit tired out," the young man answered frankly. 
" Those hot climates, I suppose." 

Sir Reuben glanced at him sharply, as if to surprise a sneer. 
He failed to surprise one, and then, remembering his companion's 
boy-nature, wondered at his own expectation and at the forgetful- 
ness which had caused it. 

" The hot climates ! " he answered. " Yes, I suppose so. But 
your mother didn't seem to notice much change in my appearance." 

" Oh, mother never notices anything of that kind," Aubrey 
said. 

And again Sir Reuben was startled by his lack of memory. 

" Ah, no ! I remember," he said. " But if I had not altered, 
she might have remarked it." 

" Yes. How hot the sun is ! " 

" It seems very cold to me," said Sir Reuben. 



THE SLAVE 3 

They did not seem to have very much to say to each other, and 
yet it was easy to note that they were, or had been, upon very 
familiar terms. The youth was perfectly at his ease. It was Sir 
Reuben who was a little anxious-minded, staccato, and apologetic 
at first. Yet, as they walked, with each step he took he appeared 
to be regaining an equanimity that was really natural to him. 
London is like an odd and difficult game to the man who has not 
played it for a number of years ; but, if he has ever played it well, 
he soon remembers his old cunning, and faces the complexities of 
the game with an assured vivacity. By the time the walkers drew 
near to Bond Street Sir Reuben was happier. He had greeted 
two acquaintances, who had instantly recognised him. Perhaps 
this recognition gave him courage, or perhaps old custom breathed 
into him certaintv and relief. He grew brighter, raised his head, 
and walked with lighter steps. 

" I shall soon feel at home," he said. 

" You in town ! I should think so," Aubrey answered. 

" And yet," said Sir Reuben, " not as you are never as you 
are." 

He looked his companion over sharply. 

" London fits you like a glove, like a glove from Vennings." 

Aubrey smiled. 

" It isn't Vennings for gloves now," he said. 

" No ? " 

" Richards and Clayfield's the place now." 

" I'll go there and get some gloves. Where ? " 

" Bond Street the right as you go towards Oxford Street." 

" Thank you ! Yes, Aubrey, London fits you now, as Eton did 
when I went away." 

The youth smiled rather cynically. 

" You think so ? " 

"Every one must." 

" Perhaps every one in London. If we don't seem to fit our 
environment I think we are fools." 

They turned into Bond Street. 

"You would be at home anywhere?" asked Sir Reuben. 

" I hope I should seem to be," Aubrey answered. 

He spoke in a voice that was exactly like the voices of a 
thousand perfectly bred young men. Its intonations are the 
common property of a certain world. Sir Reuben had spent more 
years in London than all the years of Aubrey Herrick's life without 
catching one of them. It is true that he had not desired to catch 
them, and now he heard them come from the youth at his side 
with a sensation of disappointment. So her son, too, must be 
poured into the mould, must be cast, as it were, and turned out a 



THE SLAVE 

statuette like all the other statuettes. Dolls of women/ statuettes 
of men, he saw them on every side of him. He had expected to 
see them, had known that he must see them. Yet the contempt of 
one of an alien race rose in him as he watched their antics and 
heard their voices similar as the voices of two Punches, though 
certainly more melodious. 

The Prince drove by. He was in a brougham. He caught 
sight of Aubrey and nodded. 

" I wonder when he will be dining with me again/' Sir Reuben 
thought. 

Bond Street was full of women going to their dressmakers. 
Many of them were walking and carried purses in their hands. 
They had an air of preoccupation, and moved slowly with their 
faces turned towards the windows of the shops. They were often 
silent. Those who talked spoke of hats and bonnets, of opera wraps, 
of the dominating colour the momentary queen of the hues of the 
world of the most becoming tint for the hair, of the latest 
powder, of the latest essence, of the prettiest flower for a table 
decoration, of the proper height of diamond combs, of the charm 
or the reverse of a throat seen on either side of a tight collar of 
pearls in the evening, of the utility of earrings in lighting up 
a dark face, of the absurdity of a modiste who permitted her 
oldest clients to appear old. Their gowns rustled gently as they 
walked, and paused, with elvish consideration, before the acres of 
plate glass. One dropped her purse. Sir Reuben picked it up 
and gave it to her. She thanked him with a pretty stare, turned 
to her companion and spoke, with a pale animation, of feather 
boas, and of a coat which she had seen made of the breasts of sea- 
birds. Two women drove by in a victoria. They were both 
celebrities, were both very thin, with white faces, dust-coloured 
hair, and moony smiles. Their long hands lay in their laps, and 
they talked, in soft and childish voices, of the last new play, 
condemning it. Seeing Aubrey, they shed their artificial moon- 
light upon him, and moved on behind their prancing horses. 

"Will-power makes them so thin," Aubrey said to Sir Reuben. 

"They look half-starved," he replied. 

" Oh no ; they have no idea of starving themselves. Who has 
in London ? " 

He spoke with such a calm simplicity that Sir Reuben did not 
pause to wonder if he were a cynic. They were now a little way 
down Bond Street, moving slowly through the crawling women 
whose eyes were turned to the windows. Laces fluttered against 
them. Flashing silks beset them as the leaves of the trees beset 
a man who passes through a forest. The air was full of the soft 
murmur of feminine voices and of the music of lightly falling feet. 



THE SLAVE 5 

Sir Reuben woke gradually to a curious consciousness of excite- 
ment. It was more than seven years since he had heard the 
rustle of a London crowd of smart women, and he had forgotten 
its subtle enchantment until now. His large dark eyes began to 
glow. A smile hovered on his flexible lips. He grasped his cane 
more tightly, and felt almost like a boy at a fair. Presently he 
glanced towards Aubrey, and met the calm and reserved gaze 
of his steady blue eyes. He was totally unconcerned, and Sir 
Reuben grew red in the secret consciousness of his own boyish 
elevation. He thought, " Nowadays it is only the old who can 
have sensations," and yet he wished that he were young. Then, 
answering Aubrey's calm gaze, he said 

" It seems quite strange to me to see so many Englishwomen 
again, after the eternal veils of the East, and to see them just as 
they were eight years ago." 
" Looking into shops ? " 

" Exactly ! They will be looking into shops on the morning of 
the Judgment Day. How easy it is to foresee the life and to 
foretell the future of many women." 
" Do you think so ? " 

" Don't you ? Now, for instance " 

He paused and glanced around. Then he touched his com- 
panion's arm and whispered 
" Look there ! " 

As they walked down the street they had come near to a" 
famous jewel-shop. The crowd had thinned a little here, and 
they were able to see some short distance before them. Aubrey's 
eyes followed the gaze of Sir Reuben. It was fixed upon a girl 
who was standing very still before the jewel-shop. She was dressed 
with simplicity in black and grey, and wore a small hat which 
showed her face and hair distinctly. In figure she was tall and 
thin, like a thousand English girls ; but, seen near, she was unlike 
them all. The live pallor of her face is sometimes seen in Italy, 
but in that country it is generally framed in dark hair. Her hair 
was very light and sparkling, as if it had been daintily frosted with 
some golden powder. Her features were small and aristocratic, 
and her eyes were very long and grey and full of glittering fire. 
The head was small and perfectly poised, the mouth at the same 
time cold and eager. She was a beauty, and a beauty of an un- 
common type, fresh without being rosy, calm without being blurred 
and dull. Nevertheless it was her pose rather than her appearance 
that had riveted the eyes of Sir Reuben. In Bond Street that 
pose was peculiar, because it suggested a deep unconsciousness of 
place. It was surely the still bodily expression of a most absolute 
interest of the soul. Such an interest of the soul is remarkable in 



6 THE SLAVE 

solitude, but it is far more remarkable in a crowd. This girl was 
evidently for the moment alone, so far as she was aware. She paid 
no heed to anything except to the shop-window before which she 
was standing. Her white face was strangely intent. Her long 
grey eyes were fixed, almost as are fixed the open eyes of one who 
dreams. By her side, unnoticed and obviously a little bored, waited 
a small and wispy woman in black, whose meek attitude was almost 
pathetic, and whose neat gown could have belonged to no one but 
a lady's-maid. The girl was gazing at some jewels. Behind the 
plate-glass of the shop there was a gentle slope of pale amber 
velvet, over which a number of small and shaded electric lights 
shed a strong white radiance. Stretched upon this velvet slope 
were diamonds a chain, earrings, bracelets, a watch, a pendant, a 
narrow crown. They sparkled fiercely and glowed with a brilliance 
that was angry. The amber velvet was their humble foil. As 
they shone out to the street they were like contemptuous living 
things, indifferent in their glory as a woman who has her foot on 
the world. And the depths of their silver fire seemed illimitable. 
In these depths the absorbed girl drowned herself with a grave 
eagerness that was like the eagerness of sensuality. Her lips 
parted. Her eyes began to shine. Her small nostrils widened. 
And then suddenly there floated into her face a sort of mist of 
romance, of the romance of jewelled things in which lives light 
and changing radiance. She had been intent. She became ima- 
ginative. She had been watching a soul in her eyes. She 
seemed now to be thinking a soul in her heart. The loveliness 
of dreaming ran over her and the magic of desire. She developed 
softly into a still marvel of expression under the piercing influence 
of the angry jewels, which glittered at her, and at the indifferent 
crowd that flowed by her, with the impudence of accomplished 
courtesans. 

As Sir Reuben touched his arm Aubrey's serenity was broken. 
When he saw the girl before the window he started slightly and 
flushed like a boy. But in an instant he had recovered himself, 
and Sir Reuben was unaware of the little cloud of emotion that had 
floated over him. Still touching his arm, Sir Reuben murmured 
in his ear 

"For instance, the future of that girl can't you read it?" 

"No," Aubrey said with a cold abruptness. 

"It will be a future of jewels, a diamond future." 

"I don't agree with you," Aubrey answered quickly, and with 
a flash of anger that startled his companion. " You are utterly 
wrong mistaken." 

As he spoke he moved forward till he stood by the girl before 
the diamonds. He raised his hat and addressed some words to her. 






THE SLAVE 7 

She turned slowly, withdrawing her eyes from the jewels as if the 
action were a renunciation which hurt her physically. It seemed 
that she was indeed a dreamer who could only return from dream- 
land with pain. But when she saw Aubrey, her lips curved up- 
wards in a smile and she held out her hand. 

" Aren't those diamonds pretty ? " she said lightly. 

" Beautiful ! Do you want them ?" 

This was said for Sir Reuben. 

" I suppose all women want pretty things, now and then, for a 
moment; and men too." 

A gleam of coquetry had come into her eyes. 

"Sometimes men want pretty things for longer than that," 
Aubrey said, lowering his voice. 

" Do they ? " she answered. " I thought they got tired of 
things sooner than women. My mother always says so. Isn't she 
right ? Don't answer. You aren't certain. I must be going. 
Poor Marie is longing to sit down." 

It was her maid's normal condition of mind. She loved repose. 
But now, in broken English, she proclaimed a respectful preference 
for constant motion. Her young mistress smiled on her rhetoric 
indulgently, touched Aubrey's hand and moved away. Apparently 
she had not seen Sir Reuben, who, leaning on his stick, was waiting 
a few paces off. Her slim and graceful figure, attended by the 
trotting maid, was quickly lost in the crowd. 

" So you know the diamond star-gazer ?" said Sir Reuben as 
Aubrey joined him. 

" Everybody knows Lady Caryll Knox," Aubrey answered curtly. 

" Who is she ? " 

" Lord St. Ormyn's daughter." 

"St. Ormyn's daughter! She'll get no jewels from him." 

They turned into a club of which Aubrey was a member. The 
long smoking-room on the ground floor was almost deserted at this 
hour of the morning. They sat down and Sir Reuben lit a cigar. 
He had realised London now and regained his normal ugly self- 
possession. 

" She is the daughter who was at school in France when I went 
away," he continued. " People used to say that St. Ormyn was 
educating her to be a governess, because he'd been hit so hard by 
the death duties." 

Aubrey said nothing. Apparently the conversation did not 
please him. He looked at his varnished boots meditatively. 

"Is St. Ormyn as poor as ever?" Sir Reuben asked. 

" Poorer." 

" I should have thought that was impossible. But Lady Caryll 
won't be a governess." 



8 THE SLAVE 

" No ? " 

Sir Reuben looked at his young companion. 

" No. She has made up her mind what her life is to be." 

" Really ! " Aubrey said, lighting a cigarette slowly. 

" Yes. How sensible that is ! To succeed one must be a 
specialist, and one must make up one's mind, when young, what is 
to be one's metier. It is quite useless to be versatile in these 
ci'owded days. If you do two things well, you are considered an 
amateur ; if three, a fribble. But if you do only one well, you may 
be a success. Imagine a doctor who was known as a first-rate 
doctor and as a first-rate painter. Who would give him a pulse to 
feel ? who would buy his pictures ? The shadow of medicine would 
blight his artistic career ; the shadow of art would blight his pro- 
fessional triumph. Successful people are one-sided. Lady Caryll 
is one-sided ; she sees distinctly the vista of her life to come." 

" You think so ? " Aubrey said, crossing his long legs with deli- 
beration and speaking with a slightly frosty slowness. 

" I am sure of it." 

" And what is it, then ? " 

"A vista of jewels." 

Aubrey shook his head slightly, but did not speak. Sir Reuben 
repeated 

" A vista of jewels such as Aladdin may have seen when he 
descended into the enchanted cavern. Imagination is rare in 
Englishwomen, but Lady Caryll has it. As she looked at those 
diamonds she saw her jewelled life, the life that she desires, that 
she will have. She saw her days of diamonds, of blood-red rubies, 
of sapphires like the sky at night, of emeralds from the mines of 
Muzo or from the mountains of Sahara, of orange and crimson ver- 
milions from the East, and spotted turquoises from Persia." 

As he spoke it was easy to see that foreign blood ran in his 
veins; his dark eyes glowed; he was in the magic cavern with 
Aladdin, and for him each jewel was alive and scented with strange 
odours of the land from which it came ; he smelt the balmy spices 
of Ceylon, emitted with the resinous brightness of the jargoon ; 
perfumes of India came to him with the sapphire, and with the 
live sparks of the grey green variolite the wild scents of the Alps ; 
and the atmosphere of Persia, heavy with a sickliness of roses, 
hung about the cool turquoise. For the moment he was Oriental 
utterly, and drew into his high curved nostrils the breath of all the 
jewels of the world. Yet on the edge of rhapsody he paused, 
remembering that he was in London and with an English youth. 

" Did you watch Lady Caryll's face when she was looking at 
those diamonds ? " he said. 

" Yes," said Aubrey. 






THE SLAVE 



" Don't you think she cares for jewels ? " 

" As she cares for all beauty. Lady Caryll loves what is beau- 
tiful. Those diamonds are beautiful ; therefore she looked at them, 
merely for that reason." 

" And lost herself in their fire ? No, Aubrey ; she was sunk in 
a lovely dream of light and colour, perhaps, but she was facing her 
career also. She was thinking of her future as a boy does when 
he decides on his profession. She means to possess jewels, as the 
boy means to possess what ? The Victoria Cross, perhaps, if he 
is going to be a soldier, or a house in Cavendish Square if he is 
going to be a doctor. And why not ? She is like a diamond her- 
self, with that wonderful live white complexion, that sparkling 
hair, and those glittering grey eyes." 

" You have only seen her once, and you don't understand her 
at all," said Aubrey. 

He spoke quietly, but his lips tightened, and he let his eyelids 
drop lest Sir Reuben should see the expression in his eyes. 

" I have only seen her once, but I have seen many women," 
Sir Reuben replied. 

This time Aubrey showed a real impatience. 

" I hate that judging of sexes in a crowd," he said, " the women 
all on one side, the men all on the other. In a crowd of a hundred 
women there are a hundred individualities." 

" And the same little core the eternal woman in the heart 
of each ? Would you say that Lady Caryll has it ? " 

" I say that Lady Caryll is not like ordinary girls." 

" I agree with you. I saw that when I looked at her in Bond 
Street. She has a character far more strange and decisive than 
most girls." 

" Strange yes, she is that." 

" Strange as a jewel. And what, after all, is stranger than a 
jewel ? Really shallow, and yet with apparently endless depths ; 
sparkling as no living thing can sparkle, and yet dead ; a coloured 
torch to which no man has set the light. Yes, Lady Caryll is like 
a jewel, and you know, Aubrey, I understand jewels." 

Sir Reuben had started in life as a diamond merchant. 

" Jewels haven't hearts." 

" You think all women have ? " 

" I suppose so. I don't know. Some women don't seem to 
have any, in London." 

"And in the country in country-houses?" 

" Oh, they're very much the same, only a bit noisier. Lady 
t'aryll is never noisy." 

Sir Reuben smiled at this sudden return to their first subject. 

" No, I don't imagine her that," he said. 



10 THE SLAVE 

He was watching his companion with a curious grotesque sym- 
pathy. Almost everything Sir Reuben did had a touch of the 
grotesque, almost a hint of deformity in it. Yet he was obviously 
a man accustomed to society, a man of considerable cultivation. 
He was grim, and yet pathetic ; for he seemed like a man who 
has found everything, and who yet cannot entirely cease from 
seeking. Perhaps he was seeking something now, but if so, his 
young companion had no intention of rewarding him with a dis- 
covery. But Aubrey sometimes rewarded without intention, in 
the guileless fashion of youth, which thinks itself so clever, so 
subtle. 

" Is this her first season ? " Sir Reuben asked. 

" Yes." 

" Is she enjoying it ? " 

" I think so. She's not like some girls. She doesn't mind 
being poor. Some day she'll be rich, perhaps. Her great-uncle, 
Lord Verrender, is going to leave her his money. But he's good 
for twenty or thirty years yet. Lady Caryll doesn't care about 
money." 

"St. Ormyn used to care." 

" Oh, he cares still." 

"And is still directing companies?" 

" I fancy most of them have gone smash now. At present he's 
incessantly in the courts, giving evidence about people who have 
been ruined, and doing sums all wrong in the box." 

" Rather trying in hot weather. And Lady St. Ormyn ? " 

" Oh, she's all right. She doesn't care much about being a 
chaperon, but she'll get used to it." 

" Does she still wear pink bonnets ? " 

11 Oh yes." 

" She always was a faithful woman, except in matters of religion. 
I wonder if she'll be jealous of the jewels ? " 

He spoke musingly. 

" What jewels ? " Aubrey asked. 

" Her daughter's." 

"You talk as if she possessed them already." 

" I only look forward a little into her bright future." 

" Do you claim to be a prophet ? " 

" No ; only a fair judge of character." 

Aubrey was drawing on his gloves. He fidgeted with the 
buttons of one, as he replied, always in the conventional voice of 
young London 

" Not quite a fair one in this case, Sir Reuben." 

Sir Reuben made no reply. 

" Shall I prove that to you ? " said Aubrey. 



THE SLAVE 11 

" How could you ? " 

" By introducing you to Lady Caryll. When you know her 
you'll " 

" Know I've made a mistake ? " 

Aubrey nodded. 

" If I think I have, I'll acknowledge it." 

" All right ! Come into the Park this afternoon between four 
and five. She and her mother are certain to be there." 

"Lunch with me in Park Lane first." 

Aubrey hesitated. 

"I'm awfully sorry," he said. "But I can't lunch. I must 
look in at my tailor's, and at one or two places. And I break- 
fasted very late." 

" Call for me, then." 

" I will about four." 

They were at the door of the club now. Bond Street hummed 
round them. They came to the shop into which Lady Caryll 
had looked. Sir Reuben stopped Aubrey before it, and they faced 
the sparkle of the diamonds. 

" Look at them," Sir Reuben said, smiling. " What do you see 
down there in the fire of the stones?" 

" Nothing." 

" Not a face ? Not the face of Lady Caryll, the human 
diamond ? " 

"Well, I must be off to my tailor," the youth said quickly. He 
crossed the street and disappeared in the direction of Hanover 
Square. 

Sir Reuben remained for two or three minutes before the shop- 
window. He was, as he had said, a very good judge of jewels. 



CHAPTER II 

AUBREY did not go to his tailor, nor did he lunch. After he had 
parted from Sir Reuben he made a detour by way of Hanover 
Square, and presently reached his rooms in Jermyn Street. There 
he threw himself into an arm-chair and smoked rather violently 
until it was time to start for Park Lane. And while he smoked 
he thought about jewels. 

He was the third son of Lord Rangecliffe, a peer who was as 
poor as a church-mouse, although he never went to church. He 
and St. Ormyn were both very well known in London for their 
poverty, but they were poor in totally different ways. Lord 
Rangecliffe was tall, difficult in conversation, conventional in man- 
ner, and indecisive in mind. He desired to be rich, but he did 
not mean to be rich. To mean anything was extremely trying to 
him. He had never even meant to be a good husband. Never- 
theless, he had a strong sense of decorum, and it had been said 
of him that he lived under the rose. He did little for his four 
sons he had no daughters. When he found that he possessed a 
family he was a good deal surprised, but he kept his astonishment 
to himself. Later he gave his boys small allowances, and advised 
them to "do something." In pursuance of this paternal ideal, 
John, the eldest, went into the Life Guards, and Vane, the second, 
went to Ceylon with vague intentions of tea-planting. Aubrey 
was at present supposed to be engaged in looking out for some- 
thing rather in the manner of Sister Anne. The youngest boy, 
Herbert, was at Eton, following the agreeable profession of a 
"wet bob." 

As to Lord St. Ormyn, he loved to present the striking spec- 
tacle of a brave man struggling gaily with adversity. He was 
precisely five feet two inches high, with a very rosy face and a 
blond beard sprinkled with grey. A mercurial expression beamed 
in his rascally brown eyes, and his active brain was incessantly at 
work divining fresh means of ruining himself and others ; for his 
love of being perpetually with his kind had, so far, prevented him 
from even " going smash," as he called it, alone. There were 
always various well-meaning people who lost their money with 
him ; elderly country vicars witli small livings and large ideas, 

12 



THE SLAVE 13 

spinster ladies who wanted fifteen per cent, for their money, 
youthful sprigs of the aristocracy who didn't know the ropes, sub- 
urban widows and rich Americans recently arrived in London. All 
this varied crowd of people agreed in one thing they all liked 
St. Ormyn. He made it his business to know personally as many of 
those he was going to ruin as possible. At the meetings of the 
various companies with which he was connected he often took 
the chair, but he was very seldom in it ; as he said, there were so 
many hands to shake, so many shoulders to pat. St. Ormyn always 
patted men on the back directly he knew them. The action, as 
performed by him, established an extraordinary confidence between 
patter and patted, which endured at least until the last new com- 
pany went into liquidation, and often for a much longer period. 
He really was very genial, and always called himself a rascal the 
most ingenious method of persuading society that you are a 
thoroughly good, honest fellow. And then his sacrifices in the 
great cause of ruining and being ruined were enormous. He had 
even been known to lunch with one of the suburban widows at her 
semi-detached residence in Hornsey Rise and to drink to the 
health of their mutual financial operations in a glass of Australian 
burgundy. His hostess shortly afterwards found herself obliged 
to take refuge in a small boarding-house, and to complicate her 
life with the multifarious occupations of a daily nursery governess, 
but she always spoke of St. Ormyn with sentimental pride, and the 
lunch at Hornsey was one of her few precious memories. 

Lady St. Ormyn, now for the first time a chaperon, had a 
certain amount of money of her own, which she wisely kept to 
herself, long experience of St. Ormyn having bred in her a pro- 
found distrust of all men who smilingly said they were ruffians 
and couldn't help it. She was violently musical, but behaved, as 
a rule, in a most unmusical manner. A would-be wit had once 
described her as a polka played by a brass band. The image was 
not inapt. Very tall, with snow-white hair and vivacious eyes, 
she was usually dressed in light colours, and was excessively fond 
of marrons glaces, and pink bonnets. She was never alone, and 
either had a lunch-party in her own house or went to one in 
somebody else's every day of the week when she was in London. 
On Sundays she generally took down a party to a summer-house 
in a pretty garden which she possessed not far from London. On 
these occasions there was music in the afternoon, followed by 
dinner and games on the lawn in the evening. The Good Friday 
strains from " Parsifal " served as an excellent introduction to 
Kitchen Lancers and bicycle races, in which many of the most 
celebrated operatic artists of the day were glad to take part. 
Indeed, Lady St. Ormyn's Sundays were as famous as Lord St. 



14 THE SLAVE 

Ormyn's bankruptcies, and were very nearly as cheerful. Lady 
St. Ormyn went to the opera whenever Wagner was given. She 
had travelled to Bayreuth five times, and spoke of Wotan so 
familiarly that many uninstructed persons supposed him to be 
her grandfather, or an uncle from whom she had expectations. 
She loved a tenor more than most women love a soldier, and had 
once given a dinner at which no less than five notorious baritones 
were present. Lady Caryll was her only child. 

It was half-past three when Aubrey took up his hat and gloves 
and strolled out towards Sir Reuben's house in Park Lane. The 
day was hot, and all the world seemed to be out enjoying the 
sunshine. Piccadilly was thronged with that peculiarly hetero- 
geneous multitude which lives upon its narrow pavement during 
the fashionable two months and a half of the year. A great 
violinist hurried past towards St. James's Hall, his long hair, 
curving inwards at the neck, spread voluminously abroad to claim 
attention. Provincial ladies in buff-colour, and laden with strings 
of parcels, sprang eagerly towards the bun-shops. A thin clergy- 
man stared pathetically at a corner window in which eyeglasses 
were displayed in vacuous crowds. Some damsels in very large 
hats made their smiling way towards the Burlington Arcade, and 
received with simplicity the open-mouthed attention of a large 
and guileless youth who had come up for the day from Surrey 
to buy seeds. Two young actresses, very much overdressed, 
bustled past on their journey to a charitable entertainment at 
St. George's Hall. They were always performing for nothing, in 
the vain hope of obtaining recognition and a regular engagement. 
In fact, they were trying to enter the army through the militia. 
As they walked they discussed agents and the impotence of the 
leading ladies of London. A little boy in a sailor suit was being 
conveyed by his anxious mother to a fashionable dentist in George 
Street. His round face was very pale as the fatal corner of Old 
Bond Street was gained, but he struggled bravely with his emotions, 
and endeavoured to fix his mind on the eventual peace of Gunter's, 
and the rosy charms of the strawberry ice which was to greet him 
when the Rubicon was crossed. Numberless young men strolled 
forward in the sun, and numberless young maidens wondered 
about them in hansom cabs. Motor cars hissed like angry snakes, 
and omnibuses jerked along the kerbs, paused, and moved, and 
paused again. 

But Aubrey paid no heed to the turmoil, and had no thought 
for the thoughts of the pedestrians in Piccadilly. He stared at 
the little sailor who was going to the dentist, but did not see the 
round white face, and the large youth who had come up from 
Surrey to buy seeds jostled him without receiving the delicate 



THE SLAVE 15 

attention of a cold remonstrance. Aubrey was indeed singularly 
abstracted. He was thinking over the conversation of the morn- 
ing. It was a peculiarity of Sir Reuben that, although he was 
elderly, plain, and slightly grotesque, he had a singular faculty of 
impressing himself upon those with whom he was brought into 
contact. This faculty had contributed not a little to his success in 
life. It was said by unkind people that he had, on one occasion, 
succeeded to such an extent in impressing himself upon the 
Government of a certain foreign country that he had managed to 
swindle it out of about five hundred thousand pounds over some 
railways. Whether this were true or false, Sir Reuben was un- 
doubtedly supposed to be very rich, and had undoubtedly at one 
time been a power in London. He was by birth Oriental, his 
father having been an Egyptian Pasha and his mother a French 
dancer. He was born in Cairo, educated on the Continent, and 
started in life as a jewel merchant, following this sparkling pro- 
fession at first in Egypt, afterwards in London, where he was given 
a title because he was rich enough to be exceedingly useful to 
various people who shall be nameless. He had married a pretty 
Creole, who had died eight years before. Since her death he had 
lived abroad, spending long periods in the East, in India, Persia, 
Egypt, and Morocco, in which places he was vaguely supposed by 
the world to have "interests." He had now returned to London, 
much aged and considerably altered in appearance. 

Aubrey Herrick was his godson. 

This fact arose out of a very strong and remai'kable friendship 
which existed between Aubrey's mother, Lady Rangecliffe, and 
Sir Reuben. Lady Rangecliffe was a woman who was almost 
sensationally unselfish. She never thought about herself even 
when she was alone. She had originally endeavoured to live 
in her husband. As he had tacitly declined to permit such a 
loving liberty, she withdrew from him sensitively to her boys so 
soon as they were born, and spent her life in disorderly attempts 
to make them happier than any boys ought to be. For Lady 
Rangeclifle was rather untidy and surprising in her manner of life. 
It was her nature to be so. It was her temperament to lunch at 
one o'clock on Thursday and at three on the following Friday, to 
get up one morning at six and another at twelve, and to be deliri- 
ously unpunctual at all times and seasons. She was pictorial and 
imaginative, a harp with a great deal of wind entangled in its 
strings. And she was apt, from her absurdly high conception of 
the nobility of average human nature, to be abruptly confidential 
with comparative strangers. From this trait in her character had 
arisen her friendship witli Sir Reuben. Her only brother, Lord 
Henry Grale, fell into a serious monetary scrape. He was much 



16 THE SLAVE 

younger than she was, almost a boy, and came to her for assistance, 
which she was absolutely unable to give. On the evening of the 
day of his visit she dined out in much tribulation, and happened to 
sit next to Sir Reuben at dinner. She did not know him very 
well, but that made no difference. Before the third course she 
had become confidential. Sympathy always caused her nature to 
expand with emotional abruptness. Sir Reuben was politely sym- 
pathetic. Lady Rangecliffe's nature expanded. Before dinner was 
over Sir Reuben had promised to use his large financial experi- 
ence in aid of Lord Henry. He kept his word to such good effect 
that the young fellow was quickly set upon his feet again. Lady 
Rangecliffe's gratitude knew no bounds. Had Sir Reuben saved 
her neck from the block she could not have felt more grateful to 
him. She desired to show publicly her depth of feeling. Aubrey 
was her opportunity. He was born soon afterwards, and had to 
be christened. Lady Rangecliffe asked Sir Reuben to be one of 
his godfathers. In this manner she made the Egyptian one of the 
family, and he accepted the situation with a curious sensation of 
pleasure. He learnt to adore Lady Rangecliffe. She had none of 
the coldness of many of the patrician women of England. She did 
not confuse the idea of dignity with the idea of swallowing a poker. 
Some Irish blood ran in her veins. Perhaps it saved her from the 
ironmongery of the British matron. When Lady Allabruth died, 
Lady Rangecliffe was to some extent Sir Reuben's confidante, and 
knew something of his sorrow. And now, on his return to England 
after his long absence, he naturally came first to see his godson and 
the godson's mother. He found the mother unaltered. But the 
godson was no longer a lively boy, but a young man, dandified in 
appearance, conventional in manner, and reserved in speech. Sir 
Reuben was disappointed at the transformation. Yet he told him- 
self that he ought to have expected it. London has an extraordi- 
nary knack of turning agreeable boys into disgreeable young men. 
Aubrey was not disagreeable. But Sir Reuben had thought him 
decidedly inhuman until this morning in Bond Street. The inci- 
dents of the street and of the club seemed to let in a little light 
upon his young stiffness and rather grim propriety of conduct. As 
Sir Reuben sat in the smoking-room of his big house in Park Lane 
he thought them over, with a mingling sense of satisfaction and of 
dissatisfaction. 

And Aubrey thought them over in the street and in Hamilton 
Place. He remembered every word Sir Reuben had said. He 
weighed every word in his mind. And he arrived at the house in 
Park Lane terribly preoccupied. 

He was shown at once into the smoking-room, which was de- 
corated in Eastern fashion. Sir Reuben was seated on a divan, 






THE SLAVE 17 

looking remarkably old and Oriental. Men of his appearance may 
be seen any day in the bazaars of Cairo and Constantinople. But 
long i-esidence in England had robbed him of much of their dramatic 
manner. He had acquired some of the outward phlegm of the 
Western, so different from the unutterable repose, often shattered 
bv sharp passion, of the Eastern. In the decorations of his enor- 
mous house, however, something of his mind was shown. Strong 
colours abounded fierce reds and blues, and yellow as glaring as 
that so often seen on the walls of low Moorish cafes. The room 
in which he was sitting was filled with a faint smell of incense and 
of orange flowers. On a low table covered with lacquer-work was 
a porcelain cup, which had contained Turkish coffee, on a stand 
j of silver. Sir Reuben invited Aubrey to have some coffee, but he 
refused. 

"We ought to be starting," he said. "Lady St. Ormyn is 
never in the Park after five. She always goes to parties." 

" Very well," said Sir Reuben. 

He rang for his hat and gloves. They were brought by an 
Arab servant who had been in his service for years. His house 
was opposite to the gates of the Park. They had merely to 
cross the road to gain the gay crowd which was promenading 
under the trees, and sitting on the little green chairs to talk 
scandal comfortably. Sir Reuben drew on his gloves. They were 
lavender kid, and fitted his thin hands very tightly. His frock- 
coat was buttoned, and his white satin tie was passed through a 
broad gold ring, in which was set a gigantic ruby. He walked 
on wearily in his patent leather boots, glancing at the crowd, and 
rolling his enormous black eyes hither and thither. Several people 
greeted him with effusion, expressing delight at his return. 

" I was very tired of the yacht," he said, " and I wanted to feel 
cold again." 

" But this is the hottest day we have had this year," said a 
scarlet elderly lady in black grenadine and a green bonnet covered 
with ivy. 

" It is almost the coldest I have had," he replied. 

Aubrey was searching the crowd with his eyes. He seemed to 
see every one except Lady St. Orrnyn and her daughter. There 
was the vacuous old Scotchman who ran from one smart wedding 
to another, who bicycled and golfed, and did everything he hated 
that could possibly lead to the making of a new acquaintance in 
the smart world. When it was the fashion to have the gout, he 
had it and went to Carlsbad. When heart failure became the 
vogue, he was to be seen at Nauheim, as ill as the oldest Royal 
Duke. He pretended to have discovered Marienbad, but was a 
failure there because its most distinguished patron always conversed 



18 THE SLAVE 

in French, and he had never been able to learn any language except 
Scotch. Now he was conveying a heavy baroness and her plain 
daughter to their monstrous family barouche which waited against 
the rails. There were the Australians who had bought the most 
exclusive set in town for a round sum, and now aired their 
Colonial accent and their knowledge of sheep and kangaroos in 
the drawing-rooms of Mayfair and of Belgravia. There was the 
money-lender who was the intimate of princes, and the lovely girl 
who was the most successful tout of a celebrated modiste. There 
was the titled young man who ran an insurance office, and his 
old Eton and Christchurch friend who pushed a second-rate wine 
merchant's business for a consideration. There was the gay 
gentleman who managed parties and started clubs, chattering to 
the venerable fragment who wore white garden hats and owned 
a theatre. There was the Honourable Mrs. Grenwich with her 
pencil and notebook, picking up a meagre living by getting ready 
her weekly article on the fashionable world for that refined papei 
"The Smart Woman." There was the last new beauty, aged 
eighteen, a girl who six weeks ago had been the most charming 
and simple creature imaginable, but who was now a mass of affecta- 
tion, a tricky egoist without a thought that was not concentrated 
upon herself. There was the lady who had been almost sweet- 
looking until her picture, by Redding, the great portrait-painter, 
had been the success of the year at the Royal Academy. There 
was the agreeable clergyman who ran his church with music-hall 
singers for the warbling of anthems, and comic actors for the 
reading of lessons. There was Mrs. Campbell, who sang so ex- 
quisitely that Calve had told her so she said that she was too 
good for the wear and tear of an opera-house. There, in fact, 
was half the world. But where were Lady St. Ormyn and Lady 
Caryll ? 

"Perhaps they are at a concert," said Aubrey. "There are 
about twenty-five this afternoon. Lady St. Ormyn is fond of 
concerts." 

" I saw in the Times that Barre has a recital of his own works 
at St. James's Hall to-day." 

"Ah ! then she is there. She adores Barre at least his music. 
He is the man who hates Brahms and loves dining out. He has 
composed himself into society. I think he's awfully dull, but then 
ah ! there they are ! The carriage is just stopping." 

The faintest little quiver of excitement shook in his calm young 
voice for a moment. Sir Reuben heard it. He had sharp ears. 

A victoria drew up at the rails. It had bright scarlet wheels, 
men in black and scarlet liveries, and black horses. In it were 
seated Lady Caryll and a woman with white hair and rather bright 



THE SLAVE 19 

eyes, who was dressed in pink and green, and who wore a pink 
bonnet covered with roses. Perched on a tiny stool opposite to 
them was a little man with a pointed black beard, who was very 
smartly dressed, and who wore a large buttonhole. 

"They've got Bredelli with them," said Aubrey. "What a 
bore ! " 

" Does he still sing ? " asked Sir Reuben. 

" Yes, as a great favour. He's frightfully rich from his 
songs. He composes four a year, one in each season spring, 
summer, and so on. He's married now to a woman with a heap 
of money. They're getting out. Shall we join them ? " 

" If you like." 

They moved forward across the grass, but before they reached 
Lady St. Ormyn she was joined by an immensely stout elderly 
man of decrepit appearance, who wore a long and straggling beard, 
and looked perpetually as if he were on the point of bursting into 
a flood of tears. This was Mr. Gerry Fane, the friend of kings, 
the dullest and most sought after man in London. Aubrey's brow 
grew cloudy at the sight of his approach. 

" There's old Fane with them now," he said. 

"Still on the verge of tears!" said Sir Reuben. "After all, 
things don't alter much in eight years." 

" Bores don't," said Aubrey, almost crossly. 

At this moment Lady St. Ormyn caught sight of him, and 
nodded. She and her party were strolling towards some chairs 
under a tree. She was talking eagerly to Bredelli, while Lady 
Caryll followed silently with Mr. Fane, who seldom thought it 
necessary to make the effort of saying anything. 

"That song about the nun and the lily and Pierrot in a tall 
hat was delicious," she was saying. "Nobody but a Frenchman 
could have ah ! Mr. Herrick, why weren't you at Barre's concert ? 
We stayed half an hour, and were delighted. Your friend ? 
Certainly Sir Reuben Allabruth ! I think we've seen each other 
often at a distance, haven't we, and you know my husband in the 
City, don't you ? " 

" Yes, Lady St. Ormyn." 

" But you've been staying at Ramsgate, or somewhere, for your 
health, haven't you, lately ? " 

" Not at Ramsgate. Persia." 

" Oh, Persia was it ? Of course ! I hope the air did you good ? 
Barre has written an exquisite song about Persian flowers. Are 
there flowers in Persia? It doesn't matter. The song is beautiful. 
There are flowers ! I must tell Barre. He'll be gratified. He 
likes to be exact. Do you know my daughter, Sir Reuben ? Let 
me Sir Reuben Allabruth Lady Caryll Knox." 



20 THE SLAVE 

The introduction had taken place without Aubrey's help. Sir 
Reuben remembered being glad of that afterwards. 

Lady St. Ormyn sat down under a tree. Her face was flushed 
with music, and she continued to talk rapidly to Sir Reuben, 
Mr. Fane, and Bredelli, while Lady Caryll and Aubrey took two 
chairs a little in the background. 

" Barre likes Wagner this season/' Lady St. Ormyn said to 
Bredelli. " It's such a mercy, because it was his only draw- 
back, his hatred, you know, of Wotan. Really, it was almost 
personal." 

" Mine is entirely personal," Bredelli said in French he had 
not lived in England long enough to learn its language, having 
only taken up his residence in London twenty-three years before 
" I hate Wotan as if he were my brother." 

"Oh, of course, relations are a bore," said Lady St. Ormyn, 
"as a general rule ; but I think Wotan would have been charming 
what do you say, Mr. Fane ? " 

But Mr. Fane was sunk in a melancholy reverie. 

" Nothing, of course," murmured Lady St. Ormyn. " You like 
music, Sir Reuben ?" 

"It is one of my greatest pleasures." 

"That's right; then you are one of us. Are you engaged next 
Sunday ? " 

" No." 

"Come down and spend ^ie day with me at Epsom. I've got 
a garden there. Barre is coming and some of the people from the 
opera, and two or three others. I'll ask Mr. Herrick. We shall 
have music all the time, at least nearly Are you coming, Bredelli ? " 

" I am very sorry, but I have a ' command ' for Sunday after- 
noon." 

" You always have a ' command.' Really, it is quite dangerous 
to have such a large royal family. One may be obliged to You are 
only just back from Persia, Sir Reuben ?" 

" I have only been in England four days." 

"Then probably you haven't read Le Sentier Defendu. It's 
been out three days. I read it the day before yesterday. You 
must get it. The author is a great friend of mine, a young French- 
man. He may be at Epsom on Sunday, though he hates music. 
He's only a boy, and his books are entirely psychological. I prefer 
that. I hate incident ; don't you ? What we do is nothing. What 
we feel and think is Bredelli, I don't agree with you at all about 
that picture of Legeuve's, ' L'Eau de Vie.' I saw it at Harrington's 
this morning on my way to lunch with the Larches Fraulein 
Marie Brindt was there, not a bit tired after Ortrud and I 
thought it magnificent, a marvellous elucidation of drunkenness." 



THE SLAVE 21 

" I do not care for tipsy tableaux," murmured Bredelli, who 
had an elaborate air of graceful preoccupation. 

"Oh, there is an enormous amount of interest in being tip I 
mean in seeing other people tipsy. Isn't there, Sir Reuben ? " 

" No doubt," said Sir Reuben gravely. 

"From the philosophic point of view, I mean, of course, the 
allegory of absinthe, as it were. Do you see, Bredelli ? Mr. Fane, 
don't you agree with me ? " 

"I thought it was eau de vie," said Bredelli, arranging his 
button-hole, while Mr. Fane murmured something about "never 
mix your drinks " that nobody attended to. 

"Absinthe or eau de vie, it's all the same to the painter." 

" The painter ! Oh, possibly," said Bredelli. 

" He cares only for the degradation, which is so wonderful as a 
subject. Talking of degradation, have you seen Kitty Gremlin 
this season ? I never saw such an alteration, and all from morphine. 
She's all over little marks. One might suppose her a sempstress if 
one didn't know. Of course you remember Guilbert in ' Morphinee' ? 
Well, really she's like that, only of course without Guilbert's genius. 
That's what I always say the true realism is reality beautifully 
exaggerated. It's the touch of exaggeration that gives perfection. 

But at this point Bredelli, with a certain hardy impudence that 
was supposed to be one of his great attractions, interrupted Lady 
St. Ormyn by drawing her attention to a cinnamon-coloured lady 
who was passing at the moment, and who wore a silk gown the 
colour of a ripe orange, while on her head reposed a sealskin toque 
trimmed with a remarkably well-developed stuffed fox. 

" The touch of exaggeration that gives perfection," he said softly. 

"Oh, but Mrs. Luffa Parkinson is always no, Bredelli, that's 
not fair, a woman who goes to a dressmaker in Amsterdam for 
her no, no. Sir Reuben, you know what I mean, don't you ? 
In all the arts, in music, painting, sculpture even in dancing, isn't 
it the touch of by the way, have you seen Rene Mackintosh 
dance ? Oh, of course, you've been in Persia ! Well, last night 
at the " 

Meanwhile Lady Caryll and Aubrey were talking in low voices. 
Although Lady Caryll had been to Barre's concert with her mother 
she was not flushed with music. Pierrot in a tall hat had not ex- 
cited her. In her white gown and black hat she looked cool and 
clear and sparkling as frost. It was a physical peculiarity of hers 
never to get hot, even in the most crowded ball-room, and it \vas a 
peculiarity that some men found remarkably attractive. Perhaps 
Aubrey was one of them. He looked at her now as if he were. 

"You know who that is," he said, as they sat down, indicating 



22 THE SLAVE 

Sir Reuben, who, with his hands crossed on the top of his stick, 
and his body inclined forward, was listening to Lady St. Ormyn's 
numerous philosophies of life. " My godfather." 

" Sir Reuben is your godfather ! " said Lady Caryll, shutting her 
white parasol gently. 

" Why not ? " 

" I don't know why he shouldn't be as well as any one else. I 
was not thinking of him. I was only trying to realise that you 
were somebody's godson." 

" Is it difficult ? " 

"Yes," she said, looking at him steadily with her long grey 
eyes, " I think it is very." 

" And why ? " he asked, smiling at her with something of the 
grave indulgence that paternally inclined people show towards 
children who are not their children. 

" A godson sounds like something innocent, simple, out of the 
world. It suggests a monastery and a life dedicated to some high 
aim." 

' I see now why it seems rather absurd for me to be one." 

'You aren't very simple, are you, Mr. Herrick?" 

' Perhaps not." 

'And do you honestly wish to be simple?" 

' 1 can scarcely imagine what it would be like," he said 
seriously and quite truthfully. 

He had wondered about this very thing many times since he 
had left Eton, studied for the Foreign Office, and dropped it for an 
ordinary London life. Certainly he was not very simple. And he 
knew it. But there were moments when he had faint and nebu- 
lous fancies that to be simple in character, in desires, in aim, in 
habit of life, was to be nearly beautiful. He found, as a rule, little 
that seemed to him beautiful in complexity. Yet it was his des- 
tiny, so far, to live in the midst of a peculiarly complex world, in a 
peculiarly complex period of social and civilised life. And it is 
difficult to grasp thoroughly with the imagination any destiny com- 
pletely unlike one's own. 

" Can you, Lady Caryll ? " he added, after a moment of silence. 

" I don't know. Yes, I believe I can. I believe I'm rather 
simple myself, in fact," she added. 

She had a very calm unimpassioned voice, that could be bright 
if she wished it to be bright, but that seldom or never vibrated 
with any deep feeling, although Aubrey sometimes thought it did. 

" You you say you are simple ? " he said. 

He looked at her, and thought of Sir Reuben's remark that 
Lady Caryll was sure to be successful in her aim, because she was 
one-sided. To be complex was to be many-sided. Was she now 



THE SLAVE 23 

unconsciously telling him that Sir Reuben had spoken the truth 
about her ? 

" I shouldn't be surprised if I am," she said, touching the 
blades of grass at her feet lightly with the point of her parasol. " 1 
am not like mother, always excited about something or other, a 
song, or a picture, or a man. Am I ? " 

" No, you're not at all like your mother," he said, looking at 
Lady St. Ormyn, who was holding forth violently in French to 
Bredelli at the moment, and whose hot voice could be heard 
saying, " Je n'ai jamais entendu une chose aussi bizarre ! " 

" But I am not at all sure that you are simple, nevertheless," he 
went on. " I can't tell. I wish I could. Do you honestly like 
to be quiet ? " 

" I don't mind being alone, if that is what you mean." 

" Well, but Lady Caryll, when are you alone ?" 

"Oh, now of course not. But before I came out." 

" You were at school in France. You were with other girls." 

" Yes. It's true I have not often been alone. But I shouldn't 
mind it. I know that quite well. To be alone with a gratified 
desire must be delightful." 

She said the last unexpected sentence rather thoughtfully. 

" With a gratified desire ? " said Aubrey quickly. 

" Well, who would wish to be alone with a sorrow ? " 

" No, of course not. But tell me do you know what it is to 
have a great desire ? " 

"You are very curious." 

"Am I? Yes, perhaps, about you. I should like to under- 
stand you, Lady Caryll. Are you going to let me understand 
you?" 

" Have I the power of letting you ? Has any woman the 
power to let herself be completely understood by a man?" 

" Surely if she chooses." 

" 1 fancy it depends on the man more than on the woman." 

" If that is so, I shall learn to understand you," Aubrey said 
gravely. " But help me a little now by telling me whether you 
have a great desire, and if so, what it is." 

Lady Caryll did not answer for a moment. As she sat silent 
on the little green chair, looking away from her companion, there 
was a smile on her face. She seemed to be musing, and to forget 
that she ought to reply. Aubrey watched her with a keen, and 
almost boyish, curiosity. And Sir Reuben, although he seemed to 
be listening intently to the eternal animation of Lady St. Ormyn, 
watched her too, and wondered of what pleasant things she was 
thinking under the shade of the trees. 

" You won't answer ? " Aubrey said, after a long pause. 



24 THE SLAVE 

The smile died from Lady Caryll's face, like a light that fades 
and leaves that on which it rested cold and altered. 

" I don't know that I can/' she said. " Perhaps I have not 
made up my mind what I want most, what is my greatest 
desire." 

" Isn't it the desire that all women have ? " he said very low. 

"You think me so very ordinary as that? Must I follow the 
crowd all these women ? " 

She glanced round rather disdainfully. As far as the eye could 
see, there were women ; women old and young, and no age at all ; 
women with grey faces and wrinkled eyelids ; women whose cheeks 
were tinted, mauve or rose-coloured, or dead white like the wall of 
a foreign house ; women with red hair, and powdered hair, and 
gold hair, and black hair; women with monstrous hats and gay 
gowns ; women smiling, chattering, frowning, looking joyous or 
tired, or wicked, or ill, or sensitive ; women attentive, indifferent, 
exuberant, enervated, or merely patient patient of this noisy and 
persuasive world of London. 

Aubrey's face flushed to his forehead. 

"Don't misunderstand me," he said hastily. "I did not mean 
that you are like other women." 

" But what did you mean then ? " 

" That that there is something in all women that asks for the 
same gift." 

" What is that ? " 

"Why a heart." 

"Oh, I see." 

Her voice, in that reply, sounded very young. There was no 
tremor in it. And Aubrey thought, " How innocent she is ; she 
doesn't understand what I mean." 

Whether she understood or not, Lady Caryll did not give him 
an opportunity of explaining himself. She looked at the group 
gathered round her flushed and exigent mother, and remarked, 
" Is your godfather very old ? " 

"Over sixty, I should think," said Aubrey, recalled from a 
distance. 

"That is very old." 

"To us yes." 

" He has guessed that we are speaking of him. I think he is 
clever." 

Sir Reuben was, in fact, looking steadily at them, and now he 
smiled at Lady Caryll, and moved slightly backward from Lady 
St. Ormyn's reminiscences of baritones and of French poets. 

" He is clever," added Lady Caryll. " But he smiles like an 
old money-lender. He could look very fantastic if he were alone." 



THE SLAVE 25 

Before Aubrey had time to make any remark, Sir Reuben joined 
them. 

" Lady St. Ormyn is going in a moment, Lady Caryll," he 
said. 

" She always is," she answered. " She and I make more exits 
and entrances in a day than an actress does in a month." 

" And the comedy amuses you ? " 

" Sometimes. But I don't know that my amusement will last. 
Do you like baritones, Sir Reuben ? " 

He smiled. So did Aubrey. 

" I haven't seen many lately," Sir Reuben said. " The last I 
talked with was an old man with a lantern and a djelabe, who fre- 
quented minarets." 

'' He never comes to Epsom." 

" But your mother has kindly asked me to come on Sunday." 

" 1 hope you like music." 

" It is one of my greatest pleasures." 

" In a shrubbery ? " 

" Anywhere if it is good." 

" I don't know whether it will be good on Sunday, but it will 
be in a shrubbery. That is mother's and Monsieur Barre's last 
idea to hide the players among plants. You will come to Epsom 
too, Mr. Herrick ? " 

" If I'm invited." 

" I invite you." 

" I will come," he said, trying, successfully, not to look too 
pleased. 

At this moment there was a bustle. Lady St. Ormyn was 
en mute, overturning chairs with the skirt of her gown. 

" Caryll ! " she cried. " We must go to Lady Harriet's now, 
or we shall not hear John Dobb's imitations." 

" Very well, mother." 

" Bredelli, are you coining ? " 

"No," said the little Italian with sangfroid. "John Dobb is 
for the English, not for me." 

" Oh, well, you call me English ? Good Heavens ! " 

" Are you not English, miladi ? " 

" It is absurd to think about nationality in our world. Don't 
you agree with me, Sir Reuben ? " 

Sir Reuben had not time. 

" Art has no nationality," continued Lady St. Ormyn, moving 
towards her carriage, and upsetting another green chair. " Art " 

"But people have," interrupted Bredelli impudently. "You 
are English, miladi, I am Italian. You like John Dobl>. I find 
him horrible. To me he is like a plum-pudding." 



26 THE SLAVE 

"Now, Breclelli, you have spent Christmas with me, and you 
know perfectly well that I never have Turkey or 

She stepped into the carriage, followed by Lady Caryll. 

" Don't forget, Sir Reuben Sunday at four, and you must stay 
to dinner, and you too, Mr. Herrick. Barre's last quartette will be 
played in the shrubbery " Sir Reuben glanced at Lady Caryll 
with his smile of an old money-lender "It is on Herr Kranz's 
account. He is so ugly that it is better not to see him, but he 

plays the 'cello like a Won't he be delicious, Bredelli, among 

the rhododendrons ? Oh, but you can't come ! What a pity ! Mr. 
Fane, you can easily get away in time for your dinner with the 
Prince ; so mind, I shall 100 Belgrave Square ! After dinner, Sir 
Reuben, bicycle races by torchlight, French songs from Araki, the 
Syrian with the red hair, you know ! and so on. We shall drive 
back to town on the coach. Au revoir ! Au revoir ! We shall 

be at the opera to-n Well, Caryll, what do you think of Sir 

Reuben ? " 

"That was a marvellous ruby in his tie, mother. Did you 
notice it ? " 



CHAPTER III 

Sm REUBEN AUBREY, Mr. Fane, and Bredelli stood in a row by the 
rails and raised their hats as the black and red carriage drove 
away. As he replaced his hat upon his elaborately dressed hair, 
Bredelli remarked, vaguely to the world in general, " Milady came 
to me to learn singing. That is twelve years ago. But how can 
she sing when she talks for ever like that, the voice always in the 
upper register! It is the Queen of the Night talking." 

Nobody made any response, unless a heavy, inarticulate sound 
from Mr. Fane could be considered in the light of a rejoinder. 
And the Italian moved away, strutting like a bird that has been 
overfed on grain. He adored his appearance, worshipped his 
talent, and had been in love with his whole ego since he was a 
dirty baby playing in a gutter of Naples fifty-five years before. 
Now he sang little things to Grand Duchesses as a personal favour, 
and was called "Bredelli" by the whole world. Impudence in- 
creased upon him. But that only made him the more popular. 
For London women love the impudence of fat little foreigners who 
can sing and who are famous. If Bredelli was disliked, it was 
always by men, and men were nothing to him. "Give me the 
women and I have the world," was his motto. Providence had 
given him the women. So now he lived in Portland Place, and 
had evening parties to which princesses sometimes came. And he 
had quite forgotten the gutters of Naples. 

After the departure of Bredelli, Mr. Fane looked piteously at 
Sir Reuben and Aubrey, pulled his immense beard with his enor- 
mous hand, said " Club bye ! " in a voice like a muffled drum, and 
drifted helplessly away towards Achilles. 

" He still dines out every night, I suppose ? " said Sir Reuben. 

" Every night," said Aubrey. " He's off now to the Marl- 
borough. And you ? " 

He looked at Sir Reuben a little uncomfortably, and his young 
figure was very stiff and English in its attitude of grim attention 
and consciousness. 

" I am going to see your mother." 

"Oh, I'll walk with you as far as the house." 

They went on in silence. The Rangecliffes lived in Eaton 

27 



28 THE SLAVE 

Square in a large and poorly furnished mansion. They had three 
men in the hall and threadbare stair-carpets. This was Lord 
Rangecliffe's idea of keeping up his position. As to Lady Range- 
cliffe, she had no ideas at all on such a subject. She was very kind 
to the three men in the hall, and the stair carpets did not enter 
into her life. Inanimate minutiae were nothing to her. 

In Grosvenor Place Aubrey said, in his cold and conventional 
voice 

" You found Lady St. Ormyri amusing ? " 

" Do you mean Lady Caryll ? " said Sir Reuben, not without 
malice. 

" Oh, she does not go in for that sort of thing." 

"Yet in the end she might prove more amusing than her 
mother." 

" D'you think so ? " 

" I ought not to think anything till I know her, eh, Aubrey ?" 

" I daresay you are accustomed to form judgments quickly," 
said the young man, with a very poor attempt at that deference to 
age which London youth has so utterly lost the knack of. 

" Perhaps I ought not to do so in this case. I may have 
jumped too soon to my Bond Street conclusion." 

They were now at the corner of Eaton Square. They shook 
hands and parted. Sir Reuben walked thoughtfully to No. 300, 
and faced the three men in the hall. Lady Rangecliffe was at 
home to him. He was shown upstairs to her boudoir, and found 
her in a black stuff gown, sitting in a sea of elderly picture papers, 
with a bottle of gum in one hand and an Ally Shper's Half-Holiday 
in the other. 

" Please bring tea, Charles," she said to the man who had 
opened the door. " I am only making a screen, Sir Reuben, for 
my old women in Whitechapel. Charles, please take those Lady's 
Pictorials off that settee, and put the Ally Slopers Half Holidays on 
that couch by the window. Thank you ; that's it. They like 
Ally Sloper," she explained to Sir Reuben. "They think him 
distinguished in appearance, poor old souls." 

" So do I," said Sir Reuben, examining that gentleman as dis- 
played at an angle of perhaps forty-five degrees on Lady Range- 
cliffe's work of art. " Isn't he a little crooked ? " 

" Is he ? I didn't notice it." 

She put down the gum in an arm-chair and came to sit down 
by her visitor. 

Lady Rangecliffe was a tall, thin woman of about fifty-one, with 
broad shoulders, long arms, and jet black hair. She had rather 
blunt features, a nose that turned slightly up, big, dark, short- 
sighted eyes, and a generous mouth. As a girl she had been very 






THE SLAVE 29 

athletic, and she still rode exceedingly well, and could drive a four- 
in-hand better than any woman in England. She was slightly deaf 
in addition to being short-sighted, and partly perhaps in conse- 
quence of these defects she liked to sit very close to those with 
whom she conversed, and had a habit of staring at them very hard 
while she was talking to them. Her manner was habitually eager 
and responsive. As a child she had been troubled with a touch of 
St. Vitus's Dance. It had gone, leaving behind it a characteristic 
quick movement of the head sideways when she was interested 
or excited. She was often both. Now, coming very close to Sir 
Reuben, she sat touching him and said 

" Well, now you've seen Aubrey ? " 

"I have just left him at the corner." 

" Isn't he handsome ? He is handsomer than Vane ; but then 
Vane is just like me, poor old boy." 

This was said with an accent of convinced and simple regret. 
And she added quickly 

" Did Aubrey talk much to you ? " 

" Not very much." 

" He's tremendously reserved." 

Here tea was brought in. Lady Rangecliffe hastily helped Sir 
Reuben to some milk and sugar, gave him his cup, and then 
continued 

"Tremendously especially with me. That's what mothers 
have to bear the reserve of the sons they love, and who love 
them. Aubrey loves me very much, but he would tell his inmost 
thoughts and all he does to any one rather than to me. The tea? 
Oh, didn't I ? 1 beg your pardon. Yes, I'll have some in a minute, 
too. Those old women in Whitechapel tell me everything, but 
Aubrey nothing. But of course I know old women are per- 
fectly miserable except when they're telling you how miserable 
they are. They're happy then. I wish one's sons could be 
like no, I don't no, I don't. Do have something to eat, will 
you ? " 

Sir Reuben assented, and said 

"But do you think Aubrey's miserable ?" 

" Perhaps he is rather. But the terrible thing is that I want 
him to be very at least not that. But he'll have to be, unless 
he's to be more wretched still. Now I'll have some tea, now I've 
told you." 

She helped herself to tea rapidly, and added 

" I tell you this because you're his godfather, Sir Reuben, and 
besides, you're a man of the world." 

" I am afraid you must tell me a little more, if I am to know 
anything," Sir Reuben said, smiling blandly at Lady Rangecliffe's 



30 THE SLAVE 

rather crude idea of a full explanation. She sat a little nearer to 
him, and approached her large and short-sighted eyes close to his 
lined and sunburnt face. 

" Don't you understand ? " 

" No." 

"Why, it's simply this, that the more Aubrey doesn't tell me 
he's in love with her the more I know it. After all, mothers have 
that advantage of knowing perfectly what their boys won't tell 
them for anything, I mean. Of course I wouldn't let Aubrey 
understand that for the world, and he'll never find it out. Boys 
think themselves so wise. I do love boys for that. Girls only 
think themselves shrewd, but boys think themselves wise. Isn't 
that the difference ? " 

" Ah ! And women and men ? " 

" Oh, we're old and uninteresting, so it doesn't much matter 
what we think of ourselves." 

Sir Reuben could not wince at such hasty sincerity. Indeed, 
although Lady RangeclifFe was wanting in tact, she never lacked 
the truest delicacy. 

" But Lady Caryll is only a child," she now exclaimed abruptly. 
" And then she is really clever, that's so unfortunate. So is Aubrey, 
of course. But a girl always gets the best of it." 

" Lady Caryll Knox ? " interrupted Sir Reuben at this juncture. 

" Yes, exactly. Isn't it a pity ? And Aubrey is terribly imagi- 
native like me in that way." 

" Is he ? " 

Sir Reuben put down his cup, and tried not to knock Lady 
Rangecliffe's head with his own ; his plan of action being to keep 
his head perfectly still while they conversed, and to allow hers the 
complete monopoly of movement. By this means a collision was 
successfully avoided. 

" Is Aubrey imaginative ? " 

" I'm sure he is, and very poetical. He is a dreamer, too so 
totally unlike other London men. I'm glad of that in most ways, 
but it makes such a matter as this very painful." 

" Do you mean that he's in love with Lady Caryll, and that you 
don't approve of her ? " 

Lady RangeclifFe looked rather aghast. 

" Oh, I wouldn't say that. In many ways I do approve of her. 
She's beautiful, and perfectly well bred, of course not like her 
I mean not like some poor girls who've been rather foolishly 
brought up. But she would not make Aubrey happy. She hasn't 
his depth of human feeling. It isn't her fault. She can't help it. 
But Aubrey needs love, almost like a woman. It isn't only that 
he wants it. He needs it. Some men don't." 






THE SLAVE SI 

She thought of her husband at this moment. 

" I don't know the new Aubrey, the grown-up Aubrey, yet," 
Sir Reuben said slowly. " I don't know him at all." 

" Scarcely anybody does. That's owing to his reserve. How- 
ever, I'm his mother, and I know him, dear old boy, in spite of all 
his little precautions. That can't be helped, and so long as he 
isn't aware of it, I don't think it matters, as I said before. I fancy 
he'll propose to Lady Caryll quite soon now. That's why I'm in 
such trouble." 

She looked as anxious as a kind dog that has missed an expected 
caress. 

" I should not be surprised if he did," Sir Reuben said. 

" Wouldn't you ? Why not ? " cried Lady RangeclifFe with 
some irrelevance. 

" I was with them both to-day." 

" Were you ? Where ? " 

" In Bond Street this morning. In the Park this afternoon." 

" Ah ! Now what do you think of her ? " 

"I think her both beautiful and interesting." 

" Beautiful ! Yes ; isn't she ? Ah ! I remember now you 
worship beauty. Still ? You love a pretty face still ? " 

She looked at him so steadily that his large eyes began to wink, 
as eyes wink in fierce sunshine. 

" Why not ? " said Sir Reuben, with a trace of hurried dis- 
comfort. 

"It ought to mean so much," Lady Rangecliffe said doubtfully. 

" It does mean much," answered Sir Reuben, and there came 
into his eyes a dramatic expression that transformed him. " Phy- 
sical beauty turns the world round. And why not ? It means 
much, but not always much that is good. Why should we ask 
that of it?" 

" Is it real beauty unless there is some high-mindedness in it ? " 

" Certainly," he said. " Goodness is not for sale, but beauty is 

here, in London, as well as in Zanzibar. And it is worth buying 

well worth buying though the price is often high." 

He looked very ugly while he spoke, but Lady RangeclifFe was 
so short-sighted that she was seldom able to see anything 



" I am so glad Aubrey has no money," she remarked. " He'll 
never be able to buy beauty of that kind." 

" Ah, you are very different from all of us ! " Sir Reuben ex- 
claimed, with a flash of worship for this elderly woman who had no 
bi-auty. " I wonder if Aubrey is like you." 

" A little bit here and there, but he's not so odd, and that's a 
great mercy for him. I don't know. And so you've seen Lady 



32 THE SLAVE 

Caryl! and Aubrey together. Do you think he's going to propose 
to her ? But it doesn't matter really whether you do or not, because 
I'm quite sure he is." 

" Are you quite sure she will accept him ? " said Sir Reuben 
quietly. 

"I'm never sure about women/' said Lady Rangecliffe. "When 
you know a horse, you know what it will do on any occasion, 
whether it will shy or jib, or be as quiet as a lamb. It's very 
much the same with a man when you know him. Aubrey's very 
attractive," she concluded with a jerk. "And Lady Caryll's very 
young. What will they live on ? " 

Sir Reuben had been well accustomed to the Irish proceed- 
ings of his friend's mind eight years ago. Now, however, they 
almost confused him. Lady Ilangecliffe's appearance was most 
distressed. 

" But it's not that," she continued, with much vivacity of 
sorrow. " Money is nothing. We've got none, and half our friends 
have less. It is the difference in temperament. Sir Reuben, 
you're his godfather and you're a man." 

Again he endeavoured to conceal a smile. 

"Can't you suggest don't say it, suggest it to Aubrey that 
Lady Caryll will be unhappy with a pauper?" 

"Ah, you do understand Lady Caryll a little !" 

" Oh, women always understand each other a little. It's the 
very human people who can be happy in poverty. Lady Caryll is 
very beautiful, but there's something I say it to you only because 
you'i'e Aubrey's godfather and you ought to know something 
well, decidedly inhuman about her. She's a dear girl, I'm sure, 
and she can't help it, but Aubrey would find it out and be miser- 
able. What are you going to do ? " 

Sir Reuben happened to be stretching out his hand with his 
teacup in it. 

" I only want to put my cup down," he said. 

" No, but about Aubrey." 

" You wish me to do something definite." 

" Ask him to dine." 

" Yes ; that is definite so far. And then ? " 

"Then act as you think best. Mothers can only influence their 
sons by living. Talking is very little good, because boys always 
think that women, and especially mothers, don't understand the 
world. With you it is different. You've been in Persia." 

"That's true." 

" Well, don't smile. Even that is something with a boy who 
hasn't, don't you see ? That's the thing with a boy. Of course, 
if Aubrey had been in Persia too ! " 






THE SLAVE 33 

"Ah!" 

"Aubrey's impressionable and might be influenced. Though 
really I don't suppose he can/' she concluded, with an abrupt 
access of sincere hopelessness. 

"You don't think Lady Caryll could be influenced?" said Sir 
Reuben. 

He spoke very quietly, but his black eyes shone with a light 
that seemed kindled by malice, or at least by mischief. 

" I'm sure not by me," said Lady Rangecliffe with hearty 
conviction. 

"No. But by me?" 

Lady Rangecliffe stared into his face at excessively close 
quarters. It was sufficiently obvious that she was mentally cal- 
culating his physical charms. The sum of them was not great, 
and her expressive though plain features quickly betokened that 
she was aware of it. The dawning query in her eyes faded ere 
even it came to a sunrise, and she shook her head. 

" No," she said. " Oh no." 

" I shall meet her again on Sunday, with Aubrey." 

" At one of those Epsom parties of Lady St. Ormyn's ? I wish 
people wouldn't entertain so much on Sundays. It's the servants 
I think of, but I know every one laughs at me. I'm certain our 
poor men get very tired of that hall, so I always send them out 
on Sunday. Are you going on the coach ? " 

' No ; but we may come back on it." 

An earnest expression came into her face. 

" Don't let Lady St. Ormyn drive you," she cried with great 
animation. "She's the most good-natured woman in the world, 
and capital at music or anything of that sort, but she'd ruin the 
mouth of any horse, and then she catches all the corners." 

" I'll come home in my carriage," said Sir Reuben with con- 
viction. 

" Do. Her roans were first-rate goers when she first had them, 
but now " 

And Lady Rangecliffe launched forth into a thrilling disserta- 
tion on horse-flesh which lasted till Sir Reuben rose to go. 

" Must you ? But you've never told me what you mean to do 
on Sunday ? " 

" I mean to drive home behind my own cobs." 

" \o, no about Aubrey and Lady Caryll take care of the 
///// .S'/o/;rr.v / What do you think?" 

" I think," said Sir Reuben, who had his hand on the door, 
" that it Aubrey does propose, Lady Caryll will refuse him." 

lie was now three or four yards away from Lady Rangecliffe, 
and slie saw him as a taint blur of darkness. She could not observe 



34 THE SLAVE 

that his mouth was twisted into a smile like an old goblin's smile, 
and that his brown fingers twitched round the stick they held. 
She could only hear his rather grating voice as it spoke with a 
curious confidence. 

"Do you really?" she cried. "Poor old boy! He'll be ter- 
ribly miserable not like other men, who forget a thing like that 
in two minutes. I fancy she likes him very much." 

" I'm sure she does." 

" Well, then ? " 

" I'm equally sure that she'll refuse to marry him." 

He turned and shuffled out of the room. 

Lady Rangecliffe took up the gum-bottle out of the armchair 
very thoughtfully. 



CHAPTER IV 

ON the Saturday before Lady St. Ormyn's party at Epsom there 
was a great sale of jewels at Murphy's in King Street. Sir Reuben 
All.-ibnil.il went to it. Among the jewels offered to the public 
there was an enormous emerald which had at one time belonged 
to that astounding courtesan, Catherine the Great of Russia. It 
was engraved with three figures representing the soul being carried 
away by pleasures. The bidding for this jewel lay between Sir 
Reuben and two dealers of world-wide notoriety, and Sir Reuben 
secured it at a fabulous price. The people in the rooms held their 
breath when it came into his possession, and some of the women 
present looked at him with an expression that was like a silent 
solicitation. For this emerald was one of the finest in the world. 

"Who's the woman?" murmured one young man to another. 

" Haven't an idea. But I don't envy her," answered his com- 
panion, with a glance at Sir Reuben's brown and wizened face and 
incoherent, elderly figure. 

The dealers were in a flutter. They had seldom to contend 
against such triumphant rivalry. One of them was in a towering 
passion. He muttered curses to a solicitous understrapper, who 
agreed with him in muffled whispers and grew very warm in the 
process. The heat in the rooms was, in fact, excessive, but Sir 
Reuben made his way out into the street looking perfectly cool 
and unaware of the excitement he had created. On the 
pavement he met a well-known stockbroker with whom he had 
had many business dealings. The stockbroker congratulated him 
on his success, and could not refrain from adding 

" I had no idea you collected jewels, Allabruth. I suppose you 
saw many splendid stones in India and Persia ? " 

" Yes, but I did not buy any." 

"You waited till you were back in London among enormous 
prices?" said the stockbroker, with obvious surprise. 

" The competition amuses me," said Sir Reuben carelessly, as 
he got into his brougham. 

As he drove away a friend joined the stockbroker. 

" Has Allabruth told you who that jewel is for ? " he asked. 

" No. Has anybody an idea ?" 



36 THE SLAVE 

"Not a soul. He's only just back from the East. Perhaps 
he's brought a harem with him. The extraordinary thing is that 
when Lady Allabruth died he sold all her jewels. Now he's 
starting again in his old age." 

" I wish he'd invite me to Park Lane and show me his house/' 
said the stockbroker. " Perhaps she's black and will wear the 
emerald in her nose." 

" More likely she's a chorus girl, without an h in her composi- 
tion, playing in some musical comedy," said the other. 

Sir Reuben was well aware of the excitement he had created, 
but he was entirely indifferent to it. Nevertheless as he passed 
through the crowded streets, shut in by the padded green walls of 
his carriage, he was conscious of a strange thrill of anticipation 
that flickered up suddenly in his heart, and made him feel that 
there was youth in him yet, the power to enjoy and even to exult. 
This man was a Christian. His father had been converted to 
Christianity by his mother. For the ex-dancer had become 
ecstatically devout when she found herself unexpectedly received 
into the haven of matrimony. In his middle life he had been 
much in the best English society. He was now fatigued and 
elderly. He had worked hard. He had suffered. Yet his in- 
herited nature had remained unaltered. This nature was Oriental. 
Beneath his frock-coat beat a curious heart, a heart that could be 
cruel, jealous, uncivilised, and fiercely dramatic in its passions. 
And this heart was now full of a lust of desire, an ardour of pursuit, 
not wholly unlike the ardour of some animals that do not dwell in 
kennels. Since the death of Lady Allabruth Sir Reuben had not 
felt so young as he felt to-day. 

His dark eyes glowed as he leaned back in the carriage, and 
watched the vanishing pictures presented to him by the streets : a 
girl mounting carefully into a barouche preceded by an enormous 
mother ; two self-conscious young men in a motor car that hissed 
at the contemptuous drivers of the hansoms; a roaring blind man 
hammering with his stick to make the world give way before his 
triumphant infirmity ; a group of old ladies perched anxiously upon 
the kerb to see their sovereign pass; an elderly minister giving 
his daily dole to a conservative crossing-sweeper ; a flushed man in 
a tall hat ensconcing himself carefully in a brougham that was 
embowered in samples of silks. He saw pictures of a modern 
world, of a world led by the iron hand of civilisation to the inmost 
shrine of ugliness ; narrow, treeless streets ; dingy, flat houses ; 
plain women smothered in finery ; men in tweed caps bent double 
over the handle-bars of charging bicycles ; ragamuffins screaming 
of murder and assault, committed within the last few minutes; 
omnibuses dressed from head to foot in advertisements; piano- 



THE SLAVE 37 

organs pelting the ear with tunes like stones ; white waiters in 
greasy evening clothes staring out of the narrow doorways of cafes ; 
a black funeral crowned with the ostentatious pyramids of plumes 
that had nodded already over the heads of a hundred corpses ; a 
butcher's shop lined with red animals hanging upside down for 
the passing children to see ; a row of patient waxen gentlemen in 
auburn wigs, clad in check suits at two pounds ten a-piece. All 
these idols of the great market-place Sir Reuben saw from his 
carriage. He had not seen them for years, but he had known 
them so well once that they were only familiar now. Even the 
motor cars had already greeted him in Paris. Nothing was quite 
new. And had there been anything new in the teeming thorough- 
fares those brilliant eyes would hardly have observed it. For, 
before them, shone the green light of an enormous emerald, and 
three faint engraved figures representing the soul being carried 
away by pleasures. They disfigured the liquid jewel with their 
rarity. To engrave a jewel is to make an insult preciously in- 
delible. It is a work of decadence, of men who might wish to 
carve some legend on the sea, or to write a sonnet on the silver of 
the moon. But Sir Reuben loved this work of the engraver, not 
for its rarity, but for its subject. His rich and rank imagination 
was captivated by the faint suggestiveness, the ethereal cynicism, 
of those tiny figures floating on the shining and fixed water of the 
jewel ; the legend of the soul borne away by pleasures stamped 
upon one of the most potent sirens that can lure it into dangerous 
paths. There was a sarcasm in the doing of it; there was a devil 
of mischief. And he saw the dead engraver at his artful work, 
us he had seen stern men at work in the shadowed bazaars of 
Cairo, Bagdad, and India. In his thin dark fingers fingers alive 
with race this dead artificer held the jewel, resting his long and 
lustrous eyes in the green light that Pliny loved, and that Theo- 
phrastus wrote of. And the jewel was clean and clear, unsmirched 
by allegory or by any human suggestion. It was a drop of shining 
beauty at which the sight, weary with desire, might slake its eager 
thirst. It was a shrine of perfection, beyond praise like all flawless 
things. But the dead artificer who held it saw in it but a fine 
material for his craft, a surface to support and reveal for ever his 
cunning. And he held it in lithe fingers that longed to change it, 
to compel it to show forth not only itself and its loveliness, but 
also him and his intellect. He had that strange desire, so common 
among men, to force a perfection that has no thought to seem to 
think, to induce a wonder that has no utterance to seem to speak. 
And of what should the jewel seem to speak, of what should it 
seem to think ? And then surely the dead artificer smiled, with 
that dim and enigmatic smile of Eastern men, as the thought came 



38 THE SLAVE 

to him : " Through me thou shalt give to men thy secret ; thou 
shalt tell to women what thou art ; a lure, a danger, a green light 
that beckons to darkness, a spark glittering upon the edge of the 
pit." It is a grim pleasure to force perpetual silence to perpetual 
revelation. And the artificer drew forth his tiny tools, and sat 
down in his corner, cross-legged, and alone with his untiring 
patience and with his secret irony. And the jewel yielded itself 
to him. And he stamped upon it, with infinite precaution, his 
faint legend of what he thought it was. Who were near him in 
the bazaar? A hundred buyers and sellers, a multitude of still 
and ardent workers like himself, and all the shadows that sit 
beneath the leaning pent-house roofs in those strange countries 
of the sun ; dark men, veiled women, shadows, and this enormous 
jewel, on whose surface the tiny tools wrote slowly out their 
story. But the artificer must surely, in his toil, have sent out 
his imagination on the wing above the paths of the emerald's 
eventual pilgrimage, must have seen that light, which now he held 
in his long fingers, shining faintly in many places, beckoning to 
the eyes of many unveiled women. And perhaps, as he strove, he 
saw, too, the dim pilgrimage of those who would follow that light, 
and heard, as from afar, the softly beating footsteps of the crowding 
women who worship jewels and are borne away by them. He 
would never know them. He would sit in the bazaar, and grow 
old with the shadows, his nostrils full of the strange scents of the 
East, his ears full of those cries which are never heard in Western 
market-places. He would grow old and never know them, would 
die and rest in the Moslem paradise, attended by beauty and 
soothed by gratified desire among the roses of the other world. 
But they would know his handiwork, would read his legend, would 
smile, perhaps, at his graven irony, or would weep. And then, 
cross-legged in his comer, and leaning close above the jewel, 
surely the dead artificer fell into many dreams of smiling and of 
weeping women, soft dreams of triumph. For is it not the greatest 
triumph of a man when he can make a woman smile or weep at 
his will ? And to be at rest among the roses of paradise, and still 
to have power over women in the world that is far from the roses, 
must not that be strangely sweet? And so in the shadowy bazaar 
the artificer dreamed, and turned the great jewel in his delicate 
fingers until his work was done. 

Sir Reuben's carriage stopped before the house in Park Lane ; 
he got out slowly and entered his home. It was strange to him 
this summer, not because he had been absent from it for eight 
years eight years are as the dropping of a handful of sand to an 
old man but because his pretty Creole wife was no longer there. 



THE SLAVE 39 

Her absence made the house seem fantastically large to Sir Reuben ; 
he shuddered at its immensity despite the warm, bright colours, 
the pictures, the dense carpets, the painted ceilings. His home 
was not only gorgeous in its wealth of strong and magnificent hues, 
its superb reds and blues, its subtle greens and rose colours ; it was 
seductive also, for it suggested repose, enduring inertia, and con- 
tented rest. Many of the windows of the rooms were heavily 
latticed with carved wood. The air could enter, but it was difficult 
for the eyes to catch any disconcerting glimpses of the passing 
world of the town. Such glimpses disturb the mental peace and re- 
call to the memory the convulsive energies of London. To a man of 
Sir Reuben's temperament there could be no beginning of comfort 
so long as one travelling cry could be heard, one flitting figure 
seen. But his precautions of past years had not been in vain ; the 
men who had made his house what it was had set London very far 
away ; its sounds were deadened, its sights were hidden. The 
tinkle of the fountain in the central hall was so ceaseless that it 
seemed at last to cease. There was a long perfume of flowers, 
instead of the short and violent rushes of scent that startle and 
confuse the senses in many English homes. Sir Reuben under- 
stood that the mission of perfume is to create atmosphere, not to 
tickle a curious nose or to enchant the inartistic lover of surprises. 
Draperies fell over the doors. There was no suggestion that 
because you had entered you must presently emerge. There was 
never heard a murmur of talking servants in the hall or a bang of 
a gate in the offices. 

And in this house, too, there was a faint sense of mystery. It 
was so quiet, so coloured, so full of carefully subdued light, and so 
very large that it suggested to the curious mind infinite hidden 
possibilities. There might well be a harem here, concealed and 
guarded, as in the palaces of the East. There might well be 
pretty, chattering, empty-headed women living indolent and luxu- 
rious lives in unseen apartments concealed beyond the falling 
tapestries, the grotesquely carved wood of the tall lattices; but if 
there were, no one ever heard their laughter or the patter of their 
feet, no one ever saw the flash of their peeping eyes or the sparkle 
of the jewels that they wore. The great house seemed to be 
empty. If any houri dwelt there she made no sign ; she sighed, 
smiled, wept, loved, slept, and played her little lute in some 
chamber that was utterly secret. 

The intensity of the privacy in his house had pleased Sir Reuben 
in bygone years. After the passion of business that rages like a 
plague through the city, he had loved to pass abruptly into the 
stillness of his home, and to remain, sometimes for long hours, 
idle, sunk in a reverie through which no chink of money sang a 



40 THE SLAVE 

grating tune. His power of work had had as companion a power 
of rest that belongs in the same degree to few Englishmen. But 
then Lady Allabruth had been alive ; she had not been a clever 
woman, but Sir Reuben did not seek for cleverness in beauty. 
She had loved society. Often when her husband returned from 
the city she had been out, and he had sat alone ; but such a loneli- 
ness did not weigh upon his senses, Oriental though he was, for 
he had trained himself in the codes of this society in which he 
lived, and this society gave unlimited freedom to its women when 
they were married. And then Sir Reuben felt Lady Allabruth's 
presence in his house when she was absent. He felt the quiet 
contentment of possession and of power to give pleasure to the 
woman who pleased his senses. He heard continually the song of 
her beauty, continually renewed by her radiant re-entries from the 
outer world which she delighted by her gaiety and grace. If he 
sat alone he could indulge in the quiet luxury of recollection, pre- 
sently to be corrected by actual vision of the beauty recalled. 
Now he could, it is true, remember ; he could listen to the echoes, 
but vision and music were denied to him. And perhaps he did 
not care to remember; perhaps the echoes were hideous and harsh, 
like the reflected voices of ugly and wicked things false witches 
of the Brocken. 

When Lady Allabruth died suddenly, Sir Reuben sold all her 
jewels, all the trinkets she had loved and worn on her soft neck, 
arms, and bosom. He shut up his house and vanished. Perhaps 
he fled from the haunting memory of a tragedy, having given its 
souvenirs into strange hands that he had never clasped. Now his 
home seemed too large, and all its rooms were empty. To-night 
he had no engagement. He did not wish to have one. Yet the 
luxury of solitude weighed upon him, and he was unquiet with his 
mind, which could not cease from an intensity of thought that 
stirred and troubled him. The day drew on. He dined. After 
dinner he shut himself up in the smoking-room. He drank his 
coffee slowly. There was a reception at the house that adjoined 
his on the right. He went to the window for a moment, drew 
aside the curtains, and looked out through the lattice. In the 
distance, through the tall railings of his garden, he could see the 
lights of the carriages, a double chain of yellow eyes. He drew 
the curtains again, and sat down on a couch. He still saw the 
double chain of eyes, but now they were of a deep, translucent 
green. They looked like strings of enormous emeralds,, and their 
light was soft and silken. As they moved on towards the house, 
they were continually replaced by others, by endless emeralds of 
immense size, and of an intense, soft lustre. The lamps in the 
smoking-room were carefully shaded^ and were set high in the 



THE SLAVE 41 

ceiling. Sir Reuben no longer noticed them. The room seemed 
lit by the fire emitted by jewels, and all these jewels were still 
emeralds. Even the iced-water that stood in a glass beside the 
porcelain coffee-cup had changed from phantom white to a 
wonderful green hue. And Sir Reuben remembered the saying 
of the old writer, that the emerald imparts its colour to water 
when dipped in it. Was it not, then, the most influential of all 
jewels. Had it not powers denied to other jewels. Possibly for 
this reason the dead artificer had chosen it as the imperturbable 
scroll on which to write his ironical allegory. For he had thought, 
perhaps, that it could bear away the soul more swiftly, more 
certainly, than the gems that gleamed beside it. And was that 
true ? Sir Reuben meant to prove it presently. The green lights 
died out. They faded as the pretty Creole wife had faded and 
were gone. But, ere they faded, they seemed to crowd together, 
for one livid moment, all these great emeralds, and to rise in a 
wall of marvellous, implacable green, and to stand there before 
Sir Reuben, dividing his past with the pretty Creole from his 
future with whom ? 






CHAPTER V 

SIR REUBEN drove Aubrey down to Epsom on Sunday. The 
weather was fine and hot. There was a clear sky. It seemed 
certain that the musicians in the shubbery would not be rained 
upon, and that the torches borne by the bicyclists would burn 
bravely in a still evening. On the journey down Sir Reuben found 
his godson even more stiff and reticent than usual. He looked 
well in his light suit, with his fresh English complexion and thick, 
smooth hair, and Sir Reuben was rather proud of him, and of their 
curious connection. But decidedly the new Aubrey was difficult 
to get on with. His reserve of manner was singularly impenetrable. 
He was perfectly civil. Any desire to be unpleasant was certainly 
far from him. But he was rigid, and looked like an immaculate 
male puppet dressed for a highly conventional country life. As 
they drove along, he examined the passers-by calmly with his 
clear blue eyes, apparently taking no interest in them as human 
beings, but regarding them simply as the furniture of the streets 
stripped of the brown holland in honour of the Sabbath. He 
talked to Sir Reuben quietly, with a sort of gentle and sustained 
indifference. All subjects seemed alike to him, as they seem alike 
to those half-dead men whose minds slumber in bodies proud that 
they are flesh. Yet Aubrey did not convey any impression either 
of sensuality or of sleepiness. He was full, apparently, of a cold 
and attentive life, that could watch but could not respond, that 
chose neither to give nor to receive. There was no summer in 
him, one would have said, no sensation of youth, no desire of 
anything, good or evil. And to-day his invariable conventionality 
of manner was slightly accentuated. The stamp set upon him by 
society was more clearly marked even than usual. He resembled 
more closely than ever those many Englishmen, of whom one 
would never say they are intelligent, or bright, or amusing, or 
thoughtful ; but of whom one would say, dismissing them in one 
fully descriptive word they are thoroughbred. 

Sir Reuben, when he was not attending to his spanking pie- 
balds, thought over his conversation with Lady Rangecliffe. Was 
this young man really so unlike his usual companions ? Was he, 
as his mother declared, imaginative, desirous of sympathy, even 

42 



THE SLAVE 43 

one of those strange and pathetic beings at whom the world 
smiles, calling them dreamers ? It seemed unlikely, and yet re- 
serve is curiously deceptive. It is like one of those maladies that 
manifest themselves in pain remote from the seat of the disease. 
You are aware of a result, but are often far from guessing its 
cause. Sir Reuben shot a glance at his companion out of the 
corner of his eye. Aubrey was settling the pin in his narrow tie, 
and gazing indifferently at a row of mean suburban villas along 
which they were passing. His face wore ti weary expression. Sir 
Reuben began to rearrange his ideas, originally put in train by 
the incident in Bond Street, rejecting some despite the maternal 
evidence of Lady Rangecliffe. His first conception of the new 
Aubrey returned to him, the conception of a youth ground down 
in the ruthless mill of fashionable life, which finds the soul a 
jewel and leaves it a powder, a dust that disperses along the 
winds. 

" Shall we have an amusing day, Aubrey, do you think ? " he 
asked the young man. 

" I don't know. I don't care particularly for opera-singers." 
"I hope to advance in my acquaintance with Lady Caryll." 
But this remark did not tend to any more vivid conversation. 
Aubrey merely replied 

" Lady Caryll is scarcely seen at her best on these occasions." 
The garden of Lady St Ormyn at Epsom was not very large, 
but it was very artfully laid out. The building which she called 
the summer-house stood in the middle of a good-sized lawn, and 
contained a music-room with a parquet floor, a dining-room, a 
billiard-room, three or four dressing-rooms, a kitchen and offices. 
Behind these were stables. On the lawn a tent was pitched ; it 
was hung with Egyptian embroideries, and was decorated with 
palms and hot-house flowers. Beyond the lawn were large trees, 
copper beeches, monkey-trees, yews cut into conventional forms, 
imd some fine walnuts ; belts of rhododendron, shrubberies, a rose- 
walk, and a fish-pond, at the edge of which was a pretty tea-house 
hung with wisteria. Round the garden, on the outskirts, was a 
bicycling track. The garden was walled, and was entered through 
a very high iron gateway between brick buttresses covered thickly 
with ivy. A few village loafers hung about this gateway in the 
dust, watching the arrival of Lady St. Ormyn's guests. They 
stared with round eyes at Sir Reuben's piebalds, and one of them 
said in an audible voice 

" That's not a h'opera gent. Thems from the circus." 
"Lady St. Ormyn's guests are very mixed, I suppose?" said 
.Sir Reuben. 

"Very mixed indeed," said Aubrey stiffly. 



44 THE SLAVE 

It was four o'clock as they drew up at the thatched porch of 
the summer-house, and the sound of many voices came from the 
lawn. English, French, German, and Italian mingled in the warm 
summer air, and two men servants were carrying out some tall 
music-stands and some portfolios. Lady St. Ormyn, in a pink silk 
gown and a large and shady pink hat, was standing on the verandah 
of the music-room engaged in violent conversation with three men. 
Her face was covered with paint, her white hair with powder, and 
she plied a huge fan of pink feathers as she talked in French. 
One of the men, very tall and broad, with a dyed beard and 
feverish eyes, was a famous operatic bass. Another, small and 
grizzled, and carrying in his hand a pair of blood-red kid gloves, 
was Barre, the fashionable composer. The third, a melancholy 
youngish man like a bird, with black hair and a deformed smile, 
was a well-known musical amateur, who was mystic, immoral, 
cultivated, and dyspeptic. He composed hymns and gave luncheon 
parties, doing both decidedly well. And he was always in Lady 
St. Ormyn's pocket. Beyond the verandah there was a vision of 
the lawn, spotted with conversing celebrities. Araki, the Syrian 
singer, was lighting a cigarette in a corner, and at the same 
time furtively examining his face in a mirror that was let into 
the wall. 

" You are just in time, Sir Reuben. No, no, Barre, the one 
with the canon, about the monk and the nightingale ! I love it ! 
You are just in time. They're arranging Herr Kranz in the rhodo- 
dendrons at this moment. Mr. Herrick, you must Put the 

stand for Herr Kranz well behind the shrubs, James well behind." 

"Yes, my lady," said a man-servant. 

" He's not to be seen on any account ; it would spoil every- 
thing. Sir Reuben, you know Monsieur Anneau ? The finest 
Mephisto since Faure." 

The man with the dyed beard and the feverish eyes bowed 
very magnificently. 

" Yes, Barre, after the quartet. And no, not Araki's sobbing 
song we'll have that after dinner. It sounds better in the dark, 
much better. Lady Mary, do come out, won't you ? and you, Sir 
Reuben. Where's St. Ormyn, Mr. Fraser ? He must be kept 
quiet during the music. I can't have him wandering about in the 
shrubbery trying to get up companies all through Barre's exquisite 
where is he ?" 

The melancholy man with the face like a bird said he didn't 
know. 

"Do find him. Yes, Barre, whenever you like now. Mind 
about Herr Kranz ! Now, Mr. Herrick, come along. St. Ormyn ! 
St. Ormyn ! " 



THE SLAVE 45 

A very small man with a beard, who was skipping furtively 
across the verandah, stopped short. 

" What is it, Fifi ? " 

" Where are you off to ? Not into the shrubbery ? " 

"Well, but surely the quartet 

" Nonsense, St. Ormyn, you don't understand anything of that 
kind. You are going to make a noise about money and disturb 
Sir Henry, would you like to have a game of billiards ? Yes ! I 

thought so. St. Ormyn's longing for a Now, Sir Reuben, will 

you come f It's quite safe now. My husband is so noisy when 
he's talking about investments that I have to yes, it's a pretty 
little garden, quite small, of course. Mrs. Luffa Parkinson, will 
you come with us ? You shall have a chair. Where's Caryll ? 
Oh, there she is with Mr. Fane." 

A light sprang up in Aubrey's eyes as he saw Lady Caryll, in 
white, standing by Mr. Fane on the lawn. He was pulling his 
beard slowly, and staring piteously at the guests who were gather- 
ing round an ambush of rhododendrons, in which Barre was now 
arranging four anaemic-looking men who carried stringed instru- 
ments. Lady Caryll was saying something with a smile. Aubrey 
could not hear what it was, but, as Lady St. Ormyn and her en- 
tuitra^e came up, Mr. Fane's reply was audible. 

"The prince don't like it," he said ; "the prince don't like it." 

" What doesn't he like ? " cried Lady St. Ormyn. " Caryll, 
here's Sir Reu Herr Kranz, you aren't comfortable. Put your 
chair a little more into the bushes." 

Herr Kranz, an enormously stout German, with a yellow face 
and long mouse-coloured hair, secluded himself obediently, and 
began to tune his 'cello. 

" Isn't his tone delicious, like a rich wine ? " said Lady St. 
Ormyn. " He's quite hidden now. Barre ! Barre ! " 

Meanwhile Lady Caryll had greeted Sir Reuben and Aubrey. 
Sir Reuben noticed as he took her ungloved hand that it was very 
cold. Aubrey brought her a chair, but she declined to take it. 

"I can see Herr Kranz if I stand," she said. "Just his head 
surrounded by leaves. I must have something to interest me 
while they are playing." 

" Don't you care for music, then ? " asked Sir Reuben. 

" Oh yes. But I have heard Monsieur Barre's so often." 

" You are like Lady St. Ormyn you worship Wagner ? " 

"Oh, Lady Caryll adores the Italian school," said a young 
Italian composer who was standing by an adjacent rosebush. 

" Perhaps. But how did you divine it, Signor Rudini ? " 

"Because I heard you say that you would rather have a box for 
Madame Viva in ' Traviata ' this week than for the ' Meistersinger.' " 



46 THE SLAVE 

"They say she's going to wear 80,000 worth of diamonds 
in the first act/' murmured Mrs. Luffa Parkinson, the cinnamon- 
coloured lady, putting up a red parasol covered with poppies. 

Sir Reuben looked across at Aubrey. But the boy was gazing 
at Lady Caryll with an expression that had become suddenly almost 
wistful. 

" Oh, I like the tunes in ' Traviata,' " said the girl, in her calm 
voice. 

" 'Traviata' is a threadbare outrage. Hush! they're beginning !" 
said Lady St. Ormyn. "Mr. Harris/' she added in a hot whisper 
to a dark young man who was moving away, "come and sit by 
me. I want you to write about this quartet in your paper. You'll 
love it." 

The dark young man sat down in a resigned manner as the 
'cello of Herr Kranz buzzed out from the bushes. 

Sir Reuben and Aubrey stood with Lady Caryll while the music 
ran its course. Her grey eyes were fixed upon the flower-like face 
of Herr Kranz, grotesque amid the leaves, and transformed by 
various terrible expressions of hard labour as executive difficulties 
increased. A little smile of cool amusement hovered on her lips. 
She seemed unaware of the people round her. These whispered 
incessantly, unable to be quiet even for a moment. The air was 
full of faint ejaculations, half-smothered scraps of scandal, mur- 
mured bits of information that covered a wide range of topics, 
furtive utterances of praise and blame. 

"Delicious in the open air? Yes. We go to Nauheim in 
July. My heart gives me so much trouble. My heart only five 
balls this week things are quieting down a little." 

"This morning? Yes. He preached against Sunday-parties 
it was very impressive I never miss hearing him. I shall be glad 
when the bicycle races begin. A little heavy, yes, but still 
beautiful." 

"Oh no, not at Ascot. I never bet in the ring. She lost 
three thousand last week. Will he back any bill for her ? Really ! 
Then there is something in it after all. Scherzos, yes, they're 
always delightful. I agree with you I hate slow movements." 

"No, I think he'll get fourteen years he won't be hanged, oh 
no ! He used to dine with us quite often, so we have been to the 
court twice. He cried when she was giving her evidence most 
distressing. Yes, it's a killing piece. Algy roared. I thought 
he'd have to go out. Exquisite music but Barre's always is I 
could listen to it for ever." 

" He's very strong in the leg doosed strong in the leg, and 
don't know when he's beaten. Like a man like that, do you ? 
Oh, as fast as they make 'em. Not a marryin' man ; pity for her, 



THE SLAVE 47 

yes. Gone oa music ? I should think so ; dead gone ! You're 
right there too much butcher's meat about him for real stayin'. 
He's very ready with his fists, very ready, but he'll have to knock 
under to " 

"Three inches less than it was last season, and she's got three 
children. Wicked, yes, isn't it ? so bad for her health. No, she's 
not naturally small ; I'm much smaller by nature, but I don't 

choose to squeeze my . I'm glad you prefer natural people ; 

after all, sincerity is " 

" Yes, violins are perfect ; nothing like them, no. Yes, the 
coach-horn is very gay. Well, perhaps it is for out of doors per- 
haps it is ; more fulness of tone, certainly. They're stopping ; oh, 
what a pity ! Three more movements ! not really ! But I thought 
no, I'm not tired, only a little cramped from sitting so long. 
Shall we ? An ice, well, perhaps. I love music, still I am a little 
cramped ; let's go quietly." 

Lady St. Ormyn listened violently, her ostentatious silence 
being illuminated by a great deal of very expressive pantomime, 
denoting passionate and almost wild admiration of Barre and all 
his works. Music, she said, was her religion ; and, like many other 
people, she liked to have her religion brought comfortably to her 
door, planted among her own rhododendrons, and preached to her 
by famous male celebrities. Her soul, being diffused through the 
network of her nervous system, was only appealed to by the music 
of certain composers, of whom the chief was Wagner. She thought 
Mozart tiresome, just as many people who go to church think the 
Litany tiresome. Noise gave her an agreeable sensation in the 
small of the back. She always had an opera-box close to the 
stage, so that she could beck and nod to the singers, and ask 
them to lunch when they were kissing their hands before the 
curtain. And she valued her influence over a tenor or a baritone 
as earnest-minded maiden ladies value theirs over a vicar or an 
archdeacon. At present Barre was her idol, and his songs, which 
generally dealt with priests and birds, or nuns and Pierrots, or 
graves and ladies who were no better than they should be, moved 
her to tears as ostentatious as the popping of champagne corks. 
His quartets really bored her, but she said they were angelic. 
She had made Barre the vogue in England, and therefore loved 
him as we all love our own inventions. And Barre kissed her feet 
on every public occasion, and was at present composing a " Hymn 
to the Virgin" which was dedicated to her, and was peacefully 
scored for an organ and four trumpets. 

A prolonged and sonorous rustling at length announced that 
the quartet was over. The four anaemic-looking men, bathed in 
perspiration like bicyclists, emerged from the concealment of the 



48 THE SLAVE 

shrubbery, and Lady St. Ormyn began to exhibit Barre, as a 
conjui'er exhibits the pigeon he has extracted from the bottle 
of wine. 

" Isn't he extraordinary ? " she cried to Mrs. LufFa Parkinson, a 
lady without the encumbrance of a mind, who was always " in the 
movement " of the moment, whether it made for immoral literature 
or for the extension of Roman Catholicism in England. 

" Most extraordinary," said Mrs. Parkinson in a thin and fatigued 
soprano voice. " Most ! How does he think of it ? How do you 
think of it, Monsieur Barre ? " 

" It comes," said the little Frenchman, with all the modesty of 
a cock-sparrow. " I sit down at the piano and it comes to me." 

" But where from f " said Mrs. Parkinson, with the peculiar 
earnestness of idiocy. " That is what I want to know. Where 
from ? " 

But Lady St. Ormyn had no idea of allowing her little god to 
be monopolised, so she broke in upon this searching cross-examina- 
tion of genius. 

" Barre, you want something to drink," she said firmly. 

The composer smiled with greedy deprecation. 

"Come with me to the tent. Caryll, bring Sir Reuben. And 
then Monsieur Anneau is going to sing ' Le Bon Dieu et les 
Oiseaux,' Barre' s last song. Monsieur Anneau, you haven't for- 
gotten ! " 

The famous bass, who was one of the wickedest-looking men in 
Europe, bowed and smiled. 

" May I come with you also, Lady Caryll ? " he said to her in 
excellent English. 

" Please do," she answered. "And you, Sir Reuben." 

She walked across the lawn between the two men, while 
Aubrey escorted Mrs. Parkinson. 

" I love to sing about the little birds," said Monsieur Anneau. 
" They are innocent. They sing so exquisitely because they are so 
innocent." 

He made his glorious voice intensely gentle as he spoke. 

"Do you sing so exquisitely for the same reason, Monsieur 
Anneau ? " said the girl. 

He smiled pathetically. 

" You should have asked me that question before I came to 
London," he answered. 

"The little birds can be sarcastic," she said, smiling. 

" Perhaps it is my lost innocence which gives me my passion 
when I sing," he murmured. " No one can be an artist who has 
not something to regret." 

"Then you cannot regret your lost innocence." 



THE SLAVE 49 

a You are an artist in conversation ; I am a blunderer. It is 
only when I sing that I have power." 

He fixed his feverish eyes upon her with the expression that 
had turned America's head and put Russia into the hollow of 
his hand. 

She laughed lightly at him and looked at Sir Reuben. 

" Music is dangerous, isn't it, Sir Reuben ? " she said, as they 
entered the tent. " I don't think I shall dare to listen to M. 
Barre's last song." 

"I fancy you need have no fear," he said with intention. 

She turned suddenly, and gazed at him for the first time with 
real interest. 

" Am I not to be influenced like the rest of London, then ? " 
she said. 

" Yes and no," he replied. 

" Ah, you take refuge in enigmas. What a crowd ! " 

The marquee, large though it was, presented the spectacle of a 
polite battlefield. It was thronged with people, all anxious to be 
soothed with refreshments, and the heat, on which was borne 
the heavy scent of flowers, had become tremendous. Near the 
entrance a world-renowned prima donna, in a garden-hat and a 
white muslin dress spotted with mauve orchids, was eating pine- 
apple and talking French with a vivid colonial accent. Her 
companion was a big boy who hated music. She loved big boys, 
and, as she hated music too, they naturally had a great deal in 
common. They were talking about the Grand Piix, and the boy 
was giving her a good tip for it. She cared more for a good tip 
than for all the operas ever composed. Yet she could sing with 
consummate art when she chose. She had been born with an iron 
will and with an inordinate ambition, and God had given her 
one of the loveliest voices in the world. 

" I rather fancy the Comte de Gramont's ' Hirondelle,' " she 
said to the big boy. 

" Not a chance. Take my tip and go for ' Sourisette,' " said the 
big boy. "Some more pine-apple?" 

" My voice forbids. What a nuisance it is to have a voice ! " 

" Yes. Awfully hard lines for you." 

" Well, it can't be helped. What stable is ' Sourisette ' 
out of? " 

Barre was drinking champagne and receiving the adulation of 
two elderly peeresses with auburn hair, sisters, who dyed their grey 
heads exactly the same hue in order to deceive society, at which 
innocent effort society was perennially amused. Lady St. Ormyn 
was standing in the centre of a circle of people connected with the 
opera, and was accepting from the hands of a great Italian con- 



50 THE SLAVE 

thictor a plate of strawberries. A dull and impudent-looking man, 
with a turned-up nose and a curled moustache, was talking authori- 
tatively to her, and to the group around her. He was a business 
man, totally unmusical, who had a great deal to do with the 
financing of operatic speculations, and who, in consequence, thought 
himself fully competent to teach mere artists their business. 

" I heard her twice in Buda-Pesth," he was saying, in a slow 
and thick voice. " A perfect soprano. Not been spoilt by singing 
Wagner." 

A very stout young woman in mustard-colour, who wore yellow 
thread gloves and a large red rose in the front of her gown, turned 
suddenly purple. She had been singing " Venus " the evening 
before. 

"Really, Mr. Wilson!" she ejaculated. 

" Spoilt ! I repeat it," he continued calmly. " I shall bring 
her over next season, and then you will all see." 

"But what's she to sing?" said Lady St. Ormyn. "Who cares 
for anything but Wagner ? I'm sure I don't." 

"Oh, this Wagner craze will blow over it will blow over," said 
Mr. Wilson. " As long as it pays it's all very well ; but it can't last. 
I know the signs of the times. It can't last for ever." 

Three other stout people in the group turned pale and began 
to look unstrung. They were celebrated vocalists from the Father- 
land, who knew quite well that nobody would tolerate their voices 
for a moment in any music but " the master's." Would they " blow 
over," too, when he did ? Mr. Wilson wrinkled up his nose and 
continued 

"There will have to be great changes in the personnel of opera 
companies within the next few years. That's to say if money is to 
be made. And the whole question is really one of money, in this 
country at any rate." 

" Well, I'm sure Wagner pays," cried Lady St. Ormyn trium- 
phantly. 

" For the moment," said Mr. Wilson, drinking some iced cham- 
pagne. " But if I remain on the syndicate I shall take very good 
care he's not kept incessantly on the bills till the public gets sick 
of him." 

"You're perfectly right, Mr. Wilson," said a light soprano in 
green, who couldn't be heard unless she were singing top notes or 
runs and shakes. " Heavy music can't last for ever. I always said 
so. The reaction must come." 

" Ah, but we shan't go back to ' The Barber,' Signorina," said 
Mr. Wilson with a slow smile. 

The lady in green hastily devoted herself to a strawberry ice. 
The Barber ! ' I should hope not ! " said Lady St. Ormyn. 



f< C ' 



THE SLAVE 51 

" We shall advance, of course, though how any one can go farther 
than 'Tristan' I can't imagine." 

"Nor I farther in uproar," said an elderly judge, who had 
been educated on Bach, Mozart, and Haydn, and who thought the 
modern world was mad. " I wish Wagner had been brought up 
before me for sentence." 

" I think salvation will come from the young French school," 
said one of the auburn-haired peeresses who had been petting 
Barre. 

Barre, who was only just sixty-four, looked modest. 

" Not if they go on giving us symphonic poems and rubbish of 
that kind," said Mr. Wilson. " The public doesn't want old beggars 
dying in attics on the flute and the kettledrum." 

"Such a combination of instruments is practically unheard of!" 
cried Barre indignantly. 

"The flute and the kettledrum!" repeated Mr. Wilson more 
loudly. " They want good, honest, sterling stuff, something they 
can take hold of and remember. That's what they want, and that's 
what they'll have in a very short time if I have my say." 

The four Germans uttered a sniff that was like a blast. But 
Mr. Wilson was a power, and could prevent their re-engagement at 
the opera. They dared not offend him, so they waddled away in 
different directions, wondering what life would be like when they 
had "blown over" with Wagner. 

" You're very hard on them, Mr. Wilson," said Lady St. Ormyn, 
while the light soprano in green bridled with satisfaction. 

" These Wagner people want taking down," he replied. " And 
if nobody else will do it I will. I'm not afraid of them. They 
must learn to know that they're only so much material, and material 
that's very soon worn out into the bargain." 

" What a way to speak of an artist ! " cried Barre, who was 
not connected with the opera, and had nothing to hope for from 
Mr. Wilson. 

" Yes, indeed," said Lady St. Ormyn. " The artistic tempera- 
ment is a gift from the gods." 

" And if the ' gods ' get tired of it, it's not worth tuppence- 
ha'penny," said Mr. Wilson, strolling away to smoke a cigar on the 
lawn and talk about the rise in guano to another of the opera 
syndicate. 

" I believe that ( Parsifal ' is the beginning of the new musical 
era," said Mr. Eraser, the man like a bird, who wrote hymns and 
gave luncheon parties. " And that we shall have religious music 
dramas, full of passion, love, desire, but floating in a beautiful 
atmosphere of mysticism. Man must believe in something. He 
must aspire, even if the body holds him back." 



52 THE SLAVE 

If the world spoke truth about him, Mr. Eraser's body was very 
much given to holding him back. 

" I should like to play St. Stephen, if an opera could be written 
round him, say by Bruneau," said Monsieur Anneau. " Think of 
the last scene. What a chance for a singer ! " 

" Oh, I fancy Herod, or some strong character of that kind, 
would suit you much better," cried Lady St. Ormyn. " But I 
hope we shall never have another oratorio era. I went once to 
stay with the Duchess of Grandon for a provincial musical festival. 
It was perfectly awful hot weather, and one prolonged cry of 
' Hallelujah, Amen ! ' from one end of the week to the other. 
We sat on cane chairs in a crypt for eight hours a day, and there 
was a collection going but. I was seriously ill afterwards, and had 
to go to Paris to recover. Now, Monsieur Anneau, don't you 
think we might have ' Le Bon Dieu ' ? In the music-room, of 
course. I know you don't like singing out of doors." 

" I shall be delighted," said Monsieur Anneau, looking more 
like Herod than ever. 

He turned to Lady Caryll, who, with Sir Reuben, Mrs. Luffa 
Parkinson, and Aubrey Herrick, was standing close by. 

" You will come to hear me ? " he asked her. " If you do not, 
I shall think " 

"What will you think?" the girl asked, calmly looking into 
his dissipated eyes. 

"That you fear the power." 

" I will come," she answered. " But I fear nothing." 

" Not even the most dangerous of all the arts ? " 

" Not even that. Will you come, Sir Reuben ? You must be 
justified of your faith in me." 

As Sir Reuben left the tent with her, he saw Aubrey follow- 
ing Monsieur Anneau with his eyes. For a moment his calm 
face was transformed. A cold and yet fierce anger and disgust 
made it strangely vivid. Then the smooth and conventional ex- 
pression returned. 

"Would you like to hear 'Le Bon Dieu'?" he said to Mrs. 
Parkinson. 

" Oh yes ! It's sure to be delicious ! Nobody can write about 
such a subject like Barre, or sing about it like dear Monsieur 
Anneau." 

" Then let us go too. I agree with you. Monsieur Anneau is 
the very man to make the Deity popular in such a society." 

" Yes, isn't he ? I love his sacred manner." 

They followed the crowd slowly towards the music-room. 



CHAPTER VI 

BARRE seated himself at the piano, ran his fat hands through his 
grey hair, and struck a chord high up in the treble. And Mon- 
sieur Anneau, leaning with his elbow on the piano lid, and fixing 
his eyes upon Lady Caryll, began to sing, or rather to recite on 
one note, in a beautiful, deep voice, a sentimental poem about dead 
flowers in the snow, starving birds, and the white terrors of the 
first frost of winter. Most of Barre's songs were on one, or at 
most two notes until quite close to the end, when there appeared 
a tiny tune of a very languid nature, to take you by surprise just as 
you had given up all hope. The singers of his masterpieces spoke 
till they reached the tiny tune, and then sang with all their might 
in order to show that they really did possess voices ; and as Barre 
always took care to set very pretty words, everybody was invari- 
ably delighted, and said that the man who could interest you so 
much with a melody on one note must be a genius. On this 
occasion the dead flowers, the starving birds, and the frost were 
presented in recitative, and the little tune was reserved for the 
appearance of the Bon Dieu, with rain for the flowers, and crumbs 
apparently of a supernatural description for the attenuated 
sparrows and robin redbreasts. 

Lady Caryll stood in the crowd, and met the fixed gaze of the 
fierce-looking singer with her calm and glittering grey eyes. Both 
Aubrey and Sir Reuben were watching her closely for different 
reasons. At the close of the song Monsieur Anneau's magnificent 
voice filled the whole room, and all the women present were 
thrilled with an emotion that was wholly sensuous. Their nerves 
danced, as the nerves of America had danced under the spell of this 
magician with the dyed beard and the feverish eyes. His shame- 
ful reputation, his evil appearance, and his gorgeous talent car- 
ried everything before them And then there was something 
strangely piquant in this immense, broad-shouldered man, with 
his great arms and mighty chest, warbling so tenderly about such 
tiny things. No more attractive could have been a magnificent 
blacksmith lamenting over the chagrin of a glow-worm, or Her- 
cules shedding tears about the accident to a grasshopper. Mrs. 
LufFa Parkinson wept, and the paint on Lady St. Ormyn's cheeks 



54 THE SLAVE 

glistened in the heat of her enthusiasm. Only Lady Caryll, to 
whom the whole song had been pointedly addressed, remained 
totally unmoved. When the last note died away she said to Sir 
Reuben 

" I think mother was right. Monsieur Anneau would make 
an admirable Herod. As the Bon Dieu he is hardly convincing." 

" Have you a nervous system ? " he said in reply, and there 
was an intonation of genuine wonder in his voice. 

" What a strange question ! Yes, I suppose so. Why do you 
ask me ? " 

" Look round. Look at the women in this room." 

She glanced at the faces near her. They all looked the same 
as Barre struck the final chord of the symphony, for a peculiar 
staring excitement was in all the eyes, the undressed expression 
that displays the savage in civilisation. In many faces, too, the 
cheek-bones seemed unnaturally prominent, and the lips of the 
mouths were parted to allow the hurried breath to escape. The 
success of Monsieur Anneau was plainly written on these feminine 
faces. He had struck home, not to the heart, but to the senses. 
And that is the aim of singers like him when they sing in fashion- 
able drawing-rooms. His voice had stirred the stagnant pools. 
There was a movement, the water eddied, the weeds below the 
surface, those tall, rank, secret things, swayed noiselessly. For 
the Bon Dieu had appeared to all these women in the guise of a 
man with feverish eyes and dyed hair, and they were enchanted. 
Aubrey had been right. Monsieur Anneau was the very person 
to make the Deity welcome in such a society. 

Lady Caryll glanced round slowly. Then she said to Sir 
Reuben, " Well ? " 

" And now look at yourself in that mirror." 

The mirror in which Araki had examined himself was close to 
them. She turned to it, and saw her white face. 

" You mean that I look different. But I never feel the heat," 
she said quite simply. 

" No, you never feel the heat," he said. " And you never will. 
No tropics could ever affect you." 

" Sir Reuben, you speak about me with a great deal of assurance, 
as if you had known me very well for a long time." 

" Do you know how I started in life ? " he replied. " What 
my metier was at the beginning of my career ? " 

"No." 

" I was a diamond merchant." 

The girl suddenly fixed her eyes upon his worn and furrowed 
face with an expression of sparkling interest and animation. She 
opened her soft and narrow lips to speak. 



THE SLAVE 55 

"Did you feel the power, Lady Caryll?" said Monsieur An- 
neau's voice. 

He had made his way to them from the piano, despite the 
noisy entreaties of Lady St. Ormyn and of all the other women in 
the room for one more song, the one about the nun who was 
unfaithful to her vows with pretty Pierrot, and who was eventually 
carried to Purgatory by laughing clowns, bound in a net of wild 
roses. 

All the sparkle died away from the girl's face. 

" Your voice is beautiful," she said. 

"The voice ! Ah! that is nothing. But my soul when I sing, 
my will, I myself did you feel that?" 

" In what way ? In my heart, as a child might, or in my nerve- 
centres, like all these people?" 

He bent over her, with his favourite movement suggestive of 
a stormy embrace barely checked by the foolish conventions of 
the world. 

" In both." 

" I don't think I have any nerve-centres," she said coolly, with 
just a glance at Sir Reuben. 

" In your heart then ? " 

" I am too young to have one. This is my first season." 

" The first season of a woman's heart is the most beautiful, is 
the only one worth having," he murmured gently. 

"Shall I tell you really what I thought all the time you were 
singing, Monsieur Anneau ? " she said, with a half smile that was 
full of mischief. 

" Please do," he answered, folding his huge arms, and staring 
steadily into her eyes. 

"That you and the Bon Dieu haven't even a bowing acquaint- 
ance, and that your voice is the finest in Europe." 

At this point Mrs. LufTa Parkinson came up drying her eyes. 

" We have all been in heaven," she said in her weary little voice. 
" Mr. Fraser is so upset by it that he has scratched for the bicycle 
handicap this evening. And all my money was on him. I ought 
to hate you, Monsieur Anneau." 

" But you will not?" he said, transferring his passionate gaze 
to her. 

She was immensely rich, and gave very smart little concerts at 
which royalties were often present. 

"I am sorry Mr. Fraser is upset by being in heaven," said 
Lady Caryll. "Oh, good-bye, Lady Mary. Must you go?" 

" I dare not trust myself to hear any more music, and I'm 
dining early at Claridge's to meet the new negro acrobat, Darkie 
Tom. He's going to be the rage this season, and I hear he's most 



56 THE SLAVE 

good-natured about performing for charities. Your mother's very 
anxious to meet him. I'll try to arrange it." 

An elderly American poetess who was standing near almost 
fainted, and afterwards published a terrible satire in verse upon 
the British aristocracy. 

" You're not staying for the orgy ? " said a captain in the Life 
Guards to a brother officer who had ordered round his cart. 

" No. Wish I was. Goin' to be extra lively this evening, I'm 
told. They're goin' to have a skit on it in the Pink Un. Won't 
Lady St. Ormyn be jolly proud of herself? " 

The big boy who hated music was staying on for the orgy. 
He was a noted cyclist, and the prima donna had plunged heavily 
on him. 

"Thank heaven all the music's over," she said. "We shall 
have a little peace when these people are gone. D'you think I'm 
really not too heavy for the wheel-barrow race ? " 

" You're a feather-weight," he replied gallantly. " I wouldn't 
take the risk with one of those Germans." 

" Fraulein Vogel, for instance ! Did you see her Isolde ? " 

"Not I. But she don't come in my wheel-barrow, I'll swear." 

He plucked at his tiny blond moustache with an air of martial 
determination, as became an arbiter of fates. 

People were going fast, undeterred by the piercing shouts of 
the plump young woman in mustard-colour, who was singing, 
"Ocean, thou mighty monster!" in a voice that could be heard 
for miles around. Aubrey had at length shaken himself free from 
Mrs. Luffa Parkinson. He approached Lady Caryll, who was still 
with Sir Reuben. 

" Can't you get away for a few minutes now ? " he said to her 
in a low voice. "Come and have a cup of tea in the tea-house." 

" Yes," she answered. " Sir Reuben, I want you to see it. 
You must tell me whether it is as pretty as the tea-houses of 
Japan." 

Aubrey's face was like stone. She did not seem to notice it. 
Her manner had become more than usually animated. 

" I feel quite domestic," she said, as they crossed the lawn, 
on which two young novelists were conversing about golf and 
American drinks in earnest undertones. "Walking between the 
godfather and the godson. Have you given Mr. Herrick a silver 
spoon, Sir Reuben?" 

" Not yet," he said. 

" But you are going to ? " 

" Perhaps if you mean by a silver spoon a lucky chance." 
His voice had become oddly significant. But Aubrey was not 
listening ; he was feeling. Beneath the stone there was leaping 



THE SLAVE 57 

fire. They passed through the shrubbery and the pond lay before 
them. In it red goldfish made everlasting tours, opening and shut- 
ting their bland mouths, and gazing at the water with strained 
eyes, in which seemed to flicker the hint of a faint and idiotic 
amusement. Aubrey looked at them. Their coloured bodies 
glowed like flames. And yet how cold they were. This thought 
came to his mind with intensity. He could not tell why. But in 
moments of emotion some insignificant object will often attract the 
attention with violence, acting as a magnet to the needle of the 
mind. And long afterwards such an object is inseparably bound 
up with our tragedy or with our rapture. It is the fly caged in the 
amber of our destiny. The largest of the flickering scarlet fish 
poised itself in the water with its blunt head turned towards 
Aubrey. It opened its vacuous mouth in a sort of smiling yawn. 
He remembered the exact expression for years. 

" Those fish are like moving jewels," said Sir Reuben. " Their 
colour is alive like the colour of fire." 

"Yes," said Lady Caryll. "I always feel they would be warm 
to the touch." 

"And yet they are cold," said Sir Reuben, thinking of the 
moment when he had shaken hands with her for the first time. 

Between them Lady Caryll and he had translated Aubrey's 
thought into words, and it dwindled at once, and seemed to 
become childishly obvious and insignificant. 

The tea-house, a small and low building of wood with a pointed 
and thatched roof, was divided into four rooms, in all of which 
were little tables. The long locks of the wisteria flowed down 
its sides and rustled gently in the light summer wind. As they 
approached it seemed to be deserted, and Aubrey had a moment 
of cold hatred for his godfather. The young are lashed by agony 
when they see the flying chance as it escapes them. But often 
they do not see it. When they entered the tea-house it proved to 
be deceptive. They looked into the first room a well-known 
tenor was playing Faust over the teacups to the Margaret of a 
pretty Russian princess, whose husband spent his life in taking 
baths for a complication of diseases ; into the second a little 
clergyman, who held that godliness is next to gaiety, was telling a 
funny story to a comic-opera divette; into the third the elderly 
judge who hated Wagner was giving a little legal advice to a 
beauty whose husband troubled her by being faithful, and expect- 
ing in others the old-fashioned virtues he practised himself; into 
the fourth a Jewess in rose-colour was looking through a lorgnon 
at a young artist who sat at one pace from her whispering that a 
portrait of her would make his fortune. 

" How fond people are of tea," said Lady Caryll, recoiling 



58 THE SLAVE 

gracefully for the fourth time. " Shall we have ours out of 
doors ? " 

But at this moment the little clergyman and the comic-opera 
divette made a convulsive exit from their room, and disappeared in 
a peal of laughter that seemed to be the appropriate anthem of a 
consolidated Church and Stage brotherhood. 

" How kind of Mr. Sebastian/' said Lady Caryll, entering the 
room. "He has to get back to town for his eight-o'clock service. 
Miss Daisy Heriot is singing ' Blessed are the pure in heart ' for 
him to-night." 

She sat down at a round table by the window, and a servant 
brought them tea. They could hear the legal voice of the judge 
humming softly through the wall, and the final cries of the German 
prima donna made almost Italian by distance. The wisteria rustled 
gently. Aubrey listened to it, ignoring the other voices. There 
was a clink of china as the servant put down his silver tray. 

" Do you like silence ? " said Sir Reuben to Lady Caryll. 

She gave him his teacup. 

" I don't mind it," she said. " Here, Mr. Herrick. It is un- 
common, and so it becomes distinguished. What do you say, Mr. 
Herrick ?" 

" I love it." 

The words were on Aubrey's lips, but he checked them, and 
said 

" I hear it so seldom that I don't know much about it. I dare- 
say it's all right." 

" I have had years of it," said Sir Reuben. " Silence on the 
sea in my yacht ; silence in the desert in my caravan ; silence in 
my Moorish garden on the edge of the Bay of Tangier." 

"Why were you away so long?" said the girl carelessly. 
" What did your diamonds do without you ? " 

Aubrey moved slightly and suddenly. 

" I gave up my diamonds many years ago," said Sir Reuben, 
" for finance." 

"That's what my father goes in for," she said. 

The two men succeeded in not smiling. 

"And I have been away in my own world," he continued. 
" You know I am not English. My blood is Oriental, and I am at 
home in places and with people who would frighten you." 

" Oh no ! " 

Lady Caryll was stirring her tea gently. 

" Well, then, with people whose habits, whose way of life, would 
at least disgust you." 

" Do you think so ? After the habits and customs of civilisa- 
tion ? " 



THE SLAVE 59 

" You forget that I have a husband; Mr. Hickson," said the 
voice of the Jewess in rose-colour to the artist as they passed into 
the garden. 

" Won't you forget it too ? " he replied. " Think what such a 
success would mean to me ! Why, in " 

Their conversation died away. 

"You are very sarcastic, Lady Caryll," said Sir Reuben. 

"I sarcastic?" she said with calm surprise. 

Aubrey longed to tell Sir Reuben that Lady Caryll spoke in 
simplicity and not in sarcasm, as when she had misunderstood an 
allusion to love in Hyde Park. 

" How can he look into her face," the boy thought, " and 
think she understands the true meaning of this world in which she 
moves? She is a white flower with all the petals folded in a white 
sleep." 

" Yes. Think of the position of women in the Western world," 
said Sir Reuben. 

" What sort of women ? Do you mean the typewriters ? I 
know Lady Wickham said in her speech the other day that the 
true light has spread so far that now no less than I forget how 
many hundreds of thousands of young women are ' typewriting 
happily in our midst.' Is that what you mean ? I suppose women 
are not allowed to be typewriters in the East ? " 

" That is true ; but that is not all I meant." 

" Did you see many women from your garden in Morocco ?" 

" Yes, many in the early morning, in the twilight, going to 
and coming from the Soko of Tangier. I used to watch them as I 
trimmed the roses that grew along my garden wall." 

"Twilight!" she repeated. "Ah, listen!" 

And she held up her small, cool hand, which he had touched 
for the first time that day. In the distance they heard the deep 
voice of Monsieur Anneau. He was singing " Crepuscule," Barre's 
last song but two. Evening was falling. They sat in silence. 
Aubrey's eyes were fastened on Lady Caryll, but his face preserved 
its conventional and rigid expression, the fixed expression of a 
mask. 

" Let us come out on to the grass," Lady Caryll said, when the 
first verse faded away. 

The voice of the singer sounded nearer to them now, and more 
beautiful. At their feet lay the water in which the glowing fish 
moved silently. Aubrey watched their bodies gleaming and grow- 
ing dim as they vanished in the opaque shadows, and colour seemed 
to him then, as often before, to be music, as music often seems to 
be colour. The red gold of the fish was a song, and the clear 
pallor of Lady Caryll's face, the frosty yellow of her hair, the grey 



60 THE SLAVE 

of her long eyes these were a song too. And the evening light 
had a voice that blended with the voice that sang again and again 
" Crepuscule ! Crepuscule ! " His heart was stirred. Something 
within him seemed suddenly to live and to be restless in its life, as 
if all these voices called to it and cried, " Do you not hear us ? 
We are calling to you." And he was filled with that strange and 
terrible sensation of a living thing that knows it has never really 
lived, and that scarcely knows what is the way to live, but that 
knows there is a marvel, a wonder called living. But this new- 
born creature within him ached. It was in pain ; yet its pain was 
beautiful, for he felt that he divined from its power to suffer its 
power to rejoice, and that, robbed of the one, he could never hope 
to possess the other. 

The song was over. A gong sounded, and then the wild note 
of a coach-horn blown by the big boy who hated music. It was 
followed by a shrill peal of laughter and by loud voices raised in 
merry remonstrance. The crepuscule of society was falling ! 

"Dinner!" said Lady Caryll. "While we are at dinner they 
will light up the gai'den." 

" I'm hungry," Aubrey said, merely because he felt that the 
blast on the horn, the dinner, the artificially lighted garden, were 
things hateful as the cries of hawkers would be along the ways of 
paradise. 

." Are you going in for the bicycle races ? " she asked him. 

" No. Wish 1 was, but I drove down. Don't make me take 
in Mrs. Parkinson ; she's the wrong colour for dinner." 

They went towards the house. 

The guests of Lady St. Ormyn who had waited for the orgy 
dined at little tables. There were eight people at each table. 
Aubrey took in the American poetess, and sat opposite to Lady 
Caryll, who was with Monsieur Anneau. Sir Reuben was at Lady 
Ormyn's table. The American poetess was a charming creature, 
with soft, snow-white hair and bright, observant brown eyes. She 
had travelled much and suffered much, and, like most sweet- 
natured women who have suffered, she had a very sensitive love 
for all young things. She looked forward for them, and hoped for 
them, and feared for them, and longed to preserve their purity, and 
the morning light in their eyes and in their hearts. She was 
of those who can shed tears in secret for strangers, who can have 
the heartache for vagrants seen only in passing by the roadside. 
Nevertheless she had many odd prejudices, and could write with 
a lively bitterness. Some of her readers thought her cruel, but all 
those who knew her knew her kind. 

She and Aubrey had never met before, and Aubrey was not 
easy to talk to. In many ways he resembled his father, and his 



THE SLAVE 61 

father was patrician and British to the core. Mrs. Reckitt Adela 
Reckitt, as she was always called by the reading world tried him 
on several subjects, and found him dull and abstracted. Yet she 
liked him. She liked what she would have called his atmosphere. 
She was quick to read character, quicker still to feel it. And 
very soon, looking round for the cause of this character's dissimu- 
lation, she found it in Monsieur Anneau. 

Monsieur Annean was one of those many men who think ill of 
all women, who divine debauchery in every nature, and who believe 
that descending is the secret pleasure of every foot that treads upon 
the earth, whatever pretences to the contrary may be put forward 
to deceive a watching world. He loved to wallow, had loved to 
do so all his life. And he felt pleasantly certain that this affection 
was shared by everybody. Those who endeavoured to make him 
think otherwise he called hypocrites, and he considered himself 
better than they were because he was honest. Even talents he 
looked upon as aids towards the attainment of the slough. He 
was immensely gifted. He had a noble voice, would have had 
a noble appearance, had he not looked evil, was intensely 
musical, and had an emotional temperament. When he sang he 
could and did feel what he was singing, though he felt it often in 
a wrong way. But even in his art he was a libertine. When he 
sang of the Bon Dieu he thought of a woman, of some human being 
on whom he meant to cast his spell for one reason or another. 
And he had done more evil with his music than most men could 
accomplish with all the devilish weapons invented by the cruel artful- 
ness of civilisation. Finding that he possessed something which 
could be made a great power, he perfected it. And ever since it had 
been perfected he had used it vigilantly in the service of ambition 
and in a lower service. And the use of it in this lower service espe- 
cially had become an inordinate passion in him. If he was yielded 
to, he was agreeable at first and cruel at last. If he was resisted, 
he became dangerous. It was his continual desire to feel that his 
power was being effective on some individuality. Night and day 
some thought connected with this desire, some hope arising out 
of it, was with him. It filled him to-night as he sat by L^dy 
Caryll. 

Aubrey knew it, and Mrs. Reckitt grew to know it through 
Aubrey. Her companion, calm, self-possessed, and frigid though 
he appeared, was on the watch, was whipped by a keen emotion of 
manly anger. Mrs. Reckitt went back a great many years. She 
saw another man who had felt like that for her sake, and she knew 
Aubrey intimately, though he was totally unaware of it. 

" Did you hear me summoning the twilight ? " said Monsieur 
Anneau softly to Lady Caryll. 



62 THE SLAVE 

"Yes even Nature obeys you. What's your Christian name ?" 

"Jules." 

"Not Orpheus?" 

" You are cruel. But I do not care for the twilight. It is an 
affair for Nature. I care only to have power over human beings." 

"The people at the opera! Well, old Lady Groome never 
misses a night when you sing." 

" But you miss many." 

" It is so hot at Covent Garden." 

" Ah, you love the coolness of night in open spaces. Come out 
with me after dinner. I want to-, " 

Mrs. Reckitt felt that a quiver ran through her companion. He 
lifted his glass to his lips, and she noticed that his hand trembled 
slightly. From Lady St. Ormyn's table came peals of laughter 
that were almost wild. They heard her saying at the top of her 
voice 

" No, no, I won't go in your barrow. Monsieur Anneau shall 
wheel me. His arms are as strong as his voice. Sir Reuben, you 
must no, no, I won't I won't. W'hat, Sir Frederick ? Margaret 
carried away by Mephisto ! Absurd ! But Barre's going to wheel 
Fraulein Vogel." 

There was a scream of merriment. 

" I'll make him. He'll do anything for me. What ? Kill 
him ! He's wonderfully wiry quite a stayer ! More likely to 
stay than go ! Then he shall have a prize for " 

The conversation in the big room seemed to Aubrey to become 
a deafening roar, from which now and then voices detached them- 
selves for an instant only to sink back eventually into the whirlpool. 
He heard Lord St. Ormyn's light and playful tones, suggesting 
to a rich Australian widow that there was any amount of money 
to be made in electric perambulators. Araki's mechanical and 
almost hyena-like laugh came to his ears, and then the guttural 
murmur of a German tenor talking about Bayreuth to one of the 
auburn-haired sisters. Some one near Aubrey said, " Yes, Lady 
St. Ormyn's parties are always so delightfully gay ; " and he felt 
inclined to shudder. He tried not to look at Monsieur Anneau, but 
the feverish brilliancy of the singer's terribly expressive face tore at 
his attention. It was to him an utterly hateful face, but he realised 
its power, its magnetic influence. And it seemed to him that such 
eyes must stir a girl's heart to excitement, even if only to an excite- 
ment of repulsion. And then he remembered a song that he had 
heard, " If thou art sleeping, maiden, wake ! wake and open thy 
door ! " A sort of dull terror seized him. For he saw before him 
a sleeper, wrapped in the white dreams of early youth, of purity, of 
that perfect thing called ignorance. And he saw a brilliant, middle- 



THE SLAVE 63 

aged roue giving way to his one inordinate passion the passion for 
making an effect upon, for gaining control over, a new nature and 
a new heart. If it should fall to Monsieur Anneau to awaken that 
lovely sleeper ! A sort of sickness of the soul fell upon Aubrey. 
The length of the dinner seemed endless, because he was resolved 
what to do when the end came. 

" Night ought to be lovely in this garden/' said the gentle voice 
of Mrs. Reckitt to him. 

He turned to her mechanically. 

"Yes, and there'll be a moon." 

" Are vou fond of country places ? " 

Aubrey thought of his annual tour of big houses, and answered, 
without enthusiasm 

" I don't know sometimes. I'm fond of shooting and hunt- 
ing." Then he added perfunctorily, "And you ?" 

" I love quiet, and I love animals, and thoughts so I love the 
country. It is difficult to think in crowds." 

"Do you find that ? " Aubrey said, with a sudden quickening of 
the voice, aware of the ferment of thought in his own mind. 

"To think rightly, that is," she said. "Of course the mind 
often works very rapidly in noise and a vision of multitudes. But 
we want quiet in order to find out the errors in our thoughts, just 
as we often need suffering in order to discover the errors in our 
conduct." 

Aubrey looked into her face carefully, curiously, for the first 
time. 

Rings of smoke rose softly over the little tables. People were 
sipping coffee. 

" Is the garden lit ? " said Lady St. Ormyn to a servant. 

"Yes, my lady." 

Aubrey glanced out across the verandah. He could see a small 
moon coming up above the chestnut trees, and a multitude of blood- 
red stars, like eyes, looking out among the leaves. Along the 
paths green glow-worms seemed crawling in multitudes, and the 
mauve spray of an illuminated fountain aspired between the earth 
and the dark evening sky. 

" Don't forget the torches," said Lady St. Ormyn. 

"No, my lady." 

" Let me see," she cried. " How many do we want ? You 
count, Johnnie ! " 

"All right, Fifi ; don't you bother. I know all about it," said 
the big boy. 

He was in roaring spirits, and was showing the prima donna a 
new game played with nuts and cherries. He threw her a cherrv, 
and at the same time she threw him a nut. Opening his wide 



64 THE SLAVE 

mouth, full of strong white teeth, he caught his nut and cracked it 
like a monkey. The prima donna made a wild effort, a terrible 
grimace, and missed the cherry, which fell with a splash into a 
silver bowl full of rose-water. They shrieked with laughter. 

"Try again!" shouted the boy. "You nearly got it. Hold 
your head lower, and turn your face up towards the ceiling. No ; 
that's not enough. Here pardon let me. Now open your 
mouth ! " 

" Make haste. It's worse than holding a high C." 

Araki came up to Lady St. Ormyn, bringing his chair with 
him. He began to consult her about his songs, which always 
sounded best at night. 

" Oh, give us your wickedest. Nobody here'll mind besides, 
out in the garden it doesn't matter. What is it about ? " 

He murmured two verses of French with his sly and conscious 
smile. 

" That's delicious yes, very, very ! But that's all the better. 
We must have it. Repeat the refrain once more, 'Ah, ma petite 
tu ' What comes next ? " 

He whispered. She smiled. 

"It's like a song I heard in Vienna, only worse. Just the 
thing. Sing it and the sobbing song, and then we'll have the 
races, and a punch to finish up with. Now, good people ! " 

There was a general movement. The men began to light . 
cigars. All the women had dined in their hats. A few of them 
began to put light wraps over their shoulders. The prima donna, 
assisted by the big boy, wound some lace round the throat that 
had made her fortune, and went off with him to see about the 
torches for the bicycles. Lord St. Ormyn patted Sir Reuben 
gently on the back preparatory to a conversation about a very 
promising new concern in the City. Araki surreptitiously arranged 
his hair before a mirror and looked at a new smile which he was 
going to try for the first time in the song he had recited to Lady 
St. Ormyn. It didn't quite do. He tried another, rather more 
obviously wicked, and contemplated it fixedly with anxious, in- 
quiring eyes. Monsieur Anneau bent over Lady Gary 11. 

"The garden looks exquisite." 

" Like Marguerite's garden. You ought to be dressed in 
red." 

" Why ? I am only a fiend when I'm paid to be one. To- 
night " 

" You are an angel for nothing. What self-sacrifice ! " 

Mrs. Reckitt was trying to give Aubrey the chance of escaping 
from her without being impolite. He stayed beside her and 
spoke of Araki's singing, endeavouring to conceal the effort that it 



THE SLAVE 65 

cost him. His eyes were fixed upon Monsieur Anneau, who was 
now moving towards the verandah with Lady Caryll. 

" Yes, French songs are generally pretty enough," he said. 
"Absurd things sound pathetic in French or gay. It's different 
in English." 

Monsieur Anneau and Lady Caryll moved across the verandah 
and disappeared. Their figures threw a black cloud upon the 
mauve spray of the fountain for an instant, hiding it. Then 
Aubrey saw the coloured lacework of the water again. 

' Would you care to go out into the garden ?" he said to Mrs. 
Reckitt in a very calm and constrained voice. " Every one is " 

He looked round. People were flowing out. All of them 
were talking loudly and laughing. Even Mr. Fraser was in fits. 
His mysticism had disappeared for the moment under the human- 
ising influence of champagne, and his melancholy was merged in a 
sort of hysterical and birdlike madness. He chirrupped in a high 
soprano voice, and made extraordinary gestures with his thin 
hands as he accompanied a pretty Frenchwoman into the garden, 
which began to hum with the sound of voices. 

"Yes, let us go," said Mrs. Reckitt, "and then I must find 
Lord St. Ormyn. I want to have a little business talk Avith him." 

Lord St. Ormyn had been kind enough to lose a couple of 
hundred pounds for the poetess recently, "as a friend." 

Aubrey thanked his kind companion in his heart, and they 
went out. 

The garden wanted to be poetical, and the lovely night aimed 
at an atmosphere of tenderness and of reverent romance. The 
silver disc of the moon was almost cruelly bright against the black 
funeral of the chestnuts, and in the wind, delicate and vague, the 
scent of flowers hovered still, reluctant to depart. With it, ethereal, 
emotional, mysteriously pathetic, mingled the scent of Nature in 
night hours. Alone, the garden would have been a nocturne. 

As Aubrey and Mrs. Reckitt stepped out, the big boy exploded 
a rocket without warning, and all the women screamed. The 
rocket went up above the trees and burst in the very face of the 
moon. A flood of golden sparks poured down upon the funeral of 
the trees. Every one acclaimed the big boy, who then prepared 
to entertain the poor, sad, old night with a few squibs of extra- 
ordinary detonating power. Meanwhile servants were getting 
ready the torches, and a piano had been carried out to the front of 
the verandah. The popping of soda-water corks gave a hint of what 
music ought to be to the untutored wind, and three-quarters of 
the men present began to think steadily of Scotch whisky. 

As the rocket burst Aubrey found himself alone and free. His 
sweet companion had vanished under fire. 

E 



CHAPTER VII 

ARAKI pulled his favourite lock of hair forward on his forehead, and 
whispered to his accompanist, a young man of talent who was 
doomed for the moment to play pigeon-music at the parties of 
fools. The accompanist nodded with a weary expression of re- 
iterated assent. He was thinking all the time about the things 
he wanted to do in life. He began to play a tinkling prelude 
mechanically, and to improvise in order to attract the attention of 
the people who were shrieking and bounding round the squibs of 
the big boy. 

"Johnnie, be quiet!" cried Lady St. Orinyn on the lawn. 
" Araki is going to " 

" Only one more, Fifi ! " 

Bang ! 

The prirna donna clapped her hands. She was almost in love 
with the young roisterer, for he had just refused her offer of a box 
at the opera to hear her sing " Traviata." 

" You're splendid at letting off fireworks ! " he had said, " but 
singing symphonies no thank you ! " 

And then he had trusted her with a " Pharaoh's Serpent." 
She began to appreciate his frank nature too warmly to explain 
that she had not yet begun to earn her living by singing symphonies. 
And she grew hot with triumph when she managed the " Pharaoh's 
Serpent" cleverly, although she was always cold before the fiery 
applause of an adoring public. 

Araki began to fidget and to lose his conception of his new 
smile. The accompanist went on industriously improvising and 
kept his right foot firmly pressed upon the loud pedal of the piano. 

"Johnnie, you naughty boy ! you are only fit to be at Eton !" 
cried Lady St. Ormyn. " I insist upon " 

" Only one more, Fifi, 'pon honour ! " 

Bang ! 

" Play louder ! Play louder ! " said Araki to the accompanist. 
" They don't hear you." 

" I can't," said the accompanist. " I shall break the piano." 

" Break it, then ! I must have it in the papers to-morrow that 
I sang my new song here with success." 

66 



THE SLAVE 67 

" No, Johnnie, that must be the last. Mr. Fraser, stop him for 
me ! Madame Viva, do try to." 

Bang ! 

"Here, Madame Viva! You shall do the Catherine wheel. 
Hang it on this rose-bush. Bravo ! Look out for the sparks ! 
You are a dodger and no mistake ! " 

Mr. Fraser fluttered away with the movements of a distressed 
canary-bird. He was afraid of everything, but especially of fire- 
works. And then big boys seemed to him like dangerous wild 
animals. He never asked them to his luncheon parties. 

But now, acting under Lady St. Ormyn's shrill and laughing 
commands, two guardsmen made for the big boy amid peals of 
merriment. He took to his heels, his arms full of fireworks. They 
gave chase, leaping flower-beds, and deploying cleverly round 
rhododendrons and rose-bushes. Madame Viva, forgetting her voice 
imprudently, shrieked directions to the big boy. He doubled like 
a gigantic hare. But unfortunately he had no form at Epsom. 
So, after a prolonged chase, he was caught, seized, and robbed of 
his explosives, to the secret sorrow of all those who were laughing 
at his efforts to go on being naughty. 

" Now, Araki ! " said Lady St. Ormyn. 

And the Syrian, quickly rehearsing the smile for the last time, 
touched an electric button which illuminated his expressive face, 
and signed to his accompanist to begin the new song which was 
worse than the song heard by Lady St. Ormyn at Vienna. 

Meanwhile Aubrey was searching in the garden. He followed 
the winding paths, walking slowly and calmly between the green 
lines of the artificial glow-worms. And everywhere he found 
people talking violently and laughing as people only laugh at 
night after dinner. The elderly judge was being very funny to 
the Beauty. The Jewess in rose-colour was still arguing with the 
young artist about the possibility of his painting her picture. 
Barre, seated in a garden-chair, was receiving more exaggerated 
compliments from the auburn-haired sisters, and Fraulein Vogel was 
discussing Isolde with two compatriots in a voice that reached 
the stars. All the natures seemed stirred into a frothing tur- 
moil, and on every side volubility was indulging in the luxury 
of a steady crescendo. Through the trees that concealed the 
stables moving lights flashed, and the voices of grooms and of 
footmen rose in a confused murmur. Then there was a shrill little 
shriek and a burst of soprano giggling. The maids were evidently 
following a long-recognised custom and were imitating the amuse- 
ments of their mistresses. 

Aubrey reached the shrubberies. Just then Araki began to 
sing. He had a thin and penetrating voice, very foreign in timbre, 



68 THE SLAVE 

with a little break or catch in it, and he sang with a great deal of 
trickery, and uttered his words with almost hysterical precision and 
clearness. As Aubrey came into the black shadow of the trees he 
understood the meaning of the song, and a sense of disgust, often 
felt by him before, flooded his heart. This sense of disgust was 
quite distinct from prudery, but it was complicated by a feeling of 
wonder which seemed to set him very much apart from his kind. 
He wondered at his world. Yet, so far, it had never occurred to 
him that he might, if he chose, seek another world, make a trial of 
a different class of society from that which was his own. Day by 
day, night by night, he did a thousand things. Why ? For no 
reason of affection or of desire. He was like a man in a climate 
that does not suit his health, who is vaguely aware that there are 
other climates, but who never dreams of going to them. 

After the first verse of the song there was a confused murmur 
of approval. Many people who were pacing the paths of the 
garden stood still between the lights to listen. They whispered 
to each other, and smiled consciously while the accompanist played 
the interlude. 

Aubrey passed into the shrubbery. He heard the birds shifting 
their places among the trees, and was sharply conscious of this 
other life, so strangely different from the human destiny, yet being 
lived so continuously and so ignorantly by its side and in its shadow. 
The instinct of these birds told them to sleep. Yet they remained 
in Lady St. Ormyn's woods while Araki was singing. He began 
his second verse. But here, among the trees, Aubrey could not 
hear the words. Only the nasal voice, with its shrill break, reached 
his ears. And from its inflections he gathered the progress of the 
historiette about the "petite." He followed a tiny path that 
curved among the chestnuts. It was deserted, and might have 
been a path in a forest. Only the red eyes watching from the 
branches of the trees created an artificial atmosphere. Aubrey 
turned a corner and saw two figures walking slowly in front of him. 
He recognised Lady Caryll and Monsieur Anneau. The girl's 
white robe was like the robe of a ghost that treads a sorrowful 
round on the dark nights of the year ; and the huge form of the 
singer was almost blotted out against it. He was a towering 
vagueness in the night, and seemed to impend over his companion 
like the shadow of something tremendous and influential, that was 
too discreet to allow itself to be plainly seen. Aubrey hesitated to 
join Lady Caryll and Monsieur Anneau, although he had come to 
seek them. The reserve that was the guiding principle of his life 
took hold on him. He cursed it, but, for the moment, he could 
not fight it. He paused and watched the white robe of the girl 
grow faint among the trees. His exact knowledge of where she 



THE SLAFE 6$ 

was seemed to arrest his power of action and to chill the impulses 
which had been leaping in his heart. To seek had been possible 
to him, and he had thought that he sought with intention. But 
he had not realised himself and his own sensitiveness. He stopped, 
stood still for a moment, then turned and retraversed the shrub- 
bery, just as Araki began to sing his famous sobbing song. 

This song had been the rage of London for an unusually long 
time. It was a tale of varying griefs, and once the Syrian had 
sung it well, with a real art, variety, and the touch of nature. In- 
cessant repetition had, however, blunted his powers. He hated it 
now as a man hates an illness that is incessantly with him. The 
sound of his own voice in it filled him with a sickness of ennui that 
was almost insupportable. It was incredible to him that there 
should still be people who wished to hear him sob ; and so his 
sobbing had become entirely mechanical, like the melancholy of a 
machine, and he cried in the refrain like a loud thing that is with- 
out life. Aubrey, who at this moment felt strangely sad, heard this 
lifeless noise of grief among the trees the weeping of a young girl 
for her lost lover, of an old man for his lost youth, of a coquette 
pretending repentance, of a child who has broken a toy. And 
all these griefs sounded to him the same and sounded horrible. 
Laughter had oppressed him the laughter of Lady St. Ormyn's 
guests, forgetful of the night and drowned in the influence of a good 
dinner. Now tears oppressed him, and, moved by Araki's poor and 
pitiful mechanics, he began to say to himself that both the gaiety 
and the grief of the world were equally horrible, that men and 
women wept without real sorrow, even as they laughed without real 
joy. All expression of emotion, even all emotion, became for the 
time ridiculous to him. He did not except his own. When you 
suffer physical pain, watch your pain, consider it, and often it will 
seem to cease to be yours, and become like an object outside of you 
observed by the eye. And so it is sometimes with the pain of the 
heart. Aubrey listened to Araki and watched his own grief until 
it became detached from him and he could dissect it coolly, as 
many a man dissects the grief of his acquaintance. He stood 
there in the shrubbery, and stared at and laughed at his heart 
until the song ceased. 

But then, in a moment, the atmosphere changed. The cessa- 
tion of false expression caused also the cessation of that which was 
unreal in him. And he walked on, and mingled with the crowd, 
tormented, tingling with excitement, yet always pressed by the icy 
hands of reserve. 

Araki, on whose forehead stood little beads of perspiration, was 
surrounded by people expressing their delight in the thing that 
he loathed. He smiled at them with his mouth, and could have 



70 THE SLAVE 

struck them. The accompanist watched the scene with cold and 
lacklustre eyes. Two servants came out and carried the piano 
away. 

" Thank goodness the music's all over ! " said the big boy to the 
prima donna. " Now then for the larks ! " 

She looked at him with her unimaginative, greedy eyes, and 
almost loved him. 

Lady St. Ormyn was now in a state of boisterous excitement. 
Talking always intoxicated her, and she had been talking ever 
since one o'clock in the afternoon. She began to give innumerable 
directions about the races. 

" How many wheel-barrows are there ? " she cried. 

" One dozen, my lady," said a servant. 

" Wheel them all to the top of the slope." 

" Yes, my lady." 

" Now, let's see ! Who's entered ? Sir Frederick, Barre, Monsieur 
Anneau, Johnnie." She counted on her fingers, which were covered 
with extraordinary rings, and rattled her bracelets, from which 
hung innumerable charms. For she was as superstitious as an 
Indian. 

" Eleven ! " she exclaimed arithmetically. " We want one more." 
She looked round. " Mr. Herrick, will " 

But Aubrey had disappeared. As he reached the outskirts of 
the little crowd he met Lady Caryll and Monsieur Anneau. The 
singer looked angry. His red-brown eyes were flashing. The girl 
was like a moonbeam, Aubrey thought. He stopped, and said to 
Monsieur Anneau 

" Lady St. Ormyn wants you for the wheel-barrow race." 

The singer bowed, as he bowed on the stage when he took the 
part of a king or of a high priest. He was undeniably impressive. 
He stretched out his mighty arms with a smile. 

" I shall win the race," he said, looking hard at Lady Caryll. 

" With my mother," Lady Caryll said. " I will pray for your 
success." 

He stared into her face with fiery impudence. 

"In all things ? " 

" All things connected with wheel-barrows." 

" Your prayers move only in a limited circle ? " 

" My prayers on your behalf." 

" Monsieur Anneau ! Where is Monsieur Barre, you're to 
wheel Fraulein Vogel ! Yes, you are. Now, Sir Frederick No, 
no, you have the green barrow with the green lamp ! The green 
barrow ! Monsieur Anneau, where are you ? " 

The singer cast a last glance at Lady Caryll, and went towards 
his hostess with a slow and striding walk. Barre and Fraulein 



THE SLAVE 71 

Vogel were passionately discussing their chances amid peals of 
laughter. The big boy was giving the prima donna tips about 
sitting firmly, and helping him at the turn with her feet. Two of 
the men-servants were trying to conceal their convulsive merri- 
ment. They failed, but nobody noticed it. Lady St. Ormyn's 
voice grew continually louder. She shouted without being aware 
that she was not whispering, and made as many gestures as if she 
were arranging a pageant of elephants. She was quite happy 
because she was in the midst of noise and confusion, and confusion 
was her idea of gaiety. She liked to feel as if she were stirring 
people with a large spoon. 

" Lady Caryll ! " 
Yes." 

You have been in the wood with Monsieur Anneau ? " 
Yes." 

" Come into the wood with me." 

" But the races ? " 
We shall not see them there." 

" Don't you want to see them ? " 

" Not to-night." 

" But M. Barre and Fraulein Vogel ? " 

" Don't let us think about them/' he said, trying to beat down 
his riotous and nervous impatience. 

" Have you no sense of humour?" she answered. 

" Perhaps not to-night. Will you come into the wood ? " 

" Do you know that there is quite a heavy dew on the grass ? " 

" A dew ! " he said. " How strange ! " 

"Why?" 

But he could not explain there those little sudden thoughts 
that glide into some minds, whimsically as it seems, or make her 
understand, in the midst of the laughing crowd, his sense of the 
strangeness of dew in that garden. 

" Come into the wood," he repeated. 

" Very well," she said, without either apparent eagerness or 
apparent reluctance. 

They turned and went away from the people, who were now 
beginning to follow Lady St. Ormyn to the top of the slope where 
the wheel-barrows had been arranged in a gaily painted row. In 
the small wood there was loneliness for the moment. Aubrey 
bent down and put his hand to the grass. He withdrew it wet. 
He felt that he could have kissed his hand with the dew on it. 

" Wasn't I right?" Lady Caryll said. 

" Yes." 

" Don't you pity the people who are spilt in turning the 
corner ? " 



72 THE SLAFE 

" No. They deserve it." 

" But why ? " 

" For romping on such a night as this," he answered slowly. 

" Is it not like other summer nights ? " 

There was a little note of mischief in her voice. 

" How can you say that ? " he said. 

And indeed he wondered. For to him now it was the first magical 
summer night of the world. He knew why; he wanted to tell 
her why. Yet to do so was difficult to him. His reserve made 
most things difficult to him ; but he was almost feverishly resolved 
to cast it away, here and now under the moon. Yet lie hesitated 
and was troubled. They heard a shriek of laughter in the distance. 
Fraulein Vogel was taking her place in the orange-coloured wheel- 
barrow, and Barre was seizing the handles with his trembling fat 
fingers. Aubrey said to himself that it was this noise of humanity 
that troubled him. 

" How can they do that ? " he said impatiently. 

For he feared each little thing that fought against the holy 
influence of the night on his companion and on himself. 

" Don't you like to hear people enjoying themselves ? " said 
Lady Caryll. 

" Not like that not to-night." 

" How peculiar you are, Mr. Herrick," she said. 

They were in the darkness of the trees, but always the red eyes 
were watching them, and now Aubrey thought they looked like 
jewels. 

" Don't you- feel as I do ? " he said. 

" How can I tell what you feel ? " she asked a little carelessly. 

The remark seemed to explain Aubrey to himself, to set before 
him all the blunted and sick life of the reserved man who lives 
eternally alone, pacing uneasily the cage that his own nature has 
constructed for him to dwell in. 

" Shall I tell you, then ?" he said. 

And his voice changed in uttering the words. It was no longer 
the voice of a special world, of a special society, but it was the 
voice of a man. 

" Sit here," he said. 

There were some chairs dotted about in the wood. She obeyed 
him. 

" I brought you here to tell you what I feel," he said. And 
then again he hesitated. " It is difficult, but I know you will 
understand me. No one else could." 

He had felt that about Lady Caryll ever since he had loved 
her, and he thought he loved her partly because he felt that. 
She was silent, looking at him with her long, clear eyes, that had 



THE SLAVE 73 

so lately, and in the same shadow, met the angry glance of Mon- 
sieur Anneau. 

" Do you care to understand me ? " he added. 

" Yes," she answered. 

A faint sense of curiosity was really waking in her, and she 
wished him to gratify it. 

"Caryll," he said in an uneven voice that sounded half ashamed, 
"it is awfully difficult to me to explain what I feel about anything 
to any one. I don't know why. Somehow I cannot ever do it 
without a sense that I am being ridiculous or violent If I seem 
so to you to-night, you must try to forgive me. But indeed I 
would rather seem absurd to you than continue to be silent. 
Monsieur Anneau has not been silent. Has he, Caryll ? " 

"No, not exactly." 

"Then why should I be ? Do you care to tell me what lie said 
to you ? " 

"It isn't worth while. But he was very operatic." 

There was ice in her voice when she said that ice that made 
Aubrey grow hot all over. 

" I can't be that. He's been practising an art of expression all 
his life nearly." 

" And he insists on making every woman listen to his exercises." 

" You don't like him ? " 

" Bravo ! Anneau old boy ! Well run ! " 

It was the stentorian voice of the big boy shouting on the 
slope. 

" I like him when he sings. I don't care particularly for his 
speaking voice." 

" And I can neither sing nor speak." 

"Try to." 

Now she really wanted to know him. She looked up at the 
red eyes in the trees, and she thought how unlike jewels they 
were. 

" I will try," he said. " Caryll, I daresay you think I am cold 
and selfish and idle. That fellow Anneau has worked. He's 
better than I. I've been a fool dropping the Foreign Office, and 
all that. But I'm young and I can change. I I love you very 
much." 

He grew scarlet in the darkness, and his reserve stung him like 
a flame. But he let it go on stinging him. 

" I love you, and I don't even like many people. I say this 
only because I want you to understand how much I mean when I 
say I love you. Can you understand ? You must feel it for I 
can't really explain properly. I can't explain myself. I don't 
believe I ever shall be able to." 



74 THE SLAVE 

There was a tiny tinkling of bells in the garden. The bicycles 
were being brought out from the stables. 

" Perhaps my hands can tell you/' Aubrey said suddenly, after 
an instant of silence. 

He bent down and took Lady Caryl 1's hands out of her lap and 
held them in his tightly. 

" I never want to touch people/' he said. " I always want to 
touch you. Do you understand what that means in a man ?" 

" Go on/' she said. 

And then, having her hands in his, he was able to. The flame 
of his reserve almost ceased from stinging him. 

"Nearly all my life I have felt things more than people," he 
said. " Now I feel all those things in you ; summer, and night, 
and the stars, Caryll, and silence, and flowers, and the sun, and 
everything that is beautiful. Whenever I feel anything that 
makes me happy, or that makes me think I could be worth some- 
thing, it is in you too and seems to reach me because I love 
you." 

The sound of the little bells began to be drawn round the 
garden in a circle. Two or three of the bicyclists were exercising 
on the racing track. Aubrey thought of the rings of the fairies in 
woodland places, and the music seemed to make a home in which 
he sat with this young girl whom he loved. 

" Music too," he said. " I feel that in you, but not in all these 
people who talk for ever about music. They don't seem to under- 
stand at all the thing they are discussing. I don't know anything 
about music, of course, but it helps me to feel. Isn't it meant only 
to do that ? Like the sound of the sea and of wind in the night ? 
Perhaps I'm talking nonsense. But I don't care, now I've got hold 
of your hands. I don't care for anything but to make you know 
how I love you." 

The circle of bells became more complete as more bicyclists 
slipped round the track, and here and there, through distant trees, 
the torches flashed and faded. 

" How can I make you ? You are so young and so " pure 

he was going to say. But he stopped. It seemed impure even to 
whisper such a word to her "so good. I should like to take you 
away from everybody who is not as good as you are, so that you 
should never understand them. But I think you never will. You 
are so different. Perhaps you are too different to love me. I've 
often thought that too." 

"I am different from you yes," she said. 

And she spoke with the voice of one in whom a slight surprise 
was waking. 

" I know I know. But I will try to be like you, or at least 



THE SLAVE 75 

not that, perhaps. But I'll try to be worthy in my way. That's 
all a man can do, for he can't ever be like a good woman." He 
thought of his mother just then, the mother to whom he never 
told his thoughts or his desires. " He can only follow her at a 
distance, but she can lead him into a life he would never know 
without her, a life different from this ! " 

He said the last words with a sudden impatience, for with the 
sound of the flying bells was now mingled another sound. The 
bicyclists were calling to one another ; the torches they carried 
seemed to glare through the trees like spies. And the shrill voices 
of anxious partisans, yelling encouragement or condemnation to 
the racers, disturbed the beauty of the night, and stirred into 
angry ripples the still waters of its dream. Aubrey tried to be 
deaf to these riotous voices which strove to make everything vulgar 
and absurd. He endeavoured to forget these gay revellers, who 
were so near to him in body, so far away from him in mind, and 
with an effort he set them at a distance, until their cries became 
indifferent to him, as noises that come to one from a ship irrevocably 
sailing to some place that one will never see. 

" Caryll," he said, "don't you hate this life too, with all its 
noise and its lack of real meaning ? Don't you feel that though 
it never stops talking it has really very little to say to you ? " 

"Sometimes I do," she said. 

Her voice was slightly less calm than usual. Perhaps his hands 
did begin to tell her something. 

" I do always. And I have often felt that you do, for you 
seem outside of it all. These singers with their everlasting 
jealousies and intrigues, these actors who talk about the Church 
as if it were their profession, and clergymen who talk about the 
stage as if it were theirs, these beauties who can only see their 
own faces, and these City men who " He suddenly stopped, re- 
membering Lord St. Ormyn. " 1 don't know why I've any right 
to condemn, though," he said with sudden humbleness. " I'm no 
better than they are. Only, I do think life is nothing without 
some poetry, some romance, some one to understand and to love, 
some one to tell one's thoughts to, some one who will tell their 
thoughts in return." 

He stopped, suddenly aware of her long silence. 

" Have you nothing to tell me, Caryll ?" he said. 

She looked up at him in the shadow of the trees. 

" Have you nothing to tell me ?" he repeated. 

"Of myself?" 

"Yes. The things that you never tell to others to most 
people." 

A curious expression of reticence, almost of cunning, came 



76 THE SLAVE 

into her face. It was ugly and strange. A red spear of light 
from one of the lamps among the leaves lay across her face 
almost like a narrow bar of blood. Aubrey thought it was this 
red spear that tarnished her moonlight beauty. And he sprang 
up, detached the little lamp, came to her, and again took her 
hands in his. 

" Why did you do that ? " she said. 

"That horrible light made you seem seem " 

"What?" 

"It gave you a false and dreadful expression, like a mask." 

She was beautiful again now. 

" Tell me ! " he reiterated. 

"The things I never tell to most people," she said, in a low 
voice. " You want to hear them ? " 

" Yes." 

Now her face changed again and became mischievous, and the 
corners of her soft mouth turned upwards. 

" Do you think a woman ever tells those things ? " she said. 

" Yes, to a man when when she loves him." 

He spoke with a quiver of proud shyness. 

''Especially to him ?" she said. " Aubrey, do you understand 
women ? They love their secrets, but they seldom love to tell 
them to the man they love." 

" Would you say that all women are so reserved, then ? " he 
said. 

He had been accustomed to think that no one suffered from 
that strange sickness of the soul as he did. 

" I think all women are naturally secretive ?" she said. 

" You too ? " 

" I suppose I am like my sisters." 

" How little you know yourself," he said. " You are strangely 
unlike them." 

" Do you think so ? " 

" I know it. I feel it whenever I am with you. I never met 
any one like you. I never shall." 

" Perhaps that is a happy fortune for you, then," she said. 

" What do you mean ? " 

" You don't know at all ? " 

" No, Caryll." 

" Perhaps some day you will know." 

"Tell me now," he said. 

A sudden sensation of mystery and of oppression had come to 
him, as if the night had grown more sultry, as if a storm were 
hidden in its breast. He looked up at the sky. The stars were 
clear and bright ; then he looked down into her eyes, and the 



THE SLATE 77 

mystery and the storm seemed to be in them. But he saw them 
in shadow, and in a gloom that was flecked with dim light, both 
natural and artificial. He remembered that afterwards. 

" No/' she said, " I cannot. And it is only a fancy. Perhaps 
I am too young to know myself. Even if I do, I cannot tell you 
what I am." 

" You do not know," he said. 

And the sense of mystery and of oppression left him. She 
seemed only a child to him, a child whom he worshipped. 

" Shall I tell you what you are ? " he added. 

" What you think I am ! " she said with a smile. 

"What I know. You are a dreamer, Caryll." 

" A dreamer, you think ? " 

" A dreamer in the midst of the hot noise and bustle of the 
world you and I live in. You do not notice it ; you do not under- 
stand it, and it cannot hurt you, because you are asleep like a 
child asleep upon a battlefield or in a place of wickedness." 

" How you weave your fancies round me ! " 

" You do not think them true ? " 

" And of what am I dreaming ? " 

" Of beautiful things." 

" Things of the world ? " 

" Why not ? There are beautiful things in the world every- 
where in this garden. You feel them as I do." 

"Yes?" 

" Don't you ?" 

" I want to hear you tell me what I feel," she said. 

And that was true. Never before had she felt any real interest 
in that strange tiling, the character of a human being. 

" In your dream ? But I want to wake you from it." 

" Isn't that cruel ? " 

" I wonder ! " he said. 

It almost seemed to him that it was, that a man's love for a 
woman was, and must always be, in some degree cruel. But if so, 
that was ordained and could only be accepted. And, being a man, 
he was even conscious of a thrill of joy that came with the thought. 
There is always a violence in any love that seeks a reward. And 
Aubrey had his great purpose in view, though as yet he had not 
stated it. Two things made him go slowly his reserve and his 
joy in this absolutely novel renunciation of it. Beyond the belt of 
trees the laughter and the cries of people grew louder and more 
incessant. The torches carried by the racers spun by like demon 
flames borne on a travelling wind. And the tinkle of the bells 
was ceaseless. 

"Would you dream for ever?" Aubrey said. " But that too is 



78 THE SLAVE 

sad, because in a dream you never really feel. You only dream 
that you feel, that you act, that you are sad or joyous. You hear 
only echoes. You are not absolutely alive. Let me wake you, 
Caryll." 

" To what ? " 

"To love." 

There was a slight rustle among the nearest trees. They did 
not notice it. 

" Others have tried, I know," he went on earnestly. " That 
man to-night Anneau " 

" We need not speak of him," she said. 

" And yet," Aubrey said, with an uncontrollable flash of jealousy, 
"he has great influence over women." 

" None over me." 

Again he looked at her with wonder, and thought that the 
difference between her and all other women was strangely acute. 

" Could I have ? " he said. 

And he spoke doubtfully. 

" Do you think so ? " 

And she looked up right into his eyes, as if she asked him for 
an answer that her own heart had not yet given her, almost, too, 
as if she asked herself the question, slowly, thoughtfully, with a 
vague activity of curiosity that was not merely idle. They were 
silent for a long moment under the trees, as people are when they 
sit close and alone and try to read each other's souls, to tempt 
the great enigma from its distant hiding-place. And through 
their silence came the ceaseless sound of the bells. Aubrey hated 
them then. They seemed to stand in his way and to obscure his 
power of clear vision. Their noise was like a mirage that rises 
and floats before the real scenery that lies along the way of life. 
And when he answered Lady Caryll his voice was still doubtful 
at first. 

" Yes," he said, " Caryll, wake from your dream, wake to-night. 
Sleep to those people out there," he pointed towards the moving 
torches and the cries, "to their world. Wake to me and to the 
world we two will make for ourselves. It shall be a beautiful 
world ; not cold like theirs, and full of noise and intrigue, but 
warm and calm, a real summer world for us. I will give up my 
contemptible, unmanly life. I will work for you. We shall be 
poor at first. But do we want what all these people want ? Do 
we want to outshine our neighbours, to gamble and race, and 
cram our home with strangers, and go to every place that is the 
fashion, and entertain princes, and be in the front rank of this 
endless turmoil ? Do we, Caryll ? " 

" No," she said, " not that. Not that. But " 



THE SLAVE 79 

She paused and hesitated. An uneasy look had come into her 
eyes. He drew her towards him with an instinct that his moment, 
his great opportunity had come. He felt then, and all his life 
afterwards, that she could be susceptible to love alone, that she 
possessed that strange, divine something which is without self- 
interest, without greed or worldliness that spark, red and glowing 
with pure and intense feeling, which can only be kindled into 
flume by another spark, red and glowing, pure and intense as 
itself. And he felt then that in his heart was that other spark, 
united with which the divinity within her would burn as God 
surely desired and decreed. 

But, as she knew the pressure of his arms, the look of uneasi- 
ness, almost of fear in her eyes grew more definite. Never before 
had she known the greatest of all terrors. Never before had she 
thought it possible that she could fear herself. Was this hideous 
and slow stirring within her, this lethargic uncoiling, as of a serpent 
from its glazed and relentless reveries, a stirring of the flesh or of 
the spirit ? She could not tell. She could only tell that a dreadful 
confusion began to fill her soul, like the confusion that beats in the 
ears of a drowning man who dies amid unutterable tumult in a 
silent and breathless sea. 

"Caryll," she heard Aubrey's voice say, "you are waking at 
last. You are waking." 

And that seemed to be true and terrible, as the waking of the 
drowning man from the life we call life to the life we call death. 
The tumult within her grew louder, as if she were sinking down in 
the last struggle of that sea-tragedy. 

There was again a rustling among the nearest trees, then the 
sound of soft steps, and then a voice, elderly and grating, but clear 
and almost pitilessly distinct in the night. 

" Yes," it said. " It is quite true. I did buy the great emerald 
yesterday. It really is a marvel, one of the most wonderful jewels 
in the world." 

There was a silence. Lady Caryll drew herself away from 
Aubrey's arms. He felt, just before her movement, that her slim 
body grew stiff, as the body of one who is startled and who listens 
intently. Then the voice of Sir Reuben again spoke, appa- 
rently in reply to some question unheard by Lady Caryll and 
by Aubrey. 

" It belonged to Catherine of Russia. I daresay she wore it 
often in that pavilion with the strange gardens that have become 
a legend. It is engraved " the voice was more distant now, but 
still clear and clean cut on the surface of the night " with three 
figures the soul being borne away by pleasures." 

Silence. 



80 THE SLAVE 

" Caryl!/' Aubrey whispered, "love me. I am so much alone 
in the world ; you are so much alone. Let us " 

" Hush ! " she whispered. 

She held up one hand and seemed to strain her ears, as if she 
waited to hear again the voice speaking of the emerald. Her 
white brows were drawn down over her eyes. Aubrey felt his 
glowing impulse turn cold as if a heavy breath of winter mystery 
floated upon it and hung about it. Then she dropped her hand 
into her lap and turned to him. 

" Leave me to my dream," she said. " Leave me I do not 
wish to wake." 

Her voice had become dull like the voice of a somnambulist. 

The ice of Aubrey's reserve, broken through for a moment, 
began to close over him again. He struggled against it with a 
sense of despair. 

" Caryll," he said. " Caryll ! " 

He caught at her hands. She avoided his touch, leaning away 
from him. 

" Leave me," she repeated, and now her voice was intensely 
cold and repellent. " I will not love you. And if I ever did, it 
would lead to my hating you." 

The wild blast of a coach-horn rang out, and the noise of many 
footsteps and of loud voices approached among the trees. 

" You rode splendidly," cried the prima donna with unaffected 
enthusiasm. 

" Oh, that's all right. The others were only duffers," said the 
big boy. 

Aubrey stood up quickly. 

The crowd in front of the summer-house was saying loud 
good-byes. The lights of the carriages gleamed. 

" Monsieur Anneau Monsieur Anneau," cried Lady St. Ormyn, 
' ' you're to come on the coach, and Caryll and Sir Frederick ! 
Where's Barre ? Still lying down in the billiard-room ? Is he so bad 
as that ? He must have some more punch to pick him up. Wait a 
moment we'll all have some more, and oh, an idea! while we 
are doing it Mr. Whitney Brown shall sing ' Drinking, Drinking, 
Drinking ! ' Will you, Mr. Brown ? Charming of you. Where's 
Caryll ? Now 

In the crowd Aubrey found himself beside Mrs. Reckitt. She 
looked at him with her kind and thoughtful smile. 

" A characteristic close to a varied evening," she said. 

" Yes," Aubrey replied, in his slightly mannered voice of 
society. " It's been great fun. Lady St. Ormyn knows how to 
do things." 



THE SLAVE 81 

He glanced round on all the faces that were flushed under the 
faint light of the moon, and he saw among them the grotesque 
brown features of Sir Reuben. 

How ugly he seemed to the boy just then, hideous as a goblin 
perched upon a cathedral buttress to sneer at all the tenderness 
of religion. 

"Now, Mr. Brown, please !" shrieked Lady St. Ormyn. 

There was a clinking of glasses. 

And then the moon heard " Drinking, Drinking, Drinking ! " 



CHAPTER VIII 

ON the afternoon of the following day Sir Reuben had invited 
a few people to his house to see the famous emerald. Among 
them were Lady St. Ormyn and her daughter and Lady RangeclifFe. 
Lady RangeclifFe, having been asked to come at four o'clock, turned 
up at a quarter past three, on her way to Whitechapel, where 
she was going to assist at a bazaar in aid of some extraordinary 
charity connected with an obscure profession that most people 
have never heard of. 

Fortunately Sir Reuben happened to be at home. He received 
her without surprise in a drawing-room full of beautiful things, 
whose effect was almost dimmed by the strong colours of the 
background against which they were set. 

" I'm afraid I'm late," Lady RangeclifFe said, striding into the 
room with her curious gait of a middle-aged but still athletic boy. 

" Not at all." 

" I couldn't help it. Rangecliffe kept me. How odd it seems 

to be here again. It is so long since " She stopped abruptly, 

fearful of rousing painful memories in her host's mind. 

Sir Reuben led her to a huge red divan, and she sat down, a 
curious patch of black in the brilliant room. 

" Aubrey isn't coming ? " she asked. 

" No. I asked him, but he is on the river to-day." 

" On the river ! Then last night he You were at Lady 

St. Ormyn's ? " 

She stared into his face inquiringly. 

"Till past midnight." 

" And what do you think ? " 

"It was an amusing party." 

" I'm sure it was. But Aubrey and Lady Caryll ? " 

Sir Reuben either was, or chose to seem, unable to grasp Lady 
Rangecliffe's meaning. Seated on the red divan he looked exactly 
like an old merchant in an Eastern bazaar, a seller of carpets from 
Bagdad or of perfumes from Mecca ; and Lady Rangecliffe in her 
trailing and unfashionable black gown seemed an anxious tourist 
at the mercy of his Oriental cunning. 

" They enjoyed themselves like the rest of the world, I suppose. 

82 



THE SLATE 83 

We had music, bicycle races, dinner, fireworks. It was a Crystal 
Palace fete in little." 

" Aubrey hates Crystal Palace fetes. You know what I mean, 
Sir Reuben. Did he ask her to marry him, poor dear old boy ? " 

At this question Sir Reuben looked up out of the corners of his 
bright eyes, which twinkled as if he were on the point of driving a 
hard bargain. 

" It is difficult to say," he replied. " In such a turmoil 

" Well, but you stayed till midnight," she interrupted. 

"There were a great many fireworks." 

"Still he must have had a chance. And rockets are nothing 
to a boy who's in love. He wouldn't notice them. Even a girl 
wouldn't, and girls notice almost everything." 

" I think Lady Caryll noticed all the rockets," said Sir Reuben 
in a quiet and dry voice. " Do you wish to see the emerald ? " 

" What ? " said Lady Rangecliffe, who happened to be sitting 
with her deaf ear turned towards her host. 

" Do you wish to see the emerald ? " 

" What emerald ? " said Lady Rangecliffe, entirely preoccupied 
and totally unaware that her visit was supposed to have any special 
object. 

Sir Reuben shifted his position and came round to her other 
side. His brown face had become grave and wizened. 

"In my note to you I told you I had just purchased the 
Catherine of Russia emerald at Murphy's jewel sale," he said. 

"Oh yes, to be sure," said Lady Rangecliffe, recalling her 
wandering thoughts. " W T hat made you want to have it ? " 

She spoke with her usual blunt directness, staring him full in 
the eyes. 

For a moment Sir Reuben was glad that she was so short- 
sighted. Subtlety was apt to feel small and singularly mean in 
the presence of this plain and badly-dressed woman. 

He hesitated obviously before replying to her question. To 
give a truthful answer was difficult to him. To give an untruthful 
one seemed impossible while her eyes were fixed on his. At last 
he said 

" You remember our conversation the other day ? " 

"Which one? About the old women and Ally tiloper?" said 
Lady Rangecliffe, going off at a tangent. 

" No," said Sir Reuben, still hesitating, divided in mind between 
his natural love of working in the dark and the quick prompting 
to sincerity that Lady Rangecliffe was apt to rouse in the breasts 
of all those with whom she was brought into contact. 

"About Persia, or Sunday and the poor servants getting a 
little air "' " 



84 THE SLAVE 

"No; about Aubrey and this girl this Lady Caryll." 

He spoke more quickly now. 

" I asked you if you thought I could have any influence upon 
her, any influence which might induce her denial of Aubrey's 
desire, her refusal to grant him the wraith of happiness which you 
said he was seeking, in the belief that it was a reality." 

"Ah! now I remember. I said you couldn't have any influ- 
ence. You see, Sir Reuben, you and I are elderly ; and the 
elderly understand the merits of a sensible abdication. Don't they, 
if they've got any gumption ? " 

Her wide mouth smiled, showing two rows of large but perfect 
white teeth. 

"You and I haven't waited to be given the ' chuck,' as the 
boys say," she added. 

But his answer sent the smile from her kind and open face. 

" Shall I show you my influence ? " he said. 

There was a note of bitterness in his voice. She heard it, deaf 
though she was. 

" Your influence over Lady Caryll ? " 

" Exactly ! " 

"You mean that you really have any? Well, but she isn't 
here. How can you show it ? " said Lady Rangecliffe, in perfectly 
frank bewilderment. 

" Her absence doesn't matter. Wait one moment." 

He got up and shuffled quickly out of the room, leaving Lady 
Rangecliffe alone on the red divan. She sat still, her long lean 
arms resting on the bright cushions, and glanced about this room, 
which appeared like a sort of excessively brilliant fog to her large 
dark eyes. She remembered having been in it eight years ago, 
when Sir Reuben talked to her of his dead wife, and she recalled 
a sentence he had spoken then : " This room will not easily forget 
her." He had said the words with a curious and hard emphasis 
which had graven them upon her rather fluid memory. In this 
brilliant fog the pretty Creole had passed many hours, chattering 
to her gay world of acquaintances, or alone with her strange and 
unattractive husband. To Lady Rangecliffe Sir Reuben was never 
unattractive. For he had once done her a kindness. She respected 
and was sincerely attached to him. But her respect and attach- 
ment could not blind her to the fact that his days of bodily vigour 
and of the prime of manhood were long over. He was but a shell, 
roughened by the action of time and beating waves of circumstance. 
Possibly, within the hollow of the shell the thin and murmuring 
voice of desire still sang with a faint and an unceasing ardour, still 
demanded many things of life. If so, that was melancholy. Those 
persistent voices, murmuring within the darkness of the strewn 



THE SLAVE 85 

shells upon the storm-worn strands, are more pathetic than are 
the voices of ghosts. Lady Rangecliffe began to hear them, as 
she sat alone, till all the bright room, so dim to her, was full of 
murmurings. 

The door opened again, and she perceived something dark 
like a man entering. 

" Sir Reuben," she said, " do you know that this " 

Two more figures appeared. They rustled. 

" I will tell Sir Reuben, my lady," said a cold servant's voice. 

Lady St. Ormyn and Lady Caryll came up to the red divan and 
shook hands with Lady Rangecliffe. 

Lady St. Ormyn, as usual, looked very hot and flushed, Lady 
Caryll very cool and clear. Lady Rangecliffe was struck afresh by 
the peculiarity of her beauty and by the delicacy of her colouring, 
which suggested transparence. 

" What a house ! " said Lady St. Ormyn. " I'm sure I'm in 
Bagdad do I mean Bagdad ? There is such a place, isn't there ? 
It's more Eastern than anything I've ever seen before in the West 
End, or even at Earl's Court, or one of those other dreadful places 
where they have exhibitions, with Burmese natives learning English 
ways in public at so much an hour. And then it's got such an 
enchanting hermetically sealed look, that one feels it's a sort of 
extraordinary privilege to be in it. We're preposterously punctual, 

because we've got some musical parties to Ah, here's Sir 

Reuben ! We are absurdly punctual, Sir Reuben, but we've so 
many things this afternoon. Monsieur Anneau is giving an opera tea 
at the Cecil, and Rene Mackintosh has one of her dancing Mondays, 

and I'm in love with your house. It's so very Bagdad ! Did 

you bring it over bodily from Persia ? Or who did it for you ? 
This scarlet is extraordinary, and I adore scarlet. It reminds me 
of a superb military band on a hot afternoon, or the trumpets in the 
overture to ' Tannhauser.' Where is the emerald? All London 
is talking about it." 

She fanned herself stormily. 

Sir Reuben was holding something in his left hand. The ex- 
pression on his face was difficult to read as he came in at the door 
and saw his visitors. For a moment he was secretly vexed not to 
find Lady Rangecliffe still alone. Then the dramatic possibilities 
of the new situation struck him, and he smiled like a man with 
many threads in his fingers, all attached to living things which 
he governs and restrains. He greeted Lady St. Ormyn and her 
daughter. Then he looked at Lady Rangecliffe. 

"The emerald !" he said. "I have it here. I was just going 
to show it to Lady Rangecliffe." 

As he spoke Lady Rangeclitte jerked abruptly on the divan 



86 THE SLAVE 

and made a quick movement sideways with her head. Sir Reuben 
sat down close to her, facing Lady Caryll and her mother. A 
strong, naked-looking gleam of sunshine stretched, like a sword 
slanting downward, from one of the tall windows to the place 
where he sat. In it a minute dust, like a powder of tiny living 
things, whirled and danced ceaselessly. The eyes of the three 
women were all fixed upon his thin and brown left hand. None of 
them spoke as he opened it, showing a white velvet case. Even 
Lady St. Ormyn was overtaken by a momentary silence of curiosity. 
Sir Reuben pressed a spring. The white velvet lid flew up, and the 
point of the sword of the sun touched the great jewel, and seemed 
to pierce without wounding it, and to fill it with fire, which it 
transformed from yellow into an exquisite clear dark green. It 
looked alive, and full of a sort of eager and yet calm animation. 

Sir Reuben turned to Lady RangeclifFe. 

" That is what I wanted to show you," he said, and he held the 
jewel up in the heart of the sunshine. 

She jerked again, fixing her eyes on the emerald ; but she said 
nothing. 

"It's superb!" said Lady St. Ormyn. " It's finer than anything 
that racing woman Mrs. Turner's got. Do let me take it out of 
the case." 

She stretched out her hand. As she did so, Lady Caryll re- 
pressed an almost ungovernable gesture of quick prohibition. Sir 
Reuben noticed it, and his eyes sparkled. The girl's eyes were 
fixed upon the emerald, like Lady Rangecliffe's, and they glowed 
as they had glowed in Bond Street when they looked into the 
diamond-shop. She leaned slightly forward, in a posture of one 
fascinated, still, passionately attentive. 

Lady RangeclifFe watched her now as well as Sir Reuben. He 
gave the emerald into Lady St. Ormyn's sacrilegious hands. She 
snatched at it, as she snatched at marrons glaces, and celebrated 
baritones ; took it out of the case and flashed it about in the sun, 
turning it this way and that with a rapidity that was irritating. 

"What does the engraving mean?" she cried. "The soul 
going to heaven is it ? " 

" The soul being borne away by pleasures," Sir Reuben said. 

Lady Caryll seemed to hear again the hidden voice in the dark 
garden. 

" Dear me ! By pleasures ? How very shocking ! Isn't it 
shocking, Lady Rangecliffe ? I know you'll think so, because you 
don't like parties." 

But Lady Rangecliffe appeared to be absorbed in thought, or 
else her deafness prevented her from hearing the remark. In any 
case she made no answer. 



THE SLAVE 87 

" Gary 11," continued Lady St. Ormyn, still fidgeting with the 
emerald violently, " take warning from this engraving. I'm sure 
it's meant especially for girls. One can't be too careful of one's 
soul. That's why I adore music, Sir Reuben. It does me so much 
good. A sermon makes me ill and cross, but music brings out all 
that is fine in one, doesn't it ? Especially Wagner and Barre. 
What a funny little soul, and what funny little pleasures ? Where 
are they bearing the soul to?" 

" Where do souls go when they are borne away by pleasures ?" 
he said, looking at Lady Caryll. 

" That depends 011 whether they're male or female," said Lady 
St. Ormyn. " Men's souls go racing, or to Paris on business. 
Don't they ? " 

" And women's ? " 

"You mustn't ask me. It's just as well that men should remain 
in ignorance of some things. Isn't it, Lady Rangecliffe ? " 

" Yes," she said gravely. 

Lady Caryll said nothing. The rapid movements of her mother's 
hands seemed to irritate her intensely. She looked at Lady St. 
Ormyn with unfavourable eyes, with a glance full of sombre jealousy. 

"Well," said Lady St. Ormyn, "it's very wonderful, but we 
ought to be going. Here, Sir Reuben," she thrust the emerald 
into his hand. " Its marvellous, matchless. Mrs. Turner would sell 
her soul for it, and her horses, too, I'm certain. But what will you 
do with it ? You can't wear it." 

" No. What shall I do with it, Lady Rangecliffe ? " 

" Sell it again," she said. 

Her voice sounded like the voice of one moved. She was 
looking at Lady Caryll, and the fierceness of the sun had filled 
her eyes with moisture. 

" Oh, Lady Rangecliffe ! " the girl said brusquely, and almost 
with excitement. " Would you sell one of your dogs ? " 

Then she burst into a laugh and sprang up. 

" Mother, if we are really going to all these places we had 
better start," she said. 

"Yes, we must be off. Well, good-bye, Lady Rangecliffe. I 
know it's no use asking you to Epsom on Sunday ? Sir Reuben, 
this scarlet is the most marvellous thing in London. You are a 
magician with your wonderful house and your wonderful emerald. 
I'm half afraid of you. Aren't you, Caryll ? Aren't you afraid of 
Sir Reuben?" 

" Are you, Lady Caryll ? " he asked her. 

She met his twinkling old eyes gravely. 

" No/' she said. "I'm not afraid of anything." 

" Not even of being borne away by pleasures ? " he said. 



88 THE SLAVE 

When he said that there was a sound of mystery in his rather 
croaking voice. 

" It's dangerous not to be afraid of anything, my dear child/' 
Lady Rangecliffe interrupted suddenly. 

She had stood up to say good-bye to Lady St. Ormyn, and 
now she laid her long hand on Lady Caryll's. 

"It's awful dangerous/' she said. "I've never forgotten what 
a boy once said to me he had saved another boy's life in the sea 
and nearly lost his own in doing it 'I can't think what made 
me do it/ he said, 'for I was in an unholy funk all the time.' 
There's nothing cowardly in being able to feel afraid, and it's 
more human." 

" Well, then, I'm very human now," cried Lady St. Ormyn ; 
"for I'm afraid of this house. I'm sure there's a harem in it 
somewhere, and all sorts of mysteries. Don't blush, Sir Reuben ; 
such a house ought to contain a harem as part of the furniture. 
I can imagine veiled women passing their lives in rooms like this, 
eating bonbons, and talking to parroquets, and playing on lutes 
and tom-toms, and wearing marvellous jewels and spangled 
trousers. After all, the moral sense is merely a question of sur- 
I'oundings. I. always say that, especially to young clergymen. I 
think it braces them to hear common-sense once or twice a year. 
And we ought to speak the truth even to clergymen. They think 
me shocking, but I do them good. And we should try to do good 
to the ' cloth/ shouldn't we ? Why are curates called the ( cloth ' ? 
Is it because they wear hats like puddings made by a chef who 
doesn't know his business ? I always say " 

She talked herself into her victoria, followed by Lady Caryll, 
who had said good-bye to Lady Rangecliffe very coldly, and had 
looked at the room she was leaving as a child looks at a strangely 
painted butterfly, or at the shadow of a reality it cannot see. 

Lady Rangecliffe had forgotten her bazaar. She was standing 
by the window when Sir Reuben returned, and looking almost 
stern and curiously angular in the summer light. He came up to 
her. The emerald was still in his hand. On his face there was 
an expression of rather uneasy watchfulness. 

"I understand now," Lady Rangecliffe said. "I'm as stupid as 
an owl in these things, but I understand now. Why do you think 
so horribly of women ? " 

" Do I think worse of them than some of them deserve ? " 

He opened the case, and let the light flash once more upon 
the jewel, and as it gleamed he smiled. 

" But why don't you try to help them, then ? " 

" As you would try to help Lady Caryll. It would be useless. 
Some of them are meant to be as some of them are." 



THE SLAVE 89 

"You're wrong." 

" I like to know there's one woman who can honestly think so/' 
he said almost tenderly. 

"And you think so too?" 

" No." 

" You must. You helped me long ago when I was in trouble." 

"What does that prove ?" 

"A great deal to me a great deal more than you know, perhaps." 

She sat down again. 

"Don't think I'm going yet," she said. " I'm not." 

" I wish you to stay." 

" Give me that jewel," Lady Rangecliffe said. 

Sir Reuben handed it to her. She lifted it till it was close to 
her eyes, and looked at it for a long time in silence. At last she 
said, still looking at it 

"And this is the influence you spoke of." 

"Yes." 

" You believe in its power ? " 

" Do not you ? " 

" I don't know. I can't understand it a bit this miserable, 
paltry little green thing, without a voice or a heart." 

"Think of what some women are," he said. "You told me 
yourself that there was something inhuman in Lady Gary 11." 

" And I was ashamed of having said it afterwards," said Lady 
Rangecliffe vehemently. " I felt like a cad. And now I've been 
with her again, and she is so beautiful and young. I've been 
uncharitable and selfish, thinking of nobody but my own boy. 
Perhaps he's right. Since he loves her he sees what she is better 
than we can." 

" Since he loves her he cannot see what she is. Lady Range- 
cliffe, you are trying to laugh at your own instinct." 

" No. There is something fine in every nature, but it has to 
be found and awakened and developed. Perhaps Aubrey " 

" Has tried to awaken Lady Caryll and has failed." 

Lady Rangecliffe moved her head quickly sideways. 

"When?" 

" Last night." 

" And has failed ? " 

" I bought that emerald on Saturday. Lady Caryll knew it 
yesterday." 

Lady Rangecliffe put the jewel down as if it burnt her hand. 

"You think that if you hadn't she " 

" I am too old ever to trust to chance again." 

He snapped the white lid of the jewel case, and the emerald 
was hidden from the sun. 



90 THE SLAVE 

"Sir Reuben/' Lady Rangecliffe said, "a great many years ago 
you did something for me. Did you do this for me too, because I 
told you what I thought Aubrey's nature needed to be happy?" 

He did not reply for a moment, but sat leaning his head on his 
hand. 

" Perhaps I oughtn't to ask you/' she said. 

" No ; I didn't do it entirely for you/' he answered at last. 

Lady Rangecliffe thought of Lady St. Ormyn's remark, that 
there must surely be a harem in this strange and Oriental-looking 
house. And then she thought of Lady Caryll of this beautiful 
child, with all the possibilities of a free woman's life in England 
stretching out before her ; love, satisfaction of love, motherhood, 
with its pain and its passion. She thought, too, of her boy and 
of what he needed. She looked at Sir Reuben, old, wrinkled, 
burned by hot suns, worn with travelling, with toil, with cynicism, 
perhaps with pleasure. As he remained motionless he was like an 
ugly idol in some heathen land, a deity carved from a block by 
superstitious, savage, and cunning fingers ; a deity to whom the 
ruthless and the fearful bow down, creeping round the hewn feet 
in hideous attitudes of abnegation. And the little white velvet 
case which still lay in one of his dry and corrugated hands was 
like a gift offered up to him in condonation of some nameless 
crime. 

She had spoken to this silent idol of age and of its sensible 
abdications. But does it ever really abdicate ? Does it not cling 
frantically to power until it is rudely pushed from the throne, on 
which it has become, in the inexorable passage of time, a pitiful 
spectre, horrible beneath a tottering crown ? 

A chilly sense of sorrow, almost of hopelessness, ran over her, 
such as she had never felt before in quite the same degree. But 
Lady Rangecliffe was never hopeless for long. She was by nature 
too manly for that. 

"Sell your emerald, Sir Reuben," she said abruptly. "You 
know what I mean." 

"You think I am too old to possess a jewel?" he answered. 

That was the truth, and she acknowledged it bluntly. 

"Yes, I do," she said. 

"Then you misunderstand men. No man is ever too old to 
possess that which he has the power to possess. Eight years ago 
I thought I had lost all power, and I sold all my jewels. I never 
told you why ?" 

" Never." 

"Eight years ago," he said, speaking slowly and with a bitter 
distinctness, " I discovered that the jewel I loved most had not 
been really and entirely mine." 



THE SLAVE 91 

Lady Rangecliffe understood that he alluded to the beautiful 
Creole. She understood his Odyssey. 

" Before I die/' he continued, speaking more quietly and with 
a deliberate composure, "I wish to have a jewel that will be 
wholly mine. Is that wonderful ? Is it wonderful that, having 
found a rare jewel that I could possess wholly, I should take the 
necessary measures to purchase it ? " 

" My friend," Lady Rangeclifff'e said, " when you speak like that 
you make me feel as if I were stifling." 

"You can only breathe in one atmosphere, in air that is 
perfectly pare. But many of us can breathe in dark places where 
you would die. Leave us to do so. You will always be seated by 
your open window." 

" I want my friends to be there too with me," she said, " or I 
have no pleasure." 

" Remember that I am of different blood, accustomed to hot 
climates, and to suns that never shine here in England. Remember 
that I have been deceived, that I have stood by the corpse of the 
thing I had loved and longed to strike it !" 

For a moment his face was terrible and his eyes blazed with 
fury ; then, with an abrupt change to inexorable softness, he added, 
"Lady Rangecliffe, I must I must buy my jewel." 

A man-servant showed in some more visitors. 

Lady Rangecliffe remembered that she had to go to White- 
chapel, to breathe the purest of all air the air of charity. 



CHAPTER IX 

WHEN London heard, at the end of the month of June, that Lady 
Caryll Knox had accepted Sir Reuben Allabruth as her future 
husband, London was gratified. Its curiosity about the famous 
emerald was at length lulled to rest. Sir Reuben had bought it 
for no actress, for no mysterious slave of the harem, but as a gift 
for the young beauty who was to step into the place formerly 
occupied by the pretty Creole. Once again in the history of 
society youth was to mate with age, while all the world looked 
on. Once again the gifts of God had been bought with the gifts 
of man, and the shadows of night came forward to take possession 
of the twilight of dawn. 

It was all very gratifying and customary, and Lady St. Ormyii 
was warmly and sincerely congratulated, while Lord St. Ormvn 
chirped about the City like a sparrow sunning itself upon a house- 
top after adverse storms and showers. 

Aubrey happened to be in the company of his mother when 
she received Sir Reuben's note announcing the news, which she 
had long expected. He noticed her agitation, for Lady Rangecliffe 
was too natural to be able to conceal anything. She was expres- 
sive despite her wish, and, unfortunately, was always expressive of 
truth. 

The note arrived just after lunch. Lady Rangecliffe read it 
about five-and-twenty times, endeavouring to do so with a happy air 
of carelessness that was not very convincing. Aubrey was smoking, 
for Lady RangeclifFe allowed all her boys to smoke in her boudoir, 
or in her bedroom, if they liked. The smoke of her children rose 
like incense to her nostrils. Aubrey observed that she was excited 
and distressed. 

" Bad news, Mater ? " he said. 

" What, Aubrey ? " 

" Had bad news ? " 

Lady Rangecliffe grew very red, and looked and felt more 
guilty that most criminals. It seemed to her in that moment 
as if she had conceived a plot against her best beloved son on the 
day when she first told Sir Reuben of her fears that Aubrey was 
deceived. Yet she knew well that Sir Reuben had laid the snare 

92 



THE SLAVE 93 

for Lady Caryll to please his own decisive nature, that strange 
and relentless nature which desired as strongly in age as in 
youth. 

"What is it, Mater?" Aubrey repeated, looking at his mother 
with calm astonishment. " One'd think you'd robbed a bank and 
just been found out." 

"Nonsense, Aubrey," said Lady Rangecliffe desperately, and 
tingling all over like a young girl lashed by shyness. " It's only 
a note from Sir Reuben." 

" Is that all ? " 

" Yes." 

A silence followed, through which Aubrey smoked languidly. 

" There's a piece of news in it," said Lady Rangecliffe nervously, 
and jerking her head sideways. 

"Oh! What is it?" 

" He's going to be married." 

Aubrey was really surprised now. He had never supposed that 
his godfather would do anything so obviously absurd and in such 
bad taste as to link his battered and embrowned life with that 
of another. 

"Well!" he said, letting his cigarette go out. "Who is the 
old lady? " 

" Lady Caryll Knox. Now I must go and see about my Brompton 
Clothing Club." 

She turned to hurry away, but before she could leave the room, 
Aubrey said 

" Mater, when I said ' old lady/ I was merely joking. You'll 
understand that." 

" Yes, Aubrey, of course I understand that," she said. 

And directly she was outside the door she burst into tears. 

When Aubrey found himself alone, he put down the burnt-out 
cigarette in an ashtray, took another from his case very carefully, 
struck a match, lit the cigarette, and began to smoke again, looking 
straight before him. He had not changed his lounging attitude, 
but his body was stiff in the chair. He felt as if he were made of 
steel, and that within the steel was some little thing which was 
bleeding to death. He would have liked to see it, this little 
bleeding thing, hidden away in a seclusion that nothing could 
reach, dying there in its dark corner. It did not choose to be 
helped. It did not want any lint, or any bandages, or any hand 
to hold the lips of its tiny and deep wound together. It only 
wanted to be quite alone and utterly unsuspected. It required just 
that. Was it unsuspected ? 

Aubrey was afraid of his mother then. Was it possible that 
she knew of the little thing and of its hideous wound. He had 



94 THE SLAVE 

heard no sound outside the door. But why had she hesitated and 
looked guilty ? Perhaps it was merely for Sir Reuben's sake. 
Aubrey knew of her deep friendship for him. Perhaps she had 
been thinking only of him. Any other idea was insufferable to 
the boy. His uncertainty tortured him. But he was resolved to 
believe, to convince himself, that so it was ; that Lady Rangecliffe, 
always very sensitive for those she esteemed or loved, was pained 
by fear that the world, and with the world her son, might be 
inclined to sneer at Sir Reuben's last effort to be happy. 

People are so ready to laugh when they see the old and the 
weary trying to go on being happy. 

And then, that matter forcibly settled, Aubrey sat there quite 
still and felt the awful pain of the little hidden thing. 

How strange the pain of the heart is, the pain that is not 
physical, but that seems intensely physical as well as intensely 
mental. At first it is often humiliating. The creature crawls in 
the dust. It has heard that suffering is ennobling. It feels that 
it is degrading. It has read that the fire refines. It feels that 
the fire destroys. It has been taught that pain fits wings to 
the soul. It feels the soft powder of the dust. It breathes the 
breath of the dust. It smells the dry and acrid perfume of the 
dust. It is conscious of each separate, shifting, infinitesimal frag- 
ment of this shattered material in which it creeps, which floats 
about it in a mist of decay, blotting out all clear forms and 
ti'ansforming all things into a phantasmagoria of blurred and sickly 
activities. 

The creature crawls in the dust, fit only so it feels to be 
trampled to death, that it too may form part of the dust and 
become for ever one with the uneasy powder of the destroyed. 

Aubrey felt at this moment as many others have felt, that 
sorrow can be so keen as to be degrading. He could not have 
explained why, but that was his sensation. His heart, his soul, 
his whole nature grovelled. 

Sorrow was not new to him. But this sorrow was wholly new. 
Since that evening in the garden at Epsom when Lady Gary 11 had 
refused him he had suffered, but not without hope. He had 
believed that he had spoken prematurely to a dreamer who must 
dream on a little longer, alone with the visions of maidenly igno- 
rance and of youth. He had thought that he had perhaps been 
too impulsive, and had startled the heart he meant to win. Lady 
Caryll, for the moment, loved her dreams better than she loved 
any man. He had imagined that, and he had waited, allowing 
his reserve to close round him again. And indeed, in any case, it 
would have been impossible to him to speak to her once more as 
he had spoken in the garden until time had renewed the lapsed 






THE SLAVE fl/i 

force of his unusual impulse. There was no failure of feeling, no 
cessation of internal vehemence of desire. But verbal expression 
of his true self was seldom possible to him with any one, even with 
this girl whom he loved. And his reserve had suffered acute pain 
from the check he had received. His passionate impulse, put 
aside, driven back upon itself, had become timid, self-conscious, 
and slow for the moment. It must pause to gather courage. 

And through the pause came his mother's voice with this 
message. 

This old man had put out his wrinkled hands to beauty, had 
touched the dreamer, and she awoke. 

Was that possible ? Or had his voice, penetrating vaguely 
through her dreams, confused her, and had she answered idly, not 
knowing what she said ? 

In the degradation of his horror Aubrey began to think, or to 
try to think. But his imagination was at first stronger than his 
mind, and he could only see with mental eyes. He saw incessantly 
two dry brown hands, ugly with the peculiar rough transparency 
of age, grasping the soft young hands of his dreamer, stroking 
them with an abominable and greedy tenderness. 

That was terrible. He felt sick ; not romantically, but as a 
man may feel sick at the sight of blood flowing after some dread- 
ful operation. His flesh shuddered when he saw the union of 
those hands. He underwent personally the evil and shrinking 
sensation that affects any sensitive person who is touched, felt, 
held by some live and ugly thing. That was an affection of the 
body calling on the sympathy of the mind. 

But the eyes of the mind in such moments will not be content 
with but one watchfulness. They have seen one thing; they 
throw their piercing gaze farther ; they seek to see more intimately. 
Aubrey began to lose sight of the hands. . . . With a sudden 
exclamation he sprang up, opened the door, and went out hurriedly. 
Gaining the square, he walked on heedlessly and fast. It was one 
of those curious, still, and almost black summer days that may be 
seen sometimes in London, a day on which everything looks sullen, 
and graceless, and unusually large. The sky was low, like a pent- 
house eyebrow lowering over a morose eye. The dingy pavement 
seemed another sky, dour and forbidding. Shut in between them 
was a sick and heavy world. Houses, churches, monuments in this 
atmosphere were all alike sulky and without apparent beauty of 
design. The trees in the square stood up like weary and discon- 
tented shadows enclosed within the sentinel railings on which the 
mournful dust lay thick. The leaves drowsed silently and did not 
rustle. Along the walks sad servant-girls and peevish children 
plodded, without activity and without perceptible aim. A little 



96 THE SLAVE 

dog with fatigued eyes sat alone on a doorstep furtively regarding 
a stain of milk which was drying before the entrance of an area. 
Enormous policemen were rooted at the corners of the streets. They 
appeared to be vulgar effigies, ravaged out of some uncivilised ark, 
and set down to show how far absurdity in costume had advanced 
in prehistoric ages an alphabet of dumb and staring puppets. 
Organ-grinders wandered here and there, and as their stretched 
arms mechanically revolved, a mechanical uproar made this world 
grow darker and more submarine in sentiment. A massive ocean 
surely weighed upon it and caused it to be heavy with this dulness, 
which was fearful, like a crime. In the streets there were many 
people, but in such an atmosphere faces do not seem to vary or to 
be expressive of changing or of quickly flowing thoughts. Eyes 
look stagnant and complexions faded and morose, and the move- 
ments of limbs seem slow, like those of an invalid who can never 
recover from the illness that oppresses him. The cabs went by, 
directed in their course by perched men, careless of gesture and of 
aspect. What could an accident matter in such a world ? Although 
the atmosphere was so still, sound did not travel ; the eternal noise 
of the metropolis seemed to be enclosed in a massive envelope of 
wool. Inside this envelope there might be a thousand different 
notes : of men, women, children, of beating hoofs of horses, of 
bands playing, of dogs barking, of birds twittering, and fountains 
falling, of the sirens of mighty ships calling in the black river 
between the wharves and warehouses, of trains roaring beneath 
the twisted iron bridges, of millions of doors shutting, of walls slip- 
ping under the blows of pickaxes, of steam-rollers grinding new- 
roads together, of barrels rolling from vans into the dark embrace 
of hidden cellars, of girls singing love-songs over their sewing at 
open windows, of drunkards stumbling on the stairs of gin-palaces, 
of runaway ponies, of bicycle horns at dangerous corners, of ham- 
mers beating on square blocks of stone, of machinery whirring 
while a thousand wheels revolved, of motor-cars spitting, of furnaces 
hissing, of smartly dressed men shrieking like maniacs in the Stock 
Exchange, of bells tinkling on a child's rattle, of bottles and glasses 
jingling and clinking in restaurants, of an iron curtain falling in a 
theatre, of organs pealing in churches, of bells tolling for deaths, 
of cries of pain and of joy at births, of a crowd applauding some one 
who smiled, of many tears, of shrieks of fear and of anger, of 
costermongers snarling over their barrows, of anchors let down 
from steamers come from far, of the shattering crash of founder- 
ing houses London's message written in music. But all these 
notes were ruthlessly blended together into one deep bourdon, 
which hummed with a blurred and an inexorable heaviness through 
the ebon summer day beneath the leaning sky. 



THE SLAVE 97 

People, things, the elements, distant and near views, all were 
hypnotised. The day was not a slumber, soft and refreshing, but 
a trance, artificial and forbidding. 

So Aubrey felt, and, as he walked, he too was wrapped in this 
numb and dreary dream. He no longer experienced a keen sense 
of pain. No activities were alert within brain or heart. Only a 
continual oppression weighed upon him and swam around him. 
Everything was warm and black. That was his actual sensation. 
And the heat in this silent and dull blackness was more sad and 
destructive of vigour than the fiercest cold could have been. Yet 
there was no feeling of storm in this atmosphere. That is exciting. 
It rouses anticipation, and sends the thoughts flying forward to 
meet the thunderclaps and to watch the hurried signature of the 
lightning dashed across the sky. This atmosphere seemed habitual, 
like the monotonous relation who sits for ever by the hearth, 
permanent as the hapless city over which it crouched. It was 
unnatural but enduring, and Aubrey could not imagine that there 
could ever be sunshine in this city, a smiling life, or the breath of 
a gay and fluttering wind. 

All the world dreamed sullenly, and he, too, and Lady Caryll. 
And he had wondered at her dream. He had striven to wake her. 
How absurd that was. What is there to wake to in life ? Only 
a black sky and a crowd of mournful shadows going heavily. Sir 
Reuben was but a grotesque among them, he, too, like some curious 
mandarin recumbent upon a woman's mantelpiece, nodding eter- 
nally a shaven head and curving his lips in a heathen smile. Aubrey 
saw him there. His legs were crossed like an Egyptian's, and his 
thin, old body was bent forward. His flexible lips were extended, 
and in one of his hands he held an emerald. And he bowed his 
head unceasingly as if towards some one who stood in front of him. 
And then Aubrey perceived that a girl was standing by the mantel- 
piece, and that to her the grotesque was eternally bowing. The 
girl was Lady Caryll. She stood motionless as if fascinated by 
this smiling mandarin, and by his obsequious and inviting genu- 
flexions. But Aubrey noticed that she was not looking at him. 
Her eyes were fastened on the emerald that he held, and the 
expression in them was horrible and greedy. She was like a 
snake charmed by hideous music. And Sir Reuben smiled and 
bowed without ceasing, his hand inflexibly thrust forward towards 
the girl with the jewel in its palm. 

"I am mad today," the boy said to himself suddenly. 

Why do thoughts escape from our control and perform such 
insane gyrations ? The world was still black, and warm, and 
sullen, but Aubrey's numbness was passing. He was no longer 
in a dream, though a universe dreamed around him. For a 



98 THE SLAVE 

moment he was passionately angry with himself. Why had he 
seen Lady Caryll with her eyes fastened upon the emerald ? 
Aubrey was one of those rare men who can seldom do a woman 
they love injustice even by a momentary and wandering thought. 
His sense of chivalry was not shifting, but permanent, although it 
did not concern itself with all women merely because of their sex. 
Many women seemed to him utterly unworthy of respect, and his 
chivalry died at sight of them. He would have given way to them 
or have defended them in any danger, but to be inspired to the 
mere beauty of chivalry by cold vanity, and boundless greed, and 
immorality was not possible to him. Nor did he wish it to be so. 
But Lady Caryll had been a goddess to him, and she was a goddess 
still. All the romance within him flowed instinctively to her 
all his dreams clustered round her footstool. And now, waking to 
a sense of his own reality in this unreal world, he hated himself 
for his foolish vision of the nodding grotesque and of the watch- 
ing girl. 

He found himself near Kensington Gardens. The trees, with 
their black and motionless leaves, looked gigantic. The flowers 
were strangely colourless, as if they gained their hues from sky and 
sun, and, like the chameleon, were not sufficient for themselves. 
Aubrey entered the gardens, and began to retrace his steps between 
the lines of beds and the hedges of brooding foliage. Presently 
he saw a small white butterfly on the wing. It looked unnaturally 
white in this weather and his eyes could not leave it. Wayward, 
as butterflies always are, it flew for a while along the path, turning 
hither and thither, hesitating, resting, then fluttering on again. 
Its tiny wings trembled, as if it shivered at its own purity. It 
alighted on various flowers, but only stayed for an instant, as if 
dissatisfied or deceived. Aubrey began to feel that it had some 
definite end in view, and that its investigations were not pursued 
without a purpose. It desired, surely, some special flower or leaf 
on which its heart was set, and it would flutter on until it reached 
that flower. Presently Aubrey saw, growing among a tangle of 
shrubs, an ugly plant. He did not know its name, but it was 
squat, had flaccid, prickly leaves, and looked unhealthy and fatigued. 
The edges of its leaves were of a sickly yellowish-brown colour, and 
were ragged and thin, attacked apparently by a decay which, 
beginning at the limits of the plant, was eating its way stealthily 
towai'ds the heart. Over this plant the white butterfly poised on 
flickering wings. Then it alighted, keeping its wings extended for 
a moment. Aubrey thought it was going to dart away as usual. 
He stopped in the path to see it fly forward again on its search. 
And while he stood there it folded its wings as if satisfied and sub- 
missive. He felt that its search was over. Yet he waited there 



THE SLAVE 99 

for a long while. He knew that he was longing with intensity to ' 
see this tiny white thing fly away from its ugly home on the breast 
of the sickly plant. It was so near to the disease, to the yellow 
edges of the leaves. Even while he watched a film of the decayed 
matter detached itself from the rest and went to feed the rank 
black mould in the shadow. In time the disease, ever moving, 
must reach the butterfly. Yet it remained. It seemed at last con- 
tented. Aubrey stretched out his hand softly and touched it with 
the tip of his finger. It did not move. Perhaps it was asleep. 

He walked on, and all the strength of his pain had come back 
to him. 

It was terrible to leave the butterfly there with the ugly and 
the decaying plant. But if a thing wishes, what is the use of 
bodily force ? One cannot lay hands on the mind and lift it into 
beauty and into safety. The free will of the weakest can laugh at 
the muscles of the strongest. Even a butterfly owns its awful gift, 
that gift which is the mystery at the heart of the mysterious world. 

Lady Gary 11 and Sir Reuben ! Always, when he reached that 
thought and tried to face it, Aubrey felt stunned and stupid, able 
to contemplate without being able to realise. This was because he 
could not alter his conception of what Lady Caryll was. She re- 
mained with her beauty unchanged, the temple of all things lovely 
to him. He could not allow her to descend. And it was this in- 
ability that afterwards led to his strange and as many people 
thought infatuated elevation of his godfather. 

Why had she done this ? What curious spring of human tender- 
ness had gushed forth from her heart at the touch of Sir Reuben's 
wand ? Even in his pain Aubrey could foreshadow the remarks of 
his world, could hear all the society voices saying the usual things 
with the usual little sneer tacked on at the end like the tail to a 
kite. When an ugly elderly man marries a beautiful young girl, 
the smallest child in a Mayfair drawing-room knows very well the 
proper thing to say and how to say it. But Aubrey brushed all 
the cackling voices aside and left all the time-worn remarks be- 
hind him. He knew Lady Caryll so much better than any one else 
could. He had always felt that. He felt it as strongly as ever 
even now. 

And then he tried to think calmly of this old man, worn and 
travelled, who had done so much, whose eyes had watched so many 
activities in distant places, who had sprung from so strange a union, 
and in whose veins ran alien blood. 

But his grief and surprise were too young. He recoiled before 
this effort, and the numb and stupid sensation returned upon him. 
He saw again the smiling mandarin holding a great emerald in its 
extended hand and bending obsequiously to a watching figure. 



100 THE SLAVE 

The heaviness of the black and sultry city, full of a multitude 
of hypnotised desires, dull in a weary trance of heat, rolled over his 
spirit once more, and he plodded on like those he saw vaguely 
around him. The pain within him had not gone. He felt it, 
but at a distance, as a man who has injected morphia feels the 
agony that is stunned within him for the moment struggling feebly 
after its former vivid life. He let it struggle. He knew well that 
the effect of morphia is but transient, and that his pain must be 
lasting. And the deadly day became like a hot and exceptional 
night to him ; night without night's tenderness, romance, and starry 
charm, night only because the world was so black that it could 
surely not be day. The lamps were not lit, and the stupid, en- 
tranced world continued monotonously its occupations of the day- 
light. The children tried to play. Women drove to pay calls. 
Boys bicycled, and in the Park the nocturnal loafers had not begun 
to creep among the trees, like insects intent on mysterious and 
unholy errands. 

But it was night. 

The shops were open and the theatres were shut. No windows 
shone. Gardeners were watering their plants, and the omnibuses 
were full of women laden with packages. The early editions of the 
evening papers were coming out, and the City men still remained 
in their hot and hidden hive. In their dingy lodgings, behind the 
blinds tied with cheap lengths of gaudy ribbon, the birds who 
fly when the owls fly had not begun to assume their marvellous 
plumage, and all the bats hung still to the rafters, and the eaves 
sunk in a steady sleep. 

But it was night. 

And the great city could not understand that. For it was 
stagnant, emasculate, and overwhelmed in the hot and heavy 
gloom that increased upon it moment by moment. It moved, but 
like a sleepy cripple. It spoke, but like a man who is paralytic. It 
watched, but its eyes were surely glazing to blindness. It lived, but 
like a monster resting its head against the gate of death. 

And in the centre of this tranced and sodden world the white 
butterfly with the folded wings ch'eamed on the haggard and sickly 
plant, and the pale and pertinacious decay crept softly along the 
edges of the drooping leaves. 



CHAPTER X 

Now it was actually night. The strange and unnatural darkness 
merged into the darkness the world knows and expects when day 
fails. The lamps were lit and society was dining. Lord and Lady 
RangeclifFe were at the house of a Minister, and poor Lady Range- 
cliffe, distraite, abrupt and so her husband thought even more 
angular than usual, was talking politics to an Under-Secretary of 
State, who wondered whether there had ever before been a woman 
so deaf to epigrams in the history of the world. 

Lord and Lady St. Ormyn and Lady Caryll were dining with 
Sir Reuben Allabruth in Park Lane before going to the opera. 

Aubrey was alone in his rooms in Jermyn Street. With the 
coming of the real night had come a deepening of his sense of 
loss. He began to know now that he had looked forward to a 
future with Lady Carvll as something that must come, as some- 
thing beautiful and inevitable. Her refusal had delayed it. But 
he had not reallv believed that refusal was final. He had spoken 
too soon, too ruthlessly perhaps. It was true that he had thought 
little of himself, that he had felt himself unworthy of her. But 
this sense of unworthiness had not rendered him hopeless. For he 
was young ; and when youth longs for one thing only, it cannot 
easily believe that life will never grant it that one thing. For life 
seldom seems utterly unkind in the morning. 

Now it was really night. And Aubrey thought that he felt 
old. It seemed to him that he was looking back on his lost youth 
from a long distance, and that already it was something faint and 
pale and spectral. He was like some one who had missed the 
experiences that generally come with the years, and had gained 
only one, the true knowledge of what loss is. His days had fled 
while he slept, now he woke to age, and he had only a dream to 
comfort him. 

The dull heat of the city had surely increased with the conning 
of night. In some vague way it entered into his grief, becoming 
one with it and deepening it. He found himself thinking ridicu- 
lously that on a winter evening his pain must have been less 
intolerable, and he longed to see white snow lying upon the 
ground. He thought of Sir Reuben. This new and brooding heat 

101 



102 THE SLAVE 

connected itself with him. Aubrey saw his burnt and lined face and 
his shrewd eyes in the blackness. He looked like some creature 
that had grown old in sunshine and fire. Now he sought the cool- 
ness of Lady Caryll's jewelled beauty. Aubrey saw him resting 
his wrinkled cheek against hers, and playing with the sparkling 
meshes of her hair. 

Would he draw youth from her ? Or would he give her age ? 
One of those two chances was surely inevitable. For the link of 
marriage is so strong that often it induces an abominable imitation 
in bodies as well as in natures. Even features sometimes change 
insidiously, as under a spell, and the wife's face seeks to resemble 
the husband's, or vice versa. 

Then Aubrey saw in the night Lady Caryll after long after 
this marriage with Sir Reuben. She was not old yet in years, but 
she looked old, horribly old. And she had the expression of one 
who has thro\vn youth away without using it. But that was not 
all. Her face had grown to resemble the face of her husband in 
some mysterious and hideous way. It seemed as if her features 
were becoming transparent and his showed vaguely behind them ; 
his dark and twinkling eyes behind her clear and glittering grey 
eyes, his dry and parched mouth behind her fresh soft lips, his 
wrinkles behind her smooth cheeks. 

All his age, his fatigue, his guile of an Eastern man, his sad 
cunning, were fastening upon her, and making her a dreadful and 
an unnatural travesty of him. And Aubrey saw in her, too, some- 
thing of that fleeting and sensual curiosity that gleams in the eyes 
of veiled women who live in an eternal seclusion. They pass 
through the teeming streets of Constantinople and of Cairo, en- 
closed in smart European carriages, shrouded in their thin white 
veils. And the streets are full of men with whom they can never 
speak. But the expressive eyes speak sometimes eloquently above 
the veils. Aubrey looked at this new face of Lady Caryll, and he 
felt as if he were looking at a harem woman, at a slave covered 
with jewels. 

Suddenly he knew that he could not remain alone any longer. 
The heat, the blackness, the hum of the city, and these visionary 
faces were becoming like the heat, the blackness, the noise and 
the visions of a nightmare. Aubrey felt that he was terribly 
unsafe with himself to night. A sensation of horror overcame him. 
He looked at his soul as a man looks at a stranger encountered in 
a lonely road by night. And he asked it silently, " What are you 
going to do to me ? " He knew for the first time that there were 
within him abominable possibilities whose existence he had never 
suspected. They were stirring, they were rising up from their long 
inertia. He shuddered at the thought of their unknown activities. 



THE SLAVE 103 

He longed for some powerful distraction. He longed to hear 
music. He thought of going to the opera. Then he remembered 
that the visionary faces would perhaps be realised there. He 
dressed, and went out into the street. It seemed to him that 
Jermyn Street was the darkest and saddest street in London. He 
wondered how he had been able to live in it for so many months. 
An old beggar woman was singing in the gutter. She wore a 
black bonnet, pushed very far back on her head, which was nearly 
bald. Her face was red and wore a fixed expression of distress, 
and she was singing a coquettish song about a gipsy who was loved 
by a soldier. There were many high notes in the song ; when the 
old voice reached them it cracked. The reiterated failures of this 
sad diva of the gutter were both pathetic and ridiculous ; to 
Aubrey they were frightful. As he passed the old woman he 
felt terrified, as a child does when it passes the open door of an 
empty room at night. 

His nerves were playing him stupid tricks. Why should he 
fear an old beggar woman ? Yet he did fear her physically. He 
hurried on towards the glare of Piccadilly. He sought light, 
the noise of many people, the sight of a world of pleasure-seekers, 
the safety of crowds. He wanted to be jostled, touched. It 
seemed to him that human contact would break the spell that 
bound him, would force him to feel less painfully and dangerously 
unnatural. 

He turned up a narrow street past a small and furtive-looking 
public-house which stood demurely at a corner. Three youths 
were lounging in front of it. As Aubrey went by he heard one of 
them say 

" Yes, I come 'ome Wednesday and we got called Sunday. I 
soon bustled 'er up. You take my tip, mates allays drive the 
women, allays drive 'em ! " 

Aubrey longed to be a poor man leaning against a public-house. 
He had sometimes thought that the so-called lower classes are 
happier than is generally supposed, owing to a gift of devil-may- 
care insouciance which many of them undoubtedly possess.. Now 
he felt sure of it. 

In Piccadilly he found the usual crowd, and he walked through 
it very slowly. For he wanted to get help from it. He wanted it 
to touch him, speak to him, say to him, " Life is not altered. All 
is the same as ever. There is no dull trance over the city. There 
is no nightmare in the gloom. We are not shadows. We are 
human. We too suffer, like you, and are happy, as you will again 
be happy." 

Above all, he wanted this crowd to say to him 

" We are natural. We are following all our little impulses 



J04 THE SLAVE 

thoughtlessly, gaily, and you are like us. For a moment you have 
been apart; but the moment has passed. You are only a boy, 
and a boy cannot be broken on the wheel in an instant. Life is 
only beginning for you. It is not over. You will not walk in this 
black dream for ever." 

He walked slowly, wading, as it were, through this mighty 
river of rushing life. But it meant no more to him than the 
painted stream that pauses, so hideously and artificially, upon the 
canvas of a scene at a playhouse. 

His state was more unnatural than he had supposed. Even 
physical contact with those around him could not stir him to 
normality. A beggar laid a filthy hand upon his sleeve. He 
perceived the hand but did not feel its touch. 

And again he felt afraid of himself 

When he gained Piccadilly Circus he saw one of those piteous 
and awful tragedies that are so common in London. A bright and 
rosy-cheeked young woman, whose sparkling eyes and dewy lips 
looked and breathed a fulness of life and of hopeful anticipation, 
was saying a gay good-bye to her sweetheart, a handsome young 
soldier. Aubrey heard them making arrangements to meet on the 
following Sunday. The soldier kissed the girl. 

"Well," he said, in a hearty voice, "so long!" 

" So long ! " she answered. 

She mounted into an omnibus and the soldier sauntered away 
down the street, whistling a lively tune. As he vanished, apparently 
the girl found that she was in the wrong omnibus. She jumped 
hastily out, stood on the kerb for a moment, glanced round her, 
then started to cross the Circus at a run. Suddenly in the distance 
there was a dull roar of men's voices. It seemed to startle the 
girl. She hesitated in the middle of the traffic. People began to 
shout to her. She got confused. The dull roar grew louder. A 
fire-engine came at a hand-gallop down Shaftesbury Avenue. 
Cabs, omnibuses drew aside, but the paralysed girl did not stir 
until the engine was close to her. Then, as if governed by some 
insane impulse, she uttered a cry and started forward in front of 
the stretching horses. 

When they were pulled up, a crowd of women, cabbies, street 
boys, and policemen stood round something that had been a woman. 

A little way off a young soldier was whistling gaily and thinking 
of Sunday as lie strode to barracks. 

Aubrey tried to realise him now and later, when he knew. 

But the soldier was a shadow, and the thing lying there on the 
pavement a shadow. 

He walked on, and again he thought of music. 

As he had once said to Lady Caryll, he was no musician. He 



THE SLATE 10.1 

neither sang nor played. He could scarcely talk the usual jargon 
that the fool is at home with in the happy modern world in which 
every self-respecting person is a critic. 

He only loved music, and felt it like a live thing in his veins. 

It seemed to him now that music alone could break the heavy 
spell which lay, like a thing of iron, upon his numbed and inhuman 
spirit. 

He turned into an immense playhouse which stood in a noisy 
square, bought a seat, and made his way into the stalls. They 
were nearly full, but the seat next to Aubrey on the left was at 
present vacant. He felt glad of this. He would have liked to be 
alone, to watch and to listen without being forced into a close and 
intimate contact with strangers. He carefully avoided glancing 
about him, for fear of seeing some one he knew. Almost imme- 
diately a stiff little grey-haired man stepped into the orchestra 
amid applause, and the musicians drew from their instruments 
a strong flood of sensuous melody. 

Aubrey listened idly to this music, which sounded far away. 

The curtain drew up, and strings of ballet-girls floated towards 
the footlights. 

Aubrey watched them as a man watches little dolls manipu- 
lated by a showman in the street. 

Some of them smiled at the audience. Some looked dull and 
waxen. Some giggled at each other, and whispered as they moved. 
A few wore a fixed expression of fatigued wickedness, which might 
have made even a j'oung man up from the country understand the 
unrewarding lassitudes of sin. 

Nearly all looked stereotyped and unoriginal, and as the ballet 
continued on its way, Aubrey's dream seemed to increase and to 
become denser. Even the music, expressive and beautiful though 
it was, made no impression upon him. It had no meaning. It was 
like a voice that did not come from a heart, but from a machine. 
He listened. He thought of the frightful accident he had seen in 
the street. He thought of Lady Caryll united with Sir Reuben. 
He thought of the emerald, and of its legend. 

And all these thoughts were the same, and were nothing! 

Music could not break the spell. Rows of glittering women 
could not break it. The death of a human being full of life and 
of love could not break it. Aubrey had become ruthless and heavy 
as an image. He sat there in his seat staring before him, and his 
face was so inexpressive as to be horrible. 

The scene of the spectacle was now changed, and was laid in 
some island probably mythical of the East. The atmosphere 
and the colouring were exquisitely warm and sparkling. Huge 
red flowers drooped in the glory of a supreme sunshine, languorous 



106 THE SLAVE 

and fatiguing, but thrilling in its completeness of golden heat and 
light. The sky was a hazy blue, clear, but clear behind an ethereal 
veil, that seemed born of waves and of clouds, melting together, 
and diffused along vast distances. In the vague background the 
sea lay, a blue mirror on which a jewelled dust had been scattered 
by the hands of the gods mythical, too, and strange of this fan- 
tastic region, in which life seemed at the same time intensely full 
and intensely dreamy, passionate and drowsy as a tropical flower 
that is heavy with the burthen of its colour beneath a piercing 
noon. 

This island was deserted. Yet Aubrey looked at it with 
anticipation. For the first time he stirred in his dull dream. 
The fulness of this superbly imitated life of Nature in some 
distant region touched some spring within him that nothing 
else had been able to reach. This veiled sky, these mysterious 
flowers, this distant sea held in coral arms, this shimmering atmos- 
phere moved him, almost excited him. There must surely be 
some spirit in this place, sleeping in the shadows of the mighty 
trees and listening to the voices of the eternal waters. 

The music played by the orchestra now became very thin and 
plaintive and mocking. There was a little pipe that reiterated 
again and again a melody that was both droll and melancholy. 
This melody trickled like a thread of water, that winds and is lost 
in sand and reappears, imperturbable but never increasing, small 
and wayward and indiscreet. Then, from some hidden place in 
the empty island, there rose the mutinous beat of distant tom-toms, 
and from the sea came two huge black slaves, with mighty bodies 
and submissive velvet eyes. They stood in the background, like 
two statues of ebony, and between them, beneath the heavy foliage 
of the palm-trees, trickled a thin stream of girls, like the stream of 
the pipe's frail melody. They were clad in varying shades of 
yellow, the colour deepening down the stream from very pale 
primrose to very deep and lustrous orange. And their hair, which 
hung down in long, loose plaits, bound with jewels, was blond and 
red, curled at the temples, and crowned with small, coloured 
turbans. These girls came forward with sleepy footsteps, and as 
they drew nearer the music made a crescendo, becoming more full 
of colour, of intention, and of depth, but always remaining intensely 
languid, and full of a sort of exquisite fatigue. There was the beat 
of noon in it, the beat of marvellous life in the everlasting sun- 
shine, where the flowers are sick with their own beauty, and the 
sea is tired in the glory of its depths ; where the slaves are slaves in 
soul rather than in body, and the trees droop towards their faithful 
shadows; where existence is ever a kind of dream, women are a 
dream, and men a dream ; where the wave is so quiet that it is 



THE SLAVE 107 

like the sky, and the sky is so gentle that it is like the wave ; where 
decay is fruitful as birth, and all things are fused together without 
thought of moralities, obedient to one law only, the marvellous 
law of the sun ; where death itself is a sort of golden ecstasy, even 
as life is a golden trance. And in the sun these sunny girls, with 
their blond and red hair, their pale-yellow and orange robes 
sunshine of spring and sunshine of summer slipped forward as 
the stream slips down an enchanted garden. In their hands they 
carried long garlands of tropical flowers, and the jewels slept in the 
glory of their hair. They moved slowly, as if the heat oppressed 
them, and their faces were pale and dream-like, attentive to the 
dreamy music. 

Aubrey watched them. And it seemed as if their dream awoke 
him. For he began to suffer once more. But now his pain was an 
intoxication. And the rocking music touched him. It gathered 
round his heart and puckered it together, as the fingers of a woman 
pucker silk into a rosette. When the two lines of girls approached 
the footlights they began to dance, or rather to posture rhyth- 
mically and drowsily, swinging their garlands of roses. Presently 
one of them detached herself from her companions. As she did 
so a new melody sounded in the orchestra. It was her theme 
Aubrey thought, and it was very sensuous and infinitely sad, sad 
with the rich sorrow of golden languors, and with the melancholy 
of desires satisfied. There was nothing classical about it, and there 
was nothing classical about this girl. But there seemed to be a 
sleepy depth of passion and of longing in both, a cry in her melody, 
and a cry in her. They came from far, and from mysterious places 
haunted by dreams and by strange experiences, and they affected 
Aubrey powerfully. The girl was tall and slim. She looked very 
young. Her face was oval and pale and full of tender fatigue, and 
the eyes beneath her red-brown hair were very large and dark. 
She fixed them on Aubrey as she danced. Perhaps she did not see 
him. But it seemed to the boy that she watched him, and that she 
too was sad. He fancied even that he saw tears welling up beneath 
her heavy white eyelids, and that the footlights glittered in them 
as fire glitters in water. While she danced some of the other girls 
smiled at the audience and whispered to each other ; but she was 
engrossed by the dream of the melody and by the dream of her 
sorrow, which it related, and cradled, and concealed. She listened 
to the music, now as a girl listens to her lover when he speaks to 
her, now as a slave listens to the voice of the master in whose 
bosom she lies submissively whether she will or no. And she 
replied, catching its mood and reproducing it in her sinuous move- 
ments, and in her wide soft gestures, which were slow and exqui- 
sitely graceful. While she danced, her sorrow seemed to increase 



108 THE SLAVE 

till the burden of it was heavy on those young shoulders. And the 
great eyes that looked at Aubrey spoke in the dumbness of an 
appeal that was like the appeal of distant things ; of an echo in the 
hills at the end of a valley, or a far-off wave of the sea. When 
her steps were finished, she floated softly away and merged herself 
in the yellow line of girls. But her great eyes still rested on 
Aubrey, and he felt as if he had been sitting with her in some 
hidden place hearing her sorrow and telling her of his. He 
glanced at his programme, and saw that the soloist of the island 
dance was called " Miss Di Manners." 

" How are you ? " said a voice which spoke with a foreign 
accent. 

Aubrey turned and saw that the empty chair at his side was 
now filled by Monsieur Anneau. 

He longed to get up and go out without a word. He hated the 
singer instinctively, and to-night he felt as if he could no longer 
control his feelings. 

" You are not singing ? " he said mechanically. 

" No." 

The scene on the stage was changed. 

"That was a pretty girl," said Monsieur Anneau, looking at 
Aubrey with his fierce eyes, in which a red light seemed always 
flickering. 

"There are always pretty girls here," Aubrey said coldly. 

He felt as if a coarse hot hand was laid upon him. The singer 
smiled with the air of one who can divine at a glance all the secrets 
of the flesh. He lit a cigar. 

"I am very sad to-night," he said. "I come here for dis- 
traction." 

"Ah !" 

" This news of Lady Caryll will make me hate emeralds for 
ever, and I have to wear them so often on the stage." 

" I don't understand you," said Aubrey, putting his hand under 
the seat to find his hat. 

" You have not heard that she has succumbed to Sir Reuben's 
jewel. It is all over London to-night." 

And he smiled with intolerable satisfaction. Monsieur Anneau 
was always pleased when any fact seemed to prove to him anew 
that his low conception of all women was founded upon rock. 

" And now," he added, still smiling and stroking his dyed 
beard, "now begins the drama." 

Aubrey took his hat, nodded, and made his way out. In the 
portico, between the great china tubs of flowers, he stopped and 
stood still. He felt confused and almost stunned. The sudden 
meeting with Monsieur Anneau, just as the curious lethargy of his 




THE SLAVE 109 

mind was giving way to a more natural condition of impulsive 
thought, had produced upon him a physical effect. He put his 
hand to his head, which ached as if he had just received a blow, 
and he had a strange sensation of having forgotten something, 
though what he could not imagine. 

" Cab, sir ? " said the gigantic attendant. 

Aubrey shook his head. He still waited. He was trying to 
remember what he had thought of or desired just before Monsieur 
Anneau had spoken to him. Then before his hot eyes floated 
once more the girls of the island. He saw again the strange and 
sorrowful look of sympathy in the dark eyes of the unknown 
dancer. He glanced round. The attendant was still at his side. 

" Which is the way to the stage-door ? " Aubrey said. 

The giant smiled, and his large hand instinctively curved itself 
into a suggestive cup. 

"This way, sir," he said in a confidential murmur. 

Aubrey followed him into the street. Some hideous boys were 
standing there staring in at the flowers and the thick carpets. 
They wore the sad and abominable look of those Avho have never 
had a chance. As Aubrey passed, following the giant, they eyed 
him with bitter scrutiny and made some coarse remarks which he 
did not hear. The attendant turned to the left up a side street, 
walked on for some distance, then stopped at the corner of another 
street which ran to the right. 

"Straight up there, sir," he said. " But the ballet ladies won't 
be out for another half-hour." 

And he smiled again. He thought he knew the aristocracy as 
an organ-grinder thinks he knows a monkey. Aubrey gave him a 
florin and he retired, wondering how any one can be so short- 
sighted as to wish to do away with the upper classes. 

Aubrey stood at the street corner. London is full of worlds, 
all huddled close together, and different from one another. 
The few yards that he had traversed in the wake of the 
giant had taken Aubrey from a world he knew into one 
of which he was ignorant. He glanced at the street before 
him. It was narrow, dark, and at present quiet. The build- 
ings on either side of it were immensely tall, and looked 
unkempt and blind, like the backs of warehouses. The one on 
the right of the street was the theatre. But no one would have 
supposed so, for it was blank and dreary, and though there were 
many windows, few of them were lit up. There were three or 
four loungers at some distance, and while Aubrey stood at the 
corner a little girl with a blond pigtail and meanly dressed ran 
by accompanied by a magnificent white poodle with which she was 
playing. This little girl earned twenty-five pounds a week for 



110 THE SLAVE 

her father, and had travelled all over the globe as an acrobat. 
She tumbled down in the gutter and burst out crying. Aubrey 
picked her up. She thanked him in lisping German, ran on and 
disappeared into a doorway at some distance, wiping her blue 
eyes with her little knuckles. The poodle, a famous trick-dog, 
followed her barking. 

Aubrey guessed that she had entered by the stage-door, and 
he walked slowly down the left pavement. He passed two or 
three men who were smoking and staring at nothing. They looked 
like his idea of stage-carpentei's. He stopped near them and 
almost opposite to the stage-entrance of the theatre, which flamed 
with gas. As he waited he could hear music very faintly. It 
sounded ugly and sad, though it was obviously dance music. An 
omnibus loaded with baskets and drawn by a wretched horse 
drove up. It stopped, and five very strong and athletic-looking 
men sprang out. They all wore ulsters down to their heels. They 
were followed by a small boy with an abnormally large hooked nose 
and hair plastered down on his forehead. The boy squinted across 
at Aubrey, then abruptly stood on his head in the street, elevated 
himself on his hands, curved his body like a serpent and put his 
left foot in his mouth. One of the men gave him a cuff, picked 
him up by the waist with one hand and carried him in at the door 
like a parcel. The two or three loungers laughed, and one of them 
remarked 

"He's a devil that Alf!" 

"He draws more than the bally," rejoined another. "All the 
nobs come for his turn. He and Vauxhall between 'em could run 
a show off of their own bat, could they ! " 

Aubrey wondered what was the connection between the boy 
with the hooked nose and the unfashionable locality alluded to. 
He waited. Two or three more badly dressed men slouched 
slowly up out of the darkness of the street and hovered upon the 
kerb, regarding their companions in expectancy sideways without 
turning their heads. One of them took out an enormous silver 
watch and muttered 

"'Tain't time yet. They're only in the wheel now." 

He lit a penny-cigar. Owing to the direction of the breeze 
Aubrey received the smoke in his face. He moved a little nearer 
to the stage-door. Within he saw dimly a man with spectacles 
and a red nose arranging some letters in a rack, another man 
drinking slowly out of a bottle, and a boy in the livery of the 
theatre picking a walnut out of its shell. The distant music 
swelled into a soft uproar. 

" That's curtain ! " said one of the loungers. 

Light sprang suddenly into the windows of the great build- 



fHE SLAVE 111 

ing, which were modestly shrouded in thin white blinds. And, 
following the light as if in pursuit, came sound, the noise of 
dozens of feet running upstairs, of dozens of screaming girls' voices 
mounting from some hidden abyss. Peals of soprano laughter, 
cries of remonstrance, of gaiety, of anger, of fear, all swimming in 
the enveloping noise of feet on bare boards, poured out into the 
street. Aubrey could even distinguish words 

" Get away, Annie ! " " Slow coach ! let me get by then, can't 
yer ? " " Yuss, I see 'im. Ain't he Slyboots ! " "I won't be 
tickled, no I won't Ugh, you 'orror ! " " Madame'll give it 'er 
to-morrer you see!" "Shan't, then, shan't I tell yer!" "I've 
got a thirst on me." "Thought I should a dropped in the wheel." 
" She's a nice 'un to carry a flag ! 'Alf mast 'igh, that's what she is." 
"'Urry up, Susie, Lord sakes ! 'urry up!" "Supper with a nob, 
well why not ? What's supper ? " " Lost 'er shoe in the wheel, 
and then says its cruel 'ard to mike a gurl go barefoot ! " " Coin' 
on yer bike! My word, where' s the broom?" "Did yer 'ear 
Madame shriek to 'er ? She'll git the sack if she turns 'em in 
agine." 

And then female shadows began to tower and diminish, waver, 
flicker, and gyrate upon the white blinds. In some of the win- 
dows, half-way up, the shadows were of feet and legs darting 
hastily about as if in some mad acrobatic performance, and in the 
lower halves of these windows wei'e shadows of heads and raised 
arms and busts. For one long window often lit two dressing- 
rooms, and the dividing floor was midway up the panes. The 
voices continued to scream and to chatter, and there was some- 
thing unholy and diabolic in this piercing uproar emanating from 
this crowd of shadows. 

As Aubrey stood in the dark street watching the intense 
activity of the silhouettes upon the blinds, and listening to the 
screams, the loud laughter, and the broken ejaculations, he felt as 
if he were observing the progress of a nightmare. He saw arms 
thrust suddenly up as if in appeal to Heaven really to get rapidly 
into sleeves ; slabs of black, that were hair, rolling up and diminish- 
ing into roundnesses that resembled bullets but that were " buns " ; 
draperies falling from shoulders, and vanishing like shapes drop- 
ping clown into hell ; shoes, kicked from eager feet, mounting into 
the air like birds ; mouths opening wide as if demanding invisible 
morsels of food ; waists enlarging as corsets fell, diminishing as 
other corsets were violently assumed ; bent knees, like knees of 
statues carved to represent motion; backs dodging to and fro; 
sharp profiles ; blots that were full faces ; bending heads that 
suggested heads of mourners, heads thrown far back ; a hand 
with thin fingers that held an immense pin ; a hand grasping a 



112 THE SLAVE 

brush that was like a weapon. Then, a little later, and when the 
knot of loungers in the street had increased into a tiny crowd, 
there were shadows of hats upon the blinds, ostrich feathers tower- 
ing like feathers on a hearse ; quaint shapes of fruit, of flowers, of 
knots of riband, butterflies of tulle, and straw brims curved like 
shells. And all the time the cries were unceasing, and seemed to 
grow louder perpetually, storming the heights of the silence of the 
night. 

The man with the penny-cigar pulled down his shirt-cuffs and 
gave a sudden twist to his moustache. Two or three other loungers 
assumed alert attitudes that were almost military, and the boy in 
livery swallowed his fifth walnut with a gulp and emerged into 
the street conducting a bicycle, upon the handle of which he 
proceeded to tie a brown paper parcel. Far down the street 
appeared two huge yellow eyes, which slowly approached, and 
presently a horse became visible between them. 

" Madame's carriage/' said a lounger. "They'll be comiri' 
now." 

And then girls began to flow forth under the gas jet on to the 
pavement. At first they came in solitary units, then in twos and 
threes, then in a stream, hurrying downwards, stopping by the 
man with the red nose and the spectacles, then turning through 
the half glass door into the street. As they came they chattered 
and laughed, pulling on thread gloves, and arranging hair-pins 
and buttoning cloth jackets. Some of them were smart and 
majestic, and walked in a dignified solitude, though jostled by 
impertinent neighbours. Others the majority were poorly clad 
in dark dresses, and wore sailor hats of straw pinned carelessly on 
hair that was twisted loosely into inartistic knobs. They talked 
at the tops of their voices, screamed with laughter, and stood in 
knots on the pavement exchanging piercing good-byes, mingled 
with boisterous chaff, scraps of intimate conversation, or comments 
on the events of the evening. 

"Well, so long, Alice. If he should, you give him the chuck. 
That's my advice. He ain't worth it. You take my tip. So long." 

" So long." 

And a great girl with red cheeks tramped off, moving instinc- 
tively like one who is born to carry banners. 

The boy in livery appeared again, escorting a pretty girl with 
impudent eyes, and a large bunch of roses in the front of her drab 
jacket. 

"You're a good boy, Jackie," she said. "I'll bring you some 
more nuts to-morrow." 

" Thank you, Miss." 

" Is the lamp right ? What time's the call ? " 



THE SLAVE 113 

" Half-past eleven." 

'< My word ! they don't give us much rest." 

She put her hand on the bicycle and arranged her skirt, keeping 
one foot on the kerb and one on the right pedal. Some loungers 
gathered round, staring at her with admiration. 

" Give 'im 'is 'ead, Miss," said one. 

"Jackie," continued the girl with calm indifference, "when 
you're a man I'll marry you. You understand bikes and you ain't 
shoddy." 

She glanced contemptuously round her at the staring men. 

" Here, Jackie," she said. 

The little boy in livery put his head down to receive a whisper. 
The girl gave him a sounding kiss on his round face, rang her bell, 
and glided off in the direction of the Strand, while Jackie returned 
proudly to the stage-door amid the laughter and ejaculations of the 
bystanders. 

Aubrey wondered what it felt like to be a child in livery, eating 
nuts and being petted by dancers. All that he saw going on before 
him still seemed dreamlike and unnatural. But behind the dream- 
like sensation lurked an acute sense of disappointment. In this 
dark and flickering crowd of girls how could he find the pale face 
and the deep eyes that had looked at him with such thrilling 
sympathy. He felt that he was foolish to wait, that it was useless, 
and even humiliating. Yet he waited. For now he did not feel 
as if he could remain alone, as if he could go back to his rooms 
without having spoken to some one. And he wished to speak to 
some one who knew nothing about him, to a stranger, whom he 
need never see again. The idea had come to him. It was eccen- 
tric, perhaps, but it governed him. He was resolved to wait a little 
longer. More girls flowed out. Some of them were mere children, 
and began to play " touch " in the street, or to perform steps for 
the benefit of the diminishing throng of men. For many of the 
loungers had welcomed, and departed with, their womenkind. 
They were brothers, cousins, husbands, lovers of the dancers. A 
man in a top-hat appeared, ceremoniously escorting a middle-aged 
lady dressed in plain black silk and a bonnet, who walked very 
slowly with a queenly air. This was the ballet-mistress, famous all 
over Europe. A girl came behind them carrying some roses. An 
attendant darted forward to open the carriage-door. The lady 
in black stepped in majestically. She was followed by the girl. 
Several loungers raised their hats. As the carriage drove away 
Aubrey saw the lady smelling the roses. He noticed that she had 
reddish-brown hair arranged in bands, and that she looked clever 
and determined. 

Most of the girls were gone now. The street was beginning 

H 



114 THE SLAVE 

to look deserted again, and in the windows of the great build- 
ing many of the lights were extinguished. The man with the 
penny-cigar had found his companion, and had walked off with her, 
arm in arm, in a contented silence. At last Aubrey turned to go. 
As he did so he heard a voice say 

"Well, Di, night, night ! Try and cheer up, Di." 

" Night, night ! " replied a young voice with a weary note in it. 

And then Aubrey heard light feet behind him. 

He stopped. A tall, slim girl walked slowly past him. In her 
hand she held a letter. She had a white, oval face, and dark hair 
fluffed out over her ears beneath a sailor hat with a white riband. 
He did not recognise her. But she was called " Di." 

He followed her. 



CHAPTER XI 

HE passed her. As he did so, the girl glanced at him with a 
sort of hesitating inquiry, and, seeing her eyes, he knew that she 
was the Island dancer, although her dark hair transformed her, 
and she now seemed a very ordinary young woman, by no means 
formed to attract attention in a crowd or in a dimly lit street. 
He slackened his pace till she was at his side. Then he took off 
his hat. The girl stopped on the pavement. 

"Go away, please," she said, speaking in a pretty, soft voice 
with a London accent. "It's no use. You've made a mistake." 

" Mayn't I speak to you for a moment ? " 

" No. What for ? " 

" I'm very unhappy to-night," Aubrey said. 

Such a confession contradicted his character. Sometimes such 
moments of direct contradiction occur in a life. They puzzle 
our relatives and throw our friends into confusion. The girl looked 
startled. 

"Are you?" she said; then, after a little pause, she added, 
" Why ever do you tell me ? " 

" I don't know," Aubrey said. 

He wondered sometimes, afterwards, why he did not find him- 
self and his words ridiculous at that moment. But, at that 
moment, he had no feeling of self-consciousness. The girl stared 
at him with her great eyes, which looked heavy and as if they 
had been weeping recently. 

" If you're unhappy whatever are you here for ? " she asked 
prosaically. 

" Let me walk with you for a minute," Aubrey said. 

" But I don't know you, and I don't walk with strangers. I 
don't care about that sort of thing." 

" I've never spoken to any one in the street before like this/ 
said Aubrey. 

"Then why d'you do it now?" 

"Because aren't you unhappy too?" 

"What if I am?" she said. "It don't matter to anybody 
except me. Now please I'm goin'." 

And she went on, but slowly, and almost reluctantly. At a 

115 



116 THE SLAVE 

crossing she had to stop to let a cab go by, and she looked back. 
Aubrey joined her again. 

" I'm going to walk with you/' he said. " I saw you dancing 
to-night and you looked sad. I'm sad too. Let me talk to you 
just to-night. We shan't ever meet again, I daresay." 

" Well, but," said the girl. " There isn't any harm, perhaps, but 
if Vauxhall was to see me, I don't know whatever he'd think. He'd 
tell Lill and 

" Vauxhall ! " repeated Aubrey, thinking of the boy with the 
hooked nose. "And Alf ? " 

" D'you know them ? " cried the girl, brightening. 

" I've seen Alf," said Aubrey. 

They were walking on slowly now. 

" Isn't he a demon?" she said. "You should see him do his 
tricks in our kitchen. The dad laughs fit to split his sides. Dad 
manages the lights at Covent Garden," she added. " He knows 
all the singers. They give him presents sometimes." 

" But who's Vauxhall ? " said Aubrey. 

" He's married to Lill, my sister. He's Alf s brother. You 
know the ' Marvellous Flicks/ don't you ? Well, he's the one that 
lies on his back and catches Alf on his feet, and does the corpse 
business and the bird act. He lives at our place with Lill and 
Alf when they ain't travellin'. If he was to see me " 

She looked apprehensively behind her. They were passing a 
restaurant. The light streamed out upon the girl's white London 
complexion. 

"Come in here and have supper," Aubrey said. 

"Oh no, I couldn't; I've never done such a thing not with a 
stranger." 

She spoke quite simply, without any of the coquettish affecta- 
tion that touts for persuasion. But Aubrey was determined to 
have his way. To-night he was very selfish in his sorrow, and he 
would not part from this momentary distraction. 

" It's quite early," he said. " After supper I'll get you a cab. 
You can go home and never see rne again." 

She looked at him with a sort of babyish inquiry in her pretty 
eyes. 

" Well, but whatever's the good of that ? " she said. " You 
are funny ! " 

For reply he took her by the arm and drew her gently into the 
cafe. They arrived at a little table covered with a white cloth. A 
waiter, with an ashen face and dark rings under his Italian eyes, 
hastened up to serve them. 

"I don't think I can," the girl said. "And besides, I ain't 
hungry really I ain't, only tired." 



THE SLAVE 117 

" Sit down then. I'll take your jacket." 

He held out his hands. The girl looked at him again with 
inquiring eyes. Then she wriggled slowly out of her jacket, which 
was very tight, and appeared in a pretty white blouse with a frill 
down the front and little lilac flowers scattered over it. 

" I made it myself," she remarked, seeing that Aubrey was 
observing it. " I always make my own blouses." 

She laid the letter on the table and sat down on the red plush 
divan. 

"It's a deal cheaper," she added. "And besides, I can make 
'em more tasty." 

Suddenly her eyes filled with tears. 

" Oh dear ! I am bail to-night," she almost whispered. " Cruel 
bad." 

Aubrey gave the waiter an order. He skipped to execute it 
with a weary agility. 

" You are tired with dancing." 

" No, it ain't that. I love dancin'. Madame knows it. No, it 
ain't that." 

" What is it, then ? " Aubrey asked gently. 

He was sitting opposite to her, facing the long mirror, in 
which he could see the back of the girl's head, the counter, at 
which sat a heavy-looking foreign woman with a black cat in her 
lap, two or three waiters staring at the street, and two elderly 
Jews who were eating kidneys and onions at a distant table. 

"I've had bad news to-day, shockin' bad. I don't know how 
to bear it." 

The tears in her eyes made them look larger and infinitely 
pathetic. For the first time that evening Aubrey almost forgot 
his own life and himself. 

" What is it ? " he asked. 

The waiter planted a dish between them, and uncorked a 
bottle with mechanical violence. Aubrey helped his companion 
to a cutlet and poured some wine into her glass. Then, when the 
waiter had gone, he repeated 

"What is it?" 

"I've been deceived," she said slowly, putting her fork into 
the cutlet. " I trusted somebody, that's all. No, I can't eat to- 
night, really I can't." 

" You must try." 

"Oh dear!" she said, and she leaned her face on her hand. 
"Why ever isn't a girl let be happy? And I don't ever do no 
harm to anybody. 1 never crab another girl, or curry to Madame, 
or try to make the orchestra gentlemen like me to get anything 
out of 'em. I don't, really I don't. I can't see why it is I've had 



118 THE SLAVE 

this awful cruel letter. If I'd give him any cause. But I haven't. 
1 don't never speak to the Acros." 

"What?" 

"Why any of the acrobats, or anything like that. I wouldn't 
do it. Except Vauxhall and them, and they're relations, aren't 
they?" 

"Yes." 

"We were engaged," she continued, speaking with the direct 
simplicity of a small child, "Bert and I, for over a year. I used to 
go to his place of an afternoon and make his tea, and look after his 
clothes and sew for him, and all. And now he writes that we 
can't be married, because I'm not educated, and because Dad's a 
common person ! Why Dad's liked by all the singers, and Madame 
Patti's shook him by the hand. And Bert used to come and dine 
at our place and talk to Dad by the hour, and say afterwards how 
he was intelligent and all what a lot he knew. And now he turns 
round like this, and we aren't to meet any more. I don't know 
how to bear it." 

She put up one hand to her eyes. 

" Oh, I am silly," she said. 

Then she began to try to eat in silence, cutting the meat into 
tiny lozenges in order to be able to swallow it easily. 

"A thing like that hurts dreadfully," Aubrey said. 

" Ah, you don't know ! But it does. It come all over me when 
I was dancin'. It's like when snow comes, and makes you all 
shivery. And I did understand him so. He'll never find another 
to understand him like I did. And I've read a lot of books since I 
knew him. But it ain't easy, is it, readin' when there's calls every 
day, and dancin' at night and then tii'ed afterwards. I'm not 
educated, p'raps. But then he can't dance, so in a way it's quits, 
ain't it ?" 

She gazed at Aubrey with pathetic inquiry. 

" Yes, in a way it's quits," he echoed. 

In all his life he had never before talked to a girl like this. 
He had never before been in contact with such childlike and 
unconscious frankness. He knew comparatively few theatrical 
people, and those whom he knew were fashionable actor-managers, 
and the opei'a- singers whom he met, and generally avoided, at 
Lady St. Ormyn's. Chorus-girls and ballet-dancers had never 
entered into his life. Until this evening he had never waited 
outside a stage-door. If he had ever thought of dancing girls at 
all, he had thought of them as knowing minxes, sharp London 
children, with the allures of the stage grafted on to the fearful 
cleverness that has its birth in the gutter. The extraordinary 
and sentimental simplicity of this girl, the bourgeois respectability 



THE SLAVE 119 

that floated round her like an atmosphere, and set her apart in a 
virginal region to which few society women could penetrate, her 
unconscious confidence in a total stranger and her curious unreserve 
all these things touched and surprised Aubrey. His own sense 
of reserve dropped away from him as he looked into this girl's eyes, 
and in the sympathy that he felt for her frankly expressed sorrow 
there was a vague, if momentary, solace for his own. 

" He writes for the papers, Bert does," she continued. " He 
is clever. He does police cases and weddins, and his father was 
a capting. That's why he's always held himself so high. He's 

had an education, but I never thought as " 

She paused, took out her handkerchief, which had scalloped 
edges and a purple letter D in one corner, and wiped her eyes. 
" It's come so sudden," she added. 
Aubrey thought of the abruptness of his sorrow. 
" Bad things generally come like that," he said. 
"Yes, don't they? Ma was never so well as just before she 
had that seizure." 

" You live with your father and mother ? " 

"And Li 11, and Vauxhall, and Alf, and Jenny, and Bob, and 
Susie, and Charley. I'm the eldest. I have a lot to do." 
She sighed. 

" However shall I be to-morrow ? " she said. " I don't know 
what Dad'll say. He's so high-tempered is Dad, and as proud 
as Lucifer. And he thinks a lot of me. They all do at home. 
It's Di here and Di there from morning to night." 
" Is your name Diana ? " asked Aubrey. 
" No, Diamond." 

Aubrey was silent for a moment. He was thinking of jewels, 
and of Sir Reuben's remark about Lady Caryll, that she was a 
human diamond. And it seemed to Aubrey strange that to-night 
he should be talking to a girl with such a name, and that her name 
alone had had something to do with her entry into his life. 

"Just before I was born, Ma was dancin' in the Jewel ballet 
at the 'Crown,'" said the girl. "She was one of the diamonds, so 
they christened me after her. Ma used to be first class on her 
feet. She's dresser now at the Opera, so her and Dad's together. 
Whatever time is it ? I must be home before they are. Dad's 
that particular with us girls. He'd be for killin' you if he was to 
see us here." 

Aubrey could not help smiling at the earnest tragedy of the 
last sentence. 

" It's not late," he said. 

" Let's see ! It's f Lohengrin ' to-night, I know. But who's 
the Elsie ? " 



120 THE SLAVE 

"Why d'you want to know ?" 

" Because it makes a lot of difference in the time. If it's 
Madame Sabini, they won't be out till after twelve. She goes so 
slow with all them high notes. Dad can't a-bear her because she 
keeps them all from supper. All the carpenters hate her." 

" It is Madame Sabini," he said, wondering if that famous Diva 
knew of her reputation in the carpentering world. 

"Oh, then we've got a little more time. I used to dance at 
the Opera, so I know 'em all there. I've held Madame Sabini's 
train many a time. She's that kind-hearted, and can't she sing ? 
But she does go so mortal slow, don't she ? D'you like singin' ? " 

"Yes." 

" So he does, does Bert. Oh dear ! everything brings him up, 
dancin' and singin', and books and supper, and everything. He 
loves cutlets like these with mushrooms. He always will have 
mushrooms. That's it. If you love any one, it's them with every- 
thing. Even if its eatin', you're put in mind of 'em. Ain't you ?" 

" Yes," Aubrey said. 

Had he not tried, in different language, to express the same 
thought to Lady Caryll in the dark garden at Epsom ? Had he 
not felt her in music, and in all beautiful things, like a presence 
sanctifying and being sanctified by them ? It was strange to find 
this little dancing-girl touched by the same sensation in her so 
different love. And it seemed to close humanity round in a very 
small circle. 

"When were you at the Opera ?" he asked her. 

" Oh, last season. Madame lent me." 

" Did you ever see a Lady St. Ormyn there ? " 

" What ! Her as thinks she bosses the show ! You should 
hear Dad on her ! Why, she come to him once at rehearsal with 
that there Mr. Wilson, tryin' to teach him his business. She says, 
'At Bayroot or some place or another the lights is blue,' she 
says. Dad ups and says, ' If I make 'em blue, my lady,' he 
says, 'the singers'll look for all the world like a pack o' ghosts.' 
' Nonsense,' she says she's a high-tempered lady too. ' Nonsense,' 
says Mr. Wilson. 'Very well,' says Dad, and he turns on the blue. 
You should have heard Madame Sabini cry out. ' I shall not sing,' 
she says, ' if I'm to be made a corpse of at every moment,' she 
says. There was a rumpus. Oh, how Dad did laugh ! When he 
come home that night he says to Ma, ' This ain't Bayroot, nor 
this ain't Madigascar,' he says. 'This is England, and it's no 
manner of use her ladyship trying to introduce them savage tricks.' 
Dad can be firm with 'em, I tell you. He does think nothin' at 
all of them amateurs." 

"Have you ever seen Lady St. Ormyn's daughter?" 



THE SLATE 121 

"Only once in a box. Oh, she is pretty. You seen her?" 

" Yes," said Aubrey. 

The waiter brought some grapes. The girl ate them slowly. 
Whatever she was saying, her eyes never lost their sad and clouded 
look, nor her manner its childlike and soft gravity, sometimes 
deepening into sentiment, or into simple and homely tragedy. 
She was utterly without self-consciousness. Her white face was 
roughened here and there by her undue violence in removing her 
false complexion at night, and in the corner of one of her eyes 
there was a black fragment of make-up. Her lips were very 
flexible and pale, and her slim body looked like the body of a 
child in the frilled and puffed white blouse with the lilac flowers. 
It was difficult to believe that she was the Island sorceress, for her 
red-gold wig completely transformed her. And it was difficult to 
believe that this simple little girl could command at will all the 
curious seductions of dancing. She ate her grapes mechanically 
while Aubrey watched her. He noticed that her hands were long 
and thin. A little artificial rose still tinted the nails here and 
there, and she wore two rings. She glanced up suddenly and met 
his gaze. 

" He give me them/' she said, alluding to the rings. "They 
were his mother's. I shall have to send 'em back to-morrow, 1 
s'pose." 

And she choked. 

"I'm not fit to be out to-night," she murmured. "Whatever 
must you think of me?" 

"I think you must try to be brave and bear it," Aubrey said. 

And he felt, while he spoke to her, as if he were speaking to 
his own soul. 

" Other people have sorrows like this," he continued. 

" Do they ? " 

" Hundreds." 

She shook her head slowly. 

"Ah! but they don't love as I love Bert. There's Mr. King, 
though. It is odd." 

"Mr. King?" 

" Yes. Oh, he is good. He's wanted to marry me oh for ever 
so long, since 1 was sixteen. He's a ridin'-master in a very good 
way of business, and so quiet and respectable. I almost thought I 
could like him till I see Bert, and then I had to tell him 'no.' 
He did take it well, but he always looks at me so sad. Whatever 
will he say ? D'you think he feels about me what I do about Bert ? " 

" I daresay." 

" Oh dear ! it is a world, ain't it ? Why ever can't we be 
let happy : " 



122 THE SLAVE 

" I don't know," said Aubrey, wondering why. 

"There's Mr. King," she continued, in sad and wide-eyed 
reflection ; "he won't never like any one but me. He says so. He 
says he's tried, and it ain't no use, because he can't. I went with 
him once to Virginia Waters on my birthday, before I knew Bert. 
Oh, he was kind. There wasn't nothin' he didn't give me, first 
class in the train, and supper when we got back, and all, He is 
good. But it's no use. Oh dear ! " 

And again the tears welled up in her eyes. 

" Dad always said that Mr. King was the one for a good 
husband," she added. " He taught a princess to ride once." 

" Did he ? " 

" Yes, and lie's always with high people, but not a bit uppish 
for all. He'll never love any one but me ! " 

"Some day, perhaps, you'll be able to care for him." 

" No, not like that. You don't understand what it is to love." 

"Perhaps not," Aubrey said. "What is it like ?" 

"Why," she said earnestly, "one ain't oneself, and one's in 
a rare takin' all the time. Now it's happiness and as bright as 
ninepence and up to anything, and now it's as black as ink, and 
feelin' ten times worse than when Madame's took you out of a step 
because you're awkward, or when you've lost your shoe in the 
wheel, or fell down like Lizzie Gunnin' did to-night. You 
seen her?" 

" No. Well ? " 

" She will get her feet too close together and goin' round like 
that sideways you must keep 'em more apart. See ? " 

"Yes." 

"And you feel lonesome all the time if you're not with 'em, 
'specially of an evenin' and when it's dark. Oh dear ! All these 
evenin's coming ! Whatever am I to do ? " 

She gazed at him, and her eyes were full of a terrible and 
childish questioning. They were afraid and wondering. And 
Aubrey looked at her, and silently asked himself her question, 
and tried to see his future in the darkness, as she was trying to 
see hers. But suddenly she said, in a dry little voice, that sounded 
almost like the voice of an invalid 

" Whatever time is it ? " 

" Half-past eleven." 

"Oh, I must go. Vauxhall and Lill'll think that I don't 
know what. And Ma and Dad'll be home soon. If you'll help 
me on with my jacket, please. It is tight." 

She stood up, and, turning, stretched out her long arms behind 
her, seeking the sleeves which Aubrey brought. Her white face 
was towards the long mirror, and was puckered by the physical 



THE SLAVE 123 

effort of getting into the jacket, and for a moment Aubrey thought 
it was like the face of a little child being tortured. 

" Oh dear ! I've left on some of my make-up," she said. 
" Whatever must you think ? " 

And then, with the tip of her little finger, she removed the 
tiny black fragment from the corner of her eye. She buttoned 
the jacket while Aubrey paid the bill. Then they went out. 
Diamond held her gloves, which were of white thread, in her 
hand. On the pavement Aubrey stopped. 

"Shall I take you home in a cab ? " he asked. 

" No, let's walk. It ain't far, and I don't like you spendin' all 
this money for nothin'/' she answered. " I was always careful of 
Bert's money. Oh dear ! he will spend it without me. He'll run 
into debt, I know he will. He's no idea of money. It's this way. 
We live in Milk Court." 

"Oh," said Aubrey, with an air of being informed. He had 
never heard of the quarter before. 

As they started, Monsieur Anneau passed them. He wore a 
light overcoat down to his heels, in which he looked gigantic. 
He was smoking a huge cigar, and had white Suede gloves on his 
hands. He stared hard at Diamond, smiled, and took off his hat. 
She nodded. 

" Why, there's Mr. Anno," she said. 

" D'you know him ?" said Aubrey, feeling secretly irritated. 

" I've often spoke with him at the Opera. He's a gay gentle- 
man, ain't he ? He gave me some chocolates oncest. They come 
from Paris. He can sing, but I wouldn't walk with him like 
this." 

" Why ? " 

" Because I wouldn't,'' she replied quietly. 

Aubrey did not inquire further. He respected both her ignor- 
ance and her knowledge, which seemed, at that moment, equally 
complete. They walked on in silence, turning up side streets 
occasionally. Presently Diamond said 

" We're nearly there now." 

And she began to walk more slowly. 

'It'll be good-bye, I s'pose ? " she said, with a note of inquiry 
in her soft voice. 

"For to-night," Aubrey said. 

In the distance he saw a court, surrounded with high new 
buildings of red and white brick. Diamond stopped under a gas- 
lain p. 

"That's where we live," she said. "You mustn't come any 
farther." 

" Well ? " Aubrey said, and he held out his hand. 



124 THE SLAVE 

She looked up into his face. At this moment of farewell a 
certain self-consciousness seemed to dawn in her for the first time, 
and, looking into his face, a memory came back to her. 

" But why ? " she exclaimed. " You said as you was miserable 
to-night too ! And I've never asked oh, I am mean ! Didn't 
you want to tell me ? " 

"No, no," Aubrey said. " Good-bye. Some day I'll come to 
the theatre again." 

- "Will you?" she said. "Bert used to come every night, Oh 
dear ! whatever will Dad say ? He'll want to kill Bert. It'll be 
awful for me to-morrow morning. And there's a call too. Oh, it's 
all come back to me again now." 

She stared at Aubrey for a moment with sorrowful eyes, like 
the helpless eyes of a very young animal in mortal pain. Then 
she nodded. 

"Thank you," she said. "So long." 

And she walked slowly away towards the high buildings. 
Aubrey stood watching her. Just before she went out of sight 
she turned to look back, saw him under the gas-lamp and made a 
gesture of farewell. It was a very pretty gesture, full of grace 
and meaning. For this little girl's body was as carefully and 
cleverly trained as her mind was untrained. She could say more 
in a pose or in a pirouette than in a sentence, or even in a speech. 
For she had studied since she was a baby the wonderful language 
of the limbs. And her movements were always grammatical, if 
her sentences were not. 

Aubrey walked away down the grim and narrow streets, seeking 
an outlet into some great artery that he knew. He had gained 
a curious solace from hearing another's sorrow. It was momentary, 
he knew, but it was definite. When he had followed Diamond in 
the street, he had been driven by the desire of telling his own 
misery to a total stranger, to a girl of a different world from his, 
whom he would never see again. She had looked soft and 
sympathetic. And, in her dancing, she had seemed to reach 
out a hand to rescue him from the cold and implacable dream 
in which his agony had wrapped him. Then she was the blond 
sorceress of a sunlit isle, and she postured to the dull sound of 
tom-toms. In her red-gold hair were jewels and in her slim hands 
were roses. And her great eyes were surely heavy with the 
burden of noon, and her lips were pale with the kisses of a tyrant. 

And then he heard the story of her sorrow instead of telling 
the story of his own. He heard how the blond sorceress was 
loved by a riding-master in a good way of business, and how she 
had given her heart to a newspaper man who had jilted her, 
because she broke the rules of grammar and had a father who was 



THE SLAVE 125 

closely connected with lights. And now he found it strange, this 
knowledge that filled him as he walked alone along the gloomy 
byways of London the knowledge that he had found more solace 
in the little girl who cried over her cutlet than in the houri who 
moved to music through the sunny languor of the enchanted 
hours. The one had summoned him like a siren. With her body 
she wove a dreamy spell among the huge red flowers of her Island 
of the East. And her sorrow was subtle and indefinite, as the 
tattered emotions that lie like shadows in the hollow bosoms of 
the waves of music. The other had summoned him as a woman 
who is budding out of a child. He had been roused from his cold 
reverie by a fay, and he had wished to tell the fay the tale of his 
misery. Instead he had heard an old street story from the pale 
lips of a street-bred girl. 

And for the moment he was comforted. He had no longer 
any wish to tell the secret of his sorrow, having heard the secret 
of another's. 

He wondered why that was. 

As he walked, he thought of these old street stories which he 
had never realised before. Then he thought of the girl's name 
Diamond. 

And then he saw again the vision of the island, and a pale 
sorceress in yellow robes. But she had the white and glittering 
face of Lady Caryll, and in her hair was a great emerald. 

The tom-toms muttered in the drowsy noontide. They sounded 
like the distant murmur of the tyrant's voice summoning his slave. 



CHAPTER XII 

AT the end of the season Lady Caryll was married to Sir Reuben 
Allabruth. Aubrey went to the wedding, which took place at 
St. Paul's, Knightsbridge. He escorted his mother, and people 
noticed that Lady Rangecliffe was very pale, and seemed deafer 
and more absent-minded than ever. Aubrey watched the cere- 
mony with calm eyes, and listened to " The voice that breathed 
o'er Eden " with an air of cold attention. He had seen Lady 
Caryll pass up the aisle convoyed by her radiant father. On her 
breast burned the great emerald. As she went by there was a 
faint whispering and a rustling of women, and a murmuring voice 
behind Aubrey said softly 

" That was her price. Isn't it marvellous ? " 

He longed to strike the speaker, who was a woman. Yet, when 
he saw Sir Reuben at the altar, he could scarcely wonder at the 
judgment of the world. Some men always look their worst on the 
great occasions of their lives, as many women always look their 
best. On his wedding-day Sir Reuben appeared frightful. It was 
a bright afternoon, and the sun shone upon his face as if to show 
distinctly how old and how fatigued he was in his tightly buttoned 
frock-coat and his light and baggy trousers. As he stood looking 
at Lady Caryll, a strange and cruel expression hovered round his 
dry lips and flickered in his shining dark eyes. Some people 
thought it was like the expression of a slave-owner, rich enough 
to buy the most beautiful slave offered up in the market-place. 
But Aubrey only tried to read in this bending, elderly figure, this 
lined and foreign face, some fascination, some curious and Oriental 
attractiveness. He could not. He seemed to see a goblin. And 
then he gazed at Lady Caryll, and his heart seemed to shrivel 
within him. Yet he would not believe what the world believed. 
As she came down the aisle, now Lady Caryll Allabruth, she looked 
brilliantly happy and sparkling, and her eyes were bent down upon 
her breast, where the emerald and its story glowed on the ivory 
background of her wedding-gown. Sir Reuben shuffled along at 
her side. He turned his head slightly away when he was close to 
Lady Rangecliffe. But she was not looking at him or at his wife. 
Hot tears prevented her from seeing anything for a moment. 

126 







THE SLAVE 127 

Aubrey's right hand was on the edge of the pew. The impulse 
to touch it with hers was irresistible. He turned and looked at 
her calmly. 

" What's the matter, mother ? " he said. 

" Nothing, Aubrey, nothing," she answered hastily. 

They mingled with the smart crowd. At Lady St. Ormyn's 
house they saw the wedding presents. Some of them were jewels. 
Aubrey had given an antique ring. It looked rather humble and 
mean among the diamonds and pearls, and some extraordinary 
rubies set in silver, which were Sir Reuben's gift to his bride. 

In the autumn, towards the end of October, the Allabruths 
came back to town and settled in Park Lane. Aubrey was in 
London. He had found something to do in the City, and was now 
the secretary of a company. He worked every day from ten to 
four in the afternoon, trying to entangle his soul in the meshes of 
routine, and to still the voices of romance in the roar of the music 
of commerce. But he hated the City and men when they were 
there. The great matinal procession was like some mighty funeral 
to him. These thousands of men, with their high hats, their 
morning papers, their attentive eyes devouring the news of the 
day, moved him to a sort of pity for them, and for himself now 
that he was one of them. He saw life like a beautiful light which 
shines only for an hour. And he saw all these men and himself 
pulling down black blinds, and making all things about them 
gloomy and horrible during that hour. Was it only by doing such 
a deed as this that bread could be earned ? That seemed an irony. 
Yet, for himself, it was different. He felt that life was indeed a 
beautiful shining light, or was meant to be so to human beings. 
But he knew also that circumstances had occurred which rendered 
it impossible for him personally to be gladdened and to be warmed 
by that light. For he had committed the fatal error of seeking 
joy in another who could not give it to him. And now he could 
not gain it from elsewhere, as other men. He was like some one 
who has a little fortune, and who places it for increase in hands 
that cast it into the sea, leaving him destitute. But these other 
men by whom he was surrounded were not in his case. Many of 
them had strong powers of enjoyment, yet they passed the greater 
part of their existence in this terrible and dreary court of intrigues 
and of lies, of bitter fluctuations and of evil triumphs. At this 
time Aubrey saw many things wrongly in consequence of the 
sorrow that lived within him. He perceived the horrible side of 
the City, with all its details of chicanery, stealthy cheating, covet- 
ousness of other men's goods, slanderings, grinding down of one's 
neighbours, plannings of ruin, cruel selfishness, and savage greedi- 
ness. And he failed to see the other side, the sturdy honesty, 



128 THE SLAVE 

brave perseverance, calm facing of misfortune, noble sense of duty, 
and fine effort that others wife, children, relations might see 
more of the beautiful shining light than the toilers in the grim and 
murmurous prison. We look at things generally through the 
windows of our own emotions, and if the windows are dusty and 
dim, the figures that pass are dreary or wicked to us, and they 
move in an atmosphere that is like the atmosphere of unholy 
places. 

Aubrey sought peace in routine. He found not peace, but a 
sort of narcotic, which dulled his senses and taught his brain the 
lesson of lethargy. He sometimes forgot, not because memory had 
really fled from him, but because he sometimes ceased to think. 
He let the City dream float over him. He gave himself into the 
grasp of mechanism. At moments he thought that he was like 
some piece of machinery, a wheel ceaselessly turning with an 
eternal whirring music, or a steel rod rising and falling with the 
gloomy precision of inanimate things constructed for the uses of 
men. At moments he thought that he was like a mannikin, 
making gestures in obedience to a wire that was pulled far away 
by a ruthless hand. Sometimes he seemed to be nothing, not 
even a machine, or a doll imitating at the bidding of another the 
movements of that which is alive. 

But then, again, there were periods in which sensation and 
thought came back upon him with the flowing of a tide like the 
resistless tides of the sea. These periods were brought to him by 
the hands of Nature. When he left the City, he often walked alone 
into the unfashionable quarters of the town, and saw the fading of 
the day among houses whose occupants had no part or lot in the 
life of his order. He saw the sunsets of the autumn skies wake 
over the long streets of Hammersmith cloudy and red, sometimes 
pathetic, sometimes mysterious and foreboding, glories on whose 
garments clung shadowy hands, in whose bosoms lay the winds, 
and the rain, and the bleak wild nights of winter. He saw the 
leaves fluttering down in parks where the people think of country 
places that they will never see, and wonder wistfully why any 
birds twitter in London trees, why any green things turn gold, 
and fall upon its sad and dusky earth. He stood by artificial 
lakes, and watched the dull stillness of their evening sleep while 
the mists ran along their trim shores and hid the aquatic birds that 
pursued endlessly their apparently aimless occupations, making 
little journeys for no obvious purpose, searching for things that 
were invisible, staring at the grey and sombre atmosphere with 
their round and unconscious eyes, or paddling upon the water like 
creatures on a treadmill. And sometimes, when he was thus alone, 
he probed to the very depth of his sorrow, and wondered why he 




THE SLAVE 129 

had to bear it. At such times he saw it like a phantom rising out 
of the sunset above the tall houses where middle-class people lived, 
or moving restlessly across the sullen waters into the breathless 
mists, or pacing on the carpet of the faded leaves beneath trees 
that could no longer hide their nakedness. He saw it, and he 
spoke to it, and he went with it where it went, as we go with our 
sorrows drawn on despite ourselves. There were moments when 
it seemed to him that his sorrow wished to leave him, and that 
then he was compelled to pursue it, calling on it to stay, fearful of 
its departure, and obliged to be with it. He pursued it thus, and 
perceived that it was approaching a rim that seemed to him the 
rim of the world. And he imagined it falling over this rim out of 
his sight. Then he hastened and caught his sorrow, and they 
returned together through the night. For his sorrow was his fate, 
and we cannot let our fate go though we abhor it. When he was 
alone in these out-of-the-way places, he no longer schooled his 
face, and the people who met him and chanced to observe him 
could see that he was suffering, and could not doubt that he was 
sad. But, when he returned to his own quarter of the town, he 
resumed his calm and imperturbable mask, and he felt like a man 
stepping into prison. 

When Sir Reuben and Lady Caryll were established in Park 
Lane, Sir Reuben wrote to Aubrey asking him to come and see 
them. At the end of the note were these words : " Caryll is your 
godmother now, she says, and you must pay your respects to her." 

Aubrey tore this note up with violent hands. But afterwards 
he started for Park Lane. 

He expected to find alteration in Lady Caryll. Marriage does 
alter very strangely the expression of women's faces. Often these 
faces blossom. There is a flowering of happiness distinct as the 
flowering of spring in an orchard, or there is a flowering of passion. 
Sometimes the face becomes almost insolent with triumph when 
the nature of the woman is evil or cruel. Sometimes it is wistful 
and supremely tender. Then the heart is pulsing for the days 
that are to come, and training itself to receive a great message of 
anguish and of joy. But always marriage writes some new mean- 
ing, however subtle, on the face of a woman. What had it written 
on the face of Lady Caryll ? Aubrey wondered as he went. 

It was five o'clock in the afternoon when he reached the house. 
The darkness was coming on. He entered the hall, and seemed to 
leave England on the doorstep behind him. It was warm here, 
and the warmth was faintly scented. The light was dim and 
evenly diffused; and Aubrey was aware of the sensation, once 
crudely expressed by Lady St. Ormyn, that in this great house 
there might be hidden places in which hidden and secluded lives 



130 THE SLAVE 

were being lived. He heard the tinkle of a fountain falling some- 
where at a distance. The footman drew aside a great curtain, 
embroidered with a huge design in red and gold, and showed him 
into a small and lofty chamber which was empty. 

" 1 will tell her Ladyship you are here, sir," he said. 

Aubrey looked round the room. He felt instinctively that it 
was Lady Caryll's boudoir. The walls were hung with green silk. 
Two or three pictures stood on easels. One represented a gaunt 
Arab shepherd playing on his pipe in a rocky nook of the rosy 
Libyan hills. It was the sunset hour, and the sky was radiant 
with the clear lemon colour so often seen in Egypt. The face of 
the shepherd was sad, and Aubrey thought there was even a sort 
of horror staring out of his wild and dark eyes, which were looking 
at Lady Caryll's boudoir. Another picture was of some veiled 
women at a well. Their faces were covered, but they too regarded 
this room with curiosity through the slits that served them as 
windows. Near the hearth, on which burned a wood fire, was a 
small ebony table. A number of watches lay upon it. They were 
set with various jewels. Diamonds sparkled upon the gold case of 
one. Another was enamelled and was spotted with turquoises. 
None of these watches were going. Green curtains were drawn 
before the tall windows. There was a grand piano, but it was 
shut, and Aubrey saw no music. The couches in this room were 
low and broad, with many cushions. There were no books lying 
about. In a large gilded cage two gigantic green parrots sat 
blinking their round and irritable eyes. They seemed to be dozing 
in the warmth and the silence. A beautifulty shaped lute leaned 
against the green walls in an angle. On the mantelpiece there 
was a large photograph of Sir Reuben standing in the garden of 
his Moorish villa. He was in native costume, and was smiling as 
men smile in photographs without any appearance of being really 
amused. Aubrey approached the fire and looked closely at the 
photograph. Certainly Sir Reuben was much more natural and 
effective in a djelebe than in a frock-coat. In this costume one 
realised that in England and in English dress he was really mas- 
querading as something that he was not and could never be. And 
this Oriental, with his sly eyes and his barbarous smile, was Lady 
Caryll's husband. She belonged to him, as possibly black slaves 
had belonged to him in those periods of his life which he had 
spent in distant countries. Had she changed already under his 
influence, in her intimacy with him ? Whither would he lead her, 
through what mysterious and abnormal phases, to what unforeseen 
and perhaps undesired end ? Aubrey was shaken with a wild 
passion of fear and of desire. He trembled and laid his hands 011 
the mantelpiece on either side of the photograph. And it seemed 




THE SLAVE 131 

to him just then that he had never before really understood that 
Lady Caryll was irrevocably gone from him, had never before 
understood the exact meaning of his loss. 

He heard a door open softly behind him. Lady Caryll came 
into the room. Aubrey did not turn until she stood beside him. 
He could not. When she was on the hearth he moved with an 
effort, half held out his hand, then paused, arrested by the brilliant 
happiness that shone out of her face, and seemed even to emanate 
visibly from her whole person. She was dressed in white, and 
wore round her throat a tight collar of magnificent pearls, all ot 
the same size but varying in colour. Some were milk-white, others 
were yellow, blue, green, and red. Her frosty yellow hair was 
dressed very simply but very perfectly, high on her small head. 
Her long grey eyes were sparkling with a radiance that was like 
the radiance of satisfied love. She held out her right hand. It 
was covered with magnificent rings. Aubrey drew in his breath. 
The glory of this almost insolent joy struck him. It was like a 
blow. He felt stunned by it and dazzled. There was violence 
and there was illumination in it, but no heat. It blinded. It did 
not warm. When he had recovered from the shock of her beauty 
and of her joy, he took her cold, white hand, and as he pressed it 
the rings upon her fingers came in contact with his. A shiver ran 
through him. The different shapes of those rings were strangely 
disagreeable to his sense of touch. 

"Come and sit down," she said. " Your godfather is in the 
City, I believe, but he will be back almost directly.'' 

She sat down on one of the low couches just under the high 
golden cage in which the parrots were dozing on their perch, and 
the wild, black eyes of the Egyptian shepherd in the picture 
seemed to stare upon her with horror, and the shrouded women at 
the well seemed to watch her, too, through the round eyeholes of 
their veils. So Aubrey thought as he sat beside her. He looked 
at the coloured pearls round her throat, and he remembered her 
pose before the diamond-shop in Bond Street, seeing her for a 
moment as a figure in a long dead dream. Then the necessity 01 
speech came upon him. 

" You are happy," he said bluntly, moved to express his sense 
of her almost terrible radiance. 

She smiled, and the smile was her answer. 

" And you have become a worker, Mr. Herrick," she said 
"Do you like it ?" 

"No," Aubrey answered. "I think the City is horrible. Hut I 
must do something." 

As he spoke, he was wondering whether she remembered how 
he had talked of work in Lady St. Ormyn's garden. Then he 



132 THE SLAVE 

meant to labour for her, and he felt that, under certain circum- 
stances, even the City might be a joy. 

"The City is a necessity of many men's existence, I believe," 
Lady Caryll said, "as the nursery is a necessity of many women's 
women I don't understand." 

She touched the pearls at her throat. 

"I think Sir Reuben loves the City," she added. 

" I suppose he must," Aubrey said, " or why should he go 
there now ? '' 

" Oh, do you believe that any man ever feels that he has made 
enough money while he has the power of making more f " she 
asked him. 

"You think our sex is born insatiable?" 

" I believe most people of both sexes are. That's why life 
continues to be interesting." 

" And continues to be sad." 

He spoke the words instinctively, but almost as he spoke them 
the absurdity of addressing them to her struck him forcibly, and 
he resolved to make an effort to throw himself into the joy of this 
girl whom he loved. He would live in her, if only for a moment. 
He looked into her white and radiant face. 

" But not sad to you/' he said. " How happy Sir Reuben must 
be to be able to make you so happy." 

And, in speaking the words, he saw Sir Reuben surrounded by 
a sort of supernatural glory, such as attends men gifted with 
supreme and beautiful powers. 

"Sir Reuben !" she said. "Oh yes." 

She paused for a moment, and then she added 

" Sir Reuben understands me." 

As she spoke she looked at Aubrey, and with the fingers of her 
left hand she softly touched the rings on the fingers of her right 
hand. Her brilliant eyes became more thoughtful than usual, and 
Aubrey found again in her something of the mystery that had 
oppressed him in Lady St. Ormyn's garden, some suggestion of 
strange and hidden depths that no man had fathomed. Far away 
down in these depths he felt that her soul, her real self, was still 
hidden, waiting for what ? For the voice that was appointed to 
call it upward to life, as the prince called the mermaid from the 
shadows of the sea. 

"And you?" he said, gazing at her with a sort of awe in his 
young eyes. " Do you understand yourself." 

" At least to the extent of knowing when I am understood," 
she answered. " I always thought Sir Reuben was clever, but it is 
only lately that I have realised how clever he is." 

As she spoke her husband came slowly into the room. During 



THE SLAVE 133 

his journey to London he had caught cold, and his face had the 
blunted appearance that a cold imparts to many people. His 
usually keen black eyes were dulled and watery, and he looked less 
intelligent than usual, and consequently older. He greeted Aubrey 
affectionately and kissed his wife ; she gave him her cheek to kiss. 
Then he sat down close to the fire and made a cruel remark upon 
the climate of London. 

" It kills me after my long sojourn in the sun," he added. 
" Well, Aubrey, so you have gone into the City ? " 

" Yes." 

" Do you like it ? " 

" I can't say I do." 

" It's an ugly mine, but one can dig up jewels in it." 

And he looked at his wife's hands and at her throat. 

" Hardly as secretary to a company," Aubrey said. 

" You must get something better," Lady Caryll said. 

" Yes, we must see what we can do," rejoined Sir Reuben. 
" My godson 

" Oh, it's a good enough berth, thanks," Aubrey said quickly. 

He felt himself stiffening with proud reserve as he looked at 
this beautiful girl and at the old, grave man with a cold who had 
been able, strangely, to make her so beautiful. For the change 
wrought by marriage in Lady Caryll was exquisite. It began to 
thrill through him with a strange power as he grew more intimate 
with it. And from this moment he sought, with the determination 
to find it, the hidden and remarkable quality in his godfather which 
alone could have had such a subtle influence, an influence akin to 
that of a soft rain upon a flower or of a gleam of sudden light upon 
a jewel. 

" What company is it ? " said Sir Reuben. 

Aubrey told him with a reluctant voice. Sir Reuben pursed 
his lips and said nothing; then he took out his handkerchief and 
blew his nose sonorously. Tea was brought in by the Arab ser- 
vant whom Aubrey had seen on his first visit to Park Lane, and 
almost immediately after it Lady St. Ormyn arrived. She was 
dressed in scarlet and furs, and carried a muff about two sizes 
larger than any muff ever seen in London before. As she entered 
rapidly she exclaimed 

" I feel just as if I were coming into a harem. Oh, you here, 
Mr. Herrick ! And how is the sultan?" 

She spoke to Sir Reuben, but did not wait for an answer. 

" Caryll ! Good heavens ! are those pearls round your neck ? 
Yes ! How superb ! Red pearls ! How long have you had 
them ?" 

" Since yesterday." 



134 THE SLAVE 

" Do take them off and let me see them." 

" They look better when they are being worn," her daughter 
answered. And there was a sound of inflexible obstinacy in her 
voice. She drew back from her mother, who was extending an 
eager hand towards her throat. 

Sir Reuben coughed harshly. His cold was really very bad. 
Aubrey tried not to realise how extremely ugly the cough of an 
old man is. 

" Well, Caryll, you are very selfish about your jewels, I'm sure," 
said Lady St. Ormyn pettishly. " Really one would think you 
were jealous of them, as other women are jealous of their 
lovers." 

" Pearls look their best when they are being worn," her daughter 
repeated. 

She began to pour out some tea. Ladv St. Ormyn's round and 
staring eyes were now fixed upon her daughter's rings. Aubrey 
saw that she was on the point of speaking about them, and he was 
suddenly moved to interrupt her. He felt that her remark would 
be disagreeable to Lady Caryll. 

" Did you go to Bayreuth this summer ? " he asked. 

For the next twenty minutes Lady St. Ormyn talked Wagner 
with all the volubility of a mill-stream. Some more people dropped 
in, and the eyes of the women present seemed totally unable to 
leave Lady Caryll's throat. They were hypnotised by the circle of 
perfectly matched coloured pearls. More than once Aubrey found 
himself absurdly thinking that the horror deepened in the watch- 
ing eyes of the sad shepherd in the picture, who, from the loneli- 
ness of his rocky fastness, joined his gaze to that of these smart 
and chattering London women. 

Presently Lady St. Ormyn mentioned Monsieur Anneau. 

" I've just heard such an extraordinary thing," she said. 
" Monsieur Anneau has thrown up his American engagement and 
returned to Paris. The New York management is furious." 

"What is his reason ?" Sir Reuben asked. 

"Nobody knows. I've wired to him five times without getting 
an answer. And this afternoon I've been with Ritz, the agent, 
trying to persuade him to engage Monsieur Anneau for some song 
recitals this winter here. Before Christmas, of course, because I 
shall go to the Riviera in January." 

"And what does Ritz say?" said Sir Reuben. 

" Oh, he'll do anything I want." 

The other women present eagerly exclaimed that they would 
take seats, that they would go anywhere, do anything for Monsieur 
Anneau. Only Lady Caryll seemed totally indifferent about the 
matter. Yet she had received that morning a letter from Paris, 



THE SLAVE 135 

in which the great singer explained very frankly the reason of his 
return to Europe. 

" I find now that I can only sing well when I am near to you," 
he wrote. "Will you not let me come to England and give a 
concert in your beautiful house ? " 

When she had read this letter, Lady Caryll had touched the 
pearls at her throat and had given the letter to her husband. 
Sir Reuben read it slowly and smiled at his wife as King Shahrizar 
may have smiled on Shahrazad when her story pleased him. 

" Let him give his concert here if you like, Caryll," he said. 

"Very well," she replied, in her cool young voice that sounded 
so indifferent. " But I think there are too many draperies and 
hangings. They muffle the voice." 

" I will have a music-room made if you wish it," he answered. 

And in the afternoon, as he was returning from the City, he 
stopped at a famous shop in Bond Street and bought a marvellous 
amethyst comb. 

Aubrey watched the eager light in the other women's faces as 
they talked of Monsieur Anneau, and remembered what Diamond, 
the humble little dancer, had said about him. She would shun 
him for the same reason that drew these society women to him. 
That was curious and traced a grim line between two worlds. 
I/idy Caryll seemed to be in neither of them. In what world then 
was she ? Still in the world of jewelled dreams in which Aubrey 
had set her before her marriage ? He looked at the radiant happi- 
ness sparkling in her eyes. That surely was too definite to be a 
happiness of dreams. Sir Reuben coughed again, trying to stifle 
his complaint, and failing. He came over and sat down by Aubrey, 
and Aubrey noticed that there was an expression as of pity in his 
eyes heavy with the cold that oppressed him. Aubrey felt in- 
clined to shrink away from this expression, but when his god- 
father spoke his sensitive reserve was reassured. For Sir Reuben 
said 

" My boy, this berth of yours in the City is fairly good, but it 
can never lead to anything." 

Aubrey understood the compassion of a great business man for 
his very humble appointment, and did not much mind it. 

" It is better than nothing, Sir Reuben," he said. 

" You really mean to work now ? " 

" Yes, I cannot be idle any longer." 

Sir Reuben was looking at him with a sort of watchful curiosity. 
He continued 

" I have got tired of the life of a lounger. It never really 
suited me." 

" No ! You are worth more than that," 



136 THE SLAVE 

He was silent for a moment, still looking at Aubrey. At last 
he said 

"You are my godson. If you choose to work, I shall find you 
something to do that is worth doing." 

Aubrey felt himself grow hot and red. 

" Oh, I'm getting on all right," he said, almost with brutality. 
" Thank you, Sir Reuben, very much," he added uneasily. 

"Why are you so proud, Aubrey ? Why should you hate my 
helping you to a career ? " 

"Thank you, Sir Reuben," the boy said again. "But I like 
my present work. I've got accustomed to it." 

Sir Reuben said no more. He deferred the expiation which he 
was, nevertheless, determined to offer as a solace to his busy con- 
science. He understood Aubrey's desire to avoid receiving a gift 
from the hand that had struck him a cruel blow. But generosity 
which, oftener than most men think, springs from self-love 
was determined eventually to have its way in Sir Reuben's nature. 
When he bade Aubrey good-bye that night he said to himself 

" I have hurt you in the soul. I will heal you in the body." 

He had been brought up as a Christian. But whenever he 
thought of paradise, he thought of a paradise of the senses. Many 
very good Christians do the same secretly, dreaming of an ever- 
perfect cuisine, eternally fine weather, and natural surroundings as 
delicious as those in the Garden of Eden. 

When all his visitors were gone, Sir Reuben told his wife that 
he had purchased for her a wonderful amethyst comb. 

She gave him her lips to kiss. 

Then he spoke of Aubrey and of his position in the City. 

" I shall do something for him," he said. " He might be very 
useful to me in my affairs. One could trust Aubrey implicitly." 

" Of course," she answered a little abstractedly. 

She was standing by the fireside, and the light played on her 
beautiful hair. Her eyes were fixed eagerly on her husband. 

"What is it, Caryll ?" he said, with a sort of grotesque passion, 
coming towards her, drawn by the spell of her loveliness. " What 
is it ?" 

He put his arm round her waist. 

"Will the amethysts be sent home to-night?" she said. 

He laughed, and answered her. He was in England. He 
was surrounded by civilisation. But he had his slave. And that 
pleased him. 



CHAPTER XIII 

AUBREY had seen Diamond twice since their first meeting on the 
night of his tragedy. Once he had met her by accident in the 
street ; once he had waited for her outside the stage-door and 
walked with her as far as Milk Court. He had found her un- 
altered, simple, sentimental, and childlike, despite her evidently 
full knowledge of certain sides of life, and her continued acquaint- 
ance with the rather unrefined existence of the " ballet ladies " of 
a great variety theatre. In those three meetings a strong feeling 
of friendship had sprung up between these two members of two 
far different societies. It was uncomplicated by any thought of 
evil. Diamond spoke to Aubrey, as at first, with the frankness of 
a child. He listened to her with a full and untainted sympathy 
rather rare in a young man. Her entire lack of reserve fell upon 
his reserved nature like a refreshing rain, and caused certain buds 
folded hitherto to expand their petals, and to blossom quietly 
and confidently. Already Aubrey had begun to think of Diamond 
as men think of the one woman to whom they could tell their 
troubles trustfully. Yet he had never confided in her. He had 
only received her full confidence. That was enough. As he 
listened to the details of her very real though very ordinary 
trouble, he had the sensation that he was telling his, and he 
seemed to escape from his prison when he saw the open door of 
hers. After he left Park Lane, stunned and confused by the 
happiness of Lady Caryll, companioned by the vision of the jewels 
round her throat and on her hands, drugged by the curious and 
brilliant atmosphere of the house that was now her home, he felt 
the need of the wide simplicity of an uncomplicated nature. He 
could not understand Lady Caryll. To-day he had felt absolutely 
that there was a mystery hidden in her nature, which formerly he 
had thought he understood. And his sense of this mystery drove 
his love on to a more remote turning of the maze in which he was 
caught. A profound curiosity was added to his passion, and seemed 
to become one with it, and to touch it with a fierceness foreign to 
it before. And this mystery, shrouded somewhere in Lady Caryll, 
was not the mystery which lurks in all women. It was peculiar, 
and even, perhaps, not natural to her sex. Aubrey was dimly 

137 



138 THE SLAVE 

aware of that. Had Sir Reuben divined it, and so gained his 
power to win her ? But he had thought of her so cynically. Did 
he think of her cynically now. Aubrey's curiosity, his love that 
must be eternally repressed, fatigued him. He felt as if he 
walked in chains, and as if they were made of coloured pearls. 
But each pearl was heavy as a lump of iron. He wanted to rest, 
and he thought of Diamond, resolving to wait for her that night 
outside the theatre. When he reached his rooms, a note lay on 
his table. The envelope was light-mauve in colour, and looked 
very cheap. The address was written in a large, unformed hand. 
Aubrey wondered who his correspondent could be. He opened 
the note, and found that it was from Diamond : 

" DEAR MR. HERRICK, It is my birthday to-day. I am going 
to keep it after the show, and Dad has let me invite Mr. King. 
Would you care to come ? I have told Dad you are a friend, 
and that I've met you at the theatre. He's not angry. I did not 
tell him just how we met, and he says to me to ask you, too, if I 
like. But p'raps you will not want to come. I will look for you 
at the stage-door, but I daresay you will not be there. Yours 
faithfully, Di MANNERS." 

That night Aubrey was at the stage-door when the ballet-girls 
came out, chattering shrilly, and laughing as they buttoned their 
jackets and hastily pulled on their gloves. In his hand he held 
a small parcel wrapped in white paper and tied with pink twine. 
Diamond had -dressed more quickly than usual, and he had not 
long to wait before he saw her crossing the road from the narrow 
doorway, beyond which the gas flared. She had on a white hat, 
with white poppies dancing on it, and white kid gloves, and she 
smiled with pleasure when she saw him. 

"Oh, are you comin' to supper?" she said, "or have you only 
come to say as you can't ? It's only us, and Mr. King, and Vauxhall, 
and Alf. Dad's not a bit angry, because I said how quiet and 
respectable you were. He won't have any one rowdy round at our 
house. He's that particular. Are you comin' ? " 

" Yes, and many happy returns of the day," Aubrey said. 

As they turned to walk away, he put the white packet into 
Diamond's hand. 

"Whatever's this?" she said. Then she looked at him re- 
proachfully. 

"Now I didn't mean you to do anything like that," she said. 
"You are naughty." 

She stopped under a lamp, and untied the twine. Her face 
was eager, but not greedy. When she saw the little gold bangle 






THE SLAVE 139 

curved in the velvet furrow of the red jewel box, she uttered a cry 
of surprise and pleasure. 

" Oh, how pretty ! But you oughtn't to." 

Aubrey fastened it on her wrist over her white glove. Hanging 
from the bangle was the letter D in tiny pearls. 

" There ! " he said. " Now come along, or that policeman will 
move us on." 

"It is lovely," Diamond reiterated. Her face had become 
quite red with delight. " It's ever so much prettier than the one 
Vauxhall gave Lill when they got married," she continued. "You 
are kind. But I never meant 

" I know," Aubrey said quietly. " What did you say to your 
father about me ? " 

"Only that I'd met y u ft t the theatre, and that you were so 
quiet, and that I should like you to be at my birthday. Dad says, 
'Then ask him, child, if he ain't too much of a nob to come.' So 
I did. But I never thought you'd come." 
" Why not ? " 

"Oh, I don't know. Gentlemen don't care for everything, 
do they ? Why, lots of 'em don't so much as give us a hand when 
we go round in the wheel. And we do look nice then. The 
young gentlemen in especial don't seem to like anything much, 
not when they're together. When they're alone it's different. I 
believe they're afraid of one another thinkin' they're enjoyin' 
themselves, I mean." 

"That's it," Aubrey said, smiling at her shrewdness, which was 
as childish as everything else about her. 

They reached Milk Court. Aubrey felt moved by a strange 
sense of expectation, which he had seldom known before a state 
ball or any great society function. Just as they got to the door 
of Diamond's abode she said 

"Oh, our name's Slagg, not Manners. I took Manners for 
dancin'. See ? " 

"Yes, thanks." 

She opened the door with a latch-key, and, as she did so, Aubrey 
heard the sound of many voices, all talking very loud, and the 
running patter of wild feet. 

"The children are awful excited to-night," Diamond said, as if 
in explanation. "Susie's half mad. Come in, will you?" 

Aubrey followed her into a narrow passage. 

" Put your hat here. I'll take your coat." 

Just then a little girl, whose curly dark hair was tied up with 
a red riband, ran shrieking out of an adjoining room. 

" Di ! Di ! it's all ready, and Vauxhall says " 

She caught sight of the stranger, and subsided with the 



140 THE SLAVE 

abruptness of one seized by paralysis, putting one finger in her 
mouth and drooping her head, while her face became a meeting- 
place of blushes. 

" Here, Susie, speak to Mr. Herrick. Now, don't be silly. 
Say ' how dee do ? ' ' 

" How dee do ?" whispered the child, drawing in her breath as 
she spoke, and drooping her head still lower. 

"How are you?" responded Aubrey, taking her little flabby 
hand. " Now, you mustn't be afraid of me, will you ? " 

Susie stared with enormous round eyes. 

" Say ' no,' Susie," said her sister. 

" No," whispered the little thing, with the manner of one 
making a great concession from the motive of terror. 

" She's shy with strangers," explained Diamond, " but she's 
awful noisy when once she knows you. Dad, here's Mr. Herrick." 

They had entered a good-sized room, new, but furnished in a 
rather old-fashioned way. The floor was spread with oil-cloth. 
There was a table laid for supper. On it stood a large sugared cake 
with an immense " Di " in red sugar letters. The chairs were of 
solid wood with seats of black horsehair, and near the fire there was 
a broad settle witli a high back covered with cherry coloured and 
white chintz. The only occupant of this settle was an exceedingly 
small china doll with a round head and coal-black eyes. It was 
dressed in yellow muslin. Its legs were extended. Its arms were 
stuck out in a gesture of surprise or alarm, and it appeared to be 
lost in the sad reverie of one abandoned by the world in desolate 
places. Upon the walls of the room hung two or three oleographs ; 
one displayed several bright yellow chickens examining, with an 
air of meek astonishment, the broken shells from which they had 
recently emerged. Another was a Swiss valley, bounded by chalk- 
white mountains and intersected by a bright purple stream, beside 
which stood a lady tourist in a poke bonnet, a pelerine, and elastic- 
sided boots, with a small hairy dog, designed in a barking attitude. 
On the mantelpiece, painted the colour of the yoke of an egg, 
stood several photographs of a theatrical nature, and a red-glass 
vase containing a bouquet of chrysanthemums. On the hearth 
was a black cat. This room contained a number of people, from 
which, on Aubrey's entrance, a burly man of middle height, with 
a dark moustache and bright humorous eyes, detached himself. 
This was Mr. Slagg, who had "stood up" to Lady St. Ormyn. 
He was dressed in a black morning-coat with short tails, brown 
trousers, and a red tie. 

" Your servant, sir," he said, in a strong bass voice to Aubrey as 
he came forward. " Proud to see you, sir. Any friend of Di's is 
welcome here." 



THE SLAVE 141 

And he held out his hand, with unembarrassed and straight- 
forward cordiality. Then he turned and kissed his daughter. 

" Mr. Henick," she said, "this is iny sister Lill." 

A tall girl, very like Di but less simple in appearance, came 
forward and shook hands with a smile. 

"And this," continued Diamond, "is Vauxhall and Alf, and 
Jenny and Bob." 

All those presented came forward in turn to shake hands. Alf, 
in returning to his place, cut an attenuated caper, which was met 
by a cuff from his brother, and the remark, " It ain't your ' turn,' 
so leave it, Alf." 

Alf left it with the grin of the incorrigible. 

"Where's Ma?" continued Diamond. 

" In the kitchen. So's Charley. And Mr. King hasn't yet 
arrived," replied Lill, who spoke with a certain slight air of 
superiority, having travelled on the Continent with the " Mar- 
vellous Flicks" since her marriage with Vauxhall. 

"Won't you come to the fire, sir?" said Mr. Slagg to Aubrey. 
" Bob, make room for the gentleman." 

Bob was the elder boy, a serious lad who was devoted to 
machinery and understood it. His family was proud of him, and 
he talked much of steel and electricity in the home circle, a fact 
which gave him a certain authority. He made room with quiet 
alacrity, while Susie, still in awe, proceeded to join the china doll 
on the settle. Aubrey, who felt slightly embarrassed, made two 
or three remarks about the weather, to which Mr. Slagg responded 
with great heartiness and an air of having considered the question 
from all imaginable points of view. 

" It's a funny thing is the weather/' was his eventual con- 
clusion, "a very funny thing." 

" That it is," said Vauxhall, a young man of about twenty-five, 
who held himself acrobatically, and looked daring but modest. 
"That it is. And it's just the same on the Continong. Ain't 
it, Lill?" 

" So it is, Vaux," she replied. " Have you been in France, sir ? " 
she added to Aubrey, while Mr. Slagg looked at her proudly, almost 
self-conscious at having a child so obviously cosmopolitan. 

" Yes, often," said Aubrey. " Your sister tells me that you 
have travelled a great deal." 

" Oh, we go everywhere pretty well, don't we, Vaux ? " 

"Yes, sir. Russia, Austria, Paris, Buda-Pesth, Berling. We 
haven't performed in Turkey, but them Turks is such a dirty lot." 

"Oli, them Turks, tlu-m naughty, bad Turks, 
\\ liy don't they try to be good, be good ? 
\Vliy don't they 



142 THE SLAVE 

"Shut it, Alf! or I'll " 

The singing voice died abruptly away, while Mr. Slagg continued 
the discussion of the Turkish question with the remark 

" We English can't do with savage tricks, can we, sir ? " 

"No, indeed," said Aubrey, thinking of Mr. Slagg's episode 
with Lady St. Ormyn. 

At this point in politics a stoutish lady dressed in black silk 
came into the room with a rather gliding gait, followed by a little 
boy attired in a sailor suit. Behind her through the open door 
followed a smell of roast beef accompanied by a scent of cabbages. 

"Oh, Ma," cried Diamond, "this is Mr. Herrick, and just look 
what he's given me." 

And she exhibited the bangle, around which all the company 
gathered, while Aubrey felt more shy than he had ever felt before. 
Mrs. Slagg shook hands with Aubrey and said 

" Oh, sir, you spoil Di, you do indeed. Glad to see you here, 
sir." 

"Thank you very much. It's so good of you to ask me." 

" It's only a little birthday spread, sir, in honour of the day. 
Where's Mr. King?" 

" Not come yet," said Di, while Alf began to tickle Susie, who 
emitted a piercing cry of mingled joy and anguish. 

"Susie, you naughty there he is," said Mrs. Slagg, as a bell 
sounded. " Go to the door, Jenny." 

Jenny, who was a pretty girl of sixteen, in training at 
"Madame's" school for dancers, complied, and speedily returned 
with a small, horsey-looking man, who walked with his legs very 
wide apart, and fixed his pleasant blue eyes on Diamond with an 
eager look as he came forward. He carried a toothpick in his 
mouth and a large bunch of hothouse flowers in his hand. 

" For you, Miss Diamond," he said, presenting them to her, 
"and many happy returns." 

While she was thanking him and introducing him to Aubrey, 
Jenny and Bob brought in the supper, a huge joint of roast-beef, 
with Yorkshire pudding, potatoes, and cabbages, beer in jugs and 
lemonade in bottles with green glass-stoppers. At this point Susie 
began to be painfully excited, and, seizing the china doll from its 
desolation on the settle, bounded several times into the air, utter- 
ing piercing cries expressive of wonder and delight. 

" Now, Susie, Susie," said her mother. " Mr. Herrick, sir, will 
you sit here by me, and Mr. King on the left next to Di. Susie, 
put the doll down and go next your dad. You're not to eat too 
much. Charlie, don't you spill anything, now mind." 

They all sat down with much rustling and movement of chairs, 
Alf vaulting over the back of his chair, and alighting in a sitting 






THE SLAVE 143 

posture, with his knife and fork in each hand, and his mouth open 
as if to receive his food. 

"Alf, you're a demon," said Diamond, while Vauxhall leaned 
over and smacked the offender's head. Susie giggled wildly, and 
Charlie looked at Alt' with an expression of awful worship. To all 
children Alf was as a god. His complete aplomb and diabolic 
agility penetrated their souls like strange qualities of deity. After 
everybody had sat down there was a silence, in which Mr. Slagg 
took up his carving-knife and fork. All eyes were fixed upon him, 
and a certain embarrassment of expectation seemed to reign. 
Aubrey thought of the ordinary dinner-parties to which he went so 
often. He glanced at the lady tourist in the oleograph, and re- 
membered the watching shepherd in Lady Caryll's boudour. Then 
he looked at the faces round him; Mr. Slagg's rather grim with 
the effort of carving, Mr. King's red with adoration of Diamond, 
Diamond's a little sad, yet pleased with the festivity in her honour, 
Alf s solemnly mischievous, Lill's graciously cosmopolitan and edu- 
cated. The faces of the children were excited and attentively 
greedy. Vauxhall observed Mr. Slagg's proceedings with the 
carving-knife and fork rather as he observed his brother's acrobatic 
feats in theatres and circuses, his lithe body braced and one hand 
on his hip. Mrs. Slagg smiled vaguely in the way of hostesses, and 
pursed her lips as she noticed some brown gravy splash over the 
edge of the dish on to the white tablecloth. 

" Take care of the gravy, John," she said. 

"All right, Harriet," responded her husband. 

Susie burst out into a hysterical laugh, and somebody said 
" Hush." Mr. Slagg handed a plate to Bob, who, on account of 
his well-known sedateness of character, had been placed in charge 
of the Yorkshire pudding. 

" Mr. Herrick, sir," said Mrs. Slagg. 

And Aubrey found the plate in front of him. He began to 
protest but in vain. It was quite evident that he was to play the 
part of honoured guest. When all were helped, Mr. Slagg sighed 
heavily. 

" Carving's no joke," he remarked ; and he looked at Aubrey, 
on whom at once all eyes were turned with expectation. 

" Not for such a party as we are, Mr. Slagg," Aubrey replied. 

He wished to identify himself thoroughly with his very novel 
surroundings, but being very English, and so not very supple in 
nature, he found the task a difficult one. All the usual weapons 
of a young society man were blunted here. And he did not know 
how to be genially simple. When he was alone with Diamond he 
was quite at his ease. To-night, surrounded by her people, he felt 
intensely shy. He caught the solemnly observant eye of Alf, who 



144 THE SLAVE 

was bolting his food as men bolt food in plays, for the benefit of 
Susie arid Charlie. Alf winked, without moving any muscle of his 
countenance except the one necessary for the performance of this 
operation. 

"Just look at Alf!" choked Susie, caught in a vice between 
sense of humour and love of food. 

Her father patted her back and reproved her gently. Then he 
again addressed himself to Aubrey. 

" London's a fine town, sir," he remarked. 

" It is a very fine town," said Aubrey. 

"Not many like it; is there, Lill?" said Vauxhall. 

"Indeed no, Vaux," she replied. 

A silence again fell. Aubrey began to feel rather desperate. 

" You've seen many cities ? " he said to Lill. 

" Yes ; when we're not here we're always travelling. Alf, you 
bad boy, how dare you ! " 

Alf had poised a glass of beer upon two fingers, and was now 
engaged in drinking its contents after a novel fashion of his own 
invention, his lips being placed on its far instead of on its near 
rim, while the glass was gradually tilted forward towards the table 
until the last drop it contained disappeared down Alf's throat, 
which was turned sideways and looked like the wrung throat of 
a fowl. 

" He practised for a year, sir, to get that perfect," said Vauxhall 
with brotherly pride to Aubrey. 

" Did he indeed ? " said Aubrey. 

"Yes. It ain't so easy as it looks. That's often the way with 
our tricks ; ain't it, Lill ? " 

" So it is, Vaux," she replied. 

" It's the same dancin'," said Diamond. 

" Verily," added Mrs. Slagg, who had grown somewhat Scrip- 
tural in her retirement from the stage. 

"And in the light business," joined in her husband. "Susie, 
leave that fat ; it'll upset you." 

"Take it from her, John," said Mrs. Slagg. 

Mr. Slagg complied, and then continued 

" The public, sir, don't understand what they're looking at half 
their time. They ain't sufficiently eddicated. That's what it is. 
Why, I ask you, how many gentlemen is there that can tell you 
how to bring on a twilight real natural like ? " 

" Or how to do a full wheel without catching your feet, verily ? " 
said Mrs. Slagg. 

" Aye, or how to lie still and do the corpse act ? " said Vauxhall. 

"Oh, .they may talk," said Mr. Slagg, wiping his mouth pre- 
paratory to a draught of ale. " But I say as edclication ain't gone 



THE SLAVE 145 

on as much as some think. Why, would you believe it, sir, I've 
had a ladyship, a real ladyship, at me in the Opera to turn blue 
lights on the singers ! And when I says they'll look like a pack o' 
ghosts, she ups and says, ' It's done in Madigascar.' I tell you 
some of the ladyships are that ignorant you'd think they'd never 
been to Board School." 

' That was Lady St. Ormyn," said Diamond to Aubrey. 
' D'you know her, sir ? " asked Mr. Slagg. 
1 Yes, I've met her," Aubrey answered. 
' No offence meant, I'm sure, sir." 

' And none taken," said Aubrey, making an inspired effort to 
play up to his environment. 

" She's all for foreign ways, sir, that's how it is foreign ways 
and foreign mounseers. She says one day at rehearsal, she says, 
' Englishmen haven't no temperiment,' she says. ' P'raps not, my 
lady,' says Mr. Wilson, him as does the opera business, you know, 
sir, ' but they've got devils of tempers,' he says, 'and it's temper 
rules the world, not temperiment/ he says." 

" A wise saying, be sure," remarked Mrs. Slagg, helping her- 
self to cabbage, like an oracle. " There's a deal done through 
temper. My poor mother knew it well." 

" And made others know it too, Harriet," said her husband 
with genuine feeling. 

"She thought it her duty, John." 

"And made it her pleasure, Harriet, as is the way o' thin 
women," said Mr. Slagg, without bitterness. " I often thank the 
day when you began to put on flesh." 

Mrs. Slagg smiled good-humouredly. She turned in dignified 
fashion towards Aubrey. 

" Fat and fun go together, they do say, sir, don't they ? So, I 
daresay, my fat is all for the best." 

" Certainly," said Aubrey, divided between the polite feeling 
that he ought to deprecate the idea of Mrs. Slagg's being fat, and 
the knowledge that, by doing so, he might seem to deny her pos- 
session of fun. 

" Well, Ma, but Alf's awful thin," piped little Charlie at this 
juncture, "and lor', ain't he funny! Why, the boys in our court 
all 

"Little boys should be seen and not heard." 

His dad launched this quotation at Charlie, and the child lay 
low, devoting himself rosily to his gravy, and wondering when he 
would arrive at the majestic age at which it is permitted to 
humanity to address itself to the ear as well as to the eye. 

The thinness of Alf was now the subject of discussion, and 
was thrashed out in all its bearings, while that self-possessed 

K* 



146 THE SLAVE 

young acrobat continued to do what he named Food-tricks, with- 
out apparently being aware that a tempest of talk was raging 
around him. Mr. King, meanwhile, was speaking earnestly with 
Diamond. His sentiment for her was not concealed. But the 
Slagg family was evidently accustomed to it. Now and then 
Aubrey cast an eye upon his unreserve and marvelled at it. Mr. 
King leant his brick-red face towards Diamond, and fixed his 
small, honest blue eyes upon her with an intentness that did not 
confuse her the least. He was too deep in love to eat much, and 
only trifled with the beef and cabbage upon his plate. 

" Why, Mr. King, you ain't eating anything," said Lill pre- 
sently ; " where ever's your appetite ? " 

Mr. King grew redder, and murmured something hastily, while 
Alf went through a pantomime of a man losing, searching for, 
and eventually finding an appetite, the final scene being almost 
glaringly pictorial and realistic, and causing Mrs. Slagg, as a thrifty 
housewife, a certain amount of scarcely concealed alarm. A rather 
peculiar atmosphere seemed to enfold Alf, emanating from the 
double fact of his sustained abnormal silence, and of his sustained 
abnormal activity. He appeared as one dumb, yet was so con- 
tinally voluble with his body that he always seemed to be making 
a tremendous row. No speech could have been so deafening as 
his silence was, and his tricks constantly showed an inclination 
to perorate. At such divine moments Charlie and Susie were 
seized with a species of paralysis of adoration, and sat like heathen 
at an idol's feet, their supper in suspense and the vegetables fall- 
ing from their motionless forks. Even the elders, who affected to 
ignore the proceedings of Alf as things beneath the notice of 
educated wisdom, constantly interrupted their intercourse to turn 
their eyes upon his juggling with knives and forks, his supreme 
manipulation of plates and tumblers, his exquisite interpretation 
of a napkin's true relation to its ring, and his intricate knowledge 
of the possibilities of toothpicks when brought into connection 
with the human mouth. Vauxhall, more especially, was intent 
upon this long and brilliant soliloquy of the body, which evidently 
rendered him imaginative. His daring eyes glowed when Alf 
became supreme, but he made no comment upon his brother, and, 
at this point of the meal, no further proceedings were taken to 
check the full expression of a nature which was evidently regarded 
by all with a scarcely concealed reverence and joy. 

Apple-tart succeeded the beef, and, with the arrival of a second 
course, an added geniality prevailed about the long table. Mr. 
Slagg gave off so he himself expressed it a couple of anecdotes 
connected with lenses, and made a pun about the electric light, 
which was well received by every one. Mrs. Slagg, who was, it 



THE SLAVE 147 

seemed, a lady of a romantic turn of mind, became more flowery 
in speech, and spoke aside to Aubrey of certain tender experiences 
that had waited upon her early dancing life, expressing the remark- 
able opinion that, " after all, there was nothing like love for making 
a young girl think of serious things, verily, dancing or no dancing ; " 
and Bob, the elder boy, described with grave minuteness and an 
almost alarming command of strictly technical language, the un- 
seemly behaviour of a boiler which got out of order on board a ship 
named The Happy Despatch while cruising along the coasts of Java. 
Vauxhall, too, in the intervals of observing his brother's silent 
intercourse with spoons, forks, apple-pips, and squares of pastry, 
discoursed of back falls, double summersaults, the proper mode of 
standing on the head for lengthy periods, the art of flying leaps 
and of walking on the hands, the inward beauty of Catherine 
wheels of a superior kind, and the best methods of balancing heavy 
men upon the stomach with the head thrown back and the arms 
extended. Mr. King, forcibly detached from his secret conversa- 
tion with Diamond by the gay badinage of Mr. Slagg, described 
the efforts of a royal princess to ride barebacked under his super- 
vision, and Diamond gave a gentle, and obviously unexaggerated, 
account of her first solo dance at the Grand Theatre of Varieties in 
Champion Square. 

Aubrey was surprised to find how all this quite artless and 
sincere conversation interested him, although he was so often 
completely bored by the chatter of the set in which he generally 
moved. He found charm in the entire lack of all pretension, in the 
often complete and unaffected display of ignorance. When Bob 
spoke of machinery, all listened with a reverence which betokened 
frankly lack of knowledge of the subject; and when he ceased, the 
nods that ran round the circle, the expressive looks of pride in 
Bob, made clear a modesty and an anxiety to appreciate others 
that really warmed the heart of Aubrey ; for he was accustomed to 
the far different demeanour of those who strive to hide their 
ignorance by volubility, and to conquer the admiration they have 
not earned by bluster. 

He was surprised by the good manners of these people, and 
began to feel himself oddly at home in this long room with the 
oil-cloth floor and the cherry and white chintz-covered settle. 
Yet he felt that he had little to tell in return for the confidences 
of those around him, and, as he looked at Alf, now balancing a 
knife upright upon a spoon, and causing it, bv almost imperceptible 
movements of his hand, to take a short walk without losing its 
equilibrium, he was conscious of an odd impotence that was 
almost crushing. For those around him were workers. Their 
spheres of work were perhaps peculiar, but the point was that they 



148 THE SLAVE 

were really interested in their own labours and took a pride in 
them. Mr. Slagg, for instance, was a blazing enthusiast about 
everything connected, however remotely, with limelight and elec- 
tricity. He grew hot with excitement when he discussed the 
manipulation of sunsets or the tutoring of a rising dawn. He 
would have laid down his life in defence of his theory that, to give 
a moonlight night its proper effect, radiance should be conveyed 
from directly overhead as well as from high up at the sides of the 
scene. His deep bass voice vibrated with quick feeling as he 
talked, and it was difficult at moments to bring him to a sense of 
the duties appertaining to his position as dispenser of the apple- 
pie. Vauxhall was equally passionate about all feats of the body 
and all questions connected with muscular development. When 
speaking learnedly about the beautiful mechanism of the human 
frame, he perpetually appealed to his adoring wife for confirmation, 
and Lill's equally perpetual " So it is, Vaux," was alive with a 
simple fervour of wifely admiration that delighted Aubrey. He 
had been for so long accustomed to wedded contempts, whether 
genuine or offensively affected, in adherence to a feeble and despi- 
cable fashion. The atmosphere that floated around this supper- 
table was warm with good-will and bright with loyalty even in the 
pudding stage. With the arrival of oranges and nuts, and the 
reverent uncorking of a dusty bottle of elderly if not absolutely 
old port, it became almost tempestuous with high geniality. Mr. 
Slagg called loudly for a song, -and, after some pressing, Mrs. Slagg 
obliged with a high soprano rendering of " Gaily the Troubadour," 
which she gave seated and dexterously peeling an orange "all in 
one," so that the peel might afterwards be dropped on the floor, 
and consulted as the sign of a coming future. Then the little 
Charlie was set standing upon his chair to speak a piece. This was 
an elaborate business, not in respect of matter, for the piece was 
" Mary had a Little Lamb," but in respect of manner, since the 
little Charlie, overcome by a sudden and evidently very acute con- 
sciousness of the presence in the family bosom of an aristocratic 
stranger from the outer world, rose to tragic heights of emotion, 
which flushed his round face with purple, withdrew his habitually 
small voice to his boots, and obscured it there, and forced the tiny 
thumb of his right hand into the neighbourhood of his thorax. 
Nevertheless he won through somehow, supported by the inherent 
pluck of the Slaggs, and his final choke and infantine subsidence 
were welcomed with the applause due to heroism as remarkable as 
that commonly attributed to Casabianca and other youthful spectres 
of legend. 

Mary and her lamb ushered in the era of tobacco, when chairs 
were pushed back and legs were frankly stretched to their fullest 



THE SLAVE 149 

extent. Mr. Slagg and Vauxhall smoked pipes. Mr. King pre- 
ferred a cigar, and Aubrey lit a cigarette. Bob did not smoke, but 
Alf now neared the summit of his glory. When smoking was 
mentioned, he was juggling with a knife and fork, a plate, and an 
orange. He made no remark, but his small eyes twinkled as he 
let his properties rest, and gave Susie a nudge which caused the 
child to swallow her thimbleful of port the wrong way and to 
tremble on the verge of suffocation. 

"Alf," began Lill, "you'll choke the child. Upon my word, 
you " 

Her reproving voice died into silence, and an almost theatrical 
pause ensued, during which Alf proceeded to do a dozen amazing 
tricks connected with matches, cigarettes, and ash-trays. Throw- 
ing up a cigarette and catching it in his mouth, he spun a match- 
box sky high, and made it fall upon an up-turned match in such a 
manner as to ignite it. The match then mounted like a firefly 
into space, and, in dropping earthwards, mysteriously communi- 
cated its glow to Alf s cigarette, the smoke of which, inhaled by 
the young miracle-worker, after a portentously long interval, 
wherein the expectation of Susie mounted like apoplexy to her 
head and flushed her face with lively scarlet, issued in an abrupt 
cloud from the porch of his left ear. This finale was also the finale 
of Susie, who was taken with something very like convulsions of 
surprise, and had to be removed by Mrs. Slagg and conveyed 
gurgling to another chamber, there to be put to bed. The little 
Charlie was bade by his father to follow her example, and a com- 
parative calm ensued. Agility and surprise were followed by a 
gazing contemplation, during which the souls of men floated di'eam- 
like in a haze of smoke. 

Aubrey took this opportunity to have a little conversation 
with Diamond, who gently turned from the adoration of Mr. 
King. 

" Let's come to the settle," she said, indicating the place of the 
doll, which hud gone to bed with Susie. 

Mr. King began to discuss equine problems with Mr. Slagg, 
who was "a bit of a sport," to use his own words. Lill, Bob, and 
Vauxhall, chattered seriously together of acrobatic and mechanical 
mysteries. Diamond and Aubrey were left to themselves. 

"This isn't much of an evening for you, is it?" she said, and 
her big and pathetic eyes looked into his with inquiry. 

"It's a very happy evening forme," he answered, "and for 
you, Miss Diamond ? " 

She nodded her head towards the talking group of relatives. 
" I want them to think so," she said. " But 

The quick tears swam up in her eyes. 



150 THE SLAVE 

"He was here my last birthday," she continued. "And now 
oh, it does make a difference, don't it?" 

" It must. I understand that. But some day, don't you think, 
some day you'll be able to forget it?" 

" Oh no. I ain't a girl like that." 

She spoke with absolute certainty. 

" There's some made so as they can't never forget/' she added. 

"That's very hard for them/' Aubrey said. 

"Not many of 'em are men/' said Diamond. 

" You think not ? " 

" I'm sure not." 

"Why?" 

" Because he's forgotten, I know," she answered simply, unable 
to get away from her own little personal experience. 

" But men aren't all alike." 

" No. There's Mr. King now," she whispered. " Do you 
like him ? " 

"Yes." 

" He is kind. But it's no use. Oh, it is dreadful when I 
think of all the other birthdays I shall have and never him." 

She was silent for a minute, then she looked suddenly at 
Aubrey and said 

" You're happy, ain't you ? " 

" Not very." 

"Oh, what a pity ! But it it isn't anything it isn't like me 
over again ? " 

"Yes," he said, "it's something like that." 

"You'll have to forget." 

" But if I'm like you ? If I can't ? " 

She shifted restlessly, as one under a burden. 

" Perhaps we aren't meant to be happy, you and me," she said 
at length. " That's about it, I s'pose." 

" I suppose that's about it," echoed Aubrey. 

Suddenly he got up to go. A horrible sensation that he might lose 
his habitual self-control if he stayed had come upon him. Perhaps, 
in some dim way, Diamond realised this, for she did not try to keep 
him. But Mr. Slagg was loud in expressions of regret. Aubrey 
pleaded that he must be up early on the following morning, and, 
as he felt, with a certain shifty awkwardness, due to the uprising 
of fear within him, took his leave. He met Mrs. Slagg in the 
passage, and was cordially invited by her to call round again. 

It was raining in the empty street. Nobody was about. 
Beneath his umbrella Aubrey tried to fight with his stupid, fierce, 
unreasonable demon of Sorrow. The London night seemed 
swollen with black despair, as eyes are swollen with tears. The 



THE SLAFE 151 

rain grieved. It was the visible expression of some high, far-off 
and portentous tragedy that lay, perhaps, beyond the hidden stars. 

A light run of feet behind him startled Aubrey. He glanced 
round quickly, and saw Alf in coat and cap. Alf joined him with 
n nod, and walked forward at his side with a springing step. 

"Coming with me ?" said Aubrey. 

Alf nodded again. Apparently he did not want to talk. They 
went on in silence all the way to Jermyn Street. At his door 
Aubrey stopped. 

"Will you come up?" he said to Alf. 

" No, thank you, sir," said Alf. 

" Look at the number, and come to see me another day, then," 
Aubrey said. 

" Yes," said Alf. 

He cast a piercing glance at the number on the door, cut a 
curious caper in token of farewell, and was off down the street in 
the twinkling of an eye. 

Aubrey entered his rooms wondering why this little silent goblin 
of mysterious agilities had joined him. He found himself thinking 
that the boy was like some strange, scarcely tamed animal, full of 
odd impulses and droll whims. Diamond, and Alf, and himself 
three lives pulsing on ! Dark London enclosed them, as the 
tunnel encloses the life of a train. The train emerges presently 
into the light, Aubrey stood there on the wet doorstep when 
Alf was gone, and seemed to hear the roar of the train in the 
tunnel. But he could not think that it was rushing towards the 
light. 

Good Christians thought so his mother among them. But 
Aubrey was not a good Christian. He was one of the beings of 
to-day, who have to be restless in wondering, instead of being 
content, or at the least trustful, in believing. 

As he put the latchkey into his door, Lady Rangecliffe was on 
her knees in the big, bare house in Eaton Square, praying for him 
with a strength as of one who wrestles with an angel. She told 
those secrets of her son that he had never told her to God. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Two or three days later Aubrey received a letter from Sir Reuben 
asking him to give up his poor little position in the City and to 
become his godfather's confidential secretary. Sir Reuben laid 
great stress upon the fact of his requiring such a person, and 
upon the extraordinary difficulty of finding any man who could 
be absolutely trusted, intimately confided in. He added that 
Lady Caryll begged Aubrey to accept the position, and concluded 
by a proposition that astonished Aubrey completely. This pro- 
position was that, if he could see his way to accept the post, he 
should come to live with the Allabruths in Park Lane. In sug- 
gesting this change of life to his godson, Sir Reuben dwelt 
only upon the convenience such an arrangement would be to 
him. 

" I am not so young as I was," he wrote. "There will often be 
days when I shall not care to go to my office, and important letters 
may arrive at any moment which will require to be dealt with. I 
must have my secretary upon the spot. The house is very large, 
as you know. YOU will have your own rooms, and will be as much 
your own master as you are in Jermyn Street. If you do not 
accept the position, I shall have to look out for somebody else, 
with whom I shall make this arrangement. I may add in con- 
clusion, that Caryll is most anxious for you to accept this offer. 
She knows that my health is not always what it should be, and 
she wishes that my burthen should be lightened. You can lighten 
it more completely than any other man. I trust you will think it 
your duty to do so." 

Sir Reuben then stated the salary attaching to the post. It 
was a very generous one. The busy conscience had been at work. 
The possessor of Lady Caryll was very determined to heal in the 
body him who had been so deeply wounded in the soul. 

Aubrey's immediate and startled impulse was to refuse this 
offer, and the strength of this impulse was born of the strength 
of the desire within him to accept it. As he read the letter a hot 
passion of yearning flamed up in his heart, lit by the possibility 
of dwelling in that curious foreign London house with Caryll. 
What a transformation of life that would be, like a strange journey 

152 



THE SLAVE 153 

to some Eastern land, to some far-off' home of rich colour, of rich 
silence. London, that great and ebony tide of life and crime and 
breathless activities, ceased upon the doorstep of her house, as the 
flowing sea-tide, spent in its journey onward, ceases when the hour 
of return, fixed, immutable, strikes for the ignorant wave. Aubrey 
longed so cruelly to accept that his longing told him to refuse. 
He sat down at his table and wrote a letter to decline Sir Reuben's 
offer. He put it into an envelope, and threw the envelope into 
the fire. Then he wrote another letter, asking for a week to 
consider the offer, for which he warmly thanked his godfather. 
He sent it to Park Lane by a boy messenger and received a 
reply 

" By all means. Take a week on one condition at the end 
of it you must say ' Yes.' " 

Aubrey went into the City, succeeded in obtaining a week's 
holiday, had his bag packed, and left London in the evening, alone. 
In the tremendous moments of our lives we often have an over- 
mastering desire for complete solitude, perhaps because in the 
most tremendous moment of all we must be solitary. This invita- 
tion to a changed existence filled the heart and brain of Aubrey 
with feeling and thought that seemed to combine in flame. He 
felt that he must come to his decision alone and among silences. 
He went to the hills in Northern England, to a place that he 
knew as a child, that he had not seen for some years. This was 
a very narrow, very deserted valley, hidden at the feet of heights, 
barred in by obdurate grey and hoary crags. Midway in the valley 
stood a small inn, quite alone, by the side of a grey road set between 
grey walls of stone. A river crept behind it. Above, the sky was 
often cloudy. This valley was a place of clouds and of soft melancho- 
lies, where few passed by, where a man might flower and fade almost 
unnoticed. In the early morning Aubrey came to it through the 
cold air. The little inn was empty, its owner, once a shepherd, 
surprised, most cordially, to take the commands of a guest. Aubrey 
bivakfasted in the coffee-room, listening to the trickling river's 
cry, looking at the clouds that leaned, grey it seemed with weari- 
ness, upon the shoulders of the hills. 

Then he walked out, thinking that this place was an oasis of 
silence in the desert of the world's far-stretching uproar. 

Strangely fast fled his days in the valley. He wandered very 
far among the hills, and looked at winter from the heights. 
Scarcely knowing it, he asked all the stealthy influences around 
him to help him in his decision. How did they answer ? For 
surely they knew and listened. The indecision of Aubrey was 
not the ordinary indecision of the young man, in his case, desiring 
not to be wicked. He loved a woman, and she was wedded to 



154 THE SLAVE 

an old man, but he did not fear the proximity to her now pressed 
upon him as would have feared it many a man touched by personal 
vanity and uncertain of his hold upon the moralities. He could 
not be so insolent in his thought of Caryll as to suppose her 
wrongly drifting to his arms from those of her husband, or im- 
pelled from purity by a wholly vulgar intrusion of immoral possi- 
bility. She stood upon the peaks, white as the morning when 
it faces aloft the longing sky. 

What Aubrey feared was torture to himself in entering so 
intimately a life that he had longed to occupy completely. Yet 
she wished it. She was perfectly pure, he perfectly chivalrous. 
Youth in such hands is not a hammer plied for the breaking of 
commandments. Of the sordid danger feared ever by a world 
full to the throat of sordid imaginings, Aubrey had no thought. 
It was too far away, too impossible. But no man desires to suffer, 
more keenly than is necessary. Aubrey in his long walks debated the 
amount of pain, to be avoided or endured, that hung in the balance 
of his decision against or for, and midway through the week he 
thought he had made up his mind to refuse Sir Reuben's offer. 

Perhaps it was Nature herself who stepped in to twist his 
purpose. He never quite knew, though afterwards he asked him- 
self the question. For one day he walked forth without purpose, 
moving in the open air that he might think the better, and it was 
at the beginning of this walk that he believed he had come to the 
final resolve. As he stepped out on the narrow grey road, hard 
in a frost, and glanced over the grey stone wall at the grey hills 
frigidly towering towards the sky in which lay snow as in a net, 
he realised strongly the iron-grey bitterness of pain, and he 
thought that he had settled to refuse the changed life offered to 
him. So fully did he think this that he dismissed the subject 
which had recently possessed him. He thought no longer of him- 
self in connection with Caryll and her husband, but only of Caryll 
as he left the valley and mounted almost mechanically towards the 
heights. It was a mysterious afternoon, so deadly still that it pro- 
duced upon Aubrey's imagination the effect of a great grey beast 
crouched to spring. The repose seemed to be that precedent to 
intense and cruel activity, immobility of a winter's day waiting its 
opportunity to wound or kill. He fancied that if he mounted 
out of the valley he would escape from this disagreeable impres- 
sion which took fast hold upon him. But, strangely, it decidedly 
gained upon him as he proceeded. The beast now seemed 
crouched on the hill summits or in the lowering clouds. He stood 
and listened, as a man in a forest listens for the growl of the 
hidden creature whose near presence his instinct divines. But he 
heard nothing. Nature lay as one paralysed. He went on upward 



THE SLAVE 155 

When from time to time he turned to look back, he saw the valley, 
each time become more spectral than the last, as the faint mist 
shrouded yet one more detail from his eyes. Presently it was a 
grey blur. Then it was nothing. It ceased to exist for him. 
Only the heights had any meaning now, and they were full of 
mystery. He could not read them. Each hill was an enigma, 
intentionally, not unconsciously. Each grasped its secret with a 
portentous determination, a clear knowledge of all it meant or 
ever could mean. Aubrey felt that he trod in a cold world of 
secrets. The very stones, shifting like things alive beneath his 
feet, were stern with reticence. And the sky, leaking mist, was 
muffled in a bleak and almost perilous reserve. He was, indeed, 
quite alone, a wandering hermit in a world of secrets. The crescendo 
of an impression upon the mind is like the crescendo of a sound 
upon the ear. Each, to the mental vision, is a thing that climbs, 
as Fate climbs on its ladder. And since Aubrey was also actually 
climbing in the bodily sense, the crescendo was enormously accen- 
tuated for him. He felt as one who mounts to the top of things, 
and as if the noise of all the secrets of the world rose now to 
its highest and most piercing expression. Nature clamoured in 
his ears, " I am full of mystery." 

Presently he came- to the edge of the clouds, an edge so 
sharply defined upon the hill that he lifted his hand to feel it. 
His hand melted into the grey mantle, and he followed his hand 
into it. He was lost in the trackless waste of the sky, though his 
feet still trod the earth. Now he saw nothing except the wet 
grass, the wet stones immediately around and beneath him, and 
he breathed dampness and cold secrecy. He knew not why he 
still went onward. But he felt expectant, as if on some hidden 
summit he was going to meet a great personality. He lost the 
sense of time, the sense of fatigue. He walked eagerly, and the 
murmur of mystery rustled all about him, rousing a vital curiosity. 
Far off he heard the voice of a stream descending to the valley 
submerged in the clouds. It went in haste to tell the hollow its 
tale of the spirit of the summits. At last, looking upward, he saw 
the height curve and cease. He stood among rocks. He had 
gained the top of the hill. Resting against a boulder, he waited. 
He felt that he had something to wait for ; and now that he had 
ceased from bodily activity he began to think, not vaguely of the 
vague mysteries of Nature, crowding here like shadowy figures in 
some gaunt circus lit by tragic fires, but clearly of the mystery 
of Caryll. He saw her standing with the coloured pearls about 
her throat, her eyes glittering with a strange joy. He felt again, 
and more acutely than ever before, the profound curiosity which 
had seized him when first he saw her in her new home. This 



156 THE SLAVE 

profound curiosity had indeed become one with his passion for 
her, and touched it with a new fierceness. And now he knew 
that all the time he had been mounting the hill so eagerly, he had 
been, almost unconsciously, dreaming of the activity of investiga- 
tion which must lead him at last to understand the exact meaning 
of the soul of the woman he loved and had lost. Our thoughts 
often direct our limbs without our knowing it, drive them as a 
man drives horses. And when we cannot grasp the substance by 
doing that which we desire mentally, we often grasp the shadow 
by a grotesque bodily travesty of the soul-action we have to forego. 
So Aubrey's mind had led his body to the home of the mysteries 
of the hills. 

He did not go wholly unrewarded. For while he stood on the 
summit the mist stirred under some prompting of Nature, crawled 
up and aside, broke, dispersed, was shattered into drifting frag- 
ments. Through many a rent Aubrey saw vague and far-off views, 
grey pictures of wild scenery. A jagged tooth of rock pierced 
through a cloud, a distant hill wandered into sight and stayed. 
And still the mist continued to disperse, shrugging itself together 
and shifting uneasily like an anxious creature stealthy in its de- 
parting. The country disclosed itself, cold and full of a wan and 
wintry pathos. Below lay a sheet of steel at the foot of an iron 
precipice. And then a curious and romantic greyness appeared, 
lying along the darker edge of the world. Aubrey knew this was 
the sea, and his pulses quickened, as they always did when he saw 
the sea far off. He could not discern its movement, but he divined 
the restlessness of its wave, the restlessness of its voice, the sway 
of its uncouth desire and half-strangled despair. And beyond 
and above it glowed a penetrating orange light light of the 
sunset struggling in the hands of Winter, like a live thing being 
sti-angled by one who has caught it, and calling, in its dumb way, 
by a frantic and dumb manifestation, on notice and on help. 

That light was like the cry of a voice, magnificent with appre- 
hension and coming up out of the heart of things. Aubrey listened 
to it. And again he thought of Caryll. Was not her soul, per- 
haps, struggling like that sunset in the hands of Winter ? Can any 
human being be happy with a secret that no one knows ? The 
light faded and he turned to go. As he went down the hill he 
knew that he would accept his godfather's offer. The mysteries of 
the hills pushed him towards the mystery of a woman. He must 
learn the meaning of her joy ; he must go through the mist until, 
gaining the summit, he caught at last a glimpse of the light in 
the sky, and heard the cry of the inner voice that is the only 
voice worth hearing. 



CHAPTER XV 

WHEN Lady Rangecliffe heard from Aubrey of his new decision 
and new plan of life, she was exceedingly upset, and, acting with 
her usual abruptness, she wired to Sir Reuben asking him to call 
upon her. He came promptly, and found her looking violently 
uncomfortable. 

" Sir Reuben," she said quickly, " look here ! Aubrey can't 
possibly go to live with you and Lady Caryll." 

" Why not ? " he asked, with a smiling serenity. " Do you 
think the world will talk ? " 

Lady Rangecliffe jerked her head upwards. 

" I'm not thinking about the world, but about my boy. It's 
not right for him to do this. I know that." 

" It is to his advantage." 

"Oh, Sir Reuben," she said. "Aubrey loves your wife, we 
both know it. How can he live with you ? How can he ? " 

Lady Rangecliffe did not understand what subtlety meant. 
Had she felt it to be her duty to commit a crime, she would 
probably have committed it in Piccadilly Circus at three o'clock 
in the afternoon. But her terribly true statement did not confuse 
her visitor. 

"Aubrey is my godson and a gentleman," Sir Reuben said. 
" If he accepts my offer " 

" Why on earth did you make it ? " 

Lady Rangecliffe pushed forward her face till she almost 
touched Sir Reuben's, and stared at him with a directness well- 
nigh inhuman. 

" Because I wished to have an assistant in my affairs whom " 

" No, Sir Reuben, no. I never thought you'd tell me a lie." 

She looked much distressed, and walked about the room, which 
was littered with work for a bazaar, and had a confusingly calico 
appearance. 

"Because I wished to make Aubrey happier than he is now." 

Lady Rangecliffe turned, rather like a grenadier, and came up 
to him again. After a silent scrutiny of his lined face she said 

" Yes, that's your reason. But this can't make him happy, and 
it's wrong." 

157 



158 THE SLAVE 

" Aubrey is to be trusted ; he loves honour." 

" Yes, but " 

"Caryll is to be trusted ; she loves an emerald." 

Lady Rangecliffe moved a step backward as if physically 
repelled. 

" You can speak of her like that now ? " 

"Why not? Do you not love the truth? This is the truth 
then. My wife is not quite like other women of this London, of this 
epoch. She was born to live in a harem, petted as an animal is 
petted, adorned with jewels as a sultan's favourite is adorned. 
Such a life would have satisfied her nature. Her soul shines like 
a jewel and is as hard. Human sorrow will never touch her, for 
she cares for nobody. Ordinary pride will never uplift her, for 
I believe that social position, that great traditions, are as dust in 
her eyes. But she must have a life that glitters with jewels or she 
would die or become as nothing. There are certain foods, Lady 
Rangecliffe, that give certain powers to men. Well, my wife, to 
reach her highest and most complete development, must be fed 
upon a diet of precious stones, not quite in Cleopatra's way, 
though. You realise, or perhaps, being so splendidly human as 
you are, you don't realise, that a certain class of women has 
breathed through so long a chain of years a foetid atmosphere of 
unintellectual selfishness, has sold itself, body, mind and soul, so 
repeatedly for hard things that glitter, for gold, for diamonds, for 
the petted slave-girl's joys, that humanity has absolutely dwindled 
in the race, just as size might dwindle in a race breeding in 
and in with dwarfs. In Caryll that dwindling light of humanity 
though the light of a strange intellect burns has gone out. 
My wife's not human." 

" You can say that of the girl you've married ? " 

" I can do more. I can thank the Ruler of Paradise that she's 
not human. Lady Rangecliffe, I worshipped a woman once, and 
she was human. She married me, and loved me perhaps as only 
human women can love, for a little while. And that short time of 
passion put the steel ropes round me that held me to her. Then 
she deceived me, because she was so human, and because of this 
deadly truth that lots of you English won't realise, that there's 
such an enormous amount of the animal in humanity. And she 
went on deceiving me till her end. Why, her death and she was 
atrociously afraid of death, too her death was brought about by 
a lawless effort to deceive me. And when I saw this human woman 
I had loved in her coffin, I wanted to take her body out and 
trample on it." 

Lady Rangecliffe was white with the horror of his words. 

"My friend, you lie against yourself,'' she said. 




THE SLAVE 159 

o. In that moment I vowed that I had done with humanity. 
I was away so long. You remember ? I bought my slaves then. 
You can do that easily enough under the rose the Eastern rose. 
I studied the slave-mind. Many slave-girls aren't human at all 
according to Western ideas of what humanity is. Then I came 
back, and I found a white fairy with a slave-girl's mind, for all her 
brilliance, standing before a jewel-shop in Bond Street. Your boy 
has dreamed lies about her, beautiful lies. In his mind, in his 
imagination, she has the magic that clothes the forms which flit 
through our happy dreams. He loves Caryll. He's unhappy be- 
cause he loves her, because she is mysterious to him. Let him 
come to live with her. Let him get to know her really as she is, 
the white fairy with the slave-mind, or the white diamond with no 
more soul than has a diamond. He has a passion for the lie, 
thinking her human. I have a passion for the truth, knowing her 
inhuman. Let him come to learn the truth, and, in his horror of 
it, his love will die, as in my joy of it mine lives." 

"But it cannot be the truth." 

"It is. You yourself divined it. You yourself said to me in 
this room that there was something decidedly inhuman about 
Caryll." 

"Something- yes, I didn't say she was a monster. Oh, Sir 
Reuben, you are horrible you are horrible." 

She was violently agitated. Her face twitched fantastically, 
almost as it had twitched when she was a child. She fidgeted 
with her long hands and tears stood in her short-sighted eyes. 

" I can't let you speak like this of any woman," she said. 
"There is a chivalry of sex. No, I can't. I won't." 

"Very well. But you can and will let Aubrey come to learn 
his lesson ? " 

The passion that had disfigured Sir Reuben's face while he had 
been speaking now died out of it. He spoke very quietly. 

" I can't prevent him," said Lady Rangecliffe. " But I know 
Aubrey, although he's my son, and I know this, that were what 
you say true and it isn't, it can't be Aubrey has such a nature 
that he could never understand it, never believe it. He is too 
human to believe in inhumanity." 

" Poor Aubrey ! " 

" Rich Aubrey ! Oh, Sir Reuben, my friend, who once saved 
my brother from destruction, oh how poor, how bankrupt you 
are ! " 

For a moment he seemed touched by her vehemence and 
sincerity, then he said 

" Lady Rangecliffe, the poorest, the most bankrupt is he who 
turns away from the truth and makes a religion of sweet lies. Let 



160 THE SLAVE 

Aubrey look his world in the face and endure the cruelty of its 
expression. The happiness of dreams is after all only a mirage. He 
must know Caryll as she is a soul, perhaps, but, like the soul 
engraved upon the emerald, made to be borne away by curious 
pleasures. When I desire to comprehend clearly the differences in 
the natures of human beings, I study their differing pleasures. 
Caryll would rather feel her soft hand resting upon a pearl than 
upon a heart that loved her. Let Aubrey once understand that, 
and he will escape out of the prison of his dream. Would you, 
who love him, desire that he should be a prisoner for ever ? " 

Lady Rangecliffe made no reply for a moment. Then suddenly 
she came to Sir Reuben and cried 

" But you you ! " 

" I ? " 

" What are you, that, believing this of your wife, you can be 
happy with her ? " 

" I am an old man. I have seen hell through its open door. 
Henceforth if I can own a slave I shall be content." 

She said nothing. Sir Reuben touched her hand and left her. 

The return of Monsieur Anneau to London coincided almost 
exactly with the beginning of Aubrey's new life, and the two 
events gave to the modern wild beast some food to tear with its 
savage teeth. There are certain women who will never attract 
the close attention of the world, whatever may be their position. 
There are others who can never escape the staring eyes, the staring 
mind of Society. The question is one of personality rather than of 
acts. Lady Caryll was of the latter class of women. Had she sat 
doing worsted work through the circling years the progress of her 
worsted work would certainly have engrossed the attention of all 
who knew of her. Since she never did worsted work, her promi- 
nence was of a less matronly nature, and, at this time of her career, 
was connected with three men and her jewel-case. Why did she 
seem so happy with her goblin of the East ? Why did the goblin 
attach to his household a man so young, so handsome, as Aubrey 
Herrick ? W T hy did Monsieur Anneau throw up a magnificent 
American engagement in order to come to London and persuade 
the Eastern goblin to arrange a perfect music-room for a concert 
of French songs? These questions leaped on the lips of London 
as bubbles leap on the lips of a stream. And then there was the 
question of the jewels ! For now at last the feet of Lady Caryll 
began to stray down the twinkling avenues of that cave of Aladdin 
to which the murmured words of a priest had been the open 
sesame. And what woman is not fixed in curiosity, if not drawn 
in passion, by the changeful light of gems? In the cold and 
black winter the romance of Caryll's life began to glow like the 






THE SLAVE 161 

strange emerald she so often wore. And curious eyes observed 
the peculiar radiance. 

The progress of this pilgrim of the world was now a fact. If 
her feet had rested hitherto, they rested no longer. She had 
begun to advance towards the fulfilment of her destiny, and the 
ear of the world heard the soft and secret sound of her first foot- 
step. 

The installation of Aubrey was quickly accomplished. Lady 
Rangecliffe did not try to interfere with it. She was in a strange 
confusion since her interview with Sir Reuben, and out of this 
confusion her inaction was born. Perhaps the old man had in- 
fluenced her despite herself, and she began to believe that her 
boy might learn a lesson in the great and brilliant home of the 
being who had struck so stern a blow at his heart. 

Aubrey was given a suite of rooms on the second floor of the 
house. It was called the red suite. Surroundings undoubtedly 
influence the mind. Living in these changed conditions, and amid 
these unusual surroundings, Aubrey felt as if he were another man. 
He never forgot his first evening as Sir Reuben's secretary. It was 
of course an understood thing that he should dine where he would, 
and, except during certain fixed hours of work, be absolutely his 
own master. But, on this first evening, he dined alone with the 
Allabruths. Sir Reuben called the meal the banquet of inaugura- 
tion. Being a man of much ironic humour, and a born lover of 
the fantastic, his novel situation a thorn, as it were, between two 
roses delighted him mischievously. 

"Wear the emerald to-night, Caryll," he said to his wife before 
dinner, " in honour of the new member of the family. And you 
are more truly yourself, more absolutely a human jewel, when you 
wear it." 

She smiled at him, and the light of her smile was blinding. 
Presently he watched her fastening the emerald on the black dress 
she wore. She never allowed her maid to touch it. Sir Reuben 
always thought that her hands looked changed and far more lovely 
when they were touching precious stones, as the hands of a mother 
change and are more lovely when they clasp the round limbs of 
her little child. 

"Don't wear any other jewel," he said. "For that emerald 
kills its rivals. Now let us go down. No, wait a moment." 

He stood looking at her with his preternaturally bright eyes, 
and she remained quite still with the obedience of one who is 
perfectly happy. Her face was turned towards him. Its clear 
white tint gleamed under the electric lights. The frosty grey of 
her beautiful eyes looked almost magically Northern. Her neck 
and arms were snow. And as there can be a peculiar intensity 

L 



162 THE SLAVE 

of life in a white landscape, so there was an intensity of life in 
her. Her very soul seemed to emanate in radiance and to mingle 
with the radiance of the emerald. Sir Reuben, gazing at her with 
the deep attention of ownership, thought that to-night Aubrey 
must understand ; and, going to his wife, he put his old arms around 
her and said 

" How truly you are yourself to-night, Caryll ! " 
She only smiled in answer, and they went downstairs. 
Aubrey thought that banquet of inauguration was like an 
Arabian Night's dream. They ate strange dishes, and only Sir 
Reuben's Arab servant waited upon them. The lights were low 
and the table was covered with very strongly scented flowers. 
And Sir Reuben talked. It was a monologue, and the most 
uncommon monologue imaginable. For he talked of jewels, and 
allowed his rank imagination to have full play, even sending it 
on with a sort of deliberate violence, as if he desired to whirl his 
two companions with him into another world. His knowledge of 
gems was profound ; his exhibition of that knowledge was limit- 
less. And it was impossible not to feel the strange fascination of 
his peculiar mental powers. For he spoke of jewels as a man 
might speak of those live things which, by their life, have influence 
on the destinies of men. And he told tales of engraved gems 
most curiously and imaginatively, and as if he fancied that they 
might perhaps be changed, as the character of a living thing may 
be changed, by the stamp put upon them. Thus he discoursed of 
the little grove of seven trees seen by Camello Leonardo da Pesaro 
upon a figured agate, and of the curious love of trees that probably 
grew in the substance on which they grew. He described the 
changelessness of this solitary grove, and pictured, fancifully, the 
seasons passing in the heart of the agate, the sense of spring and 
of young desires stirring within it, the rapture of summer and the 
heavy golden noons, the whispering wistfulness of autumn full of 
the premonitions of decay, the white calm of winter with its leaf- 
less thoughts. He told them of Boece de Boot's agate, upon 
which was the design of a mitred bishop, and wove curious and 
sacerdotal fantasies about it, fantasies in which the bishop drew 
inflexibility from the substance on which he rested, while the 
substance became magically impregnated with the deep ideas, the 
tragic doubts, the solemn purities and hopes that stir in the secret 
homes of God. He described to them the fly agate, with its 
wonderful insect patterns, and the amazzonite with its little straws 
of green, like veins in which ran the blood of leaves. He painted 
for them in words the silvery argirite, opaque and delicate, fairy- 
like as a moonbeam on a midsummer night, and quoted the words 
of Pliny about the asteria, which has enclosed in it a light, " like 



THE SLAVE 163 

that of the eyeball, which it sends out now from one place, now 
from another, as if moving about in the jewel. 

"Ah !" he said, turning his intensely bright eyes from his wife, 
who listened absorbed, to Aubrey, who was listening too and 
watching her, " does it not seem as if jewels have in very truth 
life, not as we have it, but life of a different kind, still, intense, and 
reticent ? Does not the asteria watch like a spy ? Who knows ? 
Can that mysterious light within it, directed now towards one 
object, now towards another, spring from no source of will and be 
motived by no keen mental desire to observe ? I have seen a 
gigantic oriental ruby, which, when submitted to the influence of 
the sun, gave out a luminous star. The sun spoke to it, the star 
was its reply. So do the silent things have their intercourse, even 
as we have ours. And gems do not merely speak in their ordained 
way. They, like men and women, 'know the pride of possession. 
The green calcedonyx, Indian by origin, holds fast its drop of water. 
The chalcedony clutches its golden sand. The beryl is a revealer 
of mysteries, for men, looking through it, have beheld things 
otherwise invisible to the eye. The Brazilian carbon, when whis- 
pered to by heat, yields up its phosphorescent flame, yet never 
diminishes or dies. The obstinate cyanite declines to melt under 
the assaults of the blowpipe, and the clorophane, like a cat, pierces 
the darkness with its strange and terrible green stare. Can it not, 
like the cat, see those activities of the dark that escape the eyes 
of men ? and cannot it, perhaps, consider mentally that which 
it sees ? How men would laugh at the idea ! But men, since the 
beginning of things, have spent their short time on earth in 
laughing in the very face of truth. Plants feel, flowers enjoy and 
sorrow. Who shall say that jewels, in their flaming inactivity, do 
not love and suffer, attach themselves to a passionate owner" he 
glanced from the face of Lady Caryll to the great emerald shining 
on her breast " feel terror and pain when the hands of the 
robber or of the thief who comes in the night tear them from 
the safety of their home ? " 

As he spoke, his wife, with a stealthy and instinctive gesture, 
lifted her hand and laid it upon the emerald. She kept it there 
while Sir Reuben continued 

" I have often thought of the possible sufferings of jewels in 
those long and fantastic journeyings which they have made from 
country to country, from hand to hand, and of the cruelties which 
they have endured for the pleasure of men and women. The 
biography of such a gem as the Kohinoor, written with power and 
sympathy, would surely make every one with an imagination tremble 
and weep. Think of the terror to it of its dreary reputation, 
haunting it for ever on its wanderings through the world, from the 



164 THE SLAVE 

moment when the dark Hindoos whispered together of its malign 
influence, till that day in which the revolt of a great city and 
the death of a great prince were placed to the balance of its 
dread account. Think of its physical sufferings at the hands of 
its possessors, operated upon by brutal hands, forced to undergo 
the bitter deprivation of so much magical beauty, of so much 
legendary value, cut and hacked by the insolent tools of the 
ignorant, and of those whose only idea of improvement is massacre. 
What a life has it led in the past at the court of the king of 
Anga and in the palace of Aurungzeb. It has seen the sacking 
of Delhi, the assassination of the greedy Persian into whose grasp 
it fell. It has dwelt with Ahmed Shah Doorannee in Afghanistan, 
and has watched his nameless crimes. It has been solemnly dedi- 
cated to the temple of Juggernaut, and ravished from its sacred 
home to see the Punjaub crawl beneath the British yoke. Exiled 
from the lovely lands of the East, it is forced now to dwell here 
in cold and sunless England, and to listen to the wild and hideous 
march of civilisation along the bleak and iron roads of vulgarity. 
Yet still it watches life with the same clear serenity of old, and 
still it stares upon the masquerade of men with the imperturbable 
lustre that long ago made it one of the celebrities of the universe. 
The OrlofF diamond, too, has suffered dreary things. It was an 
eye in the head of Brama in the temple of Scheringham. Brama 
himself made it a vehicle by means of which he gazed out upon 
the kneeling crowds of them who worshipped him. Through it he 
perceived the French dastard stealing in with a hideous mockery 
of devotion to blaspheme among the pious at his sacred feet. He 
watched the fatuity of his chief priests, so ignorant despite their 
mysterious office. He saw them learning to love and trust the 
traitor. He saw the traitor placed to guard his very temple. He 
heard the rising of that terrific tempest which roared through the 
black night in which the diamond was torn from its socket and 
borne away to its fate ; to those amazing vicissitudes which carried 
it from the English captain to the Whitechapel Jew, from the 
Greek merchant to the royal courtesan who sat upon her throne 
in the White North, and showed her silent victim to the lovers 
whom she snatched from the gutter, kissed for a while, and then 
sent forth to prison and to death. Can things so full of radiance 
and of colour, things so marvellously vivacious, so quick to grasp 
the sun, and to smile back to the smile of the moon can they, 
who rest upon the throbbing breasts of the loveliest human beings, 
Avho assist at the fetes of kings, and are borne tenderly in the 
processions of empresses, can they who are made the heralds of love 
and the trusted messengers of passion, can they be insensitive ? 
Can they be soulless, frigid, without life, or mystery, or wonder ? " 



THE SLAVE 165 

He paused suddenly, looking sharply from his wife to Aubrey. 
Lady Caryll's steel-grey eyes were fixed upon him with an intensity 
that was piercing. Her lips were slightly parted, and, in the 
silence of this pause, he caught the sound of her breathing, which 
was strangely audible. One of her hands was still clasped about 
the emerald, en which her fingers closed tightly. The other lay 
clenched upon the tablecloth. She was leaning forward, and her 
white bosom rose and fell with a certain violence, as of one who 
secretly struggles for full breath in an airless room. Her whole 
attitude indicated an extreme fervour of attention, such as men 
give in great moments to a very great orator. And she did not 
stir during the silence. There was no relaxation of muscles, no sigh 
of the released, no throwing off of tension. The white lids did not 
droop over the gazing eyes. The parted lips did not softly join. 
Her whole body absolutely, even wonderfully, expressive of the 
meaning of the spirit demanded a continuance of that which had 
given to it so passionate a vitality. 

Sir Reuben turned his bright eyes from her to Aubrey. He 
was as deeply absorbed in Gary 11 as she was in her husband. 
He too was leaning forward in his place, and the most profound 
attention was written in his attitude. He had taken some fruit 
from the Arab servant. It lay upon his plate untasted. His glass 
was full of wine. He did not touch it with his lips. He had for- 
gotten where he was, despite the modern consciousness which so 
continually dwelt with him, making part of his nature at all ordi- 
nary times. The book that contained his lesson was open before 
him. At Sir Reuben's crafty touch it had opened wide. His eyes 
were fixed upon it with a gaze that was full of a sort of passion 
of inquiry. Could he read that lesson? Could he understand, 
learn it ? 

" I often think," Sir Reuben said, and his voice became low and 
more monotonous than before, " that everything on earth, whether 
it is dubbed animate or inanimate, that absolutely everything has 
some power, however stunted, of giving and of receiving. Jewels, 
we know, can give a thousand things light, colour, brilliance, 
pleasure, torture, despair, envy, greed, jealousy. These things and 
others they give to the world, to the men and women who possess 
them. What do they receive, and how do they keep it ? And, if 
they receive and retain gifts from men, and Caryll from women, 
how do they return them ? Do you think that it is possible for 
anything, alive or dead, to receive a real ardour of love, keen passion, 
deep faithfulness, and to remain absolutely unaffected by it, abso- 
lutely unaltered ? Suppose that a man worships a woman " Aubrey 
stirred slightly in his chair " She may not love him in return. 
She may not grant him any favour. She may even refuse his wor- 



166 THE SLAVE 

ship, turn away from his prayers, laugh at his tears. But do you 
think she is exactly the same woman as she would have been if the 
man had never looked at her ? Is it in the power of anything to 
refuse to accept some kinds of gifts ? If love, if passion, be given, 
it belongs to that to which it is given despite a thousand refusals. 
And suppose a woman loves a jewel " Lady Caryll did not stir as 
Aubrey had stirred " Can the jewel, in its hardness, in its glitter- 
ing inflexibility, can it absolutely repel that love ? Can it remain 
totally unchanged by that love ? Does it not retain, amid its tinted 
fires, one spark from the fire of the woman's adoring eyes ? Does 
it not seize a more mysterious glow from the glow of her soft hands 
when she caresses it ? Does not the woman pour part of herself 
into the depths of the jewel, draw part of the jewel into her own 
depths ? For the law of exchange governs the world and weaves 
the ropes that bind the universe together. And the secrecies of 
attachment, so often apparently inexplicable, are strung like beads 
upon these invisible ropes. There is always a road on which love 
sets his feet when he travels. But often we cannot see the road, 
or hear the sound of his delicate footsteps upon it." 

Lady Caryll dropped her hand from the great emerald, which 
sent forth its mysterious green lustre into the dimly lighted room. 

"Look at that jewel," said Sir Reuben. " Does it not seem to 
live, to live as strongly, as persistently, as you, Caryll, or you, Aubrey, 
or I myself? We watch it, think about it. Has it no thought, 
no gaze for us ? And upon its bosom it bears its child that faint 
engraving of three figures, the soul being borne away by pleasures. 
Good people are shocked by that engraving. To them there is 
something awful in that journey of the soul, and they dream of a 
far-off and hideous destination to which the soul must come." 

" Yes," said Aubrey. 

Lady Caryll started at the sound of his voice and lifted her 
hand as if to still an interruption. Aubrey noticed the gesture and 
his lips tightened. 

"But who can tell if the destination of wrinkled duty, creeping 
about its unimpassioned task, may not be as hideous ? If the cry that 
is born in a nature, when the nature is born, be eternally unheeded, 
will not the nature in eternity resemble that flower which is ever- 
lasting merely because it has none of the loveliness of the flower 
which fades and dies ? Will it not be dry, frigid, without colour, 
without scent, dead in its eternal life because of the cry that has 
been starved to death within it ? Some people cannot feel that 
they have power unless they are withholding something. I cannot 
feel that I have power unless 1 am giving something. And if I 
met with a strong nature, a nature fierce in its desire and crying 
for all the seas, I should like to pour all the seas into it." 



THE SLAVE 167 

His eyes were on Lady Caryll as he spoke, and in her eyes he 
surprised a look of almost terrible gratitude. Under that look he 
was silent, lest he should interrupt its speech. Then, at last, 
Aubrey took up the peach from his plate and began slowly to peel 
it. Once or twice his knife struck the plate, which emitted a tiny 
ringing sound. He divided the peach into two parts, keeping his 
gaze upon it all the time. And all the time Sir Reuben and Caryll 
looked at each other. At last Aubrey glanced up. He saw the 
expression in the eyes of Lady Caryll as she gazed into the eyes 
of Sir Reuben, and he mistook the passion of gratitude in them 
for the passion of love. And that evening, for the first time, he 
began, as he thought, to understand the attraction of the Goblin 
of the East. Within his small, withered, and sun-dried frame his 
husk, old and ugly to the eye there dwelt a cunning of magic 
that was peculiar among men. There was something of the fas- 
cination of a geni about him, a diabolic quickness and changeful- 
ness, an atmosphere of far-off lands and of secrets which are hidden 
from London eyes and are disbelieved by London sceptical hearts. 
His speech, like a thin dagger, pierced below the surface of ordi- 
nary life, and through the crevice the eye could dimly see deep 
down a multitude of passionate activities never before suspected, 
far less revealed. 

" And would you ask for any reward, Reuben ? " said 
Caryll. 

Aubrey had never before heard her call her husband by his 
Christian name. Her doing of it seemed to establish a strange 
familiarity between husband and wife. Never had Aubrey felt so 
far away from Caryll as at this moment. 
" Possibly I might," Sir Reuben said. 
"And what would it be ? " 

" That the one who submitted to my power of giving should 
only receive from me." 
"Ah!" 

She smiled quietly. 

" Is that too much to demand ? " he asked. " What do you 
say, Aubrey ?" 

" Oh, I suppose that charity can be jealous like all the other 
virtues," he replied quickly. 

He spoke a little bitterly, as a man whose hands are empty 
and whose heart is full. And he fixed his eyes upon the emerald 
on Lady Caryll's breast. Now he fancied that in the dim light it 
was cautiously regarding him with its green eye, as if it would 
penetrate his soul. Remembering Sir Reuben's strange monologue, 
he could for a moment almost believe that it was alive, and that 
by degrees it was establishing a curious sympathy with Caryll 



168 THE SLAVE 

giving her part of its nature, taking to itself part of hers. Suddenly 
he leaned back in his chair and'burst out laughing. 

"Why are you laughing, Mr. Herrick ? " said Caryll. 
" At my own folly," he said. " As I looked at your emerald 
I found myself thinking of it as a mental fourth in our little party 
to-night. You see, Sir Reuben, that you tell fairy stories too 
well." 

He went on laughing in a way that was not natural. In truth, 
this first evening of intimacy in this house tried his nerves terribly, 
although he scarcely knew it. A profound curiosity the curiosity 
of love had led him to this new life. But this new life wrapped 
him in a flame that burned, that seared his heart. He laughed 
now because a demon, with the face of death, seemed to sit on his 
knee and to whisper in his ear, " Look, look ! you are nothing to 
her, scarcely even a shadow. Watch her when she smiles at him. 
There is love." 

The Arab servant stole in with coffee and cigarettes. On the 
salver, beside the cigarettes, there lay a letter for Lady Caryll. 
She glanced at it and said 

"This is from Monsieur Anneau. He has arrived in London." 
Sir Reuben turned to Aubrey and remarked 
" He is going to give a song recital here. We shall arrange a 
music-room for the occasion." 
"Yes," said Aubrey. 

He knew that he had nothing to say. He wondered whether 
the man who woke from the dreams induced by hacheesh in the 
Mediterranean isle felt as he did this evening. Afterwards, when 
he was in his rooms alone, he tried to understand from whence 
emanated the spell that had certainly enveloped him during his 
godfather's dissertation upon jewels. Why had he not more clearly 
felt the absurdity of such a theory as that jewels are perhaps alive 
although men know it not ? A thing made of a mineral substance 
crystallised alive ! Why had not that commonplace common- 
sense, which so often mercifully assists men in their intercourse 
with dullards, shaken him to amusement at the notion of the 
sufferings of a Kohinoor or the tragedy of an Orloff diamond ? A 
spell had been upon him certainly. For a moment he supposed 
that it had come solely from Sir Reuben. But, after silent con- 
sideration, he recognised that it had been laid upon him partly 
by Lady Caryll. Her attention had been so genuinely profound 
that his could not be insincere or half-hearted. Her peculiar 
nature had been so entirely absorbed by the imaginative possi- 
bilities with curious cunning presented by Sir Reuben, that Aubrey 
had been folded in the draperies of her thoughtfulness, had laid 
in the bosom of her fascination. He knew it now, and, more 



THE SLAVE ifip 

certainly than ever before, knew the existence within her of the 
strength of a peculiar force, unusual, almost unfeminine. Only 
strength can listen as she listened, only vigour can be absorbed as 
she was absorbed. Aubrey, sitting in this new room, which was a 
pageant of deep rich colour, and which seemed heavy with a per- 
fume of peculiar personality, watched the dusky smoke of his cigar 
mount wearily towards the light that burned in an ancient Moorish 
lantern, and loved this being, who was a mystery to him, more 
deeply even than he had loved her in Lady St. Ormyn's garden. 

Meanwhile she was alone with her husband, with her Goblin of 
the East, as society called him. A fire of wood burned brightly, 
and threw a dancing yellow light upon the walls and upon the bed, 
which was hung with thin Moorish draperies, full of faded colours, 
varied, yet so faint that they seemed slipping into one. Caryll, 
whose maid had taken off her gown and left the room, was putting 
the emerald into her jewel-case. She snapped the lid sharply, and 
then turned to give the case to Sir Reuben, who placed it in the 
heavy iron safe which was attached to the floor beneath the bed. 
To do this he knelt down. The attitude made him look so small, 
so shrunken, that he was almost nothing. Caryll, wrapped in a 
white dressing-gown, her sparkling yellow hair loosened, stood 
looking at this pinched and dry being on the carpet. She watched 
his brown hands as he placed the jewel-case in the safe and closed 
the heavy door. He turned, and made a queer movement to get 
up ; but suddenly she sat down on the bed, and put her two hands 
on his narrow shoulders. 

" No," she said ; " I like to see you at my feet." 

He remained kneeling, and looked up into her long and 
piercing eyes, that were full of a sort of cold, almost wintry 
excitement. 

" How wonderful you were to-night," she said in a low, very 
clear voice. " You should always talk about jewels." 

"To you, Caryll." 

" Do you believe what you said ? Do you think it may be 
true?" 

" Do not you ? " 

She was silent, and her white face became serious, almost grim. 

" How can the opal be affected by the health of its wearer if it 
has not some secret life ? Change of atmosphere has almost as 
much effect upon it as upon a human being. It blossoms like a 
flower in the air and in the sun. It fades and faints in frost. Can 
a dead thing do this ? " 

" And my emerald ? " 

She pressed her hands more firmly upon his shoulders. 

"The Peruvian priests in the time of Pizarro believed that the 



170 THE SLAVE 

goddess Esmeralda lived in an emerald. Do you not live in an 
emerald, and if so, is it not full of your life ? But be careful, 
my beautiful Esmeralda think if your home were to be lost, 
destroyed, stolen ! " 

A sudden horrible look, of terror and of resolution combined, 
flooded her face, and her hands gripped his shoulders till he felt pain. 
He loved to have the power to waken such violence in his slave. 

" Hush ! hush ! " she whispered. 

" Or think if I became poor if I took it from you ! " 

" You ! " she cried. 

And he felt that her whole body trembled. He put his thin 
arms round her and held her tightly. 

"Do not fear, my Esmeralda," he whispered. "Do not fear. 
To you jewels give life, and I worship your life. Outside the cave 
of Aladdin you are nothing. You shiver in the emptiness of the 
world your heart scarcely beats, and your soul lies still in a shroud 
of snow. Is it not so ? " 

She answered him with her eyes, from which the fire seemed to 
withdraw as he slowly spoke. 

" But inside inside the cave ! " 

"Yes!" 

"You are a thing of magic. Your eyes flame. Your heart 
beats strongly. Your soul awakes, and all your powers expand. 
Inside the cave you are the most live thing that lives, and the 
farther your feet stray down its enchanted avenues, where all the 
jewels watch, where all the jewels are intent, the more brightly 
will burn the flame of your soul. Put your arms round me, my 
Esmeralda, and I will lead you for ever through the jewelled 
wonders of the cave." 

Caryll put her soft arms round his almost fleshless and withered 
body, and rested her head upon his breast. The firelight shone 
over them, as the moonlight shone over Romeo and Juliet in the 
Italian garden long ago. Caryll half closed her eyes. And she 
seemed to see, in a dim and delicious gloom of hazy enchantment, 
the long procession of the lustrous children of the cave. She 
saw the emeralds, the jades, and jaspers, a troop of exquisite 
green beauty. She saw the pure rapture of the pearl. The 
diamonds sparkled at her from the shadows, and among the rocks 
the blood-red rubies lay asleep. Coloured lights shone, like fairy 
torches, from the opals, and the striped epidotes gave out their 
pearly radiance. The chrysolites, those golden stones, glittered, 
to tell their sweet romances, and the wavy spark of the cymophane 
twittered through the magic mist. Far off, the purple sapphire 
gleamed like a tropical sky at midnight, and the moonstone 
dreamed its pale_dreams upon the breast of the silver clouds. 



THE SLAVE 



171 



Caryll gazed into the lustrous eyes of the children of the cave, 
drinking their coloured beauty. She heard the murmur of their 
sparkling voices. And in her arms she seemed to hold, not a 
weary and wrinkled old man, fatigued with the years and with the 
burden of time, but a wondrous magician, a powerful geni, at whose 
touch the shell of the grey prosaic world opened, and disclosed 
the shining infinity that she had so long and so cruelly desired. 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE arrival in London of Monsieur Anneau created a sensation in 
that musical society which thinks and talks of performers, and 
practically ignores that which they perform. Large numbers of 
very worthy ladies became hectic when they read in the Morning 
Pout that he was staying at Claridge's, and Mrs. Eldridge B. 
Mybrough, of New. York City, at once sent a boy messenger to 
the hotel, offering him his own terms if he would sing at an 
" afternoon " at her hired mansion in Belgrave Square. He de- 
clined. He could sing for no one. Mrs. Eldridge B. Mybrough 
informed all her acquaintance of this tragic fact, and three days 
later received a card from Lady Caryll to hear Monsieur Anneau 
in Park Lane. 

Mrs. Mybrough was not a silent woman. She had a piercing 
soprano voice, on which scandal seemed to float like a touzled 
feather on a millrace. She spoke her mind, and London smiled 
quietly, thinking of how many French plays. It was all so right 
and improper. The foolish old Goblin of the East deserved his 
fate. Let him kneel at Lady Caryll's feet with his hands full 
of jewels. Those hands were ugly with age the contrast between 
him and his gifts was hideous and absurd. And then his voice 
croaked when he made a remark. It did not boom like the deep 
and drowsy bell of the Cathedral of Granada. It was not at the 
same time manly as war and magical as peace. His figure had 
no authority, and though his eyes were piercing and full of 
lively cunning, they were never shadowy with melting sentiment, 
or feverish with an ardour that seemed like a song and a sword, 
the serenade of one who would slay by his sweet singing, and who 
was ruthless in his tenderness. 

Many people had noticed Monsieur Anneau's observation of 
Lady Caryll's beauty before her marriage. They delightedly com- 
prehended his sudden reappearance, and prepared themselves 
eagerly for the spectacle of his triumph. For the world has a 
curious love of seeing men live up to their reputations. To 
gratify it the Saint must press his hair-shirt ever closer to his 
tortured flesh, the Sinner must walk, without deviation, in the 
broad path, and never heed the destruction waiting at its end. 

172 






THE SLAVE 173 



Very few of Caryll's invitation cards elicited refusals. Lady 
St. Ormyn was in violent commotion. She had quickly grown to 
believe that it was she who had drawn Monsieur Anneau from 
the eager claws of America, and she went about London demand- 
ing gratitude for this imaginary feat. Her victoria was incessantly 
before the great door of Claridge's, and the men on the box grew 
numb beneath their furs while she discussed the arrangement of 
the programme, and the respective merits of Barre and Bruneau, 
Chaminade and Massenet. Monsieur Anneau was magnificently 
tolerant of her. He murmured occasionally to a sympathetic 
friend, a mime from Montmartre, " Miladi Mon Dieu ! Qiiand 
elle parle elle se grise toujours ! " And the mime went through 
a pantomime of an English aristocrat getting very drunk indeed 
on conversation, and passing through all the successive stages 
of uproarious intoxication to a finale of exhaustion and a frantic 
silence. But the singer never lost his superb self-possession, or 
his demeanour of a high priest who had ministered in all the 
known temples of darkness. He had much to sustain him beside 
the sympathetic mime. His large sense of drama, which made 
him so effective a figure on the stage, was stirred by his re- 
nunciation of a continent for one concert in a private house. His 
fighting spirit was in arms, remembering the shadows of Lady 
St. Ormyn's garden in the summer before Lady Caryll's marriage. 
His nature, made theatrical by Providence and operatic by Fate, 
was braced to a new and engrossing task, compared with which 
all previous tasks were as nothing. And the power of music 
itself was being weighed in his balance. This great art had been 
his weapon in life, and this weapon he had burnished, sharpened, 
tempered, tried. He had studied its uses, and learned all its 
most subtle possibilities, as the fencer learns all the possibilities 
of the foils, and though he might have been persuaded to acknow- 
ledge that there had been in the history of the world greater 
singers than himself, he felt unalterably convinced that there had 
never before been a man who had so ingeniously placed any art 
beneath the yoke of his own purpose. That yoke should not be 
lifted now. 

In his pale-yellow sitting-room, crowded with flowers sent by 
his innumerable adorers, he lounged majestically, giving ear to 
Lady St. Ormyn's passionate chatter, and seeming to yield to 
her clamorous arrangements for his programme. In reality, his 
vivid mind was concentrated upon his idea of the nature of Lady 
Caryll, and upon the best programme for its subjugation. He 
had not renounced America to further the reputation of Barre, 
or to float into popularity any of Lady St. Ormyn's quite in- 
numerable boyish proteges, who were all remarkable for their 



174 THE SLAVE 

large eyes and their elaborate buttonholes, if not for their musical 
genius, and who were all far more devoted to her than to their 
art. He was at this period rather like an eagle at which a 
parroquet was pecking, while his tireless eyes stared at some 
far-off' brilliant luminary aloft on the horizon. Lady St. Ormyn 
was enchanted by his shining imperturbability, which she mistook 
for a sublime deference. 

" Monsieur Anneau's so delighful as a winter friend," she said 
to Mrs. Luffa Parkinson. " I had no idea singers are generally 
so entirely suited to summer weather, aren't they ? I mean the 
great ones. One never imagines I always think of them as 
lizards on a south wall, because they make all their great efforts 
in the hot months, May and June, at least over here of course 
in Paris it's different. Besides, the great stars aren't much in 
Paris except to go to Paquin, the women. But Monsieur Anneau 
is so sympathetic even in a frost, and quite as musical in Decem- 
ber as in June." 

"That shows great depth of character," said Mrs. Parkinson 
in her weary voice. 

When she had stated this it suddenly dawned upon her that she 
had said something very profound, and she repeated the remark in 
connection with Monsieur Anneau's admirable winter qualities in 
half the drawing-rooms of London. His fame as a December friend 
spread rapidly, and his yellow sitting-room would have been 
thronged with callers had he not been almost always out. Just at 
present he did not wish to diffuse, but to concentrate, his intelli- 
gence and his will, and he had no intention of distributing his 
power in fragments to all the smart women of the town. On his 
arrival from Paris he had learnt of Aubrey's appointment as 
secretary to Sir Reuben and of his residence in the Park Lane 
house. And at first the news had thrown the singer into a silent 
paroxysm of secret anger. To such a mind as his there was only 
one inference to be drawn from this fact. He drew it, and for 
half-an-hour ground his teeth at the thought of his lost American 
dollars. But he was no bad judge of men despite his exaggerated 
conception of the wickedness of human nature. A couple of visits 
to Lady Caryll, during which he saw and conversed with Aubrey, 
convinced him that Aubrey was not playing the ordinary sordid 
game of the world. And his observation of Lady Caryll persuaded 
him that no man had yet entered into her heart. Her apparent 
satisfaction, if not joy, in the presence of her brown old husband 
only puzzled him for a moment. Then he decided that it was the 
brilliant deception of a very clever woman, and smiled at it with 
the gay eyes of the man who sees through the veil held up to blind 
him. The fact of Lady Caryll's growing celebrity, the crescendo 



THE SLAVE 175 



of gossip about her jewels, whetted his insatiable appetite for 
dominion, and increased the ardour which had driven him across 
the Atlantic. When Lady St. Ormyn had mounted at last into 
the waiting victoria and told the numbed men on the box to drive 
home, he sat alone on a couch touching the grand piano with his 
large hand, so apt in ample gesture, and looked at his art as a man 
looks at his sword for the fight. He partially realised the strange- 
ness of his adversary. He got up from the couch, struck the piano, 
sang to test his sword. Improvising with his voice, he spread the 
passions out before him, in fancy seeing the panorama of the heart. 
He threw fear into his voice, exultation, pity, desire, content, and 
supremacy all this with the quick ease that he had gained by the 
assiduous education of his natural genius. His sword seemed to 
him magnificently tempered and he could not doubt its efficacy. 
And then he meant to wield it with his soul. For he had the 
determination which is given only to the man of the fixed idea. 
Since he had known how to sing he had dominated women of the 
most diverse natures, the musically ignorant as well as the musically 
cultivated. Even the unmusical he had pierced, exercising his 
peculiar and illegitimate talent, almost surgical, upon the nervous 
system. But he felt that Lady Gary 11 was a perhaps unique sub- 
ject for one of his experiments. She stood aloof from other women 
wrapped in a species of blinding white radiance which was very 
frigid and curiously repellent. 

Aubrey, with the instinct of love, which sometimes can almost 
change the sex of a mind, giving to man the peculiar perception 
of woman, divined the purpose of Monsieur Anneau. He abhorred 
him for it, and the strength of his hatred for the singer was 
measured by the strength of his love for Caryll. Nor was it in 
any way lessened by his secret conviction that Monsieur Anneau's 
victorious weapon would quickly know defeat. Monsieur Anneau 
was perpetually in Park Lane, superintending the arrangement of 
the music-room or discussing the selection of the programme. It 
is true that Lady St. Ormyn was also perpetually dropping in. 
Nevertheless he had many moments alone with Lady Caryll. 
While he opened Sir Reuben's correspondence and wrote his 
letters, Aubrey's heart was hot with anger, almost as it had been 
hot with anger when, in the shrubbery at Epsom, he had seen the 
white robe of this white girl vanish into the darkness with the 
impending shadow, scarcely defined, at its side. Sir Reuben 
watched him, and understood much of what was passing in his 
mind, guessing from his scarcely concealed nervous irritability on 
certain days, judging by one or two mistakes that crept into the 
performance of his duties. 

" That isn't quite what I dictated to you, Aubrey," he said one 



176 THE SLAVE 

day, handing back a written letter to his godson. " Your memory 
is short this morning." 

Aubrey reddened. 

" I beg your pardon/' he said. " I'm stupid. I'm not fit to be 
a secretary." 

He held the letter crushed in his hand. 

"Sir Reuben/' he said suddenly, "you'd better let me go. 
You'd better get rid of me. I'm no real use to you." 

Sir Reuben smiled. He was by the fire, smoking a long 
pipe. On his head he wore a skull-cap. The winter morning 
was cold. 

" You're young to the work, my boy, that's all, and perhaps 
something has upset you this morning." 

The twinkling eyes searched Aubrey's grave face, and a cloud 
of smoke rose suddenly from the bowl of the pipe. 

" Would you like a day's holiday ? " 

" No, thanks. If I take a holiday from all this it had better be 
a permanent one. It's not fair on you this this 

" Don't talk nonsense, Aubrey. If you stay on here, you must 
soon learn all that it is necessary for you to know." 

The croaky voice had become curiously significant. Aubrey 
looked up quickly from the writing-table. 

"Is there much ?" he said. 

He hardly knew what he meant by the question. It sprang to 
his lips almost mechanically. 

"There's a good deal," Sir Reuben said quietly. "Now write 
as follows to Burn and Woodcroft : ' Dear Sirs, Sir Reuben 
Allabruth requests me to say that 

He dictated a letter. Aubrey fixed his attention fiercely on 
the matter in hand. After that conversation he exerted all his 
will-power, and resolutely banished the thought of Caryll and 
Monsieur Anneau during working hours. Each day a sense of 
loyalty to his godfather deepened within him. Sir Reuben's kind- 
ness was great. Perhaps it may seem strange, but Aubrey never 
connected his passion for Caryll with disloyalty. His knowledge 
of its purity, his belief in her white stainlessness, were too com- 
plete. He could not doubt either. Sometimes he wondered, 
however, why Sir Reuben allowed, even encouraged, such a 
man as Monsieur Anneau to come perpetually to his house, 
and took so much trouble to oblige his musical ambition. But 
then Aubrey never succeeded in understanding Sir Reuben's 
curiously mischievous and complicated nature. And he would 
have considered incredible the fact, that Sir Reuben, knowing 
all the truth quite clearly, was daily delighting in the efforts 
of personality put forth by the singer, was daily anticipating, 




THE SLAVE 177 

with a sort of goblin's glee, the finale that must certainly com- 
plete this very operatic crescendo of will-power manifesting itself 
through the greatest of the arts. It was like a Rossini cres- 
cendo, in which the music steadily quickens as it grows steadily 
louder. 

There were rehearsals to test the perfection of the music- 
room, which Lady St. Ormyn declared was inferior to the one at 
Epsom. At these rehearsals Monsieur Anneau, so he thought, 
proceeded cleverly with the education of Lady Caryll's heart. For 
he always insisted that she should be present as audience, and she 
happily consented. In the beautiful room, which had been lined 
with white wood, he gave his strong personality to music, and 
ordered the music to exercise it on this woman with the sparkling 
hair and the grey eyes. The art moved obediently under the 
yoke that he placed upon its neck, returning patient labour for 
patient labour undertaken in its service. For had not this man 
given to it the shining years of his youth ? Sometimes he 
thought of it as of the sad-eyed ox, that one may see on an 
Italian highway, stirring the white dust between the cypress 
trees with uncomplaining feet. He seemed some swarthy vagrant 
driving it forward, and when he sang he could hear the crack of 
a whip. 

Lady Caryll listened with the absolute repose that distinguished 
her among women, and that Sir Reuben loved. It was so Eastern. 
She sat in a white velvet chair. On her white hands, loosely 
clasped, as if the muscles were indifferent, jewels sparkled. Round 
her throat she wore her collar of coloured pearls. Her face was 
brilliant with a shining of content brilliant through all the chang- 
ing songs. Monsieur Anneau watched it as he sang, and, dis- 
appointed of the emotional panorama he desired, told himself that 
it was but a mask. 

" She is the cleverest woman in London," he thought ; " but 
she is a woman ! " 

And he sang again. 

The winter twilight was falling. Sir Reuben shuffled in softly. 
He sat down on a chair close to the door at the end of the room. 
Lady Caryll moved her head and sent him a smile. He smiled, 
turning his eyes to Monsieur Anneau. 

The singer's broad shoulders and mighty chest loomed up above 
the grand piano at which he was seated. He had not noticed Sir 
Reuben's entrance, for he was playing a prelude softly while he 
considered what song he should sing now while the dull darkness 
came into the white room. And the prelude seemed to cover and 
to assist his thought. He looked at the pallor of the sinking after- 
noon, and the existence of monotony in the world struck him. His 

* M 



178 THE SLAVE 

fingers sought and found a monotonous music, and he began to 
sing a desert song. It was warm with sunshine, with the mono- 
tony of sunshine, with the long heat that will not leave its home, 
that stays out there alone in the land ocean, alone with solitary 
animals, and with solitary birds hideous in mind and ever on the 
watch. Only a few men live there, and they are fierce in heart. 
For the long heat is in their blood, and pulses in their veins like 
music. And the land lies under the sunshine like a slave. Day 
follows day, and still the sun goes not. And the desert nights 
hold fast its red fingers, when it seems to have wandered down 
some far mysterious hill, like a pilgrim going to the hidden shrine 
that has beckoned him over the seas. The few men there are 
fierce in heart in the night as in the day. This was their song 
and the song of the land that held them. Monsieur Anneau's 
eyes blazed as he sang it. He threw into his voice a fiery languor 
and the sound of a passion that has never feared a law. He sang 
this song seldom. But he knew that few civilised women could 
resist its desolate influence or listen to it untouched. For it gave 
to civilisation the violent shock of complete novelty, having nothing 
in it of convention. It had been composed by a young and half- 
insane Frenchman, who had wasted his life in wandering and had died 
young. All his life he had known that he would die young. That 
knowledge had set his feet in many places. For always he was 
haunted by the fear that if he remained long anywhere he would 
die there and so indeed it chanced. Wherever he went he caught 
some vagrant inspiration, now from the ice of Norway, now from 
the fire of the Soudan, from the flowering orchards by the rivers 
of Touraine, from the white and scented showers of the thickets 
of the Morocco mountains. Everywhere he wrote verses, and to 
these verses he gave music. And his last song was this desert 
song, made in the desert that he loved too well. For there out 
there in the long heat he forgot his fear, and he stayed his 
feet, and he made this song, and gave it to a friend, and died. 
Arabs buried him in the sand, and bowed their shaven heads 
to the ground in their prayers to Allah where he lay. And his 
friend took the song and brought it back to his loved Paris, and 
gave it to Monsieur Anneau, who had known him. In the singer's 
armoury this song was the surest weapon. The wildness of it was 
the wildness of the desert and of its few men, mingled with the 
wildness of a young and haunted, alien yet sympathetic, heart. It 
stirred civilisation from its dreams of drawing-rooms and of restau- 
rants, and fired the blood of women who got their gowns from 
Kate Reilly and from Paquin. Monsieur Anneau delivered it mag- 
nificently. He had known the madness of its creator, his fear of 
rest so strangely justified. And he sang it as a desert man might 







THE SLAVE 179 

have sung it above the Parisian's sandy grave. He did not know 
that the East and Paris were listening to it, united in the old body 
of Sir Reuben, who sat by the door. It was growing dark when 
he finished and played the monotonous conclusion of the accom- 
paniment, which suggested the endless flatness of the desert lying 
in the endless burning heat. He got up from the piano, walked 
towards Lady Caryll, bent over her, and said 

" Shall I sing that at my concert ? Does it move you ? Tell 
me or let me see for myself." 

And he bent lower to gaze close into her long eyes. They 
were shining calmly. Her white cheeks looked as if they would 
be cold to the touch, and her hands lay still. Monsieur Anneau 
stared at her with fierce astonishment. 

" Do you not feel such music ? " he said. " Ah ! I sing badly. 
Mon Dieu ! I cannot sing if you can still look like that!" 

His large and dark face was hot with the effort he had been 
making. Now tears rose in his great, staring eyes. 

u You sang superbly," said Sir Reuben's voice near the door. 

The creak of a chair was audible as he got up, and the shuffling 
tread of his feet on the parquet floor as he came forward. Monsieur 
Anneau was surprised, but he did not start. Sir Reuben's small 
figure stood by him in the twilight. The wrinkled face was 
contorted as if by emotion. 

" You sang as if you had the soul of the East in you," he 
continued. 

" I have it in me when I sing that song," replied Monsieur 
Anneau. 

He had made so great, so exciting an effort, that even his body 
cried out for a little enthusiasm from some listener. 

" It was very strange and beautiful," Lady Caryll said quietly 
in her clear voice. 

As she spoke Sir Reuben stretched his hand to the wall and 
turned on the electric light. The two men with their emotional 
faces were standing on either side of the white velvet chair in 
which Lady Caryll sat so calmly. As the light shone they looked 
at each other and then at her. Sir Reuben smiled. Monsieur 
Anneau went back to the piano and shut its lid. Perhaps by 
accident he let it fall rather heavily, with a noise that suggested 
finality. Standing by the piano he said 

"The man who composed that song wrote it in the desert. 
He never heard it. He died where he wrote it, and was buried 
in the sand beside the tent door." 

He came up to Lady Caryll again. 

"Think of that when I sing you that song again at my 
concert," he said. 



180 THE SLAVE 

"Why?" she asked, touching the hand of Sir Reuben, which 
lay on the arm of her chair. 

" It may make you feel its force more keenly." 

"To think of the grave of a man I never knew, never even 
saw ? " she answered. 

Monsieur Anneau said good-bye. 

As he went out Sir Reuben laughed softly to himself. 

When Monsieur Anneau reached his hotel he shut himself up 
in his room alone, and denied himself to every one. He was in the 
strange and horrible condition of a powerful man who, for the first 
time, begins to lose faith in his power, begins to waver, and to feel 
weakness and irresolution. He flung himself down on a sofa and 
remained very still for a long while, looking older than he really 
was, despite his dyed hair and beard. After a time he began to 
hold a silent colloquy with his art, with this thing that he had for 
so long made the servant of his pleasures and of his vices. He 
seemed to look it in the face, and to question it, and to feel that 
it grew obstinate, or stupid, or elusive, that it held back something 
from him, and so was no longer completely his servant. Then he 
recalled, as if speaking to it, the memory of how, in the past, he 
had most diligently been its slave, toiling hereafter to have its 
services at his command. He felt like a man who has made a 
bargain I will do all this for you if you will do all this for me 
and who finds himself betrayed. He grew bitter, as men do grow 
bitter with their art, which can come to be like a living mistress, 
and to seem to have a person and a countenance even as it has a 
name. He reproached it, cursed it, most pitiful thing of all 
furiously regretted the sacrifices he had made for it. He wished 
that it were china to break, a dog to kick, a woman to stab. 
He was the more embittered because he was physically fatigued. 
Often had he sung through a whole opera to some great audience, 
and been at the end less tired than he was by his effort of the 
afternoon. Only his temper supported him against exhaustion. 
Lady Caryll drew his vitality from him and returned him nothing. 
His passion for influence over others, his music, his genius, his 
powerful appearance and impressive manner, his determination and 
energy, all these combined beat upon the senses of this girl. And 
she was like a rock, splitting a wave into a thousand white drops 
of spray. 

As he had spoken his last words to her he had seen her touch 
the hand of Sir Reuben, and now he said to himself again, really 
with doubt "Can she love that brown wreck her husband?" 
He felt it to be impossible. Rut then how consummately she acted, 
with such quietude too, such absence of effort ! And then suddenly 
he remembered that all the time he was singing his last song Sir 




THE SLAVE 181 

Reuben must have been sitting quietly at the end of the room. 
She must have been aware of it. 

He sprang up from the sofa, and walked up and down the 
room, moving rather as if he were upon the stage and desired to 
fix the eyes of two or three thousand people upon his mere 
allure. 

Of course she knew it, and disguised the impression that the 
song and its singing must have made upon her. Her glittering 
coldness was a marvellously clever trick. He felt comforted and 
forgave music, realising that he had done it an injustice. And he 
resolved next time he was alone with Lady Caryll to elicit from her 
some expression of the effect made upon her by the force of his 
genius. His opportunity soon came. 

Three days before the concert he sat with her in the green 
chamber in which Aubrey had first seen her after her marriage. 
The weather had become excessively cold. There was skating on 
the artificial waters in the parks. Fog brooded over the snowy 
slopes that in summer were shady lawns, and wolves might well 
have felt at home in the thickets of Kensington Gardens. In 
such weather the whole atmosphere of London changes. It no 
longer seems an English city. Mystery deepens in its bleak 
thoroughfares where, by night, the demon linkmen flit, drawing 
wild patterns of colour upon the background of the fog with 
their flaming brands. The misery of the poor rushes to the 
surface of life, and the cry of the starving wails through the 
darkness like the cry of famished animals in a frost - bound 
forest. 

But in Lady Caryll's green chamber the cry could not be 
heard. The fog could not enter there. The white eyes of the 
snow could not peer through the heavy curtains to watch her as 
she sat near the hearth, with the singer beside her. He had 
murmured a few commonplaces. She had carelessly replied. 
Now he said quietly 

" My friend was at peace in his desert grave when I sang his 
song to you the other day. For he knew what I did not know. 
You cannot deceive the dead, Lady Caryll ! " 

A faint expression of surprise came into her face. " I don't 
care even to deceive the living," she answered. " Nor do I 
try to." 

" I can't believe that forgive me." 

Men always think a woman is deceiving somebody. It is 
their favourite delusion." 

" Do you say, then, that you are a frank woman, and do not 
care to be a mystery ? " 

" Certainly." 



182 THE SLAVE 

" Yet you are perhaps the greatest mystery in London." 

She laughed softly, holding one of her white hands to the 
wood fire. The jewels in the rings on it flashed in the dancing 
light. 

" To whom ? " she asked. 

He thought for a moment, keeping his eagle eyes on her face. 

" To that boy who lives here/' he said. 

" Mr. Herrick ? " 

" Yes." 

" To any one else ? " 

" Shall I say to me also ? " 

She laughed again as if with a genuine amusement. 

" You had better include the whole city. You had better 
include Sir Reuben/' she said. 

" I certainly should include him/' Monsieur Anneau said. 

"You would be wrong." 

" I cannot think so." 

" I assure you that no other husband ever understood his wife so 
perfectly and completely as Sir Reuben understands me. That is 
why we are so happy together." 

" You are really happy ? " 

" Then you think I look sad ? " 

She shot him a glance that was radiant, that was luminous with 
a cold joy. He shivered, and drew nearer to the fire. He felt as 
if his force were turned to feebleness by this girl. She was like 
the snow that was falling outside, manifesting a soft and inflexible 
power upon the works of nature. 

" If you were sad you might choose to look radiantly happy," 
he replied. " Many women do that." 

" How foolish and absurd of them ! " 

" Perhaps it pays them to act. They receive their salary like 
the actresses upon the stage like me." 

" When you play high priests people who would bore you to 
tears in real life." 

"They are glorified by music." 

"As those women you speak of are glorified by the paint on 
their cheeks, the belladonna in their eyes." 

"Why do you speak like that of music and then claim that you 
are frank ? Your husband is not here, as he was the other after- 
noon." 

He spoke with a bold significance, drawing his chair quietly a 
little nearer to hers. She did not move, or appear to notice his 
movement. But, returning to his first remark, she said 

" What did your dead friend know in his desert grave ? You 
haven't told me." 



THE SLAVE 183 

"That you were acting indifference to his wonderful song, to 
his swan song." 

" Why should I do that ? " 

" Because your husband was sitting in the corner of the dark 
room all the time that I was singing it." 

" You give strange reasons for indifference." 

"Not at all. But I am jealous for my dead friend's power." 

Lady Caryll looked into the fire. Keeping her eyes there, 
and away from Monsieur Anneau's, she said, rather softly and 
carelessly 

"Ah! Not for your own ?" 

" Mine ! " he exclaimed, and the almost childish pride of the 
worshipped singer peeped out in him. " Mine is in my own keep- 
ing. I can take care of it." 

He paused she said nothing. 

" Well ? " he exclaimed almost irritably. 

" You wish me to say something. What ? Tell me and I will 
say it." 

He recovered himself. The trickle of sarcasm in her voice 
cooled the sudden heat of his mind. 

"Tell me the truth," he said. "You were moved by that song 
the other day, but you would not show it." 

" Why ? " 

"I have told you because of your husband's presence." 

"But he is fond of music, and was moved himself. You saw 
that ? " 

" I was not looking at his face, but at yours." 

" And that ? " 

" Expressed no feeling, no emotion. Yet, I had sung with my 
whole heart and spirit never have I sung better." 

" You think I did not choose to show how much you moved me 
because my husband was in the room ? " 

" I think so." 

Lady Caryll laughed softly again, and just then Sir Reuben 
came in. 

He had been in Hatton Garden, among the diamond merchants. 
His wife welcomed him with her happy eyes. 



CHAPTER XVII 

ON the day of his concert Monsieur Anneau felt doubtful of 
himself, almost nervous. His operatic mind was generally fixed 
upon some " scene " in the future, and when he thought quite 
naturally, he was inclined to think in acts, and instinctively to lay 
out the episodes of his life as a stage manager lays out the business 
of a music drama or of a play. He had now arrived at the Lady 
Gary 11 episode of his life. It seemed to him a terribly important 
one. It had come to seem so from the cold and impenetrable 
opposition to his purpose that hung round her like a mist round 
a frosty day. And Monsieur Anneau, always on the alert for 
great finales, in which his mighty voice and loud, violent, and 
forcible nature stood him in good stead, had decided that the 
finale of this opera, in which Lady Caryll and he were heroine 
and hero, must be reached on the day of his concert in her 
house. 

The day dawned in cold and fog. He was magnificently excited. 
He did not go out. He resolved not to receive any visitor during 
the day. He wished to test his force, to feel the muscles of his 
influence. So he tried his voice, singing some of the songs of the 
night. And he knew that as a vocalist he would be at his best, 
which meant that he would be at his best as a man. While he 
sang alone, he imagined Lady Caryll there, before him, fixing her 
grey eyes on his, listening to the superb warmth, the changing 
raptures of his voice. She would look cold as a diamond lit only 
by the moon. He knew that. He was prepared for it, and was 
determined that her aspect should not disconcert him. Yet he was 
. doubtful of himself. Through a long career he had grown accus- 
tomed to judge of the effect he was creating with his eyes, to 
expect and to look for symptoms shown by the body ; deepening 
or dying colour, the shadows that unshed tears paint in their home, 
the shifting of lips, the tension of hands that tell the tale of the 
heart. 

Lady Caryll, he knew, would grant him none of these customary 
gifts. To be with her was to be with darkness, seeming to see it, 
because one sees nothing. He was prepared to sing to the change- 
lessness of her serenity. He was determined to believe that this 







THE SLAVE 185 

serenity told the tale only of her cleverness, and not the true tale 
of her exact emotion. Yet he was nervous, he was doubtful in 
this determination, haunted secretly by the wonder whether this 
glittering and joyous calm were her setting forth of a fact and not 
of a fiction. But it could not be, for she was a woman. He de- 
termined that he would not enfeeble himself by striving still, as 
he had striven, to obtain from this woman the visible tribute given 
him so often by so many others. Instead of doing that, he would 
believe in a secret performance behind the mask, in the wild and 
flickering action of flames under the snow, dancing in obedience to 
his will. He would divine what he could not see. It must exist. 
He would not doubt it. And, in some solitary moment, he would 
appeal to it. He would force the flames to pierce, like glowing 
spears, through the snow. He could not think that this action 
would be beyond his power for ever. 

Yet he was strangely doubtful, and began to fear lest this 
timidity might cripple his effort. 

Thinking of this, he got up from his piano, and strode to the 
window. The fog hung in Brook Street, yellow and lethargic. 
Beneath it lay the frost, wrapped in its icy dreams. London was 
strangely motionless, and was not singing, or, if it still sang, he 
could not hear the song. Had he not been himself a singer he 
would have opened the window, and leaned out into this spurious 
and dreary travesty of night. For he had the desire to stretch 
forward into something that comes to excited men. While he 
was standing by the window, he heard behind him the sound of 
the door of his room shutting. He turned round. By the door, 
close to the yellow wall, stood a pale man, atrociously dressed, 
with a terrified and yet determined expression upon his face, 
which was abominably thin. He held in his left hand a parcel 
wrapped in brown paper. Monsieur Anneau looked at him in 
silence, stiff with surprise. The man touched the parcel, and the 
singer noticed that he had the hand of a pianist. 

" You are the great singer," the man said in English, but with 
a strong foreign accent. " To-night you give a concert. I am 
starving. I have written a song. It is here. I wish you to sing 
it to-night at your concert. I borrowed the money with which I 
bribed the servant to let me in. I gave it to him all of it, and I 
say that I am starving." 

The man was silent. He now began to tremble excessively, 
and Monsieur Anneau could hear the shuffle of the brown paper 
under his shaking hand. Then, with an effort that was hideous 
in its violence, he controlled himself. 

"Sing my song to-night," he said. "Or I shall be dead to 
morrow." 



186 THE SLAVE 

And then he burst into a passion of tears, pressing his face 
against the wall. 

Monsieur Anneau strode forward. He did not speak to or 
touch the man, but snatched from the trembling hand the song, 
and brusquely tore it out of its covering. Hearing him do this, 
the man wheeled round, a wild excitement dawning in his face, 
over which the shameful tears were running. Monsieur Anneau 
was reading the words of the song. They were French, and told 
of the last sea journey of a pearl-fisher through the still waters of 
the East. He went to seek the most beautiful pearl in all the 
world for the maiden he loved. It lay far down in the shadow of 
the sea. He stood upon the pearl bank, murmured his prayer and 
the name of the maiden, and cast himself into the deep, sinking 
down from the world where walked his dreams and his great 
desire. The water resisted him. He felt that its blue hands 
were striving to press him back, that its voices were telling him 
to begone. He heeded them not, but sank down with open 
eyes watching for the pearl. He saw it where it lay asleep in the 
purple shadows, and caught it softly in his hand. Then he turned 
to rise. But the depth to which he had come was very great, and 
he felt a terrible oppression stealing upon him. It seemed to him 
now that, while he had been sinking in the sea, the maiden had 
come to the pearl-bank where he had prayed surely a thousand 
years ago and was watching for his return, and was extending 
her little hands towards the wave, to clasp his gift and the gift of 
the sea. Her dark eyes were full of a passion of desire as she 
leaned down. And surely he could hear her voice faintly calling 
to him from above, as if from some heaven very far away. He 
strove to answer, to cry, " 1 have the pearl, my love, my love ! It 
is here ! " But the oppression deepened around him, and drew 
nearer. And the sound of her calling voice died away. Now he 
could no longer feel that the pearl was in his hand. Yet it was 
there. Mechanically he strove to rise. Then he strove no longer. 
Everything faded. He was a dead man drifting in the sea with 
its greatest treasure hidden in his lifeless hand. And always, far 
above upon the pearl-bank, the maiden leaned over the wave, cry- 
ing, " Come to me, come ! Bring me my pearl ! " And her voice 
'changed into a horrible wailing. And she held out her little 
hands for ever to the sea, growing ghostly with desire, and ivory 
wan as the days gave themselves to the years. 

When he had read the verses Monsieur Anneau glanced at the 
music. His large eyes were blazing, and with one hand he pulled 
at his beard. The man stood by the wall gazing at him with an 
anxiety that was animal in its intensity. 

" Go to the piano," said Monsieur Anneau. 






THE SLAVE 187 

He had not spoken to the intruder till he said this. And now 
he scarcely looked at the man. The song was everything to him. 
The composer was less than nothing. The man went to the piano, 
trembling. He stretched out his hands, which were horribly thin, 
and struck some notes. 

" Wrong ! wrong ! " cried Monsieur Anneau, with harsh im- 
patience. 

The man started as if stung by the exclamation. There were 
still tears in his hungry eyes, and he was on the verge of complete 
physical prostration. But, with a pitiful effort, he controlled him- 
self and played the opening symphony. Then Monsieur Anneau 
sang. He read music easily at first sight. But now he did more 
than this. He gave an interpretation of the meaning of the song 
that was superb. When he had finished, the composer's hands 
fell from the key-board before he could strike the last chord. He 
had fainted. He had not known that his song was so beautiful. 

When he had revived, and had been given some food and wine, 
brought by the amazed servant whom he had bribed, Monsieur 
Anneau said to him 

" I will sing your song to-night at my concert. It will be the 
last thing in the programme." 

The man said nothing. He felt as if he were the core of a 
world that spun like a zoetrope, and roared as it spun. Monsieur 
Anneau sat down at his writing-table, drew a cheque, and gave it 
to the man. 

" I wish you to accompany your song to-night," he said. " Come 
to Number 100 Park Lane at eleven o'clock." 

"I have no clothes," the man said. Monsieur Anneau wrote 
some words on a sheet of note-paper, and gave it to the man. 

"Go to Wilmington, New Bond Street, get some, and have 
them placed to my account. That will do ! " 

The man went out without another word, gazing at the cheque 
which he held in his shaking hand with eyes that were full of 
terror, the terror that seizes the imagination encompassed by the 
violence of change. 

Monsieur Anneau, left alone, flung himself down on a couch 
and devoured the song with eyes that were full not of terror but 
of triumph. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

THE fog that lay over London deepened as night came on. 
Lady St. Ormyn was in despair. She feared that people would be 
afraid to venture out, and that Monsieur Anneau's concert would be 
a fiasco. As her maid dressed her in scarlet silk, she said bitter 
things about the climate of her native land, and she almost burst 
into tears when she received a message from her coachman saying 
that nearly all traffic was stopped, and that he did not think it 
would be safe to attempt to get to Park Lane. 

"Tell him to come round at once," she cried, smothering her 
flushed face with powder, and pushing up one of her thick and 
dark eyebrows which was drooping perhaps from depression at 
the tragedy of the weather. " The horses are not his, but mine, 
and if I choose, I shall kill them." 

Ten minutes later she hurried over the strip of carpet into the 
brougham. A thick, swimming blackness, like a gigantic witch's 
brew, stirred wearily in the cauldron of the town. Every landmark 
was submerged in it and utterly lost. There were no gas-lamps, no 
railings, no nouses, no people. Even the ground, slippery with the 
frost, was scarcely visible under one's feet. Faint sounds, soft and 
spectral cries, ghostly footfalls, the thin grating of distant traffic in 
cautious and hesitating motion, shivered through the bitter atmos- 
phere, suggesting some far away world full of timorous activities. 
Lady St. Ormyn's bosom quivered under the cold jewels that 
decorated it. She wrapped herself in her furs and lay back. The 
horses moved on slowly and stopped. She twisted the long gloves 
that she was beginning to draw on into a ball, and then frantically 
unwound them. The horses started. The left wheels of the 
carriage struck the kerb and grated against it. The horses stopped 
again, and she heard the gruff murmur of the coachman's voice 
speaking to the groom. She violently let down the window and 
put her head out into the darkness, exposing her astonished 
diamond stars to the terror of the night. 

" Go on," she vociferated. " Chalmers, go on at once ! Whip 
the horses, whip them ! " 

The coachman leaned sideways and backwards towards her. 
He was invisible, but she heard his thick voice. 

188 



THE SLAVE 189 

" I daren't, my lady," he said. " It's a cruel night." 

" I tell you to whij) the horses." 

" If I do, my lady, there'll be an accident." 

" I order you to whip the horses. If you don't take my orders, 
you leave my service to-morrow." 

The lash fell on the satin backs. There was a jerk, a moment 
of quick progress, then a crash and a battering of hoofs on pave- 
ment. Two flickering lights sprang up by the carriage window, and 
a voice that suggested innumerable casks of gin, cried 

" D'yer want to put 'em down the airey, stoopid ? Where the 
blazes are yer a-drivin' to ? " 

The whip fell again. The coachman was losing his temper. 
Lady St. Ormyn, thrusting her head once more through the window, 
beheld two filthy and degraded-looking men holding torches. 

"Give us a bob, lydy," said one, "and we'll tike yer any- 
wheres." 

"If you'll " began Lady St. Ormyn. 

There was another crash. The carriage lurched forward. One 
of the horses was down. Then there was a noise of smashing 
woodwork. He was expressing his surprise in the usual way of 
horses with his hoofs. The tattered linkmen ran forward, swear- 
ing happily. They foresaw a fortune, and their oaths came in a 
most joyful profusion. A moment later a scarlet woman, whose 
hair bristled with diamonds, stood in the road joining a shrill voice 
to theirs. 

That night was one of the tragedies of Lady St. Ormyn's exis- 
tence When, half an hour later, she regained her house, escorted 
by an alarmed groom and the two roughs, who backed before her, 
as if before a royal personage, extending their grimy hands for 
lucre, anger and disappointment had almost filched the semblance 
of humanity from her disordered features. 

The hysterics that preceded her retirement to bed were of so 
complicated a nature, and so many-sided, that her maid gave her 
warning on the following day, on the ground as stated in the 
servants' hall that she was "a Christian woman, and didn't want 
to know anything about the other place before her time came, if it 
was ever so." 

Meanwhile Monsieur Anneau was very heroically bearing with 
the fog that had destroyed so many plans. His concert was fixed 
to begin at eleven o'clock. At that hour only sixteen or twenty 
intrepid people who lived close by had put in an appearance. The 
white chairs in the music-room stood ghostly and deserted among 
the azaleas and the roses. Lady Caryll expressed her regret. She 
wore a white gown, very plainly made. On her breast shone the 
uncut jewels of a marvellous Indian necklace that Sir Reuben had 



190 THE SLAVE 

just given her an emerald, a ruby, a blue sapphire, a turquoise, 
a diamond, a white sapphire, and a topaz in an old silver setting. 
In her hair was a silver ornament in which more jewels gleamed. 
As she stood in the almost empty drawing-room, she looked like a 
radiant spirit striving after a semblance of sorrow. Aubrey watched 
her while she spoke to the singer. 

" It seems cruel to expect you to sing such a programme to 
such an audience," she said. 

" I wish my audience were composed of only one lover of 
music," he answered. 

"Ah! you mean Sir Reuben!" she said, with an airy malice. 
" He admires your singing of that desert song. He can talk of 
nothing else." 

" I have another song more beautiful for to-night," said 
Monsieur Anneau, glancing round as if looking for some one. 

" What is it about ? " 

" It is about a woman and a pearl." 

An intent expression floated up in her eyes. 

Just then the drawing-room door was opened and a footman 
called unintelligibly a foreign name. A man, horribly thin, hor- 
ribly pale, with painfully excited eyes and twitching lips, entered 
the room. He looked nervous and as if he were being hunted. 
He was well dressed, but wore his clothes so badly that they 
seemed ridiculous on him. Perhaps his age was thirty-five. His 
dark hair was carefully brushed, but his black tie was a flourishing 
mess, and his shirt-front was impossible. Lady Caryll murmured 
to Monsieur Anneau 

" I don't know this dreadful-looking man." 

" I told him to come." 

"Why?" 

" He is the composer of the song about the pearl." 

The man was standing with his terrible eyes fixed upon 
Monsieur Anneau, who now went up to him, asked his name, 
and formally presented him to Lady Caryll. The few guests 
examined him with scarcely concealed astonishment. Aubrey 
wondered who on earth he was, and how he had got in ; wondered 
still more when Lady Caryll, with an eager smile, began to talk 
to him. 

" You have composed a song ? " 

The man bowed awkwardly. 

"About a pearl ? " 

" Yes, madame." 

" The music only ? " 

"And the words, madame." 

" When did you write it ? " 



THE SLAVE 191 

"Yesterday, maclame." 

" Only then ! " said Monsieur Anneau, in deep-voiced surprise. 
" What made you think of it so suddenly ? " 

The man hesitated, looking feverishly about the beautiful room, 
and at the few people gathered in it. 

" I heard I knew I heard you were going to sing to-night, 
monsieur. It was in a paper," he stammered. 

"Well?" 

"And more. In the paper it spoke of jewels, of a lady who 
had wonderful jewels." 

Lady Caryll was listening with deep attention. 

" Go on," said Monsieur Anneau. 

" I was I was ill starving I thought if I could write a song 
about a jewel, perhaps you would sing it to the lady." 

He was painfully embarrassed. Lady Caryll spoke to him in a 
soft voice. 

" And so you wrote this song for me ? " 

The man bowed again. 

"Is it pretty?" 

A sudden fierce enthusiasm leapt up in the man's pinched 
face. 

"When he sings it," he said, in a husky voice, "it is beautiful." 

Suddenly he caught Monsieur Anneau's hand and kissed it 
adoringly. The singer looked delighted. Such a scene did not 
embarrass him in the least. Was he not a Parisian ? He cast an 
impressive and powerful glance at Lady Caryll. But her eyes were 
fixed upon the pale and hungry man who was losing his head, 
overwhelmed by this great episode in his wretched life. 

Mrs. Luffa Parkinson was announced. She entered in her 
usual rippling manner. She had come through the fog in a 
bath-chair attended by two footmen. It was past eleven. Lady 
St. Ormyn did not arrive. It seemed useless to wait, and Lady 
Caryll decided that the concert should begin. As her guests 
began to move towards the music-room she said to the starving 
composer 

" Come with me. I wish you to sit by me till you accompany 
your song." 

Then, as she walked with him through the warm and scented 
corridors towards the music-room, she added 

" Tell me the story of your song. What happens to the pearl ? " 

He looked at her as if she were a goddess, he a poor beggar 
suddenly led into heaven. He stammered out the story, striving 
painfully to hide his emotion. She listened with intensity to his 
halting words. At the close her clear white face was like a 
tragic mask. 



192 THE SLAVE 

"Why did you not give the maiden her pearl ?" she said; and 
her voice thrilled the man. 

She had turned her head as she walked, and was glancing at 
him keenly. But now his fear seemed leaving him. He looked 
at her and replied, almost boldly 

"Ah, madame, when one is starving one cannot give, and then 
it seems to one too that death attends every effort, and that no 
one is really happy. Is there happiness on the earth, madame ? " 

" There is happiness in the sea," she said. " Your dead man is 
happy, for he has the pearl." 

They were now in the softly illuminated music-room. Aubrey 
came into it last. He was greatly touched by Lady Caryll's treat- 
ment of the poor composer, and by her keeping him to sit near 
her at the concert. 

"She is full of sympathy for the poor and friendless," he said 
to himself. His thought flew to Diamond and to her humble 
family ; and for the first time he was able to imagine Lady Caryll 
in Milk Court, sharing in simple sorrows, partaking happily in 
simple joys. 

The little audience began to settle itself in the room. Mrs. 
Luffa Parkinson was full of regret. As she sat down by Sir Reuben, 
she exclaimed 

" Why is it, Sir Reuben, that atmospheric conditions are allowed 
to destroy the calculations of genius? Who sends a fog like this 
to shatter the plans of the world's greatest singer ? I shall ask my 
confessor, Father Grimble." 

"Would it not be better to make inquiry of the clerk of the 
weather ? " said Sir Reuben. 

"Oh, I can't endure clerks, they are so uncultured. They read 
those dreadful farthing magazines that answer questions. Long 
ago, when I was an atheist " 

She chattered theologically. Sir Reuben listened with his eyes 
on Lady Caryll. The mental proceedings of cinnamon-coloured 
ladies when they were atheists had long ceased to interest him. 

It seemed almost as if the snow that wrapped the outer world 
had entered into this room, had floated upon the white walls, the 
white chairs so many of which were empty. Only the scented 
warmth, the sweet breath of flowers, destroyed the illusion. The 
grand piano that stood on the small platform was open. A mass 
of roses almost concealed it. The few guests rustled as they 
settled themselves down here and there in luxurious attitudes. 
Mrs. Luffa Parkinson began to look slightly abandoned in antici- 
pation of the approaching orgy of the talent she loved. Sir 
Reuben, who sat very low, appeared strangely shrivelled at her 
side. Aubrey was with a typical London girl all royal fringe, 







THE SLAVE 193 

weary chatter and bare shoulders. She told him a story about 
a supper-party, and asked him a few dozen questions about 
racing. He spoke softly to her and looked at Lady Caryll as a 
man looks at magic, for he thought he saw the root-humanity, 
God in his creature, shining in her eyes as she gazed at the poor 
composer, who moved among the white chairs and the flowers as 
one who treads the mazes of a dream so beautiful that it is terrible. 
She sat down at the side of the room at some little distance from 
the platform. The composer sat timidly by her. Despite the 
good clothes he wore, it was evident that he feared to defile the 
whiteness of his chair. In his mind he still wore the rags of 
poverty. Monsieur Anneau, followed by his usual London accom- 
panist, a thin gentleman with an English face and Polish hair, 
stepped upon the platform. There was a flutter of applause. 
Monsieur Anneau bowed as if to a continent. He glanced round 
for Lady Caryll, found her, and looked confident. Sir Reuben's 
flexible lips curved in a mischievous smile, and Aubrey involuntarily 
clenched his hands. 

"I'm sure you're a dab at boxing," whispered his lively com- 
panion. "I like a man who can make good play with his tup- 
pennies." 

Aubrey wished her dead. 

The accompanist ran airily about over the keyboard, making a 
light noise, as indefinite as the chirping of grasshoppers in the 
heart of a summer's day. Then he became definite. Conversation 
was hushed. Monsieur Anneau called on all his experience of 
music, on all his experience of women, and began his brilliantly 
arranged programme. 

It was a procession of sentiment, a quick passing of the passions. 
Many composers had given their hearts to make this procession, 
and some their frivolities. For with the priests and the enthu- 
siasts, mingling among the devotees, there must be dancers and 
those who posture and leap towards the fire of the torches. Mon- 
sieur Anneau soon felt that he had seized and held all the women 
in the white room except one. Mrs. Parkinson lay back as one 
who floats upon an ocean of soft, hysteric ecstasy. Even Aubrey's 
companion began to look grave, and to forget all about fists and 
horses. Her large eyes were dewy beneath her cloudy fringe. 
Her round cheeks shone with rosy heats. Monsieur Anneau felt 
an abrupt contempt for her easy emotion. Only Lady Caryll sat 
negligently in her chair, looking towards him with quiet and 
observant eyes. She seemed to watch the procession of the 
passions as a savant watches through a microscope the movements 
of insects, only she watched with less intensity. He sang of Margaret 
at the door, of the man who saw the Lorelei as he rode through the 



194 THE SLAVE 

forest hunting, and who let his dogs leap on while he stood gazing 
through the leaves at the wicked and lovely angel singing above 
the rushing Rhine. He sang of Mimi, who died for her student 
lover ; of Pierrette, who was lifted into the moon when she wept 
for the false Pierrot ; of the little German peasant girl, whose life 
was ruined because she had once heard the jingle of spurs as a blond 
soldier rode by on the dusty highway; of Fatima, with the deep 
and long Eastern eyes, who crouched at evening in her coloured 
doorway of the mysterious Kasbah, and listened to the wailing of 
the pipes, and smelt the smoke of the incense and of the Indian 
perfumes, and thought of the Breton sailor, who had loved her for 
an hour in a black night, and who had sailed for France and his 
bright-eyed Jlancce in the morning. He sang the desert song, 
watching for a shiver, or the parted lips through which escapes a 
sigh. He saw the poor composer, torn by his splendid singing, 
holding the arms of his chair with spectral hands, forgetting his 
fear, his poverty, his future as he gave himself to the influence of 
the music that was the air in which alone his soul could live. But 
the one woman escaped him still, even as a white ghost escapes the 
grasp of the man who adores and tries to seize an apparition. 

Anger rose up in him again, and he forgot his resolution to 
expect no outward sign of feeling from Lady Caryll, and to divine 
the fire leaping beneath the snow. He forgot it because, with his 
quick intuition, lie knew that this calm was not assumed, but was 
real and deeply rooted. Something like despair seized him as he 
stood there among the flowers. For a moment he slightly lost 
control of his great voice, and sang an ornament roughly. The 
slip recalled his artist's pride and gave him greater power, as one 
sin may increase the holiness of a deep-hearted saint. All the white 
room swam before his eyes in a mist of shadowy faces and floating 
forms, as if the snow and the fog had entered. The flowers and 
the jewels worn by the women seemed to retreat. He saw their 
colours as from a long distance, and the sound of the piano was 
surely far away in the air. Then everything became painfully close 
and clear. Each note struck by the accompanist was unnaturally 
definite. Each form in the chamber was accentuated till it looked 
grotesque. His own voice hammered upon his brain murderously. 
When he finished the song he was singing, he retired for a moment 
from the platform. The feeble but continuous applause of the 
small excited audience recalled him. He bowed with shut eyes, 
and again retired. He sat for a little while alone in the room that 
served as the artists' room. The gentleman with the English face 
and the Polish hair approached him to adulate. 

" Please leave me, Monsieur," he said, rather fiercely. 

The gentleman contained his admiration with an uneasy smile, 






THE SLAVE 195 

half deprecatory, half offended. Monsieur Aimeau leaned his head 
on his hands; they were burning, and his temples throbbed. Was 
his fire to be overborne thus by ice ? He felt on the edge of his 
faculties, strung un to something far beyond concert pitch, and as 
if he might either sing the last two songs on his programme better 
than he had ever sung in his life, or break down altogether. He 
was so uncertain of himself as he sat there that he absolutely 
debated for a moment whether to go again on to the platform, or 
to send a message that he was unwell and could not continue. 
He remembered all his triumphs over women and that his music 
had never failed him yet. Perhaps even now he was on the verge 
of his greatest success. Intense depression of soul often immedi- 
ately precedes an exceptional triumph. What artist does not know 
that ? He rang the bell, and asked the man who came to bring 
the composer of the pearl song to him. Almost immediately the 
composer entered ; his thin face was alive with intense expression ; 
he hurried forward and seemed about to fall at Monsieur Anneau's 
feet. The singer checked him. Looking into the man's eyes, in 
which an almost hideous fire of excitement was burning, he said 
slowly 

" I feel fatigued ill." 

The man's face turned grey as ashes. 

" I am not sure whether I can go on again," Monsieur Anneau 
continued. 

The man dropped at his feet, seized his burning hands, and 
cried out piteously 

" My pearl song, Monsieur my song ! You must sing it, you 
must you must ! " 

" Why ?" said Monsieur Anneau. 

" The lady the beautiful lady like a white dream ; she is wait- 
ing for it. All the time when you sing of Gretchen, of the 
Lorelei, of Fatima all the time she is waiting for my song, for my 
pearl." 

Monsieur Anneau hesitated. A sudden jealousy stirred in his 
heart. Then he looked at the man at his feet, mad with anxiety, 
feverish with fear and hope, haggard, thin, with the beast mark of 
poverty and of starvation on him. He burst into a laugh. How 
fantastic to be jealous of such a creature, ridiculous in his new, 
ready-made clothes. 

" We must not keep the lady waiting," he said. " But I shall 
only sing your song; I shall omit the other. Come !" 

The man bounded up and followed him trembling. Monsieur 
Anneau made 110 explanation to the audience of the change in the 
programme. He did not care whether people were disappointed 
or not. As he came forward he looked towards Lady Gary 11. Her 



196 THE SLAVE 

eyes were fixed on the composer ; then she glanced at the pro- 
gramme, rose from her seat, and came close to the platform. She 
sat down softly near the piano. The composer turned his flaming 
eyes on her. An authority had suddenly come into his bearing and 
manner. He no longer seemed awkward, but powerful ; not merely 
at home with his audience, but born to dominate them. His ex- 
pression did not timidly ask, it demanded Lady Caryll's attention. 
He played a soft prelude that had much resemblance to certain 
Indian music. Lady Caryll leaned forward ; her breast touched the 
red azaleas that made a bright cloud along the platform. Then 
Monsieur Anneau sang. He was fired by the sight of this creature 
who escaped him, close though she was, with her white breast 
against the red flowers. And, with the complete impudence that 
was one of his gifts, he sang to her, ignoring the rest of the audi- 
ence. The composer played to her, but in a totally different spirit, 
with the delicate fervour of a young father showing to a friend his 
beautiful first child. Aubrey, watching, felt Monsieur Anneau's 
exclusion of the audience to be an insult, the composer's to be a 
compliment. Sir Reuben cared little for either. To him Lady 
Caryll was always in the harem, safe as a veiled woman of the East. 
As Monsieur Anneau sang the prayer of the pearl-fisher upon the 
bank above the sea, he saw that Lady Caryll stirred at last from 
her cold slumber of the soul, and he thought of her suddenly as 
the maiden for whom the fisher sought the pearl. He was the 
man looking down upon the shining water that hid the secret in 
its shadow. The song was a great drama of two passions. They 
acted it together. But it became real. He dived into the sea, 
the last cry of the prayer upon his lips. She knew, as he sank 
down out of reach of the sun and of her glittering eyes she knew 
of his journey. The darkness of the deep sea came upon him, 
blue moving dimness, and all those murmuring voices that speak 
together in the bosom of the sea. And now he saw the pale gleam 
of the pearl, and he knew that Caryll stood upon the pearl bank far 
above him. The heavy waters prevented him from seeing her, but 
he knew that she was there watching for his return with passionate 
eyes. And he caught the great pearl in his hand. How smooth 
and wet it was. He held it with the tenderness of a woman and 
turned to rise. Then he felt the horror of the sea's resistance. 
It was pressing him down like one who presses violent hands upon 
the throat of a thief who seeks to rob him in the night. He fought 
against it. For Caryll was leaning down to the sea Avith out- 
stretched hands. She was calling, and her faint voice mingled 
with all the angry whispering voices of the sea. He strove to 
answer her, to cry aloud that he had the pearl. But his voice was 
faint and frail, like the voice in a shell of the sea, and an immense 



THE SLAVE Ip7 

weariness overtook him. Everything was dulled and all the world 
was full of heaviness. Still he strove to rise. Then he strove no 
longer. He died, holding the pearl fast in his hand. And it was 
after death that, as in a vision, he saw Caryll leaning ever over the 
wave with outstretched piteous hands, whiter, whiter, becoming 
spectral, thin, almost like a hag, but always with the flaming eyes 
of youth, the shining hair of youth. And, as after death, he heard 
her voice crying, " Give me my pearl ! " At last it was hoarse 
and hideous. It might have been the faint howl of a wolf had 
there not been in it the thrilling note of a human soul. 

" Hark, Monsieur ! Oh, listen, listen," said the composer in 
the artists' room. " They are moved ! You have touched their 
hearts ! They cry ' Encore.' They cry it to my song." 

"Those people would encore my death agony, if I showed 
them that I suffered the torments of purgatory," said Monsieur 
Anneau fiercely. 

He flung himself into a chair and hid his face in his hands. 
The little, persistent noise continued, and increased in the hidden 
room. 

" Go go, bow to them, show yourself to them," he cried to 
the composer. " It is your song. Go, go ! " 

The composer went, shaking. He had composed much music, 
but never had he been applauded before, except by one or two 
friends, poor, wretched like himself. Monsieur Anneau sat waiting 
for him to return. He did not return. At length the noise of 
applause completely died away. Monsieur Anneau's attention was 
attracted by the silence. The intense excitement which had fol- 
lowed the superb effort he had made in singing faded within him. 
He felt seized by a reaction, cold and fatigued. Then he heard a 
shuffling tread, and he knew that it announced the approach of Sir 
Reuben. In fact, he entered smiling, held out his dry brown hand 
and clasped the hand of the singer. 

" I have heard all the great vocalists of the world in many 
years," he said. " You surpassed them all to-night. And then, 
too, you are a discoverer of hidden genius." 

" I ! What genius ? " said Monsieur Anneau. 

"The composer of the last song. He is with my wife now. 
Will you not come to her? We shall go to supper in a moment." 

He stood by the door, holding it with his hand and still smil- 
ing. Monsieur Anneau thought there was malice in the eyes that 
watched him. He got up and came forward, staring at Sir Reuben 
almost stupidly. He was wondering what could be the cause of 
the quick gleam of triumph in the face of his host. 

They passed out into the music-room together. The few people 
were scattered about, talking eagerly after their enforced silence. 



T98 THE SLAVE 

Mrs. Luffa Parkinson was ostentatiously giving way to the emotion 
wakened in her by the final song. Two young men ministered 
to her, while she lay back in a large, deep chair murmuring 
hysterically 

"Oh, poor thing ! Poor dear thing ! Oh, give her the pearl ! 
Oh, give her the pearl ! " 

Observing the entrance of Monsieur Anneau, she had a relapse, 
and, grasping the sleeve of his coat as he passed her, she cried, in 
a piping soprano 

"Oh, Monsieur Anneau cruel cruel! Give the dear thing 
her pearl ! Poor little me's so upset ! " 

He spoke suavely to her, but his eyes sought Lady Caryll. He 
saw her standing in deep conversation with the composer. And 
he was startled by the strangeness of her demeanour. She had 
unfurled a big white fan, which she moved mechanically to and 
fro. Her face was flushed. Her eyes were very bright and staring, 
and she was speaking with extraordinary animation, as if carrying 
on a violent argument or protesting vehemently against some- 
thing. The hand that was not holding the fan grasped the folds 
of her dress tightly. The composer stood silently listening to her. 
His eyes were cast down, and his thin lips were pressed tightly 
together. There was a curiously obstinate expression about those 
lips. 

"Go to Lady Caryll," Sir Reuben said to the singer. "She 
wants to thank you for your magnificent performance." 

And he bent down to give some pity to poor Mrs. Parkinson, 
who absolutely declined to recover from the prostration caused by 
her too lively realisation of imaginary events. 

Monsieur Anneau approached Lady Caryll. She was too much 
engrossed by the conversation she was carrying on with the com- 
poser to notice him. 

" You must do it," he heard her say. " You must do it 
for me." 

The composer looked down on the floor and made no answer. 

" But why don't you answer me ? " she exclaimed, almost 
angrily. " Ah, Monsieur Anneau ! " 

The singer was standing before her. She could no longer 
ignore him. Her hand fell from the folds of her gown, and the 
fire died out of her face as she thanked him for his singing. 

" It was superb," she said. " You have no rival." 

"You were moved?" he asked, looking at her with violent 
curiosity. 

" Oh yes. Every one was moved." 

"But you ! For it is so difficult to touch your heart. It is so 
difficult even to stir forgive me your temper." 



THE SLAVE 199 

A very faint smile hovered about the composer's thin lips. 
Lady Gary 11 saw it. 

" Those who can stir the dog that sleeps possess the opiate that 
can make it sleep again," she said, looking at the composer. 
"Just as the hands that can make a terrible crescendo upon the 
pianoforte can make an exquisite diminuendo." 

Monsieur Anneau shot an angry glance at this man whom he 
had lifted out of the gutter, and who now seemed the hero of 
some curious and inexplicable intimacy with the woman who 
ignored the power that triumphed over others. 

"Caryll," said Sir Reuben's voice, "shall we go in to supper? 
I will take in the Duchess, and you " 

Lady Caryll turned hastily. 

"As we are so few," she said, "perhaps we had better be quite 
informal. Don't you think it will be pleasanter?" she added, 
speaking to one or two people near her. 

They agreed. A heterogeneous move was made towards the 
supper-room, in which were several small oval tables. Lady 
Caryll had the inevitable big-wig at her right hand. She made the 
composer sit at her left. Monsieur Anneau's angry astonishment 
was so great that he stood looking actually confused and almost 
stupid. 

Sir Reuben touched his arm. 

"Will you sit with my party?" he said. " Here, on the other 
side of the Duchess." 

Sir Reuben enjoyed that supper immensely. He forced Mon- 
sieur Anneau to talk. He discussed music. The singer, who 
hated his art at that moment more than he hated the thought of 
death or the approach of old age, could scarcely find conventional 
words in which to reply. His eyes, which looked as if they had 
been polished, were incessantly turned towards Lady Caryll's table. 
Aubrey, too, often looked towards her. He loved her that night 
as we love those who have been mysterious to us, and who suddenly 
seem to fulfil our half-timid ideal of them. Caryll's marked honour 
paid to the most obscure man present comforted Aubrey as a fire 
comforts a man who is cold. He felt like one who, reciting the 
Creed, suddenly beholds a vision of the Trinity whose existence 
his faith is affirming. 

While Lady Caryll talked to the big-wig, the composer added 
one more excitement to the long list of his excitements of the 
day and night. Only when he was offered food did he know how 
near he had been to starvation. The first mouthful of soup sent 
a message to his poor body. It came like an animal to the ca^e 
bars. All the mental faculties were dumb, while the imperious 
body spoke. The servants glanced at the strange guest in cold 



200 THE SLAVE 

astonishment. They were too well fed to be touched by pity for 
starvation. They simply thought that this extraordinary man was 
an unmannerly glutton. Lady Caryll knew better. She was not 
touched either. But she talked to the big-wig calmly, divining 
the new mental condition that would inevitably follow the bodily 
process going on in the composer. Towards the end of supper 
she turned and found, as she expected, a new man at her side. 
She spoke quietly to this new man on indifferent subjects, watching 
his oddly contented look, an expression so abrupt and novel in him 
that it rendered him almost self-satisfied in appearance. She was 
like a cat playing with a plump, sleepy, and ignorant .mouse, that 
rolled beneath the velvet paw in voluptuous enjoyment. For a 
moment she felt the contempt for the physical side of men that 
almost every woman feels at some period of her life generally at 
some period that immediately precedes a feminine triumph. The 
composer of the pearl song, in a condition of starvation, was 
obviously a man of genius. Well fed, he seemed a blinking, 
complacent bourgeois. She talked to him softly. He expanded, 
leaning back in his chair, sipping his champagne from time to 
time. She drew the conversation towards music. Easy tears 
shone in his eyes, from which the former fires had died away. 
He praised his goddess in flowing periods. Lady Caryll watched 
him impatiently. Then she spoke again of his song. 

" You will change it ? " she said. 

A servant filled his glass. 

" I will do anything for you, madame," he answered exuberantly. 

He had a sensation that he was floating upwards on clouds, 
rather in the fashion of Margaret in Gounod's opera. Lady Caryll 
was the chief attendant houri. He blinked in the heavenly 
light. 

"Anything," he repeated. 

"Then let your diver rise from the sea and give the maiden 
her pearl. I hate these beautiful works of our day which end in 
unsatisfied desire. You must not be like all the others. You can 
venture to be original." 

" I I will be myself. Henceforward, madame, I will fear 
nothing." 

He blinked again. 

"Then change your song and bring it to me. It shall be sung 
everywhere. You shall be famous." 

They rose from the supper-table. Around the composer the 
celestial aether swam and swii-led. 

Aubrey helped him to put on his tattered overcoat among the 
contemptuous footmen. Monsieur Anneau had only given him an 



THE SLAVE 



201 



order for a dress suit. He held Aubrey's hand and blessed him in 
French. Then he went into the fog sideways, singing 

" On a mis la graine en terre, 

Saute done, la brune, au son du flutieau ! 

En terre on a mis la graine, 

Saute done, la brune, au son de la flute ! 

En terre pres du ruisseau, 

Au son de la flute, au son du flutieau ! " 



CHAPTER XIX 

LADY CARYLL'S guests had melted away into the fog. Monsieur 
Anneau alone remained, and he lingered with the air of one about 
to depart and on the edge of his polite good-bye. Aubrey had 
disappeared to his rooms, and now Sir Reuben, with a hidden glee, 
said to the singer 

" I am going to have a cigar; will you join me ? Ah ! I dare- 
say too much smoking is bad for the voice." 

" And I must be going," Monsieur Anneau said. 

He was standing up. Rather hastily Sir Reuben pressed his 
large hand and left the room before he could. 

" I must be going," the singer repeated to Lady Caryll. 

She extended her hand ; as she did so the door closed behind 
Sir Reuben. Monsieur Anneau took her hand and held it. 

" Good-night," she said. "A thousand thanks." 

" Ah ! " he exclaimed, " why are you so conventional with me, 
so unconventional with that wretched, hideous, absurd spectre who 
who " 

He dropped her hand suddenly, flung himself down on a 
sofa, and leaned his face for a moment against his arm on the 
cushion. 

" Why ? why ? " he i-epeated, looking at her with a violence he 
did not seek to conceal. 

There was no surprise in her face. She sat down quietly. 

" Who is the spectre ? " she asked. 

" The man I brought here, the composer of the song. I made 
his triumph ; I gave him his success. He owes all to me, and 
then you ignore me, on such an evening. You devote yourself to 
him. Am I nothing?" 

His jealous anger gathered while he was speaking. A sense of 
outrage overwhelmed him. 

" Do you know what I have given up for you, Lady Caryll ?" 
he continued, almost with bitterness. "Ah! you never read the 
American papers." 

She smiled, rather as one smiles easily at a child when he shows 
his childishness. 

" What did they say ? " 






THE SLAVE 203 



That I was mad to give up such an engagement to lose so 
much money." 

" Oh, money ! " she said, with a note of profound indifference 
that stung him. 

" You can say that ? " he exclaimed. " You but " 

He hesitated, looking at her. It was strange, but his habitual 
bold impudence with women began to waver before her bright 
and cold glance. Yet his excitement, engendered partly by the 
intense effort to conquer he had made in his singing, partly by the 
subsequent insult so he considered it that he had undergone at 
the hands of Lady Caryll, drove him on. He thought again of all 
he had lost in America and grew reckless. 

" Do you wish to say that you are indifferent to money, 
then ? " he asked, " that you think it is nothing to give up a 
fortune ? " 

The stress on the pronoun was bitter. She did not seem to 
notice it. 

I know that it is the accepted creed of men to-day that money 
is to be worshipped," she said. 

" And of women ? Mon Dieu ! do you leave the women out ? " 
he said. " Why, you do you not love money ? " 

I ? " she said, and there was a note of genuine surprise in her 
voice. " Not at all." 

" Yet you are here," he said. 

The sneer was unmistakable and revealed his meaning com- 
pletely. 

Monsieur Anneau," Lady Caryll said quietly, " do you know 
that though you are a genius you can be singularly stupid ?" 

In his excitement he had got up. Now he stood before 
her, and the dogged expression that came into his eyes made him 
look suddenly common, like a great dock labourer or a hulking 
navvy. 

" You are here," he repeated almost threateningly. " You 
have given yourself, Miladi, for what you speak of so lightly in 
regard to others. I have yielded up a fortune to spend a few 
hours with you, to sing a few songs for you, to show you my heart 
and my desire in my music. Would you give up ah ! not even a 

fortune, I will not say that, but even one of your jewels " 

He stretched out his hand towards her throat while he spoke 
with the quick freedom of gesture that his nationality and his long 
training for the stage had made his second language. Lady Caryll's 
face changed. It looked peaked, pinched with a sort of shrivelled 
reserve and fear, as she leaned back farther in her chair. The 
transformation startled and arrested the singer. He was silent, 
dropping his hand ; he had never supposed that Lady Caryll could 



204 THE SLAVE 

look so ugly. The expression in her eyes reminded him of the 
expression in the eyes of a French maid-servant whom he had 
once discovered reading some of his private letters in Paris. And 
then he had thought of the half-recoiling, half-threatening aspect 
of a suddenly disturbed snake. 

" Ah ! " he exclaimed, after a moment's pause, " what I say 
is true truer than I ever knew till now." 

He felt like one who reads a page of some extraordinary 
book by the blinding light that comes from a great conflagration. 
The ugly reserve increased in Lady Caryll's face, but she said 
nothing. 

" I say," repeated Monsieur Anneau, " that you would not 
give even one of your jewels to save the life of shall I say of 
Sir Reuben ? " 

He sat down again. This new ugliness fascinated his eyes, 
and he wanted to probe the depth of its meaning. Lady Caryll 
laughed, he thought uneasily. 

" Sir Reuben is in no danger of death," she said. 

She laughed again, and the strange expression passed away 
from her face. 

" If he were, you would not," repeated Monsieur Anneau 
obstinately. 

He had a sudden sensation that she was slipping away from 
him like a snake in the grass. The light from the conflagra- 
tion was dying, and the letters of the book were fading from 
his eyes. 

" You need not answer me," he continued ; " I know it." 

He leaned towards her. 

"But is this, then, your only passion?" he asked, in a lower 
voice. " And how deep is it ? " 

For he was conscious now of some mystery in her, and that 
there was darkness round about them both. 

" How curious men always are," she said lightly. " More 
curious than children and vainer than women. I have no passions, 
and if I had, I should not discuss them with my acquaintances." 

Monsieur Anneau was silent. The last few minutes had pushed 
him back from the angry declaration of what he called love, that 
he had been so near to. He scarcely knew how to return upon 
his steps. Yet he had decided that to-night was to find him 
triumphant. He would not go off the stage having missed his 
climax. He began to think, in his anger, that he had made a false 
move. Instead of attacking, he should have pleaded. Suddenly 
he assumed a softer manner, and said more quietly 

"You will not allow any man to read you. Yet I have given 
up everything." 






THE SLAVE 205 

"You can take back everything again." 

" What do you mean ? " he asked quickly. 

"America has not been swallowed up by the sea." 

As she spoke she got up and shot a deliberate glance at the 
clock that ticked softly upon the mantelpiece. Monsieur Anneau 
flushed scarlet. 

"You tell me to go back to America ? It is too late." 

" It is late," Lady Caryll said. 

Her grey eyes were still looking towards the clock. The 
singer felt as if all the frost of the cruel winter had entered into 
the room. He struggled against its influence upon him. 

" I shall not return to America/' he said. 

" Paris, then ? " 

" Paris ! I hate Paris ! " 

He spoke with intense bitterness. 

" I never heard any Frenchman utter so crude a blasphemy 
before," Lady Caryll exclaimed. 

She felt the gaiety that springs in the soul of one suddenly 
emerging from an undesired situation. Her face sparkled in a 
smile, and it seemed incredible that she was the woman who had 
looked so grim and starved with reticence a moment before. 

"You will unsay that to-morrow/' she added. 

And she held out her hand. 

"I will unsay nothing," he answered. "Nothing of what I am 
going to tell you now." 

" You need not, for you are going to tell me nothing. I am not 
curious about you, Monsieur Anneau. Keep your secrets." 

As she spoke she touched the bell. The singer felt like 
a withered leaf that is quietly shed in autumn by the tree that 
will soon face a new spring. For a moment he stood there. 
He opened his lips to speak. Then a footman appeared in the 
doorway, an enormous puppet with a powdered head, silently 
staring. 

Monsieur Anneau strode slowly out. He felt as if, for the first 
time in his life, he had been hissed off the stage. 

" Has he gone, Caryll ? " asked the thin, rather drawling voice 
of Sir Reuben. 

" Yes, Reuben." 

She came up to him. He was curled up on a divan by a big 
fire, with his thin legs crossed and his feet tucked almost under 
him. A cloud of scented smoke hung round him, and his dry 
fingers grasped a pipe with a long wooden stem, on which was 
Arab lettering. On his head was a red skull-cap, whose brilliant 
colour accentuated the wrinkled age of his face. 
" Ah ! into the cold and the fog." 



206 THE SLAVE 

"We are safe from them." 

She came up to the fire. He watched her slim figure lit by 
the fierce flames. And it struck him that he had never seen her 
in the light of the true sun, of the sun that gives to the desert 
its peculiar glory, of the sun that shines upon the land of the 
slave. Speaking from his thought, he said 

"And safe, too, from the sun." 

"That ! But there is none." 

"Not here. But out there" he waved his hand "over the 
sea it shines. It shines on the barbaric jewels worn by Eastern 
women. Come here, Caryll." 

She came and sat down on a stool by the divan. Sir Reuben 
put his hand on her bare shoulder. His touch was hot, as if the 
sun of which he spoke burned in his blood. 

" Before I die I must see you stand in that sunshine," he 
said. 

" Die ! What are you saying ? " 

He felt her soft skin shift under his fingers. 

" Did you shiver, Caryll ? " he said, and he coughed after the 
words. 

"The thought of death." 

"The thought of my death!" he said, having heard her im- 
perfectly owing to his complaint. 

He closed his hot, thin hand more firmly on her white shoulder, 
leaned forward, bending over his crossed legs like a mandarin, and 
looked eagerly into her face, which was turned towards the fire. 

"Would you miss me ? Would you be sorry if I died ? " 

There was a wistful, almost shy, sound in his voice. 

"Death is disagreeable to think of when one is full of life," 
she answered. " He spoke of it to-night, too." 

" Who ? " 

"Monsieur Anneau." 

"Ah ! In connection with whom ?" 

"What, Reuben?" she asked, in the voice of one who is think- 
ing deeply. 

" Of whose death did he speak ? " 

She looked up at him, and answered quietly 

" Of yours." 

Sir Reuben smiled with an air of disagreeable comprehension. 

" He thinks that I am old ; that I shall not live long, perhaps ? " 

" Oh no ! He did not say that." 

"What did he say?" 

She pursed her lips together, considering. 

" I scarcely remember. Oh, he was wondering what I would 
do to save your life, how much I would do." 



THE SLAVE 207 

" Well ? What ilul you say ? " 

" Nothing." 

" But to me you can say what you did not choose to say to him. 
Tell me, Caryll, how much you would give to save my life." 

His hand was on her hair now, near the silver ornament in 
which the jewels shone. 

"I don't know," she answered in an indifferent voice. 

"Then, let us say, to save me from ruin." 

" Ruin ! " 

Her voice changed. There was a sharp note of vitality in it, 
and she turned quickly, so that his hand dropped from her hair. 

" Yes, ruin. You would give all, would you not your dresses, 
your pictures, your horses, your jewels to save me from ruin?" 

She stared hard at him, all the muscles of her face set, her 
mouth and chin protruded, the whole woman at gaze. She was 
trying to read him. He knew it and enjoyed it, making his own 
face an enigma for answer to the question in hers. 

" Are you -" she stopped. 

He blew a cloud of smoke to shelter them in this odd colloquy. 
But she caught the mischievous flash of his eyes through the 
smoke, let her face go, and laughed gaily. 

"When you are ruined, you will know, Reuben, what I would 
do to help you." 

"And when I am dead what shall I know then?" 

" Nothing, I suppose. How late it is ! " 

She got up to go to bed. As Sir Reuben finished his pipe 
alone, he muttered to himself 

" Is one ever too old to be a fool ? Can one ever know the 
world well enough not to hope for the impossible ? That I I 
should have looked into my jewel to-night to find a heart ! 
Piff!" 

He sat cross-legged in the scented cloud, sneering at himself. 

Caryll was asleep when he came upstairs. She looked exquisite 
in her sleep, almost tender ; diamond fading into pearl, he thought, 
and caught himself wondering what she would look like dead. He 
held a candle, and shaded it with one hand while he watched her. 
Just so he had watched his other wife years ago, in a night that 
stayed with him still like a hideous ghost, whispering rules of sad 
conduct to him, teaching him the behests of cynicism, murmuring 
to him the worthlessness of apparent virtue and the emptiness of 
noble dreams. He had gazed on her as now he gazed on her 
successor. But she had lain dead, her dark face on the white 
pillow, her dark hair that looked so fearfully alive flowing 
loosely over her icy shoulders. Flowers had been scattered upon 
the counterpane. He remembered brushing some of them away, 



208 THE SLAVE 

and trampling them beneath his feet on the carpet. He remem- 
bered, too, bending down to strike the dead face, and then seizing 
the bed-curtains with his hands, and drawing back, and wondering 
if he were not mad to have had so filthy an impulse. Now, as he 
stood looking on this golden-haired girl, noting the regular move- 
ment of her body pushed by the breath of life, he found that his 
hand was tremulous. It shook so violently that the ray from the 
candle danced upon the white bed and across the face of the 
sleeper. She stirred and opened her eyes, stared for a moment, 
and said 

"Take away the light from me. I want to sleep." 

He obeyed her with a sense of guilt, as if she could have read, 
in sleep, his memories while he stood there by the bed. Later, 
while he lay awake, he found himself incessantly repeating her words 
in his mind, and putting them into the mouth of a dying person. 

It seemed as if Death must have paused on the snowy door-step 
of the house that night. 

In the morning the fog had lifted, the frost was melting, and 
Lady St. Ormyn, glaring from her windows, gave vent to the bitter 
soprano invectives of an excitable woman to whom fine weather is 
sent ten hours too late. 

Monsieur Anneau ceased to come to Park Lane from this time. 
He had returned suddenly to Paris. Lady St. Ormyn, who followed 
him there, and afterwards went on to the Riviera, wrote incoherent 
letters to her daughter declaring that he must be seriously ill. He 
went nowhere, declined to sing, and seemed to hate the very name 
of music. In one letter she declared 

" I asked him to-day if there was anything wrong with his 
throat. He said that his voice had been out of order ever since he 
sang at that dreadful concert of yours that was such a fiasco. I 
always said that it was madness for him to come to London in the 
winter." 

Lady Caryll smiled over this, wondering a little at the straight- 
forward ways of untruthfulness. She was still in London. She was 
so contented that she did not seem to wish to travel or to track 
the sun. Sir Reuben's cough was persistent, but he loved her con- 
tent and did not seek to disturb it. " She is happy behind the 
bars," he said to himself, and thought of the blind windows of the 
harem. He fed her behind the bars with jewels, till all London 
rang with the fortunes he gave to the dealers in precious stones. 
Five thousand pounds went to an Indian for one pearl. It was this 
pearl that Lady Caryll showed to Paul Villet, the composer of the 
song sung by Monsieur Anneau. 

" The maiden has her pearl," she said, smiling on him. " And 
you, too, have given it to her in your song." 



THE SLAVE 209 

The composer, well fed now, and quite commonplace in appear- 
ance, agreed almost unctuously. He had fallen under the spell of 
Lady Gary 11, and had forgotten that once, when he was starving, 
he had been obstinate, inclined to put his artistic conviction of 
what was right on a throne above her. Impelled by food, by 
comfort, by a dulling sense of safety, he had given his song-maiden 
her pearl. Lady Caryll, pleased, had made him the fashion. He 
composed little songs quite ordinary now and smart women said 
they sprang from his heart. Really they rose wearily from a too 
satisfied appetite. Starving, people had thought him ridiculous, 
and he had been almost sublime, in the sincerity of his privation, 
in the honesty of his fiery talent. Satisfied, even satiated, he 
became contemptible, believed that he gained dignity by setting 
foot in certain famous houses, and that music adored by great ladies 
became, by that very adoration, great music. He had a lap-dog 
air and ogled when he played, like certain libertine musicians, who 
become the rage by their impudence of allure, and whose songs are 
veiled insults offered to delighted women. 

Aubrey saw him spoilt and pitied his human nature, loving 
Lady Caryll's. She, in her charitable compassion, had picked this 
man up out of the dust that he might be free, that his genius 
might have nourishment and grow. It was not her fault if lie, in 
return, sprawled in satiety and let his soul snore in the warm 
darkness of the black night that he found full of golden glory. 
Do we not often ruin the man to whom we give what is called 
his chance ? One day Aubrey spoke of this to Lady Caryll. 

" Isn't it strange," he said, " that by helping people we can 
do them irreparable harm?" 

" How ? " she asked. 

He hesitated a moment, then he said 

" I was thinking of Villet." 

Lady Caryll did not seem to understand. She answered 

" He told me to-day that he has taken rooms for the season 
in South Street, and that half the royal family are coming to his 
concert at Kichborough House." 

She smiled happily. Aubrey thought her too joyful in her 
charity to see the black side of its result. 

And at this time she was too happy to see any black side to 
life. Her radiance grew as the radiance of jewels increased in 
the Park Lane house, till the sparkle of her and of them began 
to dazzle the eyes, and more, the mind of the world. The worship 
of the partially imaginative is roused by size or by quantity. An 
immense building kindles their fires, and bows them in adora- 
tion, or a fabulous number of banknotes, or of acres of land, or 
of palaces and castles possessed by anybody. The worship of the 



210 THE SLAVE 

partially imaginative began to creep round the skirts of Lady 
Caryll at this time, fed by the vulgarity of the Press which wallows 
in narrations of what money can do. But the reputation which 
Lady Caryll began now to acquire, and'which spread beyond her 
private circle, was never, even in its beginning, quite akin to the 
American millionaire's, or the South African Croesus' ! From the 
first there was a touch of the magical in it, a suspicion of the fairy- 
like, as in the Peruvian priests' conception of the Goddess 
Esmeralda, who had her home in the great emerald. This arose, 
perhaps, from various causes, of which one or two may be suggested. 
Lady Caryll's beauty was peculiar, and had something of the cool 
glitter that many associate vaguely with fairy things and places. 
Then, too, the troop of her jewels was headed, as it were, by one 
which possessed a sort of definite personality. The knowledge of 
the great emerald and of its engraving was quickly spread abroad. 
The papers originally had recorded its sale to Sir Reuben, and the 
immense price paid for it, then the marriage of Lady Caryll, and 
her wearing it on her wedding day. Now, when they spoke of 
Sir Reuben's notorious buyings of famous gems, they seldom failed 
to allude again to the emerald and to its engraved soul being borne 
away by pleasures. And so its green light began, as it were, to 
pierce very far, and to men and women who had never seen, who 
would never see it. And in its green light generally danced a 
vision of Lady Caryll, till she became a sort of goddess of jewels 
to many who had never seen her. Thieves talked of the emerald 
in their ugly dwellings. Suburban people chattered of it about 
their decent tea-tables. Sometimes Wesleyan mothers, stern to 
improve an occasion, lectured and advised plain daughters never 
likely to possess much more than a Cairngorm brooch on the 
danger of being led away by specious worldly things, or persuaded 
to sell themselves for gems even the most wonderful. And the 
daughters meekly acquiesced, aching dully with the desire for 
such leading away, for such persuasion, and seeing the probably 
very wicked Lady Caryll set in a terrible light of success on the 
edge of the flaming pit. In London itself the emerald and its 
legend appealed to the easy emotionalism of the many young, and 
so-called decadent, persons of both sexes who sigh vaguely after 
all that is strange, confusing that which is out-of-the-way with 
that which is desirable. Young versifiers, really not so far from 
being poets as some bulky men brought up on Byron thought, 
wrote rapid lines on the journey of such a soul as the emerald's, 
taking it each to his own delightful Vanity Fair, and setting it 
amid the most wonderful and vivid crowds of joys. And each, 
as he wrote, had under-thoughts of Lady Caryll, and was inclined 
to bear her away to these riotous places of the imagination. To 



THE SLAVE 211 

others, more sombre in temperament, there was something dream- 
like and full of space in the notion of a thing borne away. They 
set the imagined Lady Caryll Hitting through moonlit deserts on 
the way to some far horizon, beyond which lay unimagined things, 
such as many suppose to await them after death. Then there 
were the more sordid, who thought of her merely as a sort of Queen 
over the mob of rustling effigies of womanhood who trample and 
howl after money, and cling to the most loathsome man if he can 
but pay a dressmaker's bill. These despised her for her greed 
when they did not adore her for her triumph in its brilliant satis- 
faction, or envy her for being at the top of what they told them- 
selves was a despicable world. 

In any case, and to the eyes of all, a certain strange dazzle and 
sparkle of light began to concentrate itself about Lady Caryll. 
She moved in radiance, though there were some who chose to 
think the radiance vulgar, and to affect to pity the girl who walked 
in it with so imperturbable a contentment. 

And thieves talked of her in their ugly dwellings, often and 
long. 

Aubrey, settled in now to the routine of secretarial work, had 
not yet learnt the lesson Sir Reuben had spoken of to Lady Range- 
cliffe. The circumstance of the raising of that Lazarus, Paul Villet, 
from the tomb of his starvation and neglect to his present modish- 
ness, and the circumstance of Monsieur Anneau's sudden departure, 
had delayed the learning of the lesson. Sir Reuben, who had 
come to read his godson, understood this. The dismissal of Mon- 
sieur Anneau increased Aubrey's ideal of Caryll's purity, the raising 
of Paul Villet his ideal of her pity. And both these qualities en- 
dowed her in his mind with a fresh and beautiful humanity. She 
could resist what conquered her sister women, stoop to what they 
would have passed by on the other side. 

Since he had lived in Park Lane, Aubrey had set Caryll higher. 
Sir Reuben knew it and wondered at the blindness of youth. But 
this blindness tended also oddly to his own satisfaction, for, since 
the evening when he had descanted on the virtues and the wonders 
of jewels, Aubrey had begun to look upon him differently, with a 
growing admiration and reticent regard that pleased Sir Reuben 
more than he had thought anything could please him. Aubrey no 
longer saw only, or chiefly, the ugly and withered body upon which 
Time and a past despair had set a dreary seal. He began to suc- 
ceed in the effort to avoid the sight of the body by fixing his eyes 
upon the supposed nature it housed. Caryll had done this must 
have done it why should not he ? He would look at his godfather 
more as she looked at her husband. It should be possible since 
they were one and the same man. Sir Reuben's great kindness to 



212 THE SLAVE 

him was an assistance. He began to think that he too, like 
Caryll, was under the fascination of a peculiar and brilliant mind, 
where that which was ordinary scarcely found any lodgment for its 
heavy foot. He sought continually for reasons of admiration at 
least, if not of something more, in his godfather. Now and then 
Sir Reuben gave one, consciously or unconsciously. 

One was connected with the little acrobat, Alf, to whom he 
showed kindness. 



CHAFIEH XX 

AFTER Aubrey had given up his rooms in Jermyn Street, he re- 
ceived one day a card forwarded from them. On it was printed 

ALF FLICK. 

" The Marvellous Flicks." 

In the corner was written, in pencil and a round, boyish hand, 
"Grand Theatre of Varieties, Champion Square." So it seemed 
that Alf had taken Aubrey at his word and come to see him. He 
wrote the boy a note asking him to call in Park Lane, but for 
several weeks received no reply. This did not surprise Aubrey, 
however, for he had seen Diamond one evening, and had learnt 
from her that the Flicks were fulfilling a special engagement at 
Marseilles, and would not be back in England till the spring. One 
day, in the spring, a rather astonished-looking footman showed Alf 
into Aubrey's sitting-room. He entered with his usual imper- 
turbable assurance. Life had rendered him incapable of feeling 
abashed. His hair was carefully plastered over his forehead and 
drenched with cold water. He wore an enormous, loose bow-tie, 
bought in France, and carried in one hand a soft black hat. As 
the footman retired, Alf cut a caper at him, something between a 
Catherine wheel and a back somersault, with a touch of the comic 
Leotard on the imaginary horizontal bar thrown in, just to give the 
tin rcvoir a delicate finish. The footman, who could not see well 
what was happening, depressed a fearful back, and, as he passed 
through the door, half turned and shot a pale glance of haughty 
inquiry mingled with terror at the extraordinary visitor. 

Alf shook a leg at him with a violent suppleness that completed 
the man's discomfiture, and he closed the door, with an amount of 
noise that should have cost him his place, tremulous in the con- 
viction that Mr. Herrick was closeted with one of the younger 
members of the lunatic tribe. 

"That chap'd be hissed off the bar," remarked Alf significantly. 
" He's as soft as butter. Them calves ain't real. He couldn't 
stand on his head with all that powder on and grease on. Why, 
he'd slip ! What's he for ? " 

213 



214 THE SLAVE 

"Show/' said Aubrey, smiling. 

"To look at?" 

" Partly." 

" He's like the fat chaps at our place what change the 
numbers." 

He spun the soft hat high in whizzing circles, and let it fall on 
a peg in the shape of a big vase of oriental china. Then he winked 
solemnly at Aubrey, who invited him to sit down. Having accepted 
the invitation in a collapsible manner, he seemed to have no further 
mission, but sat regarding Aubrey with steadfastness and an unwink- 
ing stony gravity, yet with a hint of goblin humour that suggested 
the gargoyle. Aubrey, marvelling very much why he had come, 
started the conversation. 

" Been at Marseilles, haven't you ? " he asked. 

" Yes, sir." 

" Good audiences ? " 

"Thundering. Four calls every night after the corpse act. 
The Froggies ain't such fools as they sound when they're at their 
lingo." 

He spoke some gibberish with a wonderful faithfulness to the 
singing sonorousness of certain French voices, and an accompani- 
ment of exaggerated gesture that placed France accurately, if 
ridiculously, upon the carpet. Then he again relapsed into stony 
silence, steadily regarding Aubrey with his small grey eyes. 

"They're glad to have you back in Milk Court, I'm sure," said 
Aubrey. 

" Milk Court ah ! " responded Alf. 

He nodded his head in a portentous manner. 

" Milk Court," he repeated again in a voice surcharged with an 
intelligence that was mysterious. "That's it, ain't it?" 

Aubrey was sincerely mystified. Alf's statement could not be 
controverted or his question greeted with a negative response, yet 
the evident sarcasm that lurked in his remark suggested his antici- 
pation of strong refutals and denials. Aubrey waited for develop- 
ments. He began dimly to appreciate the fact that the goblin of 
the halls sought his closer acquaintance with a definite object. 

" That's it, ain't it ? " repeated Alf with more stress, and a con- 
tortion of the face rather neuralgic in tendency. "Oh no, sir, not 
Milk Court ! Rather not ! " 

This time his tongue went openly into his right cheek, and 
he regarded Aubrey with distinct suspicion. It was impossible 
to be offended with such an odd specimen of humanity. Never- 
theless, Aubrey began to suppose that, for some secret reason, 
he was held in enmity, rather than in regard, by the hero of the 
corpse act. 



THE SLAVE 215 

" What is it ? What's the row about Milk Court ? " 
" Don't Di live there ?" responded little Alf. 
" Miss Diamond ! Why, of course she does." 
" 'Tain't your home, is it ? " said Alf. 
" My home ? " said Aubrey, in complete bewilderment. 
" Is it, then ? " 
"Of course not." 

" You're a nob," continued Alf. " One of the lot that slopes 
in at nine o'clock, and couldn't be there at eight oh no ! not to 
see Queen Victoria do a tumble, or the Prince of Wales hisself go 
up the Juggins on his hands. Now, ain't you ? " 

" I didn't know it," said Aubrey, with difficulty repressing a 
tendency to laugh. 

"Well, sir, I did d'rectly I see you helping yourself to cab- 
bage on her birthday. The governor's no class for watching it. 
But them that's in the light biz never is. It's all them colours 
blinds 'em." 

" What to ? Watching what ? " asked Aubrey, more and more 
bewildered. 

" Oh, we can't guess ! can we, sir? " 

This time the neuralgic tendency of the face became even more 
definitely marked, and Aubrey was obliged to understand it. 

" Apparently you think I'm trying to tell you a lie," he said, 
assuming offence. 

" It won't be no good not if you do," the boy calmly rejoined. 
" I'm up to all the games, sir, ground and lofty, and all the rest of 
it. No offence. Remember the night I walked home with you?" 
Aubrey nodded. 

" See me watching of you ? I was taking it all on." 
" Taking what on ? " 
" Your game, sir." 

" What game ? What on earth d'you mean ? " 
"Well, sir, Di's dropped through the net once and very near 
broke her back. There ain't no reason why she's got to do it 
again, is there ? " 

Alf had begun to look quite old. 

" Come now, sir, man to man without the gloves on, is there ? " 
Aubrey began at last to guess at his visitor's object in call- 
ing, and to like him for it, even though it might prove to be 
embarrassing. 

" Dropping the nob, sir, now is there ?" reiterated little Alf, a 

crescendo of old age and worldly wisdom being all the time apparent 

in his comical face, which was full of hints of the solitary chaperon. 

" Miss Diamond isn't an acrobat, is she ? " said Aubrey. " How 

should she drop through a net ? " 



216 THE SLAVE 

" My way of putting it, sir. You twig ? I'm the man at the 
rope what watches Di. See ? " 

His little grey eyes were very stern. 

"You don't go to Milk Court to play ball with Susie, now does 
you?" he continued gravely. "Nor touch with Charlie, I'll lay." 

" I went there because Miss Diamond invited me to her birth- 
day party, and because I have a sincere regard for her," said 
Aubrey. 

Alf contorted his face gymnastically. 

" Sincere regard," he repeated. " So had the other chap, but 
she fell through the net all the same, and's never tumbled as well 
since. I ain't going to see her do it again, Mister. I tell you 
that straight. I'm the man at the rope what watches Di. So 
now ! " 

His face was rigidly obstinate. Aubrey thought he looked like a 
fierce little dog guarding the door of his mistress. The watered 
lock of hair on his forehead curled up slightly at its tip as if in 
defiance, and his hard, knuckly little hands grasped his knees as 
he sat staring fiercely at Aubrey. 

"So now !" he repeated challengingly. 

Aubrey looked at him with the half awkward admiration that 
the Englishman gives to grit in another when it is working steadily 
against himself. 

" Alf, you don't understand," he said. 

A lov/ and piercing whistle greeted this observation a whistle 
that rose high, ran down a scale with infinite incredulity, and died 
in a cooing jeer. 

" No," Aubrey repeated, " you don't. Miss Diamond and I are 
friends, nothing moi*e nor less. I have a sincere regard for her. 
That's all." 

"Oh my ! these nobs these nobs !" was the boy's somewhat 
enigmatic rejonder. 

The exclamation made Aubrey feel slightly irritated for the 
first time. 

"Go and talk to Miss Diamond, if you like," he exclaimed. 
"She'll soon tell you how foolish your idea is." 

Alf smiled a terribly wise smile. 

" The other chap said he had a ' sincere regard ' for Di after 
he'd let her through the net," was his reply. 

" He was a blackguard," said Aubrey with genuine feeling. 

"Most of 'em are," said Alf. "There's more blackguards than 
one in the great theaytre, just as there's more fried fish than one 
in the Whitechapel Road of a Saturday night. That's how I look 
at it, that is." 

And again he regarded Aubrey with convinced suspicion. 



THE SLAVE 217 

"Give it up, Mister, give it up," he continued, after a brief 
pause. " In the words of the song, ' Leave the pore young gal 
alone.' " 

His manner was such a strange mixture of manly resolve and 
impish satire, his face, by turns, so keenly expressive of serious con- 
cern and bitter worldly wisdom, that Aubrey felt rather as if he 
were sitting with two or three persons of varying ages and mental 
qualities. He suddenly resolved to speak more frankly to Alf. 
"I quite understand what you mean," he said. 
" Really, Mister!" interposed Alf, with an inflection of studied 
surprise. 

" And I daresay your idea is natural enough. But it's wrong 
all the same. Miss Diamond and I are good friends. I know that 
she that she's well fallen through the net, if you like to call 
it so, and hurt herself. She'll never have such another accident 
through me." 

" How are you to twig that, Mister? " 
"How because I tell you we are only friends." 
"That's what you think, p'r'aps. But then you ain't a gnl." 
"What has that to do with it?" 

" A lot. A man can hold up a heavy weight longer nor a gal, 
and so he can stay only friends, as you calls it, longer. While you 
think as Di's safe on the wire, she may be falling through the net 
like as she did before. Put your eye to it, Mister, if you're talking 
straight, and see what she's after. And anyhow, you take it from 
me that I'm the man at the rope what watches Di." 

As he spoke he bounded up from his chair like one longing for 
active movement after a tension of enforced repose. 

" I hate setting," he said, with an entire change of manner. 
" I'm off now." 

He stood still for a second, and his demeanour, suddenly become 
boyish, suggested that he was impatient to pour forth his bottled- 
u p vitality in some violent exhibition. 

"Seen my new game?" he suddenly cried, and before Aubrey 
could make any reply he had seized a book from a table near him 
it was Pater's "Marius" gone down on the floor on his hands 
with his body rigidly extended upward, and his feet pointing to 
the ceiling, thrown up the book into mid air, caught it on his toe, 
and was tossing it from the sole of one foot to the other while he 
promenaded rapidly about wrong end up. 

At this moment there was a tap at the door, and Sir Reuben 
entered to speak to Aubrey about SOUR- business. He met the 
feet of the little acrobat and the flying " Marius," and started in 
surprise. Alf curved his body slowly till it formed an arch, leaped 
backwards and forwards several times, alighting alternately on 



218 THE SLAVE 

hands and feet, then came to a normal standing posture and faced 
Sir Reuben gravely. 

" It should be a ball by rights," he remarked, calmly laying 
down Pater's masterpiece, " but most anything does." 

"Ah ! " said Sir Reuben, who was still in the doorway, glancing 
at the young performer with a smile, " you're studying gymnastics, 
Aubrey ?" 

Aubrey looked rather embarrassed. 

" Mr. Alf Flick, a a he looked at Alf " friend of a friend 
of mine," he concluded. 

Alf nodded. 

"The Marvellous Flicks, sir," he said to Sir Reuben in explana- 
tion. Then he caught up his hat, threw it to the ceiling, ducked 
his head to receive it, and prepared to go. But Sir Reuben stopped 
him. 

"Are you in a hurry, my boy?" he asked. 

" Not so very partic'lar," said Alf. " Want anything, sir ? " 

He shot a glance of cool inquiry at the little old man before 
him, observed Sir Reuben's red fez, and wondered if he were one 
of " them naughty, bad Turks." 

" Like to see some tricks, Mister ? " he added, apparently 
reading Sir Reuben's mind, and he was about to give a selection 
of somersaults when Sir Reuben stopped him. 

"Not here," said Sir Reuben. "Will you perform before a 
lady ? " 

"Is it Her Most Gracious?" said Alf, assuming an air of dra- 
matic excitement. " Her Most Gracious hasn't never seen the 
Flicks, and she must see 'em all together, she must see 'em in 
patterns. Ever seen the Mai'vellous Flicks in patterns, sir ; the 
growing vine, the serpent before and arter he's eat the pore little 
rabbit, the engine what's going sixty miles an hour, and the bishop 
that's father falling out of the pulpit and pitching on his head, 
yet never hurt? Ever seen that, sir?" 

"Never," said Sir Reuben. "It isn't her Majesty, so it 
doesn't matter about the patterns. To amuse Caryll," he added 
to Aubrey. 

Aubrey nodded. It seemed to him as if Diamond were taking 
a step towards that other diamond, since the man at the rope was 
to be introduced into Lady Caryll's presence. 

" Right you are," said little Alf, whose sincere pride in his pro- 
fession rendered him easily amenable to such an offer, and whose 
existence might be called one prolonged trick performance. " If 
it ain't Her Most Gracious, it don't matter. But when she sees 
the Flicks, she's bound to see 'em in patterns." 

He followed Sir Reuben out of the room with a jaunty step. 



THE SLAVE 219 

The last hint of the chaperon vanished from his lively aspect. Sir 
Reuben led the way to the music-room in which Monsieur Anneau 
had shot his useless shafts. The white chairs were ranged rigidly 
against the wall. A piano still stood upon the small platform. 

"Wait here a moment," he said to Alf. "I'll fetch the lady." 

He shuffled off. 

" A Turk, ain't he ? " asked Alf of Aubrey. 

Aubrey smiled and shook his head. 

"Well," continued Alf, "he ain't far off it, I'll lay. Who's the 
lady ? Them Turks is " 

His manner suggested that some scandalous allusion to the 
domestic habits of the average Oriental was about to flow from his 
lips. But at this moment Sir Reuben returned with Lady Caryll, 
who was dressed for going out She wore black, which made her 
look even fairer and whiter than usual. Alf gazed at her with an 
obvious admiration that rendered his appearance almost senti- 
mental. 

" Well, I never, if it ain't Her Most Gracious, it's the Queen of 
Diamonds ! " he whispered to Aubrey. 

" A private performance, Caryll, such as the Sultan has in that 
theatre of his at the Yildiz," said Sir Reuben. " Master Flick, 
here's the lady. Will you show her your tricks ?" 

Alf ran sideways, as between footlights and a down-dropped 
curtain, smiling, ducking his head, and blowing breaths to his hand 
with pursed lips in the way of successful acrobats. In this fashion 
he gained the platform upon which he lightly sprang. He put his 
hands to his coat, then hesitated. 

"May I off it, lady ?" he asked, addressing Lady Caryll. 

She nodded. This odd moment, breaking an ordinary morning, 
pleased her. Alf was out of his coat in an instant and spinning in 
the air like a ball. Lady Caryll sat close to the platform to watch 
him, as she had sat to hear the pearl song on the foggy night of 
Monsieur Anneau's concert. But now she looked gay, almost like 
a schoolgirl, Aubrey thought, as her sparkling eyes followed little 
Alf s amazing gyrations, all cleverly adapted to the small space. 
When he stopped to breathe she clapped her hands. 

" Bravo ! " she cried. 

Alf sidled and ducked conventionally, again with his sliding air 
of aiming for invisible wings. Having reached the wall he stopped, 
fixed his eyes on Lady Caryll, to whom his performance and all his 
thoughts were evidently directed, and cried 

" Like to see me do a juggle, lady ? " 

"Yes," she answered. 

Alf looked about him. 

" I must have something to juggle, lady," he said. 



220 THE SLAVE 

He fixed his eyes on her again. 

" You give me something, lady," he said, looking her over 
searchingly. 

Lady Caryll wore, in the front of her gown, a long serpent of 
dull green enamel with eyes that were big yellow amethysts. 

"The insect, lady," continued Alf, stretching out his hand to 
this. " I'll make it alive for you." 

Lady Caryll had put her hand over it at his first words, and had 
shaken her head at his request. His last remark seemed to change 
her decision. 

"Make it alive?" she repeated. 

" Yuss," said Alf. " Crawl over me like as if it was real, and 
a pet." 

Lady Caryll unfastened the serpent and handed it to him. 

Sir Reuben, who had closely watched her hesitation, and its 
disappearance, shot a glance at Aubrey. Alf took the serpent 
very carefully, even delicately, into his hard and sinewy hands. 
He rolled up his shirt sleeves and bared his arms. Then he let the 
serpent run on them, slip through his divided fingers, creep into 
his curved palms. That was the effect of his performance. He 
allowed the green creature, with its prominent yellow eyes, to do 
what it chose, and it chose to run. The innumerable movements, 
graduated with infinite skill and deftness, by which the boy gave 
it the semblance of life, were so slight and so swift, that to the 
untrained eye they were almost invisible. Lady Caryll did not 
seek for them, or think of them. She was intent upon the little 
green creature that was hers, that had lain on her breast so still, 
and that now showed such curious and unexpected activities. At 
last Alf caused the snake to glide, with an appearance of infinite 
secrecy, into the pocket of his waistcoat. 

" It's tired, lady," he remarked ; "wants a by-bye." 

And he turned down his sleeves, popped on his jacket, and 
jumped off the platform. Lady Caryll looked at him with more 
than admiration, with the peculiar and complete attention that 
a child gives to a magician. She said nothing, but presently she 
extended her hand towards Alf. 

"Oh, lady, mustn't disturb him," said Alf, touching his pocket 
with a soft gesture. '' What ? He's awake again, is he ? " 

And with an extraordinary wriggle of his body he caused the 
serpent to emerge, shudder along his hand, and drop into Lady 
Caryll's lap. She picked it up and looked at it. 
" I always felt as if it were alive," she said. 

Then she fastened it into the breast of her gown again and 
thanked Alf for his performance. It was evident that Alf had 
completely lost his heart to her. 



THE SLAVE 221 

" I say," he murmured aside te Sir Reuben, as Lady Caryl! got 
up to go ; "I say, sir, I should like the lady to see us in patterns. 
I should like her to see the growing vine." 

" She shall see it," said Sir Reuben, with a kindness that pleased 
Aubrey. 

" When ? " said little Alf anxiously. 

For Lady Caryll had nodded to him kindly, had received his 
answering respectful bob, and was going. 

"Caryll," Sir Reuben said, " Master Flick wishes you to see him 
in a pattern with his relations." 

" With Vauxhall and the rest of 'em, lady," cried Alf with 
goblin earnestness. "The growing vine, the serpent not yours, 
lady before and arter he's eat the poor little rabbit, the engine 
what's going sixty miles an hour, and the bishop that's father 
falling out of the pulpit and pitching on his head, yet never hurt. 
There ain't nothing like it on the halls, lady, specially the growing 
vine. I'm the grape on the top spray." 

Lady Caryll smiled at him, but now with a certain indifference. 
The idea of Alf in a pattern with his relations did not seem to 
excite her very much. 

" I'd rather see you making my serpent show itself in its true 
colours," she said. 

Alf's face fell. 

"Then you ain't coming, lady?" he rejoined. "You'll die 
laughing to see father fall out of the pulpit, yet never hurt. Why, 
I've seen old ladies regular churchers, too split their sides at 
it, and they thinking all the time as it's wicked, because of him 
pretending to be the bishop. You haven't no idea." 

"Perhaps I'll come some day," said Lady Caryll. 

She went out, touching the serpent and looking down on it. 

"Well, I'm " began Alf. "Any one'd think she b'lieved it 
was alive." 

Sir Reuben laughed. 

"That's because you're so clever," he answered. 

He took out two sovereigns and gave them to Alf, who spun 
them in the air and caught them as they fell in his two waistcoat 
pockets. 

" I promise you I'll bring the lady to see you as the top grape 
of the vine," Sir Reuben said. "So don't make yourself uneasy." 

Alf grinned with pleasure. 

" I'd almost as soon do a turn for her as for Her Most Gracious," 
he said. "She's the Queen of Di'monds, she is, straight." 

" Ah ! " said Sir Reuben, " you've noticed that ? " 

He glanced at Aubrey and went out after Lady Caryll. Aubrey 
thought again of that morning in Bond Street. 



222 THE SLAVE 

" Is the Turk the lady's governor ? " asked the voice of 
little Alf. 

"That gentleman is the lady's husband/' said Aubrey in a 
rather cold voice. 

Alf renewed his peculiar whistle, prolonging it this time as one 
who must accompany the busy working of his mind with music. 

"Well, I'm blovved ! " he said, when at length he spoke. 

He looked at Aubrey, pursing and protruding his lips. 

" Ain't you ? " he added. 

" Am I not what ? " asked Aubrey. 

"Why blowed !" 

Aubrey made no reply, but led the way toward the hall. 

" Right," said Alf behind him. " I'm off. Don't you worry." 

Having arrived in the large space of the hall, instinctively he 
prepared for acrobatic exercises. But suddenly something seemed 
to intervene. He paused, pulled himself together, and marched 
solemnly onward till the hall door was reached. Aubrey opened 
it. Alf stood looking at him. It was a sunny day, and the light 
fell upon them both. Alf glanced back into the dim and richly 
coloured hall where the tiny fountain tinkled. 

" So the Turk's her Jack her husband is he ? " remarked 
Alf. 

He glanced again at Aubrey. 

" You her brother ? " he said. 

"No," said Aubrey. 

" No relation ? " 

" None." 

Alf threw up his hat and caught it on his head. 

"Don't let him the Turk forget to bring the lady to see us 
in patterns," he said. " Morning, Mister." 

He sprang down the steps. Just before he darted away a 
thought seemed to strike him. He turned. 

"I'm the man at the rope !" he said. Then he spun round and 
was gone. 

Aubrey stood for a moment in the sunshine. He scarcely knew 
whether he was angry or entertained. The little imp had intruded 
strangely into his privacy, digging a sharp, childishly quizzical 
glance, like a tiny knife, into his reserve. He liked him for his 
watch-dog defence of Diamond. But 

Aubrey shut the hall door suddenly and went back to his 
own rooms. When he reached them he sat down and thought 
of Diamond. He thought of little Alf's saying that she had fallen 
through the net once, and that he wasn't going to let her do it 
again. There could be no chance of that, surely. Aubrey won- 
dered. He thought of his own fall through the net and again 



THE SLAVE 223 

of Diamond. They were like two injured ones of different ranks, 
brought together in the ward of a great hospital, seeking to com- 
fort each other in a community of suffering. To comfort each 
other ! Yes, that was their mission. They must fulfil it. Neither 
must increase the suffering of the other. Not till that moment 
had Aubrey ever quite realised how much Diamond's sorrow, even 
though he grieved for her, had soothed the pain of his. 

He was reluctant to forego this solace. Yet the small grey 
eyes of little Alf were keen. It was possible that they had seen 
farther than Aubrey's. 

He cursed the imp, then saw him sitting with his hands on his 
knees, and almost loved him. 

For, after all, was he not the man at the rope, watching in his 
odd way over the safety of more than a body ? 



CHAPTER XXI 

SIR REUBEN was a man of his word. He did not forget his pro- 
mise to Alf that Caryll should be brought to see that wonder, the 
growing vine. But London is very full of preventing circum- 
stances. Two or three weeks passed before the promise could be 
fulfilled. During these weeks more jewels came to seek a home 
in the great safe in Caryll's bedchamber, and Aubrey found an 
opportunity of seeing Diamond. The visit of Alf had made an 
impression upon him and had awakened him to possibilities. As 
yet he declined to think of them as probabilities. But he wanted 
to see Diamond now that his eyes had caught something, perhaps, 
of the watchfulness of Alf s. And he resolved that his own desire 
for a continuance of companionship should not blind him to any 
danger signal. 

He met Diamond after the theatre. It was a warm Spring 
night. The month was April. During the day there had been 
soft showers, those sweet attendants that lead forward the hesi- 
tating steps of the sometimes reluctant goddess. The breath of 
the night was exquisite even in the ugly streets, like the breath 
of violets in a cellar. As Aubrey waited on the pavement outside 
the stage door, the omnibus containing the Marvellous Flicks drove 
up heavily. Their " turn " succeeded the ballet. Aubrey drew a 
little further away. He did not want to meet Alf just then. 
From the distance he saw the lithe acrobats leap out and hasten 
off to their duty. Little Alf was last. He cut his usual caper for 
the benefit of the loungers. They laughed and clapped their 
hands as he vanished. Aubrey came nearer and waited. He was 
strongly conscious of the charm of the night, despite the hideous 
thoroughfare, dingy and narrow, in which he stood, and a longing 
came to him for country places. He thought of the pleasant street 
of a village, with its few cheerful lights, its cottage gardens, its 
atmosphere of peace and of safety. Scents would be rising from 
the baptized ground. Scents would be flying on the breeze, and 
all the black woods would be stirring in the happy uneasiness of 
their birth pangs. He saw, in fancy, the lights go out behind the 
window panes, and thought of all the villagers at rest ; the rosy 
children breathing quietly and regularly, their apple cheeks pressed 



THE SLAVE 225 

against the white pillows ; their parents stirring, perhaps, in the 
anxious wakefulness that often comes with the coming of old age, 
when the soul, so near its flight, listens each night more keenly for 
the soft sound of the footsteps of the angel. 

Aubrey thought of these footsteps. It seemed to him that 
he would like to hear them treading over the earth of spring, that 
he would wish to go away with the angel over fields that were 
expectant, not regretful. 

Some one touched him gently. He started and saw Diamond 
at his side. 

" Well, I never," she said, in her low voice. " Any one'd think 
you was asleep and dreamin' ! " 

" Dreaming, perhaps," said Aubrey. 

" Whatever about ? " she asked, as they walked on together. 

"Something most people think very sad." 

"Oh ? " 

" Death, Diamond/' he said. 

He saw a little flush come into her face, and wondered why it 
came. He did not remember that he had always called her Miss 
Diamond till this moment. 

" I never see a dead person," she remarked. 

" Nor I," said Aubrey. "Would you be afraid to ?" 

"No," she said simply. "Where are we goin' ?" 

Aubrey hesitated. It was not very late. The night was 
soft and warm ; the longing for trees, grass, cessation of noise, 
came to him again and strongly. He looked under Diamond's 
sailor hat. 

"Are you very tired to-night?" he said. 

" Not a bit," she answered. 

"Shall we go and sit in the Park? It's so warm, almost 
like summer, and we shall be away from the noise and the 
houses." 

" All right ! " said Diamond in a tone of perfect confidence. 
" But I've never been in the Park of a night before. What's it 
like?" 

Aubrey scarcely knew. He had once or twice walked across it 
after dining in Great Cumberland Place or in Hyde Park Gardens. 
And then he had generally been with some friend and had talked 
London gossip. 

" Like the country," he answered at a venture. 

He hailed a cab and ordered the man to drive to Hyde Park 
Corner. 

When they were there, Diamond sprang out lightly. She was 
quite gay, and amused by this little adventure. As they passed 
through the gateway a constable eyed them with a gaze that 



seemed full of ugly humour. Aubrey noticed it, but the girl did 
not. They crossed the open space and reached the trees. There 
was a crescent moon in the sky, which was vaporous and full of 
mystery where the feeble moon rays touched the edges of the 
shallow clouds. Diamond looked around her cheerfully. 

" It is nice," she said. " Where shall we go ? " 

Some boys in caps went by them, shooting impudent inquiry 
from their furtive eyes. Aubrey felt a sudden longing to attack 
them. 

" Let's go under the trees and find two chairs," he said. " Are 
you afraid of the grass being damp ? " 

" Not I." 

They found two chairs in a green silence, well away from the 
broad walk. It was rather dark here. The lamps shone far off. 
Far off the carriages rolled by. Diamond unfastened her straw 
hat to let the light wind play about her fluffy dark hair. 

" This is lovely after the theatre," she said. " Quite a little 
holiday. Ah ! you've never seen me on my holiday ! I'm a dif- 
ferent girl then." 

" How long d'you have ? " said Aubrey, watching the moon 
through the trees. 

"A fortnight. I go to Minchester-on-Sea." 

" Who with ? " 

" Susie. We go in lodgin's. Susie is mad. You should hear 
her scream at the window when we get in the station. Alf came 
down one year. And once he came." 

She paused. Her eyes filled with ready tears. She took off 
her thread gloves and clasped her thin hands in her lap. 

" Oh dear ! we did have a time," she continued. " He took 
Susie shrimpin'. The child was half crazy when she got among 
the rocks and all them little pools. She fell in ever so many, but 
salt water don't hurt you that's what he said. Oh ! " 

A dark figure had crept close in the gloom and stood before 
them. 

"Tuppence, please," it murmured, turning its head aside and 
extending its hand, 

Aubrey paid, received two tickets, and saw it creep away to 
search in the shadows for other couples. 

"He did give me a turn," Diamond said, "comin' so sudden. 
I should be afraid here alone." 

She had drawn nearer to Aubrey. He felt her slim body touch 
his arm. 

"And Alf came that year too," she went on, "the year he was 
there. Alf got on rare with him then. They used to go swimmin' 
together. I was frightened to see 'em so far out in the water ; like 




THE SLAVE 227 

dolls' heads they looked, and the great waves rollin" up to 'em. 

Susie did howl, like she'd have a fit, and I thought " She paused 

" Well, I thought if he was to go under, how different it'd all be, 
them lodgin's, and tea of a night, and the walk afterwards, and all. 
We used to like to see the sun go." 

She leaned a little sideways. It seemed to Aubrey that her 
attitude was full of recollection. 

" Oh, Alf was funny," she went on. " Doin' all his tricks on 
the sand of a night when there was the moon, like a goblin he 
was. He frightened an old lady what was lookin' out of the 
window oncest. She screamed like mad seein' him do his somer- 
saults backwards, you know, and she cries out, ' If there ain't the 
Devil hisself on the shore ! ' she cries. We died laughin'. I don't 
know whatever we should do without Alf." 

" Are you very fond of him ? " Aubrey asked. 

" Yes. He's a good boy. He'd do anything for me, would Alf. 

Why, lie wanted to " 

She hesitated. 
"Yes?" said Aubrey. 

"To go for him, when you know. But for me, he would 
have, too. And he's no size at all. But he ain't afraid of any- 
thing. That's why they all say he can't never have an accident. 
Vauxhall'd give his life for Alf, he's that proud of him." 
" Did he tell you about coming to see me ? " 
"Yes, and doin' his tricks to the lady. He's crazy to see 
her again." 
" Is he ? " 

"Yes. Says she's the Queen of Diamonds, and ought to walk 
first in our march down. You know ? " 
" I know." 

"The old feller pardon, her husband " 

" Sir Reuben ? " 

" Yes. He's promised to bring her to see the growin' vine. 
Will she come ? " 

"Yes, I'm sure she will." 

"You'll see how Alf 11 perform that night. He's practisin' up 
some new tricks a-purpose, awful darin' ones. He says as the 
lady Lady Caryll, isn't it ? " 
Aubrey nodded. 

"As she's dead gone on him. Cheeky ! " 

Aubrey smiled. But Alf's adoration of Lady Caryll pleased 
him and made him almost love the imp. He was silent, thinking 
of her and of the fascination that had reached even the little 
acrobat. He thought of Alf busily practising his tricks in the 
hope of her coming to see them, and then of the beautiful legend 



228 THE SLAVE 

of the poor and deformed tumbler, who was found on the fete day 
of the Virgin going through his performance before her shrine, 
since he had nothing else to offer to the Divine Mother of God. 
The wind sighed in the trees, and the flitting clouds created the 
illusion of a hastening, anxious moon abroad on some nocturnal 
quest. Aubrey still felt the touch of Diamond against his arm, 
and now he heard her say 

"Whatever are you thinkin' of?" 

" I don't know. I feel as if I were thinking of nothing 
and of everything at the same time. That's the night and the 
moon." 

" They make me think too." 
"What of?" 

"Why people should be so beastly to each other. Ain't it 
odd ? " 

As she spoke, Aubrey saw in the distance two dingy figures of 

a man and a woman. They were standing under a tree. The 

woman was making violent gestures to the man. The man shoved 

her away with his shoulder. The woman seized his arm. He 

broke from her and made off. The woman shrieked after him. 

Aubrey could just hear the hideous thin sound of her crying voice. 

" It is odd," he said in answer to Diamond. 

"We might have such a nice time of it," she continued, 

looking wistfully at him. " Mightn't we ? And it ought to be 

easy, too." 

" Perhaps some day it will be easy," he said. 
"When?" 

" I can't tell you. At any rate, we must never be beastly to 
anybody, either of us, Diamond." 

" Oh, you wouldn't, never, I'm sure," she said. 
And it seemed to Aubrey that again, and as if unconsciously, 
she drew a little closer to him. 

"How can you be sure about anything a man might do?" he 
asked, " or not do ? " 

Her large, soft eyes were cloudy with a sort of childish wonder 
as he spoke. 

" Eh ?" she said. 

"Men don't know themselves what they are capable of, one 
way or another. They have their kind moments and their cruel 
moments." 

"D'you think they always know how cruel they're bein' ? " she 
said. " D'you think lie knew ? I often wonder ; and when it gets 
night, I wonder more," she added. 

Aubrey felt that in her simple way she was imaginative. She 
was sensitive to the quickening influence of the dark and the silent 




THE SLAVE 229 

hours, when the mind wanders as it never wanders by day, alone, 
like some fantastic figure on a mysterious heath, led by the winds 
and by the dim stars towards summits or abysses that are hidden 
in the light of noon. 

"Ever so much more!" she continued. "Why ever is it? 
And sometimes I feel as if there was something inside of me beatin' 
round just like a bird. And I want to let it out and I can't. 
Isn't it funny? I told Mr. King that once, and he said 

She paused. 

" Well, what did he say ? " 

" Why, he says, ' That's only a form of indigestion, Miss 
Diamond,' he says. 'Don't let it go on/ he says, 'or it'll be 
difficult to cure,' he says. And after he sent me some pills. He 
is kind. I took 'em, but it didn't go. It's here to-night. I think 
it comes because of the moon." 

" I think I've felt it," Aubrey said. 

Already he had forgotten Alfs warning, and forgotten what 
he had meant to find out, carried away by the curious sympathy 
that emanated so ignorantly from Diamond. How much and 
how directly she felt ! How little she knew ! 

" Whatever is it, then ? " 

"Not what Mr. King thinks, though lots of people would agree 
with him that it was liver, or something of the sort." 

" Ah ! but you don't ? " 

" No, Diamond ; don't ever try to stop your feelings. Don't 
ever try to have no feelings at all." 

Without knowing it, he had spoken with sudden violence. She 
looked quite startled. 

"Well, but we can't, however we get tryin'," she said. 

" Yes, we can," he said, thinking of many people in his world, 
of many who were in Lady St. Ormyn's garden on the night of his 
failure and his loss. " We can laugh at all real feelings until we 
scarcely feel at all. Or we can be afraid to feel, and let our 
cowardice triumph till our nature changes and we grow hard and 
indifferent, until we can hardly even be sorry. Diamond, depend 
upon it, there's a great tragedy in that in being unable to feel 
really sad." 

He had turned sideways and was looking into her face. His 
arm was behind the tiny chair on which she sat. A cloud was 
travelling before the moon and the wind shook the branches of 
the tree above them. Two or three drops of moisture that had 
been clinging to the twigs fell. They were cold on Diamond's 
face, cold as tears. She put up her thin hand to them. Her face 
was looking puzzled, like a child's (ace when it listens to an 
elaborate story. 



230 THE SLAVE 

" I thought we was all able to feel bad upset, I mean. We 
all can. Even Dad, if there's anything goes wrong with the 
lights." 

She paused in thought. Then she said 

" I don't know about Alf, though. I never seen him down, as I 
can remember." 

As usual, she went straight to her personal experience, and told 
the truth as she had found it. 

" No, he ain't never down. Vauxhall says it's just the same 
when they're travellin'. He's laughin' and playin' his games all 
the time and don't seem never tired. They can't keep him still. 
Why, it wouldn't be Alf, quiet. I do like settin' here with you." 

The words and the mention of Alf recalled Aubrey to duty, 
and to the remembrance of the intention that had led him to seek 
Diamond that night. 

" Why ? " he asked quickly. 

" Oh, I can talk to you like I can't to the others, not even Lill. 
And then it is nice here, like the country." 

She lifted up her pale oval face to the tree. The wind shook 
down two or three more drops on to her cheeks. 

"It's jolly after the theatre and all them painted trees on our 
Island palms, ain't they ? " 

"Yes. They grow in the East." 

" Lill's seen 'em really growin' and lizards runnin' up 'em. 
Hark at them soldiers." 

A long way off on the broad walk there was a gleam of waver- 
ing scarlet under a gas-lamp, and a subdued shouting of " Tommy 
Atkins " came to their ears. 

" Whatever do they want to make a noise for here ? " said 
Diamond, with a sort of soft pettishness. " You wouldn't ? " 

" No," said Aubrey, thinking of the uproar in Lady St. Ormyn's 
garden. " But lots of people would." 

" Yes, because they think as nobody can't be feelin* happy if 
they ain't shouting. There's ever so many like that in our Court ; 
and the girls at the theatre too. One of them says to me to-night 
in the dressin' room, ( Why, Di,' she says, 'you sit so quiet, any one'd 
think you was dead.' We can't be talkin' all the time, can we?" 

" No," said Aubrey. 

And then they sat in silence for a little while. He thought 
of Caryll's capacity for shining silences, when she sat looking 
brilliantly calm, and far away from the dense shadows of speechless 
stupidity. There was a link between her and this little girl, who, 
in her odd way, loved quiet too. Two or three couples glided 
among the trees, with arms entwined sentimentally or affectionately 
round each other's waists. They murmured foolish words or 






THE SLAVE 231 

giggled among the dark trees. One girl, in a long black jacket 
and a hat brimming over with feathers and ribbons, broke away 
from her swain and ran off awkwardly, looking over her shoulder 
to see if he was following. He started in pursuit. She screamed 
in triumphant terror, tried feebly to escape him and tumbled 
against a trunk. He caught at her arm. She broke into a 
piercing music of mingled cries and laughter, jerked, fought, 
tumbled down and rolled on the grass. He picked her up, shoved 
her hat which had come off on to her disorderly head, put his 
arm round her and dragged her away cackling hysterically and 
pretending to resist. Diamond observed it all calmly but with no 
disgust such as Aubrey felt. She was perfectly accustomed to 
such vulgar doings. 

" They will have their larks," she said, as the striving black 
figures tortuously disappeared. "I couldn't never care for any- 
thing like that now." 

" I should think not," said Aubrey. 

" And Dad wouldn't never allow us girls to make too free. Be- 
sides, he couldn't bear anything low. And I shall always be just 
as I should if if it'd kep' all right." 

"Do you care for him still, Diamond, as much as ever ?" 

"Oh yes." 

" You are as unhappy as ever ? " 

He would prove Alf's suspicions to be unfounded. She opened 
her lips to reply, then she shut them and looked at Aubrey. 

"Sometimes," she said at length. 

" Not always?" 

"Not now," she said. " Not when I'm talkin' with you." 

She made the confession without the slightest hint of shyness 
or of confusion. Aubrey felt uncomfortable, beginning to recog- 
nise the prescience of Alf. 

" Why's that ? " 

" I dunno. Because I like bein' with you, I s'pose." 

" And if we didn't meet at all ? " 

" Eh ? " 

" Suppose we didn't ever meet at all ? " 

The pale moonlight filtered through the branches to a white 
face that had suddenly become anxious. 

" Why shouldn't we ? Ain't we goin' to ? Now you know 
Dad, and Alf, and all of 'em, I thought 

" Yes ? " 

" I thought you was real friends with us." 

Aubrey let his hand fall on hers. Something in the nervous 
tone of her voice compelled him. He had felt, he always felt love 
a love that was apart from all else in his life. But for no one 



232 THE SLAVE 

living did he feel such warm and pure friendship as for Diamond. 
She had come, in a horrible moment, to stand, almost like a guar- 
dian angel, between him and the artificial monster that held and 
yet disgusted him. She had saved him, ignorantly, from the last 
hopeless depth of despair. He even loved her, as we love our 
truest friends, without obscuring passion, without defiant and per- 
secuting lust. She curved her thin fingers up to hold his. Hers 
were cold and wet with the tears of the tree which she had wiped 
from her cheeks. Their damp and almost clinging touch struck a 
chill of apprehension through Aubrey. He thought of the man at 
the rope, and seemed to see the little grey eyes of Alf fiercely 
watching him from some dark nook of the Park. 

"Why ever d'you do that?" asked the voice of Diamond. 

"Do what?" 

" Grit your teeth like that ? " 

"Did I?" 

"Yes, just as if you was angry." 

" Perhaps I was angry." 

" With me ? Whatever for ? " 

" Not with you, Diamond,, never with you. With fate, with 
life, with the Power that has made us so strangely." 

" What ! our fathers and mothers marryin' ? " 

" No, the Power that has made all men and women." 

" God, you mean. Naughty ! You musn't be angry with God. 
That's awful. wrong." 

She might have been rebuking little Susie. 

"And it ain't a bit of good, either," she continued, still holding 
his hand within hers, that was growing warmer from the contact. 
" Any more than it's a bit of good me bein' angry with Madame 
when she don't give me a solo step. We have to put up with 
things." 

" Of course. But but don't you give me anything to put up 
with." 

He was bending over her. 

" Me ! " she said. " Whatever are you sayin' ? " 

"Yes, you, Diamond. Be my friend always." 

" Why, of course. Whatever is it ? " 

" And just my friend. Come along." 

He got up. The growing warmth of her hand seemed to tell 
him that it would be dangerous to sit longer. Diamond obeyed 
him with obvious reluctance. 

" Must we go already ? " she said. 

"It's damp under the trees." 

"Then let's walk a little. I don't want to go yet." 

Aubrey knew it would be better to go, but he could not refuse 



THE SLAVE 233 

her pleading look of appeal. They strolled over the grass in 
silence and reached a broad path. Here several people were 
walking slowly, some together, some alone, furtively, like spies. 
These were badly dressed men with degraded faces. 

" What are they after ? " said Diamond. 

"I wonder!" said Aubrey. "Perhaps they could scarcely tell 
themselves. Don't you know that London is full of people who 
come out day after day, night after night, with no real purpose, on 
the chance of finding something or somebody that will change 
their lives and lessen their miseries?" 

" I seen 'em in the streets ; but whatever can they find here ? " 

" I daresay they are wondering. Don't look at them." 

She turned her eyes away obediently from the dark places and 
the prowling figures. 

" I should like to walk like this with you every night," she said 
simply. "Can't we do a day in the country some time ?" 

"I'm very busy in the day," Aubrey said hastily, and almost 
brusquely. 

She did not speak again for several minutes. They reached the 
Serpentine. Its brown waters were whipped by the wind into little 
hurrying waves. On the near waves there was a streak of moon- 
light, which emphasised the flowing darkness all around. The wind 
was rising, and there was a mysterious wet breath in it. 

" It's going to rain soon," Aubrey said. " We must turn and go." 

"Yes, let's go," Diamond assented. 

Her voice sounded strained and less sweet than usual. Aubrey 
guessed why. He did not look at her. As they walked towards 
the gates he felt as if a gulf yawned between them. He knew she 
was sensitively suffering, like a plant that folds its leaves. When 
they reached the gates they found two women and a man having a 
violent quarrel. A small and laughing crowd surrounded them, 
and two soldiers were urging them on. One of the women was 
crying bitterly. The other cursed the man, who cursed her back 
in the loathsome language of the street. 

" You did," shrieked the woman. " You devil, you did, you 
did ! And now look at 'er ! You 'ave got 'er money ! I say you 
'ave, and she starvin' and nowheres to go." 

She flew at the man, knocked off his hat, and tore at his hair 
like a wild-cat, all the time screaming oaths and curses. The 
man got away. The woman attacked him again, and fastened her 
teeth in his hand. He yelled. A policeman came up, and took 
the woman into custody. She was marched off, shrieking and 
struggling. 

You'll get three months, you hell-cat!" said the man, fol- 
lowing. 



234 THE SLAVE 

The other woman was left weeping. The crowd had forgotten 
her already, and melted away cheerfully, discussing the pleasant 
little excitement that had broken the dark monotony of the streets. 
Diamond, who had watched the affair, and heard all the blas- 
phemies without the shadow of a blush, went up to the woman 
who was crying. 

" Did he take your money ? " she asked. 

" Ye-ye-ye-es, the 'ound, the 'ound ! " whimpered the 

woman. 

Diamond put two or three pence into her hand and returned 
to Aubrey. 

" Spoils all the niceness of the Park, don't it ? " she remarked 
quietly. "I'll go on a 'bus, please. No, I won't have you come 
with me to-night, please. No." 

There was decision in her voice. Aubrey helped her on to the 
step of the 'bus, and watched her climb the stair to the seats on 
the top. He had not seen Sir Reuben's brougham going by, 
taking him and Lady Caryll to a ball. But Sir Reuben saw him 
and Diamond distinctly, just as they were passing through the 
Park gates. He moved suddenly in the carriage and looked out of 
the window. 

" What is it, Reuben ? " asked Lady Caryll. 

" A street row," said Sir Reuben. 

He leaned back, and turned his eyes again to the jewels that 
gleamed in Lady Caryll's frosty yellow hair, and on her neck and 
bosom. When he felt very old and tired, as now he often did at 
night, it reposed him to glance at his radiant slave, in whom the 
very heart of youth was surely beating, in whom the most exqui- 
sitely perfumed blossoms of youth were surely flowering. He strove 
to drink in her vitality, to sun himself in her radiance, to live in 
her still and yet increasingly intense virility. And when the grey 
and aged feeling crept upon him he was angry. Foi the sensation 
was horrible. He felt like a man with some soft, but heavy and 
inexorable animal crouched upon his breast. He strove to shake it 
off, to crawl, to wriggle from under it. But it could not be stirred. 
Indeed, his violence of exertion seemed only to increase the burden 
of its dominion, which was always more noticeable to him at night. 

A few days later he told Aubrey that he had got a box at the 
theatre in Champion Square for a certain night. 

"Tell that little imp, your friend, if you like," he added. 
" He fell in love with Caryll, and may be glad to know she is to 
see him and his relations in patterns. By the way, I've asked your 
mother to come with us." 

Lady Rangecliffe did not often come to the house in Park Lane. 
She was discomforted there. It pained her to see Aubrey in his 






THE SLAVE 235 

new home. It hurt her to see Lady Caryll gleaming with jewels 
and watched by the dark eyes of her husband. Lady Rangecliffe's 
honesty seldom wore a veil. She refused several of the Allabruth's 
invitations for no very apparent reason. 

"Your mother dislikes me," Caryll said to Aubrey. 

"Oh no, indeed," he answered hastily. "But she's always so 
busy. You know she looks after poor people a great deal." 

" Yes. But I know, too, that she dislikes me. If not, why 
should she not come here ? Besides, I saw her eyes on my 
wedding-day. There were no congratulations in them. And 
yet she has been my husband's great friend. She ought to wish 
him to be happy. And I have made him as happy as 1 have 
made him happy." 

" Yes." 

Aubrey found nothing more to say. He was glad when 
Lady Rangecliffe accepted Sir Reuben's invitation to the theatre. 
Aubrey wrote to tell Diamond whom he had not seen since the 
walk in the Park the date on which they were coming, and 
received her answer. She said 

" Alf is in a state. He's got the new tricks ready, and talks 
of nothing but the Queen of Diamonds says as she'll be fair mad 
with surprise when she sees him do his dive. All the music's 
to stop when he does it exceptin' the drums, what's to roll. I 
says they only roll like that for funerals, when they bury soldiers. 
Susie and all of 'em are to be there to see him, because it's the 
first time he done it, and I shall get Madame to let me stand with 
Lill in the wings." The letter was signed, " Faithfully yours, 
Diamond Manners." 

Aubrey told Lady Caryll of the excitement which her promised 
presence at the theatre was already causing, and of the special pre- 
paration that was being made in her honour. She smiled lightly. 

" Your little friend is like a gnome," she said. " I believe 
he came out of a tree-trunk to perform his antics, and that some 
day he will disappear among the leaves of a forest and be seen 
no more." 

" He quite worships you," said Aubrey. 

" Oh, does he ? " she answered. 

Her voice sounded cold, and for a moment Aubrey felt chilled. 
But then he remembered that Lady Caryll had no acquaintance 
with Alf's family, knew nothing of the pedestal on which he was 
placed in his home circle, and could not be expected to realise that 
the night of her visit to the theatre would be a great night in the 
humble annals of Milk Court. 

Lady Rangecliffe came to dine in Park Lane before the per- 
formance. After it Sir Reuben was taking Lady Caryll to a great 



236 THE SLAVE 

ball in Portman Square, to which Aubrey was also invited. A 
Royalty was to be there. Lady Caryll was dressed in black, and 
wore the engraved emerald, and a quantity of emeralds mounted 
on a black ornament that stood up high in her yellow hair. She 
looked radiant, but Lady Rangecliffe noticed that Sir Reuben was 
again oppressed by a cold, and that his cough troubled him. He 
seemed very fatigued. 

" I am sure you ought not to go out to-night," she said to him 
bluntly. "You're looking dreadful." 

" I always go with Caryll," he answered. 

Lady Rangecliffe heard the obstinate note in his voice, remem- 
bered the dead wife, and said no more. But once or twice, at 
dinner, when Sir Reuben coughed, she winced, and an anxious 
look came into her honest face. Lady Rangecliffe was always in a 
state of anxiety about other people, though she took her own 
buffets from life as a boy takes a kick in a football scrimmage. 
As she dined, she often glanced at the emerald on Lady Caryll's 
breast. Then she looked at the wearer, and she too was dazzled 
by the radiance that emanated from Lady Caryll. There was 
something fierce in the apparent completeness of her joy, and 
Lady Rangecliffe suddenly thought that joy can be very horrible. 
Then, mentally, she as she would have termed it caught herself 
up, rebuking herself for lack of charity, and tried to share in her 
boy's worship of the glory of this girl, who shone upon the ugly 
and withered old man opposite to her, so uncomfortable in his 
unromantic malady. 

When the carriage was announced, Sir Reuben wrapped himself 
in an immense fur coat, in which he looked like some small and 
peculiar animal. He stepped wearily into the brougham after his 
wife. Aubrey went with his mother in her carriage. On the way 
they talked a little, but conversation seldom flowed easily between 
them. Lady Rangecliffe, with the marvellously quick delicacy of 
perception that often guides a mother in her dealings with her 
children, lost much of her bluntness when she was with Aubrey. 
She did not blunder with him as she blundered with others. All 
her senses were sharpened by his presence, because he was her son, 
and she became highly strung and perceptive as a clairvoyante. 
The second-sight of the mother is often more truly miraculous than 
are the so-called marvels of the occultists. But this second-sight, 
and a certain confused and dim knowledge of it by the child, 
scarcely tends towards talk. Lady Rangecliffe and Aubrey said 
little in the brougham. Once she remarked that Sir Reuben was 
looking very ill. 

" I fancy it's only a cold," Aubrey said. " I expect England 
hardly suits him after those hot climates." 



THE SLAVE 2.37 

" Well, he ought to go back to them ; but perhaps it wouldn't 
suit her." 

" Lady Caryll ? I don't know. She looks meant for the sun, 
I think."' 

The words would not have slipped out but for the darkness in 
which they sat and the street noises that roared round them, and 
Aubrey quickly changed the subject till they were silent again. 
Lady Rangecliffe wished she could talk long with her boy in the 
dark. His unreserve would have been a sort of foretaste of heaven 
to her, but instinct told her that she could never hope for it. She 
must be content with silence, and the secret knowledge that he 
loved her as a mother longs to be loved. The lights shone from 
the front of the playhouse. They were blown sideways by the 
wind. The party of four entered Sir Reuben's box in time to see 
the ballet. There was a full house. The Marvellous Flicks always 
attracted a multitude wherever they performed, and to-night a long 
and strange Frenchwoman was singing terrible little songs of the 
horrors of the Paris streets. Pale, simply dressed, and wearing 
mournful black gloves up to her shoulders, she chanted hoarsely, in 
a veiled voice, the tragedies of the poor and of the wicked. And 
the smart world hurried from its dinner to hear her, loving to learn 
from her almost white lips the downward progress of the morphia 
victim or the hideous dreams of the drunkard. 

Aubrey sat between his mother and Lady Caryll, and watched 
the ballet. Diamond did not come on until the Island scene. As 
Aubrey anticipated it, he recalled his condition on the evening 
when he had first seen Diamond. Then he had sat benumbed, 
face to face with a tragedy ; now he sat beside the tragedy. It 
was with him in this small room with the red walls and the open 
window, through which he saw the pleasure-seeking world, with its 
eyes often upturned to Lady Caryll. She leaned her arm rather 
idly on the ledge of the box, seeming unconscious that she caused 
any sensation. 

When the Island was disclosed, Aubrey's pulses quickened. 
The tom-toms sounded, and the line of girls floated forward. 
Diamond was among them, transformed by her red-gold wig and 
by the lithe and weary grace of her dancing. She glanced up at 
Aubrey. Sir Reuben leaned forward and scanned her through his 
opera-glasses. He wondered if she were the girl whom he had 
seen with Aubrey at the gate of the Park. He could not help 
thinking of a vulgar intrigue, and the cold and tuneless voice of 
experience whispered within him that all men were alike. Then 
he looked at Aubrey and found that his eyes were fixed on Lady 
Caryll. Ladv Rangecliffe, who very seldom went to the theatre, 
was entirely engrossed by the stage spectacle. She moved her 



238 THE SLAVE 

head to the music, and had put up her eye - glasses to see 
better. 

" That girl there dances well, Aubrey/' said Sir Reuben. 

" Yes, doesn't she ? " 

" I wonder what she's like off the stage," said Sir Reuben, 
watching his godson sharply. 

Aubrey made no answer. He had looked away from Lady 
Caryll, and now seemed absorbed in the business of the stage. 

"Very common and uninteresting, probably," continued Sir 
Reuben. 

He noticed a spot of red flame in his godson's cheek, and 
said to himself, " Can he really be cured already ? " and, in face 
of the possibility, he was conscious of a sudden contempt for 
Aubrey. 

When the curtain fell on the ballet, Sir Reuben talked a 
little between his coughing fits with Lady Rangecliffe. Lady 
Caryll sat silent, looking about the house. Her content to-night 
seemed supreme. There was a quiet expression of complete 
happiness in her white face. Aubrey did not disturb her by any 
words. He thought of Alfs excitement and expectation behind 
the painted curtain, of the tenseness of that body preparing for 
new and terrific physical feats. Alf was going to do homage with 
the body to the happy girl to whom Aubrey's soul did homage. 
Like the poor tumbler before the Virgin's altar, Alf would offer 
his gift. And Aubrey had a moment of jealousy of the little 
acrobat, a flitting, ugly sensation of which he was ashamed. It 
passed, and he looked up towards the black human swarm crowded 
under the many-coloured roof in which the lights gleamed. Susie 
was probably there with little Charley. Aubrey could imagine 
their condition of childish excitement, and of exultant pride in. 
Alf and their relationship to him. Aubrey supposed them as 
was, indeed, actually the casebusy in informing those around 
them of the great and almost awful fact that the celebrated 
Alf Flick lived under their roof and played his tricks in their 
parlour; that their own father's cutlery and glassware endured 
the fearful honour of miraculous tossing at his hands ; that from 
their own small and fidgety persons he produced eggs and apples, 
knives and cheese-plates at will. In truth, the little creatures, 
carefully installed in the front row behind the rail, were indeed 
floating on clouds of glory, and all agleam with pride and triumph. 
Nor had they failed to inform their sympathetic neighbours of 
their identity. Quickly from mouth to mouth the wonder flew 
that the small and shiny children with the excited red faces in 
the front row were relations of the Marvellous Flicks, and on 
terms of the closest intimacy with the famous Alf, whose demon 



THE SLAVE 239 

antics and most terrific feats had moved even those stony-hearted 
potentates, the kings and emperors of Europe, to applause and 
admiration. The serious-minded Bob had much ado to answer 
all the questions addressed to him by those around him ; by gallery 
boys suddenly become most strangely respectful, by a couple of 
scarlet soldiers who had done their valiant part in the last military 
tournament, by several young women in elaborate hats, and by 
a stout lady in gold earrings and a silk pelisse who professed 
herself a whole-hearted admirer of "all brave fellers, she didn't 
care where they come from ! " The little Charley, by no means 
disposed to hide his light under a bushel, lispingly spread on 
all sides the tremendous news that to-night Alf was to perform 
a novel and hitherto unknown miracle in a descent from the roof, 
complicated by a perfect whirl of somersaults, and accompanied by 
the portentous rolling of muffled drums. 

" He's been at the somersets in our kitching," announced the 
child, swelling with innocent gratification in the circumstance 
of being able truly to make so magisterial a statement. 

And he beat his little hands on the rail before him in a perfect 
agony of pleasure, self-importance, and excitement. Nor was 
Susie at all his inferior on the occasion. Indeed, by right of her 
sex, she claimed an even greater share of attention than the 
battering Charley. Once her rosy shyness was overcome, and 
with it the attacks of suffocation which impeded her power of 
speech, she began indeed to border on the garrulous, and babbled 
freely of Alf and of his doings to all in her immediate neighbour- 
hood, addressing herself more especially to the two soldiers, who 
received her confidences with every show of sympathy, and re- 
turned them with a fine orange which Susie was nothing loth 
to suck. Bob played chaperon with his usual serious air, but 
inwardly he was scarcely less excited than his little brother and 
sister, for Alf had won the admiration of all the Slagg connection 
since first he entered Milk Court. Bob, however, thought it due 
to himself, and to the machinery with which he was so closely 
bound up, to maintain an air of slight detachment, and not to 
thrust his relationship to the hero of the evening too prominently 
into notice. It may be that he saw the putting forward of the 
fact might, with safety, be left to the initiative of Susie and 
Charley. As the ballet drew to an end, the excitement of the 
children increased. They thrust forward their small heads beneath 
the rail, and squeaked their comments on the crowded audience. 
Susie, with the sharp eyes of woman, spied Aubrey in the box 
next the stage. 

"There's the gen'leman ! " she piped. "The gen'leman as 
come to supper at our house ! " 



240 THE SLAVE 

" And there's the pitty lady ! " cried Charley, perceiving Lady 
Caryll's pale face and sparkling hair. 

For Alf had made no secret of his adoration of Lady Caryll, 
and had transformed her into a sort of marvellous fairy queen for 
the benefit of the children. Bob leaned forward to gaze at her 
with unwinking solemnity, and the eyes of half the gallery were 
at once riveted on Sir Reuben's box. 

" She's a rare one, and no mistake," said one of the soldiers. 

" My, what stones ! " cried the stout lady in the silk pelisse 
and the gold earrings. " A king's ransom wouldn't buy the like, 
I'll lay." 

And she broke into an account of a certain cat's-eye brooch of 
great value which at one time had been in her possession, but of 
which she had been most basely robbed by an individual who, it 
seemed, had been a candlemaker, and with whom she had injudi- 
ciously walked out in the neighbourhood, by what one could gather, 
of Barnes Common, the result being a proposal of marriage 
accepted the loss of the cat's-eye brooch, and the mysterious dis- 
appearance of the candlemaker, whom the good lady more than 
suspected of having fled over the seas to America in order most 
profitably to dispose of the magnificent booty. The history of this 
priceless jewel, to which no one listened very particularly, lasted 
till a bewigged functionary thrust a gigantic number into a gold 
frame, and the orchestra struck up a lively measure that smacked 
of the circus. 

" That's their toon ! that's their toon ! " screamed little Charley, 
and he turned and furiously thumped the nearest stranger with 
his doubled fists. Susie began to get up from her seat in order to 
crane her head farther forward, but Bob caught her skirts and held 
her fast. 

A large net was stretched over the heads of the people in the 
stalls, and secured by some mysterious arrangement of ropes and 
pulleys. Above this net swung one small trapeze, from which a 
cord dropped. 

" He's goin' on that ! " cried Charley, beside himself with excite- 
ment. " He's goin' in the roof! Oh ! oh !" 

He shuffled his feet in a sort of frantic dance, while Susie, 
whose face, bright-red in hue, seemed suddenly to have swelled in 
an alarming manner, dropped her half-sucked orange to the floor 
and grasped the rail with diminutive hands, puffing like one 
attacked by a sudden asthma. The people around caught the 
infection of the children's excitement, at which they could not 
help laughing sympathetically, and the pelisse lady, blessing them 
for a pair of pretty ducks, dispersed her bonnet-strings abroad upon 
her ample shoulders, and declared she felt all of a tremble at the 



THE SLAVE 241 

prospect of Alf s high doings. Then the curtain was drawn up 
and the Flick Family bounded forward, making elaborate gestures, 
and smiling in the most athletic and self-possessed manner possible. 

"Where's the little 'un ?" asked one of the soldiers. 

" He ain't there yet," piped Charley. " He comes by hisself. 
That's Vauxhall, what married my sister." 

And he glowed, like a hot coal, with vanity. 

Vauxhall's magnificent figure looked very well in his tight 
black suit, which was decorated with silver embroidery in a 
" chaste design " invented by Lill, as Susie took care to inform the 
company in the gallery. - He stood in an easy attitude at the end 
of the family line, and turned his face towards the wings. There 
was a moment's pause, and then, in obedience to a gesture from 
Vauxhall, Alf came running forward with his quick and sidling 
gait, ducking his head on which the watered hair was plastered, 
and blowing kisses with his hands. 

"There he is ! There's Alf! that's Alf!" shrieked Charley. 

He turned sharply round to the pelisse lady, who sat imme- 
diately behind him, cried again, " That's Alf ! " and gave her a 
punch in the ribs that made her catch her breath and ejaculate 

" Bless the child ! if he ain't crazed with it all ! " 

Having made his habitual salute in the most solemn and mecha- 
nical manner, Alf cut an extraordinary caper which made the house 
rock with laughter, stood on his head waving one hand at the 
audience, regained his feet, and looked stonily round the house 
with his grim, yet twinkling eyes. 

Aubrey could just see Diamond and Lill half hidden in the 
wings to watch their little relative's new triumph. And once he 
saw Diamond peep forth to stare at their box. Her big eyes rested 
on Lady Caryll and then on him. Aubrey wondered if, with those 
two swift glances, there was linked a quick woman's thought. 

Lady Rangecliffe, who adored all feats of strength, all daring 
exercises, like a boy, sat forward in the box, jerking her head 
sideways. 

"The little chap's well put together," she said. "Not an 
ounce of flesh. He'd have made a jockey. Wouldn't he, 
Aubrey ? " 

" Yes, mother," said Aubrey. 

He turned to Lady Caryll. 

" He'll do all his tricks to-night for you," he said to her. 

She smiled a cool recognition at Alf. Alf saw the smile, and 
his small eyes gleamed in the glare of the footlights. At that 
moment he felt an intense pride in his physical abilities. It ran 
like fire through his veins. He knew that Charley, Susie, and Bob 
were watching him from the gallery. He could squint at Lill and 

9* 



242 THE SLAFE 

Diamond in the wings. And the Queen of Diamonds smiled at 
him from her box. It was quite the grandest day of his life, and 
he felt born within him an overpowering excitement, a devilry of 
daring. He felt inclined to attempt some feat that he had never 
practised, to trust utterly to the perfection of his trained and 
obedient muscles. His mind went to work busily while the music 
I'ang out. Mechanically he caught the tambourine that Vauxhall 
flung at him, shook its bells in the air, and beat it while his 
brothers and father performed their first evolution. And all the 
time he was thinking he gazed at Lady Caryll. She looked calm 
and gay. Her smooth cheeks were white, her yellow hair was 
frosty under the great emeralds that quivered in their black set- 
ting. Alf desired to bring the red to her cheeks and the fire to 
her eyes. The actor's longing to hold captive the least easily 
moved person in his audience came upon him. He could see with 
his trained eyes, which had watched so many watching multitudes, 
that the dark, blunt-faced he called her ugly woman beside 
Lady Caryll would swiftly be waked to enthusiasm by his daring, 
but he felt that he must do something almost miraculous to send 
a thrill through the heart of the Fairy Queen. All this shot 
through his brain in the twinkling of an eye, always accompanied 
by the glaring sound of the music. Then his bar came. He 
dropped his tambourine, stretched out his arms to attract attention, 
spun forward in Catherine wheels, leaped into the air and alighted, 
rigid as a dead thing, on the upturned feet of his father, his arms 
pinned to his sides, his legs extended, his toes turned up towards 
the lights in the ceiling. This was the famous corpse act, during 
which Alf was kicked about from one relation to another, was spun 
high into the air, dropped nearly to the boards of the stage, saved 
just in time on a toe, set whirling like a top to the four points of 
the compass, jerked into a standing position on his head, all the 
time rigid, motionless as a bundle of dead limbs and a dead body 
sewn up in black and silver trappings for the grave. This act was 
always a success, and was sometimes repeated if the applause was 
very persistent. Alf prayed that it might be encored to-night, 
for while he was a corpse he could think out some daring deed, 
some exquisite and unrivalled feat of lofty tumbling, that must 
conquer that fairy woman on whose white breast the huge jewel 
shone. As the great audience gazed at his stiff horizontal body, 
while his father, propped on his back against a velvet stand, turned 
him with drumming feet as the Japanese turn their gigantic barrels, 
little Alf was thinking furiously. Mechanically he kept his body 
perfectly straight, perfectly motionless. His small, wide-open eyes 
were now staring at the stage, now at the ceiling and the blazing 
lights, now at the wings, now at the back-cloth, as his father's 



THE SLAVE 243 

practised feet kicked him with apparent violence first in one 
direction then in another. Then Vauxhall took up a prostrate 
position at some distance, and Alf was tossed high in the air side- 
ways towards his brother. While Alf went on thinking he made 
the necessary effort which turned him twice in mid-air. He 
alighted on the soles of Vauxhall's feet. Great applause burst out 
in the house. Alf scarcely heard it. What extraordinary thing 
could he do to startle into irresistible admiration the lovely lady ? 
There was his great new dive, it was true. He had thought that 
would be a sensation. But now, in her cool presence, it hardly 
seemed enough. Vauxhall kicked him high, still cogitating, taking 
his thoughts with him far into the air. He spun like a ball. 

" Any one'd swear he was dead," said the pelisse lady, the per- 
spiration bursting out upon her large, motherly face. " Never did 
I see such doin's, never, no. Oh, law ! I thought they'd dropped 
him that time ! " 

In her tremor of fright she had laid hold of those on each side 
of her. Charley and Susie had become perfectly silent. With 
round and staring eyes, as those that look on some sacred vision, 
they regarded the flights, the turns, the uprisings and the descents 
of their august relative. 

" He do keep jolly still," said one of the soldiers. 

"Like one dead and ready for the layin' out, I say again!" 
said the pelisse lady. " Oh ! it's enough to send a body silly to 
look at him." 

Her bonnet was cocked, and a button burst from her boot. 
She never heeded it. Now Alf spun with inconceivable rapidity 
above the tripping treadmill action of Vauxhall's feet. It was 
impossible to distinguish which side up he was. His face became 
a blur. The silver embroidery on his tights flashed in the light. 
Merely to watch his whirling body made people giddy. They 
would have been surprised could they have known the calm 
calculations, the daring projects that were seething in his mind. 
He scarcely felt the continuous soft drumming of his brother's 
feet against him. Yet, at each short cry of command, at each 
clapping of the hands that signalled some change in the nature 
of the feat performed, his alert spirit almost mechanically responded, 
giving the necessary message to the trained muscles that swiftly 
and surely carried out his will. And all the time the gay, familiar 
circus music rang in his ears which scarcely heard it. He could 
not see Lady Caryll. He wondered if she were watching him.. 
She should watch him presently when he was drawn up to the 
roof. He flew high into the air, bent his body, turned twice with 
the speed of lightning, and stood on the stage calmly regarding 
the immense audience. His breath was not hastened. His 



244 THE SLAVE 

cheeks were not flushed. He sidled to the fierce applause and 
glanced up at Sir Reuben's box. Lady Caryll was looking down- 
ward at the emerald on her bosom. Then the scarlet came into 
the boy's face, and he drew his breath hard as he retired to his 
corner. Nor did he come out of it in answer to the demand for 
an encore. His father glanced towards him, but Alf shook his 
head. The elder Flick did not insist. He knew that Alf did 
nothing in a public performance without good reason. Vauxhall 
took the field, and Charley and Susie were once again in glory, 
inspired by the ardent praises that came from those around them. 
Yet the affection of the gallery, even as the affection of Milk 
Court, flowed in greatest volume to Alf. The feats of Vauxhall, 
brilliant though they were, did not fire the blood as did the feats 
of Alf, whose minute size and impudent daring always caught the 
imagination of the public. 

After Vauxhall's "turn," the Flick Family proceeded to go 
through what they called their "trick patterns." In this act they 
all six took pai-t, the father and the five brothers. It was a 
kaleidoscope performance of the most brilliant kind. Nor was it 
devoid of a curious and swift grace. The Flick father, sturdy and 
stout as some rooted immemorial oak, was the magnificent founda- 
tion of each new combination. Planted firmly on his large feet, 
a gay and continuous smile upon his broad and masculine face, he 
served his sons as base, springboard, ladder, pivot. They leaped 
upon him like cats, planting their light feet on his broad hips, 
darting to his shoulders, ready, in their turn, to be a base for 
startling operations by their higher climbing brothers. Now they 
seemed a human tree with spreading branches, now a wheel, now a 
wavering plant blown aslant by a wind, now a fierce group of 
scowling gladiators, now a laughing ladder of gay souls ascending 
skyward, now a quivering fan with their black arms spread for 
sprouting feathers, now a trumpet broadening to give egress to some 
triumphant sound, now a comb with living teeth. The swiftness, 
the intense, almost angry vigour with which each new pattern was 
formed and broken, made the watching eyes blink as eyes blink 
at the monotonous raging of machinery, or at the goblin play of 
darting fires. 

Lady Rangecliffe was completely absorbed by the performance. 
Her long, thin body twitched with a responsive energy to the 
acrobatic energy upon the stage. She jerked her head continually 
and blinked her short-sighted eyes. But Lady Caryll was in no 
way moved. Often her eyes were turned to the house or to the 
jewel on her breast. Sir Reuben watched her from the shadow 
of the box. Aubrey's attention, like his mother's, was fixed for 
the present upon the stage. He felt a strongly personal interest 



THE SLAVE 245 

in the performance, much of Diamond's interest, some of the 
glowing enthusiasm of the little Charley and Susie, even a certain 
pride that was very boyish in the feats of this family, because 
he knew something of its inner history, and of the happy homeli- 
ness of its anxiety and sincerity. 

Presently came the pattern of the growing vine. The Flicks 
arranged themselves against a back cloth which represented a great 
trellis against which they seemed to grow, while Alf stood quietly 
upon the stage apparently indifferent to their proceedings. Then 
the father clapped his hands. Alf turned sharply, came backwards 
to the footlights, took a quick tripping run, sprang at his father, 
darted up him, reached his shoulder, stood on his head, swarmed 
up Vauxhall, wriggled with amazing rapidity between the arms 
and legs of the various brothers, and finally came out at the top of 
the pattern on which he perched in the shape of a round ball, or 
grape, his head completely doubled under him. There was a 
moment's pause, during which all the Flicks i-emained motionless 
as black figures carved out of ebony, while the fiddles in the 
orchestra played a shrieking tremolo. Then there was a bang on 
the big drum. The black grape was shaken from its plant by the 
mighty sound. It rolled into mid-air. The pelisse lady in the 
gallery cried out in terror. 

" My, he's done for ! " she shrieked, covering her hot face with 
her fat hands. 

She heard a burst of applause, looked up, and saw the Flicks 
in a row before the footlights, leaping and bowing, their faces gay 
with smiles. A bell sounded. The curtain slowly fell, concealing 
them from sight. The pelisse lady heaved a lengthy sigh. 

" I thought he was killed," she murmured. " I thought he 
was in pieces, that I did." 

The two soldiers and those around her laughed at her excite- 
ment, stamped their feet vigorously, gave forth piercing whistles, 
and clapped their hands. Susie and Charley banged the rail till 
their little fists were marked with weals of red. Up went the 
curtain again, and the Flicks were disclosed in surprised and half- 
deprecatory attitudes. They made a combined movement as if to 
retire, paused before the frantically renewed applause, hesitated, 
looked at each other, then simultaneously burst into a wild series 
of leaping somersaults, till some huge black and silver serpent 
seemed winding its way about the stage. Then, rising to their 
feet, they stood at attention. The moment of Alf had come. He 
stepped forward. Up in the far away gallery Bob, Susie, and 
Charley were quivering with expectation. Even the serious and 
reserved elder brother could no longer conceal his excitement. 
In the wings Lill and Diamond stood motionless, their eyes fixed 



246 THE SLAVE 

on Alf. The band stopped playing, and, amid silence, Alf ran to 
the footlights, bounded into the net that roofed the stalls, and, 
leaping on the rising and falling floor with the prancing gait of 
an exceptionally agile dancing-master, gained the cord that hung 
from the trapeze. He grasped it, gave a signal, and was drawn 
up in mid-air, swaying this way and that, his body rigidly extended 
and his feet close together. And, while he mounted thus towards 
the trapeze that hung at present midway between the floor and 
the ceiling of the great theatre, he peered at Lady Caryll, whose 
attention was now at last fixed upon him. The cessation of the 
music had attracted her attention. Apparently she had forgotten 
the jewel on her breast. She had turned in the box to get a 
better view of Alf, and as she saw him looking at her she smiled 
slightly and said something to Aubrey, who was now standing up 
behind her. 

A fierce boldness, that was like a storm, swept into the boy's 
heart. His muscles tightened. His small hard hands gripped the 
rope more fiercely, and his body seemed to become indomitable as 
iron. Lady Rangecliffe had put up her opera-glasses. Sir Reuben 
pushed his head forward to see better. 

Alf gained the trapeze, caught it with one hand, let the rope 
go, swung in the air, threw his leg over the bar, and sat looking 
calmly round him. Vauxhall had stepped forward to the edge of 
the stage. He rested one hand on his hip and gazed up at his 
brother, with the fixed and impassive expression which hid so 
strong an excitement and admiration. Susie sat closer to Charley. 
She felt a little frightened, as children feel when it begins to 
grow dark and no lamp is lit in the room where they are playing. 
Charley wriggled, and stuck out an elbow to keep her off. He 
was absorbed in Alf and could brook no feminine distraction. 
Bob said "Hush !" to Susie, and the pelisse lady remarked "Law 
sakes!" twice, in a voice that was muffled and stertorous. The 
cessation of the music produced a rather uncanny effect upon the 
crowd. Only the little black and silver figui'e that dominated the 
multitude seemed totally unconcerned. But what a life was beat- 
ing in it, what a hurry and turmoil of wild and happy youth and 
strength and power ! Alf was like a blackbird looking down upon 
a city into whose heart he presently meant to take a daring flight. 
Like a bird, he whistled. The faint and clear sound made the 
pelisse lady jump. Her nervous system was more sensitive than 
could possibly have been supposed from her appearance. Vauxhall 
heard the whistle and replied to it. A cord was pulled from 
below, and the frail trapeze on which Alf was perched glided 
stealthily upward toward the lights that shone in the ceiling. All 
the people in the front stalls leaned their heads far back and 



THE SLAVE 247 

turned up their faces, which looked peculiarly white in the cold 
illumination of the electric lamps. 

And now Susie and Charley Bob, too, in his more secret way 
reached the apex of family emotion. For they saw their all- 
glorious relative, serenely ascending to their level, honour them 
with an almost fraternal wink (which was observed with awe as 
testimony to their previous truth in narrative by those about them) 
and pass on and up to the coloured ceiling, against which he 
seemed almost a tiny, summer fly. 

Susie clutched Charley's damp little hand, and made an odd, 
childish noise, something between a gasp and a chuckle. The 
pelisse lady began to breathe hard. 

" Whatever's the child goin' to do up there ? " she said, rolling 
her pocket-handkerchief into a ball, and beginning to look almost 
sick with apprehension. " It turns a body giddy to see him. 
Whatever's he goin' to do ? " 

"Jump down into the net," said Bob, trying to keep his voice 
decently calm, as became a young man absorbed by day in com- 
plicated pursuits. 

"Jump what! He'll be killed. For certain sure he'll break 
his neck ! " she cried, covering her eyes with one hand, and clap- 
ping the other over her ear. 

Bob smiled. 

" Oh, Alfll never have an accident," he answered. " He ain't 
any more afraid of doing that than you might be of jumping off a 
chair, Ma'am." 

"Alf won't never have no excident!" piped Charley. "Oh! oh!" 

Below in the orchestra the silence was broken by a drum 
tap, sharp and short. Alf stood up on the trapeze. Vauxhall 
moved a step forward, staring steadily up at his small brother, 
who was to dive head foremost into the net, turning two somer- 
saults sideways in the rapid flight. To accomplish this feat Alf 
ought to stand facing the stage, and at this moment he was so 
standing, with his eyes fixed upon Lady Caryll far down below 
him. Muffled drums began to growl, rising into a soft thunder, 
dying away into a cruel and suggestive murmur. Vauxhall clapped 
his hands as a signal. Suddenly Alf turned on the trapeze, and 
faced the other way. Vauxhall made a quick movement of surprise. 

"What's he at?" murmured the Flick father, still preserving 
the stereotyped smile with which he always honoured his audiences. 
Vauxhall shook his head. The veiled roar of the drums rose 
louder. Alf took one hand from the red rope of the trapeze. 

" By God ! " murmured Vauxhall, " he's going to do it back- 
wards ! The little devil ! " 

And into his stony face there came a strong flush of scarlet. 



248 THE SLAVE 

The roar of the drums increased. Alf swayed, took his other 
hand from the i-ope, and dived backwards. There was a flash of 
silver in the light as he turned in the air, a thud as his body 
dropped into the net. The watching crowd broke into a tempest 
of applause. Vauxhall had advanced to the edge of the net to 
give his brother a hand as he leaped on to the stage. But Alf lay 
quite still in the net over the white, upturned faces in the stalls. 

"Little devil! He's feigning, to frighten 'em!" whispered 
Vauxhall to the line of brothers behind him. 

He knew the mischief that bubbled eternally in Alf. 

The line of brothers smiled. The applause died suddenly 
away. Only the muffled drums roared on. The people in the 
gallery and in the boxes craned forward to look into the net, and 
the pelisse lady, taking her fat hand from her eyes, said 

" Law sakes ! I'm glad it's over. I sy such things is wicked 
and oughtn't to be allowed, that I do." 

The roar of the drums ceased. The drummers, as if paralysed 
by curiosity, dropped their sticks. All the red had died away 
from Vauxhall's face. In silence he sprang into the net and bent 
over Alf. 

"Come out of it, Alf!" he muttered. " You're scaring 'em !" 

"Carry me off!" whispered Alf. 

His lips were white. 

" God ! " said Vauxhall. 

He bent down and raised his brother in his arms. Then, 
walking with the frightful, tripping motion that the net forced on 
him, a sprightly dancing-master's gait above the staring faces in 
the stalls, he carried Alf to the stage. 

" Put me on my feet," Alf whispered. " D'you hear, Vaux ? 
I'll take the call." 

Vauxhall held him up in a standing position. He smiled, lifted 
one hand, blew a kiss, tried to duck his head and failed. 

" Gawd ! how it hurts ! " he whispered. 

The curtain fell. There was no applause. People were 
frightened. An intense silence reigned. 

After a minute or two the curtain was slightly pulled back, and 
a large and glossy man in evening dress, and carrying a shining 
silk hat, stepped before the footlights. He lifted up his plump 
hand, on which gleamed an immense diamond ring. 

"Is there any medical gentleman in the house?" he said in 
a loud voice. " If so, the management will be greatly obliged to 
him if he will come at once behind the stage." 

Two or three men in the stalls rose and made their way out. 
The band struck up a march, and the curtain drew up and dis- 
played a number of performing dogs barking round their trainer. 




CHAPTER XXII 

ADY CARYLL was talking to a royal personage about twelve 
o'clock that night. The royal personage paid her a number of 
rather heavy compliments. All the time he was speaking to 
her his eyes were fixed on the great emerald. He said after- 
wards to his hostess 

" The Princess has no jewel so magnificent as Lady Caryll's jewel. 
Sir Reuben must be another Count of Monte Cristo, or he must 
have discovered the philosopher's stone which can transmute every 
substance into gold." 

His hostess smiled rather indiscreetly. Her face wore a demure 
expression of artfulness which excited the curiosity of the royal 
personage, who loved to know, in good time, all the scandals of 
London. 

" What is it ? " he asked in a low voice, leaning sideways from 
the hot quail that lay in his plate. 

His hostess bent to him over the flowers. 

" They say, sir," she whispered, " that Sir Reuben is not a Monte 
Cristo. The resources of Dumas' hero were limitless." 

" Ah ! And Sir Reuben's ? " 

" They say in the City that if he lives long enough he will be 
ruined." 

The royal personage looked towards Sir Reuben, who was 
supping at a table near them. 

"Sir Reuben ! he does not look that sort of man." 

" He is not that sort of man by nature, sir. But he is in the 
hands of a strange woman." 

The royal personage smiled and resolved to see something 
more of Lady Caryll. 

Aubrey was not at supper. He came into the ball-room about 
one o'clock, just as Lady Caryll and her husband were preparing to 
leave. His face was very white and there were red rims round his 
eyes. After shaking hands with his hostess he made his way at 
once to Lady Caryll. 

" Please let me speak to you for a moment," he said. " Come 
and sit down." 

He led her into an alcove. The orchestra played a valse. 

249 



250 THE SLAVE 

'' Caryll," Aubrey said, in a rather unsteady voice, " that poor 
little chap is dying." 

" Horrible ! " she said. 

A quiet expression of pity had come into her face. 

" I have been so wondering," she continued, " whether he was 
seriously injured. I feared he must be." 

She glanced into the ball-room. A woman with wonderful 
diamonds in her hair passed before the entrance of the alcove, 
valsing. The light from the chandelier shone over the jewels. 
They gleamed. Lady Gary 11 leaned slightly forward to see the 
woman better. 

" How terribly sad ! " she added. 

" Isn't it?" Aubrey said in an unsteady voice. 

The sound of the valse gave him a dreadful feeling of nausea. 
The sensation was absolutely physical. 

"Some frightful internal injury," he added, "which causes 
intense pain. They thought at first of operating. How abomin- 
ably loud this band is playing." 

" Yes. It is the fashion this season. Poor little boy ! " 

"But they have decided that it couldn't save him." 

Aubrey cleared his throat as if he were suffering from a cold. 
There were beads of perspiration on his forehead. 

" I don't believe any of the windows are open," he said im- 
patiently. "The heat is insufferable." 

"I don't feel it," Lady Caryll said. " We are just leaving " 

" I'm glad of that, because look here, he'll probably die som 
time in the early morning." 

" This morning ? " 

"Yes." 

" How shocking ! " 

" He wants he'd like you know people have strange fancies 
when they're dying." 

" Do they ? I dou't like to think about death." 

She spoke with a certain obstinacy. Aubrey did not notice it. 
He was painfully excited, though he appeared calm, and sat per- 
fectly still by her side. 

"They've carried him home to to Milk Court. It's near the 
theatre rather not so very far. Look here, Caryll, will you drive 
there now ? " 

She moved, and her gown rustled slightly. 

" I ! " she said quickly. " Why ? What for ? What could I 
do?" 

" Nothing, of course, to save him, poor little chap." 

" No exactly. These things are horrible, but we cannot pre- 
vent them. The doctors are with him, no doubt." 



THE SLAVE 251 

The woman with the wonderful diamonds passed again before 
the alcove. Lady Caryll's eyes followed her eagerly. 

" The doctors can do no good. Caryll. he wants to see you." 

" Me ? " 

Aubrey cleared his throat again. 

" My mother is there still. She knows a lot about nursing." 

" But I know nothing." 

" It isn't that. He wants just to see you." 

" But how extraordinary ! Why ? " 

With each sentence the sound of her voice grew colder. 

" W T hy ? Because well, Caryll, he did the trick that will kill 
him in a few hours he it was for you, poor little chap. He'd 
never tried it before. He thought he wanted 

Aubrey stopped, and pressed his lips tightly together. He was 
angry with himself. Speaking very quickly, he said at last 

" He wanted to do something extraordinary to please you." 

" How very strange ! " 

"It was terribly foolish. But he was always the most most 
daring little beast. Well, he's paid for it. But he wants to see 
you before he dies. Look here, Caryll, don't be afraid. There's 
nothing horrible to see. The injury you understand, it's inside. 
He looks much as usual, really only very white. He's quite " 

" I can't go," Lady Caryll said. 

Her face was distorted by an expression almost of loathing. 

" But, Caryll " 

"I can't I can't!" 

She spoke sharply. 

" But, Caryll, why not ? You needn't stay more than a moment. 
He wants to hear you say you you he it is absurd, I know he 
wishes to hear you say you enjoyed your evening seeing him per- 
form, you know. He'd like to know he gave you pleasure." 

" Yes, yes. Tell him so. Go and tell him so, poor little fellow." 

She tore some white lilies out of her gown. 

"Take those with you with my love. Say I've been wear- 
ing them to-night and sent them, and was grieved shocked 
that I loved his performance thought it wonderful. Reuben 
Reuben ! " 

She called to her husband. 

"Take me down to the carriage now, please. Good night, Mr. 
Her rick." 

"Why have you given those lilies to Aubrey ?" said Sir Reuben, 
as they got into the carriage. 

" To give to that poor little boy. He's badly hurt. I thought 
it might please him, comfort him, perhaps." 

" Caryll ! " 



252 THE SLAVE 

It was dark in the carriage. Sir Reuben's voice sounded moved 
in the darkness. He put his hand on his wife's. 

" Why, how good you are ! " he said. 

And, when he said that, he seemed a little surprised, too. 

" I hope it will turn out to be nothing very serious," he 
continued. 

"Oh, I hope so. Acrobats often have these accidents, don't 
they and recover ? " 

" I daresay. I trust it will prove so. I'm glad you sent those 
lilies." 

He kissed her in the dark carriage. In doing so, he noticed 
that her cheek was unusually warm. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

AUBREY came out into Portman Square. His hands were full of 
Lady Caryll's white lilies. Their scent was hot and feverish, and 
seemed to him strangely ai-tificial. He felt that he hated the 
flowers, but he held them carefully as he stood on the pavement 
before the rows of carriages, whose lamps glared in the night. A 
linkman ran to call him a hansom. While he waited for it 
he heard the band in the house behind him beginning to play a 
Lancers. A number of popular tunes tripped jerkily through the 
scheme of the music. Cruel and frivolous things they seemed 
to him just then. The crowd of footmen standing about the door 
stared at the flowers he carried, whispered to one another, and 
smiled. Aubrey was glad when the cab drove up. To-night he 
shrank from all watching eyes. The linkman shut the apron with 
a bang, touched his hat, and said, " Good luck to you, my lord ! 
Good luck to you, Capting ! " Aubrey gave him some money, and 
leaned back in the cab. He was startled when he heard the 
cabman's voice saying 

" Where to, sir ? " 

" Drive to Milk Court, Graham Street," he said. 

" Where, sir ? " said the cabman in an astonished voice. 

" Milk Court near Champion Square. Drive as fast as you 
can." 

" Well, I'm blowed ! " murmured the cabman, as he shut down 
the door of his peep-hole. " Milk Court ! " 

He whipped up his horse. The lines of waiting broughams 
vanished. Soon Aubrey was in Oxford Street. He saw people 
hurrying along, or standing at the street corners staring about 
them, as if vaguely expectant. A few belated bicyclists were 
darting homeward, bending forward over their lamps. The police- 
men marched heavily on their beats, turning their bull's-eye 
lanterns to the doors of houses, the windows of shops. Some lads 
slouched along, arm in arm, squalling a music-hall song. They 
had pale London faces, and wore caps stuck on the backs of their 
heads, and their hair brushed forward on their foreheads. One 
of them held a flower in his mouth, and jigged to the tune of his 
companions. Two women in shabby dresses and long black cloth 

253 



254 THE SLAVE 

jackets conferred mysteriously together at a crossing. While they 
murmured to each other they watched the street furtively. They 
parted suddenly as an oldish man went by slowly, smoking a cigar. 
One of them followed the man, the other stood where she was, 
staring after them. Aubrey noticed that she wore long gold 
earrings which trembled perpetually against her bloated cheeks. 
She moved wearily down a dark side street as a policeman 
lethargically approached her. Aubrey felt a deep pity for her, 
and for all poor women, and then a terrible sense of the hope- 
lessness of great cities. He looked no more at the streets. The 
sickly smell of the lilies enervated him. He thought of the 
place where they would soon be lying, and an old w r onder came 
back to him. Is there any sensation in a flower ? If so, how 
helpless it must feel in the hands of men. These lilies were 
torn from a ballroom to lie, perhaps soon, on the breast of a 
corpse. 

"This is Champion Square, sir," said the cabman's voice. "I 
don't exactly know where Graham 

Aubrey directed him, and in a few minutes the high red and 
white buildings of Milk Court were in sight. 

" Shall I stop for you, sir ? " said the cabman, as Aubrey 
got out. 

" No, thanks," Aubrey answered, paying him. 

The cabman drove off, wondering how the deuce a young swell 
came to live in such a neighbourhood. Then the usual thought 
came to him, and he chuckled. 

As Aubrey approached the big house in which the Slaggs 
lived, he was conscious of a sensation of cowardice, almost of 
terror. Sorrow is like an advancing and invincible enemy. He 
stood for some time on the pavement of the Court before he could 
summon courage to go and knock at the door which Diamond had 
opened with her key on the night of her birthday party. And he 
remembered that evening with amazing vividness ; the rush of the 
excited Susie into the narrow passage, the china doll desolate 
upon the settle, the happy group of relations by the fire, the lady 
tourist in the pelerine upon the wall. He recalled the little 
remarks that were made, and saw Alf leaping over the back of his 
chair and alighting before the supper-table. It was vivid, yet it 
all seemed a long time ago. At last he knocked on the door. 
Immediately there was a noise of steps in the passage, and the 
door was softly opened by Bob. 

"Hasn't she come, sir?" he asked, in a voice that was full of 
anxiety, as he saw Aubrey standing alone. 

" No," Aubrey answered, stepping into the passage. 

Bob looked at the lilies. 



THE SLAVE 255 

" When's she coming, sir ? " 

Aubrey shook his head. 

" What ! " said Bob. " Then he'll I don't know- 
Aubrey walked towards the sitting-room, the door of which 
stood partially open. There was a whisper of voices within. As 
Aubrey entered he saw that the room was crowded with people, 
all of whom were standing up, as if in readiness for instant move- 
ment. All the Flicks were here, except Vauxhall. Mrs. Slagg 
and Lill were crying into pocket-handkerchiefs which they held 
up to their faces. Mr. Slagg, whose face was very white, and 
whose eyes were fixed and staring, had his lips pursed up as if 
he were going to whistle. When Aubrey came into the room 
the sound of whispering ceased instantly, and everybody gazed 
fixedly at him and at the lilies in his hands, with the excep- 
tion of the two women, who, after a hasty glance, buried their 
faces again in their pocket-handkerchiefs, and turned towards the 
wall. 

There was something peculiarly horrible in this crowd of silent 
people all standing up as if expectant. 

Mr. Slagg was the first to break the silence. Speaking in a 
low and very unnatural voice a voice as of one who talks in a 
church he said 

" Mr. Herrick, sir, ain't the lady coming then ? " 

"She she can't come," Aubrey said, trying in vain to appear 
unconstrained. " She sent these. She's deeply grieved and 
shocked." 

How cold and bare his words sounded as he heard them. 

" How is he ? " he asked. 

Mr. Slagg pursed his lips again. 

"Cruel, cruel bad, sir. The doctor's just going, I believe. 
They can't do nothing for him." 

The father of the Flick family suddenly sat down by the table 
and put his hand over his face. He was still dressed in tights, as 
were all his sons. Over their tights they wore the long ulsters in 
which they always went to the theatre. The pause that followed 
was broken by the entrance of the doctor. He came in softly, 
buttoning one of his gloves. He was an elderly, substantial 
looking man with a kind, though rather heavy face. Every one 
stared at him as he entered. Even the two women showed their 
tear-stained faces. He took Mr. Slagg by the arm and led him 
into the passage. There was a murmur of voices, the sound of 
retreating steps, of a door shutting softly. Then Mr. Slagg 
appeared again. 

"John?" sobbed Mrs. Slagg. "John?" 

Mr. Slagg looked round on those assembled and cleared his 



256 THE SLAVE 

voice like a man about to deliver a speech. Then he said, with 
great formality 

"Doctor says he can't do nothing more. He'll come back 
again in the morning if necessary." 

Mr. Flick suddenly looked up, and said, with a sort of dull 
anger 

" Necessary ! What's he mean by that ? Of course it's neces- 
sary." 

" It all depends, Sam," said Mr. Slagg rather huskily. 

" Depends what on ? " 

"Why on why, whether he's you know, Sam, as well as 
I do." 

" I do not," said Mr. Flick quite fiercely, and pulling at the 
front of his long coat with a restless hand. 

"Well, then" Mr. Slagg appeared to gather himself together 
for some unusual effort "Well, then," he repeated, "you'd better 
know, Sam. Them that's gone don't need no doctors." 

Mr. Flick half rose from his seat. Aubrey thought he looked 
as if he were going to strike the speaker. Then he tumbled back 
in his chair, leaned his mighty arm along the table, and dropped 
his head on it. There was a slight rustling in the passage, and 
Lady RangeclifFe put her head in at the door. 

" Please come here," she said, looking towards the women. 
" I want another poultice heated at once." 

Lill got up trembling. 

"Come, Ma," she said through her sobs. 

She pulled her mother by the arm. Mrs. Slagg got up and 
followed her out to the kitchen. Lady Rangecliffe saw them go 
and then beckoned to Aubrey to come into the passage. Aubrey 
obeyed the sign and shut the door behind him. It was rather 
dark in the passage. Lady Rangecliffe stood close to her son and 
looked into his face with her short-sighted eyes. 

"Where is she, Aubrey?" she said, jerking her head sideways. 
" He keeps on asking when she'll come." 

A dull flush rose in Aubrey's face. He hesitated a moment. 
Then, for the first time in his life, he told his mother a deliberate 
lie. 

"Mater, I didn't think it right to bring her here." 

"What, Aubrey?" said Lady Rangecliffe, bending down her 
head to hear the better. 

" I didn't think it right for her to come. She's too young. 
She's never she's never seen" (he whispered) "death." 

" Do you mean that you didn't ask her to come ? " said Lady 
RangeclifFe, looking intently into her son's face. 

Aubrey nodded. He held out his hands full of the lilies. 



THE SLAVE 257 

" She was terribly grieved. She sent these. She tore them 
out of her gown for him." 

But Lady Rangecliffe did not take the lilies. She stood quite 
still, and her face looked strangely stern in the dim light. Then 
she pointed to a side passage. 

"Aubrey, you can tell him your lie," she said. "Yes let him 
make him believe it. We mustn't hurt him any more." 

She blinked her eyelids rapidly as she turned towards the kitchen. 

Aubrey stood in the passage hesitating, considering what to 
do. He began to feel dazed and fatigued. After a moment he 
mechanically followed his mother, and looked through the doorway 
into the kitchen. A fire was burning there. The coals were red 
hot and cast a strong glow over the hearth. Lady Rangecliffe stood 
by a deal table waiting for the poultice. Some muslin was spread 
out before her. The light gleamed on some family jewels which 
she wore round her long, thin neck. As she waited she jerked 
her head, and the shadow of her head, thrown by the light upon 
the wall, jerked too. The shadow looked much more grotesque 
than the substance. Mrs. Slagg and Lill were busying themselves 
over the heating of the oatmeal, and sobbing bitterly at their work. 
The contrast between their practical labour and their deep distress 
struck Aubrey as singularly painful. There was a sort of comic 
element in it which was heartrending. Lill choked into her 
handkerchief and said 

"Give me the spoon, Ma, please." 

And Mrs. Slagg, with trembling hands, pulled open the drawer 
of the dresser and fumbled among its contents like a blind woman. 

" Which spoon, Lill ? " she said almost inaudibly. 

" The wooden one. Oh, Ma this'll kill Vaux. Oh, it will ! " 

Mrs. Slagg sniffed. Her usually serene face was distorted by 
grief into a vehement mask of grief, undignified, almost absurd. 
There is often something painfully ludicrous in very sincere sorrow. 
The oatmeal began to steam. Aubrey could smell it from where 
he stood in the doorway. 

" Is it quite hot ? " asked Lady Rangecliffe. 

She spoke in a practical voice. 

" Yes, ma'am my lady," sobbed Lill. 

"That's right. Bring it here then and I'll put it in the 
muslin." 

Lill took the wooden spoon, and with it put the hot oatmeal 
on to a plate. Taking the plate in her hands she came towards 
the table. But her hands trembled so much that she dropped the 
plate to the floor. It was broken. She fell into a chair and burst 
into hysterical weeping, repeating, "I can't I can't. Oh, Alt'! 
Alf!" 



258 THE SLAVE 

Lady Rangecliffe kneeled down on the kitchen floor, quickly 
gathered together the oatmeal and put it on to the muslin, which 
she folded twice over it. Then she got another plate, put the 
poultice on it, and turned to leave the room. Before going, how- 
ever, she went over to Lill, bent down and kissed her, saying 

" Never mind, my dear. Try to be brave. Remember that we 
should do all we can to ease his sufferings." 

" Yes, yes," sobbed Lill. " But oh ! it is awful. I'm frightened." 

She rocked herself to and fro. Her face, down which the tears 
streamed, was red with the heat from the fire. Aubrey understood 
her fear. The dim passage in which he stood seemed to him to be 
alive with terror. Lady Rangecliffe paused for a moment when 
she reached him. 

"When I've put this on him I expect you can come in, Aubrey," 
she said. " It will give him a few minutes' ease. Poor little chap ! 
He's as brave as a lion such pluck ! " 

She strode away, the steam from the poultice making a thin 
cloudy veil about her. Aubrey waited where he was. In about 
three or four minutes she returned. 

" You can go in now," she whispered. 

Aubrey felt horribly expectant as he walked down the pas- 
sage. He saw some one peeping at him round the edge of the 
sitting-room door, which was slightly open, and realised the 
tall, strong brothers, in their tights and their long coats, waiting 
there, almost as they waited at the theatre for their summons 
to perform their feats. Then he turned down the passage 
and stood outside the door of the room where Alf was lying. 
He tapped. Diamond opened the door. Her face was always 
quite pale. Now she looked much as usual, except that her 
eyes seemed unusually large and strained in expression, as if, by 
a violent effort, she was opening them wider than was natural. 
When she saw Aubrey she nodded to him and looked at the lilies 
he carried. 

" He's askin' for you," she whispered. " He knows she isn't 
comin'." 

Aubrey felt again the sense of acute shame that had stung him 
when he h'ed to his mother. 

" Vaux is in there," continued Diamond. " He won't go, not 
for a minute." 

She opened the door wider, and Aubrey entered the room. 

It was very small. The walls were covered with a cheap paper, 
grey, with red bunches of flowers sprinkled about on it. A wash- 
handstand, holding an iron basin, stood close to the one narrow 
window, which looked on to the court. By this window, and 
leaning with his back against the wall, was Vauxhall. He had 



THE SLAVE 259 

taken off his coat, and, in his black and silver costume, looked 
extraordinarily out of place and theatrical, like a man who has 
" dressed up " for a joke or to act in a charade. His strong, 
muscular arms were folded across his broad chest, and he remained 
absolutely motionless, fixing his eyes on the narrow iron bed where 
his brother lay. Aubrey looked with a sickening sensation of 
apprehension towards the bed. He expected vaguely to see some- 
thing horrible. He scarcely knew what. But death was sitting 
by that bed-head, and death is fearful to the young. So Aubrey 
looked with fear. 

He saw Alf lying flat on his back, his head on a pillow which, 
being soft, stuck up on either side of his face, partially concealing 
his ears. His hair was still plastered forward over his forehead, 
which was covered with perspiration. His face was white. In 
order to ease his frightful pain, he had drawn up his legs under 
the patchwork coverlet, and the soles of his feet rested flat upon 
the sheet. His arms lay outside the coverlet, straight against his 
sides. His hands were clenched. His mouth was partially open. 
Now and then he panted, almost as a dog pants in hot weather 
when it has been running with a carriage. When Aubrey looked 
at him he turned his head slightly to one side and tried to nod. 
His attempt made the pillow give forth a scratching sound. There 
was a cane chair by the bed. 

" Sit down, sir, won't you ? " Alf said. 

His voice sounded much as usual, only drier. 

Aubrey sat down. Alf looked at the lilies inquiringly. Aubrey 
laid them gently on the bed. 

"What's them for?" said Alf, staring at the flowers, which he 
did not attempt to handle. 

Aubrey felt as if he could not control his voice sufficiently to 
speak for a moment. So he made no answer. 

" Eh, sir ? " said Alf. 

"She sent them to you with her love." 

" She what, the lady ? " 

" Yes. She was wearing them. She took them out of her 
dress and gave them to me to bring to you." 

"Ah!" said Alf. 

He drew up one hand, put it inside the clothes and shifted the 
poultice, shrivelling up his face as he did so till there were masses 
of wrinkles round his small eyes. 

Vauxhall watched him with a stern, staring ga/e, frowning 
when he moved. 

" Lay still, Alf," he muttered. " Lay still ! " 

Alf looked at his brother sideways, with difficulty. 

" Get out for a minute, Vaux," he said. " Will you ? " 



260 THE SLAVE 

Vauxhall shook his head. 

"Yes, Vaux, you must," said Alf almost peevishly, and moving 
his feet to and fro in the bed. " Do get, I tell you." 

"What for?" said Vauxhall, never moving. 

" I'm going to talk to the Cr'rr ! " 

He stopped speaking, and ground his teeth together. His 
face was contorted. Aubrey shivered as he sat in the chair. 

"For God's sake lay still, Alf, and don't talk," said Vauxhall. 

He, too, began to tremble where he stood against the wall, 
and he passed his tongue across his lips. 

There was a silence in the room. Beads of perspiration ran 
from Alf s forehead down his cheeks. He had caught the counter- 
pane in his hands. His eyes stared up at the ceiling fiercely. 
The expression upon his face seemed one of anger. At last he 
spoke again. 

" Get, Vaux get ! " he said. 

There was something in his voice this time that constrained 
his brother. Vauxhall moved slowly to the door. Aubrey remem- 
bered afterwards the strangeness of seeing him walking heavily, 
almost slouchingly, like a man whose body is flaccid, untrained, 
enervated. He did not look at his brother again, but opened the 
door and went out. Then Alf glanced at Aubrey and at the 
lilies. 

" She ain't coming, I s'pose ? " he said. 

Aubrey shook his head. He did not feel as if he could put 
Lady Caryl 1's refusal into words. 

" Why wouldn't she come ? " asked Alf. " Eh ? " 

He seemed for the moment easier, and unclenched his hands. 

" It was very late," Aubrey stammered. 

Somehow he could not obey his mother. He could not tell 
a lie to this little being who was hastening towards the Great 
Truth. 

" She didn't want to come ? " said Alf. 

He paused. Then he added 

"Well, it don't much matter, I s'pose." 

As he said this, whether by design or accident he moved, and 
Lady Caryll's lilies fell from the bed to the floor. He did not 
seem to notice it. Aubrey bowed to a storm of pity. 

" She might come to-morrow," he said. 

" What's the good of that ? " said Alf. 

Aubrey could not answer him. 

" It don't matter," he repeated, as if speaking to himself, and 
for the benefit of his own mind. 

Then he looked at Aubrey. 

" Did she enjoy it ? " he said. " The Show ? Eh ? " 



JTHE SLAVE 2fil 

es." 
ire ? " 
le did. I know she did. She thought it she thought it 
wonaerful." 

"Right." 

He lay quiet for two or three minutes, always with his knees 
hunched up. He appeared to be thinking hard. Presently he 
said 

" You know King ? " 

"King?" said Aubrey. 

"The riding chap that's after Di." 

" Oh yes, of course ! " 

" He's the right sort, is King. Think so ? " 

"Yes," said Aubrey, wondering. 

"Means biz," continued Alf, clenching his hands tightly. 

Aubrey saw that he was suffering a paroxysm of pain. He 
bent over the bed. 

" Can't I do anything to ease you ? " he asked, tortured by the 
sensation of awful helplessness that comes so often to those who 
are forced to watch human agony. 

" Shut up, sir please," Alf said. " It it ain't no good to 
worry." 

He jerked in the bed, and his face twitched. His teeth were 
fixed on his under lip and his eyes were nearly shut. After two 
or three minutes the paroxysm passed and he spoke again, but in 
a lower voice, as if weakened. 

"King means biz," he said. "You know that eh, sir?" 

" Perhaps he does," Aubrey replied. " But " 

"Well, sir!" 

" But does Miss Diamond care for him ? " 

Alf turned on the pillow and stared at him fiercely. 

" But for you she would, sir." 

" Me ! I only want her life to be happy." 

"Ah ! That's what you say." 

"Alf," Aubrey said, "that's the truth. You ought to 
believe me." 

Alf looked him full in the eyes. 

" Look here, sir," he said. " We'd better fix it. I've got to 
give up watching Di. That back fall's done me." 

" But you may get 

" It's done me," he repeated. " I ain't heard what the doctors say, 
nor don't want to. I knew when Vaux took me out of the net 
so that's all right enough. Give me a drop of the jug, will you ? " 

Aubrey went to the washhandstand, poured out some water, 
and brought it to the bedside. Alf drank eagerly. 



262 THE SLAVE 

" It's all hot it's reg'lar Hell inside me now," he said, giving 
Aubrey the glass. 

Aubrey felt a sickness of pity, but he said nothing. He was 
cruelly preoccupied by the sense of his own utter uselessness. 
Any expression of sorrow, of sympathy, would, he thought, seem 
conventional and heartless. He put the glass back in its place 
and came again to the bed. Then he laid his hand on Alf s, which 
was burning hot. 

"You want something of me," he said. "Just tell me what 
it is." 

" You leave Di alone, sir. Leave her alone. Give over seeing 
her. She likes you, does Di." 

"We are friends." 

" You're a nob and she ain't. Give over seeing her and she'll 
get spliced to King. She would now if 'twasn't for you." 

But " 

" Oh, she don't know it. Gals never do." 

He spoke with a sort ot old man's contempt and worldly 
knowledge. 

" King ain't much to look at, but he's the man for Di, and you 
ain't. You know that well enough." 

"What d'you want me to do ? " 

"Don't have Di for a friend. Don't pal up to her any more. 
It ain't no good. Let her cry and think you're like the rest of 
'em like that cad what wrote for papers." 

"That's rather hard," said Aubrey. 

"Ah ! And it's a bit hard on me leaving the rope." 

For the first time he seemed to think of himself with pity, and 
two tears glistened in his small eyes. 

" But I've got to put up with it, and so must you with the 
other, if you don't want to start in as a beast." 

He shifted the poultice again. Aubrey looked away. The 
vain effort after relief was terrible to witness. He heard the 
movement beneath the bed-clothes and then a long and bitter 
sigh. 

"I'll leave Diamond alone," he said. " Perhaps you are right. 
But I never meant her any harm." 

" I know as you didn't, poor old Di ! " 

There was silence in the room. A faint light glimmered at the 
window, which was only partially covered by a thin white blind. 
It was the light of the moon, which would soon die in the dawn. 
Alf sighed heavily again. Aubrey turned suddenly to him. 

" Alf," he said almost passionately, " I wish to God I could do 
something for you." 

"You have, sir. I feel easier, that I do. Vaux can come 



THE SLAVE 263 

in again now ; and you might ask the you might ask the tall 
lady to give me that stuff the doctor left for when it come on 
mortal bad." 

He hurried the last words and ended in a sort of stifled cry. 
Aubrey got up and hastened to the door. He opened it on 
Vauxhall, who was just outside in the passage. Vauxhall looked 
at him and sprang into the bedroom. 

" Mater ! Mater ! " Aubrey called, " where are you ? " 

Lady Rangecliffe came hurrying from the kitchen, and at the 
same time the sitting-room door was flung wide open and Mr. 
Flick strode out. He stood in the light that streamed after him 
and stared at Lady Rangecliffe and at Aubrey. 

"Mater," said Aubrey hurriedly, "go in and help him. You've 
got something from the doctor he wants it horribly." 

"What are you doing to my boy?" said Mr. Flick, with the 
harsh incivility of dread and love. " I won't have him done any- 
thing to. What's the doctor mean by leaving him ? " 

And he stood right across the passage, barring the way to 
Alf s room with his great bulky form, while Alf s tall brothers 
crowded in the doorway. Lady Rangecliffe showed him a card- 
board box. 

"This is morphia," she said. " It will ease his pain. Please 
let me go in and give it to him." 

" Will it hurt the little 'un the taking it ? " 

"No. It is to save him from cruel suffering." 

Alf cried out from the bedroom. 

" Lady ! Lady ! " he called. 

His voice was terrible. 

Mr. Flick shuddered and stood aside. Lady Rangecliffe passed 
into the bedroom. Then the Flick brothers came out into the 
passage. Their strong and manly faces were grey with fear. The 
whole company stood listening in a breathless silence. They heard 
Alf gasping, and the rustle of Lady Rangecliffe's gown as she 
moved about, and then a low, uncanny sound. 

It was Vauxhall sobbing as he leaned out of the window into 
the Court, holding his hands over his ears. 

" What's it ? " said Mr. Flick. 

Diamond pushed her way into the passage and took him by 
the arm. 

" Come back in," she whispered. " Come ! " 

She led him into the sitting-room again. 

" Now, you all keep quiet," she said gently ; " the lady's makin' 
him better." 

She forced him to sit down, and stole out again. Lady Range- 
cliffe met her in the passage. 



264 THE SLAVE 

" The morphia will do him good in a few minutes," Lady 
Rangecliffe said. "He's asking for you now." 

Diamond went into Alf s room. He was still in great agony 
and had his eyes turned towards the door. Vauxhall was leaning 
on the window-sill with his head in his hands. He made no 
sound now, but his shoulders were shaking. Alf beckoned to 
Diamond to sit by the bed. She took his hand and held it in 
hers till presently the morphia began to take effect. He stretched 
out his legs in the bed, and sighed once or twice. 

" Better now ? " asked Diamond. 

He nodded. 

"I want to see Susie," he said, "and Charley." 

"They've gone to bed. Jenny's with 'em." 

" They ain't asleep, are they ? " said Alf. 

It was evidently incredible to him that anybody should be 
asleep in that house. 

"Why d'you want to see 'em, Alf?" said Diamond. 

" Because I should like to. Can't I ? " 

Diamond got up and went to the children's room 

"Jenny," she said, gently opening the door. "Jenny ! " 

Jenny came and showed a white, tear-stained face, full of 
terror. 

" What is it ? " 

" Are the children asleep ? " 

" Yes. They've been cryin' fearful, but they've dropped off at 
last. Whatever is it ? " 

"Alf wants to see 'em." 

" What for ? Oh, Di, is he gettin' better ? " 

Diamond shook her head. 

" I don't think it's that." 

The tears began to roll again over Jenny's cheeks. 

" Shall I wake 'em ? " she said between her sobs. 

" I dunno," said Di, hesitating. 

She stepped into the room and contemplated Susie and Charley. 
They were fast asleep in their little beds. Susie's rosy fists were 
doubled on the white sheet. Charley had one finger in his half- 
opened mouth. Their breathing was soft and regular. 

" It seems a pity," Diamond said. " But then Oh, Jenny ! if 
we don't wake 'em now, in the mornin' it'll be too late, p'raps." 

" Too late ! What for, Di ? " Jenny asked in a nervous voice. 

" For Alf," said Diamond. 

Jenny said nothing. She had sat down on the edge of the big 
bed, in which Mr. and Mrs. Slagg slept each night between their 
little ones. Diamond was considering deeply. 

" Jenny," she said, at length, " we'll lift 'em up and carry 'em 



THE SLAVE 2fi5 

in to Alf. Try not to wake 'em. Then he can do what he likes. 
You take Susie." 

And she leant down and, with infinite precaution, lifted her 
small brother in her arms. He murmured and moved his hands, 
but did not wake. Nor did Susie. The children were utterly 
exhausted after the unusual excitement of their evening at the 
theatre. The two sisters then went out softly along the passage 
to Alf s room. He moved a little as they came in and towards 
the bed. 

"Was they asleep?" he whispered. . 

Then he saw their closed eyes. 

"Shall I wake 'em?" asked Diamond. 

"No, I wouldn't. Bring "em down to me." 

Diamond bent down with Charley in her arms. Alf looked hard 
at the little fellow, touched his flabby hand, and said 

" Now Susie ! " 

Jenny followed Di's example, bent, then knelt at the bedside. 
But suddenly she began to cry. Alf said " Hush ! " Jenny strove 
to check her grief, but Susie had opened her eyes. She stared 
hazily at Alf and pouted her rosy lips. With great difficulty Alf 
raised himself up enough to kiss her. 

"Bye, bye, Susie," he whispered. 

" Bye, bye," responded Susie in a muffled, tiny voice. 

Alf lay back. The children were carried off to their beds. 
When they woke late in the morning Alf could no longer kiss 
them. 

The morphia fulfilled its blessed task. For a time he felt but 
little pain. When the sun began to rise, however, his agony 
recommenced, and he was obviously much feebler. Again he 
drew up his legs in the bed, and his features were contorted. 
His face had become almost slate-coloured. Lady Rangecliffe 
whispered to Diamond to summon his father and brothers. Vaux- 
hall had never left the room. He stood quite motionless, and 
looked half stunned. There was little expression in his eyes. 
The Flicks stole in, trying to walk softly. They stood round the 
bed, looking down on the boy who had been the pride of them 
all. Only Vauxhall never left his post by the partially open 
window. Mr. Flick, whose face still wore its former expression 
of dull anger, leaned over Alf and looked hard at him without 
saying a word. 

"Well, Guv," Alf whispered. "It's a go, ain't it?" 

Then the father spoke. 

"Why did you try it, Alf?" he said, in a tone that was full 
of chiding. " Whatever was you after ? " 

Alf made no reply. The father saw Lady Caryll's lilies lying 



266 THE SLAVE 

faded on the floor. He bent and picked them up, and put them 
rather awkwardly upon the outside of the bed. 

"See what it's brought you, boy," he continued. 

"Ah !" said Alf, touching the lilies. 

He did not speak again for a long time. Diamond was the 
last to kiss him. She tried to draw Vauxhall to the bed, but he 
refused to come. He seemed now to be under the spell of an 
ungovernable horror. 

" Come, dear Vaux," she whispered, pulling at his arm. 

" Vaux," said Lill, trying in her turn to persuade him. " Vaux ! " 

But he still resisted, holding fast to the window-sill with one 
hand, and keeping the other on his hip, as he did when he watched 
Alf performing. At length Alf whispered his name. Then he 
came slowly, and stood by his brother's bed. Alf made a feeble 
motion with his hand. 

Vauxhall took his brother's hand and shook it hard, almost 
brutally. 

"With a day's practice you'd have done it, Alf," he said in 
a loud voice, bending over the bed. 

Alf moved slightly, and lay still. 

Then Vauxhall raised himself up and turned to those in the 
room. 

" He would, I tell you," he said proudly, and as if daring any 
one to contradict him. "Just a day at it and he'd have brought 
it off. There never was one to come near Alf'! " 

So the epitaph of the little acrobat was spoken. 



CHAPTER XXIV 

COVENT GARDEN is strange in the dawn, strange in its activities of 
men, in its mingling of the sordid and the sweet, in its suggestion 
of the darkest slums and of the most perfumed country places. It 
is a maze of vans, wagons, roses, swearing half-dressed men, running 
boys, palms, orchids, violets, police. Bow Street and the tropics 
meet under the slowly brightening sky, and the people who live in 
glass houses are ruthlessly dragooned by those at whom they would 
probably like to throw stones. Aubrey walked through Covent 
Garden in the dawn, alter the death of Alf. And the shouting of 
the market porters, the heavy rolling of the vans on the paving- 
stones, the cackling of the loungers round the coffee-stalls, the 
hoarse laughter of the men perched high in little eyries above 
the mighty, labouring horses, mingled in a dreary confusion that 
stunned his ears. The sky was grey and cold, and a wind blew up 
the dirty rubbish that had accumulated among the greasy cobble 
stones. Filthy bits of paper whirled by, straws floated aimlessly 
up and settled again in crevices. Lady RangeclifFe strode along 
muffled in her cloak, with a black lace shawl tied over her head. 
She held her gown high, and the men in the market stared ruth- 
lessly at her ankles, and made crude remarks to each other in 
obscure, though strident, voices. Presently Lady Rangecliffe 
stopped before an open van, in whose dark shadow were en- 
sconced hundreds of red roses. A small, pale man, crouched in 
the van, was handing them with mechanical rapidity to a mate 
who stood outside. He glowered at Lady Rangecliffe from his 
rose-bower. 

"I want some of your flowers," she said abruptly. "Give me 
a handful, please." 

The man gave her a red crowd of his wares, naming their price. 

" Have you got enough money, Aubrey ? I haven't," said his 
mother. 

Aubrey, whose hand trembled, fished out a sovereign with 
difficulty. 

"That cove's been out on the spree," thought the wise little 
man in the rose-bower. 

He chuckled to himself, looked again at Lady Rangecliffe, 

267 



2fi8 THE SLAVE 

and thought she was a curious companion to choose for a 
spree. 

" I want these flowers taken at once over the way," said Lady 
Rangecliffe. 

" Where to, ma'am ? " said the little man, with growing 
surprise. 

Lady RangeclifFe mentioned the number in Milk Court, waited 
till a dirty messenger had departed with the flowers, and then 
walked on with her son. Presently they met a four-wheeler, on 
whose box a purple-faced old man, in a patched cloak, drowsed 
under a shining round black hat. Lady Rangecliffe woke him up 
and got in. Aubrey shut the door on her. 

"You won't come, Aubrey?" she asked. 

He shook his head. His face looked grey in the growing light. 
He leaned his arms on the top of the door for a moment. 

" Why did you send those flowers, Mater ? " he asked. 

Lady Rangecliffe made no reply. 

" I know," Aubrey said. " You wanted to to cover up her 
lilies." 

"The little chap deserves fresh flowers," she said. 

Aubrey took his arms from the ledge, and the purple-faced man 
whipped up his degraded-looking horse. 

In that moment Aubrey realised what his mother thought of 
Lady Caryll. He was too confused, too benumbed by the quick- 
ness and horror of recent incidents, to know what were his thoughts 
of her. Yet he- was aware of one fact that he felt an intense 
disinclination to return to Park Lane just then. 

Presently he was standing on the wide step of the house in 
Eaton Square. Lady Rangecliffe let him in before he had time 
to ring. 

" I thought perhaps you'd come, Aubrey," she said quietly. 
"Go to your father's room. He's away." 

She made no further remark, but turned and went quickly 
upstairs. Aubrey loved her for her silence and her abrupt 
departure. 

When the world was awake it was necessary for him to go to 
Park Lane. He recognised sternly his duty as his godfather's 
hired servant and did not mean to shirk it. A footman brought 
him some of the clothes he kept at his father's house. He dressed, 
had some tea in his room, and took up his hat and gloves. It was 
eleven o'clock. He waited for a moment, considering whether he 
should go to see his mother before he went out. Then he opened 
the bedroom door, descended a flight of stairs, and stood outside 
Lady Rangecliffe's boudoir. He heard her rustling about, and 
the^bang of a lid as she shut something; then he went in. Lady 



THE SLAVE 269 

RangeclifFe turned round and stared to see who it was. Aubrey 
went up to her and kissed her rather roughly. 

" Thank you for last night, Mater," he said, and bolted out of 
the room again, leaving his mother standing all red with emotion 
like a girl. 

Near Hyde Park Corner Aubrey met two or three men he 
knew strolling towards the Row. He nodded to them, but did 
not stop to speak. They observed his tired eyes and abrupt 
avoidance of them. 

"Herrick's been on the spree," they said. "Looks deuced 
cheap this mornin'." 

And they smiled, having echoed in words the thought of the 
little man in the Covent Garden rose-bower. The " classes " are 
very like the "masses," and misjudge with much the same gay 
certainty. 

Aubrey let himself in to Sir Reuben's house with his latchkey 
and made his way to his rooms. On the writing-table lay a 
quantity of letters for him to answer. He sat down and set to 
work. 

After about half-an-hour Sir Reuben entered. He noticed at 
once the expression of fatigue and almost of horror in his godson's 
face. His first remark referred to the incidents of the night. 

" How is that poor boy ? " he said, sitting down by the table, 
and drawing his fez a little forward over his scanty hair. 

" He died early this morning," Aubrey replied, tearing open a 
letter, and glancing over its pages. 

Sir Reuben looked genuinely shocked. 

" Dead how dreadful ! " he said. " Did he suffer much ? " 

"Very much," said Aubrey. "Here's a letter from Perkins 
about that mortgage." 

He read it aloud. Sir Reuben looked at him in astonishment, 
then in pity, recognising from what cause his strangeness sprang. 
After the nature of the reply to the letter had been settled, Sir 
Reuben stopped work authoritatively. 

" I wish to speak about that boy," he said. 

He saw that Aubrey winced, but he went on. 

" Caryll has been so anxious about him. She will be fearfully 
shocked." 

Aubrey said nothing. 

"Was he sensible to the last?" said Sir Reuben. 

" Yes," Aubrey said. 

" Did he have the lilies ? " 

" Yes." 

Aubrey's voice was chilly and constrained. Sir Reuben felt 
surprised at its tone. 



270 THE SLAVE 

" It was a kind thought of hers to send them," he said, almost 
as if asking a question. " Did they please the poor little chap 
at all ? " 

Then Aubrey looked up at his godfather suddenly. 

"I don't know," he said. "I don't see how they could." 

"Why? I don't understand you." 

"Well, you see they were instead of something he wanted." 

"W T hat was that?" 

" Lady Gary 11 herself." 

There was a moment's silence. Then Sir Reuben said 

"What d'you mean? Had he wanted had he asked " 

" To see her before he died ? Yes. I came to the ball-room 
with his message and she gave me the lilies." 

Sir Reuben pulled again at his fez. There was an odd expres- 
sion in his eyes, half tragic, half bitterly humorous. He was 
thinking of the kiss he had given his wife in the carriage as 
they drove home from the ball. Just then there was a knock 
at the door and Lady Caryll came in. Aubrey stood up to re- 
ceive her. 

" How is he ? " she said. " How is the poor little boy ? Did 
you give him my flowers ? " 

" Yes," Aubrey said. 

" Was he pleased ? What did he say ? " 

" I don't remember." 

Sir Reuben was struck by the resemblance between Aubrey's 
voice and his mother's when he spoke that blunt sentence. 

" How is he now ? " continued Lady Caryll. 

She had come up to the writing-table and was resting her hand 
on it. 

" He is dead," said Aubrey, speaking without emotion. 

Lady Caryll moved backwards. 

" Dead ! " she exclaimed incredulously. " Dead already ! " 

" He died hours ago," Aubrey said. 

" How horrible ! " she said. 

" It was much more horrible before he died," Aubrey said. 

"Don't," she said, holding out her hand as if to stop him. 
" Don't ! " 

" He had your gift of flowers, Caryll," Sir Reuben said. " They 
were not too late." 

"I am glad I am glad." 

She spoke hurriedly, and moved towards her husband. 

" I will send more. Poor boy ! " 

" You need not trouble about flowers," Aubrey said. " My 
mother has sent a quantity. She was with him till the end." 

" Your mother ! " said Sir Reuben. " Till the end ! " 






THE SLAVE 271 

He looked across at his wife. In reply to his look Lady 
Caryll said 

"Lady Rangecliffe has studied nursing." 

"Ah ! " said Sir Reuben. " I see." 

He could almost have laughed, when he thought again of his 
kiss in the carriage. Lady Caryll stood there. She did not seem 
as if she could decide what to do. 

" Poor poor little boy ! " she said again. 

Aubrey took no notice of her. He was looking at the letters 
on the writing-table as if he wanted to go on with his work. 
Lady Caryll took advantage of his glance. 

" I must not interrupt you," she said, turning to go. " I've no 
business here in the morning. But I could not resist coming to 
learn the truth. I have been so anxious. And now how horrible 
horrible ! " 

She left the room. Aubrey sat down to resume work, and Sir 
Reuben sat on the opposite side of the table. He lit his pipe. 
He did not refer again to the tragedy of the previous night. Now 
and then he stole a glance at Aubrey. His face was white and 
grim. And Sir Reuben thought, " He has learnt the lesson at 
last. He knows her now." But then again Sir Reuben wondered, 
remembering his own facility for being deceived that eternal 
facility of man which woman adores in him. Even he had looked 
into his jewel for a heart he, with all his worldly wisdom, with 
all his bitter experience, with all his corroding unbelief. He 
had caressed Caryll after Monsieur Anneau's concert, thinking 
for a moment that she would miss his ugly presence if he died. 
And he had kissed her in the darkness of the carriage after 
the ball, loving her for her gift of lilies to the dying acrobat. 
Yes, even he had been deceived. And this youth would he 
ever learn a lesson that must be strangely difficult, since an 
old man, who thought he had learnt it long ago, forgot it so 
easily ? 

" Sir Reuben," Aubrey said, when the morning's work was 
over, " I want I wish to say something to you." 

" What is it, my boy ? " 

Aubrey looked down. 

" I want to give up my position here." 

" Ah ! " said Sir Reuben. 

" You have been too good to me. But I must resign it." 

"Without giving me any reason?" 

Aubrey still looked down, almost like a man terribly ashamed 
of something, and trying to conceal his shame. 

" I don't know that I've got any reason to give," he answered 
in a low voice. "But I wish to go. I'm very sorry." 



272 THE SLAVE 

Sir Reuben understood the flood of bitterness by which Aubrey's 
youth was overwhelmed just then. 

" I will not try to keep you," he said quietly. " But I shall 
miss your assistance very much." 

" I'm very sorry/' Aubrey reiterated. 

Nothing else was said. It was not a time for talking. That 
afternoon Lady Rangecliffe received a telegram : 

"The lesson I wished to teach is learnt, I think. REUBEN 
ALLABRUTH." 

Later, Aubrey arrived with luggage. 

" I should like to stay a few days, Mater, if I can," he said. 
" I've thrown up that berth at Sir Reuben's. He only made it for 
me, you know. He doesn't really need anybody in the house." 

Lady Rangecliffe did not discuss the matter. But she was, 
unostentatiously, very tender to her son that night. 

When little Alf was buried Aubrey went to the funeral. It 
was a strange ceremony to him. He had never been to a funeral 
before. He stood at Brompton Cemetery in the midst of a hetero- 
geneous crowd of people whose like he had scarcely even imagined. 
Among them were many performers connected with " the Halls." 
These had come to pay a last tribute of respect to one who had 
been at the head of his profession, child though he was. There 
were ladies of the ballet carrying flowers, which they were going 
presently to strew into the grave. Tears streamed down their 
cheeks. They were of the class in which emotion is a matter of 
habit, and by no means a thing to be ashamed of or to conceal. 
No doubt many of them were genuinely moved. But some would 
have wept as copiously had the coffin been occupied by a wax doll 
that had been famous. A huge girl, who carried banners in the 
ballet, sobbed mechanically at regular intervals, and pressed a 
pocket-handkerchief bordered with black first to one cheek-bone 
and then to the other. Her grief was as ostentatious as would 
have been a singing of the Marseillaise. Never before had Aubrey 
seen so strange a collection of men. There were low comedians 
with broad faces that looked almost as if they were made of india- 
rubber ; lion comiques in elaborate costumes, and strange shaped 
hats with curly brims, and gigantic mourning ties suggesting bogs 
in which one might almost have floundered ; clever deformed 
people, whose desperate exploiting of unsightly defects had rendered 
them dear to the great, unhealthy minded public ; strong men 
who lived by breaking chains ; pantomime gentry with red noses, 
who struck strange attitudes as if they had just been shot up out 
of the bowels of the earth through traps ; boxers, bull-necked 
pugilists, "Sports," and patrons of the " Ring," who had loved Alf 
for his mischievous daring and contempt of danger. There was a 



THE SLAVE 273 

melancholy serpent man who performed in striped tights and an 
artificial viper's head. There were several " knock-about artistes " 
in their Sunday clothes, and one or two ventriloquists with pursed 
lips and high Jewish noses. Few of these people were accustomed 
to hear solemn words or sacred sentences, or to think seriously of 
any life unconnected with their own professions. And this lack of 
custom made them shy and uncomfortable, as well as unhappy 
over the loss of a "good little pal." They shifted uneasily about 
as they stood near the grave, darting furtive glances at the coffin, 
and shooting their voluminous cuffs as if in an effort after severe 
respectability. Some of them squinted at the ballet-girls, began 
to smile, then, recollecting themselves, violently composed their 
countenances into what they hoped was an expression of resigna- 
tion to the will of the Almighty. The professional humourists 
looked especially tragic, and were most ostentatious in their mourn- 
ing. It was, perhaps, a genuine relief from their public labours. 

All the Marvellous Flicks were there in the forefront of the 
throng. They were deeply disguised in their suits of decent black 
and their high silk hats with broad mourning bands. But these 
were doffed now, and they stood bareheaded. Their clothes made 
them appear much more common than usual. Their magnificent 
figures, their superb muscles, were concealed from view, and they 
stood awkwardly in their shiny leather boots. Their painful grief 
bowed them down, and had drawn all their normal elasticity 
from them. By way of hiding it they endeavoured to assume a 
sternly cold and manly demeanour, which, in the case of the 
father, became defiance. Mr. Flick stared hard at those near 
him, with bloodshot eyes whose rims were red and puffy. His 
thick moustache was carefully arranged, waxed, and curled upward 
at the tips in a martial manner. He carried his hat in one hand, 
a pair of black kid gloves, an umbrella, and a prayer-book bound 
in black in the other. At the grave side he assumed an indifferent, 
almost an irreverent posture, looking away from the clergyman 
with a pretence of easy carelessness, and glancing casually about 
from time to time like one who examines some country scene that 
happens to be novel to him. His tall sons stood with him the 
troupe without the "star." 

Perhaps instinctively, from their many performances, they had 
formed up in line as they did on the stage before they leapt into 
patterns, or sprang to airy feats. Vauxhall stood at the end of 
the line, and Aubrey thought that once he shot a hasty glance 
sideways, as if to summon his little brother to run in from the 
wings, ducking his head to an applauding audience. Vauxhall 
was the youngest now. He stared down at the hole in the ground, 
and then at the coffin, in which lay the boy of whom he had been 

8* 



274. THE SLAVE 

so generously proud. A dazed expression came into his face, his 
shoulders rounded themselves, and his head drooped forward. It 
is always terrible to stand before the stillness of a being we have 
been accustomed to see in perpetual activity. In this case the 
change was peculiarly startling and fearful to Vauxhall. He had 
been constantly with Alf, and Alf had been constantly in quick, 
most often in violent, movement. To watch his bodily feats, to 
observe his infinite powers of juggling, of sleight of hand, to assist 
at the growth of his extraordinary and vehemently complicated 
tricks, had been Vauxhall's daily occupation and engrossing plea- 
sure. Alf had been not only alive himself. By his goblin ingenuity 
he had made all the inanimate things within his reach seem alive 
also. Therefore his present stillness was the more unnatural and 
appalling. The sensation that gripped Vauxhall was one of absolute 
horror. He stood with his brothers and gazed at Alf s coffin, and 
his legs trembled. He did not know whether he was sad. No 
tears rose in his eyes. He thrust forward his head, looking at the 
coffin, and trying to realise that Alf was inside it, lying perfectly 
still with his eyes shut. 

All the Slaggs were present, with the exception of Mrs. Slagg, 
who was too much overcome to leave Milk Court. Lill stood 
near her entranced husband, looking at him with frightened 
eyes. Diamond had little Susie and Charlie on either side of her, 
holding fast to her hands. Susie was crying. But Charlie was 
too much excited by the novelty of his situation to give way to 
grief. His eyes were round and protuberant as they looked first 
in one direction, then in another, trying to take in the whole 
tremendous scene. Sometimes he was hypnotised for a minute 
or two by his new black suit, and by the short black stockings 
which made his small legs look so white where they were un- 
covered. Then the box in the centre of the throng occupied him. 
He pointed to it with his thumb, tugged at Diamond's merino 
dress, and whispered, "What's in there ?" 

Diamond looked down at him, shook her head, and sobbed. 
That frightened Charlie, and, seeing all of a sudden that Susie 
was crying, he began to cry too, and to hide his face in Diamond's 
skirt. Mr. Slagg picked him up, and muttered incoherent words 
of comfort to him. Then, being in a coign of vantage, he recovered 
a little and stared at the clergyman, who had black whiskers of a 
surprising size. 

Aubrey's attention was now mainly preoccupied by the little 
circle of which Alf had been the centre, the pride and joy. He 
looked at the pale and tear-stained face of Diamond, and re- 
membered her saying " It wouldn't be Alf quiet." Then what 
was in that coffin, and what was going to be lowered into that 



THE SLAVE 275 

grave ? He felt as if it could not possibly be Alf, or anything to 
do with him. A few drops of rain fell. The ladies of the ballet 
began hastily to put up umbrellas and to pat in their skirts with 
their hands. The serpent man took the huge girl who carried 
banners under his protection. She went on whimpering heavily, 
and looked as if she wanted to lay her large, round face on his 
thin shoulder. 

When the last moment came, when the coffin slowly dis- 
appeared from sight, Aubrey thought of Caryll. Her beauty and 
cold charm had given birth to the tragedy of Alf, and so had, 
directly, brought about this ceremony. She had in fact dug this 
grave and provided it with an occupant. He looked once more 
at all the faces opposite to him. Susie and Charlie were terrified 
by the lowering of the coffin, and were crying loudly, as children 
cry when fear wakes in them something of protest that is akin to 
anger. Alf s father still preserved his desperate travesty of un- 
concern. But the effort, the fierce determination not to show 
any natural emotion, now caused him to look actually sinister, 
almost malignant. One might have supposed that he was about 
to strike the clergyman. Vauxhall followed the slowly descending 
coffin with strained eyes, leaning forward as if he were attracted 
magnetically to fall into the grave after it. Now some of the 
ballet ladies moved forward under their umbrellas, on which the 
rain pattered, to throw their flowers into the grave. One of them, 
an affected-looking, thin girl, with a cloud of fuzzy hair snakily 
curled upon her narrow forehead, performed the action dramati- 
cally, then suddenly threw up her arms, screamed, and seemed to 
faint. Her friends assisted her, and there was some confusion, in 
the midst of which Aubrey noticed Vauxhall still staring fixedly 
down at the coffin with dull, yet horrified eyes. He looked almost 
like a man who had drunk too much, and who was at the same 
time stupid, and alarmed by something he could not understand. 
The last thing Aubrey noticed before the crowd separated was a 
well-known droll, familiar to the world as " Little Gee," and to all 
children as a source of perpetual laughter, putting up the collar 
of his coat hurriedly to protect his black satin cravat from the 
rain. He performed the action with a quick anxiety that was 
intensely ludicrous, and turned to leave the cemetery with the 
comic briskness of movement that had roused uproarious mirth 
in thousands of people both in England and in America. Yet 
there were tears streaming down his pasty and closely shaven 
cheeks. The rain beat on the umbrellas, and the ladies of the 
ballet hastened away, trying to make themselves small, and draw- 
ing their skirts forward into bunches, which they grasped with 
solicitous hands. The serpent man and the big girl who carried 



276 THE SLAVE 

banners murmured to each other as they departed under one 
umbrella. Already they had become dear friends. 



Aubrey kept his promise to the dead boy with the unnecessary 
sternness of youth. When the young make up their minds to 
perform a distasteful duty they often perform it deliberately in the 
way that will hurt them most. Aubrey did not go to see Diamond 
after the funeral. He wrote a letter of sympathy, to which she 
replied rather formally. Then he let the acquaintance drop. Alf 
had asked him to be cruel. He was cruel, perhaps most cruel of 
all to himself. The man at the net was gone. But now Aubrey 
told himself Diamond should need no one to watch her. His own 
loneliness did not matter. 

Lady RangeclifFe wondered why he never alluded to the family 
in whose tragedy he had been mingled. She sometimes paid a 
visit to Milk Court, and she noticed that Diamond did not speak 
of Aubrey. 

The double silence perplexed her. Aubrey had never told her 
how he had come to know Diamond. She wondered how. But 
she thought no evil either of this simple, and now very sad, girl or 
of her son. 

Sometimes she drove to Brompton Cemetery and put some 
flowers on "the little chap's" grave. 



CHAPTER XXV 

THE true history of but one gay pilgrim through a London season 
would be strangely interesting, could it be related exhaustively 
and with absolute accuracy. Lady Caryll was a fascinating pilgrim 
through the three brilliant months that immediately succeeded 
the tragedy in Milk Court. Afterwards, when her life was 
changed, and she struck society a stinging blow in the face that 
set its eyes watering, its tongue stammering blasphemies, many 
people looked back to this season and acknowledged, with reluctant 
truth, that it had been hers, in a manner had belonged to her. 
For she performed the rare feat of rising up definitely from the 
whirlpool like some goddess rising from the sea. And all the 
flotsam and jetsam spinning on the surface of the whirlpool, and 
all the engulfed, saw her predominant, and felt as if they could 
only perceive her clearly at all just then by looking above them. 
Few lives flash, few careers sparkle and shine, few existences blaze 
bringing memories of fire, unless the imp of recklessness is near 
them with his torch. Caryll had her own young recklessness to 
do her service. But she had more she had the old recklessness 
of her husband. That was a strange spectacle, a fury of the 
Orient. Caryll's youth waking in her, Sir Reuben's age waking in 
him, these two opposites, coming together like two chemicals, gave 
birth to flame which illuminated society. Youth held out its hands 
in a passion of acceptance, age held out its hands in a passion of 
prodigality. The two recklessnesses fed each the desire of the other. 
That was an orgy of giving and of receiving. 

The publicity of a London season is almost like the publicity 
of a ship, in which all the berths are taken and whose course is set 
towards the tropics. A madness of proximity in warmth comes 
upon the voyagers, the bias towards the frantic which swims up 
in heated crowds. Watching becomes a disease, talking a vice, 
laughter a jackal's necessity, exertion an intemperate monotony. 
Thought is trampled under boots with high heels. Reserve is 
driven away with whips of tulle. And as, on the before-mentioned 
ship, when the first white flying-fish are seen, human nature breaks 
loose from its irons, and all the secrets are told, while the quarter- 
masters gailv listen, and the very Lascars fall to sarcastic grimacing 

277 



278 THE SLAVE 

behind their dusky hands, so, when June is hot in Hyde Park, and 
Mayfair is red with roses, does the book of revelation open, does 
the staring world bend over the pages to read. 

Amid the recklessness of this season Lady Caryll and Sir 
Reuben stood out like forms seen in a firework. The great audi- 
ence stared at the woman with her white hands held out to take 
at the man with his brown hands held out to give. And be sure 
that the quartermasters and the Lascars, ignored by the passen- 
gers, did not forget to play their time-honoured role. Those Avho 
swab the decks of London have sharp eyes and sharper tongues. 
But what do the occupants of the state-rooms care for that ? 

Once Sir Reuben had said, at the banquet of inauguration, 
" If I met a strong nature, a nature fierce in its desire and crying 
for all the seas, I should like to pour all the seas into it." Now, 
at last, he yielded himself entirely with a sort of old fury to this 
satisfaction. And he had no desire to yield in secret. He wished 
the world to be on the watch. That watchfulness made part of 
his joy. When he first married Lady Caryll he enjoyed giving 
her peeps into Aladdin's cave. Now he took from her the jewels 
that had been given to her by others as wedding presents, saying, 
"The one who submits to my power of giving must only re- 
ceive from me." Then he flung the doors of the cave wide open 
and led her in to be wrapt in the enchantment of its jewelled 
wonder. And often he looked back to enjoy the spectacle of 
the world trampling about the entrance. Aubrey stood there with 
the rest. 

Lady Caryll's jewels were the wonder of that season, the 
constant subject of discussion among women in boudoirs, among 
men in clubs and on racecourses, among both sexes in general 
society. 

"Allabruth treats his wife as if she were a courtesan/' said a 
married man, who admired King Solomon. 

" He puts very rotten ideas into the heads of respectable 
women," said his companion. " Their expectations will become 
absurd. If virtue is to be rewarded by such a cataract of precious 
stones what encouragement will be left for vice ? I think some one 
should speak seriously to Allabruth." 

Lady Caryll's virtue was acknowledged even by the cynical. A 
famous Spanish dancer, who usually dressed in diamonds and very 
little else, said of her that she was the cleverest of all English- 
women, because she was the mistress of her own husband. The 
jewellers thanked God for the madness of Sir Reuben, and longed 
to infuse a little Eastern blood into the veins of all millionaires. 
They recognised in his proceedings the gorgeous fantasy of an 
Oriental. He grew almost barbarous in the violence of his 






THE SLAVE 279 

generosity. There was something fearful in it, as there is in 
unbridled avarice, the hint of wickedness that exists in all uncon- 
trolled passions. He was like some monstrous figure of a dangerous 
legend scattering unceasing largesse on the woman whom he had 
chosen to be the recipient of his desperate bounty. Some people 
began to think of her as strangely fearless, facing this storm of 
jewels that fell about her almost like hail. Her serenity astonished 
them. Sir Reuben was not serene. The recklessness of his 
generosity sprang up, like some quick, licentious tropical plant, 
growing out of the peculiar rank richness of decay. For still the 
grey and the -aged feeling crept upon him. The heavy and 
inexorable animal lay crouched upon his breast and could not 
be stirred. The permanence of its repose sometimes appalled 
him, and he underwent that most intense agony the supporting 
of that which man tells himself is insupportable. In the paroxysms 
of his prodigality he found a sharp solace. Some felt that there 
was terror in his giving because he sometimes gave in an effort to 
escape from terror. Caryll was not one of these, and he knew well 
that she never could be. The woman who had stood before the 
diamond shop to gaze into the hearts of jewels, never stood before 
that larger house, the worldly house of many mansions, to gaze into 
the hearts of men. She knew very little about Sir Reuben, but 
he knew a great deal about her. At this time she looked upon 
him as she would have looked upon the Geni who led her through 
the cave. The magic of the jewels that came from his hands 
lingered about him. She always connected him with jewels. 
Some people thought that she was unnatural and loved him, others 
that she was politic, and pretended to love him. She neither 
loved, nor did she pretend to love him. He completely contented 
her by his actions. She lived happily with his passionate genero- 
sity. She had no wish to understand his complicated nature. It 
was enough for her that she was understood. The under-currents 
of his life were nothing to her. The ghost of the dead Creole 
never haunted her. Nor did she notice the unnatural vehemence 
of his desire to satisfy her, the fury of his kindness. The abandon- 
ment which began to amaze the world simply did not strike her. 
That was all. But then she did not hear the voices in the city, 
the mutter of the hard-headed men who trod the devious ways 
of finance. Nor did she hear the mutter of the thieves in their 
quarters, or understand the depth of the attention that was 
slowly concentrating upon her. She met the staring eyes of 
society easily enough. Staring is a sort of profession among well- 
bred people. They look at each other as a savage would look at 
the moon if you gave it into his hand. Caryll was accustomed to 
create a sensation and to meet unflinching eyes. She probably 



280 THE SLAVE 

never thought that she was an object of intense interest to people, 
often the strangest, who had never seen her. 

Yet so it was. In very humble, in very sinister quarters she 
was ardently discussed, as a woman of great possessions, as a 
woman who had infatuated a man to the point of mania, as a 
woman who was utterly careless of many things that meant much 
to her sister women, yet who was intensely solicitous about the 
shining things she loved. Certain tragedies were attributed to 
her. Truths float up on the surface of London sometimes almost 
as strangely as lies. Thus the truth of Alf s death became 
generally known. He had performed the feat he had never 
practised, the feat that killed him, to please Lady Caryll, and 
she had refused to stand for a moment by his deathbed, and to 
tell him that his performance pleased her. In some subtle 
fashion, from the bosom of a broken-hearted family, this fact 
penetrated into the world and was discussed there. The scent 
of those dead lilies went abroad upon the air. 

Another and far more piquant fact also became known during 
this season. It caused great tumult in the feminine world. The 
death of an acrobat was of very little consequence. Alf had been 
a god in Milk Court, and ladies of the ballet had wept over his 
grave. Monsieur Anneau was a god in a larger sphere, and ladies, 
not of the ballet, were disposed to weep when he was attacked, 
or was rudely shaken upon his throne. 

Monsieur Anneau had accepted an engagement at the Opera 
for the summer. He had not sung anywhere since his concert in 
Park Lane, nor. had he been seen in Parisian society. Newspaper 
gossip had been busy with his name. Rumours had gone about 
that he had lost his voice, that he had been ill, that he was going 
to retire from the stage and take up farming. These rumours 
died comfortably when it was announced that he had arrived in 
London, and would sing for the Syndicate through the whole 
season. Lady St. Ormyn was in raptures. She had returned from 
abroad with several new proteges, and a conductor whom she 
had " discovered " at Monte Carlo, and intended to force upon 
London. The summer-house at Epsom was prepared for her 
famous " Sundays." She had brought a quantity of marvellous 
gowns from Paris, and was now to be seen everywhere perpetually 
talking opera, and getting her newest geniuses known. Her face 
was redder, her hair was whiter than ever. A pair of new 
eyebrows of a most startling blackness put a brilliant finishing 
touch to her always striking appearance, and, since she was 
already bacchanalian in May, her tribes of friends were busy in 
anticipating a more than usually remarkable July, and a series of 
Epsom Sabbaths rivalling the witch's sabbaths of legend. 



THE SLAVE 281 

Monsieur Anneau made his first appearance at the Opera 
during the third week in May. As usual he took the part of a 
high priest, and his admirers assembled in force to acclaim him. 
Lady St. Ormyn was in her box next the stage on the grand tier. 
The Allabruths were not far off. Mrs. Luffa Parkinson, in cinna- 
mon-coloured velvet and yellow jewels, was in the stalls. All the 
critics were buzzing about, or scratching their comments in sur- 
reptitious note-books. At the end of the third act one of them 
said to another 

" What on earth's the matter with Anneau ? " 

"Temper, I should think," said his confrere. "The most 
sulky singing I ever heard." 

" And all the sweetness, the luscious quality, seems gone from 
his voice." 

" He sings like a man who hates music, I think," said the 
second critic, who was not without acute instincts. 

" I'm afraid he must have caught cold in crossing the Channel," 
Lady St. Ormyn was saying to a young composer, whose eyes 
were like saucers, and whose compositions were as sweet as 
chocolates. 

Sir Reuben leaned towards Caryll, whose blazing diamonds dis- 
tracted even the honest music lovers who thronged the gallery. 

" Caryll," he said, " can you hear what you have done ? " 

The curtain had gone up again. Monsieur Anneau, attired 
in flowing robes heavy with embroidery, stood upon some uneasy 
operatic temple steps. His mighty arms were raised towards 
heaven, and he began to declaim a solemn chaunt, which was 
taken up by a crowd of unwashed Italian gentlemen below. Caryll 
listened. The voice of Monsieur Anneau sounded harsh and dry, 
like the voice of an angry priest. 

"Listen listen!" said Sir Reuben, and he touched his wife's 
arm. " Do you hear ? That note and that ! " 

He smiled at her, twisting his brown face which seemed to 
have shrunk, as a sheet of paper shrinks and is brown after a flame 
has run over it and died away from it. 

" You mean that he is out of voice, Reuben ? " 

She glanced about the house, then lifted her opera-glasses to 
look at some sapphires that shot purple fire from an opposite box. 

"Shocking, shocking!" said Paul Villet, the composer of the 
Pearl Song. 

He sat in a box on the ground floor, with a heavy Dowager 
Countess, a black-haired ex-actress whom he had lately married, 
and a sleek and rosy young man, with manicured hands and an 
ostentatious manner, who sang in draw -ing-rooms under an assumed 
name, and cut every one who knew that his father was an upholsterer 



282 THE SLAVE 

at Greenwich, and that he had been known as Albert Sprigg 
before he went to Paris to become Sebastian de Rameau. 

" Really disgraceful," continued Villet, who had grown very 
fat and authoritative ; and who now earned eight guineas an hour 
by giving singing lessons, and "producing" voices by a new and 
acrobatic method, which, he said, had been revealed to him in a 
dream. 

The Dowager Countess agreed that the chorus sang atrociously. 

" No, no Anneau ! " cried Villet. " His voice is in an awful 
condition. He ought to come to me. Mon Dieu ! Hark at 
that F." 

He turned to Albert Sprigg, who was talking to Madame 
Villet about a well-known princess whom he called " Poor little 
Toto." 

Mr. Sprigg waved his manicured hands in a French gesture of 
sarcastic disgust. 

"Anneau is finished," he cried, "quite finished. We won't 
look at him in Paris. We won't hear his name. But here in 
London you will stand anything." 

And he resumed his conversation about poor little Toto, who, 
he let it be understood, was dying for love of his fat, rosy face. 

Madame Villet, who had forgotten that she had been an un- 
successful actress a year ago, and who now posed as a wit and an 
eccentric genius, was very sarcastic about the princess. 

" She's asked herself to lunch with us on Thursday," she said, 
" to meet some of the singers Jacques, you know, and Henri. 
Such a bore ! princesses are like Scotch Sundays, always so weari- 
some. D'you admire my hair to-night ? I want to look like a 
grouse." 

" You look delicious," said Albert Sprigg, staring at her with 
the pig's expression that was so fascinating. " A gem in the midst 
of these heavy English women, with their everlasting royal fringes. 
Why is it that one can't see a forehead in England ? Do the 
English consider foreheads indecent ? " 

He always spoke as if he were French, and many people 
thought that his parents were Parisian. 

" Monsieur Anneau ought to be brayed in a mortar," said a 
clever girl in the stalls to a large hunting man who was half asleep 
at her side. 

" The mortar' d have to be a bit large," said the hunting man, 
with a yawn. 

"Yes," said the girl; "and the fragments would fill more 
baskets than contained the remains of the loaves and fishes. . His 
voice sounds like an asphalte pavement to-night." 

Up in the gallery, where a good deal of real intelligence and 



THE SLAVE 283 

true sensitiveness to music was sitting on wooden benches, there 
were more murmurs and sincere regrets. A man with broad 
shoulders and a flowing beard, who carried a score, and wore a 
loose mustard-coloured suit, said that Monsieur Anneau was singing 
without sincerity. 

" The voice is out of order," he said. " But there's something 
worse than that. The nature of the man's out of order. And 
he used to be so great in this part." 

He shook his large leonine head, while a little woman in green 
linen by his side murmured, "Yes, William, I've noticed it too." 

Bedford Park had divined something of the truth ; but Bedford 
Park never knew the whole truth, nor even so much of it as 
eventually went, distorted, through Mayfair and Belgravia. 

Monsieur Anneau's nature was forcible and violent. He had 
a fierce mind, and he had been accustomed for many years to 
triumph in all his undertakings. Whenever he had set out to 
do evil, that evil had been eventually wrought. Whenever he 
had sung, he had been travelling along some road towards a goal. 
And so he had had the sensation of jocund triumph from which, 
along how many roads, springs the carolling voice of man, the 
voice of the gay traveller, of the human bird in sunshine. Always 
witli him had been his obsequious and efficient servant his art. 
Now all was changed. His art had revolted. He had called upon 
it to perform an act. It had failed him. It had left him in the 
lurch. Lady Caryll had remained unmoved by his musical powers. 
He hated music. He held it in contempt. He cursed the long 
and patient service he had given to it. The memory of his years 
of pupilage years which the locusts had eaten was intolerably 
bitter to him. Now, when he sang, he felt as if he were giving 
his life to an enemy, or were performing menial offices for a 
loathsome master. All the sacrifices he had made for music came 
round about him like a troop of phantoms, like creatures pale and 
sneering, tragic and forlorn. They had the awful aspect of utterly 
useless things. He lived in the midst of them. He counted 
incessantly their numbers, and passed them in eternal review, and 
grew sick because he had been their creator. How drearily they 
tripped about him. Here was a pale year of his life, a full flower 
of time, laid, with its every petal, at the feet of music ; and here 
a night of pain that might have been a night of pleasure ; and 
here a cold day of aching self-denial ; and here a black hour of 
passionate despair, that, but for music, might have been a golden 
hour. In youth, when life had called him to the open door, he 
had shut the door, had thrust away pleasure, had given himself 
to hard and unremitting toil. And this was his reward. He 
forgot all that he had gained in remembering the one thing he 



284 THE SLAVE 

had lost. And whenever he sang he saw his enemy, music, the 
thing he longed to strike. 

The alteration in his art became a thing of note, a tragedy in 
the London of Lady Caryll's year, one of the hoarse and sinister 
voices of the whirlpool above which she radiantly rose. 

There were many voices in that whirlpool, and some of them 
were sad. Was there not the whispering voice of a little acrobat 
calling her to see him die ? Were there not the voices of those 
whom he had left, the voices of Diamond and of Vauxhall ? The 
voices of thieves muttered in the whirlpool, and of the city mur- 
muring its chorus to the wild solo of Sir Reuben. Sometimes 
there was the growl, far, far down it seemed, of the creature that 
lay ever on his breast, and strove to gain the attention that he 
would not give to it. And Aubrey's voice, a little strange, a little 
doubtful, was there, and his mother's voice, as it sounded when 
she said "the little chap deserves fresh flowers." 

Lady Caryll heard none of these voices. Women with their 
feet on the world are the deafest of all the creatures of God. 
And her feet were on the world now. She and her great emerald 
stood there together. For of all her jewels she still loved it the 
best, even as Eve probably loved in secret best of all fruits the 
apple which she gave unto the man. Had the Peruvian priests 
of the time of Pizarro been yet alive they would surely have 
acclaimed Caryll as the goddess Esmeralda. For she lived in her 
emerald on whose surface was graven the story of her fate. Sir 
Reuben, throwing jewels instead of dust in the eyes of the world, 
at length saw -the scales fall from those eyes. Voices called from 
the whirlpool. They clamoured of the love of Lady Caryll and 
where alone her heart was given. She was elevated into a shining 
mystery. The strangeness of her attachment to jewels struck the 
imaginative, and came to the knowledge of those curious beings, 
the occultists, the mystery-mongers, the star-gazers, the card- 
dealers, the clairvoyants of London. Fringed men in Bond Street 
sought to read the lines of her hand. Suburban hermits, closeted 
in Clapham villas, or secluded in semi-detached residences near 
Barnes and Brondesbury, were fain to cast her horoscope. Wisps 
of women, dwelling above grocer's shops in Hornsey, or lurking in 
Whitechapel lairs, laid out the dingy cards for her, and wrote 
illiterate letters to Park Lane, describing the wonders they had 
discovered and asking for small sums of money. Thin females, of 
Mexican appearance and Jewish temperament, fell into trances on 
her behalf, and, on recovering, noted down the circumstances of 
their dreams, and the pale future that had shaken far off, like a 
mirage, before their sleeping eyes. One of these called on Lady 
Caryll, was admitted, and spoke this prophecy : 



THE SLAVE 285 

" I see you happy in a dark place where none of your friends 
will ever come, with a man whom none of your friends will know. 
In this dark place you wear a great jewel, you have much money, 
and you are deserted by those who are about you in your present 
existence." 

Lady Caryll smiled, gave the prophetess tea and a sovereign 
and told Sir Reuben the tale that evening after dinner. He 
frowned, looking at her strangely. 

" Do you believe in prophecies, Reuben ? " she said. 

" I have known them to come true," he replied. " There are 
magicians in the East." 

"This woman said she was a Mexican. Do Mexicans speak 
with a Cockney accent ? " 

" In a dark place," he said musingly. " In a dark place." 

That night, when they had returned from a party, he referred 
again to his desire to see Caryll in the sunshine of the Eastern 
world. 

" Next winter we will travel," he said. " I will take you over 
the sea." 

"To the villa on the bay of Tangier?" she asked him. 

" To a place where I have lived with slaves," he answered. 

Suddenly he caught her by the arms and looked into her fair 
face, while all the jewels she wore flashed in his eyes. 

" Happy," he said, repeating the prophecy, " in a dark place 
. . . with a man whom none of your friends will know. Caryll, 
where shall I be then ? " 

His face became disfigured with passion as his eyes broodingly 
watched hers. 

" The great jewel will be your emerald," he continued, like a 
man talking to himself. " Yes the emerald. You will be happy 
with it. I understand I understand. But I gave it to you. I 
should be there. I should be that man." 

He let her go, and sank down on the divan, still staring at 
her, with eyes in which suspicion flickered like a spitting flame. 

" Where I go," he continued, " I should be able to take you 
with me. That is only just. You ought always to travel with 
me always, whenever I journey. For 1 have made you happy 
I have made you happy." 

"Yes, Reuben," she said. "And I will travel with you." 

She came to the divan. 

" What is the matter ? " she asked. " Why do you look like 
that ? I will go with you." 

" But suppose it is impossible," he said, in an under-voice. 

" How could it be ? You are strange to-night." 

Now his eyes were fixed on her jewels and on the great emerald 



286 THE SLAVE 

which she was wearing. An expression of intense hatred came 
into his eyes. He pointed at the emerald with his brown finger. 

" That will last/' he said hoarsely. " My gift will last. And 
I go to bed, Caryll go to bed ! " 

He turned his back on her suddenly. She obeyed him, and 
left the room. Some instinct told her not to wear the emerald for 
many nights after that interview with her husband. She looked 
at it in secret and wished him to forget it. 

Through all that season Sir Reuben accompanied her every- 
where. People grew accustomed to see the small and shrivelled 
figure shuffling into crowded reception rooms, leaning wearily back 
in his chair at the Opera, driving in the Park almost hidden at 
her side, even waiting patiently about ball-room doors till the 
dawn came up in the sky over faded London. For Lady Caryll 
was gay, and he chose that she should be seen everywhere. In 
the publicity of her life he found pleasure. He had learned to 
pity those Easterns who seclude their treasures. Civilisation was 
gloriously blatant. He rejoiced in that, the more keenly because 
he was never really civilised. He rejoiced, too, in the misfortune 
which lay about Caryll's feet. When people spoke of Monsieur 
Anneau's downfall, he thought of the dead Creole and was glad. 
It is good to triumph, to be secure in old age, when one has been 
tortured and deceived in younger days. And the greatness of the 
compensation lies partly in the added burthen of the years. 

All the world talked of Monsieur Anneau's misfortunes. Some 
women were in despair, and showed him solicitous pity, driving 
daggers into his soul. The Opera directorate began to treat him 
cavalierly as a waning star. Other singers, over whom he had 
formerly exulted, were very anxious on his behalf. They spoke to 
him, quite casually, of certain throat doctors in whom they had 
every confidence, and of the undoubted advantages of prolonged 
rest when the voice became fatigued ; never hinting that he was 
in question, but on the contrary alluding to his giant strength and 
immunity from such troubles as came to others. The papers 
struck hard, and, when he sang, Monsieur Anneau faced a row of 
busy gentlemen, in whose note-books was being nightly recorded 
the serial story of his downward progress. His private engage- 
ments as a concert singer were far less numerous than in former 
years. But Sir Reuben wrote to invite him to sing in Park Lane. 
And Paul Villet came to suggest that he should undergo the new 
method of training the voice. Sir Reuben offered him a large 
cheque, Paul Villet a series of lessons for nothing. Monsieur 
Anneau cursed Villet, rang for a servant, and ordered him to show 
Villet out and never to admit him again. Sir Reuben's cheque he 
refused, declining to sing at Lady Caryll's concert. Sir Reuben 




THE SLAVE 287 

smiled over the letter. Villet went about everywhere abusing 
Anneau and speaking of his ingratitude. " For did not I," he 
cried, "give him his greatest success when I let him be the first 
to sing my Pearl Song ? " And all the people who had once 
admired Barre, and who now adored Villet, sympathised with their 
fat and authoritative pet. And Albert Sprigg, waving the mani- 
cured hands, and talking English with the slippery and gliding 
French accent of Paris, inveighed against those who are un- 
gracious to the men who have helped them up the ladder. He 
forgot, no doubt, that he never went near the Greenwich uphol- 
sterer, whose savings had sent him to France, and who had 
certainly at one time been his father. 

Who was it set afloat the sly and whispered story connecting 
the great singer's ruin already people called it ruin with Lady 
Caryll's virtue ? London, at least, never knew. But the story 
certainly did float forth, a cockle-shell on the whirlpool, floated 
forth and lived in such an angry sea. Monsieur Anneau 's innume- 
rable successes with women had extended to a failure. People 
whispered that he was broken-hearted. Villet babbled memories 
of that foggy winter night when there had been a concert in a 
white room, when he had triumphed, and the singer had what ? 
That concert soon marked a turning-point in Monsieur Anneau's 
life in the minds of men, and especially in the minds of women. 
Lady St. Ormyn now spoke of it as if she had been there, and 
declared that she remembered acutely how hoarse Monsieur 
Anneau had become towards the end of the performance. 

" It's his nature that's hoarse," said that critic who had spoken 
of his sulky singing. 

And the critic, who was young and odd, conceived the idea of 
writing a book about the influence of the passions upon the 
singing voice. 

Mr. Wilson, the snub-nosed man, to whom music was merely 
a thing out of whicli money could be made, declared that Mon- 
sieur Anneau should never again be engaged to sing for the 
Syndicate. 

" The public don't want high priests who bawl like a navvy 
in a passion," he said delicately in the hearing of the stage hands. 

They sniggered, to please him, and Mr. Slagg, somewhere up 
in the flies busy with his lights, thanked heaven that he was not 
"one of them opera gents." 

Monsieur Anneau, the vainest of men, lived in a veritable 
Inferno, and, as the season grr\v, felt that he was passing on and 
on from one circle to another. The disorder of his mind became 
as the disorder of some hideous lumber-room, in which the Furies 
rummage at their will. When he entered the stage door of the 



288 THE SLAVE 

Opera House when he appeared at rehearsal, his eyes were wild 
and suspicious. He looked about him when he sang as if 
expectant of some outrage. His gaze searched the crowding 
chorus, and if two women whispered together, or a man smiled at 
his neighbour, Monsieur Anneau stopped the whispers, cut through 
the smile with a glance that was like an attack. When he 
appeared in society he was defiant and incessantly on the watch, 
angrily fearful of neglect, of any sign that his empire was passing 
away. London is very active in contempt of a waning celebrity, 
very callous of personal sensitiveness. Monsieur Anneau now had 
the joy of seeing Paul Villet surrounded by adorers while he was 
scarcely noticed. One night he was engaged to sing at a concert 
given by Mrs. Luffa Parkinson. The Allabruths were there, 
Monsieur and Madame Villet, Lady St. Ormyn, and all the smart 
musical world. Monsieur Anneau sang harshly and unsteadily, 
without real finish or any subtlety of expression. He saw Villet 
shrugging his shoulders, and whispering to Albert Sprigg, whose 
sleek face was screwed into an answering grimace of contempt. 
Towards the end of the concert a new baritone from Paris sang 
the altered Pearl Song. Villet accompanied. Everybody was in 
ecstasies. Monsieur Anneau left early. Two or three days later 
he called on Lady Caryll and found her at home and alone. She 
held out her hand to him. He bowed without taking it. When 
the servant had left the room he said 

" Are you satisfied, Miladi ? Are you pleased ? Tell me." 

His voice was rough and uncontrolled. His expression was 
disordered. He stood there looking down on Lady Caryll, who 
glanced at him with a quiet surprise. 

" What do you mean, Monsieur?" she asked. 

" Are you not laughing at my ruin ? Are you not laughing 
with Villet, with all London ? " 

His chest heaved with excitement. He clenched his hands 
together, dropping the gloves they had held upon the carpet. 

" Your ruin ! You are not ruined. What are you saying ? " 

"What every one is saying. My singing power is gone. It 
is gone. They say my talent is broken. You you have broken 
it. They say I can no longer govern my music. Was not music 
my servant till I met you ? I say it was, Miladi. I commanded 
it to do what I would. It obeyed me. It made the world the 
world that laughs, Mon Dieu ! obey me too. I conquered whom I 
would till I met you. Do you know what you have done ? You 
have made my art revolt against me. I gave all to my art my 
youth, my brain, my strength, my soul's strength, and my body's. 
I made sacrifices ah ! the sacrifices I have made ! You cannot 
understand. You have never made sacrifices. You are content 



THE SLAVE 289 

to exact them from others. But I I was music's slave 
I tell you so, to make music my slave do you hear mine ? 
All I chose to have I got through music, all all, till I met you." 

" Monsieur Anneau " 

" I loved music I say to you I loved it for what it did and 
had done for me. Now I hate it for what it will not do, and 
because I hate it, I fail I fail always. My voice is here." With 
a wild gesture he raised his hand and laid it on his throat. 
" People, fools say it is gone. I say it is not gone. But how can 
I govern the thing I could tear out ? How can I use the thing I 
am cursing? How can I how can I? Tell me you! They 
laugh at me Villet, too, the man I saved from starving ! They 
will not listen any more. And it is because you you have laughed, 
you have not listened, you have resisted, you have had contempt 
only for my music, as you have contempt for everything, everybody, 
that boy who is gone from here, your husband, every everything 
except your jewels, except your great emerald." 

He had become passionately excited. His eyes were almost 
like the eyes of a crazy man. Lady Caryll, who at first had tried 
to interrupt his torrent of words, now sat silent. Her face had 
become very cold and hard, but her eyes were fixed on his face 
with an expression of uncontrollable interest. 

" Your emerald," he repeated. " People say that is the only 
thing you love, the only thing that moves you. Ah ! now you 
listen ! Now you hear ! It is so ! It is as they say ! " 

Suddenly he lost all control over himself. He leaned down, 
and with an oath, he exclaimed 

" Ah ! Ah ! if I could tear it if I could tear it from you, as 
you have torn all from me ! If I if I 

He stretched out his hands as if furiously to seize something, 
stretched them out to Lady Caryll's breast. 

Suddenly she sprang up. All her calm deserted her. She 
looked horribly excited, too, horribly afraid. She clasped her 
hands over her breast and rushed towards the door. As she 
reached it Sir Reuben opened it from the hall and came in. She 
caught him by the arm with one hand, keeping the other still 
upon her breast. 

" Reuben ! Reuben ! " she cried, in a stifled voice that was 
thick and veiled with terror. 

She turned, and looked at Monsieur Anneau. 

"Thief! " she whispered at him. 

She looked down at her breast. No jewel gleamed there. Sir 
Reuben supported her feebly, glancing at the singer for an explana- 
tion. Monsieur Anneau strode up to them. A sort of ferocious 
curiosity had come into his face. He stopped close to tlu-m. 

T 



90 THE SLAVE 

" She has it there," he said. " She has it there hidden the 
only thing she loves ! Search and see ! " 

He put his hand on the door. 

"Are you not afraid?" he said to Sir Reuben. "Afraid to let 
her touch you ? What is she ? What is she ? " 

He did not utter another word. He seemed seized with fear 
of Lady Caryll. He hurried out of the house. 

Sir Reuben touched his wife's breast under her hand. He felt 
something hard, hidden beneath her dress. 

She cried out and thrust away his hand. 

" Ah ! Caryll," he said, " keep your treasure. But do not quite 
forget I gave it to you and do not fear me." 

Then she threw her arms about his neck and hid her face 
against his shoulder. 







CHAPTER XXVI 

MONSIEUR ANNEAU did not sing again at the Opera that season. 
He asked the Syndicate to release him from his engagement, 
pleading ill health. Mr. Wilson patronisingly announced to him 
that he might go when he would without let or hindrance. 

"Take my advice, Anneau, old chap," he said; "give the 
voice a rest. Grow roses, farm, try a country life, potter about 
your garden. Good luck to you. Bernardine will take your 
parts." 

Bernardine was a new man discovered by Mr. Wilson in 
Lapland, or some remote place. He was burning to step into 
Monsieur Anneau's shoes. 

" He's been training with Villet," added Mr. Wilson, curling 
his moustaches. 

Monsieur Anneau bowed. As he turned to go he was seized 
by an intense longing to perform some act of violence, to commit 
some crime for the perpetration of which great physical force 
would be necessary. Of course he controlled this desire. Next 
day he was in Paris. He had many strange acquaintances in 
Paris, and, as has been said, when he was resisted he became 
dangerous. Mr. Wilson had genially advised him to potter about 
a garden. 

Instead he lived, for a while, a rather hidden life in the Gay 
City. Each week there was forwarded to him from London a 
certain paper which gave him a bird's-eye-view of the smart world. 
From Paris, then, he followed the career of Lady Caryll. He read 
of the entertainments she gave, of those given by others at which 
she appeared. He read glowing accounts of her dresses and of 
her jewels. One day he read a paragraph about the great emerald. 
At a party a modern magician had touched it and had told Lady 
Caryll something of its past, something, too, of its future. 

Monsieur Anneau snowed this paragraph to a man with whom 
he was sitting in a cafe. 

Aubrey's intercourse with the Allabruths at this time was not 
very intimate. He often met them in society. He often talked 
with them. But, since the episode of Alf s death, he had come to 
feel a certain uneasiness when he was with Caryll. He believed, 

291 



292 THE SLAVE 

as he always had believed, that she was misunderstood by others, 
by the world. He thought he knew that she was not the cold 
and glittering creature strangely far from humanity that she 
was supposed to be. Yet he could not find the humanity iu her. 
He had sought it at the ball, when Alf lay dying. He had not 
found it and, at the time, he had been repelled. Later, he had 
argued with himself. He had told himself that Caryll was only 
a girl still, and that she had feared the horror of a thing she 
had never seen, of death ! Was not that natural ? He knew 
that, silently, his mother condemned Caryll's refusal to comply 
with Alfs request. But then his mother had a sort of manly 
strength in her character. She would never " shirk " an un- 
pleasant duty. Caryll had been afraid, and probably she had not 
at all realised the effect her peculiar beauty, her peculiar person- 
ality, had had on the little acrobat. Aubrey found in her a fine 
lack of personal vanity. She never seemed to think much about 
her influence over others. Nor did she appear to realise, as a 
beautiful woman, her power over men. She was utterly careless 
of the sensation she created. That made the sensation greater, 
and made Aubrey place her high. The episode of Alf had caused 
him to shrink from Caryll for the moment. Even now he seemed 
set far from her. But his allegiance was not broken. He stood 
with the crowd, and gazed into the cave, through whose jewelled 
mysteries Caryll wandered on with her attendant Geni, going 
so Aubrey felt farther and farther away. Would she fade down 
the twinkling avenues ? Would she disappear in a mist of gold ? 
There was a remoteness in the magic of her content. The crowd 
hummed about her, yet she was distant, lonely with her Geni who 
was her husband. She loved him. Aubrey did not doubt it. And, 
this season, he placed Sir Reuben on a throne. His power over 
Caryll gave to Aubrey dreams of him, imaginations of a hidden 
splendour that must be like some hidden splendour of the East. 
Then Aubrey discarded the shell of the soul on which all men 
fix their eyes, and many women their hearts. The ugliness of 
Sir Reuben, his creeping, his shuddering old age, these became 
but as the ragged trappings of a king, who wears them for 
a freak, or from a superb indifference, for a while, or for a little 
moment. Aubrey felt that Caryll's eyes could see the truth of 
the soul through the riddle of the body. What she doubtless saw 
he tried to divine. He thought of his godfather as a being remote 
from others. And many wondered at his reverence for the little 
shuffling old man, and some supposed that he was acting a part. 

And so, through all that season, Caryll wandered farther and 
farther among the jewels of the Cave. Her hands were filled with 
the jewels. They shone in her hair. They glittered on her neck 



THE SLAVE 293 

and arms and bosom. And still Sir Reuben sought for more 
wonderful gems. And the jewel merchants were ever in Park 
Lane. The strangest people came to the door ; foreigners, 
Easterns from over the seas, Swedes bringing pearls, Indian 
dealers, and Jews seeking custom for their masters in Paris, in 
Vienna, in Tunis, or in Persia ; Siberians and Caucasians, men from 
the steppes of Asia, from Gogaz, from Cubaja and from Brazil. 
For reputations, like migratory birds, travel far, and the name of 
Sir Reuben, his supposed gigantic wealth, and his undoubted 
mania, had become known through the world to the men who 
traffic with jewels. And whenever a man brought to Park Lane 
a strange gem, a precious stone with a history, a jewel that was 
very beautiful, or that was very curious, in colour, in shape, in 
gleam of light or depth of mystery, Sir Reuben bought it and 
it passed into the soft and eager hands of Lady Caryll. She never 
heeded the prices that were given for the things she loved. Sir 
Reuben never spoke to her of money. But on the Stock Exchange 
men talked of the magnitude of his speculations, and of the wild- 
ness of his financial dealings, of his buyings and sellings, of the 
almost frantic greediness he showed for investments bringing in 
dangerously high interest, and of his continual gambling with 
stocks and shares. 

"Allabruth wants money," they said. "And he doesn't care 
how he makes it." 

The risks he ran appalled the prudent and woke admiration 
in the breasts of the younger men who knew of them. These 
younger men laughed about Lady Caryll, and applied to Sir 
Reuben the proverb of the old fool. Yet they were captured by 
the magnitude of his mania. There was something almost great 
in the force of his concentration on one object the filling up of 
the measure of one human being's joy. There was something 
almost great too, in, that human being's apparently measureless 
depth of desire, in the calmness of her unending readiness to 
receive. She was like a deity whom no sacrifice could ever per- 
suade to cease from waiting expectantly for further propitiation. 
She was like a deity and she was like a slave. But the world 
forgot the slavery, for the world is ever inclined to see discontent 
in a slave. Yet the happiness of many slaves has been, and 
still is, one of the most astounding of facts. 

Could any one have seen quite clearly into the heart and mind 
of Sir Reuben, the view must have startled him, had he been 
cynic, philosopher, or most cruel thing of all mere determined 
watcher of his brother man. For the man who rages near his 
end, and in his grey old days, is fearful as one struggling to escape 
from the bosom of Abraham into the last abode of Dives. Old 



294 THE SLAVE 

age, we think, must be calm or weak, querulous or holy. We 
dwell on the supposed merciful dispensation by which men's earthly 
desires drop again in our supposition from them by degrees as 
they approach the tomb. Door after door is shut between them 
and the things of this life, the things of the great street. The 
door of deafness shuts out the voices, the sound of the beating 
footsteps that go for ever by. The door of blindness closes, and 
the people in the great street are seen no more. The door of 
forgetfulness bars from the old man even the recollection of the 
actions without, the accidents, the bloodshed, the assignations and 
the joys. And then, too, do we not suppose, comfortably, that 
the memory of the flesh grows beautifully blunt in these, the grey 
old days, and that the withered creature of the Lord, wrinkled, 
bent, bony, and fatigued, is become but a material for the divine 
preparation, which will make of it presently a mere film of matter 
fit for its kneading by the fingers of Eternity. 

Sir Reuben was neither calm nor weak, querulous nor holy. 
Nor was his fleshly memory blunted or dimmed. He was living 
now as he had never lived before. He was living desperately, 
recklessly, as a man lives in a fever, or when delirium catches him 
by the hand and bids him come away into the regions of the 
wildest dreams. All that there had ever been in him seemed to 
have started up, to be fermenting. All his qualities had become 
exaggerated, all his desires excited, all his mental faculties alert. 
He was the man having his last fling in the great street, not the 
man dozing behind the shut door, dozing away into the darkness. 
Something had enabled him to stir beneath the imposition of the 
heavy, crouching creature that had been lying on his breast, to 
struggle, to fight, to escape from it with a cry. He rushed out 
like one emancipated. 

He rushed out to buy jewels for his slave. 

Daily his fury of unnatural vitality seemed to increase. Nightly 
the vehement memory of younger days burned brighter. 

Caryll as she yielded to his fantastic generosity yielded also to 
his other desires. 

The Geni who led her ever through the wonders of the Cave 
was, indeed, her husband. 

He thought of the dead Creole and, when Caryll lay in his 
arms, he flung defiance at the watching shade. 

And when he came to Caryll softly, with new and curious gems 
in his brown hands, he looked back over his shoulder to see if the 
shade came enviously behind him. 

And when Caryll kissed him, he thought of the singer's down- 
fall. And when she spoke sweetly to him he heard the singer's 
voice, harsh and tremulous and full of fury. Then he shook with 



THE SLAVE 295 

joy in the faithfulness of his slave, and he thought that here, in 
Park Lane, with the English popinjays all round about him, he was 
a veritable Sultan. Savagery bubbled up in him and a contempt 
of these cold, pale people who knew him not, who had never 
understood him. He had come among them. He had bought 
their friendship and had twined them into the meshes of his 
golden nets. But they were not his people and they could never 
know his glory. 

Gary 11 was one of them. He knew that. But she was a being 
apart, like none other, one of those abnormal beings who rise up 
occasionally, who sometimes pass to the grave unnoticed, and some- 
times pass through lines of staring eyes and muttering lips. He 
thought of her as belonging to no nation and having no ancestry. 
What had Lady St. Ormyn to do with her, or what the little man 
who chirped about the city, and fluttered gaily above the ruin he 
had caused ? The geni longed to take her away. She was a slave. 
She ought to see a slave's land. 

At the end of the season he spoke of his desire, which 
grew ever upon him, his desire to see her among women of a 
different race and of far different traditions. She listened to his 
passionate description of the lands in which he had travelled, of 
the strange surroundings among which he had lived. But no 
fervour of interest flashed in her long eyes. Thoughts of wild 
scenery and of wilder people, of untamed, cruel men, and of sub- 
missive, burdened women, or of harem women, hidden, and lives of 
golden ease such thoughts did not stir her, or flush the whiteness 
of her face. 

"You do not care, Gary 11," said Sir Reuben. "You do not 
care to go." 

" Oh yes, Reuben," she said, smiling at him. " I should like 
to see such places, such people." 

But he saw that it was not so. He had contented her so much 
that no new, changed prospect moved her. For a moment he sat 
silent, feeling chilled and almost repelled. Then a light of 
mischief, of cunning, blazed up in his eyes. He leaned forward 
to her, as he had leaned at that dinner when he had told to her 
and to Aubrey his thoughts and his wandering fancies about jewels. 

" Would you not, Caryll," he said softly, " would you not like 
to see the lands where jewels come from ? Tavernier and Jaubert 
visited the home of the diamond. Why not you ? Do you care 
less for the children of India than did they ? " 

Her face changed. Instantly a look of eager interest stole into it. 

"Do you know," he continued, "that one of the most famous 
of the world's sapphires was found in Bengal by a poor wood- 
cutter, He did not love jewels as you do. Yet you are ever here. 



296 THE SLAVE 

in this cold England, where the jewels come, it is true, but where 
all the jewels are in exile. Did not he know something of jewels 
that you do not know ? Was he not nearer to them even than 
you that poor wood-cutter who found a gem that has been one 
of the glories of Europe ? And think of your emerald, your second 
self. Cailloud visited long ago the mountains of the emerald, near 
the Egyptian city of Asna. Will you not see Egypt ? Will you not 
see Peru, where once dwelt those priests who spoke to the people 
of the Goddess Esmeralda of you, Caryll, of you. For who can 
say if you are not, indeed, the Goddess Esmeralda come again 
strangely, mysteriously upon the earth ? Perhaps you have been 
reincarnated to be one with your great emerald, here, in my house 
with me." 

A strong excitement was awake in him. She had caught it 
now. This little man could fascinate her in moments like these. 
Her eyes shone as she thought of the far-off homes of jewels. 
He saw that he had lit the torch, and, holding her soft hands in 
his, he made her travel, travel with him on the wings of a storm 
of words. They went together far away that sultry summer night, 
while London revelled and slept, while the women slipped along the 
streets, gazing into the shadows with their hollow, hungry eyes, 
and the beggars crouched on the Embankment, and in the Parks 
the weary children having hidden among the trees as midnight 
passed lay upon the grass by the water and dreamed. They 
travelled and saw strange things. They stood with the old negress 
at Bogagem, in Brazil, and saw the round amazement in her 
bulging, velvet . eyes as she found the great diamond that Paris 
called, long after, "the Star of the South." They stood by the 
Afghan chief, and watched him give into the hands of Schafrass, 
the Armenian merchant, the marvellous jewel called "the Moon of 
the Mountains." And, in the market-place of Bassora, they looked 
upon the merchant returning with his trophy to his home in the 
night. In Upper Hungary, and in Arabia, they lingered to gaze 
upon the triangular reflections of the harlequin opal, and at 
Limapan they rejoiced, with Humboldt, in the discovery of the 
fire-red Mexican opal that glows with such a vehement and almost 
murderous glory. They heard the crying prayer of pearl fishers 
by Indian waters, and in Siberian solitudes the topaz smiled at 
them, as smiles the yellow jonquil in an English happy valley. In 
the Islands of Mount Caucasus they perceived the turquoise eyes 
protruding from the "inaccessible and cold banks," to stare upon 
a frigid world. And in Ortosia they wandered through the red 
crowds of the rubies. 

And that night Caryll said to her husband ere she fell asleep 
" Take me with you, Reuben. Take me over the world," 



THE SLAVE 297 

And he laughed, and held her fast in his small, withered arms, 
and answered 

" I will take you first to the land of the sunshine where once 
I lived with slaves. For are not you a slave, my Esmeralda ? " 

" How ? " she asked. 

" Slave to your jewels, if not to me ? " 

She felt his dry lips on hers as she fell asleep, and the last 
tiling she heard was her husband laughing softly beside her in the 
dark. 



CHAPTER XXVII 

WHEN the world fled from London in July, the Allabruths stayed 
on in Park Lane. Since the night of Sir Reuben's outburst, 
Caryll's perfect content had left her. She had become restless, 
desirous of a wider horizon. The heavy lattices that bounded her 
view when she was within doors now gave to her mind unquiet 
thoughts of prison. Sometimes Sir Reuben, coming in upon her 
unexpectedly, found her pacing softly to and fro. He smiled, 
and thought of a beautiful animal in its cage. She stopped when 
she saw him. 

"Why do you smile like that, Reuben?" she asked. 

He did not tell her that he was thinking how cleverly his words 
had caused her uneasiness. 

" The desire to wander has come to you at last," he said. 

" Yes, it has. When shall we go ? " 

" Where do you want to go ? " 

" You know, Reuben." 

She did not try to tell him. She trusted completely to his 
comprehension of her. 

" Yes," he answered, " I think I know. Caryll, we will stay 
on quietly here in the dead months of London. We will rest as 
people rest in the long heats of the East. We will rest, you and I, 
with our companions." 

She smiled now. 

"And," he continued, "I have affairs to arrange, things to 
wind up, people to see. In these dead months all can be set in 
order. Then, in the autumn, we will start for our tour to the 
homes of the jewels. It will be a strange pilgrimage, will it not? 
London will not know why we go, where we are going, what is our 
aim in setting forth. We will cherish our mystery." 

" Yes, yes." 

She was quiet now. She had sat down and was smiling almost 
dreamily. Her grey eyes, turned towards the latticed window, 
seemed to gaze on far-off things. 

" Rest, Caryll, rest a little while," he said. " For our pilgrimage 
will be long, and we shall visit many lands." 

As he spoke the last words some bitter thought seemed to 

298 



THE SLAVE 299 

strike him. A shade came over his face. He paused. Then he 
repeated defiantly 

"Yes many, many lands." 

One of the last things people heard, as they bade good-bye 
to the season, was that the Allabruths were going to make a 
tour of the world. They refused all country house invitations ; 
they would not even go to Lady St. Ormyn in Hampshire. She 
had taken a Grange, and was about to fill it with French com- 
posers, Italian singers, Russian authors, and English people who 
knew how to remain in an attitude of extravagant worship. She 
was horribly shocked to think of her daughter in London during 
the month of August. 

"You'll be obliged to dine with caretakers," she cried, "and 

spend your afternoons at the Cattle Show. I always say that 

What, Mr. Fraser? The promenade concerts ! Oh, but it's wicked 
to walk about and drink what do the lower classes drink ? 
Bottled something, isn't it? while Wagner is being played. 
Besides, everything is in brown holland in August, and brown 
Holland has such an awful effect on the mind. People who live 
much with brown holland always turn out badly. My great aunt, 
Lady Rimmington " 

She described various ancestral tragedies directly springing 
from the influence upon weak natures of that material which drapes 
dead seasons, and leads autumn into the echoing reception rooms 
of great cities. But she could not shake the decision of her 
daughter and her son-in-law. 

Lady Rangecliffe, and the three men in the hall, departed 
to Beechin Castle in Shropshire, Lord Rangecliffe's country place. 
Aubrey went up to Scotland to stay with friends. Monsieur 
and Madame Villet and Albert Sprigg hurried to Homburg in 
the wake of royal dukes. The deliberate heat of an excep- 
tional summer crawled upon London, sank down heavily upon 
the empty streets, leaned against the blind houses, brooded 
wearily over the great river, breathed, like a panting dragon, 
through the narrow alleys of the poor, filled each yellow day with 
a slumberous discontent, and each black night with a wakeful 
dreariness. 

Through the town men went with tired feet. Women sat by 
open windows watching the white children quarrel in their play, 
and thinking of sea-places, where the winds were salt and vivid, 
and the waves were whispering blue. Government nodded, like 
an old man in the twilight. Commerce dozed with its chin upon 
its breast. The flies buz/ed against the hot and shining window- 
panes, where usury looked out with heavy-lidded eyes. And 
religion, from the pulpit, yawned to its yawning devotees. And 



300 THE SLAVE 

the silence of Park Lane was almost as the silence of those ruined 
highways that the lion and leopard keep. 

The long line of empty houses stared gloomily on the almost 
empty Park, where a few carriages, filled with stiff, conversing 
servants, passed self-consciously in circular promenades. 

In the newspaper offices perspiring men in shirt sleeves wrote 
the columns on the "Annual Exodus/' and waded through the 
ungrammatical letters that the silly season brings. 

And behind the carved lattices of Allabruth House Sir Reuben 
and Lady Caryll enjoyed their long siesta before their flitting to 
the countries of her dream. 

For now she had lost the restlessness, and spent many hours 
alone, wrapped in reveries or reading diligently in books. These 
books were given to her by Sir Reuben. They were histories of 
jewels, accounts of those countries in whicli jewels are found, 
imaginative tales of the supposed virtues, vices, influences and 
constitutions of gems. One of these books was very old. Its 
dingy brown cover and tattered label at first repelled her hands ; 
but when she read it she was fascinated, and mused of a new 
science of healing. For it gave many instances of the curative 
properties of precious stones. 

One evening she talked much to her husband of this book and 
of the beliefs that had come to her from reading it. 

"If I were to choose a profession, Reuben," she said, "do you 
know what I would be ? " 

"What, Caryll ?" he asked. 

" I would be a jewel-doctor. I would heal my patients with 
my jewels. My medicines should be gems." 

And then she related to him many curious instances of people 
cured of horrible complaints by precious stones. She told him of 
the scholar who was brought to the door of death by loss of blood, 
and who was saved by the gift of a blood-stone the size of a 
pigeon's egg, which was brought to him by a woman who loved 
him, and which he wore about his neck. She described minutely 
the pitiful condition of a young girl who was fading in a fever, and 
must have died had not an old sage who lived in a tower placed 
some oriental rubies upon her burning breast, whereupon the fever 
left her and she arose and went about her occupations. She grew 
eloquent as she enlarged on the appalling dreams which haunted 
the sleep of a certain Persian prince rendering his existence terrible 
to him, till he grew fearful and tremulous and nervous as a female 
child, and wept when the dark night fell upon his palace, and 
called to his musicians to play, to his slaves to sing eternally to 
him, that he might not sleep and enter into torture. One day an 
old crone, begging for alms at the portal of the palace, heard of 



THE SLAVE 301 

the desperate condition of the prince. "Let him wear on his 
breast a spinel ruby," she croaked. And she turned and went 
upon her way. The prince obeyed her injunction, and hence- 
forth the dream-goblins departed from him and he suffered no 
more. 

Sir Reuben listened to such tales. They seemed to him as 
the tales of the thousand and one nights. He thought that their 
narration made Caryll seem still more like a lovely slave. And he 
leaned upon a divan, smoking his long pipe, sipping his Turkish 
coffee, and listening to the soft and eager voice that sang the long 
praises of all the precious stones. 

The nights were hot and still. A great August moon looked 
down on the city. Sir Reuben ordered the Arab servant to draw 
back the curtain from the door of the room in which they sat, in 
order that he might be able to hear the tinkle of the ftuntain in 
the hall ripple on with the voice of Caryll as she talked. One 
night, recurring again to the subject of the medicinal virtues of 
gems, she said to him 

" Reuben, I shall study this subject, and then if you are ever 
ill I will heal you with one of your own gifts to me." 

He lay on the cushions of the divan and said nothing. She 
looked closely, curiously at him. For the first time, and because 
of this pre-occupation of hers, she noticed that he had the 
peculiarly alive expression of a man in an unnatural condition of 
health. 

" Are you quite well, Reuben ? " she said. 

" Why do you #sk me ? " he answered from a cloud of smoke. 

She drew a little nearer to him, put out her hand and 
touched his. 

He trembled, and sat up on the divan. 

" Do you wish to find me ill, Caryll ? " he asked slowly. 

" No, no, Reuben." 

She talked of other things. But after that night he noticed 
that she began to observe him with new and attentive eyes, and 
that she read more deeply in her books than ever. 

The sultry days went by. Sir Reuben received a good many 
visitors. He was often closeted with city men. The news of his 
approaching departure on such long journeying had become 
generally known. It seemed that a vast number of persons 
wished to see him before he went. He never spoke of their 
visits to Caryll, and she had no sort of curiosity about them. 
Only those who brought with them jewels woke any attention 
in her. 

Sir Reuben's yacht, the Emerald, was fitting out at Southampton. 
They were to start in the laut week of September. 



302 THE SLAVE 

As the days went by Caryll noticed, with those new doctor's 
eyes of hers, that the peculiar expression of unnatural life increased 
in her husband's face. When he lay quite still in the evening 
after dinner, he appeared to be in movement. When he was 
silent it seemed as if he spoke. Although at this time he was 
generally one of the most motionless of men, Caryll found herself 
thinking of him steadily as one of the most restless. She came 
to believe that this strange vivid effect of movement where there 
was no, or so little, movement, must be produced by some very 
unusual condition of health. In former days she would not cer- 
tainly have noticed the matter at all. She noticed it now because 
it connected itself with the fancies created in her by her reading 
in jewel-books. Her mind went busily to work. But she said 
nothing to her husband of the subject that now began to engross 
her. 

She watched him, and he knew it, as he knew everything she 
did, everything almost that she thought. And this new personal 
watchfulness in her was disagreeable to him. It altered her, and 
he had no desire to find her altered. 

" Never change," he said to her one day. 

And he resolved to shut his eyes to change in her if there 
were any. He told himself that he was becoming fanciful, that 
certain affairs of his, of which Caryll knew nothing, were pro- 
ducing deceptive impressions upon his mind. 

Then he fell again into the fury of living that sometimes 
attacks the old. He pretended that this seclusion in the great, 
silent, brilliant .house, and in the dead season of the great town, 
was the seclusion of a honeymoon. Caryll was young, as a bride 
should be. He recalled the saying that no man need ever be 
old if he does not choose to be so. And he sought to play the 
youth. Caryll observed that, from this date, the peculiarity of 
aspect, noticed by her, markedly increased on him. 

She thought of herself in a new relation with jewels. Mentally 
she began to regard herself in a novel light. When she was 
sitting alone her mind was filled with thoughts of the way of a 
jewel-doctor's life. 

So the August days all slipped away, and went with the August 
moon. 

September came, bringing the altering hints of autumn that 
always seem to come with it into the London ways. 

Sir Reuben talked more and more of their travels as the time 
of departure drew near. He spoke with the eagerness of a man 
longing for emancipation. Already the sound of the sea was in 
his ears, the flash of the tropical sun was in his eyes. 

" I hate London/' he said one day. 



THE SLAVE 303 

As he said the words a look almost of horror came into his 
face. Caryll was sitting in an arm-chair, reading a jewel-book, a 
treatise on the supposed virtues of the emerald and the beliefs 
cherished by the ancients about this stone. She looked up. 
They were in the green boudoir, where Aubrey had first seen 
her after her marriage. 
" Why ? " she asked. 

Her husband opened his lips as if to speak, but he said 
nothing. It was quite evident that he had checked himself 
abruptly on the edge of some quick remark. Seeing Caryll's 
eyes fixed upon him, he considered for a moment, and then 
said 

" I am tired of it. That is all. My temperament inclines 
me to wandering." 

" Are you always restless ? " she asked rather quickly. 
"Why ? Have you thought me so ? " 
" Sometimes lately," she answered. 

" It is the knowledge that we are going to start on a journey so 
soon," he said. 

Caryll returned to her reading. After she had read a page 
or two, she heard her husband say 

" Do you fancy that I am in any way abnormal, Caryll ? " 
His voice sounded suspicious. She put down her book. 
" Abnormal ? " she said. " How ? " 
"That is for you to say." 

" I don't think you so," she answered, wishing to please him. 
"You are certain the thought has never come to you lately?" 
She shook her head smiling. But now she felt that he, too, 
had secretly recognised that some curious process was going on 
within him. Was it physical, or mental, or both ? 

"I think you have seemed well -" she paused to consider. 
What did she think exactly ? " Unusually young lately," she con- 
cluded. 

He looked pleased. 

" Is that all ? Yes, I feel young. You keep me young. Since 
I have married you I have dropped a weight of years." 

All that evening he was gay. He talked much, mischievously 
and imaginatively by turns. But when Caryll was next alone she 
sought among her books until she found one which dealt with 
"The strangeness of that which is familiar." This was a curious 
and rather wandering work, written by the editor of a certain 
paper much read by occultists. It dealt with the mysterious 
qualities possessed by many things with which mankind is well 
acquainted. One of the chapters was devoted to a discussion of 
the strangeness of jewels, and to their power, fantastically affirmed 



304 THE SLAVE 

by the author, of giving information to those who understand them. 
Certain persons he stated that he was among their number can, 
by merely holding a jewel in their hands, receive mysteriously 
from it the knowledge of whence it came, of the people to whom 
it belonged in the past, of the circumstances and surroundings 
among which it had been preserved. And, he went on to say, 
this communication is a deliberate act on the part of the jewel, 
which can at will either impart or withhold such information. A 
jewel then possesses life ? The author declared his absolute con- 
viction that life exists far more generally than most men suppose, 
arid that a certain amount of life different from our own, and 
misunderstood by us as present in things generally pronounced 
lifeless. 

He brought forth a number of facts to support his contention, 
but acknowledged that this unernphatic, and intensely reserved or 
modest life is so mysterious, and often so faint, that it seems im- 
possible at present to discover clearly much about it. He con- 
cluded his chapter by a reference to the life in a human being 
which, so unreserved and so blatant in comparison with the life in 
a jewel, or in the materials of a house (in this connection he had 
dealt already with so-called haunted houses), is nevertheless so 
misunderstood, so often unheeded when it is trying to tell the 
most important truths. 

The following paragraph struck Gary 11 very forcibly. Indeed, 
her vague memory of it had prompted her to get down the book 
from its shelf and to search again through its pages. 

"The Spirit of Life is continually speaking to us, and we 
decline to hear it. In jewels it exists and speaks ; in trees, in 
flowers, and in plants. Sometimes our indifference to its voice 
angers or distresses it. This is often the case when it speaks in a 
human body. Never more anxious is the Spirit of Life to convey 
to us a message than during the period which immediately pre- 
cedes that moment in which it is obliged to go elsewhere. It 
rises up then like a departing visitor, holds out its hand to us, and 
says ' Farewell ! ' How often do we decline the hand and fail to 
hear the adieu ! How often afterwards do we complain that the 
abrupt departure of the Spirit of Life has taken us by surprise or 
has stricken us to the earth with grief and terror ! So-called 
sudden deaths generally startle and amaze us. They do so because 
most of us have never learnt to be truly observant. I am con- 
vinced that the Spirit of Life seldom or never departs from a body 
without previously giving definite signs of its intention to do so. 
One of the most common of these signs is any very unusual or 
seemingly unnatural symptom of brightness, fierceness, flaming 
vigour, or intense restlessness manifested by man or woman." 



THE SLAVE 305 

The author then proceeded to give instances of persons who 
had displayed such unnatural vigour and restlessness immediately 
before their so-called deaths, and when they were apparently in 
perfect health. Afterwards he sought to show that certain jewels 
sometimes foretell the death of their wearers. He claimed this 
quality more especially for the sapphire, which, since it can protect 
against death as the ancients believed can also indicate when 
its power of protection is being drawn from it. Then, he said, 
it becomes dull in appearance, clouded and almost black, as if 
perturbed by its own uselessness and weakness. 

When she had reached this passage Caryll laid down the book 
and sat absorbed in thought. 

That evening, at dinner with her husband, she wore a wonder- 
ful sapphire ring which he had given to her in the early days of 
their married life. 

Sir Reuben did not talk very much during dinner. But it 
seemed to Caryll that the silent vivacity of his appearance, the 
extraordinary atmosphere of energy that seemed to emanate 
mysteriously from his inactive body, had decidedly increased. 
She thought of the book she had been reading and looked 
at the sapphire, turning it gently round on her finger. She 
wanted her husband to wear it. She wanted to watch it while 
he wore it. 

A profound curiosity was awake in her. It was not touched 
by or mingled with fear. It stood quite alone in its intensity. 

She wanted to prove to herself what ? That there exists in 
certain jewels the curious life, even the knowledge of coming 
events, affirmed by the author of the book she had been reading ? 

Perhaps she scarcely told herself at first what she desired. 
She looked at the great sapphire jewel of Roman cardinals in 
modern days, jewel sacred to Apollo in days of old, jewel that 
had murdered asps and pacified enemies, that had given liberty 
to slaves, and delivered the sad victims of enchantments. The 
gem was marvellously clear and Hawless, neither absolutely blue nor 
absolutely purple, but full of a mingled beauty of two wedded 
colours. Translucent and serene it looked as if it would be soft 
to the touch like velvet. Caryll gazed at it with a passionate 
interest. Then she glanced up at her husband. 

He was leaning back in his chair, in which he sat very low. 
In one hand he held a glass of wine, which he was in the act of 
raising to his lips. Often his hand trembled slightly when it held 
anything. To-night it was steady as a rock. He sipped the wine 
slowly. Then he put down the glass and said 

"I bought yon a present to-day, Caryll." 

'' What ? A jewel ? " she asked quickly. 



306 THE SLAVE 

"No, a travelling-case to hold your jewels. I knew you would 
want to take them, or many of them, on the yacht." 

She thanked him. 

" I will show it to you after dinner/' he said. " It is marvel- 
lously arranged, and full of ingenuities." 

When he had smoked a cigarette and drunk his coffee, he told 
the Arab servant to bring down the case into the smoking-room 
where he and Caryll were sitting. He unlocked it, and showed 
her all its multitudinous drawers and recesses, its little doors, its 
nests for necklaces, and tiny wells for rings. She examined it 
with some eagerness, but with less than he had anticipated. The 
case was so contrived as to hold an enormous quantity of jewels 
and yet to be comparatively small. Some conversation took place 
between Caryll and Sir Reuben as to the amount it would contain 
when it was full. Suddenly an idea struck Sir Reuben. 

"Let us pack the case with jewels," he said, "and then it will 
be ready for our journey." 

" For our journey," she answered. " Yes." 

Her manner was certainly preoccupied to-night. He wondered 
why, and the desire came to him to stir her to a shining excite- 
ment. He therefore determined to proceed at once to the jewel 
packing. For he felt certain that the sight, the touch of her 
gems would wake Caryll from the cloudy di*eams that seemed so 
strangely to beset her. He went upstairs himself to bring down 
her jewels. All the time he was out of the room she sat looking 
at the sapphire on her finger, drinking, with her eyes, its exquisite 
clear purplish .blue. Could so radiant a jewel ever look misty 
black ? That seemed impossible. Sir Reuben returned. The 
Arab servant took away the coffee. 

The travelling-case stood open on a divan. 

"Now, Caryll, come and help me to take your jewels out of 
their cases," Sir Reuben said. 

He had put them down all about the room, upon the long 
divans. Now he went to the wall near the door and turned 011 
all the electric light. Caryll got up. She opened two or three of 
the cases. The jewels they contained flashed in the light, flashed 
red, white, pink, yellow, green, purple fire. Sir Reuben opened 
the other cases. The huge engraved emerald shone from its 
snowy velvet bd. The big, smooth, milky-white pearl that Sir 
Reuben had bought from the Indian for five thousand pounds 
gleamed gently in the midst of the fiery or more showy jewels 
that surrounded it, the strings of rubies, the diamond chains, the 
quivering sprays of sapphires and amethysts, the ornaments thickly 
set with turquoises, with emeralds, with harlequin opals, with 
beryls, and with vivid blood-red garnets. The chamber shone 



THE SLAVE 307 

with varied and distinct brightnesses, with silky brightness, with 
pearly brightness, with brightness adamantine, resinous or vitreous. 

Caryll stood looking at the coloured sparks that flashed at her 
from all sides. 

" I love to see you standing in the midst of your jewels, 
Caryll," her husband said. " Now we are together in the Cave 
of Aladdin." 

To-night he was full of changes. He became quite gay, almost 
childish now, and took her hand. 

" Yes," he said, " this is indeed the Cave. No one can come 
into it but we two, but you and your Geni, who obeys all your 
behests." 

" If you are the Geni of the Cave, Reuben," she cried, ap- 
parently falling into his mood, " if you are the geni of the jewels, 
you should be covered with jewels. They should cling about you 
as if they loved you." 

She burst into soft laughter. 

" Let me make you like a geni," she exclaimed. 

She seemed to be full of a gay excitement. Sir Reuben was 
not loth to submit to her pretty desire. All this was like a game 
in a harem and London lay around, hot and black, and wearily 
drowsing. 

"Do you want to dress me in jewels?" he said. "Would you 
make me like an Eastern potentate ? " 

" Yes, yes. Are you not Eastern ? " 

" I feel so to-night. And you you are surely a beautiful Cir- 
cassian, with your gleaming skin and your bright eyes." 

He wanted to kiss her. She drew back hastily, and a momen- 
tary expression of dread, or of disgust, flitted across her face. 

" No, no," she cried, "not till you are really my geni." 

She looked at the sapphire on her finger and at her hus- 
band's hands. Then she went swiftly to the divan and began 
to lift the jewels from their cases. He watched her eagerly, 
thinking, almost like a boy, of the kiss which she had refused but 
which he would give her presently. She turned and came towards 
him. Her hands were full of jewels. 

" There is a diamond chain for the geni," she said, hanging one 
round his neck ; " emeralds for his fez " she fastened an emerald 
ornament into the front of the fez that he was wearing " rubies 
for his robe." 

Slowly, with a deliberation that was almost sensual, she covered 
all the front of his silk smoking coat with gems. She put no 
sapphires among them. But each jewel fastened upon him was 
a step on the road to her purpose. She journeyed quietly, with 
a deep joy in her anticipation of arrival, with a passion of interest 



308 THE SLAVE 

such as she had never felt before. Presently she turned him about 
under the lights. His brown face was smiling in the midst of 
the jewels. His brown hands touched, with an Oriental delicacy 
and gentleness, the precious stones that gleamed on his narrow 
chest. 

Caryll noticed that their vivid fire, instead of dulling the effect 
of his appearance, seemed, on the contrary, to increase the violence 
of the life in his face, the quickness of vitality that seemed to 
emanate from his whole person. She watched him furtively with 
wary eyes. 

"Now I am a Rajah," he said. "Do I wear my jewels well? 
Tell me, Esmeralda." 

Again he sought to touch her lips with his. She avoided him, 
with an agile indifference that sprang from her secret intention, 
unknown by him. 

"Wait, Reuben, wait!" she exclaimed. "You have no jewels 
on your hands." 

As she spoke, she slipped the sapphire ring from her third finger. 

" You must wear this," she said. 

"It will be too small," he replied. "I could not get it on." 

" Try try your little finger." 

He made a grimace at her, as, almost with roughness, she 
pressed the ring upon the little finger of his right hand. 

" How strong and determined you are, Caryll," he said. " Yes, 
it is on. But it is very tight. Now am I quite a geni ? Caryll, do 
you hear ? Am I quite a geni, I said ? " 

For she had not answered him or seemed to hear him. She had 
been looking intently at the sapphire on his hand. She glanced up 
hastily, impatiently. 

" Yes, Reuben. Now you are a geni. Let us sit down on the 
divan." 

She led him to it. He sat cross-legged, with a deliberate 
assumption of an Oriental attitude. He was still smiling. To-night 
all this folly amused him, because it was connected with her, and 
with the price he had paid for her. It had delighted him to be 
dressed in jewels by her soft hands. It delighted him now to squat, 
like some old Moor or Egyptian, upon the big cushions of the divan 
with all the jewels sparkling about him, while she sank down at his 
side. It chanced that the hand on which he wore the sapphire was 
hidden beneath one of the cushions. Caryll sought gently to remove 
this cushion. 

"Why do you do that?" he asked. 

" Are you comfortable ? " 

" Quite. I could sit like this for hours." 

His hand was still hidden. Caryll frowned. It was evident 



THE SLAVE 309 

that something displeased her. She moved uneasily on the divan. 
Sir Reuben began to talk about their approaching journey with the 
extravagance, the half fantastic, half serious eloquence that was 
natural to him. He poured forth a flood of words about the foreign 
lands they would visit, about the many aspects of the seas, the 
variations of weather they would encounter, about the differing 
races of men among which they would sojourn for a while. As he 
talked the vivacity of. his appearance increased. Caryll noticed 
that. Never had he seemed so curiously, so almost unnaturally 
young and vigorous. Could it be the brilliant effect of the jewels 
that made him look so brilliant ? Again and again, while he talked, 
she asked herself that question. His hand was still concealed 
beneath the silken cushion. 

She could not see the sapphire. 

This circumstance irritated her intensely, and preoccupied her 
so much that she scarcely knew what he was saying. When she 
did know, when she heai-d him elaborately describing the possi- 
bilities he faced them as certainties of their future, a curious 
sensation of pitiful doubt overwhelmed her. But her mind was 
really given not at all to him but to the hidden sapphire. Curiosity 
as to its condition crept upon her till the fact that it was invisible 
caused her physical pain, and she could have struck her husband 
for remaining always in one position while he talked. She inter- 
rupted him brusquely at last. 

" Reuben," she said. " How can you sit hunched up like that ? 
You ought to rest after dinner. Do lie down, and I will pile up 
the cushions behind you." 

He shook his head. 

" Why should I rest ? I am a geni ; I am no ordinary mortal. 
You are not romantic, Caryll. Your conception of a geni who has 
to lie down and repose after dinner does you no credit." 

And he went on talking about their travels. He was in Ceylon 
now. She set her teeth. It was only with great difficulty that 
she could refrain from tearing the cushion away from the hand it 
concealed. The marvellous colours of Ceylon all rushed together 
in a flash of glaring yellow before her eyes. For a moment she shut 
them. She lifted her hands to her ears, then hastily controlled 
herself and sat listening with apparent attention. From Ceylon 
Sir Reuben passed to India. His dissertation seemed as if it would 
be endless, and he was evidently under the impression that Caryll 
was enthralled by the prospect before her. Both his imagination 
and his memory were now fully awake. There was a glow in his 
words. There was an onward movement in his sentences. And 
Caryll, noting it, compared it with the repose of his body, and found 
the contrast intolerable. Suddenly an idea came to her, 



310 THE SLAVE 

" Reuben, you aren't smoking," she said. " I will get you a 
cigarette." 

" Thank you, Caryll," he answered. 

She got up from the divan. He sat watching her as she moved 
across the floor to a table on which lay a box of cigarettes. He let 
the lids droop over his eyes till she was misty, and looked like a 
vision in the distance of the big room. And, with half-shut eyes, 
he continued to regard her sensually, while she lifted the silver lid 
of the box, took out a cigarette and began to return, holding it 
lightly in her soft hand. She approached him. 

"Here it is, Reuben." 

For a moment he did not move, but sat gazing at her. He 
was enjoying his possession of her more keenly, more fiercely to- 
night than ever before. 

" Reuben ! " she said. 

And now her voice sounded irritable. He took his hand from 
under the cushion and held it out for the cigarette. She gave it 
to him, and was bending to gaze at the sapphire when he said, 
drawling the words with a kind of lazy passion 

"A light, my Esmeralda." 

Caryll started. She turned sharply, went again to the table 
and fetched the little silver cup in which, red hot, the fire glowed 
against the metal. Sir Reuben bowed himself forward like a 
Mandarin. He had put the cigarette between his lips and had 
once more hidden his hand against the cushion. The cigarette 
touched the cup and gleamed. Caryll could scarcely prevent her- 
self from crying out impatiently, or even furiously. She longed to 
dash the cup down upon the floor. Her face contracted and the 
brows lowered over her eyes, which were sickly, like the eyes of a 
malicious invalid. But just as she was on the edge of her self- 
control, her husband lifted his hand from the divan, took the 
cigarette from his lips and said 

" What is it, Caryll ? Why do you look vexed ? " 

Without answering she stared upon the sapphire. The ex- 
quisite clearness had gone from it with the intense glory of colour 
that had made it so rarely beautiful. A tiny cloud had surely 
floated upon it, and it had become almost black. She dropped the 
silver cup as she bent to gaze at it more closely. 
"Caryll, what on earth is the matter?" 

Sir Reuben moved with quick agility, and lifted the cup 
from the floor. She followed his hand with her eyes, completely 
fascinated. He put the cup down. 

" Is there anything on my hand ? Why do you stare at it like 
that ? What do you see ? " 

"A black sapphire/' she replied. 



THE SLAVE 311 

And she looked straight into his eyes as he stood opposite to 
her. He glanced at the ring. 

"What extraordinary fancies you have about your jewels !" he 
exclaimed. " This sapphire is not black. How could it be ? " 

"It is black," she reiterated. "Now you wear it." 

There was such a strange depth of meaning in her voice, that 
he was startled, as a man is startled by the apprehension of an im- 
pending tragedy. 

"Now I wear it ! " he said. " How could that affect it ? " 

Suddenly, and scarcely knowing why, he began to try to take 
the ring off. But, since it was really rather too small for his finger, 
this was difficult. The flesh had puffed up slightly along the 
golden band, and the effort to remove it was useless and caused 
him pain. The resistance offered to his instinctive desire showed 
him its absurdity. 

"What nonsense !" he exclaimed. "Why should I take it off? 
But it is too small, as I said, and will be difficult to remove." 

" Yes," she replied. 

She was looking at him with the most fervent attention. He 
thought that a passion of expectation gazed out of her eyes. It 
was so definite, so vivid that he felt as if she had expressed it 
plainly in words. And he answered it 

" What are you waiting for ? " he said uneasily. 

He glanced round and behind him. He stood and listened, 
though he could not have said for what he listened whether for a 
step in the hall, for the rustle of a curtain, or for the faint sound of 
a voice. She sent him some of her mind just then. She did not 
send him all ; for he was perplexed and confused, and knew not 
what he anticipated. An echo is ignorant, as a voice is not. He 
turned round to her again 

" Caryll, what is it ? " he said urgently. " Tell me what is it 
you are waiting for ? " 

Now there was a sound of fear in his voice. 

" It is for you to tell me," she said, almost in a whisper. 

" For me ? " he stammered. " For me ? " 

As he spoke the last word a sudden fury of life ran through his 
body. A sudden fury of thought flooded his brain. Light blazed 
before his eyes, and there came upon him an amazing sensation of 
being lifted up and swept on toward some tremendous experience. 
Caryll saw all this reflected in his appearance, which became 
totally unnatural in its abrupt and hideous energy. She saw him 
move forward upon her, and she thrust out her hands, mechanically, 
to keep him off'. When she did so, and before her hands touched 
him, all the life, that was like light, in him went out swiftly. MS 
when a lamp that stands at an open window is extinguished by a 



312 THE SLAVE 

gust of night air. He stood before her, all dark it seemed, as the 
aperture in which the lamp flame has died. He swayed, and fell 
down at her feet with his face hidden. 

She stood quite still, looking at the heap he made. Then a 
faint smile flickered over her face. 

" My sapphire told me the truth," she whispered. 
She was conscious of a thrill of pleasure. It passed ; but it 
was not at first succeeded by any actual terror. She knelt down 
on the carpet, turned her husband over slowly, carefully, and looked 
into his face. His eyes were wide open and gazed at her. There 
was expression in them. He was not dead. All the jewels sparkled 
upon him. Only the sapphire was clouded and dim. 

She thought of the curative properties of certain jewels. A 
new fervour of curiosity and of desire seized her. 

i ....... 

When, a few minutes later, the Arab servant entered the room, 
bringing the iced water that Sir Reuben always drank before going 
to bed, he found his master lying motionless upon the floor, with 
his head propped upon a cushion. 

Lady Caryll was reading diligently in a small book. Its cover 
was dingy brown. Its label, on which was written in old lettering 
its name, was tattered. 

The Arab bent down, looked closely at his master, then 
approached Lady Caryll and touched her arm softly. She started 
and glanced up. Then she made a sign to the Arab not to inter- 
rupt her. She pointed to Sir Reuben. 

"I will cure him/' she said. "I will cure him, D'oud. Have 
no fear." 

^j^The Arab made her get up and come with him to where Sir 
Reuben lay. 

The expression had gone out of his eyes. He was dead. 
Lady Caryll's book fell to the floor. 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

THE news of Sir Reuben's sudden death from paralysis greatly 
astonished those people who are always ready to be amazed by 
anything abrupt. But certain doctors and certain wise men of 
the world heard of it without wonder. And others City men 
believed that they had actually expected such a tragedy. The 
reason of their belief soon appeared. Sir Reuben had sunk to the 
grave in the midst of financial ruin. His frequent visitors from 
the City had been birds of ill-omen. All through the previous 
London season the hoarse voices of the whirlpool had been mutter- 
ing predictions of a reckoning day, while the jewel merchants 
came daily to the door of Allabruth House, and Lady Caryll went 
into the world wearing the gifts of those far countries that made 
Sir Reuben's latest dream. That dream was dead with the so 
desirous pilgrim. And the men of the City, knowing of liabilities 
that could not be met, of immense loans raised and promises of 
fantastic interest, of feverish gambling with stocks and shares, 
talked of old age as an inevitable period of mania, and of paralysis 
as its natural close. 

They thought of mental worry and shook their heads gravely. 
Certain doctors and men of the world thought of Lady Caryll. 
They shook their heads and smiled, as some will always smile 
at a mental vision of human nature bearing its burden to the 
abyss. 

One class saw Sir Reuben dead in the arms of despair, the 
other saw him dead in the arms of pleasure. 

His creditors merely saw him dead, and clamoured for their 
dues. The exact story of his ruin is not worth the telling. As his 
original success sprang from the fierceness of his nature, so did his 
eventual failure rise from the same source. The death of the 
Creole marked the dividing of the ways. Till her death he had 
won because he could believe in the worth of Life's gifts to men. 
After her death he lost because he could believe no more. His 
relation with Caryll was but an episode occurring at the mouth 
of the black valley. It could not stem the wild tide of his im- 
prudence, because it could not make him believe rightly again. 
But after she came into his life he had one more reason for living. 



314 THE SLAVE 

And so he lived, and his vitality was like the artificial glory that 
pigments give to fading cheeks. At last Death grew weary of 
waiting for him, came upon him, showed him for one moment, 
dark, the pigments gone, to the woman by whom he had paused 
near the valley, then took him with no more ceremony than the 
butcher shows 'to the chased sheep pinned at last in a corner of 
its field. 

How his death, if it had been succeeded by a normal period of 
peace, would have affected Caryll can never be known. Would 
she have grieved ? Would she have shuddered under the shock ? 
Would she have been grave and prayed have been contumacious 
and blasphemed ? Ruin would not grant her any moment to play 
the ordinary widow according to her nature. Ruin fell upon her at 
once ; with ruin tumult. 

The Emerald, fitting out at Southampton, was become a sort 
of emblem of the dead man's recklessness. His last project was 
talked of as the mental exploit of one who was willing to cheat, 
or who was really astray in the mazes of a dream, drugged by old 
age and wandering blindly. The other emerald became Caryll's 
rock, the one thing left for her to cling to now that the great sea 
came upon her. For the engraved emerald was the only thing Sir 
Reuben had settled upon his wife. 

And that settlement, too, had been one of his fantasies. The 
jewel was worth a fortune. In the dark garden at Epsom it had 
played its part in the comedy of life. Sir Reuben always thought 
of it as of some live and cynically smiling thing, standing alone. 
So he left it alone to her whom he had called a slave. 

Was it not worth a fortune ? 

After his death, then, all his property was seized ; the great 
house, the yacht, and all the other jewels. The horror of ruin is 
always great. It moves humanity. The horror of this ruin was 
peculiar, for it showed a woman struggling at first, vainly, against 
the approach of an infernal solitude. When Caryll was told, by 
lawyers, something of the truth of her situation, she did not appear 
surprised or appalled. They spoke to her of money losses, of the 
necessity of giving up a great house, of removal, of an altered way 
of life. They spoke sympathetically. She heard them calmly. In 
solicitor's offices she was talked of as a plucky woman. Later, in 
those offices, she was talked of differently, almost nervously, as men 
speak of ugly and mysterious things. For only when she knew 
that she no longer possessed any jewels, except the great emerald, 
did she allow herself to be partially understood. There was a 
moment then in which her legal advisers feared her, a moment 
that they could not easily forget. There is a white wrath that 
comes upon a human being as a white squall comes upon the sea, 



THE SLAVE 315 

Its pallor is more horrible than any darkness, the livid hue of 
destruction that makes men think of hell as white. 

Aubrey was not near Caryll when she learnt her fate. He 
came afterwards, in the wake of Lady St. Ormyn chattering like a 
distressed pie, of Lord St. Ormyn always at home in ruin, of 
others who joined in the loud chorus of condolence. Caring so 
much more for her than others, he had not dared to thrust him- 
self sooner into the sorrow he wondered about and attempted 
to realise. His own most deep and exact sensation lie had not 
tried to analyse. That all the world seemed suddenly changed, 
he knew; in what manner changed he did not know. Confusion 
was in his life. His heart seemed all littered with strange odds 
and ends of feeling, of fear and something else. He did not know 
that it was hope. 

The white squall passed upon the sea. He never saw it. He 
had written to Caryll that he would come when she wished it, when 
she sent for him. He received no summons till several weeks had 
passed. Then a note came from her. It was very brief, and was 
addressed from a hotel in a fashionable part of London. It named 
an hour as kept free for him on the following day. At that hour 
he followed a servant from the lift to the door of Lady Caryll's 
sitting-room. She was there when he came in, sitting by a 
window and gazing out to the open space before the hotel, in 
which stood a number of cabs. It was one of those slippery wet 
days of late autumn, when London glistens and yet looks ineffably 
dreary. The rain, very small and persistent, had not ceased since 
the grey morning. It was a patient rain, discreet but untiring, 
desirous apparently of remaining unnoticed and yet of producing an 
enormous effect upon the great city that was its victim. Those 
who were taken in by it and went without umbrellas, walked in 
the way of pneumonia. In the open space the cabmen, who had 
not taken refuge in their shelter, looked like mournful bundles as 
they sat hunched upon the perches of their hansoms. The horses 
were decorated with dark streaks, and held their heads down, as 
if examining the wet surface of the wooden pavement on which 
they were presently to slip and stagger. In the distance Caryll 
could see a policeman directing a very wet old lady from the 
country in the way that leadeth to Gunter's. As she gazed from 
the shiny hats of the cabmen to the shiny tops of the cabs, thence 
to the shiny pavement and to the shiny roofs of the houses 
opposite, she thought of the pilgrimage that would never be taken, 
and saw the white sails of the Emerald set in a warm wind 
that journeyed between the clasping blues of sea and sky. The 
servant spoke at the door. She turned and saw Aubrey standing 
among the chairs that seemed to murmur together of the shop 



316 THE SLAVE 

from which they came. As she looked at him, while the servant 
shut the door, she saw an expression of almost shrill surprise slip 
across his face. She did not care. She came from the window 
slowly, as if her black gown weighed upon her, gave her hand to 
Aubrey, and asked him to sit down. He glanced at her furtively 
now that they were close together. The surprise that had left his 
face stayed in his heart. For to him she seemed so altered that, 
for a moment, he felt as if he were sitting with a stranger. She 
did not look older. She did not look actively unhappy. The 
exact impression he had of her first was that she was entirely 
dulled, like a window-pane just breathed upon. Of her eyes he 
must have said had he spoken absolute truth that they were 
persistently obstinate. Her lips were obstinate, too. Perhaps 
they had aged. Her whole person suggested resistance, a species 
of congealed activity force held fast by ice, ineffable possibilities 
of outbreak partially smothered. Behind the dulness there was 
surely danger. When the mist faded from the pane there would 
be a blood-red gleam on it as of fire. There would be no drop- 
pings as of tears. He remembered that nothing can seem harder 
than hidden sorrow. When grief conceals itself, does it not lurk 
behind an iron door ? 

They spoke of one or two indifferent matters. The timbre of 
her voice was dull. 

" Are you staying here long ? " he asked presently. 

"No. It is too expensive." 

He started. She smiled. 

"The charges here are horrible," she said. "And I am a 
pauper, as you know." 

" But where will you go ? " he asked. 

"I have taken a small flat near Baker Street Station." 

" Baker Street ! " he repeated. 

The idea of Caryll living in the named quarter seemed to him 
as ridiculous as the notion of a charwoman retiring from her peri- 
patetic labours about other people's homes to spend the evening 
of her days in a palace on the Bosphorus. 

"You are going to live there ?" 

" Yes." 

" Alone ? " 

" Naturally. With whom should I live ? " 

He could suggest nobody, but he knew that such a solitude 
presented itself to him as the most inconceivable of events. 

" I cannot imagine " he began. 

"What?" she asked, as he paused. 

"I cannot think that you will be able to endure such a life." 

" Why ? " 



THE SLAVE 317 

" Because you have never been accustomed to it. You don't 
know what it is like." 

"What would you advise me to do?" 

He looked up at her. He was thinking of the emerald which 
she still possessed, and which must be worth an enormous sum of 
money. 

" I have only a small allowance from my father," she said. 
"Some day, as you probably know, I shall inherit a fortune from 
Lord Verrender, my father's uncle. But he is neither very old 
nor very weak. I may die before he does die in the neighbour- 
hood of Baker Street. Why not ? " 

Aubrey had little to say. He was comparing her poverty with 
such a poverty as prevailed in Milk Court. The former seemed 
entirely horrible and hopeless, the latter, by comparison, quite 
natural, sanguine, and humane. From the former he revolted 
absolutely. 

" I am sure," he said, " that you will find such an existence 
quite intolerable." 

" I hope not. I have taken a basement flat. I get six rooms, 
two servants' rooms, and a kitchen for ninety-six pounds a year. 
It is marvellously cheap, and there is far more light in the 
rooms than you could expect. I only signed the agreement this 
afternoon." 

" For how long ? " 

"Three years." 

There was no self-pity in her voice. Aubrey found himself 
astonished by the strength of character she was showing. Yet he 
had always known that she was strong. 

" You did not think of going of staying for a time with Lady 
St. Ormyn ? " he said tentatively. 

He was longing to protect her from what seemed her own 
cruelty. 

'' My mother? Oh no ! " she said. 

An expression of irritation had come into her face. 

" My mother does not understand me at all," she added. " We 
could never get on together." 

As she spoke, the door of the room was opened and the servant 
announced Lady St. Ormyn. The expression of irritation deepened 
on Lady Caryll's face as her mother hurried in. 

Lady St. Ormyn was one of those women who never look more 
worldly than when they are dressed in mourning. Black seems 
to emphasise their chattering impiety. Crape throws their dis- 
organised vivacity into high relief. They walk in weeds as a circus 
horse might walk harnessed to a bier, and ostentatiously piebald 
in the midst of its sombre trappings. 



318 THE SLAVE 

As Caryll submitted to her mother's pecking kiss, Aubrey 
thought he saw grief as it appears at the Music Halls, a sniff, 
a grimace, and a pair of black thread gloves, too long in the 
fingers. 

"Ah, Mr. Herrick," cried Lady St. Ormyn, "you here! I'm 
so thankful. Now I shall have an ally. You are such a friend of 
Caryll's, and so full of common-sense, that I always say of men 
that they spend half their time in trying to hide their common- 
sense, for fear of being thought old-fashioned. But there are 
moments. Caryll, I've got great news for you." 

She had sat down on one of the hotel settees. Lady Caryll 
listened with apparent indifference, but two hard lines showed 
themselves on each side of her under lip. 

" Prince Mirzoroff called on your father again to-day, and it 
will all be arranged quite charmingly and without any publicity. 
No going to the dealer's, or anything of that kind. Publicity is 
so horrible in grief isn't it, Mr. Herrick ? Grief should be sacred ; 
but nothing's sacred in London, not even one's most holy emotions. 
I remember when I burst into tears once at the opera Tristan's 
death, you know, when he tears open his wounds to that marvellous 
accompaniment it got into all the evening papers. So cruel ! 
' A Countess cries/ they headed it. But one has to endure these 
things. Well, Caryll, the Prince will give whatever you choose to 
ask. It's so lucky. He wants it for the little Biondetti girl who 
made such a sensation at the Roman races last spring. It seems 
she saw you wearing it once at Prince's, and what's the matter ? 
Are you ill ? What is it ? " 

Caryll's face was full of a cold indignation. 

"I am not ill, mother," she answered. "What are you talking 
about ? I don't understand." 

"The emerald, of course. Your father will have it properly 
valued by Hitching, and then you will have enough to live upon 
in a quiet way. How much does thirty thousand pounds bring in 
a year, Mr. Herrick? You've been in the City, so you're sure to 
know. You mustn't let your father invest it, Caryll, because if 
you do, you'll never " 

"There will be nothing to invest." 

" Nothing to but the Prince " 

" Prince Mirzoroff will never possess my emerald." 

"What? You've found somebody else? Really, Caryll, you 
might have spared me all this trouble. I've had the Prince to 
lunch twice. And he's the most you know the kind of man, Mr. 
Herrick ! He's been everywhere in the world, and can only talk 
about young women who dance. Nothing exists for him except 
dancing girls with over-developed muscles. He never heard of 



THE SLATE 319 

Wagner, although he's spent months in Germany. Whom have you 
found, Caryll ? Not that dreadful old African who " 

" I haven't found anybody." 

"Then the Prince " 

" I am not going to sell the emerald, mother." 

" But you must ! " 

Lady St. Ormyn grew rather shrill. 

" You must. If you don't, you'll starve. Mr. Herrick, wasn't 
it shocking, poor Sir Reuben throwing away his money in the way 
he " 

" We won't discuss it, mother." 

Aubrey got up to go. He felt that the atmosphere, though 
undoubtedly domestic, was becoming tragic. Caryll spoke quite 
calmly. But he divined an amazing depth of feeling behind her 
stillness. He remembered that the emerald was the only souvenir 
of her husband that she now possessed, and thought he understood 
her passion. He longed to still Lady St. Ormyn's clamour, to 
open her blind eyes to the refinement of a sorrow that was deeper, 
perhaps, than any she could understand. But he felt that he 
ought to go. He held out his hand to Caryll, but she said 
quickly 

" Please stay, Mr. Herrick." 

She had looked into his face and had, perhaps, seen his thought. 
Lady St. Ormyn was rapidly becoming excited. Her forehead 
reddened in its frame of powdered hair. 

" Caryll," she cried, " you are a pauper, and you must " 

" Live like a pauper ! I am going to do so, mother. But I am 
not going to sell my husband's first gift to me. ' 

She had caught Aubrey's thought. He believed he had caught 
hers. Lady St. Ormyn tried to interrupt her daughter, but Lady 
Caryll continued 

" I shall live quietly and I shall need very little money." 

" Live quietly ! " cried Lady St. Ormyn, with as much amaze- 
ment as if her daughter had said that she was going to live in a 
balloon. " What do you mean, Caryll ? Where are you going ? 
To Boulogne ? To Dieppe ? To one of those places where one 
sees nothing but bankrupts listening to brass bands ! " 

" I have taken a little flat near Baker Street." 

" Baker Street ! " exclaimed her mother. " The place where 
the waxworks live, and there's an underground railway ! " 

For a moment she seemed benumbed. Then she turned to 
Aubrey and said 

" Did you ever hear of a more horrible notion, Mr. Herrick ? 
Am I not justified in asserting my authority? If Caryll had been 
born a Tussaud " 



320 THE SLAVE 

" Baker Street is a perfectly respectable neighbourhood, I 
believe/' Aubrey said. 

He could scarcely help smiling, and Caryll's face had become 
less grim. 

"It may be respectable, but it really doesn't matter in the 
least what it is, because nobody lives there. No, Caryl], that's 
impossible. If you were a dentist's widow, or something absurd 
of that kind, it would be different. But as it is " 

" My dear mother, don't let us argue. Please tell the Prince 
that the emerald is not for sale." 

" I can't. He will be furious. It seems that the little Bion- 
detti is determined to 

"A woman of that kind shall never possess my emerald/' said 
Caryll. 

Her calm, her obstinate self-possession suddenly deserted her, 
and she spoke with a fierce intensity that startled, even alarmed, 
her mother. Lady St. Ormyn sat for a moment staring at her 
daughter in silence. Then she tried to recover herself. 

"Nowadays," she began, "all the finest jewels are in the hands 
of members of that class. Everybody knows it. Why " 

" I don't discuss such people," said Caryll. " And my emerald 
is not for sale." 

As Lady St. Ormyn left she said to Aubrey, who put her into 
the lift 

'' I'm really afraid the shock of poor Sir Reuben's sudden death 
has you know, Mr. Herrick ! Caryll in a Baker Street flat with 
that emerald ! It's mania. Why, one might as well settle down 
at Southend or one of those places where trippers eat shrimps 
and fall off donkeys with the Crown jewels ! one really might. 
Do use your influence. I always say that men 

The lift sank with her, carrying her conversation to the ground 
floor. 

Aubrey returned to Lady Caryll. She looked at him with an 
unusual kindness and gentleness which made his heart beat fast. 

"You understand me," she said. "This afternoon I feel 
that." 

" Yes," he said. " To-day I think perhaps I do. But " 

He paused. He was thinking of the many days when he had 
wondered about her, had almost feared her. 

" But what ? '' she said. 

" I was thinking that possibly I have often misunderstood you," 
he answered. 

"Misjudged me too, perhaps," she said. 

Never, since her marriage, had she spoken to him with quite 
so much intention. As Aubrey listened he felt, for the first time, 






THE SLAVE 321 

that Sir Reuben's absence would be eternal, that he was speaking 
to a woman who had no husband. 

" I daresay I have/' he said, almost shyly. 

And he thought of the episode of Alf s death, and resolved to 
forget it. 

"You are very difficult to read," he continued. "And I dare- 
say I am very stupid and blundering. Perhaps I shall blunder 
less from to-day though. I will try to be clever." 

" He was clever," she answered slowly. " Clever even in the 
way he died." 

As she said the last words she looked straight into Aubrey's 
eyes. 

Suddenly there came upon him that same sensation of mystery 
and of oppression which had beset him long ago in the garden at 
Epsom. Caryll was apparently speaking to him. Yet her voice 
sounded like the voice of one who talks in loneliness, to develop 
thought, to trace the trail of surreptitious motive in a mind. 

When Aubrey was alone he asked himself what Caryll had 
meant. 

He did not know that a great sapphire was hidden in the 
darkness of the dead man's tomb. 



CHAPTER XXIX 

DESPITE the horror of Lady St. Ormyn, who spread on all sides 
voluble hints of the madness of her only child, despite the reproach- 
ful and pathetic appeals of Lord St. Ormyn, who had naturally 
intended to pocket a nice little commission when the famous 
emerald changed hands, despite the tears of a lady's-maid, and the 
pale and spectral despair of a faithful but distracted footman, 
despite all these, and many other lets and hindrances, Lady Caryll 
took up her abode in the Baker Street quarter. Her flat was, as 
she had said, in the basement of a big building containing a whole 
alphabet of flats. Even the letter Z was annexed as an address 
by a stout lady, of uncertain age, but certain vigour, who followed 
some peremptory profession, wore a shirt front, cooked her own 
supper, and smoked a strong cigar afterwards with her spats boldly 
displayed on the mantlepiece of her "den." Lady Caryll's letter 
was A, and the milkman could look down from the pavement 
on to her drawing-room chairs and sofas. In fact, all the world 
could look down on her if it liked to do so. Her windows in the 
front of the building opened on a narrow area, above which the 
usual railings lifted their mournful spikes towards heaven. Her 
windows at the back opened on a most dreary court, a small stretch 
of unrelieved asphalte, bounded by brick walls pierced by the 
windows of other flats. 

Lest the unknown dwellers in the evidently prodigious base- 
ment should permit themselves the liberty of raking her humble 
abode, Lady Caryll dressed her back windows in those hanging 
strings of beads which let in light but exclude vision. All the 
windows were also fitted with shutters which were closed and barred 
at night. 

She furnished the flat very simply, and spent most of her time 
in a small room at the back, which rather resembled a library than 
the boudoir of a pretty woman. This room contained the only 
effects of Sir Reuben that Caryll had bought in at the sale of the 
contents of Allabruth House the collection of books about jewels. 
These were ranged in tall book-shelves round three sides of the 
room. Caryll often spent hours among them, reading steadily. 
When she read them she lived in'the past, or was able to dream in 

322 



THE SLAVE 323 

the present. For she learnt the art of losing herself, of wandering 
down long avenues of thought, until the life around her faded, and 
all its weariness grew pale and died. These books led her once 
more into the cave from which she had been driven forth, a sad 
new Eve expelled from a garden of jewels. She trod again among 
the flickering fires. She met again the burning eyes of all the 
silent things she loved. Sometimes she sat and listened for voices 
that were vague, or lay back as one who rests on a gleaming bank 
in some magical grotto. Sometimes, too, she seemed as one who 
seeks, who stretches out a hand for some familiar hand, who gazes 
down dim ways for the flitting shadow of a friend. Was she not 
then a pale and woeful Esmeralda, searching for the geni who had 
led her long ago to the desired place ? Did she not miss the small 
and shrunken figure that, like a kindly goblin, had once shuffled 
so solicitously at her side, gathering for her, with crooked brown 
hands, all the wonders she desired, all the charmed flowers that 
bloomed in this fiery under-world ? He was no longer there. He 
lay still. The black sapphire that told the truth watched over 
him for ever. No longer could he smile upon the rapture of his 
slave. 

Sometimes Caryll sighed, and laid down the book over which 
she had been dreaming, and stared before her in the little gloomy 
room. It seemed to her as if between floor and ceiling in the 
dusky twilight, hemmed in by the tall cases of the books, a faint 
shape hovered, a faint mouth smiled, bright eyes, old and mischie- 
vous, shone at her in a gleam of twinkling triumph, or again, in a 
gloom of tragic, cold despair. She listened, and fancied she could 
hear the distant murmur of a voice, that was husky and remote, 
telling her once more the strange histories of jewels, the histories 
of her jewels that were gone into other hands than hers. Then 
she felt that perhaps Sir Reuben, in his grave, knew of her loneli- 
liness, or could watch upon her deprivation, that he was angered 
at her present fate, that he stirred in the shroud of death and 
longed to come forth, like another Lazarus, to give her again the 
life for which she was surely meant, the beauty, the changefulness 
she loved. 

The rain dripped on the asphalte pavement of the dreary court. 
The winter evening closed in. Darkness came and the hovering 
shade vanished, melting towards the silent ranks of the books. 
Then Caryll rose from her chair, went to her bedroom, sought in a 
secret place a hidden friend. 

She passed long hours holding in her hand the great emerald. 
And when she held it she was happy. 

Did not Sir Reuben, perhaps, regard her from the place of his 
penance or of his joy ? And did not other eyes, too, dark and 



324 THE SLAVE 

mysterious, gaze on her from some distant region of the air, the 
eyes of that Eastern man who, long ago, graved on the emerald 
the story of the soul ? Had he not seen, through many years, 
faint shapes of women floating, as in ethereal dances, about the 
treasure that was, in a sense, his child ? Did he not see now a 
shadowy woman, fair and pale and solitary, quiet in the darkness 
with the wonder he had made ? And, thinking of the graven 
jewel and of this woman, could he not trace the path she was to 
tread, or perceive, far off, the vision of her eventual fate ? 

Lady Caryll presently began to go once more into the world. 
She was still a subject of much conversation, of much surmise in 
society. Even Baker Street had not power to deprive her per- 
sonality of all importance so long as she possessed such a jewel as 
the emerald. Indeed, there were many people who found her 
more interesting now than in the days of her unquestioned 
triumph. Her situation was so delightfully peculiar. It is not 
every day that one can meet an aristocratic pauper, who lives in a 
basement, and has for companion in her rather dingy solitude a 
jewel whose sale could give her not merely a life on the ground 
floor, but a life in every respect airy and complete. Lady St. 
Ormyn continued to hint at mania. Lord St. Ormyn was quite 
overcome by the necessity of paying any one even his only child 
a fixed allowance. But the world was fascinated by Lady 
Caryll's queer situation and strangely selfish self-denial. It be- 
came known that Prince Mirzoroff had made an enormous bid for 
the emerald, and that the little Biondetti woman had torn his hair, 
as well as her- own, in the fit of fury caused by Lady Caryll's 
refusal to give it into the greedy hands that were held out to 
take it. 

So society still talked of Lady Caryll's passion for gems. And 
the imaginative, the young, and the odd inhabitants of London still 
set her in a place apart from the other women of the world. 

When, after her time of mourning was over, she went once 
more to certain houses, men turned to look at her as she came in, 
plainly, inexpensively dressed and wearing her wonderful jewel. 
Women whispered about her and stared with envious eyes. She 
never passed unnoticed, or went away without leaving behind her 
a very definite and very unusual impression. Although she was 
less brilliant in appearance, less triumphant in manner, than when 
she had ruled at Allabruth House, she seemed neither discontented 
nor dismayed. There was change in her. Before Sir Reuben's 
death she had looked like a girl ignorant of failure or defeat. 
Now she looked like a woman aware of the cruel possibilities of 
life, a little hardened, a little contracted by knowledge. The 
dulled, the blurred expression once noticed by Aubrey the breath 



THE SLAVE 325 

upon the window-pane had almost gone. But something of her 
former sparkling vitality had gone with it. She was tarnished. 
She was not effaced. 

Lady Rangecliffe had been one of the first among the visitors 
to her basement, and one of the most sincerely sympathetic. It 
was impossible to Lady Rangecliffe to think ill of any one per- 
manently, impossible to her to think ill of any one in trouble. 
After Sir Reuben's death she forgot the afternoon on which she 
had first seen the emerald, she forgot the night in which the 
sickly smell of lilies had seemed so to offend the pity in her heart. 
She forgot even those red roses she had bought, and remembered 
only the death of her friend and helper, of Lady Caryll's husband. 
But, despite her short memory and long charity, it was not or- 
dained that she and Lady Caryll should get on together. Uneasi- 
ness prevailed between them, and a feeling of continual necessary 
effort that could not be overcome. Lady Rangecliffe was more 
aware of this than was Lady Caryll. Her humanity appreciated 
certain "facts more quickly, and though she never recoiled before 
any difficulty because it was cruel or surprising, she had a sense 
that told her what obstacles could not be overleaped. A woman 
always knows when another woman shuns the best that is in her. 
Lady Caryll shunned the reality of Aubrey's mother, even when 
that reality was quick sympathy for her. 

Lady Rangecliffe was obliged to know of her son's apparent 
success where she so entirely failed. Aubrey was Lady Caryll's 
most intimate visitor. Like so many of those who drift for a while 
in London, and are without a talent that marks their path in life, 
he had come at last to the threshold of the Stock Exchange. The 
roaring crowd took him, and his days were spent where money is 
set to hideous music. He no longer allowed himself to condemn 
the struggle in the street, or to sit down with his contempt for the 
aims of City lives. The necessity of work showed itself to him as 
worthy. He was able to fear more the tinted existence of the gay 
idler than the grey travail of labour, even the least congenial. 
Industry claimed him. It seemed that he might, in time, grow 
successful. His chance was good, and he developed perseverance. 
From what secret cause this perseverance sprang only one person 
knew. Lady Rangecliffe began to understand that Aubrey had 
once more an ambition. She thought of a conversation she had 
had with Sir Reuben in Eaton Square, and the rapid turuing of the 
wheel of life made her blink her short-sighted eyes. But she was 
resolute in inaction before the steadfast sameness of her son. 

Sometimes Aubrey called upon Lady Caryll late in the after- 
noon as he was returning from the City to Jermyn Street, where 
he was once again living. Sometimes he sat with her in the little 



326 THE SLAVE 

room whose windows looked upon the dreary court. One day, 
when he was waiting for her, he pushed aside one of the hanging 
blinds, and glanced idly out across the asphalte, and up at the 
many windows opposite. He began to wonder about the innumer- 
able dwellers in the other flats, living their enclosed lives behind 
the mysterious lettered doors. There was something strangely 
disagreeable to him in the fact of Lady Caryll's dwelling in the 
midst of such a human beehive. The great house in Park Lane, 
with its curious atmosphere of mystery, and of secret, silent places, 
its latticed windows, its heavy-curtained doors, and falling fountain, 
had been an ideal shelter for her and all her shining jewels. But 
this home was sordid and offensively public. Remembering the 
sedulous care Sir Reuben had always taken to protect himself and 
Caryll from all sights and sounds of the busy London world with- 
out, Aubrey found himself realising what would be Sir Reuben's 
horror if he could know where Caryll's present life was spent. 
Looking from window to window, while his mind compared the 
present with the past, Aubrey saw here and there some sign from 
which he gathered vague ideas of the personalities and lives of the 
various owners of the flats. From one window, high up, a servant- 
girl leaned out, holding in her arms, bare to the elbow, a tiny 
child. She pointed to the sky along which clouds were slowly 
drifting. The child gazed up and began to cry. Instantly a 
second figure appeared. Aubrey saw a pretty, fair head, arms that 
snatched at the child to comfort it. He felt that married life, new 
and eager and solicitous, pulsed in the flat behind that window. 
Lower down he, saw a bit of an elderly man who was reading in a 
book, part of a tired face, a long beard, hands that held the book 
close to spectacled eyes. He thought of the student's life, remote 
and monotonous in the changeful London crowd. Presently his 
eyes, travelling along the ugly walls, sank down to the line of 
windows that, on a level with Lady Caryll's, looked close upon the 
asphalte of the court. Across an open window, almost exactly 
opposite, he saw the figure of a man pass, disappear, return, and 
pause motionless. He could not see clearly the man's face, but 
he felt as if its eyes were staring fixedly at Lady Caryll's windows. 
And he recollected afterwards the disagreeable sensation that came 
to him with the idea that she was overlooked, thought about, 
perhaps, by some stranger. He stood for three or four minutes 
watching the motionless figure. Then it abruptly disappeared. 
Aubrey was about to drop the blind when, at another window, on 
the left of the court and nearer, he saw a girl standing with her 
back to him. She had dark hair, and wore a straw hat with a 
black riband round it. There seemed to Aubrey something oddly 
familiar in her appearance or posture. As he was wondering why 



THE SLAVE 32? 

he found her friendly almost to his eyes, he heard Lady Caryll 
come in behind him. And he thought of the other flats and of 
their occupants no more. 

But that day, as he left the big building and stepped into the 
street, he came face to face with Diamond. She did not start on 
seeing him, but two small spots of red glowed suddenly in her pale 
cheeks, and, for a moment, she looked as if in doubt whether to 
recognise him or not. Then, as he took off his hat, she gave a 
little nod, and walked on without stopping to speak to him. 
Aubrey knew in a moment that she was the girl he had seen at 
the window of the flat on the left of Lady Caryll's. He was walk- 
ing just behind her. Now he considered what he should do. 

Diamond did not look back, as she had looked back long ago, 
on the night of their first meeting. She went on steadily, neither 
hurrying nor walking with an elaborate slowness. It seemed she 
had no sort of desire to have him for companion. But Aubrey 
felt that even his promise to Alf did not bind him to deliberate 
avoidance of her in such a close, unpremeditated encounter. He 
hastened his steps and caught her up. 

" Miss Diamond," he said, and he held out his hand. 

He saw that she hesitated to take it. But she did take it 
at last without a word. They had paused on the pavement, and 
looked at each other now with questioning eyes. Aubrey felt 
unpleasantly embarrassed, almost guilty. 

"I think I saw you just now," he began. "I was in one of 
those flats looking on to the court, in the basement, you know. 
Weren't you standing with your back to a window, talking to 
some one ? " 

" Yes," she said. " Quite well ? " 

"Quite. And you? I hope the children all your people 
are " 

" They're all nicely, thank you. Well " she began to move 

away. 

"Diamond," he said quickly, "this is absurd. I'm going your 
way. I shall walk with you. You will let me ? " 

" I can't see why ever you want to," she said in the old simple 
way he remembered so well. " We ain't friends, so what's the good ? " 

" Not friends ! " said Aubrey. 

He felt deeply hurt. 

" How can you say that ? " he continued. 

" Because it's true. I thought we was friends once. But I'm 
a silly and always thinkin' wrong." 

She was not looking at him now. She had cast clown her eyes, 
and, with the point of her umbrella, was making imaginary tracings 
on the pavement. 



328 THE SLAVE 

"Always thinkin' wrong," she repeated. "Except about " 

Her voice died away. 
" What ? " Aubrey asked. 

He did not know what to say, how to explain his long avoidance 
of her. 

" Mr. King/' she said. " I'm I'm goin' to get married to 
him !" 

" Married to Mr. King ! When ? " 

"Next week. We're goin' to live in that flat where you saw 
me to-day. He is good." 

A load seemed suddenly to fall from Aubrey's shoulders. Alf's 
prophecy was about to be fulfilled, and Aubrey felt that now, per- 
haps, he could tell at least part of the truth. As they walked 
slowly down an almost empty street, he said 

" I'm so glad. Do you know, Diamond, Alf wanted this ? " 

"Alf!" she said, and her voice was sad. "Ah! we do miss 
him. It's been awful. Lill has had a time with poor Vaux. 
Everything's different now everything. I'm glad I'm goin' to 
stop dancin'. Yes, I am. It's always the same now. When I 
see the lights and hear the music them drums especial I always 
see him fall. Poor Alf! He was fond of me." 

" I want to tell you how fond he was," Aubrey said quickly. 

" You tell me ? " said Diamond, in plain surprise. 

" Yes. Diamond, when Alf was dying, he spoke to me about 
you." 

" What about ? " 

''About you and Mr. King. He wanted you to marry, and he 
thought " 

Aubrey hesitated. He scarcely knew how to put the suspicions 
of Alf in any form that would not hurt Diamond's sensitive delicacy 
or make his own position intolerable. 

" Eh ? " said Diamond. 

"He thought that perhaps you and I saw each other too 
much." 

" Why, though ? Whatever for ? " 

There was genuine surprise in her voice. 

"Well, Diamond, perhaps Alf was right, even if he didn't 
know much about it. You and I often talked of well, of " 

" Bert, you mean ? " 

" And Alf wanted you to forget everything and marry a good 
man. Don't you see ? " 

" And he said it to you ? " 

She was looking at him now with her great eyes, which were 
always pathetic and full of a soi't of shadowy sentiment. 

"Yes, when he was in all that dreadful pain." 



THE SLAVE 329 

"It was awful that night," she murmured. "I shan't never 
forget it, never." 

" Diamond, Alf wanted me to go right away from you. He 
asked me to. He didn't want us to talk any more. That's why I've 
never seen you since since his funeral. He's dead, but he kept 
me away. D'you understand ? I promised not to come." 

All the time he spoke she looked at him steadily as a child. 
When he stopped, she said 

"I'm glad. Then you wasn't tired of seein' us?" 

"No. I wanted to come, but I could not." 

" It was funny of Alf," she said. " Because it didn't make a 
bit of difference you not cominY' 

" No ? " 

" Not a bit about my thinkin' of Bert, I mean. Of course I 
was sorry. I cried about it oncest. I cried awful." 

"Did you ?" said Aubrey humbly. 

" Yes. It was one night. I thought about Alf, and you and 
me that night in the Park, and the people under the trees, and 
the woman you know as was fightin' the man, and the other 
woman cryin', and no money and Bert, and all. Everything 
seemed in a muddle worse than washin'-day or rehearsal and 
dark, and callin' out, and strugglin'. I wanted to go that 
night." 

" Go ? " 

" After Alf, and be done with it. Oh, I did cry. The pillow 
was in a state nex' mornin'." 

" Poor Diamond," Aubrey said. 

He felt a deep sense of relief at her evidently complete ignor- 
ance of Alf s suspicion, her absolute unconsciousness that her heart 
had, perhaps, taken some little steps on one more wandering journey 
with sorrow at its end. 

" I was bad," she continued. " But we can't go not when we 
want to. Can we? We have to off' it, like Alf, just when we're 
thinkin' p'raps we're happy. It is odd. I can't never understand 
things. Mr. King says we ain't meant to." 

" I expect he's right. And so you've got fond of him at last, 
Diamond ? " 

" Yes." 

She was silent, thinking. Then she nodded her head, in answer 
to some thought, and added 

" Because 1 know he's good. That's why. But that's not why 
most girls care, nor not why I used to care for Bert." 

" It's the best way." 

" Is it ? " 

Her face was full of a sort of soft, half-puzzled interrogation. 



330 THE SLAVE 

11 Is it silly to care for people just because you do ? *' she asked. 
"That's like most girls, like me oncest." 

Aubrey thought it was very like him, too. But he considered 
that subject dangerous, and he talked resolutely of Mr. King. He 
learnt that the riding-master had just taken the large basement 
flat near to Lady Caryll's, and in the same building. 

" Why Diamond," he said, " you'll be close to a friend of 
mine, close to " 

Suddenly he stopped, remembering the death of Alf, and Lady 
Caryll's connection with it. 

" What friend ? " she said. " Eh ? " 

"Why well, Lady Caryll Allabruth." 

Diamond's face flushed. 

" You was in her flat when you saw me to-day ? " she asked. 

"Yes." 

She said nothing, but her soft lips stuck out as she pressed 
them together, and her dark eyes became almost fierce. Aubrey 
understood what she was feeling. At first he thought he would 
change the subject. Then a desire to turn Diamond towards 
greater charity induced him to say 

"Diamond, I know what you are thinking. I want you to 
think differently." 

" It ain't no use. I can't," she said. " She treated Alf bad, 
cruel bad." 

Her low voice sounded obstinate, even bitter. 

" She was grieved at his death. It was not her fault that he 
died." 

" She wouldn't come. He wanted her, and she wouldn't come. 
She's no feelin's." 

" She was afraid. She had never been accustomed to see people 
ill. Can't you understand how she felt?" 

" No. She's no feelin's, and I don't like livin' near her," said 
Diamond. " Can I see her windows, then, acrost the court ? " 

" Yes." 

" I shan't look at 'em, but I don't like it. I shall always think 
of her and Alf. She's no feelin's." 

It was obvious that she was really disturbed by the idea of 
living so close to Lady Caryll. Aubrey saw that it would be use- 
less at present to speak further of the matter. Her reiteration of 
her verdict on Lady Caryll showed the cult of the fixed idea. Yet 
Aubrey could not resist saying 

" Some day perhaps you'll know that she has feelings." 

" Why ? " said Diamond. '' I shan't never see her not to 
speak to, I mean." 

" Perhaps not." 




THE SLAVE 331 

" Sure not. No, I couldn't never speak to her. I should feel 
I was lettin' Alf know as I'd forgot him, and after all he'd thought 
of me when he was goin'." 

Tears now filled her eyes. She shook her head as she felt 
quietly at the back of her black skirt for her pocket-handkerchief. 

" No/' she said. " I don't like livin' near her, and I shan't 
never look at her windows. I'd better take a 'bus at the corner, 
please." 

She wiped her eyes. 

" The green 'bus, please," she said. 

" May I come and see you when you are married ? " Aubrey 
asked. 

" Yes. Would you care to, then ? " 

Already she was brightening, though she wiped her eyes again. 

" Very much." 

" We'd like to see you. Mr. King always says how nice and 
quiet you was that night at my birthday. He likes people quiet. 
He is good." 

Aubrey pressed her thin hand. 

" You'll be happy with him, I think very happy." 

Her eyes clouded again, but she answered 

" He is good. And we ought to care for people, because they're 
good. I'll get happy from tryin', p'r'aps." 

She paused on the kerb, looking at him pathetically. Her 
dark eyes seemed to be always asking childish questions. 

" Could you ? " she said. " Get happy only from tryin', I 
mean." 

Before Aubrey could answer the 'bus conductor said snappishly 

" Now, Miss, please ! " 

Diamond nodded to Aubrey and mounted, with her habitual 
light gracefulness, into the omnibus. 

" So long ! " she said, as she disappeared. 

It seemed very strange to Aubrey that in a week she and Lady 
Caryll would be living their lives side by side. Would fate ever 
draw them together ? That seemed impossible. These two women 
in his life were so different, so necessarily apart. One had brought 
him much pain, one a little comfort. For both he felt deep sym- 
pathy. Now he thought, as long ago, of the tales of enchantment 
and of the old street stories that make up the volume of the book 
of life. And a desire came to him to mingle the complicated with 
the simple, to draw the brilliant enigma towards the sincerity which 
was plain, to set mystery with revelation, the soul apart with the 
soul that was human, and that had spoken but never sordidly 
with the passers by the way. 

In the gloomy street Aubrey stood still for just, a moment, 



332 THE SLAVE 

and lost the sense of its hurrying crowds, of all its cries and 
shadows. 

He saw two women at their windows ; they watched each 
other strangely across a little court. The sunshine faded ; twilight 
came ; evening fell around them. Still they watched, but never 
spoke. Night entered the little court, and black darkness. 

Sometimes, with the darkness, come the shining feet of Truth. 



CHAPTER XXX 

DIAMOND became Mrs. King, and was soon settled in her flat near 
Lady Caryll. But Aubrey's fancy of the street was not imitated by 
reality. Two women did not sit at their windows watching each 
other across the little court that divided them. Lady Caryll did 
not know of Diamond's proximity. If she had, the near presence 
of a girl, not of her own class, to whom she had never spoken, 
would doubtless have been a matter of most complete indifference 
to her. The knowledge of Diamond's close connection with the 
dead acrobat, had it come to her, would scarcely have stirred in her 
a clear memory of him. Once she had heard a boy was dying and 
she had sent him lilies. He had died. The lilies had faded. All 
that was long ago, and had happened on the other side of the gulf 
which divided her present from her past. She never thought 
about it, and when by chance she sat reading in her little room 
among her books, she was never attracted to look out and across to 
other windows, was never stirred by any uneasiness telling her that 
some mind near at hand, perhaps hostile, fixed its thoughts on her. 
Certainly Diamond played no part in her life. 

In the life of Diamond, nevertheless, she was more than a 
shadow. The simple nature of this girl was extraordinarily tenaci- 
ous. The quickness of her emotions did not spring from their 
weakness, nor did she float to foi-getfulness upon her easy tears. 
Her heart held fast to those whom once it accepted, and gratitude 
in her was the same thing as love. She had loved Alf, his im- 
pudence, his tricks, his mischief, his manly thoughts for her. Per- 
haps more than all his relatives, except Vauxhall, she had mourned 
him. Her meeting with Aubrey, his explanation of his apparent 
coldness and curious neglect, again set Alf before her, protector of 
her future from the assaults of sorrow, even in the moment of his 
pain and preparation for death. She cried openly in the street 
at Aubrey's explanation, probably with no greater secrecy in the 
omnibus on her way home. But her tears sealed her to recollec- 
tion, and recollection sealed her to a still more sensitive bitterness 
against the woman for whom Alf had called in vain. 

It is no doubt very improbable that, had she been igno- 
rant of the fact of Lady Caryll's nearness, she would ever have 

333 



334 THE SLAVE 

divined it. But, knowing of it, she was certainly affected by 
it. Gradually something began to play upon her nerves, which 
were more than normally sensitive at this early period of her 
married life. She had given up the stage in order to marry Mr. 
King. The persistent occupation of years was forsworn, and the 
abandonment let free her mind in unaccustomed idleness. A 
power of thought, long concentrated upon the great theatre, 
the autocratic ballet mistress, her position, her companions, and 
her dancing hopes must be now directed in some other channel. 
That channel soon stretched to the windows of Lady Caryll, who 
sat so indifferently beyond her hanging blinds. In her solitude 
Diamond began to believe that she actually felt the near presence 
of her unseen neighbour. She had said hastily to Aubrey that she 
disliked the thought of living within view of Lady Caryll, but she 
had never imagined that she would come to shrink, as at an un- 
pleasant touch, from a fact that should surely have taken little hold 
on her, since she neither saw, heard, nor was materially affected by it. 
For at first she never looked out of her windows to Lady Caryll's. 
If she had, she could only have seen dimly the hanging beads, or 
sometimes perhaps a servant pushing a window up or down. But 
she felt at moments as if she knew that Lady Caryll had come into 
the room which looked upon the court, or was sitting so near to 
her that they might have spoken to each other. Then she 
grew restless, uneasy, and perturbed. Thoughts of Alf thronged 
about her, and of the influence to which he had, boyishly, thrown 
his life. Knowing the influence to be so close to her, she said to 
herself that now she felt it actually as wicked. Sometimes a sort of 
fear fell on her, at other times a kind of unnatural rage possessed 
her, despite her gentleness and the childlike softness of her 
character. She imagined Lady Caryll happy in her life, self- 
centred, unperturbed ; a shining, cold inhabitant of a different 
world from hers. And then she remembered the horror of Alf's 
painful death, the almost greater horror of his denied request, 
made so pitiful by the reserved bravery with which he saw his 
latest hope so swiftly fade away. Diamond felt all this and much 
more without analysing what she felt. But she knew that she 
began to hold the little dreary court in a sort of horror. And 
she knew why. 

She never said a word on the subject to her husband. He was 
infatuated, and was far too happy to observe subtleties or to search 
after things unseen. When he was at home he beameol upon his 
wife and spent his time in trying to give her pleasure. When he 
was away he thought about her, never doubting that she was gay 
in their cosy little flat. He meditated teaching her to ride, or, 
running towards the future, glowed with silent hopes. 



THE SLAVE 335 

As time went on, Diamond found herself thinking more and 
move persistently about her neighbour's windows. The furtive 
curiosity wakened by dislike had been strengthened by a visit 
paid to her by Aubrey. During this visit Diamond had made a 
discovery. Now that she was married, either she had stronger 
intuition or he a weaker power of reserve. Lady Caryll's widow- 
hood, too, had revived a feeling long held in check by circum- 
stance, given to Aubrey a sense of freedom that formerly he lacked, 
and so had given to Diamond an opportunity of observation and de- 
duction. Suddenly her eyes were opened to the truth of his desires 
for the future, and she realised almost exactly how he thought of 
Lady Caryll. She felt the vital power over a man whom she 
admired and respected of this woman whom she had so long secretly 
condemned. And, from the day of Aubrey's first visit to her flat, 
she began to feel a curious inclination to go to her windows and 
to gaze out upon the court. She yielded to it, and she knew that 
when she did so she looked forth with a hope of catching a glimpse 
of Lady Caryll. By degrees she grew familiar with the life of this 
deep and dismal well, the walls of which were formed of the 
discoloured bricks of the great building in which she and so 
many others lived. She thought she could recognise the varied 
characters of the sparrows which chirped upon the asphalte, and 
differentiate them one from another. Like Aubrey, she glanced 
sometimes from window to window, letting her mind wander about 
the supposed lives of the usually invisible inhabitants. She saw 
the rare sunbeams enter the dark place, and the rain which made 
so complicated and plaintive a music sometimes upon the pave- 
ment. She knew the morning and the evening aspect of the 
court. But she never saw Lady Caryll. Often, while she stood 
by her window watching the black surface on which no one ever 
walked, she was seized with a longing to judge this woman for 
herself, to use the terrible penetration of another woman upon her. 
For even the simplest girl, in moments, knows her power, and 
feels herself more able than the most complex man. Thinking 
about this sister woman to whom Alf had flung his life, Sir Reuben 
his intellect and fortune, Aubrey, apparently, his heart, Diamond 
longed to be actually with her, if only for a short time, to hear her 
speak, to watch her while she spoke. Something almost irre- 
sistible often seemed to bid her step out across the court to those 
inexpressive windows behind which a mystery sat. There was a 
voice in the pale twilight urging her to undertake the little jour- 
ney, and in the heavy London dusk surely sometimes a shadowy 
hand that called her with its gesture. 

From a variety of causes, her new mode of life, her loneliness 
in her husband's absence, her now frequent contemplation of a 



336 THE SLAVE 

small and dreary scene, Diamond fell into a condition of mental 
and physical unrest that was unnatural and that inclined her to 
secret exaggeration. 

One afternoon, when she went to her window and looked out, 
she saw at a window opposite to Lady Cai-yll's the figure of a man. 
It was motionless, and was not close to the window, but slightly 
withdrawn in the shadow of the room beyond. Diamond could 
not see the face at all distinctly. But she felt that this man had 
been attracted to his window by a curiosity akin to hers, that he 
was watching the blinds upon which she so often fixed her eyes. 
She stood for two or three minutes looking towards the stranger, 
and then retreated to some woman's occupation of dressmaking in 
another room. 

In the evening of that day she found herself often thinking 
about this unknown companion in curiosity. Her happy husband 
talked on to her, and she scarcely heard him. 

On two other occasions when she looked into the court she 
saw this rather vaguely defined figure of a man in an attitude of 
contemplation, and on the second of these occasions a little inci- 
dent occurred which stirred her to excitement. There was sun- 
shine in the court, an unusual glowing brightness. The sparrows 
chirped with a heedless impudence here and there upon the 
asphalte, then flew up between the narrow walls and out over 
the roofs towards the spacious blue. Diamond stood quietly, 
looking at the quiet stranger whose face she could not see. She 
was thinking how strangely still he was, like a waxen figure in a 
solitary show,- and had begun to rely upon his continued inactivity 
with a certainty of which perhaps she was hardly conscious, when 
abruptly he moved forward, bending as if to stare at some- 
thing. The action startled her. It was so strongly suggestive of 
a new feature in the prospect that, without a pause to observe the 
stranger's face, Diamond turned to look where he was looking. 
She saw that one of Lady Caryll's blinds had been pulled aside to 
admit the full light of the sun, which fell upon the figure of a 
woman, with a pale face and shining hair, who stood close to the 
window looking down upon something which she held in her left 
hand. Diamond saw a flash of green light. Then the blind fell 
and hid the woman. Diamond turned to see the man. He was 
110 longer at his window. 

She thought of the green flash, and guessed that it issued from 
Lady Caryll's famous emerald. Then she thought of the vehement 
motion of the man. Her nerves tingled as if danger came near 
her. That night she was sleepless. She lay very still and heard 
the regular breathing of her husband. The faint noise at first 
perplexed, at last irritated her. She knew that she had sometimes 



THE SLAVE 337 

lain awake on other nights, that then she had heard this breathing, 
and that it had not annoyed her. For a long while she did not 
know why it vexed her so keenly now. Its momentary alteration, 
then cessation, informed her. Something, some thought in a 
dream perhaps, disturbed her husband's tranquillity. He stirred, 
sighed, drew a long breath, then was silent for a moment. 
During that silence Diamond found herself listening with painful 
attention. For what ? She did not know. But, when her 
husband's breathing once more became regular in sleep, she was 
aware that for a long while she had been wishing to listen for 
some other sound. The night wore on. Confused and violent 
thoughts seemed struggling together in her mind, striving simul- 
taneously to engross her attention. She saw a green light that 
danced before her shut eyes, withdrew, faded then many figures 
of men and women, all posed in the strangest attitudes at open 
windows ; then only one man leaning out into a great space, and 
staring horribly at a thing she could not perceive. It seemed as 
if she saw and could not see him. For she could not tell what 
he was like. She could not have recognised him again. He 
leaned out farther and farther. It seemed that he must fall. 
But his violent interest in the distant thing that attracted him 
made him heedless of his danger. He cast himself out of the 
window and disappeared into the air as Diamond at last fell 
asleep. 

When, in the following week, Mr. King was obliged to leave 
London for a couple of days in order to visit a great horse-fair 
near Darlington, Diamond felt almost glad that she was to be left 
alone. He suggested that she should have Jenny to stay with 
her, but she refused. 

She was fanciful, and longed for nights of complete silence. 



CHAPTER XXXI 

ON the second night of Mr. King's absence it chanced that 
Lady Caryll had no evening engagement. In the afternoon she 
had received a visit from Aubrey. He had stayed late, and, in 
going, had hesitated near the door. 

" What is it ? " she asked him. " You have something still to 
say to me ? " 

" Yes, Caryll. I can't understand how you endure this life of 
yours so calmly. Are you not unhappy ? Oh, forgive me for 
asking. There are always so many lives about which I wonder. 
We all wonder at the lives of others, I suppose, when we see 
people going on day after day doing the same dull things, seeing 
the same dull prospect. But often they seem created for their 
fate. Yet even then we wonder. So how can I help thinking 
that you who should have everything must feel 

He paused. He had been speaking with emotion, full of the 
desire to give her, some day, a different life from this meagre, 
prisoned existence in which she seemed so out of place. But her 
calm face, hef eyes, in which a faint inquiry flashed, daunted him. 
She claimed no pity, no sympathy. 

" I am not unhappy," she said. 

<-' No ? But now when I go what will you do ? There are 
hours to get through before you can sleep." 

He glanced round the little room. 

" You will be all alone. No one will come. If you were a 
man, you could go out, to a club, anywhere, to meet other men. 
What can women do with their lonely evenings?" 

Perhaps for the first time he wondered. 

" I have no idea what most women do," she said ; " but it would 
give me no particular pleasure to go to a club, although I might 
even do that. For you know I belong to one." 

" You don't mind loneliness at all, then ?" he said. 

He spoke almost with pleading. He longed at that moment 
to see her show some weakness, some sorrow even, a desire to lean 
on him, to claim his sympathy. In reply she said 

" A long while ago you asked me that question, or one like it. 
Do you remember ? " 

338 



THE SLAVE 339 

He called on his memory. 

" Faintly," he said. " Wait where was it ? Ah, yes, I re- 
member now. We were in the Park." 

" And I told you I did not altogether fear loneliness. You said 
I had never known it. Well, I know it now. Look at me. Did 
I not understand myself even then, when I was almost a school- 
girl?" 

She stood and smiled at him ; and seeing her smile, he felt how 
impossible it was to pity her. In the small, dull room, she looked 
commanding, strong in an undoubted satisfaction. He went out 
wondering, and left her to her lonely dinner, to her lonely evening. 
It seemed as if such solitude, in such rooms, must be dreary. Yet 
he could not question her contentment in it. She was not acting. 
As he walked away down Baker Street, he said to himself that her 
spirit could never be broken ; that she could never kneel in the 
dust, bent, destroyed beneath the chastisement of fate. There 
was something in her that was invincible. He feared that uncon- 
querable spirit. It was like a sword stretched out between him and 
her. Yet, while he feared, he almost worshipped it. For he said 
to himself that Caryll possessed a strength, a force, that could not 
be found in other women. In the past he had thought that she 
feared to gaze on the ugliness of pain, the great stillness of death. 
Now he told himself that even then he had read her wrongly. A 
refusal that he still remembered could not have been prompted by 
so common-place a timidity. He sought for other reasons. He 
was always searching for a clue to the enigma of this woman. 

Meanwhile she had already forgotten him and their conversa- 
tion. She put on a tea-gown, ate her dinner, and heard the re- 
quest of her only footman that he might go out for the rest of the 
evening. His family lived near. Some relative had joined the 
circle. A natural feeling summoned the footman to greet this 
new-comer, if her Ladyship did not want anything more. He was 
allowed to go, and, like Aubrey, was at once forgotten. Presently 
Lady Caryll rang for her maid and dismissed her also for the even- 
ing, to bed or whithersoever she pleased. It seemed as if far from 
fearing, she actually desired, and rejoiced in solitude. She shut 
herself up in the little room that looked upon the court. The 
footman, in his warmth of family feeling, had forgotten to close the 
shutters, which he barred every night at the falling of darkness. 
Lady Caryll did not notice his omission. She did not even glance 
towards the windows as she came into the room. 

It is a habit of man to suppose that, so soon as a woman is left 
alone, she performs a solitary operation called dropping the mask. 
Lady Caryll dropped no mask now that night had fallen and she 
stood among her books. In the front of her grey gown, which was 



34.0 THE SLAVE 

loose and long, the emerald was fastened. No one would see it 
to-night but its mistress. She wore it now, as always, to please 
herself. One electric light was turned on in the little room. As 
the shutters were not closed, a gleam shone out into the black court, 
giving a phantom air of pale gaiety to the dreary place. Diamond, 
looking from her window, noticed the unusual illumination, and 
wondered whether Lady Caryll "had company." One of the other 
neighbours also observed it, and remarked that the shutters were 
not drawn across the window and barred, as they had been on every 
other night since Lady Caryll had inhabited the flat. 

Meanwhile, Lady Caryll, unaware that any unusual circum- 
stance called attention to her modest window, confident of her 
complete solitude, stood for a moment in her little room and 
glanced round contentedly enough. It seemed that she had not 
lied to Aubrey, either by word or look. The loneliness that might 
have weighed on many women did not apparently weigh on 
her. For there was a slight smile on her lips and in her 
eyes. The utter silence, her freedom in it, pleased her. She 
looked down on the great jewel in the bosom of her gown. It 
shone to greet her shining eyes; and, as she gazed at it, her ex- 
pression changed, becoming more definite, more vivid. In that 
moment she surely became younger. A ripple of golden youth ran 
over her. The faint shadow that dwelt upon her now, since the 
events that had followed the death of Sir Reuben, faded away. 
She forgot all the lost jewels in the jewel that still remained to 
her, and as she looked down upon it she seemed to be again the 
girl who once paused before the diamond shop, and lost herself in 
the white fire of the things she loved. As she stood there, motion- 
less, her head slightly bent, she was surely the dreamer that Aubrey 
had called her when, in the dark garden, he made that vain effort 
to show her what he was in truth, and to win her by the difficult 
revelation. She was a dreamer as she gazed, but then something 
more, something different. The expression grew in her face till 
all the tender vagueness died away, carrying with it much of her 
beauty. Hard lines, like lines drawn by the eager fingers of 
sensuality, first flickered, then grew firm about her mouth. The 
soft fire that seemed to swim in her long eyes, as if diffused in some 
mysterious way through a mist of tears, concentrated itself in fierce 
and hungry sparks. Something of that strange and sudden ugli- 
ness long ago remarked in her by Aubrey, and attributed by him 
to the outside influence of environment, crept up in her and peered 
forth, as if her nature stirred deep down, then slowly, almost slug- 
gishly, forced its way to the surface of her, to stare out unabashed 
upon a world it seldom faced so frankly. She had looked at the 
emerald as an imaginative woman looks at a thing that is beautiful, 



THE "SLAVE 341 

at a thing that stirs quick and furtive tenderness in her, and a 
delicate, not wholly understood desire. Now she began to gaze at 
it as a greedy woman gazes on the tiling she has seized, on the 
thing that she will keep, ruthlessly, cruelly, passionately if need be, 
against man, devil, or another woman. In such an expression of 
love there is a tinge of something that is not far from hate. For 
the things that can hold us in so fierce a grip often seem monstrous, 
appalling to us, even while we watch them with lust, with worship 
in our eyes. They are the fearful pleasures that are the heaviest 
burdens upon our tottering lives. They persecute us when we 
desire to rest. They are like an everlasting clamour of the street, 
that will not let us, with a clear soul, work out the problem of 
conduct, or of thought, to which we began to apply ourselves long 
ago in some lost day of youth. 

Lady Caryll looked on her jewel with this love, in which hate 
vaguely lurked. Then she sighed, lifting her eyes to the narrow 
walls of the mean little room in which she stood. She went to 
a book-shelf, took down a volume and carried it to a sofa, on which 
she slowly lay back. But at first she did not open the book ; some 
thought pre-occupied her. She stared before her, opening her eyes 
widely. Perhaps she was thinking of Bond Street and of its morning 
dream ; of the touch of Aubrey's hands, and of the strange stirring 
within her that for a moment had made her feel so horribly afraid. 
Perhaps she was thinking of her wedding-day, or of Aubrey's first 
evening in Park Lane, when Sir Reuben filled the night with 
magic. Perhaps she was thinking of the mysterious prophecy of 
the sapphire that was buried in the darkness of the grave. Or 
perhaps she heard a singing voice that was hard with discontent, 
or saw faded lilies lying on a dead boy's breast. 

Her reverie was long. 

The light gleamed from her window out upon the dreary little 
court. Diamond, in the flat close by, was doing some fancy work. 
She sat on a wicker chair that creaked whenever she moved, and 
held the work close to a lamp. On the table beside her lay a 
tangle of gold and bright green silk. She put in some threads 
slowly, drawing her brows over her big eyes. Then she paused, 
laid the work down almost furtively, got up from the complaining 
chair and stood for a moment, resting one hand, palm downwards, 
on the tangle of silk. The night was very silent here, though in 
the front rooms of the flat a distant sound of the traffic of Baker 
Street might be heard. Diamond seemed to be listening. Pre- 
sently she walked softly to the window and looked out. She saw 
the steady radiance in Lady Caryl 1's room, and longed to steal across 
the asphalte, and to peep in upon this woman of whom she knew 
so much and so little. 



342 THE SLAVE 

She glanced at her watch. It was ten o'clock. The chair 
protested as she sat down again to go on with her work. 

Lady Caryll opened the tattered book at last, and began to 
read. She joined the crowd of the lapidaries, followed their 
occupation with them, was excited by their difficulties, rejoiced 
in their achievements. She stood with them, weighing coloured 
gems in air and water, leaned over strange diamonds to examine 
the mystic clouds enclosed within their brightness clouds mystic 
as those silver looming shadows that dream within the circle of 
the moon followed, with a grave attention, the operations of the 
jewel-cutters, toiling to make more precious the precious material 
they handled with so much gentleness and shaped with such a 
crafty care. 

When Diamond, having put away her work, looked out once 
more from her window before she went to bed, she perceived the 
light still shining steadily across the court. She watched it for 
some minutes, then turned out the lamp reluctantly, and left the 
room. 

It was then nearly twelve o'clock. Half-an-hour later Lady 
Caryll closed her book, returned it to its place on the shelf, and 
put out the electric light. She crossed the passage to her bed- 
room, and undressed slowly, leaving her things about the room 
for her maid to put away in the morning. Her gown lay over an 
arm-chair like a grey and weary ghost. When she had unfastened 
the emerald she carried it to its case, opened the case and was 
about to put it in. But she hesitated, shut the case again, and 
presently got into bed, still holding the jewel in her hand. On a 
pedestal at the bed-head stood a small electric lamp covered with 
a dark green shade. By stretching out her hand Caryll could turn 
the light on or oft' at will. Often she read at night after she was 
in bed. To-night she did not read. She lay, propped up high on 
her pillows, opened her hand and looked at the emerald, upon 
which the light shone. She shut her hand, opened it again, and 
again shut it, performing the action with some of the whimsical 
softness and swiftness of a child. When her hand was open she 
smiled. When it was shut she became grave. Two ideas alter- 
nated in her mind just then. Two visions stood, by turns, before 
her fanciful imagination. She dreamed of herself, she saw herself, 
with, without her emerald. She looked into darkness and perceived 
presently two flashing panels of light. In one panel she stood, 
a radiant, powerful figure, with uplifted head and sparkling eyes. 
In the other she was like some haggard phantom, with bent head, 
drooping towards the dust. 

She kept her hand open, resting it with the palm upturned 
towards her upon the white sheets of the bed. And at first she 



THE SLAVE 343 

lay smiling. But presently the smile died, first from her eyes, then 
from her lips. A frown that was bitter wrinkled her forehead. 
Now and then she had horrible moments, when all her contentment 
vanished and fury surged abruptly into her heart. These moments 
came to her seldom. She never knew when they would come, 
whether in loneliness or when people surrounded her In them 
she saw spectral processions of all the jewels she had lost. They 
went by slowly, and each of them was faded like a lovely woman 
on whom time has taken hold. Faint were now the colours that 
had been once so vivid, dulled was the silken lustre that had shed 
glory through her days. And she thought that every jewel looked 
upon her with a distant, yet a piercing despair, such as stares from 
the eyes of the dying when they gaze for the last time upon those 
rare beings who have been to them true friends. And Caryll knew 
that all the jewels were sad because they were separated from her, 
because they might stay no longer with the one who understood 
them. In these frail and haunted moments she felt the sickness 
of an immense sorrow creeping upon her, like some dreadful malady 
that will only fade in death. And she felt it not only in her mind, 
but in her body, as we feel our deepest and most inexorable griefs. 
It lay upon her flesh like snow, or burned in her blood like flame. 
Or she felt it like a hard hand, squeezing her heart which it con- 
tained. So insufferable was this agony when it came, that it often 
produced upon Caryll intense physical effects. Perspiration broke 
out upon her. She could not cry with her eyes, but her whole 
body seemed to weep, in every vein and sinew, in every shuddering 
nerve. This despair rummaged through all her being, as a violent 
and ruthless investigator rummages through a box, scattering, 
destroying, mingling, separating, till stark confusion of horrible 
distance, equally horrible proximity grows before the cruel will 
to seek. 

These moments of iron pain had set the faint shadow upon 
Caryll's face, the hard lines by her lips. In them she was dispersed 
in a torture of weakness. But she came out of them hard as steel, 
as some natures come up out of their sorrows. She was never 
more mistress of herself and of fate than after one of these attacks, 
during which she stood in outer darkness, gazing into the Cave 
where once she had walked in triumph. 

Now, as she lay still in the bed, she shut her eyes ; her face 
became drawn and pinched, till every feature looked sharp as a 
witch's, old as a withered crone's ; her teeth were set ; her body 
became rigid under the white bed-covering, and she clenched the 
hand that held the emerald as if she would grind it into powder. 
Her breast heaved, and she breathed with a hissing swiftness; 
drops of perspiration ran down from her forehead upon her white 



344 THE SLAVE 

cheeks ; she turned and turned in the bed, burying her face in the 
pillows as if she would suffocate herself, stretching out her limbs as 
if in obedience to the summons of the rack. 

Suddenly she thrust out her arm to the electric lamp, and 
wrapped herself and her torture in darkness. 

Nearly half-an-hour passed, then light again filled the room. 
Caryll was sitting up in bed, the clothes were thrown back. All 
her hair fell round her, twisted and in an ugly disorder ; but her 
face was calm and hard. She got up, poured some cold water into 
a basin, took a silver phial from the dressing-table, dropped some 
of its contents into the water, and bathed her face. Then she took 
out of a drawer a large white fan, got into bed again and lay there 
slowly fanning herself, while the hair fluttered up and fell again 
round her damp forehead. Over the fan she looked at the emerald 
in her hand till at last she could smile once more. The motion of 
the fan presently grew uncertain. It wavered and dropped upon 
the bed. Sleep was near. Once more Caryll turned out the light ; 
soon she lay motionless, breathing regularly. In her relaxed hand 
she still held the emerald. It was the medicine she took to combat 
the malady of her despair. 

Between one and two o'clock, when the night was deep and 
silent, it seemed that some one in the flat opposite to Lady Caryll's, 
being sleepless, wished to enjoy the air of the little court. A man 
stood in a room which contained no light, opened a window with 
precaution, and, looking into the court, saw that now it was 
enfolded in obscurity. No ray gleamed from any window of the 
big building whose walls towered up into the blackness. The man 
leaned on the sill of his window. There was a faint breeze rustling 
about in the dimness, pressing against the dirty bricks, stealing to 
and fro across the asphalte. The man drew it into his nostrils while 
he listened. He bent down to the floor of his room, picked up a 
tiny covered lantern, swung himself over the window-sill, and stood 
in the court. He waited a moment, and then moved across it 
towards the window of Lady Caryll's library. His feet made no 
noise as he walked. When he reached the window he paused 
again, and remained motionless for several minutes, holding 
himself very close to the wall. Then he put out his hand to the 
window and pushed it. Slowly it moved up, it was not even fas- 
tened, the bead blind shook slightly, and made a faint grating 
sound as the man held it aside and stepped into the room where 
Caryll so often sat reading the histories of jewels. He flashed a 
light upon the covers of the books. On the back of one was a large 
white label which caught his eye, and on the label, in big letters, 
was printed its title, " The History of the Emerald." Under the 
thin black mask which he wore the man smiled. He did not 



THE SLAVE 345 

linger in the room, but opened the door and stepped, with infinite 
precaution, into the narrow passage of the flat, leaving the door and 
the window open behind him. 

Although Diamond had gone to bed late that night, and had 
been tired when she put away her work, she did not fall asleep 
when she lay down. This was the second of her two lonely nights. 
On the first, too, she had been the prey of insomnia. But she had 
rather encouraged it than fought against it. She had chosen to 
think. She had chosen to allow her ears to be attentive to all the 
faint and stealthy sounds of night. She had even spent hours in 
keen listening, sitting up in her bed. Her reward had been a 
painful sensation of fatigue towards dawn, and a flooding feeling 
of vague, and yet large, apprehension which rolled around and 
upon her in speechless black waves. Overwhelmed by these 
waves, she had at last fallen into a heavy, crushing sleep just at 
sunrise. On this second night when she was alone, she had re- 
solved to summon, instead of repelling, sleep. So she lay down 
and kept very quiet. Only one low pillow was beneath her head. 
She repeated some foolish rhymes over and over with dull reitera- 
tion, pressing her head again and again upon the pillow as a sort 
of monotonous accompaniment to the jingle of the whispered 
words. Yet, though she certainly began presently to feel dazed 
and bewildered, she did not begin to feel that sleep was near. A 
sudden heat ran over her and her forehead tingled. She felt as if 
she were being pricked by multitudes of tiny needles, and that the 
sheets had become almost intolerably rough and unpleasant to her 
skin. She had made the mistake of being too active, too deter- 
mined, in her attempt to capture sleep. She ceased from repeating 
the foolish rhymes, pushed the pillow higher, turned over and 
rested her cheek on her hand. Recently she had been irritated 
by the sound of her husband's breathing ; now she found herself 
desiring it. The complete silence weighed upon her, and she felt 
certain that some slight and regular noise would help her to fall 
into a more drowsy and less nervous condition. She still felt 
the tiny needles pricking her, and she thought that as each one 
pricked her, it seemed to emit a little spark, which burned her. 
She twisted from side to side till the bedclothes were all in dis- 
order. Then she got up to make the bed. This action roused her 
so completely that she felt disinclined to get into bed again. She 
looked at her watch. It was a little past one. She put on a dress- 
ing-gown, sat down in a chair by the side of the bed, and began to 
read a book. It was called " His only Love," and was published in 
a series called for its purity's sake, perhaps "The Snowdrop 
Series." The plot was full of crime. Many of the characters were 
unbridled ruffians, and the book could not have done harm to a 



346 THE SLAVE 

child. Diamond, whose tastes in all directions were very simple, 
found this bald narrative of unusual, if not of impossible, deeds 
quite interesting. She passed from one arson to another, through 
murder to sacrilege, thence to weddings, by way of forgery and 
theft, with a quiet and serene enjoyment. Gradually the soothing 
influence that dwells in such books began to get hold upon her, 
preparing her insidiously for sleep. She nodded over the book. 
It shook in her hand, and at last dropped into her lap. She was 
becoming deliciously drowsy. Realising this, she laid the volume 
down, got up from her chair and prepared to step into bed again. 
As she was standing up by the bedside, pulling back the clothes 
with one lax hand, she was startled by something. She scarcely 
knew what it was. It might have been some very distant sound, 
a call in the street perhaps. Her exact sensation was that, if she 
had not been so sleepy, she would have heard it quite distinctly, 
but that, being so sleepy, she heard it confusedly and faintly. 
Indeed, she could hardly have said that she had actually heard 
anything. Rather, she seemed to know that there was some- 
thing to listen for in the night. That was all. But it was 
enough to drive sleep from her, to render her sharply alert. 
She stood perfectly still, straining her ears to listen. She heard 
nothing. She looked round, darted across the room to the door, 
opened it and again listened, standing in the doorway and 
looking into the dark passage. This time, after an instant of 
waiting, she heard distinctly a faint but, as it seemed to her, most 
horrible cry, short, sharp, full, she thought, of fury. It was like 
a distant imprecation uttered with supreme intensity. It chilled 
the blood of Diamond and filled her with fear. So terrified was 
she, that she suddenly shut her door, locked it, ran back to her 
bed, and fell upon it trembling, and stopping her ears with the 
bed-clothes. She felt as if she had heard some one cry out in hell. 
For an instant she really believed this. There had been in the 
cry a power of fury that seemed to her entirely unearthly. As she 
crouched trembling on the bed she kept repeating aloud, "Hush ! 
Hush! Hush! Hush!" 

She wanted to prevent a repetition of the appalling exclama- 
tion. She thought that if she heard it again she would lose her 
reason. But now, as silence continued around her, she began to 
recover from her panic. Presently she sat up, taking her hands 
from her ears. Her huge eyes were staring with fright, but a sort 
of ghastly curiosity began to wake in her, a feeling that if the cry 
were being repeated she must listen for it, must hear it again. 
This curiosity of terror at length governed her so utterly, that she 
stole back to the door, unlocked it, opened it, listened. She heard 
nothing. She looked into the darkness of the passage. Whence 



THE SLAVE 347 

had come the cry ? She could not tell. She stepped into the 
passage and crept softly into the room which looked upon the 
court. There she paused again. A belief had seized upon her. 
It came abruptly, for no imaginable reason, as if it were furiously 
thrust into her from outside the belief that the horrible cry had 
been uttered by Lady Caryll in her rooms on the other side of the 
court. Diamond went to her window, opened it, and stared into 
the court. All was dark and silent there. No light gleamed. 
But the silence, the darkness, beckoned her forward. She could 
not resist the summons. She felt that she was being led by the 
hand and must go. She wrapped herself in a shawl, traversed the 
court, and arrived before that mysterious window at which she had 
so often looked. It was open. This discovery why she hardly 
knew again filled Diamond with panic, and she began to tremble. 
But she did not go back. She dared not. But she was obliged 
again to pause, leaning against the damp wall of the court. While 
she waited she looked into Lady Caryll's room through the open 
window. She could scarcely see anything in it, only the vague 
outlines of furniture, barely defined in the blackness by the very 
faint light which entered from the court. At last she took 
courage, stepped into the room, and felt her way to the door. 
That, too, was open. She passed out into a passage. And now 
an extraordinary vagueness came upon her. It was born of this 
strange action of hers in a strange hour, like a dream-action in a 
dream-hour. An odd sensation of swimming lightness invaded her 
brain ; with it came an abrupt personal carelessness very charac- 
teristic of dreams. Fear left her, for she no longer felt entirely 
conscious of herself or of what she was doing or meant to do. She 
was wandering somewhere in darkness, somewhere far from home, 
feeling her way with her hands. She was heedless, inconsequent. 
Nothing mattered now. She had a sense of actually tripping, with 
an absurd sort of jaunty liveliness, towards the dream-goal that lay 
before her far or near ? she could not tell. Never, in after days, 
was Diamond able to understand or to explain the hallucination 
that beset her at this time, an hallucination that came so swiftly, 
and that for the moment was so singularly powerful, so singularly 
complete. Doubtless it sprang from the confusion of a brain wearied 
by insomnia, which, on the very threshold of sleep, had been struck 
a blow by the shocking cry which had risen up in the night. 
Rendered furiously alert by this blow, terrified, curious, repelled, 
and desirous, the brain perhaps partially collapsed in its turmoil 
of confusion. It seemed to spin like a ball in the darkness, to 
whirr like machinery, to be at the same time recklessly active and 
oddly sluggish, vigorous and impotent, ardent and inert. The 
darkness of this unknown flat swallowed it in a nightmare influence. 



348 THE SLAVE 

Diamond, at this moment, resembled one of those somnambulists 
who, partially conscious while they feebly travel on some inco- 
herent errand, surging with tattered purposes, grope their way 
towards they know not what, driven by desires they cannot fully 
apprehend. Such somnambulists often go aimlessly backward and 
forward. They reiterate their journeys, under the impression that 
they are travelling onward, or are turning to the right or left to 
pursue some unknown path. Within a very small space they will 
sometimes move incessantly for a long period of time, always 
strong in the belief that they are steadily advancing. So Diamond, 
beset by this vagueness of the night, wandered several times to 
and fro, feeling with her fingers along the passage walls. Gradu- 
ally she grew more definite. She was seized by a sensation of 
being imprisoned. With a violent effort she partially recalled her 
scattered senses. She stood still, stretched forth her hands, and 
laid them on the handle of a door which, turning, made a slight 
but distinct sound in the night. Instantly an event occurred 
which drove all vagueness away and braced her once more to a 
terrified alertness. There came a violent knocking upon the door 
from the inside, a knocking so sudden, fierce, and sharp, that 
Diamond felt as if she were being beaten by the hail of blows. 
She took her hand from the door and stood still, scarcely breath- 
ing. No doubt the circumstance that this desperate assault was 
delivered inside a room instead of outside helped to terrify her. 
There is nothing very odd in the fact that somebody wishes to 
come into a room whose door is locked. But this passionate en- 
deavour to break out of a locked room at this hour of night proved 
the existence of some strange event, of some nature roused to 
a grim determination of combat. 

Diamond feared to set free the person who had knocked upon 
the door. 

The blows ceased as suddenly as they had begun. Diamond 
stood perfectly still, listening. The knocking was not repeated 
and the intense silence was most horrible to her. Presently 
she bent down, and perceived a tiny gleam of light under the 
door. As she did so, she fancied that she heard the two faint 
sounds, continuously alternated, made by a person breathing 
close by. 

For a moment she was divided between two keen desires, a 
longing to turn and escape from the mystery and the violence 
that were close to her, and a longing to stand her ground and 
to investigate them. She never knew how long her irresolution 
lasted, nor why she abruptly bent down at its end to search 
for the key of the door. But she did bend down. The 
key was outside the door, in the lock, but loosely, as if it had 




THE SLAVE 349 

been nearly pulled out. Diamond hesitated no longer, but pushed 
the key home, turned it sharply and threw the door wide 
open. 

Something white, animal it seemed, sprang instantly upon 
her and caught her by the throat in a grip as hard as steel. 

Lady Caryll and Diamond met at last. 



CHAPTER XXXII 

THE sleep into which Caryll fell, when the strange paroxysm which 
had seized her passed away, was profound as the sleep of a child ; 
no dreams troubled it, no broken words came from her parted lips. 
Her relaxed limbs had fallen into a posture of most delicate 
abandonment in their repose. One arm lay outside the coverings, 
and in her half-shut hand the emerald i-ested. It seemed that she 
could dismiss the sorrow which had come upon her, that, having 
dismissed it, she knew how to forget it. No slumber could be 
more calm, more youthful, than the slumber that now was hers. 
When the man whose face was concealed by the thin black mask 
glided down the dark passage of the little flat and paused outside 
Caryll's bedroom door, no furtive anxiety, partially piercing her 
sweet unconsciousness, made her stir on her pillow or unclose her 
eyes. When, with rapid softness, he opened her door and slipped 
into her room, she still slept on. He waited in the dark, listening 
to her gentle breathing, until he had assured himself that, for the 
moment, there was no danger. Then he allowed the light from 
his lantern to. gleam for an instant over the room, while, with a 
rapid glance he surveyed it. He perceived that Caryll's bed, which 
stood out from the wall on a level with the door, was hung with 
curtains, and that these curtains were not drawn. Shielding the 
flame of the lantern he pulled the curtain at the side next to him 
forward as far as it would go. He had noticed that Caryll was 
sleeping with her back turned to him. This was a fortunate 
circumstance. But he dared not run the risk of waking her by 
flashing his light near her eyes. On the other hand, he could not 
conduct the search which he was there to undertake in darkness. 
So, when the curtain was drawn, he allowed his lantern to shine 
out once more. He saw that the bedroom was narrow, long, rather 
crowded with furniture. Thick curtains of pale yellow stuff hung 
before the two windows, between which stood a satinwood dressing- 
table containing a number of drawers, above which there was a 
mirror. On this dressing-table stood a quantity of silver things, 
bottles, brushes, boxes for pins and other trifles. In the mirror 
hung a pale reflection of the bed and of Caryll lying in it. Another 
small table near the fireplace on the far side of the bed was covered 

350 



THE SLAVE 351 

with framed photographs. It contained a couple of drawers larger 
than those of the dressing-table. The man noticed all this in an 
instant. Then he glanced more searchingly about the room. He 
could not see either a dressing-case or a safe, only a sofa, a chair 
or two, a divan in an angle of the wall heaped with cushions, 
Caryll's clothes lying here and there ; a pair of satin shoes, silk 
stockings, a wisp of black tulle like a butterfly, a tiny embroidered 
handkerchief. 

He knelt down to examine the floor beneath the bed. Per- 
haps he had heard where Caryll kept her jewels at Allabruth 
House. He found nothing. As he got up from his knees, by 
accident he touched the grey gown that lay on an arm-chair. It 
rustled slightly. He held his breath, inwardly cursing himself 
for his awkwardness. Caryll's steady breathing continued, and the 
man smiled under his mask. There was nothing to fear and he 
gained in impudence. He moved behind the bed-curtain, set his 
lantern down on the floor, went to the dressing-table and opened 
all its drawers. They slipped easily to and fro. Only one stuck 
when he was trying to shut it. He left it gaping. With a deft- 
ness that was amazing he turned over the contents of the drawers, 
ransacking every corner. But he found only women's fripperies 
laces, gloves, ribands, perfumed satchets, and a few trinkets of 
little value. He took none of these trinkets. He had come in 
the night to seek a gem that was worth a fortune, and he had no 
inclination to carry away anything else. His nature revolted 
against pettifogging theft. In his fashion he loved to play the 
large-minded man. So all the trinkets and the laces were put 
back for Lady Caryll to wear when she would. The other table 
was then exhaustively examined. Here the man was again at 
fault, for he found in the drawers only loose photographs, writing 
materials, two or three French novels, and a small despatch box. 
With silent dexterity he forced the lock of the box, and discovered 
a few receipted bills, some gold, and a paper. This paper he held 
to his lantern. It was a printed history of the great emerald for 
which he was seeking. He read a few words with keen interest, 
then dropped the paper into the box and proceeded to exa- 
mine the whole room thoroughly, moving about with the silent 
quickness of a cat. At last he satisfied himself that either the 
emerald was not in the bedroom at all, or that it was concealed in 
some pocket of the bed, or beneath the pillow on which Lady 
Caryll was sleeping. The man thought this was not improbable. 
He knew the notorious passion of the sleeper for the only valuable 
jewel she still possessed. She might well guard it with her body 
while she slept. He crept to the bedside, and, for the first time, 
looked closely and long at Caryll. She was very lovely, but he 



352 THE SLAFE 

did not allow himself to become romantic, although he noted the 
shining hair streaming over the pillow, the soft arm stretched 
along the sheet. While Caryll slept she had folded her fingers 
over the emerald and concealed it from view, but so softly, so 
naturally did her hand hold fast its treasure, that her visitor 
glanced at the pretty hand, and glanced away, without suspecting 
that the thing he sought lay there close to him. He scanned the 
bed, considering how he could examine it thoroughly without 
disturbing its occupant. This would be no easy matter he knew. 
For though he were as quiet, as ingenious, and as swift as possible, the 
mere fact of his close proximity to Caryll might very well awake her. 
This man was not an occultist. Probably, like most of the 
members of his ingenious and exciting profession, he did not 
know the meaning of the term. Yet how many thieves could, 
if they related the histories of their lives, tell truths of the dark- 
ness, and of tragic nights, as strange, more interesting, than any 
narrative of prolonged and doleful seances, complicated by tam- 
bourines and psalm-singing of elderly voices. They could relate 
facts which prove the possibility of mysterious messages being sent 
by one body to another against the desire and intention of the 
will inhabiting the first body. They could describe, too, the 
curious rebellions of the body against the mind, rebellions sudden, 
bitter, and ruinous, which seem to spring, armed, from some 
secretly nourished enmity of the flesh against the spirit. But the 
people who work in gloom keep their counsel, they make no 
parade of their strange knowledge. Perhaps they are hardly 
aware that they possess it until they stand, as the man in the 
thin, black mask now stood, in a dim twilight beside some sleeper 
and prepare to put it to the test in action. To search is easy. 
To search in silence is not very difficult. Fingers can be trained 
to cleverness in theft as they can be trained to cleverness in con- 
juring. The body can be drilled into moving with swiftness and 
caution, without noise or dangerous awkwardness. A thousand 
things can be guarded against, a thousand things foreseen. But 
fate dwells in the unforeseen. The body and the mind, in crises, 
develop the most amazing and unexpected aptitudes, or crumble 
in failures that are as the twisted ruins heaped by earthquakes. 
The successful criminal is he who has drawn his mind and his 
body together into a perfect friendship, and even when he has 
done this he has something still to fear from the subtle and appar- 
ently irresistible communications that pass between body and body 
in darkness and in silence. 

The man in the mask was not inexperienced, nor was he thought- 
less. He lived by his hands, but he had a mind. Now he was on 
the verge of a difficult and dangerous adventure, and, while he stood 



THE SLAVE 353 

silently by the bed where Caryll slept, he deliberately performed a 
mental action as preface to the physical actions he was about to 
undertake. Making a strong effort of will, he withdrew his mind 
almost entirely from Caryll. He thought of her no more as a 
sleeping woman who must not be awaked, but as a doll to 
whom he need pay no attention, who was nothing to him and could 
be nothing. Then he began to search for the jewel. And Caryll 
still slept, now enclosed within the circle of his quick activity. He 
examined every portion of the bed. He ran his hands up the 
curtains on each side of Caryll's head. Bending over her, he softly 
felt the pillows on which her cheek was resting. His fingers crept 
beneath them as delicately as insects creep in hidden places. He 
explored the framework of the bed from end to end, the mattress 
which rested on the woven wire, the sheets that enveloped Caryll, 
the coverlet on which the white fan still lay where it had fallen. 
She must have been completely wrapped in this man's atmos- 
phere had he not, through all his search, avoided the thought of 
her. At length he paused. He was at a loss. He stood still in 
the shadow of the bed-curtain considering what he should do. For 
a moment he thought of searching the other rooms of the flat. Then 
he dismissed the idea. He felt positive that the emerald must be 
in this room. Lady Caryll would keep it near her. Of that he was 
certain. Hut where was it? He had examined everything. His 
clever hands had touched every surface, had dived into every secret 
place of the chamber. Looking round him, he asked himself if 
there was a corner that had not been explored, a drawer that had 
not been opened, a trifle of any kind that had not been submitted 
to his diligence. And, thus considering with an intensely active 
mind, by a process of exhaustion he at length arrived at the doll 
which lay upon the bed, at the one thing from which he had 
hitherto sedulously driven away his thought. 

Only Carvll had been left untouched. 

Now, standing by the back of the bed, the man lifted the 
curtain slightly, and peered cautiously upon her. She had not 
once moved since he entered the room. He saw the tangle of her 
hair on the pillows, the curve of a shoulder, the soft whiteness of 
a delicate cheek, the fringe of eyelash that looked so exquisitely 
sensitive above it, the half circle of a breast almost hidden beneath 
the loose night robe she wore. His eyes travelled on, down the 
arm that lay outside the bed-clothes, to the hand. 

He noticed, for the first time, that the hand was shut. 

This shut hand fascinated him, and he stared at it from his 
hiding-place. The nails of the curved fingers were concealed from 
him by the sheet on which they rested. The thumb was tunu-d 
inward under the first and second Angers. Only the back of this 

z 



354 THE SLAVE 

motionless human box was visible. And the man gazed at it with 
the most concentrated attention, wondering if it contained the 
precious thing he sought. How improbable that seemed to him. 
Yet it was possible. He stole forward, softly drew back the clothes 
of the bed and looked at Caryll's other hand. That was open, 
relaxed in slumber. This fact renewed the man's fever of curiosity. 
Why should this exposed hand, on which he stared again, be so 
fast closed in sleep ? There might be a reason. Do the passions 
always slumber in the body when the body slumbers? Is the will 
dead when the soul lies dreaming or lies beyond the gate of dreams ? 
Or is there for ever in life something that cannot sleep in every 
man and woman, that secret tyrant, the ruling passion ? Does 
avarice ever sleep in the sleeping miser, lust in the roue, love in 
the faithful woman, hate in the one who cherishes the thought of 
vengeance ? Does not the mourner weep before she wakes ? Does 
not the coward shiver in those dream alleys where he wanders ? 
The thief's thoughts trooped about the delicate hand of Caryll ; 
they could not leave it. He was accustomed to judge and to read 
the body. Yet to-night, either because he was unnaturally excited, 
or because the light in the room was very dim, he could not decide 
whether the hand he watched held, or did not hold, something. 
In an ordinary hour, in daylight, he could have known, or have 
been nearly certain that he knew. Now, when it was necessary for 
him to know, he felt doubtful. He leaned forward a little, bending 
his head nearer to the hand. He was forgetting to continue the 
mental action which had so far rendered him secure. No longer 
did he put the sleeper from him altogether, or before him as a 
thing without life or any power. How could he, since his whole 
soul was, for the moment, intent upon the consideration of the 
power of this live hand to plunge him in uncertainty. Every fibre 
of his being strove in a silent effort to compel it to give way to his 
desire for enlightenment. There are moments in which men forget 
that they are men, that they are living, thinking, feeling. Self- 
consciousness drops from them, and they become merely a red-hot 
desire, hanging like a fierce point of light in space. At this 
moment this man was such a desire ; the desire to know not for 
theft's sake just then, but for the sake of knowledge only -whether 
that hand of Caryll was closed upon anything but itself. 

He leaned farther forward, protruding his masked face beyond 
the curtain till he almost touched the hand of the sleeper. 

Suddenly Caryll turned her arm upon the bed, showing its inner 
surface and the pink finger-nails of her hand. The man trembled 
and drew back, startled by the knowledge that this hand was pre- 
paring to obey the irresistible desire of his will. Once more 
concealed by the curtain he^ gazed at the hand, and, while he 



THE SLAVE 355 

gazed, the fingers gently unclosed and he saw the emerald resting 
in the cup made by the soft palm. 

At this moment, for the first time, a sense of almost imaginative 
awe strange to his nature came upon him, hand in hand with the 
instinct of sex. He thought of C'aryll as a beautiful woman, of all 
he had heard about her, whispered or loudly spoken, in many times 
and places. Hitherto his practical and criminal mind had ignored 
the shining mystery of her peculiar reputation. He had come into 
her bedroom as he would have come into a jeweller's shop, intent 
upon his own ends, heedful only of himself, his desire, his safe 
achievement and subsequent escape. Caryll had been to him, then, 
but the possessor of something he wanted and meant to take 
from her. Now, as he looked at her, and at the jewel which she 
grasped even in sleep, he was conscious of a new sensation. Won- 
der and admiration shot through him. He gazed at her with a 
man's rather than with a thief's eyes, and while he gazed he 
recalled many things he had heard about her in Paris and else- 
where. Lying there, asleep in the dim light, half-shrouded in her 
frosty yellow hair, she seemed very young and very calm. Who 
would have said that within that soft body, so gracious in its 
contours, there dwelt a voracious soul, eternally greedy, a soul 
that had ruined so clever a financier as the notorious Reuben 
Allabruth ? The man in the mask admired cunning and worldly 
cleverness like most thieves. Such women as Lady Caryll seemed 
to him almost like adepts in his own profession. They drew to 
themselves all they wanted, drew it from the pockets of infatuated 
men. The men, being fools, let them take it, and so made their 
proceedings legal. But what of that ? These lovely greedy women 
are at the top of the thieves' class. That is all. So the thief 
thought, looking down on Caryll, and on the soft hand that 
had received so much, and that now held unconsciously its last 
treasure. He knew that he was going to take away that treasure. 
Yet a certain sentimental pity came to him at the thought of the 
awakening which he would never see. What would that be like ? 
He was beginning to wonder, when something roused him sharply 
to a sense of the necessity for instant action. Caryl 1's hand, as if 
mechanically, closed slightly over the emerald. In a moment all 
the man's business-like instinct and sordid intentness returned to 
him. He glanced swiftly at Caryll's face, saw that she was still 
asleep, bent down, and, with exquisite delicacy of touch, tried to 
slip the emerald out of her hand on to the bed. He nearly suc- 
ceeded in his object, but just as the jewel seemed about to fall 
from Caryll's fingers, she shut her hand firmly and turned in the 
bed. The man did not draw back. He waited, keeping his eyes 
on her face. She was near to wakefulness. He knew that. The 



356 THE SLAVE 

attention which he was now obliged to fix upon her penetrated into 
the heavy underworld of unconsciousness, vaguely disturbed her 
there. Her movement in the bed had been full of an odd, un- 
finished petulance. And she had opened her lips as if to utter 
some childish remonstrance. In her sleep she was becoming 
faintly aware that there was a project afoot against her happiness. 
Some strange stirring of instinct had caused her to close her hand 
ere it lost its possession. 

The man drew back. He knew that he must again possess his 
soul in patience. Folly had made him lose one chance. He must 
wait for another which he would not miss. And, while waiting, he 
must withdraw from Caryll the attention which troubled her like a 
touch. He leaned against the wall behind the curtain, glancing 
round the room. In the faint light the furniture looked spectral 
and uneasy. The gown, hanging over a chair, had the distraught 
aspect of some thin, fainting woman, whose drooping head was 
hidden by the neighbouring sofa. The boxes and ornaments on 
the dressing-table, the vases and candlesticks, the photographs in 
their variously shaped frames were like a crowd of miserable suf- 
ferers from insomnia, forced, by their malady, to be alert in this 
empty hour of the deepest night. In the mirror the reflection of 
the bed seemed fading away from the man's eyes, fading in a mist, 
as if some one had gone up to the glass and had breathed upon it. 
He let his attention wander from one sad thing to another, while 
he remained absolutely motionless, carefully managing his breath, 
lest the slightest suggestion of any presence near to her should 
continue to increase the disturbance already set up in the sleeper. 
Not until this painful pause of inaction had lasted for several 
minutes, perhaps for ten, did he resolve once more to risk the 
trial of his will upon the closed hand. Then he moved the curtain 
gently aside, and glanced towards the enigma. His joy was great 
when he saw that the fingers had again unclosed, and that the 
emerald lay in the flat palm, gleaming gently in the light. He 
had only to take it softly and go, and this he meant to do without 
glancing again at his unconscious victim. He leaned cautiously 
forward, put out his hand and touched the emerald. 

As he did so Caryll uttered the horrible cry which so shocked 
Diamond as she stood at her open door. Although the thief 
was unaware of it, Caryll's disturbed intelligence had not 
been lulled once more to rest by the deliberate withdrawal 
of his attention from her during his long and patient pause. 
The uneasiness in her had developed until sleep slipped from 
her, and, without movement or sigh, she opened her eyes to 
the dim light that shone from the hidden lantern. Although 
she was unaccustomed to sleep with a light in her room, she was 






THE SLAVE 357 

not immediately astonished by the illumination. Absolutely full 
consciousness had not yet come to her, nor had she begun to realise 
where she was. But, being able to see, she looked instinctively at 
the hand that held the emerald, and, just before the thief leaned 
forward to take it, she opened her fingers and gazed with a quiet, 
half-drugged feeling of contentment upon it, neither asking her- 
self how she could see thus in the night, nor forming any definite 
thought, serene or sad. She was possessed by a luxurious languor as 
she lazily contemplated the treasure her hand caressed. The thief s 
sudden movement struck her awake with a lashing sharpness which 
drew from her that terrible cry. In an instant fierce consciousness 
came upon her. Even as she cried out she closed her hand on the 
emerald, and, turning violently on her pillows, looked behind her 
with eyes that were full, not of fear, but of a passionate menace. 
With the emerald she had grasped two of the thief's fingers as they 
touched it. And, while she turned, she caught his wrist with her other 
hand in a grasp of iron. In the silence that followed her cry she faced 
this masked intruder, against whom the curtain swayed, and she felt 
that his wrist shook for an instant beneath her clutching fingers. 

Her cry had startled him for the moment into an agony of sur- 
prise that was akin to an agony of fear. His confidence in her 
sleep had been so great that he was thrown into tragic confusion 
by her unforeseen wakefulness and the amazingly complete display 
of vital energy that accompanied it. Had Caryll released his hand 
then it is probable that he would have fled precipitately, guided 
out into the darkness by his quivering nerves. But she clung to 
him with the tenacity of an animal that has fastened its claws in 
its assailant. Her cry, her vice-like grasp, were purely instinctive. 
She had scarcely begun to realise what was happening. But she 
prevented the man from flight. She held him till his fear told him 
to remain inactive no longer. He looked down into her hideously 
expressive eyes, at her twisted figure half uplifted in the bed. 
In deadly silence he resolved to attack her. 

Then all that there was in Caryll, all that Aubrey had faintly 
discerned and forgotten, that Monsieur Anneau had suspected, 
Sir Reuben partially known, certain lawyers trembled before all 
that there was of tiger-like strength, of unnatural passion, of 
animal persistence and of ruthless resolution, all rose upon her 
to do battle for her jewel. 

She had no more thought of fear than has one of the fierce 
beasts when brought to bay. She was too full of fury to think of 
personal danger. In the moment when the thief met her eyes 
and was prisoned by her grip, he knew that there was room for 
doubt as to the issue of the conflict. For he felt that he was going 
to fight with a being who had become utterly savage, and who had 



358 THE SLAVE 

a force different from any he had known in the past. A sense of 
fear clung to him ; such a fear as is roused in man by all intensity 
that seems entirely abnormal. But his fingers were crushed against 
the surface of the emerald. What could he do but set his teeth 
hard and attack the white fury who would not let him go ? 

During the combat that followed the thief was at a disadvan- 
tage, for his imagination was haunted by a terror from which 
Caryll's was free. He was fighting to seize what she possessed. 
He should have been moved by the eager daring that rises with the 
fierce activity of attack. But from the moment when her iron 
hand seized his wrist till the moment when the fight was over, he 
was ceaselessly beset by an impression that was novel to him and 
terrifying an impression that he was defending himself against 
the cunning fury, the measureless hatred, of something that had 
no imagination to be moved by terror, no heart to be stirred by 
irresolution. He felt as if this woman's bedroom were a cage, as 
if he were shut up in it with the animal whose habitation it was, 
as if could the animal have its will he would not be allowed to 
escape from the cage alive. Could he succeed in reaching the 
door leaving the emerald behind him he felt convinced that 
Caryll would pursue him, that she would not cease from pursuit 
till she gained him or fell dead. He would have fled if he could 
till he understood the unyielding character of her rage, and that 
escape without struggle was impossible. Then, underneath his 
horror, his obstinacy stirred, though still the horror stayed. Since 
she would not let him go without the emerald, he would force her 
to let him go -with it. 

With his left hand, which was free, he caught the bed-curtain 
which impeded his full activity, tore it down, and threw it on the 
ground behind him. Then he grasped Caryll's arm, and strove 
brutally to tear her fingers from his wrist. 

She bent down her head, and set her teeth hard in his hand. 

For a moment he shut his eyes, more cruelly overcome by the 
sickening feeling that he was indeed fighting with an animal. 
Then the sharpness of the pain woke his spirit. He forced Caryll 
down and back upon the bed. She still clung to his hands with 
mouth and fingers of steel. Her hair streamed over his arms. He 
could no longer see her face, for her forehead was against his fore- 
arm. Nor could she see him. The veil of his limb blinded her 
eyes. She set her teeth harder harder, till they were against 
bone. He forced her farther back among the pillows, but she 
curved her body rigidly till his hands were imprisoned between 
her knees and the mouth, which, like the mouth of a vampire, was 
red with his blood. And she bit, as if she strove to grind the 
bones of his fingers to powder between her teeth. Despite the 



THE SLAVE 359 

thief's great muscular force, he could not get his hands free, though, 
since he was standing and was above Caryll, he was able to force 
her down in the bed till the wire mattress creaked as if about to 
break under the burden laid upon it. Leaning forward over the 
bed, squaring his elbows and using the full power of his strong 
arms, he shook her to and fro, trying to thrust her down on her 
back into a position in which she must be helpless. But she 
thwarted him. Her body seemed made of iron. She kept it 
curved like a serpent, and still the unyielding teeth teeth of a 
trap surely clung to his hand. The sheets of the bed were 
spotted with blood, all the framework of the bed jangled. The 
sticks of Caryll's white fan were splintered. The feathers were 
torn into shreds. Perspiration burst out under the mask the thief 
wore. The horrible sickness crept upon him. He began to fear 
that it would overcome him, that it would develop into a fainting 
fit. Gathering all his force, he drew himself violently up and 
back, raised his arms, and pulled Caryll with him till she was high 
out of the bed. He dashed her down. 

But the teeth kept their vicious hold on him. 

Then the vigour of despair came upon him. He I'ested one 
knee on the bed, stretched out his arms along it, and gradually 
pushed Caryll towards its farther edge. She could not see. Her 
hair was tangled about her eyes, and she had shut them fast, 
contracting all her face, striving to add to her tenacious force by 
making herself for the moment blind. Blindness assisted her. 
She did not want to see. She wanted only to feel, to send her 
soul into those clenched teeth. She never tasted his blood ; she 
never knew that it was flowing. She felt as if she were suspended 
in the air in some deep and narrow pit, pressing a hated thing down 
to destruction. Dense was the darkness in the pit. The thing 
she held, but could not see, struggled with a frantic strength, 
dashed her to and fro, lifted her up and cast her down. Only the 
force of her hatred enabled her to keep her vice-like grip upon it. 
She hated more to gain more power. Strength inhuman seemed 
to pour out of her mind into her body, making it a new body, the 
most powerful ever created. She ground her teeth on the man's 
fingers. 

Suddenly she felt that she was falling, as if to the bottom of 
the pit. Leaning across the bed, the man had at last succeeded 
in thrusting her to the floor. But she dragged him forward with 
her, and now he was deprived of the advantage his upright posture 
had formerly given him. He lay across the bed. His face pro- 
truded over its edge above Caryll's, as she sank to the ground. 
He strove furiously to drag himself up and away from her. She 
resisted, trying to drag him down upon her. The sensation of 



360 THE SLAVE 

mortal sickness gained upon him. He felt as if blood were surg- 
ing into his eyes, but as if his heart were becoming bloodless, cold, 
and faint. He saw great spots of darkness leaping before him in 
the dim light. They formed devilish patterns, rushed together, 
separated, shooting out furiously in all directions like things escap- 
ing from some monster that gave chase. They vanished. 

He felt now that his hands, to which the animal's teeth inex- 
orably clung, were far away from him, at the end of arms stretched 
to so great a length that they might have bridged the distances 
between the spheres. Pain tortured him still, but it was pain 
gnawing him in some place that seemed miles away, where surely 
he had a second body, not the same as that now invaded by this 
loathsome sick feeling which was rendering him powerless. His 
head began to swim. Now he thought that he could see the teeth 
of the animal. At first they were small and vague ; little things, 
white, inflexible and motionless. Then they grew. He saw them 
gleaming. They became gigantic. They were pointed as spears, 
teeth of a monster such as the world had never known. He 
saw his bleeding flesh compressed, tortured, shuddering between 
them. 

The horror of this vision became so keen that it gave the man 
a new access of strength. He cast himself over the bed upon 
Caryll, and, with a supreme effort, tore his mutilated hand from 
her mouth. Then, catching her by the throat, he held her 
away from him and stared into her face, while the blood from his 
hand jerked down upon her breast. Her lips were red. Her 
teeth were red. With half-shut eyes, that had no humanity in 
them, she watched him steadily, and he fancied with a sort of 
malignant stupidity. Her mouth was set in a grimace that was 
like the grimace of a snarling animal, fended off for a moment but 
waiting an opportunity to rush upon its prey. Her cheeks and 
forehead were starred with bright red spots. The stiffness of her 
body, reared up at his arm's length, resembled the stiffness of some 
abominable puppet. Her arms hung down at her sides. Her right 
hand was still closed upon the emerald. She did not attempt to 
use her hands against him now, but he could feel the muscles of 
her throat contracting as she tried to bend down her head and set 
her teeth once more in his hands. He compressed her throat with 
his strong fingers. The blood surged into her face. He closed 
his fingers more firmly. Her veins swelled. Her cheeks puffed 
out. The whites of her eyes were bloodshot. The eyes themselves 
protruded. He thought they would come out of their sockets. 
He pressed upon her throat harder, harder, till her tongue lolled 
out of her gaping mouth. Then he heard a faint noise as if some- 
thing had fallen to the floor. He looked down and saw the 



THE SLAVE 



361 



emerald, which had dropped from her nerveless fingers. Still keep- 
ing one hand upon her throat, he felt for the jewel with the other, 
grasped it, lifted it. As he did so he saw an appalling expression of 
hatred and despair rise, as if behind a veil, in the swelled face and 
blood-suffused eyes of his victim. With the hand that held the 
emerald he struck Caryll down to the floor. He leaped over the 
bed, opened the door, snatched the key from the keyhole, darted 
out. He heard behind him the rustle of her night-dress as she 
threw herself across the bed after him, and then a horrible cry as 
he escaped, locking the door of the cage upon the animal. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

WHEN Caryll leaped upon her, Diamond was, for the moment, too 
utterly confused, even too terrified, to attempt either resistance or 
escape. She did not know what had seized her, why she was 
furiously attacked. In her first paroxysm of fear she had shut her 
eyes. The grip on her throat seemed to her wholly inhuman no 
grip of a woman. Only when it was relaxed, only when she heard 
the backward movement of her assailant recoiling from her did she 
open her eyes to face the horror that was her companion, and that 
seemed to be her enemy. Then she saw, in the dim light which 
shone from the lantern left behind by the thief, something that in 
shape was human, something that had the outline of a woman, the 
flowing hair of a woman but the eyes, the features, the expres- 
sion of what ? Those stained lips drawn away from the dis- 
coloured teeth, that furrowed and bruised forehead, those cheeks, 
one dabbled with scarlet, one yellowish-white, those hands which 
moved incessantly as if trying to clutch something invisible in the 
air did they belong to woman ? For a moment Diamond scarcely 
knew. 

Caryll had half fallen against the blood-stained and disordered 
bed. Her bare feet were entangled in the curtain that lay twisted 
on the floor. Under her tattered night-robe her breast shuddered 
as she drew her breath heavily, gasping, sometimes almost sobbing. 
Her eyes, nearly shut, squinted from exhaustion and had lost all 
their expression. She swayed her head feebly to and fro, and this 
rhythmical and unconscious movement, at the same time piteous 
and absurd, conveyed to Diamond's mind a most filthy suspicion. 
She thought the woman before her was suffering from some access 
of mania produced by drunkenness. Diamond knew the gutter, 
the wretched creatures who dwell there. The curse of drink had 
been laid upon more than one of her dancing companions, and she 
had seen the terrors that crowd about the victims of this most 
dreary and unaccomplished sin. She looked at the swaying figure 
and at the chamber in which it had been caged. Everything there 
cried aloud of violence and of ferocious brutality. The clothes 
were torn from the bed. A blood-stained pillow lay doubled up on 
the floor, protruding from its white slip, which had been rent by 



THE SLAVE 363 

furious hands. One of the iron rods of the bedstead was bent, 
and the brass knob which had been at the top had fallen on to the 
curtain where Caryll's feet were set. A chair, thrown down by the 
thief as he escaped, lay near the door, and on the door panels 
there were spots of blood. The electric lamp at the bed-head 
was smashed. Splinters of broken glass covered the carpet, and 
the green cord which protected the electric wires curved like a 
thin snake about the feet of the bed. In the faint light the 
chamber looked like a chamber into which a dreamer might come 
in a nightmare to gaze upon some vision vague but terrible, to 
shudder among the furtive ruins heaped and tangled by a crime. 

Diamond looked from this brutal room to the brutalised woman 
whom she had found shut up alone in it. She did not at first 
recognise this woman. She did not discern Lady Caryll in the 
disordered, shuddering, and blood-stained creature who lay back 
against the bed, feebly rocking herself to and fro. The horrible 
confusion and the loneliness of the chamber induced the street- 
bred girl to believe that its sole occupant, tormented by an hallu- 
cination, had been fighting with an imaginary enemy, struggling 
frantically against the darting shadows which, moving in activities 
like the activities of hell, beset the sodden brain, cringe and 
posture before the staring eyes of the drunkard in the deserted 
hours of night. And Diamond supposed that her abrupt entrance 
into the shadowy realm had turned this woman to a new and 
terrified violence, then struck her back to dazed stupidity that 
was nevertheless malignant in its lethargy. 

She twined her hands in her hair, rocked herself to and fro, 
and gazed at Diamond with her fearfully inexpressive eyes. 

Neither of the women spoke. Nor could Diamond conceive of 
coherent words issuing from the gaping mouth of the creature 
opposite to her. As well could she have imagined an animal 
talking, or a dreadful image of some vice or misery laying hold, 
for some mad purpose, upon the speech of man. In this crisis of 
Caryll's life her unreality, as a woman, beat upon the perception 
of Diamond, and turned her very cold. But behind that awful 
unreality there lay a reality more awful, more explicit, and more 
venemous. Vaguely, by others, had the unreality been divined. 
To Diamond it was already clearer than it had ever been to them. 
And, in the past, sometimes the reality had flitted for a moment 
before certain puzzled eyes. Now it moved not, but stood up 
like a sentinel half-hidden in the night half-hidden because still 
there fell before it the veil of the unreality. Diamond felt as if 
she looked on distant horror through some heavy sombre mist. 

She never knew how long the silence lasted, but there came a 
moment when it was intolerable, and she broke it with a word. 



364 THE SLAVE 

She said something what she could not afterwards remember 
and, as she said it, she moved a step forward. The effect of the 
sound of her voice and of her movement was startling. Caryll 
ceased from her palsied gesture, so mechanical in its repetition, 
started sideways against the wall, then rushed forward and gained 
the doorway, through which she vanished into the black passage, 
leaving Diamond alone in the disordered chamber. This abrupt 
activity and display of purpose, succeeding the dull and almost 
bestial reverie in which Caryll had seemed wrapped, startled 
Diamond like the sound of a shot. She turned and looked to- 
wards the passage, down which the rustle of Caryll's night-dress 
almost immediately died away. Her exit, and the quick fading of 
the sound of her, left the room so lonely that Diamond shook with 
fear, discovering that this removal of a living and dreadful thing 
from its home increased, instead of diminishing, the tragedy of the 
aspect of that home, the grim and ghastly eloquence of its silence 
and its twilight. She had felt afraid with Caryll, but now felt 
more afraid without her. 

After waiting for a moment, till her situation seemed to her 
unbearable, Diamond hurried to the door and down the passage, 
turning presently into the little room that looked upon the court. 
She found no one, and she ran to the open window and gazed out. 
At first she saw nothing but the night leaning against the towering 
brick walls from which no light shone to give her courage. The 
blackness in this deserted funnel confused her eyes because they 
had just been used with so much intensity. She gazed forth, 
indeed, like a blind woman. Then the plaintive wind of the night 
pressed gently against her cheek, and she thought that scales fell 
from her eyes. In the court she saw Caryll searching along the 
walls, searching swiftly like one in a frenzy. Her bare feet 
pattered on the asphalte. The loose sleeves of her robe fell back 
from her arms as she raised them, feeling the lower windows of 
the building with her hands. Diamond stayed where she was 
and watched the white and ghostly figure as it circled round 
feverishly. She dared not interrupt this search which she could 
not comprehend, though she supposed it to be the fantastic quest 
of a creature impelled by mania to seek things non-existent. The 
uselessness of such a quest appalled her. Why should it ever have 
an end ? She imagined it continuing through all eternity without 
result or pause ; the arms for ever raised, the fingers clutching at 
the closed and slippery windows, the bare feet reiterating their 
naked note upon the pavement, the torn robe fluttering out from 
the thin and eager body. To watch this body was like watching a 
creature in a circus, that could never cease from a performance 
in which it suffered pain. The violent monotony of its action 



THE SLAVE 365 

fatigued Diamond's brain and eyes. As she gazed out of the 
window she began to feel stupid, and as if she would be forced to 
see for ever the eternal progress of this crazy pilgrim of the night. 
This sensation was killed in her by a circumstance that informed 
her with a new excitement. In her tour round the court, Caryll 
came to the window of Diamond's flat, found it open, stopped 
before it, then sprang in and disappeared. 

The two women had exchanged their homes. 

Caryll's last action destroyed in Diamond the vagueness that had 
come to her out of the night, swept away her confusion and her 
abnormal fears, and let in upon her another fear, very natural, even 
very bourgeois the discreet anxiety of a newly-married woman 
who perceives a frantic stranger invading the sacred precincts of 
"the home." In such a newly-married woman awe fades before 
such great intrusion. Not for a moment did Diamond hesitate. 
She sprang across the court in the wake of Caryll, and came upon 
her in the bedroom to which her dreadful cry had penetrated so 
short a time before. 

She was standing near the bed, in the midst of a confusion 
caused by the continuance of her impassioned search. The window 
curtains were pulled back, and one, caught by the edge of the 
dressing-table, protruded into the room. The door of a large 
cupboard, in which Diamond hung clothes, stood open, and the 
gowns within it were disarranged, one of them being thrown upon 
the floor. Chairs had been moved from their places and the bed 
had been pulled out from its station against the wall. Diamond 
reddened at the sight of so much anarchy. She opened her lips 
to utter chiding words, to proclaim her ownership and the intruder's 
impertinence, but, before she could speak, Caryll, hearing her 
enter, started, angrily not nervously, and turned sharply round as 
if she were disposed to attack any one who should dare to interrupt 
her in her mysterious and apparently crazy purpose. When she 
saw Diamond clearly, however, she stood still. Her eyes were 
wide open and were no longer inexpressive. In them burned the 
fires of an immeasurable despair. As Diamond looked into them 
she understood that her first impression on entering Caryll's flat 
had been entirely wrong. The woman who stood here was the 
victim of some tragedy, but she was sane. For the first time 
Diamond began to feel that the struggle which must have taken 
place in the dreadful chamber she had left had been a struggle 
with no shadow. She recognised that her companion was Lady 
Caryll and divined some dreadful incident as the cause of her 
despair. 

" Whatever is it ? " she asked. " Whatever's the matter, eh ? " 

The sound of her voice seemed to frighten Caryll, for she 



366 THE SLAVE 

moved back feebly, fell against the bed, and sank down on it. 
Her expression became suddenly as weak and helpless as that of 
a child who has been beaten till it can stand no longer. Her head 
drooped and her hands, and her teeth chattered as if she were 
very cold. Diamond's anger disappeared. She was filled with 
deep pity for this child in agony. Caryll looked down on the floor. 
She trembled, till the bed creaked and the dark blue stuff' that 
bordered its edge shook uneasily to and fro. Diamond pulled the 
shawl from her shoulders quickly, came up to the bed and wrapped 
the shawl round Caryll, who did not glance up, and who seemed 
unconscious that anything was being done for her and that she 
was not entirely alone. Her silence and her shuddering stupor of 
despair began to unnerve Diamond. She pushed Caryll gently 
and exclaimed 

"Why ever 've you come in here? What was you lookin' 
for? What's the matter? Can't you say?" 

Caryll made no reply. 

Then, after another long look at Caryll's bending figure, 
Diamond sat down beside her on the bed and seized her hands. 
There was dried blood upon them, and they were very cold and 
damp. Their message to Diamond was poignant and deepened 
her wondering pity. 

" Why ever was you locked in ? " she continued, speaking in a 
very distinct voice as if to a small and confused child. " Who did it?" 

At the final question Caryll looked up for the first time. Her 
discoloured face was transformed by an expression of intense 
hatred. She glanced slowly round the room and then at Diamond. 

" He came from here/' she said in a whisper. Her hand 
stiffened in Diamond's. 

" He came from here," she repeated, still whispering. " He 
must have come from here." 

The expression of fury grew in her face, her strength seemed 
to be returning, and she began to move restlessly on the bed. 
Diamond was utterly puzzled. 

" From here ? " she exclaimed. " Whatever can you mean ? 
Why, I live here." 

Caryll grasped her wrist. 

" You ! " she said fiercely. "Then tell me where he is ! " 

She stared threateningly on Diamond. 

" I dunno' who you mean," Diamond answered, holding Caryll 
fast, and trying to speak firmly and to show no fear. " Whoever 
is it, and what's he done?" 

Caryll wrenched herself away from Diamond, sprang up, and 
stood over her as she sat back on the bed looking upward. The 
direct interrogation gave to the victim a clear sense of her con- 



THE SLAVE 367 

dition, of her present fate, set before her, in a white and cruel 
radiance, the imj>otence that she bore like a crushing burden. 
She perceived her solitude standing by her, a towering spectre, 
fleshless and immovable. She looked back over her past, and the 
glance was like an immense journey taken with incredible swift- 
ness. As a train flashes along vast plains, under bridges, through 
the darkness of tunnels, above the flitting silver of running rivers 
in the twilight, between the whispering armies of the woods, she 
flashed along the vanished days, and saw their gifts and heard 
their voices. Their lights gleamed upon her as gleam the flying 
lights of retreating cities upon the roaring train that heeds them 
not. The smoke of their sacrifices shook round her like a veil. 
Their wisdom and their folly and the stillness of their joy rushed 
before her like the landscape that hurries to its end. In the dusk 
she saw their jewels, in the shadowy dawn their fading stars, and 
with the moonlight came their awful magic, and with the clouds 
fled fast their transient loans. 

For had she ever a gift, or has any one that lives ? 

Diamond grew terrified as she sat looking up at Caryll and 
watching the expressions that swept across her face. 

" Whatever is it ? " Diamond said at last in an unsteady voice. 
" Whatever is it ? What's he done ? " 

Till she had finished her journey Caryll could not speak. But 
then the thin veil of her unreality fell from her. The naked 
reality stood before Diamond. Caryll put forth her hands, grasped 
Diamond's shoulders and leaned heavily upon them. She began 
to speak, at first in a mechanical voice, and, while she spoke, she 
looked away towards the wall at the far side of the bed. The words 
came rapidly from her lips, as if she had said them often to herself 
in hours of solitude, as if she said them now very familiarly, with 
a hard certainty of all they meant to her if not to her auditor. 

" You want to know what he has done," she said. " Well, 
then, what do women want in their lives? What are they always 
crying out for ? You ought to know, I suppose. You're a woman. 
Aren't you like all the rest? What do you all want? He told 
me once Aubrey Herrick told me." 

Diamond started at this name. Caryll glanced at her for an 
instant with indifferent eyes and continued rapidly. 

"Love, he said, of course the gift of a heart, of a thing that's 
subject to disease, failure, change isn't it? For what is it 
exactly ? I don't know. But that's what they all say women 
want, and so I suppose it's true. If they all say it, mustn't it be 
true of all of them ? I don't mind if it is. 1 never did mind. 
All you women don't mean much to me. I don't understand you, 
perhaps. I don't know that I want to. But you go about, 



368 THE SLAVE 

directly you're old enough, searching for what you wish for 
somebody's love or something of the kind very likely somebody's 
pretence of love. Does it matter? If you get it, you're in a 
state of bliss, and if you don't get it, you put on a starved look. 
You must know that look- hungry and sour. Lots of unmarried 
women have it here in London. It's the look men hate most 
in women's faces because they've put it there, I suppose. 
They've made it, and men hate most of the things they've made, 
in the end especially the things they've made of women. But, 
suppose you've been lucky and got the first thing women want 
you begin to want something else directly. For none of you are 
ever satisfied, so far as I can see. Are you ? No ; you want to 
have a child. If you're denied that, another sort of hungry 
expression comes into your faces, and you surround yourself with 
things that are what is called alive birds, or horrible little dogs, 
that get illnesses, and have changeable tempers, and are always 
worrying you to do something for them, and horses that you have to 
go into the stable to visit, and wretched things that twirl in cages. 
You don't care whether they want to get out of their cages or 
not. But perhaps you do have a child. Then you want to have 
another. For if it's a girl, you can't be happy till you have a boy 
and if it's a boy, of course you need a girl too. And then your 
health breaks down. You become ugly, and the kind man who's 
made you so is angry or contemptuous. And he's faithless and you're 
jealous. Or else the children are delicate, and, for years, you think 
of nothing but their illnesses. You read (medical books and have 
the doctor for ever in the house. If you're not that sort of 
motherly woman, your children soon begin to bore you, and you 
wisli you'd never had any. You see them growing up, and you're 
angry. If you have a girl, and she's good-looking, she reminds 
you of all the attractions you're losing. She keeps showing you 
your exact age in the mirror of her youth. You hate her. Lots 
of mothers in London wish their pretty daughters dead whenever 
they look at them. If you have a boy, you're always in misery 
because he won't tell you anything about his affairs, or the people 
he knows whom you don't know, and he doesn't intend you ever 
shall know. You fancy he's being dissipated, and you can't bear the 
idea that he's getting to understand all about life, far more about 
it than you ever will. You expect him to trust you, and of course 
he won't. Why should he when your mind is as different from 
his as mine is from yours and from other women's ? " 

She paused and pressed her lips tightly together. 

"So different," she said, with much more emphasis, grasping 
Diamond's shoulders more firmly. " I see the horror, the dis- 
gustingness, of all these things you women seek for, of these 



r s 

r 



THE SLAVE 369 

human relations. It is always these human relations with others 
that make lives abominable when they're entered into for the 
usual reasons. Only once, for a moment, did I think that I could 
ever long for them for a usual reason and why d'you think that 
was ? Because I was out in a garden after dinner, and somebody 
touched me with well-shaped hands, and it was night." 

She burst into a laugh that made Diamond shiver. 

"After dinner!" she repeated with bitter emphasis, "that's 
how you are all made to be played upon by all the miserable, 
second-rate things that crowd up life, by food actually food ! 
and by flesh touching your flesh, and by eyes staring into yours, 
and by shapes that can be altered entirely by gluttony, or illness, 
or a fall, and by the noise of voices, and by smells the smells of 
plants, or perfumes that you buy in shops and by Ah ! I needn't 
say them all. Well, I didn't want the things you women all want. 
You hear? I didn't want them. But I did want something. I " 

She hesitated, and, for the first time, looked h;ird at Diamond, 
trying to read her. 

" But you won't understand," she cried fiercely. " You won't 
hut I found some one who did understand me. He was old and 
ugly, and nearly tired out. Some people thought him mad, and 
some ridiculous. But he understood me. And, because of that, I 
gave myself to him. And he gave me in return all I cared for. 
What was that, d'you say ?" 

Diamond had not spoken. She sat upon the bed quite still, 
never shifting under the hands that grasped her, or shrinking from 
the glittering eyes that were now fixed upon hers. She looked up, 
puzzled, horrified, fascinated. Caryll's eyes drew her. She had a 
sensation of being pulled up towards this extraordinary being whom 
she had seen shaken by hysteria but a few minutes before, but 
who now displayed a growing force that was like the force of some 
contemptuous and inhuman fury. As Caryll asked the question 
her face changed. An ugly and cunning look transformed it. 

" Shall I tell you ? " she said. 

She paused. Diamond moved her head in a sort of vehement 
nod. The ugly look died in Caryll's face. 

" I cared," she said, speaking with an excitement that con- 
tinually increased, " I cared for things that were silent and 
beautiful, that came from far away, from hidden places, from 
mountains, and from the depths of mines and from the depths of 
the sea. They can do no harm to those who understand them and 
who love them rightly, for themselves. Lots of women think they 
love them vain women, egoists, creatures who live to startle 
other women and to capture men. I love them differently. They 
gave me dreams. They took me into fairyland." 

2A 



.370 THE SLAVE 

Her manner became impregnated with mystery, and imagina- 
tion flowed into her eyes, which were now luminous and curiously 
vague, and which seemed no longer to see Diamond. 

"With them I was happy. He knew that. He took me into 
the cave. That was what he called it. I was there with him and 
I wanted nothing else nothing, nothing that other women want. 
The things in the cave had no connection with the loathsomeness 
of life and if he had, well, I forgave him. I accepted his man- 
hood because he did so much for me. And then he had to accept 
change. They hadn't. They were freed from the necessity of 
undergoing that transformation which comes to the vilest animal 
as well as to the human being to a rat, or a jackal, or a pariah 
dog that lives on offal to every ugly, greedy, dangerous, degraded 
live thing live in the way you think of, you and the other women. 
A boy once asked me sent for me in the night to come and see 
him go through that filthy change, to leave my fairyland and 
come." (Diamond shuddered.) "I wouldn't. Why should we go 
into the mud of life? Why should we pursue its curse? Why 
should I have come out of my true life, my own land, to watch a 
hideous change in one I scarcely knew ? They thought ill of me 
perhaps. What did that matter ? My beautiful things couldn't 
die. For that I loved them. They could only be destroyed by 
violence or taken. But they were helpless, horribly helpless." 

The passion in her face was mingled again with the terrible 
despair which Diamond had already noticed. 

"Yes, they were helpless," she said again, and her voice 
became thick and hoarse. " He went through that filthy change. 
The one who gave them to me died as that boy died. And 

then " her voice diminished, " then there were men who came 

and took them from me, took them all " 

The horror on her face turned Diamond to answering horror. 
Never before, not even when standing by the death-bed of Alf, or 
when striving to comfort Vauxhall after his brother's funeral, had 
she understood so absolutely the ultimate tragedy of loss. 

"All but one," Caryll continued, almost murmuring. "But that 
one was nearest to me, was most mine. Mine ! It was more 
than that. It was part of me. He said so and he knew. I 
gave myself to it and I drew it into me. It was of me and I 
of it. Sometimes he said that I lived in it like some one long 
ago, like a goddess whom men worshipped. Perhaps she has 
never died." 

Caryll's voice sank and ceased. She had forgotten Diamond. 
She had forgotten where she was. She stared before her in deep 
meditation. 

"Long ago she lived in the thing she loved," Caryll continued 



THE SLATE 371 

presently, speaking slowly like one who is pu//ling out some 
elaborate problem. "The priests knew it, the priests who wor- 
shipped her, who made her their religion. And he thought one 
night he said so that perhaps she has come again upon the earth, 
although now no one could ever know her, no one except except 
the one thing that she loved." 

She fixed her eyes again upon Diamond questioningly. 

"That would know her," she said. "That would miss her. 
What is an empty home ? What is it ? Do you know ? Isn't it 
desolate ? Isn't it terrible ? Isn't it isn't it ? " 

Her voice rose in a cry. 

" You come here and ask me what has been done to me to- 
night," she exclaimed. "What he has done? He has stolen the 
home of a goddess. He has stolen the thing she loved. He has 
stolen part of her part of her very soul." 

She dropped her hands from Diamond's shoulders and stood 
listening intently. 

" Hark ! " she whispered. " Hark ! " 

Her face was grey and drawn. She held up her right hand 
and moved a step towards the door. 

" Hark ! " she whispered again, looking back over her shoulder 
to Diamond, who stayed where she was, almost paralysed by fear. 
" Can't you hear them ? Can't you hear the hoarse voices of the 
priests ? They're waking, I tell you they're waking in their 
tombs out there out there in that far country they know they 
know they're waking from their sleep they're rising up they're 
coming. Hush ! Listen now ! Don't you hear their footsteps 
and all their voices cursing cursing in the dark cursing him who 
has profaned the temple of their goddess ! I hear them they're 
nearer now they're nearer they're marching marching like an 
army in the night they shall fight for me let me go to meet 
them let me go ! " 

She made a tottering movement, turning towards the door and 
thrusting out her hands. Her face was full of awe and of shud- 
dering expectation. 

"The priests!" she muttered. "The priests of the goddess 
Ksmeralda ! " 

She caught her breath, choked, fought for air. She strove to 
cry out, to rush forward, but her voice was strangled in her throat, 
and she stood where she was, swaying to and fro. Then a long 
wailing sob tore her, and she fell down, striking her head against 
the post of the door. 

Diamond watched her from the bed, not daring to go near her. 

For all the black night seemed full of the hoarse voices and of 
the tramplings of men. 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

IN crowds the individual qualities of men and women seem to faint 
and grow pale, as travellers grow pale in long journeys. Even pure 
merriment, hustled by a thousand differing gaieties, loses some of 
the liveliness of its meaning. Even sheer despair may often pass 
if it will unrecognised, unfeared. Nevertheless, in the gigantic 
human masses that surge through modern cities, there are some- 
times figures that claim notice as definitely almost as a man seen in 
a lonely landscape to which he gives, ignorantly, the atmosphere 
of life. The watcher of such a landscape starts at the man's 
unanticipated entry upon the scene, of which he creates the loneli- 
ness when he gives to it his presence. Far away he may be, but a 
pigmy black and forbidding among the wide ploughlands to which 
the sun declines, yet his vague and scarce perceptible movements 
fascinate the eyes that have been fixed on Nature, his weary, 
creeping progress grips the attention that has been drawn else- 
where. A tired labourer, moving against a sunset, speaks to the 
watcher as the sunset never can. The sunset may contain all the 
mystery of heaven ; the dark shadow contains all the mystery of 
life. In such a moment and scene the exact species and amount 
of life which the shadow contains matter not at all. The watcher 
is conscious only of a fact, of a naked sincerity, illuminated and 
thrown into prominence by a tinted, dream-like pageant. The 
pageant fades, and the watcher feels that because he can no longer 
see it the existence it had is ended. Nor can he see the shadow- 
any more. Yet he is conscious of its continuing presence, however 
far away. 

Sometimes in a great city, against the background of its turmoil, 
there stands such a shadow, so full of meaning because of its naked 
sincerity. It draws the attention. The crowd assists, instead of 
destroying, the strange influence it has in the scene where it abides. 
It may be tired in a circle of voluble activities, yet it has more 
power than they. Its calm has more significance than their move- 
ment. Its silence wakes long echoes that their voices cannot stir. 

There was a period when Caryll was such a shadow, standing 
out against London like a figure against the sunset. 

372 



THE SLAVE 373 

The notoriety of her disaster was naturally great. When the 
emerald went, there was a very definite splash in the whirlpool. A 
great jewel with a history and a satire, worn by a beautiful woman 
and greatly loved by her, stirs quickly the attention of the mob 
and plays upon its passions. It quickens the pulse of avarice and 
whips the rage of envy. Vulgarity turns to it as a dog turns to a 
smell in the gutter. Poverty creeps about it as a beggar creeps 
about a lighted house. The world talked of the loss of Caryll's 
emerald. The world was engrossed by the efforts of the police to 
discover the identity of the thief. And this was natural enough. 
What was less natural was the peculiar impression created by 
Caryll upon the minds of many persons when the police authorities 
at last acknowledged that they were at fault, and she was obliged 
to consider her loss as permanent and to resign herself to the 
decree of a fate that was inflexibly cruel. 

The newspapers had rung with her story. The public had 
battened on descriptions of her struggle with the masked robber. 
Pictures of her bedroom, before his entrance and after his de- 
parture, had appeared in the journals that are read on Sunday 
mornings by tired men in shirt-sleeves, and by women whose hair 
seems to be in process of arrangement for the Last Day. Caryll's 
heroism had been praised and her subsequent collapse had been 
duly recorded. Diamond had been interviewed, and had said very 
little to the importunate journalist who beset her with his desire. 
There had been the usual fictions and reports that the thief had 
been found here or there, that he was a peer or a noted cracksman, 
that he had been watchirg Lady Caryll's flat for months before he 
entered it, that he had only entered it casually to steal the silver 
spoons, and had carried off the emerald without being aware of its 
value. Both Diamond and Aubrey had mentioned their observa- 
tion of a man's attentive figure in an opposite flat. But inquiries 
there had only led to the discovery of an apparently most respect- 
able and peaceful old Frenchman, who was utterly shocked at any 
misfortune overtaking itue belle Anglaixc. 

This sort of sensation lasted a long while, but at length in- 
evitably died away. Not till it died away did the strange figure 
rise up and come upon the scene to make its sensation, so different 
and so new. Only one or two people who were intimate with 
Caryll thought dimly, from the beginning, that she would interpret 
her role unusually, that she would plav the part of victim as few 
have ever played it. These noted in her a double peculiarity, a 
profound mental indifference linked with an extraordinary bodily 
activity. Caryll never repeated the outburst of which Diamond 
had been a witness. She never spoke of it to Diamond, whom she 
afterwards ignored. Diamond grew to believe that Caryll \v;i-, 



374 THE SLAVE 

unaware of the words she had uttered in her wild moment, and 
that she would never again listen for the voices of the priests, or 
dream of the vengeance of the dead. She woke from the trance 
that succeeded her passion to a cairn that was pertinacious, to some 
people alarming. She showed no interest in the proceedings of 
the police. She answered their questions without irritation, but 
with the vague carelessness we give to children who interrupt us 
when we are reading some interesting book. 

She scarcely glanced at the theories put forward by the news- 
papers as to the thief's identity. When, after a time, it was 
acknowledged by police and press that every clue had failed, she 
made no comment. Nor did she offer any reward for the discovery 
of the thief. This avoidance of a natural act was at first attributed 
to her poverty. But fate speedily proved such a surmise to be 
false by taking away her great-uncle, Lord Verrender, and giving 
her his fortune. He succumbed to an attack of apoplexy, and she 
was once more rich. Now the world thought that she would make 
some definite move, that a huge reward would be offered and the 
emerald perhaps returned to its owner. Caryll did nothing. She 
did not even bid farewell to the scene of her tragedy. She still 
slept each night in the bedroom that was haunted by its memories, 
and sat each day in the little room that looked upon the court. 

There came upon her then a white stillness that, despite the 
activity of her body, seemed to many people akin to the stillness 
of death. And this abnormal calm set her against the sunset to 
strike wonder through the world, and a mysterious pity, like that 
mysterious pity some feel at times for life, through the hearts of 
one or two who thought they understood her. These regarded her 
indeed as the shadow is regarded, as emblem and as truth. They 
saw tears in her eyes that were so dry and fixed, despair in the face 
that was so pallidly serene. The tide of natural vigour that flows 
in a healthy body had ebbed from hers. Her expression, her voice, 
her movements, her attitudes, were so lifeless as to be terrible. Yet 
in her deadness she conveyed an impression similar to the impres- 
sion conveyed by the life against the sky ; for there was something 
within her, something distant, that sat for ever gazing, tireless as 
the Arab in his tower gazing across the desert sands. 

Had Caryll become a recluse, people would have talked of her 
far less than they did. The wretched beings who hide their misery 
by hiding themselves are unheeded by London. They can live or 
die as they please. But Caryll still went into the world. This 
moving corpse of a human being was seen at parties, drove per- 
petually in the Park, visited the playhouses, went to race meetings, 
sent a cold chill through the ardent mobs that stare at private views. 
Her youth, her activity, and her ghastly indifference to all the things 



THE SLAVE 375 

and people whom she continually sought made her now more famous 
than she had ever been before. The new arrivals in society always 
desired an introduction to her. The crowd about the Park railings 
whispered her name as she drove by, turning her half-shut eyes upon 
the scene that was so instinct with life, and that she observed as a 
mummy might observe its tomb. Hostesses desired her presence 
at their parties ; men thronged around her like schoolboys round a 
show. She gave nothing in return for all that was given to her. 
If she spoke, it was without animation, in a voice that had lost the 
ringing note of life. Her rare smile was like that first light of the 
dawn which makes the watcher sadly realise the tenderness of night. 
Nothing pleased or displeased her. There was something shocking 
in her incapacity for anger. One day, as she was passing through 
a side-street of London, a half-tipsy man caught up a cat that was 
purring before an area railing, and dashed out its brains against a 
wall. Caryll watched the action from her carriage without moving 
a muscle. A friend who was with her was overcome by nausea, 
caused less by the cruelty than by the woman who observed it. 

Caryll never became more animated in her more private life. 
She preserved always the same unchanging calm. Her servants 
feared her ; children shrank from her. Nothing that was very young, 
and so instinctive, could bear to be long with her. Her atmosphere 
to them was like the atmosphere of death. In it they felt as if they 
could no longer breathe. 

Many people asked wondering why she still chose to go inces- 
santly into the world. There is always in London a brigade of 
women who may be seen everywhere, carrying their despair from 
one party to another, bearing their hopelessness along the public 
ways. Their hands are full of cards, their hearts of lost illusions. 
About their tattered mouths crawl the wrinkles that seek the un- 
repentant. The gold dust in their hair is as the dust of the ages to 
the man who sees them rightly, and the dim fire in their eyes as 
the first flashing of the purgatorial fires. But they are old. It is 
their age, and their vain battle against it, that gives to them their 
horror. Caryll's horror lay in her youth, even in her abiding fresh- 
ness ; for her body was not tarnished. Even as the spectral brigade 
carries the terror of its age and deep despair through the grinning 
faces of the show, Caryll carried the terror of her youth and its calm 
hopelessness. Why ? People asked the question, recognising that 
the world could give this girl nothing on which she set a value. 

Aubrey, too, asked himself the question. 

At first, when Lord Verrender died, expectation waited on 
Caryll's steps, seeing them in fancy already set towards the jewel 
shops. She bought no jewels. A man who admired her greatly 
ventured to send her a strange Persian necklace that he had found 



376 THE SLAVE 

in Bagdad, making the excuse that it was unique, a curiosity that 
was absurd in the possession of a man. She sent the necklace back 
with a cold line of refusal. 

Had the love for jewels, then, died out in her strange nature ? 

Aubrey was led to think so. 

The change in Caryll was terrible to him. At first he tried to 
combat it, and believed that it would be transitory ; that it was 
perhaps a mental illness due to the nervous exhaustion that had 
followed her struggle with the thief. He questioned Diamond 
closely on the events of the tragic night, but he found her less frank 
than usual, and he could get little from her. Once he surprised a 
strange look of pity in her eyes, and he remembered that he had 
seen such a look in the eyes of his mother. 

" What is the matter ? " he asked quickly. " Why do you look 
at me like that ? " 

Diamond flushed. 

" Don't ask me any more," she said ; " don't ask me any more, 
then." 

" Then there is something you have not told me ? " Aubrey cried 
with quick suspicion; "something about her?" 

Diamond looked obstinate. She did not answer. If she had 
received a revelation, it was one she could not rightly understand, 
could not rightly explain to another. 

" What is it ? " Aubrey said, speaking with unusual sharpness. 
" Tell me, Diamond." 

"I dunno," she replied. "There ain't nothin' to tell any 
more than you .know. But but " 

She hesitated. 

"Well! What is it?" 

Again the look of pity came into her eyes. 

" Look here ! " she said. " We're pals, aren't we now ? Pals 
for always ? " 

" Yes," he answered. " You know we are." 

"And pals ought to stand by each other." 

"Stand by me then, Diamond, and tell me all you know." 

" I know as you'd better give it up," she replied, looking down 
on the carpet. 

They were sitting in her flat. It was afternoon. 

" Give up what ? " Aubrey asked. 

His voice had become cold, full of suspicion and reserve. 

" You know. It ain't no good. She's she's not like any of em." 

" What do you mean ? " 

" Girls other women. She's by herself. She don't want 
anything they do. She's not nat'ral." She looked down on some 
tiny clothes that she was sewing. 






THE SLAVE 377 

She would say no more. She never described to Aubrey the 
fierce outburst of Gary 11, her wild hallucination in the night. And 
he ceased from questioning Diamond. Her blunt and simple 
summing up of Caryll in the sentence "She's not nat'ral," had 
moved him more than all the gossip of the world. He strove 
again to break through Caryll's impenetrable indifference, but in 
vain. 

He said to himself that she must be ill. Her mother told him 
so. For Lady St. Ormyn honestly believed that her daughter was 
mentally affected. 

" Shock ! " she cried. " Shock ! Sir Reuben shouldn't have 
died as he did. He must have known it was coming on, and he 
ought to have gone to bed. Death is much more natural when a 
person's in bed. One sees them like that, and one is prepared. 
But to die dressed, on a carpet, and when one is in the act of 
packing a box, is really I always shall say that poor Caryll has 
never recovered from it. If she has, why should she live in Baker 
Street ? " 

Aubrey secretly consulted a great brain specialist, not mention- 
ing Caryll's name, but describing the tragic circumstances of her 
life rather vaguely so he thought and her present perpetual 
condition of utter indifference to all things, people, joys, and 
sorrows. 

"You are speaking to me of a very-well known woman," the 
specialist replied, looking keenly at Aubrey. 

Aubrey reddened. 

"We need not mention her name," continued the doctor, 
" but I know the lady you mean. I have met her in society. 
You have alluded to the sad circumstances of her life, to her 
losses, to her present apparent lethargy of mind. Her circum- 
stances have been strange. Her present condition is abnormal. 
She is, to my thinking, the most extraordinary figure now in 
London society. But you haven't touched upon her most peculiar 
characteristic." 

He paused. Aubrey looked at him eagerly. 

"Why is she for ever in society? Why does she hurry from 
one party to another ? Why does she travel to race meetings ? 
Did she race formerly ?" 

" No," Aubrey answered, wondering. 

"W T hy does she spend hours at private views, and try to be 
wherever there is a crowd of people ? Do you know that last 
week, when there was that Sportsman's fete at the Crystal Palace, 
she drove down to it ? " 

Aubrey was amazed. 

"Alone?" he asked. 



378 THE SLAVE 

"Quite alone. Since you have consulted me 1 will tell you 
that, if you want to discover the truth of this enigma, you must 
seek for the cause of this perpetual activity an activity existing in 
one who apparently cares for nothing, looks at nothing with any 
interest. The strangeness of this lady arises not from one reason 
alone, but from two in combination. There is something almost 
appalling in such a union of inactivity with activity inactivity of 
the soul, activity of the body. It is not natural, and so it both 
distresses and fascinates people. They are accustomed to see the 
desires of the mind being accomplished in and by the body. In 
this lady they see a body acting with vehemence on its own 
account, and apparently quite irrespective of the commands or 
desires of the mind." 

" Apparently ? " Aubrey said. 

" Apparently," the specialist replied with a slight smile. 

And there the interview ended. 

From this time Aubrey observed Caryll more closely than ever, 
but he could find no clue to her strange conduct. Once he asked 
her why she went about so incessantly, and whether doing so did 
not tire her. 

"No," she said, in her dry, dull voice. "One must do some- 
thing." 

" But you don't enjoy these things." 

"And does any one enjoy them ?" she asked. 

Her remark, and the way in which it was made, seemed to take 
all the colour out of life. Aubrey remembered that, long ago, he 
had told Caryll she was a dreamer. But that dream of hers had 
been beautiful. This was terrible. 

He felt hopeless about it as the days went by. Things 
prospered with him in the City. He was making money. Soon 
he would be in a position to support a wife. But Caryll always 
seemed far away from him now. How could he ever draw near to 
her again ? He was tortured at this time by his consciousness of 
one of the most painful mysteries that complicate human relations, 
and make them often sad the terrible power of the soul to remove 
itself when it chooses, and apparently without effort, to some vast 
distance, beyond the reach, beyond the vision of its friends and 
those who love it. When he sat with Caryll, and could have 
touched her hand, he was conscious that she the real Caryll 
was not with him, did not choose to be with him. Where she was 
he knew not. And sometimes he sickened with despair, with the 
hungry desire of such knowledge that comes to those who love and 
that cannot be gratified. But he never now made any of those 
useless efforts that men and women are for ever making to compass 
the impossible. He never sought to pursue the soul to its remote 






THE SLA^E 379 

lair, to surprise it iri the hidden place, and see it turn to bay. 
There was something tremendously powerful in the white stupor 
of Caryll that acted both upon him and upon the world, holding 
the most tender as well as the most idle curiosity in check. 

Lady Rangecliffe felt it, and was weary for her son and for his 
long delusion. She never spoke of it, either to him or to any one 
else. But she began to think that Aubrey had in his nature a 
feminine obstinacy of love that is rarely found in men. And at 
last she even ceased to pray that his faithfulness might die. For 
she recognised the grandeur of its folly, and felt that without it 
her son would be something less than he was. Perhaps, secretly, 
she was one of that company of big-hearted and brave beings who 
see in the shadowy face of sorrow most clearly the Divine expres- 
sion God in the pallor and the tears. 



CHAPTER XXXV 

SPRING dawned in London. The Morning Post announced each 
day the return of fashionable pilgrims from their Continental 
wanderings. Many people were staying at hotels in order to 
search at their ease for furnished houses for the season. The 
theatres and smart restaurants were crowded every night. A good 
many small dinners were being given, and all the gossip was of the 
future. Would the season be a gay one ? Who would entertain ? 
What great houses would be thrown open, and what new hostesses 
would rise to the surface ? Who would be the new lion, and who 
the new beauty ? Would there be a wit, and would there be a 
salon ? Most important thing of all, would there be a sensation 
a great scandal, a great tragedy, or a great triumph something 
to set the world talking, something to stamp this season, to set 
it apart from all its forerunners ? Nobody knew. Everybody 
gossiped. 

People flowed upon London from the four quarters of the 
globe. Thither came, from South Africa and all places honey- 
combed with mines, gay millionaires anxious to play the part of 
the Calf of Gold in the eternal cotillon. The painters flocked 
to their studios, welcomed their friends, and stood in knots, if 
they were elderly, praising the Royal Academy ; in knots, if they 
were young, abusing it. Musicians swarmed across the Channel 
like locusts ; authors flew to town like returning swallows to their 
English eaves. Explorers turned up from hideous wilds and melan- 
choly deserts, hairy, debilitated, but still pertinacious. Actresses 
arrived from foreign tours, and beauties from now deserted capitals. 
Heiresses superintended the packing of gigantic trunks and thought 
of titled husbands. Handsome male paupers dreamed of such 
heiresses, and sent up the prices of lodgings in St. James's. On 
the Atlantic rolled mighty vessels full of the Americans who despise 
England but cannot keep away from London. The dressmakers 
prayed fervently against the sudden death of any Royalty, and the 
hotel-keepers against any war scare. The shutters slipped away 
from many a window, and flowers bloomed in many a hitherto 
empty window-box. Bond Street was packed with women every 
morning, and the Park was gay with carriages every afternoon. 



THE SLAJ'I. 381 

The great town stirred, shook itself, awoke, and lifted its heavy 
head to greet the summer. 

At the Opera-House, in Covent Garden, there was a wild bustle 
of preparation for the musical season. Some of the principal singers 
had already arrived. Among them was Monsieur Anneau. He had 
been re-engaged, despite his previous failure. Mr. Wilson had 
chanced to hear him sing a few weeks before in Paris, and found 
that he had almost recovered his former strenuous power. His 
voice had regained much of its mellow beauty. The curious 
malaise which had destroyed his value for a time seemed to have 
passed away. 

He had seen Lady Caryll. 

She did not know it. She never knew of his secret journey 
from Paris, of the surreptitious watch he kept, until, one day, he 
saw a white image pass by him in the soft dusk of a damp winter's 
afternoon. He stood under the skeleton of a great tree, and his 
fierce eyes were ablaze with anticipation. She sat alone in an open 
carriage, staring straight before her into the growing gloom. Her 
horses trotted fast. In a moment she was gone. But the singer 
had been rewarded for his journey. He had looked upon the white 
beauty of despair. 

Now he could sing again, for now he could forget. He could 
sing again less well, perhaps, than formerly; for trust, once it has 
been tarnished, can never more be quite the radiant thing it was. 
But he could sing. And he knew well that few would ever divine 
that his faith in the power of a great art had once grown sick, had 
faltered, had fallen in the dust. His glory would return. His 
triumphs were not over. His sin had still its servitor, if its sweet 
slave had sought for, and had won, the sacred boon of freedom. 

Lady St. Ormyn was enchanted. Mrs. Luffa Parkinson wept in 
the confessional with joy, and asked Father Grimble if such ecstasy 
were sinful. Monsieur and Madame Villet besieged Monsieur 
Anneau with invitations to lunch, and as for Albert Sprigg well, 
he quite forgot that Paris had ever forgotten its great high priest. 

A few weeks before the opening of the opera season a cer- 
tain society of young painters sent out cards for a private view. 
Their exhibition was a protest against accepted things, and more 
especially against those things which are accepted by the foolish 
nonentities who sit in judgment each spring at Burlington House, 
to "pass" pictures of puppy-dogs and canvases displaying the 
wooden cattle grazing upon a thousand oily hills. Protest has 
become popular in London, where pugnacious infants are wor- 
shipped. The cards of the young painters drew a mighty crowd 
to their surprising gallery. All the fifth -rate people who were 
bidden came, as a matter of course. They never refuse an invita- 



382 THE SLAVE 

tion. All the bilious gentlemen who think dyspeptic thoughts and 
express them in dyspeptic articles were there. All the conceit 
that dwells apart in honoured suburbs, all the contempt of the gods 
the mob has crowned, walked in to see the show. But this year 
the young painters scored an exceptional triumph. The noise of 
their shrill cackling against that shameful thing, Success, pierced 
through the malady of the deaf monster whom all desire to move. 
The smart world rose up and clamoured for a card. The card was 
promptly sent. The smart world presented it at the turnstile, and 
was politely ushered in, and shown by the young painters the way 
to be intelligent. Fashion walked, gaping, round the amazing 
walls, and, towards five o'clock, the throng was become so dense 
that many Philistines, overtaken by confusion and the nervous 
hallucinations begotten of stewed tea, wondered whether they were 
not at the Royal Academy, and stared vaguely about them, trying 
to discover how many of their own disgraceful failures the Acade- 
micians had dared to hang upon the line. Celebrities were still 
flocking in, amid the buzz of comment they excite on such occa- 
sions, when there was an abrupt and very general movement 
towards the door. A whisper ran through the long room. The 
few people who were sitting down took courage and stood up. 
Even the contemptuous suburban nonentities deigned to display a 
certain amount of frigid interest in one who knew nothing of their 
sacred wilds. 

Lady Caryll had come in. She was alone, and looked more 
cruelly indifferent even than usual. Her eyes were bent down 
under their drooping lids, and she seemed to see no one as she 
moved very slowly towards the middle of the gallery. She was 
evidently quite unconscious of the mob that pressed upon her. 
She did not seem desirous of glancing at the pictures. Her 
beauty, her intense pallor, and her wholly unnatural abstraction 
elevated her into a really terrible figure in the midst of such 
an assembly. To certain strangers who had never seen her before 
she gave a sensation that was akin to fear, for some contrasts 
are horrible merely from their sharpness. The chattering and 
busy throng made Caryll's grim silence and motionless features 
seem dreadful as the silence and insensibility of a corpse standing, 
by some artificial means, upright among the living. And, on the 
other hand, the contradiction of her inflexible appearance gave 
to the gaiety around her a hideous and unnatural aspect, trans- 
forming even most excusable liveliness into the palsied or epileptic 
travesty of a temper too hectic, too grimacing almost for long 
endurance. By the force of her presence Caryll made the crowd 
about her assume a new and most disagreeable aspect, like the 
aspect of a crowd in a nightmare, in which every feature, every 



THE SLATE 383 

motion is distorted, crept upon by the disease of exaggeration. 
By the force of its presence the crowd made Caryll appear 
dangerous and abnormal in her pallor, in her speechless and 
merciless contempt of all its merriment, of all the music of its 
words and its desires. 

Having gained the middle of the gallery, she paused for a 
moment, and, for the first time, looked up. Some of those near 
her shrank instinctively from the still glance of her inexpressive 
eyes, and more than one tumultuous conversation died before her 
deadly silence. 

Then an intrepid young man, who had painted a huge picture 
of Dieppe by night, with early Victorian ladies eating oranges 
on a lawn before a small pavilion, and ogling the Great Bear, 
came up to her, greeted her, and tried to convoy her round the 
room. 

He struggled to make a way for her. She followed him 
like a woman in a dream. He shrieked information at her. 
She bent her head and seemed to listen. He pointed out 
Dieppe, and explained, in a crying voice, the significance of the 
oranges, the symbolism of the Bear. She smiled slightly in 
reply, and examined the early Victorian ladies with her unmean- 
ing eyes. Then Aubrey spoke to her, and the young painter was 
engulfed. 

" How can you stand these crushes ? " Aubrey asked her. 

"You endure them," she said. 

" I knew I should meet you here," he replied. 

He looked at her white and impassive face, thought of what 
the specialist had said to him, and was filled anew with wonder at 
her curious and obstinate activity. 

" Why do you go about so incessantly ? " he said in a low voice. 
" You care for nothing. Tell me why you go." 

The crush was so great that he was pressed forward till his 
Ixxly touched hers, and as lie uttered the last words his body 
felt hers start violently, so violently and abruptly that his nerves 
quivered. 

"What is the matter?" he asked quickly, looking down at her. 

She put her hand on his arm and closed her fingers tightly. 
He gazed at her, and saw that her face had changed. The death 
that had been in it was replaced by life. A veil had surely 
dropped from her, passion stood in the place of indifference, her 
eyes shone with excitement, and she bent her head to him and 
said hurriedly 

"Tell me who that is that man who has just come in." 

Aubrey glanced round. 

"Which one ? " 



384 THE SLAVE 

" Not there not there ! " she exclaimed impatiently ; " on the 
left. Look where I am looking." 

Aubrey did so, and saw, not far off, a tall man, perhaps forty 
years old, who was slowly making his way in their direction. 
His hair was mouse-coloured and was cut very short. His face 
was long, clean-shaven, with lantern jaws, high cheek-bones, and 
a resolute and coarse mouth, from the corners of which two deep 
lines spread away obliquely. Aubrey could not see well what his 
eyes were like, but one stared through a glass with a black rim. 
He was elaborately dressed, and wore a silk hat, whose brim was 
perfectly straight and unusually large. As he drew slowly nearer, 
Aubrey noticed that his face was exceptionally mobile, and that 
his eyes were very small, and very pale and furtive. He carried 
himself well, and had indeed the sort of ostentatiously upright 
bearing and allure that very common and unobservant people 
are apt to call distinguished. His figure was thin. His coat was 
made with a distinctly defined waist. His cane had a gold top in 
which a turquoise was set. He was self-consciously self-possessed. 
He seemed to have no acquaintance, for he spoke to no one, 
greeted no one with a bow or with a smile. Yet he looked at every 
one as he slowly moved along, walking, Aubrey thought, with a 
curious ingenuity that was almost cat-like in its ease and softness. 

" That man ! " Aubrey said, and there was contempt in his voice. 
" I don't know him, but I think he looks like 

" Yes, yes ! " she interrupted quickly. " Like what ? Tell me 
what you think he looks like. I want to know." 

Aubrey gazed at her with growing amazement. Her excitement 
was inexplicable. 

" Like a cad, I was going to say," he answered. 

" That is hardly a clever description," Caryll said, with a touch 
of sarcasm. " It is far too indefinite for that man." 

" Why ? " 

" Don't you think he's the most definite personality in this 
gallery ? " 

Aubrey stared again at the new-comer, who was nearer to 
them now. Whether Caryll's remark, which was uttered with 
intense conviction, governed him, Aubrey scarcely knew, but he 
did know that, after it, the stranger meant much more to him than 
before, seemed to stand out clearly from every other man in the 
crowded room. 

" Definite ! " Aubrey said. " Yes, he is that. But why ? " 

" Definitely hateful," she answered. " Everybody must feel 
enmity against such a man." 

There was violence in her low voice. Her excitement increased 
as the man drew nearer. 



THE SLAVE 385 

" It is very strange," she continued. " I have certainly never 
seen his face before, and yet I feel as if I had met him, as if I had 
had some intercourse with him, and loathed him in the past." 

" Caryll ! " Aubrey said. 

His amazement at her passion increased. The man was now 
close to them, staring about him with his furtive light eyes. He 
had not seen them. Caryll began to tremble. 

" What horrible hands he has ! " she whispered. 

Aubrey looked at the man's hands. They were encased in very 
tight-fitting lavender gloves sewn with black. 

" What's the matter with them ? " Aubrey said. " You are 
really unreasonable." 

" They are horrible, horrible ! " she repeated. " He is the most 
hateful human being I have ever seen. How can he have got in 
here ? " 

" But this sort of function is always a frightful mixture. You 
should not have come." 

The man stood by them now. He was very tall. He glanced 
down, met Caryll's eyes, and immediately looked away. Aubrey 
thought that he started very slightly, and that an uneasy expression 
Hashed across his face. He moved on slowly in the crowd. She 
turned to look after him, am} seemed inclined to follow him, but 
she hesitated. 

" Go," she said to Aubrey. " Go at once and find out for me 
who that man is. I must know before I leave. I must." 

" I will see if any one can tell us. But it is ' 

"Go, please go, Mr. Herrick. Don't waste time." 

Her manner was terribly irritable. She frowned as she spoke. 
Aubrey left her wondering, and soon lost her in the throng. 

He maile the inquiry she desired, and pointed the man out to 
several acquaintances, but could not gain any information about 
him. One painter said, " I've seen him somewhere in Paris." But 
no one knew his name, and at last Aubrey was obliged to give up 
the effort to discover who he was. Meanwhile he had vanished in 
the crowd. 

It was now late in the afternoon. Aubrey turned to regain 
Caryll, but she was not where he had left her. People were 
beginning to leave, and, still looking for her, he was drawn by 
the impulse of the crowd towards the door of the gallery. He 
resolved to stand there and to meet her as she came out. People 
streamed by, exchanging loud comments on the pictures, bidding 
each other good-bye or making arrangements for future gaieties. 
Aubrey felt dazed by the uproar, and by the vision of open mouths, 
Hushed cheeks, and animated eyes. He began to wonder whether 
Caryll had already gone, and, turning, stared into the now half- 

2 u 



386 THE SLAVE 

empty gallery. His astonishment was great when he perceived 
her coming towards the door escorted by the stranger of whom she 
had expressed so unfavourable an opinion but a short time before. 
She was talking to him eagerly, and, while she talked, she stared 
intently into his face. She passed Aubrey without noticing him, 
and he was almost petrified by the contrast between her words 
the few words that he heard in the hubbub and her face as she 
looked incessantly at her companion. 

For she spoke with a pressure of animation, with an odd and 
nervous cordiality to this stranger. 

But she gazed at him with hatred in her eyes. 

This union of two contrasts, her manner and appearance, seemed 
to set treachery before Aubrey, treachery endeavouring to conciliate 
that which it intended presently, and under favouring circumstances, 
to attack. 

He followed Caryll and her companion slowly. When he 
gained the street he saw the man putting Caryll into her carriage. 
He took her hand, leaning familiarly on the carriage door to say 
good-bye. Horror crept into her face as he held her hand. 

" Come to see me," she said. 

She withdrew her hand hastily, sought for her card-case, and 
presently gave the stranger her card. 

" You will come ? " she said, with a pressure of obvious anxiety. 

The man bowed, and took off his hat with a certain vulgar 
elaboration of manner. 

As the carriage drove away he looked at the card, and a faint 
smile flickered across his face, deepening the two lines that 
stretched away obliquely from the corners of his coarse mouth. 
Then he drew from the breast-pocket of his coat a small green and 
gold case, put the card carefully into it, slipped the case into his 
pocket, buttoned up his coat, lit a large cigar, and sauntered gently 
away into the dusk that brooded over Piccadilly. 

Aubrey stood and watched him go. When the shadows took 
him, Aubrey still remained upon the pavement gazing into the 
gloom that shrouded the humming city. Two or three people, 
coming from the gallery, spoke to him, but he did not hear them. 
He was suffering, and he was fighting a battle against the enemy 
that was ever with him in all the ways of his life. Presently he 
clenched his right hand with a fierce gesture, raised it, and hailed 
a hansom. He sprang in and ordered the man in a loud voice to 
drive to Caryll's flat, and to go fast. The man drove towards the 
unfashionable north. When he reached Baker Street, Aubrey got 
out quickly, paid him, entered the big building in which Caryll 
lived, and rang at her door. Her man answered the summons, and 
said that her Ladyship had just come in. 



<> 

' 



THE SLAVE 387 

" Ask if I can see her," Aubrey said. 

The man looked doubtful. He hesitated for a moment, glanced 
furtively at Aubrey, and seemed almost confused. At length he 
cleared his throat and became respectfully confidential. He had 
been with Lady Caryll for some years, having originally been in 
the service of Sir Reuben. 

"To tell the truth, sir," he murmured, "I don't know that her 
Ladyship can see anybody just at the moment. She she " 

" She's alone ? " 

" Oh yes, sir ; quite, quite alone. But well, sir, her Ladyship 
don't seem quite herself this evening." 

" She's not ill ? Why, I was with her a moment ago." 
" Oh no, sir, not to say ill. But, in fact, sir, I thought her Lady- 
ship looked upset when she came in very much upset, I might say." 

" Please take her my message, Charles ; say I specially wish to 
see her." 

The servant retired and returned almost immediately. 

" Her Ladyship asks if you can send in a message, sir." 

" I can't," Aubrey replied, with a ringing decision that amazed 
the footman, who again retreated, and was away for a longer 
time. 

" Will you come this way, sir, please ? " he said, appearing once 
more. 

He showed Aubrey to the drawing-room. About five minutes 
passed, then the slow rustle of a gown announced the approach of 
Lady Caryll. Aubrey had become very pale. He turned towards 
the door, fixing his eyes upon it. Caryll came in, walking languidly. 
He had expected to see the strange excitement that she had shown 
in the gallery still in her face ; but it had gone, and she looked as 
weary, inexpressive, and remote as usual. She shut the door gently 
and came to him. 

"What is it?" she asked. "Forgive me for saying that I am 
tired and must rest. The gallery was hot and noisy. I was just 
going to lie down. What is it that you wish to say to me ? " 

She paused. They stood together on the hearth. She did not 
look at him. Aubrey felt the chill of her presence, but he struggled 
against it. 

" There is something 1 want to say something I must say," he 
answered. 

She looked a little surprised at the firm and unusually resonant 
sound of his voice. 

" What is it ? " she repeated. 

" Please sit down," he replied ; " I will tell you." 

She obeyed him, and sat down on a low sofa. He stood looking 
down on her. 



388 



THE SLAVE 



" Caryll," he began, " I want you to grant me the greatest favour 
a woman can grant to a man." 

"And that is - ' 

Her voice was cold and full of indifference. 

" The right to protect her." 

She moved slightly on the sofa, clasped her hands one over the 
other, unclasped them, and said, still in the same level voice 

" You want to protect me ! From what ? " 

"If I said, from yourself! " 

" From myself ! If you said so, well ? " 

She never looked at him. 

" Would you call me intrusive, impertinent ? You couldn't, 
Caryll, and you know the reason why you couldn't." 

"Tell it me." 

" The reason is that I love you, and that you are alone. I stand 
nearer to you than any other man." 

" Why ? " 

" Because of my love." 

" That isn't necessarily true. A man's nearness to a woman does 
not depend merely on his feeling for her." 

" On what, then ? " 

" It depends also on her feeling for him. And that need not 
be love, but it must be a strong feeling if she and the man are to 
draw close together." 

" But what could it be, then ? " 

" It might be the reverse of love." 

"Dislike-!" 

" Hatred ! " 

The word came from her lips like a stone. Aubrey was silent. 

" We can draw very near to others in our hatred of them," she 
continued. 

" You're speaking of of that blackguard we met this afternoon," 
Aubrey exclaimed abruptly. 

He flushed with anger, and was conscious of an extraordinary 
sensation rising up in his heart jealousy of Caryll's hatred of this 
man. She moved again quickly as if she were startled, and laid her 
hand oil a cushion, which she squeezed with her fingers as she 
replied with a forced carelessness 

" That man a total stranger ! How absurd ! " 

" But you know him ! " Aubrey exclaimed. 

As he spoke he sat down beside her, so that he might see her 
face better. 

" You know him ! " he repeated roughly, staring hard at her. 

Never before had he been so carried away by passion. He for- 
got himself and his reserve. Self-consciousness utterly forsook hit 



THE SLAJ'E 589 

"Do you deny it ?" he added almost fiercely. 

She shot a swift glance of ugly inquiry at him and looked away 
again. 

" So you saw us coming out together ? " she said. 

" Yes." 

"Very well. Yes, I know him. What then ?" 

" Who introduced him ? Who dared to present such a black- 
guard to you ? " 

" I see no reason why I should tell you." 

Aubrey suddenly returned to self-consciousness. He saw a 
deadly obstinacy waking in her. 

''Forgive me," he said, "and tell me. I ask in your interest." 

" If that is so, the question is unnecessary, and I don't an- 
swer it." 

"Then then I ask because I love yon, because I am am 
jealous, Caryll jealous even of your hatred." 

She looked unmoved, even absent-minded. He resolved to 
tear her from her hideous reveries. He seized her hands as once 
he had seized them in the night and held them fast in his while 
he continued 

" 1 love you, I have loved you all this time, and you could love 
me if you would. I knew it long ago in the night we both 
remember. I lost you once. I lost you then. But time has 
given you your freedom again. And 1 I too am free." 

" Do you know what freedom means ?" she said bitterly. " No, 
or you would never say that now I am free. I now ! This 
freedom ! " 

Her indifference was dying. She drew her hands away from 
his. 

"If this is freedom," she exclaimed, "I was born to be a 
slave." 

She looked up at him. 

"He said that," she continued, staring fixedly at him, "and 
he knew me. Very well ; if it is so I must fulfil my destiny." 

"Caryll! No, you must be guarded from rushing upon that 
which is not your destiny." 

" I need no guard," she said. 

"You need one more than other women." 

"Because I am weaker than they are ?" 

"Because you are stronger. Danger dwells in strength. Don't 
you know it ? " 

She said nothing. 

" Don't you know it, Caryll ?" he repeated. "Weakness walks 
in the paths of convention. Weakness fears the world, fate, a 
thousand things ; and so it keeps in the safe and familiar ways. 



3<)0 THE SLATE 

The greatest ruin comes upon those who are strongest, upon the 
fearless who defy." 

She glanced at him with a furtive cunning that, in his excite- 
ment, he did not notice. 

"Caryll," he said, "to-day I am afraid for you horribly 
afraid." 

" Why ? " she said sharply. 
"You go deliberately into danger." 
" How ? " 

"You draw near to to what you hate to that man." 
He paused. She was silent. 

" That shows strength," he went on. " The kind of strength 
that is dangerous, that I dread in you, that I dread unspeakably. 
It is my dread that has brought me here. I can't explain it. I 
don't try to excuse it. I love you. You must accept rny love. 
The time has come when you shall accept it, as a protection, if 
nothing more." 

He spoke resolutely. She glanced at him with amazement. 
"You are a stranger to me to-night," she said. 
The words set Aubrey's past before him in a pale light, waver- 
ing and weak. He felt, perhaps for the first time with complete 
fulness, that man fashions circumstance and guides the chariot of 
life. He was stricken almost to the dust by a quick vision of his 
own nature, at work in the past on the destruction of the happiness 
that might have been his. 

"Give me the right to protect you," he said in a low voice. 
"Don't let us be strangers any more." 

In saying the words he made a mistake of manner. His 
decision shrank into pleading. The stranger was no longer there, 
and she felt at once that she sat with a too familiar friend. 

"I need no protection," she said quietly, "and I will not 
accept it. One's fate is not a would-be assassin that can be ' run 
in ' by one's next-door neighbour, or by the acquaintance of one's 
childhood." 

"You are a fatalist?" he said. 
Against his will his voice shook. 

" I do what I must," she answered. " I go where I must." 
"And where are you going? What are you about to do?" 
He spoke with a sort of terror of earnestness, looking close into 
her eyes. His manner, his inquiry, filled her with a repugnance 
that she herself could not understand. She could only act in 
accordance with it, and this she did. 

"It is useless to continue this discussion," she said. "You 
make the mistake of a kind and loyal friend. You want to manage 
my life for me that is to say, you are anxious to trip up my fate. 






THE SLATE 391 

Will you never know that you might as well strive to alter the 
courses of the stars as strive to prevent me from being what I was 
created to be ? " 

" And what is that ? Oh, Caryll ! " 

" He said a slave," she answered slowly. 

"A slave ! To what ? To whom ?" 

" Perhaps to myself," she said dreamily. " To myself, to my 
own nature." 

And then she fell into a deep and heavy reverie. 

He waited for a moment. All his confidence hail faded. He 
felt that she had gone away and left him, had left him almost as 
the dead leave us when they die. 

He stooped to bid her good-bye. 

She gave him her hand, but did not look at him. 

At the door he turned, and saw her leaning back on the sofa 
and gazing straight before her with fixed and steady eyes. 

As he went out he wondered where she was, and with whom, 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

ON a warm and delicious May night the innumerable clocks of 
London sang, in straggling chorus, the hour of eight. Upon the 
pavement of Bow Street a crowd of more or less dirty loungers was 
gathered to stare upon the carriages that passed slowly down the little 
hill to the Opera House in Covent Garden. It was the first night 
of the new season, and the line of vehicles was long. Above the 
wooden aprons of hansoms stiff men gazed out upon the beggars, 
the match-boys, the disordered old women in black bonnets selling 
unauthorised libretti to the ignorant, the round-eyed, murmuring 
shop-girls, the market porters smoking filthy pipes, the flower 
maidens who had never heard of their operatic and Wagnerian 
sisters the cheeky children from the Drury Lane Alleys, and the 
calm police constables from the station over the way. Women 
leaned back in their sedate night broughams and talked of the 
coming season. Americans, just arrived from their great country, 
to conquer the little Island where abide the meet husbands for 
democracy and dollars, glanced sharply through the windows of 
smart hired coupes, and gave themselves up to a rather nasal tur- 
moil of comparison. Critics fluttered towards the ugly portico, 
holding fast their scores, and looking cheerfully important, like 
men created to support upon magnificently bowed shoulders the 
big round world of music. Country cousins, rather unnecessarily 
crimped and too promiscuously beflowered, showed their flushed 
and excited faces above the creaking doors of four-wheelers. 
Tiaras gleamed from the elaborate heads of wrinkled dowagers, 
enthroned in enormous equipages that danced on quivering springs. 
Here and there an auto-mobile conveyed a self-conscious burden 
rather uneasily poised above the hidden tank. The moving and 
pausing procession seemed endless in the night. The horses 
champed their bits, sending the white foam flying from theii 
nervous lips. From the boxes of the carriages the stern, con- 
temptuous servants surveyed the gaping people on the pavement 
with cold and repellent eyes. Two large landaus drove up a side 
street to a private entrance, and some slim ladies, wearing their 
h air in heavy fringes and gazing straight before them, were escorted 
over a red carpet by bowing gentlemen, who looked like depressed 
bu Iwarks of the State. 

392 



THE SLAVE wr, 

The chorus of clocks joined in an uneven statement of the fact 
that it was a quarter past eight. And still the stream flowed on. 
From the winter garden above the mighty porch the electric light 
gleamed out upon the carriage roofs, and the attendants who stood 
among the palms prophesied that the house would soon be crowded 
to the doors. In the vestibule a certain number of men who were 
weary, perhaps, of listening to Italian renderings of the English 
National Anthem, stood together talking of the musical and social 
prospects of the season, and examining the people who rustled in 
looking rather furtively about them, touching their hair, shaking 
out their gowns and blinking in the light. When a beautiful 
woman went by, these men hushed their chatter and became 
instantly observant effigies. When a celebrity passed, they whis- 
pered of his fame. When they saw a millionaire, they looked 
deeply religious, and named his income as a Catholic names her 
saint. When a popular man drew near, they smiled as if they knew 
him. Insignificance alone found them distrait, a little blind, a 
little stolid, and went on its way meekly, too sensible or too well 
trained to murmur. The crowd grew thicker as people stopped in 
the vestibule to greet their acquaintance, and to exchange those 
disjointed scraps of geographical information that make the open- 
ing conversations of the season so like the child's guide to know- 
ledge. People just arrived from Naples talked of Mascagni's last 
opera and of D'Annunzio's latest play to friends who had been 
among the Kaffirs, and who knew all the latest gossip of Bulu- 
wayo and of Cape Town. An ancient Egyptologist, who had 
recently dug up a temple not a thousand miles from Thebes, spoke 
enthusiastically of the exquisite colours of the figures on its walls to 
a venerable friend who had been excavating in Greece, and who 
could scarcely restrain a sneer at the musty memory of Ti. Singers 
from all parts of Europe, who had not been engaged by the Syndi- 
cate, forgathered to condemn the unfortunate stars who had. A 
noted German conductor, with blue spectacles and a blonde beard, 
expressed his indignant grief that the Ring was not to be given to 
an Italian confrere, who was hand and glove with Mr. Wilson, and 
who secretly thought Wagner the most pernicious maniac that ever 
gave his madness to the world. Some stern Englishmen, with pro- 
minent noses and straight figures, spoke coldly together about 
grouse prospects, the future of China, a new Spanish dancer, and a 
new " pick-me-up " called "Amber Swizzle." They dropped their 
G's, clipped their sentences more viciously than a gardener clips 
a too vivacious yew hedge, and adjourned wearily to an omnibus 
box full of opera-glasses to spy out the nakedness of the land of 
fashion. 

Presently Paul Villet and his wife stepped out of a neat coupe 



394 THE SLATE 

with bright yellow wheels, and swept into the lobby with all the 
plump assurance of success. Villet was now so much the reverse of 
starved in appearance that unkind persons called him distressingly 
obese. He walked like a pouter pigeon sunning itself on a roof, 
wore his hair crimped and his moustache waxed, spoke languidly, 
but with an air of brutal authority, and never mentioned the name 
of any one who was not perfectly well known. His wife grew 
daily more deliberately eccentric. Her elongated gaiety mind was 
now applauded as the mind of a genius. Her freaks were 
chronicled by those unfortunate ladies who earn a precarious 
living by writing about people whom they will never know, and 
houses that they will never enter. She waxed offensive, and her 
flippancies were not seldom unworthy of the bar. But did that 
matter ? She had been " accepted." She had even been to Court. 
Tolerated by the right set, she was worshipped by the wrong. 
Young men found it did them no harm to think her handsome, and 
old men liked her because she knew how to tell smoking-room 
stories with an innocent air, and could appreciate the peculiar 
brazen wit that is the delight of the old campaigner and doting 
citizen of the world. Her coffee parties after the theatre had 
become the rage, and a Russian Grand-Duke had condescended to 
join her in her favourite diversion of building card houses for the 
accommodation of living beans. 

In the lobby the Villets were joined by Albert Sprigg, who had 
just arrived from Paris with a stronger French accent, a more 
elaborate manner, a more seductive voice, and a more tripping 
acquaintance with titles than ever. His round and rosy face shone 
with self-satisfaction as he distributed bows most carefully and 
conspicuously foreign to those happy aristocrats whom he knew, 
screwing up his small eyes in a fascinating manner at every woman 
with money, and laying his plump hand familiarly on the shoulders 
of those enviable beings whom he called " useful men." When he 
perceived the Villets he hastened forward, took the left hand of 
Madame Villet in his left hand, and held her gently clasped while 
he murmured, in French, sly compliments upon her appearance, 
and upon her strangely done hair which made her look like a 
dissipated Esquimaux. 

" So good of you to take me into your box," he said presently, 
making a grimace, like an amorous butcher-boy, at Madame Villet. 
" Before we go to it, I want to show you both something." 

He looked archly secretive. Madame Villet, who was the most 
inquisitive woman in London, was immediately on the alert. 

" What is it, Boo-boo ? " she said. " Now don't be tiresome, but 
tell me quick." 

" What is it, mon cher ? " asked Villet, arranging his button- 



THE SLAl'r. 395 

liole and staring through his eyeglass. " Has the little princess 
followed you from Paris?" 

"Ah ! give me a day's respite ! She will be here to-morrow ! 
Come, and I will show you ! " 

He led them to the curved passage that runs behind the boxes 
on the ground floor of the opera-house. Upon the white doors of 
these boxes are printed the names of their owners. Passing rapidly 
by many of these doors, he stopped at length before one next to 
the steps down which the stall-holders make their way to their 
seats. On the door was printed : 

" V r ernon Demetrius, Esquire." 

Mr. Sprigg waved his plump hand towards this name. 

"There ! " he said. 

Madame Villet read the name and uttered an exclamation. 
Paul Villet threw up his hands, which were encased in very tight 
lavender gloves. 

"Mon Dieu ! " he ejaculated. "They will be here to-night! 
All London is talking of that tragedy ! All London is asking me 
questions ! Am I Providence that I should know every secret of 
such a woman ? It is true that " 

"But who do you think is exactly opposite?" interrupted Mr. 
Sprigg, glistening with vulgar satisfaction at his power of revela- 
tion : " Guess ! " 

"Aubrey Herrick!" cried Madame Villet. 

" Fifi St. Ormyn ! She said at first she wouldn't come. But 
she can't keep away. They're not on speaking terms, of course. 
She's simply furious ! " 

He was walking now with the Villets towards their box. 

" Has she discovered who this Demetrius really is, Boo-boo ? " 
said Madame Villet. " A cad, of course. One knows that and a 
beggar. So, quite impossible ! But what else ? Is it true a 
shocking thing I've heard that he's quite well known to the 
Paris police ? Surely " 

She entered her box, followed by the two men. 

The Opera House was already very full. Most of the boxes 
contained occupants women who sat well forward to show their 
gowns and their jewels, men hidden in the shadow and whispering 
gently of a thousand things unconnected with music. Many of 
these men were speaking of Mr. Demetrius, and the women, too, 
murmured his name, asking if it were not perhaps assumed, taken 
by an adventurer for the purpose of making an impression upon 
the credulous persons who are susceptible to sound, and who are 
easily won to worship by any hint of the unusual. Almost every- 
body in the boxes knows almost everybody else on the first night 
of an opera season at Covent Garden. The attention of more than 



396 THE SLAVE 

half this intimate world was certainly concentrated upon the box 
of Mr. Demetrius during the performance of the first act. And 
many people in the stalls turned perpetually to level their opera- 
glasses at his red curtains and his empty chairs. 

Seven days before, the following announcement had appeared 
in the Morning Post ; 

" We are informed that the Lady Caryll Allabruth, widow of 
the late Sir Reuben Allabruth, Bart., was married yesterday to 
Vemon Demetrius, Esq." 

The wedding had taken place at a registrar's office. 

As nobody in Lady Caryll's world had ever heard of Mr. De- 
metrius, the amazement caused by this paragraph was intense. 
Curiosity was roused. Scandal desired to be busy. But scandal 
had literally nothing to feed upon, for the ignorance of the smart 
set concerning Lady Caryll's new husband was singularly com- 
plete. His name and his personality were both unfamiliar. 

Lady St. Ormyn, who was besieged with questions, was scarcely 
wiser than the rest of society. She had seen Mr. Demetrius, but 
only after the marriage had taken place. Her account of him was 
deplorable. She could not say where Caryll had picked him up. 
She could get no information about him from her daughter or from 
any one else. She could not conceive why Caryll had married 
him. She could only affirm hysterically that he was impossible, 
totally impossible, and that she and Lord St. Ormyn had resolved 
to have nothing to do with him. And she reiterated her firm 
conviction that Caryll had never properly recovered from the shock 
of Sir Reuben's death, and ought not to be considered responsible 
for her actions. 

This view of the case was not generally adopted. Those who 
knew Caryll were all impressed with her strength rather than with 
her weakness. The men were specially disinclined to believe her 
capable of hysterical folly in giving herself to an "outsider" merely 
because he had a handsome face or an attractive manner. 

" Lady Caryll doesn't care tuppence for men/' they said. "She 
never did. There must be some other reason." 

What could it be ? Both men and women asked that question, 
turning their opera-glasses towards the empty box of Mr. Demetrius. 

Lady St. Ormyn was in her box next the stage with Mrs. Luffa 
Parkinson and Mr. Fraser, to whom she was tearfully recounting 
her woes in a voice that distracted the singers and drove the con- 
ductor almost to despair. 

Towards the middle of the act Monsieur Anneau had come into 
the house. He was not singing to-night, and had a stall in one of 
the back rows. But he did not go to it immediately. He stood 
for a time in the vestibule, glancing fiercely about him and talking 



TH1. SLATE 397 

to one or two friends. Then he strode to the passage behind the 
boxes on the ground tier, and began to pace up and down rest- 
lessly. He seemed to be on the watch, and the attendants were 
surprised by the strangeness of his demeanour. When he met 
any one whom he knew, he smiled and bowed with his habitual 
magnificence ; but when he was for a moment alone his face con- 
tracted, his eyes gleamed with anger, and once or twice he muttered 
some words to himself, as if the impulse to express his emotion 
audibly had become uncontrollable and he had forgotten that he 
was not isolated, beyond the reach of curious eyes and ears. More 
than once he paused before the box of Mr. Demetrius, stared at 
the name printed on the white door and surrounded by narrow gilt 
bars, then resumed his walk with increasing agitation. 

Lady Rangecliffe did not often go to the opera, but it chanced 
that she had been lent a box for the opening night by a friend, and 
presently, as Monsieur Anueau turned from his contemplation of 
the name that was on so many tongues, she passed him, accom- 
panied by Aubrey. Lady Rangeclitte, who knew Monsieur Anneau 
very slightly, bowed and went on. Aubrey, who was pale, and 
who looked older than usual, and weary like a man recovering from 
an illness, nodded and was following his mother when Monsieur 
Anneau stopped him. 

" So you have come ! " he said, staring into Aubrey's face as if 
he sought to feed his fury on the sorrow of another. " You have 
come too ! Ah ! my friend, you have lived in ignorance so long. 
I know ! I have watched you. Well, to-night you will under- 
stand. To-night your eyes of the blind will be opened at last. 
Your dream your foolish dream will die. Do you hear?" 

Aubrey drew back haughtily. His lips stiffened. His face 
became hard and inexpressive as he turned to follow his mother, 
who was now at the foot of the staircase which leads to the Grand 
Tier. But Monsieur Anneau stepped forward, caught him by the 
shoulder, and held him for a moment forcibly. 

"No one understands this crazy marriage," the singer said. 
"Do you ? No not yet ! But look look close when your white 
dream lady comes, when she comes forward into the light. Look 
close, and you will understand it, and at last you will know her, as 
1 knew her long ago, as he knew her he, that dead man." 

While he spoke Aubrey's face changed. Interest woke in it, 
excitement, a piercing fervour of interrogation. But he said 
nothing, and when Monsieur Anneau's great hand dropped from 
his shoulder, he followed his mother quickly. He found her seat- 
ing herself in the box. 

"Anneau wanted to speak to me, Mater," he said, shutting the 
door. 



898 THE SLAVE 

His brain was on fire, but his voice was calm. 

" What a full house ! " he added. 

He came to the front of the box, sat down by his mother and 
glanced round coolly, nodding to some of his friends. But his 
hands were shaking. He could not keep them still. He laid 
them on the arms of his chair, which he grasped tightly. He 
gazed down upon the brilliant house and a cloud seemed to float 
before his eyes. It was heavy and black. It rolled away, and 
then the lights, the flashing of the jewels worn by the women, the 
colours of their gowns and of the decorations of the Theatre 
mingled together, and shrank into a tiny circle of fierce yellow 
whose ragged edge was bordered by vivid violet. He shut his eyes 
for a moment. He heard a noise of music ; of violins, of a 
trembling horn, of some one singing with a clear soprano voice. 
This noise sounded faint and far away, and seemed to be enclosed 
within the yellow and violet circle which he could still see very 
distinctly. It vibrated, quivered violently, flashed like a firework 
and disappeared. And as it disappeared the music suddenly grew 
terrifically loud and menacing. 

" Aubrey, you are ill ? " said his mother's voice anxiously. 

" No, Mater," he answered. " Who is singing ? " 

He took up the programme that lay on the edge of the box 
and looked at it carefully. And now his hand was steady. He 
was master of himself. He fixed his eyes on the empty box of Mr. 
Demetrius. Every other box that he could see was occupied. 

" It's a tremendous house," he said. 

Lady Rangecliffe nodded. Her black gown rustled as she 
moved incessantly. To-night she was suffering from a more de- 
finite return of the malady of her childhood than she had endured 
for many years. She looked away from her son unnaturally, not 
even glancing at him when she spoke to him. 

" Very full," she said. " What is the opera ? " 

Aubrey told her. 

" It's very odd," she said. " I know it quite well, but it seems 
unfamiliar to-night, I think " 

She checked herself abruptly, recognising that the travail of 
her heart rendered all things strange to her just then. Putting 
her opera-glasses to her short-sighted eyes she glanced round the 
Theatre. 

"Only one box empty," she said nervously. " I wonder whose 
it is." 

"That box belongs to Mr. Demetrius, Mater," Aubrey said calmly 

Lady Rangecliffe nearly let her glasses fall. She looked at h 
son, opened her lips to speak, then closed them without sayin 
anything, and looked away. 






THE SLAVE S99 

Aubrey remained motionless, keeping his eyes intently fixed 
upon the empty box. There were two arm-chairs in it, with red 
damask seats and white and gold arms. He stared at them until 
he saw two figures seated in them, a* woman and a man Lady 
Caryll and the tall stranger whom she had met at the private view, 
whom she had trembled before, whom she had hated, whom she 
had married. 

Why ? What did the singer mean by his strange words ? And 
how could Lady Caryll, in silence, tell Aubrey the reason of her 
mad act, of her new and horrible departure ? 

The woman and the man faded. Aubrey saw again the red 
damask seats of the chairs, their white and gold arms. 

Then the music grew louder, travelling towards a climax. 
Instruments that had been silent began to speak with their various 
and almost human voices, and Aubrey, being in an unnatural con- 
dition of excitement, sorrow, anticipation, wonder, heard the 
orchestra unnaturally. He felt that he was listening no longer to 
the voices of lifeless instruments, but to the voices of live and 
hidden commentators upon the mysteries of destiny. Some of these 
commentators spoke of him, some of Lady Caryll. They recounted 
pitilessly, made deductions, from facts drew inferences, and founded 
statements upon a broad basis of unanswerable truth. He heard 
them clearly, and some of them he hated more than others. There 
was a certain flute, which was to him like the thin but pellucid 
voice of conscience penetrating with consummate ease through the 
turmoil of the more fierce and louder voices which strove in vain to 
overwhelm it. This flute worked upon him as a file works upon 
iron. It was at the same time a voice and a weapon, whispering 
and plying its way through a resisting substance. He heard it dis- 
tinctly telling him of his weakness, and laying bare to him present 
reality as a result of his reserve. And it laid this bare like a pene- 
trating intellect that lays bare truth, and like a scalpel that lays 
bare some hidden portion of a quivering body. His nerves shrieked 
under it and his soul cried out. Nevertheless he had to endure. 
Sometimes this flute, this voice of conscience, this deadly trickling 
stream of truth was lost in the chorus of the voices of the other 
commentators. They became importunate as the sea when a black 
storm expands within it, and seems to enlarge it. And they led 
Aubrey fiercely from one scene to another of his past. They 
seemed, then, to give themselves up to curious fantasies, and to 
become imitative. 

One instrument, or set of instruments, resembled the voice of 
Monsieur Anneau singing " Crepuscule " to the sunset long ago in 
the garden at Epsom. And the sound as sound can, or as scent 
called up not only an earthly scene full of details, but also simul- 



400 THE SLAVE 

taneously the exact mental condition of the hearer set in that 
scene. Aubrey saw the red gold-fish moving blandly around their 
artificial home, gleaming and growing dim as they vanished in the 
opaque shadows. He saw the long locks of the wisteria rustling 
gently in the cool breeze of evening. He saw the melting prim- 
rose of the imaginative sky and the soft darkness of the suggestive 
trees. He saw a girl's frosty yellow hair and long grey eyes. 
Colour and music flowed together. Song became the divinity of 
colour, and colour the inmost secrecy of song. And, born of them, 
and of all the wonder of the evening atmosphere, that something 
strange which dwells far down in the deep recesses of each human 
being seemed suddenly to live again in Aubrey and to be restless 
in its life. Again the voices called to it, and it listened to them 
with pain. Again, in its remote place, it felt the touch of magic 
and longed for the wonder that it could never see. Again it 
aspired, and, flying beyond the realm of reason, knew what it could 
not prove, loved what it could not know. 

Another instrument stole in. That scene was shattered. Now 
he saw the blood-red stars, like eyes, looking out among the leaves 
of the chestnut trees and the green glow-worms crawling along the 
dusky garden paths. The fountain played, leaping towards the 
crescent of the little moon, and on the grass the sacred dew lay 
like the tears of God. And there was a white robe in the distance, 
like the robe of a ghost that treads a sorrowful round on the dark 
nights of the year. Aubrey followed that robe. He heard the 
voices of horns, those misty human voices that have talked with 
all the fairies on all the midsummer eves. They set the trees 
before him, and the white and gliding ghost. And he followed. But 
the wood was very dark and far larger, far more impenetrable than 
the little wood at Epsom. And the white robe fluttered on as if 
its phantom wearer sought ever deeper recesses, and more sad and 
sombre paths. Where could it be going, and what could be its 
quest ? Now, for a moment, in the towering blackness of the 
wood that had become a forest, the white-robed ghost was like a 
white butterfly fluttering forward with trembling, outstretched 
wings, and Aubrey heard among the trees a deep and muffled mur- 
mur, like the murmur of a weary city hidden somewhere in the 
gloom. The forest became a jungle full of amazing undergrowths 
and inextricable mysteries of intertwining plants. Terrible flowers, 
with gigantic folded petals, slept all around him. Among them 
were dying lilies. He heard the beating of the wings of monstrous 
bats. A trumpet in the orchestra typified the flowers. They woke 
as he passed through them, yawning with brazen mouths. The 
butterfly was far before him, a white shadow in the gloom. Non- 
all the flowers were gone. He had passed beyond the regions of 



THE SLA YE 401 

any flowers. All around he saw but one sort of plant, growing 
rankly in pestilent abundance, a sickly and haggard plant, with 
flaccid leaves, round the edges of which crept a horrible decay. 
The air was full of the odour of death. Dense and noisome mists 
rose from the yielding swamp beneath his feet, and the white 
butterfly vanished in the dark. 

The little flute spoke again in its pitilessly clear voice, telling 
him that he might have rescued the butterfly if he had not delayed, 
if he had had more courage, more reliance on his manhood. 

Then other voices arose. Again he seemed to be following the 
dolorous progress of the ghost. And now he could see what led 
it forward the chimera, or the Will-o'-the-wisp, it eternally pur- 
sued. Far before it in its path there shone a flitting light, green, 
mysterious, and delusive, moving for ever towards some hidden 
place. Sometimes this light was high up, as if mounting into 
heaven to take its place among the stars. Sometimes it was low, 
as if sinking into the earth. Sometimes it shone more fiercely 
a few feet above the earth. And then, as in a vision, Aubrey saw 
beneath and around it the shadow of a hand that held it, saw 
above it the shadow of a dim and whimsical face. Some goblin 
grasped it, and ran onward with it in the eternal mazes of the 
wood. He longed to see the goblin's face more clearly, and he 
bent his mind upon it, commanding the goblin to show itself to 
him plainly. Then the green light flashed, and he saw a Mandarin 
sitting cross-legged and with a heathen smile upon its flexible lips ; 
and the mandarin had Sir Reuben's face. The green light flashed 
again. Now Aubrey saw no face, but only something dai'k, black 
and forbidding like a mask. While he looked on it the white 
ghost rushed forward, lifted eager lips, and kissed the ugly thing. 
Then the green light shone with an abnormal brilliance, and 
Aubrey saw that it was an emerald, and that it lay upon Caryll's 
breast. He gazed upon it. The noise of the orchestra rose in 
a roar and ceased. The curtain fell. Upon the red damask of the 
chairs in the empty box of Demetrius there floated again two 
figures of a woman and a man. On the white and gold arms 
of the chairs rested human arms. The figures stayed in silence. 
They grew more clear. Aubrey started. He heard all around him 
the hum of conversation. He heard the rustle of his mother's 
gown as she moved. But still he seemed to see Lady Caryll, with 
the great emerald glowing on her breast. Yes, it was she, and she 
was dressed in white like the ghost. Beside her was the tall man 
whom Aubrey had seen at the Private View. She spoke to him 
and smiled happily. Then she sat forward in the box, as if she 
wished to be more plainly seen by the crowded house. Aubrey 
said to his mother quietly 

2 c 



402 THE SLAVE 

" Can I have the glasses, Matei', please ? ' 
" Yes, Aubrey," said Lady Rangecliffe. 

She handed them to him, and, turning away from him, pre- 
tended to glance about the house. It seemed to her as if many 
hours passed before she heard Aubrey move again. At length he 
laid the glasses down carefully upon the ledge of the box. 

" Mater," he said, " Lady Caryll has found the emerald that 
was stolen from her. She is wearing it to-night." 

His voice was perfectly calm. He got up and went out of the 
box without another word. 

Meanwhile the entrance of Lady Caryll and Mr. Demetrius had 
caused a sensation in the crowded house. In all directions men 
and women were putting up their opera-glasses to gaze at her and 
at her companion. Lady St. Orrnyn, half-hidden behind a curtain, 
examined her daughter with round and agitated eyes, then whis- 
pered eagerly to Mrs. Luffa Parkinson and Mr. Fraser, whose 
pantomime of astonishment and deprecation was most expressive. 
A prince, who had once resolved to know more of Lady Caryll, 
stared at her from an omnibus box, and recalled a certain ball to 
the recollection of a gentleman of his suite. As to the Villets and 
Albert Sprigg, they were really in a turmoil. 

" How utterly changed she looks ! " exclaimed Madame Villet. 
" Why, she's perfectly radiant. Is she in love with the man ? " 

" She looks as she did that night that night when I saw her 
first/' ejaculated Paul Villet, screwing his eyeglass into his eye to 
glare at the woman who had drawn him from the fangs of poverty 
and laid upon him the curse of his fame. " A goddess, ma foi ! " 
He smacked his sensual lips. 

Albert Sprigg protruded his fat face between his host and 
hostess and half shut his eyes. 

"Delicious!" he murmured. "The little princess would be 
jealous of her jealous to salt tears." 

" But/' cried Madame Villet suddenly, " what's she staring 
at ? What's she touching ? Has she some ornament ? But she 
never wears jewels now. She has none since the emerald was 
stolen." 

" Mon Dieu ! " exclaimed Paul Villet, bringing his hand down 
violently on the shoulder of Albert Sprigg, who started effemi- 
nately and looked elaborately disgusted. " Mon Dieu ! It cannot 
it cannot be ! " 

"Mori cher Paul," began Mr. Sprigg, "you really " 

But Villet, who was leaning forward excitedly, took no notice 
of his friend's injury. 

" What is it, Paul ? " twittered Madame Villet. " Are you going 
to have a fit ? " 



THE SLAVE 403 

" It is it is the emerald ! " he cried. " Mon Dieu ! She wears 
it on her breast ! " 

"The emerald!" exclaimed his wife. "Impossible! You are 
mad, Paul ! " 

"You must be mad, mon cher," cried Albert Sprigg, getting up 
from his seat in great haste. " Give me the glasses." 

He snatched them rudely from Madame Villet, who was taking 
them, stared for a moment at Lady Caryll, and then said, with no 
French accent 

" By Jove ! I believe you're right ! I'll find out for certain." 

He hurried out of the box. In an instant they saw him stand- 
ing in the stalls just under the box of Demetrius. He returned to 
them greatly excited. 

" You're right, Paul," he said. " It is the emerald. Every 
one's talking of it. But what a miracle ! Has it fallen from the 
skies ? " 

" Was it ever stolen ? " criedMadame Villet sarcastically. " Who 
knows ? Women " 

She checked herself, glancing narrowly at Albert Sprigg. He 
smiled disagreeably. 

" Women exactly ! " he said. 

Madame Villet gazed at Lady Caryll with bitter eyes, and then 
at her companion. 

" He's a handsome man, rather," she said. " But abominable 
looking. Where can she have picked him up ? Why can she have 
married him ? " 

At this moment Monsieur Anneau entered the box. His eyes 
were flashing and he looked tremendously excited. Madame Villet 
turned upon him. 

" You know of the miracle ? " she said. 

" The miracle ! " 

" Of the emerald of the emerald's return ! " 

" Is it a miracle ? " he said. 

An evil smile ran over his dark face. 

" Perhaps it is/' he said. " Every one talks as if it were ! " 

"Well, but you was it ever stolen?" began Madame Villet. 
" What do you think ? " 

" I ? " said Monsieur Anneau. " I ? " 

He shrugged his great shoulders. 

" I never think seriously. I am a citizen of the world. But 
if I thought " 

He paused, and looked with almost ferocious significance at the 
three faces that were turned to his. 

" Yes, yes ! " cried Madame Villet, restlessly tapping the ledge 
of the box with her hand, x "Tell me tell me ! " 



404 THE SLAVE 

"I might perhaps be led to fancy we artists, you know, 
madame, are full of fancies that Miladi had had a stroke of 
strange good fortune." 

" How ? How ? " cried Madame Villet. 
" How, mon cher ? " ejaculated Villet. 

" How the deuce ? " exclaimed Albert Sprigg nearing 

Greenwich, and leaving Paris in the distance. 

" In marrying the man who well, let us say, who has been 
taking care of her treasure, of the only thing she loves, for so 
many months. And perhaps I might be led to fancy, further, that 
having won a rich bride, he has been moved to generosity, and has 
given back her jewel to her as his wedding gift." 

His hearers were silent for a moment. Astonishment deprived 
them of the powers of speech. At length Madame Villet said 

" Demetrius, the thief who robbed her ! But she would have 
recognised him ! " 

"Did he not wear a mask?" said Monsieur Anneau. 

" But but why should she have been drawn to him, why 
should she have married him ? " 

" Did not her jewel call her from its hiding-place, draw her to 
it whether she would or no? PifF! I only hazard a theory, an 
absurd and childish theory, at which I am the first to laugh." 

As he spoke he burst into a great laugh that was like the 
laugh of Mephistopheles at the end of the garden-scene in Faust, 
but his eyes were full of anger and his hearers were petrified. 
There was a moment of uneasy silence. Then Albert Sprigg 
dashed out of the box to spread abroad the theory of Monsieur 
Anneau. 

He did his work so well like a good conversationalist, allowing 
theory to develop into fact that before the third act was over all 
Lady Caryll's world agreed that she had linked her fate with a 
thief, in order to get back the treasure she had lost ; though how 
she had discovered that Demetrius was the thief, or how, having 
discovered it, she had wedded, instead of denouncing him, nobody 
could explain. 

Aubrey heard the rumour, and, as the opera was nearing its 
end, he said to Lady Rangecliffe 

" Mater ! " 

"Yes, Aubrey," she answered. 

" Will you do something for me ? " 

" Yes, Aubrey. What is it ? " 

" I must tell you something first. I believe Mr. Demetrius to 
be a backguard. Now I'll ask you will you call on his wife 
to-morrow and let everybody know you've done it ? " 

"All right, Aubrey," Lady Rangecliflfe said, in a very low voice. 



! 




THE SLAVE 405 

The orchestra played the last chord. The curtain fell, and the 
crowd surged into the vestibule, where grooms with staring eyes 
stood in eager rows to claim the notice of their employers. People 
gathered together in mobs, waiting for their carriages, and discuss- 
ing the great scandal of the evening with animated voices. 

Suddenly an attendant outside shouted : 

" Mr. Demetrius' carriage ! Mr. Demetrius' carriage !" 

A hundred pretty heads turned towards the glass doors. Men 
moved quickly forward, and innumerable conversations died away. 

" Mr. Demetrius' carriage ! " shouted the attendant more 
fiercely. 

There was an agitation at the back of the crowd. An elabo- 
rately refined and over-polite man's voice said several times, and 
each time with an increasing and more intolerable sweetness 

" Will you have the great kindness to permit this lady to pass ? 
Thank you ! Thank you ! Will you courteously permit Thank 
you ! I am obliged ! " 

And Lady Caryl 1, with one hand on her new husband's arm, 
passed slowly through the staring throng. There was a defiant 
smile on her face, but she looked straight before her. 

No one spoke to her. Lady Rangecliffe had already gone. 

No one bowed to her. She did not pass by Aubrey. 

Every one gazed at her white face and shining eyes, then 
turned to stare at her solicitous companion, who smiled meretri- 
ciously as he continued to repeat, with a damning crescendo of 
gentlemanliness, as a wit said afterwards at White's 

" If you will most courteously permit me one moment allow 
this lady to reach her carriage, I beg of you. Thank you thank 
you I am indeed greatly obliged." 

As Lady Caryll got into her carriage, a detective who was 
standing outside with a companion, smiled, jerked his thumb at 
Mr. Demetrius, and remarked 

" Paris Jack's in luck ! " 

The other man laughed as the carriage drove away. 

Aubrey had seen his mother off. He meant to walk to Jermyn 
Street. As he was coming from the cloak-room to the door 
he chanced to meet Adela Reckitt, the white-haired American 
poetess whom he had taken into dinner at Lady St. Ormyn's on the 
night of the festivities at Epsom. She stopped him, looked at him 
with a curious gentleness of compassion that he could not resent 
it was so sincere, so humane, so incurious and said to him 
softly 

" Is it not true that on the famous emerald there are engraved 
three figures ? " 

" Yes," he said, wondering. 



406 THE SLAVE 

"The Soul, and two Pleasures?" 

" Yes." 

" Only two," she said. " Remember that. Pleasures die but 
the Soul lives on." 

She vanished in the crowd, but her words remained with 
Aubrey. He seemed to hold Caryll again in his arms, to feel again 
that she was still a dreamer, and that he alone had the power to 
wake her at last from her dream to true understanding, to true and 
beautiful life. 

One Pleasure had passed into the shades. 

As Aubrey walked home under the stars he, the true, the 
eternal dreamer, gave himself to his dreams once more. He saw 
the light of a tender sunset struggling in the arms of a cruel, 
wintry sky. He listened for the inner voice which he still believed 
to be murmuring in the Soul that was borne away by Pleasures. 

And surely, far away among the roses of his Eastern Paradise, 
the cunning artificer, who had graven his irony upon a jewel long 
ago, smiled as he looked down and saw the dreamer wandering in 
the night among the voices of the City smiled, thinking of the 
generations that had vanished, and of all the dreamers who had 
died, since he drew forth his tiny tools in a shadowy bazaar, and 
leaned above his shining scroll in a strange country of the Sun. 



THE END 



Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co. 
Edinburgh dr" London 



Hrt Boohs 



RUBENS 

THE LIFE AND WORK OF 

By EMILE MICHEL. 
Translated by ELIZABETH LEE. 

With 80 Photogravures and Coloured Plates, and about 250 Text Illustrations- 
In Two Vols., demy 4to, price 2 2B. net. [Ready in October. 

BRITISH CONTEMPORARY ARTISTS 

SEVEN STUDIES 
By COSMO MONKHOUSE 

In One Volume. With a number of Reproductions of Paintings, Portraits, and 
Studies. [In preparation. 

GAINSBOROUGH 

AND HIS PLACE IN ENGLISH ART 
By SIR WALTER ARMSTRONG 

DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL GALLERY, IRELAND 

With 62 Photogravures from Photographs specially taken for this Edition, and 
printed on the finest French plate paper, and IO Lithographs in Colours. In 
One Volume, large imperial 410, gilt top, price .5 55. net. 

LEONARDO DA VINCI 

ARTIST, THINKER, AND MAN OF SCIENCE 
By EUGENE MONTZ 

MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE, ETC. 

With 48 Plates and 252 Tot Illustrations. In Two Vols. Price 2 2s. net. 
Also published in 16 Parts, at 2S. net 

MEISSONIER 

HIS LIFE AND HIS ART 

By VALLERY C. O. GREARD 

DB L'ACADEMIE FRANCAISE 

Translated from the French by Lady MARY LOYD and FLORENCE SIMMONDS 
With 38 Full-page Plates, 20 in Photogravure and 18 in Colour, and 200 Text 
Illustrations. Imperial 8vo, l i6s. net. 

Also published in 14 Parts, at 2s. 6d. net 

ANTONIO ALLEGRI DA CORREGGIO 

HIS LIFE, HIS FRIENDS. AND HIS TIME 
ByCORRADO RICCI 

DIRECTOR OF THE ROYAL GALLERY, PARMA 

Translated by FLORENCE SIMMONDS 

With 16 Photogravure Plates, 21 Full-page Plates in Tint, and 190 Illustrations 
in the the Text. Imperial 8vo, 2 2s. net. 

Also published in 16 Parts, at 2s. 6d. net 

REMBRANDT 

HIS LIFE, HIS WORK, AND HIS TIME 
By EMILE MICHEL 

MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE 

Translated by FLORENCE SIMMONDS 
Edited and Prefaced by FREDERICK. WEDMORE 

Second Edition, Enlarged, with 76 Full-page Plate*, and 250 Illustrations in the Text. 
In One Volume, Gilt Top, or in Two Volumes, imperial 8vo, 2 2s. net. 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



popular 30. 6t>, 1Rovel0. 



BY MRS. ALEXANDER. 
Mammon. 

BY FRANK BARRETT. 
The Justification of Andrew Lebrun. 

BY HALL CAINE. 
Capt'n Davy's Honeymoon. 

BY ADA CAMBRIDGE. 

A Marked Man. 
A Little Minx. 

BY RICHARD HARDING DAVIS. 

The King's Jackal. 

BY BURTON DIBBS. 
In Summer Isles. 

BY ERNEST DOWSON AND 

ARTHUR MOORE. 
A Comedy of Masks. 

BY J. PERCY FITZPATRICK. 
The Outspan. (Tales of South Africa.) 

BY MRS. FLEMING. 
A Pinchbeck Goddess. 

BY HAROLD FREDERIC 
The Copperhead; and other Stories. 
The Return of the O'Mahony. 
In the Valley. 

BY CHARLES GRANVILLE. 
Mrs. John Foster. 

BY HENRY HARLAND. 
Mademoiselle Miss, and other Stories. 



BY C. J. CUTCLIFFE HYNE. 
The Recipe for Diamonds. 

BY WALKER KENNEDY. 
In the Dwellings of Silence. 

BY MRS. ARCHIBALD LITTLE. 
A Marriage in China. 

BY MAARTEN MAARTENS. 
A Question of Taste. 

BY BERTRAM MITFORD. 
A Romance of the Cape Frontier. 
'Tween Snow and Fire. 

BY J. H. PEARCE. 
Eli's Daughter. 
Inconsequent Lives. 

BY ELIZABETH STUART PHELPS 

AND HERBERT D. WARD. 
The Master of the Magicians 

BY ADELINE SERGEANT. 
The Story of a Penitent Soul. 

BY TASMA. 

A Knight of the White Feather. 
Uncle Piper of Piper's Hill. 

BY DAVID DWIGHT WELLS. 
Her Ladyship's Elephant. 

BY EMILE ZOLA. 
Stories for Ninon. 



1beinemann'0 10. 



Uniformly bound in Cloth. Price is. 6d. net. 



THE TENOR AND THE BOY. 

By SARAH GRAND. 
THE REDS OF THE MIDI. 

By FELIX GRAS. 
THE THREE MISS KINGS. 

By ADA CAMBRIDGE. 
THE HEAD OF THE FIRM. 

By Mrs. RIDDELL. 
KITTY'S FATHER. 

By FRANK BAKKETT. 
THE TOWER OF TADDEO. 

By OUIDA. 
NOT ALL IN VAIN. 

By ADA CAMBKIDGE. 
DONALD MARCY. 

By ELIZABETH STUART PHELPS. 
DAUGHTERS OF MEN. 

By HANNAH LYNCH. 
THE KING OF THE MOUNTAINS. 

By EDMOND ABOUT. 
MR. BLAKE OF NEWMARKET. 

By E. H. COOPER. 
THE PENANCE OF PORTIA JAMES. 

By TASMA. 



COME LIVE WITH ME AND BE MY 
LOVE. 

By ROBERT BUCHANAN. 

MARGARET BELLARMINE. 
By ADELINE SERGEANT. 

sr. IVES. 

By ROBERT Louis STEVENSON. 
NOR WIFE NOR MAID. 

By Mrs. HUNGERFORD. 
THE FOURTH NAPOLEON. 

By CHARLES BENHAM. 
ORIOLE'S DAUGHTER. 

By JESSIE FOTHERGILL. 
LOU. 

By BARON VON ROBERTS. 
A ROMANCE OF THE FIRST CONSUL. 

By MATILDA MALLING. 
THE GRANDEE. 

By A, PALACIO VALDES. 
THE O'CONNORS OF BALLINA- 
HINCH. 

By Mrs. HUNGERFORD. 
THE HOYDEN. 

By Mrs. HUNGERFORD. 






Other Volumes to folhw. 



LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 Bedford Street, W.C. 



THE OPEN QUESTION 

BY ELIZABETH ROBINS 
In One Volume, price 6s, 

Daily Chronicle. 'He gives us here three deeply differentiated beings, in 
whom yet some family likeness of mentality is made to appear, and he draws 
them with that concern for the value of each stroke, which was known to 
masters of etching, and to them only. There is a seriousness of purpose, an 
artist's genuine humility before his material, mated to a rare sense of life and 
the play of strong hearts and souls, which makes this a book of moment. ' 

St. James's Gazette. 'This is an extraordinarily fine novel. . . . We 
have not, for many years, come across a serious novel of modern life which 
has more powerfully impressed our imagination, or created such an instant 
conviction of the genius of its writer. . . . We express our own decided 
opinion that it is a book which, setting itself a profound human problem, 
treats it in a manner worthy of the profoundest thinkers of the time, with a 
literary art and a fulness of the knowledge of life which stamp a master 
novelist. ... It is not meat for little people or for fools ; but for those who 
care for English fiction as a vehicle of the constructive intellect, building up 
types of living humanity for our study, it will be a new revelation of strength, 
and strange, serious beauty. . . . The brief statement of this Question can 
give but the barest conception of the broad and architectonic way in which it 
is worked out in the lives of the actors, with what tender insight, what utterly 
unmaudlin unsentimentality, and absolutely inevitable dramatic sequence.' 

Outlook. ' It were difficult here to give more than a dim, perhaps even a 
distorted, outline of this book ; difficult here to give more than bare and in- 
complete suggestions of the splendid art, the frequent magic, the leashed 
power wherewith Mr. Raimond has wrought out his story no gloomy story 
by any manner of means, rather a thing of light and colour and laughter, 
touched here and there with shadow.' 

VIA LUCIS 

BY KASSANDRA VIVARIA 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Daily Telegraph. ' No one who reads these pages, in which the life of 
the spirit is so completely described, can doubt for an instant that the author 
is laying bare her soul's autobiography. Perhaps never before has there been 
related with such detail, such convincing honesty, and such pitiless clear- 
sightedness, the tale of misery and torturing perplexity, through which a young 
and ardent seeker after truth can struggle. It is all so strongly drawn. The 
book is simply and quietly written, and gains in force from its clear direct 
style. Every page, every descriptive line bears the stamp of truth.' 

Morning- Post. ' In the telling of the story thete is much that is worth 
attention, since the author possesses distinct gifts of vivid expression, and 
clothes many of her thoughts in language marked by considerable force, and 
sometimes by beauty of imagery and of melody. ... Via Lucis is but one 
more exercise, and by no means the least admirable, on that great and inex- 
haustible theme which has inspired countless artists and poets and novelists 
the conflict between the aspirations of the soul for rest in religion and of the 
heart for human love and the warfare of the world. ' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 

A 



THE BONDMAN 

BY HALL CAINE 

With a Photogravure Portrait of the Author. 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Mr. Gladstone. ' The Bondman is a work of which I recognise the 
freshness, vigour, and sustained interest, no less than its integrity of aim.' 

The Times. ' It is impossible to deny originality and rude power to this 
saga, impossible not to admire its forceful directness, and the colossal 
grandeur of its leading characters." 

The Academy. 'The language of The Bondman is full of nervous, 
graphic, and poetical English ;'its interest never flags, and its situations and 
descriptions are magnificent. It is a splendid novel.' 

The Speaker. 'This is the best book that Mr. Hall Caine has yet 
written, and it reaches a level to which fiction very rarely attains. . . . We 
are, in fact, so loth to let such good work be degraded by the title of 
" novel" that we are almost tempted to consider its claim to rank as a prose 
epic. ' 

The Scotsman. 'Mr. Hall Caine has in this work placed himself 
beyond the front rank of the novelists of the day. He has produced a story 
which, for the ingenuity of its plot, for its literary excellence, for its delinea- 
tions of human passions, and for its intensely powerful dramatic scenes, is 
distinctly ahead of all the fictional literature of our time, and fit to rank with 
the most powerful fictional writing of the past century.' 

THE SCAPEGOAT 

BY HALL CAINE 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. ' In our judgment it excels in dramatic force all the Author's 
previous efforts. For grace and touching pathos Naomi is a character which 
any romancist in the world might be proud to have created, and the tale of 
her parents' despair and hopes, and of her own development, confers upon 
The Scapegoat a distinction which is matchless of its kind. ' 

The Guardian. ' Mr. Hall Caine is undoubtedly master of a style which 
is peculiarly his own. He is in a way a Rembrandt among novelists.' 

The Athenaeum. 'It is a delightful story to read.' 

The Academy. 'Israel ben Oliel is the third of a series of the most 
profoundly conceived characters in modern fiction. ' 

The Saturday Review. 'This is the best novel which Mr. Caine has 
yet produced.' 

The Scotsman. ' The new story will rank with Mr. Hall Caine's previous 
productions. Nay, it will in some respects rank above them. It will take 
its place by the side of the Hebrew histories in the Apocrypha. It is nobly 
and manfully written. It stirs the blood and kindles the imagination.' 

Truth. 'Mr. Hall Caine has been winning his way slowly, but surely, 
and securely I think also, to fame. You must by all means read his 
absorbing Moorish romance, The Scapegoat.'' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 






THE CHRISTIAN 

BY HALL CAINE 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Mr. Gladstone writes : ' I cannot but regard with warm respect and 
admiration the conduct of one holding your position as an admired and 
accepted novelist who stakes himself, so to speak, on so bold a protestation 
on behalf of the things which are unseen as against those which are seen, and 
are so terribly effective in chaining us down to the level of our earthly 
existence." 

Dean Farrar. ' After all deductions and all qualifications, it seems to 
me that The Christian is of much more serious import and of much more 
permanent value than the immense majority of novels. It is a book which 
makes us think.' 

The Sketch. ' It quivers and palpitates with passion, for even Mr. 
Caine's bitterest detractors cannot deny that he is the possessor of that rarest 
of all gifts, genius.' 

The Newcastle Daily Chronicle. ' Establishes Mr. Caine's position 
once for all as the greatest emotional force in contemporary fiction. A great 
effort, splendid in emotion and vitality, a noble inspiration carried to noble 
issues an honour to Mr. Hall Caine and to English fiction.' 

The Standard. 'The book has humour, it has pathos, it is full of colour 
and movement. It abounds in passages of terse, bold, animated descriptions. 
. . . There is, above all, the fascination of a skilful narrative. ' 

The Speaker. ' It is a notable book, written in the heart's blood of the 
author, and palpitating with the passionate enthusiasm that has inspired it. 
A book that is good to read, and that cannot fail to produce an impression on 
its readers. ' 

The Scotsman. ' The tale will enthral the reader by its natural power 
and beauty. The spell it casts is instantaneous, but it also gathers strength 
from chapter to chapter, until we are swept irresistibly along by the impetuous 
current of passion and action. ' 

THE MANXMAN 

BY HALL CAINE 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. 'With the exception of The Scapegoat, this is unquestion- 
ably the finest and most dramatic of Mr. Hall Caine's novels. . . . The 
Manxman goes very straight to the roots of human passion and emotion. It 
is a remarkable book, throbbing with human interest.' 

The Queen. ' The Manxman is undoubtedly one of the most remarkable 
books of the century. It will be read and re-read, and take its place in the 
literary inheritance of the English-speaking nations.' 

The St. James's Gazette. ' The Manxman is a contribution to litera- 
ture, and the most fastidious critic would give in exchange for it a wilderness 
of that deciduous trash which our publishers call fiction. ... It is not possible 
to part from The Manxman with anything but a warm tribute of approval.' 
EDMUND GOSSE. 

LONDON : WILLIAM IIEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



ST. IVES 

BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Times. 'Neither Stevenson himself nor any one else has given us 
a better example of a dashing story, full of life and colour and interest. St. 
Ives is both an entirely delightful personage and a narrator with an enthralling 
style a character who will be treasured up in the memory along with David 
Balfour and Alan Breck, even with D'Artagnan and the Musketeers.' 

The Daily News. ' We see our author at his best. It is Stevenson with 
his rare eighteenth century quaintness, grace, and humaneness, to which is 
added a sense of nature permeating the whole work and lending to it a charm 
that the masters of the eighteenth century did not possess.' 

The Scotsman. ' It is a dashing book. The hero is a glorious fellow. 
It has " passion, impudence, and energy," and in the multitude of its quickly 
changing scenes "there shines a brilliant and romantic grace." It is a tale 
to keep many readers sitting up late at night.' 

Literature. ' Never, perhaps, have the fascination and the foibles of the 
typical Frenchman been studied with such humorous insight, or hit off with 
such felicity of touch. The dialogue is of Stevenson's best. ' 



THE EBB-TIDE 

BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON 

AND 

LLOYD OSBOURNE 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The St. James's Gazette. 'The book takes your imagination and 
attention captive from the first chapter nay, from the first paragraph and it 
does not set them free till the last word has been read.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'We are swept along without a pause on the 
current of the animated and vigorous narrative. Each incident and adven- 
ture is told with that incomparable keenness of vision which is Mr. Stevenson's 
greatest charm as a story-teller.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'It is brilliantly invented, and it is not less 
brilliantly told. There is not a dull sentence in the whole run of it. And 
the style is fresh, alert, full of surprises in fact, is very good latter-day 
Stevenson indeed.' 

The World. 'It is amazingly clever, full of that extraordinary know- 
ledge of human nature which makes certain creations of Mr. Stevenson's pen 
far more real to us than persons we have met in the flesh. 

The Morning Post. ' Boldly conceived, probing some of the darkest 
depths of the human soul, the tale has a vigour and breadth of touch which 
have been surpassed in none of Mr. Stevenson's previous works. . . . We 
do not, of course, know how much Mr. Osbourne has contributed to the tale, 
but there is no chapter of which any author need be unwilling to acknow- 
ledge, or which is wanting in vivid interest.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE NAULAHKA 

A Tale of West and East 

BY RUDYARD KIPLING AND WOLCOTT BALESTIER 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. ' There is no one but Mr. Kipling who can make his 
readers taste and smell, as well as see and hear, the East ; and in this book 
(if we except the description of Tarvin's adventures in the deserted city of 
Gunvaur, which is perhaps less clear-cut than usual) he has surely surpassed 
himself. In his faculty for getting inside the Eastern mind and showing its 
queer workings, Mr. Kipling stands alone.' 

The Academy. ' The Nanlahka contains passages of great merit. 
There are descriptions scattered through its pages which no one but Mr. 
Kipling could have written. . . . Whoever reads this novel will find much of 
it hard to forget . . . and the story of the exodus from the hospital will rank 
among the best passages in modern fiction.' 

The Times. 'A happy idea, well adapted to utilise the respective ex- 
perience of the joint authors. . . . An excellent story. . . . The dramatic 
train of incident, the climax of which is certainly the interview between 
Sitabhai and Tarvin, the alternate crudeness and ferocity of the girl-queen, the 
susceptibility of the full-blooded American, hardly kept in subjection by his 
alertness and 'keen eye to business, the anxious eunuch waiting in the distance 
with the horses, and fretting as the stars grow paler and paler, the cough of 
the tiger slinking home at the dawn after a fruitless night's hunt the whole 
forms a scene not easily effaced from the memory.' 

THE CELIBATES' CLUB 

BY I. ZANGWILL 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Daily Graphic. 'A capital volume for one's dull moments.' 

St. James's Gazette.' Mr. Zangwill's Bachelors' Club and Old Maids' 
Club have separately had such a success as their sparkling humour, gay 
characterisation, and irresistible punning richly deserved that it is no 
surprise to find Mr. Heinemann now issuing them together in one volume. 
Readers who have not purchased the separate volumes will be glad to add 
this joint publication to their bookshelves. Others, who have failed to read 
either, until they foolishly imagined that it was too late, have now the best 
excuse for combining the pleasures of two.' 

Literature. 'Mr. Zangwill's intensely, almost excessively, clever 
Bachelors' Club and Old Maids' Club are republished by Mr. Heinemann in 
one volume, entitled The Celibates' Club. 

World. ' Every one knows the lines on which Mr. Zangwill's humour is 
apt to run. Every one knows how keen is his insight where it is concerned 
with that section of human life of which he mainly writes. The present 
volume is typical of his literary methods.' 

Saturday Review. ' It is, however, not so much in clever grammatical 
byplay as in humorous epigram that Mr. Zangwill shines. . . . For smart- 
ness, originality, and total absence of platitude, they deserve high commenda- 
tion. . . . Mr. Zangwill is not only desirous of making his readers think, he 
loves to perplex them.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



DREAMERS OF THE GHETTO 

BY I. ZANGWILL 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

W. E. Henley in the ' Outlook.' ' A brave, eloquent, absorbing, and, on 
the whole, persuasive book, whose author speaking with a magnanimity and 
a large and liberal candour not common in his race tells you as much, 
perhaps, as has before been told in modern literature. ... I find them all 
vastly agreeable reading, and I take pleasure in recognising them all for the 
work of a man who loves his race, and for his race's sake would like to make 
literature. . , . Here, I take it here, so it seems to me is that rarest of 
rare things, a book. As I have said, I do not wholly believe in it. But it is a 
book ; it goes far to explain the Jew ; in terms of romance it sets forth not a 
little of the most romantic, practical, persistent, and immitigable people that 
the world has known or will ever know. It is, in fact, a Jew of something akin 
to genius upon Jewry the unchangeable quantity. And I feel that the reading 
of it has widened my horizon, and given me much to perpend.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It is hard to describe this book, for we can think 
of no exact parallel to it. In form, perhaps, it comes nearest to some of 
Walter Pater's work. For each of the fifteen chapters contains a criticism of 
thought under the similitude of an "Imaginary Portrait." . . . We have a 
vision of the years presented to us in typical souls. We live again through 
crises of human thought, and are compelled by the writer's art to regard them, 
not as a catalogue of errors or hopes dead or done with, but under the vital 
forms in which at one time or another they confronted the minds of actual 
men like ourselves. Nearly all these scenes from the Ghetto take the form 
of stories. A few are examples of the imaginative short story, that fine 
method of art. The majority are dramatic scenes chosen from the actual life's 
history of the idealists of Jewry in almost every European land.' 

THE MASTER 

Bv I. ZANGWILL 

With a Photogravure Portrait of the Author 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Queen. 'It is impossible to deny the greatness of a book like The 
Master, a veritable human document, in which the characters do exactly as 
they would in life. ... I venture to say that Matt himself is one of the most 
striking and original characters in our fiction, and I have not the least doubt 
that The Master will always be reckoned one of our classics. ' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'It is a powerful and masterly piece of work. . . . 
Quite the best novel of the year.' 

The Literary World. ' In The Master, Mr. Zangwill has eclipsed all his 
previous work. This strong and striking story of patience and passion, of 
sorrow and success, of art, ambition, and vain gauds, is genuinely powerful 
in its tragedy, and picturesque in its completeness. . . . The work, thoroughly 
wholesome in tone, is of sterling merit, and strikes a truly tragic chord, which 
leaves a deep impression upon the mind.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



CHILDREN OF THE GHETTO 

BY I. ZANGWILL 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. 'From whatever point of view we regard it, it is a remark- 
able book.' 

The Guardian. 'A novel such as only our own day could produce. A 
masterly study of a complicated psychological problem in which every factor 
is handled with such astonishing dexterity and intelligence that again and 
again we are tempted to think a really good book has come into our hands.' 

Black and White. 'A moving- panorama of Jewish life, full of truth, full 
of sympathy, vivid in the setting forth, and occasionally most brilliant. Such 
a book as this has the germs of a dozen novels. A book to read, to keep, to 
ponder over, to remember.' 

The Manchester Guardian. 'The best Jewish novel ever written.' 



THE KING OF SCHNORRERS 

BY I. ZANGWILL 

With over Ninety Illustrations by PHIL MAY and Others. 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Saturday Review. 'Mr. Zangwill has created a new figure in 
fiction, and a new type of humour. The entire series of adventures is a 
triumphant progress. . . . Humour of a rich and active character pervades 
the delightful history of Manasses. Mr. Zangwill's book is altogether very 
good reading. It is also very cleverly illustrated by Phil May and other 
artists.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It is a beautiful story. The King of Schnorrers 
is that great rarity an entirely new thing, that is as good as it is new.' 

THE PREMIER AND THE PAINTER 

BY I. ZANGWILL 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Morning Post. 'The story is described as a "fantastic romance," 
and, indeed, fantasy reigns supreme from the first to the last of its pages. It 
relates the history of our time with humour and well-aimed sarcasm. All the 
most prominent characters of the day, whether political or otherwise, come in 
for notice. The identity of the leading politicians is but thinly veiled, while 
many celebrities appear in proprid person^. Both the "Premier" and 
"Painter" now and again find themselves in the most critical situations. 
Certainly this is not a story that he who runs may read, but it is cleverly 
original, and often lightened by bright flashes of wit.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM IIEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE WAR OF THE WORLDS 

BY H. G. WELLS 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Spectator. 'In The War of the Worlds Mr. Wells has achieved a 
very notable success. As a writer of scientific romances he has never been 
surpassed. In manner, as in scheme and incident, he is singularly original, 
and if he suggests any one it is Defoe. He has not written haphazard, but 
has imagined and then followed his imagination with the utmost niceness and 
sincerity. In his romance two things have been done with marvellous power : 
the imagining of the Martians, their descent upon the earth and their final 
overthrow, and the description of the moral effects produced on a great city 
by the attack of a ruthless enemy. . . . That his readers will read with 
intense pleasure and interest we make no sort of doubt, for the book is one of 
the most readable and most exciting works of imaginative fiction published 
for many a long day. There is not a dull page in it. When once one has 
taken it up, one cannot bear to put it down without a pang. It is one of the 
books which it is imperatively necessary to sit up and finish.' 

The Academy. ' Mr. Wells has done nothing before quite so fine as this. 
He has two distinct gifts of scientific imagination and of mundane observa- 
tion and has succeeded in bringing them together and harmoniously into 
play. His speculative science is extraordinarily detailed, and the probable 
departures from possibility are, at least, so contrived as not to offend the 
reader who has but a small smattering of exact knowledge. Given the 
scientific hypotheses, the story as a whole is remarkably plausible. You 
feel it, not as romance, but as realism. As a crowning merit of the 
book, beyond its imaginative vigour and its fidelity to life, it suggests 
rather than obtrudes moral ideas. ... It is a thoughtful as well as an 
unusually vivid and effective bit of workmanship. Already Mr. Wells has 
his imitators, but their laboured productions, distinguished either by prolixity 
or inaccuracy, neither excite the admiration of scientific readers nor attract 
the attention of the world in general.' 

THE ISLAND OF DOCTOR MOREAU 

BY H. G. WELLS 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Spectator. 'There is nothing in Swift's grim conceptions of animal- 
ised men and rationalised animals more powerfully conceived. Doctor Moreau 
is a figure to make an impression on the imagination, and his tragic death has 
a kind of poetic justice which satisfies the mind of the reader. Although we 
do not recommend The Island of Doctor Moreau to readers of sensitive 
nerves, as it might well haunt them too powerfully, we believe that Mr. 
Wells has almost rivalled Swift in the power of his very gruesome, but very 
salutary as well as impressive, conception.' 

The St. James's Gazette. ' There can be no question that Mr. Wells has 
written a singularly vivid and stimulating story. The idea is original and 
boldly fantastic. The description of the strange Beast Folk is powerful, and 
even convincing. The reader follows with a growing interest the fate of the 
stranger who is cast by accident upon this island of pain and terror. There 
are thrilling episodes and adventurous moments, and, above all, that happy 
knack of the tale-teller which makes you want to go on till you have got to 
the end of the story. The book is well written, with occasional passages that 
show a rare felicity in the use and handling of language. There is none of the 
younger romancers more gifted.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



GLORIA MUNDI 

BY HAROLD FREDERIC 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Daily Chronicle. 'Mr. Harold Frederic has here achieved a triumph of 
characterisation rare indeed in fiction, even in such fiction as is given us by 
our greatest. He has presented to us a young hero, unimpeachable of morals, 
gentle of soul, idealistic of temperament. . . . He has interested us in that 
young hero, won our sympathy for him from the first, and held it unto the 
last. Gloria Mundi is a work of art ; and one cannot read a dozen of its 
pages without feeling that the artist was an informed, large-minded, tolerant 
man of the world.' 

St. James's Gazette. ' It is packed with interesting thought as well as 
clear-cut individual and living character, and is certainly one of the few 
striking serious novels, apart from adventure and romance, which have been 
produced this year. . . . Mr. Frederic is very successful in his women, both 
the frivolous and the serious. . . . The story will be found entertaining, 
fresh, and vigorous throughout.' 

Daily Telegraph. '. . . The extraordinarily clever delineation of the 
few principal characters of the plot. We are never mistaken as to what they 
mean or what they intend to typify. Like a true artist, Mr. Harold Frederic 
has painted with a few decisive strokes, and his portraits become almost 
masterpieces.' 

Daily Mail. 'To read the book is a liberal education. It is written with 
eloquence, and is stuffed with ability from cover to cover.' 

ILLUMINATION 

BY HAROLD FREDERIC 
In One Volume, price bs. 

The Spectator. 'There is something more than the mere touch of the 
vanished hand that wrote The Scarlet Letter in Illumination, which is the 
best novel Mr. Harold Frederic has produced, and, indeed, places him very 
near if not quite at the head of the newest school of American fiction. . . . 
Illumination is undoubtedly one of the novels of the year. ' 

The Manchester Guardian. ' A remarkable book, and likely to be the 
novel of the year. It is a long time since a book of such genuine importance 
has appeared. It will not only afford novel-readers food for discussion during 
the coming season, but it will eventually fill a recognised place in English 
fiction.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' Mr. Harold Frederic is winning his way by 
sure steps to the foremost ranks of writers of fiction. Each book he gives us 
is an advance upon the one before it. ... His story is chiselled in detail, 
but the details gradually merge into a finished work ; and when we close the 
last page we have a new set of men and women for our acquaintances, a new 
set of provocative ideas, and almost a Meissonier in literature to add to our 
shelves. . . . Mr. Frederic's new novel is the work of a man born to write 
fiction ; of a keen observer, a genuine humorist, a thinker always original 
and sometimes even profound ; and of a man who has thoroughly learned 
the use of his own pen.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 

A 2 



ON THE FACE OF THE WATERS 

By FLORA ANNIE STEEL 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Spectator. 'We have read Mrs. Steel's book with ever-increasing 
surprise and admiration surprise at her insight into people with whom 
she can scarcely have been intimate, admiration for the genius which has 
enabled her to realise that wonderful welter of the East and West, which 
Delhi must have presented just before the Mutiny. There is many an officer 
who would give his sword to write military history as Mrs. Steel has written 
the history of the rising, the siege, and the storm. It is the most wonderful 
picture. We know that none who lived through the Mutiny will lay the book 
down without a gasp of admiration, and believe that the same emotion will be 
felt by thousands to whom the scenes depicted are but lurid phantasmagoria.' 

The Saturday Review. 'Many novelists and spinners of tales have 
made use of the Indian Mutiny, but Mrs.' Steel leaves them all a long way 
behind. On the Face of the Waters is the best novel of the Great Mutiny, 
and we are not likely to see its rival in our time.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'A picture, glowing with colour, of the most 
momentous and dramatic events in all our Empire's later history. We have 
read many stories having for their setting the lurid background of the Indian 
Mutiny, but none that for fidelity to fact, for vivacity of imagination, for 
masterly breadth of treatment, comes within half a dozen places of this. ' 

THE POTTER'S THUMB 

BY FLORA ANNIE STEEL 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Globe.' ' This is a brilliant story a story that fascinates, tingling 
with life, steeped in sympathy with all that is best and saddest.' 

The Manchester Guardian. 'The impression left upon one after reading 
The Potter's Thtimb is that a new literary artist, of very great and unusual 
gifts, has arisen. . . . In short, Mrs. Steel must be congratulated upon having 
achieved a very genuine and amply deserved success. ' 

The Glasgow Herald. 'A clever story which, in many respects, brings 
India very near to its readers. The novel is certainly one interesting alike to 
the Anglo-Indian and to those untravelled travellers who make their only 
voyages in novelists' romantic company. ' 

The Scotsman. ' It is a capital story, full of variety and movement, which 
brings with great vividness before the reader one of the phases of Anglo- 
Indian life. Mrs. Steel writes forcibly and sympathetically, and much of the 
charm of the picture which she draws lies in the force with which she brings 
out the contrast between the Asiatic and European world. 77;.? Potter's 
Thumb is very good reading, with its mingling of the tragedy and comedy of 
life.. Its evil woman par excellence . . . is a finished study.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



IN THE PERMANENT WAY 

BY FLORA ANNIE STEEL 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Spectator. 'While her only rival in this field of fiction is Mr. 
Kipling, her work is marked by an even subtler appreciation of the Oriental 
standpoint both ethical and religious a more exhaustive acquaintance with 
native life in its domestic and indoor aspects, and a deeper sense of the moral 
responsibilities attaching to our rule in the East. The book is profoundly 
interesting from beginning to end. ' 

The World. 'All Indian, all interesting, and all characteristic of the 
writer's exceptional ability, knowledge, and style. It is needless to say that 
there is beauty in every one of these tales. The author goes farther in the 
interpretation to us of the mysterious East than any other writer.' 

Literature. ' The tales of the fanaticism and humanity of Deen Mahomed, 
of the love and self-sacrifice of Glory-of- Woman, of the superstition and self- 
sacrifice of Hajji-Raheen are so many fragments of palpitating life taken 
from the myriadfold existence of our Indian Empire to make us realise which 
is not merely a service to literature. Mrs. Steel's sketches are founded, like 
Mr. Kipling's, on "the bed-rock of humanity," and they will live.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'A volume of charming stories and of stories 
possessing something more than mere charm. Stories made rich with beauty 
and colour, strong with the strength of truth, and pathetic with the intimate 
pathos which grows only from the heart. All the mystery and the frankness, 
the simplicity and the complexity of Indian life are here in a glowing setting of 
brilliant Oriental hues. A book to read and a book to buy. A book which 
no one but Mrs. Steel could have given us, a book which all persons of leisure 
should read, and for which all persons of taste will be grateful. ' 

FROM THE FIVE RIVERS 

BY FLORA ANNIE STEEL 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. 'Time was when these sketches of native Punjabi society 
would have been considered a curiosity in literature. They are sufficiently 
remarkable, even in these days, when interest in the "dumb millions "of 
India is thoroughly alive, and writers, great and small, vie in ministering to it. 
They are the more notable as being the work of a woman. Mrs. Steel has 
evidently been brought into close contact with the domestic life of all classes, 
Hindu and Mahomedan, in city and village, and has steeped herself in their 
customs and superstitions. . . . Mrs. Steel's book is of exceptional merit and 
freshness. ' 

The Athenaeum. ' They possess this great merit, that they reflect the 
habits, modes of life, and ideas of the middle and lower classes of the popula- 
tion of Northern India better than do systematic and more pretentious works.' 

The Globe. ' She puts before us the natives of our Empire in the East as 
they live and move and speak, with their pitiful superstitions, their strange 
fancies, their melancholy ignorance of what poses with us for knowledge and 
civilisation, their doubt of the new ways, the new laws, the new people. 
" Shah Sujah's Mouse," the gem of the collection a touching tale of un- 
reasoning fidelity towards an English " Sinny Baba" is a tiny bit of perfect 
writing.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE GADFLY 

BY E. L. VOYNICH 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Academy. c A remarkable story, which readers who prefer flesh and 
blood and human emotions to sawdust and adventure should consider as some- 
thing of a godsend. It is more deeply interesting and rich in promise than 
ninety-nine out of every hundred novels.' 

The Daily Telegraph. 'The character is finely drawn, with a tragic 
power and intensity which leave a lasting impression on the reader.' 

The World. 'The author's name is unknown to us : if this be his first 
work of fiction, it makes a mark such as it is given very few to impress, for 
the strength and originality of the story are indisputable, and its Dis-like gloom 
is conveyed with unerring skill. It is not faultless, but the Padre of the 
beginning, who is the Cardinal of the end, the one woman of the story, whose 
influence is so pervading, but so finely subordinated to the supreme interest, 
and the grandeur of the close of the tragedy, make us disinclined to look for 
flaws.' 

The St. James's Gazette. 'A very strikingly original romance which 
will hold the attention of all who read it, and establish the author's reputation 
at once for first-rate dramatic ability and power of expression. No one who 
opens its pages can fail to be engrossed by the vivid and convincing manner 
in which each character plays his part and each incident follows the other. 
Exciting, sinister, even terrifying, as it is at times, we must avow it to be a 
work of real genius, which will hold its head high among the ruck of recent 
fiction. ' 

THE MINISTER OF STATE 

BY J. A. STEUART 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Daily Mail. ' A brilliantly clever novel, charged with intellectuality 
and worldly knowledge, written with uncommon literary finish, pulsating 
with human nature. The story is constructed with marked ability, the 
characters are skilfully differentiated, and the literary workmanship gives 
continual pleasure.' 

The Globe. ' Its style is clear and vigorous, its matter interesting ; in fact, 
Mr. Steuart has produced an excellent piece of work.' 

The "World. 'The working of character and the power of self-making have 
rarely been so finely delineated as in this novel, which is nothing that fiction 
ought not to be, while its qualities place it far above the novels we are 
accustomed to, even of the higher class. It is dramatic, romantic and 
realistic ; and, apart from those charms, it pleases the very soul by the care- 
fulness, the cultivation of its style, the sense of respect for his art and his 
public conveyed by the writer's nice apportionment and finish. The life 
history of the Scotch laddie is one to be followed with vivid interest.' 

The Literary World. 'A novel which should make the author's name 
a familiar one among all classes of readers. To a polished style Mr. Steuart 
adds an ability to interest us in his characters which does not always go with 
epigrammatic writing. The story is one that appeals with great force both 
to the young and to the old.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE HOUSE OF HIDDEN TREASURE 

BY MAXWELL GRAY 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Chronicle. 'There is a strong and pervading charm in this new novel by 
Maxwell Gray. ... It is full of tragedy and irony, though irony is not the 
dominant note.' 

Spectator. ' The Silence if Dean Maitland was a very popular novel, 
and we cannot see why The House of Hidden Treasure should not rival the 
success of its forerunner. . . . It appeals throughout to the generous emotions, 
and holds up a high ideal of self-sacrifice. ' 

Speaker. ' We can promise that its perusal will bring a rich reward.' 

World. ' There is something of the old-time care and finish and of the 
old-time pathos about the story which is particularly attractive in the present 
day.' 

Saturday Review. ' The House of Hidden Treasure is in some ways the 
best thing its author has ever done. . . . It has beauty and distinction.' 

Times. ' Its buoyant humour and lively character-drawing will be found 
very enjoyable.' 

Scotsman. 'There is something out of the common in The House of 
Hidden Treasure. It is not only well written and interesting, it is distin- 
guished.' 

Daily Mail. 'The book becomes positively great, fathoming a depth of 
human pathos which has not been equalled in any novel we have read for 
years past. . . . The House of Hidden Treasure is not a novel to be bor- 
rowed ; it is a book to be bought and read, and read again and again.' 

THE LAST SENTENCE 

BY MAXWELL GRAY 

AUTHOR OF 'THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND,' ETC. 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Standard. ' The Last Sentence is a remarkable story ; it abounds 
with dramatic situations, the interest never for a moment flags, and the 
characters are well drawn and consistent.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' One of the most powerful and adroitly worked- 
out plots embodied in any modern work of fiction runs through The Last 
Sentence. . . . This terrible tale of retribution is told with well-sustained 
force and picturesqueness, and abounds in light as well as shade.' 

The Morning 1 Post. ' Maxwell Gray has the advantage of manner that is 
both cultured and picturesque, and while avoiding even the appearance of the 
melodramatic, makes coming events cast a shadow before them so as to excite 
and entertain expectation. ... It required the imagination of an artist to 
select the kind of Nemesis which finally overtakes this successful evil-doer, 
and which affords an affecting climax to a rather fascinating tale. ' 

The Lady's Pictorial. 'The book is a clever and powerful one. . . . 
Cynthia Marlowe will live in our memories as a sweet and noble woman ; one 
of whom it is a pleasure to think of beside some of the "emancipated" 
heroines so common in the fiction of the day.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE LONDONERS 

BY ROBERT HICHENS 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

Punch. 'Mr. Hichens calls his eccentric story "an absurdity," and so it 
is. As amusing nonsense, written in a happy-go-lucky style, it works up to 
a genuine hearty-laugh-extracting scene. . . . The Londoners is one of 
the most outrageous pieces of extravagant absurdity we have come across for 
many a day.' 

The Manchester Guardian. 'A roaring farce, full of excellent fooling, 
and capital situations.' 

The Globe. ' It is refreshing to come across a really amusing book now 
and again, and to all in search of a diverting piece of absurdity we can 
recommend The Londoners. Herein Mr. Hichens has returned to his earlier 
manner, and it will be added to his credit that the author of The Green 
Carnation has for a second time contributed to the innocent gaiety of the 
nation.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' A farce and a very excellent one. Should be 
read by every one in search of a laugh. Mr. Hichens simply revels in 
epigrams, similes, and satire, and his achievements in this respect in The 
Londoners will disappoint no one. It reads as if the author himself laughed 
when writing it, and the laughter is contagious.' 

Pall Mall Gazette. ' It is all screamingly funny, and does great credit 
to Mr. Hichens's luxuriant imagination.' 



FLAMES 

BY ROBERT HICHENS 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Daily Chronicle. ' A cunning blend of the romantic and the real, the 
work of a man who can observe, who can think, who can imagine, and who 
can write. . . . And the little thumb-nail sketches of the London streets have 
the grim force of a Callot. But the real virtue of the book consists of its 
tender, sympathetic, almost reverential picture of Cuckoo Bright. Not that 
there is any attempt at idealising her ; she is shown in all her tawdry, slangy, 
noisy vulgarity, as she is. But in despite of all this, the woman is essen- 
tially a heroine, and lovable. If it contained nothing more than what we 
do not hesitate to call this beautiful story and it does contain more 
Flames would be a noteworthy book.' 

The World. 'An exceedingly clever and daring work . . . a novel so 
weirdly fascinating and engrossing that the reader easily forgives its length. 
Its unflagging interest and strength, no less than its striking originality, both 
of design and treatment, will certainly rank it among the most notable novels 
of the season.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' It carries on the attention of the reader from 
the first chapter to the last. It is full of exciting incidents, very modern, and 
excessively up-to-date.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



AN IMAGINATIVE MAN 

BY ROBERT HICHENS 
AUTHOR OF 'THE GREEN CARNATION' 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Guardian. 'There is no possible doubt as to the cleverness of the 
book. The scenes are exceeding powerful.' 

The Graphic. 'The story embodies a study of remarkable subtlety and 
power, and the style is not only vivid and picturesque, but in those passages 
of mixed emotion and reflection, which strike what is, perhaps, the charac- 
teristic note of late nineteenth century prose literature, is touched with some- 
thing of poetic charm.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It treats an original idea with no little skill, and 
it is written with a distinction which gives Mr. Hichens a conspicuous place 
amongst the younger story-tellers who are really studious of English diction. 
... It is marked out with an imaginative resource which has a welcome note 
of literature.' 

The Scotsman. 'It is no doubt a remarkable book. If it has almost 
none of the humour of its predecessor (The Green Carnation], it is written 
with the same brilliancy of style, and the same skill is shown in the drawing 
of accessories. Mr. Hicbens's three characters never fail to be interesting. 
They are presented with very considerable power, while the background of 
Egyptian life and scenery is drawn with a sure hand.' 



THE FOLLY OF EUSTACE 

BY ROBERT HICHENS 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Daily Telegraph. ' There is both imaginative power and a sense of 
style in all that Mr. Hichens writes, coupled with a distinct vein of humour.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'Admirably written, and in the vein that Mr. 
Hichens has made peculiarly his own. ' 

The World. ' The author of An Imaginative Man took a high place 
among imaginative writers by that remarkable work, and The Folly of 
Eustace fully sustains his well-merited repute as a teller of tales. The little 
story is as fantastic and also as reasonable as could be desired, with the 
occasional dash of strong sentiment, the sudden turning on of the lights of 
sound knowledge of life and things that we find in the author when he is most 
fanciful. The others are weird enough and strong enough in human interest 
to make a name for their writer had his name needed making.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



TONY DRUM 

BY EDWIN PUGH 
With Coloured Illustrations by the Beggarstaff Brothers. 

In One Volume, price 6s, 

Daily Telegraph. 'Mr. Pugh studies the East-end and low life with a 
singularly vivid power and a picturesque style of presentation, which make 
him one of the masters of this style of craft. If the book were remarkable for 
nothing else and it forms an extremely vivid and clever little study the 
pictures which illustrate it would make it noticeable. The picture of Tony's 
father, of Tony himself, and of his mother, tell us in a few masterly touches 
very nearly as much of the domestic life of those interesting personages as the 
pages of Mr. 'Pugh himself.' 

St. James's Gazette. ' Mr. Pugh is grimly pathetic and humorously 
tragic. 

Athenaeum. 'There is so much that is graphic, direct, and simple in 
Mr. Pugh's presentment of Tony, his sister, parents, and surroundings, that 
it is difficult not to feel that he knows far more thoroughly what he is about 
than any one else can. He shows that even the children of the slums have 
their short hour of irresponsible merriment. . . . Tony's good heart and the 
early devotion of his sister Honor are given with lifelike and touching traits.' 

Truth. 'An exquisite little sketch painted like a rainbow with sunshine 
on tears.' 

THE MAN OF STRAW 

BY EDWIN PUGH 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Daily Mail. ' So finely imagined and so richly built up with natural 
incident and truthful detail, that no one who cares for a fine novel, finely 
written, can afford to let it pass. Mr. Pugh's study of John Coldershaw is, 
in its strength, a graduated truth of detail, masterly almost beyond possibility 
of overpraise. Possibly it is the London setting which lends the story a 
touch of the style of Dickens. Certain it is that London humanity has never 
been so well portrayed since Dickens, ceased to portray it. ' 

Black and White. ' Certain to be widely read and to be discussed, since 
it is notable for matter and manner alike. Abounds in magnificent situations. 
The realism is ever touched with imagination, and it is often powerful and 
never dull.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' Places its author in the front rank of the new 
realism. Nothing that Mr. Pugh describes is a mere fancy picture every 
stroke of his pen brings conviction with it. . He writes with the instinct of 
an artist, and selects his incidents with marvellous skill.' 

The Scotsman. ' A story of singular power and absorbing interest. The 
author proves himself a keen, sympathetic student of life in the poorer parts 
of the Metropolis. It is impossible to convey anything like an adequate 
conception of the sustained animation and the dramatic vigour of the book, 
or of the fertile imagination of the writer. It is full of scenes of pathos, of 
humour, or of those possessing a fine blending of both qualities.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



KING CIRCUMSTANCE 

BY EDWIN PUGH 
In One Volume, price 6*. 

Pall Mall Gazette. 'Throughout Mr. Pugh displays a deft conciseness 
and ease of workmanship that are exceptional. Distinctly, Mr. Pugh is high 
above the ruck, and he should go far.' 

Daily Telegraph. 'They touch on life in many phases ; they are terse, 
. . . and they go straight to the point.' 

Daily Mail. ' Life, picturesqueness, and colour characterise most of these 
short stories.' 

Outlook. 'Mr. Pugh possesses the inestimable faculty of putting a scene 
vividly before his readers in a few words.' 

Academy. ' In his lighter vein, as in his moods of indignation and rebel- 
lion, Mr. Pugh is a realist of the best stamp : he makes no effort to take us 
out of our world of moderate quality into a shadow realm of excellence ; but, 
on the other hand, he sees, and can show forth, the humour, the pathos, and 
the tenderness that abide in things as they are.' 

Graphic. ' There is power both of imagination and of presentment in Mr. 
Edwin Pugh's collection of stories. ' 

THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH 

BY GABRIELE D'ANNUNZIO 

% 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' A masterpiece. The story holds and haunts 
one. Unequalled even by the great French contemporary whom, in his realism, 
D'Annunzio most resembles, is the account of the pilgrimage to the shrine of 
the Virgin by the sick, deformed, and afflicted. It is a great prose poem, that, 
of its kind, cannot be surpassed. Every detail of the scene is brought before 
us in a series of word-pictures of wonderful power and vivid colouring, and the 
ever-recurring refrain Viva Maria ! Maria Ewiva ! rings in our ears as we 
lay down the book. It is the work of a master, whose genius is beyond 
dispute. ' 

The Daily Telegraph. 'The author gives us numerous delightful pictures, 
pictures of Italian scenery, simple sketches, too, of ordinary commonplace 
innocent lives. The range of his female portrait gallery is almost as wide and 
varied as that of George Meredith. His Ippolita, his Marie Ferris, his 
Giuliana Hermil live as strong and vivid presentments of real and skilfully 
contrasted women. The Triumph of Death ends with a tragedy as it also 
begins with one. Between the two extremes are to be found many pages of 
poetry, of tender appreciation of nature, of rare artistic skill, of subtle and 
penetrative analysis.' 

The Westminster Gazette. ' For a vivid and searching description of 
the Italian peasant on his religious side, written with knowledge and under- 
standing, these pages could hardly be surpassed. This book is one which 
will not yield to any simple test. It is a work of singular power, which 
cannot be ignored, left unread when once started, or easily banished from 
the mind when read.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM IIEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



PHASES OF AN INFERIOR PLANET 

BY ELLEN GLASGOW 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Literary World. 'The extraordinary sincerity of parts of the book, 
especially that dealing with Mariana's early married life, the photographic 
directness with which the privations, the monotony, the dismal want of all 
that makes marriage and motherhood beautiful, and of all that Mariana's 
colour-loving nature craved, is pictured, are quite out of the common.' 

Speaker. 'Phases of an Inferior Planet is an American story by a 
writer whose name we have not met with before, but gives promise in this 
book of real distinction.' 

T. P. O'Connor in the 'Weekly Sun.' 'There are passages in the 
book which any living author might be proud to have written.' 

Daily Graphic. ' Its plot is a trifle far-fetched, but the writing of it is 
brilliant . . . one rises from reading it ... with gratitude for having been 
in the company of a writer who has something to say, and can deal with 
human emotions with the most subtle and suggestive analysis.' 

THE THIRD VIOLET 

BY STEPHEN CRANE 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Academy. 'A precipitate outpouring of lively pictures, a spontaneous 
dazzle of colour, a frequent success in the quest of the right word and phrase, 
were among the qualities which won for The Red Badge of Courage immediate 
recognition as the product of genius. These qualities, with less of their 
excess, are manifest in The Third Violet; and the sincere psychology, the 
scientific analysis, which, in the earlier work, lay at the root of the treatment 
of its subject-matter, are no less sure in the author's portrayal of more daily 
emotions of the hackneyed, but never to be outworn, themes of a man's 
love, a woman's modesty, and the snobbery which is very near to us all. Of 
the hundreds who strive after this inward vision, and this power of just 
expression, once in a decade of years, or in a score, one attains to them; and 
the result is literature.' 

The Athenaeum. ' In his present book, Mr. Crane is more the rival of 
Mr. Henry James than of Mr. Rudyard Kipling. But he is intensely American, 
which can hardly be said of Mr. Henry James, and it is possible that if he 
continues in his present line of writing, he may be the author who will intro- 
duce the United States to the ordinary English world. We have never come 
across a book that brought certain sections of American society so perfectly 
before the reader as does The Third Violet, which introduces us to a farming 
family, to the boarders at a summer hotel, and to the young artists of New 
York. The picture is an extremely pleasant one, and its truth appeals to the 
English reader, so that the effect of the book is to draw him nearer to his 
American cousins. The Third Violet incidentally contains the best dog we 
have come across in modern fiction. Mr. Crane's dialogue is excellent, and 
it is dialogue of a type for which neither The Red Badge of Courage nor his 
later books had prepared us.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE OPEN BOAT 

BY STEPHEN CRANE 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Spectator. ' Mr. Stephen Crane grows, and this is no small thing to say 
of a writer who sprang full armed on the public with his first book. . . . He 
has never done anything finer than this truly wonderful picture of four men 
battling for their lives.' 

Saturday Review. '. . . The most artistic thing Mr. Crane has yet 
accomplished. ' 

St. James's Gazette. ' Each tale is the concise, clear, vivid record of 
one sensational impression. Facts, epithets, or colours are given to the 
reader with a rigorousness of selection, an artfulness of restraint, that achieves 
an absolute clearness in the resulting imaginative vision. Mr. Crane has a 
personal touch of artistry that is refreshing.' 

Daily Graphic. 'Graphic, vigorous, and admirably told. They range 
over a variety of subjects, but each and all have the vivid impressionism 
which first drew attention to this writer's work.' 

Truth. ' Mr. Stephen Crane's reputation, which was suddenly and justly 
made, will be decidedly enhanced by this striking collection of short stories.' 

Times. ' . . . About Mr. Crane's ability and power of exciting and 
holding our interest there can be only one opinion. ' 

Academy. '. . . A volume made up out of odds and ends; excellent 
odds, laudable ends . . . one may say of him what can be said of but few 
of the men and women who write prose fiction that he is not superfluous.' 

PICTURES OF WAR 

BY STEPHEN CRANE 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Saturday Review. ' Mr. Crane is nothing if not vivid and exhilarating ; 
he carries his reader away with the rush and glitter of his epithets and 
pictures.' 

Critic. *Mn Crane has original qualities that give distinction to his 
work. His sentiment is noble and intense, free from any sickly taint, and 
there is poetry in his sense of beauty in nature and in the unfolding of heroic 
events. ' 

Daily Chronicle. Another reading in nowise lessens the vividness of 
the astonishing work.' 

Truth. 'The pictures themselves are certainly wonderful. ... So fine 
a book as Mr. Stephen Crane's Pictures of War is not to be judged 
pedantically.' 

Daily Graphic. ' ... A second reading leaves one with no whit 
diminished opinion of their extraordinary power. Stories they are not* really, 
but as vivid war pictures they have scarcely been equalled. . . . One cannot 
recall any book which conveys to the outsider more clearly what war means 
to the fighters than this collection of brilliant pictures.' 

Standard. ' There is no need to dwell on the stories themselves, since 
they have already made for their author, by their strength, passion, and 
insight, a thoroughly deserved reputation.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



In One Volume, price 6s, 

Punch. 'The heroine of the Beth Book is one of Sarah Grand's most 
fascinating creations. With such realistic art is her life set forth that, for a 
while, the reader will probably be under the impression that he has before him 
the actual story of a wayward genius compiled from her genuine diary. The 
story is absorbing ; the truth to nature in the characters, whether virtuous, 
ordinary, or vicious, every reader, with some experience will recognise. 

Sketch. ' Madame Sarah Grand has given us the fruits of much thought 
and hard work in her new novel, wherein she tells of the "life of a woman 
of genius." Beth's character is moulded by the varied experiences of her 
early youth, and every detail is observed with the masterly hand that gave 
us the pranks of the Heavenly Twins. As a study of the maturing process of 
character and of the influence of surroundings exercised on a human being, 
this book is a complete success and stands far ahead of the novels of recent date.' 

The Standard. 'The style is simple and direct, and the manner altogether 
is that of a woman who has thought much and evidently felt much. It is 
impossible to help being interested in her book.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' There is humour, observation, and sympathetic 
insight into the temperaments of both men and women. Beth is realised ; we 
more than admit, we assert, that we love her.' 

The Globe. ' It is quite safe to prophesy that those who peruse The Beth 
Book will linger delightedly over one of the freshest and deepest studies of 
child character ever given to the world, and hereafter will find it an ever- 
present factor in their literary recollections and impressions.' 

THE HEAVENLY TWINS 

BY SARAH GRAND 
In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. 'It is so full of interest, and the characters are so 
eccentrically humorous yet true, that one feels inclined to pardon all its 
faults, and give oneself up to unreserved enjoyment of it. ... The twins 
Angelica and Diavolo, young barbarians, utterly devoid of all respect, con- 
ventionality, or decency, are among the most delightful and amusing children 
in fiction.' 

The Academy. 'The adventures of Diavolo and Angelica the 
"heavenly twins" are delightfully funny. No more original children were 
ever put into a book. Their audacity, unmanageableness, and genius for 
mischief in none of which qualities, as they are here shown, is there any 
taint of vice are refreshing ; and it is impossible not to follow, with very 
keen interest, the progress of these youngsters.' 

The- Daily Telegraph. ' Everybody ought to read it, for it is aft inex- 
haustible source of refreshing and highly stimulating entertainment.' 

Punch. ' The Twins themselves are a creation : the epithet " Heavenly" 
for these two mischievous little fiends is admirable.' 

The Queen. ' There is a touch of real genius in The Heavenly Twins.' 

The Guardian. 'Exceptionally brilliant in dialogue, and dealing with 
modern society life, this book has a purpose to draw out and emancipate 
women.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



IDEALA 

A STUDY FROM LIFE 
BY SARAH GRAND 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Morning Post. 'Sarah Grand's Ideala. ... A clever book in 
itself, is especially interesting when read in the light of her later works. 
Standing alone, it is remarkable as the outcome of an earnest mind seeking 
in good faith the solution of a difficult and ever present problem. . . . Ideala 
is original and somewhat daring. . . . The story is in many ways delightful 
and thought-suggesting.' 

The Liverpool Mercury. 'The book is a wonderful one an evangel 
for the fair sex, and at once an inspiration and a comforting companion, to 
which thoughtful womanhood will recur again and again.' 

The Glasgow Herald. 'Ideala has attained the honour of a fifth 
edition. . . . The stir created by The Heavenly Twins, the more recent 
work by the same authoress, Madame Sarah Grand, would justify this step. 
Ideala can, however, stand on its own merits. ' 

The Yorkshire Post 'As a psychological study the book cannot fail to 
be of interest to many readers.' 

The Birmingham Gazette. 'Madame Sarah Grand thoroughly deserves 
her success. Ideala, the heroine, is a splendid conception, and her opinions 
are noble. . . . The book is not one to be forgotten. ' 

OUR MANIFOLD NATURE 

BY SARAH GRAND 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Spectator. 'Insight into, and general sympathy with widely 
differing phases of humanity, coupled with power to reproduce what is seen, 
with vivid, distinct strokes, that rivet the attention, are qualifications for 
work of the kind contained in Our Manifold Nature which Sarah Grand 
evidently possesses in a high degree. . . . All these studies, male and female 
alike, are marked by humour, pathos, fidelity to life, and power to recognise 
in human nature the frequent recurrence of some apparently incongruous 
and remote trait, which, when at last it becomes visible, helps to a com- 
prehension of what might otherwise be inexplicable.' 

The Speaker. 'In Our Manifold Nature Sarah Grand is seen at her 
best. How good that is can only be known by those who read for them- 
selves this admirable little volume. In freshness of conception and originality 
of treatment these stories are delightful, full of force and piquancy, whilst 
the studies of character are carried out with equal firmness and delicacy." 

The Guardian. ' Our Manifold Nature is a clever book. Sarah Grand 
has the power of touching common things, which, if it fails to make them 
"rise to touch the spheres," renders them exceedingly interesting.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE GODS ARRIVE 

BY ANNIE E. HOLDSWORTH 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Review of Reviews. ' Extremely interesting and very clever. The 
characters are well drawn, especially the women. Old Martha is a gem ; 
there are very few more palpably living and lovable old women in modern 
fiction than her.' 

The Guardian. 'There is really good work in Miss Holdsworth's books, 
and this is no exception to the rule. In many ways it is really a fine story ; 
the dialogue is good, and the characters, aje interesting. The peasants, too, 
are well drawn.' 

The Daily Telegraph. ' Packed full of cleverness : the minor personages 
are instinct with comedy. 

The Observer. ' The book has the attractive qualities which have 
distinguished the author's former works, some knowledge of human nature, 
touches of humour rubbing shoulders with pathos, a keen sympathy for the 
sorrows of life all these make her story one to be read and appreciated.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' The book is well written, the characters keenly 
observed, the incidents neatly presented.' 

The Queen. 'A book to linger over and enjoy.' 

The Literary World. ' Once more this talented writer and genuine 
observer of human nature has given us a book which is full of valuable and 
attractive qualities. It deals with realities ; it makes us think.'. 



THE YEARS THAT THE LOCUST 
HATH EATEN 

BY ANNIE E. HOLDSWORTH 
In One Volume, price 6.?. 

The Literary World. 'The novel is marked by great strength, which 
is always under subjection to the author's gift of restraint, so that we are made 
to feel the intensity all the more. Pathos and humour (in the true sense) go 
together through these chapters ; and for such qualities as earnestness, insight, 
moral courage, and thoughtfulness, The Years that the Locust hath Eaten 
stands out prominently among noteworthy books of the time.' 

The Standard. 'A worthy successor to Joanna Traill, Spinster. It is 
quite as powerful. It has insight and sympathy and pathos, humour, and 
some shrewd understanding of human nature scattered up and down its pages. 
Moreover, there is beauty in the story and idealism. . . . Told with a humour, 
a grace, a simplicity, that ought to give the story a long reign. . . . The 
charm of the book is undeniable ; it is one that only a clever woman, full of 
the best instincts of her sex, could have written.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' The book should not be missed by a fastidious 
novel-reader.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



M C LEOD OF THE CAMERONS 

BY M. HAMILTON 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Speaker. ' We have read many novels of life at Malta, but none so 
vivid and accurate in local colour as M'Leod of the Camerons. A well-told 
and powerful story . . . acute analysis of character ; it offers a standard of 
perfection to which the majority of writers of fiction cannot attain.' 

The Manchester Guardian. 'Striking and exceedingly readable. Miss 
Hamilton is to be congratulated upon a very fresh, exciting, and yet natural 
piece of work.' 

THE FREEDOM OF HENRY MEREDYTH 

BY M. HAMILTON 

In One Volume, price 6.r. 

The Observer. ' Miss Hamilton has seldom written to better advantage 
than in this volume. The book is mainly dependent for interest on its 
characterisation, but there is a distinctly human note struck throughout, and 
the author displays keen insight into everyday life and its complications.' 
Literature. 'Well told in a vein of vigorous and consistent realism.' 
The Court Journal. ' It is written with good taste, and is full of shrewd 
perceptive touches, so the interest is sustained agreeably without effort and 
without the artificial stimulus of sensationalism. The story, in a word, is 
both interesting and pleasant, and one that should not be missed." 

A SELF-DENYING ORDINANCE 

BY M. HAMILTON 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. 'The characters are exceptionally distinct, the move- 
ment is brisk, and the dialogue is natural and convincing.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'An excellent novel. Joanna Conway is one of 
the most attractive figures in recent fiction. It is no small tribute to the 
author's skill that this simple country girl, without beauty or accomplishments, 
is from first to last so winning a personality. The book is full of excellent 
observation.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE WIDOWER 

BY W. E. NORRIS 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

St. James's Gazette.' Mr. Norris's new story is one of his best. There 
is always about his novels an atmosphere of able authorship . . . and The 
Widower is handled throughout in the perfect manner to which Mr. Norris's 
readers are accustomed. ' 

Saturday Review. 'Without effort at style, the writing is graceful, correct, 
well balanced ; the economy of effects is curiously skilful ; the record of 
mental conditions is excellent. Humour comes to his help in the unravelling 
of his knotty scheme. He has never been more brilliantly entertaining than 
in his description of the childhood of Cuckoo. At her conversations with her 
maid and her boy cousin the reader laughs aloud. The maid, Budgett, is a 
comic creation of really a high order. Anything more amusing than the 
discussions between Lady Wardlow and her husband we do not want to 
read. ' 

Pall Mall Gazette. ' There is distinction of all kinds in every paragraph, 
and the whole is worthy of the delicately-finished details. Mr. Norris is 
always delightfully witty, clever, and unfailing in delicacy and point of style 
and manner, breezily actual, and briskly passing along. In a word, he is 
charming. ' 

MARIETTA'S MARRIAGE 

BY W. E. NORRIS 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Athenaeum. C A fluent style, a keen insight into certain types of 
human nature, a comprehensive and humorous view of modern society these 
are gifts Mr. Norris has already displayed, and again exhibits in his present 
volume. From the first chapter to the last, the book runs smoothly and 
briskly, with natural dialogue and many a piquant situation.' 

The Morning Post. 'Mr. Norris has had the good fortune to discover 
a variety of the "society" novel which offers little but satisfaction to the 
taste. Perfectly acquainted with the types he reproduces, the author's 
characterisation is, as always, graphic and convincing. Rarely has the type 
of ihefemwe incomprise been studied with such careful attention or rendered 
with so much of subtle comprehension as in Marietta.' 

The Sketch. 'It would be difficult to over-estimate the ability it dis- 
plays, its keen reading of human nature, the careful realism of its descriptions 
of life to-day.' 

The Daily News. 'Every character in the book is dexterously drawn. 
Mr. Norris's book is interesting, often dramatic, and is the work of, if not a 
deep, a close and humorous observer of men and women.' 

The Observer. 'Novels from Mr. Norris's pen are invariably welcome, 
and this will be no exception to the rule. Amongst other capabilities, he 
possesses a strong knowledge of human nature, and his characters, be their 
natures good, bad, or indifferent, are scrupulously true to life.' 

The Spectator. 'A specimen of Mr. Norris's work when he is in his 
happiest mood.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



A VICTIM OF GOOD LUCK 

BY W. E. NORRIS 

In One Volume^ price 6s. 

The Daily Chronicle. ' It has not a dull page from first to last. Any 
one with normal health and taste can read a book like this with real pleasure.' 

The Spectator. ' Mr. Norris displays to the full his general command of 
narrative expedients which are at once happily invented and yet quite natural 
which seem to belong to their place in the book, just as a keystone belongs 
to its place in the arch. . . . The brightest and cleverest book which Mr. 
Norris has given us since he wrote The Rogue.' 

The Saturday Review. 'Novels which are neither dull, unwholesome, 
morbid, nor disagreeable, are so rare in these days, that A Victim of Good 
Luck . . . ought to find a place in a book-box filled for the most part with 
light literature. . . . We think it will increase the reputation of an already 
very popular author.' 

THE DANCER IN YELLOW 

BvW. E. NORRIS 
In One Volume^ price 65. 

The Manchester Guardian. ' From first to last it is easy, pleasant read- 
ing ; full, as usual, of shrewd knowledge of men and things.' 

The Guardian. 'A very clever and finished study of a dancer at one of 
the London theatres. We found the book very pleasant and refreshing, and 
laid it down with the wish that there were more like it.' 

The World. ' The Dancer in Yellow takes us by surprise. The story is 
both tragic and pathetic. . . . We do not think he has written any more 
clever and skilful story than this one, and particular admiration is due to the 
byways and episodes of the narrative. ' 

THE COUNTESS RADNA 

BY W. E. NORRIS 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Speaker. 'In style, skill in construction, and general "go, "it is 
worth a dozen ordinary novels.' 

Black and White. 'The novel, like all Mr. Norris's work, is an exces- 
sively clever piece of work, and the author never for a moment allows his 
grasp of his plot and his characters to slacken.' 

The Westminster Gazette. ' Mr. Norris writes throughout with much 
liveliness and force, saying now and then something that is worth remember- 
ing. And he sketches his minor characters with a firm touch.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM IIEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE TERROR 

BY FELIX GRAS 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Daily Mail. ' Strong and vivid.' 

Pall Mall Gazette. ' Those who shared Mr. Gladstone's admiration for 
The Reds of the Midi will renew it when they read The Terror. It is a 
stirring and vivid story, full of perilous and startling adventures, and with- 
out one interval of dulness. ... It excites and absorbs the reader's atten- 
tion. The excitement grows with the development of the plot, and the 
incidents are told with much spirit.' 

Saturday Review. 'The narrative is told with vivacity, with humour. 
If Mr. Gras observes life with a melodramatic eye, his glance is pretty com- 
prehensive. This picture of a terrible time has many happy effects of light 
and shade.' 

Bookman. ' Every page is either lurid, or feverish, or lyrical. The glow 
of the South is in it. The general impression left on the memory is of some- 
thing strong, original, and exhilarating.' 

Critic. ' Felix Gras gives us in this book a merciless picture of France 
when that blind thing of fury, Marat, was in the zenith of his baleful power. 
The events of that terrible time are given with a realism that is almost brutal 
in its directness and force. Felix Gras is amongst the great story-tellers of 
France. His invention never flags, and, like Daudet, he fascinates by reason 
of the Southern warmth and buoyancy of his temperament.' 

A ROMANCE OF THE FIRST CONSUL 

BY M. MALLING 
In One Volume, price 6,y. 

Daily Mail. 'The pages of it exhale fascination. The story is especially 
a triumph of restraint. . . . The magic of the romance is undeniable, and its 
historical framework is as accurate as it is simple and natural.' 

Pall Mall Gazette.' The love story of Mile, de la Feuillade is infinitely 
passionate and pathetic. Most lifelike and vivid is the portrait of the First 
Consul in all his greatness and pettiness. Most excellent are the many 
pictures the author gives, displaying as they do the most scrupulous and 
detailed knowledge of the conditions of society under the Consulate. A 
Romance of the First Consul, every page of it, is a most fascinating and 
interesting story.' 

Sketch. ' Behind the romantic story which runs through this novel, there 
is a background of history, which shows an extraordinary appreciation of the 
atmosphere of France at the period, and the whole result is a book which has 
not a dull page in it from start to finish.' 

Morning Post. The enthusiasm of the young girl for the man whose per- 
sonality dominates and whose glory dazzles her, is rendered with the subtle 
force and intimate knowledge of the workings of the feminine mind that 
excite admiration. It is really a work of art, tender, delicate, strong, and 
passionate by turns. The mise-en-scene is essentially dramatic. There can 
only be one opinion as to the author's ability. ' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE LAKE OF WINE 

BY BERNARD CAPES 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

W. E. Henley in the 'Outlook.' 'Mr. Capes's devotion to style does 
him yeoman sen-ice all through this excellent romance. ... I have read no 
book for long which contented me as this book. This story excellently 
invented and excellently done is one no lover of romance can afford to leave 
unread.' 

Observer. 'The plot and its working out are thoroughly interesting 
features in this novel . . . a book which shows fine literary workmanship.' 

Daily Telegraph. 'A tender and sympathetic love idyll underlies the 
feverish drama. The leading incidents and situations of this stirring book are 
highly tragical, but its dialogue sparkles with light and genial humour.' 

Daily Chronicle. 'This is one of those desirable books which may be 
sampled on any page. The reading of a paragraph or two is inducement 
sufficient to the judicious to settle down and read the whole. It is a story of 
incident, of course, of constant and breathless incident, but it is a story of 
characterisation also.' 

Spectator. ' Mr. Bernard Capes has an intrepid imagination, a keen 
sense of the picturesque and the eerie, and he has style. He is not less 
successful in the framing of his plot, the invention of incident, and the discreet 
application of the great law of suspense. ' 

St. James's Gazette. 'The love-motif is of the quaintest and daintiest ; 
the clash of arms is Stevensonian. . . . There is a vein of mystery running 
through the book, and greatly enhancing its interest.' 

THE SCOURGE-STICK 

BY MRS. CAMPBELL PRAED 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

Daily Telegraph. ' Undeniably powerful and interesting.' 

Daily Chronicle. ' There is good and strong work in The Scourge-Stick.' 

Academy. 'Mrs. Campbell Praed has produced a story of much more 
than her usual significance and power.' 

Truth. ' It is a very powerful and interesting story.' 

World. ' The first half of The Scourge-Stick is as admirable a piece of 
fiction as any one need wish to read. Situation and character-drawing are 
alike excellent ; and, what is still more rare and delightful, every page is 
pervaded by that nameless charm of style which is the glamour cast only by 
genuine power. For simple straightforward mastery and grip, it would not 
be easy to surpass the first chapter.' 

Observer. ' Not only is The Scourge-Stick the best novel that Mrs. Praed 
has yet written, but it is one that will long occupy a prominent place in the 
literature of the age.' 

Illustrated London News. 'A singularly powerful study of a woman 
who fails in everything, only to rise on stepping-stones to higher things. . . . 
A succession of strong, natural, and exciting situations.' 

Black and White. 'A notable book which must be admitted by all to 
have real power, and that most intangible quality fascination.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C 



THE TWO MAGICS 

BY HENRY JAMES 
In Two Volumes, price 6s. 

Athenaeum. { In The Two Magics, the first tale, "The Turn of the 
Screw," is one of the most engrossing and terrifying ghost stories we have 
ever read. The other story in the book, "Covering End," ... is in its way 
excellently told.' 

Daily Chronicle. ' Mr. James holds us and thrills us, strikes us with 
wonder, strikes us with awe ; but over and above this, more than anything 
else, he delights us with the pure, the joyous delight of art, of beauty. It is 
incredible, it is impossible ; and Mr. James has done it.' 

Daily Telegraph. ' By a series of the minutest touches Mr. James makes 
us feel . . . the horror and bewilderment of malign influence at work. To 
create this atmosphere of the supernatural is no small literary achievement.' 

Daily News. ' The first story shows Mr. James's subtlest characteristics, 
his supreme delicacy of touch, his surpassing mastery of the art of suggestion. 
It is a masterpiece of artistic execution. Mr. James has lavished upon it all 
the resources and subtleties of his art. The workmanship throughout is 
exquisite in the precision of the touch, in the rendering of shades of spectral 
representation. The artistic effect and the moral intention are in admirable 
harmony. The second story is a delightful comedietta, abounding in 
dialogue, swift, brilliant, polished.' 

Outlook. ' Taken individually, these stories are strikingly the product of 
the author ; yet the difference between the two is so vast, they might well 
have emanated from different minds . . . the effect is unsurpassable.' 

THE SPOILS OF POYNTON 

BY HENRY JAMES 

In One Volume, price 6^. 

The National Observer. 'One of the finest works of the imagination, if 
not actually the finest, that has come from the press for several years. A 
work of brilliant fancy, of delicate humour, of gentle satire, of tragedy and 
comedy in appropriate admixture. A polished and enthralling story of the 
lives of men and women, who, one and all, are absolutely real. We con- 
gratulate Mr. James without reserve upon the power, the delicacy, and the 
charm of a book of no common fascination.' 

The Bookseller. 'Shows all Mr. James's wonted subtleness of observa- 
tion and analysis, fine humour, and originality of thought.' 

The Standard. 'Immensely clever.' 

The Daily News. ' Mr. James's art is that of the miniaturist. In this 
book we have much of the delicate whimsicalities of expression, of the amaz- 
ing cleverness in verbal parryings ; we never cease to admire the workman- 
ship. ' 

The St. James's Gazette. 'A notable novel, written with perfect com- 
mand of the situation, original a piece of exquisitely polished literature.' 
' 'The Manchester Guardian. 'Delightful reading. The old felicity of 
phrase and epithet, the quick, subtle flashes of insight, the fastidious liking 
for the best in character and art, are as marked as ever, and give one an 
intellectual pleasure for which one cannot be too grateful. ' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



WHAT MAISIE KNEW 

BY HENRY JAMES 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Academy. 'We have read this book with amazement and delight : 
with amazement at its supreme delicacy ; with delight that its author retains 
an unswerving allegiance to literary conscience that forbids him to leave a 
slipshod phrase, or a single word out of its appointed place. There are many 
writers who can write dialogue that is amusing, convincing, real. But there 
is none who can reach Mr. James's extraordinary skill in tracing dialogue 
from the first vague impulse in the mind to the definite spoken word.' 

The Daily Chronicle. ' A work of art so complex, so many-coloured, so 
variously beautiful ! One is bewildered, one is a little intoxicated. The 
splendid voice still rings in one's ears, the splendid emotions still vibrate 
in one's heart, but one is not yet ready to explain or to translate them. It 
is life, it is human life, with the flesh and blood and the atmosphere of life ; 
it is English life, it is the very life of London. But it is not what they call 
"realism." It is life seen, felt, understood, and interpreted by a rich ima- 
gination, by an educated temperament ; it is life with an added meaning ; 
it is life made rhythmic ; it is life sung in high melodious prose ; and that, it 
seems to us, is the highest romance.' 



THE OTHER HOUSE 

BY HENRY JAMES 

In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Morning Post. ' Mr. James stands almost alone among contemporary 
novelists, in that his work as a whole shows that time, instead of impairing, 
ripens and widens his gifts. He has ever been an example of style. His 
already wide popularity among those who appreciate the higher literature of 
fiction should be considerably increased by the production of this excellent 
novel." 

The Daily News. 'A melodrama wrought with the exquisiteness of a 
madrigal. All the characters, however lightly sketched, are drawn with that 
clearness of insight, with those minute, accurate, unforeseen touches that tell 
of relentless observation. The presentation is so clear that they seem to 
move in an atmosphere as limpid as that which permeates the pictures painted 
by De Hooghe. It may be the consummate literary art with which the whole 
thing is done that the horror of the theme does not grip us. At the sinister 
crisis we remain calm enough to admire the unfailing felicity of the author's 
phrase, the subtlety of his discriminating touches, the dexterity of his 
handling.' 

The Scotsman. 'A masterpiece of Mr. James's analytical genius and 
finished literary style. It also shows him at his dramatic best. He has 
never written anything in which insight and dramatic power are so marvel- 
lously combined with fine and delicate literary workmanship. 

LONDON : WILLIAM IIEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



EMBARRASSMENTS 

BY HENRY JAMES 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. ' Mr. James's stories are a continued protest against super- 
ficial workmanship and slovenly style. He is an enthusiast who has devoted 
himself to keeping alive the sacred fire of genuine literature ; and he has his 
reward in a circle of constant admirers.' 

The Daily News. ' Mr. Henry James is the Meissonier of literary art. 
In his new volume, we find all the exquisiteness, the precision of touch, that 
are his characteristic qualities. It is a curiously fascinating volume.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' His style is well-nigh perfect, and there are 
phrases which reveal in admirable combination the skill of the practised crafts- 
man, and the inspiration of the born writer." 

The National Observer. 'The delicate art of Mr. Henry James has 
rarely been seen to more advantage than in these stories. ' 

The St. James's Gazette. 'All four stories are delightful for admirable 
workmanship, for nicety and precision of presentation, and The Way it Came 
is beyond question a masterpiece.' 

The Literary World. 'Admirers of Mr. Henry James will be glad to 
have this collection of polished stories. There is a fine finish about all his 
work : no signs of hurry or carelessness disfigure the most insignificant para- 
graph. Enibarrassments is as good as anything he has written. As the work 
of a sincere and brilliantly clever writer it is welcome.' 

TERMINATIONS 

BY HENRY JAMES 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Times. c All the stories are told by a man whose heart and soul are 
in his profession of literature.' 

The Morning Post. 'The discriminating will not fail to recognise in the 
tales composing this volume workmanship of a very high order and a wealth 
of imaginative fancy that is, in a measure, a revelation. ' 

The Athenaeum. ' The appearance of Terminations will in no way shake 
the general belief in Mr. Henry James's accomplished touch and command of 
material. On the contrary, it confirms conclusions long since foregone, and 
will increase the respect of his readers. . . . With such passages of trenchant 
wit and sparkling observation, surely in his best manner, Mr. James ought to 
be as satisfied as his readers cannot fail to be.' 

The Pall Mall Gazette. 'What strikes one, in fact, in every corner of 
Mr. James's work is his inordinate cleverness. These four tales are so clever, 
that one can only raise one's hands in admiration. The insight, the sympathy 
with character, the extraordinary observation, and the neat and dexterous 
phrasing these qualities are everywhere visible.' 

The Scotsman. ' All the stories are peculiar and full of a rare interest.' 
LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 




THE FOURTH NAPOLEON 

BY CHARLES BENHAM 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Academy. 'The picture of the incapable, ambitious sentimentalist, 
attitudinising in his shabby London lodgings, attitudinising on the throne, and 
sinking into flabby senility, while still in his own eyes a hero, is far more 
than a successful piece of portraiture. It is a profound and moving allegory 
of life. Surely to have produced such an effect is a high triumph of art. The 
other people are all drawn with uncommon subtlety and vigour. Mr. Benham 
follows great models. He has learned much from Thackeray, and there is a 
strong hint of Balzac in the half-ironical swiftness of change from scene to 
scene. It is a fine piece of work, with enough wit and style and knowledge 
of life to set up half-a-dozen ordinary novels. It is one of the best first books 
we have read for a long time. ' 

The Saturday Review. 'A definite attitude to life, the courage of his 
opinion of human nature, and a biting humour, have enabled Mr. Benham to 
write a very good novel indeed. The book is worked out thoroughly ; the 
people in it are alive ; they are interesting.' 

I. Zangwill in 'The Jewish Chronicle.' 'Surely one of the most 
remarkable first books of our day. A daring imagination, a sombre, subtle 
sense of la comedie hutnaine, such are the characteristics of this powerful 
book. ... A thoroughness and subtlety which Balzac could not have 
excelled. Most first books are, in essence, autobiographies. It is as much 
because The Fourth Napoleon reveals powers of wholly imaginative combina- 
tion as because of its actual achievement, that I venture to think it marks the 
advent of a novelist who has only to practice concentration and to study his 
art to take no ordinary position in English fiction.' 

IN HASTE AND AT LEISURE 

BY E. LYNN LINTON 
In One Volume, price 6s. 

The Speaker. ' Mrs. Lynn Linton commands the respect of her readers 
and critics. Her new story, In Haste and at Leisure, is as powerful a piece 
of writing as any that we owe to her pen.' 

The St. James's Budget. 'A thorough mistress of English, Mrs. Lynn 
Linton uses the weapons of knowledge and ridicule, of sarcasm and logic, with 
powerful effect; the shallow pretences of the "New Woman" are ruthlessly 
torn aside.' 

The Literary World. ' Whatever its exaggerations may be, In Haste and 
at Leisure remains a notable achievement. It has given us pleasure, and we 
can recommend it with confidence.' 

The Daily Graphic. ' It is an interesting story, while it is the most 
tremendous all-round cannonade to which the fair emancipated have been 
subjected.' 

The World. ' It is clever, and well written.' 

The Graphic.' It is thoroughly interesting, and it is full of passages that 
almost irresistibly tempt quotation." 

The St. James's Gazette. ' It is a novel that ought to be, and will be, 
widely read and enjoyed.' 

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



THE NIGGER OF THE 'NARCISSUS' 

BY JOSEPH CONRAD 

In One Volume, price 65-. 

A. T. Quiller-Couch in Pall Mall Magazine.' Had I to award a 
prize among the novels of the past season, it should go to The Nigger of the 
"Narcissus" Mr. Conrad's is a thoroughly good tale. He has something 
of Mr. Crane's insistence ; he grips a situation, an incident, much as Mr. 
Browning's Italian wished to grasp Metternich ; he squeezes emotion and 
colour out of it to the last drop ; he is ferociously vivid ; he knows the life he 
is writing about, and he knows his seamen too. And, by consequence, the 
crew of the 'Narcissus are the most plausibly life-like set of rascals that ever 
sailed through the pages of fiction.' 

Mr. James Payn. 'Never, in any book with which I am acquainted, 
has a storm at sea been so magnificently yet so realistically depicted. At 
times, there is the same sort of poetic power in the book that is manifested 
by Victor Hugo ; at ' others, it treats matters in the most practical and 
common-sense manner, though always with something separate about it which 
belongs to the writer. It does not seem too much to say that Mr. Conrad 
has, in this book, introduced us to the British merchant seaman, as Rudyard 
Kipling introduced us to the British soldier. ' 

Speaker. ' A picture of sea-life as it is lived in storm and sunshine on 
a merchant-ship, which, in its vividness, its emphasis, and its extraordinary 
fulness of detail, is a worthy pendant to the battle-picture presented to us in 
The Red Badge of Courage. . . . We have had many descriptions of storms 
at sea before, but none like this. It is a wonderful picture. To have painted 
it in such a fashion that its vivid colouring bites into the mind of the spectator, 
is a very notable achievement. ' 

SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE 

BY RICHARD HARDING DAVIS 
In One Volume, price 6s. Illustrated. 

The Pall Mall Gazette. ' We heartily congratulate Mr. Davis on this 
story it is one which it is a great delight to read and an imperative duty to 
praise.' 

The Athenaeum. ' The adventures and exciting incidents in the book are 
admirable ; the whole story of the revolution is most brilliantly told. This 
is really a great tale of adventure.' 

The Spectator. 'The fighting is described with a vividness and vigour 
worthy of Mr. Stephen Crane. The story is artistically told as well as highly 
exciting.' 

The Daily Chronicle. 'We turn the pages quickly, carried on by a 
swiftly moving story, and many a brilliant passage : and when we put the 
book down, our impression is that few works of this season are to be named 
with it for the many qualities which make a successful novel. We congratu- 
late Mr. Harding Davis upon a very clever piece of work.' 

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN, 21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C. 



.' 






n 

3 



PR 

6015 

IMS55 

1899 

C.I 

ROBA 






